NASA/GSFC Contract NASW-99032 
Photochemical Phenomenology Model for the New Millennium 
Annual Report, 23 August 2(X)1 
Dr. James Bishop and J. Scott Evans 


ABSTRACT 

The “Photochemical Phenomenology Model for the New Millennium” project tackles the issue of 
reengineering and exteasion of validated physics-based modeling capabilities (“legacy computer 
codes) to application-oriented software for use in science and science-support activities. While 
the design and architecture layouts are in terms of general particle distributions involved in 
scattering, impact, and reactive interactions, initial Photochemical Phenomenology Modeling 
Tool ( PPMT) implementations are aimed at construction and evaluation ol photochemical 
transport models with rapid execution for use in remote sensing data analysis activities in 
distributed systems. Current locus is on the Composite Inlrarcd Spectrometer (CIRS) data 
acquired during the CASSINI tlyby of Jupiter. Overall, the project has stayed on the 
development track outlined in the Year 1 annual report and most Year 2 goals have been met. 
The issues that have required the most attention are: implementation of the core photochemistry 
algorithms: implementation ol a lunctional Java Graphical User Interface, completion ot a 
functional CORBA Component Model framework; and assessment of performance issues. 
Specific accomplishments and the di 1 1 iculties encountered are summarized in this report. Work 
to be carried out in the next year center on: completion of testing ol the initial operational 
implementation; its application to analysis of the CASSINI/CIRS Jovian flyby data; extension ol 
the PPMT to incorporate additional phenomenology algorithms; and delivery ol a mature 
operational implementation. 


1 . YEAR 2 ACCOMPLISHMENTS 

The stated goals from the Year 1 annual report arc here discussed in terms of the progress made 
in achieving these goals and what if any teclmical issues arose in the process of working towards 
these goals. 

1.1 Application Goals & Tasks 

1.1.1 Complete development of initial implementatioas (1-D photochemical tr an sport modelin g 
of planetary stratospheres using empirical atmosphere models and t h e Newton-Raphsop 
algorithm) (T 1 & 2 nd quarters) 

We have succeeded in developing an initial, partially tested, implementation of the 1-D transport 
modeling code employing the Newton-Raphson algorithm but were unable to meet the target goal 
of 2 nd quarter for completion of the initial implementation. The initial version has been tested 
successfully only for a simplified Chapman ozone chemistry scheme. In addition, the coupling 
between the PPMT GUI (client code) and the PPMT photochemistry implementation (servers) 



was not completed due to delays in development of the PPMT GUI. The principle cause of the 
delay in completing the GUI was a steeper than expected learning curve for the extensible 
Markup Language (XML) and the Mathematics Markup Language (MathML). Both XML and 
MathML play substantial roles in the communication of data between the GUI and the 
photochemistry code. Finally, although we did complete an initial implementation of the 1-D 
transport code, the initial version has not yet been fully integrated into a compliant CCM 
framework because of unexpected delays in the availability of an open source Java 
implementation of the CCM. As a result of unexpected changes in the Information Technology 
sector some companies that had previously committed to development of a CCM platform 
changed direction and delayed their CCM implementation. Consequently, we needed to redirect 
some effort to solidifying our “partial’' implementation of the CCM. We still support our initial 
decision to base the PPMT architecture on a CCM framework and we are excited to be at the 
forefront of the CCM maturity process (we are now an Influencing member of the Object 
Management Group (OMG), actively participating in the Finalization Task Force (FTF) for the 
CCM, and developers of the most advanced CCM implementation known to the CCM FTF). 

1.1.2 Validation and testing of initial implementations via detailed analysis of CASS1N1/C1RS 
Jupiter flvbv data (e.g.. CIRS/JUPITER Far-IR Composition Study data, CIRS/Jupiter Mid-IR 
Composition Map data) (2 nd & 3 rd quarters) 

Prior to validation and testing of the PPMT implementation, a number of databases needed to be 
constructed: reference solar llux spectra, photoabsorption cross sections and branching ratios, 
identification of chemical species relevant to the Jovian atmosphere and corresponding lists of 
relevant chemical reactions, and pertinent atmosphere models. Mapping existing data formats to 
XML and MathML was not trivial and required additional effort than expected. The database 
files were completely defined by the early part of the 4 th quarter and rigorous testing of the PPMT 
implementation commenced soon after. We are still in the process of validating and testing the 
implementation and expect to complete this task early next quarter. 

Regarding analysis of CASSINI/CIRS data, calibrated data sets with required meta-data suitable 
for scientific analysis are expected to be available no sooner than mid-September, 2001. 

1.1.3 Delivery of a completed, validated “official” PPMT Jupiter version to NASA/GSFC Code 
693 (end of 2 nd quarter) [Also: 1.1.6 Delivery of the next “official” PPMT version , . . (end of 4 lh 
quarter)! 

The obstacles described in the previous subsections and described in following sections have 
resulted in failure to meet this goal. Delivery of a completed, validated, “official” PPMT 
implementation with “default” database files for Jupiter is expected early next quarter (provided 
the CASSINI/CIRS Jovian flyby data are released soon). 

1.1.4 Construction (i.e., re-codin» of legacy algorithms) and implementation of photon transport 
algorithms . . . (3 rJ & 4 th quarters) 

This was an obviously ambitious goal. Alter delivery of the Year 1 annual report, we recognized 
that elementary particle transport phenomenology went well beyond the role(s) captured in the 
PPMT architecture. It was decided that it would be beneficial not only to the PPMT project but 
to the aeronomy community at large if we “spun off’ the implementation of elementary particle 
transport under a separate AISR proposal. We subsequently submitted a proposal and were 
awarded a contract several months ago. Therefore, implementation of photon (as well as 
electron and possibly hydrogen and proton) transport has begun under the follow-on contract 




entitled “Transport Phenomenology Modeling Tool’’ (TPMT, Dr. Douglas Strickland, P.I.). We 
hope photon transport algorithms will he available for use in the PPMT within six months; 
however, design and architecture layout modifications or extensions may be required. 

1.1.5 Begin extension of photochemical modeling methods to the thermospheric/ionospheric 
region with addition of methods for calculating corresponding emissions at UV and visible 
wavelengths (3 rd & 4 lh quarters) 

This task cannot be commenced until a validated PPMT implementation is completed. This task 
in particular entails close coupled between the PPMT and TPMT software, hence potential design 
and architecture conflicts (e.g., those stemming from performance issues) need to be resolved 
quickly. We expect to begin work on this task in the 2" d quarter ot Year 3. 


1.2 Software Development Goals & Tasks 

1.2.1 Complete implementation of Graphical User Interface (GUI) for the PPMT that satishes the 
Use Cases needed to support detailed analysis of the CASS1N1/CIRS Jupiter flyby data sets 

We succeeded in developing a functional Graphical User Interface for the PPMT that satisfies 
most (but not all) of the use cases associated with analysis of the CASS1NL/CIRS Jupiter flyby 
data sets. Specifically, the PPMT GUI currently supports a client/server distributed processing 
scenario using validated XML (and MatliML) as the means of data transport between the Java 
GUI and the PPMT servers. (There are many potential servers depending on how a user deploys 
the PPMT system on one or more computer hosts). The GUI allows users to specify; the model 
atmosphere, the external solar flux spectrum (and make adjustments), the chemical species 
involved (transient, transported, bath, and end-product — these can be selected or deleted but 
currently can not added except through editing of XML configuration files), the reaction scheme 
and associated reaction rate coefficients (allowed reactions can be constructed using the identified 
species but reaction rates are currently limited to certain functional forms), and eddy mixing 
profile layers. The GUI reads a “default” Jupiter configuration XML file from a remote server 
and then allows the user to modify specific contents of the configuration in a graphical manner. 
Plotting capabilities have also been added via the freeware Java plotting tool from the Berkeley 
Ptolemy project. Use cases that are not currently satisfied by the GUI include; addition of new 
species (and all required information such as cross sections, branching ratios, etc), specification 
of general expressions for reaction rates and eddy mixing coefficients, saving and loading of local 
configuration files, and support for construction of “custom” model atmospheres (e.g . , for use in 
extra-solar planet modeling). 

We have decided to implement a relatively simplistic equation editor in Java that will allow a user 
to specify one or more mathematical expressions for reaction rate coefficients, eddy mixing 
coefficients, and any other future use cases that require specification of mathematical expressions. 
The math equation editor will generate MatliML context and will be limited to only those 
functions and operations that are deemed necessary for the PPMT. Unfortunately, there are no 
robust, freeware implementations of a Java equation editor that we can reuse. There are. 
however, several free Java equation editors that are available that arc extensible and will serve as 
the basis for the PPMT equation editor. 



1.2.2 Incorporate type definitions and use of the CORBA Persistent Stale Service (PSS) to enable 
archiving of phenomenology inputs as well as post -processing ou louts 

We have just recently incorporated the PSS into our CCM implementation so we will be able to 
take advantage of the PSS once the PPMT is ported to our CCM implementation (expected in the 
next quarter). 

1.2.3 Incorporate use of XML to maintain disconnect between the PPMT GUI and the PPMT 
server and for standardized configuration of CCM component “Homes" 

This goal has been reached. 

1.2.4 Establish test suite for automated component and integration tests of the PPMT 

This goal has been reached although we need to continue to maintain the test suite as we add 
additional functionality to the PPMT. 

1.2.5 Develop web pages for deployment platform that provides access to GUI. PPMT servers, 
compiled middleware products (ORB and CORBA Services). Application Programmers Interface 
(API), and documentation 

We have not yet created a web site for accessing the PPMT. This task will be completed once the 
PPMT “official" version is ready for release. 

1 .2.6 Port PPMT to open source CCM implementation (when available) 

As discussed in section 1.1.1. (here are no robust CCM implementations available. Consequently, 
we have developed our own robust CCM implementation that will serve as the framework of the 
PPMT. We expect to port the PPMT to our CCM implementation in the early part of the next 
quarter. 

1.2.7 Port PPMT to Linux/lnlel platform 

This goal has not yet been reached. We will port the PPMT before we release it (expected next 
quarter). 

1.2.8 Implement security measures in the PPMT by incorporating use of the CORBA Security 
Service and the CORBA Firewall specification. These security measures are needed primarily by 
users and developers that work within a network that is protected by a firewall or IP packet filter. 

This goal has not been reached. However, we will be adding security features to our CCM 
implementation (as defined in the CCM specification) and these features will be available to the 
PPMT once we port it to the CCM framework. 


- 4 - 







2. YEAR 3 GOALS & TASKS 


2.1 Application Goals & Tasks 

• Completion of testing and optimization of the initial implementation lor 1-D 
photochemical transport modeling of planetary stratospheres using empirical atmosphere 
models and the Newton-Raphson algorithm (l sl quarter) 

• Delivery of a completed, validated “official” PPMT Jupiter version to NASA/GSFC 
Code 693 (l sl quarter) 

• Validation and testing of initial implementations via detailed analysis of CASSINI/CIRS 
Jupiter flyby data (e.p.. CIRS/Jupiter Mid-IR Composition Map data) (T' & 2 nd quarters) 

• Initial expansion of recognized phenomenology for condensation loss processes (3 & 4 
quarters) 

• Begin extension of photochemical modeling methods to thermospheric/ionosphcric 
region and addition of methods for calculating corresponding emissions at UV and visible 
wavelengths (3 rd & 4 th quarters) 

• Delivery of the next “official” PPMT version including basic photon transport algorithms 
(MUV stratospheric photodissociation and 1R molecular band spectral radiances) to 
NASA/GSFC Code 693 (end of 4 th quarter) 

2.2 Software Development Goals & Tasks 

• Update and maintain test suite for automated component and integration tests of the 
PPMT (all quarters) 

• Implement a simple MathML equation editor and MatliML evaluator (I s1 quarter) 

• Port PPMT to our open source CCM implementation (l sl quarter) 

• Test PPMT on Linux and SGI platforms (T 1 quarter) 

• Add additional plotting capabilities to the GUI (1 st quarter) 

• Add post-processing capabilities to the GUI (2 nd — 4 th quarters) 

• Continue work on CCM implementation to enhance deployment and configuration and to 
add security features (1 st & 2 nd quarters) 


- 5 - 



3. ANTICIPATED PPMT-HASED STUDIES & SOME LESSONS LEARNED 


We are becoming especially eager to carry out analysis of the CASSINI/C1RS Jovian tlyby data, 
now that an operational implementation of the PPMT is nearing completion. The various 
obstacles that have arisen, described in previous reports and in this document, demonstrate the 
genuine research aspect of this project - the risks and challenges have at times been very 
frustrating - but now the advances accomplished on the software front can be utilized in scientific 
studies. One study of considerable intrinsic interest, to be carried out with Dr. Paul Romani 
(NASA/GSFC), is investigation of the chemical pathways responsible for the ubiquitous presence 
of benzene in the Jupiter atmosphere, seen in ISO and CASSINL/CIRS data; the initial study in 
this direction will likely focus on methylacetylene and allene abundances and chemistry. Another 
anticipated study involves utilization of the latitudinal distributions of observed hydrocarbons 
(e.g., C 1 H 2 and C;fh,) to infer the distributions of unobserved species and the magnitudes of 
vertical v.v horizontal dynamical mixing responsible for these distributions. Phosphine chemistry 
is also of interest, but investigation of the distribution of phosphine compounds in the Jovian 
atmosphere will require the extension of PPMT to incorporate condensation-related processes. In 
anticipation of the CASSINI tour of the Saturnian system, PPMT will be applied in predictive 
studies of photochemistry on Saturn and Titan, for which relevant reference databases will need 
to be constructed; the design and architecture, GUI, and computational capabilities of the PPMT 
are of particular advantage in this sort of study, allowing rapid and thorough comparative analysis 
of photochemical schemes proposed by competing groups. From a scientific viewpoint, this will 
be a very active, exciting year. 

3.1 The impact of architectural design decisions and distributed computing on performance 

As discussed in previous quarterly reports in the first year, most modern software processes or 
methodologies (especially the Unified Process subscribed to by us) promote an iterative process 
that attempts to minimize long-term risk and maximize robust designs and implementation 
productivity. We have attempted to follow the recommendations of the Unified Process as 
deemed relevant to the PPMT project and we have been fairly successful to date. Several issues 
that we have encountered with respect to the software development process deserve to be 
mentioned. Specifically, in following an iterative scheme for developing an architecture, 
implementing architectural designs, and testing implementations we failed in two important ways: 

1 . Assessing the impact of chosen algorithms on a domain model 

2. Consideration of the overall scalability of our design and implementation 

In the first case, through the typical cycle of domain modeling, analysis and design, 
implementation, and testing, it is important during the analysis and design phases of a 
development cycle to ensure that the requirements of an algorithm can be satisfied by a 
corresponding domain model. In other words, the implementation of a design must fit within the 
constraints defined by a domain model; since a domain model defines the types or classes of 
objects in a system, the behavior of the objects, and the interaction between the objects, an 
algorithm is constrained to use the constructs (i.e. classes, packages, attributes, operations, 
associations, etc) defined by the domain model (except when dealing with the specifics of a 
particular behavior of an object). Whenever an algorithm does not “fit” within the constraints of 
the domain model then the domain model must be improved or generalized to accommodate the 
algorithm (this may appear backwards but of what use is a domain model without some form of 
software to justify it?). To illustrate the issue, we encountered a problem with our domain model 
because it did not properly support the computation of Jacobian elements that are required by the 
Newton-Raphson algorithm. The problem arose because the Jacobian elements contain 


- 6 - 



contributions from both photodissociation and chemical reactions, yet there was no “placeholder” 
in the domain model for these Jacobian elements (they were assumed to be local “behavior” and 
therefore not important from a domain perspective). The Jacobian problem was temporarily 
resolved but needs to be revisited from a domain perspective to ensure that the domain model 
docs not expose what arc otherwise artifacts of a particular algorithm. 

Our initial test framework for the PPMT implementation was based on a simplified Chapman 
ozone chemistry that included about six chemical species involved in about six chemical 
reactions with an artificial atmosphere model that contained ten altitude points. The performance 
of the PPMT code when tested in this case was relatively quick and did not indicate that our 
decisions to use Java and CORBA were faulty. Alter our initial tests we produced detailed input 
configuration files that consist of many more chemical species and reactions and atmosphere 
models containing up to 200 altitude points. When we executed the PPMT axle with the more 
realistic inputs, we were surprised to find that our algorithms did not scale well and that 
performance was significantly degraded. After some investigation we determined that a false 
assumption about the performance of certain key parts of the PPMT architecture (namely, the 
access of remote, i.e. CORBA, particle distribution “fields” via an iterator approach) had resulted 
in poor performance and lack of scalability. Fortunately, we had anticipated (but, unfortunately, 
not tested) the possibility of performance problems in accessing remote particle distribution fields 
and had designed the field iterator to provide alternative behavior that enhances performance. 
We arc presently making improvements to the PPMT software to utilize the performance-oriented 
behavior of the design and we arc achieving significant improvements in performance as a result. 


- 7 - 


REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

Fomi Approved 
OMB No 0704-0188 

Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response including the time for reviewing instructions searching existing data sources, gathering 
and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of 
information including suggestions for reducing this burden to Washington Headquarters Services Directorate for Information Operations and Reports 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway Suite 
1204 Arlington, VA 22202-4302. and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC 20503 

1 AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank) 

2 REPORT DATE 3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

21 August 2001 Annual Report - Year 2 thru 8/01 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Photochemical Phenomenology Model for the New Millennium 


6. AUTHORS 

Dr. James Bishop and J. Scott Evans 


5 FUNDING NUMBERS 
NASW-99032 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 
Computational Physics, Inc 
8001 Braddock Road, Ste 210 
Springfield, VA 22151 


8 


PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 
5108-8 


9 SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 
NASA 

Goddard Space Flight Center 


10. SPONSORING/MONITORING 
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 

#8 


1 1 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 


12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 


12b DISTRIBUTION CODE 


13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words ) 

The “Photochemical Phenomenology Model for the New Millennium” project tackles the issue of reengineering and extension 
of validated physics-based modeling capabilities (“legacy” computer codes) to application-oriented software for use in science 
and science-support activities. While the design and architecture layouts are in terms of general particle distributions involved 
in scattering, impact, and reactive interactions, initial Photochemical Phenomenology Modeling Tool (PPMT) implementations 
are aimed at construction and evaluation of photochemical transport models with rapid execution for use in remote sensing 
data analysis activities in distributed systems. Current focus is on the Composite Infrared Spectrometer (CIRS) data acquired 
during the CASSINI flyby of Jupiter. Overall, the project has stayed on the development track outlined in the Year 1 annual 
report and most Year 2 goals have been met. The issues that have required the most attention are: implementation of the 
core photochemistry algorithms; implementation of a functional Java Graphical User Interface; completion of a functional 
CORBA Component Model framework; and assessment of performance issues. Specific accomplishments and the difficulties 
encountered are summarized in this report. Work to be carried out in the next year center on: completion of testing of the 
initial operational implementation; its application to analysis of the CASSINI/CIRS Jovian flyby data; extension of the PPMT to 
incorporate additional phenomenology algorithms; and delivery of a mature operational implementation. 


14. SUBJECT TERMS 

Photochemical Phenomenology Modeling Tools (PPMT) 


15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

? 


16. PRICE CODE 
$285,551 00 


17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF REPORT 
unclassified 


18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF THIS PAGE 
unclassified 


19 SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF ABSTRACT 
unclassified 


20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 
SAR 


NSN 7540-01-280-5500 


Computer Generated 


STANDARD FORM 298 (Rev 2-89) 
Prescribed by ANSI Std 239-18 
298-102 









