
ITOS to EDGE “Bridge” Software for 
Morpheus Lunar/Martian Vehicle 

Authors: Jordan Fuchs; Robert Hirsh; Prairie View A&M University; Johnson Space Center; Mentor: Robert Hirsh 



Abstract 

My project involved improving upon existing software and writing 
new software for the Project Morpheus Team. Specifically, I 
created and updated Integrated Test and Operations Systems 
(ITOS) user interfaces for on-board interaction with the vehicle 
during archive playback as well as live streaming data. These 
interfaces are an integral part of the testing and operations for 
the Morpheus vehicle providing any and all Information from the 
vehicle to evaluate instruments and insure coherence and control 
of the vehicle during Morpheus missions. I also created a “bridge” 
program for interfacing “live” telemetry data with the Engineering 
DOUG Graphics Engine (EDGE) software for a graphical (stand- 
alone or VR dome) view of live Morpheus flights or archive 
replays, providing graphical representation of vehicle flight and 
movement during subsequent tests and in real missions. 



Introduction 

I was selected to work at NASA-Johnson Space Center this 
summer under my mentor, Robert Hirsh, working in the 
Engineering Robotics Division (ER6) to create and update 
software for the MORPHEUS Team throughout the course of my 
internship. Project Morpheus is a vertical test bed demonstrating 
new green propellant propulsion systems and autonomous landing 
and hazard detection technology. Designed, developed, 
manufactured and operated in-house by engineers at NASA’s 
Johnson Space Center, the Morpheus Project represents not only 
a vehicle to advance technologies, but also an opportunity to try 
out “lean development" engineering practices. 


Methods 


The early stages of the project consisted of familiarizing myself 
with Linux shell scripting and C++. The first stage of the project 
entailed using NASA’s GUI page-builder to isolate problem 
mnemonics causing the CPU to overload and assisted in source 
code debugging. I was then tasked with updating existing ITOS 
pages by altering each element to make room to add thruster 
temperatures and fail indicators. I wrote the code to create a 
graphical representation of each of the new mnemonics I had 
added. The subsequent project I worked on detailed researching 
and writing new code to produce real time and archive replay 
visualization for tracking and analysis of the Morpheus vehicle. I 
choose to write a C++ code that opened a client to “bridge” the 
live telemetry data from the vehicle and push It into the already 
existing EDGE visualization software. 



Results & Discussion 


I was able to complete each task assigned this summer and took 
on additional projects to help other divisions with various tasks 
such as the ITOS interface pages. For my first task, I was able to 
track down and isolate the problem mnemonics on each of the 
pages, remove them, and recreate them in another window until I 
was able to sit down with my mentor and determine that the 
problem was a NaN value that was conflicting with the expected 
value which resulted in overloading the CPU. 



nOS ftw wdhyt oM— iwK nw t, iwwJumI 


I was then tasked with updating ITOS pages with thruster 
temperatures and fail indicators requiring me to code graphical 
charts for each of the newly added mnemonics. 




IVt« - InWtTnnp ti I - 

During the second part of summer, I worked to create a “bridge” 
program to produce real time and archive replay visualization for 
tracking and analysis of the Morpheus vehicle. I was able to 
achieve the desired outcome and my program accurately created 
a visualization of the vehicle's telemetry data as it was being 
replayed. This software was used to visualize live streaming 
CCSDS data for subsequent flight tests. 



Conclusion 

Throughout my internship I delivered quality work on each project 
to which I was assigned or volunteered for, I demonstrated a high 
level of competence, taking the Initiative to work on my own or In 
seeking out different projects or assistance. I was fortunate enough 
to be chosen to work on one of NASA’s most recognizable rapid 
development projects, Project Morpheus, giving me a complete and 
enjoyable internship experience I will never forget. 








