N90-20935 

INVESTIGATION OF AIR TRANSPORTATION 

TECHNOLOGY 

AT PRINCETON UNIVERSITY, 1988-1989 


Robert F. Stengel 

Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering 
Princeton University 
Princeton, New Jersey 


SUMMARY OF RESEARCH 

The Air Transportation Technology Program at Princeton Univer- 
sity, a program emphasizing graduate and undergraduate student research, 
proceeded along seven avenues during the past year: 

• Microburst and Wind Shear Hazards to Aircraft 

• Intelligent Flight Control Systems 

• Real-time Cockpit Simulation 

• Revitalization of General Aviation 

• Alternatives for the Air Traffic Control System 

• Stochastic Robustness of Flight Control Systems 

• Neural Networks for Flight Control 

It has become apparent that severe downdrafts and resulting high 
velocity outflows caused by microbursts present a significant hazard to 
aircraft on takeoff and final approach. Microbursts, which are often asso- 
ciated with thunderstorm activity, also can occur in the vicinity of dissi- 
pating convective clouds that produce no rainfall at ground level. Micro- 
burst encounter is a rare but extremely dangerous phenomenon that 
accounts for one or two air carrier accidents and numerous general avia- 
tion accidents each year (on the average). Conditions are such that an 
aircraft's performance envelope may be inadequate for safe penetration 
unless optimal control strategies are known and applied. 

While a number of simulation studies have been directed at the 
problem, there are varied opinions in the flying community regarding the 
best piloting procedures, and optimal control strategies have only recently 
been defined. Graduate student Mark Psiaki completed a study of optimal 
trajectories for penetration of microbursts when encounter is unavoidable. 
His initial work (reported earlier) showed that simple control laws could 
greatly reduce an aircraft's response to wind shear. His 1987 Ph.D. thesis 


PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED 


131 



presents flight envelopes within which optimal application of throttle and 
pitch control produce acceptable deviations from nominal takeoff and 
landing flight paths for a jet transport and a propeller-driven general avia- 
tion aircraft. Although the response mechanism is the same, jet transport 
and general aviation aircraft behave somewhat differently in microbursts; 
the larger, heavier aircraft are more adversely affected by variations in the 
horizontal wind, while the smaller, lighter aircraft have greater difficulty 
with the downdraft. These findings are summarized in Ref. 1 . 

The emphasis of current wind shear research, being pursued by 
graduate student Alex Stratton under a separate NASA grant, is on devel- 
oping an expert system for wind shear avoidance [2,3]. Our principal 
objectives are to develop methods for assessing the likelihood of wind shear 
encounter (based on real-time information in the cockpit), for deciding 
what flight path to pursue (e.g., abort, go-around, normal climbout, or 
glide slope), and for using the aircraft's full potential to combat wind 
shear. This study requires the definition of deterministic and statistical 
techniques for fusing internal and external information, for making 
"go/no-go" decisions, and for generating commands to the aircraft's auto- 
pilot and flight directors in automatic and manually controlled flight. 

Undetected system failures and/or inadequately defined recovery 
procedures have contributed to numerous air carrier incidents and acci- 
dents. The infamous DC- 10 accident at Chicago's O’Hare Airport, in 
which loss of an engine pod, subsequent loss of subsystems, and asymmetric 
wing stall led to disaster, provides a prototype for the kind of tragedy that 
could be averted by intelligent flight control systems. (An intelligent 
control system is one that uses artificial intelligence concepts, e.g., an 
expert systems program, to improve performance and failure tolerance.) 
Although many methods of modem control theory are applicable, the 
scope of the problem is such that none of the existing theories provides a 
complete and practical solution to the problem. At the same time, heuristic 
logic may be applicable, but it has yet to be stated in satisfactory format. 

Graduate student David Handelman has developed a knowledge-based 
reconfigurable flight control system that is implemented with the Pascal 
programming language using parallel microprocessors. This expert system 
could be considered a prototype for a failure-tolerant control system that 
can be constructed using existing hardware. The knowledge-based flight 
control system is specified initially and tested using the LISP programming 
language. When desired logic is determined, the corresponding Pascal 
code is generated automatically. Concepts for rule-based learning and 



control that can be used in such systems are contained in two technical 
papers and in Mr. Handelman's Ph.D. thesis [4-6]. 

Helping a pilot make quick decisions under high workload conditions 
is important for aircraft missions of all types. In research principally sup- 
ported by an Army/Navy grant but reported at numerous quarterly reviews 
of the Joint University Program, Brenda Belkin has developed an expert 
system of expert systems called AUTOCREW. In her M.S.E. thesis [7], 

Ms. Belkin uses the paradigm of a hypothetical aircraft crew to facilitate 
the assignment of tasks, rules, and data within parallel knowledge bases. 
AUTOCREW performs a cyclical search in which the Director expert sys- 
tem, the electronic analog of the aircraft commander, establishes goals that 
invoke the crew-member expert systems. The crew members then perform 
such tasks as observation, monitoring, and control in response to continu- 
ing needs as well as special requests from the Director. The application of 
AUTOCREW to civil jet transports is apparent, and Ms. Belkin has 
participated in the Joint University Program with this in mind. 

Development of a real-time cockpit simulator continued during the 
year. The simulator provides a single-person crew station with both con- 
ventional and advanced control devices; it currently is programmed to 
simulate the Navion single-engine general aviation airplane. Displays for 
the "out-the-window" view and the control panel devices are generated 
entirely by computers and are presented on color cathode-ray tubes. The 
external view is generated and displayed by a Silicon Graphics IRIS 3020 
Workstation, which has 1024 x 768-pixel resolution and can perform over 
85,000 3-D transformations per second. A central computing unit per- 
forms dynamic and control calculations, accepts analog inputs, drives the 
panel displays, and commands the external view. It is a special-purpose 
Multibus computer employing parallel 80286 processors and special-pur- 
pose graphics boards, which are controlled by an IBM PC- AT computer. 
Senior Jeffrey Seinwill developed an all-attitude artificial horizon display 
for the simulator during the year [8]. 


For all practical purposes, the production of small general aviation 
(GA) airplanes in the U.S. has come to an end. Fewer than a thousand 
four-seaters were produced in 1987, and most of the principal American 
GA manufacturers have all but abandoned the business. Although there are 
many reasons for the erosion of this industry, outmoded technology is a 
major factor. General aviation has a potentially significant role to play not 
only in the National Transportation System but in the economic infrastruc- 
ture of the country. Revival demands reinvention of the small plane, in 


133 



what might be called a Modem-Equipment General Aviation airplane. 
There is a wealth of fundamental research to be done in this area, much of 
it already underway in the Air Transportation Technology Program. 

Senior Joakim Karlsson's independent work project dealt with the design of 
such an aircraft [9] using modem aerodynamic, structural, and control 
technology. Senior Bruce Weiner conducted an economic review of the 
price-performance characteristics of small aircraft during the period from 
1970 to 1987 that graphically illustrates the effects of increased product 
liability costs [10]. 

Air commerce is a significant factor in the nation's economy, 
involving hundreds of millions of passenger trips and tens of billions of 
dollars in operating revenue each year. Recent revenue growth rates aver- 
age 10 percent per year; much of this growth can be traced to the deregu- 
lation of the nation’s airlines in 1978. This growth has caused severe air 
traffic control problems, most often demonstrated in flight delays and 
reflected by growing concerns for passenger safety. Despite the aggregate 
economic benefits of deregulation, many people are questioning whether 
the benefits outweigh the perceived costs of reduced confidence and 
increased delays. Senior Lawrence Neubauer analyzes alternatives for the 
air traffic control system in his thesis, giving particular attention to the 
institutional structure of the FA A [11]. 

Control system robustness is defined as the ability to maintain satis- 
factory stability or performance characteristics in the presence of all con- 
ceivable system parameter variations. While assured robustness may be 
viewed as an alternative to gain adaptation or scheduling to accommodate 
known parameter variations, more often it is seen as protection against 
uncertainties in plant specification. Consequently, a statistical description 
of control system robustness is consistent with what may be known about 
the structure and parameters of the plant's dynamic model. Guaranteeing 
robustness has long been a design objective of control system analysis, 
although in most instances, insensitivity to parameter variations has been 
treated as a deterministic problem. Graduate student Laura Ryan is inves- 
tigating a simple numerical procedure for estimating the stochastic robust- 
ness of control systems [12-14]. Monte Carlo evaluation of the system's 
eigenvalues allows the probability of instability and the related stochastic 
root locus to be estimated. This analysis approach treats not only Gaussian 
parameter uncertainties but non-Gaussian cases, including uncertain-but- 
bounded variations. Trivial extensions of the procedure admit alternate 
discriminants to be considered. Thus, the probabilities that stipulated 
degrees of instability will be exceeded or that closed-loop roots will leave 


134 


desirable regions also can be estimated. Results are particularly amenable 
to graphical presentation. 

There is growing interest in the use of neural networks for compu- 
tational decision-making and control, brought about by the advent of small, 
fast, inexpensive computers. The neural network paradigm offers a poten- 
tially attractive structure for flight control systems that adapt to changing 
flight conditions and system failures, but much is to be learned about the 
practicality of such an approach. Graduate student Dennis Linse has begun 
to examine this potential. To date, he has formulated various multi-layer 
networks to trim the longitudinal motions of a twin-jet transport. The 
network is resilient in the face of elemental failures and provides moder- 
ately accurate open-loop control of throttle and elevator over a wide range 
of flight conditions. 


ANNOTATED REFERENCES OF 1988-89 PUBLICATIONS 


1. Psiaki, M., and Stengel, R.F., "Performance Limits for Optimal Micro- 
burst Encounter," Proceedings of the AIAA 15 th Atmospheric Flight 
Mechanics Conference , Minneapolis, Aug 1988, pp. 358-370. 

The performance limits of optimal aircraft control strategies for 
microburst encounter are presented. The purpose is to determine the 
"edges of the envelope" for no-accident aircraft penetration of microburst 
wind shear. Over 1,100 optimal trajectories have been computed for jet 
transport and general aviation aircraft flying through idealized micro- 
bursts. They have been generated using a Successive Quadratic Programs 
trajectory optimization algorithm, which directly handles inequality con- 
straints. Qualitative aspects of the best strategies provide a composite pic- 
ture of good control in a microburst. Variations of the no-accident per- 
formance with microburst type, intensity, length scale, and location define 
performance limits. 

Optimal performance limits show three length-scale regimes. At 
short length scales, hazards usually associated with gustiness predominate. 
At intermediate length scales, a degraded ability to maintain flight path 
and/or vertical velocity sets the limiting microburst intensities for no-acci- 
dent performance. At very long microburst length scales, the hazards 
associated with intense steady winds are the critical safety limits. The abil- 


135 



ity to successfully transit a microburst also varies strongly with microburst 
location. The performance limits show that both aircraft types, if con- 
trolled properly, can penetrate very severe microbursts. Nevertheless, 
even the best control strategies have their limits. The jet transport perfor- 
mance limits occur at higher microburst intensities than the general avia- 
tion limits. 


2. Stengel, R.F., and Stratton, D.A., "An Expert System for Wind Shear 
Avoidance," presented at the Second Combined Manufacturers and Tech- 
nology Airborne Wind Shear Review Meeting, Williamsburg, VA, Oct 
1988. 


Flight in strong wind shears, especially microbursts, poses a unique 
and severe hazard to aircraft. The disturbance caused by the wind field 
may literally exceed the performance characteristics of the aircraft, making 
safe transit impossible even with optimal guidance and control strategies. 
An unusual degree of piloting skill may be required to successfully elude 
danger. Nevertheless, planes fly in moderate wind shear all the time; pilots 
leam to handle crosswinds, gustiness, and moderate frontal activity. The 
problem is that microbursts are random, rare phenomena; pilots do not 
develop the needed skills for coping with wind shear through normal expe- 
rience. The typical pilot is likely to be confronted with a life-threatening 
wind shear only once or twice during an entire flying career; hence, it is 
unlikely that he or she can leam all the important signs of wind shear and 
maintain a high level of proficiency in the proper control procedures. 

On-board computation provides an excellent opportunity to assist the 
pilot in surviving encounters with severe wind shears, but the logic that 
must be executed in real time is complex and must have sufficient inputs 
for framing decisions about appropriate control actions. The computer 
program(s) and hardware to perform this task must have attributes of 
expert systems and control systems, they must account for the limitations of 
aircraft performance, and they must operate in real time. At least as 
important as its technical specifications, the on-board system must provide 
a satisfactory interface with the flight crew, which bears the ultimate 
responsibility for assuring safety. This means not only that the system 
must deduce near-optimal strategies and tactics for emergency situations 
but that it must distinguish between truly hazardous conditions and the 
more likely alternatives associated with normal aircraft operations. 


136 


A program to investigate ways of protecting against wind shear has 
begun at Princeton University, with current emphasis on developing an 


expert system for wind shear avoidance . Our principal objectives are to 
develop methods for assessing the likelihood of wind shear encounter 
(based on real-time information in the cockpit), for deciding what flight 
path to pursue (e.g., abort, go-around, normal climbout, or glide slope), 
and for using the aircraft’s full potential to combat wind shear. This study 
requires the definition of deterministic and statistical techniques for fusing 
internal and external information, for making "go/no-go" decisions, and 
for generating commands to the aircraft’s autopilot and flight directors in 
automatic and manually controlled flight. 

The expert system for pilot aiding is based on results of the Inte- 
grated FAA Wind Shear Program. Its two-volume manual presents an 
overview, pilot guide, training program, and substantiating data and pro- 
vides guidelines for this initial development. The WindShear Safety Advi- 
sor currently being developed at Princeton contains over 140 rules and is 
coded in the LISP programming language for implementation on a Sym- 
bolics 3670 LISP Machine. 


3. Stengel, R.F., and Stratton, D.A., "An Expert System for Wind Shear 
Avoidance," presented at the 1989 American Control Conference, Pitts- 
burgh, June 1989. 

A study of intelligent guidance and control concepts for protecting 
against the adverse effects of wind shear during aircraft takeoffs and land- 
ings is being conducted, with current emphasis on developing an expert 
system for wind shear avoidance. Principal objectives are to develop 
methods for assessing the likelihood of wind shear encounter (based on 
real-time information in the cockpit), for deciding what flight path to 
pursue (e.g., takeoff abort, landing go-around, or normal climbout or 
glide slope), and for using the aircraft's full potential for combating wind 
shear. This study requires the definition of both deterministic and statisti- 
cal techniques for fusing internal and external information, for making 
"go/no-go"decisions, and for generating commands to the aircraft’s 
autopilot and flight directors for both automatic and manually controlled 
flight. The program has begun with the development of the WindShear 
Safety Advisor, an expert system for pilot aiding that is based on the FAA 
Windshear Training Aid, a two-volume manual that presents an overview, 
pilot guide, training program, and substantiating data provides guidelines 
for this initial development. The WindShear Safety Advisor expert system 
currently contains over 200 rules and is coded in the LISP programming 
language. 


137 



4. Handelman, D.A., and Stengel, R. F., "Rule-Based Mechanisms of 
Learning for Intelligent Adaptive Flight Control," Proceedings of the 1988 
American Control Conference , Atlanta, June 1988, pp. 208-213. 

This paper investigates how certain aspects of human learning can be 
used to characterize learning in intelligent adaptive control systems. 
Reflexive and declarative memory and learning are described. It is shown 
that model-based systems-theoretic adaptive control methods exhibit 
attributes of reflexive learning, whereas the problem-solving capabilities of 
knowledge-based systems of artificial intelligence are naturally suited for 
implementing declarative learning. Issues related to learning in knowl- 
edge-based control systems are addressed, with particular attention given to 
rule-based systems. A mechanism for real-time rule-based knowledge 
acquisition is suggested, and utilization of this mechanism within the con- 
text of failure analysis for fault-tolerant flight control is demonstrated. 


5. Handelman, D.A., and Stengel, R. F., "Perspectives on the Use of Rule- 
Based Control," Proceedings of the IF AC Workshop on Artificial Intelli- 
gence in Real-Time Control, Swansea, UK, Sept 1988. 

This paper addresses issues regarding the application of artificial 
intelligence techniques to real-time control. Advantages associated with 
knowledge-based programming are discussed. A proposed rule-based 
control technique is summarized and applied to the problem of automated 
emergency procedure execution. Although emergency procedures are by 
definition predominantly procedural, their numerous evaluation and deci- 
sion points make a declarative representation of the knowledge they encode 
highly attractive, resulting in an organized and easily maintained software 
hierarchy. Simulation results demonstrate that real-time performance can 
be obtained using a microprocessor-based controller. It is concluded that a 
rule-based control system design approach may prove more useful than 
conventional methods under certain circumstances, and that declarative 
rules with embedded procedural code provide a sound basis for the con- 
struction of complex control systems. 


138 



6. Handelman, D.A., "A Rule-Based Paradigm for Intelligent Adaptive 
Flight Control," Ph. D. Thesis, Princeton University, Report No. 1858-T, 
April 1989. 

Although fault tolerance always has been an important aspect of air- 
craft design, the reduced static stability and increased maneuverability of 
modem aircraft complicate the problem by shortening the amount of time 
available to detect, identify, and adjust for component failures. This dis- 
sertation investigates the use of highly integrated symbolic and numeric 
processing in real-time knowledge-based systems for enhanced automatic 
aircraft failure accommodation. A rule-based control technique is pro- 
posed whereby procedural activity is attained through the manipulation of 
declarative expressions. Rules are used to encode common-sense depen- 
dencies, to incorporate expert knowledge on specific situations, and to 
invoke algorithmic mathematical procedures. Task execution occurs as a 
by-product of search through these knowledge-base rules. Also proposed 
is a rule-based controller development system that utilizes a high-level 
symbolic LISP environment for preliminary system design. Automatic 
LISP-to-Pascal knowledge-base translation is used to provide dramatically 
increased execution speed and an environment for highly integrated sym- 
bolic and numeric computation. The utility of the control technique is 
demonstrated through the construction of a multi-processor Rule-Based 
Flight Control System (RBFCS) for a CH-47 tandem-rotor helicopter. The 
RBFCS is shown to accommodate multiple simulated failures affecting the 
electrical, hydraulic, and stability augmentation subsystems of the heli- 
copter. It is concluded that declarative rules with embedded procedural 
code provide a sound basis for the construction of complex control sys- 
tems. 


7. Belkin, B.L., "Cooperative Rule-Based Systems for Aircraft Navigation 
and Control," M.S.E. Thesis, Princeton University, Report No. MAE- 
1856-T, June 1989. 

This thesis proposes a design methodology for the development of 
multiple cooperating rule-based systems for aircraft. Nine systems, collec- 
tively called AUTOCREW were designed to automate functions and deci- 
sions. The organization of tasks is described, details of knowledge-base 
development and implementation are given, and performance metrics for 
evaluating the workload of each knowledge base are demonstrated. Several 
test scenarios were evaluated using an interactive graphical simulation on 
an IBM PC-AT computer. Software tools developed to aid in high-level 
design also are described. Results show that these tools facilitate rapid 


139 



prototyping of a complex system exhibiting knowledge-base cooperation, 
satisfactory logic flow, and human pilot- AUTOCREW interaction. 

Design of one of the component expert systems, the Navigation Sen- 
sor Management (NSM) module, was pursued in considerable detail. This 
problem was chosen because it presented the challenge of designing an 
expert system from simulation data? that is, from quantitative test results. 
The NSM Expert was systematically derived from Kalman filter covariance 
data for simulated missions flown with seven different navigation system 
types. This development used Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) and the 
"ID3" algorithm. The function of the NSM Expert was to determine opti- 
mal navigation strategies from a set of available sensors based on a root- 
sum-square metric. Results show that the NSM Expert predicted position 
accuracy between 65 and 100 percent of the time for a specified "navaid" 
configuration and aircraft trajectory; hence, this decision-making logic 
could be incorporated in a scheme for best navaid selection. The system- 
atic nature of the ANOVA/ID3 method makes it broadly applicable to 
expert system design when experimental or simulation data are available. 


8. Seinwill, J., "Design and Testing of Cockpit Displays for a Flight 
Simulator," Princeton University Senior Independent Work Project 
Report, May 1988. 

A program to simulate an artificial horizon display on a CRT was 
developed and tested. The code exhibits real-time performance using a 
Matrox Multibus graphics board to generate an image of the aircraft's pitch 
and roll attitudes in maneuvering flight. The display can be masked to 
yield circular or rectangular format, and additional alphanumeric or 
graphical information can be presented within the mask. A pitch "ladder" 
can be superimposed on the artificial horizon to show quantitative data. 


9. Karlsson, J., "Preliminary Design for a Modem Equipment General 
Aviation (M.E.G.A.) Aircraft," Princeton University Senior Independent 
Work Project Report, May 1988. 

A single-engine/propeller aircraft design is proposed to revitalize the 
U.S. general aviation industry. The objective of the design is to improve 
safety over existing designs, improve cost efficiency, and to provide easy- 
to-fly aircraft, while maintaining good performance qualities. The design 
approach is defined, followed by the resulting design procedure, and a 
preliminary design is presented. These objectives are realized through the 


use of modem, but proven, technology, as well as a high degree of system 
redundancy. 

The Modem Equipment General Aviation (M.E.G.A.) airplane is 
designed to carry a payload of one pilot and three passengers, as well as 
two children on a folding seat or 100 kg of baggage. The range specifica- 
tion is 1000 km, the cruising speed is 90 m/s, and the landing speed is 25 
m/s. The resulting design incorporates a stratified-charge rotary engine 
and three lifting surfaces: a laminar-flow wing, a T-tail, and a small 
flapped canard in the propeller slipstream. All lifting surfaces have 
mechanically uncoupled controls. The wing has 50%-span simple flaps, 
and the wing tips are sheared to improve aerodynamic efficiency. Large 
cockpit windows afford good visibility, and limited use is made of com- 
posite materials to reduce weight and insure partial laminar flow over the 
wing. 


The first phases of the preliminary design were based on conven- 
tional analytical procedures. Two computer programs, LinAir and Paper 
Airplane , were used to optimize design details such as wing twist and static 
stability to produce the final design. 


10. Weiner, B.W., "Public Policy and Its Impact on The Decline Of Gen- 
eral Aviation: Directions For Future Improvement," Senior Thesis, 
Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs, Princeton 
University, May 1988. 

General aviation has not participated in the recent upswings in the 
economy. This year represented the ninth consecutive year of the decline 
in shipments of U.S. -built general aviation airplanes. The number of pri- 
vate pilots has been following a downtrend as well. The cause of the 
decline and future directions for general aviation are the topics of this the- 
sis. 


The purpose of the inquiry is to examine some of the external influ- 
ences driving general aviation pilots and aircraft out of American skies. It 
begins by examining the benefits of general aviation in both quantitative 
and qualitative terms. It considers the effect that the FAA has had and the 
policy changes that would benefit general aviation. It develops a "hedonic" 
pricing model to examine the economic demand for general aviation air- 
craft, focusing on single-reciprocating-engine configurations. The thesis 
concludes with policy recommendations. 


141 



The pricing model is a function of cruise speed, range, useful load, 
rate of climb, landing gear (retractable or not), and aircraft age. An eight- 
term polynomial was found to fit the logarithm of current average price 
with an R 2 statistic of 0.93 for a 17-year period beginning in 1970. The 
resulting index was applied to the general aviation fleet on an averaged, 
annualized basis to determine the relative quality of available aircraft. This 
measure suggests that both quality Imd aircraft price increased during the 
period, although there was a downturn in both during the final two years. 
The price index tracked the gross national product rather well until the 
same point in time. The author presents evidence that this relative reversal 
is due to skyrocketing product liability costs, which impact established 
manufacturers with many aircraft in the field most heavily. Liability costs 
have smaller impact on foreign competitors, who do not have as large an 
American fleet and thus have fewer claims. Tort reform is seen as a prim 
cipal means of solving this problem. 


11. Neubauer, L. A., "The Air Traffic Control System: Problems and 
Prospects," Senior Thesis, Woodrow Wilson School of Public and Inter- 
national Affairs, Princeton University, April 1988. 

Air commerce is a significant factor in the nation's economy, 
involving hundreds of millions of passenger trips and tens of billions of 
dollars in operating revenue each year. Recent revenue growth rates aver- 
age 10 percent per year; much of this growth can be traced to the deregu- 
lation of .the nation's airlines in 1978. This growth has caused severe air 
traffic control problems, most often demonstrated in flight delays and 
reflected by growing concerns for passenger safety. Despite the aggregate 
economic benefits of deregulation, many people are questioning whether 
the benefits outweigh the perceived costs of reduced safety and increased 
delays. Elected officials have responded by holding numerous hearings and 
introducing bills providing for a range of alternatives from total re-regu- 
lation to dismantling the Federal Aviation Administration. 

The FAA faces a growing crisis of confidence in its ability to pro- 
vide air traffic control. In response to funding, procurement, staffing, and 
oversight problems, three alternative solutions were analyzed in this thesis: 
reestablishing the FAA as an independent agency, setting up a government- 
owned corporation to run air traffic control, and privatizing air traffic 
control. After extensive review, it was concluded that the first alternative 
provides the best opportunity for resolving this dilemma, while creating 
the fewest new problems. An independent FAA would provide the oppor- 
tunity for a revitalization of the Agency by reducing funding concerns, 


142 



cutting outside influence over the organization, and providing the Admin- 
istrator with more flexibility to appoint staff and to recognize meritorious 
service. Resolution of the concerns facing air traffic control depends upon 
the joint efforts of FAA, DOT, Congress, and the Administration, as well 
as the users of the system. 


12. Stengel, R.F., and Ryan, L.E., "Stochastic Robustness of Linear Con- 
trol Systems," presented at the 1989 Conference on Information Sciences 
and Systems, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Mar 1989. 

A simple numerical procedure for estimating the stochastic robust- 
ness of a linear, time-invariant system is described. Monte Carlo evalua- 
tion of the system’s eigenvalues allows the probability of instability and the 
related stochastic root locus to be estimated. This definition of robustness 
is an alternative to existing deterministic definitions that address both 
structured and unstructured parameter variations directly. This analysis 
approach treats not only Gaussian parameter uncertainties but non-Gaussian 
cases, including uncertain-but-bounded variations. Trivial extensions of 
the procedure admit alternate discriminants to be considered. Thus, the 
probabilities that stipulated degrees of instability will be exceeded or that 
closed-loop roots will leave desirable regions also can be estimated. 

Results are particularly amenable to graphical presentation. 


13. Stengel, R.F., and Ryan, L.E., "Stochastic Robustness," presented at 
the SIAM Conference on Control in the 90's," San Francisco, May 1989. 

This paper is an oral-only extension of the above paper with 
extended numerical results for the Doyle LQG counterexample. In partic- 
ular, the comparison of stochastic robustness with singular-value analysis is 
pursued; whereas the latter provides only qualitative guidelines for "loop 
transfer recovery," the former provides a specific solution for the amount 
of robustness recovery required as a function of parameter uncertainty. 

14. Stengel, R.F., and Ryan, L.E., "Multivariate Histograms for Analysis 
of Linear Control System Robustness," presented at the 1989 American 
Control Conference, Pittsburgh, June 1989. 

A simple numerical procedure for estimating the stochastic robust- 
ness of a linear, time-invariant system is described. Based on Monte Carlo 
evaluation of the system's eigenvalues, this analysis approach introduces the 


i 


143 


probability of instability as a scalar measure of stability robustness. The 
related stochastic root locus, a portrayal of the root probability density, 
provides insight into robustness characteristics. Parameter variations are 
not limited to Gaussian parameter uncertainties; non-Gaussian cases, 
including uncertain-but-bounded variations, can be considered as well. 
Confidence intervals for the scalar probability of instability address com- 
putational issues inherent in Monte Carlo simulation. An example demon- 
strates stochastic robustness as applied to an aircraft control system in 
which parameters are alternately considered to have Gaussian, uniform, or 
binary probability distributions. 


