I I 0 0 J G 0 IQ/f ‘ 
s f> i :>ur 


// 






Trip Reports: 

ISO Working Group 9, Ada , 
Uniformity of Ada Applications 
Rapporteur Group, and Ada Europe 


Sue LeGrand 

Planning Research Corporation 


~ c C c 
0 

£ < *•/! 

C' 3 

£ ^ O U 
a C 

D 


or 


% 

O 

r 


fi v 


6/28 and 9/24, 1990 


Cooperative Agreement NCC 9-16 
Research Activity No. SE.32 

NASA Johnson Space Center 
Engineering Directorate 



TECHNICAL REPORT 




The 

RICIS 

Concept 


The University of Houston-Clear Lake established the Research Institute for 
Computing and Information systems in 1986 to encourage NASA Johnson Space 
Center and local industry to actively support research in the computing and 
information sciences. As part of this endeavor, UH-Clear Lake proposed a 
partnership with JSC to jointly define and manage an integrated program of research 
in advanced data processing technology needed for JSC’s main missions, including 
administrative, engineering and science responsibilities. JSC agreed and entered into 
a three-year cooperative agreement with UH-Clear Lake beginning in May, 1 986, to 
jointly plan and execute such research through RICIS. Additionally, under 
Cooperative Agreement NCC 9-16, computing and educational facilities are shared 
by the two institutions to conduct the research. 

The mission of RICIS is to conduct, coordinate and disseminate research on 
computing and information systems among researchers, sponsors and users from 
UH-Clear Lake, NASA/JSC, and other research organizations. Within UH-Clear 
Lake, the mission is being implemented through interdisciplinary involvement of 
faculty and students from each of the four schools; Business, Education, Human 
Sciences and Humanities, and Natural and Applied Sciences. 

Other research organizations are involved via the “gateway” concept. UH-Clear 
Lake establishes relationships with other universities and research organizations, 
having common research interests, to provide additional sources of expertise to 
conduct needed research. 

A major role of RICIS is to find the best match of sponsors, researchers and 
research objectives to advance knowledge in the computing and information 
sciences. Working jointly with NASA/JSC, RICIS advises on research needs, 
recommends principals for conducting the research, provides technical and 
administrative support to coordinate the research, and integrates technical results 
into the cooperative goals of UH-Clear Lake and NASA/ JSC. 



« 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 


a 

a 


Trip Reports: 

ISO Working Group 9, Ada, 
Uniformity of Ada Applications 
Rapporteur Group, and Ada Europe 


Sue LeGrand 

Planning Research Corporation 


6/28 and 9/24, 1990 


Cooperative Agreement NCC 9-16 
Research Activity No. SE.32 

NASA Johnson Space Center 
Engineering Directorate 






Research Institute for Computing and Information Systems 
University of Houston - Clear Lake 


TECHNICAL 


REPORT 




Preface 


This research was conducted under auspices of the Research Institute for 
Computing and Information Systems by Sue LeGrand of Planning Research 
Corporation. Dr. Charles McKay served as RICIS research coordinator. 

Funding has been provided by the Engineering Directorate, NASA/JSC 
through Cooperative Agreement NCC 9-16 between NASA Johnson Space Center 
and the University of Houston-Clear Lake. The NASA technical monitor for this 
activity was Edward S. Chevers of the Engineering Directorate, NASA/JSC. 

The views and conclusions contained in this report are those of the author 
and should not be interpreted as representative of the official policies, either 
express or implied, of NASA or the United States Government. 



Meetings of ISO WG 9, Ada, 

Uniformity of Ada Applications Rapporteur Group, 

and Ada Europe 


Ada EUROPE 

The proceedings collection is listed in the bibliography. Topics 
included: 

Ada Application Experience 
Design Aspects 
Environments and Tools 
Reliability and Testing 

Object Oriented Design (including HOOD) 

Language Issues 
Distribution 


Ada 9X 

—Ada 9X reports were given on a number of occasions. Erhard 

Ploedereder, Tartan Labs, is chairman of the Distinguished Reviewers. 
He listed the following revision issues: 

Predictability 

Efficiency 

Run time implementation 
— Asynchronous communication 

Object oriented design 
For mal definition 
_ Character set 

Execution model 

Interfaces with other languages and standards 

—Bill Carlson, Intermetrics, is in charge of the Mapping and Revision 
Program. He announced that Tucker Taft will be the technical lead, 

• and so far Ada 83 is upward compatible with all features of Ada 9X. 

The schedule for Ada 9X is: 


Final Mapping Document 6/91 
Draft Reference Manual 6/92 
Draft Rationale Document 3/92 
ANSII Canvass Start 6/92 
Final Reference Manual 3/93 


Ada 9X Reports - Due This Summer 

The titles and editors are listed below. Contact the Ada Information 
Clearinghouse for copies . 

Character Sets - Ron Bender, DEC 
Shared Variables - Robert Dewar, NYU 
Fixed Point Arithmetic - Robert Dewar , NYU 
Pragmas and Attributes - Ken Fowler, SEI 
In/Out Issues - Karl Nyberg, Grebyn, Inc. 

Distribution - Anthony Gregaro, CSC 
Reuse - Sholem Cohen, SEI 

Real Time Scheduling - Roger Van Scoy, SEI 

Math Libraries - Jon Squire, Westinghouse 

Exceptions and Optimizations - John McHue, Computer Logic 


ShiCuKl Ii 


Limiting the resources on a bare machine not only helps memory 
‘ requirements , but it also facilitates security. There are fewer 
hiding places for destructive code. 

In software doing floating point arithmetic, consider that the filling 
bits added to numbers are a good place to hide secret information. 
Always initialize variables to zero. 

The United Kingdom Ministry of Defense has a policy for using compiler 
optimization for the new Air Force fighter plane. Since optimizing 
eliminates checks, it is allowed for mission critical systems, but not 
for safety critical systems. 


ISO WG 9 MEETING 

Representatives from 12 countries met in Dublin, Ireland. Reports 
were given by liaisons to other working groups and by the chairs of 
the Rapporteur Groups. 

Memorandum of Agreement 

Ada 9X liaison, Robert Dewar, reported that a memorandum of 
understanding between the Ada 9X project and ISO WG 9 is being 
drafted. See the list attached. A workbook of Ada 9X issues will be 
available for general issue in August. 

Graphics 

In graphics standards, the GKS/Ada Binding is an ISO Standard. The 
PHGS/Ada Binding is a Draft International Standard. ANSI is seriously 
considering the adoption of both of these. 

* '’Esprxt / Llii'Gpean SUI'dLfciyJC lOf i\eScaICIi aii^ v 

Information Technoloc . Commission of the European Communities. 

"Esprit", European Strategic Programme for Research and Development in 

Information Technology "1988 Annual Report"; Commission of the European 
Communities, DG XII: Telecommunications, Information Industries and 
Innovation 

ExTRA: Real Time Legal Ada Extension, 1990. 

Gargaro, Anthony "Toward Supporting Distributed Systems in ADA 9X 

ADA-Europe Conference Dublin" June 12-14, 1990; Computer Sciences 
Corporation, Integrated Systems Division. 

Graham, Marc H. "Guidelines for the Use of the SAME", May, 1989; Carnegie- 
Mellon University, Software Engineering Institute. 

"ISO-IEC/JTC 1/SC 22/WG 9 Dublin Documents" June 15, 1990, Contel 
Technology Center. 

Lynch, Barry "Ada: Experiences and Prospects", Proceeding of the Ada- 
Europe International Conference Dublin 12-14 June 1990, Cambridge 
University Press, 1990. 

Moore, James W. "Conformance Criteria for the SAME Approach to Binding 
Ada Programs to SQL", August, 1989; Carnegie-Mellon University, 

Software Engineering Institute. 

Romanski, George "Ada in Aerospace", Systeam, Your Ada Partner 



TRIP REPORT 


— ISO UNIFORMITY RAPPORTURE GROUP XV 

September, 1990 Ay- 

Tne Uniformity Rapporteur Group (URG) is a technical working group: 
which reports to the part of the International Organization for v.’ : 
i andardization (ISO) which handles the standardization of Ada. Th??. ( 
p_irpose of tlie URG is to fulfill an item of work which was assigneiNfX 
ISO Working Group 9, Ada. 


r . le Ada Language Standard specifically allows implementations to 
vary the ways that can influence the Ada program. Some of these 
variances are necessary to accommodate a special hardware. Many 
1 .mes, however, there is a most common way of implementing a 
mature. These are studied, discussed and recommendations are 
made to promote portability of Ada code. 


r le data base of the URG material is maintained at the National 
Physical Laboratory (NPL) in the United Kingdom. A list of the 
uniformity issues and each status is available from the High 
( ichnologies Library at University of Houston - Clear Lake. Call 
l_iren Gunter at (713) 283-3833. 


r~>rk has been undertaken at NPL in collecting and writing test 
j rograms for the issues agreed upon by the URG. For each issue, the 
test program will pass if the implementation satisfies the 
requirements of the recommendations or fails by giving warnings of 
i ly shortcomings. These tests are available for distribution. Call Sue 
l_^Grand (713) 282-6411 for more information on the finalized issues 
and available tests. 


r . le available test programs cover the following finalized issues: 
Integer Types 

Definition of Type DURATION 
— Treatment of Undefined Variables 

Files Closed Automatically on Termination 
Incorrect Order Dependencies 
_ Maximum Line Length 

~ Never Raise NUMERIC ERROR 


, : the last meeting of the URG, the following issues were finalized: 


Tasking and 10 

Unchecked Conversion for Equal Sized Types 
Address Arithmetic Specifications 
Floating Point Names 
Null Address Standard Name 

mese last issues will be forwarded to the appropriate other groups 
for coordination before they become official recommendations. 

_ppies of the following documents were obtained at the meeting and 
are available from the High Technologies Library: 

POSIX Language Binding to Ada 
— Ada 9X Requirements Working Draft, Version 3.3 





ORiGSNAl PAGE IS 
OF Poort quality 


Sue LeGrand 
PRC 

(713 ) 282-64 11 . 






