An Integrated MEMS Sensor Cluster System for Aerospace Applications 


Seun K. Kahng, Michael A. Scott, George B. Beeler, James E. Bartlett, and Richard S. Collins* 
NASA, Langley Research Center and *Wyle Laboratories 
Hampton, Virginia 23681 


Abstract 


Efforts to reduce viscous drag on airfoils could results in a considerable saving for the 
operation of flight vehicles including those of space transportation. This reduction of 
viscous drag effort requires measurement and active control of boundary layer flow 
property on an airfoil. Measurement of viscous drag of the boundary layer flow over an 
airfoil with minimal flow disturbance is achievable with newly developed MEMS sensor 
clusters. These sensor clusters provide information that can be used to actively control 
actuators to obtain desired flow properties or design a vehicle to satisfy particular 
boundary layer flow criteria. 

A series of MEMS sensor clusters has been developed with a data acquisition and control 
module for local measurements of shear stress, pressure, and temperature on an airfoil. 
The sensor cluster consists of two shear stress sensors, two pressure sensors, and two 
temperature sensors on a surface area of 1.24 mm x 1.86 mm. Each sensor is 300 microns 
square and is placed on a flexible polyimide sheet. The shear stress sensor is a polysilicon 
hot- film resistor, which is insulated by a vacuum cavity of 200 x 200 x 2 microns. The 
pressure sensors are silicon piezoresistive type, and the temperature sensors are also hot 
film poly silicon resistors. The total size of the cluster including sensors and electrical 
leads is 10mm x 10mm x 0.1 mm. A typical sensitivity of shear stress sensor is 150 
mV/Pascal, the pressure sensors are an absolute type with a measurement range from 9 to 
36 psia with 0.8mV/V/psi sensitivity, and the temperature sensors have a measurement 
resolution of 0. 1 degree C. 

The sensor clusters are interfaced to a data acquisition and control module that consists of 
two custom ASICs (Application Specific Integrated Circuits) and a microcontroller. The 
data acquisition and control module transfers data to a host PC that configures and 
controls a total of three sensor clusters. Functionality of the entire system has been tested 
in the laboratory, and preliminary test results are presented. 

I. Introduction 

Reduction of viscous drag is an important area of study to all flight vehicle operations. It 
is also important to manage viscous drag on a surface of a flight object by employing a 
set of actuators, shear stress sensors, and control circuits with a predetermined control 
algorithm. There are three elements that are required for control of boundary layer flow 
property on a flight vehicle to attain desired flight efficiency, namely sensors, actuators, 
and control strategy. This paper addresses the sensor system element. 



In wind tunnels and flight vehicles, viscous drag on an airfoil has been determined by 
means of measuring shear force on a moving platform that is fabricated into an integral 
part of the vehicle/model, which is a direct measurement scheme. Another method is 
calculating amount of heat transferred from the surface of the airfoil into the surrounding 
ambient flow regime, which is an indirect measurement scheme. Direct measurement 
devices include servomechanism force balance, moving platform MEMS devices, and oil 
film devices. The indirect measurement devices include heat transfer devices such as hot 
film/wire gages. Direct measurement devices are preferred, however, they present a gap 
between the stationary and moving element of the sensor that disturbs boundary layer 
flow properties. Oil film devices can be considered as a research tool, but it is not a 
practical measurement tool whose output is used as a feedback signal to control a set of 
actuators. 

Heat transfer devices have the advantage of maintaining the flow property with minimum 
disturbance, because they do not have gaps or a physical moving component. However, 
it does not measure the shear stress directly, and a precise relationship between heat 
transfer and shear stress values are difficult to obtain under practical measurement 
conditions. 

A heat transfer based (thermal type) MEMS shear stress measurement system has been 
developed for use in wind tunnels and other applications where viscous drag reduction or 
boundary layer control on an airfoil is desired. The system consists of a sensor cluster 
which measures shear stress, pressure, and temperature; interfacing electronic circuits for 
signal processing with a microcontroller; and a host computer (PC) that configures and 
controls the entire system. 

Viscous drag exists in a thin boundary layer adjacent to the airfoil in which tangential 
flow velocity changes from zero on the airfoil to the free-stream velocity. The change in 
the velocity across the thin boundary layer is proportional to the shear stress on the 
airfoil. The viscous drag force, F d , is a sum of surface shear stress over the airfoil area, 

Fd = j_dA and _ = _ {du/dy} 

Where x is shear stress, which is a product of fluid viscosity, _, and gradient of velocity 
across the boundary layer. 

Fluid flow in the boundary layer will alter the convective heat transfer from the sensor, 
thus changing the temperature of the sensor. The amount of convective heat transfer due 
to viscous flow can be related to the electrical power transferred into the shear sensor, 
when the temperature of the shear sensor is maintained at a constant value and the hot 
film element of the shear sensor is thermally isolated from the airfoil. With the shear 
stress sensing element kept at a constant temperature, the classical heat transfer model 
gives a relationship [1] between the power (P) supplied to the sensor element and the 
shear stress (_) as, 


P 


1/3 



This classical macroscale heat transfer model is not always applicable to MEMS sensors 
with a mircoscale structure. For MEMS devices values of exponent to the shear stress _ 
ranges considerably higher than 0.33. The values of 0.5 to 1 .36 have been observed. 

II. Sensor Cluster System 

The sensor cluster system has three major building blocks: the sensor cluster, the 
interfacing electronics, and a host computer as shown in Figure 1 . The interfacing 
electronics receives inputs from the sensors and provide feedback current to maintain a 
constant temperature to the hot film resistor of the shear stress sensors. It also 
communicates to host computer through a RS-485 link. The last block of the system is a 
PC based host processor that configures and controls the entire system. 


Sensor Cluster 

9 

i 

Interfacing 
Electronics for the 


Host Computer 
for System 


i 

i 

Sensor Cluster with 
a Microcontroller 


Configuration 
and control 


Figure 1. System Block Diagram 


Il-a. Sensor Cluster 

A MEMS sensor cluster has 2 shear stress sensors, 2 pressure sensors, and 2 temperature 
sensors. These 6 sensors are fabricated on a surface area of 1 .24 mm x 1 .86 mm. 



Figure 2. Sensor Cluster Layout 


Figure 2 shows a typical layout of the sensor cluster. The 6 sensors are shown in green 
squares: T1 and T2 are temperature sensors, P’s are pressure sensors, and the shear stress 







sensors are shown with slanted bar in green boxes. Dark yellow square boxes represent 
silicon islands on a flexible polyimide sheet. 

Each sensor is 300 _m square. The shear stress sensors have a 0.25 _m thick 75 _m long 
polysilicon wire embedded in the 200_m square silicon nitride diaphragm that is isolated 
by a 2 m deep vacuum cavity in a silicon substrate [2, 3]. The shear stress sensors are 
operated in constant temperature mode, and a feedback circuit maintains its temperature 
at a given point. Both pressure and temperature sensors use a standard interfacing circuit 
for signal conditioning. The pressure sensors consist of a polysilicon Wheatstone bridge 
embedded in the diaphragm over a vacuum cavity. One temperature sensor has the same 
structure as the shear stress sensors, and the other temperature sensor does not have a 
vacuum cavity. The total thickness of the sensor cluster is 80 _m. Figure 3 shows the 
sensor cluster on a polyimide sheet with contact pads for electrical connections. 

An array of these sensor clusters can be placed on a larger polyimide sheet that covers an 
area of interests for measurements of shear stress and pressure with temperature. A sensor 
belt that consists of 3 sensor clusters on a 20” x 6” (50 cm x 15.24 cm) flexible polyimide 
sheet has been fabricated for wind tunnel studies. 



Figure 3. Sensor cluster on a flexible polyimide sheet of 10 mm x 14 mm. 

Il-b. Data Acquisition and Control Module: 

The Data Acquisition and Control Module (DACM) is a multi-channel signal processing 
and data transfer unit that interfaces to the sensor clusters and communicates with a host 
computer by a serial RS-485 link. The DACM configuration may be altered by 
downloads from the host computer and the host can request a data upload from the 
DACM. 

The DACM includes a custom analog front-end integrated circuit, support circuitry, 
analog-to-digital converter, digital interface circuitry, and microcontroller board. The 





microcontroller board comprises a microcontroller CPU, memory, and support circuitry. 
The memory includes RAM, firmware ROM, and a flash memory for nonvolatile storage 
of default and calibration settings. The user interface is a Windows 95/98 compatible 
program that provides a means for configuring, testing and operating the system. 

III. Experimental Results: 

Laboratory evaluation of the sensor clusters exhibited a pressure sensor sensitivity of 
0.8mV/V/psi in the pressure range from 9 to 36 psia with a linearity of 0.07% of 
full-scale output at room temperatures. Response of a typical pressure sensor is shown in 
Figure 4 [4], 


y = 81 242x -211.96 R 2 = 0.9996 



Figure 4. Response of typical pressure sensor 


> 

E 


3 

Q_ 

"3 

O 

a3 

c 

c 

CO 

-C 

O 


1 - 500 - 

400 . 



■ 



0 

300 





:>* 

! onn_ 






w 






0 — 






10 -100 

i ----A 


0 3 

0 4 

0 5 

X- onp .1 





— *— Bd2/Ch1 






-m- Bd2/Ch2 
Bd2/Ch3 
\ Bd2/Ch4 
-x Bd2/Ch5 
-• Bd2/Ch6 

..... 





Degrees C 


Figure 5. Response of typical temperature sensor 





The temperature sensors show a resolution of 0. 1 degree C from -5 to +45 degree 
Celsius. Responses of typical temperature sensors are shown in Figure 5 [4]. The output 
voltages of the temperature sensors are set at 1 00 mV at ambient temperature to show 
coincidence. 

The shear stress sensors on a polyimide sheet belt are currently under evaluation and 
tunnel calibration and repeatability data are not available at this time. Previous shear 
stress sensors of the same physical configuration have been tested in 20” x 28” LaRC 
wind tunnel, the calibration and repeatability results are shown in Figure 6. 


MEMS THERMAL SHEARSTRESS SENSOR CALIBRATION 



Figure 6. Calibration result of a typical shear stress sensor with respect to a Preston tube. 

The shear stress sensors exhibited a typical sensitivity of 150 mV/Pascal. These sensors 
were mounted on a flat plate that is an integral part of the tunnel test section floor. The 
outputs from the shear stress sensors were recorded with that of a Preston tube in the 
tunnel and compared for sensor repeatability and calibrated against the Preston tube 
results. These wind tunnel tests are conducted in the 20” x 28” Wind Tunnel at Langley 
Research Center. It is noted that the outputs from the sensors are temperature corrected, 
and the range of free stream velocity is from 0 to 160 feet per second. 

IV. Conclusion and Remarks: 

This work has demonstrated an application of MEMS devices to aerodynamic studies on 
airfoils in wind tunnels. Local measurements of several parameters such as shear stress, 
pressure, and temperature on the surface of an airfoil using collocated sensors have been 
made with the MEMS sensors integrated into a flexible insulating sheet. 



In wind tunnel applications test articles do not provide a large space for model on-board 
data modules. A small intelligent and cost effective model embedded data module with 
wireless data transfer system are desirable for further applications of micro- and nano- 
sensing devices. In addition applications of Micro/Nano devices for aerospace parameter 
measurements require a considerable number of interconnects, transfer of large data 
volume, and packaging of the sensors with test articles. All of these are technical 
challenges that need to be overcome. 

V. References 

[1] B.J. Bellhouse et al., “Determination of Mean and Dynamic Skin Friction, Separation 
and Transition in Low-Speed Flow with a Thin-Film Heated Element”, J. Fluid 
Mechanics, Vol. 24, pp. 379-400, 1966. 

[2] F. Jiang et al., “A Michromachined Shear Stress Sensor Array,” MEMS ’96. pp. 110- 
115,1996. 

[3] Fukang Jiang, Yu-Chong Tai, Ken Walsh, Tom Tsao, Gwo-Bin Lee, and Chi-Ming 
Ho, “A Flexible MEMS Technology and its First Application to Shear Stress Sensor 
Skin,” MEMS ’97, pp. 465-470, 1997. 

[4] Richard S. Collins,” Characterization and Test of the UM MEMS Based 
Instrumentation System,” HD6231300-397RO-D8Wyle Laboratories, Hampton, VA. 
September 1999. 



