N96- 12960 






An Object Oriented Generic Controller using CLIPS. 


By Cody R. Nivens * 


* Cody R. Nivens is a member of the Information Systems Staff of 
California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo, 
California . 


902 



ABSTRACT 


In today's applications, the need for the division of code 
and data has focused on the growth of object oriented 
programming . This philosophy gives software engineers greater 
control over the environment of an application. Yet the use of 
object oriented design does not exclude the need for greater 
understanding by the application of what the controller is doing. 
Such understanding is only possible by using expert systems. 
Providing a controller that is capable of controlling an object 
by using rule - based expertise would expedite the use of both 
object oriented design and expert knowledge of the dynamic of an 
environment in modern controllers. 

This project presents a model of a controller that uses the 
CLIPS expert system and objects in C++ to create a generic 
controller. The polymorphic abilities of C++ allow for the 
design of a generic component stored in individual data files. 
Accompanying the component is a set of rules written in CLIPS 
which provide the following: the control of individual 
components, the input of sensory data from components and the 
ability to find the status of a given component. Along with the 
data describing the application, a set of inference rules written 
in CLIPS allows the application to make use of sensory facts and 
status and control abilities. 

As a demonstration of this ability, the control of the 
environment of a house is provided. This demonstration includes 
the data files describing the rooms and their contents as far as 
devices, windows and doors. The rules used for the home consist 
of the flow of people in the house and the control of devices by 
the home owner. 


903 



INTRODUCTION 


In the evolution of control mechanisms, it has become 
apparent that a higher level of knowledge of the system 
controlled must be embedded in the controller. This project uses 
the control of a house as an example of a knowledge-based 
controller. This is done by using the abilities of the CLIPS 
programming language to utilize user defined routines to input 
sensor information and to control external devices. 

A real-time expert system can be defined as a system that 
decides in time to undertake a corrective action. Uses of such 
systems range from the home system described by this project to 
the control of nuclear power plants and space stations. Such 
systems have a set of common characteristics: 

compartmentalization ; processes which run over minutes and hours; 
events which occur on a regular basis; exceptions to standard 
procedures which augment presently scheduled events; and a set of 
general rules on how operations in the controlled environment can 
be influenced by outside factors. 

These principles illustrate the use of expertise: 
Specifically the body of knowledge acquired about the behavior of 
a complex system. The use of a rule— based knowledge system as a 
controller must have the following: the ability to control 
external devices; the ability to receive sensory information in a 
timely manner; the ability to make decisions within certain time 
limits; finally, the ability to expand as more knowledge of the 
behavior of the system becomes available. These principles are 
only a few that must be examined and met for such a controller to 
be effective. 

The home enviroment is becoming a laboratory for the design 
of user-friendly control systems. Such systems are programmed in 
one of several procedural oriented languages and as such they are 
difficult to expand to meet the needs of the user. A solution to 
this problem is the use of real-time expert systems. These 
systems provide the logic in a style that is easy to update and 
understand. A carefully crafted expert system could be updated 
and changed by the home owner with little need for their 
understanding of the rule system. 

This paper discusses the combining of CLIPS with objects 
defined in C++ to create an intelligent controller. The C++ 
objects define what is controlled. It is mated together with the 
CLIPS expert system, with CLIPS supplying the expertise for the 
control of the object. This is done by a loop mechanism which 
alternates between CLIPS, the C++ objects, and an interrupt 
information structure. CLIPS controls the object via external 
functions which access the objects controlled. The user 
interface employs the objects as a selection mechanism and the 
assert routine of CLIPS. 


904 



OBJECT ORIENTED PROGRAMMING 

Object oriented programming is ideally suited for use in 
intelligent controllers for several reasons. There are several 
reasons for this. First, an object oriented programming language 
allows for the creation of an abstract data type. Second, 
components of a program can inherit functions and data from other 
objects allowing for the reuse of previous code. Finally, an 
object oriented programming language provides for the use of 
polymorphic characteristics. The abstract data type is the key 
feature of an object oriented syste. 

An abstract data type is called a class. A class is 
composed of the data structure associated with the implementation 
of the data type and a set of member functions which manipulate 
that data structure called member functions. There are several 
advantages to creating a new data type; the hiding of the 
implementation of a design from its user, encapsulation of both 
the data and the code that manipulates it, and the restriction on 
access to the data reducing inter-module dependences. Member 
functions allow limited access to the data of a class. These are 
messages that the class accepts for manipulating itself. The 
function passes the parameters necessary to complete the desired 
operation. Member functions can be overloaded by using the same 
name with different parameters. This feature allows descriptive 
function names to have different routes to the same service. 

Inheritance and polymorphism are interrelated in their uses. 
Inheritance allows both code reusability and the derivation of 
new data type types that share both the code and data of its 
base. Polymorphism uses this ability to create derived classes 
which use functions of the base class and redefine functions in 
the derived class. Functions which can be redefined are called 
virtual functions. The virtual function differs from the normal 
function in that the binding to the function occurs at run time 
as opposed to the static binding at compile time. There are two 
major uses for this feature. First, the redefined function of 
the derived class is used when the base class calls the function. 
Second, a pointer to a base class can be used on a derived class 
with the functions redefined by the derived class being used. 

This allows the calling program to use a derived class without 
knowing what it is. For example, an array of components which 
having the same base class can all be sent the same function call 
even though each component in the array is a different derived 
class. 

For example, consider a set. The implementation of a set in 
the C++ language consists of two classes as defined in figure 1. 
The first class is a set element. The second class is the set 
itself. Two types of set elements are defined in figure 2 to 
show how the inheritance and polymorphic abilities of C++ work. 
The main program and output is defined in figure 3. Note that 
'a' is said to be an instanciation of the set class. This is 
similar to saying that x is an instanciation of an integer, but 
is not an integer class. 


905 



DEVICE CONTROLLERS 


Computer based controllers fall into three broad categories. 
First, the group of controller are those controllers that are 
based on a clock signal. These controllers deal with the use of a 
set sequence of events that are triggered when a predetermined 
time arrives. An example of this is a steel mill which heats a 
piece of metal for a predetermined length of time. A second type 
of controller is based on sensory input. These controllers must 
provide a response based on input from the environment of a 
device. Examples of this type of controller are the closing of 
valves based on the level of liquid in a tank. The last type of 
controller is interactive. These controllers generally deal with 
human input and have their responses geared towards the average 
person using the device. An automated teller machine is an 
example of this type of controller. 

INTELLIGENT CONTROLLERS 


An intelligent controller will be defined as a controller 
that has the ability to arrive at decisions based on external 
facts and internal rules of the behavior of the system being 
controlled. To illustrate such a controller, a model of how the 
controller relates to the controlled component is needed. The 
simplest way to achieve this is to consider the controller as an 
indivisible computer. The inference engine is the cpu, the rules 
are the programs, and the fact lists are the data. I/O for such 
a computer consists of external assertions of facts and the 
execution of commands from the consequent portions of rules. 

The use of a central processor for the CLIPS engine is a 
very useful metaphor. The Rete algorithm uses tokens of the 
changes in working memory to communicate which rules may fire. 
Such a system is similar to the concept of an associate memory 
system. All changes within the memory system happen at one time. 
The tokens affect only those rules that use the changed component 
of working memory. Such a scheme allows for a large number of 
rules and facts to be compiled into a network whose access time 
is dependent on the changes in working memory. 

The model of the cpu would have to be extended to include 
the use of interrupts. In CLIPS, interrupts could be handled by 
rules that are fired by the assertion of a specific fact. The 
chain of events that follows from the interrupt can be determined 
by the precedence of the rules. The use of the salience feature 
allows for the running of priority tasks based on interrupt 
information. Each set of interrupt rules would have a salience 
level associated with it. It should be noted that the CLIPS 
system handles input from the interrupts, not the interrupts 
themselves. 


906 



Programming the Device Controller 


Programming the CLIPS machine for the use of several 
independent processes involves little change in method from 
conventional programming. The major difference between normal 
programming and this model is the use of a set of rule chains to 
determine the "program. 1 ' The need for scheduling, enqueing or 
dequeing for resources, or rendezvousing between tasks is 
eliminated. All these things are handled by the working of the 
Rete mechanism. Two tasks which have independent chains of 
inference can perform a rendezvous via the assertion of a common 
fact. 


For example, the standard consumer /producer problem can be 
defined in CLIPS by two rules as shown in figure 4. The 
producer /consumer cycle starts with an assertion of the specific 
producer facts and the start fact for the producer rule. The 
cycle between the producer /consumer is controlled by two facts 
which are asserted when the particular phase of the cycle is 
done. Such a system does not have the ability to enque messages, 
but such abilities can be accessed via an external procedure. 


Interrupts 


Interrupts and device input are handled in a similar manner. 
The use of the add_exec function allows a user defined routine to 
be used between the firTng of rules. This function then has the 
option of asserting information based on the state of an 
interrupt or device. The control of such assertions can be 
handled by two routines defined by the define_f unction routine. 
One function enables interrupts from devices and external 
interrupts. A second function disables the asserting of new 
facts. A supporting function returns the state of interrupts . 
Interrupt precedence can be controlled via the salience clause of 
a CLIPS rule. This allows specific interrupts to have control of 
the system while they are working. An example is shown in figure 
5. 


Input /Output 


Traditional device input is handled by the add_function 
routine of CLIPS. This function allows for the creation of a 
routine which can be used in the RHS of a rule. The function 
defined would then assert a fact based on the responding device. 
Output is handled in a similar manner; the defined function would 
take a multi-variable pattern and consult the appropriate 
component being controlled. 


907 



THE GENERIC CONTROLLER 


The generic controller is an object which uses an expert 
system to provide control to some other object. The controller 
class has the following components: a CLIPS expert system, a 
component to control, a simulation to run the component through, 
an alarm manager for time signals and alarm activations, a 
command object to pass commands between CLIPS and the controlled 
object, windows to display output for the user, and a set of I/O 
ports for information on the component controlled and through 
which to control the component. 

The basic use of the controller consists of loading the 
information on the windows, the ports, the component information, 
the simulation information and the files that the CLIPS system 
will use for a trace of all its output, as well as the rules and 
data of the controller and the application. Next, either the 
controller is run in real-time mode where the alarm manager and 
ports deal with the real-time and hardware of the system, or the 
controller is run in simulation mode where the time and port 
values are artificial. 

In either case, the controller goes into a loop where the 
following events occur endlessly. First, the CLIPS expert system 
is executed for a set number of inferences (rule firings.) 

Second, if a command was executed by the executive function then 
the status is updated. Third, the keyboard is checked for user 
input. If input is found, it is passed to the controlled 
component to interpret. If the interpretation returns a command 
string, the string is asserted into CLIPS after the current time 
is attached to it. Next, the sensor inputs are checked for new 
data. If input is present, it is asserted into CLIPS after the 
time is stamped onto it. Finally, the alarms are checked and the 
time is updated if necessary. 


THE CLIPS CLASS 

The CLIPS class is not an implementation of the CLIPS expert 
system, but is an interface to the C routines that define the 
CLIPS system. The encapsulation of CLIPS in a C++ class has 
enabled the restriction of the many available routines that 
provide access to the CLIPS environment. The member function of 
the CLIPS class provides for the following areas of access. 

First, the embedding functions of clear, reset, execute and load 
are given standard names and definitions of their use. 

The CLIPS class also provides for the use of I/O routers. 
These functions allow for access to external I/O devices. The 
use of this function requires that the functions passed to the 
I/O router not be a member function of a class. The reason for 
this is that while the address of the member function is known, 
the instanciation of the class it is being used by is not known. 
As such, the I/O router functions are defined as friend functions 
to the controller class. 


908 



The next area that the CLIPS class provides a common 
interface for is the use of executive functions. The executive 
function is one that is called by the interpreter of CLIPS rules 
between rule firing. In this project, the executive function is 
responsible for asserting sensory information if it is present. 

The next member function that the CLIPS class contains is 
concerned with defining a function that CLIPS can call from the 
right-hand side of a CLIPS rule. This function can do work 
outside of the CLIPS environment, possibly returning a value as a 
predicate function. There are three functions defined in this 
project: do_command, seek, and set_alarm. 

The interaction between CLIPS and external routines are 
defined in two member functions: The first asserts a string into 

the CLIPS environment, and the second loads a command object with 
the parameters passed to a function when it is called by a CLIPS 
rule. 


The last set of functions in the CLIPS class are involved 
with debugging and status display. These routines deal with the 
activation of watches on facts, rules and activations. They also 
provide functions for the display of the CLIPS fact environment 
and the current agenda of rules to fire. 


THE COMPONENT CLASS 

The component class is the class which describes the object 
being controlled. This class provides a generic holder for 
information on how a system relates to itself. This scheme is a 
hierarchical system. Objects at one level only access those at a 
lower level and the parent of the present object. Access across 
branches of the component tree are not possible in this system. 

A component provides an object display, I/O, and relational 
information. 

The display information of a component is divided into four 
parts. The first part is a window display of the contents of a 
component in a window. The second part is a display of the status 
information about the component. The next area is a display of 
the related objects of the component. This part consists of an 
overlay which fits the related objects into a cohesive whole. 

The last area consists of the display windows and the index to 
the window in which the overlay and related components of the 
component are displayed. 

The I/O information consists of several values. The input 
port id determines which related object is the next component in 
the component-path name of the input item. If there are no 
related objects then the value from the port is the state of the 
device or sensor. The output value, the command or value related 
to the place of the component in the system begin controlled, is 


909 



sent to the output port. If there are no related objects, the 
output value is the state of the component. The I/O ports are an 
array of ports that are used for input/output operations. These 
allow for an index to determine which input port and which output 
port should be used. The I/O ports are used by the interrupt 
mechanism to establish an interrupt path to a component. This is 
done by enqueing the id of the component in the set of related 
objects of the parent component. 

The related object information consists of the related 
objects, their number and which are currently selected. This 
information is used to create command strings that are asserted 
into the CLIPS system. The related object information identifies 
which is the master (root) component and which component is 
active (being selected from.) 

The use of individual I/O ports, command levels and display 
windows allows the programmer to create generic components that 
are independent of the device being controlled. For example, the 
application of this project is a house controller. In the test 
case, there are 3 rooms, 10 lamps, 13 outlets, 12 sensors, and 12 
command components. All can be represented by generic 
components. All I/O in the system is done by the generic 
component; no further programming is needed. A draw-back is that 
the number of components goes up with an increase in command 
complexity with any device. The simple solution to this is to 
create new device components derived from the base component. 


SUPPORTING CLASSES 

The alarm manager class has four major functions. First, it 
is responsible for the time and date clock. Second, it holds the 
times of alarms that are active in the CLIPS environment. Third, 
when an alarm occurs, the alarm manager asserts a time fact into 
CLIPS for the time of the alarm. Finally, the alarm manager class 
is responsible for the time stamp when an event occurs. 

The command class acts as a data carrier for communications 
between CLIPS and the component. There are two parts to a 
command: the count of lines in the command, and the lines 
themselves. The command class is defined as an array of strings. 
The dimensions of the array are dynamically enabled when the 
class is instanciated. It must be noted that the CLIPS version 
used in this project has multiple field variables containing 
extra lines of information, specifically, the fact name-field 
(the first field in the fact.) Hence, the offset must be one 
greater than the position of the field in the multivariable of 
the CLIPS rule. This can be used to allow one routine to 
interpret many commands, as the command is always the first 
field. 

The port class defines an input/ output medium. The port can 
either be used for real I/O or for simulated I/O. Real I/O is 


910 



device and implementation dependent. The simulation of the port 
input is done via an index that the port acquires along with a 
simulation when it is instanciated. This id is passed to the 
simulation which returns -1 if either the index is lower than the 
ports simulated or there is no input for the port ready. The 
ports used for the house application are shown in figure 6. 
Interrupts use the ports to signal that a value is present. This 
is done by the interrupt routine which calls the component. It 
changes the state of the component and creates an interrupt trail 
via a member function of the parent of the component. 


The simulation class contains an array of values that are 
assigned to ports dependent on the time that the simulator has 
for the next input. The first member function deals with the 
loading of the simulation values from an input stream. There are 
two functions which deal with stepping the simulation and testing 
if the simulation is done. Two further functions deal with 
returning the simulation time and the simulation value given a 
port index. The private variables of the simulation define the 
number of simulations, the offset for the port index, the current 
simulation time, and the index of the next simulation event. 


SYSTEM RULES AND FACTS 


The system rules are divided into four areas: changes in 
sensory information, time and date maintenance, alarm durations, 
and activation of alarms. 

The first set of rules in the system CLIPS file deals with 
sensory information. This section is divided into two parts. 

The first deals with the rules involved with the processing of 
sensory input. There is only one rule: sensor— reset . This rule 
resets the sensor input states when the sensor cycles from ON to 
OFF or OFF to ON. 

The second set of rules dealing with sensory information 
seeks status of components in the system. There are three rules 
in this set: seek-status, status-seek, and reset-seek. 

Seek— status is used to reset the knowledge system given existing 
state facts. This allows for the periodic checking of the 
consistency of the knowledge base against the controlled 
component. Status-seek processes the results of a seek operation 
by creating a state fact. Seek— status and status— seek work with 
a control fact: seek-state. Seek-state carries a list of selector 
elements, which quizzes related objects and their descendants for 
their status. Reset-seek retracts the seek-state fact if no other 
rules are activated by the fact. The structure of the system 
facts are listed in figure 7. 

The second part of the system rules is composed of 
guidelines related to the maintenance of time and date. When the 
date changes at midnight, the alarm manager asserts the new date. 


911 



This assertion causes the rule change-date to fire. This rule 
asserts seek-state on all components and process-alarms to set up 
the alarm manager for the next 24 hours. The reset-time rule 
removes the time fact if no other rules are activated by it. The 
time fact is asserted by the alarm manager when an alarm occurs. 

The third set of rules are those involved in processing 
alarm times. There are three rules. Process-alarms is activated 
by the process-alarms fact asserted by the change-date rule. 
Set-alarm-time sets the time of a newly activated alarm. 
Reset-process-alarms removes the process-alarms fact if no other 
rules are activated by it. A more complex system of rules would 
process alarms on an hourly basis. 

The next section of the system rules is concerned with rules 
which govern the use of durations. Durations are alarms which 
run from one time to another. This section is divided into three 
parts. The first part is the rule set-duration. This rule is 
activated by process-alarms asserted by the rule change-date. 

The second part consists of the rules start-duration and 
reset-start-alarm. Start duration fires when the alarm created 
by the duration is activated. It asserts start-alarm fact 
containing the id of the alarm activated. This is asserted for 
application rules use when alarms are activated. 

Reset-start-alarm removes the fact if no other rule is activated 
by it. The last part consists of the rules end-duration and 
reset— end— duration . End— duration removes the alarm associated 
with a duration. It fires when the duration reaches its end. It 
also asserts the end-alarm fact with the id of the duration 
associated with the retracted alarm. Reset-end-alarm removes the 
fact end— alarm if no other rules are activated by it. 

The final set of rules consists of the rules for the firing 
of alarms. There are nine rules which correspond to the types of 
alarms. All alarms have the following in common: an id, a type, a 
possible repetition count, a date and time to fire, and 
information specific to the application which is used to command 
the cc -rolled component. The alarm types are listed in figure 
8. Alarm fact structures and constants are listed in figure 9. 


THE APPLICATION 


The application of this project consists of a house 
controller. The basic design focuses around the use of the X-10 
house controller. X-10 is an industry standard for the control 
of components in a home. The application consists of a three room 
building. Each room has at least one door, one or more windows, 
lamps and outlets. For each room, there is an overlay file, a 
list of devices in the room as well as CLIPS facts on the room. 
The house as a whole also possesses an overlay. 

The controller is used in a command mode by selecting which 
room to work in. .Next the type of device to control is selected. 


912 



The device is then selected. Finally, the command to perform on 
the device is selected. When this is done, a command is sent to 
the CLIPS controller. The controller in turn sends a command to 
the component to perform the operation. 

The application and the controller have performed well in 
simulation runs. It will soon be implemented in a model system 
consisting of the basis house that is now defined along with X-10 
controlled devices. The outcome of this implementation will be 
presented at the CLIPS Users Conference. 


HOUSE RULES AND FACTS 


The house rules file is divided into three parts. The first 
part deals with door direction and specification information. 

The second part deals with room and house occupancy. .The last 
part contains exception rules for possible error conditions. 

The door direction rules are outside-door-dir and door-dir. 
Outside— door- dir is concerned with determining if a person is 
entering or leaving the house. Door— dir determines which room a 
person is entering and leaving. 

The next set of rules deal with house and room occupancy. 

The first rule is changing— rooms which adjusts the appropriate 
room occupancy counts. The next rule is person— entering— house. 

It adjusts the house occupancy count and the room being entered 
or left. 

The last set of rules contain two exception rules. The 
first is person— too— many— room. This rule resets the room count 
and issues an exception message to standard out. The second rule 
is person-too-many-house. This rule resets the house and 
appropriate room count and issues an exception message to 
standard out. Figure 10 shows the house controller fact 
structures . 


913 



SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 


The use of CLIPS as a real-time controller in a house has be 
examined. The CLIPS expert system is suited to this work because 
of its abilities to define external functions and executive 
functions which allow the insertion of interrupts into the 
working storage of the system. This allows the CLIPS system to 
be viewed as a computer with programs, interrupts, and 
input/ output capability. 

The use of rule-based systems as opposed to 
procedural ly-based systems gives a programmer greater control 
over the logic embedded in a system. As the logic of a system 
goes beyond a certain limit of comprehension, rules for clarity 
become necessary. Traditional control systems in conventional 
languages are based on simple formula describing the system. In 
an application such as a home, a descriptive formula is all but 
impossible. Yet, it is possible to describe the behavior of the 
system in pseudo-English. This pseudo-English allows the 
programmer to develop rules that describe the behavior of the 
system. These rules are then given directly to the controller 
without need for additional programming or development. 

The use of an object oriented programming language allows 
the creation of descriptive fact structure related to the 
component being controlled. C++ is a language which provides 
such capability in a familiar setting. A programmer familiar 
with C will have little difficulty improving or adding code. 

This reduces the cost of development of new projects, and their 
maintenance once they are in operation. 

Intelligent controllers are a natural extension of 
Artificial Intelligence into the fields of conventional 
programming and control. Embedded systems may one day have the 
ability to control and learn from previous conditions and 
actions. Research into such systems will prove to be profitable 
and stimulating. CLIPS is an excellent tool with which to 
conduct such research as it is written in C, which combined with 
C++, allows for programmer involvement in the development of the 
rules and structure of the application. 


914 



Figure 1 - Set Classes 


class set _e lement { 
friend set ; 
pr 1 va te : 

set element * next: // pointer to the next element in the set. 


publ i c : 

set_elementOl 

// Effects: Creates a set element. 


virtual pr 1 n t O ; 

// Effects: Prints the set element's contents. 

} ; 


class set { 
pr 1 va t e : 

int size; // number of elements in the set. 

set element * elements; // The elements in the set. 


publ i c : 

set C 5 ; 

// Effects: Creates a set. 


addfset_e lement* a); 

// Requires: A set element to add to the set. 


prlntOi 

// Effects: Prints the contents of the set. 

}; 


915 



Figure 2 - Derived Set Classes 


class card : public settlement { 

private: 

1 nt value; 

1 nt suit; 


publ 1 c : 

cardC 1 nt v , 1 nt s} ; 

// Requires; A value and a suit. 

// Effects; Creates a card with value of suit. 


printed; 

// Effects: Prints the value arid suit of the card. 


class toy : public settlement { 
private : 

char * name; // Name of the toy. 
char* color; // Color of the toy. 


publ i c ; 

toyCchar* n.char* cO ; 

// Requires: Name and color of the toy. 

// Effects: Creates a toy. 


pr i nt O ; 

// Effects: Prints the toy. 


916 



Figure 3 — The use of the Set class and Its output 


fcde fine DIAMONDS 1 
#de f 1 ne HEARTS 2 


ma 1 nC ! 

{ 

set a ; 

card dlO CIO, DIAMONDS!; 
card hlCl . HEARTS!; 


OUTPUT 

green ball 
ace of hearts 
blue doll 
10 of d 1 amends 


toy dollC , 'doll ,, . ,, blue ,, !; 
toy ballC'ball" ."green"!; 


a .addCdlO!; 
a . addCdo 11!: 
a .addChl!; 
a . addCba 1 1 ! ; 


} 


a . pr 1 nt C ! I 



Figure 4 


Co msumer/ Producer Rules 


Cdefrule consumer 

?f<~(consume S?a) 

-=> 

misl processing 

(retract 70 

(assert (produce a)) 5 


(defrule producer 
?f (-(produce a) 

. Specific producer info 


O 

(retract ?f) 

mlsl processing 
(assert (consume $?a}J } 


918 



Figure 5 - Interrupt Rule 


Cdefrule fire-rule 

(declare (salience 10Q00)) 

(fire ?room ) 

(sprinklers ?room $?sprks) 

= > 

(sound-alarm) 

(bind ? 1 1) 

(while (< ? 1 (length $?sprks)) 

( do __c oroma nd ?room (member ?1 S(sparks) ON) 
(bind ?1 ( + ?1 I ) ) 

) 

) 


Interrupt asserts (fire rooml). 


919 



Figure 6 - Input/Output Port Definitions 


INPUTS 


Port 

Port 

Port 

Port 

Port 

Port 

Port 

Port 

0 

1 

2 

3 

A 

5 

6 

7 

NULL 

XIO 

House 

Poom 

Device 

Device 

Command 

Dim 


Type Value 

OUTPUTS 


Port 

Port 

Port 

Port 

Port 

Port 

Port 

Port 

0 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

NULL 

XIO 

NULL 

NULL 

NULL 

NULL 

NULL 

NULL 


920 



Figure 7 - Application Independent Fact Structures 


The following information consists of the structure of the 
facts that are used by the controller. These facts are generic 
to all applications that run on the controller. In the house 
rule, data and alarm files, their use is further illustrated. 

Application Facts: These rules deal with the contents of 

application specific information. The format of the rule does 
not change only the contents of the $? into field. 


faction ?act ion-type $?info ?state ?tlme) 
(sensor S?info ?state ?tlmel 
(state $?lnfo ?state) 

(status $? i n f o ?state ?tlmel 


Where : 

? a c t ion-type 


$? 1 nf o 
? s t a t e 
?t 1 me 


Action description: Usually user defined 

based on sensor information sensor reset 
is signified by break in ?act ion-type 
field. 

Application specific information 

State location is in (i.e., on, off, 0, 1 

Time status was returned from controlled 


, etc . 1 
oblert . 


921 



Figure 8 - Alarm Types 


ALARM EVENT TYPES 


TYPE 


DESCRIPTION 


one-t i me 

dally 

week-day 

weeK-end 

weekly 

b i weekly 

monthly 

every-day 

every 


Fires on specified date and time and is removed from 
the system. 

Fires every day. 

Fires Monday through Friday. 

Fires on Saturday and Sunday. 

Fires each week on the same day. 

Fires on the first week day and then 3 days later. 
Fires each month on the same day. 

Fires every specified number of days. 

Fires every specified number of seconds. 



Figure 9 - Fact Structures and Time Constants 


Alarm Facts: 

(alarm ?ld ?event-type ?e ve nt -repet 1 1 i on ?year ?month 
?day ?t ime $?lnfo} 

Calarm-mark ?id ?ev*nt-typ* ?e vent -repet 1 1 i on ?vear 


?mont h 


?day ?t Ime $?lnfo} 

Cdate ?year ?month ?day ?day-of-week ? ju 1 i a n-da t e } 
(durat ion ?id ?from ?to) 

Cnew-date ?year ?month ?day ?time ?day-of-week 
? jul i a n-da t e } 

Ctlme ?secs) 


Where: 

? 1 d 

?event -type 

f i red . 

?e vent -re pet 1 1 1 on 


?year 
?mont h 
?da y 
? 1 1 me 
$? 1 nf o 
? sec s 
?f rom 
?to 

run . 

?day-of-week 
? Jul ian-date 

present . 


Alarm id - either number or character 
string. 

Determines how and when alarm Is 

See above table for event types. 
Determines frequency of event. 

Used by 

weekly - Day of week to 

activate alarm, 
biweekly - First day of week 

to activate 
ala rm on . 

every-day — Number of days till 

next alarm. 

every - Number of seconds 

till next alarm. 
Last two digits of year. 

Month id based from zero. 

Day of month. 

Time of day in seconds. 

Application specific information. 
Number of seconds since midnight. 

Time in seconds to start alarm. 

Number of seconds to allow alarm to 

The day of tne week with Sunday as 0. 
Days from beginning of year to 


Constant Facts: These facts are constant through out the life of 

an application and from application to application. 


Cb 1 weekl y-map 123456012 3 } 

Cmonth ?month-ld ?month-name ?da ys- 1 n-mont h} 
C week-days 12345} 

( week-end-days 0 6} 

Cyeai — length 365} 


023 



Where : 


?month-ld - Id of month ("January - 0) 

?month— name - Jan, Feb, etc. 

?days- 1 n-month - length of month in days 


924 



Figure 10 - House Controller Fact Structures 


The following consists of the structure of the facts that 
are unique to the house controller application. 


Cdoor ?house ?door ?rooml ?rooin2') 

(door-sensor ?house ?room Tsensor ?door-type ?door) 
(out s i de-sensor ?house ?room ?sensor ) 

C peopl e- 1 n- house ?house Tnumber) 

(people-ln-rooni ?house ?r oorn ?nuraber) 

(window-sensor ?house ?room ?sensor ?window) 


Whe re : 

?house 
?door 
?rooml 
?room2 
? sensor 
?dooi — type 
Tnumber 
? w i n d o w 


House Id door Is In 

Door id 

Room 1 Id 

Room 2 Id 

Id of sensor 

Door type: door, outslde—door 

Number of people 
Window id 


B25 



