ML 

News Release atari- 

O A Werr m Cornmijricatrana Comoanv 

Atari Incorporated 1265 Borregas Avenue PO Box 427 Sunnyvale California 94086 

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE Contact: A. J. Sekel 

(408) 942-6790 

ATARI INTRODUCES ENHANCED VERSION OF LOGO 
THE LEARNING LANGUAGE FOR ALL KIDS 

SUNNYVALE, CA — This summer The ATARI Products Company will introduce a 
powerful new version of the popular high-level computer programming language, 
Logo, for use in schools and homes. ATARI Logo provides a friendly 
introduction to programming, a serious tool for advanced nrogrammers, and a 
medium for educational discovery. 

Collision detection, animation, and four dynamic graphics "turtles", not 
usually found in other versions of Logo, allow users to create video 
game-quality animated graphics. Other unique features of ATARI Logo include 
128 colors available simultaneously on one screen and multi-voice sound 
capabilbities. Joysticks and paddle controllers can add a playful dimension 
to ATARI Logo programming. 



With ATARI Logo users can create programs that converse in recognizable words 
and sentences. Since commonplace words are used, beginners can manipulate 
text and shapes on the TV screen the very first time they use Logo. 


- more - 





The simple ATABI Logo vocabulary can be expanded to suit individual needs and 
grow with the user* 3y experimenting with ATABI Logo, students discover the 
principles of computer programming. 

The ATABI Logo program cartridge works on all Atari Home Computers and 
requires as little as 16K HAH. The complete package, including a handy 
reference guide and two 200-page manuals^ Introduction to Programing Through 
Turtle Graphics and ATABI Logo Reference Hanual , sells for the suggested 
retail price of $99•95* Institutional customers may purchase manuals and 
program cartridges separately. 

✓ 

ATAKI Logo is exclusively designed and manufactured for all Atari Home 
Computers by Logo Computer Systems, Inc., of Montreal. 

Atari Inc., a subsidiary of Varner Communications Inc., is a leading designer 
and manufacturer of home computers, peripherals and software for a variety of 
applications, as well as coin video games and home video games. 



ATARI LOGO 


CODE NO. 

KX7079 CARTRIDGE 

SUGGESTED RETAIL PRICE 

$99.95 

AVAILABLE 

NOW 

REQUIRES 

16K RAM 

SUMMARY Perfect programming language for beginners. Uses everyday words 
and multiple turtles to enhance math and language skills. Simple enough for pre¬ 
schoolers, yet expandable enough to interest experienced programmers. 

FEATURES 

• Dynamic turtle graphics 

• Built-in collision detection 

• Unlimited shapes via shape editor 

• 128 colors 

• Built-in (2-voice) sound capabilities 

• Compatible with all Atari Home Computers 

TARGET MARKET Beginning programmers. 3 and up. 

MARKET RESEARCH Logo was developed at MIT 16 years ago and widely ac¬ 
cepted by educators as an introductory programming language. Many computer 
publications have had special issues on LOGO and have regular monthly columns 
about LOGO. 

ADVERTISING Alan Alda TV spot—Fall '83; National print ads in consumer 
magazines—fall-winter / 83-'84. 

PROMOTION General Foods Box Top Redemption—fall-winter '83-'84 







ATARI LOGO 

BRING IT HOME! 

Now eager computer users of all ages can learn programming the easy way, with 
Atari Logo. 

Fast becoming The number 1 educational programming language in the world. Atari 
makes it possible for you to bring this powerful learning language home. 

Here's why: 


Featur^ bb(— 

1. Atari Logo is a self-contained 
16K cartridge. 


2. No other hardware required 
to run Atari Logo. 


3. Full-featured Logo for only 
$99.95 

4. Famous "turtle graphics” 
with four dynamic turtles 
that LOOK like turtles. 


5. 128 colors; 3 pens. 


6. Turtle shape editor/ collision 
detection, joystick or paddle 
input and two voice sound 
capability. 


7. List processing capability. 


• Runs on all Atari computers—from 
400's through the new XL line. 

• Sell to the entire installed base plus 
drives new computer sales. 

• Less expensive to install and run than 

Apple Logo. Tl Logo, and many other 
Logo systems. 

• Minimal investment; maximum poten¬ 
tial for learning to program. 

• Direct, graphic way to learn to 
program. 

• Easy to tell the directions turtles 
move. 

• Engaging to program; fun to watch. 

• Create powerful graphics and 
dynamic color displays. 

• Vary backgrounds, turtle colors, and 
lines in pictures. 

• Puts simple, original video game 
development into the hands of 
everyone. 

• Create powerful animation 
with sound effects and music. 

• Lets the computer handle words in a 
simple and natural manner. 

• State of the art approach to pro¬ 

gramming, including robotics and ^ 
artificial intelligence. tW, 


♦This product was developed and manufactured for 
ATARI, INC. by Logo Computer Systems, Inc. 







