THE JOINT FORCE COMMANDER 
(JEC) - WARFIGHTER OR BATTLEFIELD 

MANAGER? 


A Monograph 
By 

Major Michael T. Miklos 
Field Artillery 



School of Advanced Military Studies 
United States Army Command and General Staff College 
Fort Leavenworth, Kansas 


Second Term AY 95-96 


Approved for Public Release; Distribution is Unlimited 



REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

1 Form Approved 

0MB No. 0704-0188 

PuWic reponmg burden for ihu colleaion of informjiion is estimated to average 1 hour per response, Including the time for reviewino Instructions searchino existing 
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or Inv othe? asoect of thJi 
wllecbon of Washington Headquarters Services, Olrectorate?or Information Operations ar>d Reports 1215 Jefferson 

Davis Highway, Suite 1204. Arlington, VA 22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704*0188), Washington. DC 20503. 

1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank) 12. REPORT DATE I 3. REPORT TYPE ANO OATES COVERED 

1 '1 MONOGRAPH 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

5. FUNDING NUMBERS 

6. AUTHOR{S) £ ---— 

/Yjfff' /, 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) .. 

School of Advanced Military Studies 

Conmand and General Staff College 

Fort Leavenworth, Kansas 66027 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 

REPORT NUMBER 

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME{S} AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Command and General Staff College 

Fort Leavenworth, Kansas 66027 

10. SPONSORING/MONITORING 

AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 

11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES ---- 

iza. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

12b. distribution code 

APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE- 
DISTRIBUTION UNLIMITED. 



13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) 


SEE ATTACHED 


1996100 

im 

[Due QUAunr inspected 9 

14. SUBJECT TERMS f 

15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

16. PRICE CODE 

17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF REPORT 

18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF THIS PAGE 

19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF ABSTRAa 

20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 

UNCLASSIFIED 

UNCLASSIFIED 

UNCLASSIFIED 

mfflXTEP_ 


NSN 7540-01-280-5500 Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) 


Prescribed by ANSI Std 239-18 












SCHOOL OF ADVANCED MILITARY STUDIES 
MONOGRAPH APPROVAL 
Major Michael T. Miklos 


Title of Monograph; The Joint 
Manager? 


Force Commander (JFC) - Warfighter or Battlefield 


Approved by: 






Philip J. Brookes. Ph.D. 


Director, Graduate 
Degree Program 


Accepted this 23rd day of May 1996 



ABSTRACT 


The Joint Force Commander (JFC) - Warfighter or Battlefield Manager? by MAJ Michael T. Miklos, USA 

This study examines the issue of fighting with operational fires at the theater level. Specifically, it 
examines the question how can the JFC best integrate airspace control measures, fire support coordination 
measures, and ADA control measures to fight vwth operational fires. Two major events have effected the 
way in which the JFC can look at conducting his campaign plan. The first is the 1986 Goldwater-Nichols 
Department of Defense Reorganization Act. The second is recent technological developments which 
changed the dynamics on the battlefield. 

The Goldwater-Nichols Act shifted the military's focus on joint warfighting and interoperability. This 
change placed the responsibility for the development of joint doctrine on the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff. It also placed more autonomy in the theater commanders-in-chief 

Recent technological developments have enabled the branches of the service to more accurately 
engage enemy targets at ranges greater than ever before. This capability was first manifested during the 
Persian Gulf War. The use of ATACMS, Patriot, and cruise missiles changed the role of the JFC from a 
battlefield manager to an active warfighter. 

At the foundation of this examination is the interaction between doctrine, technology and 
organizational structure at the theater level. Each of the services provides different capabilities to the JFC. 
Currently the doctrine and organizational structure do not support technological capabilities. 

The Army's TRADOC Pamphlet 525-5 provides a conceptual framework for how to think about the 
elements required for success in future conflicts. Central to the concept are five battlefield dynamics. The 
dynamic that directly applies to the JFC in this study is depth and simultaneous attack. 

In accordance with the Golwater-Nichols Act, future conflicts will require an organizational structure 
and doctrine that effectively and efficiently synchronize service capabilities at the theater level. Currently, 
the organizational structure and doctrine do not support the JFC as a warfighter. This study offers a solution 
to the doctrinal and organizational deficiency. 

The monograph consists of five chapters. Chapter one frames the problem. Chapter two examines 
the current service and special operations forces capabilities, doctrine and organizational control measures. 
Chapter three discusses the role of future warfighting trends in fighting with operational fires. Chapter four 
examines joint doctrine and organization structure. It offers a solution to the integration of FSCMs with 
airspace command and control measures, and air defense control measures under a joint organizational 
structure. This solution allows the theater commander to maximize his deep fires capabilities. Lastly, 
chapter five addresses the conclusions of the study. 


TABLE OF CQNTENTc? 


APPROVAL PAGE . 

ABSTRACT . 

TABLE OF CONTENTS . 

CHAPTERS: 

1. INTRODUCTION . 

2. CAPABILITIES AND DOCTRINE. 

3. TRADOC PAMPHLET 525-5 AND FORCE XXI 

4. INTEGRATION. 

5. CONCLUSIONS. 

ENDNOTES . 

APPENDIX: 

1. JOINT A^C^ PROCEDURAL MEASURES. 

2. FIRE CONTROL MEASURES AFFECTING TAGS 

3. JOINT FORCE COMPONENT COMMANDS 

4. COMBAT AND COMMUNICATIONS ZONE. 

5. OPERATIONAL AREAS IN THEATER. 

GLOSSARY . 

BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

INITIAL DISTRIBUTION LIST. 


22 

27 

42 

47 

62 

63 

64 

65 

66 
67 
69 
77 





















CHAPTER 1 


INTRODUCTION 

...[Djoctrine reflects the adaptation of technology to new weapons systems and 

capabilities, organizations, missions, training, leader development, and soldier support. 

Field Manual 100-S 

The U.S. military's approach toward warfighting is reflected in its doctrine. The military 
works to improve its warfighting potential through a systems approach toward doctrinal 
development, technological capabilities, and organizational structure to accomplish assigned [roles 
and] missions.^ Each branch of service approaches doctrinal development from a different point of 
view. 

The U.S. military’s doctrinal development evolves primarily from three stimuli; internally, 
from the lessons learned during operations and training; from the development and infusion of new 
technologies; or externally, from the influence of hostile threats or external pressures, such as 
attack by Warsaw Pact forces during the Cold War or the passage of laws by the Congress. 
Arguably, military doctrine is developed and promulgated to increase combat potential, to promote 
interoperability amongst the services, and ultimately to win the nation's wars. 

Technological capabilities have been heavily influenced by improvements in the computer 
industry. The recent emphasis within each of the services on information dominance, digitization, 
and deep battle is a demonstrated example of the impact of technology. 

The Goldwater-Nichols Department of Defense Reorganization Act of 1986 has had a 
significant influence. It served as a benchmark in the evolution of the American military's approach 
to warfighting. It vested the overall responsibility for the development of joint doctrine with the 
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS). Prior to the implementation of the Act, military 
emphasis was predominantly on individual service, specific doctrine rather than a coherent, joint 
doctrine for operations. This made interoperability more difficult. 

The Army and Air Force attempted to improve interoperability through the development of 
multi-service doctrine. In July, 1975 the Army's Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) and 


1 




the Air Force's Tactical Air Command (TAG) established the Directorate of Air-Land Forces 
Application (ALFA) in an attempt to resolve tactical and procedural issues regarding air-ground 
interface on a highly lethal battlefield. The limitation in this initiative was that TAG was not able 
speak for the Air Force in the development and promulgation of Air Force doctrine. Through its 
work ALFA accomplished a number of initiatives. However, "ALFA was not able to bridge the gap 
between Army and Air Force views on air-ground operations at the operational level."^ 

Since 1986, joint doctrine has evolved slowly under the auspices of the Joint Staff. Issues 
for joint doctrinal development were mandated in a top-down approach (from the Joint Staff). 
Doctrinal publications were then developed from the bottom-up through the collaboration of the 
services.'* The resulting development of joint doctrine, tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTP) 
has been slow in some cases. The most common reason for delays in drafting publications was 
differing philosophical beliefs toward the conduct of operations by each of the services. For 
example, the keystone document Joint Publication 3-0, Doctrine for Joint Operations was not 
published until 1993. The bottom line in the delay is that "development of U.S. joint doctrine is a 
process based upon consensus. Thus, many joint publications reflect the lowest common 
denominators upon which the services do not disagree."® 

The Act played a critical role in shifting more autonomy to the theater commanders-in-chief 
(GING), in prosecuting conflict. Pnor to the Goidwater-Nichols Act, theater commanders primarily 
employed armed fixed-wing aircraft, special operating forces (SOF), electronic warfare, and field 
artillery assets — Pershing or Lance missiles — through subordinate units to develop and shape the 
battlefield to accomplish operational objectives. Since the passage of the Act, technological 
developments have heavily influenced the role the theater commander plays as a warfighter. 

The GING prosecutes conflict at the operational level of war. Joint Publication 1-02, 
Department of D efense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms , defines the operational level of 
war as 

"[tjhe level of war at which campaigns and major operations are planned, conducted, and 
sustained to accomplish strategic objectives within theaters or areas of operations. 

Activities at this level link tactics and strategy by establishing operational objectives needed 


2 




to accomplish strategic objectives, sequencing events to achieve the operational objectives 
initiatong actions, and applying resources to bring about and sustain these events. These 
activities imply a broader dimension of time and space than do tactics they ensure the 
logistic and administrative support of tactical forces, and provide the means by which 
tactical successes are exploited to achieve strategic objectives.'^ 


The CINC or Joint Force Commander’s (JFC) goal is to generate and apply combat power 
within the theater. Joint Force Commanders use command and control systems to focus the 
requisite combat power at the decisive place and time to achieve the desired operational end state.^ 
According to FM 100-5, . Qperations , "Joint operations are the integrated military activities of 
two or more sen/ice components - Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps - of the US military." In 
conducting joint operations, each branch of the military provides different capabilities on the 
battlefield. The challenge for the joint commander is to synchronize the capabilities each service 
provides in available combat power to achieve a synergistic effect. Under current doctrine, the joint 
commander sets the conditions through his staff and subordinate commanders to focus combat 
power to ultimately accomplish his campaign plan objectives. One way to set the conditions is the 
employment of effective control measures. Control measures, if properly employed, increase 
responsiveness and simultaneity, expand depth, and allow the commander to manage his 
battlespace. 


Technological developments have further enhanced the joint commander's ability to employ 
and control combat power. Specifically, the technological developments in tactical missiles 
(ATACMS), cruise missiles - tactical land attack missile (TLAMS) and conventional air-launched 
cruise missile (CALCM) ~ and armed aircraft have provided the joint commander with the necessary 

combat power to conduct operations at theater-level in order to set the conditions for subordinate 
units. 


The Gulf War was the first opportunity in which the JFC could apply combat power at 
significant distances. It was also the first conflict in which all four branches of the military had the 
technological capability and requisite quality of weapons systems to conduct sustained 
engagements and battles to effect deep operations. In previous conflicts, the major element of 
combat power directly available to the joint commander was armed fixed-wing aircraft; however. 


3 



during the Gulf War. aircraft of the Air Force, Navy, and Marine Corps conducted sorties against 
deep targets during the first two phases of the four phase air operation. The Navy and Air Force 
launched 317 cruise missiles and the Army conducted 21 fire missions with Army Tactical Missiles 
(ATACMS).® These capabilities required the joint commander to establish control measures, at his 
level, for the successful integration of the resources from all four branches of service. 

In light of the experiences gained from the Gulf War, with increased weapons systems 
capabilities, the JFC must now be prepared to conduct deep operations with the combined 
resources of all four branches of the military. These capabilities require a coherent, integrated 
doctrine for the control of the indirect fire of tactical ballistic and cruise missiles, and the direct fires 
from armed aircraft. Unfortunately, the doctrine for the control of these resources lags behind the 
technological developments. 

Currently, each service employs weapons systems based on their philosophical approach 
to warfighting. For air power, the Army uses the Army Air Ground System (AAGS). The Air Force 
uses the Theater Air Control System (TACS). The Navy uses the Naval Tactical Air Control System 
(NTACS). And the Marine Corps uses the Marine Air Command and Control System (MACCS). All 
are integral parts of the overall Theater Air Ground System (TAGS) used to manage airspace.® 
TAGS is not a formal system in itself, but the actual sum of various component air-ground systems. 
The TAGS mission is to enable the delivery of the maximum amount of combat power to the desired 
place at the right time."’® The TAGS, however, does not incorporate fire support coordinating 
measures (FSCMs) required for the synchronization of tactical ballistic missiles and cruise missiles, 
or air defense artillery control measures. 

Doctrinally, FSCMs perform one of two functions for the commander. They either restrict 
the access to the terrain, the formations, or structures located within the boundaries of the FSCM. 
or they open the terrain to permit unrestricted fire into the area. The former are restrictive measures 
that function as a method of force protection or security while the latter are permissive measures 
that provide increased surprise and responsiveness. The only fire support coordinating measure 
that applies specifically to air power is the airspace coordination area (ACA). The Fire Suotjort 


4 




C oordination Line (FSCL). the most contentious FSCM. is a permissive measure that enables air-to- 
surface and surface-to-surface fires without additional coordination. Joint doctrine addresses the 
requirements for synchronization of the operational missile fires with armed aircraft; however, it does 
not offer solutions for the successful synchronization of these fires.^’ For example, it does not 
address the synchronization of sub-surface launched Tomahawk cruise missiles and Air Force 
armed aircraft to attack operational level targets. The impact of this doctrinal gap for the JFC is 

decreased responsiveness, ineffective use of resources, a lack of synergy, and an unnecessary risk 
to aircrews — in short, reduced interoperability. 

Senior Army leaders have already recognized that "in future operations, emerging 
technologies in precision weapons, target acquisition, information systems and unmanned aerial 
vehicles (UAVs), at multiple levels of command will require new perspectives on command and 
control (C^) of airspace at Army and joint use level."^^ These perspectives include an understanding 
of the maximum effective employment of ATACMS with ranges to 300Kms^^ and cruise missiles, 
both of which provide the joint commander with the resources of all weather, day-night munitions. 

The JFC will have the capability to acquire targets farther out on the battlefield and conduct 
operations against the enemy at ranges greater than previously considered. This change will make 
the JFC an active warfighter rather than a battlefield manager. 

This monograph will examine the need to integrate fire support coordinating measures with 
air space command and control measures, and air defense artillery control measures. Specifically. 

It will answer the question, how can the theater commander best integrate fire support coordinating 
measures with airspace command and control measures in conducting operational fires? It is the 
thesis of this paper that, as the military becomes more joint in its operational warfighting focus, 
developing technology in tactical ballistic and cruise missile systems will mandate a more efficient 
use of air space and the orchestration of control measures by the theater commander. 

To address the thesis question, the monograph consists of five chapters. Chapter one 
frames the problem. Chapter two examines the current service and special operations forces 
capabilities, doctnne and organizational control of fire support coordinating measures and airspace 


5 



command and control measures. Chapter three discusses the role of future warfighting trends in 
fighting with operational fires using Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) Pamphlet 525-5, 
F orce XXI Operations . Chapter four examines joint doctrine and organization. It suggests a 
solution to the integration of FSCMs with airspace command and control measures, and air defense 
control measures under a joint organizational structure. This solution allows the theater commander 
to maximize his deep fires capabilities. Lastly, chapter five addresses the conclusions. 


6 



CHAPTER 2 


CAPABILITIES AND DQCTBIMF 

In Modern war, the new high ground belongs to the side that controls the air-and space. 

Brigadier General Robert H. Scales, Jr?* 


Department of Defense Dictionary of Milita ry and Associated Terms joint Publication 
1-02, defines doctrine as "the fundamental principles by which the military forces or elements 
thereof guide their actions in support of national objectives. It is authoritative but requires 
judgement in application."’® It further defines capability as "the ability to execute a specified course 
of action."’® Capabilities, therefore, include the weapons systems, doctrine and controlling 
organizations that provide the services with the ability to prosecute conflict as the National 
Command Authority specifies and the theater commander directs. 

ARMY 

CAPABILITIES 

The Army, through the land component commander (LCC), provides the JFC with rotary¬ 
wing aviation, and rocket and missile field artillery systems to engage enemy targets beyond the 
corps forward boundary, or beyond the FSCL in the absence of a corps forward boundary. 

Additionally, the Army furnishes air defense missile systems for counterair operations and for 
theater missile defense. 


Aviation provides the JFC with 


Aviation 


a Ivghly flexible maneuver force capable of performing a variety of combat, combat support 
(CS), and combat service support (CSS) missions across the entire range of operations. 
Aviation units can rapidly maneuver to provide the decisive component of combat power 
^roughout the depth of the battlefield during day, night, or adverse weather conditions. 

The aviation brigade can operate independently or, when properly augmented, become the 
controlling headquarters for other combined arms elements conducting ground operations.’^ 

At the theater level there are no aviation units directly available to the JFC. Assets for 

direct use by the JFC must come from corps and division aviation brigades. 'The aviation brigade is 


7 



a maneuver force of organic attack, air assault, reconnaissance, electronic warfare, and general 
support aviation units."’® The Corps aviation brigades contain three attack battalions with 24 
Apache helicopters (AH-64) per battalion for a total of 72 attack helicopters. The Army's most robust 
aviation brigade is located in the air assault division. It has three attack battalions with a total of 64 
AH-64,125 AH-58D, and 16 AH-1 attack helicopters. Heavy division (armored and mechanized) 
aviation brigades have two attack battalions with 24 Apache helicopters (AH-64) per battalion, and 
16 Kiowa attack helicopters (AH-58D) in the division cavalry squadron for a total of 64 attack 
helicopters. Light division aviation brigades, depending on the table of organization and equipment 
(TOE), may have 40 AH-64, AH-58D, or AH-1 attack helicopters.’® 

Generally, the JFC will task the corps headquarters for the aviation brigade’s attack 
helicopter assets before he will task the divisions. The attack helicopter battalions are a formidable 
weapons system with significant day and night capabilities, including electro-optic suites and laser 
range finders, to engage and destroy armored vehicles and soft skin targets at long range.“ They 
carry Laser HELLFIRE missile system as the primary armament.®’ 

The Laser HELLFIRE is an air to-ground missile system designed to defeat individual hard 
point targets. "During Operation Desert Stomn, HELLFIRE earned the reputation of being the U.S. 
military's most formidable tank killer."®® It has a maximum range of 7.0Km direct fire and 8.0Km 
indirect fire.®® 

Aviation units destroy enemy forces by fire and maneuver, perform target acquisition 
and reconnaissance, enhance command and control, and move combat personnel, supplies, 
and equipment in compliance with the scheme of maneuver.... In the area of fire or ground 
support. Army aviation functions in the following roles: 

Aerial fon«rard observation 
Air reconnaissance 
Electronic warfare (EW) 

Aerial mine delivery 
Air assault 

Air movement of weapons systems and/or ammunition 
Attack helicopter operations 

Command and control for joint air attack team (JAAT) operation^*' 

While rotary-wing assets are capable of flying in adverse weather conditions, their 


8 




performance is degraded. The only system that is all weather capable is the field artillery. 

Field ArtitlBry 

As with aviation, the JFC has no organic field artillery assets to fight. For indirect fires, he 
must task subordinate corps field artillery (FA) brigades or division artilleries for assets. While the 
corps and division artillery contain cannon, rocket, and missile artillery firing units, only the missile 
artillery attains the range for the JFC fight. The Army tactical missile system (ATACMS) provides the 
JFC with an all-weather, precision, indirect fire weapons system. Because all multiple launch rocket 
launch systems (MLRS) and the High Mobility Artillery Rocket System (HIMARS) are capable of 
firing ATACMs, the JFC has great flexibility in planning and engaging targets. 

The ATACMS is currently planned for fielding in four blocks. ‘The ATACMS Block I 
replaces the conventional Lance system. It is a ground-launched, semi-ballistic, deep fires missile 
system consisting of a surface-to-surface guided missile with an anti-personnel/anti-materiel 
(APAM) warhead consisting of 950 M-74 bomblets... [and] a range of 165Km"^® 

■The Block lA missile is an extended range variant of the Block I missile... with a range of 
300Km."“ It includes an onboard Global Positioning System (GPS) and an inertial navigation 
system. These additions reduce the payload to 310 bomblets to achieve the extended range and 
accuracy.*^ Because of the reduced payload the area of coverage of the Block lA is slightly less.® 
The Block II variant is a preplanned product improvement (P3I) to the ATACMS Blocks I 
and lA missile systems specifically designed to kill moving armored targets and surface-to-surface 
missile (SSM) transporter erector launchers (TELS)."^® The Block II carries a payload of either 13 
brilliant anti-armor (BAT) submunitions or BAT P3I brilliant submunitions, and has a range of 
140Kms.® 'The BAT (P3I) is a preplanned improvement of the BAT submunition to provide 
enhanced acquisition capability and an improved warhead for use against an expanded target set to 
include moving or stationary, and hot or cold targets."®’ 

'The Block HA is the extended range version of the Block II system."®® The Block IIA 
delivers a payload of six BAT (P3I) submunition to 248Kms.®® The area of coverage for both BAT 
and BAT (P3I) is a radius of four kilometers.®^ 


9 



Air Defense Artillery 


Air defense operations provide the force with protection from enemy air and missile attack. 
They prevent the enemy from separating friendly forces while freeing the commander to fully 
synchronize maneuver and firepower."® Army air defense contributes to theater counterair 
operations and to theater missile defense. 'Theater counterair operations protect the force from 
attack by enemy fixed-wing and rotary-wing armed aircraft and by unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). 
Theater missile defense protects the force and critical assets from attack by... ballistic missiles, 
cnjise missiles (CMs), and tactical air-to-surface missiles (TASMs).'^ 

The JFC employs Patriot and Hawk missile battalions, from theater and corps air defense 
brigades, to establish a high- to medium-altitude air defense (HIMAD) air defense umbrella against 
tactical ballistic missiles (TBM) and air breathing threats (ABT). "The Patriot system is a mobile air 
defense system that is effective against aircraft. UAVs. cruise missiles, anti-radiation missiles, and 
tactical ballistic missiles. It has a radar that can detect aircraft from near ground level up to altitudes 
in excess of 80Kms, and it can acquire targets out to 160Kms, depending on the terrain.'®^ Each 
Patriot battalion has six firing batteries with eight launchers.® The Patriofs effectiveness, as a 
theater ballistic missile deterrent, was proven during the Gulf War. This was the first time a tactical 
ballistic missile was intercepted and destroyed in combat.® The exact number of Scud missiles 
destroyed by Patriot units during the Gulf War is unknown; however, its contribution was a 
significant influence in Israel's decision not to intervene in the war.'” 

'The Hawk missile system is found only in the Army National Guard. Currently, there are 
only three National Guard Hawk Battalions."^’ "The Hawk is effective against targets from 100 feet 
to more than 45,000 feet in altitude to a maximum effective range of 40Kms."’* The Hawk battalion 
has three firing batteries of six launchers each, totaling 18 launchers for a corps ADA battalion, and 
24 launchers in a theater hawk battalion.'” 

DOCTRINE 

These technological capabilities are applied through the Army's doctrine. "Within the Army, 
doctrine is seen as essential. It is accepted as the basis of the organization as well as the engine 


10 




of change."^ The Army keystone Field Manual 100-5. Operations, states that "doctrine is the 
statement of how America's Army, as part of a joint team, intends to conduct war."^ It goes on to 
state that "[djoctrine should reflect new technology and its potential for the future, as well as its 
effects on Army operations."^ At the theater level, the Army control system that turns weapons 
technology into combat power is the Army Air-Ground System (AAGS) for air power. Fire Support 

Coordinating Measures (FSCMs) for indirect fires, and weapons control and air defense procedures 
for air defense fires. 

AAGS 

•The AAGS provides the means to initiate, receive, process, and execute requests for air 
support and to disseminate information and intelligence produced by aerial assets."^^ The Army 
elements of AAGS consist of operations, fire support, air defense, command and control, liaison 
and coordination.^ The Arm/s employment of control and coordination is conducted through Army 
Airspace Command and Control {A^C% Army Airspace Command and Control allows for the 
concurrent employment of airspace working toward the accomplishment of assigned missions.'® 
Doctrine defines A^C^ as those actions that ensure the synchronized use of airspace and enhance 
the command and control of those forces using airspace. The A'C^ system accomplishes the four 
basic functional activities of airspace control ~ C^ air defense, fire support coordination, and air 
traffic control. The system includes the organizations, personnel, facilities, and procedures required 
to perform the airspace control function.®® 

Army places emphasis on the dynamics of maneuver and firepower in all dimensions of 
warfighting. While [the] doctrine clearly articulates the procedures necessary to synchronize 
operations in the ground regime, the third dimension of the battlespace ~ "airspace" has not been 
fully addressed. Technological advances on the battlefield give [friendly forces] the capability to 
detect arid engage enemy targets at far greater ranges and at increasingly shorter times. The ability 
to deconflict all Army users of the airspace and provide for their simultaneous utilization is of 
paramount importance.... The current A^C^ system does not provide the ARFOR Commander with 
the capability to interface his requirements with those of other airspace users. This lack of 
interconnectivity within the Army... currently prevents synchronized operations.®^ 

Doctrinally, the A^C^ system employs positive and procedural control measures to manage 
airspace and to shape the battlefield. "Positive control is [defined as] a method of airspace control 
which relies on positive identification, tracking, and direction of aircraft within an airspace conducted 


11 


with electronic means by an agency having authority and responsibility therein.'® Positive control 
measures include radars using IFF, and ground and air forward air controllers (FACs). "Procedural 
cgnfrol is [defined as] a method of airspace control which relies on a combination of previously 
agreed and promulgated orders and procedures."® "Procedural control measures must be 
employed when positive control measures cannot be used or are inappropriate for the situation.'®^ 
Procedural control measures include: "air control orders (ACOs), special instructions (SPINS) in the 
air tasking order (ATO), airspace control authority (ACA) techniques, procedures, and rules in the 
airspace control plan (ACP),"®® the coordinating altitude, the High-Density Airspace Control Zone 
(HIDAC2), the Minimum Risk Route (MRR), the Restricted Operations Zone (ROZ), and Standard- 
Use Army Aircraft Flight Routes (SAAFR). (see appendix 01)®® 

FSCM 

Current Army and Marine Corps doctrine for FSCMs are the same. 

Fire Support Coordinating Measures strike a balance between the need for rapid execution 
of fire support missions and protection of the friendly force from its own fires. Within their 
boundaries, land and amphibious commanders employ permissive and restrictive FSCMs to 
enhance the expeditious attack of targets; to protect forces, populations, critical pieces of 
infrastructure, and sites of religious or cultural significance, and to set the stage for future 
operations.® 

Permissive FSCMs include: the Fire Support Coordination Line (FSCL), Coordinated Fire Line 
(CFL), Free Fire Area (FFA).“ Restrictive FSCMs include: the Restricted Fire Line (RFL), the 
Restricted Fire Area (RFA), the No Fire Area (NFA), and the Airspace Coordination Area (ACA).*® 
(see appendix 02)“ 

ADA 

'The ot^ect of air defense is to limit the effectiveness of enemy offensive air efforts and 
permit freedom of action by friendly forces."®^ Air defense control measures include both positive 
and procedural methods. Positive methods include IFF/SIF On/Off Line, and procedural methods 
include the joint (JEZ). fighter (FEZ), high-altitude missile (HIMEZ), low-altitude missile (LOMEZ), 
and short-range air defense engagement zones (SHORADEZ) and the base defense zone (BDZ).® 


12 



ORGANIZATIONc; 


The Army's representation, at the theater level, is provided through the battlefield 
coordination detachment (BCD). The name was recently changed from the battlefield coordination 
element (BCE). Depending on the source, both terms are still used. 


objectives, guidance, and priorities from the ooerations offirpr « w 

are sufficientiv clear that the rcc le (®^)- The guidance and priorities 


The BCD represents the interests and desires of the land component commander (LCC) in 
the air operations center (AOC). It serves as the interface with the Air Component Commander 
(ACC) for the Land Component Commander (LCC). The combination of ground and air 
representatives establishes a connectivity to facilitate unity of effort and synchronization in both 
mediums (air and ground). "It monitors and analyzes the land battle forthe JAOC and provides the 
interface for the exchange of current intelligence, operational data, and operational support 
requirements between the ARFOR, the JFACC, and participating mulfinational forces.'^ The 
Army's doctrine. Field Manual 100-13. forthe BCD is presently being written. The doctnne for these 
organizations has largely been based on standard operating procedures. Currently, there are four 
BCEs established in the Army.« "Activities in the BCE are joint by virtue of the joint coordination.'- 
Dunng World War II the ground commanders realized that air and ground resources had to 
work together to achieve victory.- Since then, ground and air-power advocates have rediscovered 
the need for complementary operations. "The requirement for the BCD [organization] grew out of 
the requirement in the 1980's in Europe to deal with the then Soviet capability to attack in 
successive echelons, overwhelming the ground defense."®® 

AIR FORCE 

CAPABILITIES 

■me Air Force provides Ihe JFC, rronpally through the joiht forces air component 

commander (JFACC), »lth Significant air power assets. Air Feme Manual f-t. Basin Aemvo.,. 


13 



D octnne of the United States Air Fnrcft , specifies that platforms used to exercise aerospace power 
include fixed- and rotary -wing aircraft, ballistic and cruise missiles, and satellites.In today's 
force structure most aerospace platforms can perform multiple roles and missions. 

FIGHTERS 

The Air Force structure is currently built around 20 fighter wing equivalents (FWEs). The 

term fighter wing denotes an organizational unit comprising varying numbers of fighter aircraft. 

depending on the unit's mission. The fighter wing equivalent is 72 combat-coded fighter aircraft. 

Currently, the Air Force has five types of fighter airframes: 

F-15A/B/C/D - air superiority aircraft 

F-15E ~ long range attack aircraft 

F-16C/D - multirole (air-to-air and air-to-ground) aircraft 

F117 ~ attack aircraft 

A-10 - close air support aircraft.™ 


BOMBERS 

For striking power the Air Force provides long range bombers that can fly from the United 
States if need be. The Air Force has three main line bombers: B-2 (stealth). B-1B, B-52.^^ "At the 
end of 1995 the U.S. long-range bomber force included 95 B-ls. 94 B-52s, and eight B-2s."™ 
These three airframes alone can provide the JFC a significant combat potential for any adversary. 

The B-2 is scheduled for production in three blocks. Each block improves on stealth 
characteristics and munitions delivery. The B-1 is scheduled to be the backbone of the bomber 
force. Scheduled upgrades in the airframe will enable the bomber to carry several types of 
advanced weapons including the entire family - three types ~ of cluster munitions. The B-52 can 
serve as a nuclear or nonnuclear platform. It can carry unguided weapons, the Conventional Air- 

Launched Cruise Missile (CALCM). the Harpoon antiship missiles, and planned advanced weapons 
systems.™ 

The Air Force provides the JFC with the majority of combat power for conducting deep 
attacks. The combination of fighter and bomber aircraft provides the JFC with a suite of weapons 
systems for conducting his campaign plan. During the Gulf War. General Schwarzkopf viewed his 


14 



air power as his most responsive strategic and operational InsOonwnt to cover the entire theater" 

DOCTRINF 

The Air Force's approach to doctnne Is encapsulated In Air Foice Manual 1-1 which states, 

P™»r and the best 

orS™dS“rsCaht™" 


The philosophical view on doctrine Is reliected In how the Air Force appoDaches warUghllng. 
Air Force Manual 1-1, Basic Aerospace noctrine of the I Inite d Stales Air Foice lists four basic roles 
that are perfomred by aerospace forces: -aerospace control, force application, force enhancement, 
and force support The manual goes on to explain that the roles define broad purposes for 
aerospace forces; whereas, missions define specific tasks not capabilities or organizations. The 
table breaks out roles and missions. The sfruoture suggests a sense of linearity between roles and 
missions: however. Air Force doctrine Indicates that the connectivity Is nonlinear. For example a 
bomber may be used to conduct strategic attack or close air support.^ 


ROLES 

AEROSPACE CONTROL 
(Control the Combat Environment) 


FORCE APPLICATION 
(Apply Combat Power) 


FORCE ENHANCEMENT 
(Multiple Combat Effectiveness) 


TYPICAL MISSIONS 


Counterair 

Offensive and Defensive 
Counterspace 


Strategic Attack 
Interdiction 
Close Air Support 


Airlift 

Air Refueling 
Spacelift 

Electronic Combat 
Surveillance and Reconnaissance 
Special Operations 


15 


FORCE SUPPORT 
(Sustain Forces) 


Base Operability and Defense 
Logistics 
Combat Support 
On-Orbit Support 

In order to match equipment capabilities to assigned tasks, Air Force planners use several 
employment methods to build a composite package to accomplish the mission. Some of the 
methods are listed below: 

Sweep 

Combat Air Patrol (CAP) 

Escort 

Air-to-surface attacks against specified targets 
Air-to-surface Attacks using specialized weapons 
Armed reconnaissance” 

Depending on the target, air planners work backwards from target-to-airfield in order to determine 
the most effective means to engage the target. This approach implies that the Air Force may use 
the same aircraft for different types of mission packages. It also offers flexibility to the JFC in 
considering theater priorities to achieve operational objectives. 

ORGANIZATIONS 

•The Air Force believes its positive-control philosophy best supports a unified [campaign] 
plan in a complex and fast-changing battle for air supremacy."” At the theater level the Air Force 
Control System (TACS) is intended to provide maximum flexibility to the commander. "It is the 
backbone of the AFFOR contribution to TACS." It consists of the Air Operations Center (AOC) 
which hosts the BCD and liaisons from the Navy and special operations. It employs centralized 
planning and control, and decentralized execution. Additionally, it has subordinate TACS agencies, 
down to battalion level, that perform coordination, monitoring, liaison, and reporting. In the event 

the JFACC IS from another branch of the service the AOC remains the AFFOR's command and 
control center “ 

Dunng the execution of a mission the airspace is controlled by a number of actors. The 
Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS) provides radar controi and surveiiiance. The 
Control and Reporting Center (CRC) which is the senior radar element that directs air defense 


16 



activities, provides airspace conw, and manages the Air Foma's subonlinate radar systems. The 
Jotnt Surveillance and Target Attack Radar System (JSTARS) provides alr-teground surveillance. 
The JSTARS is Insttumehtal in establishing situational a»araness and raal-time target intelligence.*’ 
In addition to the positive control established by the previously mentioned actors, the Air 
Foree tblkMS the ACP established by the ACA. -Operadons threughout the Air Feme are designed 
to leave little to chance or integoretation at the air »ing. squadron, or cockpit level. The virtue of this 
approach Is that It lends familiarity to each operatloh and gives each wing and squadron commander 
and each air crewman confidence in the overall plan and the pertoimahce of each component.'- 

NAVY and Marine Cnrps 
CAPABILITIFS 

The Navy and Mahne Corps provide the JFC, normally through the joint forces maritime 
component commander (JFMCC), with maritime forces In building blocks of Carrier Battle Groups 
(CVBGs). Amphibious Ready Groups (ARGs). and Mahne Expedllionaty Forces (MEFs). Because 

oftheirinherentfiexibillty.manllmeunitscanbeemployedinvaryingcombinallonsandcan 

undeifake missions in conjunction with other forces. Mahtime toroes - Navy-Mahne Corps - 
■deploy in canter battle groups (CVBG) and amphibious ready groups (ARGs) with ah embarked 
special operations capable Marine expeditionary unit."®^ 

The Navy deploys seven types of battle force ships that contribute to the combat power 
available to the JFC; aircraft earners, ballistic-missile and attack submarines, surface combatants, 
amphibious ships, mine warfare ships, and logistics force ships. The CVBG-ARG can maintain 
dominance over an area, project combat power ashore, and contribute to the depioyed force 
ashore. Maritime forces project lethal fire-power ashore through the following: 

AV-8B Harrier ~ Close Air Support aircraft 

suj)^^ " strike, reconnaissance, close air 

F-14D— Multirole 

F-18A/C/D/E/F ~ Multirole®^ 

Tomahawk Land Attack Cruise Missile 

Trident II D5 submarine launched ballistic missile*® 

Ih addifion 10 lha CVBG^G, the Navy provides submahnes which can serve as sMke 



platforms for ballistic and cruise missiles, intelligence collection and surveillance, and antisubmarine 
and antisurface warfare, special warfare, mine warfare, and battlegroup support. 

Manne expeditionary forces extend the landward reach of littoral power-projection 
operations through Marine air-ground task forces (MAGTFs). The MAGTF is a combined arms 
expeditionary force. It contains four elements: ground combat, air combat, command, and service 
support. The combat forces available will depend on the size of the MAGTF. As a package. Naval 
strike and MEF, the JFC has a significant combat power projection capability at his disposal. This 

force can dominate littoral regions or deny the enemy access to the sea - surface, subsurface, and 
airborne.*® 

DOCTRINF 

•The limited emphasis the Navy has historically placed on doctrine can be. at least partially, 
attributed to its culture, particularly in its focus on technology and independent operations. 
Traditionally, the Navy has viewed doctrine as procedures for applying capital systems.'®^ 

The Marine Corps considers doctrine to be a philosophy of warfighting."®® FMFM1, 
j ^Jfiqhtinq , posits that "Marine Corps doctrine sets forth a particular way of thinking about war and 
a way of fighting, a philosophy of leading Marines in combat, a mandate for professionalism and 
common language."®® "In short, it appears that the Marine Corps views its doctrine as a codification 
of Its essence, its raison d'etre, rather than a body of knowledge to be consulted in the preparation 
for, and conduct of, war"®° 

Naval Doctrine Publication 6 (signed by the Chief of Naval Operations and the 
Commandant of the Marine Corps), Nay al Command and Control states that "command and control 
is the foundation upon which the planning and executions are built. It is the tool the naval 
commander uses to cope with the uncertainty of combat and direct his forces to accomplish the 
assigned mission. Naval command and control reflect the way we organize, train, and fight.’®' 

The naval tradition represents a history of independence and initiative on the part of the 
ship’s captain. Since the development of the radio, the autonomy of the ship’s captain has gradually 
Changed. The Goldwater-Nichols Department of Defense Act worked as a catylst forcing the Navy 


18 




to catch up to the rest of the services. The development of the Naval DoctifrK Command has 
hegun to develop a core hody of doctnne. The tmd«ion, mentioned, is dovetailed w«n sh#. and fle« 


SOPS and TIPS. For Naval forces to operate as part of a joint force there must be a core body of 
doctrine for all ships to follow. Carrier battle groups and ARGs will have to work lor joint 
commanders from different services as well as dllferent canter battle groups In future operations. 


The ultmtate impact for the JFC Is the requirement to accom,kisn operelmna, objectwes as welt as 


theeffecdvenessandsurvlvaloftneiointlbrces. This mandates that the Navy overcomethls 

hislortcal bias. Within the Navy the mentality of the captain's autonomy will take lime to change. 

The Martne Corps has had a body of doctrine for much longer. The Commandant of the 
Mahne Corps, General Charles C. Kmlak. supports the Navys efforts to devekrp its docthne.” The 
Mahne Corps as an organizalioh follows the belief that once you become a Marine you are always a 
Marine. The belief is reflected in its doctrine and philosophy. 


■ORGANIZATinNl.<^ 

The Navy uses composite warfare to maximize the each ship's warfighllng capabllilies. 
This concept prevents the enemy from saturating a single command node with massed 

-Psources.- The same approach is taken for control of air forces, 'The Navy practices command 
by negation. Tactical decisions are made at the lowest apprppnate level. This philosophy Is a 

naforalconsequenceoflheNavy'sIradiliOhofplacingatiustlhofficersincomrnandatsea. The 

Navy believes control by negation allows its forces the flexibllty and autonomy required in a high- 
jamming environment."®^ 

The maritime component commander (MCC) will designate warfare commanders who will 
Play a role in the JFCs operalional fires. They are the anfiairwarfare commander (AAWC). the 
strike warfare commander (STWC). and the air resource coordinator (AREC). The STWC 
coordinates the strike capabiiitles of the force which Is usually cruise missiles and aircraft. The 
STWC Is usually the carrier-s air wing commander. The AREC Is usually the carrier commander. 
The AAWC coordinates the fleet's air defense capabilltfos and airspace control.” m the event of 
an amphibious operation the Navy employs the Navy Tactical Air Control System (NTACS).The 


19 



commander of the amphibious task force (CATF) organizes and executes air operations within the 
AOA. From a ground perspective this operation is, very much in theory, similiar to a forward 
passage of lines. The difference in this case is that the stationary unit is afloat. The CATF runs 
the NTACS through his tactical air control center which is usually on his ship. During the 
preparation and landing the Navy TACC controls the anti-air and air support forces within the AOA. 
Positioned near the TACC ship is the supporting arms coordination center (SACC) which is the 
equivalent to the FSE on land. The SACC controls all fire support into the AOA. During the landing 
the Marine FSE is backed up by the SACC and the Marine TACC is backed up by the Navy TACC. 
While both the Marine Air Command and Control System (MACCS) and the NTACS are operational 
they form the Amphibious Tactical Air Control System (ATACS).*® The NTACS can augment TAGS 
or run an entire TAGS if required. Once ashore, the MACCS assumes control of operations on 
land. The MACCS runs through a tactical air command center (TACC). The combination of the 
SACC/FSE and the TACC/TACC function in principle like the AOC and the BCD for the Air Force 
and the Army; however, there are two differences. 

The first is the habitual relationship the MAGTF will usually have with the Naval force. The 
second is that the AOC/BCD are normally operating at echelons above corps. The TACC/SACC 
usually operates at corps-level and below. In both cases there are two separate organizations (air 
oriented and ground oriented) trying to integrate and synchronize operations. 

SPECIAL OPERATING FORCES 

CAPABILITIFR 

"Special operations are a form of warfare characterized by a unique set of objectives, 
weapons, and forces."®^ Special operating forces provide the JFC with unique equipment and 
capabilities designed to address those missions, regardless of where they are conducted. The 
capabilities are routinely not present in conventional forces. They are joint forces with assets from 
active and reserve components of the Army. Navy and Air Force. Other forces as deemed 
necessary for SOF related missions may receive training and equipment. 

Army SOF consists of forces that include special forces, rangers, special operations 


20 



aviallon, psychologioal operafais units, and civil aflairs units. Navy SOF consists of (orees that 
include SEAL, SEAL dellveiy vehiaa (SDV) teams, and Special Boat Units (SBUs). Air Force SOF 

consists offerees that include fixedaiang and vertlcaHm aircraft and aircrews, and composite 
special tactical teams.*® 

SOF conduct five pnncipal missions: unconventional warfare (UW), direct action (DA), 
special reconnaissance (SR), foreign internal defense (FID), and counterterrorism (CT).* 
Unconventional warfare is a broad spectrum of usually long duration operations. They include 
guerrilla warfare, sabotage, subversion and other low visibility missions. Direct action operations 
are habitually short duration, offensive actions to destroy, capture, recover, or inflict damage on a 
specified target. These missions may include raids, ambushes, standoff attacks from air or naval 
platforms, terminal guidance for precision munitions or other actions. Special reconnaissance 
missions are used to obtain or verify information concerning capabilities or intentions of actual or 
potential enemies or areas. Foreign internal defense missions consist of training and assitance to 
indigenous military and paramilitary forces to reestablish security within the country. 

Counterterrorism missions are offensive actions taken to preempt or resovie terrorist actions 
abroad. 

DOCTRINF 

"Spedal operating forces use a combination of their own service-unique, joint, and other 
services- tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTP) to cany out assigned tasks."'* The SOF 

approach toward doctrine is one of flexibility and agility. Basically, it is a philosophy of 'use what 
works and then adjust as required.' 


21 



CHAPTER 3 


TRADOC Pam S2S-S and Force XXI 

Force XXI will represent a new way of thinking for a new wave of warfare'^' 

General Gordon R. Sullivan 
Chief of Staff, U.S. Army 


The decision on how to prepare for future military operations is contentious at best. The 
Army's Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC), published TRADOC Pam 525-5 as a think 
piece for future Army operations. The current TRADOC Pam 525-5, Force XXI Oneration.s 
identifies trends for the 21 st century. It is a conceptual view of future joint military operations. "It 
describes, in general terms, how the Army will function in the future as the primary land force 
executing joint, multinational operations in War and Operations Other Than War (OOTW) to achieve 
established objectives in operations where domination of terrain or control of populations is central 
to victory."^“ 

While an Army publication, TRADOC Pam 525-5 offers concepts and approaches toward 
the prosecution of conflict across the threat spectrum that are useful for all branches of the service. 
The concepts promulgated through TRADOC Pam 525-5 recognize the opportunities available from 
the recent changes in world affairs. "Even though in the mid-1990s no credible near-term threat 
exists for the United States, the nation's vital security interests may not go unchallenged during this 
period of great strategic reordering."’” The pamphlet continues that 'Ihere can be no single, 
prescribed, authoritative... doctrine for this period.... [and postulates] a concept built on principles 
that must be translated to action in specific scenarios that cannot be predicted with enough 
certainty to warrant a return to prescriptive doctrine."’” 

The counter-argument for not changing warfighting doctrine is that the same technology 
may pose a threat to the United States when it is controlled by hostile forces. There are some who 
would argue that the old adage "if it ain't broke don't fix it" applies at this time. They further argue 
that the adage applies to the United States as the world's sole superpower. However, history does 


22 



not support this assertion. 


Assuming the foundations of the pamphlet are correct, the changing situation in world 
affairs affords the military the opportunrty to readjust its warfighting doctrine from the symmetrical 
approach against the fomrier Warsaw Pact forces in Europe to a coherent, joint doctrine that 
maximizes rapidly advancing technological capabilities. The days of the general-purpose doctrinal 
threat template are gone.^** The most serious challenge to U.S. military superiority will not come 
from any one state or group but from a process - the proliferation of weapons and technology.-* 
Previously the military was a threat-based force structure that focused on combined arms 

operations, and changed to a capabilities-based force structure shortly after the fall of the Berlin 
Wall in 1989.^°^ 

Bngadier General Leo Baxter, Deputy Commandant of the Field Artillery School, opined that 
"combined arms is the 20th century endstate for warfighting. The dominant trend has been to 
achieve synchronization of fire and maneuver through a range of doctrinal, materiel, training and 
organizational innovations.-* This observation follows the assertions of Dr. James J. Schneider. 
Professor of Military Theory at the Army’s School of Advanced Military Studies. US Army Command 
and General Staff College. Dr. Schneider's article The Theory of the Emotv Batttefipiri states that a 
phenomenon evolved on the battlefield through the influence of three characteristics: the dispersion 
of formations, the increase in weapons lethality, and the decrease in casualties.’* The causal 
relationship in the phenomenon was based on technological development. The inaease in 
weapons technology caused the dispersion of troops thus giving the perception of an empty 
battlefield. The expected result from more lethal technology was an increase in casualties; 
however, the opposite occurred. Casualty rates dropped. General Baxter^s comments offer a 
marking point in the process of the expanding battlefield that Dr Schneider describes. 

The marking point is reflected in the maximization of available technology with current 
doctrine. At each point, a change occurs in the development of doctrine, training and organizational 
structures. Earlier examples in the 20th century include the development of mechanization and the 
internal combustion engine, the combination of the airplane and the aircraft carrier, the development 


23 



of nuclear weapons, and the combination of jet propulsion and computers. 

Mechanization increased the tempo and the size of the battlefield. The airplane and aircraft 
carrier caused a paradigm shift away from the battleship as the predominant capital ship. This shift 
resulted in surface forces fighting without ever "seeing" each other. This occurred in the battle of 
Leyte Gulf during World War II. The combination of nuclear weapons with jet propulsion posed an 
increased threat to population centers of countries. The addition of computer technology with 
missile technology pushed the battlefield beyond continental boundaries. 

Students of military art attempted to explain the apparent disparity between decreased 
casualty rates and technological changes. One such noted student was Brigadier General S.L.A. 
Marshall. General Marshall postulated, in his book Men Aoainst Fire that soldiers felt 
psychologically isolated as they began to fire and maneuver in the face of the enemy. While 
General Marshall's observations were the source of study and debate for years, technology 
continued to evolve. The interaction between technology, doctrine (how troop formations and 
equipment move on the battlefield), and organizational structure is a dynamic process. 

A cause and effect relationship will continue between technological development and the 
boundaries of the battlefield. As technological capabilities are enhanced, boundaries of the 
battlefield will expand which is what Dr Schneider alluded to in his article. Commanders, now and in 
the future, will have the ability to acquire the enemy at greater ranges, faster, and more accurately 
than ever before. This capability provides commanders freedom of action to engage the enemy - 
with precision — and with more combat power. This developing capability is at the heart of 
TRADOC Pam 525-5. 

The concepts of FORCE XXI are built on five characteristics: doctrinal flexibility, strategic 
mobility, tailorability and modularity, joint and multinational connectivity, and the versatility to 
function in War.^^° Dovetailed with the characteristics are five battle dynamics that define significant 
areas of change from current operations to Force XXI operations. The dynamics are battle 
command, battlespace, depth and simultaneous attack, early entry, and combat service support.’” 
The battle dynamic that most significantly affects the capability of the Joint Force Commander is 


24 




depth and simultaneous attack. 


Simply stated, depth and simultaneous attack will enable the commander to directiv 

heigm, and depth of his ba«lS^“ W^Srapidly 
defeat an enemy... By massing the effects of long- and short-range area and precision fires ^ ^ 

and deafen the enemy, concunent 

wnn rapid combined aims maneuver, ground and from the air, a larger and less aoile enemv fhrr-A 

SolSton fromdefeated. Although these attacks may not be simulteneous in 
Wcabon from the enemy's perspective, they will appear seamless and nearly simultaneous in 


„ l^'Shting at depth is a key aspect of operational and tactical force protection Successful 
deep operations take away the enemy's ability to hold our centers of gravity and critical fuSons at 

SimSan'Sl^S T capabilities, RISTA. and command and control 

attack rapidly denies the enemy the ability to conduct military operations throughout a 

Ri<tTA^n!f TI’® ^®*^y's attacked from what appears to be all directions, blinding his 
RISTA and rommand and control in the process. As a result, the enemy commander is ^ 

hS concentrate on any single thrust and can no tonger 

Snent°^’ ^ ® disintegrated and his entire force is disarrayed. Decisive defeat is 


attack Rra? m! <=f imperaftve for successful execution of depth and simultaneous 

finri anri W ^ ® situational awareness. They will be able to 

mmmanSf the elements of an enemy’s order of battle in near-real-time. Secondly 

StetSrXrtl^rnJ precision and 

ghiy lethal effects, in near-real-time, and at the times and places of their choosing.”^ 


While the endstate of Force XXI is undetermined, the implication is clear. Depth and 
simultaneous attack will be a key characteristic of future military operations. New technologies will 
be at the center of developing military operations. 'Technologies as drastically different from those 
of today have always created the need for a doctrinal review: doctrine before the tank, radio, and 
airplane for example differed significantly from that prior to those technologies.'-^ The application 
of combat power against the enemy using continuously new technologies mandates the next logical 
step in how the military plans to fight - the development of an improved doctrine. 

This includes the doctrine for joint warfare at the operational level. Current attempts to 
adjust to a Changing environment include the development of deep operations cells at divisions and 
corps, and battlefield coordination detachments at echelons above corps. These organizational 
structures may be interim solutions. The evolutionary process requires a long term solution that 
matches capabilities with a coherent, workable doctrine. With the advent of Force XXI, the short 
term solutions are in place. It is time to adjust the doctrine to match emerging capabilities. 


25 



The trend is clear a joint, capabilities based force, with enhanced information dominating 
capabilities, needs to overcome parochial differences and achieve the next level of synergistic 
potential with a coherent Joint doctrine. That doctrine includes the seamless prosecution of conflict 
at the operational level with integrated FSCMs, airspace command and control, and air defense 
control measures. 

Force XXI provides the methodology to achieve the next step in the evolution of military art. 
For the military to remain a credible force in the future it must reassess its doctrine during this time. 
Failure to do so offers a missed opportunity like those marking points that occurred earlier in this 
century. This missed opportunity will result in future military misfortunes caused by the failure to 
learn, the failure to adapt, and the failure to anticipate.’’® 


26 



CHAPTER 4 


INTEGRATION! 


'^® as a team.... The resulting team 

^■s=xs£^‘sszs.‘ss:xs... 

!S-SSSS:STJ=‘SPJSi^-S^ 

Joint Pub 


The JFC and Joint PocfrinA 

■The seivices provide the forces; unified commands put them together for operations. 

Each service's forces have distinctive qualities deriving tram culture and tradition."" Within the 
context Of joint doctrtne the JFC "may establish tunctional components to provide cantralixed 
direction and control of certain tuncllons and types of operations to tlx responsibility for certain 
normal, continuing functions. or«*ien It Is appropriate and desirable to establish the authodty and 
responsibility ot a subordinate commander."" Functional component commanders may Include 
(see appendix 3)'»: the Joint Force Air Component Commander (JFACC). the Joint Foioe Maritime 
Component Commander (JFMCC). the Joint Force Land Component Commander (JFLOC). and the 
Joint Force Special Operations Component Commander (JFSOCC). 

The JFC will normally designate a JF^; however, "in cases where a JFACC is not 
designated, the JFC may plan, deect. and control joint air operations. If this option Is exeraised by 
the JFC. the JFCs statf will assist to provide direction and coordination of the capabilitiesdOrces 
assigned to the joint torae.- The JFACC will usually be the commander with the preponderance 
of airforces. The JFACC derives authority from the JFC. who has the authority to exercise 
operational control, assign missions, direct coordination among subonlinale commanders, redirect 
and organize forces to ensure unity of effort in the accomplishment of the overall mission. The 
JFACCs responsibilities will be assigned by the JFC (norttially these would Include, but not limited 
to. planning, coordination. allocaSon. and tasking [of air soUesj based on the JFCs apportionment 
decision). Using the JFCs guidance, the JFACC win recommend to the JFC apportionment ot air 


27 




sorties to various missions or geographic areas.^^ "The JFC will normally designate a JFACC to 
exploit the capabilities of joint air operations. The JFACC directs this exploitation through a cohesive 
joint air operations plan (centralized planning) and a responsive and integrated control system 
(decentralized execution)."^^^ Additionally, "based on the combat situation, the JFC may delegate 
an Airspace Control Authority (ACA) and/or an Area Air Defense Coordinating (AADC) authority to 
the JFACC.’”^'' 

The JFMCC is usually the commander with the preponderance of maritime forces. The 
commander within a unified command, subordinate unified command, or JTF is responsible to the 
establishing commander for making recommendations on the proper employment of maritime forces 
and assets, planning and coordinating maritime operations, or accomplishing such operational 
missions as may be assigned. The JFMCC is given the authority necessary to accomplish missions 
and tasks assigned by the establishing commander. He has responsibility for all maritime forces 
within the area of operations. The JFMCC may employ various maritime warfare assets to support 
the theater campaign and subordinate operations including strike warfare, anti-air warfare, mine 
warfare, electronic warfare, amphibious operations, and special operations.^* 

The JFLCC will usually be the commander with the preponderance of land forces. The 
JFLCC is the commander within a unified command, subordinate unified command, or JTF 
responsible to the establishing commander for making recommendations on the proper employment 
of land forces, planning and coordinating land operations, or accomplishing such operational 
missions as may be assigned. The JFLCC is given the authority necessary to accomplish missions 
and tasks assigned by the establishing commander.^* 

The JFSOCC will normally be the commander with the preponderance of special operations 
forces and the requisite command and control capabilities. The JFSOCC exercises operational 
control (OPCON) over assigned special operations forces (SOF) within the area of operations. He 
is the commander within a unified command, subordinate unified command, or joint task force 
responsible to the establishing commander for making recommendations on the proper employment 
of special operations forces and assets, planning and coordinating special operations, or 


28 



accomplishing such operational missions as may be assigned. The JFSOCC is given the authority 
necessary to accomplish missions and tasks assigned by the establishing commander.^^^ 

While each of these component commanders works to achieve the JFC's concept of 
operations through the authority, responsibility and concept of support relationships assigned by the 
JFC, there is still a struggle to overcome service parochialism in the application of combat power. 

The challenge of service parochialism is not a new obstacle to effective and efficient 

interoperability. In his testimony before the House Armed Services Committee in 1949, General 

Omar N. Bradley identified the same challenge within the branches of the service. He stated that 

[o]ur military forces are one team in the game to win regardless of who carries the ball. This is 
no time for "Fancy Dans" who won' t hit the line with all they have on every play, unless they can 
call the signals. Each player on this team whether he shines in the spotlight of the backfield or 
eats dirt in the line must be an all-American.’*® 

General Bradley's insightful comments, gained through four years of fighting experience 
during World War il, are correct. Almost 50 years later the military is still trying to resolve the same 
fundamental issues. These issues center around how the military can fight more efficiently and 
effectively, and not lose individual service identity. 

The Goldwater-Nichols Act mandates change that may address General Bradley's 

observations. "Joint doctrine guides the employment of joint forces and facilitates the use of 

operational capability to achieve strategic and operational endstates.'”*® 

The development of Joint doctrine can be contentious from the perspective of the services for 
different reasons. Disagreement exists among the services concerning the actual role to be 
played by Joint doctrine.... To the extent that there is not a common view of the purpose and 
utility of Joint doctrine and that its development process permits the infusion of service 
parochialism, the effectiveness of the process is constrained.’®” 

The resulting differences in the perception by the individual services toward the application 
of combat power causes suboptimal solutions in the employment of Joint forces. The JFC is the 
catalyst that ensures service parochialism is set aside and unity of effort is attained in achieving the 
operational endstate. The JFC must balance doctrine with his Judgement and experience in the 
application of his forces. In an effort to mitigate the previously mentioned service parochialism, the 
JFC, can influence the outcome of campaigns by: 


29 



assigning missions 

designating the priority efforts(s) 

prioritizing and allocating resources 

assessing risks to be taken 

deciding when and how to make adjustments 

committing reserves 

seeing, hearing and understanding the needs of subordinates and seniors 
guiding and motivating the organization toward the desired end state^^^ 

The stated influences illustrate an apparent disparity between joint doctrine and the 
capabilities available to the JFC. While doctrine addresses the ways in which the JFC can influence 
the outcome of conflict at his level, it falls short in meeting his needs as a warfighter. General John 
H. Cushman stated that "joint operations are too often portrayed as a matter of management, with 
the senior joint commander 'allocating forces' and 'providing strategic direction,' the joint task force 
is a transient organization where the effect of leadership is fleeting at best and the fighting heart, if 
noted at all, is at service echelons only."^®^ The identified influences make the JFC a battlefield 
manager who fights through his subordinate commanders. The capabilities available through recent 
developments in technology allow the JFC to take on the active role of a warfighter. The JFC can 
employ weapons systems through operational maneuver and operational fires. 

Operational Maneuver and Operational Fires 

Field Manual 100-7, Decisive Force: The Army in Theater Operations, defines Operational 
Maneuver as "the means by which the commander sets the terms of battle, declines battle, or acts 
to take advantage of tactical situations."^^ This implies that the commander has the time to 
tactically maneuver subordinate forces so that they are in the proper position to achieve operational 
endstates. At the theater level, the JFC has positioned armed rotary and fixed-wing air forces, EAC 
air-defense brigades, SOF units, and missile artillery units to interdict the enemy. 

Interdiction has both air and surface aspects. Joint doctrine defines interdiction as "an 
action to divert, disrupt, delay, or destroy the enemy's surface military potential before it can be used 
effectively against friendly forces."’®^ Air interdiction is defined as "air operations conducted to 
destroy, neutralize, or delay, the enemy's military potential before it can be brought to bear 
effectively against friendly forces at such distance from friendly forces that detailed integration of 


30 




each air mission with the fire and movement of friendly forces is not required."’* 

The approach toward destroying the enemy between the air and surface interdiction is 
different. The aim of air interdiction is to achieve the desired effects through separate and distinct 
operations that focus on the operational objective without the active role of ground forces. This 
operation may or may not include the attack of ground targets. The aim of surface interdiction is to 
achieve the pre-emption of surface forces, which causes geographic separation between friendly 
and enemy ground forces. It also requires an element of timing to achieve the desired effects 
before the enemy can react. It does not limit surface interdiction to just surface combatants, which 
suggests that air interdiction may be a subset of interdiction." While interdiction destroys enemy 
forces, its primary contribution to the operation is curtailing the enemy's freedom of movement and 
information flow and influencing the enemy’s battle tempo."’* 

Operational fires refer to a commander's application of lethal and nonlethal firepower to 
achieve a decisive impact on the conduct of a campaign or major operation. They are a separate 
element of the commander's concept of operations but must be closely integrated and synchronized 
with the commander's concept of maneuver.’^^ Operational maneuver and operational fires may 
occur simultaneously within a commander’s battlespace, but may have very different objectives. 
Operational fires are nof fire support, and operational maneuver is not necessarily dependent on 
operational fires.’* 

In a paper written while at the Naval War College, General Crosbie E. Saint opined that 
"operational fires should be a product of using air interdiction, battlefield air interdiction and ground 
launched or helicopter fire allocations."’* The general's observations reflect the role of the 
battlefield manager as opposed to the warfighter. They also suggest the synchronization of fires 
and maneuver forces, or based on the proximity of friendly forces, synchronization of interdiction 
and maneuver. However, synchronization between fire and maneuver is not operational fires. 
Operational fires are more than deep fire. They achieve operational objectives by extending the 
battlefield in both space and time. Integrated properly with operational maneuver, fires can help 
achieve a decisive impact on the operation. Examples of operational fires include theater missile 


31 



defense, counterreconnaissance, surveillance and target acquisition, counterfire, and joint 
suppression of enemy air defenses (JSEAD). They focus on one or more of three general tasks; 
facilitating maneuver, isolating the battlefield, or destroying critical enemy functions and facilities.’'” 

The JFC, to be more effective, should have an agent to synchronize the operations across 
the combat zones. Currently there is no one individual on the staff that coordinates and 
synchronizes the efforts of the component commanders. In corps and below units there are fire 
support elements that serve this function for fires. In echelons above corps the closest comparable 
agency to the FSE is the BCD which is collocated with the Air Operations Center (AOC). The staffs 
do not have a long standing working relationship like a corps headquarters. 

The command and control measures of military power on the expanding battlefield that Dr. 
Schneider suggested requires closer working interfaces among staffs at this level. Failure to 
develop a working organization will result in unnecessary tension. 

FSCL 

One of the most significant philosophical differences that exists between the Army and Air 
Force is the interpretation and purpose of the FSCL. The FSCL is intended as a land oriented 
control measure which largely eliminates the Navy’s interest in the development of this measure as 
a truly joint measure. Joint Publication 1-02, Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and 
Associated Terms defines the FSCL as 

a line established by the appropriate ground commander to ensure coordination of fire not 
under the commander's control but which may affect current tactical operations. The fire 
support coordination line is used to coordinate fires of air, ground, or sea weapons systems 
using any type of ammunition against surface targets. The fire support coordination line 
should follow well-defined terrain features. The establishment of the fire support 
coordination line must be coordinated the appropriate tactical air commander and other 
supporting elements. Supporting elements may attack targets forward of the fire support 
coordination line without prior coordination with the ground force commander provided the 
attack will not produce adverse surface effects on or to the rear of the line. Attack against 
surface targets behind this line must be coordinated with the appropriate ground force 
commander.’'" 


Additionally, Joint Publication 3-0, Doctrine for Joint Operations , states that 

forces attacking beyond an FSCL must inform [emphasis added] all affected commanders in 
sufficient time to allow necessary reaction to avoid fratricide, both in the air and on the ground.... 


32 






Coordination of attacks beyond the FSCL is especially critical to commanders of air, iand, and 
special operations forces ... Such coordination is also important when employing munitions with 
delayed effects. Finally, this coordination assists in avoiding conflicting or redundant attack 
operations. In exceptional circumstances, the inability to conduct this coordination will not 
preclude the attack of targets beyond the FSCL. 

The Army's doctrinal approach toward fires and their effects beyond the FSCL is that 
affected commanders must be informed as stated in Joint Publication 3-0. The requirement for 
coordination is a two way dialogue which takes longer than a message which is the requirement for 
informed . A message is a one way communication. From a land combat perspective, this ensures 
the ground forces freedom of action and increased responsiveness to quickly engage time- 
sensitive, high-payoff-targets. 

The Air Force position is opposite to the Army's. The FSCL should serve as a forward 
boundary in which the fires and their effects must be coordinated. As a service, they believe that air 
power is primarily designed to conduct operational and strategic level operations beyond the FSCL. 
This philosophical approach follows the Air Force methodology of controlling air frames. The Air 
Force maintains positive control of aircraft through the use of the airborne battlefield command and 
control center (ABCCC), airborne warning and control system (AWACS), forward air-controllers 
(FACs) and other systems. This view of the use of the FSCL as a fonward boundary for ground 
forces and requiring coordination provides the Air Force JFACC with freedom of action for armed 
aircraft and a method of force protection for those air frames. By requiring coordination before firing 
surface to surface munitions, the Air Force can ensure that its forces are not in the line of fire. The 
requirement for coordination implies a dialogue between the Anny and Air Force, but risks the loss 
of the opportunity to engage time-sensitive, high-payoff targets. The challenge In using the FSCL 
continues between maintaining the balance between force protection and responsiveness in 
engaging perishable high payoff targets. 

The example of the on-going friction between the Army and the Air Force in prosecuting 
enemy targets at greater ranges, with the need to maintain force protection, illustrates the changing 
nature of armed conflict at the theater level. This one example demonstrates the philosophical 


33 




differences and a lack of trust between the services. 


Ultimately, GENICOM took over setting of the FSCL and used it as a boundary, assigning all 
terrain on one side to the ground commanders and all terrain and airspace on the other to the air 
component commander. In the words of the Third Army deep fires after-action report. 'The end 
result, ironically, was that the high level of success attained on the ground frequently led to a 
loss of air support, since bombers could no longer execute their mission, and because the 
mission manager didn't have the necessary lead time to successfully divert the mission to 
another target... " 

The Air Force capabilities, combining J-STARS observation with sophisticated attack 
tools, would seem likely to have been much more effective. VII Corps was unable to employ Air 
Force battlefield air interdiction as a blocking force in support of its maneuver units or maintain 
continuous interdiction with its own aviation brigade (the 11th). Indeed, because of its lack of 
control over the FSCL, it could not interdict targets within range.’'*'** 


RECOMMENDATIONS 


There are two possible evolutionary steps that will help the JFC integrate FSCMs with 
airspace command and control measures in conducting operational fires. These steps will also 
keep doctrine in synchronization with emerging technological capabilities. The first step requires an 
organizational change, and the second step is a procedural change. 

The organizational change is the outgrowth of an existing structural concept. It entails 
applying the principles of integration that have worked for corps and below units, and applying them 
at the theater level. The concept centers on the creation of the Joint Force Operational Fires 
Coordinator (JFOFC) and his staff which form the Joint Force Operational Fires Coordination Center 
(JFOFCC). The JFOFC functions in a similar manner to Fire Support Coordinators (FSCOORD) at 
the corps level and below. At the theater level, he is the integration agent for all component combat 
functions for the JFC. The criticality of the fires coordinator was addressed by Brigadier General 
Robert H. Scales Jr. in his book. Firepower in Limited War . BG Scales stated that 

A fire support coordinator must know how much is enough. He must apply firepower 
not with the objective of relieving pressure on friendiy infantry, but with the single purpose of 
destroying the enemy's ability to fight. He must be extravagant when the enemy is precisely 
located, exposed, or psychologically vulnerable. He must resist the temptation to fire for the 
sake of firing when the situation clearly does not justify the expenditure. Decisions of this sort 
demand of a fire support coordinator far more than technical skill and knowledge of the systems 
at his command. He must study the enemy and his environment intimately, and must be as 
aware as his maneuver commander of the intangible factors, the hidden strengths and frictions 
of battle, which are truer indicators of the types and qualities of firepower he must employ to 
win.*^ 


34 



The technical expertise and holistic understanding of the battlefield environment that the 
FSCOORD must have, according to BG Scales, applies across an even wider area for the JFOFC. 
He should have a joint background which provides the knowledge and experience of weapons 
systems and doctrine. This experience will allow him to develop an effective system of systems to 
achieve the desired operational objectives. 

Currently, the role of the JFOFC is filled through a collection of joint boards that represent 
the requirements of component commanders. While not discounting the importance of their own 
mission, there is no specified executive agent for the JFC who focuses solely on the integration of 
operational fires assets at the theater level - without regard for service parochialism. At corps and 
division level, units are standing up Deep Operations Coordination Cells (DOCC) to accomplish the 
same purpose. The III Corps Commander has specified that the Corps Artillery Commander is the 
Deep Battle Expert. He supervises and integrates the Corp's deep fight. Another example 
occurred during the Gulf War. Third Army formed a deep battle cell only days prior to the initiation 
of the air war. The cell collected ail corps target nominations and then prioritized them in 
accordance with the Third Army Commander's priorities before forwarding the target nominations to 
the Joint Targeting Board.^^ 

At the theater level, the AOC-BCD is the vehicle in place to integrate the operational fires 
for the JFC; however, the role of the BCD is to serve as the Army Forces Commander's (ARFOR) 
liaison in the air component commander's operation center.’^ Under this structure the AOC serves 
the JFACC and the BCD serves the ARFOR/JFLCC. Arguably, everyone in the AOC-BCD works 
for the JFC, unfortunately because they serve the JFACC and the JFLCC, service parochialism may 
become obstacles. 

The problems with parochialism have improved, but are still emotional issues today as 
evidenced during the Gulf War and the Roles and Missions Commission. 

With the start of air operations, tension grew between the Air Force, which was 
concentrating its efforts on strategic and independent operational strikes, and the leadership of 
the Third Army, which assumed that the ground attack would be the theater commander's 
principal means of achieving success and must, therefore, be given priority for direct 
employment of air assets. At its root, the argument was an old one, reflecting differing views of 


35 


the role of air power in theater operations.’^ 


The congressionally mandated commission was formed in May 1994 and is still resolving 
issues that were raised during the study. One of the most contentious was the issue of deep 
attack. The Air Force position was to divest the Army and Marine Corps of deep attack systems - 
ATACMS and the F/A18 Hornet aircraft - and segment the battlefield. This would make the deep 
fight primarily an Air Force and Navy responsibility with the JFACC commanding the deep battle. 
According to the Air Force, the dividing line between the close and deep battle would be the FSCL, 
normally positioned at multiple launch rocket system (MLRS) range. This proposal was 
unacceptable to the Army and the Marine Corps. 

The Army made the case that with current and planned sensors and C^ systems, the LCC 
will have an unprecedented picture of friendly and enemy forces on the battlefield. This will provide 
the ability to more effectively synchronize resources from supporting commanders. Additionally, the 
Army cited the need for an organic deep fires capability exemplified by ATACMS. The missile 
systems advantages are its responsiveness, all weather capability and ability to penetrate high- 
threat air defense areas. The Navy and the Marine Corps supported the Army position on ATACMS 
and the Army confirmed the Marine Corps’ use of the Hornet as its organic deep attack and CAS 
system in the MARFOR AO.”*^ 

The philosophical differences manifested during the Roles and Missions Commission clearly 
show that while the JFC may have unity of command, through Combatant Command (COCOM), 
over his subordinates, he does not have full unity of effort.”" The creation of the JFOFC will take 
the necessary steps to correct this problem. Instead of the component commanders focusing on 
their areas of responsibility exclusively, the JFOFC will ensure that unity of effort is achieved in all 
warfare mediums — land, sea, air, and space. The JFOFCC will ensure the integration of all 
command and control systems. In the absence of a specified JFOFC. the JFC may designate the 
deputy JFC as the standing JFOFC to accomplish operational integration. During the Gulf War. 
General Schwarzkopf initiated a similiar system with General Calvin Waller, Deputy CINC. General 


36 




Waller had oversight responsibility of the target review process - an Army initiative. This was not 
the full role of the JFOFC described; however, it is a step toward that end.''^® 

The second step is to change the current procedures for FSCMs, airspace control 
measures (ACMs), and air defense control measures. The JFOFCC would serve as the JFC’s 
executive agent on the management of these three areas. At the theater level the integration of 
these three areas is a complex endeavor since the Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps and the Army 
use different systems. 

For the integration to be effective there must be detailed planning in the JFOFCC and 
decentralized execution, all four services must have a common communications and an IFF 
capability, and there must be one set of permissive and procedural controls. 

Common Communications 

The JFOFCC must conduct a detailed METT-T (mission, enemy, troops, terrain - time 
available) analysis of the theater - in each area of responsibility as well as the combat and 
communications zone - to determine the control requirements, (see appendices 4 & 5)^“. The 
tendency is to focus on the LCC or the amphibious area of operations, and then deconflict problems 
as they occur. The problem is wasted time in clearing targets and the inefficient use of resources. 

If the METT-T is properly conducted the JFC will be able to conduct precision depth and 
simultaneous attacks against high payoff targets. 

The detailed planning allows for the deconfliction of preplanned deep missile fires with fixed 
and rotary wing aircraft. 

With all of the services having a common communications and an IFF capability, units will 
be able to quickly pass information to protect friendly assets, and to minimize sensor to shooter 
times. The requirement to have 30 minutes to clear airspace prior to the launch of an AT ACMS 
missile, as happened in the Gulf War, with these capabilities is unrealistic. 

A common relevant picture, provided through a common communications network, that the 
Army alluded to during the Roles and Missions Commission study allows air-power commanders to 
quickly identify the front line trace of troops. It also allows ground commanders to locate friendly 


37 



aircraft when conducting tactical fire direction to engage a perishable HPT. With this type of system 
in place, the coordination required would drop considerably. The only real requirement for 
coordination would be for SOF teams that are deployed beyond the FSCL, in the combat zone or in 
the communications zone. There may be an operational security reason as to why their location 
can not be disseminated. 

Positive Control 

The current concepts of positive and procedural control are necessary; however, one set of 
controls would be more effective. For positive control, the clearance of immediate missile fires — 
ATACMS, cruise (subsurface, surface, and air-launched), or ballistic. Future computer 
technological capabilities will enhance coordintion and positive control. With the increased 
capability of computers the execution of depth and simultaneous attack will become much faster. 

An example of pending technology is the Army's Battle Command System (ABCS). The 
ABCS is a system of systems. It connects sensors with shooters. The fire direction centers of 
shooters, like ATACMS, Hawk, or a Poseidon (IRBM) will communicate with sensors like JSTARS, 
AWACS, or ABCCC as well as higher headquarters (HQ) elements, like the BCD. If the target is 
identified by a sensor, like a SOF team, the target is passed through the HQ where its status is 
monitored. The target is cleared and passed to the advanced Field Artillery tactical data system 
(AFATDS) where it will determine if a SEAD program is required. If a SEAD proagram is required, 
subordinate corps FSEs will plan the program for targets in their AO. 

Simultaneously, the Contingency Theater Automated Planning System (CTAPS) will 
determine if any preplanned sorties from the ATO are capable of attacking the target. If there are 
available sorties then the directions are passed to the controllers such as the airborne battlefield 
command and control center (ABCCC) or airborne warning and control system (AWACS) to engage 
and destroy the target. The controllers will also determine if any airframes are in danger. If they 
are, then the AWACS will vector them to a safe area. If the fire support platform is a naval vessel, 
then its fire direction computer would perform the same functions as the AFATDS. In the event the 
munition selected to destroy the enemy HPT is a cruise missile, fired from a submerged submarine, 


38 




the digitial traffic could be passed through a satellite for clearance and fire commands. All of these 
actions minimize the inherent delays in the current system of three different combat function control 
systems (FSCMs, ACM, and ADA control measures). 

The speed of the operational fire is based on the quality of the data bases of the computers 
involved. The JFOFCC is responsible for collecting the materials for building the data base for the 
control procedures for theater system, like ABCS. This ensures a common relevant picture. 

Procedural Control Measures 

While positive control is desirable, it is not always possible due to battlefield conditions and 
inherent system vulnerabilities. Facilities for positive control are subject to direct attack, sabatoge, 
adverse weather conditions or jamming. Procedural control provides a backup system that 
overcomes positive control vulnerabilities. It relies upon techniques such as segmenting the 
airspace by volume and time, and using weapon system statuses.’®’ The procedural operational 
fire control measures (OFCMs) should focus on permissive and restrictive management. These 
measures are applicable for corps and echelon above corps level only; therefore tactical measures 
such as CFLs and RFLs normally will not be used. However, the same measures do have 
relevance for tactical forces. The approach on employing OFCMs should be established based on 
a METT-T anaylsis, and planned in concert with the JFC's plan for operational fires. 

Joint Publication 3-52, Doctrine for Joint Airspace Control in the Combat Zone , lists 29 
different airspace procedural control measures used by the different services. When the airspace 
measures are combined with the seven FSCMs, and four maneuver control measures, the impact of 
the potential combinations may be unknown until the enemy is engaged.’®^ This makes command 
and control very complex. Listed below are some of the control measure that apply at the theater 
level. 

PERMISSIVE RESTRICTIVE 

FSCMs 

FFA ACA 

FSCL NFA 

ACMs 

Coordinating Altitude 


39 




MRR 


HIDACZ 
ROA/ROZ 
SAAFR 

AIR CORRIDOR 

ADCMS 

WEZ (JEZ) WEZ (FEZ / MEZ - 

HIMEZ/LOMEZ/FAADEZ) 

Weapons Free Zone ADOA (ADAA/ADA/ADIZ) 


A way to integrate these measures with the weapons systems avaiiable to the JFC is using 
the weapon controi status procedures the air defense artiiiery employs. "The weapons control status 
provides a reiative degree of controi of the air defense system fires. Weapons control statuses 
apply to weapons systems, volumes of airspace, or types of air platforms."'” The control status 
reflects the degree of permission/restriction available to the operator of the weapons system. 
Weapons Free allows the operator to fire at any target not positively identified as friendly. 

Weapons Tight allows the operator to engage a target positively identified as enemy. Weapons 
Ho ld restricts the operator from firing unless in self defense or with an explicit order. An example of 
nine control measures (listed down the side) with the four systems (across the top) may look like the 
chart below. The operational fire control measures are the FSCL, the FFA, the NFA, the Air Transit 
Route [this is a non-doctrinal term that combines the airspace coordination area (ACA), minimum 
risk route (MRR), air corridor, and standard use Army aircraft flight route (SAAFR], the high-density 
airspace control zone (HIDACZ), the restricted operations area (ROA)/ restricted operations zone 
(ROZ), the joint engagement zone (JEZ), the weapons free zone (WFZ), and the air defense 
operations area (ADOA). The weapons systems are ATACMS, air-breathing systems (rotary and 
fixed-wing airaaft), non-air-breathing systems (ballistic, caiise, and air defense missiles), and SOF. 



ATACMS 

AB SYSTEMS NAB SYSTEMS 

SOF 

FSCL 

FREE 

FREE 

FREE 

N/A 

FFA 

FREE 

FREE 

FREE 

N/A 

NFA 

HOLD 

<-must SPECIFY— 

-> 

YES 

ATR 

TIGHT 

TIGHT 

TIGHT 

N/A 

HIDACZ 

TIGHT 

< ~ -MUST SPECIFY— 

-> 

N/A 

ROZ/ROA 

HOLD 

HOLD 

HOLD 

N/A 

JEZ 

FREE 

FREE 

FREE 

N/A 

WFZ 

FREE 

FREE 

FREE 

N/A 

ADOA 

FREE 

FREE 

TIGHT 

N/A 


40 




When the weapon control status methodology is used in conjunction with IFF and a 
common relevant picture, available through electronic means, control of integrated weapons 
systems are much less complex. The advantage to this system is that rather than employing 
service specific elements of TAGS to manage and control assets, the JFOFCC under the direction 
of the JFOFC is able to execute operational fires much more effectively and efficiently. 


41 



CHAPTER S 


CONCLUSIONS 

There can never be too many projectiles in a battle. Whether they are thrown by cannon, 
rockets, or recoilless devices is immaterial. The purpose of all these instruments is 
identical - namely, to deluge the enemy with fire. Nor is it necessary that these projectiles 
be discharged on the ground. 

General George S. Patton, JR.^^ 

General Patton's comment concerning intensity on the battlefield, reflected through the 
number of projectiles is extremely insightful. The general's observations suggest activity but not 
necessarily accomplishment. Activity does not, however, equate to the precision and accuracy that 
are required when engaging targets. As such, the military must have a coherent methodology on 
how it intends to prosecute conflict. Othenwise it has misdirected activity and no accomplishment. 

The methodology of how wars are fought and how the military employs its technology 
(projectiles) is the result of the military's doctrine. The type of projectiles the military uses is a 
reflection of the nation s technological abilities. The combat formations involved in fighting comprise 
the organizational structure of the military. Each of these elements — doctrine, technology, and 
organizational structure - are connected as functions of time and capability. The interaction of 
doctrine, technology, and organizational structure are linked in a dynamic process that suggests an 
ongoing evolution and results in the success or failure of the military. If there is too great of a 
divergence in one direction or another the military may be defeated. 

Doctrine evolves from three sources: lessons learned during operations, the infusion of new 
technologies, and external influences. It is used to develop combat potential for the nation, 
enhance interoperability, and win the nation's wars. Improvements in technology have caused 
significant changes in the style and approach the military takes toward conflict. Dovetailed with the 
recent infusion of new technological abilities was the Goldwater-Nichols Department of Defense 
Reorganization Act. This law was a milestone in the evolution of joint warfare. 

Prior to the Act the services used individual service doctrine and TTPs. At the end of the 
Vietnam War some of the services tried to develop multi-service initiatives to enhance 


42 



interoperability. Since then joint doctrine has evolved through a system of top-down initiation and 
bottom-up development. The process results in a doctrine of least disagreement from the services. 

The Act made two other significant changes in the Department of Defense. The first 
change was shifting more authority to the theater commanders-in-chief This piece of legislation 
along with the technological developments of the 1980s and 1990s shifted the role of the JFC from 
battlefield manager to warfighter. As the individual responsible for linking battles and engagements 

to operational objectives and strategic endstates. the JFC became a more active player in the 
operational level of war. 

The second change made the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) the executive 
agent for the development of joint doctrine. Since then joint doctrine has developed slowly. The 
tendency was to follow service doctrine if at ail possible. By making the doctrine authoritative, the 
CJCS forced the services to follow joint doctrine. This served to increase interoperability. 
Unfortunately the doctrine failed to maximize the emerging technology. 

Prior to the Act. the JFC’s goal was to generate and decisively apply combat power within 
the theater. Theater commanders employed fixed-wing aircraft, SOF, missile artillery, and ADA 
missile systems, or influenced the campaign through their subordinate commanders. The 
development of the ATACMS missile and cruise missile systems allowed JFCs to engage enemy 
targets well beyond the corps forward boundary. Along with the capability came the requirement to 
control the resources. In this area the doctrine and organizational structure failed to match the 
capability of available technology. 

Each of the services provide the JFC unique capabilities. The Army provides rotary-wing 
aviation, rocket and missile artillery, and air defense missile systems. The Air Force provides fixed- 
wing air frames - fighter, fighter bomber, bomber, electronic combat, and reconnaissance ~ cruise 
missiles, and space systems. The Navy provides subsurface, surface and air launched cruise 
missiles, intermediate range ballistic missiles, and fixed-wing airframes. The Marine Corps has 
missile artillery and fixed-wing airframes. The special operating forces provide unique capabilities 
that can augment conventional forces or operate independently. 


43 


With each set of capabilities comes a service spedfic philosophy. This philosophy affects 
weapons employment and doctrine development. It ultimately affects interoperability. There is an 
inherent tension that builds during joint operations because of differing philosophies. This tension 
does not suggest that American citizens, in uniform, are going to work against each in other combat 
at the expense of their fellow countrymen. It does however, illustrate that the fundamental beliefs 
about the employment of the combat functions, in each medium - ground, sea. and air - must 
evolve for the military to remain effective as a future fighting force. 

This obstacle is not new. General Bradley commented about it in 1949. Since then, the 
Act has influenced military operations. General Colin Powell's message in the front of Joint 
Publication 1. jo jnt Warfare of the US Armed Forces , shows the different ways the services view 
themselves when they go to war.^*^ In the Army, soldiers fight as a team, as the member of a unit - 
- something larger than himself, yet 'in harm's way' - who can directly enter the fight as a player. In 
the Air Force, the pilot fights by himself - 'there's no one better^ - who directly affects how his 
weapons system gets to the fight, completes the mission and returns home. In the Navy, the sailor 
fights as the member of a ship - something larger then himself, yet a metallic hull - with no input on 
the way the ship is fought. And lastly the Marine [the only serviceman that the CJCS capitalized], 
fights as an individual - there is no better infantrymen in the world - who controls his own destiny. 
These mental models still affect how the services approach conflict. Additionally, the size and 
complexity of the battlefield has grown since General Bradley made his comments. At the theater 
level, systems designed and proven at the corps level and below may not be effective. 

Current FSCMs, ACMs, and ADA control measures do not integrate at the theater level. 

The organizational stmctures designed to manage the air-ground operations are focused on the 
needs of subordinate commanders and not on the intent and changing needs/opportunities of the 
JFC. There is no organization that currently focuses all combat functional capabilities at the theater 
level. The result of this deficiency may be missed opportunities, wasted resources and 
unnecessary risk to friendly forces. During the Gulf War General Schwarzkopf attempted to resolve 
the air-ground interface by using his deputy CINC, General Waller, as the oversight for subordinate 


44 



air nominations. 


The Gulf War was the first conflict that demonstrated this challenge of maintaining unity of 
effort while employing the increased capabilities of newly fielded technology available to the JFC. 
Examples are the ATACMS and Patriot missiles which were fired for the first time. 

The doctrine used to manage the theater airspace is TAGS which is not a formal system, 
but a conglomeration of service systems. It includes three types of control: positive and procedural 
through the Army A^C" system, positive control for the Air Force TAGS, and control by negation by 

the Navy. These three systems do not integrate indirect fires (artillery, cruise, or ballistic missiles) or 
ADA fires. 

Fire Support Coordinating Measures are either restrictive or permissive. They offer force 
protection or facilitate the rapid attack of targets. The ADA control measures establish weapons 
control statuses and provide guidance on airspace defense. 

The OFCM provides the JFC with a system of permissive and restrictive procedural control 
measures. The OFCMs are the synthesis of the current FSCMs, ACMs, and ADA control 
measures. They focus only on those control measures that are relevant at the corps-level and 
above. They combine like functions across the three systems and establish weapons control. The 
restrictive measures function as a method of force protection and restrict access to terrain, 
structures, or formations. The permissive measures open terrain, permitting increased 
responsiveness in engaging enemy targets. When combined, positive and procedural 
countermeasures provide a robust, integrated system. It is a system that can apply across all 
services. It facilitates the rapid engagements of HPTs, provides force protection as needed, and 
allows a common body of terms for the services. 

The positive measures, through IFF and other electronic systems, allow for a common 
relevant picture across the theater. Common communications means fadlitate the positive control, 
and allow minimum sensor-to-shooter times for the engagement of HPTs. The employment of 
positive and procedural control measures provide depth to the JFC. 

The organization that integrates the combat functions of the component commanders is the 


45 





JFOFCC. The JFOFCC ensures that unity of effort and synchronization of available combat power 
is achieved to attain operational objectives. 


The future of military operations is clearly changing. "Advances in technology are likely to 
continue to increase the tempo, lethality, and depth of warfare. Joint doctrine should be flexible 
enough to recognize the impact of emerging technologies and integrate emerging advances that 
may provide the Armed Forces of the United States with a decisive advantage.’”®® At the center of 
the advances is the ability to conduct depth and simultaneous attacks that TRADOC Pam 525-5 
discusses. The senior leadership of the country has also recognized this requirement and offered 
the following comments. 

The ability to precisely strike targets deep in the heartland of a potential adversary is a critical 
operational capability of our Armed Forces. The military services field an expanding arsenal of 
d^p attack munitions, which can be delivered from a variety of platforms - land- and sea-based 
tactical airaaft, long-range bombers, sea-based cruise missiles, and land-based ballistic 
missiles. 


These capabilities further demonstrate the phenomenon of the expanding battlefield, and 
the role of the JFC as a warfighter. This mandates the need to adjust doctrine and organizational 
structure to match technological realities. Failure to do so will result in misfortune stemming from a 
failure to learn, a failure to adapt, and the failure to anticipate when the time was available. 


46 



ENDNOTFfi 


1. Field Manual 100-5, O perations . (Washington. DC: US Government Printing Office,1993), vi. 

War rTho%rI!°*D' Military Misfortu nes The Anatomy of Faiiiim m 

a '■eview of examples of previous military failures 
Of failure in organizations: failure to learn, failure to adap7 and failure 

1^1 thrla^i^nac ^ny two failures is an aggregate failure, and the combination of 

all three types of failure is a catastrophic failure, 

cK°lw "Partnership and Tension: The Army and Air Force Between Vietnam and 

Desert Shield. Parameters . XXVI (Spring 1996): 105,109. 

4. Douglas Lovelace Jr. and Thomas-Durell Young, Strategic Plans. Joint Dnrtrin p and 
ff POdean Insights , (Carlisle Barracks: Strategic Studies Institute U. S. Amiy War College, 1995), 

5. Lovelace and Young, 7, 

firjJiifu?„i['Dr'?|-°?-!'.'? Dicti onary of M ili t ary and AssociatPri T^rm. 

(wasrungton, DC. US Government Pnnting Office, 1994), 276. 

fWashimton'^nr'' mI p P^n ma nd and Cont rol for Commanders and Staff 

OA^ashmgton, DC. US Goyemment Pnnting Office. 1993), 1-1; states that "Command includes the 
nlfnn^^ responsibility for effectively using available resources a commander employs in 
planning, organizing, directing, coordinating, and controlling military forces for the accomplishment 
(rf assigned missions." "Commanders use control to regulate forces and functions on the battlefield 
to execute the commander's intent." (1-18) 'The command and control system enaWertL 

leadership skills to press and sustain that end," (1-1) "Command and 
control functons are performed through an arrangement of personnel, equipment, communications 

procedures a commander employs in planning, directing, coordinating, and controlling 
forces and operations in the accomplishment of the mission." (1 -1). ^ 

n r • I Cohen, Gulf War Air Power Summary Report (Washington 

one m?ssite ^ the Anrny fired more than ’ 


AA/ Multiservice Proce dures for the Theater Air-Gmimri .gy^tom 

(Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 1994), 8, 22.26, 35. 42. 

/ILch- ^ Procerliirft.^ f or the Theater Air-Gmunri Sygtpm 

En- t^’a us Govemmen^t Pnnting Office, 1994). 73; Harold R. Winton, "Partnership and 

Se 1J Bv So Si " Parameters . XXVI (Spring 

of S m ^ ^ '^°^®® disagreed significantly over two issues: the amount 

SndJhf mfi commanders should have over Air Force interdiction operations 

Silc the effects of fixed-wing air and extended-range Army ’ 

fvS aTthp 5S!praf^'^*i ^ significant agreement [between the Army and Air Force], 

[yet] at the operational level views are noticeably divergent. ^ 

11 Joint PubHcation 3-09 (Second Draft), .Doctrine for Jo int Fire Support (Washington DC- 
US Government Pnnting Office, 1995), 1-4,1-5.1-6,1-7. ' 9 . 


47 



’*-•Thomas P. Odom Certain Viotnrv- tho i iq 
^ yin the Gulf War . Office of the Chief of Staff, United States Army ( WashSiqton DC- US 
Government Pnnting Office. 1993; a selected reprint. Fort Leavenworth, 

Command and General Staff College Press, 1994), 368 ^ 

15. Joint Publication 1-02,120. 

16. Ibid, 60. 

1^6), l-ra (Washington, DC: US Govemmenl Pnnting Office, 

Washington, DC: US 

r^' * States Army Command and General Staff College Student Text 100-3 Battle Book- 

Army command and Gent;!!^ 

wash^^ri;”us^i“^r^ 3^™jrS,,T?,' °^>: »hQP.ra^ons, 

riS^r r 

Whitmore Pnnting, August, 1993), 24 'viaiyidfiu. 

Executive Office for Tactical Missiles. Protect Book- nio.,^ 


22 . 


Ibid. 


23. Ibid. 

24. Field Manual 100-103-2 ,12 

25. 


.^..^u_a^"‘*®l^*®*®® P'°9ram Executive Office for Tactical Missiles. Proiect Book- f^io.=p 
Co mbat, Fire Support, Forward Area Air Defense Tactical Missite -- 

SrtirTmk throughout the corps area of influence and is designed to destroy 

tactical missile launchers, suppress air defense, counter C^ (command control and ^ 

communications complexes) and disrupt logistics. t^mmano, control, and 

26. Ibid, II-8-3. 


48 



?7 Ap« '*'^- "V «-e Author 

Advanced Military Studies ’ Leavenworth. Kansas School of 


CQ^agl P®P®L ‘P®re 


are no unclassified published areas of 


and infrared seekers^TheteraKTfo^BATi?m? ®P^P®P ®P®f9® submunition with acoustic 
bat (P3I) are sitting armored formations a(^ller^^Son?r‘^-^°^^^^^ ®®^® 

surface missile transporter-erector launched (TEL). stationary surface-to- 

Gombat. Fire Sn ppS.'Srrrt S Ta^i;^l Missiles. Project Book-r.ing» 

Program Executive Office. January 1996) II-8 7 and iSartn ^ Bystems . (Redstone Arsenal. AL; 
thoArmy. fflM BPI? Sv?fems , (Washington, Dc’us GovamS?Wn'g®S^M5rS^ 

LSS!!!' 

Program and P mfeysuSrj^ Directorate of Combat Developments. 

Cimer and Fort Sill. 1 May 1995) SV and ^ n Artillery 

(Weapons Sy«e.s, ,WasLZDC%?Grn,rrL^^^^^ 

34. David Johnson. Interview. 

Center for Army TJrt?oc7c^^° r^rrnm^^ ^Tnsal-lj^S '''®xt 100-3. Battle Book- 

College. 1995). 7 - 1 . ’ LI S. Army Command and General Staff 

Government Pn^ting ^[^-^and PP®''®^'®^® ' (Washington, DC: US 

College Student Text 100-3 Battle Book Command and General Staff 

Army Command and GeneraTbFatt College 1995 ) 7 ^ ^ ^ Leavenworth. Kansas; U.S. 


37. United States Army Command and General Staff College Student 

38. Ibid, 7-7. 


Text 100-3, 7-15. 


is planned for 1998. ® fi®Wing of the PAC-3 missile 


49 




The PAC-3 missile has no explosive warhead; it employs hit-to-kill 
technology to intercept and destroy the target through kinetic energy. The PAC-3 
system will help protect friendly forces from cruise missiles and other 
air-breathing air defense threats as well as TBMD threats. 

The PAC-3 missile is a ground-launched "fire and forget" weapon. It is inertially guided to 
a predicted impact point that is provided by a fire-solution computer from data supplied by the 
Patriot radar. 

PAC-3 launchers will be incorporated into the Patriot battery configuration.... The baseline 
Patriot battery vrauld consist of two PAC-3 (PAC-2-capabie) launchers, one PAC-2 (PAC-3-capable) 
launcher and five PAC-2-only launchers, along with an engagement control station, fire control 
radar, antenna mast group and electrical plant systems. 

PAC-3 launchers will reduce the chance of TBM defense saturation because they provide 
a four-to-one firepower enhancement. There are 16 PAC-3 missiles per launcher compared with 
four Patriot missiles per launcher." 

40. Robert H. Scales, Jr., Terry L Johnson, and Thomas P. Odom, Certain Victory: The US 
Army in the Gulf War. Office of the Chief of Staff, United States Army, (Washington, DC: US 
Government Printing Office, 1993; a selected reprint. Fort Leavenworth, Kansas: U.S. Army 
Command and General Staff College Press, 1994),367; and Richard Moody Swain, "Luckv War" 
Third Army in Desert Storm. (Fort Leavenworth, Kansas: U.S. Army Command and General Staff 
College Press, 1994), 177. 

On 18 January, seven Scud missiles fell on Israel, followed by one on Dhahran. The 
decision, taken during Internal Look, to make the 11th Air Defense Brigade a theater air defense 
asset now proved to have been wise indeed. Patriot missiles, by their rapid response and evident 
success in intercepting incoming Scuds, quickly restored confidence to those in the target areas, 
whatever the missiles' practical value in destroying Scud warheads. 

41. United States Army Command and General Staff College Student Text 100-3, 7-15. 

42. Ibid. 

43. Field Manual 100-15, Corps Operations. (Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 
1989), A-11; and United States Army Command and General Staff College Student Text 100-3, 
Battle Book: Center for Army Tactics . (Fort Leavenworth, Kansas: U.S. Army Command and 
General Staff College, 1995), 7-7. 

44. Field Manual 100-1. The Army. (Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, June 
1994), Foreword. 

45. Field Manual 100-5,1 -1. 

46. Ibid, 1-2. 

47. Field Manual 100-103-2,13. 

48. Ibid. 

49. Field Manual 101-5-1 (Final Draft), Operational Terms and Symbols . (Washington, DC: US 

Government Printing Office, July 1995,) 1-20. 


50 



Command Pamphlet 525-XXX (Draft), U.S. Armv Onor^tinnai 
(Washing J: £c'' urG^eZemVnl Sl 'S?). ^'""^'’^ """" 

■ Fire support operations, 

■ Air defense artillery (ADA) operations, 

■ Army aviation operations, 

■ Special electronic mission aircraft (SEMA) operations 

■ Helibome electronic warfare operations, 

■ Remotely piloted vehicle operations. 

■ Intratheater airlift operations, 

■ Amphibious operations, and 

■ Joint and combined arms operations. 

51. TRADOC Pam 525-XXX (Draft), 5. 

H ,0 ' (Washington. DC: US Govemmeni PanTg S, 

54. Field Manual 1 -111, H-11. 

55. Ibid. 

56. Field Manual 100-103-2, 70. 

g oordinatinq Altitude . A coordinating altitude separates fixed- and rotary-winq aircraft The Air«;nar.P 

A°rSe cS pt^^^CP)°Tr A? "9 *s normally specified in the 

pace control Plan (ACP). The ACA is the final approving authority for chanoes which arp 

SSto iSalSr raS“aS„^e'enaea 
penetration of this altitude, when possible, will notify the appropriate airspace control facilitv 

however, approval acknowledgement is not required. 

SnwS (HinAr,7) An HIDACZ is an area of airspace in which 

emptoymerit of weapons and airspace users is concentrated. The zone has defined dimensions 

noiSiiSTS WDACZrn^?hP A^^^^ features/navigational aids. The ground commander ' 
friiH!! ^ ^ an HIDACZ and the ACA approves it. Preplanned HIDACZs, which are based on threat 
fnendly operations, and minimum risk routes, are included in the ACP. The requestino authority ’ 
normally controls access to air defense weapons status within an HIDACZ. 


51 



R estricted Operations Area/Restricted Operatio n s Zone rROA/RDZ^ roas and ROZs are 
^^nymous for defining a volume of airs^e set aside for a specific op^lfonal rSSioTlhey are 

“o—o~ a„.. 

the ROA/ROZ are similar to those required for an HIDACZ. 

temporary corridors recommended for use by 
high-speed, fixed-wing aircraft. These routes present ^ 

the minimum known hazards to low-flying aircraft transiting the combat zone The ground 
component commander recommends the routes and the ACA approves them. They normally extend 
from the corps rear boundary to the FSCL and may extend belo^the coordinating altituX 

S tandard-Use Army Aircraft Flight Routes fSAAFR..;) SAAFRs are established below the 

allow safe movement of aviation assets performing combat support and 
combat service support missions. These routes 

mau approval. They are normally located in the corps through brigade rear areas but 

may be extended to support logistics missions. 

aI/o y® j^Mlti-Service Procedures for J oint Application of Firennwpr 

(Washington, DC; US Government Printing Office, February 1994) 

57. ibid, 68. 

58; Field Manual 100-103-2, Multiservice Procedures for the Theater Air-Ground 
(Washington, DC. US Government Printing Office, 1994), 68-69; Field Manual 6-20-30, Tactics 
y hniqu^, and Procedures for Corps and Division Operation.^ (Washington, DC: US Government 
nnting Office 1989), Appendix F. FM 6-20-30 discusses each of the terms; The Army doctrinal 

fwT«!h?nntnn^r5r"i 10''-5-1 (Final Draft), Operational Terms and Symbols 

(Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, July 1995), 1-32,1-19, 1-34 

gre. Support Coordination Line (FSCI) - A line established by the appropriate ground commander 

Thrpqn not under his control but which may affect current tactical operations, 

he FSCL IS used to coordinate fires of air, ground, or sea weapons systems using any type of 
arnniunition against surface targets. The FSCL should follow well-defined terrain features The 

?hpr y.nnnrt!ny T c be Coordinated with the appropriate tactical air commander and 

other supporting elements. Supporting elements may attack targets forward of the FSCL without 

with the ground force commander, provided the attack will not produce’ adverse 

bP ro?rr^nSH° ''"®’ ^Qaihst surface targets behind this line must 

be coordinated with the appropriate ground force commander. 

(CFL) - A line beyond which conventional surface fire support means 

Ld ShoMflnJ? ^'® zone of the establishing 

HQ without additional coordination. It is usually ^ 

estabiished by brigade or division, but may be established by a maneuver 

battaiion. (The term no-fire line is used by other NATO nations for a CFL.) 

Fr ee Fire Area (FFA) - A specific designated area into which any weapon system 
may fire without additional coordination with the estabiishing headquarters. 

AA/aeh- Multlservice Procedures for the Theater Air-Ground Rv.QtPm 

(Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 1994), 69; Field Manual 6-20-30, Tactics ’ 
j echniqu^, and Procedures for Corps and Division O perations. (Washington, DC: US Government 
Printing Office, 1989), Appendix F. FM 6-20-30 discusses each of the terms; The Army doctrinal 


52 




De moving)'that'prohiWts fireJir 

affected force. ,t is established by the commander 

mat exceed those resWdtons'maTnot bede?^^^ ar^mposed and into which fires 

headquarters. without pnor coordination with the establishing 

- allowed. TWO excep«ons a,e 

and (2) wtien me anLyfor^ZamSSiTa 'T''* '>asis. 

the enemy to defend his force. ^ ^ fnendly force, the commander may engage 

three-dimensional box in the S MoS!.Jln occasionally be a formal measure (a 
simultaneous attack of targets near each other bv mfSTi^ Purpose of the ACA is to allow the 

normally is air. Formal Acfs arTusuaTv 

command, mmnnal ACAa may be eajiished as as m?S'4^=(T,^ '™' 

60. Field Manual 100-103-2, 69 

61. Ibid, 72. 

62. Ibid, 72. 73. 

^NT ENGAGFMENT ZONF (.IF7 ). The JEZ is airspace of specified 

rorirra^mrs^rSaSriT 

place In airspace above arSteyond th^eSS.™™? “1"“'*'’ »*" c FEZ usually take 

ruroeTS~-r^^ 

aircr^ for niission^^aEg pu^SeT* location of the engagement zone for fighter 

applied to long-range 

conduct engagements without the AADC's specific direcKorRom an weapons may 

normally used when a high-altitude missile Sm perspective, it is 

aircraft. From an airspace colol peZ^ti^ operational advantage over using 

engagement zone of a high-altitude missile system for missfoTpSnnS Wose?°' 

^ .Clume ofairspaca 

weapon sy^em capa*es, me LO«EZ - noraTe^ri^^^S^SC otteCie 


53 


area. 


sh ort-range air defense ENGAGEMF N TZONE rSHnRAnF7^ Normally SHORADEZs 

faTwitWn a LOMEZ high-value assets. Areas of SHORAD deployment may 

^ P® defended solely by SHORAD assets A 

f o f^r P® ®®^®P''®hed to define the airspace within which these assets will operate 

Because ^nfralized control over the SHORAD weapons may not be possible, these areas must be 
clearly defined and disseminated so friendly aircraft can avoid them. From an airspace control 
perspective, a SHORADEZ provides airspace users with location of the 
engagement zone of short-range air defense systems for mission plannino 
purposes. ^ 

defense zone is a zone established around an air base limited to 
th6 engagement envelope of short-range air defense weapons 

STrfofpS^I-el^^^^^ established entry, exit, and identification 

not a formal system in itself, but the actual sum of various component air-ground 
fhfw I 's to enable the delivery of the maximum amount of combat power to 

mriffcS ^ eeeon’Pl'sh this, everyone working within the TAGS must 

understand each component's capabilities, limitations, and contributions to the overall system 

!? T.?'® knowing system and coordination requirements 

what IS required to make the system work, and who to contact when coordination is required. 

63. Ibid, 18. 

64. Field Manual 100-13 (proposed initial draft), 1-2,1-3. 

fFebrua^°lT95)*^3?^'^'^ Pnfner on the BCE." Field Artillery Journal HQDA PB6-95-1 

rApS-n^nri will Carolina which supports Army Central Command 

(ARCENT) and XVIII Airborne Corps contingency missions; 2nd BCE in Birmingham. Alabama is 

oroviS^mp^orp'''Src(USARPAC); 7th Liaison Group which ’ 
anTc ki, A supporting United States Army Europe (USAREUR)/Seventh Army 

and Eighth Army BCE. OSAN, Korea, which supports the Combined Forces Command (CFC’s)^’ 
Ground Component Commander (GCC). ^ ' 

66. Ibid. 29. 

67. Department of the Air Force Manual 1-1 Volume II, 126. 

A classic example of the close working relationship necessary between air and ground forces for 

1942-1945 (Wortd War II). General George C. Kenney 
OTmmanderof the airforces supporting the Southwest Pacific Forces underthe command of 
General Douglas MacArthur was instrumental in developing TTPs for the employment of airpower 
dunng General MacArthur's famous island hoping campaign. 

68. Field Manual 100-13 (Proposed Initial Draft). 3-1. 

69. Department of the Air Force Manual 1-1 Volume II, 72. 


54 



Government Printing the President and the Conqmss , (Washington, DC; US 

71. Perry, 174. 

72. Perry, 215. 

73. Peny, 175. 

74. Swain, 184. 

75. Lovelace and Young, 8. 

76. Department of the Air Force Manual 1 -1 Volume II, 6. 

con^.1 

CQuoteTM missions are those whose objective is control of the air. 

tensive and defensive aeros^croonJol.^^^'^*''^^ missions include 

forces attempting to ated< Wen(^y^fo°^s^^^^ intercept, and destroy enemy aerospace 

surface forces. ^ penetrate the aerospace environment above Wendly 

w neutralizing en enemy’s war.suslalnln 9 

Pe'P« « can 

Aldl pnsjecis power b, transpoPing people and material without regard to surface obstacles. 
AiCBSfyaiDa inoraases the ability of alreraP by extending their range, payload, and endurance. 
SCissB projects power by transporting people and materiel to and through space. 

S?SSSp'Ses“* PP«™ Py neu-ralfeing or destroying the enemy’s 

aunt elllanceandreconnalssnnco. provides data needed for effective combat operations. 


55 



Special Operations perform a variety of missions. 

E ase Qperability and Defense missions defend aerospace installations from attack helo aero«?nflre 
forces survive such attacks, and return installations to full capability airlS ^ ^ 

creates and sustains aerospace forces. This mission involves all such activities exceot 
those that are part of the combat support mission. «iwiviiies except 

On-Qrbit Support keeps platforms in space operating as effectively and efficiently as possible. 

These missions listed above were developed from lessons learned during the Gulf War The aerial 
missions flown during the Gulf War included: Counter Air (offensive and dSens^e) SupJrSsir 
of Enemy Air Defense (SEAD), Air Interdiction. Close Air Support (CAS). Tactical SiirveiHance and 
Reconnaissance, Electronic Combat. Special Operations, and Combat karch and Rescue. 

78. A Cohen, ed.. Gulf War Air Power Survey Vol. IV, Weapons Tartirc an H Special 
O perations . (Washington, D.C.: US Government Printing Office, 1993), 367 & 368. 

79. Dennis Palzkill. "Making Interoperability Work," Proceedings. 118 (September 1991): 

fWashinoton ^service Procedures for the T h eater Air-Grounri Rv.stpm 

(Washington DC. US Government Pnnting Office. 1994), 26, 27; For a good article on differences 

approaches to control see Dennis Palzkill "Making Interoperability 
Work." Pr oceeding s, 118 (September 1991): 50-54. ® 'nteroperability 

81. Field Manual 100-103-2,27, 28. 

82. Palzkill, 51. 

83. Perry, 158. 

84. Perry, 158,159. 


85. Department of the Navy. Deputy Chief of Naval Operations. Resources. Warfare 

Dc'^'ir ® EQRCE 2001 , a Program Guide to the U.S. Naw rwa.shingtr^n 

DC. US Government Pnnting Office, 1995), 59-62. - ^ ’ 

86. William J. Perry, ^ual Report to the President and the Conorass rw^phinntn. nr^. . .o 

W 159; also see Ohato c. raiak. The“l« 

^ tfr IhB Cwli Marine Corps Association, 

87. Lovelace and Young, 8,9. 

88. Ibid. 10. 

Office. 1989). 43^4 (''Washington. DC: US Government Printing 

90. Lovelace and Young, 10. 


56 



Govemr!ynTpS?ffoffi^^ Fore S*^ See Siam ^C: US 

doctrinal view of command and control Nnp ^ endnote number seven for the Army's 

is The focus of naval command and control is the SSnder"^Smman?"*^°f "''here 

responsibility, and accountability Command ^ ® function of authority, 

toward a common objectivrLeadershToTthP P^OP'® 

and sense of purpose It is the cataS thi in command, instilling unit cohesion 

is the comerstonT of effS comm^^^^ Leadership 

sources - official and P^arSfauJo^^^^^ authority form two 

by law. Personal authority is a function of influence an^ 

control Of indiv,<Jua[^Tpo^Se,?r nnSl^"’ h"""' ” 

irardTrntzrcTc^ 

Sns?ssigned.'°'^'^'''^^ Personnel essential to commanderfor^p^alT^^^^ 

92. Krulak, A-14. 


93. 

94. 

95. 

96. 
97 


FM100-103-2, 32. 
Palzkill, 51. 

FM 100-103-2, 33, 34. 
Ibid, 35, 36. 


GovemnS ^^rr . (WaaWngton, DC: US 

98. Ibid, 11-1,11-2. 

Svemr^ent Prit?tii^S^'°ib ^f 1^^ For^a bri5^^'^' Operations . (Washington. DC: US 
Aqnual R eport to the President and tho s®® William J. Perry. 

Office, March, 1996), 199-202 ^ *^ 9100 . DC. US Government Pnnting 


100 . 


101 . 


25. 


Joint Publication 3-05,1-2. 

Gordon R. Sullivan, -Force XXI, A New Force for a New Cenluiy," aRtjV, 6 (May 1994): 


102. TRADOC Pam 525-5, i. 


57 



103. Ibid. 1-1. 

104. Ibid. 1-3. 

105. Ibid. 2-11. 

106. Ibid. 2-5. 

«ibii 'r ="’^^-bBSbd to 

Annual Conference of The James A Baker in inJt-t The Future of Warfare Inaugural 

November 1995. University on "C-SPAN", 26 

(Novembe^!°DL^Sl9^^^^ " Journal. HQDA PB6-94-5 

Royal l miM 

110. TRADOC Pam 525-5. 3-1. 

111 - Ibid. Glossary. Definitions of the five battle dynamics are defined as follows: 

organizationslntoaSlo acSmplis^^ motivating soldiers and their 

then formulating concepts of operations to oet frnm visu^izing cunent stale and future state, 
assigning misstons, prioiiiangSl^^n?™™®!'I?®'' ® '"aludes 

and knowing how and when to make adjustaents dunng 

Wendly and en^y^TOrt^Mufrearrf di^kmf^ det^tned by the maximum capabilities of 
electromagnebc spe^r^. ^ ^ '>>' «"<• '"aneuver and in the 

^ves goes beyond defeating the enemy; oblective is to SeS e2y 

112. Ibid. 3-10. 

(Washlh9S!1x:tjS^Si^twSg'’S.'lS^'S4M *^^'^^™ 


114. 


Ibid. 


JIto.y,'’l''ISi), a Pwr in Force xxi; nettinn m. (Unpublished, 


58 




a failure to leam, me milure to adapt L me S Z an^te °' "* 

GlvernmM^mSlSS^oJ: °' (Washington, DC: US 
118. Cushman, 18. 

P«n, £'(Washington, DC: US Government 
120 . Joint Publication 0 - 2 , IV- 3 . 

(Washington, 

SritigrISScMs!AviatS Command. Corns DePn 

Handbook. (Wachinjt^r, p/^. Procfidnrag 

Doctrine for Joint Operations (Washington DC- u'i On^^’ Publication 3-0, 

GL-8. tvvasnington. DC. US Government Pnnting Office, February 1995), 

123. Joint Publication 3-56.1,1-2. 

Joint Publication 3-561 S“SIl JnSr„l!l?wT".“" '< also sei 

Government Panting oki^, November iS^ll-ys IK llT ' DC: US 

^?eraaonswSrAvl"^!!g^,f:^^^^^^ CotEsBeeg 

Handbook. 0^^°ghinnton PC' UC Cnujjn .^.—.i P rocedure.*? 

^SMsSdCS:;- 

responsibilities of the JFMCC "" ^^d 



Operations fA TACMS^^Aviatinn fSttntpZ J^T T °r«rc — 


59 



command fcOMsSn h commander of the theater special operations 

join, “Ss 

thG thsatpr Poiv/iQr^p onH +»-»a ^ ^ ^ JroUL»o IS 3 QGriGnc tGrm thst r 6 f 0 rs to both 

128 . Joint Publication 3-0, I-7. 

129. Lovelace and Young, 4. 

130. Ibid, 11. 

131. Joint Publication 3-0, 11 - 20 . 

132. Cushman, 1. 

133. Field Manual 100-7, 5-1. 

134. Joint Publication 1-02,192. 

135. Ibid, 16. 

136. Field Manual 100-7, 5-8. 


137. Ibid, 5-3. 

138. Ibid. 

1990, repnnted by permission from Military Review, (September 1990): 76. ^ 

140. Field Manual 100-7,5-7. 

141. Joint Publication 1-02,146. 

142. Swain, 228. 

l!wversl^,1^sri4o),'24a ' War . (Washington, DC: NaBonal Defense 

144. Swain, 186. 

(Washinoton'^rlrlil (Proposed Initial Draft), Battlefield Coordination Detar.hmpnf 
(Washington, DC. US Government Pnnt ng Office, June 19951 1 - 1 - ThP Rrn r,mwiHaT«37’ i 

146. Swain, 181. 


60 


Inurml Hn'nA^°nr°«v-'r’ I?Missions." Field Artillerv 
journal . HQDA PB6-95-5 (November-December 1995 ): 6, 7 . ^ ^ 

148. Joint Doctrine defines combatant command is JP 1-02, 74. 

s:s=£s:=?s=™~ 

==^ss==i==^- 

s=,r.ssH=“~~=^^ 

FM 100-5, 2-5. Unity of Commanri means that all forces 

n^cessariiv^a'rt n V n!o coordination and cooperation among all forces not 

y P of the same command structure toward a commonly recognized objective. 

149. Swain, 187. 


are under one commander. 


150. 

151. 

152. 

153. 


Joint Publication 3-0, (appendix 4) 11-20 & (appendix 5) 11-18. 
Field Manual 44-100, 5-10. 

Joint Publication 3-09 (Second Draft), appendix F. 

Field Manual 44-100, 5-12. 


155. Joint Publication 1, Message form the CJCS. 

156. Joint Publication 3-0,11-1. 

Publications@clinton.ai.mit.edu [Publications@clinton.ai.mit.edu], February k iSs), 1 . 


61 




APPENDIX 01; JOINT PROCEDURAL MEASURES 


FIGURE 7-7. Joint Procedural Measures 



Figure 1 PROCEDURAL MEASURES 











APPENDIX 02: FIRE CONTROL MEASURES AFFECTING TAGS 



Figure!: FSCMs 


63 












APPENDIX 03: JOINT FORCE COMPONENT COMMANDS 



.. Op«nit!ofwl Control (OPCON) 

—Command nelatlonahlp(8) datarmlnad by JFC 

NOTE: (1) A Jofnt Force contains Senrlco Components (because of logistic and training responsbHities), 
even when ^rations are conducted through hinctional components. 

(2) All Servtice and functional components are depicted. Any mix of the above components can 
constitute ajolnt force. 

(3) There may also be a Coast Guard component in ajolnt force. 


Figure IV-1. Possible Components in a Joint Force 


Figure 3; Joint Force Component Commands 


64 




















APPENDIX 04: COMBAT AND COMMUNICATIONS ZONE 



Hiw enmpto depictit a CINCs ADR in which a theator of operaikNia has been Am igmnwri 
The eembetzAneineludee that ana required for the conduct of combat opentloiw. The 
COMMZ in Urn example » nntiouoiis to the combel zone. 


65 








APPENDIX 05; OPERATIONAL AREAS WITHIN THEATER 


OPERATIONAL AREAS WITHIN A THEATER 



ThiBttcampkcltiiiete a combatant ctMnmaiuler'ftAOR, also kncMm as a ihaator. VWhintha 
ADR, the CINC haa designalBd a thaatar of war with two auborainata thaatara of opaiationa. 
Alao wHNn the theater of war la a JSOA. To handle a aluallon outalde the theater of war, the 
CINC haa astablialied a J0A.wMiin which a JTFwfl operate. JOAacouMabobe 
eatebiahed within the theater of war orthaateia of operatjona. 


66 









GLOSSARY 


Amy airspace command and control (A=C>) - Those actions that ensure the synchronized use of 
airspace and enhance the command and control of those forces using airspace. This system Includes those 

organizations, personnel, facilities, and procedures required to perfonn the airspace control function. 
(TRADOC Pam 525-XXX, C-1) 

Army air-ground system (AAGS) - 

The Army piece of integrating airspace management which begins at field army and extends 
through all echelons down to maneuver battalion level. (TRADOC Pam 525-XXX. C-1) 

The Army system which provides for interface between Army and tactical air support agencies of 
other Services in the planning, evaluating, processing, and operations. It is composed of appropriate staff 

members, including G-2 air and G-3 air personnel, and necessa^ communications equipment. (Joint 
Publication 1-02. 36) 

Almpace contrel Authority (ACA) - The commander designated to assume overell responsibility for the 
operation of aiispace control system in the airspace control area. (TRADOC Pam 525-XXX, C-1) 

Air operations Center (ACC) - 

The principal air operations installation (land- or ship-based) from which all aircraft and air warning 
functions of tactical air operations are controlled. (Joint Publication 1-02, 373) 

Formerly called the Tactical Air Control Center (TACC). It is a ground based element of the 

Theater Air Control System (TACS), that is divided between the plans and operations functions. Its primary 

function is to provide the staff necessary to support the Air Component Commander in his function as the 

Airspace Control Authority. The Army representative at this element is the BCE. (TRADOC Pam 525-XXX, 

C-2) 

Battlefield Coordination Element (BCE) ~ 

AhAnhyliaisdnprovidedbytheAnhycomponentcommandertotheAirOperatlonsCenterfAOC) 

ahd/ortothe ccmpohaht desighated by the Jbiht force commahdertb plah, coohllnate. apd deconffictair 
operatiohs. The battleBeld coordihatioh elemeht processes Amiy requests for tactical air suppod, monitors 
and Inteqirets the land battle siluaSon tor the AOC, and provides the necessary interfaces for exchange of 


67 



current intelligence and operational data. (Joint Publication 1-02. 50) 

Provided by the Land Component Commander and is collocated with the AOC or theater equivalent. 
The BCE expedites the exchange of information through face-to-face coordination with elements of the 
AOC. (TRADOC Pam 525-XXX. C-2) 

Hre support coordinsllon messurs (FSCM) - A measure employed by land or amphibious commanded 

to facilitate the rapid engagement of targets and simultaneously provide safeguanJs for tnendly forces. (Joint 
Publication 1-02,146) 

Marine air command and control system (MACCS) - A US Marine Corps tactical air command and 
control system which provides the tactical air commander with the means to command, coordinate, and 
control all air operations within an assigned sector and to coordinate air operations with other Services, it is 
composed of communications-electronics equipment that incorporates a capability from manual through 
semiautomatic control. (TRADOC Pam 525-XXX. C-4) 

Naval tactical air control system (NTACS) - A US Navy tactical air control system which provides the 
commander of the amphibious task force (CATF) with the means to command, coordinate, and control all air 
operations to support air operations in the amphibious objective area (AOA). When NTACS is used in 
conjunction with MACCS. it forms the Amphibious Tactical Air Control System (ATACS). 

Theater air control system (TACS) - (USAF) The organization and equipment necessary to plan, direct, 
and control tactical air operations and to coordinate air operations with other Services. It is composed of 
control agencies and communications electronics facilities which provide the means for centralized control 
decentralized execution of missions. (TRADOC Pam 525-XXX. C-5) 


68 



bibliography 

BOOKS: 

Tre^ri"pre^"i°9T Misfortunes The Anatom, nf P.ii,... ^ N^wYork: 

Annapolis, Maryland: Whlknora Pnndng, 

Dubik. J^es M and Gordon R, Sullivan, Envislonino F..i,„„ Warn^ For, Leavenworth Kansas 
U.s. Army Command and GeneralStaff College Press, 1995 ; ''enworrn, Kansas. 

“'^'°"Mas^sai*a;tiei srrur ...» 

Pauon J^Georg^S. iA ^r as I Knew It . Annoyed by Colonel Paul D. Harkins. New York: Ban«m 

rZd^rSrSSgV»--“-—^ 

■'iiS'^ga ■ Q^ g^i’^MpnlledWar . Washington, DO: National Defense Universe 

ra^aid Moody. -Lucky War Third Army m pospn stonn Fort Leavenwortt Kansas u S 
Army Command and General Staff College Press. 1994. Kansas. U.S. 

^ ““-c^useds: 

MILITARY PUBLICATIOMS- 

Airforce. Washingt“^ DC: US Govrmme ^mting°S. March'X^^^ 

'*'‘=5SSsssss-"ces.. 


69 



Department^of the Navy, Director, Surface Warfare (N86) Office of the Chief of Naval Operations 
Surface Cornbatant Force Level Study Group. Surface Combatant Fnrra Level Stnriy 
^uirement for Joint Warfare . Washington, DC; US Government Printing Office, August 

Reid ManuaM-100. D octrinal Principles f or Army Aviation in Combat Oppratinnc Washington DC- 
US Government Printing Office, 1989. - ^ ’ 

Field Battlefield Siirvivahility . Washington. DC: US Government Printing 

Field Manual 1-1 ll.^ iation Brigades . Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office. 1990. 

Field Manual 6-20-30 Ta ctics, Tech niques, and Procedures for Corns and Division Onaratinn c 
Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 1989. ^- 

Field 44-100. iJ^ Army Air Defense Operations . Washington, DC: US Government Printing 
Field ^^";;^;.71-^^Appro^ Draft). DiyL sion Operations. Washington. DC: US Goverriment 

Field 

Field Manual 90-36 (Second Draft). largetinq. Procedures for Co ordinating. Deconflictinn end 
^ ng So^beMTol^^^ Washington. DC: US Government 

Field Manual 100-1. Ih e Army . Washington. DC: US Government Printing Office. June 1994. 

Field Manual 100-5. O perations. Washington, DC; US Government Printing Office, June 1993. 

DC: US Government 

"TolZent ^rg 0^2; ^ HPration^ Washington. DC: US 

Field Manual 100-12 (hitial Draft). Anriy Theater Missile Def ense Operations Washington DC'US 
Government Pnnting Office, September 1995. - ^ 

Field Manual 100-12 (Coordinating Draft). Army The ater Missile Defense Qr^eratinn. Washington 
DC. US Government Pnnting Office. February 1996. - ^ ’ 

Field Manual 100-13 (Proposed Initial Draft). Battlefield Coordin ation Detachment Washington 
DC. US Government Pnnting Office, June 1995. - ^ 

Field Manual 100-13 (Initial Draft). Battlefield Coordination De t achment Washington, DC US 
Government Printing Office, November 1995. 


70 



Field Manual 100-15. S°i ps Openalion.i . Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office 1989 
Rem Manual 100-15. ggffi^ Ppe^lons . Washington, DC: US Government Pnn.ng Office. 1995. 

“=: US Government 

Washlr° n 

""'Sg Theater Alr^rctnrl Sy stem.. Washington, 

Reid 

Reid - Sfis rational Terms and Symhol; . Washington. DC: US Government Printing 

Washington, DC: US 

Fleet Marine Force Manual 1. analog. Washington, DC: US Government Pnnhng Office 1989 
Fleet Marine Force Manual 1-1. Washington, DC: US Govenvnant Printing Office, 

Reel Ma^Ss^rntrlt nif-n-e. Wasffington, 

Fleet «a*^For^^Manual 6-9, Mad na Wllery Su p port . Washington, DC: US Government Pdnhng 

"““iiifAvt'S“=“ 7and. QgrpspeepQperatlnas 
Washington, Dc'T s 

Joint '^^shington. DC: US Government 

^^pSng ''''®®'^'"9ton. DC: US Government 


71 




Joint Publication 1. Joint Warfare of the US Armed Forces . Washington, DC; US Government 
Printing Office, 1991. 

Joint Publication 1-02. Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Temns . 
Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 1994. 

Joint Publication 3-0. Doctrine for Joint Operations . Washington, DC: US Government Printing 
Office, 1993. 

Joint Publication 3-0. Doctrine for Joint Operations . Washington, DC: US Government Printing 
Office. 1995. 

Joint Publication 3-05. Doctrine for Joint Special Operations . Washington, DC; US Government 
Printing Office, 1992. 

Joint Publication 3-05.3. Joint Special Operations Operational Procedures . Washington. DC: US 
Government Printing Office, 1993. 

Joint Publication 3-09 (Second Draft). Doctrine for Joint Fire Support . Washington, DC: US 
Government Printing Office, 1995. 

Joint Publication 3-52. Doctrine for Joint Airspace Control in the Combat Zone . Washington, DC; US 
Government Printing Office, 1993. 

Joint Publication 3-56 (Initial Draft). Command and Control Doctrine for Joint Operations . 
Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 1992. 

Joint Publication 3-56.1. Command and Control for Joint Air Operations . Washington, DC; US 
Government Printing Office. November 1994. 

Joint Publication 5-0. Doctrine for Planning Joint Operations . Washington, DC; US Government 
Printing Office, 1994. 

Krulak, Charles C. The 31 st Commandant's Planning Guidance. A Marine Corps for the 21 st 
Century . Marine Corps Association, August 1995. 

Naval Doctrine Publication 6, Naval Command and Control . Washington, DC; US Government 
Printing Office. 1995. 

Training and Doctrine Command Pamphlet 525-5. FORCE XXI OPERATIONS, a Concept for the 
Evolution of Full-Dimensional Operations for the Strategic Army of the Early Twenty-First 
Century . Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, August 1994. 

Training and Doctrine Command Pamphlet 525-200-5. Depth and Simultaneous Attack. 
Washington, DC; US Government Printing Office, June 1994. 

Training and Doctrine Command Pamphlet 525-200-6. Combat Service Support. W ashington. DC. 
US Government Printing Office, August 1994. 

Training and Doctrine Command Pamphlet 525-XX. Force XXI Division Operations Concept . 
Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, May 1995. 


72 





Training arrt DMnne Command Pamphlet S25-XXX (Draft). tLS-AtnULODeratlonal Concent tor 

Washi^, DC: US Government Renting 

united J«nt Air Oneratinne h iaff Coume Reel, ne. 

1994 . ^ ^ ^ ^ Air Ground Operations School. November 

United States Army Command and General Staff College Student Text 100-3 Battle Book- r^ntar 
fo^Leavenwodh, Kansas: US. AnmyCo^andanlSs^i^ 

Bane Rnni, Center 

1995 Leavenworth. Kansas: U.S. Army Command and General Staff 

United States Amy^F^^^ Artillery Center and School. Directorate of Combat Developments 

Project Summary Sheet . Fort Sill. Oklahoma: United States Army Field 
Artillery Center and Fort Sill. May 1995. ' 

United States Army Program Executive Office for Tactical Missiles. Modernization Plan- Firp 

a^ortRo^cket and Missile Systems . Redstone Arsenal. AL^ o g ram ExeTuL S fice. 

United States Army Program Executive Office for Tactical Missiles. Proiect Book- cin«P rnmK.* 

.. Bddsmne!:^rL 

U.S.N.I. Database. Missile^ockets - Land Attackn-heater - ATACMS. Provided by the 

1991 b^^uJJtPrt r?fmm * Institute. Edition 05/01/95. Copyright 

1991 by United Communications Group. 11300 Rockville Pike. Suite 1100, RockvHll Md. 

ARTICLES 

"Army Weaponry and Equipment.” Army . 10 (October 1995): 217 - 320. 

HQDAPB6-94-5(Novemt«-- 

Gamer, Jay M. "Army Theater Missile Defense." Army. 12 (December 1995):17-19. 

- Bi!a.At)l|leivJodmg,!. HQDA 

Gourley.^Scott R. "Extending the Range of Rockets and Missile Systems." ARMY . 6 (June 1995): 


73 



"PAC-3." Army . 12 (December 1995); 20 

Haynes »>= Divisional Deep Rght.- Field Anlllerv .Innmel hQDA PB6. 

°^P-Es ld Arenas joMM . HQDAPB6. 

Oxford, Donald G. "A Primer on the BCE." Field Artillery Journal hqda PB6-95-1 (February 1995): 

Palzkill, Dennis. "Making Interoperability Work." Proceedings.118 (September 1991): 50-54. 

Rigby. Randan L Tres for Division XXI: State of the Branch 1995." _Field Artillery Jo umel HQDA 
PB6-95-5(November-December 1995): 1-5. - 

Rigby, Randall L and ‘-on E Maggart. "Shaping Battlespace - More than just Deep Attack." Field 
A rtillery Journal . HQDA PB6-95-5 (November-December 1995 ); 12-14. 

Saint. Crosby E. C's View of Operational Art . The United States Naval War College 

Operations Department. Rhode Island; The United States Naval War Colleoe Press 
September 1990; repnnted by permission from Military Review. (September 1990): 65-78. 

Schneider, James J. "The Theory of the Empty Battlefield." Journal of the Rovaltlniteri Rpn/ir oc 
institute for Defen se Studies . 3 (September 1987): 37- ^/| . ^ ^ 

Stewart, wniiam^^lnter^cnon of Firepower. Mobility, and Dispersion." Military Review XXXIX 

Sullivan. Gordon R.. "Force XXI. A New Force for A New Century." ARMY 5 (May 1994): 24-26. 

Valle, Herto^r R. "Army Airspace Command and Control." Air Defense Artillery (March-April 1993): 

Wagner Louis c. U .3. Forces - Theater Missile Defen.«ie Association of the United States Armv 
Institute of Land Warfare, Land Power Essay Series Number 94-9. Arlington, VA' 

Association of the United States Army, (October 1994): 1 - 5 . 

^ P""* BF>ween Vietnam and Desert 

Shield. Parameters. XXVI (Spring 1996):100-119 

MONOGRAPHS and THgSFtg 

Brehm, Norman R. Solving Field Artillery Standa rd Tactical Missions for Force xxi Fort 
Leavenworth, Kansas: U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, 1995. 

Corpac. Peter S. Aidand Battle . Future - Fires: How Do You Bn it? Fort Leavenworth, KS' School of 
Advanced Military Studies, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, 1991. 

Crawford Darrell E. jee p Operations in Airland Battle Do ctrine: The Emnlnyment nf 11 r^m, ,nH 

Pg f Mane uver. Fort Leavenworth. KS: School of Advanced Military 

Studies, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, 1989. ^ 


74 



Daniel, Donald C.F. and Bradd C. Hayes, The Future of U S. Sea Power. Carlisle Barracks; 
Strategic Studies Institute, U. S. Army War College, 1993. 

Holder, Don. Ill Corns Maneuver Booklet . Fort Hood, TX; III Corps, May 1987. 

House, Jonathan M. Toward Combined Arms Warfare: A Survey of 20th-Centurv Tactics, Doctrine 
and Organization . Fort Leavenworth, Kansas: U.S. Army Command and General Staff 
College Press, 1984. 

Kelly, Patrick. Modem Scientific Metaphors of Warfare: Updating the Doctrinal Paradigm . Fort 

Leavenworth, KS; School of Advanced Military Studies, U.S. Army Command and General 
Staff College, 1993. 

Lovelace, Douglas C. Jr. and Thomas-Durell Young, Strategic Plans. Joint Doctrine and Antipodean 
Insights . Carlisle Barracks, PA; Strategic Studies Institute, U. S. Army War College, 1995. 

M'Meen, Scott R. Field Artillery Doctrine Development 1917 -1945 . Fort Leavenworth, Kansas: 

U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, 1991. 

Pickar, Charles K. Tactical Deep Battle: The Missing Link . Fort Leavenworth, Kansas; School of 
Advanced Military Studies, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, 1991. 

Schneider, James J. Vulcan's Anvil: The American Civil War and the Emergence of Operational Art . 
Theoretical Paper Number Four, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas: School of Advanced Military 
Studies, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, 1991. 

Swan, Robin P. The Pieces of a Chessboard - What is the Contemporary Significance of Jomini's 
Design of a Theater of Operations? . Fort Leavenworth, KS; School of Advanced Military 
Studies, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, 1991. 

UNPUBLISHED MATERIAL 

After Action Report from the Mobile Strike Force. Exercise Prairie Warrior. 1995. Fort Leavenworth, 
Kansas; U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, 1995. 

Dubik, James M. Combat Power in Force XXI: Getting the Balance Right . Unpublished, February 
1996. 

Field Standard Operating Procedures (FSOPL Deep Operations Annex. Vth Corps Artillery 
Headquarters (AETV-AT-GC), April 1995. 

... From The Sea. A New Direction for the Naval Service. Preparing the Naval Service for the 21st 
Century . White Paper produced by the Honorable Sean O’Keefe, Secretary of the Navy, 
Frank Kelso II, Chief of Naval Operations, and C.E. Mundy, JR., Commandant of the 
Marine Corps, September 1992. 

Shaping the Deep Battlefield Synchronized Operations in the Air Assault Division . Division Fire 
Support Element, 101st Airborne Division (Air Assault), April 1992. 

Tactical Standard Operating Procedures fTACSOPL Vth Corps Artillery Headquarters (AETV-AT- 
GC), Undated. 


75 






United States Army Command and General Staff College, Corps and Division Doctrine Division. 

Battlefield Framework White Paper . Fort Leavenworth, Kansas: U.S. Army Command and 
General Staff College, June 1995. 

United States Army Field Artillery Center and School, War Fighter Division, Fire Support and 

Combined Arms Operations Department. Joint Fire Support and Interdiction: Conduct of 
Operations Between the Fire Support Coordination Line and the Fonvard Boundary . (Final 
Draft) Fort Sill, Oklahoma: United States Army Field Artillery Center and Fort Sill, August 
1994. 


INTERVIEWS 


Johnson, David, Assistant TRADOC Systems Manager - ATACMS. Interview by the Author, 17 

April 1996, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas. Verbal Interview. Fort Leavenworth, Kansas: School 
of Advanced Military Studies. 


CONFERENCES 


The Future of Warfare . Inaugural Annual Conference of The James A. Baker III Institute at Rice 
University on "C-SPAN", 26 November 1995. 

Shape the Battlespace . "How to Fight Seminar" held by the Training and Doctrine Command, 26 
September 1995. 


PRESS RELEASES 

The White House, Office of the Press Secretary. Fact Sheet on Deep Attack Weapons Mix Study 
From:The White House [Publications-Admin@WhiteHouse.Gov] Reply-To: 
Publications@clinton.ai.mit.edu [Publications@clinton.ai.mit.edu], February 8,1996. 


76 





INITIAL DISTRIBUTIOM LIST 


1. Combined Arms Research Library 

U.S. Army Command and General Staff College 
Fort Leavenworth , KS 66027-6900 

2. Defense Technical Information Center 
Cameron Station 

Alexandria, VA 22314 

3. Commander 

US Army Field Artillery Center and Fort Sill 
Task Force 2000 
ATTN: LTC Carafano 
Fort Sill, OK 73503 

4. Commander 
USAAVNC 

Directorate of Combat Developments 
ATTN: ATZQ TDS D (MAJ Steve Greenberg) 
Fort Rucker, AL 36362-5000 

5. Commander 
USACAC 

Battle Command Battle Lab 

ATTN: ATZL TP (Mr. Thomas L. Douthitt) 

Fort Leavenworth, KS 66027-5300 

6. Commander 

US Army Field Artillery Center and Fort Sill 
Depth and Simultaneous Attack Battle Lab 
ATTN: COL Cunningham 
Fort Sili, OK 73503 

7. Commander 

US Army Field Artillery Center and Fort Sill 
TRADOC Systems Manager - ATACMS 
ATTN: CPT David Johnson 
Fort Sill, OK 73503 

8. Commander 
USACAC, USACGSC 
Center for Army Leadership 
ATTN: LTC Joel A. Buck 

Fort Leavenworth, KS 66027-5300 

9. Commander 
USACAC, USACGSC 
Combat Doctrine Directorate 

ATTN: ATZL-SWW (Mr. David E. Turek) 

Fort Leavenworth, KS 66027-5300 


77 




10. Commander 
USACAC, USACGSC 
CTAC 

ATTN: LTC Grier 

Fort Leavenworth, KS 66027-5300 

11. Commander 
USACAC 
Director TRAC 

ATTN: SWC (MAJ Jeff Springman) 

Fort Leavenworth, KS 66027-5300 

12. Commander 
USACAC, USACGSC 
CTAC 

ATTN: LTC Al Gomez 

Fort Leavenworth, KS 66027-5300 

13. Commander 
USA ADA School 

ATTN: ATSA-CDF (MAJ Glenn Guyant) 
5800 Carter Road 
Fort Bliss, Texas 79916 

14. Commander 

Program Executive Office, Tactical Missiles 
ATTN: SFAE-MSL-I (Mr. Mel Bartlett) 
Redstone, AL 35898-8000 


78 



