Automated Vectorization of Decision-Based Algorithms 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


Virtually all existing vectorization algo- 
rithms are designed to only analyze the 
numeric properties of an algorithm and 
distribute those elements across multiple 
processors. This advances the state of the 
practice because it is the only known sys- 
tem, at the time of this reporting, that 
takes high-level statements and analyzes 
them for their decision properties and 
converts them to a form that allows them 
to automatically be executed in parallel. 


The software takes a high-level source 
program that describes a complex deci- 
sion-based condition and rewrites it as a 
disjunctive set of component Boolean re- 
lations that can then be executed in par- 
allel. This is important because parallel 
architectures are becoming more com- 
monplace in conventional systems and 
they have always been present in NASA 
flight systems. This technology allows 
one to take existing condition-based 


code and automatically vectorize it so it 
naturally decomposes across parallel ar- 
chitectures. 

This program was written by Mark James 
of Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Lab- 
oratory. Further information is contained in 
a TSP (see page 1). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer - to NPO-42524. ' 


Grayscale Optical Correlator Workbench 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


Grayscale Optical Correlator Work- 
bench (GOCWB) is a computer pro- 
gram for use in automatic target recog- 
nition (ATR). GOCWB performs ATR 
with an accurate simulation of a hard- 
ware grayscale optical correlator (GOC). 
This simulation is performed to test fil- 
ters that are created in GOCWB. Thus, 
GOCWB can be used as a stand-alone 
ATR software tool or in combination 
with GOC hardware for building (target 
training), testing, and optimization of 
filters. The software is divided into three 
main parts, denoted filter, testing, and 


training. The training part is used for as- 
sembling training images as input to a 
filter. The filter part is used for combin- 
ing training images into a filter and opti- 
mizing that filter. The testing part is 
used for testing new filters and for gen- 
eral simulation of GOC output. The cur- 
rent version of GOCWB relies on the 
mathematical software tools from MAT- 
LAB binaries for performing matrix op- 
erations and fast Fourier transforms. 
Optimization of filters is based on an al- 
gorithm, known as OT-MACH, in which 
variables specified by the user are para- 


meterized and the best filter is selected 
on the basis of an average result for cor- 
rect identification of targets in multiple 
test images. 

This program was written by Jay Hanan, 
Hanying Zhou, and Tien-Hsin Chao of Cal- 
tech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Labora- 
tory. Further information is contained in a 
TSP (see page 1). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-41021. ' 


@ “One-Stop Shopping” for Ocean Remote-Sensing and Model Data 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


OurOcean Portal 2.0 (http:// 
ouroceanjpl.nasa.gov) is a software system 
designed to enable users to easily gain ac- 
cess to ocean observation data, both re- 
mote-sensing and in-situ, configure and 
run an Ocean Model with observation data 
assimilated on a remote computer, and vi- 
sualize both the observation data and the 
model outputs. At present, the observation 
data and models focus on the California 
coastal regions and Prince William Sound 
in Alaska. This system can be used to per- 
form both real-time and retrospective 
analyses of remote-sensing data and model 
outputs. OurOcean Portal 2.0 incorporates 
state-of-the-art information technologies 
(IT) such as MySQL database, Java Web 
Server (Apache/Tomcat), Live Access 
Server (LAS) , interactive graphics with Java 
Applet at the Client site and MatLab/GMT 
at the server site, and disnibuted comput- 


ing. OurOcean currently serves over 20 
real-time or historical ocean data products. 
The data are served in pre-generated plots 
or their native data format. For some of the 
datasets, users can choose different plot- 
ting parameters and produce customized 
graphics. OurOcean also serves 3D Ocean 
Model outputs generated by ROMS (Re- 
gional Ocean Model System) using LAS. 
The Live Access Server (LAS) software, de- 
veloped by the Pacific Marine Environ- 
mental Laboratory (PMEL) of the Na- 
tional Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA), is a configurable 
Web-server program designed to provide 
flexible access to geo-referenced scientific 
data. The model output can be views as 
plots in horizontal slices, depth profiles or 
time sequences, or can be downloaded as 
raw data in different data formats, such as 
NetCDF, ASCII, Binary, etc. The interactive 


visualization is provided by graphic soft- 
ware, Ferret, also developed by PMEL. In 
addition, OurOcean allows users with min- 
imal computing resources to configure 
and run an Ocean Model with data assimi- 
lation on a remote computer. Users may se- 
lect the forcing input, the data to be assim- 
ilated, the simulation period, and the 
output variables and submit the model to 
run on a backend parallel computer. 
When die run is complete, the output trill 
be added to the LAS server for user to re- 
trieve and examine the results. 

This program was written by P. Peggy Li, 
Quoc Vu, and Yi Chao of Caltech, and Zhi- 
jin Li and Jei-Kook Choi of Raytheon for 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-41761. 


56 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2006 


