








AIAA 2001-4006 

The Impact of Structural Vibration 

on Flying Qualities of a Supersonic 

Transport 



David L. Raney, E. Bruce Jackson, 
Carey S. Buttrill, and Williann M. Adanns 
NASA Langley Research Center 
Hannpton, VA 23681-2199 



AIAA Atmospheric Flight Mechanics 

Conference 

6-9 August 2001 
Montreal, Canada 



For permission to copy or to republish!, contact tiie copyrigiit owner named on tiie first page. For AIAA-iield copyrigiit, 
write to AIAA Permissions Department, 1801 Alexander Bell Drive, Suite 500, Reston, VA, 20191-4344. 



The Impact of Structural Vibration on Flying Qualities 
of a Supersonic Transport 

David L. Raney', E. Bruce Jackson^, Carey S. Buttrill^, and William M. Adams* 

NASA Langley Research Center 

Hampton, VA 23681-2199 



ABSTRACT 

A piloted simulation experiment has been 
conducted in the NASA Langley Visual/Motion 
Simulator facility to address the impact of 
dynamic aeroelastic effects on flying qualities of 
a supersonic transport. The intent of this 
experiment was to determine the effectiveness of 
several measures that may be taken to reduce the 
impact of aircraft flexibility on piloting tasks. 
Potential solutions that were examined included 
structural stiffening, active vibration 
suppression, and elimination of visual cues 
associated with the elastic modes. A series of 
parametric configurations was evaluated by six 
test pilots for several types of maneuver tasks. 

During the investigation, several incidents 
were encountered in which cockpit vibrations 
due to elastic modes fed back into the control 
stick through involuntary motions of the pilot's 
upper body and arm. The phenomenon, referred 
to as biodynamic coupling, is evidenced by a 
resonant peak in the power spectrum of the 
pilot's stick inputs at a structural mode 
frequency. 

The results of the investigation indicate that 
structural stiffening and compensation of the 
visual display were of little benefit in alleviating 
the impact of elastic dynamics on the piloting 
tasks, while increased damping and elimination 
of control-effector excitation of the lowest 
frequency modes offered great improvements 
when applied in sufficient degree. 

INTRODUCTION 

As commercial transport aircraft designs 
become larger and more flexible, the impact of 
aeroelastic vibration on the vehicle's flight 
dynamics, flight control, and flying qualities 
increases in prominence. The consideration of 
such effects assumed unprecedented significance 



in the design of the Boeing High Speed Civil 
Transport (HSCT). Constraints imposed by flight 
at supersonic speeds resulted in a very large but 
relatively light and slender vehicle design that 
exhibited unusually low-frequency aeroelastic 
modes. The resulting low frequency cockpit 
vibrations had significant potential to negatively 
influence the pilot's ability to maneuver the 
aircraft, not only due to the degradation of ride 
quality but also due to adverse coupling between 
the human pilot's control dynamics and the 
configuration's aeroelastic dynamics. 

A piloted simulation experiment was 
therefore conducted in the Langley 
Visual/Motion Simulator (VMS) facility to 
address the impact of dynamic aeroelastic effects 
on flying qualities of the High-Speed Civil 
Transport. The primary objective of this 
investigation was to determine the effectiveness 
of measures that may be taken to reduce the 
impact of aircraft flexibility on piloting tasks for 
the HSCT. The secondary objective was to 
establish preliminary guidelines for designing a 
structural mode control system for an HSCT 
concept. 

An earlier motion-based simulation study 
using a dynamic aeroelastic HSCT model in the 
Langley VMS facility revealed a significant 
reduction in the ease with which piloted 
approach and landing tasks were performed 
when dynamic elastic modes were included in 
the model. ^ An even earlier investigation by 
Schmidt and Waszak had also been conducted in 
the Langley VMS, illustrating the potentially 
detrimental effects of dynamic elasticity on the 
flying qualities of a flexible Bl aircraft 
simulation in 1985.^ The potential for such 
effects had been noted in a 1983 report by 

Ashkenas, Magdaleno and McRuer that 
cautioned of implications of structural flexibility 
for the flying qualities of large aircraft. ^ 



* Reseaich scientist, Dynamics and Contiol Branch, MS 406, Senior Member AIAA. 

^ Reseaich scientist, Dynamics and Contiol Blanch, MS 149, Senior Member AIAA. 

t Reseaich scientist, Systems Development Blanch, MS 125B, Senior Member AIAA. 

:j: Distinguished Reseaich Associate, Dynamics and Contiol Blanch, MS 406, Senior Member AIAA. 

Copyright © 2001 by the American Institute of Aeronautics, Inc. No copyright is asserted in the United States under 
Title 17, U.S. Code. The Government has royalty-free license to exercise all lights under the copyright claimed herein 
for government puiposes. All other lights resei'ved by the copyright owner. 

1 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



The approach of the present investigation 
was to vary certain parameters in the aeroelastic 
model to provide a simplified representation of 
several potential means of alleviating the impact 
of dynamic aeroelasticity on piloting tasks. The 
potential solutions that were examined consisted 
of 1) increasing the frequency of the elastic 
modes, 2) increasing the damping of various 
combinations of elastic modes, 3) elimination of 
control effector excitation of the lowest 
frequency elastic modes, and 4) elimination of 
visual cues associated with the elastic modes. 

Approximate representations for each of 
these potential solutions were generated in the 
simulation model by directly parameterizing the 
modal frequencies and damping, as well as 
control input and visual output effects. By 
exploring parametric variations in each of these 
factors, information was gained regarding the 
effectiveness of each approach, and the degree to 
which it must be exercised in order to achieve 
the desired flying qualities improvement. A total 
of 20 parametric configurations were evaluated 
by six test pilots representing the FAA (1), 
Boeing (1), NASA (2), and Calspan (2). 

HSCT SIMULATION MODEL 

This experiment used a mathematical 
simulation of the so-called "Cycle 3" version of 
the "Reference-H" supersonic transport design. ^ 
The model was published by Boeing 
Commercial Aircraft Group in the summer of 
1996 as the fourth major release in a series of 
increasingly detailed math models of the 
Reference-H configuration. The simulation 
model was based upon a combination of wind 
tunnel and computational fluid dynamics studies 
of the Reference-H design, ranging from low 
subsonic to Mach 2.4 supersonic wind tunnel 
studies. 

Finite-element structural models were used 
to predict the effect of steady flight loads upon 
aerodynamic stability derivatives, referred to as 
quasi-static aeroelastic effects (QSAE). A key 
feature of the math model was the inclusion of 
dynamic aeroservoelastic effects (DASE), which 
required additional states to represent the flexible 
modes of the aircraft structure. 

General Configuration Description 

The Reference-H vehicle design has a 
cranked-arrow planform with a conventional aft 
tail and four under-wing engines. The control 
devices include an independently actuated 
horizontal stabilizer and elevator, a three- 
segment rudder on a fixed vertical fin, eight 



trailing-edge flaperons (four per wing), and 
leading-edge flaps. 

The vehicle is designed to carry 300 
passengers a distance of approximately 5,000 
nautical miles. The aircraft has an operating 
empty weight of 280,000 lb and a maximum 
takeoff gross weight of 650,000 lb. Final cruise 
weight is expected to be 385,000 lb. 

The length of the HSCT configuration is 
approximately 310 ft, with a wingspan of 130 ft. 
The HSCT's length and slendemess result in very 
low-frequency structural modes, with the first 
symmetric bending mode occurring at approxi- 
mately 1.25 Hz. As a point of reference, the 
length of the Concorde is approximately 204 ft, 
the length of the Tu-144 is 215 ft, and the Bl is 
approximately 135 ft. The HSCT planform is 
shown in Figure 1, super- imposed with a 
planform of the Bl configuration for scale 
comparison. 




Ride Control Vanes 
(RC¥| and Chin Firs 
(CF| added at nose 



Figure 1. Comparison of HSCT and B-1 
planforms. 

The B 1 uses an active vibration suppression 
control system to improve ride quality at the 
cockpit station. Small active control surfaces 
called ride control vanes are located near the 
pilot station of the B 1 to damp vertical vibrations 
at the cockpit. The Boeing HSCT design is 
equipped with similar devices for active 
suppression of vertical vibrations as noted in 
Figure 1. Additionally, a vertical "chin fin" is 
included in the HSCT design for active 
suppression of lateral cockpit vibrations. 

Dynamic Aeroelastic Effects 

The dynamic aeroelastic portion of the 
model used in this simulation experiment 
contained six flexible aircraft modes, 3 
symmetric and 3 antisymmetric. The mode 
shapes and their associated in-vacuo frequencies 
are shown in Figure 2. The model was generated 
for a flight condition of Mach 0.24 at a weight of 
384,862 lb and a eg location at 53.2% of the 
mean aerodynamic chord, which constitutes the 
landing condition. 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



Symmetric Modes (side view) Antisymmetric IVIodes (Top view) 

.. , „„, , „^ ,, Mode AN 1: 1 .39 Hz 

ModeSYI: 1 .25 Hz 




Figure 2. Aeroelastic mode shapes and in-vacuo 
frequencies used in simulation. 

Dynamic aeroelastic modes contained in the 
model could be excited by turbulence and by 
control effector movements. No inputs from 
landing gear reaction forces or engine pylon 
reaction forces were included in the model. 

Visual effects of the structural flexibility 
were provided in the simulation. The out-the- 
window scene that was presented on the cockpit 
monitors moved in relation to the Head-Up 
Display (HUD) to represent local perturbations 
in pitch and yaw at the pilot station. The overall 
effect was that the out-the window scene 
appeared to bounce slightly both vertically and 
laterally in response to elastic excitation. These 
visual perturbations were typically on the order 
of + 0.1 degrees during maneuvers performed 
with dynamic aeroelastic effects. 

Parameterized Aeroelastic Characteristics 

The baseline aeroelastic model described 
above was parameterized to provide the ability to 
systematically vary several characteristics of the 
piloted simulation. These modifications allowed 
the impact of structural stiffening, modal 
damping, modal cancellation and visual cues to 
be evaluated from a piloted control standpoint. 

Variation of Structural Stiffness 

The variation of structural stiffness was 
represented by multiplying the frequencies of all 
six elastic modes by a given frequency ratio. The 
representation of structural stiffening by directly 
manipulating the model in this fashion is clearly 
approximate, but appeared sufficient to capture 
the basic effect. Frequency ratios of 1.0 
(baseline), 1.16 ("stifl" configuration), 1.36 
("stif2") and 1.60 ("stif3") were chosen. This 
selection produced first symmetric bending 
mode frequencies of 1.25 Hz, 1.45 Hz, 1.80 Hz 
and 2.0 Hz. Aeroelastic simulation models were 
produced for each of these conditions. 

Figure 3 illustrates the migration of the 
dynamic elastic poles that occurred as the 
stiffness level was varied. The total range of 



variation probably extends beyond the conditions 
that would be physically practical for this design 
because of the weight penalties associated with 
producing the stiffer structure. Aircraft weight 
was not increased in the simulation as the modal 
frequencies were increased. 

The "stifl" condition of 1.45 Hz for the first 
symmetric mode was considered to be most 
representative of the actual configuration, and so 
was used as the modified baseline configuration 
for all other parametric variations. Acceleration 
time histories from the motion-based simulation 
were used to verify that this parameterization 
method produced the desired effect. 



Configuration Frequency Stiffness 



Ratio 



Increase 



baseline 

stifl 
stif2 
stifS 



1.00 

1,16 
1.36 
1.60 



IstSYIUIode 
Frequency 



-35% 
~85% 

■Asm 



1 .25 Hz 

1 .45 Hz 
'i .80 Hi: 
2.00 Hi: 



0.10 



0.08 0.06 0.04 0.02 - damping ratio 



)^l ; Mode 4 (AN) 




Mode 3 (SY) :^.; P5 I Mode 2 (AN) 
Mode 1 (SY) n" 



Real Axis 



Figure 3. Migration of elastic mode poles with 
structural stiffness variation. 

Variation of Modal Damping 

The portion of the test matrix that varied the 
modal damping level actually targeted several 
issues. The first issue was the effect of the 
amount of damping that was applied to the 
dynamic elastic modes. Damping ratios of 0.07, 
0.15, and 0.30 were selected based on feedback 
obtained during an HSR Dynamic Aeroelastic 
Model Working Group meeting that was held in 
August of 1997. 

The second issue dealt with the frequency 
range of the modes to which damping was 
applied. In the first variation, damping was 
applied only to elastic modes with frequencies 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



less than 2 Hz. This range included the first 
symmetric mode at 1.45 Hz and the first 
antisymmetric mode at 1.62 Hz. In the second 
variation, damping was applied to elastic modes 
with frequencies less than 3 Hz. This range 
included the first two symmetric and the first two 
antisymmetric modes. The intent was to examine 
the effect of damping only the first fuselage 
bending modes as compared to the first and 
second fuselage harmonics shown in Figure 2. 

Figure 4 illustrates the migration of the 
dynamic elastic poles that occurred as increased 
damping was applied in these two frequency 
ranges. The frequency response plots shown in 
Figure 5 illustrate the attenuation of the elastic 
response to control inputs that results from the 
increased damping levels applied to modes with 
frequencies less than 3 Hz. Vertical acceleration 
at the pilot station (Nz ps) in response to elevator 
inputs and lateral acceleration at the pilot station 
(Ny ps) in response to rudder inputs are shown. 

An additional issue that was addressed by 
this portion of the test matrix was the relative 
importance of suppressing symmetric modes 
versus antisymmetric modes. In both frequency 
ranges, a damping ratio of 0.3 was applied to the 
symmetric modes alone (configurations "damp4" 
and "damp9") and then the antisymmetric modes 
alone (configurations "damp5" and "damplO"). 

Configuration Damping Ratio Modes 



Nz ps / Elevator (g/deg) 



stif1 



damps 
darinp4 



ilB^II 



nominal 

0,07 
0.15 
0.30 
0.30 

„„MM,„„„„ 



iliil 



SYI.AMI 
S¥1,AN1 
SYl, AN1 
SY1 

liiiiiiiils 
ilW«iiiil2 

■ilBIIII 



CO 1 = 

>< 

CD 

.C 5 
C35 
CD 



0.30 



0.15 ^ 0.07 ■ 
\ 



XX V, 



)0( 



Mode AN3 
Mode SYS 

Mode AN2 
i-Mode SY2 

Mode AN1 
HMode SY1 



Real Axis 

Figure 4. Migration of the dynamic elastic poles 
with damping level variation. 




Frequency, Hz 
Ny ps / Rudder (g/deg) 




Frequency, Hz 



Figure 5. Variation of frequency response to 
control inputs for various damping levels. 

A total of 10 parametric conditions were 
included in the damping portion of the test 
matrix. Again, since the model was directly 
manipulated to produce the desired damping 
levels, the representation of an active mode 
suppression system is approximate and lacks 
nonlinearities and additional filter dynamics that 
might be present in the actual system. 

Impact of Modal Cancellation 

Another portion of the test matrix examined 
the impact of modal cancellation. This term 
refers to the elimination of the control effector 
excitation of a particular elastic mode or modes. 
Such a modification allows the control system to 
pitch, roll, or yaw the aircraft without exciting 
the specifically targeted modes. It is intended to 
represent the effect that would be produced by 
using multiple control effectors in appropriate 
proportion (canard and elevator for instance) to 
pitch the vehicle without exciting the first 
fuselage bending mode. In the lateral case, it 
represents the use of rudder and chin fin in 
combination to avoid excitation of the first 
antisymmetric mode. 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



Configuration 


lUlodes Canceied 


lUlodes Damped 


stif1 


none 


none 


WIMmMIMMmli 


;:;:;:;:;:;:;:;:;:;:;:;:;:<s^^:;:;:;:^;sa:^:;:;:;:;:;:;:;:;:;:;:;: 






liiiiipiiiiiiiiiiii 






■M^i^^^^MMMM 


^if^^^i^i^il^l 


fSi|SSigSiSi5!|l 






iiilsiJlliiiiiiiiiil 







Nz ps / Elevator (g/deg) 




Frequency, Hz 4 

Ny ps / Rudder (g/deg) 




Frequency, Hz 



Figure 6. Variation in frequency response to 
control inputs for mode-canceled configurations. 

The effect of such a mode-canceling control 
system was approximated by eliminating the 
elements of the B matrix in the dynamic 
aeroelastic model that represent the control 
effector excitation inputs to the first symmetric 
and first antisymmetric fuselage bending modes. 
Mode-canceling configurations were generated 
for each of the three damping levels so that the 
test matrix would include direct comparisons of 
cancellation on and off for each of these 
damping conditions. 

Figure 6 illustrates the change in frequency 
responses that resulted from this modification. 
The plots show that the first symmetric and first 
antisymmetric modes can no longer be excited 
by control inputs for the canceled configurations. 
The modal dynamics remain, however, and are 
subject to excitation by turbulence or by 
coupling from other elastic modes. Cancellation 
was applied only to the first symmetric and first 
antisymmetric modes, since cancellation of 
higher fuselage harmonics would probably 



require more control effectors. This representa- 
tion is inherently approximate since it cannot 
depict the effect of nonlinearities that would be 
present in an actual mode suppression system 
such as control saturation or rate limiting. 

THE LANGLEY VISUAL/MOTION 
SIMULATOR 

The Langley Visual Motion Simulator 
(VMS), shown in Figure 7, uses a synergistic 
hexapod motion system. The motion platform 
provides up to +0.6 g acceleration cues vertically 
within a 5.75 foot travel envelope; lateral and 
longitudinal acceleration limits are similar." The 
angular limits of the platform are +30/— 20° pitch, 
+32° yaw, and +22° roll. (Positive pitch is in the 
nose up direction.) 



Linear Accelerations, g 

Surge: ± 0.6 Sway: ± 0.6 Heave: ± 0.8 
Angular Accelerations, deg/s ^ 

Roll: + 50 Pitch: + 50 Yaw: + 50 



1 u 

Ii ■ ^iP''*** *''*™^^^»»*j» 






linillliiiiiiiii ^ ^nBninniiiiiift^ 




Figure 7. Langley Visual/Motion Simulator 
(VMS) and its acceleration capabilities. 

The cockpit configuration at the time of this 
experiment included a left seat pilot's station and 
a right seat observer's station. A four-lever 
throttle quadrant was located between the two 
stations. A McFadden left-handed side stick 
controller was used for all maneuvers performed 
during this experiment. The pilot station 
included an armrest that was adjustable to 
provide appropriate forearm support for the left 
arm of the evaluation pilot. 

Refinements were made to the motion drive 
algorithms to improve the suitability of the 
simulator for representing the aeroelastic motion 
cues. The motion commands produced by the 
dynamic elastic portion of the aircraft model 
generally bypassed the motion washout filters to 
avoid any attenuation or delay of the elastic 
vibration cues. 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



Figure 8 was taken from a 1973 report 
which documented the frequency response 
capabilities of the Langley VMS Motion 
facility." The input/output amplitude ratios for 
vertical (z) and lateral (y) sinusoidal inputs of 1.8 
inches are shown, along with the resulting phase 
lag, for input frequencies from 0.1 to 12 rad/sec. 
Also shown on these plots is the frequency range 
of the dynamic elastic modes that were included 
in the earlier (LaRC.l) assessment.^ 
o 

l.S| 1 — I I I i iii i NASA TND-7349, 1973 












O 










1 ni 


t=#= 


-Q- 


H ha 


2 






JM 










\-\^ 


=^ 


■=ib ~ 


'! 




















_"!::: 












n + 1.8 in p 

O 1 H in n 


3aks~^ 










.? 


-J 


u 


nil 


m-l 











iO. so. 











CD 












ox 

- ny 










1 








■q 










t 


t-H 


h» 


^^'i 




^ 


^>---i 


r 













r 












frequency, rad/sec 



1.25 ■■ 2.82 S 



Figure 8. Frequency response of Langley 

Visual/Motion Simulator as documented in 

NASA TN D-7349, 1973. 

The dynamic elastic portions of the model 
caused the motion platform to operate at the 
threshold of its capabilities. The simulator 
provides reasonable performance (0.8 amplitude 
ratio vertically and 1.0 amplitude ratio laterally, 
with about 15 deg of phase loss) at the lowest 
structural mode frequencies (1.25 and 1.39 Hz). 
The next two dynamic elastic modes (at 2.0 and 
2.1 Hz) lie marginally within the motion 
platform's capabilities with about 25 deg of 
phase loss. Based on cockpit accelerometer time 
histories, the facility appeared to provide a 
reasonable representation of the modes that were 
included in the dynamic aeroelastic model. 

EVALUATION SCALES 

The familiar Cooper-Harper rating (CHR) 
scale was used during pilot evaluations of the 
parametric aeroelastic configurations. After 



completing a sufficient number of runs to rate a 
particular configuration, the test pilot's 
evaluations and comments were recorded. The 
pilot's task performance, in terms of touchdown 
parameters or flight-director tracking accuracy, 
was provided on a cockpit display immediately 
following each run. This information provided 
an indication of whether desired or adequate 
performance tolerances had been achieved, thus 
helping the pilot to navigate through the Cooper- 
Harper decision tree. 

In addition to Cooper-Harper Ratings, the 
pilots were asked to provide an assessment of the 
extent to which dynamic elastic effects adversely 
impacted their control inputs and ride quality. 
The rating scales for these assessments are 
shown in Figure 9 and Figure 10. 



DASE INFLUENCE ON 
RIDE QUALITY 



RQR 



Cockpit vibrations do not impact ride 
quality. 



Cocl<pit vibrations are perceptible but not 
objectionable - no improvement necessary. 



Cockpit vibrations are mildly objectionable - 
improvement desired. 



Cockpit vibrations are moderately 
objectionable - improvement warranted. 



Cockpit vibrations are highly objectionable - 
improvement required. 



Cockpit vibrations cause abandonment 
of task - improvement required. 



Figure 9. Evaluation scale for dynamic 
aeroelastic influence on ride quality. 

DASE INFLUENCE ON PILOT'S 
CONTROL INPUTS 



CIR 



Pilot does not alter control inputs as a 
result of aircraft flexibility. 



Pilot intentionally modifies control inputs 
to avoid excitation of flexible modes. 



Cockpit vibrations impact precision of 
voluntary control inputs. 



Cockpit vibrations cause occasional 
involuntary control inputs. 



Cockpit vibrations cause frequent 
involuntary control inputs. 



Cockpit vibrations cause sustained involun- 
tary control inputs or loss of control. 



Figure 10. Evaluation scale for dynamic 
aeroelastic influence on pilot's control inputs. 

These supplemental rating scales were 
designed for this experiment and are intended to 
target the acceptability of a particular aeroelastic 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



configuration apart from deficiencies tiiat tiie 
pilot may perceive in tiie nominal flight control 
system. For instance, if a pilot awards the 
landing task a CHR of 4, but provides a DASE 
Control Influence Rating (CIR) of 1 and a DASE 
Ride Quality Rating (RQR) of 1, then we might 
conclude that the deficient CHR is due to pilot 
dissatisfaction with the baseline flight control 
system, and not with the dynamic aeroelastic 
characteristics of that particular configuration. 

The CIR Scale shown in Figure 10 bears 
further discussion. The scale was developed 
based on pilot comments from the earlier 
(LaRC.l) piloted assessment of dynamic 
aeroelastic effects. Pilots sometimes indicated 
that they were "reducing the gain" or "backing 
off on their control inputs to avoid excitation of 
the elastic modes. Several time histories from 
the LaRC.l test suggested that the cockpit 
vibration environment had sometimes corrupted 
the precision of pilot control inputs, or even 
caused occasional involuntary stick inputs that 
have been referred to as biodynamic feedthruj' 
The Control Influence Rating Scale was 
developed to specifically address this issue apart 
from the pilot comfort or ride quality issue. Pilot 
feedback was incorporated during the design of 
the CIR and RQR scales prior to this experiment. 

EVALUATION MANEUVERS 

The tasks that were evaluated during this 
investigation included an up-and-away flight 
director tracking task, a nominal approach and 
landing, and a lateral-offset landing task. The 
offset landing was the most challenging of the 
three evaluation maneuvers. This task was 
initiated at an altitude of 750 ft with a 300-ft 
lateral offset and 580 ft longitudinal offset of the 
instrument landing system (ILS) approach glide- 
slope from the nominal approach path. The pilot 
was directed to fly down the offset glideslope to 
an altitude of 250 ft. At this point, the test 
conductor called "Correct," and the pilot 
executed a lateral correction and vertical descent 
to re-acquire the runway centerline. The pilot 
then executed a flare and attempted to achieve 
touchdown within the tolerances required for 
desired performance. The task required an 
aggressive lateral maneuver due to the low 
altitude at which the correction was initiated. 
The lateral offset landing is a standard evaluation 
maneuver used in Calspan's Total In-Flight 
Simulator (I'lFS) aircraft flight tests. 

The intent of the flight director tracking task 
was to cause the pilot to exercise a wide range of 
control input frequencies. The flight director 
presented on the pilot's HUD was driven with a 



signal containing segments from various 
maneuvers that had been examined in previous 
HSCT simulations. These segments included a 
localizer capture, a glideslope capture, a 
descending turn, and a rapid pull-up as 
performed during an aborted landing task. Flight 
path and track angle command segments from 
these tasks were combined with varying order 
and sign to produce a flight director behavior 
that was not easily anticipated, but was still 
representative of actual flight maneuver tasks. 

Each of the parametric aeroelastic 
configurations were evaluated using each of the 
3 maneuver tasks described above. All tasks 
were performed in the presence of mild 
turbulence that was produced using a Dryden 
spectra turbulence model. 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

Conflguration Preference Ranking 

Figure 11 presents a ranking of the 20 
parametric aeroelastic configurations based on 
the average of the DASE Control Influence 
Ratings and Ride Quality Ratings that were 
assigned by all the pilots for all three maneuver 
tasks performed with a given configuration. 
Cooper-Harper Ratings did not seem to 
discriminate among configurations as clearly as 
the CIR and RQR ratings which specifically 
targeted DASE effects, and their impact has not 
been included in this ranking. 



< 




stiffening 



D Extremes V 

Damped SY vs. Damped AN 
Standard Deviation 



Pilot Preference Ranl<ing 

Figure 1 1 . Pilot preference ranking of 
configurations based on DASE ratings. 

The ranking exhibits a number of trends that 
would appear to make intuitive sense. First, the 
baseline aeroelastic configuration (baseO), with 
no structural stiffening or active mode 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



suppression, was ranked as the worst 
configuration. Also reassuringly, the rigid 
(quasi-static effects only) configuration without 
any dynamic aeroelastic effects (qsaeO) was 
ranked the best. 

Differentiation among configurations is 
greatest at the start of the ranking, in the most 
desirable region, and tapers off to near-ties at the 
undesirable end of the spectrum. The stiffened 
cases without active mode suppression were all 
ranked poorly, suggesting that this approach was 
not effective at reducing the impact of cockpit 
vibration on piloting tasks. The configuration 
with the greatest number of modes damped (4) 
at the greatest level (0.3) and with modal 
cancellation (canc4) was rated the best of the 
flexible configurations, but was still very 
noticeably different from the rigid aircraft 
(qsaeO). The next-best case was identical to this 
one with the exception of damping level, which 
was reduced to 0.15 (canc3). The fourth ranked 
configuration had 0.3 damping on 4 modes, but 
had no cancellation (damp8). 

The order of ranking provides some 
interesting insights regarding potential trades 
between mode-canceling control and additional 
damping. Another insight is gained when we 
compare the rankings of the configuration which 
had only symmetric modes damped (damp9, 
ranked 18th) with the configuration which had 
only antisymmetric modes damped (damp 10, 
ranked 9th). It is clear that the pilots found the 
undamped antisymmetric motions to be more 
problematic than undamped symmetric motions. 

A comparison of the dispO configuration 
with the dampl configuration indicates that the 
elimination of vibration-induced perturbations in 
the visual scene provided little or no benefit 
according to this ranking. These configurations 
were identical in all respects other than the lack 
of vibration-induced perturbations in the out-the- 
window scene for the dispO configuration. 

Ride Quality Ratings vs. Pilot Preference 

The ranking in the previous figure provides 
insight regarding the order of pilot preference for 
the 20 parametric configurations, but does not 
indicate the point in the ranking at which 
dynamic elastic characteristics make the 
configuration unacceptable. Figure 12 shows the 
average Ride Quality Rating assigned by the 
pilots for each configuration plotted against the 
Pilot Preference Ranking from the previous 
figure. The RQR assigned by the pilots is shown 
adjacent to the ride quality axis, along with 
shading to indicate the transition from accept- 
able to marginal to unacceptable configuration 



characteristics. On the basis of the average 
ratings, the first four configurations (qsaeO, 
canc4, canc3, and damp8) appear to be in or on 
the border of the acceptable ride quality region. 




Aemptabt0 



Marginal 






Unacceptable 



12 3 4 5 6 7 



10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 



Best 



Pilot Preference Ranking 



Figure 12. Average ride quality rating vs. 
preference ranking of parametric configurations. 

Also shown on the plot are the maximum 
and minimum ride quality ratings assigned to the 
configurations. On the basis of the maximum 
rating, even the most highly mode-suppressed 
configuration (canc4) provides only marginally 
acceptable ride quality at the pilot station. It 
should be noted that these ratings were provided 
during tasks that were performed with mild 
turbulence, and that the ride quality acceptability 
will probably vary with turbulence level. This 
plot provides a subjective basis for the judgment 
of an acceptable level of mode suppression from 
the pilot's ride-quality perspective. 

Control Influence Ratings vs. Pilot Preference 

This chart provides an analogous ranking to 
the previous chart in terms of the Control 
Influence Rating instead of Ride Quality Rating. 
The CIR assigned by the pilots is shown adjacent 
to the control influence axis, along with shading 
to indicate the transition from acceptable to 
marginal to unacceptable configuration charac- 
teristics. Based on discussions with the test 
pilots prior to the experiment, it was decided that 
the unacceptable threshold should be placed at 
the point at which cockpit vibrations impact the 
precision of voluntary control inputs. 

On the basis of the average control influence 
ratings, the first four configurations (qsaeO, 
canc4, canc3, damp8) again lie within the 
acceptable region. Each of the acceptable elastic 
configurations applies a damping level of 0.3 to 
the first two symmetric and first two 
antisymmetric modes. On the basis of the 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



maximum rating, tiie most iiigiily mode- 
suppressed configuration (canc4) again lies in 
tiie marginal control influence region. 



qsa&Q 



Acceptable 




Unacceptable 



a 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 

Best Pilot Preference Ranking m 

Figure 13. Average control influence rating vs. 
preference ranking for parametric configurations 

The border between acceptable and marginal 
control influence on this plot is somewhat 
arbitrary, since it might be perfectly acceptable 
for the pilots to intentionally modify their control 
inputs to avoid excitation of the dynamic elastic 
modes as long as their ability to precisely control 
the aircraft is in no way hindered by this 
practice. However, recorded time histories of 
pilot stick deflections indicate that pilots were 
sometimes unaware that cockpit vibrations were 
in fact impacting their control inputs. 

The occurrence of biodynamic feedthru of 
cockpit vibrations through the pilot's arm and 
back into the control stick is involuntary and 
therefore may indeed be unnoticed by the pilot in 
minor instances. Use of the Control Influence 
Rating scale shown in the figure requires the 
pilot to be aware of the occurrence, and therefore 
the CIR ratings may sometimes be optimistic. 
There were, however, a number of profound 
instances of frequent or sustained biodynamic 
feedthru of cockpit vibrations into the control 
stick as indicated by the maximum CIR ratings 
shown on the figure. Frequent or sustained 
feedthru of cockpit vibrations through the pilot's 
arm and back into the stick will be referred to as 
Biodynamic Coupling (BDC) in this report. 

Example of Biodynamic Coupling Incident 

Figure 14 presents a power-spectrum 
analysis of a lateral offset landing run in which 
the pilot experienced biodynamic coupling while 
flying the stifl configuration with no additional 
damping or cancellation. The time history at the 
top of the figure shows lateral cockpit 



20 

isrst 



accelerations in g's (dashed line) and lateral stick 
deflections (solid line). Although the units on 
the two quantities differ, the scaling of +1 is 
convenient since it represents the maximum 
throw for lateral stick deflection and since lateral 
g's commanded by the simulation remained in 
the range of + 1 g. The plot in the lower left of 
the figure shows the power spectral density of 
lateral accelerations and lateral stick deflections 
applied to a 6-second segment of the time history 
(from 37 to 43 seconds). 

The frequency spectrum of the pilot's 
voluntary control inputs during this period lies 
primarily below 1 Hz. The frequency spectrum 
of the lateral accelerations at the pilot station 
shows some content at the first antisymmetric 
mode frequency of 1.6 Hz and the second 
antisymmetric mode frequency of 2.5 Hz due to 
minor turbulence excitation of these structural 
modes. (Recall that the frequencies shown in 
Figure 2 were multiplied by a factor of 1.16 to 
produce the "stifl" modified baseline.) 

Time History: Offset Landing f^aneuver Tasii, stif 1 Configuration 



Lateral Stick Deflection (±t) s^,^; 


^ ! Si - 




1 
I 


1 1 ' 


Lafera 


Cockpit Acces i,n-id (g; ■ 


'W 1 i''' 'l'" - 


-, 


- . . :■ . . ;.. . 


:.U 




Frequency, Hz 

Voluntary Inputs 



Frequency, Hz 

Input Contamination 



Figure 14. Power-spectrum analysis of 
biodynamic coupling incident for pilot B. 

The power spectrum of a later 6-second 
segment of the time history (from 41 to 47 
seconds) indicates the bulk of the pilot's input 
spectrum remains below 1 Hz, but it also shows 
some frequency content of the pilot's inputs in 
the range of the lateral elastic modes. Once the 
pilot begins to move the stick at the resonant 
frequency of the first antisymmetric structural 
mode there is tremendous potential for the lateral 
mode to be excited by the control inputs, 
producing larger lateral accelerations at the pilot 
station. These lateral accelerations can move the 
pilot's frame in a fashion which produces 
involuntary control inputs that further excite the 
structural mode. 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



The third power spectrum plot shown in 
Figure 14 is applied to a 6-second segment of the 
time history from 45 to 51 seconds. Here, the 
spectrum of the pilot's stick input exhibits a 
pronounced resonant peak at the frequency of the 
first antisymmetric structural mode. It is highly 
unlikely that the pilot's inputs in this frequency 
range are voluntary. Video footage of the cockpit 
interior along with footage of the pilot's hand on 
the sidestick depicts a strong correlation between 
the involuntary motions of the pilot's upper body 
with his control inputs. A clear change in the 
character of the pilot's stick inputs is apparent in 
the time history, as lateral accelerations feed 
through the pilot's frame and back into the 
control stick. The pilot would break the involun- 
tary coupling loop if he released the stick, but he 
is in the midst of the flare and therefore 
unwilling to do so. In this instance the run was 
terminated by the co-pilot who hit the simulator 
"kill switch" due to the abusive ride quality. 

This type of adverse biodynamic interaction 
between pilot and aircraft dynamics is not 
entirely unprecedented. An investigation 
performed at Dryden Flight Research Center 
identified a similar phenomenon involving the 
use of a sidestick control input in the F-16XL 
which resulted in roll ratcheting during abrupt 
high-rate rolling maneuvers.^ The researchers 
produced an analytical model of the coupled 
system including dynamics of the pilot's frame 
and the control stick. The dynamics involved 
appeared somewhat similar to those encountered 
during the incidents of lateral biodynamic 
coupling in the present experiment. Dryden 
researchers identified a lateral resonant fre- 
quency of approximately 2.1 Hz for their 
combined pilot/control stick dynamic system. 

Biodynamic Coupling Incidents for 3 Pilots 

A number of incidents of biodynamic 
coupling were encountered when test pilots flew 
the HSCT with no active suppression of the 
lateral structural modes. At least three of the six 
test pilots encountered biodynamic coupling 
during some portion of the experiment. Pilots 
appeared most likely to couple with the 
configurations that had a P' antisymmetric mode 
frequency in the range of 1.4 Hz to 2.2 Hz. 
Examples for pilots B, E, and C are shown in 
Figure 15. Power spectra of the pilots' stick 
inputs for each of these cases indicate a resonant 
peak at the frequency of the first antisymmetric 
elastic mode (mode ANl in Figure 2). 

Encounters with BDC were often catastro- 
phic in terms their impact on the pilot's control 
of the aircraft. Note that Pilot C experienced 



coupling with the stif3 configuration, which has 
its first antisymmetric mode at a higher 
frequency than the stifl baseline (2.2 Hz instead 
of 1.6 Hz.) The time histories shown for pilots B 
and E are for the damp 9 configuration, which 
actually applies 0.3 damping to the symmetric 
modes but leaves the antisymmetric modes 
undamped. The presence of significant damping 
for symmetric modes did little to prevent the 
coupling since the lateral axis is far more prone 
to BDC for a number of reasons. 

First, the pilot's seat tends to support the 
body longitudinally and vertically, but not 
laterally, so side-to-side accelerations are more 
difficult to resist. Furthermore, symmetric 
modes produce vertical accelerations while the 
stick input is fore and aft, so there is less 
tendency for the pilot's body motions to feed 
directly into the stick. However, antisymmetric 
modes produce lateral accelerations which feed 
directly into lateral stick deflections. A sidestick 
control input device was used in this experiment. 
The susceptibility of various control input 
devices to biodynamic feedthru is a potential 
topic for future investigations and is a factor that 
clearly should be taken into consideration during 
design of the cockpit controls. 



Power Spectra 



Pilot B, 
damp 9 

CIR: 4 
RQR: 6 
CHR: 8 



Pilot E, 
damp 9 

CIR: 4 
RQR: 5 
CHR: 7 



Pilot C, 
stif 3 

CIR: 5 
RQR: 5 
CHR: 8 



Time History Segments 





^-A#W| 



1 2 3 4 40 
frequency, Hz 



Figure 15. Examples of biodynamic coupling 
incidents for pilots B, E, and C. 

One element of the control system that is 
implicated in the occurrence of BDC is the 
aileron-rudder interconnect (ARI). This is the 
control path whereby lateral stick displacements 
produce rudder deflections in proportion to 
aileron deflections to achieve turn coordination. 
But it is also the path whereby lateral cockpit 
vibrations may feed directly through the pilot/ 
stick dynamics and back into rudder deflections, 
further exciting lateral elastic modes. It is 



52 



10 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



possible that some provision may be included in 
the design of the ARI to interrupt or prevent 
biodynamic coupling. 

Structural stiffening did not provide relief 
from biodynamic coupling for the pilots who 
appeared most prone to this type of interaction. 
Damping levels of 0.15 applied to the first 
symmetric and first antisymmetric modes 
appeared sufficient to prevent biodynamic coupl- 
ing for all pilots involved in the experiment. 

The potential hazard posed by biodynamic 
coupling would seem to suggest that certain 
elements of an HSCT active mode suppression 
control system should be designated as flight 
critical. However, a final judgment regarding 
this issue should be made on the basis of 
evaluations performed with a higher fidelity 
dynamic aeroelastic model of the final aircraft 
configuration. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS 

A piloted simulation experiment has been 
conducted in the Langley Visual/Motion 
Simulator facility to address the impact of 
dynamic aeroelastic effects on flying qualities of 
a High-Speed Civil Transport. The intent of the 
experiment was to generate information 
regarding measures that may be taken to reduce 
the impact of aircraft flexibility on piloting tasks. 
Potential solutions that were examined consisted 
of increasing the frequency of the elastic modes, 
increasing the damping of various combinations 
of elastic modes, elimination of control effector 
excitation of the lowest frequency elastic modes, 
and elimination of visual cues associated with 
the elastic modes. A total of 20 parametric 
aeroelastic configurations were each evaluated 
by six test pilots. 

During the investigation, several profound 
incidents of biodynamic coupling were 
encountered in which cockpit vibrations due to 
elastic modes fed back into the control stick 
through involuntary motions of the pilot's upper 
body and arm. The phenomenon is evidenced by 
a resonant peak in the power spectrum of the 
pilot's stick inputs at the frequency of one of the 
dynamic elastic modes. The tendency to couple 
with structural modes in this fashion appears to 
increase when pilots tighten their grip on the 
stick, often in preparation for the flare as the 
aircraft nears the runway. 

Three of the six evaluation pilots 
encountered biodynamic coupling during the 
experiment. All of the pilots indicated that 
vibrations had impacted the precision of their 
inputs at some point in the experiment. Pilots 



were far more prone to experience adverse 
coupling with antisymmetric modes rather than 
symmetric modes. The severity of the 
biodynamic coupling phenomenon may have 
implications for control stick design and for the 
flight criticality of an active mode suppression 
control system. 

The results of the investigation indicate that 
structural stiffening and compensation of the 
visual display were of little benefit in alleviating 
the impact of elastic dynamics on the piloting 
tasks, while increased damping and elimination 
of control effector excitation of the lowest 
frequency modes both offered great improve- 
ments when applied in sufficient degree. 

Damping levels of 0.15 applied to the first 
symmetric and first antisymmetric modes 
appeared sufficient to prevent biodynamic coupl- 
ing for all pilots who participated in the 
experiment. When damping levels of 0.3 were 
applied to the first two symmetric and first two 
antisymmetric modes, average pilot ratings 
indicated that an acceptable configuration was 
achieved. 



REFERENCES 

^ Jackson, E. Bruce; Raney, David L; Hahne, 
David; Derry, Stephen D., NASA Langley 
Research Center, and Glaab, Louis J., Lockheed- 
Martin Engineering Services Company: 
"(LaRC.l) Pilot Briefing Guide", NASA TM, 
November 1996. 

^ Waszak, Martin R.; Schmidt, David K.: 
"Analysis of Flexible Aircraft Longitudinal 
Dynamics and Handling Qualities, Volumes I 
and II." NASA Contractor Report 177943, Grant 
NAGl-254, June 1985. 

^ Ashkenas, I.L.; Magdaleno, R.E.; McRuer, 
D.T.: "Flight Control and Analysis Methods for 
Studying Flying and Ride Qualities of Flexible 
Transport Aircraft". Systems Technology, Inc.; 
Contract NAS 1-1847, NASA Contractor Report 
172201, August 1983. 

" Parrish, Russell V.; Dieudonne, James E.; 
Martin, Dennis J.; Copeland, James L.: 
"Compensation Based on Linearized Analysis 
for a Six-Degree-of-Freedom Motion Simulator", 
NASA TN D-7349, 1973. 

^ Smith, John W.; Montgomery, Terry: 
"Biomechanically Induced and Controller- 
Coupled Oscillations Experienced on the F- 
16XL Aircraft During Rolling Maneuvers", 
NASA TM 4752, Dryden Flight Research 
Center, Edwards, CA, 1996. 



11 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



