JPL REUSE PROGRAM 


N90- 14795 

^ ^ 


James W. Brown 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 


The goal of the JPL reuse activity is to develop a quantitative understanding of the factors 
which encourage or inhibit software reuse, and of productivity improvements achievable 
through reuse. The primary activity is the measurement of parameters relevant to reuse in the 
environment of actual projects. The program has three objectives: (1) to develop a model to 
allow assessment of competing reuse techniques, (2) to extend reuse from the unit to the sub- 
system level, and (3) to expand from specific applications to a broader application domain. 
Application domains, which apply to all interplanetary projects, include Mission Operations, 
Science Information Systems, Flight Software, and Simulations. The program is targeting all 
phases and activities of the life cycle and a full range of software products. The approach will 
be both experimental (observe, hypothesize and evaluate) and constructive (introduce new tools 
and techniques). The primary target projects are Deep Space Network activities - the Ground 
Facilities facility upgrade, the Network Operations Control Center upgrade, and the Signal Pro- 
cessing Center. This is the first group of closely related projects being done in Ada at JPL. A 
"reuse base" will be developed initially by classifying potentially reusable components from 
one project; it will be used and expanded with additional projects. 


55 



GOAL 


GOAL: Improve the software development process by application of advanced 

reuse technology 


OBJECTIVES: • Develop a model to allow assessment of competinq 

techniques for reuse 

■ Improve leverage by extending reuse from the unit to the 
subsystem level 


• Expand from specific applications to broader application 
domain 


SCOPE - APPLICATION DOMAINS 


Mission Operations (planning, commanding, navigation, tracking and data 
acquisition for unmanned spacecraft) 


• Science Information Systems (data management, level conversion, 
visualization, analysis and modeling) 


• Flight Software (autonomous spacecraft operation, instrument software) 

• Simulations (spacecraft operations, physical processes, command/control 
problems) 


56 


SCOPE - FULL LIFE CYCLE - ALL PHASES AND ACTIVITIES 


Investigate impact of reuse on: 

■ Requirements Analysis 

• Design 

• Implementation 

• Integration 

■ Test 

• Maintenance 

• Inter-project relationships 

SCOPE - FULL RANGE OF SOFTWARE PRODUCTS 


Plans and Procedures (e.g. software management plans, configuration 
management plans, integration and test plans) 

Requirements and Constraints 

Designs 

Code (e.g. 3GL, 4GL, execution procedures, data tables) 

Test cases and test data 
Development tools and environments 
Run-time data (e.g. file labels, digital maps) 


57 



APPROACH 


CHARACTERISTICS 

* evaluate^* 3 * ^°^ serve ( ex P* ora tory, descriptive), hypothesize, 

• Constructive (introduce new tools and techniques rather than survey 

natural selection) 1 


STEPS 

• Identify currently available reuse technologies 

• Select a model that seems likely to improve software development 

• Construct a "reuse base" based on the model 

• Observe (measure) utilization patterns by actual development projects 
■ Revise and refine model based on observations 

• Recommend tools and techniques for effective reuse 

TARGET PROJECTS 

Deep Space Network 

• Ground Communications Facility Upgrade (GCF) 

• Network Operations Control Center Upgrade (NOCC) 

■ Signal Processing Center (SPC) 

Others (TBD) 


58 



BACKGROUND 


Phase 


Phase 


Products available from previous work: 

■ Theoretical model 

• Technology assessment 

■ Metrics evaluation 

• Behavioral design for reuse base 


SCHEDULE 


(FY89) 

Determine user needs (GCF); acquire and analyze components 
Design reuse base 

• Implement reuse base 

• Analyze reuse and report 

> (FY90-91) 

• Determine user needs (NOCC, SPC) 

■ Identify new suppliers 

• Modify reuse base design 

■ Implement modifications 

■ Monitor reuse; add users; add suppliers; adapt reuse base 


59 



JPL REUSE PROGRAM 



60 















