Submission to 

Remote Sensing of Environment 
Speeial Issue 

Fine Spatial Resolution Land Observations: IKONOS Example 



Acquisition of Earth Science Remote Sensing Observations from Commercial Sources: 
Lessons Learned from the Space Imaging IKONOS Example 

Running Title - IKONOS: Lessons Learned 



Samuel N. Go ward 
John R. G. Townshend 

Department of Geography 

2181 LeFrak Hall 

University of Maryland 

College Park, MD 20242 



Vicki Zanoni 
Fritz Policelli 



Tnm Ctanlmr 

.1 CP4AA U S-iHAfiV- > 



Earth Science Applications Division 

NASA Stennis Space Center 
Stennis Space Center, MS 39529 USA 

Robert Ryan 

Kara Holekamp 

Lauren Underwood 

Mary Pagnutti 

Rose Fletcher 

Remote Sensing Directorate, 

Lockheed Martin Space Operations - Stennis Programs, 

John C. Stennis Space Center, MS 39529 USA 



Revised Based on Reviews 
April 30, 2003 



Lessons Learned from NASA Scientific Data Purchase IKONOS 
Goward, Zanoni, et al. 

ABSTRACT 

Over the last decade, NASA and other federal agencies have been increasingly encouraged to 
explore commercial sources of land remote sensing data, rather than pursuing government- 
funded sources of these measurements (Executive, 2003). The science and applications users 
have been skeptical of this move to commercial sources of observations both because of 
uncertainty over the capabilities of the private sector and the unsatisfactory outcomes of previous 
efforts to commercialize satellite-acquired land remote sensing observations. In an effort to more 
fully explore the potential of commercial remotely sensed land data sources, the NASA Earth 
Science Enterprise (ESE) implemented an experimental Scientific Data Purchase (SDP) that 
solicited bids from the private sector to meet ESE-user data needs. The SDP activity spanned 
nearly 5 years, and supplied many US and international researchers with sources of land remote 
sensing observations that had not been previously available. The images from the Space 
Imaging IKONOS system provided a particularly good match to the current ESE missions such 
as Terra and Landsat 7 and therefore serve as focal point in this analysis. 

Throughout the SDP process, there have been many lessons learned concerning interactions 
between US industry, government agencies and the science user community. . The specifics of 
the Space Imaging IKONOS experience under the NASA SDP are most valuable with respect to 
possible future uses of commercial vendors to supply NASA ESE user needs for space-acquired 
land observations. Areas where valuable lessons were learned included the technical, scientific, 
proprietary, and management aspects of the interactions. As this activity has evolved, user 
connaence in me icunniuai aim. oiacumic 4u.a111.1to ui mc uvunuo uu/oouiv/uu/uid ">" mvivuovu 
substantially. There are still areas where further progress could be achieved, with respect to 
proprietary and management aspects of scientific commercial data buys. 

To date, the NASA scientific and applications users who have examined the IKONOS imagery 
have found the data to be of high quality, providing substantial value to their specific pursuits. 
They have found that the novel attributes of IKONOS, particularly in the spatio-temporal domain 
have introduced new analysis challenges not previously experienced with EOS. sensors such as 
Landsat and MODIS. The technical qualities of the observations have been substantially 
improved during the SDP activity as a result of independent validation and verification by the 
Joint Agency Commercial Imagery Evaluation (JACffi) of the IKONOS observations. 

The experience gained from the Space Imaging IKONOS SDP activity, suggests that US private 
sector is technically capable of meeting the needs of NASA ESE science and application users . 
The future success of such interactions between industry, government and users appears to be far 
more dependent on the organizational and legal aspects of such arrangements than technical 
capabilities of the data providers. 



Lessons Learned from NASA Scientific Data Purchase IKONOS 
Goward, Zanoni, et al. 



1. Introduction 



The NASA Scientific Data Purchase (SDP) experiment to acquire scientific-quality satellite- 
acquired remotely sensed Earth observations from private industry suppliers, conducted under 
the NASA Scientific Data Purchase (SDP), has provided valuable and important lessons, which 
will prove useful for the potential future success of commercial remote sensing systems in 
satisfying the needs of US terrestrial scientists. 

Of the private industry vendors selected for the SDP (Birk et al., 2003), Space Imaging presents 
the best case study for describing how well US industry may be able to fulfill the role, 
historically filled by US government laboratories (particularly the NASA Goddard Space Flight 
Center), of supplying space-acquired remotely sensed land measurements. The experience with 
the Space Imaging IKONOS system, launched successfully in September 1999, now 
encompasses over 4 years and provides a useful foundation to consider what processes have 
worked, and which might be improved. 1 

2. The Space Imaging IKONOS Mission 

Details concerning the specifics of the Space Imaging IKONOS observatory are covered 
elsewhere in the issue (Dial et al., 2003). From the perspective of the NASA Earth Science 
Enterprise (ESE) community, the following are considered interesting characteristics of the 
IKONOS observatory: 

The four multispectral bands closely approximate three of the visible and the near infrared 
s"ectral measurements of the Landsat Thematic Ma^^er ^T]VD the Earth Observine Svstem 



(EOS) Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER) and the 
French HRV-SPOT systems (Fig. 1, Table 1). The red and near infrared measurements are also 
comparable to red and near infrared spectral measurements from the Advanced Very High 
Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR), the EOS Moderate resolution Imaging Spectrometer 
(MODIS) as well as the French VEGETATION instrument as well as several other'sensors (see 
table 1 in (Townshend & Justice, 2002)) 

• The pixel area of the multispectral measurements is more than a factor 50 improvement 
over Landsat 7 (16m 2 versus 900m 2 ), and the lm panchromatic band is over 200 times 
better than the 15m-pan band on Landsat 7. This substantial increase in spatial resolution 
helps provide the types of detailed spatial measurements needed to assess scaling issues 
encountered when moving from local to global-scale observatories (Woodcock & 
Strahler, 1987) (Fig. 2) 



It is interesting to note that a portion of Space Imaging 's heritage originates in EOSAT, the corporation that was 
created to commercially operate Landsats 4 & 5, as well as build, launch and operate Landsat 6. For many reasons, 
this earlier Landsat commercialization was not successful, and the Landsat mission was returned to government 
management in 1992 (Sheffer, E.J. 1994) 



Lessons Learned from NASA Scientific Data Purchase LKONOS 
Goward, Zanoni, et al. 

• The radiometric precision of the IKONOS sensor, with its 1 1-bit analog to digital data 
conversion, is a factor of 8 improvement compared to the 8 bit radiometry for Landsat 7's 
ETM+, providing a comparable improvement in radiometric measurement precision that 
IKONOS supplies spatially. Potentially, this combination of radiometric precision and 
spatial detail could provide the high quality means needed to validate the lower resolution 
measurements from Landsat and other systems. 

• The orbital equatorial crossing time is also nearly the same as Landsat, Terra, EO-1 and 
SPOT, although the IKONOS system's nadir, repeat frequency is much lower at ~ 140 
days, a necessary trade-off for the increased spatial resolution of the IKONOS system. 
With platform agility it can revisit most locations with 3 days within ±30° from nadir 
/Dial e t ni 2^3"* 

As a result, IKONOS supplies an important step in multi-scale land remote sensing, one that is 
most closely associated with field measurements and ground "truth". 

The similarities in spectral measurements and orbit that exist between IKONOS and other 
systems, combined with the increased radiometric precision and spatial resolution of the 
IKONOS satellite, make it a valuable tool in comparing and evaluating higher and lower 
resolution systems. Thus, the IKONOS images offer significant potential in providing the 
validation and local assessments needed to support regional and global scale studies of the Earth 
system, using Landsat, SPOT, ASTER, MODIS, AVHRR and VEGETATION as the primary 
observatories. 

3. Science Community Perspective on Commercially-Acquired Scientific Measurements 

The significance of the IKONOS data purchase for the U.S. science community can best be 
appreciated from the context of their previous experiences with the U.S. (foreign) private sector 
U.S. scientists have noted several aspects of commercial observations that might limit their 
value for scientific query (National Research Council, 2001, 2002). These can be broadly 
categorized as follows: 

• Technical: The research community believes that the commercial remote sensing sector 
is targeting markets where the visual quality of the imagery is valued more highly than 
the spectro-radiometric precision of the pixel level measurements. Experience with 
sensors such as the Landsat Return Beam Vidicon (RB V) and the NOAA Advanced Very 
High Resolution Radiometer have demonstrated how limited observatory quality can 
impact the scientific quality of remotely sensed measurements (Teillet & Holben, 1993). 
Because scientists and engineers consider commercial systems "black boxes" containing 
many unknowns and therefore of uncertain value, they tend to be skeptical of using 
measurements from such systems. 



• 



Scientific: Each new observatory brings new capabilities and new challenges. How best 
to exploit such systems requires a significant investment in time and resources. However 
researchers must continue to make successful progress on their current research goals, if 
they are to have any hope of winning renewed funding for their research based. 
Consequently it is frequently difficult for research teams to dedicate the effort needed to 
develop applications of new observatories without targeted support for these efforts. 



Lessons Learned from NASA Scientific Data Purchase LKONOS 
Goward, Zanoni, et al. 

• Proprietary: Commercial providers often reluctant or even unable to reveal details 
concerning sensor design, acquisition procedures, or pre-processing of imagery. In the 
commercial marketplace, proprietary advantages may add significant revenue potential. 
Added to this profit concern are the increasing governmental pressures not to export 
advanced US technologies outside the US. On the other hand, the science community, in 
fulfilling its research goals, expects both full disclosure of observatory and data 
specifications as well as participation in the discovery and resolution of identified 
observatory problems. Science community experience has also shown that as data sets 
age, much of the original knowledge base used to create and operate an observatory is 
quickly lost and not recoverable. Researchers worry that the inherent long-term value of 
the original observations can be lost through a failure to originally document the mission 
specifications. 

• Organization and Management Processes: Access to and shared use of commercial 
remote sensing data is a major concern for scientific applications researchers that utilize 
these images. The vendor's approach to these issues is reflected in their data licensing 
and mission operations strategies. 

o Mission Management - Satellite observatories that exclusively serve science 
interests have mission operation strategies that are specifically targeted to science 
needs (Arvidson et al., 2001). For example, when a research team has staff in the 
field collecting ground measurements, mission operations can place highest 
priority on acquisition of that site. However, with a commercial system, where 
scientists are but one of several types of customer, coordination of acquisition 
schedules to meet specific scientific goals may either be quite costly or 
impossible. This may suggest that more automated ground measurement systems 
may be needed in the future. 

o Data Licensing - A difficult lesson learned from Landsat commercialization 
resulted from the highly restrictive licensing agreements associated with the data 
imposed by EOS AT; they nearly eliminated scientific exploration of the new 
Thematic Mapper data (Marshall, 1989a; Marshall, 1989b). Inability to share data 
among researchers is a fundamental problem within the context of the scientific 

* method that depends, in part, on repeatability and traceability of experiments and 
analyses. 

The scientific community's previous concerns about receiving remotely sensed data from the 
private sector originated from both a lack of understanding of how the commercial approach 
could be tailored to meet science needs, as well as prior failed attempts to partner with private 
industry. The 1980's Landsat privatization and the SEAWIFS ocean color observation 
procurement are examples the science community considers when evaluating commercial 
suppliers of remotely sensed scientific measurements(National Research Council, 1985, 1995). 
The NASA SDP differ from the earlier Landsat "privatization" effort in that under the SDP 
NASA is buying data from an existing commercial provider rather attempting to commercialize 
an existing NASA science mission (National Research Council, 2002). 



Lessons Learned from NASA Scientific Data Purchase IKONOS 
Goward, Zanoni, et al. 

4. Lessons Learned 

From 1999 to present, the NASA SDP procured approximately 2400 IKONOS data products 
(550 GB), costing over $11 million, for NASA's Earth Science Enterprise researchers. These 
data sets have been used to support a wide range of Earth science applications, as noted by the 
papers published in this special issue. 

There is no question that NASA-funded researchers have enjoyed the access to these novel 
observations that has been provided under this experimental NASA Scientific Data Purchase. 
Analysis of these observations has posed some new challenges, but they have also provided new 
insights about land cover properties. Many of the early concerns that the NASA ESE community 
of users had about the measurements have been alleviated through working with the actual data. 

An observatory as novel as IKONOS takes some time to adjust to both in terms of getting used to 
the new perspective provided as well as becoming comfortable with the technical characteristics 
of the observations . As stated in the JACIE paper (Zanoni et al, 2003), it took a large team of 
engineers and scientists from US government laboratories and universities, over 3 years to 
complete a detailed assessment of metric properties of the imagery supplied by Space Imaging . 
The extent of the IKONOS validation is consistent with prior validation experiences with 
government-funded ESE science missions. It takes time to develop full confidence in the output 
of new observatories. Having a team of scientists and engineers working on such system ^ 
validation is vital to mission scientific success (Goward & Masek, 2001; Justice & lownshend, 
1 gg/L 2002V 



Tj w- 



4.1. Technical Assessment 

Overall, NASA and affiliated researchers, in conjunction with Space Imaging engineers and 
technicians, believe that the IKONOS system supplies h igh quality, high spatial resolution 
multispectral imagery that is suitable to support the researc h goals and requirements of NASA- 
supported Earth scientists . Validation and independent scientific assessment of the IKONOS 
observations extended over 4 years. A scientifically compre hensive validation takes 
considerable time and effort . After 4 years there are few technical questions related to sensor 
performance and Space Imaging-applied, post-acquisition processing that remain to be 
addressed. Technical areas that have been evaluated and required detailed attention include: 

« Sensor Radiometric Calibration: 

Initial radiometric calibration information supplied by Space Imaging for the multispectral 
observations, was found to have an error that increased with increasing spectral wavelength, 
when compared with the independent JACIE evaluation (Goward et al., 2003; Pagnutti et al., 
^r\r\n\ c^n^o T-norrinrr ic pmnimmo n rnlihrfltinn rrmcedure that is relatively novel to the 
Earth science community involving use of stellar observations to periodically calibrate the 
measurements (Bowen, 2002). Space Imaging employed the JACIE results to adjust their 
calibration information. 

The detector-to-detector calibration is remarkably good. The only artifact that was seen in 
early products, across the nearly 3000 detectors, was the contrast noted between adjacent 
arrays (Pagnutti et al, 2003). Space Imaging later adjusted for this effect. 



• 



Lessons Learned from NASA Scientific Data Purchase IKONOS 
Goward, Zanoni, et al. 

Sensor Geometric Properties: 

Overall the image geometry is exceptionally good with only minor problems noted. This is 
especially noteworthy given that the sensor often captures images at angles substantially 
different from nadir by tilting the spacecraft (Helder et al., 2003). A minor error in the 
processing algorithm was identified that when addressed, further reduced geometric errors by 
50%, to nominal levels (Helder et al., 2003). Interestingly, in the process of discovering this 
latter problem, the current basis for one of the Federal Geographic Data Committee 
standards are called into question (Helder et al., 2003). 

Image Modulation Transfer Function Compensation (MTFC): 

Modulation transfer function compensation is an image enhancement technique that is rarely 
used in the Earth sciences although there may be some real value in doing so (Huang et al., 
2002; Townshend et al, 2000). Initial examination of the imagery metadata, at NASA 
Stennis revealed the phrase "MTFC applied: Yes"(Ryan et al., 2003). This was surprising, 
since such processing had not been requested as part of the NASA SDP. Discussions with 
Space Imaging revealed that MTFC is a standard part of Space hnaging's data production 
process, with the prime objective of making the visual appearance of images sharper to the 
user. JACIE analyses revealed that the MTFC, as applied, introduces some noise as a result 
of over-compensating the data, though this occurs for much less than 1% of the observed 
pixels (e.g. (Goward et al, 2003; Pagnutti et al., 2003; Ryan et al., 2003). Further 
assessment at the Stennis Space Center showed that the MTFC processing kernel had been 
rotated 90 degrees, sharpening the across-track direction more than the along-track direction 
. This resulted in in the "over-compensation" observed in the initial empirical analyses 
(Ryan et al., 2003). 



• On-board Compression: 

To achieve adequate satellite to ground telemetry of these high- volume observations. Space 
Imaging uses a proprietary data compression scheme developed by Kodak. Although this 
introduces uncertainties in the ground-based calibrations methods employed by the JACIE 
team since it violates the linearity assumptions upon which such methods are based, the 
JACIE team found little evidence of detrimental effects resulting from this compression. The 
1 1 bit data, even with compression, provides more dynamic range than the 8 bit systems used 
on sensors such as Landsat ETM+. 

The JACIE technical assessment of the IKONOS data revealed specific technical measurement 
uncertainties that, if not discovered, could have reduced the value of IKONOS as a source of 
scientific measurements. These uncertainties were addressed in an open collaboration between 
industry, government and the research community. This collaborative activity converged on 
effective answers that resolved and validated the qualitative and quantitative integrity of the 
measurements, observatory and post-acquisition processing procedures. 

It is clear from the JACIE experience that successful adoption of commercial remote sensing 
data by the land science community necessitates open dialogue between the systems developers 
and the scientists and engineers who use the data. An unanticipated outcome of this JACIE 
activity was the increased trust that developed over time between representatives from industry, 
research and government involved in the technical assessment of the IKONOS data. These 



Lessons Learned from NASA Scientific Data Purchase LKONOS 
Goward, Zanoni, et al. 

analyses produced benefits for all involved and demonstrated that all parties could work together 
in a constructive framework. It also demonstrated that the development of such a successful 
working relationship requires a substantial commitment of time and resources from all sides. 

The availability of IKONOS imagery to the terrestrial science community has generally been 
greeted with considerable enthusiasm (Andrefouet et al., 2003; Goetz et al., 2003; Hurtt et al., 
2003; Masuoka et al., 2003; Morisette et al., 2003; Sawaya et al., 2003; Seelan et al., 2003; 
Small, 2003; Thenkabail et al, 2003). The IKONOS observatory provides a valuable source of 
spatially detailed land visible and near infrared measurements that may be used to valida te and 
evaluate coarser spatial resolution multispectral visible and near infrar ed measurements acquired 
bv NASA observatories such as Landsat and MODIS. This is particularly true for foreign 
investigations, where access to fine resolution imaging is often difficult, if not impossible, to 
achieve (Figs 2&3). Space-acquired high spatial resolution measurements overcome serious 
problems encountered with using aircraft-based sensors relative to both restricted airspace and 
unfavorable flying conditions. An IKONOS-type system substantially improves global access to 
such high spatial resolution multispectral measurements. 

There are some novel aspects of an IKONOS-type observatory that introduce new interpretation 
challenges not previously encountered with systems such as Landsat and MODIS. The IKONOS 
observatory basically follows the same polar, sun-synchronous orbit as Landsat and Terra. 
However the basic observation image is approximately 1 1 km by 1 1 km . In order xor tu.e 
observatory to provide reasonable repetitive coverage for most land areas, it is an extremely agile 
observatory, having the capacity to point off nadir up to at least ±60° and in any azimuthal 
direction relative to the ground track (Dial et al., 2003). The IKONOS near-nadir repeat cycle 
(±1°) is better than 140 days, but with its agility, IKONOS can observe any land location within 
3 days and look angles between ±30°, assuming that the particular land area is cloud free at that 
time. This operational configuration introduces several interpretation issues. 

. The time delay between acquisitions of adjacent scenes for a given land region can be as 
large as several months, introducing significant variations across adjacent scenes, as a result 
of sun angle and vegetation phenology and other temporal changes, such as tide stage. Such 
delays can make analysis of adjacent scenes exceptionally difficult, if not impossible 
(Andrefouet et al., 2003; Seelan et al, 2003) (Fig. 4). Similar timing problems are 
experienced with moderate resolution systems such as Landsat, Aster and SPOT again 
demonstrating the trade-offs between spatial and temporal resolution with contemporary 
satellite remote sensing systems. 

• Tne limited areai exienx oi a scene, cumimicu wim ptisioium ^±uuu ^ v ^ ^.^ ^^^ — ~~~ — 
for the observatory, have made coordination between satellite observations and ground 
measurements quite difficult (Helder et al, 2003; Morisette et al, 2003; Pagnutti et al., 2003) 

. Specular reflectance as a result of sun glint from local water bodies, can be a major problem, 
depending upon the relation between solar zenith and azimuth angles, relative to the view 
zenith and azimuth angles, preventing some applications of the measurements (Sawaya et al, 
2003, Dial et al, 2003). 



Lessons Learned from NASA Scientific Data Purchase IKONOS 
Goward, Zanoni, et al. 

. Scene contamination with haze and cirrus-type clouds (Fig. 5), when they had met the "clear 
scene" criteria for SDP was found to be a problem in several locations around the globe 
(Sawaya, et al, 2003, Goward, et aL 2003) 

. A few investigators(Hurtt et al., 2003) also note the need for a shortwave infrared (e.g. 1.65 
jam) measurement particularly in forestry applications, based on their experiences with 
Landsat, MODIS and SPOT-HRV. This poses significant challenges to sensor design, since 
it would likely lead to more costly high spatial resolution array technology using non-silicon 
detectors. Hopefully in the near future this will become more feasible. 

Overall, the NASA ESE scientific experience with IKONOS imagery has been positive. Access 
to these high spatial resolution, digital multispectral measurements is yet another major step 
forward in our capacity to observe the Earth's land areas over a wide range of spatial and 
temporal scales. 

It is worth noting that most of the scientific concerns with IKONOS observations result from the 
necessary technical trade-offs that must be made to produce such a high spatial resolution 
system. As with any new technology, the learning curve for the science community for this new 
high spatial resolution satellite has been steep and more time will be needed to develop a full 
scientific understanding of this new observation resource. Certainly this first step under the 
NASA Scientific Data Purchase has provided and excellent start. 

4.3. Proprietary/ITAR Factors 

Over time, one of the more interesting changes that occurred during the SDP IKONOS 
evaluation was that Space Imaging became less and less "proprietary" about their system 
configuration and operations. 

In the development of commercial remote sensing private industry is facing the challenge that 
small technical differences can result in a significant competitive advantage. Also this an area of 
technology, where the political system is becoming increasingly concerned about the export of 
advanced US technologies overseas. Based both on concerns about their own competitive 
advantages as well as government regulations placed on them during licensing under current US 
ITAR (International Traffic hi Arms Regulations), companies such as Space Imaging are either 
unable or quite reluctant to reveal the details of their observatory design to user communities, 
particularly those that are technically and scientifically well informed. 

In initial discussions of sensor radiometric calibration, sensor performance characteristics and 
other mission characteristics were considered proprietary and were not made available for 
. distribution to the broad user community. As more questions were posed concerning mission 
performance, information gradually began to flow. By the first High Spatial Resolution 
Commercial Imagery Workshop in 2001, Space Imaging was publicly offering descriptions of 
systems design and mission operations. This release of information helped to develop substantial 
confidence within the user community regarding the quality of the acquired data. 

A primary goal of partnerships between government and commercial entities aimed at supporting 
the science community, should be to keep the "proprietary" knowledge needed to understand an 



Lessons Learned from NASA Scientific Data Purchase IKONOS 
Goward, Zanoni, et al. 

observatory and its measurements at an absolute minimum. The role of government scientists 
and engineers, serving as moderators of the interactions between private indust ry and the science 
community facilitated a dialogue that led to effective interactions. The government staff served 
as a neutral agent assuring industry that their proprietary and ITAR interests would not be 
violated, while at the same time assuring users that best engineering and science practices were 
being followed. This brokering role maybe critical to future efforts to pursue such 
industry/science community interactions. 

4.4. Administrative Considerations 

The science community holds the view, based on years of working with NASA Earth 
observation missions, that the practices restricting access to knowledge of mission operations 
and data licensing limit the value of such data sets for scientific purposes. This might appear to 
raise significant barriers preventing the use of commercial sources for science measurements, but 
present experience with reference to Space Imaging IKONOS data suggests they can be 
overcome. 

4.4. 1 . Mission Operations 

Many of the science users were quite disappointed with the length of time between image 
acquisition, when they were notified of this event and finally when the data were delivered. As a 
model, many of the users have become accustomed to the ready access to such information 
„„„«k^j u„ a^ttchc cunc r»o+p Paviw p™- t onHccit 7 Tiip t dnHcat-7 nrvjuisition schedule is 

placed on the EROS web site a few hours prior to acquisition, and within 48 hours a JPEG of 
each acquired image can be viewed. Such an approach keeps the user well informed and 
significantly reduces time-consuming communications between users and suppliers (Morisette et 
al., 2003; Sawaya et al., 2003). This appears to be an easily resolvable administrative issue. 

4.4.2. Data Licensing 

A more complex problem is encountered in data licensing and costs. Under the NASA Scientific 
Data Purchase, NASA Stennis acted as broker for individual NASA ESE principal investigators 
for the acquisition of approximately $ 1 1 million of Space Imaging IKONOS data products. 
NASA Stennis negotiated a licensing agreement with Space Imaging that permitted sharing these 
data freely among NASA-affiliated researchers, which includes virtually anyone currently 
funded through the NASA Earth Science Enterprise. Users are very positive about the fact that 
the data can be shared among NASA investigators. 

The US science community has become increasingly aware that the single government agency 
14„„„„^ „ an ^+: n +t±A £-^ ,/.« om +1^ nrrYwrvQ Ao.ia A\A nnt fiHrlrfisfi a fhnrlflmental activity, that has 
applied to most previously acquired NASA earth observations, archival preservation at the 
USGS EROS Data Center (National Research Council, 2002).. Most, if not all land 
observations originally acquired by NASA, ultimately migrate to the archival repository at the 
USGS Earth Resources Observation System (EROS) Data Center. A fundamental criterion for 
data sets which are archived at EROS is that they are publicly available to any interested users. 
Based on the original licensing agreement on IKONOS data between NASA and Space Imaging, 
submission to the EROS data archive under these terms will be impossible for data acquired 

10 



Lessons Learned from NASA Scientific Data Purchase IKONOS 
Goward, Zanoni, et al. 

under the NASA SDP . In fact, this is problem not unique to the IKONOS data purchase but all 
licensing agreements, with the exception of the Earth Satellite Corp, (Birk, et al, 2003), 
developed under the NASA SDP. This archival issue simply was not considered in these 
deliberations. This is a fundamental lesson learned that extends well past that learned from 
working with Space Imaging alone. 

4.4.3 . Future Data Costs 

Under the NASA SDP, individual investigator's procurement of these observations, was through 
a modest proposal process that was approved by NASA Headquarters. There was no realized 
cost to individual investigators for IKONOS data products other than writing the proposal. Thus 
under the NASA SDP individual investigators viewed these IKONOS observations as "free" to 
their funded research activities. This process is quite similar to access to other NASA EOS 
observations, with the exception of Landsat data. 

However, as the NASA investigators considered continued use of IKONOS data to support their 
scientific goals, that they recognized that they could probably not count on continued "free" 
access the NASA Scientific Data Purchase. After reviewing NASA negotiated data costs, most 
of the investigators concluded that they could not afford, within their grant budgets, to purchase 
many such data sets. This suggests that if use of such commercial resources are to be 
considered for scientific research in the future that negotiated arrangements between NASA and 
other federal agencies and individual companies will most likely be needed to make the costs 
aceeptauie to inuividual users. 

These issues of data licensing and who should bear the direct costs for access to commercially 
supplied remotely sensed data are at the heart of the clear cultural differences between the open- 
access expectations of the government-funded scientific community and the proprietary, 
commercial concerns of private industry. How these cultures are ultimately integrated is well 
beyond the scope of this current assessment but has been well exposed in NRC evaluations of 
the NASA SDP of IKONOS data (National Research Council, 1997, 2001, 2002). Areas.that 
need further consideration include legal factors related to intellectual property rights and data 
cost issues, including how the fees should be paid and the specific costs that are acceptable to 
both industry and users. These are complex questions that are the crux of relations between the 
US government, industry, and academia. Answering these questions may prove difficult, but 
addressing them will ultimately be critical to successfully meet the goals of all partners 
involved. 

5. Summary and Conclusions 

The NASA Scientific Data Purchase activity was directed to evaluate whether the US private 
sector, in place of the government, is capable of supplying remotely sensed land imagery to 
science users that meet their needs. In this activity, Space Imaging, space-based IKONOS 
mission, accheived this goal, demonstrating that a private industry financed satellite observatory 
is capable of meeting some of the observation needs of the US science community. 

The primary conclusion that can be reached from the SDP IKONOS experience is that US 
private industry, in this case Space Imaging, is technically able to supply useful remotely sensed 



11 



Lessons Learned from NASA Scientific Data Purchase IKONOS 
Goward, Zanoni, et al. 

digital imagery to the US science community. This overcomes a major concern of the science 
community that typically commercial observatories are not of sufficient technical quality to meet 
science needs. There are several considerations that should be given further attention in any 
future efforts by NASA or others to procure scientific measurements from the commercial sector. 

5.1. Some Guidelines for Future Scientific Data Purchases 

There are specific lessons learned from the SDP IKONOS experience that should be recognized 
when future efforts to acquire scientific measurements from the US private sector to support 
government-funded researchers are to be considered. These include: 

• Independent assessment and validation of acquired measurements is a critical part of the 
acquisition process. This assessment could be performed either by individual 
investigators or by an oversight team, such as the NASA/US GS/NM A JACIE team used 
in the SDP activity, or even by an independent group such as the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST) or Underwriters Laboratories Inc. (UL) evaluators. 
There are some real advantages in using the single organization point of contact for these 
activities because critical technical and intellectual resources are in short supply. 
Focusing these resources produced reasonably quick (1-3 year) turnaround on the results. 

• An open dialogue between industry and ultimate data users is essential to ensure that the 
best outcome is achieved in the industry/science community interaction. Some of the 
difficulties the science community experienced with Space Imaging may have occurreu 
as a result of the organizational arrangements made by the government entities. For 
example, the uncertainties concerning acquisition schedules could have been easily 
resolved if Space Imaging and/or the responsible government agency simply had a web 
site where interested users could check on the status of their requests. 

• Finding a balance between the perceived necessity of full disclosure in the science 
community and the restrictions in disclosure caused by competitive and ITAR concerns 
of the private sector should be a major goal in interactions between government and 
industry. The Space Imaging experience has shown that as trust and confidence develop, 
these issues have become substantially less problematic; each realizing that the 
overarching goal is to satisfy everyone's best interests. There also is a further need for 
appropriate government agencies to review and evaluate the importance of ITAR 
restrictions in protecting national security relative to the substantial negative impact such 
restrictions have on scientific and technical developments. With the advent of foreign 
systems, the topic will need considerable further attention. History has shown that to the 
degree possible, open-access has the largest benefits for all involved. 

• Workable data licensing procedures are still difficult to achieve in satellite land remote 
sensing. Industry's desire to preserve the economic potential and of the observations 
though strict copyrighting, so they can benefit from repetitive sales tends to conflict with 
the user community's interests in preserving the scientific value of the observations 
through sharing and long-term repetitive access. This is an area where industry, 
government agencies and science community representatives need to work together to 
seek effective compromises that satisfy each community. For example, a possible 

12 



Lessons Learned from NASA Scientific Data Purchase IKONOS 
Goward, Zanoni, et al. 

alternate licensing agreement could include some type of a time-limit clause, where after 
for example 5 years the observations acquired under a commercial data buy would revert 
to the public archive and be made generally available to the scientific community. It will 
probably take more time for the commercial market place to evolve before a rational 
long-term answer to this issue will emerge. However, it is likely useful to continue 
experiments such as the NASA SDP to encourage emergence of new insights into the 
appropriate licensing arrangments. 

Much of what has been revealed in this effort by NASA and Space Imaging jointly to meet 
NASA ESE scientists' data needs reinforces what had been previously discovered in earlier 
efforts in this direction (National Research Council, 1985; Pace et al., 2000; Pace et al., 1999). 
Moving away from government sources to commercial sources of scientific land remote sensing 
observations is not simple and will require further efforts to refine the models of this interaction 
that have been employed to date. 

Not withstanding remaining uncertainties, the NASA Scientific Data Purchase of Space Imaging 
IKONOS high spatial resolution, multispectral, satellite-acquired imagery, has served as a 
successful step forward by NASA and Space Imaging in moving towards commercial sources of 
valuable scientific data. The particular lessons learned in this NASA SDP activity should be of 
value to the Landsat Data Continuity Mission (LDCM) procurement that is now underway. 

Acknowledgements 

This assessment of the NASA Scientific Data Purchase experience with the Space Imaging 
IKONOS observations was carried out with support from the Scientific Data Purchase 
a/li-nit-iiot^rw! TwtVif> ™'\7i1 cmrant unri ^r>ntrartrvr staff at \\\e~. NASA Stermis Snace Center. Drs. 
Goward and Townshend received support from NASA Grant NAG 1398001 from NASA Stennis 
to pursue this study. All of the participants in the JACIE program as well as contributors to the 
JACIE Workshops dedicated to IKONOS assessment substantially contributed to the 
understanding noted here. It is our hope that we have properly represented all participants' 
perspectives in this regard. 



13 



Lessons Learned from NASA Scientific Data Purchase IKONOS 
Goward, Zanoni, et al. 



References 



Andrefouet, S., Kramer, P., Torres-Pulliza, D., Joyce, K.E., Hochberg, E.J., Garza-Perez, R., 

Mumby, P.J., Riegl, B., Yamano, H., White, W.H., Zubia, M., Brock, J.C., Phinn, S.R., & 

IvlUlier-JVarger, r.Xi. \£\JVJJ IVLluu-siica cvaiuauuu ui jJS^vyi-^ v-'O ucua ±\jx v/ifBBuivO^v.. ~^ 

tropical coral reef environments. Remote Sensing of Environment, (this issue). 

Arvidson, T., Gasch, J., & Goward, S.N. (2001) Landsat 7's Long Term Acquisition Plan - An 
Innovative Approach to Building a Global Archive, Special Issue on Landsat 7. Remote 
Sensing of Environment, 75(1-2), 13-26. 

Birk, R.J., Stanley, T., & Snyder, G.L. (2003) U.S. government commercial data purchase 

programs for use in government-sponsored science and applications activities. Remote 
Sensing of Environment, (this issue). 

Bowen, H.S. (2002). Absolute radiometric calibration of the IKONOS sensor using 

radiometrically characterized stellar sources. InPecora 15 /Land Satellite Information 
IV/ISPRS Commission I/FIFOS 2002, pp. CD-ROM. American Society of 
Photogramrnetry and Remote Sensing, Denver, CO. 

Dial, G, Bowen, H., Gerlach, F., Grodecki, J., & Oleszczuk, R. (2003) IKONOS satellite, 
imagery, and applications. Remote Sensing of Environment, (this issue). 

Executive (2003). U. S. Commerical Remote Sensing Policy. White House, Washington D.C. 

Goetz, S.J., Wright, R., Smith, A. J., Zinecker, E., & Shaub, E. (2003) IKONOS imagery for 

resource managementtree cover, impervious surfaces and riparian buffer analyses in the 
Mid- Atlantic region. Remote Sensing of Environment, (this issue). 

Goward, S.N., Davis, P.E., Fleming, D., Miller, L., & Townshend, J.R.G. (2003) Empirical 
comparison of Landsat 7 and IKONOS multispectral measurements for selected Earth 
Observation System (EOS) validation sites. Remote Sensing of Environment, (this issue). 

Goward, S.N. & Masek, J. (2001) Landsat 7 Special Issue. Remote Sensing of Environment, 
75(1-2), 1-325. 

Helder, D., Coan, M., Patrick, K., & Gaska, P. (2003) Ikonos geometric characterization. Remote 
Sensing of Environment, (this issue). 

Huang, C, Townshend, J.R.G., Liang, S., Kalluri, S.V.N., & Defries, R.D. (2002) Impact of 
sensor's point spread function on land cover characterization, assessment and 
deconvolution. Remote Sensing of Environment, 50(203-212). 

Hurtt, G, Xiao, X., Keller, M., Palace, M., Asner, G.P., Braswell, R., Brondizio, E.S., Cardoso, 
M., Carvalho, C.J.R., Fearon, M.G., Guild, L., Hagen, S., SI T., Schloss, A., Vourlitis, 
G.,' Wickel, A. J., Mo'ore UI, B., & Nobre, C. (2003) IKONOS Imagery for the Large 
Scale Biosphere- Atmosphere Experiment in Amazonia (LBA). Remote Sensing of 
Environment, (this issue). 

Justice, CO. & Townshend, J.R.G. (1994) Data sets for global remote sensing: Lessons learnt. 
InternationalJournal of Remote Sensing, 15, 3621-3639. 



14 



Lessons Learned from NASA Scientific Data Purchase IKONOS 
Goward, Zanoni, et al. 

Justice, CO. & Townshend, J.R.G. (2002) Special Issue - The Moderate Resolution Imaging 

Spectrometer (MODIS): A new generation of Land Surface Monitoring. Remote Sensing 
of Environment, 83(1-2), 1-359. 

Marshall, E. (1989a) News and Comment. Landsats: Drifting toward oblivion? Science, 243, 
999. 

Marshall, E. (1989b) News and Comment. Landsat wins a reprieve. Science, 243, 1429. 

Masuoka, P.M., Clayborn, D.M., Andre, R.G., Nigro, J., Gordon, S.W., & Klein, T.A. (2003) 

Use of Ikonos and Landsat for malaria control in the Republic of Korea. Remote Sensing 
of Environment, (this issue). 

Morisette, J.T., Nickeson, J.E., Davis, P., Wang, Y., Tian, Y., Woodcock, C.E., Shabanov, N., 
Hansen, M., Schaub, D.L., Huete, A.R., Cohen, W.B., Oetter, D.R., & Kennedy, R.E. 
(2003) The Use of NASA's Commercial Data Purchase program in support of MODIS 
land validation. Remote Sensing of Environment, (this issue). 

National Research Council (1985). Remote Sensing of the Earth from Space: A Program in 
Crisis. National Academy Press, Washington, DC. 

National Research Council (1995). Earth Observations from Space: History, Promise and 
Reality. National Academy of Sciences, Washington, D.C. 

National Research Council (1997). Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific Data. 
National Academy Press, Washington, DC. 

National Research Council (2001). Resolving Conflicts Arising from the Privatization of 
Environmental Data. National Academy Press, Washington D.C. 

National Research Council (2002). Toward New Partnerships in Remote Sensing: Government, 
the Private Sector and Earth Science Research. National Academy Press, Washington, 
D.C. 

Pace, S., Frelinger, D., Lachman, B., Brooks, A., & Gabriele, M. (2000). The Earth Below: 

Purchasing Science Data and the Role of Public-Private Partnerships. Rand Science and 
Policy Institute, Washington D.C. 

Pace, S., Sponberg, B., & Maccauley, M. (1999). Data Policy Issues and Barriers to Using 

Commercial Resources for Mission to Planet Earth. Rand Science and Policy Institute, 
Washington D.C. 

Pagnutti, M., Ryan, R., Kelly, M., Holekamp, K, Zanoni, V., Thome, K., & Schiller, S. (2003) 
Radiometric characterization of IKONOS multispectral imagery. Remote Sensing of 
Environment, (this issue). 

Ryan, R., Baldridge, B., Schowedgerdt, R., Choi, T., Helder, D., & Blonski, S. (2003) IKONOS 
spatial resolution and image interpretability. Remote Sensing of Environment, (this issue). 

Sawaya, K., Olmanson, L., Heinert, N., Loeffelholz, B., Rich, R., Brezonik, P., & Bauer, M. 
(2003) Extending satellite remote sensing to local scales: 

Land and water resource management using high- resolution imagery. Remote Sensing of 
Environment, (this issue). 



15 



Lessons Learned from NASA Scientific Data Purchase IKONOS 
Goward, Zanoni, et al. 

Sedan, S.K., Laguette, S., Casady, G.M., & Seielstad, G.A. (2003) Remote sensing applications 
for precision agriculture: A learning community approach. Remote Sensing of 
Environment, (this issue). 

Small, C. (2003) High resolution spectral mixture analysis of urban reflectance. Remote Sensing 

Teillet, P.M. & Holben, B.N. (1993) Toward operational radiometric calibration of NOAA 
AVHRR imagery in visible and near infrared channels. Canadian Journal of Remote 
Sensing, (submitted). 

Thenkabail, P.S., Stucky, N., Griscom, B.W., S.Ashton, M., Diels, J., Meer, B.V.D., & Enclona, 
E. (2003) Biomass estimations and carbon stock calculations in the oil palm plantations 
of African derived savannas using IKONOS data. Remote Sensing of Environment, (in 
review). 

Townshend, J.R.G., Huang, C, Kalluri, S.N.V., Denies, R.S., Liang, S., & Yang, K. (2000) 
Beware of per-pixel characterization of land cover. InternationalJounral of Remote 
Sensing, 21, 839-843. 

Townshend, J.R.G. & Justice, CO. (2002) Towards operational monitoring of terrestrial systems 
by moderate resolution imaging. Remote Sensing of Environment, 83, 351-359. 

Woodcock, C.E. & Strahler, A.H. (1987) The factor of scale in remote sensing. Remote Sensing 
of Environment, 21, 311-322. 

Zanoni, V., Stanley, T., Ryan, R., Pagnutti, M ., Baidridge, B., Roylance, S., Snyder, G.L., & 
Lee, G. (2003) The joint agency commercial imagery evaluation (JACIE) team: 
Overview and IKONOS joint characterization approach. Remote Sensing of Environment, 
(this issue). 



16 



Lessons Learned from NASA Scientific Data Purchase IKONOS 
Goward, Zanoni, et al. 

Table 1 : Spectral Band Passes for IKONOS and Lansat-7 visible and near-infrared bands 



Spectral Band 


IKONOS Spectral Range 


Lansat-7 Spectral Range 


Blue 


445- 516 nm 


450- 515 nm 


Green 


506- 595 nm 


525 - 605 nm 


Red 


632 - 698 nm 


630 - 690 nm 


NIR 


757 - 853 nm 


750 - 900 nm 



17 



List of Figures 

Figure 1. The spectral band passes of IKONOS versus Landsat 7. Note the differences 
particularly in the near infrared. This leads to a divergence in spectral measurements from the 
two systems (see Goward, et. al., this issue for further details) 

Figure 2: Comparison of IKONOS (left); acquisition date: 04/02/2001, image upper left corner 
latitude/longitude: 45.45/12.38, and Landsat 7 (right); acquisition date: 08/26/2001, image upper 
left corner latitude/longitude: 47.0/1 1.12 observations for the city of Venice, Italy. The differing 
spatial resolution of the two sensors is clear. The trade off is that Landsat systematically 
monitors all land areas of the Earth seasonally whereas the IKONOS system can only sample 
small portions of the Earth's land areas each year. 

Figure 3. a) IKONOS imagery from Antarctica; acquisition date: 10/05/2000; image upper left 
corner latitude/longitude: -65.25/-60.89. b) IKONOS image of Kerguelen Island in the Indian 
Ocean; acquisition date: 09/24/2002; image upper left corner latitude/longitude: -49.09/70.54. 
These observations demonstrate the value of a space-based high spatial resolution observatory. 
Acquisition of such detailed imagery from aircraft would have been quite difficult and very 
expensive. A space-based system such as IKONOS provides ready access to all areas of the 
Earth's land areas, an important attribute for an observation system that is used to study global 
changes. 

Figure 4: Seasonal changes recorded between adjacent IKONOS scenes acquired from an area in 
Maryland just north of Washington D. C; one acquired on 04/07/2000, image upper left corner 
latitude/longitude: 39.36/-77.16, and one acquired on 04/06/2000, image upper left corner 
latitude/longitude: 39.33/-77.02. Note that at this time of the year, vegetation foliage are rapidly 
growing so that the scene from the early date shows much less green foliage than the later date 
(THIS ALL DEPENDS ON THE SCENE PAIR FINALLY SELECTED). 

Figure 5: Impact of haze and cirrus clouds on observation quality for two images acquired of 
Congo, Africa. Note the significant loss of contrast in the image on the right, acquired on 
03/26/2001, image upper left corner latitude/longitude: 1.19/16.01, due to haze and clouds (the 
image without the haze and cirrus clouds, on the left, was acquired on 10/23/2000). 






=S 

o 

te 

a 

o 
U 

U 

e 
o 

c« 
•-- 

05 



W 

c 
o 

Q. 
W 

o 

a: 

"co 



^ CM 

C C 
03 03 
□D ^ 03 CM 

03 "5 CO? 

O roO a 
Z 00 Z CO 



co <=f 



c 
03 
LU CO CQ "vf 

CO? CO? 
O §0 a 

-z.m-z.rn 



c 

03 

CQ , 



O 
O 



O 

o 

o 




0< 



G) 


CO 


h- 


CO 


m 


^f 


CO 


CN 


O 


o 


o 


o 


o 


o 


o 


O 



— ' o 
oco 



esuodsey lejjoeds peznetujofsj 



d 



a 

© 



o 

a, 
as 




$4$^ -'i'S&V 










u 

g 
"5b 



o 

a, 



c3 



s-i 



ai 



d 






r"> 



5« 

Qi 
WD 

S 



a 



I .2 

= 




J3L 






JUL. 






u 



PI 

*i— ( 

00 



SI X> 

00 S ' 



as 



CO 

CD 

O 

PI 



U 

i-l 

oS 

g 
'5b 

03 



o 

£ c3 



!-t 
CD 

"8 



<D 






3 

"43 



. "^ -t 



"* * *■ jmP 1 * "^ 












." '. 5 
- " s -'-- *- '* 



'fee 
\ 3. 





»^r 


■V 


p 


v 


* 


h 


1- 






* ■«- 




* 




% «*,m *» 




*£»_-. 




















» 


*- \xV 








11 *' 


^* 


* 






r 








— * -- , J* 


* 


-fir 








* 




* 


V 


































4 










"V* 


' - 


- 


- 




.. 


j*~~~ 


4 


-* ~+ y 




^ 








* _ fc 




' 


2> * 


* 






-»* 


















Cb*n+ 






£ 


„ 




/ ** 






• 


' » ^ 


•44 








-- : 



u 

d 

60 



o 

ft 

!/5 



s-< 
(D 

t3 



03 

-d 

d 




I 



W 

Vi 

o 






r * 

i i 

« i 



11 > 









;'*. 



» - . • • V"" ■>., 

» T " " ... i f 2 



i* 



* 






i t 



H-l 

g 
'5b 



CO 



03 






cS 



CO 

.n 






< . . - 



it 






"1 _ ■ 



« ■ 






v> 



REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 



Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 



The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing 
data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or 
any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Department of Defense, Washington Headguarters Services, Directorate 
for Information Operations and Reports (0704-0 188), 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202^1302. Respondents should be aware that 
notwithstanding any other provision of law.no person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently 
valid OMB control number. 
PLEASE DO NOT RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS. 



1 . REPORT DATE (DD-MM- YYYY) 
26-09-2003 



2. REPORT TYPE 



3. DATES COVERED (From - To) 



4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Acquistion of Earth Science Remote Sensing Observations from Commercial 
Sources: Lessons Learned from the Space Imaging IKONOS Example 



5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 

NASI 3 -650 



5b. GRANT NUMBER 



5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 



6. AUTHOR(S) 

Samuel N. Goward Kara Holek amp 
Lauren Underwood 
Mary Pagnutti 
Rose Fletcher 
John R.G. Townshend 
Vicki Zanoni 



5d. PROJECT NUMBER 



5e. TASK NUMBER 



5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 



7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND AD DRESS (ES) 
Lockheed Martin Space Operations - Stennis Programs 



8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 



SE-2003-09-00067-SSC 



9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

NASA 



10. SPONSORING/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 



11. SPONSORING/MONITORING 
REPORT NUMBER 



12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 
Publicly Available STT per form 1676 



13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

Journal Name - Remote Sensing of Environment (IKONOS Special Issue) 



14. ABSTRACT 



15. SUBJECT TERMS 



16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 



a. REPORT 

U 



b. ABSTRACT 



c. THIS PAGE 

U 



17. LIMITATION OF 
ABSTRACT 



UU 



18. NUMBER 
OF 
PAGES 



23 



19b. NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON 
Robert Ryan 



19b. TELEPHONE NUMBER (Include area code) 
(228) 688-1868 



Standard Form 298 (Rev 8-98) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-1 8 



