Interaction and Communication of Agents in 
Networks and Language Complexity Estimates 


Jan Smid 1 , Marek Obitko 2 , David Fisher 3 , Walt Truszkowski 4 


1 Dept, of Computer Sci., Morgan State University, USA, jsnnd0jewel.morgaii.edu 

2 Dept, of Cybernetics, Czech Technical University, obitko01abe.felk.cvnt.cz 

3 Software Eng. Inst., Carnegie Mellon University, USA, dfisher0sei.cmu.edu 

4 NASA/GSFC 588 , Greenbelt, MD 20771, USA, walt.truszkowski0gsfc.nasa.gov 


1 Introduction 

Knowledge acquisition and sharing are arguably the most critical activities of 
communicating agents. We report about our on-going project featuring knowl- 
edge acquisition and sharing among communicating agents embedded in a net- 
work [7,8]. The applications we target range from hardware robots to virtual 
entities such as internet agents. Agent experiments can be simulated using a 
convenient simulation language. We analyzed the complexity of communicating 
agent simulations using Java and Easel [2]. Scenarios we have studied (see also 
our previous work [6]) axe listed below. The communication among agents can 
range from declarative queries to sub-natural language queries. 

- A set of agents monitoring an object are asked to build activity profiles based 
on exchanging elementary observations. 

- A set of car drivers form a line, where every car is following its predecessor. 
An unsafe distance can create a strong wave in the fine. Individual agents 
axe asked to incorporate and apply directions how to avoid the wave. 

- A set of micro-air vehicles form a grid and are asked to propagate information 
and concepts to a central server. 

2 Knowledge Acquisition and Communication 

For given knowledge representation language and agent communication language 
we follow several principles: 

- The agent network is a graph that has short search paths [9], [1]. 

- The individual agent is a graph that has short search paths. 

- All graphs can dynamically change, communities can be formed and com- 
municate. 

- The agent understanding substantially depends on the semantic information. 

For the knowledge acquisition of agents we use an algorithm that is based on 
the approach developed by J. Siskind [4]. In short, agents receive a sequence of 
utterances, each to be paired with a set of conceptual expressions. Conceptual 



expressions are assumed to be provided by e.g. the agent’s cognitive system, 
and consist of conceptual symbols. The basic problem is to map words onto 
conceptual symbols. The thesis is that the natural language based knowledge 
representation is effective in representing the agent world. 

3 Simulation Language Complexity 

For knowledge processing as well as for other important agent-related tasks we 
have studied Easel property-based types (PBT) paradigm [2], A type is a de- 
scription of some class of objects, while a description is a set of properties. PBTs 
are intended to provide a foundation for automated systems that solve problems 
in ways analogous to those of humans. We further developed our initial com- 
parison of Easel and Java presented in [6]. Java can be extended using special 
classes, such as Actor that is similar to Easel actor type, which enables lower 
complexity of programming simulations, such as in Jade [3] agent development 
environment. However, PBTs are not native structures in Java. 

4 Conclusion 

The presented knowledge acquisition method is promising for the next step of our 
project that deals with entities equipped with sensors. We have studied several 
examples of emergent agent systems and described knowledge acquisition and 
communication and the complexity of the implementation. The complexity of 
simulation using a specialized language such as Easel is lower compared with a 
general purpose language such as Java. The drawback of using a new language 
is the cost of mastering a special purpose language and its syntax rules. 

References 

1. A. Barabasi, E. Bonabeau: Scale-Free Networks. Scientific American. May 2003. 

2. A. Christie, D. Durkee, D. A. Fisher and D. A. Mundie. Easel Language Reference 
Manual and Author’s Guide. http://wwH.cert.org/Easel/lrm/index.html 

3. F. Bellifemine, A. Poggi, G. Rimassa. JADE - A FIPA-compliant agent framework. 
Proceedings of PAAM’99. London. 1999 

4. J. Siskind. Learning Word-to-meaning Mapping. Models of Language Acquisition. 
Edited by P. Broeder and J. Murre. Oxford University Press. 2000. 

5. J. Smid, M. Obitko, W. Truszkowski. An Approach to Knowledge Exchange and 
Sharing Between Agents. Innovative Concepts for Agent-Based Systems. Springer 
Verlag. 2003. LNCS 2534. 

6. J. Smid, M. Obitko, V. Snasel. Communicating Agents and Property-Based Types 
versus Objects. SOFSEM — Current Trends in Computer Science. 2004. 

7. J. Smid. Knowledge Models for Network Environment Communications: An 
Overview. IASTED AIA 2004 > PSMP 2 Workshop. Innsbruck. 2004. 

8. J. Smid, M. Obitko, V. Snasel. Semantically Based Knowledge Representation. In 
B.d’Auriol (ed.): The Proceedings of the CIC’04 Conference. Las Vegas. 2004. 
http : // j ewel . morgan . edu/" j smid/psmp3/index . php 

9. D. Watts. Small Worlds: The Dynamics of Networks between Order and Random- 
ness. Priceton University Pressq. 1999. . 



