International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) 

Volume 3 Issue 5, August 2019 Available Online: www.ijtsrd.com e-ISSN: 2456 - 6470 


A Real Dynamic Cyber Trust Model 

Kuchillapati Chinnari^ Dr. Adusumalli Balaji^ 

iM.Tech Student, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 

^Associate Professor and Head of Department, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 
i'2Guntur Engineering College, Yanamadala, Guntur, Andhra Pradesh, India 


ABSTRACT 


A Real Dynamic Cyber Trust Model is an application that is proposed in order 
to distinguish the trust belief among the trustees who have been marketing in 
today’s digital world by authenticated users. Though we are happy with the 
developing technology, still we are worrying about the security issues in every 
scenario. In the same way, if we shop online by trusting some products, there 
are few chances of getting bad products. We can experience these t 3 rpes of 
scenarios when we shop online in some interfaces like amazon, e-bay, flip- 
kart, etc. Of course, there are many existing systems which give a rating to the 
product, that help the buyer to trust the seller and buy the product. Still, there 
is an issue of being cheated by some wrong reviews given by unauthenticated 
users. In order to overcome that type of issues, this Real D 3 mamic Cyber Trust 
Model has been proposed. A Real D 3 mamic Cyber Trust Model has taken the 
scenario of seller and buyer who goes shopping for products online. This Real 
D 3 mamic Cyber Trust model acts as an interface between the Seller and Buyer. 
Both Modules of Seller and Buyer have the opportunity of getting registered 
and log in to the application. Buyer can give the feedback of any product he 
buys and checks the trust factor of any seller. Whereas the Seller can add, 
update or delete the products he sells. Based on the feedback given by the 
buyer the Real D 3 mamic Cyber Trust Model calculates the trust factor of the 
seller, which helps the buyer to find out whether the seller is trustworthy or 
not. 


KEYWORDS: Authentication, Competence, Integrity, Interface, Trust Factor, 
Trustworthy, Trust model 

INTRODUCTION 

A REAL DYNAMIC CYBER TRUST MODEL is a system which is 
used in any of the real-time scenarios in order to provide the 
trust factor i.e.; the believing rate of a particular entity 
dynamically based on their actions performed. It further 
helps to maintain the details of trusters and Trustees in the 
Scenario. This system maintains a centralized database where 
the details of trusters and trustees are stored. 

A Real Dynamic Cyber Trust Model can be useful to the 
trusters in any organization. It provides the facility to the 
trusters to get Trust Factor of the Trustees which changes 
d 3 mamically based on the feedback of the other trusters. 

The main aim of this system is to provide "Trust Factor" 
which changes based on the feedback of trusters. Here we are 
considering a scenario of a SELLER and a BUYER. Here, the 
Seller is a Trustee and the Buyer is a Truster. 

OBJECTIVE 

The main objective of this system is to calculate the trust 
factor of the seller based on feedback provided by the buyer 
for his purchased product. In this project. Seller registers 
with the system by entering his details. Further, he could log 
in by using credentials and performs operations like selecting 
his products from the database and updating products if any 
required. This system provides registration to the buyer, such 
that the buyer login and selects a product based on his 


requirement. Then the system will automatically provide the 
id of seller producing that product which helps buyer either 
to get trust factor of a particular seller or provides the 
feedback to a particular seller about his product. 

AIM AND SCOPE 

A. Aim 

The main aim of this system is to provide Trust Factor of 
Seller which changes dynamically based on feedback 
provided by the Buyers. 

B. Scope 

The scope of this system is to enable automated trust 
management that represents trusting behaviors, trusting 
belief in integrity from that incompetence. We propose this 
real dynamic cyber trust model with the authentication of the 
user. 

EXISTING SYSTEMS 

RBAC [ROLE BASED ACCESS CONTROL) is a modern system 
uses digital identity as evidence about a user to grant access 
to resources the user is entitled to. However, holding 
evidence does not necessarily certify a user’s good behavior. 

For example, when a credit card company is deciding to issue 
a credit card to an individual, it does not only require 
evidence such as social security number and home address 


How to cite this paper: Kuchillapati 
Chinnari | Dr. Adusumalli Balaji "A Real 
Dynamic Cyber Trust Model" Published in 
International 
Journal of Trend in 
Scientific Research 
and Development 
[ijtsrd], ISSN: 2456- 
6470, Volume-3 | 

Issue-5, August 
2019, pp.718-720, 
https://doi.org/10.31142/ijtsrd26420 



Copyright © 2019 by authorfs) and 
International Journal of Trend in Scientific 
Research and Development Journal. This 
is an Open Access article distributed 
under the terms of 




the Creative 

Commons Attribution 
License (CC BY 4.0] 

fhttp://creativecommons.org/hcenses/by 
/4.0} 


(5) IJTSRD I Unique Paper ID - IJTSRD26420 | Volume - 3 | Issue - 5 | July - August 2019 


Page 718 












International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) @ www.iitsrd.com elSSN: 2456-6470 


but also checks the credit score, representing the belief about 
the applicant, formed based on previous behavior. That belief 
is called d 3 mamic measure which assures that a user will not 
conduct harmful actions. Similarly, here our work is 
proposed. We developed a real dynamic trust model with 
authentication of the user. Experimental evaluation of the 
proposed integrity belief model in a simulated environment 
of entities with different behavior patterns suggests that the 
model is able to provide better estimations of integrity trust 
behavior than other major trust computation models, 
especially in the case of trustees with changing behavior. 

Hence, we proposed a REAL DYNAMIC CYBER TRUST MODEL 
with user authorization which solves this problem by having 
both integrity trust and competence trust. 

> Competence means a trustee havings the ability to 
perform certain tasks. 

> Integrity means a trustee is honest and keeps 
commitments. 


SYSTEM ANALYSIS 

The Real Dynamic Cyber Trust Model is built on Net 
Beans IDE, where JAVA is front-end and MySQL is back¬ 
end connected using JDBC. 


It is independent of the operating system and accessible 
application. 

A. Hardware Requirements: 


> 

> 

> 

> 


Processor 

Speed 

RAM 

Hard Disk 


Pentium 3 
1.1 GHz 
256 MB [min) 
20 GB [min) 


B. 

> 

> 

> 

> 


Software Requirements: 

Operating System 
Front End 
Back End 

Database Connectivity 


: Windows XP 
: Java 
: MySQL 
; JDBC 


SYSTEM DESIGN 



As per our Scenario of SELLER-BUYER, here the trustee is the 
seller. His products could be purchased by ‘n’ number of 
people [buyers). The feedback of product purchased buyers 
will be given to our trust model (Reputation System). Based 


on which the trust factor of that particular Seller will be 
dynamically changed and is provided to the truster (Buyer). 

PROJECT ANALYSIS 

Our Real dynamic cyber trust model contains three different 
modules namely: 

> Reputation System Module: 

The Reputation System stores and provides the operations 
done by the Seller and Buyer. It provides Trust Factor of 
Seller to the Buyer and also changes it dynamically based on 
feedback provided by the Buyer. 

> Seller Module: 

The Seller registers and login into the system in order to 
select, update or delete his products. 

> Buyer Module: 

The Buyer registers and login into the system in order to 
select the products and get its corresponding seller’s id, such 
that he could get Trust Factor of that Seller or he can provide 
feedback to the Seller’s product. 

CONCLUSION 

In REAL DYNAMIC CYBER TRUST MODEL, we proposed and 
designed a dynamic trust model for determining the trust 
factor of a seller in a SELLER-BUYER scenario. This system 
provides services such as registrations and logins for seller 
and buyer, buyers view products of different sellers, obtain 
the trust factor of seller given by multiple buyers and they 
provide feedback to sellers. The sellers will give the details of 
the products they produce. The buyer will see the products of 
different sellers along with their ids’. Among different 
products, buyers will select their required products. The 
system we developed can be used by different scenarios. 
Buyers can also see the existing trust factor saved in our 
system. The trust factor of a particular seller will be varied 
depending on the feedback provided by the buyers who 
purchased products. This model is ingrained in answering 
from social science and is not restricted to trusting belief as 
most cyber methods are. We presented a demonstration of 
context and functions that relate dissimilar contexts, enabling 
Building and testing initial competence trust. Experiments in 
a virtual trust environment show that the proposed integrity 
trust model carries out better than other major trust models 
in calculating the behavior of users whose behavior 
transform based on certain patterns over time. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The satisfaction and euphoria that accompany the successful 
completion of any task would be incomplete without the 
mention of people who made it possible, whose constant 
guidance and encouragement crowned our efforts with 
success. 

The first person 1 would like to thank my Project guide Mr. Dr. 
A. Balaji, M. Tech, Ph.D., Associate Professor and Head of the 
Department in the Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering. His understanding, encouragement and 
personal guidance have provided the basis for this project. 

1 wish to thank Mr. Dr. A. RAMA RAO M. Tech, Ph.D., Professor 
in the Department Mechanical Engineering, Principal of 
Guntur Engineering College, Yanamadala, for their 
encouragement. 


(5) IJTSRD I Unique Paper ID - 1JTSRD26420 | Volume - 3 | Issue - 5 | July - August 2019 


Page 719 













International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) @ www.iitsrd.com elSSN: 2456-6470 


1 also take this opportunity to express gratitude from the 
core of my heart to our honorable Chairman, Mr. M. 
NARAHARl RAO for his cordial support, which helped me in 
completing this task through various stages. 

1 am very much thankful to Technical Supporting Staff, 
especially Mr. M. Koteswara Rao, M. Tech, Assistant Professor 
who has helped me in the successful completion of the 
project. 

Finally, 1 would like to thank my parents for their 
encouragement and support in studying this course and for 
providing valuable suggestions which helped me a lot. 


REFERENCES 

[1] G.R. Barnes and P.B. Cerrito, "A mathematical model for 
interpersonal relationships in social networks," Social 
Networks, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 179- 196,1998. 

[2] R. Brent, Algorithms for Minimization without 
Derivatives. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1973. 

[3] A. Das and M.M. Islam. "Secured Trust: a dynamic trust 
computation model for secured communication in 
multivalent systems," IEEE Trans. Dependable Sec. 
Compute., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 261-274, 2012. 

[4] C. Dellarocas, "Immunizing online reputation reporting 
systems against unfair ratings and discriminatory 
behavior," in Proc. 2nd ACM Conference on Electronic 
Commerce, 2000, pp. 150-157 


(5) IJTSRD I Unique Paper ID - 1JTSRD26420 | Volume - 3 | Issue - 5 | July - August 2019 


Page 720 





