New Web Server — the Java Version of 
Tempest — Produced 

A new software design and development effort has produced a Java (Sun Microsystems, 
Inc.) version of the award-winning Tempest software (refs. 1 and 2). In 1999, the 
Embedded Web Technology (EWT) team received a prestigious R&D 100 Award for 
Tempest , Java Version. In this article, " Tempest " will refer to the Java version of Tempest, 
a World Wide Web server for desktop or embedded systems. 

Tempest was designed at the NASA Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field to run on any 
platform for which a Java Virtual Machine (JVM, Sun Microsystems, Inc.) exists. The 
JVM acts as a translator between the native code of the platform and the byte code of 
Tempest, which is compiled in Java. These byte code files are Java executables with a 
".class" extension. Multiple byte code files can be zipped together as a "*.jar" file for more 
efficient transmission over the Internet. Today’s popular browsers, such as Netscape 
(Netscape Communications Corporation) and Internet Explorer (Microsoft Corporation) 
have built-in Virtual Machines to display Java applets. 



Embedded Web Technology. 

The popularity of Java has given Sun Microsystems, Inc., the ability to support a large 
number of platforms and operating systems. Tempest was able to leverage this popularity 
and make it attractive for a wide range of users to employ Tempest as a platform- 
independent web server. 







Tempest was designed with features allowing ease of installation in embedded or desktop 
computers. Separate configuration files are one of these features. The user can modify the 
configuration files to limit client access to the server according to Internet Protocol (IP) 
addresses or to specific user ID and password combinations that force clients to identify 
themselves as valid users. Other configuration files include a file that links stored images 
to specific user ID’s for the customization of web pages served by Tempest and a file that 
contains pseudo commands for other executables on the server. The pseudo commands 
work in conjunction with Tempest ’ s dynamic web page feature or custom <TEMPEST> 
tags to modify the contents of web pages as they are served. 

Command line options allow users to specify Tempest port numbers and persistent or 
nonpersistent connections, and to enable or disable a debug feature, a logging feature, or 
the client ID and password authorization. 

Tempest requires little minimum memory (<200 kilobytes) and computer resources. Its 
source code is available through participation in the EWT Workshops and is well 
documented for those who wish to customize the code. A user manual and design manual 
are also available. 

Existing applications of Tempest include remote control of video cameras (pan, tilt, zoom, 
and focus), science experiments for education (ref. 2), and applications in the automotive, 
medical, instrumentation, machine control, and communications industries. Tempest is 
being applied in-house in Glenn’s Satellites and Networking Branch, Manufacturing 
Engineering Division, and External Programs Directorate. 

Find out more about Glenn’s EWT http://vic.grc.nasa.gov/. 

References 

1. Daniele, C.J.: Embedded Web Technology: Internet Technology Applied to Real- 
Time System Control. Research & Technology 1997, NASA/TM — 1998-206312, 
1998, pp. 165-166. 

2. York, D.W.; and Babula, M: Virtual Interactive Classroom: A New Technology 
for Distance Learning Developed. Research & Technology 1998, 

NASA/TM — 1999-208815, 1999, pp. 183-184. 

Glenn contacts: David W. York, (216) 433-3162, David.W.York@grc.nasa.gov; Maria 
Babula, (216) 433-5221, Maria.Babula@grc.nasa.gov; Joseph G. Ponyik, (216) 
433-8592, Joseph.G.Ponyik@grc.nasa.gov; and Lisa M. Lambert, (216) 433-3994, 
Lisa.M.Lambert@grc.nasa.gov 

Authors: David W. York and Joseph G. Ponyik 

Headquarters program office: OLMSA 

Programs/Projects: VIC, EWT, SEMAA, AEL, FCF, LTP 



Special Recognition: Tempest, Java Version, received a 1999 R&D 100 Award. 



