

International Journal of Trend in Scientific 
Research and Development (IJTSRD) 
International Open Access Journal 



♦. 

ISSN No: 2456 - 6470 | www.ijtsrd.com | Volume - 2 | Issue - 3 


♦ 

♦ 


Learning of “How to build attractive 
and unique E-commerce websites” 


Aakash Vidhate, Rupesh Tarlekar, Prof. Sujata Gawade 

Dept, of Computer Technology, Bharati Vidyapeeth Institute 
of Technology, Kharghar, Navi Mumbai, Maharashtra, India 


ABSTRACT 

Additional features of the website are now a days, e- 
commerce websites like Flip kart, snap deal, Amazon, 
etc have become a trend but the common thing in 
them is they show comparisons in products of various 
different companies. Whereas how it will be if a 
website similar to the concept of trivago is developed 
which allows the user to compare same products price 
between two or more than two (as per user choice) 
most trending websites which will provide users with 
the most user-friendly environment and will be time¬ 
saving. In today's world, mostly, people get confused 
about which product to buy? And they start 
comparing its reviews, popularity, prize quality by 
using various different websites in spite of comparing 
on each and every website how is it if a website like 
trivago is developed which cannot only sell its own 
products but also can even provide reviews, prize, and 
popularity, quality comparison of all other sites on 
one single website. A proper E-commerce website 
should contain cart, search engine, products menu, 
efficiently functioning login and registering system, 
fully functioning payment methods like COD, Paytm, 
Paypal, Online banking etc. In the field of software 
engineering E-commerce is trending way of 
commercial sales since the user can avoid long 
queues, saves queue time, provides refund or 
exchange options for the user, most important it 
provides the user-friendly environment, huge number 
of products and filters for getting the best product out 
of all, etc .E-commerce makes life easier by providing 
user-friendly GUI. 

Keywords: product, Website, Paypal,Paytm, GUI. 


INTRODUCTION 

E-commerce can be defined as the exchanging of 
products, business information using electronic data 
interchange (EDI), electronic mail (Email), electronic 
fund transfer and other network technologies without 
making use of paper. 

E-commerce acts user-friendly by allowing e- 
commerce users to visit World Wide Web sites of 
multiple vendors 24 hours a day and seven days a 
week to make choice and purchase product as per 
their wish without leaving home or offices. For 
sellers, E-commerce provides a way to cut cost and 
expand a market. They do not maintain a store or print 
and distribute mail order catalogs. E-commerce 
follows principles same as traditional commerce 
follows which is buyers and sellers exchange and 
transfer goods and services from one place to another 
Internet technology also allows sellers to track the 
interests and preferences of their customer with 
customer’s permission and then use this information 
to build a coordinative relationship with a customer 
by customizing products and services to meet 
customer needs. Typical e-commerce a transaction 
contains the purchasing of online products, and with 
rare use, customized or personalized online liquor 
store inventory services. 

Electronic commerce is mainly divided into following 
sections such as economic and technological. The 
importance of this system will show you how to get 
started in the interesting and exciting world of 
Electronic Commerce. New inn ovative technologies 
are constantly being evolved and their proper 
understanding plays a significant role in achieving the 
success of an operation, and especially for the one 


@ IJTSRD | Available Online @ www.ijtsrd.com | Volume-2 | Issue-3 | Mar-Apr 2018 


Page: 1660 







International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) ISSN: 2456-6470 


who is given a duty to select, establish, and 

maintain the respective infrastructure. 

Building attractive and unique website 

For increasing your profits and benefits out of huge 
number of ecommerce websites, no doubt it should be 
advertised on other sites but it should also such an 
attractive and fully user friendly system which will 
make it stand out of other Ecommerce systems. Such 
type of Ecommerce website should have features such 
as:- 

• Allow comparison of two or more than two 
products of two or more than two trending 
Ecommerce sites. 

• Even if your website is comparing two or more 
products on another site as an addition to it can 
sell its own product and can also allow consumers 
to sell their product which can increase its profit 
too much extent. 

• Notify users whenever any new product is 
launched on site by either mailing them or by 
sending SMS. 

• Providing maximum number of filters for user for 
purpose of satisfying user’s choice. 

• Providing maximum number of payment options 
of various trending payment applications such as 
PayPal, Paytm, etc for user convenience. 

• Provide the user interface in such a way that even 
website visitors will get attract to purchase the 
products on Ecommerce site. 


Implementation of Ecommerce Website 

We began implementation of our project with HTML 
language but only making use of HTML doesn’t make 
website fully functional i.e. Using HTML now a days 
can make a website functional but only up to some 
extent not full because it can neither store user 
account details nor product details and neither search 
engine can work just by only HTML. A website can 
look most attractive by using CSS (Cascading Style 
Sheet).CSS provides you user-friendly environment 
and user-friendly Interface which helps a website to 
function more efficiently and adds an attractiveness to 
a site. Further, we made use of PHP (Personal Home 
Page) which is an HTML embedded language that 
helps in making site functional to much extent.PHP is 
used mostly in Login, Signup, Search engine, etc. 
PHP plays a significant role in establish connectivity 
with database. 

But, still our website doesn’t become fully functional 
because still it doesn’t stores user account details or 
product details, Therefore, To overcome this problem 
we should use database software like My SQL etc My 
SQL database allows storing user account details, 
User purchased product details, User credential 
Details, and also allows admin to manage database, 
provides password protection, which in turn actually 
contributes making website fully functional in an 
efficient way. 


in Look@me * 

E* C # Secure ' https:/.^ wr«:liKilatme«m/?30»teR*nge%SB«rT%5D=2018-04-OMuOate«ange%SBdep%50=2018-04-098uPnceRange%5Bfrom%SD=0&»PrKeRange%SBto%50=0&iPathld=M7... £ j % j 



Fig 1 : Attractive & Unique Ecommerce Website/ 1] 


@ IJTSRD | Available Online @ www.ijtsrd.com | Volume-2 | Issue-3 | Mar-Apr 2018 


Page: 1661 














International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) ISSN: 2456-6470 


Working of Ecommerce 



Fig. 2: Flowchart of Unique an attractive 
Ecommerce 

Algorithm:- 

Step 1: If already have an account go to [step 2] else 
enter Registration details. 


Step 5: Click on product you wish to purchase. 
Confirm purchase. 

Step 6: Proceed to Check out or Go to [Step 8]. 

Step 7: If you want to Shop Further Go to[Step3] or 
Go to[Step 8]. 

Step 8: Log out 

CONCLUSION 

After creating the website for our project, we learnt 
Ecommerce development approaches and 
fundamentals, as well as how to use and code for e- 
commerce systems. This helped us understand 
languages and knowledge required for developing an 
ecommerce website. Our project is creating the 
attractive website which entails users about executing 
business by describing products with a specification, 
customer intentioned delivering products 
electronically. The main aim of this project is to make 
people aware of trending E-commerce business and 
even some trending e-commerce websites. 

• The knowledge that we could gain from this 
project is about 

• Learning languages such as HTML, CSS, JAVA, 
MYSQL, etc. 

• Business management 

• Time Management 

REFERENCES 

1. http://devdocs.io/ 

2. https://guide.freecodecamp.org/ 

3. https://developer.mozilla.org/en- 
US/docs/Web/Reference 

4. https://tympanus.net/codrops/css_reference/ 

5. https://stackoverflow/ 


Step 2: Enter Log in details 

Step 3: select from two options whether to proceed to 
buy products from our own website or from our 
product comparison website. 

Step 4: Products menu and search bar is displayed. 
Enter the product name you want to search. 


@ IJTSRD | AvailableOnline@www.ijtsrd.coml Volume-2 | Issue-3 | Mar-Apr 2018 


Page: 1662 











































































