Corresponding Water-Vapor Absorption Spectrum 
Light Transmitted Through Filter 


'’''"qafi nnrn-nm 




Two Pass Bands; 
One at Wavelength 
of Absorption Peak^ 


946.0003-nm 
Absorption Peak 


l_JL 



943.5 944.0 944.5 945.0 945.5 946.0 946.5 947.0 947.5 948.0 

Wavelength, nm 


The Transmission Spectrum of a prototype filter was found to contain the desired two narrow pass 
bands within a stop band and was tension-tuned to match the 946-nm water vapor absorption line. 


vapor absorption peak [which has 8.47 
pm full width at half maximum 
(FWHM)], and 

• Contains another pass band at the 
slightly shorter wavelength of 945.9 
nm, where there is scattering of light 
from aerosol particles but no absorp- 
tion by water molecules. 

Whereas filters used heretofore in 
DIAL have had bandwidths of =300 pm, 
recent progress in the art of fiber-optic 
Bragg-grating filters has made it feasible 
to reduce bandwidths to <20 pm and 
thereby to reduce background noise. An- 
other benefit of substituting fiber-optic 
Bragg-grating filters for those now in use 


would be significant reductions in the 
weights of DIAL instruments. Yet another 
advantage of fiber-optic Bragg-grating fil- 
ters is that their transmission spectra can 
be shifted to longer wavelengths by heat- 
ing or stretching: hence, it is envisioned 
that future DIAL instruments would con- 
tain devices for fine adjustment of trans- 
mission wavelengths through stretching 
or heating of fiber-optic Bragg-grating fil- 
ters nominally designed and fabricated to 
have transmission wavelengths that, in 
the absence of stretching, would be 
slightly too short. 

Prototype fiber-optic Bragg-grating fil- 
ters were designed so that their grating 


structures were chirped and each filter 
included 7t-radian phase shifts at two lo- 
cations along its length. In each filter, 
the chirp was characterized by 200 uni- 
form-pitch fields concatenated along a 
total length of about 6 cm. The chirp 
rate was 0.3 nm/cm, with a pitch cen- 
tered at 648.9 nm. The 7t-radian phase 
shifts were located at lengthwise posi- 
tions of 29 and 31 cm, respectively. The 
particular combination of chirping pa- 
rameters and phase-shift locations was 
chosen to yield the desired pass bands at 
wavelengths of 945.9 and 946.0003 nm in 
a stop band 2.66 nm wide upon stretch- 
ing of the fiber at a tension equivalent to 
the terrestrial weight of a mass of 140 mg 
(see figure). The filters were fabricated 
in a multistep process, starting with elec- 
tron-beam patterning of step-chirp cor- 
rugations into a mask. Hydrogen-loaded 
single-mode optical fibers were irradi- 
ated through the mask by light from an 
ultraviolet excimer laser, then the fibers 
were annealed by heating. 

The prototype fiber-optic Bragg-grat- 
ing filters were subjected to several tests 
that demonstrated their potential utility 
for DIAL water-vapor measurements. 
Measurements of the transmission spec- 
tra of the filters were found to be well ap- 
proximated by theoretical calculations, 
which were made by use of a piecewise- 
matrix form of a coupled-mode equation. 
Tension tuning was also demonstrated. 

This work was done by Leila B. Vann and 
Russell f. DeYoung of Langley Research 
Center and Stephen J. Mihailov, Ping Lu, 
Dan Grobnic, and Robert Walker of the Com- 
munications Research Centre Canada. Fur- 
ther information is contained in a TSP (see 
page!). LAR-1 7039-1 


@ Simulating Responses of Gravitational-Wave Instrumentation 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


Synthetic LISA is a computer pro- 
gram for simulating the responses of the 
instrumentation of the NASA/ESA 
Laser Interferometer Space Antenna 
(LISA) mission, the purpose of which is 
to detect and study gravitational waves. 
Synthetic LISA generates synthetic time 
series of the LISA fundamental noises, 
as filtered through all the time-delay-in- 
terferometry (TDI) observables. (TDI is 
a method of canceling phase noise in 
temporally varying unequal-arm inter- 
ferometers.) Synthetic LISA provides a 
streamlined module to compute the 


TDI responses to gravitational waves, ac- 
cording to a full model of TDI (includ- 
ing the motion of the LISA array and 
the temporal and directional depend- 
ence of the arm lengths). Synthetic 
LISA is written in the C++ programming 
language as a modular package that ac- 
commodates the addition of code for 
specific gravitational wave sources or for 
new noise models. In addition, time se- 
ries for waves and noises can be easily 
loaded from disk storage or electronic 
memory. The package includes a 
Python-language interface for easy, in- 


teractive steering and scripting. 
Through Python, Synthetic LISA can 
read and write data files in Flexible 
Image Transport System (FITS), which 
is a commonly used astronomical data 
format. 

This program was written by fohn Arm- 
strong, feffrey Edlund, and Michele Vallisneri 
of Caltech for 'NASA's Jet Propulsion Labo- 
ratory. 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-41001. ' 


42 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2006 


