///' 



Ruubaugh - Bahsvior/Parfomance - Page 1 



P' ^ 



Semiannual Status Report 
September, 1991 - February, 1992 

Behavior & Performance Project 

I. SUMMARY OF FINDINGS : The results of several experiments 
were disseminated professionally during this semiannual period. 
Integration of these data into the professional literature — 
essential to the science goals of the Behavior & Performance 
project — reveals the regard the psychological scientific 
community has expressed for this NASA-supported work. These 
studies are critical for the interpretation and acceptance of 
flight-based science to be conducted by the Behavior & 
Performance project. 

A. Publications (In print and in press) 

1. Washburn, D. A. (1992). External audio for IBM/PC- 

compatible computers. Behavior Research Methods , 
Instruments. & Co mputers . 24, 80-81. (see Appendix) 

2. Washburn, D. A., & Rurabaugh, D. M. (In press). A 

comparative assessment of psychomotor performance: Target 
prediction by humans and macaques. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: General . 

Abstract 

Although nonhuman primates such as rhesus monkeys have been 
useful models of many aspects of cognition and performance, it 
has been argued that they, unlike humans, may lack the capacity 
to respond as predictor-operators. Consequently these animals 
may respond to psychomotor demands in ways that are qualitatively 
different than humans. Data from the present series of 
experiments undermine this claim, suggesting rather a continuity 
of predictive competency between humans and nonhuman primates. A 
prediction coefficient, based on a regression analysis of the 
observed path of responding, was devised to examine the degree to 
which each subject's response path approximated the optimal 
predictive strategy. These coefficients indicated that whereas 
human subjects (M = 30) generally predict more accurately, the 
rhesus (N = 10) anticipated the movements of the target in all 
conditions and performed comparably to humans under some 
conditions. It appears that humans and rhesus monkeys both 
possess and exhibit the capacity, at least to some degree, to 
respond to where a stimulus is going. 



(N'ASA-C?'-1V^11^) HUMAN a'HAVTO'' ANO HUf'AN \'^2- 1"^.^?! 
i-'FRC"ORMANC f : PSYCHQMfjTuS "'b^'ANluS "e^iannuil 
^♦:.a*:ur, Rorjort, Sep. 1991 - Pvjh. 1^9? 

(i"eor';ii "^t^te Univ.) "^ o CSCL OoA Unci us 

Gj/bl 007^07'+ 



Rumbaugh - B«havlor/P*rComanc« - Pag* 2 



3. Washburn, D. A. (In press). Response path: A dependent 

measure for computer-maze solving and other tasks. Behavior 
Research Methods ^ Instruments. & Computers . 

Abstract 

Response time and accuracy are sensitive measures of overall 
performance but may mask underlying response strategies. For 
example, analysis of latency and accuracy measures produced in a 
computerized-maze task does not reveal whether rhesus monkeys 
really "solve a maze" or simply move as much as is possible 
toward the target, negotiating barriers through trial-and-error 
as they are encountered. Regression procedures are described for 
analyzing response path against several hypothetical response 
curves, and analyses of response path for rhesus monkeys' 
performance on the computerized MAZE task are presented to 
illustrate. The data suggest that rhesus monkeys do invoke a 
"solve the maze" response strategy, as the observed response 
topography is significantly associated with the optimal path of 
responding. It is argued that many experimental paradigms would 
benefit from analysis of the response path that subjects exhibit. 

4. Hopkins, W. D., Washburn, D. A., Berke, L. , & Williams, M. 

(In press). Behavioral Asymmetries of Psychomotor 
Performance in Rhesus Monkey: A Dissociation between Hand 
Preference and Skill. Journal of Comparative Psychology . 

Abstract 

Hand preferences were recorded for 36 rhesus monkeys as they 
manipulated a joystick in response to two computerized tasks. 
These preferences were then used to contrast 8 left- and 10 
right-handed subjects on performance measures of hand skill. 
Individual hand preferences were found but no significant 
population asymmetry was observed across the sample. However, 
the performance data reveal substantial benefits of right 
handedness for joystick manipulation, as this group of monkeys 
mastered the two psychomotor tasks significantly faster than did 
their left-handed counterparts. These data support earlier 
reports of a right-hand advantage for joystick manipulation, as 
well as of the importance of distinguishing between hand 
preference and manual performance in research on functional 
asymmetries. 

5. Washburn, D. A., & Rumbaugh, D. M. (In press). Testing 

primates with joystick-based automated apparatus. Behavior 
Research Methods. Instruments. & Computers. 



Ruabaugb - B«havlor/P«rforaance - Paga 3 



Abstract 



Nonhuman primates provide useful models for studying a 
variety of medical, biological, and behavioral topics. In the 
present investigation, 4 years of joystick-based automated 
testing of monkeys using the Language Research Center's 
Computerized Test System (LRC-CTS) are examined to derive hints 
and principles for comparable testing with other species — 
including humans. The results of multiple parametric studies are 
reviewed and reliability data are presented to reveal the 
surprises and pitfalls associated with video-task testing of 
performance . 

6. Washburn, D. A. , & Rumbaugh, D. M. (1991). Environmental 

enrichment and performance assessment for ground- or flight- 
based research with primates (abstract only). ASGSB 
Bulletin ^ 5., 91. 

Abstract 

An automated training and testing paradigm was developed to 
provide (a) environmental enrichment for rhesus monkeys used in 
biopsychological space research; (b) continuous assessment of the 
psychological wellbeing of these animals; and (c) a battery of 
behavioral/ performance measures indicative of or correlative 
with biological indices of adaptation. Subjects respond to 
computer-generated stimuli by the skillful manipulation of a 
joystick in accordance with the demands of a variety of tasks. 
Measures of psychomotor competence, learning, attention, and 
memory are obtained with no significant compromise to potential 
biomedical analyses. 

From a series of ground-based studies, data from 36 animals 
are presented to represent the characteristics of training and to 
provide empirical support that these three research goals can be 
satisfied. The data support the utility of the paradigm for 
ground-based research and its viability for future studies in 
microgravity. In particular, the potential is discussed for 
immediate integrated biopsychological studies of wellbeing and 
adaptation. 

B. Submitted for publication 

Smith, J. D., Schull, J, & Washburn, D. A. Cognition and 
Metacoanition in Rhesus Monkeys . 

Washburn, D. A. Comparative Perspectives on Cognitive Science: 
A Commentary . Submitted for publication. 

Washburn , D . A . , & Rumbaugh , D . M . Investigations of Rhesus 



Riuibaugh - Bahavlor/Perfomanc* - Pag* 4 



Monkey Video-Task Performance: Evidence for Enrichment . 
Submitted for publication. 

C . Presentations 

Washburn, D. A., & Rumbaugh, D. M. (1991, October). 

Environmental Enrichment and Performance Assessment for 
Ground- or Flight-Based Research with Primates . Poster 
presented to the annual meeting of the American Society for 
Gravitational and Space Biology, Washington, DC. 

Washburn, D. A. , & Rumbaugh, D. M. (1991, October). 

Investigations of Rhesus Monkey (Macaca mulatta^ Video-Task 
Performance; Evidence for Enrichment . Paper presented to 
the Annual meeting of the American Association for 
Laboratory Animal Science, Buffalo, NY. 

Washburn, D. A., & Rumbaugh, D. M. (1991, November). Joystick 
and Graphics Utilities for Studying Behavior . Paper 
presented to the annual meeting of the Society for Computers 
in Psychology, San Francisco, CA. 

Washburn, D. A. (1991, November). A Tool for Analyzing Response 
Sequences . Paper presented to the annual meeting of the 
Society for Computers in Psychology, San Francisco, CA. 

D- Other 

Kent, D. (1992). "Spotlight on research: What can monkey 

factors tell us about human factors?" (A report on the 
research by Washburn & Rumbaugh reported at the 1991 
convention of the American Psychological Society) . APS 
Observer, 4., 5. (see Appendix). 



II. TRAINING 

The animals continued to progress satisfactorily through the 
tasks at both labs. Changes, based on the growing corpus of 
training data, were made in the training criteria during this 
semiannual period; already it is clear that these changes are 
enhancing progress through the training curriculum. Figure 1 
displays the training status of each animal in the current 
training pool. 

Testing of the new NASA-produced software (see below) has 
enabled GSU animals to begin additional training, for instance on 
those SELECT icons that correspond to tasks not currently 
available in the GSU-written SELECT task. 



Ruabaugh 



B«havlor/P«rforManc« - Pag« 5 



GSU TRAINING PROGRESS 




ARC (Groups A & B) TRAINING PROGRESS 




ARC (Groups C & D) TRAINING PROGRESS 




(/I O "D 

C 

m c 



5i 



H 1 h 

q c/)H>rnm °-o 

m 



O O r- 
m < -; 
-I -n S 






Ruabaugh - Behavior /Per fomanc* - Pag* 6 



III. RESEARCH ACTIVITIES : The following support studies and 
research-related activities were undertaken within this 
semiannual period. 

A. Continuation of ongoing studies. We continue to test Abel 
and Baker regularly, as well now as the 6 other animals that have 
completed the entire training protocol. These sessions 
contribute to the corpus of normative and support data required 
for our science. In particular, Abel and Baker are key subjects 
for hardware/software verification and for continuing 
investigations of enrichment and psychological well-being — as 
evidenced by the publications of this period. Extended testing 
effects on SELECT task performance, were the SELECT options may 
be changed, is an important part of this continued testing, as 
ARC animals will be maintained on SELECT after completing 
training. Additionally, follow-up studies to the previously 
published NUMBER, isolation, memory, and DVF papers are underway. 

B. DESK support study. During the last semiannual period, it 
was observed that ESOP performance is significantly worse than 
performance by the same animals in the PPR. A series of 
experiments was conducted to determine whether the location of 
the ESOP desk is the cause of this performance disruption. The 
results of these studies have been reported, and are summarized 
below. 

DESK Support Study #1 Abstract 
(31-Dec-91) 

To determine the effects of the ESOP desk upon PTS 
performance, one unrestrained monkey (Abel) was tested under 
conditions that differed only in the position of the desk 
relative to the tip of the joystick. Using a mock-up of an ESOP 
desk, attached to Abel's home cage for testing that was otherwise 
noirmal, desk position relative to constant joystick position/ 
angle was varied. Desk position was found significantly to 
affect the speed and accuracy of psychomotor responding (p < 
.05). Performance was compromised with the desk in the standard 
ESOP position (11 mm below the tip of the joystick), but was 
improved approximately 5% when the desk was lowered slightly (to 
36 mm below the tip of the joystick) . 

DESK Support Study #2 Abstract 
24-Jan-92 

A rhesus monkey (Abel) was tested with a range of potential 
desk and joystick positions to determine the effects on 
psychomotor task performance. The subject was tested with the 
joystick above the desk by 0, 11, 22, 33, or 44 mm, or with the 
desk removed altogether. These distances were achieved first by 



RuBbaugh - Bahavior/Perfomance - Pag* 7 



manipulating the position of the desk and then by manipulating 
the position of the joystick; for both sets of manipulations, the 
order of distances was randomized (e.g., 33, 0, 22, 11, 44 mm 
separation. CHASE response time and PURSUIT accuracy was found 
systematically to improve by lowering the desk as much as 44 mm, 
although performance was poor when the desk was removed 
altogether. In contrast, performance on the psychomotor tasks 
improved only when the joystick was elevated 22 mm above the 
desk; further elevations of the joystick resulted in poorer 
performance. In all cases, performance declined as the joystick 
was raised. These data confirm earlier suspicions that the 
position of the desk relative to the joystick influences 
performance and that raising the joystick relative to the animal 
is the less preferred solution to the problem. 

Desk Support Study #3 Abstract 
(2-Feb-92) 

The second DESK experiment was refined and repeated, holding 
joystick position/angle constant, to determine the putative 
"optimal displacement" between joystick and ESOP desk. Three 
fully-trained monkeys (Abel, Baker, CIO) were tested with 
joystick-to-desk distance varied between 11 and 66 mm, or with 
the desk removed altogether. Performance systematically improved 
toward nominal baseline as the desk was lowered relative to the 
joystick. However, lowering the desk beyond 44 mm below the 
joystick tip resulted in relatively compromised performance, 
culminating in poor performance when the desk was removed 
altogether. It is recommended that the desk be positioned so as 
to achieve a 33 mm vertical separation with the joystick (which 
cannot be elevated to achieve this separation), resulting in 
freedom of joystick movement in all directions. 

SUMMARY 

*■ Desk position relative to joystick position does adversely 

affect performance. 

► Raising the joystick slightly while keeping desk position 
constant results in slight benefits to performance. 
However, this option is not recommended because (a) further 
elevation of the joystick results in performance disruption; 
(b) that performance is relatively worse than baseline is 
probably attributable to the current elevation of the 
joystick; and (c) hardware restricts the degree to which the 
joystick can be raised without interfering with the monitor. 

»• Lowering the desk to permit 33 mm vertical separation 

between the tip of the joystick and the edge of the desk 
permits (at least with the joystick used in these 



RuBbaugh - B«h«vlor/Pertom«nee - P«g« 8 



experiments) free range of unrestricted joystick movement 
and, in these experiments, most favorable performance. 

*■ Removing the desk altogether while leaving the joystick at 

its current ESOP elevation results in poor performance. 
Positioning the desk 3 3 mm below the joystick tip provides 
support for the arm. 

►■ Thus, it is requested that the desk be lowered (approx. 33 

mm) or modified within the ESOP so as to permit unrestricted 
joystick movement in all directions. 

C- Task-specific experiments. The MAZE task was used in an 
experiment currently in press. The LASER task was used in an 
experiment which has been submitted for publication. PURSUIT, 
DMTS, CHASE, LASER, SDI , NUMBER, and MTS were used in experiments 
that are being prepared for publication. 

D. Comparative models. In conjunction with these task-specific 
experiments, emphasis has been placed within this semiannual 
period on exploring/demonstrating the utility of the rhesus 
monkey as a model of human behavior and performance. Experiments 
in which both monkeys and humans were tested, and the relations 
between these two species were mapped, are expected to continue. 
These experiments form an essential basis for justifying and 
interpreting the science of the Behavior & Performance project. 

IV. Integration of ARC data 

The ARC data primarily contribute to the corpus of available 
normative data, and in many cases are used to replicate prior 
findings from Abel and Baker. The data provided by the ARC 
animals is increasingly being integrated with GSU-produced data 
for presentation and publication. This semiannual period saw the 
first publication in which ARC-animal data were included 
(Hopkins, Washburn, Berke, & Williams, in press). A second set 
of GSU and ARC data, the learning curves for various training 
tasks, are currently submitted for presentation this fall. 

We also stand ready to contribute to any support studies 
that are conducted with ARC animals, including those on water 
consumption and respitrace effects that have begun during this 
semiannual period. 

V. Testing of NASA-p roduced task software 

The re-writing of the PTS tasks is progressing rapidly. 
Although the battery of tasks is not yet finished, the software 
currently reflects all 18 tasks, scheduling capability, and has 



RUBluugh - B«havior/P«r£orBBnce - Page 9 



few major bugs. GSU animals are presently tested routinely on 
the new PTS software, with performance videotaped and/or data 
maintained for subsequent analysis. We have, within this 
semiannual period, spent over 500 hours testing and evaluating 
this new software against the GSU tasks, against the Software 
Requirements Document specifications, and against the goals and 
needs of the Behavior & Performance project. 



