Technology Focus: Data Acquisition 


Computer Program Recognizes Patterns in Time-Series Data 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


A computer program recognizes se- 
lected patterns in time-series data like 
digitized samples of seismic or electro- 
physiological signals. The program im- 
plements an artificial neural network 
(ANN) and a set of N clocks for the 
purpose of determining whether N or 
more instances of a certain waveform, 
W, occur within a given time interval, 
T. The ANN must be trained to recog- 
nize W in the incoming stream of data. 
The first time the ANN recognizes W, 
it sets clock 1 to count down from T to 


zero; the second time it recognizes W, 
it sets clock 2 to count down from T to 
zero, and so forth through the Mh in- 
stance. On the N + 1st instance, the 
cycle is repeated, starting with clock 1. 
If any clock has not reached zero when 
it is reset, then N instances of W have 
been detected within time T, and the 
program so indicates. The program 
can readily be encoded in a field-pro- 
grammable gate array or an applica- 
tion-specific integrated circuit that 
could be used, for example, to detect 


electroencephalographic or electrocar- 
diographic waveforms indicative of 
epileptic seizures or heart attacks, respec- 
tively. 

This program was written by Charles 
Hand of Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory. Further information is con- 
tained in a TSP ( seepage 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Don Hart of the Cal- 
ifornia Institute of Technology at (818) 393- 
3425. Refer to NPO-30636. 


1 Program for User-Friendly Management of Input and 
Output Data Sets 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


A computer program manages large, 
hierarchical sets of input and output 
(I/O) parameters (typically, sequences 
of alphanumeric data) involved in com- 
putational simulations in a variety of 
technological disciplines. This program 
represents sets of parameters as struc- 
tures coded in object-oriented but oth- 
erwise standard American National 
Standards Institute C language. Each 
structure contains a group of I/O 
parameters that “make sense” as a unit 
in the simulation program with which 
this program is used. The addition of 
options and/or elements to sets of pa- 
rameters amounts to the addition of 


new elements to data structures. By as- 
sociation of child data generated in re- 
sponse to a particular user input, a hi- 
erarchical ordering of input 
parameters can be achieved. Associated 
with child data structures are the cre- 
ation and description mechanisms 
within the parent data structures. 
Child data structures can spawn further 
child data structures. In this program, 
the creation and representation of a se- 
quence of data structures is effected by 
one line of code that looks for children 
of a sequence of structures until there 
are no more children to be found. A 
linked list of structures is created dy- 


namically and is completely repre- 
sented in the data structures them- 
selves. Such hierarchical data presenta- 
tion can guide users through otherwise 
complex setup procedures and it can 
be integrated within a variety of graphi- 
cal representations. 

This program was written by Gerhard 
Klimeck of Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propul- 
sion Laboratory. Further information is con- 
tained in a TSP (seepage 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Don Hart of the Cal- 
ifornia Institute of Technology at (818) 393- 
3425. Refer to NPO-30835. 


® Noncoherent Tracking of a Source of a Data-Modulated Signal 

Properties of the modulation would be exploited to determine direction-dependent 
phase differences. 

Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas 


A proposed tracking receiver system 
containing three suitably positioned an- 
tenna elements and special signal-pro- 
cessing equipment would determine the 
direction of incidence of a microwave 
signal containing spread-spectrum digi- 
tal data modulation. If the system were 


to contain two sets of antenna elements 
separated by a known baseline, it could 
determine the location of the transmit- 
ter as the intersection of the lines of in- 
cidence on the two antennas. Such sys- 
tems could be used for diverse purposes 
in outer space and on Earth, including 


tracking astronauts and small robotic 
spacecraft working outside a spacecraft 
or space station, and locating cellular 
telephones from which distress calls 
have been made. The principle of oper- 
ation does not require the transmission 
of a special identifying or distress signal 


NASA Tech Briefs, November 2003 


5 


