/9 ?$*, y/ &*/,>• 


N95- 19628 


EXPERT WITNESS - A SYSTEM FOR DEVELOPING 
EXPERT MEDICAL TESTIMONY 


r-s 


Raymond Lewandowski, MD. 

Center for Genetic Services 
7121 S. Padre Island Dr. 

Corpus Christi, Texas 78412 

David Perkins and David Leasure 
Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences 
Texas A&M University - Corpus Christi 
6300 Ocean Dr. 

Corpus Christi, Texas 78412 


ABSTRACT 

Expert Witness is an expert system designed to assist attorneys and medical experts in 
determining the merit of medical malpractice claims in the area of obstetrics. It this by 
substitutes the time of the medical expert with the time of a paralegal assistant guided 
by the expert system during the initial investigation of the medical records and patient 
interviews. The product of the system is a narrative transcript containing important 
data, immediate conclusions from the data, and overall conclusions of the case that the 
attorney and medical expert use to make decisions about whether and how to proceed 
with the case. The transcript may also contain directives for gathering additional 
information needed for the case. 

The system is a modified heuristic classifier and is implemented using over 600 CLIPS 
rules together with a C-based user interface. The data abstraction and solution 
refinement are implemented directly using forward chaining production and matching. 
The use of CLIPS and C is essential to delivering a system that runs on a generic PC 
platform. The direct implementation in CLIPS together with locality of inference 
ensures that the system will scale gracefully. Two years of use has revealed no errors 
in the reasoning. 

1. INTRODUCTION 

When preparing a medical malpractice lawsuit, an attorney must identify the relevant 
facts and use them to decide first if the case has merit. Usually, the attorney consults a 
medical expert to evaluate the client's medical records and to advise the attorney. The 
problems for attorneys and clients is that medical experts are both expensive and 
relatively scarce, the problem of determining fault is tedious and time consuming, and 
the case load is growing. 


13 


Our approach to this problem is to make a preliminary determination of merit without 
investing large amounts of time from a medical expert. Using an expert system called 
Expert Witness, the paralegal staff can be guided in their examination of medical 
records and conducting of client interviews. After data collection, Expert Witness 
produces a transcript of reasoning that aids the attorney and medical expert in 
determining the validity of a case. The transcript is very similar to what the medical 
expert would also have produced, except that it was created with far less expense. By 
taking this approach, an attorney can determine the preliminary merits of a lawsuit 
while saving substantial amounts of money. The attorney and medical expert can take 
on more work. Deserving cases are more likely to be pursued because more cases can 
be handled overall. Fewer non-meritorious, wasteful cases need be pursued, resulting 
in saved expense and anguish. Overall, in two years of operation. Expert Witness has 
been tested in 10 legal offices on numerous cases with no complaints, and based on the 
success of the system, significant development is planned to greatly expand its 
coverage. 

This paper describes the functional architecture, the implementation, the history, and 
the plans for expansion of Expert Witness. It begins with a functional overview of the 
Expert Witness in Section 2. After the functional description, some typical cases are 
described in Section 3. In Section 4, the implementation of the current system in 
C l TP S and C is described, as is the history of the project, and the future directions. 
Results and conclusions are given in section 5. 

2. FUNCTIONAL DESCRIPTION 

The current domain of expertise for Expert Witness is obstetrical malpractice. The 
overall context in which Expert Witness determines the extent of medical malpractice is 
shown in Figure 1. To determine the fault of medical personnel, Expert Witness 
directs a paralegal in the search for relevant medical facts from patient records and 
patient interviews. Such information includes the family history, the patient history, 
the history of the mother prior to birth, the events and medical procedures performed at 
birth, and subsequent tests and treatment. Expert Witness builds a case file for each 
client. This multiple client feature allows the paralegal to start and stop data collection 
corresponding to the availability of information and access to the client. When 
sufficient data has been collected, a narrative transcript and a fact summary is 
produced. The narrative transcript is similar to what the medical expert would have 
produced. It marks the important details, such as confirming or disconfirming 
evidence, presents reasoning chains based on evidence, suggests further tests, and 
derives conclusions regarding the viability of the case. The transcripts and the fact 
summaries are used by the attorney and the medical expert to make the final decision 
whether malpractice contributed to the client's condition, and also to determine what 
additional data need collected. The general philosophy embedded in Expert Witness s 
knowledge is to only make conservative conclusions, based on practice that is well 
accepted in the field. 


14 




patient histories 


Figure 1 . Context of Expert Witness 


3. EXAMPLE CASES 

The following cases are summaries of two actual cases handled by Expert Witness. 

Case I 

An infant was bom with apgar scores of 8 and 9. The birth weight was six pounds. 
During the mothers labor, monitoring indicated that the baby was in distress. In response 
to the data suggesting distress, the physician treated the mother and reviewed the 
mother’s medications. It was found that one of the medications that the mother was 
taking is known to create false positive findings of fetal distress. Normally, the distress 
patterns would have lead to a cesarean section. By reviewing the data correctly, the 
physician avoided an unnecessary surgery which carries added risks for the mother. The 
Expert Witness program analyzed the data and advised the user that the physician had 
acted appropriately based upon the facts presented. This analysis prevented a potentially 
frivolous law suite. 

Case II 

A child is known to be mentally retarded. The child was bom with apgar scores of 2 and 
5. During labor, the mother had a biophysical profile which was abnormal. After 
delivery, the infant developed low blood sugar and seizures. Family history revealed that 
the mother has a nephew by one of her sisters who is also mentally retarded. The Expert 
Witness program analyzed the data and advised the user that there appeared to be some 
improprieties on the part of the physician during fire mother's labor that could have 
contributed to the child's present condition. It also noted, however, that there may have 
been a pre-existing condition which may be the main contributor to the child's problems. 
It suggested that further analysis is necessary. This is a case that deserved further in 
depth analysis by actual expert witness physicians. 


15 





4. IMPLEMENTATION, HISTORY, AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 

Expert Witness is used cyclically to build up a patient file. Within each cycle there are 
two stages, data collection and data inference. Data collection is done interactively as 
the paralegal presents known information to the system through a text based user 
interface written in C. Once all known information is provided, the inference phase 
begins, and the known data are analyzed to determine what conclusions are able to be 
made and what they are. When more information is needed, additional data are 
suggested in the transcript. The medical expert may also direct the paralegal to obtain 
more information. The next cycle of data collection/ inference process allows direct 
entry of any additional information, and produces a more complete narration. 

The inference part of the system is written in CLIPS 4.3. 1 Over 600 rules constitute 
the knowledge base. The basic architecture is an elaboration of the heuristic 
classification model. 2 Initial data are abstracted from quantitative values to qualitative 
categories. Matching, based directly on CLIPS rule matching, is used to determine the 
first level of solutions in the form of direct conclusions in the narrative transcript. 
Additional reasoning is performed to produce the next level of conclusions, based on 
the initial level. In contrast to some heuristic classifiers which seek to produce one 
conclusion and may take the first one that is satisfactory, Expert Witness makes all 
conclusions that it can. It uses a mix of reasoning methods, using some data to 
strengthen and some data to weaken conclusions. It does not use certainty factors or 
other approximate reasoning methods, since the qualitative representation of strength of 
belief using basic CLIPS was adequate for the conservative reasoning philosophy 
adopted for the system. 

The performance of Expert Witness has been very good. The knowledge used has 
generally been localized, and the reasoning chains have been kept relatively short. 
Factoring of the rule base into a number of independent subsystems for determining the 
first level of conclusions has also helped. The second level conclusions are made using 
a rule base that is loaded after all first level conclusions have been made. 

Expert Witness was built over a period of 5 months beginning in 1991 . The initial 
knowledge engineer and expert was Dr. Ray Lewandowski, a medical consultant and 
clinical geneticist. The user interface was constructed by David Perkins at Texas A&M 
University-Corpus Christi. The system has since been used by ten attorneys and their 
staff. Follow-up consultations are performed with Dr. Lewandowski. Plans are 
underway to increase the number of users. In the several years since being introduced 
in the field environment, no incorrect recommendations have been made, and much 
time has been saved. 

Based on the success of the initial system and demands of the users for broadening the 
scope of application, additional experts are currently being interviewed in the areas of 
neonatology, expanded obstetrical coverage, and hospital practices and procedures. 
Additional modules beyond those are in the planning stage. No significant changes to 


16 



the structure of the knowledge base are expected. Knowledge should remain localized, 
and the performance penalty should grow linearly with the number of systems. Each 
system will be incorporated so that it can function as a stand-alone or integrated 
component of the entire system. 

5. RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS 

The system has since been used continuously since its development by ten attorneys 
and their staff. In the several years since being introduced in the field environment, no 
incorrect recommendations have been made, and much time has been saved. Based on 
this extended success, plans are underway to increase the number of users and the 
scope of the system's coverage. 

A critical success factor for Expert Witness, aside from the quality of the knowledge 
base, has been the need for it to run on a generic hardware platform. The use of 
CLIPS has allowed us to keep the system small, while maintaining speed and ease of 
programming, both because the inference component is small and because it easily 
interfaced with a compact C user interface. 

The second critical success factor derived from CLIPS is the suitability of the forward 
reasoning and matching to the application and representation of the knowledge. 
Although CLIPS would have allowed it, no meta-level reasoning was necessary. This 
simplicity allowed the knowledge base to grow to over 600 rules without greatly 
affecting the structural complexity of the knowledge or the cost of using it. On the 
face of it, the plainness of the knowledge representation as rules speaks against this 
system when compared to more complicated knowledge structures and control regimes, 
but in reality, the degree of fit between the knowledge and the inference system has 
allowed us to create and maintain a reasonably large knowledge base cheaply and 
reliably. This simplicity is crucial for us when we consider expanding the knowledge 
base as much as fivefold, which we intend to do. 


REFERENCES 

1 CLIPS Release Notes, Version 4.3, NASA Johnson Space Flight Center, June 13, 
1989. 

2 Clancey, W. J., "Heuristic Classification," Artificial Intelligence, 27:3, December 
1985, pp. 289-350. 


17 



