NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL 
Monterey, California 



THESIS 


A DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM FOR SEA-BASED 

SUSTAINMENT OPERATIONS 

by 


Norman L. Reitter 


September 1999 


Thesis Advisors: 

David A. Schrady 

Second Reader: 

Gordon Bradley 


Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 


DTIC QUALITY INSPECTED Z 


19991227 027 




Amateurs discuss strategy, 
Professionals study logistics 







REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

Form Approved 

OMB No. 0704-0188 

Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathe'ring and 
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of infoimation. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including 
suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Senrices, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, 
and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC 20503. 

1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave Blank) 2. REPORT DATE 3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

September 1999 , Master’s Thesis 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

A DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM FOR SEA-BASED SUSTAINMENT OPERATIONS 

5. FUNDING NUMBERS 

6. AUTHOR(S) 

Reitter, Norman L. 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Naval Postgraduate School 

Monterey, CA 93943-5000 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 

9. SPONSORING / MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

10. SPONSORING/MONITORING 
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 

11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

The views expressed in this thesis are those of the author and do not reflect the official policy or position of the Department of 
Defense or the U.S. Government. 

12a.DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

12b.DISTRIBUTION CODE 

13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) 

The Marine Corps plans to fight battles in the 21^^ century using the littoral battlespace to maneuver forces from a sea-base to the 
operational objective. Combat forces ashore will be sustained directly from a sea-base to allow combat elements to maneuver freely 
without having to defend a rear area. In this type of environment, planners must be able to convert current data, intelligence, and 
status reports of units ashore into useful planning information. A sea-based sustainment posture makes transportation assets in the 
ship-to-objective delivery network critical for sustainment. 

This thesis focuses on sustainment and distribution in a sea-based environment. The Sea-based Logistics Decision Support 

System (SBLDSS) is developed to assist sustainment planners in this environment to predict inventory levels of forces ashore and 
assist in managing transportation assets. First, typical forces are modeled to reflect both their composition and activities ashore. 
Resupply needs are determined based on the commander’s concept of operations and logistics planning factors developed for each 
force. Transportation assets, used to sustain the forces, are modeled. Demand is then placed on these transporters by both logistical 
and operational missions. Finally, a utilization schedule is constructed to determine if a feasible distribution plan exists. 

14. SUBJECT TERMS 

Mission Planning, Analysis, Decision Support Systems, Operational Maneuver From The Sea, 

(OMFTS), Ship-to-Objective Maneuver (STOM), Sea-based Logistics (SBL), Sustainment 
Planning, Mathematical Programming, Java 

15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

110 

16. PRICE CODE 

17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

OF REPORT 

Unclassified 

18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF THIS 
PAGE 

Unclassified 

19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

OF ABSTRACT 

Unclassified 

20. UMITATION OF ABSTRACT 

UL 


NSN 7540-01-280-5500 Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) 


Prescribed by ANSI Std. 239.18 


1 






















11 



Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 


A DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM FOR SEA-BASED SUSTAINMENT 

OPERATIONS 


Nonnan Lyle Reitter 
Captain, United States Marine Corps 
B.S., United States Naval Academy, 1993 

Submitted in partial fiilfillment of the 
requirements for the degree of 


MASTER OF SCIENCE IN OPERATIONS RESEARCH 

from the 


NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL 
September 1999 


Author; 


Approved by; 



Richard E. Rosenthal, Chairman 
Department of Operations Research 


iii 



ABSTRACT 


The Marine Corps plans to fight battles in the century using the littoral 
battlespace to maneuver forces from a sea-base to the operational objective. Combat 
forces ashore will be sustained directly from a sea-base to allow combat elements to 
maneuver freely without having to defend a rear area. In this type of environment, 
planners must be able to convert current data, intelligence, and status reports of units 
ashore into useful planning information. A sea-based sustainment posture makes 
transportation assets in the ship-to-objective delivery network critical for sustainment. 

This thesis focuses on sustainment and distribution in a sea-based environment. 
The Sea-based Logistics Decision Support System (SBLDSS) is developed to assist 
sustainment planners in this environment to predict inventory levels of forces ashore and 
assist in managing transportation assets. First, typical forces are modeled to reflect both 
their composition and activities ashore. Resupply needs are determined based on the 
commander’s concept of operations and logistics planning factors developed for each 
force. Transportation assets, used to sustain the forces, are modeled. Demand is then 
placed on these transporters by both logistical and operational missions. Finally, a 
utilization schedule is constructed to determine if a feasible distribution plan exists. 


V 





DISCLAIMER 


The reader is cautioned that computer programs developed in this research may 
not have been exercised for all cases of interest. While every effort has been made, within 
the time available, to ensure that the programs are free of computational and logic errors, 
they cannot be considered validated. Any application of these programs without 
additional verification is at the risk of the planner. 


vii 






TABLE OF CONTENTS 

l. INTRODUCTION..1 

II. BACKGROUND. 3 

A. MARINE CORPS WARFIGHTING CONCEPTS.3 

1. Operational Maneuver From The Sea (OMFTS).4 

2. Ship-to-Objective Maneuver (STOM).4 

3. Sustained Operations Ashore (SOA).5 

4. Sea-based Logistics (SBL). 6 

5. Recent Studies.7 

B. FUTURE OPERATIONS IN LITTORAL AREAS..7 

m. DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM OVERVIEW.. 11 

A. LOGISTICS DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEMS. 11 

B. SEA-BASED LOGISTICS DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM.12 

1. Description of User.12 

2. Java Programming Language. 13 

3. Program Overview. 14 

4. Setup.16 

5. Force Manager. 17 

6. Event Manager.:...19 

a. Force Events.19 

b. Transporter Events.21 

7. Arcraft Manager.24 

8. Commodity Inventory Reports. 27 

IV. MODEL DEVELOPMENT.29 

A. METHODOLOGY OVERVIEW. 29 

B. MODEL ENTITIES. 30 

1. Marine Forces. 30 

2. Transporters.32 

C. COMMODITY INVENTORY MODELS OVERVIEW. 33 

D. CLASS I (FOOD AND WATER) CONSUMPTION.34 

E. CLASS III(W) (BULK FUEL) CONSUMPTION.36 

ix 
































F. CLASS V(W) (GROUND AMMUNITION) EXPENDITURE.37 

1. Threat Environment.38 

a. Infantry-Heavy Planning Factors.38 

b. Armor-Heavy Planning Factors.39 

c. Composite Planning Factors.39 

2. Insignificant Ammunition.39 

3. Significant Ammunition. 40 

a. Movement T o Contact. 40 

b. Attack. 41 

c. Raid.;.41 

d. Withdraw.41 

e. Ambush.41 

f Defend.41 

G. TRANSPORTATION PLANNING..42 

1. MV22 Osprey.43 

2. CH-53E Super Stallion.44 

3. Transportation Planning Considerations.45 

a. Maximum Sortie Distance.46 

b. Mission Load Efficiency.46 

c. Aircraft Availability.48 

d. Cycle Time Calculations.49 

e. Mission Sequencing.50 

4. Aircraft Scheduling Algorithm.51 

a. Multiple Tour Maximum Collection Problem (MTMCP).51 

b. SBLDSS Scheduling Heuristic Description..52 

c. Scheduling Algorithm.55 

V. MODEL APPLICATION..57 

A. SITUATION. 57 

B. TASK ORGANIZATION. 57 

1. Forces Ashore. 57 

2. Total Air Assets Available...;58 

C. CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS. 58 

D. FORCE LIST.58 

E. INITIAL REPORTS.59 

F. EVENT LIST.60 

G. UPDATED COMMODITY INVENTORY REPORTS.62 


X 






































H. SCHEDULER OUTPUT..63 

VI. CONCLUSIONS.:.77 

A. OBSERVATIONS.77 

B. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FURTHER STUDIES.78 

C. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUTURE DEVELOPMENT.79 

LIST OF REFERENCES.81 

INITIAL DISTRIBUTION LIST.83 


XI 











LIST OF FIGURES 


Figure 1: SBLDSS Program Flowchart.15 

Figure 2: Operating Environment Window.16 

Figure 3: Create New Force Window.17 

Figure 4: Create New Rifle Company Window. 18 

Figure 5: Example Force List Window.19 

Figure 6; Create New Force Event.21 

Figure 7: Create New Transporter Event Window.23 

Figure 8: Event List.24 

Figure 9: Example Aircraft List Window.26 

Figure 10: Example Schedule Output Window.27 

Figure 11: Commodity Inventory Report Window...28 

Figure 12: Example Create MV-22 Window.44 

Figure 13: Example Create CH-53E Window.45 

Figure 14: Example Arc-Node Representation.52 

Figure 15: Force List.59 

Figure 16: A Company (Rein) Commodity Inventory Report.60 

Figure 17: LAV Detachment Commodity Inventory Report.60 

Figure 18: Event List for A Company (Rein) and the LAV Det.61 

Figure 19: Updated Commodity Inventory Report for A Company (Rein).62 

Figure 20: Updated Commodity Inventory Report for LAV Det.63 

Figure 21: Initial Aircraft List. 64 

Figure 22: First Window of First Scheduler Output.65 

Figure 23: Second Window of First Scheduler Output.65 

Figure 24: Third Window of First Scheduler Output.. 66 

Figure 25: Updated Aircraft List.67 

Figure 26: First Window of Second Scheduler Output.:.68 

Figure 27: Second Window of Second Scheduler Output.68 

Figure 28: Updated Event List for Second 24 Hour Planning Horizon.69 

Figure 29: Third Window of Second Scheduler Output.70 

Figure 30: Updated Aircraft List. 71 

Figure 31: First Window of Third Scheduler Output..72 

Figure 32: Second Window of Third Scheduler Output.72 

Figure 33: Third Window of Third Scheduler Output.73 

Figure 34: Event List Updated After Third Scheduler Output Displayed.74 

Figure 35: Third Part of Third Scheduler Output.75 


xiii 






































LIST OF TABLES 


Table 1. Force Events.20 

Table 2. Transporter Events.22 

Table 3. Force Module Entities.31 

Table 4. Water Consumption Planning Factors After [Ref. 12].35 

Table 5. MV-22 Cargo Profile by Class of Supply After [Ref. 16].47 

Table 6. CH-53E Cargo Profile by Class of Supply After [Ref. 16]. 47 

Table 7. MV-22 and CH-53E Time Planning Factors After [Ref 16].50 

Table 8. Task Organization.58 


XV 











i 

xvi 


/ 



LIST OF SYMBOLS, ACRONYMS AND/OR ABBREVIATIONS 


AAAV 

ACE 

BA 

BLT 

CAAT 

CE 

CSSE 

DOS 

GCE 

HST 

LAV 

LFSP 

LPF 

MAGTF 

MCSSD 

MEDEVAC 

MEU(SOC) 

MTMCP 

OMFTS 

OTH 

STOD 

STOM 

SOA 

SBL 

T/E 

T/O 

TOS 

TOT 


Advanced Assault Amphibious Vehicle 

Aviation Combat Element of a MAGTF 

Basic Allowance 

Battalion Landing Team 

Combined Anti-Armor Team 

Command Element of a MAGTF 

Combat Service Support Element of a MAGTF 

Days of Supply 

Ground Combat Element of a MAGTF 

Helicopter Support Team 

Light Armored Vehicle 

Landing Force Support Party 

Logistics Planning Factor 

Marine Air Ground Task Force 

Mobile Combat Service Support Detachment 

Medical Evacuation 

Marine Expeditionary Unit, Special Operations Capable 

Multiple Tour Maximum Collection Problem 

Operational Maneuver From The Sea 

Over The Horizon 

Ship-to-Objective Delivery 

Ship-to-Objective Maneuver 

Sustained Operations Ashore 

Sea-based Logistics 

Table of Equipment 

Table of Organization 

Time on Station 

Time on Target 


xvii 


XVlll 



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 


As the Marine Corps continues to develop its 21*‘ Century Warfighting Concepts, 
it needs a planning tool to assist operators and logisticians in planning littoral operations. 
Operational Maneuver From The Sea (OMFTS), Ship-to-Objective Maneuver (STOM) 
and Sea-based Logistics (SBL) define how the Marine Corps will conduct littoral 
operations in the Century. These concepts diverge from traditional ship-to-shore 
operations by maneuvering combat forces directly from a sea-base to operational 
objectives deep inland without first building up logistical bases ashore. By using the sea 
as a maneuver space, Marines will out maneuver the enemy through deception 
operations, rapidly collect and process data into information, and make decisions before 
the enemy has time to react. The forces operating ashore will have minimal sustainment 
in the form of commodity inventory levels. By reducing the heavy logistics burden 
associated with these inventories, they will maneuver more freely to secure objective 
areas without establishing a land line of communication to a beach support area. This 
flexibility comes at the cost of placing heavy demand on the ship-to-objective distribution 
network needed to provide reliable and responsive logistics support to these combat 
forces. 

The sea-based ship-to-objective delivery (STOD) network will be supported 
primarily by the MV-22 Osprey and CH-53E Super Stallion vertical replenishment 
aircraft. Sea-basing logistics assets implies that logistic resupply missions will demand 
more aircraft than during traditional littoral operations, competing with tactical missions 


XIX 



already required to accomplish the commander’s concept of operations ashore. To 
properly manage these scarce transportation resources at the sea-base, operational and 
logistics planners need to anticipate the resupply requirements of the combat forces 
operating ashore and plan for the additional demand placed on the aircraft by emergent 
resupply requests. 

This thesis provides a stand-alone program, the Sea-based Logistics Decision 
Support System (SBLDSS), that assists planners in determining sustainment requirements 
of forces ashore and managing the aircraft at the sea-base. The SBLDSS provides 
planners an easy-to-use graphical user interface to model the force structure ashore, the 
transportation assets at the sea-base, and the tasks the forces and transporters need to 
accomplish. The planner is able to model each force’s food, water, fuel, and ammunition 
consumption by either using the logistics planning factors developed for each force 
module or by developing their own and editing the program’s default values. The forces 
can then be tasked through events, already built-in to the support system, that model 
typical actions of forces operating in a land combat environment. These events, the 
logistics planning factors of each force, and passage of time drive a conmiodity inventory 
model that allows planners to anticipate emergent resupply requirements. Transportation 
assets at the sea-base can be modeled and tasked with both operational and logistics 
resupply missions. Finally, the planners are able to use an aircraft-scheduling algorithm 
to tell them if the sustainment plan is feasible. The schedule provides them information 
for managing the aircraft assets more efficiently. 


XX 



This thesis provides a planning tool that uses data from the forces ashore, applies 
operations research techniques to the problem, and produces useful information for 
planners operating in a sea-based environment. The Marine Corps Century 
Warfighting Concepts will not be realized until a plaiming tool, with a capability like the 
SBLDSS, emerges to properly manage limited sea-based transportation assets required to 
sustain operational forces ashore. 


XXI 




xxn 



ACKNOWLEDGMENT 


I would like to thank Dr. Dave Schrady for his logistics insight, persistence, and 
guidance through this effort, from our initial discussions through the final product. Dr. 
Gordon Bradley was ever-ready to provide his mathematical programming techniques, 
organizational advice, and Java expertise to assist in my programming endeavors. 

Finally, I would like to thank my wife Jodi and daughter Summer for sacrificing 
many, many hours to allow Daddy to work on ‘his model’. Thank you for your 
perseverance. You both have my eternal love. 


xxiii 



XXIV 



I. INTRODUCTION 


Transformation from a landbased to a seabased support system will 
require nothing less than a revolution in logistics functions and 
applications. [Ref. 1] 

CSS Branch, Requirements Division, 
MCCDC 


The Marine Corps plans to fight battles in the 21®‘ century using the littoral 
battlespace to maneuver forces from a sea-base to the operational objective. Operational 
Maneuver From The Sea (OMFTS) and Ship-to-Objective Maneuver (STOM) are the 
cornerstones for how the Marine Corps expects to develop this type of warfare. Sea- 
based Logistics (SBL) focuses on how this type of warfare will be logistically supported. 

OMFTS is not a new concept. During World War II, both the Army and the 
Marine Corps used operational maneuver from amphibious shipping to outflank the Axis 
powers in Northern Africa, Europe, and during the Island-hopping campaign in the 
Pacific. STOM diverges from the classic amphibious warfare by moving through the 
littoral area without an operational pause. By using emergent technology for information 
processing and rapid planning. Marine Forces will out-maneuver and overcome the 
enemy. 

SBL is the concept that discusses how the Marine Corps will sustain the combat 
forces ashore. Sea-based combat service support (CSS) will be delivered directly to the 
friendly forces in the objective area. Reduced sustainment inventories ashore will provide 
maneuver forces greater speed and maneuverability. In this type of environment, planners 


1 



must be able to convert current data, intelligence, and status reports of units ashore into 
useful planning information. This will allow them to quickly and efficiently evaluate the 
commander’s courses of action and determine the best concept of operations with a 
feasible sustainment plan. 

Proactive logistics planning is crucial in the SBL environment. The very nature 
of the pull of forces’ logistics requests, coupled with reduced inventory carrying capacity 
of these forces, make the transportation assets in the delivery network critical for 
sustainment. Inventory levels of logistics drivers ashore must be predicted, resupply 
requests must be anticipated, and transportation assets must be judiciously managed. This 
thesis focuses on sustainment and distribution in a sea-based environment. 

A planning tool, the Sea-based Logistics Decision Support System (SBLDSS), is 
developed to assist planners in a sea-based environment to predict inventory levels of 
forces ashore and to assist in managing transportation assets. First, typical combat, 
combat support, and combat service support units, expected to participate in operations 
ashore, are modeled to reflect both their composition and activities ashore. Resupply 
needs are then determined based on the commander’s concept of operations and logistics 
planning factors developed for each force. Transportation assets, used to sustain the 
forces, are modeled. Demand is then placed on these transporters by both logistical and 
operational missions. Finally, a utilization schedule is constructed to determine if a 
feasible distribution plan exists. 


2 



II. BACKGROUND 


Always recognized as the critical element in any military campaign (tacticians worry 
about battles; strategists worry about logistics), although often neglected, logistics must 
now evolve to accommodate the new strategy of the Navy and Marine Corps operating 
within a joint environment. [Ref. 2] 

1999 Naval Studies Board 

7 don’t know what the hell logistics is.. .but I want some of it! 

Fleet Admiral Ernest King, USN 

The purpose of this chapter is to provide the reader with an overview of the 
organizational structure and operational concepts modeled in this thesis. Marine Corps 
Warfighting Concepts, that describe how Marines will execute future operations, are 
discussed to lay the foundation for how the SBLDSS could be used in their support. 
Results of some prior studies are also discussed to highlight analysis that has already been 
done on this subject. These studies are used in modeling sea-based logistics in the 
SBLDSS. 

A. MARINE CORPS WARFIGHTING CONCEPTS 

The Marine Corps Warfighting Concepts, developed by the Concepts Division of 
the Marine Corps Combat Development Command (MCCDC), describe the intended 
direction of how the Marine Corps will fight in the 21** Century. These Concepts provide 
a basic idea of expected future operational conditions and methods for fighting battles 
during this timeframe. Several Marine Corps Concepts are used to develop this thesis. 


3 


1. Operational Maneuver From The Sea (OMFTS) 

OMFTS [Ref. 3] is the first of a series of warfighting concepts that describe how 
the Marine Corps expects to fight future ground operations. OMFTS adapts the tradition 
of maneuver warfare to all aspects of warfare in and around coastal waters. In future 
concepts, the Marine Corps will need to provide sustainable forcible entry from the sea. 
OMFTS says operations will be high tempo in and between a wide variety of 
environments. Rapid decision making during these high tempo operations will prevent the 
enemy from responding quickly enough to the Marines’ actions. OMFTS lists wargaming 
and combat simulation as two elements that will enhance this intuitive-based decision¬ 
making cycle. To prevent large logistics support areas from hindering maneuver warfare 
from the sea, a significant reduction of logistics assets is needed ashore. 

2. Ship-to-Objective Maneuver (STOM) 

STOM [Ref. 4] further defines how future OMFTS operations will be conducted 
by directly applying the principles and tactics of maneuver warfare to the littoral 
battlespace. STOM operations will be conducted with dispersed forces maneuvering over 
extended distances. Depending on enemy threat conditions, the Advanced Amphibious 
Assault Vehicle (AAAV), and the Ml A1 Abrams Main Battle Tank will be sent to shore 
from over-the-horizon (OTH). The Landing Craft Air Cushioned (LCAC) vehicle, 
carrying the Ml A1 from OTH, and the AAAV make up the surface tips of the triad 
expected to provide surface and air lift into the STOM environment. The MV-22 Osprey, 
planned to be fully operational in 2014, will become the principal aerial delivery asset for 
operational and sustainment missions. Using the sea as a maneuver space, the Marine 


4 


Corps will take advantage of fast delivery vehicles and its ability to penetrate the enemy 
shoreline at points of its own choosing. The Marine Corps will gain operational advantage 
through surprise, by using speed and deceptive feints with decoy assets. Once ashore, 
forces will advance through the littoral area without pausing at the beach. Instead, power 
will be projected deeply inland directly to the maneuver objectives. The combat service 
support footprint, normally established ashore, will be reduced to only those forces 
absolutely necessary to sustain forces ashore. “Freed from the constaints of securing a 
large beachhead, the commander will be able to focus on the enemy and begin the landing 
force’s maneuver from over-the-horizon”. [Ref. 4] Once maneuver units pass through 
the beach area, grormd lines of communication will collapse behind them, placing reliance 
for sustainability on a vertical ship-to-objective delivery system. 

3. Sustained Operations Ashore (SOA) 

MAGTF in Sustained Operations Ashore (SOA) [Ref. 5] is a concept to describe 
how the Marine Corps could be employed in sustained joint operations ashore. SOA 
envisions the MAGTF remaining as a general-purpose force, but one capable of executing 
a series of precise, focused, combat actions rather than primarily participating in 
continuous methodical ground operations. SOA states that a sea-based Marine Force will 
be responsible for the Marine’s service level administrative and logistics functions. 

In this concept, maneuver forces ashore will have limited organic logistics capabilities. 
Mobile combat service support elements (MCSSE) may be task organized to directly 
support the maneuver element’s mission. The maneuver elements will only rely on an 
MCSSE in emergency situations. Direct support from the sea-base will be used for 


5 



routine resupply. Again, SOA emphasizes the requirement to rapidly plan complex 
operations. Sea basing is noted as the thread that ties OMFTS, STOM, and SOA together. 

4. Sea-based Logistics (SBL) 

The Sea-based Logistics Concept [Ref 6] describes operational and tactical 
sustainment of forces operating on and from the sea. This Concept describes a means to 
support littoral power projection from OTH, allowing Naval Forces to operate 
independently from sovereignty restrictions and overseas basing requirements. SBL will 
provide a unique capability to both sustain the expected future, high tempo, battlefield and 
exploit the advantage inherently found in mobility and OTH standoff of naval vessels. 

The primary thrust of the Sea-based Logistics concept is to reduce or eliminate the 
logistics footprint ashore historically used in amphibious operations. Sustaining the full 
spectrum of littoral operations and coupling ship-to-objective distribution with network- 
based automated logistics information will provide the enabling element necessary to 
successfully realize this warfighting concept. The ship-to-objective distribution is noted 
as the keystone to SBL. “Managing finite lift resources to satisfy the broad range of 
operational and logistics missions will require close coordination” [Ref 6: p. XI-11] 
between operational and logistics planners. Finally, integrated tactical and logistics 
planning, to include course of action development and associated concepts of 
employment, will ensure the distribution assets are appropriately assigned to support the 
commander’s concept of operations ashore. 



5. 


Recent Studies 


Recent studies have focused on limitations of OMFTS based on transportation 
support from the sea-base. In 1997, LT Mark Beddoes stipulated available CSS assets can 
not support a traditional ground force mix, but can support smaller, infiltration-type units 
[Ref. 7]. He stated that naval amphibious shipping would desire at least 100 nautical 
miles of stand-off distance from ship-to-shore due to the enemy threat of mines, anti-ship 
missiles, diesel submarines and small coastal craft. His analysis showed that this shipping 
would need to move within 43 nautical miles from the shore to support Marine OMFTS 
operations longer than 15 days. The risk associated with enemy threat is significantly 
increased when the naval ships must position themselves within the 25 and 40 nautical 
mile ship-to-shore distance required for advanced assault amphibious vehicle (AAAV) 
and air cushioned landing craft (LCAC) deployment, respectively, hi 1998, Maj Robert 
Hagan demonstrated the inherent difficulty of sea-based sustainment over the distances 
associated with OMFTS, 25 miles from ship-to-shore and 50 miles from shore-to- 
objective [Ref. 8]. In his thesis, he highlighted the difficulties of using air delivered 
sustainment to provide the logistical movement requirements of a Special Operations 
Capable Marine Expeditionary Unit (MEU (SOC)) in a wide range of operational 
missions. 

B. FUTURE OPERATIONS IN LITTORAL AREAS 

Future operations in littoral areas will be complex. Logistics and Operational 
planners must ensure redundancy and flexibility are incorporated into each sustainment 
plan. The Marine Corps future warfighting concepts focus on several key elements for 


7 




operations in littoral areas. These include smaller, mobile combat service support 
elements (MCSSE) ashore and dependence on a sea-base for sustainment ashore. 

MCSSEs are expected to operate in direct support of combat units operating 
ashore. MCSSEs will be small, attached to combat units, and will not have a ground link 
to a traditional beach support area. This implies the MCSSEs must be mobile and provide 
organic defense so they minimize their impact on the combat units’ main mission. 
Mobility will limit the supply storage capacity of the MCSSE, further increasing the risk 
of the combat unit running short on supplies. Without a direct ground link to a beach 
support area, MCSSEs will be solely dependent upon air transporters to deliver critical 
supplies at critical points in time to a specific location. Timing is a key planning element 
which places increased dependence on transporter capabilities, including availability, 
reliability, and vulnerability. Logistics planners must be able to minimize the high level 
of risk associated with transporters delivering critical supplies within limited time- 
windows of opportunity by predicting when units will require resupply and how best to 
employ the transporter assets available to carry out both the resupply and operational 
missions. These transportation assets, already tasked with providing direct operational 
support to combat units, must now also sustain the logistical distribution network. 

Logistics planners must have an ability to predict inventory levels of forces 
operating ashore. The sea-based environment implies logistics planners must plan 
logistics support using a “logistical push” or anticipatory, style of logistics planning, while 
relying on a “logistical pull” style distribution network [Ref. 9]. The logistics distribution 
system will be reliant on close communication and coordination with the combat units to 


8 



ensure the critical timing for resupply is achieved. Also, logistics coordinators must be 
able to predict inventory levels of forces operating ashore to prevent reactive, myopic, 
operational tasking. By anticipating force logistics requirements, logistics coordinators 
will be able to prepare supplies and transporter vehicles on the sea-base to minimize the 
overall risk to force sustainment. 

Once logistics coordinators have the ability to anticipate expected resupply 
missions, they will be able to better manage their transportation assets. The 1999 Naval 
Studies Board, [Ref. 2: Ch. 4, p. 8], describes how a transporter’s carrying capacity is 
degraded with increased support radius. These findings imply that allocation of the small 
number of transporter assets will be critical for planning future sea-based operations that 
involve both logistics and operational missions. 


9 




10 



III. DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM OVERVIEW 


Recommendation: The Marine Corps should start developing the logistics information 
systems, displays, and automated decision aids it will need to manage fast-paced, 
complex support operations in tomorrow’s warfighting environment. [Ref. 2] 

1999 Naval Studies Board 

This chapter discusses requirements for logistics decision support systems and 
describes how the Sea-based Logistics Decision Support System (SBLDSS) can be used to 
fulfill this requirement. An overview of the SBLDSS also provides background for 
discussion of model development. 

A. LOGISTICS DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEMS 

Logistics decision support systems must provide the supported commander with 
useable information about combat and combat support forces sustainability. Using 
logistics planning factors to convert data to measurable information is the key to providing 
proactive sustainment plans and capturing the true logistics posture of forces. This idea is 
captured in the following quote: 

Data becomes information with which to create a picture of the logistics of 
the forces on the battlefield, to predict the sustainability of these forces, 
and to evaluate alternative courses of action as they are affected by 
logistics when it has been processed by software built around models that 
transform input data (tons of ordnance or barrels of fuel for example) into 
measures of sustainability (days of supply for example). 

Schrady [Ref. 10] 


Finally, the logistics decision support system must allow the planner to select forces, 
determine their support requirements, and determine a feasible transportation plan. 


11 




B. SEA-BASED LOGISTICS DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM 

The Sea-based Logistics Decision Support System (SBLDSS) is a planning tool 
for operational and logistics planners operating in a sea-based environment. The amount 
of data and calculations associated with amphibious logistics planning is extensive. This 
often results in reactive, myopic, planning. The SBLDSS will allow logistics coordinators 
to incorporate operational plans into a decision support system that gives the commander 
predicted inventory status of Marines operating ashore and the number of transporters 
required to support resupply and movement operations 12,24, 36,48, and 72 hours in 
advance. This will allow for more proactive transportation and resupply planning. The 
SBLDSS program’s primary function is to assist sustainment planners in determining 
feasible sustainment plans for the commander’s concept of operations ashore. It provides 
the planner an ability to plan, track, and predict the usage and sea-based replenishment of 
food, water, fuel, and ammunition of ground forces operating ashore. It also provides an 
aircraft-scheduling tool to assist in determining if a feasible distribution plan exists. This 
helps aircraft plaimers better manage transportation assets. 

1. Description of User 

The SBLDSS requires an intelligent user. This user should be able to interpret 
operational plans, supply inventory reports, and transporter availability reports. The user 
is expected to enter Events into the SBLDSS to coincide with the Marine Air Ground Task 
Force (MAGTF) commander’s concept of operations. These Events drive consumption 
rates and tasks transporters with missions. Since SBLDSS is designed as a pl annin g tool, 
the user is expected to be involved in Marine Air Ground Task Force (MAGTF) Logistics 


12 



and Operational planning. As such, the user must be fully integrated into the operational 
and logistics planning cell. Situation and intelligence reports must be made available to 
the user and he must be familiar with the scheme of maneuver for elements operating 
ashore. Ground Combat Element logistics planners ashore, the plans section in the 
Aviation Combat Element, or a Sea-based Command Element planning section can use the 
SBLDSS for future logistics and transportation planning. To use the SBLDSS effectively, 
the user should be knowledgeable in logistics and aviation transportation assets’ 
capabilities and limitations. Finally, the user is expected to be an operational and logistics 
planner either operating in a real-life operation or participating in a wargame. Throughout 
this thesis, the user will be identified as a planner. 

2. Java Programming Language 

Developed in Java [Ref. 11], the SBLDSS benefits from low-cost, modeling 
flexibility, and platform independence features associated with this programming 
language. The Java Virtual Machine, the only software required to run the program, is 
available for download from Sun Microsystems’ World Wide Web site, www.sun.com . at 
no cost. The inherent modeling flexibility of the object-oriented programming language 
allows the user to easily add forces, change transportation characteristics, or improve the 
current modeling algorithms without changing the entire program. Since Java is platform 
independent, the operators and players in wargames have the flexibility to run the program 
on a variety of hardware located on a ship or in the office. Finally, the Java progr ammin g 
language provides an ideal programming environment to comply with the common 


13 



operating environment requirement mandated by the Defense Information Systems 
Agency for all Department of Defense programs. 

3. Program Overview 

SBLDSS is a man-in-the-loop decision support system. The program is designed 
to perform the multimdes of calculations involved in logistics and transportation planning 
and provide the planner useful planning information as output reports. The SBLDSS is a 
prototype planning tool for operational forces forward deployed. It can also be used as a 
pre-deployment wargaming tool. The planner begins using the program when the 
commander receives a mission order. Operational and logistic planning is concurrent to 
ensure operational plans are logistically feasible. First, the program allows the planner to 
create forces operating ashore and aircraft supporting the distribution network. Next, the 
planner models what the forces are doing and the demand placed on the transportation 
assets by creating events and placing them on an event list. Resupply requirements are 
then determined through use of a commodity inventory prediction model. Next, the 
planner is able to generate sortie requirements before the force ashore places a request. 
Once this is done, an aircraft-scheduling algorithm identifies if the available aircraft are 
able to support the sustainment requirements of the forces ashore. If the distribution plan 
is feasible, the planner can move forward with evaluating another course of action. If not, 
the planner must either manage the aircraft to increase the number of available 
transportation assets or re-evaluate the resupply plan. Figure 1 shoWs the SBLDSS 
program flow diagram. 


14 



Mission 


J 


Plan? 


Yes 


Evaluate 
another COA 



Figure 1: SBLDSS Program Flowchart 


15 









4. Setup 

The Setup Menu allows the planner to specify characteristics of the forces 
operating ashore, and types and characteristics of aircraft. This section is completed 
before operations commence. Forces, Events, and Aircraft may be added to their 
respective lists. The planner must also define the operating environment during setup. 
Environment factors include enemy threat, operational tempo, and temperature. Enemy 
threat and operational tempo drive ammunition consumption. Temperature drives food 
and water consumption. Figure 2 shows the environmental setup options window in the 
SBLDSS. 



Figure 2: Operating Environment Window 
5. Force Manager 

The Force Manager Menu allows the planner to model forces ashore by providing 
typical combat, combat support, and combat service support units for selection. Figure 3 
shows the Create New Force window. 


16 







^Sea-based Logistics Decision Suppoit System (SBLDSS) 


-2Ml 







tm 


flhi 


" .'j ''”5- 'v' "yv' ; 

Cottiteat’ - - 

' ..■ • ■ ■ . 

. FireTem ^ ;'| 


..'Platoari 

Weapons PK 


Weapons 

..:H&SCDinp«y-v;"j 

Mant^ Bn A ' 


Coml>atSup(OTt> . s,;i ' ' , • 


wuivprtiiwji j, LAVM 


Ctr^Bi^Det 


' '"''V^ ■ 

; ■ 



, y;! yh"' 'HSI 

IBHBSBHIli 








OK 




y-r^ 


Figure 3: Create New Force Window 

Logistics planning factors are developed from typical tables of organization (T/O) 
and tables of equipment (T/E), and are included for use in requirements and inventory 
prediction. Once the planner selects a force, he is then able to edit that force, and view all 
forces on the force list. The Create New Rifle Company Window, displayed in Figure 4, 
shows an example force edit window. 


1 ^ Create Hew RiHeCoinpan? ' 

. ... y 








. .. .:= B! 

h;-' 

f: " 

fotceDala 









,,|v. 


t ' 


. '•'r - ; 

4|a Company (Rein) 



Size: 


1202 


■■I 

1 




. jsS.0.85.0 


jpt,y) bt naies reiativelrom (0,0,0,0) ftUssion 


lObjectiveA ■' 

■■1 

■■i 

1 

1' ■' ■ 



: '-7, 









% 



''T 



Rwert®iy(p«^ 



|a 

1 


|l818 

^isaEs . 

, .jv 

Food . |606 . ■: 




iff*?:' 


9 




isaHors 

i 

W^V |2930:0 

[t|aBous/day 

:wa4ef 

18790.0 



1 

fee 

SiBilii;!' 

hEiOBi 



feoi^idowj [ 017 ' 

IsaOofisamn 

yj&Milmj 



■ ;7 ife't 

1 

p/: 


.|7467.9 

~piy 


fijeiai6dcK<;rotmii|l4.0 

' - jjB^ehsid^v^ IBrIl 


ip||;ilj7467J^ 



9 


:',s. 1- ' ' V 


r' '> 

Sig^UTimo .'lo.S ; 

l^-ofBAUsed 

iliijlp 




i 

1' 

m- r < -■■ ■■"7; 




bisigAmitiQ |o.3 




7 

i," s. 

i 

I''.-' r' 


' ; 

' 1 " ■ '■: ■ ' ■ 







' ' 

:? 'B '\:.7 : 

r.v 


33iBHI 


Acccfit kftenxMO 

cancel 



0 y\ \yi 


'' ?i4 V 


1 '; 



' '1= 

' V ’ 








Figure 4: Create New Rifle Company Window 


17 

















































This edit window allows the planner to change a force’s characteristics. The initial basic 
allowance, consumption rates, and force inventory planning factors were developed using 
Marine Corps planning factors from the MAGTF Data Library [Ref. 12] and Marine 
Corps Class V(W) Planning Factors for Fleet Marine Force Combat Operations. [Ref. 13] 
The basic allowance and commodity consumption rates are used for estimating 
commodity inventory levels. The initial commodity inventory levels are assumed to be 
the same as the force’s basic allowance. The coordinate location, relative to the sea-base, 
is used to determine distance calculations in the scheduling algorithm. A description of 
the conunodity consumption models and the scheduling algorithm is discussed in more 
detail in Chapter IV. Once a Force is created, it is added to the SBLDSS Force List. The 
Force List displays each Force created by the planner, its location, and commodity 


inventory levels. Figure 5 shows an example Force List. 



^ Force Lisl 


Name 




Add Forc^ t JtemaweF^ce 






-Locition X ^ FuelOW^ 


C Comp RifleCompany 

A Comp RifleCbmparty 

B Comp RifleCompany ; 


( 30 . 0 , 110 . 0 ) 

( 10 . 0 . 100 . 0 ) 

( 20 . 0 . 150 . 0 ) 


Objective C 
Objective A 
Objective B 


8190.0 
8190.0 
8190:0 


7073.4 

7073.4 

7073.4 


Figure 5: Example Force List Window 


6. Event Manager 

The Event Manager is used by the planner to model force actions ashore based on 
the commander’s scheme of maneuver and expected enemy actions. It also is used to task 
aircraft with missions in support of the forces ashore. Events are never automatically 


18 







entered into the model by the SBLDSS program. The intelligent planner must determine a 
specific time for each Event to occur and which forces are effected by the specific Event. 
When the planner creates an Event, it is added to an Event List with the associated date 
time group (DTG). This shows the user when the Event is to occur. SBLDSS uses two 
basic types of events: Force Events and Transporter Events. 
a. Force Events 

Force Events model operations of each force operating ashore and drive 
consumption of logistics commodities associated with these operations. Force Events 
drive the inventory consumption models, allowing the SBLDSS program to anticipate 
inventory levels of individual forces ashore. Force Events are scheduled by the planner 
based on the current Concept of Operations and enemy threat. The planner must be aware 
of the overall intelligence picture as the enemy has a direct effect on how forces ashore 
consume supplies, particularly fuel and ammunition. The planner must also be involved in 
operational planning to ensure maneuver plans are sustainable with the available 
transportation assets. Table 1 lists the Force Events used by the SBLDSS. 


19 



Event 

Description 

Move Force 

Models a force movement from location a to location b 

Movement to Contact 

Models a force conducting a movement to contact mission against a 
known enemy threat and unknown enemy location. 

Conduct Raid 

Models a force conducting a limited engagement on a known enemy 

location. 

Attack 

Models a force conducting a full engagement on a known enemy 

location. 

Withdrawal 

Models a force withdrawing in the face of a constant enemy force 

Defend 

Models an expected attack against a specific force. 

Idle 

Models stand down periods for forces while still ashore. 


Table 1. Force Events 


Figure 6 shows the Create New Move Event Window. This is an example of the Force 
Event edit feature. This window appears after the planner selects the Force Event he 
wants to add to the Event List. It is found under the Add Force menu option under the 
Force Manager Menu. Force Event descriptions are discussed in greater detail during the 
discussion of consumption model development in the Chapter IV. 


20 



^5ea>based Logistics Decision Support S 3 rstem (S6LDS5) {Wjf-J B 



b. Transporter Events 

Transporter Events allow the planner to add specific operational and 
logistics missions to the Event List that place demand on transportation assets. By 
modeling both operational and logistics missions, the planner is able to see the full impact 
of the commander’s Concept of Operations on the distribution plan. Similar to the Force 
Events, Transporter Events are input into the SBLDSS by the planner based on the current 
Concept of Operations and Air Requests from the supported force. Table 2 describes the 
Transporter Events used by SBLDSS. 


21 

































Event 

Description 

Emergent Resupply 

Models a resupply mission to a particular 
force operating ashore requested by that force 

Planned Resupply 

Models an anticipated resupply mission to a 
particular force based on the planner’s 
judgement and SBLDSS inventory reports 

Force Move 

Models a force movement from location a to 
location b by air extraction/insertion 

MEDEVAC 

Models a medical evacuation of a number of 
casualties from a specified force 

Table 2. 

Transporter Events 


The planner uses Resupply Events to anticipate the demand logistics resupply 
missions place on the sea-based transportation assets. Only single commodity Resupply 
Events are allowed in the SBLDSS. Resupply Events may be placed on the Event List for 
two reasons. Either the planner anticipates a resupply need based on a force’s projected 
inventory level from the force’s inventory report, or the planner receives a logistics Air 
Request from a force operating ashore. These two Events are called Planned Resupply 
Events and Emergent Resupply Events, respectively. 

Force Move and MEDEVAC Events are used to model the operational demand 
placed on the sea-based transporters. The Force Move Event models aerial movement of a 
force from one location to another. The MEDEVAC Event is used when the planner 
either expects casualty evacuation or receives a request for evacuation from a specific 


22 



force. Figure 7 shows the Create New Resupply Event Window, selected from the Add 
Event option, which is found under either the Setup or the Event Manager menus. 



Figure 7: Create New Transporter Event Window 


Once the planner creates Events, they are able to view the Events on the 
program’s Event List. The Event List is used to ensure all force tasks in the commander’s 
Concept of Operations are included in the program. The Event List displays the mission 
number, date-time group of when the Event is to occur, the type of Event, the time 
window in which aircraft must accomplish Transporter Events, and a message explaining 
the Force and description of the Event. The word "null" appears in the mission number 
column until the Aircraft Scheduler is solved. After the scheduler displays its output, the 
Event List will automatically update the new mission numbers for the Transporter Events. 
"N/A" appears in the Force Event columns to show that neither a mission number nor a 
time window is required for Force Events. Figure 8 shows how the Event List appears in 
the SBLDSS. 


23 



























Add Event" 








>M 


N/A 170500ZAug99 Defend N/A N/A A Co (Rein) 
null 170700ZAug99 resupply 1707002Aug99 170900ZAug99 

null 171000ZAug99 resupply 1710002Aug99 17110aZAug99 

null 171200ZAug99 resupply 171200ZAug99 1717002Aug99 

null 171700ZAug99 resupply 171700ZAug99 172000ZAug99 

null 171800ZAug99 resupply 171800ZAug99 172000ZAug99 

N/A 172000ZAug9g MvmfToContact N/A N/A A Co (Rein) 

N/A 180600ZAug99 Defend N/A N/A A Co (Rein) 
null 180700ZAug99 resupply 180700ZAug99 181100ZAug99 

null 180700ZAug99 resupply 180700ZAug99 1 810002Aug99 

null 181100ZAug99 resupply 181100ZAug99 18130,0ZAug99 

null 181200ZAug99 resupply 1812002Aug99 182000ZAug99 

null 181700ZAug99 resupply 181700ZAug99 182200ZAug99 

null 191200ZAug99 resupply 1912002Aug99 1 917002Aug99 

null 191600ZAug99 resupply 191600ZAug99 191900ZAug99 


ResupplyA Co (Rein) 300.0 MREs 
ResupplyACo (Rein) 3500.0 lbs of ammo 
ResupplyA Co (Rein) 2930.0 gallons of water 
ResupplyACo (Rein) 300.0 MREs 
ResupplyA Co (Rein) 3500.0 lbs of ammo 


Resupply A Co (Rein) 70.0 gallons offuel 
Resupply A Co (Rein) 300.0 MREs 
ResupplyA Co (Rein) 3200.0 lbs of ammo 
Resupply ACo (Rein) 2390.0 gallons of water 
ResupplyA Co (Rein) 300.0 MREs 
ResupplyA Co (Rein) 3000.0 gallons ofwater 
ResupplyACo (Rein) 600.0 MREs 


Figure 8: Event List 


7. Aircraft Manager 

The Aircraft Manager menu provides the planner a transportation-planning tool to 
determine if available aircraft can feasibly support the planned concept of operations 
ashore. Expected future missions will impact aircraft availability. The planner is able to 
adjust transportation scheduling constraints, such as crew assignment and scheduled 
aircraft maintenance, to try to ensure the forces ashore can be sustained. The SBLDSS 
program is not designed as a scheduling tool; it is a planning tool to provide insight into 
upcoming mission requirements and expected number of transporters required to 
accomplish all the upcoming missions. From the Aircraft Manager menu, the planner is 


24 

















able to create new aircraft and edit their characteristics either during setup or as the 
aircraft status changes. The planner can then view all the aircraft on the Transporter List 
along with their current availability, maintenance, and operational hour status. The 
planner is able to model missions not included in the SBLDSS as the Transporter Events, 
for example a deception flight, by setting the aircraft as unavailable for the current 
planning time horizon. This allows the user to decrease the number of available aircraft 
and realistically reflect the number of transportation assets available for the sustainment 
plan. The two types of aircraft, the MV-22 Osprey and the CH-53E Super Stallion, are 
discussed in more detail in Chapter IV. The setup windows for each of these aircraft are 
also displayed in their respective sections. Figure 9 shows an example Aircraft List found 
in the SBLDSS. 

The Aircraft Scheduler provides the planner with information on whether the 
current distribution plan is feasible with the number of available aircraft. It is a planning 
tool and should not be used for operational aircraft scheduling. If a distribution plan is 
infeasible, the planner is able to adjust the number of available aircraft, adjust the 
maintenance schedule, or relax the crew operating limit. He can then recompute the 
schedule. This process can be repeated until either the planner finds a feasible distribution 
plan or realizes the distribution plan for the current course of action is infeasible. 

The Aircraft Scheduler output includes four sections. The first section includes a 
recommended assignment of available aircraft to Transporter Events. Each feasible 
mission is shown including the sortie departure time, delivery time, and return time for the 


25 





1 

MV22 

1895.0 

1925.0 

8.0 

no 

2 

MV22 

1234.0 

1275,0 

8.0 

no 

3 

MV22 

1490.0 

1525.0 

8.0 

yes 

5 

MV22 

6896,0 

5925.0 

8.0 

yes 

6 

MV22 

1454.0 

1500.0 

8.0 

yes 

7 

MV22 

1123.0 

1150.0 

8.0 

yes 

8 

W22 

3450.0 

3500.0 

8.0 

yes 

9 

My22 

5642.0 

5675.0 

88 

yes 

10 

m 

4553.0 

4600.0 

8.0 

yes 

11 

mil 

3113.0 

3150.0 

8.0 

yes 

12 

MV22 

1342.0 

1375.0 

8.0 

yes 

21 

CH53E 

34526.0 

34575 0 


8.0 

22 

CH53E 

303446.0 303475.0 


8.0 

23 

CH53E 

304321.0 304350.0 


8.0 

24 

CH53E 

65567.0 

65600.0 


8.0 


Figure 9: Example Aircraft List Window 


aircraft assigned to the mission. The amount of lift still required to complete the mission 
is also displayed. The second section shows the planner the restrictions that are causing 
the scheduler not to schedule missions to specific aircraft. This allows the plaimer to see 
how they can adjust their maintenance schedule, available aircraft, or change their 
sustainment plan to make it feasible with the available number of aircraft. The third 
section shows the planner the missions that were not scheduled during the selected 
planning horizon and includes the remaining requirement to complete the mission. The 
last section shows the planner the numbers of hours and sorties each aircraft accumulated 
based on the scheduler output. This allows the planner to see the potential impact of the 


26 




















schedule on the available aircraft. Figure 10 shows an example output from the Aircraft 
Scheduler. The algorithm used in SBLDSS for aircraft scheduling is discussed in more 
detail in Chapter IV. 


5 Sea-based LogisUcs Decision Suppwt System (SBLPSSI 



resupply. lAVDet (50.0. 70.0) 

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

' ^ ^ Mission: 100,residual =0 lbs 

Restrictions ‘ , 

1, MV22, For missions: 200. Total Distance (349.83518815988236 miles) is > maximum sortie distance 
f 2, MV22. For missions: 200, Tota^ Distance (349.83518815988236 miles) IS > maximum sortie distance 

3. MV22. Formisslons: 200. Total Distance (349.83518815988236 miles) is>» maximum sortie distance 

4, MV22, For missions: 200, Total Distance (349.83518815988236 miles) is > maximum sortie distance 
i21, CH53E. could not meet mission 100 earliesttime window, difference is 8;097 hours 

IncompleteMIssions :- 
l All missions were completed. ; 


Jdaximum Total Nurhber of MV22 Sorties Required; 4 

OR'-:- 

iMaximum Total Number of CH53E Sorties Required: 4 


frail Number Accumulated op time 


MV22,1 

MV22,2 

MV22.3 

MV22,4 

CH53E,21 


2-1 

1.983 
0 : 

0 

2:867 - 


Total sorties 

1 

1 

0 

0 

1 


Figure 10: Example Schedule Output Window 


8. Commodity Inventory Reports 

After the planner completes the Event List, the planner can generate a Commodity 
Inventory Report for each Force based on usage, and the Events placed on the Event List. 
The commodity inventory report displays the expected food, water, fuel, and ammunition 
supply level 12,24, 36,48, and 72 hours from the current planning time. It also shows 
the planner the basic allowance and carrying capacity of the Force. The current 


27 





























commodity level is based on the starting coinmodity level, the amount of the commodity 
delivered to the Force, and the amount of commodity used by the Force. By viewing the 
Forces’commodity inventory level at future time increments, the planner is able to 
anticipate when the Force will require resupply of a specific commodity before the Force 
submits a request. This allows the planner to place Planned Events on the Event List and 
solve the aircraft scheduler to ensure any emergent requests will not surprise the planner 
and cause an infeasible distribution plan. Instead, the planner is able to see if the number 


of available aircraft is adequate to support the commander’s concept of operations ashore. 
Figure 11 shows an example Commodity Inventory for a typical infantry rifle company. 

It is found under the Reports Menu. 



Sea-ba^d Logistics Decision Stippoft System CSBLDSS^ 


inventory Report Setup 


^Inventory Report Window fot A COMP 


Choose ^Force A COMP 


Capacitir 

1638.0 

8190.0 

25.0 

7073.4 


2209Q6Z^ug99 
+12 Hours : 
1365 
6.825 
19 

7.073.4 


222106Zfliug99 
+24 Hours 
1992 
5.480 
13 

7,073.4 


3 DOS 

yipoodO/HCMREs) 1638 

iK'!; 

Water 0/H (gal) 8190.0 
'S Fuel 0/H (gal) 25.0 

i 

h|AmmoO/H0bs) 7073.4 






230906Z«Wg99 2321062e\ug99 242106ZAug99 


+36 Hours 

+48 Hours 

+72 Hours 

1719 

1446 

900 

4.095 

2,730 


7 

1 

0 

7,073.4 

7,073.4 

7,073.4 


Figure 11: Coinmodity Inventory Report Window 


28 
























IV. MODEL DEVELOPMENT 


A. METHODOLOGY OVERVIEW 

Modeling sea-based logistical and operational planning requires two distinct, but 

necessary, models: a sustainment model and a distribution model. The SBLDSS models 
sustainment through commodity consumption models and replenishment of forces ashore. 
Distribution is modeled using aircraft scheduling that is based on available aircraft and 
Transporter Events. This section provides an overview of how each model is developed. 
The following sections will offer greater detail. Both models depend upon planning 
factors that are created for three object entities; Force Modules, Events, and Transporters. 

For this decision support system to be credible, each entity must realistically 
model current or future force stracmres, operations, and aircraft. The entities used in this 
model are a mixture of current forces and transportation assets expected to be operational 
after the year 2010. Various sized Force Modules give the planner flexibility to model 
various tactical scenarios in dispersed locations. Transporter entities vary in type, 
capabilities, and cargo capacities. This heterogeneous mix of transportation assets allows 
exploration into optimal mixes for specified missions. Once the modeling entities are 
defined, logistics planning factors are developed to reflect accurate supply consumption 
for the Force Modules and accurate transporter characteristics. Force Module 
consumption is dependent on the t 5 q)e of environment the force is operating in and the 
enemy threat. Transportation distribution capabilities depend on time, speed, and distance 


29 



relationships. The distance from the transporter’s base to the forces ashore, both 
scheduled and corrective maintenance, and maximum crew operating times determine the 
availability of a transporter for a specific mission. Before discussing the force commodity 
inventory and the aircraft scheduling models, the three modelling entities are described in 
the next section. 

B. MODEL ENTITIES 

1. Marine Forces 

Marine forces are modeled as Force Modules to reflect possible units operating 
ashore. Each Force Module is characterized by its number of personnel, number of 
weapons and weapon types, number of vehicles and equipment, and supply carrying 
capacities. These individual force characteristics drive commodity consumption and 
invoke constraints on each Force Module. Force Modules were developed to reflect all 
possible types of ground units from an infantry fire team up to a battalion landing team 
(BLT)-sized force. Units are segregated into three types: combat, combat support, and 
combat service support units. Larger units incorporate the smaller units into their tables of 
organization (T/O) and tables of equipment (T/E). Although these types of forces were 
modeled as the default forces for the SBLDSS, the planner is able to edit any 
characteristic, either during setup or while the program is in use, to reflect more accurate 
planning factors. If infantry, combat support, and combat service support units operate 
together as a task force, their characteristics must be combined to reflect accurate Force 
Module planning factors. In this case, the sum of each planning factor for the different 
types of units can be used as the planning factors for the new Force Module. The planner 


30 



may also modify a Force Module to reflect planning factors for modeling other units not 
offered as default units in the SBLDSS. For example, an Infantry Rifle Company could 
become an Infantry Regiment by renaming the company and replacing planning factors to 
reflect those expected of a regimental sized force. This gives planners the flexibility to 
realistically model forces under the current task organization ashore. It also allows 
analysts and wargamers to evaluate how different force structures effect the sea-based 
distribution problem. The SBLDSS default Force Modules are listed in Table 3. 


Infantry Units 

Combat Support Units 

Combat Service Support 
Units 

Fire Team 

Artillery Battery 

Helicopter Support Team 

Squad 

Tank Platoon 

(HST) 


Landing Force Support 

Platoon 

LAV Detachment 

Party (LFSP) 

Weapons Platoon 

AAAV Detachment 

Mobile Combat Service 

Rifle Company 

Combat Engineer 

Support 

Detachment (MCSSD) 

Weapons Company 

Infantry Battalion 

Detachment 



Table 3. Force Module Entities 


After forces are created and, if required, their default planning factors modified, 
the force is added to the SBLDSS Force List. The planner is then able to edit the forces 
on the Force List in the Force Manager Menu and view inventory reports for each force. 
Since the aviation combat element (ACE) is expected to be sea-based during OMFTS 


31 




operations, it remains sea-based for the SBLDSS. If the planner wishes to model the ACE 
ashore, logistics planning factors may be established using the methodology provided in 
this thesis. 

2. Transporters 

Transporters provide a critical link in the sea-based distribution system between 
the sea-base and the forces operating ashore. By reducing the logistical tail of large shore- 
based combat service support units, supply storage capacities of forces operating ashore 
are drastically decreased. This increases the risk associated with conducting combat 
operations with a constrained logistics system. As stated by LtGen P. Shutler, USMC 
(Ret.), “successful military operations depend on positioning a superior force to overcome 
the enemy threat with minimum loses to friendly units”. [Ref. 2] Available transportation 
assets are required to move these forces, their supplies, and their equipment into tactically 
sound positions. These same transporters must provide sustainment, operational 
maneuver, and MEDEVAC support to these forces. Surface craft may be used for initially 
establishing units ashore. However, once inland, the combat units, with their mobile 
combat service support detachments, will not be expected to maintain logistical lines of 
communication with a beach support area. Instead, they will rely solely on aircraft for 
distribution functions. 

The operating distances expected in the OMFTS and STOM Concepts (25-100 
miles from ship-to-shore and up to 200 miles from shore-to-objective) are large. This 
makes aircraft survivability, availability, mission radius, and cargo capacity at these 
distances critical planning factors in determining the feasibility of the commander’s 


32 



concept of operations ashore. Maximum distances exceed the MV-22’s non-refueled 
mission radius of 200 nautical miles. [Ref. 14: p. 71] Even at the MV-22’s maximum 
non-refueled mission radius, mobile combat service support detachments will not have the 
survivability or responsiveness to convoy from a beach support area, through potential 
enemy controlled areas, to resupply the supported combat units. For this reason, air 
transportation assets provide a critical link to sustaining combat units in the OMFTS, 
STOM, and SBL environment. The principal transportation assets modeled in the 
SBLDSS program for ship-to-shore movement include: the MV-22 Osprey, expected to 
begin fielding to Marine Corps units in 2005 and the CH-53E Super Stallion, currently in 
the Marine Corps inventory. 

C. COMMODITY INVENTORY MODELS OVERVIEW 

The SBLDSS predicts commodity levels of forces operating ashore based on the 
Events on the SBLDSS Event List and the passage of time. The expected amount of a 
certain commodity at a specific time depends on the initial commodity level of the force, 
the amount of the commodity consumed by the force, and the amount of the conunodity 
delivered to the force. The basic commodity inventory model for forces operating ashore 
can be described with the following equation: 


33 



Is,f,ti = Is.f,tb — ^consumeds,f + ^delivereds.f 

tb tb 

Where: 

Is. f .11 = the inventory level of supply s in force f at end time ti 
Is.f.tb = the inventory level of supply s in force f at beginning time 4 

tl 

^consumeds.f- amount of supply s consumed in force f between tb and ti 

tb 

tl 

^delivereds.f= amount of supply s delivered to force f between tb and ti 

tb 

The class I subsistence, class in(W) bulk fuel, and class V(W) ground 
ammunition commodity consumption models, used to determine the amount of supplies 

consumed, are based on passage of time and scheduled Events during the time window of 

/ 

interest. For example, a Movement to Contact Event will cause a force to consume 
ammunition and fuel based on the amount of ammunition the force is expected to expend 
and the movement duration of the Event. The reduction in the commodity level occurs 
when the Event is scheduled to take place on the Event List. The force’s generators and 
material handling equipment may also consume fuel during this time period. This causes 
a further reduction of the fuel commodity level at the end of the time-period. The force’s 
fuel level is increased by a Resupply Event modeling fuel being delivered to the force. 
Consumption models for each class of supply are discussed in the following sections. 

D. CLASS I (FOOD AND WATER) CONSUMPTION 

Class I (Food) consumption depends on the number of Marines in each Force 
Module. Since STOM operations are implicitly short term operations, MREs are the only 


34 


food planned for in this model. The amount of food each Force Module requires per day 
is determined using the following equation: 

Ff = Mf X CRf X CF 


Where: 

Ff = pounds of food force / requires per day 
Mf = number of Marines in force / 

CRf = consumption rate (MREs per day) of force /, [Ref. 15] 

CF = planning factor converting MREs to pounds( 1.46 lbs per MRE), [Ref. 15] 


Class I (water) consumption is computed in gallons per man per day for each 
Force Module. Adequate water sources and water purification units may not always 
satisfy daily demand requirements of Marine forces ashore during sea-based operations. 
In this case, water made from the sea-base would need to be transported to forces ashore. 
The model uses the four planning factors in Table 1, dependent on force size and 
temperature in the operating area, to predict daily water consumption of forces ashore. 


Environmental 

Condition 

Temperature Range 
(degrees Fahrenheit) 

Planning Factor 
(gallons per man per day) 

Extremely Cold (EC) 

-65 < T < 0 

10 

Cold (C) 

0<T<32 

12 

Normal (N) 

33<T< 109 

15 

Hot (H) 

T> 110 

24 


Table 4. Water Consumption Planning Factors After [Ref. 12] 


35 

















Water consumption is computed using the following equation: 


Wf = MfxWCRf.c 

Wf =gallons of water consumed by force / per day 
Mf = number of Marines in force / 

WCRf, c = per day water consumption planning factor, in Table 4, of 
force / operating in environment c, [Ref. 12] 


E. CLASS ra(W) (BULK FUEL) CONSUMPTION 

In a sea-based environment, both forces operating ashore and the vehicles and 
equipment used to support them contribute to overall fuel consumption. In this model, 
forces ashore are assumed to consume diesel fuel. Force fuel usage is predicted by either 
passage of time or by a specific Event. The first case, passage of time, occurs when forces 
have equipment, such as generators or material handling equipment, as part of their T/E. 

If a force has these types of equipment as part of their T/E, the model uses a daily fuel 
planning factor [Ref. 12] based on the typical number of hours each piece of equipment 
operates and the amount of fuel each piece of equipment consumes per hour. The 
consumption rate and hours of operation per day are then converted to gallons per day fuel 
constimption rates for each Force Module ashore. The equation below shows this 
relationship: 


36 



Ff = En.f*FCRn*T 


Where; 

Ff =gallons of fuel consumed per day by force / 

En, /=number of equipment type n in use by force /, [Ref. 15,16] 

FCRn =fuel consumption rate of equipment n in gallons per hour, [Ref. 12] 
T =hours each day equipment type n is operated, [Ref. 12] 


In the model, the amount of fuel consumed per day causes a discrete reduction in the 
force’s fuel inventory. The second case in which a force consumes fuel is during a move 
event. A move event occurs when a force uses vehicles assigned to their T/E to move for 
a specified duration. The equation below shows this relationship: 


Ff=Vn.f*FCRn*T 


"Where: 

Ff =gallons of fuel consumed by force / during a move event 
Vn, / = number of vehicles of type n in the T/E of force / 

FCRn =fuel consumption rate of vehicle type n in gallons per minute 
T = time in minutes for force to travel 


Each move event causes a reduction in the Force Module’s fuel inventory. 


37 



day or rounds per unit type per day. These planning factors, designed to determine war 
reserve stock, positioning, and transportation planning, do not provide the combat service 
support planner an accurate LPF. Modeling expenditure as rounds per weapon per day 
multiplied by the number of weapons ashore in a given threat scenario seems like a good 
way to forecast consumption rates and thus plan resupply missions. However, these LPFs 
do not account for periods of inactivity or periods with high operational tempo. 

The SBLDSS models ammunition expenditure for Marine Forces ashore by 
accounting for the enemy threat environment, tempo of operations, expected expenditure 
over a period of time, and the Concept of Operations for the Marine Force. 

1. Threat Environment 

Marine Corps Order (MCO) 8010. IE [Ref 13] provides LPFs for three different 
enemy threats in which Marines are expected to operate. These include infantry-heavy, 
armor-heavy, and composite planning factors by ammunition type in units of rounds per 
weapon per day and rounds per unit per day. 

a. Infantry-Heavy Planning Factors 

Infantry-heavy planning factors are based on a scenario involving a 
Marine Air-Ground Task Force (MAGTF) stopping the advance of an opposing force 
within an assigned sector; defending in place while forces are built up in the area of 
operations; and then conducting offensive operations. The opposing force is expected to 
be a regularly organized infantry-heavy combined arms army supported by modern air 
forces. 


38 



be a regularly organized infantry-heavy combined arms army supported by modem air 
forces. 

b. Armor-Heavy Planning Factors 

Armor-heavy planning factors are based on a scenario involving a 
MAGTF stopping the advance of an opposing force within an assigned sector; defending 
in place while forces are built up in the area of operations; and then conducting offensive 
operations, including an amphibious assault. The opposing force is a regularly organized 
armor-heavy combined arms army supported by modem air forces. 

c. Composite Planning Factors 

The composite planning factors were determined by using “weighted 
averages” of the LPFs from the two previous scenarios. [Ref 13] These LPFs are used 
when planning class V(W) expenditure in an uncertain environment. The expected threat 
is primarily infantry, but may be reinforced by unknown forces. 

2. Insignificant Ammunition 

The SBLDSS determines the expected expenditure of Insignificant Ammunition, 
as defined here, over time by the current threat level and the size of each Marine element 
operating ashore. Insignificant Ammunition is ammunition required for mission 
accomplishment, but with a very low expenditure rate and overall weight. Examples 
include M9 pistol and sniper rifle ammunition. This type of ammunition is planned using 
the LPFs provided in MCO 8010. IE and the following equation: 


39 




xr)foraIl Forces 

j 


Where: 

Ai = total daily ammunition type i requirement by the Marine element in pounds during perdiod t 
Oij = rounds per day of type i used by weapon type j, [Ref 12] 

Yi = weight of ammunition type i round in pounds, [Ref 12] 

Vj = number of weapon type j in Marine element 
T = time period of interest in days 


3. Significant Ammunition 

"Significant ammunition" is ammunition critical for mission accomplishment that 
has a high consumption rate and/or heavy overall weight. Examples include crew-served 
weapon and artillery ammunition. This type of ammunition is forecasted using aggregate 
consumption of certain Force Events, related to operational tasks, planned for the Marine 
elements ashore. The following Force Events, taken from the Army's Mission Training 
Plan (MTP) for the Infantry Rifle Company, [Ref 15], are included in this part of the 
model: Movement to Contact, Attack, Raid, Withdraw, and Defend. 
a. Movement To Contact 

The Movement to Contact Event is used when the Marine element is 
plaiming to take combat action upon contact with the enemy in a known area. A typical 
situation when this is used includes when enemy contact has been broken, he has 
withdrawn deep, is being reinforced, and is preparing to counterattack near his last known 


40 


location. The Marine element is tasked with moving forward to establish contact with the 
enemy, destroying smaller sized units or fixing larger units in place. 

b. Attack 

The Attack Event is used when the Marine element is planning to attack 
and seize an objective. The element knows the enemy’s location and plans to kill or 
capture the enemy, or force him to withdrawal. 

c. Raid 

The Raid Event is used when the Marine element is planning a raid on an 
unexpecting enemy position. The element is expected to accomplish its assigned tasks 
without becoming decisively engaged. 

d. Withdraw 

The Withdraw Event is used when the Marine element is planning to 
conduct a delaying operation while withdrawing in the face of a superior enemy force. 

The element is expected to delay the enemy in a designated area for a specified period of 
time. 

e. Ambush 

The Ambush Event is used when a Marine element plans to ambush a 
known enemy force, mounted or dismounted, along lines of communication or natural 
lines of drift The element is expected to surprise and engage the enemy and either kills or 
captures all enemy in the established kill zone. 

/. Defend 

The Defend Event is used when a Marine element is planning to repel an 
expected enemy force from a defensive position. 


41 



All Events assume the basic allowance (BA) of ammunition is established prior to 
the Event and the element has been reinforced with the necessary ammunition to perform 
the specific purpose of each Event during preparation. This requires the SBLDSS planner 
to either accept the BA already in the model or change it to reflect the amount required to 
complete the mission. Basic allowance of ammunition is defined as the amount of 
ammunition by type recommended to be carried within the means normally available to 
the Marine element [Ref 16]. BA established in MCO 8010.1E, in units of rounds per 
weapon, is used as default values in the model. Force Events effect each Force Module’s 
class V(W) inventory as discrete events. The model assumes the Force Module will not 
consume more than 50% of its BA before breaking contact with the enemy. The expected 
amount of ammunition required for each Event is determined by the following equation: 

Ai= (jRA. *Yi*CPF ) for each Force 

Where: 

At = total expected amount of ammunition type i used in pounds 

BAi = rounds of type i in basic allowance, [Ref. 15] 

Ti = weight of ammunition type i round in pounds, [Ref. 15] 

CPF = percentage of BA expected to consume during the combat event. Default value = 0.5. 


G. TRANSPORTATION PLANNING 

The Ship-to-Objective Delivery (STOD) transportation assets modeled in the 
SBLDSS include the MV22 and CH53E aircraft. Characteristics of each aircraft, along 


42 


with transportation planning factors, are used to model STOD capability to meet 
operational and logistic demand. The planner imposes a demand on the available 
transportation assets by creating Resupply, Move Force, and MEDEVAC Events, on the 
SBLDSS Event List. The planner is then able to model the desired number of MV22 and 
CH53E aircraft by creating each aircraft in the setup menu of the SBLDSS. Before the 
transportation asset is added to the Aircraft List, the planner is able to change any of its 
characteristics to reflect up-to-date status from current availability reports and known 
operating conditions. 

1. MV22 Osprey 

The MV-22 Osprey is a medium lift, vertical assault transport for troops, 
equipment, and supplies, and is designated to replace the CH-46 Sea Knight as the Marine 
Corps’ aviation medium lift asset A tiltrotor aircraft, the MV-22’s improved range, speed, 
and payload is expected to provide a tremendous improvement in the Marine Corps’ 
ability to project power from OTH towards inland objectives in STOM. The MV-22’s 
extended combat radius will aUow the Navy ships to maintain adequate stand-off distances 
from enemy shore-to-ship missiles and other developing threats while complicating the 
enemy’s defense and inhibiting his ability to concentrate his forces. The MV-22, currently 
in the test and evaluation phase, is expected to be operational in the Marine Corps in 2014. 
Figure 12 shows the default characteristics as pictured in the MV22 setup window of the 
SBLDSS. 


43 





Figure 12: Example Create MV-22 Window 


2. CH-53E Super Stallion 

The CH-53E Super Stallion is the Marine Corps’ premier heavy lift aviation asset. 
A shipboard-compatible helicopter, the CH-53E is configured for lift and movement of 
cargo and passengers internally and external lift of heavy oversized equipment. CH-53E 
missions include tactical movement of heavy weapons and equipment and tactical 
resupply and insertion/extraction of Marine forces operating ashore. Figure 13 shows the 
default characteristics as pictured in the CH-53E setup window of the SBLDSS. 


44 





























































































Figure 13: Example Create CH-53E Window 


3. Transportation Planning Considerations 

Throughout the duration of a ground operation, many factors determine whether 
the commander’s concept of operations can be feasibly supported using available aircraft. 
The effects of night operations, adverse weather, and enemy air defense diminish the 
ultimate performance of the transportation systems. Additionally, aircraft maintenance 
and aircrew flying constraints make planning even more difficult. This section discusses 
the plaiming factors considered when modeling transportation assignment and scheduling 
in the SBLDSS. Aircraft planning factors discussed include maximum sortie distance, 
mission load efficiency, aircraft availability, cycle time calculations, and possible mission 
sequencing. 


45 





























































































a. Maximum Sortie Distance 

The maximum sortie distance each Transporter can support forces is a 
function of the cargo load, time planning factors, fuel consumption rates, and 
environmental conditions. Using speed, distance, time, and consumption relationships, the 
maximum sortie distance for each Transporter type can be calculated. The SBLDSS uses 
a maximum sortie radius of200 nautical miles for the MV-22 and 240 nautical miles for 
the CH-53E. 

h. Mission Load Efficiency 

The mission load requirement, whether Resupply, Force Move, or 
MEDEVAC missions, and the aircraft’s cargo capacity determine Mission Load 
Efficiency. 

. Payload 

Efficiency =-- 

MissionLoad 


Where : 

Payload = cargo capacity of the aircraft 

MissionLoad = demand placed on Transporter assets based on mission requirement 

Aircraft cargo capacity takes into account the type of mission, the type of cargo, 
and the amount of fuel reserve the aircraft crew desires upon return to the sea-base. The 
model distinguishes between wet and dry cargo capacities. Fuel and water delivery 
missions are assumed to be accomplished using 500 gallon fuel bladders and 250 gallon 
water bladders, respectively. Tables 5 and 6 show the MV-22 and CH-53E cargo 
profiles. In the SBLDSS the maximum weight allowed for the CH-53E is 23,500 pounds. 


46 


Supply Class 

Quantity 

Package 

Unit Weight 
Obs) 

Maximum 
Weight Qbs) 

Class I Food 

4 

Pallets internal 




6 

Pallets external 



Class I Water 

5 


2,325 

11,625 

Class in Fuel 

3 


3,685 

11,055 

Class V Ammo 

4 

Pallets internal 




1 

Pallets external 




Table 5. MV-22 Cargo Profile by Class of Supply After [Ref. 16] 


Supply Class 

Quantity 

Package 

Unit Weight 
(lbs) 

Maximum 
Weight (lbs) 

Class I Food 

7 

Pallets internal 

1,110 



8 

Pallets external 

1,110 


Class I Water 

12 

250 gal 
bladders 

2,325 

27,900 

Class in Fuel 

6 

500 gal 
bladders 

3,685 

22,110 


7 

Pallets internal 


15,400 


4 

Pallets external 


8,800 


Table 6. CH-53E Cargo Profile by Class of Supply After [Ref. 16] 


Aircraft cargo capacity is a function of maximum vertical takeoff weight, the residual 
weight of the crew and reserve fuel, and the amount of fuel needed to accomplish the 
mission at the location of the supported force. The equation below shows this 
relationship: 


47 
















































Capacity -MVTOW-Resid-ReqFuel 

Capacity = cargo capacity of the aircraft 
MVTOW = maxinium vertical takeoff weight at operational 
temperature and altitude in lbs 

Resid = residual weight of airframe, aircrew and reserve fuel in lbs 
ReqFuel = fuel required to complete mission 

As an example, the My-22 has a maximum sortie radius of 200 nautical miles. The 
maximum amount of fuel the MV-22 can carry is 7,700 pounds. With an MVTOW of 
50,887 pounds and a 37,687 pounds, the MV-22 has a payload capacity of 5,500 pounds. 
c. Aircraft Availability 

The SBLDSS does not model aircraft availability using typical availability 
calculations. Aircraft availability is typically modeled using a mission capable rate 
between zero and one, for example between 0.70 and 0.85, depending on the type of 
aircraft. This factor, determined through operational testing, is based on the expected 
number of aircraft available during a given day. The small number of aircraft on a sea- 
base magnifies the capabilities each aircraft provides to the ship-to-objective distribution 
network. For this reason, the planner must be aware of each aircraft’s current availability 
status. 

The planner is able to view the status of each aircraft on the Aircraft List that is 
found under the Aircraft Manager Menu. He can change an aircraft’s availability as its 
status changes by editing the aircraft. By designating a transporter as unavailable during 
a given planning horizon, the planner is able to reflect the aircraft's current status on the 


48 




daily availability report. The planner can also model other operational taskings not 
already modeled as Transporter Events (for example, use as a command and control 
platform). The SBLDSS takes both the amount of time to the next scheduled 
maintenance check and the maximum daily crew operating limits into consideration as 
constraints when scheduling transportation sorties. If, due to the operation time 
accumulated during a sortie, the aircraft does not meet one of these constraints, the 
aircraft is then set as unavailable for that mission and for the remainder of the planning 
horizon. 

The number of aircraft available for lift missions determines the total number of 
sorties available for mission planning. This determines the amount of troop and cargo 
throughput capacity, or maximum flow, from the ship to the objective, along the ship-to- 
objective distribution network. 

d. Cycle Time Calculations 

The total cycle time of each sortie determines the time when the aircraft 
will become available after it completes an assigned mission sequence. In the SBLDSS, 
an aircraft sortie may consist of either one or two Transporter Events. When modeling 
aircraft sorties, the SBLDSS considers the time to load and unload passengers, the time to 
load and unload both internal and external cargo, and the time to hot-refliel each aircraft. 
The total cycle time for each sortie is computed using the following equation: 


49 



TCt,s = 2xTsxTLT, + 2xRsXTLa+TRHi 


TCt,s 

Ts 

Rs 

TLTt 

TLCt 

TRHt 


=total cycle time in minutes of aircraft t on sortie s 
- number of Move Force and MEDEVAC Events in sortie s 
= number of Resupply Events in sortie s 
= time to load/offload Marines for aircraft t 
= time to load/offload cargo for aircraft t 
= time to hot refuel aircraft t 


Table 7 shows the time planning factors used in the SBLDSS. 


Time Factor (minutes) 

MV-22 Osprey 

CH-53E 

Load/unload troops 

10 

10 

Load/unload internal cargo 

20 

20 

Load/unload external cargo 

3 

3 

Hot refuel at the Sea-base 

15 

15 


Table 7. lVIV-22 and CH-53E Time Planning Factors After [Ref 16] 


e. Mission Sequencing 

Transporter Events in the SBLDSS model possible aircraft missions. 
These missions are specifically modeled to demonstrate the necessity for sea-based 
transportation planning to include both operational and sustainment operations. Feasible 
mission combinations in each sortie include: 


50 







{R},{T},{M}, 

OR 

{R,T} 

Where: 

R = Resupply Event 
T = Move Force Event 
M=MEDEVAC Event 

4. Aircraft Sdieduling Algorithm 

The aircraft scheduling algorithm developed for the SBLDSS is a heuristic based 
on the Multiple Tour Maximum Collection Problem (MTMCP) as outlined in Naylor, [Ref 
17]. The heuristic, written in Java 1.2 [Ref. 11], uses the Konig Java Class Library 
developed by MAJ Leroy A. Jackson of the TRADOC Analysis Center-Monterey (TRAC- 
Monterey). [Ref. 18] Kdnig is an application programmer interface (API) providing a set 
of graph and network objects and algorithms to model and solve network problems. 

a. Multiple Tour Maximum Collection Problem (MTMCP) 

The MTMCP consists of collecting the maximum reward from a subset of 
weighted nodes such that each tour is completed within a time constraint. A tour is 
defined as a sequence of mission nodes visited by the aircraft during one cycle. A tour 
provides a theoretical representation of an aircraft sortie with multiple aircraft missions. 
The weights on each node are determined by the measure of effectiveness the modeler 
wishes to maximize. The goal of the MTMCP algorithm is to gain the maximum value 


51 



from the nodes selected for a predefined number of tours. A distinct feature of the 
MTMCP is that the number of tours is fixed and not all nodes are visited. 

b. SBLDSS Scheduling Heuristic Description 

The SBLDSS scheduling heuristic differs from the MTMCP in that the 
number of tours are determined by the ability of an aircraft to accomplish a sequence of 
missions within time and distance constraints. The aircraft are constrained by cargo 
limitations based on distance, cargo, and fuel tradeoff as described in the previous section. 
The total cycle time of each tour must be less than the time until the available aircraft’s 
next maintenance check and the maximum crew-operating limit. Each mission in the 
SBLDSS also has a time window in which the mission must be accomplished. Each node 
in the SBLDSS scheduling algorithm represents either an available aircraft modeled as an 
aircraft node or a sequence of missions, modeled as a mission node. An arc exists 
between an aircraft node and a mission node only if the aircraft can accomplish the 
mission sequence within these constraints. Figure 14 shows an example of the graphical 
representation of this node and arc relationship. 



Figure 14: Example Arc-Node Representation 


52 



Each aircraft and mission node combination is designated a feasible tour and 
added to a tour list. Each mission node is given a weight determined by the efficiency of 
the Transporter accomplishing the mission and the distance from the sea-base to the 
mission objective location. A penalty is applied to the mission weight if the aircraft must 
loiter between two missions for over 30 minutes. The following equation shows how 
each missipn node is weighted: 


Wgti=^ Di, jX X Penalty (loiter) 

MissionLoadj 


Where: 

Wgtj 

^i} 

MissionLoadj 

Payloadij 
Penalty (loiter) 


= the weight determined for mission node j 
= the distance the Transporter must travel from node i to node j 
= the total lbs required to accomplish the sequence of missions at 
the mission node j 

= the cargo capacity potential of the transporter between nodes i andy 
= a penalty for the time an aircraft loiters between missions in a two 
ntission sequence 


Each tour accumulates a reward, consisting of the sum of all the weighted mission 
nodes the Transporter is able to accomplish. Once all feasible tours are determined, they 
are sorted and ranked by highest reward first in a tour list. Once ranked, the Transporter 
associated with the tour having the highest reward is assigned a sortie consisting of the 
mission sequence associated with this tour. The residual for all missions in the mission 
sequence of the assigned sortie is computed using the following equation: 

residual = Missionloadj—Payloadi. j 


53 



The tour list is then searched and all identical missions have their residuals 
updated to reflect the new residual. If the residual is equal to zero, each tour on the tour 
list with an identical mission is marked as completed. The operation time of the 
Transporter that accomplished the sortie is updated to reflect the additional time 
accumulated by completing the sortie. The next uncompleted tour on the tour list is now 
checked to see if the associated Transporter can accomplish the tour based on its new 
operational time and any sorties already scheduled. At this point, all constraints are 
checked, including the time to the Transporter’s next scheduled maintenance check, the 
maximum allowed daily crew fl 5 dng time, and the earliest and latest time window delivery 
requirement of each mission in the mission sequence of this next tour. If the tour is 
feasible, it becomes a sortie, it is added to the sortie list, and the Transporter’s variables 
are updated. If not feasible, it is passed and the next tour is checked for feasibility. This 
procedure continues until all tours have been inspected for feasibility. The final sortie list 
provides a schedule for each Transporter sortie including a departure time from the sea- 
base, a delivery time at the mission objective, and a return time to the sea-base. A list of 
unaccomplished missions is displayed along with the reason for their unfeasibility to allow 
the planner to determine how he can relax the constraints to obtain a feasible sustainment 
solution. The total number of sorties and operational hours accumulated by each 
Transporter is also displayed to allow the planner to update this information if they choose 
the sustainment solution. 


54 



c. Scheduling Algorithm 

The following section outlines the Scheduling heuristic developed for the 

SBLDSS. 

• For each Transporter, create a simple Graph of all feasible single mission 
nodes. If the tour is feasible, assign the mission node a calculated weight. 

• For each Graph, create an improved Graph of feasible single mission nodes 
and two mission sequence nodes. For each feasible tour, assign the tour a 
reward calculated by accumulating weights of all mission nodes in the tour. 

• Create a tour list, consisting of all tours associated with all Graphs, sorted in 
rank order by highest reward. 

• Create a sortie list by iterating through the tour list, determining feasible tours, 
updating Transporter operational calculations, and computing and updating all 
mission residuals on the tour list. 

• Display the sortie list as a schedule for all Transporter sorties on the list. 


55 





V. MODEL APPLICATION 


This chapter shows how the SBLDSS can be applied to a real-world planning 
environment by providing an illustrative scenario. In this scenario, the planners are using 
the SBLDSS as a planning tool to develop a feasible Course of Action to support the 
commander's mission statement and Concept of Operations. Since the SBLDSS is a 
sustainment-planning tool, the scenario begins immediately after the forces finish their 
ship-to-shore movement. 

A. SITUATION 

A deteriorating situation in a Third World nation threatens U.S. interests in the 
region. Security is required to provide stability to the government. CSS requirements 
must be delivered directly to each task force element. Intelligence estimates indicate an 
infantry threat. Daytime temperature is 88 degrees Fahrenheit. 

B. TASK ORGANIZATION 

One Rifle Company will be with command group Alpha ashore, A LAV 
detachment will provide screening support. The ACE, along with the majority of the 
CSSE, remains afloat to reduce the security requirements of an established CSSE and 
ACE ashore. 

1. Forces Ashore 

The force structure is shown below in Table 8. 


57 



Unit Description 

Personnel 

Command Element 

20 

A Company 

182 

LAVDet 


Total 

252 


Table 8. Task Organization 


2. Total Air Assets Available 

The lift assets for this scenario assume a one-for-one swap between current 
numbers of CH-46E helicopters found in a typical MEU (SOC) and the MV-22 tilt-rotor 
aircraft. 

• 12 - MV22 Osprey 

• 4 - CH53E Super Stallion 

C. CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS 

Establish a force ashore in order to provide a secure perimeter around objective A. 
Conduct the security operation until relieved. Class I, Class III, and Class V(W) 
sustainment will be provided directly from amphibious shipping to each security element. 
Routine situation reports will be provided daily along with immediate requests. 

D. FORCE LIST 

Figure 15 shows the Force List for this Course of Action as displayed in the 
SBLDSS. Command Group Alpha is co-located with A Company at coordinate (10, 
100). This accounts for the size of A Company (Reinforced) being 202 instead of the 182 
default value. The commodity consumption rates, basic allowances, and initial inventory 
levels have also been changed to reflect the LPFs associated with this larger force. The 
LAV Detachment, located at coordinate (-10, 120), has default LPFs to model 
commodity consumption, basic allowance, and initial inventory levels. Each force is 


58 




assumed to have matching initial inventory levels and basic allowances for each 
commodity. 



Figure 15: Force List 


E. INITIAL REPORTS 

The initial Commodity Inventory Reports, for each force in the Force List, are 
shown in Figures 16 and 17. These reports are generated once the planner develops the 
tasks for each force and models these tasks as Force Events. The planner uses the reports 
to anticipate resupply requests from the forces ashore. For example, the planner's 
objective is to maintain the commodity levels of each force at three days of supply (DOS) 
for every period over the report's 72 hours planning horizon. Since the planner will not 
be able to meet this goal, they will develop a resupply policy, or a trigger, for when a 
Resupply Event should be expected for each commodity. The planner first determines 
the amount of the commodity needed, along with the time the force requires resupply, 
and then adds Resupply Events to the Event List. This creates a demand that the 
Transportation Assets need to accomplish in the Scheduling Algorithm. Note that 
Figures 15 and 16 indicate no ammunition usage. This is because no Force Events are 
added to the Event List for either force. As the planner adds Force Events and Resupply 
Events to the Event List, they are able to view an updated Commodity Inventory Report 


59 
































for ea.ch force. This ensures each commodity inventory level is met for every period in 
the planning horizon. 


j: ^ Inventory Report Window for A Company (Retnl 




2721l1ZAag99 280911ZAug99 2^2in2Aufi99 :290911ZAug99 292111ZAug99 302111ZAug99 



3 DOS 

Capacdy^ 

+8 Hours 

+12 Hours 

+24 Hours 

+36 Hours 

t48Hours 

+72Hours 

FoodO/H^REs) 

1,818 

1,638 

1,838 

1,535 

1,232 

929 

626 

■20 

Water OJH <gal) 

8,790 

8.198 

8,790 

7.325 

5,860 

4,395 

: . ■ 2;930 

:o 

FiieEO/H(gal> 

108 

180 

108 

93 

B8 

■: i. 

•: ,T9 

• 72 

58 

Ammo OM (lbs) 

7,467 

7,073 • 

• 7467 

7,457 

M67 

: 7.487 

7,467 

7,4671 


Figure 16: A Company (Rein) Commodity Inventory Report 


^Inventory Report Window for LAV Del 


2721112Aug99 28091 t2Aug99 2821112Aug99 2909112Aug99 2921112:^g99 30211 T2Aug99 


1 

3dos ; 

iCapacity 

+0 Hours; 

+i 2!;H6urs : 

+24 Hours ' 

+36 Hours 

♦48 Hours 

+72:Hours 

1 Food DM ^REs) 

450 

■ h 45d : 

4SD 

375 


225 

150 

0 

i Water O^H^gal) 

1 

2.i50. 

(2,250 : 

2,250: 

■ 


1,125 

750 : 

0 . . 

|FuetO)H<ga8 

14,934 

■ ■:i4.9?4 ; 

14,994 " 



■ 14,994 

14,934 

:H994 

1 Ammo O/H Obs) 

23,905 

!2'3.905 • : 

■ 23,905 : 

23.905 

23,905 

23,905 

23,905 

23,905 



Figure 17: LAV Detachment Commodity Inventory Report 


F. EVENT LIST 

Figure 18 shows the Event List, including both Force Events and Resupply 
Events, for A Company (Rein) and the LAV Detachment. These Events are placed in the 
SBLDSS to model specific tasks and emergent resupply requests of the forces ashore. As 
a reminder, since none of the Force Events are assigned a mission number in the 
Scheduling Algorithm, an “N/A” appears in the mission number column for all Force 





































Events. Also, “null” appears for all Transporter Events until the Scheduling Algorithm is 


executed. 



|N/A 2805302Aug99 MvmtToContact Wk tHA 

N/A 280600ZAug99 Defend N/A NW A Company (Rein) 

|nul! 2809002Aug99 resupply 28090aZAug99 2816002Aug99 ResupplyA Company (Rein) 3538.0 lbs of ammo 

|null 280900ZAug99 resupply 28090C^g99 281600ZAug99 ResupplyA Company (Rein) 1465.0 gallons of water; 

inull 2809302Aug99 resupply 28Q9302Aug99 2814302Aug99 Resupply LAV Det 7171.0 lbs of ammo 

[null 28123QZAug99 resupply 28123QZAug99 281600ZAug99 ResupplyA Company (Rein) 606.0 MREs 

jlvl/A 2816002Aug99 MvnrtToCorrtatt m . LAV Det 

ilM/A 281730ZAug99 Defend NAA NW A Company (Rein) 

inull 2820002Aug99 resupply 28200QZAUg99 290500ZAug99 ResupplyA Company (Rein) 1465.0 gallons of vrater 

inull 282030ZAug99 resupply 282a30ZAug99 300500ZAug99 ResupplyA Company (Rein) 3536.0 lbs of ammo 

Inull 282O302Aug99 resupply . 28203OZAug99 2909002Aug99 Resupply LAV Det 160.0 MREs : 

Inull 282030ZAug99 resupply 282030ZAug99 290900^g99 Resupply LAV Det 750,0 gallons of mel : . 

Inull 282O30ZAug99 resupply 2820302Aug99 291 i002Aug99 Resupply LAV Det 7171.0 lbs of ammo : 

inull 2821002Aug99 resupply 28210OZAug99 290800ZAug99 Resupply LAV Det 750.0 gallons of water 

Ma 290600ZAug99 Defend NfA N/A :ACompany^eln) 

null 290700ZAug99 resupply 290700ZAug99 290900ZAug99 Resupply A Company (Rein) 3536.0 lbs of ammo 

null 290930ZAug99 movefbrte 290930ZAug99 291400ZAug99 Move 202 of A Company (Rein) from (10.0.100.0) to (20.0.140.0) 

!n/A 291200ZAug99 MvmfToContact N/A ^ LAVDet.. ; 

N/A 291330ZAug99 Attack N/A N/A A Company (Rein) xr : 

null 291530ZAug99 resupply 29153(EAug99 .36o900ZAug99 Resupply LAV Det 7171.0 lbs of ammo 

null 291600ZAug99 resupply 291600ZAug99 : 300500ZAug99 Resupply A Company (Rein) 3538.0 lbs of ammo; 

null 291600ZAug99 resupply 291600ZAug99 :300800ZAug99 Resupply LAV Det 750,0 gallons of water 

null 291600ZAug99 resupply 29160OZAug99 300900ZAug99 Resupply LAV Det 150.0 MREs 

null 2916302Aug99 resupply 2916302Aug99 300900ZAug99 Resupply LAV Det 636.0 gallons of fuel ^ 

N/A 291700ZAug99 Defend N/A N/A A Company (Rein) 

null 292000ZAug99 resupply 29200QZAug99 300500ZAug99 Resupply A Company (Rein) 3636.0 lbs of ammo 

null 292000ZAug99 resupply 29200Q2Aug99 3005002Aug99 ResupplyA Company (Rein) 59.0 gallons of fuel . ^ 

null 292000ZAug99 resupply 2920002Aug99 300500ZAug99 RasupplyACompany(Rein) 2930.0 gallons of water 

null 29200D2Aug99 resupply 292000ZAug99 300500ZAug99 ResupplyA Company (Rein) 606.0 MREs : \ 

null 29220dZAug99 resupply 29220d^g99 300500ZAug99 ResupplyA Company (Rein) 3536.0 Iba Of ammo 

N/A 300600ZAug99 Defend N/A N/A . A Company . . . .^ 

null 300800ZAug99 resupply 3008002Aug99 3016002Aug99 ResupplyA Company (Rein) 3537,0 MREs 

null 3010002Aug99 resupply 3bl00aZAug99 3023302Aug99 ResupplyA Company (Rein) 2930.0 gallons ofwater : 

null 3010002Aug99 resupply 301 OOOZAug99 301600ZAug99 ResupplyA Company (Rein) 606.0 MREs 

N/A 301100ZAug99 MvmfToContact N/A N/A LAVDet 

null 3016002Aug99 resupply 30160t3ZAug99 302300ZAug99 Resupply LAV Det 160.0 MREs 

null 301600ZAug99 resupply 301600ZAug99 302300ZAug99 Resupply LAV Det 630.0 gallons of fuel . 

null 301600ZAug99 resupply 301600ZAug99 3a2330ZAug99 Resupply LAV Det 7171.0 lbs of ammo ^ 

null 301630ZAug99 resupply 301630^g99 3023002Aug99 Resupply LAV Det 750.0 gallons of water 

N/A 301730ZAug99 Defend N/A N/A A Company (Rein) 

null 302000ZAug99 resupply 302000ZAug99 0105002Sep99 . . ResupplyACompany (Rein) 3536.0 lbs of ammo 


Figure 18: Event List for A Company (Rein) and the LAV Det 


61 



























































G. UPDATED COMMODITY INVENTORY REPORTS 

As the planner adds Resupply Events to the Event List, they are able to view an 
updated Commodity Inventory Report for each force. This allows the planner to ensure 
each force has the required commodity inventory level and that the transportation assets 
are properly tasked. Figures 19 and 20 show the final Commodity Inventory Reports for 
each force in the Force List, as seen in the SBLDSS. In this case, the planner decided to 
plan for only one food and one water resupply mission each day to fill the food and water 
requirements of each force, regardless of the 3 DOS goal. This is done to ensure 
increased aircraft sortie efficiency for the transportation assets. For this reason, food and 


water commodities are not maintained at each force's carrying capacity for each time in 
the planning horizon. Fuel is not critical for A Company (Rein) survivability, so it is 
only delivered once over the entire planning horizon. Conversely, fuel is critical for the 



Iinventory Report Window lot A Company (Rein) 






: Size: 202 


‘raillZAugOg 2800112Aufl99 282ii;l2AUfl99 2909112Aug99 2921112Aug99 3021112AU099 



3 DOS 

: CapaciV 

; ytOiMooris- 

+12 Hours;;: 

= +24 Hours 

♦36 Hours 

+48 Hours 

+72 Hours 

I FoocJO/H^MREs) 

1,83^ 

■ :• 1.838■ 

.. ^;838 •” 

1.1535;..: 


1.535 

; 1,838 

5,375 

1 Water 0A^<gaD 

1 

8J90 

;!8.790 




7,325 


;8;790 

1 FDero;H<gao 

100 

:ii3o .r • • 

“iiqb 

93‘. 


■ 79 

100 

86 

& 

1 Ammo 0/H (lbs) 

* 

7.467 

• 7,467 . 

; ; iw . • 

7,466' ‘ 

.;;7:465"; 

7,464 

7.465 

7.463 



62 
















1^Inventory Report Window for LAV Del 

-— 




3721irZAug99 2809112»UQ99 282111ZAug99 2g0911ZAugg9 292t11ZAug99302111ZAug99 



3 DOS 

Capacity 

*0 Hours 

*12 Hours 

*24 Hours 

*36 Hours 

. *48 Hours 

♦72 Hours 

Fodd 0/H (MREs) 

450 

450 

450 

376 

450 

•375 ; 

450 

450 

Water CWM<gaO 

2.250 

2,250 

'2,250 

1.875 

2.250 

: ■ ■ 

2.250 

2,250 

FuaEO/H^ai) 

U,994f 

14.934 

14,994 

14,490 

14,736 

■ ■ 14736 

; 14,99*4 

14,994 

Ammo Qfrl (lbs) 

23,905,2 

23,905 

23,905 

23,905 

23,905 

23,904 

23,905 

23,905 


Figure 20: Updated Commodity Inventory Report for LAV Det 
LAV Det, so the planner has more routine fuel resupply missions planned for this force. 
Note the ammunition levels in Figures 19 and 20 only fluctuate by a small amount, even 
though there are several Force Events involving ammunition consumption in Figure 18. 
This small fluctuation occurs because the planner realizes the emergent resupply needs of 
each force and adds emergent Resupply Events on the Event List. Ammunition is a 
logistics driver for each force because it is critical for each force to have adequate 
ammunition whenever they engage the enemy. Therefore, the planner must plan 
ammunition resupply missions to maintain as close to a 3 DOS level of ammunition as 
possible. 

H. SCHEDULER OUTPUT 


After the planner establishes a commodity resupply plan for each force ashore, 
they are able to see if they have enough available transportation assets to feasibly support 
the Course of Action. The available aircraft for this scenario are shown in Figure 21. 
This list shows four MV-22s and one CH-53E as being unavailable. Two MV-22s and 
the CH-53E are expected to be in scheduled maintenance. One MV-22 is planned for a 


63 




















deception operation to draw attention away from the forces operating ashore. The last 
unavailable MV-22 will be used as a command and control platform for the MEU 
Commander. 



Figure 21: Initial Aircraft List 


Figures 22, 23, and 24 show the scheduler output for the first day based on the 
Event List and the available aircraft in the Initial Aircraft List. Figures 22 and 23 show 
mission-to-aircraft combinations from the Aircraft Scheduling Algorithm. These two 
windows allow the planner to see the missions assigned to each aircraft by tail number. 
The scheduler computes and displays the departure time, time on station (TOS)/ time on 


64 










target (TOT), and return time for each mission based on the user’s time window input for 
each Transporter Event. 


Schedule for fime beginning 2721112Aug99 


ISIDtX 


Mission# 

Depart Time 

272111ZAug99 

TOSfTOT 

Return Time 

WC Type 

A/C Tail Num 

Remarks 


1100 

272211ZAug39 

272336ZAug99 

CH53E 

22 

resupply. LAVDet (*10.0,120.0) 

P 







Mission: 1100. residual = 0 lbs 

P 

300 

272111ZAug99 

272201ZAug99 

2723162Aug99 

CH53E 

23 

resupply, A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 

i 







Mission: 300, residual = 0 lbs 

I 

900 

272111ZAug99 

2721442Aug99 

272241ZAug99 

MV22 

5 

resupply, A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 
Mission: 900, residual = 0 lbs 


300 

2721112Aug99 

272144ZAug99 

2722412Aug99 

MV22 

7 

resupply, A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 
Mission: 300, residual = 0 lbs 


1200 

272111ZAug99 

2721512Aug99 

272256ZAug99 

MV22 

8 

resupply, LAV Det (-10.0,120.0) 

Mission: 1200, residual = 0 lbs 


100 

280551ZAug99 

280630ZAug99 

280732ZAug99 

MV22 

6 

medevac, A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 
Mission: 100, residual = 0 lbs 


200 

280826ZAug9g 

280900ZAug99 

280957ZAug99 

MV22 

8 

resupply. A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 
Mission: 200, residual = 0 lbs 


400 

280849ZAug9g 

2809302Aug99 

281034ZAug99 

MV22 

9 

resupply. LAV Det (-10.0,120.0) 

Mission: 400, residual = 0 lbs 


400 

280849ZAug99 

2809302Aug99 

281034ZAug99 

MV22 

10 

resupply. LAV Det (-10.0,120.0) 

Mission: 400, residual = 0 lbs 


400 

280849ZAug99 

280930ZAug99 

2810342Aug99 

MV22 

11 

resupply. LAV Det (-10.0,120.0) 

Mission: 400, residual = 0 lbs 


400 

281003ZAug99 

281043ZAug99 

281148ZAug99 

MV22 

8 

resupply, LAV Det (-10.0,120.0) 

Mission: 400, residual = 0 lbs 


500 

2811562Aug99 

281230ZAug99 

281327ZAug99 

MV22 

5 

resupply. A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 

s 

Baa 


Figure 22: First Window of First Scheduler Output 


^Schedule for time beginning 272111ZAug99 




400 

281003ZAug99 

281043ZAug99 

2811482Aug99 

MV22 

8 

resupply. LAV Det (-10.0,120.0) 

Mission: 400, residual = 0 lbs 

500 

281156ZAug99 

2812302Aug99 

281327ZAug99 

MV22 

5 

resupply, A Company (Rein) (10.0,100,0) 
Mission: 500, residual - 0 lbs 

200 

281333ZAug99 

281406ZAug99 

281504ZAug99 

MV22 

5 

resupply, A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 
Mission: 200, residual = 0 lbs 

800 

. 281510ZAug99 

281544ZAug99 

2816412Aug99 

MV22 

5 

resupply, A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 
Mission: 800, residual - 0 lbs 

600 

281554ZAug99 

281700ZAug99 

281829ZAug99 

CH53E 

24 

medevac. LAV Det (-10.0,120.0) 

Mission: 600, residual = 0 lbs 

1200 

281647ZAug99 

281727ZAug99 

281832ZAug99 

MV22 

5 

resupply. LAVDet (-10.0,120.0) 

Mission; 1200, residual = 0 lbs 

700 

281704ZAug99 

281800ZAug99 

2819192Aug99 

CH53E 

23 

medevac. A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 
Mission: 700, residual = 0 lbs 

800 

2819252Aug99 

2820162Aug99 

282130ZAug99 

CH53E 

23 

resupply. A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 
Mission: 800, residual = 0 lbs 

1000 

281929ZAug99 

282030ZAug99 

282154ZAug99 

CH53E 

22 

resupply. LAVDet (-10.0,120.0) 

Mission: 1000, residual = 0 ibs 

1200 

28194gZAug99 

2820302Aug99 

282134ZAug99 

MV22 

12 

resupply, LAVDet (-10.0,120.0) 

Mission: 1200, residual = 0 Ibs 

1300 

282019ZAug99 

282100ZAug99 

282204ZAug99 

MV22 

7 

resupply. LAV Det (-10.0,120.0) 

Mission; 1300, residua! = 0 Ibs 

1200 

2821402Aug99 

282221ZAug99 

282325ZAug99 

MV22 

12 

resupply. UVDet (-10.0,120.0) 

Mission: 1200, residual = 0 Ibs 

1300 

282200ZAua99 

282301ZAua99 

290025ZAua99 

CH53E 

22 

resuDDiv. LAVDet (-10.0.120.0^ 






v-.j; 



Figure 23: Second Window of First Scheduler Output 


65 












The scheduler provides a feasible schedule for the first 24-hour transportation¬ 
planning horizon. In this case, the number of available aircraft for this planning horizon is 
sufficient to accomplish all missions within each associated Transporter Event’s time 
window. Figure 24 shows the number of operating hours and the number of sorties 
accumulated by each aircraft over the first 24-hour transportation-planning horizon based 
on the scheduling algorithm. 


Schedule for lime beginning 27211 lZAug99 




All missions were completed. 

Maximum Total Number of MV22 Sorties Required: 24 
OR 

|Maximum Total Number of CH53E Sorties Required; 24 


[Tail Number Accumulated op time 


MV22.1 

MV22.2 

MV22.3 

MV22.4 

MV22.5 

MV22.6 

MV22.7 

MV22.8 

MV22.9 

MV22.10 

MV22.11 

MV22.12 

CH53E. 21 

CH53E. 22 

CH53E. 23 

CH53E. 24 


0 

0 

0 

0 

7.817 

1.683 

4.783 

5.017 

1.75 

1.75 

1.75 

3.5 

0 

7.25 

6.417 

2.583 


Total sorties 

.0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

1 

3 

3 

1 

1 

1 

2 

0 

3 

3 


Figure 24: Third Window of First Scheduler Output 


Since the planner has a feasible solution, he updates the accumulated operation 


time for each aircraft, from Figure 24, and solves the scheduler for the next 24 hour 


planning horizon. Figure 25 shows this updated aircraft list, used to solve for the second 


24-hour transportation-planning horizon. 


66 





no 

no 


1 

MV22 

1895.0 

1925.0 

8.0 

no 

2 

MV22 

1234.0 

1275.0 

8.0 

no 

3 

MV22 

1490.0 

1525.0 

8.0 

no 

4 

MV22 

4959.0 

5000.0 

8.0 

no 

5 

MV22 

5929.8 

5975.0 

8.0 

yes 

6 

MV22 

1524.6 

1550.0 

8.0 

yes 

7 

MV22 

1227.8 

1250.0 

8.0 

yes 

8 

MV22 

3551.8 

3600.0 

8.0 

yes 

9 

MV22 

5676.8 

5725.0 

8.0 

yes 


10 

MV22 

4554.8 

4600.0 

8.0 


yes 


11 

MV22 

3114.8 

3150.0 

8.0 


yes 


12 

MV22 

1343.8 

1375.0 

8.0 


yes 


21 

CH53E 

34526.0 

34575.0 


8.0 


no 

22 

CH53E 

303453.3 

303475.0 


8.0 


yes 

23 

CH53E 

304323.1 

304350.0 


8.0 


yes 

24 

CH53E 

65573.9 

65600.0 


8.0 


yes 


Figure 25: Updated Aircraft List 


Figures 26 and 27 show the first two windows of the scheduler output for the 
Transporter Events in the second 24-hour transportation-planning horizon. These figures 
provide the planner similar information to that shown in Figures 22 and 23. 

















Schedule for time beginning 2721 1 lZAug93 


Mission^ 

Depart Time 

TosrroT 

Return Time 

A/C Type 

A/C Tail Num 

Remarks 


700 

2721l1ZAug99 

272211ZAug99 

272336ZAug99 

CH53E 

22 

resupply, LAV Det (-10.0.120.0) 

Mission: 700, residual = 0 lbs 

m 

w 

1100 

272111ZAug99 

272201ZAug9g 

272316ZAug99 

CH53E 

23 

resupply, A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 
Mission: 1100, residual = 0 lbs 

1100 

2721112Aug99 

272144ZAug99 

272241ZAug99 

MV22 

5 

resupply. A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 
Mission: 1100, residual = 0 lbs 


1300 

2721112Aug99 

272201ZAug99 

272316ZAug99 

CH53E 

24 

resupply. A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 
Mission: 1300, residual = 0 lbs 


500 

272111ZAug39 

272151ZAug99 

272256ZAug99 

MV22 

9 

resupply. LAV Det (-10.0,120.0) 

Mission: 500, residual ^ 0 lbs 


500 

272111ZAug99 

2721512Aug99 

272256ZAug99 

MV22 

10 

resupply. LAV Det (-10.0.120.0) 

Mission: 500, residual = 0 lbs 


1300 

2721112Aug99 

272144ZAug99 

272241ZAug99 

MV22 

6 

resupply. A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 
Mission: 1300, residual = 0 lbs 


100 

280626ZAug99 

280700ZAug99 

280757ZAug99 

MV22 

7 

resupply. A Company (Rein) (10.0.100.0) 
Mission: 100, residual = 0 lbs 


100 

280626ZAug9g 

280700ZAug99 

280757ZAug99 

MV22 

8 

resupply. A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 
Mission: 100, residual = 0 lbs 


300 

281154ZAug99 

2813002Aug99 

2814292Aug99 

CH53E 

24 

medevac. LAV Det (-10.0,120.0) 

Mission: 300, residual = 0 lbs 


400 

281321ZAug99 

281400ZAug99 

281502ZAug99 

MV22 

6 

medevac, A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 
Mission: 400, residual = 0 lbs 


500 

281435ZAug99 

2815362Aug99 

281700ZAug99 

CH53E 

24 

resupply. LAV Det (-10.0.120.0) 



Figure 26: First Window of Second Scheduler Output 


^Schedule for time beginning 272111ZAug39 




800 

281459ZAug99 

281600ZAug99 

281724ZAug99 

CH53E 

22 

500 

281508ZAug99 

2815482Aug99 

281653ZAug99 

MV22 

6 

1000 

281721ZAug99 

281800ZAug99 

28ig02ZAugg9 

MV22 

5 

900 

2817302Aug99 

281831ZAug99 

281955ZAug99 

CH53E 

22 

700 

2819082Aug99 

281948ZAug99 

282053ZAug99 

MV22 

5 

1200 

28190gZAugg9 

282000ZAug99 

282114ZAug99 

CH53E 

23 

1300 

281926ZAug99 

282000ZAug99 

2820572Aug99 

MV22 

11 

1300 

281926ZAug99 

282000ZAug99 

2820572Aug99 

MV22 

12 

1400 

282120ZAug99 

2822112Aug99 

282325ZAug99 

CH53E 

23 

1500 

282126ZAug99 

282200ZAug99 

282257ZAug99 

MV22 

9 

1500 

282126ZAug99 

282200ZAug99 

2822572Aug99 

MV22 

10 

600 

282303ZAug99 

282337ZAug99 

290034ZAug99 

MV22 

9 


" Mission: buu, residual = 0 lbs 
resupply, lAV Det (-10.0,120.0) 

Mission: 800, residual = 0 lbs 
resupply. LAV Det (-10.0.120.0) 

Mission: 500, residual = 0 lbs 
medevac, A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 
Mission: 1000, residual = 0 lbs 
resupply, LAV Det (-10.0,120.0) 

Mission: 900, residual = 0 lbs 
resupply, LAV Det (-10.0,120.0) 

Mission: 700. residual =: 0 lbs 
resupply. A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 
Mission: 1200, residual = 0 lbs 
resupply, A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 
Mission: 1300, residual = 0 lbs 
resupply. A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 
Mission: 1300, residual = 0 lbs 
resupply, A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 
Mission: 1400, residual = 0 lbs 
resupply. A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 
Mission: 1500. residual = 0 lbs 
resupply, A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 
Mission: 1500, residual = 0 lbs 
resupply, A Company (Rein) (10.0,100.0) 
Mission: 600, residual = 0 lbs 


Figure 27: Second Window of Second Scheduler Output 


68 












Figure 28 shows the updated Event List associated with the scheduler output for 
this transportation-planning horizon. Notice how the scheduler assigns mission numbers 
in the updated Event List to match the same missions displayed in the scheduler output. 




.1:;^* 


fm 




Event 












N;A 290600ZAug99 
100 2907002Aug99 
200 290930ZAug99 

N;A 2912002Aug99 
300 291300ZAug99 

N/A 291330ZAug99 
400 291400ZAug99 

500 291530ZAug99 

600 291600ZAug99 
700 291600ZAug99 
800 2916002Aug99 

900 291630ZAug99 

N/A 291700ZAug99 
1000 291800ZAug99 
1100 292000ZAug99 
1200 292000ZAug99 
1300 2920002Aug99 
1400 292000ZAug99 

1500 292200ZAug99 

N/A 3QD6Q02Auq95_ 


Defend N/A N/A A Company (Rein) 
resupply 290700ZAug99 290900ZAug99 
moveforce 290930ZAug99 291400ZAug99 
MvmfToContact N/A N/A lAVDet 
medevac 2913002Aug99 2913302Aug99 
Attack N/A N/A A Company (Rein) 
medevac 291400ZAug99 291430ZAug99 
resupply 291530ZAug99 300900ZAug99 
resupply 2916002Aug99 3005002Aug99 
resupply 291800ZAug99 3008002Aug99 
resupply 291600ZAug99 300900ZAug99 
resupply 291630ZAug99 300900ZAug99 
Defend N/A N/A A Company (Rein) 
medevac 291800ZAug99 291830ZAug99 
resupply 292000ZAug99 300500ZAug99 
resupply 292000ZAug99 300500ZAug99 
resupply 2920002Aug99 300500ZAug99 
resupply 292000ZAug99 300500ZAug99 
resupply 292200ZAug99 3006002Aug99 
Defend N/A M/A A Company (Rein)_ 


Resupply A Company (Rein) 3536.0 lbs of ammo 
Move 202 of A Company (Rein) from (10.0,100.0) to (20.0,140. 

MEDEVAC 6 from LAV Det at (*10.0,120.0) 

MEDEVAC 12 from A Company (Rein) at (10.0,100.0) 

Resupply LAVDet7171.0lbs ofammo 
Resupply A Company (Rein) 3538.0 lbs ofammo 
Resupply LAVDet 750.0 gallons of water 
Resupply LAV Detl 50.0 MREs 
Resupply LAVDet 636.0 gallons of fuel 

MEDEVAC 10 from A Company (Rein) at (10.0,100.0) 
Resupply A Company (Rein) 3536.0 lbs of ammo 
Resupply A Company (Rein) 59.0 gallons of fuel 
Resupply A Company (Rein) 2930.0 gallons of water 
Resupply A Company (Rein) 606.0 MREs 
Resupply A Company (Rein) 3536.0 lbs ofammo 


Figure 28; Updated Event List for Second 24 Hour Planning Horizon 


After inspecting Figures 26,27, and 28, the planner is able to see that the 
scheduler provides an infeasible solution for the second 24-hour transportation-planning 
horizon. Mission 200, a Move Force Event relocating A Company (Rein) from location 
(10,100) to (20,140), is not accomplished. In this case, the available aircraft were not 
sufficient to accomplish all aircraft missions. Figure 29, the fourth window of the third 
scheduler output, shows the accumulated operating hours and sorties associated with this 
















aircraft schedule. The four MV-22’s and one CH-53E, designated as unavailable by the 
planner, are not assigned mission sorties by the scheduler. 


[^Schedule for time beginning 272111ZAug99 pglin 

E 


.f-p-—-'........ .... -v .■ ■■■■—. 

I Maximum Total Number of MV22 Sorties Required; 35 

a 


P- OR 

f Maximum Total Number of CH53E Sorties Required: 35 



t: 

Tall Number 

i- 

Accumulated op time 

Total sorties 



ImV22.1 

0 

0 



NV22, 2 

0 

0 



1 MV22.3 

0 

0 



f MV22.4 

0 

0 



{;MV22.5 

4.95 

3 



1; MV22. 6 

4.95 

3 



£ MV22.7 

1.517 

1 



IMV22.8 

1.517 

1 



NV22.9 

4.783 

3 



ImV22.10 

4.783 

3 



lMV22.11 

1.517 

1 

% 


|mV22.12 

1.517 

1 



ICH53E,21 

0 

0 



ICH53E, 22 

7.25 

3 

i 


:|CH53E. 23 

6.25 

3 


1CH53E. 24 

7.083 

3 

a 





m 



Figure 29: Third Window of Second Scheduler Output 


To get a feasible schedule, the planner could either make more aircraft available 
or change the time windows of the Resupply Events on the Event List. More aircraft 
could be made available by either finishing maintenance early or reallocating aircraft from 
other operational missions to the missions on the Event List. The planner could change 
the Resupply Event time windows by selecting them on the Updated Event List. To solve 
this infeasible schedule, the planner chooses to see how making more aircraft available 
effects the scheduler solution. The three aircraft in maintenance and the aircraft reserved 
for the decoy operation are made available by selecting each of these aircraft in the 
Updated Aircraft Window, Figure 25, selecting the “Edit Transporter” button, and 


70 














selecting the "available" checkbox in the Edit Transporter Window. Figure 30 shows the 
updated aircraft list with all aircraft available except the one MV-22 being used as a 
command and control platform. 


s 

Transporter List 





m 

Add Tran^^er> ^, 

: Remove Trar^qrter ; 


H 

L, 






Tallf Mrs iftfeBWCheidt Crew Li^ V 



1. 

MV22 

1895.0 

1925.0 

8.0 

no 



2 

MV22 

1234.0 

1275.0 

8.0 

yes 



3 

MV22 

1490.0 

1525.0 

8.0 

yes 



4 

MV22 

4959.0 

5000.0 

8.0 

yes 



5 

MV22 

5929.8 

5975.0 

8.0 

yes 



6 

MV22 

1524.6 

1550.0 

8.0 

yes 



7 

MV22 

1227.8 

1250.0 

8.0 

yes 



8 

MV22 

3551.8 

3600.0 

8.0 

yes 



9 

MV22 

5676.8 

5725.0 

8.0 

yes 


i 

10 

MV22 

4554.8 

4600.0 

8.0 

yes 



11 

MV22 

3114.8 

3150.0 

8.0 

yes 


if 

12 

MV22 

1343.8 

1375.0 

8.0 

yes 



21 

CH53E 

34526.0 

34575.0 


8.0 yes 


1 

22 

CH53E 

303453.3 303475.0 

8.0 yes 

Ij 

23 

CH53E 

304323.1 

304350.0 

8.0 yes 

i 

1 

24 

CH53E 

65573.9 

65600.0 


8.0 yes 



Figure 30: Updated Aircraft List 


Once the planner makes this change, they are able to re-solve the scheduler to see 
if a feasible distribution plan exists. Figures 31,32 and 33 show the first three windows of 




















the updated scheduler output. 


^Schedule for lime beginning 272111ZAug99 


; Mission # 

Depart Time 

TOS/TOT 

Return Time 

AfCType A/C Tail Num Remarks 

E 900 

272111ZAug99 

272211ZAug99 

272336ZAug99 

CH53E 

21 

resupply, LAVDet (-10.0,120.0) 

Mission: 900, residual = 0 lbs 

I; 

272111ZAug99 

2722112Aug99 

272336ZAug99 

CH53E 

22 

resupply, UVDet (-10.0,120.0) 

Mission: 700, residual = 0 lbs ' 

1 1300 

t 

2721112Aug99 

2722212Aug99 

272357ZAug99 

CH53E 

23 

resupply, A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission: 1300, residual = 0 ibs 

f 

272111ZAug99 

272151ZAug99 

2722562Aug99 

MV22 

2 

resupply. lAVDet (-10.0,120.0) 

Mission: 500, residual = 0 Ibs 

:• 1200 

272111ZAug99 

2721582Aug99 

272310ZAug99 

MV22 

3 

resupply, A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission: 1300, residual = 0 Ibs 

i 1300 

272111ZAug99 

272158ZAug99 

2723102Aug99 

MV22 

6 

resupply, A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission; 1300, residual = 0 Ibs 

i; 200 

272111ZAug99 

272203ZAug99 

2723202Aug99 

MV22 

7 

moveforce, A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission: 200, residual = 0 Ibs 

|: 100 

280612ZAug99 

2807002Aug99 

280811ZAug99 

MV22 

4 

resupply. A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission: 100. residual = 0 Ibs 

f: 100 

f 

280612ZAug99 

280700ZAug99 

280811ZAug99 

MV22 

5 

resupply. A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission: 100, residual = 0 Ibs 

1 200 

280837ZAug99 

2809302Aug99 

281046ZAug99 

MV22 

9 

moveforce, A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission: 200, residual = 0 lbs 

? 200 

280837Z^g9g 

2809302Aug99 

281046ZAugg9 

MV22 

10 

moveforce, A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission: 200, residual = 0 Ibs 

i 200 

280837ZAug99 

2809302Aug99 

281046ZAug99 

MV22 

11 

moveforce. A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 




Figure 31: First Window of Third Scheduler Output 


[^Schedule for lime beginning 272111ZAug99 





m 




E 200 

280837ZAug99 

280g30ZAug9g 

281046ZAug99 

MV22 

12 

moveforce, A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission: 200, residual = 0 Ibs 

A 


200 

281052ZAugg9 

281145ZAug99 

281301ZAug99 

MV22 

9 

moveforce. A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission: 200, residual = 0 Ibs 



1 200 

281052ZAug99 

281145ZAug99 

281301ZAug99 

MV22 

10 

moveforce. A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission: 200, residuals 0 Ibs 

1 


1: 200 

2810522Aug99 

2811452Aug99 

281301ZAugg9 

MV22 

11 

moveforce, A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission: 200, residua! := 0 Ibs 

M 


1 200 

f 

281052ZAug99 

281145ZAug9g 

281301ZAug99 

MV22 

12 

moveforce. A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission: 200, residual = 0 Ibs 

1 


300 

2811542Aug99 

281300ZAug99 

281429ZAug99 

CH53E 

23 

medevac, LAV Det (-10.0,120.0) 









Mission: 300, residual = 0 Ibs 



^ 400 

281307ZAug99 

281400ZAug39 

281516ZAug99 

MV22 

2 

medevac, A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission: 400. residual = 0 Ibs 



1 500 

281435ZAug99 

281536ZAug99 

281700ZAug99 

CH53E 

23 

resupply. LAVDet (-10.0,120.0) 



f 






Mission: 500, residual = 0 Ibs 



800 

281459ZAug99 

281600ZAug99 

2817242Aug99 

CH53E 

21 

resupply. LAV Det (-10.0,120.0) , 

r-R 








Mission: 800, residual = 0 lbs 

S’ 


1 700 

281519ZAug99 

281600ZAug99 

2817042Aug99 

MV22 

3 

resupply, LAV Det (-10.0,120.0) 

Mission: 700, residual := 0 Ibs 

7 


J 600 

281522ZAug99 

281610ZAug99 

2817212Aug99 

MV22 

2 

resupply. A Company (Rein) (20.0.140.0) 
Mission: 600, residual = 0 Ibs 



1 1000 

281644ZAug99 

281800ZAug99 

281940ZAug99 

CH53E 

24 

medevac, A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission: 1000, residual = 0 Ibs 

1 


R 500 

281710ZAUCI99 

2817612Aua99 

281855ZAua99 

MV22 

3 

resuDDlv. LAVDet M0.0.120.0) 




Figure 32: Second Window of Third Scheduler Output 


72 














^Schedule for lime beginning 272111ZAug99 




MME 


1300 

281727ZAug99 

2818152Aug99 

281926ZAugg9 

MV22 

2 

resupply, A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission: 1300, residual = 0 lbs 

B 

I 


600 

2817302Aug99 

2818412Aug99 

2820162Aug99 

CH53E 

21 

resupply, A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission: 600, residuai = 0 lbs 



1200 

2818492Aug99 

282000ZAug99 

282135ZAug99 

CH53E 

22 

resupply, A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission: 1200, residual = 0 lbs 

fi 


1100 

2819122Aug99 

282000ZAug99 

2821112Aug99 

MV22 

6 

resupply. A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission: 1100, residual = 0 lbs 



1100 

281946ZAug99 

282057ZAug99 

2822322Aug99 

CH53E 

24 

resupply, A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission: 1100, residual = 0 lbs 



1500 

282112ZAug99 

282200ZAug99 

282311ZAug99 

MV22 

7 

resupply, A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission: 1500, residual = 0 lbs 

m 

§ 


1500 

282112Zftug99 

2822002Aug99 

282311ZAug99 

MV22 

8 

resupply. A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission: 1500. residual = 0 lbs 

-01 


500 

282117ZAug99 

282157ZAug99 

282302ZAug99 

MV22 

6 

resupply. LAV Det (-10.0,120.0) 

Mission: 500, residual = 0 lbs 

& 

m 


1400 

282141Z<Ujg99 

282252ZAug99 

290027ZAug99 

CH53E 

22 

resupply, A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission: 1400, residual = 0 lbs 

ft 


1300 

282317ZAug99 

2900052Aug99 

290116ZAug99 

MV22 

7 

resupply, A Company (Rein) (20.0,140.0) 
Mission: 1300, residual = 0 lbs 

' 



Figure 33; Third Window of Third Scheduler Output 


Figure 34 shows the Updated Event List associated with this scheduler output. As 
the planner can see by inspecting Figures 31 through 34, this scheduler output provides a 
feasible aircraft sortie schedule for the second 24-hour transportation-planning horizon. 


73 







Event List 


HI^ES 


i^EwentS 





1 ^ \ t, Ornip^rylRein),result ^ 


1 : ^ - iRiissioii^ ^ ' ftlessage ^ 


N/A 2906002Aug99 Defend N/A N/A A Company (Rein) 

100 290700ZAug99 resupply 290700ZAug99 290900ZAug99 

200 290930ZAug99 moveforce 290930ZAug99 2914002Aug99 

N/A 291200ZAug99 MvmtToContact N/A N/A UWDet 
300 291300ZAug99 medevac 291300ZAug99 291330ZAug99 
N/A 291330ZAug99 Attack N/A N/A A Company (Rein) 

400 291400ZAug99 medevac 291400ZAug99 2914302Aug99 

500 291530ZAug99 resupply 2915302Aug99 300900ZAug99 

600 291600ZAug99 resupply 291600ZAug99 300500ZAug99 

700 291600ZAug99 resupply 291600ZAug99 300800ZAug99 

800 2916002Aug99 resupply 291600ZAug99 3009002Aug99 

900 291630ZAug99 resupply 29163QZAug99 300900ZAug99 

N/A 291700ZAug99 Defend N/A N/A A Company (Rein) 

1000 291800ZAug99 medevac 2918002Aug99 2918302Aug99 

1100 292000ZAug99 resupply 292000ZAug99 3005002Aug99 

1200 292000ZAug99 resupply 292000ZAug99 300500ZAug99 

1300 2920002Aug99 resupply 292000ZAug99 300500ZAug99 


Resupply A Company (Rein) 3536.0 lbs of ammo 
Move 202 of A Company (Rein) from (20.0,140.0) to (20.0,140 

MEDEVAC 5 from lAV Det at (-10.0,120.0) 

MEDEVAC 12 from A Company (Rein) at (20.0,140,0) 

Resupply LAV Det 7171.0 lbs of ammo 
Resupply A Company (Rein) 3538.0 lbs of ammo 
Resupply LAV Det 750.0 gallons of water 
Resupply L^V Det 150.0 MREs 
Resupply LAV Det 636.0 gallons of fuel 

MEDEVAC 10 from A Company (Rein) at (20.0,140.0) 
Resupply A Company (Rein) 3536.0 lbs of ammo 
Resupply A Company (Rein) 59.0 gallons of fuel 
Resupply A Company (Rein) 2930.0 gallons ofwater 


|1400 - 292000^099 iresupply^;29200QZtog99 :300500ZAug99 R^supplyACbmpM(^^ 


1500 292200ZAug99 resupply 2922002Aug99 300500ZAug99 Resupply A Company (Rein) 3536.0 lbs of ammo 
N/A 3Q060QZAua99 Defend N/A N/A A Company (Reim 


Figure 34: Event List Updated After Third Scheduler Output Displayed 


Figure 35 shows the accumulated operating time and total sorties for each aircraft 
as displayed in the fourth scheduler output window. The aircraft that were changed from 
unavailable to available at the beginning of this last scheduler run were assigned a total of 
eleven sorties in this feasible schedule. 


74 

















Figure 35: Third Part of Third Scheduler Output 

The planner found a feasible schedule for the second 24-hour transportation¬ 
planning horizon by making more aircraft available. This implies that several changes 
must be made to the aircraft maintenance and operations sections' current plans. The 
planner will first need to coordinate with the aircraft maintenance section to increase their 
efforts to ensure that the three aircraft in maintenance are ready after the first 24 hours of 
the operation. Next, the planner needs to coordinate with the aircraft operations section 
and recommend that the deception mission be canceled. If these changes are 
unacceptable, the planner will need to change the Resupply time windows. This may also 
change the Resupply policy by reducing the resupply trigger to a lower amount of each 
commodity on hand in each force. If none of these changes are acceptable, the planner 
should not recommend this Course of Action to accomplish the commander's mission 
requirement. However, if the maintenance and operations sections agree with these 


75 






















changes or a modified resupply plan is feasible, the planner can continue examining this 
Course of Action by checking the third 24-hour transportation-planning horizon using the 
same technique outlined in the last three scheduler runs. 

If the planner obtains a feasible distribution plan for the third 24-hour 
transportation-planning horizon, this Course of Action is a possible option to support the 
commander's mission requirement. The planner is now able to either recommend this 
Course of Action to the commander, or evaluate the feasibility of another Course of 
Action for comparison. 


76 



VI. CONCLUSIONS 


Every unit that is not supported is a defeated unit. 

Maurice de Saxe, Mes Reveries, XIII, 1732 

Strategy and tactics provide the scheme for the conduct of military 
operations, logistics the means therefor. 

Lieutenant Colonel George C. Thorpe, USMC 


Forget logistics, you lose! 

Lieutenant General Franks, USA, Corps 
Commander, Operation Desert Storm 


A. OBSERVATIONS 

Sea-based sustainment of combat forces operating in a STOM environment 
requires a planning tool for managing the limited transportation assets at the sea-base. 

The sea-base of the 2\^ century will be similar to today’s Amphibious Ready Group, 
with similar types of ship-to-shore transportation capabilities. While the operating 
environment may not change, the way we conduct operations will change drastically. 
Competition between operational and logistics aircraft missions place greater demand on 
these aircraft, further restricting the feasibility of sea-based operations. The exclusive use 
of aircraft to support the STOD network will limit the size and types of forces able to 
operate ashore. This may also limit the number and types of tasks that forcfes, operating 
at large distances, can accomplish. Traditionally, a logistics operation is only successful 
if the supported forces are not impacted by the logistics distribution system. However, in 
a STOM environment, SBL is the constraint that binds the size and type of the supported 


77 




forces and the distances at which they will operate. The SBLDSS provides a planning 
tool to help sea-based planners manage limited sea-based logistics resources, particularly 
the aviation assets, necessary to sustain the forces ashore. 

B. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FURTHER STUDIES 

The SBLDSS developed in this thesis provides a planning tool for sea-based 
operational and logistics planners to determine feasible sustainment plans for a variety of 
courses of action. This is a prototype-planning tool that demonstrates how a decision 
support system might be developed by the Marine Corps and used to plan operational and 
logistics sustainment operations from a sea-base. While the focus of the thesis has been 
operational planning, the SBLDSS could also be used for wargaming and to analyze the 
following issues directly related to the STOM environment: 

• Feasible force sizes and compositions facing a variety of mission 
requirements; 

• The effect of distances from the sea-base to the objective and dispersion of 
forces operating ashore; 

• New delivery containers, such as the Tactical Bulk Fuel Distribution System, 
and new liquid delivery techniques; and 

• The impact of sending caches of supplies in the form of self-sufficient 
MCSSDs, Helicopter Support Teams, or Landing Force Support Parties; 


78 



C. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUTURE DEVELOPMENT 

The Java program that defines the SBLDSS has been developed to allow 
additional features to be added to enhance the decision support system as an effective 
planning tool. Some of these features are listed below: 

• A map display feature could be added to the program that shows force 
locations and the location of the sea-base. The map should be displayed on a 
contour map so terrain features are easily identifiable. The planner should be 
able to view force logistics status by clicking on the force icon with a mouse. 

• A geographically referenced coordinate system should be added instead of the 
generic coordinate system currently used in the program. 

• A save feature that allows the planner to save the force, event, and transporter 
lists is necessary to allow multiple course of action development and review. 

• The SBLDSS should be tied to a data base containing logistics planning 
factors to allow the LPFs associated with the different Force Modules to 
change as the planner updates the T/0 and T/E of the force. The planner 
would then be able to see the number of weapons and the number of rounds of 
ammunition the force has instead of the generic pounds of ammunition 
currently provided in this program. This feature should allow the planner to 
dynamically update data received from logistics data collection devices 
uploaded fi'om the forces ashore. 

• An improved scheduling algorithm could be developed to improve on the 
heuristic developed for the SBLDSS. The improvement algorithm might 


79 




iterate through a variety of rewards and penalties for aircraft accomplishing 
mission nodes and choose the best mix from these iterations. 

• Surface transportation assets could be added to the program to allow multiple 
delivery modes. If this is done, either a new heuristic to determine STOD 
feasibility should be developed for both air and surface transportation assets, 
or a heuristic specifically focused on the surface lift assets should be 
developed. 

• SBLDSS only allows single commodity resupply missions. Transporters and 
the scheduling algorithm could be modeled to allow for multi-commodity 
delivery. 

• If developed as an operational planning tool, the SBLDSS must be rigorously 
tested. It should also be modified to comply with the Defense Information 
System Agency’s Common Operating Environment for use with the Global 
Command and Control System and the Global Combat Support System. 

The Marine Corps should continue to develop improved consumption models for 
a variety of forces to help predict sustainability of forces operating ashore in a STOM 
environment. This will help identify resupply requirements, and ultimately the number 
and/or capabilities required of the transportation assets at the sea-base. The 21^ century 
warfighting environment reiterates the validity of the phrase “forget logistics, you lose” 
uttered by Lieutenant General Franks, USA, the 7* Corps Commander during Operation 
Desert Storm. The Marine Corps must keep this in mind as we continue to develop how 
we will fight in the 21^ century. 


80 




LIST OF REFERENCES 


1. Combat Service Support Branch, Requirements Division, Marine Corps Combat 
Development Command, Expeditionary Seabased Logistics . Marine Corps Gazette, 
Quantico, Virginia, June 1999. 

2. Betaque Jr.. Norman et al.. Enabling Operational Maneuver From the Sea. McLean, 
.Virginia, Naval Studies Board, 1999. 

3. U.S. Marine Corps, Operational Maneuver From the Sea (Concept Paper), Quantico, 
Virginia, Marine Corps Combat Development Command, 1996. 

4. U.S. Marine Corps, Ship-to-Obiective Manuever (Concept Paper), Quantico, 

Virginia, Marine Corps Combat Development Command, 1997. 

5. U.S. Marine Corps, Sustained Operations Ashore (Concept Paper), Quantico, 
Virginia, Marine Corps Combat Development Command, 1999. 

6. U.S. Marine Corps, Sea-Based Logistics (Concept Paper), Quantico, Virginia, Marine 
Corps Combat Development Command, 1998. 

7. Naval Postgraduate School Thesis, Logistical Implications of Operational Maneuver 
From The Sea, M. W. Beddoes, March 1997. 

8. Naval Postgraduate School Thesis, Modeling Sea-based Sustainment of Marine 
Expeditionary Unit (Special Operations Capable) (MEU(SOC)) Operations Ashore, 

R. M. Hagan, September 1998. 

9. U. S. Marine Corps, Marine Corps Doctrinal Publication (MCDP) 4, Logistics. 
Quantico, Virginia, Marine Corps Combat Development Command, 1997. 

10. Schrady, David Combatant Logistics Command and Control For The Joint Force 
Commander . Monterey, California, Naval Postgraduate School, 1999. 

11. Java 2 [Computer programming language]. Sun Microsystems, 1998. 

12. Marine Air-Ground Task Force (MAGTF) Data Library (MDL) CD-ROM, 
Headquarters Marine Corps, June 1998. 

13. Marine Corps Order 8010. IE, Class V(W) Planning Factors for Fleet Marine Force 
Combat Operations, Quantico, Virginia, Marine Corps Combat Development 
Command, 1994. 

14. Hanifen, T. C., The MV-22 Osprev. Part HI: Warfighting and Related Acquisition 
Challenges . Marine Corps Gazette, Quantico, Virginia, July 1999. 


81 




15. U.S. Army, Mission Training Plan for the Infantry Rifle Company, Washington, 
D.C., 1994. 

16. McAllister, Keith R. (Naval Surface Warfare Center, Carderock Divisio n) CRM 98- 
19, MPF 2010 Ship-to-Shore Movement and Sea-based Logistics Support Volnme T- 
Report . Alexandria, Virginia, Center for Naval Analysis, 1998. 

17. Pennsylvania State University Thesis, Using Simulated Annealing to Solve A 
Routing Problem with a Discounted Reward Structure, Amy Jo Naylor, December 
1998. 

18. Jackson, L.A., Konig [Computer software], 1999. 


82 



INITIAL DISTRIBUTION LIST 


1. Defense Technical Information Center..2 

8725 John J. Kingman Rd., STE 0944 

Ft. Belvoir, VA 22060-6218 

2. Dudley Knox Library.2 

Naval Postgraduate School 

411 Dyer Road 
Monterey, CA 93943-5000 

3. Director, Training and Education. 1 

MCCDC, Code C46 

1019 Elliot Road 
Quantico, VA 22134-5027 

4. Director, Marine Corps Research Center.2 

MCCDC, Code C40RC 

2040 Broadway Street 
Quantico, VA 22134-5107 

5. Director, Studies and Analysis Division. 1 

MCCDC, (Attn: Dr. George Akst) 

300 Russell Road 
Quantico, VA 22134-5130 

6. DC/S Installations & Logistics (LX)..1 

(Attn: Maj R. M. Hagan) 

2 Navy Annex 

Washington DC 20380-1775 

7. Marine Corps Representative.1 

Naval Postgraduate School 

Code 037, Bldg. 234, HA-220 
699 Dyer Road 
Monterey, CA 93940 

8. Chairman, Department of Operations Research.1 

Code OR 

Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, CA 93943-5000 


83 










9. Defense Logistic Studies Information Exchange.1 

U.S. Army Logistics Management Center 

Fort Lee, VA 23801-6043 

10. Deputy Chief of Naval Operations (Logistics).1 

Attn: CDR Carolyn Kresek, 421C 

2000 Navy Pentagon 
Washington, D.C. 20350-2000 

11. Professor David Schrady. 1 

Code OR/So 

Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, CA 93943-5000 

12. Professor Gordon Bradley. 1 

Code OR/BR 

Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, CA 93943-5000 

13. Associate Professor Arnold Buss. 1 

Code OR/BZ 

Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, CA 93955-5000 

14. Associate Professor Kevin Gue. 1 

Code SM/BR 

Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, CA 93943-5000 

15. Ms. Amy Jo Naylor. 1 

1917 Lake Road 

Ontario, NY 14519 

16. Norman L. Reitter. 1 

367 Ellisburg Road 

Genesee, PA 16923 


84 











