
Geographic Freedom 

W ith the demands of a high-tech society, it 
seems like people are being asked to be 
in several places at the same time. 

While this may seem impossible, NASA managed 
to find a way to do just that through the Internet. 
NetLander, Inc., a Titusville, Florida, company has 
licensed the technology from Kennedy Space 
Center for use in a variety of commercial applica- 
tions. 

Kennedy originally developed a web-based, 
near real-time monitoring system called JView, 
used in Space Shuttle operations. Written in the 
Java™ programming language, JView allows users 
to access Space Shuttle and ground support 
equipment data from any desktop computer with a 
web browser. Engineers can view information 
found in Mission Control rooms with a delay as 
short as two seconds. 

NetLander has taken this technology and 
developed its commercial cousin, JTouch, to 
monitor and distribute data using the Internet. 
JTouch can be used to monitor sensors around the 
globe from one location using a standard web 
browser and any existing web connection. The 
capability to monitor systems from multiple 
sources without leaving your desk, also known as 
geographic independence, has significant benefits 
for companies using the JTouch system. 

Most of the benefits reaped are increases in 
efficiency, through reductions in time and costs. 
Company travel expenses can be reduced as 
facilities fanned out around the globe can be 
monitored at one desktop computer rather than by 
visiting each site. Productivity is increased through 
better communications and improved decision 
making by company executives, who have access 
to real-time data rather than outdated material. In 
the past, outdated information did not allow for 
timely solutions, so that by the time a decision was 
made, the problem had passed or a new, more 
pressing problem had arisen. 

JTouch is presently finding a home in the 
manufacturing and telemedicine fields. It can 
support up to 200 users in its original form and up 
to 800 with a scalable design. JTouch also has 


graphic capabilities that allow for the generation of 
color charts and graphs to capture incoming data 
in a usable, visual format. The system can process 
multiple data streams with up to 50,000 measure- 
ments per stream. Due to its Java programming 
language, it can run on Unix or Windows® operat- 
ing systems. 

NetLander is a tenant of the Florida/NASA 
Business Incubation Center (FNBIC). The FNBIC 
aims to foster the successful development of new 
high tech companies in the region by providing 
office space and other resources to young, devel- 
oping companies. Prior to creating NetLander, 
company president Thomas Beever was a NASA 
employee for 1 3 years and the original leader of 
the “Java Think Tank.” 

Besides current sales, NetLander has received 
interest in the JTouch system from semi-conductor 
manufacturers, clothing manufacturers, utility 
companies, and university labs. With JTouch, 
anybody can turn a local desktop computer into 
Mission Control. 

Java™ is a trademark of Sun Microsystems, Inc. 

Windows® is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. 



JTouch provides continuous perfect information by 
graphing any number of measurements to aid visual 
interpretation of numerical data. 


NASA SPINOFF 2000 


63 




