
A Solder-Covered Copper Rod or Wire affords 
the benefit of high thermal conductivity of the 
copper and, when sufficiently cold, electrical su- 
perconductivity of the solder. 

ever, the superconducting coil material 
is not suitable as such a link because 
electrically superconductive materials 
are typically poor thermal conductors. 


The heterogeneous material construc- 
tion makes it possible to solve both the 
electrical- and thermal-conductivity 
problems. The basic idea is to construct 
the coil as a skeleton made of a highly 
thermally conductive material (typically, 
annealed copper), then coat the skele- 
ton with an electrically superconductive 
alloy (typically, a lead-tin solder) [see fig- 
ure]. In operation, the copper skeleton 
provides the required thermally conduc- 
tive connection to the cold source, while 
the electrically superconductive coating 
material shields against Johnson noise 
that originates in the copper skeleton. 

This work was doneby Inseob H ahn, Kon- 
stantin I. Penanen, and Byeong Ho Eom of 


Caltech for NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 
Further information is contained in a TSP 
(see page 1). 

In accordance with Public Law 96-517 , 
the contractor has elected to retain title to 
this invention. Inquiries concerning rights 
for its commercial use should be addressed 
to: 

In nova tive T echn ology A ssets M anagemen t 
JPL 

M ail Stop 202-233 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena , CA 91109-8099 
E-mail: iaoffice@jpl.nasa.gov 
Refer to NPO -45929, volume and number 
of this NASA Tech Briefs issue, and the 
page number. 


Progress Toward Making Epoxy/ Carbon-Nanotube Composites 

Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas 


A modicum of progress has been made 
in an effort to exploit single-walled carbon 
nanotubes as fibers in epoxy-matrix/ fiber 
composite materials. Two main obstacles 
to such use of carbon nanotubes are the 
following: ( 1) bare nanotubes are not sol- 
uble in epoxy resin sand so they tend to ag- 
glomerate instead of becoming dispersed 
asdesired; and (2) because of lack of affin- 
ity between nanotubes and epoxy matri- 
ces, there is insufficient transfer of me- 
chanical loadsbetween the nanotubes and 
the matrices. 


Part of the effort reported here was 
oriented toward (1) functionalization of 
single-walled carbon nanotubes with 
methyl methacrylate (MMA) to increase 
their dispersability in epoxy resins and 
increase transfer of mechanical loads 
and (2) ultrasonic dispersion of the 
functionalized nanotubes in tetrahydro- 
furan, which wasused as an auxiliary sol- 
vent to aid in dispersing the functional- 
ized nanotubes into a epoxy resin. In 
another part of this effort, poly( styrene 
sulfonic acid) wasused as the dispersant 


and water as the auxiliary solvent. In one 
experiment, the strength of composite 
of epoxy with MMA-functionalized-nan- 
otubes was found to be 29 percent 
greater than that of a similar composite 
of epoxy with the same proportion of 
untreated nanotubes. 

This work was done by Thomas Tiano, 
M argaret Roylance, and John Gassner of Fos- 
ter-M iller, Inc. and William Kyle (consultant) 
for Johnson Space Center. Further informa- 
tion is contained in a TSP (seepagel).M SC- 
23278-1 


Predicting Properties of U nidirectional-Nanofiber Composites 

John H . Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio 


A theory for predicting mechanical, 
thermal, electrical, and other properties 
of unidirectional-nanofiber/ matrix 
composite materials is based on the 
prior theory of micromechanics of com- 
posite materials. In the development of 
the present theory, the prior theory of 
micromechanics was extended, through 
progressive substructuring, to the level 
of detail of a nanoscale slice of a 
nanofiber. All the governing equations 
were then formulated at this level. 

The substructuring and the equations 
have been programmed in the 


ICAN/JAVA computer code, which was 
reported in "ICAN/JAVA: Integrated 
Composite Analyzer Recoded in Java" 
(LEW-17247), NASA Tech Briefs, Vol. 26, 
No. 12 (December 2002), page 36. In a 
demonstration, the theory as embodied 
in the computer code was applied to a 
graphite-nanofiber/ epoxy laminate and 
used to predict 25 properties. Most of 
the properties were found to be distrib- 
uted along the through-the-thickness di- 
rection. Matrix-dependent properties 
were found to have bimodal through- 
the-thickness distributions with discon- 


tinuous changes from mode to mode. 

T his work was doneby Christos C. C ha mis, 
Louis M. Handler, and Jane M anderscheid of 
Glenn Research Center. Further information is 
contained in a TSP (see page 1). 

Inquiries concerning rights for thecommercial 
use of this invention should be addressed to 
NASA Glenn Research Center, InnovativePart- 
nerships Office Attn: Steve Fedor, Mail Stop 
4-8, 21000 Brookpark Road, Cleveland, Ohio 
44135. Refer to LEW-18366-1. 


22 


NASA Tech Briefs, December 2008 


