David Juge, NASA Johnson Space Center Co-op Student 
Electrical Engineering/Junior 


NASA Johnson Space Center 
Houston, TX 

Supervisor: Deborah Buscher/EV3 Branch Chief 


Fall 2011 



Purpose: Inform reader of cooperative education experience at the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration (NASA) Johnson Space Center (JSC). 

Objective: Obtain practical working experience in the electrical engineering field. 


History: 

The NASA was founded in 1958 by President Dwight Eisenhower. NASA was created 
largely because of concern over the Soviet Union’s formation of a space program. Since then, 
NASA has collaboratively worked with international partners and accomplished many scientific 
and technological achievements. Many of 
those achievements have been adapted for use 
in the private sector. 

There are 1 1 NASA Space Centers 
across the United States which employ nearly 
19,000 federal workers. The Lyndon B. 

Johnson Space Center (JSC) has the largest 
federal workforce of all the NASA Space 
Centers. JSC was established in 1961 and was 
formerly known as the Manned Spacecraft 

Center. Today JSC consists of over 100 buildings covering over 1600 acres of land. The land 
upon which JSC was built was donated by Rice University. JSC’s primary role within the 
agency is to provide spaceflight training for astronauts, flight control during missions, and to 
research and develop innovative technologies. 



The Avionic Systems Division is a division of the Engineering Directorate at JSC. 
Within the Avionic Systems Division, the Human Interfaces Branch (EV3) is the office of 
primary responsibility for all avionics systems that a crew member uses. The avionics systems 
which EV3 provide technical expertise for include imagery, audio, and displays and controls 
systems. 

Work Assignments: 

My primary tasks for my second tour here at JSC were working with an Augmented 
Reality Project and also constructing a Dodecahedron Speaker. I was mentored by several 
people during this tour including Mary McCabe, Andy Romero, and George Salazar. While 
working on these two projects, I was able to gain a great deal of hands-on electrical and 
programming experience. 

Augmented Reality Project: 

My first task was to familiarize myself with and modify enhance voice recognition 
software. The software developed for this project was 
primarily worked by a summer intern. The previous intern 
was able to successfully program a VoiceGP Development 
Kit Module which would respond to voice commands and 
playback an In-flight Maintenance (IFM) procedure. The 
program was coded using the C programming language. I 
had very little experience programming prior to this tour. 

The first challenge I faced was debugging the previously 



developed program, getting the program back to its original state and demoing the software. I 





was given many reading materials to gain a better understanding of the C programming 
language. After some time spent troubleshooting and gaining an understanding of the program, I 

was able to determine that there were two 
misplaced closing brackets nested in the code. 
After realigning the brackets throughout the code, 
I was able to make modifications within the code 
which included providing a more structured 
program and incorporating an audio ON/OFF 
voice command for user preference of actively 
listening to the IFM procedure. It was also desired to have a microphone jack added to the 
board to allow for the use of a noise cancelling headset. Soldering the microphone jack to the 
PC board and identifying the proper connections which needed to be made were new experiences 
for me, however I was able to successfully add the microphone jack to the PC board. 




The next aspect of the project was to accomplish computer mediated reality with a pair of 
augmented reality goggles manufactured by Vuzix. My objectives were to first perform object 
recognition by using NI Vision Software and then have the software project a two-dimensional 
text overlay or animation onto the display of the goggles. The text overlays or animations could 




then serve as a visual aid to complete a procedure as key objects are referenced. I was unable to 
accomplish as much as I would have liked with respect to this portion of the project due to issues 
with procuring the NI Vision Software as well as the 2 nd generation augmented reality goggles. I 
was able to successfully interface the goggles with the NI Vision Software, however soon after 
that feat, a hardware issue I discovered with the camera on the goggles required shipping them 
back to the manufacturer for repair. Before shipping the goggles back to the manufacturer, I was 
also able to make presentations to the JSC Engineering Director, Steve Altemus as well as other 
co-op students interested in the EV Division. I also worked on preparing a detailed summary of 

the work I completed & assisted 
David Overland with 
transitioning in to take over the 
project. 



Dodecahedron Speaker Project: 

The purpose of the dodecahedron speaker is to provide an omni-directional sound source 
which can then be used to acoustically stimulate a habitable volume. Acoustic modeling of the 
volume can then be performed to determine optimum placement, quantity, frequency response 
and power requirements of loudspeakers and microphones. The primary reason the 



project. 


dodecahedron shape was selected is because it 
allows for a uniform spherical distribution of an 
audio signal. It is possible that a geometric solid 
with more faces could be used, however a 
dodecahedron shape was deemed to be sufficient. 
I was able to learn a great deal about the design, 

manufacturing, and assembly process during the 


My mentor Andy Romero first asked that I use AutoCad software to model the 
dodecahedron speaker. This required understanding the dodecahedron shape itself. The 
dodecahedron is a geometric solid with 12 pentagonal faces. In order to construct an accurate 
3D model of the dodecahedron, the angles at which the faces were joined had to be precise. This 
proved to be more challenging than I expected, however I was able to finally draw a solid 3D 
model. It was then brought to my attention that we would be using Vi” thick plywood as the 
housing material for the speaker. I decided to then model one of the 12 speakers we planned on 
using for the dodecahedron speaker to scale. This would serve as a method of determining the 
size of each of the pentagonal faces we would 
manufacture. After successfully modeling the 
dodecahedron speaker in AutoCad, I set forth 
to design the amplifier circuit. 

I decided to use a TDA7385 car radio 
amplifier chip to drive the speakers. The 



TDA7385 chip has four channel outputs and is capable of providing 35 watts of power to each 
speaker. After acquiring the amplifier chips, my mentor requested that I breadboard the 
amplifier chips in the audio lab to ensure we understood the circuitry we planned on using as 
well as the performance of the amplifier chip. The chip is manufactured by STMicroelectronics 
and the company provides a suggested circuit schematic with the datasheet for the component. 
After obtaining the various capacitors and resistors recommended in the datasheet, I started to 
make the connections as shown in the circuit (see Figure 7). It took a significant amount of time 
troubleshooting with a function generator, a multi-meter, and an oscilloscope before I was able to 
finally produce a functioning circuit. 

I was then advised I should begin capturing the circuit schematic using the software tool 
Altium. I had never worked with Altium before and discovered that there was a significant 
learning curve associated with the software. After receiving many tips and guidance from Andy 
Romero, Fred Shetz, and Richard Norman, I was able to make progress with the software tool. 
The process of completing the circuit schematic also included having to manually add specific 
components to a custom library. My first version of the circuit schematic in Altium (see Figure 
8), although wired accurately, was not user friendly and was difficult to follow. I then 
discovered the usefulness of “net ports” which allow you to make connections without having to 




manually wire the components in the software. This allowed for the same circuit schematic to be 
represented in a more neat and organized fashion (see Figure 9). 

After completing the circuit schematic, I then proceeded to design the printed circuit 
board which was also done using the Altium software. I had no prior experience with PC board 
design, so this was another great learning opportunity. There were many things which I needed 
to keep in mind while generating the PC board layout such as trace width, the size of the PC 
board, and proper clearances between the components. I also had to produce custom footprints 
for many of the components I decided to use. This was done to ensure that the components 
would fit on the board after the PC board was fabricated. After producing a few different 
versions of the PC board layout, I was eventually able to select the best one to have fabricated. I 
decided it would be faster to have the PC board fabricated in house and this also gave me the 
opportunity to observe the fabrication process. 

Although the process of fabricating a PC board is very 
tedious and methodical, it did not take longer than one 
complete working day for the technician to finish. 

After the PC board was completed, I then 
moved on towards constructing the housing for the 
speaker. This was definitely one of the more challenging phases of the project due to there being 
a lack of information about how to actually construct the geometric solid. During this time I had 
an opportunity to take advantage of a newly opened facility at JSC called the Innovation Design 
Center (IDC). At the IDC, there are various hand & power tools that engineers at NASA are able 
to use for prototyping pit any ideas that they are interested in. It is especially useful for students 
working at JSC because we typically do not produce any flight graded hardware and therefore 



Figure 10: PC being fabricated. 


are encouraged to use the facility. Before using any of the equipment at the IDC, I was required 
to learn about the machine I planned on using and given hands-on training. These tactics were 
necessary to ensure proper and safe use of the equipment. I was assisted during this process by 
James Brown and Daniel Peterson. I spent many hours working at the IDC while being closely 
supervised. I was able to complete the speaker housing with adequate time to complete the 
remaining portions of the project. 

The final phase of constructing the 
dodecahedron speaker included mounting 
the speakers to the housing, soldering the 
speaker wires to connectors, and 
populating the PC board with the 
appropriate components. There were a 
few issues I encountered during this phase 
such as proper pin placement on the 
connectors. I realized this soon after I 
discovered that the footprint in the PC board layout was backwards (a common mistake) and 
required me to re-label the placement of the speaker wires. There was also an issue with the PC 
board itself that required troubleshooting. After probing with a multi-meter, it became apparent 
that there was a short circuit between the power & ground plane on the PC board which was 
causing the problem. Using a pair of fine nosed tweezers, I cleaned out the clearances between 
the tracing which solved the problem. The next phase of the project will be to characterize the 
performance of the dodecahedron speakers, but unfortunately due to time constraints, I did not 
have an opportunity to start this process. 



Experience Gained: 


My goal upon entering my 2 nd working co-op tour at NASA was to gain hands on 
electrical engineering 
experience. The experience I 
gained here during this tour was 
definitely hands on and I also 
gained experience with many 
things I had little to no previous 
experience with. Working 
within the Avionic Systems 
Division at JSC has taught me 
many workplace and fundamental engineering lessons. 

One of my primary objectives entering this tour was to gain experience with 
programming. I am more than satisfied with the programming knowledge I gained during this 
tour. Having an opportunity to debug the voice recognition program was a great opportunity to 
develop software debugging experience as well as knowledge of the C programming language. 
By modifying the existing code, I grew more confident in my abilities to program and hope to 
continue gaining more experience in this area. 

I was also presented with an opportunity to become familiar with NI LabView Software 
and NI Vision Software. I wasn’t able to make as much progress with using the software due to 
issues with procurement, however just gaining a working knowledge of the LabView 



environment and interface was great. I would like to learn more about how it can be utilized in 
different working areas. 

Acquiring experience with soldering was both challenging and fun. What made this even 
more valuable was that I had never learned proper techniques while soldering and discovered 
that what I had been doing was not very effective. My branch management provided me with 
practice kits to learn how to solder better. These proved to be very helpful and helped a great 
deal when soldering the dodecahedron’s 
PC board. I also had never used a solder 
wick before and learned how useful it can 
be to remove solder. Soldering was a 
skill that 1 thought 1 had a sufficient 
amount of working knowledge prior to 
arriving here for my 2 nd tour, but 1 am 
extremely pleased to say that 1 have 
greatly advanced my previous knowledge. 

Working with power tools was actually an unexpected opportunity that presented itself 
during this tour. Receiving the proper training before using the equipment provided practical 
experience that 1 can take with me even away from the working environment. 1 had a chance to 
use power tools that I’d never used before and also grew comfortable using them. 

The most rewarding experience 1 gained from this tour was the amplifier circuit design as 
well as PC board design. Being an electrical engineering major, it is invaluable to work with any 
circuit design process. This working tour provided a wealth of experience with the circuit design 



process and was very much like completing an elongated lab course at school. It was also 
surprising to actually be able to finish a working model of a PC board before having to return to 
school. I am confident that I now have sufficient experience working with PC board layout 
software to complete smaller and less complex designs. Also it was great to actually have 
problems and difficulties with the amplifier circuit and PC board, because without them I would 
not have had an opportunity to develop good troubleshooting techniques. I really hope to be able 
to incorporate some of this experience into my senior design course. 


Personal Assessment of Experience: 

Completing my 2 nd tour at JSC actually exceeded all of my personal expectations. I had 
an opportunity to work in a lab more often than my last tour which provided me the great hands 
on experience that I sought out. I must also add that without the guidance and mentoring I 
received from the experts around me, I would not have been able to accomplish everything that I 
did. Any equipment, component, or guidance I needed was provided at a moment’s notice. 

Future: 

The co-op program at JSC 
requires technical co-op students 
complete 2 semesters and 1 summer of 
work. I have now completed 2 
semesters and only have the summer of 
2012 tour remaining. This tour will also be in the EV3 Branch. This current tour was a great 
supplement to what I gained from my previous tour and I plan to continue with what I’ve learned 



both at home and at school. I 
managed to gain experience 
with many different things 
which will only help out with 
the different projects I plan on 
working on myself. I plan on 
graduating in May 2013, and 
upon graduating I hope to be 
offered a full-time position as 
an electrical engineer at JSC. It 
will take hard work, however I 
am looking forward to the 



Figure 15: Pictured with dodecahedron speaker after delivering exit 
presentation to Division Management. 


challenge. 



