CALIFORNIA STATE UNIVERSITY NORTHRIDGE 


INTRODUCTION TO BASIC PROGRAMMING: 
A STUDENT WORKBOOK FOR THE ATARI 


A graduate project submitted in partial satisfaction of 
the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in 

Secondary Education 
by 

Jon M. Lauritzen 


May, 1985 




The Graduate Project of Jon. M. Lauritzen is approved 


Barnabas B. Hughes, Phi. 57 


CThrristine C. Smith, Ed. D. 


Charles H. Heimler, Ed. D., Chair 


California State University, Northridge 


ii 






TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 


ABSTRACT. .iv 

CHAPTER 

I. Introduction . 1 


The Problem 
Need for the Project 
Purpose of the Project 
Definition of Terms 
Outline of the Project 

II. REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE.12 

Programming in BASIC 

Learning BASIC 

Learning Theory 

Obtaining Programming Skills 

The Workbook for Student Use 

Summary 

III. WRITING THE WORKBOOK.21 

Design 

Development of Learning Activities 
Locating and Evaluating Materials 
Adapting Materials for Use with the ATARI 
Techniques of Learning 
Summary 

IV. DESCRIPTION OF THE WORKBOOK.28 

Lesson I: Introduction to the 
Microcomputer 

Lesson II: Meeting ATARI BASIC 
Lesson III: Steps in Planning, Saving, 
and Printing a Program 
Lesson IV: Additional Programming 
Features 

Lesson V: Branching and Loops 
Lesson VI: Variables 
Lesson VII: Computer Functions 
Lesson VIII: Sound, Color, and Graphics 


Evaluation and Summary 

V. CLASSROOM USE OF THE WORKBOOK.38 

Classroom Evaluation 
Projected use of the Workbook 
Summary 

REFERENCES . . ..43 

APPENDIX A...45 


iii 











ABSTRACT 


AN INTRODUCTION TO BASIC PROGRAMMING: 

STUDENT WORKBOOK FEATURING THE ATARI 

by 

Jon M. Lauritzen 

Master of Arts in Secondary Education 

With the advent of the microcomputer, decisions were 
difficult, there were a wide variety of hardware choices, 
and a limited supply of material suitable for classroom 
use. Those who instructed computer classes had to collect 
materials from many sources, then write their own lessons. 
In that historical context, the workbook in this project 
was developed. 

Individual lessons were written and compiled into a 
workbook, for the instruction of ATARI BASIC. The material 
has been used and tested in a variety of classrooms, then 
revised to provide an instructional guide, or reference 
document. Each lesson presents the instructor with the 
materials necessary to provide information and answers for 
a lecture, demonstration, or discussion. The student, 
working on the computer explores each of the areas 
discussed in a lesson. Exercises then direct students 
through each section of BASIC programming, where they 
expand upon the concepts presented. 

iv 




The workbook begins with an introduction to the 
keyboard and screen editing. Lesson two introduces the 
concepts of BASIC programming statements and commands, then 
explores the treatment of mathematical functions on the 
computer. The third lesson introduces program planning, 
and the use of computer peripherals, including the disk 
drive and the printer. In lesson four the student will 
expand his or her understanding of programming features. 
Lesson five looks at the BASIC concepts of branching and 
loops. The treatment of variables in BASIC is developed in 
lesson six, and lesson seven explores functions programmed 
into the computer. In the concluding lesson, the student is 
introduced to the use of sound, color, and graphics in 
programming. Throughout the workbook there is an attempt 
to allow the student to discover as many of the programming 
concepts as possible. 


V 





CHAPTER I 


INTRODUCTION 


When the computer was first introduced to the 
classroom, educators found little or no instructional 
material acceptable for use with their instructional 
program. Teachers, whether they had been assigned, or had 
chosen to work with computers because of a personal 
interest, were frustrated by the limited quantity of 
quality material suitable for classroom use. To be 
effective; therefore, it became necessary for educators to 
create their own materials, including lessons and support 
documents for use with the computer. 

To create their own materials required a great deal of 
research through many different sources in order for the 
teachers to educate themselves in the operation of 
complicated hardware and acquire necessary programming 
skills. This research was required of teachers to the 
extent that they could not only operate the computer 
effectively, but could also structure a viable programming 
lesson for use with their students. Those who were 
fortunate enough to find courses either through a college, 
university or commercial organization had certain 
advantages in understanding BASIC programming and the 


1 





operation of the computer. 

Teachers who had a math or science background, usually 
had some experience in working with computers. These 
teachers met their assignment with experience and 
enthusiasm, eagerly designing and implementing their 
assigned course. Those not already computer literate, 
however, were likely to become easily discouraged (Bell, 
1983). 

The history of using computers in the schools is one 
of changing trends. Use of computers in the classroom 
started sometime in the sixties. Instructional computing 
began with a reliance on the mainframe computers of certain 
large universities, since they were the only ones available 
at the time. With the advent of the microcomputer, 
specialized retail outlets began to offer programming 
courses, as did many schools and colleges (DeDault, Harvey, 
1983). 

Initially, there was little or no instructional 
software available for the microcomputer. What followed 
was a virtual avalanche of programs and printed material, 
making the selection process for the teacher exceedingly 
difficult. The many magazines and volumes of books 
provided a wealth of material. Much of this material, 
however, was unsuitable or too technical for classroom use. 




The Problem 


In the early years of computer education, an educator 
required to use a microcomputer for classroom instruction 
could get very little help. Few materials were available, 
and each individual teacher was forced to resort to his or 
her own resources for computer related lessons. Exploring 
the varying functions and capabilities of a given 
microcomputer and the programming languages as they also 
became available, was quite a challenge. This was 
extremely difficult, particularly if the instructor had 
little or no experience with the computer selected for 
classroom use. Moreover, there has always been a shortage 
of courses for microcomputers, particularly courses which 
offered the student a "hands-on" experience. Locating 
programming courses, for many of the different brands of 
microcomputers, unless offered by a retail outlet was next 
to impossible. Finding programming materials for a 
specific type of hardware, was equally difficult. Here to, 
when material was available, it was frequently of a 
technical nature, difficult to understand and impossible to 
interpret. Other materials were poorly organized, with a 
structure which would not adapt well to a classroom 


situation 




Need For The Project 


Due to the lack of specific material for teaching 
BASIC on the ATARI computer, it was necessary to compile a 
series of lessons and exercises to provide instruction and 
activities for assigned classes. Since there is still a 
shortage of materials in the area of specialized hardware 
oriented programming, the need exists for a workbook which 
is suitable for classroom use. 

The ATARI microcomputer with its modified BASIC 
language, and the additional features it offers, is one of 
those microcomputers which require different programming 
techniques to take full advantage of its special 
capabilities. In addition as the use of peripherals, such 
as disk drives, and printers becomes more wide spread, 
students need to be familiar with their operation. 

Features such as color, sound, and graphics, give the 
ATARI, and some of the other microcomputers, a motivational 
appeal which should be incorporated into programming 
courses. 

General textbooks for microcomputers have a tendency 
to be incomplete or inadequate, and have limited use in the 
classroom. Standard textbooks on BASIC programming are at 
variance with ATARI BASIC and often lead to frustration for 
the student. Programming textbooks which do not meet the 
students needs are of little help in learning to use the 
graphics capability of the ATARI (Haskell, 1983). 



A student attempting to work individually found a void 
in effective materials for self-instruction. The teacher 
who attempted to give individual attention to students 
working, "hands-on”, at a computer station, was frequently 
frustrated both in the attempt to give assistance, and in 
maintaining discipline among other students in the class. 
Those students not at a computer station, who had 
insufficient material to work with or to keep them 
occupied, often become disinterested. Good activity 
related study material is essential in this area. 

Initially most teachers have a very limited number of 
computers to work with, perhaps only one or two. The 
"hands-on" approach to learning was almost impossible to 
conceive, let alone implement. Even in the computer labs 
of today where microcomputers have proliferated to a great 
extent, there are cases where a teacher is beginning a new 
program with an insufficient number of computers for each 
individual student to have access to one whenever it is 
needed. It does, therefore, become necessary to provide 
activities for those students who are not able to work at a 
computer station during a class period. The teacher new to 
computers, seldom has the experience to plan effective 
"seat work" activities for a computer class, even many of 
those with extensive computer experience, were limited in 
this area which requires a special skill. 

Historically the computer teacher has run into 
difficulty when attempting to piece together a lesson from 



the inadequate documentation available with most computers. 
Unfortunately the documentation which was available was of 
a technical nature and was often difficult to interpret. 

It therefore became necessary for the author in teaching 
his computer classes to begin the long and arduous task of 
collecting useful ideas from all available sources. These 
sources included the product documentation, the few books 
and magazines available, and consultation with other 
experienced individuals. Using these resources it was 
possible to piece together a workable lesson for use with 
the author's students. A few experienced individuals were 
available to provide assistance, these have been extremely 
helpful: Dr. Sid Kolpas, of TRS, Bill Gibbons of HW 
computers, Mike Seldon, a self educated expert on the 
ATARI, and Dr. Charles Heimler of California State 
University at Northridge. 


Purpose of the Project 

It was the purpose of this project to develop a 
self-directing student workbook for classroom or individual 
use. The use of such a workbook, with its individual 
lessons, will free the instructor to provide assistance to 
those students who need individual attention with either 
computer hardware or programming techniques. At the same 
time it will provide those students who do not have access 




to computer learning stations, activities to occupy and 
challenge them. 

The workbook designed for this project will fill the 
needs of ATARI computer teachers and students as they 
pursue the study of BASIC programming. The teacher is 
provided with a study and activity guide. While the 
student using this workbook will, with some limited 
direction, be able to work at the computer, they will also 
discover the intricacies of the hardware and the 
fascination of program development. Further, the workbook 
will free the teacher from the burden of daily preparing 
viable lessons for classroom use. Also access to this 
material will allow more time for work with the individual 
student and provide constructive in-class activities for 
students when they are not able to use a computer. 


Definition of Terms 


Workbook 

As an attempt is made to present the material in this 
project there must be an understanding of terms. When the 
term Workbook is used in the context of this project it is 
defined as a study document which can be used by an 
individual working to comprehend the concepts presented. 

It is also the type of document which can be used by an 




instructor who can present the material for exploration by 
a group of students. In either event the document may be 
used as a primary study guide or as a supplementary 
resource document. 

Programming 

The use of computers in instruction has introduced 
many misunderstood terms. Many of those with little 
understanding of instruction in the realm of computers, 
might relate the term Programming to the entire structure 
of course work within the area of related computer studies. 
A more precise definition of this concept is necessary as 
it applies to the material presented here. Programming is 
the process of comprehending a problem, planning the 
structure of the solution, writing a program, and then 
correcting all errors so the program will itself, then 
present a solution. Programming requires the use of a 
specific language for communication between the computer 
and the programmer. 

BASIC 

One of the most widespread and useful languages is 
BASIC, an acronym for Beginner's All-Purpose Symbolic 
Instruction Code. BASIC is a particularly useful language 
for use with students, as it is closer to the English 
language than the others. BASIC also allows many creative 



variations in the approach to a programming problem. 

Computer Lab 

A Computer Lab for purposes of this project is defined 
as a microcomputer laboratory. The lab may be any room or 
facility set up with one or more computers, and designed 
for use with the instruction of computer programming or 
computer related subjects. An ideal lab would contain a 
sufficient number of computer stations to accommodate the 
anticipated enrollment. Each station should contain a 
microcomputer with an external storage devise such as a 
disk drive, a monitor with sound and full color capability, 
and access to a printer. In addition their should be a 
seating area where students can receive instructions or 
work away from the distraction of the computers. 


Outline of the Project 

Chapter II reviews the literature related to the use 
of BASIC as a computer language for the classroom, the 
acquitision of programming knowledge and skills by an 
individual instructor, the learning theory involved in the 
instruction of students in a computer lab situation, and 
the need for student instructional material for the 
teaching of ATARI BASIC 

Chapter III details the writing of the workbook, 



constructed for this project. It explains and documents 
the development of the materials which were created and 
assembled within the structure of a workbook. The 
presentation of the activities included here, is designed 
to give an overview of the material which enables the user 
to judge its validity as it relates to the selection of 
study needs. The difficulty in locating materials for use 
with the instructional program, a constant in the teaching 
of any computer related subject, is presented. The 
problems involved in adapting materials for use with the 
ATARI are detailed. Finally the studies of the techniques 
of learning which lead to the use of discovery procedures 
in the learning process, wherever possible, is explored and 
documented. 

Chapter IV includes the description of the actual 
workbook as the primary objective of this project. The 
outline of the eight lessons gives a description of each, 
as it is related to the overall project. Then, each lesson 
is detailed as its description is documented 

Chapter V documents the classroom use and evaluation 
of the workbook material. The documentation procedures are 
outlined and used to project the use of the materials as 
individual lessons, or activities. The possible uses of 
the complete workbook are analyzed and discussed. 
Development of materials and studies related to the project 
have only begun to cover the subject area. There is a 
strong indication that there is still significant need in 



the area of lesson and activity development. Future needs 
are in the computer fields of program instruction, and the 
use of software in the instructional program. 




CHAPTER II 


REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE 


Even though the debate over which programming language 
should be taught in the classroom continues to rage, there 
are valid arguments for the teaching of BASIC. For most 
teachers the question of which language they will use has 
already been decided, either by the school district, a 
school administrator or the department of which they are a 
part. For the teachers, who will be teaching BASIC it 
becomes a question of where to obtain the necessary 
training. The teacher must select the materials to be used 
in the classroom with the computer. When unable to locate 
or adopt appropriate materials the teacher must then write 
the lessons and worksheets necessary to provide information 
and activities for their classes. 


Programming in BASIC 

Perhaps the most eloquent defender for the teaching 
of BASIC in the classroom is Arthur Luehrmann, founding 
partner of Computer Literacy in Berkeley, Ca. According to 
Luehrman: 


12 



There is no "right" computer language. And 
preoccupation with languages is misleading 
because it takes us away from the important 
problems: teaching people to think carefully 
and write clearly for the computer 
(Luehrmann, 1982, p.23). 

Luehrman (1982) also points out that BASIC is the 
common language of the computer, and that all 
microcomputers have a version of BASIC. The important 
thing then is to teach, "clear, readable, programs" in the 
common language of BASIC (p. 24). 


Learning BASIC 


Learning to program, according to Electronic Learning, 

in "The Computer Primer", is simply learning to "talk" to 

the computer. BASIC is the language most widely used for 

instructional applications. 

Like any language, a computer language consists 
of both a vocabulary and a set of grammatical 
rules. Unlike foreign languages, though, 
a computer language, such as BASIC consists of 
a limited number of standard English words or 
abbreviations, a set of symbols such as 
those used in mathematics, and just a few rules of 
grammar ( Electronic Learning, 1982, p. 20). 

In, "Is a Computer Hard to Learn", from Consumer 

Reports , there is support for the concept that learning a 

computer language is a procedure which because it is 

similar to learning any language, need not create 

difficulty for the learner. It is also pointed out that 



one need not learn the entire language in order to gain 
value from it. 

Learning BASIC, or another programming language, 
is an enterprise not unlike learning French. 

You don't need to learn programming to use 
a computer, just as you don't need to learn French 
to vacation in Quebec. But at least a little 
programming is helpful in understanding how 
the computer works and in figuring out what 
you may have done wrong ( Consumer Reports , 

1983, p. 488). 

With just a few BASIC commands students can begin 
seeing the results of their programming efforts almost 
immediately. It is further pointed out by Paul Bonner in 
Personal Computing , that since BASIC is an interpreted 
rather than compiled language, it has the advantage of 
immediate execution (Bonner, 1983, p. 128). 


Learning Theory 

When The language question has been settled, the 
educator must look at learning theory to determine the 
method which will best communicate the capabilities of the 
computer and the language to the student. The argument for 
the use of computers in the classroom should be looked at 
in an attempt to avoid those abuses, computer instructors 
have been accused of in the past. 

In an interview in the "People in Computing" section 
of Personal Computing magazine, Richard Koff of the 


Northwestern University in Chicago, states: 


"there's no 



hands-on experience." 


Koff 


better way to learn than by 


goes on to point out how he has set up elaborate computer 
"what-if" models to teach his students ( Personal Computing , 
1983, p. 15). 

When Paul Bonner quotes Nels Winkless of the Excalibur 

Company, Winkless would seem to support the explorative 

nature of learning to program as he indicates that a 

traditional analytical approach to programming: 

virtually excludes intuitive learners...The 
traditional educational route has been strictly 
analytical-you sit down and get a little bit of 
introduction,...First you learn a set of rules, 
and then you sit there and work through those 
rules,... That certainly impedes learning 
for those not inclined to work on a rule-driven 
system (Bonner, 1983, p. 137). 

Another supporter of the discovery theory of learning 

to program is Tony Morris of the University of Michigan, as 

he relates in an interview about teaching his own children 

to work with the computer. His goal was to have the 

children understand the computer and how it worked. To 

accomplish this he banned all commercial software from the 

home. "If the kids had used only commercial software from 

the start, they wouldn't have had any curiosity. It would 

have been too easy." (Frenkel, 1983, p. 45) 

Decker F. Walker of Stanford, relates his philosophy 

of learning with the microcomputer: 

My experience - derived from three years of 
reading, thinking, and working with computers and 
computer-based education programs - leads me 
to identify seven main ways that today’s 
microcomputers can contribute to education. 



These are: l)more active learning, 2) more 
varied sensory and conceptual modes, 3) less 
mental drudgery, 4) learning nearer the speed 
of thought, 5) learning better tailored to 
individuals, 6) more independent learning, 
and 7) better aids to abstraction 
(Walker, 1983, p. 103). 

T.H. Bell, Secretary U.S. department of Education 

writes about the spread of microcomputers and the need for 

quality educational materials for use with them, even 

though he speaks of software development these ideas 

translate easily to other areas of microcomputer education. 

What we need is a major effort to develop 
some super software packages that will: 

1) Motivate the student through reaching into 
the interests and concerns of the minds of 
the learners; 2)Branch out and present the 
subject matter again and again to the learner 
who did not grasp the concept the first time 
it was presented; 3) Move ahead rapidly with 
the gifted and talented learners; 4)present 
the subject matter with the utmost in 
attractive sound, color and animation; 

5) Reinforce the students' desire to learn 
more by offering prompts, cues and encouragement 
in working through some of the most crucial 
phases of some lessons; and 6) Keep careful 
tabulation of each student's progress, correct 
and erroneous responses, and print the same 
out for use of the teacher (Bell, 1984, p. 81). 

In planning a program, writing materials, or just 

locating ideas, it is important to view the computer as a 

tool which can allow the student a great deal of 

flexibility in learning, but the learning must also be 

accompanied by valid instructional techniques. 



Obtaining Programming Skills 


The Instructor must first aquire skills in 
programming, before these can be taught to others. 

Initially there were few resources for obtaining these 
skills. More recently, however many sources of instruction 
have become available. Some are exotic and some mundane, 
Leroy Finkel, author, educator, and advisor, when 
interviewed by Lorraine Hopping, assistant editor to 
Teaching and Computing , suggests that if one is going to be 
working with a specific type of computer, he or she should 
first take a short course that is specific to that machine, 
he cautions that those who really want to learn programming 
can expect to invest a lot of time. She quotes Finkel as 
saying: 

In a short course, you can learn a little 
programming, computer operations, and 
how to run software. You have to invest a 
minimum of 12 weeks, probably more to become 
proficient in programming (Hopping, 1983, p. 56). 

Hopping (1983) has evaluated eight alternative sources 

of computer education including: l)Computer stores, where 

courses are offered, but don't expect much from the sales 

people she cautions, 2) Computer fairs, particularly those 

which have begun to "specialize by machine type,..., 

thereby offering more in-depth coverage of one machine", 3) 

Resorts, it is possible to educate the whole family while 

vacationing, 4) Nonprofit organizations such as scout 

troups or clubs, 5) Universities where many in-depth 



courses are available, 6) Adult education centers, 7) 
Computer camps, and 8) the manufacturer, who offer computer 
users various programs of instruction specific to their 
machines (Pp. 56-59) 

Add to this list the user groups which can be an 
invaluable source of both general and specific programming 
information. For the teacher there is now a wealth of 
in-service courses, also a certain amount of on the job 
training is available for those currently beginning their 
education in computers. 


The Workbooks for Student Use 

When the type of computer has been determined, the 
programming language has been selected, and the instructor 
has been prepared with adequate programming knowledge, 
there is still the question of selecting the materials for 
use with the course to be taught. 

The textbooks and related materials available during the 
development of this project, while offering a valuable 
source of information were lacking in many respects. Some 
of the materials were more technical than an introductory 
course required, this was true of Cummins’ BASIC 
Programming , others were either too general or too specific 
for this type of course (Cummins, Kuechmann, 1983). The 
format used by TRS in its BASIC student manuals was one of 





the best at the time, but there were several problems. 

First they require an instructor to give the information to 
complete the lessons, second the programming techniques 
were very elementary, and third there is no color or sound 
and very limited graphics capabilities (Radio Shack, 1979). 

Other volumes such as Albrecht’s ATARI BASIC are good 
references, but are written at an advanced level and would 
not be effective at the secondary level (Albrecht, Finkel, 
Brown, 1979). 

Use of documentation or available instructional 

material has proven ineffective, as is indicated by Dianne 

Martin of George Washington University, when she says: 

A walk through the typical local library will 
reveal a small selection of out-of-date books 
on computers and data processing comparable 
to reading a book about the Model T to study 
automobiles... the local bookstore can 
leave...[one]...confused and overwhelmed by 
the diversity and sheer number of trade books 
available on the subject. Few books are 
written with the general adult learner in mind 
(Martin, Heller, 1984, p. 125). 

With a lack of materials which suit the needs of the 
classroom instructor, the only choice remaining seemed to 
write a workbook in the format which has historically 
proven effective as a means of instructing and giving the 
student a means for recording responses. 




Summary 


In reviewing the literature for this project, 
conclusions have been drawn in five related areas: (a) 

BASIC language programming should be taught in the schools, 
(b) an individual educator can find means of developing 
programming skills, becoming proficient enough to work in a 
computer equipped classroom, (c) it is possible to conduct 
a class implementing a theory of learning in which the 
student is allowed to discover many of the desirable 
programming skills, and (d) a workbook format would be the 
most effective medium for this project. 



CHAPTER III 


WRITING THE WORKBOOK 


The workbook developed in this project, was produced 
in response to the lack of adequate materials available for 
instructional purposes. Teaching ATARI BASIC courses 
required specialized programs, techniques, and lessons, 
none of which were available in a form designed for 
classroom use. additional problems included difficulty in 
obtaining instruction, a need for organized, activity 
oriented, lessons, and the difficulty of translating 
technical references into a usable form. The only solution 
to the problems which had been encountered it seemed would 
be to write a detailed set of lessons which would challange 
and motivate, as well as educate the student. The lessons 
were written, tested, revised, and eventually compiled into 
a workbook format. 


Design 

A working knowledge of the BASIC programming language 
had been acquired by the author through the completion of 
several courses in programming on the TRS 80 microcomputer. 


21 



The ATARI computer, however, required an understanding of 
the existing variations in both the hardware and in the 
programming so as to take advantage of its special 
features. To understand, and subsequently teach, these 
specialized features required much research and 
experimentation. Fortunately, resource people were 
available to give assistance at various times during the 
development of the workbook. 

The author determined the best approach to the 
teaching of BASIC was to introduce statements and commands 
in a specific sequence. But first the student needed to be 
taught the special features of the ATARI keyboard, then 
shown or allowed to discover the differences in programming 
the ATARI computer, as these differences were encountered. 
Finally those special features of the ATARI ROM (read only 
memory), which were not available on other computers were 
to be explored and developed, as program components. 


Development of Learning Activities 

Activities which would keep the student interested and 
challenged were essential to each stage of a computer 
class. The student appears to gain most from activities 
when they lead to the discovery of general concepts as the 
problem is explored. Ideally the student would have access 



to a computer at any time during a class period; however, 
this isn't always possible due to a limited number of 
computers available under most circumstances. It was 
necessary, therefore, to provide activities in the workbook 
which can be completed without the aid of the computer. 
Activities of this nature are effective when directed by 
the instructor, but they must be structured in such a way 
that they can be completed by a student working 
individually. Additional activities in the workbook have 
been designed as "seat work", for exploration when a 
computer isn't available. Verification of the results of 
this type of work is still required by entering the 
problems or programs on the computer and comparing the 
output. 


Locating and Evaluating Materials 

While much of the material included in the workbook, 
is the result of personal experience and experimentation, 
several sources proved invaluable in its development: 1) 
the TRS Student Manual, Vols. I and II (Radio Shack Corp., 
1979). 2) An Invitation to Programming, (ATARI Corp., 
1981). 3) ATARI BASIC . (Albrecht, Finkel, and Brown). 

There are numerous publications featuring BASIC 
programming, sorting through these materials, made it 
possible to find ideas which would work in a classroom 



situation. The initial problem was one of locating 
sufficient material adaptable to a programming class 
featuring ATARI hardware. When a flood of material began 
to emerge, it became a matter of sifting through quantities 
of avialable magazines, books and hardware documentation, 
in an attempt to keep current on programming ideas. 


Adapting materials for use with the ATARI 

In order to adapt materials for the ATARI it became 
necessary to test all general materials to see what was 
compatible with ATARI BASIC. Several areas which caused 
difficulty when attempting to adapt from materials written 
for general use included: TAB statements, ATARI uses a 
POSITION (POS.) statement to replace TAB, VTAB, and HTAB; 
DIMENSION statements are required with all string variables 
on the ATARI, but may not be necessary on other computers; 
String and subscripted variables are both dealt with 
differently on the ATARI than on most other computers. 

Where the instructor has experience with other computers it 
is sometimes effective to compare the various means used by 
each type of computer, for the benefit of the class. If 
programs or commands require adaptation to function 
properly on different computers, the activities for which 
they are intended should include this fact. With most of 
the simpler programming ideas, generally adapted from early 





resources, it was merely a matter of changing one or two 
program lines or perhaps only one or two symbols, to 
accomplish the desired result. 

Ideas for interesting and educational activities for 
use in the workbook were derived from several sources: 
Compute! and Antic magazines were of particular value with 
ideas for use with the ATARI. The Volumes published by 
Compute! featuring articles written specifically for the 
ATARI were of value in developing materials in the areas of 
color, sound, and graphics where there were very limited 
resources in other publications ( Compute! , 1981). Another 
valuable resource in developing and clarifying concepts in 
programming was Lon Poole’s, Your ATARI Computer . The 
sections dealing with strings, arrays, and ATARI 
peripherals, contained in-depth studies of these areas 
(Poole, McNiff, Cook, 1982). 


Techniques of Learning 

Among the activities incorporated within the workbook 
format are several learning techniques. Lessons are: 1) 
Tutorial - information is given as text, or demonstrated by 
the instructor; 2) Discovery - the student is directed to 
complete specific procedures and record the results; 3) 
Evaluative - problems are assigned with instructions to 
check and evaluate the results on the computer, or programs 



with deliberate errors may be included with instructions to 
"de-bug” the program (remove the errors); 4) Practice - 
exercises are included for the student to complete, either 
with the computer, at a desk or both; and 5) Experimental - 
programming assignments are given and the student is to 
write or complete a segment or an entire program, 
documenting each step in the program, and explaining the 
RUN (output) of the program. Each of these techniques is 
designed to place the emphasis on the discovery of 
programming procedures by the student as lessons are 
completed, how well this is implemented would depend on the 
instructor of the course. 


Summary 

In this chapter the need for a workbook which would 
aid in the instruction of ATARI BASIC was described. The 
design of the workbook was reviewed; the types of 
activities, the reasoning behind the structure of the 
activities, and their purpose in the instruction was 
presented. The procedure for locating and evaluating 
materials along with the process of adapting materials for 
the ATARI was outlined. Finally, techniques of learning 
incorporated into the workbook were explored. 

Collecting, organizing, testing, and writing the 
material for this workbook was initiated to provide lessons 



27 


and activities, for classes being taught by the author. 

The material as compiled in the workbook, is presented as a 
resource for those who will teach BASIC programming on the 


ATARI 



CHAPTER IV 


DESCRIPTION OF THE WORKBOOK 


In organizing the material for this workbook it was 
necessary to consider who might use it, and how to most 
effectively arrange it for a variety of users. Initially 
the material was designed for use by an instructor with a 
group of students. Later it was determined that the 
material could also be used effectively by a student 
working individually. It is necessary, therefore, to 
provide instructions for use of the workbook, for both the 
instructor and the student. The most effective methods of 
using the individual lessons and the workbook as a whole 
have been presented here. Introductory material includes 
objectives for each lesson. 

The lessons are designed as "units" of instruction, 
and may take a week for a class in a secondary school, 
several hours with adults in an in-service situation, or an 
individual may complete each section more rapidly working 
alone. In each case, however, it is necessary for the 
student to spend a certain amount of time individually 
practicing the skills presented. This summary of the 
workbook, will be presented as if it were to be used in a 
classroom setting with an instructor directing the lessons. 


28 




29 


It includes the following: 

Introduction 

Lesson I: Introduction to the microcomputer 
Computer definitions 
Hardware and peripheral hook-up 
The keyboard 
Keyboard editing 

Lesson II: Meeting ATARI BASIC 
The PRINT command 
Mathematical operations 
Mathematical exercises 
Algebra on the ATARI 
RUN, LIST and NEW commands 

Lesson III: Steps in planning, saving and printing 
a program 
The flow chart 
Program analysis 
Disk drive 

Operation 

Format 

Printer operation 

Lesson IV: Additional programming features 
LET,END, STOP, AND CONT commands 
BASIC message responses 
The INPUT statement 
READ/DATA, RESTORE statements 




30 


Lesson V: Branching and loops 

Unconditional branching: the GOTO statement 
Conditional branching: IF/THEN statements 
FOR/NEXT loops 

Subroutines: the GOSUB/RETURN statements 
Lesson VI: variables 

Definitions and limitations 
Assignment of variables 
Numeric 
String 

DIMENSION statement 
Subscripted variables 
Array 
Matrix 

Lesson VII: Computer functions 
ASCII (ASC) 

CHARACTER STRING (CHR$) 

LENGTH (LEN) 

RANDOM (RND) 

Mathematical and scientific functions 
SQUARE ROOT (SQR) 

LOG, SIN, and COS 

Lesson VIII: Sound, color and graphics 
SOUND statement 
COLOR statement 
Graphic modes 
Evaluation and summary 




LESSON I: Introduction to the Microcomputer 


The instructor will begin with an introduction to the 
computer hardware and peripherals. The student learns 
about the computer components and how to "hook-up" 
(assemble) them. When the equipment is together, and the 
power is turned on, the student begins exploring the 
keyboard. The differences between a typewriter and a 
computer keyboard is evaluated. The keyboard graphics of 
the ATARI are presented and explored for the enjoyment and 
interest of the student. The student should become 
comfortable with the keyboard and its special functions, 
particularly the editing features which allow the 
correction or changing of anything on the screen without 
retyping entire segments of material. This lesson is 
concluded with a practical quiz, in which the student 
performs given operations on the computer, under the 
observation of the instructor. 


LESSON II: Meeting ATARI BASIC 

In Lesson 2 the instructor can begin the introduction 
of BASIC language commands. PRINT is the first command 
presented, the student is given lines of material to type, 



leading to the discovery of the variations and limitations 
of this important command. After the introduction of the 
PRINT command the fundamental math operations of BASIC are 
introduced, the student is asked to compute simplified math 
problems, then type them in to the computer in order to see 
how the computer deals with the operations of addition, 
subtraction, multiplication, division, and exponents. The 
proper grouping of mathematical operations is explored, and 
the treatment of Algebraic expressions in BASIC is 
demonstrated. Next, in displaying large and small numbers, 
scientific notation is compared to the computer form of 
"E-Notation". The student is given the first in a series of 
programs, for exploration and development. Definitions 
previously encountered as the lesson developed are: BASIC, 
bit, byte, RAM, and ROM. The statements REM and PRINT, and 
commands RUN, LIST, and NEW also previously introduced are 
reviewed to summarize this lesson. 


LESSON III: Steps in Planning, Saving, 
and Printing a Program 

This lesson leads the student into the area of BASIC 
program development. The design of a flow chart is 
presented for student use in outlining the scope and 
structure of a program. The actual writing of a program is 
accomplished by following the step by step procedures 



outlined: 1) analyzing the problem, 2) flow charting the 
solution, 3) writing the program, 4) Typing the program 
into the computer, and 5) RUNning (executing), and 
debugging (correcting errors) the program. The student 
then analyzes the program for desired results. The 
operation of the disk drive and printer are to be 
demonstrated and discussed. A diskette will be formatted, 
(ie) prepared for saving programs, sample programs will be 
saved on the diskette, then printed on paper. The 
instructor would critique the printed material, to 
summarize the lesson, and evaluate student progress. 


LESSON IV: Additional Programming Features 

The additional commands LET, END, STOP, and CONT are 
featured in this lesson. "Debugging" is pursued in a series 
of programs where each is to be rewritten to produce a 
desired result. BASIC message responses of the ATARI are 
reviewed, as three types of errors are discussed, along 
with informative messages, called screen prompts. The 
INPUT statement is explored as another means of entering 
data into the computer either as single or multiple items. 
An additional form of entering data, the READ/DATA 
statement, is most useful when a great deal of information 
must be entered. The RESTORE statement, and its relation 
to READ/DATA is explored, as it allows the reuse of 



previous data 


LESSON V: Branching and Loops 

Two aspects of branching are introduced in this 
lesson. In unconditional branching the computer is not 
given an alternative, but must turn over control of the 
program to another section. The GOTO statement is employed 
for this programming situation. Conditional branching in 
which a given condition or set of conditions must be met 
includes the IF/THEN statement. GOTO and IF/THEN 
statements can be used to set up loops in a program, where 
a part of the program is to be repeated. The FOR/NEXT 
statement, however, always creates a loop, with the number 
of times the loop is to be repeated defined in the 
statement. Various aspects of these statements are 
explored as the student works through the exercises of this 
lesson. A subroutine allows the reuse of any segment of 
the program which would be needed more than once. The 
GOSUB/RETURN statements are introduced and expanded in this 
lesson. 


LESSON VI: Variables 


The assignment of values to numeric variables is 




accomplished through the let statement presented in a 
previous lesson. The limitations and scope of these 
variables is presented here. The use and assignment of 
string variables is much more complex and requires a more 
in depth study. The Dimensioning requirements of the 
ATARI, necessary to deal with string variable needs to be 
presented at the same time as these variables are 
discussed, in order for the student to use them in 
programs. Subscripted variables on the ATARI involve a 
considerable variation from other forms of BASIC and these 
differences must also be explored. Both arrays and the 
matrix are introduced in this lesson. 


LESSON VII: Computer Functions 

The most useful of the computer, mathematical and 
scientific functions programmed into BASIC, are discussed 
in this lesson. Two purposes are accomplished by the 
introduction of computer functions through the manipulation 
of string variables, first it can be the vehicle for the 
introduction of several commands, (ASC) which will give the 
ASCII code (American Standard Code for Information 
Interchange), for any symbol, (CHR$) produces the Character 
string for an ASCII number, and (LEN) will give the length 
of a particular string. The other feature of this exercise 
is the development of an understanding of the use of the 



36 


ASCII code. Random (RND) allows a random number to be 
selected, when used with the integer (INT) function, the 
number can be defined within specific limits. The number 
can then be used in a program, for example the numbers 
between 1 and 6 which could be used to simulate the throw 
of a dice, are used in an exercise to illustrate this 
function. Other functions explored here are: (ABS) for the 
absolute value, (SQR) Square root, (LOG) will give the 
logarithmic value, (SIN) sine, and (COS) cosine return 
those mathematical values. 

LESSON VIII: Sound, Color, and Graphics 

The introduction of sound, color and graphics at this 
time in the program, is to add interest and motivate the 
student to use the programming techniques learned up to 
this point in the course. The sound portion of the lesson 
will examine voice, pitch, note, and volume within the 
SOUND statement, exercises will emphasize sound effects and 
music. Color will be introduced by the use of The SETCOLOR 
statement, including use of color registers, color codes, 
and luminance. The graphics modes, including text and 
graphics will be included in the exercises which will 
display the various screens, colors, and size of text. 



Evaluation and Summary 


Sample testing instruments will be included and may be 
used as a summarizing or evaluative technique. These 
testing instruments will include both written questions and 
problems in computer programming, and practical exercise 
problems for demonstration of computer skills. 




CHAPTER V 


CLASSROOM USE OF THE WORKBOOK 


The various lessons of the workbook have been used at 
every level from the upper grades in an elementary school, 
to in-service classes with adults. At the elementary level 
several of the lessons were presented to students of the 
Chatsworth Park Elementary School Computer Club, The 
response was enthusiastic, the ability of these young 
students (5th and 6th graders) to grasp the concepts 
presented, even though two computers had to be shared by 
groups of up to 10 students, was remarkable. In addition 
several of the lessons were taken into each of the sixth 
grade classes of the school, again only two computers were 
available, each student was able to type only one item, but 
they were fascinated and very adept at acquiring computer 
skills. 

The entire Workbook was used on a trial basis with 
computer classes at Columbus Junior High School and Canoga 
Park High School, including grades seven to twelve. At the 
secondary level, with the time frame of a regular public 
school semester in Los Angeles, it has been necessary to 
supplement this material with a textbook. The current 
choice for a secondary text is Programming in Basic, 


38 



(Cummins, 1983) 


Perhaps the most successful trial use of the material 
to date has been with adult in-service classes. Much of 
the workbook material was tried with the faculties of 
Columbus Junior High and Canoga Park High School. 


Classroom Evaluation 

Generally there are two purposes in evaluating 
materials, first to insure the effectiveness of the 
program, and secondly to locate areas where changes are 
needed in order to improve instruction and student 
retention. 

The workbook material was evaluated by either orally 
questioning the students before beginning each 
instructional session, to determine their level of 
expertise on the subject of computers, or the use of a 
written pre-test, to determine attitude and knowledge. At 
the conclusion of each session the students were given 
written worksheets, quizzes, or practical tests to complete 
as post-testing instruments. The evaluation of student 
response to the presentation, and their performance on the 
post-testing instruments, was used to revise some of the 
materials. An example of this was the elimination of 
several items of technical information relating to the 
integrated circuit chips which provide sound and color 




capability within the machine, this material proved to be 
of little interest and unnecessary to the teaching of 
BASIC, therefore it was dropped from the workbook and the 
questions eliminated from the testing instruments. 

In several instances product changes have required 
changes in the lessons. The introduction of the 800XL 
model is an example of an equipment change which has 
required several changes in the lessons to account for its 
differences. 


Projected use of the Workbook 

While the workbook is designed for an introductory 
course in ATARI BASIC, the individual lessons, taken 
separately would make effective springboard activities for 
the introduction of each included topic area. The 
"keyboard" exercises in lesson one, for example, are an 
effective way to begin any course using the ATARI, or ATARI 
software. The section dealing with Algebraic expressions 
in lesson two would be helpful to a math teacher in 
teaching students to translate formulas for use with the 
computer. Lessons, or activities from the lessons would 
also provide effective summaries for a unit of instruction. 
Art or music teachers could use the color or sound lesson 
to demonstrate and summarize principles in their fields. 
With proper structuring the activities could be used for 




the evaluation of instruction, use of exercises in 
mathematical functions and concepts, to test student 
knowledge in those areas, would be an example of how this 
could be accomplished. 

This workbook material can be used in the upper grades 
of an elementary classroom, to develop or expand the 
understanding of programming and mathematical skills. 
Programming classes in both Junior and Senior High Schools, 
and adult in-service classes for teachers would both be 
effective areas for the use of this material. 

Additionally, the material used by an individual beginning 
the exploration of programming in BASIC is possible. 

Almost any instructional situation where a microcomputer, 
particularly ATARI hardware is featured, would provide an 
effective setting for the workbook, either as the primary 
instructional material or as a resource document. 


Summary 

Evaluation of the workbook through classroom testing 
has played an important part in the development of these 
instructional materials. At each level where it has been 
used, the material has proven effective. When a better 
means of putting an idea across was indicated, new ideas 
were encountered, or new equipment was introduced, the 
material was changed to reflect or incorporate the new 







products and ideas. 

The use of individual lessons, activities, and the 
complete workbook were reviewed. Possible extended use of 
each, was discussed, but development of the work in this 
project has merely opened a door to a new areas of 
exploration. There is a need for advanced courses in 
BASIC, and courses in other languages like LOGO, and 
PASCAL. Development of instruction in programming to take 
advantage of the data or file management capabilities of 
the computer systems are needed. Finally the development 
of instruction in application programming where the student 
can learn to apply programming techniques for useful 
purposes, would prove beneficial. 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Albrecht, Bob, Finkel, LeRoy, Brown, J.L. ATARI BASIC . 

John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York, New York, 1979. 

ATARI Corp. Invitation to Programming 1&2. ATARI ,Inc., 
Sunnyvale, Ca., 1981. 

Bell, Norman. A computer Awareness Program for All 
Teachers and All Students. T.H.E. Journal Technical 
Horizons in Education . September, 1983, Pp. 138-141. 

Bell, Hon. T. H. Effective use of Computers In Schools 
Requires Coordinated Developement. T.H.E. Journal 
Technical Horizons In Education . February, 1984, Pp. 80-83. 

Bonner, Paul. Computer Programming: What's In It For You? 
Personal Computing, August , 1983, Pp. 128-137. 

Is A Computer Hard To Learn? Consumer Reports, September, 
1983, P. 488. ”” 

The Computer Primer. Electronic Learning, March/April, 

1982, Pp.21-22. ‘ 

Cummins, Jerry, Kuechmann, G. Programming in BASIC , 

Charles E. Merril Publishing CoT Columbus, Ohio, 1*983. 

DeVault, Vere, Harvey, J.G. Teacher Education and 
Curriculum Development in Computer Education. T.H.E. 

Journal Technical Horizons in Education, March, 1985. Pp. 
83-86. 

Frenkel, Cindy. How To Program Success Into Your Computer. 
Family Computing. September, 1983, Pp. 44-48. 


Hopping, Lorraine. Eight Ways To Learn About Computers. 
Family Computing , October, 1983, Pp. 56-59. 

Luehrmann, Arthur. Don't Feel Bad About Teaching Basic. 
Electronic Learning , September 1982, Pp. 23-24. 

Martin, Diane, Heller, R. Presenting Computer Literacy for 
the B.C. Generation at the Smithsonian Institution. T.H.E. 
Journal Technological Horizons in Education , January 1984, 
Pp. 125-126. 


People In computing. Personal Computing. December, 1983, 
Pp. 15-17. 



Poole, Lon, McNiff, M. Cook, S 
Osborne/McGraw-Hill, Berkeley, 


Your ATARI Computer, 


Tandy Corp. Introduction to BASIC . Radio Shack. Tandy 
Corp., Fort Worth, Texas, 1979. 

Walker, Decker. Reflections on the Potential And 
Limitations of Microcomputers. Phi Delta Kappan, October, 
1983, Pp. 103-107. 



APPENDIX A 


INTRODUCTION TO BASIC PROGRAMMING 


A STUDENT WORKBOOK FOR THE ATARI 




INTRODUCTION TO BASIC PROGRAMMING: 


A STUDENT WORKBOOK FOR THE ATARI 


This workbook will give an introduction to the 
microcomputer. Lesson one will familiarize the student 
with the ATARI keyboard and the screen editing procedures. 
Lesson two will introduce the concepts of BASIC programming 
statements and commands, and explore the treatment of 
mathematical functions on the computer. Lesson three will 
introduce program planning and the use of computer 
peripherals, including the disk drive and the printer. In 
lesson four, we will expand on the understanding of 
programming features. Lesson five will look at the BASIC 
concepts of branching and loops. The treatment of 
variables in BASIC is developed in lesson six. Lesson 
seven will explore functions programmed into the computer. 
In the concluding lesson, lesson eight, we will be 
introduced to the use of sound, color, and graphics in 
programming. 

TO THE STUDENT: 

As you work through these lessons you will be given 
very explicit instructions at some points and very general 
ones at other times. When instructions and programs are 
given it, is important that you follow them carefully until 
you understand the principles involved completely. You 



should then feel free to explore the area to see what you 
can do to expand your understanding and enjoyment of the 
computer and your programming skills. 

TO THE TEACHER: 

In this workbook there is sufficient material to teach 
a course in beginning BASIC. As you become more familiar 
with ATARI BASIC you will be able to add to the material 
and make it more interesting. The student should be 
encouraged to continue exploring each of the areas 
presented here. Those who complete this workbook should 
have a good start in understanding BASIC programming. 




LESSON I: 


Introduction to the Microcomputer 
Purpose: The student will learn about the ATARI computer, 
the peripherals, and how to "hook-up" the equipment. There 
will be an exploratory experience with the computer 
keyboard, and keyboard editing. 

NOTE: All answers will appear in parentheses. 

Introduction is presented as a lecture by 
the instructor. 

1. Introduction to the terminology. 

CPU: Central Processing unit: the heart of the 

computer, ATARI uses the (6502 MICRO PROCESSOR), 
integrated circuit chip, the same as the APPLE. 

Bit: The basic numerical unit for the (digital) 
computer, "ON" counts as one, "OFF" would 
represent zero. 

Byte: The binary configuration of eight bits, 
it can represent a number up to (255) in 
decimal numerals. 

K (kilobytes): One thousand bytes, actually 1024, 

used to figure computer memory, 64 K represents 
(64 THOUSAND) bytes of memory. It takes one 
byte to put one character on the screen. 

ROM: Read only Memory, this is where all the (BUILT IN) 
functions of the computer reside, this memory 
cannot be erased, and is available each time the 



49 


computer is turned on. 

RAM: Random Access Memory, where programs and data 

are (STORED) in the computer, is erased each time 
the power to the computer is turned off. 

Languages: Allows human communication with the 

(COMPUTER), BASIC, LOGO, PASCAL, FORTRAN, COBAL, 

C, AND FORTH are the most popular currently in use. 

Cursor: Blinking square on the screen to show where 
next (CHARACTER TYPED) will appear. 

Cartridges: ROM Programs, such as languages, 

word or data processors, and games; these plug 
into a (CARTRIDGE SLOT) for instant use. 

2. Introduction to machine hardware (PERIPHERAL 

DEVICES), and hookup: 

NOTE: hardware assembly will require demonstration 
by the instructor. 

Video: 

T.V.: ATARI uses (CHANNEL 2 or 3), attach 

adaptor, provided, to VHF connector, cable is also 
provided, may permit some outside interference with 
picture, but provides for full color and sound. 
Monitor: May be (MONOCHROMATIC) or full 
color, with or without sound, no outside 
(INTERFERENCE), requires purchase of separate cable s 
may be more or less expensive depending 
on resolution and quality. 




50 


Power pack: (TRANSFORMERS), necessary for all 

components with integrated circuits, these decrease 
the voltage to prevent (ELECTRICAL ARCING) 
within the microscopic circuits of the components. 
CAUTION: USE ONLY THE POWER PACK INTENDED FOR THE 
PARTICULAR COMPONENT. 

Cassette Recorder: Slow but inexpensive (STORAGE 
DEVICE), 

has sequential rather than (RANDOM ACCESS), main 
advantage is sound capability, making narration 
of programs possible. 

Disk Drive: Fast (HIGH VOLUME) storage device, uses 
random access, more dependable, but also more 
expensive . 

Interface: (TRANSLATES) computer signals for use 
with printer or modem. 

Printer: Several (TYPES), will be discussed later, it 
allows production of "hard" copy of material. 

Modem: Permits communication between (COMPUTERS) 
and "bulletin board", information services 
through the use of the (TELEPHONE). 

3. Turning on: 

1) Video, This component needs time to (WARM UP). 

2) Computer, All ATARIs can be turned on with or 
without the BASIC language being engaged. 

400 - 800 Models: Will come on in (MEMO-PAD) mode 



if the BASIC cartridge is not plugged in. 

XL Models: Will come on in the (TEST MODE) if 
BASIC is disengaged by holding the 
(OPTION KEY) when turning on the 
machine, this is also necessary when 
loading a program which does not require BASIC. 
800XL Test Mode: Allows testing various aspects of 
the CPU, such as: (MEMORY, KEYBOARD, and 
AUDIO/VISUAL) 

3) Other Peripherals: Turning on, will be discussed 
as they are introduced. 

The ATARI Keyboard: 

Arrangement of (ALPHA-NUMERIC) keys (letters and 

Numbers), is the same as a standard typewriter. 

In addition there are many (specialized) 

keys on the keyboard. 

CONTROL (CTRL) and SHIFT KEYS: Must be pushed down 
(BEFORE) and then (HELD DOWN) when using 
with another key, they do (NOTHING) 
by themselves. 

RETURN KEY: Is used to (ENTER) information 

into the computer's (MEMORY). The computer 
will not recognize, acknowledge, or 
perform any activity until it has been 
(ENTER)ed. Pushing down the RETURN key 
tells the (COMPUTER) that you are finished. 

Then it interprets your line and gives an 




(ERROR) message if it does not understand what 
to do with what you have written. The RETURN key 
must be used to ENTER BASIC (COMMANDS) or 
(STATEMENTS) into the computer. 

BREAK KEY: Brings activity to a (HALT), or (STOPS) a 
program RUN. You can usually start again by 
typing (CONT) but not always, so 
be careful about hitting it by accident. 

NOTE: The BREAK key may be used to advance the cursor to 
the next line on the screen without getting an ERROR 
message. When experimenting with the keyboard, use the 
BREAK key rather than the RETURN key to advance the cursor. 
ESC (ESCAPE) KEY: Has various functions; 

1) May be used in programming to (DELAY) 
action of functions which would normally 
take place immediately upon pushing a key. 
Example: Clearing the screen or 

Ringing (BUZZER). 

2) It can be programmed to perform different 
functions depending upon the needs of the 
program or software used. It is pushed down 
one time before pushing another key. It is 
(NEVER) used while holding down another key. 

In (BASIC), it is always used in sequence 
to (SUSPEND) activities. 

NOTE: This part of the exercise should be introduced by the 



instructor 


ATARI Keyboard Exercise: 

1) Turn on Video, 2) turn on Computer, you see (READY) on 
the screen. 

START: By typing each key alone to see what it does, record 
the results on the chart below. If nothing seems to happen 
when you push the key, then try typing several letters and 
see if anything has changed. 

Notice what happens when a key is held down (CHARACTER 
REPEATS) 

Notice what happens when the cursor gets to the end of a 
line without pushing the BREAK or RETURN key (JUMPS) to 
beginning of next line. 

For this exercise use the (BREAK) key rather than the 
(RETURN) key to avoid getting (ERROR) messages. 

NEXT: HOLD DOWN the SHIFT key and type the key again, 
record the results (hold key down if necessary to observe 
difference). 

FINALLY: Adjust sound to hear a (BUZZER), when each key is 
depressed then, HOLD DOWN the CONTROL key and push each key 
a third time, record the results. Typing another character 
following, is sometimes necessary, to see the results of 
using a key with CONTROL. It may be necessary to move the 
cursor with the CONTROL (CTRL)+ one of the four (ARROW) 
keys to the middle of a line of characters to obtain the 
desired results. 


Student Exercise 1: 




54 


Student Exercise 1: 


KEYBOARD 

: 


SYMBOLS 

SHIFT + KEY 

CONTROL + KEY 

1/! 

(EXCLAMATION) 

(CURSOR WILL DISAPPEAR) 

2/" 

(QUOTES) 

(BUZZER SOUNDS) 

3/# 

(NUMBER) 

(ERROR MESSAGE) 

4/$ 

($ DOLLAR) 

(4 TO 9 NOTHING HAPPENS 

5/% 

(PER CENT) 


6/& 

(AMPERSAND AND) 


ir 

(APOSTROPHE) 


8/@ 

(AT) 


9/( 

(OPEN PAREN) 


o/) 

(CLOSE PAREN) 


NOTE: PARENTHESES: (ARE GROUPING SYMBOLS IN BASIC) 

,/[ 

(BRACKET) 


./] 

(BRACKET) 


/ ? 

(QUESTION SHORT 

FOR PRINT) 


(SLASH USED FOR 

DIVISION) 


ALPHABET (UPPER CASE) (GRAPHICS CHARACTERS) 

CLEAR/< (CLEARS SCREEN) (ALSO CLEARS SCREEN) 

NOTE: It will be necessary to have several lines of text on 
the screen for the next part of this exercise. 

INSERT/> (INSERTS LINE) (INSERTS SPACE) 

DELETE/ 

BACK SPACE (DELETES LINE) (DELETES SPACE) 

TAB (SETS STOPS) (CLEARS STOPS) 


NOTE: Default stops: (those set when machine is turned on), 



55 


are 6 spaces for the first and 8 spaces for the 
remaining stops. 

-/_/1 (UNDERLINES) (CURSOR UP ONE SPACE) 

(- HYPHEN OR MINUS SIGN) 

»/|/J, (VERTICAL BAR) (CURSOR DOWN ONE SPACE) 

+/\/«- (REVERSE SLASH) (CURSOR LEFT ONE SPACE) 

*/ A /-» (CARET) (CURSOR RIGHT ONE SPACE) 

(ASTERISK USED FOR MULTIPLICATION, 

CARET USED FOR POWERS) 

NOTE: Cursor movement continues as long as ARROW keys are 
(HELD DOWN), when it reaches the edge of the screen it 
(JUMPS) to the opposite edge. 

CAPS key (UPPER CASE) (GRAPHICS CHARACTERS) 

NOTE: Default for CAPS = CAPITALS when machine comes on, 
push key one time alone for lower case, once with CTRL key 
for graphics characters, once with shift key will return to 
regular (UPPER CASE) characters. 

INVERSE KEY (BLACK/WHITE): Push (ONE TIME) to give 
inverse characters, (ONCE MORE) to 
return to normal. 

Student Exercise 2: 

KEYBOARD USE AND SCREEN EDITING 

Use the BREAK KEY or CTRL + ARROW KEYS to move the cursor 
to the next line. DO NOT use the (RETURN) key which will 
give an ERROR message. 

1. Make an alphabet of 2 of each letter. 
(AABBCCDDEEFFGG etc.) 



56 


Notice, it is in (UPPER) case, and that it 
wraps around (JUMPS) to the next line, use of the 
RETURN key is NOT necessary at the end of the 
line. Hit the BREAK key at the end of the entire 
alphabet, to move to the beginning of the next line. 

2. Push the CAPS key ONE time, then make another 
double alphabet. (aabbccddeeffgg etc.) 

This one is in (LOWER) case. 

Now hold the SHIFT key and push the (CAPS) key 
to exit the lower case. 

3. Push the INVERSE key and make a single alphabet, 
this time it will be in (INVERSE) video. 

Push the INVERSE key one more time to get back 
to normal. 

4. Hold the CTRL key and push the CAPS key. 

Type another single alphabet. This one 

is really different! It is in a (GRAPHICS) mode 
Remember to push CAPS once to get back to the 
regular characters. 

5. Hold the CTRL KEY + the four (ARROW) keys 
to move the cursor all around the screen. 

Move to the the upper left corner, the upper 
right, the lower right, the lower left. Now, aim 
straight off the top of the screen. What happened? 
The cursor (JUMPED) to the (BOTTOM) of the 
screen. Try going off the left or the right. 

Try the bottom, this is called (WRAP) around. 


57 


6. Move the cursor back up the screen, using the 
(CONTROL) + (UP) ARROW key, to the first alphabet 
you typed, the UPPER CASE alphabet. Change the 
second letter in each pair to an X. Use CTRL + 
the (LEFT) ARROW key to place the cursor, 

then just type over the old letter. The alphabet 
should now look like this: AXBXCXDXEXFX etc. 

7. Move the cursor to the LOWER CASE alphabet. 
Eliminate 1 letter of every pair. Just typing over 
that letter will remove it, but there would be a 
(BLANK) left. So, use the CTRL key + 

DELETE/BACK SPACE to get rid of the spaces. 

Notice: the space was filled as the character 

was deleted. CTRL + DELETE BACK SPACE removes 
(ONE) space or character each time it is pushed. 
Your alphabet should read: abcdef etc. 

8. CAREFUL NOW. Take the cursor to the line with 
the inverse video. SHIFT + DELETE BACK SPACE will 
(DELETE) an entire (LINE). This is a LOGICAL line, 
which may be up to (THREE) physical lines on the 
screen. A logical line ends whenever the 
(RETURN) key is pushed. Hold down SHIFT and 

push DELETE. The entire inverse alphabet 
(DISAPPEARED). 

9. Move to the first letter of the lower case 
alphabet and try holding SHIFT + INSERT key. 

This will (INSERT) an entire line above 





the cursor 


10. Move to the lower case alphabet again and 

add a second letter back into it. Use (CONTROL) 

+ INSERT to do this. Place the cursor over the 
letter "b" to insert the space, and type a second 
letter "a”. Use CTRL + (ARROW) to move over 
the "b". You should end up with: aabbccddeeff etc. 

11. To CLEAR the screen. Use (SHIFT) + CLEAR, 
or(CONTROL) + CLEAR. They will both accomplish 
the same thing. 

12. To use the keyboard graphics to draw 
a picture, (CONTROL) + (CAPS) will 

lock the computer into the graphics mode. 

Can you draw a wagon, a car, or something 
interesting? 

Have FUN! 

13. How would you make inverse graphics? Push the 
(INVERSE) key then (CONTROL) + (CAPS). 

NOTE: The instructor should review and demonstrate all 
covered material at this point. 

QUIZ: (This is a practical quiz to be taken at the keyboard 
and observed by the instructor.) 

ATARI KEYBOARD QUIZ 
*** Do NOT write below this line. *** 

One point for each item correctly completed. 

You may proceed with the first four items. 

_1) Type first name in Capital letters. 





2) Move cursor to next line type last name in lower 
case with only the first letter capitalized. 

3) Type your address, number and street, use upper 
and lower case letters. 

4) Sound the buzzer and wait for the instructor. 

*** WAIT *** 

5) Move the cursor to the line where your first 
name appears, replace it with inverse video. 

6) Delete the line with your last name on it. 

7) Clear the screen. 

SCORE 



LESSON II: 


Meeting ATARI BASIC 

Purpose: This lesson will introduce students to computer 

commands in the BASIC language. They will learn to use 
direct commands to produce text and mathematical answers on 
the screen. 

BASIC - Beginner's All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code. 

Student Exercise 1: 

THE PRINT COMMAND 

Look at each item below, what do you think will be 
displayed if each is typed into the computer? 

Write down your prediction before turning on the 
computer. Then, TYPE and ENTER each line EXACTLY 
as it appears. Use the (RETURN) key to enter 
each item. Record the computer's answer. 

TYPE STUDENT ANSWER COMPUTER ANSWER 


1) 

2 + 5 


(ERROR) 

2) 

PRINT 

2 + 5 

(7) 

3) 

PRINT 

HELLO 

(0) 

4) 

PRINT 

"HELLO" 

(HELLO) 

5) 

PRINT 

"hello" 

(hello) 

6) 

print 

"OOPS" 

(ERROR) 

7) 

PRINT 

"this is ok" 

(this is ok) 

8) 

PRINT 

"25@ *$*+.?>" 

(25@'$#+.?>) 

No 

tice: When following PRINT 

(EVERYTHING) within the 





quotation marks will be displayed (EXACTLY) as it is TYPED 
The computer does (NOT) perform any operation on anything 
within them. 


Student Exercise 2: 

MATH SYMBOLS AND ORDER OF FUNCTIONS 
SYMBOLS: Addition ( + ), Subtraction (-), 

Multiplication (*), Division (/) 

Exponentiation (*). 

Indicate what you think the answer for each of the 
following is. Then type each EXACTLY. 

Remember: Press RETURN to ENTER the line when you have 
finished typing it. 

TYPE STUDENT ANSWER COMPUTER ANSWER 

1) PRINT "3-3" _ (3-3) 

2) PRINT "7*7 _ (7*7) 

3) PRINT 4*4 (16) 

4) PRINT 10/2+4-5 _ (4) 

5) PRINT 8-2*3/2 _ (5) 

6) PRINT 26+6/2-8 (21) 

7) PRINT (3*6) /(3*3)_ (2) 

8) PRINT 3*6/3*3 (18) 

9) PRINT 2*2 _ (4) 

Rules on the order of OPERATIONS: The computer follows th 
rules of (ALGEBRA) and performs (OPERATIONS) according to 
the following: 

WORKING from (LEFT) to (RIGHT) through the problem, 




FIRST: it checks for (GROUPING SYMBOLS), performing 
any operations within (PARENTHESES). 

SECOND: it performs any (EXPONENTIATION), 
raising each to its (POWER). 

THIRD: it finds and performs, still from left to right, 
any (MULTIPLICATION) or (DIVISION). 

LAST: left to right, it performs all (ADDITION) and 
(SUBTRACTION). 

Try a few more difficult problems to be sure you've got it 


correct. 


By the way, most microcomputers allow you to use a question 


mark "?" instead of having to type out 
PRINT. 

TYPE STUDENT ANSWER 

1) ? 25+(6/2-2)-8 _ 

2) ? 200/(3+2)*2-60 _ 

3) ? (6-2)*2*5 _ 

4) ? 5+2*8*5 _ 

5) ? (4/2+2)*3+(2+2)-12_ 

6) ? 3 A 2+6*4/2 A 2 _ 


the entire word 

COMPUTER ANSWER 
(18) 

( 20 ) 

(40) 

(85) 

( 4 ) 

(15) 


Student Exercise 3: (OPTIONAL) 

ALGEBRAIC EXPRESSIONS 

One of the things BASIC does well, is deal with ALGEBRAIC 
expressions. 

These expressions must be re-written to conform to the 
principles of BASIC. 





Compare, then evaluate the following: 


ALGEBRAIC EXPRESSION 

BASIC EXPRESSION 

EVALUATION 

1) 3*" +7X5-4-J-2 

?3 A 2+7*5-4/2 

(42) 

2) 6X4+5 l -r 1-7 

?6*4+5 A 2/1-7 

(42) 

TRY THIS ONE: 



3) 4X3-l + 2 3 -f4 

?(4*3-l+2 A 3/4) 

(13) 

6X7-2 

4) 3* +-5 

3*8-4 

?3 A 2+(6*7-2)/(3*8~4)-5 

(6) 

3(6+10) 

5) 2 + - 

?2+(3*(6+10))/(2*(20+4) 

(3) 


2(20+4) 

Student Exercise 4: 

BASIC NUMBERS 

What about numbers in BASIC? They don’t always look the 
way you might expect them to. Some numbers must be typed 
into the computer differently than they would as a regular 
decimal number. (COMMAS) cannot be used in a BASIC number 
because they are used to separate DATA, or to display 
items in various print zones on the screen. 

For example: 7123,456,789 will appear: 

(123 456 789). 

For very large and very small numbers BASIC uses a 
variation of SCIENTIFIC NOTATION to display the numbers. 
Compare the following: 

BASIC NOTATION SCIENTIFIC NOTATION E-NOTATION 

1) 321000000000 3.21X10" 3.21E+11 

2) 0.00000321 3.21X10" 6 3.21E-06 



You may have noticed that the power of ten in the number in 
scientific notation and the portion of the number in 
E-notation following the "E" are similar, leading you to 
conclude the ”E" stands for (EXPONENT). 

Try these: 7321000000000 AND 70.00000321 are the results 
the same as the E-notation examples above? (YES) 

What about these? 

3) 0.000765 (7.65X10* 4 ) 

Try some problems: 

PROBLEM ANS: E-N0TATI0N 

4) 5E+05+4E+02 (5.004E+05) 

5) 3.2E-02+3.2E+02 (3.20032E+02) 

6) 45,000X.00023 (1.035E+01) 

INTERESTING BITS OF INFORMATION: 

This information is useful for screen editing, setting up 
program lines, of placement of screen graphics. 

A Physical line is (38) characters or columns. It is 
referred to as a 40 column line, but the left margin is set 
in 2 spaces from the edge due to the curved corners cutting 
into the display on some T.V. screens. This can be 
eliminated and all 40 spaces used. 

A Logical line is (114) characters normally, but it can 
be made to take 120. A bell rings at 107 to remind you to 
stop. All characters beyond the 114, are ignored by the 
computer. A logical line can be 1, 2, or 3 physical lines. 


(7.65E-04) 

DECIMAL FORM 
(500400) 
(320.032) 
(10.35) 




The shortest logical line is (1 CHARACTER). Pushing the 
(RETURN) key indicates the end of the logical line. 
Understanding the difference between a logical and a 
physical line will help in screen editing, since pushing 
CTRL + DELETE removes a (LOGICAL) line rather than a 
(PHYSICAL) line. 

A Program line is treated as a logical line. The 
Computer acts as if it is 1 line. Many programs are 
written in only one line. Try typing this: 

FOR 1=1 TO 722: ?"A";:NEXT I:?"PHEW!" (REMEMBER PUSH 
RETURN) To check the amount of memory (ROM), type the 
following: PRINT FRE(O). A special print statement will 

tell us exactly how much memory (bytes) we have 

left for use. Type PRINT FRE(O) and hit RETURN. How 
many bytes do you have? (?) Push the RESET key. Type 
PRINT FRE(O) again and write the number (?). Are they the 
same? (NO) Why not? (THE CHARACTERS USED IN THE SECOND 
LINE USED SOME BYTES OF MEMORY). 

PROGRAMMED MODE or DEFERRED MODE: 

Everything that we have done so far has been in DIRECT or 
(COMMAND) MODE. This means that the computer was 
instructed to do something as soon as the (RETURN) key was 
pressed. Programmed or Deferred mode provides the computer 
with a list of one or more operations. Then, when ready, 
the computer is told to do all of them in order one after 
another. 

For this, we must use a (PROGRAM LINE) to tell the computer 




66 


what order to do each item. To start the "execution'* of 
the program, we "RUN" it, type (RUN). This is a COMMAND 
which tells the computer to do anything that it has been 
programmed to do. 

To get rid of an old program when we want to do something 
different, we must type (NEW) or turn off the machine. 

Then the computer will empty its (RAM), ready for fresh 
information, or new directions. 

Student Exercise 5: 

It is time for your first program: 

TYPE THE FOLLOWING: Don't forget to push the RETURN, <R> 

key at the end of each line to ENTER or EXECUTE it. 

TYPE EXACTLY: 

10 PRINT "HOW" <R> 

20 PRINT "ARE" <R> 

30 PRINT "YOU?" <R> 

CHECK for errors, if there are any move the cursor to that 
point and make the necessary corrections. Don't forget <R> 
after each line has been corrected. 

NOW TYPE: 

RUN <R> 

What do you see on the screen? 

(HOW) 

(ARE) 

(YOU?) 

CLEAR the screen SHIFT + CLEAR. Is the program gone? (NO) 
The computer doesn't forget the program just because it has 


been RUN 



TYPE: RUN <R>, again. What happened this time? (SAME). 

NOW TYPE: LIST <R>. What happened? (THE PROGRAM LINES WERE 
PUT BACK ON THE SCREEN IN THE ORDER OF THE LINE NUMBERS). 
CLEAR the screen again. 

TYPE: NEW <R>, RUN <R>, what happened? (NOTHING). 

TYPE: LIST <R>, did anything happen? (NO). 

Is the program really gone this time? (YES). 

No two program lines can have the same (LINE NUMBER). When 
you type the same number a second time, what happens to the 
first one? 

TYPE and RUN the following to find out. 

10 ? "LINE 10 ONCE" <R> 

10 ? "LINE 10 TWICE" <R> 

20 END <R> 

RUN <R> 

The first line was eliminated automatically. 

The LINE NUMBER determines the (ORDER) of the program 
execution. 

TYPE: NEW <R>, DON'T FORGET THE <R>, NO MORE REMINDERS. 
TYPE: 

30 ? "SINK" 

10 ? "SWIM" 

20 ? "OR" 

40 END 
RUN 

NOW TYPE: 

5 ? "EITHER" 

TYPE: RUN, what was the result (RUN) of this program? 

(EITHER) 

(SWIM) 

(OR) 

(SINK) 




TYPE: LIST 20, what happened? (LINE 20 APPEARED ON THE 
SCREEN). 

TYPE: LIST 20,40, what happened? (LINES 20, 30, AND 40 
APPEARED). 

TYPE: L., what happened? 

(THE PROGRAM LINES WERE PUT BACK ON THE SCREEN IN THE ORDER 
OF THE LINE NUMBERS). 

NOTE: L. is an acceptable abbreviation for LIST. 

At times it is convenient to put things in your program to 
explain what a particular part of the program is doing, but 
you may not want it to show on the screen. 

TRY THIS: 

2 WILL THIS APPEAR ON THE SCREEN? 

WHOOPS!!!!!, An ERROR message! 

TRY AGAIN: 

2 REM WILL THIS APPEAR ON THE SCREEN? 

RUN: did it appear? (NO). 

REM stands for REMARK, abbreviated (.) and is used for 
documenting a program, or it explains what something in the 
program does. 

REVIEW: 

Definitions, commands, and statements. 

BASIC: (BEGINNER’S ALL-PURPOSE SYMBOLIC 

INSTRUCTION CODE). 

RAM: (RANDOM ACCESS MEMORY). 

(READ ONLY MEMORY). 


ROM: 







STATEMENTS: 


(TO BE EXECUTED LATER) 


REM: (.) (REMARK, FOR DOCUMENTING PROGRAM). 

PRINT: (?) (CAUSES MATERIAL TO BE DISPLAYED 
ON THE SCREEN). 

COMMAND: (EXECUTED AS SOON AS RETURN IS PUSHED) 

PRINT: (?) (MAY BE EITHER COMMAND OR STATEMENT). 

RUN: (CAUSES PROGRAM TO BE EXECUTED). 

LIST: (L.) (CAUSES PROGRAM LINES 

TO BE DISPLAYED ON SCREEN IN 
NUMERICAL ORDER). 

NEW: (ERASES RAM, OR DELETES 

PREVIOUS PROGRAM). 

The BASIC language acts as an (INTERPRETER), it takes 
English and translates it so the computer's micro processo 
can understand it. Conversely, it takes what the 
(COMPUTER) says and lets us understand it. 


LESSON Ills 


Steps in Planning, Saving, and Printing a Program 
Purpose: This lesson will give the student an experience in 
planning a program through the use of flow charts. Then 
practice in the essential skills of operating a Disk Drive 
and formatting a Disk will be given. The use and operation 
of the Printer will be presented. 

Program Development: 

When an essay is written certain procedures are followed. 
First the assignment must be understood, then the plan of 
what is to be written must be put together. This is put on 
paper in the form of an outline, then the essay is written. 
It is edited to make sure there are no mistakes. Finally 
it is turned in. When a program is written essentially the 
same steps are followed. 

FIRST: (UNDERSTAND THE SITUATION). 

SECOND: (OUTLINE THE PROCEDURES). 

THIRD: (WRITE THE PROGRAM). 

FINALLY: (RUN THE PROGRAM AND "DEBUG” IT). 

Student Exercise: 1 

Suppose your assignment is to write a program to display 
the the numbers from one to ten, then compute and give 
their sum. 


FIRST: The Situation: (THE NUMBERS FROM FROM ONE TO TEN 




MUST APPEAR ON THE SCREEN. THEY MUST BE ADDED TOGETHER AND 


THEIR SUM DISPLAYED). 


SECOND: OUTLINE THE PROCEDURES, Would a FLOW CHART help? 


SYMBOLS 

CD 

□ 



H 


FUNCTION 
(START/STOP) 
(INPUT/OUTPUT) 
(OPERATIONS) 
(DECISIONS) 
(DIRECTION OF FLOW) 


THIRD: WRITE THE PROGRAM, 


10 LET NUMBER=0 

20 LET NUMBER=NUMBER+1 

30 LET SUM=SUM + NUMBER 

40 PRINT NUMBER 

50 IF NUMBER < 10 THEN 20 

60 PRINT SUM 

70 END 


FLOW CHART 

(*mf) 

/N-O/ 

_ 

= N fa 


[S»£4-N 





FOURTH: How would you test this program? (RUN AND DEBUG) 
DEBUG: means (GET ALL THE ERRORS OUT OF THE PROGRAM). 

TYPE, DEBUG, RUN, and LIST the program. Show the results 
to the instructor before continuing. 

SCORE: 


DISK DRIVE AND DOS 

DISK DRIVE: A high speed, RAM (RANDOM ACCESS MEMORY) 
storage device, for data or programs, expensive, 
must be handled with care. 

DISKETTES: (5 1/4) inch, floppy, single or 

double (SIDED), single or double density, soft 
(SECTORED). Most brands are OK. 





STRUCTURE: Mylar, with an (oxide) coating 

which stores information as (MAGNETIC) signals. 
Protective jacket has a fabric lining to keep clean, 
a drive window, (READ/WRITE) window,and a 
(WRITE PROTECT) notch. 

USE: To store large amounts of data or programs in a 
small area, very fast, convenient. 

CARE: 1) keep in protective (ENVELOPE), 

2) do NOT touch (READ/WRITE) window, 

3) keep away from anything (MAGNETIC), 

4) avoid extreme (TEMPERATURES), 

5) don't (BEND) or fold, 

6) keep away from food, drink, or dust. 

FORMAT: New disk is (BLANK), and may be used by any 

computer with a 5 1/4 inch drive, but must be Formatted or 
(INITIALIZED). For the ATARI, this process divides the 
disk magnetically into 40 tracks, or (RINGS) like those on 
a record, but invisible. Each track has 18 sections, which 
gives (720) sectors. 

TURNING ON MACHINES: following the correct procedure is 
very important here. 

1) (VIDEO) and (DRIVE) may be turned on 
simultaneously. Actually the VIDEO may be turned 
on at any stage of the procedure, but needs time 
to warm up. 

2) Insert disk with DOS (DISK OPERATING SYSTEM) 
in drive, (LABEL) or smooth side up. 





3) Lock disk in place, turn locking lever from 
(horizontal) to (vertical). 

4) Finally, turn on the computer. 

5) When (READY) appears on the screen, TYPE (DOS <R>), 
the disk operating system menu should appear on the screen 
We are looking at: Disk Operating System II Version 2.05 
Copyright 1980 ATARI. 

There are other operating systems available. 

MENU and USE OF ITEMS: allows the selection of any one 


item. Use only the (LETTER <R>). 


A. Disk Directory- 

B. RUN Cartridge- 

C. Copy File- 

D. Delete File(s)- 

E. Rename File- 

F. Lock File- 

G. Unlock File- 

H. Write DOS Files 


I. Format Disk- 

J. Duplicate Disk 

K. Binary Save 

L. Binary Load 

M. Run at Address 

N. Create Mem. Sav 

O. Duplicate File 


ITEM FUNCTIONS: Follow the prompts for each item to 
complete the function. 

A. Provides a list of (FILES) or (PROGRAMS) on the disk. 


B. Allows the use of any language, or software cartridge 
returns the machine to (BASIC) on the XL models. 

C. Makes it posible to duplicate a program at another 
location on the disk or a disk in another drive 

D. Allows a file to be (REMOVED) from the disk. 

E. Keeps the file but gives it a new (NAME). 

F. (LOCKS) the file so it can't be changed or erased. 

G. Unlocks the file so it can be replaced or (CHANGED). 

H. Puts DOS and DUP (DISK UTILITY PROGRAM), on the disk 





so programs can be stored there. 

I. Divides the disk into magnetic (SECTORS), for use 
with the ATARI. 

J. Allows the copying of the contents of an (ENTIRE) 
disk onto another disk. 

K. L, and M. Used with machine language programs. 

N. Prevents the erasing of a program if it is necessary 
to reload (DOS). Must be done before the program 

is typed. 

O. Permits the copying of a program or file 
on another disk. 

Student Exercise 2: 

FORMATTING A DISK: 

1. Turn on the (VIDEO) and the (DISK DRIVE). 

2. Insert an old Disk containing (DOS), lock it 
in place. 

3. Turn on the (COMPUTER). 

4. TYPE: (DOS) <R> to call or bring up the menu. 

5. Insert a new (DISK) in drive. 

6. TYPE: (A) <RXR> to check for anything 

on the disk, ERROR 144 means the disk hasn’t 
been (FORMATTED), if you are sure that the disk is 
new, that is if you just opened the box, 
skip step 6. 

7. TYPE: (H) <R>, to Format the Disk, watch the 


screen for instructions 




8. Answer the prompts, or questions on the screen: 

What drive...? TYPE: (1) <R>. 

If there is more than one drive, then type the number of 
the drive which contains the (NEW) disk. Be very careful 
that you don't format the OLD disk. 

Type "Y" to Format Disk? Type (Y) <R>. 

WARNING: FORMATTING WILL ERASE ANYTHING THAT MAY ALREADY BE 
ON THE DISK. Whenever you see Type "Y" to ...» STOP, 
think, and be sure, before continuing. 

Listen to formatting if drive is loud enough. Prompt will 
appear when disk is Formatted. 

9. Type: (A) <RXR> to check if formatting was 
successful. You should see (707) Free Sectors. 

10. Type: (H) <R> to Write DOS Files onto Formatted 
disk, see menu. Follow prompts: Drive..., (1) <R>. 
Then (Y) <R> to Write Files. 

11. When complete, prompt will appear. TYPE: 

(A) <R><R> again to check for DOS and DUP 
Files, prompt should read (626) free sectors. 

If you read 626 free sectors, congratulations: you have 
successfully formatted a disk. 

Wait for the instructor before going on. 

SCORE_ 

Student Exercise 3: 

SAVING A PROGRAM: 

It's time to SAVE your first program: 






76 


HELP how do we get back to BASIC? TYPE: (B <R>). 

TYPE: the following program. Don't forget <R>. Give 
your own information for items in lower case. 

10 ? "HELLO 

20 ? "MY NAME IS (your name) 

30 ? "GOODBYE 
40 GOTO 10 
50 END 

LIST, TYPE: (L.), correct any errors. Did you include your 
name? 

NOTICE: the (CLOSING QUOTES) have been included in the 
listing. 

TYPE, and RUN: How do we STOP this? (BREAK) key. 

Let's save the program: 

TYPE: SAVE "D:(name) <R> 

Did the busy light go on? 

Check the directory: 

TYPE: DOS <R>, when the DOS (MENU) comes up, <A>,<R><R>. 
Is your "name" on the directory? 

If so you have successfully saved your first program. 

Remove Disk from drive. Turn off computer. Turn off drive. 
RUNNING YOUR PROGRAM: 

Turn on (DRIVE). When (BUSY LIGHT) 
goes off, (INSERT) disk. Turn on (COMPUTER), 
when READY, call up (Type) (DOS). Call Disk 
Directory: (A) <R><R>. Identify correct name 
of File or (PROGRAM). 

TYPE: RUN "D:(name), just exactly the way you saved the 
program. Did your program RUN? GREAT! TRY, changing a 



77 


line then save the program again. Back to BASIC. 

TYPE: L0AD"D:(name), TYPE: L., is your program there? 

LOCK: your file, check the directory, what's different? 

(AN ASTERISK). 

DELETE: your file, what happened? (ERROR). 

UNLOCK: it and try DELETING again. Check the directory. 

Did it work this time? 

REMOVE disk before turning off hardware. 

FILENAMES and EXTENDERS: 

A Filename may contain up to (8) letters or 
(NUMBERS), must start with a (LETTER), contain 
no (SYMBOLS) or (SPACES). An (EXTENDER) 
of up to (3) letters or numbers may be added, 
to the end of a file name. Between the regular 
filename and the Extender, there must be a (PERIOD). 
Extenders frequently indicate the (LANGUAGE) 
used to execute the program, or a special software 
package like (AW, FOR ATARI WRITER). 

REMEMBER, 8 letters, a ".", and an extender (if used), 

NO spaces or symbols. 

USING A PRINTER: 

TYPES OF PRINTERS: 

DOT MATRIX: Most have 9X9 array of pins which impact 
the paper through a ribbon. They are fast, durable, 
and will do carbons, dittos, and graphics, but are 



(NOISY). The cost is moderate. 

LETTER QUALITY: Impacts through a (DAISY WHEEL), has very 
high quality, but is expensive, and slow and loud. 

INK JET: Shoots ink from a (CARTRIDGE) onto the paper. 
Very quiet, inexpensive, and durable. They are messy, 
and don't give an impression for carbons or dittos. 

THERMAL: Requires heat sensitive (PAPER), is very quiet, 
clean, inexpensive to buy, but expensive to operate, 
due to the cost of the paper. There is no impact on 
the paper. 

FEATURES to look for: 

FRICTION ROLLER: Allows the use of stationary, 
dittos, rolls and single sheets (OF PAPER). 

TRACTOR DRIVE: Provides for continuous (FEED) of 
folded paper or forms, and much more precise 
positioning of them. 

Having BOTH friction and tractor, is the best situation, 
but a friction roller is preferable in most cases if a 
choice must be made. 

INTERFACE: (TRANSLATES) computer language for 
the printer and other peripherals. 

CABLES: Must have the proper wiring and end 
(CONNECTORS), may have interface built in. 

CONTROLS: This information is specifically for the 

GEMENI 10X but applies to many Dot Matrix Printers. 

HOOK UP: Plugs into regular outlet, doesn’t require 

a transformer. Usually routed through the back of the 




disk drive to the computer. 

POWER SWITCH: Located on the right side, may be turned 


on at any time prior to sending print command 
from computer. Certain programming may require 
the printer to be turned on at a specific time to 
receive special formatting instructions. 

ON LINE: Sets printer to receive print commands. 

F.F.: (FORM FEED), advances the paper to the setting 
required for the next printing operation. 

L.F.: (LINE FEED), moves the paper up one space each 
time it is pushed, or continuously when 
held down. 

NOTE: The ON LINE button must be pushed before FF or LF 
will function. 

DIP SWITCHES: Control the type of print, the size 
of spaces, the form feed, and other aspects of 
the print on the page. It is necessary to check 
the printer manual for all the variations. 

Student Exercise 4: 

TURNING ON: 

1) Turn on the video, disk drive, and the computer 

2) When ready turn on the printer. 

3) Check positioning of paper. 

WARNING: Do NOT move the paper roller with the power turned 
on, damage to the printer drive mechanism may result. 

4) Check the POWER, ON LINE, READY and 




PAPER OUT lights 


BASIC COMMANDS: which will be used with the printer. 

LINE PRINT (LP.): Will replace ? in the program to 
send the line to the printer rather than the 
screen. If both screen display 
and "hard copy" are desired, two Print 
lines may be necessary. 

L."P: (LIST device, PRINTER), sends a listing of 

the program to the printer. 

TYPE: and SAVE the following BASIC program: 

10 LP. "(your name) 

20 LP. "(today's date) 

30 FOR N=1T05 
40 LP. "TEST",N 
50 NEXT N 
60 LP.:LP. 

70 LP. "THAT'S ALL FOLKS 
80 LP.:LP.: 

90 END 

To save this program: 

TYPE: SAVE "D:PRINTEST.(put your initials here for 

the extender so we can tell who it belongs to, but remember 
no spaces. 

Take your disk to printer station: 

TYPE: LOAD "D:PRINTEST.(initials) 

TYPE: L. (to list and check the program on the 

screen.) 

CHECK: Is the printer ON LINE? 

RUN 

TYPE: L."P (to list program on the paper, "Hard copy") 





Show "print out" to instructor for evaluation. 
SCORE 



LESSON IV: 


Additional Programming Features 
Purpose: In this lesson we will look at some new commands: 
END and STOP, and some programming techniques which will 
make many routines easier. Messages from the computer will 
be explored. The INPUT, READ/DATA, and RESTORE statements 
will be looked at as they effect putting information into 
the computer. 

More Commands: 

END: 

Terminates execution of the program whenever (COMMAND) is 
encountered. With most microcomputers, END is not 
necessary in BASIC, however, it is needed on some larger 
computers, with some other programming languages, and can 
serve a purpose here, as will be discussed later. 

STOP: 

Functions the same as the END command, but includes the 
PROMPT: (STOPPED AT LINE _?_). It serves a useful purpose 
when debugging longer programs, and prevents certain 
routines from being exicuted unintentionally. 

Student Exercise 1 : 

ENTER AND RUN the following: 

10 ?"HELL0 
20 ?"HOW ARE 
30 END 
40 ?"YOU? 

RUN 



83 


What is the output? 

(HELLO) 

(HOW ARE) 

DELETE: line 30, TYPE: 30 <R>. 

LIST: is line 30 gone? 

RUN: what is the output this time? 

ENTER AND RUN: 

10 ?"THE SUM OF 3+4 IS "; 

20 ?3+4 
30 STOP 

40 ?"2 TIMES 3 = 

50 STOP 
60 ?2*3 
70 END 

Give the output. 

(THE SUM OF 3+4 IS 7) 

STOPPED AT LINE (30) 

TYPE: CONT, the out put is: 

(2 TIMES 3 =) 

(STOPPED AT LINE 50) 

TYPE: CONT: What is the function of the CONT command? It 
causes the program to continue after the (STOP). 


Student Exercise 2: 


ENTER and DEBUG the following program: 


PROGRAM 

CORRECTIONS 

OUTPUT 

10 RAM ODD INTEGERS 

(10 REM ODD INTEGERS 

(1) 

1-11 AND THEIR SUM 

(1-11 AND THEIR SUM) 

(3) 

20 N= 1 

(OK) 

(5) 

30 S = 5 

(S=0) 

(7) 

40 print n 

(PRINT N) 

(9) 

50 S=S-N 

(S=S=N) 

(ID 



(_) 

(36) 


60 N=N+3 (N=N+2) 

70 IF N>11 THEN 10 (IF N<11 THEN 40) 

80 ?"_ (OK) 

90 ? RUN (? S) 

RUN 

Did you get the correct output? 

Check with instructor. 

Score_ 

BASIC Message Responses 

Student Exercise 3: 

ERRORS: You've already seen some ERROR messages. These 
appeared because the computer didn't understand what you 
typed. 

1. COMPUTER DETECTED ERRORS: 

There are 2 types of computer detected errors: SYNTAX 
and RUN-TIME errors. 

A. SYNTAX ERRORS: are those BASIC language errors the 
computer detects when the RETURN key is pushed. 
Examples: 

1. Something left out or incorrect: (;/: ./, 

NO QUOTES, SINGLE (, NO LINE NUMBER) 

2. Additional characters present: (GOTO, 20; 

AT END OF LINE) 

3. Command name is incorrect for ATARI BASIC: 
(HOME, FLASH, SET, etc.) 

4. Indicated character or word has no meaning to 
ATARI BASIC within the context of the statement 
being examined: (PINT, RUM, PRINTY), usually 





a spelling error. 

B. RUN-TIME ERRORS: Errors in the program 
(INSTRUCTIONS) . 

Detected when attempt is made to execute 
(STATEMENT) . 

Examples: 

1. Variable out of (RANGE) or off the screen 

2. Missing a necessary part of a command: 

FOR without (NEXT), THEN no (IF), 
missing (DATA). 

3. INCORRECT NESTING OF (FOR/NEXT) loops. 

4. Division by (0). 

5. GOTO or (GOSUB) with non-existent 
line numbers. 

6. GOSUB with no (RETURN), or VISA VERSA. 

2. LOGICAL ERRORS: Definition doesn't violate rules, 
but gives incorrect (RESULTS). 

Example: using the formula for the area of a triangle 
when the area of a rectangle was intended, putting 
the wrong DATA into the program, or putting the 
wrong operation symbol like / instead of *. 

INFORMATIVE MESSAGES: 

Not all messages from the computer are "ERROR" messages, 
some are programmed merely to give information. These 
non-ERROR messages are sometimes called (PROMPTS) 

1. READY which indicates: 



a. Task is (COMPLETED). 

b. (BREAK) Key was pressed pressed. 

c. (RESET) Key was pressed. 

2. STOPPED AT LINE _?_ which indicates that: 

a. (BREAK KEY PRESSED). 

b. (RUN TIME ERROR). 

c. (STOP in program). 

INPUT statements: 

There are several ways to get information or DATA into the 

computer. So far we have looked at the "LET" statement as 

a means to assign values to variables. The next statement 

we will work with allows the assignment of values to 

variables from outside the program. When the computer 

executes an INPUT statement, it (WAITS) for an entry from 

the keyboard. Until the computer gets the (INPUT) it 

requires, nothing else will happen. Compare the following: 

LET INPUT 

10 LET N=5 10 INPUT N,M 

20 LET M=10 RUN 

?5,10 

In its simplest form, an INPUT statement begins with the 
word INPUT and is followed by a variable name. Data 
entered from the keyboard is assigned to the variable, 
after the program execution has started. 

Student Exercise 4: 

TYPE and RUN the following program and when the (?) appears 



on the screen, type some different numbers. 

10 INPUT A 
20 PRINT A 
40 GOTO 10 
RUN 

Upon executing an INPUT statement, the computer displays a 
question mark, then waits for your entry. The program 
above displays each (NUMBER) as you ENTER it. REMEMBER to 
press the <RETURN> key to (COMPLETE) your entry. Why do you 
think this program displays every number twice? 

HOW DO YOU STOP THIS PROGRAM? (BREAK KEY) 

ADD line 30 below, RUN again, try various numbers. 

30 IF A=0 THEN END :REM End program if 0 is entered 
NOW try 0, what happened? (PROGRAM ENDS). 

The INPUT statement can accept more than one value at a 
time. The variables are separated with (COMMAS). When an 
INPUT statement is executed, there are two ways to enter 
the DATA, but you must respond with a separate value for 
each variable. 

Change lines 10 and 20 to those below. 

10 INPUT A, B, C 
20 ? A, B, C 
RUN 

TRY entering a number each time the "?" appears. Be sure 
to press the RETURN key after each value. 

Now try entering three numbers with commas between them. 
What happened? Try two numbers and then RETURN. What 
happened? 

You should see that if more than one number is called for. 



they can be entered together or separately, but the 
computer will not continue until they have all been 
(ENTERED). 

REMEMBER: in large numbers, use 1000000 not 1,000,000. 

READ/DATA: 

Let’s look at one more way to enter data into the computer, 
the READ and DATA commands MUST be used together. The DATA 
statement is always in the (DEFERRED) mode in a program, it 
is usually located at the (BEGINNING) or (END) of the 
program, rather than somewhere in the middle, since it is 
not really a part of the program itself. 


Look at this program and try to determine the output. 

ANTICIPATED OUTPUT: _ 

10 DATA 2,4,6,8 

20 READ M,N,0,P 

30 ? M 

40 ? N 

50 ? 0 

60 ? P 

RUN 

How did your prediction turn out? 

Look at the program below and note how the READ/DATA 
statement pair is used. What will be the outcome here? 


10 DATA 2,4,6,8,10,99 
20 READ A 

30 IF A=99 THEN 100 
40 ? A 
50 GOTO 20 
100 END 



89 


READ/DATA must follow these rules: 

1. (DATA) must be assigned by a (READ) 
statement. 

2. DATA must be separated by (COMMAS). 

3. DATA must be read from (LEFT) to 
(RIGHT) . 

4. DATA may be located anywhere in the program 

5. The number of READ variables and the number 
of DATA (ELEMENTS) must always be (THE SAME). 

If there are more "READS" than there are "DATA" 
elements you will get an (OUT OF DATA) ERROR. 

6. The DATA statement (CAN CONTAIN) both numbers 
and words. 

7. The computer will (NOT) evaluate (ARITHMETIC 
OPERATIONS) or (FUNCTIONS). What you see 

is what you get. 

What will be the out put of this program? (123456 

ERROR) 

10 READ A 
20 ? A 
30 GOTO 10 
40 DATA 1,2,3 
50 DATA 4,5,6 
RUN 

TYPE, these lines: 

30 GOTO 60 

60 IF A = 6 THEN RESTORE 

70 GOTO 10 

RUN 

What did RESTORE do? Allowed the (DATA) to be used over and 


over. 



RESTORE: 


The ATARI contains an internal pointer which keeps track of 
the DATA item to be read next. The (RESTORE) statement 
(RESETS) that pointer to the first (DATA) item in the 
program. This permits the reuse of the same DATA over 
again. RESTORE may also be used with a line number in 
which case it will reset to the first item on that line. 
Example: Replace line 60 in the program above, with: 

RESTORE 20 
What happened? 

Experiment with the RESTORE statement to see what effects 
you can achieve. 




LESSON V: 


Branching and Loops 

Purpose: In This lesson we will look at two types of 
branching, where the program goes out of the normal 
sequence of line numbers, as it is executed. There are 
other branching techniques called loops which will also be 
explored here. 

Branching: 

Each time there is a decision to be made in a program, we 
think of it as a branch. The computer must analyze the 
information or data and decide which choice to make. There 
are essentially two types of branches: an unconditional 
branch, in which the computer must go in the direction 
indicated, and a conditional branch, where certain 
"conditions" must be met before the computer will execute a 
branch from the program. 

The Unconditional Branch: 

Student Exercise 1: 

Examine the program below. What is the function of 
each line? 

What is in the RUN? Complete the chart, indicating what 
will take place in the computer memory and on the screen. 


PROGRAM 

LINE FUNCTION 

MEMORY - 

SCREEN 

10 N=0 

(INITIALIZE) 

( N=0 

- 

) 

20 N=N+1 

(ADD ONE) 

(N = l 

- 

1 ) 

30 ? N 

(DISPLAY #) 

( N=2 

- 

2 ) 

40 GOTO 20 

(BRANCH) 

( N = 3 

- 

3 ) 

50 ?"THE END 


( N=4 

- 

4 ETC 



Will line 50 ever be executed? (NO). 

KEEP the program in your machine. We will work with it 
again. 

Notice we have used statements including "GOTO” in several 
of our practice programs. 

The GOTO statement: is known as an (UNCONDITIONAL BRANCH), 
because each time the computer reaches it in the program it 
must transfer control to the (LINE INDICATED). 

When the computer reaches line 40 in the program above, 
line (20) is the next to be executed. 

GOSUB is also an unconditional branch, but we will cover 
it in more detail later. 

The CONDITIONAL Branch: 

CHANGE line 40 from the program listed above, to read as 
follows: ENTER and RUN. 

40 IF N<10 THEN 20 

What is the output of the program now? 

(123456789 10 THE END) . 

Was line 50 executed? What is the condition set up in line 
40, for branching to occur? (THE NUMBER MUST BE LESS THAN 
TEN). What happens if this condition is not met? (THE 
PROGRAM "FALLS THROUGH" TO THE NEXT LINE). 

THE IF/THEN STATEMENT: these program statements provide for 
a (CONDITIONAL LOGIC) sequence. IF a given condition or 
set of conditions exist, the computer performs the 
instruction present in the THEN command. If the conditions 





are not met, the computer ignores the THEN portion of the 
statement and goes to, (FALLS THROUGH TO) the next program 
line. 

LOGICAL OPERATORS used in determining (CONDITIONS) are: 

= means (EQUAL) 

<> means (NOT EQUAL) 

> means (GREATER THAN) 

< means (LESS THAN) 

<= means (LESS THAN OR EQUAL TO) 

>= means (GREATER THAN OR EQUAL TO) 

KEYWORDS: AND, NOT, OR are also operators. 

Let's go back and make another change in our program, then 
predict the results: 

What will the output be? (2468 ALL DONE). 

20 N=N+2 

50 PRINT "ALL DONE" 

Was the output as you predicted? 

Complete the statements for this program which counts to 30 
by 3's. 

Indicate what each line is doing. 

LINE FUNCTION 

10 N= (0) (ASSIGNS 0 TO N) 

20 N= (N+3) (ADDS 3 TO N) 

30 ? (N) (DISPLAYS THE VALUE OF N) 

40 IF (N<30 THEN 20) (LOOPS UNTIL N = 30) 

50 PRINT "THE END" (DISPLAYS "THE END) 

TYPE, ENTER, DEBUG and RUN your program. Did it RUN 

correctly? 

The following program illustrates the use of multiple 
IF/THEN statements. The computer is told to compare and 




94 


decide. 

REMEMBER, the message in an IF/THEN PRINT statement will be 

printed ONLY if the comparison is true. 

TYPE: NEW, then ENTER and RUN this program 

10 REM ** DETERMINE IF X IS POSITIVE, NEGATIVE OR ZERO** 

20 ? "I WILL ASK YOU TO ENTER A NUMBER, THEN I " 

30 ? "WILL TELL YOU WHETHER YOUR NUMBER IS " 

40 ? "POSITIVE, NEGATIVE, OR ZERO" 

50 ? 

60 ? "WHAT IS YOUR NUMBER"; 

70 INPUT X 

80 IF X>0 THEN ? "YOUR NUMBER IS POSITIVE" 

90 IF X<0 THEN ? "YOUR NUMBER IS NEGATIVE" 

100 IF X=0 THEN ? "YOUR NUMBER IS ZERO" 

110 GOTO 50 

Try several numbers, then answer the following questions. 

1) What is the condition in line 80? (X MUST BE 
GREATER THAN 0) 

2) What is the condition in line 90? (X MUST BE 
LESS THAN 0) 

3) What is the condition in line 100? (X MUST EQUAL 0) 

4) What does line 110 do and why doesn't it use line 20 

instead? 

(THERE IS NO NEED TO GIVE THE INSTRUCTIONS OVER AGAIN). 

5) If your program is still going on, what do you have 
to do to stop it? (use the BREAK KEY). 

FOR/NEXT LOOPS: 

REVIEW: 

The simplest way of causing a program to repeat is to use a 

GOTO which sends you back to an earlier line. 

10 PRINT "OVER AND OVER" 

20 GOTO 10 
RUN 





If you want to loop only a certain number of times, you can 

use a variable which increases each time you go through the 

loop. When the variable reaches a certain value, you can 

exit using an IF X=n...THEN GOTO command. Note it is not 

necessary to use the word GOTO, though the computer will 

accept it here. 

10 ? "OVER AND OVER 
20 X=X+1 

30 IF X=10 THEN 50 

40 GOTO 10 

50 ? "FINISHED!" 

In the program above, which begins with line 10, progresses 
through lines 20,30, and 40 with some activity, and ends 
with line 50, the following will have taken place: 

1) The Variable X starts at 0, the default value 

2) Next it is incremented by one each time through 

the loop 

3) It continues until X reaches 10 

4) Then the condition of the loop is no longer met 

5) It then "falls through" to line 50 and ENDs. 

A FOR/NEXT command is a third way to accomplish this same 
kind of thing. The FOR/NEXT counting loop repeats a 
program segment by executing statements contained within 
the loop a given number of times. 

The FOR....NEXT command is actually two commands. The 
(FOR) command is placed at the (BEGINNING) of a section of 
the program that you wish to repeat. 

It appears as follows: 




96 


10 FOR X = 1 TO 10 

The "X" can be any arithmetic variable. The first number 
"1" sets the initial value of this variable. The second 
number "10" sets the upper limit of the variable. In this 
loop the increment, or the adding to the number each time 
through the loop is automatic. 

The (NEXT) command is found at the (END) of the section to 
be repeated. It appears as follows: 

50 NEXT X 

The NEXT statement in line 50 tells the computer to return 

to the FOR statement in line 10 and proceed back down to 

line 50 again. Each time the computer encounters this 

program line, X increments it by 1 and returns to (REPEAT 

THE LOOP AGAIN) until the program lines have been executed 

the number of times specified by the upper limit of the 

(FOR) statement. 

TYPE and RUN: 

10 FOR NUMBER = 1 TO 99 
20 ? NUMBER 
30 NEXT NUMBER 
40 ? "THE END" 

The computer has counted by "ones" in executing this 
program. We can tell the computer to use something other 
than one, by typing the STEP N function, (where N = the 
number we wish to count by.) 

Try changing line 10, RUNning it, and then write your 
results. 


TRY THESE: 




97 


10 NUMBER = 1 TO 99 STEP 2 
RESULTS: (1 3 5 7...99) 

10 FOR NUMBER = 1 TO 99 STEP .5 
RESULTS: (1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5...99) 

10 FOR NUMBER = 100 TO 1 STEP -2 
RESULTS: (100 98 96 94...2) 

Note: when the STEP is negative the upper and lower limits 
must be reversed. 

You can use the FOR/NEXT loop for many things: (Try each 
and record your results) 

A. To delay the computer while it counts up to the limit 
you 

have set. This can be used to hold something on the 
screen for a specific amount of time. 

Add this line and RUN the program again. 

25 FOR D=1 TO 1000:NEXT D RESULTS: (WAITS UNTIL COUNT 

HAS FINISHED BEFORE GOING ON) 

B. To play a musical scale. 

Note: adjust sound volume before RUNning this program. 

10 DELAY = 100 
20 FOR P=1 TO 255 
30 SOUND 0,P,10,10 
40 FOR D=1 TO DELAY:NEXT D 
NOTE: This delay loop slows down the sound. 

50 NEXT P 
60 END 

Note:END will turn off SOUND 

TRY: changing the value of DELAY in line 10 and indicate 
your results. (WILL BE LONGER OR SHORTER DEPENDING ON 
VALUES USED) 





98 


C. To draw a pattern. 

10 GR. 7 
20 COLOR 3 

30 FOR X=1 TO 80 STEP 5 
40 PLOT 2*X,X 
50 NEXT X 

FOR/NEXT LOOPS are so common in programs that they are 
frequently (NESTED) one inside the other like a set of 
mixing bowls. There can be any number of statements 
between the FOR and the NEXT. Frequently there are tens, 
or even hundreds of statements. And within these tens or 
hundreds of statements, additional loops may occur. Since 
ATARI BASIC allows (128 DIFFERENT) variables, you can have 
at most 128 levels of FOR/NEXT NESTING. 

Just remember that each (NESTED LOOP) must be completely 
inside the next outer loop. 

NOTE: You may not close an outer loop before you close the 

inner loop. 

Try this example: 

10 GRAPHICS 7:COLOR 3 
20 FOR X=50 TO 100 STEP 2 
30 FOR Y=50 TO 20 STEP -2 
40 PLOT X,Y 
50 NEXT Y 
60 NEXT X 

REMEMBER, we can put several commands on one line, but we 

must still close the loops in the proper (ORDER). 

TYPE and RUN. 

10 FOR OVER = 1 TO 3 
20 FOR FIRST=1 TO 255 STEP 50 
30 FOR SEC0ND=1 TO PI 
40 SOUND 0,FIRST,10,10 
50 SOUND 1,SECOND,10,10 





60 NEXT SECOND:NEXT FIRST:NEXT OVER 
70 END 


What do you hear? 


SUBROUTINES 

The GOSUB statement branches in the same way as a GOTO, but 

in addition it remembers the (LINE) number from which it 

branched. It will then (RETURN) to the line following. In 

computer jargon, we say GOSUB calls a (SUBROUTINE). 

You MUST end the subroutine with a (RETURN) statement. It 

causes a branch back to the statement which follows the 

original GOSUB statement. 

TYPE and RUN: 

10 REM SUBROUTINE PROGRAM 
20 ? "THE 1ST TIME:" 

30 GOSUB 1000 
40 ? "2ND TIME:" 

50 GOSUB 1000 
60 ? "3RD TIME:" 

70 GOSUB 1000 
80 STOP 
1000 ? 

1010 ? 1 , 2 , 3 , 4,5 
1020 ? 

1030 RETURN 

Take line 80 out of the program. What happened? 

(SUBROUTINE WAS USED AN EXTRA TIME, WHEN <RETURN> WAS 
REACHED AN ERROR OCCURRED). 

This next program has 3 subroutines. Can you tell what the 

results will be BEFORE you RUN it? RESULTS: 

(++++++++++) 

( - ) 

( **#*****:{<£ ) 

C-) 

(++++++++++) 







10 REM PROGRAM WITH SUBROUTINES 

20 GOSUB 100 

30 GOSUB 200 

40 GOSUB 300 

50 GOSUB 200 

60 GOSUB 100 

70 END 

100 ? :? "++++++++++":RETURN 

200 ? : ? "-RETURN 

300 ? :? "**********";RETURN 

GOSUBs in ATARI BASIC can also use variables instead of 


numbers. Change the program as follows: 

10 REM PROGRAM WITH SUBROUTINES USING VARIABLES 
15 LET PLUS=100:LET MINUS=200:LET TIMES=300 
20 GOSUB TIMES 
30 GOSUB MINUS 
40 GOSUB PLUS 
50 GOSUB MINUS 
60 GOSUB TIMES 
70 END 

100 ? :? "++++++++++":RETURN 

200 ? : ? "---" : RETURN 

300 ? :? "**********";RETURN 

Get the computer to display the name of each subroutine. 
Type:100 ? :? "PLUS";"++++++++++":RETURN and change the 
other two accordingly. 

ON GOTO and ON GOSUB are used to send the computer to 

different lines as the program is run. The difference 

between them is that (ON GOSUB) will RETURN to the line 

following the (ON GO SUB )statement, while the (ON GOTO) 

will continue from the line to which it was sent. Try the 

following example of ON GOTO. 

10 ?"TYPE IN 1 FOR A HOT MESSAGE, 2 FOR A COOL MESSAGE, 
AND 3 FOR A COLD MESSAGE"; 

20 INPUT X 

30 ON X GOTO 60,90,110 
30 ON X GOTO 60,90,110 
40 ? 

50 GOTO 10 

60 ?"IT’S 100 DEGREES" 






101 


70 FOR A=1 TO 500:NEXT A 
80 GOTO 10 

90 ?"ICE CREAM CONE" 

100 GOTO 70 

110 ?"A BLIZZARD" 

120 GOTO 70 
130 END 

What is the purpose of line 50? (IT SENDS THE PROGRAM BACK 
TO START OVER IF A WRONG CHARACTER IS PRESSED). What is 
the name given to a program line which does this? (ERROR 
TRAP) 

What is the purpose of lines 70 and 80? (70 IS A DELAY 
LOOP, TO KEEP RESPONSE ON SCREEN FOR SEVERAL SECONDS, 80 
SENDS COMPUTER BACK FOR NEW RESPONSES). 

Try to convert this program to an ON GOSUB, removing any 

extra lines. Lines 10, 20, 40, and 50 are ok, change the 

GOTO in line 30 to (GOSUB) 

40 (FOR A=1 TO 500: NEXT A) 

50 (GOTO 20) 

60 (?"IT'S 100 DEGREES":RETURN) 

90 (?"ICE CREAM CONE":RETURN) 

110 (?"A BLIZZARD":RETURN) 

120 (END) 

One use of the ON GOSUB and ON GOTO subroutines is to 
eliminate repetition of (RESPONSES). Many times a program 
will go to the same response every time the computer 
receives a certain input. For instance, each time a 
student gets a math problem or spelling word correct the 
computer prints "GREAT WORK". By using ON GOTO or ON GOSUB 
with a (RANDOM FUNCTION) generating a 1, 2, or 3, the 
computer can print "RIGHT ON", or "YOU GOT IT. KEEP IT UP", 
ETC., in response to correct answers. 



102 


LESSON VI: 

VARIABLES 

Purpose: We have been using letters and words to represent 
values through out these lessons, it is time to see what 
the functions and limitations of these VARIABLES are. We 
will see that it is necessary to DIMENSION, to save memory 
space for word or string variables. Then we will work with 
subscripted variables to create arrays and matrices. 

Variables: 

To the computer a variable is like the street address is to 
a house. The first time it is used in a program a variable 
is assigned a location in memory where a value can be 
stored. 

1. Variables identify (MEMORY LOCATIONS) in which 
the computer stores specific (ALPHABETIC) or 
(NUMERIC) characters, the result of a computation 
or an assigned value. Assignment statements let 

you assign values to variables. Some examples include: 

10 LET X=3 10 W=56 

10 A$="ANY0NE" 10 NAME$="SUSAN" 

2. Variable types determine the kind of labels 
required. Numeric variables reference numbers ONLY. 
String, (WORD) variables store any assigned 
sequence of (ALPHA) or (NUMERIC) 

characters or their combination. 

STRINGS can include any combination of letters, 



words, or numbers up to (255) characters. 

A$="ARF", GIRL$="5", M$="MUSIC", etc. are 
all possible. Just remember to use (QUOTATION) 
marks to indicate the entire string to the computer. 
Each item of information is given a name which will 
be used throughout the program to refer to that 
particular item. This name is an identifier or label. 

As each item is given a label, (A VARIABLE NAME) 
it is stored by the computer in a memory box. 

We say A=15, B$="HELLO", HEADS=1, or SIDE=X, see below: 
MEMORY BOXES 

A=15 B$ = , 'HELLO" HEADS = 1 SIDE=X 

| 15 | |_HELLO_ | |_1_| |_X_| 

A B$ HEADS SIDE 

The computer will file each of these variables 

away in a box with that label. The contents of the box 
can be changed any time we tell the computer that the 
variable has changed. For example, HEADS=2 and 
B$="G00DBYE" will switch the contents of those boxes 
from 1 to 2 and from hello to goodbye. 

3. Commands for variable operation include: 

LET. This stores numbers or letters into a 
(VARIABLE). You may see in a program: LET X=100 or 
LET X$="SHELLY". In ATARI BASIC the (LET) 
command is usually eliminated because the computer 
automatically assumes its existence. 

Note: normally reserved words in BASIC, such things as 



104 


labels, commands and statements can be used on the ATARI if 
the LET statement is used. This is the only time that LET 
is really necessary. Words like: FOR, NEXT, DIM, LET, 

PRINT or even RUN can then be used as variables. 

4. The specifications for variable labels include: 

Assign (IDENTIFIERS) like A, B. C3, DE49 
to (NUMERIC) variables. Assign identifiers 
like A$, B2$, ERR0R$ 
to (STRING) variables. 


Type the following and write the results: 

LET HEADS = 1 
LET HEADS = 2 

PRINT HEADS RESULTS (2) 

TYPE and RUN: PURPOSE: 


10 HEADS = 2 (ASSIGNS 2 TO VARIABLE HEADS) 

20 TAILS = 3 (ASSIGNS 3 TO VARIABLE TAILS) 

30 TOSS = HEADS+TAILS (ASSIGNS SUM 2+3 TO VARIABLE TOSS) 
40 ? TOSS (DISPLAYS VALUE OF VARIABLE TOSS) 


RESULTS: (5) 

TYPE, NEW: 

10 ? "WHAT IS THE PERIMETER OF A SQUARE WITH A SIDE OF 5?" 
20 SIDE=5 

30 PERIMETER=SIDE*4 
40 ? PERIMETER 


RESULTS: (20) 

Note: ATARI will read and recognize variables up to (255) 
characters long. This contrasts with other micros which 
only sort through 1 or possibly 2 letters. This is why we 
have been able to use (words) rather than just letters for 


variables. 

Example: if we could only look at the first 2 letters, the 




words APE and APPLE would look the same and the computer 
would pick the first one it came to. 

We need some rules for numeric variables: 

1. Each variable must include only (ALPHA) or 
(NUMERIC) characters. 

2. The first must be an (ALPHA) character. 

3. No (PUNCTUATION ) or (SPACES) may be included. 

Let's look at some variables. Are these valid or invalid 
on the ATARI? If not valid, why? 



VARIABLE 

VALID 

REASON 

A. 

A? 

(NO) 

(? NOT ALPHA OR NUMERIC) 

B. 

BALL 

(YES) 

(OK) 

C. 

2BAD 

(NO) 

(ALPHA MUST COME FIRST) 

D. 

P*3 

(NO) 

(* NOT ALPHA OR NUMERIC) 

E. 

NEXT 

(YES) 

(RESERVED, REQUIRES LET) 


Data which contains both numbers and strings is called 
(ALPHANUMERIC) data. A (STRING VARIABLE) is used to name a 
memory location in which a string is stored. 

Note: a string variable may be any valid numeric variable 
followed by a ($, DOLLAR SIGN). 

Remember: In a LET or PRINT statement the data must be 

enclosed in (QUOTATION MARKS), however this is not 
necessary when the string is in a (DATA) statement. 

Dimensioning : 

Some BASICS allow limited strings to be used without 
reserving special memory locations. This is not the case 



with the ATARI. All STRINGS must have memory locations set 


aside. This procedure is called DIMensioning. 

The statement format is: 

DIM A$(X). DIM signifies there is a maximum number of 
characters allowed into variable (A$). It sets aside 
space, (X) in the computers memory to place data for that 
variable. Again it is required with all STRING variables, 
but not with numeric ones. 

Examples: The statement is DIM A$(10) or DIM NAME$(25). 

All strings to be used in a program may be dimensioned 

at one time, DIM A$(10), B$(20), C$(30), etc. 

Note: A string may NOT be (DIMENSIONED) more than once in 

a program, so care must be taken to avoid placing DIMENSION 

statements inside of any (LOOPS). 

TYPE and RUN: 

10 DIM MUSIC$(5) 

20 MUSIC$="MUSIC" 

30 ? MUSIC$ RESULTS: (MUSIC). 

Now change line 10 so that it reads: 

10 DIM MUSIC$(4) 

RUN the program again. RESULTS: (MUSI). 

Try the following program using DIM: 

10 DIM WH0$(20), DID$(20), WHAT$(20), 

20 LET WHAT$="A LITTLE LAMB" 

30 LET WH0$="MARY " 

40 LET DID$="HAD " 

50 ? WH0$; 

70 ? DID$; 

80 ? WHAT$; 

RESULTS: (MARY HAD A LITTLE LAMB). 

Type and RUN of the following program, indicating the 



107 


purposes of each statement and the results. 

PROGRAM LINE FUNCTION 

10 DIM NAME$(20) (RESERVES 20 SPACES IN MEMORY) 

20 LET NAME$="MARY" (ASSIGNS MARY TO NAME$) 

30 ? NAME$ (DISPLAYS MARY) 

TYPE and RUN: 

10 DIM NAME$(20) 

20 ? "TYPE YOUR NAME?" 

30 INPUT NAME$ 

40 ? "HELLO "; 

What does the do here? (PUTS NAME ON SAME LINE). 

50 ? NAME$ RESULTS: (HELLO and NAME). 

Subscripted Variables and Arrays: 

NOTE: To avoid confusion with the parentheses used in the 
programming functions, this will be the form for <ANSWERS> 
for the remainder of this workbook. 

As we have seen, simple BASIC variables come in the form: 
P, R, PI, P2, etc. We are now going to expand the use of 
variables through the use of SUBSCRIPTS. 

A SUBSCRIPTED variable is written: P(5), P is the 

<VARIABLE>, 5 is the <SUBSCRIPT> 

It consists of any letter followed by a <NUMBER> in 
<PARENTHESES>. 

Which are the subscripted variables: X(l), C(3). 

X(l) X XI C(3) D 
Notice that X, XI and X(l) are three distinct variables. 
All three can appear in the same program. The computer 
will recognize them as three distinct variables. 
Subscripted variables (like the simple variables we have 



been using) name a <MEMORY LOCATION> inside the computer. 

You can think of it as a box, a place to store a number. 

ASSIGN the following to the correct memory boxes below: 

P(2)=36 P(3)=12 P(4)=P(2)+P(3) 

I_I I_I l_36_| I _12_| |_48_| 

P(0) P(1) P(2) P(3) P(4) 

A set of subscripted variables is also called an <ARRAY>. 

This set of subscripted variables is a <ONE DIMENSIONAL 

ARRAY>, also known as a <VECT0R>. Subscripts may also 

include variables, Y(J) has J for a subscript: 

If J=1 then Y(J) = <Y(1)>. 

If J = 2 then Y(J) = <Y(2)>. 

Subscripts can be more complex. Y(A+1), Y(B*2), etc., are 
all legal. 

You must DIMension subscripted variables for the <MAXIMUM 
NUMBER> of values to be assigned to a particular 
subscripted variable. The DIM statement(s) in a program 
must be placed so that they are executed <BEFORE> the 
subscripted variable(s) are actually used in the program. 
The format for DIMensioning an array is similar to 
DIMensioning a string variable. In the example below X is 
the <VARIABLE> and the number 100 represents the 
<SUBSCRIPT>. 

100 DIM X(100) 

Write a DIMension statement for variable A, with a maximum 
subscript of 50: 

100 <DIM A(50)> 


109 


One common use of subscripted variables is to store a list 
of numbers entered via <INPUT> or <READ STATEMENTS>. This 
can be done with a <F0R/NEXT> loop. 

ATARI BASIC requires a modification of standard BASIC 

programs when assigning values to subscripted variables 

through READ or INPUT statements. 

COMPARE: STANDARD BASIC ATARI BASIC 

INPUT INPUT A(I) INPUT A 

A(I)=A 

READ READ A(I) READ A 

A(I)=A 

TYPE and RUN: 

PROGRAM PREDICTED OUTPUT 

10 DIM A (5) <A(1)=9> 

20 FOR I = 1 TO 5 <A(2)=8> 

30 READ A <A(3)=7> 

40 A(I)=A <A(4)=6> 

50 NEXT I <A(5)=5> 

60 FOR I = 1 TO 5 
70 ? "A(";I;") = ";A(I ) 

80 NEXT I 
90 DATA 9,8,7,6,5 

CHANGE line 30 and delete 90 to allow INPUT. <30 INPUT A> 
RUN your program and note the results. 

These programs used the control variable as the variable 
for the subscript, causing the subscript to <INCREASE BY 
0NE> each time through the loop. For another illustration, 
we will turn to an expensive Adding Machine. 

Type in the following program and RUN it. INPUT 5 when 
asked How Many Numbers?. INPUT any number of your choice 


when asked A=?. 



PROGRAM 

100 REM ***AN EXPENSIVE*** 

105 REM ***ADDING MACHINE 
110 DIM A(10) 

120 ? "HOW MANY NUMBERS"; 

130 INPUT NUMBER 
140 ? 

150 FOR 1=1 TO NUMBER 
160 ? "A="; 

170 INPUT A 
180 A(I)=A 
190 NEXT I 
200 T=0 

210 FOR 1=1 TO N 
220 LET T=T+A(I ) 

230 NEXT I 

240 ? "THE TOTAL IS "; T 

For the RUN we just did, N was <5>. Therefore, <5> numbers 
will be entered by the operator and stored as A(l) through 
<A(5)>. 

Remember in lines 170 and 180, first the input value is 
assigned to the simple numeric variable <A>. Then the 
subscripted variable <A(I) > is assigned the <SAME> value by 
letting <A(I)=A>. 

Suppose the computer is running the program, it has just 
completed the FOR/NEXT loop in lines 150 to 190. The 
numbers entered by the user are now stored as follows: 

N=5, A(1)=37, A(2) = 23 , A(3)=46, A(4) = 78, and A(5) = 59. The 
computer is ready to proceed with line 200. This statement 
initializes the variable T, that is, <ASSIGNS> T its first 
value. Show the value of T after line 200 has been 
executed. T = <0>, Next the computer will execute the 
FOR/NEXT loop in lines 210 to 230. How many times will the 
FOR/NEXT loop be executed? <5> 




WHY? <THE UPPER LIMIT OF THE FOR/NEXT LOOP IS N WHICH 
EQUALS 5>. The first time I will = 1, then 1=2, 1=3, 1=4, 
and finally for 1=5. Looking at line 220, we see: LET 
T=T+A(I). This statement tells the computer to add the 
values of A(I) to the <0LD> value of T and then assign the 
results as the <NEW> value of T. What is the value of T 
after line 220 has been executed for A(l), T= <37>, A(2), 
T=<60>, A(3), T=<106>, A(4), T=<184>, and A(5), T=<234> 

Doubly-subscripted Variables: 

Double subscripts are used with <ARRAYS> which might 
require several <C0LUMNS> and <R0WS>. A rectangular 
arrangement of doubly-subscripted variables is called a 
<TABLE>, <MATRIX>, or a <TW0-DIMENSI0NAL ARRAY>. Earlier 
we were describing arrays of singly subscripted variables 
which are also called <LISTS>, <VECT0RS>, or 
<0NE-DIMENSI0NAL ARRAYS>. 

T(3) is a subscripted variable with <0NE> subscript. 
T(7,5) has <TW0> subscripts which are separated by a 
<C0MMA>. 

Variables with <D0UBLE> subscripts arranged in an array of 

rows and columns is shown below. Put the follo\^ing in the 

correct boxes below: 

LET A(1,3) = 0 

LET A(2,1)=73 

LET A(1,1)=49 

LET A(2,3)=A(2,1)-A(1,1) 

LET A(1,2) = 2*A(2,1 ) 

LET A(2,2)=INT(A(2,1)/A(2,3)) 



COLUMN 1 COLUMN 2 COLUMN 3 


ROW 1 

A ( 1 , 1 ) 

49 

A ( 1,2 ) 

_1*6 | 

A(1,3) 

0 

ROW 2 

A( 2, 1 ) 

_73_ 

A(2,2 ) 

_3_T 

A ( 2, 3 ) 

_2*_ 


The above array has <TWO> rows and <THREE> columns. 

With the arrangement shown above, we can relate subscripts 
to particular places <L0CATI0NS, or "BOXES" for VALUES> in 
rows and columns. These are called the <ELEMENTS> in the 
array. These doubly subscripted variables are simply the 
names of a location in the computer. As with any other 
variable, you can think of them as the names for a place to 
store a number. 

In the above example: A(2,3) is in row <2>, column <3>. 

See if you can write a program to create an array of your 
class schedule, or your last report card. 



LESSON VII: 


COMPUTER FUNCTIONS: 

Purpose: The special functions programmed into BASIC make 
it possible to accomplish many interesting things, in this 
lesson we will look at some of those functions, and what 
can be done with them. 

MathematicaL Functions: 

Most of the following functions are illustrated by simple 
<IMMEDIATE MODE> commands. Type them in to see how they 
work, then write the answer in the space provided. A fex^ 
have short programs to type in and RUN. 

RANDOM we will go into in more detail than the others 
because it is used so often by BASIC programmers. 

RANDOM: <RND(X)> where "X" is a "dummy" (one without a 
value) variable, gives a random number between 0 and 1. It 
is used very frequently in programs to generate a set of 
random numbers between 0 and 1, 1 and 10, 1 and 100, etc. 

10 PRINT RND(l) 

20 GOTO 10 

RUN this and then hit BREAK. What kinds of numbers do you 
get? Give examples: <0.0123456789> or <0.123456789>. In 
most cases, we would prefer whole numbers rather than 
decimals. So, let's combine the RANDOM with the INTEGER 
function and see what happens. But first a look at the 



INTEGER function. 


INTEGER: <INT(X)> truncates a decimal number at the decimal 
point, giving only the <WHOLE> number value. For a 
<NEGATIVE> it gives the lower value, for example: 


TYPE these: RESULTS 

?INT(2.8) <2> 

?INT(-2.8) <-3> 

?INT(1) <1> 

?INT(14.7265) <14> 


TYPE and RUN: 

10 ? "TYPE A WHOLE NUMBER" 

20 INPUT N 

30 IF N/2=INT(N/2) THEN ? "EVEN" 

40 IF N/2<>INT(N/2) THEN ? "ODD" 

50 GOTO 10 

Try a variety of numbers. Does it work? <YES>. 

Now try INTEGER and RANDOM, TYPE these: 

10 ? INT(RND(1)) 

20 GOTO 10 

What kinds of numbers do you get now? <JUST 0's>. What we 
did was to eliminate the <DECIMAL> part and PRINT the 
<INTEGER>, which in each instance here was <0>. What we 
were getting was a number between 0 and 1, rounded down. 

In order to get a number up to 10 we will need to multiply 
our RND(l) by <10>. 

TYPE this new line, and RUN: 

10 ? INT(RND(1)*10) 

Now, what appears to be our range? <0 TO 9>. Did we get 
any zeros? <YES>. Did we get any 10's? <N0>. To get a 
range from 1 to 10 we must <ADD 1> to our program. 





10 ? INT(RND(1)*10)+1 


Finally - we got to our range of a 1 to 10. What should we 
do if we wish to get a number range of 1 to 100? 

10 ? INT(RND(1) _(*100)+1)_ 

How would we get the numbers from 1 to 6 to simulate the 
roll of a dice? 

10 ? INT(RND(1) (*6) + l) 

The even numbers from 10 to 20? 

10 ? INT(RND(1) (*6)*2 + 10) . 

Let's look at some other functions: 


ABSOLUTE VALUE: <ABS(X)> gives you the "ABSOLUTE" value of 
a number, which is the number without the + or - sign. 


EXAMPLE: RESULTS 

?ABS(5) <5> 

?ABS(-17) <17 > 

10 X=-8 

20 ? ABS(X) <8> 


This function is used to tell how far something is from 
<ZER0> when the sign is not important, or if a <NEGATIVE> 
sign would create an undiserable result. 


SQUARE ROOT: <SQR(X)> gives you the square root of any 
positive expression. 


TYPE: RESULT 

? SQR(25) <5> 

?SQR(144) <12> 

? SQR(2) <1.41421356> 

?SQR(-4) <ERR0R> 




116 


We have looked at the command to check our memory before. 


FREE MEMORY: <FRE(X)> where X is a "dummy" variable, we 

usually use 1 or 0. It tells how much free <RAM> memory is 

available. You should check this whenever using a 

different computer, so that you will know how many "K" it 

has and therefore what software you can run on it, etc. 

TYPE: ?FRE(0) WRITE RESULTS <ANSWERS WILL VARY>. 

TYPE: in this program and RUN it. 

5 GR. 0 
10 ?:? 

20 ? "NUMBER","SQUARE","SQUARE ROOT" 

30 ? 

40 FOR NUMBER = 1 TO 10 
50 LET SQUARE=NUMBER*NUMBER 
60 LET R00T=SQR(NUMBER) 

70 ? NUMBER,SQUARE,ROOT 
80 NEXT NUMBER 
90 ? 

100 ? "THIS PROGRAM LEFT YOU WITH " 

110 ? FRE(O); " MEMORY UNITS" 

How much memory did this program take to RUN? Compare 
with previous FRE(O). <SH0W THE DIFFERENCE> 


SIGN: <SGN(X)> is used to evaluate an expression for its 
sign. Returns <-l> if it evaluates to a negative number, 
<0> if zero, and <1> if positive number. 


TYPE: RESULTS 

?SGN(5*12-15) <1> 

?SGN(25-50) <-l> 

?SGN(5-5) <0> 



117 


LOG: <LOG(X)> returns the natural logarithm of a positive 

number in the parentheses. 

TYPE: RESULTS 

?L0G(1) <0> 

?LOG(100) <4.605...> 

?L0G(1.5) <0.405...> 

COSINE: <C0S(X)> returns the trigonometric cosine of the 
expression. 

TYPE: RESULTS 

?C0S(0) <1> 

? COS(27) <0.292...> 


SINE: <SIN(X)> returns the trigonometric sine of the 
expression in the parentheses. 


TYPE: 


RESULTS 


? SIN ( 0 ) 

?SIN(1.7) 


<0> 

<0.991...> 


The following is a list of the functions and statements 


described in the ATARI BASIC REFERENCE MANUAL, starting on 
page 33. We have covered some of the more important 
functions and will deal with any others as they apply to 
the material we are working with. 


ABS 

LOG 

ATN 

ADR 

CLOG 

RND 

COS 

FRE 

EXP 

SGN 

SIN 

PEEK 

INT 

USR 

SQR 

DEG/RAD 

POKE 


STRINGS and COMPUTER FUNCTIONS: 


Storing Strings: You need to understand how characters are 





118 


stored in the computer's memory. Computer memory can store 
<NUMBERS>, but not <CHARACTERS>. Therefore, characters 
must be converted to numbers. The special numeric code is 
called ASCII (American Standard Code for Information 
Interchange). The ATARI computer uses a slightly different 
code, called ATASCII (ATARI ASCII). This involves a simple 
substitution of the code number for the letter. A is 65, B 
is 66, C is 67, and so on. 

ASCII function: <ASC(A$)> converts the first character of a 
string to its ATASCII code. To see how this works, try the 
following program: 

10 DIM A$(1) 

20 ? "ENTER ONE CHARACTER"; 

30 INPUT A$ 

40 ? "THE ATASCII CODE" 

45 ? "FOR ";A$;" IS:" 

50 ? ASC(A$) 

60 GOTO 20 

Try the following characters and enter their ATASCII codes 
below: 

A = <65> a = <47> D = <68> d = <100> 

9 = <57> ? = <63> * = <42> S = <83> 

To reverse the above procedure the CHR$ function: <CHR$(N)> 
will give the character or command when you indicate the 
ATASCII number. 

Redo the above program, changing from string variables to 
numeric variables and changing lines 40 and 50. Eliminate 


(For the complete ATASCII 
CODE listing see the ATARI 
BASIC REFERENCE MANUAL 
APPENDIX C) 


line 10 




119 


20 ? "ENTER A NUMBER FROM 0 TO 255" 

30 INPUT A 

40 ? "THE CHARACTER OR COMMAND FOR ";A;" IS: "; 

50 ? CHR$(A) 

60 GOTO 20 

Enter the character or function for the following: 

38 = <&> 125 = <CLEARS SCREEN> 

253 = <BUZZER> 113 = <q> 

Sometimes it is necessary to know the length of a specified 
string. 


LENGTH: <LEN(A$)> gives the length of the specified 
string, including all spaces. 

TYPE: 

W0RD$="A SHORT PHRASE" 

?LEN(W0RD$)= <14> 


SUBSTRINGS and COMPUTER FUNCTIONS: 


Substrings: To use only a part of a string variable the 
following are possible techniques. 

Note: The ATARI doesn’t use LEFT$, MID$, AND RIGHT$ 


functions as other BASICs do. 
TYPE: RESULT 


10 DIM A$(10) 

20 A$="ABCDEFGHIJ" 
30 ? A$(3) 

40 ? A$(1,3) 

50 ? A$(2,5) 

60 ? A$(LEN(A$)-3) 


<CDEFGHIJ> 

<ABC> 

<BCDE> 

<GHIJ> 


1. A$(3) will specify everything from the <3RD> character 


on. 

Note: to get (X) characters from the end of a string use: 
A$(LEN(A$)-X), where X is one less than the number you 
want, if X=3 your will get <GHIJ>, because LEN(A$)=10 and 





10-3= 7, so we are really saying A$(7). 

2. A$(l,3) specifies the characters from the beginning to 
the <3RD> character, or the 1st <3> characters. 

3. A$(2,5) specifies the characters from the <2ND to the 
4TH>. 

STRING CONCATENATION: Allows you to join strings or 
substrings together to form new longer strings. A string 


can be any 

length 

up to the end of 

the available <RAM>. 

Fill in the 

boxes 

below if C$=HER, 

A$=T0, AND B$=GET 

STRING 

1 + 

STRING 2 + 

STRING 3 

|_T0_| 

+ 

1 GET I + 

1 HER 1 




1 — _ 1 

A$ 


B$ 

C$ 

Becomes: 

$1 $2 $3 

|_T0|GET|HER_| 


?A$;B$; 

C$ = _ 

(TOGETHER)_. 



In ATARI BASIC the second and third strings are 

concatenated by making them substrings which start just 

after the last character of the string before it. 

EXAMPLE: STRING 1 = STRING 1 + STRING 2 would be 
A$(LEN(A$)+1)=B$ STRING 3 = STRING 1 + STRING 2 would be 
C$=A$ C$(LEN(C$)+1)=B$ 

Enter the following in Direct Mode: 

DIM W0RD$(40) 

LET W0RD$="MARY HAD A LITTLE LAMB" 

Now experiment with printing out pieces of the words in 
W0RD$ by using the following kinds of instructions: 






TYPE: 

? WORD$(6) 

? WORD$(10,10) 

? W0RD$(12,17) 

Now TYPE and RUN: 

5 DIM W0RD$(40) 

10 GR. 0 
20 ? 

30 ? "TYPE IN WORD” 

40 INPUT W0RD$ 

50 ? WORD$;" CONTAINS ";LEN(WORD$);" LETTERS." 

60 ? 

70 GOTO 20 

RESULTS: <WILL GIVE THE LENGTH OF THE TYPED WORD>. 

TYPE and RUN: 

10 DIM A$ (50) 

20 ? "TYPE NAME” 

30 INPUT A$ 

40 ?:? 

50 FOR N = LEN(A$) TO 1 STEP -1 
60 ?A$(N,N); 

70 NEXT N 
80 ? : ? 

90 GOTO 20 

RESULTS: <WILL DISPLAY NAME IN REVERSE ORDER>. 
EXPERIMENT: with this program and have fun. 


RESULTS 

CHAD A LITTLE LAMB> 
<A> 

<LITTLE> 



LESSON VIII: 


Sound, Color, and Graphics 

Purpose: We have used some short programs with sound, color 
and graphics to illustrate programming techniques, now in 
this lesson we will look at the specific commands that make 
these possible. 

SOUND: 

In ATARI BASIC, SOUND statements control the <AUDIO ON THE 
T.V. OR MONITOR>. The command is: 

SOUND V,P,D,L or SO. V,P,D,L: 

V= <VOICE>: 

The ATARI computer has <4> independent voices or sound 
registers. This means it can make as many as <4> different 
sounds simultaneously. The different voices blend together 
in the television speaker, like voices in a chorus. The 
voices are numbered <0> through <3>. You must use a 
<SEPARATE> SOUND statement to control each voice. 

RHYTHM is controlled by <DELAYS> built into the program or 
through DATA statements. 

P= <PITCH>: 

or NOTE, the second number sets the <PITCH>, it can be any 
number between <0> and <255>. The lowest notes are played 
by the <LARGEST> numbers so they seem to be opposite from 
what you might guess. The ATARI computer can produce all 
notes: sharps, flats, and neutrals, from <ONE OCTAVE> below 




middle C to <TWO OCTAVES> above it. It can produce a good 
many other tones as well. For example, there are (6) 
intermediate values between middle C and the tone one-half 
step below it, B. Such tones do not match any of the notes 
on the regular "Western" music scale, so they will be of no 
use for programming music, unless you want to try some 
"Eastern" or Oriental music. You can, however, use these 
tones for sound effects. 

D= <DISTORTION>: 

The ATARI computer produces both <PURE> and <DISTORTED> 
tones. 

This, the third number in a SOUND statement regulates the 
<DISTORTION>. It can be any value between <0> and <15>. 
Distortion values of <10 and 14> generate pure tone. 

Other even numbered distortion values <0,2,4,6,8,and 12> 
introduce different amounts of noise into the pure tone. 

The amount of noise depends on both the distortion value 
and the pitch value. 

L- <L0UDNESS>: 

The fourth number in a SOUND statement controls the 
<V0LUME> of the specified voice. "L" is used because "V" 
was used for <V0ICE> It lets the program determine the 
<AUDI0> level. It also allows the program to mix 
multiple-voices, with each voice at a different volume 
level. The loudness value can be between <0=SILENT> and 
<15=L0UDEST>. Loudness is direct, 8 produces a sound half 
as loud as 15 and 12 is halfway between 8 and 15 in 



loudness 


Note: to turn off the sound when using the direct mode you 
must type <END>. BREAK will <NOT> turn it off. 

Type in direct mode: SO. 0,96,10,8 and hit <RETURN>. Once 
turned on, each sound generator stays on until the program 
reaches an <END> statement or the program shuts it off, 
usually with the command SO. 0,0,0,0. 

TYPE: SO. 1,121,10,8 <R>. This plays middle C on sound 
register 0. On the line below the one playing middle C, 
type: SO. 0,96,10,8 <R>, now take your cursor up to the 
first of the two commands and press <R> 2 times. What did 
the computer do? <S0UNDED ONE NOTE THEN THE NEXT>. 

Now type the following 1 line command: SO. 0,108,10,8:SO. 
1,96,10,8 and write the results: (TWO NOTES PLAY AT THE 
SAME TIME) 

The notes you are playing are E and C. ADD G <81> and a 
higher C <60> to your line and play a "C" chord. 

REMEMBER: you can use <4> voices at one time. How should 
this command be written? <S0.0,100,10,8:SO.1,96,10.8:ETC.> 
The following program shows off the ATARI'S complete tonal 
range. 

10 FOR TONE=-255 TO 255 
20 SO. 0,ABS(T0NE),10,8 
30 ? "NOTE VALUE: ";ABS(TONE) 

40 FOR TIME=1 TO 50:NEXT TIME 
50 NEXT TONE 
60 SO. 0,0,0,0 

As you listen, notice that the low notes seem to last 
longer than the high notes. You can see that the program 



holds each tone for the same length of time (line 30). But 
the tone produced by a pitch value of 255 is very nearly 
the same as that produced by 254, 253, and even 252. These 
low tones run together, sounding like <0NE LONG N0TE>. In 
contrast there is a distinct difference between pitch 
values <11 and 10>. Each change in pitch value is very 
obvious, after the program goes smoothly through the low 
tones, but ends up jumping roughly between the higher tones. 
The following program will play the notes of the scale as 
we are familiar with them. 

10 READ A 

20 IF SCALE=999 THEN END 

30 SO. 0,SCALE,10,10 

40 FOR TIME=1 TO 400:NEXT TIME 

50 ? SCALE 

60 GOTO 10 

70 END 

80 DATA 29,31,35,40,45,47,53,60,64,72,81,91,96,108,121 
90 DATA 128,144,162,182,193,217,243,999 

NOTE: The DATA statement in line 80 ends with a 999, which 

is outside of the designated range. The 999 is used as an 

<END OF DATA> marker. This program will tell the computer 

to continue to READ and play notes until that marker is 

reached. It will allow you to program as many notes as you 

wish without getting an (OUT OF DATA) ERROR. You can 

experiment all you want if you will be sure to start a new 

DATA line whenever the one you are on reaches 3 computer 

<L0GICAL> lines, then you place 999 or some other number 

out of the tonal range, as your last DATA number to tell 

the computer that you are finished. 

Generally speaking, odd numbered distortion values 



<1,3,5,7,9,11,,13,15> silence a specified voice. But if 

the voice is off, a SOUND statement with an odd-numbered 

distortion value causes a single click, then silence. 

Turning the voice off causes another click. Try this 

program to see how odd numbered distortion values work: 

10 FOR J-l TO 20 

20 SO. 0,0,1,8 

25 FOR K=1T025:NEXT K 

30 SO. 0,0,0,0 

40 FOR K=1 TO 100:NEXT K 

50 NEXT J 

Experiment with a DELAY LOOP to adjust the speed of the 
clicks. 

How about a metronome for piano practice? What happens if 
you change line 20 to SO. 0,96,1,8 <STILL CLICKS, NO S0UND> 
or to SO. 0,96,2,8 DISTORTED S0UND> or to SO. 0,96,10,8 
<0N and OFF N0TE>. 

Type in direct mode a SOUND command with a loudness of 8, 
play it, then change to 15, 3, and 0 respectively. Can you 
hear a loudness of 1? <DEPENDS ON VOLUME SETTING, etc.> 


SOUND EFFECTS: 

Let's see how some sound effects are created. 

10 REM ** BOUNCING BALL ** 

20 FOR N=25 TO 1 STEP -1 

30 FOR K=1 TO 5 

40 SO. 0,125,14,6 

50 NEXT K 

60 SO. 0,0,0,0 

70 FOR K-l TO N*5:NEXT K 

80 NEXT J 

100 END 

TRY THIS ONE: What does it sound like? Notice how the 
program has been compressed. 




10 V=64:FOR M=1T030:SO.0,V-J,10,10 
20 S0.1,F+J,10,10:FOR K=1T0 30-J:NEXT K 
30 SO.0,0,0,0:S0.1,0,0,O.-FOR K=1T010:NEXT K 
40 NEXTJ:END 

Try making some changes in the variables and re-RUNning 
the program. 

More Sounds: 

5 REM **STAR WARS** 

10 FOR SD=1 TO 8:FOR SX=0 TO 2:S0. 1,12,4,8 
20 FOR SY=20 TO 160 STEP 8:S0. 0,SY,10,8*(SX>0) 

25 NEXT SY:NEXT SX 
30 NEXT SD:GOTO 100 
100 SO. 0,0,0,0:SO. 1,0,0,0 

5 REM **D00R BELL** 

10 FOR SD=1 TO 6: FOR SY = 14 TO 0 STEP -0.35-.S0. 0,255,10,SY 
20 SO. 1,252,10,SYrNEXT SY:NEXT SD 


By changing the data statement in the following, you can 
get it to play one voice of any piece of music. 

The following is a listing of the approximate note values 
to put into the "P" (PITCH) variable. 

G=162, G# = l53, A=144, A# = 136, B=128 (middle)C=121, C#=114 

D=108, D#=102, E=96, F=91, F#=85, G=83, G#=76, A=72 

The time each note is held is controlled by the delay loop, 

give a 1/4 note a value of 25, 1/2 note is 50, a whole note 

is 100. Alternate the note or PITCH value and the DELAY 

value in the data statement. 

TYPE and RUN: 

10 READ N,D 

20 SO,1,N,10,8 

30 FOR I=1T0D:NEXT 1 

40 SO.0,0,0,0 

50 IF N=999 THEN END 

60 GOTO 10 

70 DATA 40,25,31,25,29,25,53,100,40,25,31,25, 
29,25,53,100,999,0 



See if you can re-write the program to play a tune with 
several voices. 

INTRODUCTION TO GRAPHICS: 

Next we will look at the ATARI graphics. This is another 
area where you can be very creative. As you go through 
these programs try mixing SOUND and GRAPHICS. 

Color Registers: 

The ATARI computer has five color registers numbered <0> 
through <4>. Each color register has a specific 
application; for example. Color Register 4 changes the 
color of the <FRAME AROUND THE SCREEN> and Color Register 2 
changes the <BACKGROUND> color of the <SCREEN> itself. Two 
numbers, the color number and its shade value, are 
associated with each color register. 


SETCOLOR: 

Use the SETCOLOR (SE.) statement to assign specific colors 
and associated shades to each color register. The 
structure of the SETCOLOR statement is as follows: 


SE. X,Y,Z where: 

X <0 to 4> represents the (COLOR REGISTER). 

Y <0 to 15> represents the COLOR <NUMBER> 

Z <0 to 14> represents the <LUMINANCE> number. 


COLOR NUMBERS 
0 
1 
2 

3 

4 

5 


APPROXIMATE COLOR ON TV SCREEN 
Gray 
Gold 
Orange 
Red-orange 
Pink 

Purple or Violet 





129 


6 

Red-blue 

7 

Blue 

8 

Blue 

9 

Light Blue 

10 

Turquoise 

11 

Green-blue 

12 

Green 

13 

Yellow-green 

14 

Orange-green 

15 

Light Orange 


LUMINANCE: 

Luminance, (BRIGHTNESS) is changed on every (EVEN) number: 
0,2,4,6,8,10,12&14. 

Note: #10 will cause a blank screen, either reassign the 
number or press <RETURN>. 

(VARIABLES) can be substituted for numbers in the SETC0L0R 
statement. An example of this follows. 

Practice: In direct command mode use Color Register 2 or 4 

and try various colors and shades. Example: SE. 2,3,6. 

TYPE NEW, and then the following program: 

10 REM SHOWS ALL COLORS AND SHADES 
20 REM USES COLOR REGISTER 2 
30 FOR X=0 TO 15 
40 FOR Y=0 TO 14 
50 SE. 2,X,Y 

55 FOR 1=0 TO 100: NEXT I 
60 NEXT Y: NEXT X: END 

Experiment with SETCOLOR on Register 1 to determine the 
shade of the letters on the screen. 

GRAPHICS: 

TYPE NEW, and the following program: 

10 REM ****BLAST-0FF*** 

20 SE. 2,0,2 

30 FOR T=10 TO 0 STEP -1 
40 ? T 




130 


50 FOR D=1 TO 100: NEXT D 
60 NEXT T 
65 SE. 2,4,14 

70 ? CHR$(253);"BLAST-OFF ! " 

80 SE. 2,0,2: END 

GRAPHICS MODES: 

Let's take a look at some of the graphics modes available. 
We already know that (GRAPHICS 0 or GR.O) will clear the 
screen. What else does it do? 


COMPUTER 

INSTRUCTION 

OBJECT ON 

SCREEN 

SIZE (NO. 
OBJECTS ON 

OF 

SCREEN) 

GR. 

0 

regular type 1 color. 

24 

lines 

of 

40 

char. 

GR. 

1 

2 luminances) 
large type (double 

20 

lines 

of 

20 

char. 

GR. 

2 

width) (5 colors) 
large type (double 

10 

lines 

of 

20 

char. 

GR. 

3 

and width) (5 colors) 
large graphics 20 

lines 

of 

40 

squares 

GR. 

4 

squares (4 colors) 
smaller graphics 

40 

lines 

of 

80 

squares 

GR. 

5 

points (2 colors) 
smaller graphics 

40 

lines 

of 

80 

squares 

GR. 

6 

points (4 colors) 
very small graphics 

80 

lines 

of 

160 

points 

GR. 

7 

points (2 colors) 
very small graphics 

80 

lines 

of 

160 

points 

GR. 

8 

points (4 colors) 
high-resolution 

160 

lines 

of 

320 

points 

Note: 

check 

graphics (1 color, 
2 luminances 

ATARI BASIC manual for 

Graphics Modes 

9 - 

11. 


DEFAULT COLORS: 

In those Graphics Modes where large text is available 


through the PRINT #6 command if no (SETCOLOR) commands are 
given before the PRINT #6 instructions are encountered, the 
text will appear in default colors in the (COLOR REGISTER). 


COLOR REGISTER 

CHARACTER COLORED 

DEFAULT COLOR 

0 

Capital Letters 

Orange 

1 

Lowercase 

Light Green 

2 

Inverse Capitals 

Dark Blue 

3 

Inverse Lowercase 

Red 

4 

Screen Background 

Dark Gray, Black 




131 


Enter Graphics Mode 1 by typing (GR.l). Type in various 

PRINT #6 instructions to see what appears on the screen. 

Do the same with Graphics 2. To get back into the regular 

(TEXT) mode, TYPE GR.O, or use the <RESET> key. 

TYPE (exactly) and RUN: 

10 GR.l:REM USE INVERSE FOR 3 AND 4 BELOW: 

20 ? #6;"ONE two THREE four" 

30 END 


List the colors for each word: 

1. (ORANGE), 2. (LIGHT GREEN), 3. (DARK BLUE), 4. 
(RED). 

Change to GR.2 in line 10, RUN: what happened? (CHARACTERS 
GOT LARGER). 

Now TYPE in the following SETCOLOR commands after the above 
program has RUN. Do this while still in graphics mode 2, 
using the Direct Command mode. Observe what happens on the 


screen to the results of the previously RUN program. 


LINE 

SE. 0,8,0 
SE. 1,2,10 
SE. 2,15,14 

SE. 3,0,6 
SE. 4,4,2 


RESULT 

(ONE TURNS DARK BLUE) 

(TWO TURNS GOLD) 

(THREE TURNS LIGHT GOLD, 

AS DOES TEXT WINDOW) 

(FOUR TURNS GRAY) 

(BACKGROUND TURNS BRIGHT RED) 


Which thing did each change in color register affect? 


LIST the above program and add the following lines. Then 


RUN again. 

30 FOR X=0 TO 3:REM NUMBER OF (COLOR REGISTER) 
40 FOR Y=0 TO 10:REM NUMBER OF (FLASHES) 

50 SE. X,0,0 

60 FOR TIME=1 TO 100:NEXT TIME:REM (DELAY) 

70 SE. X,0,14 

80 FOR TIME=1 TO 100:NEXT TIME:REM DELAY 
90 NEXT Y: NEXT X 



132 


RUN the program, then press the RESET key and add the 
following line. Now RUN it again. 

15 SE. 4,4,10 

NOTE: Whenever GR.0,l,or 2 is executed, the screen is 
(CLEARED) and default colors are placed back in the color 
registers. 

Other Graphics Modes (3-8): 

These modes are sometimes referred to as low resolution or 
LORES Graphics. 

To see all the colors and shades available to you, type in 

the following program and RUN it. You can speed it up or 

slow it down after you have run it the first time. 

10 REM ***FLASHING COLORS*** 

20 GR.0:FOR R= 0 TO 255 

30 POKE 710,R: FOR 1= 1 TO 250 :NEXT I 

40 P0S. 10,10:?" THIS IS COLOR ”;INT(R/16) 

50 NEXT (R): END 

Note: there are 2 new commands in this program, P0S. we 
will look at later. POKE is a special command which can be 
used to send instructions directly to computer memory, to 
be acted upon immediately. In the program above it is used 
to put a color number into the memory location which 
controls colors. POKE has its counterpart, PEEK whick 
allows us to look at a memory location to determine what 
number is in that location. We can then use that 
information to create other effects. 



133 


PLOT and DRAWTO Commands: 

We can put points of color or text at specific locations on 
the screen. The PLOT and DRAWTO commands make this 
possible. 

The PLOT command is: (PLOT X,Y) where "X” represents the 
number of spaces across the screen, and "Y" is the number 
of spaces down the screen. Visualize a grid pattern on the 
screen. A (GRAPHICS) point is placed at the intersection 
of the X and Y coordinates given in the structure of the 
command. In Graphics Mode 0 and 3, coordinates can be 
given from 0 to 39 on the X axis and from 0 to 19 (0 to 23 
in GR.O) of the Y axis. Try placing a few points on the 
screen using the Direct Command. For example: PLOT 4,8 

This places a (HEART) at the given location on the screen. 
To use GR. 3, first TYPE COLOR X (SEE TABLE), then try: 
PLOT 4,8 

NOW try to put a point in each corner of the screen, and 
one in the center. 

REMEMBER that the COLOR instruction does NOT place a color 
in any of the registers, but does tell the computer which 
register will be controlling the color of the graphics 
point. 

Determine the missing instruction from the following 

program and write it in: (You do not need to type it.) 

PROGRAM 
10 GR. 3 

20 SETC0L0R 3,9,4 
30 PLOT 15,6 


MISSING 

(LINE 15 OR 25 COLOR 1 



A COLOR command directly controls the choice of the color 
register involved in any following PLOT or DRAWTO commands. 
The following table illustrates this relationship. Example: 
COLOR 1 corresponds to Color Register 0, COLOR 2 to Color 
Register 1, COLOR 3 to Color Register 2, and COLOR 3 to 
Color Register 3. 

Try this SAMPLE PROGRAM: using COLOR Command. 

10 GR. 3 
20 SE. 0,6,8 
30 SE. 2,0,6 
40 COLOR 1 
50 PLOT 15,15 

BEFORE you RUN it, see if you can figure out what the 
colors will be (HINT: look at Color List). 

Change the COLOR and SETCOLOR instruction to get different 

colored squares on the screen. 

TYPE the following Program and RUN it: 

10 GR.3 
20 COLOR 1 

30 X=INT(RND(1)*40):Y=INT(RND(1)*20) 

40 PLOT X,Y 
50 GOTO 20 

HIT <BREAK> and ADD: 

20 C=INT(RND(1)*4) 

25 COLOR C 

Put in a FOR/NEXT loop to create some interesting effects. 
DRAWTO X,Y: 

To Draw a line, you must start from a PLOT point and DRAWTO 

a new point. Enter and RUN the following: 

10 REM FLASHING LIGHTNING 
20 GR. 3 
30 COLOR 1 
40 PLOT 10,0 
42 DRAWTO 20,19 




135 


After RUNning the program, add: 

45 FOR X=1 TO 10 
50 SE. 0,X,8 

60 FOR D=1 TO 100: NEXT D 
70 SE. 0,9,14 
80 FOR D=1 TO 100:NEXT D 
100 NEXT X 

TRY changing the Graphics Mode to GR. 5 and RUN the 
program. Then try GR.7 and RUN it again. 

Using only PLOT and DRAWTO, see if you can draw a square 
near the center of the screen. Draw it in Graphics 3 and 
make each side 25 units long. RUN your program. 

Show it to the INSTRUCTOR before continuing. 

The PLOT command puts points at the intersection of a grid 
position on the screen. 

LIST your square program and change it to GR. 5. Now try 
to POSITION it back in the center of the screen. When you 
are sure you have succeeded in this, try GR. 7. 

POSITION (P0S.X,Y): is similar, except the coordinate would 
not be illuminated, rather the next PRINT statement to be 
executed would be located at that point. POSITION can also 
be used in Graphics Modes 0, 1, and 2 to move the cursor to 
different places. It is also used to place text on the 
screen at specific locations, it replaces, TAB, VTAB, and 
HTAB 

Example: 10 P0S. 0,0:?”*, will put an asterisk in the 

upper left corner of the screen. See if you can write a 
program to put a character in the upper right, lower left. 


etc. 



All the Graphics we have done so far have had a (Text 
Window) at the bottom. On the 800 model, to remove it, 
just add 16 to the Graphics Mode number. It is usually 
listed as (NUMBER) + 16, but sometimes you will see it 
already added, as 17. On the XL model you will need to put 
a delay loop to hold it on the screen. 

To see POSITION at work in GR.O, 1 AND 2, try the following 

10 GR.O 
20 POS. 5,5 
30 ?"TEXT" 

ALSO:10 GR. 2 

20 POS. 8,4 
30 ? #6;"text" 

AND: 10 GR. 1 

20 P0S.8,4:?#6;"TEXT" 

Try changing the POSITION "coordinates" of line 20 in each 
of the programs, but remember your limitations from the 
"Graphics Mode" chart, otherwise you may "ERROR OUT" with 


the cursor out of range 
Happy PLOTing!! 



SUMMARY 


This workbook began with an introduction to the 
keyboard and screen editing. Lesson two introduced the 
concepts of BASIC programming statements and commands, then 
explored the treatment of mathematical functions on the 
computer. The third lesson introduced program planning and 
the use of computer peripherals, including the disk drive 
and the printer. In lesson four we expanded the 
understanding of programming features. Lesson five looked 
at the BASIC concepts of branching and loops. The 
treatment of variables in BASIC was developed in lesson 
six, while lesson seven explored functions programmed into 
the computer. In the concluding lesson, we were introduced 
to the use of sound, color, and graphics in programming. 
Throughout the workbook there was an attempt to allow the 
student to discover as many of the programming concepts as 
possible. You should now continue with studies of 
computers and computer programming. You can work on your 
own or select other courses as they are available. 





