


©BOD^^asz&QDffi^ 






















Report Documentation Page 


Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 


Public reporting burden for the collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and 
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, 
including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington 
VA 22202-4302. Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it 
does not display a currently valid OMB control number. 


1. REPORT DATE 

JUL 2010 


2. REPORT TYPE 


3. DATES COVERED 

00-07-2010 to 00-08-2010 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Fires. A Joint Publication for U.S. Artillery Professionals. July - August 
2010 

6. AUTHOR(S) 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Fires,Building 652, Room 203, McNair Road,Fort Sill,OK,73503 

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 


5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 


5b. GRANT NUMBER 

5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 

5d. PROJECT NUMBER 


5e. TASK NUMBER 


5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 


10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 

11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 


12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited 


13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 


14. ABSTRACT 


15. SUBJECT TERMS 

16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 


a. REPORT 

unclassified 


b. ABSTRACT 

unclassified 


c. THIS PAGE 

unclassified 


17. LIMITATION OF 

18. NUMBER 

ABSTRACT 

OF PAGES 

Same as 

52 

Report (SAR) 



19a. NAME OF 
RESPONSIBLE PERSON 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std Z39-18 






Mud t(| Space 

Adapting to evolving operational environments: 

Pa 9 e 5 ADA provides 360-degree Fires for full-spectrum operations 

By CSM James T. Carr Sr. 

Versatile 





The transformation of a firing battery into an in lieu of target 
p age 14 acquisition battery 

By CPT Urban Picard 

Expeditionary 

p i6 PATRIOT missile battery arrives in Poland 

9 By 1LT William A. Green 

paqe 19 Company level fire support in Afghanistan during OEF IX and X 

By 1LT Brian R. Buchholz 

Sustainable 

page 24 Arm Y Capstone Concept: A new direction for a stronger future 

By Jennifer Blais 


Headquarters, Department of the Army • PB644-10-4 















Developing collaborative governance 
page 27 ' n * rac l : ‘Reverse Helicopter’ ideology 
fosters political progress 

By LTC Lance Oskey and COL Darryl Williams 

p 31 C-RAM and IFPC: The way ahead 

9 By CPT Edmund A. Guy III 

Lethal and nonlethal 


DISCLAIMER: Fires, a professional bulletin, is published 
bimonthly by Headquarters, Department of the Army under 
the auspices of the Fires Center of Excellence (Building 
758, McNair Road), Fort Sill, Okla. The views expressed are 
those of the authors and not the Department of Defense 
or its elements. Fires' content doesn’t necessarily reflect 
the U.S. Army's position or supersede information in other 
official Army publications. Use of news items constitutes 
neither affirmation of their accuracy nor product endorse¬ 
ments. Fires is printed by Monarch Litho Inc., a private 
firm in no way connected with the Department of the 
Army. Fires assumes no responsibility for any unsolicited 
material. By Order of the Secretary of the Army: 

George W. Casey Jr. 

General, United States Army 
Chief of Staff 

Official: ..■ .» j 

.■•'■i-cnyr-t C. i 

Joyce E. Morrow 

Administrative Assistant to the 
Secretary of the Army, 1013002 

David D. Halverson 

Major General, United States Army 

Commanding General 
Fort Sill, Okla. 


Editor-in-Chief: Sharon McBride 
Managing Editor: Jennifer M. Blais 
Art Director: Jason Kelly 
Assistant Editor: Paul Jiron 


The intelligence fight in a 
page 33 counterinsurgency environment 

By CPT Robert Destefano, CPT Peter Graham and 
CPT Andrew Narcum 

paqe 38 Scalable fire support for limited warfare 

By CSM Dennis J. Woods 

Interoperable 

Counterinsurgency close air support: 
page 40 p uzz | e pieces for a successful mission 

By CPT Jonathan McCoy 

Dominating the spectrum: Army 
Page 45 integration of electronic warfare 

By COL David J. McCauley and LTC Eric A. Healey 

International artillery focus: Developing 
page 48 and training the Afghanistan army artillery 
during counterinsurgency operations 

By 1st Lt. Gary Deitch, U.S. Marine Corps 



On the combi* 


Soldiers from U.S. Army Europe’s Alpha Battery, 5th Battalion, 
7th Air Defense Artillery Regiment, familiarize members of the 
Polish military on how to conduct preventive maintenance on 
the PATRIOT Missile Systems in Morag, Poland, June 1. 
(Photo by SSG Lawree Washington, U.S. Army) 


PURPOSE: Founded in 2007, Fires serves as a forum 
for the professional discussions of U.S. Army and Marine 
Field Artillery (FA) and Army Air Defense Artillery (ADA) 
professionals, both active and Reserve Component 
(RC); disseminates professional knowledge about the 
FA’s and ADA’s progress, developments and best use in 
campaigns; cultivates a common understanding of the 
power, [imitations and application of joint fires, both lethal 
and nonlethal; fosters joint fires interdependency among 
the armed services: and promotes the understanding of 
and interoperability between the FA’s and ADA’s active and 
RC units—all of which contribute to the good of the FA and 
ADA, Army, joint and combined forces, and our nation. 


OFFICIAL DISTRIBUTION: Free copies are sent to USA 
and USMC FA units: 7 per corps artillery, FA/fires brigade, 
brigade combat team (BCT), Stryker cavalry regimenf 
(SCR), FA Marine regiment and battlefield coordination 
detachment (BCD) headquarters; 13 per FA/fires/battalion/ 
squadron-3 per fire support element (FSE), fires and ef¬ 
fects cell (FEC), effects coordination cell (ECC) fire support 
cell (FSC), fire support coordination center (FSCC), force 
fires coordination center (FFCC) and separate battery or 
detachment; 3 per fire support team (FlST) and combat 
observation lasing team (COLT); and 1 per Master Gun¬ 
ner and Fire Support Officer (FSO). Free copies to Army 
ADA units: 7 per Army air and missile defense command 
(AAMDC) and ADA brigade headquarters; 13 per ADA 
battalion; and 3 per air defense airspace management 
(ADAM) cell and separate battery or detachment.The FA 
and ADA Schools’ departments, directorates and divisions 
each get 2 copies. Other U.S. Army and armed services 
units/organizations and U.S. government agencies that 
work with FA or ADA personnel, equipment, doctrine, 
tactics, training organization or leadership issues may 
request a free copy—including, but not limited to, ROTCs, 
recruiting commands, libraries, attaches, liaison officers, 
state adjutants general, public affairs offices, military 
academies, laboratories, arsenals, major commands, etc. 
Contact Fires at http://sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/. 


SUBSCRIPTIONS: Those not eligible for official distribu¬ 
tion may subscribe to Fires via theTJ.S. Superintendent of 
Documents, P.O. Box 37154, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954 
(1-866-512-1800). 

SUBMISSIONS: Email to the Editor, Fires, at firesbul- 
letin@conus.army.mil; mail to P.O. Box 33311, Fort Sill, 
OK 73503-0311; overnjght to Building 758, Room 7, 
McNair Road, Fort Sill, Ok 73503-5600- or call at DSbl 
639-5121/6856 or commercial (580) 442-5121/6806. 


REPRINTS: Firesls pleased to grant permission to reprint; 
please credit Fires, the authorfs) and photographers. 

POSTMASTER: Fires( USPS 309-010) (ISSN 1935-4096) 
is published bimonthly; periodical postage paid by Depart¬ 
ment of the Army at Lawton, OK 73501 and an additional 
mailing post office. Send address changes to Fires, P.O. 
Box 33311, Fort Sill, OK 73503-0311. 


ADA 24/7 Hotline & Email 

(Organization, Doctrine, 
Material, Training) 

DSN 978-5312 or 
(915)568-5312 
ada_fires@bliss.army.mil 


FA 24/7 Hotline & Email 

(Organization, Doctrine, 
Material, Training) 
DSN 639-2204 or 
(580) 442-2204 
redleg@conus.army.mil 



EG Forward 




COMMANDING GENERAL, W & ARMY FJRE5- CENTER OF EXCELLENCE AND FOftT SILL 
BLDG 455 McMai r Awe-fiue, Suite 100, Fort Sill, OK ?3S03 

July 15,2010 

To the entire Fires community, 

Thank you for making the 2010 Fires Seminar: Adaptable Fires for 
Full-Spectrum Operations a colossal success. Here, at the Fires Center of 
Excellence, we have received a massive amount of positive feedback from 
all of our Fires partners, both military and civilian, on how well the seminar 
was facilitated and presented. So once again - tha nk you everyone - for a 
job well done. 

It’s definitely an exciting time to be a Fires professional. New 
doctrine is emerging at a record pace so I encourage you, as Fires 
professionals, to keep up to date. For example, in December 2009, the 
Training and Doctrine Command released DA Pam 525-3-0, The Army 
Capstone Concept Operational Adaptability - Operation under Conditions 
of Uncertainty and Complexity in an Era of Persistent Conflict. I also 
recently revealed my Fires Warfighting Functional Concept, which will 
set the foundation for Fires in the 2016-2028 timeframe. It is nested with 
the Army Operating Concept and the Army Capstone Concept as they are 
being developed in parallel. This concept will serve as the overarching 
framework for Air Defense Artillery and Field Artillery branches. 

A new version of FM 5-0, The Operations Process, has also 
recently been released. This revamped FM introduces “Design” into 
Anny Doctrine, which gives us a new ideology to understand complex 
problems more fully before we seek to solve them through our traditional 
planning processes. Change 1 to FM 3-0, Operations, is also scheduled to 


3 July-August 2010 • 


Fires 







be released by October 2010. This change replaces Command and Control 
with Mission Command as a warfighting function. It further refines 
Inform and Influence Activities and their application across full-spectrum 
operations. Finally, Change 1 will introduce the concept that nonlethal 
fires, traditionally a Fires responsibility, will now be applied as scalable 
capabilities available to all warfighting functions. 

I also want to take the time to encourage everyone to actively 
engage in intellectual discussions. I firmly believe we must all be involved, 
take ownership and share our combined wisdom in order to continuously 
evolve and adapt. A great way to facilitate this is to fully embrace 
our Fires social networking forums. As we move deeper into the 21st 
Century, cyberspace and its associated technologies offer unprecedented 
opportunities, but it is imperative upon us, as Fire professionals, to fully 
understand every possibility - both offensive and defensive within this 
domain. 

The bottom line is we must continue “Adapting to Evolving 
Operational Environments, ” which is also the theme of the July-August 
2010 of the Fires Bulletin. This edition is full of articles proving as a 
Fires force we have the willingness and the aptitude to do what it takes to 
dominate in full-spectrum operations. Thank you for all you do. 

Fit to Fight - Fires Strong! 


Sincerely, 



David D. Halverson 
Major General, U.S. Anny 
Commanding 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • July-August 2010 










mud to space 



Adapting to evolving 

operational environments: 
ADA provides 360-degree Fires 
for full-spectrum operations 


By CSM James T. Carr Sr., 

command sergeant major of the U.S. Army Air Defense Artillery 
and Air Defense Artillery School 


"Operational adaptability requires a mindset based on flexibility of thought calling for 

LEADERS AT ALL LEVELS WHO ARE COMFORTABLE WITH COLLABORATIVE PLANNING AND DECENTRALIZED 
EXECUTION, HAVE A TOLERANCE FOR AMBIGUITY AND POSSESS THE ABILITY AND WILLINGNESS TO MAKE 
RAPID ADjUSTMENTS ACCORDING TO THE SITUATION.” 

GEN MARTIN E. DEMPSEY 

U.S. Army Training and doctrine Command Commanding General 




O perational adaptability is a key 
concept that will continue to guide 
the U. S. Army for years to come. In 
December 2009, the Training and Doctrine 
Command released DA Pam 525-3-0, The 
Army Capstone Concept Operational 
Adaptability - Operation under Conditions 
of Uncertainty and Complexity in an Era of 
Persistent Conflict. This pivotal document 
will not only guide the Air Defense Artillery 
and Air Defense Artillery School but the 
U.S. Army as a whole. We will continue 
to evolve our leader development strategy, 
which is central to Officer Education System 
and NCO Education System training, 
as we field future systems, develop new 
techniques, tactics and procedures, to hone 
our training programs and warfighting 
capabilities. 

Recently, MG David D. Halverson, 
commanding general of the Fires Center 
of Excellence and Fort Sill, Okla., revealed 
his Fires Functional Concept, which will 
set the foundation for Fires in the 2016- 
2028 timeframe. It is nested with the Army 
Operating Concept and the Army Capstone 
Concept. The Fires Functional Concept will 
serve as the overarching framework for 
Air Defense Artillery and Field Artillery 
capabilities for future support to our 
Army. We all need to stay informed as 
this key concept evolves, and to develop 
our courses accordingly that will see us 
through operations in the future operating 
environment. 

But what does all this mean to the Air 
5 July-August 2010 • Fires 


Defense Artillery branch? 

The Air and Missile Defense is being 
looked at as a key player of the Fires 
Warfighting Function. ADA, together with 
the FA, is pushing forward and placing 
more emphasis on providing a wide range 
of conventional to precision capabilities. 

The multitude of Army missions requires 
operationally adaptable Fires. This in 
essence means matching a wide range of 
targets with any sensor and the right effects 
to achieve timely, effective and efficient 
Fires in a wide range of environmental 
and operational conditions, including 
homeland defense. This is definitely the 
ADA’s functional area of expertise. 

ADA forces will continue to rapidly 
deploy to global locations and will 
plan, integrate and execute offensive 
and defensive counter-air with joint and 
multinational forces at tactical to strategic 
levels. ADA will provide a mix of weapon 
systems to include multi-mission sensors 
and shooters. We will provide the right 
set of air defense capabilities to support 
maneuver and other supported commanders ’ 
operations. We will continue to exemplify 
‘operational adaptability’ in providing 
360-degree, persistent aerial coverage and 
protection - wherever and whenever. 

The concept of‘operational adaptability’ 
is made up of several principles: versatile 
and agile, expeditionary, sustainable, 
interoperable, and lastly, lethal and 
nonlethal. Each of these tenets play a key 
role in inculcating ‘operationaladaptability’ 


into our fighting force for the next few years, 
ersatile and agile. I believe our ADA 
Soldiers and leaders have this 
concept down to a science. Forthe past year, 
versatile and agile has been our mainstay 
as we have deployed into the U.S. Central 
Command area of operations, sustained 24/7 
operations in the National Capitol Region 
and, this is especially true as we completed 
the move from Fort Bliss, Texas, to Fort Sill. 
Our school’s move became permanent as our 
‘First to Fire’ statue also took up residence 
at Fort Sill. This statue is a significant 
piece of our culture and history and with its 
placement here we unequivocally now call 
Fort Sill ‘home.’ It is a new environment, 
but our Soldiers have proven to be very 
adaptable. We are good from every angle 
of our foxhole. The Fort Sill and Lawton 
community, as a whole, have been great to 
the ADA. Our community partnership with 
Lawton is the best I’ve seen in my 30-plus 
years in the Army. It is phenomenal. 

xpeditionary. While some air defenders 
are participating in combat operations 
in Iraq and Afghanistan, others are protecting 
the United States against terrorist attacks. 
On a rotational basis, AD Abattalions from 
the Army National Guard are serving as 
America’s ‘palace guard,’ employing 
Avengers, Sentinel radars and surface-to-air 
missile systems. 

ustainable. Our challenge is to 
continue to go to school while at 
war. Ninety percent of our classes are now 
being held at Fort Sill. We are producing 




















innovative staffs and commanders who 
understand how to interact with other 
services’ leaders and how to get the most 
out of the full set of joint and interagency 
capabilities. 

Being a professional of your branch 
means continuing to pursue educational 
opportunities inside and outside the Army. 
We have continued to work with civilian 
institutions to ensure credit for our military 
occupational specialty courses. 

ethal and nonlethal. Although 
nonlethal effects fall outside our 
arena, we will continue to support composite 
organizations that will provide the right mix 
of capabilities at the right time. The ADA 
will continue to provide specific effects in 
conjunction with the field artillery. ADA 
will provide offensive and defensive Fires 
through contributions to joint concepts and 
doctrine such as Joint Fire Support, Global 
Missile Defense, Integrated Air and Missile 
Defense, and Offensive and Defensive 
Counter Air Operations. 


i nteroperable. We will continue to 
leverage our sister services’ mobility, 
reach and lethality to satisfy mission 
requirements. From our air defense airspace 
management cells to manning our Ballistic 
Missile Defense System, we never go to 
war alone. We will continue to serve with 
our sister services and coalition partners 
to get the mission done. We will continue 
to evolve to manage the diverse air and 
missile threats that continue to be seen in 
the 21st century. 

daptable Fires. ADA Soldiers will 
stand ready to defend deployed U. S. 
forces, allies and host population centers 
against uncertainty and complexity around 
the globe. We will continue to deploy and 
man Counter Rocket, Artillery and Mortar 
systems to counter indirect-fire attacks 
on forward operating bases in Iraq and 
Afghanistan. ADA Soldiers assigned to 
ADAM cells will continue to manage 
the airspace above the battlefield in Iraq 
and Afghanistan, coordinating combat 


air support missions with friendly rocket, 
mortar and artillery fire missions. 

At home, in Europe and across the 
Pacific, ADA Soldiers will continue to 
operate newly fielded Terminal Fligh 
Altitude Area Defense and combat-proven 
PATRIOT and Avenger systems and stand 
ready to defend against air and missile 
attack anywhere around the globe. Similarly, 
Army National Guard ADA units continue 
to operate Ground-Based Interceptors in 
Alaska and California to defend America 
against long-range ballistic missile strikes. 

In summary, our skills and our units 
have never been in so much demand as they 
are today. We will continue to grow as the 
missions and demands on our force continue 
to grow more complex. No matter where 
maneuver forces find themselves we will 
be there - providing a layered air defense 
shield with our joint and coalition partners 
from mud to space. 

First to fire! 



Soldiers from U.S. Army Europe's Alpha Battery, 5th Battalion, 7th Air Defense Artillery Regiment, familiarize members of the Polish military on how 
to conduct preventive maintenance on the PATRIOT Missile Systems in Morag, Poland, June 1. This is the first time a U.S. missile system has come 
to Poland for a new rotational training program intended to familiarize Polish armed forces on the PATRIOT Missile System. The training is designed 
to provide mutual benefits for improving Polish air defense capabilities while also developing the skills of U.S. PATRIOT crew members. This type of 
mutual training helps to expand U.S. and Poland air and missile defense cooperation while helping to strengthen the partnership between the U.S. 

and Poland. (Photo bySSG Lawree Washington, U.S. Army) 














versatile 



By LTC Joel E. Hamby 



Being selected as an advisor is a tough duty, arguably more intellectual in its 

TASKS THAN PHYSICAL; IT SURELY WILL STRESS YOUR IMAGE OF YOURSELF AS A SOLDIER 
AND PROFESSIONAL AND EITHER UNDERMINE OR UPLIFT YOUR FAITH IN YOUR ARMY AND 
THE ARMY YOU ARE ADVISING. IN MANY WAYS, ADVISING IS EQUIVALENT TO MANY OF THE 
'FAITH BASED’ 12-STEP REHABILITATION PROGRAMS THAT SEEM TO ABOUND THESE DAYS. 

If advising is anything, it is truly a faith-based operation. You often have to 

BELIEVE AND CARE MORE IN THE ULTIMATE OUTCOME OF THE MISSION THAN IT APPEARS 
YOUR COUNTERPARTS IN THE COALITION FORCES AND IRAQL SECURITY FORCES DO. AND 
BELIEVE IT OR NOT, YOU ARE JUST AS WELL EQUIPPED AS ANY OTHER SOLDIER IN THE ARMY 
FOR THIS MISSION. 



July-August 2010 • Fires 


Photo by SPC Maurice Galloway, U.S. Army 


lb 


r e 11th Brigade, 3rd Iraqi Army Division, is, in many 
ways, a typical Iraqi army brigade, and it is unique in 
many ways. Building rapport with your Iraqi counterpart 
means respecting and trusting each other’s culture and traditions; 
it’s not just simply participating in a one-way trade to get what 
the coalition desires. Your past experiences in Army tactical units 
will come in handy in your tour as an advisor, but it will be far 
and away from what you’ve done all ofyour conventional Army 
areer in most cases. That being said, this duty can be extremely 
Similar to being an observer/controller in combat. 

i Both militaries have a lot to teach each other, but it will 
require more patience, understanding, cultural understanding 
and more guile than you ever believed you had in yourself to 
complete your tour successfully. 1 used T.E. Lawrence’s The 
Seven Pillars of Wisdom, which still truly embodies what an 
advisor to Arab militaries should strive to be; the U.S. 
























Corps 1940 Small Wars Manual', and Raphael Patai’s The Arab 
Mind as primary sources for the basis of this article as these were 
the books that formed my outlook and decisions for my team during 
our tour with the Iraqi army. I hope they will guide you as well. 

Our experiences as advisors are encapsulated here in 12, loosely- 
based rules in no particular order. They are from our experiences and 
should be modified immediately by the advisor on the ground to fit 
emerging circumstances. As a field grade officer in these troubled 
times, you stand a very good chance of ending up as an advisor 
before the end of your military career. Just remember everything 
you do has consequences, and the advisor has to be on the lookout 
for the deadly outcomes of short-term thinking. Your team’s mission 
will endure from one team to the next. It’s a long distance run and 
not a short sprint, so short-term success might portend long term 
failure. 

Don’t minnon image. The Iraqi army is not 
the U.S. Army. Memorize that statement and repeat it 
every morning and night. As Lawrence said in his 
immortal 27 Articles, “Do not try to trade on what you 
know of fighting. The Hejaz confounds ordinary tactics. Learn the 
Bedu principles of war as thoroughly and as quickly as you can, 
for till you know them your advice will be no good to the Sherif.” 
This is not to say that the Bedouin tribes that Lawrence advised 
and the tactics they used will 
be reflective of the Iraqi 
army today, but the B edouin 
is as reflective of the Iraqi 
character and Arab mind as 
is the frontier influence on 
the American character and 
temperament. 

There is tendency 
among new advisors to go 
over to the Iraqi army side 
and immediately dictate 
to them how to solve all 
their problems by simply 
adopting the U.S. method. 

“The belief that inside the 
heart of every Iraqi there 
is a tiny American trying to get out then reinforces the natural 
human tendency to project one’s values and priorities onto others,” 
(Lawrence, 27 Articles). This doesn’t work as well as most think 
it will. 

Part of your role as an advisor is to get the Iraqis to find their 
own way to an Iraqi solution. Use their doctrine to help guide you 
toward what you think the end result should be. This involves 
learning their systems and standing operating procedures, and it 
can be very difficult to find a subject matter expert or a product to 
use as a baseline. You must become that subject matter expert by 
whatever means necessary. 

U.S. solutions cannot always solve everything for the Iraqi 
army. The coalition helped the Iraqi army set up identical brigades 
when they stood up the larger formations of the Iraqi army, but 
these structures were nearly cookie-cutter, identical brigades. We 
built the fighting formations first, and only later did we follow up 
with the logistics formations and specialty units, such as engineers, 
explosive ordnance disposal, mortars, etc. When the Iraqi army 
went back under control of the Ministry of Defense, some of the 
older army officers didn’t think a brigade was complete without 
a commando company under the brigade commander’s personal 
guidance. And so, despite the official organization structure, these 
companies were formed and equipment given to them from units 


that had been formed already. Now, we never quite figured out 
what the commando company did during the previous regime, and 
sometimes it’s not quite sure whether or not the Iraqi leadership 
did either. But they were bound and determined to have them, so 
they did it their way. 

Get used to this and be happy when they do it themselves. If 
it’s not perfect to your way of thinking, at least they simply did it. 
Forgetting to mirror image the Iraqi army is one of the most valuable 
things you can do, but it is a difficult task to unlearn the lessons 
of your military background. Never forget frustration is the bread 
and butter of an advisor, and the Iraqi army is not the U.S. Army. 

Respect their culture, but make 
them respect yours as well. You are 
going to be living with your counterparts in the Iraqi 
security forces more than with the coalition. You need 
to understand and respect their culture while making them respect 
your culture. You must adjust to their battle-rhythm to get anything 
done. 

We found we mostly were able to get things done with our 
counterparts from 8 a.m. until 1 p.m. in the afternoon, then everyone 
went down for a nap in the afternoon (except if on a mission) and 
were ready to go back to work at about 6 p.m. until the wee hours 
of the morning. Mostly, the mornings were a rush of activity or 

daily missions while the 
evenings proved to be the 
best time for getting down 
to the intellectual business 
of advising. You will have 
to get used to this way of 
life, so you and your team 
probably will have to adopt 
the Iraqi afternoon nap (or 
kai-lula) to avoid the heat 
of the day. Don’t forget 
this and don’t expect to 
have a meeting with your 
counterpart at 3 p.m. on a 
routine basis. 

Your interpreters will 
be invaluable to you if you 
incorporate them into the routine ofthe team and use them extensively 
as cultural advisors to tell you what is normal and what isn’t in your 
interactions with the Iraqi army. “You must find these inner reasons 
(they will be denied, but are none the less in operation) before 
shaping your arguments for one course or other. Allusion is more 
effective than logical exposition: they dislike concise expression. 
Their minds work just as ours do, but on different premises. There 
is nothing unreasonable, incomprehensible or inscrutable in the 
Arab. Experience of them and knowledge of their prejudices will 
enable you to foresee their attitude and possible course of action 
in nearly every case.” (See Lawrence, 27 Articles.) 

Every meeting usually is accompanied by Chai tea and other 
liquid refreshments as a basic part of Iraqi hospitality. If you don’t 
smoke, don’t accept that first cigarette or you’ll be smoking for 
the rest of the tour. Make them respect that you don’t smoke, even 
if they continue to offer a cigarette at every meeting. The mostly 
Kurdish 11th Brigade wasn’t big on small talk and greetings, but 
it was still expected to have that casual and friendly interchange. 

You must know the character of your unit. Sunni and Shi’ite 
officers and soldiers will expect the standard greetings and small 
talk until they are ready to get down to work. Iraqis, like most 
Arabs, have a love of their spoken language and often are effusive 
in their greetings. Staff Brigadier General Rashid didn’t appreciate 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • July-August 2010 8 



“Pant of your role as an 
advisor is to get the Iraqis 
to find their own way to 
an Iraqi solution. Use their 
doctrine to help guide you 
toward what you think the 
end result should be.” 




PowerPoint presentations, but preferred hearing our advice in 
sessions that normally lasted three to four hours over Kent cigarettes 
and Chai. He would play devil’s advocate through all of it, before 
he eventually took our advice (or at least most of it). On average, 
Iraqi soldiers work 21 days and then take seven days of leave 
(jaza). Not much will get in the way of jaza, and for this reason 
most formations have a deputy commander who takes over while 
the commander is on leave. Make sure you plan around this, as 
most units don’t do anything without the commander’s approval. 

If religion comes up, I would respect the introduction of Islam 
into the conversation and either steer the talk around it or tactfully 
discuss the argument on the merits of my personal religion. I suggest 
to never getting into a point-to-point discussion that compares 
religions if you are not comfortable debating fine points or if you 
are agnostic. Personally, I chose the avenue of respect and kept 
silent on my own religious preferences. 

Politics (at least outside the realm of the army) were not much 
discussed and usually are safely skirted in conversation. Politics 
are a staple in Iraqi life though, and it has its effect everywhere at 
the tribal, city and national level. Understand who belongs to what 
tribe and to whom they owe their allegiances. However, you can’t 
do this through direct questioning, but rather close observation. 
General Rashid often claimed to be just a simple soldier, but, if 
that was true, he was a simple soldier with an uncanny instinct for 
the political realm he was playing in. If 1 ventured into that topic 
with him, I would attempt to drive the conversation about how the 
political environment was influencing our area of responsibility 
instead of staying on the macro level. In this way, I kept us in the 
realm of things we could influence under the auspices of the Iraqi 
security forces. If you take my advice, gradually, a respect and 
rapport will build based on mutual understanding. 

Don’t give them anything . As Lawrence 
said, “Do not let them ask you for things, since their 
greed will then make them look upon you only as a cow 
to milk.” In setting up the Iraqi security forces during 
the middle of a full-blown counterinsurgency, the coalition made 
a set of errors that have compounded with time. We set up the Iraqi 
security forces fighting units first and supplied them with everything 
they needed. The logistic units were set up only afterwards, and, 
for a long time, they were wholly dependent on coalition support. 
During 2008 and 2009, we were under coalition and Ministry of 
Defense dictate, letting the Iraqi security forces support themselves 
so their system can begin to function properly. 

Many coalition units and advisors have been circumventing 
these orders by continuing to give barrier material, ammunition, 
medical supplies and class IX repair parts to their particular Iraqi 
units providing them what they need to accomplish the mission at 
hand. It’s American ‘can-do-itiveness’ at its best, but it also is short¬ 
term thinking at its finest. The Iraqi security forces have gotten very 
used to the fact the coalition will provide when the Iraqi system 
doesn’t and are more than content to say the system is impossible 
and ask you, sometimes not so politely, to provide their needs for 
the mission at hand. 

Admittedly, the Iraqi system doesn’t work very well, if at all. The 
supply system is dependent on the battalion orbrigade submitting the 
appropriate paperwork (the infamous Iraqi Form 101) that receives 
the appropriate signature of the commander at each and every level 
until it reaches the Ministry of Defense where it is either filled or 
lolled (and most often killed). If the submitting officer is lucky, he 
will get a call when it is killed. There is no tracking system, higher 
or lower, and no apparent sense of responsibility from higher to 
help out their subordinate brigades or battalions. 

Food and fuel systems actually work well with the ever-present 

9 July-August 2010 • 


corruption endemic in the system (such as filling your 16k liter tanker 
of fuel and actually signing for 20k from the division). Repair parts 
requests are almost never filled, and instead the division issues the 
brigades millions of Iraqi dinars to purchase the parts for vehicle on 
local purchase or from the black market. In some cases, the repair 
parts bought still bear the identification tag from the national depot 
at Taji. 

Every advisor will have his own stories of endemic Iraqi 
corruption, but corruption is in almost every system, even our own. 
If the system doesn’t work, we need to force the Iraqi security forces 
to recognize the system is flawed and let it break, if necessary, under 
the weight of its own incompetence. That is why we must refuse 
to supply the Iraqi security forces any longer, especially when the 
Iraqi government has requested we no longer do this. 

Many of your team members will disagree with this step, as 
one of the surest way to get the Iraqi security forces’ attention, at 
least for a day, is to give them the gear and ammo their system 
cannot or will not provide. But giving them the supplies now only 
prolongs the life of the flawed Iraqi system. No American system 
is going to replace the Iraqi way, so when it breaks, the Iraqis will 
find a way of fixing it so it works. As a division advisor told us at 
the Phoenix Academy at Taji, “you must have the courage to let 
them fail.” We have to find that courage or the Iraqi security forces 
system will never repair itself into something workable. 

Make the Iraqi army do their 
mission and train themselves with 
your advice and support. The coalition 
has taken on the attributes of a drug dealer toward the 
Iraqi security forces. The Iraqi security forces are the addict, and 
if we want them to be able to stand on their own as the coalition 
draws down, we must wean them off the ‘crack’ of coalition support 
to which we have addicted them. “Do not try to do too much with 
your own hands. Better the Arabs do it tolerably than that you do 
it perfectly. It is their war, and you are to help them, not to win it 
for them. Actually, also, under the very odd conditions of Arabia, 
your practical work will not be as good as, perhaps, you think it 
is,” (Lawrence, 27 Articles). 

You can relate this to two common phrases heard in Iraq: “By, 
with and through the Iraqi security forces,” and “Put an Iraqi face 
between you and the problem.” The Iraqi army and its members 
have come a long way in the six years since its reestablishment, and 
they can and will do what they believe to be important when it is 
obvious they are the ones who will have to do it. Some commanders 
are more than willing to let the coalition do their fighting for them 
and will let their U.S. partners do the heavy lifting if it appears they 
will assume that role. 

Your role as the advisor is to get the Iraqi security forces to 
recognize their mission and do their mission their way. Our brigade, 
once it realized that fact after the Security Agreement of June 30, 
2009 went into effect, did realize the fight was Iraq’s with coalition 
support. During a dual suicide vest event in S injar in August of that 
year, the brigade took action without any coalition help and quickly 
rolled up a multiple-man cell inside the city. It was still reactive, 
but they did it the Iraqi way and, as such, probably far better than 
we could have done in the lead. 

The Iraqi army often will rely on their advisors to do their 
training for them and ask them to provide them the supplies to do 
this. We have done some train-the-trainer operations and facilitated 
partnerships for all operations, including the use of limited assets 
the Iraqi army has limited amount of, notably helicopter air assault 
operations. But we refuse to provide any support that they reasonably 
can provide for themselves. 

Marksmanship is an obvious failing for the Iraqi army. Most 




Fires 


soldiers in the 3rd Iraqi Army have not re-zeroed or qualified with 
their M16/M4 rifles since they were issued at basic training unless 
the coalition provided the ammunition. The ammunition system in 
the Iraqi army is more obviously broken than any other system, but 
this is another area where we refuse to resource the Iraqi security 
forces. There have been several attacks in the past few months 
where the soldiers of the 11th Brigade have failed to hit anything 
in small arms contacts, some due to distance, but most due to poor 
training. The brigade leadership needs to make the point to higher, 
which we have tried to assist, but it seems broken army-wide. 

It is painful to see, because by simply giving them the easily 
available ammunition in our own containers, we could repair the 
problem, at least locally. But we have done this for too long already, 
and it is time for them to start training and operating for themselves. 
When they realize you are not there to be the supply wagon any 
longer, they will take the reins and begin doing it themselves. It 
may take a lot longer than you like for the Iraqi security forces to 
do this. Don’t settle for a short-term victory, as it leads to long-term 
failure. 

Learn the language as much as 
possible . “Get to know their families, clans and 
tribes, friends and enemies, wells, hills and roads. Do 
all this by listening and by indirect inquiry. Do not ask 
questions. Get to speak their dialect of Arabic, not yours,” (See 
Lawrence, 27Articles). This is excellent advice and as relevant to 
the times as when Lawrence committed it to paper approximately 
90 years ago. The official language of the Iraqi army is Iraqi Arabic, 
so it behooves you to know as much of the language as possible. 
The Rosetta Stone and Iraqi Headstart issued by Defense Language 
Institute are great beginnings, but the more you know coming in, 
the better. 

Arabic is key to the souls of the Iraqis, and it allows you to frame 
how they are thinking on the subject based simply on how they 
speak and how they formulate their arguments. Their language is a 
mirror of the culture, and through even an incomplete understanding 
of their language you can gain valuable insight into their actions. 
The 11th Brigade is mainly a Kurdish unit, with a heavy mixture 
of Yezidi, Kurds and some Arabs. A knowledge of the Kurmanji 
dialect is invaluable in northern Iraq as some of the j unood (soldiers) 
only speak Kurmanji with a little bit of Arabic. Your interpreters 
(most of whom in the north speak both Arabic and Kurmanji) will 
be invaluable in communicating your intent, but acquiring as much 
knowledge of both dialects will serve you well in your interactions 
with your counterparts. Most of the officers understand both dialects, 
for example General Rashid speaks Arabic, Kurmanji and Sorani 
(the eastern Kurdish dialect) and will frequently mix the dialects 
together. 

Don’t set your goals too high. The 
immediate reaction of most new teams coming in is to 
try to fix everything immediately. Take a realistic look 
at what the unit is supposed to be capable of and mold 
your team goals accordingly. Our team took this to heart early on 
in our training at Fort Riley, Kan., and structured a philosophy and 
set of goals to guide us for our tour (See figure 1, figure 2 and figure 
3). 

We thought we had set modest goals and, as it turned out, all 
of our goals were wildly unrealistic in the Iraqi environment. 
Our brigade was still in a counterinsurgency fight, and its logistic 
and administrative problems were likely to be solved only at the 
Ministry of Defense level. Your team has to look for the small and 
sustainable improvements that can be carried into the brigade’s 
future. We were lucky the brigade commander had an excellent 
grasp on counterinsurgency fundamentals and a long experience as 


Figure 1: Mission essential task list 


Advise foreign security forces 


Control coalition efforts 


Protect the team 

M - - - - - - ---- - -- 

Sustain the team 


Command and control 


Figure 2: Philosophy 


Wearesuccesiful when our Iraqi army counterpa rt? are 
succexj-ful. Wl m jit continualUy le.sm the Iraqi army 
system end culture- Their jurcc?? reay not lotA like curs; we 
willihnVw them tnui v.-.iy jr.d let them ilulerminu IKi.Gr Own 
way. All operations wilt have an Iraq. lace. 

■- 

We honor the 'golden role.' Respect ro*h both wavs on our 
team with the Iraqi army and coalition lorxcx. 

Flexibility and adoptability Are hey. We must understand all 
aspect? of the 'grey a rea 

Communicate freely ipeok with one voice. IVo one hai the 
'right' a nswer. Each person has a it obi Igatlon to spea k up. 


Figure 3: Goals 


Role model for a strong NCO corps 

► 

Improve and assist the Iraqi logistics 
and administrative systems 

h- 

Focus ll lhl Brigade towards the border 
and the role of a traditional army 

b - 

Trust and cooperation with the Iraqi 
police and border police 




sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • July-August 2010 10 












A group of Iraqi army soldiers assigned to 4th Battalion, 16th Iraqi Army Brigade, 4th Iraqi Army 
Division, listen to a lecture before having hands-on training in their compound in Tuz Qadajraq, 

January 1 6. (Photo by SPC Canaan Radcliffe, U.S. Army) 


a former regime commander. Unfortunately, while he understood 
counterinsurgency, he preferred the highly reactive ‘whack a mole’ 
tactics, was an incorrigible micromanager that stifled battalion and 
lower initiative and believed that as a brigade commander he did not 
have the authority to meet with local officials and politicians to get 
things done that were essential for a counterinsurgency campaign 
to be effective. Many of the problems that are endemic with the 
Iraqi logistics and administrative systems (pay, leave, awards, 
promotions, repair parts, etc.) cannot be fixed at the lower levels 
such as battalion and brigade. And simple micromanagement tends 
to make leaders who are unwilling to take individual action. 

This forced us to spend the first month simply defining the 
problem and then advising our counterparts for small changes 
leading to small successes. To get General Rashid to see the futility 
in his current reactive counterterrorist fight, our team spent several 
three- to four-hour sessions advancing a plan to engage the local 
city councils in the fight and improve their security, while asking 
his opinion of that option. We walked away from one long meeting 
early in the morning believing we had failed utterly in getting our 
point across as he had fought me verbally at every step. The next 
day, we came in for another meeting and to our surprise, said he 
had to cut the meeting short as the city council was coming in. We 
won our point only after we convinced him his current methods 
were failing and he was ready to try something new, even if it was 
outside his authority. Advising is a series of small victories and 
losses to further your mission, and success will strike you often 
when you believe you have failed. 

Micromanagement is indicative of 
the Iraqi army process . The Iraqis in 
general have lived for 30 years under a dictator, so they 
have not yet acquired the sense of a democracy, but it 
must be remembered representative democracy takes time, enough 
to try the patience of a saint. No one could have predicted the South 
Koreans could make a functional democracy after the Korean War. 
It required American protection and approximately 50 years to get 
them there - their way. 

11 July-August 2010 • 



The way this represents itself inside the 
Iraqi army is extreme micromanagement, 
especially considering the reinstatement 
of many old regime leaders. Some of them 
believe this is the way an army operates, 
and some believe this experiment with a 
democracy will fail. Most only take no more 
initiative than what their orders specify, 
believing that’s the only way to protect 
themselves and their subordinate officers. 
Micromanagement was a survival tool in 
Saddam’s army and that habit will take a 
long time to break. Either way, you need 
to get used to extreme micromanagement 
in the Iraqi security forces. Instead, focus 
on why the Iraqi army works as it does and 
help make their system better. 

The commander authorizes everything 
and usually delegates only to those officers 
he has deemed trustworthy. Iraqi army staff 
work is a series of stovepipes that revolve 
around the commander’s orders, and there 
is little of a collaborative staff process to 
help them along. One of our primary goals 
of role modeling a strong NCO corps hit this 
obstacle. We continued nevertheless, but 
it was difficult to break into that old army 
mindset that officers are responsible for everything. An Iraqi brigade 
commander is given great power and responsibility in terms of area 
and subordinate units, but he is limited in the tactical flexibility you 
would expect of a simple U.S. company commander. BG Rashid 
could not, for instance, swap battalions in sector when one was 
worn out or shift his tactical set if he had the idea. Officers are 
responsible for many of the day-to-day tasks that we naturally see 
as the NCO’s duties. Our persistent model of the senior NCO as 
indispensable was important in making the small efforts forward 
into NCO autonomy. The advances were small, but they were there. 
We did it by always bringing an NCO along for our meetings and 
operations with the staff officers and commanders, and showed we 
respected their counsel and their views as much as our own. 

Remember always the Arab mind and military process do 
not work the way ours do. If you believe you will be able to slap 
down Field Manual 3-0 Operations and start instructing on how 
to conduct a proper mission analysis, you’ve misread the Iraqi 
army. The commanders tend to keep the missions close hold to 
themselves and a few others until just before execution time and 
then announce there is a mission. Staff planning is limited to either 
the mind of the commander or perhaps the G2 or G3 (whichever is 
most trusted). This short circuits staff planning from the start, and 
it is nearly impossible to stop. ‘Staff meetings’ are normally either 
‘bitch sessions’ or a one-way handing out of tasks or criticisms. 
Arabs in general are resistant to criticism; so it takes a deft advisor 
to frame suggestions that do not injure their pride. You have to get 
to know the character and makeup of your unit so you can advise 
the commander and his staff on how to make corrections they 
actually will implement because they want their unit to improve, 
rather than to please their advisors. 

If we remain in Iraq in some way shape or form, I think the odds 
are good for, maybe not ofdemocracy, but maybe a government that 
is ‘Iraqi good enough. ’ If we leave precipitously, I believe the odds 
are the Iraqis will follow a ‘leader on a white horse’ to save them 
and they will fall back into autocracy, slowly but surely. Democracy 
is hard and requires dedicated leaders and sure principles. There 


Fires 










are many patterns of corruption in the U.S. government mirrored 
in the Iraqi system. So, we aren’t perfect yet. Given time (and six 
years isn’t long enough using U.S. campaigns and history as an 
example), they can make it work, but it won’t look like what we 
consider to be a democracy. Maybe a strong republic, but they’ve 
got to outgrow (or sink back into) the Stalinist system Saddam 
Hussein used. No takers on any bets yet, but they’ve come a long 
way in six short years. 

Live with your counterparts as 
much as possible. This almost goes without 
saying. As an advisoryou are not executing your mission 
when you are not living with your unit. Unless you are 
building rapport with the partnered coalition unit, you should be 
there and available to your counterparts. A separate compound on 
their cantonment area is a great example of this, but there are always 
distractions that will try to lure you away from your counterparts. 
F ight those distractions. If possible another unit should handle your 
logistics, which was, strictly speaking, impossible for externally 
sourced military transition teams. “Remain in touch with your 
leader as constantly and unobtrusively as you can. Live with him, 
that at meal times and at audiences you may be naturally with him 
in his tent. Formal visits to give advice are not so good as the 
constant dropping of ideas in casual talk. When stranger sheikhs 
come in for the first time to swear allegiance and offer service, 
clear out of the tent. If their first impression is of foreigners in the 
confidence of the Sherif, it will do the Arab cause much harm,” 
(Lawrence, 27Articles). It should be possible to live full time with 
your Iraqi army counterparts except for required meetings and 
maintenance at your home forward operating base. 

Gifts. Don’t accept gifts from your counterparts 
unless it is absolutely necessary; if so, reciprocate to 
avoid perceived advantages. Unless you cannot avoid 
it, do not accept logistical support from the Iraqi security 
forces. Use your coalition contacts to provide the needed support 


or use outside contractors. “If you can, without being too lavish, 
forestall presents to yourself. A well-placed gift is often most 
effective in winning over a suspicious sheikh. Never receive a 
present without giving a liberal return, but you may delay this return 
(while letting its ultimate certainty be known) if you require a 
particular service from the giver,” (See Lawrence, 27Articles). You 
are an advisor and should not be able to be bought off or perceived 
to be bought off by gifts. 

Small unit dynamics and team 
cohesiveness . Yourteamwill be an interesting 
blend of the Army if it is anything close to resembling 
the structure of many of the external transition teams. 
Our teams were thrown together from across the Army based off 
simple military occupational specialty requirements, dwell time, 
volunteers and ‘volun-tolds.’ Not everyone was happy to be there, 
especially the three-tour veterans. While we had all the requisite 
skill sets we needed to accomplish our mission, how we went about 
it was different from any other conventional Army unit to which 
I’ve ever belonged. We had a uniquely special forces type mission 
— that of advising foreign security forces — and had none of the 
required training, experience, language ability, cultural sensitivity, 
equipment or funding to execute that stated mission properly. We 
were truly “an A-Team on a budget,” as one of our NCO’s called 
it during our training. 

Despite this, we tried to form our team to reflect a small-unit 
dynamic that is inherent in most effective small groups. Everyone 
had to possess a certain set of skills, and we worked hard to at least 
pick up a rudiment of each skill between us. Everyone had to be 
able to fill a radio (for example, a multiband inter/intra team radio 
or a single-channel ground-air radio system tactical radio), crew 
a M2 .50 cal and M240B machine gun effectively from the turret. 


A group of Iraqi Army soldiers assigned to 4th Battalion, 16th Iraqi Army 
Brigade, 4th Iraqi Army Division, stand in formation in their compound in 
Tuz Qada, Iraq, January 1 6. (Photo by SPC Canaan Radcliffe, U.S. Army) 


















and a host of other duties. We had no privates to help with the grunt 
work, and each of us had to be a competent Soldier in our daily 
Army tasks as well as an advisor. No one was special, but each of 
us had a job to do and a baseline competence at all daily skills was 
a requirement. 

A good tactical standing operating procedure was a must, not 
for advising operations, but for effective battle drills. We rapidly 
learned who was better at what and tried to get everyone to that 
level. To do that, we had to forego the tradition hierarchal Army 
structure and develop the cohesiveness that allowed the team the 
initiative to do the job. It isn’t easy by any means, but we formed 
our philosophy together and tried to live it as well. Living in 
close quarters with your team for up to 15 months, at one point or 
another everyone will blow up over something or Tose their mind’ 
temporarily. I can’t say we were the happiest team around, but we 
were very functional and good at what we did. 

Part of the guidance we put out was the ‘grey area’ that exists in 
all advising operations allowed such a small team that built effective 
rapport with coalition and Iraqi units alike to accomplish our goals. 
We allowed ourselves not to act necessarily like a conventional 
coalition unit except when it was illegal, immoral, unethical or when 
it adversely affected another Soldier. This gave us quite a bit of 
latitude to get the job done without getting ourselves into long-term 
trouble. Even if you can’t stand a member of your team, you still 
have to trust him to get his job done. There will be some members 
of your team who won’t be able to advise effectively either due to 
inability or unwillingness, and you must find a spot for them either 
away. Sometimes that entails giving them internal-type activities 
team so they do not damage your outside mission, activities of this 
type keeps them out of trouble. The small-unit dynamic will be a 
part of your life for quite some time. Foster it or not at your peril. 

Know the difference between 
partners and advisors. Field Manual 
3-07.1 Security Force Assistance states unequivocally, 
“Advisors are not partners; U.S. Forces act as partners. 
Advising and partnering are complementary but inherently different 
activities. Advising requires relationship building and candid 
discourse to influence development of a professional security force. 
Partnering incorporates training with combined operations to achieve 
the same SFAgoals. Advisorsperfomipartnership shaping functions, 
shape discussions with their counterparts, and create opportunities 
for the partner units.” That quote is at the heart of what your team’s 
mission is. 

You must build the rapport and trust between the partner unit and 
your counterparts as much as possible and create the atmosphere 
that allows an effective partnership to form. A lot of advisors feel 
threatened when faced with a partner unit, as they see it threatens 
their role as advisors. Nothing could be further from the truth if the 
advisors and partnered unit both understand what their functions 
are. The true money phrase in that quote is “complementary but 
inherently different activities.” A partnered coalition unit can never 
replace a good advisor team because they will never develop the 
same kind of relationship and trust the advisors need for day-to- 
day operations. The advisor can never hope to have the resources, 
skills or expertise to train or teach like the partner unit. Instead, they 
must work together to form a synergistic body to accomplish the 
mission at hand. The fact that some coalition units don’t get this, 
and probably will never understand this, will be addressed next. 

\ The ‘care and feeding’ of coalition 
|^| 2] leaders. This is arguably the hardest part of the 
V J murky business that is advising, but the simple fact is 
you must put the same effort into advising your coalition 
leaders that you do with the Iraqi security forces. I wish it wasn’t 

13 July-August 2010 • 


so, but we had more trouble getting situational understanding and 
rapport with our higher coalition headquarters than with the Iraqi 
security forces. We spend more time, on average, explaining simple 
facts and traditions of Iraqis to the coalition than we did in dealing 
with the Iraqis. Some of our brigade and battalion commanders 
don’t understand the current fight any more than the Iraqi security 
forces. 

Brought up in the conventional Army, conventional operations 
are comfortable and easy to frame in reference and a great many of 
our brother commanders do not want to venture out of their comfort 
zones. Especially after the security agreement went into effect on 
Jan. 1,2009, and Iraqi Sovereignty Day on June 30,2009, coalition 
leaders still think and believe they are the battlespace owners and 
have no interest in the Iraqi security forces beyond which they 
think appropriate. They want them to bend to our culture instead of 
simply respecting theirs. I had to explain to a brigade commander 
and staff, an experienced Iraq veteran with two previous tours and 
nine months in the current fight here, that three hours, lunch and 
Chai is the appropriate amount of time to spend with an Iraqi army 
commander to do a proper meet and greet. He still kept trying to 
leave early in any case. He didn’t understand, and though he said all 
the right words to the Iraqi army commander, he wasn’t interested 
in understanding. 

As our 3rd Iraqi Army Division commander said, “If you only 
have 15 minutes to spend with me, send me a picture because 
that’s all we will have time for.” He said you could get all sorts of 
wonderful things from the coalition, supplies, ammunition, barrier 
material, vehicles and aircraft, but in his experience by far the most 
valuable thing to a coalition commander was time. If the commander 
wouldn’t invest the time to see and respect him as a peer, then he 
wasn’t worth a relationship. In many cases in the past, coalition 
commanders did not want to spend time with the Iraqi security 
forces leadership and, instead, treated their advisors as liaisons. 

Do not allow yourself to get pulled into that realm and insist if 
they want a liaison to the Iraqi security forces, they should provide 
one to you. Take the time to build up the rapport and trust with 
your conventional forces in your area of responsibility because 
you are going to need them. You will need to be the intermediary 
and their American cultural advisor, as it were, as to how the Iraqi 
security forces function, and be able to interpret the culture for 
them. You have to be able to bridge the gap acceptably between the 
two formations and use your relationships with the Iraqi security 
forces to form opportunities where we can accomplish the mission 
effectively. You can bypass some leaders who don’t get it, but others 
you will have to work with. And an obstinate coalition commander 
and a stubborn Iraqi security forces commander can lead to deadly 
consequences. Effective relationship building from the beginning 
can only make things easier when obstacles crop up. 


Lieutenant Colonel Joel E. Hamby, field artillery, is currently the division 
rear detachment commander at the 101st Airborne Division at Fort 
Campbell, Ky. He was the 11th Brigade, 3rd Iraqi Army Division, military 
transition team chief serving in Sinjar, Ninewa province, Iraq, from March 
2009 to January 2010. Previously, he served at the National Military 
Command Center on the joint staff in Washington, D.C. He served in 
the 82nd Airborne Division as the regimental fire support officer for 
Combined Task Force Devil (504th Parachute Infantry Regiment) and 
as the executive officer and S3 for 3rd Battalion, 319th Airborne Field 
Artillery Regiment, both in Afghanistan and Fort Bragg, N.C. He has 
been a fire support observer/controller at the Joint Readiness Training 
Center, Fort Polk, La. He holds a master’s degree in Liberal Arts from 
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, La., and a Master of Military 
Studies from the Marine Corps University at Quantico, Va. 



Fires 



The transformation of a 
firing battery into an in lieu 
of target acquisition battery 



SSG Wilson Suarez's section fires a high-angle mission in support of Task Force Denali at Camp 
Clark, KhOWSt, Afghanistan, September 2009. (Photo by LTC Gene Meredith, U.S. Army) 


By CPT Urban Picard 


I n January 2008, 1st Battalion, 321st 
Airborne Field Artillery Regiment 
received orders to deploy its 
three firing batteries to Afghanistan in 
support of combat operations in Regional 
Command East; however, Alpha Battery 
would leave their howitzers behind and 
deploy as a targeting and acquisition 
battery. Transforming a firing battery into 
a TAB is not an easy task, but feasible 
when leaders focus on the basics. Five 
essential elements must exist in order for 
the transition to be a success: effective 
personnel management, relevant pre¬ 
deployment training, quality sustainment 
training during deployment, tracking of 
an accurate essential repair parts stockage 
list, proper maintenance procedures, and a 
positive attitude throughout the ranks. 

The first step in building a target 
acquisition battery is setting the task 
organization through the selection of 
personnel. Six Soldiers are ideal for steady 
state operations of a static radar. The section 
is composed of a staff sergeant as the radar 
section leader; a sergeant as the radar 
section chief; a 94M Radar Mechanic; and 
three specialists or below as the 13R Radar 
Operators. For anAN/TPQ-37 (Q3 7) section 
it is beneficial to have an extra 94M Radar 
Mechanic, as it is more challenging than 
the AN/TPQ-36 (Q36) to maintain. 

The selection of the Firefinder radar 
personnel must be selective due to the 
extremely technical nature of the system. 
The military occupational skills of the 
in lieu of personnel are irrelevant for 
all positions except for the 94M Radar 
Mechanic; which can be a 63B Light- 
Wheeled Vehicle Mechanic. The 63B is the 
most qualified Soldier for the position due 
to their understanding of troubleshooting 
techniques and mechanical aptitude. An 
additional benefit of having a 63B serve 
as an 1LO radar mechanic is their ability 
to perform services on other types of 
equipment, such as generators and vehicles. 
Selection of battery leadership is equally 
important, a targeting warrant (131A) and 
a lieutenant should be assigned for every 


four radars; the warrant officer serves as 
the radar platoon leader and the lieutenant 
as the battery executive officer. 

The second element is MOS specific 
training, which ‘transforms’ MOS 
mismatched Soldiers into radar operators. 
The Fires Center offers the majority of 
the training with Soldiers attending the 
1LO 13R Radar Operator’s Course, which 
covers the basics of radar operations and is 
about a month long. Radar section leaders 
and section chiefs attend the abbreviated 
ILO 131A course training leaders on field 
artillery warrant officers tasks and spans 
just over three months long. The 94M 
Radar Mechanic conducts two phases of 
training. First, they attend a one month 
block of instruction at Redstone Arsenal, 
Ala., on the basics of electronics. Phase 
II is at Fort Sill, Okla., consisting of radar 
specific maintenance based on the type of 


system they will be assigned, either the Q3 6 
or Q37. Ideally, MOS specific training is 
completed no later than four months prior 
to the unit’s latest arrival date in theater 
to allow time to validate and standard 
operating procedures at home station. The 
professional training that is conducted at 
the Fires Center of Excellence at Fort Sill, 
Okla. is essential, arming Soldiers from 
various backgrounds and skill sets with the 
tools to conduct effective radar operations. 

The third element is pre-deployment 
training. All sections must train on the 
following Army Doctrine and Training 
Publication tasks: 

• Perform unit maintenance on radar 
(06-4-Q011). 

• Perform hasty radar survey (06-4-Q001). 

• Reconnoiter a radar position (06-4- 
Q010). 

• Occupy a radar site (06-4-Q009). 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • July-August 2010 14 



versatile 












Maneuver platoon Soldiers of Bravo Battery, 1 st Battalion, 321 st Airborne Field Artillery Regiment 
take a break during refit operations in front of Task Force Steel Headquarters, Forward Operating 
Base Salerno, Khowst, Afghanistan, April 2009. (Photo by Lie Gene Meredith, U.S. Army) 


• Emplace and prepare radar equipment 
for operations (06-4-Q003). 

• March order radar equipment (06-4- 
Q002). 

• Perform surveillance and locate targets 
(06-4-Q045). 

Once trained, the radar sections should 
be externally evaluated on these ARTEP 
tasks to ensure competence and instill 
confidence. Radar operations in Operation 
Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring 
Freedom are mostly static; however, 
movement task should be incorporated 
during the train up to make it challenging 
and more difficult than what is expected 
during the deployment. 

In addition to ARTEP tasks, the ILO TAB 
requires: light counter mortar radar training, 
sling load training, and Firefinder radar 
alignment training prior to deployment. 

There are more than 80 light counter 
mortar radars in OEF alone. Alpha Battery, 
1 st Battalion, 321 st Airborne Field Artillery 
Regiment, 18th Fires Brigade (Airborne), 
provided first responder teams that supplied 
coverage to the entire RC-East. With 
the wide spread use of the LCMR, it is 
very important that all TAB personnel, to 
include leadership, understand the many 
capabilities and limitations of the radar. 
The TAB commander should know the 
track volume, max range, the difference in 
modes and the probability of detection on 
all types of enemy indirect fire ammunition. 
It is highly recommended that an ILO TAB 
deploys with at least 10 personnel that 
have been trained on the emplacement, 
operations, and maintenance of the LCMR. 

15 July-August 2010 • 


Fortunately, the field artillery schoolhouse 
has a very effective mobile training team 
to train Soldiers on the LCMR. 

Air assault training is highly 
recommended in preparation for assuming 
an ILO TAB mission. Air assault is the 
primary movement method for the radar 
in Afghanistan. The battery must have 
personnel qualified in rigging, inspecting 
and hook-up operations for the Q36 shelter 
and ATG. Rigging exercises are effective 
training when rotary wing aircraft are 
unavailable. 

Once deployed, the TAB should 
conduct sustainment training. Sustainment 
training should include a written exam 
for the entire section, counter fire battle 
drill, speed and accuracy training, and 
cross training at the Soldier level. Cross 
training means that all ILO 94Ms must be 
properly trained in operator TTPs, and the 
radar operators should be familiar with the 
radar maintenance plan. LCMR training 
teams also need to conduct sustainment 
training; constantly communicating with the 
field service representatives about lessons 
learned. OIF and OEF both have several 
LCMR FSRs in theater. 

Essential repair part stockage list 
management is the one element that will 
make or break a Firefinder radar section. 
The amount of attention that the 94M 
dedicates to maintenance and the ERPSL 
directly correlates with the operational 
readiness rate that a TAB has throughout 
a combat tour. The 94M and radar section 
leader should understand the level of 
maintenance required to meet the demands 


of24 hour operations. The 94M must always 
strive to improve the quality of climate 
control in the shelter. Heat is the biggest 
detriment to the radar in combat; cool air 
must constantly cycle through the shelter. 
It is also recommended to have a cooling 
system for the Q37 ATG. 

There are operational differences 
between the Q36 and Q37 that need to 
be understood by the TAB’s 94Ms. For 
example, maintenance is required daily on 
the Q36, but not on the Q37. The ERPSL is 
also very important to the readiness of the 
Firefinder radars; section leaders and 94Ms 
need to know what they have on hand at their 
radar positions. It is recommended that a 
daily report be sent to the TAB commander 
with ERPSL status; the commander can 
then make decisions to cross-level parts 
when necessary. The container that holds 
the section’s ERPSL needs to be climate 
controlled. It is also very important that 
the 94Ms develop a good rapport with the 
assigned U.S. Army Communications- 
Electronics Command logistics assistance 
representatives, who are the subject matter 
expert for radar repairs. 

The final ingredient for success is a 
positive attitude throughout the ranks. Radar 
personnel do not get the same recognition 
as 13Ds and 13Bs; however, every member 
of the TAB is just as important as the next 
and must understand their role which is an 
essential component of force protection. 
TAB leadership must stress to each radar 
section the importance of their job; that 
they need to continually strive to improve 
SOPs and conduct position improvement 
because their business saves lives. With the 
proper selection of personnel, the proper 
training and positive leadership the ILO 
TAB mission is extremely rewarding. 


Captain Urban M. Picard Jr. is a graduate 
of St. Bonaventure University, Western New 
York, and was commissioned in the Field 
Artillery in 2004. He is currently enrolled in 
the Field Artillery Captain’s Career Course. 
Prior to attending the FACCC, Picard served 
as a member of 1 st Battalion, 321 st Airborne 
Field Artillery Regiment, 18th Fires Brigade 
(Airborne). The positions he has held are 
firing platoon leader, gun-truck security 
platoon leader, battery executive, battalion 
liaison officer, forward support company 
commander, and firing battery commander. 
His deployments include a 12-month rotation 
to Mosul, Iraq, as a gun-truck security platoon 
leader in 2005-2006, and a 12-month rotation 
as an in lieu of target acquisition battery 
commander to Regional Command East, 
Afghanistan in 2009. 


Fires 
















Soldiers from U.S. Army Europe's Alpha Battery, 5th Battalion, 7th Air Defense Artillery Regiment, familiarize members 
of the Polish military on how to conduct preventive maintenance on the PATRIOT Missile Systems in Morag, Poland, 
June 1. This is the first time a U.S. missile system has come to Poland for a new rotational training program intended 
to familiarize Polish armed forces on the PATRIOT Missile System. The training is designed to provide mutual benefits 
for improving Polish air defense capabilities while also developing the skills of U.S. PATRIOT crew members. This type 
of mutual training helps to expand U.S. and Poland air and missile defense cooperation while helping to strengthen the 
partnership between the U.S. and Poland. (Photo by SSG Lawree Washington, U.S. Army) 


By 1LT William A. Green 

r e 5th Battalion 7th Air Defense 
Artillery is a forward deployed, 
PATRIOTBattalion, headquartered 
in Kaiserslautern, Germany, and is dedicated 
to missions within the United States 
European Command area of responsibility. 
Alpha Battery 5-7 ADAdeployed to Poland 
as a part of the PATRIOT to Poland (P2P ) 
mission in early May. 

The P2P mission involves the 
deployment of a single PATRIOT Battery 
to a site in Poland in order to conduct 
partnership training with personnel 
from the Polish military. The Army 
will spend the next two years 
teaching the Polish military to operate the 
advanced guided missile system at a base 
just a few miles from the Russian border. 

The mission amounts to the most 
significant deployment ever of U.S. forces 
to Poland, which once was behind the Iron 
Curtain but is now a member of North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization. 

T he mission consists of four key 
tasks. First, the Polish 
armed forces will learn 
how U.S. forces conduct 


reconnaissance, selection 
and occupation of position to 
include chemical, biological, 
radiological and nuclear training, 
minesweeping and site layout. 
Second, it will be a familiarization 
with emplacement, sustainment 
operations, and the organizational 
maintenance of the six primary 
pieces of PATRIOT equipment: 
the engagement control station, 
electric power plant, antenna 
mast group, radar set, battery 
command post and the launching 
station. Third, the Polish armed 


forces will receive instruction on the guided 
missile transporter and missile reload 
operations, and fourth they will become 
familiarized with the Army Composite 
Risk Management Program, how to do after 
action reviews, and conduct command and 
control operations. 

At the completion of the first rotation of 
training, Alpha Battery 5-7 ADA will have 
provided the PAF with an introduction to the 
overall operations of a PATRIOT Battery 
and will conduct a hand off to the next 
PATRIOT Battery for the follow-on rotation. 
It is hoped these rotations will further build 
the Polish knowledge of the PATRIOT 
System and continue to strengthen the 
United States’ relationship with the NATO 
ally. 

L essons learned. The deployment of 
a single battery for the first time is 
a daunting task. It requires a great deal 
of coordination between the battery, 
battalion, brigade and installation 
movement officers. Strict German 
and European Union regulations 
create complications that 
are not normally seen 
by continental United 
States units deploying 
into theater. 
















Soldiers from 357th Air and Missile Defense Detachment Brigade, 5th Battalion, 7th Air Defense Artillery Regiment, Alpha Battery, familiarize members 
of the Polish military on how to conduct preventive maintenance on the PATRIOT Missile Systems in Morag, Poland, June 1. The purpose of the drills 
is to show joint cooperation between U.S. and Polish forces. (Photo by SSG Lawree Washington, U.S. Army) 


Additionally, the battery on rotation must 
remain ready to deploy directly from Poland 
in support of other contingency missions. 
Once on the ground, the battery loses the 
higher echelon support that would be 
available in the case of another deployment 
from Kaiserslautern, Germany. Movement 
officers must know exactly what is needed 
to prepare and move the battery, first to 
Poland, and then possibly at a moment’s 
notice into a combat zone. The only way 
to achieve this knowledge is to combine 
realistic and relevant training with as much 
real-world experience as possible, and the 
357th Air and Missile Defense Detachment 
has done just that. Using a combination of 
emergency deployment readiness exercises 
at brigade, battalion and battery level, the 
brigade trained its subordinate units to 
react quickly and efficiently to a real-world 
deployment call. 

This training was aided by the battalion’s 
proximity to the deployment resources 
available from the Deployment Processing 
Center, Europe, and from Ramstein Air 
Force Base, also located in Germany. Still, 

17 July-August 2010 • 


the best way to practice a deployment is to 
execute. 

eploy ment timeline. In F ebruary 2010, 
Alpha Battery, was selected as the 
first unit to enter Poland to conduct the P2P 
mission. While the unit needed to prepare for 
the primary obj ecti ve, which is familiarizing 
the Polish armed forces personnel on 
PATRIOT Battery operations, they also 
had to work through all the tasks that come 
with being the first unit to deploy to a new 
area of operations. Slice elements needed 
to be assigned to Alpha Battery in order to 
support requirements for food, maintenance 
and signal. Movement operations would 
have to be carefully planned so that the 
correct equipment showed up on time for 
each phase of the mission. 

The advanced party consisted primarily 
of the RSOP team, which would be 
conducting instruction on reconnaissance, 
selection and occupation of position tasks 
before the arrival of the main body. Luckily, 
the equipment required for RSOP is fairly 
limited. Based on time constraints and 
the small size of the equipment, a line 


haul was requested for its movement. The 
main body equipment, however, which 
was the majority of the battery’s assigned 
equipment, would require a rail movement 
of 37 railway cars of equipment to deploy 
efficiently. 

With this established, it became the 
battery unit movement officer’s job to 
ensure the unit deployment lists were 
generated correctly in the Transportation 
Coordinator’s Automated Information for 
Movement System II, and to account for 
all necessary equipment and containers. 

The battery worked closely with the 
battalion and brigade staffs to fully 
utilize their resources, as well as the 
Branch Movement Control Team, and the 
Deployment Processing Centers, who were 
also always willing to help. 

bstacles and problems. During the 
movement preparation for the first 
rotation of P2P, Alpha Battery encountered 
many obstacles and problems; however each 
was engaged at the lowest level possible. The 
unit took full advantage of the opportunity 
to practice the skills necessary to deploy a 




Fires 
















“Cultural awareness is a key task 
for the development of competent 
Soldiers and especially leaders, 
and P2P is a prime opportunity 
to further that awareness. 
This is diplomacy at its finest— 
establishing bonds with a foreign 
nation one Soldier at a time.” 


battery using all the networks and systems 
available to it. Alpha Battery also conducted 
an ongoing after action review to track the 
lessons learned from the movement, for the 
next battery deploying in support of P2P, 
as well as any other deployments. Lessons 
learned included the lackof training in using 
the TC-AIMSII System at the battery level, 
as well as its unavailability. The system, 
which can be a great tool in deployment 
operations, is not exactly user friendly. 
Alpha Battery identified the need for brigade 
staff, which was well versed in the use ofTC- 
AIMS II, to conduct small unit training to 
familiarize the battery with the system. The 
brigade S-4 supply shop was also the only 
place the battery could go to print military 
shipping labels, transportation control and 
movement documents, and to burn radio 
frequency identification tags for tracking 
equipment and containers. While the brigade 
shop was extremely helpful with everything 
needed, it would still have been easier if the 
battalion had its own resources. As a result 
of this void identified by Alpha Battery’s 
AAR, the battalion now also has the ability 
to build the required documentation for 
any further deployments, and has acquired 
its own TCAIMS II System. Despite 
these minor complications. Alpha Battery 
accomplished all the tasks necessary to 
ensure their equipment sailed through the 
installation staging area operations, and was 
ready to be loaded when the train arrived. 


Soldiers from 357th Air and Missile Defense 
Detachment Brigade, 5th Battalion, 7th Air 
Defense Artillery Regiment, Alpha Battery, 
familiarize members of the Polish military on 
how to conduct preventive maintenance on the 
PATRIOT Missile Systems in Morag, Poland, 
June 1. The drills show joint cooperation 
between the militaries. (Photo by SSG Lawree 
Washington, U.S. Army) 


rrival in Poland. PATRIOT to Poland 
promises to be another outstanding 
mission carried out by the Soldiers of 
Alpha Battery 5-7 ADA. It will be a great 
opportunity for the Polish military to 
learn, not only about a weapon system, 
but about what makes the U.S. Army the 
most formidable fighting force in the world 
— our Soldiers. They will see firsthand 
the way we empower subordinates to 


carry out tasks, and encourage them to take 
initiative wheneverpossible. They will also 
get to see the many systems we have in 
place to ensure we constantly improve and 
develop ourselves, and how we balance and 
mitigate risk while conducting dangerous 
tasks. Additionally, it will be an excellent 
opportunity for our Soldiers to interface 
with their Polish counter-parts, learn from 
them, and build relationships through shared 
training objectives. Cultural awareness is a 
key task for the development of competent 
Soldiers and especially leaders, and P2P is a 
prime opportunity to further that awareness. 
This is diplomacy at its finest—establishing 
bonds with a foreign nation one Soldier at 
a time. 


1 st Lieutenant William A. Green is currently the 
fire control platoon leader of Alpha Battery, 
5th Battalion, 7th Air Defense Artillery. He 
has served in that position since April 2009. 
As a platoon leader he deployed to Israel in 
support of Juniper Cobra 2010 and as a part 
of the PATRIOT to Poland mission where he 
served as the battery unit movement officer 
and the primary trainer for the engagement 
control station. 




sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • July-August 2010 18 











expeditionary 



By 1LT Brian R. Buchholz 



P rior to 3rd Brigade Combat Team, 1 Oth Mountain Division’s 
deployment to Afghanistan in Operation Enduring Freedom 
IX, we spent months certifying our 13F’s, fire support 
specialists, in core competencies. Although this training ensured 
that our 13F’s understood their jobs at the platoon level, I found that 
fire support officers at the company level received little guidance. 

In particular, lessons learned at the company level from previous 
Afghanistan deployments were notpassed down. Formerfire support 
officers had already transferred by the time of our arrival in theater, 
and our battalion FSOs’ prior deployments were mostly to Iraq. 

FSOs have three different types of duties: lethal, nonlethal, and 
command and control. Unfortunately, we spend more time learning 
about the lethal side of our jobs than the nonlethal side at the Field 
Artillery Officer’s Basic Course. Almost no time was spent on 
command and control. FSO’s need expertise at all three of these 
skill sets in order to affect their company’s success in theater. This 
article will focus on the lessons learned about these three skill sets, 
and suggest ways future FSO’s can be successful throughout their 
deployment in Afghanistan. 

Prior to deployment, there are several courses of action that 
you can take to improve the lethality of your fire support team. 
The majority of your junior FISTER’s will be relatively fresh from 
advanced individual training, and will have less experience calling 
for fire than an FSO just out of the officer basic course. Most of 
your senior FISTER’s will have at least one deployment under their 
belts; however they may not be experienced at ‘call for fire.’ 

Because of the shortage of 13F’s Army-wide, it’s likely that at 
least one of your senior 13F’s will be a re-class. With this in mind, 

19 July-August 2010 • Fires 


SGT John Lopez, a forward observer forthe scout platoon of Headquarters 
and Headquarters Troop, 1st Squadron, 221st Cavalry Regiment, 4th 
Brigade Combat Team, 4th Infantry Division, alerts other members of his 
platoon to the bomb an U.S. Air Force A-10 Warthog dropped in Laghman 
province, Oct. 8, 2009. (Photo by Derek Kuhn) 


it’s obvious the first way you can prepare for your deployment is 
by shooting as much as possible. 

While actual live-fire mortar and artillery shoots can be a 
challenge to schedule, rock drills and simulators are also effective 
training aids for 13F’s. Fortunately for my FIST, our commander 
allowed us time to train instead of forcing the FO’s to train with 
their platoons every day. Spending time with their platoons is 
valuable for 13F’s, however, several hours practicing call for fire 
or in a ‘call for fire’ trainer is more valuable than a class on M240 
maintenance. 

After finding out that 3rd Infantry Brigade Combat Team ‘call 
for fire’ trainer was available, our FIST team obtained permission 
to use it and trained there almost every day. As deployment neared, 
other FIST teams began to use the simulator, but by then our FO’s 
excelled at ‘call for fire’ and our scheduled simulator days were 
used to train the company’s platoon leaders through team leaders. 
Each platoon’s FO’s assisted their platoon’s leadership in this 
training. This helped two fold; first by re-integrating the FO’s with 
their platoons, and second through developing the confidence each 
platoon had in their FO’s. 

If the simulator was unavailable, we conducted rock drills in the 
company area, hands on training with our radios and Lightweight 
Laser Designator Rangefinder and conducted classes on fire support 
planning. During counterinsurgency training in late August 2008, my 
fire support NCO, SSG Jason Sanders, and I identified fire support 
planning as a major weakness in our FIST. We set out to correct this 




















by conducting classes and practical exercises on maps. Next we 
progressed to practical exercises using maps and the simulator, and 
by the time we conducted the Platoon Fire Support Coordination 
Exercise in early November 2008, the battalion fire support officer 
commended our FIST as being the best at fire support planning in 
the battalion. This focus on fire support planning paid dividends 
in Afghanistan. 

Lastly, attendance at the Joint Fires Observers Course also 
assisted greatly in our preparation for an Afghanistan deployment. 
Prior to Operating Enduring Freedom IX, I’ve been told that 
platoon leaders and forward observers regularly spoke with close 
air support aircraft and conducted ordinance drops. This has not 
been the case during OEF’s IX and X. While air weapons teams 
have been willing to talk with and take guidance from platoon 
leaders, forward observers, and various NCO’s, fixed-wing close 
air support consistently wants to be in communication with a 
qualified joint fire observer on the ground as well as the joint 
temiinal attack controller at battalion headquarters. Attendance at 
the JFP course, greatly improves your usefulness at the company 
level, and ensures you will be on company level missions as part 
of the company tactical command post, instead of remaining in the 
rear at the tactical operations center. FSO’s should do everything in 
their power to attend the course themselves and to enroll as many 
of their FISTER’s as possible. 

Our time spent learning fire support planning paid off during 
our deployment to Afghanistan, as our FO’s planned targets, with 
minimal refinement on Falcon View. FalconView is the mapping 
portion of the portable flight planning software, the foundation for 
the Army’s Aviation Mission Planning System. We met collateral 
damage estimate requirements and ensured indirect fire assets 


supported every patrol. My FO’s were able to bring their targets into 
the tactical operations center, have myself or the fire support NCO 
check them on FalconView, and then forward them to battalion for 
approval. This guaranteed that their platoon’s specific concerns for 
each operation were covered by indirect fire assets. 

Additionally, fire support rehearsals ensured each forward 
observer was ready and understood what to do in case of contact. 
Although this might seem to be common sense, conditions in 
the contemporary operating environment made these rehearsals 
absolutely essential to our success. Communications between 
maneuvering elements and their higher headquarters, for example, 
are extremely challenging in Afghanistan. Most FM radios are 
limited in range to several kilometers because of the mountainous 
terrain. Because of this, our company F ires net was not viable unless 
the patrol in contact was within eyesight of the company outpost. 
Our company command net on the other hand, was broadcast over 
a retransmission net and provided consistent communications 
throughout most ofour area ofoperations. In a fire support rehearsal, 
this would result in one of our forward observers announcing a 
communications plan like this: “While the platoon leader sends up 
his initial contact report over (tactical satellite), I will try company 
fires. If Fires doesn’t work. I’ll send my call for fire over company 
command. If company command does not work, I will use Roshan 
(a local national cell phone company) or Thurya (satellite phone) 
to call the TOC Roshan or TOC Thurya.” 


PFC Matthew Boyd, a forward observer with Charlie Company, 1st 
Battalion, 26th Infantry Regiment, 1 st Infantry Division, checks the distance 
to the next objective, during Operation Viper Shake in the Korengal Valley, 
Apr. 21,2009. (Photo by SGT Matthew Moeller, U.S. Army) 



silliwwy/.army.mil/firesbulletin/^rjulv/Auqust(2010] 











Soldiers of C Company, 2nd Battalion, 87nd Infantry Regiment, fire on an enemy position to interdict enemy 
rocket, artillery and mortar fire against Combat Outpost Sayed Abad, Afghanistan, Nov. 14, 2009. (Photo by 

1LT Brian R. Buchholz, U.S. Army) 


Besides the traditional fire support rehearsal and communications 
rehearsal, we found rehearsing allocation of close air support and 
close combat attack assets was very valuable. On company missions, 
we initially have assets check in with either the company commander 
or myself. With air weapons teams, we usually keep the high bird 
under company control to maintain situational awareness of the 
entire battlefield, and push the low bird to the platoon in contact 
or the platoon maneuvering to give them dedicated aerial support. 
We typically maintain control of close air support at the company 
level, as it’s easier for me to speak to the aircraft on Fires, common 
air to ground, or Strike nets than a platoon forward observer, who 
is maneuvering with his platoon. 

Rehearsing this allocation prior to every mission allowed us 
to operate smoothly and efficiently, and did not lead to everyone 
on the net attempting to ‘grab’ assets, which sometimes hinders 
operations by having multiple Soldiers providing conflicting 
guidance to aircraft. 

estricted operational zone. The next lesson we learned was 
activating the restricted operational zone to ensure all aircraft 
are clear of the gun target line and to allow for fire. At first, we 
thought you coidd send the request to get the ROZ hot immediately 
prior to a fire mission. However, our area of operations was along 
the glide path for civilian aircraft flying into Kabul, so the battalion 
Fires cell and higher had to deconflict not only military aircraft but 
also civilian aircraft. This deconfliction process occasionally caused 
significant delays for fire mission. 

Although not always possible, we’ve found that activating 

21 July-August 2010 


the ROZ prior to the start and 
deactiviating it after the finish 
worked the best for short duration 
missions; however for longer 
missions this technique was not 
feasible. During longer duration 
missions we’ve found it useful to 
raise the ROZ prior to dawn and 
dusk, as many attacks occurred 
during those times. This allowed 
the platoon leader and forward 
observer on the ground to lay one 
of their indirect fire systems onto 
a target which greatly reduced the 
time necessary to get rounds down 
range. 

Not all fire missions required 
the ROZ to be hot. For example, 
fire missions can proceed if the 
rounds’ max ordinate is expected to 
fall below the coordinating altitude 
as dictated by the Air Force. If the 
ground commander can visually 
clear the airspace, and ensure 
no collateral damage within 500 
meters of the target, he can assume 
risk and authorize the fire mission 
while the ROZ is in the process of 
getting hot. To take advantage of 
this rule and provide every patrol 
an indirect fire asset; each patrol 
takes with it a 60mm mortar. 

everse echelonment of fire. 
Our most effective 
technique for bringing indirect 
fire onto the enemy was reverse 
echelonment of fire. As soon as the FO can accurately determine 
the enemy’s location during contact, he adjusts the 60mm onto the 
target. While this is occurring, the FO calls back to the company 
tactical operations center and begins the process of getting the ROZ 
hot. If the target is in range of the company’s 81mm or 120mm 
mortar, the ROZ will be hot and rounds will be headed down range 
within minutes of the initial contact. The clearance process takes 
longer for the 105mm and 155mm howitzers. 

We’ve found that calling for fire on a collateral damage cleared 
planned target can shave 10 minutes or more off the time it takes 
to get howitzer rounds down range. Because the target is already 
cleared, approval at battalion is almost instantaneous. Once the 
rounds arrive it’s easy to make subsequent adjustments to the 
rounds and to get effects onto the insurgent’s position and allow 
the infantry to maneuver upon them. 

The time necessary to identify, conduct call for fire, and get 
rounds on target is roughly equal to the time necessary to receive 
additional assets in the form of close air support or air weapons 
team. If you’re achieving good effects with your IDF assets, we’ve 
found it best to deconflict laterally or through maximum ordinate 
in order to fix the enemy with the mortars and allow the air assets 
to kill them in position. 

If you’re not achieving good effects however, I’d advise you 
to stop indirect firing and guide the AWT on target. AWT can be 
guided using direction and distance from your position allowing 
Apaches to get ‘eyes on’ the insurgents. The insurgents regularly 
break contact when AWT arrive on station, so it is critical to attempt 



Fires 











to deconflict the gun target line of mortars and use them to fix the 
enemy so the AWT can kill them in position. When the insurgents 
don ’t break however, you ’ re facing determined enemy and a serious 
kinetic engagement will most likely ensue. 

I nterdiction of rocket, artillery and mortar. The last lesson 
we learned on the lethal side was that interdiction of rocket, 
artillery and mortar missions can be effective in preventing your 
combat observation post from coming under IDF attacks, but they are 
seasonal mission based off of effective pattern analysis of insurgent 
trends. When we arrived in theater 
in January 2009, we took almost no 
contact until April. From this, and 
our COP’s location next to the Sayed 
Abad District Center, we assumed 
that we would not face a high threat 
of indirect fire, and did not conduct 
improvised rocket assisted munitions 
missions for several months. 

Initially, this was a correct decision, 
but as the fighting season occurred, we 
took increasing number of IDF attacks. 

Using pattern analysis, we discovered 
that our high threat times for IDF 
attacks were between 10 .amandnoon 
and 2 p.m. to 7 p.m. We responded 
with interdiction of rocket artillery 
and mortar shoots during these times, 
which significantly lowered the 
number of IDF attacks. IRAM also 
proved useful when we received signal 
intelligence of attacks on the combat 
observation post ranging from suicide 
bombers to direct fire attacks. Most 
times, when possible attacks were 
reported by signal and we conducted 
an IRAM shoot in response to the 
threat, we later received intelligence 
that the attack was called off because 
of heavy activity. 

I nformation operations. Shifting 
focus to nonlethal operations, 
the most important thing you can 
do prior to deployment is attend the 
Information Operations School at 
Fort Sill, Okla. None of our company 
level fire support officers attended this 
school, so we had to learn information 
operations ‘on the job.’ In theater, 
the 10 aspect of your job is very 
time consuming. You’ll compile 
various reports and send them to the 
battalion fires and effects coordination 
cell; which is compiling all of the 
reports into more slides and sending 
them to the brigade fires and effects 
coordination cell. 10 is important to 
the brigade, so if you don’t stay on top 
of your 10 responsibilities, you’ll find 
that they will take up all of your time, 
and your fire support NCO will take 
over your lethal duties while you spend 
every day compiling late 10 reports. 

You’ll spend some time developing 


talking points for your company in response to input from the line 
platoon’s patrols. When not developing talking points, your 10 
duties will consist of broadcasting messages on a radio in a box or 
on a local national radio station. Sayed Abad District, has a radio 
station attached to the COP and district center, so we take messages 
to them (either pre-recorded or written down so an interpreter can 
record them at the station) talk for a little bit with employees and 
then give them the message. Most combat outposts do not have a 
local radio station, so they broadcast messages over their RIAB’s. 


Ayoung Afghan searches forthe new Shinwar District radio station on a hand-cranked radio distributed by 
Afghan national and coalition security forces in Nangarhar, Afghanistan, January 18. The radios and new 
radio station are part of a media information initiative sponsored by the International Security Assistance 
Force's counterinsurgency program to give the Afghans a ‘voice’ in their security and to counter Taliban 

propaganda. (Photo by SGT Tracy J. Smith, U.S. Army) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • July-August 2010 22 













Pep© support is © 

m 


R1AB is a 250-watt transmitter - in a box - set up inside a base. 
The Army has distributed thousands of hand-crank radios that can 
pick up the station. In a country where only one in eight Afghans 
can read and write, this is powerful stuff. While RIAB’s are easier 
to use because there’s no dependence on an outside organization 
to broadcast 10 messages (RIAB’s use interpreters as the disk 
jockeys). I’d recommend that you use a local national radio station 
ifpossible. The local radio station will already have an audience and 
interspersing International Security Assistance Force’s messages 
with local programming presents a better image than a purely 
American station. 

G ood things come to those who wait. The last lesson learned 
on the nonlethal side is patience. Everything on this side 
takes time. You can’t send up a request for humanitarian assistance 
supplies three or four days in advance and expect results. You 
should send your request to the battalion S-9 at least a week, if 
not two weeks in advance. Once your request gets up to battalion, 
they have to process it, physically go to the supply yard to box up 
the supplies, wait until a convoy leaves for your COP and load the 
supplies onto the convoy. Because the fire support call supports 
your entire area of operations, it might take a week or longer for a 
combat logistics patrol to reach your combat observation post. So 
unless you submitted the request a week to two weeks in advance 
of your planned humanitarian assistance drop, you might not have 
the supplies on hand 
when the time comes. 

It’s also important to 
note that proj ects take a 
long time to complete. 

Most projects require 
at least three bids from 
local firms before a 
contractor is selected. 

These three bids can 
take weeks or longer 
to complete. After the 
contractors selected, 
he has thirty days to 
start work. So what 
might be considered a small project will take at least three months 
to complete. One technique we’ve used has the executive officer 
assisting on projects as well as the fire support officer. You’ll both 
be busy, but this team acting together results in constant coverage, 
and brings the XO’s experience in contracting into the fold. The 
key to being successful with regards to various projects is staying 
in touch with the contractors and requiring updates on the progress 
on each project. 

In between your hours spent on PowerPoint, and the weekly 
company mission, you’ll assist your commander in command and 
control. Depending on the size of your COP, you’ll probably spend 
six to 12 hours a day on shift as the battle captain. In this role, you’ll 
monitor the situation in your area of operations and run the TOC. 
While you’re on battle captain duty, you’ll provide guidance and 
updates to your patrols as well as update the battalion TOC. When 
contact occurs and if the commanders’ not in the TOC, you’ll have 
to request assets, push them to the unit in contact, keep battalion 
updated and fight the fight from the TOC until your commander 
arrives. This will be done in addition to your fire support duties 
of getting the ROZ hot, clearing collateral estimates, getting the 
mortar or howitzer crew ready, etc. When your commander arrives, 
he’s going to want to know what’s going on, as well as knowing 
what course of action you suggest. So, you’re going to have to 
have a firm grasp of maneuver tactics in order to formulate several 

23 July-August 2010 • 


©®m©eams0^7 ©w®0™@ 

The duties Hsmb 



the pass ft©® □□ 


courses of action for your commander to evaluate. Once he arrives 
and you’ve suggested your courses of action, you can go back to 
your fire support duties while he takes charge. 

While your C2 duties as battle captain are important, you can 
make an even greater contribution as an additional C2 asset in 
the field. On missions, you’ll be right next to the commander. 
The commander, you and an radio-telephone operator or two 
will compose the company tactical command post. You’ll be in 
a great position to maintain situational awareness, and unless 
you’re talking to aircraft, your Fires net will be relatively quiet. 
Taking observer positions and coordinates and updates from your 
forward observers and shifting the guns won’t take long. You’ll be 
a great help to your unit if you maintain situational awareness and 
spell the commander from time to time. This will free him up to 
leave the truck if mounted, and leave the C2 node if dismounted. 
Furthermore, as combat missions run 24 hours a day, you’re going 
to get very little sleep on extended missions. If you’re competent at 
C2 however, you can be a great help to your commander and cover 
down as the C2 element at various times throughout the day and 
night. While covering C2, the commander can get a few hours of 
sleep, attend a Shura, or just take a break to have lunch or dinner. 

T he only thing consistent is change. Fire support is a constantly 
evolving world. The duties have changed greatly over the 
past few years and vary between Iraq and Afghanistan. Although not 

traditionally a task of 
the fire support officer, I 
suggest that F SO’s learn 
as much as possible 
about maneuver 
tactics in order to help 
their company as an 
additional C2 element. 
As it’s becoming a 
core competency, I 
recommend that F SO’s 
learn from the civil 
affairs personnel all 
they can about the 
projects process. 
Projects take a long time, and your battalion is going to want 
results quickly, so you must stay prepared and stay on top ofproj ects 
in order to be successful. You’re going to have to plan ahead to 
make progress in your nonlethal duties. If you can attend the 10 
school before deployment I’d highly recommend it. 10 has been 
challenging for us as we weren’t fully trained in it. Better training 
prior to deployment will help you in this. 

Lastly, I’d suggest that your most important duties are still your 
lethal tasks. If you can attend the JFO School prior to deployment, 
train your FIST on the CFF and Fires planning, get the ROZ hot 
prior to missions and high risk times, and use reverse echelonment 
of fires to mitigate the time necessary to get fire mission approval, 
you’ll be a great asset to your unit. By taking the suggestions 
I’ve made in this article, you’ll be better prepared for your lethal, 
nonlethal, and command and control duties in the contemporary 
operating environment in Operation Enduring Freedom. 


1 st Lieutenant Brian R. Buchholz is currently attending the Field Artillery 
Captains Career Course at Fort Sill, Okla. He served as a fire support 
officer for C Company, 2nd Battalion, 87th Infantry Regiment, 3rd Brigade 
Combat Team, 10th Mountain Division, from May 2008 to April 2010. 
He deployed to Afghanistan in Operation Enduring Freedom IX-X. He 
graduated from Cornell University with a Bachelor of Arts in History. 



Fires 



2010 Fires Seminar 

From May 17 to May 21, members of the Fires community gathered at the 
Fires Center of Excellence, Fort Sill, Okia., for the 2010 Fires Seminar. The 
following article continues our coverage of this year’s seminar. 



A new/ di 


skinnier and skinnier - it’s recognition that 
public conversation is moving into your 
world. If our Army is not fully a part of that 
conversation - we’ve not done ourselves 
justice.” 

Smith went on to discuss the ACC 
and its role in developing capabilities 
for the Army of the future through the 
operational environment, leader attributes 
and organizational tenants. 

But what exactly is the ACC? 

BG H.R. McMaster, director of 
the U.S. Army Capabilities Integration 


Center’s Concepts Development and 
Experimentation Directorate explained 
the purpose of ACC earlier this year. 
“The Capstone Concept aims to define the 
problem of the future armed conflict and 
describes how the Army will function in 
the future 

“[The ACC] will give a broader 
definition of situational understanding,” 
McMaster stated. When we’re dealing 
with a complex problem, like the future of 


By Jennifer Blais 

Managing Editor 


M eeting the challenges of the future 
was the main focus of the brief 
by Mr. Rickey E. Smith, director. 
Army Capabilities Integration Center, 
Training and Doctrine Command. His 
presentation was given as part of the Fires 
Seminar held May 18-20, 2010 at Fort 
Sill, Okla. 

Smith spoke about the Army Capstone 
Concept and how it is sparking many 
changes across the Army. Highlights 
included the Army’s relationship with social 
media, the operational environment, leader 
attributes, joint Fires and operations. All of 
these changes were shown in Smith’s brief 
to be assets the Army can use to create a 
stronger, more agile force. 

Smith started his discussion with talking 
about social media. Using Facebook, Flickr 
and Twitter as a part of everyday Army 
communication is now the norm. 

“Facebook has exceeded e-mail as 
the preformed form of communication,” 
Smith said. It’s a testament that social 
networking has become part of the 
Army’s operational environment. Smith 
spoke of the need for Army leaders to 
pay attention to the growing trends of 
social networking and its impact as we 
continue into an information age. 

It’s an affirmation that’s shared by 
Secretary of the Army Pete Geren. “We are 
an organization made up of the young and 
run by a newspaper generation that came 
into their adult years before the Internet 
and social media,” Geren has gone on the 
record as saying. 

“The future of our Army depends on 
how we communicate with our audience 
in between the ages [of] 15 to 25. We’re 
sitting around lamenting the passing of 
newspaper after newspaper. There’s some 
effort by Congress to find out how to save 
them. But even the ones surviving are getting 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • July-August 2010 24 



sustainable 








armed conflict, nobody has a clear answer. 
Its emphasis is for us to consult with a broad 
range of people. 

The broad range includes consulting 
with our sister services. Maj. Lisa Nemeth, 
with the Concept Writing Team, U.S. Air 
Force, stated earlier this year, that each of 
the services has a different perspective on 
the fight, and brings different capabilities 
to the fight. 

“By being involved with the Capstone 
Concept we (other services) can see where 
the Army is going, look at what the gaps are, 
see what the Army sees,” she said. Together 
all the services will find the solution as to 
what the U.S. needs for the future, and start 
to work toward common ground. 

Yet what does the ACC mean to the 
individual warfighter? What does it and 
doesn’t it do for commanders and leaders? 

Smith went on to explain the ACC 
outlines capabilities the Army will require 
in 2016-2028, and will guide changes across 
our Army to fulfill those requirements. 
Through the implementation of the ACC 
the Army must ask additional fundamental 
questions, Smith said. 


For example, what is the Army’s 
vision for the future of armed conflict and 
how should the Army conduct joint land 
operations to facilitate strategic objectives? 
What additional or new capabilities should 
the Army develop and provide to joint force 
commanders to meet the broad range of 
national security threats? 

To analyze these questions Smith 
discussed three major points beginning 
with operational environment. Fie said the 
operational environment is guided by two 
things; certainty (defense transformation 
theory) versus uncertainty (recent and 
ongoing conflicts). 

Threats to the operational environment 
present or perceived, to name a few, are 
enhanced by technology as well as lethal 
direct fires, lethal indirect fires, mobility 
and counter-mobility. ACC logic includes 
considerations of environment, or full 
spectrum operations, combined with 
military problems. It also considers how the 
Army should use available and anticipated 
resources to educate its leaders and organize 
to win wars as a larger team, to solve the 
central idea of operational adaptability, 


and create resilient Soldiers and a cohesive 
Army. 

Smith said these considerations and 
ideas, can be honed with fine tuning leader 
attributes and the four Ps; prevail in war; 
prevent (and deter conflict); prepare (to 
defeat the enemy and succeed in wide range 
operations); and preserve (the national 
treasure, the force). Smith went on to explain 
that defining comprehensive lessons learned 
and adapting those lessons to make stronger 
leaders will make our forces and maneuver 
more adaptable to the aim of the overall 
Army. 

In doing this, he said, the Army must 
understand and frame complex problems, 
conduct and sustain operations, employ 
manpower, mobility, firepower and 
protection. 

Smith also talked about the need for 
adaptable Soldiers, who are able to develop 
solutions to overcome hybrid threats, 
enable operations without pause and ensure 
freedom of maneuver in all areas. 

Smith emphasized the human element 
of the ACC. “Networks don’t do (win the 
fight) it. People do it. We should plan for 


“‘u’Go© fcaOsm®© fe©®®©©® sGd© CoQaomam ©D©Dm©ofle B 
QasGDDDaOsg^B eCo© [Mg©® ansi ©pepaSamiO [JogotfiRmaaiiiife 
0© ©©omssiioHmgl m?© ©ammse a(W@P(°] 0gm®p© a ® 



Soldiers and Afghan national police officers walk down a path while on their way into the village of Sequala, Jalrez District, Wardak province, 
Afghanistan, May 11. This combined forces patrol is going to communicate with and help maintain good relations with the locals. (Photo bySGT 

Russell Gilchrest, U.S. Army) 







. z 



Soldiers prepare to move from cover during an attack by anti-Afghan forces in the Tantil village in eastern Afghanistan's Kunar province, March 13. 

(Photo by SSG Gary A. Witte, U.S. Army) 


f A L 

■ * f. 









.“r * 4"' 



technology, but not count on it. 

“The balance between the human 
element, technology, the budget and 
operational requirements is something we 
cannot afford to ignore,” Smith said. 

Creating a balance in a full spectrum of 
challenges is also a key component to the 
ACC. 

One challenge, that isn’t going away any 
time soon, is conducting Army operations 
under the scrutiny of a 24-hour media 
news cycle and instant public access to 
the Internet. Media-forced, transparent 
operations are a challenge the Anny must 
face head-on. Smith said. Additionally, 
the Army must continue fighting for 
information and protect communication 
systems in an ever-changing information 
environment. Smith indicated we are also 
falling behind in technology. 

“We can’t have an impact on the local 
population and economy if we do not have 
the technology to offer,” Smith explained. 

Smith went on to talk about how the 
enemy is evolving and adapting through 


technology and defense. Implications of 
these informational and technological 
changes are continually expanding the Fires 
warfighting function, which now includes 
indirect Fires, air and missile defense 
and electronic warfare. Discrimination in 
targeting, the application of current Fires 
capabilities as well as integrating Army, 
joint, multi-national lethal and nonlethal 
capabilities are also the operational focus 
of the ACC. 

Smith’s final discussion focused on Army 
Force Generation and its relationship to the 
ACC. ARFORGEN provides combatant 
commanders and civil authorities with a 
steady supply of trained and ready units that 
are task organized in modular expeditionary 
force packages and tailored to joint 
mission requirements. These operational 
requirements focus the prioritization and 
synchronization of institutional functions 
to recruit, organize, man, equip, train, 
sustain, mobilize, and deploy units on a 
cyclic basis. ARFORGEN’s adaptability 
addresses both emerging and enduring 


requirements. Simultaneously, Army 
institutional adaptations to ARFORGEN 
maximize potential efficiencies while 
ensuring effective capabilities are built to 
support operational requirements. The use 
of strategy and risk assessment to drive 
procurement creating sustainability across 
the Army is an example of the guidance the 
ACC can provide for ARFORGEN, Smith 
explained. 

To facilitate these changes in 
procurement, Smith suggested cutting 
timelines. Procurement should span months 
rather than decades. Fie said, buying 
less more often; a principle driven by 
economic considerations and the changing 
warfighting function should be the norm. 
The former practice of buying “all of 
what the Army needs at the moment,” 
compared to the new practice of buying 
“what is needed at the moment through 
budgeting,” were lessons learned that could 
be quantified and implemented through 
prioritization of capabilities and alignment 
with ARFORGEN. 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • July-August 2010 26 












sustainable 



MG Mark P. Hertling, commanding general of Multi-National Division 
North and Task Force Iron, meets with Government of Iraq leaders visiting 
By LTC Lance Oskey and COL Darryl Williams Diyala province, Iraq. (Photo courtesy of LTC Lance Oskey, U.S. Army) 



M ilitary efforts to support governance help to build progress 
toward achieving effective, legitimate governance. 
Military support to governance focuses on restoring 
public administration and resuming public services while fostering 
long-tenn efforts to establish a functional, effective system of 
political governance. The support provided by military forces 
helps to shape the environment for extended unified action by other 
partners. Their efforts eventually enable the host nation to develop 
an open political process, a free press, a functioning civil society, 
and legitimate legal and constitutional frameworks. 

FM 3-07 Stability Operations 

U nderstanding the problem: the complex environment of 
MND-N. MG Mark P. Hertling, commanding general of 
Multi-National Division North and Task Force Iron, understood 
that a hindrance to political progress in the northern provinces was 
a simple lack of communication between provincial and national 
leadership. As such, he directed that the division’s governance efforts 
would focus on bringing together entrenched senior leadership of 
the government of Iraq with and to the provincial leaders of the 
northern provinces. The simple geography of MND-N (consisting 
of the four northern provinces of Ninewa, Kirkuk, Salah ad Din, 
and Diyala and bordered by the three provinces of the autonomous 
Kurdish Regional Government) contained a very complex set of 
issues which hampered political and economic development in the 
north. Furthermore, the division had the challenge of coordinating 
cross-provincial actions in partnership with the four provincial 
reconstruction teams. Each province contained a distinct ethnic, 
tribal and religious composition; therefore, each maintained distinct 
security and governance problems. Adding to the complexity of the 
operational environment of MND-N were the inter-related Kurdish 
issues that affected each of the four northern provinces. (By way of 
comparison, Multi-National Force - West and their battle space of 
Anbar province consisted of one major tribal group, one partnered 
PRT, and one provincial government). The Division Fires and 
Effects Coordination Cell, was the staff agency responsible for the 
division’s economics and governance progress, and also had the 
mission to plan, prepare, and execute a series of executive level 
cross provincial conferences. 

elping to support “good governance:” facilitating 
communication. The practice ofbringing government oflraq 
senior and ministerial leaders from Baghdad to the provinces was a 
significant evolution from earlierpractices of‘helicopter diplomacy. ’ 
Helicopter diplomacy was the successful practice ofbringing senior 
leaders from the provinces to Baghdad to discuss economics and 

27 July-August 2010 • Fires 


governance issues with key officials. The evolution of this concept 
from ‘helicopter diplomacy’ to ‘reverse helicopter diplomacy’ 
allowed the consolidated northern provinces to collectively voice 
their concerns to the central government. The emphasis on hosting 
these conferences in the north instead of Baghdad sent a significant 
message to the provinces, demonstrating the central government 
was concerned enough to leave their offices in Baghdad to listen 
to the people in their own cities. With thorough media coverage 
(local andnational Arabic media sources were always givenpriority; 
Western media was invited as well) for each venue, the citizens 
were informed through print and broadcast media that their local 
leaders were working with and through the central government on 
their behalf. Over the course of the deployment, MND-N hosted a 
number of conferences on a variety of topics ranging from a narrow 
focus on oil, electricity and agriculture initiatives to broadly focused 
large conferences addressing economics and reconstruction in all 
of northern Iraq. 

uild it and they will come: the division conference series. 

The various conferences of MND-N manifested in several 
variations: Single province, single topic; single province, multiple 
topics; multiple provinces, single topic; multiple provinces, multiple 
topics. 

In the single province, single topic conferences, key government 
oflraq representatives were able to focus efforts on a single theme. 
An example of this was the Ministry of Agriculture focused visit 
to Kirkuk province. This single province, single topic focus (with 
multiple representatives to include the Minister of Agriculture 
and the Minister of Water Resources) allowed for the agricultural 
community in Kirkuk to better connect with the key representatives 
on those issues. At the division level, the FECC ensured that the 
interests of the brigade combat team/province were addressed, 
while at the same time the agenda of the GOI was also met. In 
all of these conference variations, division assistance in gaining 
the commitment of appropriate GOI representation began early. 
Working through the division liaison officer to the United States 
Embassy, engagements to gaining ministerial support were critical. 
Additional resources from division included translation headsets, 
coordination with the brigade combat team public affairs officer 
for media support, and air movement support. 

In a single province, multiple topic conference, the leadership 
of the central government was able to interact with the leadership 
of the province on a variety of issues. An example of this variation 
was one of the many Deputy Prime Minister Al-Essawi visits to 
the northern provinces. The ‘best practice’ for this engagement 
was for the provincial reconstruction team to coach, teach and 








mentor the provincial directors general to provide a short prepared 
presentation on the two or three most important issues within their 
area of responsibility. Initially, the division, PRTs and BCT shaped 
an agenda for MNF-I to present to the GOI. Over time, the amount 
of assistance from the coalition diminished, but division assistance 
was still required to enable these conferences. The level of support 
varied depending on PRT involvement, and the capacity of the 
provincial leadership. Division support to these conferences were 
the same as in the previous model; however additional preparation 
with the BCT/PRT was often necessary to help ensure that the 
multiple provincial presenters were prepared with the appropriate 
information for what was essentially an executive level conference. 
A sample agenda for a single province, multiple topic conference is 
depicted below. All parties had to remain sufficiently flexible with 
the actual agenda to allow for the deputy prime minister to make 
changes to the itinerary: 

• 1000 arrives at the airfield (in this case with a C130). 

• 1000-1030 ground transportation to PROV HALL (CF MRAPs 
with ISF augmentation). 

• 1030-1130 small security meeting in GOV Office to include 
local military leaders. 

• 1130-1230 Ninewa leadership presents issues/provincial action 
plan to DPM. 

• 1230-1330 lunch. 

• 1330-1430 DPM presentation regarding commitments towards 
Mosul Reconstruction. 

• 1430-1530 press conference. 

• 1530-UTC ground movement to airfield, air movement to 
Baghdad. 

The multiple provinces, single topic conference used division 
movement assets to bring BCT/PRT/provincial representatives 
together to discuss a single topic. The Energy Conference Series 
(discussed and resolved oil and electricity issues in the north), the 
United and Healthy Conference (identified major health issues 
and opportunities), and the Women’s Conference (focused on 
opportunities how and for provided empowerment of the women in 
the north) are all examples of this format. These conferences rarely 
had provincial governors present, and took on a more ‘worker’type 
format where break-out sessions, and detailed discussions on the 
topic were featured. Division assistance to these types of conferences 
was significant. As representatives from all of the provinces (to 
include the KRG) were invited, the division’s role in selecting 
the cross-provincial level issues for presentation was critical to 
ensuring the conference had applicability to the entire audience. 
Division enablement for the multiple province level conferences 
were more substantial and involved not only hosting the conference, 
but also, as in the case with the Women’s Conference, contracting 
for an appropriate venue, contracting for meal support, contracting 


for additional transportation and continuous engagements to gain 
guest speakers, as well as to gain local, national, and international 
media coverage. 

The multiple provinces, multiple topic conference represented 
the conference variation that was largest in scope, planning, and 
resources required. This type of conference was attended by the most 
senior representatives of the state, as well as provincial governors 
and senior coalition interlocutors. Representatives from all the major 
media outlets were invited with the promise of receiving personal 
media follow-ups, which helped gain media coverage. These types 
of conferences were the most staff intensive and required extensive 
planning and preparation. 

Division support to these conferences was considerable, and 
included ensuring that amenities associated with this type of 
executive level conference were on hand. VIP rooms, high-quality 
local food, live music (positioned during transitions and during 
lunch), floral arrangements, official photographs and conference 
mementos were examples of the attention to detail demanded forthis 
type of conference. Combined protocol planning and pre-execution 
checks ensured the venue was properly prepared and the various 
dignitaries were afforded the proper accommodations as dictated 
by protocol. 

The content and presentation of these conferences required 
extensive combined staff work between the GOI lead planners to 
ensure the conferences merited the time investment of the senior 
leaders present. Linkages between past engagements, conferences, 
and visits between the attendees were established. 

Topics presented in these conferences were categorized as such: 

Issues raised to check on progress. These issues are “follow up” 
issues from earlier commitments in previous venues. For example, 
during one of the later Mosul conferences by DPM Essawi, he used 
the conference as a venue to announce the delivery of agriculture 
relief to farmers of the province. This announcement was a follow 
up on previously published drought relief commitments made by 
the GOI. 

Issues raised to inform. These were used to inform the GOI 
on cross-provincial issues that required assistance from the central 
government. For example, during the discussion of fuel shortages 
to the provinces in the division United and Strong III Conference, 
MG Hertling was able to inform the provinces and GOI of the 
actual fuel allocation and fuel pick-up rates across the provinces. 
This information helped better frame the discussion at hand. 

Issues raised to gain a commitment. Although few definite 
decisions were made by the senior GOI leadership, commitments 
to address the issues raised were then followed up in subsequent 
engagements, visits and conferences. As an example, the 
commitment to hire and train female Iraqi police for the Diyala 
province was delivered a few months after the topic was addressed 


^Althomli taw definite declaims wore 
made by the aanior GOI Qaadarahop, 


®®ouDmoSDiam]t^ an a&fegs tte 


mm® 3Go@m 

suggpnM, visits 


oop In subsequent 
and conference 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • July-August 2010 28 







in the Women’s Conference with the successful graduation of fifty 
female Iraqi police. 

As all events are potential media and information operations 
opportunities, this was especially true with these conferences. The 
division “branded” each major conference initiative to facilitate 
recognition of the conference, and their results. The distinctive 
icons were often picked up by the province or central government 
and similarly used in subsequent related meetings and smaller 
conferences. 

hat we learned: the lag time of conference results. 

Immediate, quantifiable results following any of these 
conferences were difficult to measure. Media monitoring of coverage 
of the events in local media through open sources provided feedback 
on relative importance of the conference based on the amount of 
coverage. We continuously monitored and reported on local media 
[internet, print and television] broadcasts. In the case of Western 
media, these sources often combined the conference into larger 
stories and themes. 

The MND-N engagements team combined, in some cases, with 
a digital recording of the session which allowed the staff to capture 
any commitments made for follow-up. Examples of specific tasks 
accomplished, at least in part, due to the accountability of the 
conferences included the following: 


• United and Just Iraqi Police conferences: increased Iraqi police 
hiring and training. 

• United and Healthy Conference: increased partnership 
between PRT health officers to include establishment of 
first responder training. 

• Women’s Conference: influenced the hiring of female Iraqi 
police officers in Diyala, support for the ‘Doves of Peace’ radio 
show in Diyala, and support in establishment of women’s groups 
in all four provinces. 

• Energy Conferences: encouraged greater fuel pickup rates from 
the Bayji Refinery, and contributed to the release of water from the 
KRG dams to support irrigation in Diyala. 

• United and Strong Conferences: contributed to the establishment 
of Sons of Iraq program throughout the four provinces, and 
incorporated Kurdish Regional Government into division 
conferences. 

• United and Prosperous Conferences: facilitated the 
announcement then followed up on thirteen million dollars of 
medium-sized loans delivered to MND-N businesses through the 
Ministry of Industry and Minerals Loan Program. This conference 
also launched the establishment of follow-up DPM Essawi provincial 
visits to gauge the status of reconstruction/ essential services. 

In the case of the United and Strong III, and United and Prosperous 




Governor of Diyala Abdal Nassir takes on questions from a crowd of Iraqi news media at the remodeled Al Kindi Elementary School grand opening 
ceremony in Muqdadyah, Diyala, Iraq, May 24. (Photo by spc Anderson savoy, u.s. Army) 


29 July-August 2010 • 


Fires 










"Topics wHDO bo contentious, travol 
arrangomonts (to linclud® waathar 
@@@@mm®datlono) wM ba frustrating, 
and comNned plannfaig ©fffore© wM fe© 
©i^Diaustlng - but ®Go© p©©oaDg© eCo© 



EQtmmjD, 


ED 


conferences, both deputy prime ministers were thankful for the 
division’s efforts in convening the various parties to discuss their 
issues. Deputy Prime Minister Salih followed up after the United 
and Strong III, with a security team visit to Mosul, whereby he 
told MG Herding that he learned the value of ‘getting out of the 
provinces’ through the model of the conference series. Similarly, 
Deputy Prime Minister Essawi ordered his staff (following the 
United and Prosperous Conference) to host a ‘Southern Provinces 
Economic Council,’ and model it after our United and Prosperous 
(this conference was held in September 2008). Additionally, 
DPM Essawi launched follow-up visits to each of the provinces 
to continue the momentum gained through the initial United and 
Prosperous Conference. 

As this article addresses much of the preparation required for 
these conferences, the transition from planning to execution was 
equally important. Planning briefs to the commanding general 
were facilitated during the weekly G5 plans updates, full-operation 
orders were published to coordinate activities, handover briefs from 
the FECC planning cell to the G3, division operations team (both 
day and night shifts) occurred, and complete operations schedules 
for each conference were used to track progress, and troubleshoot 
as necessary. During execution, a full command and control cell 
was established at each venue to aid the division CP in command 
and control. 

he way ahead: enabling governance in a post-United 
Nations Security Council Resolution environment. Instead 
of allowing the central government to remain in Baghdad, MG 
Hertling and MND-N executed a variety of interrelated conferences 
that facilitated discussion between the provinces and the GOI, 
with each conference serving as an accountability mechanism to 
commitments made in previous conferences, while serving as an 
azimuth for future actions. Though a large amount of staff energy and 
resources were expended to host these events, the Iraqi leadership 
began to increase their level of assistance in each, and soon required 
little assistance in hosting similar venues. However, division level 
assistance was still necessary as some topics (Kurdish Regional 
Government / Government of Iraq issues, the always contentious 
power (fuel and electricity issues), required an honest broker who 
both sides trusted. The division served this role - as an interlocutor 
for both parties. In a post UNSCR environment, the ability to host 
these types of conferences may become more challenging. The 
following considerations apply: 

With a change in provincial leadership following the 2009 
elections, some provincial leaders may be less likely to maintain a 
‘close’ relationship with the coalition. Coalition partners will need 


to re-establish their relationships, and encourage participation in 
these types of forums. 

Likely coalition troop withdrawals (mandated in the Status of 
Forces Agreement) will result in more and more security burdens 
passed on to the Iraqis. Finding suitable, secure venues to host large 
conferences will be the task of the provincial govermnent, and not 
the coalition forces. The most notable impact to these conferences 
is the reduction in rotary wing air support to assist in moving the 
parties to the conference venues. 

With security improving, and the state of Iraq ‘returning to 
normalcy’ more and more, conference topics may trend towards 
civil themes such as women’s issues, health issues, minority 
issues, and education issues to name a few. The encouragement of 
a greater role by the PRTs, United States Agency for International 
Government, and non-governmental organizations in hosting these 
types of conferences should be encouraged. 

Although the counter insurgency truism that no solution in one 
city or province can be replicated in another, we feel that the 
convening power of a division level organization was a significant 
enabler to the progress gained under TF Irons’ deployment. Too 
often, the excuses by the local government on why they can’t 
host conferences are precisely why these conferences can prove 
to be effective. Topics will be contentious, travel arrangements 
(to include weather accommodations) will be frustrating, and 
combined planning efforts will be exhausting - but the results of 
the conferences can help further the mission. 


Lieutenant Colonel Lance Oskey is a 1993 ROTC graduate from 
California University of Pennsylvania and was commissioned as an 
infantry officer. As a company grade officer, Oskey served in various 
positions with the 101st Airborne (Air Assault), and 2nd Infantry 
Divisions. As a major, Oskey deployed with the 1st Stryker Brigade 
Combat Team, 25th Infantry Division during Operation Iraqi Freedom 
2003. Oskey later deployed with the 1st Armored Division as the 
deputy effects coordinator during the division’s deployment from 
September 2008 to December 2009. Oskey is currently the battalion 
commander of 2nd Battalion, 54th Infantry Regiment at Fort Benning, Ga. 

Colonel Darryl Williams is an artillery officer who formerly commanded 
the 1st Armored Division Artillery. After completing command, he 
deployed with 1-AD in support of OIF, where he served as the Fires 
and Effects Coordination Cell chief. He is currently the deputy director 
of the Comprehensive Soldier Fitness Program, headquartered at the 
Department of the Army G-3/5/7. 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • July-August 2010 30 






sustainable 



C-RAMancl 


The Counter-Rocket Artillery Missile Weapon System fires flares up during a test fire at Joint Base 


Balad, Iraq, January 31, The C-RAM has the ability to fire up to 4,500 rounds per minute to protect 


By CPT Edmund A. Guy III 


the base against incoming projectiles. (Photo by SrA Brittany Y. Bateman, U.S. Air Force) 



H ow do we as leaders in the Fires 
Center of Excellence work 
a concept into reality and then 
continue to make it relevant to the maneuver 
force in the contemporary operating 
environment? Counter Rocket, Artillery, 
Mortars or indirect fire protection capability 
is actually a living embodiment of a concept 
that eventually was forged into reality. 

With all things considered, the C-RAM/ 
IFPC concept came into reality rather 
quickly. In May 2004, the Chief of Staff 
of the Army at the time, General Peter 
J. Schoomaker, inquired about a counter 
indirect fire capability during an Operation 
Iraq Freedom 1 after action review. Amonth 
later in June 2004, an operational needs 
statement from theater explained the need 
for intercept capability in detail, and the 
necessity to link current equipment found 
within the forward air defense command 
and control, and field artillery sensors, 
esting ensued. Over the next year, 
rapid testing was conducted trying 
to find the right system that would be meet 
interceptor requirements for the current 
deployment. Indirect fire events in theater 
continued to show the need for C-RAM 
capabilities, whether for intercept or sense 
and warn capabilities. Less than a year after 

31 July-August 2010 • Fires 


the ONS was submitted, the first Sense and 
Warn Systems were deployed to fight the 
continued indirect fire threat to our forward 
operating bases and a month later the first 
Land-based Phalanx Weapon Systems were 
deployed. Phalanx is a rapid-fire, computer- 
controlled, radar-guided gun system 
designed to defeat anti-ship missiles and 
other close-in air and surface threats. A self- 
contained package, Phalanx automatically 
carries out functions usually performed 
by multiple systems — including search, 
detection, threat evaluation, tracking, 
engagement and kill assessment. In less 
than 10 months after the first fielding, four 
additional LPWS were delivered to theater 
and the first indirect fire intercept was 
recorded. Since the time ofthat first success, 
personnel for intercept responsibilities 
shifted from the Navy to the Army, and then 
finally to a joint intercept battery concept. 
Since then sense and warn locations have 
been added and closely linked together to 
form ‘warning networks.’ 

rom concept to reality. In a short six 
years since the ONS was first 
submitted, we have gone from concept to 
completing more than 100 intercepts and 
saving thousands upon thousands of lives 
by the warning that C-RAM units have 


provided ground troops. 

The question that remains as the 
drawdown in Iraq continues and a timetable 
has been set by the president for end 
of combat operations in Afghanistan is 
where does C-RAM go from here? We all 
know what C-RAM can do in post-combat 
operations, but what can it bring to the table 
after major combat operations are done and 
the Army has gone into stability and support 
actions? 

The next logical step, for those ADA 
personnel involved in C-RAM, is to start 
preparing C-RAM, or the Indirect Fire 
Protection Capability Program, for the 
next war. If we do not prepare now, 1 think 
inevitably IFPC will be left behind with the 
maneuver force. 

merging concepts. Army Operational 
Concepts, Army Capstone Doctrine, 
and emerging Fires Center of Excellence 
concepts originating from the current 
campaign plan have definitely highlighted 
the need for an Integrated Fires Management 
Capability Program that provides digital 
clearance of Fires for joint and coalition land 
force engagement operations. So the need 
is there, but where do we go for solutions? 
I think we already have them in the Army 
inventory; we just need to put them together. 










The overarching concept that will tie 
the initial stages of this together is the 
combination of the current air defense 
airspace management cell and the sense 
and warn portion of IFPC. If done properly, 
the Tashing together’ of IFPC with the 
maneuver force will have long been 
cemented prior to needing it again in the 
future fight. 

I think the ADAM cell is the right 
place to start because of how the current 
interworking and configuration of the 
ADAM cell and thebrigade aviation element 
cell. They are essentially one team. If IFPC 
is brought into the mix it would add another 
capability without adding any other major 
equipment inside the brigade combat team’s 
tactical operation center, and it could also 
help to synergize the ADAM, BAE, and fire 
support coordinator/Fires support element 
cells into a team that dovetails perfectly with 
digital/dynamic clearance of Fires and the 
need for airspace deconfliction. 

All the tools are there in these cells to 
make these things happen now; adding 
the Tactical Airspace Integration System, 
Forward Area Air Defense Command and 
Control System, Air and Missile Defense 
Work Station to the equation will only make 
it better. 

A manpower issue. Due to the lack of 
14J s (C4ITactical Operations C enter 
Enhanced Operator/Maintainers) as well as 
a shortage of 140As (Command and Control 
System Technicians) we currently have a 
critical shortfall of trained Soldiers and 
leaders who have the experience necessary 
to operate these systems. Normally, this is 
usually supplanted by personnel with the 
ADAM and BAE cells working in concert 
together to deconflict the airspace. 

But, this shortfall could easily be 
fixed with new equipment training for air 
defenders, field artilleryman, and aviators 
- so everyone could work together and 
there would be no need for a force structure 
increase. Properly conducted training and 
manning shifts could be done prior to a unit 
deploying to one of the combat training 
centers, so that any battle roster changes 
could be made there instead of once in 
combat. 

A dditional software is needed. If the 

ADAM cell as well as the FEC and 
BAE were to combine it would provide a 
correlated air picture, clearance of Fires, 
decrease the amount of time for sensor 
to shooter, provide sense and warn to the 
BCT location, and respond to the attack 
faster and more accurately with a better 
point of origin grid coordinate. But, there 
would need to be upgrades to many units’ 
software packages on their existing systems 


as well as minor modifications to TOC 
layouts, so an effective integrated Fires 
management capability could be achieved. 
Digital clearance of Fires, joint airspace 
management, sense and warn, interface 
with ground troops, and a link to the Army 
Battle Command System could happen if 
capabilities woidd set these interworking 
cells apart as the doctrinal centerpiece for 
the BCT. 

There are official reports of this being 
done in some fashion on FOBs that no longer 
have C-RAM Soldiers stationed there, but 
the ADAM cells in certain situations have 
shown their effectiveness in providing at 
least part of the integrated F ires management 
capability and allowing a BCT to have more 
efficient responsiveness to enemy attacks, 
ush for the future. As the Fires force 
continues to come up with ideas 
and move toward concepts that integrate 
with other branches as well as the Fires 
Center of Excellence as a whole, other 


questions and other possible solutions are 
inevitable. However, the main solution we 
are all searching for in the implementation 
of C-RAM or IFPC is how do we continue 
to save lives and how do we turn the 
force multiplier pillars of C-RAM (shape, 
respond, and protect) into something that 
will allow the maneuver commander in 
the field to put '‘Steel on Target” faster and 
more efficiently. 


Captain Edmund A. Guy III, air defense, is 
currently the commander of Delta Battery, 2nd 
Battalion, 6th Air Defense Artillery Brigade, 
which trains all joint and combined forces 
conducting a C-RAM deployment. From 
November2007to March 2010, he commanded 
Alpha Battery, 2nd Battalion, 44th Air Defense 
Artillery at Fort Campbell, Ky. Also during this 
timeframe, Guy deployed to Joint Base Balad, 
Iraq and served as the C-RAM Joint Intercept 
Battery commander. 


PFC Alysha Gleason and SGT Chad Ervin conduct maintenance on a radar station at Forward 
Operating Base Delta, Iraq, Aug. 22, 2009. Both Soldiers are members of a counter-rocket, 
artillery and mortar team from Echo Battery, 4th Battalion, 5th Air Defense Artillery Brigade. 

(Photo by SSG Brien Vorhees, U.S. Army) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • July-August 2010 32 












lethal and nonlethal 


"tHtD© QKfS©OO0©@[rD©© (SgDoS 
©JiMKirffiuDSJaS 



By CPT Robert Destefano, 
CPT Peter Graham and 
CPT Andrew Narcum 


U ultiple Launch Rocket System 

1 I operations are driven from the 
JJJ top-down and rely heavily on 
the ability to rapidly receive and process 
targeting data from higher levels. Both the 
MLRS battalion and battery are postured to 
receive data and to quickly turn it into a fire 
mission with absolutely no need for analysis 
or refinement of the target. Our battle drills 
are designed for quick and accurate fires 
with no feedback from the lower level 
units. Simply put, we are consumers of 
intelligence. While this top-down system is 
effective at putting rounds on target quickly, 
but it is ineffective in the counterinsurgency 
environment. 

When the 2nd Battalion, 20th Field 
Artillery, 41th Fires Brigade deployed to 
Forward Operating Base Delta in Wasit 
province, Iraq, in early June 2008, our 
initial mission was to provide escort to the 
provincial reconstruction team or the local 
civil affairs teams. Our responsibilities 
shifted in July 2008, when Russia invaded 
the Republic of Georgia and the Georgian 
army withdrew from a series of checkpoints 
they had been manning throughout 
Wasit province. Our battalion assumed 
responsibility ofthree of these checkpoints. 

Alpha B attery was tasked with occupying 
Checkpoint 5, a Georgian base near the city 
of An Nu’maniyah, on Highway 8 running 
from A1 Kut to Baghdad. At 1 a.m., Aug. 
9, 2008, we were notified of a 7:30 a.m. 
movement the same day to occupy the 
checkpoint indefinitely. Alpha Battery found 
itself as a battlespace owner containing 
the second largest city in the province. In 
response, the battalion pushed a total of 
three batteries out to man the Georgian’s 
abandoned checkpoints. 

Immediately, the units at these three 
checkpoints were partnered with local 
Iraqi security forces, including the Iraqi 
National Police and Iraqi army. For the 
next 13 months, the batteries conducted full 
spectrum counterinsurgency while focused 

33 July-August 2010 • Fires 



2nd Battalion, 20th Field Artillery, 41th Fires Brigade deployed to Forward Operating Base Delta 
in Wasit province, Iraq, in early June 2008 to provide escort to the provincial reconstruction team 
or the local civil affairs teams. 


on stability and support operations. The 
batteries had to quickly learn and adapt to 
this new role. 

It is widely acknowledged 
counterinsurgency’s reliance on detailed, 
to-the-minute intelligence makes it the exact 
opposite of how traditional MLRS Soldiers 
are trained to fight wars. “Counterinsurgency 
is an intelligence-driven endeavor,” states 
the first line of Chapter 3, Field Manual 
3 -24 Counterinsurgency. At this point, it was 
obvious an aggressive bottom-up approach 
to target generation was essential. 

In Iraq, every Soldier became a source of 
timely intelligence who could help develop 
the battlefield. From the brigade level to 


each junior Soldier, there were three main 
things we needed to rethink and rework. 
First, we needed to expand the notion of 
intelligence collection itself. This was not 
just a lethal fight anymore; the nonlethal 
lines of operation became an integral part 
of the intelligence picture. Secondly, we 
needed to enhance and develop systems in 
place to analyze and process intelligence at 
the battalion and battery levels, rather than 
simply relying on the brigade and higher to 
generate targets for us. Lastly, we had to 
adjust our mindset to allow the lowest level 
units, the ones who knew the terrain and the 
environment best, to refine all operations. 


























pansion of intelligence collection. 

This change from lethal targeting to 
nonlethal intelligence gathering required 
us to redefine what was important for us to 
know. The set of information requirements 
that each patrol was given was a clear 
reflection of this shift. When our initial 
patrols left the wire, their information 
requests were mirrored with the necessity 
of rapidly understanding the lethal fight. 
Common brigade and battalion information 
requests included, “What groups are 
responsible for the September rocket 
attacks on the forward operating base 
and which insurgent groups are actively 
targeting coalition forces?” These were 
valid questions to ask and necessitated by 
an unclear picture of the insurgent network 
we faced. However, we gained little to no 
information on the lethal front, and our 
gunners, drivers and section chiefs were 
nothing more than taxi drivers forpersonnel 
conducting assessments. We would conduct 
our patrols and report on changes to 
the route, such as 
personnel digging 
or conducting 
observation of our 
movements, but 
little else. While 
our patrols were 
alert and attentive 
to every detail 
along the route, 
they focused on 
providing security 
and kept their 
distance from the 
local populace. 

We kept 
everyone at a distance in an effort to 
allow sufficient time to react and assess 
every approaching vehicle and person’s 
propensity for violence towards us. In doing 
this, patrols were simply staying safe and 
reporting on the information they were 
told to report. The patrol debriefs reflected 
this; they were short and to the point. The 
information collected was focused on 
understanding the enemy that was seeking 
to attack us. All reporting went directly to 
battalion S2 (intelligence) which sent the 
information to the brigade S2. At the brigade 
level, a briefing was created that discussed 
purely lethal threats. This briefing was sent 
back down to the platoon leaders daily. If 
this way of doing business had continued 
for long, our later successes would not have 
been possible. 

The province remained relatively quiet 
with infrequent and poorly-coordinated 
attacks. In order to be successful, we 
needed to move past the lethal fight and 


focus on counter insurgency. To accomplish 
this, our intelligence gathering adapted 
by moving away from solely looking for 
insurgent cells and focusing our information 
requirements on nonlethal fronts such 
as finding government officials and 
determining where they worked and what 
services they were supposed to be providing. 
We knew our operating environment was 
extremely complicated and intelligence 
driven operations were going to be key to 
our success. 

Field Manual 2-0 Intelligence states, 
“The environment is often much more 
complex during stability operations and as 
a result intelligence is often more complex. 
In fact, intelligence is even more important 
a factor (or operational multiplier) during 
stability operations.” This became more 
obvious as we pushed further into our vast 
operating environments. Questions began 
to form, ‘The mayor said they are providing 
fresh water to 90 percent of the city; 
is this true?’ 


With the current information 
requirements, our only way to confirm this 
fact was to conduct a key leader engagement 
with a local sheikh or other local leader. This 
would generate a mission from the battalion 
or the battery. As these missions appeared, 
the patrols began to gain a clearer picture 
of what kind of information was important. 
They began to realize this information was 
right in front ofthem and could be gathered 
concurrently. Patrol leaders adjusted tactics 
and brought themselves closer to the local 
populace. This is a direct reflection of the 
fact that, “intelligence in COIN is about 
the people.” (See Field Manual 3-24 
Counterinsurgency). 

We realized we could be more effective 
with our collection mission if while a key 
leader engagement was being conducted 
inside, a designated team would begin 
engaging nearby locals outside. Shop 
owners, workers, children and any locals 
became sources of information. The 


battalion began to have more questions and 
pushed formore answers. New information 
requirements generated forpatrols included 
questions such as, ‘Do schools have up- 
to-date text books; how much does micro¬ 
generated electricity cost; and how late 
are stores open in the neighborhood?’ This 
process began to develop and expand as 
more answers brought more questions. 

The battalion began to push more and 
more information requirements that were 
focused along a significantly broader 
spectrum. The four lines of operations 
provided the framework for this more robust 
set of information requirements. These lines 
of operations focused on the economy, 
the security situation, legitimacy of the 
provincial and local governments, and 
the quality of essential services across 
the province. We were no longer narrow¬ 
mindedly simply try ing to collect information 
on the insurgent groups opposing us. Our 
Soldiers were quickly gaining a fuller 
idea of the nonlethal fight and how vital 
gaining reliable 
information was to 
winning it. As their 
understanding 
grew, so did 
their ability to 
collect useful 
intelligence. 
Patrols began 
to hone their 
skills; they 
were becoming 
sponges of 
information. The 
gunners, drivers, 
and section chiefs 
were all in the fight now. Each understood 
how important even the most minute 
details were. The patrol debrief began 
to grow. Information on all four lines of 
operations was pouring in. Empowered, 
the patrols grew into their new role, often 
pushing more information than they were 
asked to discover. 

stems to analyze. This increased 
reporting and influx of intelligence 
created an information overload. The 
battalion S2 section did not have the 
manpower to gather and analyze intelligence 
on every neighborhood, much less every 
street. Once again, they were forced to 
adapt. The section had to find a way to 
efficiently receive and analyze this wealth 
of information. 

The section received daily patrol 
debriefs from across the province, and, at 
times, was overloaded with information. To 
combat this, the section was reorganized at 
the battalion level by having one Soldier 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • July-August 2010 34 



our operating 
emiironment uuas extremely 
complicated 




o o 


0 0 


03 fc© \kSfl 0® ®QQP ©QQ@©©©©[ 


EE 






(a private first class or specialist who 
was a Multiple Launch Rocket System 
Operations/Automated Tactical Data 
Systems operator with no intelligence 
background) attached to the intel section 
who was responsible for analyzing and 
organizing all data that came out of a 
specific battery’s area of operations. It was 
his job to make sure that no data was lost 
in transit while being shuffled from the 
battery to the battalion and then back to the 
battery. This Soldier also was responsible 
for providing all the relevant data to the 
intel section and to the battalion’s one and 
only school-trained intelligence Soldier, 
who was an intelligence analyst. Together, 
these two were able break down the huge 
amounts of data into a manageable product 
for dissemination back to the patrol sets. 

To catalog this information and 
graphically represent it, the battalion 
acquired a system known as Tactical 
Ground Integrated Reporting. Itwasa Secret 
Internet-Protocol Router Network side map 
database that operated similarly to Google 
Earth. It allowed for information to be 
inputed, archived and searched by anyone 
with a Secret Internet-Protocol Router 
Network connection. This system kept 
track of the location of key infrastructure, 
attack history, shop owner’s information 
and any relevant information that the 
patrols gathered. Battalion S2 intel was 
the keeper of this database and policed its 
contents. It also was the battalion level S2 
who incorporated the reporting from outside 
organizations and inputed it into the system 
for access by the batteries. Even with a more 
robust S2 intel section, they still suffered 
from information overload. The batteries 
ended up carrying some of the load and 
had to create their own S2 intel capability. 

The battery level intelligence cells 
grew immensely in importance and 
prominence. They were the keepers 
of the minute details that proved so 
important in the current counterinsurgency 
fight. Previously, patrol debriefs were sent 
directly to battalion S2 intel. Now, the same 
debriefs were carefully scrutinized and 
analyzed at the battery level. While the 
battalion worked the trends for the province, 
the batteries specialized in their areas. This 
meant there had to be constant work done by 
each battery to ensure they were capturing as 
much intelligence as possible. From phone 
numbers to grid coordinates, everything 
had its use. The batteries also made use of 
the Tactical Integrated Ground Reporting 
system. It allowed the patrol leaders and 
section leaders access to historical reporting 
as well as battery and battalion-level 
analysis of information. It also provided 

35 July-August 2010 • 


a link to the numerous force multipliers 
available throughout the province. Signals 
intelligence, human intelligence, reports 
from special operations forces and any 
number of intelligence pieces could all 
be found on the TIGR. The battery was 
armed with all the tools it needed to 
successfully catalogue and map their areas 
of responsibility. 

rT)efinement. Due to the sheer amount of 

I I 1 information gathered and the 
expertise found at the battery level, 
the battalion allowed for more and 
more autonomous action. Refinement of 
operations was not only encouraged, it was 
expected. A commander’s intent would be 
issued along with certain requirements for 
operations. From this point, the refinement 
would be up to the battery. It was then the 
battery’s intelligence cell that would bring 
together the local experts and work to 
pinpoint how best to provide effects along 
the maximum number of lines of operation. 
The battery would push back-up requests 
for combat multipliers and requests for 
information. “Effective intelligence drives 
effective operations. Effective operations 
produce information which generates 
more intelligence.” (See Field Manual 
3-24 Counterinsurgency). Every mission 
the battalion conducted was intelligence 
driven and aimed at generating more 
intelligence. After a back brief, the battalion 
wouldblessoffonafinalmissionplan.Then, 
it woidd be up to the batteries to execute. 

fPlperation Dirty Deeds. A classic 

IJJ example of the way the battalion 
grew to operate occurred May 5, 2009, 
when we conducted Operation Dirty Deeds 
in An Nu’maniyah, Wasit province. Dirty 
Deeds was an entirely nonlethal operation. 
No part of the mission was focused on 
targeting a specific wanted individual or 
insurgent group. Instead, we focused on 
shaping the human terrain to our favor. The 
mission was to target the local populace’s 
perception of Iraqi security forces and local 
government officials. We hoped to do this 
by bringing the Iraqi army, Iraqi police 
and local government officials together 
and systematically clean the streets of the 
city. This low cost, but manpower-intensive 
operation, would show the locals their 
leaders and security forces were there to 
support them, and together they could make 
a huge impact on the city, even if the help 
did not come from Baghdad. To conceive 
and execute this operation required months 
of nonlethal intelligence gathering. 

During the first few months, patrol 
leaders throughout the battalion’s operating 
environment were reporting large amounts 
of trash on the streets and in the local 


neighborhoods. While the severity varied 
from town to town, this problem was present 
everywhere. The S2 intel section identified 
this as a provincial-wide problem that 
required a provincial-wide solution. These 
reports were coupled with a provincal- 
wide improvement in the perception of the 
Iraqi security forces. The battalion saw an 
opportunity to engage the populace along 
multiple lines of operations and developed 
“Operation Dirty Deeds.” 

The operation essentially called for a 
day where both U.S. Soldiers and Iraqi 
security forces personnel would partner to 
remove trash from the streets. The battalion 
believed this would serve their goals in a 
number of ways: most notably casting the 
Iraqi security forces in a favorable light 
with the local citizens, getting trash off 
of the streets, denying the enemy possible 
cover for improvised explosive device 
emplacement and creating an area that 
encouraged commerce and community. 

The battalion received approval from 
the provincial Iraqi police liaison and the 
government of Iraq and issued their intent 
to the batteries with a wide focus. It was 
then up to the batteries to implement this 
plan and specifically address the situation 
in their individual areas. The battalion 
provided the blue print for the batteries to 
expand and improve. Operating as a battle 
space owner for eight months, the battery 
was well prepared to receive a broad 
commander’s intent and translate it into 
a precisely targeted operation that would 
compound positive effects. 

In April 2009, A Battery received a 
fragmentary order to conduct Dirty Deeds. 
We were to conduct the operation in early 
May in A1 Akhara. Specific tasks included 
ensuring units throughout the battalion’s 
operating environment were collaborating 
and synching efforts. We also were to make 
certain each unit put the Iraqi security forces 
in the forefront. The battalion pushed us this 
information as a starting point; however, it 
was our responsibility to make Dirty Deeds 
successful along as many lines of operations 
as possible. So for example, if we did not 
think A1 Akhrar was the right place to 
conduct operations, we had the freedom to 
request a change. 

Though our economically-focused 
information requirements, we found 
tourism was a big part of An Nu’maniyah’s 
economy, the major population center 
in our area of responsibility. However, 
in recent years, it had suffered due to 
a decrease in the number of religious 
pilgrims from Iran. Nu’maniyah’s location 
was key; it was located on a major route 
from Iran up to Baghdad and Karbala. We 


Fires 


were able to find out from our many key 
leader engagements with the mayor, local 
contractors, vendors and even shoppers 
that the city ofNu’maniyah has gone great 
lengths to restore its tourism industry by 
building along the waterfront of the Tigris 
River. Through this development, the city 
was aiming to capitalize on its prominent 
location as the only Tigris River crossing 
for 40 kilometers in either direction. By 
focusing near this waterfront area, we could 
contribute to the revitalization of the city. 

We also found there were two, main 
economic centers near the river-crossing in 
the form of a factory complex that produced 
vinegar, dates and ketchup as well as a large 
local market. These areas had seen growth 
and were increasingly active. Since we 
wanted our efforts to be seen and noticed, 
this made the market area very appealing. 

This stretch of road historically was not 
the friendliest towards coalition forces 
though. On TIGR we were able to see the 
history of rock throwing, small arms fire 
and improvised explosive device attacks 
in the area. On the map, the area looked 
intimidating. However, the increased 
proficiency of the local security forces 
and our continued partnership with the 
Iraqi security forces went a long way to 


enabling the Iraqis to take back their city. 
Our battery had been conducting joint 
patrols with the local Iraqi security forces 
for several months. We were getting very 
positive feedback from local nationals who 
had begun to notice the change in the Iraqi 
security forces’sproficiency. In talking with 
the local shop owners and residents on these 
joint patrols, ABattery was able to ascertain 
the local nationals were quickly respecting 
the joint force, and trusting in both coalition 
forces and, most importantly, in the Iraqi 
security forces. Because of these security 
gains and the cooperation of the Iraqi army, 
Iraqi local police and national police in 
the area, we felt confident operating in the 
crowded market area. 

To further involve local leadership, 
we engaged Nu’maniyah’s mayor and 
city council. Nu’maniyah was a major 
population center and was one of the bigger 
players in the province, second only to 
the provincial capital A1 Kut. Knowing 
this, we spent the majority of our time and 
resources cultivating relationships with the 
local government and winning their trust. 
We knew that without any support from the 
mayor and councilmen the operation would 
not succeed. With the mayor’s backing, 
we could promote community values and 


legitimate governance while helping restore 
the people’s faith in their local government. 

To promote the legitimacy of the local 
government, we worked to get these 
fledgling essential services off the ground 
and get them to a point where they were 
self sufficient. We also wanted the people 
to see they did have municipal services, 
even if they were struggling. The biggest 
complaint our patrols had gathered about 
their local government was that it did not 
provide adequate essential services to the 
people. Some went so far as to say that life 
under Saddam Hussein was better simply 
because essential services were not a 
problem. Of all the essential services, local 
nationals most frequently complained about 
the conditions of the city’s main roads. They 
expressed concern there was no municipal 
plan to improve the situation. The trash also 
affected the condition of the roads, most of 
which were in disrepair. 

We remained focused on the trash first 
rather than initiating a project to rebuild 
the roads because the government of 
Nu’maniyah informed ABattery there was 
already a government plan in place to repair 
the roads. However, that plan would not 
be fully implemented until 2014. People 
were growing exasperated of the local 



•v,*" 

•. , 

Hki 



•% 

IlirB 8 " 2 


' / V 

- ** f 1 ^ 

Bpt 

j ~ jAt jME 4j-i ^ », 1 ' | 



lb 


"-s 

■P j 

i 1 | I vCr j; 4* fcr - H Jf 

JKaf ' f Jr iff 


M 

L * 

rv. 

in 

1 M 











-■ 14 1 f 








Wk ■ Vl 

rHU 




















government’s empty promises and were 
quickly losing patience. 

We decided to capitalize on the need for 
instant gratification, which would please the 
citizens and empower the local government 
by following up on the locals’ complaints. 
We worked this problem by engaging the 
city Council. We got the local municipalities 
manager and waste services managerto take 
part in the event. They provided city trucks 
to collect the trash that was picked up and 
ensure that there were trash cans along the 
road that would be emptied regularly even 
after the operation was over. We wanted 
to make certain that every operation we 
conducted was sustainable, or at least pushed 
the local leadership in a direction that made 
them stand on their own. 

We also aimed to maximize the effects in 
every way possible and continued to refine 
the plan to meet our objective. Based on our 
patrol debriefs, we were able to confidently 
say conducting the operation on a Saturday 
was the best way to ensure the maximum 
number ofpeople would see the Iraqi security 
forces and coalition forces working hand-in- 
hand to clean up the streets near the market. 
Saturday was the optimal day because this 
was the day we consistently observed the 
most people in the market, and it had the 
highest concentration of kids outside due to 
no school. This also allowed for the local 
media to attend the event and capitalize on 
the cooperation between coalition forces 
and Iraqi security forces. As a final piece 
to the operation, we sought to integrate the 
distribution of a micro-grant. The grant was 
intended to start a small veterinary clinic 
and, with the media present, we would be 
able to cover an event that on its own they 
would not attend. However, since they were 
in the area, they woidd cover the start up of 
the veterinary clinic. 

All this information was sent back-up 
to the battalion for further coordination and 
planning. When we back briefed our plan, we 
were confident we had done everything we 
could to compound the effects of the mission 
and maximize our efforts. The battery’s 
intimate knowledge ofthe city andpersonnel 
present enabled them to plan a mission that 
sought to achieve a multitude of effects and 
impact along all four lines of operations. 
This would have been impossible had we not 
learned the value of nonlethal intelligence 
and adjusted our systems accordingly. 

© ean-up day. On May 5, 2009, when 
we executed Operation Dirty Deeds, 
we were able to achieve success on not just 
one line of operation, but along all four lines 
of operations. We were able to show the 
Iraqi security forces were a capable force 
that was professional and there to serve the 

37 July-August 2010 • 


people of Iraq. We placed the Iraqi security 
forces in the forefront, and made it known 
the mayor and city council stood together 
with the police. At the same time, we did 
substantial work to boost the local tourism 
industry and local shop owners by cleaning 
up one ofthe majormarkets and major routes 
in the city. Finally, we showed the people of 
An Nu’maniyah they could improve their 
city without our help. They could be the 
ones to effect this change. 

This was only possible because of the 
massive intelligence gathering effort that 
had taken place the preceding months. The 
collection of intelligence along a broad set 
of information requirements enabled us to 
think outside the box and plan missions that 
had far reaching sustainable effects. The 
battalion was not working with blinders on, 
effecting only one line ofoperation at a time. 
Instead, we had a thorough understanding 
of the full breadth of issues. We sought to 
examine the economy, local politics, the 
security situation and the state of essential 
services. Each unit had intimate knowledge 
of the people they were working and 
living amongst. By ensuring there were 
strong systems in place to gather and 
analyze this information, we guaranteed 
the information was not lost or forgotten, 
but put to maximum effect. This coupled 
with a command that was willing to accept 
refinement from the troops on the ground 
created an environment that maximized 
every patrol that left the wire. The lethal 
fight did not blind us to the plight of the very 
people we were there to protect. Instead, 
we used this broad approach and nonlethal 
targeting to shape the human terrain and 
deny the enemy the ability to hide amongst 
them. 

Q essons learned. Get the most up-to-date 
tactics, techniques and procedures and 
trends on the theater you are moving into. 
Talk to units returning from that particular 
theater. Get their contact information and 
learn everything you can before deploying. 
This is especially important to a Fires 
brigade who does not have other sister 
maneuver brigades to trade best practices. 
We were not aggressive enough about this 
and should have made better use of 1st 
Cavalry units at Fort Hood, Texas, that had 
recently returned from Iraq. 

Do all that you can to synchronize efforts 
across the battle space. Ensure people are 
asking the same questions. Ensure your 
message is unified. 

The current field artillery mission is 
amorphous and attempting to train for 
deployment can be tough. During our 
preparation for deployment, we trained to 
be military police prison guards, forward 


operating base security units and finally 
maneuver platoons. This was all while 
maintaining our core ability to put rockets 
on target, on time. Focusing on the basics 
and building Soldiers and sections who 
are proficient with the basics sets the 
groundwork for accomplishing any of these 
missions. 

Have a plan for collecting, analyzing 
and disseminating intelligence at the battery 
level. Put some serious thought into the 
battery intelligence cell, specifically who 
is in it, its primary means of receiving 
information and the products it will produce 
for the platoons. 


Captain Robert L. DeStefano, field artillery, is 
currently the battalion fire support officer for 

1- 145th Armor Battalion, 174th Air Defense 
Artillery, Ohio National Guard at Stow, Ohio. 
DeStefano has deployed to Iraq twice in 
support of Operation Iraqi Freedom. He 
previously served as the battalion S2 for 
2nd Battalion, 20th Field Artillery (MLRS), 
as executive officer, and as a platoon leader 
while stationed at Fort Hood, Texas. He 
holds a Bachelor of Science in finance from 
Marquette University in Milwaukee, Wis. 

Captain Peter J. Graham, field artillery, now 
serves as a reservist in Alpha Company, 450th 
Civil Affairs Battalion (Airborne) in Riverdale, 
Md. Previously, he served as the battalion 
intelligence officer for 2nd Battalion, 20th 
Field Artillery (MLRS) upon its redeployment 
from Iraq. During a 14 month deployment to 
Wasit province, Iraq, in 2008 he served as the 
2nd platoon leader and as battery executive 
officer for Alpha Battery, 2-20th FA (MLRS), 
operating from a Joint Security Station. He 
also served as the ammunition platoon leader 
and battery executive officer of Alpha Battery, 

2- 20th FA (MLRS) during a brigade deployment 
to White Sands, NM. He has a Bachelor of 
Arts in history from Villanova University, Pa. 

Captain Andrew Narcum, field artillery, 
presently is the battalion fire direction officer 
for 2nd Battalion, 20th Field Artillery (MLRS) in 
Fort Hood, Texas. He has also served as the 
1 st platoon leaderfor Alpha Battery, 2-20th FA 
(MLRS) during a 14 month deployment to Iraq 
in 2008. During this timeframe he ran partnered 
patrols out of a Joint Security Station in An 
Nu’maiyah, Iraq. Before deploying to Iraq, he 
was the fire direction officerfor Alpha Battery, 
2-20th FA (MLRS), and served in this position 
during the unit’s training in White Sands, NM. 
He is a graduate of the United States Military 
Academy. 


Fires 






By CSM Dennis J. Woods 


PVT Jacob Dunn, cannoneer, fires a 155-mm round from a Ml 98 howitzer during a support fire 
mission at Forward Operating Base Boris, Afghanistan, May 1. (Photo by sgt Derec Pierson, u.s. Army) 


A rtillery is the only fire support weapon can provide maneuver commanders with main battle tank; nothing can compete with 

that is scalable in both range and the same effects on a smaller scale, are its combination of firepower, accuracy, and 

destructive force. Used as a large more cost effective, and are available now. crewprotection. However, in a close fight its 

bore, crew-served weapon, tube artillery can Brigade commanders already own 12 to limited main gun elevation prevents it from 

deliverfocusedlethality.Otherconventional 18 complete systems, and no additional engaging elevated targets. The inability to 

systems in use today were originally coordination would be required. ramp up or down firing velocity, or swap out 

developed for open warfare, and mass Howitzer direct fire; assault fire, and different projectile and fuse combinations 
killing. Modifications added to increase indirect fire are established skill sets used ‘in the field’ limits a battle tank’s ability to 

accuracy and hard target penetration only in crew certification. With adequate risk reduce collateral damage, 

address half of the problem: a complete mitigation and planning, artillery’s unique By comparison, tube artillery’s ability 

solution for limited warfare must both ability to deliver scalable fire support to reach very high firing angles allow it to 

penetrate buildings and scale the amount for limited warfare can reduce collateral engage elevated targets at the close ranges 

of force delivered. damage, avoid civilian casualties, and is experienced in city fighting. Artillery’s 

As a separate loading system, artillery economically supportable over the course ability to adjust ‘on site’ the amount of 

can prevent over penetration of targets of a long war. energy used in firing, and use a wide variety 

through a variety of means. The U.S. Air By conducting a quick comparison of projectile and fuse combinations allow 

Force already conducts limited destruction contrast with other systems in use, one will it to tailor its effects on target, 

missions through the employment guided quickly notice the lack of any ability to At the high end of destruction, tube 

bomb systems attached to non-exploding limit over- penetration of the target area or artillery can engage targets using concrete 

training munitions. Field artillery systems destructive force used. Take for instance the piercing fuses fitted to high-explosive 


"With ed(|uete risk mitigation and planning! 
artfllery's unique ability to delver scalable lira 



(alsmogigPE, anld (gaauaMaa, and la 

supportable over the ©auras of a long war.” 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • July-August 2010 38 



lethal and nonlethal 






a 3 g®aO@M@ iip® supptDPB top fflEftei mmwimm 

Os an Information aparatOans success 


projectiles fired at maximum velocity. At the 
lower end of our escalation of force, artillery 
systems can attack with non-exploding 
training munitions at a reduced speed relying 
on velocity, and mass to achieve effects. In 
a close city fight artillery can be employed 
as if it were a gas powered wrecking ball, 
firing steel-coated concrete blocks. 

With the recent fielding of howitzer 
night sight systems, artillery crews can 
conduct these missions under the cover of 
darkness. Using different combinations of 
issued thermal weapon sights, night sights, 
and infrared aiming lasers, engagements 
can be planned and executed much like 
AC 130 H/U’s gunship mission. In a line 
of sight engagement the supported unit can 
designate what portion of a structure to 
attack with any common infrared aiming 
device. Operating from a support by fire 
position the artillery crew then confirms 
the target with its own mounted laser, and 
on order, delivers focused lethality, limiting 
collateral damage. 

When compared to rockets and missiles 
one will find many of the same limitations 
that apply to the tank. While these systems 
are very accurate, they are also very 
expensive. With rocket prices ranging from 
$10,000 to $25,000 per shot, artillery’s 
cost of $250.00 for a box of two, complete 
105mm rounds is quite a bargain. The cost 
benefit of leveraging artillery’s ability to 
deliver scalable destruction for limited 
warfare addresses the issue of supporting 
a long war. 

Baron Von Clausewitz once said, “War 
is an act of violence pushed to its utmost 
bounds,” and I think he is right. However, 
you do have to ask yourself at the end of 
every engagement, “how many insurgents 
did I kill?” and “how many did I create?” 
Indiscriminate destruction aids the enemy’s 
recruiting efforts and reduces popular 
support. 

During the adjustment phase of some 
indirect and direct fire missions less lethal 
ballistically matched training munitions 
can be used as a technique to reduce the 
possibility of civilian causalities. Using the 
training munitions ballistic similitude to 
live rounds; artillery strikes can be adjusted 
on target away from protected areas, then 
actual lethal munitions canbe applied. When 
switching among different munitions types; 
seeking different combinations of effects, 
data gained in the less lethal adjustment 


phase can be inferred to the selected 
munitions. Applying tube artillery’s scalable 
focused destruction fits our own rules of 
engagement while allowing its continued 
use against our enemies. 

calable lire support is an information 
operations success. Scalable fire 
support for limited warfare is an information 
operations success. Even if it is never used 
in combat, demonstrating our willingness 
to avoid civilian causalities goes over well 
with allies and U.S. citizens alike. 

If one considers the fact that almost all 
future population growth will be in built-up 
areas, our current and future enemies will 
chose to fight among the population. As a 
moral nation, the effect of so many human 
shields limits our options in combat. When 
training ourselves on restricted terrain; or 
training allies on artillery, using less lethal 
training missions will reduce the possibility 
of creating unwanted collateral damage. 

Where it concerns our allies whose 
security forces may have to fight within 
its own cities, among its own citizens, 
scalable fire support is a must. With limited 
budgets, tube artillery’s focused lethality 
will allow them to achieve their victories 
while minimizing collateral damage. At 
the government to government level, our 
artillery night sight systems could be easily 
modified to accommodate there fire support 
assets, at a reduced cost. 

With tube Artillery employed as a large 
bore crew-served weapon possible non¬ 
standard missions include: Follow and 
support with direct fire / assault fire; support 
Infantry hard point defense for early entry 
forces; planned limited destruction missions 
near occupied and protected structures; 
and support combat engineers conducting 
shaping operations, breaching. 

ragmentation mitigation. Techniques 
for fragmentation mitigation vary as 
artillerymen progress from highly lethal 
to less lethal fires. At the high end of 
destruction concrete piercing fuses fitted 
to conventional high explosive rounds 
are fired into a structure, detonating after 
penetration using the building itself to 
contain fragments. Those same missions 
fired using a proj ectile constructed with high 
fragmentation steel such as the 105mm (HF 
1) detonated either in or on the target will 
increase the probability of a hit as well as 
produce less collateral damage. 

For those readers not acquainted with 


high fragmentation steel, this is one case 
where size really does matter. Using the blast 
pattern of a typical, 105mm high-explosive 
round as a benchmark for destruction, I 
will explain the difference between large 
and small fragmentation. Normally, a 
typical 105mm round produces between 
3,000 - 5,000 fragments which range in 
size from one pound, to several grams in 
weight. By comparison, a typical high- 
fragmentation round produces in excess of 
14,000 fragments. When concerned with 
collateral damage, smaller fragments are 
better as they retain less kinetic energy, 
travel shorter distances, yet increase 
the probability of a lethal hit. Artillery 
projectiles were not originally designed as 
hard target penetrators. Upon assuming a 
new battle space, direct lay effects should 
be observed on derelict structures. To 
determine the amount of force required to 
yield a desired result. 

I am not proposing artillery be used as a 
stand-alone weapon, but when employed as 
a large-bore, crew-served weapon, it can do 
the ugly job in a crude manner with tailored 
effects. 


Command Sergeant Major Dennis J. Woods 
is the battalion command sergeant major 
for 4th Battalion, 319th Airborne Field 
Artillery Regiment, 173rd Airborne Brigade. 
He deployed to Grenada in 1983 with Alpha 
Battery, 1st Battalion, 319th Airborne Field 
Artillery Regiment, 82nd Airborne Division, 
as well as Desert Shield/Desert Storm with 
Charlie Battery, 2nd Battalion, 319th Airborne 
Field Artillery Regiment, 82nd Airborne 
Division. He deployed in support of Operation 
Enduring Freedom with the 82nd Airborne 
Division Artillery before it was deactivated 
in January 2006. He also served in Operation 
Iraqi Freedom 1 and 6 with Bravo Battery, 
2nd Battalion, 3rd Field Artillery, 1st Armored 
Division. Woods is also credited by the U.S. 
Army Suggestion Program as the inventor of 
the 105mm howitzer night sight mount, the 
M198 155mm howitzer night sight mount, 
the dual optic Multiple Integrated Laser 
Engagement System laser, and the PALADIN 
urban assault kit. Woods is also the first 
recipient of the U.S. Field Artillery’s Gruber 
Award for his invention of the GELON night 
sight mount. 



39 July-August 2010 • 


Fires 







in/ • July-August 2010 


By CPT Jonathan McCoy 


I ntegrating close air support operations 
into a counterinsurgency strategy 
that adheres to conventional war 
methodologies and strategies is not simple. 
It requires an adherence to established CAS 
doctrine at the most fundamental levels 
before creative, but critical, thinking and 
integration can be pursued at the brigade 
level. If an Army unit seeks to integrate 
CAS into a non-linear mission, that unit 
must first understand joint doctrine vis-a- 
vis joint Fires and CAS in a linear mission 
before the aligned tactical air control party 
can successfully provide effective advice 
and assistance in accordance with the ground 
commander’s intentions and objectives. In 
addition, the brigade aligned tactical air 
control party must admit, at least internally, 
their role may become more strategic 
in nature. Realizing the potential for 
strategic thinking within the assigned area 
of operations inherently means the divide 
between operational- and tactical-level roles 
for airpower is less distinguishable than in 
previous eras. 

Recently, it was this notion of moving 
beyond thetactical which provedchallenging 
to the tactical air control party. However, 
its aligned brigade had equal difficulty 
requesting and using CAS tactically to 
support the strategic objectives of the 
brigade commander. The advice and lessons 
learned found below are intended for Army 
maneuver commanders and U.S. Air Force 
tactical air control party personnel and are 
founded upon the accomplishments of a 
tactical air control party which recently 
returned from northern Iraq. 

G oals and intentions. Out of a six month 
tour to northern Iraq, two months 
were spent trying to determine how to 
meet the brigade commander’s goals and 
intentions for CAS in a counterinsurgency 


operating environment without the aid of 
a fire support officer dedicated to lethal 
Fires and integration. There was also no 
clear historical evidence orprecedence of 
effective CAS when lethal effects are not 
required. The predominant mindset among 
the tactical air control party believes CAS 
is only an option if the ground commander 
needs integrated or responsive lethal air 
action. However, to successfully integrate 
CAS into counterinsurgency operations, 
this mindset must make room to allow a 
less lethally-oriented mindset to coexist. 
This pre-existing mindset, combined with 
previous departures from CAS doctrine, 
posed significant challenges for the 
tactical air control party. 

Using CAS effectively in a 
counterinsurgency environment, as 
was the case recently in northern Iraq, 
required a re-emphasis and re-education 
of CAS doctrine within the brigade. 
Ultimately, this process ended with the 
brigade establishing an expectation 
for its battalions to utilize airpower (to 
include CAS) and maximize all the 
assets available in theatre rather than 
overlooking or ignoring a vital war 
fighting function. Once the foundation for 
CAS requests was reconstructed within 
the brigade, the supporting tactical air 
control party sought effective solutions 
to meet the brigade commander’s intent 
for airpower and subsequently CAS. By 
creatively searching for solutions, the 
tactical air control party implemented 
a non-traditional methodology for 
incorporatingCAS into counterinsurgency 
operations where there was little-to-no 
perceived requirement for preplanned or 
spontaneous lethal effects. 

The following excerpt is a discussion 
the air liaison officer and the brigade’s 
operations officer (S3) had shortly after 
the commander’s frustration with the lack 
of airpower supporting his objectives 



interoperable 



















surfaced and set the stage for the remedies 
and integration plan discussed below. 

ALO: Sir, what effect does the commander 
want from CAS? 

BCT S-3: He doesn’t care about effects; 
he wants more CAS. What does he have to 
do to get more CAS? 

There are two interpretations to the context 
of that conversation. First, the S3 believed 
he was giving the ALO near-unconditional 
authority to do what was necessary to 
increase CAS utilization. Second, the ALO 
sought to gain a deeper understanding of 
what the brigade commander was trying 
to accomplish with CAS before actions 
were taken to increase CAS utilization so 
that increases would occur efficiently and 
effectively for the commander. 

octrine and reality. CAS, as definedby 
Joint Publication 3-09.3 Joint 
Tactics, Techniques and Procedures for 
Close Air Support is “air action by fixed- and 
rotary-wing aircraft against hostile targets 
that are in close proximity to friendly forces, 
and requires detailed integration of each air 
mission with the fire and movement of those 
forces.” Doctrinally, CAS is one element 
of joint Fires support. So, naturally this 
definition leads terminal attack controllers, 
air liaison officers and CAS aviators to think 
of CAS as primarily - if not solely - lethal. 
This is easily understood in a linear, force- 
on-force fight, such as what was seen in 
the early days of Operation Iraqi Freedom 
(see Steven Call’s Danger Close: Tactical 
Air Controllers in Afghanistan and Iraq). 
The above definition potentially hinders 
air liaison officers and joint terminal 
attack controllers from applying airpower 
principles which lie beyond the traditional 
scope of CAS and also hinders the tactical 


air control party from realizing the necessity 
to understand objectives of various Army 
echelons when those objectives do not fit 
neatly into some type of lethal air action. 

Operation Iraqi Freedom is now two 
years past the surge and is in the process of 
handing Iraq back to Iraqi citizens. If CAS 
aircraft are not responding to a traditional 
kinetic requirement, the likelihood those 
aircraft are fulfilling some type of armed 
reconnaissance, or similar role, is great. 
This need not be the case; limiting CAS to 
a predominantly intelligence, surveillance 
and reconnaissance role does not allow 
for CAS planners to maximize CAS’ 
Operation Iraqi Freedom observed utility. 
During Operation Iraqi Freedom in 2009, 
significant CAS utility beyond the scope of 
persistent stare reconnaissance on one end 
of the spectrum and rapid reaction to ground 
force engagements on the opposite end was 
realized. This breadth of utilization allowed 
the tactical air control party to capitalize 
on the strengths of the entire airpower 
spectrum for CAS operations and provide 
effective nonlethal air effects throughout 
the supported commander’s battle space, 
ntegration. Close air support is effective 
when one thinks about integrating the 
whole of joint F ires to conquer territory. But 
can the same be true in a counterinsurgency 
where the enemy holds no territory and 
is not fighting to take hold of territory? 
(see David Galula’s Counterinsurgency 
Warfare: Theoiy and Practice). In short, 
yes. However, fundamental levels of CAS 
doctrine must be adhered to in order to 
most effectively utilize CAS in counter¬ 
insurgencies before any departures from 
CAS doctrine can be made. 

Due to thebreadth ofoperations that exist 


between full-scale linear and stability non¬ 
linear operations, close air support needs to 
remain adaptive, responsive and flexible. 
The current operational environment 
requires an increased awareness of airpower 
effects and its associated strengths and 
weaknesses when integrating CAS into 
counterinsurgency operations throughout 
the entirety of the tactical air control party 
community. If CAS execution requires 
creative thinking, so too, must the thought 
process of airpower advisers to ground force 
commanders expand beyond the scope of 
lethal effects in the use and integration of 
CAS with counterinsurgency. 

Previously, the brigade initiated air 
support requests and then summarily 
controlled the allocated air from the brigade 
command post. From the perspective of a 
centrally consolidated tactical air control 
party unit at the brigade (brigade pooling), 
misapplying command and control is 
unavoidable when situational awareness 
is decreased and removal from battalions 
occurs. Misapplied brigade pooling 
procedures destroy battalions’ capability 
to understand CAS’ influence within 
their battle spaces and stunt battalion- 
level requests creating a separate, loosely 
associated air component with no clearly 
defined purpose in the counterinsurgency 
fight because of a tendency to reduce 
interaction with battalions. However, due 
to this brigade commander’s continued 
airpower emphasis, the battalions’ ability 
to plan for and levy CAS increased, freeing 
the tactical air control party to focus on its 
doctrinal advice, assist and control roles. 
As air support requests were submitted, the 
tactical air control party provided direction 
and coherence to airpower in the various 




41 July-AugJst 2010 





battalion operational environments. 

rioritization. To begin to bring CAS 
into focus within the battle space, joint 
terminal attack controllers re-engaged with 
battalions and provided education on the 
requesting process while at the brigade, 
education focused more directly on the 
approvalprocess. Furthermore, prioritization 
recommendations and modifications were 
made to ensure CAS effectively reached 
the commander’s priority areas. Properly 
prioritized CAS integrates easily and can 
be readily requested to accomplish specific 
tasks according to the commander’s force 
composition and priorities. Establishing 
a prioritization matrix allowed CAS to 
maximize its effectiveness at all levels of 
command andpresent a more clearly defined 
air component to the area of operations. 

In additional to correcting these 
misapplied requesting procedures, the 
tactical air control party had 
to overcome a second, more 
difficult challenge: that of 
differing expectations for 
the use of CAS. The ground 
commander priorities, 
though defined in terms 
of battle space objectives, 
were not specific enough 
to support effective and 
synergistic CAS execution 
from the perspective of the 
airman while CAS was not 
flexible enough to meet 
immediate changes in battle 
space priorities from the 
perspective of the ground 
commander. In his book, 

Danger Close: Tactical Air 
Controllers in Afghanistan 
and Iraq, Steve Call relates, 

“(Army) commanders at all 
levels want and expect to control, not just 
command, all their combat assets...the 
Air Force operates in a much more fluid 
environment; air operations are subject 
to myriad forces of nature to a greater 
extent than any other mode of combat, and 
modern air power has become so diverse, 
widespread, and complex, and serves so 
many divergent interests that the air force 
has evolved a highly decentralized mode of 
operation.” As requests began originating 
with battalions, the natural tension between 
command and control eased and the 
brigade commander better visualized CAS ’ 
responsiveness to his priorities. Proving 
CAS’ flexibility hinged on the tactical air 
control party’s ability to help the brigade 
commander visualize CAS’ role within his 


battle space and subsequently use it to shape 
the battle space. 

ffective roles. A third challenge 
was convincing joint terminal attack 
controllers that close air support can and 
wouldbe effective in the counterinsurgency 
environment - without the traditional 
kinetic events for which they were trained. 
Once they had something solid, albeit non- 
traditional, to digest, the battalion-aligned 
joint terminal attack controllers more 
effectively re-educated their battalion Fires 
elements on the fundamentals of CAS and 
used those lessons as a bridge to incorporate 
CAS more effectively. If lethal-minded 
airmen are convinced CAS has an effective 
role in counterinsurgency, the next natural 
roadblock is at the intersection of integration 
and provision of measurable effects in the 
various CAS missions - not only statically 
in mission planning but also dynamically in 


execution. In his book Counterinsurgency 
Warfare: Theory and Practice, David 
Galula says counterinsurgency success is 
effectively linked to the counter-insurgent’s 
ability to maintain sustained operations. 
In Iraq, counterinsurgency success also 
consists of teaching people how to take 
charge of their own affairs and consenting 
to the rule of law - in one sense, nation¬ 
building. Conventional wisdom currently 
applied to counterinsurgency requires 
current operations and mission sets (whether 
air or ground missions) to form around 
civil considerations and the human terrain 
that counter-insurgents seek to influence 
reinforcing the roadblock where integration 
and measurable effects intersect. Often, 
incorporating CAS into civil considerations 


leads to an ill-defined task or purpose or 
both creating frustration on the part of 
all parties - aviator, joint terminal attack 
controller and ground commander alike, 
lexibility. Inefficiently planned and 
executed close air support reinforces 
the inflexibility of CAS to the ground 
commander. However, convincing the 
brigade commander of the flexibility of 
CAS to meet his mission priorities occurred 
naturally once CAS fundamentals were 
re-emphasized, which allowed the tactical 
air control party to use CAS to help shape 
the battle space and maximize the entire 
spectrum of airpower effects. With the 
re-education process complete, battalions 
began requesting CAS thus enabling the 
tactical air control party to effectively 
incorporate and integrate CAS to meet 
commander’s intent. Now that battalions 
once again owned the requesting process, 
minor deviations from 
doctrine in the end- 
user of CAS from 
the company level 
down to platoon level 
appeared, lfbattalions 
requested CAS 
simply to satisfy the 
brigade commander 
without engaging in 
the military decision¬ 
making process, the 
results were apparent 
and gave the tactical 
air control party a 
chance to engage in 
further education. 
Typically deficiencies 
in the military decision 
making process are 
noticeable in the 
issuing of tasks to 
CAS aircraft without any contextual 
purpose (i.e. non-traditional intelligence, 
surveillance and reconnaissance) of 
historical improvised explosive devise 
hotspots if no friendly activity warrants the 
task. However, the minor deviations from 
doctrine in the execution ofCAS precluded 
this from happening. CAS was doctrinally 
planned and non-doctrinally executed in 
that platoon level operations were supported 
rather than company level operations 
or higher. By deviating in this fashion, 
CAS was flexible, efficient, purposefully 
tasked with maximized utilization, which 
supported the ground commander while 
simultaneously shaping the various battle 
spaces. 

Successful integration and decisive 


QHpfflaS 03 (3300003^^ 

PS^mBlPS© 0BPP3OOS ®[°X3[?a3f]®[JD© 

and ootfeeOsGO ©@o© gflp 

®(P gJFSQnOOd DODBseQsOO©!) 0® (totHErfl 

anatnid @M1 ©siigOilaMaas© and 
oft© GDHuias] SSFoatei sGoas saotniOao^ 
tasougaas© ©sate 03 


Joint terminal attack controllers walk to a training site after calling in F-16 air strikes at Colorado Springs, Colo., January. 10. (Photo courtesy of U.S. Air Force) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • July-August 2010 42 





action are predicated on intelligence and 
an established partnership between a 
commander’s intelligence staff and the 
tactical air control party, which is not to 
say CAS should be used unconditionally 
in an intelligence gathering role. However, 
CAS can provide actionable intelligence 
via non-traditional methods, in that sensor 
capabilities exist which can be exploited 
on non-intelligence, surveillance and 
reconnaissance aircraft. Strike aircraft 
that provide intelligence, surveillance and 
reconnaissance data must do so in a much 
more focused manner. Mitigating CAS 
to a persistent stare role because it can 
provide rudimentary reconnaissance is not 
what is meant when an airman mentions 
CAS and intelligence, surveillance and 
reconnaissance in the same breath. 

Though capable of this mission, CAS 
is better utilized in more graduate level 
forms of integration. To reach this level of 
integration the tactical air control party must 
understand battlefield intelligence and the 
commander’s plan to use that intelligence 
to integrate CAS to shape the battle space. 
For example, CAS can be easily requested 
to provide presence for a commander when 
manning is such that personnel cannot 
occupy required posts and still accomplish 
other priority assigned missions. The young 
company commander requesting CAS 
to fill an intelligence, surveillance and 
reconnaissance mission should consult the 
battalion joint terminal attack controller 
for assistance with integration to maximize 
and focus the CAS mission as experience 
shows the need for focused reconnaissance 
during battle space-shaping phases of 
counterinsurgency. 

The tactical air control party noticed that 
though companies were being tasked with 
ground missions, often the execution was 
left to platoon- or patrol-sized elements. 
Battalions thus began to request CAS in 
support of patrols, to act as additional force 
security, route reconnaissance, etc. CAS also 
began acting in concert with intelligence, 
surveillance and reconnaissance assets, 
though at the time of this writing, little 
empirical data is available to provide a 
verdict on those practices. Both practices 
provided CAS aircraft the ability to 
be in or near a decisive point for the 
counterinsurgency, which may not have 
clearly defined decisive points (see Air 
Force Doctrine Document 2-1.3 Counter 
land Operations). This means the tactical 
air control party must understand how to 
help brigade or battalion commanders use 
the realm of counter land airpower through 
the function of CAS and potentially request 
CAS for non-traditional CAS missions 


that are still in line with stated counter 
land goals and objectives. However, it 
must be understood that CAS requested 
for traditional mission sets will out 
prioritize non-linear CAS requests at higher 
levels of command when the need for 
integrated fires exists. 

Requesting close air support for 
counterinsurgency operations should 
remain flexible and open. For instance, CAS 
can fly dependent upon Soldiers executing 
ground missions, as an aid to air and 
groundbased intelligence, surveillance and 
reconnaissance assets to facilitate collection 
or independently in a kinetic show-of-force 
role when neither Soldiers nor intelligence, 
surveillance and reconnaissance assets 
are present - yet the ground commander 
(company through brigade) needs to 
influence a particular area of interest. 
The latter situation is less a function of 
CAS than it is air interdiction; however, 
in the counterinsurgency environment 
concessions may need to be made by 
the tactical air control party to maximize 
airpower effects through roles of indirect 
support. Incorporating CAS at the platoon 
or even company level during stability 
operations when a troops-in-contact 
situation does not exist revolves around 
brigade commander’s stated objectives, 
mission planning and aforementioned 
intelligence. Flexible adaptation is one 
of airpower’s greatest strengths. Yet, 
inability to meet current mission demands 
undermines the tactical air control party’s 
credibility within the brigade command 
staff, appearing to be a unit that remains 
blinded by offensive and lethal actions and 
an inability to adapt. 

While a platoon conducting a screening 
operation, patrolling a neighborhood or 
village, or executing a cordon and search 
or project oversight mission may not have 
great need for detailed mission planning 
in the realm of time and space, successful 
CAS integration requires such information 
fidelity. Detailed concept of operations 
allows joint terminal attack controllers and 
CAS aviators to maximize measureable 
and immeasurable CAS effects assisting 
in deterrence, force protection or simply 
route reconnaissance. Additionally, there 
must be a means for the j oint terminal attack 
controller to communicate with the lowest 
tactical element; he could be a member of 
a brigade pool located at a central location 
and not on mission with the patrol. The 
same holds true should CAS be requested 
for its minimal intelligence, surveillance 
and reconnaissance capabilities. 

est practices. In those instances when 
CAS may be requested independent 



of an executable ground mission 
(typically intelligence, surveillance and 
reconnaissance-type tasks) desired effect(s) 
must be more clearly communicated. 
To lethal-minded airmen not trained in 
intelligence analysis, the immediately 
desired outcome of the mission is as 
important as the assigned task. Without a 
desired effect that is visible immediately, 
these airmen incorrectly view CAS as 
ineffective and unnecessary. For example, 
counter-indirect fire and counter-improvised 
explosive device, if requested and tasked 
appropriately, provide deterrence. Deterring 
would-be shooters, through CAS presence, 
proved successful over time as zero 
indirect fire incidences occurred over six 
weeks when previously indirect fire was 
experienced one to two times per week. 
(This occurred at one point during a recent 
six month deployment in northern Iraq 
where CAS initially was used for deterrence 
until rotary wing assets assumed the mission. 
Fixed-wing CAS ’participation declined and 
then saw a resurgence near the end when 
indirect fire began to increase. Though one 
cannot directly attribute the reduction in 
indirect fire to a renewed CAS presence, 
one can also not deny CAS had no effect 
in producing a deterrent during these six 
weeks.) In stability operations, where 
CAS is requested in a focused-intelligence, 
surveillance and reconnaissance role, it is 
essential for CAS requestors to enumerate 
specific ground actions for CAS which can 
then be passed to the joint terminal attack 
controller for follow-up action. Requestors 
should also expect to provide information 
pertaining to other assets requested for 
similar tasks near in time and/or space to 
CAS. 

As is evident, counterinsurgency 
provides non-traditional challenges to joint 
Fires integration, thus intuitive solutions do 
not readily appear. Fire support officers may 
notbe required to have anorganic fire support 
plan if emphasis is placed upon nonlethal 
effects through economic and political 
means. Neither will a traditional forward line 
oftroops nor a forward edge ofthebattlefield 
area exist and where there is no plan for 
instances when ground units work outside 
organic Fire support ranges, CAS and close 
combat attack assets are default reactionary 
responses to enemy engagements and 
force protection. Therefore, CAS must 
maintain fundamentally and doctrinally 
sound procedures to meet various degrees 
of operational demands - full-scale, linear 
operations on one hand and stability, non¬ 
linear operations on the other. The tactical 
air control party, aligned with command 
echelons is the link to use airpower to meet 


43 July-August 2010 • 


Fires 



SSG Pete Wartena passes a joint terminal attack control call to Capt. Joby Bennett, U.S. Air Force, at the Air Special Operations Center in Camp 
Victory, Iraq, April 29, 2007. (Photo by SSgt Carlos Diaz, U.S. Air Force) 


objectives and create effects on both ends 
of that spectrum. 

For CAS to remain useful to future 
brigade commanders in Operation Iraqi 
Freedom or even be considered during future 
stability operations, continued diligence 
in using CAS to its inherent airpower 
strengths - not necessarily and solely its 
traditional skills - will be paramount. Efforts 
to include the tactical air control party in 
intelligence fusion so air liaison officers 
and joint terminal attack controllers can 
most effectively advise ground commanders 
regardingCAS must continue. Incorporating 
CAS into counterinsurgency is a product of 
intelligence-driven operations. Because 
the battlefield is broad and assets are at a 
premium, CAS requires more intelligence 
feedback from battalion and brigade 
intelligence analysts to properly position 
assets to help shape - in a sense, fine-tune 
- the battle space and meet the ground force 
commander’s objectives. However, this 
fusion only will occur once airmen begin to 


understand the shaping that must occur in the 
counter-insurgent environment and Soldiers 
see the utility of airpower where the need 
to control and retain terrain is potentially 
unnecessary and the political desire to fight 
a war of attrition is non-existent (see Phillip 
Meilinger’s article “Counterinsurgency 
from Above’’ in the July 2008 edition of 
Air Force Magazine). 

A counterinsurgency, at the core, does 
not measure success by holding traditional 
territory. Airpower in general and close 
air support specifically - albeit counter 
intuitively - is suited for just such a mission 
because of its inability to hold ground where 
the reaches of land maneuver are strained 
(see Phillip Meilinger’s article “Paradox 
List” in the April 2009 edition of Air Force 
Magazine). Doctrinally, close air support 
supports maneuver units and is well-suited 
for counterinsurgency. CAS ’ availability to 
brigade commanders is invaluable when the 
need exists to influence a non-territorial, 
human psyche-based fight. The problem 


of integration and incorporation, however, 
remains difficult to solve because there 
is a requirement for Soldiers to think in 
a dimension not taught to young Army 
lieutenants and captains and for airmen to 
lookbeyond the standard metrics employed 
when measuring the success of a mission. 


Captain Jonathan McCoy, U.S. Air Force, is 
an air liaison officer in the 13th Air Support 
Operations Squadron, Fort Carson, Colo., 
and is the senior Air Force advisor to the 2nd 
Brigade Combat Team, 4th Infantry Division 
on combat air power employment in air-land 
battle operations. He is responsiblefortraining 
and integrating battlefield airmen supporting 
three combat battalions within the brigade. 
McCoy also served as a weapons system 
officer in the 37th Bombardment Squadron at 
Ellsworth Air Force Base, S.D. His deployments 
include Operation Iraqi Freedom and Enduring 
Freedom. McCoy earned a Bachelor of Science 
in Political Science from the University of 
Wyoming. 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • July-August 2010 44 







interoperable 


By COL David J. McCauley and LTC Eric A. Healey 



n today’s electronic age, the electromagnetic spectrum is 
becoming key terrain and our Army electronic warfare 
warriors provide commanders necessary insight and advice 
for its domination. During the high-intensity combat phase of 
Operation Iraqi Freedom, and in response to the asymmetric nature 
of the counter insurgency environment, the Army has sought to 
return electronic warfare professionals to the force. After the end 
of the Cold War, the Army lost the institutional competency that 
the electronic warfare professional brought to the operational 
environment because the program was focused on a Warsaw Pact- 
based threat. The reduction of this potential threat and the overall 
drawdown the Army experienced in the late 1980s caused a strain 
on already limited resources and the electronic warfare support 
program suffered as a result. So, over time, because the field wasn’t 
being adequately maintained, doctrine and regulations became 
outdated and the Army became unprepared to employ electronic 
warfare across the battlefield. 

In the absence of an Army presence, the Navy and Air Force 
quickly stepped forward to establish support organizations for both 
Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan and Operation Iraqi 
Freedom. These organizations provided direct support for joint 
electronic warfare officers from battalion through corps level to fill 
operational requirements. But it wasn’t enough, so shortly after, 
it was decided that the Army woidd reestablish electronic warfare 
as a core competency to dominate the electromagnetic spectrum 
in support of land warfare. 

The Army electronic warfare officer is the commander’s subject- 
matter expert to plan, coordinate, synchronize and deconflict EW 
support to full spectrum operations. In order to do this, he must 
view effects in terms of control, protect, deny, deceive, disrupt, 
degrade, and destroy as appropriate for the problem and target set 
to achieve desired results. The Army is in the process of building 
a long term institutional core competency in EW while at the same 
time integrating newly trained EW warriors with additional skills 
at the operational and tactical level to meet the immediate needs 
of OIF and OEF. 

The Army is currently executing a bridging strategy where 
deploying units select personnel from within their ranks for 
additional EW skills training to gap the manning shortfall until an 
EW military occupational specialty (MOS) and a functional area 
management system are institutionalized and produce fully trained 
electronic warfare professionals. 

45 July-August 2010 • 



This cell phone was rigged as a detonator for an improvised explosive 
device. The detonator was recovered undamaged after having been 
successfully jammed by electronic warfare personnel using Counter 
Radio-Controlled I ED Electronic Warfare equipment funded by the 
Joint Improvised Explosive Device Defeat Organization. (Photo courtesy of 
the Department of Defense) 

The plan is for the Army to build an enduring EW manning 
capability by assigning an MOS and functional area for electronic 
warfare professionals to facilitate assignments to units in accordance 
with Army Force Generation priorities beginning in fiscal year 2011 
through fiscal year 2013. Approximately 40 percent ofthe total Army 
EW requirements are going to be added to unit manning documents 
and filled during this time period. The Army plans to manage 
EW personnel as a career field designation for noncommissioned 
officers and warrant officers - 29E and 290A respectively. The 
enlisted 29E career field is available to sergeant (E5) to sergeants 
major (E9) and will serve at the battalion up to corps level. The 
290A electronic warfare warrant officer provides EW technicians 
in the grade of WOl to CW05. Officers are managed as a FA29 
population. Commissioned officers can serve in FA29 from captain 
to colonel and both officers and warrant officers serve at the brigade 


Fires 



to Army Service Component Command (ASCC) level. 

A major institutional step towards establishing EW as a long 
term capability was the recent update of two key documents, Army 
Regulation252-22 U.S. Army Electronic Warfare and Field Manual 
3-36 Electronic Warfare in Operations. These documents lay the 
foundation and concepts of how the Army will execute EW in 
full spectrum operations. AR 252-22 supersedes the last revision 
dated Oct. 1,1982. FM 3-36 provides commanders and staff clear 
concepts to operationalize the electromagnetic spectrum and the 
framework for which they operate. This FM, in conjunction with 
Joint Publication 3-13.1 Electronic Warfare, provided useful tools 
in executing EW operations in OIF. 

The current institutional EW training options available to the 
commander are currently located at Fort Sill, Okla., and Fort 
Huachuca, Ariz. Commanders can also schedule mobile training 
teams to travel to their installation to provide an array of EW 
training. Training in theater will be provided by joint electronic 
warfare officers who have the added flexibility to mitigate training 
shortfalls as this Army program continues to grow. 

United States Forces - Iraq achieved frill operating capability 
of Army electronic warfare bridging strategy in OIF 09-11. USF-I 
headquarters maintains a joint structure at the electronic warfare 
coordination cell and integrated an Army corps electronic warfare 
officer with training from the functional area 29 pilot course. By 
adding an Army electronic warfare officer into the Electronic 
Warfare Coordination Cell (EWCC). It brought a much needed 
Army and ground-based perspective into what was previously an 
air-centric AirForce and Navy cell. This initial move synchronized 
the E WCCs efforts among all the services and increased the overall 
capability to include coordinating operations with subordinate 
commands. The current success at division and below was the 
result of the successful synchronization and integration of Anny 
electronic warfare into every type of formation down to company 
level. 

Today’s fight in OIF is best characterized as a counterinsurgency 
environment, which is only one particular aspect of the overall 
spectrum of conflict. Commanders must include EW as part of 
their overall mission analysis when determining a unit’s mission 
essential task list, leader, Soldier and staff tasks to mitigate 
the risks that Radio Controlled Improvised Explosive Devices 
(RCIED) and other remote detonated devices pose to the troops 
on the ground. Commanders must know and understand their EW 
manning requirements and ensure they are trained to execute their 
mission. Current manning and training guidance for the United 
States Central Command area of responsibility is published and 
available for commander’spre-deploymentplanning. Meeting this 
guidance will facilitate a seamless transition of Army E W personnel 
and counter RCIED electronic warfare specialists (CREW). Any 
command with a mission ‘outside the wire’ will require a trained 
and competent electronic warfare team. CREW specialists are key 
members of the team and play a vital role in pre-combat checks 
and inspections. 

The Army continues to evolve into a more potent, capable and 
flexible land warfare organization. We leverage technology and 
continually search for better ways to employ it to enable the force. 
The recent emphasis on electronic warfare is another example of 
the Army evolving and is a timely example, as well, due to the 
proliferation of affordable commercial off-the-shelf technologies 
available to our adversaries. On today’s battlefield a myriad of 
techniques must be employed to mitigate these low cost yet highly 
effective methods of warfare. Therefore, the integration of Army 
EW personnel into our formations provides a unique capability to 
exploit the electromagnetic spectrum. 


Commanders of the modular force have a key role in growing 
EW as a core competency. Understanding of the electronic warfare 
system and how electronic warfare professionals utilize and 
manipulate the EMS are paramount skill sets that must continue 
to be developed. Commanders need to leverage their Army EW 
professional and establish unit EW programs that include Leader, 
Soldier, and collective training. Soldiers in OIF are now dominating 
the spectrum with the full integration of the Army through the EW 
bridging strategy. 


Colonel David J. McCauley, field artillery, is the Multi-National Corps- 
Iraq Effects coordinator at Camp Victory, Iraq. He most recently 
commanded 17th Fires Brigade at Fort Lewis, Wash., and commanded 
2nd Battalion, 18th Field Artillery as part of V Corps during major 
combat operations as Operation Iraqi Freedom began in 2003. 

Lieutenant Colonel Eric A. Healey, field artillery, is the Multi-National 
Corps-lraq Joint Fires and Effects Cell Electronic Warfare officer at 
Camp Victory, Iraq. Previously, he served as the 17th Fires Brigade 
deputy commanding officer in Fort Lewis, Wash. 



CPT Daniel Grieve (left) tells Capt. Dane Bannach, U.S. Air Force 
electronic warfare officer, how to properly function check a new generation 
jammer system in Camp Taji, Iraq, March 25, 2009. (Photo byssG Diiia Ayala, 
U.S. Army) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • July-August 2010 46 



AUThOR 

GODt 



A rticle subjects. Fires strives to be 
“forward-looking.” We’re at the dawn 
of a new Army transformation. Many 
exciting things are taking place in the field 
and air defense artillery fields of expertise. 
Article subjects should therefore be current 
and relevant. Writers may share good 
ideas and lessons learned with their fellow 
Soldiers, as exploring better ways of doing 
things remains a high emphasis with Fires. 

If an article subject is significant and 
pertains to field artillery or air defense 
artillery and its diverse activities, as a rule 
of thumb we’ll consider it appropriate for 
publication. Article subjects include (but 
aren’t limited to) technical developments, 
tactics, techniques and procedures; how¬ 
to pieces, practical exercises, training 
methods and historical perspectives (Army 
Regulation 25-30, Paragraph 2-3, b). 

We are actively seeking lessons-learned 
articles which will enhance understanding 
of current field and air defense artillery 
operations. The magazine’s heart is 
material dealing with doctrinal, technical 
or operational concepts. We especially 
solicit progressive, forward-thinking and 
challenging subject matter for publication. 
In addition to conceptual and doctrinal 
materials, we encourage manuscripts 
dealing with maintenance, training or 
operational techniques. 

Good ideas or lessons-learned articles 
should have two closely related themes: 
one, what did you learn from what you 
did? The second theme is: what is most 
important for others to know, or what will 
you do differently in the future? Include 
only the pertinent information on how you 
did it so someone else can repeat what you 
did. Don’t include a blow-by-blow of your 
whole deployment. The article’s emphasis 
should be that your unit has a good idea or 
some lessons-learned to share. 

Steps involved in submitting an article 
to Fires are outlined following. 

All articles should have the bottom line 
up front; however, to better ensure your 
chances of publication, we recommend 
that you read all the criteria contained in 
this article as well as apply the guidance 
contained in the Fires style manual at 
sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/style. 
asp for more details. We do not pay for 
articles or illustrations other than providing 
contributors with complimentary copies of 

47 July-August 2010 • 


the magazine. 

Fires is not copyrighted. All material 
published is considered in the public domain 
unless otherwise indicated. (Occasionally 
we use copyrighted material by permission; 
this material is clearly marked with the 
appropriate legal notification.) 

If you get permission to use someone 
else’s graphic or photo, especially from 
the private sector, we need proof of that in 
writing. 

etting started. Select a relevant topic of 
interest to the U.S. Army field and air 
defense artillery community. The topic must 
professionally develop members of these 
fields. Write an outline to organize your 
work. Put the bottom line up front and write 
clear, concise introduction and conclusion 
paragraphs. Follow the writing standard 
established in Army Regulation 25-50, 
Preparing and Managing Correspondence, 
Section IV (the Army writing style), and 
Department of the Army Pamphlet 600- 
67, Effective Writing for Army Leaders, 
especially Paragraphs 3-1 and 3-2. 

The Army standard is writing you can 
understand in a single rapid reading and 
is generally free of errors in grammar, 
mechanics and usage. Also see Fires’ 
style manual. Maintain the active voice as 
much as possible. Write “Congress cut the 
budget” rather than “the budget was cut 
by Congress.” (Department of the Army 
Pamphlet 600-67, Paragraph 3-2, b[ 1 ]). 
Write as if you were telling someone face-to- 
face about your subject: use conversational 
tone; ‘I,’ ‘you’and ‘we’personalpronouns; 
short sentences and short paragraphs. 
Articles should be double-spaced, typed, 
unpublished manuscript, between 3,000 
and 3,500 (or less), but no more than 
5,000 words, including inline citations as 
appropriate. 

Authors should check their articles’ 
contents with unit commanders or 
organization directors or S2s/G2s to 
ensure the articles have no classified or 
operations security information in them. 
Clearance requirements are outlined 
in Army Regulation 360-1, Chapter 5, 
Paragraph 5-3. Headquarters Department of 
the Army/Office of the Secretary of Defense 
c learance is required if your article meets any 
of the criteria listed there. Article clearance 
is further covered in Paragraph 6-6, with 
procedures on how to do so outlined in 


Paragraph 6-9. The bottom line on most 
article clearance is discussed in Paragraph 
6-6. While you certainly may ask your 
local Public Affairs Office’s advice, it is the 
“author’s responsibility to ensure security 
is not compromised. Information that 
appears in open sources does not constitute 
declassification. The combination of several 
open-source documents may residt in a 
classified document.” 

So while the Fires staff may question 
the sensitivity of an article we receive, it 
is not our responsibility to officially clear 
articles, however if we do see something 
within an article that might cause concern, 
we reserve the right to withhold publication 
of such an article until it is thoroughly 
vetted with the proper subject matter expert 
or Army authority. But it still remains the 
author’s responsibility, as outlined in Army 
Regulation 360-1, not to compromise 
national security or U.S. Army operational 
security matters. 

We reserve the right to edit an article, so 
the Fires staff will edit all manuscripts and 
put them in the magazine’s style and format. 
The author of an article or interviewee will 
receive a courtesy copy of the edited version 
for review before publication, however, if 
the author does not get back to the Fires 
staff with any questions or concerns within 
a specified suspense date (typically five to 
seven working days) it will be assumed the 
author concurs with all edits and the article 
will run as is. 

Except in the case of Armywide 
news items, authors should not submit 
a manuscript to Fires while it is being 
considered elsewhere. A comprehensive 
biography, highlighting experience, 
education and training relevant to the 
article’s subject and credentialing the author 
as the writer of the article also is required. 
Include e-mail and mailing addresses and 
telephone, cell and fax numbers. Please 
keep this information current with Fires 
for as long as we’re considering the 
manuscript. 

hotographs and graphics. Visit 
sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ 
submissionguide.html for information on 
submitting graphics or photographs. 

end the article. E-mail the editor at 
firesbulletin@conus.army.mil; or mail 
them to P.O. Box 33311, Fort Sill, OK 
73503-0311. 




Fires 











By 1st Lt. Gary Deitch, U.S. Marine Corps 


I developing and training an army is a long and intense process, 
especially when you are developing that army to fight and 

_win during an unyielding and ever capable resistance. I, 

along with a small team of artillerymen from various backgrounds 
and training regimen from the United States and abroad, attempted 
to develop and train various artillery units throughout Afghanistan 
with no developed or predetermined guidance on the use of artillery 
with the Afghan army. The Afghan army’s focus has been for some 
time to conduct counterinsurgency operations within the borders of 
Afghanistan, but we attempted to widen their focus to developing 
fire support skills so we could maximize their capabilities on the 
battlefield. 

In order to get started, first, it was important to develop a working 
knowledge on how the artillery within Afghanistan differs than 
any other artillery unit in the world. The Soviets during their 
occupation developed the Afghan army to fight vast armies on a 
linear battlefield with mass precision fires. Thinkof it like an artillery 
army with lots of tanks, heavily mechanized assets with little or 
no focus on the human toll of war. When the Soviets left in the 
winter of 1989, they left their equipment with the Afghans to help 
them fight. This in turn left a huge stockpile of Soviet artillery guns 


Afghan artillery soldiers conduct fire direction training at Forward 
Operating Base Kalagush, Afghanistan, Aug. 20, 2009, culminating with 
a live-fire exercise. (Photo by 1st Lt. Gary Deitch, U.S. Marine Corps) 


and equipment, to be used many years later in developing capable 
artillery while still balancing the focus of training and fighting. The 
main Soviet artillery piece is the D-30; a medium towed 122mm 
howitzer capable of reaching out to 12 Kilometers. Fire direction 
utilizes a 6000 mil system with no common deflection. As well, 
firing computations from the fire direction center to the gun line 
were computed for elevation and angle of site at the gun line by 
the gunner, instead of the FDC computing it for them and sending 
that data to the guns. Since learning of this issue, U.S. and North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization artillerymen have developed a way 
to bypass the sight equipment corresponding to the distance to 
the target on the gun and receive the data directly from the FDC 
and place it on the elevation and deflection counters, like how we 
are taught to do. The piece on the D30, known as the range drum, 
had the Soviet gunner compute for data then apply the changes 
to the site corresponding to the range. The other main issue was 
computing data with both 6400 mil systems and 6000. Special 
mathematical equations had to be set up to convert between the 
two firing systems. Computing fire direction differences became 
an existing issue with NATO units utilizing their own record of fire 
worksheets, as well as Afghan units having their own record of fire 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • July-August 2010 48 












Afghan soldiers conduct forward observation training acquiring targets off a map in Kunar province, Afghanistan, Aug. 20, 2009. (Photo by 1 st Lt. Gary 
Deitch, U.S. Marine Corps) 


worksheets. Noticeably, there are exactly 6283 mils in a circle, the 
Soviets rounded down, the Americans and NATO forces rounded 
up. Instead of multiplying 1.0186 to get angle of site, the Soviets 
and Afghans would use 0.955. 

There are also many other issues that are Soviet specific including 
powder, map reading, and utilizing the Soviet Tabular Firing Tables 
to compute manual gunnery. The D30 also utilizes a 360-degree 
firing capability, good for engaging targets without moving the 
trails; they remain fixed with the ability to traverse the gun on an 
azimuth. In many ways, this was very different than what the U.S. 
Field Artillery has been focusing on for so many years and required 
an open mind approach when training on an unfamiliar system. This 
had posed some issues during training, as incoming units were not 
familiar with Soviet fire direction and gun line procedures, training 
as if they were utilizing a common deflection system. This is where 
our team came in. Not only were we training the Afghan artillery 
units, we were training incoming embedded training teams who 
were unfamiliar with Soviet artillery doctrine and practice. 

One of the biggest issues in training and developing capable 
artillery has been the lack of unification of efforts with many other 
NATO countries, for example, trying to standardize our practices 
with what other countries were teaching. For the Afghans, the 
process begins at the Kabul Military Training Center, where all 
combat units train, then individual teams head out to their assigned 
units. There is currently no formal school to train in fire direction or 
forward observation, only a short practical application class on gun 

49 July-August 2010 • 


line procedures with newly graduated Afghan recruits. Unification 
efforts started there, but were slowly lost as Afghan units became 
involved in combat operations other than artillery. The majority of 
the training fell in the hands of the ETT’s, who became both the 
day-to-day operational planners for the Afghans, as well as training 
them on standardized artillery practices. 

Depending on what country was training the Afghans, there were 
different artillery procedures in place. For instance, a Romanian 
artillery team taught similarly to how the Soviets taught, because 
the Romanians use the D30 currently in their country. Their system 
works great, but without the rest of the artillery community on the 
same page, it was often an isolated effort. The Romanians and 
Croatians focused on the PUO-9 Soviet plotting board for manual 
computations of gunnery, a complex system one can only master 
by going through their schooling. This had been the primary 
means of fire direction for the Soviets, but became downgraded as 
it was mainly meant for massing fires, and not meant for precise 
fire missions involving enemies in close proximity to a village or 
civilian populations. 

On the Western side, the main players were the British, 
Australians, Canadians, and the Americans, all teaching to their 
country’s doctrine and practice. The results were good, but isolated 
as there was not a dedicated doctrine to focus on. 

Flence came the conversion from a 6000 mil system to a 6400 
NATO standard system. This posed many issues. Right away, our 
team discussed the many issues in dealing with the conversion, the 


Fires 






largest issue pertaining to having a gun built and computed for 6000 
mils now being shot in 6400 sights and FDC. A positive to this was 
it allowed greater interoperability between NATO training forces 
and Afghan forces. They may be able to flow right into training 
without a 3-to-6 month buildup and begin training artillery units 
from the start. The downside was that the 6-month rotation effort 
of each ETT could be potentially lost as a result of new doctrine 
and the Afghans would have to be retrained on some things that 
pertain to the conversion. 

A contract is currently in place to convert the gun sights, 
collimators, aiming circles, all being built to specifications in 6400 
mils. Computations of fire direction and firing tables and ballistics 
becomes an issue as there are currently no doctrinal fire direction 
methods nor equipment to compute data for the D30 in a 6400 mil 
system. The closest 
piece of equipment we 
saw that could fit the 
bill was a Ukrainian 
handheld ballistics 
computer capable of 
computing automated 
gunnery. The 
conversion is currently 
being undertaken by 
General Dynamics 
with a specialized 
Ukrainian technical armament company supplying the equipment. 

But what we had in mind was more long term. We wanted to let 
the Afghans fight on their own, and to do that we needed a system 
that was not only easy to learn, but practical. Before the conversion 
process, we were supplying them with a Microsoft Access program 
known as the Afghanistan Field Artillery Computer or AFAC on 
a standalone laptop. Developed by an Army major, it was capable 
of computing fire direction for the D30 in both 6000 and 6400 mil 
systems. The issue with this is that many Afghans, to include their 
officers, were illiterate. Also, itbecameapower supply issue as many 
fire direction centers were located in remote areas of Afghanistan 
where their only power supply came from NATO forces. 

So the proposal we had come up with was to provide a manual 
working system only, one that couldbeused anywhere, anytime. The 
United State Fire Direction Center was an option, but new graphical 
site tables, tabular firing tables, and equipment would have to be 


fabricated to meet the D30 requirements. Another option was to 
use the Romanian 6400-mil wheel capable of shooting in 6400 mils 
with the D30, as the Romanians had acquired the new D30 system 
that came in 6400 mils. This system, I observed firsthand, was easy 
to use, and required basic accurate firing location to compute data. 

Forward observers were another big issue when attempting to 
train artillery batteries, whether in combat or on the forward operating 
bases as we had no formally trained observers. We began to set up 
observation posts throughout the Afghan army area of operations and 
dictated known points so that fires could be quickly and accurately 
determined. This worked well for a while, until Taliban fighters 
began figuring this out and simply attacked from other locations. 
The FDC was then left to compute firing computations without 
pre-recorded data, lengthening the time it took to provide the guns 

the data they needed to 
shoot. 

Success for the 
Afghan army is going 
to be a slow process. 
Developing the right 
skill sets needs to begin 
at the earliest stages 
of their training. A 
formal artillery school 
is set to begin training 
sometime in fall 2011. 
Until then, it is up to the ETT’s and mentors to continue to train 
their artillery units so that we can assist in providing accurate and 
timely fires for the Afghan soldiers engaging in direct combat with 
the enemy. 


First Lieutenant Gary Deitch, United States Marine Corps, is currently 
assigned to 2nd Battalion, 10th Marines, Camp Lejeune, N.C. Previously, 
he was the field artillery training officer, Combined Joint Task Force 
Phoenix, deployed in support of Operation Enduring Freedom, training 
the Afghan National Army on the D30 howitzer and former Warsaw Pact 
82mm mortars. He also served as guns platoon commander, Battery 
I, 3rd Battalion, 10th Marines, as executive officer for Headquarters 
Battery, 3rd Battalion, 10th Marines, deploying in support of Operation 
Iraqi Freedom with Task Force Military Police. 


a WJ® ®50deiS3£] So D@S SDd© £%DoaoD3 
GQgDoS odd SMp ecshiOe, sm°l So (3® Sloes 
wb mascots] a spsma Sloes ffiseoooes 

as DaHHjD D [kaS [pfooSML 11 ' 


Point. Click. Search. 

The 

Hlree Bulleln 
HEstorEjal 
Archives 

si 11-www. army .mil/firesbulletin 






sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • July-August 2010 50 

















I 


Fires 

(USPS 309-010) 

P.O. Box 33311 

Fort Sill, OK 73503-0311 


Periodicals Postage 

PAID 

San Bernardino, CA 





The Fires community is online 24/7. 


I 


I 




I 


Point. Click. Connect 


Social media websites 


Fires Center of Excellence 

http ://www.facebook.com/FiresCenterOfExcellence 



Commanding general's blog 

^ http ://usacac.army.mil/blog/blogs/bloggers.aspx 


Fires Forum 

^ https ://forums. bcks.army.mil/secure/CommunityBrowser. 
aspx?id=65687i&lang=en-US 


U.S. Army Air Defense Artillery School 

http://www.facebook.com/AirDefenseArtillerySchool 


U.S. Army Field Artillery School 
^ http://www.facebook.com/FieldArtilleryRedLegLive 
^ http ://twitter.com/RedLegLive 
^http ://www.flickr.com/photos/RedLegLive 


Fires Bulletin 

^ http ://www.facebook.com/FiresBulletin 


; 






















