MEASUREMENT PROTOCOLS FOR LNSITU ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS AT MARS 
AND COMETS. P. R. Mahaffy', W. B Brinckerhoff", A. Buch', M. Cabane', P. Coii^ j. Demick', D. P. Giavin', 
R. Navarro-Gonzalez.' 'NASA Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), GreenbeJt, MD 20771, 
paul.r.mahaffv(a),nasa.gov . "The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD 20723, 
'Service d'Aeronomie, IPSL, Universite Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, ""LISA, Universite de Paris VII et XII, Creteil, 
'University of Mexico. 



Introduction: The determination of the abun- 
dance and chemical and isotopic composition of or- 
ganic molecules in comets and those that might be 
found in protected environments at Mars is a first step 
toward understanding prebiotic chemistries on these 
solar system bodies. While future sample return mis- 
sions from Mars and comets will enable detailed 
chemical and isotopic analysis with a wide range of 
analytical techniques, precursor insitu investigations 
can complement these missions and facilitate the iden- 
tification of optimal sites for sample return. Robust 
automated experiments that make efficient use of lim- 
ited spacecraft power, mass, and data volume re- 
sources are required for use by insitu missions. Within 
these constraints we continue to explore a range of 
instrument techniques and measurement protocols that 
can maximize the return from such insitu investiga- 
tions. 

Mars: A significant step toward resolving the 
question of the habitability and potential for past or 
present life on Mars will be the detailed characteriza- 
tion of organic compounds that might be preserved in 
rocks, ices, or sedimentary layers such as those re- 
cently revealed by the Mars Exploration Rovers. The 
Scout Phoenix mission [1] will target an analysis of 
volatiles in ices and it is likely that the mobility of the 
planned Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) will enable it 
to locate and sample sedimentary layers. It is not yet 
clear how well near surface enviroimients at Mars 
might preserve organic molecules produced in an ear- 
lier warmer and wetter epoch or delivered to Mars by 
meteoritic infall. These may be destroyed by oxidants 
such as hydrogen peroxide (produced photochemically 



or by the chemistry of dust devil induced discharges) 
or by ultraviolet or particle radiation. For this reason, it 
is important not only to locate sites of high preserva- 
tion potential, but to implement organic analysis ex- 
periments with the highest possible sensitivity and 
breadth of chemical analysis. We have explored the 
techniques of laser desorption mass spectrometry 
(LDMS) for analysis of insoluble refiractory organics, 
chemical derivatization for analysis of soluble organ- 
ics, and pyrolysis. The pyrolysis approach is to heat a 
few milligrams of sample from ambient temperature to 
approximately 1200°C using a linear temperature 
ramp. Gases are rapidly removed from the sample by 
an inert helium carrier gas. They are first analyzed 
directly by a mass spectrometer and then again after 
completion of the pyrolysis by rapid release of organic 
molecules trapped on a high surface area adsorbant 
into a GC column. The controlled sample heating also 
enables analysis of simple inorganic gases, such as 
CO?, H2O, SO2 that provide information on mineral 
type and the degree of mineral alteration by weather- 
ing. The derivatization technique also employs the 
separation technique of multicolumn gas chromato- 
graph mass spectrometer (GCMS) analysis for detec- 
tion of a wide range of organic compounds. A subset 
of these techniques was recently selected for inclusion 
on the Mars Science Laboratory. Figure 1 illustrates a 
chemical derivatization reaction that enables detection 
of a wide range of molecules that are relevant to terres- 
trial life such as carboxylic acids, amino acids, and 
nucleobases to be analyzed by the GCMS technique. 
Such derivatization transforms polar organic molecules 
into highly volatile species that readily elute from the 



OH 



;Si(GH5)iq;cty3 




\ derivatization agent (MTBSTFA) 
unknown cartxixyh'c acid 



DMF / 

75°C \ 



- ■;4. 



d 




derivatized prodiR:t 






.H 



N 



Figure 1 . The chemical reaction that we have used on a wide variety of Mars analogue samples to transform polar molecules 
such as carboxylic acids and amino acids to volatile products that can readily be analyzed by the GCMS technique. The mass 
spectrometer, in this case, must have a mass range sufficient to reach the parent peak of the derivatized product. The deri- 
vatization agent is N,N-Methyl-tert.-butyl (dimethylsilyl) trifluoroacetamide (MTBSTFA) assisted by the solvent dimethyl- 
formamide (DMF). Lacking derivatization, the Viking GCMS would not have detected carboxylic acids. 



GC columns. Mars analogues that we have examined 
include Atacama desert [2] samples, and weathered 
volcanic material that is often selected for remote sens- 
ing analogue studies. 

Comets: The role of the exogeneous delivery of 
organic material to the terrestrial planets in the origin 
of life motivates the detailed exploration of the organic 
chemistry of comets. Simple organic molecules CH4, 
CjHg, C2H2, CH3OH, H2CO and others have been ob- 
served by remote sensing in comets, but the fast flyby 
of Comet Halley by the Giotto and Vega spacecraft did 
not yield a detailed understanding of the composition 
of more complex organic molecules present in the 
coma. Since the cold ices of the cometary nucleus may 
never have reached liquid water temperatures, it is 
appropriate to interrogate these samples with a variety 
of techniques such as the direct ionization (LDMS), 
the dry pyrolysis processing, as well as the liquid 
based derivatization methods. As in the case of the 
Mars exploration, our primitive knowledge of the or- 
ganic composition of comets suggests that these sam- 
ples are best explored with a broad chemical analysis. 
For missions that flyby the nucleus or rendezvous with 
a comet without touching the surface, both the gases of 
the coma and the collected dust particles can be ana- 
lyzed by the protocols described. The best cometary 
analogues to evaluate the measurement protocols may 
be the chetnically complex residues produced by labo- 
ratory irradiation of ices formed from simple combina- 
tions of gases such as H2O, CH4, and NH3. Primary 
goals of the analysis of cometary organics will be to 











1.tHS 










! 


5.E+07 




1.tH}l7 








S 






4.E+07 
















I 


3.E+07 




ItHX 


irt 


s 


3 




? 


■ I' 






atKS 

s 





n 


n 11a i» 


1 


ai ira 


ISO 

i 



— ZEi-07 



l.E+07 



measure the mixing ratios in homologous carbon chain 
series such as CH4, C2H6, CjHg, . . . CnH2N-2 and similar 
series for the more oxidized alcohols, aldehydes, or 
carboxylic acids. Other parameters of interst include 
the degree of branching of organic chains, the fraction 
of aliphatic vs aromatic molecules, and the isotopic 
composition of C and H as a function of chemical 
complexity. These measurements may distinguish 
thermodynamically driven abundance distributions 
from those that are kinetically controlled and hetero- 
geneous catalytic formation mechanisms from ho- 
mogoneous processes. 

Insitu Laboratories: The analytic power of the 
individual techniques described is greatly enhanced 
when several of these techniques can be combined to 
interrogate the same sample. The organic composition 
should be analyzed in the context of the host mineral- 
ogy and highly complementary elemental and minera- 
logical techniques are those that resolve fine scale spa- 
tial variations. 

References: (1) Smith, P. "The Phoenix Scout Mis- 
sion", 34th Annual Lunar and Planetary Science Con- 
ference, 1855 (2003). (2) Navarro-Gonzalez, R., 
Rainey, F.A., Molina, P., Bagaley, D.R., Hollen, B.J., 
Rosa, J., Small, A.M., Quinn, R.C., Grunthaner, F.J, 
Caceres, L., Gomez-Silva, B., and McKay, C.P., 
"Mars-Like Soils in the Atacama Desert, Chile, and 
the Dry Limit of Microbial Life", Science 7, 1018- 
1021 (2003). 






r^ 



S 
10 



S 



O l-l 



O.E+00 



LA 



8 

id 

1 



t 




(« 

o 

c 

IS 



II.. ■ 1/ 



18 



22 



26 30 34 

Retention time (min) 



38 



42 



Figure 2. The derivatization agent MTBSTFA allows a variety of polar molecules that are not seen in pyrolysis GCMS to be 
identified. This sample is from a dry region of the Atacama desert where there arc few organic molecules produced by dry 
extraction techniques. 



