NASA 
Technical 
Paper 
2393 



NASA-TP-2393 19850018394 



May 1 985 



Planning Fuel-Conservative 
Descents in an Airline 
Environment Using a Small 
Programmable Calculator 

Algorithm development and 
Flight Test Results 



Charles E. Knox, 

Dan D. Vicrpy, 

and David A. Simmon 



iRAHY :cipi 



J^NGL[:Y RESfi^ARCH CENTCf? i 
, LIBRARY, >^SA 
HAMPION, V!!?GIN!A; 



NASA 



NASA 
Technical 
Paper 
2393 

1985 



IWNSA 

National Aeronautics 
and Space Adnninistration 



Scientific and Technical 
Information Branch 



Planning Fuel-Conservative 
Descents in an Airline 
Environment Using a Small 
Programmable Calculator 

Algorithm Development and 
Flight Test Results 



Charles E. Knox 
and Dan D. Vicroy 

Langley Research Center 
Hampton, Virginia 

David A. Simmon 

United Airlines, Inc. 
Chicago, Illinois 



Contents 

Summary ^ 

Introduction ^ 

Symbols and Abbreviations 2 

Description of Flight-Management Descent Algorithm 4 

Description of General Profile 4 

Logic Flow of Profile Descent Algorithm 5 

Empirical Representation of Airplane Performance Characteristics 7 

Constant IAS descent model 7 

Constant Mach number descent model 8 

Acceleration performance model 8 

Gross-weight variation 8 

Head- wind gradient effect .9 

Approximation of True Airspeed 9 

Wind Modeling Technique 9 

Compensation for Effects of Nonstandard Atmospheric Temperature 10 

Computations of Descent Path 10 

M/IAS transition altitude 10 

Segment 1 11 

Segment 2 H 

Segment 3 H 

Segment 4 ' 11 

Segment 5 H 

Segment 6 12 

Segment 7 12 

Input/Output Requirements 12 

Flight Test Objectives • 13 

Description of Airplane and Cockpit Instrumentation 13 

Data Recording 14 

Test Procedure 14 

Performance-model validation tests 14 

Pilot-evaluation tests 14 

Results and Discussion 14 

Validation and Evaluation Criteria 14 

Parametric Sensitivity Analysis 14 

Nominal case 15 

Static-air-temperature sensitivity 15 

Gross-weight sensitivity • • 15 

Mach number sensitivity 16 

Descent airspeed sensitivity 16 

Wind modeling sensitivity 16 

Wind-gradient sensitivity 16 

Performance-Model Validation Tests 17 

Variation in Pilot Technique 17 

Pilot-Evaluation Test Phase , 18 



111 



Pilot Comments 19 

Suggested Modifications 19 

Concluding Remarks 20 

Tables 21 

Appendix A — Program Flow Chart 27 

Appendix B — Calculator Program 48 

Storage Register Location of Descent Algorithm Variables 48 

Program Listing 49 

References 56 

Figures . \ 57 



IV 



Summary 



Introduction 



The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) is 
implementing an automated, time-based metering 
form of air traffic control with profile descent pro- 
cedures for arrivals into the terminal area. These 
concepts provide fuel savings by matching the ar- 
rival flow of airplanes to the airport acceptance rate 
through time-control computations and by allowing 
the pilot to descend at his discretion from cruise al- 
titude to a designated metering fix in an idle-thrust 
clean configuration (with landing gear up, flaps zero, 
and speed brakes retracted). Although substantial 
fuel savings have resulted from these procedures, a 
potential for further fuel savings exists. Currently, 
the radar controller maintains time management for 
each airplane through either speed control or path 
stretching with radar vectors. This often results in 
more fuel being consumed than would have been if 
the descent planned by the pilot had been flown. 
Work load for the pilot is also high since he must 
plan for an idle-thrust descent to the metering fix by 
using various rules of thumb. 

The National Aeronautics and Space Administra- 
tion (NASA) has developed an airborne descent al- 
gorithm compatible with time-based metering and 
proflle descent procedures and designed to improve 
the accuracy of delivering an airplane during a fuel- 
efficient descent to a metering fix at a time desig- 
nated by the air trafiic control (ATC) system. This 
algorithm provides open-loop guidance for an air- 
plane to make an idle-thrust, clean-configured de- 
scent to arrive at the metering fix at a predetermined 
time, altitude, and airspeed. The algorithm also 
provides open-loop guidance for fuel-conservative de- 
scents when time constraints are not a consideration. 
An investigation into the feasibility of using the 
open-loop guidance in an airline operational envi- 
ronment was conducted. The algorithm was pro- 
grammed on a small programmable calculator for 
use with a McDonnell Douglas DC- 10- 10 airplane. 
Flight tests were conducted on routine airline fiights 
into various major airports. The resulting mean dis- 
tance and time errors to actually achieve the pre- 
dicted speed and altitude conditions at the end of 
the descent profile were 2.3 n.mi. long and 1.3 sec 
early, respectively, based on 19 test runs. The mean 
arrival time error at the metering fix was 8.4 sec early 
(compared with approximately 1 to 2 min when vec- 
tored by ATC). The subject pilots reported that the 
calculator was easy to use and did not interfere with 
normal flight duties. They felt that the open-loop 
guidance provided by the calculator would be of most 
value while flying descents at nonstandard speeds or 
during time-metered operations. 



In an effort to improve the efficiency of terminal 
area operations, the Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) is implementing an automated time-based me- 
tering form of air traffic control (ATC) with profile 
descent procedures. The time-based metering con- 
cept is based upon airplane arrivals crossing a meter- 
ing fix: (typically 30 to 40 n.mi. from the airport) at a 
specified altitude, airspeed, and time. The time me- 
tering derandomizes the arrivals to the airport prior 
to entering the terminal area and results in a reduc- 
tion of the low-altitude, high-fuel-consumption flight 
normally used to sequence airplanes to a common fi- 
nal approach path. The proper sequencing and spac- 
ing of enroute traffic also allows for increased airport 
productivity (refs. 1 and 2). The profile descent pro- 
cedure allows the pilot to plan and fiy a descent that 
is fuel conservative for his particular airplane, thus 
resulting in additional fuel savings. 

With the current time-based metering/profile de- 
scent procedures, the air traffic controller is respon- 
sible for the time management of each airplane. The 
controller can adjust the airplane time of arrival at 
the metering fix by increasing the flight path length 
through heading changes or by requesting the pilot 
to change speed. The pilot is responsible for crossing 
the metering fix at the proper airspeed and altitude 
and must plan the descent carefully if fuel is to be 
conserved. The time management and the descent 
planning are both work load intensive and interde- 
pendent. Since limited or no guidance is available to 
either the controller or the pilot, their tasks must be 
accomplished independently through various rules of 
thumb and past experience. With this present oper- 
ational concept, airplanes typically cross the meter- 
ing fix with a time accuracy between 1 and 2 min 
(ref. 3). When the controller must lengthen the path 
or change the speed of the airplane for time con- 
trol (even though the time-based metering and pro- 
file descent procedures are saving fuel), additional 
fuel must be used. 

During the summer of 1979, the National Aero- 
nautics and Space Administration (NASA) devel- 
oped and flight tested, in its Transport Systems Re- 
search Vehicle (TSRV, previously designated the Ter- 
minal Configured Vehicle) Boeing 737 research air- 
plane, a fiight-management descent algorithm de- 
signed to provide closed-loop guidance for a fuel- 
conservative descent and to reduce the metering-fix 
crossing-time dispersion. The fiight-management al- 
gorithm, which was based on an idle-thrust, clean- 
configured descent (with landing gear up and fiaps 
and spoilers retracted), was designed to place the 
airplane at the metering fix at the proper altitude, 



airspeed, and ATC-designated time. The results of 
the flight tests showed that the closed-loop guid- 
ance provided by the guidance and display system 
could reduce the time error when the metering fix 
is crossed to approximately 12 sec, based on 19 test 
runs (ref. 4). 

This research was continued in June of 1981 with 
a T-39A (Sabreliner) airplane to determine if similar 
results could be obtained with open-loop guidance 
and a conventional complement of cockpit instrumen- 
tation (ref. 5). A version of the flight-management 
descent algorithm was implemented on a Hewlett- 
Packard HP-41CV programmable calculator. Open- 
loop guidance was provided by the calculator in the 
form of the Mach number and airspeed at which the 
descent should be flown and the point at which the 
pilot was to reduce the thrust to flight idle and begin 
the descent. The descent was then flown with ref- 
erence to the airplane Mach and airspeed indicators 
and by maintaining an altitude profile computed by 
the calculator as a function of distance to the me- 
tering fix. Flight tests using this open-loop guidance 
resulted in an average time error when crossing the 
metering fix of 20 sec, based on 12 runs. This version 
of the descent algorithm was designed to operate in 
both the time-based metered and the conventional 
air traffic control environment, in which metering-fix 
times are not assigned. 

Having determined the viability of the open-loop 
descent guidance, additional research w^s conducted 
to evaluate the feasibility of using such a descent 
planning tool in an airline operational environment. 
The airplane used in this study was the McDonnell 
Douglas DC- 10- 10. This report contains a description 
of the programmable calculator software, the DC- 10 
descent performance model used in the algorithm 
computations, and the results of the model- validation 
and pilot-evaluation flight tests. 

Symbols and Abbreviations 

ATC air traffic control 

Agw coefficient for gross-weight multiplica- 

tion factor, Ib"^ 

Aj coefficient for constant IAS descent 

rate equation, ft/sec 

^M^Bm coefficients for constant Mach descent 
rate equation, ft 

^0) ^1j c^2 coefficients for quadratic curve flts of 
altitude as a function of time 

-Bgw coefficient for gross-weight multiplica- 

tion factor 



Bj coeflScient for constant IAS descent 

rate equation, knots"-*^ 

bo modeled vertical speed at sea level, 

ft/sec 

&1 slope of linear model for h during 

constant IAS descent, (ft/sec) /ft 

CRS magnetic course from entry flx to 

metering flx, deg 

Cj coeflBcient for constant IAS descent 

rate equation, sec"^ 

C^ coefficient for constant Mach descent 

rate equation, sec^/ft 

CO constant in model for h^^^ sec^/ft 

ci constant in model for h^^^ ft 

DME distance measuring equipment 

D^ magnetic wind direction, deg 

I>it;^/i magnetic wind direction evaluated at 

altitude /i, deg 

Dyj^s magnetic wind direction computed for 

sea-level altitude, deg 

dDyj/dH wind direction gradient with respect to 
altitude if, deg/ft 

EF entry fix 

EFdme DME reading at entry fix, n.mi. 

GSc ground speed at cruise altitude, knots 

GS5 average ground speed on segment 5, 

knots 

GW gross weight, lb 

H pressure altitude, ft 

-ffav average pressure altitude, ft 

^bod pressure altitude at bottom of descent, 

ft 

He pressure altitude at cruise, ft 

^MF pressure altitude of metering fix, ft 

^XO pressure altitude at transition from 

constant Mach descent to constant 
airspeed descent, ft 

h geopotential altitude, ft 

he cruise altitude, ft 

^MF metering-fix altitude, ft 



hxo 
h 

hg 

IAS 

lASd 

lASd^jnitial 

IASd,i 

IASmf 
IDLdme 

ISA 
K 

Ka 



K, 



gw 



if. 



h,XO 



K, 



/i,250 



A/,- 



altitude at transition from constant 
Mach descent to constant airspeed 
descent, ft 

rate of change of altitude (vertical 
speed), ft/sec 

rate of change of altitude due to wind 
gradient, ft/sec 

rate of change of altitude evaluated at 
indicated airspeed lAS^;, ft/sec 

rate of change of altitude evaluated at 
descent Mach number M^^ ft/sec 

rate of change of altitude, normalized 
for gross weight, evaluated at descent 
Mach number M^, ft/sec 

indicated airspeed, knots 

indicated airspeed used during de- 
scent, knots 

indicated airspeed of initial descent for 
speed-iteration computations, knots 

indicated airspeed of descent com- 
puted on ith iteration, knots 

maximum indicated airspeed limit 
during descent, knots 

minimum indicated airspeed limit 
during descent, knots 

indicated airspeed to cross metering 
fix, knots 

DME indication of point at which 
thrust should be reduced to flight idle, 
n.mi. 

ICAO Standard Atmosphere 

interpolation factor computed for 
speed-iteration purposes 

coefficient in rate of change of alti- 
tude due to wind gradient equation, 

(ft/sec) /knots/ft 

gross-weight multiplication factor for 
altitude rate 

substitution variable in JiME-^H 
routine 

substitution variable in segment 2 
computation 

length of path segment j , n.mi. 



k 


distance between entry fix and meter- 
ing fix, n.mi. 


Al 


distance increment, n.mi. 


M 


Mach number 


M/IAS 


Mach number and indicated airspeed 


M/IASrf^initial initial Mach number and indicated 

airspeed for speed-iteration computa- 
tions, knots 


MF 


metering fix 


MFdme 


DME indication of metering fix, n.mi. 


MSL 


mean sea level 


Mc 


cruise Mach number 


Md 


descent Mach number 


Mi,initial 


initial descent Mach number for spee(] 



N 

JVreg 
Nseg 
Nsnh 

OAT 

dSiD/dH 
TAS 

TASav 

TAS/ 

TAS^ 

TRK 

TSRV 
Tc 

TiSA,c 



iteration purposes 

number of wind data points 

storage register number 

segment number 

subroutine number 

outside air temperature, °C 

wind speed, knots 

wind speed evaluated at altitude h^ 
knots 

wind speed computed for sea-level 
altitude, knots 

wind speed gradient with respect to 
altitude if, knots/ft 

true airspeed, knots 

average true airspeed, knots 

final true airspeed of level flight 
segment, knots 

initial true airspeed of level flight 
segment, knots 

airplane magnetic track angle along 
ground, deg 

Transport Systems Research Vehicle 

temperature measured at cruise 
altitude, K 

International Standard Atmospheric 
temperature at cruise altitude c, K 



TiSA.F 



To 
T' 



Z 



st,c 



tst,if 



Acreq 

VAR 

V 

Vi 
WH,h 



International Standard Atmospheric 
temperature at altitude H, K 

standard sea-level air temperature, K 

nonstandard sea-level air temperature, 
K 

static air temperature measured at 
cruise altitude, K 

static air temperature at altitude H^ 
K 



X 

^DME 



head-wind component along airplane 
ground track in cruise, knots 

head-wind component along airplane 
ground track at metering fix, knots 

distance variable in DME—^H routine, 
n.mi. 

input DME reading used in DME— >if 
routine, n.mi. 

acceleration, knots/sec 



•?trop 


static air temperature at tropopause, 
K 


Yi,Y2,Ys 


substitution variables used in 
DME-^jET routine 


AT 
t 


difference between actual temperature 
and standard temperature, K 

time, sec 


Airport abbreviations: 

BDL Bradley International, Windsor Locks, 
Connecticut 


tE 


time error for descent speed conver- 
gence criterion, sec 


BOS 


Logan International, Boston, 
Massachusetts 


^£;,initial 


initial time error, sec 


DEN 


Stapleton International, Denver, 


*EF 


time that entry fix was crossed, 
hr:min:sec 


EWR 


Colorado 

Newark International, Newark, New 


*IDL 


crossing time of point at which 
throttles are reduced to flight idle, 
hr:min:sec 


HNL 


Jersey 

Honolulu International, Honolulu, 
Hawaii 


At 


metering-fix crossing time, hr:min:sec 
time increment, sec 


LAX 


Los Angeles International, Los Ange- 
les, California 


^^initial 


time required to fly initial descent 
profile, sec 


ORD 
SFO 


0*Hare International, Chicago, Illinois 
San Francisco International, San 



time required to fiy on path segment 
y, sec 

time required to fly between entry fix 
and metering fix, sec 

magnetic variation in descent area, deg 

indicated airspeed used in flow chart 

final speed of level flight segment, 
knots 

initial speed of level flight segment, 
knots 

difference between actual and com- 
puted ground speeds at cruise altitude, 
knots 

head-wind component along airplane 
ground track evaluated at altitude h^ 
knots 



Francisco, California 

Description of Flight-Management Descent 
Algorithm 

Description of General Profile 

The flight-management descent algorithm com- 
putes the parameters required to describe a seven- 
segment cruise and descent profile (fig. 1) between 
an arbitrarily located entry fix and an ATC-defined 
metering fix. The descent profile is computed based 
on empirical modeling of airplane performance for 
an idle- thrust, clean-configured descent. The descent 
Mach/airspeed schedule, airplane gross weight, wind, 
wind gradient, and nonstandard temperature effects 
are also considered in these calculations. 

Figure 1 shows the vertical-plane geometry of 
the path between the entry fix and the metering 
fix. Each path segment, starting at the metering 
fix, is numbered according to the order in which it 



is calculated by the algorithm. To be compatible 
with standard airline operating practices, the path 
is calculated based upon the descent being flown 
first at a constant Mach number with a subsequent 
transition to a constant indicated airspeed and with 
all speed reductions made in level flight. 

The first segment traversed on the profile is seg- 
ment 7, which begins at the entry fix and is flown 
at constant cruise altitude and Mach number. Seg- 
ment 6 is a relatively short, level-flight path segment 
in which the pilot reduces thrust to flight idle so that 
the airplane will slow from the cruise Mach number to 
the descent Mach number. Segment 6 is eliminated if 
the descent and cruise Mach numbers are the same. 
Once the descent Mach number is attained, the con- 
stant Mach descent segment (segment 5) is started. 
As altitude is decreased along this path segment, the 
indicated airspeed will increase because of increas- 
ing air pressure. Segment 4 begins when the desired 
indicated airspeed is attained for descent. The de- 
scent is continued along this segment at the desired, 
constant indicated airspeed. When the metering-fix 
altitude has been reached, the airplane is flown at a 
constant altitude along segment 3 and is slowed from 
the descent airspeed to the designated airspeed over 
the metering fix. Segments 1 and 2 are not computed. 

If the metering fix is below 10 000 ft MSL and 
the descent airspeed flown on segment 4 is greater 
than 250 knots, the airplane must be slowed to com- 
ply with an ATC-imposed speed limit of 250 knots 
below 10 000 ft MSL. In this case, segments 1 and 2 
are computed as depicted in flgure 1. Segment 3 
then becomes a level-flight segment at 10 000 ft MSL 
in which the airspeed is reduced to 250 knots. The 
descent is then continued at 250 knots along seg- 
ment 2. When the metering-fix altitude has been 
reached, the airplane is flown at a constant altitude 
along segment 1 and is slowed from 250 knots to the 
designated airspeed over the metering fix. Path seg- 
ment 1 is not computed if the metering-fix crossing 
airspeed is also 250 knots. 

The flight-management descent algorithm can be 
used in either of two modes. The first mode was de- 
signed for time-metered operations. In this mode, in- 
stead of specifying the M/IAS descent schedule, the 
pilot enters the time that the entry fix was crossed 
and the metering-fix arrival time that was assigned 
by ATC. The descent profile is then calculated based 
on an M/IAS descent schedule, which is computed 
through an iterative process, that will closely satisfy 
the crossing time specified for the metering fix. Dur- 
ing this iterative process, the Mach number used for 
the descent is set equal to the cruise Mach number in 
an effort to reduce computational requirements and 
operational complexity. The airspeed is adjusted to 



satisfy the time constraints. A check is made within 
the profile computations to ensure that the descent 
airspeed lAS^ is within the minimum and maximum 
speed limits for the particular airplane modeled. For 
the DC- 10 airplane, these limits were 

220 < lASd < 350 [knots] 

An additional constraint was that IAS(£ would not 
be less than the airspeed at which the airplane was 
to cross the metering fix. This eliminated the need 
to accelerate the airplane to a higher airspeed, which 
results in greater fuel usage. If the ATC-assigned 
metering-fix crossing time requires a descent airspeed 
less than the airplane minimum descent airspeed 
limit, the profile is computed based on the minimum 
airspeed limit and a message is displayed to the pilot 
to "hold" (delay) for the required amount of time. 
A similar "late" message is displayed with the time 
error if a descent airspeed schedule greater than the 
maximum allowed is required. 

The second mode is called the speed mode. In 
this mode the pilot must enter the desired M/IAS 
to be flown during descent. The descent profile is 
then computed, based on this descent speed schedule, 
without consideration of a constraint on metering-fix 
arrival time. This mode would be used when time- 
based metering is not being used. 

Logic Flow of Profile Descent Algorithm 

Figure 2 shows the general logic flow of the pro- 
file descent computations. Pilot inputs used to com- 
pute the profile may be entered prior to flight and 
modified, as required, prior to the descent. These 
parameters include cruise altitude and Mach num- 
ber, airplane gross weight, outside air temperature, 
wind velocity at various altitudes selected by the pi- 
lot, entry-fix and metering-fix descriptions, and the 
course direction to the metering fix. In addition to 
these parameters, the pilot may enter either a partic- 
ular Mach number and indicated airspeed to be used 
during the descent or the entry-fix crossing time and 
the ATC-assigned metering-fix crossing time. 

If the M/IAS descent speed schedule has been 
entered in the calculator, the computations will be 
based on a nonmetered traffic environment. The pilot 
initiates the computations by pushing the "compute" 
key. The descent profile is then computed in a 
single iteration, and the point where thrust should be 
reduced to flight idle to start the descent is indicated 
as a DME distance on the calculator display. 

If the entry-fix crossing time and the ATC- 
assigned metering-fix crossing time have been entered 
in the calculator, the time required to fly between the 
fixes Aireq will be computed and subsequent calcu- 



lations will be based on a time-metered traffic en- 
vironment. Once the pilot has initiated the compu- 
tations by pushing the "compute" key, an iterative 
process is started to determine an appropriate IAS 
descent speed that will satisfy the time constraints. 
The Mach number used for the descent is set equal to 
the cruise Mach number in an effort to reduce com- 
putational requirements and operational complexity. 
The iterative process starts with the computation 
of the time to fly from the entry fix to the metering 

at the following descent speed 



fix (eJ=i Ai,) 
schedule 



initial 



^d,initial = ^c 



d,initial I IASmf [knots] (if lAS^F > 280) 

The lASj/^initial value of 280 knots is used because 
it is the approximate midpoint between the maxi- 
mum and minimum allowable descent airspeeds and 
because it is a descent speed typically used by the 
airlines. 

A check is made with the following transition- 
time inequality to determine if the time-convergence 
criterion Ie has been satisfied. (For the purposes of 
these tests, t^ = ^ sec.) 



At 



req 



-eL% 



<tE 



where 



Aireq = *MF " ^EF 



sec 



[sec] 



If this inequality is satisfied, the computations 
are complete and the idle-thrust descent point is dis- 
played to the pilot. If the inequality is not satisfied, 
the descent computations will be repeated by using 
the operational airspeed limits as follows: 

Md = Me 



(^ IASmf [knots] otherwise 

A check is then made to determine if the time 
criterion has been satisfied or if a speed greater than 
350 knots or less than IASj^f would be required to 
satisfy the time constraints. If the time criterion is 
satisfied, the idle-thrust descent point is displayed to 
the pilot. If either the upper or lower airspeed limit 
must be violated to satisfy the time constraints, the 
appropriate speed limit will be used in the descent 



computations and the resulting time error for cross- 
ing the metering fix will be displayed to the pilot. 

If the time criterion has not been satisfied and nei- 
ther the upper nor lower airspeed limitation will be 
violated, a revised descent airspeed lAS^f and asso- 
ciated descent time will be computed and compared 
with Atreq- This iterative process will continue until 
the time-convergence criterion has been satisfied. 

The computation of the revised lAS,^ is graphi- 
cally depicted in figure 3, which shows a plot of the 
time required to fly between a specified entry fix and 
metering fix at a specified cruise Mach number over 
the complete lAS^f range of the airplane. The descent 
airspeed is revised through a modified linear interpo- 
lation of the desired Aireq within a range of time 
bounded by an initial value and a computed vari- 
able value. The initial value fel=i ^ti) was 

V -^ *'/ initial 

the resulting time computed with the M/IAS^^jnitial 
descent speed schedule on the first iteration. The 
variable time value (Z)J=i ^^j) . is the time com- 
puted for the M/IASd^i^i descent speed schedule on 
the last (i—l) iteration. The revised descent speed 
schedule M/lAS^i^i is computed as follows: 

Md^Mc 



lASa^i = lASd^initial + {l^^d,i-l " ^^^dMitia.\)K 



where 



K = 



X 5sin(180A') [knots] 

(s,'=.^'.),.,.,.-(E,'..^'.)<.. 



and i is the ith iteration. 

The last term of the computations for lAS^^^- is a 
compensation factor for the difference in curvature 
between the plot of time required to fly between 
the entry fix and the metering fix as a function of 
descent airspeed and the straight line used in the 
linear interpolation. 

The following numerical example will illustrate 
the interpolation process. The entry fix is crossed 
at an altitude of 37 000 ft and at a cruise Mach 
number of 0.81. ATC has assigned a metering-fix 
crossing time for 15 min (900 sec) later at an altitude 
of 8000 ft and at an airspeed of 280 knots. 

An initial airspeed of 280 knots has been pro- 
grammed into the interpolation routine. At this 



6 



speed, 934.8 sec are needed to fly this profile. Since 
the ATC time required to fly the profile is 900 sec, 
the maximum limit airspeed of 350 knots is chosen 
by the calculator for the second iteration. The time 
needed to fly the profile with a descent airspeed of 
350 knots was computed to be 842.5 sec. 

An interpolation for the next descent airspeed can 
now be made between the speed and time points 
of 280 knots and 934.8 sec and of 350 knots and 
842.5 sec, respectively. A simple linear interpolation 
between these points for 900 sec results in a speed 
of 306.4 knots. However, when the compensation 
factor term is applied to correct for the straight- 
line interpolation effects, a slightly lower airspeed of 
302.9 knots is obtained for further computations. 

At a descent airspeed of 302.9 knots, 890.2 sec 
is needed to fiy the profile. Since this exceeds the 
5-sec time-convergence criterion (900 — 890.2 = 9.8 
sec), another iteration is necessary to select a new 
descent airspeed. A linear interpolation between the 
speed and time points of 280 knots and 934.8 sec and 
of 302.9 knots and 890.2 sec, respectively, results in 
an airspeed of 297.9 knots for a time of 900 sec. A 
slightly lower airspeed of 296.2 knots is obtained after 
the compensation factor term is applied. The time 
needed to fly the profile with a descent airspeed of 
296.2 knots is 901.4 sec. This satisfies the 5-sec time 
criterion (900 — 901,4 = —1.4 sec) and completes the 
iteration process. The descent airspeed displayed to 
the pilot is 296 knots. 

Empirical Representation of Airplane Perfor- 
mance Characteristics 

Computer memory limitations with the pro- 
grammable calculator preclude the use of detailed 
aerodynamic and performance tables to represent the 
airplane for profile descent calculations. Instead, an 
empirical model of the performance of the DC- 10 air- 
plane was developed from flight data collected dur- 
ing idle-thrust, clean-configured descents and during 
level-flight speed reductions. 

A portable voice recorder, a stop watch, and 
conventional flight instruments were used to collect 
data for descent performance modeling. Altitude, 
speed, temperature, and time were recorded at al- 
titude increments of approxfrnately 500 ft during 
the descents. Speed, temperature, and time were 
recorded at 10-sec intervals during constant-altitude 
speed changes. Gross weights were recorded at the 
beginning and end of each test run. 

Constant IAS descent model. The performance 
model for the constant indicated airspeed descents 
consisted of linear approximations of vertical speed as 



a function of an approximated geopotential altitude 
for a range of airspeeds between 220 and 350 knots. 
The vertical speed was adjusted to compensate for 
variations in gross weight. 

The first step in the development of the verti- 
cal performance model for constant lAS^^ was to ap- 
proximate, for each descent, geopotential altitude as 
a function of time as a quadratic equation through 
a least-squares curve-fit analysis. The general form 
assumed for this equation was 



h = a2t^ -\-ait-\-ao 



[ft] 



Figure 4 shows a typical plot of the data and resulting 
curve fit for a descent flown at a constant lAS^; of 
280 knots. 

Vertical speed was determined by differentiating 
this equation with respect to time. This resulted in 
an equation of the form 

h = 2a2t + ai [ft/sec] 

A plot of A as a function of h was then developed 
for each descent. Figure 5 shows typical data for 
various descent speeds. These plots indicated that 
vertical speed was approximately linear as a function 
of geopotential altitude and were modeled with an 
equation of the form 

" h = bih + bo [ft /sec] 

The slope bi was approximately the same for all 
descent speeds and was equal to —3.5 X 10"'* 
(ft/sec) /ft. The modeled vertical speed at sea level 6o 
was corrected for gross-weight variations by dividing 
by the gross-weight multiplication factor ifgw (to 
be discussed subsequently). The 6o data varied 
exponentially as a function of descent airspeed. A 
plot of these data with the exponential model of bo 
is shown in figure 6. 

The vertical-speed model was also adjusted with 
a correction factor kg due to head-wind gradient (to 
be discussed subsequently) to account for changes 
in the vertical speed due to head-wind component 
variations during the descent. The resulting model 
of vertical speed, for a DC- 10 airplane, corrected 
for gross-weight variations and head-wind gradient 
effects, was 

hiASa = (-3.5 X 10-^)h 

+ Kg„[hg - 3.07783 exp(8. 158681 
X 10-^ X lASd)] [ft/sec] 



Constant Mach number descent model. The 

performance model for constant Mach number de- 
scents consisted of parabolic approximations of ver- 
tical speed as a function of approximated geopoten- 
tial altitude for a range of Mach numbers between 
0.73 and 0.85. The vertical speed was adjusted to 
compensate for variations in gross weight. 

The procedures used to develop the descent model 
for constant Mach number were similar to those 
used for development of the model for constant IAS 
descents. A quadratic equation for altitude as a 
function of time was derived for each descent through 
a least-squares curve-fit analysis. These equations 
were differentiated with respect to time to determine 
vertical speed as a function of time. The vertical 
speed was adjusted for gross- weight variations by 
dividing by the gross-weight correction factor ifg^ 
(to be discussed subsequently). 

The vertical speed h^ adjusted for gross-weight 
variation, was then plotted as a function of altitude. 
Typical plots of these data are shown in figure 7. The 
resulting curves were parabolic in nature and were 
modeled with an equation of the following form: 

The magnitude of the coefficient cq was subjectively 
selected based on the shape of a generic parabola 
that would overlay the descent data. A value of 
Co = —1.85 sec'^/ft was selected and resulted in the 
parabola shown by the dashed line in figure 7. 

The coefficient ci was calculated for each descent 
at an altitude approximately 2000 ft below cruise al- 
titude for Co = -1.85 sec^/ft. The resulting values 
for c\ are plotted as a function of the descent Mach 
number in figure 8. A linear regression analysis re- 
sulted in an equation of ci as a function of the Mach 
number. However, the slope of this model was in- 
creased slightly to ensure that ci would be greater 
than the maximum cruisf altitude of the airplane (de- 
fined by the altitude limits shown in fig. 8), thus en- 
suring that an imaginary root would not be obtained 
from the equation for fiM^- The maximum altitude 
limits are defined by the maximum operating altitude 
(42 000 ft) of the airplane and by the altitudes cor- 
responding to a minimum airspeed of 220 knots for 
Mach numbers less than 0.79. The resulting model 
for ci is 

ci = 25 750Mrf + 22167 [ft] 



The correction factor hg due to head-wind gradient 
was added to the descent-rate equation similarly 
as in the constant indicated airspeed case. The 



resulting equation for vertical speed for a constant 
Mach number descent was 



^Md = -^1 



gw 



' h~~{2h 750Mrf + 22 1 67) 1 V^ . 

~~ " ' — hn 



-1.85 



~J 



[ft/sec] 



Acceleration performance model. Acceleration 
performance data were obtained for idle-thrust, 
clean-configured speed reductions on level flight 
paths for typical cruise and metering-fix altitudes. 
Indicated airspeed and time data were recorded dur- 
ing the speed reductions. The indicated airspeeds 
were converted to approximate true airspeeds to re- 
duce computational requirements within the descent 
algorithm. Figure 9 shows a plot of approximate true 
airspeed, as a function of time, that resulted dur- 
ing speed reductions at various altitudes and gross 
weights. The average slope of each of these test runs 
was approximately the same. Hence, acceleration for 
the DC- 10 airplane was modeled as constant and was 
approximated by 



i = -1.3 



[knots/sec] 



Gross-weight variation. The effects of gross- 
weight variation on the descent performance of the 
airplane were accounted for with a single multiplica- 
tion factor applied to the vertical performance mod- 
els developed for both constant airspeed and constant 
Mach number descents. The multiplication factor 
iiTgw is a linear, nondimensional expression. 

The multiplication factor was derived for the 
DC- 10 airplane by plotting the vertical speeds ob- 
tained during descents (conducted at the same indi- 
cated airspeed) against the gross weight of the air- 
plane. Figure 10 shows the vertical speed at sea level 
as a function of gross weight for descents conducted 
at constant airspeeds of 250, 280, 300, and 340 knots. 
A linear curve fit was applied to the data points 
for the 280-knot descents since more descents were 
flown at this speed and since a wider range of gross 
weights existed in the data. This plot also shows 
that the model derived for the 280-knot descents may 
be shifted vertically (maintaining approximately the 
same slope) to overlay the descent data obtained at 
the other speeds. Since the same slope could be ap- 
proximated for all airspeeds, changes to the vertical 
speed due to gross-weight variations were modeled 
independent of airspeed. The plot in figure 10 was 
then nondimensionalized by dividing the abscissa by 
304 000 lb and the ordinate by -30.2 ft/sec (in which 
6o = -30.2 ft/sec at an airspeed of 280 knots and 
a gross weight of 304 000 lb). Nondimensionaliza- 
tion allowed the gross-weight variation model derived 
with the 280-knot descent data to be expressed in a 



8 



form useful for descents at any airspeed. The result- 
ing multiplication factor Kg^ for gross-weight varia- 
tions was 

Kg^ = (-3.863133 x 10~^)GW + 2.174392369 

where 

260000 < GW < 350000 [lb] 

Head-wind gradient effect. The head-wind- 
gradient effect is an adjustment to the vertical-speed 
model required when the head-wind component of 
the airplane changes during an idle thrust, constant 
airspeed, or Mach number descent. If the head-wind 
component decreases during the descent, indicated 
airspeed will also decrease unless the pilot lowers the 
pitch angle of the airplane to maintain the airspeed. 
When the pitch angle is lowered, vertical speed will 
increase. Similarly, vertical speed must be decreased 
if the head-wind component increases during the de- 
scent. 

The head-wind-gradient effect was quantified with 
an adjustment factor Kg computed from data ob- 
tained during a series of piloted descents with a 
DC- 10 simulator. The idle- thrust descents were con- 
ducted at a constant indicated airspeed of 280 knots, 
at a gross weight of 300 000 lb, and in the presence 
of head- wind components that decreased 2, 3, and 
10 knots per 1000 ft of descent. A quadratic regres- 
sion analysis was applied to the data from each de- 
scent to obtain an equation for altitude as a function 
of time. The derivative of this equation resulted in a 
computed, smoothed vertical speed for each of the de- 
scents. The average vertical speed obtained for each 
of the descents with the wind gradients was then sub- 
tracted from the average vertical speed obtained dur- 
ing a descent with no wind gradient. The difference 
in vertical speed was divided by the magnitude of the 
wind gradient encountered during the descent. The 
results of these computations were then averaged to 
obtain a head-wind-gradient factor equal to a change 
in vertical speed of -1.28 ft/sec for a 1-knot decrease 
in head-wind component for each 1000 ft of change 
in altitude (i.e.. Kg = -1280 (ft/sec) /knots/ft). The 
effect that the head-wind gradient had on vertical 
speed kg could then be calculated based on the mod- 
eled wind and the cruise and metering-fix altitudes 
as shown in the following equation: 



hg = Kg 



WH^,-WH^h 



>"MF 



He - H^Y 



[ft/sec] 



Approximation of True Airspeed 

It is necessary to determine true airspeed from 



both Mach number and calibrated airspeed, as re- 
quired for each path segment, so that a head- wind 
component can be added to obtain ground speed for 
time calculations. True airspeed, as a function of 
Mach number and static air temperature T^^jj^ was 
defined by the following equation (ref. 4): 

TAS = 38.96M(Tst,if )^/2 [knots] 

True airspeed, as a function of calibrated airspeed 
and altitude h^ was approximated with the following 
empirical equation: 



TAS = 



IAS 



1 - (0.12 X 10-4)/i 



where 



/i<42 000 
220 < IAS < 360 



[knots] 

[ft] 

[knots] 



Wind Modeling Technique 



A two-component linear wind model was used to 
represent the wind speed and the wind direction as 
functions of altitude. The coefHcients of the wind 
model were computed via a linear regression analy- 
sis of data from winds-aloft reports and forecasts in 
the descent area. Winds-aloft data for the linear re- 
gression analysis were inserted through the calculator 
keyboard in a format similar to that used in standard 
aviation winds-aloft forecasts. Although wind speed 
and direction from only two altitudes were required 
to define a wind model, the pilot could choose to 
insert additional wind data based on both forecasts 
and pilot reports. 

The magnitude of the wind speed and the direc- 
tion of the wind defined by the linear wind model 
were computed for each segment of the profile based 
on the middle altitude of each segment. The follow- 
ing equations were used for these computations: 



^w,h — 



~dH 



h + S, 



w^s 



n ^^^ u I n 



[knots] 
[deg] 



A head-wind component for each segment was 
computed automatically during the profile computa- 
tions by multiplying the wind speed with the cosine 
of the angle between the airplane ground track and 
the wind direction. A head-wind-component correc- 
tion factor, based on the actual winds encountered 
during cruise flight, could also be added to the wind 
model if the pilot determined it was necessary. The 
correction factor was obtained by first computing the 
term Wc^ which was the difference between the actual 



9 



ground speed along the cruise segment (computed by 
the pilot) and the predicted ground speed based on 
the modeled winds and cruise Mach number. This 
term was assumed to be proportional to altitude and 
decreased linearly to at sea level {h = 0). The cor- 
rected head-wind component Wjj ^ used in the profile 
computations was defined by the following equation: 

^H,h==S^,h^oa{D^^h, ~ TRK) + {h/hc)Wc [knots] 



where 



TRK = CRS - VAR 



Compensation for Effects of Nonstandard 
Atmospheric Temperature 

Various flight instruments, including the Mach 
meter and the altimeter, are designed to display 
true indications in a standard atmosphere. How- 
ever, standard atmospheric conditions are rarely en- 
countered. This results in slight errors in speed and 
indicated altitude. The profile descent algorithm 
compensates for nonstandard temperatures as they 
affect the Mach number calculations and altimeter 
indications. 

Nonstandard temperatures are computed by the 
algorithm based on a standard atmospheric temper- 
ature model with a bias correction based on the dif- 
ference between the actual and the standard temper- 
atures. The standard-temperature model is a two- 
segment linear profile defined as a function of alti- 
tude. This temperature model uses a slope equal to 
a temperature lapse rate of -1.978 X 10~^ °C/ft for 
altitudes below the tropopause {H < 36 152 ft). At 
higher altitudes {H > 36 152 ft), it was assumed that 
flight was being conducted within the tropopause 
where temperature remains constant with changes in 
altitude. The standard-temperature model is repre- 
sented mathematically as 

TisA,H = 216.65 [K] 

where H > 36 152 ft and as 

TiSA,H = 216.65 + (1.978xl0~^)(36152-fr) [K] 

where H <36 152 ft. 

The following bias correction AT, representing 
the difference between the actual temperature mea- 
sured at cruise altitude Tc and the standard tem- 
perature for cruise altitude Tjsac) is added to the 
standard atmospheric temperature profile to define 
static temperature Tgt^/f completely at any altitude 
H as follows: 

AT = Tc~TisA,c [K] 



rst,i/ = TisA,f/ + AT [K] 

The static temperature is then used for conversion of 
Mach number to true airspeed. 

Pressure altitudes H used to define the end points 
of each segment are corrected to approximate geopo- 
tential altitudes by multiplying the pressure altitude 
by a temperature ratio of nonstandard and standard 
sea-level temperatures (ref. 6) as follows: 

h = H{TUTo) [ft] 

The standard sea- level air temperature To is 288.15 K; 
the nonstandard sea-level air temperature T^, is com- 
puted from the static temperature model for if = 0. 

Computations of Descent Path 

The point where the pilot is to reduce power 
to idle thrust to start the descent was defined by 
summing the distances required to fly segments 1 
through 6. Each segment length was determined by 
first computing the required time to traverse the seg- 
ment and then multiplying by the average ground 
speed computed for the segment. Times for the level- 
flight segments requiring airspeed or Mach reduc- 
tions were determined by dividing the required speed 
change by the deceleration capability of the airplane. 
Times for the path segments requiring descents were 
determined from equations derived by integrating the 
equation of the vertical-speed model over the alti- 
tude change required. The average ground speed at 
which the airplane was to fly each segment was de- 
termined by summing the computed true airspeed 
and the head-wind component evaluated for each 
segment. 

The cruise segment (segment 7) at level flight 
and constant Mach number had no influence on the 
location of the point where idle thrust was to begin. 
This segment was significant only during the time- 
metered mode and was used for the calculations to 
satisfy the time constraints. Segments 1 and 2 were 
computed only if the ATC- imposed limit of 250 knots 
indicated airspeed for flight below 10 000 ft MSL 
was applicable. The details of these calculations are 
presented in the following paragraphs. 

M/IAS transition altitude. As the airplane 
descends at a constant Mach number, the indicated 
airspeed increases because of an increase in the air 
pressure. The altitude at which the desired descent 
airspeed is obtained is called the M/IAS transition 
altitude and defines the point at which the constant 
Mach segment ends and the constant IAS segment 
begins. The general equation for this transition 
altitude was determined by equating true airspeed 



10 



as a function of indicated airspeed and altitude, with 
true airspeed as a function of Mach number and 
altitude. Solving for altitude results in the following 
equation to define the altitude for transition of Mach 
number to indicated airspeed: 



hxo = 1.77675 X 10^ - 



8.90046 X 10^ 



+ (3.42936 X 10^) 



lASd 



Md 



1/2 



[ft] 



Segment 7, Path segment 1 is a level-flight 
segment on which the airplane is slowed from an 
indicated airspeed of 250 knots to the metering-fix 
crossing speed. If the metering-fix crossing speed is 
less than or equaj. to 250 knots, or if the metering-fix 
altitude is equal to or greater than 10 000 ft MSL, 
this segment is not computed. The equations for time 
and length in segment 1 are, respectively. 



Ail = —r 



IASmf - 250 



i[l - (0.12 X 10-4)/iMF] 
where i = — 1.3 knots/sec, and 



[sec] 



A^ = 



(IASmf +250)/2 ,y 

X - (0.12 X 10-4)/ij^p ^.^MP 



Ati 
3600 



Segment 2. Segment 2 is an idle-thrust descent 
flown at a constant 250 knots from 10 000 ft MSL to 
the metering-fix altitude. Segment 2 is not computed 
if the metering- fix altitude is equal to or greater than 
10 000 ft MSL or if the descent speed lAS^ flown on 
segment 4 is 250 knots or less. The equations for 
time and length in segment 2 are, respectively, 



^*2 ^ 77- In 



hUF^I + ^«w(K^ 250 + ^ff) 



[sec] 



where 



Aj = -3.07783 

Bj = 8.158681 X 10"^ 

Cj = -3.5 X 10"^ 



[ft/sec] 
[ft/sec] 
[knots" ^] 



sec 



-li 



and 

A/2 = 



250 



1 - (0.12 X 10-4)/i 



^^U - ^H^ 



At2 
3600 



n.mi. 



where 



h^[{lOOOO + HMF)TUTo]/2 [ft] 



Segment 5. Segment 3 is a level-flight segment on 
which the airplane is slowed from the descent speed 
lAS^ to the metering-fix crossing speed (or 250 knots 
if segments 1 and 2 are computed). The equations 
for time and length in segment 3 are, respectively, 



Ai3 = 



IASmf - lAS^ 



x[l-[0.12xl0-4)/i] 
where x = —1.3 knots/sec, and 



sec 



A/3 = 



(IASrf + IASMF)/2 ^^. 
1 - (0.12 X 10-4)/i ^''^ 



3600 



where 



r hf^-p [ft] (if segments 1 and 2 are not computed) 

^"" y 10000^ [ft] (otherwise) 



Segment 4. Segment 4 is an idle-thrust descent 
fiown at a constant indicated airspeed lAS^. The 
descent begins at the transition altitude hxo ^^^ 
ends at the metering-fix altitude (or at 10 000 ft MSL, 
if segments 1 and 2 are computed). The equations 
for time and length of segment 4 are, respectively. 



AU = ^ In 
where 

^bod = 

and 
Al4 = 
where 



OlH^od^+Kf^v^JAie^' IAS^+^ 



, CxHxo ^ + ^gw {AieBi lAS^ + ^^) 



[sec] 



( 10 000 [ft] (if segments 1 and 2 are computed) 
\ ^MF [ft] (otherwise) 



lASd 



1 - (0.12 X 10-4)fe " ^^''^J 3600 [°-°^^-l 



A<4 



h=[{Hxo + HbodmTo]/2 [ft] 



Segment 5. Segment 5 is a constant Mach descent 
flown at idle- thrust power settings. This segment 
begins at cruise altitude he and ends when lAS,^ 
is attained at the transition altitude hxo- The 



11 



equations for time and length of segment 5 are, 
respectively, 



2Cm / /^cg-^y /' . 



h,XO 




sec 



where 



..„„=f^^2iifiV"-/., 



^/i,XO 



V Cm 



ci = M^Am + Bm 
Am = 25 750 
Bm = 22 167 
Cjv/ = —1.85 



[ft] 
[ft] 
[ft] 

[secVft] 



and 



A/5 = [38.96(r,t,5)l/2Md - WH,h]^ 



n.mi. 



where 



h = [iHc + Hxo)T'o/To]/2 [ft] 



The static temperature Tgt^s and the head-wind com- 
ponent are evaluated at the average altitude between 
the cruise and transition altitudes. 

Segment 6. Segment 6 is a level-flight speed 
change from the cruise Mach number to the descent 
Mach number. If the cruise and descent Mach num- 
bers are the same, this segment is not computed. 
The equations for time and length of segment 6 are, 
respectively, 



sec 



A*6 = 38.96(rst,c)l/2^^^^ 

X 

where x = -1.3 knots/sec, and 



Ai, = [ss.miT^,,)U2Mi±^ - w^,,^] II [„.„.i.] 



Segment 7. Segment 7 is the remaining path 
between the entry fix and the beginning of segment 6. 
The length of segment 7 is the difference between the 
total distance between the entry fix and metering fix 



k and the sum of the distances of the remaining six 
segments. The length is given as follows: 

^^7 = lt- Y:%i ^h [°-°^i-] 

Segment 7 time Aiy is found by dividing the distance 
to be flown by the ground speed as follows: 



At7 = 



3600 A/7 

38M{T,t,cV/^Mc^WH^hc 



[sec] 



Input/Output Requirements 



The data required for the profile descent equa- 
tions are obtained from the preprogrammed calcula- 
tor memory and from pilot entries through the key- 
board shown in figure 11. Even though all the data 
necessary to compute the descent are entered prior 
to takeoff, these parameters may be updated during 
cruise to obtain more accurate results. 

The wind data are entered through the keyboard 
and the wind model coefficients are automatically 
computed and stored in the proper memory loca- 
tions. The wind data, correlated to altitude, are in- 
serted in a data format similar to that found on an 
aviation weather forecast. To insert the wind data, 
the pilot must first push the key labeled "*", fol- 
lowed by the key labeled "*Wind". The display will 
request the altitude for the wind speed and direc- 
tion data with the message "if =?FT" , The altitude 
is keyed into the display and entered into memory by 
pushing the "New Entry" key. The calculator will 
then request the wind direction and speed with the 
message "DIR.SPD?". Wind direction and speed are 
keyed into the display and entered into memory by 
pushing the "New Entry" key. This process will be 
repeated until all wind data have been inserted in 
the calculator. The linear regression analysis will be 
completed after the pilot inserts a negative altitude 
to indicate that no more wind data will be inserted. 
The calculator will then display a "WIND IN" 
message. 

The wind data used by the pilot to compute the 
wind model could contain some errors since that 
information is usually based on aviation forecasts 
that may not be current. A procedure was developed 
that allows the pilot to modify the wind model with 
a correction factor based on the difference between 
the computed and actual ground speeds along the 
cruise segment (segment 7). The computed ground 
speed used in the profile descent computations may 
be displayed by pushing the "*" key followed by the 
"*GSc" key. The difference between the displayed 
ground speed and the actual ground speed represents 
the wind modeling error along the magnetic course 



12 



of the airplane to the metering fix. If the ground 
speeds are different, the actual ground speed may 
be keyed into the display. Then, by pushing the 
"New Entry" key, the difference between the ground 
speeds is computed and stored in memory for use in 
subsequent descent and ground-speed computations. 

The operational parameters affected by ATC con- 
straints or pilot desires, and not accurately known 
until just prior to the start of descent, were designed 
to be single key inputs. To enter these data, the pilot 
presses the particular key dedicated to the parame- 
ter to be changed. After the key has been pressed, 
the display will show the name of the parameter and 
its current value that is stored in the calculator. An- 
other numerical value may be keyed on the display 
and then stored in the proper memory location by 
simply pressing the "New Entry" key. If the current 
value shown is satisfactory, no more keyboard actions 
will be required for that parameter. 

The operational parameters may be inserted in 
any order, or they may be changed at any time 
prior to initiating the descent calculations. When 
the magnitudes of the parameters are satisfactory 
to the pilot, the profile descent computations are 
initiated by pressing the "Profile" key. Computations 
typically require less than 2 min for completion in the 
time-metered mode of operation and approximately 
25 sec in the nonmetered mode. 

The operational parameters to be entered by the 
flight crew through the keyboard, as well as their 
symbology as presented on the keyboard and the 
display, are shown in table L 

If the descent speed schedule has been specified, a 
zero flag, indicating that the algorithm is in a speed 
mode, will be shown in the middle of the calculator 
display. While in the speed mode the entry-fix and 
metering-fix crossing times must remain unassigned. 
If these times are specified through the keyboard, the 
zero flag will not be shown and the algorithm will be 
in the time mode. While in the time mode the proper 
descent speed schedule will be computed and stored 
in the correct memory location for recall by the pilot. 

When the computations are completed, the dis- 
play will normally show the DME indication where 
thrust should be reduced to flight idle for the descent 
to the metering fix. It should be noted that the dis- 
tance displayed is the point where an instantaneous 
thrust reduction and descent should be started. The 
pilot should start the descent 1 to 2 miles prior to the 
computed descent point to ensure that good passen- 
ger ride qualities are maintained during the transi- 
tion to descent. If the assigned metering-fix crossing 
time cannot be attained in the time-metered mode 
because of airplane operational speed limitations, a 



message will be displayed indicating the amount of 
time required to delay (hold) before starting the de- 
scent or the amount of time that the airplane will 
arrive late at the metering fix. 

After the profile descent computations have been 
completed, the value of any operational parameters, 
including those required for input, may be displayed 
by pressing the particular designated key on the key- 
board. Parameters that may be displayed after the 
descent computations, and their designated names, 
are shown in table IL 

Open-loop guidance in the form of desired alti- 
tude as a function of distance along the profile may 
also be computed by the pilot. This is accomplished 
by keying a DME mileage indication into the display 
and pushing the "DME^F" key. The desired alti- 
tude corresponding to that distance will then be com- 
puted and displayed to the pilot. The "DME-^if" 
feature may be used as guidance throughout the 
descent. 

A program flow chart showing the steps used 
in the algorithm computations is included in ap- 
pendix A. It is in a generalized format and may be 
used to aid in programming the algorithm on any 
computer. The actual program listing used with the 
HP-41CV calculator is included in appendix B. 

Flight Test Objectives 

The flight tests consisted of two phases: (1) the 
performance-model validation phase, and (2) the op- 
erational evaluation phase. The objectives of the 
performance-model validation phase were to docu- 
ment the accuracy of the vertical performance model 
programmed into the calculator and to investigate 
the effect of variations in pilot technique on the ar- 
rival accuracy at the metering fix. These objectives 
were achieved by evaluating flight data in the form of 
time, speed, altitude, and DME indications. These 
data were recorded with a portable voice recorder 
on the flight segment between the entry fix and the 
metering fix. 

The objectives of the operational evaluation phase 
were to determine if the concept of providing open- 
loop descent guidance with a small, hand-held elec- 
tronic computing device was acceptable to the pilot 
and if the concept was operationally feasible in an 
airline cockpit environment. These objectives were 
achieved by using quantitative data as recorded in 
the performance-model validation phase and subjec- 
tive data in the form of pilot comments and test ob- 
server notes. 

Description of Airplane and Cockpit In- 
strumentation 

The airplane type used during the flight tests 



13 



was a McDonnell Douglas DC-10-10 wide-body trijet 
commercial transport configured to carry 254 pas- 
sengers. Flight tests were conducted on various 
DC-10-10 airplanes within the United Airlines fleet. 
The actual airplanes used in the tests were arbitrar- 
ily chosen. Even though all the DC- 10 airplanes in 
the United Airlines fleet are powered by the same 
engines, rated at 39 300 lb takeoff thrust, certified 
maximum takeoff weight varied between 410 000 and 
430 000 lb. In addition, some of the test airplanes 
had been aerodynamically modified to reduce drag. 
Specific flight instruments used by the pilot to fly 
the descent included an airspeed indicator and Mach 
number meter combined in one instrument, an al- 
timeter, and a digital DME indicator. The airspeed 
indicator, Mach meter, and altimeter were driven 
by an air data computer that corrected pitot-static 
system inputs for sensor-position error and angle-of- 
attack effects. Static air temperature was also com- 
puted by the air data computer and displayed digi- 
tally on the instrument panel. DME indications were 
displayed digitally to tenths of a nautical mile in both 
upper left- and right-hand corners of the horizontal 
situation indicator. If the inertial navigation system 
were used, distance to, or from, the next way point 
would be displayed in place of the DME indications. 

Data Recording 

A portable voice recorder and conventional flight 
instruments were used to collect data for descent 
performance and acceleration modeling. Altitude, 
Mach number, static air temperature, and DME 
readings were recorded at altitude increments of ap- 
proximately 500 ft during the descents and at air- 
speed increments of approximately 10 knots during 
the idle- thrust, level-flight speed reductions. A stop 
watch was used to correlate the data with time dur- 
ing postflight analysis. 

When the calculator was used to provide descent 
guidance, the contents of the calculator memory were 
printed with a portable printer after completing each 
descent. These data included all parameters inserted 
by the pilots and the results of intermediate compu- 
tations that allowed reconstruction of the guidance 
computations for postflight analysis. 

Flight notes were also recorded by the test con- 
ductor during the descents. These notes contained 
the resulting time and DME indication at which the 
metering-flx crossing altitude and airspeed were ac- 
tually obtained, ATC instructions related to the de- 
scent, pilot comments, and other observations perti- 
nent to the tests (i.e., turbulence, wind shear, and 
variations in pilot technique). 



Test Procedure 

Performance-model validation tests. During the 
model validation flight tests, the calculator inputs 
were made by either the flight crew or the NASA 
test engineers. The tests were conducted on selected 
line flights and coordinated with ATC in an effort to 
yield, to the extent possible, uninterrupted descents. 
The pilot was asked to fly a specifled M/IAS speed 
schedule as accurately as possible, beginning the 
descent at the DME indication computed by the 
calculator. 

Pilot-evaluation tests. During the pilot-evaluation 
tests, the subject pilots were given a brieflng on the 
use of the descent calculator prior to the flight tests. 
During the tests, the subject pilots were asked to use 
the calculator in whatever manner they felt most use- 
ful. The NASA test engineers observed how the cal- 
culator was used and answered any questions about 
its use. The same subject pilots were used on 2 to 
3 consecutive days on regular line flights to various 
large cities (Chicago, Denver, Boston, Newark, and 
Windsor Locks). Four to six descents were flown per 
subject pilot during both peak and off-peak traffic 
periods. There was no special ATC coordination dur- 
ing these tests. However, on some flights into Denver, 
a metering-fix crossing time (computed by the Den- 
ver Air Route Traffic Control Center enroute meter- 
ing program) was given to the pilot by ATC. The 
metering-fix crossing time is normally retained for 
use by the ATC controller. When each subject pilot 
completed his series of descents, he was interviewed 
to obtain a subjective evaluation of the descent 
calculator. 

Results and Discussion 

Validation and Evaluation Criteria 

The results of the performance-model validation 
and pilot-evaluation tests, as well as the results of 
a parametric sensitivity analysis conducted on the 
algorithm, were quantified in terms of the errors 
in time, altitude, and airspeed when the airplane 
crossed the metering fix and in terms of the time and 
distance required to achieve the desired metering- 
fix crossing altitude and airspeed. The results of 
the subjective evaluations by the subject pilots were 
summarized and are presented in a later section. 

Parametric Sensitivity Analysis 

A parametric sensitivity analysis was conducted 
to determine the effects that uncertainties in the 
magnitudes of the operational parameters input for 
the descent computations would have upon the time 



14 



and distance predictions for crossing the metering 
fix. This analysis was conducted by comparing the 
output (i.e., time and distance predictions) of the 
descent computations for a nominal case with the 
output of a descent profile constructed to reflect the 
flight path resulting from an off-nominal flight con- 
dition. Each off-nominal descent was constructed 
by using the predicted time and distance computed 
with the same inputs used for the nominal case, 
except for the specific input parameter to be ex- 
amined. The descent profile computed for the off- 
nominal case was shifted so that the idle-thrust de- 
scent point computed for the off-nominal case cor- 
responded to the DME indication computed for the 
nominal case. Then, the resulting time and airspeed 
errors for crossing the metering fix were calculated. 
The magnitude of each parameter examined in the 
sensitivity analysis was varied throughout a range of 
values that could typically be encountered. 

Nominal case. The magnitudes of the parameters 
used to compute the nominal case were as follows: 

Cruise altitude = 37 000 ft 
Cruise Mach number = 0.830 
Airplane gross weight = 304 000 lb 
Outside static air temperature = — 56.5°C (ISA 
at 37 000 ft) 

Descent Mach number = 0.830 

Descent airspeed = 280 knots 

Metering-fix crossing altitude = 8000 ft 

Metering-fix crossing speed = 230 knots 

No wind 

Entry-fix location = 100 n.mi. from metering fix 

The following results were obtained from the pro- 
file descent computations by using the nominal in- 
puts. Thrust was to be reduced to flight idle to start 
the descent 83.0 n.mi. from the metering fix. A con- 
stant Mach number of 0.830 was to be maintained 
during the descent until an airspeed of 280 knots was 
obtained. The 280-knot airspeed was to be main- 
tained until reaching an altitude of 10 000 ft MSL. 
At 10 000 ft MSL, the airplane was to be slowed to 
250 knots in level flight. After obtaining 250 knots, 
the descent was to be continued to 8000 ft MSL at 
which point the airplane would be flown at a con- 
stant altitude and slowed to 230 knots airspeed. The 
metering fix would be crossed as 230 knots was ob- 
tained. The time to fly from the idle-thrust point to 
the metering fix would be 802 sec. 

The following parameters were varied in the sensi- 
tivity analysis: static air temperature, gross weight, 
Mach number, descent airspeed, wind magnitude, 
and wind gradient. The results of the sensitivity 



analysis, shown in figure 12 as plots of altitude er- 
ror, airspeed error, and time error that would result 
when the airplane crossed the metering fix, are shown 
for the range of values computed for each parameter. 
The distance prior to or past the metering fix where 
the desired metering-fix altitude and airspeed were 
attained is also plotted. 

Static-air-temperature sensitivity. Static air tem- 
perature is used in the descent computations to con- 
vert pressure altitude to an approximate geopotential 
altitude and to compute true airspeed (in knots) from 
Mach number. The effects of static-air-temperature 
error on the descent profile were calculated by bias- 
ing the nominal temperature profile through a range 
from 10°C warmer to 10°C colder than standard. 
Temperatures warmer than standard resulted in an 
increase in both geopotential altitudes and true air- 
speed; temperatures colder than standard resulted in 
decreases. The metering-fix crossing errors resulting 
from temperature errors are plotted in figure 12(a). 

With a temperature profile 5°C warmer than 
standard, the increased altitudes and airspeeds would 
cause the metering fix to be crossed 9.8 sec early, 
at an airspeed 20 knots faster than desired. The 
desired crossing airspeed and altitude would be at- 
tained 1.2 n.mi. past the metering fix. For a temper- 
ature profile 5°C colder than standard, the desired 
crossing speed would be attained 1.1 n.mi. prior to 
the metering fix. The fix would be crossed 9.0 sec 
later than predicted. Although no altitude and air- 
speed error would occur with the colder temperature, 
extra fuel would be used to maintain altitude and air- 
speed. 

Gross-weight sensitivity. The effects of gross- 
weight variations on the descent profile were calcu- 
lated for a weight range from 270 000 to 350 000 lb. 
These weights represented the minimum and maxi- 
mum landing gross weights, respectively, that would 
likely be encountered in routine operations. The 
metering-fix crossing errors resulting from variations 
in gross-weight errors are plotted in figure 12(b). 

The descent parameter most significantly affected 
by gross- weight variations was the point at which 
thrust should be retarded to fiight idle for begin- 
ning the descent. An airplane that was 3.3 percent 
(10 000 lb) heavier than that for the nominal case 
(304 000 lb) would require a path 2.6 n.mi. longer 
than that predicted for the descent, since it must be 
flown at a slightly higher lift/drag ratio (same in- 
dicated airspeeds) that would result in a shallower 
descent angle. The metering fix would be crossed 
14.4 sec earlier and 20 knots faster than desired. The 
desired airspeed would be achieved 2.6 n.mi. past the 
fix. For the 10 000-lb lighter- than-nominal case, the 



15 



desired crossing speed and altitude would be achieved 
2.5 n.mi. prior to crossing the metering fix. This 
would result in an arrival-time error of 12.1 sec late. 
Extra fuel would be used to maintain altitude and 
airspeed. 

Mach number sensitivity. The effects of Mach 
number variations on the descent profile were calcu- 
lated for two separate scenarios. In the first scenario, 
the cruise Mach number was constant and equal to 
0.83 and the descent Mach number was varied for a 
range between 0.74 and 0.86. The metering-fix cross- 
ing errors resulting from these variations are plotted 
in figure 12(c). The variation in the descent Mach 
number yielded the least relative variation in the 
metering-fix crossing errors. This was due primarily 
to the relatively short duration of the Mach descent 
segment. 

In the second scenario, both the cruise and the 
descent Mach number were biased by a 0.02 Mach 
increment faster and slower to represent an error in 
the Mach indicator on board the airplane. At the 
higher Mach number (0.85), the metering fix was 
crossed 8.9 sec early with an airspeed 15 knots higher 
than desired. The desired 230-knot airspeed was 
attained 1.0 n.mi. past the metering fix. At the lower 
Mach number (0.81), the metering fix was crossed 
12.3 sec late. The desired airspeed and altitude were 
attained 1.2 n.mi. prior to the metering fix and were 
maintained at a cost of increased fuel. 

Descent airspeed sensitivity. The eff^ects of de- 
scent airspeed variations on the descent profile were 
calculated for an airspeed range between 230 and 350 
knots. Metering-fix crossing errors were plotted in 
figure 12(d) for variations of airspeed at altitudes 
above 10 000 ft MSL. The distance error plot shows 
that variations in the descent airspeed resulted in cor- 
responding changes in the distance required to attain 
the metering-fix crossing conditions. A 10-knot speed 
increase (290-knot descent airspeed) resulted in at- 
taining the metering-fix conditions 3.0 n.mi. prior 
to crossing the metering fix; a 10-knot airspeed de- 
crease, 2.9 n.mi. past the fix. The time error to 
cross the metering fix, when flown at the slower air- 
speeds, also resulted in a corresponding increase. (A 
270-knot airspeed resulted in a 11.1-sec late time 
error.) However, when airspeeds higher than the 
nominal speed were used, time error was not signif- 
icantly changed. (A 290-knot airspeed resulted in a 
2.5-sec early time error.) This was caused by the 
fact that the metering-fix altitude and airspeed con- 
ditions were attained prior to crossing the metering 
fix. The additional time required to fly to the me- 
tering fix would then offset the time saved with the 



higher descent speed and would eventually result in 
crossing the metering fix later than desired, as shown 
in figure 12(d). 

Wind modeling sensitivity. The effects of wind 
modeling errors were calculated first, by assuming a 
constant 20-knot error in the head-wind component 
for the entire flight path between the entry fix and the 
metering fix. These calculations were then repeated 
by assuming a 20-knot tail-wind error. 

With an unknown 20-knot head wind, the result- 
ing ground speed would be decreased proportionately 
and would result in a crossing-time error of 76.8 sec 
later than predicted. The desired airspeed and alti- 
tude for crossing the metering fix would be attained 
4.5 n.mi. prior to the metering fix. Thrust would 
be required to maintain airspeed and altitude to the 
metering fix. With the 20-knot tail wind, the me- 
tering fix would be crossed 58.9 sec earlier than pre- 
dicted, but with an airspeed 20 knots faster than de- 
sired. The desired final airspeed and altitude would 
be achieved 4.4 n.mi. past the metering fix. 

It should be noted that the time error is accu- 
mulated both in the descent and cruise portions of 
flight between the entry and metering fixes. Hence, 
this time error will also be a function of distance be- 
tween the fixes. If the time error incurred during the 
cruise portion is not considered, the time error for 
the head-wind case would be 71.1 sec late; and for 
the tail-wind case, 53.7 sec early. 

The potential for significant errors occurring in 
wind modeling is high because of a constantly chang- 
ing atmosphere and the vagaries of forecasting winds 
aloft. However, the wind modeling accuracy problem 
may be reduced if the pilot modifies the wind model 
based upon the winds actually encountered during 
the cruise portion of his flight through the cruise 
ground-speed function (*GSc key). By pushing the 
"*" and the "*GSc" keys, the ground speed will be 
computed for the cruise segment of flight based on 
the wind model in the calculator. If the computed 
and actual ground speeds are different, the actual 
ground speed can be entered into the calculator so 
that the wind model will be modified for subsequent 
computations. The wind model will be changed by 
summing an error component to the original wind 
model. The error component is equal to the differ- 
ence in the computed and actual ground speeds, lin- 
early decreased to from cruise altitude to sea level. 

Wind-gradient sensitivity. The effects of wind 
gradient (change in head-wind component due to a 
change in altitude) were calculated for a range of 
magnitudes between -4 knots/ 1000 ft (increasing 
head wind from cruise to the metering fix) and 



16 



4 knots/ 1000 ft (decreasing head wind from cruise 
to the metering fix). The wind gradients were input 
such that the average head wind from cruise to the 
metering fix was 0. The results of these changes are 
shown in figure 12(e). 

The effect of an increasing head wind on the air- 
plane as it descends is to lengthen the distance re- 
quired to attain the metering-fix crossing conditions. 
This results in an early arrival at the metering fix 
at a higher airspeed than desired. The increased dis- 
tance to descend is due to the shallowing of the flight 
path angle that is required to maintain the desired 
descent airspeed, 

Performance-Model Validation Tests 

The purpose of the initial flight testing and data 
analysis was to validate and refine the descent perfor- 
mance model used in the profile descent algorithm. 
Altitude, DME, airspeed, and temperature data were 
recorded continuously during the descent so that the 
fiight profile could be reconstructed for postfiight 
analysis. The same subject pilot fiew each of the 
descents during this phase of the evaluation. The 
subject pilot also advised ATC that NASA fuel con- 
servation tests were in progress and requested an un- 
restricted descent. 

The criterion used to evaluate the performance 
that resulted "With the open-loop guidance was the 
accuracy in terms of the descent time and the descent 
distance required to achieve the desired metering-fix 
altitude ^mf ^tnd airspeed IAS^f and the accuracy 
in terms of the resulting time error when the meter- 
ing fix was crossed. These errors are presented in 
table III. The mean and standard deviation for these 
errors are presented at the bottom of the table. The 
origin and destination airports and the M/IAS de- 
scent speed schedule for each test run are also shown 
in the table. 

The time error associated with attaining the de- 
sired metering-fix airspeed and altitude was an indi- 
cation of the accuracies with which the airplane de- 
scent performance data had been modeled and how 
closely the airplane had been fiown on the predicted 
profile with the open-loop guidance. This particu- 
lar form of time error was not affected by horizon- 
tal winds since it was a time associated with at- 
taining airspeeds and altitudes that are air-mass ref- 
erenced. However, wind-speed-gradient effects (the 
change in head-wind component due to a change in 
altitude) can have an effect upon this form of time 
error. Runs 10 and 16 are examples in which large 
time errors resulted in the presence of a known wind- 
speed gradient recorded from airborne, inertial nav- 
igation system data. The mean and standard devia- 
tion of the time error to attain the desired airspeed 



and altitude for the 19 test runs were 1.3 sec early 
and 22.4 sec, respectively, for descents lasting be- 
tween 5 and 14.3 min. Based on these time errors, 
it was concluded that the airplane descent perfor- 
mance data were adequately modeled and that the 
time required to attain the desired airspeed and al- 
titude could be adequately predicted with the open- 
loop guidance provided by the Mach and airspeed 
indicators. 

The distance error that resulted while attaining 
the desired metering-fix speed and altitude and the 
time error associated with crossing the metering fix 
were indicators of the same error components asso- 
ciated with the descent time error discussed previ- 
ously and, in addition, indicators of the accuracy of 
wind modeling. The resulting mean and standard 
deviation for the distance error for these test runs 
were 2.3 n.mi. past the metering fix and 2.3 n.mi., re- 
spectively. The mean and standard deviation for the 
crossing-time error at the metering fix were 24.4 sec 
early and 28.3 sec, respectively. These errors are con- 
sistent (i.e., approximately 1/2 min is required to fly 
2.3 n.mi. past the metering fix) and are referenced 
to Earth-fixed axes (i.e., the metering fix) and, as 
such, are affected by the wind. Since a much smaller 
time error to attain the desired altitude and airspeed 
(air-mass referenced) was achieved, it was concluded 
that the data inserted into the wind model may have 
been in error. 

Experience obtained during the profile descent 
tests with the Advanced Transport Operating 
Systems TSRV Boeing 737 airplane (ref. 4) and with 
the NASA T-39A airplane (ref. 5) indicates that the 
linear wind model is sufficient to model the wind dur- 
ing the descent, provided that the model is based on 
reasonably accurate wind data. However, the winds- 
aloft weather forecast may be based on observations 
more than 12 hr old and, as such, may be subject to 
some error. 

Variation in Pilot Technique 

Variation in pilot technique in fiying the descent 
can have an effect upon the crossing errors at the 
metering fix. Three phases of the descent were noted 
during these tests as having a significant impact 
on the crossing accuracy. They were the thrust 
reduction and the pitch rate used at the start of the 
descent, the pilot technique used to control the pitch 
attitude of the airplane during the constant Mach 
number descent segment, and the technique used to 
make the transition to the level fiight on the speed- 
reduction segments. 

It was initially assumed that the pilot would re- 
duce the thrust to fiight idle with a rather short de- 
liberate action. However, in the interest of passenger 



17 



comfort, the pilot would gradually reduce the throt- 
tles over a 10- to 20-sec interval and would slowly de- 
crease the pitch attitude of the airplane to begin the 
descent. In addition, all three throttles were seldom 
reduced in unison to avoid the simultaneous shifting 
of engine bleed air valves which causes loud noises 
in the pressurization system. Because of the gradual 
thrust reduction, it was found that some anticipation 
of the idle-thrust point was required for the throttles 
to be at idle at that point. The amount of lead dis- 
tance required varied with the speed with which the 
pilot reduced the throttle. The method utilized by 
most pilots was to gradually reduce power to idle 
thrust on the left and right engines about 2 n.mi. 
prior to the computed idle-thrust descent point. Af- 
ter the left and right engines were reduced to flight 
idle, the center engine would be similarly reduced. 

The second phase of the descent in which the 
metering-fix crossing accuracy could be affected was 
in the constant Mach number descent segment. To 
maintain a constant Mach number during an idle- 
thrust descent, the pitch attitude of the airplane 
must be continuously decreased as altitude is lost. 
As a result, cabin deck angles may become excessive 
for passenger comfort during high-speed descents. 
Some pilots approximated the constant Mach descent 
segment by flying a constant vertical-speed descent 
instead. If the airspeed that will be used in the 
constant airspeed descent segment is low, then the 
Mach segment will be short and the resulting errors 
small. If the constant airspeed segment is to be flown 
at higher airspeeds, the Mach segment will be longer 
and greater errors will accrue. As an example, from 
a cruise altitude of 37 000 ft, with a descent speed 
schedule of 0.830/280 knots, only 2600 ft must be lost 
during the constant Mach segment; with a descent 
speed schedule of 0.830/340 knots, 10 800 ft must be 
lost. 

The last phases of the descent, in which piloting 
technique aff'ected the vertical performance, were the 
level-flight deceleration segments at 10 000 ft and at 
the bottom of the descent. If the pilot gradually de- 
creased the descent rate, by beginning 1000 to 2000 ft 
above the level-flight altitude to achieve a gradual 
transition to level flight, the distance required to de- 
celerate from the descent speed to the metering-fix 
crossing speed was longer than if the pilot chose to 
descend slightly below the level-fiight altitude and 
gradually climb back up to it. The pilot could use 
either of these techniques to null distance or time 
error. 

Pilot-Evaluation Test Phase 

Five subject pilots were briefed on the use of 
the calculator during the pilot-evaluation phase of 



the tests. Each pilot participated in four, or more, 
descents while using the calculator. Twenty-two 
descents were completed during the pilot-evaluation 
phase of the tests. 

The fiight test results achieved during this phase 
are presented in table IV. These results include 
the metering-fix crossing errors that were defined 
as the difference between the actual and the com- 
puted crossing time, altitude, and indicated airspeed. 
Also tabulated were the origin and destination air- 
ports, the airport arrival time, if ATC altered or con- 
strained the descent clearance, if the calculator was 
unusable, if the pilot used an M/IAS speed schedule 
or the BME~^H feature for descent guidance, and 
remarks about any anomalies incurred during the de- 
scent. 

Each subject pilot followed the same general pro- 
cedures when using the calculator. Preliminary in- 
puts to the calculator were made prior to takeoff from 
a computerized flight plan normally provided by the 
company flight dispatcher. Data from the comput- 
erized flight plan input to the calculator included an 
estimated gross weight, cruise altitude, cruise Mach 
number, winds-aloft forecast, and outside air tem- 
perature. The pilot would estimate altitude and air- 
speeds to cross the metering fix based on previous 
fiight experience at the destination airport. The pi- 
lot would then compute a preliminary descent pro- 
file. He would update the input parameters later in 
the fiight and recompute the descent profile as re- 
quired. The final descent profile would typically be 
computed 150 to 200 n.mi. from the metering fix. 
However, on several occasions during this phase of 
the test, to satisfy ATC constraints, the pilot was re- 
quired to reprogram the calculator just prior to the 
top-of-descent point and during the descent. 

The mean and standard deviation of the cross- 
ing errors at the metering fix are shown at the bot- 
tom of table IV. Except for the mean time error at 
the metering fix, the crossing errors were larger than 
those obtained during the performance-model valida- 
tion tests because of ATC clearance changes. Only 
6 of the 22 runs were completed without receiving 
an amended ATC clearance. Amended clearances re- 
ceived during the descent were more difficult to mod- 
ify on the calculator than those received prior to the 
descent. On four of the descents, the calculator was 
not used at all because of numerous ATC clearance 
changes received throughout the descent. On five of 
the descents, the guidance provided by the calculator 
was used for only a portion of the descent because of 
ATC requests for spacing and sequencing. 

Data in the calculator were modified by the pilot 
just prior to the descent to accommodate amended 
ATC clearances on six of the descents. However, 



18 



some of the amended clearances did not require data 
modification. As an example, if the pilot was told to 
descend early to an intermediate altitude, the pilot 
would descend to, and remain at, the intermediate 
altitude until he had reacquired the original profile 
as determined from the DME— >iJ feature. The idle- 
thrust descent would then be continued by using the 
guidance provided by the calculator. 

If an amended ATC clearance were received in 
enough time prior to the top-of-descent point, the 
flight crew could modify the data in the calculator 
and then the full benefits of fuel conservation from 
use of the guidance could be obtained. Amended 
clearances received after the descent has begun may, 
or may not, preclude the use of the guidance provided 
by the calculator. However, amended clearances re- 
ceived after the descent has begun will almost al- 
ways result in more fuel being used. Amended ATC 
clearances may be necessary for safe and expeditious 
movement of airplanes in a very dynamic environ- 
ment. It was noted, however, that an amended clear- 
ance was received on only one of the descents during 
the performance-model validation tests during which 
the pilot told ATC that fuel-conservation tests were 
in progress. 

The time mode of the calculator was used on 
only three of the descents during the pilot-evaluation 
test phase. All these descents were into Denver 
since this was the only destination terminal of the 
various flights actively using time-based metering. 
On these flights the pilot input the actual time that 
the airplane crossed an arbitrary entry fix (typically 
about 130 n.mi. from the metering fix) and the 
metering-fix crossing time assigned by ATC. The 
pilot would then start the computation of the descent 
profile. The computations typically required about 
2 min to complete. 

On two of the three time-metered flights, the 
crossing-time accuracy was within ±6 sec. On 
flight 20, however, the pilot started the descent late 
and used a higher descent speed in an attempt to 
reacquire the computed descent profile. Even though 
the altitude error was nulled, the metering fix was 
crossed 50 sec earlier than desired and 35 knots faster 
than planned. 

On seven descents, the pilot used the M/IAS 
speed schedule provided by the calculator as the pri- 
mary descent guidance. On 11 of the descents, the 
altitude profile generated by the calculator through 
the DME— ►if function was used as the primary de- 
scent guidance. When the DME^H function was 
used, one of the nonflying crew would operate the 
calculator and call out the altitudes corresponding 
to upcoming DME indications. When this form of 
guidance was used instead of maintaining an M/IAS 



descent speed schedule, slightly earlier arrival times 
at the metering fix resulted. These results occurred 
because the airplane was typically initially high on 
the computed vertical profile since the pilots would 
make the transition from cruise flight into the descent 
slowly because of passenger ride-comfort considera- 
tions. As the pilot increased the vertical speed of 
the airplane to correct back to the vertical profile, a 
higher airspeed would result. If the airplane were be- 
low the computed profile, it would be expected that 
the metering fix would be crossed at a later time. 

Pilot Comments 

Each pilot was interviewed at the conclusion of 
the series of descents to obtain a subjective evalua- 
tion of the descent calculator concept. All subject 
pilots in general derived the same consensus. A com- 
pendium of the pilot comments is as follows: 

1. The work load required to operate the calcu- 
lator was acceptable provided that major modifica- 
tions to the data were not required during the de- 
scent. The pilots felt that the use of the calculator 
did not interfere with their normal fiight duties or 
ever compromise safety. 

2. All the pilots felt that some training period 
would be required to use the calculator operationally. 
All but one of the pilots felt that the calculator 
was much easier to learn to operate than an inertial 
navigation system. 

3. Most of the pilots felt that they could plan the 
descent as well by using various rules of thumb for 
their standard airline-policy M/IAS descent. How- 
ever, for descents at other than standard M/IAS 
speed schedules or for time-metered descents, the cal- 
culator was very useful. 

4. All the pilots felt that the guidance provided 
by the DME— ^Jf function was very useful. 

5. Even though no operational problems due 
to the computation speed were encountered during 
these tests, it was felt that the computation time 
should be reduced, especially for the time-metered 
computations. 

6. Some of the pilots wanted to be able to recall 
the wind data that was input so that key-punching 
errors could be rechecked and corrected. With the 
present software configuration, wind inputs can be 
checked only prior to pushing the "New Entry" key. 

7. All the pilots felt that the display was difficult 
to read at night in reduced lighting. This is typical 
of all liquid-crystal displays that are not backlighted. 

Suggested Modifications 

During the flight tests, situations arose which 
highlighted areas in which design improvements to 



19 



the descent calculator could enhance its use. The 
following is a list of features which should be con- 
sidered in any future design of a descent planning 
calculator: 

1. The DME distance term presently used in the 
DME-^H function represents the distance between 
the airplane and the DME ground station parallel 
to the Earth's surface. The DME indication in the 
airplane represents the distance directly between the 
airplane and the DME ground station (called slant 
range). The difference between the horizontal dis- 
tance and the slant range distance should be included 
in the algorithm so as to yield a more accurate alti- 
tude computation. 

2. The altimeter setting of the destination airport 
should be included in the calculator inputs so that a 
correction for the change in the indicated altitude 
can be accounted for when changing from a pressure 
altitude setting to a corrected altimeter setting. 

3. The wind data used in generating the wind 
model should be stored so that they can be reviewed 
and modified. 

4. The display should be lit so that it is readable 
in a reduced-lighting environment. 

5. The computation time should be reduced. 
This could be accomplished by using a small portable 
computer rather than a programmable calculator to 
exercise the algorithm. 

6. A function to compute the DME reading(s) 
corresponding to a given altitude should be included 
as an alternate form of guidance to the DME^^H 
function (which provides the altitude corresponding 
to a given DME reading). 

7. A function to compute the desired time cor- 
responding to a DME distance input (similar to the 
DME-^if function) should be included. 

8. A revised temperature model that can account 
for nonstandard lapse rates and nonstandard tropo- 
sphere altitudes may result in higher accuracy. 



Concluding Remarks 

A simple, airborne, flight-management descent al- 
gorithm, designed to aid the pilot in planning a fuel- 
efficient time-constrained descent, was programmed 
into a small programmable calculator. In a time- 
metered mode, the airborne algorithm computes the 
specific Mach number, airspeed, and point for the 
pilot to begin the descent to arrive at a metering 
fix at a predetermined airspeed, altitude, and time 
assigned by air traffic control (ATC). In the non- 
metered mode, the algorithm computes the point to 
begin the descent based on the Mach and airspeed 
descent schedule input by the pilot. 

Flight test data obtained in an airline opera- 
tional environment during normally scheduled flights 
indicated that the time and distance to descend 
could be satisfactorily predicted with the use of rel- 
atively simple equations and airplane-performance- 
characteristics modeling. The flight data also have 
shown that the descent profile could be satisfactorily 
flown with open-loop guidance provided by conven- 
tional cockpit Mach and airspeed indicators. How- 
ever, pilot technique used to fly the descent can affect 
the accuracy of crossing the metering fix at the de- 
sired time. 

The subject pilots commented that the use of the 
calculator to plan descents was particularly useful 
when nonstandard descent speeds were used or when 
the time to cross the metering flx had been assigned 
by ATC. They also found that the calculator did not 
interfere with their normal flight duties. Amended 
clearances received from ATC, after the descent had 
begun, precluded the use of the calculator for descent 
guidance when extensive modifications to the input 
data were required. 

NASA Langley Research Center 
Hampton, VA 23665 
December 6, 1984 



20 



TABLE I. OPERATIONAL PARAMETERS REQUIRED FOR DESCENT COMPUTATIONS 



Keyboard 


Display 


Operational parameter 


symbology 


symbology 


(symbol used in equations) 


Mc 


Mc 


Cruise Mcteh number (Mc) 


He 


He 


Cruise altitude {He), ft 


*GSc 


GSc 


Ground speed at eruise altitude (GSc), knots 


Md 


Md 


Descent Mach number (M^) 


lASd 


lASd 


Descent indicated airspeed (lAS^), knots 


Time MF 


MFTM 


Time assigned by ATC to cross metering fix (tj^p), hr:min:sec 


Time EF 


EF TM 


Time to cross entry fix (^ef)) hr:min:sec 


GW 


GW 


Airplane gross weight at top of descent (GW), lb 


OAT 


OAT 


Static outside air temperature (OAT), °C 


Metering Fix 


HMF 


Pressure altitude of metering fix (i?^MF)) ^ 


Metering Fix 


IAS MF 


Indicated airspeed to cross metering fix, (lAS^p), knots 


Metering Fix 


MFDME 


DME indication defining metering-fix location (MFdme)i n.mi. 


Entry Fix 


EFDME 


DME indication defining entry-fix location; this mileage must 
be relative to same DME station used to define metering fix 
(EFdme), n.mi. 


Entry Fix 


MAGCRS 


Magnetic course from entry fix to metering fix (CRS), deg 


Entry Fix 


MAGYAR 


Magnetic variation in descent £u:ea (VAR), deg 



21 



TABLE 11. PARAMETERS COMPUTED BY DESCENT COMPUTATIONS 



Keyboard 
symbology 



Md 



lASd 



Idle DME 



2nd push of 
Idle DME 

Late 



Early 



Display 
symbology 



Md 



lASd 



IDL DME 



IDLTM 



LATE 



HOLD 



Operational parameter 
(symbol used in equations) 



Descent Mach number required to satisfy entry-fix and metering-fix time 
constraints (M^^) 

Descent indicated airspeed required to satisfy entry-fix and 
metering- fix time constraints (lAS^), knots 

DME indication showing point where thrust should be reduced 
to flight idle (IDLdj^e), n.mi. 

Incremental time to fly between entry fix and metering 
fix (Atreq), sec 

Amount of time that airplane will be late in crossing metering 
fix, min:sec 

Amount of time that airplane must delay before starting descent if 
crossing-time constraint at metering fix is to be satisfied, min:sec 



22 



TABLE III. TIME AND DISTANCE ERRORS TO ATTAIN METERING-FIX CONDITIONS 
DURING PERFORMANCE-MODEL VALIDATION TESTS 









Descent distance to 


Descent time to attain 


Time to cross 






Airport, 




attain lAS^p and /imFj 


IASmf a^d '^MF) 




metering fix, 




Run 


origin — 
destination 


Md/IASd, 
knots 


n.mi. 


sec 




sec 




Calculated 


Actual 


Error 


Calculated 


Actual 


Error 


Calculated 


Actual 


Error 


1 


ORD— DEN 


0.730/250 


68.3 


70.1 


-1.8 


681 


671 


10 


681 


653 


28 


2 


DEN— ORD 


.710/250 


81.4 


84.7 


-3.3 


828 


841 


-13 


828 


799 


29 


3 


ORD— DEN 


.814/289 


60.1 


61.7 


-1.6 


538 


540 


-2 


538 


525 


13 


4 


ORD— DEN 


.830/296 


60.0 


60.0 





540 


535 


5 


540 


535 


5 


5 


DEN— ORD 


.830/280 


95.7 


95.2 


.5 


867 


836 


31 


867 


844 


23 


6 


ORD— DEN 


.834/350 


34.5 


37.4 


-2.9 


300 


298 


2 


300 


273 


27 


7 


DEN— LAX 


.830/280 


83.0 


83.8 


-.8 


779 


758 


21 


779 


796 


-17 


8 


LAX— DEN 


.830/280 


62.2 


64.6 


-2.4 


526 


540 


-14 


526 


517 


9 


9 


DEN— SFO 


.820/280 


70.8 


76.0 


-5.2 


698 


725 


-27 


698 


660 


38 


10 


SFO— HNL 


.820/280 


73.0 


80.8 


-7.8 


716 


752 


-36 


716 


671 


45 


11 


HNL— SFO 


.820/280 


97.2 


97.8 


-.6 


898 


860 


38 


898 


852 


46 


12 


SFO— DEN 


.830/280 


69.6 


72.4 


-2.8 


567 


605 


-38 


567 


567 





13 


DEN— ORD 


.820/280 


73.9 


78.4 


-4.5 


608 


606 


2 


608 


561 


47 


14 


ORD— DEN 


.820/280 


61.1 


59.0 


2.1 


555 


565 


-10 


555 


591 


-36 


15 


DEN— SFO 


.830/280 


76.2 


78.4 


-2.2 


692 


700 


-8 


692 


674 


18 


16 


SFO— HNL 


.800/280 


55.3 


59.9 


-4.6 


645 


601 


44 


645 


545 


100 


17 


HNL— SFO 


.830/320 


70.2 


71.9 


-1.7 


708 


706 


2 


708 


683 


25 


18 


SFO— DEN 


.830/280 


65.4 


69.0 


-3.6 


569 


560 


9 


569 


526 


43 


19 


ORD— DEN 


.830/280 


64.9 


65.9 


-1.0 


599 


590 


9 


599 


579 


20 


TVif-i-Ti 






-2.3 




1.3 




24.4 


Standard deviation 


2.3 




22.4 




28.3 



09 



1^ 



TABLE rV. PHASE H FLIGHT TEST RESULTS 



Run 


Airport 

origin — 

destination 


Local 
airport 

time, 
hr:min 


Metering-fix crossing errors 


ATC 
altered 
descent 


Calculator 

was 

reprogrammed 


Calculator 

was 
unusable 


Descent 
was time 
metered 






Remarks 


Time 

(Early = +; 

Late = -), 

sec 


Indicated 
airspeed 

(Fast = +; 

Slow = -), 
knots 


Altitude 

(High = +; 

Low - -), 

ft 


Primary 
guidance 


M/IAS 


DME^H 


1 


DEN— ORD 


4:04 p.m. 


85 


40 















X 


Started descent late (1.0 n.mi.); 
flew higher airspeed to 
reacquire vertical profile. 


2 


ORD— BOS 


8:17 p.m. 


-6 


15 















X 




3 


BOS— ORD 


9:10 a.m. 


18 


40 


600 


X 


X 








X 


ATC requested increase in 
airspeed; pilot maintained 
profile and added thrust; 
ATC later changed metering- 
fix altitude and location; 
cedculator was reprogrammed 
accordingly. 


4 


ORD— DEN 


11:43 a.m. 


27 





1400 


X 










X 


ATC clearance to descend was 
3.4 n.mi. past computed idle 
DME point; airplane was 
also held at intermediate 
altitude for traflac before 
being cleared for profile 
descent; pilot flew at faster 
airspeed to reeicquire vertical 
profile. 


5 


DEN— ORD 


4:04 p.m. 








X 




X 








ATC changed clearance during 
descent too frequently to 
reprogram calcialator. 


6 


ORD— BOS 


8:17 p.m. 


56 


30 


1200 


X 


X 








X 


ATC requested early descent 
to intermediate altitude; 
calcTilator was reprogrammed 
to reflect change; new descent 
started 5.9 n.mi. late; pilot 
flew at faster airspeed to 
reacquire verticsd profile. 


7 


BOS— ORD 


9:10 a.m. 








X 




X 








ATC changed clearance during 
descent too frequently to 
reprogram calculator. 



TABLE rV. Continued 



Run 


Airport 

origin — 

destination 


Local 
cdrport 
amval 

time, 
hnmin 


Metering-fix crossing errors 


ATC 
altered 
descent 


Calculator 

was 

reprogramm.ed 


Calculator 

WclS 

unusable 


Descent 
was time 
metered 








Time 

(Early = +; 

Late = -), 

sec 


Indicated 

airspeed 

(Fast = +; 

Slow = -), 

knots 


Altitude 

(High = +; 

Low = -), 

ft 


Primary 
guidance 


M/IAS 


DME^H 


8 


ORD— DEN 


11:43 a.m. 


6 


5 


1000 


X 






X 


X 




ATC requested decrease in 
airspeed midway through 
descent; calculator was not 
used after speed reduction. 


9 


ORD— BOS 


2:44 p.m. 


33 


30 


1000 










X 






10 


BOS— ORD 


5:45 p.m. 


-13 








X 


X 






X 




ATC requested early descent 
to intermediate altitude; 
calculator was reprogrammed 
accordingly. 


11 


ORD— EWR 


2:40 p.m. 


-52 
















X 




Experienced large change in 
head wind during last third 
of descent. 


12 


EWR— ORD 


5:40 p.m. 


-21 





-1000 


X 








X 




ATC requested speed reduction 
and changed crossing restric- 
tion; pilot used speed brsikes 
to increase descent rate. 


13 


ORD— DEN 


8:10 p.m. 


-47 
















X 




Began descent off track because 
of ATC vectoring for spacing. 


14 


DEN— ORD 


6:54 p.m. 


13 


5 


-1000 


X 


X 








X 


ATC chzmged crossing restric- 
tion; calculator was repro- 
grammed; ATC requested 
speed increase. 


15 


BDL— ORD 


12:18 p.m. 


20 


10 


300 


X 


X 








X 


ATC changed metering fix mid- 
way through descent; calcula- 
tor was reprogrammed; new 
vertical profile was acqiiired. 


16 


ORD— DEN 


2:39 p.m. 


21 


-5 





X 


X 








X 


ATC requested speed reduc- 
tion; calculator was repro- 
grammed; pilot held at in- 
termediate altitude and idle 
thrust to slow and acquire 
new vertical profile. 


17 


DEN— ORD 


10:50 p.m. 








X 




X 








ATC changed clearance during 
descent too frequently to 
reprogram calculator. 



en 



fed 



TABLE IV, Concluded 



Run 


Airport 

origin — 

destination 


Local 
airport 
arrival 

time, 

hr:min 


Metering-fix crossing errors 


ATC 
altered 
descent 


Ccdculator 

was 

reprogrammed 


Calculator 

was 
unusable 


Descent 
was time 
metered 






Remarks 


Time 

(Early = +; 

Late = -), 

sec 


Indicated 

airspeed 

(Fast = +; 

Slow = -), 

knots 


Altitude 

(High = +; 

Low = -), 

ft 


Primary 
guidance 


M/IAS 


DME->^ 


18 


ORD— DEN 


2:30 p.m. 


-27 





1100 


X 










X 


Descent was interrupted be- 
cause of intermediate alti- 
tude restriction; thrust was 
added at intermediate alti- 
tude to maintain airspeed 
until cleared to continue de- 
scent. 


19 


DEN— ORD 


7:05 p.m. 








X 




X 








ATC changed clearance during 
descent too frequently to 
reprogram calculator. 


20 


ORD— DEN 


11:42 a.m. 


50 


35 











X 




X 


St«irted descent about 1.0 n.mi. 
late; used higher ciirspeed to 
reacquire vertical profile. 


21 


DEN— ORD 


3:57 p.m. 


-6 





^500 


X 










X 


ATC requested speed reduction 
near end of descent. 


22 


ORD— DEN 


8:17 p.m. 


-6 














X 


X 






Mean 


8.39 


11.39 


228 


Total 




Standard deviation .... 


35.27 


15.89 


702 


15 


6 


4 


3 


7 


11 





Appendix A — Program Flow Chart 



(Pilot "\ 
Inputs J 



(^ Label A J (Beginning of profile computation) 




(Initialize time error) 

(Compute temperature at tropopause) 
No (H^ is below tropopause) 



1 



^trop = (36 152 - Hj.)(-1.978 x lO""^) + OAT + 273.15 



Yes (H is above tropopause) 



I- 


T. - 216.65 + 288.15 
trop 


288.15 




* 






Kgw = V GW - Bg„ 


(Comp 






i 










H = H^ 





(Compute temperature ratio) 



(Compute gross-weight multiplication factor) 



^Execute 05) 



/compute head-wind 
I component at Hy 



H = H, 



MF 



I 



N /compute head-wind \ 

Execute 05j \^ component at H/ 




(Compute descent rate due to wind gradient) 



27 




Begin profile computat 
Yes [ for selected M^j/IAS^, 



No /Begin time -mete red \ 
Vprofile computation/ 



ions\ 
d / 



*> ( GO TO 04 j 



r Label 23 ^ 

T 



Md - \ 



(Determine M^j/IAS^i for first iteration) 




No 



I AS J = 280 



i 



lASj = IAS„p 



(^ Label 25 j 



^'^Sd, initial " ^'^^d 



r Execute 04^ (Compute profile segments) 



3 



:,inUial = Uj "]) - "req 



I 



(Compute time error) 



At. . . = y At 

imtial . j 




28 




Yes (Use lower speed limit) 



< Label 15 "^ 



No (Use upper speed limit) 



Q Execute 04 J (Compute profile segments) 



No ("LATE" message) 





No 



1 



lASjj = IAS 



MF 



lASd = IASd,„in 



Yes 



Q Execute 04 3 



Yes 



("HOLD" message 



( GO TO I ) 
(Display message) 




C Label 12 \m 



(Begin next iteration) 



K = 



E, initial 



1 

^^initial -/^/^j 



I 



/IAS. - IAS. ^„^^.^,^\ 
''^6 - I'^Sd.initial ' (I'^S, - IAS .,.^^)K -(-Ad^^nnial^ ^.^^ 
^^ initial ' 



180 K) 



1 

C Execute 04 j (Compute profile segments] 

i 

Q GO TO 12 J 



29 



C Label 04 ) (Beginning of profile segment computations) 



(Initialize segment time and distance values) 



* 


7 






): 


At. 


= 


j=i 


J 




7 






>; 


Al . 


= 


j=i 


J 






No 



5 r o IAS —^^^ 

1.77675 X 10 - 8.90046 x 10^ + (3.42936 x IQ^) „ ^ 

\.. L ^dJ 

XO tTTt 



V\ 




(Computer crossover altitude) 



(Check for 10 000 ft/250H(not speed limit) 



Yes 



Yes 



^Labe l 07^ /No 10 000 ft/250-knot\ 

fvspeed limit in effect/ 
_ 



^bod " ^^MF 



* 


h = 





S 


= 250 


Vf 


= ^«MF 



I 



AIj = 
Al^ = 



1 



I 



/ Set segments 1 \ 
\ and 2 to / 



Vf = lAS^p 



(^ Execute 27 ^ /Compute acceleration\ 
Y \ segment 1 / 






30 



At^ = At 

1 

I At. = At, 
j = l ^ 

mz 



Al J = Al 



I Al . = AX , 
j = l ^ ^ 

311 



(Compute descent segment 2) 



Atg =c^ln 



'iWf ^Sw(Kh.250^V 









Cj(l0 000)T:^.Kg„(K^^250^V 



I 



2 1 

^ At = At. + I At. 
j = l ^ ^ j = l '^ 



I 



IAS = 250 



3 



r Execute 03 ^ (Compute TAS = f(IAS,h)) 



(^ Execute 05 j /Compute head-wind\ 
\ \ component at h / 



Mj. 


(TAS - W,^,)At2 


3600 


* 


2 1 

I Al . = Al 2 + I At . 




Ik 






Vf = 250 





C Label 08~^ 



5 



© 



31 




(Check for Mach only or IAS only descent) 



Clear flag 05 




No (lASj only descent) 



ho - He 



I 



Set flag 05 

I 



( Label 09 }^*- 




Yes (Mach only descent) 



"» ^ Label 10^ 



^3 = 
M^ = 



I 



( 



Set segments 3 
and 4 to 



^XO "^ ^MF 



CExecute 2l) /Compute acceleration\ 
I \ segment 3 / 



At^ = At 



I At. - At^ + I At. 



I 



AI3 =Al 

3 2 

I Al . = Al ^ + I Al . 
j = l ^ -^ j = l J 




i 



32 




(Compute IAS descent segment 4) 



at^ =^ln 



•^I^bod 



Ti / B.IAS. . V 



IT 7 B.I AS. TT 



I 



4 3 

I At, = At- + 5; At. 
j-1 ^ ^ j=l ^ 



I 



/ "XO ' "bod^ ^0 



IAS = lAS^ 



I 



( Execute 03 ) (Compute TAS = f(IAS,h)) 



(^Execute 05^ /Compute head-wind \ 
I \ component at h/ 



AI; 



^''^ - "H.h)^^4 



3600 



I 



4 








3 




I 


^^j 


= ^4 


+ 


I 
j = l 


^^j 



I 



( Label if) 




Yes (IAS only descent) 



No (Compute Mach descent segment 5) 



1 c, = M/m + Bm I 




+ 




/"xo t; - ^1 


% 


S.xo ^ c„ 



5 



o 



(^ Label 21 ) 

j[ / Set segment 5 

to 



AI5 = 



Vf = lAS^ 







33 







2C, 



At 



5 " K„ 



gw 



l»,^-c, 



g n,XO g ^ 



^ti,XO 



/H 'o 



I At. = At. + I At. 
j=l ^ ^ j = l "^ 



I 



h = 



'XO 



+ H \T' 
c ) 



M = M^ 



I 



(^ Execute 06 ^ (Compute TAS = f(M,h)) 

I 



(^ Execute 05 J /Compute head-wind \ 
I \ component at h/ 



SS5= TAS- Wh,J 



AI 



GS^ At^ 



5 ' 3600 



5 4 

I Al . = Al 5 + I A\ . 
j = l ^ ^ j = l •" 



Vf = Md 



I 



( Label 22 ^ 



^1 = ^ 



h = H 






3 



(^Exec ute 27 J /Compute acceleration\ 
r I segment 6 j 




34 



At^ = At 





I At . = At^ + Jl At 

j=i ' ' j=i ' 



Alg = Al 



I At . = AI g + I Al . 
j = l ^ " j = l -^ 



(Compute cruise segment 7) 



^^7 = E^DME - ""^DME " /./'j 




f Execute 02 ^ (Distance error message) 



3600 a; 



At 



7 " TAS -W, 



7 



H.hp 



I 



i At. = At-^ + j; At. 
j< J ^ j = l -^ 




Yes 



No (Time-met e red profile) 

(Compute time error) 



■ (^ Label 18 ) 



At = y At. 

req -i^ j 



MF EF req 



I 



* ^ GO TO P) 

(Display idle DME) 



35 



( Label I ) (Display Late/Hold message) 




^ Label 26 ) 



'e " -'e 



i 



Display: HOLD t^ 



( Label J ) (Display IDL DME/IDL TM) 






I 



Display: IDL DME IDL 



DME 



I 



^IDL - % * ^h 



I 



Display: IDL TM t 



IDL 




36 



/ Label 27 ^ /Acceleration segment computation; 



4- 



Al. At = f(V..V^.h) 



3 



C Execute JT) (Compute TAS = f(Vf,h)) 



^^Sf = TAS 



I 



V. V, 



I 



f Execute 13 } (Compute TAS = f(V4,h)) 



TAS^ = TAS 



I 



TAS- - TAS. 
TASav = -^1 ' TAS. 



I 



At 



TAS^ - TAS. 




Al = 



3600 
Q Return j 



37 



Q Label Ob) (Computation of head-wind component, W|^ |^) 




(^ Return ) 



( Label 13"^ /computation of TAS = f(V,h)\ 
I \ where V = IAS or M / 




Yes (V = IAS) 



No (V = M) 



* V /computation of\ 

Label 06 ) \ tAS = f(M.h)/ 

♦ 



^st.H = Ttrop -f "8 ■< 10-=')(h- 36 152) 




Yes (above tropopause) 



i 



^st.H ' ^trop 



-»*C Label 29 ) 



h = h 



^ f ^ /Computation of \ 
C Label 03 ) \ TAS = f(IAS,h); 

-JlT 



TAS 



IAS 



(7 Return ) 



1 - (12 X 10"^) h 

I 



Q Return 3 



38 



Q Label 02 ^ (Display distance error message) 




No (Time-metered profile) 



\ Return J 



""-„„E 


= EFpHE * ^' 7 


t 


*MF = 


'ef ^ l^ "j 


t 


Display: 


EF < lOLoME 


" 


C 


Return J 



39 



(^ Label 39J (Position calculator pointer) 




(^ Label H^ (Beginning of DME ^^ H computation) 




Yes 



(Initialize pointers) 



» ^ GO TO 46^ 



X = MF 


dme] 


t 


Nreg = 


55 


t 


Nseg = 


M 



I (Determine segment of Xqi^^^) 
( Label 30 }-« ■ 



X = X + Al 




Yes 



> ^ GO TO 32 ) 



^seg = Nseg ^ 1 




Npeg = ^eg ^ ^ 



(^ GO TO 31 ") (Xpi^g is in cruise) 



40 






IAS = IAS 



MF 



~1 

(Execute oF) (Compute TAS = f{IAS,h 

it 



)) 



(^Execute 05^ (Compute head-wind component) 



Y, = 



exp 



L^^DME - ^DME^ 36000^ 



TAS - W 



H,h 



i 



'z - ^^ 



lAS^pBj 



I 



VlVVLVmfI 

V. 

c -^ 



C GO TO 14"^ 



( Label sQ (X^i^^ is in cruise) 



H = H, 



C GO TO 14 ) 



41 



C Label 32 ) 



A, - X„„^ - X + A.^ 



seg 



I 



(Determine distance within segment) 



Nsub = 32 + Ngeg 



~~r~ 



Q Label 33 ^ (^dME ^^ ^"^ segment 1) 



H = H, 



'MF 



( GO TO 14 3 



( Label 34 j (Xdme ^^ In segment 2) 



nAI 



H . (10 000 - H„p)fi- . H„f 



( GO TO 14 J 



(^ Label 35) (Xqi^j^ is in segment 3) 



H = Hi 



"bod 
C GO TO 14 ) 



42 



C Label 36 j (Xhmc is in segment 4) 



1 



" " ("XO - ^bod^AlT'" %d 



7~r~ 

C GO TO iQ 



(^ Label 37 J (^DME ^^ ^" segments) 



„ . "c - "xo - ^hHM^j{^o'''5 

3 ' At? 



i 



At = 



3600 Al 
GS. 



I 



O' 



3 



( Label 14) (Display altitude) 



Display: H = _H 
( GO TO 39^ 



43 



( label a ^ (Beginning of wind input routine) 



\ 


N = 




N N ^ 




I H = ^ H^ = 
i=l ^ i-1 ^ 






N N ^ 
I D i = I D^ . = 
i=l "*^ 1=1 ^'^ 






N N ^ 
I s . = X S^ . = 
1=1 "'^ 1=1 ^*^ 




N N 




iL °w.i"i = ,1, ^w.i^ = 






(Initialize parameters) 



Clear flags 07, 
( Label 40 } " 



Display: H = ? FT 




(Input H) 



- (^ GO TO 41 ) 



Display: DIR.SPD? 



(Input D^,S^) 



N = N + 1 

N N-1 

I H. = H + J H. 



1=1 
N 



1 = 1 



1=1 ^ 1=1 ^ 

N N-1 



i=l w,i w /^ W,l 

N . . N-1 ^ 

>1 w,i w .^^ W,l 

N N-1 



/Compute linear regress1on\ 
\ parameters j 




6 



44 








( Execute aT) (Check for and resolve O** or 360° situation) 



N N-1 

N « 5 N-1 

I D^ . = D^ + y D . 

1=1 w,i w ^^^ w,i 

N N-1 



I 



f GO TO 40 ) ^ 

(^ Label 41 j (Compute linear wind-model coefficients) 



N N 



dS. 



Tr 



^ "i ^ ^w i - N I S H 



/N Y N 



I 



1 " 
"av = ¥ J, "i 



i=l 



\,s " N .^^ \,i ■ "av dH" 



I 



N N 



dH 



I H. X D . - N I D .H. 
w _ i=l _ i=l ^'^ i^l '^'^ ^ 

N \^ N 

I H. - N I H. 



\i=l 



i=l 



I 



1 ^ ^°w 

^w,s " N .^^ '^wj " ^awW 



I 



Display: WIND IN 




46 



( Label 42 j 




^ GO TO 43 ) 



.^^ Return ^ 



^j[^ Return ^ 



( GO TO 44 ) 



r Return) 



46 



( Label 43 ) 




Set flag 07 



^ Return ^ 

III 

C Label 44) 

^^ 

D^ = D^ + 360 

~T~ 

Q Return J 



, t 

r Label 45 J 

D = D - 360 
w w 



I 



-»"^ Return ^ 



-»> ( GO TO 45 ) 



(^Return ) 



47 



Appendix B — Calculator Program 



Storage Register Location of Descent Algorithm 
Variables (Numerical Values for the DC-10-10 
Model) 



Input Variables 




17 


Mc 




18 


He 




08 


Md 




10 


lASd 




21 


*MF 




22 


<EF 




23 


GW 




19 


OAT 




07 


^MF 




26 


IASmf 




27 


MFdme 




28 


EFdme 




29 


CRS 




24 


VAR 




Comouted Variables 




00 






01 






02 


Temporary 




03 






04 






05 


Ej=i Af,- 


(i = l,7) 


06 


E}=i AZy 


(i = l,7) 


09 


T'olTo 




11 


Hxo 




12 


^bod 




13 


Kgy, 




14 


*-fi^.initial 




15 


tE 




16 


Afinitial 




20 


-»trop 




25 


Aireq 




55 


A/i 




56 


Ah 




57 


A/3 




58 


A/4 




59 


Ak 




60 


Afg 




61 


GSs 




62 


w.XO 




63 


IASd,i 




64 


GSc 




65 


kg 




66 


Ai7 





Wind Model Coefficients 


50 


dD^/dH 


51 


Du,,S 


52 


dS^/dH 


53 


Sw,s 


54 


WH,h. 


Airplane 


! Model Coefficients 


30 


IASd,„in (220 knots) 


31 


IASrf,„,ax (350 knots) 


32 


Am (25 750 ft) 


33 


Bm (22 167 ft) 


34 


Cm (-1.85 sec2/ft) 


35 


Ai (-3.07783 ft/secj 

Bi (8.158681 X 10-^ knots"!) 


36 


37 


Ci (-3.5 X 10-4 gg(.-l) 


38 


X (-1.3 knots/sec) 


39 


Agw (-3.863133 x IQ-^ lb"!) 


40 


Bgw (2.174392369) 


41 


Kg (-1280 (ft/sec)/knots/ft) 


42 


^h,250 (-24.70908254) 


Computational Constants 


43 


10 000 


44 


250 


45 


3600 


46 


-1.978 X 10-3 


47 


34 293 550 


48 


8 900 460 000 


49 


177 675 



48 



8I»LBL "PD DCie- 
02»LBL B 
03 RCL 17 
64 FIX 3 

05 -He " 

06 flRCL X 

07 PROHPT 

08 STO 17 
09+LBL B 

10 RCL 13 

11 FIX 

12 -Ho " 

13 fiRCL X 

14 PROHPT 

15 STO 18 

16 "Ok" 

17 PROHPT 
18*LBL b 
19 FIX 
28 RCL 19 

21 273.15 

22 + 

23 SORT 

24 RCL 17 

25 * 

26 38.96 

27 ♦ 

28 RCL 13 

29 XEQ 05 

30 + 

31 STO 64 

32 "GSc " 

33 fiRCL X 

34 PROKPT 

35 RCL 64 

36 - 

37 CHS 

38 ST+ 54 

39 "OK" 

40 PROHPT 
4ULBL C 

42 RCL 03 

43 FIX 3 

44 "Hd " 

45 flRCL X 

46 PROHPT 

47 STO 08 

48 SF 00 
49*LBL C 

50 RCL 10 

51 FIX 8 

52 "IflSd " 

53 flRCL X 



Program Listing 


54 PROHPT 


55 STO 16 


56 SF 00 


57 "OK" 


58 PROHPT 


59*LBL D 


60 FIX 4 


61 RCL 21 


62 "HF TH " 


63 flRCL X 


64 PROHPT 


65 STO 21 


66 CF 00 


67 XE6 86 


68*LBL D 


69 RCL 22 


70 "EF TH " 


71 flRCL X 


72 PROHPT 


73 STO 22 


74 XEQ 08 


75+LBL D 


76 FIX 1 


77 RCL 25 


78 "DEL TH " 


79 fiRCL X 


80 PROHPT 


81«L6L 00 


82 RCL 21 


83 RCL 22 


84 HHS- 


85 HR 


86 RCL 45 


87 * 


88 STO 25 


89 RTH 


98»LBL E 


91. FIX 8 


92 RCL 23 


93 "GH " 


94 flRCL X 


95 PROHPT 


96 STO 23 


97*LBL E 


98 FIX I 


99 RCL 19 


180 "OflT C " 


101 fiRCL X 


102 PROHPT 


183 STO 19 


104 "OK" 


105 PROHPT 


196+LBL F 



107 FIX 

108 RCL 07 

109 -H HF " 

110 flRCL X 
HI PROHPT 
112 STO 07 
II3*LBL F 

114 RCL 26 

115 "IflS HF 

116 fiRCL X 

117 PROHPT 

118 STO 26 
119+LBL F 

120 FIX 1 

121 RCL 27 

122 "HF BHE 

123 flRCL X 

124 PROHPT 

125 STO 27 

126 -OK" 

127 PROHPT 
128*LBL G 

129 FIX 1 

130 RCL 28 

131 -EF DHE 

132 fiRCL X 

133 PROHPT 

134 STO 28 
135+LBL G 

136 FIX 

137 RCL 29 

138 "HflGCRS 

139 flRCL X 

140 PROHPT 

141 STO 29 
1424LBL G 

143 RCL 24 

144 "HflGVflR 

145 flRCL X 

146 PROHPT 

147 STO 24 

148 "OK" 

149 PROHPT 
150+LBL fl 

151 FIX 2 

152 

153 STO 15 

154 36152 

155 RCL 18 

156 - 

157 x<e? 
153 

159 RCL 46 



49 



m * 



161 RCL 19 


162 273.15 


163 + 


164 + 


165 STO 28 


166 216.65 


167 - 


168 288.15 


169 + 


178 LfiSTi^ 


171 / 


172 STO 89 


173 RCL 23 


174 RCL 39 


175 ♦ 


176 RCL 48 


177 + 


178 STO 13 


179 RCL 18 


186 XEQ 65 


181 STO 61 


182 RCL 87 


183 XE6 65 


184 RCL 61 


135 - 


186 RCL 18 


187 RCL 07 


188 - 


189 / 


198 RCL 41 


191 * 


192 STO 65 


193 FS? 00 


194 GTO 84 


195*LBL 23 


196 RCL 17 


197 STO 08 


198 RCL 26 


199 280 


260 X>Y? 


261 GTO 25 


262 XOY 


263«LBL 25 


264 STO 63 


205 STO 10 


266 XEQ 64 


207 LflSTX 


208 STO 14 


289 RCL 65 


216 STO 16 


211 XOY 


212 X<0? 



213 GTO 15 

214 RCL 31 

215 STO 10 

216 XEQ 04 

217 LflSTX 

218 X<8? 

219 GTO 12 

220 GTO I 
221+LBL 15 

222 RCL 30 

223 RCL 26 

224 X<Y? 

225 XOY 

226 STO 10 

227 XEQ 04 

228 LflSTX 

229 X<0? 

230 GTO I 
231*LBL 12 

232 RCL 14 

233 RCL 16 

234 RCL 05 

235 - 

236 / 

237 STO 60 

238 RCL 16 

239 RCL 63 
248 - 

241 * 

242 EHTERt 

243 EHTERt 

244 RCL 14 

245 / 

246 5 

247 ♦ 

248 RCL 00 

249 138 

250 * 

251 SIN 

252 * 

253 - 

254 RCL 63 

255 + 

256 STO 18 

257 XEQ 04 

258 GTO 12 
259*LBL 64 
266 6 

261 STO 85 

262 STO 96 

263 RCL 10 

264 RCL 26 

265 X>Y? 



266 STO 16 


267 RCL 16 


268 RCL 08 


269 / 


270 RCL 47 


271 * 


272 RCL 43 


273 + 


274 SORT 


275 CHS 


276 RCL 49 


277 + 


278 RCL 89 


279 / 


280 STO 11 


281 RCL 44 


282 RCL 10 


283 X<=Y? 


284 GTO 07 


285 RCL 07 


286 RCL 43 


287 X<=Y? 


288 GTO 07 


289 STO 12 


290 RCL 67 


291 RCL 69 


292 ♦ 


293 STO 96 


294 RCL 26 


295 STO 01 


296 RCL 44 


297 STO 82 


298 XEQ 27 


299 RCL 61 


389 STO 95 


301 RCL 02 


392 STO 96 


393 STO 55 


364 RCL 67 


305 RCL 09 


386 * 


307 RCL 37 


308 * 


369 RCL 42 


318 RCL 65 


311 + 


312 RCL 13 


313 ♦ 


314 + 


315 RCL 43 


316 RCL 89 


317 * 


318 RCL 37 



60 



319 ♦ 
328 RCL 42 

321 RCL 65 

322 + 

323 RCL 13 

324 ♦ 

325 + 

326 / 

327 LH 

328 RCL 37 

329 / 

339 STO 91 

331 8T+ 95 

332 RCL 97 

333 RCL 43 

334 + 

335 2 

336 / 

337 RCL 99 

338 ♦ 

339 STO 92 
349 RCL 44 

341 XOY 

342 XE8 93 

343 RCL 92 

344 XEQ 95 

345 + 

346 RCL 91 

347 * 

348 RCL 45 

349 / 

359 STt 96 

351 STO 56 

352 RCL 44 

353 STO 91 

354 GTO 98 
355*LBL 97 

356 RCL 97 

357 STO 12 

358 8 

359 STO 55 
369 STO 56 

361 RCL 26 

362 STO 91 
363*LBL 98 

364 CF 95 

365 RCL 11 

366 RCL 18 

367 X>Y? 

368 GTO 99 

369 STO 11 
379 SF 95 
371+LBL 99 



372 RCL 11 


373 RCL 12 


374 X>Y? 


375 GTO 10 


376 RCL 99 


377 * 


378 STO 98 


379 RCL 10 


389 STO 92 


381 XEQ 27 


382 RCL 91 


383 ST+ 05 


384 RCL 92 


385 STO 57 


386 ST+ 96 


387 RCL 10 


388 RCL 36 


389 * 


399 EtX 


391 RCL 35 


392 * 


393 RCL 65 


394 + 


395 RCL 13 


396 * 


397 STO 01 


398 RCL 12 


399 RCL 09 


409 * 


491 RCL 37 


492 * 


493 + 


494 RCL 11 


495 RCL 09 


496 * 


497 RCL 37 


408 * 


499 RCL 91 


419 + 


411 / 


412 LH 


413 RCL 37 


414 / 


415 ST+ 95 


416 STO 91 


417 RCL 11 


418 RCL 12 


419 + 


429 2 


421 / 


422 RCL 09 


423 * 


424 STO 02 



425 RCL 10 

426 XOY 

427 XEQ 03 

428 RCL 02 

429 XEQ 05 

430 + 

431 RCL 01 

432 * 

433 RCL 45 

434 / 

435 ST+ 96 

436 STO 58 

437 GTO 11 
438*LBL 10 
439 

448 STO 57 

441 STO 58 

442 RCL 07 

443 STO 11 
444*LBL 11 

445 FS? 05 

446 GTO 21 

447 RCL 08 

448 RCL 32 

449 * 

459 RCL 33 

451 + 

452 STO 01 

453 RCL IS 

454 RCL 99 

455 * 

456 - 

457 CHS 

458 RCL 34 

459 / 
469 SORT 

461 STO 92 

462 RCL 11 

463 RCL 99 

464 ♦ 

465 RCL 91 

466 - 

467 RCL 34 

468 / 

469 SORT 

470 RCL 65 

471 - 

472 STO 62 

473 RCL 82 

474 RCL 65 

475 - 

476 / 

477 LN 



51 



478 RCL 65 


479 * 


486 CHS 


481 RCL 62 


482 - 


483 RCL 65 


484 - 


485 RCL 02 


486 + 


487 2 


488 * 


489 RCL 34 


498 ♦ 


491 RCL 13 


492 / 


493 ST+ 05 


494 STO 69 


495 STO 01 


496 RCL 11 


497 RCL 18 


498 + 


499 2 


500 / 


501 RCL 09 


502 * 


503 STO 04 


504 RCL 08 


505 XOY 


506 XEQ 06 


507 RCL 04 


508 XEQ 05 


599 + 


510 STO 61 


511 RCL 61 


512 ♦ 


513 RCL 45 


514 / 


515 ST+ 06 


516 STO 59 


517 RCL 08 


518 STO 01 


519 GTO 22 


520»LBL 21 


521 


522 STO 59 


523 RCL 10 


524 STO 91 


525»LBL 22 


526 RCL 17 


527 STO 02 


528 RCL 18 


529 RCL 09 


530 ♦ 



531 STO 00 

532 XEQ 27 

533 RCL 81 

534 ST+ 05 

535 RCL 02 

536 ST+ 06 

537 RCL 28 

538 RCL 27 

539 - 

540 RCL 06 

541 - 

542 X<0? 

543 XEQ 02 

544 RCL 45 

545 * 

546 RCL 03 

547 RCL 04 

548 + 

549 / 

558 STO 66 

551 ST+ 05 

552 FS? 60 

553 GTO 18 

554 5 

555 RCL 05 

556 RCL 25 

557 - 

558 STO 15 

559 flBS 

560 X>Y? 

561 RTN 

562 GTO J 
563*LeL 18 

564 RCL 05 

565 STO 25 

566 RCL 45 

567 / 

568 HHS 

569 RCL 22 

570 Hns+ 

571 STO 21 

572 GTO J 
573#LBL I 

574 FIX 4 

575 RCL 15 

576 RCL 45 

577 / 

578 H«S 

579 X<0? 

580 GTO 26 

581 "LATE • 

582 flRCL X 

583 PROHPT 



584»LBL 26 

585 CHS 

586 "HOLD " 

587 flRCL X 

588 PROMPT 
589»LBL J 

590 RCL 27 

591 RCL 06 

592 + 

593 FIX 1 

594 "IDL DHE 

595 flRCL X 

596 PROHPT 
597*LBL J 

598 RCL 66 

599 RCL 45 

600 / 

601 HHS 

602 RCL 22 

603 HKS+ 

604 FIX 4 

605 -IDL TH ■ 

606 flRCL X 
687 PROHPT 
608«LBL 27 

609 RCL 01 

610 XEQ 13 

611 STO 01 

612 RCL 82 

613 XEQ 13 

614 STO 62 

615 STO 03 

616 ST- 01 

617 RCL 01 

618 2 

619 / 

620 ST+ 02 

621 RCL 61 

622 RCL 38 

623 / 

624 X<0? 

625 CHS 

626 STO 81 

627 RCL 06 

628 XEQ 65 

629 STO 84 

630 RCL 02 

631 + 

632 * 

633 RCL 45 

634 / 

635 STO 62 

636 RTN 



52 



637+LBL 05 


638 STO 64 


639 RCL 52 


646 * 


641 RCL 53 


642 + 


643 RCL 04 


644 RCL 56 


645 * 


646 RCL 51 


647 + 


648 RCL 29 


649 - 


650 RCL 24 


651 + 


652 COS 


653 * 


654 CHS 


655 RCL 04 


656 RCL 54 


657 ♦ 


658 RCL 18 


659 / 


666 - 


661 RTN 


662»LBL 29 


663 RCL 00 


664*LBL 03 


665 -12 E-66 


666 * 


667 1 


668 + 


669 / 


676 RTH 


67ULBL 13 


672 1 


673 XOY 


674 X>Y? 


675 GTO 29 


676 RCL 06 


677*LBL 06 


678 36152 


679 - 


680 RCL 46 


681 ♦ 


682 RCL 26 


683 + 


684 RCL 26 


685 X<=Y? 


686 XOY 


687 S8RT 


688 RCL Z 


689 * 



690 33.96 

691 * 

692 RTH 
693*LBL 02 

694 CHS 

695 FC? 00 

696 RTN 

697 FIX 1 

698 RCL 28 

699 + 

700 STO 06 

701 RCL 05 

702 RCL 45 
783 / 

764 HMS 

705 RCL 22 

706 HMS+ 

707 STO 21 

708 RCL 66 
769 "EF < " 
716 flRCL X 
711 PROHPT 
712»LBL 39 
713 PROHF'T 
714+LBL H 

715 STO 66 

716 RCL 27 

717 XOY 

718 X<Y? 

719 GTO 46 

726 RCL 27 

721 STO 62 

722 55 

723 STO 03 

724 1 

725 STO 64 
726*LBL 30 

727 RCL IHD 63 

728 ST+ 62 

729 RCL 02 

730 RCL 68 

731 X<=Y? 

732 GTO 32 

733 1 

734 ST+ 64 

735 5 

736 RCL 64 

737 X>Y? 

738 GTO 31 

739 1 

746 8T+ 03 
741 GTO 30 
742»LBL 46 



743 RCL 07 

744 RCL 09 

745 * 

746 STO 03 

747 RCL 26 

748 XOY 

749 XEQ 03 

750 RCL 03 

751 XEQ 65 

752 + 

753 RCL 27 

754 RCL 86 

755 - 

756 / 

757 1/X 

758 RCL 45 

759 * 

766 RCL 37 

761 * 

762 RCL 13 

763 * 

764 EtX 

765 STO 01 

766 RCL 26 

767 RCL 36 

768 ♦ 

769 EtX 
776 RCL 35 

771 * 

772 STO Y 

773 RCL 37 

774 RCL 63 

775 * 

776 + 

777 RCL 61 

778 ♦ 

779 - 

786 RCL 37 

781 / 

782 RCL 69 

783 / 

784 CHS 

785 GTO 14 
786*LBL 31 

787 RCL 18 

788 GTO 14 
789*LBL 32 
796 RCL 06 

791 RCL 62 

792 - 

793 RCL IHD 63 

794 + 

795 STO 61 



53 



796 32 


797 8T+ 84 


798 GTO IHD 84 


799+LBL 33 


809 RCL 07 


801 GTO 14 


802*LBL 34 


803 RCL 43 


804 RCL 07 


805 - 


806 RCL 81 


807 ♦ 


808 RCL IND 03 


809 / 


810 RCL 07 


811 + 


812 GTO 14 


813*LBL 35 


314 RCL 12 


815 GTO 14 


816+LBL 36 


817 RCL 11 


818 RCL 12 


819 - 


820 RCL 81 


821 * 


822 RCL IHD 83 


823 / 


824 RCL 12 


825 + 


826 GTO 14 


827*LBL 37 


828 RCL 62 


829 RCL 13 


830 * 


831 RCL 89 


832 / 


833 RCL 68 


834 * 


835 RCL 11 


836 + 


837 RCL 18 


838 - 


839 RCL 60 


848 Xt2 


841 / 


842 CHS 


843 STO 00 


844 RCL 45 


845 RCL 01 


846 ♦ 


847 RCL 61 


848 / 



849 STO 01 

850 Xt2 

851 RCL 00 

852 * 

853 RCL 62 

854 RCL 13 

855 * 

856 RCL 09 

857 / 

858 RCL 01 

859 * 

860 i 

861 RCL 11 

862 + 
863+LBL 14 

864 FIX 8 

865 "H = " 

866 fiRCL X 

867 GTO 39 
868*LBL a 
869 SREG 01 
878 CLE 

871 EREG 11 

872 CLE 

873 CF 87 

874 CF 06 
875*LBL 40 

876 ■H=? FT" 

877 PROHFT 

878 X<0? 

879 GTO 41 
888 STO 08 

881 "DIR . 

882 FROflPT 

883 STO 58 

884 FRC 

885 1808 

886 * 

887 RCL 00 

888 XOY 

889 E+ 

890 RCL 11 

891 STO 81 

892 RCL 12 

893 STO 82 

894 RCL 15 

895 STO 03 

896 RCL 00 

897 LfiSTX 

898 Z- 

899 RCL 04 

900 STO 11 

901 RCL 05 



SPD ?" 



902 STO 12 

903 RCL 06 

904 STO 15 

905 RCL 50 

906 IHT 

907 XE8 42 

908 RCL 08 

909 XOY 

910 E+ 

911 RCL 11 

912 STO 04 

913 RCL 12 

914 STO 05 

915 RCL 15 

916 STO 06 

917 RCL 01 

918 STO 11 

919 RCL 02 

920 STO 12 

921 RCL 03 

922 STO 15 

923 GTO 48 
924*LBL 41 

925 RCL 13 

926 RCL 81 

927 * 

928 RCL 16 

929 X=0? 
938 XEQ a 

931 / 

932 RCL 03 

933 - 

934 RCL 13 

935 Xt2 

936 RCL 16 

937 / 

938 RCL 14 

939 - 

948 STO 11 

941 / 

942 STO 52 

943 RCL 13 

944 RCL 16 

945 / 

946 STO 12 

947 ♦ 

948 CHS 

949 RCL 01 

950 RCL 16 

951 / 

952 + 

953 STO 53 

954 RCL 13 



54 



955 RCL 04 

956 * 

957 RCL 16 

958 / 

959 RCL 06 

960 - 

961 RCL II 

962 / 

963 STO 50 

964 RCL 12 

965 ♦ 

966 CHS 

967 RCL 04 

968 RCL 16 

969 / 

970 + 

971 STO 51 

972 

973 STG 54 

974 -HIHD IH- 

975 PROMPT 
976»LBL 42 

977 300 

978 XOY 

979 mi 

980 GTO 43 

981 60 

982 XOY 

983 X>Y? 

984 RTH 

985 FS? 06 

986 RTH 

987 FS? 07 

988 GTO 44 

989 SF 86 

998 RTH 
991+LBL 43 

992 FS? 07 

993 RTH 

994 FS? 06 

995 GTO 45 

996 SF 87 

997 RTH 
998*LBL 44 

999 360 

1000 * 

leei RTH 
1002«LBL 45 

1003 360 

1004 - 

1005 RTH 
1886 .END. 



55 



References 

1. Stein, Kenneth J.: New Procedures Key to Fuel Sav- 
ings. Aviat Week & Space TechnoL, vol. Ill, no. 9, 
Aug. 27, 1979, pp. 105-111. 

2. Stein, Kenneth J.: Advanced Systems Aid Profile De- 
scents. Aviat Week & Space Technol.^ vol. 111, no. 8, 
Aug. 20, 1979, pp. 57-62, 

3. Heimbold, R. L.; Lee, H. P.; and Leffler, M. F.: De- 
velopment of Advanced Avionics Systems Applicable to 
Terminal-Configured Vehicles. NASA CR-3280, 1980. 



4. 



5. 



Knox, Charles E,; and Cannon, Dennis G.: Development 
and Flight Test Results of a Flight Management Algorithm 
for Fuel- Conservative Descents in a Time-Based Metered 
Traffic Environment. NASA TP-1717, 1980. 
Knox, Charles E.: Planning Fuel- Conservative De- 
scents With or Without Time Constraints Using a Small 
Programmable Calculator — Algorithm Development and 
Flight Test Results. NASA TP-2085, 1983, 
Manual of Barometry (WBAN) — Volume I, First ed. 
U,S, Govt. Printing Off., 1963. 



56 



Top of 
descent 



^A = M^ for time 
d c 



Constant 
lAS^ = 

250 knots/J 
Speed change /^ 



Speed 

change 

to 250 knots 



® 




Reduce thrust 
to flight 

©idle 
I 



to IAS, 



MF 



Metering fix (^ 
*MF V 



I J 

'MF "mF 10 000 ft 

I I 



)te Constant 
IAS 
descent 



Constant Mach 
descent 



'XO 



10 000 ft 



At^ 
All 



At, 
Ale 



At, 
Al, 



At, 



Atj 
Ale 



Speed 

change 

from 

cruise to 

descent 

Mach 



Atj 

Mi 



N- 



® Entry fix 

* 



M, 



Constant cruise 
Mach 



JV 



At- 
Al- 



A% 



Figure 1. Vertical-plane geometry of computed descent path. 






( START J 







DTI AT 


Thini i-rr 


INPUTS PRIOR TO FLIGHT 




-w 


KlLUr iinruio 


INPUTS PRIOR TO DESCENT 


NONMETERED 
MODE 


TIME - ^ METERED 


MODE 


^Veq = ^MF " *EF 






\ 






PILOT INITIATED 
"COMPUTE" 






^ 






NONMETERED 




< METEREC 






(Mj/IASj sped 


fied) 


TIME > 


) (tj^p and tgp SPECIFIED) 




SELECT INITIAL 
Md/IASd 






^ 


. 






> 


f 




' ^ 






COMPUTE 

7 

E At, 
j = l J 

7 

S At. 

J = l ^ 




COMPUTE 

7 

Z At. 
j=l ^ 

7 

E Al. 
j = l J 










REVISE 
lAS^ 








^lAt -VAf f < tcV. 


NO 


>^ 




>— i YES 









DISPLAY START OF 

DESCENT 

INFORMATION 



( END j 



Figure 2. Logic flow of flight-management descent algorithm. 



58 



IAS 



■o 
o 

CO 
Q. 



O 



0) 



00 



d,max 



IAS 



d,i-l 



IAS 



d,i 



IAS 



d, initial — 



IAS. . l_ 




' 7 \ At 

y;At. >eq 



^j=l /initial 

Time to fly descent profile, sec 



s 



Figure 3. Schedule selection of indicated airspeed descent via interpolation. 



s 



X 10^ 





40 




38 




36 




34 




32 


+J 




M- 


30 


«v 




<D 




t3 

3 


28 


-M 




•r- 




+-> 


26 


ro 




<tJ 


24 


•n— 




-P 




0) 


2? 


+J 




o 




O 


20 


<D 




CD 






18 




16 




14 




12 



O Flight data 
— Curve fit 



h = apt + a,t + Bq 




100 



200 



300 400 
Time, sec 



500 



600 



700 



Figure 4. Quadratic curve fit of altitude plotted against time for DC- 10 airplane executing a constant 280-knot 
indicated airspeed descent. 



-70 



■60 




IAS . = 340 knots 
d 



CO 
Q. 



-50 



-40 




•30 



lASj = 280 knots 




lASj = 250 knots 



I 



-\i- 



14 



18 



22 



26 



30 



34 



-J 

38 X 10^ 



Geopotential altitude, ft 



Figure 5. Vertical-speed model of DC- 10 airplane for constant indicated airspeed descents (idle thrust). 






U 
<U 
(/I 



o 



-60 I- 

-55 

-50 

-45 

-40 

-35 

-30 

-25 
-20 
-15 



230 



o p-© 



O 



/ 



/ 



/ o 




bp = -3.07783 exp [(8.158681 x 10"^) IAS J 



240 250 260 270 280 290 300 310 320 330 340 350 

lAS^, knots 

Figure 6. Modeled vertical speed at sea level (idle thrust) for DC- 10 eiirplame. 



u 



-120 



-100 



-80 



■60 



-40 



-20 



26 



28 



Flight data 

Curve fit 




30 



32 34 36 
Altitude, ft 



38 



Generic 
model 



42 X 10^ 



Figure 7. Flight data and generic parabolic model with Co = -1.85 sec^/ft for constant Mach niunber descents 
(idle thrust) for DC- 10 airplzme. 



a 

CO 



2 



50 r 
48 
46 
44 

42 

40 
38 
36 

34 I- 
32 



X 10^ 







I 



72 



Model of 

c^ = 25 750 M. + 22 167 



O 



Minimum 

220-knot 

airspeed 



o 




Maximum 

operating 

altitude 



74 



76 



78 



80 



82 



.84 



.86 



Descent Mach number, M 



Figure 8. Model of ci for constant Mach number descents for DC-10 airplane. 



500 
480 

460 
440 
420 
400 
380 




Acceleration model, 
X = -1.3 knots/sec 





H, ft 


GW, lb 


o 


10 000 


308 500 


D 


10 000 


324 200 


o 


10 000 


303 250 


A 


10 000 


283 500 


t^ 


40 500 


285 250 


Ci 


10 000 


330 400 


Q 


17 000 


328 400 


C> 


10 000 


313 000 




10 



15 



20 



25 30 35 

Time, sec 



40 45 



50 



55 



60 



65 



Figure 9. Modeled and actual true airspeed reduction in level flight (idle thrust) for DC-10 airplane. 



65 



s 



o 
I/) 



C3 
J3 



-60 
-55 
-50 

-45 H 
-40 



D 

o 



knots 

340 
300 
280 
250 



340 knots 



D 



-35 



-—- -^->. 



— -o~ 



■30 



-25 



-20 - 



L 






''0,280 'Vl^-^S? X lO'^JGW - 65.6667 
"^ 300 knots 



-^.- 



"A- 



-^-A~~~-_^ 



V^ 



A 
280 knots 



250 knots 



-if- 



290 



J 



300 310 



Gross weight, lb 



320 



330 



340 X 10^ 



Figure 10. Vertical speed at sea level as a function of gross weight for DC- 10 airplane. 




L-84-12,910 
Figure 11. Programmable descent calculator. 



67 







3000 




x: 
en 


2000 


no 

Z3 


•r— 

x: 


1000 


+J 







o 




60 


c: 






J!)£ 






•» 






S- 


.^^ 


40 


O 


+J 




s- 


(/) 




%. 


CO 




Q) 


i+- 




-o 




20 


(U 






<D 






Q. 







to 






t. 






•r-* 






<: 




40 


(J 


>> 




(/> 


J- 


20 


s- 


<D 




o 













Q) 


,^-^ 








-?n 


1- 




-40 


• 
•r- 






B 




10 


c 


^ 






S- 




5- 

o 


.£ 


5 


S- 


0) 




J- 


^ 




OJ 


**~^ 





<u 






u 


^«-»^ 




c 


••-) 




to 


(/) 


-5 


+^ 


<0 


v> 


Ol 




•1— 

Q 




-10 






J L 



± 



■10 -8 -6 -4 
(colder) 



■202468 
(wanner) 



10 



Temperature error, °C 

(a) Metering-fix crossing errors due to temperature error. 
Figure 12. Metering-fix crossing errors. 



68 



6000 r 



4000 - 



o ^-^ 

-S ^ 2000 

3 







o 

c 



o 

s- 
s- 

O) 

XJ 
(U 

cu 

CL 
CO 

s- 



60 r- 



40 



^ 20 



.^ 






o 

s- 






cu 

4-> 




15 r- 



•r- <U 

^ h 

C M- 

s- 
o 
s- 

s- 

O) 
O) 

o 

c 

(X3 ^-^ 
CO CO 




J L 



± 



270 280 290 300 310 320 

Gross weight, lb 



330 



340 



-J 

350 X 10^ 



(b) Metering-fix crossing errors due to gross-weight variation. 
Figure 12. Continued. 



69 



o 

S-. 

s- 
<u 

13 



3000 r 



^ 2000 



1000 




o 

c 




60 


.21^ 






«\ 






o 


-P 


40 


i- 


t/) 




s- 


ro 




(U 


^- 


20 


x» 






<D 






<D 






Q- 







S- 






•r- 






cC 




10 


o 


>y 




OJ 


r— 




to 




20 


^ 


Q) 




s- 


^— ^ 




o 




n 


s- 






<u 


.^-^ 




0) 


a; 

re 


-10 


•r- 


1 — 


-20 


• 




10 


£ 


*^-«. 




• 


+J 




c 


t/> 






rtJ 


S 


u 


Q. 




o 






u 






u 







<u 


„. , 




O 

c 




-5 


•4-> 






Q 




-10 



^ 




1 



X 



X 



1 



.74 .76 .78 .80 .82 

Descent Mach number 



.84 



.86 



(c) Metering-fix crossing errors due to descent Mach number error. 
Figure 12. Continued. 



70 



o 

s- 



5 



o 






0) ' 

Q. 

CO 



sz 



to 




40 r 








^ 


20 






TO 








<u 













s- 








o 










o 




-^u 


Of 


CO 






E 






-40 


1— 




CD 








+-> 

(0 


-60 






l~- 










-80 

-100 

20 






^^^ 










15 






o 




«1 




4- 




o 






10 






C 




CO 

^ -10 




1 



J. 



X 



230 250 270 290 310 
Descent airspeed, knots 



330 



350 



(d) Metering-fix crossing errors due to descent airspeed variation. 
Figure 12. Continued. 



71 



o 

s- 




o 

s- 

O CO 

+-> 
-a o 

CU .^ 

i- 



4-> 




o 




(U 


s^ 




"^""^ 


Q) 


O 

CU 




CU 


to 




£ 




.^— N. 


1^ 




CU 
•4-> 




o 

s- 
<u 

CU 

o 

c 

00 



2 

CU 



CO 

re 

Q. 




L 
-4 



J L 



1 1 1 



-3 



-1 



Wind gradient, knots /lOOO ft 

(e) Metering-fix crossing errors due to wind-gradient variation. 
Figure 12. Concluded. 



72 



1. Report No. 

NASA TP-2393 



2. Government Accession No. 



4. Title and Subtitle 
Planning Fuel-Conservative Descents in an Airline 
Environment Using a Small Programmable Calculator — 
Algorithm Development and Flight Test Results 

7. Author(s) 

Charles E. Knox, Dan D. Vicroy, and David A. Simmon 



9. Performing Organization Name and Address 

NASA Langley Research Center 
Hampton, VA 23665 



12. Sponsoring Agency Name and Address 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Washington, DC 20546 



3. Recipient's Catalog No. 



5. Report Date 

May 1985 



6. Performing Organization Code 

505-45-33-03 



8. Performing Organization Report No. 

L-15844 



10. Work Unit No. 



11. Contract or Grant No, 



13. Type of Report and Period Covered 

Technical Paper 



14. Sponsoring Agency Code 



15. Supplementary Notes 

Charles E. Knox and Dan D. Vicroy: Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia. 
David A. Simmon: United Airlines, Inc., Chicago, Illin ois. 

16. Abstract 

A simple, airborne, flight-management descent algorithm has been developed and programmed into a small 
programmable calculator. The algorithm may be operated in either a time mode or speed mode. The 
time mode was designed to aid the pilot in planning and executing a fuel-conservative descent to arrive at 
a metering fix at a time designated by the air traJBRc control system. The speed mode was designed for 
planning fuel-conservative descents when time is not a consideration. The descent path for both modes 
was calculated for a constant Mach/airspeed schedule from linear approximations of airplane performance 
with considerations given for the descent Mach/airspeed schedule, gross weight, wind, wind gradient, and 
nonstandard temperature effects. Flight tests, using the algorithm on the programmable calculator, have 
shown that the open-loop guidance could be useful to airline flight crews for planning and executing fuel- 
conservative descents. 



17. Key Words (Suggested by Authors(s)) 

Fuel conservation 

Flight-management systems 

Airplanes 

Air traffic control 

Time-based metering 



18. Distribution Statement 

Unclassified — Unlimited 



Subject Category 06 



19. Security Classif.(of this report) 

Unclassified 



20. Security Classif.(of this page) 

Unclassified 



21. No. of 

75 



22. Price 
A04 



For sale by the National Technical Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161 



NASA-Langley, 1986 



^■■'\ ? >: : '■^:i:^^?^^ ■^^.:-^iA^^^^^:^^^^^m:y'^^^:^^^^^!^^ 



National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration 

Washington, D.C. 
20546 

Official Biisiness ■ 
Penalty for Private Use, $300 



THIRD-CLASS BULK RATE 



Postage and Fees Paid 
National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration 
NASA-451 




fVIASA 



POSTMASTER: If Undeliverable (Section 158 
Postal Manual) Do Not Return 



) ■ f : 



