This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(818) 393-2827. Refer to NPO-40951. ' 


?|8 Architecture Adaptive 
Computing Environment 

Architecture Adaptive Computing 
Environment (aCe) is a software system 
that includes a language, compiler, and 
run-time library for parallel computing. 
aCe was developed to enable program- 
mers to write programs, more easily 
than was previously possible, for a vari- 
ety of parallel computing architectures. 
Heretofore, it has been perceived to be 
difficult to write parallel programs for 
parallel computers and more difficult to 
port the programs to different parallel 
computing architectures. In contrast, 
aCe is supportable on all high-perform- 
ance computing architectures. Cur- 
rently, it is supported on LINUX clus- 
ters. aCe uses parallel programming 
constructs that facilitate writing of paral- 
lel programs. Such constructs were used 
in single-instruction/multiple-data 
(SIMD) programming languages of the 
1980s, including Parallel Pascal, Parallel 
Forth, C*, *LISP, and MasPar MPL. In 
aCe, these constructs are extended and 


implemented for both SIMD and multi- 
ple-instruction/ multiple-data (MIMD) 
architectures. Two new constructs incor- 
porated in aCe are those of (1) scalar 
and virtual variables and (2) pre-com- 
puted paths. The scalar-and-virtual-vari- 
ables construct increases flexibility in 
optimizing memory utilization in vari- 
ous architectures. The pre-computed- 
paths construct enables the compiler to 
pre-compute part of a communication 
operation once, rather than computing 
it every time the communication opera- 
tion is performed. 

This program was written by John E. Dor- 
band of Goddard Space Flight Center. 

For further information, contact the Goddard 
Innovative Partnerships Office at (301 ) 286- 
5810. 

GSC-14911-1 


@ Computing Fault 
Displacements From 
Surface Deformations 

Simplex is a computer program that 
calculates locations and displacements 
of subterranean faults from data on 
Earth-surface deformations. The calcu- 
lation involves inversion of a forward 
model (given a point source represent- 
ing a fault, a forward model calculates 


the surface deformations) for displace- 
ments, and strains caused by a fault lo- 
cated in isotropic, elastic half-space. The 
inversion involves the use of nonlinear, 
multiparameter estimation techniques. 
The input surface-deformation data can 
be in multiple formats, with absolute or 
differential positioning. The input data 
can be derived from multiple sources, 
including interferometric synthetic- 
aperture radar, the Global Positioning 
System, and strain meters. Parameters 
can be constrained or free. Estimates 
can be calculated for single or multiple 
faults. Estimates of parameters are ac- 
companied by reports of their covari- 
ances and uncertainties. Simplex has 
been tested extensively against forward 
models and against other means of in- 
verting geodetic data and seismic obser- 
vations. 

This work was done by Gregory Lyzenga, 
Jay Parker, and. Andrea Donnellan of Caltech 
and Wendy Panero of Ohio State University 

for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 

Further information is contained in a TSP 
(see page 1). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(818) 393-2827. Refer to NPO-41078 ’. 


16 


NASA Tech Briefs, October 2006 


