used to convey instrument-pointing in- 
formation to the activity plan. The soft- 
ware allows users to develop a plan of 
what they would like the rover to accom- 
plish for a given time period. When de- 
veloping the plan, the user can input 
constraints between activities or groups 
of activities. MSLICE will enforce said 


constraints and ensure that all mission 
flight rules are satisfied. 

This work was done by Mark W. Powell, 
Khawaja S. Shams, Michael N. Wallick, Jef- 
frey S. Norris, Joseph C. Joswig, Thomas M. 
Crockett, Jason M. Fox, Recaredo J. Torres of 
Caltech; James A. Kurien, Michael P. Mc- 
Curdy, and Guy Pyrzak of NASA Ames Re- 


search Center; and Arash Aghevli and An- 
drew G. Bachmann of Stinger Ghaffarian 
Technologies, Inc. for NASA’s Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory. 

This software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-45908. ' 


Telemetry-Enhancing Scripts 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


Scripts Providing a Cool Kit of 
Telemetry Enhancing Tools 
(SPACKLE) is a set of software tools 
that fill gaps in capabilities of other 
software used in processing downlinked 
data in the Mars Exploration Rovers’ 
(MER) flight and test-bed operations. 
SPACKLE tools have helped to acceler- 
ate the automatic processing and inter- 
pretation of MER mission data, en- 
abling non-experts to understand 
and/or use MER query and data prod- 
uct command simulation software tools 
more effectively. SPACKLE has greatly 
accelerated some operations and pro- 
vides new capabilities. 


The tools of SPACKLE are written, vari- 
ously, in Perl or the C or C++ language. 

They perform a variety of search and short- 
cut functions that include the following: 

• Generating text-only, Event Report-an- 
notated, and Web-enhanced views of 
command sequences; 

• Labeling integer enumerations with 
their symbolic meanings in text mes- 
sages and engineering channels; 

• Systematic detecting of corruption 
within data products; 

• Generating text-only displays of data-prod- 
uct catalogs including downlink status; 

• Validating and labeling of commands 
related to data products; 


• Performing of convenient searches of 
detailed engineering data spanning 
multiple Martian solar days; 

• Generating tables of initial conditions 
pertaining to engineering, health, and 
accountability data; 

• Simplified construction and simula- 
tion of command sequences; and 

• Fast time format conversions and sorting. 

This program was written by Mark W. 
Maimone of Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propul- 
sion Laboratory. 

This software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-45700. ' 


Analog Input Data Acquisition Software 

John F. Kennedy Space Center, Florida 


DAQ Master Software allows users to 
easily set up a system to monitor up to five 
analog input channels and save the data 
after acquisition. This program was writ- 
ten in LabVIEW 8.0, and requires the 
Lab VIEW runtime engine 8.0 (free down- 
load from National Instruments; ni.com) 
to run the executable. A DAQ card must 
be installed in the computer for this pro- 
gram to work correctly, and it must have 


up to five analog input channels. The 
user can set the channel configuration, 
and other channel details, from the setup 
tab after the program has begun. 

A Setup tab holds all information for 
the channels that will be used for data 
acquisition, and allows the user to save 
or upload the settings for future use by 
writing or reading a configuration file. 
The Data Acquisition tab is where the 


commands to acquire, stop, and save 
data are located, and where the data will 
be displayed. The user can choose to dis- 
play scaled or un-scaled data while acqui- 
sition is taking place. 

This work was done by Ellen Arens of 
Kennedy Space Center. For more information, 
visit http://www.openchannelsoftivare.com/ 
p)ojects/Analog_Input_Data_Acquisition for a 
free download. KSC-13203 


Relay Sequence Generation Software 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 

activities with the rest of the MRO sci- 
ence plans. The software also generates 
the needed command products that ini- 
tiate the relay sessions, some features of 
which are provided by the lander team, 
some are managed by MRO internally, 
and some being derived. 


Due to thermal and electromagnetic 
interactivity between the UHF (ultra- 
high frequency) radio onboard the Mars 
Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO), which 
performs relay sessions with the Martian 
landers, and the remainder of the MRO 
payloads, it is required to integrate and 


de-conflict relay sessions with the MRO 
science plan. The MRO relay SASF/PTF 
(spacecraft activity sequence file/ pay- 
load target file) generation software fa- 
cilitates this process by generating a PTF 
that is needed to integrate the periods of 
time during which MRO supports relay 


52 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2009 


