
NAVAL 

POSTGRADUATE 

SCHOOL 

MONTEREY, CALIEORNIA 


THESIS 


CHARACTERIZATION AND APPLICATION OF FOUR- 
LAYER SEMICONDUCTOR STRUCTURES IN PULSE 
MODE OPERATION 

by 

Antonio P. Matos 
September 2006 

Thesis Advisor: Gamani Karunasiri 

Thesis Co-Advisor: James H. Luscombe 


Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 




THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEET BLANK 



1 REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

Form Approved OMB No. 0704-0188 \ 

Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruction, 
searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send 
comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to 
Washington headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 
22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188) Washington DC 20503. 

1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank) 2. REPORT DATE 3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

September 2006 Master’s Thesis 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Characterization and Application of Four-Layer Semiconductor Structures in Pulse 
Mode Operation. 

5. LENDING NUMBERS 

6. AUTHOR(S) Antonio P. Matos 

7. PEREORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Naval Postgraduate School 

Monterey, CA 93943-5000 

8. PEREORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 

9. SPONSORING /MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Space and Naval Warfare Systems Center, San Diego 

52560 Hull St. San Diego, CA 92152-5001 

10. SPONSORING/MONITORING 
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 

11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES The views expressed in this thesis are those of the author and do not reflect the official policy 
or position of the Department of Defense or the U.S. Government. 

12a. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 

A 

13. ABSTRACT (maximum 200 words) 

The characteristics and application of a thyristor (a four-layer semiconductor structure) in a pulse generating circuit are explored. A 
thyristor device was used to create a pulse generating circuit and the pulse interval duration of this circuit was experimentally 
measured. The pulse interval duration was determined to be characterized by a Poisson Point Process distribution that is dependent 
on both temperature and applied voltage bias. The adjustable aperiodicity of the pulse intervals was a key characteristic used to 
design a distributed processing system of micro-robots that are capable of swarming. A micro-robotic swarm platform was 
simulated using finite element analysis, a JAVA-hased swarm model, and three fully operational macro-scale platforms. 

14. SUBJECT TERMS Thyristor, SCR, Pulse Mode Operation, Poisson Point Process, Micro¬ 
robotics, Emergent Behavior, Swarming, COMSOL 

15. NUMBER OE 

PAGES 

89 

16. PRICE CODE 

17. SECURITY 
CLASSIEICATION OE 
REPORT 

Unclassified 

18. SECURITY 

CLASSIEICATION OE THIS 
PAGE 

Unclassified 

19. SECURITY 
CLASSIEICATION OE 
ABSTRACT 

Unclassified 

20. LIMITATION OE 
ABSTRACT 

UL 


NSN 7540-01-280-5500 Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) 


Prescribed by ANSI Std. 239-18 


1 




























THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEET BLANK 


11 



Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 


CHARACTERIZATION AND APPLICATION OF FOUR-LAYER 
SEMICONDUCTOR STRUCTURES IN PULSE MODE OPERATION 

Antonio P. Matos 
Lieutenant, United States Navy 
B.S., Woreester Polyteehnie Institute, 1999 


Submitted in partial fulfillment of the 
requirements for the degree of 


MASTER OF SCIENCE IN PHYSICS 


from the 


NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL 
September 2006 


Author: Antonio P. Matos 


Approved by: Gamani Karunasiri 

Thesis Advisor 


James H. Luseombe 
Thesis Co-Advisor 


James L. Kays 

Dean, Graduate Sehool of Engineering and Applied Seienees 



THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEET BLANK 


IV 



ABSTRACT 


The characteristics and application of a thyristor (a four-layer semiconductor 
structure) in a pulse generating circuit are explored. A thyristor device was used to create 
a pulse generating circuit and the pulse interval duration of this circuit was 
experimentally measured. The pulse interval duration was determined to be characterized 
by a Poisson Point Process distribution that is dependent on both temperature and applied 
voltage bias. The adjustable aperiodicity of the pulse intervals was a key characteristic 
used to design a distributed processing system of micro-robots that are capable of 
swarming. A micro-robotic swarm platform was simulated using finite element analysis, 
a JAVA-based swarm model, and three fully operational macro-scale platforms. 


V 



THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEET BLANK 


VI 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


L INTRODUCTION.1 

A. ORIGIN OF PULSE GENERATION.1 

B. SUMMARY OF PREVIOUS EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS.3 

C. DATA COLLECTION METHOD.5 

1, LABVIEW Control.7 

2, SBS Characteristics.7 

3, Pulse Generating Circuit Characteristics.9 

II. THYRISTOR CIRCUIT CHARATERISTICS.11 

A, MEAN TIME INTERVAL DEPENDENCE ON BIAS.12 

B, MEAN TIME INTERVAL DEPENDENCE ON TEMPERATURE.16 

C, STATISTICAL MODEL.19 

1. Effects of Pulse Width.22 

2. Mean Interpulse Time Interval and Variance.23 

D, TIME INTERVAL DISTRIBUTION.24 

1. Mean.25 

2, Variance.29 

E, CHAOS ANALYSIS.30 

1, Power Spectral Density.31 

3, Lyapunov Exponent.36 

4, Autocorrelation.38 

5. Correlation Dimension.40 

6. Conclusion.42 

III, APPLICATION OF PULSING CIRCUIT.43 

A, EMERGENT BEHAVIOR MODEL.43 

1, Distributed Processing.43 

2, Artificial Intelligence.44 

3, Swarming.45 

4, Robot Design Concepts.45 

5, JAVA Simulation of Swarming Behavior.46 

B, MACRO-SCALE ROBOT SWARM.48 

1, Design Considerations.48 

2, Chassis Design.49 

3, Electronics Design.49 

4, Power Supply.50 

5, Voltage Regulator.50 

6, Sensing and Logic.50 

7, Pulse Converter.51 

8, Motor Control Circuit.51 

9, Results.51 

C, MICRO-SCALE ROBOT SWARM.52 

1. Simple Logic.53 

vii 












































2, Fabrication Process.55 

3, Finite Element Simulation.56 

4, Leg Structure.57 

5, Thyristor Circuit.58 

6, Results.62 

IV. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS.65 

A, DISTRIBUTED PROCESSING.65 

B. FUTURE WORK.66 

APPENDIX MACRO-SCALE ROBOT SCHEMATIC.67 

LIST OF REFERENCES.69 

INITIAL DISTRIBUTION LIST.71 


viii 














LIST OF FIGURES 


Figure 1. SCR circuit schematic.2 

Figure 2. (Taken from Ref. [1]) Measured current-voltage (I-V) characteristics of 
the SCR showing the on and off states. The switching voltage of the SCR 
is about 8.5 V. The inset shows the schematic band diagram and charge 
accumulation in the SCR just below the switching voltage (in the off 

state). The dashed line shows the load line of the circuit.3 

Figure 3. Typical observed sequences of pulses as a function of time or high DC 
bias (top) and low DC bias (bottom). The pulse height is approximately 

equal to the switching voltage of the SCR.4 

Figure 4. Experimental setup used for the measurement of a time series of pulses.6 

Figure 5. Voltage output across the resistor (yellow trace) and the corresponding 

TTL pulse (green trace).7 

Figure 6. I-V Characteristics of the MBS4991.8 

Figure 7. Temperature dependence of switching voltage (use the same y-axis format 

as the Fig. 6).9 

Figure 8. Plot of time interval between pulse peaks as a function of recording time.11 

Figure 9. Histogram of inter-pulse time interval distribution.12 

Figure 10. Saturation occurs as the voltage bias approaches 14.75V.14 

Figure 11. Vp varies linearly with VDC.15 

Figure 12. Iterative approach to finding the solution to Equation 2.7. The green 

dashed line shows the fit with Vp=0 in Equation 2.7, which shows the 
exponential dependence of the mean time interval on bias without the 
saturation condition imposed. The red line shows the effect of the RC 

constraint that leads to the saturation condition.16 

Eigure 13. (Taken from Ref. [3]) Switching current vs. temperature plot from the 
Motorolla MBS4991 SBS Data Sheet. The current is approximately 

exponentially dependent on temperature.17 

Eigure 14. (Taken from Ref. [3]) Switching current vs. temperature plot from the 
Motorolla MBS4991 SBS Data Sheet. The switching voltage is weakly 

dependent on temperature compared to the switching current.18 

Eigure 15. Mean time interval as a function of temperature. Each color is a different 

temperature and each data point represents a different bias.19 

Eigure 16. Time series of spikes.20 

Eigure 17. Inter-pulse time At and refractory period to.22 

Eigure 18. PDE fit for 60E showing very long time interval (0-10 s) distributions for a 

set of bias voltages.25 

Eigure 19. PDE fit for 60E showing long time interval (0-1 s) distributions.26 

Eigure 20. PDE fit for 60E showing short time interval (0-0.1 s) distributions.26 

Eigure 21. PDE fit for 60E showing very short time interval (0-0.01 s) distributions.27 

Eigure 22. PDE fit for 68E showing very long time interval distributions.27 

Eigure 23. PDE fit for 68E showing long time interval distributions.28 

Eigure 24. PDE fit for 68E showing short time interval distributions.28 


IX 


























Figure 25. PDF fit for 68F showing very short time interval distributions.29 

Figure 26. Comparison of aetual cr^ (blue) to expeeted erf (red) using Equation 2.41 

for a eonstant temperature of 64F.30 

Figure 27. Power Speetral Density via Periodogram for periodie pulse rate (22.40 V, 

60 F, red line) and aperiodie (21.75 V, 60 F, blue line) pulse rate series. 

The firing rate of the periodie series has more high frequeney eomponents, 

as expected.32 

Figure 28. Power Spectral Density via Welch for periodic pulse rate (22.40 V, 60 F, 
red line) and aperiodic (21.75 V, 60 F, blue line) pulse rate series. The 
firing rate frequency components are the same as in figure 29, but with a 

much smoother estimate.33 

Figure 29. Embedding of a series characterized by a large mean time interval <t>.34 

Eigure 30. Embedding of a series characterized by a small mean time interval <t>.34 

Eigure 31. Large <t> 2“*^ Order Embedding.35 

Eigure 32. Small <t> 2“*^ Order Embedding.36 

Eigure 33. Two propagation paths for two points that begin close together in Poincare 

phase space.37 

Eigure 34. Average Lyapunov Exponents for 14 different data sets with different bias 

at 60E.38 

Eigure 35. Correlation plots of various sample sizes with the entire series. The index 

is the order in which the data was recorded in the series.39 

Eigure 36. Counting mechanism.40 

Eigure 37. Correlation sum for an aperiodic series.41 

Eigure 38. Correlation dimension for the aperiodic series in Eigure 39.41 

Eigure 39. Correlation dimension for a periodic series.42 

Eigure 40. Output voltage is across the thyristor. The thyristor cathode is grounded.45 

Eigure 41. The left diagram shows the turning effect that incident light has on the 

robot. The right diagram graphically depicts the sensor and emitter logic.46 

Eigure 42. Graphic User Interface (GUI) for a JAVA based large swarm simulation 
program. The green dots are micro-robots and they move according the 
physics rules defined in the program. The grey dots are micro-robots that 
have landed on their back during the initial deployment and are therefore 

unable to move.47 

Eigure 43. Robot platform.49 

Eigure 44. Robot functional diagram.49 

Eigure 45. Sensing and logic.50 

Eigure 46. Sensor placement requires a shallow dead zone in front to counter the 

tailgating effect of one robot directly behind another.52 

Eigure 47. Thyristor circuit.53 

Eigure 48. Typical output.53 

Eigure 49. Micro-robot design.54 

Eigure 50. SCN3M CMOS process.55 

Eigure 51. MEMS process.56 

Eigure 52. Beam deflection calculation for different size capacitor plates.58 


X 































Figure 53. Cross section of hole concentration in a thyristor device with no bias 

applied. The contour lines represent built-in electrostatic potential.60 

Figure 54. Height and surface coloring reflect electrostatic potential across the 

thyristor for 16.01 V applied to the anode. The red lines are electric field.61 

Figure 55. 1-V characteristics of the thyristor. Units arcH/ fj.m .61 

Figure 56. LEDIT layout using SCN3M rules and custom MEMS layers.62 







THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEET BLANK 



ACKNOWLEDGMENT 


The author would like to aeknowledge the fmaneial support of SPA WAR, 
Code 200, for allowing the purehase of the equipment used in this thesis. 
In addition, the author would like to thank Dr. Richard Waters of SSC-SD, 
Code 2876, for his exceptional support and mentorship. This work was 
performed under SPAWAR Fellowship (RPH57). 


The author wants to thank Sam Barone for his guidance and patience 
during the construction of a macro-scale robot swarm. 





THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEET BLANK 


XIV 



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 


A four-layer (PNPN) semiconductor structure commonly known as silicon 
controlled rectifier (SCR) or thyristor can be used to create a pulse generation circuit by 
connecting it in series with a parallel resistor and capacitor. Previous work by Karunasiri 
has shown that the pulse generation of this circuit appears to have elements of both 
periodicity and randomness [1]. In this thesis, a detailed experimental study of the 
dependence of pulse rate with external bias and temperature are presented. The pulse 
interval duration can be characterized by a Poisson Point Process distribution that is 
dependent on both temperature and applied voltage bias. 

In addition, the aperiodicity of the interval between pulses can be used in a 
distributed processing system such as a micro-robotic swarm. Individual elements can be 
biased to perform random-walk operations in the absence of external stimuli. When 
stimuli are present, the individual elements can transition to periodic, goal-seeking 
routines. In this manner, a system capable of emergent behavior can be constructed from 
extremely simple circuitry. The advantages of a distributed processing system are that it 
can have very small elements that can penetrate unobserved into very sensitive places and 
that it is highly adaptive to a rapidly changing environment. 

The most important feature of the thyristor circuit is its scalability to very small 
dimensions. The fact that it is composed of three elements reduces the weight and cost of 
circuitry needed for a micro-robotic platform capable of swarming. The thyristor circuit 
is also an analog signal processor, which makes it fast and highly responsive to changing 
stimuli. Proof of concept of this distributed processing logic was observed through the 
use of macro-scale swarm platforms and a large-swarm computer simulation. 

The design of the micro-robotic platform was created using standard CMOS, 
MEMS and RIMS processes and tested with the aid of finite element analysis. The design 
presented is ready for fabrication. 


XV 



THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEET BLANK 


XVI 



I. INTRODUCTION 


The purpose of this thesis was to eharaeterize the behavior of a PNPN deviee in a 
pulse generating eireuit and then apply the results to a useful applieation. The first goal of 
this thesis is to show that the pulse interval distribution is dependent on temperature and 
bias voltage, and that the distribution of pulse intervals is deseribed by a Poisson Point 
Proeess model. The seeond goal of this thesis is to use the unique eharaeteristics of the 
pulse generating eireuit to design a distributed proeessing system of miero-robots that are 
eapable of swarming. 

This ehapter gives a brief introduetion to the physies of pulse generation using a 
PNPN deviee and outlines some previous experimental evidenee of the aperiodie nature 
of the pulse intervals. This is followed by a deseription of the data eolleetion method used 
to study the dependenee of inter-pulse duration on temperature and voltage bias. The 
seeond ehapter of the thesis deseribes the observed pulse rate dependenee on temperature 
and bias voltage. This is followed by an analysis of this behavior using a statistieal model 
and ehaos. The third ehapter presents an applieation of the unique eharaeteristies of the 
thyristor eireuit to a distributed proeessing system eapable of swarming. The final ehapter 
summarizes the results of this thesis and suggests some ideas for future researeh. 

A, ORIGIN OF PULSE GENERATION 

The spontaneous generation of voltage pulses in response to a DC bias is of 
partieular interest in applieations that require pulse mode logie. The arehetype for this 
behavior is the retinal neuron whieh operates as a pulse mode optieal sensor. A similar 
spontaneous pulse generation ean be aehieved with a four-layer semieonduetor deviee. 

Spontaneous generation of voltage pulses was observed in a eireuit that eonsists 
of an SCR in series with a parallel RC eireuit under a DC bias. The pulse rate was found 
to inerease with the DC bias and saturated as the pulse period reaehed the RC time 
eonstant. Injeetion of eurrent into the gate was also found to inerease the pulse rate [1]. 
Figure 1 shows a sehematie of a typieal pulse generation eireuit used. 


1 



Vdc 



Figure 1. SCR circuit schematic. 


In the off state, the SCR acts as an open and the capacitor drains off its charge 
through the resistor. When enough charge is depleted, the capacitor has a low enough 
voltage across it that the SCR can switch on, if the voltage across it exceeds the threshold 
voltage. When the SCR turns on, the charge on the capacitor fills up much faster than it 
can discharge through the resistor and the voltage across the SCR reduces until it is 
forced to turn back off The process repeats. 

Karunasiri [1] explains the switching behavior of the SCR as follows: 

As the DC bias across the SCR approaches the switching voltage, the 
injection of electrons and holes into the middle reverse biased p-n junction 
by the two outer forward biased p-n junctions rapidly increases as 
illustrated by the band diagram (in the inset of Fig. 2). These injected 
carriers sweep across the middle p-n junction and accumulate in the 
potential wells formed near the outer two p-n junctions as shown by the 
band diagram of the SCR (see the inset of Fig. 2). These accumulated 
charges tend to attract additional charge carriers with opposite polarity 
from the two outmost layers and the process quickly becomes 
regenerative. The accumulation of charges generates an increasing 
electric field in the middle p-n junction opposite to that of the applied bias 
causing it to forward bias sending the SCR to the ON state [1]. 


2 




Voltage (V) 


Figure 2. (Taken from Ref [1]) Measured current-voltage (I-V) 
characteristics of the SCR showing the on and off states. The switching 
voltage of the SCR is about 8.5 V. The inset shows the schematic band 
diagram and charge accumulation in the SCR just below the switching 
voltage (in the off state). The dashed line shows the load line of the circuit. 


This theory is derived from PN Hook Theory, which was first introduced in 1950 
by William Shockley to describe the switching mechanism of a PNPN device [2]. 


B, SUMMARY OF PREVIOUS EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 

In order to properly bias the SCR circuit for sustained pulsing operation, the 
capacitance must be chosen to be big enough to provide a low impedance path (~1 fl) 
given the switching rise time and the peak transient current (CVp / t) of the thyristor. The 
resistor must be chosen to be small enough to maintain the current needed for switching 
and large enough to keep the current below the holding current of the thyristor [1]. 

The observation of interest is that the inter-pulse time duration does not depend 
solely on the RC time constant as expected. Rather, it is intrinsic to the SCR and the 
strength of the DC bias across the circuit. The inter-pulse duration can be arbitrarily 

3 




increased by redueing the DC bias aeross the eireuit. At low bias, the rate of injeetion of 
minority earners into the reverse biased middle p-n junetion is relatively small whieh in 
turn slows the regenerative proeess and henee inereases the time required for generating 
the eleetrie field neeessary for switehing the SCR. This is also responsible for the 
aperiodie nature of the time intervals between pulses [1]. Figure 3 shows typieal 
observed voltage outputs for the thyristor eireuit for high DC bias (periodie) pulses and 
low DC bias (aperiodie) pulses. 



Figure 3. Typieal observed sequenees of pulses as a funetion of time or high 
DC bias (top) and low DC bias (bottom). The pulse height is 
approximately equal to the switehing voltage of the SCR. 

The pulse rate prior to saturation (due to the RC time eonstant of the eireuit) is 
determined by the amount of eurrent injeeted into the middle PN junetion by the two 
forward biased outer PN junetions. The bias dependenee of the injeeted eurrent ean be 
obtained using the standard diode equation and thus the average frequeney dependenee 
on bias is expressed as 


4 



(/) = /.expf^fe^ 

\ rjkT 


( 1 . 1 ) 


where;;is the ideality factor, is a parameter, and Vj is the threshold voltage for 

pulsing which depends on the switching voltage of the SCR [1]. By taking the inverse of 
both sides, the average time interval dependence of the PNPN device as a function of 
applied bias can be understood as follows: 


t) = tg exp 


rjkT 


where C = — is related to the RC time constant, 
/o 


C. DATA COLLECTION METHOD 

The purpose of data collection was to measure the pulse rate dependence of a 
thyristor circuit on temperature and voltage bias. It was also desired to examine the 
variation of inter-pulse time delay for a large time series of data at a constant temperature 
and voltage bias. It was determined that the best way to achieve these objectives was to 
record the time interval between pulse peaks. 

Data collection was conducted on the Motorola MBS4991 Silicon Bilateral 
Switch (SBS) connected to parallel RC circuit with C = 30 nF and R= 33 kQ . This is a 4 
layer PNPN thyristor device that exhibits pulse generation with random pulse intervals. 
Figure 4 shows the functional setup used for data collection. 


5 



Vdc 



TTL Pulse Converter 



m 


o o 



Pulse Interval Timer 


Figure 4. Experimental setup used for the measurement of a time series of 

pulses. 


The pulse generating circuit signal was fed through an attenuator into a TTL Pulse 
Converter which took the input of 16 V pulses and converted them to 5 V TTL pulses. 
This step is necessary since the pulses from the circuit are not capable of driving the 
counter directly. This TTL output was used as an input to a Pulse Interval Timer data 
acquisition program written in LABVIEW. The pulse interval times were recorded for 
65536 pulses per series. Each series was chosen for a particular temperature and DC bias. 
Temperature was manually controlled by the use of a thermo-electric heater/cooler with 
an accuracy of +1 L. Voltage was automatically controlled via a Keithly 230 
Programmable Voltage Source with an interface to LABVIEW. 

An Agilent Infmiium Oscilloscope (1 GSa/sec) was used to record the average 
voltage waveform characteristics of 32 pulses per series. Ligure 5 shows a typical voltage 
waveform output recorded by the Oscilloscope for a circuit with a 1 ms RC time constant. 
The yellow line is the voltage output across the resistor and the green line is the TTL 
conversion of the signal used for counting. 


6 


























Figure 5. Voltage output across the resistor (yellow trace) and the 
corresponding TTL pulse (green trace). 

1. LABVIEW Control 

The acquisition of pulse interval time was facilitated by the use of a computer 
control system. The 5V TTL pulses were fed into the computer via a National 
Instruments SCB-68 Counter/Timer PCI Board. The accuracy of the timer was set to 
±I0//s'. The pulse interval times were recorded via a LABVIEW Virtual Instrument 
script and output to a file tagged with the DC bias voltage and temperature information. 
For series with long pulse interval times, the number of counts attained was less than 
65536 because the total data acquisition time for each series was restricted to 24 hrs. 

The DC bias was also computer controlled via a PCIB interface to the Keithly 230 
Programmable Voltage Source. The power supply was accurate up to±l mV and could be 
computer controlled by 0.05 V increments. 

2, SBS Characteristics 

The switching voltage of the MBS4991 was experimentally determined by the use 
of an Agilent 4155B Semiconductor Parameter Analyzer. Figure 6 shows the observed 
I-V characteristics of the device. 


7 




































Figure 6. I-V Characteristics of the MBS4991. 

The Switching Voltage is about 8.42 V at a room temperature of approximately 
65 F. The manufacturer data sheet shows that the switching voltage has an approximately 
linear dependence on temperature [2], This dependence was experimentally verified for 
the range of temperatures 60-68 F. Figure 7 shows the experimentally determined results. 
It appears that the switching voltage remains relatively constant over the range of 
temperatures used. 


8 






IV CHARACTERISTICS 


x10'® 



Figure 7. Temperature dependence of switching voltage (use the same y-axis 

format as the Fig. 6). 


3, Pulse Generating Circuit Characteristics 

The SBS was placed in series with a parallel resistor and capacitor circuit. The 
resistance value chosen was 33 kQ. This resistance was small enough to maintain the 
current needed for switching and large enough to keep the current below the holding 
current of the SBS. The capacitance value chosen was 30 nF which was big enough to 
provide a low impedance path for the peak transient current during switching. The RC 
time constant of the circuit is about 1 ms. 


This time constant was experimentally observed to be the refractory period for the 
pulse generating circuit. During this time, no pulses were observed in any of the series. 


9 










THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEET BLANK 


10 



II. THYRISTOR CIRCUIT CHARATERISTICS 


This chapter discusses the observed pulse rate dependence on temperature and 
bias voltage of an SBS cireuit. This is followed by an analysis of this behavior using a 
Poison Point Proeess statistieal model and chaos. The goal is to show that the 
spontaneous pulse generation observed ean be classified as a memoryless proeess similar 
to that observed in action potentials of some biological neurons [4]. 

In order to measure the pulse rate dependence on voltage bias and temperature, 
the interval times between pulses was recorded for a set of bias and temperature values. 
Figure 8 is a typical output as a function of recording time. 

TIME SERIES OF INTERVALS (21.260V, 64F) 

50-1-1-1-1-1-1-1-1- 

45 - 

40 - 

35 - * - 


ii> 

t2.30 



Figure 8. Plot of time interval between pulse peaks as a funetion of 

recording time. 

There does not appear to be any sort of periodic behavior. The inter-pulse time 
intervals appear to vary randomly from pulse to pulse. 


11 






Period (s) 

Figure 9. Flistogram of inter-pulse time interval distribution. 

Figure 9 is a typieal time interval distribution for a series represented by a 
histogram. The distribution is divided into 100 equally wide bins and the height denotes 
the number of eounts in that bin. The histogram is normalized so that sum of the heights 
is unity. 

The average time interval of the distribution was observed to have an exponential 
dependence on both the bias voltage and the inverse of temperature as given by the 
empirical equation 1.2 as: 

_^{^sbs^^sbs.t) 

{t) = tf^e (2-1) 

A. MEAN TIME INTERVAL DEPENDENCE ON BIAS 

The dependence of mean time interval on the DC bias can be understood by 
analyzing the dynamics of the circuit. The voltage across the SBS is given by 

VsBs-V^c-V, ( 2 . 2 ) 


12 







The voltage aeross the resistor is a funetion of time and depends on the RC time 
eonstant of the eireuit and the voltage aeross the resistor during the steady state ON 
eondition of the SBS: 

(2.3) 

The time t is the mean pulse interval for the applied bias. The voltage Vp is the peak 
value of the voltage aeross the resistor, as seen in Figure 5. The voltage aeross the SBS 
ean be written using Equations 2.2 and 2.3 as follows: 

_j_ _j_ 

V=V-Ve^^=V-Ve^'^ 

'SBS 'DC ' 'DC ' (^. 4 ) 

where f is the mean firing rate whieh is the inverse of the mean time interval t. 

The mean frequeney was observed to have the following dependenee on bias [1]: 

— n 


The parameter in Equation 2.5 has absorbed the threshold term in Equation 1.1. The 
mean time interval is simply the inverse of frequeney: 

( 2 . 6 ) 


t - t^e 


rfkT 


We can rewrite this using Equation 2.4: 


t - t^e 


rjkT 


(2.7) 


This is a transeendental equation for t. 

Sinee at longer mean time intervals or at low bias, the exponential eontaining RC 
in Equation 2.7 is negligibly eompared to VDC and to can be found using the data in 
non-saturation region. Eigure 10 shows the mean time dependence on bias voltage. It is 
observed that at the non-saturation condition, the bias voltage is at a minimum when the 
mean pulse interval time t is equal to 0.69 s. 


13 



MEAN TIME INTERVAL DEPENDENCE ON BIAS (60F) 


10 


[3 


$ 10 It 

"ra 

e 

0) 

0) 


a; 10 


10 "' 


□ 


□ 


□ □ 


□ 


Saturation 


□ □ □ □ □ 


14.2 14.3 14.4 14.5 14.6 14.7 

Voltage Bias (V) 


Figure 10. Saturation occurs as the voltage bias approaches 14.75V 


At the non-saturation condition of Vdc = 14.20 V and tconstraint = 0.69 s and using 
Equation 2.7 with r\=2, the to can be determined as follows: 


f — f p 

^0 ^ constraint'^ 


r}kT 


( 2 . 8 ) 


Using Equation 2.8, we can now find the value of t that solves Equation 2.7 for a given 
applied bias. 

The exponential term contained within another exponential term makes this 
equation very sensitive to the value of Vp. Thus the dependence of Vp as a function of 
applied DC bias was measured and the result is shown in Eigure 11. 


14 







VOLTAGE RELATIONSHIPS (60F) 



Figure 11. Vp varies linearly with VDC. 


The linear slope equation shown in Figure 11 was used to compute the values of 
Vp for the fit. These smoothed out values were substituted into Equation 2.7 to get a 
filtered picture of the dependence of the mean time interval on the voltage bias. 

The fit must be calculated by using an iterative approach. By solving the 
transcendental equation, Equation 2.7, using a loop that tries to get an exact value for the 
predicted mean time interval for a given voltage bias, we can see that the fitting function 
provides a very good qualitative match to the data. Eigure 12 shows the results of this 
approach. 


15 









Figure 12. Iterative approach to finding the solution to Equation 2.7. The 
green dashed line shows the fit with Vp=0 in Equation 2.7, which shows 
the exponential dependence of the mean time interval on bias without the 
saturation condition imposed. The red line shows the effect of the RC 
constraint that leads to the saturation condition. 


The transition behavior of the iterative solution matches observations for other 
data sets. Qualitatively, the transitioning between aperiodic and periodic regimes can be 
understood by applying the maximum firing rate constraints of the RC circuit to the 
switching mechanism of the SBS, which is best described by PN Hook Theory. 


B. MEAN TIME INTERVAL DEPENDENCE ON TEMPERATURE 

The frequency parameter fo in Equation 2.5 is proportional to the diode saturation 
current Iq from the standard diode equation [1]. Iq is a function of temperature because it 
depends upon the carrier concentration directly and this minority-carrier concentration 
depends on temperature exponentially. If we stay well within the extrinsic range, the 
value of lo can be compared to Iq at some reference temperature To as follows [5]; 


Ml 

Wo) 


7 

T 

V^'oy 


Ejl 1 


k\T T„ 


(2.9) 


16 














The diode saturation current Iq is approximately exponentially dependent on temperature. 
This qualitative relationship can be seen in the manufacturer data sheet for the MBS4991 
Silicon Bilateral Switch produced by Motorolla [3]. Figure 13 shows this relationship. 

FIGURE 2 - SWITCHING CURRENT versus TEMPERATURE 



-75 -50 -25 0 +25 +50 +75 +100 +125 

Ta, ambient temperature ("O 

Figure 13. (Taken from Ref [3]) Switching current vs. temperature plot from 
the Motorolla MBS4991 SBS Data Sheet. The current is approximately 
exponentially dependent on temperature. 


This relationship can be used to define a to in Equation 2.7 that is a function of 
temperature; 






( 2 . 10 ) 


where is a parameter that represents the saturation time interval for the reference 

temperature To. Note that «1.66xl0'‘’j in Equation 2.16 is the bandgap energy 
between the conduction and valence bands of the PN diode outer regions [5]. 


17 




The switching voltage has very little sensitivity to temperature, as experimentally 
observed from Figure 7. This qualitative relationship can be seen in the manufacturer data 
sheet for the MBS4991 Silicon Bilateral Switch produced by Motorolla [3]. Figure 14 
shows this relationship. 



-75 -50 -25 0 +25 +50 +75 +100 +125 

Ta. ambient temperature (°C) 

Figure 14. (Taken from Ref [3]) Switching current vs. temperature plot from 
the Motorolla MBS4991 SBS Data Sheet. The switching voltage is weakly 
dependent on temperature compared to the switching current. 


The parameter to is proportional to the inverse of the diode injection current from 
the outer forward biased PN regions and thus has an effect on the rate at which the 
thyristor switches on due to filling of the potential wells in the PN Hook model. We can 
now rewrite Equation 2.7 to include temperature the effects to injection current given by 
Equation 2.10; 


t = tn 


^ T \ 
kT) 




vkTX VkT 


V —V £> 7?C 
^ nr * 


( 2 . 11 ) 


The diode ideality factor;; is also weakly dependent on temperature. There are too 
many unknown variables to provide good fit, but Equation 2.11 gives us a good 


18 



qualitative description of the behavior. Figure 15 shows the actual mean time interval 
data. Each color represents a different temperature. 



20 


20.5 


21 21.5 

Vbias (V) 


22 


22.5 


Figure 15. Mean time interval as a function of temperature. Each color is a 
different temperature and each data point represents a different bias. 


It is clear from the data that an increase in temperature greatly lowers the required 
switching current, as shown in Figure 13. It also slightly lowers the switching voltage 
required to turn on, as shown in Figure 14. This has the effect of shifting the curve left. 
The slope of the curve also decreases with an increase in temperature, because the mean 
time interval is exponentially dependent on the inverse of temperature and the ideality 
factor. 


C. STATISTICAL MODEL 

A memoryless process, such as a train of random pulses, depends only on the time 
of the last event. The probability of when the next pulse occurs depends only on when the 
last pulse occurs and has no dependence on any of the previous pulses. This behavior can 
be modeled using a Homogenous Poisson Distribution [6]. Homogenous denotes that the 
firing rate r is independent of time. 


19 



If we consider a total of N pulse spikes in a total time interval T, then the average 
N 

firing rate is given by r = —. Figure 16 illustrates this example. 





> 


Figure 16. Time series of spikes. 


If the probability that a spike does not occur between time 0 and time t is S(t), 
then the probability of a spike not occurring in time At is S(At). The probability of a 
spike not occurring between time 0 and t+At can be written as follows: 

( 2 . 12 ) 


5(t + At) = A(t)A(At) 


This relation holds true because each event is independent of the other. The probability 
S(At) can be rewritten using the above relationship and a Taylor Expansion of 
A(t +At): 


A(At) 


5'(t +At) 

S(') 




dt 


S{t) 


= 1 +- 


dt 


At 


S(() 


(2.13) 


The probability of finding at least one spike within At is equal to 1- S(At), thus 
using the result in Equation 2.13, the probability of firing within At is given by: 

^ ^ A(t) dt 


If the firing rate within At is equal to the probability of firing in At divided by the time 
interval At. If we assume that the firing rate within At is independent of time and is equal 
to the average firing rate r, then the following relationship exists: 

_l-A(At)^ 1 dS{t) 

At A(t) dt 


20 















The firing rate r is a eonstant, whieh means that the above differential equation has the 
solution; 


5(t) = e 


(2.16) 


This implies that the probability of not having a pulse deereases exponentially with time. 
The probability of firing for the first time in At and not within t ean be written as the 
produet of the probability of not firing within t and the probability of firing within At: 


P{t)At = S{t)(l-S{At)) = S{t) 


1 - 




dS{t) 


dt 


At (2.17) 


The probability density P(t) of firing within At for the first time is equal to the negative 
derivative of S(t) whieh is given in Equation 2.16; 


p(t) 


dS{t) 

—^ = re ' 
dt 


(2.18) 


Alternatively, the probability density given in Equation 2.18 ean be interpreted as the 
probability density for having pulse period of t. In other words, it gives the information 
about the distribution of pulse intervals. 

It ean be easily shown as follows that having n pulses within a time period T 
follows the Poisson distribution. If we eonsider a large time interval T, the probability of 
just on spike oeeurring in that interval is a eumulative probability equal to the sum of the 
probabilities of all the possible times a spike eould oeeur. The probability density of a 
single spike oeeurring at t for the first time is given by P(t). The probability that no spikes 
oeeur afterwards is equal to S(T-t). Thus, the eumulative probability funotionP^. (l) that 

only one spike oeeurs at any given time within the time interval T is the sum of all 
probabilities of a spike oeeurring at preeisely the time t and nowhere else; 

(1) = ^P[t)S[T-t)dt = Jre= rfe(2-19) 

0 0 


Similarly, the probability (2) of two spikes oeeurring within the time interval T 

is equal to the eumulative probability of a spike oeeurring at time ti, a spike oeeurring at 
time t 2 >ti, and a spike not oeeurring after t 2 ; 


21 



( 2 . 20 ) 


T T T T 

(2) = j j P(?, )P (?2 - 0- ^ 2 ) dt,dt^ = j j re-’^'={rT) 
0 0 0 0 




If we normalize this result for the variable A = rT, the probability funetion must be 
multiplied by a constant. This can be easily shown by the following integral; 


jp^(2)r//l = jlVV/l 

0 0 




= 2 ! 


( 2 . 21 ) 


For 3 spikes, the normalization constant is 3!, and so on. Thus, the probability of n spikes 
is the standard Poisson Distribution with respect to A : 

PA{n) = ^{^y ( 2 . 22 ) 

1, Effects of Pulse Width 

In our case that the spikes have a width that is greater than zero, the duration of 
the pulse is known as refractory period in which the probability of the next pulse 
occurring is zero. This is a behavior commonly observed in neurons [4]. The neuron 
cannot fire again until it has had time to reset [4]. Figure 17 illustrates the relationship for 
the inter-pulse wait time t = At+ tQ. 



Figure 17. Inter-pulse time At and refractory period to. 


The effect of pulse width can be taken into account by modifying the function S(t) 
as follows. Since the probability of not having a pulse during t = 0 and t = to, S(to), is 
unity, the probability of not having a pulse between 0 and t can be written as 


S(to)S(t-to) = S(t-to). Thus, using Equation 2.18, the probability density of having the first 
pulse at t can be written as; 


/>(() 


\re ^ \ t>ta 


0, t<L 


(2.23) 


In addition, the firing rate needs to be modified to accommodate the pulse width. The 

firing rate is the total number of spikes divided by the total time interval. Consider the 

22 






case of a single spike, the firing rate changes from zero during the refraetory period to a 
finite value during the inter-pulse period. The total number of spikes in an interval T ean 
be found by adding the contribution from the refractory period to the contribution from 
the inter-pulse period. This is equivalent to the number of spikes per inter-pulse period: 

N = r T +r T =r T (2.24) 

refract refract inter inter inter inter 

If we assume N = 1, then the average inter-pulse period time is equal to the 
average time between spikes minus the refractory period: 

(At) = (t-to) = (t)-to, t>t, 

Thus, the firing rate ean be defined as follows: 

N 1 1 

r. = - 

inter / 

r = < 


(2.25) 


4,er (^0 (0“^O 


t>L 


(2.26) 


r =0 

'refract 


t<ta 


Combining the Equations 2.23 and 2.26 the resulting probability density funetion 
(PDF) ean be obtained as follows: 


p{t) 


'inter^ ' ' ^ 


{t-k) 


ifiefract^ 


'^refract (^—^o) _ Q 


t<L 


(2.27) 


This PDF is properly normalized, as can be seen by the following integration: 


c» (t)-tn 












{‘}-k 


= e' 




= 1 (2.28) 


2, Mean Interpulse Time Interval and Variance 

The mean time interval between events ean be obtained using the probability 
density funetion given in Equation 2.27 as follows: 


23 



(2.29) 


t = 


= tP{t)dt = I rte =-1 xe '‘dx = - ^ xd{e 


t =- 


\jce ^ j ^ ~ \ ^ 

rto 

T = t^+[it)-t^) = {t), t>t^ 


■(-rt,e-"-) = (,+i 


It can be seen that as the pulse rate inereases, the average pulse interval reaehes the 
refractory period to as expeeted. 

The variance of the interpulse time intervals ean be derived as follows: 

_ CO ^^0 °° '■^0 °° 

= I rt^dt = | x^e^'^dx = | d (e 




= 


x^e ^ j ^ -2| xe'‘d'x =e-2 


r?n -rtt 


e " - 2 -rt^e " - e 


'•]) 


-tl +2to((t)-to) + 2((t)-to) 

■f=t^-T^=to +2to({t)-to) + 2({t)-tof-{tf , t>t^ (2.30) 


Thus, the expected result is = {t)-tg for a Poisson Process with a refractory period. 
This is a key characteristic of a Homogenous Poisson Process. 


D, TIME INTERVAL DISTRIBUTION 

The average time interval was observed to be time-independent. This was 
determined by eomparing mean interpulse time intervals for different sample sizes from 
the same series. The number of data points in the sample varied from 1000 to 65536. The 
estimated average interpulse time interval did not change as the number of data points 
increased. This is one of the requirements for a Homogenous Poisson Process. 


The time interval distribution was observed to have the following PDF: 


P{t) = 


, t>t 


^)-h 


0 


(2.31) 


0, t < L 


24 



The to used was the observed minimum of each data series and in all cases was equal to 
the refractory period of 1.0 ms which is the RC time constant of the circuit given by 
Equation 2.7. 

1, Mean 

The <t> used in the PDF fit was the observed mean interpulse time t of each data 
series. This is another key characteristic of a Homogenous Poisson Process. Figures 18- 
25 are plots of the PDF fit to data for temperatures 60 F and 68 F for a set of bias 
voltages. It is important to note that the fit is especially well suited to describe the 
behavior of the circuit just prior to saturation. 



Figure 18. PDF fit for 60F showing very long time interval (0-10 s) 
distributions for a set of bias voltages. 


25 







Figure 19. PDF fit for 60F showing long time interval (0-1 s) distributions. 



Figure 20. PDF fit for 60F showing short time interval (0-0.1 s) distributions. 


26 










Probability (event) Probability (event) 



21. PDF fit for 60F showing very short time interval (0-0.01 s) 

distributions. 



Figure 22. PDF fit for 68F showing very long time interval distributions. 


27 






Figure 23. PDF fit for 68F showing long time interval distributions. 



Figure 24. PDF fit for 68F showing short time interval distributions. 


28 









Figure 25. PDF fit for 68F showing very short time interval distributions. 

The PDF fit is an exeellent fit for all of the voltage and temperature series 
eolleeted. This suggests that the pulse generation is a spontaneous, memoryless proeess 
deseribed by the Poisson Point Distribution with a refraetory period. 

2, Variance 

The varianee was eomputed from the data and found to satisfy the following 
relationship; 

= ( 2 - 32 ) 

Figure 26 shows a eomparison of the expeeted to the aetual for one temperature set. 


29 



VARIANCE VS. VOLTAGE BIAS (64F) 


10 


10 - 


oT' 10 - 

<0 

a> 
o 
c 
.5 

I 10" 


10'® h 


10 






_]_I_I_I_I_I_I_i_ 


21.3 21 4 21.5 21.6 21.7 21.8 21.9 22 22.1 

Voltage Bias (V) 

Figure 26. Comparison of actual erf (blue) to expected erf (red) using 
Equation 2.41 for a constant temperature of 64F. 


The blue crosses are the data and the red squares are the fit. The fit appears to be 
very good. The results are the same for the other four temperature sets. This is the final 
confirming evidence that the pulse generation is a Poisson Process with a refractory 
period. The key idea is that it is a completely random process where the probability of a 
pulse occurring depends only the firing rate and the time of the last pulse. 


E. CHAOS ANALYSIS 

The time interval distribution of the pulse generating circuit is characterized by a 
Poisson Point Process with a refractory period. This is a memoryless process in which the 
generation of a pulse is completely random. There are two sates, ON and OFF, that 
depend on the external voltage bias and the temperature. The language of Chaos is 
helpful in further characterizing the behavior of the circuit 


30 



1, Power Spectral Density 

The most widely used analytieal tool is the power speetral density. MATLAB has 
an easy to use power spectral density tool called the Periodogram Power Spectral Density 
Tool [7]. This computes the Discrete Fourier Transform of the signal 


N-l 


Itt jkn 


n=0 


(2.33) 


where x[n] is the voltage waveform in time coordinates and 


L = 





(2.34) 


is the vector of frequency coordinates. The frequency is the sampling frequency an N 


is the total number of data points. The Fourier Transform is squared and normalized to 
get the resulting Power Spectral Density: 


pm= 




(2.35) 


Figure 27 is a Power Spectral Density for periodic (22.40 V, 60 F) and aperiodic 
(21.75 V, 60 F) pulsing circuits. The sampling frequency is assumed to be 1 klTz and the 
total time interval is 10 s. This corresponds to 10000 data points and aNyquist Frequency 
of 500 Hz. The voltage waveform was reconstructed from the time series of pulse interval 
lengths by assuming that the pulse firing event (rise time) occurs within 80 ns and 
therefore the maximum voltage falls into just one of the time bins. All of the other bins 
are set to the off state voltage, given by the experimental data. This is a bit artificial, but 
still demonstrates the difference in the frequency components of the firing rate for the 
two different operating regimes. 


31 



POWER SPECTRAL DENSITY ESTIMATE VIA PERIODOGRAM 


40 


20 


s 

TJ 

> -20 

c 

3 

TT 

2 -40 

u. 

% 

° -60 


-80 


-100 

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 

Frequency (kHz) 


Figure 27. Power Speetral Density via Periodogram for periodie pulse rate 
(22.40 V, 60 F, red line) and aperiodie (21.75 V, 60 F, blue line) pulse rate 
series. The firing rate of the periodie series has more high frequeney 
eomponents, as expeeted. 



The power speetrum ean be smoothed by an averaging funetion. This is usually 
done by windowing the data into a small segment, averaging what is inside the window, 
and then sliding the window aeross the entire speetrum. The windowing in a Weleh 
estimate is done using a Flamming window over n = 8 data points [7]. The Flamming 
window is defined as 


(jL)[k) = 0.54-0.46eos 


27rk 

n-l 


k = 0,1,...,n -1 


(2.36) 


All this window does is suppress the high and low frequeney components of the data 
inside the window for a nice smoothing effect. Figure 28 is a Power Spectral Density 
estimate via Welch method for the data in Figure 27. 


32 












































POWER SPECTRAL DENSITY ESTIMATE VIA WELCH 



Figure 28. Power Spectral Density via Welch for periodic pulse rate (22.40 V, 

60 F, red line) and aperiodic (21.75 V, 60 F, blue line) pulse rate series. 

The firing rate frequency components are the same as in figure 29, but 
with a much smoother estimate. 

The variance of the long time delay circuit is much larger than the variance of the 
short time delay circuit, which affects the shape of the spectrums at high frequency. 
Figures 27 and 28 show the firing frequency of the periodic series (22.40 V) has more 
high frequency components, as expected. The long time delay represents a less 
constrained process in which the distribution of firing frequencies corresponds to 
aperiodic operation. In contrast, the short time delay is a more constrained process, in 
which the firing rate of the device approaches periodic operation of IkHz. 

2, Embedding 

Embedding is used to detect memory within a process by looking at the 
dependence of the current value on the previous values. In this technique, a vector of data 
is shifted by one place and then plotted against itself Figure 29 is an embedding plot for 
a circuit operating with a very large average time delay between pulses. Figure 30 is an 
embedding plot for a circuit operating with a very small average time delay between 
pulses. 


33 

























EMBEDDING PLOT (21.75V,60F) 


0.9 - 
0 8 - 
0.7 - 


~ 06h 
<>> 

S 0.5 - 

4 04 

<0 

<0 

Q 0.3 - 


0.2 - 
0.1 - 
0 - 






♦ ♦» ^ ♦ ♦♦ ^ ^ ^ 

^ ^♦ 1*1 , ♦* ♦♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ * 
*. V***. ** » * 

* * ♦ * i*: t 


- 0.1 


0.2 0.4 0.6 

Data[n] (sec) 


0.8 


Figure 29. Embedding of a series characterized by a large mean time interval 

<t>. 

-3 


xIO 


EMBEDDING PLOT (22.40V,60F) 



3 4 

Data[n] (sec) 


xIO 


Figure 30. 


Embedding of a series characterized by a small mean time interval 

<t>. 


34 




Both of the embedding plots are highly dispersed. This is confirming evidence that the 
process is highly memoryless. 

A higher order embedding can be used to look for further detail. A plot of a third 
vector shifted by two against the 2D embedding plot produces a 3D embedding plot. 
Figure 31 is a 2nd order embedding plot for the large <t> case. Figure 32 is a 2nd order 
embedding plot for the small <t> case. 

3D EMBEDDING PLOT (21.75V,60F) 


1 ^ 
0 . 8 . 



Data[n+1] (sec) Data[n] (sec) 

Figure 31. Large <t> 2"‘* Order Embedding 


35 



3D EMBEDDING PLOT (22.40V,60F) 


x10'^ 


7 -. 

6 . 



Data[n+1](sec) U Data[n] (sec) 

Figure 32. Small <t> 2"^^ Order Embedding 


Once again, both of the 2"‘^ order embedding plots are highly dispersed. This is further 
proof that the process is highly memoryless. 

3, Lyapunov Exponent 

One of the key characteristics of a chaotic process is sensitivity to initial 
conditions. The Lyapunov Exponent is a measure of the exponential divergence of a 
system from two very similar starting conditions. It is computed using the following 
expression [8]: 

At 

(2.37) 

where Ato is the initial difference in time interval length and At is the final difference in 
the time interval length. Eor the pulse interval data, two time intervals within 10ms were 
chosen as start points. The two start points were propagated 20 steps, then the difference 
between the time intervals located 20 pulses ahead of each initial data point was 
computed. Eigure 33 is a plot of the propagation paths of two different data points for 20 
steps. 


36 



Propagation Path (21.75V,60F) 



Figure 33. Two propagation paths for two points that begin close together in 

Poincare phase space. 


The logarithm of the final difference over the initial difference is the Lyapunov 
Exponent for that 2 point data set. 20 Lyapunov Exponents were computed at random 
start points for a data set. The average of the 20 exponents is approximately the average 
Lyapunov exponent for the entire data series. Eigure 34 shows the average Lyapunov 
Exponent computed for the 60F temperature data set. 


37 






8 


Average Lyapunov Exponent (60F) 



22 22.1 

Voltage Bias (V) 


22.4 


Figure 34. Average Lyapunov Exponents for 14 different data sets with 

different bias at 60F. 


The deerease in Lyapunov Exponent eorresponds to a decrease in the variance of 
the average time interval distribution. This variance depends exponentially on the 
temperature and voltage bias. Thus, the aperiodic series are characterized by a strong 
sensitivity to initial conditions while the periodic series are characterized by a weak 
sensitivity to initial conditions. 

4, Autocorrelation 

The Autocorrelation Function is useful to determine whether there are higher 
order periodic patterns in a series of data. It is given by the following formula [9]; 

C(t) = jc(t + z-)c(r)Jr (2.38) 

The integral acts like a sliding window that multiplies the series times a selection of itself 
that is shifted along by the window. Figure 35 is a set of correlation plots for an aperiodic 
series. 


38 








Actual Data Used (21.75V,60F) 


Correlation of 1000 Point Sample with Data 



Figure 35. Correlation plots of various sample sizes with the entire series. The 

index is the order in whieh the data was reeorded in the series. 


Of partieular interest is the autocorrelation in the bottom right plot. The single 
large spike in the middle represents a perfect correlation, when the shift is zero. The 
smooth, triangular envelope of the rest of the plot is characteristic of randomness. This is 
evidence that there are no higher order relationships between pulse intervals. 


39 


























































































5, Correlation Dimension 

The correlation dimension is a useful tool to look for patterns in a very disperse 
embedding plot. The data is embedded in a 2D map which creates a trajectory of N-1 
points in Poincare phase space. For each point i on the trajectory, the number of points 
lying within the distance R of the point i are counted, with the exception of i itself. This 
number is Ni. Next, Pi=Ni/(N-l) is calculated to be the relative number of points within 
distance R of i. Figure 36 shows a graphical depiction of this counting mechanism. 


t+1 



Figure 36. Counting mechanism. 

The correlation sumC. is then computed for the space for the given R. The 

correlation dimension D*" is determined from the slope of the plot of correlation cum vs. 
R over the "scaling region" [8]. This is the region where R is between the minimum and 
maximum correlation sums. Figure 37 is a correlation sum plot for an aperiodic series. 
Figure 38 is the correlation dimension plot for the series in Figure 37. Figure 39 is a 
correlation dimension plot for a periodic series. 


40 





Slope of Correlation Sum Correlation Sum 


CORRELATION SUM (21.75V, 60F) 



Figure 37. Correlation sum for an aperiodic series. 


CORRELATION DIMENSION (21.75V,60F) 



Figure 38. Correlation dimension for the aperiodic series in Figure 39. 


41 




























25 


CORRELATION DIMENSION (22.40V,60F) 



Figure 39. Correlation dimension for a periodic series. 


The scaling region of the correlation sum plot has a smooth, gradually changing 
slope. This behavior is generally associated with random processes [8]. For both the 
aperiodic and periodic cases, the correlation dimension reflects the variance of the data. 

6, Conclusion 

The conclusion that can be drawn from chaos analysis is that pulse generation is a 
memoryless process. The temperature and voltage bias set the average firing rate 
somewhere between the periodic and aperiodic regimes. The pulse interval distribution 
exhibits a great deal of sensitivity to temperature and voltage bias. This sensitivity to 
initial conditions is the key defining characteristic of a chaotic system. Pulse generation 
within the inter-pulse period is observed to be a random process with a time independent 
firing rate. 


42 














III. APPLICATION OF PULSING CIRCUIT 


This chapter discusses the usefulness of the circuit to applications involving a 
distributed processing system capable of swarming. The first goal of this chapter is to 
show that the ability to transition between chaotic and periodic operating regimes is the 
key enabler of an emergent behavior swarming model. The second goal is to describe the 
successful construction of macro-robotic platforms capable of swarming using the SBS 
circuit studied in Chapter II. Finally, the design of a micro-robotic swarm using standard 
complementary metal oxide (CMOS), micro electromechanical system (MEMS) and 
Radioisotope Micro Power Source (RIMS) processes is presented. 


A, EMERGENT BEHAVIOR MODEL 

In his book Emergence , Steve Johnson defines self-organizing systems as bodies 
of individual entities whose behavior as individual entities results in a higher level of 
intelligence to guide that behavior [10]. This higher level of intelligence is unpredictable 
and is therefore classified as emergent behavior [10]. Archetypes in nature include 
flocking and swarming behavior. Eor example, a swarm of ants consists of individual 
units that have a limited piece of the big picture and a rather small instruction set, but act 
together to forage food, form bridges, construct complex hives and defend territory. The 
complex behavior that emerges is always unpredictable and is influenced by random 
events in the environment. This does not deter the ants from reaching their goal. Each ant 
is part of a distributed processing network that is decentralized and each ant has the same 
basic capabilities as the rest. 

1, Distributed Processing 

Swarming and flocking behavior can be modeled by genetic algorithms. John 
Koza, a consulting professor of computer science at Stanford, is credited as the creator of 
genetic algorithms which demonstrate emergent behaviors that arise from a distributed 
processing network [11]. His algorithms are widely used in research and have even been 
applied to combat simulations. The ISAAC project is one example of this type of combat 
modeling which was created in 1997 by the Center for Naval Analysis [12]. ISAAC has 
an impressive set of emergent behaviors that arise from a decentralized force of infantry 

43 



and armor units. These behaviors inelude forward advanee, frontal attaek, loeal 
elustering, penetration, retreat, attaek posturing, eontainment, flanking maneuvers, 
defensive posturing, "guerilla-like" assaults and eneirelement of enemy forees [12], Of 
partieular interest in the ISAAC model is that a deeentralized foree may able to evolve its 
own eommand and eontrol structure [12], This means that in the absence of a pre¬ 
ordained command and control unit, the force can carry on all of the functions of 
command and control required to reach its end state. 

If this model is applied to warfare, many ideas transcend from the archetypes in 
nature to next-generation combat forces. Individual units collect locally available data 
and act locally. This is an extremely important concept and is the next step beyond 
network-centric warfare. The global network that is established with network centric 
warfare enables real-time control of an entire operation’s execution. The data flow on the 
net can be over-driven, resulting in an “embarrassment of riches” for the operational 
commander and his staff. Further, the global network can be compromised by the enemy 
because it is required to operate continuously and individual units must be part of it in 
order to operate effectively. The emergent behavior model does not require real time 
command and control over a global network. Individual units only require interaction 
with their local environment and are collectively able to think and act globally via 
distributed processing. 

2, Artificial Intelligence 

Distributed Processing Systems are highly adaptive and like ISAAC, are capable 
of learning. The emergence of artificial intelligence is a science fiction term known as 
rampancy in which an AI has limited self-awareness and can adapt like a neural network 
[13]. In this approach, information operations and cyber warfare are used to disrupt 
information flow by exploiting a “self-aware” AI to respond to communication actions of 
the regime. The AI learns to be more effective as it operates. No kinetic force is required, 
rather the AI adapts to the local information flow and learns how to adapt to the 
environment and target the regime. The General can’t command if he can’t communicate. 
This adaptive learning concept was first realized in 1994 in the cutting edge adaptive AI 
of the Marathon videogame [14] and can be directly applied to Information Operations in 
Military Operations Other Than War. 


44 



All of the emergent behavior models require an understanding of complex 
systems capable of distributed processing. The fundamental enabler of a distributed 
processing system is the ability to transition between random and periodic processes. The 
capability to rapidly evolve and the speed of operation are key characteristics that make 
distributed processing systems highly desirable for use in warfare. 

3, Swarming 

One application of the thyristor pulse-mode logic is that it can be used in a 
distributed processing network. The ability to transition from chaotic to periodic pulse 
rate regimes is a key enabler for swarming. In the chaotic pulse state, the output can be 
used to enable a random walk process. In the periodic pulse state, the output can be used 
to enable a goal-seeking routine. The transition from random walk to periodic goal 
seeking is accomplished by application of input bias. 

4, Robot Design Concepts 

The thyristor circuit demonstrates both chaotic and periodic behavior based on 
voltage and temperature biasing [15]. Figure 40 shows typical outputs of the logic circuit. 


CHAOTIC BIAS 



► t 


V(t) 


PERIODIC BIAS 


rrrrrrrrrrrrw 


-> t 


Figure 40. Output voltage is across the thyristor. The thyristor cathode is 

grounded. 


This dual-mode of operation can be used to produce the required logic for a robot 
to swarm. It accomplishes this by biasing the thyristor circuit based on sensory input. The 
robot will have a sensor on each side that applies a voltage to the gate of a thyristor 
circuit used to drive a leg bank on the opposite side. In the absence of light, the leg bank 
will operate chaotically. In the presence of light, the leg bank will operate periodically 


45 






























and turn the robot towards the light source. Both leg banks operate independently and the 
end result is that the robot demonstrates random walk ability and can hunt for the 
brightest light source. 

The swarming robot design also requires an LED in the back of the robot. When 
other robots see this light source, they turn towards it. This characteristic allows flocking. 
If the robots can also sense a human IR light source, then the ones closest will turn 
towards it. The ones behind them will turn towards the ones in front. The ones behind 
them will turn and so on. The end result is a swarm directed towards the human. Figure 
41 shows an example of the sensor logic. 



Figure 41. The left diagram shows the turning effect that incident light has on 
the robot. The right diagram graphically depicts the sensor and emitter 

logic. 

5, JAVA Simulation of Swarming Behavior 

A simulation of swarming behavior was created using JAVA. Figure 42 shows the 
GUI that was designed to allow the user to control the swarm. The interface options allow 
the user to change the size of the swarm and to move the human light source to one of the 
four corners during the simulation. There is also the option to select one robot and watch 
its relative picture in the mini-map. This is a North-up view that moves with the robot 
and keeps track of its closest neighbors. The total intensities on the left and right sensors 
of the selected robot are tracked by the intensity meter. 


46 










Figure 42. Graphic User Interface (GUI) for a JAVA based large swarm 
simulation program. The green dots are micro-robots and they move 
according the physics rules defined in the program. The grey dots are 
micro-robots that have landed on their back during the initial deployment 
and are therefore unable to move. 


This simulation used the First Rayleigh-Sommerfeld solution for incoherent 
intensity addition on the sensor in order to account for the obliquity of the light sources 
on the sensor [16]. The robot sensor and emitter layout is identical to the picture in figure 
41. It was assumed that the light source was of uniform intensity for 180 degrees. It was 
desired to model the physics of light propagation and the intensity of the light source was 
added to the random signal drive power. This linear addition of speed to a random speed 
signal is an approximation to the actual thyristor logic, but the end result is the same. 

The simulation shows that in the absence of a light source, the robots exhibit 
flocking behavior. It is even possible to get the robots to mill in a circle if the sensor gain 


47 

























is increased. In the presenee of a strong light source, all of the robots turn towards it and 
elose in on it. If the sensor gain is tuned to allow floeking and while avoiding saturation 
by the strong light souree, swarming oeeurs. The robots elosest to the human turn towards 
it and close in. The robots behind them see the LEDS of the robots in front all leading to 
the human and turn towards them. The ones behind them turn as well. In seconds, most of 
the population of robots is speeding towards the human. 

The robots not engaged in swarming are looking away for another strong light 
source. If the light souree is moved to another eorner, it is these stray robots that are first 
to detect it, and within seconds the swarming begins anew. This is a demonstrated highly 
adaptive network. 


B. MACRO-SCALE ROBOT SWARM 

The power of the pulse mode thyristor circuit is its scalability. Because only three 
eomponents are required to produce the logic required for swarming, it is easy to make 
very simple devices that take advantage of the ability to scale the required circuitry down 
to a very small footprint. It was this idea that lead to the applieation of the pulse mode 
logie technology to micro-robot design. 

In order to test the design concepts for a Micro Electro-Mechanical System 
(MEMS) based micro-robot swarm, a macro-scale model of the swarm was desired. 
Three robots were construeted from standard electronics components and easily 
fabrieated ehasses. Pulse mode logie was suecessfully evaluated using these models. 

1. Design Considerations 

The maero-seale model was designed as proof of concept for the pulse mode 
logie. Beeause of this, off-the-shelf eomponents were seleeted to support the logie and 
sensing functions. The leg banks were replaced with wheels and DC motors and the 
power supply was eonstructed from 9V batteries. The resulting electronie eireuits 
operated as desired, but considerable attention had to be paid to reducing the noise caused 
by the motors. 


48 



2, Chassis Design 

The chassis was constructed from 3mm plastic and 1/32 scale battery operated 
monster trucks from Tamiya. The electronics were placed in an aluminum project box, 
and the sensors were mounted externally. Figure 43 shows pictures of the robot. 



Figure 43. Robot platform. 


The gearing of the toy trucks was such that the device has enough torque to allow 
a slow random walk signal to easily move the chassis. The big tires allow better grip, an 
independent power supply for each of the motors reduced the noise and allowed for ease 
of battery replacement. 

The front wheels are free to rotate and the rear tires are independently controlled, 
which allows for very sharp turns. This is of particular importance in simulating the 
hunting behavior of the device locking onto a light source and following it. 

3, Electronics Design 

The electronics were designed to allow the thyristor circuit to drive a single rear 
wheel based on an IR sensor input. Figure 46 shows a functional diagram of one side of 
the electronics. 



Figure 44. Robot functional diagram. 


49 























The actual schematic of the electronics circuit constructed is found in the appendix. All 
electronics were hard wired in sockets on perf-board for ease of component replacement. 

4, Power Supply 

The power supply was reduced in size to three 9V batteries in order to reduce the 
weight of the vehicle. Because of this, there are many filter components to prevent cross¬ 
talk between the left and right sensor circuits. A small resistor was added in series to 
prevent the thyristors from switching on when the power was switched on. 

5, Voltage Regulator 

One of the key requirements for operation of the pulse generating circuit is a 
stable -I-17VDC bias. This was accomplished by use of a voltage regulator circuit. An 
externally mounted potentiometer allows manual tuning of the DC bias in order to 
compensate for ambient light sources and temperature variations. This method of power 
regulation actually worked quite well and should be considered for more complex micro- 
robotic designs. 

6, Sensing and Logic 

This element is at the heart of the design. It consists of a Silicon Bilateral Switch 
pulse generating circuit and a photo diode connected to the gate of the thyristor. Figure 
45 shows the schematic for this element. 



Figure 45. Sensing and logic. 

The photo diode injects current into the gate in proportion to the intensity of the 
light it detects. This current changes the pulse rate of the circuit. In the absence of light, 
the circuit pulses chaotically. In the presence of light, the device transitions to periodic 


50 



operation. The light eould be incident on the thyristor gate itself, but the casing to the 
thyristor would have to be removed. It was much easier to use a photodiode. 

The refractory period is given by RC = 1.0 ms. The success of the sensor and 
logic circuit is heavily dependent on photodiode selection. The ideal case is a large area 
photodiode with low dark current and at least 1 mA peak current. It is important to note 
that this is analog signal processing. It is very fast and requires only four components. 
The downside is that it is more susceptible to thermal noise than a digital circuit. 

7. Pulse Converter 

One of the problems introduced by having DC motors is having a sufficient drive 
signal to turn the wheels when the input is chaotic. If the spike train is transformed into a 
constant DC voltage by a tachometer circuit, the random walk behavior is lost because 
the DC motor does not develop sufficient power to turn the wheels. This was overcome 
by converting the spikes into rectangle pulses with a mono-stable multi-vibrator circuit. 
This allows full-ON and full-OFF operation of the motor. The random walk behavior is 
translated into a stutter which is very effective at turning the vehicle. 

8. Motor Control Circuit 

The pulses generated by the pulse converter are applied to the gate of a FET. This 
FET acts as a switch which powers the motor via a separate 3V battery power supply. 
The EET also acts as isolation between the noisy DC motor and the motor-controller 
electronics. The DC motors are very cheap and produce a great deal of sparking. The 
large capacitor acts as a filter to reduce some of that noise. With a better motor, most of 
the supporting fdter circuitry could be removed. 

9. Results 

The three Macro-Scale Robots successfully demonstrated random walk behavior 
in a variety of temperature and ambient light environments. They also demonstrated a 
stunningly efficient ability to detect a broadband light source, slew in the direction of that 
source and then move rapidly towards it while adjusting course to get both sensors to 
look straight at it. This hunting ability is ideal for swarming. The gradual transition 
between chaotic and periodic operation was also observed. 

Elocking behavior was demonstrated by placing a light source on the back of one 
robot and letting another robot follow it. When the lead robot’s random walk shined its 

51 



light source away from the trailing robot, the trailing robot transitioned back into random 
walk. In the presence of a swarm, this behavior will keep the group coherent. 

One design consideration was that the trailing robot would tailgate the lead robot 
because it was moving faster due to a higher pulse frequeney. This undesirable behavior 
was eliminated by mounting the sensors in sueh a way that there was a deteetion dead 
zone directly in front of the robot. Figure 46 illustrates this concept. 



Figure 46. Sensor placement requires a shallow dead zone in front to eounter 
the tailgating effect of one robot directly behind another. 

Proof of concept for pulse mode optical detection and processing was achieved. 
The success of the macro-robot design paves the way for MEMS based micro-robot 
design and provides lessons learned for future work. 

C. MICRO-SCALE ROBOT SWARM 

Micro-robotics requires simplieity of design and adaptability to the environment. 
This can be aecomplished through the use of a distributed processing network. Individual 
robots have aceess to local information but interact with each other to produce a global 
behavior. The archetype for this model ean be found in the theoretical work of emergent 
behavior theory [10]. The key enabler of a miero-robotie design is the integration of 
CMOS and MEMS in a monolithie structure. The electrical and mechanical properties of 
a 300//m micro-robot can be successfully simulated and evaluated for application to 
swarming logic with finite element analysis. 


52 





1, Simple Logic 

The motivation for creating a micro-robotic swarm is to demonstrate the 
capability of a simple logic circuit in developing a distributed processing system. The 
circuit consists of a thyristor in series with a parallel capacitor and resistor circuit. Figure 
47 shows a schematic of the circuit. Note that the output is across the thyristor itself 



Figure 47. Thyristor circuit. 
Figure 48 shows typical outputs of the logic circuit. 



V(t) PERIODIC BIAS 



53 


































The spectrum of operation between chaotic and periodic pulse rates can be used to 
produce the required logic for the robot to swarm. It accomplishes this by biasing the 
thyristor circuit based on sensory input. The robot has a sensor on each side that applies a 
voltage to the gate of a thyristor circuit used to drive a leg bank on the opposite side. In 
the absence of light, the leg bank will operate chaotically. In the presence of light, the leg 
bank will operate periodically and turn towards the light source. Both leg banks operate 
independently. Figure 49 shows the layout of the micro-robot design (the robot is upside 
down in the picture). 

It is important to note that the circuit configuration was chosen to keep the legs 
grounded. This allows the legs to make contact with surfaces that are not insulators. This 
is of importance if the platform is used as a weapon against electronics. 



Figure 49. Micro-robot design. 


54 




The design has an LED in the back of the robot. When other robots see this light 
source, they turn towards it. This characteristic allows flocking. If the robots can also 
sense a human light source, then the ones closest will turn towards the human. The ones 
behind them will turn towards the ones in front. The ones behind them will turn and so 
on. The end result is a swarm. 

The power supply is a critical design feature. The current state of the art power 
supply is Radio Isotope Micro Power Sources (RIMS) technology, which is ideally suited 
for use in high-energy, low power applications. The power supply will be used to slowly 
charge a capacitor, and the capacitor will discharge with current suitable for switching of 
the thyristor. This design concept has already been successfully implemented in the 
macro-scale model as discussed in section III.B. 

2, Fabrication Process 

The micro-robot design incorporates both CMOS and MEMS onto a single 
structure. The electronics components will be fabricated on the assumptions of the SOI- 
SCMOS process that is available from MOSIS [17]. The advantage of this process is that 
is multi-user and therefore has a low cost of fabrication. Eigure 50 shows the SCN3M 
CMOS process layers that are available for the design. All of the layers are used. 



Eigure 50. SCN3M CMOS process. 


The structural components will be fabricated by adding additional layers of oxide 
and poly-silicon via a custom post-CMOS MEMS process similar to IMEMS [18]. Eigure 
51 shows the custom MEMS process. 


55 
























POLY 



Figure 51. MEMS process. 


The nitride layer acts as a barrier to prevent the CMOS oxide from being etched 
when the MEMS oxide is released. An important consideration is the stresses inherent in 
the poly-silicon leg structure. Because the MEMS process is a follow on to the CMOS 
process, the temperature used for annealing must be low enough to prevent damage to the 
CMOS metals and oxide. This requires careful management of the stress gradients so that 
the legs bend away from the substrate with the minimal possible deflection. Another 
mitigating factor is that the leg is 3 pm above the CMOS structure, so some bending is 
acceptable. 

The final step will be to deep RIE etch around each robot and then release the top 
of the SOI wafer. The proof of concept that the micro-robot can operate its legs according 
to a swarming logic is immediate the goal. Therefore, the integration of a RIMS power 
supply and a GaAs LED will not be accomplished in the first fabrication run. 

The micro-robot is required to demonstrate an ability to move according to 
sensory inputs. This will be accomplished by using PN diodes as light sensors to bias the 
thyristors for chaotic or period pulse mode operation. These thyristor pulses will be used 
to pull-in and release the leg structures in order to allow the robot to hop. The legs will be 
pulled forward as well as up so that the momentum of the released leg moves the robot up 
and forward. 

3, Finite Element Simulation 

Both the electrical and mechanical properties of the micro-robot design were 
modeled in COMSOL, a multi-physics finite element program. The fabrication layout file 


56 





















was generated in LEDIT using the SCN3M design rules for CMOS proeessing. 
Additional layers were added to the SCN3M layout in order to add the eustom CMOS 
proeess. 


The two important design eonsiderations in the miero-robot are the leg banks and 
the thyristor eireuits. The leg banks are an eleetro-meehanieal system and the thyristor 
eireuit is a solid state eleetronies system. Eaeh of these systems was evaluated 
analytieally and then modeled using finite element analysis. 

4. Leg Structure 

The leg banks were designed aeeording to the requirement that the applied voltage 
on the pull-in eapaeitor ereated suffieient deflection of the leg to allow the robot to move 
forward. The analytical model uses a balance of forces equation for the spring force of 
the beam and the Maxwell force of the capacitor. The standard force balance equation 
for a cantilever beam as follows [19]; 


Ebhh sAV^ 

-^'- 

4L^ 2g^ 


= 0 


(3.1) 


The electrical circuit is capable of applying a 16 V bias to the leg actuator 
capacitor which can then be rapidly decreased to 0 when the thyristor turns on. When the 
thyristor turns back off again, the voltage slowly builds back up to 16 V. The result is that 
the 16 V is applied over a long period of time and the leg is able to come to a stable, fully 
cocked position. When the thyristor turns on, the leg is almost instantly released and the 
spring force of the beam drives the end of the leg down without the opposing Maxwell 
force to slow its decent. The momentum of the collision with the ground drives the robot 
up and forward in a hop. 

Eor a lOOnm deflection of a 100 jum x l//mx \ jum beam and a 50 pm long 
capacitor plate, the applied bias voltage can be calculated analytically to be 22.1 V. This 
is close to the desired voltage of 16 V. Eigure 52 shows the result of finite element 
analysis for three different size capacitors for an applied voltage of 16 V. 


57 




LENGTH OF CONTROL 

CAPACITOR 

40x10 "m 

50x10 

60x10 

DISTANCE OF TOTAL 

DISPLACEMENT 

5.1xl0^^m 

8.7x10'm 

1.3xl0^"m 

CAPACITANCE OF LEG 

ASSEMBLY 

6.4x10 

7.8x10’"’F 

9.3x10 ‘'^F 




Figure 52. Beam deflection calculation for different size capacitor plates. 


The actual jump height of the micro-robot can be calculated analytically using 
conservation of energy. The following is the energy balance equation [19]: 


1 

1 

E„bh’ '' 

^2 

1 


M\g\ 

2 

AT^ 

K J 


2M\g\ 

1 2g^ J 


For 16 V applied and 50 legs with an average capacitor plate length of 50um and a 
1 OOnm deflection, the jump height can be computed to be 0.67 /urn . 

Three different sized capacitor plates are used. In the front the plates are 60 qm, 
in the middle they are 50 qm and in the back they are 40 qm. The reason is that the extra 
energy in the forward legs causes the front of the robot to tilt up. This causes the rear end 
to hit the ground first and give greater obstacle clearance height. 

The COMSOL model of the electro-mechanical leg system was created using 
Structural, Electrostatic and ALE models. The structural model computed all of the 
bending stress and added the Maxwell force generated in the electrostatic model to get a 
total beam deflection. The ALE deformable mesh model allowed the electrostatic and 
mechanical systems to be coupled without having to use an iterative solver routine. This 
is a very powerful technique for multi-physics coupling. 

5, Thyristor Circuit 

The thyristor circuit was first modeled analytically by determining the required 
capacitor and resistor values for a given switching voltage to produce the correct bias for 

58 





















chaotic operation. The resistance was ehosen to bias the thyristor eireuit at the switch 
point of the IV eurve. The following relationship was used to determine the required 
value of the resistanee, 16A:Q ; 


V 

Holding 

^Holding 


<R< 


V. 


Switch 


' Switch 


(3.3) 


The eapaeitanee was ehosen to hold more eharge than the reverse biased junetion 
of the thyristor. The following equation was used to determine the value of the 
eapaeitanee, 8.5x10 


^Thyristor 


s A 

^ Oxide '^Capacitor 


Sa 


apacitor 


(3.4) 


The eapaeitanee of the thyristor was determined from finite element modeling with 
COMSOL. It is important to note that the eapaeitanee of the leg assembly is mueh less 
than that of the eireuit eapaeitor, so it will have a minimal effeet on the biasing of the 
thyristor eireuit. 

The doping and dimensions of the thyristor were taken from thesis work 
eompleted by David Moore [16]. These eharaeteristies were used to model the eleetrieal 
behavior of the thyristor under an applied voltage and to determine the switehing voltage 
of the deviee. The COMSOL model of the solid state thyristor eireuit was ereated using 
Eleetrostatie and Diffusion models plus an ODE to simulate the external eireuit. The 
Eleetrostatie model eomputed the potential aeross the deviee and the diffusion model 
ealeulated the eleetron and hole eoneentrations in the deviee. Eigure 53 is a eross-seetion 
plot of the hole eoneentration aeross the thyristor. The drain is on the left, the souree is in 
the middle, and the gate is on the right. The depletion region ean be elearly seen where 
the blue line is. The eontour lines represent potential. 


59 



>^(9^ Sulfdce: loglO(cp) Contour: Elecdic potential [V) 


Max; 19.602 
I-10,194 H 



Figure 53. Cross section of hole concentration in a thyristor device with no 
bias applied. The contour lines represent built-in electrostatic potential. 


The switching voltage was predicted by COMSOL to be 16.1V. Figure 54 shows 
a plot of the voltage across the device. The middle PN junction is reversed biased as 
expected. 


60 













Va(1610) = 16.09 Surface; Electric potential [V] Height; Electric potential [V] Contour; Electric potential 
(V] Streamline: Electric fielcJ (V/m] 



112 


10 


Max; 15.^ Max: 15.£ 
15.49< 


14.70$ 

13.925 

13-14] 

12.35; 

11.573 

10.78$ 

10.005 

9.221 

8.437 

7.653 

6.869 

6.085 

5.301 

4.517 

3.733 

2.949 

2.165 

1.381 


1—10.597 
Min: 0.59 Min: 0.20! 


Figure 54. Fleight and surface coloring reflect electrostatic potential across the 
thyristor for 16.01 V applied to the anode. The red lines are electric field. 


Figure 55 shows the current as a function of the applied voltage. The solution stops 
converging at the switching voltage. 


Thvristor Source Current Per Micron Width 



Figure 55. I-V characteristics of the thyristor. Units slvqA! jum . 

61 


16 










































6, Results 

The analytic and finite element analysis was used to generate a layout for the 
micro-robot in LEDIT. The length of the thyristor required was made to be32//m which 
results in a switching current of 51.2//y4. The resistance value required for the circuit 
bias was then determined to bel6A:Q. This translates to 484 squares of CMOS poly. 
Finally, the CMOS metal capacitors needed to be 50//mx50//m in order to have a 
capacitance of 8.5 x 10. The final dimensions of the micro-robot are 290/um x 310//m. 
Figure 56 shows the FEDIT layout that will be used for fabrication. 


LEGS 
THYRISTOR 
RESISTOR 
CAPACITOR 
PN DIODE 
POWER 



Figure 56. FEDIT layout using SCN3M rules and custom MEMS layers. 


The fabrication of a micro-robot platform that is capable of swarming is possible. 
The first step is to have a working electro-mechanical system. A CMOS/MEMS process 
can be used to create that system. Follow on work will integrate a RIMS power supply 
and a GaAs FED light source so that the platform is totally autonomous. 

There are a number of hurdles yet to overcome. The first is to ensure adequate 
electrical isolation between thyristor circuits. The second is to overcome inherent stresses 
of MEMS fabrication. The third and most difficult is to ensure that the thyristor is 

62 
































































































































correctly biased for chaotic operation at room temperature. With these challenges met, 
the future of emergent behavior micro-robotics is bright. A swarm of micro-robots can 
penetrate and destroy electronics, collect hazardous materials, form self-assembling 
structures, transmit targeting data and perform many other useful applications. 


63 



THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEET BLANK 


64 



IV. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 


It was determined that the behavior of the thyristor pulse generating cireuit is 
deseribed by the Poisson Point Proeess statistieal model; 


P{t) = 


^ -e«-\ t>U 




(2.27) 


0, t < tn 


The mean time interval is related to temperature and voltage bias by the following; 


(0 = ^0 


q 

rjkT 


(2.7) 


The refraetory period to is related to the RC time eonstant of the eireuit; 


t,=RC 


(2.25) 


Thus, the pulse rate and varianee of the distribution ean be eontrolled by the 
proper applieation of voltage bias. It was also observed that the injeetion of eurrent into 
the gate produees the same effeet as inereasing the bias voltage. PN Hook Theory offers a 
qualitative deseription of the behavior of the pulse generating eireuit that suggests that 
eurrent multiplieation is highly sensitive to temperature and voltage bias. 


A. DISTRIBUTED PROCESSING 

The thyristor eireuit and a photo diode were implemented as an effeetive pulse 
mode optieal deteetor capable of operation in both periodic and chaotic regimes. This 
circuit consists of four components and can be scaled in size to very small dimensions 
because of this simplicity. 

The pulse mode optical detector behaves like a biological neuron and can be used 
for distributed processing logic in a neural network. This concept was successfully 
applied to a macro-scale robotic platform capable of emergent behavior swarming and 
was a key enabler of the micro-robotic swarm design. 

A micro-robotic platform capable of swarming is easily attainable using current 

MEMS/CMOS/RIMS fabrication methods, and is far from cost-prohibitive. The proposed 

65 



swarming platform is highly adaptive to a changing environment and can be easily 
adapted for specialized missions because of the simplicity of the design. 


B, FUTURE WORK 

The power of this distributed processing system is in its scalability. Future work 
should seek to apply the aperiodic pulse-mode logic to other micro-scale systems that are 
required to learn and adapt to the environment quickly. 

The proposed micro-robotic swarm can be used as a weapon against electronics, 
collect hazardous materials, form self-assembling structures, and transmit targeting data. 
By changing the physical characteristics of the platform, it is not hard to imagine that this 
swarm could operate in the cold vacuum of space or in the harsh atmosphere of Mars. 

Future work should be directed at making this swarm capable of other distributed 
processing tasks. The power of emergent behavior systems is that they are highly 
adaptable and can exhibit a variety of complex behaviors required for attaining and end- 
state. Some possible applications of the pulse generating circuit include a self-healing 
sensor network, neural enhancement in humans such as artificial vision for the blind, 
neural networks based on analog pulse-mode logic, and off-world terra-forming and 
space exploration. 

The simplicity of the device and the complexity of its behavior suggest its 
applicability to the creation of neural network artificial life. This is an endeavor that 
should be seriously considered as a means to enhance human understanding of complex 
systems and enable humans to master the challenges of survival in the new century. 


66 



APPENDIX 


MACRO-SCALE ROBOT SCHEMATIC 


HH 


Hh 






% 


cc 

u 

o 

Cu 


67 





























































THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEET BLANK 


68 



LIST OF REFERENCES 


1. Gamani Karunasiri, “Spontaneous Pulse Generation Using Silicon Controlled 
Rectifier,” Applied Physics Letters, Vol. 89, pp.1-3, 2006 

2. W. Shockley, Electrons and Holes in Semiconductors with Applications to Transistor 
Electronics, D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc., NY, 1950, pp.l 11-113 

3. Motorolla MBS4991/4992/4993 Technical Data Sheet, Motorolla Semiconductor, Inc., 
www.motorolla.com , last accessed 1 July 2006. 

4. N. Y. S. Kiang, T. Watanabe, E. C. Thomas, and L. E. Clark, Discharge Patterns of 
Single Fibers in the Cat’s Auditory Nerve, Cambridge, Mass.; M.I.T. Press, 1965. 

5. Richard A. Greiner, Semiconductor Devices and Applications, McGraw-Hill, NY, 
1961,p.l22 

6. David Heeger, FTP document “Poisson Model of Spike Generation,” 05 Sep 2000, 
pp.4-5, www.cns.nvu.edu/~david/ftp/handouts/poisson.pdf last accessed 30 July 2006 

7. MATEAB Online Help File: “Power Spectral Density,” MATEAB 7.1 Software, The 
MathWorks, Inc, 1994-2005 

8. R.C. Hilbome, Chaos and Nonlinear Dynamics, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 
U.K., 1994 

9. MATEAB Online Help File; “xcorr (Signal Processing Toolbox),” MATEAB 7.1 
Software, The MathWorks, Inc, 1994-2005 

10. Steve Johnson, Emergence: The Connected Lives of Ants, Brains, Cities and 
Software, Scribner, NY, 2001 

11. Website: “Home Page of John Koza,” http://www.genetic- 
programming.com/iohnkoza.html , last accessed 1 Aug 2006 

12. Andrew Ilachinski, Irreducible Semi-Autonomous Adaptive Combat (ISAAC): An 
artificial Life Approach to Land Warfare (U), Center for Naval Analyses, Alexandria, 
VA, 1997 

13. Website: “Neural Network,” http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neural network , last 
accessed 1 Aug 2006 

14. Greg Kirkpatrick, Webpage: “Marathon’s Story,” 
http://marathon.bungie.org/storv/rampancv.html , last accessed 1 Aug 2006 


69 








15. David A. Moore, “Optical Detection Using Four-Layer Semiconductor Structures,” 
Naval Postgraduate School, Master’s Thesis, June 2005 

16. Joseph W. Goodman, Introduction to Fourier Optics, Ed., Roberts and Company, 
Englewood, Colorado, 2005 

17. ETP Document: “MOSIS SCMOS Design Rules,” MOSIS, 
http://www.mosis.org/Technical/Designrules/scmos/scmos-main.html, last accessed 1 
Aug 2006 

18. J.H. Smith, et. all, “Embedded Micromechanical Devices for the Monolithic 
Integration of MEMS with CMOS,” Sandia National Eaboratories, Proc. 1995 lEDM, 
pp.609-612 

19. Stephen D. Senturia, Microsystem Design, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, 
MA, 2001 


70 



INITIAL DISTRIBUTION LIST 


1. Defense Technical Information Center 
Ft. Belvoir, Virginia 

2. Dudley Knox Library 
Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, California 

3. Professor Gamani Karunasiri, Code PH/Kg 
Naval Postgraduate School 

Monterey, California 

4. Dr. Richard Waters, Code 2876 (MEMS) 

SSC-SD 

San Diego, California 

3. Mr. William G. Glenney IV, Deputy Director CNO Strategic Studies Group 
Naval War College 
Newport, Rhode Island 


71 



