/ 



NASA CASE NO. LAB_1M 

PRINT FIG. J 

NOTICE 



'% 



The invention disclosed in this document resulted from research in aeronautical 
and space activities performed under programs of the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration. The invention is owned by NASA and is, therefore, available for 
licensing in accordance with the patent licensing regulations applicable to U.S. 
Government-owned inventions (37 CFR 404.1 el sea,.). 

To encourage commercial utilization of NASA-owned inventions, it is NASA 
policy to grant licenses to commercial concerns. Although NASA encourages 
nonexclusive licensing to promote competition and achieve the widest possible 
utilization, NASA will provide the necessary incentive to the licensee to achieve early 
practical application of the invention. 

Address informational requests for this invention to the Technology 
Applications Team, NASA Langley Research Center, Code 200, Hampton, Virginia 
23681-0001. 

Address applications for license to the Patent Counsel Office, Mail Stop 212, 
3 Langley Boulevard, Hampton, Virginia 23681-0001. 



Serial No.: 08/644,655 

Filed: 04/23/96 LaRC 



NASA Case No. LAR 151 59-1 -SB 



STRAIN INSENSITIVE OPTICAL PHASE LOCKED LOOP 



AWARDS A RSTRACT 



An apparatus is provided to allow for quasi distributed sensing of strain within a 
test object. Strain insensitive fiber is used to deliver a light signal to a strain 
sensitive fiber in an optical phase locked loop sensor configuration. The use of 
strain insensitive delivery fiber allows for non-integrated measurements of strain 
without the use of expensive electronics such as those employed in ODTR 
techniques. 

The novelty of the present invention lies in the use of strain insensitive multimode 
fiber. The inventors had previously developed a similar sensor with strain 
insensitive fiber, however it was restricted to the use of single or few mode fibers. 
The use of an optical phase locked loop arrangement allows for the use of 
multimode strain insensitive fiber. 



Inventors: 
Address: 



Employer: 



Claudio Oliviera Egalon 
2658 N. Armistead Ave. B-2 
Hampton, VA 23666 
SSN:| 
AS&M 



Robert S. Rogowski 
109 Wicomico Turn 
Yorktown, VA 23693 

SSN: 
NASA LaRC 



Initial Evaluator: none 



Serial No.: 08/644,655 
Filed: 4/23/96 



10 



15 



20 



LAR 151 59-1 -SB -1- PATENT APPLICATION 

STRAIN INSENSITIVE OPTICAL PHASE LOCKED LOOP 



Origin of th e Invention 

The invention described herein was jointly made by an employee of 
the United States Government and a contract employee during the 
performance of work under NASA Contract No. NAS-1 -19236. In 
accordance with 35 U.S.C. 202, the contractor elected not to retain title. 



Background of the In vention 

1. Technical Eieid_of the Invention 

The present invention relates generally to distributed monitoring of 
strain in a structure through use of embedded or surface mounted optical 
fibers and specifically to strain monitoring with an optical phase locked 
loop (OPLL). 

2. Discussion o f the Re lated Art 



Optical fibers may be attached to a structure for the purpose of 
monitoring strain. As the structure is strained, embedded fibers or fibers 
25 affixed to the surface of the structure will undergo strain as well. As the 
fibers are strained, the light transmission characteristics are altered in a 
known manner, allowing one to extract information about the strain in 
the structure. 



LAR 15159-1-SB -2- PATENT APPLICATION 

Optical fibers may be generally classified as single mode, few 
mode or multimode fibers. These classes refer to the number of modes 
propagating through the fibers. The light transmitting cores of single 
mode fibers are very small, on the order of a few microns in diameter so 
5 that only one mode may be transmitted. These fibers are more 

expensive and more difficult to work with than larger, multimode fibers 
which usually have cores on the order of 100 microns. Few mode fibers 
fall between these two categories. 

As a fiber is strained, the optical path length of light traveling 
10 through the fiber is altered. This produces a phase shift in the light 

exiting the receiving end of the fiber. It is by detecting the phase shift 
that strain information is extracted. 

One simple example of the use of this is a pair of single mode 
fibers, one is attached to the test object and one is held as a reference. 
1 5 They are employed in an interferometer configuration and as the test 

object is strained the test fiber will also be strained. The reference fiber 
will not be subject to strain and through the use of the interferometer 
changes in phase may be compared between the two fibers. 

One of the drawbacks of this type of monitoring is that the 
20 information about strain is necessarily integrated over the length of the 
detecting fiber. That is, since the phase change depends on the change 
in optical path length of the entire fiber, the strain information reflects 
strain in the entire fiber. In a test object having widely varying strain 
response or in an object in which strain is important at specific points 
25 rather than in the object as a whole, integrated measurements are not 
very useful. 

Egalon, et. al. (US Pat. No. 5,343,035, hereafter the '035 patent) 
disclose an optical fiber strain sensor for use in making measurements 
over a small region. The invention according to the '035 patent makes 



LAR 151 59-1 -SB -3- PATENT APPLICATION 

use of a strain insensitive optical lead fiber to carry a light signal to a 
strain sensitive optical fiber disposed in the region of interest of the test 
object. Thus the sensor is sensitive to strain only in the region occupied 
by the strain sensitive fiber and integrated information from the lead fiber 
5 is ignored. The invention according to the '035 patent requires that the 
sensing fiber be a two-mode optical fiber. 

Lagakos, et. al. (US Pat. No. 4,979,798) make use of lead optical 
fibers that are insensitive to strain in the region being monitored. This is 
achieved through the leads not being within the test region. This is not 

10 always a viable option when, for example, the test region lies within a 
larger region of a test structure which is itself undergoing strain. 

Kleinerman (US Pat. No. 5,363,463) makes use of optical time 
domain reflectometry (OTDR) to determine temperature measurements in 
selected areas of a test object. This method employs a fluorescent dye 

1 5 that will react in a temperature dependant manner in the presence of an 
interrogating light signal. The light given off by the fluorescent dye may 
then be monitored and its intensity and time of arrival give both a 
temperature reading and an indication of the location at which that 
temperature was measured. A drawback of OTDR methods is the 

20 expense of the electronic processing elements that are necessary. 

Kleinerman additionally discusses monitoring of microbends within 
a fiber. In the case of microbend information it is often practical to 
monitor backscattered light. Again, through the use of OTDR it is 
possible to find the locations of multiple microbends as revealed by 

25 discontinuities in the backscatter intensity versus a known distance 
decay curve. 

Summa ry of the In vention 



LAR 151 59-1 -SB -4- PATENT APPLICATION 

It is an object of the present invention to provide an optical fiber 
arrangement that may be used to sense strain and vibration at specific 
locations within a test object. 

It is an additional object of the present invention to use multimode 
5 optical fibers to achieve the above object. 

It is a further object of the present invention to achieve the 
forgoing objects without the use of OTDR methods which require 
expensive electronic elements. 

To achieve the forgoing objects, strain insensitive optical fiber is 
10 used to carry a light signal to a strain sensitive optical fiber. Information 
from the strain sensitive fiber travels through strain insensitive fiber to a 
detector. Since the leads are chosen to be strain insensitive, strain in the 
region of interest is the only contribution to the signal. The signal from 
the sensor is monitored in an optical phase locked loop (OPLL). The use 
15 of the OPLL allows for use of multimode fibers instead of the single or 
few mode fibers used in other optical fiber monitoring devices. 

Brief Description of the Drawing s 

20 Fig. 1 is a drawing showing a fiber having a strain sensitive region 

and strain insensitive regions of the fiber carrying an optical signal to and 
from the strain sensitive region. 

Fig. 2 is a drawing showing a system according to the present 
invention in an OPLL configuration. 



25 



Description of P referred Em bodiments 

Referring first to Fig. 1, a multimode optical fiber sensor is shown. 
The multimode optical fiber sensor 2 is made up of a strain insensitive 



LAR 15159-1-SB -5- PATENT APPLICATION 

fiber 4 leading to a strain sensitive fiber 6 located in the region being 
monitored and a second strain insensitive fiber 8 leading away from the 
strain sensitive fiber. For example the three fibers may be connected by 
splicing. Light 1 enters the sensor and strain 3 is applied. 
5 A voltage controlled oscillator 10 is used to directly modulate a 

laser 12 and to provide a reference signal to a double balanced mixer 14, 
as shown in Figure 2. The laser radiation passes through a multimode 
optical fiber sensor 2. 

The second strain insensitive fiber 8 leads to a detector 16. The 

10 detected signal passes through an amplifier 18, the amplified signal 

passes through the mixer 14 and is mixed with the reference signal. The 
phases of the two signals are maintained at quadrature by feedback of 
the DC error voltage from the mixer 14 to the oscillator 10. A filter 22 
removes the radio frequency component coming from the mixer 14. 

15 A change in the phase of the modulation is expressed as an error 

voltage at the mixer 14 and is compensated by a change in the 
modulation frequency. A change in phase length, AL, of the optical fiber 
will produce a change in frequency, AF, according to: 

AL = AF 
20 L ~~ F (1) 

Where L is the effective path length of the strain sensitive optical fiber 6 
and F is the nominal frequency value. Frequency is monitored by a 
counter 24. 
25 An important consideration is the strain insensitive optical fibers 4 

and 8. The phase shift due to strain in the OPLL is given by: 

5 l=f S,n core (2-P eff ni re ) {2) 



LAR 15159-1-SB -6- PATENT APPLICATION 

p (P^2-MP^ P^2)) <3) 

r efT ^ 

Where P n and P 12 are 
the strain optic coefficients of the fiber, v f is the Poisson's ratio of the 
fiber, to is the frequency of modulation of the laser, c is the speed of 
light, z is the length of the fiber under strain, S 1 is the value of axial 
strain and n core is the refractive index of the fiber core. The fiber is 
assumed to be weakly guiding, that is, it meets the inequality: 



10 " core ~ n ' clad <0.01 (4) 

2n core 



From the above, it is evident that a fiber can be made more or less 
sensitive by choosing appropriate optical fiber parameters. So, for a 
1 5 strain insensitive fiber, the core refractive index must be given by: 



core ' 



\ P, 



(5) 



eff 



20 While for strain sensitive fiber it is best to maximize Eqn. 2. 

Using appropriate parameters in Eqn. 5 it is determined that a 
strain insensitive fiber is one with a very high core refractive index, e.g. 
n core ~ 4-5. Germanium, for example is an appropriate material for 
producing multimode optical fibers with very high refractive index. 

25 Other variations and uses will be apparent to those skilled in the art. 

The above embodiments are not exhaustive but rather are given by way of 
example. It is understood that the present invention is capable of numerous 
modifications within the scope of the following claims. 



M6W 

LAR -SB PATENT APPLICATION 

STRAIN INSENSITIVE OPTICAL PHASE LOCKED LOOP 



Abstract of_ the_ Disclosure 

5 A strain sensor uses optical fibers including strain insensitive 

portions and a strain sensitive portion. The optical fibers form a sensitive 
arm of an optical phase locked loop (OPLL). The use of the OPLL allows 
for multimode optical fiber to be used in a strain insensitive configuration. 
Only strain information for the strain sensitive portion is monitored rather 
10 than the integrated strain measurements commonly made with optical 
fiber sensors. 



9 



"iii^lkliiiu 




8 



5<t>/ B =0 



8<t>;„ *0 



&&„ =0 



Figure 1. 




i£ 



F.^r*. Z- 



