Thomas Hobiger et al.: c5++ - Multi-technique Analysis Software for Next Generation Geodetic Instruments, IVS 

2010 General Meeting Proceedings, p.212-216 

http:/ /ivscc.gsfc.nasa.gov/publications/gm2010/hobiger2.pdf 


c5H — b - Multi-technique Analysis Software for Next Generation 

Geodetic Instruments 

Thomas Hobiger 1 , Tadahiro Gotoli 1 , Toshimichi Otsubo 2 , Toshihiro Kubooka 1 , 
Marnoru Sekido 1 , Hiroshi Takiguchi 1 , Hiroshi Takeuchi 3 

b Space-Time Standards Group, National Institute of Information and Communications Technology 
Hitotsubashi University and the Space-Time Standards Group, NICT 
b Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency, Institute of Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS) 

Contact author: Thomas Hobiger, e-mail: hobiger@nict.go.jp 

Abstract 

Processing of space geodetic techniques should be carried out with consistent and utmost up-to- 
date physical models. Therefore, c5-| — P is being developed, which will act as a framework under which 
dedicated space geodetic applications can be created. Due to its nature, combination of different 
techniques as well as automated processing of VLBI experiments will become possible with c5++. 


1. Introduction 

An analysis software package based on Java and named C0NCERT04 [3] enabled the user to 
consistently process SLR, GPS, and other satellite tracking data. The next version of this program 
package will also include VLBI as additional space-geodetic technique. As the software is currently 
being redesigned and completely re-written in C++, the requirements for VLBI data analysis could 
be taken into account. Moreover, combination of space geodetic techniques was considered during 
the design phase. 

2. Space Geodesy with c5H — \- 

Basically, c5++ provides the framework (Figure 1) under which space geodetic applications can 
be built. Thus, stand-alone technique specific applications can be developed or multi-technique 
solutions can be realized. Thereby consistent geophysical and geodetic models, based on the 
IERS conventions 2003, are applied to each technique, which enables the combination either on 
the observation level or on the normal-equation level. External libraries, which are available as 
open source packages, are utilized for data input/output as well as vector and matrix operations. 
c5++ has been successfully compiled and tested under Windows, Linux, and Mac OS using 32-bit 
and 64-bit environments. Modules are commented within the code and information is extracted 
via Doxygen, which outputs on-line the documentation (in HTML) and/or an off-line reference 
manual. 

2.1. Libraries Resp. Classes Contained Within c5H — |- 

Table 1 lists the most relevant classes together with their functionality. Space-geodetic software 
can be built by interfacing the required modules, and other applications can be realized from this 
framework. 


212 


IVS 2010 General Meeting Proceedings 



Thomas Hobiger et al.: c5++ for VLBI 



Figure 1. Building space geodetic analysis software for SLR, GPS, or VLBI by interfacing the c5++ libraries. 


Table 1. c5++ libraries and their functionality. 


Name 

Functionality 

C5Time 

Implements internal time container, allows input of UTC, 
TAI, TT, MJD, JD and converts between the time systems 
using an internal storage format. 

C5Math 

Main math library, which provides dedicated matrix opera- 
tions and geodetic tools. 

Transform 

Transforms positions between TRF and CRF 

Ephm 

Reads JPL binary ephemeris and provides position/velocity 
of any given celestial body in a user-defined frame 

Displacement 

Computes solid Earth tides, ocean, and atmosphere loading 
corrections 

Accel 

Provides various accelerations respectively forces which act 
on a satellite 

Cowel 

Fast and accurate orbit integrator 

Par am 

Is the backbone of c5-| — I- which manages all kind of selectable 
parameters and carries out automatic interpolation for time- 
dependent parameters. 

ParamlO 

Reads and writes parameters/results in XML format 

Relativity 

Computes relativistic corrections for GPS and SLR and 
transforms VLBI delays into the TCG frame 

C50bsData 

Reads observational data and stores it in an STL container 
class. 

Antenna 

Antenna/telescope specific corrections models (deforma- 
tions, axis offsets, . . .) 


TVS 2010 General Meeting Proceedings 


213 



Thomas Hobiger et al.: c5++ for VLBI 


2.2. VLBI with c5H — |- 

Based on the main classes of c5++, a dedicated VLBI analysis chain can be implemented 
with minimal efforts. Thereby, modules can be attached like building blocks and even dedi- 
cated/specialized VLBI software solutions can be realized, without in-depth knowledge of the spe- 
cific classes. In order to fulfill the requirements of different applications the following observation 
formats are supported within c5++: 

• NGS 

• NetCDF 

• Mark III 

• Raw correlator (K5 format) 

In the first stage all modules are designed to work properly and give correct results. Optimization 
concerning the improvement of processing speed will be made, once the testing and verification 
phase has been completed. 

3. Multi-technique Combination 

Since all space-geodetic techniques can utilize the same physical and geophysical models from 
c5++, consistent combination across the techniques can be realized. Thereby, results can be 
either combined on the normal-equation level or on the observation level, in accordance with the 
goals of the Global Geodetic Observing System (GGOS). Moreover, novel applications like space- 
craft tracking can be developed, whereas orbit calculations based on multi-technique observations 
(GNSS, SLR, and VLBI) are expected to provide an utmost accurate 3D trajectory of the satellite. 



Figure 2. Since c5-| — h is also designed for satellite techniques, existing modules and models can also be 
utilized to do space-craft tracking either by VLBI or by a combination of several techniques. E.g., an 
integration of SLR and VLBI tracking will allow the computation of highly accurate orbit arcs. 


214 


TVS 2010 General Meeting Proceedings 


Thomas Hobiger et al.: c5++ for VLBI 


4. Automated UT1 Processing 

Beside multi-baseline sessions, regular single-baseline VLBI experiments are scheduled in order 
to provide estimates of UT1 for the international space community. As shown by [4] and [2] the 
latency of these Intensive experiments could be improved tremendously and results could be made 
available within less than an hour if e-VLBI and automated processing routines were applied. If 
the whole processing pipeline works well, results can be obtained even within minutes after the 
last scan has been recorded, which is highly appreciated by the user community as discussed in [1], 
Based on the experience gained over the last two years, the automated processing chain will be 
improved and the analysis software used until now will be replaced by c5+- K Since the correlator 
output format can be read directly with c5-| — no intermediate interface is necessary. Moreover, 
ambiguity resolution and ionosphere correction can be done within the framework of c5++. Not 
only the target parameter, i.e., UT1, will be estimated with c5-| — but also databases for the 
VLBI community are expected to be created with that software. As shown in Figure 3, it will also 
be possible to input a-priori delay models into the correlator in order to achieve highest possible 
consistency between all the data processing stages. 



Figure 3. Flow-chart of automated VLBI analysis and UT1 estimation. 

A focus will be set on robust and reliable automated ambiguity resolution, in order to allow for 
completely unattended operation. Additional functions will include automated reporting of results 
to international services as well as export of standard formats for independent analysis within the 
space-geodetic community. 


TVS 2010 General Meeting Proceedings 


215 


Thomas Hobiger et al.: c5++ for VLBI 


Acknowledgments 

Parts of this work were supported by a Grant-in- Aid for scientific research (KAKENHI, No. 
24241043) from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS). We highly appreciate 
the support from the VieVS group at Vienna University for helping us with the validation of our 
modules. 

References 

[1] Luzum B. and A. Nothnagel, Improved UT1 predictions through low-latency VLBI observations”, 
Journal of Geodesy, in print, 2010. 

[2] Matsuzaka S., H. Shigematsu, S. Kurihara, M. Machida, K. Kokado and D. Tanimoto, Ultra Rapid 
UT1 Experiments with e-VLBI, Proceedings of the 5th IVS General Meeting, 68-71, 2008. 

[3] Otsubo T. and T. Gotoh, SLR-based TRF Contributing to the ITRF2000 project, IVS 2002 General 
Meeting Proceedings, 300-303, 2002. 

[4] Sekido M., H. Takiguchi, Y. Koyama, T. Kondo, R. Haas, .1. Wagner, .1. Ritakari, S. Kurihara and 
K. Kokado, Ultra-rapid UT1 measurement by e-VLBI, Earth Planets Space, 60, 8, 865-870, 2008. 


216 


IVS 2010 General Meeting Proceedings 



