ANATOMICAL MODELS FOR VIRTUAL REALITY AND WEB-BASED 

APPLICATIONS 


M. A. Villasenor, F. Flores and M. E. Algorri 

Department of Digital Systems, Instituto Tecnologico Autonomo de Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico 


Abstract- We present a methodology for the creation, 
manipulation and transmission of 3D anatomical models 
starting from stacks of medical images. The anatomical 
information for the models is first segmented from the 
images and then used by a surface reconstruction 
algorithm to create 3D meshes that accurately represent 
the surface of the organs being modeled. The meshes are 
then exported in an open format for manipulation in a 
graphics platform. Using high-end graphics algorithms 
we render and texture-map our meshes. We can also 
deform the meshes and assign physical and material 
properties to them. Our models can be used for virtual 
reality applications and can also be transmitted over the 
Internet for remote interactive visualization and retrieval. 
Keywords - 3D Models, Java, VRML, X3D, Medical Web 
Applications, Medical Graphics, Visualization, Telemedicine 

I. Introduction 

In the past decades medical imaging systems such as CT and 
MRI have become widely used diagnostic tools for clinical 
diagnosis and medical scientific research. However, as 
household as these technologies have become, they remain 
expensive systems readily available only in radiology clinics. 
It is until recently, that the Internet, combined with powerful 
PC’s, new graphics standards and web-based technologies 
have made previously restricted MR/CTI data available to 
everyone, even modest hospitals in small communities or 
rural areas. The Visible Human Project [1] was a landmark 
for widespread availability of radiological data. Current 
Internet 2 technology, combined with new specifications for 
the transmission of graphical data such as X3D and Lattice 
[2] [3], offer promises that, in the short to medium term, not 
only images, but full 3D models, and even virtual reality 
scenarios and 3D medical simulators will be available over 
the Internet. Some authors [4] [5], have already used web- 
based languages such as VRML and Java3D to create Internet 
available medical applications. 

In this paper we present a methodology for the creation of 
accurate, realistic 3D anatomical models starting from a stack 
of 2D images. We use robust segmentation and reconstruction 
methods that have been developed in our lab in the past years 
[6] [7] to go from 2D images to 3D meshes corresponding to 
the anatomical models. The anatomical models created can be 
exported in open format for its use in most graphical, CAD or 
modeling software. We are also able to transmit the models 
over the Internet using Java, VRML, and X3D technologies 
for remote users to visualize, manipulate and retrieve them 
for local use. 


II. Methodology 
A. Segmentation 

We start the creation of our 3D models by segmenting a 
stack of 2D images. All of our models have been created by 
segmenting stacks of MR studies. Our segmentation 
algorithm identifies all the pixels from a particular anatomical 
structure inside an MR image. We work with information of 2 
images at a time and assume that each distinct anatomical 
structure is represented by a relatively uniform gray level. 
With this simplified model of the MR images we achieve a 
very fast, practically automatic segmentation tool with only 
one parameter to adjust. The automatic segmentation of a 
stack of over 100 MR images of the brain is done in under 1 
minute in a PHI PC. When the segmentation is interactively 
guided to achieve improved results, the visual interface that 
modifies the algorithm parameter allows the user to quickly 
improve the results and, in this case, the segmentation of a 
whole stack of 128 images takes roughly between 10-15 
minutes when performed by an experienced user. A detailed 
description of the segmentation algorithm can be found in [6]. 
An example of the segmentation results used to build the 
anatomical models presented in this paper is shown in Fig.l. 



Fig. 1. Segmentation results of 3 non consecutive images. The original image 
is shown in the 1 st column. Segmentation of the white matter, cerebellum and 
left and right ventricles are shown in the 2 nd and 3 rd columns. 





Report Documentation Page 


Report Date Report Type 

250CT2001 N/A 

Dates Covered (from... to) 

Title and Subtitle 

Contract Number 

Anatomical Models tor Virtual Reality and Web-Based 
Applications 

Grant Number 


Program Element Number 

Author(s) 

Project Number 


Task Number 


Work Unit Number 

Performing Organization Name(s) and Address(es) 

Department of Digital Systems, Instituto Tecnologico Autonomo 
de Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico 

Performing Organization Report Number 

Sponsoring/Monitoring Agency Name(s) and Address(es) 

Sponsor/Monitor’s Acronym(s) 

US Army Research, Development & Standardization Group 
(UK) PSC 802 Box 15 FPO AE 09499-1500 

Sponsor/Monitor’s Report Number(s) 

Distribution/Availability Statement 

Approved for public release, distribution unlimited 

Supplementary Notes 

Papers from the 23rd Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 
October 25-28, 2001, held in Istanbul, Turkey. See also ADM001351 for entire conference on cd-rom., The original 
document contains color images. 

Abstract 

Subject Terms 

Report Classification 

unclassified 

Classification of this page 

unclassified 

Classification of Abstract 

unclassified 

Limitation of Abstract 

UU 

Number of Pages 

4 






B. Reconstruction 



We use a very robust 3D surface reconstruction algorithm 
developed in our lab and described in detail in [7] [8]. The 
reconstruction algorithm takes as input the set of 3D points 
resulting from the segmentation of the stack of images and 
produces a 3D triangular mesh that closely approximates the 
real surface of the models. The reconstruction algorithm uses 
space partitioning, filtering and dynamical rules to build a 
detailed final mesh. The density of the mesh can be 
interactively adjusted by the user depending on the density of 
the set of points resulting from the segmentation and on the 
complexity of the surface to be reconstructed. This mesh can 
then be furthered simplified to eliminate triangles in areas of 
less detail to create compressed models that can then be used 
for remote and web-based applications. The details of the 
simplification algorithm are described in [9]. Some 
reconstruction examples are shown in Figs 2,3. The first 
column in Fig. 2 shows: a) the set of points produced after 
segmenting the cerebellum and ventricles from an MR study 
of the brain, b) the 3D mesh that reconstructs the surface of 
the set of points, and c) the rendered mesh. The second 
column of Fig. 2 shows the same results for the left and right 
ventricles. Fig. 3 shows 3 dense meshes corresponding to 2 
pairs of ventricles and the white matter and different stages of 
mesh compression. 


Fig. 2. Reconstruction of the cerebellum with ventricles attached and of the 
left and right ventricles alone. 



Fig. 3. 3D meshes corresponding to the ventricles and white matter with 
3 different levels of mesh compression. 

C. Graphical Production and Manipulation 

The 3D meshes that result from the reconstruction process 
can be output in DXF or VRML format, making them 
suitable for manipulation by graphics packages. We use 
Maya™, a high-end graphics software to render our 3D 
meshes with various material and lightning properties. We are 
also able to give our meshes physical properties to simulate 
dynamic phenomena. An interesting option in Maya is the 
possibility to interactively deform and render the meshes for 
applications such as cosmetic and reconstructive surgery or 
for matching and registration of information. We are also able 
to construct complex scenes containing several anatomical 
models as needed for the construction of atlases or virtual 
scenarios. Because of the physical properties of the models, 
they can interact with each other in a realistic way to simulate 
simplified surgical procedures or collisions as a result of an 
accident. 








D. Web-based Application 


The 3D anatomical models can also be transmitted over 
the Internet for remote interactive visualization and retrieval. 

We use a VRML representation of the 3D meshes where 
we encode the information about vertices, triangles, normals, 
colors and texture coordinates. Using JavaScript we create a 
user interface for the user to interactively visualize the 
meshes and download the information for local use. Our 
current work includes integrating the recent graphics 
specification X3D and its Lattice extension (as proposed at 
the Web3D Consortium) to accelerate the transmission rate of 
our models in low band-width networks. 

III. Results 

Some resulting anatomical models after rendering and 
texture mapping are shown in Fig. 4. Again, these results 
were produced from the segmentation and reconstruction of 
MR images. We show the model of the left and right 
ventricles, of the skull and of the white matter. In Fig.5 we 
show the possibility to render some models as semi¬ 
transparent in order to combine models and create anatomical 
atlases. We show the skull rendered with transparency and 
containing the ventricles inside. Fig. 6 shows a graphical 
manipulation of the models consisting of cutting the white 
matter in half to be able to analyse it from the inside as well 
as the outside of the model. This type of visualisation can be 
important when rendering artifacts create some ambiguity on 
the information that cannot be resolved by analysing just one 
side of the surface. 




Fig. 4. Anatomical models corresponding to the ventricles, the skull and 
the white matter after rendering and texture mapping. 


Fig. 5. Models rendered using transparency and superposition. We see a 
transparent white matter containing the ventricles inside. 




Maya™ a high end graphics software to manipulate the 
models in a variety of ways: from simple rendering and 
texture mapping, to deformation, simulation of collisions and 
creation of complex virtual scenes containing multiple 
objects. We concentrate our current work in creating an 
efficient web-based application for the transmission of the 
models. We use VRML descriptions of the 3D anatomical 
models and JavaScript to create a web-user interface where 
the user can interactively visualize and retrieve the models 
over the Internet. We intend to migrate our model description 
to X3D in order to speed up the model transmission over low- 
band networks. Our application fits in various fields of use: 
from medical anatomical training, to the creation of medical 
virtual scenarios, graphics applications, clinical diagnosis and 
telemedicine. 


Acknowledgment 


Fig. 6. The white matter cut in half in order to visualize the interior wall The WOrk Presented in this paper was financed by 

of the model and the interior organs (in this case a ventricle). CONACYT under the grant J-31985A. 


IV. Discussion 

For some years now, much work has been devoted to the 
creation of static 3D anatomical models and at least as much 
work to the simulation of deformations on the models. The 
possibility of creating 3D anatomical computer models as 
substitutes of real organs has seen big advances, but it is until 
recent years, that powerful graphical software and hardware 
driven mainly by the entertainment, games and animation 
industry have made it possible to have realistic medical 
simulators and medical virtual scenarios at our desktop. More 
and more, we are prone to encounter such graphical tools at 
the doctors office, but the possibilities of these new 
applications remain wide open and, most important, remain to 
be made available to a large audience of potential users. 

Web-based applications make it possible to bring new and 
exciting graphics technology to remote locations for uses in 
all areas of Telemedicine. However, transmission of complex 
graphical information such as virtual scenarios, medical 
simulators, or simple anatomical data over the Internet using 
modems and low-band networks, remains still an unresolved 
technical challenge. Broad-band networks such as the Internet 
2 initiative may be a solution, but remote applications are 
most needed in areas of low resources, so work on efficient 
transmission of medical information over the Internet is clue 
if these applications are to be available to everyone. 

V. Conclusion 

We propose in this paper a complete methodology for the 
creation, manipulation and transmission of 3D anatomical 
models starting from stacks of medical images. We use well- 
established segmentation and reconstruction algorithms 
previoulsy developed by the authors and focus on the 
manipulation and transmission of the models. We use 


References 

[1] National Library of Medicine, “The Visible Human 
Project,” http://www.nlm.nih.Ron/rwd/new/VH.html , 1999 

[2] E. Fogel, D. Cohen-Or, R. Ironi, T. Zvi, “A Web 
Architecture for progressive delivery of 3D content,” ACM 
WEB3D’2001 , Paderbon, Germany, pp. 35-41 

[3] A. Wakita, T. Hayashi, T. Kanai, H. Chiyokura, “ 
Using Lattice for Web-based Medical Applications,” ACM 
WEB3D’2001, Paderbon, Germany, pp.29-34 

[4] N.W.John, N. Phillips, “Surgical Simulators using the 
WWW,” in Medicine meets Virtual Reality 2000, IOS Press, 
pp. 146-152 

[5] O. Hendin, N.W. John, P.Schochet, “Medical volume 
rendering on the WWW using JAVA and VRML,” in 
Medicine meets Virtual Reality 1998, IOS Press, pp. 34 - 40 

[6] F. Flores, M. A. Villasenor, M.E. Algorri, “ A Tool for 
the Analysis, Segmentation and Reconstruction of MR Brain 
Images, ” Proceedings of the V Mexican Symposium of 
Medican Physics, American Physics Association, Juriquilla 
Queretaro, March 2001 

[7] M.E. Algorri, F. Schmitt, "Surface Reconstruction from 
Unstructured 3D Data", Computer Graphics Forum , vol. 15(1), pp. 
47-60, 1996. 

[8] M.E. Algorri, “Generation et simplification de maillages 
pour la reconstruction de surfaces a partir de points non¬ 
structures,” PhD thesis, Ecole Nationale Superieure des 
Telecommunications, ENST 95 E 024, Paris, 1995 

[9] M.E.Algorri, F.Schmitt, “Mesh Simplification ,” Computer 
Graphics Forum, Eurographics 1996, Poitiers, France 




