LAMP-TR-062 

CAR-TR-959 

CS-TR-4212 


MDA9049-6C-1250 
9802167270 
N660010028910/IIS9987944 
February 2001 


The architecture of TRUEVIZ: 

A groundTRUth/metadata 
Editing and Visualizing toolkit 

Chang Ha Lee and Tapas Kanungo 

Language and Media Processing Laboratory 
Center for Automation Research 
University of Maryland 
College Park, MD 20742-3275 
{ chlee, kanungo } @ cfar. umd.edu 


Abstract 

Tools for visualizing and creating groundtruth and metadata are crucial for document im¬ 
age analysis research. In this paper we describe TrueViz [LK00, KLCB01], which is a tool 
for visualizing and editing groundtruth/metadata. We first describe the groundtruthing 
task and the requirements for any interactive groundtruthing tool. Next we describe the 
system design of TrueViz and discuss how a user can use it to create groundtruth. True¬ 
Viz is implemented in the Java programming language and works on various platforms 
including Windows and Unix. TrueViz reads and stores groundtruth/metadata in XML 
format, and reads a corresponding image stored in TIFF image hie format. Multilingual 
text editing, display, and search modules based on the Unicode representation for text 
are also provided. This software is being made available free of charge to researchers. 


This research was funded in part by the Department of Defense under Contract MDA0949-6C-1250, 
Lockheed Martin under Contract 9802167270, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency under 
Contract N660010028910, and the National Science Foundation under Grant IIS9987944. 



Report Documentation Page 

Form Approved 

OMB No. 0704-0188 

Public reporting burden for the collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and 
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, 
including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington 

VA 22202-4302. Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it 
does not display a currently valid OMB control number. 

1. REPORT DATE 

FEB 2001 

2. REPORT TYPE 

3. DATES COVERED 

00-02-2001 to 00-02-2001 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 




5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 

The architecture of TRUEVIZ: A groundTRUth/metadata Editing and 

5b. GRANT NUMBER 

v iz»u<uizjiiig luuiivii 



5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 

6. AUTHOR(S) 




5d. PROIECT NUMBER 





5e. TASK NUMBER 





5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Language and Media Processing Laboratory,Institute for Advanced 
Computer Studies,University of Maryland,College Park,MD,20742-3275 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 

REPORT NUMBER 

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 


10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 





11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 

12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited 

13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

The original document contains color images. 

14. ABSTRACT 

15. SUBIECT TERMS 

16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 

17. LIMITATION OF 
ABSTRACT 

18. NUMBER 
OF PAGES 

11 

19a. NAME OF 
RESPONSIBLE PERSON 

a. REPORT 

unclassified 

b. ABSTRACT 

unclassified 

c. THIS PAGE 

unclassified 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std Z39-18 





LAMP-TR-062 

CAR-TR-959 

CS-TR-4212 


MDA9049-6C-1250 
9802167270 
N660010028910/IIS9987944 
February 2001 


The architecture of TRUEVIZ: 

A groundTRUth/metadata 
Editing and Visualizing toolkit 

Chang Ha Lee and Tapas Kanungo 



The architecture of TRUEVIZ: 

A groundTRUth/metadata 
Editing and Visualizing toolkit 

Chang Ha Lee and Tapas Kanungo 


Language and Media Processing Laboratory 
Center for Automation Research 
University of Maryland 
College Park, MD 20742 
{chlee, kanungo} @cfar. umd.edu 


Abstract 

Tools for visualizing and creating groundtruth and metadata are crucial for doc¬ 
ument image analysis research. In this paper we describe TrueViz [LK00, KLCB01], 
which is a tool for visualizing and editing groundtruth/metadata. We first describe 
the groundtruthing task and the requirements for any interactive groundtruthing tool. 
Next we describe the system design of TrueViz and discuss how a user can use it to 
create groundtruth. TrueViz is implemented in the Java programming language and 
works on various platforms including Windows and Unix. TrueViz reads and stores 
groundtruth/metadata in XML format, and reads a corresponding image stored in TIFF 
image hie format. Multilingual text editing, display, and search modules based on the 
Unicode representation for text are also provided. This software is being made available 
free of charge to researchers. 


This research was funded in part by the Department of Defense under Contract MDA0949-6C-1250, 
Lockheed Martin under Contract 9802167270, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency under 
Contract N660010028910, and the National Science Foundation under Grant IIS9987944. 



1 Introduction 


In the document image analysis (DIA) research area, the term ‘groundtruth’ refers to 
various attributes associated with the text on the image — bounding box coordinates 
of words, lines, characters; font type; character size; direction of text; etc. Groundtruth 
data is crucial for document image analysis because it is impossible to train and test 
Optical Character Recognition (OCR) algorithms without it. Since groundtruth is cre¬ 
ated manually in most cases, tools for annotating and visualizing groundtruth are very 
important. In fact, at the MLOCR99 international workshop [mlo99] the consensus in 
the corpus working group was that our community needs i) a protocol for groundtruthing 
documents, ii) an XML-based groundtruth representation format, iii) a public-domain 
multilingual/multiplatform visualization and data-entry tool, and iv) a consortium for 
managing and distributing datasets. 

In this paper we address two of the four issues raised by the working group: i) We 
describe an XML-based groundtruth representation format, and ii) we describe TrueViz, 
which is a public domain 1 annotation tool that we have developed at the University of 
Maryland. 

This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe various existing an¬ 
notation tools used in document image analysis and in related areas such as speech 
recognition, linguistics, and information retrieval. The desirable features of a document 
image groundtruthing tool are described in Section 3. In Section 4 we discuss design 
and implementation issues related to editing, visualization, and search. The XML data 
format for groundtruth is discussed in Section 5, where we also provide representative 
samples of XML hies. The multilingual data entry, visualization, and search features of 
TrueViz are quite unique and are discussed in Section 6. Finally, in Section 7 we list 
the things that we hope the international DIA community will add to the public domain 
system. 

2 Previous Work 

There are many annotation and visualization tools in various domains. In this section 
we describe a few annotation tools commonly used in document image analysis, speech 
recognition, linguistics, information retrieval, video analysis, geographic systems, and 
statistics. In Table 1 we provide a comparison of these tools. 

2.1 Document Image Visualization Tools 

Visualization tools for displaying or editing a document image and groundtruth meta¬ 
data have been developed for evaluating algorithms, creating document groundtruth, or 
browsing documents. 

Pink Panther [YV98] is an environment for creating segmentation groundtruth hies 
and for page segmentation benchmarking. Page segmentation is the process of decompos¬ 
ing a document page image into structural and logical units, such as images, paragraphs, 
headlines, tables, etc. The performance of a page segmentation algorithm is evaluated 

1 TrueViz is available at http://www.cfar.umd.edu/~kanungo/software/software.html 


1 



Table 1: Comparison of Visualization Tools; 


Name 

Platform 

Data Format 

Domain 

PinkPanther 

Unix/X Windows System 

ASCII 

Document Image 
Ground truth 

Illuminator 

Unix/X Windows System 

DAFS 

Document Image 
Ground truth 

Oulu Database Browser 

Mult i-Plat form /Java 

ASCII 

Document Image 
Groundt ruth 

TrueViz 

Multfr P1 at form / J ava 

XML Format 

Document Image 
Ground truth 

Transcriber 

Unix/Windows X'T 

XML Format 

Speech Annotation 

ATLAS 

Unix/Windows X’T 

XML Format 

Linguistic Annota t ion 

Alembic Workbench 

Unix system 

SGML/PTF Format 

Linguistic/Named Entities 
Annotation 

ViPER 

Mu It i- P1 at form / J a va 

ASCII 

Video Sequence 
Groundt ruth 

XGobi 

Unix/X Windows System 

S Data Format/ASCII 

Statistical Data 

S-PLUS 

Windows 95/98 

Customized Data 

Statistical Data 

CLASP 

Unix/Macintosl) 

Commonly Used Format s 

Statistical Data 

Mondrian 

Mult i- P la t form / Java 

ASCII/Dat abases 

Categorical / 
Geographical Data 

Poly Paint+ 

SunOS/Solaris 

netCDF 

Geographical Data 

Spotfire 

MS Windows 

Database/Spreadsheet/ 

ASCII 

Decision Making 
by Data Analysis 

Slicer Dicer 

MS Windows 

Binary/ASCII/ 
Commonly Used Formats 

Medical/Scientitic Data 
Defined on Grids 


2 



































by running the algorithm on a set of document images, and comparing the output for 
each document to corresponding groundtruth metadata. Pink Panther consists of two 
parts: Grounds-Keeper and Cluzo. Grounds-Keeper is a tool for creating groundtruth 
metadata. It visualizes a document image and the corresponding metadata, and also 
allows users to zone the document image and specify the information for each zone. 
Groundtruth metadata created by Grounds-Keeper is stored in an ASCII hie format. 
Cluzo is a benchmarking tool for collecting the locations, types and severities of seg¬ 
mentation errors on a page as well as information on segmentation performance. Pink 
Panther is implemented on the Unix and X Windows platforms and is written in C. 
While Grounds-Keeper allows the user to enter segmentation groundtruth, entering text 
groundtruth is not possible. 

Illuminator [Fru95] is an editor developed by RAF Technology, Inc. for building 
document understanding test and training sets, for correction of OCR (Optical Character 
Recognition) errors, and for reverse-encoding the essential information and attributes of 
a document. Illuminator visualizes or edits a document image and its entities, which 
are specific regions of the image and the associated metadata. It is configured to handle 
text in major European languages and Japanese. Illuminator uses the DAFS (Document 
Attribute Format Specification) hie format [Fru95] to store the document image and 
metadata. DAFS provides a format for breaking down a document into entities which 
have hierarchical structure, and for dehning entity boundaries and attributes. Illuminator 
is implemented on the Unix and X Windows platforms and is written in C. 

The MediaTeam Oulu Document Database [SK98] is a collection of scanned docu¬ 
ments with corresponding groundtruth for the physical and logical structure of the docu¬ 
ments. It was developed by the University of Oulu MediaTeam. The document database 
browser is a visualization tool for exploring the contents of the database. The browser is 
written in the Java programming language and allows visualization of document images 
and corresponding metadata simultaneously. The browser can explore the database and 
select particular documents for visualization. The browser also provides a window to 
list attributes of the document. Document images which were originally stored in TIFF 
image format are stored in JPEG image format and metadata is stored in an ASCII hie 
format. 

Pink Panther and Illuminator work only on the Unix platform. Because there are 
many tools that are executable only on the Windows platform, this is a limitation. The 
Oulu document database browser is written in the Java programming language, and can 
be run on various platforms. However, the Oulu document database supports JPEG 
image format only, while TIFF is the most popular image format for document images. 
Furthermore, the hie representation of the groundtruth is non-standard. In fact, all 
the above tools store document metadata in their own hie formats. To provide data 
compatibility, a standard hie format, or a hie format to which other hie formats can be 
easily converted, is needed. 

A prototype system for visualizing and editing groundtruth is currently being built 
at the University of Fribourg, Switzerland [HRIOO]. This system allows users to edit 
the hierarchical structure of the document. However, the system does not provide a 
compatible OCR evaluation package to visualize OCR segmentation results. 


3 



2.2 Other Visualization Tools 

We surveyed visualization tools in other data domains to find out the best way to pro¬ 
vide multi-platform and data compatibility. In this section we summarize features of 
visualization tools in various domains such as statistical, categorical, geographical, and 
medical data as well as linguistic data and speech signals. 

Transcriber [BGWLOO, GBBWOO, BGWL98] is a tool for segmenting, labeling and 
transcribing speech signals. It supports most common audio formats and stores the 
transcription in XML format. It was developed in the Tcl/Tk and C programming 
languages, and works on Unix and Windows NT platforms. 

ATLAS [BDH + 00] is an architecture and tool for linguistic analysis based on a formal 
model for annotating linguistic artifacts. It uses an XML-based ATLAS Interchange 
Format (AIF) for storing annotated corpora, and was developed in the C-|—|-, Perl, Tcl/Tk 
and Java programming languages. 

Alembic Workbench [DAH + 97] is a new set of integrated tools that uses a mixed- 
initiative approach to bootstrapping the manual tagging process with the goal of reducing 
the overhead associated with corpus development. The Alembic Workbench is developed 
using the Tcl/Tk, Perl, C and Lisp programming languages, and works on the Unix 
platform. Alembic uses the SGML and PTF (Parallel Tag File) formats for source text 
and annotations. 

ViPER (Video Processing Evaluation Resource) [DM00] consists of three main com¬ 
ponents: ViPER-GT, ViPER-PE, and ViPER-Viz. ViPER-GT contains modules for 
configuring and producing groundtruth information which describes a video sequence. 
The ViPER-PE module provides performance evaluation capabilities for comparing com¬ 
puted results with appropriate groundtruth information. ViPER-Viz enables a user to 
visualize groundtruth, analysis results, performance evaluation results, or an entire video 
clip. ViPER was developed in the Java programming language, and groundtruth and 
results are stored in ASCII hie format. 

XGobi [SCB98, SHB91, SCB92] is an X Window application for interactively ex¬ 
ploring statistical data. Its current functionalities include brushing, identification, and 
editing of connected lines, as well as rotation and the grand tour, with several interactive 
projection pursuit indices. Several functions can be linked so that actions in one window 
are promptly reflected in another. 

S-PLUS [VR99] is a desktop data analysis tool that provides data analysis and visu¬ 
alization capabilities to identify trends in data. It allows data import and export from 
spreadsheets such as Excel, as well as from a wide range of relational and other data 
sources. 

The Common Lisp Analytical Statistics Package (CLASP) [AWC + 95] is a tool for 
visualizing and statistically analyzing data. CLASP provides an interactive environment 
for data manipulation and statistical analysis and a variety of descriptive and hypothesis¬ 
testing statistics. It includes many features that facilitate exploratory data analysis. 

Mondrian [Uni] is a data-visualization system written in Java. Its main emphasis is on 
visualization techniques for categorical data and geographical aata. Mondrian provides 
various plots such as mosaic plots, maps, barcharts, and parallel coordinates, which are 
fully linked and allow various interrogations. 


4 



PolyPaint+ [Nat] is an interactive scientific visualization tool that displays complex 
structures within three-dimensional data fields. It provides color shaded-surface display, 
as well as simple volumetric rendering in either index or true color. PolyPaint+ routines 
first compute the polygon set that describes a desired surface within the 3D data volume, 
and these polygons are then rendered as continuously shaded surfaces. Objects rendered 
volumetrically may be viewed along with shaded surfaces. Additional data sets can be 
overlaid on shaded surfaces by color coding the data according to a specified color map. 

Spothre [AS94] is a decision analysis workspace that uses the connectivity of the Web 
to provide a workspace in which to access large amounts of complex data from wherever 
it resides, to visually explore and analyze the data, and to share results. 

Sheer Dicer [PIX] provides tools for analysis, interpretation and documentation of 
complex data defined in three or more dimensions. It helps in exploring the data visu¬ 
ally by “slicing and dicing” to create arbitrary orthogonal and oblique slices, rectilinear 
blocks and cutouts, isosurfaces, and projected volumes. It also provides animation se¬ 
quences featuring continuous rotation, moving slices, blocks, parametric variation (time 
animation), oblique slice rotation, and varying transparency. 

A more detailed review and taxonomy of visualization tools can be found in an article 
by Shneiderman [Shn96], and a good general reference for user interfaces is Shneiderman’s 
book [Shn98], 

3 Desired GUI Functionalities 

Since TrueViz will be used by different researchers for different tasks, we first summarize 
the functionalities that are desired of such a tool. The simplest task that the tool could 
be used for is to visualize and input multilingual text. Next, it could be used to mark 
regions of a scanned document image as text or graphics, and assign labels to regions. 
A researcher wanting to look at the results obtained by a DIA system might want to 
search for all the incorrectly recognized characters and then zoom into the image at 
those locations. A researcher interested in extracting the logical structure of a document 
might want to label the reading order of the text areas, or the hierarchy of the text 
regions corresponding to sections and subsections. 

After studying the various tasks for which a user might want to use the to-be-designed 
tool, we formulated the following set of requirements for the graphical user interface: 

Entities: Users should be able to visualize and edit zone-, line-, word-, and character- 
level geometric groundtruth. Furthermore, they should be able to establish their 
own entity structure. For each entity, they should be able to define attributes (e.g. 
bounding boxes) and specify their values. 

Scale: Users should be able to zoom in and out of the image and overlaid groundtruth 
so that they can study the image and OCR error results at the page, paragraph, 
line, word, or character level. 

Color: It should be possible to display entities that have different attributes in different 
colors. For example, image zones could be shown in one color and table or text 


5 



zones in another. Thus if a DIA system incorrectly recognizes a table zone as an 
image zone, the error would be easily identifiable from the color coding. 

Logical information: The visualization tool should allow users to visualize and edit 
the logical reading order of text zones, and also to specify the hierarchy of the text 
zones. For example, it should be possible to visually specify that a subsection is 
contained in a section. 

Multilingual Visualization: Since DIA systems are being developed for various lan¬ 
guages and scripts, users should be able to visualize groundtruth text in these 
languages and scripts. The use of a standard encoding such as Unicode is highly 
desirable. 

Multilingual Data Entry: While regular English text can be entered by regular key¬ 
boards, keyboard mappings that allow other languages and scripts to be entered 
should also be available. 

XML-based Representation: The XML markup language would be ideal for repre¬ 
senting page layout groundtruth since it is the current industry standard and vari¬ 
ous parsers, syntax checkers and editors are publicly available for it. 

Converters: Converters to convert standard datasets such as the University of Washing¬ 
ton dataset (in DAFS format) into the XML representation would help bootstrap 
research by providing seed datasets. 

Search: Users should be able to search for strings in the groundtruth and find the 
locations where they appear in the image. The search module should work in 
any language and users should be able to specify edit distances for approximate 
searching, which is essential when searching for strings in noisy OCR text. 

Evaluation: The tool should have a built-in OCR evaluation module or should be com¬ 
patible with one, so that users are able to visualize OCR evaluation results easily. 

Multiplatform: Since researchers and data entry persons work on various platforms 
such as UNIX, PC and Mac, the tool should be platform-independent so that users 
need not spend time learning how to use it on a platform that they are not familiar 
with. 

Public Domain: In order for the community to take full advantage of it, the tool should 
be freely available. 

4 Design and Implementation 

4.1 Overview 

The TrueViz display is vertically split into two panels (see Figure 1). The left panel is 

an image panel for displaying a document image and corresponding geometric metadata, 

and the right panel is a tree view for displaying textual metadata structure. 


6 




Figure 1: TrueViz consists of an image panel (left) and a tree view (right). 


The image panel displays a document image and overlays geometric metadata on the 
image. Currently, three kinds of geometric metadata can be visualized: Bounding boxes, 
logical relationships, and an Infopanel. The bounding box of an entity is visualized as 
a. polygon whose color represents the type of the entity. “Logical relationship” refers to 
logical reading order, and is visualized using an arrow from one entity to the next. The 
Infopanel is a small window for displaying a few important attributes of the entity. The 
image and metadata visualization can be scaled to various resolutions. 

The tree view displays the XML-based groundtruth metadata in a tree structure of 
expandable, and collapsible nodes. The attribute values can be edited in the tree nodes 
and the groundtruth text can be edited in the separate multilingual text editor. 

4.1.1 Metadata Visualization 

Entities can be classified into four categories: Zones, Lines, Words and Characters. En¬ 
tities are hierarchical in nature, so a Zone is contained within a Page, a Line is contained 
within a Zone, a Word is contained within a Line, and a Character is contained within a 
Word. Because of the hierarchical nature of the entities, it is necessary to change views in 
order to view specific portions of the structure. There are five views: Image Only, Page, 
Zone, Line, Word and Character. The Image Only view shows only the image without 
any groundtruth visualization. The Page view shows metadata for all entities, from the 
highest level to the lowest level. This view is not editable or selectable. The Zone view 
shows only Zone metadata. A Zone’s data, can be accessed by clicking on the Zone. This 
causes the Zone to be active (selected) and highlighted, and the Infopanel to pop up. 
The Infopanel is a small window for displaying important metadata for the active entity 
(see Figure 8). The corresponding node in the tree view will also be selected. Similarly, 
the Line view shows all Line metadata (see Figure 2 (a)), the Word view shows all Word 
metadata (see Figure 2 (b)), and the Character view shows all Character metadata. As 


7 
























