' e/L- 


/£/$¥ 

9i 9 

Ada NET KEY ISSUES 
SUMMARY REPORT 


(NASA-CR-188241) AdaNET KEY ISSUFS SUMMARY N91-2F685 

REPORT {Softech) 10 p CSCL 095 


Unci as 

G 3/62 001S13A 


SofTech, Incorporated 


April 30, 1991 


Cooperative Agreement NCC 9-1 6 
Research Activity No. SE.18 
Deliverable 2.1.3B 


NASA Johnson Space Center 
Information Systems Directorate 
Information Technology Division 



Research Institute for Computing and Information Systems 
University of Houston - Clear Lake 



T • E • C • H • N • / • C • A • L R*E*P' O*/?* T 



The 

RICIS 

Concept 


The University of Houston-Clear Lake established the Research Institute for 
Computing and Information systems in 1986 to encourage NASA Johnson Space 
Center and local industry to actively support research in the computing and 
information sciences. As part of this endeavor, UH-Clear Lake proposed a 
partnership with JSC to jointly define and manage an integrated program of research 
in advanced data processing technology needed for JSC's main missions, including 
administrative, engineering and science responsibilities. JSC agreed and entered into 
a three-year cooperative agreement with UH-Clear Lake beginning in May, 1 986, to 
jointly plan and execute such research through RICIS. Additionally, under 
Cooperative Agreement NCC 9- 1 6, computing and educational facilities are shared 
by the two institutions to conduct the research. 

The mission of RICIS is to conduct, coordinate and disseminate research on 
computing and information systems among researchers, sponsors and users from 
UH-Clear Lake, NASA/JSC, and other research org anizations. Within UH-C lear 
Lake, the mission is being implemented through interdisciplin ary involvem ent of 
faculty and students from each of the four schools: Business, Education, Human 
Sciences and Humanities, and Natural and Applied Sciences. 

Other research organizations are involved via the “gateway” concept. UH-Clear 
Lake establishes relationships with other universities and research organizations, 
having common research interests, to provide additional sources of expertise to 
conduct needed research. 

A major role of RICIS is to find the best match of sponsors, researchers and 
research objectives to advance knowledge in the computing and information., 
sciences. Working jointly with NASA/JSC, RICIS advises on research needs, 
recommends principals for conducting the research, provides technical and 
administrative support to coordinate the research, and Integrates technical results 
into the cooperative goals of UH-Clear Lake and NASA/ JSC. 


Ada NET KEY ISSUES 
SUMMARY REPORT 


SofTech, Incorporated 


April 30, 1991 


Cooperative Agreement NCC 9-16 
Research Activity No. SE.18 
Deliverable 2.1.3B 

NASA Johnson Space Center 
Information Systems Directorate 
Information Technology Division 



Ada NET KEY ISSUES 
SUMMARY REPORT 





Preface 


This research was conducted under auspices of the Research Institute for 
Computing and Information Systems by SofTech, Incorporated. Dr. Charles 
McKay served as RICIS research representative. 

Funding has been provided by Information Technology Division, 
Information Systems Directorate, NASA/JSC through Cooperative Agreement 
NCC 9-16 between NASA Johnson Space Center and the University of Houston- 
Clear Lake. The NASA technical monitor for this activity was Ernest M. Fridge, 
of the Software Technology Branch, Information Technology Division, Information 
Systems Directorate, NASA/JSC. 

The views and conclusions contained in this report are those of the author 
and should not be interpreted as representative of the official policies, either 
express or implied, of NASA or the United States Government. 




Subcontract No. 044 
Cooperative Agreement NCC9-16 
Project No. RICIS No. SE.18 


Submitted to: 
MountainNet, Inc. 

P.O. Box 370 
Dellslow, WV 26531-0370 


Prepared by: 
SofTech, Inc. 
1300 Hercules Drive 
Suite 105 

Houston, TX 77058 





AdaNet Key Issues Summary Report 
April 30, 1991 


Introduction 

This report is the first in a series of reports planned to address key issues in the development of the 
AdaNet program. It is also a summary report reflecting the work of others on the AdaNet Team. 
In particular, the following reports have recendy been or are concurrendy being completed: 

ASV3 Product Assessment 

A Research Review of Quality Assessment for Software 
Cooperative Processing User Interfaces for AdaNet 

The report is intended to address the key issues as they relate to project planning in general, and 
research planning in particular. The report is concluded with a general recommendation for 
research to follow. 

The AdaNet program has completed an assessment of the current on-line system, ASV2, and is 
preparing to provide a new system, ASV3, with similar capabilities as for ASV2, but with some 
specific new capabilities and improved potential for enhancement and evolution. Much of this 
report addresses the plans for ASV3 as they are understood at this time. Additional issues are 
raised by the Quality Management Research White Paper and by the recent experiences of SofTech, 
Inc. on other projects relating to reuse. 


Selection of AutoLIb for ASV3 

There has been lengthy consideration of what platform (hardware and commercial or "off-the- 
shelf' software) to base ASV3 on. The most recent plans are based upon the use of the AutoLib 
system developed for JSC by Barrios. AutoLib, among others, has relevant capabilities and useful 
capabilities beyond those of ASV2. Assuming AutoLib as the ASV3 platform provides a basis for 
moving the project forward, but not without raising a number of detailed concerns (see following). 
It is important that short-term development support the longer-term needs for enhancement and 
evolution. This issue still warrants further planning than has been provided to date, specifically 
addressing: 

The prototyping, development and subsequent deployment of ASV3 
The operational transition from ASV2 to ASV3, 

The planned capture of ASV3 capabilities for ASV4. 


ASV3 Use of Autolib 

In order for ASV3 to be successfully based upon Autolib, several details of functionality and user 
interface need to be worked out. These include: 

• The nature and quality of dial-in access (including performance concerns), 

• If and how Internet access will be provided, and 

• How the additional functionality required to support user downloading of files and message 
requests to the operational staff (for bulk requests or other assistance) will be provided. 


SOF feCH 


1 



While it is not anticipated that these issues cannot be satisfactorily resolved, their resolution will 
take time and development effort. Thus these are primarily programmatic issues which impact on 
the schedule and quality of ASV3 development. Issues which follow are more research oriented 
and impact primarily on research and the definition of ASV4. 


Quality Engineering and its Implications for AdaNet 

There are two principle benefits to be sought from reuse in software engineering, not only the more 
obvious benefit of productivity improvements but quality improvements as well. It is part of the 
AdaNet charter to insure that the AdaNet repository provide a resource which adds to the quality of 
systems which draw from it. ’ 

The Quality Management Research White Paper is a detailed review of software quality assessment 
as it is understood today. Unfortunately, there is not a clear consensus today of what, in detail, 
software quality is and how to measure it. There are research developments which suggest how 
we might provide a metric or various metrics, which relate to software quality. There are further 
developments which suggest how to assess the development process and its impact on quality, 
what might be documented in a pedigree for software components. Both of these are of interest to 
the project 

Quality measures will be an important part of a reuser's assessment of potential for any given 
component found in the repository. To play an active role in promoting reuse we must be involved 
in the assessment of quality and how to express it. While the strongest recommendation might be 
reserved for components which are re-engineered within the project, with particular emphasis on 
quality, this should not be a limiting factor in the size of the repository's holdings. Thus metrics 
and the pedigree of acquired software are critical. Since this is an emerging science we must take 
our part in establishing as well as researching the field. 


Lessons Learned From Related Efforts 

SofTech, Inc. has been involved for several years now in the support of reuse both through 
analysis of how best to implement reuse and through the development and maintenance of a 
software repository. That experience has lead lately to a more active participation in the process of 
reuse. Following the development and initial population of a repository, it was felt necessary to 
both seek out larger units of software and to actively find sources and potential targets for these 
larger software units. 

This has been a more involved approach to the problem of reuse, dealing with the process of 
development and inserting reuse engineering. So far it has been a gratifying effort and bears 
consideration for AdaNet. In particular, the repository tool, while recognizably an important part 
of the reuse equation, may not have any success standing by itself. 

It is not clearly a part of the current planning for AdaNet to play an active role in finding sources 
and targets and implementing the analysis and design necessary to make reuse successful. At least 
this should be a research topic with planned activity spanning the project's lifetime. (Note this 
would fall under the research topic of Reuse Technology and Engineering for Reuse, but is a 
significantly larger task than the existing Support for and Study of Exemplary Projects tasks). 


2 


SOFJeCH 



Research Thrusts for the Second Half of Calendar 1991 


In general, the research activities which have significance in the next half-year can be grouped into 
two areas: 

• Reuse Technology - including, initially at least, follow-on work in quality management 
and including, if desired, active participation in reuse engineering, and 

• Library Technology - including additional work on cooperative user interfaces, object 
management systems and classification schemes 

Reuse Technology research focuses on how reuse is factored into the software development 
process. Quality management research addresses what measures and attributes can be provided 
which will assist the reuser in using a repository and selecting components for reuse. The quality 
management research will also provide for lessons learned and process related recommendations 
which can be incorporated into the holdings and potentially offer unique benefits from the 
repository to those willing to adopt specific approaches. Other research in reuse technology is 
critical to ensuring the acceptance and adoption of reuse. 

Library Technology research focuses on the organization and presentation of the reuse repository, 
and ultimately, its integration into a larger CASE (Computer Aided Software Engineering) 
framework. For AdaNet, the ability to interact effectively and conveniently from remote sites is a 
unique and significant concern for which cooperative user interfaces provides a promising 
approach. Additional research in object management is important to providing a current and 
effective tool. Lastly, it is clear that software cataloging and classification is a significant part of 
the challenge to making reuse a realistic alternative for software engineering. 


SOFfecn 


3 








