Version 0.1 



A Little Ruby, A Lot of Objects 



Preface 



Welcome to my little book. In it, my goal is to teach you a way to think about 
computation, to show you how far you can take a simple idea: that all computation 
consists of sending messages to objects. Object-oriented programming is no longer 
unusual, but taking it to the extreme - making everything an object - is still supported by 
only a few programming languages. 

Can I justify this book in practical terms? Will reading it make you a better programmer, 
even if you never use "call with current continuation" or indulge in "metaclass hackery"? 
I think it might, but perhaps only if you're the sort of person who would read this sort of 
book even if it had no practical value. 

The real reason for reading this book is that the ideas in it are neat. There's an intellectual 
heritage here, a history of people building idea upon idea. It's an academic heritage, but 
not in the fussy sense. It's more a joyous heritage of tinkerers, of people buttonholing 
their friends and saying, "You know, if I take that and think about it like this, look what I 
can do!" 

Prerequisites 

With effort, someone who didn't know programming could read this book. I expect that 
most readers will know at least one programming language, not necessarily an object- 
oriented one. 

I use a few simple mathematical ideas in some of the examples. The factorial function is 
the most complex, and I explain a simplified form of it, rather than assume you know 
what it is. I don't think the book requires any particular mathematical inclination, so don't 
be scared off at the first sight of factorial. 

Using the book 

This book is written as a dialogue between two people, one who knows objects well, and 
one who doesn't. The text builds cumulatively. If you don't understand something about 
one chapter, you'll likely understand the next chapter even less. So I recommend you read 
slowly. The characters in the book take frequent breaks. I think that's a good idea. 

This book uses Ruby, a freely available language developed by Yukihiro Matsumoto, but 
it is not a book about Ruby. Ruby constructs are introduced gradually, as they're needed, 
rather than in any systematic order. They're described only enough to allow you to 
understand code that contains them. 

If you want to try variants of the examples, you may need a little more Ruby knowledge. 
The example files (see below) define new constructs a little more completely. However, 

Copyright © 2001 by Brian Marick. All Rights Reserved. 
DRAFT (marick@visibleworkings.com) DRAFT 



even with the examples, this book is not a Ruby tutorial. If you want to use Ruby for 
general-purpose programming - and you should, since it's a wonderful rapid- 
development language for many types of applications - the book to read is Programming 
Ruby, by David Thomas and Andrew Hunt (available online at 

www.rubycentral.com/book/index.html) . You'll find that Ruby has many more features 
than this book describes. 

Notation 

Ruby text and values printed by the Ruby interpreter are in italic font. Everything else is 
in normal font. Important terms are in bold when they're defined. 

Sometimes, one participant will show a partially completed snippet of Ruby code. The 
unfinished part is indicated with ???: 

clef finishjthis 

??? 
end 

Bold italic font is used to draw your attention to a part of some Ruby code 

class Something 

def some ^function 
"look here" 

end 
end 

Running the examples 

I recommend you play with the examples as you read. 

As of this writing, Ruby works on Unix and Windows. It is available from www.ruby- 
lang.org . The Windows download comes from www.rubycentral.com , at 
www.rubycentral.com/downloads/ruby-install.html . 

I recommend you use the Ruby interpreter irb. Here's an example: 

> irb 

irb (main) : 001: 0> 1 + 1 

2 

irb (main) : 002: 0> 

All of the examples in the book are available from www.visibleworkings.com/little- 
ruby/source . At the points in the text where an example is complete, a marginal note 
names the example's file: 



DRAFT 2 DRAFT 



Exactly. What do you suppose this Ruby The name tells me it computes factorial, 
function does? but I'm not sure how. 

def factorial(n) 
ifn == 1 

n 
else 

n * factorial(n-l) 
end 
end 



chl-factorial.rb 



s 



You can either cut and paste the example into irb, or load the example into Ruby like 
this: 

> irb 

irb (main) : 001 : 0> load 'chl-factorial.rb' 

true 

irb (main) : 002: 0> 

(This assumes you're running irb in the directories where the examples live.) Thereafter, 
you can type things like this: 

irb (main) : 002 : 0> factorial 5 
120 

irb (main) : 003: 0> 

Acknowledgements 

This book was inspired by The Little Lisper, by Daniel P. Friedman and Mattthias 
Felleisen. I fell in love with their book around 1984. The fourth edition, titled The Little 
Schemer, is still available. If you like this book, you'll like that one too, especially 
because it treats computation from a different perspective. 

The Little Lisper is famous for using food in its examples. As the authors say, "[it] is not 
a good book to read while dieting." As an ironic homage to my inspiration, one of the 
characters here is an exercise freak. In that way, this is a very different book. 

I received help and encouragement from people who read drafts: Al Chou, Mikkel 
Damsgaard, Joani DiSilvestro, Pat Eyler, Darrell Ferguson, Tammo Freese, Hal E. 
Fulton, Ned Konz, Dragos A. Manolescu, Dawn Marick, Pete McBreen, Nat Pryce, 
Christopher Sawtell, Kevin Smith, Dave Thomas, David Tillman, and Eugene 
Wallingford. 



DRAFT 3 DRAFT 



