Australian Government 
Department of Defence 

Defence Science and 
Technology Organisation 


Design and Evaluation of the MINT ACS SeeTrack 
Exchange (MINSTE) Concept Demonstrator 

Alison Irwin 

Maritime Operations Division 
Defence Science and Technology Organisation 

DSTO-GD-0574 


ABSTRACT 

MINSTE is a computer program that automates data exchange between MINTACS (MINe 
Warfare TACtical Software) used by the RAN for planning and assessment of naval mine 
countermeasures (MCM) and SeeTrack, a 'generic' mission planner and post-mission analysis tool 
for unmanned underwater systems - particularly towed or self-propelled side-scan sonar that 
images underwater objects. MINSTE was developed by DSTO with open-source software in order 
to reduce operator overheads by automating data entry for reported mine-like objects, which can 
amount to several hundred contacts for some MCM missions. This document describes the 
MINSTE concept design and development within the context of current and emerging RAN 
requirements for mine warfare mission planning and reporting in network-enabled and joint 
operations. Eor a more detailed discussion on the installation and use of MINSTE, the reader is 
referred to DSTO-TN-0887, "User Guide for MINTACS SeeTrack Exchange (MINSTE)". 


RELEASE LIMITATION 


Approved for public release 



Report Documentation Page 

Form Approved 

0MB No. 0704-0188 

Public reporting burden for the collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and 
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, 
including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington 

VA 22202-4302. Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it 
does not display a currently valid 0MB control number. 

1. REPORT DATE 

APR 2009 

2. REPORT TYPE 

3. DATES COVERED 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Design and Evaluation of the MINTACS SeeTrack Exchange (MINSTE) 
Concept Demonstrator 

5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 

5b. GRANT NUMBER 

5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 

6. AUTHOR(S) 

5d. PROJECT NUMBER 

5e. TASK NUMBER 

5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

DSTO,,,,, 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 

REPORT NUMBER 

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

10. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S ACRONYM(S) 

11. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 

12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distrihution unlimited. 

13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

The original document contains color images. 

14. ABSTRACT 

15. SUBJECT TERMS 

16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 

17. LIMITATION OF 
ABSTRACT 

18. NUMBER 
OF PAGES 

29 

19a. NAME OF 
RESPONSIBLE PERSON 

a. REPORT 

unclassified 

b. ABSTRACT 

unclassified 

c. THIS PAGE 

unclassified 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98} 

Prescribed by ANSI Std Z39-18 





Published by 

Maritime Operations Division 

DSTO Defence Science and Technology Organisation 

PO Box 1500 

Edinburgh South Australia 5111 Australia 

Telephone: (08) 8259 5555 
Fax: (08) 8259 6567 

© Commonwealth of Australia 2009 

AR-014-508 

April 2009 


APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE 



Design and Evaluation of the MINT ACS SeeTrack 
Exchange (MINSTE) Concept Demonstrator 


Executive Summary 

MINTACS - the MINe Warfare Tactical Software developed for the Royal Australian 
Navy (RAN) - supports the Mine Warfare Force Commander and operations staff with 
mission planning, task monitoring, and detailed assessment of mission progress by 
individual assets or force elements. MINTACS also contains database and charting tools 
for the management and visualisation of tactical data such as mines and q-routes. 
MINTACS is primarily designed for mine countermeasures operations conducted by 
dedicated, manned platforms, like the Mine Hunter Coastal (MHC) vessels. 

As part of Project SEA1778, the RAN is acquiring unmarmed systems (UMS) to conduct 
military operations such as reconnaissance of sea routes for the detection of mine-like 
objects. Commercial UMS are generally supported by their own mission planning and 
post-mission analysis software. One such tool used by DSTO and the RAN is SeeByte's 
SeeTrack. SeeTrack is advertised as being a 'generic' mission planner and battlespace 
visualisation tool for operations that may involve several different types of UMS. An 
example of its 'generic' capability is a module for analysing UMS side scan sonar imagery, 
which has the ability to ingest several different standard sonar data formats. It is 
envisaged that in the near future, a tool like SeeTrack will be used to analyse sonar 
imagery for detection of mine-like contacts, and report these contacts up the chain of 
command. The contacts would then archive into a common MCM repository like 
MINTACS for further analysis. It was from this reporting requirement that the concept 
demonstrator MINTACS SeeTrack Exchange (MINSTE) evolved. The primary purpose of 
MINSTE is to automate the exchange of contact data from SeeTrack to MINTACS. 

MINTACS Release 12, currently in use by the RAN, is designed for manual data entry of 
tactical mine objects and environmental contacts. This process is acceptable for 
conventional mine hunting clearance where contacts are addressed one at a time, but 
unwieldy for unmarmed operations, where several hundred mine-like contacts can be 
reported in one mission. The US MCM tactical decision aid MEDAL automates contact 
reporting by requiring all MCM UMS to generate messages in MEDAL-compatible 
formats, a strategy suitable for all nations that have MEDAL, namely, the United States. A 
more suitable approach for multi-national coalition operations may be to report in a 
common format. One such format is the NATO standard MCMREP used for conventional 
manned operations, but ongoing MEDAL software development has adopted the use of 
XML files. XML is a general purpose open-source specification to facilitate the sharing of 
structured data across different information systems. 



The SEA1778 Project S&T Plan included a work package to de-risk software integration 
issues through the development and demonstration of a prototype software interface "for 
data transfer between UMS and mine warfare command support system." Although 
originally slated for outsourcing, the research was a natural progression of DSTO work 
conducted during Trial MONGOOSE 07 and the RAN Eleet Training Activity DUGONG 
07, and the result, MINSTE, was demonstrated to the RAN MCDEEG during a meeting of 
the Tactical Development Steering Group in May 2008. 

MINSTE is considered a concept demonstrator, because instead of following the usual 
tendency of developing a purpose-built (and therefore single-use) tool for data exchange, 
it was developed to take advantage of existing standard data formats, particularly human- 
readable text-based XML, to support automated data exchange. In order to further test 
requirements for extensibility and interoperability, MINSTE follows the principles of 
object-oriented programming, and is developed entirely from Java open-source software, 
which is designed to run on any computer platform. 

While the primary objective of MINSTE was to facilitate development requirements for 
software integration and interoperability between various mission planning and reporting 
tools currently on the market, the feedback DSTO has received from the RAN on MINSTE 
went much further than this, suggesting new concepts of operation, not only for 
unmanned systems, but also for MINTAGE and the Mine Warfare Command Support 
System. 

An accompanying CDROM is attached to end of this report containing the described 
software and DSTO-TN-0887: User Guide for MINTAGE SeeTrack Exchange (MINSTE). 



Contents 


GLOSSARY 

1. INTRODUCTION.1 

2. BACKGROUND.2 

2.1 Observations from DUGONG 07.2 

2.2 Software Tools.5 

2.2.1 MINTACS R12.5 

2.2.2 SeeTrack Military.5 

3. MINSTE OVERVIEW.5 

4. MINSTE DESIGN.7 

4.1 Operator Workload.7 

4.2 Information Security.8 

4.3 Technology.9 

4.3.1 Java.9 

4.3.2 XML.9 

4.3.3 Java Architecture for XML Binding (JAXB).9 

4.3.4 Java Database Connectivity (JDBC).9 

5. XML FOR DATA EXCHANGE.10 

5.1 XML.10 

5.2 Mandated Standards for Interoperability.11 

5.3 Net-Centric Concept and Web Services.12 

6. SOFTWARE ENGINEERING PRINCIPLES.13 

6.1 Reusability, Maintainability and Object-Oriented Programming.13 

6.2 Economy, Flexibility and the Java Development Environment.13 

6.3 Open Source Tools.14 

7. OTHER COMMENTS.14 

7.1 Development Effort.14 

7.2 User Feedback.15 

8. CONCLUSION.18 

9. REFERENCES.19 


APPENDIX A: XML SCHEMA 


21 
































Glossary 


API 

Application Programming Interface 

ATSL 

Approved Technical Standards List 

AUSCDT 

Australia Clearance Diving Team 

CDT 

Clearance Diving Team 

COI 

Community Of Interest 

COIN 

Common Operating Interface for Navy 

COMATG 

COMmander Amphibious Task Group 

COP 

Common Operating Picture 

CRN 

Contact Reference Number 

DoD 

US Department of Defense 

DSTO 

Defence Science Technology Organisation 

EODMUl 

Explosive Ordnance Disposal Mobile Unit ONE 

EXI 

Efficient XML Interchange 

ETA 

Eleet Training Activity 

CIS 

Geographical Information System 

GUI 

Graphical User Interface 

HQ 

HeadQuarters 

HTML 

Hyper-Text Markup Lanuguage 

JAXB 

Java Architecture for XML Binding 

JDBC 

Java DataBase Connectivity 

JDBC-ODBC 

Java DataBase Connectivity-Open DataBase Connectivity 

JDK 

Java Development Kit 

JRE 

Java Runtime Environment 

JTA 

Joint Technical Architecture 

JVM 

Java Virtual Machine 

MCDFEG 

Mine warfare and Clearance Diving Eorce Element Group 

MCD OSU 

Mine warfare and Clearance Diving Operations Support Unit 

MCDTG 

Mine warfare and Clearance Diving Task Group 

MCM 

Mine CounterMeasures 

MCMREP 

MCM Report (message format) 

MCMTA 

Mine CounterMeasures Tasking Authority 

MEDAL 

Mine warfare Environmental Decision Aid Library 



MHC 

Mine Hunter Coastal 

MINSTE 

MINTACS SeeTrack Exchange 

MINTACS 

MINe warfare TActical Command Software 

MRN 

Mine Reference Number 

MS 

Microsoft 

MTO 

Maritime Tactical Operation 

MW 

Mine Warfare 

MWCSS 

Mine Warfare Command Support System 

MWDC 

Mine Warfare Data Centre 

NATO 

North Atlantic Treaty Organisation 

NEO 

Network-enabled operations 

OIC 

Officer-In-Charge 

OOP 

Object-Oriented Programming 

PMA 

Post-Mission Analysis 

RAN 

Royal Australian Navy 

REA 

Rapid Environmental Assessment 

RIMPAC 

RIM of the PACific 

RSDB 

Route Survey Database 

SfS 

Solutions from Silicon 

SOA 

Service Oriented Architecture 

SQL 

Structured Query Language 

TACDEV 

TACtical DEVelopment 

TRM 

Technical Reference Model 

TTCP 

The Technical Cooperation Panel 

UMS 

Unmanned Systems 

URL 

Uniform Resource Locator 

UUV 

Unmanned Underwater Vehicle 

VSW 

Very Shallow Water 

W3C 

World Wide Web Consortium 

XML 

extensible Mark-up Language 



DSTO-GD-0574 


1. Introduction 


Two new concepts of operations for Mine Warfare (MW) and Mine Countermeasures (MCM) 
are used with (1) underwater unmanned systems (UUVs), and (2) principles of network- 
enabled (or "net centric") operations (NEO) and interoperability. UUVs are being used for 
MCM as a way to remove service personnel from the minefield in what are typically 
considered "dull, dirty and dangerous" missions. A primary objective of NEO is rapid and 
effective data collection and communication in near real-time. However, current limitations in 
maritime communications, particularly underwater technologies, means that data collected by 
UUVs are generally processed after the mission is completed (that is, during post-mission 
analysis or TMA'). Hence, in a case such as this, a practical application of NEO is to ensure 
that data from PMA is reported up the command chain quickly and is interoperable with 
other suites of software used by command headquarters. Project SEA 1778 has been 
established for the acquisition of new technologies to support these concepts. 

During 2007, DSTO attend three trial activities where these new concepts were tested: 
EX MULGOGGER 07, Trial MONGOOSE 07 and ETA DUGONG 07. 

At EX MULGOGGER 07, DSTO was requested to analyse the rapid and effective reporting of 
environmental and contact data between Australia Clearance Diving Team Headquarters 
(AUSCDT HQ) and the Amphibious Task Group Command (COMATG). A tactical 
development (TACDEV) objective was to investigate the use of MINTACS as a common 
operating picture (COP) tool - using it to import and chart data collected by Australian 
Clearance Diving Teams (AUSCDT) during Maritime Tactical Operations (MTO)i. DSTO 
observations at MULGOGGER were summarised in an informal minute, which noted 
interoperability issues between MINTACS and ArcGlS^ as well as difficulties with the use of 
MINTACS as a COP tool. The main issue was that MINTACS required all data, including 
reported contacts, to be entered manually, and that the typical map resolution of MINTACS 
was too coarse for proper display of AUSCDT search areas. 

MONGOOSE 2007 was a TTCP^ MAR TP-13 (Mine Warfare) trial run held during AUVPest, 
Panama City, PL (USA). The two MONGOOSE objectives were: (1) to examine MCM mission 
planning requirements for multiple unmanned systems and (2) to generate a COP from the 
data they collected. Using the MW tactical decision aids, MINTACS from Australia and 
MEDAL from the US, the collection and archiving of data from several unrelated systems was 
tested along with operational planning and assessment of the MCM capability. 
Interoperability between MINTACS and MEDAL was examined by testing automatic transfer 
of data on mine-like contacts in MEDAL to MINTACS'^. At the request of the SEA 1778 
sponsor, interoperability between SeeTrack (used for UUV mission planning and post-mission 


* MTO is generally used to refer to remote and/or elandestine operations typieally eondueted by AUSCDTs. 
^ AreGIS is an integrated eolleetion of GIS software produets. URL - http://www.esri.eom/ 

^ The Technieal Cooperation Program (TTCP) is an international organisation that eollaborates in defenee 
seientifie and teehnieal information exchange; program harmonisation and alignment; and shared research 
activities for the five nations: Australia, Canada, New Zealand, UK and US. 

^ Contact data was exchanged between MEDAL and MINTACS R12 using NATO structured Mine 
Countermeasure Report (MCMREP). This was achieved by a MINTACS RI2 add-on developed by SfS. 


1 




DSTO-GD-0574 


analysis) and MINT ACS was also analysed. An important outcome from MONGOOSE was an 
understanding of the gaps in the exchange of data between SeeTrack and MINTACS: it was 
evident that contact data from UUV missions processed using SeeTrack could only be 
imported into MINTACS by manual data entry, resulting in significant overheads to operator 
workload. 

The Fleet Training Activity ETA DUGONG 07 was the first exercise where the RAN MCDFEG 
tasked unmarmed systems to search areas for mine-like contacts. DSTO attended ETA 
DUGONG 07 to benchmark MCM data exchange, with MINTACS being used as the ultimate 
repository for the data collection and reporting, as well as MCM operations analysis. DSTO 
objectives for DUGONG were to benchmark data exchange between existing deployable 
(portable) sonar systems and MINTACS or ArcGIS software. MINTACS, which was used to 
generate the COP, required contact data to be imported with the classification 'POSSIBLE 
MINE.' Whilst a suite of MS Excel macros had been written prior to the exercise to help 
support automated data exchange, existing compatibility issues necessitated manual data 
entry and added data formatting. 

As a result of the trials the MIN TACS SeeTrack Exchange (MINSTE) was developed as a 
concept demonstrator to meet the requirements for a network enabled, interoperable software 
application that provides quick and seamless information flow between the UMS PMA 
software tool, SeeTrack and the MW command support tool MINTACS R12, through the use 
of standards developed for Internet-based data exchange and computer programs for cross¬ 
platform applications. 

This report aims to provide greater insight into MINSTE design principles. 


2. Background 

2.1 Observations from DUGONG 07 

The DSTO Mine Warfare Systems Group attended DUGONG 07 to observe on-site data 
collection and analysis, and to benchmark data exchange between MCM units, the MCM 
Tasking Authority (MCMTA), and the COMATG [1]. 

One area of focus was to examine MCM data exchange between the four software packages 
used by the MCD Operations Support Unit (OSU) for PMA - SeeTrack Military, SeaScan PC 
Review, EdgeTech Discover and C-Max MaxView - and the tactical decision aid MINTACS, 
used by the MCMTA. 


2 



DSTO-GD-0574 



Figure 1: 


Overview of contact reporting at DUGONG 07. UMS sonar records are processed for 
contacts by some form of PMA software, the output of which is then reported to the 


MGMTA 


An objective at DUGONG 07 was to import any contact data reported by OSU and classified 
as POSSIBLE MINE into MINTACS. There were 4 unmanned systems^ used at DUGONG 
with an array of options to conduct PMA of the data collected by these systems. The software 
used for PMA generated contact reports with differing data types and data output. Data types 
reported by the PMA software would differ, for example, by contact location latitudes and 
longitudes being reported in degree minutes or decimal degrees, or by time formats ranging 
from epoch time, Julian or Zulu time. Some PMA tools allow measurement and reporting of 
contact dimensions, while others do not.^ There were no procedures on how to reference 
contacts {e.g., a standard Contact Reference Number), so the labelling of reported contacts was 
left to the discretion of the operator conducting PMA,^ and the PMA output took various 
forms, as text files. Excel files or HTML files. 


^ The four UMS at DUGONG 07 were: C-Max SSS, EdgeTech 4200, REMUS 600 and REMUS 100. 

® For instanee, Sea Scan PC Review only reported the height of the contact; MaxView did not report any 
measurements while Discover and SeeTrack reported height, width and length measurements. 

’ This is in contrast to existing doctrine and Standard Operating Procedures. 


3 













































DSTO-GD-0574 


Only contacts classified as POSSIBLE MINE were imported into MINTACS. While this 
practice limited the number of contacts reported, the difficulty of manually entering contact 
data into MINTACS was increased by the need to also fill in any gaps in the data reported, 
filter out urmecessary data, convert to appropriate units and reformat the data according to 
MINTACS requirements. 

A MINTACS operator can input contact data by hand (commonly referred to as 'hand¬ 
jamming') or through the 'Import Contact' functionality in MINTACS, using correctly- 
formatted Excel spreadsheets. Both methods involve 'tweaking' of the data, such as 
reformatting the latitude longitude formats from degree minutes to decimal degrees and date 
times into a MINTACS date/time format. Eurthermore, both methods could lead to data entry 
errors and loss of traceability. Although use of an Excel spreadsheet and the creation of 
specific macros could reformat large amounts of data quickly, this still involves an operator 
knowing what macro to use and how to format the specific piece of data. In addition, the 
'Import Contact' wizard available in MINTACS involves dealing with each contact 
individually, which could prove time consuming. ^ 

Interoperability issues between the PMA software and MINTACS was first flagged at 
MONGOOSE 2007 where transfer of contact data reported by SeeTrack to MINTACS was 
tested.9 At MONGOOSE, the focus was on using the 'Import Contact' functionality in 
MINTACS, whereby the data was reformatted using an Excel spreadsheet. Erom this, the need 
to develop Excel macros to reformat this data, and the gaps in the data exchange between 
SeeTrack and MINTACS became clear. At DUGONG, the Excel macros were applied to the 
SeeTrack data files but there was still a need to 'tweak' the data, and it became evident that 
there was a need for a common referencing system to track the contact from SeeTrack to 
MINTACS. In addition, other Excel macros had to be written to deal with the output of other 
PMA software, such as SeaScan PC or EdgeTech Discover. 

It is apparent from these observations that even simple data transfer between MINTACS and 
SeeTrack was at best an involved process and one that could be significantly improved by a 
purpose-built user interface. DSTO reported on these observations onsite at DUGONG and, 
based on this analysis, was invited to participate in Exercise Rim of the Pacific 2008 (RIMPAC 
08). It was anticipated that at RIMPAC 08 several UUVs would be used, and there would be a 
requirement to import the contact data into MINTACS. The need for easy importation of 
contact data into MINTACS drove the rapid development of a software interface to 
automatically transfer data from one PMA application, namely SeeTrack, to MINTACS. 


* For instance, one reported mission had 24 contacts. 

^ MONGOOSE 07 was the first time data exchange between SeeTrack and MINTACS was tested by DSTO. 
Data exchange between the two applications had been demonstrated at a trial held in Australia, April 2007. 


4 



DSTO-GD-0574 


2.2 Software Tools 

2.2.1 MINTACSR12 

The Mine Warfare Tactical Command Software (MINTACS) is a MW tactical decision aid 
developed by Solutions from Silicon (SfS) and in use by the RAN and UK Royal Navy 
(MINTACS R13). It is a comprehensive Tactical Command software suite that enables the 
"Mine Warfare Force Commander and operations staff to plan missions, monitor tasking and 
conduct detailed assessment of mission progress from an individual asset or total force 
perspective" [2]. 

2.2.2 SeeTrack Military 

SeeByte SeeTrack is a "generic" UUV mission planning and battlespace visualisation tool. It 
acts as a viewer and analysis software for side scan sonar imagery. The side scan sonar 
imagery can be viewed and processed where contacts are identified and stored to the 
SeeTrack database [3]. 


3. MINSTE Overview 


The MINSTE application provides a means to transfer data automatically from SeeTrack to 
MINTACS, and move data from one MINTACS database to another. 



5 




















































DSTO-GD-0574 


XML is used as the standard to enable information processing and interoperability between 
SeeTrack and MINT ACS R12. XML is license free, platform independent and a well supported 
method for putting structured data in a text file.io XML was chosen as the standard for data 
transfer between SeeTrack and MINT ACS for several reasons: 

• In operations, these applications will likely reside on different computers that, 
for security reasons, may have an 'air gap,' that is, they are not networked, and 
data must be transferred via a data storage device like a compact disk or USB 
memory 

• XML files are text-based and human-readable, thus allowing "on site" security 
checks 

• XML is being proposed as a standard for data transfer within the US military 
and other government agencies. 

MINSTE interfaces directly to the SeeTrack database and the MINTACS databases. MINSTE 
queries the SeeTrack database on the mission selected by the user, and exports the contact 
data associated with the selected mission to a text file where each data element is tagged from 
an XML schema developed for this purpose. Then MINSTE processes the XML file, and each 
tagged element is imported into the appropriate table and fields contained within the 
MINTACS Route Survey Database (RSDB). 

MINTACS treats contacts as environmental data, and possible mines as tactical objects, and 
there is a separate database for each. As with contact data, tactical features like POSSIBLE 
MINES must be entered manually in MINTACS R12. Hence, for convenience, a 'Promote 
Contact' function was added to MINSTE to allow transfer of data between the MINTACS 
RSDB and tactical databases. There are no XML files generated or used for this functionality as 
the movement of data is done between databases contained within the MINTACS application 
(and so no "air gap" required) and the databases being located in the same SQL Server Group 
(and so no transfer of data across different systems). 

MINSTE requires configuration to create connections to the databases used by SeeTrack 
and/ or MINTACS. Connection to the MS Access database used by SeeTrack requires the 
MINSTE user to select the appropriate database. Eor MINSTE to connect to the MINTACS 
databases 'MINTACS' and 'MlNTACS_MWDS,'ii the user must input the values for MS SQL 
Server 2000 settings. 

In summary, this release of MINSTE provides three functions: 

1. Export data from SeeTrack database to an XML file. 

2. Import XML file into the MINTACS RSDB - M1NTACS_MWDS. 

3. Promote a contact from the MINTACS RSDB (M1NTACS_MWDS) to the 
MINTACS Tactical Display Database (MINTACS). 


*** For more information on XML refer to Seetion 4.3.2 XML and Seetion 5 XML for Data Exehange 
*’ MINTACS database stores the tactieal for eaeh operation while the MINTACS MWDS is the route survey 
database, managed by the MW Data Centre as HMAS Waterhen. 


6 



DSTO-GD-0574 


4. MINSTE Design 


4.1 Operator Workload 

The main thrust for the development of the MINSTE application was to reduce the workload 
of the MINTACS operator. Manual entry of contact data generated by SeeTrack and other 
PMA software into MINTACS can be cumbersome and prone to error. Providing a means to 
automate processing of contact data not only reduces manual data entry but also allows for 
timely, accurate information to be available to the MW Commander. 


Data transfer is achieved through a Graphical User Interface (GUI) that presents the user with 
a series of five windows, each denoting one step of the process, where the user can make 
selections from the information provided by simple button pressing. First, MINSTE reads the 
SeeTrack database and provides the operator with a list of missions to select from. Once the 
mission is selected all the contacts associated with the mission are outputted directly to a XML 
file, the name of which can be designated by the user in a second window, with a third 
window confirming generation of the XML file. This or other XML files can then be selected 
by the operator in a fourth window, and clicking the "Import XML to MINTACS" button will 
insert all contact data for a mission into the MINTACS RSDB. This information is then 
available for viewing in the MINTACS application. 



Figure 3: 


Example of button selections required and required operator interaction to export contact 
data from the SeeTrack database to an XML file and import that XML file to the 


MINTACS RSDB 


7 








































































DSTO-GD-0574 


MINSTE was demonstrated to LEUT Brandon Horn, Staff Officer Tactical Development MCD, 
by transferring 24 contacts from one DUGONG 07 mission from the SeeTrack database to 
MINTACS. His response was: "You did in a few minutes what used to take 45." 

While 45 minutes may seem excessive, it could be expected, given that MINTACS is not 
designed to support UUV MCM operations. Eor example, manual data entry was purpose- 
built into MINTACS, probably to encourage careful deliberation of data viability. While this is 
appropriate for MHC minehunting operations, where generally only contacts with a high 
likelihood of being mines are reported, it is not feasible for typical UUV operations, which can 
result in several hundred contacts being reported at a time. While MINTACS can manage 
route survey contact data, it is not designed to do so simultaneously with minehunting (hence 
the separate databases), whereas UUV operations can be considered a combination of the two. 
To be fair, at one time MINTACS actually did support automated data transfer via 
MCMREPS, but subsequently lost this functionality following changes to communications 
software and protocols. Hence, in some regard, MINSTE can be considered a software "patch" 
to update MINTACS functionality, Nevertheless, the noted time savings of some 45 minutes 
indicates that this utility will aid in the rapid and seamless transfer of data during high tempo 
operations, with a "few clicks of the button." 

4.2 Information Security 

The use of XML allows for transparency and information assurance when exchanging data 
between two separate pieces of software. MINSTE could have been designed to simply extract 
the required data from the SeeTrack database and store the data within the MINSTE program 
as a binary file and then populate the MINSTE databases. However, this process would allow 
for little transparency and no ability to insert an air gap between two possible classified 
database systems. 

XML is a good way to overcome such security considerations as it generates a text-based data 
file that is both machine- and human-readable. Since the data exchanged can be checked for 
information assurance by both humans and automated systems, it precludes the possibility 
that MINSTE could be used or mistaken for "spyware." 


<object> 

<contactID>28308</contactID> 

<latitude>-33.0210378398674</latitude> 

<longitude>137.747353486466</longitude> 

<width>1.41844616223701</width> 

< length >1.18130717824099 </length> 

<height>0.423372804262136</height> 

<timeDate>2007-ll-14T13:25:52.000+ll:00</timeDate> 

</object> 


Figure 4: Example of XML output from one SeeTrack mission, illustrating the ease with which XML 
files can be read. XML tags provide a reference for each data element. 


Indeed, SfS have noted that mueh of MINSTE’s funetionality is available in new releases of MINTACS. 


8 




4.3 Technology 

4.3.1 Java 


DSTO-GD-0574 


The MINSTE software is programmed in Java. Java was developed by Sun Microsystems, with 
Java applications typically compiled to byte code that can run on any Java virtual machine 
(JVM) regardless of computer architecture. That is, MINSTE can be installed and run on any 
platform (Intel/Windows, Mac/Jaguar, Sun/Unix) as long as the Java Runtime Environment 
(JRE) is installed. 

The JRE is the software required to run any application deployed on the Java Platform. End- 
users commonly use a JRE in software packages. Eor developers. Sun also distributes a 
superset of the JRE called the Java 2 Standard Development Kit (JDK), which includes 
development tools such as the Java compiler and debugger. 

4.3.2 XML 

The MINSTE application writes out and reads in XML documents. XML is a general purpose 
specification that allows users to define their own "schema" to tag data elements. Its primary 
purpose is to facilitate the sharing of structured data across systems. XML simplifies data 
sharing of incompatible formats by converting the data to plain text. 

4.3.3 Java Architecture for XML Binding (JAXB) 

A Java application importing or exporting data to XML can use a free application 
programming interface (API) named Java Architecture for XML Binding (JAXB) [4]. JAXB will 
bind Java code to the XML schema. It provides the necessary code to write out Java objects to 
an XML file based on this schema (marshalling) and create Java objects bases on an XML file 
(unmarshalling). 

NetBeans 6.01^ provides tooling support for JAXB, principally by means of a wizard that turns 
various types of XML documents into Java classes [5]. 

4.3.4 Java Database Connectivity (JDBC) 

MINSTE application communicates with the databases of SeeTrack and MINTACS using a 
Java Database Connectivity (JDBC) API [6] that defines how a database will be accessed. 

Specific drivers are required to connect the application to each database. SeeTrack uses 
MS Access, and MINSTE connects to this database using JDBC-ODBC Driver released by Sun. 
MINTACS uses MS SQL Server 2000 or MS SQL Server 7. MINSTE will communicate 
automatically to MS SQL Server 2000 once the MS SQL Server settings are configured within 
the MINSTE program. This is possible by using a Microsoft released SQL Server driver for 
JDBC. 


Netbeans 6.0 was used as the development environment for MINSTE. 


9 



DSTO-GD-0574 


5. XML for Data Exchange 


5.1 XML 

XML is a fundamental enabler for the automated exchange of data and the processes that act 
upon that data. It is a method for putting structured data in a text file along with describing, 
archiving and communicating digital information in a text file. It is displayed and defines its 
data content by the use of tags (word bracketed by '<' and '>') and attributes. 


< mission Name> REMUS_11950061 16</missionName> 

<missionDescnption>REMUS MSN030 Wed Nov 14 02:08:36 

2007</missionDescnption> 

<object> 

<contactID > 28307 </contactID> 
<latitude>-33.021017079916</latitude> 

< long itude> 137.747327465382</longitude> 

< width >0.0</width> 

< length >1.1053796093101 1</Iength> 
<height>0.428375641494789</height> 

<timeDate> 2007-11-14T13:23:23.000+ ll:00</timeDate> 

</object> 


Figure 5: Example of a mission and contact data from a SecTrack XML output file. Each piece of 
information is given on one line, tagged by a description of the data content and the 
attribute value. 


Each XML line in the file makes it clear to an extraction routine, such as in MINSTE or human 
reader, what the data between the tags mean. 

Eor MINSTE, DSTO developed an XML schema to specify the data that is transferred from 
SeeTrack to MINTACS, and its format. This schema was developed to be as generic as 
possible and incorporates a data set that is common amongst the PMA software. The XML 
schema is attached as Appendix A. 

In summary, the benefits of XML are: 

• XML incorporates modern commercial best practice such as robust tool sets and 
platform independence. 

• The software industry understands the need for a common information exchange 
resulting in XML being available in most commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) products. 
This provides a basis for implementing interoperability across application, vendor and 
organisation boundaries. 

• XML uses a text based protocol, so it is both man- and machine-readable, problems 
can be fixed by a simple text editor, and there are no proprietary message formats. 


10 



DSTO-GD-0574 


Whilst XML is designed for large scale information storage, processing and exchange its 
shortcomings are quickly identified when the XML data is required to be transmitted across 
network protocols. By its nature XML is verbose and this verbosity clogs networks. It is 
possible to compress XML files, using compression tools such as gzipi^ or XMllL^ but this 
compression comes at a processing and time cost, however, general purpose compression may 
not be adequate in all environments. Also XML is resource intensive; the XML needs to be 
parsed by the application and due to its textual make-up subsequently increases processing 
time. This in itself needs to be addressed due to the use of smaller, hand-held and/or mobile 
devices where battery consumption needs to be efficiently managed. 

Binary XML formats are being developed to overcome these shortcomings along with the 
clear advantage that can be gained with interoperable systems through the use of XML. One 
format in particular, EXl - Efficient XML Interchange^^ was developed initially by a company 
named AgileDeltai^, and is now being standardised and endorsed by the World Wide Web 
Consortium (W3C). EXl is an emerging standard where work is being carried out by W3C's 
XML Binary Characterisation (XBC)^® and EXl Working Groups^^. It is a serialisation format 
for XML to optimise performance and the utilisation of computational resources with the end 
goal to reduce the impact of XML application interoperability. 

An additional disadvantage for the use of XML is that a user group or community of interest 
(COl) needs to be established to agree on a common XML schema and maintain the standard. 
A COl would ensure that the schema developed for data exchange considers all required 
elements. So, for example, an MCM COl may require an XML standard that not only supports 
MINTACS and UUV PMA software, but also MUCS, AMEAS, geospatial information systems 
for the ADE and other Australian government agencies (e.g., the Bureau of Meteorology), and 
coalition partners such as the US and NATO. 20 

5.2 Mandated Standards for Interoperability 

A key objective of MINSTE is to demonstrate interoperability between two systems that are 
identified as enablers in MCM mission performance. Eor systems to be interoperable they 
require adherence to a set of technical standards that mandate the means by which systems 
interface and exchange data. 

To achieve seamless integration, an architectural framework or Technical Reference Model 
(TRM) may be used to endorse and mandate standards to achieve interoperability. The US 
Department of Defense (DoD) Joint Technical Architecture (JTA) Volume 1 [7] consists of core 


URL - http://www.gzip.org 

Efficient compressor for XML; URL - http://www.liefk:e.com/hartmut/xmilLxmill.html 

Efficient XML Interchange (EXl) Format 1.0 September 2008: URL - http://www.w3.org/TR/2008/WD- 
exi-20Q8Q919/ 

Information about AgileDelta and Efficient XML can be found at: URL - 
http://www.agiledelta.com/product efx.html 

URL - http://www.w3.org/TR/xbc-properties/ 

URL - http://www.w3.org/XML/EXI/ 

The USN uses the MCM tactical decision aid MEDAL, which has its own XML schema. The NATO 
standard tactical decision aid is MCMExpert. 


11 










DSTO-GD-0574 


standards applicable to all US DoD systems .21 Its purpose is to provide a common conceptual 
framework and a common vocabulary so that the diverse components within an enterprise 
can better coordinate acquisition, development and support US DoD information technology. 
The JTA mandates the use of XML [8] for document or information exchange. 

While Australia, at present, does not have an endorsed TRM, it does have an Approved 
Technology Standards List (ATSL) [9] managed by the Australian Department of Defence 
Chief Information Officer Group. The ATSL references the US DoD JTA and provides a set of 
categories for use in Defence acquisition and development with focus being on 
interoperability [10]. It details its recommendations and lists XML as a standard for data 
exchange, stating: 

Data exchange services enable data-level interoperability (the ability of two or more 
systems to effectively exchange data) by exchanging data: without loss of athibutes 
(e.g. both Excel data and the formula); in an agreed format (syntax); in a marmer in 
which the data meaning is interpreted in the same way (semantics); and via an agreed 
common set of configuration profiles to support the exchange of data...With the 
increasing use of the Internet and Intranets, mark-up languages have recently 
proliferated for various communities of interest (COl). In particular, the adoption of 
XML and its developments is becoming more widespread. [11] 

5.3 Net-Centric Concept and Web Services 

The basis for net-centricity is to allow an organisation to enhance its information position and 
capabilities of its decision makers. The net-centric approach moves technology away from an 
application-centric to a data-centric paradigm, where an information environment is provided 
that is comprised of interoperable computing and communication components. The 
incorporation of UMS into the MCM environment will enable the automatic transfer of 
information between components in this environment - with contact data being the first step - 
resulting in better situational awareness and efficient decision making. 

Net-centric environments are underpinned by a range of standards and technologies 
including component based systems. Service Oriented Architecture (SOA), middleware and 
frameworks. SOA "make software resources available and discoverable as services to end- 
user applications and other services through public or published interfaces.... Currently, the 
most common technology used to realise SOAs are Web Services". [12] 

The web services paradigm provides a solution for the movement away from the monolithic 
software that currently exists to a communicable service that is platform independent (that is, 
based on Internet protocols). 


The US Department of Defense has migrated to a new model called the Net Centric Operations and Warfare 
(NCOW) Reference Model [US DoD 2006] which not only mandates the us of XML but also other web based 
standards. While the US DoD no longer references the JTA TRM, it does retain the JTA as a useful source of 
standards - both mature and emerging for interoperability purposes. More information about the NCOW 
Reference Model refer to URL - http://asks.dau.mil/dag/Guidebook/IG c7.2.6.1.asp 


12 




DSTO-GD-0574 


Web services are described as "distributed services that are identified by URLs, whose 
interfaces and binding can be defined, described and discovered by XML artefacts, and that 
support direct XML message-based interactions with other software applications via internet- 
based protocols." [13] 

Whilst MINSTE is not a web service, as a concept demonstrator, it provides an example of 
how web service technologies that are available today will allow for the development of 
software applications used for information management by the MCDFEG.22 [1] 

Web services exhibit communication properties; they follow a message-driven operational 
model exchanging messages in XML syntax. MINSTE demonstrates this ability by managing 
the data exchange between SeeTrack and MINTACS using XML. 

In addition, the web service paradigm undertakes to provide service-centric computing by 
using the Internet as the platform; that is, services are delivered over the Internet (or the 
Intranet). To achieve this, MINSTE was developed and implemented using the platform 
independent language Java. Whilst the MINSTE software architecture acts as an interface and 
not a distributed computing solution, the use of Java allows the ability for MINSTE to be 
extended to provide this functionality. 


6. Software Engineering Principles 

6.1 Reusability, Maintainability and Object-Oriented Programming 

The software programming design of MINSTE takes on an object-oriented programming 
(OOP) approach. OOP is the standard way of most software design today. It has many 
benefits including maintainability and reusability. MINSTE was designed to be maintainable 
by mapping the objects to the XML schema. Therefore, when new elements are added to the 
XML schema, this change can be incorporated easily into the Java code. The software design 
also ensures the code is reusable and extendable, ensuring the easy integration of new PMA 
software as part of the interface. 

The main focus for MINSTE development was that the application be easily extended in the 
future. With additional PMA software tools being incorporated into the interface, new 
components can easily be integrated into the current software. 

6.2 Economy, Flexibility and the Java Development Environment 

Developing MINSTE in Java allows MINSTE to be run on a wide range of computer systems 
without expensive and time consuming code rewrites or compilations. It also allows access to 


Additional information outlining the reasons why the MCDFEG should adopt web serviees ean be found in 
the DSTO Client Report MCM Data Exehange at DUGONG 07: Quiek-Look Report (U), DSTO-CR-2008- 
0035. 


13 



DSTO-GD-0574 


a wide range of good open source libraries and packages and the possibility of using the tool 
through a web-based service. 

The NetBeans Integrated Development Environment Version 6.0 was used for the 
development of MINSTE. This is an open source software tool and available for download 
from http://www.netbeans.org/ . 

6.3 Open Source Tools 

• Netbeans Integrated Development Environment (IDE): http://www.netbeans.org/ 

• To install Netbeans with JAXB functionality install the 'AIT download version: 
http://download.netbeans.org/netbeans/6.1/final/ 

• Java Architecture for XML Binding (JAXB) : 

http: / /iava.sun.com/developer/ technicalArticles/WebServices/jaxb/ 

• Java Runtime Environment (JRE) 6.0: 

http://iava.sun.com/iavase/downloads/?intcmp=1281 

• JDBC: http://iava.sun.com/iavase/6/docs/technotes/guides/jdbc/ 

• Microsoft SQL Server JDBC Driver: 

http://www.microsoft.com/downloads/details.aspx?EamilylD=c47053eb-3b64- 

4794-950d-81elec91clba&DisplayLang=en 


7. Other Comments 


7.1 Development Effort 

MINSTE contains 34 classes with approximately 2500 code lines^s. 

The original S&T work plan for de-risking Project 1778 allocated $150k for contractor 
development. DSTO developed MINSTE from its conception through to the software design, 
implementation, testing and documentation, for approximately $12k with 0.3 staff years' 
salary. Costings 

• Attendance at trial, DUGONG07 - $6000 

• MINSTE development for one S&T 3 staff member - $3000 

• MINSTE installation packaging, one S&T 3 staff member - $1000 

• Publication of one MINSTE User Manual and Technical Note - $500 

• Skills development for one S&T staff member - $1500 

The tool was developed without any requisition costs, using only open-source software. 


Refer to Irwin, A. (2009) User Guide for MINTACS SeeTrack Exchange (MINSTE), DSTO-TN-0887 for a 
eomplete schematie MINSTE class diagram and software developer notes. 


14 












DSTO-GD-0574 


7.2 User Feedback 

Throughout its development, the MINSTE concept was presented to the MCDFEG for user 
feedback and input into the design and use of the application. Discussions with the MCDEEG 
also extended to the use of MINTAGE R12 as a data management tool and Geographic 
Information System (GIS) for information reported from the UMS to the tasking or command 
HQ. Below are some opinions voiced during presentations of the use of XML for data 
exchange and demonstration and use of the MINSTE application. 

MINSTE was demonstrated to Mr Wayne Dunn, OIC of the MWDC HMAS Waterhen, on the 
11 April 2008. A number of points were discussed at this meeting: 

• Requirement to keep the MINSTE GUI simple. This was achieved by providing 
simple function selections and instructions to guide the user through the 
complete import / export process. 

• Requirement by the MWDC for an interface between MINTACS and PMA tools for 
deployable side-scan sonar systems. Mr Wayne Dunn suggested that a complete 
software interface be developed as proposed in the S&T Plan SEA 1778 Work 
Package 6 - Analysis of MWCSS Interfaces. 

• Requirement for a standard operating procedure within the RAN on reporting 
environmental contacts and possible mines (tactical features) from deployable systems. 
This point was raised because the contact referencing system has been hard¬ 
coded into MINSTE, since the only existing standard for contact referencing (to 
align with MINTACS R12 requirements) only supports the circumstance when a 
contact is promoted to a tactical mine object. In this case, mine object is 
referenced by an 'Asset Call Sign' and a user-selected mine reference number 
(an 'MRN' as opposed to a 'CRN'). 

An overview of MINSTE and its objectives as a concept demonstrator was presented to the 
MCD Group Tactical Development Steering Group, 2 May 2008. LCDR Andrew Fraser, OIC 
Operations Support Unit, sent the following comments in an email dated 9 May 2008: 

• MINSTE, as a concept demonstrator and interface tool, needed no more 
development. 

• S&T research should be conducted to further investigate more powerful and 
purpose-built tools for Rapid Environmental Analysis (REA) data analysis (such 
as ArcGlS). It was suggested that it may be more beneficial to develop software 
interfaces to these other tools rather than to MINTACS, which is designed 
specifically for MW mission planning and assessment. 

• Future MINTACS upgrades should focus on improving MCM mission 
planning, assessment and force analysis. Future requirements for MINTACS 
development could include provision for a common user interface to a MCM 
'toolbox' which would include mission planning for unmanned systems. 

• LCDR Fraser commented that by making available on the Defence Secret 
Network a suite of data analysis tools, such as ArcGlS products: 


15 



DSTO-GD-0574 


"...represents a great opportunity for the bringing together of a COP [common 
operational picture] for the disparate warfare disciplines/environments. ..This will allow 
MINTACS to be operated alongside a powerful COP/GIS with potentially seamless 
transition /exchange of data between them.. .MCM utopial" 

A copy of the MINSTE application was provided to LEUT Lena Thompson, Maritime 
Geospatial Officer - Meteorology and Oceanography, for use at RIMPAC 08. LEUT Thompson 
was deployed to work with the UUV Operators of Explosive Ordnance Disposal Mobile Unit 
ONE (EODMUl) of the US Navy. At RIMPAC 08, hundreds of contacts generated over the 
three weeks of UUV operations were managed and processed using the Common Operating 
Interface for Navy (COIN), which is basically the US version of SeeTrack Military 24 . MINSTE 
was used to import contact data from COIN (SeeTrack) to MINTACS, and the process was 
reported to be streamlined and incident free. LEUT Thompson made comment on a few 
operational issues with the use of MINSTE and MINTACS R12 for the UUV missions 
conducted at RIMPAC 08. 

These issues included: 

• There were a large number of contacts generated in SeeTrack that were 
imported into MINTACS using the MINSTE interface and XML files. When the 
contacts were in the MINTACS database, issues with assigned contact 
classification were noted. PMA conducted by EODMUl would, at the very 
least, assign contact classification in COIN; however when the contact data was 
imported into MINTACS the contact classification was assigned "POSSIBLE 
MINE". MINSTE assigns "POSSIBLE MINE" classification automatically and 
does not capture this extra classification information from the COIN (SeeTrack) 
database. Consequently, this classification data was lost in the data exchange. 

• Management of contact data was difficult within MINTACS. All contact data 
was rendered in the CIS, regardless of operation, and in the "management of 
contacts" window, every contact in the database was displayed. As mentioned, 
with hundreds of contacts being reported this was difficult to manage. 

• The MINSTE application was not installed on the deployed DSN because the 
software had not been tested to determine if it met the requirements for 
installation on the Defence network environment. The application was used 
only on a standalone laptop with an installed version of MINTACS R12 while 
the SeeTrack database was copied to an external hard drive for access. As a 
result, MINSTE could not provide effective support to the Operations Staff 
through rapid transfer of contact data from the PMA software used at RIMPAC 
to the MINTACS SQL Server. 


COIN is the US Navy version of SeeTrack Military and is tightly integrated with the US tactical decision 
aid MEDAL. A US Government developed interface sits between SeeTrack and MEDAL providing 
sophisticated exchange of information between the two systems. 


16 



DSTO-GD-0574 


The results of the RIMPAC 08 exercise and the real issue of managing a large number of 
reported contacts from many UMS can be summarised in a comment sort from CMDR Dean 
Shopen, Commander Australian Mine Warfare and Clearance Diving Task Group: 

"The Mine Warfare and Clearance Diving Task Group (MCDTG) executed command 
of the Undersea MCM Task Group at Exercise RIMPAC over the period 29 Jun - 01 
Aug 08, in Hawaii. The Task Group consisted on 146 personnel from 5 different 
countries (US, UK, Canada, the Netherlands and Australia), with 9 UUV's and 4 
dolphins. The MCDTG staff experienced considerable difficulty in achieving 
transparent and accurate transfer of contact information from each Task Unit 
(represented by the different participating countries), because they operated their 
organic data management systems. 

This resulted in large volumes of contacts being manually collated into MINTAGS 
because there was no effective common data interface. The status of the contacts could 
not be edited from the results of progressive VSWMGM missions, which added to the 
complexity of the cumbersome arrangement. Gompatibility of data management systems 
needs to occur at the lowest level in order to capture all contact details and allow 
information sharing at the lowest subsystem level. 

The current arrangement used by the USN with the interoperability between GOIN and 
MEDAL illustrates a baseline of compatibility that needs to be achieved by MINTAGS 
if the RAN aspires to effectively contribute to a coalition VSW MCM force. This 
baseline requirement should also be supplemented with contemporary, smart image 
store and representation capacity. Based on the information provided by DSTO the 
MINSTE interface demonstrating the use of XML has potential to provide the 
capability required for an effective MCM data management system ." 


17 



DSTO-GD-0574 


8. Conclusion 

MINSTE was developed to demonstrate the following concepts: 

1. Rapid data transfer between MCM mission support tools, 

2. Use of human- and machine-readable XML as a standard for data exchange, 

3. Automated management of contact data within MINTACS, 

4. Use of object-oriented programming principles and platform-independent languages 
for command support software. 

MINSTE was successful in that it achieved its original objectives to reduce operator overheads 
associated with Mine Warfare (MW) data management, and to familiarise MW personnel with 
the advantages of using common data standards and flexible programming techniques.25 
Because much of the functionality demonstrated by MINSTE will be incorporated in later 
versions of MINTACS, no further development of MINSTE is planned. 

One significant outcome from the development of MINSTE is an awareness of the advantages 
for the adoption of a standard architecture framework underpinned by interoperability 
standards and net-centric concepts. In particular. Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) has 
become the leading approach and becoming more common place in the commercial world. 
SOA software is available and discoverable as a service and marks a transformation from 
isolated software environments to a more dynamic and interactive one. The use of such 
technology is the acknowledgement of commercial vendors of the need to move their software 
components from monolithic applications to those that are communicable and integrated at 
minimum cost. The most common technology to realise SOAs are web-based services whose 
benefits include being platform independent (for example, based on Internet Protocols) and 
using XML to conduct the interactions between the software applications. XML is a robust tool 
set and enabler for information exchange providing interoperability and platform 
independence. 

Consideration should now be sort for further MCM data exchange analysis at the semantic 
level. Semantic interoperability is where the system or computer processing the data received 
is able to extract knowledge from that data. Interoperability between systems not only 
requires a technical understanding between the systems but also requires an understanding of 
the information and context received. A semantic interoperability analysis is a future 
possibility in understanding the role and meaning of the data being communicated from the 
UMS PMA to the MCM tactical decision aid (and possibly other CIS tools). 


Indeed, one user suggested that exchange of operational data may well be supported by two standards: 

XML for transfer of tactical data, and Additional Military Layers (AMLs), which are designed for the transfer 
of large amounts of data and imagery produced by persistent sensors. 


18 



DSTO-GD-0574 


A number of methods can be adopted for a semantic interoperability analysis. One is defining 
the ontology of the system being used. Ontologies are a formal representation of a set of 
concepts within a domain and the relationship between the concepts. It is possible to then 
extend semantic interoperability to the tactical decision aid domain or even a web (IP) 
domain. This can be achieved by using a Semantic Web framework. Semantic Web is the next- 
generation of web concepts, where concepts rather than keywords are linked within the 
(internet) domain. Languages are now available, at varying degrees of development, that 
enable this linkage of concepts to occur. One such language is the Resource Description 
Framework (RDF) that graphs concepts to concepts in a semantic network. The RDF can be 
easily mapped and managed in an XML file format, where for example, Java requires an open- 
source API to achieve this. 


9. References 

1 Dorsett, H. and Irwin, A. (2008) MCM Data Exchange at DUGONG 07: Quick-Look Report 
(U). DSTO-CR-2008-0035, Sydney, NSW, Defence Science and Technology 
Organisation (Australia) 

2 MINTACS R12 Brochure. [Accessed 01 March 2009]; Available from: 
http: / / www.sfs.com.au/MlNTACSBrochureR12.pdf 

3 SeeTrack Military Brochure. [Accessed 01 March 2009]; Available from: 
http:// WWW. seebyte.com/docs/STMBrochure-final 001.pdf 

4 JAXB library. [Accessed 01 March 2009]; Available from https://jaxb.dev.iava.net/ 

5 Netbeans 6.0 Intergrated Development Environment. [Accessed 01 March 2009]; 
Available from http: / /www.netbeans.org/ 

6 Java Database Connectivity API. [Accessed 01 March 2009]; Available from 
http://java.sun.com/javase/technologies/database/ 

7 US DoD Joint Technical Architecture Vol 1 (2003) [Accessed 01 March 2009]; Available 
from: http://www.acq.osd.mil/osjtf/pdf/jta-vol-Lpdf 

8 Namespaces in XML 1.0 (Second Edition) W3C Recommendation 
http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-xml-names/ 

9 Australian Defence Information Environment Approved Technology Standards List 
(DIE ATSL) [Accessed 16 Eebruary 2009]; Available from 

http:/ / intranet.defence.gov.au/do gweb/sites/DAS/comweb.asp?page=48672#DAS 

10 Vencel, L. (2006) Towards Establishing a Set of Australian DoD Net Gentric Standards. 
DSTO-CR-2006-0200, Canberra, ACT, Defence Science and Technology Organisation 
(Australia) 


19 










DSTO-GD-0574 


11 Defence Information Environment Approved Technology Standards List [Accessed 2 
February 2009]; Available from: 

http://intranet.defence.gov.au/ciogweb/sites/DA5/docs/AT5L Nov 06 Update.pdf 

173 

12 Foster, K., lannos A., Lawrie G., Temple, P. and Tobin, B. (2007) Exploring a Net Centric 
Architecture using the Net Warrior Airborne Early Warning and Control Node. DSTO-TR- 
2093, Edinburgh, South Australia, Defence Science and Technology Organisation 
(Australia) 

13 Sahai, A., Graupner, S. and Kim, W. The Unfolding of the Web Services Paradigm (2002) 
[Accessed 4 November 2008]; Available from: 

http: / / www.hpl.hp.com/techreports/2002/HPL-2002-130.pdf 


20 




DSTO-GD-0574 


Appendix A: XML Schema 


<?xml version="l.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 

<xsd:schema xmlns:xsd="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" 

targetNamespace="http://xml.netbeans.org/schema/MissionReport" 
xmlns:tns="http://xml.netbeans.org/schema/MissionReport" 
elementFormDefault="qualified"> 

<xsd:element name="exportmission"> 

<xsd:complexType> 

<xsd:sequence> 

<xsd:element name="missionName" 

type="xsd:string"></xsd:element> 

<xsd:element name="missionDescription" 

type="xsd:string"></xsd:element> 

<xsd:element name="object" minOccurs="0" 

maxOccurs="unbounded"> 

<xsd:complexType> 

<xsd:sequence> 

<xsd:element 

type="xsd:integer"></xsd:element> 

<xsd:element 

type="xsd:double"></xsd:element> 

<xsd:element 

type="xsd:double"></xsd:element> 

<xsd:element 

type="xsd:double"></xsd:element> 

<xsd:element 

type="xsd:double"></xsd:element> 

<xsd:element 

type="xsd:double"></xsd:element> 

<xsd:element 

type="xsd:dateTime"></xsd:element> 

</xsd:sequence> 

</xsd:complexType> 

</xsd:element> 

</xsd:sequence> 

<xsd:attribute name="missionID" type="xsd:int"/> 

</xsd:complexType> 

</xsd:element> 

</xsd:schema> 


name="contactID" 
name="latitude" 
name="longitude" 
name="width" 
name="length" 
name="height" 
name="timeDate" 


21 



Page classification: UNCLASSIFIED 


DEFENCE SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ORGANISATION 
DOCUMENT CONTROL DATA 


1. PRIVACY MARKING/CAVEAT (OF DOCUMENT) 


2. TITLE 

Design and Evaluation of the MINTACS SeeTrack Exchange 
(MINSTE) Concept Demonstrator 


3. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION (FOR UNCLASSIFIED REPORTS 
THAT ARE LIMITED RELEASE USE (L) NEXT TO DOCUMENT 
CLASSIFICATION) 


Document 

Title 

Abstract 


(U) 

(U) 

(U) 


4. AUTHOR(S) 
Alison Irwin 


5. CORPORATE AUTHOR 


DSTO Defence Science and Technology Organisation 
PO Box 1500 

Edinburgh South Australia 5111 Australia 


6a. DSTO NUMBER 
DSTO-GD-0574 


6b. AR NUMBER 
AR-014-508 


6c. TYPE OF REPORT 
General Document 


7. DOCUMENT DATE 
April 2009 


8. FILE NUMBER 

9. TASK NUMBER 

10. TASK SPONSOR 

11. NO. OF PAGES 

12. NO. OF REFERENCES 

U-490-6-342 

NAV 07/088 

DDMCD 

21 

13 


13. URL OF ELECTRONIC VERSION 

http://dsto.defence.gov.au/corporate/reports/DSTO-GD-0574.pdf 


14. RELEASE AUTHORITY 

Chief, Maritime Operations Division 


15. SECONDARY RELEASE STATEMENT OF THIS DOCUMENT 

Approved for public release 


OVERSEAS ENQUIRIES OUTSIDE STATED LIMITATIONS SHOULD BE REFERRED THROUGH DOCUMENT EXCHANGE, PO BOX 1500, EDINBURGH, SA 5111 

16. DELIBERATE ANNOUNCEMENT 

No Limitations 


17. CITATION IN OTHER DOCUMENTS _Yes_ 

18. DSTO RESEARCH LIBRARY THESAURUS http://web-vic.dsto.defence.gov.au/workareas/Iibrarv/resources/dsto thesaurus.shtml 

Automatic data exchange, XML, MINTACS, SeeTrack, UUV 


19. ABSTRACT 

MINSTE is a computer program that automates data exchange between MINTACS (MINe Warfare TACtical Software) used by the RAN for 
planning and assessment of naval mine countermeasures (MCM) and SeeTrack, a 'generic' mission planner and post-mission analysis tool for 
unmanned underwater systems - particularly towed or self-propelled side-scan sonar that images underwater objects. MINSTE was 
developed by DSTO with open-source software in order to reduce operator overheads by automating data entry for reported mine-like 
objects, which can amount to several hundred contacts for some MCM missions. This document describes the MINSTE concept design and 
development within the context of current and emerging RAN requirements for mine warfare mission planning and reporting in network- 
enabled and joint operations. For a more detailed discussion on the installation and use of MINSTE, the reader is referred to DSTO-TN-0887, 
"User Guide for MINTACS SeeTrack Exchange (MINSTE)". 


Page classification: UNCLASSIFIED 

























