Software 


@ JavaGenes Molecular 
Evolution 

JavaGenes is a general-purpose, evolu- 
tionary software system written in Java. 
It implements several versions of a ge- 
netic algorithm, simulated annealing, 
stochastic hill climbing, and other 
search techniques. This software has 
been used to evolve molecules, atomic 
force field parameters, digital circuits, 
Earth Observing Satellite schedules, 
and antennas. This version differs from 
version 0.7.28 in that it includes the 
molecule evolution code and other im- 
provements. Except for the antenna 
code, JaveGenes is available for NASA 
Open Source distribution. 

This program was written by Jason 
Lohn, David Smith, and Jeremy Frank oj 
Ames Research Center; Al Globus oj Com- 
puter Science Corp.; and James Crawford 
oj Universities Space Research Associa- 
tion. For further information, access 
http://opensource.arc.nasa.gov or contact the 
Ames Technology Partnerships Division at 
(650) 604-2954. ARC-15103-1 


@1 World Wind 3D Earth 
Viewing 

World Wind allows users to zoom 
from satellite altitude down to any place 
on Earth, leveraging high-resolution 
LandSat imagery and SRTM (Shuttle 
Radar Topography Mission) elevation 
data to experience Earth in visually rich 
3D. In addition to Earth, World Wind 
can also visualize other planets, and 
there are already comprehensive data 
sets for Mars and the Earth’s moon, 
which are as easily accessible as those of 
Earth. 

There have been more than 20 mil- 
lion downloads to date, and the soft- 
ware is being used heavily by the Depart- 
ment of Defense due to the code’s 
ability to be extended and the evolution 
of the code courtesy of NASA and the 
user community. Primary features in- 
clude the dynamic access to public do- 
main imagery and its ease of use. All 
one needs to control World Wind is a 
two-button mouse. Additional guides 
and features can be accessed through a 


simplified menu. A JAVA version will be 
available soon. Navigation is automated 
with single clicks of a mouse, or by typ- 
ing in any location to automatically 
zoom in to see it. 

The World Wind install package 
contains the necessary requirements 
such as the .NET runtime and man- 
aged DirectX library. World Wind can 
display combinations of data from a va- 
riety of sources, including Blue Mar- 
ble, LandSat 7, SRTM, NASA Scientific 
Visualization Studio, GLOBE, and 
much more. A thorough list of fea- 
tures, the user manual, a key chart, 
and screen shots are available at 
h ttp : / / worldwind . arc . nasa. gov. 

This program was written by Patrick 
Hogan of Ames Research Center, Christo- 
pher Maxwell and Randolph Kim of Na- 
tional Space Grant Foundation, and 
Tom Gaskins. For further information, 
access http://worldwind.arc.nasa.gov/ or 
contact the Ames Technology Partnerships 
Division at (650) 604-2954. ARC- 
15166-1. 


NASA Tech Briefs, April 2007 


15 


