AD-A250 349 


Special Report 
SEI-89-SR-14 


oarnegie-Mellon University 

Software Engineering Institute 


Conformance Criteria for the SAME Approach 
to Binding Ada Programs to SQL 


James W. Moore 
August 1989 













The foffowmg statement of assurance >S more than a statement required to comply with the federal law This is a sincere statement by the university to assure that all 
people are deluded m the diversify which makes Carnegie Melton an exciting place Carnegie Mellon wishes to include people wrthoul regard to race color, national 
ongm sex handicap, religion creed, ancestry, belief age. veteran status or sexual orientation 

Carnegie Mellon university does not discriminate and Carnegie Mellon University ts required not to discriminate «n admissions and employment on the basis ot race 
color. national origin, sex or handicap in violation of Tile Vi of the Civil flights Act o< 1964. Title IX of the Educational Amendments of 1972 and Section 504 of the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 or other federal slate or locaf laws or executive orders in addition Carnegie Meflon does not discriminate m admissions and employment on 
the basis of religion creed, ancestry, belief age. veteran status or sexual orientation >.n violation of any federal state, or local laws or executive orders inquiries concern 
ng application of this pokey should be directed to the Provost Carnegie Melton University. 5000 Forbes Avenue. Pittsburgh. PA 15213, telephone (412) 268-6684 or ihe 
Vice President tor Enrolment. Carnegie Mellon Uruversny 5000 Forbes Avenue Pittsburgh. PA 15213 telephone (412) 268 2056 





Special Report 

SEI-89-SR-14 
August 1989 


Conformance Criteria for the SAME Approach 
to Binding Ada Programs to SQL 


James W. Moore 

IBM Systems Integration Division 
in conjunction with 
the Binding of Ada and SQL Project 



Approved for public release. 
Distribution unlimited. 


Software Engineering Institute 

Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213 






Table of Contents 

1. Background 

2. Approach 

3. Conformance Criteria 
Acknowledgements 
References 



Accession For 


ITIS GRA&I 

DT1C TAB 
Unannounced 
Justification_ 

wL 
a f 


By 


Distri bution/ 


Availability Codes 


Diet 


* 


4 


Avail and/or 
Special 



Conformance Criteria for the SAME Approach 
to Binding Ada Programs to SQL 


Abstract: The structured query language (SQL) Ada Module Extensions (SAME) 
form a method for the design and construction of Ada database applications. The 
method is explained in a companion document: "Guidelines for the Use of the 
SAME," [2]. In order to enable the method to be referenced in requests for 
proposals (RFPs) and development contracts, there must be some method to de¬ 
termine if a given software design and implementation conform to the SAME 
guidelines. Such conformance criteria are contained in this report. 


1. Background 

The American National Standards Institute (ANSI) has provided a standard binding from the 
Ada programming language to the structured query language (SQL) database module lan¬ 
guage in [1] [3]. This standard treats the binding to Ada in a manner similar to the binding to 
other programming languages and does not exploit the specific strengths of the Ada pro¬ 
gramming language. The SQL-Ada Module Extensions Design Committee (SAME-DC) has 
developed an approach, the "SAME approach," for building an interface between an Ada 
program and the ANSI binding in a manner that exploits the particular strengths of the Ada 
language. This approach is described in [2]. Specific Ada code packages that may be used 
to implement a particular instance of the SAME approach are listed in [2]. The SAME-DC 
recognizes that it may be desirable to describe the SAME approach in a manner suitable for 
subsequent standardization. This paper is an initial attempt at achieving that goal. At the 
current state of description, proper usage of the SAME approach involves engineering judg¬ 
ment by the developer. So, the decision as to whether a particular implementation conforms 
to the SAME approach also involves some judgment. Therefore, the current conformance 
criteria are intended for use in the sort of peer review process that is oriented toward the 
evaluation of software design and implementation for conformance to sound software engi¬ 
neering practice. 


SEI-89-SR-14 


1 




2. Approach 


The general approach for describing conformance to the SAME method is to provide qualita¬ 
tive statements regarding the role and function of the Abstract Module that must be present 
in a conforming binding. Various of the SAME support services would be useful in the de¬ 
velopment of an abstract module, and their usage is described. It must be understood, how¬ 
ever, that these code specifications represent only an example of a way to achieve confor¬ 
mance and that, in a particular instance, other ways to achieve conformance may be desir¬ 
able. For the purposes of this document, the SAME support services are defined as the 
collection of some of the Ada package specifications listed in [2] with the exception of the 
contents of their private sections. The selected Ada package specifications are the follow¬ 
ing: 


SQL_Standard (part of ANSI binding to Ada, [3]) 


SQL_System 

SQL_Exceptions 

SQL_lnt_Pkg 

SQL_Real_Pkg 

SQL_Char_Pkg 

SQL_Database_Error_Pkg 


SQL_Communications_Pkg 

SQL_Boolean_Pkg 

SQL_Smallint_Pkg 

SQL_Double_Precision_Pkg 

SQL_Enumeration_Pkg 


SEI-89-SR-14 


3 




3. Conformance Criteria 


An interface from an Ada application program to an ANSI SQL database is viewed as con¬ 
forming to the SAME approach if it satisfies the criteria below: 

1. A set of Ada packages, called the Abstract Module (AM), shall provide the 
exclusive means of access of the application program to the database. The 
Abstract Interface (Al) is the Ada specifications for those portions of the AM 
that are visible to the application program. The Abstract Module shall provide 
no function other than that necessary to provide the application program ac¬ 
cess to the database. 

2. A one-to-one correspondence shall exist between the procedures of the SQL 
Module and the Ada procedures in the Al. (In some implementations, the SQL 
Module may not actually exist except as a formalism ol the ANSI standard 
binding.) 

3. Parameters. There are two cases that shall be termed "status parameters" 
and "data parameters": 

a. Status parameter: Each Al procedure may have a parameter of 
mode out used to return information regarding the value of the 
SQLCODE parameter in the corresponding procedure of the SQL 
Module. This parameter shall be of an enumeration type. In the ab¬ 
sence of such a parameter, any non-zero SQLCODE value returned 
from the corresponding SQL Module procedure shall cause the raising 
of an exception in the execution of the corresponding Al procedure. If 
the status parameter is coded, a partial function shall exist from the 
possible values of SQLCODE to the possible values of the status 
parameter. The value of the status parameter shall be set in accor¬ 
dance with the partial function except that the exception shall be raised 
whenever SQLCODE is set to an unmapped non-zero value. The ex¬ 
ception shall have the unique meaning that a non-zero, unmapped 
SQLCODE value has been returned by the SQL module. 

In the SAME support services, the exception described by the preced¬ 
ing paragraph is named 

SQL_COMMUNICATIONS_PKG.SQL_DATABASE_ERROR. 

b. Data parameters: All parameters of the SQL Module except 
SQLCODE are referred to as "data parameters." All data parameters 
of an SQL Module procedure shall be placed in correspondence with 
parameters of the corresponding Al procedure. In those cases where 
the SQL Module procedure is a fetch statement or an insert-values 
statement, all of the data parameters of the SQL procedure shall be 
placed in correspondence with the components of a row record 
parameter of the corresponding Al procedure. In the case where the 
SQL Module procedure is a select statement, the data parameters 
representing the table row shall likewise be placed in correspondence 
with the components of a row record parameter of the corresponding 
Al procedure. In all other cases, each data parameter of the SQL 
Module procedure shall be placed in correspondence with an individual 
parameter of the Al procedure. 


SEI-39-SR-14 


5 






Char 

Smallint 

Int 

Real 

Double Precision 


SQL_Char_Pkg. SQL_Char_Not_Null 
S QL_Sma 11int_P kg. 

S QL_Sma11int_Not_Nul1 
SQL_Int_Pkg.SQL_Int_Not_Null 
S QL_Re a1_P kg.SQL_Real_Not_Null 
SQL_Double_Precision_Pkg. 

SQL Double Precision Not Null 







Acknowledgements 

This initial draft was based upon material formulated by the SAME Design Committee 
(SAME-DC) at its meeting of May 15-17, 1989, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. This meeting 
was chaired by Marc Graham of the SEI and attended by: 

Greg Zelesnik, SEI 
Pat Timpanaro, Compass 
Judith Richardson, U.S. Army 
Rowan Maclaren, Compass 
Kurt Wallnau, Unisys 
Joan Krier, Intermetrics 
Eugene Vasilescu, Grumman 
Tom Wheeler, U.S. Army 
Dudley Rodericks, U.S. Army 
Jim Moore, IBM 

Organizations are listed for identification purposes only. This document should not be taken 
as reflecting the opinions of any company or organization other than the SAME-DC. 


SEI-89-SR-14 


9 





References 


[ 1 ] Database Language SQL. 

American National Standards Institute, ANSI X3.135-1986. 

also published as International Standards Organization ISO 9075-1987. 

[2] Graham, Marc. 

Guidelines for the Use of the SAME. 

Technical Report SEI/CMU-89-TR-16, Software Engineering Institute, June, 1989. 

[3] Database Language Embedded SQL. 

ANS X3.168.1989. 





