DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 



TECHNICAL ASSESSMENT REPORT 


PRECISION MEASUREMENT EQUIPMENT LABORATORY 
AUTOMATED MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 

Report No. 95-004 October 4,1994 


distribution statement a 

Approved for Public Release 

Distribution Unlimited 


Office of the 
Inspector General 



200003U 035 

imo (iUALIlY IHSFEOTBD 3 -(3 4?-- J ^ 





Additional Copies 

To obtain additional copies of this report, contact the Secondary 
Reports Distribution Unit, Audit Planning and Technical Support Directorate, at 
(703) 604-8937 (DSN 664-6303) or FAX (703) 604-8932. 

Suggestions for Future Audits 

To suggest ideas for or request future audits, contact the Planning and Coordination 
Branch, Audit Planning and Technical Support Directorate, at (703) 604-8939 
(DSN 664-8939) or FAX (703) 604-8932. Ideas and requests can also be mailed to: 

Inspector General, Department of Defense 
OAIG-AUD (ATTN: APTS Audit Suggestions) 

4(X) Army Navy Drive (Room 801) 

Arlington, Virginia 22202-2884 

DoD Hotline 

To report fraud, waste, or abuse, call the DoD Hotline at (800) 424-9098 or write to 
the DoD Hotline, The Pentagon, Washington, D.C. 20301-1900. The identity 
of writers and callers is fully protected. 


Acronyms 


ADP 

CAMS 

C-CS 

IMDS 

PAMS 

PMEL 

REMIS 

TMDE 


Automated Data Processing 
Core Automated Maintenance System 
Communications-Computer Systems 
Integrated Maintenance Data System 
Precision Measurement Equipment Laboratory Automated 
Management System 

Precision Measurement Equipment Laboratory 
Reliability and Maintainability Information System 
Test, Measurement, and Diagnostic Equipment 






INSPECTOR GENERAL 
department of defense 

400 ARMY NAVY DRIVE 
ARLINGTON. VIRGINIA 22202-2884 



October 4, 1994 


MEMORANDUM 


PfiR ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE 

FOR ASa^^^j^^jANAGEMENT AND COMPTROLLER) 

INSPECTOR GENERAL, DEPARTMENT OF THE 


ATI? FOi?rF. 


SUBJECT: 


Technical Assessment Report of the Precision Measurement 
Equipment Laboratory Automated Management System 
(Report 95-004) 


This report is provided for your information and use. We conducted the 
Technical Assessment in response to a Hotline allegation that the Air Force wa 
waSg nS ustag Commerdal-Off-The-Shelf products to^usj. Precision 

Measurement Equipment Laboratory Automated Management System (P.^S) 
requirements PAMS is an Air Force-developed computer system that automates the 
Smiiistrative aspects of metrology and calibration. Management comments on a draft 
ofTte iSS wercoiSideted in preparing this report. Air Force consents conformed 
to die requirements of DoD Directive 7630.3 and resoived all issues. Therefore, 
additional comments are not required. 

The courtesies extended to the Technical Assessment Division „ 

annreciated If vou have questions on this assessment, please contact Mr. Kenneth H. 
appreciatea. II you I 4 604-8952 (DSN 664-8952) or Mr. Gregory R. 

SXn JSSan ger al 703) 60n94?(DSN 664-8946). The distribution of 
Kpo« is iS in Appendix D. The technical assessment team members are listed 

inside the back cover. 


David K. Steersman 
Deputy Assistant Inspector General 
for Auditing 



Office of the Inspector General, DoD 


Report No. 95-004 October 4, 1994 

(Project No. 3PT-8016) 

TECHNICAL ASSESSMENT OF THE PRECISION MEASUREMENT 
EQUIPMENT LABORATORY AUTOMATED MANAGEMENT 

SYSTEM 


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 


Introduction. The Precision Measurement Equipment Laboratory Automated 
Management System (PAMS) is an Air Force-developed computer system that 
automates the administrative aspects of metrology and calibration. 

We received a Hotline complaint asserting that the Air Force has wasted resources by 
continuing to use PAMS when more capable Commercial-Off-The-Shelf products are 
available at lower costs. The complainant cited three specific deficiencies concerning 
the development of PAMS to support this conclusion. These deficiencies were: 

o PAMS was not developed in accordance with Air Force directives, 

o the Air Force was planning to reverse-engineer PAMS and convert the 
software from the Basic computer language to Ada, and 

0 an independent validation and verification of PAMS was never completed. 

The complainant believed that the PAMS software would be difficult and expensive to 
maintain and that reverse-engineering and converting the PAMS software to Ada would 
be very costly. The complainant, therefore, concluded that Air Force could save 
money by replacing PAMS with a Commercial-Off-The-Shelf product. 

Objective. The objective of our technical assessment was to determine whether the Air 
Force had wasted resources by using PAMS instead of a Commercial-Off-The-Shelf 
product. 

Technical Assessment Results. The Air Force did not waste resources by using 
PAMS instead of a Commercial-Off-The-Shelf product (Finding A). The complainant 
correctly identified several PAMS deficiencies, but the Air Force has also recognized 
these deficiencies and corrected them for the most part. 

As a result, the PAMS software has not been overly troublesome or expensive to 
maintain. Further, the PAMS users are satisfied with the system. Consequently, the 
complainant's recommendation that PAMS be replaced with a Commercial-Off-The- 
Shelf product could not be supported. 

The Air Force, however, has yet to correct one PAMS problem that stems from the 
deficiencies identified by the complainant. The Aerospace Guidance and Metrology 
Center routinely does not receive PAMS data from approximately 



40 percent of the Precision Measurement Equipment Laboratories because PAMS 
cannot communicate with other Air Force maintenance management systems 
(Finding B). PAMS does not communicate with these other systems as the result of 
two factors: 

o PAMS was not fully integrated into a Communications-Computer Systems 
(C-CS) architecture when the system was developed, and 

o a PAMS Program Management Directive was not implemented when the 
PAMS program management responsibility transferred from the PAMS Design Office 
to the Standard Systems Center. 

Although the Air Force is aware of the PAMS communications problems, it has not 
addressed the causes of these problems. Instead, the Aerospace Guidance and 
Metrology Center has instituted a short-term solution that b3q)asses the communications 
problems; the TMDE data are being mailed to the Aerospace Guidance and Metrology 
Center on computer discs. While this solution is expected to improve the percentage of 
data that reaches the Aerospace Guidance and Metrology Center, it is person-power 
intensive and an inefficient use of the Air Force's computer resources. Two additional 
reasons warrant the timely correction of the PAMS communications problems. First, 
the Air Force will pay less for the necessary corrections the sooner tot the problems 
are addressed. Second, by correcting the PAMS communications problems, the Air 
Force will lay a solid foundation for future PAMS improvements, whether they be 
upgrades to the current PAMS configuration or Commercial-Off-The-Shelf products. 

Summary of Recommendations. We made no recommendations in Finding A. In 
Finding B, we recommended tot the Air Force correct the PAMS communications and 
management problems by fully integrating PAMS into a Communications-Computer 
Systems architecture for Air Force maintenance management systems and establishing a 
PAMS Program Management Directive. 

Management Comments. The Air Force agreed with the substance of the 
recommendations, but provided an alternative approach for implementing the 
recommendations. The Air Force agreed tot PAMS functionality should be integrated 
into a Communications-Computer Systems architecture for Air Force maintenance 
systems and tot a corresponding Program Management Directive is warranted. 

Technical Assessment Comments. The Air Force's comments were responsive and 
consistent with our recommendations. Consequently, additional comments on this final 
report are not required. Further information on management comments is in Part II, 
and the complete text of the comments is in Part IV. 


*The 40 percent value is based on an input of 38 percent from Air Force 
representatives familiar with the problem and a 40 percent value calculated from 
the Aerospace Guidance and Metrology Center's Maintenance Data Collection 
reports for the month of March 1993 (zero Test, Measurement, and Diagnostic 
Equipment (TMDE) data was received from 62 of 155 PMELs). 


11 



Table of Contents 


Executive Summary i 

Part I - Introduction 1 

Background 2 

Objective 3 

Scope and Methodology 3 

Part II - Findings and Recommendations S 

Finding A. PAMS Development 6 

Finding B. PAMS Communications 8 

Part III - Additional Information 15 

Appendix A. PAMS Communications Paths 16 

Appendix B. Options for Improving PAMS 18 

Appendix C. Organizations Visited or Contacted 19 

Appendix D. Report Distribution 20 

Part IV - Management Comments 21 

Department of the Air Force 22 


This report was prepared by the Technical Assessment Division, Audit P lannin g and 
Technical Support Directorate, Office of the Assistant Inspector General for Auditing, 
DoD. 




Part I - Introduction 


1 



Background 


The Air Force relies on precise measurement equipment (oscilloscopes, for 
example) to ensure that safety and mission-critical instruments (such as 
altimeters and pressure gauges) are properly maintained. The precise 
measurement equipment are more commonly termed Test, Measurement, and 
Diagnostic jEquipment (TMDE) and are themselves sensitive instruments that 
must be periodically calibrated to ensure that they are operating properly. 

For optimum efficiency, the calibration intervals of TMDE must be closely 
monitored. The calibrating of TMDE requires that the equipment be removed 
from service; therefore, the calibration periodicity must be balanced to eliminate 
unnecessary calibrations while still ensuring that the TMDE remains accurate. 
To achieve this balance, data are collected whenever a piece of TMDE is 
calibrated. 

A computer system is necessary to manage the Air Force's TMDE data. The 
Air Force utilizes more than 860,000 pieces of TMDE and data must be 
collected on each piece of measurement equipment. The data are used for 
several purposes, including: 

o tracking the maintenance history and status of each individual piece of 
measurement equipment and 

o updating the TMDE calibration intervals. 

The Air Force developed the Precision Measurement Equipment Laboratory 
(PMEL) Automated Management System (PAMS) to effectively collect, 
manage, and disseminate TMDE data. Before the development of PAMS, the 
Air Force manually conducted these tasks; however, this process was time- 
consuming and could be more readily accomplished by a computer. 

We received a Hotline complaint asserting that the Air Force was was ting 
resources by utilizing PAMS when more capable Commercial-Off-The-Shelf 
products are available at lower costs. The complainant cited the following 
problems with PAMS: 

o PAMS was not developed in accordance with Air Force Regulations^; 

o the Air Force has planned to reverse-engineer^ PAMS and convert the 
software from the Basic computer language to Ada; and 


^The 700 series of the Air Force Regulations govern the development of 
Automated Data Processing systems, such as PAMS. 

2ln this case, reverse-engineer means taking the existing PAMS code and 
working backward to document the software's structure. 


2 



Introduction 


o an independent validation and verification^ has never been conducted 
for PAMS. 

The complainant believed the PAMS software would be difficult and expensive 
to maintain and that the reverse-engineering and conversion of the PAMS 
software to Ada would be very costly. Consequently, the complainant 
concluded that the Air Force could save money by replacing PAMS with a 
Commercial-Off-The-Shelf product. 


Objectives 


The overall objective of this technical assessment was to determine whether the 
Air Force was wasting resources by using PAMS instead of a Commercial-Off- 
The-Shelf product. More precisely, our objectives were to determine the 
validity of each specific problem cited by the complainant; whether the Air 
Force had corrected these problems; and whether these problems resulted in 
wasted resources that could have been saved by replacing PAMS with a 
Commercial-Off-The-Shelf product. 


Scope and Methodology 


We traced the chronological history of the specific problems cited by the 
complainant. We first evaluated whether the complainant had accurately 
identified the PAMS problems. We assessed the actions taken by the Air Force 
to correct the problems and analyzed whether the problems resulted in wasted 
Air Force resources. We also reviewed several potential PAMS improvement 
options, including the replacement of PAMS with a Commercial-Off-The-Shelf 
product. 

The Technical Assessment was conducted from May through September 1993. 
We met with representatives from the Aerospace Guidance and Metrology 
Center; the Standard Systems Center; and the Headquarters, U.S. Air Force. 
We also discussed the PAMS assessment with the Air Force Director of 
Metrology; the Air Force Material Command's Logistics Applications of 
Automated Marking and Reading Symbols office; a Headquarters, U.S. Air 
Force, computer policy representative; and the Air Force Materiel Command's 
PMEL representative. Additionally, we visited a PMEL at Andrews Air Force 
Base, Maryland, for a hands-on demonstration of PAMS. Appendix C lists the 
organizations that we visited or contacted. 


^Independent verification and validation is a technique used to reduce risk in 
software development. An independent party tests the software and ensures that 
the software satisfies all system-level requirements. 


3 



Introduction 


The assessment team consisted of members from the Technical Assessment 
Division, Audit Planning and Technical Support Directorate. The team 
members have experience in computer science, engineering, and acquisition 
management. 


4 




Part II - Findings and Reconunendations 


5 



Finding A. PAMS Development 

The Air Force had not wasted resources by using PAMS instead of a 
Commercial-Off-The-Shelf product. Although the complainant 
identified valid PAMS discrepancies, the Air Force also recognized these 
problems and corrected them for the most part. The Air Force, 
however, has yet to correct one PAMS problem that stems from the 
deficiencies identified by the complainant (See Finding B). In general, 
the extent of the PAMS problems have not been as significant as alleged 
by the complainant. 


Discussion 


At the time of the allegation, the complainant had identified valid PAMS 
discrepancies. PAMS was not developed in accordance with Air Force 
directives, the Air Force had plans to reverse-engineer PAMS and convert the 
software to Ada, and the Air Force had not conducted an independent validation 
and verification of PAMS. 

However, the Air Force also recognized the PAMS discrepancies and, in 
general, has corrected them. At the time of our assessment, the status of the 
problems cited by the complainant were as follows: 

o the Standard Systems Center had reviewed the PAMS development 
documentation for compliance with Air Force regulations. Some documentation 
was inadequate and was being updated. In general, however, the Aerospace 
Guidance and Metrology Center and the Standard Systems Center were 
managing PAMS in accordance with the applicable directives and regulations 
(the notable exceptions are discussed in Finding B); 

o the Air Force had canceled its plans to reverse-engineer PAMS and 
convert the software to Ada; and 

o the Standard Systems Center validated (tested) the PAMS software 
when the PAMS Program Management transferred to the Standard Systems 
Center. Several software errors were identified and the Standard Systems 
Center upgraded the software accordingly. The revised software was distributed 
to the PAMS users for "operational" validation and verification. 

The complainant believed that the PAMS discrepancies would have two major 
effects. First, the PAMS software would be difficult and expensive to maintain. 
Second, the reverse-engineering and converting of the PAMS software to Ada 
would be extremely costly. Given the status of the PAMS system at the time of 
the allegation, the complainant was right. However, as a result of the Air 
Force's subsequent actions, the extent of the PAMS problems have not been as 
significant as contemplated by the complainant. 


6 


Finding A. PAMS Development 


At the time of the allegation (late 1992), the Standard Systems Center had just 
accepted PAMS program management responsibility and the PAMS software 
was trouble-ridden to the extent that some PMELs would not use the latest 
software version. Further, the PAMS software was not adequately documented. 
These factors lead the complainant to conclude that the PAMS software would 
be difficult and costly to maintain. However, upon accepting programs 
management responsibility for PAMS, the Standard Systems Center 
implemented a recovery plan and was able to develop a much improved 
software version relatively quickly, without exceeding the PAMS' budger. The 
recovery plan included not only fixing the PAMS software errors but also 
updating Ae associated documentation. Consequently, the PAMS software has 
not been overly difficult or expensive to maintain. 

In a similar vein, the complainant's allegation that reverse-engineering PAMS 
and converting the software to Ada would be costly was correct. However, 
significant resources were never expended on this effort. At the time of the 
allegation, the Standard Systems Center had initiated a project to reverse- 
engineer and.convert the PAMS software to Ada. The Standard Systems Center 
had planned to use the Ada software on other Air Force systems. Little work 
was actually accomplished on this project, however, before the Air Force 
recognized ftiat the project was not cost-effective and cancelled it. 

Further, the PAMS users were satisfied with the system. Several PAMS users 
were interviewed and all indicated a general satisfaction with PAMS 
performance. Additionally, these users felt that the Standard Systems Center 
and the PAMS Configuration Control Board were adequately responding to the 
users' requirements. Although some users indicated that PAMS should be 
upgraded in the future, none stated that PAMS should necessarily be replaced 
with a Commercial-Off-The-Shelf product. In short, a detailed cost analysis 
between PAMS and the Conunercial-Off-The-Shelf products would need to be 
performed to justify the acquisition of a new system. While the Standard 
Systems Center had begun to research possible PAMS upgrades, the PAMS 
communications requirements must be clearly established before a cost 
comparison of the various options can be performed. The need to clearly define 
the PAMS communications requirements is further discussed in Finding B. 


Conclusion 


At the time of the allegation, the complainant cited several valid PAMS 
problems, which could have resulted in waste. However, the Air Force has 
corrected these problems for the most part. Consequently, resources have not 
been wasted on PAMS that could have been saved by replacing PAMS with a 
Coimnercial-Off-The-Shelf product. 


^The Standard Systems Center spent approximately $650,000 in 1992 and 1993 
on PAMS. 


7 




Finding B. PAMS Communications 

The Aerospace Guidance and Metrology Center routinely did not receive 
TMDE data from approximately 40 percent of the Precision 
Measurement Equipment Laboratories. This condition existed because 
the PAMS communications^ requirements and management 
responsibilities have never been clearly defmed. A short-term solution 
to the PAMS communications problems has been implemented, but the 
management causes have not been addressed. In resolving these 
problems, the Air Force will alleviate the need for inefficient short-term 
solutions, avoid the higher costs of correcting the problems later, and lay 
a solid foundation for future PAMS enhancements. 


Discussion 


The Aerospace Guidance and Metrology Center routinely does not receive 
TMDE data from approximately 40 percent of the Precision Measurement 
Equipment Laboratories because of PAMS communications problems. PAMS 
relies on other Air Force maintenance management systems to transfer TMDE 
data from the Precision Measurement Equipment Laboratories to the Aerospace 
Guidance and Metrology Center. However, PAMS often cannot communicate 
with these other systems. The details on the PAMS communications problems 
are in Appendix A, but, in general, PAMS cannot communicate with these other 
systems because the communications requirements (such as data flow padis and 
interfaces) between the systems have not been clearly defined. From a 
management perspective, the PAMS communications requirements have not 
been clearly defined for two reasons: 

o PAMS was not adequately integrated into a Communications- 
Computer Systems (C-CS) architecture when the system was developed, and 

o a PAMS Program Management Directive was not established when 
the PAMS program management responsibility transferred from the PAMS 
Design Office to the Standard Systems Center. 

The integration of PAMS into a C-CS architecture and the establishment of a 
Program Management Directive are management issues that result in technical 
problems. The Air Force has recognized ^s fact and established procedures to 
prevent the PAMS-type problems from occurring. However, these procedures 
were not followed when PAMS was developed. Specifically, PAMS was not 
fully integrated into a C-CS architecture (that is, PAMS interface and data flow 
requirements were not defmed), contrary to Air Force Regulation 700-2, 


5ln this report, communications means the transfer of information from PAMS 
to another computer system, regardless of means (e.g., modem or computer 
discs). 


8 



Finding B. PAMS Conununications 


"Communications-Computer Systems Planning and Architectures." In general. 
Air Force Regulation 700-2 directs that all Automated Data Processing (ADP) 
systems be integrated into C-CS architectures to minimize interface problems. 
The purpose of integrating ADP systems in C-CS architectures is more fully 
explained in Air Force Pamphlet 700-50, Volume I, Air Force 
Communications-Computer Systems Architecture, which states: 

The architectures make sure validated communications-computer 
systems requirements are satisfied with integrated, affordable 
technical solutions. Their purpose is to provide standards, systems, 
protocols, interfaces, and so forth, that must be considered when 
developing, implementing, or modifying Air Force communications- 
computer systems. 

PAMS was not fully integrated into a C-CS architecture for a variety of reasons. 
Among the significant reasons were: 

o the Air Force wanted to field PAMS as expeditiously as possible, 

o several computer systems that PAMS was to communicate with were 
being updated or replaced, and 

o the responsibility for developing the necessary interfaces was levied 
upon the non-PAMS systems management. 

The net result was that PAMS was fielded with little regard for interfaces or 
integration with other systems, which is precisely the situation that Air Force 
Regulation 700-2 was intended to avoid. 

Additionally, Air Force regulations were not followed when the PAMS program 
management responsibility transferred to the Standard Systems Center. PAMS 
program management responsibility transferred from the PAMS Design Office 
to the Standard Systems Center in the summer of 1992, but a PAMS Program 
Management Directive was not implemented as reguired by Air Force 
Regulation 700-53, "Management of Standard Systems."” Although the lack of 
a Program Management Directive did not directly cause the PAMS 
communications problems, it has prevented the timely correction of the 
problems. To illustrate this point, a review of some objectives of Air Force 
Regulation 700-53 is necessary. These objectives include: 

o providing a review process for standard systems at the appropriate 
levels witWn the Air Force, 

o ensuring involvement of all appropriate Air Force organizations and 
other agencies early in the planning process, and 


^Air Force Regulation 700-53 directs that Program Management Directives be 
implemented for Standard Systems; PAMS is a Standard System because more 
than one major Command utilizes the system. 


9 



Finding B. PAMS Communications 


o ensuring that standard systems meet Air Force Communications- 
Computer Systems architectural guidance. 

To meet these objectives, Air Force Regulation 700-53 requires that the Air 
Force Functional Manager (in PAMS case, the Aerospace Guidance and 
Metrology Center) develop a Program Management Directive. In general, the 
purpose of a Program Management Directive is to designate the organizational 
responsibilities for the maintenance of a standard system. 

As of the time of this assessment, however, a PAMS Program Management 
Directive had not been established. Consequently, the corrective actions for the 
PAMS communications problems had not been funded. In general, the 
responsibilities for ensuring that one computer system can interface with another 
system must be clearly defined so that the proponents of each system can 
properly plan and fund for changes to the interface. In PAMS case, these 
responsibilities have not been defined. As a result, several Air Force 
maintenance systems have made changes that impacted their interface with 
PAMS but no funds have been budgeted to correct the communications 
problems. 

While Air Force Regulations 700-2 and 700-53 should have been implemented 
earlier in PAMS development, three factors warrant that the Air Force 
"retroactively" implement these regulations. These factors are: 

o the PAMS communications capabilities have continued to deteriorate, 
forcing the Aerospace Guidance and Metrology Center to impose an additional 
person-power burden on the Precision Measurement Equipment Laboratories; 

o the longer the Air Force delays fixing these problems, the higher the 
cost of implementing the fixes; and 

0 until the Air Force corrects the PAMS communications problems, the 
Air Force will not have a solid foundation upon which to base future PAMS 
improvement decisions. 

The most pressing reason for fully incorporating PAMS into a C-CS 
architecture is that the PAMS communications capabilities continue to 
deteriorate. Since being fielded, PAMS has been able to communicate with 
other Air Force systems to varying degrees. Some problems have been site- 
specific; but, in general, PAMS communications have continued to deteriorate 
because changes have been made to other maintenance management systems 
without regard to the PAMS communications requirements. An example best 
illustrates this point. On at least one occasion, the Core Automated 
Maintenance System (CAMS) software was upgraded but the PAMS community 
was not informed of the upgrade until after the changes had been made. As a 
result of these changes, PAMS was not able to communicate with CAMS. The 
problem was fixed only after the PAMS technical representatives met with 
representatives from the CAMS community. In this particular case, the 
problem was simple so significant resources were not required to remedy the 
situation. However, such is not always the case. For instance, at the time of 


10 





Finding B. PAMS Conununications 


the assessment, another CAMS upgrade was planned that would again prevent 
PAMS from effectively communicating with CAMS. TTiis problem involves the 
type of communications lines CAMS uses and had yet to be resolved. 

Because many PAMS communications problems have not been easily corrected, 
the Air Force has implemented a short-term solution. At the time of this 
assessment, the PAMS community had been trying to correct the PAMS 
communications problems for at least a year with little success. Consequently, 
in May 1993, the PMELs were instructed to mail their TMDE data to the 
Aerospace Guidance and Metrology Center on computer discs. While this 
approach is expected to improve the percentage of TMDE data that is received 
at the Aerospace Guidance and Metrology Center, it imposes a greater person- 
power burden on the PMELs and is an inefficient use of Air Force computer 
resources. 

Given the circumstances, the Air Force's solution makes sense for the short¬ 
term. Nonetheless, a long-term solution needs to be implemented, and the 
sooner, the better, because the sooner that the PAMS communications problems 
are corrected, the lower the overall cost. In general, correcting the PAMS 
conununications problems will entail software modifications. While the cost of 
developing the necessary modifications should not increase significantly over 
time, die overall cost of the fixes can be expected to increase. This increase 
will result because the other Air Force maintenance management systems can be 
expected to continue evolving without regard to PAMS communications 
requirements. In these instances, the changes may need to be re-worked or 
additional modifications may be required to support PAMS requirements, thus 
raising the overall cost. While the extent of these types of problems cannot be 
forecasted, the historical evidence of similar problems indicates fairly strongly 
that these types of problems will continue in the absence of Air Force action. 

Another reason that the Air Force should correct the PAMS problems is that, by 
doing so, the Air Force will lay a solid foundation for future PAMS 
improvements. By integrating PAMS into a C-CS architecture and 
implementing a PAMS Program Management Directive, the Air Force will 
formalize die PAMS communications requirements and management 
responsibilities. This information will allow Ae Air Force to rhore readily 
upgrade PAMS in the future, whether the improvement be a simple 
enhancement to the current PAMS configuration or a complete replacement of 
the system with a Commercial-Off-The-Shelf product. Several improvement 
options are discussed in Appendix B. 


Conclusion 


Because PAMS cannot communicate with other Air Force maintenance 
man agement systems, the TMDE data from approximately 40 percent of the 
PMELs routinely does not reach the Aerospace Guidance and Metrology 
Center. The communications problems were caused by the lack of program 
mana gement structure. The requirements for communications had never been 



Finding B. PAMS Conununications 


explicitly defined and no organization was designated to correct the problems. 
Although the Air Force designed a short-term solution, that solution did not 
address the underlying cause of the problems. By correcting these deficiencies, 
the Air Force will not need inefficient short-term solutions, will pay less for the 
fixes, and will better support future PAMS system enhancements. 


Recommendations for Corrective Action 


1. We recommend that Chairman of the Headquarters, U.S. Air Force 
- Communications-Computer Systems Requirements Board, ensure that the 

Precision Measurement Equipment Laboratory Automated Management 
System communications requirements are clearly defined by fully 
incorporating the system into an Air Force Communications-Computer 
Systems arcMtecture for automated maintenance management systems in 
accordance with Air Force Regulation 700-2, "Communications-Computer 
Systems Planning and Architectures." 

Management Comments. The Air Force agreed with the substance of the 
recommendation and provided an alternative approach for implementing the 
recommendation. The Air Force stated it was currently evaluating the 
migration of PAMS and other maintenance systems into a standard system 
called the Integrated Maintenance Data System (IMDS). As a part of this 
process, the Air Force intends to clearly define the PAMS functionality and 
communications requirements. The IMDS proof of concept studies will be 
performed in FY 1995 and a competitive acquisition strategy will be formulated 
for solicitation in FY 1996. The complete text of management comments is in 
Part IV. 

Technical Assessment Response. The Air Force's comments were responsive 
and provided a reasonable approach for implementing our recommendation. 
While the Air Force's comments implied that IMDS will correct the PAMS 
communications problems, we could not evaluate this position as IMDS has not 
yet been developed. Whether IMDS is developed or not, the Chairman of the 
Headquarters, U.S. Air Force Communications-Computer Systems 
Requirements Board, will need to integrate PAMS communications 
requirements into a Communications-Computer architecture with other Air 
Force maintenance systems. Consequently, we did not change our original 
recommendation. 

2. We recommend that the Director, Aerospace Guidance and Metrology 
Center, establish overall Precision Measurement Equipment Laboratory 
Automated Management System management responsibilities by 
implementing a corresponding Program Management Directive in 
accordance with Air Force Regulation 700-53, "Management of Standard 
Systems." 


12 





Finding B. PAMS Conununications 


Management Comments. The Air Force agreed with the substance of the 
recommendation, stating that an IMDS Program Management Directive is 
currently being developed. The Air Force intends to include the required 
PAMS management actions in this Program Management Directive. 

Technical Assessment Response. The Air Force's comments were responsive 
and provided a reasonable approach for implementing the recommendation. 
Provided that IMDS comes to fruition as planned, a separate PAMS Program 
Management Directive is not necessary. 


13 



This page was left out of orignial document 


K 



Part III - Additional Information 




Appendix A. PAMS Communications Paths 


No direct connectivity exists between the Precision Measurement Equipment 
Laboratories (PMELs) and the Aerospace Guidance and Metrology Center, so 
the TMDE calibration data is transferred from PAMS, through several other Air 
Force computer systems, to the Air Force Materiel Command. Because PAMS 
and these other Air Force maintenance management systems employ different 
software protocols, they must be "interfaced" for the data transfer to occur. 
Once the data arrives at the Air Force Materiel Command, it is stored on 
magnetic tapes and delivered to the Aerospace Guidance and Metrology Center 
by truck. This data flow path is convoluted and complex; and routinely, the 
Test, Measurement, and Diagnostic Equipment (TMDE) data from 
approximately 40 percent of the PMELs does not reach the Aerospace Guidance 
and Metrology Center. 

Depending on where the PMEL is located, PAMS interfaces with different 
systems. For most PMELs, PAMS interfaces with the Core Automated 
Maintenance System (CAMS). However, if the PMEL is located at an Air 
Logistics Center, PAMS interfaces with a subsystem of the Depot Maintenance 
Data Systems Network, commonly referred to as "G004I." CJ004I is not a 
computer system in the classical sense, but rather a combination of various 
maintenance management systems. CAMS and G004I are mutually exclusive 
systems, but both are connected to another computer system, the Product 
Performance System, designated as "D056." PAMS information from CAMS 
and G004I are transferred to D056; a magnetic tape of the D056 output is 
delivered to the Aerospace Guidance and Metrology Center by truck. Figure 1 
on the following page is a simplified presentation of the TMDE data flow paths. 

Some PAMS interfaces have been formally established; others have not. The 
PAMS to CAMS and CAMS to D056 interfaces have been formally established 
in Memorandums of Agreement, but the data transfer process is still error prone 
and manual "massaging" of the ^ta is often required. Additionally, D056 may 
soon be replaced by the Reliability and Maintainability Information System 
(REMIS); however, REMIS is not able to process PAMS data. No interface 
agreement has been established between PAMS and G004I because each Air 
logistics Center's G004I configuration is unique. Some Air Logistics Centers’ 
PAMS data does reach the Aerospace Guidance and Metrology Center, 
however. Like D056, G004I may soon be replaced by yet another computer 
system, namely the Depot Maintenance Management Information System. 


16 


Appendix A. PAMS Communications Paths 




AGMC: Aerospace Guidonce ond 
Metrology Center 
ALC: Air Logistics Center 

TMDE: Test, Measurement, and 
Diagnostic Equipment 

Figure 1. TMDE Doto Flow Paths 


ALC PME 
























Appendix B. Options for Improving PAMS 


Several options exist for improving PAMS' capabilities, but recommendations 
concerning PAMS improvements would be premature before the Air Force has 
addressed the PAMS communications problems. Once the PAMS 
communications problems have been resolved, a market survey can be 
performed and the costs of the various alternatives compared to the cost of 
maintaining PAMS. In the interim, maintaining the current system is a 
reasonable option. The following discussion on upgrading PAMS is based on 
information that was provided by the complainant and the Air Force and is 
provided for information purposes only. 

The options for upgrading PAMS that were reviewed are upgrading the PAMS 
hardware and so^are or replacing PAMS with a Commercial-Off-The-Shelf 
product. Both options are technically feasible. Other options, such as replacing 
PAMS with another Air Force maintenance management system or connecting 
the PMELs directly to the Aerospace Guidance and Metrology Center might 
also be feasible. 

Upgrading the hardware (and to some aspects, the software) of the PAMS is 
feasible. The PAMS software can only be run on UNISYS® compatible 
computers due to the unique operating system; however, the processing 
(throughput) capabilities can be readily improved. Additionally, newer 
UNISYS computers can run MS-DOS® software applications. 

Replacing PAMS with a Commercial-Off-The-Shelf product is also possible. 
The Standard Systems Center has reviewed several Commercial-Off-'nie-Shelf 
products that are similar to PAMS and could replace the system. The products 
vary in capabilities and may require replacement of the PAMS hardware at a 
significant cost. The new software would also have to be procured and 
maintained. Additionally, the Commercial-Off-The-Shelf products would 
require modifications to be compatible with the existing Air Force maintenance 
systems; this simation is essentially the same as exists with PAMS. 

Replacing PAMS with another Air Force maintenance management system 
might be a viable alternative for improving PAMS. Essentially, PAMS and 
other Air Force maintenance management systems accomplish the same 
functions (database management of maintenance information) and should have 
common requirements. Another theoretically possible option is to connect the 
Precision Measurement Equipment Laboratories directly to the Aerospace 
Guidance and Metrology Center with a wide-area network. 

Trademarks 


UNISYS is a registered trademark name for UNISYS Corporation, San Jose, California 

MS-DOS is a registered trademark name for Microsoft Disc Operating System, Microsoft 
Corporation, ReSmond, Washington 


18 




Appendix C. Organizations Visited or Contacted 


Department of the Air Force 

Headquarters, U.S. Air Force, Pentagon, Washington, DC 
Air Force Materiel Command, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, OH 
Aerospace Guidance and Metrology Center, Newark Air Force Base, OH 
Standard Systems Center, Gunter Annex, Maxwell Air Force Base, AL 
89th Equipment Maintenance Squadron, Andrews Air Force Base, MD 


19 



Appendix D. Report Distribution 


Department of the Air Force 

Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Financial Management and Comptroller) 
Auditor General, Department of the Air Force 
Aerospace Guidance and Metrology Center 
Standard Systems Center 


Other Defense Organizations 

Director, Defense Information Systems Agency 

Director, Defense Logistics Agency 

Director, National Security Agency 

Inspector General, Central Imagery Office 

Inspector General, Defense Intelligence Agency 

Inspector General, National Security Agency 

Director, Defense Logistics Studies Information Exchange 


Non-Defense Federal Organizations 

Office of Management and Budget 

Technical Information Center, National Security and International Affairs Division, 
General Accounting Office 

Chairman and Ranking Minority Member of each of the following Congressional 
Committees and Subcommittees: 

Senate Subcommittee on Appropriations 

Senate Subcommittee on Defense, Committee on Appropriations 

Senate Committee on Armed Services 

Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs 

House Committee on Appropriations 

House Subcommittee on Defense, Committee on Appropriations 
House Committee on Armed Services 
House Committee on Government Operations 

House Subcommittee on Legislative and National Security, Committee on 
Government Operations 


20 



Part rv - Management Comments 




Department of the Air Force Comments 


DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE 

MtADOUAHTtHS UNITED STATES AIN PONCE 


U 1WI 

MEMCHIANDUM PC» ASSISTANT INSPECTW GENERAL TOR AUDITING. 

OFFICE OT THE INSPECTOR GENERAL. 

MPARTMENT OF I«FENSE 

FROM: HQUSAF/LGM 

1030 Air Face Pentagon 
W«shin|toa D.C. 20330-1030 

SUBJECT; Draft Technic*] Assessment Rqwrt of AePiedaonMeasuiemeoiEquipinem 

Laboratory Automated Management Systtra (PAMS) (Projea No. 3PT-8016). 13 June 94 

This is in reply to your request for Air Force comments on the subjea draft report. We 

concur in pan with the recommendations to Findinj B. Hie Air Force is cutrenOy evaluating 

migrating the PAMS and other maintenance dau systems into a standard core lysttm called the 

Integrated Maintenance Data System (IMDS). Tliis system is envisioned to be a aeamless 
maintenance data system integrating numerous mainicnana processes. A program management 
direcuve (PMD) is currenUy being developed fa the IMDS and it is our intent to include tte reouired 
PAMS manageraem actions in ihis PMD. 




The IMDS System Program Oftiu is currently being formed within the Electronic Systems 
center. This program office will perform fimctiooal economic analyses to determine core process 
requuements fa the IMDS. As a result of these analyses. PAMS functionality may be moved into 
the core process a evolved into * system module at which time communications requirements will be 
clearly defined IMDS proof of concept studies will be performed in Fy95 and a competitive 
acquisttion strategy will be formulated for solicitation in FY96. This IMDS effort has Air Staff 
Office of the Secretary of Defense, and Congressional suppoa 

Questions may be directed to Mr Tom Ght. HQ USAF/LGMM. DSN 227-3859. 


cc; 

HQUSAF/SCX 

AGMCVML 

ESOIS 



RONALD LORR 
AModatt Ditaclor 

OFaaorato ol MNnsranot 


22 




Technical Assessment Team Members 


Michael G. Huston 
Kenneth H. Stavenjord 
Gregory R. Donnellon 
Jacob E. Rabatin 
Darwin L. Webster 
Donna M. Preston 



