N96- 12957 


PREDICTION OF SHIPBOARD ELECTROMAGNETIC INTERFERENCE (EMI) 
PROBLEMS USING ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI) TECHNOLOGY 


32 - 

/ '//* 7 



Written By: 

DAVID J. SWANSON 
Systems Exploration, Inc. 
4241 Jutland Drive 
San Diego, CA 92117 


871 



ABSTRACT 


The electromagnetic interference prediction problem is characteris- 
tically ill-defined and complicated. Severe EMI problems are 
prevalent throughout the U.S. Navy, causing both expected and 
unexpected impacts on the operational performance of electronic 
combat systems onboard ships. This paper focuses on applying 
artificial intelligence (AI) technology to the prediction of ship 
related electromagnetic interference (EMI) problems. 


INTRODUCTION 

Electromagnetic interference, radio noise, and radio frequency 
interference all refer to the same condition. Most commonly 
ref ®rred to by the Navy as EMI, this condition inhibits, prevents, 
or distorts clear reception of an electromagnetic (EM) signal and 
degrades the overall performance of an electromagnetic system. The 
largest single consumer of the electromagnetic spectrum is the 
military. Modern military operations require that a large number 
of electromagnetic pieces of equipment be compatibly operated 
within a relatively small geographical area. The complexity of 
shipboard antennas, military radio frequency communications, and 
military combat EM systems is increasing far more rapidly than the 
improvements in EM design technology [1] . 


DEFINING THE PROBLEM 


^he increased use and dependence on electromagnetic equipment, 
accurate prediction of EMI has become a major tactical concern 
as well as a system design issue. More EM equipment is on U.S. 
Na Y ft l vessels today than ever before and most of it is considered 
cr itical to the vessel ' s success and survival in combat and routine 
da y“ to "day operations. While the U.S. Navy has received substan- 
tial b nefit from the technological advancements, shipboard EM 
systems have become increasingly complex and vulnerable to EMI 
effects. Although shipboard EMI is not a new issue, the U.S. Navy 
is currently undergoing what the President of the U.S. Navy Board 
of Inspection and Survey called an "Electromagnetic Interference 
Pandemic" [ 2 ] . This means that every U.S. warship suffers from mild 
to severe electromagnetic interference that could threaten safety 
ai }d decrease the ability of a ship to successfully complete its 
mission. The Navy has already witnessed several EMI induced 
disasters . 


Three examples include: 

* HMS SHEFFIELD. To avoid EMI to satellite communica- 
tions, missile defenses were turnea off resulting in 
the loss of this ship in 1984. Losses included over 
$200 million in damage and the death of many crew 
members . 


872 



* USS FORRESTAL. EMI triggered an aircraft rocket 
detonation on this aircraft carrier in the late 1960s. 
Losses included 134 crew members, 32 aircraft, and 
$172 million in damage to the carrier. 

* NAVY CRUISER. A missile hit a friendly cruiser in 
the late 1960s due to electromagnetic interference. 
Losses included over $100 million in damage, the 
destruction of the topside of the ship, and the injury 
of many crew members [ 3 ] . 


In an effort to mitigate interference problems, the Navy has 
sponsored research and development to investigate various methods 
of solving the shipboard EMI prediction problem. 


MATHEMATICAL MODELING 

One standard approach to EMI prediction uses computationally 
intensive mathematical models. These mathematical models will 
produce reliable forecasts if the number of possible EMI sources 
and victims is small. Unfortunately, in U.S. warship communica- 
tions and radar systems, the number of EMI sources is vast, varied, 
and constantly changing, making this mathematical approach 
cumbersome and impractical . An example that demonstrates the 
inefficiency of the mathematical model approach involves hull- 
generated intermodulation interference (IMI) signals. IMI signals 
are multiple transmissions that combine in a nonlinear fashion in 
and around the topside of a ship and reradiate as unwanted signals. 
A mathematical model is used to determine the interference 
freguency. The means for predicting when and which signals cause 
interference involves analyzing an overwhelming number of transmit- 
ter freguency combinations [4 ] . Due to the large number of 
freguencies that have to be considered, the testing process is 
labor-intensive, costly, and can take up to 24 hours to complete, 
although automated testing systems are being explored that are 
expected to reduce the overall testing time to about 6 hours [5]. 


It is freguently too costly, time-consuming and impractical to use 
these mathematical models in a rapidly changing tactical situation. 
In an effort to resolve EMI obstacles two alternatives are often 
employed. 


CURRENT EMI SOLUTIONS 

Two approaches have been relatively successful in containing and 
eliminating EMI. These approaches attempt to ensure EM eguipment 
will function as designed without adversely affecting surrounding 
EM systems. The first approach relies on maintenance. Wait until 
an EMI problem occurs and then attempt to ’correct it. The second 
approach stresses prevention. Impose rigid design specifications 


873 



on the system during the planning stages in an attempt to "over- 
engineer" or design-out all possible interference problems. Both 
of these approaches have been reasonably successful in reducing EMI 
in the past, but as additional EM equipment is installed aboard 
U.S. warships, these methods are not able to cope with the complex- 
ity and complications resulting from the presence of the large 
number of electromagnetic devices [6]. 


Once again, forecasting is possible, but only in an environment 
containing a small number of possible sources and victims of EMI. 
To meet the challenge of electromagnetic compatibility in an 
increasingly dense electromagnetic environment, the Navy is 
directing its attention to the application of AI technology to this 
problem. 


AI AS AN ALTERNATIVE 80LUTI0N 

Artificial intelligence technology has been widely successful in 
bringing ill-defined or combinatorial ly explosive problems into a 
tractable state [7, 8]. AI technology differs from conventional 
programming technology in several ways. 


One of the fundamental differences is AI techniques solve problems 
by manipulating symbols and symbolic relationships instead of 
performing standard mathematical computations. Another important 
distinction between AI techniques and conventional programming 
techniques is the use of heuristics instead of algorithms. 
Heuristics are useful principles or guidelines applicable in an 
area that may not be strictly defined. 


Heuristics are typically used in areas that are resistant to 
mathematical approaches or algorithmic solutions [ 9 ] . The algorith- 
mic approach will always produce the optimal solution but may take 
an unacceptable amount of time. The heuristic approach will 
generally produce an acceptable solution within a much shorter 
timeframe. 


The most popular and effective way to express heuristics has been 
in the form of pattern/action decision rules, called "production 
rules" [10]. This methodology centers on the use of statements of 
the form IF condition THEN action. Production rules are a superior 
paradigm for use in describing situations or processes driven by 
changing data. Production rules can specify how the program should 
behave in the presence of changing information without detailed 
advance knowledge about the flow of control. Symbolic reasoning, 
heuristics, and the use of production rules are an appealing 
approach to problems that are resistant to mathematical approaches 
or algorithmic solutions such as the EMI prediction problem. 


874 



In late 1986, the Naval Ocean Systems Center (NOSC) San Diego, 
California, began exploring alternative approaches to EMI predic- 
tion. At that time, NOSC initiated the Adaptive Electromagnetic 
Control System (AEMCS) project. The focus of this effort was to 
develop a prototype decision aid that would forecast potential EMI 
problems on individual U.S. Navy destroyers. AI programming 
techniques and rapid-prototyping were the research and development 
approaches selected to explore both the problem and various partial 
solutions. The prototype itself was written in C and PROLOG 
programming languages and ran on IBM ATs. An EMI expert was 
consulted in the beginning of the AEMCS project to ascertain EMI 
prediction heuristics. Surveys were conducted on several ships to 
obtain information regarding the equipment and current EMI 
problems. The AEMCS prototype system required the operator to 
enter into an IBM AT computer the frequencies for all operating 
transmitters and receivers. Other EMI prediction factors, such as 
transmission power and transmitter location, were addressed 
implicitly within the production rules. Once the operator wanted 
an EMI forecast, facts about transmitters, receivers, and their 
respective frequencies would be asserted into the PROLOG EMI 
analysis system. If a production rule concluded there was a 
possible EMI conflict, then M a possible conflict fact" would be 
asserted into working memory and text concerning the problem would 
be sent to the terminal. If the operator wished to get further 
information on a potential conflict, the conflict would be selected 
and a description of the effect with possible resolutions would be 
displayed. 


When the AEMCS system prototype was installed aboard the first 
ship, it was well received. Later, the AEMCS system was enhanced 
in response to suggestions from the users and was installed on 
several other ships. 


EXPANSION OF THE AI APPLICATION 

During 1989 NOSC initiated work on an EMI prediction system (EPS) 
prototype with a much larger scope than the AEMCS project. The 
focus of this effort was to better define the tactical EMI 
prediction problem and develop an embeddable prototype decision aid 
that would forecast potential ownship and ship-to— ship EMI . The 
project was to apply and expand the knowledge gained from the AEMCS 
project to the prediction of EMI problems within a preselected 
group of naval vessels. The EPS prototype was intended to be 
embedded within an electronic warfare command, control, and 
communication program, the Electronic Combat Module (ECM) . 


A n umb er of different expert system development tools and languages 
were considered. The C Language Integrated Production System 
(CLIPS) was finally selected as the development tool for the 
project, using a SUN 4 as the development platform. CLIPS was 
selected because of its forward chaining inference method based on 


875 



the Rete algorithm and its performance. It was expected that up to 
150 EM devices might have to be considered at one time. Analyzing 
150 devices was a formidable and computationally intensive problem 
and the expectation was that CLIPS would exhibit superior perfor- 
mance while analyzing a large number of different devices for 
potential EMI conflicts. 


After CLIPS was selected as the development tool, a rudimentary 
knowledge base design was established. The design incorporated 
into the EPS prototype the heuristics for predicting historically 
known EMI problems among various ship classes. See Figure 1. The 
prediction of historical EMI problems were focused on since the 
problem forecasts could be verified and the historical information 
forecasts were the most useful to shipboard personnel. Ownship EMI 
problems were also concentrated on since these problems currently 
represent the most mission inhibiting collection of EMI problems. 
Heuristics for determining general receiver EMI, such as adjacent 
channel interference and odd-order IMI, were also incorporated. 


(defrule SPS94-SSR13 

"The broadband noise that is generated by RF transmissions 
illuminating metal-to-metal contacts raises the ambient noise level 
surrounding the ship throughout a wide spectrum of frequencies. 
This reduces the signal-to-noise ratio of the incoming desired 
signals resulting in reduced receiver sensitivity and loss of 
signal reception." 

; ; If the SPS-94 radar and the SSR-13 receiver are 
; ; operating simultaneously on a Ticonderoga class 
; ; cruiser then assert the existence of a possible 
; ; EMI problem. 

(?dl&:(eq ?dl sps-94) ? 

?shipl 

?shipclass&: (eq ?shipclass cg-47) 

????????) 

(?d2&:(eq ?d2 ssr-13) ? 

?ship2&:(eq ?ship2 ?shipl) 

?shipclass&: (eq ?shipclass cg-47) 

«> 

; ; Bind a pattern matching variable 
; ; and assert a possible EMI problem. 

(bind ?gen (gensym) ) 

(assert (emi SPS94-SSR13 ?gen ?dl ?shipl ?d2 ?shipl 
"Lost or reduced ssr-13 reception"))) 

Figure 1. Historical EMI Problem Rule. 


876 



After many design refinements, the current design of the EPS 
prototype encompasses historical EMI problems for most classes of 
surface ships. This design is similar to the AEMCS design in that 
the EMI forecasts concentrate on individual ships rather than ship- 
to-ship EMI problems. 


The architecture of the initial EPS prototype was not complicated. 
A file containing a list of facts, or characteristics, about all 
transmitters and receivers operating on the various ships was 
created by the ECM program. A fact list is made up of the device 
name, device type, ship name, ship class, function, frequency in 
MHz, 3db-bandwidth, receiver bandpass, auxiliary received fre- 
quency, relative priority, power, and antenna gain. See Figure 2. 


(DEVICE-1 TRANSCEIVER YORKTOWN CG-47 ECM 9000.0 15.0 10.0 0.0 
HIGH 200.0 UNKNOWN) 

(DEVICE-2 TRANSMITTER MERRILL DD-963 TACAN 286.5 2.0 1.0 316.7 
MEDIUM 15.0 UNKNOWN) 

(DEVICE-3 RECEIVER OBRIAN DD-963 COMMS 245.3 2.0 1.0 0.0 
LOW 15.0 UNKNOWN) 

Figure 2. Facts are Lists of Device characteristics. 


Upon execution, the EPS prototype asserts facts into working memory 
and the EPS is then run. Another file is created during execution 
that contains the resulting EMI problem forecasts. In this case 
the EMI forecasts are lists. The first element in Figure 3 is a 
pattern matching symbol, followed by rule name, conflict index, 
source device name, source ship, victim device name, victim ship, 
and effect. 


(EMI URN54-SPS92 GENl URN-54 YORKTOWN S PS-92 YORKTOWN 
"INTERFERENCE TO THE VIDEO OF THE SPS-92 RADAR") 

(EMI HF-SPS5 GEN 2 T2213 RAY SPS-5 RAY "SPOKING") 

Figure 3. EMI Problem Forecasts are Represented as Lists. 


The ECM takes this file with the EMI forecasts and displays them 
through the ECM's man machine interface (MMI) . In some cases there 
are workarounds to the EMI problems and these can also be displayed 
through the MMI. 


The current version of the EPS prototype is completely embedded 
within the ECM program. Files are no longer used to -assert facts 
or capture EMI forecasts. The EPS system is controlled through a 


877 



C program that obtains the required information, asserts it into 
the system and takes the EMI forecasts and displays them through 
the MMI. As devices are shut off or frequencies are changed, the 
EPS system responds by creating a new fact containing the change 
and asserts it into the EPS facts list. Production rules retract 
old facts and EMI forecasts change when a frequency, power level, 
or ship distance changes. 


Efforts currently focus on obtaining heuristics that relate to the 
function and priority of various shipboard devices. In a high- 
threat area, all shipboard self-defense systems are given the 
highest operating priority. Suppose a high powered high frequency 
(HF) communication transmitter interferes with a shipboard self- 
defense system. In the context of ship survival, tactics dictate 
securing the HF transmitter rather than the self-defense system, if 
no workaround is available. The result of incorporating these 
heuristics into the system is that the system has judgement 
concerning possible solutions to EMI problems. 


Information about historical EMI problems is obtained from the 
Shipboard Electromagnetic Compatibility Improvement Program 
(SlpICIP) . SEMCIP is at the forefront of efforts to correct Naval 
shipboard EMI problems. Most historical EMI problems concern 
simultaneous operation of multiple shipboard systems. In the 
SEMCIP database, which contains various problem descriptions, one 
of these systems is considered the source of the EMI and the other 
is the victim. Figure 4 translates this source-victim format into 
a production rule. 


(defrule SPS94-HFRECEIVERS 

"SEMCIP reference number 414-82. The transmissions from the SPS-94 
radar can cause broadband noise (BBN) to be generated around the 
topside of a Ticonderoga cruiser. This occurs when there is arcing 
across loose metal -to-metal junctions due to illumination of the 
junctions by transmissions from the SPS-94. This BBN raises the 
ambient noise level surrounding the ship across a wide spectrum of 
frequencies, reducing the signal-to-noise ratio of 'incoming signals 
and consequently reduces the sensitivity of any HF receiver (s) . 
The solution is to eliminate the BBN by insulating, grounding, or 
removing loose metal-to-metal junctions where induced RF energy has 
caused arcing . " 

; ; The following clause will be true if the SPS-94 is 
; ; operating on a Ticonderoga class cruiser. 

(?dl&:(eq ?dl sps-94) ? 

?shipl 

?shipclass&: (eq ?shipclass cg-47) 

????????) 


878 



9 9 


If there are High Frequency (3-30 MHz) receivers 
; ; operating on the same cruiser at the same time , 

(?d2 ?type&:(eq ?type receiver) 

?ship2&:(eq ?shipl ?ship2) 

?shipclass& : (eq ?shipclass cg-47) 

? 

?f requency& : (&& (<= ?frequency 30) 

(> ?frequency 3)) 

• • » • * « / 

; ; then assume a possible EMI problem exists 
; ; with the source of the EMI being the SPS-94 
? ; and the victims being any HF receivers. 


(bind ?gen (gensym) ) 

(assert (emi sps94-hfreceivers 
?gen ?dl ?shipl 
?d2 ?shipl 

"Possible mild to severe EMI/IMI to HF receivers" 

))) 

Figure 4. Source-Victim Production Rule. 


The prototype EMI prediction system has over 100 production rules, 
most of which describe severe historical EMI problems. The 
prototype can analyze 75-100 transmitters and receivers within a 
matter of minutes, using a SUN 4 under UNIX. Shipboard testing is 
scheduled to begin in the Fall of 1990. The system will be used 
by shipboard electronic warfare commanders. 


CONCLUSION 

Over the last 40 years, the U.S. Navy has become increasingly 
dependent upon systems that exploit the electromagnetic environ- 
ment. Electromagnetic technology has evolved from vacuum tube 
technology in the 1950s to very large scale integration technology 
in the 1990s. More capable and sophisticated shipboard communica- 
tion equipment, radars, and other sensors have evolved. As a 
result, shipboard EMI has become a severe problem. The traditional 
approaches to EMI prediction and the achievement of system 
electromagnetic compatibility are impractical for shipboard use and 
are frequently too costly and time-consuming to use in tactical or 
day-to-day operational situations. In an effort to create a low- 
cost, effective EMI prediction system, alternative approaches are 
being explored using AI technology. AI technology is currently 
being applied successfully to portions of the shipboard EMI 
prediction problem. These research efforts have resulted in better 
Naval shipboard frequency management and are serving in the 
continued effort to mitigate shipboard EM interference conflicts. 


879 



REFERENCES 


[1] ^i, S., Logan, J., and Rockway, J., "Ship EM Design Tech- 
nology," Naval Engineers Journal, May 1988, p.154. 

[2] Orem, J. , "The Impact of Electromagnetic Engineering on Warship 
Design," Naval Engineers Journal, May 1987, p.210. 

[3] Grich, R. and Bruninga, R. , "Electromagnetic Environment 
Engineering - A Solution to the EMI Pandemic," Naval Engineers 
Journal, May 1987, p.202. 

[4] Maia, P. and Smith, J. , "A Method for Predicting Intermodula- 
tion Product Levels," IEEE 1985 National Symposium on Electromag- 
netic Compatibility, June 1985, p.408 

[5] Mieth, W. , "A Cost-Effective Solution to Measurement of Hull- 
Generated Intermodulation Interference on U.S. Navy Ships," IEEE 
1989 National Symposium on Electromagnetic Compatibility, May 1989, 

p. 186 

[6] Duff, W. and White, D. , "A Handbook Series in Electromagnetic 
Interference and Compatibility," Vol. 5, Germantown, Maryland: Don 
White Consultants, 1972. 

[7] Waterman, D. , "A Guide to Expert Systems," Reading, Massachu- 
setts: Addison-Wesley, 1986. 

[8] Calabough , J., "Software Configuration - An NP Complete 
Problem," ACM Special Interest Group on Business Data Processing, 
Computer Personnel Research Proceedings, Conference on Expert 
Systems in Business, March 1987. 

[9] Kunz, J., Kehler, T., and Williams, D. , "Applications Develop- 
ment Using a Hybrid AI Development System," The AI Magazine, Fall 
1984, p.53. 

[10] Fikes, R. and Kehler, T. , "The Role of Frame-Based Representa- 
tion in Reasoning," IntelliCorp Technical Article from the special 
issue of Communications of the ACM on Knowledge-based Systems, 
September 1885, p.4. 


880 



