3\ 



^ 



<0 



NASA-CR-192639 



(NASA-CR-192639) A DESCRIPTIVE 
MODEL FOR DETERMINING OPTIMAL HUMAN 
PERFORMANCE IN SYSTEMS Final 
Summary Report { Serendi pity 
Associates) 52 p 




Unci as 



Z9/53 0151414 



SKIP 




I serendipity associatesKj 



9760 C02YCROFT 



SWORTH. CALIF0RNl4^^fl 



TR 29-66-32 (U) 



FINAL SUMMARY REPORT 
A DESCRIPTIVE MODEL FOR DETERMINING OPTIMAL 
HUMAN PERFORMANCE IN SYSTEMS 



Distribution of this report is provided in the interest of 
information exchange. Responsibility for the contents 
resides in the author or organization that prepared it. 



Prepared under Contract NAS 2-2955 

SERENDIPITY ASSOCIATES 

Chatsworth, California 

for 

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION 



RESEARCH REPORT SERIES 

Prepared under Contract NAS 2-2955 
for 
A DESCRIPTIVE MODEL FOR DETERMINING OPTIMAL 
HUMAN PERFORMANCE IN SYSTEMS 



Research Report I 
PART A 
A SIMPLE MODEL OF A MAN-MACHINE DEVELOPMENT CYCLE 

PART B 
A SIMPLE CALCULUS FOR DISCRETE SYSTEMS 



Research Report II 
PART A 
SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES CONCERNED WITH 
PUTTING MAN IN AN AEROSPACE SYSTEM 

PART B 
DEVELOPMENT OF MAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS: 
Some Concepts and Guidelines 



Research Report III 

AN APPROACH FOR DETERMINING THE OPTIMAL ROLE OF MAN 

AND ALLOCATION OF FUNCTIONS IN AN AEROSPACE SYSTEM 



Final Summary Report 

A DESCRIPTIVE MODEL FOR DETERMINING OPTIMAL 

HUMAN PERFORMANCE IN SYSTEMS 



pRE(-;PTV*«r> p«*cf F»i ANK NOT FILMED 



FOREWORD 

This report describes a study carried out by Serendipity Associates 
under contract NAS 2-2955 for the Biotechnology Division of the Ames 
Research Center of the NASA. The purposes of this report are: to 
summarize the objectives of the study as a whole, to describe the method 
employed to carry out the study, and to present recommendations for 
further work. This study report contains a summary of results, but 
it is not intended as a technical report; three research reports present the 
technical products of the study. These research reports are identified 
on the preceding page; they will be described and interrelated in this 
report. 

This effort was greatly enhanced through the interest and support 
of the technical monitor, Mr. Charles Kubokawa of the Biotechnology 
Division at Ames Research Center. 



K';£0tiDtN4« 1'AGt uuH^tv iMul r"!LA'ii-JL) 



v 



CONTENTS 

Page 
FOREWORD v 

I. OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY 1 

II. SUMMARY OF RESEARCH REPORTS 7 

Report IA. A Simple Model of a Man-Machine 

Development Cycle 8 

Report IB. A Simple Calculus for Discrete Systems 11 

Report IIA. System Development Activities Concerned 

with Putting Man in an Aerospace System 15 

Report IIB. Development of Man-Machine Systems: 

Some Concepts and Guidelines 17 

Report III. An Approach for Determining the Optimal 
Role of Man and Allocation of Functions in 
an Aerospace System 19 

III. STUDY METHOD 23 

IV. IMPLICATIONS FOR FUTURE WORK 33 

1. Development of Techniques for Determining When 

to Select a Preferred System Approach in a Complex 

System Development Cycle 33 

2. Extension of the Development Cycle Model to Include 
Improved Detail with Respect to Hardware- Related 

Activities 37 

3. Principles for Developing a Quality Score Formula 

for an Aerospace Science Mission 38 

4. A Study of Management Techniques for Insuring 

Maximum Development Cycle Quality 41 

5. Restudy of Human Factors and Biotechnological 
Specializations for the Purpose of Relating Them 
to Cost and Quality Criteria for Operational 

Aerospace Systems 43 

6. Study of an Information System to Support Man- Related 

Activities in Aerospace System Development 45 



™««N0 P * GE fiUNK N0T fiimed 

vii 



I. OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY 

The successful operation of every spacecraft and of every aircraft requires 
that essential functions be carried out by men. Even when the flight segment 
of the system is unmanned, human performance is required in launching and 
recovering the flight segment. Long before most other industries became aware 
of the importance of man in the operation of complex systems, the aerospace 
industry began to concern itself with the problems of man in aircraft systems. 
Perhaps the aerospace industry was motivated by the high cost of system failure, 
both in terms of dollars and human life, but whatever the motivation, the 
aerospace industry has been a leader in the development of system personnel 
selection techniques, system operator training, and human engineering, all 
to the end of achieving superior aircraft system reliability. The development 
of technology has now brought to the fore another problem which relates to 
man in aerospace systems — a problem which requires once more that the 
aerospace industry invest in study to help find general solutions. 

Since the decade of the forties when human factors began to be accepted 
as of significant importance, hardware technology has flourished and its fruits 
are now so abundant that an aerospace system designer frequently has options 
to implement critical aerospace system functions by means of hardware or by 
means of human performance. While there are still instances where the use 
of human performance is mandatory, the many instances where it is not call 
for decisions to be made. The decisions called for go beyond the scope of 
personnel selection, personnel training, human engineering, and all of the 
other established specializations that are concerned with man in an aerospace 
system. Basically what is required is that decisions be made in the course of 
aerospace system development which relate to two questions; (1) should man 
be included in the system at all, and (2) if he be included, what functions 
should be implemented by him? 

The overall focus of the study reported here was upon the decision pro- 
cesses necessary to answer these two basic questions in the process of 
developing an aerospace system. The objective was to develop materials 
that would assist aerospace system designers. 



The very posing of the question "Should man be included in this system 
to implement system functions? " carries with it the connotation that the ques- 
tion is not to be answered simply by flipping a coin. There is an implication 
that the "right" decision should be made — that man should be included in the 
system if it is better to implement the system that way than to implement it 
without man. What is lacking is a criterion, a basis for deciding whether or 
not a given decision is a good one. The second question carries with it the 
same sort of connotation. Thus, to ask "What basic functions should be im- 
plemented by man in this system? " is to imply that there is an optimal^ alloca- 
tion of functions and that we desire some criterion by which to decide what is 
optimal and what is not. Therefore, this study was concerned with identify- 
ing and justifying criteria to be employed in answering these questions, as 
well as with identifying the more mechanical aspects of finding answers. 

The Zeitgeist, in which cost- effectiveness has become a key word, pro- 
vided an important background for the selection of criteria by which good 
answers to these questions might be recognized. Thus, as progress in tech- 
nology has inevitably led the aerospace industry to concern over the basic 
design decisions involving the use of men in aerospace systems, there have 
been parallel developments in another area that have yielded concepts which 
are of basic importance to these decision questions. The complex systems 
which the new technology enables us to build are frequently very costly. In 
fact, sometimes to build and operate one of the new systems requires a signi- 
ficant portion of the total resources available to us as a nation. Because 
the impact of such high costs in terms of resources cannot go unnoticed, 
economic concepts have recently found an accepting audience in the Depart- 
ment of Defense and in other major government agencies. It has been 
simply a case of need creating an audience for proffered solutions. One im- 
portant result of the new introduction of economic thought into the prosecution 
of major system development programs has been to familiarize managers of 
complex system development programs with the concept of optimal use of 
resources. These days we are less likely to think exclusively about building 
a system that will do a job, and we are more likely to think about balancing 
the resources needed to build and operate the system against what the system 
can do for us as compared with other resources used. In the case of aerospace 



systems, decisions whether or not to include man in the system, and decisions 
with respect to what man will do in the system if he be included, impact both 
the cost of development and the usefulness of the system that is finally built. 
Therefore, the Zeitgeist favors the intersection of concern with the decision 
problems and ideas about system optimization in terms of cost and quality as 
criteria for resolving the decision problem. 

In this study, it was accepted that the basic criterion to be used in deciding 
how to implement a system is cost and quality jointly considered. Moreover, 
it is the cost and quality of the total system required to solve a given problem 
that is of interest; the idea does not permit a separate and independent assess- 
ment of a part of a system in cost and quality terms. Therefore, if we wish 
to concern ourselves with the optimal allocation of performance to man in the 
development of an aerospace system, we must be prepared to talk about the 
aerospace system as a whole, and not simply about the man-performance in 
it. And just as we must talk about the cost and quality of the aerospace system 
as a whole, so must we concern ourselves with the whole development cycle 
necessary to produce it, so that we may see the decision processes in question 
in the context of a complete development cycle for producing a complete aero- 
space system. What is called for is a way of designing and controlling the 
process of developing aerospace systems that provides for the consideration 
of man as a means of system implementation and which provides for his 
inclusion in the system to the end that the decisions made will result in a system 
of the desired quality at an acceptable cost. 

The study reported here is therefore concerned with the design and control 
of the aerospace system development process. The basic method selected for 
presenting information about the development process was to employ an aero- 
space system development cycle model . At the heart of the study there was 
the attempt to generate and rationalize a development cycle model that could 
be used by development cycle managers to provide for the proper inclusion of 



We use the word quality here to refer to the idea which is also sometimes 
connoted by benefit, effectiveness, utility, and the like, as used to convey 
the concept of system "goodness. M 



the activities necessary to achieve a system that would employ man in an 
optimal way. The criterion against which the development cycle model was 
prepared was an overall system assessment in terms of cost and quality 
with general regard for the manner in- which man is to be employed in the 
system. To provide for the development of an aerospace system that will not 
suffer in quality or cost because of the improper consideration of man in the 
system, the model that was developed and which is reported in Report IA is one 
which specifically identifies three categories of activities: 

1. Activities deliberately woven into the early phases of system develop- 
ment which are designed to enable determination of whether or not 
man should have a role either in the flight segment or in the ground 
segment of an aerospace system. 

2. Activities carefully related to parallel hardware development activities 
and focused upon determining the specific operator and maintenance 
tasks to be carried out by man in an aerospace system (assuming 

that he has a role). 

3. Activities to provide for fabricating man (selection and training) and 
man- related things which must be delivered as parts of a total opera- 
tional aerospace system in a manner that will assure capability and 
reliability of man and man- related products. 

Since the development cycle model is the vehicle which relates man-focused 
activities in system development to overall development cycle criteria, the 
model presented in Report IA was a central point of departure for all of the 
study work, and the report of the model is the anchor point of the research 
report series. A brief summary of this report, and of the other reports in the 
series, is presented in the following section of this study report. Research 
Report IA will be of interest to those who must take part in the overall design 
of an aerospace system development cycle. The report provides basic infor- 
mation and concepts which should provide a useful point of departure for 
carrying out development cycle design. The report will also be of interest to 
anyone who is engaged in the study of development cycle strategy per se. Such 
a reader will also be interested in Report IB which presents a simple calculus 



for discrete systems that is an appropriate language for describing development 
cycles and development cycle strategy. Research Report IB will probably not 
be of interest to someone who is not in some sense a student in the special area 
of development cycle processes. 

The model which is presented in Report IA is an appropriate document to 
consult if one is concerned with the overall development cycle design problems. 
Detail with respect to the man- related development cycle activities is presented 
in Report IIA. The second report will therefore be of interest to managers con- 
cerned with the design and control of those aspects of the aerospace system 
development cycle process that are specifically concerned with man- related 
problems. When used for the purpose of providing information about the de- 
sign of man- related activities in development, the user of the report will find 
that Research Report IA will also be useful. 

Whereas Reports IA and IIA take an overall look at the development pro- 
cess, there is need for a report specifically concerned with the two questions, 
"Does man have a role?" and n What is the optimal use of man, if he has a 
role?" Specialists concerned specifically with these two questions should con- 
sult Report III. This report takes a look at the development process specifi- 
cally for the purpose of answering these questions. The report will be useful 
to anyone who must plan a strategy in detail for answering these two questions 
in a specific aerospace system development cycle. It will also be useful to 
anyone who must carry out the actual work in development germane to alloca- 
tion of functions to man. For such users the report is amplified by appendices 
that present important data. 

Reports IA, IB, IIA, and III use a special language to provide for a pre- 
cise description of the aerospace system development process. This language 
is described in Report IA for the general reader. That part of the language 
which relates to the calculus is, of course, presented in detail in Report IB. 
Many readers will find that terms commonly used in the human factors and bio- 
technological areas of specialization are simply not employed in these reports. 
Use of many of the common terms has been avoided because of the ambiguity 
associated with ordinary usage. Report IIB is for readers who would like to 
relate the vernacular to the special usage. It considers the terms and concepts 



in common use that are germane to the topic of the study and presents an 
everyday interpretation of them. It also shows how they are related to the 
special language of the report series. Of all of the research reports, Report 
IIB is thus the least closely tied to the development cycle model which is the 
core of the study. 



II. SUMMARY OF RESEARCH REPORTS 

The purposes of this section are to explain the individual goals of each of 
the five parts (packaged in three reports) in the study series and to character- 
ize the content of each. 

As stated in the previous section, the overall objectives of the study were 
to provide tools to aid in management decisions germane to the development 
of complex aerospace systems to the end that man be employed in an optimal 
way. Each of the five parts is focused upon a particular area of concern to 
enable the necessary decision-making, planning, and execution efforts to be 
carried out. The five parts of the study are packaged in three reports with 
Reports I and II containing two parts each, identified as A and B respectively. 
Part A of Report I is identified as Report IA; Part B of Report I is identified 
as Report IB, etc. The five parts of the three reports are discussed in order, 
i.e., IA, IB, IIA, HB and III. 

A very brief review of the reports will be useful as an introduction. Re- 
port IA is entitled A Simple Model of a Man-Machine Development Cycle. It 
describes the major efforts necessary to develop a complex aerospace system. 
Report IB, entitled A Simple Calculus for Discrete Systems contributes a public 
language for talking about development cycles. It provides a foundation upon 
which the description of future development cycles may be based. Further, it 
provides the rationale for, and a precise definition of, some of the basic terms 
and notations used in the development and expression of the simple model ex- 
plained in Report IA. Report IIA is entitled System Development Activities 
Concerned with Putting Man in an Aerospace System . It describes each of the 
biotechnological functions which should be carried out during a development 
cycle to yield the system personnel and supporting equipment necessary to man 
the operational aerospace system. This report fractionates in further detail 
those biotechnological functions first identified in the simple model in Report 
IA. Report HB— Development of Man-Machine Systems: Some Concepts and 
Guidelines — is an attempt to relate selected terms generated by necessity for 
precise communication within the Research Reports, to the common vernacu- 
lar of the biotechnology and system engineering community. Hence, this report 



enables the reader to understand the basic differences and similarities between 
the vernacular and the special language introduced in Reports IA and IB. Re- 
port III is called An Approach for Determining the Optimal Role of Man and 
Allocation of Functions in an Aerospace System. This report provides methods 
and biotechnological data for determining whether or not man should have a 
role in an aerospace system and for determining the allocation of operator and 
maintenance functions to man if he has a role. The method and data are both 
articulated with the simple model documented in Report IA. 

The content of all these reports is related to the simple model given in 
Report IA. The other reports amplify and enrich the simple model with more 
detail about biotechnological events which must occur, their order and relative 
importance to the Quality and Cost position of the eventual operational system 
(produced as the end product of development efforts). A more detailed discus- 
sion of each of these reports is undertaken next. 



Report IA. A Simple Model of a Man-Machine 
Development Cycle 



Report Requirements 

In developing an aerospace system, it is important at frequent milestones 
to be able to predict the necessary development events that have not yet taken 
place, and to estimate the cost of that part of the development which remains. 
To estimate cost, ordinarily one must first predict the things which remain to 
be done which have cost associated with them. It is also mandatory early in 
system development to predict and thus to prepare for manning and equipping 
the design and production teams. Further, it is always desirable to be able 
to predict the supporting research and development activities that must be 
carried out in order to provide the required data inputs to enable development 
to progress in a timely manner. In fact, it is possible to continue to list many 



occasions which require the prediction of the course of events that a develop- 
ment cycle should follow in order that it be carried out in an optimum way. 

In the past, we have successfully developed many aerospace systems. 
If it is true that such predictions as those exemplified above are required in 
the course of any aerospace system development cycle, then how has the job 
of prediction been handled in the past? The answer is that we have employed 
crude models based upon our understanding of some of the commonalities 
which exist among development cycles and of how things have seemed to work 
best in the past. Because there are common features, someone who is familiar 
by experience with past aerospace system development cycles is able to set 
down (either implicitly or explicitly) a sort of model for a typical aerospace 
development cycle. It is necessary today to employ such implicit models be- 
cause there is no satisfactorily detailed documented model useful for the 
purpose of prediction. To date, no model has been set down in the open litera- 
ture where it may be subjected to examination and comment, and eventually 
to gradual improvement toward one that will truly meet the needs of managers 
of aerospace system development cycles. That is not to say that the literature 
is completely devoid of consideration of development cycles. Several authors 
in the field of system engineering discuss the general problem of the system 
development cycle and present brief characterizations of the process. However, 
most characterizations fall far short of the detail needed. 

What is done today in the way of modeling for the purpose of enabling 
prediction is perforce makeshift. What is needed is a model in sufficient 
detail so that it can be used to improve predictive processes. If the first 
model has a sound basic structure, it will be possible for future efforts to build 
upon it. It is therefore desirable that a model be produced for the use of those 
system managers who must make predictions about system development, and 
that every effort be made to provide this first model with a sound framework. 
This report presents a model which has been developed in an attempt to satisfy 
this need. 

The focus in this report is a biased one. First, emphasis is upon aero- 
space system development cycles. Second, in developing the model there was 



more interest in serving the needs of system managers concerned with person- 
nel products than the needs of hardware engineers. The model is thus designed 
primarily to satisfy a requirement for a model to enable personnel products 
oriented system managers to make predictions about the personnel products 
facets of an aerospace system development cycle. 

Report Content and Uses 

Report IA contains five key sections: (1) Conventions and Assumptions, 
(2) The Index Model, (3) The Development Cycle Model, (4) Use of the Model, 
and (5) Method of Developing the Model. 

The section on conventions and assumptions presents the terms, symbols, 
conventions and concepts needed to evolve a technology of development cycles. 
New terms, and familiar terms with new meanings, have been developed in 
Report IA because there are not satisfactory terms in the vernacular for the 
concepts to which they refer, or because some words in the vernacular which 
are candidates for use appear to have so many alternative meanings that they 
might give rise to difficulty of interpretation on the part of the reader. This 
section defines a set of forty special-purpose terms used in the report series 
to describe the system development process. 

The next major section concerns the description of an abbreviated version 
of the system development model called the index model . There are eight 
basic functions identified on this model to cover the more than 100 component 
functions in the complete development cycle model. The index model has two 
uses. First of all, it allows entry into the larger model by way of an intro- 
duction to the reader. Secondly, the brevity of the index model is intended to 
foster memorization by the reader. Each of the eight in-line functions com- 
prising the index model represents a phase of system development to aid in 
referencing the larger simple model. 

The third section presents the full development cycle model and the 
rationale by which it was derived from the index model. Each function or 
"activity" partitioned from each of the eight index model functions is described 



10 



briefly in terms of its output and its overall role in the success of the develop- 
ment cycle. The process of developing personnel products (i. e. , man in 
the system and his directly associated equipment) comprises the bulk of the 
activities within the development cycle model. As indicated earlier, the 
model has a biotechnological bias. The description and discussion of equip- 
ment development in the model is carried only to a level of detail necessary 
to place the development of man in the system in context. The model differ- 
entiates the part of the aerospace system which, when operational, does its 
work in the sky (or space) and those system means which remain remote 
from it (e. g. , on the ground). In the case of aerospace systems, the aircraft 
or spacecraft is referred to as the local segment , and that segment of the 
aerospace system which is remote from it is called the remote segment (be it 
on the ground or other location). 

Report IB. A Simple Calculus 
for Discrete Systems 

Report Requirements 

The complex utility systems and weapon systems that are built out of 
public resources are basically problem solving systems; society buys them 
in the hope that they will serve to reduce needs that broadly affect society. 
As the larder of technology becomes better stocked and more sophisticated, 
society marks an unsteady course toward solving its problems by building new 
systems that are made possible by new technology. In recent times the fruits 
of science have become abundant and society has been building new systems 
at an accelerating rate. To some extent each new system builds upon the 
systems that have been developed in the past, and thus the overall size and 
complexity of systems tend to grow. With systems of ever-growing complexity, 
society has been able in recent years to solve problems that were not even 
deemed worth talking about in earlier times because the solutions to them 
seemed so remote. Thus, the importance of the new complex systems to 
society is great and there are strong pressures to continue to try to solve more 
and more of the problems of a society that is itself made increasingly complex. 



11 



With increasing complexity, and with increasing importance of the prob- 
lems encountered, there has also been a trend toward increasing cost of 
systems. Thus, in our time new systems to serve society > such as waste 
management systems, power supply systems, and transportation systems 
require for their development such a significant proportion of our total re- 
sources that we cannot undertake them all at once, even though all are clearly 
within the scope of technology to build. Because of the high cost, there is 
need for capability to predict, to design, and to control development processes 
for the complex systems needed, so that our resources can be used most 
effectively to solve as many problems as possible. 

In recognition of the importance of control over the development process, 
in recent years there has been increasing use of one tool that is useful for 
this purpose, the Program Evaluation and Review Technique called PERT. 
PERT was developed specifically to help solve the problem of gaining control 
of the development process and it does provide a partial answer to the need. 
However, the successful use of PERT techniques for the control of a given 
development cycle depends upon having an adequate description of the develop- 
ment process to be controlled. Given an adequate description, PERT techniques 
can be employed to redescribe the process in terms of resource requirements, 
time requirements, and contingencies, but without any description of the steps 
in the development process to start with, PERT is of no use. By the same 
token, a good PERT description cannot offset a bad process description upon 
which it is based. To date it appears that there is no generally available 
method for generating an adequate description of a development cycle so that 
a PERT description may be generated in turn and used to full advantage. There 
is a need for such a descriptive method. 

There have been attempts to describe or model the process of complex 
system development. The most significant undertaking has been sponsored 
by the Air Force. With the support of the Department of Defense, the Air 
Force has prepared horrendously detailed description of the process by which 
the systems built under its aegis should be developed. However, the Air 
Force documentation does not lend itself to adaptation for solving the develop- 
ment cycle problem in general. It is tailored specifically for the management 



12 



conventions and hierarchical relationships of the Air Force. It presents a 
model for system development in great detail, but the model is not one from 
which general principles may be extracted, nor is it one that is easily ame- 
nable to evolution by means of rigorous public discussion. Several authors 
writing in the general area of system engineering have recently presented 
models of what the system development process is like; none of these contains 
sufficient detail nor adequate rationale for it to be useful for solving the prob- 
lem of gaining control of the system development process. 

Although existing documented descriptions of the development process 
are not adequate to enable the prediction, design , and control of development 
cycles for complex systems, they all demonstrate that the business of design- 
ing a development cycle is essentially that of finding a defensible strategy for 
the sequence and relationships of events that must take place in the course of 
developing a complex system. In order to talk about development cycle strate- 
gies without ambiguity, and in order to promote the comparison of alternatives 
in the course of evolving good strategies, we need a special language; specif- 
ically, there is need for a language whose terms and concepts are public and 
precise, and whose symbology is well-defined so that there can be an exchange 
of precise ideas between the specialists interested in the development process. 
Given such a language, there would be a good basis for communicating and 
improving development cycle models which exhibit useful strategies. 

Report Content and Uses 

Report IB presents a language which satisfies the needs outlined above. 
The language was generated within certain ground rules. A basic rule was 
that the language be useful for talking about development cycles. Another 
ground rule was that it be presented as a calculus according to the conventions 
of mathematics in order to take advantage of the established mores of the 
mathematical community as a way of providing for the orderly improvement 
of the language. Yet another ground rule was that the calculus should articulate 
with PERT and with probability calculus, such that it would permit building 
models of development cycles which could be translated into probability equations 
(models) on the one hand, or into PERT models on the other. This ground rule 



13 



was compatible with the objective that the language make it possible to utilize 
computers for testing and manipulating detailed development cycle models 
which might result from the use of the language. Finally, it was hoped to 
provide a language rich enough to enable the evolution and elaboration of 
relatively complex models of the system development process, should such 
elaboration prove to be necessary and fruitful. 

The content of Report IB, then, is a simple calculus which serves as a 
language for talking about development cycles. It is called a "simple calculus 
for discrete systems, M because we believe that any development cycle may 
usefully be treated as a discrete system. In this manner, we have avoided 
the complexity which would have been necessary had we chosen to attempt the 
development of a calculus for systems whose individual outputs must be 
described over an interval of time, or whose outputs are distributed over 
time. Only the test of application will reveal whether or not this was a good 
decision. 

The simple calculus presented in Report IB is for the reader who is 
interested in system development at a more theoretical (yet more precise) 
level than that portrayed in Report IA. Nine concepts basic to system develop- 
ment are rigorously interrogated and are precisely defined. 

Report IB is organized into three sections. The first introduces the need 
for the calculus. Section two presents the list of concepts and the calculus 
plus a partial justification for the specific coinage and syntax chosen for the 
calculus. The last section relates the use of calculus in a brief manner to the 
description of system development cycles. 



A discrete system is one whose operation can satisfactorily be described as 
a sequence of events moving forward in time and whose terminal output state 
is fully described at a point in time after which no further events occur. Such 
a system must be one whose condition at any point of time can satisfactorily 
be described by stopping the clock and by identifying the complete condition of 
the system at that point in time. (Output state is precisely defined in the 
following section of this paper. ) 



14 



Report IIA. System Development Activities Concerned 
With Putting Man in An Aerospace System 

Report Requirements 

Given that a system is to be manned (and all aerospace systems are, in 
one way or another), it is clear that there is a need to ensure that man is 
designed into aerospace systems in an optimal way. That is, the system 
solutions selected must employ man in a way that results in an operational 
system of high desirability measured in terms of overall quality and cost as 
compared with other system solutions. This report emphasizes that an opti- 
mal solution is one which is desirable as a whole; it is not one which has been 
suboptimized with respect to human performance (or any other system part or 
subsystem). 

The development of an optimal system solution requires first that a stra- 
tegy be created that will produce one. This is almost always difficult to ac- 
complish. For one thing, such a strategy must take account of when 
man- related events should occur relative to the timing of other events in the 
development cycle. Of course, the timing strategy should be such that de- 
cisions are made neither so late that prior related decisions force a poor 
one to be made, nor so early that the decisions exclude subsequent desirable 
decisions. Therefore, we need a strategy for making design decisions which 
does not preclude the production of an optimal solution, but which promotes 
an optimal solution. A development cycle strategy to satisfy these require- 
ments is presented in Report IA, discussed earlier. But while the model in 
Report IA defines such a strategy for man- related decisions in development, 
it does not provide information necessary for the design and control of each 
of the man-related activities per se. 

Report Content and Uses 

Report IIA is designed to meet the need which is not satisfied by Report 
IA. It is intended as an aid for planning and controlling each activity in an 
aerospace system development cycle which contributes to the production of 



15 



man-related end products, such as trained personnel, job aids, human- 
engineered interfaces and so on. To achieve this objective, Report IIA pre- 
sents information about each man- related activity in terms of its purpose, 
its detailed relationships to other activities, and its organization. 

The model of Report IA is not appropriate for the purpose of identifying 
who will perform the activities, what equipments are needed, and what 
disciplines and data must be brought to bear for each activity. It is in the 
description of the activities in Report IIA that these matters are considered. 
Further, the model presented in Report IA is a "GO" model; it does not take 
into account the technical management required to preclude, to detect, and 
to correct errors in the development cycle as it proceeds. In Report IIA, the 
description of each man- related activity departs from the "ideal" approach 
of the simple model and reconsiders, from a practical standpoint, what must 
take place in the real world of system development to produce personnel 
products. 

We further find that, in the real world of system development, the man- 
ning and the equipage of certain kinds of development activities fall into 
natural groupings. Thus, several different activities might be accomplished 
essentially by the same personnel using the same equipment. It is therefore 
convenient to talk about those activities as a group. For this reason, the 
man- related activities identified in the model are organized into 13 activity 
groups . Each group is presented as a chapter and includes a prologue in 
addition to specific discussions of each of the activities in the group. The 
prologue to each group discusses the requirement for the group, the relation- 
ship of the group to the entire development cycle, and the personnel and equip- 
ment needed to perform the activities in the group. 

Each activity group is sufficiently redundant in terms of identifying its 
relationship to the rest of the model to allow the potential user freedom from 
careful study of the remainder of the report. The write-up of the individual 
activity group, plus the system development model, provide for most of the 
user's needs for employing the activity group write-up as a guide. The main 
objective of ReportHA is to provide information useful in the planning and 



16 



control of activities related to putting man in an aerospace system, and it is 
anticipated that when it is used for this purpose it will be done so by persons 
primarily interested in a single activity group, or even in a single activity. 

Report IIB. Development of Man-Machine 
Systems: Some Concepts and Guidelines 

Report Requirements 

The general discipline of human factors, with all its ramified sub-disci- 
plines and splinter groups, has evolved a jargon peculiar to the design and 
development of aerospace systems. The terms and concepts developed have 
arisen from a need to communicate within the discipline and to have a basis 
for expression when studying and solving some of the man-related problems 
in the development of systems. These terms and concepts are, of course, in 
addition to those basic to system development, which are used extensively 
across disciplines. 

Any new concepts which are introduced into the human factors encyclopedia, 
or any new terms which describe a new concept or a concept which has hereto- 
fore been described in some other manner, are slow to become accepted into 
human factors language. The creation of new concepts usually occurs either 
as a function of advancing technology for implementing them, or as a function 
of their never having been verbalized or heretofore made public. Terms 
originate in much the same manner. A new term which is merely a synonym 
for another term already in the repertory of human factors specialists stands 
little chance of acceptance. However, terms which do well for communicating 
new concepts, or are better able to communicate existing concepts, find the 
road to acceptance somewhat smoother. In any event, the proposition of a 
concept or a term should include a rationale as evidence to the potential user 
(however implicitly) that there is good reason to use the term in the future, 
and perhaps to reject others as a consequence. Even when this rationale is 
provided, acceptance is still often a slow process. 

The report series (i.e., Reports IA and IB, IIA and IIB, and III) intro- 
duce and consistently use a set of terms, some of which are familiar to the 



17 



human factors specialist. However, many of the terms and concepts employed 
have new meanings for human factors specialists interested in aerospace sys- 
tem development. There is also an obvious absence of some terms and con- 
cepts quite common in the present human factors jargon, mainly because they 
have been subsumed within a new term or concept. The introduction of these 
strange terms and concepts was necessary due to the inability of some of the 
present vernacular to describe with precision and unambiguity the concepts put 
forth in this series of reports. 

We face a large problem in attempting to present these terms and con- 
cepts in such a way that they will be accepted into the vernacular. What is 
required in order to do this is to provide the necessary rationale or justifica- 
tion, as discussed earlier. 

Report Content and Uses 

Since it is presumptuous to think that a new set of terms and concepts will 
be immediately accepted into the vernacular, it would be very useful as a first 
step to relate them to those which are already in the vernacular. Such an 
approach would give the reader the perspective he needs to evaluate for him- 
self the worth of the new terms and concepts by comparing them to the vernac- 
ular and thereby demonstrating how they contribute to it. 

Therefore, it was decided that the content of Report IIB should be a defi- 
nition of the major terms and concepts used in the vernacular, many of which 
the Air Force has given birth to, plus a description of how the terms and con- 
cepts in the vernacular articulate with those put forth in the report series. 
Such an exposition provides the reader of the report series a means of entry 
into the vernacular and "out again" in order to better evaluate the worth of 
the contents of the report series. 

To this end, a set of 27 well-known terms and concepts from the vernac- 
ular are discussed within Report IIB. These terms are considered under the 
following major concept headings: 

1. Personnel Subsystem; 

2. System Requirements Analysis; 



18 



3. Functions Analysis; 

4. Design Conceptualization (Means Allocation); 

5. Personnel Specifications Analysis (Task Analysis); 

6. System Synthesis; 

7. Human Engineering — Maintainability; 

8. Personnel Selection and Training; 

9. Personnel Subsystem Test and Evaluation; 
10. Basic Design Data. 

In addition, there is a section in Report IIB entitled Research Implications, 
which is a discussion of needs for providing greater clarity in aerospace 
system development terms and concepts evolution. 

Report IIB affords the reader a chance to reexamine, the vernacular 
objectively and determine for himself what there is in it which is not precise, 
and thereby ultimately to select for himself that set of terms and concepts 
which should, because of communicability, comprise the human factors 
vernacular of the future. 

Report III. An Approach for Determining 
the Optimal Role of Man and Allocation of 

Functions in an Aerospace System 

Report Requirements 

Very early in the development cycle of each aerospace system a decision 
must be made whether or not to include man as one of the means by which the 
operational system will be implemented. A decision of this type is usually 
more important for the flight segment than for the remote base since man will 
probably always have some role in launching and recovery operations. When 
the system solution of choice does include a role for man, the next important 
step is to determine what man will do as a component means of the aerospace 
system. Identifying what he should do requires an effort generally known as 
allocation of functions. That is, since the value of the system lies within the 
services it can perform, there is need to identify specifically which of the 



19 



entire set of system functions man should be responsible for in order to 
obtain a system of superior quality within reasonable cost. 

Therefore, there is a need early in system development to decide, first 
of all, whether man will be required, and secondly, if he is, what he should 
do. Subsequent man-related activities in system development are concerned 
with selecting, job -aiding, training, supporting, and human engineering for 
man in the system. These are consequences of the allocation of function 
decisions; they cannot make up for bad allocation decisions. 

Despite the importance of being able to (1) define man's role, and (2) 
determine what he is to do in the system to be built, there is general concern 
among human factors and biotechnological specialists that good allocation of 
function decisions are not now being made. Specifically, we are not presently 
able to completely justify a role (or no role) for man in aerospace systems, 
and we cannot fully justify the determinations of the performances that are 
allocated to man when he is included in the system. The problems associated 
with making allocations are probably more severe with respect to the local 
segment than the remote segment. A review of current procedures in the 
literature for allocating functions reveals that there are two related needs 
which must be satisfied to improve the now imperfect allocation process: 
(1) a need for a public, teachable, generalizable method for carrying out the 
allocation of function decisions in a manner which fits the decisions properly 
into the total development process, and (2) a need for an organization of the 
supporting data used in making trade-offs during the decision-making process, 
so that data can be retrieved readily when needed. It appears that much of 
the data required are, in fact, available. The weakness of present methods 
of allocating functions appears to be that the data are indexed in a manner 
which makes them relatively inaccessible, thereby decreasing their utility. 

Report Content and Uses 

There are two major parts of Report III. The first is a model describing 
an effective strategy for both the determination of man's role and for carrying 
out the allocation of function decisions. The model is intended to be useful as 



20 



a guide for carrying out these decisions, and effort has been expended to the 
end that the model does not require unusual or unavailable background know- 
ledge or data for its use. To render the model improvable, a rationale for 
its creation and use is included in Report III. The model contains 25 activities 
germane to the determination of the role of man and to allocating system 
functions to him. The activities are articulated with the system development 
model contained within Report I A. Each activity provides the user with infor- 
mation under the following headings: Outputs, Requirements or Constraints, 
Initiating Inputs, Input Data Requirements, Data Documentation Format, 
Method, and Research Needs. 

The second objective of Report III is to present data necessary to support 
allocation decisions in aformat which makesthedata readily available as they 
are needed in the development process. Therefore, access to the relevant 
data is provided in a way that is compatible with the structure of the model to 
carry out allocation of functions. Further, the report contains appendices 
which include some supporting data for allocation of functions. Since the 
model and data are articulated with the total development cycle model of 
Report IA, it provides a way of integrating the decision -making activities 
into the system development cycle to ensure that the allocation decisions help 
to achieve a system which is optimum as a whole. 



21 



III. STUDY METHOD 

The method by which the study was conducted is described diagrammati- 
cally in summary form in Figure 1. This figure presents an overview of the 
study in terms of twelve major tasks as it was conducted; it is a relatively 
minor variation of the plan prepared at the beginning of the study. The major 
difference between the study as conducted and the study as planned will be 
discussed in the description of the program which follows. 

It is our objective here to describe the steps and rationale by which the 
study which resulted in Reports I through III was carried out. Such a report 
will provide one useful basis for evaluation of the study results. It may also 
be useful to others who wish to do further work in this field. The description 
of the study will be in terms of the twelve tasks identified in Figure 1. 

In overview, it can be seen that Tasks A through F were all focused 
primarily upon the development of the basic model which was the output of 
Task F, and which was subsequently reported in Report IA. These six tasks 
were the core tasks of the study. They provided the basic information for 
the preparation of Reports I through III. Tasks H, I, and J (ReportsIA, IIA, and 
III) were directly dependent upon the accomplishment of these core tasks. 
Tasks K and L are less directly related, as shown in Figure 1. We will first 
discuss the core Tasks A through F, which culminated in setting forth the 
basic development cycle model for manned aerospace systems. 

As an interim step in the generation of the development cycle model, 
three prototype models were independently generated. Two of these were 
generated in Task D and one in Task E. Initially, the plan of the study was 
to integrate these three prototype models in Task F. The strategy in devel- 
oping three independent prototype models was to reduce the probability that 
significant necessary development cycle events or interactions would be over- 
looked. By employing three independent researchers to develop three separate 
models, it was hoped to obtain models which could be cross-checked. 
Both of the models prepared in Task D were intended to account for producing 
a manned Mars system capable of scientific exploration. The objective in 



23 
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED 




CM* 

£ <u - 

3 E- 

c p o 



lO r ■ 






24 



forcing these development cycle models into the mold of development cycles 
for a manned Mars system was to ensure attention to detail and to force con- 
sideration of real development cycle problems. The manned Mars mission 
was chosen because data at an appropriate level of detail were available rela- 
tive to a mission of this type; another manned aerospace mission might have 
been as satisfactory for the purpose. One of the Mars models was developed 
on the basis of publicly documented information germane to development 
cycle strategy. By this method, consideration was given to existing infor- 
mation relative to the aerospace system development process in a context 
which forced an evaluation of current concepts. The second prototype model 
produced in Task D was generated on the basis of a logical analysis of the 
process required to develop a manned Mars system. Logical consistency and 
an explicit rationale were sought in this effort. There was no requirement 
to conform to established practice, as in the case of the model based upon 
documented approaches. 

The third prototype model was developed in Task E. This model was 
based primarily upon earlier studies performed by Serendiptiy Associates 
which generated information relative to the processes of aerospace system 
development. The modeling effort in Task E was not oriented toward the 
development of a model specific to a manned Mars system, but rather the 
effort was directed toward the consideration of all types of aerospace systems, 
including aircraft systems. Specifically, information relative to what is 
known about the SST development cycle was taken into account. 

The three prototype models produced in Tasks D and E were documented 
as n box and arrow" diagrams, with annotation presenting the underlying 
rationale for each. It is these working documents to which the output states 
for these tasks identified in Figure 1 refer. 

Inasmuch as it was intended that the three prototype models be integrated 
to achieve a single model incorporating the best features of the three, there 
was need to provide some basic rules for common application to all three 
modeling efforts; otherwise, the end products might not have covered the 
same ground. The basic rules for generating the development cycle models 
were prepared in Task C. In preparing these rules, care was taken to avoid 

25 



providing so much structure that the three models would necessarily be highly 
similar. To achieve these objectives, two working papers were prepared in 
Task C. The first was entitled Outputs of Typical NASA Development Cycles. 
This working paper described the categories of outputs for which any aero- 
space development system cycle must account. Basically, the categories were 
categories of operational aerospace system means. The second working paper 
prepared in Task C was entitled Rules for Preparing Development Cycle Models. 
The paper included information under four headings: (1) Development Cycle 
Boundaries, (2) Major Subsystems, (3) Symbol Conventions, and (4) Assumed 
Development Cycle Outputs for a Manned Mars System. The last of these four 
sections of this paper was prepared as an output of Task B and will be discussed 
shortly. The first section identified the development cycle boundaries to be 
the Primitive Need Statement on the input side, and to be the delivery of an 
operational system with demonstrated capability on the output side. The sec- 
ond section partitioned the development cycle into three major subsystems in 
sequence: a definition phase, a design phase, and a development/production 
phase. This section also directed attention to the fact that the prototype model 
should contain only so much information about hardware development activities 
as needed to provide context for the specific identification of development acti- 
vities related to man in an aerospace system. This section also directed that 
management functions be coded in the prototype models in such a way that the 
different prototype models might be compared after management functions were 
excluded. The symbol conventions section simply identified the symbols by 
which all of the prototype models should be described in order that comparison 
of the different models might be facilitated. 

The symbol convention section of the second working paper was abstracted 
from an earlier working paper produced within Task C which informally de- 
scribed a basic calculus appropriate for application to development cycle 
modeling. This early calculus paper became a basic input to Task L as well 
as the basis for the symbol convention section. The informal calculus paper 
was an attempt to set down the system-descriptive language which has gradu- 
ally been developing within the human factors /systems engineering technology. 



26 



To provide a common objective for the two models for a manned Mars 
system development cycle, effort was undertaken in Task B to develop a list 
of the typical end products of a manned Mars system development cycle so 
that the list might be employed in common as a definition of the output state 
of both Mars system models. The list of end products was derived by analy- 
sis of an abstraction from available study reports on manned Mars missions. 
The list of end products to be assumed was given in Section 4 of the working 
paper, Rules for Preparing Development Cycle Models. 

The first of the two Mars system-related development cycle models was 
developed by integrating the best concepts available in the open literature. 
To provide for the development of this model, it was necessary first to iden- 
tify the concepts to be considered and to document such development cycle 
model information as could be found. The symbol convention employed for 
this purpose is identified in Reports IA and IB. The open literature was sur- 
veyed for the purpose of identifying significant documents containing informa- 
tion about the development cycle process, and documents containing relatively 
complete models were selected for translation of the models into M box and 
arrow" form. Such models were prepared to represent the aerospace system 
development approach of the Air Force as presented in the 375 series docu- 
ments, for the CAPRI approach of the Navy, and for the method of Asimow. 
Incomplete models were prepared, as appropriate, to document important 
concepts found in the system engineering literature when such concepts were 
not judged to constitute a complete coverage of the development process. 

Tasks A, B, C, D, and E, which have just been discussed, developed 
all of the basic information necessary to undertake Task F, the task which 
produced the basic model of the study. Upon completion of Tasks D and E, 
it became apparent that no procedure could be found satisfactory to integrate 
the three models. The basic difficulty was that no criterion could be found 
for choosing parts from among the models such that a single superior one 
would result. However, at this stage in the study, the concept of the Cost, 
Quality space which is described in Report IA had not been developed. However, 



27 



the basic idea of Quality and Cost as criteria for selecting a system solution 
was contained in the second model, the one based upon system logic, and it 
became apparent that Cost and Quality taken jointly could provide a criterion 
for integrating all of the activities in a system development cycle. Therefore, 
the original plan of the program was changed and the second model was selected 
as a basic one from which to evolve the single model required as the output of 
Task F. The rationale for the second prototype model was rather fully de- 
scribed in a working document, and the prototype model was then evaluated by 
two independent system engineering experts for the purpose of determining 
whether or not it was inconsistent with the realities of what must be done in 
system development. Evaluation was also for the purpose of determining 
whether or not changes might be required to ensure logical consistency or to 
take account of significant ideas known to the engineering community. The 
prototype model stood up well under this scrutiny and it became the basic 
model which was reworked and elaborated in Task F. 

Two kinds of changes were then made in the prototype model: (1) the 
strategy for the first phase was thoroughly reworked to provide for the devel- 
opment of Cost and Quality criteria for Phases II and III; (2) provision for 
Cost and Quality criteria having been set forth in the specification in the out- 
put of Phase I, Phases II and III were organized in such a manner that the 
criteria could be applied consistently throughout these phases to guide the 
development process. The sense of the development cycle model which re- 
sulted was one in which the first phase focused upon the development of a single 
set of criteria for all steps in Phases II and III such that designs as well as 
end products might be tested against a common set. This approach tended to 
ensure the efficiency of the development process because it provided for inter- 
mediate design steps to be tested against the same criteria as the development 
cycle output and thus tended to ensure that intermediate steps would be directed 
toward achieving an acceptable output. 



1 Dr. Warren E. Wilson of Harvey Mudd College and Dr. Elliott Axelband, 



28 



The model which resulted was consistent in its internal logic and its 
logic was public in that it was made explicit in a set of notes. The model 
was then tested in several ways to determine whether or not it was compre- 
hensive. Thus, it was compared with the other two prototype models for the 
purpose of determining whether or not either of these provided for essential 
development steps not encompassed in the model being evaluated. Similar 
checks were made against the models taken from the literature and expressed 
in the output of Task A. These checks resulted in only minor changes. No 
new activities were added as a result of these checks, nor were major rela- 
tionships among the activities changed. Some output states were, however, 
amplified and made more explicit. The model was then checked for complete- 
ness of coverage against a special card file. The card file was prepared from 
a wide variety of documents, including textbooks, specifications, regulations, 
and so forth. These sources were screened and a card was prepared for each 
described or implied activity related to determining the role of man in complex 
systems. The card file, as initially developed, contained over 600 items, with 
unknown redundancies. The file was then checked by a method which employs 
a test matrix for the purpose of determining if there are empty cells when the 
contents of the card file are allocated in the matrix. The columns in the test 
matrix identified categories of man- related products of a system development 
cycle and the rows identified types of contribution of man performance to aero- 
space system performance. The result of the test was that meaningful empty 
cells identified gaps in the coverage of the card file. This directed attention 
to new sources of stimulus materials from which the gaps were filled. The 
augmented card file was then used to test the model to determine whether or 
not there were gaps of coverage in the model. The result of this check was 
to improve further the output statements in the model. 

When changes had been made as a result of the checks on the content of 
the model, these were set down in symbolic form and comprehensive notes 
on the underlying rationale were prepared. The model in this form was then 
employed as the key basis for the preparation of the final reports. 

Task H was the first of the research report tasks. In this report, the 
full rationale for the model was set down. To provide a basis for precise 



29 



communication of the rationale, over three dozen special concepts and terms 
developed in the course of the study were described so that they might be 
employed in all of the research reports. Many of these terms were drawn 
from the early calculus paper developed in Task C. As presented in Report 
IA, the definitions of these terms provided an intuitive understanding of the 
principal terms in the calculus of Report IB # The group of concepts neces- 
sary for talking about the Cost, Quality space was also defined. Report IA 
was then organized about a presentation method which was designed to intro- 
duce the reader gradually to the full detail of the aerospace system develop- 
ment cycle model. 

Task I was concerned with the preparation of Report IIA, the report which 
presents detail with respect to those activities in the model of Report IA that 
are specifically man- related. As the model was developing in Task F, the 
man-related activities began to be identified and a literature review was under- 
taken in anticipation of the task of preparing Report IIA. A study was under- 
taken of how man- related activities in development cycles are organized and 
related to each other in common practice. This provided a basis for organiz- 
ing the activities identified in the model into meaningful groups, so that they 
might be treated in Report IIA by group. The model presented in Report IA 
identified only the major outputs of activities and the initiating input of each. 
This avoided undue complexity in the model of Report IA, but at the same time 
tended to occlude many of the relationships among activities necessary in the 
prosecution of a real- world development cycle. To prepare for Report IIA, 
study was therefore undertaken of the detailed relationships among man- related 
activities and between man-related and hardware-related activities. This 
analysis became the basis for the key feature of Report IIA; and thus Report 
IIA became an extension of the model given in Report IA. On the basis of these 
analyses and a final determination of how each group must be related to the 
model as a whole, the preparation of Report IIA in its final form was undertaken. 

The complexity of Task J is not shown in Figure 1, which is a simplified 
representation of the study approach. The objective of Task J was to prepare 
Report IE, and the final preparation of this report required that the model 
expressed in the output of Task F be available. However, Task J was in fact 



30 



initiated well before the completion of Task F in order that Report III might 
be prepared quickly once the Task F output was available. Task J was ini- 
tiated by consideration of the process by which it is determined whether or 
not man will have a role in a given aerospace system and of the process by 
which his specific role is determined when he is to have one. Two sequential 
related models were developed, and when the output of Task F became avail- 
able, they were modified and articulated with it to provide for more detailed 
consideration of the role- determining process and of the allocation- of- function 
process than was provided in the overall aerospace system development cycle 
model. The two models prepared in this manner were the principal grist for 
Report III. They provided the basis for identifying component activities which 
were then described for inclusion in Report III. 

Simultaneously with the development of the role and allocation models, 
a literature search was begun to identify the basic data required as inputs in 
the course of carrying out the activities identified in the models. As the 
models took form, a scheme for organizing the available literature was devel- 
oped to provide for the ready access to information by means of entries which 
derived from consideration of the development cycle process rather than from 
consideration of the disciplines involved in the generation of the data. The 
background data were then organized and prepared as appendices to Report 
III. These appendices provided a framework for the future organization of 
new data and they provided a key pool of data organized in a manner to assist 
the human factor specialist in carrying out role determination and allocation 
of function activities in a specific aerospace system development cycle. 

Task G was preparatory to Task K, The output of Task K was ReportUB, 
a presentation and discussion of the important concepts used in the everyday 
world of man-machine system development. Task G was concerned with the 
review of the concepts in use in talking about and implementing man- machine 
system development and with selection of those which should be considered in 
Report IIB. In Task G, the literature was reviewed to identify common usage 
and preferred usage. In Task K, these concepts were related to key super- 
ordinate concepts which became chapter headings in Report IIB. To prepare 
Report IIB, each concept was developed by describing the manner of its use 



31 



in the vernacular. Concepts were discussed and related to the special terms 
and concepts presented in Report IA. 

Task L was based primarily upon the informal n calculus n paper prepared 
in Task C. This paper was reviewed and interpreted in mathematical terms 
by an independent expert. The basic concepts were then given formal meaning 
in mathematical terms. Report IB was prepared after a final check against 
the content of Report IA to determine all of the needs for the calculus. 



1 Dr. Alden F. Pixley of Harvey Mudd College. 



32 



IV. IMPLICATIONS FOR FUTURE WORK 

In this section we consider the implications of the study from the standpoint 
of what needs to be done further to improve the utility of the results presented 
in the research reports of this series. Coverage here is restricted to the 
consideration of implications of the study as a whole; research requirements 
related to specific topics in biotechnology and human factors are considered 
in Reports IIA, IIB, and III as appropriate to the major topic of each. Five 
major requirements for research are discussed. Each is identified in terms 
of the underlying requirement and in terms of the end product which should 
be produced by future research to satisfy the requirement. 

1. Development of Techniques for Determining When 
to Select a Preferred System Approach in a 
Complex System Development Cycle 

Need for the Study 

Let us suppose a system is proposed which meets a genuine requirement 
to a satisfactory degree. Let us further suppose that the system requires 
only current technology and that good cost estimates indicate that it can be 
acquired within budgeted funds. Should development of the proposed system 
proceed? The answer is, "Not necessarily. M In general, we should first 
determine that there are not significantly better alternatives. What is needed 
is a technique by which we may know when a proposed system solution is so 
"good" that we are unlikely to find a more desirable alternative without undue 
expenditure in the search. At present, the selection of the preferred system 
approach is made primarily on the basis of an informal procedure based upon 
engineering evaluations of several alternatives for the purpose of finding the 
best among those considered. Even when diligent effort is made to decrease 
the chance that good alternatives have been overlooked, the selection of one 
of the alternatives may still be primarily an act of faith. Thus, if we were 
asked in such a situation, "What is the likelihood that we could find a system 
with the same quality as the best alternative in the group but at half the cost? , " 
in most circumstances a satisfactory answer could not be given. 

33 



What is needed is a set of practical techniques to enable system designers 
to determine when a proffered solution is sufficiently desirable that better 
alternatives are unlikely to be found. 

Study End Product 

To satisfy the need identified above, a study is required that will focus 
upon investigation of the characteristic nature of the cost, quality space for 
any given system, and that will result in the identification of practical tech- 
niques which may be employed early in the development cycle to estimate the 
distribution of solutions in the cost, quality space for the system under de- 
velopment. Given a technique for estimating the distribution of solutions in 
this space, it will be possible, in general, to determine the likelihood that 
a solution can be found that is better than one of a given cost and quality. 

To identify the needed end product more precisely, it will be useful briefly 
to consider the nature of the cost, quality space and the relationship of cost 
and quality to another characteristic of systems which we will call desirabil- 

Since we are concerned with finding "better" systems, we must have 
criteria for comparing likely system solutions. We will restrict our con- 
sideration here to the comparison of systems in terms of criteria which may 
be applied to all system solutions in a given cost, quality space. Thus, we 
will set aside for consideration elsewhere problems of comparing systems 
in terms of the fortuitous, desirable, and undesirable effects of system solu- 
tions themselves. * Let us assume that measurements of quality reflecting 
the goodness of system solutions are expressed on a numerical scale ranging 
from >0 to 1, 1 standing for perfect goodness. Let us assume that measure- 
ments of cost are expressed in terms of the total dollar value of all resources 
necessary to design, develop, install, operate, and maintain a system which 
belongs to the solution family under consideration. Then a particular system 



1 ^ j_i x ^£ Ma II 



See the concept of "A" scores in Report IA. 



34 



solution takes, by virtue of its cost and quality attributes (estimates), a 
specific position in a cost, quality chart. Now if we had cost and quality 
estimates for every conceivable system solution which might be proposed to 
satisfy the requirement for the system, then the cost, quality chart would 
become literally covered with points. We know from experience that there 
are going to be more systems which fall in the low quality- high cost part of 
the chart than in the high quality-low cost part. The exact distribution of 
the systems in a given chart depends upon the specific nature of the system 
requirement and the state of the art, 

A system's position on a cost, quality chart fixes its desirability . Two 
systems which differ in cost and quality are said to be equally desirable if 
the customer for the systems cannot discriminate between them by saying 
that he would prefer to have the one over the other. With the help of the 
customer for a given system, it should be possible in concept to overlay a 
cost, quality chart with lines of equal desirability. For example, 



Q 




lines of equal 
desirability 



COST 



Any two points on the same line are equally desirable, and given two lines, 
the one which is farthest to the left touches system solutions which are more 
desirable than those touched by the other line. The lines of equal desirability 
thus show a customer's preferences in a quality versus cost trade-off. 



35 



If we had sufficient information about the distribution of systems in the 
cost, quality space, it would be possible for any given line of equal desirabil- 
ity to state the proportion of all system solutions in the space lying above and 
to the left of the line. Given the capability to calculate such proportions, we 
would have a basis for deciding for any given system solution lying on a given 
line of equal desirability the proportion of solutions that are more desirable 
and we would thus have a basis for deciding whether or not to seek a better 
solution. 

It must be recognized that each time we turn our attention to a different 
system requirement, we get a different cost, quality chart. What is needed, 
then, is a general technique for estimating the distribution of system solu- 
tions in any cost, quality space with sufficient precision to enable useful es- 
timates of the chances of finding better solutions, given a solution in the space. 
The end product may best be described as a set of instructions which will tell 
how to construct the chart to reflect the cost, quality distribution for any sys- 
tem requirement. 

If we knew nothing about the typical distribution of system solutions in a 
cost, quality space, obviously it would be necessary to find a rather large, 
unbiased sample of the solutions in a given space in order to obtain an esti- 
mate of the distribution of solutions. Inasmuch as the estimation even of 
crude quality and cost attributes of a given system solution is a rather expen- 
sive process, such an approach is not likely to be a practical one. Fortu- 
nately, we may reasonably expect to find that general statements can be made 
about the distribution of solutions such that fair estimations of distribution 
may possibly be made on the basis of a relatively small number of data points. 
For one thing, there is good reason to suspect that the contour lines in the 
cost, quality space are growth curves. If we can show that the contour lines 
which describe the changing density of solutions in a cost, quality space may 
be fairly described by growth curves, then we will be able to capitalize upon 
our mathematical understanding of these curves as an aid to estimating solu- 
tion densities in a given space. The end product that is required, then, is a 
set of techniques for estimating the density of solutions in any given cost, 
quality space on the basis of information which may be generated within 
reasonable time and dollar costs. 

36 



2. Extension of the Development Cycle Model 

to Include Improved Detail with Respect 

to Hardware-Related Activities 

Need for the Study 

The need for the model developed in the present study was presented with 
a biotechnological bias. Thus, the model presented in Report IA was designed 
primarily to provide information useful to those system developers concerned 
with man's role in the system under development. In generating the model 
it was necessary to consider grossly the hardware-related activities which 
parallel man-related activities in the course of development. Consideration 
of hardware-related activities was restricted, however, to the level of detail 
needed to identify and provide context for the man- related activities. The 
model as it stands in Report IA is thus out of balance with respect to detail. 
While sufficient information about the general strategy of system development 
is presented in Report IA to provide gross guidance for hardware-oriented 
system developers, the model falls far short of presenting the amount of 
detailed information and strategy that is desirable. What is required is an 
extension of the model to include commensurate detail with respect to hard- 
ware-related activities in system development. Such an extension not only 
would serve to provide a better context for the man- related activities, but 
would also provide a basis for designing a complete development cycle, in- 
cluding hardware- and man-related activities. By providing for complete 
support for the process of development cycle design, the quality of aerospace 
system development cycles in general might be improved, and the likelihood 
of use of the model would be increased. As a by-product, use of the overall 
model would provide a proper context for carrying out man- related activities. 

Study End Product 

With the assistance of experts who have practical experience in conducting 
development cycles for complex aerospace systems and who have top-level 
experience in the design of such development cycles, a study should be 



37 



undertaken to extend the model of Report IA to include commensurate detail 
with respect to hardware- related and man- related activities. The study 
output required is a complete symbolic model and an exposition of the ratio- 
nale underlying it. In order that the end product may find acceptance and use, 
it should be presented in such a form and in such a language that system 
managers will be willing and able to use it. Inasmuch as it can be anticipated 
that use of the model will require the user to learn certain new concepts and 
techniques, the end product of the study should include an effective didactic 
device that may readily be employed by interested managers to learn the 
necessary background in preparation for using the model. A 16 mm sound 
film might, for example, be considered as a medium for presentation of the 
concepts which must be learned. The presentation of a "cookbook" model 
which cannot be modified on the basis of learned principles relevant to system 
development is to be avoided, for such models do not lend themselves to 
improvement by evolution. Further, if a cookbook model contains sufficient 
detail to be useful, it is likely to be one that can be used only if it is com- 
mitted to memory by a tedious rote-learning process. A model which is based 
upon a learnable rationale and common logic may, on the other hand, be 
relatively easy to learn and to reproduce, and may thus more readily be 
accepted by system managers as a practical tool. 

3. Principles for Developing a Quality Score 
Formula for an Aerospace Science Mission 

Need for the Study 

Some aerospace flights are undertaken for the purpose of developing 
aerospace technology and the data which are gathered by means of such flights 
may be called engineering data . Even such flights, however, are prepara- 
tory to other flights which focus upon the gathering of scientific information. 
Thus, we may say (deliberately excluding from consideration propaganda 
effects) that aerospace missions in the foreseeable future will all be science- 
oriented. All will be oriented primarily toward obtaining information to be 
added to that public data pool which is the content of science. 



38 



In generating the development cycle model that is presented in Report IA, 
the need for a single criterion to be employed throughout the process of sys- 
tem development to evaluate all stages of development was clearly seen. 
Three kinds of criteria were identified: (1) Quality score criteria, (2) Cost 
(resources) criteria, and (3) M A !t score criteria. The first two of these may 
be set forth without considering the means by which the system requirement 
is to be satisfied. The second, the cost criterion, is one which we are rela- 
tively well prepared to develop and apply; the first, the Quality score, is 
one for which we are not so well prepared. To provide for the effective use 
of Quality score criteria in the development of future aerospace systems with 
scientific missions, it is desirable that principles with respect to the prep- 
aration and use of such Quality scores be developed and made available. By 
making available such principles, a technique would be provided for improving 
decision-making in the course of aerospace system development and a basis 
would be provided for promoting general understanding with respect to cri- 
teria and objectives in aerospace system development. All of these effects 
could be expected to improve future programs significantly. 

Study End Product 

If we think of a Quality score as a number in the interval 0< Q < 1, then 
the end product of the needed study must at least identify the mechanical 
techniques necessary to estimate a Quality score for a given mission. In 
fact, however, if one seeks to set forth such "mechanical" techniques, it 
rapidly becomes apparent that several other questions must be answered first. 
The basic underlying question to be faced is the question of what is to be 
measured in order to develop the basic data necessary to compute Q. There 
is a tendency in the literature to speak as though the purpose of a mission is 
to conduct experiments, implying that Q should be based upon whether or not 
specific experiments were conducted and upon the success of those which 
were. In fact, however, consideration should be given in the study to the 
point of view that Q should be based upon the number and goodness of scien- 
tific answers obtained, and that, before the fact, a mission should be designed 
against a criterion in terms of answers required. A principal reason for 



39 



developing Q on the basis of answers rather than experiments is that some 
desired answers may be obtained by alternative experiments, thus to call out 
a science system in terms of answers is to leave open to the discretion of the 
designers the experiments to be conducted. Such a course gives desired 
freedom to the designer and makes it possible for him to select, within weight 
restrictions, the set of experiments for a mission that will give the most de- 
sired set of answers. 

Not only must the end product of the study consider what is to be measured 
in order to estimate Q for a given system, but it must also consider how the 
various measurements obtained are to be combined to obtain the single num- 
ber which expresses Q for the system as a whole. Ordinarily, it will be 
desired that a given mission gather many answers, and most frequently the 
number of answers desired will be greater than the number that it will be 
possible to obtain because of state-of-the-art limitations, for example. The 
study must therefore consider how the measures of goodness of individual 
answers are to be combined in a Quality score formula. One basis of com- 
bination to be considered rests in the conjecture that the relation between 
the number of answers and Q for any system is given by a growth curve. 

Whatever the relation between any set of answers and Q for any given 
mission, the relation must be presented in a form that will enable the use of 
Q , first, to guide the process of system development such that maximum 
quality commensurate with available resources will be provided for in design 
and, second, so that criteria will be available during the course of system 
operation to permit continuous adjustments based upon data feedback so that 
maximum quality will be obtained. 

Without a better general understanding of Quality score criteria for aero- 
space systems, there is danger that the engineering orientation necessary 
early in the history of aerospace systems work will continue to predominate 
at the expense of achieving maximum scientific return by the optimum use 
of resources available for aerospace systems work. 



40 



4. A Study of Management Techniques for Insuring 
Maximum Development Cycle Quality 

Need for the Study 

In the design of complex systems one strives to achieve a system solution 
in a desirable cost, quality position. Usually, the Quality score formula for 
a complex system includes consideration or probability of system success 
as an important element in quality. Therefore , most system designs must 
incorporate provisions deliberately and selectively focused upon achieving 
overall operational system performance that is reliable to a specified degree. 

One may conceive of a development cycle itself as a system just as one 
conceives of the end product of the development cycle as a system. And just 
as a Quality score is necessary to provide for the evaluation of the operational 
system that is produced by a development cycle (including evaluation of the 
reliability of the operational system), so must a Quality score be set down 
to provide a basis for achieving a reliable development cycle . In Report IA, 
the Quality score for a development cycle was called Development Q (Dev 
Q). The formula for Dev Q for any development cycle must always include 
consideration of the quality of the operational system that is produced. It 
will most often include also consideration of the time and resources required 
to prosecute the development cycle, and it may even specify that the output 
of the development cycles occur neither before nor after a given target date. 

The concept of probability of success of a development cycle is important 
in estimating the goodness of a development cycle after it has been designed 
but before it has been carried out. Development cycles with low estimated 
probability of success are, in general, less desirable than otherwise similar 
development cycles with high probability of success. Because of the impor- 
tance that is usually attached to probability of success of a development cycle, 
provision is needed to enhance probability of success. In Report IA, a basic 
"GO" model of a development cycle was presented which did not consider 
provision for probability of success. In a final chapter, some principles 
were set forth by which such a "GO" model might be elaborated to provide 



41 



for high Dev Q, including high probability of development cycle success. 
The principles discussed were dubbed "management" principles. Basically, 
the principles described were derived by generalization of the techniques 
commonly employed to provide for high probability of success in operational 
systems; the techniques were not derived on the basis of consideration of the 
extant management science literature. What is needed is a study to extend the 
principles which may be employed to achieve high development cycle quality 
to include all that is useful within the current state of the art of management 
science. It can be expected that such an effort would materially increase the 
utility of the model presented in Report IA. 

Study End Product 

The end product that is desired should present what is useful within cur- 
rent management science in terms that render the management concepts 
compatible with the concepts upon which the development cycle model of Re- 
port IA are based. Basically, the end product must be the result of a filter- 
ing out of those management concepts which are too imprecise to be included 
within the rationale of the development cycle model. This will require a 
rather complete survey of current management practices and ideas which are 
publicly documented and an attempt to translate each so that it may be ex- 
pressed precisely in a manner compatible with the present model. It may be 
expected that many of the ideas found will not lend themselves to precise 
expression. Some of those which do not may be rendered more precise; some 
will have to be rejected as unsuitable for application. It is also possible that 
ideas may be uncovered that will reveal the need for basic changes in the 
present model. Such findings would be of most importance, and the study end 
product should give specific attention to them and to the consequent recom- 
mendations for change in the model. Otherwise, the end product that is 
desired should be an expansion of Chapter 5 of Report IA to include a compre- 
hensive coverage of techniques useful for elaborating a development cycle 
design to the end of providing for high development cycle quality. 



42 



5. Restudy of Human Factors and Biotechnological 

Specializations for the Purpose of Relating Them 

to Cost and Quality Criteria for Operational 

Aerospace Systems 

Need for the Study 

Human factors, biotechnology, human engineering, life support system 
technology, and all the related and component areas of specialization have 
developed in relatively recent times. These areas of specialization which 
relate to the business of putting men in complex systems, are all difficult 
to define discretely. When attempts are made to define any one of them, it 
is found that clean lines of demarcation cannot be drawn and that each over- 
laps a good deal with many others. This is so because in ordinary usage we 
think of each of these specializations as encompassing content, type of tech- 
nical activity, and special desired effects. Because each of these areas of 
specialization is fuzzily defined, we are frequently at a loss to identify ap- 
propriate criteria by which the activities carried out in the name of one of 
these areas of specialization may be evaluated in the course of a system 
development cycle. Thus, it is often difficult to say precisely how a human 
engineering group will be evaluated when such a group is employed to assist 
in the prosecution of an aerospace system development cycle. When a man- 
ager is unable to say how he will evaluate the activities of such a group, he 
is also unable, by the same token, to identify the work which they must do. 
In this kind of management void, such special groups develop criteria of 
their own and extend their interests along activity lines, along content lines, 
and along effect lines, until it is no longer clear, if indeed it ever was, how 
they relate to the overall objective of a system development program. Here 
and there we can find rationally acceptable reasons for their existence and 
so we support them in the hope that those activities which are not well under- 
stood may also be justifiable. 

Not only is there frequently an inability to specify what a specialist group 
must do, but there is also frequently an inability to justify the total proportion 
of resources to be allocated to a specialist group, such as a life support 



43 



system design group, for example. Clearly, what is needed is a way of 
developing criteria for the activities of such a group to the end that the group 
output may be evaluated in terms of its contribution to system quality, and 
in terms of the cost of its contribution as compared to the total cost of the 
development program. The development cycle model presented in Report IA 
provides an elementary basis for achieving these objectives. The discussion 
of man-related activities in Report IIA provides a further basis for the devel- 
opment of the needed criteria. However, present conceptions of the various 
areas of personnel products related specialization, are at variance with the 
conceptions of activity groups presented in Report IIA. So, therefore, is the 
supporting technical documentation for each specialty area at variance. Be- 
fore it will be possible to make significant headway in orienting development 
cycle activities such that cost and quality criteria are employed, it will be 
necessary to reorient the basic data and the practitioners of each major spe- 
cialty area. What is particularly needed, therefore, is a systematic review 
of each specialty area in terms of activity requirements as set forth in the 
development cycle model. Any such undertaking would require a relatively 
large investment in technical and dollar resources. In view of the poor basis 
for management of development cycles and consequent high cost of develop- 
ment which are the penalties for not making the undertaking, it may never- 
theless be justified in spite of its high costs. 

Study End Product 

A similar end product is desired for each of several activity groups. The 
groupings of activities for this purpose may be the groupings employed in 
Report IIA of the present series, or alternative groupings may be developed 
after further consideration of the basic development cycle model. However 
the grouping is accomplished, it should be consistent with the rationale of 
the development cycle model so that criteria for activities may be developed 
systematically on the basis of overall system cost and quality criteria. For 
each activity group, technical documentation is required that will be made 
broadly available and that will be written in language such that it may be 
used by any properly trained technical person in the area of specialization 



44 



of the document. Each document should consider the manner in which criteria 
for the activities within the group under consideration should be developed and 
applied in the course of development cycle design and prosecution. Each doc- 
ument should discuss the manner in which activities within each group may 
be managed technically for the purpose of maximizing activity contribution to 
overall system cost and quality objectives. The document should incorporate 
the information relating activities that is presented in ReportllA. In selected 
cases, technical appendices should be developed that would yield technical 
data pools reorganized in a manner to provide for the ready retrieval of infor- 
mation needed in the prosecution of the development cycle activities under 
consideration. 

6. Study of an Information System to Support Man- Related 
Activities in Aerospace System Development 

Need for the Study 

In every aerospace system development program there is need to use some 
of the existing data which relate to the attributes of man. Currently, these 
data are found in a great amorphous pool which includes information in the 
open literature and private information. While not every development program 
requires the same data, there is much overlap of usage from one program to 
the next and it is necessary that time and energy be expended in the course of 
every development cycle to "fish" in the existing pool. 

To repeat the setting up of procedures to retrieve existing data for each 
development program does not represent a good use of resources. But the 
present state of the data pool probably has an even more harmful effect than 
the wasting of resources, for the difficulty associated with the retrieval of 
needed information must frequently dissuade designers from using existing 
data. In fact, often data are not even sought because their very existence is 
not recognized. What is needed is a system which enables the ready identifi- 
cation of the data that must be consulted in the development of aerospace sys- 
tems for the purpose of promoting the optimal use of man. 



45 



The exercise conducted to collect and organize the data presented as 
appendix materials to Report III of this series uncovered the need discussed 
here. Even though this exercise encompassed only a small portion of the total 
relevant data pool, and even though no attempt was made to uncover an data 
in the restricted area of concern, the identification, collection, abstraction, 
and organization of the data presented required several months of calendar 
time. While the application of greater resources might reduce the calendar 
time required for this exercise by some amount, it does not appear that sav- 
ings in time could be achieved that would reduce the process to one which 
could be carried out as a timely adjunct to a specific system development 
program. 

Study End Product 

Satisfaction of the need identified above might involve the design, fabri- 
cation, installation, and operation of a rather complex data storage and re- 
trieval system. On the other hand, it might be found upon careful analysis 
that the cost of satisfying the need by means of such a complex solution would 
not be justifiable. What is needed at the outset, therefore, is not a detailed 
design for a solution, but rather an objective detailed description of what the 
needed system should do and a complete report of the benefits and penalties 
that will be realized if a system is developed in response to the specification 
of what it must do. Thus, what is needed is a specification identifying the 
problems the system must solve, identifying how entry to needed data must 
be gained by system users, and identifying how any implementation of a sys- 
tem would be evaluated. 

In the study underlying Report III, it became apparent that provision 
must be made to gain access to the biotechnological data by the use of system- 
related terms as opposed to terms in the biotechnological discipline. Entry 
by means of such terms is not now possible. The end product of the required 
study should therefore identify in detail an appropriate entry procedure along 
with rules for expanding the procedure in the future. The end product should 
also identify the classes of biotechnological information germane to each 
system- related entry so that the classes of data to be sought are clearly 



46 



identified. Such information would provide a basis for a third end product, 
an estimation of the cost and utility of a system to provide ready access to 
the classes of biotechnological data identified. 



Serendipity Associates, 

Chatsworth, California, October 1966. 



47 



