individually packaged components for 
compactness. Each transceiver was de- 
signed on a single PCB with a custom en- 
closure providing interior walls and com- 
partments to isolate transceiver 
subsystems from radiated interference. 
The enclosure also acts as a heat sink for 
the voltage regulators and power ampli- 
fiers inside the system. The PCB trans- 
ceiver design produces transmit pulses of 


2 W with an arbitrary duty cycle. Each 
transceiver is fed by an external 120-MHz 
signal transmit and two 1,140-MElz local 
oscillator signals. The received signal is 
amplified and downconverted to 120 
MHz and is fed to the data processor. The 
transceiver dimensions are approximately 
3.5x11.5x0.6 in. (9x29x1.5 cm). 

The PCB transceiver design reduces 
the volume and weight of the DBSAR 


instrument while maintaining the func- 
tionality found in the original design. 
Both volume and weight are critical for 
airborne and flight remote sensing in- 
strumentation. 

This work was done by Matthew Mc.Linden 
and Rafael Rincon of Goddard Space Flight 
Center. Further information is contained in a 
TSP (see page 1). 

GSC-16508-1 


Software Defined Radio With Parallelized Software Architecture 

Goddard, Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland 


This software implements software- 
defined radio procession over multi- 
core, multi-CPU systems in a way that 
maximizes the use of CPU resources in 
the system. The software treats each 
processing step in either a communica- 
tions or navigation modulator or de- 
modulator system as an independent, 
threaded block. Each threaded block is 
defined with a programmable number 
of input or output buffers; these buffers 
are implemented using POSIX pipes. In 
addition, each threaded block is as- 


signed a unique thread upon block in- 
stallation. A modulator or demodulator 
system is built by assembly of the 
threaded blocks into a flow graph, 
which assembles the processing blocks 
to accomplish the desired signal pro- 
cessing. This software architecture al- 
lows the software to scale effortlessly be- 
tween single CPU/single-core com- 
puters or multi-CPU/multi-core com- 
puters without recompilation. 

NASA spaceflight and ground com- 
munications systems currently rely ex- 


clusively on ASICs or FPGAs. This soft- 
ware allows low- and medium-bandwidth 
(100 bps to =50 Mbps) software defined 
radios to be designed and implemented 
solely in C/C++ software, while lowering 
development costs and facilitating reuse 
and extensibility. 

This work was done by Greg Heckler of God- 
dard Space Flight Center. Further information 
is contained in a TSP (see page 1). GSC- 
16442-1 


10 


NASA Tech Briefs, June 2013 


