





>Ni A T I V ^' A I T A A \ S u" ^ i C f ■ a r i L i t \^ ( ( . A . a ) 



L - L L 1 => ^ 



I/. 



unci ts 

.•■\ "J >>■>,. T ■ 



NASA Technical Memorandum 4157 



Cryogenic Temperature Effects 
on Sting-Balance Deflections in 
the National Transonic Facility 



Thomas G. Popernack, Jr., and Jerry B. Adcock 
Langley Research Center 
Hampton, Virginia 



IWNSA 

National Aeronautics and 
Space Adnninistration 

Office of Management 

Scientific and Technical 
Information Division 

1990 



The use of trademarks or names of manufacturers in this 
report is for accurate reporting and does not constitute an 
official endorsement^ either expressed or impUed, of such 
products or manufactiuers by the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration. 



Abstract 

An investigation was conducted in the National 
Transonic Facility (NTF) at Langley Research Cen- 
ter to document the change in sting-balance de- 
flections from ambient to cryogenic temperatures. 
Space Hmitations in some NTF models do not al- 
low the use of onboard angle-of-attack instrumenta- 
tion. To obtain angle-of-attack data, predetermined 
sting-balance bending data must be combined with 
arc-sector angle measurements. Presently, obtaining 
pretest sting-balance data requires several cryogenic 
cycles and cold loadings over a period of several days. 
A method of reducing the required calibration time 
is to obtain only ambient-temperature sting-balance 
bending data and to correct for changes in material 
properties at cryogenic temperatures. To validate 
this method, two typical NTF sting-balance combi- 
nations were tested. The test results show excel- 
lent agreement with the predicted values, and the 
repeatability of the data was 0.01^. 

Introduction 

Large changes in temperature alter the material 
properties of wind-tunnel sting-balance support sys- 
tems and affect the amount of angular deflection dur- 
ing testing. The National Transonic Facility (NTF) 
at Langley Research Center is a transonic wind tun- 
nel that uses cryogenic nitrogen gas to achieve high 
Reynolds numbers for aerodynamic testing. The 
operating-temperature range for the tunnel is from 
140°F to -300°F and the stagnation- pressure range 
is from 14.7 to 130 psia. The Mach number range of 
the NTF is from 0.2 to 1.2. 

The preferred method of measuring angles of at- 
tack and sideslip for wind-tunnel models is to have 
an onboard measuring system; however, because of 
space limitations in some NTF models, this method 
is not always feasible. Hence, data from the arc- 
sector (model support strut) pitch angle, the roll 
output angle, and the predetermined sting-balance 
bending characteristics must be combined to com- 
pute the model attitude. In models with an onboard 
angle-measuring system, the arc-sector pitch angle, 
roll output angle, and the sting-balance bending data 
serve as a backup method for measuring angles. A 
typical set of sting-balance deflection measurements 
includes the contributions due to the following model 
loadings: normal force, pitching moment, side force, 
and yawing moment. Because of changes in mate- 
rial properties over the tunnel operating-temperature 
range, the sting and balance stiffness varies and the 
deflection angle changes. Currently, in order to mea- 
sure this sting-balance deflection change prior to tun- 
nel testing, static weight loadings at several cryogenic 



temperatures are necessary. One of the NTF model 
assembly bays has a cryogenic chamber designed for 
performing these weight loadings. This measure- 
ment process requires several time-consuming cryo- 
genic cycles and weight loadings. 

The purpose of this investigation is to assess 
mathematical predictions of deflection changes with 
temperature. If deflection changes can be predicted 
accurately, cryogenic loadings can be ehminated. 
Eliminating these cryogenic loadings will result in 
significantly reduced model preparation time. The 
predicted cryogenic deflections are determined by 
correcting ambient-temperature deflections for tem- 
perature effects on material properties. To inves- 
tigate the accuracy of the predicted values, two 
sting-balance combinations were cooled to cryogenic 
temperatures, were loaded, and the deflections were 
measured. The results of these loadings were then 
compared with the predicted sting-balance bending 
values. 

Symbols 

E Young's modulus of elasticity, 

Ib/in^ 

/ area moment of inertia, in^ 

Km pitching-moment bending 

coefficient, deg/in-lb 

Kj^ normal-force bending coeffi- 

cient, deg/lb 

L sting length, in. 

M pitching moment, in- lb 

N normal force, lb 

NTF National Transonic Facility 

T temperature, °F 

9 sting-balance deflection angle, 

deg 

0^ sting-balance deflection angle 

due to pitching moment, deg 

9p^ sting-balance deflection angle 

due to normal force, deg 

Apparatus 

All sting-balance deflection loadings were per- 
formed in the NTF cryogenic chamber located in a 
model-assembly bay. This chamber (fig. 1) is capa- 
ble of cryogenic cycUng a test model and sting for in- 
strumentation checkout. The cryogenic chamber has 
a sting-backstop system that allows pitch, roll, and 



height adjustments. The cryogenic chamber uses a 
liquid nitrogen injection system to achieve test tem- 
peratures down to -300°F. For sting-deflection load- 
ings, slots in the floor of the cryogenic chamber per- 
mit access to a weight basket below (ref. 1). 

Figure 2 shows sketches of the NTF balances, 
model stings, and stub stings tested. Sting-balance 
combination 1 consists of the NTF-104 balance, the 
X-29 model sting, and NTF stub sting 2. Sting- 
balance combination 2 has the NTF- 113 balance, 
NTF model sting 1, and NTF stub sting 2. The 
NTF balance material is 18 Ni 200 grade maraging 
steel (VascoMax 2000. Surrounding the balance is 
an 18 Ni 200 grade maraging steel cahbration block, 
which provides a loading surface for the weight- 
loading rig (fig. 3). The weight-loading rig has a 
double knife-edge loading attachment that rests in 
a cahbration-block groove. The cahbration block 
connects to the balance by a front-end-attachment 
cyhndrical fit and a dowel pin, which transfer all 
loads to the balance gages. The weight-loading rig 
also contains a frame, a shackle, and a connecting 
rod. The total weight of the loading-rig assembly is 
approximately 200 lb. 

The two model stings are made from 18 Ni 200 
grade maraging steel. Dimensions for the two sting- 
balance combinations are shown in figure 4. The 
balance connects with a taper joint and key to the 
model sting. Two Armco Nitronic 60 10-32 set screws 
secure this joint. The stub sting material is ASTM 
A638 grade 660 steel. The model sting connects to 
the stub sting by a taper joint secured with four 
Nitronic 60 3/8-24 bolts and a key. At the backstop 
joint, the threaded stub sting secures to the backstop 
with a Nitronic 60 13-2 nut. 

Sting-balance deflection angles were defined as 
the difference between the angles of two cryo- 
genic inertial-accelerometer packages. The front ac- 
celerometer was mounted on the balance calibration 
block. The rear accelerometer was attached to a lev- 
ehng plate mounted on the stub sting. The distance 
between these two accelerometers was 110 in. The 
accuracy of these accelerometers was 0.01°. For mon- 
itoring temperature gradients, a network of copper- 
constantan thermocouples were mounted inside and 
outside the model sting and the stub sting. 

Determination of Deflection Angles 

The applied loads simulated the aerodynamic 
model loads that would be transmitted to a sting- 
balance system during tunnel operations. The no- 
load configuration included the loading rig assembly 
hanging from the leveled cahbration block. The 

^ Trademark of Teledyne Vasco. 



range of sting bending test temperatures was from 
75°F to -225°F; data taken at 75°F increments. The 
loadings began when the balance and model sting 
reached the steady-state test temperature. After 
the addition of each weight to the loading rig, the 
calibration block was returned to a level position, 
so that the applied forces were perpendicular to the 
balance centerhne. The level position was obtained 
by using an electrolytic bubble that was located 
within the accelerometer package. The sting-balance 
deflection for each load was defined as the change in 
the angle between the cahbration block and the stub 
sting from the no-load value. 

A cantilever beam with an end load and an ap- 
plied bending moment can represent a sting-balance 
system. Equation (1) gives the angular deflection due 
to a normal- force end load as follows: 



e^ = {NL^)/{2EI) 



(1) 



Equation (2) shows the angular deflection of a can- 
tilever beam that results from a pitching moment at 
the free end (ref. 2) as follows: 



9m = {ML)/{EI) 



(2) 



By applying the method of superposition, these two 
equations can be combined to calculate the total 
sting-balance deflection angle as follows: 



9^9^ + Or, 



(3) 



The superposition of these two loadings simulates a 
model with normal-force and pitching-moment load- 
ings. The terms in the deflection equations that are 
subject to thermal change are the sting length, area 
moment of inertia, and Young's modulus of elas- 
ticity. For this test, the pure normal-force load- 
ings were accomplished by hanging the weights over 
the moment center of the balance. Pure pitching- 
moment loading could not be performed. Therefore, 
combined pitching-moment and normal-force load- 
ings were performed by hanging the weights 2 in. 
forward and aft of the balance moment center. To 
determine values for side-force and yawing-moment 
loadings in the NTF cryogenic chamber, the sting 
and balance must be rotated 90°. Only normal- force 
and pitching-moment loadings were performed for 
this test. 

For sting- balance combination 1, the deflection 
data formed a system of Hnear equations. At each 
test temperature, the deflection data fit the following 
equation: 

K^N + KmM = 9 (4) 



In equation (4), K^ is the normal- force bending 
coefficient, and Km is the pitching-moment bending 
coefficient. A simultaneous equation solver that used 
a first-order, least-squares fit determined the values 
for Xyv and Kjn- Although solving for the unknowns 
required only two distinct loadings, the equation 
solver processed the entire data set and, therefore, 
increased the confidence in calculating values for Kyv 
and Km- For sting-balance combination 2, there were 
only normal-force loadings. The deflection data fit 
the following equation: 



KmN = e 



(5) 



A first-order, least-squares fit of the data determined 
the value of Kfsi at each temperature. The criterion 
for a successful curve fit was a difference of less than 
0,01° between the test data and the corresponding 
least-squares-fit values. 

Results and Discussion 

Figure 5 shows the deflection results of the am- 
bient and cryogenic loadings for sting-balance com- 
bination 1. The deflection data vary linearly with 
normal-force and pitching-moment loadings. Load- 
ing and unloading data were taken at each weight in- 
crement. The data show good repeatability between 
the weight loading and unloading data points. The 
linearity indicates elastic bending, and the good re- 
peatability indicates properly fitting sting and bal- 
ance joints. 

In the cantilever-beam deflection equations, the 
two material properties that affect deflection are the 
coefficient of thermal expansion (by way of length 
and area moment of inertia) and Young's modulus 
of elasticity. For 18 Ni grade 200 maraging steel, 
the average coefficient of thermal expansion over this 
temperature range is 4.2 x 10"^ in/in-°F (ref. 3). 
Calculations show a decrease of 0.1 percent in sting 
length and 0.5 percent in the area moment of iner- 
tia for a temperature change from 75°F to -225°F. 
Also, for this test-temperatiire range, the mate- 
rial has a linear increase in Young's modulus of 
elasticity of 4.2 percent (ref. 4). From these cal- 
culations, a 3.7 percent decrease in sting-balance 
bending coefficients should occur over this temper- 
ature range. With the ambient-temperature bend- 
ing coefficients as a starting point, normal-force and 
pitching-moment bending coefficients were calculated 
for the test-temperature range. Figure 6 shows the 
variation in the normal-force bending coefficients for 
sting-balance combinations 1 and 2 over the test- 
temperature range. Sting-balance combination 1 has 
a 3.3-percent decrease from Ib^'Y to -225°F. For 
sting-balance combination 2, the decrease in Kf^ is 



3.9 percent over the same temperature range. Fig- 
ure 7 shows a 4.7-percent decrease in the pitching- 
moment bending coefficient over the test-temperature 
range for sting-balance combination 1. Pitching- 
moment data were taken only for sting-balance com- 
bination 1. There was a difference in deflection angle 
of less than O.Or between the test data and the corre- 
sponding least-squares-fit values. These results show 
that the change in sting-balance deflection over the 
NTF operating-temperature range can be predicted 
with sufficient accuracy. 

Maintaining small sting temperature gradients 
during testing was essential for a successful test. The 
rear of the stub sting, exposed to ambient tempera- 
ture, has a relatively large thermal mass, which re- 
stricts complete cool-down. However, only a 15°F 
gradient existed between the balance and rear of the 
model sting. This small gradient assured that the 
material properties were essentially the same in the 
region where most of the bending occurred. Thermo- 
couples located in the balance and model-sting joint 
and in the model-sting and stub-sting joints showed 
a maximum gradient of lO^'F at the coldest temper- 
ature. These small gradients were not significant to 
the sting-balance deflection results. 

The method of predicting sting-balance deflec- 
tions from changes in the metaUurgical character- 
istics with temperature can be readily incorporated 
into NTF operations. Ambient loadings are essential 
for calculating sting-balance deflections. The load- 
ings assure that the sting joints are secure and pro- 
vide values for the ambient reference bending coeffi- 
cients [Kf^ and Km)- The results of this test show 
that the bending coefficients vary linearly as a func- 
tion of sting temperature. Dvuing NTF operations, 
the sting temperature is essentially the stream stag- 
nation temperature. Thus, either the sting tempera- 
ture or the tunnel stagnation temperature may be 
used in calculating the bending coefficients. The 
NTF force-and-moment balance resolves the aero- 
dynamic loads into individual components. To cal- 
culate the angular deflection due to sting-balance 
bending, each resultant force and moment is then 
multiplied by the proper deflection coefficient. These 
deflections, along with the arc-sector pitch angle and 
roll output angle, make possible the calculation of 
model orientation (i.e., angles of attack and sideslip). 

During NTF wind-tunnel testing, there is some 
movement between the stub sting and the arc-sector 
pitch-angle measuring device. Including this smafl 
amount of movement with the results from this inves- 
tigation establishes the acciiracy of the sting-balance 
deflection angles to 0.05°, The accuracy was deter- 
mined by comparing test data having an onboard 



angle-of-attack accelerometer with angles calculated 
from sting-balance deflections. 

Using the predicted cryogenic sting-balance de- 
flection method will save model preparation time. 
Presently, several cryogenic loadings of the sting- 
balance system are required to determine bending 
coefficients. A typical set of cryogenic sting-balance 
deflection measurements includes loadings for normal 
force, pitching moment, side force, and yawing mo- 
ment. A set of these deflections involves separate 
cryogenic cycles; each cycle takes 1 day to complete. 
The new method requires only ambient-temperature 
loadings and each loading takes approximately 1 hr; 
the new method results in significant time savings. 

Concluding Remarks 

A more efficient method of determining National 
Transonic Facihty (NTF) sting-balance deflections 
can replace the present time-consuming method. The 
current method requires cooling the sting and bal- 
ance to cryogenic temperatures for a series of weight 
loadings and typically takes several days to complete. 
The new method requires loadings only at ambient 
temperature. From these loadings, the changes in de- 
flection due to changes in the coefficient of thermal 
expansion and Young's modulus of elasticity with 
temperature are calculated. The time necessary for 
the new method is several hours. 

In tests conducted to show the accuracy of the 
new method, two sting-balance combinations were 
cooled to cryogenic temperatures and deflection load- 
ings were performed. These deflections were then 



compared with results predicted by the new method. 
Over the temperature range of 75°F to -225"^, the 
new method predicted a decrease of 3.7 percent for 
both the normal-force and pitching-moment deflec- 
tion coefl5cients. In two experimental tests performed 
to determine the normal-force deflection coeflficient, 
decreases of 3.3 percent and 3.9 percent occurred! 
The one experimental pitching-moment test had a 
4.7-percent decrease in pitching-moment deflection 
coefficient over the same temperature range. In the 
cryogenic chamber, the repeatability of the deflection 
data was 0.01 ^ For wind-tunnel testing, the accu- 
racy of the model attitude measurements using the 
new method of calculating sting-balance deflections 
was 0.05''. 

NASA Langley Research Center 
Hampton, VA 23665-5225 
November 6, 1989 



References 

1. Fuller, Dennis E.: Guide for Users of the National Tran- 
sonic Facility, NASA TM-83124, 1981. 

2. Beer, Ferdinand R; and Johnston, E. Russell, Jr.: Me- 
chanics of Materials. McGraw-Hill Book Co., c.1981. 

3. VascoMax C-200, C~250, C-300, €-350. Teledyne Vasco, 
C.1982, 

4. Wagner, John A.: Mechanical Behavior of 18 Ni 200 
Grade Maraging Steel at Cryogenic Temperatures. Tech- 
nical Papers, Part 1~AIAA 26th Structures, Struc- 
tural Dynamics, and Materials Conference, Apr. 1985, 
pp. 385-390. (Available as AIAA-85-0704.) 



Portable 
cryogenic 
chamber - 



" T^r- 



^ 



-Support stand 



"v"r- 



Q. 



::;EHr--i 



^ 



Roll 



^e 



Pitch 



z 



■\= 



T 



i 



- Vertical 
translation 

WW ^ 



-Calibration 
weights 



Figure 1. NTF cryogenic chamber. 



Sting-balance 
combination 1 




X-29 model sting 



NTF- 104 
balance and 
calibration block 



Stub sting 2 



Stub sting 2 




NTF model sting 1 



NTF-113 
balance and 
calibration block 



Sting-balance 
combination 2 



Figure 2. Sting-balance combinations. 



Calibration block 



Balance moment center 




Balance 



Sting 



Figure 3. NTF calibration block and balance. 



4 

T 



Sting-balance combination 1 



•1.875 diam r- 

/- 1 .875 diam / 



y-7.8 diam 
3.2 diam / ^7.8 diam 



M2-H11.17I*- 



-32.10- 



A 




V 26.0 — H12.5 I- 



•40.383 



y^ 15.3 diam 



J 



4 

T 



£ 



nun 



Sting-baiance combination 2 

on.. /-3.872 

3.0 diam / 



7.8 diam 
3.0 diam „„.,._ /-3.873diam/ ^-7.8 diam^ 



H 2-4*1 8.268*1*— 25.0 > 




I- 25.5— »|l 2.5571*- 



■40.383 



/^ 15.3 diam 



Figure 4. Sting-balance combination dimensions. All dimensions are in inches. 



6 



3.0 r- 
2.5 



O Load at moment center 

D Load 2 in. aft of moment center 

A Load 2 in. forward of moment center 





200 400 600 800 1000 1200 
Load, lb 

Figure 5. Deflections for sting-balance combination 1. 



1.86 
1.84 
1.82 
1.80 



xlO" 



K|sj,deg/lb 1.78 



O Sting-balance combination 1 
D Sting-balance combination 2 
— Predicted values 



.54 
.52 
.50 




-250 



-200 



-150 



-100 -50 

T. T 

Figure 6, Normal-force bending coefficients. 



50 



100 



2.5 



2.4 



x10-^ 



2.3 



- O 



K^, deg/in-lb 



2.2 



2.1 



2.0 



O Sting-balance combination 1 
— Predicted values 



-L 



J 



-250 -200 -150 -100 -50 50 100 

T.°F 



Figure 7. Pitching-moment bending coefficients. 



rw>sA 

Nat'Cjridl AetnncJulics and 



Report Documentation Page 



1. Report No. 

NASA TM-4157 



2. Government Accession No. 



4. Title and Subtitle 

Cryogenic Temperature Effects on Sting-Balance Deflections in the 
National Transonic Facility 



7. Author(s) 

Thomas G. Popernack, Jr., and Jerry B. Adcock 



9. Performing Organization Name and Address 

NASA Langley Research Center 
Hampton, VA 23665-5225 



12. Sponsoring Agency Name and Address 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Washington, DC 20546-0001 



3. Recipient's Catalog No. 



5, Report Date 

January 1990 



6. Performing Organization Code 



8. Performing Organization Report No. 

L- 16626 



10. Work Unit No. 

505-61-01-01 



11. Contract or Grant No. 



13. Type of Report and Period Covered 

Technical Memorandum 



14. Sponsoring Agency Code 



15. Supplementary Notes 



16. Abstract 

An investigation was conducted in the National TVansonic Facihty (NTF) at Langley Research 
Center to document the change in sting-balance deflections from ambient to cryogenic temper- 
atures. Space limitations in some NTF models do not allow the use of onboard angle-of-attack 
instrumentation. To obtain angle-of-attack data, predetermined sting-balance bending data must 
be combined with arc-sector angle measurements. Presently, obtaining pretest sting-balance data 
requires several cryogenic cycles and cold loadings over a period of several days. A method of re- 
ducing the required calibration time is to obtain only ambient-temperature sting-balance bending 
data and to correct for changes in material properties at cryogenic temperatures. To validate this 
method, two typical NTF sting-balance combinations were tested. The test results show excellent 
agreement with the predicted values, and the repeatability of the data was 0.01°. 



17. Key Words (Suggested by Authors(s)) 

National Transonic Facility 

Cryogenic 

Sting bending 



18. Distribution Statement 

Unclassified — Unhmited 



Subject Category 09 



19. Security Classif. (of this report) 

Unclassified 



20. Secm-ity Classif. (of this page) 

Unclassified 



21. No. of Pages 

9 



22 



Price 

A02 



NASA FORM 1626 OCT 86 

For sale by the National Technical Information Service, Springfield, Virgmia 22161-2171 



NASA-Langley, 1990 



National Jkimm 
Space AdmiftistiBtion 
Code NTT-4 

Washington, ^.C. 
20546-0001 



Pf^rtatty for Private Us<, S3I30 



rVIASA 



