REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 


Form Approved 
0MB No. 0704-0188 


Public rqwrting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average I hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and 
con^Ieting and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden to Department of 
Defense, Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports (0704-0188), 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302. Respondents should be aware that 
notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid 0MB control number. PLEASE DO NOT 
RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS. 


1. REPORT DATE (DD-MM-YYYY) 2. REPORT TYPE 3. DATES COVERED (From - To) 

16-09-2002 Journal Article 30 Oct 2001 - 1 Jul 2002 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 

F29601-00-D-0204 


SIM: The Satellite and Missile Mission Simulator 


6. AUTHOR(S) 

F. Cid, J. Houchard, M. Puccetti, J. Cabanillia, R. Orth 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

AFRL/DEBI (Det 15) 

535 Lipoa Parkway Ste 200 
Kihei, HI 96753 


5b. GRANT NUMBER 

N/A 


5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 

63444F 


5d. PROJECT NUMBER 

4868/4983 


5e. TASK NUMBER 

B3 


5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 

BH 


8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT 
NUMBER 

Det 15 AFRL 0205 


9. SPONSORING / MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 


10. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S ACRONYM(S) 


11- SPONSOR/MONITOR’S REPORT 


12. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 


20040315 003 


13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

F. Cid, J. Houchard, M. Puccetti, J. Cabanillia, R. Orth," SIM: The Satellite and Missile Mission," 2002 AMOS Technical 
Conference, Maui, Hawaii, 16-20 September 2002. 


14. ABSTRACT 

The Simulator (SIM) system is a powerful tool that can be used to develop, recreate, and test satellite and missile missions. 
SIM provides a geometrically correct focal-plane scene of the simulated sky for multiple mount and sensor types. It is 
operational in two modes: Pure and Hybrid. The pure-mode SIM simulates everything (time and pointing angles). Hybrid¬ 
mode SIM interfaces with actual telescope tracking and mount control software to obtain pointing angles and uses an IRIG-B 
signal for the time. Based upon an event-driven architecture, the SIM system provides an easy way to “script” simple to 
complex target sequences as viewed from a selected site, mount, and sensor combination. These scripted target sequences can 
be executed for viewing and edited, as necessary, using pure-mode SIM. They may also be used to support actual target 
acquisition and data collection missions in the hybrid-mode. 


15. SUBJECT TERMS 


The Simulator (SIM) system, satellite and missile missions, AEOS, telescope, MSSS. 


16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 



c. THIS PAGE 


Unclassified 


17. LIMITATION 

OF ABSTRACT 

18. NUMBER 
OF PAGES 

19a. NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON 
Florencio Cid 

Unlimited 

12 

19b. TELEPHONE NUMBER (include area 
code) 

(808) 874-1635 


Standard Forin 298 (Rev. 8-98) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std. 239.18 




























SIM: The Satellite and Missile Mission Simulator 


Florencio Cid, Jeff Houchard, Matt Puccetti, Juan Cabanilla 
Boeing, LTS Inc. 

Capt. Robin Orth 

Air Force Research Laboratory, DET15, Directed Energy Directorate 


Abstract 

The Simulator (SIM) system is a powerful tool that can be used to develop, recreate, and test 
satellite and missile missions, SIM provides a geometrically correct focal-plane scene of the 
simulated sky for multiple mount and sensor types. It is operational in two modes: Pure and 
Hybrid. The pure-mode SIM simulates everything (time and pointing angles). Hybrid-mode 
SIM interfaces with actual telescope tracking and mount control software to obtain pointing 
angles and uses an IRIG-B signal for the time. Based upon an event-driven architecture, the 
SiM system provides an easy way to “script” simple to complex target sequences as viewed 
from a selected site, mount, and sensor combination. These scripted target sequences can be 
executed for viewing and edited, as necessary, using pure-mode SIM. They may also be used 
to support actual target acquisition and data collection missions in the hybrid-mode. 

An overview of the SIM architecture and description of its capabilities will be presented. 


1. Introduction 

The SIMulator (SIM) system is a 3-dimensional geometric simulation tool that uses information 
from star catalogs and space object catalogs to simulate the sky, in real-time, as viewed through 
a selected mount-sensor combination. As such, it is a powerful tool that can be used to 
develop, preview, recreate, and test satellite and missile missions. 

This paper describes the architecture and capabilities of the SIM system and how these 
capabilities are applied at the MSSS (Maui Space Surveillance Site). 


2. The SIM System 

SIM is based upon the WorldView sytem that was originally developed in 1992. Various high- 
level missions have been supported by WorldView requiring extensive experimental validations 
of accuracy. The SiM software is written in C++ using object oriented programming techniques 
and is based upon on a general purpose, three-dimensional object database that uses a master 
Earth Centered Inertial (ECl) coordinate system as a reference frame and produces a variety of 
special purpose local coordinate systems to render the simulated view. This allows SIM to 
easily simulate a complex focal plane scene relative to specific telescope-sensors and sky¬ 
viewing conditions. The SIM system simulates geometric views of the celestial sphere and 
near-earth space as seen from the sensor focal plane of the telescope. Positions of celestiai 
objects such as stars, planets, the sun, the moon, and satellites as viewed from specific sites 
and telescope sensors are calculated. These calculations are based upon star field databases. 


'Ei\/!ENTA 


Approved for Public Release 
Distribution Unlimited 


ephemeris calculations for the planets and two-body {SGP4) propagators for satellites and 
missiles. 

SIM is operable in 2 modes: Pure Mode and Hybrid-Mode. 

In a pure-mode simulation, everything is simulated. No telescope hardware is used in the 
simulation. The simulation time and time increment are user specified. The simulated mount¬ 
sensor combination tracks targets of interest via the SATELLITE TRACK EVENT (refer to 
Section 4). Thus, a perfect track is simulated. 

In contrast to a pure-mode simulation, a hybrid simulation does include telescope hardware in 
the loop. The simulation time is synchronized to an IRIG-B time signal. Thus, a hybrid-mode 
simulation is executed in real-time. The simulated telescope is pointed in a direction based 
upon mount coefficients obtained from the OCS (Observatory Control System) mount control 
system. Gimbal coefficients A, B, and C including time TO for each telescope axis are 
required for SIM hybrid simulation mode such that the true pointing angle of the 
telescope can be determined at time T as follows: 


Gimbal Angle 1 = 4+ 5,(r- T^) + C,{T-T^f 

Gimbal Angle 2 = A .2 + B 2 (?' — ^)"i" ^2(^ — ^ 0 } 
Mount Azimuth = 4 


The obtained coefficients can be precisely propagated to any specified time. 

Hybrid-mode simulations are made more realistic via an interface to telescope hardware in the 
loop such as steerable mirrors. The mount angle coefficients and steering mirror positions 
obtained from the mount control system are used by the hybrid-mode SIM to generate an 
accurate simulation of the expected telescope sensor focal plane view. Hybrid mode SIM also 
supports closed loop tracking of desired targets. Track errors are calculated relative to the 
simulated focal plane boresight. These errors may be off-loaded to the mount control system so 
that a target being acquired is centered in the simulated focal plane view boresight. The 
closed loop tracking (including interfaces to the Integrated Mount Control (IMC), and Integrated 
Acquisition and Track (lAT)) is illustrated in Figure 1. 





Figure 1; Hybrid-Mode Closed Loop Tracking Scheme 


Figure 2 illustrates a typical SIM display window. A graphical display of the telescope being 
simulated, the current pointing angles (in degrees), focal plane field of view (in decimal 
degrees), and the current date and time are displayed in the lower right corner. The sensor 
name, field of view, horizontal and vertical flips indicators, and rotation are provided at the lower 
left corner of the window. The sky scene being displayed takes into account all 3D rotations 
induced by mount movements. Satellites are displayed as simple three-dimensional polygons 
that are velocity oriented and are scaled according to their slant range from the telescope. 

Stars corresponding to the currently selected star catalog that can be seen within the current 
field of view are displayed and scaled according to their magnitude. Several star catalogs are 
supported and are graphically displayed relative to brightness. 







Figure 2: SIM Display Window 


During execution of a simulation, settings such as the current sensor, field of view, sensor 
rotation, horizontal and vertical flips, and star display can be changed on the fly using the SIM 
control GUI (Graphical User Interface) shown in Figure 3. In the pure-mode, changing of the 
observation site and telescope is possible. The simulation time and time increments can also 
be changed. Execution of a pure-mode simulation is controlled using VCR like controls that can 
start, stop, and step the current simulation. In the hybrid-mode a powerful satellite 
discrimination capability is available which displays ail known satellites within the simulated 
sensor field of view (in addition to those included in the simulation script, SIMscripf). This 
capability may be selectively enabled or disabled as indicated in the GUI. 











































Figure 3: Simulation Control GUI 


3. Simulation Paradigm 

As mentioned earlier, the simulation capability of SIM is based upon WorldView, which is an 
event-driven simulation tool that uses a Gregorian calendar and a user specified time increment. 
Simulation events that represent particular simulation actions are parsed from a simulation- 
script (SIMscript) file and loaded into an event queue for execution. The loaded simulation 
events are time-ordered according to their execution time within the event queue. Depending 
on the simulation events that are used in a simulation script, the event-driven simulation 
paradigm is capable of executing very simple to very complex simulation scenarios. 












































































































































































































































































































































During the simulation, the event queue is checked to see if the event time of the next simulation 
event has been reached. If so, then that simulation event as well as any other events at the top 
of the queue whose event times have been met, is executed. At the same time, positions of aii 
sateliites in the simuiation are updated using a two-body propagator. The position of the 
steering mirror and the pointing angles of the telescope are also updated. Finally, the simulated 
view is redrawn to reflect the updated positions of aii objects that can be seen within the current 
fieid of view. These steps are repeated iteratively for each increment of time (user specified or 
signal supplied) through the duration of the simulation. Hybrid mode iterations are executed in 
reai-time. To support changes to certain simulation settings (such as changing sensors, turning 
the star dispiay on or off, star magnitude cutoff adjustments) that are performed on the fly, the 
simuiation events (cailed immediate events) are inserted at the very front of the event queue for 
immediate execution. This paradigm is depicted in Figure 4 below. 



Figure 4: Simulation scheme 























4. Supported Simulation Events 


The following simulation events are currently supported by SIM. 

SATELLITE LAUNCH EVENT 

Defines a new satellite or missile from a specified ECl state vector. This vector is propagated 
using a two-body propagator. 

SATELLITE MIRV EVENT 

Causes a secondary vehicle to be launched from a parent satellite or missile at a specified time 
and velocity. The velocity vector is defined relative to the parent body reference frame. 

SATELLITE MIRV EL EVENT 

Similar to the SATELLITE MIRV EVENT except that the secondary vehicle Is launched at a 
specified topocentric elevation. 

SATELLITE TRACK EVENT 

This event causes the simulated telescope to be pointed directly at a specified satellite or 
missile at a specified time. The simulated view will follow the specified object until the next 
satellite track event is encountered. Positions of all other simulated objects will be calculated 
from this view. 

SATELLITE TRACE EVENT 

This event draws a trace path of where a specified satellite has been or will be in the simulated 
view at a user specified time. 

SATELLITE ORIENT EVENT 

This event causes the re-orientation of a specified satellite or missile via a given 3X3 ECl 
transformation matrix. 

SATELLITE MANEUVER EVENT 

This event causes a specified satellite or missile to execute a roll, pitch, or yaw maneuver at a 
specified time. 

DISPLAY TALO EVENT 

Primarily used to support missile simulations, this event initiates the Time After Liftoff (in 
seconds) to be displayed in the simulated view. 

STARPLOTTER EVENT 

This event enables and disables the star field display in the simulated view. The displayed are 
stars are scaled in size relative to their magnitude. To support on the fly simulation setting 
changes, this event can be executed as an immediate event. 

PLANETPLOTER EVENT 

This event enables and disables the display of planets in the simulated view. To support on the 
fly simulation setting changes, this event can be executed as an immediate event. 

DATALOG EVENT 

This event initiates the logging of tabular output such as state vectors, site, telescope, and 
execution of simulation events during a simulation to a log file. 


CHANGE TIMESTEP EVENT 

Intended to be used only for the pure-mode SIM, this event changes the current time 
step/increment setting to a new setting that is specified. To support on the fly simulation setting 
changes, this event can be executed as an immediate event. 

ANGLE SEPARATION EVENT 

This event logs the simulation date and time in which the angle separation (user specified) 
between two specified satellites/missiles has been reached. 

RANGE SEPERATION EVENT 

Similar the ANGLE SEPARATION EVENT, this event logs the simulation date and time in which 
the range separation (user specified) between two specified satellites/missiles has been 
reached. 

DISPLAY TELESCOPE EVENT 

This event enables (or disables) the displaying of the telescope of the simulated view. To 
support on the fly simulation setting changes, this event is executed as an immediate event. 

STAR CUTOFF CHANGE EVENT 

If the star display is enabled, the user may adjust the star magnitude cutoff so that only stars 
with a magnitude less than or equal to the star magnitude cutoff are displayed in the simulated 
view. To support on the fly simulation setting changes, this event is executed as an immediate 
event. 

SENSOR CHANGE EVENT 

This event performs a change of the current sensor to a sensor that is specified. All geometric 
effects (horizontal and/or vertical flips, rotations, and field of view) are updated in order to 
accurately simulate the specified sensor. To support on the fly simulation setting changes, this 
event is executed as an immediate event. 

FOV (Field Of View) CHANGE EVENT 

This event adjusts the current field of view to a field of view that is specified. To support on the 
fly simulation setting changes, this event is executed as an immediate event. 

HORIZONTAL DISPLACEMENT EVENT 

This event adjusts the current horizontal displacement in the horizontal direction. To support on 
the fly simulation setting changes, this event is executed as an immediate event. 

VERTICAL DISPLACEMENT EVENT 

This event adjusts the current vertical displacement in the vertical direction. To support on the 
fly simulation setting changes, this event is executed as an immediate event. 

HORIZONTAL FLIP EVENT 

This event performs a horizontal flip on the simulated view. To support on the fly simulation 
setting changes, this event is executed as an immediate event. 

VERTICAL FLIP EVENT 

This event performs a vertical flip on the simulated view. To support on the fly simulation setting 
changes, this event is executed as an immediate event. 




SlMscript files may be created or edited using the SIM Main/Script Editor GUI shown in Figure 5 
below. This GUI contains menus that support file control functions (Open, Save, Close, Delete, 
etc.). Menus to switch star catalogs and access other SIM GUIs are also provided. Display 
fields that identify the current star catalog, SlMscript file being accessed, and the list of 
simulation events that are scripted in the SlMscript file are also shown. 



Figure 5; SIM Main/Script Editor GUI 


5. Applications of SIM at the MSSS 

SIM is currently being used at the Maui Space Surveillance Site (MSSS) to support operations. 

The pure-mode SIM is used to preview upcoming and planned satellite and missile missions 
and to recreate and analyze already completed missions. The ability to preview and recreate 
missions has been instrumental in helping to determine requirements for new telescope 
sensors. 

The hybrid-mode SIM is used to support OCS controlled telescopes at the MSSS. It is used to 
prepare and train the operations crew for upcoming satellite and missile missions. Figure 6 
illustrates the SIM Suspended Events GUI. This GUI is used to select scripted simulation 
events to be suspended (i.e. omitted) from the simulation prior to execution of a SlMscript file. 












































































































































































































































































































The suspended events can be selected for immediate execution at a time that is different from 
the originaiiy specified execution time. This capability is a very powerful training feature since 
helps to simulate any non-ideal situation(s) that may be encountered during an actual mission. 
Hybrid-mode SIM is used to support target acquisition during actual missions by providing 
telescope operators with a graphical display showing the expected position of the desired 
target(s). The simulated view generated by the hybrid-mode SIM can be overlaid with live 
sensor video to provide an actual vs. expected position of the target being acquired. The hybrid 
-mode SIM also has the ability to correlate/discriminate between the desired target(s) and other 
space objects by displaying any other satellites (in addition to the satellites that have been 
scripted in the current simulation) that may be in the field of view. 



6. SIM Improvements 

• Library of 3-dimensional satellite models to be used in simulations 

• Solar illumination of satellite models. 

• Automated generation of SIMscript fdes to support missile missions 

• Fixed wide angle simulation view to support viewing of target clusters 

• Model thrusting targets 





















































7. Summary 


The architecture and capabilities of the SIM system contains many of the components that are 
necessary to support complex space simulations. Its event-driven scheme and object oriented 
design allows for additional capability to be easily added. In addition to its current applications 
in supporting space surveillance missions, its capabilities allow for the support of other activities 
in many areas of space surveillance including mission planning since many missions are 
preplanned and extensively rehearsed due to the one-time, high cost nature of space 
surveillance experiments. 


