r*j] Software 


(# JWST Wavefront 
Control Toolbox 

A Matlab-based toolbox has been de- 
veloped for the wavefront control and 
optimization of segmented optical sur- 
faces to correct for possible misalign- 
ments of James Webb Space Telescope 
(JWST) using influence functions. The 
toolbox employs both iterative and 
non-iterative methods to converge to 
an optimal solution by minimizing the 
cost function. The toolbox could be 
used in either of constrained and un- 
constrained optimizations. The control 
process involves 1 to 7 degrees-of-free- 
dom perturbations per segment of pri- 
mary mirror in addition to the 5 de- 
grees of freedom of secondary mirror. 

The toolbox consists of a series of 
Matlab/ Simulink functions and mod- 
ules, developed based on a "wrapper" 
approach, that handles the interface 
and data flow between existing commer- 
cial optical modeling software packages 
such as Zemax and Code V. The limita- 
tions of the algorithm are dictated by 
the constraints of the moving parts in 
the mirrors. 

Thiswork wasdonebyShahram Ron Shiri 
and David L. Aronsten of Goddard Space 
Flight Center. For further information, con- 
tact the Goddard Innovative Partnerships Of- 
fice (301) 286-5810. G SC -15567-1 


@ Java Image 1/ 0 for VICAR, 
PDS, and I SIS 

This library, written in Java, supports 
input and output of images and meta- 
data (labels) in the VICAR, PDS image, 
and ISIS-2 and ISIS-3 file formats. Three 
levels of access exist. 

The first level comprises the low-level, 
direct access to the file. This allows an 
application to read and write specific 
image tiles, lines, or pixels and to ma- 
nipulate the label data directly. This 
layer is analogous to the C-language 
"VICAR Run-Time Library" (RTL), 
which is the image 1/ 0 library for the 
(C/ C-H/ Fortran) VICAR image pro- 
cessing system from JPL Ml PL (Multi- 
mission Image Processing Lab). This 
low-level library can also be used to read 


and write labeled, uncompressed im- 
ages stored in formats similar to VICAR, 
such as ISIS-2 and -3, and a subset of 
PDS (image format). 

The second level of access involves 
two codecs based on Java Advanced Im- 
aging (JAI) to provide access to VICAR 
and PDS images in a file-format-inde- 
pendent manner. JAI is supplied by Sun 
Microsystems as an extension to desktop 
Java, and has a number of codecs for for- 
mats such as GIF, TIFF, JPEG, etc. Al- 
though Sun has deprecated the codec 
mechanism (replaced by IIO), it is still 
used in many places. The VICAR and 
PDS codecs allow any program written 
using the JAI codec spec to use VICAR 
or PDS images automatically, with no 
specific knowledge of the VI CAR or PDS 
formats. Support for metadata (labels) is 
included, but is format-dependent. The 
PDS codec, when processing PDS im- 
ages with an embedded VIAR label 
("dual-labeled images,” such as used for 
MER), presents the VICAR label in a 
new way that is compatible with the 
VICAR codec. 

The third level of access involves 
VICAR, PDS, and ISIS Image 1/ 0 plug- 
ins. The Java core includes an "Image 
I/O” (IIO) package that is similar in 
concept to the JAI codec, but is newer 
and more capable. Applications written 
to the IIO specification can use any 
image format for which a plug-in exists, 
with no specific knowledge of the for- 
mat itself. 

T his work was done by Robert G . Deen and 
Steven R. Levoe of Caltech for NASA's Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. For more informa- 
tion, contact iaoffice@jpl.nasa.gov. 

T his software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Daniel Broderick of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
danielb@caltech.edu. Refer to NPO-47184. 


@ X-Band Acquisition 
Aid Software 

The X-band Acquisition Aid (AAP) 
software is a low-cost acquisition aid for 
the Deep Space Network (DSN) anten- 
nas, and is used while acquiring a space- 
craft shortly after it has launched. When 
enabled, the acquisition aid provides 


corrections to the antenna-predicted tra- 
jectory of the spacecraft to compensate 
for the variations that occur during the 
actual launch. The AAP software also 
provides the correctionsto the antenna- 
predicted trajectory to the navigation 
team that uses the corrections to refine 
their model of the spacecraft in order to 
produce improved antenna-predicted 
trajectories for each spacecraft that 
passes over each complex. 

The software provides an automated 
Acquisition Aid receiver calibration, and 
provides graphical displays to the opera- 
tor and remote viewers via an Ethernet 
connection. It has a Web server, and the 
remote workstations use the Firefox 
browser to view the displays. At any given 
time, only one operator can control any 
particular display in order to avoid con- 
flicting commands from more than one 
control point. The configuration and 
control is accomplished solely via the 
graphical displays. The operator does not 
have to remember any commands. Only a 
few configuration parameters need to be 
changed, and can be saved to the appro- 
priate spacecraft-dependent configura- 
tion file on the AAP's hard disk. 

AAP automates the calibration se- 
quence by first commanding the an- 
tenna to the correct position, starting 
the receiver calibration sequence, and 
then providing the operator with the op- 
tion of accepting or rejecting the new 
calibration parameters. If accepted, the 
new parameters are stored in the appro- 
priate spacecraft-dependent configura- 
tion file. The calibration can be per- 
formed on the Sun, greatly expanding 
the window of opportunity for calibra- 
tion. The spacecraft traditionally used 
for calibration is in view typically twice 
per day, and only for about ten minutes 
each pass. 

T his work was doneby M ichael ]. Britcliffe 
and Martha M. Strain of Caltech and 
M ichael Wert of ITT for NASA's Jet Propul- 
sion Laboratory. Further information is con- 
tained in a TSP (seepagel). 

The software used in this innovation is 
available for commercial licensing. Please 
contact Daniel Broderick of theCalifornia In- 
stitute of Technology at danielb@caltech.edu. 
Refer to NPO-47004. 


NASATech Briefs, February 2011 


13 



