


The First Aniiual 



September 24-26,1991 










_^s' ;• 5 ^V/n 


U S. Department of Transportation 
Federal Aviation Administration 


DOT/FAA/RD-91/21 




































t*chnicg|; Rtport Documihtotion Page 


!• Report No* 


2. Government Accession No. 


3. Recipient's Cetolog No. 


DOT/FAA/IU)^91/21 


4* Title ond Subtitle 

Pro,ceedlngs of The First Annual International Satellite 
.^Surveillance and Communication Symposium, 

September 24-26, 1991, 


. Aothor^s)' 

Joseph Fee, .SOTposlum Co-Chairperson 
ffitsr t l S . 8SQ 8lii a» j Syny dslum Cd^hairperf 

9. P.rferming Orgonizotion Nsm* ond Addr.si 

Federal Aviation Administration 
R&D Oceanic Program Office, ARD-20 
Washington, D.C. 20591 


' 12, Sponigring Ag.ncy Norn* and Addrttz 

Federal Aviation Administration 
R&D Oceanic Program Office, ARD-20 
V^ashington, D.C. 20591 




5. Report Dote 

September 1991 


6. P.rfarming Organization Cod* 

ARD-20 


8. Parformiiig Organization R*port ,No. 


10, Work Unit No, (TRAIS) 


11, Contract or Cront No, 


13, Typ* of Report and Poriod Covorod 


Proceedings 


14, Sponsoring Agtney Cod* 



Id, Abstract 

Recent technological advancements provide the aviation community with the opportunity 
to significantly improve t^e level of air traffic services. Automatic Dependent 
Surveillance (ADS) in conjunction with Satellite Communication (SATCOM) is the 
vehicle to accommodate real growth in oceanic traffic while preserving the excellent 
safety aspects demanded by the aviation user community. To realize these new 
services, it is necessary to Introduce satellite-based communication into the Air 
Traffic Service (ATS) inventory. Aircraft position reports will be relayed to ground 
controllers via satellite. Two way data link via satellite will augment and 
ultimately replace the present HF communications. These two programs, ADS and 
SATCOM together form the basis for improved oceanic air traffic service. 

This symposium proceedings provides an overview of international programs and 
developments related to ADS/SATCOM. Papers provide information on engineering 
trials, international coordination activities, development of standards and user 
programs. The symposium proceedingspijovides papers on current ADS/SATCOM 
developments by government and industry of participating countries and to project 
the future activities required for successful aiupjementation of the ADS/SATCOM 
programs. 


17. K«y Words 

Automatic Dependent Surveillance, ADS 
Satellite Communications, SATCOM 


18. Distribution Stotomont 

Document is available to the U.S. public 
through the National Technical Information 
Service, Springfield, VA 22161. 


19, Socurity CIgssif, (of this roport) 

Unclassified 


20. Socurity Clossif. (of this pogo) 

Unclassified 


21« No. of Pogts 22* Price 


Form DOT F 1700.7 (8-72) 


Reproduction of completed page authorized 






















THi First Annual 


' ■ . 




nd Com 


M'iMi'SmiM/. 

■'■ . ■/y//yA/Z'//////. 




mm 












mtJSi VftMMt 

WwMMm 


















Notice 


This document is disseminated under the sponsorship of the U.S. Department of 
Transportation'*!^ the interest of information exchange. ’]^e U.S. Government assumes no 
liability for the contents or use thereof. 


PREFACE 



The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) is pleased to welcome you to The First Annual 
International Satellite Surveillance and Communication Symposium at the FAA Technical 
Center in Atlantic City, New Jersey. 

Last year’s highly successful Automatic Dependent Surveillance Symposium has been 
expanded this year to include the Federal Aviation Administration’s Satellite 
Communication (SATCOM) Program. 

"ADS/SATCOM Today and Tomorrow" 

ADS - Recent technological advancements provide the aviation community with the 
opportunity to significantly improve the level of air traffic services. ADS in coi^junction 
with Satellite Communication is the vehicle to accommodate real growth in oceanic traffic 
while preserving the excellent safety aspects demanded by the aviation user community. 

SATCOM - To realize these new services, it is necessary to introduce satellite-based 
communication into the Air Traffic Service (ATS) inventory. Aircraft position reports will 
be relayed to ground controllers via satellite. Two way data link via satellite will augment 
and ultimately replace the present HF communications. These two programs, ADS and 
SATCOM together form the basis for improved oceanic air traffic service. 

The objectives of the symposium are to: 

• Coordinate ADS and SATCOM developments and applications throughout the 
aeronautical community; 

• Review and discuss current progress, issues, international testing and developments 
associated with ADS/SATCOM programs; and 

• Provide a forum for both industry and government to present and discuss status and 
implementation issues. 

This symposium should provide you with an overview of international programs and 
developments related to ADS/SATCOM. These will be discussiom on engineering trials, 
international coordination activities, development of standards and user programs. The 
keynote of this symposium will focus on the benefits of the FAA ADS/SATCOM programs 
for the aviation community. The theme of this symposium is to inform the attendees of 
current ADS/SATCOM developments by government and industry of participating countries 
and to project the future activities required for successful implementation of the 
ADS/SATCOM programs. 






TAKT E OF CONTENTS 


Symposium Co-Chairperson - Joseph J.Fee 1 

Symposium Co-Chairperson - Peter L. Massoglia 2 

Symposium Technical Chairperson - Robert D. Till 4 

OPENING SESSION Agenda 6 

Welcome Address - Harvey B. Safeer, Director, Federal Aviation Administration 7 

Technical Center 

Keynote Address - Joseph M. Del Balzo, Executive Director for System Development 10 
Federal Aviation Administration 

Introductory Address - Martin T. Pozesky, Associate Administrator for System 11 

Engineering and Development, Federal Aviation Administration 

Looking Beyond ADS; How Do We Fill in the Rest of the Squares? - Joseph J. Fee, 15 
Oceanic Systems Manager, Federal Aviation Administration 


FAA Research and Development Oceanic Program Office - David W. Ford, Research 25 
and Development Oceanic Program Manager, Federal Aviation Administration 

Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) Program Summary - Peter L. Massoglia, 29 
ADS Program Manager, Federal Aviation Administration (Co-authors Lonnie H. Bowlin, 
President, AERA and Guy T. Germana, Chief Systems Engineer, AERA) 

Satellite Communications "SATCOM" Project Summary - Joseph F. Dorfler, Satellite 41 
Program Manager, Federal Aviation Administration 

Overview of International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Panel Activities - 48 

Francisco Castro-Rodriguez, Secretary for the ICAO ADS Panel 

International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) ADS Panel Activities - W. Frank 56 
Price, Manager, International Procedures Branch, Federal Aviation Administration 
(Co-author Faye L Francy, Program Manager, MiTech, Inc.) 

International Program Summary - Peter L. Massoglia, ADS Program Manager, Federal 66 
Aviation Administration (Co-author - William J. Budurka, Senior Systems Engineer, 

MiTech, Inc.) 

Air Transport Association (ATA) - Raymond J. Hilton, Director, Air Traffic 88 

Management, Air Transport Association of America 


V 






TARLK OF CONTENTS 


SESSION ONE: TRIALS AND DEMONSTRATIONS Agenda 91 

Session Chairperson - Ronald E. Morgan, Air Traffic Manager Advanced Systems and 93 
Facilities Division, Federal Aviation Administration 

Pacific Engineering Trials - Frank L. Lorge, Electronics Engineer, Federal Aviation 94 
Administration Technical Center 

Japanese Trials - Hiroki Takeda, Special Assistant to the Director, Radio Engineering 102 
Division, Air Traffic Services Department, Japanese Civil Aviation Bureau 

Australian Experiments in Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) including the 110 
Pacific Engineering Trials (PET) - H. Brian O’Keefe, Acting General Manager, Civil 


Aviation Authority, Australia (Co-author - Graeme Challinor, Manager, Analysis Research 
and Development, Civil Aviation Authority, Australia) 

French SATCOM Program and Related International Activities - Pascal Senard, 118 

SATCOM Project Manager, French Direction Generale de I’Aviatipn Civile, Service 
Technique de la Navigation Aerienne (Go-author - P. Gautier, Satellite 
Communication Engineer, French DGAC) 

Digitized Voice Trials - Teresa A. Anderson, Air/Ground Service Planner, Engineering 126 
Services Management, Aeronautical Radio, Inc. (ARINC) 

ADS Development in Canada - Norman F. Dimock, Applications Development Engineer, 132 
Technical Services, Transport Canada Aviation (Co-author Donald F. MacLean, 

Supervisor, Flight Data Processing, Air Traffic Services, Transport Canada Aviation) 

ADS Communications: A Cornerstone - George A., Cobley, P.E., Technical Director, 142 
Communications Systems, Rockwell International 

Aeronautical Mobile Satellite Services ESA/SITA Aircom Service Trials Programme - 150 

Graham C. Lake, Assistant Director, International Relations, Societe Internationale 
de Telecommunications Aeronautiques (SITA) (Co-author - A. Jongejans and 
P. Nguyen, F.SA/SITA) 


vi 







TABLE OF CONTENTS 


SESSION TWO; PROGRAMS, STANDARDS AND 165 

INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES Agenda 

Session Chairperson - Yaroslav Kaminsky, Special Assistant, Satellite Program Office, 166 
Federal Aviation Administration 

FAA Aeronautical Satellite Communications Project Plan - Yaroslav Kaminsky, Special 167 
Assistant, Satellite Program Office, Federal Aviation Administration (Co-authors - 
Joseph F. Dorfler, Satellite Program Manager, Federal Aviation Administration; Jim 
Nussbaum, Manager, SATCOM Program, CTA) 

Aeronautical Mobile Satellite Service (AMSS) Message & Voice Access Request 180 

Transit Delay - Thomas F. Dehel, Group Engineer, CTA 

An Improved Periodic Reporting System by Satellite - Dr. Keith Smith, Manager, 191 

Engineering, Aeronautical Services Division, INMARSAT 

Satellite Data Link Research and Development Program in Japan - Hiroki Takeda, 192 
Special Assistant to the Director, Radio Engineering Division, Air Traffic Services 
Department, Civil Aviation Bureau of Japan 

Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics (RTCA) Operational Standards for 203 
ADS Avionics - B. Richard Climie, P.E., Consultant, Honeywell, Inc. 

Airlines Electrical Engineering Committee (AEEC) - Michael D. Rockwell, Senior 205 
Avionics Engineer, ARINC (AEEC Staff) 

Status of the Oceanic Display and Planning System (ODAPS) Program - William L. 206 
Umbaugh, Manager, Automation iBngineering Division, Federal Aviation Administration 

System Improvements Identified by the North Atlantic Systems Planning Group 220 

(NAT/SPG) as Related to the Capabilities of the Oceanic Display and Planning 
System (ODAPS) - Dan H. Iredell, Senior Programmer/Analyst, STX (Co-authors - 
Rajan Srirangarajan, Senior Systems Engineer, STX, and John H. Crimmins, Jr., 

Software Development Manager, STX) 

Panel Discussion; The Status and Interrelationships of Various ADS and 233 

SATCOM Standards 






TAHTM OF CONTENTS 


SESSION THREE: LINK ENVIRONMENT/AVIONICS INTEGRATION Agenda 237 

Session Chairperson - Elizabeth L. Young, PhD, Vice President Aeronautical 239 

Services, COMSAT 

INMARSAT Access Approval - Johnny Nemes, Group Leader, AES Engineering, 240 

INMARSAT 

Operational SATCOM; Moving from Trials to Service - David W. Lipke, 246 

Director of Government Aviation, COMSAT 

The FAA/ARINC Initial Implementation of AMSS - Angus D. McEachen III, 252 

Senior Director, Civil Aviation Services, Aeronautical Radio, Inc., (ARINC) 

SITA Satellite Air Communications Implementation - Graham C. Lake, Deputy 268 

Director International Relations, Societe Internationale de Telecommunications 
Aeronautiques (SITA). 

ADS Integration into the Flight Management Computer - Ingeborg L. Ray, 276 

Staff Engineer, Communications Management, Honeywell, Inc. 

International Organization for Standardization (ISO) Protocols - Stephen P. 282 

Van Trees, Senior Systems Engineer, Stanford Telecommunications 

Panel Discussion: Evolutionary Implementation of Satellite Communications 293 


viii 







TABLE OF CONTENTS 

SESSION FOUR: AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL ENVIRONMENT/CERTIFICATION 295 
Agenda 

Session Chairperson - Jerald M. Davis, Manager for Technical Programs Division, 297 

Flight Standards Service, Federal Aviation Administration 

Near-Term Satellite-Based Oceanic Air Traffic Control: Ground System Description 298 

- Elbert J. Henry, Air Traffic Control Specialist, Federal Aviation Administration 
(Co-author, Mary A. Minnix, Member of the Technical Staff, the MITRE Corporation) 

Impacts of Automation and Data Link Enhancements on Air Traffic Control 310 

- Sabrina F. Saunders-Hodge, Member of the Technical Staff, The MITRE Corporation 
(Co-author - Mark H. Runnels, Member of the Technical Staff, The MITRE Corporation) 

U.S. Air Traffic Control: Past, Present and Future - Amado Colberg, International 322 
Procedures Specialist, Federal Aviation Administration 

Preliminary Evaluation of ADS/Radar Correlation - Christopher N. Andrews, 326 

Member of the Technical Staff, The MITRE Corporation (Co-author - 

Dr. Leonard A. Wojcik, Member of the Technical Staff, The MITRE Corporation) 

Cooperative ADS/AAS Integration - Sherman G, Francisco, Senior Technical Staff 336 
Member, Air Traffic Control Programs, IBM (Co-author Charles A. Kengla, Manager 
Logistics Support, Advanced Automation System Program, IBM). 

Operational Oceanic Air Traffic Control Using Satellite Data Link - Initial 349 

Implementation - Donald Armstrong, Manager, Flight Test Branch, Aircraft 
Certification Office, Federal Aviation Administration 

Panel Discussion: Operational Approval and Implementation of Satellite Data Link 353 
into the Oceanic ATC Environment 

Flight Operations and Air Traffic Integration - Dr. Clyde A. Miller and Dr. George 356 
C. Chang, Federal Aviation Administration 


ix 







TABLE OF CONTENTS 


SESSION FIVE: AIRLINE PROGRAM/OPERATIONS Agenda 365 

Session Chairperson - Raymond J. Hilton, Director Air Traffic Management, Air 367 

Transport Associations of America 

ATA Data Link Human Factors Task - William M. Russell III, Director, Flight 369 

Technology, Air Transport Association of America 

ADS Cost and Benefit Analysis - George J. Couluris, PhD, Consultant, lAT 370 

Benefits to Airlines Presentation by: 

Northwest Airlines - Captain David R. Haapala, 376 

Director Flight Operations Development 

United Airline*' - William B. Cotton, Manager, Air Traffic Systems 377 

American Airlines - Paul R. Ryan, Manager, Operations Systems Planning 378 

Communications Needs of the Future Air Ground Interface - Anthony J. Martin, 384 

Manager, Flight Management Systems and Data Links, Boeing (Co-author - N. D. 

Molloy, Senior Specialist Engineer, Data Link Integration, Boeing) 

Model Human Engineering Approach to Development of Cockpit Data Regulations 408 
- Renate J. Roske-Hofstrand, Chief Human Factors Engineer, Air Traffic Systems 
Division, CTA Incorporated (Co-author - Albert Rehman, Technical Program Manager, 

Federal Aviation Administration; Jack Berkowitz, Staff Human Factors Engineer, Air 
Traffic Systems Division, CTA) 

Data Link Message Set - Wayne W. Aleshire, Manager, Air Traffic Systems, 421 

United Airlines 

Ground Automation Processing of Near Term Oceanic ATC Data Link Messages - 432 

Dr. Yueh-Shiou Wu, Member of the Technical Staff, The MITRE Corporation 
(Presentation by Jane Hamelink, Group Leader, ADS Program, The MITRE Corporation) 

Flight Deck Systems Analysis for Data Link Equipped Aircraft - Virginia L. White, 444 
Senior Staff Engineer, ARINC (Co-author - Richard E. Heinrich, Advanced Satellite 
Systems Engineering, ARINC) 

Potential Use of VHF Data Link (AVPAC) Where Available as an Alternative to 454 

Satellite Communications - Austin L. Snively, Systems Engineer, Communications, 

American Airlines 

Panel Discussion: What are the Airlines Doing? 457 

ATA Data Link Human Factors Task Paper - William M. Russell III 458 


X 


SYMPOSIUM CO-CHAIRPERSON 



Joseph J. Fee 
Oceanic Systems Manager 
Federal Aviation Administration 


Joseph J. Fee joined the FAA Research and Development Service in June 1980. Prior to 
being selected as Oceanic Systems Manager in April 1991, he managed the FAA’s Satellite, 
Data Link and Traffic Alert and Collision Avoidance Systems (TACS) programs. He 
received the Department of Transportation Silver Medal for Meritorious Service for his 
leadership in the TCAS program. Mr. Fee has over thirty years experience in system 
engineering and applied research in navigation, surveillance and communications. He holds 
both an MSEE and BSEE from the University of Kansas. 







SYMPOSIUM CO-CHAIRPERSON 



Peter I., Massoglia 
ADS Program Manager 
Federal Aviation Administration 




Peter L. Massoglia is the Program Manager of the Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) 
Program with the Federal Aviation Administration in Washington, D.C. Mr. Massoglia 
holds a Baccalaureate degree (BSAE) in aeronautical engineering from Saint Louis 
University and has done graduate work at George Washington University. 

In addition to a broad background in flight test engineering of U.S. Army and Navy aircraft 
he has extensive experience in reliability, mamtainability and system standards. He has 
been with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) since 1976 and is presently assigned 
to the Research and Development Service. This organization has principal responsibility 
within the FAA for the development and acquisition of new technology systems. In his 
present assignment Mr. Massoglia is responsible for: the research, development, and 
implementation of the ADS program within the FAA; The development of Memorandum 
of Cooperation (MOC) wi»h various states; and the coordination of international standards. 
















TECHNICAL CHAIRPERSON 



Robert D. Till 

Technical Program Manager 
ADS/SATCOM 

Federal Aviation Administration 


Robert D. Till is a Senior Technical Program Manager in the Airborne Systems Technology 
Branch of the Concepts Analysis Division in the Engineering, Research, and Development 
Service at the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Technical Center. He is responsible 
for the Automatic Dependent Surveillance, Satellite Navigation, and S.. »llite communication 
activities at the Technical Center, He is active in the development of Aeronautical Mobile 
Satellite Service (AMSS) standards domestically and internationally. Mr. Till was the 
navigation program manager supporting the implementation of Loran C for nonprecision 
approaches. 







OPENING SESSION 

Tuesday, September 24,1991 


Master of Ceremonies - Peter L Massoglia, ADS Program Manager, Federal Aviation 
Administration 


9:00 Opening Remarks - Peter L Massoglia, Master of Ceremonies 

Welcome Address and Federal Aviation Administration Technical Center 
Overview Video - Harvey B. Safeer, Director, Federal Aviation Administration 
Technical Center 

Keynote Address - Joseph M. Del Balzo, Executive Director for System 
Development, Federal Aviation Administration 

Introductory Address - Martin T. Pozesky, Associate Administrator for System 
Engineering and Development, Federal Aviation Administration 

Looking Beyond ADS: How Do We Fill in the Rest of the Squares? - Joseph J. 
Fee, Oceanic Systems Manager, Federal Aviation Administration 

10:00 FAA Research and Development Oceanic Program Office - David W. Ford, 

Research and Development Oceanic Program Manager, Federal Aviation 
Administration 

10:10 Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) Program Summary - Peter L. 

Massoglia, ADS Program Manager, Federal Aviation Administration (Co-authors 
Lonnie H. Bowlin, President, AERA and Guy T. Germana, Chief Systems 
Engineer, AERA) 

10:20 BREAK sponsored by MITRE 

10:50 Satellite Communications "SATCOM" Project Summary - Joseph F. Dorfler, 

Satellite Program Manager, Federal Aviation Administration 

11:00 Overview of International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Panel 

Activities - Francisco Castro-Rodriguez, Secretary for the ICAO ADS Panel 

11:15 International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) ADS Panel Activities - W. 

Frank Price, Manager, International Procedures Branch, Federal Aviation 
Administration (Co-author Faye 1. Francy, Program Manager, MiTech, Inc.) 

11:30 International Program Summary - Peter L. Massoglia, ADS Program Manager, 

Federal Aviation Administration 
Countries: 

Australia Canada 

Fiji Iceland 

Japan New Zealand 

Portugal Spain 

Singapore United Kingdom 
USSR 

12:00 Air Transport Association (ATA) - Raymond J. Hilton, Director, Air Traffic 

Management, Air Transport Association of America 


6 









WELCOME SPEAKER 


IL______________J 


Harvey B. Safeer 
Director 

Federal Aviation Administration 
Technical Center 


Harvey B. Safeer is the Director of the Federal Aviation Administration Technical Center. 
As Director, Mr. Safeer is responsible for the FAA activities conducted at the Center to 
advance civil aviation safety through research, development, test and evaluation of future 
air traffic control and safety technologies. He was appointed to this position in May 1990. 

The Technical Center is at the forefront of FAA’s efforts to update and automate the air 
traffic control system through the Capital Investment Plan (CIP). The Technical Center 
serves as the primary test and evaluation site for the advanced technology being developed 
under the advanced automation system, a subsystem of the CIP. All equipment under this 
program will be tested at the Center prior to field implementation. 

A 29-year career federal eniployee, Mr. Safeer has held several senior management positions 
in the FAA, and has worked in other government agencies and private industry. He was 
director of FAA’s Management Control Service, Office of Air Traffic Evaluation and 
Analysis, and Aviation Policy. 

A one-time labor economist, Mr. Safeer also has been manager of the agency’s Quality 
Assurance Staff and the Aviation Policy Analysis Division. Mr. Safeer holds a Master’s 
degree in Economics from the University of Minnesota, and a Bachelor’s degree in 
Economics from the City College of New York. Origittally from Brooklyn, New York, Mr. 
Safeer now resides with his wife Gail in Absecon, New Jersey. He has two daughters, oiie 
son and four grandchildreti. 









WELCOME ADDRESS 


BY 


HARVEY B. SAFEER 

DIRECTOR, FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION (FAA) 
TECHNICAL CENTER 


Welcome to the FAA Technical Center and the First International Satellite Surveillance and 
Communication Symposium. The use of satellite technology for communications, navigation 
and surveillance in aviation is an exciting and rapidly progressing field that has evoked 
tremendous interest. The FAA Technical Center is proud to play a leading role in this 
activity. 

Only two years ago the seeds were planted to develop the Pacific Engineering Trials (PET) 
to demonstrate the potential of satellite communication and Automatic Dependent 
Surveillance to solve a pressing need for improved oceanic communications and surveillance. 
The Pacific Engineering Trials are in progress today, thanks to the cooperation of industry 
and the civil aviation agencies around the world. 

We can be proud of the progress made. As the trials mature more aircraft will be 
equipping with satellite communication avionics. The FAA has awarded the Automatic 
Dependent Surveillance contract which will result in operational Automatic Dependent 
Surveillance function in the oceanic centers in about two years. The future will bring more. 
Satellite position reports will replace the oceanic mandatory High Frequency (HF) radio 
reports. Oceanic air traffic control clearances will be delivered and approved using satellite 
data link. The final benefit will be improved safety and a reduction in oceanic separation 
standards. 

We at the FAA Technical Center are proud to be partners with industry and other 
governments to develop this technology to achieve the operational and econt mic benefits 
that will result. We hope you’ll find the next three days enlightening and rewarding. 


8 







9 


KEYNOTE SPEAKER 


Joseph M. Del Baizo 
Executive Director for 
System Development 
Federal Aviation Administration 


Joseph M. Del Baizo is the Executive Director for System Development at the Federal 
Aviation Administration. Mr. Del Baizo is responsible for the agency’s research, 
engineering and development programs, as well as the acquisition of air traffic control 
systems. His organizational mission is to lead in the development and implementation of 
a global aviation system that exceeds user demand for system safety, capacity and 
productivity. 

Mr. Del Baizo previously served as Director of the FAA’s Technical Center from 1979 
through 1981, then became Director of FAA’s Pastern Region until July ^988, when he 
assumed his current position. 

He began his federal career in 1958 as an electrical engineer with the FAA. He holds a B.S. 
in Electrical Engineering from Manhattan College, an M.S. in Engineering Management 
from Drexel University and an Honorary Doctorate in Aeronautical Science from Embry- 
Riddle Aeronautical University. He also completed a one-year fellowship at Princeton 
University in public policy and international affairs. 









INTRODUCTORY SPEAKER 



Martin T. Pozesky 
Associate Administrator for 
System Engineering and Administration 
Federal Aviation Administration 


Martin T. Pozesky is Associate Administrator for System Engineering and Development for 
the Tederai Aviation Administration (FAA). He is responsible for execctive direction and 
coordination of the systems engineering activities of FAA’s research and capital investment 
programs, including formulation and management of the agency’s Facilities and Equipment 
and Research, Engineering, and Development programs, all leading to the modernization 
of the national airspace system. 

This assignment follows twenty-seven years of Federal government service where Mr. 
Pozesky successfully directed several large-scale, multi-million dollar programs involving 
command and control, radar surveillance, and aeronautical telecommunications for the 
Federal Aviation Administration and the Department of the Navy. This experience includes 
providing management direction for a wide range of system development and 
implementation programs in air traffic control, data processin^> and automation, radar and 
sensor systems, avionics and flight control, meteorology and weaiher systems, and display 
technology. 


Mr. Pozesky hidds a P>achelor’s Degree in Electrical Engineering and a Master’s Degree in 
Engineering Management. lie is the recipient of mnnerous professional and academic 
lionuih, including the I’residetU’s Meritorious Executive Award, the Secretary of 
1 ransijortation’s (iold Medal for Outstanding la?adership, and the Air Iraffic Control 
Association's prestigious (^tesada Award for Outstanding Contributions to its fiiduslry. 


\ nuni!»er of I'au Beta Pin, the Institute of Electronic and Electrical Engineers, the 
Aiimican Management Xvmciation, Armed loues Comnumicatiuns and Electronics 
\ssui lalui!!, !iie \ii' haftic Cuntroi Associatioii. Mr, Pozesky is active in tiiese and other 
[Ot'lr','ii.il,il cMgiuct f iiig a.ml aei'oiiauiica! eveiiK hcUi throoghoot the couiUrv. 








The 80's Were Great 
The 90’sWiU Be Better 
(abstract) 
by 

Martin T. Pozesky 
Associate Administrator 
for 

System Eo^eeiing and Devdopment 


Ten years ago, specifically during the summer 
and fall of 1981, we were franucly busy 
crating the original National Airspace System 
Plan, benevolently known since then as the 
"Brown Book." We went through endless 
reviews of the multitude of programs with 
Administrator Helms and the various staffs 
until it was finally completed. 

The document was totdiy embraced by 
Congress and the other members of the air 
transportation community. As such> this 
document, and the succeeding annual updates, 
have become the "road map" of FAA's major 
engineering effort in the upgrading of the 
existing systems. The "Brown Book" provided 
the 20 yeai' FAA program plans, primarily for 
the terrestrial systems and included; 

• System Demand 

• ATC Systems 
~ En Route 
- Terminal 

• Ground-to-Air Systems 

• Interfacility Communication Systems 

• Maintenance and Operations Support 
Systems 

« Other Capital Needs 

• Transition 

During the 80's, we have achieved a large 
number of major accomplishments, with more 
than 25% of the original NAS Plan Projects 
completed and most of the remaining are in the 
production/implementation phase. Some of the 


more visible include; 

• Microwave Landing Systems (MLS) 

• Advanced Automation System (AAS) 

• Automated Radar Terminal Systems 
(ARTS) upgrading 

• Flight Service Automation Systems 
(FSAS). - 

• National Airspace Data Interchange 
Network (NADIJ^ II 

• Remote Maintenance Monitoring Systems 
(RMMS) 

The 80*s, as can be stien from this list of major 
activities, have been naturally focused on the 
terrestrial side of FAA's interests because of 
the urgency of operational requirements. -Now 
the current interest is shifting to the Oceanic 
activities as the estimates for projected growth: 
over both the Atlantic and Pacific basins are 
significant, There is a major shift in emphasis 
by the FA A as well as the international 
community to the utilization of satellites. This 
has reflected major technological advances in 
the areas of: 

^ Surveillance 
- Communication 
Navigation 

These, in turn, will have a major impact on: 

Separation Standards 
Capacity Improvement 
Increase Efficiency 


12 






next two and a half days here at the 
symposium will unfold what has been 
accomplished, what's being planned and how 
it will be executed. The 90's will be another 
exciting decade. 


- Cost reductions 

- Increased reliability and life expectancy 
Expanded user utilization 

Specifically some of the FAA's satellite 
suiV'^illance and communication developmental 
activities include: 

- Satellite Communication (SATCOM) 

Program 

- Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ASD) 
Program 

- Oceanic Display and Planning System 
(ODAPS) 

- Dynamic Ocearuc Tracking System 
(DOTS) 

- Experimental Testing 

In supporting this effort, the FAA has 
established a very close "coordination network" 
with a large variety of interested and 
participating organizations: 

- International governments 

- United Nation's Intemation Civil Aviation 
Organization (ICAO) 

- National/Intemational Trade Organizations 

- National Standards Organizations 
Airlines 

- Aeronautical Mobile Communication 
Service Providers 

- Communication Satellite Service Providers 

So, with this cast of characters, programs, 
organizations and congressional support, we 
are off in the 90's to expand the oceanic 
systems much the same way that we expanded 
the terrestrial systems during the 80's. The 


- Maintenance of High Safety Standards 
Continued International Cooperation 

Extensive satellite utilization by both 
governments and private enterprise, on a daily 
basis, have resulted in: 


13 






14 


OPENING SESSION 



Joseph J. Fee 
Oceanic Systems Manager 
Federal Aviation Administration 


Joseph J. Fee joined the FAA Research and Development Service in June 1980. Prior to 
being selected as Oceanic Systems Manager in April 1991, he managed the FAA’s Satellite, 
Data Link and Traffic Alert and Collision Avoidance Systems (TAGS) programs. He 
received the Department of Transportation Silver Medal for Meritorious Service for his 
leadership in the TCAS program. Mr. Fee has over thirty years experience in system 
engineering and applied research in navigation, surveillance and communications. He holds 
both an MSEE and BSEE from the University of Kansas. 




LOOKING BEYOND ADS: 

HOW DO WE FILL 
IN THE REST OF THE SQUARES? 

Joe Fee, Oceanic Systems Manager 

Federal Aviation Administration, Washington, D.C. 


This symposium will present 
numerous papers reporting on results of 
experiments and trials which were only 
ideas a few short years ago. Government 
agencies, airlines and equipment 
manufacturers have all shown considerable 
ingenuity and expended significant effort to 
turn the idea called Automatic Dependent 
Surveillance (ADS) into the practical reality 
of todays trials. I congratulate all of you 
on your successes, knowing that this is only 
the beginning of the technology revolution 
which is transforming oceanic ATC. 

Satellite communications is becoming 
an operational fact in Oceanic Aviation. 
The expected growth in oceanic air traffic 
and the rapid rate at which airlines are 
expected to equip with satellite 
communications is a m^or factor in the 
modernization of oceanic ATC. Figure 1 
presents a projection of traffic growth over 
the current decade together with an 
estimate of the worldwide rate for aircraft 
satellite communications equipage. 

As you can see I’ve recently taken on 
a new job as the Oceanic System Manager. 
In this position one of my first tasks has 
been to review the U.S. oceanic system. 
Based upon my initial look at today’s 
system, I can say we’re going to have our 
hands full for the rest of the decade in 
bringing the whole oceanic ATC system up 
to the level required to provide the ATC 
services desired without any degradation in 
the level of safety. In the following 


comments. I’ll try to point out some key 
areas in which I believe we need to make 
more progress and what the FAA plans to 
do to help the process. 

BIG OCEAN, LITTLE SYSTEM 

Figure 2 depicts the oceanic system 
as viewed from the North American 
viewpoint. What this figure cannot show is 
the complexity of the route structures which 
cover the Atlantic, Caribbean and Pacific 
regions. Depending on the region, aircraft 
equipment, altitude, and relative speed, the 
longitudinal separation minima can vary 
between 5 and 30 minutes, the lateral 
minima between 50 and 120 nautical miles 
and required altitude separation between 
1000 and 2000 feet (for subsonic aircraft 
below FL600) As shown in the figure, we 
will soon be dealing with a mix of HF and 
satellite communication equipped aircraft 
(hereafter referred to as satellite-equipped) 
which could complicate matters for the air 
traffic controller who as shown in the 
figure, is still separating aircraft in the 
traditional manner using flight strips. 

The low level of ATC automation world¬ 
wide is one of the major shortcomings of 
oceanic ATC. To the best of my 
knowledge, only the United Kingdom and 
Canada routinely utilize an automated 
conflict probe in oceanic airspace. While 
satellite-equipped aircraft can expect rapid 
contact with ATC facilities and while the 
position of such aircraft will be accurately 


16 






Oceanic Air Traffic Environment Changes 



1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 

















The Oceanic System 












provided by ADS, only modest beneHts can 
be provided without the automation aids of 
conflict probe and conflict resolution. In 
other words, controllers’ ability to manually 
provide clearance amendments is not 
expected to improve dramatically because 
of satellite-based communications and 
automatic dependent surveillance. As 
another illustration of the improvements 
needed at the oceanic ATC centers, the sole 
"automation system"-to-"automation 
system" data link used for oceanic traffic is 
in place between Gander and Shanwick. 
The U.S. and all other countries use dial-up 
phone lines for voice relay of flight plan 
information. 

WHERE WILL ALL THE AIRPLANES 
GO? 

Recall that in Figure 1 the traffic 
growth projection for the Atlantic region 
was 40 percent, and almost 90 percent for 
the Pacific by the end of the decade. Even 
with improvements in ATC automation to 
handle the increased traffic, capability of 
the existing route structure to haadle this 
increased load is not promising. In 
addition, airlines equipping with satellite 
communications and ADS reporting will 
expect a greater capability to optimize flight 
path by means of step climbs and fuel 
optimal routings. Without significant 
modification of the air route structure, this 
expectation is not likely to occur. 

The answer to both concerns lies in 
the modification of airspace structure and 
the separation minima used in oceanic 
routes. First of all, some new routes, 
particularly in the Pacific, will be 
developed. The trial routes now being 
flown by Northwest Airlines over the USSR 
are an early example of the potential for 
more routes. However, it seems clear that 
the best way to increase capacity is by more 


efficient use of existing route structures. 
Specifically, we need to develop preferred 
routings within the existing airspace 
structure which wilt support reduced 
separations for appropriately equipped 
aircraft. By reducing the required 
separation between aircraft we effectively 
create more "slots" in which to put aircraft, 
thereby increasing capacity and the 
possibility of clearance amendments. The 
provision of preferred airspace for aircraft 
with advanced CNS capability is supported 
by the ICAO FANS committee and should 
be a major factor in improving capacity in 
oceanic airspace. However, since oceanic 
airspace is international airspace, the means 
by which this can be accomplished is not 
immediately evident. What is clear is that 
the entire aviation community needs to 
begin the process to modify airspace now if 
we expect to provide the capacity needed by 
the end of this decade. 

In much of the oceanic airspace 
today, the separation standards are out-of- 
date for the navigation capabilities of 
conventional airline aircraft and with the 
advent of satellite navig.ation and 
communication, these standards are clearly 
in need of revision. As a first step, the 
level of safety must be reassessed as a 
function of aircraft equipage, route 
structure and proposed separation minima 
to determine the best way to increase 
capacity. Factors such as the effect of 
aircraft with satellite CNS capability in a 
separate route structure, the effect of TCAS 
carriage and the capability of ATC 
automation to manage the separation 
process must all be considered in the 
analyses and validated in measurable 
performance data. At the same time, we 
need to start planning, now, on the most 
expeditious way to initiate improved oceanic 
route separation procedures and standards. 


19 






ENTER THE SYSTEM MANAGER 

In recognition of the need to 
coordinate and integrate separate efforts to 
modernize oceanic ATC underway in its 
engineering and operational services, the 
FAA created the position of Oceanic System 
Manager (OSM) in April 1991. The OSM 
is responsible for the entire oceanic ATC 
system, end-to-end, and coordinates all 
development efforts to assure that the entire 
system evolves expeditiously. The OSM 
serves as the key FAA spokesman for the 
oceanic area coordinating with both the 
national and international aviation 
community. Figure 3 depicts the various 
functions of the OSM as planner, 
integrator, reporter, and coordinator. 

A major challenge to the OSM was 
to provide the requisite planning, direction, 
and coordination without introducing 
another layer of bureaucracy. The 
approach taken as shown in Figure 4 was to 
utilize teams which are chartered to manage 
the principal areas being developed in the 
advanced oceanic system. The System 
Requirement Team (SRT), which has 
already played a major role in the ADS 
application, is developing the operational 
concept and overall system requirements for 
the next evolutionary step in oceanic ATC. 
It will then translate and validate this 
concept into system requirements utilizing 
the Oceanic Development Facility at the 
FAA’s Technical Center. The SRT has a 
strong ATC operational flavor with 
significant engineering and standards 
support. The Oceanic Engineering Team 
joins the R&D and F&E Services together 
with Systems Engineering to develop 
cooperative plans for the rapid prototype 
development and implementation of the 
system defined by the SRT. By 
coordinating across Service lines throughout 
the entire engineering cycle from prototype 


to fielded system, we expect to avoid many 
of the problems that occur during the 
transition from an R&D system to 
operational system. 

The Oceanic Standards Team is 
concerned with the coordination of the 
standards required for satellite 
communications and navigation equipment 
as well as the separation standards 
developed for the advanced capability 
aircraft in oceanic airspace. This team is 
led by Flight Standards and Air Traffic 
Service representatives, supported by 
Operations Research and Systems 
Engineering resources. 

The Oceanic System Manager, 
advised by a Steering Committee of 
recognized experts, coordinates the overall 
oceanic system development by providing 
direction and focus to the three teams, 
which in turn provide guidance for 
individual program efforts. Only time will 
tell how well this organization structure will 
work in practice. However, I believe we 
have already produced something useful by 
providing a mechanism in which all oceanic 
"stakeholders" in the FAA meet and 
coordinate with each other at regular 
intervals. 

ORGANIZING THE PARADE 

The modernization of oceanic ATC 
presents one of these rare cases where there 
is very little difference of opinion on the 
overall approach. The Government, 
airlines, avionics manufactures, and 
communications providers are all generally 
in agreement on the advantages and general 
direction of plans to utilize satellite 
communication, satellite navigation and 
advanced automation to achieve the desired 
improvement in efficiency, capacity, and 
safety. However, unless these goals are 


20 




Roles of the Oceanic System Manager 



21 


Figure 3 










Oceanic System Management Organization 

Teams 



Oceanic Standards Team 
Chaired by AFS-400 









pursued in a coordinated fashion, the full 
benefit will not be achieved and our 
progress will be limited to marginal 
improvements. 

The inherently international nature 
of oceanic ATC will require unusually close 
cooperation and coordination of the nations 
involved to make the advanced system 
operational. Because of the pace of satellite 
communications equipage we are faced by 
the need to endorse, in nearly simultaneous 
fashion, both national and international 
standards for avionics, satellite signalling 
and automatic dependent surveillance 
characteristics. I can personally attest to 
the fact that simply keeping these standards 
mutually consistent at the national level is 
no simple task. In addition, as stated 
earlier the international aviation community 
needs to begin the planning for the new 
procedures, the new air routes and related 
means by which the benefits of satellite- 
based ATC can be obtained. 

The tasks confronting us as we move 
forward to the advanced oceanic ATC 
system are truly daunting. However, the 
fact that we have already made so much 
progress, that we are here to share our 
experiences, and to plan for the next steps 
make me optimistic for the future. 


23 







24 


OPENING SESSION 



David W. Ford 
Research and Development 
Oceanic Program Manager 
Federal Aviation Administration 


David W. Ford is currently the Research and Development Oceanic Program Manager. His 
responsibilities in this position are to coordinate all new oceanic development with the FAA 
Oceanic Systems Manager and with the implementation side of the FAA. Concurrently, he 
is the program manager for the Dynamic Ocean Track System (DOTS). 

Mr. Ford’s 15 years at the FAA have been in the offices of Environment and Energy, 
Operations Research, and Research and Development. He holds a BSME fora> the 
University of Portland, Oregon and an MS in Energy Technologies from the George 
Washington University. 




FAA R & D Oceanic Progreua Office 
David W. Ford, Program Manager 
Federal Aviation Administration 
Washington, D.C. 

Presented at The 

First Annual International Satellite Surveillance 
and Conu&unication Symposium 


GOOD MEWS ! 

The FAA has begun a major 
push in providing the oceanic 
air traffic control and 
planning environment with the 
latest technology available. 
Upper management has committed 
to bring oceanic technology 
into the 1990s. 
Responsibilities have been 
given and teams are being 
formed to produce plans and 
programs for delivering this 
technology in the 2 to 5 year 
time period- 

A newly designated oceanic 
systems manager (OSM) has been 
given the responsibility for 
orchestrating the rapid 
development and smooth 
implementation of new oceanic 
automation. The R&D Program 
Manager is responsible to the 
OSM for the research and 
development phase of this 
effort. The following is an 
overview of this task. 


R&D ORGANIZATION 

The Research and 
Development Service (ARD) of 
the FAA is currently 
restructuring many of its 
program areas into program 
offices that will report 
directly to the service 
director. Oceanic is included 
in this new structure. Current 
development programs within ARD 


such as Automatic Dependent 
Surveillance (ADS) and the 
Dynamic Ocean Track System 
(DOTS) now fall within this 
office. Staff and resources 
from these programs have been 
combined and will now focus on 
delivering automation ready for 
implementation. 


GOAL 

R&D's near term goal is 
simple: Get today’s technology 
into the field. It's available 
now. The knowledge is there to 
build it. There just needs to 
be agreement on how to use it. 
This amounts to providing 
controllers with high 
resolution displays and 
processors, that are capable of 
communicating via two way data 
link with pilots and 
dispatchers, and with the 
ability to track aircraft 
electronically. 

Longer term goals will 
concentrate on better ways of 
doing business. Together with 
industry R&D will develop plans 
to provide more flexibility in 
routes to achieve better fuel 
and time performance, direct 
research and development 
efforts to reduce separation 
requirements, examine better 
ways to control and handle the 
ever increasing traffic in the 
oceanic areas, and work closer 
with other provider states for 
the smooth planning and 


26 






transition of aircraft between 
air traffic control areas. 

Ultimately, the FAA goal 
is to achieve in the ocean, the 
implementation of the FANS Air 
Traffic Management (ATM) 
concept. In this concept the 
automation capabilities of the 
cockpit, the air traffic 
service provider, and the user 
air carriers will be 
effectively linked by the 
Aeronautical Telecommunication 
Network (ATN). 


OBJECTIVE/APPROACH 

The objective of the 
Oceanic Program Office is to 
develop and test new automation 
for the control and planning of 
oceanic airspace. R&D will 
participate in engineering team 
meetings conduct'^id by the OSM, 
to insure complete coordination 
with the implementation 
organizations and others, to 
develop and maintain plans to 
accomplish the FAA goals. 

R&D will look at the ocean 
as a total system connected 
from cockpit to controller. 
Development will concentrate on 
maintaining and strengthening 
this thread in an effort to 
optimize the system as a whole. 

R&D will contribute to the 
oceanic system team's effort to 
get automation into the field, 
now! 


OCEANIC DEVELOPMENT FACILITY 

An oceanic development 
facility (ODF) at the FAA 
Technical Center in Atlantic 
City N.J. will be established. 
All new automation will be 
validated through here. Real 


world field conditions will be 
simulated. Sectors will be 
constructed identical to those 
in our oceanic facilities so 
that operational scenarios can 
be played out. 

OCEANIC DEVELOPMENT FACILITY 

• - Simulate Field Conditions. 

• - Validate New Requirements. 

• - Introduce Automation. 

Verify Benefits. 

Fine Tune CHI. 

Resolve Space Problems. 

Develop Procedures for use. 

• - Perform Testing for Operational Use. 

• - Located at FAATC. 

Facility space problems 
will be resolved where new 
hardware is required and human 
factors associated with the 
placement will be accounted 
for. Interfaces will be 
established with other oceanic 
systems such the Oceanic 
Display and Planning System 
(ODAPS) and DOTS, and with 
actual and simulated cockpits 
in order to evaluate the impact 
and performance from a total 
system view point. Cockpit 
interfaces will allow 
developers to coordinate with 
airlines and other system 
users. Benefits will be 
verified. Air Traffic 

requirement teams will work 
with system developers to 
validate requirements. 
Controller teams will work with 
developers to fine tune the 
computer human interfaces, and 
develop procedures for using 
the new automation. 

ODF 


Cockpit Control Room Layout | 
FAA 727 I 


I Airlines I 

777 

Simulator 

NASA l.angley 
Simulator 

Software 

Simulated 

Cockpit 




Inputs 

- Requirements 

- Specifications 

- Procedures 


ODAPS 

HOST 


International 

FIR'S 







In addition, this facility 
will act as a final testing 
facility for integration and 
shakedown testing prior to 
field implementation. 


INTERNATIONAL COORDINATION 

Coordination with other 
countries on new automation is 
essential to the success of 
developing the ’total' picture. 
R&D will continue to 
participate in the work being 
done by panels and 
international groups in the 
areas of creating standards and 
procedures. R&D will support 
these activities by developing 
plans for demonstrating and 
testing these recommendations. 
Agreements will be expanded 
with other governments for 
joint testing. 


NEAR TERM PROGRAM AREAS 

The first objective of the FAA 
oceanic program is to ensure a 
stable functioning ODAPS. This 
is being accomplished through 
complete FAA coordination and 
support. High technology 
workstations, similar to those 
planned for the Advanced 
Automation System (AAS), will 
be introduced during this time 
along with the capability to 
process ADS position reports. 

The R&D office will begin 
by designing automation that 
will use the ODAPS as its core. 
Initial work will concentrate 
on updating two functional 
areas of ODAPs; the flight data 
input and output (FDIO) and the 
aircraft situation display. 
These enhancements will serve 
to improve the working 
environment and efficiency for 
the oceanic controller. 


Simultaneously, development 
will begin on two way data link 
between controllers and pilots. 


NEAR TERM PROGRAM AREAS 


• - Controller FDIO Replacement. 

• - Situation Display Replacement. 

• - ADS 

SAT Position Report Processing. 
Two Way Message Data LittK. 

• -Traffic Management 

DOTS 

ETMS 


DOTS will continue to be 
the main thrust for oceanic 
traffic management. Prototype 
work will begin on the traffic 
advisory function so that 
traffic management and industry 
can agree on designs and 
procedures for its use. Work 
will begin on interfacing DOTS 
with the domestic traffic 
management system (TMS) in 
order to provide continuity 
between domestic and oceanic 
operations. 

We are confident that our 
new effort will succeed. 
Strong teams have been 
assembled that are ready and 
dedicated to getting the job 
done. 


28 




OPENING SESSION 



Peter L. Massoglia 
ADS Program Manager 
Federal Aviation Administration 


Peter I,. Massoglia is the Program Manager of the Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) 
Program with the Federal Aviation Administration in Washington, D.C. Mr. Massoglia 
holds a Baccalaureate degree (BSAE) in aeronautical engineering from Saint Louis 
University and has done graduate work at George Washington University. 

In addition to a broad background in flight test engineering of U.S. Army and Navy aircraft 
he has extensive experience in reliability, maintainability and system standards. He has 
been with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) since 1976 and is presently assigned 
to the Research and Development Service. This organization has principal responsibility 
within the FAA for the development and acquisition of new technology systems. In his 
present assignment Mr. Massoglia is responsible for: the research, development, and 
implementation of the ADS program within the FAA; The development of Memorandum 
of Cooperation (MOC) with various states; and the coordination of international standards. 


L 




Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) Fkxigram Summai^ 

Lonnie H. Bowlin and Guy T. Germana 
AERA, Inc., Landover, Maryland 20785 

and 

Peter L Massoglia 

Federal Aviation Administration, Washington, DC 20591 


INTRODUCTION 

Non-radar Air Traffic Control (ATC), and in 
particular oceanic ATC, is on the verge of a 
revolution in capabilities brought about by the 
utilization of data link communications services [1], 
The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) 
Committee on Future Air Navigation Systems 
(FANS) has identified satellite data link as the 
primary means of providing Air/Ground (A/G) 
communications and surveillance services in its 
concept of a future ATC system [2], Currently, 
both communications and surveillance in oceanic 
regions depend on High Frequency (HF) radio 
links, which are subject to fading. Controllers 
interact with flight crews via a radio operator in this 
type of environment. A/G communications can 
require up to several minutes to initiate and 
complete, thereby limiting the timeliness of the 
message. This delay can have a serious safety 
impact. In addition, the difficulty in establishing a 
contact and the flight crew workload associated 
with filing a position report limits surveillance 
reporting to approximately once per hour. 

In contrast, A/G satellite data links can be 
established within a matter of seconds. These 
links provide reliable, timely, and direct 
pilot/controller communications. The links can also 
be used to transfer Automatic Dependent 
Sun/eillance (ADS) data, which is position 
information generated by the aircraft’s navigation 
system, to ground ATC systems. This data can be 
used to track aircraft in a manner similar in some 
ways to radar tracking. Airline operational and 
passenger communications can also be supported 


using satellite links. In the future, digital voice 
capabilities for ATC purposes will also be possible. 

The FANS committee completed its work in 1988. 
However, it was realized that additional work was 
necessary to implement the concepts defined by 
the committee. ICAO then established several 
panels and study groups to continue the work, 
including the Aeronautical Mobile Communications 
(AMC) Panel, which examines many of the 
communications-related issues, and the ADS 
Panel, which developed further the concept of a 
data link-based ATC system. 

The ADS Panel’s charter is to develop the 
necessary guidance material and Standards and 
Recommended Practices (SARPs) for operational 
implementation of the FANS ATC system concept. 
This material must be consistent with the overall 
goals of maintaining or improving current safety 
levels, increasing airspace capacity, and improving 
user services while reducing operator cost. In 
doing this, the Panel chose to take a broad view of 
what constitutes such a system, since it was 
realized that an improved surveillance capability 
without a corresponding intervention capability 
would be of limited use. Therefore, issues related 
to direct pilot/controller data link communications 
are also being examined. 

This paper discusses the system architecture and 
components of a satellite data link- based oceanic 
ATC system. Topics such as the role of the 
Aeronautical Telecommunications Network, the 
status of avionics development, and the ICAO’s 
ADS Panel efforts will be addressed from an ATC 


30 






perspective as part of the paper. Material 
developed by the ICAO ADS Panel [3] is used in 
the following. 


SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE OVERVIEW 

An end-to-end system perspective is needed to 
take full advantage of all the capabilities inherent 
in the A/G data link. As defined in the ICAO ADS 
Circular [3], there are six major components 
forming an integrated data link-based ATC system 
as depicted in Figure 1: 

1. ATC controller and system 
interface, including data link 
communications: 

2. ATC automation, including new 
functions which utilize the 
information contained in ADS 
reports; 

3. terrestrial communications 
network, which connects the ATC 
system with the satellite service 
provider; 

4. satellite service provider, which 
supplies the space segment; 

5. aircraft avionics, which collects, 
formats, and transmits and 
receives messages over the 
communications channel; and 

6. pilot and system interface, 
including data link commu¬ 
nications. 

Each component resides within the same ATC 
procedures environment. The integration of ail the 
components into one overall system will result in a 
synergistic effect. For example, the capabilities of 
the avionics would be of no use without a means 
of receiving the generated ADS data and applying 
it to ATC. The remainder of this section discusses 
issues related to each system component defined 
above. A summary of some of the major issues is 
contained in Table 1. 


Controller Interface 

Air Traffic Service (ATS) providers will define and 
develop specific controller interfaces tailored to 
their particular needs. However the ADS Panel 
has developed several guidelines, which are taken 
from [3]: 

1. Display traffic situation 
information in a relevant manner; 

2. Alert the controller to potential 
and actual violations of separation 
standards: 

3. Provide tools for the 
composition of A/G data link 
messages; 

4. Display received A/Q messages; 

5. Provide a voice channel for 
emergency and non-routine 
communications: and 

6. Provide a rapid response 
method to the pilot via voice 
communications. 

The FAA is currently investigating how the oceanic 
controller interface contained within the Oceanic 
Display and Planning System (ODAPS) can be 
improved and modified to support ADS and data 
link messaging. It has been determined that 
initially the Flight Data Input/Output (FDIO) 
equipment must be replaced with a graphics- 
based interface commonly found on workstations. 
This new interface would support an enhanced 
FDIO function, and later support data link 
communications. Two modes of data link support 
will be provided: a free text mode and a message 
template mode. The first mode will allow the 
controller to enter any desired text and send it to 
the selected aircraft. The second mode provides 
templates for commonly used messages, such as 
clearances, thereby allowing quick message entry. 
The Plan View Displays (PVDs) will also be 
replaced with higher resolution displays - the same 
displays being used in Advanced Automation 
System (AAS). Oceanic sectors tend to be several 
times larger in area than typical domestic sectors, 


31 


c 5 Q. o 
•= _ E 2 
2 3®-^ 
'c Q 0 ) Q. 


(U 0) “• flj 

o -S £•• E 

<0 ® <D o 

E 2 C > 

|$|Sg 

oS^ SI 

2 d)'^''5 M 

c .£ S 2 2 

5 0) 0) oc 

^ P 3 o .2 
1 £ c 


0 } 

.2 ^ CO 


M O 'S 0) tf Si- — 

C Tl jQ ^ fl) • 

O y ^ 3 ~ W €0 


S :g 

E ® 
E o 


«i > p ^ ^ 

o > c t3 

IS - k 03 :5 

Q;g).9^'H 

^9 

c5 S ^ 

1 = ^ C 2 

3-“ •» c 

•2 2 c P .S 

2 > 2, S C 
g 0) O) ® c 

■D c -52 S 2 

O ® c- P c 


•71 'U -S 

o m — 
QJ ;rT ® 
0 ) O C 
2 ^ 
—s 0)2 
w 0) .£ 


• ® 
W CO o 

e 

o C^’ 
Q-® S 
£5 « 

CO S § 

Q 9-S 

o 8 g 

c 2 2 

o £ i= 

‘P <r i_ 
( 0 ^ 0 ) 
C 0) M 
•g JO 3 

o S> ® 
w t: o 
'*6 <0 


Q « wE CT 

i 

lii^i I 

1'^ 2 i p 
iaie-i 2i 

m JC O O ® C 

® £ .9 £ n 

•Sp-i f 

I 

SS8-5g 1 

•I I 5 2-8 .s 

CD « O ® ® 

^^ o 

2 « o >7^ ^ 

is ® Q. ra i- 
O ^ O n C p 
® S C 3 ^ 

O. P 05 0) ® 

^ i-t ^ ” 2 

2 Si- CO a a 8 

.2 . 3 c 3 o 

2 .ip?s 

2 .£ a re o E 
g. 2 «-P 3> 2 p 

.o) Q p ..^ re re o 

a — P - p O 
re gre||^ re 

^ a. p 5 re -t 


m ^ 

TO <D ( 

E^ C ! 

o ^ © 1 

-= .£ ' 

O TJ P J 

:i §i.i 

sl^' 

ffi. g I 

S © c ■' 

'~'n § c 

©9 o! 

W < J_ -■ 

3 C P 
TO > CD I 

0 ) ^ w «• 

^ o t— 
o X!!' 

822 .;:: 

2 - p ■ 
> c 2 ■ 

§ c a: 

«ll’ 

E 2 re ■ 

c > re 
re £ c 

o P -p 

M o P = 

.« 2 p ■ 

■33 c ^ 

c o 2 

88 re 

282 . 


re c 

E re 0 ) 


■§23»i 


Uj IS ^.g 


CO re P 

" O) 2 
> p .£ 
^ ^ ^ 
_ re c 



32 
















igure 1 System Components 


and a larger display area is needed. This wiii be 
critical in the future when oceanic ATC transitions 
from a procedures-based, strategic approach to 
an ADS-based, tacticai approach, in a tactical 
oceanic environment, the display will be used by 
the controller to assist in separating aircraft, similar 
to what is done today in the domestic radar 
environment. 


ATC Automation 

Satellite data link communications will support the 
transfer of information derived from the aircraft’s 
onboard navigation system to an ATC Center. 
This data can then be used for ATC purposes. 
Four principal applications have been defined so 
far: 


Clearance Validai!on. Waypoint 
data read out from the navig-tion 
system is compared with the ATC- 
issued clearance, and any 
discrepancies reported 
immediately to the controller. 
Currently, the waypoint the aircraft 
is proceeding towards and the 


subsequent waypoint can be 
downlinked. 

Conformance Monitoring. The 
ADS reported position is 
compared to the flight plan 
predicted position. Longitudinal 
deviations are used to adjust 
arrival times at downstream fixes. 
This process provides feedback 
which is used to automatically 
update the flight plan. Lateral 
deviations are ignored if within 
defined tolerance limits. 
Othewise, an out-of-conformance 
alert is issued to the controller. 

Tracking. Current tracking 
interpolates between endpoints of 
a route segment. With ADS, track 
angle and. groundspeed are 
available. This information can be 
used to develop a more accurate 
tracker. 

Wind Grid Estimation. Winds 
play a pivotal rote in any Flight 


33 









Data Processing System. Winds 
are used to convert airspeed into 
groundspeed, which in turn is 
used to calculate arrival times at 
the fix points composing a flight 
plan. The limiting factor in this 
process today is the accuracy of 
the forecast wind grids, which are 
received every twelve hours. Real¬ 
time in situ measurements of 
upper winds are possible with 
ADS. This new data source can 
be used to update the forecast, 
thereby greatly improving 
accuracy. 

The ICAO ADS Panel has defined several other 
required functions in addition to the above ADS- 
supported functions. 

Conflict Prediction, in which 
potential violations of separation 
standards are detected; 

Conflict Resolution, in which the 
automation generates possible 
solutions to potential conflicts: and 

Data Presentation to the 
controller, which consists of 
Computer-Human Interface (CHI)- 
related items such as Situation 
Display and Conflict and Out-of- 
Conformance Lists. 

Conflict resolution will initially be tailored to track 
systems, where the Mach or altitude of conflicting 
aircraft will be changed. Later, in a more tactical 
environment, vectoring (changes to the track angle 
or equivalently, heading) may be employed. 

One important area that promises major service 
improvements and reduced operations cost is the 
integration of ATC automation with aircraft Four- 
Dimensional (4D) navigation capabilities. New 
aircraft are capable of flying an optimum profile to 
a specified point in space, and arriving at that 
point at a specified time (within constraints, of 
course). Having the ATC automation generate 
optitnum conflict free clearances, including time 
restrictions, acquiring controller approval, and then 


uplifiking the clearance to the aircraft’s navigation 
system, with pilot approval, will support fuel saving 
techniques such as cruise and step climbs. With 
this approach, aircraft performance characteristics 
must be considered when generating the 
clearances. 


Terrestrial Communications Network 

The ATC Center will be connected to the Ground 
Earth Station (GES) via a terrestrial 
communications network. This network could be 
either government owned, or supplied by a 
communications service provider such as ARINC 
or SITA. It could even be supplied by the satellite 
or GES provider. Regardless of the network 
source, however, it must conform to the protocol 
suite defined as part of the Aeronautical 
Telecommunications Network (ATN) concept. 

The ATN is based on a combination of 
international and aeronautical industry standards. 
This architecture provides transparent data 
transfer, allowing applications to be designed 
independently of the communications 
subnetworks. It also eliminates the need for 
dedicated data link I/O devices and application 
processes by supporting shared avionics. The key 
ATN elements are the use of a standard 
internetwork protocol, a standard addressing 
scheme, and a standard routing protocol. 

Peer-to-peer protocols are employed within this 
concept. For example, a connection would be set 
up between an ATC application on the ground and 
the aircraft’s ADS Unit (ADSU) to transmit ADS 
reports. Once the connection is established, the 
data would flow through this "pipe". 

ATS Providers have an operational requirement for 
multiple dissemination of ADS reports. For 
example, when an aircraft is in the vicinity of an 
FIR boundary, both ATS Providers must receive 
the surveillance data [4]. However, the protocols 
employed do not directly satisfy this requirement. 
One end of the pipe is connected to the aircraft, 
while the other end is connected to a unique ATC 
Center. 

There are several different approaches that can be 


34 




taken to provide this service. Both ATS Providers 
can establish a separate surveillance contract with 
the aircraft. This means that essentially the same 
data will be down-linked from the aircraft, thereby 
wasting channel capacity and increasing 
communications cost. A second approach 
requires a router, which is an intelligent device that 
would somehow know when a surveillance report 
should be multiply disseminated. ATN Router 
development is currently underway. A third 
approach, making the ATS Providers themselves 
responsible for multiple dissemination, would work. 
However, the North Atlantic (NAT) region Provider 
States have clearly stated that this is an 
unacceptable solution, and that the 
communications sen/ice providers must supply this 
capability. 

The ATN concept is not limited to just satellite data 
links. Other data links, such HF, VHF, and Mode S 
can all be accommodated. A standard application 
interface will be provided independent of the link 
employed. The network and onboard avionics 
then selects the optimum path based on time- 
varying considerations such as geographic 
location, cost, delay, throughput, and link 
availability. For example, in the ocean satellite 
links will most likely be employed, while in 
domestic airspace VHF or Mode S may be used. 
The resulting system will appear seamless from a 
human user’s perspective. 


Satellite Communications System 

Satellite communications is the key to providing 
improved services in oceanic airspace. The near- 
term space segment will be provided by 
INMARSAT, which has geosynchronous satellites 
providing coverage up to ±81® in place. These 
satellites provide a core service to aircraft 
consisting of 600 bps data transmission, as well as 
9600 bps data and toll quality voice 
communications for appropriately equipped aircraft 
(i.e., a high gain antenna is needed for this 
service). INMARSAT Block 2 satellites are now 
being deployed, and INMARSAT Block 3 satellites, 
currently being designed, are scheduled to begin 
service in 1994. These satellites will utilize spot 
beams and have increased channel capacity. 


The Block 1 satellite constellation will support a 
basic ATC service consisting of ADS data 
downlinking. Data link communications can also be 
provided; however, this function will be better 
supported when the Block 2 satellites are 
commissioned. Digital voice for ATC purposes will 
only be required for emergency and non-routine 
situations once data link becomes the common 
means of A/G messaging. Both Block 2 and 3 
satellites will support this capability. 

Avionics 

Three principle components comprise the avionics: 
(1) the ADSU, defined in ARINC Characteristic 745 
[5]; (2) the Satellite Data Unit (SDU), defined in 
ARINC Characteristic 741; and the antenna 
subsystem (AS), available from a variety of 
manufacturers. The ADSU collects ADS-related 
information from the aircraft, reformats the data 
into the required form, and transfers it to the SDU. 
The SDU then transmits the data to the satellite via 
the AS. The ADSU will also accept up-linked 
messages that set the reporting rate, select the 
fields to be transmitted, and other similar functions 
related to establishing, maintaining, updating, and 
terminating a connection. 

The avionics will also support direct two-way 
pilot/controller communications. Messages 
entered at the pilot interface are encoded and 
transferred to the SDU, then transmitted to the 
controller. Controller-initiated messages are 
displayed to the pilot using a similar process. 

Two organizations are driving the design of ADS 
message formats; the ICAO ADS Panel and the 
Airlines Electronic Engineering Committee (AEEC) 
745 Subcommittee. Table 2 lists the data groups 
defined by in ARINC Characteristic 745. The ADS 
Panel data group definitions are included within 
the corresponding ARINC Characteristic 745 
definitions, which also contain a group tag. The 
AEEC has also defined flight ID and airframe ID 
groups, which will be of use in initially correlating 
position reports with a particular flight. In addition, 
the AEEC has defined contract initiation, update, 
and cancellation groups. Avionics manufacturers 
are currently using ARINC Characteristic 745 to 
build equipment that will be installed in aircraft. 


35 






Table 2. AEEC Data Groups 

Data Group 

DataElement 

Basic ADS 

Basic ADS Group Tag 

Latitude 

Longitude 

Altitude 

Time 

Figure of Merit 

Ground Speed Vector Information 

Ground Speed Vector Information Tag 

Track Angle 

Ground Speed 

Vertical Rate 

Mach Vector Information 

Mach Vector Information Tag 

Track Angle 

Mach Speed 

Vertical Rate 

Predicted Route 

Predicted Route Tag 

Latitude at Next Waypoint 

Longitude at Next Waypoint 

Altitude at Next Waypoint 

Latitude at Next+1 Waypoint 

Longitude at Next+1 Waypoint 

Altitude at Next+1 Waypoint 

Meteorological 

Meteorological Tag 

Wind Speed 

Wind Direction 

Temperature 


36 




































Pilot Interface 

One of the principle objectives in employing 
satellite communications within oceanic regions is 
to improve pilot/controller communications. 
Current communications utilizes HF radio and an 
intermediary radio operator. The pilot’s interface 
with the future system will be primarily data link. 
Routine messages, which form the vast majority of 
communications, will employ this mode. The most 
prevalent messages in this category are ATC 
Clearances, a pilot request for a change to a 
flight’s existing .*TO Clearance and a Clearance 
Read-back. In today’s environment, these 
messages are transmitted using HF radio. 
Standard formats can, however, be devised that 
will make these messages amenable to routine 
data link communications. 

Digital voice will gradually replace HF 
communications for emergency and non-routine 
situations. The amount of voice communications 
will be drastically reduced, however, by the 
increased use of data link. It will also be some 
time before the entire oceanic aircraft fleet is 
switched to digital voice, as the existing HF 
equipment will be used until replaced. 

For the most part, the pilot plays a minimal role in 
the transmission of ADS data. All operations 
involved in establishing and maintaining a 
surveillance link will be performed automatically. 
However, the pilot must be able to monitor systerfi 
operations. He must also must have the capability 
of forcing an ADS report during emergency and 
non-routine situations. 


PROCEDURAL ISSUES 

The most important procedural issue concerns 
separation standards. The current track systems, 
which are typically employed in high density 
corridors such as the NAT, are operating very near 
maximum capacity. Many flights operating within 
these systems can not obtain the optimum track or 
altitude, resulting in increased fuel cost. 

Capacity can be increased by decreasing 
separation standards. For example, it appears that 
1000 ft vertical separation will be feasible in the 


NAT, thereby approximately doubling the airspace 
capacity at turbojet altitudes in the NAT track 
system. Further capacity increases, however, will 
only be possible when there are improvements in 
surveillance and intervention (communications) 
capabilities. Data link communications and ADS 
together will support a reduction in separation 
standards, though the precise extent is currently 
being analyzed by the FAA using a collision risk 
model. Reductions on the order of 50-75% 
laterally seem to be possible, though [6]. 
Longitudinal standards may migrate from 10 
minutes in trail (a typical value) down to 5 minute 
separation. 

It Ic essential that ADS and data link 
communications aircraft equipage be followed as 
soon as possible by tangible user benefits. 
Reducing separation standards so that more 
aircraft can fly better profiles is one way. Another 
way is to develop preferential route systems, 
altitudes, or airspaces for equipped aircraft. As a 
possible example, the optimum track within the 
North Atlantic Track System could be reserved for 
equipped aircraft. These aircraft could then be 
packed closer, assuming the required safety 
margins are maintained, thereby increasing system 
capacity. 

Increased support for random routings must also 
be developed. Random routings are generated by 
the carriers using departure/destination pairs and 
upper winds forecast, and represent user preferred 
trajectories, typically fuel-optimal profiles. Route 
structures were introduced to help the controller 
efficiently manage complex or dense traffic 
patterns, and do not usually correspond to 
optimum profiles. The increased use of 
automation is the only way to provide increased 
support for random routings. The automation will 
be employed to perform complex but mundane 
mathematical calculations, such as separation 
monitoring and conflict prediction, v/hile the 
controller will continue to be responsible for 
separation assurance, conflict resolution, and 
overall strategic airspace management. 

Another important procedural area concerns the 
exchange of data between ATC Centers, 
particularly international ATC Centers. 
Coordination data must be exchanged between 


37 






adjacent centers prior to penetrating a new FIR. 
How this data will be exchanged is currently being 
discussed in several international forums. The 
North Atlantic System Planning Group’s (NATSPG) 
On-Line Data Interchange (OLD!) subgroup is 
perhaps furthest along in this effort, v/ith a draft 
version of an interface control document 
describing the messages to be used for OLDI 
within the NAT region completed. 

The FAA is establishing an advanced Oceanic 
Development Facility at the FAA Technical Center 
to investigate these and other issues. Controllers 
from the US and other countries will be able to 
determine the effects of procedural changes, ADS, 
and data link communications in a simulation 
environment prior to operational implemented. 
New ideas and techniques will be developed and 
refined with the goal of providing better services to 
airspace users. 


CONCLUDING REMARKS 

This paper has described the A/G system that will 
be used for ATC purposes within US oceanic FIRs. 
However, ADS and satellite data link 
communications are not being developed by the 
US alone, but by the international aviation 
community through organizations such as ICAO 
(ADS Panel, AMC Panel, NATSPG, etc.) RTCA, and 
AEEC. Most of the remarks contained in this 
paper are generic, and apply to other oceanic ATS 
Provider Slates also. In fact, the communications 
and surveillance functions described herein ate 
being extended to environments other than 
oceanic. The system concept is equally applicable 
today in areas such as the Australian Outback, the 
Chinese, African or South American interior, 
Northern Canada, and the Soviet Siberian 
airspace. Ongoing work by the ADS Panel in 
terminal area applications is of interest to many 
Provider States. Though the US does not currently 
plan to use ADS and satellite communications in 
the terminal or domestic en-route environment. 


many countries see this approach as a cost 
effective means of modernizing their ATC system 
and providing increased user services, without 
havir;g to invest in an expensive radar and VHF 
radio network. 

Preliminary testing of some of the components 
described in this paper has been performed as 
part of the Pacific Engineering Trials. These trials 
have employed prototype systems to send and 
receive data from aircraft, including position 
reports and free text data link messages. They 
have been conducted in conjunction with United 
Air Lines. Results to date have been encouraging 
from both an airspace user and ATS Provider 
perspective. 

Implementation of the FANS ATC system concept 
is dependent on acceptance by both the ATS 
providers and airspace users. Both must accrue 
tangible benefits it the concept is to .i-eplace 
existing systems and procedures. For users, the 
equipage costs must be offset by reduced 
operating costs. For ATS providers, both the risk 
of collision and controller workload must not 
increase, and preferably, be lowered. 

Lastly, the capabilities of current and next 
generation avionics and aircraft must be coupled 
with increased ATC automation support to provide 
more efficient airspace management and increased 
user services. Modern Flight Management 
Systems (FMSs) are capable of flying 4D 
trajectories: however, ATS providers can not 
currently support this function efficiently. For 
example, most ATC systems today will not issue 
cruise climb clearances, even though users desire 
cruise climbs and aircraft are capable of flying a 
cruise climb trajectory. Better conflict prediction 
and resolution. Global Positioning System-based 
aircraft navigation systems, ADS, and clearance 
delivery via data link directly from the ATC 
automation to the FMS (with human 
acknowledgement and override) will form the basis 
for this future service. 


38 







Longitude 

-—ADS Reports (H1/DF) □ D/L Waypoint (5Z) X HF Waypoint ▲ Airports 


Figure 2 Pacific Engineering Trial Flight 


REFERENCES 

[1] P.L Massoglia, M.T. Pozesky, and G.T. 
Germana, "The Use of Satellite Technology for 
Oceanic AirTraffic Control", Proceedings IEEE, Vol. 
77, No. 11, pp. 1695-1708, Nov. 1989. 

[2] FANS/4 Report, ICAO, May 1988. 

[3] ICAO Circular on Automatic Dependent 
Sun/eillance, ICAO, 1990. 

[4] System Concept Description, ICAO NATSPG, 
1990. 

[5] ARINC Characteristic 745: Automatic 
Dependent Surveillance, November, 1990. 

[6] H.J. Rome, and V. Krishnan, "Causal 
Probabilistic Model for Evaluating Transoceanic 
Airlane Separations", IEEE Trans. Aerospace and 
Elect. Sys., Vol. 26, No. 5, pp. 804-817, Sept. 1990. 


39 






















Lonnie H. Bowlin 
President & Chief Engineer 
Aerospace Engineering and Research 
Associates, Inc. 


Lonnie H. Bowlin is President and Chief System Engineer of Aerospace Engineering and 
Research Associates, Inc. In this position Mr. Bowlin provides systems engineering and 
integration support to the FAA ADS program. He is currently serving as a technical 
advisor to the ICAO ADS Panel and the North Atlantic Special Planning Group. Mr. 
Bowlin also led the development of AERALIB software libraries for ATC automation 
development. Previously, he led the conceptual design of the ADS step 1 system and 
Oceanic Display and Planning System. He has more than 17 years experience in the 
development and integration of computer systems. 


Guy T, Germana 
Chief Systems Engineer 
Aerospace Engineering and Research 
Associates, Inc, 


Guy T. Gennana is the Chief Systems Engineer for Aerospace Engineering and Research 
Associates, Inc. Previously, Mr. Germana led the design and implementation of the ODAPS 
Communications processor. He was also involved in the design and implementation of the 
ADS functional enhancement to the ODAPS, and the development of oceanic air traffic 
control systems for international applications. He was also involved in the development of 
data processing systems for NASA. He has over 14 years experience in computer systems 
development. Mr. Germana earned a B.S. and M.S. in Electrical Engineering from the 
University of Maryland. 


40 









t 


Joseph F. Dorfler 
Satellite Program Manager 
Federal Aviation Administration 



Joseph F. Dorfler is a retired Air Force pilot possessing operational, technical, and research 
experience in the field of aviation and space technology. Prior to joining the FAA, Mr. 
Dorfler led the operational phase-in of the Global Positioning System (GPS) for the 
Department of Defense (DoD). As the FAA Satellite Program Manager, Mr. Dorfler is 
responsible for research and development activities in both the satellite communications and 
navigation areas. 









SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS (SATCOM) 
PROJECT SUMMARY 

Joseph F. Dorfler, Satellite Program Manager (FAAHQ/ARD-330) 

Washington, D.C. 


INTRODUCTION 

The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
Satellite Program consists of two complimentary 
activities: the Satellite Communications 
(SATCOM) Project and the Satellite Navigation 
(SATNAV) Project. The objectives of this 
program are twofold: to determine the 
capabilities of satellites for civil aviation, and to 
verify, test, and demonstrate applications of 
satellites, including Automatic Dependent 
Surveillance (ADS), within the National 
Airspace System (NAS). The elements of the 
Satellite Program are depicted in Figure 1. This 
paper introduces and overviews the SATCOM 
Project, which will be described in greater detail 
in a companion paper entitled "FAA Aeronautical 
Satellite Communications Project Plan" to be 
presented during Session Two on Wednesday. 

At present, satellite communications are planned 
to replace High Frequency (HF) communications 
in oceanic airspace and Very High Frequency 
(VHF) communications in the majority of coastsd 
and some domestic en route airspace. Since 
satellite communications, both data and voice, 
will be provided at a cost to the user and since 
data communications are more efficient and less 
prone to error than voice communications, it is 
expected that satellite communications will 
encourage and promote the expansion of the data 
link capability for air-ground and ground-air 
communications. The use of data link will 
support the establishment of ADS, which may 


make possible the reduction of separation 
standards and increased capacity in oceanic 
airspace. It is anticipated that, at least in oceanic 
airspace, routine voice communications for the 
majority of Air Traffic Service (ATS) 
applications (about 95%) will be replaced by data 
communications. As such, voice 
communications will be used only for emergency 
and non-routine situations, and as a back-up to 
data communications. In oceanic airspace, the 
use of satellites will reduce the delays associated 
with voice communications and will improve the 
quality of voice communications. 

The research and development of satellite 
communications within the FAA is being 
performed by the Research and Development 
Service (ARD) and is sponsored by the Flight 
Standards Service (AFS). AFS interfaces with 
the users, the airlines, and the aviation public. 
In fulfilling their safety responsibility, AFS 
determines operational capability, training 
requirements, equipment suitability, and 
operational concepts to safely and efficiently 
introduce SATCOM worldwide. 

SATCOM PROJECT SUMMARY 

The specific objectives of the SATCOM Project 
are to enhance the efficiency of Air Traffic 
Management (ATM) in oceanic airspace first and 
in the NAS later, and to enhance the efficiency of 


42 



SATNAV 


_ Satellite System 
Augmentation 

— Navigation Applications 
Development 

_ Test & Verification 
of Satellite System 


SATCOM 


_Development and 
Validation of Standards 

—Cooperative Development 
of Applications 

..Definition and Development of 
Future Satellite Communications 


NASF&E 


FIGURE 1. FAA SATELLITE PROGRAM 







air carrier operations. To exploit satellite 
communications for maximum benefit of both 
the FAA and the aviation community, the 
SATCOM Project is divided into three 
complimentary activities, shown in Figure 2, 
whose objectives are as follows: 

• To guide the development, test, and 
validation of national and international 
standards for the establishment and 
certification of the Aeronautical Mobile 
Satellite Safety (Route) Service 
(AMS(R)S). 

• To select and test, in cooperation with the 
aviation community, several satellite 
communications applications in key areas 
(e.g., oceanic, offshore, polar, and low 
altitude communications) in order to 
demonstrate the substantial benefits 
gained by their implementation. 

• To extend the benefits of satellite 
communications to general aviation 
through a study of the potential for future 
widespread use of satellite 
communications in the NAS considering 
the prospects of availability of new and 
innovative technologies and approaches 
to affect the desired b^enefits. 

The first of these activities involves the 
development and validation of standards for the 
Aeronautical Mobile Satellite Service (AMSS). 
This includes the development of Standards and 
Recommended Practices (SARPs), the 
development of Minimum Operational 
Performance Standards (MOPS), the correlation 
of the SARPs and the MOPS with other evolving 
standards, and the validation and evaluation of 
the SARPs and the MOPS. The FAA will also 
collect data for avionics certification and 
validation of oceanic ATS. The goals of this 
activity are to ensure that standards are practical, 
that they satisfy user requirements, and that they 
are consistent with the goals of the FAA. The 
current plans call, for the submission of the 
AMSS MOPS to the Radio Technical 
Commission for Aeronautics (RTCA) Executive 
Committee early in 1992 and for the support of 
the development of the associated Technical 
Standards Order (TSO). The draft International 
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) AMSS 
SARPs are expected to be submitted to the Air 


Navigation Commission (ANC) in the second 
quarter of 1993. Validation and evaluation of the 
AMSS MOPS and SARPs will be initiated in 
1992 and will be completed in 1995. Collection 
of data for avionics certification and validation of 
oceanic ATS will be initiated at the end of 1993 
and will be completed in 1998, by which time 
full scale world-wide implementation of satellite 
data and voice communications for oceanic ATS 
is anticipated. 

The second of these activities involves the 
cooperative development of domestic 
applications. This includes the joint evaluation 
(FAA and airlines) of the effectiveness of high 
data rate digitized voice communications for 
oceanic ATS, the joint evaluation (FAA and 
satellite communications service providers) of 
the effectiveness of low data rate digitized voice 
and data communications for offshore 
(rotorcraft) applications, and the implementation 
of an Aeronautical Telecommunications Network 
(ATN) for satellite communications. The goals 
of this activity are to demonstrate to the user 
community the substantial benefits gained 
through the implementation of these techniques. 
A cooperative agreement with a major airline is 
being planned for late 1991 to conduct oceanic 
operational tests of the AMSS voice capability. 
A similar agreement with a satellite 
communications service provider is also being 
planned for 1991 to conduct low data rate 
satellite communications tests that will lead to 
recommendations for rotorcraft air traffic voice 
services in 1996. The FAA will provide test 
aircraft and test support for flight evaluations of 
avionics leading to an ATN functional 
specification in 1996. 

The third of these activities involves the 
definition and development of future satellite 
communications. The FAA will initiate a study 
of the potential for widespread satellite 
communications use in the NAS considering the 
prospects for new technical approaches to 
provide the desired benefits. This study will 
consider as many of the available options as 
possible and will attain consensus support within 
the aviation community; it will consider 
transition strategies, user equipment costs, and 
other key parameters to assess the sensitivity of 
the results to the assumptions; and it will 
investigate promising approaches and will 
evaluate them in comparison with the existing 


44 





45 


FIGURE 2. HIERARCHY OF SATCOM ACTIVITIES AND TASKS 




















NAS techniques. This study will assess the 
^nefits of satellite communications to general 
aviation a™ and will initiate development of 
innovative technologies to extend the user base. 
The goal of this activity is to assess the 
advantages of satellite communications in the 
FAA's long-range plans for surveillance and 
communications. In FY" 1993, a solicitation for 
a study of an advanced satellite communications 
system will be announced. The results of this 
study will be available in FY1996 and will form 
the basis for further research and development of 
an advanced satellite communications system. 

The proposed schedule for the performance of 
the above mentioned activities is shown in 
Figure 3. Note that the full implementation of 
the use of satellite data and voice 
communications for ATS using SARPs- 
compliant equipment is projected to occur in 
oceanic airspace at the end of the 1990's, in 
U.S. coastal airspace early in 2000's, and in 
U.S. domestic en route airspace by 2010, 


46 




Figure 3. 

Satellite Communications Project Schedule 



* Estimated Dates 
































OPENING SESSION 


Francisco Castro-Rodriguez 
Technical Officer 

Rules of the Air, Air Traffic Services and 
Search and Rescue Section 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
ICAO - Montreal 


Francisco Castrn-Rodriguez, with an educational background in Electronics Technical 
Engineering, has been an Air Traffic Controller since 1968 specializing in ATC data 
processing. From 1974 to 1982, Mr. Castro-Rodriguez shared Controller activities with that 
of ATC Computer Systems Analyst participating in the preparation of technical and 
operational specifications and development of ATC radar and flight data processing systems 
at the Eurocontrol Experimental Centre in Paris, the Electronic Systems Division, 
USAF/MITRE Corporation in Boston and the ATC Automated System SACTA Office in 
Madrid. 

Mr. Castro-Rodriguez joined ICAO’s Technical Assistance Programme in 1983 with the 
initial assignment of developing specifications for an en-route radar simulator, presently 
installed at the Institute de Protecao ao Voo-Centro Tecnico Aerospacial, IPV/CTA in 
Brazil. In 1985, Mr. Castro-Rodriguez was transferred to ICAO Headquarters in Montreal 
where, among other responsibilities, he is presently the Secretary of the Automatic 
Dependent Surveillance (ADS) Panel of the Air Navigation Committee. 



48 







INTERNATIONAL STANDARDIZATION OF FUTURE AIR NAVIGATION SYSTEMS 
AUTOMATIC DEPENDENT SURVEILLANCE (ADS) 

ICAO ADS PANEL ACTIVITIES 

Francisco Castro-Rodriguez 

International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) 

Montreal , Canada 


ROLE AND FUNCTION OF ICAO 

During flight, the crew of 
an aircraft frequently communi¬ 
cates with stations on the 
ground. They obtain air traffic 
control clearances and receive an 
update of weather conditions 
ahead, or the operational status 
of navigation aids en route or at 
destination. There is a con¬ 
tinuous link between the aircraft 
and the ground stations, and 
among the groi.ad stations them¬ 
selves. Many ground facilities 
and supporting services are 
needed for the safe and efficient 
operation of aircraft. To 
achieve harmonious functioning of 
all these ground facilities and 
services, international stan¬ 
dardization is necessary. To 
ensure safety, regularity and 
efficiency of international civil 
aviation operations, such inter¬ 
national standardization is 
essential in all matters concern¬ 
ing the operation of aircraft and 
all facilities and services 
required in the different disci¬ 
plines in the air navigation 
field. 

The ICAO Council has the 
responsibility for adoption of 
Standards and Recommended Prac¬ 
tices and approval of procedures. 


The principal body concerned with 
their development is the ICAO Air 
Navigation Commission. The 
Commission is assisted in this 
work by the technical secretariat 
of the Organization's Air Naviga¬ 
tion Bureau. In the advancement 
of solutions to problems requir¬ 
ing specialized expertise, the 
Commission is also assisted by 
panels. These are groups of 
experts, nominated by Contracting 
States and international organiz¬ 
ations and approved by the 
Commission. 

TECHNICAL WORK AND 
STANDARDIZATION 

The main feature of the 
technical work of the Organiz¬ 
ation deals with achieving 
agreement of the Contracting 
States on the necessary level of 
standardization for the operation 
of safe, regular and efficient 
air services. The necessary 
standardization has been achieved 
by the Organization primarily 
through the creation, adoption 
and amendment by the Council as 
Annexes to the Convention on 
International Civil Aviation of 
specifications known as Interna¬ 
tional Standards and Recommended 
Practices (SARPs). A Standard is 
a specification, the uniform 


49 




application of which is recog¬ 
nized as necessary for the safety 
or regularity of international 
civil air navigation and to which 
Contracting States will conform 
in accordance with the Conven¬ 
tion. A Recommended Practice is 
a specification for physical 
characteristics, configuration, 
material, performance, personnel 
or procedure, the uniform appli¬ 
cation of which is recognized as 
desirable in the interests of 
safety, regularity or efficiency 
of international air navigation. 

Specifications proposed to 
be given the status of Standards 
or Recommended Practices are, 
after consultation with all 
Contracting States, finalized by 
the Air Navigation Commission and 
submitted to the Council for 
adoption. SARPs become effective 
and subsequently applicable at 
dates set by the Council. 

ICAO also formulates Pro¬ 
cedures for Air Navigation 
Services (PANS). The PANS are 
developed by the Air Navigation 
Commission. Following consulta¬ 
tion with all Contracting States, 
they are approved by the Council 
and recommended to Contracting 
States for worldwide application. 


In addition, specifications 
known as Regional Supplementary 
Procedures have been developed, 
approved by the Council and 
recommended to Contracting States 
for application in the flight 
information regions to which they 
are relevant. These procedures 
may indicate modes of implement¬ 
ing procedural provisions in 
SARPs and PANS or specify addi¬ 
tional procedural options for 
regional applications. 


To facilitate the implemen¬ 
tation and to promote the uniform 
application of SARPs and PANS, 
technical manuals or guidance 
material in other forms are 
issued by the Organization under 
the authority of the Secretary 
General. 

REGIONAL PLANNING AND 
IMPLEMENTATION 

In dealing with interna¬ 
tional civil aviation, there are 
many subjects which ICAO con¬ 
siders on a regional basis as 
well as on a worldwide scale. To 
facilitate detailed planning of 
the facilities and services which 
are required to support the 
development of air navigation, 
regional air navigation meetings 
are held periodically to deter¬ 
mine the future requirements. 
These meetings result in the 
enumeration of the requirement 
for facilities and services as 
presented in Air Navigation Plans 
Publications covering the nine 
regions of ICAO. 

Continuing attention is 
being given by ICAO to implemen¬ 
tation of the required facilities 
and services. Seven ICAO re¬ 
gional offices are maintained, in 
Bangkok, Cairo, Dakar, Lima, 
Mexico City, Nairobi and Paris, 
each one accredited to a group of 
Contracting States. These 
offices consult with States in 
the region for the purpose of co¬ 
ordinating implementation plans, 
and provide all possible advice 
and assistance in air navigation 
matters. 

TECHNICAL DEVELOPMENTS 

In keeping pace with the 
rapid development of interna- 


50 


tional civil aviation, ICAO is 
conscious of the need to adopt in 
its specifications reference to 
modern systems and techniques. 
In recent years, ICAO has been 
actively involved in the develop¬ 
ment and implementation of new 
principles and techniques aimed 
at facilitating the safe and 
orderly growth of international 
civil aviation throughout the 
world. 

SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON FUTURE AIR 
NAVIGATION SYSTEMS (FANS) 

In June 1983, the ICAO 
Council established a Special 
Committee on Future Air Naviga¬ 
tion Systems (FANS) in support of 
its continuing policy to develop 
a projection of air navigation 
requirements for international 
civil aviation. 

The FANS Committee concluded 
its task during the fourth 
meeting held in May 1988. The 
report of FANS/4 (Doc 9524), the 
final report of the Committee, 
contains a consolidated set of 
material as developed by all four 
meetings. 

CNS system concept 

The envisaged changes in air 
traffic management (ATM) and the 
shortcomings and future needs 
identified by FANS constitute the 
basis which underlies the FANS 
approach to a future communica¬ 
tions, navigation and surveil¬ 
lance (CNS) system concept. 
Essentially, the Committee con¬ 
cluded that the application of 
satellite technologies was the 
only viable solution that would 
enable international civil 
aviation to overcome the short¬ 
comings of the present CNS 


systems and to fulfil the needs 
and requirements of the foresee¬ 
able future on a global basis. 
Indeed, the Committee saw very 
little prospect of substantial 
improvement in ATM if it were to 
continue having to rely upon the 
present CNS systems. Therefore, 
in response to its terms of 
reference, the Committee devel¬ 
oped ”an overall long-term 
projection for the co-ordinated 
evolutionary development of air 
navigation for international 
civil aviation over a period of 
the order of twenty-five years", 
in which, complementary to 
certain terrestrial systems, 
satellite CNS systems would be 
the key to worldwide improvement 
of ATM systems. 

Automatic dependent surveillance 

In the absence of long-range 
radar surveillance of air traffic 
operations over extensive oceanic 
and certain land areas, the 
procedural air traffic control 
system was necessarily based upon 
position reports provided by 
pilots via voice communications 
channels. The introduction of 
air-ground data links, together 
with sufficiently accurate and 
reliable aircraft navigation 
systems, gives the opportunity to 
provide surveillance services in 
areas which lack such services in 
the present infrastructure, 
particularly in oceanic and other 
areas where the current systems 
prove difficult, or even imposs¬ 
ible, to implement. 

Automatic dependent surveil¬ 
lance (ADS) was defined by FANS 
as a function for use by air 
traffic services in which air¬ 
craft automatically transmit, via 
a data link, data derived from 


51 




on-board navigation systems. As 
a minimum, the data include 
aircraft identification and four¬ 
dimensional position. Additional 
data may be provided as appropri¬ 
ate. The ADS data would be used 
by the automated ATC systems to 
display air traffic situation to 
the controller. In addition to 
areas which are at present devoid 
of traffic position information 
other than pilot-provided posi¬ 
tion reports, ADS would permit 
beneficial application in other 
areas, including high-density 
areas, where ADS may serve as an 
adjunct and/or back-up for 
secondary surveillance radar, and 
thereby reduce the need for 
primary radar. 

The functional objectives of 
ADS, which could vary in differ¬ 
ent areas of application, may be 
characterized as the enhancement 
of flight safety through the 
ability to provide a means of 
surveillance of aircraft operat¬ 
ing outside surveillance radar 
coverage. It requires the timely 
detection and correction of 
deviations from the cleared 
track. Reduction in separation 
would be possible by improved 
communications, and improved' air 
traffic control (ATC) data 
processing and display capabil¬ 
ity. An increased level of 
tactical control is envisaged, 
enabling a more flexible use of 
airspace. An early application 
of ADS is likely to be in oceanic 
areas. 

ATC automated system based on ADS 

It is foreseen that the 
functional capabilities of an ATC 
automated system based on ADS 
will include the processing of 
aircraft position, tracking, air- 


ground and ground-to-ground data 
message processing as well as 
flight plan data processing^ and 
graphical display for traffic 
situation and tabular informa¬ 
tion . Air-ground communication 
system would be mainly via 
satellite data link. 

EVOLUTION AND TRANSITION 

In considering the overall 
CNS system concept, the questions 
of evolution and transition are 
most important. For instance, 
careful planning will be necess¬ 
ary to ensure that aircraft of 
the future are not required to 
carry a multiplicity of existing 
and new communications, naviga¬ 
tion and surveillance equipment. 
In addition, there is a close 
relationship between the required 
CNS services and the desired 
level of air traffic management 
and finally, for reasons of both 
economy and efficiency, there is 
a need to ensure that differences 
in the pace of development around 
the world do not lead to imbal¬ 
ance and incoherence in the 
global air navigation system. In. 
particular, due to the wide 
coverage of satellite CNS sys¬ 
tems , the above considerations 
call for conscientious worldwide 
co-ordination of the planning and 
implementation if such systems 
are to be optimized. 

FANS-PHASE II 

Following development of the 
FANS global concept, the ICAO 
Council in July 1989 established 
a special committee for the 
monitoring and co-ordination of 
development and transition 
planning for the Future Air 
Navigation Systems (FANS-Phase 
II). Its terms of reference 


52 







require the committee to ident¬ 
ify, and make recommendations 
for, acceptable institutional 
arrangements, to develop a global 
co-ordinated plan with appropri¬ 
ate guidelines for transition, 
and to monitor the nature and 
direction of research and devel¬ 
opment programmes, trials and 
demonstrations in CNS and ATM so 
as to ensure their co-ordinated 
integration and harmonization. 
The second meeting of the commit¬ 
tee was held in Montreal, 
April/May 1991. 

RELATED ICAO TECHNICAL BODIES 

Although the technical work 
of FANS was completed at the 
fourth meeting in May 1988, the 
detailed work was only beginning 
and, as a result, existing or new 
ICAO technical bodies were 
required to undertake work on the 
key issues identified by the 
committee. These technical 
bodies include: 

a) The Aeronautical Mobile 
Communications Panel (AMCP), 

b) The Automatic Dependent 
Surveillance Panel (ADSP). 

c) The Secondary Surveillance 
Radar (SSR) Improvements and 
Collision Avoidance Systems 
Panel (SICASP). 

d) The Review of the General 
Concept of Separation Panel 
(RGCSP) 

The third meeting of the 
Aeronautical Mobile-Satellite 
Services (AMSS) Panel was held in 
Montreal, February 1990. The 
panel completed tasks related to 
studies on satellite resources 
sharing and frequency spectrum 


requirements for aeronautical 
safety services. In addition, 
several working groups of the 
panel further refined the AMSS 
SARPs which are expected to be 
completed by the next panel 
meeting. The Communications/ 
Meteorology/Operations Divisional 
Meeting (1990) held in Montreal, 
September 1991, identified the 
need for better utilization of 
the 118-137 MHz VHF band and the 
development of SARPS for VHF data 
link to be used for air traffic 
control and operational control 
services. The Air Navigation 
Commission decided that work 
could begin promptly if the new 
task were assigned to the AMSS 
Panel. As result, the termc of 
reference of the panel were 
modified accordingly and the name 
changed to the Aeronautical 
Mobile Communications Panel 
(AMCP). 

The ADS Panel held its first 
meeting in Montreal, January 
1991. The panel progressed work 
on the conceptual evolution of 
automatic dependent surveillance 
and the development of oper¬ 
ational requirements for the use 
of ADS in air traffic control. 
The meeting considered issues 
related to the expansion of the 
ADS definition, the content of 
ADS report messages to include 
new data elements and to built-in 
flexibility in the composition of 
ADS messages and the establish¬ 
ment of a framework for further 
development of the operational 
requirements for ADS systems. 
The existing guidance material on 
ADS published in the ICAO Circu¬ 
lar 226, was considered valuable 
information for the future work 
of the ADS panel. Following 
consideration of the concept of 
ADS and how the function could be 


53 





used in ATC, the panel considered 
that aircraft position reporting 
through ADS by itself as a single 
application of the future digital 
data link systems would not meet 
the requirements of ATC. It was 
felt that the reduction of 
separation minima will only be 
achieved on the basis of the 
efficient use of ADS and rapid 
controller intervention capabil¬ 
ity. The Air Navigation Commis¬ 
sion requested the Review of the 
General Concept of Separation 
Panel (RGCSP) to give a high 
priority to the question of 
separation minima for use with 
ADS. The panel recognized the 
need to standardize ADS messages 
and two-way pilot-controller data 
communications as to the format 
and content of air-ground ATS 
applications messages and ground- 
to-ground communications. The 
next meeting of the ADS Panel is 
tentatively scheduled for the 
second quarter of 1992. 

The SICAS Panel developed 
SARPs for SSR Mode S to support 
implementation of the system 
compatible with the existing SSR. 
Also, provisions for application 
of 24-bit addresses were devel¬ 
oped. SSR Mode S standardization 
is essentially complete, with the 
exception of possible modifica¬ 
tions of SARPs resulting from 
implementation experiences. The 
panel developed guidance material 
on Mode S data link and published 
it in ICAO Circular 212. The 
panel is expected to develop 
SARPs for Mode S data link at its 
fifth meeting. Regarding air¬ 
borne collision avoidance systems 
(ACAS), ICAO will continue to 
encourage operational evaluations 
of ACAS II that are being con¬ 
ducted on the basis of ICAO 
guidelines and procedures devel¬ 


oped by the SICAS Panel. Guid¬ 
ance material relating to the 
Aeronautical Telecommunication 
Network (ATN) is to be published 
shortly. The Panel is continuing 
work on developing SARPs for the 
ATN. 

The RGCS Panel is progress¬ 
ing three tasks related to FANS. 
At the seventh meeting held in 
Montreal, October/November 1990, 
the panel completed guidance ma¬ 
terial on the implementation of 
a 300 m (1 000 ft) vertical 
separation minimum above FL 290. 
The panel developed material for 
a manual of Area Navigation 
(RNAV) Operations, reflecting the 
experience gained to date with 
RNAV. This ICAO manual (Doc 
9573) is expected to facilitate 
the early implementation of RNAV 
routes on a global basis. 
Progress was also made in the 
development of the required 
navigation performance (RNP) 
concept, which is part of the 
communications, navigation and 
surveillance (CNS) system envis¬ 
aged by FANS. In addition, the 
panel considered that an airspace 
planning methodology should be 
developed for determining the 
separation minima that addresses 
the use of RNP as well as 
expected traffic, route configur¬ 
ation , and communications, 
surveillance and air traffic 
control services provided. 

CONCLUSION 

To ensure safety, regularity 
and efficiency of international 
civil aviation operations, inter¬ 
national standardization is es¬ 
sential in all matters concerning 
the operation of aircraft and the 
facilities and services required 
such as aerodromes, telecommuni- 


54 





cations, navigation aids, meteor¬ 
ology, air traffic services, 
search and rescue, aeronautical 
information services and aero¬ 
nautical charts. Participation 
in this process of standard¬ 
ization by all countries is 
absolutely necessary. The ICAO 
Council adopts (or amends when 
necessary) International Stan¬ 
dards and Recommended Practices 
and approves procedures for the 
safety, regularity and efficiency 
of air navigation. 


ICAO is actively involved in 
the evolutionary development of 
the air navigation system and in 
global implementation planning 
for the communications, naviga¬ 
tion and surveillance systems. 
Automatic dependent surveillance 
is the key to improvements in air 
traffic management on a world¬ 
wide basis, and its development 
and implementation is being 
guided by ICAO through the FANS 
Committee (Phase II) and panels 
of the Air Navigation Commission. 


55 




OPENING SESSION 




W. Frank Price 
Manager 

International Procedures Branch 
Federal Aviation Administration 


W. Frank Price is a veteran of 20 years of Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
experience. In various capacities, he has served in 5 towers, 2 ARTCCs, and FAA 
headquarters. Mr. Price has also held the position of FAA Military Liaison Officer at 
Myrtle Beach AFB, South Carolina. 

During his tenure as Manager of the Anchorage ARTCC, Mr. Price was instrumental in 
reestablishing cooperative air traffic control agreements with the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics (USSR) Ministry of Civil Aviation. These agreements provided for the exchange 
of air traffic services information between Anchorage ARTCC and Anadyr Area Control 
Center. 

Mr. Price holds a general aviation comrnerxial pilot license and instniment rating. 

Mr. Price is presently the Manager of the International Procedures Branch, Air Traffic 
Operations Service, at FAA headquarters, Washington, D.C. 










lhteiiiatipnaI^(5iyit^AMation Oi^ai^ 
Automatic Dependeiit^^SiirveOiahce-iF^hei'C^ 
ActiViti^' -■ ■ ■ 


W. Frank Price, Manager 
International Procedures Branch, 
Federal Aviation Administration 
and 

Faye I. Francy, ADS Program Manager 
MiTech, Incorporated 


Introduction 

Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS), 
with ATC Automation data link, has the 
potential to upgrade the efficiency and safety 
of air traffic control over much of the world’s 
airspace. The system must be standardized, 
however, to the extent that hardware and 
message formats are compatible, regardless of 
which satellite is being used. This will 
maximize the potential usefulness of the 
system and thus provide the motivation for 
international aircraft operators to equip their 
fleets with necessary avionics. But if only a 
few countries were to adopt the system, its 
potential usefulness would be reduced 
correspondingly. 

Fortunately a number of countries, including 
Australia, Canada, France, Iceland, Japan, 
Portugal, Spain, the Union of Socialist Soviet 
Republics, the United Kingdom, and the 
United States of America, are actively 
supporting ADS. 


Background 

The various developments are being 
coordinated through the Committees of the 
International Civil Aviation Organization 


(ICAO), which has been the forum for 
international development and standardization 
efforts for ADS and for satellite-based 
communications, navigation and surveillance 
(CNS). An initial study was performed in 
1978 by the Committee to Review the 
Applications of Satellite and Other Techniques 
to Civil Aviation, in conjunction with the 
United States Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA). 

This study resulted in the Oceanic Area 
System Improvement Study (OASIS) report, 
which was completed in 1981. It presented a 
survey of alternative approaches to improving 
air traffic services in oceanic areas, including 
the use of satellites in the application of ADS. 
It also provided the basis for subsequent ADS 
work. Since then, ICAO has continued to 
develop the concept of a global CNS system 
approach, through the work of its various 
committees, panels and working groups. 

The Special Committee on Future Air 
Navigation Systems (FANS) Committee was 
established by the ICAO Council at the end of 
1983 to identify and assess new concepts and 
technology, including satellite technology, in 
the field of air navigation, and to make 
recommendations for the development of air 
navigation for international civil aviation, over 


57 





/ 


the next 25 years. The final FANS 
Committee Report (Doc 9524, FANS/4), 
published in 1988, consolidated the 
recommendations of all of the FANS 
meetings. 

Upon completion of the FANS work program 
and the formulation of its blueprint for future 
air navigation systems, the Aeronautical 
Mobile Communication (AMC) Panel, 
formerly Aeronautical Mobile-Satellite Service 
(AMSS) Panel, the ADS Study Group, and 
subsequently the ADS Panel, were established 
within ICAO, to further the FANS work and 
develop the necessary detailed specifications 
and procedures. Additionally, a new ICAO 
Committee (FANS II) was established to carry 
out the overall monitoring and coordination of 
developments in transition planning, so that 
implementation of the future CNS system will 
take place on a global basis in a cost-effective 
manner. 

The Aeronautical Mobile Communication 
Panel (AMCP) was established in 1987 to 
undertake specific studies as approved by the 
Air Navigation Commission. Its objective 
was to develop Standards, Recommended 
Practices (SARPs), procedures and suitable 
guidance material related to air-ground digital 
data and voice communications of aeronautical 
mobile-satellite services. The results were 
required to be compatible with other air- 
ground data links and ground air traffic 
services (ATS) communication networks, and 
consideration of ADS requirements. 

The Secondary Surveillance Radar 
Improvements and Collision Avoidance 
System Panel (SICASP) was established in 
1981 to develop Standards and Recommended 
Practices, (SARPs) and suitable guidance 
material concerning secondary surveillance 
radar (SSR) enhancements and related data 
links and collision avoidance systems. 


In 1987, as a result of FANS/3 
Recommendation 7/3, the Panel was given the 
task of developing protocols to permit 
commonality and interoperability between 
Mode S and other ATS data links, including 
satellite data links. In the specific area of 
ADS, the SICAS Panel is working on the 
development of the upper layer Open System 
Interconnection (OSI) protocols to support the 
periodic reporting requirements of ADS so 
that the AMC Panel can define the satellite 
sub-network (lower OSI reference model) 
layers. In particular, this effort will include 
the interface between ADS and the 
aeronautical telecommunications network 
(ATN). The ATN is being designed to 
operate as a single, cooperative virtual data 
network using airborne and ground-based 
subnetworks based on standardized protocols. 
The ATN provides data communications 
connectivity among various communications 
interfaces that are user transparent. 

SICASP working groups have been making 
progress in connection with the development 
of SARPs and guidance material for SSR 
Mode S systems based on the aeronautical 
telecommunications network, and on matters 
relating to SSR Mode S data link and 
interoperability considerations between Mode 
S and other ATS data link systems. 

The North Atlantic Systems Planning Group 
(NAT/SPG) is composed of Member States 
directly involved with airspace within the 
North Atlantic. This group is charged with 
continuously studying, monitoring and 
evaluating the system in the light of evolving 
traffic characteristics, technological advances 
and updated traffic forecasts, so that the North 
Atlantic Regional Plan may be adjusted on a 
timely, evolutionary basis. NAT/SPG 
established a Task Force to develop a 
common future Air Traffic Management 
(ATM) system concept for the North Atlantic, 
on the basis of which a regional 


58 






implementation plan will be prepared. It is 
envisaged that several tasks will be finalized 
in time for their results to be reviewed by a 
NAT Regional Air Navigation Meeting 
scheduled for late 1992. 

In defining the common future ATM concept, 
the Task Force assessed the problems related 
to the operational concepts that must be 
developed to accommodate the transition to 
the new technologies. 

On December 10, 1987, the Air Navigation 
Commission agreed to the establishment of the 
Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) 
Study Group to assist the Secretariat in 
developing urgent tasks related to the ADS. 
The group held its first meeting in Montreal, 
Canada, March 1989 and developed 
operational communication requirements as 
requested by AMSSP/1 Recommendation 
2.1/1. The second meeting of the group was 
held in Montreal, December 1989, with the 
purpose of developing guidance material for 
the ICAO Circular on ADS. 

ICAO ADS Panel 

On April 24, 1990, the Air Navigation 
Commission established the Automatic 
Dependent Surveillance (ADS) Panel. The 
first ADS Panel meeting was held in 
Montreal, Canada, January 14 to 25, 1991. 
The meeting was attended by fourteen 
members and three observers nominated or 
designated by States and international 
organizations. The FAA’s International 
Procedures Branch Manager, Mr. Frank 
Price, (ATP-140) was elected as Chairman of 
the meeting. The Secretary of the meeting 
was Mr. F. Castro-Rodriguez, Technical 
Officer of the Rules of the Air, Air Traffic 
Services and Search and Rescue (RAC/SAR) 
Section. 


Terms of Reference (TOR) 

The Terms of Reference of the ADS Panel 
were to undertake specific studies, as 
approved by the Air Navigation Commission, 
with a view toward d jveloping Standards and 
Recommended Practices (SARPs), procedures 
and, where appropriate, suitable guidance 
material on automatic dependent surveillance 
(ADS), using as a basis the ADS material 
presented in the third meeting of the Special 
Committee on Future Air Navigation Systems 
(FANS/3) and the fourth meeting of the 
Special Committee on Future Air Navigation 
Systems (FANS/4) Reports, while maintaining 
close coordination with the Aeronautical 
Mobile Communication (AMC), Secondary 
Surveillance Radar Improvements and 
Collision Avoidance Systems (SICAS), AFS 
Systems Planning for Data Interchange (ASP), 
and Review of the General Concept of 
Separation (RGCS) Panels, and other bodies, 
as necessary, in order to facilitate the timely 
exchange of up-to-date information and 
working documentation, and to prevent, to 
the extent possible, duplication and 
fragmentation of work. 

Work Program 

In line with the TOR, the ADS Panel’s Work 
Program was outlined as follows: 

1. Undertake the necessary studies and 
coordination for the development and 
implementation of ADS; 

2. Develop operational requirements for 
automatic air-ground data interchange 
necessary for ADS; 

3. Develop operational requirements for 
two-way pilot-controller data 
interchange necessary to support the 
effective application of ADS in air 
traffic services; 


59 




4. Develop operational requirements for 

the processing and display of ADS 
data for use in air traffic services 
(ATS) with, a view to facilitating the 
harmonization of ATS systems; 

5. Develop a comprehensive assessment 

of the effect of ADS on air traffic 
services, including separation between 
aircraft in an exclusive ADS and 
mixed air traffic environment; and 

6. Develop SARPs, procedures and 

guidance material, as required, relating 
to the use of ADS in the provision of 
air traffic services. 

ADSP/1 Meeting Agenda 

The agenda for the first ADS Panel meeting 
included the following: 

Agenda Item 1: Review of ADS related 

developments, interrelationship of activities of 
related panels, on-going programs and planned 
ADS experiments; 

Agenda Item 2: Development of the 

operational requirements for automatic air- 
ground data interchange necessary for ADS; 

Agenda Item 3: Development of the 

operational requirements for two-way pilot- 
controller communications for the effective 
use of ADS; 

Agenda Item 4: Review of the panel’s work 
program and determination of the approach to 
be taken to ensure timely progress on the 
priority tasks at hand; and 

Agenda Item 5: Future work assignments. 

Review of APS Activities 

During its first meeting, the ADS Panel was 
provided with information on the- activities 
performed by ICAO in the field of ADS and 


related developments. The Panel was 
presented with an update on the progress'of 
ADS activities by different ICAO bodies, 
individual States and international 
organizations: Worldwide on-going programs 
and planned experiments were presented and 
discussed. Also, the FAA provided 
information on the ADS program and the real¬ 
time simulation of satellite-based ADS 
developed by EUROCONTROL. 

Operational Requirements for ADS 

The meeting began the study of operational 
requirements for ADS by considering the 
studies and work on communications and 
surveillance systems that had been completed 
by various ICAO specialized bodies. The 
meeting reviewed the ADS material contained 
in ICAO Circular 226-AN/135, developed by 
the Secretariat with the assistance of the ADS 
Study Group. It was recognized that the 
publication of the Circular was timely and that 
its content was extremely valuable to States 
and international organizations. 

The concept of ADS and the ATS use of this 
function were discussed extensively. It was 
argued that ADS could be considered as a 
single application of the future air-ground 
communications system to provide only 
aircraft position information for surveillance 
purposes, in a manner similar to secondary 
surveillance radar systems. The establishment 
of a base line ADS message limited to the 
capability of the "basic ADS report" message 
type defined by FANS was proposed. 

ADSP concluded that, from an operational 
point of view, ADS should be considered as a 
service rather than as a function, and that 
future air-ground data link communications 
systems will be used for both ADS and the 
interchange of all ATS messages and data 
elements necessary for two-way pilot- 
controller communications. Such 


60 







communications were considered essential if 
ADS were to be an effective component of the 
ATC system. 

ADS Definition 

The Panel reviewed the ADS definition as 
detailed in the FANS/4 report and the ICAO 
Circular 226-AN/135, and recommended 
expanding the definition as follows: 

"Automatic Dependent Surveillance" is a 
S‘>.rvice for use by air traffic services (ATS) in 
which aircraft automatically providey via a 
data link, data derived from on-board 
navigation and position-fixing systems. As a 
minimum, the data should include aircreft 
identification and four-dimensional position. 
Additional data may be provided as 
appropriate. 

An "ADS-based ATC system" (ADS-ATC) is 
an ATC system with appropriate automation 
and communications facilities relying on 
ADS updates to provide surveillance. 

The Panel agreed that ADS-ATC must also 
include the capability of exchanging messages 
between the pilot and the controller via data 
link and by voice for emergency and non- 
routine communications. 

The ADS Panel simplified the definition of 
areas and selected four representative types of 
airspace as follows: en-route high density 
without radar, en-route low density without 
radar, terminal areas with radar and terminal 
areas without radar. 

Benefits and Areas of Application 

Also considered were other areas where ADS 
would be beneficial which included: 


1. areas with low-altitude operations 
outside radar cover, such as oil rig 
support below radar coverage, and 

2. areas where air traffic would normally 
be served by a small non-fadar unit, 
which, due to unforseen 
circumstances, had to contend with 
temporary major increases of traffic 
density, such as the results of natural 
disasters, search and rescue 
operations, and other similar events. 

System Components 

The ADS system components as described in 
ICAO Circular 226-AN/135 are: Pilot 
Interface, Avionics, Data Links, 
Communications Interface, ATC Automation, 
and Controller Interface. 

Effect of ADS on Separation 

The meeting considered the probability that 
the use of ADS with its inherent capability for 
rapid intervention would permit reduced 
separation minima in various ADS-ATC 
environments. While it was considered 
beyond the scope of ADSP to define 
reductions in separation, the panel agreed that 
this issue should be referred to the RGCSP as 
a matter of urgency. The panel formulated 
Recommendation 2.1 - ADS-ATC 

separation minima : "That the RGCSP be 
requested to examine the question of 
separation minima in different ADS-ATC 
environments, taking into consideration the 
report of the first meeting of the ADSP." 

The work being carried out in the North 
Atlantic Region in the recent past has served 
to indicate that horizontal separation could be 
reduced using current navigation equipment, 
provided that the incidence of gross navigation 
errors (GNEs) was reduced. The extended 
ADS message was expected to contribute to 
such reduction. 


61 




ADS-ATC Communications Procedures 

The Panel discussed many aspects of the 
ADS-ATC system, including procedures for 
the initial establishment of data link 
communications between the avionics and the 
ground based ATC automation system and the 
agreement between aircraft and ground system 
on the data to be exchanged. 

Clearance through ADS-ATC airspace should 
not be a separate function, but a system- 
driven automatic function using on line data 
interchange (OLDI) and based on the transfer 
of current flight plans between ATC units. 
However, in the early implementation stage, 
as an aircraft approaches the ADS-ATC 
airspace boundary, the pilot may be required 
to address the initial message to the relevant 
air traffic control center and request specific 
clearance into the airspace. 

The ATC/Aircraft agreement would be 
established by the ATC system, with each 
aircraft, for portions of the aircraft flignl. The 
agreement would include the basic ADS 
message and one or more message extensions. 
There is also a requirement to address ADS 
messages to more than one addressee. 


ADS Message Format 

The ADS message content and data blocks, as 
agreed by the Panel, are as follows: 


A, Basic ADS 

Latitude 

Longitude 

Altitude 

Time 

Figure of Merit 


B. Ground Vector 

Track 

Ground Speed 
Vertical Rate 

C. Air Vector 

Heading 

Mach or Indicated Air Speed (IAS) 
Vertical Rate 

D. Projected profile 

Next Way-point 

Estimated altitude at next way-point 
Next+1 way-point 

Estimated altitude at (next+1) way- 
point 

E. Weather 

Wind speed 
Wind direction 
Temperature 


Operational Communications Requirement 

ADSP was aware of the urgent need for the 
timely exchange of information with the AMC 
Panel. The operational communications 
requirements for ADS, documented at 
Appendix B to the Report on Agenda Item 2, 
represent an initial assessment of values which 
would provide the information needed to 
progress work on developing the technical 
aspects of ADS. The panel formulated 
Recommendation 2.2 - Operational 

Requirement for ADS : "That the operational 
communications requirements at Appendix B 
to the Report on Agenda Item 2 be considered 
by the AMSS Panel and other technical bodies 
dealing with development of future 
communications systems used in air traffic 
services." 


62 







Operational Requirements for Two-Wav 
Pilot-Controller Communications for the 
Effective use of ADS 

The need for two-way pilot-controller 
communications to support the effective use of 
ADS was recognized by FANS. It was for 
this reason that the ANC had tasked the ADS 
Panel to develop operational requirements for 
this link to support air traffic services in an 
ADS environment. 

The initial scope of work contained three main 
interrelated subjects: 

1. Development of operational 
communication requirements, 

2. Data messages, and 

3. Operational scenarios. 

The Panel identified a lack of available 
information to develop the operational 
requirements and concluded that only 
preliminary data could be made available for 
the AMC Panel meeting in November. 

A third recommendation was proposed: 
Recommendation 3/1 - Studies and 

evaluation of ADS : "Taking into 

consideration the urgent need to progress 
work in this area. States and interested 
international organizations be urged to conduct 
studies of operational requirements, data 
messages and operational scenarios in order to 
evaluate the effective use of ADS and also to 
make the results of these efforts available to 
ICAO for high priority distribution." 

APS Work Program 

The objective of the ADSP is to develop a set 
of SARPs which fully define the operational 
ADS-ATC system. In order to fulfill this 
goal, the Panel defined the scope of work as 
follows: 


* Develop ADS-ATC operational 
requirements; 

* Expand and identify scenarios; 

* Translate operation^ requirements into 
the requirements for the SARPs; and 

* Develop proposals for Annex material 
and guidance material on procedures 
for the use of ADS-ATC. 

The Panel identified the work which would be 
performed through two working groups: 

A. Working Group A: ADS Operational 
Requirements 

Working Group A shall develop the 
operational requirements matrices by 
collecting data on ADS from ICAO 
bodies and other groups. This group 
will coordinate the compilation and 
presentation of the data leading to the 
development of a complete set of 
operational requirements for the ADS 
service. 

B. Working Group B: SARPs for APS 

Working Group B shall use the 
scenarios and operational requirements 
as they develop to produce SARPs and 
guidance material. 

The work program, Terms of Reference for 
each Worldng Group, and schedules were 
developed and selected to enable possible 
rapid progress in completing the work. 


Working Group Meetings 

The first Working Group Meeting was held in 
Montreal, Canada, 8-20 April, 1991. 
Working Group A completed the matrices 
"ADS Non-Radar En Route Flight Scenario 
(Near Term)" and "ADS Non-Radar Terminal 
Flight Scenario (Near Term)". Further work 


63 




was necessary for the near term ADS non¬ 
radar TMA flight description and the need to 
address emergency and abnormal situations. 

Working Group B identified and drafted an 
outline for the development of SARPs, but 
with the provision that this outline required 
further revision. This outline was intended 
for use as guidance material with the goal of 
producing a complete, efficient set of 
messages and rules which will meet the 
current and future needs of the ATC 
community. 

The second Working Group Meeting was held 
in Lisbon, Portugal, 12-23 August, 1991. 
Retaining the configuration of both Working 
Groups, it was agreed that four sub-groups: 
Drafting, Communication, Technical, and 
Coordination, would be established to produce 
Guidance Material for presentation to ADSP/2 
with a focus on developing SARPs. 

The agenda for the second Panel meeting was 
outlined and the meeting was tentatively 
scheduled for the end of April, 1992. A third 
Working Group Meeting was scheduled for 
February to review the work to be presented 
to the Panel. 

Conclusion 


aircraft operators, and would reduce the 
incentive for such operators to purchase the 
airborne equipment. 

The lower the percentage of aircraft which 
can participate in the advanced surveillance 
and the direct, reliable communications 
possible with ADS, the lower the gains which 
ADS could make in improving the efficiency 
and safety of flight operations in oceanic 
airspace, and over the vast land areas which 
lack adequate ATC surveillance or reliable, 
remote communications capabilities. 

Therefore, we must achieve the necessary 
worldwide compatibility of ADS equipment. 
Universal interoperability is the goal and the 
key to the globalization of ADS. 


In a recent speech. Admiral Busey, FAA 
Administrator, told an international audience, 
"The time is gone when each nation can do its 
own thing, without regard to what the others 
are doing." We must achieve the degree of 
standardization or harmonization necessary to 
provide universal compatibility for ADS 
equipment. Otherwise, ADS cannot be a 
global system. Its effectiveness would be 
limited to those areas where the chai’acteristics 
of the airborne equipment happened to match 
those of the satellite and the ground 
equipment. Such a limitation would reduce 
the potential economic benefit to international 


64 






CO-AUTHOR 



Faye I. Francy 
ADS Program Manager 
MiTech, Incorporated 


Faye I. Francy is the ADS Program Manager for MiTech, Incorporated under contract with 
the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). The contract furnishes technical, management, 
and administrative support to the FAA ADS Program Manager. 

Ms. Francy has been involved with many aspects in supporting the ADS Program Office 
including various technical meetings such as the System Requirements Team, RTCA, 
AEEC, and the ICAO ADS Panel and its working groups. Additionally she assists in the 
multiple management and administration areas of the ADS program and is the focal point 
for the planning and execution of this symposium. 

Ms. Francy has worked on various FAA programs including the Enhanced Traffic 
Management System (ETMS) where she provided controller training on the Aircraft 
situation Display (ASD) at Air Traffic Control Centers throughout the country, "Strategic 
Airport Research, Engineering and Development Plan" support, and "Compliance and 
Enforcement" coui'se development for airport security. 

Ms. Francy has a Bachelors degree in Chemistry and Mathematics and received her Masters 
of Science degree from the University of Pittsburgh in the area of Forensic Chemistry. 


65 






OPENING SESSION 



Peter L. Massoglia 
ADS Program Manager 
Federal Aviation Administration 


Peter L. Massoglia is the Program Manager of the Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) 
Program with the Federal Aviation Administration in Washington, D.C. Mr. Massoglia 
holds a Baccalaureate degree (BSAE) in aeronautical engineering from Saint Louis 
University and has done graduate work at George Washington University. 

In addition to a broad background in flight test engineering of U.S. Army and Navy aircraft 
he has extensive experience in reliability, maintainability and system standards. He has 
been with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) since 1976 and is presently assigned 
to the Research and Development Service. This organization has principal responsibility 
within the FAA for the development and acquisition of new technology systems. In his 
present assignment Mr. Massoglia is responsible for: the research, development, and 
implementation of the ADS program within the FAA; The development of Memorandum 
of Cooperation (MOC) with various states; and the coordination of international standards. 


r ' I . 













^ . 

. .. 








• • < 











< 



'I 

iteraational 

Prb^r 

itSuiiiliaiT 

. •• . 

' 









' • >. 


-- 

>: ».vr- -V...... 

...... 

• » V .. . • -s... ^ 



Peter L. Massoglia 
ADS Program Manager 
Federal Aviation Administration 
and 

William J. Budurka 
Senior Systems Engineer 
MiTech, Incorporated 


ABSTRACT 


This paper identifies and describes the 
Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) 
programs of those countries which, in addition 
to the United States, are most heavily 
involved in the operational implementation of 
ADS on an international basis. It also 
identifies and describes the past and on-going 
ICAO supported ADS activities that provide 
the overall guidelines for the individual 
country ADS programs. 

INTRODUCTION 

The existing manual dependent approach to 
air traffic control surveillance in oceanic 
airspace, as well as the airspace of other 
remote regions of the world, is in the process 
of being replaced with automatic dependent 
surveillance on a world-wide basis. In 
addition to replacing manual with automatic 
position reporting, ADS will replace the 
existing High Frequency (HF) analog voice 
link, for position reporting and other 
messages, with a satellite digital link for both 
data and voice messages. 

Because the implementation of ADS is 
international in scope, implementation success 
depends on the cooperative and coordinated 
efforts among many national and international 


organizations, including the following: 

• The United Nations (UN) International 
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) 
and its various committees, panels, 
study groups, etc. that are responsible 
for establishing international standards. 

• The individual countries involved (and 
their respective civil aviation 
organizations) that have responsibility 
for portions of international airspace 
delegated to them by the UN. 

• National standards organizations such 
as the Radio Technical Commission 
for Aeronautics (RTCA), and the 
Airline Electronic Engineering 
Committee (AEEC) in the United 
States. 

• Airlines from the many countries with 
international routes. 

• Providers of aeronautical mobile 
communications services such as 
SITA, ARINC, AVICOM, etc. whose 
services are impacted by ADS 
requirements. 

• Providers of satellite communication 
services, such as INMARSAT and 
COMSAT, whose services must be 
adjusted to accommodate the needs of 
ADS. 


67 





• International and National Trade 
Organizations such atlATA, IFALPA, 
IFATA who represent the ultimate 
users of ADS. 

Fortunately, the required cooperation and 
coordination among this complex set of 
organizations has been forthcoming and, as a 
result, ADS is well on its way to 
implementation internationally. Without this 
cooperation and coordination it would be 
impossible to achieve an international 
implementation of ADS and the benefits it 
promises in air safety, fuel economy, etc. 

The objective of this paper is to identify and 
describe those individual and cooperative 
efforts of the countries which have been and 
continue to be actively involved in: a) ADS 
research and development; b) ADS 
operational engineering experiments and trials; 
and c) the development of the ICAO 
standards to provide the foundation for 
international implementation of ADS. 

BACKGROUND 

The United Nations International Civil 
Aviation Organization (ICAO) has been, and 
will continue to be, the forum for international 
development and standardization of ADS as 
well as other related satellite-based 
communications, navigation, and surveillance 
(CNS) programs. This is accomplished within 
ICAO by means of ICAO established 
committees, working groups, and panels 
whose membership is comprised primarily of 
the civil aviation authorities of ICAO member 
governments, and other supporting 
organizations. 

Table 1 provides a brief chronology of some 
key world-wide ADS events resulting from 
ICAO sponsored activities. These events set 
the stage, and continue to provide a focal 
point, for the international ADS programs 


described later in this paper. 

The single event, more than any other, that 
"triggered" the international development of 
ADS was the completion, in 1981, of the 
Ocean Area System Improvement Study 
(OASIS). This study developed and evaluated 
a number of alternative approaches to 
improving air traffic services in ocean areas; 
it initially developed the ADS technique and 
consider^ its implementation using both High 
Frequency (HF) and satellite based 
communication links. The 1981 OASIS 
report was prepared to support the informal 
international "Committee to Review the 
Applications of Satellite and Other Techniques 
to Civil Aviation", commonly referred to as 
the ICAO Aviation Review Committee 
(ARC), established three years earlier in 
1978. 

In 1983, two years after the publication of the 
OASIS report, the ICAO Council, acting on 
the recommendation of the ARC, established 
a new special committee on Future Air 
Navigations Systems (FANS). The objective 
of the FANS Committee, which included a 
Working Group on ADS, was an assessment 
of the use of satellite technology for 
international civil aviation looking 25 years 
ahead (or, 10 years into the twenty-first 
century). The FANS committee was 

supported by, among others, the U.S. Radio 
Technical Commission for Aeronautics 
(RTCA). The RTCA formed Special 
Committee #155 in 1984 to provide a 
consolidated view of user inputs; the 
Committee issued its report to FANS in 1986. 

In 1988, five years after being established by 
ICAO, the FANS Committee held its fourth 
and final meeting (referred to as FANS/4) and 
issued its final report. As a part of this 
meeting, an ADS Working Group was 
established to continue the development and 


68 






Table 1. 


A Brief Chronology of Some World-Wide ADS Events 


1978 The Aviation Review Committee (ARC) initially established by the Aerosat Council, and consisting 
of 18 ICAO nations and 7 organizations, initiate a reappraisal of the future use of satellites for 
civil aviation. 

1981 The Ocean Area System Improvement Study (OASIS), completed in support of the ICAO ARC, 
initially developed the ADS technique and considered its implementation using both HF and 
satellite data link communications. 

1983 Acting on the recommendation of the ARC, the ICAO Council formed a special committee on 
Future Air Navigation Systems (FANS) to identify and assess new concepts and technology, 
including satellite technology, for the development of international civil aviation looking ahead for 
a 25 year period. FANS included a working group on ADS. 

1986 The RTCA SC-155, formed in 1984, issued its Final Report to the ICAO FANS Committee. 

1987 In December, the ICAO Air Navigation Commission established on Automatic Dependent 
Surveillance (ADS) Study Group to assist the Secretariat in conducting urgent tasks related to ADS. 

1988 In May, the Fourth and final Meeting of the full ICAO FANS Committee (referred to as FANS/4), 
formed in 1984, was held in Montreal. It initiated an ADS Working Group to continue the 
development and refinement of .ADS based on the ADS concept and message format definitions 
developed by the FANS Committee. FANS continued to advise the ICAO Council until a new 
committee could be established. 

1989 In March, the ADS Study Group held its first meeting in Montreal and developed operational 
communication requirements as requested by AMSSP/1 Recommendation 2.1/1 

1989 In July, the ICAO Council established a new FANS Phase II Committee (referred to as FANS II) 
for monitoring, coordination of development and transition planning for the future air navigation 
system. 

1989 In December, the ADS Study Group held its second meeting in Montreal to develop guidance 
material for the ICAO Circular on ADS (Circular 226-AN/135). 

1990 In April, the ICAO Air Navigation Commission established the Automatic Dependent Surveillance 
(ADS) Panel (ADSP) to undertake specific studies with a view to developing SARPS, procedures 
and guidance material on ADS and to provide timely exchange with other ICAO bodies. 

1991 In January, the ADS Panel (ADSP) held its first Meeting in Montreal, Canada. 

1991 In August, the ADSP held its second Meeting in Lisbon, Portugal. 


69 







refinement of ADS based on the ADS concept 
and message formats developed by FANS. 

In late 1987, just prior to the 1988 FANS/4 
meeting, the ICAO Air Navigation 
Commission established an ADS Study Group 
to assist the SECRETARIAT in conducting 
"urgent tasks" related to ADS. This Study 
Group held two meetings in 1989, each with 
a specific objective. The objective of the first 
meeting, held in early 1989, was to develop 
ADS communication requirements in response 
to a request by the ICAO Aeronautical Mobile 
Satellite Service Panel (AMSSP). The 
objective of the second meeting, held in late 
1989, was to develop guidance material for 
the preparation of the ICAO Circular on ADS 
(Circular 226/AN/135). 

In 1990, the ICAO Air Navigation 
Commission established an ADS Panel 
(ADSP). This panel replaced both the ADS 
Study Group and the FANS/4 ADS Working 
Group. The primary objective of the ADS 
Panel is to develop ICAO Standards and 
Recommended Practices (SARPS). So far, 
the ADS Panel has held two meetings in 
1991: the first in Montreal, Canada; the 
second in Lisbon, Portugal. As a result of 
these two ADS Working Group Meetings, 
guidance material is being prepared to present 
to the ADSP/2 for acceptance with a focus on 
developing SARPs. 

The ADS Panel is currently the principal 
organizational entity empowered by ICAO to 
focus on ADS. In addition to the ADS Panel, 
ICAO is also currently sponsoring a number 
of additional organizations with efforts that 
are ADS related. These ADS related 
organizations are shown in Table 2 together 
with their terms of reference, dates 
established, and current status. 

A more comprehensive version of the 
chronology contained in Table 1 is included in 


Appendix A. Appendix A covers some thirty 
five (35) international events, spanning twenty 
three (23) years from 1968 to the present 
(1991), that are either directly, or indirectly, 
related to the development of ADS. 

INTERNATIONAL PROGRAM 

In addition to the United States there are ten 
(10) countries with active ADS programs. 
The countries with such programs, together 
with the names of their civil aviation 
organizations, are shown in Table 3. The 
countries listed in Table 3 are interested in 
ADS because each has a responsibility, 

assigned to it by the United Nations, for a 
particular segment of oceanic airspace in 
which ADS will be implemented. 

The ADS programs of the countries identified 
in Table 3 are summarized in Table 4. This 
table contains: 

• Country Name 

• ADS Program Elements 

• Summary Description of each ADS 

Program Element 

Each of the countries included in Table 4 has 
at least one program element that is being 
pursued more or less independently of any 
other country. In addition to these 
independent program elements, several of the 
countries included in Table 4 also have an 
ADS program element that includes the 

cooperative efforts of one or more other 
countries. 

The three cooperative ADS program elements 
included in Table 4 are: 

• ESA PRODAT ATC Experiment 

• SITA PRODAT/AIRCOM Trials 

• Pacific Engineering Trials (PET) 


70 






Table 2. ICAO Organizations Involved in ADS or ADS Related Efforts 


ORGANIZATION 

CHARTER/TERMS OF REFERENCE 

DATE 

INITIATED 

STATUS 

FANS II 

Phase II 
Committee on 
Future Air 
Navigation 
Systems 
(FANS) 

Established for monitoring, 
coordination of development and 
transition planning for the future air 
navigation system. (FANS) 

1989 

On-Going 

SICASP 

Secondary 

Surveillance 

Radar (SSR) 

Improvements 

and Collision 

Avoidance 

Systems 

Panel 

Established in 1981 to develop SARPs 
concerning SSR enhancements and 
related data links and collision 
avoidance systems. In 1987, tasked to 
develop protocols to permit 
commonality and interoperability 
between Mode S and other ATS data 
links, and to support ADS. 

1981, 87 

On-Going 

AMSSP 

Aeronautical 

Mobile 

Satellite 

Service 

Panel 

Established to develop SARPs, using 
the OSI model, and guidance related to 
air-ground digital data link and ground 
ATS communications network giving 
due consideration to ADS 
requirements. 

1987 

See AMCP 
below 

ADSP 

Automatic 

Dependent 

Surveillance 

Panel 

Established to undertake specific 
studies with a view to developing 
operational requirements and SARPs. 

1990 

On-Going 

NATSPG 

North Atlantic 
System 

Planning 

Group 

Charged with creating and maintaining 
a North Atlantic airspace regional plan, 
a common future ATM system concept 
for the North Atlantic, and a plan for 
its implementation 

1965 

On-Going 

AMCP 

1 

Aeronautical 

Mobile 

Communication 

Panel 

AMSSP (see above) renamed to AMCP 
with scope expanded to include VHF 
data link. 

1991 

On-Going 


71 

































ESA PRODAT ATC Experiment 

PRODAT is an experimental satellite based 
communications system which provides low 
data rate communication (voice is not 
included) between mobile aeronautical and 
ground based users, and between mobile and 
fixed users (connected via terrestrial networks) 
to a satellite earth station. 

PRODAT air traffic control (including ADS) 
experiments were initiated in 1987. The 
principal initial participants were; European 
Space Agency (ESA), Eurocontrol, British 
Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), Spanish 
Direcion General de Aviacion Civil (DGAC), 
Societe International de Telecommunication 
Aeronautique (SITA), and French CENA. 

In addition, RACAL, ISEL, and the Madrid 
University of Technology participated on 
Technical matters. Portugal also joined as an 
additional participant in the PRODAT 
Experiment. 

The components of the PRODAT 
experiment^ system, shown in Figure-1, 
include: 

• Aircraft with aircraft earth station 
(AES) avionics for low data rate 
communications provided by ESA and 
SITA. 

• A ground earth station (GES) provided 
by ESA. 

• A PRODAT Network Management 
System (NMS), collocated with the 
GES, to provide message store and 
forward service (to interface the GES 
with the terrestrial communications 
network). 

• ATC experimental centers provided by 
the participating countries and 
Eurocontrol. 


• Terrestrial communications network to 
connect the NMS with the ATC 
experimental centers. 

Each aircraft participating in the experiment 
was equipped with two sets of aeronautical 
mobile communication terminals. One was a 
standard SITA AIRCOM/ACARS VHF digital 
communications terminal compliant with 
ARINC 600 and 700 series characteristics. 
The second was an experimental PRODAT L- 
Band satellite communications terminal 
developed by ESA in accordance with 
aeronautical standards. The PRODAT and 
AIRCOM/ACARS terminals interface through 
an ARINC 429 port. 

To provide the same interface to users, both 
on-board the aircraft and in ground facilities, 
(independently of whether the VHF or satellite 
communications link is being used) SITA 
developed the necessary software for the 
AIRCOM service processor, and the 
PRODAT Network Management System 
(NMS). 

The PRODAT experimental satellite data link 
provides airlines participating in the trials with 
extended AIRCOM coverage over oceanic 
zones, and continental areas of low traffic 
density, plus an integrated system using the 
same airborne terminal equipment (supporting 
both VHF and satellite data link), identical 
crew procedures, and a common ground 
interface. 

The experimental efforts of the countries 
participating in the PRODAT Experimental 
Program differ from each other based on their 
unique interests. Thus, as shown in Table 4, 
the United Kingdom evaluated satellite 
communications performance in term of 
communications success rates, and message 
delivery time. Portugal conducted 
experiments involving real-time simulations (at 


72 


Table 3. 


Government Civil Aviation Organizations Involved in ADS 


Country 

Name of Civil Aviation Organization 

Civil Aviation, 
Organization Acronym 

United States 

Federal Aviation Administration 

Department of Transportation 

FAA 

Japan 

Japanese Civil Aviation Bureau 

Ministry of Transport 

JCAB 

Australia 

Civil Aviation Authority 

CAA 

France 

Civil Aviation Administration 

CAA 

Canada 

Department of Transport 

Director General, Air Navigation 

DGAN 

United Kingdom 

United Kingdom Civil Aviation Authority 

CAA 

Spain 

Directorate General for Civil Aviation 

DGCA 

Portugal 

Directorate General of Civil Aviation 

DGCA 

Iceland 

Civil Aviation Administration 

Ministry of Communications 

CAA 

Singapore 

Civil Aviation Authority of Singapore 

CAAS 

Soviet Union 

Ministry of Civil Aviation 

MCA 


the Eurocontrol Experimental Center) of ADS 
based on traffic control for the Santa Maria 
Oceanic FIR. Spain conducted flight tests in 
which a satellite data link was employed for 
all messages (without voice communications) 
including enroute and terminal approach 
clearances until the aircraft was at 4000 ft. on 
a runway equalizer. 

SITA PRODAT/AIRCOM Trials 

The ESA PRODAT experimental system 
(designed for all potential applications of a 
satellite data link) was also us^ by SITA and 


cooperating airlines for air-ground data 
communications trials. These trials included 
data communications associated with various 
air traffic services (ATS) as well as ADS 
during regularly scheduled daily oceanic 
flights. Table 5 shows the various ATS 
applications that were explored by the airlines 
as part of these trials. 

Pacific Engineering Trials fPET) 

The ADS Pacific Engineering Trials (PET) 
are an engineering test program resulting from 
a trilateral memorandum of cooperation 









Table 4. Summary of ADS Programs of Other Countries 


COUNTRY 

ADS PROGRAM ELEMENTS 

SUMMARY DESCRIPTION OF ELEMENTS 

AUSTRALIA 

• Pacific Engineering Trials (PET) 

• End to end testing of ADS based ATC 

including: evaluation of periodic ADS 
position reporting, and two way digital 
data link messages between pilot and air 
traffic controller on regularly scheduled 
flights in Northern Pacific airspace. 


• Experimental Display System 
Development and Evaluation 

• Display system is designed to accept data 
from: ADS, flight data processing system, 
voice position reports, and radar data 
processing system. 

0 Different symbols and colors used for: 

ADS, voice, radar position reports. 

• Employs twin Data General Work station 
displays. 

• One display for geographic representation 
of airspace and aircraft positions, another 
display for operational information and 
control. 

• Installation planned for 1991 in Sydney 
and Adelaide. 

CANADA 

• VHF ADS Experiments 

• ADS commands to and position reports 
from aircraft sent as normal message text 
data using existing ACARS/AIRCOM 
message addressing and routing protocols. 

• Continental and intercontinental 
experiments - ie. aircraft originating in 
western Canada, Los Angeles in USA, and 
Nice France. 

• Intercontinental experiments involved three 
aeronautical mobile communications 
service providers: SITA, ARINC, AIR 
CANADA. 

• Data displayed in real time to Transport 
Canada Technical Systems Center. 


9 Satellite Based ADS Experiments 

• Will be initiated when equipped aircraft 

and GES are available. 

FRANCE 

ATC Satellite Communications 
Experiments 

• Develop experimental controller 
workstation. 

• Assess: basic ADS functions, pilot- 
controller data link dialogue, voice 
communications when available. 

• Evaluate improvements in ATC services. 
























Table 4. Summary of ADS Program of Other Countries (Cont’d) 



COUNTRY 

ADS PROGRAM ELEMENTS 

SUMMARY DESCRIPTION OF ELEMENTS 

ICELAND 

• Air-Ground Data Link Trials 

• Data Links to include: HP, VHP, Satellite. 

• Initially emphasize delivery of clearances. 

• Compares radar and ADS derived position 
reports. 

JAPAN 

• Navigation Experiments With ETS-5 
Satellite 

• Evaluate ATC surveillance based on: ADS, 
CIS, ARSR/SSR Data. 

• Evaluate message, data, and voice 
communications. 


• Pacific Engineering Trials (PET) 

• End to end testing of ADS based ATC 

including evaluation of periodic ADS 
position reporting and two way digital data 
link messages between pilot and air traffic 
controller on regularly scheduled flights in 
Northern Pacific Airspace. 

• Satellite Data Link R&D Program 

• Establish an experimental ADS based ATC 
data processing and display system. 

• Development and evaluation of ADS and 
other ATC data communications by 
controllers. 

• Verification of ICAO AMSSP SARPS 
based on OSI architecture. 

PORTUGAL 

• PROSAT/PRODAT Satellite 
Experiment 

• Trials and experiments with SITA & 
participating airlines in evaluating satellite 
data link (no voice) communications for 

ATS including ADS. 

• Real-Time simulations in Eurocontrol 
Experimental Center of ADS based ATC 
for the Santa Maria Oceanic FIR. 


• Research with Lisbon University 

• Application of AI to conflict resolution. 

• Optimization i>' man-machine interface at 
air traffic. 

• VHP ADS Experiments 

• Trials and experiments with SITA and 

participating airlines in evaluating; VHP 
data link (no voice) communications for 
oceanic clearances. 

® Oceanic ATC System 

• Replacing existing oceanic ATC system 

with a new system which includes options 
for ADS, direct Pilot/Controller 
communications, and interfacility 
communications. 



























Table 4. Summary of ADS Program of Other Countries (Cont’d) 


COUNTRY 

ADS PROGRAM ELEMENTS 

SUMMARY DESCRIPTION OF ELEMENTS 

SPAIN 

• PROSAT/PRODAT Satellite 
Experiment 

• Flight tests to evaluate satellite data link 
for ATS system. 

• Flight tests of satellite data link for all 
messages on flights from U.K. to Spain 
including en-route, decent and approach 
clearances, radar vectoring, and weather 
information until aircraft was at 4000 ft. 
on runway equalizer; voice not used at all. 


• Air Mobile Satellite Service 

Evaluation Programme 

• Develop satellite communications test 

facility. 

• Conduct tests on ADS and other ATC 

applications. 

• Evaluate ICAO Satellite System. 

• Validate ICAO SARPS. 

UNITED 

KINGDOM 

• PROSAT/PRODAT Satellite 
Experiment 

• Final report of UK PRODAT/PROSAT 
trial published; planning underway for 
surveillance development program; expect 
to have first aircraft with data link avionics 
in 1992. 

• Preparing for NAT trial with objective 
similar to NATSPG 27 agreed list. 


• SATCOM Development Program 

• In Planning Stage. 

UNION OF 

SOVIET 

SOCIALIST 

REPUBLICS 

• Research 

• Simulation of ATM using ADS for 
different control areas. 

• Air traffic controller and pilot display of 
simulated data. 

• Use of GLONASS/GPS-derived aircraft 
position data. 


• Experimental Evaluation 

• Experimental implementation and testing of 

future ATM system elements using ADS. 

• Prototype ATC Center 

• Develop and build a prototype ATC outer 

to complete development of ADS control 
procedures. 


(MOC) between the Australian Civil Aviation airlines became interested in participating in 

Authority (CAA), the Japanese Civil Aviation the PET including the governments of 

Bureau (JCAB), and the United States Federal Singapore and the Union of Soviet Socialist 

Aviation Administration (FAA). The airlines Republics (USSR); and Cathay Pacific and 

participating in the trials, through coordination Singapore Air airlines, 

with their civil aviation authorities, initially 
included Qantas, JAL, ANA, Northwest, and 
United. Subsequently, other governments and 


76 

























AIRLINE 

COMPANY 



PROSAT/PRODAT Experimental System 
























Table 5. 


SITA PRODAT/ABRCOM Trial Applications 




Airlines* 

Applications 

■1 

Varig 

(Brazil) 

Sabena 

(Belgium) 

Saudi 

(Saudi 

Arabia) 

AOC 

Airline Operational Communications 

X 

X 

X 

X 

AAC 

Airline Administrative Communications 

X 

X 

X 

X 

APC 

Aeronautical Passenger Correspondence 

X 



X 

ATC 

Air Traffic Control 



X 


ADS 

Automatic Dependent Surveillance 



tx 


* Aircraft Used in Trials: 

• TAP Air Portugal - One (1) Lockheed Tristar LlOl 1 

• Varig - One (t) Boeing B767-200ER 

• Sabena - One (1) Airbus 310-300 

• Saudi - One (1) Boeing B747-300 

± ADS Trials conducted during regular, daily transoceanic flights. 


The components of the experimental system 
used to carry out the Pacific Engineering 
Trials (PET), shown in Figure 2, include: 

• Aircraft earth station (AES) avionics, 
comprised of existing airline specific 
equipments, that provide inputs from 
ACARS to a satellite data unit. 

• Interim ground earth stations (IGES) 
that implement a subset of the 
INMARSAT System Definition 
Manual (SDM). 

• ATC experimental centers provided by 
the participating countries. 

• Terrestrial communications that utilize 
existing ARINC, SITA, and AVICOM 
networks. 

The objective of the trials is to collect data for 
an end-to-end evaluation of an ADS-based air 
traffic control system for use as a basis in 
developing and implementing an operational 
system. The trials began in late September, 


1990, when United Airlines flew a SATCOM- 
equipped aircraft on a regular scheduled flight 
from Hong Kong to San Francisco. Current 
plans call for the trials to continue until an 
operational ADS system becomes available. 

In addition to the three multi-national 
cooperative efforts just described, each 
country included in Table 4 also has 
individual ADS efforts that it is pursuing 
(more or less) independently of the other 
countries. These individual efforts (See Table 
4) are summarized below. 

AUSTRALIA 

In addition to being a principal participant in 
the Pacific Engineering Trials (PET) program, 
Australia is in the process of developing and 
evaluating an experimental air traffic 
controller display system. This system will 
display both ADS and radar position reports 


78 







































79 


Figure 2. Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) 
Pacific Engineering Trials (PET) 









using different colors and symbols for each. 
Additional information characterizing the 
system, to be installed in Sidney and Adelaide 
in 1991, is included in Table 4. 

CANADA 

Canada’s ADS program is somewhat unique 
among those summarized in Table 4 in that 
the initial emphasis, starting in 1988, has 
been on ADS experiments using ground-based 
relayed-VHF rather than satellite 
communications. Aircraft ADS position 
reports and messages are sent as normal 
message text data, using existing 
ACARS/AIRCOM protocols, to the Transport 
Canada Technical Systems Center for real 
time processing and display. 

Successful VHF-based ADS experiments were 
conducted on both continental and 
intercontinental (from Canada to France) 
flights using SITA, ARINC, and AIR 
CANADA communications services. 

Satellite based ADS experiments are planned 
and will be initiated when equipped aircraft 
and a satellite GES become available. 

FRANCE 

As indicated in Table 4 France, like Australia, 
is developing an experimental air traffic 
controller work station for use in conducting 
satellite communications experiments 
including ADS. 

ICELAND 

The focus of ICELAND’S ADS oriented Air- 
Ground Data Link Trials program (see Table 
4) is a comparison of; a) HF, VHF, and 
satellite data links, and b) radar and ADS 
derived position reports (with various, data 
link types) with initial emphasis on their use 


for the delivery of flight clearances. Iceland 
is procuring an ATC system with options for 
ADS. 

JAPAN 

Japan’s ADS program has three major 
elements (See Table 4). In addition to 
participating in the Pacific Engineering Trials 
with Australia and the United States, Japan 
has also established a Satellite Data Link 
R&D Program that will run in parallel with 
the PET for the next five years. This R«feD 
program will address: a) an experimental air 
traffic controller processing and display 
system (a subject, as Table 4 shows, that is 
also being addressed by Australia, France and 
Portugal); b) evaluation of data 
communications, and c) SARP verification. 
Japan’s PET and Satellite Data Link R&D 
programs are follow-on efforts to earlier 
navigation experiments conducted using its 
ETS-5 satellite (see Table 4). 

The Oceanic Data Processing system (ODP), 
which displays flight plan based aircraft 
position as radar (pseudo radar display), has 
been used in the oceanic sectors of the Tokyo 
Area Control Center since 1979. This system 
was upgraded in 1990. The upgrades 
included: 1) a high-resolution raster scan color 
display replaced the stroke type display and 2) 
a voice position report display and other 
functions were added. ADS processing will 
also be added to the system. 

PORTUGAL 

In addition to its efforts as a participant in the 
ESA PRODAT ATC Experiment with the 
United Kingdom and Spain, PORTUGAL is 
conducting a research program in concert with 
Lisbon University on both man-machine 
interface optimization and the application of 
artificial intelligence (AI) to conflict 
resolution. 


80 




Portugal is also replacing its existing ATC 
system with a new system with automation 
and traffic displays. Options include: ADS, 
Pilot/Controller communications and 
interfacility communications. 

SPAIN 

As a follow-on to its participation, with 
Portugal and the United Kingdom, in the ESA 
PRODAT ATC Experiment, SPAIN is in the 
process of initiating an Air Mobile Satellite 
Service (AMSS) Evaluation Program that 
includes development of a satellite 
communications test facility for use in 
evaluating the ICAO Satellite System and 
SARPS (See Table 4). 

UNITED KINGDOM 

As a follow-on to its participation (with 
Portugal and Spain) in the ESA PRODAT 
ATC Experiment, the United Kingdom has, in 
the planning stage, a SATCOM Development 
Program. 

UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALISTIC 
REPUBLICS 

A three phase ADS program was initiated in 
1988. The first phase will emphasize 
simulation studies of air traffic management 
based on ADS, including pilot and air traffic 
controller display, and the use of 
GLONASS/GPS derived position data. The 
second phase will extend the first by 
employing experimental implementation and 
testing. The third and final phase will then 
result in a prototype ATC center that will be 
used to complete the development of ADS 
control procedures evaluated in the earlier 
simulation and experimental testing phases. 


SUMMARY 

The development and implementation of ADS 
on a global basis has required, and continues 
to require a cooperative and coordinated effort 
among governments, government civil 
aviation organizations, international and 
national standards organizations, international 
and national trade associations, airlines, 
providers of aeronautical mobile 
communications, communications satellite 
service providers, and manufacturers. 

The ADS effort was initiated in the early to 
mid 1980’s with individual country R&D 
efforts, and long range study and planning 
efforts sponsored and carried out within the 
international civil aviation and space satellite 
communities. These efforts led, in turn, to 
national and international experimental and 
engineering trials programs, initiated in the 
late 1980’s and early 1990’s, aimed at 
obtaining operational experience. The 
experimental and engineering trials programs 
were/are implemented using existing and, in 
some cases, modified equipment and software 
for each of the six ADS functions: pilot 
interface, avionics, data link, communications 
interface, ATC automation, and controller 
interface. 

For ADS to become operational world-wide, 
a high degree of standardization of the 
implementation of the six ADS functions must 
be introduced. This standardization effort is 
now in progress world wide, and will soon 
undergo operational evaluation using next 
generation prototype systems that are being 
developed to satisfy the standards. 


81 



APPENDIX A 


CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS 


Table A-1 provides a chronology of some thirty 
five (35) international events, spanning twenty 
three (23) years from 1968 to the pn^ent 1991, 
that are either directly or indirectly, related to 
the international development of ADS. 



Table A-1. A Chronology of Some World-Wide ADS and ADS Related Events 


1960s 

1968 The U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) formed the Air Traffic Central Advisory Committee 
(ATCAC) for the purpose of recommending an ATC system for the 1980s and beyond. 

1968 The ICAO formed the Application of Space Techniques Related to Aviation (ASTRA) panel 
consisting of leading satellite specialists from a number of ICAO Contracting states. 

1970s 

1971 The ICAO ASTRA panel presented a paper entitled "Functional Aeronautical Applications of Space 
Techniques" at ICAO’s Seventh Air Navigation Conference, calling for an international program of 
research, development, and system evaluation. 

1975 The AEROSAT Council and the AEROSAT Coordinating Office was established, by a consortium 
of Canada, the United States FAA (with COMSAT as its operating agency) and the European 
Space Agency (ESA), to develop an aeronautical satellite system in response to the 1971 ASTRA 
panel report. 

1977 The AEROSAT program was canceled, and the AEROSAT Coordinating Office was closed as a 
result of airlines, (and subsequently U.S. government) withdrawn support to the program due to 
increased fuel costs brought on by the oil crisis of the late 1970s. However, the AEROSAT 
Council remained in existence, 

1978 The Aviation Review Committee (ARC) initially established by the Aero.sat Council, and consisting 
of 18 ICAO nations and 7 organizations, initiated a reappraisal of the future use of satellites for 
civil aviation. 

1979 The International Maritime Satellite (INMARSAT) organization was formed to offer satellite 
communication services to civil shipping on a world-wide basis. 

1980s 

1981 The Ocean Area System Improvement Study (OASIS), completed in support of the ICAO ARC, 
initially developed the ADS technique and considered its implementation using both HF and 
satellite data link communications. 

1981 The first issue of the annually updated U.S. National Airspace System (NAS) Plan for Facilities, 
Equipment, and Associated Development was completed by the Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA). 

1981 The ICAO Secondary Surveillance Radar (SSR) Improvements and Collision Avoidance Panel 
(SICASP) was established to develop SARPs and suitable guidance material concerning SSR 
enhancements, related data links and collision avoidance systems. 

1982 MITRE began development of an experimental low data rate aeronautical satellite data link (ASDL) 
terminal and related demonstration based on the shared usage of an existing commercially available 
mobile satellite space segment, the International Maritime Satellite (INMARSAT) system. 
Development work leading to the ASDL design was based on the 1981 OASIS report, and FAA 
sponsored experimentation with the NASA ATS-6 satellite. 


83 






Table A-1. A Chronology of Some World-Wide ADS and ADS Related Events (continued) 


1983 The ICAO ARC conclusions and recommendations were presented to the AEROSAT Council and 
soon thereafter to the ICAO Council. 

1984 The first meeting of the Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics (RTCA) Special Committee 
155 (SC-155) titled "User Requirements for Future Communications, Navigation and Surveillance 
Systems, Including Space Technology Applications" was held; the objective of RTCA SC-155 was 
to provide a consolidated view of user inputs for consideration by the FANS Committee. 

1985 The MITRE Corporation ASDL program, initiated in 1982, culminated in a successful flight test 
north of Iceland. An air/grdund digital data link via satellite was used for transmission of aircraft 
position data and two-way transmission of messages. 

1985 The FAA established an operational requirement for ADS, with broad application potential, and 
decided to complement the U.S. Oceanic Display and Planning Systems (ODAPS) with the ADS 
function utilizing a satellite-based air/ground communications data link with a goal of achieving 
initial operational capability in 1990, 

1986 The RTCA SC-155, formed in 1984, issued its Final Report to the ICAO FANS Committee. 

1986 ARINC initiated efforts to create AvSat, an air transport industry owned and operated aeronautical 
satellite system, to provide integrated air-ground voice and data communications throughout the 
world. 

1987 Air traffic control (including ADS) and other experiments, using the European Space Agency 
(ESA) developed PRODAT experimental satellite based, low-date rate, data only communications 
system, were initiated by a consortium consisting of ESA, Eurocontrol, British Civil Aviation 
Authority (CAA), Spanish Direccion General de Aviacion Civil (DGAC), Societe Internationale de 
Telecommunication Aeronautique (SITA), and French CENA. 

1987 Japan launched its Engineering Test Satellite (ETS) Model 5 and began air traffic control 

surveillance experiments employing satellite based automatic dependent surveillance (ADS), satellite 
based cooperative independent surveillance (CIS), and ground based search and secondary radar 
surveillance in the Japanese domestic, and Northern Pacific airspace that lasted into early 1990. 

1987 The ICAO aeronautical mobile satellite services panel (AMSSP) was established to undertake 
specific studies approved by the Air Navigation Commission with a view to developing, on an 
urgent basis, using the Open System Interconnection (OSI) model. Standards and Recommended 
Practices (SARPs) and procedures and, where appropriate, suitable guidance material related to air- 
ground digital data links and ground air traffic services communications network giving due 
consideration to ADS requirements; the AMSSP is concerned with standardizing the satellite 
communication sub-system. 

1987 The ICAO SIC ASP was given the task of developing protocols to permit commonality and 

interoperability between Mode S and other air traffic service (ATS) data links, including satellite 
data links; upper layer OSI protocols are being developed to support the ADS periodic reporting 
requirement such that the AMSSP can define the lower layer OSI protocols including the interface 
between ADS and the aeronautical telecommunication network (ATN). 


8A 





Table A-1. A Chronology of Some World-Wide ADS and ADS Related Events (continued) 


1987 Several airlines including Air France (France), Sabena (Belgium), Saudi (Saudi Arabia), TAP Air 
Portugal (Portugal), and Varig (Brazil) initiated service trials of aeronautical mobile satellite 
communications in an experimental program proposed by SITA as part of PRODAT satellite 
program. 

1988 In May, the Fourth and final Meeting of the full ICAO FANS Committee (referred to as FANS/4), 
formed in 1984, was held in Montreal. It initiated an ADS Working Group to continue the 
development and refinement of ADS based on the ADS concept and message format definitions 
developed by the FANS Committee. FANS continued to advise the ICAO Council until a new 
committee could be established. 

1988 AvSat project closed down due to technical, financial, and other problems. 

1987 In December, the ICAO Air Navigation Commission established on Automatic Dependent 

Surveillance (ADS) Study Group to assist the Secretariat in conducting urgent tasks related to ADS. 

1989 In March, the ADS Study Group held its first meeting in Montreal and developed operational 
communication requirements as requested by AMSSP/1 Recommendation 2.1/1 

1989 In July, the ICAO Council established a new FANS Phase II Committee (referred to as FANS II) 
for monitoring, coordination of development and transition planning for the future air navigation 
system. 

1989 In December, the ADS Study Group held its second meeting in Montreal to develop guidance 
material for the ICAO Circular on ADS (Circular 226-AN/135). 

1990s 

1990 In March, the first International ADS Symposium was held in Atlantic City, New Jersey. 

1990 In April, the ICAO Air Navigation Commission established the Automatic Dependent Surveillance 
(ADS) Panel (ADSP) to undertake specific studies with a view to developing SARPS, procedures 
and guidance material on ADS and to provide timely exchange with other ICAO bodies. 

1990 In September, the ADS Trilateral Pacific Engineering Trials (PET) were initiated as a cooperative 
program between the United States, Japan, and Australia. 

1991 In January, the ADS Panel (ADSP) held its first Meeting in Montreal. 

1991 The International Satellite Communications and ADS Symposium is scheduled for September in 
Atlantic City, New Jersey. 

1991 The Fourth meeting of the AMSS Panel (AMSSP) is scheduled for November. The objective is to 
finalize AMSS SARPS. The Panel name has been changed to the Aeronautical Mobile 
Communications Panel (AMCP). 





CO-AUTHOR 



William J. Budurka 
Senior Systems Engineer 
Mitech, Incorporated 


William J. Budurka is a Senior Systems Engineer at MiTech, Incorporated. His 
responsibilities include systems engineering and technical management analysis of various 
aspects of satellite based air traffic control surveillance systems in support of the FAA’s 
Automatic Dependent Surveillance Program. 

Prior to joining Mi Tech, Mr. Budurka held positions as systems engineer, systems 
engineering manager, and program manager in the areas of aircraft navigation, satellite, 
surveillance, surface ship, submarine and advanced signal processor systems in IBM’s 
Federal Systems Division. He has Bachelor and Master of Science degrees in Electrical 
Engineering from Lehigh University. 


86 






87 



OPENING I^ESMN 


Raymond J. Hilton 
Director, Air Traffic Management 
Air Transport Association of America 


Raymond J. Hilton as been with the Air Transport Association since 1981. He is 
responsible for monitoring the FAA modernization program to assure the interests of the 
ATA member airlines are served. He does this by maintaining close liaison with the 
engineering and operating services of FAA and by maintaining current knowledge of the 
FAA national airspace system modernization program, its budget requirements, and other 
government agency and industry influences affecting the modernization program. He 
coordinates and cooperates as necessary with corporate and government representatives 
interested in FAA program development and implementation, and participates in national 
and international committees and technical conferences to influence airspace development 
and modernization to the benefit of the airlines. 

Prior to joining ATA, Mr. Hilton spent twenty nine years in government service as an air 
traffic controller for nine years in the Air Force and FAA, and 20 years in engineering and 
development at FAA. He worked as an air traffic controller at various military control 
towers and at New York air route traffic control center, and for those who remember, the 
Pittsburgh air route traffic control center as an air traffic controller/computer programmer. 
He spent six and a half years at the FAA technical center at Atlantic City in 
experimentation and evaluation of air traffic control hardware and software systems. The 
remaining 14 years of his FAA career was spent at Washington headquarters planning, 
designing, developing and implementing air traffic control hardware and software systems. 
Two and a half years of that time was spent assigned to the AEROSAT Coordination Office 
at the European Space Agency in Holland where he was responsible for managing the 
development of an internationally coordinated test and evaluation plan for the application 
of satellite technology for air traffic control. 


88 






OPENING REMARKS 


BY 

RAYMOND J. HILTON 
DIRECTOR, Am TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 
Am TRANSPORT ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA 

Although this meeting is identified as the First International Satellite Surveillance and 
Conununication Symposium, many of you will recall the Automatic Dependent Surveillance 
(ADS) symposium held here in March 1990. At the opening of that symposium I made the 
following points: 

/ 

• FAA established an ADS program and has been focusing 
attention on refining the ADS technology and beginning to 
make the transition to applications of ADS. 

• FAA arranged to cooperate internationally in the various ADS 
Memoranda of Agreement in both the Pacific and Atlantic 
ocean areas. 

• We commended the efforts of FAA for establishing the system 
requirements team to assure the air traffic operations 
organization of FAA was part of the beginning and continued 
development of ADS. 

• ICAO upgraded the ADS study group to a panel and called for 
membership by operational representatives familiar with 
procedures and airspace management. They too were aware of 
the importance of making the transition to applying to ADS 
technology. 

• The ICAO FANS Phase 2 committee recognized the need to 
make the necessary transition from studying the new technology 
to application of the new technology. 

• The airlines established an Air Space Systems Task Force to 
assure the technology to application of the new technology. 

• The airline industry was expanding internationally and 
continues to do so and the new technology is needed to 
accommodate the needed expansion in the air transportation 
system. 

• What was important then was to make the transition from ADS 
development to application of the technology in oceanic ATC. 


89 





At this symposium we must recognize that nearly all the organization needed to bring the 
satellite technology forward is in place, that demonstration trials proving the concept of 
oceanic airspace management using ADS has been demonstrated, that the benefit of satellite 
technology for air trafhc service and the airlines is no longer doubtful, that internationally 
airlines have already begun to equip their aircraft with satellite communications equipment 
and are expected to continue to do so at an even more rapid rate, and finally, what is now 
needed is to find ways to expedite the mechanisms already in place to assure the technology 
is available for oceanic and domestic use to support the international civil aviation service 
providers, the international airlines and ultimately, the international air transportation 
system. 


90 





i 

SESSION ONE: TRIALS AND DEMONSTRATIONS 
Tuesday, September 24,1991 

Session Chairperson - Ronald E. Morgan, Air Traffic Manager, Advanced Systems and 
Facilities, Division, Federal Aviation Administration 


2:00 Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) Pacific Engineering Trials - Frank 

L. Lorge, Electronics Engineer, Federal Aviation Administration Technical Center 

2:20 Japanese Trials - Hiroki Takeda, Special Assistant to the Director, Radio 

Engineering Division, Air Traffic Services Department, Japanese Civil Aviation 
Bureau 

2:50 Australian Experiments in Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) 

including the Pacific Engineering Trials (PET) - H. Brian O'Keefe, Acting 
General Manager, Civil Aviation Authority, Australia (Co-author - Graeme 
Challinor, Manager, Analysis Research and Development, Civil Aviation 
Authority, Australia) 

3:10 French SATCOM Program and Related International Activities - Pascal 

Senard, SATCOM Project Manager, French Direction Generale de I'Aviation 
Civile, Service Technique de la Navigation Aerienne (Co-author - P. Gautier, 
Satellite Communication Engineer, French DGAC) 

3:30 BREAK sponsored by SITA 

4:00 Digitized Voice Trials - Teresa A. Anderson, Air/Ground Service Planner, 

Engineering/Services Management, Aeronautical Radio, Inc. (ARINC) 

4:20 ADS Development in Canada - Norman F. Dimock, Applications Development 

Engineer, Technical Services, Transport Canada Aviation (Co-author Donald F. 
McLean, Supervisor, Flight Data Processing, Air Traffic Services, Transport 
Canada Aviation) 

4:50 ADS Communications: A Cornerstone - George A. Cobley, P.E., Technical 

Director, Communications Systems, Rockwell International 

5:10 Aeronautical Mobile Satellite Services ESA/SITA Aircom Service Trials 

Programme - Graham C. Lake, Assistant Director, International Relations, 
Societe Internationale de Telecommunications Aeronautiques (SITA) (Co-author 
- A. Jongejans and P. Nguyen, ESA/SITA) 

5:30 Closing Remarks - Peter L. Massoglia, Master of Ceremonies 


91 




SESSION ONE; 

TRIALS AND DEMONSTRATIONS 
SESSION CHAIRPERSON 



Ronald E. Morgan 
Air Traffic Manager 
Advanced Systems and Facilities Division 
Federal Aviation Administration 


Ronald E. Morgan is the Manager of the Advanced Systems and Facilities Division, ATR- 
300. Ron left the Vy^estern-Pacific Region in 1988 to join the Air Traffic Plans and 
Requirements Service as the Manager of the ACF Implementation Branch. He was the 
Assistant Manager and then Acting Manager of the System Plans and Programs Division 
before becoming the Acting Assistant Manager of ATR-300. 

Ron has a background in both terminal and en route air traffic control facilities, both as 
controller and manager. He also holds a commercial pilot certificate and is a certified flight 
instructor. In the Western-Pacific Region he worked in the Planning, Requirements, and 
Automation Branch, both as a specialist and as manager, and served as Special Assistant 
to the Regional Director. 


93 





TRiM.S Mm DEMONSHtAtlONi; 



Frank L. Lorge 
Electronics Engineer 
Federal Aviation Administration 
Technical Center 


Frank L. Loi^ge received his Bachelor of Science degree from Drexel University in 
Philadelphia in 1979. Since then he has worked in flight test of helicopter and fixed-wing 
navigation systems, and development of integrated avionics systems for military aircraft. 
He has worked on Automatic Dependent Surveillance since 1986, including the Loran 
Offshore Flight Following and ADS programs. 

Mr. Lorge was responsible for developing the requirements and technical approach for the 
PET within the FAA, and wrote the original ADS PET agreement with the airlines. He 
helped develop the ADS specification for Step 1, and was the prime evaluator and technical 
negotiator of the contract. He also participates in ADS and SatCom standardization 
activities within ICAO, RTCA adn AEEC. 


94 








AUTOMATIC DEPENDENT SURVEILLANCE 
PACIFIC ENGINEERING TRIALS 

Frank L. Lorge 

Federal Aviation Administration Technical Center 


Background 

In 1988, the Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) initiated 
a cooperative program, called 
the Pacific Engineering Trials 
(PET), to evaluate the 
operational use of Automatic 
Dependent Surveillance (ADS) and 
the data link used to support 
it. The PET incorporates 
available equipment into a 
functional ADS prototype for the 
evaluation of the operational 
aspects of ADS. This program 
will ease the transition from 
the current, manual system, to 
the fully automatic system of 
the future. Results will be 
used in developing the 
specifications for ADS 
components, and identifying 
operational and technical issues 
which must be resolved before 
the ADS system can become fully 
functional. These issues will 
be addressed in the development 
stage, to insure that the 
fielded system meets all 
operational requirements in an 
efficient manner. 

The trials are one element of 
the FAA's plan to modernize its 
oceanic air traffic control 
system. FAA programs are 
currently underway which will 
result in the introduction of 
data link, ADS, and improved 
controller automation tools to 
oceanic ATC. The programs 
include Flight Data Input-Output 
(FDIO) Replacement, data link 
workstation development, and 
modification of the Oceanic 
Display and Planning System 
(ODAPS) to include ADS. 


Additional programs will provide 
improved communications through 
the use of interfaces which 
conform to the Open Systems 
Interconnect (OSI) standards and 
the implementation of the 
Aeronautical Telecommunications 
Network (ATN), using the FAA's 
Data Link Processor. 

In addition, the results of 
these tests will be used to 
support a variety of other 
applications. These include the 
development of International 
Civil Aviation Organization 
(ICAO) Standards and Recommended 
Practices (SARPS), specification 
development, procedures 
development, validation of the 
work conducted by the FAA's 
Oceanic System Requirements Team 
(OSRT), and certification 
activities. 

Work on some these initiatives 
has already begun. United 
Airlines has applied for 
certification of avionics to use 
satellite data link for oceanic 
ATC communications. The 
equipment used in the trials 
will be used to address 
certification issues. 
Continuing efforts by the FAA's 
Aircraft Certification Office in 
Long Beach California, the Air 
Traffic Services, Flight 
Standards Service, and the FAA 
Technical Center, as well as 
ARINC and United, are expected 
to result in certification in 
the near future. 


95 








Pacific Engineering Trials System 


■ Participants 

The PET is sponsored by the 
governments of the United 
States, Japan, and Australia. 
Each of these participants is 
responsible for coordinating 
airline participation within 
their countries, and sharing 
results with the other 
governments. In addition, each 
is free to make unilateral 
agreements with other nations 
and present the results of those 
efforts. The additional 
countries participating through 
these unilateral agreements 
include New Zealand, Fiji, 
France, the Soviet Union, and 
Singapore. 


In the U.S., the FAA has formed 
agreements with Northwest and 
United Airlines to participate 
in the trials. These airlines 
have agreed to install satellite 
communications and prototype ADS 
avionics on several of their 
aircraft. During normal oceanic 
flight operations over the 
Pacific, these aircraft will 
send ADS-type position reports 
and ATC communications messages 
to the ground, and receive data 
link messages from FAA 
workstations as part of the 
tests. 

In addition to airlines, a large 
group of government and industry 
participants is involved in the 
PET program. Manufacturers of 


96 







avionics and aircraft, and data 
communications service providers 
have joined the FAA, its 
contractors and the airlines in 
order to conduct the trials. 
Participation by all these 
organizations is recognized as 
essential to the success of the 
program. 


Equipment 

The system is configured using 
prototype elements which provide 
the basic ADS functionality. 
This equipment will be upgraded 
or replaced, as the system 
evolves, with components which 
meet the required standards. 
The end state, which is expected 
to be realized in 1995, will 
conform to the international 
standards for ATN and ADS which 
are currently in development. 
Figure 1 shows the configuration 
of the initial system. Each 
major element of the system is 
discussed briefly below. 

The avionics equipment used in 
the PET is comprised of existing 
airline equipment which has been 
slightly modified for these 
tests. Communications will be 
based on the Aircraft 
Communications Addressing and 
Reporting System (ACARS), which 
provides for the exchange of 
character-oriented messages 
between aircraft and the ground. 
A set of messages has been 
defined for use during the tests 
which contains information 
similar to that which is 
expected in ADS reports in the 
future. Text messages have also 
been defined which may be used, 
during an interim period only, 
to send operational ATC requests 
and clearances. As test results 
are obtained, message sets will 
be refined in order to produce 
a complete set of ATC messages. 
Once the fully operational ATC 


automation equipment is fielded, 
the avionics will be upgraded to 
conform to the avionics and 
certification standards which 
will then be in place. 

Each aircraft carries a Teledyne 
Aircraft Condition Monitoring 
System (ACMS), which is used to 
assemble the ADS-type message, 
and a Collins ACARS Management 
Unit, which formats and 
addresses the message. A 
Collins Satellite Data Unit 
(SDU) is used to transmit the 
messages over the satellite 
link, using a Ball antenna. The 
installation has been certified 
in several configurations by 
Boeing on several of their 
aircraft. 

The satellite system uses the 
existing space segment operated 
by Inmarsat and interim ground 
earth stations (IGES's), 
manufactured by Collins and 
operated in the U.S. by COMSAT. 
This link provides for bit- 
oriented communications with 
several aircraft at a time. Two 
IGES's, one on each U.S. coast, 
provide coverage of the Atlantic 
and Pacific oceans and the 
entire continental U.S. 

The terrestrial connection is 
provided through the existing 
ADNS network, operated by ARINC, 
which is used by many airlines 
for company communications. 
This character-oriented network 
is used primarily for the 
transmission of ACARS messages. 
Connectivity is provided among 
many users, including airline 
offices, aircraft, and 
government agencies. 

Data collection is performed by 
an engineering workstation 
computer, which is located at 
the FAA Technical Center, 
running special data recording 


97 



and presentation software. The 
software, developed by the MITRE 
Corporation, accepts messages 
from the ADNS communications 
line, records and displays them, 
and converts position reports 
for presentation on the 
situation display. It also 
provides the capability to 
uplink messages to any 
participating aircraft, and 
receive replies. 


FAA Aircraft 

The FAA Technical Center has 
also equipped an aircraft in 
order to evaluate satellite data 
link and ADS. This aircraft, a 
Boeing 727, will fly primarily 
along the east coast in order to 
conduct data link and ADS 
experiments. 

The aircraft carries a Collins 
ACARS Management Unit and SDU, 
and has extensive data 
collection capability which will 
enable it to conduct experiments 
which would be impractical in 
airline aircraft. The data 
collection system records 
aircraft state information once 
per second, including heading, 
altitude, pitch and roll 
attitude, airspeed, wind speed 
and direction, ground speed, 
mach speed, navigational and 
steering data. The aircraft 
currently has INS available to 
provide positioning information, 
and a GPS receiver will be 
instrumented in the near future. 
The system also records 
satellite link information not 
normally available, such as 
satellite signal strength and 
error rates. The data system 
records all message traffic to 
and from the ACARS and the SDU, 
and can send and receive 
messages over the satellite 
link. 


Plans for this aircraft include 
upgrading the SDU to a high data 
rate system using a high gain 
antenna. A GPS receiver will be 
installed early next year, and 
the aircraft will be outfitted 
with extended range fuel tanks 
in order to improve its 
performance on oceanic flights. 
Sometime next year a 
communications management unit 
will be integrated into the 
avionics to enable testing of 
the ATN, using satellite, VHF 
and Mode-S data links. 


Data Analysis 

Examples of some of the data 
collected to date are presented 
in the figures. While still at 
an early stage, several 
characteristics of the system 
are evident. Figure 2 shows the 
latitude/longitude plotted for 
a typical flight, along with the 
pilot-composed satellite 
progress reports. It can be 
seen that the satellite reports 
lie directly on the line of ADS 
reports (with one exception). 
The steady string of ADS reports 
is uninterrupted by gaps, which 
would result from missing 
reports. This demonstrates the 
reliability of the system, which 
is expected to improve as the 
fully standardized system 
components become available. 

The plot also shows that 
automating position reports has 
the potential to eliminate some 
of the errors that can occur in 
the existing system. The error 
depicted in this plot is the 
result of an incorrect entry of 
position into the position 
report. This type of error 
occurs frequently in the 
current, manual system. Use of 
the automatic position report 
provided by ADS will virtually 


98 














eliminate this problem. The 
implementation of ADS is 
intended to greatly reduce the 
amount of human error in oceanic 
flight operations. 

Figure 3 shows the relationship 
between signal quality and bit 
error rate. These data, 
collected on the FAA aircraft, 
show that performance of the 
link, based on BER, is excellent 
when sufficient signal strength 
is available. When the signal 
level decreases, the BER 
increases rapidly and results in 
total loss of communications. 
Data of this type will be 
collected and analyzed to help 
determine under what conditions 
the link meets the requirements 
for ATC use. 


Conclusion 


The Pacific Engineering Trials 
program is still in its early 
stages, but results are already 
being applied to the development 
of ADS and data link. PET is 
one part of the overall FAA 
implementation strategy to 
improve the efficiency of 
oceanic air traffic control. 
The first step, certification of 
the avionics and limited use of 
the data link for sending ATC 
messages, is nearing completion. 

The Pacific Engineering Trials 
are helping smooth the 
transition to the oceanic system 
of the future. This transition 
has already begun, and will 
result in changes to the way 
oceanic air traffic control is 
performed. This in turn will 
provide benefits in terms of 
airspace and operational 
efficiency while maintaining the 
excellent safety record of 
oceanic air travel. 


100 







101 





SESSION ONE; 

TRIALS AN® DEMONSTRATIONS 



Hiroki Takeda 

Special Assistant to the Director 
Radio Engineering Division 
Air Traffic Services Department 
The Japan Civil Aviation Bureau 
Ministry of Transport 


Hiroki Takeda graduated from the Keio University in 1975 with a Bachelor of Science in 
Electrical Engineering. He then worked with the Japan Civil Aviation Bureau, Ministry of 
Transport charging with the development of the Radar Data Processing System (RDP). In 
1977 he was transferred to the International Affairs Division, Secretariat to the Minister 
charging with the international technical cooperations to developing countries in transport 
fields. In 1979 he was sent to the Stanford University, CA., where he studied infrastructure 
planning and management, and graduated in 1981 with a Master of Science degree in Civil 
Engineering. 

Following his study abroad, he worked in the Noise Abatement Division, Aerodrome 
Department, Civil Aviation Bureau to forecast the noise contour around the airport. He 
then worked in the Radio Engineering Division, Tokyo Regional Civil Aviation Bureau to 
implement the ATC as well as navigational facilities such as ASR/SSR, RCAG, VOR/DME 
and ILS. 

Mr. Takeda was then transferred to the Business Administration Office, Corporate Planning 
Department, Kansai International Airport Co. Ltd. charging with the preparation of the 
business plan and budget. 

He has beeu working for the radio engineering division. Civil Aviation Bureau since 1988 
in charge with the new technologies in the aeronautical communications fields. He is now 
involved in the development of data link systems (VHF data link, SSR mode S and AMSS) 
also covering the international activities like ICAO. He is a Japanese nominated member 
of ICAO SICASP (SSR Improvement and Collision Avoidance System Panel) as well as 
AMSSP (Aeronautical Mobile Satellite Services Panel). 


102 







ADS (AUTOMATIC DEPENDENT SURVEILLANCE) 

PET (PACIFIC ENGINEERING TRIAL) PROGRAM IN JAPAN 

Hiroki Takeda, Special Assistant, Radio Engineering Division, 
Air Traffic Services Department, The Japan Civil Aviation Bureau 


1. I NT RQDUCTIQN 

Australia, the United States and 
Japan have agreed to initiate a cooperative 
Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) 
Pacific Engineering Trial (PET) program. 
The participating agencies are the 
Australian Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), 
the United States Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) and the Japan Civil 
Aviation Bureau (JCAB). 

The commercial airlines such as 
Quantas, United, Northwest and Japan Air 
Lines are going to participate in this ADS 
PET program. Although the international 
standard for AMSS and ADS has not been 
finalized by ICAO yet, this ADS PET 
program is expected to provide the 
opportunities concerning prc-opcrational 
experiences as well as various technical 
expertise for the development of these 
standards. 


2..0DJECJJY£ 

The goals of this ADS PET 
program are to resolve technical issues to 
gain operational experiences and to 
identify key issues related to the use of 
ADS. ADS is a function for use of air 
traffic services (ATS) in which aircraft 
automatically transmit, via a satellite data 
link, the position data derived from on¬ 
board navigation systems. As a minimum, 
the data includes aircraft identification and 
three dimensional aircraft position 


(Latitude, Longitude and Altitude). 
Additional data such as aircraft speed, way 
point etc. may be provided as appropriate. 

ADS is the first application of 
direct aircraft-satellite technology for 
ATC. Therefore, it is important to gain as 
much experiences as possible with the 
ADS system in the development phase. 
The ADS PET is expected to be conducted 
at an early date using available equipments 
and prototype systems, to obtain 
experiences before an operational ADS 
system becomes available. As much data 
as possible will be collected and analyzed 
and the results will be shared among the 
interested parties. 


3. SYSTEM. C O NFIGURATIO N 

Australia, the United States and 
Japan utilize different aircraft. Ground 
Earth Stations (GES), ground data 
networks and ADS data processing systems 
respectively. The various system 
components to be used in this ADS PET 
program in Japan are shown in Figure 1. 
and their details arc explained below. 


(1) Av ionics 

The aircraft participating in this 
ADS PET program is a newly released 
B747-400 aircraft with the satellite 
communications capability. The Japan Air 
Lines’ new B747-400s with the satellite 


103 







communications capability were delivered 
last December and this May. These aircraft 
arc fitted with a low gain antenna by 
which a low speed data transmission (600 
BPS) can be performed. The avionics 
conforms to a subset of ARINC 
characteristics of 741 which uses an 
ACARS (Aircraft Communications and 
Reporting System) type interface only and 
docs not provide the ISO's (International 
Standard Organization) OSI (Open System 
Interconnection) based protocol. 

Since the international standards for 
AMSS communications as well as ADS 
format have not been developed and 
finalized yet by ICAO, the specific airline's 
position report format (ACARS messages) 
will temporarily be used for this ADS PET 
program. Thus, ADS position report from 
aircraft varies from one airline to another. 
The format of Japan Air Lines' ADS 
position report is shown in Figure 2. 


development, the Intcrim-GES (1-GES) 
manufactured by Collins, which is a subset 
of INMARSAT SDM (System Definition 
Manual), will be used at the KDD GES 
site. 


(41 Ground data networks 

The KDD's I-GES will be 
connected to a data link computer system 
owned and operated by the AVICOM 
JAPAN which is a newly established VHF 
data link service company in Japan. The 
AVICOM JAPAN was established in 
September,1989 and has started VHF data 
link services over Japanese airspace since 
April, 1990, and also commenced satellite 
data link services (I-ACARS) over Pacific 
Ocean since December, 1990. The interface 
of Collin's I-GES matches perfectly with 
AVICOM's data link computer (DLC) 
system namely ACARS protocol. 


( 2 ) Satellite 

In this ADS PET program, the 
International Maritime Satellite 
Organization (INMARSAT) Pacific Ocean 
Region (POR) satellite will be used. 
Though the INMARSAT is preparing to 
launch the second generation satellite 
which carries a 3 Mhz band of AMSS 
transponder from last autumn, a maritime 
band of the existing satellite (POR) will be 
used because of its unavailability. If a 
second generation satellite becomes 
available during this ADS PET program, 
then the AMSS band will be utilized. 


In this ADS PET program, the 
software modification of AVICOM's DLC 
is involved. Whenever AVICOM's DLC 
accepts the ACARS messages, it will 
automatically send the messages to airline' 
host computer system by referring to the 
airline's address. Thus the AVICOM's 
software had to be changed so that 
whenever the DLC receives the ADS 
position reports, they would be directed to 
the Electronic Navigation Research 
Institute (ENRI), Ministry of Transport 
(MOT), where the ADS data processing 
and display system is located. 


(3) Ground Earth Station (GES) 

Since the INMARSAT satellite is to 
be used, the Ground Earth Station (GES) 
owned and operated by Kokusai Densin 
Denwa (KDD) company which is an 
INMARSAT signatory in Japan will be 
used. As the formal GES is still under 


(5) AD S d ata_proccssing a nd- d ispLu 
system 

The ADS position reports will be 
processed by computer systems located at 
ENRI, MOT. This computer system 
accepts the ADS data to display aircraft 
positions on a screen in realtime and to 
record them on Magnetic Tapes. This 


104 





computer system can not accept and 
process ADS data from UAL's, NWA's and 
QFA's aircraft for the time being, since 
each airline has different ADS message 
format. 

This computer system was 
originally developed for evaluating the 
Cooperative Independent Surveillance 
(CIS) and ADS performances in the 
Engineering Test Satellite (ETS-V) 
experiments. It was modified to allow 
reception of ADS data sent from the 
AVICOM's DLC. The system uses NEC's 
MS135 mini-computer with a 20-inch 
high resolution color display. Aircraft 
position derived from ADS data will be 
indicated with a certain symbol on the 
display along with air routes, 
latitudc/longitude lines and coastal lines, 
etc.. 


The data acquisition flow is shown 
in Fi gure 1 and Figure 3 . In order to derive 
the ADS position report from aircraft, the 
Japan Air Line's host computer has to 
initiate the polling messages (ADS position 
request uplink), which arc automatically 
generated every 5 minutes by computer. 
This polling messages will be transmitted 
to AVICOM's DLC, then they will be 
relayed to KDD's I-GES. The KDD's I- 
GES will transmit this polling messages to 
Japan Air Line's B747-400 through 
INMARSAT FOR satellite according to the 
subset of INMARSAT SDM format. 

Whenever Japan Air Lines's AES 
receives these polling messages, the 
airborne computer (ACARS) generates 
ADS position reports by referring to its 
INS position and send them back to I-GES 
through INMARSAT FOR satellite. Then 
ADS position reports from I-GES will be 
relayed to AVICOM’s data link computer. 


When AVICOM's data link computer 
receives ADS position reports, it will 
deliver them not only to Japan Air Line's 
host computer but also to ENRI's ADS 
data processing and display system. 

This is a basic ADS data 
acquisition flow to be adopted in the ADS 
PET program when the aircraft is over 
Pacific Ocean, namely outside VHF data 
link coverage. However, there is an 
exception in this A.DS PET program. In 
order to avoid pilot involvement as well as 
modification cost on airborne equipments, 
no modification will be made to airborne 
equipments such as ACARS management 
system, satellite data unit. 

According to Japan Air Line's 
avionics specifications, when both VHF 
data link and satellite data link arc 
available (over land area), the ACARS unit 
will automatically select the VHF data link 
channel for economic reasons. Thus, the 
ADS position reports will be sent via VHF 
data link channel when the aircraft is over 
land area or near the coastal area. This 
situation is shown in Figure 3. At the 
beginning phase (take off, transition to 
oceanic route and level flight) and the final 
phase (level flight, transition to domestic 
route and landing) of the flight, the 
satellite data link, therefore, will not be 
used and no performance evaluation can be 
realized in terms of satellite data link path 
during those phases. 


^ATAj\NALYSIS.MET1I0P 

Potential evaluation items are as 
follows. Analysis of the collected data will 
be done on an off-line basis. 


jfI).-ADS..positiQas 

(a) Comparison with SSR data 


105 






This would be possible over and 
near the land area where. SSR data is 
available. Since SSR data could be 
provided on an off-line basis, comparison 
would be made later. In this case, it would 
be desirable that clocks for ADS and for 
SSR arc synchronized or calibrated at least. 

(b) Comparison with flight plan data 

This would be possible along the 
entire oceanic route if flight plan data is 
available. It only checks possible 
discrepancy between ADS based position 
and position in flight plan. It would not 
give quantitative analysis data. 


12) Transmission errors 

Transmission errors will be 
evaluated in terms of characters. They will 
be measured by comparing the content of 
transmitted ADS reports with that received 
at the ENRI. The transmitted data will be 
recorded in the ACMS (Aircraft Condition 
Monitoring System). After the flight, this 
data will be distracted from the ACMS. 

The C/Nq will not be measured 
because of the lack of appropriate 
measuring devices at the GES. The aircraft 
attitude during the flight will be recorded 
nearly every 5 seconds by the ACMS. 

G) Transit delays 

Transit delays will be estimated by 
using an on board recorder and computer 
timer at the GES as well as at the ENRI. It 
will give rough estimates of time delays on 
such path as AES to GES and AES to 
ENRI, etc. Measurement accuracy is 
limited by the time reference accuracy at 
each measuring point, typically on the 
order of a second. 


6. PROGRAM SCHEDULE 

Airborne equipment, AVICOM's 
DLC and ENRI's ADS data processing & 
display system has been modified to 
establish the air-to-ground link, for the 
ADS PET program by the end of May and 
the ground to ground test was completed 
with the use of pseudo aircraft terminal at 
the beginning of June. The first initial 
flight test was conducted in July, 1991 to 
evaluate the end to end performance, and 
it was successfully completed. It is now 
expected that the actual flight test with the 
use of Japan Air Lines' revenue flights for 
the ADS PET program starts from this 
August. 

The destination of the flight and the 
number of flight tests to be conducted in 
FY1991 as ADS PET program arc as 
follows. 

(1) Narita to New York (JFK) 

(About 20 flights) 

(2) Narita to Singapore (Changi) 

(About 10 flights) 

(3) Narita to Saipan 

(About 10 flights) 

(4) Narita to Europe 

(About 10 flights) 


106 





FIGURE 1. ADS PET PROGRAM IN JAPAN 








































Radio Station - Three to five characters (four shown) 



108 


Fig 2. ADS Position Format by JAL 























SESSION ONE: 

TRIALS AND DEMONSTRATIONS 



H. Brian O’Keeffe 
Acting General Manager 
Research and Development 
and ICAO Division 
Civil Aviation Authority, Australia 
Chairman - ICAO FANS Committee 


H. Brian O’Keeffe is Acting General Manager-Research and Development and ICAO 
Division, Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), Australia. In this role he provides advice to the 
CAA Executive on the impact of international technological developments on civil aviation. 
He is also Chairman of the ICAO Special Committee on the Monitoring and Coordination 
of Development and Transition Planning for the Future Air Navigation Systems (FANS) 
System (FANS Phase II). 

Mr. O’Keeffe joined the Department of Civil Aviation in 1956. He carried out navigation 
aids research at the University of Adelaide from 1957 to 1959 and then joined the 
Department’s Airways Engineering Branch in Central Office in Melbourne, advancing to 
the position of Senior Assistant Secretary - Planning Research and Development in 1975. 

In 1982, he was appointed head of the Airways Division, which involved the planning, 
design, provision, and operation of air traffic control, flight service, operational control, 
and rescue and fire fighting services, as well as navigation, communication, and radar 
surveillance facilities and services. 


He has been the Australian member of the ICAO FANS Committee since its formation, and 
once served as its Vice-Chairman. In mid-1988 he was elected as Chairman of the FANS 
Phase II Committee. In May 1990 he was elected Chairman of the FANS Phase II 
Committee that is associated with the global implementation of the FANS concept. 

Following the establishment of the Civil Aviation Authority, he was appointed General 
Manager - Advanced Systems Development, responsible for the planning, research, design, 
and development of technologically advanced airways systems to meet the needs of aviation 
over the next 20 yeai’s in a cost-effective manner. 

He graduated with a bachelor’s degree in Engineering (Electrical) from the University of 
Queensland in 1956. 


110 











AUSTRALIAN EXPERIMENTS IN AUTOMATIC 
DEPENDENT SURVEILLANCE (ADS) INCLUDING 
THE PACIFIC ENGINEERING TRIALS (PET) 


Brian O'Keeffe 

Civil Aviation Authority, Australia 


INTRODUCTION 

Japan, Australia and the United States have agreed to a 
co-operative Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) 
Trilateral Pacific Engineering Trials (PET) test program. 

The participating agencies are the Australian Civil Aviation 
Authority (CAA), the Japanese Civil Aviation Bureau (JCAB), 
and the United States Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
National carriers of the three countries are also involved. 

Two meetings have been held to devise and agree on details 
of the test program. 

The latest meeting was held in Tokyo from 4 to 8 February 
1991. Besides representatives from Australia, Japan and USA, 
observers were present from USSR, France, Fiji, New Zealand, 
Japanese airlines and other institutions. The next meeting 
will be held in Australia from 9 to 12 December 1991. 

ADS data are being received in Australia from some 
transpacific flights and exchanged between the agencies. 
Increasing amounts of data are expected as more aircraft 
with ADS capability are placed in service. 

Australia is also receiving ADS data from two domestic 
carriers via VHF ACARS. 


The development of a general purpose display system is 
continuing. The displays can be driven by flight plans/pilot 






position reports, ADS data or radar data. Prototypes are 
being placed in ATC centres for evaluation. 


OBJECTIVES 

The objectives of the ADS program are to 

a) resolve technical issues; 

b) to gain operational experience in the 
compilation, transmission and reception of ADS 
data messages; 

c) to identify key issues relating to the use of 
ADS and pilot-controller data communications; 

d) to gain experience in the development of display 
systems suitable for ATC; 

e) to gather and correlate data from ADS, voice 
position reports, and radar for eventual input 
to the ICAO RGCS Panel to assist in their 
deliberations on separation minima in ADS 
airspace and in airspace with both ADS and 
non-ADS equipped aircraft. 

The operational implementation of ADS and direct 
pilot-controller data communications will result in benefits 
to the airlines and air traffic services in the form of 
reduced separation minima, reduced ATC workload and the more 
efficient use of aircraft and airspace outside radar 
coverage. 

ADS reports may also contain additional information on 
aircraft velocity vectors, weather details and the future 
intention of the aircraft in terms of the current flight 
plan. These data will allow the rapid detection of 
waypoint-insertion and other errors navigational errors and 
thus enhance the safety of operations. 

The ADS program is being actively implemented using 
available equipment and prototype systems. Experience gained 
will enable an operational system to be implemented as soon 
as practicable. 


112 






CUEIRENT STATUS OF THE AUSTEtALIAN DOMESTIC PROGRAM 


Domestic ADS 

In many parts of the world, including Australia, ADS will be 
beneficial in continental as well as oceanic areas. 

In areas where VHF air-ground communications are possible, 
it is likely that ADS could be achieved at lower cost via 
VHF than via satellite. In addition, in the medium term 
there will be many more aircraft (particularly those used by 
domestic carriers) capable of VHF/ADS than satellite/ADS. 

Australia is therefore experimenting with VHF/ADS as well as 
with satellite/ADS in the PET trials. 

In a joint effort with SITA and our domestic airlines, some 
1000 AGARS aircraft messages per day are received in the 
CAA's Head Office in Canberra. They are interfaced to our 
general purpose aircraft display system. It is proposed that 
technical evaluations including correlation with radar data 
will be performed. 

AGARS messages and their transmission rate are not suitable, 
as they stand, for an operational ADS system. However the 
transition to specific ADS messages by VHP is not difficult. 


Display systems 

The benefits of ADS cannot be fully realised without 
adequate display systems. The traditional flight progress 
board is quite unsuitable for displaying frequent position 
updates. 

The Australian CAA is therefore developing, and has 
progressed to a prototype phase, a low-cost 
hardware/software package implemented on commercially 
available workstations. Evaluation displays have been 
installed at Adelaide and will shortly be installed in the 
Sydney ATC centre. 


Other experimental projects 

The CAA is also experimenting with ADS through the use of a 
suitably equipped vehicle. The vehicle has been fitted with 
a GPS receiver, INMARSAT standard C earth station, computer, 
AGARS unit, antennae, power supplies and ancillary 
equipment. 


113 





The vehicle will be used to test and validate the proposed 
ADS and communications systems for FANS including the 
following: 

a) simulation of an aircraft by generating time 
tagged position reports and transmitting these 
via satellite back to the CAA; 

b) checking data integrity and bit error rates; 

c) assessing transmission delays via alternative 
routing; 

d) analysing protocols and procedures; 

e) development and testing of a small ground earth 
station for the direct reception of ADS messages 
at the ATC centre and investigating the direct 
reception and decoding of a simulated aircraft 
signal by a ground station in Australia. 


CURRENT STATUS OP THE PET 


Pre-operational trials over the Pacific are being held in 
collaboration with the Japanese Civil Aviation Bureau and 
with the FAA under a Memorandum of Co-operation. 
Participating airlines are Qantas, JAL, ANA, North-West and 
United. 

ADS data are being received in Australia from some 
transpacific flights. Increasing amounts of data are 
expected as more aircraft with ADS capability are placed in 
service. 

At the meeting in Tokyo, Australia reported that it was 
developing low-cost general purpose display systems for ADS. 
As noted above, the displays will also be able to show 
aircraft positional data derived from radar and from flight 
plans/voice position reports. 

Experimental displays are being installed at Sydney and 
Adelaide. 

Qantas have taken delivery of their first SITCOM equipped 
B747-400 aircraft. CAA has an agreement with them to capture 
ADS data and share these with other Pacific aviation 
administrations. 

Reports were also received at the Tokyo meeting from the 
Japan, USA, France and USSR representatives. 


114 





FUTURE PET CO-OPERATION 


The participants and observers at the Tokyo meeting resolved 
to freely exchange data and information relating to ADS. 

The USA offered to document a generic work clan of the PET 
program which would be a consolidated statensent of 
individual projects and experiments being conducted by the 
PET participants and observers. 

It was seen as highly desirable that a program of ADS data 
analysis and reduction be agreed so that useful input could 
be made to the RGCS and ADS Panels. The objective of 
allowing operating credits to ADS equipped operators is 
dependent on a reduction in separation minima and thus PET 
data on ADS performance and accuracy must be made available 
to RGCS Panel as soon as practicable and on an on-going 
basis. 

The next PET meeting will be held in Australia from 9 to 12 
December 1991. 


CONCLUSION 


ADS will bring significant benefits to the aviation industry 
and service providers. 

The PET program and the experiments with Australian domestic 
carriers and new display systems are demonstrating the 
practical feasibility of ADS. 


115 






CO-AUTHOR 



Graeme Challinor 
Manager 

Analysis Research and Development 
Civil Aviation Authority 
Australia 
Technical Center 


Graeme Challinor is Manager, Analysis Research and Development, Civil Aviation 
Authority, Australia. He manages a technical and operational group carrying out R&D 
projects related to FANS. He is also the Australian member of the ICAO ADS Panel. 

He graduated from Oxford University in Natural Sciences (Chemistry). He carried out 
research work in nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy at Oxford and then Joined the 
Atomic Energy Research Establishment, Harwell in 1964. 

He worked as Senior Chemist for the Pyrethrum Board of Kenya. He is a private pilot. 
During this period he obtained Membership of the UK Institute of Statisticians by 
examination. He was subsequently elected to Fellowship in recognition of his work in 
operational simulation techniques. 

In 1972 he joined the Australian Department of Civil Aviation and trained as an air traffic 
controller. He headed the operations research section. With the formation of the Civil 
Aviation Authority he took charge of an R&D group with interests in simulation modelling, 
airport capacities and delays, air traffic management, and artificial intelligence techniques 
and their application to air traffic services. The group is also managing the Australian 
Automatic Dependent Surveillance program including the development of new display 
systems for ATC. 


116 






117 








TRIALS 


©EMONSTRATIOMS 



Pascal Senard 
SATCOM Project Manager 
Air Navigation Technical Center 
French DGAC 


Pascal Senard is Project Manager within the Advanced Systems Division for the french Air 
Navigation Technical Center (STNA), a position he has held since 1988. He is in charge of 
the evaluation of the satellite communications systems impact in the ATC services. 

Mr. Senard is actively involved in the ICAO AMC and ADS Panels as assistant to the 
french nominees. He is currently directing the SATCOM experiment in the South Pacific. 

He joined the STNA from the french Flight Test Center where he served as Microwave 
Landing System (MLS) flight test engineer, after having held a position in A-320 avionics 
development programs. 

Mr. Senard holds a "Ingenieur" degree in Civil Aviation and Air Transport from the Ecole 
Nationale de I’Aviation Civile, Toulouse, France. 


118 




FRENCH SATCOiM PROGRAM 
AND RELATED INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES 

P.Senard / P.Gauthier 
French DGAC-STNA, Paris, France 


1 - ABSTRACT 

This j)aper describes the work that the French 
Administration wishes to undertake, or is currently 
performing, in the field of satellite communications 
used for ATC purposes. 

The aim of this work program is to prepare the 
possible integration of a future Satcom-based ATC 
system, in consistency with the needs specific to the 
French Civil Aviation and in harmony with the 
approach adopted at an international level. 

Therefore, the paper will start with a short 
introduction recalling the context in which French 
ATC authorities have to deal with the emerging 
concept t'f satellite communications. 

This will be followed by a general presentation 
of the intended work program and of its successive 
steps. 

2 - INTRODUCTION 


2.1 - International context 

For some time now, the French DGAC, as 
most of its colleagues, has been showing a growing 
interest for satellite communications. This interest is 
driven by two major events, that have occured 
recently inside the civil aviation community: 

The first event is the availability of the first 
Aeronautical Satcom system. This system is provided 
by Inmarsat and has been primarily designed to be 


used by airlines for passenger communications or for 
their own purposes. Initial versions of avionics and 
ground facilities supporting this system are now 
available and may be used by ATC for preliminary 
trials and experiments. 

The second event, related to the first one, is the 
effort carried on by international organisations such 
as ICAO and RTCA to ensure at an early stage a 
sufficient level of standardisation of future AMSS 
^sterns. These efforts are reflected in the documents 
issued by these organisations: SARPs for ICAO, 
with the main objective of ensuring interoperability 
between systems; and MOPS for RTCA, which 
define minimum performance requirements. 

According to the current international context, 
it is now probable that the use of satellite 
communications for ATC will develop rapidly. 
However, this development is likely to take place 
mainly in those countries where the need for a 
Satcom-based ATC system is particularly clear,that 
is: countries which control wide oceanic areas with a 
high density of traffic, or where the satellite is the 
only identified means to overcome the shortcomings 
of classical communication media. 


France, as a number of other countries, is 
responsible for several airspaces with widely differing 
characteristics. If we consider, for example, the 
metropolitan territory and the South Pacific region, 
it is obvious that the situation concerning air traffic 
control and the needs in air-ground communications 
is completely different. 


119 






In the first case, we are talking of a continental 
airspace with a high density of traffic and extensive 
infrastructure, a strong need for operational 
coordination with European neighbouring countries, 
and where the Mode-S Secondary Radar - as in 
most other European countries - is seen as an 
efficient way of providing the required air-ground 
communication and surveillance capacity. 

On the opposite, the South Pacific region is a 
wide oceanic airspace with relatively low traffic 
density. Control procedures relying mostly upon HF 
communications have been successfully used up to 
now. The situation is the same for the other states 
involved in the control of South Pacific airspaces, 
ensuring a satisfactory coordination between the 
various participants. 

Whereas the need for satellite communications, 
as far as the metropolitan territory is concerned, is 
for the moment rather unclear, the use of a Satcom 
system could confer to ATC in the South Pacific and 
in the Brest ACC which is interfacing oceanic 
airspaces some improvements which need now to be 
assessed. 

This example underlines the diversity of 
situations and of needs that must be accounted for, 
when we consider the possibility of integrating a 
Satcom system to support ATC. 

3 - TENTATIVE OVERALL PROGRAM 


3.1 - Main steps overview 

The main objective of the program is, as 
mentioned above, to prepare the possible integration 
of a future Satcom system to be used by French 
ATC. 

First step: preliminary study and demonstration trials 

It is then necessary, before anything else, to 
have a clear idea of the benefits that we can expect 
from such a system. In other terms, the first step of 
the program consists in a preliminary study to 
express our need for a Satcom-based ATC system. 
The most appropriate way to formalise this work is 
to issue a document called functional definition of 
requirements (and user needs), which summarizes, 
in terms of functions, the services that the system is 
expected to provide. Demonstrations trials are 
committed for that purpose. 


Second step: predefinition study 

The functions of service that can be found in 
the functional definition of requirements remain at a 
strictly qualitative level (in particular, any reference 
to technical solutions must be banished from this 
document). The next step of the program is then an 
attempt to express the requirements in a quantitative 
way. This is achieved by defining, for the various 
functions, some criteria, with a target level and a 
possible flexibility. Technical orientations may also 
be proposed at this stage. The outcome of this task 
will be another document, called functional and 
performance specification, which is supposed to be a 
faithfull reflection of the user expectancies. This 
second step may be considered as a predefinition 
phase. It must take advantage of the experience and 
expertise gained at an international level through the 
work performed by the different working groups. 

Third step: evaluation of proposals 

The interest of the functional and performance 
specification is to serve as an objective basis for the 
selection of a system configuration, with the 
associated service provider(s). 

Suppliers will be able to propose a system 
design based on this document, and their offers, 
together with the ones concerning already existing 
systems, will be compared by evaluating their degree 
of conformance to the aforementioned specification. 
This evaluation of proposals is the third step of the 
program. A decision must be taken at this stage on a 
"go" or "no go" basis, that is: whether to continue 
the program with the most suitable configuration 
and supplier (and in that case the level of 
uncertainty must be evaluated); or to stop it if the 
requirements expressed in the specification cannot 
be satisfactorily ^Ifillcd. 

Preoperaiional phase and operational deployment 

If the third step has led to the selection of a 
service provider, the next step will consist in a 
preoperational phase, where the new services will be 
integrated to the current ones and validated. This 
preoperational phase, which finalizes the system 
definition, will be followed by the final step of the 
program which is the operational deployment. 

This overall approach is summarized in figure 
1, which shows the succession of the different phases 
of the program. 


120 







The following paragraphs present the work 
plan envisaged by the French Administration about 
the first two steps: the expression of the needs and 
the predefinition study, which are considered as 
short-term tasks. 

3.2 - Preliminary study and South Pacific.Trial 


3.2.1 - Expressing the needs 

The objective of this first step of the program is 
the issue of the functional definition of 
requirements, which is aimed at expressing the needs 
for a Satcom-based system. 

In this preliminary study, emphasis will be put 
on the oceanic areas under French responsibility, 
where a potential need for satellite communications 
has been identified. Potential users of the system (i.e 
pilots and controllers) will be questionned by 
engineers involved in Satcom development are to be 
set in order to define what should be expected from 
the satellite communications service. The South 
Pacific trials are dedicated for helping the 
operational people to operate such a system and 
return pertinant comments. 

Two important points must be kept in mind 
during this study; first, consistency must be 
maintained with the developments implemented in 
neighbouring flight control areas, in order to ensure 
a uniform level of service all along the regional 
routes; second, the possibilities offered by the 
satellite must be considered in relation with the 
development of ADS in the region of concern. 

According to these points, the South Pacific 
Trial is an important element of this preliminary 
study. This experiment is described with more detail 
in the next paragraph. Although it uses early 
versions of avionics and protocols, which are not 
SARPs-compliant, it will provide an operational 
background to the study and will help to clarify the 
kind of benefits that can be expected from the 
satellite. Furthermore, the trial is coordinated the 
PET (Pacific Engineering Trial) program, and as 
such will contribute to harmonised ATC 
developments in the Pacific region. 

Although this preliminary study will mainly 
focus on the use of satellite in oceanic areas, it will 
ah'' consider the possibility of Satcom 
impicmvi tation in the metropolitan area, in the 
frame C‘ a cfv rdinated management of European 


airspace. Studies in this field should be performed in 
close cooperation with Eurocontrol. 

3.2.2 - The South Pacific Trial 

The South Pacific Trial should start by the end 
of September 1991. It will use a Boeing 747-400 of 
the UTA airline equipped with Collins "data 1" 
avionics, a Canadian Marconi high gain antenna and 
a Ball low-gain antenna. When flying over the 
Oceanic Control Area of Noumea (which should 
happen onez a week during regular scheduled 
operational flights), the plane will transmit ADS 
messages to the Control Center. These ADS 
messages will be automatically assembled by an 
ACARS unit on-board the aircraft and will be 
routed to the controller via the Pacific Ocean 
Inmarsat satellite, an Satellite Aircom consortium 
Ground Earth Station (most likely Perth's), and tl.’e 
SITA network. 

The controller will be able to visualise, on a 
graphic display, the movement of the plane 
according to the ADS position reports. Provision has 
been taken for an additional data-processing facility. 

Due to the use of data 1 avionics, the ADS 
reporting messages will be embedded in the ACARS 
format, and simplified protocols (non SARPs- 
compliant) will be used over the satellite link. 

In addition to the transmission of ADS 
messages, both pilot and controller will have the 
possibility to exchange free-text, manually typed, 
ACARS messages. Furthermore, voice 
communications, using a 9.6 kilobit per second 
codec, will be available for crew and passengers. 

Naturally, the system described here is purely 
experimental and, for safety reasons, will not 
interfere with the classical control procedures. 
However, the possibility to replay flight records will 
allow the simulation of a number of scenarios. This 
should be a major help in defining what could be the 
role of the satellite in the diverse aeronautical 
services of: search and rescue, flight information, 
surveillance and strategic planning, and tactical 
control. 

3.3 - Prcdcfinition study 

As mentioned above, the predefinition phase is 
based on the results of the preliminary study, which 
arc contained in the document functional definition 
of requirements. The role of the predefinition study 


121 





is to define the criteria by which the degree of 
satisfaction given by the system can be quantified. 
For each criterium identified, a target level must be 
established, together with the flexibility allowed (if 
any) with respect to the target value. 

It is essential at this stage of the program to 
maintain a strong coordination at international level. 
This will allow to identify, among the various 
standardization, simulation and experimentation 
programs undertaken in the different countries 
involved, the results which may help to express the 
requirements in a quantitative way. 

The scope of the study is illustrated in Figure 2, 
which gives an example of typical criteria which can 
be applied to the Satcom-based ATC services. The 
relationship between the criteria and the services, as 
well as the target levels and flexibility values, must 
be determined in accordance with the work 
performed by the relevant international bodies. In 
particular, it is important to note that the results of 
the on-going SARPs and MOPs finalization, and 
validation, will be major inputs to the study. 

Eventually, the results of the study should be 
synthetized in the document functional and 
performance specification, which could serve as a 
negotiation basis for a potential onfiguration 
proposed by service providers to French Civil 
Aviation. 

3.4 - Schedule 

As far as the schedule of the program is 
concerned, only tentative dates can be given for the 
time being. The preliminary study is foreseen to last 
until end 1992. The predefinition study should start 
approximately at mid-1993 and extend over an 
estimated one-year period. 

The continuation of the program is dependent 
upon the outcome of the first phases, and no 
forecast is made yet concerning schedule. However, 
it is likely that a Satcom-based ATC system will not 
be operational in a French-controlled airspace 
before the end of the decade. 


4 - CONCLUSION 

By undertaking this program, the French Civil 
Aviation wishes to play a role in the general plan set 
up by the FANS II Comittee. The objective of this 
genral plan is to take the best advantage of the new 
concepts in air-navigation. 

concepts, and in particular of the possibilities 
offered by satellite communications. In accordance 
with this overall direction pointed out by the FANS 
II Comittee, France and is developping an approach 
to allow the integration of a future Satcom-based 
system. 

This approach has been presented in this paper 
and is characterized by a program breakdown in 
successive phases, starting from the expression of the 
user needs to end up with the operational 
deployment of the system. For the time being, 
provisions in the workplan of French Civil Aviation 
are made for the first two phases, which consist in a 
preliminary study (expression of need!)) and a 
predefinition study (definition of satisfaction 
criteria). 

Whereas the will to respond i't an optimal way 
to French-specific ATC needs is a major aspect of 
this program, another prioritary objective is to 
maximize the benefits at a more global scale: a 
regional-scale could be considered initially (in the 
North Atlantic, the Pacific or in Europe), the final 
aim being a worlwide harmonized use of satellite 
communications for ATC purposes. 

For this reason, a tight cooordination and a 
stimulating cooperation between all the entities 
involved in these developments are felt to be a major 
condition for general success. 


122 



STEP1: 

PREUMINARY STUDY 


EXPRESSION OF 
THE NEED 


REUTED ACTIVITIES 


ACQUIRING TECHNICAL EXPERIENCE 
THROUGH EXPERIMENTS 
IN AN OPERATIONAL ENVIRONMENT 
(SOUTH PACIFIC TRIAL) 


doc 


Functional Definition of Requirements 

I 


STEP 2: 

PREDEFINITION STUDY 


DEFINITION 

AND QUANTIFICATION OF <• 
SATISFACTION CRITERIA 


i- 


COORDINATIONWITH 
INTERNATIONAL ENTITIES. 
COOPERATIVE TRIALS 
(NAT TRIALS?) 


doc, 


Functional and Performance Specification 

i 

STEP 3: 

EVALUATION 
OF PROPOSALS 


stand-by 

choice of a 
system configuration 

i 


STEP 4: 

PREOPERATIONAL PHASE 


INTEGRATION 
AND QUALIFICATION 


1 

STEP 5: 
OPERATIONAL 
DEPLOYMENT 



FIGURE 1 - OVERALL PROGRAM PHASING 


123 

















POSSIBLE 

CRITERIA 


RELEVANT 
INTERNATIONAL 
BODIES & ACTIVITIES 


BASIC ATC 
SERVICES 


INTEREST 
o( the service 



SCOPE OF THE PREDEFINITION STUDY: 

K 




APPLY THE CRITERIA TO THE SERVICES 
through coordination with the relevant bodies and activities 


FIGURE 2 ~ SCOPE OF THE PREDEFINITION STUDY 


124 
































Patrice Gauthier 

Satellite Communications Engineer 
Air Navigation Technical Center 
French DGAC 


Patrice Gauthier graduated in 1987 from the Ecole Superieure d’EIectricite, with a 
specialization in Radio Communications. 

He then joined Altran Technologies, a consultant group specializing in advanced 
technologies, particularly in space and aeronautical fields. 

After a three year mission for Matra Space Systems, where he participated to the definition 
of commercial communication payloads, he was assigned by the technical services of French 
DGAC to study the possibility offered by mobile satellite communications for Air Traffic 
Control applications. 


As such, he has been involved in the development of standards (SARPs) for an Aeronautical 
Mobile Communications Service. 










TRIALS iW BEaW^NSTRATlOllS 



Teresa A. Anderson 
Air/Ground Services Planner 
Engineering/Services Management 
Aeronautical Radio, Inc. 
ARINC 


Teresa A. Anderson is the Services Planner for ARINC’s International HF and Satellite 
Air/Ground communications services. Teresa is responsible for the business management 
and development of these services. She received a B.S. in Aviation Management from 
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University. Prior to joining ARINC, Teresa was responsible 
for market planning at Presidential Airways. 


126 







DIGITIZED VOICE TRIALS 


Teresa A. Anderson 
Aeronautical Radio, Inc., Annapolis, MD 


BACKGROUND 


In September 1990, the airline industry in¬ 
augurated satellite service with the commissioning of 
the Hrst aircraft for commercial Aeronautical Mobile 
Satellite Service (AMSS). The aircraft, operated by 
an ARINC customer, was equipped with data com¬ 
munications capability only. 

Shortly thereafter, corporate aircraft began in¬ 
stallations of passenger telephony equipment. Now, 
the next step in satellite communication is about to be 
taken as the industry prepares to adopt flight deck 
voice communications service. 

Although ICAO has stated that data link will be 
the primary mode for routine communications, voice 
will be used as a back-up and for non-routine com¬ 
munications. 

ARINC is preparing to support the introduction 
of digitized voice for Air Traffic Control (ATC) and 
Airline Operational Communications (AOC), through 
service provision and participation in joint trials. The 
FAA will be conducting an engineering evaluation of 
digitized voice communications. 

TRIAL PARTICIPANTS 


The participants of the digitized voice trials in¬ 
clude the airlines, the FAA and ARINC. All airlines 
that operate aircraft equipped with satellite voice 
avionics are eligible to participate. The FAA Tech¬ 
nical Center will be conducting engineering evalua¬ 
tions and the US Air Route Traffic Control Centers 
(ARTCC) will be participating in the direct pilot- 
controller communications. 


ARINC will bring satellite communication ser¬ 
vices and engineering support to these trials. Through 
ARINC’s existing Air/Ground Communications 
Centers, ARINC will provide call routing and 
telephone patching. Also, ARINC will collect and 
analyze test data in support of the FAA’s efforts as 
well as individual airline test programs. 


SERVICE AVAILABILITY 


The initial satellite voice service became avail¬ 
able in December 1990 and worldwide satellite voice 
communications has been in place since early 1991. 
Inmarsat has plans to offer the next generation of 
voice service, known as Voice 2, by the first quarter 
of 1992. ARINC has in place the architecture to sup¬ 
port satellite air/ground voice communications. 

Today, each of the ARINC Ground Earth Sta¬ 
tions (GES) is equipped with special equipment for 
dial-access to the /^INC Communications Centers. 
As voice communications volume increase, dedicated 
circuits will be installed as well. 

Several manufacturers are developing flight 
deck voice avionics. The Voice 2 avionics 
availability will coincide with the Voice 2 GES 
capability in early 1992. Several airlines are looking 
at new and retrofit installations of voice avicmics. 
The types of airframes include B747-400, B767-300, 
MD-11, A-340 as well as corporate aircraft such as 
the Gulfsueam G-IV. 

The FAA digitized voice trials will last ap¬ 
proximately six months, beginning in early 1992. 


127 


200220240260280900320^40 0 20 40 80 80 100 120 140 180 180 



Figure 1: Inmarsat AMSS Coverage Map 


SATELLITE SYSTEM 


Inmarsat has four satellites that together 
provide worldwide coverage for aeronautical satellite 
communications. In addition, each satellite is backed 
up with operational spares to ensure satellite 
availability. ARINC has contracted with several In¬ 
marsat signatories for redundant GES coverage for 
each satellite region. In addition, ARINC has entered 
into a Joint Venture with SITA for added redundancy 
to assure communications service availability. 


VOICE CONNECTIVITY 


Each GES is connected to ARINC AirAJround 
Communications Centers via the Public Switched 
Telephone Network (PSTN) which provides connec¬ 
tivity to any phone number in the world. Initially, 
ARINC has installed special equipment at each G^ 
to automatically receive and place calls to the ARINC 
Communications Centers in San Francisco and New 
York. As voice traffic increases, ARINC will be in¬ 
stalling dedicated circuits at each GES to assure line 
availability. PSTN connections will remain in place 
as back-up to dedicated circuits. 


ARINC COMMUNICATIONS CENTER 
ARCHITECTURE 


ARINC utilizes a specialized voice interconnect 
system at each of its Communications Centers. 
Through this system, ARINC Radio Operators are 
able to create phone patches in addition to placing and 
receiving phone calls. The voice interconnect system 
is configured to accept digitized voice calls from 
satellite equipped aircMt either through the PSTN or 
via dedicated circuits. 

The voice interconnect system also provides 
connectivity to dedicated circuits that ARINC has in 
place linking the Communications Centers and the ^- 
plicable Air Route Traffic Control Centers (ARTCC). 
Dial access capability also provides back-up in event 
of non-availability of the dedicated circuits. 

Through the voice interconnect system, the 
Radio Operators are also capable of contacting an 
airline’s dispatch office, maintenance center or other 
point to create phone patches or relay information. 

As part of the Radio Operator’s duties. Air 
Traffic Control (ATC) voice communications are 
transcribed into ARINC’s Air/Ground System (AGS). 


128 











Figure 2; Oceanic ATC Communications Delivery 


AGS sends messages through the ARINC Data 
Network Service (ADNS) to the responsible sector 
controller as well as airline dispatch destinations. 
ARINC Radio Operators also provide transcription 
services for operational communications. 


NEAR-TERM VOICE CAPABILITIES 


The ARINC Communications Centers and net¬ 
works are operated to meet the air/ground voice re¬ 
quirements of the air transport industry. This voice 
network supports both High Frequency (HF) and 
Very High Frequency (VHF) radio communications. 
ARifr'lC also acts as the voice of the FAA by provid¬ 
ing ATC communications via HF in the US controlled 
Flight Information Regions (FIR). 

In today’s oceanic environment, in order to 
deliver a clearance, first a controller contacts an 
ARINC Communications Center. The Lead Radio 
Operator, who receives the call, transcribes the ATC 
message. The Radio Operator handling the com¬ 
munications for that particular flight will then contact 
the flight crew and deliver the message via HF radio. 


Flight deck originated radio messages are 
placed to the ARINC Radio Operator who transcribes 
the message. The Radio Operator then contacts the 
apprq)rjate controller and delivers a copy of the 
transcribed message. 

ARINC has further enhanced its voice network 
architecture by introducing the capability o*’ handling 
satellite voice communications. L'y using ARINC’s 
existing Air/Ground voice communications architec¬ 
ture, aviation is able to realize digitized voice applica¬ 
tions immediately. 

For aircraft equipped with satellite voice, there 
are no changes to the existing communications 
procedures except that the flight crew is contacted 
using digital voice. 

However, faster, mors flexible and more ac¬ 
curate communications are expected. From the 
controller’s perspective, there will be no difference in 
procedures. ARINC will support an aircraft 
operator’s transition into digitized voice communica¬ 
tions with no adverse impact for ATC, minimizing ths 
implementation time. 


129 
















THE FANS CONCEPT 


Tlirough the ICAO Future Air Navigation Sys¬ 
tem (FANS) committee, aviation is planning for im¬ 
provements in communication, navigation and sur¬ 
veillance (CNS) to take air transportation into the next 
century. The basic elements of the FANS concept 
identify data link as the primary means of air/ground 
communications. Voice communications will be 
reserved for non-routine or emergency communica¬ 
tions and as a back-up in the event of data link failure. 
Other elements of the FANS concept call for im¬ 
proved performance capabilities of navigation equip¬ 
ment and enhanced surveillance of aircraft operating 
in non-radar environments. 


FUTURE OCEANIC COMMUNICATIONS 


ARINC’s system evolution is synchronized 
with the FAA’s development plans. Cona.'oient with 
the FANS concept, the FAA is migrating all routine 
communications to data link messages. Only emer¬ 
gency or non-routine communications will be con¬ 
duct^ via voice. The future oceanic voice system 
will enable direct pilot-to-controller communications 
as in today’s domestic airspace. 


The FAA has developed a five phase plan to 
migrate to the future ATC communications environ¬ 
ment. ARINC supports that plan and is developing 
the system evolution in lock-step with the FAA’s ef¬ 
forts. 


DIGITIZED VOICE TEST PLANS 


There are three things that the FAA will be 
evaluatmg during its digitized voice trials period. The 
tests consist of; 

• ATC communications evaluation 

• Edge of coverage definition 

• Long duration call validation 

ATC COMMUNICATIONS EVALUATION 


Through the procedures developed for the ATC 
communications tests, the FAA will validate the use 
of digitized satellite voice for non-routine, emergency 
and back-up communications. 

In addition, the FAA will verify that no 
procedural change is needed for ATC and minimal or 
no change is required for the flight crew. The FAA 
will conduct an appraisal of digitized voice com- 


130 






munication quality by compiling feedback fiom all 
participants of the digitized voice calls. 

Call set-up times will be recorded and analyzed 
for both air-to-ground and ground-to-air calls. Call 
set-up is defined as the period of time between the last 
digit is dialed and the Hrst ring is heard. In the air-to- 
ground direction, pilots will record the call set-up 
time and for ground-to-air calls, ARINC Radio 
Operators will record call set-up time. 

Digitized voice quality will be measured on a 
scale of 1 to 5, with 1 teing unacceptable and 5 being 
excellent. Each participant in a i^one conversation 
will grade the c^’s quality immediately after the 
call’s completion. Call participants are the flight 
crew. Radio Operator, controller and may include 
others. 

A series of scripts have been developed for 
these tests. By having a specific dialogue to follow, 
more objective comparisons can be conducted of the 
various voice calls. The scripts are based on non¬ 
routine communications such as medical emergencies 
or fuel leaks. 


EDGE OF COVERAGE DEFINITION 


The digitized voice trials will verify the boun¬ 
daries of voice coverage by empirically detennining 
the footprint of the satellite. In addition, an appraisal 
of digitized voice communications intelligibility at 
edges of coverage will be conducted. 

For these tests, the aircraft’s position will be 
recorded at the set-up of each call. Again, the voice 
conversations will follow a script of non-routine com¬ 
munications and the call quality evaluated on a scale 
of 1 to 5. In addition, the aircraft’s position will be 
logged at the point of loss of communication. 

LONG-DURATION CALL VALIDATION 


The flnal parameter the digitized voice trials 
will evaluate is the satellite system’s ability to sustain 
long duration call connection. Unlike HF, satellite 
voice communications create an actual circuit, much 
like a home telephone, it is likely that during emer¬ 
gency situations, the voice link will be in place for an 
extended period of time. 


The long duration call validation will test the 
capabilities of AMSS to sustain lengthy calls. In ad¬ 
dition, a determination will be made of the ratio of 
calls disconnected by the system to those terminated 
by one of the call p^es. Also, the average length of 
a call terminated by the system will be measured. 

The ARINC Radio Operators will establish 
voice communications with the flight deck for one of 
four different lengths. Calls will last 15 minutes, 30 
minutes, one hour and three hours. Due to the length 
of these calls, the communication link will be checked 
periodically rather than having continuous conver¬ 
sations. The call length is measured as the period of 
time between the called party answering and the ter¬ 
mination of the call. 


SUMMARY 


ARINC has the voice network architecture in 
place to support satellite voice communications today. 
By utilizing existing facilities and procedures, 
ARINC is able to facilitate rapid implementation of 
this new technology without adverse impact on sys¬ 
tem users. 

ARINC is working closely with the FAA to 
coordinate the oceanic communication evolution 
towards direct pilot-controller communications, 
whether by data or voice. 

The Digitized Voice Trials will evaluate ATC 
communication capabilities, define edge of satellite 
coverage and validate the performance of long dura¬ 
tion calls. ARINC supports these efforts by providing 
the communication service, both in the satellite link 
and in the establishment of calls. ARINC also 
provides quality evaluation and assists in data collec¬ 
tion. 


131 





SESSION ONE: 

TRIALS AND DEMONSTRATIONS 





Norman Dimock 

Applications Development Engineer 
Technical Services 
Transport Canada Aviation 


Norman Dimock graduated from the Technical University of Nova Scotia in 1972 with a 
BEng-EIect. He then worked with Transport Canada in Winnipeg, designing electronics 
and selecting and testing sites for communications and navigational aid radio facilities in the 
central and far north. In 1980 he transferred to the Advanced Communications group in 
Ottawa and there developed methods for aircraft antenna calibration, communications radio 
transmitter flight checking, speech intelligibility measurement, and digital audio processing. 

Mr. Dimock is presently the project manager for ADS Investigations, mainly concerned with 
technical development in support of ADS flight trials and simulations. He is also the 
Canadian advisor to Working Group B of the ICAO Automatic Dependent Surveillance 
Panel. 


132 







AUTOMATIC DEPENDENT SURVEILLANCE 
(ADS) DEVELOPMENT IN CANADA 

Norman F. Dimock, and Donald F. Maclean 

Transport Canada, Ottawa, Canada 


ABSTRACT 

This paper presents Canadian work in progress 
to investigate operational and technical requirements 
for using ADS and datalink in Air Traffic Control (ATCl. 
Ongoing tests and experiments are described. North 
Atlantic ADS trials pre;/arations are reported and some 
related operational and technical issues are discussed. 
ADS-ATC Simulation plans are outlined. The notable 
features of ADS Development System workstations, to 
be used by controllers participating in ADS trials and 
simulations, are detailed. 

INTRODUCTION 

Transport Canada provides AirTraffic Services 
for vast non-RADAR airspaces over the North Atlantic 
and northern Canada, and so has an acute interest in 
expediting the implementation of ADS. To support 
international guidance of ADS development we provide 
a member on the ICAO ADS Panel and representatives 
on the associated Working Groups. Meaningful 
participation depends greatly on accumulating relevant 
experience. 

We have built up some operational and 
technical experience through several years work in 
various datalink experiments and tests. This paper 
presents information and observations from those 
efforts which may be helpful to others engaged in the 
work. By sharing it we hope to further encourage the 
spirit of openness and co-operation already prevalent. 
Also presented here is a statement of our approach to 
institutional and technical arrangements for North 
Atlantic ADS trials which we are preparing to initiate 
in co-operation with other authorities. 


DATALINK/ADS TESTS AND EXPERIMENTS 
Oceanic Clearance Delivery (PCD) 

Transport Canada was alerted to the 
capabilities of VHF based air/ground datalink for ATC 
purposes in 1986, when Captain David Walker, of Air 
Canada, proposed investigating the concept of 
delivering oceanic clearances directly onto the flight 


deck, in "hard-copy". This was in recognition of the 
fact that, with the introduction of two man crews, the 
task of copying and verifying clearances had become 
onerous and, potentially, hazardous to safety. 
Company regulations stated the need for two pairs of 
ears to monitor the delivery of such clearance 
messages, to ensure correct reception, and subsequent 
"read-back". Even with a clearance on one of the 
organized North Atlantic (NAT) tracks, the reception of 
the clearance entailed a potentially lengthy "listening 
out" on a congested clearance delivery frequency, 
followed by a coordinate by coordinate readback to the 
Gander Clearance Delivery Officer. During this time, 
the aircraft could be effectively "deaf" on the tactical 
control frequency. 

Since 1986 Transport Canada has 
incorporated several refinements to the initial, basic 
concept, where the Oceanic Planner was tasked with 
manual entry of the clearance, through automatic 
generation by the Gander Automated Air Traffic 
System (GAATS) - with full voice readback, to the 
current status, where an electronic readback is 
provided from the flight deck, and is compared against 
the GAATS generated message. Use of datalink for 
delivery of the clearance message necessitates a final, 
short voice contact between the aircraft and the 
ground to validate the clearance, but misinterpretations 
because of language or dialect difficulties are now 
alleviated. 

Transport Canada has learned many valuable 
technical and operational lessons as a result of this 
evolving project in the areas of addressing aircraft 
uplinks; message integrity checking; electronic 
readback; service provider interfaces; ATC procedures; 
and message identification methods (sequence 
numbering, etc.). It is noteworthy that even for this 
narrow use of datalink it was necessary to apply the 
available technology in minimal steps, checking results 
and allowing procedures and expectations to adjust 
before the taking next step. Otherwise the stability and 
safety of the system would have been jeopardized. 


133 







VHF ADS Position Reportino 

In 1988 VHF datalink was recognized as being 
able to provide empirical data in support of the work 
being carried out by the Aeronautical Mobile Satellite 
Service Panel in relation to Automatic Dependent 
Surveillance (ADS). As a result in that year Transport 
Canada and Air Canada began downlinking automatic 
position reports from Boeing 767 aircraft. Twenty 
aircraft are now outfitted with upgraded avionics 
software, and real-time tracking over Canada, the 
United States, Europe, Greenland, and Iceland has 
been demonstrated (Figure 1). 

A related ADS Data Collection and Statistical 
Analysis study [11 was contracted to correlate VHF- 
reported positions with RADAR returns and to use the 
results to analyze the statistical behaviour of Inertial 
Reference System (IRS) errors. The objective was to 
gain information about the tails of IRS in-flight error 
distributions beyond the domain of the manufacturer's 
specifications. The information was to be used in 
evaluating the suitability of automatically reported IRS 
data as a basis for surveillance in oceanic airspace. 

It was discovered during the study that the 
available RADAR data, although being accurate as to 
the relative positions of aircraft - as required by ATC 
for ensuring separation, did not provide sufficient 
accuracy as to the absolute position of each aircraft - 
to serve as the required reference for measuring IRS 
errors. This finding will have to be addressed when 
schemes for reconciling ADS and RADAR data at 
airspace transition boundaries are being evaluated. 
However, the RADAR Modernization Project (RAMP) is 


presently upgrading Canada's systems so the problem 
may be solved coincidentally. The IRS accuracy study 
has been suspended until blended navigation data is 
available on aircraft data buses. Then VOR/DME data 
can also be downlinked to be used as the absolute 
position reference. 

Another area of investigation, of general 
concern when dealing with store-and-forward data 
networks, has been the measurement of message 
transit delay. Delay is especially critical during real-time 
ADS plotting of aircraft positions. A closely associated 
issue is the accuracy of an aircraft's time stamping of 
position reports. Because aircraft clocks are typically 
set within an accuracy of 20 seconds, measurement of 
transit delays is not entirely straightfonward. However 
useful information can be obtained by examining the 
range of transit times of messages from single flights. 

Each curve plotted on Figure 2 relates to the 
messages received from a particular flight. The curves 
indicate the percentage of messages which apparently 
( comparing time stamp to arrival time ) experienced 
less than the ordinate transit delay. Note that aircraft 
clock error resulted in some apparently negative 
delays. The plots show that transit delay surpassed 10 
seconds in about 80 percent of cases. 

Transit delays of such magnitude would make 
the network generally unusable for operational ADS. 
However with planned improvements in the interface 
to the datalink service provider the delays will be 
reduced and oceanic trials can be supported. 


134 







OF MESSAGES 



Fig. 2-*Apparent Transit Delays of VHF ADS Reports 


The following are general observations and 
questions prompted by situations encountered during 
the VHF ADS experiments: 

1) It is necessary for a network user to have a 
reliable means of metering the exchange of messages 
for purposes of verification of billings from the service 
provider. How and by whom (an independent third 
party?) will message traffic be metered? In our trials 
we have kept a loose count automatically of messages 
received for rough verification of invoices but that 
would not suffice for an operational arrangement. 

2) An off-line playback, demonstration, or 
documentation facility is required in order to convince 
a service provider or aircraft operator that problems 
exist when they arise. Examples from our experience 
include late position reports, frequent position report 
drops-outs during aircraft approach, erroneous position 
reports just after initialization, and incorrect translation 
of data from air-ground link format to ground-ground 
datalink format, if a third party is providing a network 
service connecting aircraft to ATC, where will 
responsibility for verification of reliable message 
delivery lie? 

3) When ATC finds that certain position report 
delays appear to be unacceptable, how is ATC to know 
whether the delay is in the network and not in the 
aircraft? This problem does not arise in RADAR 
surveillance, but it will in ADS. ADS position reports 
should be given priority just below that of emergency 
messages both within avionics and within any delivery 
sub-networks, and maximum tolerable message delays 
must be specified and continuously or periodically 


checked for each independent intermediate system. 
Should each prime contract service provider be 
required to routinely meter, in an auditable manner, 
message losses and delays and to report whenever 
criteria are failed? Where a prime contractor cannot 
manage such internal metering, external time-stamping 
of inputs and outputs may be a necessity. 


PRE-OPERATIONAL TRIALS 

Canada is actively promoting establishment of 
North Atlantic ADS Pre-Operational trials which are 
needed so that international standards for ADS can be 
properly developed. Requirements for operational ADS- 
ATC cannot be validated or even fully imagined 
without a period of ADS trials involving controllers 
interacting with pilots and with other ATC units to take 
advantage of the availability of aircraft equipped with 
some form of interim ADS capability. 

International Coordination, and Time Frame 

As this paper is being prepared exploratory 
discussions regarding North Atlantic ADS trials have 
taken place with representatives of civil aviation 
authorities (CAAs), user organizations, and service 
providers whose clients fly the North Atlantic. A 
willingness and readiness to collaborate within the 
earliest possible time frame prevails. lATA is 
canvassing its member airlines, several of which will be 
at least minimally equipped to participate by late 1991 
or early 1992. Service providers have offered to 
contribute data communications capacity. 


135 





Canada, in cooperation with the United 
Kingdom, is proposing to the North Atlantic Systems 
Planning Group (NAT SPG) 27th meeting (Paris, 1o-2i 
June 1991) to coordinate these initiatives and to 
monitor resulting trials commencing in late 1991. The 
desire is to enable and ensure cooperation between 
civil aviation authorities in the investigation and 
development of ADS-ATC practices for NAT airspace. 

Objectives 

The trials are to be loosely defined at the 
beginning, with additional specific goals to be 
developed in due course. The presently stated 
objectives are: 

a} Validation of scenarios developed by such bodies as 
NAT SPG and ADSP. 

b) Collection of empirical data on end-to-end system 
performance. 

ci Experimentation in transfer of communication and 
transfer of controi between A TC agencies. 

d) investigation of controller-machine interfaces, and 
familiarization of control staff with concepts of ADS. 


Constraints 

Trials procedures must not unduly affect the 
pilot: for instance, ATC control of ADS reporting must 
not require action by the aircraft crew. 

Trials practices must conform to existing and 
anticipated ICAO SARPS to the extent practicable. In 
cases where the trials require the interim use of non- 
conforming practices, such use must not be taken as 
tacit endorsement. For instance aircraft identifiers in 
datalink messages should contain seven characters, to 
provide for the standard ICAO 3-letter airline code, 
rather than six characters as used in previous trials. 

Some Questions 

From the first meetings of the ADS Panel 
working groups in April 1991 it was evident that the 
various participants came with differing ideas as to 
some basic approaches in both the operational and 
technical areas. A few of the questions prompted there 
are presented here to encourage their further 
discussion with parties who have only an indirect 
connection with the international development of ADS 
but whose experience and requirements are very 
important parties such as avionics manufacturers and 
airline technical associations and datalink service 
providers: 


1) How should the data in pilot-controller messages be 
transmitted and presented to the receiving party - only 
in standard form, or as viewed by the sending party, or 
as suits the receiving party? This is of operational 
concern but must be considered in light of the 
technology available for message entry and 
presentation. 

2) Should avionics be capable of periodically reporting 
merely a single set of data elements to each ground 
end system which has sent a simple request, or rather 
be capable of reporting different sets at different rates 
to each end system which has sent a complex request? 
Are there any operational benefits which are precluded 
by the former approach, and are there technical 
benefits to the latter approach which would outweigh 
technical complications? Aeronautical Radio, Inc. 
(ARINC) Characteristic 745, adopted by the Airlines 
Electronic Engineering Committee (AEEC) in November 
1990 clearly supports the latter approach [2], but not 
all representatives to the ICAO ADS Panel are 
conversant with the details of AEEC decisions. 

3) Should periodic ADS reporting always begin 
immediately after receipt of a request, or might it be 
necessary in some circumstances to have it deferred to 
begin at some time or location (which the request 
would somehow specify) afterward? What are the 
related operational requirements, and could the latter 
approach be implemented in a simple and efficient 
way? ARINC Characteristic 745 does not support 
deferred periodic reporting [2], but perhaps the AEEC 
is not aware of the related operational requirements. 


(4) Would spontaneous ADS position reports initiated 
by an aircraft dependent upon its manoeuvring be a 
feasible augmentation to periodic ground-requested 
reports? Then provided that an aircraft did not deviate 
significantly from its current flight plan, the only 
reports required would be those at waypoints, to 
ensure that ATC loop errors are detected. Otherwise 
reporting rates would to a certain extent have to 
account for the maximum three-dimensional 
acceleration which an aircraft is capable of, to ensure 
that any non-conformance would be detected soon 
enough. That could mean that reporting would 
generally be required at rates equivalent to RADAR 
scan rates. 

This area has not received much attention 
from the ADS Panel, but analyses could be performed 
to determine an optimal reporting strategy based on 
the probability of an aircraft divergirq from its 
anticipated trajectory in excess of appropriate 
tolerances along track, across track, or vertic.ally. 
Through collection of experimental type ADS reports 
and through simulations and studies it should be 
possible to investigate: 


136 



- Spontaneous aircraft reporting of any alteration of 
the NEXT or NEXT +1 waypoint. 

- Spontaneous aircraft reporting of any out-of¬ 
tolerance deviation from anticipated great circle track 
from present position to NEXT waypoint. 

- Message efficiency based on the premise that 
only .spontaneous (i.e. unrequested 1 reports would 
require an acknowledgement. 

- Reporting rate versus position error statistics for 
periodic and spontaneous reporting. 

- Measured aircraft enroute manoeuvring under 
representative flight conditions. 

ARINC Characteristic 745 defines ADS Event 
Contracts which require an aircraft to initiate reports 
when vertical rate change, turn rate change, or altitude 
exceed uplinked tolerances [2]. However to non¬ 
participants in AEEC business it is not obvious that 
such Event Contract provisions are the best approach 
taking account international operational requirements. 

General Technical Approach 

When planning for ADS trials was begun 
within Transport Canada two years ago it was 
anticipated that Air Canada would be one of the first 
airlines to equip with SATCOM and would continue the 
cooperation extended during our VHP ADS 
Experiments. Now because of the progress of satellite 
equipage across the industry we are presented with 
the opportunity of beginning trials in cooperation with 
several international carriers. 

We recognize that the trials should therefore 
build on the experience which some of those carriers 
have gained in their work with the FAA in the Pacific 
Engineering Trial (PET). International agreements 
should establish an interim ADS and datalink message 
standard to be evolved from the character-oriented 
data message formats which were used in the PET. We 
would wish to negotiate with the FAA and the 
participating airlines for development and formalization 
of a detailed specification of such an interim standr.-’d. 

In general our ATC Automation Systems (that 
is: ADS Development System workstations) will 
access VHF and SATCOM datalink by interfacing to 
the Host computer of an airline datalink service 
provider. That is the general arrangement employed in 
the PET and in our VHF ADS experiments and Oceanic 
Clearance Delivery tests. More specifically Transport 
Canada will use the data communications access 
arrangements and interface techniques which have 
been employed in its recent efforts toward ATIS 
delivery by datalink. 


Technical Specifics 

Discussions with Canadian carriers, and work 
being progressed by the FAA in conjunction with 
American Airlines, has prompted Transport Canada to 
begin investigating datalink delivery of Automatic 
Terminal Information Service (ATIS) and Pre-Departure 
Clearance messages. Work is progressing with Air 
Canada as a service provider on both these items, with 
concentration on ensuring that the sending systems 
can provide the required data elements in an 
appropriate format. 

As an result of this work Transport Canada 
has decided to interface to the airline datalink service 
providers' Host computers via a single Air Traffic 
Services to Datalink (ATS-D/L) Router. For the present 
all ATS end systems will access datalink service only 
through that Router. The Router-Host link is a single 
X.25 Permanent Virtual Circuit (PVC) provided by the 
Packet Switched Data Network (PSDN) service known 
as DATAPAC. See Figure 3. 

ATC end systems at regional Area Control 
Centres (ACCs) will be linked to the Router via X.25 
Switched Virtual Circuits over the PSDN. The Router 
will use the destination teletype address contained in 
standard datalink messages to direct air-to-ground 
messages to the ATC end systems. The Host will use 
the aircraft's identifier and its location coordinates, 
provided in the message preamble as for Oceanic 
Clearances at present, to direct messages to VHF 
ground stations, or if an aircraft is reachable only by 
SATCOM, the Host will route messages to the provider 
of Aeronautical Mobile Satellite Service (AMSS) - 
INMARSAT. What system will be responsible for 
correlating Flight Identifiers with ICAO 24-bit Airframe 
Identifiers must be determined, but that is a technical 
issue which will not impact the controller or the 
operational aspects of the trials. 


Transport Canada is preparing to perform 
substantial simulations of ADS-ATC. The first essential 
of the simulation exercises will be to familiarize 
Oceanic and Northern airspace controllers and 
Supervisors with situation displays and with datalink, 
to enable them to make suggestions and to train them 
for participation in ADS trials. Airline pilots are already 
accustomed to datalink. Our controllers must also be 
well prepared. 

The simulations are being supported by the 
existing facilities and staff at the Transport Canada 


SIMULATIONS 


137 







Fig. 3'-Air Traffic Services Interface to Datalink 


Research and Experimentation (R & E) Centre in Hull, 
Quebec. The computer system there which in the past 
has generated aircraft pseudo-RADAR returns is being 
enhanced to generate pseudo-ADS position reports and 
to provide pilot interfaces for simulated 2-way ATC 
datalink. For the controller's interface, including 2-way 
datalink and graphic situation display, ADS-DS 
workstations identical to those deployed to ACCs for 
ADS trials will be used. 

The first simulation exercises are slated to 
take place in September 1991. During the simulation 
exercises data regarding controller actions and conflict 
occurrences will be automatically collected. Video 
taping will be used to assist analysis of controller- 
machine interface usage. 

Objectives 

a) Perform ADS Development System 
shakedown, and develop controller's menus for 
message types and data elements; 

b) Develop ADS and datalink procedures for 
North Atlantic and Northern Domestic ATC; 

c) Integrate those procedures in a mixed 
(10%, 50%, 90% - D/L versus non-D/L equipped 
traffic) environment; 

d) Analyze impact on controller 

1) workload; 

2) traffic separation; 

3) coordination - transitions and 

hand-off procedures; 


e) Develop a non-Track sectorization scheme 
for the North Atlantic - using sectors similar to those of 
Domestic airspace; 

f) Investigate random routing and tactical 
control for the North Atlantic. 

g) Validate ADS-ATC Scenarios developed by 
the ICAO ADS Panel. 

h) Investigate operational system performance 
requirements related to message t.ansit delays. 

Remote Simulations 

Because ADS message exchange is 
intrinsically store-and-forward, X.25 Packet Assembler 
Dis-assemblers (PADs) will allow messages to be 
exchanged between the Simulator and normal ATC end 
systems via a PSDN, so we can present remotely 
simulated traffic to controllers at non-operational 
positions at ACCs. That will allow those controllers to 
take part in some restricted types of exercises without 
the expense and disruption of travel. It will be difficult 
to monitor and control an exercise where a supervisor 
cannot walk between the pilot positions and the 
controller positions, but this may be the only affordable 
way to provide working controllers with really 
interactive ADS simulation. 


ADS DEVELOPMENT SYSTEM (ADS-DS) 

To support ADS trials and simulations a stand¬ 
alone controller workstation has been developed. It is 


138 










called the ADS Development System and it is an 
enhancement of Transport Canada's Northern Airspace 
Display System (NADS) which controllers use 
operationally for planning, conflict-probing, tracking 
and progressing flights through non-RADAR northern 
domestic airspace. 

The application runs under the OS/2 
multitasking operating system on 33 MHz PC/AT 386 
hardware. Peripheral hardware includes a multi-port 
communications adapter for asynchronous character- 
based data communication, an X.25 PAD for interface 
to a PSDN, a 19-inch 1280x1024 pixel 4-colour 
monitor with mouse pointing device for graphic 
situation display, and a 14-inch colour monitor and 
VGA for text display. 

The following description of the ADS-DS, and 
observations regarding its development, are intended 
as a reference for implementors of similar systems. 

Interfaces 

Besides an interface to access datalink 
service, the system has an interface to the operational 
flight data processing system (FDPS) for input of flight 
plan data. As well at the Gander Oceanic ACC it has 
an interface to a message processing system for 
exchange of air-ground message text with HF voice 
radio operators. 

During development the most difficult of all 
problem areas was the interface to the Gander FDPS. 
Because the ADS-DS is not operational it was not 
feasible to upgrade the operational FDPS to provide a 
special interface. So the ADS-DS must decode flight 
plan data which is formatted for flight strip printing. 
That form is simple for a controller to read but 
complicated for a machine to decode. 

Activation of Flight Plan and Data Link 

Flight plan data from the FDPS is automatically 
decoded. It is stored until the flight is activated or 
automatically expired. Activation of a flight enables 
surveillance and message exchange for that flight - via 
datalink or via the link to HF radio operators. 

Winds Model 

The ADS-DS and the Gander FDPS both have 
the capability of estimating wind components using 
Atmospheric Environment Service winds data as input. 
Rather than have each system independently calculate 
the winds, the ADS-DS uses the FDPS waypoint 
estimates directly to infer the wind components for 
each flight leg. 


Graphic Situation Display (mixed eouipaoe) 

For D/L equipped aircraft, graphic display of 
position depends on ADS position reports. For non- 
equipped aircraft it depends on pilot position reports. 
Two distinct aircraft symbols are used. 

For both equipped and non-equipped aircraft, 
the symbol on the graphic display moves according to 
the current flight plan. ADS history trail dots show 
reported position for comparison to planned position 
during visual conformance checking. For nil-flight-plan 
aircraft, symbol position is extrapolated from reported 
positions. 

Pilot-Controller Message Exchange (mixed eauioagel 

Air-ground messages are sent and received by 
the controller via the same screen menus, queues, and 
display areas regardless of aircraft equipage. Messages 
are exchanged with equipped aircraft via datalink. 
Messages are exchanged with non-equipped aircraft 
via an electronic text data link to an HF voice radio 
Operator. 

A deliberately simplified scheme has been 
implemented for the creation of menus for ground-to- 
air message composition. It is not 'smart' but rather is 
very flexible and easy to learn - two essentials in the 
ADS trials environment where user training must be 
minimal and where operational needs are yet to be 
discovered. The intent is to encourage controllers and 
their supervisors to define their own selectable 
message types, data fields, formats, and selectable 
data element values according to their operational 
needs. The simplifying principle is: what-you-see during 
menu editing is what-you-get during menu use. Each 
menu is a simple text file, and any text editor can be 
used. 

Air-to-Ground messages are listed in a 
prioritized and time-ordered queue on the screen as 
they arrive, and the controller can action them in 
random order. There is a Received Messages status 
line visible in all screen modes, with associated 
annunciation tones, displaying the count of queued 
messages and new arrivals. 

There is a Messages History facility to permit 
the controller to scroll back and forth among air-ground 
messages exchanged with a certain aircraft or with all 
aircraft during a session. This provides a way to 
quickly review messages in the sequence in which they 
were sent and received. 

Conformance Checking 

Conformance checking compares the ADS- 
reported aircraft position to the flight-planned position 


139 




for the same point in time. Three-dimensional 
tolerances are applied and an appropriate warning is 
issued as a message to the controller, queued ahead of 
normal-priority air-to-ground messages, whenever an 
aircraft enters a state of non-conformance. 

The alternative to applying an along-track time 
or distance tolerance would be to automatically re¬ 
probe for conflicts, and to warn the controller only if a 
problem was found. However to keep the controller in 
the loop it is probably better to always issue a warning 
whenever an aircraft is significantly early or late and to 
re-probe only when the controller deliberately initiates 
such action. 

NEXT and NEXT +1 reported data are simply 
compared to next and next + 1 flight plan fixes. Small 
tolerances for round-off errors are applied. 

The aircraft's navigation accuracy as 
represented by the reported Figure Of Merit (FOM) is 
not taken into account. Automated ATC systems could 
realize the capability of accounting for the FOM, and 
then separation minima could be established for worst- 
case aircraft positions as determined in real time rather 
than as determined statistically for the long term. That 
would mean a potential of higher airspace capacity, but 
the price would be greater complexity of SARPS and of 
automation to implement them. 


REFERENCES 

111 ADS DATA COLLECTION AND STATISTICAL 
ANALYSIS, Phase 1 - Final Report, Transport Canada, 
Ottawa, 1991. pages 13-34 

[21 PROJECT PAPER 745 AUTOMATIC DEPENDENT 
SURVEILLANCE (ADS), Draft 6, Aeronautical Radio 
Inc., Annapolis Md., 1990, pages 66-71 


CONCLUSION 

The operational and technical questions 
touched on here, and many others, have been 
discussed within Transport Canada, within other 
CAAs, within the working groups of the ICAO ADS 
Panel, and elsewhere, but have not been resolved 
because internationally there has been no common 
base of ADS experience. Pre-operational ADS trials can 
provide much needed common experience to all 
participants - ATC authorities, aircraft operators, 
datalink service providers, and avionics manufacturers. 
Trials can also serve to test proposed ADS-ATC 
practices before ICAO recommendations are drafted. 
We urge that advantage be taken of any opportunity to 
contribute to and so benefit from trials efforts along 
with us. 






CO-AUTHOR 


Donald F. MacLean 
Supervisor - Flight Data Processing 
Air Traffic Services 
Transport Canada Aviation 


Donald F. MacLean began his career in aviation as a Navigator in the U.K. Royal Air 
Force, gaining the rank of Flight Lieutenant before returning to civilian life in 1961. He 
then served eight years with the U.K. ATC service, as an Air Traffic Control Officer at 
Prestwick Airport in Tower and Approach Control. In 1968 he immigrated to Canada and 
spent the next eight years as an Enroute Controller with Transport Canada at the Dorval 
ACC, where he became involved with the development of current automated systems. 

He spent two years in Winnipeg ACC, as a Data Systems Coordinator before moving to 
Transport Canada Headquarters, Ottawa, to join the Operational Requirements Division 
as a specialist, initially in communications requirements, and subsequently in flight data 
processing requirements. For the past several years he has been Supervisor of the FDP 
section. 

He has been an operational advisor to the Canadian representatives on international panels 
and committees such as FANS and NATSPG; and is currently the Canadian Member on the 
Automatic Dependent Surveillance Panel (ADSP). 



141 





SESSION ONE: 

TRIALS AND DEMONSTRATiONS 


George A. Cobley, P.E. 

Technical Director 
Communications Systems 
Rockwell International 


George A. Cobley graduated from Iowa State University in 1964 with a BSEE. While 
employed as a radio equipment designer at E.F. Johnson Company, he attended Graduate 
School at the University of Minnesota. In 1978, he joined Rockwell International as a 
Technical Staff Member to work in the Navigation Receiver Design Group. In 1980, he 
became manager of the Communications Group and was responsible for the design of HE 
and VHP Radio communications equipment used in commercial air transport aircraft. In 
1984, he became manager of the Commercial Avionics Engineering Data Transmission 
Group. In 1986, he was appointed manager of the new Satellite and Data Communications 
group which supported the emerging satellite based aeronautical conununications interests. 
In 1987, he was appointed Technical Director for Data Communications Systems. 

Mr. Cobley has been involved with numerous AEEC and RTCA committees relating to data 
communications. He has served as chairman of RTCA SC-165, Working Group 1, 
Equipment Standards, which prepared draft material for the SATCOM MOPS. He has 
presented technical papers around the world, covering data communication topics such as 
SATCOM flight trials, ACARS, ADS, etc. 

In addition to his holding of a Professional Engineer license, he holds FCC licenses as an 
amateur radio operator and as a commercial radio operator, and FAA licenses as a 
commercial pilot and flight instructor. 

Outside of his professional work, he has served as a Special Deputy for Waseca County 
Minnesota Sheriff Department. He has been active in Civil Defense and served as 
Communications Chief, Damage Assessment Officer, and Radiological Officer and 
instructor. He is currently holding an elected office on the Linn Country Iowa State 
University Extension Council. 



142 





ADS COMMUNICATIONS - A CORNERSTONE 


by 

George A. Cobley, P.E. 

Collins Commercial Avionics 
Rockwell International Corp. 


ABSTRACT 

ADS Communications forms a cornerstone 
to the applications and communications net¬ 
works of the 21st century. The need to communi¬ 
cate operational data between an aircraft and 
the Air Traffic Services is becoming focused and 
will lead to ever increasing applications. The 
obvious ones are the clearances and acknowl¬ 
edgements for oceanic operations, and the natu¬ 
ral extension to domestic operations. This paper 
will present a brief review of the development, 
then examine the trial results. Data will be 
presented on the operational parameters that 
were collected at the Santa Paula Ground Earth 
Station operated by COMSAT. It will be shown 
that the operational signal ps'^ameters are sta¬ 
tistically comparable to our early predictions. 
The data for this paper was collected by Collins, 
ARINC, United Airlines, and others as it became 
available. 


ADS COMMUNICATIONS - 
A CORNERSTONE 

On Friday, 28 September 1990, N176UA 
departed Hong Kong for San Francisco. The 
flight was routine to the extent of being boring 
as operation was flawless. Automatic position 
reports were generated by the ACMS every 5 
minutes when the aircraft was above 10,000 feet. 
Interspersed with those reports were free text 
and dispatch messages, weather requests and 
reports, connecting flight information, and 
engine reports. At the ground station data was 
collected showing signal-to-noise, raw bits in 
error, and frequency errors. 


Since that initial flight of N176UA, addi¬ 
tional aircraft equipped with SATCOM/ACARS 
have been commissioned. Certifications of com¬ 
bined SATCOM and ACARS equipped aircraft 
have added to the capability to communicate 
worldwide such information as current aircraft 
position. These aircraft are routinely providing 
position reports and taking full advantage of the 
ACARS service available while thousands of 
miles from land based VHF radio sites. 


On 11 September 1991, Boeing conducted an 
Engineering Plight Test of the integrated 
ACARS/SATCOM system that was certified on 
13 September 1990. On that engineering flight,, 
the aircraft was maneuvered to induce known 
conditions such as wing blockage and multipath. 
Operations were conducted near the edge of cov¬ 
erage to evaluate performance under unfavora¬ 
ble conditions, but the boundary was never 
crossed because of the aircraft schedule and fuel 
dictated a return to Seattle before the edge could 
be found. Two days later the integrated system 
successfully demonstrated to the Federal Avia¬ 
tion .Administration that it could perform the 
intended function. 


It was in late September 1990 that the first 
revenue flights carried active SATCOM systems 
integrated with ACARS and automatically 
reporting position. These flights used the first 
FAA certified integrated Satellite Communica¬ 
tions System with ACARS to provide data link 
service to 747-400’s operated by United Airlines. 
United inaugurated the Pacific Engineering Tri¬ 
als with the first flights. Since then, other inter- 


143 





national airlines, such as Qantas, have added 
similar systems to their fleets. 


The ACARS MU has a choice of operating 
channels; VHP or SATCOM. The block diagram 
shown in Figure 1 shows the typical SATCOM/ 
ACARS installation. Automatic position reports 
may be created in the ACMS (Aircraft Condition 
Monitoring System) that then forwards them to 


the ACARS MU where the message is prepared 
with the appropriate header and trailer. Error 
protection is provided across the reliable ARINC 
429 link by incorporating a parity check. Prom 
this point to the terrestrial frontend processor, 
the message integrity is protected against cor¬ 
ruption by the BCS check. Figure 2 shows where 
error protection is provided. The intermediate 
links across the ACARS MU to SATCOM SDU, 
and across the RF Links employ classical CRC 


A/C 

SENSORS 



Figure 1. UAL 747-400 Configuration 


BCS 



Figure 2. ADS Error Detection 


144 




























error detection. Using these combinations of 
error protection, the accuracy of the delivery 
system between the ACMS source and the terres¬ 
trial frontend processor is assured. 

On 27 September, United flew the first trip 
of N176UA from San Francisco to Hong Kong. 
On that fligj't, position reports were sent from 
the aircraft using an existing AGARS format. 
These reports were nearly as infrequent as HP 
voice reports. On the return trip, automatic posi¬ 
tion reports were sent every five minutes when 
the aircraft was above 10,000 feet. Each of those 
reports contained the data outlined in Figure 3. 


The basic purpose of the UAL ADS Trials 
message is to convey the current position and 
altitude of the aircraft to the user; such as FAA, 
MITRE, the airline, and support organizations 


such as Collins and ARINC. But the ADS report 
may contain more than these basic parameters. 
It could contain flight dynamics, and/or weather 
data. Figure 4 depicts the future ADS report for¬ 
mats. While these will actually have to wait for 
end-to-end bit oriented protocol operation, they 
do serve as a guide to what earlier implementa¬ 
tions should provide. The use of end-to-end bit 
oriented protocols is expected to be available 
next year at the earliest. It was with this in mind 
that United Airlines and others created their 
ADS report that functions over existing facili¬ 
ties. The United ADS format in Figure 3 paral¬ 
lels the ultimate plan. 


Even in these early trials, the amount of 
data contained in the reports is significant to all 
users of the airspace. These initial ADS Trial 
reports contain three pieces of meteorological 
information. The winds aloft and temperature 



145 



Basic ADS Group 

MSB LSB 



Vector information Group 
Earth Reference Group 
MSB LSB 

8_^6 


1 


^ I ^ -1 ^ I ^ 


GS Vector Info Tag (6) 

A —I—I—I—I—I—I- 


TRACK 

A -1-1- 


\ I I 


GROUND 

SPEED 


A- - \ - . i - -t — I- 


Sj VERTICAL RATE 


Meteorological Group 

MSB LSB 

B I 7 I 6 I 5 , 2 , 1 


METEOROLOGICAL TAG (8) 
^-1-1-1-1-1-h- 


WIND SPEED 

A —I—I—I—I- 


WIND DIRECTION 

- 1 - 1 - 1 - 


S j TEMPERATURE 


0 0 

I 


Figure 4. ADS Future Formats 


that could be used now to supplement other 
sources of such data in the oceanic environment. 
When these data are plotted, the wide variability 
that occurs during a flight is readily apparent. 
For example, Wind Speed as shown in Figure 5. 
The United ADS Trial reports also included the 
“Earth Reference Group" of Vector Information. 
Included in this group are Track Angle, Ground 
Speed, and Vertical Rate. 

With an operating data link to and from an 
aircraft, new uses start coming to mind. While 
the very beginning of the ADS Trials was to 
show the viability of ADS reporting, it didn’t 
take long to include simulated ATC messaging. 
This is a natural growth path. But was that all? 
Not really. We observe air crews using the 
SATCOM Data Link for the routine messaging 


they enjoyed when in VHF data link coverage. A 
very popular set of messages are the weather 
and NOTAM uplinks to en route aircraft. In the 
early use of the SATCOM links, we have seen 
dispatchers issuing the re-dispatch messages to 
aircraft thousands of miles from home using 
SATCOM rather than VHF or landlines. Down¬ 
link messages have included aircraft perform¬ 
ance data such as engine data, and maintenance 
needs that are required at the next destination. 
Of course, we shouldn’t overlook the desperate 
needs of passengers, and crew, to keep up on the 
latest sports. A few messages have conveyed 
football, baseball, and basketball scores. To the 
users, information is just a keyboard away. So, 
once agreement was reached to do the ADS Tri¬ 
als, there was no stopping the other messaging 
that occurred. 


U6 




















12 14 16 18 20 

AOS TIME, HRS, UTC 


Figure 5. Wind Speed vs ADS Time 


During the United flight from Hong Kong to 
San Francisco, data was collected at the Santa 
Paula Coast Earth Station. The Interim Ground 
Earth Station manufactured by Collins is capa¬ 
ble of recording every signal unit sent and 
received along with various engineering parame¬ 
ters. One of those parameters is the Carrier-to- 
Noise ratio. Figure 6 plots the C/N as a function 
of time for the flight as measured at the ground 
station. These data have been filtered to make 
them easier to see the long term trends that 
would otherwise be masked. The aircraft was 
operating in a region of good satellite signals. 
Table 1 provides a listing of the theoretical link 
budget which is similar to the INMARSAT Sys¬ 
tem Definition Manual. This table shows that 
the carrier to noise ratio should be about 37.9 dB. 
Taking into account the receiver bandwidth, the 
expected C/N at the ground station would be 
about 11.9 dB. As can be seen, there are two dis¬ 


tinct periods when the data are essentially 
unchanging, from about 0830 to 1200 and from 
about 1200 to 1600 UTC. The apparent step func¬ 
tion change in C/N at about 1200 correlates with 
a step altitude change from PL330 to PL350. No 
satisfactory explanation has yet come to mind. 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

I wish to thank the participants in the 
Pacific Engineering Trials, and in particular, 
Mr. Scott Stahr, United Airlines. His informa¬ 
tion, insight, and cooperation are very much 
appreciated. I would also like to thank Mr. Eric 
Nelson of the Collins Data Communications 
Group. His participation on the early ADS trials 
flights and during postflight data reduction has 
been very helpful. 


147 





AVERAGE dB 


R-CHANNEL 



UTC, HOURS 

□ C/N A BIT ERRORS/R-CHANNEL MESSAGE 

Figure 6. HGK-SFO, 28 Sept 90 


Table 1. Return Link Budget For 600 b/s 


Uplink (AES To Satellite) 


Frequency 
AES Elevation 
Path Loss 
Satellite G/T 
AES EIRP 
Uplink C/No 
Satellite Gain 
Satellite C/IMo 


1.64 GHz 
20 deg 
188.8 dB 
-10.3 dBk 

13.5 dBW 
43.0 dBHz 
152 dB 

46.5 dBHz 


Downlink (Satellite To GES) 


Frequency 
GES Elevation 
Path Loss 
GES G/T 
Satellite EIRP 
Downlink C/No 


4.2 GHz 
20 deg 
197.6 dB 
32.0 dBk 
-23.3 dBW 
39.7 dBHz 


148 


AVERAGE BIT ERRORS/MESSAGE 









149 


SESSION ONE: 

TRIALS AND DEMONSTRATIONS 



Graham C. Lake 

Deputy Director, International Relations 
Societe International de Telecommunications 
Aeronautiques (SITA) 


Graham C. Lake is Deputy Director, International Relations responsible for directing all 
SITA relations with Civil Aviation Administration world-wide. He is responsible for SITA 
development and implementation of the Air Traffic Control data link trial programs in 
which SITA is involved. 

Mr. Lake is a British national and graduated from the U.K. College of Air Traffic Control 
in 1976. He worked as an operational Air Traffic Controller in the British Isles until 1986 
when he moved into ATC management and administration. 

Mr. Lake joined SITA at the beginning of 1988 and is based at their Northern Europe 
regional office in London. 


150 








FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION 
TECHNICAL CENTRE 

THE FIRST ANNUAL INTERNATIONAL 
SATELLITE SURVEILLANCE AND COMMUNICATIONS SYMPOSIUM 

AERONAUTICAL MOBU.E SATELLITE SERVICES 
ESA-PRODAT/SITA AIRCOM SERVICE TRIALS PROGRAMME 


A JONGEJANS and P NGUYEN 
E S A / SIT A 


INTRODUCTION 

In order to enhance its existing VHF 
AIRCOM service and in view of the potential 
development of satellite-based data communication 
services, SITA initiated, in 1986, plans for 
dcmoaslralioas and service trials of an 
Aeronautical Mobile Satellite Communications 
system for tlic benefit of its member airlines. 

For tliis purpose tlic European Space Agency 
(ESA), the International Maritime Satellite 
Organisation (INMARSAT), and SITA reached an 
agreement to c.orry out .service trials u.sing the 
exi.sling MARECS satellite and based upon tlie 
development of tlie ESA PRODAT project. 

Hie PRODAT/AIRCOM .Service Trials 
launched in late 1986 have been siiccc-ssful and 
were expected to be completed by July 1991. 

'lire purpo.se of this paper is to descrilre briefly 
tl)c cxpcrimcnl.il work being carried out by all 
irtvolved participants. 


PRODAT/AIRCOM SERVICE TRIALS 
OVERALL DESCRIPTION 

Objectives 

The objective of the PRODAT/AIRCOM 
Service Trials is twofold: 

■ to consolidate the concept of satellite-based 
communications between aircraft and ground 
facilities in a fully integrated AIRCOM/SITA 
ground network environment: 

■ to enable airline participants to evaluate the 
potential benefits of a .satellite-based data link 
involving new applications related to three main 
areas of Aeronautical Mobile Communications i.e.: 

Air Traffic .Service (ATS) providing tlie 
Automatic Data Reporting (ADR) including both 
Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) and 
cockpit crew/ground air traffic controller 
communications capabilities. 

Company Communications including 
Airline Operation.il Communications (AOC) and 
Airiine Admini.strative Communicatioas (AAC), 

Aeronautical Pas.senger Communications 
(APC) enablirtg passengers to send and/or receive 
private telexes during the flight. 


151 






Project Organisation 

The PRODAT/AIRCOM Service Trials were 
provided to the airlines free of charge, on the basis 
of tlie voluntary participation of each interested 
party. 

The following participants have contributed to 
the project process; 

■ ESA has defined and financed the 
procurement of the PRODAT Satellite 
Communications rtctwork, including; 

PRODAT aeronautical mobile terminals, 
itKiuding installation kits. 

Upgrading of the ground earth station located 
at Villafranca dc Castillo, Spain, for supporting the 
PRODAT satellite communicatioas system. 

■ INMARSAT has made available, free of 
charge, space segment capacity for the service trial 
period; 

■ SITA has provided titc integration of the 
PRODAT satellite link into the existing SITA 
AIRCOM service and terrestrial tele¬ 
communication network. Moreover, overall 
project coordination with airlines, including end- 
to-end integration tests, has been carried out by 
SITA; 

■ Three European Air Traffic Control (ATC) 
authorities have participated actively in tire ATC 
experiments in order to evaluate the Automatic 
Dependent Surveillance (ADS) concept, i.e.; 

tlie UK Civil Aviation Authorities (UK CAA) 
with tirie Air Traffic Control Evaluation Unit 
(ATCEU), UK, 

tire Spanish "Direccion General de Aviacion 
Civil" (DGAC), Madrid, Spain, 

tlxj EUROCONTROL Experimental Centre 
(EEC) in Bretigny, France. 


Three aircraft arc equipped with PRODAT 
avionics for the purpose of the ATC experiments; 

one Jetstream from RACAL Avionics, 

one BACl-11 from the Royal Aerospace 
Establishment in Bedford, 

one HS748 from the UK CAA. 

■ The participating airlines have provided 
aircraft retrofitted with the PRODAT and 
ACARS/AIRCOM avionics, i.e.; 

TAP Air Portugal; one LOCKHEED Tristar, 

VARIG; one BOEING 767-200ER, 

SABENA; one AIRBUS A310-300, 

SAUDIA; one BOEING 747-300. 


PRODAT SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 

The PRODAT system Ls an original low data 
rate system conceived and developed by ESA in 
the frame of a wider satellite telecommunicatioas 
programme PROSAT aimed at defining and 
promoting mobile satellite communications in 
Europe. 

Figure 1 illustrates the PRODAT/AIRCOM 
system architecture. 

PRODAT Conununications System 

The satellite link was designed for using 
MARECS type L band which provides global 
coverage. The aircraft were equipped witli 
terminals manufactured by RACAL (UK) and 
SNEC (France) under ESA specificatioas. The 
main parameters are given below; 

■ link to aircraft: TDM at 1500 baud; 

■ low gain omnidireclioual antenna on aircraft 
(G/T=-24dbK): 


152 













« 






Fns ISDU 


RF/IF 












■iX: 






m 


::5«t 


Sabena Aircraft 


AIRBUS 310^300 




RECEIVEHS TRANSMITTER 



INTERFACES 


SDU: Satellite Data Unit 

MU : Management Unit 

FMS: Flight Management System 

HPAiHigh Power Amplifier 

LNA; Low Noise Amplifier 

RF/IF; Radio Freq. / Intermediate 
Freq. Unit 

NMS: Network Management Sys. 

Capsin: Civil Aviation Packet 
Switching Integrated Network 


SITA 


PSDN 

Transpac 

Capsin 


TELEX 

NETWORK 


□ 


Q 


Figure 1 - PROD AT • Overall system architecture 


153 


















■ transmit power on aircraft; 10 watts; 

■ link from aircraft 300 baud spread to 
266kchip/s: 

■ adaptive forward error correction and ARQ in 
both links. 

PRODAT Avionics 

The avionics is divided into three ARINC 600 
line replaceable units to be installed in the 
electronics equipment bay of the aircrafts 
(.see Fig. 2). 

The satellite data unit (SDU) includes the 
digital processing modules and interfaces, the 
RF/IF unit includes the radio frequency circuits 
arrd the third unit contains the 10 watt high power 
amplifier (HPA). Two omnidirectional antennas 
(transmit and receive) are mounted alrout 80 cm 
apart on the top fore part of the fuselage. 

For control and test purposes, as well as the 
manual entry of data (public telex, ATC mes.sages, 
SITA Type B messages) a Husky Hunter handheld 
miao computer is connected to the SDU via an RS 
422 interface. 

In addition, the PRODAT avionies are 
interfaced through an ARINC 429 databus and a 
customised protocol to the AIRCOM/ACARS MU 
and to the aircraft navigation avioiiics whenever 
possible. 

PRODAT Network Management System Centre 

The Network Management System (NMS) 
installed at ESA's ground station of 
VILLAFRANCA near MADRID (Spain), also 
performs the satellite Tracking, Telemetry and 
Command (TTC) operatioas. A suitable bank of 
receivers and traasmitters was developed and 
installed in tlie NMS centre, .supported by a 
redundant HPI0(X) mini computer loaded witli a 
dedicated software to drive the equipment and 
perfonn all tlie me.ssage handling tasks. In 
addition, tlie NMS controls the interfaces to tlie 
telex network, tlie X25 packet data network and die 
SITA AIRCOM network. 


The following basic functioas arc supported 
by the .system: 

■ end to end messages in both directions with 
delivery reports; 

■ request/reply for automatic collection of 
data on board; 

■ periodic polling down to 10 seconds 

according to a predefined list. 

PRODAT/ATC EXPERIMENTS 

As described eariier, the three experimental 
aircraft were equipped with PRODAT avionics in 
order to test the satellite data link for ATC 
applications for different flight configurations, 
satellite elevations and functions. 

The following ATC functions were 
available: 

■ periodic polling according to a pre- 

cstabli.shcd list at rates up to six polls per minute 
(position report on request); 

■ rcqucst/reply (for MET mfonnation, 
waypoint report, identity report); 

■ two-way ATC tactical messages 
(communication between pilot arrd ATC 
controller). 

For this experiment carried out by the three 
participating ATC administrations, a special X2S 
link was cstablislied for each session between ATC 
centres and the PRODAT network management 
cenUe. In turn, each centre drove tire experiment 
wliilc the other two received the data. 

In addition, a ground based Multi-Aircraft 
Simulator Terminal (MAST) produced by 
PESA/ETSIT in MADRID, accessed via the 
satellite link and fed with simulated flight data of 
up to 40 aircraft from the EUROCONTROL 
computer, was included in the experiment. 

A .series of flights was devoted to Automatic 
Dependent Surveillairce (ADS) during which tire 
"poll-reply" is used to track tire aircraft in real time 
on a simulated radar display. Tire .short (10 s) 
repetition period permits the tracking of very tight 
mattocuvres. 


154 





















On 24tli October, 1988 tlie RACAL's 
JeLstreatn aircraft was controlled entirely via the 
PRODAT data link and ADS functions on a flight 
from the UK to Madrid in Spain, under tlte 
responsibility of tlie Spanish Civil Aviation 
Authority (DGAC). Tltls was a world first. 
Between lOth and 14th October, 1988, the BACl- 
11 of the Royal Aircraft Establishment (UK) made 
dedicated evaluation flights at low satellite 
elevation angles. It departed from Bedford (UK) 
and flew to Thule (Nordi Greenland 76* 20'N, 68* 
30'W) via Iceland. (Fig. 3) 

No significant degradation occurred down to a 
satellite elevation of 3°, apart from a sudden 
interruption at around 8* elevation caused by the 
high tail elevator surface on this particular type of 
aircraft. 

At 0* elevation and below, the main 
limitations come from the antenna pattern which 
has a SdB lower gain in longitudinal axis than in 
the traasverse axis, owing to the cylindrical shape 
of the fuselage. 

The carrier to muldpatli ratio (C/M) at 
elevatioas close to 0” was about 8dB, with lOdB 
fades lasting 1 to 2 s. 

The link was still working at "negative" 
elevation angles, 150NM beyond tlie geometrical 
satellite horizon. It was not possible to carry the 
test further because of the range limitations of the 
aircraft. 

Some of tlic results are given in Table 1. Test 
coordination during the flight was achieved with 
PRODAT itself. 


Hlevation Range 



Above 8' 

7- to 3' 

T to -T* 

Satellite along 

I>=90% 

P= 20-60% 

E = 20-40% 

aircraft axis 

U = 0.l% 

U=8-15% 

n=2040% 

xSatellitc perp. 

P=90% 

P = 70% 

P - 60-70% 

to aircraft axis 

l•; = 0.I% 

l• = 5% 

E=20% 


PRODAT/AIRCOM EXPERIMENTS 
Scope of the Trials 

The PRODAT/AIRCOM experiment offered 
to the participating airlines a comprehensive set of 
means enabling both in-flight crew and associated 
ground staff to evaluate the benefits of 
Aeronautical Mobile Communications, including 
AOC, AAC, APC and ATC services. 

AOC Services 

The AOC applications are provided using 
the standard ACARS/AIRCOM equipment 
available on the market and fuUy compatible with 
the standard ARINC 597/724 Characteristics. 

The AOC Service features which were able 
to be tested during the trials include: 

a Movement Messages, 

a Weather Messages, 

a Free Text Messages. 

AAC Services 

Two facilities are provided : 
a SITA Type B messaging, 

a International telex. 


APC Services 

Passengers also have tlie po.ssibility of 
sending or receiving a private telex to or from any 
ground based telex terminal. 


P: polling success rale 

H: vector erasure rate received on tlie aircraft, in 

stabilising flight altitude 
*: IIPA power increased by 2dB 


156 








ATC Services 

As a complement of the PRODAT/ATC 
experiments, the airlines can also request the actual 
aircraft position from any ground based SITA 
tcnninal. Position data extracted from the on¬ 
board navigation equipment are then sent to tire 
originator of the request through the SITA ground 
network. 

The following requests can be made 
depending on the availability of navigation 
equipment Gtted in the aircraft; 

■ Aircraft position and aircraft-id requests 

■ Waypoint requests 

■ Meteorological data requests 

■ Flight-id requests 

■ Waypoint and velocity requests 

Project Step Breakdown 

'Ihe PRODAT/AIRCOM Service trials have 
been implemented as follows on a step by step 
basis for each participating airline: 

Aircraft lastallation 

'litis step includes all preparation required for 
tltc aircraft wiring and iast^lation of the PRODAT 
attd ACARS/AIRCOM avionics. 

'Ilte workload and time scliedule depend on 
tlie aircraft type and the airline ground 
maitttenance facility. 

Ground System Preparation 

Ground system preparation covers activities 
required for connecting the ESA PRODAT system 
to the SITA AIRCOM. Additional software arc 
also made available in order to allow tlie 
participants to evaluate new application fields 
during the trials. 

Ground System Integration and Technical Riglit 
Test 

Art overall system integration on the grourtd is 
performed, followed by a technical flight lest to 
decide if lire pre-operational trials can take place. 


A training course is organi.scd for the airline 
personnel providing them with tlie nece.ssary 
infonnation for the system qieration. 

Pre-operational Oight te.sts 

Flight te.sts can take place after the go-ahead 
signal from the technical flight test. 

TAP AIR PORTUGAL SERVICE TRIALS 


General infonnation 


Stalling dale 

September 1986 

End dale i' 

July 1991 

Aircraft type : 

LOCKHEED Tristar 

L lot l-SOO 

Aircraft tail no : 

ACARS/AIRCOM 

CS-TED 

Avionics ; 

TELEDINE CONTROLS 

R0UIC.S : 

NORTH AMERICA 
(New York. Boalon, Montreal, 
Toronto, etc.) 

SOUTH AMERICA 
(Rio de Janeiro, Sao Paulo, 
Porto Allegic etc.) 

WESTERN EUROPE 
(Paris, London, Amsterdam) 
AFRICAN ROUTES down to 
Johannesburg. 


Scope of the Trials 

TAP Air Portugal intended to evaluate the 
tiuee main applications of Aeronautical Mobile 
Communications, i.e; 

m AOC via TELEDYNE CONTROLS' 

avionics 

■ AAC via HUSKY liandlicid computer 

■ APC via HUSKY handlield computer 

Project history 

From a chronologic standpoint, TAP Air 
Portugal Service trials can be summarised in tliree 
main pha.ses: 

Phase one: Aircraft Installation 

Tliis pha.se extended from November 1986 
until Febmary 1988 and covered preparation work 
of die CS-TED aircraft and tlie a.s.sociated ground 
infrastructure for TAP Air Portugal. 


158 








Tljis phase ended with a groutid cficck at the 
LISBON airport followed by a technical flight test 
from LISBON to NEW YORK (JFK) on February 
llth, 1988. Thi.s was the first time an 
ACARS/AIRCOM message was exchanged via a 
satellite data link during a regular traasatlantic 
flighL 

Phase two: Pre-operational Flight test 

This phase covered the period from March 
1988 to December 1990, during which time TAP 
Air Portugal performed continuous pre-operational 
flight test campaigas with two main intemiptioa 
periods due to hardware failures. 

Numerous pre-operational flight tests have 
been carried out by TAP Air Portugal providing 
both on-board cockpit crew and ground based staff 
with valuable experience as regards the satellite- 
based data communicatioas link. In addition, new 
applicatioas such as in-flight revised flight plans 
and in-flight weather requests were also tested and 
highly appreciated by the crew. 

Company communicatioas (AAC) and 
Pas.scnger telex (APC) were also tested 
successfully many times throughout these pre- 
operational flight tests. 

Phase three : Follow-up and Maintenance period 


Scope of the Trials 

The Vatig Service Trials Programme 
concentrated on two aspects: 

■ AOC application via TELEDYNE 
CONTROLS’ avionics; 

■ AAC application via flic hand held HUSKY 
computer. 

Project history 

The VARIG Service trials can be also 
divided into three main phases: 

Phase one : Aircraft Installation 

Starting from mid 1987 and terminating in 
October 1988, this phase covered preparation work 
performed for tlic aircraft avionics installation. 

Phase one was concluded by a successful 
technical flight test from Rio de Janeiro to Porto 
Allegie on October 28th, 1988. 

Phase two: Pre-operational Flight Tests 

This phase coveted the period from 
November 1988 until March 1989 during which 
.several pre-operational flight te.'its were 
successfully conducted. 


This phase covered the last period of tltc 
.Service Trials Programme from July 1990, with tltc 
migration of ilie ESA-ground earth station from 
Villafranca-Spain to Fucino-ltaly. These 
continued until July 1991. 

VARIG SERVICE TRIALS 
General information 


Starting dale 
Ending date 
Aircraft type 
Aircraft tail no 
Route."! - Dome.stic 

- Inlematinn<d 


17 February 1987 
29 December 1989 
BOEING 767-200 ER 
PP-VNN 

Bra.'iilia, Porto Allcgre, 
Sao Paulo etc 
North and .South America 
(Aiarnctoii. Buenos Aires 
IvOs Angeles etc.) 


The number of flight te.st.s was limited by 
tlie occurrence of .several hardware failures and 
periods of unavailability of tlie aircraft and/or 
space segment. 

Phase tliree : Follow-up and Maintenance Period 

The final phase covered the last six months 
of the project with several malfunctions discovered 
during test flights due to power supply problems 
related to the use of aircraft engine power. 

The Varig Service Trials Programme was 
.suhscquenlly completed in late 1989. 


159 





SAUDI A SERVICE TRIALS 
General Inlormati on 


Stntling dale : 

Ending date ; 

Aircraft type : 

Aircraft tail 
number : 

ACARS/AIRCOM 
Avionics : 

Routes - Domestic : 
- International 


August 1988 
July 1991 
BOEING 747-300 

HZ-AIT 

BENDIX/ALLIED 
Riyadh, Dliaran ... 

Western Europe, North America, 
South Exst Asia 


Scope of tlie Trials 


■ 'I'hc Saudia Service Trials mainly focussed on: 


■ AAC applications for company messages 
througli Uk husky hand held computer. 

Project History 

The Saudia Service Trials Programme can be 
summarised in two main phases: 

■ Phase One: Aircraft lastallation 


The installation plia.se began in August 1988 
aixl lasted until February 1989 with the aircraft 
fully fitted with PRODAT/AIRCOM avionics. 

A technical flight test took place on February 
13lli, 1989 during a flight from Jeddali to Riyadh. 
Tlie first part of tlie flight test was succc.ssful while 
tlie liiticr was rather disturbed by fading conditions 
resulting from tlie aircraft's tail shadowing and 
very low elevation. 

■ Phase Two: Prc-cpcrational Flight Tests 

Tlie Saudia Service Trials liegan after tlie 
technical flight te.st of .Scplenibcr 1989, with some 
intennittent interruption periods due to hardware 
failures. 


Several flight tests were recorded during this 
pre-operational service trials period. Analy.ses 
from the history fde showed Uiat fiight control data 
and en^necring maintenance data were tlie topics 
of most interest to tlie on-board crew. New 
features such as die in-flight weather request were 
highly appreciated by the crew. 

An ultimate pre-operational lliglit test 
campaign has been agreed in order to allow Saudia 
to consolidate their Service Trials programme. 


SABENA SERVICE TRIALS 

General Information 

Storting dale ; April 1987 

Ending dale : July 1991 

Aircraft type : AIRBUS A310-300 

Aircraft tail nc : OO-SCC 

ACARS/AIRCOM 

Avionics : BENDIX/ALLIED 

Route : North America (New Yoric, 

Montreal, Bo.ston...) 

Africa (Conakry, Dakar, 
Lagos, Lome, Niamey..,) 


Scope of the Trials 

The Sabena Service Trials concentrated on 
the AOC applications providing flight control data 
using BENDIX/ALLIED avionics and ATC 
applications providing actual data extracted from 
the on-board Flight Management System (FMS), 

Project History 

The Sabena Service Trials programme can 
be summarised in two main phases: 


160 







■ Phase One: Aircraft Installation 


CONCLUSIVE REMARKS 


TIic installation phase for Sabena aircraft 
covered the pcritxl from May 1987 to February 
1989 to pmvidc tite on-board avionics fully 
iastallcd :uid operational. 

Iliis long period also included ground 
integration testing of PRODAT avionics with the 
ACARS/AIRCOM avionics and FMS equipment to 
provide flight data for tlie ATC experiments. 

Tlic aircraft installation phase was completed 
in February 1989 with a technical flight te.st from 
Brussels to Dakar. Various software upgrades in 
both PRODAT and ACARS/AIRCOM were 
performed from March 1989 to December 1989. 


■ Phase Two: Pre-operational Flight Tests 

Sina* the beginning of this service trials ptiase 
in March 1990, Sabena has succe.ssfully performed 
almost daily flight trials witli regular transoceanic 
flights (Bru.s.scl.s-Ncw York-Brusscis or Brusscls- 
Conakry-Brus,sel.s). 

Departure and Arrival reports are also 
traasmillcd to ground ATC centres participating in 
PRODAT/ATC experiments allowing them to run 
tile ADS experiments in conjunction witli the 
airline flight trials. 


Figure 4 illustrates a Satiena flight route traced 
by tlie ATCEU in Bounicmouth, England. 

Various demonstrations on flight tracking 
based on the PRODAT/ATC experiments have 
been succe.ssfully conducted using tlie Sabena 
daily flight te.st, most notably at tlie first meeting of 
Phase II of the Future Air N.avigation Sy.stem 
(FANS II) held in Montreal on M.ay 25th, 1990. 


Ihc ESA-PRODAT/SITA-AIRCOM Ser¬ 
vice Trials Programme has proved the viability of 
the satellite-based data link concept and its 
capability to provide tlie "missing link" between an 
aircraft flying over an oceanic region and its 
ground base. 

New applications such as revi.sed flight plan, 
in-flight metco update bulletin have been highly 
appreciated by die crew, providing them efficient 
and reliable means to get instantly in touch with 
their home dispatch office at any phase of the 
flight. 

Considerable efforts have been provided by 
all participants and valuable experience has been 
gained in the following areas, for the benefits of 
the aviation industry, i.e.: 

■ From the airline standpoint: 

identification and evaluation of airline needs 
as regards the satellite based data link applications; 

aircraft wiring and iastallation aspects, 
including maintenance and logi.stic needs for 
SATCOM avionics; 

coordination between ground staff and 
onboard crew implying a coordinated and 
appropriate operational procedure. 

■ From an ATC experimenter's viewpoint: 

Tlie Service trials, particularly witlt tlie 
Sabena aircraft, liave confinned that flic satellite- 
based data link has a high potential for the 
Automatic Dependent Surveillance. Several flight 
records produced during tegular transoceanic 
Sabena flights have provided ATC experimenters 
with the nccc.s.sary ADS concept modelling data, in 
view of the potential use of .satellite-based data 
links for ititcmational ATC. 

PRODAT enabled the world's first civil 
ADS flight, and the first regular ADS mcs.saging 
from a commercial airliner in revenue .service 
during the fall of 1989 and throughout 1990. 


161 







REFERENCES 


1. ADS experitncnl in Western Europe and possible future developments (M.E. Cox, G.A. Cooke, E. 
Esteban, E. Meyenberg). Paper presented at RTCA 1989 General Assembly and Technical Assembly. 


2. PRODAT Aeronautical Communication System. Overall architecture and preliminary test results R. 
Rogard and M. Pinclle. Aeronautical Satellite System Session of IEEE International Conference on 
Communications (Seattle, June 7th-10th, 1987). 


3. Mobile Commumrations by Satellite - Results of Field trials conducted in Europe with the PRODAT 
System (R. Roganl, A. Jongejans, C. Loisy - ESA Journal 1989 Vol. 13). 


4. First night controlled via satellite-based data link (D. Dicz, E. Esteban). Infomiation Pa|)er - ICAO 
AMSS panel, Montreal, November 7th-25th, 1988. 


5. ADS Experiments witliin tlie ESA/INMARSAT/SITA Trials programme (Nguyen T.Plial, F. Richard). 
Information paper - ICAO Fans Phase II, Montreal, May 22nd -June 8th, 1990. 


GLFAA()1/19069I 


163 



SESSION TWO; PROGRAMS, STANDARDS AND INSTITUTIONAL 

ISSUES 


Wednesday, September 25,1991 

Master of Ceremonies - Joseph]. Fee, Oceanic Systems Manager, Federal Aviation 
Administration 

Session Chairperson - Yaroslav Kaminsky, Special Assistant, Satellite Program Office, Federal 
Aviation Administration 


8:30 Opening Remarks - Joseph J. Fee, Master of Ceremonies 

8:35 FAA Aeronautical Satellite Communications Project Plan - Yaroslav 

Kaminsky, Special Assistant, Satellite Program Office, Federal Aviation 
Administration (Co-authors - Joseph F. Dorfler, Satellite Program Manager, 
Federal Aviation Administration; Jim Nussbaum, Manager, SATCOM Program, 
CTA) 

8:50 Aeronautical Mobile Satellite Service (AMSS) Message & Voice Access 

Request Transit Delay - Thomas F. Dehel, Group Engineer, CTA 

9:10 An Improved Periodic Reporting System by Satellite - Dr. Keith Smith, 

Manager, Engineering, Aeronautical Services Division, INMARSAT 

9:30 Satellite Data Link Research and Development Program in Japan - Hiroki 

Takeda, Special Assistant to the Director, Radio Engineering Division, Air Traffic 
Services Department, Civil Aviation Bureau of Japan 

9:50 BREAK sponsored by American Mobile Satellite Corporation 

10:10 Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics (RTCA) Operational Standards 

for ADS Avionics - B. Richard Climie, Consultant, Honeywell, Inc. 

10:25 Airlines Electrical Engineering Committee (AEEC) - Michael D. Rockwell, 

Senior Avionics Engineer, ARINC (AEEC Staff) 

10:40 Status of the Oceanic Display and Planning System (ODAPS) Program - 

William L. Umbaugh, Manager, Automation Engineering Division, Federal 
Aviation Administration 

11:00 System Improvements Identified by the North Atlantic Systems Planning 

Group (NAT/SPG) As Related to the Capabilities of the Oceanic Display and 
Planning System (ODAPS) - Dan H. Iredell, Senior Programmer/Analyst, STX 
(Co-authors Rajan Srirangarajan, Senior Systems Engineer, STX and John H. 
Crimmins, Jr., Software Development Manager, STX) 

11:20 Panel Discussion: The Status and Interrelationships of Various ADS and 

SATCOM Standards 

Panel Members. 

W. Frank Price, FAA 
R. Andrew Pickens, AVCOM 
Michael D. Rockwell, ARINC 
James C. Growling, FAA 

165 


B. Richard Climie, Honeywell 
G. Keith Smith, INMARSAT 
Joseph J. Fee, FAA 




SESSION TWO: 
PROGRAMS, STANDARDS 
AND INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES 

SESSION CHAIRPERSON 



Yaroslav Kaminsky 
Special Assistant 
Satellite Program Office 
Federal Aviation Administration 


Yaroslav Kaminsky joined ARD-330 on October 1, 1990 as a Special Assistant to the 
Satellite Pi’ogram Office. His responsibilities are to assist the Satellite Program Manager 
in the development and execution of the FAA’s Satellite Communication Project, 
particularly in the preparation of pertinent national and international standards. Presently 
he serves as the Principal U.S. Spokesman for the ICAO AMC Panel Working Group on 
SARPs. Since 1961, Mr. Kaminsky has been involved in the development, design, testing, 
evaluation, and implementation of various civil and military satellite communication and 
distress alerting systems at MITRE (1964-1990) and at Bendix (1958-1963). Among other 
projects, Mr. Kaminsky participated in the joint MITRE/COMSAT/Rockwell International/ 
Ball Aerospace Aeronautical Satellite Data Link (ASDL) Experiment (1984-1985), in the 
FAA’s ATS-6 aeronautical experiments and the AEROSAT Program (1971-1973), and in 
the establishment of the first geosynchronous (SYNCOM) communication satellite (1962- 
1963). 


166 







FAA AERONAUTICAL SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS 


PROJECT PLAN 


Joseph F. Dorfler (FAAHQ/ARD-330), Yaroslav Kaminsky (FAAHQ/ARD-330), and 

Jim Nussbaum (CTA Incorporated) 

Washington, D.C. 


ABSTRACT 

The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
Satellite Communications Project, which is a 
component of the FAA Satellite Program, 
consists of three complimentary activities that 
support current and future aeronautical 
satellite communications applications, 
including Automatic Dependent Surveillance 
(ADS). This paper presents the FAA Satellite 
Communications Project Plan. It outlines the 
tasks that are presently being pursued as well 
as the pu^ose of each task. The status of 
each task is also presented. 

INTRODUCTION 

The FAA Satellite Communications Project 
was established to enhance the efficiency of 
Air Traffic Management (ATM) in oceanic 
regions first and in the National Airspace 
System (NAS) later, and to enhance the 
efficiency of air carrier operations. To 
exploit satellite communications for 
maximum benefit of both the FAA and the 
aviation community, the Satellite 
Communications Project is divided into three 
complimentary activities, shown in Figure 1, 
whose objectives are as follows: 

• To guide the development, test, and 
validation of national and international 
standards for the establishment and 
certification of the Aeronautical 
Mobile Satellite Safety (Route) 
Service (AMS(R)S). 


• To select and test, in cooperation with 
the aviation community, several 
satellite communications applications 
in key areas (e.g., oceanic, offshore, 
polar, and low altitude 
communications) in order to 
demonstrate the substantial benefits 
gained by their implementation. 

* To extend the benefits of satellite 
communications to general aviation 
through a study of the potential for 
future widespread use of satellite 
communications in the NAS 
considering the prospects of 
availability of new and innovative 
technologies and approaches to affect 
the desir^ benefits. 

The first of these activities involves the 
development and validation of standards for 
the Aeronautical Mobile Satellite Service 
(AMSS). This includes the development of 
Standards and Recommended Practices 
(SARPs), the development of Minimum 
Operational Performance Standards (MOPS), 
the correlation of the SARPs and the MOPS 
with other evolving standards, and the 
validation and evaluation of the SARPs and 
the MOPS. The FAA will also collect data 
for avionics certification and validation of 
oceanic Air Traffic Services (ATS). The 
goals of this activity are to ensure that 
standards are practical, that they satisfy user 
requirements, and that they are consistent 


167 




168 


FIGURE 1. HIERARCHY OF SATCOM ACnVITIES AND TASKS 




























with the goals of the FAA. The current plans 
call for the submission of the AMSS MOPS 
to the Radio Technical Commission for 
Aeronautics (RTCA) Executive Committee 
early in 1992 and for the support of the 
development of the associated Technical 
Standards Order (TSO). The draft 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
(ICAO) AMSS SARPs are expected to be 
submitted to the Air Navigation Commission 
(ANC) in the second quarter of 1993. 
Validation and evaluation of the AMSS 
MOPS and SARPs will be initiated in 1992 
and will be completed in 1995. Collection of 
data for avionics certification and validation 
of oceanic ATS will be initiated at the end of 
1993 and will be completed in 1998, by 
which time full scale world-wide 
implementation of satellite data and voice 
communications for oceanic ATS is 
anticipated. 

The second of these activities involves the 
cooperative development of domestic 
applications. This includes the joint 
evaluation (FAA and airlines) of the 
effectiveness of high data rate digitized voice 
communications for oceanic ATS, the joint 
evaluation (FAA and satellite communicarions 
service providers) of the effectiveness of low 
data rate digitized voice and data 
communications for offshore (rotorcraft) 
applications, and the implementation of an 
Aeronautical Telecommunications Network 
(ATN) for satellite communications. The 
goals of this activity are to demonstrate to the 
user community the substantial benefits 
gained through the implementation of these 
techniques. A cooperative agreement with a 
major airline is being planned for late 1991 to 
conduct oceanic operational tests of the 
AMSS voice capability. A similar agreement 
with a satellite communications service 
provider is also being planned for 1991 to 
conduct low data rate satellite 
communications tests that will lead to 
recommendations for rotorcraft air traffic 
voice services in 1996. The FAA will 
provide test aircraft and test support for flight 
evaluations of avionics leading to an ATN 
functional specification in 1996. 

The third of these activities involves the 
definition and development of future satellite 


communications. The FAA will initiate a 
study of the potential for widespread satellite 
communications use in the NAS considering 
the prospects for new technical approaches to 
provide the desired benefits. This study will 
consider as many of the available options as 
possible and will attain consensus support 
within the aviation community; it will 
consider transition strategies, user equipment 
costs, and other key parameters to assess the 
sensitivity of the results to the assumptions; 
and it will investigate promising approaches 
and will evaluate them in comparison with the 
existing NAS techniques. This study will 
assess the benefits of satellite 
communications to general aviation ATM and 
will initiate development of innovative 
technologies to extend the user base. The 
goal of this activity is to assess the 
advantages of satellite communications in the 
FAA's long-range plans for surveillance and 
communications. In FY 1993, a solicitation 
for a study of an advanced satellite 
communications system will be announced. 
The results of this study will be available in 
FY 1996 and will form the basis for further 
research and development of an advanced 
satellite communications system. 

Each of these activities is described in detail 
below. 

ACTIVITY 1 - AMSS STANDARDS 

An important function of the FAA Satellite 
Communications Project is to guide the 
establishment of standards for the 
development and certification of AMS(R)S 
and equipment. AMS(R)S, i.e. safety 
services, include ATS and Aeronautical 
Operational Communications (AOC). The 
use of international standards ensures that all 
equipment developed in accordance with the 
standards will operate properly anywhere in 
the world, thereby guaranteeing 
interoperability, and satisfying applicable 
performance requirements. 

Previous work has been carried out by the 
ICAO Future Air Navigation Systems 
(FANS) Committee, RTCA, and the Airline 
Electronic Equipment Committee (AEEC). 
SARPs are currently being developed within 
the ICAO Aeronautical Mobile 


169 



Communications (AMC) Panel. MOPS are 
currently being developed within RTCA 
Special Committee 165 (SC-165). 

ICAO SARPs encompass overall system 
performance and interoperability whereas 
RTCA SC-165 MOPS focus on avionics 
requirements and system/service performance 
criteria. Consequently, the major thrust of 
the FAA's standards development effort is 
directed towards the development of SARPs. 
However, considerable involvement of 
RTCA SC-165 is required to assure 
compatibility between the SARPs and the 
MOPS. 

Four tasks will be performed in this area. 
Task 1, which consists of two subtasks, 
addresses the development of SARPs and 
related Guidance Material, and issues related 
to AMSS spectrum. Task 2 addresses the 
development of MOPS. Task 3 addresses the 
evaluation, verification, and validation of 
both the SARPs and the MOPS through 
simulation and testing. Task 4 consists of 
collecting data for avionics certification and 
validation of oceanic ATS. The ultimate goal 
of these tasks is the approval of AMSS 
SARPs by ICAO and MOPS by RTCA. 
These four tasks are described in detail 
below. 

TASK 1 - ICAO AMC PANEL SUPPORT 

Task 1 comprises two subtasks. Subtask 1, 
ICAO AMSS SARPs, supports the 
development of AMSS SARPs and related 
Guidance Material. Draft SARPs are 
currently being developed within AMC Panel 
Working Group A (WG-A). AMSS SARPs 
focus on overall system performance and 
interoperability. Only top-level requirements 
are specified in the SARPs; supporting 
information is included as Guidance Material. 
Sections 1 through 4 of the SARPs (i.e., 
definitions and system capabilities. Radio 
Frequency [RF] characteristics, and channel 
types and rates) and associated appendices 
are the responsibility of the Canadian 
Delegation. The FAA, as well as others, has 
responsibility for reviewing these sections 
and providing comments to the Canadian 
Delegation as appropriate. The U.S. 
Delegation is responsible for the remainder 


(and bulk) of the SARPs, i.e.. Sections 5 
through 10 and associated appendices. 
Sections 5 through 10 address channel 
protocols, satellite subnetwork layer 
protocols, packet mode (data) and circuit 
mode (voice) services, and aircraft and 
ground earth station management. The U.S. 
Delegation also supports the development of 
the ICAO AMSS Advisory Circular. 

Included in Subtask 1 is the support for 
miscellaneous activities related to the 
development of AMSS standards within other 
organizations such as the AEEC 
(Characteristics 741 and 745), ADS Panel, 
Inmarsat, FANS II, RTCA SC-162, and the 
Secondary Surveillance Radar Improvements 
and Collision Avoidance Systems (SICAS) 
Panel. Work in this area ensures that SARPs 
are internally consistent and that they are 
compatible with other related standards and 
vice versa. 

Subtask 2, ICAO AMSS Frequency 
Management, supports work on AMSS 
spectrum requirements, including the 
spectrum model for North America and 
AMSS frequency coordination. Spectrum- 
related work is being performed within AMC 
Panel WG-B. The primary purpose of 
Subtask 2 is to develop requirements for the 
AMSS system design, to support efforts to 
finalize spectrum requirements for North 
America, to develop guidelines for frequency 
coordination, to prepare for the 1992 World 
Administrative Radio Conference (WARC), 
and to ensure that the outputs of both AMSS 
WG-A and WG-B are consistent with U.S. 
policy. 

The FAA continues to provide technical 
expertise and leadership to the ICAO AMC 
Panel. The U.S. Preparatory Groups for 
WG-A and WG-B meet periodically to 
review progress in these areas to ensure 
agreement with the international community 
prior to working group meetings. 

TASK 2 - RTCA SC-165 MOPS 

Task 2, RTCA SC-165 MOPS, supports the 
development of AMSS MOPS. The MOPS 
address equipment performance requirements 
and test procedures, installed equipment 


170 



performance, and equipment operational 
performance characteristics. RTCA SC-165 
is also defining end-to-end service criteria 
and subnetwork performance. 

The purpose of this task is to develop 
technical characteristics for MOPS and to 
ensure that the MOPS are consistent with the 
AMSS SARPs. The MOPS for AMSS 
specify system characteristics that will be 
used by designers, manufacturers, installers, 
and users of the AMSS system and 
equipment as the basis for certification. 
Compliance with the MOPS is the principal 
means of ensuring that the AMSS will 
perform its intended functions satisfactorily 
under all conditions normally encountered in 
routine aeronautical operations. 

The FAA continues to provide technical 
expertise and leadership to RTCA SC-165. 
Subworking groups of RTCA SC-165 meet 
periodically to review the progress of the 
MOPS and to ensure that the MOPS are 
consistent with the SARPs. The FAA 
participates in RTCA SC-165 plenary and 
subworking group meetings and responds to 
action items assigned at these meetings. The 
FAA also serves on the MOPS Editorial 
Committee. 

Figure 2 illustrates the relationship between 
the aforementioned AMSS standards 
documents. 

TASK 3 - STANDARDS TEST AND 
EVALUATION 

Under Tasks 1 and 2 above, the FAA is 
supporting the development of AMSS 
standards, i.e., SARPs and MOPS. The 
need also exists to evaluate, verify, and 
validate these standards. Task 3, Standards 
Test and Evaluation, supports the verification 
and validation of SARPs and the testing of 
MOPS using several different techniques, 
including simulation. This task will ensure 
that these standards are practical, that they 
satisfy user requirements, and that they are 
consistent with the goals of the FAA. 

Much of the material in the SARPs and 
MOPS is based upon the Inmarsat System 
Definition Manual (SDM) and ARINC 


(Aeronautical Radio, Inc.) Characteristic 741. 
Hardware is currently being designed and 
built. Prior to acceptance, the SARPs and 
MOPS require validation to verify their 
functionality and completeness. 

A SARPs Validation Cross Reference Matrix 
(VCRM) has been developed and presented 
to the ICAO AMC Panel. The VCRM 
identifies several methods to validate the 
SARPs, e.g., simulation, analysis, testing, 
utilization of manufacturer's data, ami 
demonstration. A test plan, which includes 
testing of RF standards, has been developed. 
A ground Communications Test Facility 
(CIT) is being developed to conduct system 
end-to-end and RF tests to validate standards 
not currently validated by manufact urer's 
data. In addition, a Flight Test Facility (FTF) 
is being developed to evaluate state-of-the-art 
equipment and system enhancements. Initial 
testing will be conducted using a low data 
rate AMSS system that accesses the maritime 
band and uses a subset of the ARINC 
Characteristic 741 avionics. Follow-on 
testing will be conducted using a high data 
rate AMSS system, when available, that 
accesses the AMSS band. Simulation will be 
conducted to evaluate the performance of the 
planned AMSS architecture under various 
communication traffic conditions. This 
simulation will indicate the performance 
limitations of the planned AMSS architecture. 
As airlines begin equipping, additional input 
will be available for the validation database. 
Figure 3 illustrates this task. 

TASK 4 - AVIONICS CERTIFICATION 

AND VALIDATION OF OCEANIC ATS 

In conjunction with Task 3, Standards Test 
and Evaluation, ARD-330 and its contractors 
will collect data to support the FAA 
certification of AMSS and the subsequent 
verification of related end-to-end services. 
To this end, ARD-330 will interact with the 
appropriate FAA organizations, e.g., AFS, 
AIR, AMS, and ATR, to identify data that 
can be used to support the certification 
process. SARPs validation will be 
coordinated with these FAA organizations. 
Formal collection of such data will begin in 
late 1993 and will be completed in 1998. 


171 






System 

Avionics & Service 

Primarily 

Government 

ICAO 

SARPs 

Standards and Recommended 
Practices 

CTreaty-Level Agreement) 

(Adapts Capability Descriptions 
to Worldwide Service Basis} 

RTCA SC-165 

MOPS 

Minimum Operational Performance 
Standards (FAA Basis for 

Technical Standards Order) 

(Develops Testable Parameters and 

Tests for Minimum Avionics and 

AMSS Service Requirements) 


Inmarsat 

AEEC 


SDM 

ARINC Characteristic 


System Definition Manual 

741 

Primarily 

Industry 

(AES and GES Interoperability Basis) 



(Describes all Elements of 

(Describes Avionics Interfaces, 


the International System 

Except Avionics Details) 

Performance, and Signal-in-Space) 


Derived Internationally 

Derived Domestically 


FIGURE 2. STANDARDS DEVELOPMENT 


Lab Computer Manufacturer’s Operational 

Tests Simulation Data Data 


FIGURES. STANDARDS TEST AND EVALUATION 



172 




























ACTIVITY 2 - SATELLITE 
COMMUNICATIONS APPLICATIONS 

Airlines are currently equipping to standards 
(e.g., ARINC Characteristic 741, ICAO 
AMSS SARPs, and RTCA SC-165 MOPS) 
that are being developed to define the 
capabilities and performance requirements for 
AMSS operational equipment. The FA A will 
extend these standards into practical systems 
by selecting and testing several applications 
(e.g., oceanic, offshore, polar, and domestic 
low altitude communications) to demonstrate 
the substantial benefits gained by their 
implementation as well as to provide an 
operational evaluation of the aforementioned 
standards. The selected applications will 
demonstrate the capabilities of satellites to 
satisfy currently unmet communications 
needs in the NAS. 

Currently-available equipment, which 
complies with a subset of the standards, and 
satellites accessing the maritime mobile band 
will be used for initial testing of AMSS data 
and digitized voice capabilities, and will 
support applications that satisfy the near-term 
requirements of the aviation community. 
Equipment that fully complies with the 
SARPs and the MOPS will be used when 
available. 

Three tasks will be performed in this area. 
Task 1 addresses the need for the FAA to 
demonstrate satellite voice communications 
for ATS applications. Task 2 addresses 
testing of AMSS equipment onboard 
helicopters in support of low altitude off¬ 
shore operations and medical emergencies. 
Task 3 demonstrates the unifying concepts 
engendered by the ATN. The ultimate goal 
of these tasks is to demonstrate to the user 
community the substantial benefits gained 
through the implementation of satellite-based 
communications systems that adhere to 
AMSS standards, which the FAA will 
accomplish by demonstrating selected 
domestic applications that satisfy the 
currently unmet needs of the user 
community. These three tasks are described 
in detail below. 


TASK 1 - EVALUATION OF ATS VOICE 
COMMUNICATIONS VIA AMSS 

Several airlines and private aircraft operators 
intend to install the AMSS voice capability. 
To address the need to demonstrate high data 
rate digitized satellite voice communications 
for ATS applications, the FAA will 
demonstrate voice communications between 
pilots and controllers during oceanic flights. 
The results of this demonstration will be used 
to refine and enhance the evolving operational 
requirements for ATS communications using 
the AMSS voice system. This demonstration 
will also provide real-time operational AMSS 
voice system experience at a participating Air 
Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC). 

A cooperative agreement between the FAA 
and interested airlines, private aircraft 
operators, and communications service 
providers is being planned for late 1991 to 
conduct operational tests of the AMSS voice 
capability. A joint test plan will be developed 
to define the flight tests. The FAA's B-727 
will be equipped with the AMSS voice 
capability and will participate in flight trials. 
An ARTCC communications architecture 
study will be conducted to define and 
evaluate the long-term options for providing 
direct voice connectivity between oceanic 
controllers and AMSS voice equipment. 
These studies will address Voice Switching 
and Control System (VSCS) i.uerconnection, 
terrestrial call routing, call queueing and 
priority processing, and terrestrial voice 
internetworking issues. As part of this 
study, an interim approach for direct FAA 
Technical Center (FAATC) and ARTCC 
interconnection with the A'ISS voice 
equipment will be developed in order to 
support the flight tests. The AMSS voice 
capability will demonstrated to participants 
using the coder/decoder (CODEC) testbed at 
the FAATC. For the purposes of operational 
demonstration and evaluation, 
interconnections for direct two-way pilot- 
controller voice calls between the ARTCC 
and FAATC, and the AMSS voice equipment 
will be implemented using existing functional 
capabilities of AMSS Ground Earth Station 
(GES) equipment. This will support 
internetworking with private line telephony 
facilities. Contingent upon program phasing. 


173 



demonstrations may initially use the ARINC 
manual call routing function until direct 
AMSS voice interconnection capabilities to 
the ARTCC and FAATC are available. 
Figure 4 illustrates this task. 

TASK 2 - AMSS DOMESTIC 
APPLICATIONS 

The use of satellite communications in 
domestic areas has several near-term benefits, 
including rotorcraft service to oil platforms in 
offshore areas and helicopter emergency 
medical services, which are now widespread. 
As more aircraft are equipped with a data link 
communications capability, there is a 
potential to alleviate current VHF congestion. 
The initial purpose of this task is to evaluate 
prototype satellite communications hardware 
provided by the domestic service provider in 
flight tests using an FAA helicopter. The 
services tested will include data and 
extremely low data rate digitized voice using 
store-and-forward techniques. Subsequent 
evaluations will include planned helicopter 
avionics, which are expected to be compliant 
with AMSS SARPs and MOPS. Future tests 
may be conducted in other areas, e.g.. Gulf 
of Mexico, and include testing of other 
satellite communications systems. This task 
will extend the utilization of satellite 
communications techniques to Continental 
U.S. ATS. 

The FAATC is planning to sign a 
Cooperative Research Development 
Agreement (CRDA) with a domestic service 
provider for the loan of interim low data rate 
satellite communications equipment for test 
and evaluation. The FAATC will also 
coordinate with the FAA Vertical Flight 
Program Office during this task. The Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) will conduct a 
study to resolve potential problems associated 
with installing satellite communications on 
helicopters. The interim avionics obtained 
from the domestic service provider will be 
installed and flight tested on an FAA 
helicopter to evaluate the system under 
operational scenarios where existing Very 
High Frequency (VHF) and radar coverage is 
limited. Low rate digitized voice methods 
will be evaluated using store-and-forward 
techniques. The initial tests will be 


conducted using Inmarsat satellites that 
access the maritime mobile band. Additional 
tests will be conducted using the domestic 
service provider's satellite system and 
commercial-quality avionics that are 
compatible with the AMSS architecture. 
These tests may involve potential users of 
AMSS. Figure 5 illustrates this task. 

TASK 3 - AERONAUTICAL 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK 
PROJECT 

The ATN Project (ATNP) is a cooperative 
project initiated by The MITRE Corporation 
that includes various participating 
organizations (i.e., ATC authorities, end 
users, service providers, manufacturers, and 
contractors) to develop, validate, and evaluate 
the use of ATN routers in air-ground and 
ground-based configurations for air-ground 
data transmission that is independent of the 
type of radio link used. The ATNP is 
intended to develop implementable equipment 
using ATN protocols on an end-to-end basis. 
This ATNP will demonstrate an aeronautical 
implementation of an Open Systems 
Interconnection (OSI) packet data 
architecture, i.e., ATN. 

The ATNP includes the design, construction, 
and installation of both airborne and ground 
ATN intermediate systems (i.e., routers) and 
end systems (i.e., host computers), and the 
interconnection of these systems into an 
operational aeronautical mobile network 
environment. The ATNP will utilize airline 
applications as well as ATS applications, 
e.g., ADS. Satellite and VHF subnetworks 
will be utilized. 

The ATNP is defined as a series of steps, 
each having specific criteria established that 
define its completion. The FAATC will 
support ATN flight tests. The FAATC will 
develop an airborne router and will provide 
test aircraft and test support for flight 
evaluations of avionics provided by industry 
participants. The FAATC will develop 
automated test equipment to support bench 
testing of industry avionics. The FAATC 
will also develop a ground router that may 
use software developed by The MITRE 
Corporation. This router will be 


174 





Inmaisat 

Satellite 


Oceanic 

HR 


GES 

(COMSATp 

^etworiT 
Control 
V Center 
1 

\ Oceanic 

\artcc / 


FIGURE 4. EVALUATION OF ATS VOICE COMMUNICATIONS VIA AMSS 




Helicopter with 
Low Rate Data 
and Voice Store and 
Forward Capability 


Ground 

Station 


Network 

Control 

Ceitter 


. Direct 
Line 
To Users 


FIGURE 5. AMSS DOMESTIC APPLICATIONS 




interconnected to other routers developed by 
The MITRE Corporation, ARINC, and 
airline participants. Figure 6 illustrates this 
task. 

ACTIVITY 3 - FUTURE AERONAUTICAL 
SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS 
SYSTEMS 

The FAA has been challenged in a number of 
forums to consider the utilization of satellite 
communications to improve airspace 
management and reduce costs of 
communications and surveillance. It is 
unlikely that conventional satellite 
communications will ever serve more than a 
minority of U.S. aircraft and, therefore, any 
serious investigation of potential for 
widespread satellite communications use in 
the NAS must consider the prospects for new 
technical approaches to provide the desired 
benefits. TTie ultimate goal of this activity is 
to assess the advantage of satellite 
communications in the long-range plans for 
FAA surveillance and communication. 

The purpose of this activity is to initiate a 
study which should attain consensus support 
within the aviation community. The study 
will consider as many of the available options 
as possible and will consider transition 
strategies, user equipment costs, and other 
key parameters to assess the sensitivity of the 
results to assumptions, and will investigate 
and evaluate promising approaches in 
comparison with existing NAS techniques. 
This activity will provide a blueprint for 
future inclusion of satellite communications 
in U.S. airspace management and will serve 
as a means for a well reasoned response to 
proposals for adoption of specific satellite 
systems. This activity will also initiate 
research and development efforts in support 
of satellite communications in the NAS. 

Two tasks will be performed in this area. 
Under Task 1, w'hich consists of two 
subtasks, studies related to future satellite 
communications will be performed. Task 2 
will address the development of an advanced 
satellite communications system. These two 
tasks are described below. 


TASK 1 - FUTURE SATELLITE 
COMMUNICATIONS STUDY 

Under Task 1, proposals for a two phase 
advanced satellite communications study will 
be solicited. Multiple sources will be chosen 
for the first phase of the study, which will be 
completed within six months after award. 
Subtask 1, Phase 1 Study, is aimed at 
providing an overview of the contractor's 
approach, scope, and preliminary results. 
The Phase 1 study results will be reviewed 
by a panel of FAA and aviation community 
experts. This panel of experts will provide 
recommendations for selection of the 
contractor for Subtask 2. Subtask 2, Phase 2 
Study, will provide in-depth trade-off 
analyses, including costs/benefits, and will 
consider major issues such as transition 
strategies and sensitivities of results to key 
assumptions. The draft Phase 2 study results 
will be presented to the panel of experts to 
provide a means for the aviation community 
to critique and influence the study results 
prior to publication of the final report. Task 
1 will begin in late 1991 and will be 
completed in early 1996. Figure 7 illustrates 
this task. 

TASK 2 - ADVANCED SATELLITE 
COMMUNICATIONS DEVELOPMENT 

Task 2 is dependent on an FAA decision 
regarding the implementation of satellite- 
based en route ATS. Task 2 will support the 
analysis and development of an advanced 
satellite-based communications system for en 
route ATS and will begin late in 1996. 

SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS 
PROJECT SCHEDULE 

Figure 8 presents the milestone schedule for 
the Satellite Communications Project. 


176 





f Priv 
{ Groi 
VJVetw 




1 

A1 IN KuUlCf 


ATS 

Ground 

Network 






















Figure 8. 

Satellite Communications Project Schedule 



































CO-AUTHORS 



Joseph F. Dorfler 
Satellite Program Manager 
Federal Aviation Administration 

Joseph F. Dorfler is a retired Air Force 
pilot possessing operational, technical, and 
research experience in the field of aviation 
and space technology. Prior to joining the 
FA A, Mr. Dorfler led the operational 
phase-in of the Global Positioning System 
(GPS) for the Department of Defense 
(DoD). As the FA A Satellite Program 
Manager, Mr. Dorfler is responsible for 
research and development activities in both 
the satellite communications and navigation 
areas. 



Jim Nussbaum 

Manager FAA Satellite Communications 
CTA, Incorporated 

Jim Nussbaum is the Manager of the FAA 
Satellite Communications task at CTA 
Incorporated. In support of FAATC/ACD- 
330 and FAAHQ/ARD-330, Mr. Nussbaum 
serves as an advisor to the U.S. Delegation 
to the Aeronautical Mobile Communications 
(AMC) Panel, which is currently developing 
AMSS Standards and Recommended 
Practices (SARPs). He has supported 
several FAA efforts including the Oceanic 
Display and Planning System (ODAPS), the 
Maintenance Management System (MMS), 
and the Telecommunications Management 
System (TELMS). Mr. Nussbaum received 
a B.S. in Physical Sciences from the 
Univei’sity of Maryland in 1974 and an 
M.S. in Computer Science from the Johns 
Hopkins University in 1986. 


179 





SESSION TWO: 
PROGRAMS, STANDARDS 
AND INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES 


Thomas F. Dehel 
Group Engineer 
CTA Incorporated 



Thomas F. Dehel was born in Philadelphia, PA, on July 11, 1958. He received the B.S. 
degree in Computer Engineering from Lehigh University in 1980. From 1980 through 1984 
he served in the U.S. Air Force. His first assignment was operational satellite command 
and control at the Sunnyvale Satellite Control Facility, CA; his second assignment was as 
a development officer on the Joint Tactical Information Distribution System at Hanscom Air 
Force Base, MA. He attended the University of Texas and received the M.S. degree in 
Electrical Engineering in December, 1985. Other professional positions include work on Air 
Force anti-jam radio at the Mitre Corporation in Bedford, MA, and development of a laser- 
infrared circuit board inspection techniques at IBM in Austin, Texas. For the past several 
years he has been at CTA Incorporated, McKee City, NJ, supporting the FAA Technical 
Center’s work on the Aeronautical Mobile Satellite Service. He is a member of IEEE. 


180 






AERONAUTICAL MOBILE SATELLITE SERVICE (AMSS) 
MESSAGE AND VOICE ACCESS REQUEST TRANSIT DELAY 

Thomas F. Dehel 

CTA INCORPORATED, McKee City, N J. 


ABSTRACT 

The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) is 
supporting the development of standards for 
the use of satellite communications in aviation. 
As part of this support, the FAA has conducted 
a preliminary analysis and simulation of the 
Aeronautical Mobile Satellite Service (AMSS) to 
determine message transit delay of the system 
under a range of conditions. The conditions 
include various message lengths, channel 
loading, channel data rates, and bit error rates. 
The simulations focused on the link level and 
physical levels; the effect of upper layer 
protocols were not considered as part of this 
initial effort. Boeing provided the simulation 
programs ADSSIM and SATSIM which were 
used to generate results under a range of 
conditions. The distribution of the results are 
provided in this paper. 


INTRODUCTION 

The application of Aeronautical Mobile 
Satellite Service (AMSS) for Air Traffic Service 
(ATS) communications is in the process of 
becoming a reality. The FAA is supporting 
AMSS through the development of national and 
international standards, such as the RTCA 
Minimum Operational Performance Standards 
(MOPS) and the International Civil Aviation 
Organization (ICAO) Standards and 
Recommended Practices (SARPs). As an input 
to standards development, the FAA has 
conducted preliminary analysis and simulation 
of AMSS. This paper describes one of the 
simulation efforts and presents some results of 
the message transit delay expected over AMSS. 


AMSS PROTOCOL 

This section provides a cursory overview of 
the AMSS protocol. A detailed description of 
AMSS protocol can be found in the Inmarsat 
System Definition Manual [1]. 

AMSS is a subnetwork providing message 
transfer between an Aeronautical Earth Station 
(AES) and a Ground Earth Station (GES); the 
ultimate system will use ISO 8208 as the 
Subnetwork Access Protocol. At the link layer, 
the messages (including upper layer overhead) 
are segmented into Signal Units (SUs). The 
SUs in the air-to-ground direction can be 
transferred either over an R-Channel or a T- 
Channel. An R-channel is a slotted aloha 
channel which is used to transfer messages 
shorter than 34 octets. A T-channel is a Time 
Division Multiple Access (TDMA) channel which 
transfers messages of 34 octets or longer; use 
of the T-channel requires that a timeslot request 
SU be sent to the GES and that the GES 
responds with a reservation message. In the 
ground-to-air direction, the SUs are transferred 
over the P-channel. 

Two types of service exist within the AMSS 
link layer, the Direct Link Service (DLS) and 
Reliable Link Service (RLS). DLS provides no 
capability for retransmitting SUs which were 
not received or received in error. DLS is not 
used for user message transmission. RLS is 
used for user data messages and provides up to 
5 retransmissions to correct for SUs which 
were not delivered or delivered in error. The 
primary causes for SUs not being delivered are 
expected to be SU collisions on the R-channel 
(since other aircraft may also transmit SUs on 
these channels), and channel bit errors. 


181 



This paper focuses on the transmission of 
relatively short messages sent via RLS in the 
air-to-ground direction, consistent with the 
transmission of Automatic Dependent 
Surveillance (ADS) periodic position reports. 

An additional use of the AMSS R-channel is 
to send access request messages for air-to- 
ground voice calls, which occur on the C- 
channel. Voice contact via AMSS C-channels 
is expected only for nonroutine and emergency 
situations, so the time required to set up a 
voice call is an area of interest. This paper also 
considers the transmission delay of the voice 
call access request message on the R-channel. 


MESSAGE TRANSIT DELAY SIMULATION 

The Boeing ADSSIM software (described in 
(21) provides a simulation of AMSS which 
outputs message transit delay for messages of 
1, 2, or 3 SUs over the R-channel under a given 
channel occupancy condition. The model 
assumes that the channel occupancy is random, 
and it provides a Monte-Carlo simulation of the 
R-channel protocol. The Boeing ADSSIM model 
was used to generate message transit delay 
time for the AMSS R-channel and also was 
used as part of an approximation for transit 
delay over the T-channel. 

The following parameters were used to 
simulate R-channel operation: 

a. R-channel occupancy (5, 10, 15, 20, and 
25 percent); 

b. Channel bit rates (600, 1200 bps); 

c. Retransmission Timer (8 s, 15 s for voice 
setup); 

d. Number of SUs (1, 2, 3); 

e. Maximum number of retry attempts (5); 
and 

f. Link service (RLS). 


Other parameters which are requested by the 
ADSSIM model were given values appropriate 
for the goals of this simulation. These are: 

g. Time to route from GES to destination (0 
s); (to eliminate effects outside the AMSS 
subnetwork); 

h. Number of SUs in P-channel queue (6); (6 
is the minimum selectable number, chosen to 
isolate transmission delay from queuing delay); 


i. Mix of message sizes on channel (1 SU - 
34 percent, 2 SU - 33 percent, 3 SU - 33 
percent); and 

j. Link and miscellaneous processing delays 
(0.5 s) 

The model was run to simulate the transmission 
of 20,000 messages, and the transit delay 
times were recorded. The 20,000 transit time 
delay calculations for each set of input 
conditions were stored on a disk and ordered by 
transit delay time. Messages which were not 
delivered were flagged to indicate nondelivery. 
From the ordered list, the transit delay times 
were plotted as a cumulative probability density 
function. 


R-CHANNEL MESSAGE TRANSIT DELAY 
RESULTS 

Figure 1 shows the message transit delay 
results for the 15 percent occupied 600 bps R- 
channel with the transmitted message 
consisting of a single SU. The cumulative 
probability is shown along the ordinate and the 
transit delay is shown on the abscissa. The 
results show that 50 percent of the messages 
are delivered in about 3 seconds, 95 percent of 
the messages are delivered in about 16 
seconds, 99 percent of the messages are 
delivered in 30 seconds, and 99.9 percent of 
the messages are delivered in 54 seconds. The 
ADS message delivery time requirement has 
only been specified in relatively broad terms (5 
seconds -1 minute (3]). The transit delay times 
shown in Figure 1 cover this range, however. 


182 






short message transit delay times {in the 5 -15 
second range) will not be met by a small 
fraction of the messages transmitted. 

Figure 2 shows the results for the 15 
percent loaded 600 bps R-channel with the 
transmitted message consisting of two or three 
SUs (the one SU case is included for reference). 
The message delivery time increases more 
dramatically at the higher cumulative probability 
end of the curve; this is expected since 
messages consisting of more SUs are more 
likely to have collisions on the R-channel. 

The remainder of the data is plotted in 
Figures 3 to 8, showing the change in the "high 
probability" transit delay time (95, 99, and 99.9 
percent cumulative probabilities) with respect to 
R-channel occupancy. The data is plotted in 
this manner to emphasize the relationship of the 
probability of success to transit delay time. 

Figure 3 shows the high probability transit 
delay time data as a function of channel 
occupancy for the 600 bps R-channel with a 
message length of 1 SU. Figure 4 gives the 
same data for 2 SU messages, and Figure 5 
gives the same data for 3 SU messages. It 
should be noted that increasing the message 
length from 1 to 3 SUs on an R-channel with 
15 percent occupancy increases the mean 
delivery time by only 2.2 s, but the 95 percent 
cumulative probability delivery time increases 
by 8.4 s, the 99 percent cumulative probability 
delivery time increases by 8.8 s, and the 99.9 
percent cumulative probability delivery bme 
increases by 21.4 s. 

It should be noted in Figure 5 that at 20 
percent and above channel occupancies, the 
probability of delive'^y is less than 99.9 percent. 
This result is important since, if the requirement 
for message delivery is 99.9 percent or greater, 
the additional reliability will need to be applied 
at the subnetwork or higher layers. 

Figures 6 - 8 show the high probability delay 
time results for the 1200 bps R-channel. 

One assumption made in the ADSSIM 
simulation of the R-channel is that the 


messages on an R-channel are transmitted at 
random times with respect to one another. 
This may not be the case if periodic reports 
from different aircraft have the same period. 
The result could be better performance, (i.e., 
when the periods are not in phase), or worse, 
(i.e., when many aircraft try to transmit 
simultaneously for every report). 


T-CHANNEL APPROXIMATION 

The ADSSIM program contains a T-channel 
approximation which does not take into account 
the time delay of the T-channel time slot 
request message. To account for this delay, a 
model of the T-channel protocol was 
constructed which uses the ADSSIM R-channel 
model for transmission of the time slot request 
message in addition to other approximations. 

The T-channel message transit delay is 
approximated by the following simplified 
formula: 

(h-chan req time) + (time to 1st assigned slot) 
-H(Txtime) = total delay for T-channel 

In this approximation, the "R-channel 
request time" is the time to transmit a 1 SU 
message on the R-channel; these results aru 
provided in the R-channel simulation described 
previously. The "time to 1 st assigned slot" is 
dependent on the P-channel rate, as described 
in the Inmarsat SDM11 ]. This delay varies from 
1.6 s to 3.0 s. 

The "Tx" time is the time required to 
transmit the burst at the given channel rate, 
which can be calculated from Table 4 in the 
Inmarsat SDM. 

In order to assure that the simulation 
provides a minimum bound for the performance 
of the T-channel, the model uses minimum time 
delay to the T-channel timeslots assigned. This 
simplification does not take into account T- 
channel delays caused by other message traffic. 
Work is currently in progress which will define 
T-cnannel delays more accurately. 


183 



T-CHANNEL MESSAGE TRANSIT DELAY 
RESULTS 

The transmission delay for a 10 SU message 
on a 600 bps T-channel is 3.8 seconds, and the 
minimum transmission time for a 10 SU 
message on the 1200 bps T-channel is 1.9 
seconds. (The calculations are derived from 
Table 5 in the SDM.) The transit delay for the 
600 and 1200 bps R-channels for a single SU 
are shown in Figures 3 and 6. The resultant 
cumulative probability delivery delays on the 
600 bps T-channel is 23.2 s for 95 percent, 
37.4 s for 99 percent, and 60.4 s for 99.9%. 
The results for the 1200 bps T-channel are 
16.1 s for 95 percent, 27.2 s for 99 percent, 
and 42.9 s for 99.9 percent. 

VOICE CALL ACCESS REQUEST 

The AMSS call setup protocol for an air-to- 
ground voice call is initiated by the transmission 
of a call access request SU on tf i R-channel. 
The call access request is transmitted as a 
Direct Link Service (DLS) message, but other 
protocol features cause retransmission if the 
request is not acknowledged. The basic timer 
for the retransmission is 15 seconds. The 
results indicate that, for an access request SU 
on a 15% occupied 600 bps R-channel the 
median (50 percent cumulative probability) time 
for delivery is 2.91 seconds, the 95 percent 
cumulative probability delivery time is 23.3 s, 
the 99 percent cumulative probability delivery 
time is 44.2 s, and the 99.9 percent cumulative 
probability delivery time is 71.6 s. 

Voice channel availability is restricted to an 
AES with a high gain antenna, therefore it is 
likely that a 10500 bps R-channel would be 
available to transmit the voice call request. For 
the 10500 bps R-channel, the median time is 
0.5 s; the 95 percent cumulative probability 
delivery time is 16.1 s; the 99 percent 
cumulative probability delivery time is 31.8 s; 
and the 99.9 percent cumulative probability 
delivery time is 48.2 s. 

There is work in progress in the ICAO AMSS 
Panel and in Inmarsat to revise the voice call 
protocol to provide faster set up times for 


distress and flight safety voice calls. Simulation 
work will be performed in this area. 

BER EFFECTS 

After the simulation with ADSSIM was 
nearly complete, a revised version of ADSSIM, 
called SATSIM, was provided by Boeing. 
SATSIM includes the capability to vary the bit 
error rate (BER) of the channels being 
simulated. SATSIM results are provided to 
examine the effect of a range of BERs. 

The SATSIM program is similar to ADSSIM 
but includes the capability to input the bit error 
rate (BER) of the channel being simulated. 
SATSIM was run for the 600 bps R-channels 
for the 3 SU message length case, with a 
channel BER set to 1x10'^. The 95, 99, and 
99.9 percent cumulative probability transit 
delay results for the 600 bps R-channel are 
shown on Figure 9. The figure also includes the 
ADSSIM results for comparison. The figures 
show that ADSSIM and SATSIM give similar 
results, and that a BER of 1x10'® has no 
significant impact on the message delivery 
delay times except for the 99.9 percent 
cumulative probability results. A 10 percent 
increase in transit delay is seen for the 99.9 
percent results. 

The target BER on AMSS P-, R-, and T- 
channels is 1x10’®, however, degradation to 
1x10’^ is permitted by the power control 
mechanism. Loss of a P-channel is not declared 
until the BER exceeds 1x10"’ for a 3 minute 
averaging time. The effect of BER on the 
message delivery time (for a 3 SU R-channel 
message on a 600 bps channel) is shown in 
Figure 10. The most severe effect is on the 
99.9 percent delay time; increasing the BER 
above 1 x10 ® to 5x10 ® causes the probability of 
delivery to drop below 99.9 percent. As the 
BER increases from 1x10'® to 1x10’, the 99 
percent cumulative probability delivery delay 
time increases by 5 seconds, and the 95 
percent cumulative probability delivery delay 
increases by 2 seconds. The delays increase 
sharply when the BER exceeds 1x10’. At a 
BER of 1x10 ®, the probability of delivery drops 
below 99 percent. 


184 






CONCLUSIONS 


A preliminary projection of transit delay 
performance has been provided using ADSSIM 
and SATSIM to simulate the AMSS link la/er. 
These results consist of distributions of 
message transit delays under normal operation 
of the AMSS. The results indicate message 
transit delays due to the AMSS link layer are 
within expected ADS requirements. The voice 
call setup delays can be long, but the protocol 
for voice call setup may be revised for high 
priority use to reduce this delay. 


REFERENCES 

1. Inmarsat, Aeronautical System Definition 
Manual (SDMI , through CN 40. 

2. Judd, Thomas, ADS Delivery Time 
Analysis . ICAO AMSSP/3, 1990. 

3. Scales, Walter, et.al., Preliminary FAA 
Requirements for the Aeronautical Mobile 
Sa tellite Service (AMSS) . ICAO AMSSP/3, 
1990. 


185 



R-OoBeiTnisi Odor Cmoiative KsbimtiDo 
fix Oond Mg, 600 bp 



FIGURE 1. R-CHANNEL DELAY FOR 1 SU MESSAGE 

R-Chonnel Transit Delay Dsnulotive Distribution 
15X Channel looifing, 500 bps Channel 



FIGURE 2. R-CHANNEL TRANSIT DELAY FOR 1-3 SU MESSAGES 


186 







(SlAVIBOllSNVlH (S)AVT3QUSHVlll 


600BPSQIIMCL.1SUlCSSAeE 



600 BPS zmil, 1 so UESSA6E 



FIGURE 4. R-CHANNEL TRANSIT DELAY FOR 2 SU MESSAGE 




TRANSIT DELAY (S) 


6Q0BFSCIWICL,3SUiESSAC£ 



FIGURE 6. R-CHANNEL TRANSIT DEUY FOR 3 SU MESSAGE 


1200 BPS CML. 1 SU MESSAGE 



188 








120QePSaMMEL.2SUyESSAGE 




1200 BPS CHANNEL, 3 SU MESSAGE 



189 











Transit Dda/ (s] 


600 ePSOMia. 3 SU MESSAGE 



600 bps R-dunnel, 3 SU message, 15X occupancy 



190 










Dr. G. Keith Smith 
Manager, Engineering 
Aeronautical Services Division 
INMARSAT 


"An Improved Periodic Reporting System by Satellite" 


Not available for publication 


191 
























PR06RM1S, StAJ^AKDS 
AND INSTIttmONAIi ISSllES 


Hiroki Takeda 

Special Assistant to the Director 
Radio Engineering Division 
Air Traffic Services Department 
The Japan Civil Aviation Bureau 
Ministry of Transport 


Hiroki Takeda graduated from the Keio University in 1975 with a Bachelor of Science in 
Electrical Engineering. He then worked with the Japan Civil Aviation Bureau, Ministry of 
Transport charging with the development of the Radar Data Processing System (RDP). In 
1977 he was transferred to the International Affairs Division, Secretariat to the Minister 
charging with the international technical cooperations to developing countries in transport 
fields. In 1979 he was sent to the Stanford University, CA., where he studied infrastructure 
planning and management, and graduated in 1981 with a Master of Science degree in Civil 
Engineering. 

Following his study abroad, he worked in the Noise Abatement Division, Aerodrome 
Department, Civil Aviation Bureau to forecast the noise contour around the airport. He 
then worked in the Radio Engineering Division, Tokyo Regional Civil Aviation Bureau to 
implement the ATC as well as navigational facilities such as ASR/SSR, RCAG, VOR/DME 
and ILS. 

Mr. Takeda was then transferred to the Business Administration Office, Corporate Planning 
Department, Kansai International Airport Co. Ltd. charging with the preparation of the 
business plan and budget. 

He has been working for the radio engineering division. Civil Aviation Bureau since 1988 
in charge with the new technologies in the aeronautical communications fields. He is now 
involved in the development of data link systems (VHF data link, SSR mode S and AMSS) 
also covering the international activities like ICAO. He is a Japanese nominated member 
of ICAO SICASP (SSR Improvement and Collision Avoidance System Panel) as well as 

AMSSP (Aeronautical Mobile Satellite Services Panel). 

192 








SATELLITE DATA LINK R & D PROGRAM IN JAPAN 

Hiroki Takeda, Special Assistant, Radio Engineering Division, < 

Air TrafTic Services Department, The Japan Civil Aviation Bureau | 


I. I NT RODUCTION 

In parallel with the Automatic 
Dependent Surveillance (ADS) Pacific 
Engineering Trial (PET) program which is 
being initiated by Australia, the United 
States and Japan, the research and 
development (R & D) program called 
"Satellite Data Link" has been promoted in 
Japan. 

Apart from ADS PET program, the 
Aircraft Earth Station (AES) and the 
Ground Earth Station (GES) to be used in 
this satellite data link R & D program arc 
designed to be fully compatible with the 
ICAO AMSS Draft SARPs and 
INMARSAT SDM (System Definition 
Manual). The main purpose of this R & D 
program is to validate the bit oriented 
AMSS system based on the OSI (Open 
System Interconnection) model which is 
now under development in ICAO AMSSP 
(Aeronautical Mobile Satellite Service 
Panel). 


2.-QRlE.CriyE 

The objectives of this satellite data 
link R & D program are to verify the 
AMSS SARPs now under development by 
the ICAO AMSSP, and to develop and 
evaluate ADS as well as ATC data 
communications. 

Overall evaluation of ADS and 
other ATC data communications by air 
traffic controllers is also expected to be 
conducted. 


3^ySIEM-CQN£IG.URAT10N 

The concept of the satellite data 
link R & D program using the 
INMARSAT satellite is shown in Figure 1. 
Although this system configuration seems 
quite simitar to the ADS PET program, 
most of the components except for a space 
segment are different. The aircraft. Ground 
Earth Station (GES) and ground computer 
system arc all different. The details of the 
system components in this program arc 
explained below. 

flLAyjQnics 

The block diagram of the airborne 
system is shown in Figure 2. The avionics 
which will be installed in Electronic 
Navigation Research Institute's (ENRI), 
Ministry of Transport (MOT) B99 
(Bccchcraft) consists of three parts, that is, 
satellite communication part, ADS sensor 
part and communication control & data 
processing part. 

The satellite communication part 
includes a L band low gain antenna, a 
High Power Amplifier (HPA), Low Noise 
Amplifier (LNA), Radio Frequency Unit 
(RFU), Satellite Data Unit (SDU) and SDU 
interfaces. The SDU is being newly 
developed so as to provide the 
communicatioi, functions specified in the 
Draft SARPs. The SDU is capable of 
transmitting R and T channel 
communication signals and receiving P 
channel communication signals. 


193 






The ADS sensor part includes 
Global Positioning System (GPS), Inertial 
Reference Unit (IRU) and a barometric 
altimeter, etc.. The data except for GPS 
and IRU derived ones will be obtained 
through Air Data Computer (ADQ. All 
data will be input throu^ ADS I/F to data 
processing computer. 

The communication control & data 
processing computer part includes two 
laptop computers with different functions. 
The communication control computer has 
functions of link control, data formatting 
for transmission and received data 
reconstruction. The data processing 
computer has functions of ADS message 
creation (position data such as latitude, 
longitude and altitude, weather data) and 
ATC data creation. 

Spectrum analyzer will be used to 
measure basic parameters needed to 
analyze transmission performances such as 
C/Nq and frequency, etc.. 

(2) Satellite 

In this R & D program, the 
International Maritime Satellite 
Organization's (INMARSAT) Pacific 
Ocean Region (POR) satellite as well as 
Indian Ocean Region (lOR) satellite will 
be used. By the time the actual flight test 
begins, it is expected that the second 
generation of INMARSAT POR and lOR 
will be available. Accordingly, a 3 Mhz 
band of AMSS transponders of both 
satellites will be utilized. 


j3UExpcrimcntal-GES 

In this R & D program, the 
experimental GES will be designed and 
procured by ENRI, MOT and it will be 
installed at KDD (Kokusai Densin Denwa 
Co.) Yamaguchi Satellite Communication 


Center for evaluation. The commercial 
GES which is referred to DATA-2 by 
INMARSAT for operational use of I- 
ACARS will be procured and installed by 
KDD at the same Coast Earth Station 
(CES) site. Those two different GESs will 
be interfaced at Intermediate Frequency 
(IIO level. Antenna or Radio Frequency 
(RF) units will be commonly utilized by 
those two GESs. 

The system configuration of the 
experiment GES is shown in Figure 3. The 
experiment GES is composed of IF 
interface part, modem part and protocol 
converter part. The IF interface part will be 
connected with the intermediated frequency 
(70 Mhz) of CES of KDD. 

The modem part is composed of P 
channel modulator, R channel and T 
channel demodulator and the CPU. While 
the P channel modulator supports the 
transmission speed of only 600 bps with 
A-BPSK modulation, the R and T channel 
demodulators support the transmission 
speed of 600 bps and 1,200 bps with A- 
BPSK modulation. The CPU has the 
function of access control and signalling 
based on the bit oriented protocol. 

The protocol converter is composed 
of the laptop computer and m-OSI board to 
support the bit oriented protocol (X.25). 
The protocol converter will be connected 
with modem part through the RS232C with 
the speed of 9,600 bps. 

The measurement system will be 
also implemented at GES site to measure 
the C/Nq and Bit Error Rate (BER) 
characteristics to verify several items on 
modulation/demodulation performances 
specified in the draft SARPs. The C/Nq 
will also be measured during ADS and 
other ATC data communication 
experiments as a basic parameter. 


194 








f4> Ground data network 

In this R & D program, the 
experimental GES will be connected 
directly with the ATC data processing and 
display system located at ENRI, MOT 
through the dedicated leased telephone line 
in order to avoid the transit delay of any 
commercial data link networks. As shown 
in Figure 1., the commercial GES will be 
connected to AVICOM JAPAN'S Data 
Link Computer (DLC) for message 
delivery to airline host computers. 

(5) ATC d ata processin g and display 

syskm 

The ATC data processing and 
display system is composed of computer, 
ADS display, ATC data communication 
terminal and GPS as shown in Fi gure 4. 
The computer has functions of interfacing 
with the experiment GES, communication 
control, ADS display control, ATC 
terminal control and data collection. 

The ADS display will show aircraft 
positions in symbols and other associated 
alphanumerical data in data blocks over 
maps on its screen. 

Received ATC messages wilt be 
shown on the screen of the ATC data 
communication terminal. Transmitted 
messages will be input and compiled 
through simple key in procedures. 

GPS will be used for time and 
position reference. The synchronized time 
reference for the aircraft and the ground 
makes it possible to measure transit delays 
in ADS messages as well as ATC data 
communications. 


While the ICAO Automatic 
Dependent Surveillance Panel (ADSP) is 
now developing the SARPs for ADS, four 
items (latitude/longitude, altitude, time and 
figure of merit (FOM)) must be included 
as a basic ADS information in each 
transmission. The other items such as 
waypoint information and weather 
information may be included when 
requested from the ground. 

As described in 3.(1), the latitude 
and longitude data will be derived from 
cither IRU or GPS. The altitude data will 
be derived from cither barometric altimeter 
or GPS. The GPS time will be used as a 
time reference both on the aircraft and on 
the ground. Since the current navi.^ation 
systems arc not capable to output FOM 
values, the FOM will be input manually. 

The ADS update rates and "on- 
request" data transmission will be 
controlled from the ground when needed. 
While this can be done manually on the 
ground, the airborne system responds 
automatically without any aircrew 
intervention. 

ADS data and ATC data will be 
relayed to ENRI directly through the 
experimental GES at KDD. ADS data as 
well as ATC data will be processed by the 
computer system at ENRI, displayed on a 
high resolution ADS display and recorded 
on MT or Disks at the same time for later 
analysis. 


5. DATA ANALYSIS METHOD 

Though the details of the data 
analysis method have not been determined 
yet, the following items will be at least 
evaluated. 






The level and frequency variations 
in the flight environment will be measured 
for low and medium elevation angles. 
Since the flight distance of B99 is very 
limited, ie. it will fly only over Japanese 
islands, the low elevation angle situation 
will be emulated with the use of lOR 
satellite and the medium elevation angle 
situation will be emulated with the use of 
FOR satellite. 

(2) Measurement of_data transmission 

characteristics. 

The bit error and synchronization 
characteristics will be measured in the 
flight environment for both low and 
medium angles. 

(3) Measurement-Ofj^DS characteristics 

The transit delay characteristics will 
be measured. The GPS system time will be 
used as a time reference for both air and 
ground so that the maximum time 
measurement accuracy can be secured. 

{4)-Eyaiuation. oLADS. applications 

The performance of ADS using 
GPS and INS will be evaluated in terms of 
accuracy and protocol. 

The validation items for each 
section of the draft ICAO AMSS SARPs 
are now under examination. It will be 
coordinated carefully with concerned 
bodies such as ICAO AMSSP and 
INMARSAT. 


6. PROGRAM SCHEDULE 

The program schedule of this 
satellite data link R & D is shown in 
Fi gure 5. The on-board and ground 
systems for this R & D program are now 
under development. They will be 
completed by the end of FY 1991. 
Installation of avionics on the B99 is 
planned in the beginning of FY 1992. 
After installation, experiments and 
evaluations will start. The acquired data 
and experiment results will be made 
available to interested parties and they will 
be used to validate the current draft 
SARPs. 


196 
































c= 

Vi o 

8 



O C •tfHl 

Cl 



ShO C 

■M 

** 

>» 


CC 

••H 

C3 

••HI >» 


c: 


r-l Gt O C9 

CO 

=3 

CX 

CX 8 c: -M 



0) 

^ CO 

bc 

o 


-< 9 A 

c 

o 

c o 

s-« car 


o c 

=3 -•-» 

o o> o> o 

01 c: 

4.1 o 

s 

CO » Kc 

o o 

3 It 

e> V c 

O O Xx^ 

CO •’H 

(X «> 

OO -I-* s> 

X O C. ^ «M -•-» 

B <M 

<o 

0 2: O •-* 

^ ••-4 

O 0) 

CO >> -M 

r-* x: o 

O M O OS 

X= CO u 


CX » wo -M -M O O 

•*< O *<^1 QS CO C 0>« CO 

o ^ sa oo CO »-t « 

03 •rt 

" ..CO O -M 

f ^ li 

\ r-t-r* C 
O -*C 1-^ 


•—• Z ^ ti< Q 
Q_3 3;p::co 


«> 
9“^ rHI 
>% « «> 
X- CO 

<u -•-> 

4-> a> 

•!-> a> *0 
CO c o 

OQ I—I ?■ 


COODPra 



198 


Fig. 2 Experimental Airborne System Block Diagram 

























Modems 



o 

C U 

o > 
& a, — 

» o o tn 

«5 —I C rx 
O O -r* ' 

E-> ^ X 


u 

^ e 

o -!-> »-« 

-J u CO 

o « O 

^ s 

o c -< 

u o 

flu u 




1 









CO 


CO 


CO 

CD 



Q. 

0 

C3, 

0 

0 . 

CSJ 



jD 

CM 

JQ 

03 

xs 

CO 



CD 

CO 

CD 

CO 

CD 

CM 



CD 

03 

CD 

CM 

CD 

CO 



CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

C£ 



03 

oa 

03 

oc 

03 

UK 

. 

f 1 

. 1 


t 



<D 

t—I 

jz a 

O XI 

I o 
cu 2 : 


•o 
x: o 
u e 

I 0) 
Qi Q 


D 
XI 
jC O 

o e 

I 01 
E-« Q 



0) 


u 


<D 


u-l 


U 


(1) 


+> 

iu 

c 

h-f 

H 


I 


r 


N 

( 

'O 

( 

M 


X 

4 J V 

? ^ 


■Z. 

1 

(I4 -H 

2: 


0 

u. i 

OS r-l 

0 


r- 

M T 

■H 





Q U 

Q ni 

X tu 




M to 
sa sa 
o o 

CO CO 


o 

CD 


o 

-«c: 


s»- 

CD 

CD 

CSI 


O 

-c 



o 

a 


199 


Fig.3 Configuration of Experimental GES 












CPU 



Fig.4 Configuration of ATC Data Processing&Display System 










Data Link R&D Program Schedule 



201 


Fiscal Year ( 1 April ^ 31 March 
















SESSION TWO: 
PROGRAMS, STANDARDS 
AND INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES 



B. Richard Climie 
Consultant 
Honeywell, Inc. 


B. Richard Climie is one of RTCA’s designated Technical Advisors and chairman of RTCA 
Special Committee 170. The latter is charged with developing Minimum Operational 
Performance Standards (MOPS) for Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) avionics. 

Since Mr. Climie’s retirement last year as Senior Director - Industry Activities for 
Aeronautical Radio, Inc. (ARINC), he has served as a consultant to the Commercial Flight 
Systems Group of Honeywell, Inc. He is perhaps best known as the Past Chairman of the 
Airlines Electronic Engineering Committee (AEEC). The Committee establishes the 
voluntary "form, fit and function" standards for avionic systems used in civil air transports. 
He also has participated in many international avionics standardization and regulatory 
activities of EUROCAE, ICAO and ITU. 

Mr. Climie is Past President of the Aerospace and Electronics Systems Society of The 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). He was instnimental in developing 
the original ARINC and IEEE versions of the ATLAS language for automatic testing of 
avionics. 

Mr. Climie was educated in southern California where he attended La Verne College and 
UCLA. Prior to joining ARINC in 1962 he held posts of engineer in radio systems and 
installation design at Douglas Aircraft and avionics systems development at Collins Radio. 


203 








Michael D. Rockwell 
Senior Avionics Engineer 
Aeronautical Radio, Inc. 
(AEEC Staff) 


Michael D. Rockwell is an Airline Electronic Engineering Committee (AEEC) Staff Member 
in the Aircraft Telecommunications Systems Group within ARINC’s Industry Activities 
Division. Mr. Rockwell’s primary project responsibilities include providing support for the 
AEEC’s Satellite System Subcommittee, Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) 
Subcommittee, Data Radio Subcommittee and AVPAC Working Group. Mr. Rockwell also 
serves as the secretary to the RTCA Special Committee 172, Future Air-Ground 
Communications for the VHF Aeronautical Band (118-137 MHz). 

Mr. Rockwell obtained a BSEE degree from the University of Lowell in Lowell, 
Massachusetts. He also has an Associate Degree in Applied Science from the Community 
College of the Air Force and is a graduate of the Academy of Military Sciences, McGee 
Tyson AFB in Tennessee. 


205 












SESSION TWO: 
PROGRAMS, STANDARDS 
AND INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES 



W ill i am L. Umbaugh 
Manager 

Automation Engineering Division 
Federal Aviation Administration 


William L. Umbaugh joined the FAA at Erie, PA as an electronics technician trainee and 
progressed to supervisory systems engineer at Cleveland ARTCC before coming to 
headquarters in 1975. . He has held several positions of increasing technical management 
responsibility as program manager, branch manager and Deputy Manager, ATC 
Automation Division prior to assuming his present position in April, 1990. 

Mr. Umbaugh holds an AEE degree from the Pennsylvania State University and has 
completed additional studies at Cleveland State University and American University. He 
has also completed more than 2 years of specialized studies at the FAA Academy in 
Oklahoma City. 

As the Automative Engineering Division Manager, the responsibility encompasses the 
engineering support for the enroute, TMS, technical, and maintenance automation 
programs. 


206 






ODAPS TODAY 

AND ITS ROLE IN FUTURE OCEANIC AUTOMATION 


Presented by: 

William L. Umbaugh 

Manager, Automation Engineering Division, ANA-100 
September 25,1991 


Overview 

• ODAPS Requirements 

• ODAPS Design 

• ODAPS Implementation Status 

• Planned ODAPS Milestones 

• ADS Operational Concept 

• Current ADS Activity 


Oceanic Automat!' 


.Rcquircmcptsior.Q.DAPS 


• Oceanic air traffic control automation for Oakland and New York ARTCCs 

• Dedicated oceanic flight data processing 

• Interfaces with adjacent ARTCCs, ARINC, and NADIN 

• Situation displays 

• Conflict probe 


207 







OPAPS Pgsign 


* Modified NAS en route code 

- Unique adaptation and operational features 


* Conflict probe 

- Algorithms based on FAA Order 7110.83b, Oceanic Air Traffic Control 


• COTS processor complex 

- IBM 4381 mainframe and peripherals 

• Existing NAS displays 


OPAPS ImpIgThgptation Status 

• Commissioned at Oakland ARTCC on December 14,1989 with conflict probe 
inhibited 

- Conflict probe undergoing software refinement 

• Second release of operational software delivered to Oakland ARTCC in 
September 

- Implementation of NCPs developed after commissioning 

• Third release of operational software under development 

- Implementation of NCPs to enhance data input and conflict probe 
performance 


Planned OPAPS Milestones 

• Oakland operational on second release of software - November 1991 

• Contractor delivers third release to FAATC for testing - July 1992 

• Third release delivered to Oakland ARTCC - September 1992 

• New York ARTCC commissions with third release - June 1993 


208 






ODAPS is the FAA certified system selected for ADS enhancements 


CurrcnLADS 


Summan 


• Aircraft position data automatically downlinked via satellite from inertial 
navigation avionics 

• Frequent reports provide near real time position data 

• ADS reporting aircraft are uniquely identified on the situation display 


activity 

• ADS Step 1 contract awarded July 1991 

• PDR scheduled for November 1991 

• CDR scheduled for January 1992 

• First site (Oakland ARTCC) testing - February 1993 

• ADS commissioned - December 1993 

• ODAPS is operational, providing oceanic air traffic control automation 

• Enhancements under development will improve ODAPS utility 

• Implementation of ADS Step 1 — 

- Will improve the accuracy of position data 

- Sets the stage for ADS evolution providing two-way data link and 
controiler/pilot voice communications 


209 




OIZ 



September 25, 1991 







PS TODAY 

ITS ROLE IN FUTURE OCEANIC AUTOMATION 


uz 


<G 

92: 

o< 




0 

c 


• MM 

D 

O) 
• «■■■ 


CT 

0 


0 

0 


DC 

Q 


CO 

CO 


CL 

CL 


< 

< 

0 

Q 

Q 

'E 

0 

> 

0 

0 

0 

• 

• 



a 

Q> 

o 

c 

o 

O 

lo 

c 

o 

1 

(D 

CL 

O 

CO 

Q 

< 


• • • • 


Current ADS Activity 








ODAPS TODAY 

AND ITS ROLE IN FUTURE OCEANIC AUTOMATION 


ZIZ 





(0 

o CO 

CO O 
0 h- 

^ cr 
O < 




Q 

< 



O) 

c 

‘w 

CO 

0 

o 

o 


0 

0 

*D 

•*-* 

sz 

D) 

o 

c 

0 

0 

O 

O 

•D 

0 

lo 

O 

'*D 

0 

Q 


O 

2 

DC 

< 

0 

B 

< 

4-» 

c 

0 

o 

0 

*D 

0 


0 

0 

O 

0 

t: 

0 








0 



ODAPS TODAY 

AND ITS ROLE IN FUTURE OCEANIC AUTOMATION 


£IZ 







ODAPS TODAY 

AND ITS ROLE IN FUTURE OCEANIC AUTOMATION 


w B 
O n 

•D 

0 0 
c n 

.9 2 

0 Q. 

.9 ZT 
£ .9 

§ 

O o 


^ XI 

B E 
0 B 

0 Q. 
(0 0 
o CO 

£ .£ 

c ^ 

8 i 

0 (£ 

CO < 


o S 
c {5 
.9 £ 
tS o 

4 | 

CL 




ODAPS TODAY 

AND ITS ROLE IN FUTURE OCEANIC AUTOMATION 


9TZ 


Q. 

<D 

+-• 

CO 

CO 

Q 

< 


Ql 

0) 

O 

c 

o 

O 

76' 

c 

o 

13 

u. 

0 

Cl 

O 

CO 

Q 

< 


CO 

Q 

< 


T3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

E 

a 

0 

>» 

0 

TJ 

0 

M— 

• MM 

■e 

0 

o 

I 

0 


0 


0 


c 

0 

E 
0 
CO O 

< 0 

Q C 

O 0 


E 

o 

L- 

H- 

0 

+-* 

• MM 

0 

(3 

0 

0 

• MM 

> 

*o 

0 

c 

• •^M 

c 

o 

*o 


0 

O 

IS 

2 .9 

3 ^ 

0 O 
0 *> 
IS ^ 

•D C 

c 2 

.2 13 

.ti C5) 
0 *5 

Ri 

o 

w 0 

< 2 


0 

13 

T3 

C 

o 

• MM 
+-• 

*0 

o 

Q. 

0 

E 


0 

0 


0 

0 

C 

0 

■D 

• MM 
> 
o 

X- 

CL 

•S 

O 

Q. 

0 


C 

0 

D 

CJ 

0 

u. 

LL 


C 

o 

■g 

*0 

0 


T3 

0 


C 

0 

T3 

• MM 

0 

D 

CT 

• MM 

c 

D 

0 

V. 

0 

O 

0 

CJ) 

c 

t; 

o 

CL 

0 >» 
*- 0 

CO CL 
Q .2 

< ■D 







ODAPS TODAY 

AND ITS ROLE IN FUTURE OCEANIC AUTOMATION 








ODAPS TODAY 

AND ITS ROLE IN FUTURE OCEANIC AUTOMATION 


21Z 



bets tne stage tor AUb evolution providing two-way data lin 
and controller/pilot voice communications 






219 



SESSION TWO: 
PROGRAMS, STANDARDS 
AND DJSTITUTIONAL ISSUES 



Dan H. Iredell 
Senior Programmer/Analyst 
ST Systems Corporation 
STX 


Dan H. Iredell has over five years experience in ATC software development. He has 
participated in the design and development of the ODAPS conflict Probe subsystem and 
supported the ODAPS ORD effort in Oakland in December 1989. Mr. Iredell has also 
contributed on the Software Engineering Group in the presentation of the Functional Design 
Review for the Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) function. He received a B.S. 
degree in Computer Science from the University of Maryland. 


220 









SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS IDENTIFIED BY THE NORTH 'ATLANTIC SYSTEMS 
PLANNING GROUP (NAT/SPG) AS RELATED TO THE CAPABILITIES OF THE 
OCEANIC DISPLAY AND PLANNING SYSTEM (ODAPS) 

Dan H. Iredell, 

Rajan Srirangarajan, 

John H. Crimmins, Jr. 

ST Systems Corporation (STX), Lanham, Md. 


INTRODUCTION 

The need for improving 
oceanic Air Traffic Services 
(ATS) is being given significant 
attention by numerous countries 
and forums throughout the world. 
The issues being addressed range 
from concepts, standards, and 
procedures, all the way to 
procurement and implementation 
strategies. Leadership in these 
endeavors has come from the 
International Civil Aviation 
Organization (ICAO). The 
Oceanic Area System Improvement 
Study (OASIS; report (1), 
completed in 1981 under 
sponsorship by the U.S. Federal 
Aviation Administration (FAA) in 
coordination with ICAO, 
quantified the benefits of 
reducing oceanic separation 
standards. The OASIS report 
suggested the use of satellites 
for improved oceanic 
communications, navigation, and 
surveillance (CNS) services as 
one means of attaining these 
benefits. The ICAO Special 
Committee on Future Air 
Navigation Systems (FANS) was 
formed in 1983 to further 
develop the concepts suggested 
in the OASIS report. The Fourth 
Meeting of FANS, held in May of 
1988, produced a report (2) that 


provided a detailed set of 
recommendations and guidelines 
to be applied to the development 
of international standards for 
satellite-based CNS services, 
including automatic dependent 
surveillance (ADS). 

As the future CKS concepts 
began to mature, and new 
technology was becoming more 
readily available, the need to 
coordinate the implementation of 
these new CNS services on an 
international scale became 
apparent. Since the oceanic 
areas are controlled jointly by 
numerous countries sharing 
responsibility, the benefits of 
introducing new concepts cannot 
be fully realized without 
international participation and 
coordination. In recognition of 
this need, the North Atlantic 
Systems Planning Group 
(NAT/SPG), under the auspices of 
ICAO, developed a "System 
Concept Description" for the 
future North Atlantic Air 
Traffic Services (3). This 
document defines a set of 
requirements that need to be met 
to enable realization of the 
recommended concept. 

At the same time that FANS 
was being formed, the FAA 


221 






initiated development of a 
significant new tool to support 
oceanic Air Traffic Control 
(ATC). Referred to as the 
Oceanic Display and Planning 
System (ODAPS), the contract for 
development and implementation 
was awarded to ST Systems 
Corporation (STX) in 1985. Now 
operational in Oakland, 
California, and soon to be 
operational in New York, ODAPS 
inaugurates a new era of oceanic 
ATC. ODAPS introduces to the 
oceanic controller a wide 
spectrum of automation 
capabilities, and a baseline 
infrastructure within which new 
capabilities and improved 
technology can be effectively 
accommodated. 

Much of the functionality 
identified as being desirable by 
OASIS, FANS, and NAT/SPG is 
already provided by ODAPS, 
(Since the NAT/SPG system 
concept has its derivations in 
OASIS and FANS, further 
references to requirements will 
be associated only with the 
NAT/SPG system concept 
description document.) In 
addition to the baseline 
capabilities of ODAPS, STX has 
started work on a recently 
awarded FAA contract to 
implement ADS as an enhancement. 
It is envisioned that the ADS 
enhancement will be closely 
followed by the addition of 
two-way, air-ground datalink 
communications capability. 

This paper intends to 
relate the current, and 
projected, capabilities of ODAPS 
to a set of the most demanding 
requirements included in the 
NAT/SPG system concept 
description. Specifically, this 


paper will address controller- 
pilot communications, position 
report processing, conflict 
prediction, and human-computer 
interfaces. Each of these 
subject areas will be assessed 
relative to three environments: 
(1) non-ODAPS (i.e., the manual, 
procedural environment that is 
currently dominant throughout 
the world); (2) ODAPS; and (3) 
ADS/datalink ^.e., enhancements 
to ODAPS). 


CONTROLLER/PILOT COMMUNICATIONS 

NAT/SPG identifies direct 
controller/pilot communication 
as an area where there is need 
for improvement. Much benefit 
could also be realized by 
improving computer-to-computer 
communications (e.g., ground- 
based inter-facility as well as 
between ground and airborne 
systems). 

Non-ODAPS 

Communications between the 
pilot and the controller 
currently relies on High 
Frequency (HF) radio and a 
ground station operator. The 
pilot transmits position reports 
and any other ATC messages, such 
as flight profile change 
requests, by voice on the HF 
radio. In the U.S. oceanic 
airspace, these HF messages are 
received by Aeronautical Radio, 
Inc. (ARINC) , where they are 
transcribed and entered over a 
teletype interface and sent 
directly to a printer at the 
controlling oceanic sector. Any 
messages initiated by the 
controller for transmission to 
the pilot are first conveyed to 
the HF operator by telephone and 


222 






then relayed to the pilot over 
HF radio. 

ODAPS 

In ODAPS, the mode of 
communication between the 
oceanic ATC center and the 
aircraft is the same as in the 
non-ODAPS environment. However, 
since there is a one-way 
datalink between the HF operator 
and ODAPS, transcribed position 
report messages from the pilot 
are automatically received and 
processed. Messages are routed 
and displayed to the appropriate 
sector controller for action. 
This highlights an opportunity 
for immediate improvement by 
enhancing ODAPS to provide a 
digital datalink in the other 
direction, from the controller 
to the HF operator. This link 
would enable ODAPS to provide 
automatic message generation for 
the controller to approve and 
convey to the HF operator 
quickly and easily, eliminating 
the need for a telephone/voice 
link i’^ iiiost circumstances. It 
would also provide the 
controller with the tools to 
implement a future direct 
controller-to-pilot datalink 
interface. 

ODAPS has the capability to 
communicate with a number of 
other external systems, 
including adjacent Air Route 
Traffic Control Centers (ARTCC), 
the Aeronautical Fixed 
Telecommunications Network 
(AFTN) and the Service B network 
through the National Airspace 
Data Interchange Network 
(NADIN), and the North American 
Air Defense Command (NORAD). 


ADS/Datalink 

The earliest phase of ADS 
will implement the capability 
for automatic transmission of 
ADS position reports, derived 
from on-board avionics, to the 
oceanic ATC center via a 
satellite datalink. Future 
enhancements will provide a two- 
way datalink between the pilot 
and the controller. Rapid and 
reliable direct controller/pilot 
communication over the datalink 
will provide the capability to 
relay both routine and non¬ 
routine messages rapidly and 
accurately. If the pilot 
desires to change the flight 
profile while in flight, he or 
she can request the change over 
the datalink, and the controller 
can process the request 
expeditiously. If the request 
is approved, the controller can 
transmit the clearance over the 
datalink. The pilot can 
acknowledge the clearance and 
indicate compliance intentions. 
These messages can be 
standardized or free-form, 
however, the standardization of 
format and content will require 
international participation and 
coordination. The oceanic ATC 
automation system could also 
have the capability to directly 
exchange data with the on-board 
Flight Management System (FMS). 

Benefits 

The use of the satellite 
datalink in lieu of HF 
communication will mitigate the 
problems of misinterpretation 
and ambiguity that are 
associated with verbal exchanges 
over an often noisy and 
unreliable transmission medium. 
Increased reliability in pilot- 


223 






controller communications will 
make the oceanic ATC system more 
responsive to the ever- 
increasing demands of the user 
community. 

ADS reports are 
automatically generated and 
transmitted with minimal pilot 
involvement. Elimination of the 
human link in the communication 
path between the aircraft and 
the flight data processing 
computer will reduce the 
possibility of human error. 

The applications and 
benefits of direct 
controller/pilot communication 
via datalink are extensive. The 
ability to communicate directly 
with airborne and ground-based 
systems, as well as directly 
between pilots and controllers, 
using a standardized set of 
messages, will help reduce both 
pilot and controller workload, 
speed communication response 
times, and enable the oceanic 
airspace to be utilized more 
efficiently. 


POSITION REPORT PROCESSING 

The acquisition, checking 
and tracking of flight position 
information are the primary 
functions of an air traffic 
controller in an oceanic ATC 
system. The change from manual 
techniques and infrequent 
reports to the automated 
processing of periodically 
generated and transmitted ADS 
reports is one of the 
significant benefits to be 
provided to air traffic 
controllers though improvements 
in communication and automation. 
NAT/SPG identifies clearance 


compliance and conformance 
monitoring as important 
functions to be automated. 

Non-ODAPS 

At present, the North 
Atlantic airspace is largely 
without radar surveillance. The 
voice-generated HF position 
reports typically arrive once 
every 30-60 minutes for most 
trans-Atlantic flights. 
Controllers manually perform the 
comparison of the reported 
altitude, waypoints and times 
against those printed on the 
flight strips. 

ODAPS 

ODAPS provides the 
controller with a wide variety 
of tools to assist with many of 
the previously manual tasks 
involved in processing position 
reports. The current ODAPS 
environment supports the 
processing of the HF position 
reports and pilot requests by 
directly connecting the teletype 
link from the ground operators 
into ODAPS. The reports and 
requests are processed and 
displayed to controllers on a 
display screen. Additionally, 
the position, altitude and any 
weather information is extracted 
and used to automatically update 
the flight's position. 

ODAPS currently performs 
conformance monitoring and 
clearance compliance on the 
position reports by matching the 
reported altitude and present 
position, as well as the next 
and next-plus-one waypoints 
against the cleared flight plan. 
Any discrepancies in the 
reported altitude, waypoints and 


224 



times are highlighted on a 
display for the controller. 
ODAPS is designed to 
automatically invoke the 
Conflict Probe function 
(described in the next section) 
when position reports are 
received. Together with the 
position information, ODAPS uses 
the winds aloft data contained 
in the position reports to 
update the database of wind 
stations which are used to more 
accurately calculate times of 
arrivals for other flights. 
This contributes to the accuracy 
of the Conflict Probe function. 
In addition, when a flight has 
not submitted a position report 
within a specified time after 
passing an expected reporting 
fix, ODAPS automatically informs 
the controller. 

ADS/Datalink 

NAT/SPG has identified a 
need to replace HF reports with 
ADS reports. The ADS reporting 
rate will be much more frequent 
than that provided by pilots 
through HF. While the reporting 
rate can range from every twenty 
minutes to every ten seconds, 
the nominal rate is expected to 
be once every five minutes. The 
controller will be able to 
adjust the rate of the 
transmission of the reports. 
When the ADS function is 
implemented, the ADS position 
reports will be compared to the 
cleared flight plan using three 
conformance checks: vertical, 
lateral, and longitudinal. 
Conformance conditions will be 
based on adjustable parameters 
to define the tolerance 
envelope, and the controller 
will be alerted if the reports 
deviate significantly from the 


cleared route. As changes in 
separation standards evolve over 
time, the adjustable parameters 
can be changed to reflect new 
demands and requirements. When 
the ADS reports are in 
conformance, they will be used 
to automatically update the 
flight position. If the checks 
indicate significant 
longitudinal deviations from the 
cleared route, the Conflict 
Probe function will be 
automatically invoked. The 
automation system will monitor 
the means by which the flights 
are reporting their positions in 
a mixed environment, i. e., 
through either ADS or HF, and 
adjust the separation criteria 
accordingly. 

Benefits 

ODAPS provides many 
automated tools to assist the 
controller in processing 
position information. It can 
automatically perform many of 
the tasks which were previously 
performed manually. A study was 
made on the processing of HF 
position reports by the 
operational Oakland ODAPS system 
during days in January, May and 
June 1990. It showed that even 
though there is variability in 
the format of the HF reports, 
ODAPS was able to process more 
than 84% of the received 
position reports, and more than 
72% of them were within the 
conformance checks and were used 
to update the flight plan 
database automatically. Since 
that time, the rate of reports 
processed has continued to 
improve to over 90%. 

NAT/SPG has identified the 
lack of real-time surveillance 


225 





as the major shortcoming 
affecting the vast majority of 
the North Atlantic Region. The 
ADS capability both in the 
aircraft and the air traffic 
control systems is a necessary 
and fundamental building block 
with which many of the planned 
improvements in the oceanic 
region will be realized. The 
automated conformance monitoring 
function helps ensure that a 
flight remains on its cleared 
flight plan by detecting 
waypoint insertion errors and 
other blunders. The greater 
frequency and reliability of the 
ADS position reports provides an 
increased degree of confidence 
in the knowledge of aircraft 
position that could be used to 
support a reduction in 
separation standards. 


CONFLICT PREDICTION 

NAT/SPG identifies conflict 
prediction and conflict 
resolution as essential 
functions to be automated. 
NAT/SPG states that a conflict 
prediction function is required 
in order to ensure a conflict- 
free path of a length deemed 
appropriate at each stage of CNS 
evolution. 

Non-ODAPS 

In most of the North 
Atlantic region, conflict 
prediction and separation 
assurance are achieved manually 
without the use of a computer. 
The methods used include visual 
inspection and comparison of 
flight strips, and tracking of 
aircraft position manually on 
maps. 


ODAPS 

ODAPS has a conflict 
prediction function, called 
Conflict Probe, that examines a 
cleared flight plan for 
conflicts and informs the 
controller of any predicted loss 
of separation. Conflict Probe 
is invoked automatically by 
flight plan activation, flight 
plan amendment, receipt of a HF 
position report, or periodically 
if an aircraft's data has not 
changed over an adjustable 
period of time. Conflict Probe 
can also be invoked directly by 
controller request. An 
adjustable parameter within the 
look-ahead function specifies 
how far in the future the 
Conflict Probe function should 
inspect an aircraft's flight 
path for conflict. 

The ODAPS Conflict Probe is 
able to monitor air traffic in 
an airspace that has varying 
separation criteria. ODAPS uses 
discrete separation minima with 
regard to aircraft type (e.g., 
turbojet), the Minimum 
Navigation Performance 
Specification (MNPS), and 
altitude stratum, which allows 
aircraft with different 
characteristics to have 
different separation criteria 
applied. In the event of 
changes to the definition of the 
separation standards, such as 
use of the Required Navigation 
Performance Capability (RNPC) 
criteria instead of MNPS, the 
Conflict Probe parameters can be 
easily modified to reflect these 
changes. 

Conflict Probe also has the 
capability to check for a 
conflict situation between an 


226 






aircraft and temporary airspace 
reservations or warnihg areas. 
These airspace reservations are 
dynamic; they can be activated 
or de-activated while the system 
is operational. 

ODAPS allows the controller 
to use the Conflict Probe 
function to perform "What if?" 
trial amendments to check for 
potential conflict resolutions 
without changing the flight plan 
database. The controller can 
manually attempt different trial 
flight plan amendments before 
selecting one of them. This 
feature can be applied to 
cleared flight plans as well as 
to flights that have not yet 
entered the airspace. Although 
this is not a fully automated 
conflict resolution function, it 
does provide the controller a 
means of resolving conflicts 
using an automated tool. 

ADS/Datalink 

With the advent of ADS, the 
Conflict Probe function will 
also be applied to the ADS 
position reports. If there is a 
sufficient deviation between the 
ADS position report and the 
cleared flight plan, the probe 
function will be automatically 
invoked. 

The availability of direct 
two-way communications between 
the pilot and controller using 
datalink will enable rapid 
coordination of resolutions to 
potential conflicts. 

Benefits 

The automation of conflict 
prediction, through Conflict 
Probe, reduces controller 


workload and enhances safety. 
By providing advance warning of 
a potential conflict situation, 
the controller is able to 
evaluate alternative solutions. 
Thus Conflict Probe offers a 
margin of safety that may 
eventually result in a reduction 
in the required separation 
between aircraft. Such 
reductions would enable 
increased airspace capacity and 
provide more freedom for 
aircraft to fly their preferred 
routes. 


HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERFACES 

NAT/SPG states the human- 
computer interfaces (HCI) should 
optimize the system display 
capabilities by providing the 
controller a highly effective 
interface to the ATC system. 

NAT/SPG emphasizes that the 
controller's role in the 
automated system must be that of 
decision maker. ATC automation 
should be designed to 
increasingly relieve controllers 
from the repetitive and routine 
tasks required in manual 
systems. 

Non-ODAPS 

Many existing oceanic ATC 
systems rely heavily on manual 
procedures. While domestic 
systems have undergone 
significant upgrades, the 
oceanic ATC systems have 
remained essentially unchanged 
for many decades. The current 
method of monitoring oceanic air 
traffic is dependent on paper 
flight progress strips that 
require manual updating by the 


227 



controller on the basis of the 
HF position reports. 

ODAPS 

ODAPS provides improved HCI 
to the oceanic controller 
through automation functions 
specifically developed for 
oceanic ATC. Newly available to 
the oceanic controller is a 
situation display of the flights 
under his or her control- ODAPS 
employs a Plan View Display 
(PVD) that is similar to those 
used in a radar environment for 
the monitoring of air traffic. 
It provides the controller a 
visual picture of the airspace, 
including aircraft positions, 
airspace map and tabular list 
information. In each sector, 
along with the situation 
display, ODAPS provides the 
controller a Flight Data 
Input/Output (FDIO) device. The 
FDIO provides the controller the 
capability to examine and modify 
the flight plan database and to 
display informational alerts and 
updates, including the HF 
position reports and requests. 
The FDIO printer provides paper 
flight progress strips. The 
FDIO and the PVD facilitate the 
traffic monitoring capabi7.ity. 

An internal research and 
development effort at STX has 
begun to develop an FDIO 
replacement. It will address 
controller needs in the areas of 
improved display and management 
of messages. It will allow the 
recall and free-text search of 
messages already received and 
will operate on an off-the-shelf 
workstation with a color display 
and with a modern windowing 
environment. Its programming 
flexibility will allow for 


future enhemcements in the HCI 
for the controller. These 
enhamcements could include the 
automation of the processing of 
pilot requests, such as altitude 
changes. 

ADS/Datalink 

STX has also begun an 
internal research and 
development effort to develop a 
Situation Display to replace the 
current PVD. This situation 
display would run on a 
workstation similar to the one 
used for the FDIO replacement 
and provide the controller with 
an improved HCI not available on 
the current equipment. 

Enhancements to a 
replacement FDIO system could be 
accomplished to provide a 
controller workstation to 
efficiently develop and manage 
the messages used in two-way 
datalink communications. 

Benefits 

Improvements to automation 
take human performance 
capabilities into account and 
are designed to assist the 
controller in performing complex 
activities. For example, it can 
be very time-consuming for a 
controller to determine through 
manual processes whether a 
flight requesting a random route 
has sufficient separation from 
other flights. In contrast, 
there is basically no difference 
in the effort required of an 
automated Conflict Probe 
function to examine a random or 
organized route. As traffic 
levels and the demand for rr.ndom 
routes increase, it may become 
increasingly difficult for 


228 





controllers to mentally 
visualize the air traffic 
situation solely from flight 
strip information. The 
improvements provided by ODAPS 
and ADS/datalink will help 
optimize the interfaces between 
the pilot, the controller, and 
their respective automation 
systems. 


LOOKING TO THE FUTURE 

It is clear that the 
technology and functionality 
associated with oceanic Air 
Traffic Services are rapidly and 
continually evolving. As 
planned enhancements are 
implemented, new ideas emerge 
that result in new developments, 
always taking advantage of the 
capabilities of new technology. 
Migrating from mainframe 
computers to more flexible and 
powerful workstations is one 
example of system evolution. 

From a functional 
perspective, it is possible to 
envision the use of dynamically 
changing separation standards, 
by associating RNPC categories 
with the performance level of 
the on-board navigation system 
as identified by the 
Figure-of-Merit (FOM). The FOM 
would be included in each ADS 
report that is downlinked to the 
oceanic ATC Center. The 
required separation between 
aircraft would be based on their 
respective FOMs. The 
ground-based automation system 
would continually monitor the 
FOM and position of each 
aircraft, and alert the 
controller if the FOM was 
degrading to a point that would 
require intervention in order to 


maintain an adec[uate margin of 
separation. 

As weather models become 
more accurate, a time can also 
be envisioned where flight 
profiles are changed dynamically 
through direct interaction 
between the on-board Flight 
Management System (FMS) and 
ground-based databases. Both 
the pilot and controller would 
be kept aware of recommended 
changes in the flight profile 
through computer-generated 
messages. 

Adjacent oceanic centers 
would be continually sharing 
flight information data that 
would ensure consistency between 
all databases and ATC centers 
associated with a particular 
flight. This degree of 
inter-facility coordination, 
computer-to-computer, would 
enable center handoffs to be 
performed without the need for 
intervention by the pilot or 
controller. 

As future enhancements are 
implemented, the ultimate 
objective of global travel using 
standards and procedures that 
make crossing of international 
boundaries transparent to the 
pilot will become closer to 
reality. 

ODAPS has already shown the 
ability to accommodate new 
capabilities and new technology. 
This same flexibility enables 
tailoring to whatever 
requirements of a procedural 
nature that may be imposed. 
NAT/SPG has provided a concept, 
and ODAPS provides a means for 
implementation. 


229 







REFERENCES 


(1) Couluris, 6.J., and Conrad, 
B., Oceanic Area System 
Improvement Study (OASIS), 
Volume I: Executive Sinnmary and 
Improvement Alternatives 
Development and Analysis, FAA 
Report No. FAA-EM-81-17,1, SRI 
International, Menlo Park, 
California, September 1981 

(2) Report of the Fourth Meeting 
of the Special Committee on 
Future Air Navigation Systems 
(FANS/4), International Civil 
Aviation Organization (ICAO), 
Montreal, Canada 2-20 May 1988 

(3) The Future North Atlantic 
Air Traffic Services System 
Concept Description, North 
Atlantic Systems Planning Group 
(NAT/SPG), International Civil 
Aviation Organization (ICAO), 
Montreal, Canada, draft received 
February 1991 


230 







CO-AimOBS 



Rajan Srirangarajan 
Senior Systems Engineer 
ST Systems Corporation (STX) 

Rjyan Srirangar^an was involved with 
system integration and testing for ODAPS. 
His prior assignments include technical 
evaluation of the Display software in the 
Advanced Automation System for the FAA. 
His interests include software design, 
prototyping the concepts and software 
methodology. Mr. Srirangarajan holds 
M.S. degrees in Computer Science, 
Chemical Engineering, and Petroleum 
Engineering, and has over ten years 
experience in the area of Computer Science. 



John H. Crimmins, Jr. 

Software Development Manager 
ST Systems Corporation (STX) 

John H. Crinunins, Jr. has been involved in 
the development of ODAPS and its 
enhancements including the inclusion of the 
ADS function, since joining STX in 1986. 
He has over eleven years experience in the 
design and development of interactive 
computer systems. He received his B.A. 
degree with distinction in (Experimental) 
Psychology from the University of 
Rochester. Mr. Crimmins is a member of 
the Association for Computing Machinery. 


231 








msmmmim 

y /■*•■•/M''rf4f ‘ '-V' r ”/ ' 

V" y- 'f yy/y , yy - - ,y yy /Vyy-yyyyy ^ 

]PiM)L DISCBSlaM 
" 7 %^ Sttxtm 

Variousand SATG<^ 


PANFJ, MEMBERS 


B. Richard Cliinie 
Consultant 
Honeywell, Inc. 


James C. Growling 
Program Analyst 
and Aviation Inspector 
Federal Aviation Administration 
Flight Standards Service 


Joseph T. Fee 

Oceanic Systems Manager 

Federal Aviation Administration 


R. Andrew Pickens 
Principal 
AvCom, Inc. 


W. Frank Price 
Manager 

International Proceedures Branch 
Federal Aviation Administration 


G. Keith Smith 

Manager 

Engineering Aeronautical 
Services Division 
INMARSAT 


233 














ONLY THOSE BIOGRAPHIES ARE LISTED THAT DO NOT 
APPEAR ELSEWHERE. 


James C. Growling 
Federal Aviation Administration 


James J. Growling, Jr. is a Program Analyst and Aviation Inspector in FAAs Flight Standards 
Service. He is Flight Standards Global Positioning Satellite Systems Operational Implementation 
Coordinator. He coordinate the activities of the FAAs operational services in order to ensure 
the international and domestic satellite navigation and communication requirements are 
systematically implemented. 

Mr. Growling was a Program Analyst in the Office of Safety Policy and Programs from 1988 
to 1989. He was the FAA’s Program Manager to research, develop and evaluate, for national 
consideration, an innovative new concept in charting VFR routes to safely navigate in and around 
TCA’s, ARSA’s, and airport traffic areas in highly congested airspace areas. 

Mr. Growling was the manager of the United States Notice to Airman Office Facility (USNCF), 
Flight Procedures and Airspace Branch and Airports and Navigation Aids Branch from 1977 to 
1987. 

As an Air Reserve Technician in the Department of Defense from 1972 to 1977, he was the 
primary Flight Examiner Navigator for the Air Force Reserve Airlift Wing. 

He obtained a Bachelor of Science degree from Old Dominion University. 


234 























ONLY THOSE BIOGRAPHIES ARE LISTED THAT DO NOT 
APPEAR ELSEWHERE. 


R. Andrew Pickens 
AVCOM 

Mr. Pickens has an extensive background in aeronautical communications, navigation and 
surveillance systems, and in data communications networks. He currently is Chairman, RTCA 
SC-165, writing Minimum Operational Performance Standards (MOPS) for Aeronautical Mobile 
Satellite Services (AMSS), and Chairman of its System/Service Performance Criteria Working 
Group. He is active in numerous other RTCA and related AEEC projects involving 
communications, data links and airspace management technologies; is a member of the U.S. 
Aeronautical Mobile Communications Panel (AMCP) Technical Advisory Group; and is a 
member of the FAA Advisory Committee. 

Mr. Pickens is Principal of AvCom, Inc., a consulting firm providing services to government 
and industry in CNS, with emphasis on the special requirements of the aviation community. 
Previously, he has served as Chief Engineer and Vice-President, Industry Affairs, with 
Aeronautical Radio (ARINC); as Director of Research and Advanced Systems, Contel Page 
Engineers; and as head of Communications and Radar Departments with Bendix Communications 
Division. He is internationally recognized in his fields of expertise, and is the author of 
numerous publications and presentations. Mr. Pickens is a Senior Member of IEEE and 
AFCEA. 


235 














SESSION THREE: LINK ENVIRONMENT/AVIONICS INTEGRATION 


Wednesday, September 25,1991 

Session Chairperson - Elizabeth L Young, PhD, Vice President Aeronautical Services, 

COMSAT 


2:00 INMARSAT Access Approval - Johnny Nemes, Group Leader, AES Engineering, 

INMARSAT 

2:20 Operational SATCOM: Moving from Trials to Service - David W. Lipke, 

Director of Government Aviation, COMSAT 

2:40 The FAA/ARINC Initial Implementation of AMSS - An^s D. McEachen III, 

Senior Director, Civil Aviation Services, Aeronautical Radio, Inc., (ARINC) 

3:00 BREAK sponsored by COMSAT 

3:20 SITA Satellite Air Communicf’‘:ons Implementation - Graham C. Lake, 

Deputy Director International Relations, Societe Internationale de 
Telecommunications Aeronautiques (SITA). 

3:40 ADS Integration into the Flight Management Computer - Ingeborg L. Ray, 

Staff Engineer, Communications Management, Honeywell, Inc. 

4:00 International Organization for Standardization (ISO) Protocols - Stephen P. 

Van Trees, Senior Systems Engineer, Stanford Telecommunications 

4:20 Panel Discussion: Evolutionary Implementation of Satellite 

Communications 

Panel Members: 

Keith Smith, INMARSAT Angus D. McEachen, ARINC 
David W. Lipke, COMSAT William B. Garner, AMSC 
Graham C. Lake, SITA Hal F. Ludwig, FAA 

5:00 Closing Remarks - Master of Ceremonies - Joseph J. Fee 


237 






SESSION THREE: 

LINK ENVIRONMENT/AVIONICS 
INTEGRATION 

SESSION CHAIRPERSON 



Elizabeth L. Young, Ph.D 
Vice President Aeronautical Services 
COMSAT 


Elizabeth L. Young is currently Vice President, Aeronautical Services, in COMSAT’s 
Mobile Communications division. She has previously served as Vice President, INMARSAT 
Policy and Representation and joined COMSAT initially as Vice President for Sales and 
Marketing in COMSAT General Corporation. 

For five years, Dr. Young was President of the Public Service Satellite Consortium, a 
membership organization that pioneered in the use of communications satellites for public 
service. During her tenure with PSSC, she also served as President of its subsidiary. 
Services by Satellite, Inc. 

Prior to her work in the satellite industry. Dr. Young held a number of positions in public 
broadcasting, including the directorship of the public radio and television stations at The 
Ohio State University, Executive Director of the Kansas Public Television Commission, and 
Director of Station Relations for National Public Radio. 

Dr. Young holds degrees from Columbia University in New York and The American 
University in Washington, D.C. She completed her undergraduate work at Wellesley 
College in Massachusetts. 

She has published widely in professional journals and has chapters in several books about 
public broadcasting, cable television, communication satellites and instructional media. 

Dr. Young resides in Alexandria Virginia. 


239 






SESSION THREE: 

LINK ENVmONMENT/AVlONICS 
INTEGRATION 



Johnny Nemes 

Group Leader, AES Engineering 
Aeronautical Services Division 
INMARSAT 


Johnny Nemes has been involved over the last eight years with the development, testing and 
Inmarsat approval of satcom terminals. He is currently Group Leader of AES Engineering, 
a group with responsibility on the development of the technical requirements for Aircraft 
Earth Stations and the development and application of the Inmarsat Access Approval 
procedures. 

Mr. Nemes has participated in many Inmarsat activities during the past several years, 
including responsibility for the setting up of the Inmarsat test facilities and its associated 
activities, e.g., development of new services and new applications for existing services. He 
was recruited by Inmarsat from Brazil, where he worked for the communications division 
of Telefunken with the development of communications equipment for the local market. 


240 





INMARSAT ACCESS APPROVAL 

Johnny Nemos 

Aeronautical Services Division, Inmarsat, London, England 


ABSTRACT 

This paper describes the Inmarsat Access 
Approval Process that each new SATCOM 
installation type (i.e., Aircraft Earth Station • AES) 
must go through. The understanding of the 
Inmarsat approval process will help avionics and 
antenna manufacturers to plan the future activities 
required for timely and successful Implementation 
of the ADS/SATCOM program. 

The objectives and details of the Inmarsat 
approval process and the testing required are 
described, including information on the entity that 
has the responsibility for leading the approval, the 
AES Integrator. 

The paper concludes with a brief description of 
the "commissioning” tests that will be carried out on 
each example of an AES installation, of an access 
approved type, before entering service. 

INTRODUCTION 

As part of the Inmarsat convention [1], the 
Inmarsat Council has responsibility for the adoption 
of criteria and procedures for the approval of earth 
stations having access to and utilization of the 
Inmarsat space segment. The piimaiy purpose of 
the access approval process adopted by the 
Inmarsat Council is intended to ensure that AESs 
operating within the Inmarsat satellite network will 
not endanger the integrity of the system. In 
addition, it is intended to ensure that the service 
quality objectives have been achieved. 

It is important that entities considering the 
manufacture, integration, installation and use of 
SATCOM avionics for Automatic Dependent 
Surveillance (ADS) have full understanding of this 
approval process. This should allow these entities 
to plan properly this important milestone. 


INMARSAT ACCESS APPROVAL 

The "Access Approval Procedures for Inmarsat 
Aircraft Earth Stations" document (Module 6 of the 
Inmarsat Aeronautical System Definition Manual) [2] 
describes the formalities and testing required to 
obtain Inmarsat access approval. This section 
provides a summary of this approval process. 

Definitions 

Aircraft Earth Station (AES); An aircraft radio 
station capable of communicating through satellites. 
An AES is composed of a set of subsystems, 
including antenna(s), transmitter(s), receiver(s) and 
the dedicated control equipment. For an AES 
configured according to ARINC Characteristics 741, 
it includes the antenna, diplexer, LNA, HPA, RFU 
and SDU and the relevant interwiring. 

AES Installation-. A specific example of an AES 
installation type. 

AES Installation Type: An AES defined by its 
configuration details on an specific airframe in 
terms of Part and Drawing Numbers. 

AES Integrator. An entity that defines an AES 
installation type for use in the Inmarsat system in 
terms of its constituent subsystems and interwiring. 
The Integrator is the entity that applies for access 
approval and has responsibility for the 
demonstration of compliance with the relevant 
Inmarsat technical requirements. 

Ground Earth Station (GES): A fixed ground station 
which interworks with AESs via satellite, and 
interconnects them to terrestrial communication 
networks. 


241 



Inmarsat Access Approvat. Approval by Inrnarsat of 
an AES installation type, following satisfactory 
completion of tests which demonstrate that it 
complies with Inmarsat requirements. 

Inmarsat AES commissioning: The process of 
bringing a newly-installed AES (of access approved 
types) into service, involving an administrative 
procedure and a series of "checkout” tests. 

General 

An application for access approval of an AES 
Installation Type must be submitted by an AES 
Integrator, which shouid be forwarded to the 
Inmarsat headquarters in London. The AES 
Integrator may be an airframe manufacturer, 
subsystem manufacturer, company involved with 
aircraft modifications, completions, overhauis, or 
other specialized body. 

Oniy complete AES installations are access 
approved, and currently there Is no provision for the 
approval of Individual subsystems. But, for antenna 
subsystems, on request, Inmarsat can provide to 
an antenna manufacturer an assessment on the 
access approvability of AES installations fitted with 
his antenna. Access approval testing is done only 
on the first example of each new AES installation 
type and consists of two main phases. These are 
laboratory/bench tests, which are called phase 1 
tests, and installed/over the satellite tests, which 
are called phase 2 tests. 

The duration of the approval process is mostly 
driven by the quality and timing of the submissions 
made by the AES Integrator. A typical access 
approval process, for a completely new set of 
avionics and for an AES Integrator with previous 
Inmarsat approval experience, should take between 
4 to 6 months. 

Phase 1 Teats 

Phase 1 testing is intended to demonstrate in a 
laboratory or comparable context, that the AES 
installation type complies with the relevant Inmarsat 
technical requirements. Annex 1 to Module 6 [2] 
provides an outline of the minimum tests, including 
environmental tests. The AES Integrator is 
responsible for submitting to Inmarsat, for review, 
a proper phase 1 test plan and procedures. Upon 
approval of the test plan and procedures, the AES 


Integrator will carry out the tests and submit the 
test results to Inmarsat. 

This phase of testing also Includes extensive 
validation of the protocols implemented in the AES. 
Inmarsat Is developing an access approval test 
system (AATS) with the objective of expediting the 
protocol tests. Figures 1, 2 and 3 show block 
diagrams of the concept of this test system. It uses 
ISO-9646 conformance test methodology [3] and 
the test suite logic is written in ISO-9646 specified 
’TTCN’ language (Tree & Tabular Combined 
Notation). One requirement for the application of 
the test system is the implementation (on the AES 
under test) of the ’Delayed Echo Application’ (which 
is an optional requirement). Design details, 
including the necessary software, of the test system 
will be made available free of charge to 
manufacturers. 

The phase 1 of the approval process represents 
almost 95% of the approval effort. 

Phase 2 Tests 

Phase 2 testing is intended as a final validation 
of the performance of the installed AES over the 
satellite against an operational GES. The phase 2 
tests are scheduled only after successful 
completion of the phase 1 tests. It should take as 
little time as possible to minimize use of satellite 
and aircraft time for tests. Annex 2 to Module 6 [2] 
provides the phase 2 test procedures. The exact 
contents and duration of the phase 2 tests will 
depend on the type of services that the AES will 
support. 

For AES installations using a set of antenna 
and avionics that have not been part of a 
previously access approved installation, it includes 
ground and flight tests. In other situations, the 
requirement for a flight test, is reviewed on a case 
by case basis. 

Inmarsat Test Witnessing 

An Inmarsat representative will witness a 
selected number of the approval tests. The 
selection is made after the phase 1 test results 
have been submitted to Inmarsat, in some cases, 
an Inmarsat representative will also witness the 
phase 2 tests. 


242 







Access Approval Status 

Inmarsat has already access approved several 
AES Installation types. These include Data-1 AESs 
for ACARS and AIRCOM services and Voice-1 
AESs for public telephone services. There are a 
number of other AES installations that are under 
approval. The following aircrafts have already been 
fitted with access approved AES installations: 
Boeing 727, 737 and 747, LI 011, Gulfstream GIV 
and Gill, Canadair Challenger and Falcon 900. 

RTCA MOPS 

It has been an Inmarsat aim to develop test 
requirements that are compatible with those for the 
fulfilment of other national and international testing 
requirements (e.g.. Minimum Operational 
Performance Standards for AMSS, under 
development by RTCA SC 165). This aim has the 
objective of minimizing of the amount of tests that 
may need to be carried out by AES Integrators to 
satisfy Inmarsat test requirement and those test 
requirements of aviation authorities. For this 
reason, Inmarsat has been very active in the 
relevant aviation forums in the pursuit of a high 
degree of commonality, where possible, in the test 
requirements. 

It is dear that there is a need to avoid the 
duplication of testing, i.e., access approval, 
certification, etc. To achieve this goal, a working 
group has been created by Inmarsat to study 
possible streamlining and delegation of 
responsibility of access approval activities. 
Members of this group Include representatives of 
the aviation industry and Inmarsat signatories. 

INMARSAT COMMISSIONING 

Before an AES can be authorised to operate via 
the Inmarsat space segment, Inmarsat must be 
satisfied that: 

it is of an access approved type, 

it has been installed properly, 

the user is legally authorised to operate it, and 

proper arrangements have been made for the 

payment of satellite service usage charges. 

The above is verified during the commissioning 
of the AES installation. Only access approved AES 


installation types are considered for commissioning. 
An application for commissioning, using the 
relevant forms, has to be submitted to Inmarsat via 
the national routing organisation (RO). A copy of 
the notification, from the relevant aviation authority, 
of the aircraft’s 24-bit technical address must be 
attached to the commissioning application. The RO 
wll work with the applicant to ensure that the 
application form is completed correctly and will act 
as a link between Inmarsat and the applicant. The 
RO is responsible for ensuring that the user 
complies with all applicable national and 
international regulations concerning its licensing, 
installation, operation and use. 

The commissioning tests will take place after 
the application has been approved by Inmarsat. 
These consist of a series of simple end-to-end tests 
that are needed to verify that the new AES 
Installation functions properly. For SATCOM 
ADS applications, the Inmarsat commissioning test 
should comprise of EIRP and frequency tests 
measured at the ground earth station plus the 
reporting of its position. In addition to these tests, 
aviation authorities may introduce additional tests in 
consideration of the safety related aspects of the 
satellite service. 

The "Commissioning Procedures for an 
Inmarsat Aircraft Earth Stations" document (Module 
7 of the Inmarsat Aeronautical System Definition 
Manual) (4] describes the formalities and testing 
required to obtain Inmarsat access approval. 

REFERENCES 

[1] Inmarsat Basic Documents, Edited by the 
Inmarsat General Counsel, Fourth Edition 
(1989). 

[2] Access Approval Procedures for Inmarsat 
Aircraft Earth Station, Module 6 of the 
Inmarsat Aeronautical System Definition 
Manual (Version 1.1), 

[3] ISO/IEC DP9646, Information Processing 
Systems - OSI conformance Testing 
Methodology and Framework. 

[4] Commissioning Procedures for Inmarsat 
Aircraft Earth Station (AES), Module 7 of the 
Inmarsat Aeronautical System Definition 
Manual (Version 1.0). 


243 







ACCESS APPROVAL TEST SYSTEM 


TEST ARCHITECTURES 


Hardware: MicroVAX II (5 Mb) 
Software: VAXA/MS, C 




lUT - Implementation Under Test 
Transverse Test Method e.g Circuit Mode 


INPUT: TTCN.MP format test suite held in ASCII 
files on the MicroVAX 

Figure 1 Figure 3 


TEST ARCHITECTURES /i) 



lUT - Implementation Under Test 
Co-ordinated Single Layer e.g Data Link 
Figure 2 


244 






















• . f'-t jy f ■. /.* f fM '... jj / -,'f. f j j 'j//.. 

-v-v/ ^ , yffff ^ ^ f^’.r^.f^.,f . • / yt'. ,«• ,yr ‘A ff , / 

'' wmmiMmm 


David W. Lipke 

Director of Government Aviation 
COMSAT 


David W. Lipke is Director, Government Aviation Marketing/Technical Services. He is 
responsible for activities leading to the introduction and development of aeronautical mobile 
satellite services via the INMARSAT system and their application to government requirements. 

Mr. Lipke has thirty years of experience in the field of satellite communications ranging from 
engineering design of commercial and experimental systems to management of a major U.S. 
satellite program. He directed the technical efforts for the design of the world’s first commercial 
maritime satellite communications system; many of his concepts which were used in the 
MARISAT system are now included in the INMARSAT system. Later he was responsible for 
the day-to-day management of the MARISAT program. 

Mr. Lipke has been heavily involved in INMARSAT activities. He participated on behalf of the 
U.S. in early technical work leading to the establishment of the INMARSAT system, served as 
Chairman of the INMARSAT Advisory Committee on Technical and Operational Matters and 
served as alternate U.S. representative to the Council, INMARSAT’S main governing body. 

Mr. Lipke has authored more than 30 publications, mostly on satellite communications, holds 
several patents, served as Chairman of major professional groups and has been a U.S. delegate 
to international meetings associated with satellite communications. He holds Master of Science 
and Bachelor of Sciences degrees from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 


2A6 




















OPERATIOMM. SATCOM: MOVING FROM TRIALS TO SERVICE 


by David Lipke and Elizabeth Young 
COMSAT Aeronautical Services 

FAA ADS/SATCOM Symposium 
September 24-26, 1991 


The civil aviation 
community first began using 
communication satellites on an 
operational basis in late 1990. 
The satellite system 
inaugurating this service and 
in use today is owned and 
operated by Inmarsat, an 
international cooperative of 65 
countries. Both the Inmarsat 
Directorate in London and a 
number of Signatories who are 
owners, including COMSAT, have 
devoted considerable time and 
money to create an aeronautical 
communications system that will 
meet the expressed needs of the 
aviation community. 

The first ground earth 
station in the Inmarsat system 
to offer data communications to 
commercial aircraft was 
COMSAT'S station in Santa 
Paula, California, serving the 
Pacific Ocean region, followed 
shortly thereafter by COMSAT's 
Southbury, Connecticut, 
station. Through a service 
agreement with ARINC, COMSAT 
began providing ground and 
space segment, initially, to 
three United 747-400's 
outfitted with low-gain AES's. 
These AES's were comprised of a 
Ball Aerospace low-gain antenna 
and Collins avionics specified 
as "Data Level 0” in the 
Inmarsat lexicon. The low-gain 
system operates with an 
effective rate of 300 bits per 
second. To provide this 
initial service, COMSAT 
installed Collins-built interim 


ground earth station equipment 
capable of offering the initial 
data services with the Inmarsat 
system. 

During late 1990 and early 
1991, other Inmarsat 
Signatories, including KDD in 
Japan, OTC in Australia, and 
Teleglobe in Canada, also 
activated interim ground earth 
stations capable of working 
with the initial low-gain 
AES's. By the end of the first 
quarter of 1991, United had 
made a decision to upgrade 
their existing AES's to the 
newly introduced Data Level 1 
configuration, and by June, 
1991, United, Quantas, and JAL, 
Cathay Pacific and Canadian 
Airlines all had aircraft 
installed with the Data Level 1 
capability. Formal FAA trials 
of ADS services using the 
satellite system began in the 
Pacific Ocean region on June 1 
of this year. To date, the 
preponderant use of the low- 
speed data service has been in 
the Pacific Ocean region. 

Meanwhile, COMSAT has 
further expanded its ground 
station capabilities to add 
voice at both locations and to 
incorporate higher speed data 
capabilities into the full 
service stations, retiring the 
initial equipment used to 
establish the early data 
service. Today, COMSAT's 
ground earth stations serve 
aircraft equipped for voice and 


247 



for Data Levels 1 and 2. Our 
users during the past nine 
months have included more than 
a dozen corporate jets 
(equipped for voice ), the FAA's 
own 727 (for data) and aircraft 
owned by United, Quantas and 
Japan Airlines. 

Initial satcom use in the 
cockpit has shown that position 
reports, engine monitoring, 
equipment status and other 
operational communications can 
be easily accommodated via 
satellite. Message lengths 
have varied, with a typical 
position report requiring less 
than a kilobit of data 
(including overhead) but with 
some operational messages 
requiring as many as 50+ 
kilobits. Since COMSAT does 
not have any visibility into 
the messages, we cannot 
speculate as to the precise 
nature of each communication, 
but it seems clear from the 
early traffic that on the order 
of 75 to 85% of the messages 
are for position reports. 

We are continuing to 
upgrade our ground earth 
station facilities to add Data 
Level 3 capability by early 
1992 and to add service in the 
Atlantic Ocean East region, 
complementing our AOR-W and FOR 
services. With regard to 
numbers of aircraft served, 
while using the Collins-built 
interim Data Level 1 ground 
earth station equipment, 
COMSAT'S ground earth stations 
could accommodate a single 
interface. With the newer Data 
Level 1 and Data Level 2 
equipment, we are able to 
expand our ability to interface 
to more aircraft as the need 
arises. 


Voice interfaces at the 
ground earth stations are 
relatively straight forward. 
At the time this paper was 
written, COMSAT interfaced with 
AT&T, while discussions have 
been on-going with other 
terrestrial carriers. COMSAT's 
stations permit direct 
connection with other carriers 
and private lines. The latter 
could be of use in initial ATC 
services. 

While we will begin a 
number of new services in early 
1992, including high-speed data 
(10.5 kbps), facsimile and 
broadcasts such as FlightNews, 
our focus here today is the 
discussion of position 
reporting and ADS. On that 
topic, I would like to 
introduce some ideas about how 
satellite-based ADS can 
transition from a demonstration 
into an operational service. 

A key question is, of 
course, how the entire message 
network can or should be 
configured. In other words, 
assuming aircraft are equipped 
both to check their positions 
(increasingly, perhaps, with 
GPS) and to relay this 
information via the Inmarsat 
space segment and operators' 
ground stations, what is the 
most efficient and practical 
pathway for this position 
information to take from the 
aircraft to its final 
destination? 

The Inmarsat system is 
well suited to assist in the 
provision of oceanic air 
traffic control (ATC) services. 
The satellites, as a result of 
serving the international 
aeronautical and maritime 
communities, are ideally 
positioned over ocean regions 


2A8 





where improved communications 
can benefit air traffic 
management the most. Global 
coverage, except for the polar 
caps, is now provided by a 
constellation of four primary 
satellites as shown in Figure 
1, with redundancy in each 
ocean region. 

The use of the satellite 
network for periodic delivery 
of aircraft generated position 
reports can be made straight 
forward and there are several 
approaches for doing this using 
the P, R, and T data channels 
in the Inmarsat system (see 
Table 1) . The early POR ADS 
trials used an operational 
procedure whereby the aircraft, 
each time a position report was 
ready to be sent, requested a 
T-channel assignment, the 
request being sent on the R~ 
channel. Upon receipt of the 
request, the GES would assign a 
T-channel frequency to the AES 
and the burst message would be 
sent. In actuality, the GES, 
while equipped with the interim 
equipment, used the same data 
modem to receive both R and T 
channels. Different 
frequencies are used for the R 
and T channels so that both 
cannot be received 
simultaneously at the GES. The 
new GES data equipment contains 
both R and T channel receivers 
so that simultaneous reception 
is possible. Following receipt 
of the ADS message, the GES 
sends an acknowledgement to the 
AES on the P-channel. 

The same procedure used in 
the trials is one of several 
operational procedures that can 
be used in the provision of a 
fully operational worldwide 
service. The T channel can be 
used regardless of whether the 
message is short or long but it 


will be required for messages 
in excess of 264 bits. For 
shorter length messages, the R- 
channel could be used; the 
Inmarsat system permits the 
transmission of messages 
comprising up to three signal 
units on that channel. The 
advantage of using the T- 
channel method is that it 
ensures avoidance of collisions 
which might occur, albeit 
infrequently, when the complete 
messages is transmitted via 
several R-channel signal units. 

While the POR trial 
program has verified the 
ability of the satellite system 
to deliver reliably reports 
from air to ground, the 
establishment of an improved 
worldwide Air Traffic Control 
system requires a 
communications architecture 
that connects all GES's and 
ACC's in the Flight Information 
Regions of interest. This 
ground-ground communications 
capability has as its core 
requirement the need to assure 
that ADS reports reach the 
correct Area Control Centers. 
The same ADS report will have 
to be delivered to multiple 
ACC's to insure smooth FIR-FIR 
handover. It should be noted 
that satellites offer an 
alternative means to 
terrestrial systems for 
accomplishing this function. 
It is easy to envision, for 
example, a simple time division 
multiple access VSAT system 
with all ADS reports received 
at each GES being multiplexed 
on a single carrier that is 
relayed througli a 
communications satellite in the 
fixed satellite service and 
received simultaneously by 
small antennas located at every 
ACC. Each ACC would merely 
process the information of 


249 




concern to its responsibility 
and discard the rest. In this 
way, multiple ACC's would 
receive the ADS reports from 
aircraft in their individual 
FIR'S as well as from those in 
adjacent areas, and the ACC's 
could track these aircraft, 
thus assuring a seamless 
transition at the time of 
handover. 

The INTELSAT system offers 
the capability for a network 
that could link ACC's and a 
host Inmarsat aeronautical 
ground earth station. 
INTELSAT'S Intelnet service can 
provide international data 
communications between a large 
INTELSAT station (connected to 
the Inmarsat host station) and 
microterminals at ACC 
locations. Intelnet data 
service is offered as a leased 
transponder service with space 
segment units as low as 100 
kHz. 


delivering messages are well 
understood. Consideration 
should be given to 
supplementing terrestrial GES- 
ACC interconnect with a 
satellite broadcast mode type 
of signal for the dissemination 
of ADS reports to multiple 
ACC's. 


One further note regarding 
ocean air traffic management: 
The era of aeronautical 
satellite communications is 
opening with a rapid take-up by 
the corporate aviation 
community. The number of 
aircraft now equipped for voice 
service is growing steadily and 
greatly exceeds the number that 
have data capability. Since 
all of corporate aircraft are 
capable of 
international/oceanic flight, 
either equipment upgrade or use 
of satellite voice 
communications for ATC will be 
needed. 

In summary, satellites and 
ground earth stations to assist 
in the provision of improved 
ocean Air Traffic Control are 
in place and procedures for 
using the satellite network for 


250 






INMARSAT FOUR OCEAN REGION COVERAGE 



FIGURE 1 


TABLE 1 


DATA SYSTEM CHARACTERISTICS 

THREE DIFFERENT TYPES OF CHANNELS ARE USED TO CARRY PACKET 
DATA TRAFFIC: 

P-CHANNEL: A PACKET MODE TIME DIVISION MULTIPLEX (TDM) 
CHANNEL, USED IN THE FORWARD (GROUND-TO-AIR) DIRECTION. 

R-CHANNEL: A RANDOM-ACCESS (SLOTTED ALOHA) CHANNEL, USED IN 
THE RETURN (AIR-TO-GROUND) DIRECTION. 

T-CHANNEL; A RESERVATION TIME DIVISION MULTIPLE ACCESS 
CHANNEL (TDMA) CHANNEL USED IN THE RETURN DIRECTION ONLY. 
THE RECEIVING GES RESERVES TIME SLOTS FOR TRANSMISSIONS 
REQUESTED BY THE AIRCRAFT EARTH STATIONS (AES)^ACCORDING TO 
MESSAGE LENGTH. THE SENDING AES TRANSMITS THE MESSAGES IN 
THE RESERVED TIME SLOTS ACCORDING TO PRIORITY. 







SESSION THREE: 

LINK ENVmONMENT/AVIONiCS 
INTEGRATION 


Angus D. McEachen, III 
Senior Director 
Civil Aviation Services 
Aeronautical Radio, Inc. (ARINC) 


Angus D. McEachen serves as the Senior Director of Civil Aviation Services/Marketing and 
Strategic Planning at Aeronautical Radio, Inc. In that capacity, he has responsibility for 
ARINC Services provided to civil aviation authorities including the Federal Aviation 
Administration. In addition, aviation communication services furnished by ARINC to other 
civil agencies as well as military customers are within Mr. McEachen’s responsibilities at 
ARINC. Included in these services are ARINC Communications Addressing and Reporting 
System (ACARS); ARINC’s International Gateway Service which furnishes Air/Ground 
International High Frequency Radio and Satellite Services in all oceanic areas for which the 
Federal Aviation Administration has Air Traffic Control responsibilities; and a variety of 
other flight operations and weather communication services. 



Mr. McEachen served as a Captain in the U.S. Navy before he joined Aeronautical Radio. 
He served in the Navy Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence community 
for over twenty years. 


252 









Tbe FAA/AKINC Initial Implementation of AMSS 
Angus D. McEachen HI, Senior Director 
Aeronautical Radio, Inc. 


Abstract 

The application of satellite-based 
Communication Navigation and Surveillance 
(CNS) as defined by ICAO will provide 
significant cost benefits to the global air 
transport industry. This paper traces the 
evolution of Aeronautical Mobile-Satellite 
Service (AMSS), identifies the primary 
applications that are now targeted for use of 
AMSS and describes the series of phases of 
worldwide system transition from the current 
analog voice service to the future digital 
satellite communication service. Key 
implementation events that should take place 
for orderly transition to the future AMSS are 
also identified. A brief description of the 
current status of various trials and 
demonstrations of AMSS applications are also 
described. The improvements in Air Traffic 
Management (ATM) through the application 
of digital satellite based communication links 
offers the most cost efficient means to 
increase the quality and level of services 
offered and improve safety of operations 
while simultaneously lowering the overall 
system-wide costs. 


1.0 Introduction 

During the 10th Air Navigation Conference 
(ANC) recently held in Montreal, full-scale 


development and implementation of ICAO’s 
Future Air Navigation System (FANS) 
concept was a key issue. The principles that 
define this concept will serve as the basis for 
evolution and implementation of future Air 
Traffic Services (ATS) into the next century. 
The FAA’s active participation and 
sponsorship of the ICAO position, particularly 
its applicability to Air Traffic Management 
(ATM) are noteworthy. Implementation of 
the Communication Navigation and 
Surveillance (CNS) systems as defined under 
the FANS concept allows ATM to evolve on 
an orderly global basis and to become 
progressively more responsive to the users’ 
needs. Specifically, these CNS systems will 
provide for: 

a) global communications, navigation, and 
surveillance block to block coverage 
embracing remote, off-shore, and oceanic 
areas; 

b) digital data and voice interchange between 
air and ground systems to fully exploit the 
automated capabilities of both; 

c) navigation/approach service for runways 
and other landing areas which need not be 
equipped with precision landing aids. 


253 





1.1 CNS Applicability to AMSS 

The features of CNS which relate to 

Aeronautical Mobile-Satellite Service (AMSS) 

are: 

COMMUNICATIONS 

- Satellite data and voice communication 
capability will be developed to cover most 
of the world. HF will be maintained 
during the transition period and over polar 
regions until such time as other data 
communication means are available. 

- The Aeronautical Telecommunication 
Network (ATN) will provide for the 
interchange of digital packet data between 
end users over dissimilar air-ground and 
ground-ground communication links. 

NAVIGATION 

- Global Navigation Satellite System(s) will 
provide worldwide coverage and will be 
used for aircraft navigation and for 
non-precision type approaches. 

SURVEILLANCE 

- Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) 
will be used in oceanic and other airspace 
where the use of primary or secondary 
radar for surveillance is impractical. 

1.2 Air Traffic Management 
Improvements and Associated 
Benefits 

As new CNS systems provide for closer 

interaction between the ground system and 


airspace users before and during flight, 
improvements to air traffic management will 
permit a more flexible and efficient use of 
airspace and enhance safety and regularity of 
flight. ATM may be viewed as the principal 
beneficiary of the CNS improvements; i.e., it 
is the resultant benefits to ATM which 
constitute the rationale for incurring the costs 
of CNS improvements. In turn, 
improvements in ATM will ultimately benefit 
all airspace users. 

By their nature, satellite systems 
demonstrate their full advantage when 
exploited on a global scale with a 
complementary ATM infrastructure in place. 
Satellite CNS systems are the key to system 
improvements and will provide significant 
benefits. The cost/benefit analysis performed 
by FANS Phase I indicated a very favorable 
ratio of benefits to costs for satellite CNS 
systems. Sensitivity analysis indicated that 
highly conservative benefit levels would still 
show favorable benefit-to-cost ratios. The 
consolidated results show the annual cost of 
satellite CNS systems to be, in 1987 US 
dollars, about $1.0 billion against annual 
benefits ranging from $5.2 billion to $6.6 
billion. The benefit category of avoided cost 
alone roughly equals the total cost while the 
efficiency benefits are much greater. In 
appreciating this validation it needs to be 
noted that, in order to realize the benefits, 
especially in terms of avoided costs and 
efficiency improvements, implementation 
must be carried out on a global scale and a 
suitable matching ATC infrastructure should 
be available. Otherwise maximum benefits 
will not be achieved.' 

The last FANS Phase II Committee meeting 


254 







OFANS n/1 22 May - 8 June 1990) developed 
a draft Global Transition Plan that documents 
the institutional and operational issues 
relevant to the migration of the current ATS 
to the FANS CNS concept. This draft plan 
was approved at the 10th ANC and represents 
the planning framework within which all 
ICAO member States are to transition to 
FANS. A key ingredient for the successful 
implementation of the communications 
segment of the CNS concept is the need for 
an effective data link between the air traffic 
control center and aircraft in controlled 
airspace. As recommended within the Global 
Transition Plan, the first guideline urges 
States to use data link systems as soon as they 
become available. The second guideline 
recommends that oceanic airspace and "in 
continental" en-route airspace with low 
density traffic be the initial application areas 
for transition to the AMSS. The Pacific 
Engineering Trials (PET) of ADS, using 
selected suitably equipped commercial 
aircraft, have proven the feasibility of using 
ADS messages as the basis for position 
reporting and for the implementation of two- 
way data link for Air Traffic Control (ATC) 
communications. 

ICAO has developed and analyzed four 
scenarios that describe possible institutional 
arrangements among Provider States, as the 
means for implementation of the FANS 
concept. These scenarios represent varying 
levels of State Ownership and control of the 
satellite and ground communication networks 
to be used for aeronautical communication 
services, ATS activities within the U.S. can 
best be described as conforming to scenario 3 
of the four scenarios defined within the 
institutional arrangements recommended by 
ICAO. This paper describes the status of 
satellite based communications, as they are 


being implemented by the commercial airline 
communiQr, its representative, ARINC, and 
the FAA, for deployment in the Pacific Ocean 
region. The paper identifies the certification 
and other approval steps being accomplished 
within the near term to enable operational use 
of satellite communication-based ADS as the 
primary means of automated position 
reporting and other flight control information 
reporting to the oceanic control center 
sector(s) within the appropriate FAA Air 
Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC). 
Current operational HF voice communications 
equipment serves as the back-up for ATC and 
Airline Operational Control (AOC) for 
SATCOM-equipped aircraft. The system 
being implemented provides a migration path 
that allows for parallel development of 
automated air/ground communications and the 
Oceanic Automation System that ensures end- 
to-end inter-operability between the controller 
and the flight deck. In the final FANS CNS 
system, communications will be conducted via 
transparent information exchange that allows 
operation from the traditional high frequency 
voice system through the newer satellite, 
VHF, Mode S data links and the Aeronautical 
Telecommunications Network (ATN). 

In the near term benefits will also be 
available with the introduction of automation 
to Air Traffic Control procedures. These 
include: 

- Improved safety, 

- Two-way ATC data link (voice back¬ 

up), 

- Reduced message delivery time, 

- Substantial economic advantage to air 
carriers, 

- Reduce workload, 

- Reduced HF communication congestion. 
2.0 Background 


255 





2.1 ATC and AOC Message Handling 
via ARINC’s Communication 
Centers 

Current oceanic communications systems 
utilize HF voice communications for both 
ATC and AOC message exchanges. The 
ATC system in U.S. controlled oceanic 
airspace is based upon aircraft position 
reports being transmitted at prescribed 
intervals by the flight crews using HF voice 
communications. These messages are 
transcribed by ARINC radio operators into 
data messages and delivered to the specific 
oceanic control center sector(s) within the 
FAA ARTCC. When an oceanic air traffic 
controller needs to send a message to an 
aircraft, he calls the appropriate ARINC 
communications center via a dedicated voice 
circuit and provides the specific text of the 
message to be transmitted to the aircraft. At 
the ARINC communications center, the 
desired uplink message is transcribed into the 
ARINC data network (for message tracking 
and control purposes as well as to maintain a 
record of the transaction) and then relayed 
verbatim to the aircraft via an HF voice 
transmission. (Only the Anchorage ARTCC 
oceanic controllers have the capability of 
sending messages to the ARINC 
communication center via a data link rather 
than dedicated voice circuits). 

2.2 Automated Message Routing Exists 
in the VHF Continental 
Environment 

For operational control communication in 
the U.S. domestic airspace, a majority of the 
message exchanges between aircraft and 
ground systems are conducted via the Aircraft 
Communications Addressing and Reporting 
System (ACARS). Many oceanic aircraft are 


also equipped with VHF ACARS capabilities. 
This form of flight deck data link ^ows for 
the creation and transmission of data 
messages for AOC and ATC applications and 
is currently being enhanced to include oceanic 
data link via satellite communications. Use of 
this system allows background message 
exchanges between the flight deck and the 
oceanic controller with little human 
intervention, thus improving the integrity of 
the messages transmitted. Ground processors 
such as the ARINC Air Traffic Services 
Message Processor (ATSMP) will accept 
these automated reports and appropriately 
reformat them to interface with the FAA and 
other end systems such as the Oceanic 
Display and Planning System (ODAPS). 


3.0 Intermediate Services (Transition 
Phases) 

To further facilitate the initiation of data link 
message exchanges for Air Traffic Control, 
the acceptance and integration of flight deck 
data for aeronautical operations is being 
promoted by several U.S. and foreign 
carriers. The existing system will be used 
during the transition period from a totally 
voice-based system to a fully automated data 
link-based system. The migration path is via 
a two-step process. The first step automates 
the flight deck with no changes introduced to 
the ground controller procedures. The second 
step introduces changes in the ground 
controller’s environment and permits direct 
two-way data links to be established between 
the oceanic controller and the aircraft in 
flight. These processes are described in the 
following sections. 


256 






3.1 Flight Deck Data Link 

In aircraft equipped with ACARS, 
operating in oceanic areas beyond the VHF 
line-of-sight range, data link services will be 
provided by adding SATCOM to the ACARS 
avionics. To assure a smooth transition of 
ATC and AOC communications from the 
manual voice HF environment to that of 
oceanic data link service, initially, data link 
communications will be routed to and from 
aircraft to its destination via the ARINC 
communications center. Routing all 
communications traffic through an ARINC 
communications center will permit relays to 
ARTCCs of HF voice and SATCOM data 
link messages transparently, with no change 
in procedures required at the oceanic center. 
Near instantaneous fall back to manual HF 
voice procedures takes place should any 
service interruption occur on the satellite data 
channel. ATC data up-linked to the aircraft, 
from the oceanic controller will also be 
delivered to the appropriate ARINC 
communications center via the dedicated voice 
circuits, employing current procedures used. 


3.2 Oceanic Controller Data Link 

The next stage in the transition to an all 
digital data link communications system is to 
provide oceanic ATC controllers with the 
capability of origination of data messages for 
transmission via the satellite channel directly 
to the aircraft. In the U.S. this requirement 
is directly linked to the FAA’s 
implementation plans for the oceanic 
controller work stations. This direct uplink 
process will automatically detect failure of the 
aeronautical data link (end-system to end- 
system) and alert the appropriate controller, 
aircrew, and ARINC, who will immediately 


revert to either SATCOM voice or the manual 
HF voice procedures pending restoration of 
the data link services. 


4.0 SATCOM Voice and ATN Services 

4.1 Handling of Satellite Based Switched 
Circuit Mode Voice 

Aircraft equipped with flight deck SATCOM 
voice capabilities will be supported using 
procedures similar to those used for HF voice 
reporting. Under this procedure, the voice 
call will be placed from the flight deck to the 
ARINC communications center, where the 
message will be transcribed and routed to the 
appropriate ATC sector using the same 
procedures as those currently in place for the 
HF voice transmission today. The availability 
of "toll quality" satellite-based voice 
communications will provide a significant 
advantage over the current HF channel. 
SATCOM voice will be used for non-standard 
communications and as a backup to SATCOM 
data link. 

4.2 Link Independent Data 
Communications Can Be Expected 
from ATN Services 

Over the longer term, as implementation of 
full ATN services are available on ground 
networks, and avionics within the aircraft are 
suitably upgraded, the data link utilized by 
any specific message exchange will be 
dependent upon the performance requirements 
of the communication session, and could be 
conducted over any of the compatible modes 
of VHF, satellite and Mode S data link. The 
implementation of ATN will, however, 
require inter-operability of the new networks 
and those of the existing operational systems. 


257 






Current designs will support the handling of 
messages originated by the character oriented 
avionics as well as the new bit transparent 
systems. This will ensure that the oceanic 
controller can function within a single set of 
operational procedures for all data 
communications equipped aircraft as well as 
those with only HF systems. 

4.3 ATC/AOC Message Handling 

Figure 1 shows the internetworking of 
ATC/AOC messages in the ARINC 
communications system reflecting 
interoperability with analog and digital 
air/ground systems. 


5.0 Initial Operational Tasks 

After many years of intense industry 
planning, commercial satellite data 
communications was inaugurated in 
September 1990 on a United Airlines Boeing 
747-400 aircraft. The first aircraft that are 
suitably equipped and certified for operational 
use of Air Traffic Control (ATC) messages in 
lieu of the existing manual HF position 
reporting procedures will be in operational 
service shortly. Initially, these services, in 
keeping with the FANS Global Transition 
Plan Guidelines, are expected to be 
implemented over the Pacific Ocean. The 
SATCOM data link system will connect 
aircraft in flight with the appropriate oceanic 
controller at the FAA’s ARTCC through the 
ARINC communications center under the 
scenario described in this paper for downlink 
messages. United Airlines (UA) has 
undertaken a program to upgrade their Boeing 
747-400 SATCOM equipment to meet the 
certification requirements being developed 
among the FAA Certification Office in Long 


Beach, California, avionics manufacturers, 
United Airlines and ARINC. A certification 
plan and an equipment upgrade schedule has 
been approved by the FAA. 

Conversion from today’s HF based 
operations to a fully automated all digital 
service for aircraft operations over the Pacific 
has been defined under a five-step program. 
A brief description of the salient features of 
each step follows: 

STEP 1 Satellite Data Link Between Aircraft 
and ARINC Communications Center 

Satellite based communications will be 
conducted on a two-way data link between 
aircraft and the ARINC communications 
center. The data will be received 
continuously at the communications center 
and will serve as the basis for pre-operational 
evaluation and implementation of two-way 
ATC SATCOM data communications. No 
procedural changes are necessary at the 
ARTCC and the controllers will receive and 
send information to all aircraft in flight using 
the current procedures. The ARINC 
communications center responsible for 
converting controller-provided voice 
information to the digital communication for 
relay over data link via satellite to the 
aircraft. Similarly, the aircraft will undertake 
to maintain all air ground communication, 
while in the Oakland and Anchorage FIRs, 
via the digital satellite link which will be 
directed to the ARINC communications 
center. The communications center will 
transmit the downlinked information to the 
ARTCC in the manner currently operational 
at each site. 


258 




STEP 2 Satellite Voice Between Aircraft 
and ARINC Communications 
Center 

Upon the completion of certification and 
implementation of digital voice equipment 
within the aircraft, the FAA and ARINC 
communication center will conduct pre- 
operational tests of voice communication to 
the cockpit via the satellite link in lieu of the 
HF radio link. The purpose of this trial will 
be to demonstrate the link connectivity, 
capability, capacity and quality, and to 
establish performance criteria while gaining 
field experience in the use of the satellite 
voice as a back-up to the data link service 
defined and developed under Step 1. Once 
again, implementation of this step will require 
no changes in current controller procedures at 
the ARTCC. The ARINC communications 
center is currently responsible for maintaining 
the air ground voice connection over the 
Oakland and Anchorage FIRs and will 
continue to assume this responsibility. Both 
FAA and air carrier aircraft with participate 
in these trials. As the aircrews develop 
familiarity with the communications 
equipment, they will use it during the trials 
and rely upon the HF equipment as a back¬ 
up. This phase will evaluate the voice quality 
as well as all other operational parameters 
such as £.:t-up times and any delays 
experienced to determine their impact in an 
operational environment. 

STEP 3 Data Link and Voice Between 
Aircraft and ARINC 
Communications Center 

When sufficient operational experience has 
been gained in Step 1 and Step 2 , a trial 
operational cutover with the use of all digital 
satellite based communications will be 


undertaken. Step 3 will result in the 
operational implementation of two-way data 
link between the aircraft and the ARINC 
communication center, and a one-way data 
link from the communication center to 
individual sectors. Digital data will be 
received on aircraft flight deck displays. 
Voice communications with the 
communication centers will be conducted 
utilizing the satellite links when available with 
HF voice as a backup to SATCOM data link 
and voice service. 

STEP 4 Prototype Workstation Development 
for Two-way Data Link Between 
Aircraft and ARTCC 

This phase of the transition will consist of 
the development of appropriate software for 
the RS-6000 controller workstation. 
Specifically, it will include the development 
of controller workstations that permit direct 
two-way digital communications between the 
aircraft and the controller. Data traffic 
transferred in both directions will be treated 
under pre-operational procedures and will 
necessitate the maintenance of existing (or 
Step 3) data communication procedures. It 
will be utilized to conduct in-depth analysis 
and evaluation of the controller workstation 
and verification of the various interfaces to 
ODAPS. Development of the requirements 
for procedures for operational implementation 
of this data link will also be included. 

STEP 5 Operational Two-wav Data Link 
Between the Aircraft and the 
ARTCC Workstation 

The program will result in the establishment 
of operational two-way data traffic between 
the ARTCC and the aircraft utilizing the RS- 
6000 workstation. It is anticipated that a trial 


259 





period for operational cut-over will be 
requited for each ARTCC to demonstrate the 
validity of the functionality developed during 
Stq>4. Oceanic clearance processing and full 
communications of data and voice are 
expected to be handled via the satellite data 
link for routine and non-routine 
communication requirements. HF voice 
capability will be maintained as a back-up 
facility. Step 5 will result in the pre- 
operational verification and subsequent full 
implementation of end-to-end two way data 
link via SATCOM. 

5.1 Oceanic ATC Automation Concept. 

Figure 2 shows the connectivity and 
migration capabilities involved in the 
implementation of the five-step plan. 

6.0 Key Implementation Events 

There is a need to establish a priority 
structure of system elements and areas of 
applicability with regard to implementation. 
Transitioning the current air ground 
communication system to that proposed in the 
five phase process described earlier requires 
the establishment of milestones that should 
take into account the following parameters 
relative to each system and/or region:^ 

a) end-to-end integration of airborne and 
ground system elements on phased 
basis; 

b) pertinent tasks by relevant ICAO 
groups: 

c) adoption of relevant avionics 
standards; 

d) completion of relevant research and 
development and applications develop¬ 
ments; 


e) management of satellite capacity; 

f) availability of avionics; 

g) completion of pre-operational 
trials/validation; 

h) availability of suitable requirements and 
procedures; 

i) availability of ground infrastructure; 

j) completion of training; 

Ideally, the transition to new CNS systems 
will be based on improvements in AT1M and 
accompanied by procedural and structural 
changes that will provide benefits to ATM 
and to users. The transition a highly complex 
process that requires the active cooperation 
and participation of the FAA, airlines, 
equipment manufacturers, standards 
organizations and a host of other groups, for 
successful implementation. Requirements and 
procedures will be developed with the 
participation of all parties in a Computer 
Human Interface (CHI) emulation of the 
operational system. They should increase 
simulation of the end-to-end systems. See 
Figure 3. 


7.0 Current Status 

ARINC Air/Ground Data Link SATCOM 
Service for Airline Operational Control 
Communications has been in place since the 
availability of the first SATCOM-equipped 
United Airlines 747-400 aircraft initiated 
passenger service in late September 1990. 
Since then, the infrastructure for data 
communications on oceanic flights has been 
demonstrated in the Pacific Engineering Trials 
(PET). Some communications traffic 
statistics from these trials are given in Table 
1. The Automatic Dependent Surveillance 
(ADS) reports replace manual reports with an 
increase in accuracy and reliability. 


260 






During the Pacific Engineering Trials, 
ARINC developed tools and techniques for 
analyzing position reports and generating plots 
of flight paths. Three types of position 
reports were used. 

1) The Automatic Dependent Surveillance 
(ADS) reports were originated by the Aircraft 
Condition Monitoring System (ACMS). 

2) Data link position reports keyed in by the 
aircraft crew in conjunction with the voice 
waypoint reports and delivered via satcom. 

3) Waypoint reports delivered at ten degree 
crossings by voice over HF radio to one of 
the ARINC comm centers, and transcribed to 
data messages by the ARINC radio operators. 


Figure 4 is the plot of data from UAL 90 on 
December 22,1990 which illustrates all of the 
PET air/ground communications modes. The 
flight heads northeast from Narita airport 
toward the Aleutian islands. Near Alaska, the 
flight turns southeast and follows the Pacific 
coastline of the United States to Los Angeles. 
The ADS data indicates that the flight jogged 
to the east coming over land at San Francisco. 


8.0 FAA Certification 

FAA certification for use of SATCOM- 
equipped aircraft for ATC data link 
communications has resulted in early 
implementation of this capability between 
appropriately equipped aircraft and ARINC 
communications centers. No changes to 
operational procedures need be immediately 
undertaken within the ARTCC, Key 
components of the FAA certification plan 
include the following; 


• Detailed description of the data 
communications system including FMS 
diagrams, end-to-end message flows, and 
appropriate documentation describing the 
internal handling of all classes of data 
traffic. 

• Complete procedures for downlink and 
uplink message flows. (Procedures for 
assurance of positive receipt and end-to- 
end verification). 

• Ground-to-ground integrity compliance 
and assurance. 

• Annunciation of SATCOM inoperative 
and relevant procedures to be 
undertaken. 

• Message logging and lost message 
procedures. 

• Procedures implementation and training 
plan for all personnel impacted. 

• Avionics qualification test plan and 
results. 

• Operational trials and subsequent data 
analysis of results. 

• Advisory Circular exceptions. 

9.0 Conclusion 

Thoughout the aviation industry, the rapidly 
increasing need for communications and 
information transfer as a means to improve 
safety of operations while simultaneously 
lowering the overall system-wide costs, 
results in a substantial economic and 
administrative challenge. Improvements in 
ATM through the application of digital 
satellite based communication links offers the 
most cost efficient means to achieve these 
objectives. ARINC’s strong support and 
active participation in delivering digital 
communications from the flight deck to 
ground systems, whether they are for ATC or 
AOC, assures the FAA and the airline 


261 




community that the pace at which 
implementation of air ground services is 
achieved will not be delayed by the lack of 
ground based facilities to support aircraft in 
flight. 


FANS (n)/2-WP/94 1 S/5/91 Special Committee for the Monitoring and Coordination of Development and Transition Planning for the 
Future Air Navigation System (FANS Phase II) Second Meeting, Montreal 29 April to 17 May 1991 - Report on Agenda Item 5 • Development 
of a Global Transition Plan. Page SA-10 

^ Ibid p. 5A-22 





Blocks 

Messages 


HF Voice 

Month 

Year 

Flights 

D/L 

U/L 

D/L 

U/L 

POS 

ADS 

Reports 











SEP 

90 

14 

1273 

1375 

865 

306 

5 

504 

0 

OCT 

90 

2 

HD 

6 

0 

3 

■1 

0 

0 

NOV 

90 

51 

1380 

1881 

908 

869 

65 

120 

0 

DEC 

90 

57 

1712 

1872 

1063 

524 

68 

330 

12 

JAN 

91 

61 

1435 

1512 

826 

337 

42 

288 

23 

FEB 

91 

41 

146 

215 

73 

91 

8 

0 

141 











TOTALS 


226 

5946 

6861 

3735 

2130 

188 

1242 

176 


Table 1 Pacific Engineering Trials Traffic Statistics 

















































































ATC AND AOC INTERACTIO 
ARINC COMMUNICATION CE 








OCEANIC ATC AUTOMATION CONCEPT 









OCEANIC ATC AUTOMATION 
OCEANIC SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT TEST BED 













































epniftEH 

266 




























267 



SESSION THREE: 

LINK ENVIRONMENT/AVIONICS 
INTEGRATION 



Graham Lake 

Deputy Director International Relations 
Societe Internationale de Telecommunications 
Aeronautiques (SITA) 


Graham C. Lake is Deputy Director, International Relations responsible for directing all 
SITA relations with Civil Aviation Administration world-wide. He is responsible for SITA 
development and implementation of the Air Traffic Control data link trial programs in 
which SITA is involved, 

Mr. Lake is a British national and graduated from the U.K. College of Air Traffic Control 
in 1976. He worked as an operational Air Traffic Controller in the British Isles until 1986 
when he moved into ATC management and administration. 

Mr. Lake joined SITA at the beginning of 1988 and is based at their Northern Europe 
regional office in London. 


268 









SITA SATELLITE AIRCOM IMPLEMENTATION 


Graham Lake 

Dep. Director International Relations, SITA 
London 
England 


SYNOPSIS 

This paper introduces SITA as a global aeronautical 
communications service provider. SITA operates the 
world's largest private telecommunications network, 
serving over 400 airlines in 190 countries. 

SITA provides VHP datalink services in some 45 
countries and a world-wide voice and data Aeronautical 
Mobile Satellite Service. 

The status and evolution of SITA AMSS is 
discussed, together with a review of Air Traffic Control 
use of SITA datalink facilities. 

INTRODUCTION 

SITA is a highly specialised organisation that 
provides telecommunications and data processing 
services for the air transport industry world-wide. 

SITA is a not-for-profit cooperative and is owned by 
over 400 airlines. SITA operates in 190 countries and 
territories and carries around 100 million messages 
across the network each day. 

The main component of SITA network services is 
the DATA TRANSPORT NETWORK (DTN), which is a 
meshed system of 34 nodes. Host systems interface 
directly into the DTN. 

A new network architecture is currently in 
implementation to meet the needs of the air transport 
industry into the 1990's and beyond, A major 
component of this new architecture is the Mega 
Transport Network (MTN). 

The MTN is an X25 based network supfwrting 1.5 M 
bps (T1) and 2 M bps trunk speeds with X25 and SNA 
protocols. 


SITA is currently migrating the backbone network 
from the DTN to the MTN. About 30% of DTN traffic will 
be transferred to the MTN this year. The remainder of 
the migration will take place progressively over the next 
3 years. 

The MTN will enable SITA to support the networking 
requirements for the Aeronautical Telecommunications 
Network (ATN). 

AIR/GROUND SERVICE EVOLUTION 

In 1984 SITA introduced the VHP AIRCOM digital 
datalink service in Australia, using the ACARS protocol 
and compatible with the ARINC service in the United 
States. VHP AIRCOM is now available in some 45 
countries around the world including both China and the 
Soviet Union as well as at strategic locations around the 
Pacific and Atlantic oceans. 

The limitations of VHP datalink for airline 
communications were identified at an early stage and 
SITA began planning for the implementation of AMSS. 

The Committee for Aeronautical Mobile Satellite 
Service (CAMSS) was formed to enable airlines to 
participate in the development of a satellite service 
requirement and implementation. Over 30 airlines 
regularly participate in CAMSS meetings. 

The Prodat experiments, which have been the 
subject of another paper given earlier at this 
symposium, were one of the first practical results of the 
work of the CAMSS. 

Prodat proved the viability of the satellite based 
datalink concept and provided an excellent foundation 
from which SITA was able to launch the SATELLITE 
AIRCOM service. 


269 



SATELLITE AIRCOM 

In 1989 SITA signed a quadripartite agreement with 
FRANCE TELECOM. OTC AUSTRALIA and TELEGLOBE 
CANADA. Each of these Inmarsat signatories operate 
aeronautical ground earth stations (GES) and have 
enabled SITA to develop a consistent plan for service 
introduction meeting the various levels defined by 
INMARSAT on a fully redundant world-wide and 
seamless basis. 

Figure I illustrates the standard INMARSAT 
coverage chart with the SATELLITE AIRCOM GES. 

SITA SATELLITE AIRCOM IMPLEMENTATION 

1) Data communications 

Data communications are available to all aircraft 
equipped with either low gain (0 dB) or high gain (12 
dB) satellite communications antennae. 

Aircraft equipped with low gain antennas are 
capable of low speed data communications. 
Aircraft equipped with high gain antennas are 
capable of low and high speed data 
communications. 

Data communications are fully compatible with the 
SITA VHF AIRCOM Service, so as to maintain the 
same interface with airline ground systems. 

2 ) CflmmunicatiQaa 

Voice communications for cockpit crew and cabin 
crew are available to aircraft equipped with a high 
gain antenna. Both air-initiated calls and ground 
initiated calls are possible. 

Terrestrial extensions between the ground earth 
stations and ground airline personnel are by means 
of the public switched telephone network (PSTN) or 
be means of dedicated leased voice-grade lines. 

TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION 

1) System Architecture 

System architecture conforms to the Industry 
Standards such as AEEC 741 characteristic. 

2) Space Segment and Earth Stations 

The Inmarsat space segment is used. This choice 
may be reviewed periodically. 

The initial implementation of six earth stations and 
their relationship to the current Inmarsat space 
segment is described as follows: 


Operator 

Location 

Coveraoe 

Rgaion 

France Telecom 

Aussaguel* 

Atlantic 

OTC Australia 

Perth* 

(East) & 
Indian 
Indian & 

Teleglobe Canada 

Weir 

Pacific 

Atlantic 

IDB Aeronautical 

Niles Canyon** 

(West) 

Pacific 


* two stations 

** IDB Aeronautical Communications, Inc, a Joint 
Venture between Teleglobe International (US) 
Inc and IDB Communications Group. 

To ensure a coherent, world-wide Service with 
highest availability, the various ground earth 
stations are operated in a coordinated fashion; in 
geographical areas where satellite communications 
can bo established with two or more ground earth 
stations, these stations provide mutual back up 
and the possibility for load sharing. 

3) Associated Ground Functions 

A supervision centre maintains a centralised data 
base of ail user aircraft registered for service, 
monitor the status of the system components of on¬ 
going connections between aircraft and ground 
earth stations. 

CONTRACTED USERS 

To date ten airlines have taken the major step of 
committing to satellite communications and have 
contracted for SATELLITE AIRCOM service. 

These airlines are: AUSTRIAN AIRLINES, CATHAY 
PACIFIC, CHINA AIRLINES, FINNAIR, LAUDA AIR, 
QANTAS, SWISSAIR, AIR NEW ZEALAND, JAPAN 
AIRLINES AND UTA. 

SERVICE STATUS 

SATELLITE AIRCOM is available world-wide for 
data ('Data 1'), and has already been introduced in 
commercial service for voice communications. 

On the data side. SATELLITE AIRCOM remains the 
only Service available with Data 1 world-wide, including 
coverage of the Indian Ocean Region (lOR). Data 2 will 


270 





AUSSAGEL 



lOR 

AOR-E 

F.T. 

D1 

NP 

NP 

D2 

2092 

4091 

D3 

3Q92 

3092 

VI 

2Q92 

AVBL 

V2 

2Q92 

4091 


PERTH 

WEIR 

NILES C. 

DR4K)R 

ADR-W 

POR 

OTC 

TLG 

IDB 

AVBL 

AVBL 

NP 

1092 

4091 

4091 

2092 

2092 

3092 

AVBL 

AVBL 

3091 

1092 

4091 

4091 


WORLDWIDE 


SGL 

RDD 

4-0 

AVBL 

NP 

NP 

4091 

2092 

2092 

2092 

3092 

3092 

AVBL 

2092 

2092 

4091 

2092 

2092’ 


KEY 

D1 

DATA1 


NP 

NOT PLANNED 


SGL - 

SINGLE GES/OCEAN REGION 


RDD - 

MORE THAN 1 GES/OCEAN REGION (REDUNDANT) 


Figure II 


SATELLITE AIRCOM IMPLEMENTATION STATUS 


be introduced, again world-wide, during the 4th Quarter 
of this year. Five B757-400's of QANTAS (Collins SAT 
900 and ACARS avionics) and three B747-400's of 
CATHAY PACIFIC (Collins SAT 900 with Bendix ACARS) 
now use the Service in daily flight operations. Several 
other B747-400’c of both QANTAS and CATHAY 
PACIFIC will be introduced into service before end 91. 
Japan Airlines is also using the sen/ice. 

By end 91 around 12 aircraft, operated by five 
airlines ,will be using SATELLITE AIRCOM in commercial 
service. 

The first Data 2 use is expected early in 1992. 
Voice service is currently used by several corporate 
aircraft. 

See figure II above. 

AVIONICS PROCUREMENT 

One of the prime issues delaying the 
implementation of AMSS by airlines has been the non¬ 
availability of suitable avionics. As a consequence, on 
the 3rd June 1991 CHINA AIRLINES, FINNAIR, 
SWISSAIR and SITA jointly issued a request for 
proposal (RFP) for satellite communications avionics to 
potential providers. This RFP calls for the provision of 
several LRU’s: HPA, RFU, SDU and STIU, to 


progressively equip the long/medium haul fleets of the 
above customers of SATELLITE AIRCOM Service 
The RFP has enabled the parties to define an 
advanced multi channel system intended to optimise 
and expedite AMSS implementation. 

With respect to the MD11 aircraft, McDonnel 
Douglas has also formerly joined the activity, further 
expanding the benefits of the endeavour. A number of 
other airlines have also expressed their wish to 
participate.Several manufacturers have now submitted 
detailed proposals. 

A number of benefits are also expected by the 
participating airlines: 

cost saving to procure said avionics through a 
scale effect 

sharing of aircraft engineering and retrofit tasks 
among the airlines 

minimum certification costs and minimum tasks to 
obtain the required authorisation from Inmarsat, 
increased support from the concerned aircraft 
manufacturers. 

ARINC/SITA JOINT VENTURE 

SITA, together with its American counterpart 
organisation ARINC, have established a joint venture 


271 



company to provide Aeronautical Mobile Satellite 
Services for Air Traffic Services (ATS) communications. 

The Joint Venture provides a uniform, standard, 
single supplier access between aircraft and Civil 
Aviation Administrations. The Joint Venture also 
ensures consistent uninterrupted delivery of ATS 
messages irrespective of location, equipment and 
regardless of the AMSS provider used by the aircraft 
operator. 

Further ARINC and SITA have charged the Joint 
Venture with the task of building an AMSS qualification 
facility, said AVIONICS TEST BED. This facility will 
avoid redundant effort and capital expenditure that 
would otherwise be associated with aircraft equipment 
certification. It is expected that this facility will be used 
by airlines, airframe manufacturers, avionics suppliers, 
space segment providers and air traffic service 
providers. 

Air Traffic Control interest in datalink 
communications continues to grow. The activities of 
various ICAO groups and the North Atlantic Systems 
Planning Group (NATSPG), have included discussion of 
VHP and satellite datalink applications in ATC. 

SITA is co-operating with a number of 
administrations around the world by supporting various 
air/ground datalink trials. Given that some 3000 air 
transport aircraft are equipped with VHF datalink 
compared with only a handful of satellite equipped 
aircraft, it is not surprising to note that most of the trials 
activity has centred on the use of VHF datalink. 


OCEANIC CLEARANCE DELIVERY 

Authority for an aircraft to cross oceanic airspace - 
Oceanic Clearance Delivery by VHF Datalink was first 
implemented by Transport Canada in Gander Airspace, 
in cooperation with Air Canada as a user airline and 
datalink service provided. SITA became involved with 
the introduction of trials in Shanwick airspace, in 
cooperation with the U.K CAA. 

The Portuguese ano Icelandic CAA are also 
developing trial programs. The Icelandic trials began in 
July 1991, commencing with uplink ol oceanic clearance 
to aircraft entering oceanic airspace at or above 61 
degrees north. The Portuguese trials will involve 
aircraft entering Santa Maria oceanic airspace. 


AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL ACTIVITIES 
VHF 

ATUNTIC OCEAN 
Oceanic Clearance Delivery 

Shanwick 
Santa Maria : 

Iceland : 

Gander : available in coopsration with 

Air Canada 

PRE-DEPARTURE CLEARANCE(PDC) 

France 
Germany 
United Kingdom 
Portugal 
Iceland 

DIRECT CONTROLLER PILOT 
COMMUNICATION(DCPC) 

Iceland 

Germany ATIS 

France 

Australia 

Norway 

SATELLITE 

South Pacific ADS and DCPC 

French CAA Program 

NORTH ATLANTIC ADS PROGRAM 

In cooperation with the North Atlantic systems planning 
Group 

Pacific Engineering Trials (PET) ADS Program 

SITA is keen to facilitate these trials in order to 
expedite ATC implementation of AMSS to obtain 
improvements in efficiency and capacity. 

Participation will be free of charge to SITA customer 
airlines. Any space segment costs will be recovered 
from the CAA by the XA/XS Joint Venture. 


272 






DATA-LINK COVERAG 



^ARINCACARS ^SITAAIRCOM (aclual/planiictl 1990) 












275 



SESSION THREE; 

LINK ENVmONMENT/AVIONICS 
INTEGRATION 



Ingeborg L. Ray 
Staff Engineer 

Communications Management 
Honeywell, Inc. 


Ingeborg L. Ray is a staff engineer with Honeywell in Phoenix, Arizona, where she provides 
key technical leadership in the data link and advanced communications management 
technology areas. She was responsible for development and integration of data link with 
Air Transport Flight Management systems, and has been instrumental in the definition and 
industry acceptance of standards for airborne data link interfaces. Ms. Ray has a B.S. in 
Mathematics and received her M.S. in Electrical Engineering in 1979 at Arizona State 
University. 


276 






ADS Integration into the Flight Management Computer 
Ingeborg L. Ray 

Honeywell, Inc., Phoenix, Arizona 


ABSTRACT 

The Aeronautical Telecommunications Network 
(ATN) Project is providing the aeronautical 
community the first test environment for end-to-end 
bit-oriented communications. As a part of this 
project, current plans are for the Flight Management 
Computer (FMC) to provide the first avionics 
bit-oriented Automatic Dependent Surveillance 
(ADS) application process for the basic set of ADS 
messages. The FMC will use the necessary services 
of OSI communications protocols to support this first 
step of the FAA's Air Traffic Services (ATS) program. 
As more advanced steps of Air Traffic Services 
evolve, the navigational capabilities inherent in the 
FMC will allow for an optimal host environment. 

This paper discusses both the initial role of the 
flight management function in Step One of the ADS 
services development, and the future capabilities of 
the FMC as avionics host for the expanding Air 
Traffic Management environment. 

INTRODUCTION 

When we think of air traffic control, we think of a 
system based on radar surveillance and VHF 
communications. Indeed, this is primarily how 
domestic aircraft are separated from one another. 
But, for oceanic routes and other areas where radar 
coverage is not available, verbal position reports by 
the pilot have been the only way to track a flight. The 
lack of real-time reporting and real-time traffic 
presentation makes it more difficult for controllers to 
accurately separate aircraft. 

To ensure safety in areas of no radar coverage, 
such as oceanic routes, air traffic separation must 
necessarily be increased. This forces aircraft to 
operate on less than optimal oceanic routes 
(increased cost) and, with continued air traffic growth 
in the future, wili limit the volume of traffic allowed on 


these routes (loss of revenue). The only way to 
alleviate these problems is to provide controllers with 
the accurate real-time information they need. To do 
this, the world’s aviation communities are actively 
developing satellite-based data link communications. 

This satellite-based data link communication 
system provides information to Air Traffic Control 
(ATC) by automatically sending aircraft-derived 
position reports digitally to ATC via satellite. 
Currently, an interim system using character-oriented 
automatic position reporting supported by ACARS 
protocols is being used as a test bed to demonstrate 
this concept. When operational, the resultant 
international system will provide bit-oriented ADS 
messages supported by ATN (OSI) protocols. Since 
most of the required message data can be derived 
from the FMC’s navigational and guidance functions, 
the FMC provides an optimum host for these ADS 
messages. Current plans are to use the FMC as the 
ADS host in the Boeing 747-400 Package B for the 
first bit-oriented ADS implementation in conjunction 
with the ATN Project participation. 

In this paper, we will first describe the differences 
between automatic position reporting and ADS. 
Then, focusing our attention on ADS, we will show- 
the integration of ADS messages into the FMC as 
Step One of the Air Traffic Services development. 
Lastly, we will address some of the future capabilities 
of the FMC as Step Two of ATC two-way data link 
evolves into the overall Air Traffic Management 
(ATM) system. 

CHARACTER-ORIENTED AUTOMATIC POSITION 
REPORTS USING ACARS PROTOCOLS 

Several avionics systems currently have some 
capability for character-oriented automatic position 
reporting via ACARS protocois, and therefore, are 
being used in "ADS-like" interim test programs 
These systems include the FMC, ACARS MU, and 


211 



ACMS. Test programs have been developed {such as 
the Pacific Engineering Trials, PET) with existing 
ACARS-based satellite air/ground subnetworks, and 
are being used to gain valuable on-line experience 
with automatic position reporting. Also, there are 
some provisions for pilot-controller two-way data link 
in this test environment, but this capability is still very 
limited, due in part to the character-oriented nature of 
existing systems. 


encoding limitations, but should allow for total byte 
and code independence. The advent of other 
subnetworks (Mode S, AVPAC VHP, etc.) has further 
prompted tfie need to standardize data link, allowing 
all systems in the aeronautical environment to 
communicate interoperably. A suite of bit-oriented 
Open Systems Interconnect (OSl) communications 
protocols, selected for reasonable adaptation to the 
aeronautical environment, can provide this capability. 


A problem with the current AGARS automatic 
position reporting system is that it is based on 
proprietary protocols, which do not allow adequate 
international growth. What is needed is a standard 
international suite of protocols for an interoperable, 
data transparent system.... which brings us to ADS 
and the ATN. 

BIT-ORIENTED ADS MESSAGES USING ATN (OSl) 
COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS 

Since the future AOS system will be used globally, 
the supporting communications system must provide 
a compatible communications network which 
provides universal aeronautical interoperability, as 
welt as the capability to handle the new bit-oriented 
ADS messages. The communications network 
should not be constrained by ACARS 
character-based message, block size, or protocol 


For ADS messages in particular, the industry is 
recognizing the need to use only those OSl 
communications protocols which are required for the 
appiication, eliminating unnecessary protocol 
complexity wherever possible. The OSl services up 
through the transport layer (layer four) are the only 
services needed to satisfy the requirements of the 
ADS application process (i.e., the session, 
presentation, and application layers, are not needed 
for ADS). This protocol specification for ADS is in 
accordance with industry development for AEEC 
ADS Characteristic 745, RTCA SC-170 ADS MOPS 
development, and the AEEC upper layer architectural 
model. This upper layer model allows the flexibility of 
direct access (through an Application Program 
Interface, API) to the appropriate protocol subset of 
the OSl architecture for those applications which do 
not require the services of all seven layers, such as 
ADS (see Figure 1). 


I-1 



* THE APPLICATION PSOCESS INTERFACE (API) SELECTS THE APPROPRIATE SERVICE 
SET FOR A PARTICULAR APPLICATION TRANSACTION BASED ON SERVICE REQUIREMENTS 
PRESENTED BY THE APPLICATION PROCESS 


Figure 1 — OSl Architecture for ADS Application 


278 







The ADS message set is bit-oriented, as opposed 
to the character-oriented automatic position 
reporting used in test programs today. Bit-oriented 
composition allows an initial data compression of at 
least 8 to 1 over standard ASCII character-based 
messages. Therefore, the ADS message data 
(reports) are relatively short, generally on the order of 
10 to 20 bytes. 

Ground-based requests for ADS reports may be 
simple or complex, and operate in contract or 
polled/demand mode. For contract mode, the 
ground-based request specifies the time interval 
between reports to the aircraft ADS server. 
Polled/demand mode consists of a single request 
from the ground, followed by a single report response 
from the aircraft. Complex reports contain optional 
extended data. In the contract mode, ADS reports 
are nominally generated by the aircraft at 5-minute 
intervals, but can be varied to a period of 10 seconds 
to 42 minutes. 

The basic ADS teport contains general position 
information of latitude, longitude, altitude, time 
stamp, and figure of merit (an indicator of the 
aircraft’s navigational capabilities). Additional ADS 
reporting capability includes; the vector information 
group, providing track (or true heading), ground 
speed (or calibrated air speed), and vertical rate; the 
meteorological group, providing wind speed, wind 
direction, and temperature: an emergency report 
(same information as basic ADS); the Flight ID group; 
the 24-bit aircraft ID group; and a predicted route 
group, providing latitude, longitude, and altitude for 
the next and next -F 1 waypoints of the active flight 
plan. We will see shortly that the FMC provides the 
majority of this information. 

THE FLIGHT MANAGEMENT COMPUTER - 
AN OVERVIEW 

The function of the FMC (in conjunction with other 
interfacing equipment) is to form an integrated 
control and information system which provides 
automatic navigation, guidance, map display, and 
inflight performance optimization The FMC reduces 
cockpit workload by eliminating many routine tasks 
and computations normally performed by the flight 
crew The additional capability of data link to the FMC 
further reduces workload, expedites aircraft ground 
turnarounds and communications, and eliminates 
potential human data entry errors. One of the more 


tedious, and potentially error-prone entries, is the 
position report entry, especially forlat-lon waypoints. 
ADS eliminates this human link in the transfer of this 
data. 


ADS INTEGRATION INTO THE FMC 

For the package B 747-400 FMC data link 
program, the FMC will function as an OSI End 
System (ES) and provide the ADS function (in 
addition to airline AOC messaging) as a participant 
of United Airline's Team Dutch in the ATN Project. 
Some FMC programs have already begun the 
transition to OSI through the implementation of the 
OSI compatible Williamsburg link layer protocol for 
the avionics ACARS MU/FMC interface (e.g., 
757/767 PIP data link). This initial link layer 
implementation is being expanded to include the OSI 
network and transport layers required for the ADS 
service subset, as illustrated in Figure 1. 

Formatting of the data into bit-oriented messages 
allows the FMC to send binary data in a 
computer-resident format, instead of undergoing a 
translation to ASCII character representations, as is 
required for character-oriented data link. One of the 
reasons the FMC provides an optimum host 
environment for Step One of the ADS Air Traffic 
Services implementation is the availability of data as 
part of routine flight managemc-nt operation. In 
particular, data for the ADS predicted route group 
which requires next and next -t-1 waypoint position 
information are routinely calculated dynamically 
along the flight path in conjunction with performance 
and route progress updates. 


Of special interest within an FMC-hosted ADS 
function is the latest ADS "aircraft intent” report 
recently proposed by United Airlines. This new 
message could be used by ATC to improve the 
accuracy of ADS to provide conflict detection and 
correction for changes in high altitude flight paths 
outside of radar coverage. The format of the new 
intent message is currently being investigated as an 
alternative to the ADS predicted route group. The 
message provides present aircraft position plus 
short-term (20 minutes or less) intermediate "intent ’ 
projections of aircraft range, bearing, altitude, and 
projected time, allowing ATC to more accurately 
provide conflict resolution. 


279 


FUTURE ATM INTEGRATION INTO THE FMC 

Step Two of the Air Traffic Services program, the 
capability for two-way ATC data link, is the first step 
in the Air Traffic Management system. As initial host 
of the ADS function, the FMC realizes even greater 
potential in the expanding ATM arena where air traffic 
controllers can begin to make use of advanced flight 
management functions by integrating these 
operations with ATM automation via data link. One of 
these potential advantages is the automatic uplink of 
flight plan clearances directly from ATC to the FMC. 
Thus, full route or amended clearances can easily be 
integrated into the active flight plan, after pilot 
acceptance. Other relevant ATC tasks can include 
time navigation and optimal 4D descent path 
calculations, FMC approach transitions, FMC 
computed approaches, and self-spacing clearances. 
The overall transition philosophy is expected to be 
directed toward ATC-monitored systems, instead of 
ATC-controlled systems, which should better 
accommodate airline user-preferred flight paths. 

CONCLUSIONS 

The need for automatic and error-free position 
reports in non-radar environments has driven the 
development of ADS. An interim automatic position 
reporting system is currently being used to gather 
test data for evaluation. This system however, is not 
representative of the full ADS system and is limited to 
ACARS character-oriented protocols and messages. 


The fully operational ADS system will employ 
bit-oriented messages and OSl protocols, as part of 
the ATN environment, and therefore will provide 
end-to-end interoperability over various subnetworks 
from different aircraft to Air Traffic Control. 

The Flight Management Computer, as the primary 
management system for generating and calculating 
flight data, provides an optimum host environment 
for current ADS applications, as well as providing for 
the future needs of Air Traffic Management. 

REFERENCES 

1) Strawman for Project Paper 638, Upper Layer 
Specifications , 91-083/DLK-394, Aeronautical 
Radio, Inc., April 11,1991. 

2) Draft 1 of Supplement 1 to ARINC Character 745, 
Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) , 
91-138/ADS-92, Aeronautical Radio, Inc., June 
14, 1991. 


3) Possible Operational Use of ADS Position with 
AIRCRAFT INTENT . Ulf Gustafsson, United 
Airlines, June 17, 1991. 


4) Automatic Dependent Surveillance . ICAO circular 
226-AN/135, Montreal, Canada. 1990. 


280 







281 




SESSION THREE; 

LINK ENVIRONMENT/AVIONICS 
INTEGRATION 



Stephen P. Van Trees 
Senior Systems Engineer 
Stanford Telecommunications 


Stephen P. Van Trees is employed by Stanford Telecommunications (STEL) on the SEIC 
contract at FAA Headquarters, Washington, D.C. He provides ATN system.s engineering 
and ISO data communications protocol expertise. His recent work has been in the 
requirements analysis for upper-layer protocols over the ATN. He has represented the FAA 
at AEEC Datalink, 637,638,745; RTCA SC-162, SC-170; and SICASP TULIP committees. 

He has over 13 years of industry experience in data communications including participation 
in US Navy, US Air Force, and federal government network implementation. 

He holds master’s degrees in Computer Science (George Mason University, 1990) and Slavic 
Languages and Literatures (U.C. Berkeley, 1978). He is pursuing his Ph.D at George 
Mason. His research interest is in parallel-processor protocol verification. 


282 








Use of ISO protocols in the ADS Environment 


Stephen P. Van Trees 
Stanford Telecommunications, Inc. 
Washington, DC 


The work described in this paper is 
being performed under the aegis of 
the Federal Aviation Administration, 
FAA/ASE-111 for Radio Technical 
Commission for Aeronautics (RTCA) SG- 
170 [1] and Airlines Electronic 
Engineering Committee (AEEC) Project 
Paper 745 [2]. This work will also 
be forwarded to the International 
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) 
Automatic Dependent Surveillance 
Panel (ADSP). It should be noted 
that some work, especially the 
Application Layer definition is still 
under current study in committee. 

Mr. Hal F. Ludwig is the responsible 
project officer. Any errors of 
interpretation are due solely to the 
author. 

Introduction 

As depicted in [3-4] the Automatic 
Dependent Surveillance (ADS) system 
has been developed to improve 
surveillance in the oceanic 
environment, thereby leading to 
Improvement in Air Traffic Control 
(ATC). Improvements in 
communications, navigation, and 
surveillance (CNS) have the potential 
to result in lessening in separation 
requirements. This may allow airlines 
more fuel-efficient routes and more 
frequent flights. 

ADS is the implementation of an 
onboard navigation system with an 
air-ground communications system to 
relay aircraft position data to a 
ground-based command and control 
system. The implementation of pilot- 


controller data link is also be 
supported by this system. The 
physical layer is a satellite 
communications channel. The actual 
end systems (ESs) are ADS Functions 
(ADSFs) on the ground and in the 
aircraft. The communications 
Infrastructure is the topic of this 
paper. 

Use of the ISO protocol suite 

The use of the International 
Organization for Standardization 
(ISO) Open Systems Interconnection 
(OSI) model [5] is the guiding 
principle of the communications 
system design. The OSI model and the 
ISO protocols have been used since 
the ADS program is under the auspices 
of the ICAO and international 
communications interface and ATC 
handoff procedures must follow an 
internationally recognized standard. 
The ISO protocols provide 
interoperability and portability. 
These advantages of the ISO protocols 
are critical. The advantage of 
interoperability is important in 
today's environment where FAA 
equipment must communicate with 
vendor airborne equipment, as well as 
with other national civil aviation 
authorities (CAAs). Adherence to an 
international standard allows a well- 
understood interface. The advantage 
of portability allows for the 
potential usage of commercial off the 
shelf software (COTS) rather than a 
recoding of entire communications 
stacks. Each of the peer 
implementations can be run against 
the test suite allowing assurance 


283 




that the communications function will 
perform per the standard. The use of 
the ISO protocols obviates the need 
for custom in-house software, with 
its attendant protocol design, 
specification, verification, and 
implementation. For, in the words of 
two protocol verification authorities 
[6], "We have been amazed at the 
errors we have made in informal 
arguments. Programs that seemed so 
obviously correct at one time are, in 
retrospect, so obviously wrong". The 
ISO protocols have been developed 
with formal specification and 
verification as a goal, so there is a 
greater probability that what was 
meant was what was specified, and 
what was specified was what was 
implemented. Standardized test 
suites may allow certification of 
what was implemented. 

Concept of Operations 

The description of the concept of 
operations of the system is derived 
from [3-4] and [7], the Data Link 
Architecture Study. In [7], the 
ground system is the data 1 .nk 
processor (DLP). The DLP in each 
area control facility (ACF) provides 
the means for accessing air/ground 
data link communications. The 
routing for data-linked ADS, ATC and 
weather messages is through the DLP 
router for dissemination to the 
aircraft or ACF weather application 
processes (APs). 

The aircraft, in this concept of 
operations, is generally in the 
oceanic flight information region 
(FIR). This is a fundamental element 
of the architecture. There are then 
derived requirements for supporting 
logical connections past an air route 
traffic control center (ARTCC) 
boundary. Operation takes place in 
an environment with longer delays and 
different media than in the domestic 
ATC environment. This imposes 
requirements for end-to-end 
accountability (positive 


acknowledgement) and reliability that 
are met by the use of the ISO 
transport protocol. The 
interoperability requirement that is 
entailed by the aircraft's 
transitioning FIRs is met with the 
ISO internetworking protocol and the 
interdomain routing protocol (IDRP). 
The process of aircraft annunciation 
to the ATC system, logon, contract 
negotiation, and ground-controlled 
handoff as the aircraft transitions 
FIRs is a requirement that is met by 
the application-layer processes and 
ADS application process as well as by 
ground-based procedures. Connection 
management is an area of intensive 
recent study. It will be presented 
below in the discussion of the 
application layer. 

The remainder of the paper discusses 
the specific ISO protocols used to 
support ADS. Topics of interest 
covered during the protocol 
discussions include aircraft 
initiation into the ADS system, 
network routing, end-to-end 
acknowledgement strategies, and 
application layer requirement's. 

The OSI model for ADS 

The OSI model [5] is used to 
characterize the subsystems and 
protocols required for the ADSF 
Implementation. The ADSF functions 
as an OSI end system with a complete 
seven-layer stack (with null 
presentation and session layers). 
The layers and the specific protocols 
implemented at each layer are defined 
below. An overview of the ADS 
protocol architecture Is shown in 
Figure 1. An overview of the ADS 
system is presented in Figure 2. 

We give a one-sentence 
characterization of each layer, then 
discuss relevant ISO protocols at 
that layer. 


284 





Application 

Process 


ADS 

API 



285 









TRANSPORT 


TRANSPORT 




INTERNET 


429/629 

LINK 

PHYSICAL 


INTERNET, 


429/ 

629 


1 

r 


L 

1 

P 


111^^12 

■ 

8208 

1 

SN 

1 

L 

1 

L 

1 

P 

1 

P 


■ 

■ 


1 

■ 

■ 


SN 


SN 

1 

L 


L 


P 


P 


■ 

1 


INTERNET 


SUBNET 


LINK 


PHYSICAL 


Figure 2 End to End Protocol Architecture 


286 
































Physical Laver 

The physical layer is devoted to the 
transBission of electrical signals to 
the end system. All electrical 
interface requirements are as 
specified in [8]. As pointed out in 
[3] the satellite forward channel (in 
the ground-satellite-aircraft 
direction) employs the P-channel, a 
continuous mode, time division 
multiple access (TDHA) channel. The 
P-channel transmits prioritized 
messages on assigned time slots. The 
cost of the P-channel is expensive 
when a routine acknowledgement 
procedure for every ADS report is 
used. Thus, every effort has been 
made to minimize the use of forward 
channel traffic, such that only the 
minimum number of acknowledgements 
(at every protocol layer) is 
generated. 

Data Link Laver 

The data link layer is responsible 
for the framing and error detection 
of the bits transmitted to the end 
system. The data link layer provides 
data reliability, a virtual channel 
interface, and data flow control as 
specified in [8]. As seen in figure 
2, the link layer in the ES employs 
the Williamsburg 429 protocol. 

Network Laver 

The network layer provides sequence 
checking, error checking, and routing 
of packets. The ADSF operates in an 
internetwork environment, per figure 
2. The ADSF conforms to the 
standards of ISO 8348 [9] 
(Connectionless Network Service 
Definition) and supports ISO 8473 
[10] (Connectionless Network 
Protocol). As an End System, ADSF 
also supports ISO 9542 [11] (End 
System to Intermediate System 
Routing) between the ADSF and the ATN 
router. ISO CD 10747 [12] 
(Interdomain Routing Protocol (IDRP)) 
is also supported. 


The question cf communication 
initiation has been a coiqilex issue. 
Recent discussions [13] have begun to 
achieve consensus. For Hode S, the 
subnetwork event function must be 
ground-initiated. In the case of 
interest to us, the satellite 
initiation, the subnetwork event 
function is aircraft-initiated, 
though it may be a ground-initiated 
operation for redundancy and 
reliability, particularly in areas of 
continuous coverage. Thus, at the 
initiation of ADSF air/ground 
communication, the aircraft will 
initiate the process. This may be 
logon through predeparture clearance, 
•pop-up* discovery to ATC, or 
reinitiation of communications after 
an outage. 

The aeronautical telecommunications 
network (ATN) is 'the basis for next- 
generation ATC communications 
support. The ATN is the largest OSI 
implementation to date — and its end 
systems move! The critical issue of 
the network layer is that of mobile 
network service access points 
(NSAPs); how is routing information 
conveyed? Per [13], the subnetwork 
event function leads to the 
establishment of a subnetwork 
connection bicween peer routers. 
Next, network entity titles (NETs) 
are exchanged between peer routers 
via the ISO 9542 ES-IS [11] 
intermediate system hello (ISH) 
protocol data unit (PDU). Finally, 
NSAP address prefixes and associated 
path and route information between 
peer routers via ISO CD 10747 [12] 
IDRP Boundary Intermediate System 
(BIS) BIS-BIS Open PDU and subsequent 
Update PDUs. The IDRP, as is evident 
from its designation is still in 
development as an ISO standard. It 
was chosen as the routing protocol 
because it allows a model wherein 
each aircraft is its own routing 
domain (RD), it allows policy routing 
to be enforced, and it allows 
efficient update of routing tables as 
topology changes in the aeronautical 


287 




BEobile environaent. Policy in the 
oceanic environaent is currently 
simple - cost is the only criterion; 
if very high frequency (VHP) radio is 
available, that is used, otherwise 
satellite is used. 

After initial aircraft logon, the ATC 
system is responsible for 
transitioning the ATC system from one 
ATC authority to another. 

Transport Laver 

The transport layer provides end-to- 
end data sequencing and end-to-end 
error detection. 

The provision of a end-to-end 
connection assumes greater importance 
in an aeronautical mobile 
environment. As the aircraft 
transitions from one FIR to another, 
the ATC connection is established to 
the new ATC authority. However, the 
transport connection which supports 
the ADS association must persist 
across FIR boundaries. 

The first question, then, is the 
choice of a connection-oriented 
transport protocol (ISO 8073 [13-16]) 
or a connectionless transport 
protocol (ISO 8602 [17]), For the 
reasons cited above, especially the 
desire to have a positive connection 
status and the requirement for 
transport-layer acknowledgement, the 
decision has been made to field the 
connection-oriented ISO 8073 [14] as 
the transport protocol for ADS. 
Overhead analyses also bear this out 
since the ADS transport connection is 
a long-duration connection that 
amortizes the cost of the connection 
setup. ISO 8073/AD 2 [15] requires 
that ISO 8073 Class 4 be used if ISO 
8073 is implemented over a 
connectionless network. 

Examples of specific engineering 
studies of the ADS’^ transport layer 
are presented below. As stated, the 
desire is to conserve bandwidth by 


limiting the number of 
acknowledgement (AK) transport PDUs 
(TPDUs). This is done in two ways: 
be exchange of peer acknowledgment 
timers and by dynamic request for 
acknowledgment update. 

First, in acknowledgement timer 
exchange, the peer transport entities 
calculate the expected 
acknowledgement timers. If an 
implementation is operating any 
policy which delays the transmission 
of AK TPDUs, the maximum amount of 
time by which a single AK TPDU may be 
delayed shall be indicated to the 
peer Transport service provider using 
the acknowledgement time parameter. 
The value transmitted should be 
expressed in milliseconds and rounded 
up to the nearest whole millisecond- 


The implementation will infer from 
the negotiated contract the expected 
ADS message rate. Low-update-rate 
traffic (defined as five minutes or 
greater between messages) will be 
acknowledged on a one-for-one basis. 
High-update-ratu traffic (less than 
five minutes between messages) will 
rotate the credit window several 
units at a time. 

The initial flow control credit 
window is negotiated to a value 
determined by the expected traffic. 
The flow control window is set to its 
maximum for frequent update traffic, 
and set to one for sporadic update 
traffic. 

All timers used in data transfer must 
be coded to encompass expected 
air/ground delays. These delays are 
longer than those contemplated in ISO 
8073. 

Second, in the dynamic 
acknowledgement scenario, as depicted 
in figure 3, the transport 


288 





HlHDOif OPEN ~ 


TPDU 


TPDU 


WINDOW SHADE — 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

// 

WINDOW CLOSE 


TPDU 

R 


0 


A 




Figfure 3 Use of Request Acknowledge in ADS 


Protocol calculates when an 
acknowledgement is required based on 
recent traffic pattern and the space 
remaining in the flow control window. 
This design is based on ISO 8073/PDAD 
4 [16]. The goal is to minimize the 
nxmber of AK TPDUs. This is achieved 
by the AK TPDU arriving just as the 
transmission window would have 
closed. The procedure inquires, on 
sending each DT TPDU, 'is the time 
left in the window less than or equal 
the round-trip delay (RTD)?’ (i.e., 
(Local Idle Time) x (Window Size - 
Outstanding DT TPDUs) <= RTD). If 
so, we are in the 'closing' region of 
the window, and should set the ROA 
(Request of Acknowledgement) bit. If 
the ROA bit has been asserted within 
the closing region, then we do not 
send it again. If the DT TPDU with 
ROA is lost, recovery procedures are 
in place. If the ROA has been 
asserted for longer than twice the 
RTD, we assume it lost, and reassert 
ROA in DT TPDU. The request 
acknowledgement strategy works with 
both go-back-N acknowledgement and 


selective acknowledgement strategies. 
Session Laver 

The session layer handles session 
establishment, session management, 
and session termination between 
session entities. There are no 
requirements currently identified for 
the session layer. This layer is 
null in the current protocol 
architecture. 

Presentation Laver 

The presentation layer is responsible 
for the encoding of application 
protocol data units. This layer is 
null in the current protocol 
architecture. 

Application Laver 

The application layer provides the 
means for association control and the 
application to communicate using an 
application program interface (API) 
to other application service elements 


289 











(ASEs). This layer is null in the 
current protocol architecture, 
however, active consideration is 
being given to the application 
service control element (ACSE) [18] 
and the remote operations service 
element (ROSE) [19-20]. 

The use of ACSE has arisen from 
discussions of connection management 
as a sublayer above that specified by 
the transport service specification 
[21]. That is, there are aspects of 
connection management which exist 
above the transport layer such as 
when a connection is established, how 
connection errors are recovered, and 
when connections are torn down. This 
last must be provided by connection 
management, because the transport 
layer itseJ.f will endlessly exchange 
AK TPDUs as a keep alive measure. 
Connection management must decide 
when a connection is idle, i.e., it 
has been too long without supporting 
a contract. It is our preliminary 
conclusion that this requirement is 
fulfilled by use of ACSE. 

The ISO reference model provides a 
compact method of managing 
application entity-application 
entity relationships. These 
relationships are referred to as 
associations. Thus, the association 
control service element (ACSE) 
manages associations between 
application service elements (ASEs) 

The important feature of the ISO ACSE 
is its extensibility. In addition to 
application layer naming, other 
features are easily added within the 
ACSE syntax. These features include 
authentication, charging, and user 
security features. Only 
authentication is presently an ATN 
requirement. 

It is also important to note that 
ACSE does not require an ASN.l 
compiler. 

The operation of the protocol is 
described in ISO 8650 [18]. The 
protocol is straightforward. It 


co^rises two operational phases: 
association establishment and 
establishment release. Association 
establishment begins with an A- 
ASSOCIATE.REQUEST from the caller 
which is transmuted into an A- 
ASSOCIATE.INDICATION at the calling 
end. The called application entity 
(AE) then returns an A- 
ASSOCIATE.RESPONSE which appears as 
an A-ASSOCIATE.CONFIRMATION at the 
calling AE. This process allows the 
negotiation of supported application 
protocols (such as ROSE), it also 
allows exchange of protocol context 
initialization information. 

Association release, the second phase 
of the protocol, is likewise 
straightforward. There are three 
possible terminations: A-RELEASE, A- 
ABORT, and A-P-ABORT. The A-RELEASE 
is the familiar orderly termination 
which ensures that all data in 
transit are successfully delivered. 
The A-ABORT allows a unilateral 
termination of the association. The 
A-P-ABORT allows the ACSE service 
provider to inform the communicating 
application entities that the service 
has been terminated. 

Many of the more than 20 parameters 
in ACSE PDUs derive from presentation 
and session-layer context 
information. The use of ACSE over a 
short stack may obviate use of much 
of this information. 

Processing and bandwidth overhead 
calculations are now under way. At 
first calculation, the mappings 
indicate that the overhead imposed by 
the ACSE in the authentication 
dialogue is equal to one round-trip 
delay of one TPDU. 

The ROSE is used to manage 
request/reply interactions such as 
contract negotiations. The ROSE uses 
lower-layer services for data 
transfer. The primitives used in 
ROSE are straightforward. The RO- 
INVOKE.REQUEST is called by the 
invoking AE, and the RO- 







INVOKE. INDICATION is given to the 
requested A£. If the operation 
succeeds, the RO-KESDLT service is 
used. The RO-RESOLT.REQOEST and RO- 
RBSULT.INDICATION are used to 
i^>leaent the service. If the 
operation fails, the RO-ERROR service 
is used. Both the ACSE and the ROSE 
are described in [22]. 

The ROSE is also useful when an 
application-layer acknowledgement is 
required. This requirement is called 
out in [23]. The support 
requirements for these ASEs is still 
under study; the results will be 
brought to the AEEC, RTCA, and ICAO 
forums. 

Conclusion 

The paper has presented the ISO 
protocols currently used and 
envifioned for ADS communications 
support. The OSI seven-layer model 
as used in ADS was presented- The 
network layer protocols ISO 8473, ISO 
9542, and ISO CD 10747 were 
presented. The transport layer 
protocol ISO 8073 was presented. The 
application layer protocols ISO 8650 
and ISO 9072 were presented for 
Information purposes. The benefit of 
ISO protocols in terms of 
interoperability and portability is 
important to the ADS program. The 
selection, profiling, implementation 
and fielding of these protocols is an 
important ongoing effort. 

Bibliography 

[1] RTCA SC-170, Minimum Operational 
Performance Standards for Airborne 
Automatic Dependent Surveillance 
Equipment, RTCA Paper No. 226-91/SC- 
170-10, May 17, 1991 

[2] AEEC Project Paper 745, Automatic 
Dependent Surveillance (ADS) . Draft 
6, 90-180/ADS-88, October 9, 1990 

[3] Massoglia, Peter L., Martin T. 
Pozesky, and Guy T. Germana, ’’The Use 


of Satellite Technology for Oceanic 
Air Traffic Control," Proceedings of 
the IEEE, vol 77, no 11, November 
1989, pp 1695-1708 

[4] ICAO Circular, Automatic 
Dependent Surveillance . Circular 226- 
AN/135, International Civil Aviation 
Organization, Montreal, Canada, 1990 

[5] Information Processing Systems - 
Open Systems Interconnection - Basic 
Reference Model. ISO 7498-1984. 

[6] Chandy, K. Mani and Jayadev 
Misra, Parallel Program Design. A 
Foundation . Addison-Wesley, Reading, 
MA, p. zi 

[7] Ludwig, H-F., et al. Data Link 
Architecture Study . ATC-91-1029, 
Contract DTFA01-84-C-00017, Martin 
Marietta Air Traffic Systems, 
February 1991, p 4-34 

[8] RTCA SC-162, Design Guidelines 
and Recommended Standards to Support 
Open Systems Interconnection for 
Aeronautical Mobile Digital 
Communications. Part I 
Internetworking . Document No. 
RTCA/DO-205, March 21, 1990 

[9] Information Processing Systems - 
Data Communications - Network Service 
Definition - ISO 8348-1987 

[10] Information Processing Systems - 
Data Communications -Protocol for 
providing the connectionless-mode 
network service. ISO 8473 

[11] Information Processing Systems - 

Telecommunications and information 
exchange between systems - End system 
to Intermediate system routelng 
exchange protocol for use in 
conjunction with the Protocol for 
providing the connectionless-mode 
network service (ISO 8473) - ISO 

9542-1988 

[12] Information Processing Systems - 
Telecommunications and Information 


291 





Exchange between Systeas - Protocol 
for Exchange of Inter-domain Routeing 
Information among Intermediate 
Systems to Support Forwarding of ISO 
8473 PDUs - CD 10747 - July 30, 1991 
(IDRP) 

[13] F.W. Coliiver, SICASP WG 3, 
Report on the Third Meeting of the 
Internetwork SARPs Drafting Group 
(ISDG) 

[14] Information Processing Systems - 

Open Systems Interconnection 

Connection oriented transport 

protocol specification. ISO 

8073:1988 (E), 

[15] Information Processing Systems - 

Open Systems Interconnection 

Connection oriented transport 

protocol specification - Operation 
over the connectionless network 
service - ISO 

ISO 8073;1988/AD2 

[16] Information Processing Systems - 

Open Systems Interconnection 

Connection oriented transport 

protocol specification. Addendum 4: 
Protocol enhancements. ISO 8073 PDAD 
4 

[17] Information Processing Systems - 

Open Systems Interconnection 

Protocol for providing the 
connectionless-mode transport service 
- ISO 8602 


[18] Information Processing Systems - 
Open Systems Interconnection 
Protocol specification for the 
Association Control Service Element - 
ISO 8650 

[19] Information Processing Systems - 
Text communication - Remote Operation 

Part 1: Model, notation, and 
service definition -ISO 9072 - 1.2 

[20] Information Processing Systems - 
Text communication - Remote Operation 
- Part 2: Protocol Specification 


ISO 9072 - 2.2 

[21] Information Processing Systems - 
Open Systems Interconnection 
Transport Service definition. ISO 
8072. 

[22] Rose, Marshall T., The Open Book 
- A Practical Perspective on OSl . 
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 
1990 

[23] Smith, Ralph and Charlotte 
Laqui, A Reliable Application 
Protocol for ADS . MITRE 






SESSEION TeREEt 
LINK ENVmONMENT/AVIONICS 
INTEGRATION 


PANEL DISCUSSION: 

"Evolutionary Implementation of 
Satellite Communications" 


PANFJ. MKMBIillS 


William B. Garner 

American Mobile 
Satellite Corporation 


Hal F. Ludwig 

System Engineering Coordinator 
for Aeronautical Data Link 
and Oceanic Programs 
Federal Aviation Administration 


Graham C. Lake 
Deputy Director 
International Relations 
SITA 


Angus D. McEachen, III 
Senior Director 
Civil Aviation Services 
ARINC 


David W. Linke 

Director of Government Aviation 

COMSAT 


Keith Smith 

Manager, Engineering 
Aeronautical Services Division 
INMARSAT 











ONLY THOSE BIOGRAPHIES ARE LISTED THAT DO NOT 
APPEAR ELSEWHERE. 


Hal F. Ludwig 

Federal Aviation Administration 


Hal F. Ludwig is the System Engineering Coordinator for Aeronautical Data Link and Oceanic 
Programs for the Federal Aviation Administration. He is responsible for focusing the FAA’s 
efforts on Aeronautical Data Link Oceanic Programs, and has previously worked for Stanford 
Telecom, Inc., as the FAA’s SEIC System Engineering lead for Data Link. He holds a BSEE 
from Temple University. 














SESSION FOUR: AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL ENVIRONMENT/ 

CERTIFICATION 


Thursday, September 26,1991 

Master of Ceremonies - Robert D. Till, Communications, Satellite Navigation and Oceanic 
Systems Senior Program Manager, Federal Aviation Administration Technical Center 

Session Chairperson - Jerald M. Davis, Manager for Technical Programs 
Division, Flight Standards Service, Federal Aviation Administration 


8:30 Opening Remarks - Robert D. TiU, Master of Ceremonies 

8:30 Near-Term Satellite-Based Oceanic Air Traffic Control: Ground System 

Description - Elbert J. Henry, Air Traffic Control Specialist, Federal Aviation 
Administration. (Co-author, Mary A. Minnix, Member of the Technical Staff, 
the MITRE Corporation) 

8:50 Impace of Automation and Data Link Enhancements on Oceanic Air Traffic 

Control - Sabrina F. Saunders-Hodge, Member of the Technical Staff, The MITRE 
Corporation (Co-author - Mark H. Runnels, Member of the Technical Staff, The 
MITRE Corporation) 

9:10 U.S. Air Traffic Control: Past, Present and Future - Amado Colberg, 

International Procedures Specialist, Federal Aviation Administration 

9:30 Preliminary Evaluation of ADS/Radar Correlation - Christopher N. Andrews, 

Member of the Technical Staff, The MITRE Corporation (Co-author - Dr. 

Leonard A. Wojcik, Member of the Technical Staff, The MITRE Corporation) 

9:50 BREAK sponsored by IBM 

10:20 Cooperative ADS/AAS Integration - Sherman G. Francisco, Senior Technical 

Staff Member, Air Traffic Control Programs, IBM . (Co-author Charles A. Kengla, 
Manager Logistics Support, Advanced Automation System Program, IBM). 

10:40 Operational Oceanic Air Traffic Control Using Satellite Data Link - Initial 

Implementation - Donald Armstrong, Manager, Flight Test Branch, Aircraft 
Certification Office, Federal Aviation Administration 

11:00 Panel Discussion: Operational Approval and Implementation of Satellite 

Data Link into the Oceanic ATC Environment 

Panel Members: 

Howard E. Hess, FAA Donald Armstrong, FAA 

WiUiam L. Umbaugh, FAA James C. Crowling, FAA 

W. Frank Price, FAA John A. Scardina, FAA 


295 








SES^ON FOtMj 
AIR TRAFFIC COBflROL 



SESSION CHAD^ERSON 


Jerald M. Davis 

Manager, Technical Programs Division 
Flight Standards Service 
Federal Aviation Administration 


Jerald M. Davis, Manager for the Technical Programs Division, Flight Standards Service, 
is responsible for the direction of the numerous technical Flight Standards programs that 
include various weather, human factors and related R&D programs. Prior to joining the 
FAA, the experience and background of Mr, Davis covers over 20 years of extensive 
military transport aircraft service with over 9000 hours flying time logged in various 
aircraft. In the commercial field, Mr. Davis holds an Airline Transport Pilots Certificate 
with over 3500 hours recorded with the airlines. 

Mr. Davis has acquired a vast experience record with the FAA that has included positions 
as FAA’s Principle Operations Inspector for Pan Am, responsibility for the authorship of 
numerous Aircraft Circulars (ACs), operations specifications, handbooks, and an FAA 
Order. Additionally, Mr. Davis has been deeply involved in various Category HI research 
programs, several aircraft design approval certification programs, the management of 
various flight standards technical programs, and has been the final approval authority on 
a variety of landing system operations. Mr. Davis has also participated on several ICAO 
activities. Mr. Davis received his BSEE in 1964. 


297 








SESSION FOUR: 

AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL 
ENVIRONMENT/CERTIFICATION 




Elbert J. Henry 
Air Traffic Control Specialist 
Federal Aviation Administration 


Elbert J. Henry joined the FAA in 1970 as a controller at the Atlantic ARTCC. He held 
a variety of staff positions while at Atlantic ARTCC including Evaluation and Proficiency 
Specialist. 

Mr. Henry came to FAA headquarters in Washington as a Air Traffic Requirements 
Specialist. He presently is responsible for Air Traffic Requirements for all Oceanic 
Automation Programs under development including ADS and DOTS. 

Mr. Henry is Chairman of the Oceanic Air Traffic System Requirements Team (SRT). 

Mr. Henry has been a practicing attorney since 1979 and member of the Georgia Bar 
Association and a member of the Aviation Section of the State Bar. 


298 






NEAR-TERM SATELLITE-BASED OCEANIC AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL: 
GROUND SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 

Elbert J. Henry 

Federal Aviation Administration, Washington, D.C. 
Mary A. McClarnon 

MITRE Corporation, McLean, Virginia 


ABSTRACT 

This paper presents a 
functional description of the next 
generation U.S. oceanic air traffic 
control ground automation system. 
The system will be based on the use 
of automatic dependent surveillance 
and data link communications between 
pilot and controller. A number of 
automation features will be provided 
to the controller to take advantage 
of the surveillance and 
communications capabilities. This 
paper describes the significant 
aspects of the surveillance, 
communications, and automation 
capabilities, and illustrates how the 
air traffic controller will operate 
in the new environment. In addition, 
some background is given on the work 
of the Federal Aviation 
Administration's Oceanic System 
Requirements Team of active oceanic 
controllers. 

INTRODUCTION 

With the advent of aeronautical 
mobile satellite communications, the 
oceanic air traffic control (ATC) 
environment is undergoing 
revolutionary changes. The manual, 
time-consuming processing of pilot 
position reports sent via high 
frequency (HF) radio is being 
replaced by automatic dependent 
surveillance (ADS), in which frequent 
position reports are transmitted 
automatically via a communications 
satellite to ground ATC automation 
systems. The current ATC 
communications process is a complex 


one, in which voice messages are 
transmitted from the cockpit to a 
radio operator via HF radio and then 
transcribed and sent as digital data 
to the ATC position. This process is 
being replaced by direct satellite 
data link communications between 
pilot and controller. These new 
surveillance and communication 
capabilities offer many possibilities 
for improving oceanic ATC services, 
both for pilots and for air traffic 
controllers. 

Baek.gr.ound 

International oceanic ATC 
services have been based for over 
thirty years on manual, HF radio 
surveillance and communications 
processes as described above. Using 
these methods of surveillance and 
communication, the ATC job primarily 
consists of monitoring oceanic 
flights by ordering paper flight 
strips in columns according to route 
of flight. Changes and updates to 
flight information are recorded by 
the controller manually marking the 
flight strips. Very little attention 
has historically been given to 
oceanic ATC, and as a result, oceanic 
controllers have had few automated 
tools with which to do their jobs. 

The U.S. Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) has begun the 
evolution of oceanic ATC from a 
largely manual process to an 
automated process. The Oceanic 
Display and Planning System (ODAPS) 
has recently been introduced into a 
U.S. Oceanic ATC Center to help 


299 




controllers nsonitor air traffic and 
to perfoina many of the routine 
bookkeeping tasks that are required- 
A Plan View Display (PVD) provides 
the oceanic controller with a sickle 
graphical display of the traffic 
situation. Flight plan data 
processing helps the controller with 
maintenance of pertinent data as each 
flight progresses through the 
airspace. A flight plan-based 
conflict probe will soon provide an 
automated mechanism for alerting 
controllers to potential air traffic 
problems. The conflict probe will 
also be able to determine whether or 
not proposed flight plan amendments 
may safely be granted. 

Satellite-based surveillance 
and communications will allow the 
automation capabilities to be 
expanded significantly. Along with 
ODAPS* existing capabilities, the 
automation will provide the 
controller with a rich repertoire of 
data messages and many additional 
automation aids to allow the 
controller to manage expected 
increases in traffic for the next 
several years. The FA.A plans to 
enhance the ODAPS with the necessary 
hardware and software upgrades to 
allow the controller to function 
effectively in this future 
environment. 

Purpose 

The purpose of this paper is to 
provide a functional description of 
the expected oceanic ATC ground 
automation system during the mid- 
1990s. It focuses primarily on the 
oceanic controller's tasks and how 
these will be affected by new 
surveillance, communications, and 
automation capabilities. 

Scope 

This paper is a high level 
description of the future oceanic ATC 
automation system. Because of space 
limitations, the level of detail is 


not very deep. In addition, this 
paper not attempt to describe 
overall oceanic ATC operations beyond 
general issues that have been raised 
during the development of the 
functional requirements for the 
automation. A detailed operational 
concept is currently being developed 
by the FAA to fully address ATC 
operations in the new oceanic 
environment. 

THE OCE.ANIC SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS TEAM 

Since early 1988, the FAA has 
had a group of active oceanic air 
traffic controllers working together 
to establish the functional 
requirements for future oceanic ATC 
automation systems. The main 
incentive behind including active 
controllers is to maximize the 
probability that the,system developed 
for the ocean is operationally 
acceptable. Active field personnel, 
people who will actually use the 
systems being developed, help to 
focus development plans so that the 
final system will be operationally 
effective. 

Along with the five oceanic 
controllers (one from Anchorage, two 
from New York, and two from Oakland 
Oceanic ATC Centers), the Oceanic 
System Requirements Team (SRT) 
includes a group of ATC supervisors 
and other FAA ATC representatives who 
make up the SRT Oversight Committee. 
The members of this committee are 
more involved with the policy and 
rulemaking aspects of future ATC 
concepts than with the fine details 
of using the systems; hower’er, the 
Oversight Committee monitors all 
recommendations generated by the SRT. 
Along with representatives from the 
FAA, there have been SRT meetings in 
which foreign governments have sent 
ATC representatives. International 
paritcipants in the SRT have been 
from Canada, U.K., Japan, Iceland, 
and Portugal. In addition, the SRT 
has close ties with representatives 
from the International Civil Aviation 


300 







Organization (ICAO) and the Air 
Transport Association (ATA). 

The SRT began its work in 
developing functional requirements 
for oceanic ATC automation systems by 
participating in brainstorming 
sessions and reviewing deiaonst rations 
of increasingly refined prototypes of 
these systems. Early work by the SRT 
led to a refinement of the functional 
requirements previously defined for 
the initial phase of the ADS program, 
in which ADS reports are brought into 
the ODAPS- The SRT then went on to 
define a broad set of requirements 
that is being used as the basis of 
design for the oceanic ATC automation 
system phases being planned for use 
well into tne next century. 

The SRT has focused primarily 
on the ATC automation systems that 
will be based on ADS and satellite 
data link communications, but their 
responsibilities have also included 
verification of the functional 
descriptions of the Dynamic Ocean 
Tracking System (DOTS) for oceanic 
traffic management. In addition, the 
SRT has looked at operational issues 
and requirements for procedural 
modifications in the new automation 
environment. They are heavily 
involved in the FAA's work in 
developing operational concepts for 
current and future states of the 
oceanic ATC environment. 


generating and transmitting ADS 
agreement messages, cased on certain 
events. Tor example, prior to 
accepting control of a given 
aircraft, the ground automation will 
send a message establishing a nominal 
ADS agreement with the aircraft, 
whereupon the aircraft will begin to 
send a predefined set of data 
(presumably, aircraft identification, 
three-dimensional position and time, 
and figure of merit) at a predefined 
message rate (currently on the order 
of five minutes). ADS report content 
and rate will be automatically 
modified through new ADS agreement 
messages upon automatic detection of 
an alert situation and upon transfer 
of control; in addition, the 
controller will be able to manually 
send an ADS agreement message to 
change report content and rate. 

In addition to providing an 
ability to establish and modify ADS 
agreements, the ATC automation will 
be able to process all data 
transmitted in the ADS report. All 
position-relevant data will be 
automatically processed and used to 
update the flight plan data base, as 
well as to check for any 
discrepancies in current or planned 
position. Weather data contained in 
the ADS report will be used to keep 
an on-line weather data base, used in 
calculating future aircraft times and 
positions, up to date. 


FUNCTIONA’., DESCRIPTION OF THE 
SATELLITE-BASED ATC AUTOMATION SYSTEM 

ADS. Report- P.r.Qces?ing 

The full ADS report consists of 
five parts, as currently defined by 
the ICAO ADS Panel. These are 
position, ground vector, air vector, 
projected profile, and weather, with 
each part containing a number of 
individual data fields. The near- 
term oceanic ATC automation system 
will control report rate and content 
in ADS "agreements" (previously 
called "contracts") by automatically 


pgtfl .Link Message. £]a.csas.iDg 

The ATC automation will be able 
to generate, receive, process, and 
display both fixed format and free 
format data link messages. Aside 
from checks for standard 
communications protocol requirements, 
free format messages will not have 
any automatic verification processing 
upon receipt or a y automatic message 
generation. Free format messages 
will be manually created by the 
controller for transmission and 
simply displayed to the controller 
upon receipt. Any errors in free 


301 





r 


format messages must be handled by 
the controller. The use of free 
fojnnat messages is to be minimized 
and generally limited to non-routine 
situations. For critical situations, 
free format data link coanmunications 
will not usually be adequate, so the 
HF voice back-up system is identified 
as the initial communications link 
for critical situations. Digital 
voice using the satellite data link 
is planned for future use in critical 
situations; this function will be 
addressed later in this paper. 

Routine ATC operations can be 
almost completely encompassed by a 
small set of fixed-format ground-to- 
air and air-to-ground messages. Most 
messages sent to the pilot/airborne 
automation fall into the categories 
of clearance, advisory, response, and 
request; most messages received from 
the pilot/airborne automation, aside 
from ADS reports, fall into the 
categories of request, response, 
advisory, and onboard flight plan. 
There will be a very small set of 
fixed format messages to be used for 
critical situations; these will relay 
from the aircraft the existence of 
problems such as hijack, loss of 
fuel, or emergency descent, and from 
the ground a standard emergency 
request for aircraft and situation 
information. As noted above, most 
critical situation communications 
will use voice. 

To accommodate the expected 
mixed traffic environment (including 
both aircraft equipped for ADS and 
satellite communications, and 
aircraft not so equipped), a data 
link exchange capability will be 
provided between the oceanic ATC 
centers and the high frequency (HF) 
radio service provider. With this 
data link interface, routine text ATC 
messages to non-ADS-equipped aircraft 
can be created and processed in the 
same manner as for ADS-equipped 
aircraft. Messages created using the 
standard data link message creation 
tools are sent to the radio service 


provider instead of directly to the 
aircraft. The radio service provider 
then transmits messages to the non- 
equipped aircraft using HF radio. 
Routine messages received through HF 
radio are similarly sent via data 
link from the radio service provider 
to the ATC ground automation and 
processed as normal text messages. 

Format, logic, and 
reasonableness checks will be 
performed automatically on all 
incoming and outgoing fixed format 
messages. 

Ground-to-Air Fixed Format Messages 

Ground-to-air fixed format 
messages will be generated using any 
of a variety of access methods, such 
as programmable function keys, 
message alias names (two or three 
letter message identifiers), and 
menus. In addition, some types of 
fixed format messages will be 
automatically generated as a result 
of processing done by the system. 
For example, when a fixed format 
request for a flight plan change is 
received from the pilot and 
processed, the controller will simply 
touch a button to initiate a conflict 
probe trial amendment. Based on the 
outcome of the conflict probe, a 
clearance message will be 
automatically generated by the system 
and presented to the controller. With 
the touch of another button, the 
clearance can be transmitted to the 
aircraft, and when a technical 
acknowledgement of the message has 
been received from the aircraft, the 
ATC flight plan data base is 
automatically updated. The same sort 
of automatic generation of messages 
will also be available for a small 
set of alert situations, such as 
aircraft out of conformance. When an 
out of conformance position report is 
received, the system will generate a 
message instructing the pilot to 
return to his cleared flight plan. 
The controller can then touch a 


302 






button and the message is sent to the 
pilot. 

Another type of ground-to-air 
fixed format message that can be 
generated either automatically or 
manucilly is the ADS agreement message 
referred to earlier. 

Air-to-Ground Fixed Format Messages 

All air-to-ground fixed format 
messages will be received, processed, 
and displayed to the controller- The 
processing done on these messages 
depends upon the type of message 
received. All incoming fixed format 
messages will be checked for format, 
logic, and reasonableness. 
Processing done on ADS reports will 
also include conformance checking and 
time updating of the ATC flight plan 
data base. More extensive processing 
will be done on certain types of 
incoming fixed format messages. 
Simple request processing, for 
example, will include conflict probe 
trial execution and clearance message 
generation, as mentioned above. 

Automatic processing will be 
performed also for incoming fixed 
format flight plan messages 
transmitted from the aircraft for 
flight plan verification purposes. 
When aircraft enter a flight 
information region, or flight plan 
amendment clearances are granted, the 
ground automation will sena a request 
to the airborne automation for a 
flight plan check. When the flight 
plan data is transmitted down, the 
ground automation will compare the 
onboard flight plan to the ATC flight 
plan data base. This is all 
transparent to the controller unless 
there is a discrepancy, in which case 
the controller will be notified of 
the problem. 

Aut.Qinat.icinJEn]:iaag.emanJ:.s. 

A wide variety of automation 
tools will be available to the 
controller in the ADS environment. 


Dynamic flight data processing and a 
flight plan-based conflict probe will 
form the base of the ATC automation. 
Incorporating ADS reports into the 
automation will allow aircraft 
conformance monitoring and alerting 
of missing ADS reports. Similar 
processing is currently done in ODAPS 
to identify discrepant position 
reports and overdue position reports 
for non-ADS-equipped aircraft. 

Automation associated with 
fixed format data link messages, 
beyond the message generation tools, 
includes outgoing message status 
monitoring. This function assigns 
certain attributes to each type of 
ground-to-air message, such as the 
type of pilot response required and 
the time limit for the response to be 
received. For example, when a 
clearance is sent to an aircraft, if 
a response is not received within the 
specified time parameter, the 
controller will get a "pilot timeout" 
alert. 

The ground automation minimizes 
the amount of data entry required by 
the controller- One way in which it 
does this is to integrate the 
function of transmitting an uplink 
data message containing an ATC 
instruction with the function of 
updating the ground data base to 
account for that ATC instruction. 
Another is to use the data directly 
from any downlinked ATC request from 
the pilot, rather than having the 
controller enter data from scratch. 
The following two examples illustrate 
how automation reduces controller 
entry. 

Suppose that one aircraft has 
been flying at a slower speed than 
planned. After the latest ADS report 
for that aircraft, the ADS report 
processing function of the ground 
automation system determines that 
times of arrival for future points on 
the trajectory of the aircraft need 
to be updated, and it carries out 
this update. This causes the 


303 





conflict probe function to be 
automatically initiated. As a result 
of the update, the aircraft for the 
first time is predicted to have less 
than the required separation from 
another aircraft two hours in the 
future. The controller must analyze 
the situation and determine a 
tentative course of action that will 
involve an ATC instruction to one of 
the aircraft. He will enter this as 
a trial flight plan amendment and 
will submit it for trial probe 
processing by the conflict probe. If 
the probe indicates no conflict, a 
complete data link message will be 
created and presented to the 
controller for approval for uplink. 
All of the content of the uplink 
message can be obtained from the 
controller's original entry of the 
trial flight plan amendment. The 
controller approves the message for 
uplink, and in the normal situation, 
this completes his actions for this 
situation. When the pilot receives 
the instruction, he is required to 
downlink an acknowledgement, 
indicating either that he accepts the 
instruction and will comply, or that 
he is unable to comply. The ground 
automation system will process the 
downlinked will-comply 
acknowledgement message and 
automatically update the flight plan 
data base for the affected aircraft. 

The following is the sequence 
of events for a pilot-initiated ATC 
request. The pilot prepares a fixed- 
format ATC request message using 
whatever automation tools are 
provided to him. After the pilot has 
reviewed this message, he releases it 
for downlink. When received on the 
ground, the message is presented to 
the controller. With only one 
command, the controller releases the 
request for trial probe processing. 
The ground automation has all the 
data necessary from the downlinked 
ATC request to create the trial 
flight plan' amendment for the trial 
probe. If the requested flight plan 
is conflict free, a complete uplink 


ATC instruction message will be 
created and presented to the 
controller for approval for uplink. 
The message will be uplinked, and, if 
the aircraft is suitably equipped and 
the pilot accepts the instruction, 
will be entered automatically into 
the aircraft's flight management 
system. 

There are several significant 
benefits that derive from this 
fundamental principle applied in the 
development of the oceanic automation 
system: only one person (either the 
pilot or the controller) should have 
to do original data entry of an ATC 
instruction and that person should 
not have to duplicate that data 
entry. Data entry workload is 
minimized and the workload effort of 
voice readback is eliminated. With 
the approach described here it is 
very likely that all four of the 
relevant versions of an aircraft's 
flight plan are the same. Those four 
versions are the version understood 
by the controller, the version 
understood by the pilot, the version 
in the ground automation, and the 
version in the cockpit automation. 

In order to help the controller 
monitor previous ATC interactions 
with each aircraft, there will be a 
message recall feature available in 
the ADS ATC automation. This tool 
will allow the controller to search 
electronically through all text 
messages exchanged with all aircraft 
in the flight information region and 
text messages exchanged with other 
ATC facilities (all those with 
available on-line interfaces) over a 
four hour period. 

A tool to help the controller 
monitor pilot preferences is the 
deferred request list function. When 
a flight plan amendment request 
cannot be granted because of a 
potential conflict, the request will 
be placed on file in the deferred 
request list. When subsequent 
changes are made to flight plans in 


304 






the surrounding area, the deferred 
request list will be reviewed by the 
automation to determine whether or 
not any of the conflicts have been 
eliminated by the change. If a 
deferred request becomes conflict 
free, the automation reminds the 
controller that the clearance can be 
granted. 

The controller will be able to 
create lists of aircraft addresses 
using the common denominator 
function. This tool allows the 
controller to identify a common 
parameter, such as altitude, 
geographical region, aircraft type, 
or destination, and the system will 
generate a list of all aircraft under 
his/her control that fit the 
parameter. This list can then be 
used in conjunction with a related 
tool, called the muJticast function, 
which is used to transmit a message 
to groups of aircraft. When the 
multicast function is given a message 
and a list of addresses, it sends the 
message to each address in the list, 
eliminating the need for the 
controller to perform many repetitive 
actions. 

A limited amount of processing 
will be associated with the expected 
transfer of control of aircraft into 
the flight information region. Upon 
initiation of transfer of control, an 
ADS agreement will be established by 
the receiving flight information 
region's ground automation, and ADS 
report processing begins. At the 
same time, a request for the onboard 
flight plan will be transmitted 
automatically to the aircraft, and 
flight plan verification is then 
performed by the ground automation. 

Hardware Enhancements 

The basic hardware components 
used by the controller will include 
an enhanced replacement to the ODAPS 
Flight Data Input-Output (FDIO), an 
enhanced replacement to the ODAPS 
Plan View Display (PVD), and a flight 


strip printer. The FDIO replacement 
will be used to perform most 
controller-machine interface and 
communications tasks, including data 
link message generation, receipt, 
processing, and display. The PVD 
replacement will be used primarily 
for graphical display of air traffic, 
but will have the capability to 
display most of the text data 
normally shown on the FDIO 
replacement. The controller 
interface tools, namely keyboard and 
trackball, will be identical for both 
the FDIO replacement and the PVD 
replacement, and both systems will be 
capable of running from the same 
keyboard/trackball. 

The display hardware available 
to the controller will be based on 
current workstation technology, with 
standard open systems architectures 
and network interfaces among the 
various ATC hardware components. The 
displays themselves will have 
flexible computer-human interface 
features .such as sizable and moveable 
windows; scrolling, sorting, 
searching, and filtering of data; 
data emphasis capabilities including 
color, phasing, and selectable font 
size; and standard editing tools such 
as cut, paste, copy, move, and 
insert. 

BENEFITS OF THE FUTURE OCEANIC ATC 
ENVIRONMENT 

As Stated in the final report 
of the International Civil Aviation 
Organization (ICAO) Future Air 
Navigation Systems Committee, 1988, 
"satellite-based communication, 
navigation, and surveillance systems 
will be the key to world-wide 
improvements" in ATC. Use of 
satellite-based systems will provide 
the greatest immediate impact in 
oceanic airspace, which for the U.S. 
is the area most in need of 
improvements in ATC surveillance and 
communications. 


305 





Use of satellites for automatic 
dependent surveillance and two-way 
data communications will allow many 
new tools to be developed for oceanic 
controllers. The higher frequency of 
surveillance reports from ADS will 
support aircraft conformance 
monitoring and missing report 
detection. These can enhance safety 
by increasing controller confidence 
in the aircraft's position. The 
ability of the controller to have 
immediate communication with the 
pilot will facilitate the 
incorporation of a number of 
automation tools, such as Message 
Recall, Deferred Request Processing, 
and Message Multicast. Such tools 
will eliminate many of the mundane 
tasks currently performed by the 
controller. 

The use of fixed format data 
link communications will allow 
messages to be automatically 
transmitted, received, and processed, 
and data bases (both ground and 
airborne) to be updated 
automatically, with the touch of one 
or two buttons. Safety and 
efficiency will be enhanced by the 
use of fixed format data link 
communications because of the reduced 
probability of incorrect relaying or 
misinterpretation of messages. With 
fixed format messages and maximum use 
of automation processing in the 
aircraft and on the ground, there is 
greater likelihood that the expected 
future flight path of an aircraft 
will be the same in both locations. 

The addition of satellite-based 
surveillance and communications with 
automation enhancements for oceanic 
ATC will also provide pilots with a 
number of benefits. The speed and 
reliability of communications 
combined with automation aids to 
process and generate data messages 
and maintain the flight plan data 
base will permit ATC operations to be 
much more flexible. Flight plan 
amendment requests will be granted 
more often, and pilots will be 


allowed more flexible clearances such 
as step climbs. Ultimately, with the 
increased safety provided by ADS and 
data link communications, separation 
standards between aircraft will be 
able to be reduced, and more aircraft 
will be permitted to fly on the most 
desirable routes and flight levels. 

FUTURE ENHANCEMENTS TO OCEANIC ATC 
AUTOMATION 

A number of other automation 
features are planned to be available 
to oceanic air traffic controllers in 
the near future beyond the phase 
described above. These are 
capabilities that, either because of 
technical complexity or difficulty in 
determining functional and 
operational requirements, have been 
postponed to avoid slowing down the 
immediate development process. Some 
of the more significant features are 
described in this section. 

Digital voice communications 
via satellite is a feature that will 
be important in the near future for 
use primarily in emergency and non¬ 
routine situations. The use of voice 
is necessary when immediate and 
unpredictable messages must be sent 
in a time-critical manner. For the 
immediate future, HF voice 
communications will still be 
available for such situations. 
However, once the ground and airborne 
equipment are capable of digital 
satellite voice communications, this 
will be the preferred mode of 
emergency communications because 
satellite voice is quicker and more 
reliable than HF voice. Data 
communications will remain the 
preferred mode of communications for 
routine situations primarily because 
of the reduced probability of 
misunderstandings and automated 
recordkeeping capabilities associated 
with data messages. 

The use of electronic flight 
strips to reduce the amount of paper 
currently required in the ATC 


306 






environment is a popular idea. 
However, there still remains a great 
deal of work to do before it is clear 
how to most effectively and 
efficiently automate flight strip 
data. After more research has been 
done in this area and the necessary 
operational and procedural changes 
have been implemented, electronic 
flight strips will be incorporated 
into the oceanic ATC automation 
system. 

An electronic library will be 
available in future phases that 
allows controllers immediate, on-line 
access to required reference 
documents, such as FAA ATC Handbooks, 
ICAO Rules documents. Standard 
Operating Procedures manuals, and 
pertinent military guides. Because 
of the large amount of data storage 
required, this capability is being 
postponed until after the initial 
oceanic ATC automation phase. 

An out of conformance conflict 
probe function will be developed to 
determine whether or not potential 
conflicts exist for aircraft that 
have strayed off course. The 
conflict probe normally used for 
oceanic ATC operations uses flight 
plan information to identify 
potential conflicts; when an aircraft 
is out of conformance with its flight 
plan, a flight plan-based conflict 
probe is no longer sufficient. The 
out of conformance conflict probe 
will incorporate the available data 
on current and expected position of 
the aircraft to form a region of 
space that will be protected around 
the airspace. This protected 
airspace is then probed for conflicts 
with other aircraft in the area. 
This function is important to allow 
the controller to determine the 
urgency associated with an aircraft 
out of conformance situation; 
however, because the algorithms have 
not yet been developed for this 
function, it will be postponed beyond 
the initial oceanic ATC automation 
phase. 


A limited conflict resolution 
aid, whereby alternative conflict- 
free routes (altitudes, tracks) are 
suggested to the controller, may be 
available in the next automation 
phase. This tool may be used when a 
trial amendment is run and a conflict 
is detected; in such a case, the 
automation can perform conflict 
probes on altitudes immediately above 
and below the requested altitude or 
on tracks to the right and left of 
the requested track. Any such 
alternative routes that are found to 
be conflict free would then be 
displayed to the controller for 
information and selection (if 
desired). Full conflict resolution 
capabilities, however, are considered 
to be too complex to incorporate in 
the near term. 

CONCLUSIONS 

With the capabilities being 
provided by satellite-based 
surveillance and communications in 
the future oceanic environment, 
controllers will soon be able to take 
advantage of many new automation 
tools that will reduce the number of 
tedious tasks required and help make 
the oceanic ATC environment more 
efficient. In order to take full 
advantage of these technological 
tools, however, a great deal of work 
must be done in the areas of 
operational and international 
coordination and standardization. 
Within the FAA and ICAO, operational 
adjustments must be made and rules 
must be changed both to allow the new 
capabilities to be used fully and 
efficiently and in order for the 
expected increases in oceanic 
capacity demands to be met. In 
addition, by the very nature of 
oceanic ATC and satellite 
communications, international 
coordination, especially among 
countries with adjacent flight 
information regions, is imperative. 
In order to attain the full benefits 
of ADS and satellite data link 


307 






communications, countries must have 
common technical standards, a common 
base of operational requirements, and 
a coordinated plan for transition and 
evolution of their systems. This is 
the area where the real challenges 
lie. 


308 








CO-AUTHOR 



Mary A. McClarnon-Minnix 
Technical Staff Member 
MITRE Corporation 


Mary A. McCIamon-Minnix is a member of the MITRE Center for Advanced Aviation 
System Development in McLean, Virginia, where she has been employed since 1988. She 
has provided technical support to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) in the 
development of Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS). She is currently involved in the 
development of functional requirements for oceanic ATC automation systems using ADS 
and two-way satellite data link. 

From 1985 to 1986, Ms. McClarnon-Minnix worked as a computer specialist for AT&T 
Communications. She holds B.S. and M.S. degrees in Systems Engineering from the 
University of Virginia. 


309 










SESSION FOUR: 

Am TRAFFIC CONTROL 
ENVmONMENT/CERTIFICATION 



Sabrina F. Saunders-Hodge 
Technical Staff Member 
MITRE Corporation 


Sabrina F. Saundcrs-Hodge is a member of the Center for Advanced Aviation System 
Development of The MITRE Corporation in McLean, Virginia. She has provided technical 
support to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) in the development of Automatic 
Dependent Surveillance (ADS), She has also provided technical support in the area of 
Future Air Navigation Systems (FANS). 

Prior to joining MITRE, Ms. Saunders-Hodge was a project leader at Contel American 
Satellite Corporation and a senior programmer/analyst at Dialcom Inc. (a subsidiary of 
British Telecom). 

Ms. Saunders-Hodge received a B.S. degree in Computer Science from the University of 
Maryland in College Park, Maryland in 1982 and is currently pursuing an M.S. degree in 
Computer Science at Johns Hopkins University. 


310 








IMPACT OF AUTOMATION AND DATA LINK ENHANCEMENTS 
ON OCEANIC AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL 


Sabrina F. Saunders-Hodge 
Mark H. Runnels 

The MITRE Corporation, McLean, Virginia 


ABSTRACT 

Among other anticipated benefits, the 
implementation of Automatic Dependent Surveillance 
(ADS) is expected to facilitate significant 
improvements in the overall efficiency of oceanic air 
traffic control (ATC). This paper presents the findings 
of an analysis conducted to evaluate the potential 
impact of ADS on current oceanic ATC operations 
and procedures. 

INTRODUCTION 

The current oceanic ATC environment is 
characterized by very conservative aircraft separation 
standards, infrequent flight progress reporting, indirect 
controller-pilot HF voice communication, and manual 
controller operations. As a direct result, controllers 
often have limited flexibility in accommodating aircraft 
that desire to alter their flight profiles in an attempt to 
achieve maximum efficiency. 

ADS will provide automatic aircraft position 
reporting and direct two-way digital data link. ADS, 
in conjunction with ATC ground automation, is 
expected to provide air traffic controllers with 
additional capabilities, increased flexibility and allow 
the reduction of aircraft separations. As a result, 
airspace users are expected to realize increased 
acceptance of preferred routes of flight and increased 
responsiveness to in-flight requests. 

Recently, an analysis of actual flight progress 
reports, along with associated pilot requests and 
corresponding controller responses, was performed. 
The goal of this analysis was to identify situations 
where an aircraft was constrained from altering its 
flight profile within the current oceanic ATC 


environment, but more than likely would not have 
been constrained if ADS were available. The following 
information documents the analysis approach and 
findings which are represented in the form of 
reconstructed scenarios that highlight such situations. 

APPROACH 

Forthis study, three key assumptions have been 
made. First, it was assumed that ARINC text data 
messages are sufficient to reconstaict enroute aircraft 
flight histories. Second, it was assumed that the ADS 
system comprises three parts, a two-way satellite 
communications capability, an ATC ground 
automation system with a conflict probe, and ADS 
equipped aircraft. Third, it was assumed that the 
implementation of ADS will be coupled with changes 
to present ICAO and FAA rules and procedures 
governing separation criteria. 

The first assumption can be supported by 
reviewing how the current oceanic ATC system 
operates. Today alloceanicaircraft communications 
are via high frequency radio to an ARINC operations 
center. The ARINC center serves as an intermediary 
between pilots and ATC. At the center, pilot voice 
conversations are transcribed into ARINC messages 
which are delivered, via text data messages, to 
oceanic ATC controllers. Conversely, the ARINC 
operators send a read-back text data message to the 
controllers for every ATC instruction issued to pilots. 
Thus, all routine substantive communications 
between pilots and controllers are reflected in the 
ARINC text data messages. 

Although the ADS system is still under 
development, the assumption that ADS comprises 
the three stated parts is taken as given. The third 


311 





assumption is required since many of the benefits 
that can accme from ADS will not be possible without 
some changes to separation standards and existing 
ATC rules and procedures. For the purpose of this 
study, these assumptions are required if meaningful 
comparisons between the existing oceanic ATC 
system and one using ADS are to be made. 

METHODOLOGY 

An approach to analyzing the current oceanic 
environment was adopted that took into account the 
stated assumptions. Specifically, ARINC messages 
would be used to reconstruct actual flight scenarios 
in which pilots were unable to fly their desired flight 
paths. This approach was expected to identify 
situations where there was congested airspace, thus 
revealing opportunities for automation to help the 
controllers handle heavy traffic. At the same time, 
the analysis would illustrate situations where the 
responsiveness of the current ATC system, from the 
pilots perspective, could be improved through 
automation. 

The study was initiated by selecting two days at 
random for review. They were April 2,1991 for flight 
operations in the Oakland FI R and March 6,1991 for 
operations in the New York FIR. ARINC messages 
for these days were collected and stored on computer 
tape in real time. The data was then parsed and 
formatted for use in a database program. Once 
formatted, the data files could be downloaded and 
manipulated in the database program as required. 

The database program was an efficient tool for 
sorting and collecting aircraft scenarios. Forexample, 
it was quite easy to search for all aircraft that had 
passed through one or more oceanic waypoints. 
This data subset could then be sorted by time to 
establish the order in which the aircraft had passed 
the waypoints. The most instructive sorts were those 
specifying key words used in ARINC messages. 
Using the key words UNA for unable and REQ for 
request, many interesting situations were uncovered. 

FINDINGS and ANALYSIS 

From the two days reviewed, four scenarios 
were selected that highlight situations where it is 
likely that ADS would have been beneficial. These 
scenarios are described below. The analysis is 


based solely on the scenario circumstances. 
Speculation about events that led to each scenario is 
not discussed since the ARINC message data can 
only be used to reconstruct history not pilot and 
controller intentions or desires. Additionally, this 
data does not provide the information required to 
measure the influence of inter- and intrafacility 
coordination on the timeliness of controller responses 
to flight requests. 

The New York and Oakland Oceanic FIR data 
collected and analyzed comprised 1556 ARINC 
messages representing 221 separate aircraft flights 
and 2503 ARINC messages representing 391 
separate aircraft flights, respectively. Forcomparison, 
Table 1 and Table 2 list the breakdown of those 
messages by type and list the same data for the 
preceding and/or following days. Although not a 
statistical sample, it should be clearthat March 6 and 
April 2 do not appear to be unusual days for traffic. 


312 






New York Oceanic FIR 


Daily Flight Events and ARINC Message Summary 


Wednesday Thursday 

March 6.1991 March 7.1991 


Total Aircraft Flights 

221 

229 

Total ARINC Messages 

1556 

1615 

by Message Type 

Air Ground 

730 

847 

Position Report 

678 

584 

Meteorological Position 

Report 

144 

167 

Departure Report 

4 

5 

Arrival Report 

0 

1 

Errors - Unknown Type 

0 

11 







PtLOT-CQNTRQl l FR COMMUNICATIONS 
Controller: 

ATCC AAL1470 TO THE JFK ARPT VIA PSNT 
POSN DRCT MERCIA554 CHAMP THEN AS 
PREV CLRD MAINT F350 

REROUTE IS DUE TO TRAFFIC *•* ADVISE 
DELIVERY 

Pilot: 

AAL1470 RF F370 TO AVOID REROUTE 
Controller: 

ATCA AAL1470 UNAB F370 DUE OPPOSITE 
DRCTN TRAFFIC 

COMPLY WITH REROUTE 


SCENARIO EVALUATION 

As depicted in the above aircralt situation display, 
flight AAL1470 was initially headed for JFK airport 
via the route A300 containing waypoinls.CATCH 
and CHAMP. Upon AAL1470's approach to CATCH, 
the pilot was directed by the controller to reroute and 
head direct to MERCI, which lies on route A554. and 
then to adhere to his previously cleared flight plan 
after reaching CHAMP. 


in an attempt to maintain his preferred route of 
flight, the pilot requested to climb from flight level 350 
to flight level 370 as a possible alternative to the 
reroute. His request was denied by the controller due 
to opposite direction traffic. Flight AAL677 was the 
only aircraft in the immediate vidnrty traveling in the 
opposite direction on route A300 at flight level 370. 
The controller's evaluation of the situation was 
accurate in that there would have been a conflict with 
AAL677 at the time of the request. However, closer 
analysis of the situation revealed that in only 5 to 6 
minutes from AAL1470's request, AAL677 would 
have passed AAL1470making it possiblef or AAL1470 
to climb to flight level 370 without a conflict. In the 
current ATC environment, the controller would have 
had no way of knowing this until receiving more 
information from AAL1470’s next progress report 
approximately 60 minutes later. 

ATC ground automation in conjunction with 
frequent ADS position reports and modified separation 
standards would have provided the controller with 
the option to grant AAL1470's flight level request 
within 5 to 6 minutes and possibly allow AAL1470 to 
maintain its preferred route. 


314 











Pilot: 

AAL653 TB RUFF RIDE/RF F260 IMMED 
Controller: 

ATCA AAL653 UNA LWR DUE OPPOSITE 
DIRECTION HEADON AT FL310 

MAKE REQ AGAIN AFTER KRAFT..ALSO WHAT 
KIND OF TURBC ARE U HAVING 

Pilot: 

TB HAVING SOLID HEAVY LINE OF TB 


Just after crossing the waypoint: CATCH (at 
20:11 UTC) and heading for the waypoint: KRAFT 
on route A300, the pilot for flight AAL653 requested 
an immediate descent from flight level 330 to flight 
level 260 due to turbulence (at 20:20 UTC). His 
request for the lower altitude was denied by the 
controller due to opposite direction head-on traffic at 
flight level 310. Fligii'i 'JSA772 was the only aircraft 
in the immediate vicinity traveling in the opposite 
direction on route A300 at flight level 310. The 
controller's evaluation of the situation was accurate 
in that there v/ould have been a head-on conflict with 
flight USA772 within a matter of 2 to 3 minutes from 
the time of the request if flight AAL653 were cleared 


to descend through flight level 310 down tof light level 
260. However, closer analysis of the situation 
revealed that in only 4 to 5 minutes from AAL653's 
request (approx. 20:24 UTC), flight USA772 would 
have passed flight AAL653 making it possible for 
flight AAL653 to descend through flight level 310 
down to flight level 260 without a conflict. In today’s 
oceanic ATC environment, without conflict probe 
and a situation display, the controller had no way of 
realizing this. 

Another interesting point to note is that the 
controller suggested that AAL653’s pilot make his 
request again after reaching the next 
waypoint:KRAFT. The pilot estimated being over 
KRAFT at 21:13 UTC and actually arrived at 21:09 
UTC. Undercurrent ATC separation standards and 
procedures, this would have been the next allowable 
time for AAL653 to change altitude because the 
controller would then have an additional progress 
report from both USA772 (after reaching CATCH) 
and AAL653. Hence, flight AAL653 was not eligibie 
to descend to a lower altitude in order to avoid 
turbulence for at least 49 minutes after its pilot's 
original request. 

This is a clear example of where AOS combined 
with revised separation standards and procedures 
would have provided the controller with the option to 
grant the flight level request within 4 to 5 minutes and 
thus allow flight AAL653 to escape the turbulence 
and smooth out its ride in a timely manner. 


315 












Oakland Oceanic FIR 


Total Aircraft Flights 
Total ARINC Messages 
by Message Type 

Air Ground 
Position Report 
Meteorological Position 
Report 

Departure Report 
Arrival Report 
Errors - Unknown Type 


Daily Flight Events and ARINC Message Summary 


Monday 

Tuesday 

Wednesday 

Aoril 1.1991 

Anri! 2.1991 

AnrilS. 1991 

405 

391 

428 

2841 

2503 

2526 


1071 

904 

945 

543 

468 

434 

1024 

1089 

1072 

59 

35 

47 

14 

6 

24 

4 

1 

4 


Table 2 


316 









SCENARIO 3: AIRCRAFT CROSSING (OAKLAND OCEANIC FIR) 


COAl 
11:48 
F310 , 


OFAIZ 

11:48 

F310 


AFR280 

11:48 

^^^370 


COA2 
11:48 
F3S0 y 


' M70017 
11:48 
F330 


OFAll 

11:48 

F330 


^‘^OAl.ei6 
. 11:48 

■**•.=*370 


UAt.ei5 

11:48 

F310 


Hoc*: Solid I.in*» or* 

C*cabll*h*<l Ocoanic Air 
Roue** 


(C347 <BS7S) 


Pilot, QFA12 @ F310 - 11:50 UTC: 

REQ F350 

Controller to QFA12 -11:53 UTC: 

QFA12 UNA HIER DUE CONVERGING TRAFFIC 

Pilot, QFA11 @ F330 - 11:54 UTC: 

REQ F370 

Controller to QFA11 -11:58 UTC: 

QFA11 CTAMF370 

ControllertoQFA12-12:11 UTC: 

QFA12 CTAM F350 


As depicted above, QFA12 was enroute on a 
southwesterly course from the west coast of the 
United States to a destination in the Pacific Ocean. 
All aircraft in an area bounded by N15", W145" and 
SOS", W170" are plotted above at their positions for 
11:48 UTC. 

At 11:50 UTC, QFA12 made an altitude request 
for a climb to flight level 350 f rom flight level 310. ATC 
promptly responded to the QFAl 2 request but denied 
the change in altitude Inspection of this scenario 
reveals that QFAl 2, while climbing to F350, could 
have been in conflict with QFAl 1 flying a reciprocal 
course at F330 . Since oceanic controllers rely on 


flight strips to track aircraft, this controller had only a 
rough estimate of QFA11 and QFAl 2s position at 
11:50 UTC. Current separation standards would 
require the controller to maintain vertical separation 
for both crossing aircraft from 20 minutes before the 
estimated crossing point to 20 minutes after the 
aircraft had passed. At a ground speed of 500 nmi 
per hour, the aircraft would have crossed in an hour 
or less. This would have given the controller 40 
minutes or less to perform a mental conflict probe, 
communicate a clearance to QFAl2, verify that 
QFAl 2 had reached the cleared altitude, and handle 
all othertraff ic in that FIR sector. Given the uncertainly 
of each aircrafts position and the actual lime they 
would have passed, the controller prudently denied 
the flight level request. Eventually, QFAl 2 was able 
to climb to F350 since QFAl 1 was granted a climb to 
F370, eliminating the potential conflict. 

This scenario is an excellent example for 
illustrating how the ADS system could benefit 
controllers and pilots. If QFAl 1 had not requested a 
climb, then QFAl 2 could have remained at F310for 
a extended period of time. With a situation display 
and frequent ADS position reports, the controller 
would have known that QFAl 2 and QFA11 were 
separated by nearly 1000 nautical miles. Further, a 
conflict probe could immediately tell the controller if 
longitudinal separation between the aircraft would 
be maintained as QFAl 2 passed through F330. 
These tools of the ADS system should help controllers 
in making informed decisions and by default make 
the ATC system more responsive to pilots. 


317 







SCENARIO 4: AIRCRAFT FOLLOWING ENROUTE (OAKUND OCEANIC FIR) 



PILOT-CONTROLLER COMMUNICATIONS 


SCENARIO EVALUATION 


Pilot, JAL61 @ F280 - 21:58 UTC; 

REQ F330 (request flight level 330) 

Pilot, UAL97 @ F310 - 22:00 UTC: 

REQ BLK F330B350 IF UNA REQ F330 (request 
block altitude from flight level 330 through 350, if 
unable, request fight level 330) 

Controller to JAL61 - 22:03 UTC: 

UNA HIER ROF (unable higher request on file) 

Controller to UAL97 - 22:09 UTC: 

CTAM F330 (climb to and maintain flight level 330) 

Pilot, UAL97 @ F330 - 22:13 UTC: 

AT LEVEL F330 

Pilot, JAL61 @ F280 - 22:51 UTC: 

REQF310OR F330 

Pilot, UAL97 <S) F330 - 00:03 UTC: 

REQ F350 


Depicted above are seven aircraft flying in single 
file from the west coast of the United States toward 
the Anchorage FIR at 2300 UTC. The clustering of 
aircraft in this manner is quite typical forthe Oakland 
FIR. The first four aircraft in line, KAL001, NWA1, 
JAL65 and KAL017 are separated by ten or more 
minutes. Additionally they are all at flight level 310 or 
higher. 

As these four planes progressed down the route, 
all of them received requested altitudes except 
KAL017. JAL65, ahead of and higherthan KAL017, 
failed to file a position report forthe waypoint HARMS. 
ATC tried to contact JAL65 but was unsuccessful. At 
roughly the same time. KAL017 requested flight level 
350. ATC denied the request due to traffic. 
Presumably the request was denied because ATC 
was uncertain of JAL65s location. This example 
highlights the unreliable nature of high frequency 
communications. In an ADS equipped system using 
satellite communications, ATC would likely not have 
lost contact with JAL65. 


Controller to UAL97 - 00:12 UTC: 
CTAM F350 

Controller to JAL61 - 00:22 UTC: 
CTAM F330 


Aircraft five and six, LIAL97 and JAL61, enter the 
FIR at flight levels 310 and 280 respectively and are 
separated longitudinally by only six minutes. The 
last plane in this line, NWA23. enters the FIR 12 
minutes behind J AL61 at flight level F350 and remains 
there for the duration. 


318 









SCENARIO FVAt IIATION fCONTINHED^ 

Listed above are the pilot controller 
communications for UAL97.JAL61 andATC. JAL61. 
at flight level 280 and behind UAL97, requests flight 
level 330. This request is correctly denied by ATC 
since UAL97 is at flight level 310 and only slightly 
ahead In time. However, in an ADS system with a 
reduced longitudinal separation standard of 5 minutes, 
this request would have likely been granted. 

Immediately after the JAL61 request, UAL97 
requests a block altitude from flight level 330 through 
350. ATC grants UAL97 only the altitude change to 
flight level 330. The block altitude request was 
probably denied because Mach separation technique 
was not in use. Current separation standards require 
the use of Mach technique prior to granting a block 
altitude request. With ADS and modified separation 
standards, UAL97s block altitude request would 
likely have been granted since UAL97 was clearly 
behind KAL017 by roughly 20 minutes and was 
ahead of NWA23 by 18 minutes. 

Roughly an hourafterhisoriginal request, JAL61, 
still flying at flight level 280, requests flight level 310 
or 330. There was no response from ATC. Clearly 
JAL61 could have climbed to flight level 310 since 
UAL97 had been at flight level 330 for more than 30 
minutes. At 0003 UTC, UAL97 requested flight level 
350. ATC granted this request at 0012 UTC. By this 
time JAL61 has been at flight level 280 for close to 
two hours. Finally at 0022 UTC. ATC responds to 
JAL61 with approval to climb to flight level 330. 

Like scenario three, this scenario is a good 
example of where AD-S, with conflict probe, could 
have immediately ioentified that the block altitude 
request by UAL97 was acceptable. Additionally with 
the ground automation of an ADS system, the 
controller could have requested an event driven ADS 
position report from UAL97 upon reaching flight level 
330. This report could have automatically triggered 
an instruction to J AL61 for an altitude chang^to flight 
level 310. This would have avoided the two hourflight 
by JAL61 at flight level 280. With the advent of 
reduced separation standards, JAL61 could have 
been cleared to flight level 330 or higher. 

Many of the benefits that can accrue from the 
ADS system are highlighted in this scenario. Reliable 


communications coupled with ADS position reports 
should lessen the impact of unrecehred position 
reports. Additionally, controllers may be more willing 
to grant clearances that are close to minimum 
separation standards, if they know they can depend 
on immediate contact with aircraft should future 
small variations in flight dynamics cause an erosion 
of separation. Ground automation coupled with a 
conflict probe should ease controller workloads by 
providing decision aids that will quickly assess 
available options. Finally, the reductionof separation 
standards will mitigate some of the limitations found 
in the current oceanic ATC system. 

CONCLUSION 

In summary, the results of this analysis have 
indicated that the implementation of ADS, defined in 
terms of automatic position reports, two-way digital 
data link, and ATC ground automation, promises to 
have a positive and significant effect on the efficiency, 
capacity and responsiveness of oceanic air traffic 
control operations. This analysis also indicates that 
there are several benefits to be gained from ADS by 
both pilots and controllers without a change to current 
separation standards. However, it should be noted 
that unless the ADS system is accompanied by a 
simultaneous change in ICAO and FAA rules 
governing separation standards, a number of the 
anticipated improvements to air traffic control and 
management will not be realized. 

Further data analysis in support of studying the 
operational impact of ADS is planned. Using an ADS 
prototype equipped with conflict probe and operator 
interaction capabilities, simulationswillbeperformed 
to re-enact oceanic airtraffic control scenarios. These 
simulations should serve to uncoveradditional control 
situations encountered by controllers which could be 
handled more elliciently with ADS. In addition, these 
simulations may serve to uncover benefits that were 
not originally anticipated as well as additional 
functionality that should be adopted in ADS 
implementation specifications. 


319 








Mark H. Runnels 
Technical Staff Member 
MITRE Corporation 


Mark H. Runnels is a member of the MITRE Center for Advanced Aviation System 
Development in Mcl.can, Virginia. He is currently supporting the development of minimum 
operational performance standards for ADS avionics and studying the operational impact 
of ADS on the oceanic ATC system. 

From 1985 to 1989, Mr. Runnels served in the U.S. Navy developing advanced intelligence 
systems. He holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Electrical Engineering from the 
University of Houston. 


320 













SESSION FOUR: 

AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL 
ENVIRONMENT/CERTIFICATION 



Amado Colberg 

International Procedures Specialist 
Federal Aviation Administration 


Amado Colberg works as an International Procedures Specialist at the Federal Aviation 
Administration Headquarters in Washington, D.C. He participates in the Automatic 
Dependent Surveillance Panel and working group meetings held by the International Civil 
Aviation Organization, Mr. Colberg was a member of the En Route Procedures Branch for 
two years prior to his present position. During this period he helped establish and became 
chairman of the Air Traffic Advanced Automation Procedures Team which is developing 
air traffic procedures for the U.S. computerized air traffic system. 

Mr. Colberg came to Washington from San Juan CERAP (Combined En Route and 
Approach Control). He worked there for 17 years, during which time he participated as 
an Air Traffic Control Specialist (ATCS), an ATCS instructor, an automation specialist, a 
team supervisor, and an Assistant Manager for Automation. 

Mr. Colberg has a Bachelor of Arts degree from Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New 
Jersey. He is fluent in Spanish and conversant in French. 


322 












Amado Colberg 

International Procedures Specialist 
Federal Aviation Administration 


ABSTRACT 

This paper provides a brief review of oceanic 
air ti^fic control as it has been conducted in 
the United States. It then describes the 
system improvements which are planned 
through the use of satellite communications 
technology, including air/ground data link and 
Automatic Dependent Surveillance. 

As nearly all of the oceanic airspace is outside 
of air traffic control (ATC) radar coverage, 
the oceanic ATC system has been 
characterized by the use of procedural non¬ 
radar separation. Further, most of the oceanic 
airspace is beyond the c- '. erage of land-based 
Very High Frequency (V HF) communications, 
which is subject to line-of-sight limitations. 
Accordingly, it has bee necessary to use High 
Frequency (HF) for air/ground/air 
communications. HF communications are 
relayed through commercial facilities 
dedicated to this purpose, which results in an 
additional delay in the ultimate reception of 
air traffic control messages. 

Looking toward the future, it is anticipated 
that the use of satellite relays will provide 
reliable and direct data link communications 
between controllers and pilots, eliminating the 
present communications delays. The use of 
Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) will 
provide continuous surveillance of oceanic air 
traffic on displays similar in appearance to 


ATC radar displays. These improvements 
will revolutionize future oceanic air traffic 
control operations by enabling more flexible 
and efficient control with considerably higher 
traffic capacity. 

PAST 

Until recently, oceanic air traffic was 
controlled by seven U.S. Air Route Traffic 
Control Centers: Anchorage, Honolulu, 
Oakland, Houston, Miami, San Juan, and 
New York, as shown in Figure 1. As most of 
the oceanic area was outside ATC radar and 
VHF coverage, procedural non-radar 
separation was used. ATC communications 
utilized HF. Messages were relayed by 
ARINC, as the FAA does not use HF 
frequencies for air traffic control because HF 
is characteristically noisy, particularly during 
periods of sunspot activity, and is subject to 
fading due to diurnal changes in the 
ionosphere. 

Aircraft oceanic position reports were 
approximately one hour apart. However, 
because of communications difficulties and the 
need for relaying messages to and from the 
centers, messages could be delayed as much 
as 20 minutes. These factors severely limited 
the flexibility of the ATC System to respond 
to pilot requests and to obtain current 
information on aircraft position. 


323 


















Initially, dead reckoning and celestial 
navigation were the only means of navigation 
for aircraft crossing ocear’c airspace. These 
methods were not as accurate as the 
navigation systems now in use. The large 
navigation errors, combined with 
communications delays, required the use of 
large separation standards which severely 
limited the capacity of the oceanic airspace. 

In the vast reaches of oceanic airspace there 
were little or no surveillance capabiUties. The 
use of radar in oceanic airspace were limited 
to areas around islands, such has Puerto Rico, 
or offshore areas. The lack of surveillance 
capabilities over oceanic airspace makes it 
necessary for air traffic controllers to use 
flight progress strips to keep track of aircraft 
in non-radar airspace. These progress strips 
have all the necessary aircraft information 
needed to separate air traffic using non-radar 
procedures. 

PRESENT 

With the expansion of the ARINC and FAA 
communications networks, it has been possible 
for the FAA to consolidate some of the 
oceanic ATC Centers and reduce the number 
from seven to four (Anchorage, Oakland, 
Houston, and New York). The San Juan 
Combined En Route/Approach Control 
(CERAP) and Miami Center oceanic sectors 
were incorporated into New York Center, and 
the Honolulu CERAP oceanic sectors were 
incoiporated into Oakland Center. 

Further, a variable set of parallel tracks is 
currently established twice daily for the 
busiest routes across the North Atlantic and 
the North Pacific Oceans. These tracks are 
computer-derived to take advantage of 
favorable wind circulation around high and 
low pressure areas. In the North Atlantic 
MinimumNavigationalPerformanceStandards 
(MNPS) Airspace the tracks are published for 


the westbound traffic from Europe and for 
eastbound traffic from North America. These 
tracks are organized in one-way flow in the 
morning and evening and are spaced laterally 
one degree of latitude (60 NM) apart to be 
used by aircraft capable of complying with 
these tolerances. A similar set of tracks using 
100 nautical mile lateral separation is in use 
between the Orient and North American 
airports. 

Currently, the majority of aircraft on oceanic 
routes use the Inertial Navigation System 
(INS) or Internal Reference System (IRS) for 
more accurate area navigation. This has 
allowed the use of reduced lateral and 
longitudinal separations between similar 
aircraft on these tracks. 

The procedures used in oceanic Centers are 
similar to those used in domestic Centers 
many years ago, in that surveillance and direct 
communications with aircraft are not 
available. Communications are still relayed 
through the ARINC network and are 
conducted on HF. The oceanic controller’s 
ATC display are still flight progress strips, 
and the traffic situation is still a controller’s 
mental visualization. 

However, as oceanic ATC is a global activity, 
a number of international organizations have 
been working to develop the procedures and 
technology for tomorrow’s oceanic system. 
As it is very important that the developments 
in the various countries be compatible with 
each other, these developments are 
coordinated through the International Civil 
Aviation Organization (ICAO) to ensure 
standardization and harmonization. The FAA, 
particularly through its International 
Procedures Branch, participates in the work of 
various international groups, which include, 
the North Atlantic Systems Planning Group 
(NAT/SPG), the Informal Pacific ATC 
Coordination Group (IPACG), the Automatic 


324 






Dependent Surveillance Panel (ADSP), and 
the Caribbean/South America Regional 
Planning and Implementation Group 
(GREPECAS). 

The International Procedures Branch also 
participates in the FAA’s Oceanic Systems 
Requirements Team (SRT) and leads the 
FAA’s Air Traffic ODAPS Procedures Team 
(ATOPT). 

FUTURE 

North Atlantic air traffic has been forecast to 
grow 36% between 1990 and 2000; North 
Pacific Traffic has been forecast to grow at 
double this rate during the same period. To 
handle such demands, radical improvements in 
the system will be necessary. 

Although plans vary, it is expected that 
eventually U.S. Oceanic ATC Centers will be 
consolidated into two facilities, the Oakland 
and New York Centers. 

The use of satellite communications 
technology will enable direct communications 
between pilot and controller. Present 
communications delays will be eliminated, 
allowing the ATC system to be more 
responsive to pilot requests. This technology 
should allow much greater control flexibility 
and correspondingly more fuel-efficient flight 
profiles. 

Air-ground satellite data links will be utilized 
for routine messages and acknowledgements, 
as data link messages can be completed in a 
small fraction of the time required for voice 
messages. However, it is expected that voice 
capability will be retained for non-routine or 
emergency messages. 


of ADS, which in the U.S. will use ODAPS 
technology as a base. In this application, the 
aircraft will automatically and periodically 
transmit its identity, latitude, longitude, and 
altitude via data link to a communications 
satellite. Latitude and longitude data will 
originate in the INS, IRS or the Global 
Positioning System (GPS) equipment in the 
aircraft. The satellite earth station which will 
send it to the air traffic control facility. The 
aircraft position data will then be converted 
into a target on a cathode ray tube (CRT) 
display, with aircraft identity and altitude 
shown on an alphanumeric tag in a manner 
similar to current ATC radar displays. 

Such a display will enable air traffic 
controllers to separate aircraft, check the 
progress of each aircraft in relation to its 
flight plan and to monitor and correct any 
critical deviations from the planned flight 
track. Ultimately, automation will be added 
to the ADS display to alert the controller to 
any possible traffic conflict far enough in 
advance for the controller to evaluate various 
alternative ways to resolve and avoid the 
conflict. The preferred solution can then be 
coordinated directly with the pilot via the 
satellite communications system. 

SUMMARY 

Up to the present time, ATC procedures for 
oceanic airspace have changed very slowly. 
However, the development of direct satellite 
communications and ADS will revolutionize 
oceanic air traffic control procedures, by 
giving the oceanic controller surveillance and 
communications capabilities which are similar 
to those currently in use by the domestic air 
traffic controller. These improvements will 
enable oceanic separation standards to be 
reduced, increasing system capacity and 
efficiency while maintaining the safety of the 
system. 


Together, satellite and data link technology 
will make possible the continuous surveillance 
of aircraft in oceanic airspace, through the use 


325 





SESSION FOUR: 

AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL 
ENVIRONMENT/CERTIFICATION 



Christopher N. Andrews 
Technical Staff Member 
MITRE Corporation 


Christopher N. Andreevs has been a member of the MITRE Center for Advanced Aviation 
System Development in McLean, Virginia since 1990, He is currently involved in the 
development of a real-time simulation of Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS). 

Prior to joining MITRE, he worked as a Software Engineer for IVAC Corporation. Mr. 
Andrews graduated with honors form the Georgia Institute of Technology in 1990, with a 
Bachelors degree in Electrical Engineering. 


326 












PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF ADS/RADAR CORRELATION 


Christopher N. Andrews 
Dr. Leonard A. Wojcik 

The MITRE Corporation, McLean, Virginia 


ABSTRACT 

This paper addresses the potential utility, 
limitations, and implementation factors associated 
with use of an Automatic Dependent Surveillance 
(ADS) /radar correlation function in an operational 
ADS system. It also evaluates the quality of 
surveillance data that could be obtained from ADS 
equipped flights and assesses its suitability for 
oceanic automation by comparing engineering 
trials ADS data to radar data. 

SECTION 1 
INTRODUCTION 

.1.1 BacKqround 

Improvements to oceanic surveillance and 
communications provided by ADS will enable 
significant user benefits, increased system safety, 
and a more efficient use of oceanic airspace. 
While some of these benefits can be realized 
immediately upon Introduction of ADS progress 
reports, satellite data link, and oceanic air traffic 
control (ATC) automation, the most significant 
benefit will be derived from reductions in oceanic 
separation standards. 

To put reduced separation standards into 
place, thorough safety studies of the ADS system 
will be required. These safety studies will need to 
Identify all mechanisms that can lead to errors in 
navigation and propose tests that can reveal the 
presence of errors due to each mechanism. 
These studies are necessary since ADS places a 
great reliance on the integrity of navigation data 
and does not use an independent surveillance 
system that can detect erroneous navigation data. 


In September, 1990, the Federal Aviation 
/\dministration (FAA), in cooperation with several 
aviation industry companies, began testing of 
satellite ADS position reports and datalink. These 
tests involved in-service airline aircraft recently 
equipped with satellite data link and ADS 
capability. These tests, called the Pacific 
Engineering Trials (PET), generated data that 
could be used to evaluate various aspects of ADS 
in an operational environment. 

■1,2. P urpose 

There are two objectives in conducting the 
analysis of PET data and in preparing this paper: 

1. Evaluate the potential utility, limitations, 
and implementation factors associated with use of 
an ADS/radar correlation function in an 
operational ADS system. Such a function would 
be intended to detect some blunders leading to 
erroneous navigation data. 

2. Evaluate the overall quality of 
surveillance data that could be obtained by ADS 
and assess its suitability for oceanic automation 
by comparing the engineering trials ADS data to 
radar data. Both raw radar reports and track data 
were collected from the FAA's enroute automation 
system during the trials and were correlated with 
ADS progress reports. 

1.3 Study Limitations 

This study was performed with data 
collected from a limited number of ADS-equipped 
flights involved in the early part of the ADS Pacific 
Engineering Trials. Such limited data does not 
provide conciusive evidence on the relative 
accuracy of ADS. The data collected and 


327 





analyzed is limited to the airspace under radar 
coverage and to the navigation system on the 
paitici)ating aircraft. 

SECTION 2 

OPERATIONAL ADS^ADAR CORRELATION 

ADS/radar correlation could be used in 
ocean'c ATC as a final check on aircraft-reported 
position and time before outbound ADS-equipped 
aircraft leave radar coverage. This section briefly 
discusses potential applications for ADS/radar 
correlation in actual operations. 

2.1 Navigation System Correlation 

Maintaining a high level of safety for the 
oceanic air traffic system requires that human or 
machine caused blunders that could result in an 
accident be prevented or corrected through 
redundancy of independent systems or 
procedures. 

The inertial navigation system (INS) is an 
example of a redundant system. The INS must be 
at least a dual system, including navigational 
computers and reference units, and at least two 
units must be functioning at takeoff. Cross-ched(S 
among the aircraft crew help verify that all data 
entered into the system are correct, that units are 
functioning properly, and that system controls and 
switches are properly configured to provide the 
desired information. 

ADS/radar correlation could add to this set 
of INS initialization checks and could reduce the 
initialization blunder rate. This study suggests that 
ADS/radar correlation is adequate to detect large 
navigation system initialization errors. This could 
improve safety at present separation standards or 
could be part of a justification to reduce separation 
standards. 

ADS/radar correlation offers an 
independent means to validate the clock that 
provides the contents of the time field sent in ADS 
progress reports. Accurate aircraft time is a new 
element required by ADS. Current controls over 


reported aircraft time are not stringent because of 
the large existing separation standards. AOSm^ 
permit separation standards to be reduced I times 
of aircraft positions updates are known with 
enough accuracy to show positions within a few 
nautical niles on cotArolers’(ispisvs- 

Since a subsonic jet travels about 8 
nautical nvies in one minute, a time inaocuraqr of 
no greater than 20 seconds m£qr be sufficient for 
aircraft separations on the order of tens of mfes. 
Tone inaccuracy on the order of several seconds 
is ectuivalent to aircraft position inaccuracies of 
less than one nautical mie. Separation standards 
approaching domestic enroute standards would 
require niore stringent time accuracies. 

ADS/radar correlation is an attractive 
candidate to ensure that the aircraft time is 
accurate because the check could be performed 
entirely independent of the aircraft and could be 
accomplished automatically. A mechanism would 
be needed for pilots to adjust the aircraft clocks if 
a correction is rec|uired. Also, pilots would have to 
be alerted to a major inaccuracy early enough in 
the flight to permit clock adjustments and another 
ADS/radar correlation check to validate the 
adjustments. 

One limitation of ADS/radar correlation for 
clock correction is that the metthod cannot 
distinguish between clock inaccuracies and 
navigation system inaccuracies along the line of 
flight. 

2.3. filQbal.PositiQninq Syslejn (QP.S) 

In the future, GPS is expected to provide 
position and time information to equipped aircraft. 
ADS/radar correlation may diminish in importance 
for oceanic operations with widespread GPS use 
because GPS will meet stringent integrity and 
reliability requirements and does not require 
initialization. INS may still be used in aircraft with 
GPS to complement the weaknesses of GPS 
(which could appear in conditions as poor satellite 
geometry), but it is unclear whether ADS/radar 
correlation would still be justified as an 
independent means to validate aircraft time and 
position accuracy. 


328 





Una tt B»d»rCfiwfiot: ^ 
ADSfRadwComtation Ends 



Wliil AOS report; 
AOS/RadarComtalion Bogins 





Radar Target Data 


Oceanic ATC 
{OOAPScorrtelalesAOS 
wih radar, rfisplays informalion, 
and alerts oonIrDlleis) 


Correlation Alert Informalion 
Of needed by ATC or pdnt over 
terrestrial datalink) 

Radar Target Data from other ARTCCs 
Correlalion Alert Intormation to other ARTCCs 



Radv 


Figure 1-Possible ADS/radar correlation concept 


2.4-Qoeraiional A pS/Radar.C< ?pt iguraliQn 

Figure 1 suggests a possible operational 
concept for ADS/radar correlation. Since aircraft 
bound for transoceanic travel may be under 
coverage of ATC facilities other than the oceanic 
control facility prior to entering oceanic airspace, 
inter-facility communication will be needed. 
Radar position and time information for oceanic 
aircraft are transmitted from each Air Route Traffic 
Control Center (ARTCC) to the Oceanic Display 
and Planning System (ODAPS), where they are 
correlated with ADS-reported position and time. 
Depending on the outcome of the correlation, an 
alert or confirmation message could be sent to the 
aircraft. 

Oceanic controllers would also receive 
correlation alert messages so they could contact 
pilots with further instructions if correlation is .not 
achieved. The process begins early in the flight to 
permit the crew to make any clock or INS position 


adjustments. Following an alert, ADS/radar 
correlation continues until satisfactory correlation 
is achieved. 

SECTION 3 
SURVEILLANCE DATA 

Aircraft position information was collected 
from three sources: ADS progress reports, radar 
rei'jrns, and track data. Stereographic projection 
techniques were used to map the data to a 
common X, v coordinate system. 

3„1 AQS Eragrfiss-BgQfiits 

ADS progress reports, generated by 
onboard navigation equipment at five minute 
intervals, were transmitted from an United Airlines 
aircraft to the Inmarsat Pacific Ocean satellite, 
received by the COMSAT west coast ground earth 
station, and routed to several ADS experimental 


329 










workstations via the Aeronautical Radio. 
Incorporated (ARINC) Data Network Service 
(ADNS). The ADS progress report contains the 
aircraft's latitude, longitude, and altitude, as well 
as a time stamp. 

The position of the aircraft was 
determined by converting the latitude and 
longitude from the ADS report to system 
coordinates using exact stereographic projection 
equations [1]. 

3.2 Radar Returns 

Common Digitizer (CD) tapes were 
collected from the ARTCC in Oakland. California. 
The data from the CD tapes consist of the range 


and azimuth of the aircraft from the radar site, the 
altitude of the aircraft based on Mode C 
transponder returns, and a time stamp. 

The aircraft’s location was converted to 
system coordinates using exact radar data 
coordinate conversion equations and second 
order approximations to radar data transformation 
equations [1]. 

3.3 Track Data 

Track data, generated by the Host 
Computer System in six second intervals, were 
obtained from the Oakland ARTCC. These data 
include the location of the aircraft calculated by 
the tracking algorithm, based on radar returns. 



X (nmi) 

Fig. 2--This illustration shows United Airlines Flight 806 as it approaches San Francisco 
International Airport on 09-28-90. The area in the small box is shown in Figure 3. 


330 





































































The data are expressed in system coordinates 
and include a lime stamp. 

Track data do not always accurately 
reflect the flight path of the aircraft, especially 
during turns, as can be seen in Figure 3. On the 
other hand, when the aircraft is in straight flight at 
long-range from the radar, the raw radar reports 
contain random errors. In this situation, a more 
accurate estimate of aircraft position is obtained 
from track data. Because the aircraft under study 
were involved in a series of turns, raw radar 
reports were used to evaluate the accuracy of 
ADS progress reports. 


SECTION 4 
DATA ANALYSIS 
4.1 Surveillance Data Plots 

The path of United Airlines Flight 806 can 
be seen as it approaches San Francisco 
International Airport in Figure 2. This flight 
departed from Hong Kong and had been airborne 
for approximately 8 hours when the data shown in 
Figure 1 were reported. The source for the 
position data included in the ADS progress reports 
was the inertial navigation system. It is not known 
whether the system had been updated during the 
flight. 



X (nmi) 

Fig. 3"This illustration shows a detailed view of United Airlines Flight 806 as it 
approaches San Francisco International Airport. The position of the aircraft based on 
the radar data is denoted by the A. This position corresponds with the ADS progress 
report. 


331 































































© 

H 


■H 


Cioss-Coutse OWerenoe 


Along^ouse Difference 


Projected FSgM Rath 


© AOS Progress Report 

^ Aircraft Position at Time of ADS Progress Report Based on Projected 
FlighI Path 

• Radar Return 


Fig 4-lllustration of cross-course and along-course difference. 


Figure 3 shows a detailed view of the 
surveillance data shown in the box in Figure 2. 
This illustration shows a variation in time and 
position between the ADS progress report and the 
radar returns. The position of the aircraft based 
on the radar returns is denoted by the A. This 
position corresponds with the ADS progress report 
shown in the figure. 

This figure also shows the track data for 
the aircraft. Track data deviates by as much as 
1.1 nautical miles from the true path of the aircraft. 


4.2 Measurement Methodology 

A simple algorithm was used to determine 
cross-course and along-course difference. 
Position information from the ADS progress 
reports and radar reports were converted to 
system coordinates as described in section 3. 
Small segments of the flight path of the aircraft 
were generated by fitting radar reports to first- 
order polynomial equations. Radar reports used 
to generate the flight path were selected by their 
proximity in time and location to the ADS point. 



Flight 806 

09-28-90 

(Inbound) 

Flight 807 

09-28-90 

(Outbound) 

Flight 808 

09-30-90 

(Inbound) 

Flight 805 

09-30-90 

(Outbound) 

Overall 

Average Cross- 
Course Dilference 

0.5873 

0.4134 

0.2773 

1.0174 

0.4829 

Average Cross- 
Course Difference 
Sfandard Deviation 

0.4104 

0.3065 

0.2426 

0.2712 

0.3787 

Average Along- 
Course Difference 

0.9042 

0.5895 

0.9133 

0.9006 

0.8030 

Average Along- 
Course Difference 
Standard Deviation 

0.5089 

0 3871 

0.3607 

0.4218 

0.4428 

Average Total 
Difference 

1.2010 

0.7816 

0.9951 

1.3970 

1.0241 

Average Total 
Dilference Standard 
Deviation 

0 3660 

0.3834 

0.3247 

0.3536 

0.4076 


All entries in ihis table have units ol nautical miles 


Table 1"ADS/radar correlation statistics 


332 









Fig. 5--Cross-course and along-course difference distribution 


The cross-course difference is the measurement 
of the lateral distance between the aircraft and the 
projected flight path. The along-course difference 
is determined as a combination of time and 
position deviation between radar data and ADS 
reports. These were determined as shown in 
Figure 4. 


Data v;ere collected and analyzed from 
two outbound (807 and 805) and two incoming 
(806 and 808) flights involved in the Pacific 
Engineering Trials. Table 1 shows statistics for 
each flight and for the four flights combined. 

These data suggest that ADS/radar 
correlation is adequate to detect navigational 
system initialization errors greater than five 
nautical miles or large clock errors on the order of 
minutes. 


collected from the engineering trials, large outlier 
differences were not detected. 

SECTION 5 

CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

A possible application of ADS/radar 
correlation in oceanic operations would be to 
provide an independent means to detect INS 
initialization errors and to validate and update the 
aircraft clock used to insert time into ADS 
messages. This study suggest that ADS/radar 
correlation is adequate to detect large INS 
initialization and clock errors. Further safety 
studies are required to determine if ADS/radar 
correlation is needed as a check against gross 
errors, or if present safety measures are 
adequate. 


Figure 5 shows the distribution for the 
cross-course difference and along-course 
difference. Comparing the two charts, the along- 
course difference has a higher percentage of 
reports greater than one nautical mile. This 
suggests that the along-course difference is a 
combination of time and navigation system 
inaccuracies. Due to the limited set of data 


333 













REFERENCES 


1 . The MtTRE Corporation. The Stereoaraohic Projection in the National Airspace *'^YStem: PrinCiOifiS, 
Apofoximatioas and Errots. MTR-83W67, Nabil J. Saleh, Arthur P. Smith, and Balraj G. Sokkappa, 
Metrek Division. McLean. VA, May 1983. 


33A 


CO-AUTHOR 



Dr. Leonard A. Wojcik 
Technical Staff Member 
MITRE Corporation 


Leonard A. Wojcik is a member of the Technical Staff at the Center for Advanced Aviation 
System Development at the MITRE Corporation in McLean, Virginia u’here he has been 
employed from 1979-1987, and 1990-present. He has provided technical support to the 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) on oceanic aviation system engineering. Automatic 
Dependent Surveillance (ADS), and aviation weather technologies. He has served as 
technical advisor to the U.S. at meetings of the International Civil Aviation Organization 
(ICAO) Future Air Navigation Systems committee (FANS-H). He has also provided system 
engineering support to the U.S. Navy on Identification Friend/Foe (IFb’) systems for 
airborne targets. 

From 1987-1988, Dr. Wojcik was Transportation Analyst at the Office of Technology 
Assessment (OTA) of the U.S. Congress, where he made major technical and policy 
contributions to Congressional studies of aviation safety. From 1988-1990, he was Director 
of Research at the Flight Safety Foundation. His work involved statistical studies of 
worldwide commercial aviation safety, evaluations of safety-related technologies, and studies 
of organizations and management factors in aviation safety. 

Dr. Wocjik received a Ph.D in Engineering and Public Policy from Carnegie-Mellon 
University in 1984, an M.S. in physics from Cornell University in 1979, and a B.A. in 
Physics from Northwestern University in 1975. 


335 





SESSION FOUR; 

AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL 
ENVIRONMENT/CERTIFICATION 



Sherman G. Francisco 
Senior Technical Staff Member 
Air Traffic Control Programs 
IBM 


Sherman G. Francisco is a Senior Technical Staff Member, Air Traffic Control Programs, 
Federal Sector Division of IBM. With 36 years in the aerospace industry, he has managed 
engineering for many large real time systems. He served as Chief Engineer for the Control 
Segment of the Global Positioning System. Prior experience includes systems for signal 
processing of sonar and image data. He has a BSEE from Penn State, an MSEE from 
Stanford, and the professional graduate degree of Electrical Engineer from MIT. He has 
held a Commercial Pilot license with Instrument rating. 


336 







Cooperative ADS/AAS Integration 


Charles A. Kengla 
and 

Sherman G. Francisco 
International Business Machines Corp. 


ABSTRACT 


Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) offers 
the aviation community major new capabilities for 
serving air traffic in oceanic areas and other remote 
regions. For that potential to be fully realized, it is 
essential that the FAA Advanced Automation System 
(AAS) be fully integrated with ADS so that Air 
Traffic control (ATC) services and communications 
based on ADS may be provided in a way similar to 
that now used in the radar environment. 

An over\’iew of the AAS is presented. The 
architecture of AAS has been firmly defined and is 
now embedded in the AAS acquisition phase contract. 
The architecture implements a distributed modular 
network. There are five operational segments, each 
providing automation enhancements for a portion of 
the ATC system. Availability, fault tolerance. 


operational flexibility, and interface growth to 
accommodate other evolving ATC systems were all 
considered from the outset. 

ADS integration is not now specified as part of 
AAS. A suggested approach to providing an ADS 
interface with AAS is described, based on extending 
an existing AAS interface gateway module design 
while retaining the base distributed system concepts 
and standards. The AAS architecture includes radar 
gateway and communication gateway functions; these 
gateway functions are being implemented in AAS as 
distinct hardware and software elements. The AAS 
gateways could be adapted to provide ADS interface, 
thus providing a means for full utilization of ADS 
capabilities in the modem ATC system now being 
built under the AAS program. 



COOPERATIVE AAS/ADS INTEGRATION 
Figure 1 

337 










INTRODUCTION 

Automatic Dependent Surveillance is evolving 
to meet the ATC needs for surveillance in regions 
where neither primary nor secondary radar services are 
available. Through the use of advanced navigation 
and communications technologies, the position of 
ADS equipped aircraft can be reliably monitored 
anywhere, bringing the potential of increased global 
airspace capacity through improved separation 
services. Once established, ADS can provide a vital 
surveillance bridge between the National and Global 
Airspace control systems, and is of significance to 
future AAS evolution for several reasons: 

1. Aircraft will be transiting the border of National 
Airspace from/to regons where ADS will be only 
means of near real-time precision aircraft position 
surveillance. From the perspectives of both the 
controller and the pilot, a near seamless interface 
is desirable in consideration of safety and 
workload factors. In concept, a cooperative 
ADS/AAS integration would assure consistency in 
both the tracker and display data provided the 
controUei. 

2. The tracking performance of AAS could be 
significantly enhanced during critical passages by 
the inclusion of the track angle information 
contained in the extended ADS message. (The 
same applies to radar surveillance if track/heading 
were made available on the Mode-S data link.) 

3. Some aircraft operating in National Airspace may 
not be visible to the Radar Facility. 

Such potential improvements are practical due to the 
AAS design principles of distributed hardware 
resources, decentralized function allocation, and 
standardized data exchange among the many system 
elements with liigh performance Local 
Communications Networks. It is clear that the 
capabilities being offered for more efficient use of the 
airspace wiU inevitably result in the incorporation of 
ADS data by AAS, and the purpose of this paper is to 
offer a preliminary concept for that integration. 


AAS ARCHITECTURE AND 
STATUS 

The architecture of AAS has been firmly defined 
[1] and is now embedded in the AAS acquisition 
phase contract. AAS is the largest FAA program in 
the National Airspace System (NAS) Plan. The 
Architecture definition and validation was carried out 
during 1983-88 in the competition phase of the 
program, and when completed at the end of the 
decade it will completely outfit the air traffic control 
services in the United States with modem automation 
systems. 

The resulting architecture is a substantial 
evolution from that envisioned in the NAS Plan in 
1983, although the central tenet - using automation 
for increased airspace capacity and productivity while 
maintaining rigid safety standards - has not changed. 
Improvements in availability, deployability, and 
extendability have been found practical as the design 
was detailed. 

Architecture Description 

The current AAS arcliitecture partitions the 
AAS by type of ATC facility and by development 
phase. Figure 2 provides an overview of the 
Advanced Automation System which graphically 
depicts the distributed architecture and the extensive 
use of higli performance redundant Local 
Communications Networks (LCN) wliich serve to 
integrate the system data and control. Some element 
functions (i.e. Radar) are shared among multiple 
facilities wliich may be geographically S'*parated, hut 
are connected with dedicated communication services. 

A number of segments have been defined, constituting 
the AAS. Our emphasis in this paper is on the 
near-tenn major system segments, which are most 
closely concurrent with the overall ADS schedule. In 
total, AAS is structured into 5 operational system 
segments: 


338 






FACILITY OVI-RVIEW 
Figure 2 


• Peripheral Adapter Module Replacement Item 
(PAMRI) • a hardware segment upgrading radar 
and communications Input/Output (I/O) 
hardware in the Air Route Traffic Control 
Centers (ARTCCs). 

• Initial Sector Suite System (ISSS) • the first major 
system delivery', including new controller 
workstations, a new data communications 
network linking the workstations to the existing 
central processors, and additional central 
processors. Each ARTCC will be equipped with 
ISSS. 

• Terminal Advanced Automation System (TAAS) 
- automatic systems for the Terminal Radar 
Control (TRACON) function, including the 
consolidation of designated TRACONs into 
ARTCCs. 

• Tower Control Computer Complex (TCCC) - 
automation systems for Airport Traffic Control 
Towers, including interfaces to supporting TAAS. 

• Area Control Computer Complex (ACCC) - a 
software-only upgrade to the ARTCCs (renamed 


Area Control Facilities [ACFs] when TRACONs 
are consolidated into ARTCCs) to provide 
enhanced ATC functions. 

Other non-operational segments will also be provided 
at the FAA Teclmical Center for support to the 
operational segments. 

The ISSS Segment will equip each ARTCC 
with several hundred new workstations, called 
Common Consoles, replacing the existing M-1 
consoles and Flight Strip Printers. Significant 
processing capacity is distributed as part of each 
Common Console in the form of general purpose 
computers and of specialized display grapliics support. 
Most of the Common Consoles of the ARTCC are 
used as workstations for Air Traffic Controllers; a few 
are used for other supporting functions, such as 
facility control by the System Engineer. F'rom one to 
four Common Consoles are allocated to each sector in 
the ARTCC depending on the number of Controllers 
operating the sector, a geographic subarea of conliol 
assignment. 


339 


























One of the design tenets of AAS is to replace 
paper with electronic displays. The Common 
Console is the primary vehicle for carrying out that 
change of operational concept for ATC purposes. 
The key display device of the Common Console is the 
Main Display Monitor, a 20 by 20 inch Sony color 
display with 2048 by 2048 pixel resolution. This is 
the display surface used by the Controller for all 
operational ATC; it shows all required graphical and 
text displays. No paper flight strips are used, which 
drives the stringent availability requirement of 
0.9999999 for annotated radar separation service 
displays. The Main Display Monitor is augmented by 
an Auxiliary display, a 1024 by 1280 pixel color 
display mounted directly above the main display. The 
purpose of the Auxiliary Display is to show static 
data, e.g. charts, reference publications — replacing 
paper reference publications. These display surfaces 
are driven by an IBM RISC System/6000 processor 
and a Ratheon Main Display Controller, providing 
the very substantial computation, storage and graphics 
generation required. Controller command input is 
through a standard QWERTY keyboard and 
trackball. 

The Common Console also includes elements of 
another system that is not part of AAS: the Voice 
Switching and Control (VSCS). VSCS provides the 
voice communications switching capability, both 
landline and radio, used by the Controllers and other 
personnel for intra-ARTCC, inter-ARTCC, and air 
ground voice corrununications. Each Common 
Console includes two VSCS control modules, which 
are connected with the VSCS switching and control 
system in the ARTCC. 

Most of the primary flight plan processing in the 
ARTCC remains in the existing Host central 
processing system at the time of ISSS introduction. 
Communications and radar interfaces are provided 
through PAMRI, which precedes ISSS to the field. 

TAAS, the next AAS segment to deploy, 
provides a replacement for the existing ARTS 
terminal automation systems. TAAS also represents a 
new operational concept, in that the TAAS 
automation system will be located at the ARTCC that 
provides enroute ATC services in that area. This 
consolidation, where possible at larger terminals, will 


provide savings in long term operations and 
maintenance expenses. Smaller terminal areas will 
continue to be served by facilities located at their 
airports. 

TAAS brings additional Common Consoles to 
the facilities, and a new central processmg suite. The 
intra-ARTCC data communications system will be 
extended as part of integration with the existing ISSS 
enroute automation system already operational at the 
ARTCC. 

The last two segments to deploy are TCCC and 
ACCC. TCCC will provide a new automation system 
for Airport Traffic Control Towers, enhancing the 
predominantly manual system now used. ATC 
services within the local area of an airport rely on 
visual input, and thus the implemented functions are 
formulated to be very interactive to efficiently aid the 
Tower Controller. Each TCCC is tightly UnJeed with 
its associated ACCC to facilitate the handoff of traffic 
arriving and departing the airport. 

ACCC, predominately a software upgrade, integrates 
the separate ISSS and TCCC functions into a 
consolidated system, ACCC, and enables removal of 
the outdated Host processors. Mode-S data link 
capabilities are included in this segment definition. 

Development Status 

All ISSS hardware development has been 
completed, and the initial PAMRIs have been 
deployed as the initial step in the system transition 
evolution. The principal current development activity 
is ISSS software, most of which operates in processors 
contained in the Common Consoles. Over half of this 
software is in test. Delivery of the first complete ISSS 
to the FAA Technical Center will occur early the 
fourth quarter in 1992. After a several year test at the 
FAA Technical Center, deployment of tailored ISSS 
automation systems to the 20 CONUS ARTCCs will 
start. 

The other operational segments are in the last 
stages of software design and early development. 
Virile there are relatively minor hardware 
development efforts associated with these other 
segments, the principal development effort is software. 


340 






System delivery schedules extend over many years, 
with the last installation being the TCCC system for 
Hilo Tower, Honolulu in 2001. 

AUTOMATIC DEPENDENT 
SURVEILLANCE 

Automatic Dependent Surveillance is an 
evolving concept to provide precision aircraft position 
information in near real-time on a global basis. 
Figure 3 depicts the system concept of automatically 
providing onboard precision navigation data (e.g. 
GPS) to an ATC unit by way of a digital data link 
(e.g. Satellite). Proof of Concept en^eering trials 
have been conducted on Pacific Oceanic routes [2], 
and the potential use of such technology for Oceanic 
ATC [3] has been well documented by Peter 
Massoglia, et al. 



Performance of ADS position reporting can be 
comparable with the Mode-S radar facility at the 
higher message rates service. Data specifications for 
the two surveillance sy.'tems [3] [4] are comparable as 
is presented in Table 1. The Mode-S capability 
represents the best anticipated radar service, but 
achieving this service is dependent on upgrade of both 
the radar and the Common Digitizer equipment. In 
fact ADS would clearly be the superior if full accuracy 


GPS service were made avsdlable rather than the 
degraded Horizontal Reference service commitment 
for civil applications as indicated in the table. 


Table 1. Surveillance Data Characteristics 


ADS 

Mode-S 

Honzontal Reference 

100 m* 

2 m 

PosiDon 

75 ft 

79x722 ft @100 nm 

Altitude 

2.4 m 

100 ft Q 

Track/Heading 

O.I deg 

Not Available 

Data Set Period (min) 

10 sec 

4.2 sec 


(* 

- Not Corrected for SA) 


Global digital communications by satellite are 
now available as of last March [5], and the net 
economic rewards [6] for increasing the capacity of 
Oceanic Airspace through the application of ADS 
data is significant. The Air Transport Association [7] 
not only states near term requirements for ADS 
surveillance on international non-radar routes, but 
projects the application of ADS surveillance in 
domestic airspace. It is clear that with ICAO support, 
the ADS concept is about the blossom into a vital 
element of international ATC systems. 

COOPERATIVE ADS/AAS 
INTEGRATION OPPORTUNITIES 

Clearly separation services and flight plan 
conformance monitoring in the National Airspace wUl 
continue to rely on Radar Facilities. Many of the 
domestic aircraft can not be expected to carry ADS 
equipment, and the primary radar capability does add 
significantly to safety in the presence of aircraft 
equipment failures. Questions do however arise when 
comparable surveillance performance is available from 
another method of surveillance and the boundaries of 
service aren't physical surveillance constraints. 

Suneillance Sensor Transition 

ADS serv'ice appears inevitable for Oceanic 
Airspace, but what happens when an aircraft 
transitions to,'from National Airspace as is depicted in 
Figure 4? Is the transition abrupt? Is ADS data of 


341 







no use in domestic airspace? Is establi^ed NAS trade 
data of no initial value to the Oceanic ADS ^’stem? 


YOftK K£W YOSIK CAXtiOi 



Precedent docs e«st for handling such 
transitions in domestic ATC. Data from one Radar 
Facility is distributed to more than oue ARTCC 
when its surveillance coverage is of value to both 
facilities. In this way, controllers at both Centers can 
utilize the same sensor data during the handoff. This 
section will descril'i the integration of the Radar 
Sensor in the AAS distributed system arcliitccture. 
The flexibility to easily accommodate additional 
sensor interfaces on the Network ring while retaining 
the existing ATC display and track functions without 
disruption is significant for expandability of center 
capabilities. In concept, the surveillance situation 
with ADS need be no different for either the Oceanic 
Airspace transitions or for joint senso’’ use within 
National Airspace. 

Figure 5 illustrates the Surveillance Data flow in 
the AAS architecture. Multiple Radar Facilities 
provide range and azimuth data to their associated 
surveillance Processing and Correlation (SPC) 
function implemented in Radar Gateway Processors. 
The resulting processed information is distributed to 
both the Common Consoles and the Central 
Processor by the system of Local Area Networks 
(LAN). 



AAS simvsnxANCE data 
Hp0c S 


An overview of the SPC data flow is provided 
by Figure 6. Although some of the functions are 
unique to the processing of Radar data, most are 
generic to processing surveillance data to support 
ATC. Correlation iniriates, maintains, and terminates 
tracks on aircraft targets. Correlation's main job is to 
identify and associate incoming target reports with 
existing tracks at the center. When a set of reports are 
received which don't match an existmg track, a new 
track is initiated for the system. 

The coordinate conversion process converts the 
position of the target reports to the sterographic 
system plane for that ARTCC. The display oriented 
smoothing and prediction functions maintain the 2 - 
dimensional horizontal track estimation states for 
display to the controllers and also maintain the 
vertical track. Extrapolation to the next expected 
sighting of the aircraft is included to compensate for 
the low raw measurement rate. 

Once an update to the track state is made, the 
new track state and covaricnce is broadcast to other 
SPCs (processing input from other Radar.s). It is the 
object of the Track Coordination function to keep 
one track identifier among all SPCs for a single 
aircraft. This is accomplished by “track fusion" in the 
Track Coordination function which associates 
multiscnsor contact of one aircraft. Once the 


342 












association is linn, measuiements from other sensors 
are shared as input to the display tracker, establishing 


the multisensor tracking capability among all sensors 
on the Local Area Network (LAN) rings. 


Sensor 

Repons 




RADAR SENSOR 
SPC DATA FLOW OVERVIEW 

Figure 6 


Note that it is the SPC in the Radar Gateway 
that for a single sensor initiates the aircraft track, 
maintains the extrapolated real-time track, distributes 
the data to the Aircraft and Track Management 
(ATM) function in the Common Console to drive the 
controller's display, and implements the surveillance 
sensor transitions as the aircraft moves through the 
sensor's coverage area. It also establishes the target 
association and data sharing among the SPCs to 
acliicve the advantages of multisensor tracking. 

Data is also distributed to the Central Processor 
to drive the Separation Assurance Horizontal Tracker 
(SAIIT) in the Tactical Prediction Function (TPF). 
Its output is used in the Conflict Alert, the .Minimum 
Safe Altitude Warning, and the Conflict Resolution 
and Advisoiy functions. Resolutions are derived in 
and the associated Tactical Resolution Function 
(TRF). 

Adaptation for ADS 


The tracking and flight plan processing funciiuus 
of the automation system could use ADS position 
data in almost the same manner as for radar tracking 
information. The ADS capability would be integrated 
into AAS as a pseudo-sensor. With an SPC function 
for ADS implemented in a gateway, all transactions 
on the LAN could be identical to those for radar 
sensors and AAS architecture would by its design 
support the controller displays, separation assurance 
functions, multisensor tracking (ADS & radar), and 
surveillance sensor handoff. The surveillance 
transitions would be seamless in terms of data 
utilization and display, although it would be prudent 
to include a display symbol distinction so that the 
utilized sensor type is clear to the controller. 
Separation assistance via conflict alerts and conflict 
resolution advisories could be extended to oceairic 
traffic. Figure 7 illustrates a SPC data flow 
appropriately modified for the ADS sensor, and the 
congruency of data flow with that for the Radar 


343 














ADS PSEUDO 

SPC DATA FLOW OVERVIEW 
Figure 7 


Sensor is obvious. Radar unique processing is 
stripped away, and the correlation function would be 
performed in spherical geographic coordinates rather 
than range-azimuth of the radar. However, the 
baseline SPC data flow and control structure would 
be retained for system operational compatibility. 

This ADS SPC would coexist on the LAN as 
just another surveillance input adapter node and full 
ATC functionality would be achieved for ADS 
throughout the center. Seamless integration of the 
ADS sensor would help the controller by making 
additional ATC information available without 
imposing new display or system operation burdens. 
Heinrich and Wank report measured crew error 
reductions on the fliglit deck due to workload 
reduction when Digital Data Communications is used 
to integrate ADS, and the same is expected at the 
controller's end if the integration adheres to the 
established display and data utilization standards of 
AAS. The Cooperative ADS/AAS Integration 


concept is summarized by Figure 8, which portrays 
the Aeronautical Telecommunications Network as a 
typical and probable communications service to 
support all ATC needs has been described by Ludwig 
and Weiss (9) and also by Aleshire (10). 

Enhanced AAS Capabilities 

Integration of ADS information into the 
operations of AAS will enhance the ATC capabilities 
at the center. This paper has established the 
conceptual feasibility of incorporating ADS 
information as another surveillance source consistent 
with the established system operations which will 
extend the vision of the controller and ease the 
transition from/to oceanic (or other area of limited 
surveillance opportunity) while retaining norm?l AAS 
system operations familiarity. Cooperative integration 
with ADS wUl extend the AAS functional features of 
Radar surveillance to the ADS and the ADS/Radar 
environments. 


344 










COOPERATIVE ADS/AAS INTEGRATION 



The potential for additional AAS performance 
enhancements exists due to the rich data content of 
the ADS message. Although not deemed critical, 
these could add to the AAS capabilities in busy 
airspace which often exists in the vicinity of oceanic 
terminals. ADS provides valuable track measurement 
information not available from the radar sensor such 
as track angle, speed, vertical velocity, and improved 
altitude reporting quantization. If made available to 
prompt the trackers, less lag would be encountered 
when an aircraft enters or terminates a maneuver. 

At best, ATC is data poor due to the low 
aircraft contact rate of the mechanically scanned 
radars. Filters are used to provide smootliing and to 
extrapolate the position so as to improve the utility of 
the displays. In crowded airspace , logic must be 
applied to detect the exact initiation time of an aircraft 


maneuver. The filter tracking is managed on the basis 
of these detections to prevent a lag in the displayed 
information while retaining the desirable smootliing 
for normal flight. The design is sensitive, and the 
displayed information must have integrity including 
time currency at all times. Figure 9 illustrates the 
onset of a constant rate turn, and shows the difficulty 
of determining the onset from position data alone. 
The deviation form projected track is very gradual. 
However the heading trend changes abruptly at the 
transition, and fewer measurement opportunities are 
required to firmly establish the presence and time of a 
maneuver. Digital Data Link data could be of great 
value to tracking and with the Mode-S data link, a 
real-time heading or track information may become 
available for many aircraft. The data should be used 
when available. 


345 














Consistency of operations is the most important 
AAS enhancement that would result with the 
Cooperative ADS/AAS Integration. One of the 
objectives of the NAS plan was to achieve increased 
airspace capacity while containing the workload 
through automation. Artificial boundaries adopted for 
the convenience of ATC are envisioned to become 
less distinct as the capabilities evolve to handle more 
direct routing. The newer aircraft have the range to 
avoid the congestion at established gateways to 
Oceanic Airspace gateways. The concepts presented 
in this paper provide AAS the flexibility to make the 
bridge to global airspace without geographic 
constraint. 

CONCLUSIONS 

Summary 

The AAS implementation and function make it 
an ideal base for integrating extended ATC functions. 
The ease of function extendability was a stated initial 
design objective, and this paper's consideration of 
ADS data utilization shows that future 
accommodation of ADS surveillance is clean A 
near-seamless interface to the ADS system in terms of 
surveillance handover and information utilization 
would not be disruptive to the AAS architecture. 


This product of the established distributed system 
principles will permit a close integration of Air Traffic 
Control functions to reduce Controller/Pilot workload 
and to increase the operational flexibility available for 
efficiently mana^g the limited airspace resources. 
The modular distributed architecture of AAS has 
proved valid as a technique to permit future 
accommodation of new interfaces and function with 
little waste impact on any component. 

Major Issues 

Many issues must be resolved to achieve the 
Cooperative ADS/AAS Integration as suggested by 
this paper. Conununications Services are obviously 
required to acquire the ADS report on a timely basis. 
Space communications are relatively expensive, and 
the mechanisms to economically share the ADS data 
is not clear. It is our understanding that all of the 
anticipated communications system concepts (i.e. 
ATN, AVPAC) are conceived to be point-to-point 
which would impose the expense of redundant 
communications with the aircraft to share data of 
joint utility to two or more facilities. A mechanism to 
permit multiple user application nodes at the ground 
is very desirable to make best use of the surveillance 
data within the constrained financial and bandwidth 
resources. 

Management of the ADS message reporting rate 
will be an issue due to the economic implications. 
Clearly a dynamic assignment of ADS message rate 
based on the current local traffic situation has the 
potential of achieving the most benefit for the incurred 
operating cost. However a fixed cost investment 
would be required to logically merge multiple requests 
so as to cover the most demanding, and such 
economic considerations may preclude automatic 
adjustment of the reporting rate. 

Use of multisensors (even if they are both radar 
facilities) are sensitive to sources of registration error. 
GPS has the inlierent required accuracy in the 
WGS-84 geodetic system, but full accuracy service is 
unlikely. Many of the receivers automatically convert 
position to locally preferred datums, and the user of 
ADS should understand the reference specific to the 
received data. Tliis topic must be be reviewed when 
joint use of radar and ADS data is considered. 


346 







Navigation service integrity is critical to the use 
of ADS in ATC. Today's convention is to provide 
the controllers with timely Navigation Service status 
independent the aircraft. As use of GPS by aviation 
evolves, the protection of ADS operations in National 
Airspace should be covered. 

REFERENCES 

1. W.D. Carson, Jr, and Walter E. Ulrey, “The 

Advanced Automation System, A System of 
Vision,” Journal of Air Traffic Control, 

October/November 1990. 

2. V. White, “Pacific En^eering Trials (PET).” 

Third International Aeronautical 

Telecommunications Symposium on Data Link 
Integration, May 1991. 

3. P.L. Massoglia, M.T. Pozesky, and G.T 
Germana, “The Use of Satellite Technology for 
Oceanic Air Traffic Control,” Proceedings of the 
IEEE, Vol. 77, No. 11, November 1989. 

4. “Minimum Operational Performance Standards 

for Air Traffic Control Radar Beacon 

System/Mode Select (ATCRBS/Mode S) 
Airborne Equipment,” Radio Technical 
Commission for Aeronautics, March 1987. 


5. K. Smith and P. Wood, “Immarsat's Aeronautical 
Satellite Data Link,” Tliird Annual International 
Aeronautical Telecommunications Symposium on 
Data Link Integration, May 1991. 

6. GJ. Couluris, “Automatic Dependent 

Surveillance Benefit and Cost Analysis,” National 
Technical Information Service, 

Dot/FAA/RD-90/34, November 1990. 

7. P.R. ' Ryan, “Airline and Civil Aviation 
Authorities Requirements for Global Data Link 
Services, Progress & Issues,” Third Annual 
International Aeronautical Telecommunications 
Symposium on Data Link Integration, May 1991. 

8. R.E. Heinrich and R.B. Wank, “Evaluation of 
Oceanic Flight Deck Workload and Error 
Reductions Through the Use of Data 
Communications," Third Annual International 
Aeronautical Telecommunications Symposium on 
Data Link Integration, May 1991. 

9. H.F. Ludwig and J. Weiss, “A proposed Air 
Traffic Control Transition Plan to the 
Aeronautical Telecommunications Network.” 

10. W. Aleshire, “ATC Data Communications 
Operational Development and Systems 
Implementation,” Third Annual International 
Aeronautical Telecommunications Symposium on 
Data Link Integration, May 1991. 


CO-AUTHOR 

i 



CHARLES A. KENGLA is a Senior Engineer in the 
Advanced Automation System program of the Federal 
Sector Division of IB.M. He is Program Manager for 
Automated En Route ATC, Phase 2 (AERA 2). His 
earlier assigmnents have generally been in the 
development of satellite cormnunications systems, data 
communications, and communications switching 
systems. He has 29 years experience in government 
and militaiy' command control communications and 
intelligence systems. He has a BSE from .MIT, and a 
MSEE from George Wasliington. He holds a 
Commercial Pilot license with an Instrument rating. 


347 




Qpoafkxial Ooeaoic Air Traffic Coi^^ 
Usdng Satdlite Data link - Liitial ImidancntatioD 

Presented by: Donald Annsboi^, Manager 
Flight Test Kandi, Aiiraaft Ceitificatipn Office 
Federal Aviatioo Administratioo 


Background 

Operational air traffic management for oceanic 
flights currently depends on voice 
communications over a high frequency (HF) 
radio link. Information, requests, clearances 
and acknowledgements (verification of received 
messages) for Air Traffic Control (ATC) and 
Air Operations Control (AOC) in today's 
operational environment are handled by the 
exchange of spoken messages. 

The HF radio communications are provided for 
the FAA by ARINC personnel located at three 
Comm Centers: San Francisco, New York, 
and Honolulu. The ARINC operators act as 
intermediaries for both the oceanic air traffic 
controllers and the plans that traverse U.S. 
Flight Information Regions (FIR). 

System performance under this approach 
suffers from long transaction times and error 
rates on the order of 1%. Performance will 
degrade as the increasing oceanic traffic drives 
the allocated channels toward saturation. 

The same air traffic management can be 
accomplished more efficiently using data 
communication procedures. Data transactions 
can be completed much more rapidly and with 
higher accuracy and integrity than voice 
transactions. 

Objectives 

Develop a phased transition plan for 
ATC/DataLink implementation. 


• A logical step-by-stq> transition from the 
first demonstration intoprogressively more 
complete Air Traffic services via satellite 
will pave the way toward the development 
of concepts for improving the efficiency of 
air-^ce management, including the 
capacity to handle growth. 

Contribute to the long-term development of 
both airborne and ground automated systems 
incorporating flexible systems to meet future 
ATC System demands. 

• Although there are many differences in the 
details of messages us^ in the Domestic 
ATC System, compared to the Oceanic 
ATC System, the principles by which 
DataLink are to be applied are very 
similar. United Airlines is keenly 
interested in applying the knowledge 
gained from the Oceanic ATC/DataLink 
Trials and operations with the Interim 
System to the Domestic ATC scene. 

Demonstrate the use of satellite data 
communications for Air Traffic Services. 

• Transmit Waypoint Progress Reports via 
ACARS/SATCOM through the ARINC 
network directly into the ODAPS 
computer, in the same format used for HF 
Voice reports but with much higher 
accuracy. 

• Transmit pilot requests for clearances 
using ACARS/SATCOM and the response 
from ATC over the reverse route. 


349 








• Continue to demonstrate the reliability of 
ADS position rqports until such time as 
the FAA's ground computer system is 
ready to process same routinely. 

The FAA has approved a plan for 
implementation of satellite data link through a 
five phased approach which provides for the 
incremental introduction of satellite data and 
voice communications into ATC. The phases 
are described as: 

PHASE 1 - Satellite data link between aircraft 
and ARINC communications center. Satellite 
two-way data link and HF between Aircraft 
and Communication Center. 

Phase 1 will provide demonstration of 
capability of two-way data link between 
aircraft and communication center. 

PHASE 2 - Satellite voice between aircraft and 
ARINC communications center. Begin pre- 
operational voice trials (both satellite a HF to 
ease transition of voice backup capabilities. 
Use of voice link between Aircraft and 
Communication Center for both back-up (no 
procedural changes for controller). 

Phase 2 will demonstrate the capability of 
satellite or HF voice between ARTCC, 
communication center, and aircraft. 

PHASE 3 - Data link and voice between 
aircraft and ARINC. Two week trial period of 
operational cutover at OAK, demonstrating 
capabilities achieved in Phase 1 & 2. One way 
data link capabilities between aircraft and 
individual ARTCC sectors for operational 
cutover - HF voice replaced by data link 
between aircraft arid communication center 
(communications become operational). 
Communication center will route data to 
specific sectors ZOA. Data received on 
printers and by ODAPS. 


Phase 3 will result in operational 
implemoitation of two way data link betwera 
a/c and communication center, and one way 
data link from communication center to 
individual sectors. 

PHASE 4 - Prototype workstation development 
for two-way data link. Pre-operational test 
phase. Install RS-6(XX) workstation with two- 
way data link capabilities between aircraft and 
FAATC. Install a workstation at ARTCC for 
pre-operational evaluation. Verification of 
interface capabilities to ODAPS and DOTS. 
Development of requirements and procedures 
for operational implementation of workstation. 

Phase 4 will result in the demonstrated 
capability of two-way data link between 
ARTCC and aircraft. 

PHASE 5 - Operational two-way data link 
workstation (based on availability of RS-6()(X)). 
One month trial period of operational cutover 
for two-way data link at each sector witliin 
ARTCC, demonstrating capabilities achieved in 
Phase 4. Integrate satellite data and voice 
communications. Two-way data link 
(including oceanic clearance) fully operational 
within ARTCC on RS-6(XX). Satellite voice 
used for operational routine communications 
and as operational backup for non-route 
communications. In this phase, satellite data 
link will be the primary operational means of 
communication. Satellite voice will be primary 
backup. HF voice will be secondary backup. 
Phase 5 will result in the pre-operationai 
verification and subsequent full implementation 
of end-to-end two-way data link with satellite 
voice backup. 


Benefits 

United Airlines predicts substantial savings in 
fuel bum due to the reduced time to receive 


350 





stop-climb clearances. In some cases, these 
fuel-bum reductions will be oiough to 
eliminate diversions for added fuel; unplanned 
fuel stqps are typically very costly events in 
trans-oceanic operations. 

Data CoUection 

The FAA Technical Center (FAATC), in 
support of the certification of satellite data 
link for use in air traffic control (ATC), will 
include the collection, reduction, and analysis 
of data link messages transmitted to and from 
commercial aircraft during oceanic flights. 

The initial certification of satellite 
communications for ATC will enable data link 
communications between the aircraft and the 
Aeronautical Radio, Inc. (ARINC) 
communications centers only. Communi¬ 
cations between the communication centers and 
the ARTCCS will remain procedurally the 
same as today during the initial phases of 
implementation. Downlink messages from the 
aircraft will be addressed by the Communi¬ 
cation Center to the appropriate ADNS printer 
within the ARTCC. Duplicate messages will 
be sent to the Oceanic Display and Planning 
System (ODAPS) which is used to provide 
flight data processing for oceanic ATC in the 
U.S. In the forward direction, messages from 
the controller will be communicated to the 
Communication Center by voice, as performed 
under current procedures. At the 
Communication Center, the uplink will be 
transcribed into the ARINC Air/Ground 
System (AGS) by the radio operator, and then 
sent to the aircraft via data link. The use of 
high frequency (HF) radio communications will 
remain available for backup. 

United Airlines has applied for certification of 
an enhanced ACARS MU, transmitting the 
satellite data link for two-way ATC 


communications in oceanic airspace. In 
support of this effort, a data collection program 
is required to establish validity of data 
communications for certification by the FAA 
Aircraft Certification (ACO) in Long Beach, 
California. 

This plan is designed to evaluate performance 
of the existing satellite data link and verify the 
proposed ATC data link communications 
procedures, based on an analysis of the 
messages transmitted and received by end 
users. The communication architecture is 
gradually evolving into a bit oriented system, 
fiilly conforming with the ADS and ATN 
standards currently under development. The 
goal of this test plan is to evaluate performance 
from the end user perspective, without regard 
to the characteristics of the underlying 
communications media. 

During the flights, the HF progress reports, 
data link progress reports, HF ATC clearance 
requests and responses, data link ATC 
clearance requests and responses, and all 
transcribed uplinks for the satellite equipped 
aircraft will be copied to the FAATC for 
evaluation. The FAATC will receive a log of 
the transmitted and received aircraft messages 
from the airline. 

Archives of the data will be maintained at 
ARINC headquarters. In addition, a hard copy 
of all messages which are sent from die 
communication center will be available for up 
to thirty days after the flight. 


Data Reduction and Analysis 

The data collected at the FAATC will be 
compared for consistency and transmission 
delays between satellite data and HF 
transcribed data, and between the data recorded 
on-board the aircraft and data transmitted and 


351 





received on the ground. Evaluation of the data 
will be based on the following parameters: 

- Technical Time Delay 
Operational Time Delay 
Undelivered Messages 
Message Integrity 


Conclusion 

Tlie ICAO Future Air Navigation System 
(FANs) outlines the importance of an iegrated 
Communications, Navigation, and Surveillance 
(CNS) approach to Air Traffic Control. The 
transition from voice based to data link system 
require flight deck and ground procedures 
development. 

The first SATCOM-based data link messages 
were exchanged just last September (1990). 
This trials demonstration, under the auspices of 
the FAA as the Pacific Engineering Trials 
(PET), has demonstrated automatic and pilot 
entered messages origination and ground based 
uplink capabilities. It is the intent that a step- 
by-step approach be taken to ensure proper 
procedural and end system development. The 
two-way data link trials will further support 
the growth and establishment of air traffic 
management via data link. 


352 







SESSION FOUR: 

Am TRAFFIC CONTROL 
ENVmONMENT/CERTiFICATION 


PANEL DISCUSSION; 

"Operational Approval and Implementation 
of Satellite Data link into 
the Oceanic Environment" 


PANFJ. MEMBERS 


Donald Armstrong 
Manager, Flight Test Branch 
Aircraft Certification Office 
Federal Aviation Administration 


James C. Growling 
Program Analyst 
and Aviation Inspector 
Flight Standards Service 
Federal Aviation Administration 


W. Frank Price 
Manager 

International Procedures Branch 
Federal Aviation Administration 


John A. Scardina 
Manager, Automation 
System Engineering Division 
Federal Aviation Administration 


Howard E. Hess 

Special Programs 

Branch Manager 

Federal Aviation Administration 


William L. Umbaugh 

Manager, Automation 
System Engineering Division 
Federal Aviation Administration 


353 







SESSION FOUR: 

AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL 
ENVIRONMENT/CERTIFICATION 

PANEL BIOGRAPHIES 


ONLY THOSE BIOGRAPHIES ARE LISTED THAT DO NOT 
APPEAR ELSEWHERE. 


Howard E. Hess 
Federal Aviation Administration 

Howard E. Hess’s responsibilities as the Special Programs Branch Manger includes: 

• Providing the focal point for developing and implementing national concepts, 
policies, standards, criteria, guidance, and procedures related to the flight 
operational aspects of enhanced air traffic control concepts, human factors, 
navigation systems, separation assurance, and other complex and controversial 
flight technical programs. 

• Developing flight operational concepts, criteria, requirements, specifications, and 
limitations for the introduction of new en route navigation systems. 

• Conducting in-flight tests and evaluations of special technical concepts and 
procedures. 

• Providing technical representation to ICAO on matters related to complex and 
controversial special technical operations. 

Currently Mr. Hess is the Flight Standards advisor to ICAO’s North Atlantic Systems Planning 
Group and the Informal Pacific ATC Coordinating Group. Additionally he is an advisor to the 
Gulf of Mexico Task Force, and has been a participant in the FAA delegation working toward 
the development of new air routes and expanding air traffic services between the U.S. and 
U.S.S.R. 

Mr. Hess’s branch has been designated as the sponsor for the operational implementation of new 
satellite technologies. Personally, Mr. Hess has been designated as the FAA Headquarters 
project pilot for the certification of the Boeing 777. 


35A 







SESSION FOUR: 

AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL 
ENVIRONMENT/CERTIFICATION 

PANEL BIOGRAPHIES 


ONLY THOSE BIOGRAPHIES ARE LISTED THAT DO NOT 
APPEAR ELSEWHERE. 


John A. Scardina 
Federal Aviation Administration 


John A. Scardina is manager of the Automation System Engineering Division within the Federal 
Aviation Administration’s (FAA) NAS System Engineering Service. In his current position, he 
is responsible for planning the evolution of the FAA’ ATC automation systems in the various 
operation domains, including en route, terminal, tower, oceanic, traffic management, flight 
services, and data link, as well as for ensuring that these automation systems are properly 
interfaced with and integrated into the National Airspace System. This is accomplished by 
working closely with the operating service to determine their needs and translate them into 
operational requirements which in turn forms the basis for FAA R&D and acquisition activities. 

Other assignments in the FAA have included technical and managerial contribution to the 
advanced automation program, weather programs, remote maintenance monitoring, collision 
avoidance systems, oceanic automation, and the aerostat program. Prior to joining the FAA in 
1975, Dr. Scardina was a Group Leader with the MITRE Corporation in McL.ean, Virginia, 
where he worked on automation systems and satellite applications for the FAA and Department 
of Commerce. 

Mr. Scardina received the BSEE degree from the Virginia Polytechnic Institute, Blacksburg, 
Virginia, in 1964, and the M.S. and Ph.D degrees in Electrical Engineering from the Georgia 
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, in 1966 and 1968, respectively. 


355 







SESSION FOUR: 

AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL 
ENVIRONMENT/CERTIFICATION 



Dr. Clyde A. Miller 
Manager, Future Design Staff 
Research and Development Service 
Federal Aviation Administration 



Dr. George C. Chang 
FTMI Project Manager 
Federal Aviation Administration 


356 








FLIGHT 0PERATI0M8 HMD AIR TRAFFIC MAMAGEMEHT IMTEGRATIOM 


Dr. Clyde A. Miller 
Dr. George C. Chang 
Federal Aviation Administration 
Washington, D.C. 


Abstract 

Flight management systems are installed in many air carrier and 
business aviation aircraft for the purpose of assisting the flight 
crew in assuring a safe and efficient flight trajectory in 
accordance with the cleared flight plan. The FAA and other air 
traffic management service providers are aggressively pursuing 
automation improvements to enhance system capacity and to better 
accommodate user operations along their preferred flight 
trajectories. Recently, the FAA launched a comprehensive R&D 
project focused on the use of air-ground data link for integrating 
the operation of airborne flight management computers and ground- 
based air traffic management automation. An initial project plan 
will be available in October, 1991 for discussion with airspace 
users. 


Goal and Objectives of Air Traffic Management 

The goal of the air traffic management (ATM) process is the safe, 
efficient, and expeditious movement of aircraft. The principal 
subsidiary processes are: (1) air traffic control (ATC) to prevent 
collisions between aircraft and to assure that aircraft do not 
violate special use airspace and (2) traffic flow management to 
allocate traffic flows to scarce capacity resources. 

The following specific objectives of the ATM process are relevant 
to this paper: 

0 Maintain and improve the safety of flight operations 

0 Increase system capacity and fully utilize capacity resources 

as required to meet traffic demand 

0 Better accommodate user-preferred flight trajectories 

0 Increase user involvement in decisionmaking and option 
management. 


Note: This paper was presented at the Third Annual 

International Aeronautical Telecommunications 
Symposium on Data Link Integration, McLean, Virginia. 
May 20-23, 1991. 


357 




The extent to which users operate in accordance with their 
preferred trajectories (routes, altitude profiles, speeds, and 
times of departure and arrival) is inversely related to the extent 
to which the ATM process intervenes to assure that trajectories 
meet essential ATM requirements (principally separation standards 
and airspace and flow restrictions). A minimxim intervention rate 
requires effective planning and decisionmaking based on a reliable 
data base of relevant information. The infoirmation required 
includes system capacity resources available, demand forecasts, 
expected weather conditions, status of airway facilities and 
airports, aircraft performance characteristics, and user operating 
objectives. 

It is apparent that: 

0 Not all of the required information is nominally in the hands 
of the ATM service provider; important elements are available 
only from users. 

0 Similarly, the planning and real-time decisionmaking required 
are shared responsibilities. The flight dispatcher, the 
flight crew, and the ATM service provider are all involved. 

0 Effective planning and decisionmaking require that all 
decisionmakers are provided the same data on common 
information elements. There cannot be three versions of the 
wind velocity at 30,000 ft over Cincinnati, one version for 
the flight crew, another for the dispatcher, and a third for 
the ATM service provider. The correct wind velocity should 
be provided to all three. 

0 The objective stated earlier that user involvement in 
decisionmaking should increase is simply recognition that 
effective air traffic management requires teamwork among the 
three operational elements based on shared information and on 
dialogue and negotiation to arrive at effective solutions. 


Flight Management System and ATM Automation Developments 

It is sometimes suggested that ATM planning and decisionmaking 
should be relegated to the cockpit. Today, three parties share 
these responsibilities; it seems certain that all three will be 
involved for the foreseeable future. Nonetheless, new functions 
and responsibilities will migrate to the cockpit based on new 
aircraft capabilities, in particular, improved navigation and data 
link systems and sophisticated flight management systems [1], 


358 






Current flight management systems (FMSs) support flight planning 
with provisions for entry, storage, and modification of a complete 
flight plan from the departure gate to the destination runway. 
They also provide guidance commands for the autopilot to 
automatically fly optimum vertical profiles and speeds along the 
prescribed route of flight, including the capability to arrive at 
prescribed waypoints at specified times (4D navigation capability) . 
The objective of flight management automation (the FMS) is to 
assist the flight crew in assuring a safe and efficient flight 
trajectory in accordance with the cleared flight plan. 

Automation in the ATM facility is intended to aid controllers in 
assuring that aircraft trajectories meet essential ATM requirements 
(separation standards, etc.) with minimum disruption to operators' 
flight paths. Current FAA initiatives include the development of 
a series of sophisticated terminal automation aids in cooperation 
with NASA [2,3]. Comprehensive computer-based planning will assist 
controllers in metering, sequencing, and spacing arrival traffic 
in order to make best use of available runways. Capacity 
improvements approaching 25 percent may be achieved for a single 
runway in instrument weather conditions with less vectoring and 
speed adjustments than the flight crew would experience today. 
Initial field evaluations of these techniques are planned at Denver 
and Dallas/Ft. Worth beginning in 1992. National deployment is 
anticipated in the 1994-1995 time frame. 

In the en route environment, a number of automation aids to support 
traffic planning at the sector level have been developed by the 
Automated En Route ATC (AERA) initiative [4]. These aids will 
assist controllers in detecting and resolving aircraft trajectory 
conflicts with ATM requirements (e.g., predicted violations of 
separations standards and special use airspace restrictions) , in 
monitoring aircraft conformance with flight plans, and in 
coordinating traffic planning among sectors. AERA will include a 
number of data link applications for delivering clearances and ATC 
instructions to the cockpit, for filing flight plans and amendments 
from the cockpit, and for better predicting future positions of 
aircraft [5,6]. National implementation is scheduled for the 1999- 
2000 time frame. 


Flight Operations and ATM Integration 

A principal theme of the future ATM system will be integrated 
operation of flight management and ATM automation [7,8]. As shown 
in an attached illustration, air-ground data link communications 
will be the principal ingredient in effecting this integration. 


359 



A number of studies have begun to look at this subject in some 
detail. NASA has flight tested a data link system in their 
Transport Systems Research Vehicle (TSRV) B-737 aircraft [9]. Data 
link was used as the primary means of communication for ATM, 
weather, and company information. The FMS multifunction control 
display unit was used in conjunction with a dedicated touch panel 
CRT display unit to format messages and control data flows into 
and out of the FMS. Results indicate that communications workload 
and errors were reduced significantly. 

A second NASA initiative has simulated 4D flight management 
operations in a time-based terminal ATM environment [10]. The 
simulation scenarios required time delay absorption by the subject 
aircraft as it approached the terminal area. Time delays were 
implemented using speed control alone and in combination with path 
stretching. Flight crews achieved metering fix times with a 
negligible mean and a standard deviation of 2.9 seconds in test 
conditions with no wind errors. Some in-trail conflicts developed 
in moderate and heavy traffic because the FMS-derived descent speed 
schedules differed from those assvuned by ‘ the ground-based ATM 
automation - an example of the difficulty that can arise when 
system components use different data for a common element of 
necessary information. In addition, flight crews experienced some 
confusion when vectors, speed changes, and/or altitude restrictions 
were added to 4D clearances. The use of air-ground data link for 
exchanging all the information required to support 4D arrival 
operations was cited as a possible requirement. 

An alternative approach to exploiting FMS/ATM integration in 
managing arrival traffic flows postulated a family of routes to 
the final approach course [11]. As aircraft approach the airport, 
they would communicate their top of descent point and desired 
descent and approach speed profiles. Aircraft would be assigned 
routes and speed schedules, if necessary, to assure conflict free 
flight paths to the runway. The analysis of a limited sample of 
59 aircraft arriving at one airport indicated a 14 percent increase 
in the runway throughput, 30 percent fewer control instructions, 
and an average fuel savings of 54 gallons per aircraft. 

The FAA System Design Review Team recently recommended that a 
comprehensive R&D project be established to develop techniques for 
integrated operation of flight management and ATM automation. In 
response to this recommendation, a project plan is under 
development in cooperation with NASA, industry, and airspace users. 
A systems engineering approach will be used. Operational scenarios 
for integrated FMS/ATM operations will be developed and potential 


360 





benefits assessed in terms of the ATM objectives stated earlierJ 
System requirements will be .defined based on selected operational 
scenarios and alternative system concepts for meeting these 
requirements will be formulated and analyzed. The concept selected 
for test and demonstration will be developed using part-task 
simulations, flight testing of experimental equipment, and the 
development and in-flight evaluation of a demonstration FMS. 
Project products will include certification guidance for flight 
management systems capable of integrated operation with ATM 
automation, technical materials to support development of 
specifications for the necessary ATM automation enhancements, and 
interface control documents to define the associated data link 
requirements. 

The project schedule will depend upon resource availability which, 
in turn, will reflect the extent to which the user community 
supports the initiative. An initial project plan, including 
candidate operational scenarios, will be available in October of 
this year and we will be canvassing the community for indications 
of interest and support at that time. 

Conclusions 

Integrated operation of flight management and ATM automation 
appears to offer benefits for airspace users and ATM service 
providers. FAA has initiated an R&D project to define the relevant 
operational scenarios and system requirements and to develop and 
demonstrate an appropriate system concept. An initial project plan 
will be available in October as a basis for discussions within the 
community on the need for and directions of such an initiative. 


##### 


References 


^ While FMS/ATM integration studies to date have focused on 
terminal area and domestic en route operations, it seems likely 
that oceanic airspace may offer the principal opportunity for near- 
term beneficial applications. Satellite-based communications and 
navigation capabilities are rapidly emerging in oceanic airspace. 
The automatic dependent surveillance technique will exploit these 
capabilities to provide reliable, accurate aircraft position 
reports to oceanic control centers and a number of these centers 
are installing modern ATM automation capabilities. Finally, the 
oceanic aircraft fleet is generally well equipped and operators are 
highly motivated to reduce operating costs. FMS/ATM integration 
may be one element of an imminent revolution in oceanic air traffic 
management capabilities. 


361 




1. Fadden, D.M. and R.W. Schwab. "Aircraft Interface with the 
Future ATC System." Proceedings of the IEEE . Vol. 77, No. 
11. November 1989. 

2. Erzberger, H. and W. Nedell. Design of Automated System for 
Management of Arrival Traffic . NASA Technical Memorandum 
102201. June 1989. 

3. Andrews, J.W. et al. "The Challenge of Terminal Air Traffic 
Control Automation." 34th Annual Air Traffic Control 
Association Conference Proceedings . Air Traffic Control 
Association, Inc., Arlington, VA. Fall 1989. 

4. Fordham, B. AERA 2 Operational Description . MITRE Report 
MTR-85W00066. Federal Aviation Administration, Washington, 
D.C. May 1990, 

5. Lawson, N. "Data Link in the Automated En Route ATC (AERA) 
Environment." Proceedings of Aeronautical Telecommunications 
Symposium on Data Link Integration . Aeronautical Radio, Inc., 
Annapolis, MD. 15-17 May 1990. 

6. Mohleji, S.C. Information Exchange Between Flight Management 
Systems and AERA . FAA Report ARD-A3/FMS-MTR-90W00167. 
Federal Aviation Administration, Washington, D.C. March 1991. 

7. Pozesky, M.T. Concepts and Description of_ the Future Air 
Traffic Management System for the United States . Federal 
Aviation Administration, Washington, D.C. April 1991. 

8. Operational Concept for the Provision of Air Traffic 
Management Services in the Federal Republic of Germany . 
Bundesanstalt Fur Flugsicherung (BFS), Frankfurt, West 
Germany. May 1990. 

9. Knox, C.E, and C.H. Scanlon. "Flight Tests Using Data Link 
for Air Traffic Control and Weather Information Exchange." 
SAE Paper 901888. Presented at 1990 SAE Aerospace Technology 
Conference and Exposition, Long Beach, CA, 1-4 October 1990. 

10. Williams, D.H. and S.M. Green, Airborne Four-Dimensional 
Flight Management in a Time-Based Air Traffic Control 
Environment . NASA Technical Memorandum 4249. March 1991. 

11. Mohleji, S.C. "Air Traffic Control Automation Concepts to 
Optimize Flight Management System Utilization." Record of 
IEEE Position Location and Navigation Symposium (PLANS *88^ 
held in Orlando, FL, 29 November - 2 December 1988. 


362 






FLIGHT OPERATIONS AND ATM 
INTEGRATION CONCEPT 


FliclitCrew 



Airline Dispaicta/Opentioaf Penoonel 
Military Bate Opeiatloaa Penoonel 


Air Traffic 
ControUer/Manager 


J 


363 




SESSION FIVE: AIRLINE PROGRAM/OPERATIONS 


Thursday, September 26, 1991 

Session Chairperson - Raymond J. Hilton, Director Air Traffic Management, Air Transport 
Association of America 

2:00 Data Link Human Factors Team - William M. Russell, Ill, Director, Flight 

Technology, Air Transport Association of America 

2:20 ADS Cost and Benefit Analysis - George J. Couluris, PhD, Consultant, lAT 

2:30 Benefits to Airlines Presentation by: 

Northwest Airlines - Captain David R. Haapala, Director, Flight 
Operations Development 

United Airlines - William B. Cotton, Manager, Air Traffic Systems 
American Airlines - Paul R. Ryan, Manager, Operations Systems Planning 

2:50 Communications Needs of the Future - Air-Ground Interface - Anthony J. 

Martin, Manager, Flight Management Systems and Data Links, Boeing (Co¬ 
author - N.D. Molloy, Senior Specialist Engineer, Data Link Integration, Boeing) 

3:00 Model Human Engineering Approach to Development of Cockpit Data 

Regulations - Renate J. Roske-Hofstrand, Chief Human Factors Engineer, Air 
Traffic Systems Division, CTA Incorporated (Co-author - Albert Rehman, 
Technical Program Manager, Federal Aviation Administration; Jack Berkowitz, 
Staff Human Factors Engineer, Air Traffic Systems Division, CTA) 

3:20 BREAK sponsored by BALL Communications Systems Division 

3:50 ATC Data Communications Operational Development and System 

Implementation - Wayne W. Aleshire, Manager, Air Traffic Systems, United 
Airlines 

4:10 Ground Automation Processing of Near Term Oceanic ATC Data Link 

Messages - Dr. Yueh-Shiou Wu, Member of the Technical Staff, The MITRE 
Corporation (Presentation by Jane Hamelink, Group Leader, ADS Program, The 
MITRE Corporation) 

4:25 Flight Deck Systems Analysis for Data Link Equipped Aircraft - Virginia L. 

White, Senior Staff Engineer, ARINC (Co-author - Richard E. Heinrich, Advanced 
Satellite Systems Engineering, ARINC) 

4:45 Potential Use of VHF Data Link (AVPAC) Where Available as an Alternative 

to Satellite Communications - Austin L. Snively, Systems Engineer, 
Communications, American Airlines 

5:00 Panel Discussion: What are the Airlines Doing? 

Panel Members: 

William B. Cotton, United Airlines David R. Haapala, Northwest Airlines 
Paul R. Ryan, American Airlines' Virginia L. White, ARINC 
Robert Hester, MacDonald Douglas Anthony J. Martin, Boeing 

5:45 Symposium Closing - Master of Ceremonies - Robert D. Till 


365 






SESSION FWEi 

AIRLINIPROGRAM/OPERATIGNS 
SESSION CHAIRPERSON 


Raymond J. Hilton 
Director Air Traffic Management 
Air Transport Association of America 

Raymond J. Hilton has been with the Air Transport Association since 1981. He is 
responsible for monitoring the FAA modernization program to assure the interest of the 
ATA member airlines are served. He does this by maintaining close liaison with the 
engineering and operating services of FAA and by maintaining current knowledge of the 
FAA national airspace system modernization program, its budget requirements, and other 
government agency and industry influences affecting the modernization program. He 
coordinates and cooperates as necessary with corporate and government representatives 
interested in FAA program development and implementation, and participates in national 
and international committees and technical conferences to influence airspace development 
and modernization to the benefit of the airlines. 

Prior to joining ATA, Mr. Hilton spent twenty-nine years in government service as an air 
traffic controller for nine years in the Air Force and FA/*, and 20 years in engineering and 
development at FAA. He worked as an air traffic coni roller at various military control 
towers and at New York air route traffic control center, and for those who remember, the 
Pittsburgh air route traffic control center as an air traffic controMer/computer programmer. 
He spent six and a half years at the FAA technical center at Atlantic City in 
experimentation and evaluation of air traffic contr:l hardware and software systems. The 
remaining 14 years of his FAA career was spent at Washington headquarters planning, 
designing, developing and implementing air traffic control hardware and software systems. 
Two and a half years of that time was spent assigned to the AEROSAT Coordination Office 
at the European Space Agency in Holland where he was responsible for managing the 
development of an internationally coordinated test and evaluation plan for the application 
of satellite technology for air traffic control. 


367 












SESSION FIVE: 

AIRLINE PROGRAM/OPERATiONS 


William M. Russell 
Director, Flight Technology 
Air Transport Association of America 


William M. Russell is the Director - Flight Technology in the Operations and Safety 
Department of the Air Transport Association (ATA). Mr. Russell is responsible for 
programs on human factors and advanced technology. 

ATA is a service organization representing the U.S. scheduled air cayrriers, providing an 
airline forum and endeavoring to achieve implementation of airline goals. ATA also hosts 
a number of industry and government groups, including the Human Factors Task Force and 
the Data Link Human Factors Team, which develop broad consensus of current issues. 

Mr. Russell joined ATA in June, 1970, after serving as Senior Engineer at Beech Aircraft 
Corporation and as Project Engineer for the FAA. he is a graduate of Northwestern 
University in Evanston, Illinois, where he received a B.S. degree in electrical engineering. 
He is a Member of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers and a Senior 
Member of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. Mr. Russell is a pilot 
holding a flight instructor certificate with instrument and airplane ratings. 

Originally from Fernadale, Michigan, Mr. Russell has lived in many areas of the United 
States and now resides in McLean, Virginia. 


369 




SESSION FIVE: 

AIRLINE PROGRAM/OPERATIONS 


Dr. George J. Couluris 
Consultant 
lAT 



Dr. George J. Couluris, lAT, has an extensive background in the development and analysis 
of air traffic systems, with an emphasis on computer-based modeling. He has directed and 
participated in projects involving air traffic control operations analysis, capacity and delay 
modeling, controller workload and productivity assessment, man-machine interface design, 
air traffic control automation development, aircraft flight performance modeling, benefit- 
cost and cost-effectiveness analyses, test and evaluation planning, and regulatory impact 
assessment. He directed the Automatic Dependent Surveillance benefit and cost study and 
the Oceanic Air Traffic System Improvement Study (OASIS). Dr. Couluris has developed 
numerous modeling tools, including the Flight Cost Model, the Airport/Airspace Delay 
Model (the basis for SIMMOD), the Sector Workload Model, the Macronet Model of air 
traffic flow, the Controller Workload Model, and the Investment Decision Analysis Model. 
Dr. Couluris received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in civil engineering from Rensselear 
Polytechnic Institute and the Ph.D. in transportation engineering from the University of 
California, Berkeley. 

Dr. Couluris has been active in transportation systems development and operations analysis 
for over 20 years. He has served in management and technical staff positions at SRI 
International, FAA, the Port of New York and New Jersey Authority, and elsewhere. He 
is a member of the Transportation Research Board Committee on Airfield and Airspace 
Capacity and Delay. 


370 





AUTOMATIC DEPENDENT SURVEILLANCE 
BENEFIT AND COST ANALYSIS: 
INTERIM STUDY RESULTS 

George J. Couluris 

lAT. Menlo Park. California 


ABSTRACT 

This paper summarizes the results 
of an interim study of the economic 
and operational impacts of automatic 
dependent surveillance (ADS). ADS 
service will make provisions for sat¬ 
ellite communications and advanced air 
traffic control (ATC) automation and 
will enhance air traffic services in 
oceanic and other airspaces. ADS will 
provide direct communication between 
pilots and air traffic controllers and 
enhanced ATC flight monitoring and 
airspace management capabilities. The 
benefit and coat study identified the 
operational benefits and implementa¬ 
tion requirements of ADS and analyzed 
their potential impacts on users and 
providers of air traffic services. 
Potential safety benefits were quali¬ 
tatively assessed, and potential cost 
savings due to ADS operations and ADS 
implementation costs were quantita¬ 
tively estimated. The expenditures 
considered in the analysis include 
user flight operating costa, air- 
ground communication user costs, air¬ 
craft ADS communication equipage 
costs, and ATC system enhancement 
costs. The study examined ADS imple¬ 
mentation and potential operational 


impacts for the North Atlantic and 
Pacific oceanic areas through the year 
2010. The resulting estimated cost 
savings due to ADS exceed the estimat¬ 
ed implementation costs. 


INTRODUCTION 

Automatic dependent surveillance 
(ADS), which is currently under de¬ 
velopment, is designed to use satel¬ 
lite communications and advanced air 
traffic control (ATC) automation to 
improve air traffic services (1-4). 
This capability would be particularly 
effective in oceanic airspaces where 
radar coverage is not available and 
where high-frequency (HF) technology 
provides indirect air-ground voice 
communication between pilots and air 
traffic controllers. Operationally, 
ADS would use digital data link to 
provide frequent updates of aircraft 
position reports and direct air-ground 
communication between pilots and 
controllers. These capabilities would 
improve oceanic air traffic 
controllers' ability to monitor and 
manage air traffic. 




BENEFITS 

ADS would be the basis for po¬ 
tentially significant enhancements in 
flight safety and would support po¬ 
tentially significant reductions in 
flight operating coats. 


Safety Enhancements 

Current HF-supported oceanic air 
traffic operations are vulnerable to 
certain flight navigation errors as¬ 
sociated with human blunders by pi¬ 
lots, controllers or radio operators. 
Examples include waypoint insertion 
errors and ATC cotrimunication loop 
errors. The ADS-based ATC automation 
would be capable of detecting the 
occurrence of many such errors, and 
ADS-based direct pilot-controller 
communication would expedite their 
resolution and prevent potential mis¬ 
haps. 


Flight Operating Cost Savinas 

In association with improved 
aircraft navigation performance, ADS 
would support reductions in separation 
minima. Separation minima reductions 
would lessen delays and diversions 
from preferred flight paths, and would 
significantly reduce flight operating 
costs in comparison with current 
oceanic operations. ADS also would 
support improved ATC flexibility, 
which would enable controllers to be 
more responsive to air traffic flight 
preferences with or without separation 
minima reductions and would contribute 
to flight operating cost savings. 


COSTS 

The realization of ADS benefits 
will require expenditures to estab¬ 
lish, maintain and use the ADS system. 
ADS would require: expenditures by 
users (or others depending on in¬ 


stitutional arrangements) of the sat¬ 
ellite-based air-ground communication 
system for data link message trans¬ 
mission services; expenditures by 
aircraft operators for ADS communica¬ 
tion equipage; and expenditures by ATC 
provider authorities for ADS system 
development and facility and equipment 
progreuns. 


ADS Air-Ground Communication User 
Coats 

The implementation and mainte¬ 
nance costs incurred by providers of 
satellite-based air-ground communica¬ 
tion service would be recovered 
through user charges. The user costs 
pertaining to ADS are those associated 
with ATC and other air traffic 
services message transmissions. The 
messages include aircraft position 
reports, pilot clearance and informa¬ 
tion requests, controller clearance 
instructions, meteorological reports, 
weather advisories and emergency com¬ 
munications. 


Aircraft Satellite Communication Equ¬ 
ipment Costs 

Aircraft operators would incur 
expenses for satellite communication 
equipment purchases, installations of 
the equipment on board aircraft, and 
continual maintenance of the equip¬ 
ment. 


ATC Provider Costs 

ATC provider authorities would 
incur expenses to establish and sup¬ 
port ADS-based air traffic services. 
These expenses account for research 
and development of ATC hardware, sof¬ 
tware and procedural enhancements, ATC 
facility preparations and equipment 
procurement, and continual operating 
and maintenance requirements. 


372 






BENEFIT AND COST COMPARISON 

Since the AOS establishment, 
operating and maintenance costs could 
be considerable, the value of devel¬ 
oping ADS depends on the relationship 
between implementation costs and the 
benefits achievable. An interim study 
[5] was conducted to examine and 
evaluate the relative costs and 
benefits. The study developed pre¬ 
liminary assessments of ADS impacts 
based on data available. The study 
qualitatively assessed the potential 
safety benefits of ADS, and quantita¬ 
tively evaluated non-safety related 
costs and savings for the North At¬ 
lantic and Pacific during the years 
1990 through 2010. The areas under 
study include oceanic airspace juris¬ 
dictions of Canada, Iceland, Japan, 
Portugal, the United Kingdom, and the 
United States (US). 

The study compared ADS operations 
and costs with those of a baseline 
system. The baseline system repre¬ 
sents ATC operations with the Oceanic 
Display and Planning System (ODAPS) or 
equivalent ATC automation. ODAPS is 
being developed and implemented by the 
US, and comparable systems are being 
or will be developed by other ATC 
provider authorities. 

Flight cost savings due to re¬ 
duced separation minima were estimated 
by updating the results of previous 
computerized simulations [6] of 
baseline and ADS operations. The 
updates accounted for traffic loading 
and aircraft type distribution changes 
based on recent surveys and forecasts 
and for current and projected aircraft 
flight performance characteristics. 
Flight cost savings due to improved 
ATC flexibility were based on analyses 
of potential reductions in flight 
diversions. The cost saving estimates 
were adjusted to account for ADS 
coverage limitations based on proposed 
configurations of the satellite 
constellation and for ADS-based ATC 


service limitations based on the 
reported ADS implementation plans of 
ATC provider authorities. 

Estimates of aircraft satellite 
communication equipment costs were 
based on analyses of the relevant cost 
factors. These factors include the 
unit price of the ec[uipment, the 
number of aircraft in the ADS fleet, 
the number of aircraft requiring ret¬ 
rofit installation versus the number 
of aircraft that are fully-equipped 
new deliveries, and operating and 
maintenance requirements. 

Estimates of ADS air-ground com¬ 
munication user costs and ATC provider 
cost were based on data provided for 
US programs and operations. These 
estimates, subject to revision, were 
used to also represent non-US costs. 

The US ADS program plan [3] in¬ 
cluded a transition period for the 
step-wise introduction and establish¬ 
ment of ADS. The benefit and cost 
study assumed that full ADS operations 
with reduced separation minima would 
commence at the start of 1995. To 
facilitate the initial cost analysis, 
100% of the participating oceanic 
aircraft was assumed to be ADS 
equipped starting in 1995. The study 
developed estimates of ADS-based 
flight cost savings for the years 1995 
through 2010. However, all relevant 
implementation costs during 1990 
through 2010 were included. Costs and 
savings were estimated in 1990 US 
dollars and inflated at a 5% compound 
annual growth rate for subsequent 
years. To enable economic 

comparisons, the 1990 present values 
were calculated using compound annual 
discount factors of 10% for ATC pro¬ 
vider authority costs and 12% for the 
other costs and the flight cost sav¬ 
ings. 


373 




1990 Present Value 
(S million^ _ 


A potential net savings of 
$176.6 million was estimated by the 
interim study: 


Flight Cost Saving due to: 
Reduced Separation Minima 
Improved ATC Flexibility 
Total Saving 


$502.7 

S41.7 

$544.4 


ADS Air-Ground Communication User Cost Increase 
AOS Equipage Cost for Aircraft Operators 
ADS System Cost for ATC Providers 
Total Ccst 


$41.3 

$213.2 

S113.3 

S367.8 


NET SAVING 


$176.6 


These results represent the dis¬ 
counted values of the costs and sav¬ 
ings estimated for the years 1990 
through 2010. 


COST FACTORS 

The key assumptions used to de¬ 
velop the cost and savings estimates 
are described in the following para¬ 
graphs. Cost estimates are in 1990 US 
dollars. 


Flight Operating Cost Factors 

A fuel price of $1.00 per gallon 
was assumed based on costs reported 
for 1990. Fue] prices fluctuated 
drastically during the interim study, 
ranging from $.6G to $1.40 per gallon. 
The interim study was concluded in 
November 1990 A sersitivity analysis 
indicated that significant net 
benefits would still result under 
reasonable variations in the assumed 
fuel price or the fuel price inflation 
rate. 


ADS Air-Ground Communication User Cost 
Factors 

ADS satellite communication user 
cost.'i were assumed to be incurred at a 
rate of $1.20 per kilobit processed. 
A typical ATC data link message was 
assumed to require one-half kilobit, 
including message management overhead, 
which resulted in an estimate of $.60 
per ADS message. ADS position reports 
were assumed to be transmitted at 5 
minute intervals from each aircraft, 
and other ATC data link messages were 
assumed to increase AOS message 
loading by an additional 10%. The 
cost recovery requirement of the 
baseline HF voice communication system 
were assumed to total $20 milli'^n 
annually for the North Atlantic and 
Pacific airspaces under study. 

Aircraft Satellite Communication Eou- 
jpment Cost Factors 

The purchase cost of satellite 
CO .imunication equipment for one air¬ 
craft was assumed to be $137,000, 
which accounted for a satellite data 
unit, communication management unit, 
ADS unit and low gain antenna. Ret- 


374 



REFERENCES 


rofit installation cost was assiuned to 
be $100,000 per aircraft. Annual 
maintenance cost was assumed to be 6% 
of the purchase and retrofit instal¬ 
lation total cost. The low gain an¬ 
tenna would suppoirt AOS communication 
as well as airline operational commu¬ 
nication and airline administrative 
communication. AOS was assumed to 
account for 50% of these data link 
messages, and the equipment cost was 
allocated accordingly. Although high 
gain antennae may be installed to 
provide air-ground digital voice com¬ 
munication, the high gain antennae 
were not assumed to be an AOS re¬ 
quirement and their cost was not con¬ 
sidered in the study. The study as¬ 
sumed that 1200 aircraft would be AOS- 
equipped by 1995, 1400 by the year 
2000 and 1840 by the year 2010. New 
deliveries were assumed to account for 
300 AOS-equipped aircraft by 1995, 500 
by the year 2000, and 940 by the year 
2010. Retrofit installations of AOS 
equipment would apply to 900 aircraft. 


ATC Provider Cost Factors 

The ATC system research and de¬ 
velopment cost relating to ADS was 
assumed to be $7 million for each of 
the six provider authorities. Fa¬ 
cility and equipment cost v;as assumed 
to be $7 million for each of the nine 
ATC centers responsible for air traf¬ 
fic services in the airspaces under 
study. Annual maintenance cost was 
assumed to be 2.5% of the facility and 
equipment cost, which allowed for 
replacement of baseline ODAPS equip¬ 
ment. 


1. International Civil Aviation Orga¬ 
nization, "Automatic Dependent 
Surveillance," ICAO Circular, Wor¬ 
king Draft 2.2 (15 September 
1989). 

2. Massoglia, P.L., Pozesky, M.T., 
Germana, G.T., "The Use of Satel¬ 
lite Technology for Oceanic Air 
Traffic Control," Proceedings of 
the IEEE, Volume 7, No. 11 (Novem¬ 
ber 1989). 

3. Massoglia, P.L., "Automatic Depen¬ 
dent Surveillance for Oceanic Air 
Traffic Control Applications," 
Navigation: Journal of the Insti¬ 
tute of Navigation, Volume 35, No. 
4 (Winter 1988-89). 

4. Radio Technical Commission for 
Aeronautics, "User Requirements for 
Future Communications, Navigation, 
and Surveillance Systems, Including 
Space Technology Applications," 
Document No. RTCA/DO-193, RTCA 
Subcommittee SC155, Washington, DC 
20005 (September 86). 

5. Couluris, G. J., "Automatic De¬ 
pendent Surveillance Benefit and 
Cost Analysis," Interim Report, FAA 
Contract DTFA01-38-y-D-01025, 
Subcontract MIT-01025-1, lAT, 172 
East Creek Drive, Menlo Park, C."' 
94025 (November 1990). 

6. Couluris, G.J., et. al., "Oceanic 
Area System Improvement Study 
(OASIS)," Volumes I-X, Final Report 
No. FAA-EM-81-17, SRI Internation¬ 
al, Menlo Park, CA 94025 (September 
1981). 


375 




SESSION FIVE: 

AIRLINE PROGRAM/OPERATIONS 



Captain David R. Haapala 
Director of Flight Operations Development 
Northwest Airlines 


Captain David R. Haapala, Director of Flight Operations Development at Northwest 
Airlines, has played a major role in developing Northwest’s terrestrial-based datalink and 
Northwest’s planned evolution toward space-based data and voice communication systems. 

Within the airline industry he chairs the Datalink User’s Forum (an Airline Electronic 
Engineering Committee sponsored group) which examines datalink issues affecting airlines, 
avionics vendors and service providers. He also served as Northwest’s representative to 
AvSat, which was one of the earliest industry attempts to launch satellite services for airline 
use. In 1989, he was instrumental in formulating an agreement between Northwest and the 
FAA to conduct ADS trials in the Pacific. 

Prior to his present position he served as Northwest’s director of Flight Standards for the 
A320, B-757 and the B-747-400 and helped introduce those airplanes into Northwest’s fleet. 
He has also been a line pilot, instructor pilot and check airman at Northwest and type rated 
on the B-727, B-757, DC-10 and B-747 airplanes. 

He is a graduate of the University of Minnesota and is a former U.S. Air Force pilot. 


376 









SESSION FIVE: 

AIRLINE PROGRAM/OPERATIONS 



William B. Cotton 
Manager, Air Traffic Systems 
United Airlines 


William B. Cotton is Manager - Air Traffic Systems for United Airlines. Hired as a pilot 
by United Airlines in 1967, Mr. Cotton has flown six types of transport aircraft and 
currently flies as Captain on the DC-10. He has instructed and checked United flight crews 
on the Boeing 727, DC-8, DC-10. 

Mr. Cotton’s interest and participation in air traffic control (ATC) affairs has been 
continuous since 1969 when he became Chairman of the Airline Pilots Association’s National 
ATC Committee. After serving in that position for 13 years, he moved into United 
management and began to represent the company at ATC industry forums and 
improvement efforts. Mr. Cotton was also United’s Flight Operations representative in the 
traffic alert and collision avoidance system (TCAS) evaluation contract with Allied Bendix 
Aerospace. In this work, he was instrumental in the design of displays, symbology, and 
flight procedures to be used on this new avionics system. He now leads the effort by his 
airline to achieve ATC efficiencies through growth features of the TCAS. He also 
coordinates United’s Flight Operations activities for the development and implementation 
of other avionics systems for use in the airspace management and control systems of the 
future. 

Mr. Cotton was educated at Swarthmore College, the University of Illinois, and the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He holds bachelor’s and master’s degrees in 
Aeronautical and Astronautical Engineering. His thesis work at M.I.T. was on the s ibject 
of air traffic control, and specifically called attention to the potential utility of traffic 
information for use by pilots. 


377 






SESSION FIVE: 

AIRLINE PROGRAM/OPERATIONS 



Paul R. Ryan 

Manager, Operations Systems Planning 
American Airlines 


Mr. Paul R. Ryan is Manager Operations Systems Planning - Operations Department of 
American Airlines. He has held this position since 1987, after having served as Manager 
Flight Operations Control and M&E Interface. During his twenty-five years with American 
Airlines he served in a variety of positions within the Operations Department, including 
Avionics Engineer, and Systems Analyst Flight Operations Systems Development. 

Mr. Ryan joined American Airlines in 1966 as a draftsman of Airport Analysis while 
completing his college studies in New York City. In 1969 he moved to Tulsa, Oklahoma, 
as an Avionics Engineer in charge of Flight Recorder Systems and Air-to-Ground 
Communications. In 1972 he assumed responsibility for all special Aircraft 
Communications and Recording Systems, which included the development of the Aircraft 
Communications and Recording Systems (ACARS), and other Aircraft reporting systems 
for Engine, Airframe, and Crew Monitoring. In 1975 he transferred to the Flight 
Operations Development Group to design a computer system to support the Flight Planning, 
Flight Following, and Data Link Systems. In 1988, Paul was assigned to the Air Transport 
Association of America’s Airspace Systems Task Force/Data Communications Working 
Group and as Chairman he has helped guide the Data Link system requirements for Airline 
and Air Traffic Digital Communications. 

A native of Queens, New York City, Mr. Ryan earned a scholarship to The Cooper Union 
School of Engineering. New York City, New York, and was awarded an Electronic 
Eogineeriug Degree in 1969. He also earned a Master’s Degree in Engineering Management 
from The University of Tulsa, Oklahoma. 


378 






SATEIiLITE SURVEILIAMCE AND CONlfOHICATIONS 
AIRIiINE BENEFITS - THE TELEPHONE MYTH 

Paul R. Ryan 

Air Transport Association of America/American Airlines 


ABSTRACT 

When Satellite communication was 
first announced for airline usage, 
the designers and marketers proposed 
that the airlines would install the 
system to provide a public telephone 
in the aircraft to be used by the 
passenger. However, when airline ex¬ 
ecutives reviewed the benefits from 
satellite communications, it became 
clear that the Automatic Dependent 
Surveillance function, which provides 
the "FREE" airspace flying and asso¬ 
ciated Minimum Time Track savings, 
was cost justified. Satellite was 
added as a necessary’ requirement to 
deliver the ADS information to the 
Air Traffic Control people. 


INTRODUCTION 

When the Avionics and Satellite 
providers announced the development 
of the Mobile Aircraft Satellite sys¬ 
tem, the marketing staffs approached 
the airlines that the best way to 
purchase this new capability was from 
a combination of benefits derived 
from the following; 

Marketing Will generate new rev¬ 
enue from telephone us¬ 
age and "Inflight" sales 


Operations Will reduce Operations 
cost with Minimum Time 
flights 

Safety Will make flying over 

the Ocean regions 
safer- 

In today's airline economics, 
only the Operations Department can 
provide the cost/benefit from the in¬ 
stallation of Satellite through the 
proposed Automatic Dependent Surveil¬ 
lance services provided by the Air 
Traffic Authorities, with the estab¬ 
lishment of the FREE airspace and Co¬ 
operative Air Traffic Management Con¬ 
cepts. The FREE airspace provides 
the Minimum Time Track and crossing 
track capability to reduce the time 
to fly between city pairs and reduce 
both the cost of fuel used and the 
cost of Crew pay. The Co-operative 
Air Traffic Management Concept en¬ 
sures no delays into or out of the 
Oceanic Regions, which provides the 
ON TIME dependability benefits to the 
airline. 

This paper provides one airline's 
perspective of justifying the re¬ 
quirements and benefits from the 
installation of SATCOM and the ADS 
function, plus the American Airlines 
approach to the Satellite public 
telephone and Safety of Flight 
issues. 


379 




One X 10 calls X 2 flights X 300 days X SI.00 = $6,000 per year 

Aircraft flight day call 

Notes: 

1. Average time over the North Atlantic outside of the terrestrial area is 
2.5 -3.5 hours. The average number of telephone calls made is assumed 
to be 10. 

2. The aircraft assigned to the Trans-Atlantic segments make one round trip 
per day, therefore average flights per day is 2. 

3. On the average a Trans-Atlantic aircraft flies 300 days per year, with 
60 days required for scheduled monthly and yearly maintenance. 


TABLE 1 


COST ECONOMICS and THE TELEPHONE MYTH 

The satellite advocates voiced 
their support for the SATCOM system 
based upon three areas of benefits; 
Marketing (increased revenues), Opera¬ 
tions (decreased expenses), cind Flight 
Safety. The airline executive quickly 
disposed of the Safety benefit by ask¬ 
ing the question, "How meiny aircraft 
have we lost in the Non-Radar con¬ 
trolled airspace over the past 10 
years?" The answer was "NONE", 
therefore Satellite for safety of 
flight was dismissed as a benefit. 

The next analysis was conducted on 
the potential revenue generators for 
the Marketing Department. The satel¬ 
lite advocates suggested that the air¬ 
lines, in cooperation with a favorite 
telephone service provider, could 
price the telephone call at a rate 
high enough to pay for the Satellite 
installation. After a detail review, 
the Satellite system equipment was 
valued at $300,000 (USD) and the air¬ 
line would receive approximately $1.00 
(USD) for each telephone call made by 
a passenger. The analysis above de¬ 
stroyed this Satellite J^th. 


Based upon the $300,000 cost for the 
basic Satellite equipment, it would 
take 50 years to pay back the system 
(Reference Table 1). Even if the rev¬ 
enue was $10.00 per telephone, the pay 
back would take 5 years. Add to this 
analysis the cost to install and cer¬ 
tify the total system, a revenue 
increase over $100.00 (USD) would be 
necessary to justify another look at 
Satellite for the marketing Depart¬ 
ment. With the recession of the last 
couple of years, no airline was 
capable to invest in the Satellite 
system without a guarantee of over 
$100.00 per flight. None of the tele¬ 
phone service providers would provide 
this guarantee. 

That left the Operations Depart¬ 
ment to justify a Satellite system 
from the decrease in expenses based 
upon reduced flying times between city 
pairs. 


OPERATIONS DEPARTMENT ANALYSIS 

The Operations Department's cost 


380 





ssssm 

mi. RftPftB WMTRgMiBP 


ahsamz 


NORTH ATLANTIC 
CARIBBEAN 

PACIFIC - North/South/HNL 
SOUTH AMERICA 

TOTAL (ALL REGIONS) 

ANNUAL SAVINGS 


FUEL 

CREW PAY 

$2,000,000 

$4,000,000 

$1,500,000 

$3,000,000 

$1,000,000 

$2,000,000 

$ 500,000 

$1,000,000 

$5,000,000 

$10,000,000 




NOTES: 


1. Dollars are $ USD value of 1991. 

2. Fuel savings are based upon 1991 costs. 

3. Schedule is 1991 flying hours with TWA's London and 

Continental's NRT routes. 

4. Savings are based upon FREE Airspace analysis 

(MIN TIME TRACKS, FIR BOUNDARY to FIR BOUNDARY). 


TABLE 2 


analysis was simply defined by the as¬ 
sumption that with an ADS function on 
the aircraft and the ADS services pro¬ 
vided by the Civil Aviation Authority, 
the time enroute in the Non-radar con¬ 
trolled area could be reduced. At 
American Airlines, we ran a large num¬ 
ber of flight plans under the current 
North Atlantic Trade System (NATS) 
rules and then ran the flight plans 
again assuming a minimum time track 
capability from FIR Boundary to FIR 
Boundary. The results identified an 
average time reduction of 3% for 
flights over the North Atlantic area. 
This equates to an American Airlines 
savings of $2,000,000 in enroute fuel 
and $4,000,000 in Crew pay (both Pilot 
and Plight Attendant). Table 2 above 
is a summary by Non-radar controlled 


areas that will benefit American 
Airlines if the FREE airspace services 
are provide to our aircraft. 

The fuel savings for each airline will 
be similar for that of American 
Airlines, but the Crew savings will 
vary depending upon the Pilot and 
Flight Attendant contract details. 

The $15,000,000 savings looks im¬ 
pressive, but to secure these savings, 
American Airlines will have to invest 
$65,000,000 to install the SATCOM and 
ADS function in over 150 aircraft. 
The simple pay back is calculated as: 

$65,000,000/$15,000,000 = 4.4 years. 


381 



The real Return On Investment paral¬ 
lels that of the purchase of a new 
aircraft. The airlines invest all 
their capital upon the delivery of an 
aircraft and then hope that the air¬ 
craft will generate adequate revenue 
to pay for the unit over 20 years. 
For this project we plan to invest in 
the SATCOM and ADS equipment prior to 
the adoption of the FREE airspace con¬ 
cept. We hope that we will not have 
to carry the equipment for a long time 
before the FREE airspace concept is 
accepted by the CAA's. 


AIRLINE BENEFITS - THE REST OF THE 
STORY 

Now that the Operations Department 
has justified the purchase, installa¬ 
tion, and certification of the Satel¬ 
lite and the Automatic Dependent 
Surveillance function units, we need 
to revisit what the SATCOM advocates 
had suggested earlier. The original 
proposals for SATCOM advocated bene¬ 
fits from; 

Harketlng Will generate new revenue 
from telephone usage and 
from in flight sales 

Operations Will reduce Operations 
cost with Minimum Time 
flights 

Safety Will make flying over the 

Ocean regions safer. 

The previous section provided the ben¬ 
efits proposed by the Operations 
Department. The benefits from the 
Safety Department are also real. If 
the ADS information provides up to 'a 
400% improvement over the current 
Ocean Airspace information, then a re¬ 
duction in the current spacing by over 
50% is logical. Therefore the first 
benefits from the Safety of Flight are 


both reduced separation and the accep¬ 
tance of crossing traffic in areas 
such as the Caribbean airspace. When 
Air Traffic experience in the use of 
the ADS function and services are 
gained, we then will request more for 
our investment, that being the FREE 
airspace and Co-operative Air Traffic 
Management Concept. Under the current 
ATA plan, the airlines are requesting 
the following calendar plan for these 
services; 

YEAR SERVICE 

1993 Step Climbs and Two-way Communi¬ 
cations 

1995 Reduced Separation Reductions 
to; 

30 miles Nose to Tail 
05 minutes Wing Tip to Wing 
Tip 

1000 Feet Altitude Separation 

1998 FREE Airspace with Co-operative 
Air Traffic Management 
Crossing traffic 
No delays out of or into the 
Oceanic area 

Once the SATCOM equipment was pur¬ 
chased for the Oceanic aircraft, the 
Marketing Department might find the 
revenue benefits that would allow them 
to install a public telephone on the 
aircraft. Instead of justifying the 
$300,000 (USD) for SATCOM, they would 
only have to justify the cost of the 
connection to the SATCOM equipment and 
the voice Codes necessary for voice 
communications. That cost is pro¬ 
jected to be less than $100,000 per 
aircraft. Assuming revenue of $6,000 
(USD) per year, this still requires 
16,6 years to pay back the investment 
at $1.00 (USD). If the pricing or 
volume assumptions improve, they may 
be able to produce an acceptable busi¬ 
ness case for the Public Telephone as 


382 





the cost of the Satellite Communica¬ 
tions System equipment would not be 
part of their capital costs. When 
this occurs, the Telephone Myth be¬ 
comes a success story. 


SUMMARY 

Satellite Surveillance and Commu¬ 
nications is here. The rate at which 
the industry equips all aircraft is 
controlled by the acceptance of the 
system by the Civil Aviation Authori¬ 
ties and their willingness to provide 
the services we have requested. The 
SATCOM and ADS equipment investment by 
both the airlines and the CAA's re¬ 
quires a firm and absolute commitment 
to the ICAO concept of Co-operative 
Air Traffic Management. In purchas¬ 
ing, installing, and operating the 
SATCOM and ADS systems the airlines 
have made their decision to accept 
this concept: we ask the same of all 
the CAA's. 

When the ATA first advocated the 
1993/1995/1998 projected dates, the 
CAA's worldwide said the dates were 
unrealistic and a myth. We can turn 
the ATA's myth into reality by working 
together and proving the need for, and 
the benefits from SATCOM, ADS, and the 
Co-operative Air Traffic Management 
Concept. Thank you. 


383 



SESSION FIVE: 

AIRLINE PROGRAM/OPERATIONS 


Anthony J. Martin 
Manager Flight Management Systems 
And Data Link 
Boeing Commercial Airplanes 


Anthony J. Martin graduated from Manchester University, England in 1960 with a BS in 
Electrical Engineering. After working as an Avionics Engineer for Hawker Siddley 
Aviation, and as a Submarine Navigation Engineer for Vickers Shipbuilders. 

For Boeing he has worked on the development and certification of Inertial Navigation 
Systems, Colour CRT Electronic Displays, Flight Management Computers, Maintenance 
Systems and Data Link Systems for the 757/767, 737-300, 747-400 and 777 airplanes. He 
is currently the Manager of 747-400 and 767 Flight Management and Data Link systems 
group with responsibility for Flight Management Computers which include the ADS 
inunction, SATCOM and ATN Data Communications Management. 


384 










Communications Needs of the Future 
Air-Ground Interface 


Anthony J. Martin, Manager 
Flight Management Systems and Data Links 
Boeing 

N.D. Molloy, Senior Specialist Engineer 
Data Link Integration 
Boeing 


SUMMARY 

The succe^ful evoluUon of air ground data link applications is dependent on International cooperation 
and agreements to establish the environment to provide economic returns to partidpadng airlines and 
meet the safety requirements of the future Air Traffic Control environment. 

This paper addresses a Boeing perspective of the future requirements for air/g?ound data links, with 
emphasis on the near term uses of SATCOM. The current status of SATCOM systems on the 747-400 
airplane is described together iwth the development efforts underway to achieve Oceanic Air Traffic 
Control capability via SATCOM data links by 1993. The design approach being taken for the new 
Boeing 777 airplane is also described. 


Table of Contents 

Introduction 

CommerdaJ Aviation Data Link History - ACARS 
Fuhjre Growth of Data Link 
747-400 Status and Plans 
SATCOM 

Flight Management Computer System (FMCS) Package B 
Communication Managment Unit (CMU) 

United Airlines Team DUTCH 
777 Data Link Design 
Industry Activity 
Condusiou 


385 




Introduction 


The use of data links on commercial airplanes started with the Airaaft Communications Addressing 
and Reporting System (ACARS) which was initially used for Airline Operational Control (AOC) data 
traffic. 

Recognmng the value of ACARS data, the airlines have been purchasing SATCOM systems for 747- 
400 and 757 long range airplanes and usbg the SATCOM link to extend the geographic area of 
ACARS coverage to the oceanic re^ons and expanding the scope of the ACARS messages to ATC- 
type applications. 

The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), through its Future Air Nawgation System 
(FANS) committee has recogdzed that satellite technology k the only viable solution to overcome the 
shortcommgs of the present Communications, Nawgation, and Surveillance (CNS) system and to fulfill 
the needs and requirements of the foreseeable future on a global bask. (Figure 1.) 

Boeing's primary strategy k to develop products which satkfy our customers current and future 
operational requirements. In response to customer requirements, Boeing plans to develop, install, and 
certificate avionic systems which are compatib’^* wtb the future CNS requirements defined by ICAO. 
Recognizing the continuing evolution of both tne data link infrastructure (communication links, 
networking protocoU, addressmg standards, etc.) and the data link applications (Automatic Dependent 
Surveillance, Two-Way ATC CommunicaUons, etc.), Boeing will work cooperatively with the airlines, 
avionics vendors, air traffic control authorities, and airworthiness authorities to defbc operational, 
system Implementation, and certification requirements for data link systems. Airline involvement will 
ensure that the development sequence of data link infrastructure and applications k consktent with the 
operational economic priorities. 

Commercial Aviation Data Link History 

Initial operational evaluations of data link systems in air transport environment occurred in 1971 on a 
Boeing 747 operated by American Airlines. The Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting 
System (ACARS) was introduced in 1977. ACARS began as a simple Out, Off, On, In (0001) reporting 
system but has rapidly evolved into a complex system communicating many types of Airline Operating 
Control (AOC) messages. ACARS data links axe supported over land masses worldwide by a network 
of ground stations, terrestrial communication links, and VHF radio links operated by and ARINC, 
SITA, Air Canada, and AVI COM. 

Figure 2, courtesy of American Airlines, shows the projected growth of data link equipped aircraft in 
the United States. 

Currently Boeing k in the process of certifying and delivering systems from four different ACARS 
suppliers. So far b excess of 50 different airline unique part numbers have either been delivered or are 
committed for delivery on Boebg 737,757,767 and 747-400 airplanes. 


386 





Future Growth of Data Link 


Boeb^ expect5 a rapid growth u data link fuacdons contiauingthe pattern that has been established 
with ACARS. The arrival of the ARINC 741SATCOM system has opened up a large new area of 
opportunity, 

The initial application of SATCOM has been the extension of the Airline Operational Control (AOC) 
type of ACARS messages to the Oceanic arena udng the SATCOM Data 1 capability. 

The endorsement of satellite technology by FANS, and the promotion of the Aeronautical 
Teleconuntinications Network (ATN) using International Standards Organization (ISO) standards by 
both the regulatoiy agencies and the airlines has identified the requirement for a u^cd approach to 
the air/ground data link network. 

Boeing, as the leading mrframe manufacturer, is responding to this data link revolution by first 
upgrading the 747-400 systems to be compatible with ATN data links, and incorporatbg ATN- 
compatlble data link capability bto the basic design of the new 777 airplane. 

The physical communication channels systems which are being planned for bclude; 

SATCOM Data3/Voice2 

VHP AVPAC 

• ARINC 7i6 Analog VHF Radio wth Modem Interface 

• ARINC 750 Data Radio 
Mode S Transponder 

HF Data Radio 
Gatelbk 

Examples of the classes of information which vdil be transmitted over these channels are contained b 
the foUowbg lists. 

Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS) Reports 
Air Traffic Service Communications (ATSC) 

• Air Traffic Control (ATC) messages 

Emergen <7 condition reports (wbdshear, fire, bijackbg), clearance requests, 
clearances and acknowledgements, iransfer-of-coromunication instructions, 
proposed flight plans and flight plan amendments, flight progress reports, 
altimeter seitbgs 

• Flight Information Services (FIS) messages 
Weather reports and forecasts, NOTAMS, ATIS 


387 



Acxopaoiical ladosHy Sctvicfc Cnmiwankaliotts (AISQ mcssata 
.^iGae Opentiood CodtfU (AOC) Meataget 
Wedber information, plans and progiea data, mdntesaacc rqmts, 

WlndMig aMt/wwlVany trttqnrttwt rentMl Matw^atiK-fc fitimpMler and Aifgrafr 

Comfition Momtoriog System reports, cstwcftn^ ^bt data, Ont-Off-On-ln 
(OOOQ data, and urcraft aadmt^cal emeifeiiqr data 

• Agrftnautleal AdmmklfaftMft (AAtT) 

Cabin pfowAwuag and passenger sctviccQfpeiBeisagcaatKh as leataiagnmeats, 
baggage tracing, cooiimddg travd arrangctnents, and CDStomer 

Aeronantical Passenger Conmomcaiioas (APC) Services 


Voke-telsplione and digital services sndx as fa detxxome nail and personal 
computer network coooecdoos 

Customer tnnque communicadon requbemects will be accommodated by providing tallorable message 
content, message triggering and message presentation, formats. 

747«400 Status and Plans 

The first 747>400'$ were delivered without opendonal SATCOM systems and with baseline Flight 
Management Computer System software called Package A. Bodng made a commitment to offer 
upgraded FMC software somedme after initial cerdficadon. The traded FMC software, called 
Package B, conluns data fink funedons. 

747-400 SATCOM 

■V%tually all 747-400’$ arc delivered with SATCOM provisions installed. Figure 3 shows the number of 
SATCOM provisioned airaaft that Boeing expects to deliver between 1991 «ad :S93. Similar 
provisions are offered on the 767. Figures 4 and 5 show the installadon of SATCOM antennas and 
avionics, respectively, on a 747-400. 

Boeing has been and expects to condnue to be involved in the continumf evolution of commcrdal 
aircraft SATCOM systems. Boeing activity includes installation, integration, test, certification, and 
commissioning of SATCOM systems m response to change requests generated by airline customers. 

PalaLg^l-O 

Boemg delivered the first operadonal SATCOM system on a 747-400 m September of 1990. Four such 
systems were delivered under a spedal agrecraeDl with INMARSAT until a fully qualified system was 
available. This system was used by United Airlines (UAL) for Pacific trials to demonstrate the 
automated position reporting via SATCOM. 




CaigjgHdi 

Tl>e first qualified Datt Level 1 system ««$ certified by Qanlis oa a 747-400 b December of 1990, 

asd tlie first ddntiy of a Data Level 1 ^em from ihe Bodog Ewrett productioa lioe occurred io 
Fd)raatyof 199L This configuration is shown is Inures 4 and 5. 

Since that time throu^ July 1,1991 Boetog has delivered airplanes wdtbSATCOM installed to ^ 
different customers. Change requests for other747-400 customers and 7S7 customers are in process. 
Projected SATOOM ddhrries are 23 b 1991 and 26 b 1992 as shown b F^e 6. 

BaaLgygl2 

Bodng is currently studying the oSeralnll^ of SATCOM Data 2 fysiaos b 2nd quarter of1992. 

Change requests have been received from three airlbes and suppliers have plans to have equipment 
availabla b this dme period. 

American Airlbes plans to ttse SATCOM Data Level 2 on the 767 for portion repotting trials on 
Atlantic routes. 

PabLovdS 

Data Level 3 SATCOM usbg the International Standards Organization (ISO) Open System 
Interconnection (OSI) communication protocols is required for compati^ty widi the Aeronautical 
Telecommunications Network (ATN). 

One customer airlbe has already asked Boebg for a proposal to deliver a Data Level 3 SATCOM 
^stcffl b mid 1993. 

Two Avionics suppliers have iodicated to Boebg that they btend to have systems available b this time 
period. 

SAICQMViilcc 

Single channel Voice 1 or 2 is ourcntly being studied for offerabiliQ'. No Boebg activity is underway 
now to offer multi-channel voice due to lack of hardware av^abilJty b the avionics bdustiy. Cockpit 
voice via satellite will pro^dde full duplex capability b contrast to the half duplex capability provided by 
VHP and HF. Control of the cockpit voice function will be provided by the Multi-function 
Control / Display Unit (MCDU). Exploitation of multi-channel volte capability for cabb voice 
services requbes a Satellite Telecommunications Unit and a Cabb Telecommunications Intermediate 
Unit. Requirements for these systems are currently bebg developed by the AEEC ARINC 746 Sub¬ 
committee. 







Fli^tMuuigeiaeiitCompaterSjstein (FMCS) «F»dcat£*B’ 


Anodier essential ingrediest for an Oceanic ATC compatible qrstem for ibc 747-40G is a major 
software update for tbe FMCS called Tackage B*. Two major near fosedoas iaduded ta Package B 
are Antomadc Depeadent Suivdllaoce (ADS) as specified in tbe AEEC Cbantcteiisdc745 and two- 
way dau link messages. 

The ADS and ATC daU fink message fiincdoas are just two of the many operational enhancements 
whidi the 747*400 airline customers have endorsed for the FM^. Package B will also support data 
link exdmnge of the foUondog types of information: 

Flight plans (both vnth the airline dispatdi office and ATC authorities) 

Perfonnance data (weights, fuel quanti^', cost indes^ engm^ airframe characteristics) 

Takeoff parameters (runway characteristics, weights, winds, temperature, altitude, thrust and 
Sap setdsg, and speeds) 

Predicted enr.yute winds and temperatures 

Poddon and progress reports 

Desdnatioa alternate airports indudlng weather predictions 

Tdckage 6 also includes the capabitiQ' for the airfine to define up to ten customized MCDU pages 
which can be downfinked as data fink messages. 

Industry and government activity through ICAO, RTCA, ATA, and AEEC is underway to complete the 
definition of Oceanic ATC data link function. Operational requirements and implementation 
standards for the ATC data link function are currently being developed by a Working Group of the 
RICA Aeronautical Data Link Applications Special Committee (SC-169). As well as providing an 
offidally sanctioned forum for the FAA partidpation in the requirements development process, SC-169 
working group vdll involve partidpants from die ATA Human Factors and AEEC Data Link 
committees and rely to (he manmum extent possible on the output of these groups. Time is of (he 
essence due to the length of the software development process required to satisfy the DO-178 Level-2 
certification requirements. To meet the raid-1993 certification date, system and software requirements 
must be frozen by the end of 1991. 

Communication Management Unit (CMU) 

A crudal system for the airborne end of the data link network is the Data Router function. Figure 7 
shows the Data Link System Architecture applicable to 747-40Q and identifies the areas of development 
and growth. This system must be capable of accessing all subnetwork links and routing uplink and 
downlink messages from many airborne systems or functions which may be packed m different and 
multiple black boxes on different airplane types to or from the appropriate ground function. 

This brings up one of the L'.^ues being addressed b the mdustry definition of ATN requirements 
SpCtlficatiouS, namely ’logical" versus "physical" addressbg of air to ground data link messages. For 
example, the Automatic Depeudent Surveillancf* (ADS) function may be a function witifcdn pilot 
selectable Left or Right Fli^it Management Com, ulers on one airplane. Left, Right or Center 
Guidance Computers on another airplane, dedicated ADS computers on another, or b the new 
ARINC 651 Integrated Modular Avionics concept It may be a function b software which could migrate 
from one physical module to another under dynamic fault conlabmcnl conditions. 

390 




Tbc addresang saetbod as well as tbe scopt of the cetworlc mau^esieat fooction most be resolved in 
the sear future. In resolviog tbcsc issues tbe limkatioas of meiaoiy, akbome computer tbru-pot, and 
^.ground bandwidth must be wd^ed against the objective of addeving 100% commocaliQr with 
terrestrial networks and software. The alternative modi^fing tibe terrestrial software to 
interface with a simplified airbortte system be cmuridered before a requirement is generated that adds 
complexity to the avionics. In addition to the aviorucs hardware and bandwidth constraints, the 
software development and certification impact of adding functionally to tbe avionics equipment b a 
factor. If large amounts of network matogement software have to be retrofitted into memory and 
tbrupuc limited avionics Idack boxes, then there will be a prohibitive cost assodated with upgrading 
eristing airplanes such as747-400 to ATN compatible data link. 

A second issue specific to the CMU b the stated regidatoiy requirement that all software associated 
with tbe airborne handl^ of ATC messages must be certified to level 2 standards as defined in 
DO 178A - Software Considerations in Airborne Systems and Equipment Cerlifiealiou. F^ure 8 shows 
the FAA imposed Ffight Manual limitation restricting the use of SATCOM data Unk on the 747-400. 
Thb limitation b due to tbe fact tl at die software used to process the messages in the airplane b 
certified to the non-essential Level 3 standard. The primary goal of data link certification standards 
must be to ensure tbe necessary of end-to end message integriy and availabiliy commensurate mth 
tbe spedfic type of data being transmitted. The potential for failures or design errors at any point in 
the network to either interrupt or corrupt essential data must be assessed. Based on tbb assess m ent a 
coherent set of requirements should be developed and levied on both the airborne and terrestrial 
elements of the entire communication system. 

Tbc AEEC Characteristic 748 which defines the CMU requirements allows tbe CMU data router 
function to be integrated in tbe same black box as the exbting ACARS. To date all ACARS software 
has been certified to Level-3 and exbts in more than 50 difierent part niunbers for Boeing airplanes 
alone. These part numbers are generally umque to each individual airplane type for a g^en customer. 
The cost of rccertiying thb software to Level 2 b prohibitive so segregated CMU software seems to be 
the answer. Boeing b actively studying alternate configurations one of which includes a separate CMU 
data router black box An alternative 747-400 system ardutccture using thb approach b conjunction 
with an exbting ACARS b shown b Figure 9. 

Definition of the CMU architecture, functional requirements, and certification requirements as well as 
tbe detailed design, btegratioo, and test b the critical path for achieving an ATN compatible data link 
on the 747-400 by mid 1993, 

United Airlines Team DUTCH 

The MITRE Corporation, b support of the FAA, has organized an ATN Project to validate the ATN 
data link concepts. As participants b thb project both American Airlbes (AAL) and United Airlines 
(UaL) have dedded to bcorporate production certified avionics on commerdal airplanes for 
operational evaluation of the ATN. 

The United AirUnes team called DUTCH (United, Unisys, lelcdync, Collins and Honeywell) b 
deveiopbg SATCOM Data Level 3, ACARS/CMU, FMCS Package B and Airborne Condition 
Monitorbg System (ACMS) to be certified as production equipment on a 747-400 b mid 1993. Boebg 
b system btegrator for testing and certification. 

Boebg is abo the design authority for the FMCS Package B which is purchased by Boebg and sold to 
the airlbes as ScUcr Furtushed Equipment (SFE). SATCOM, ACARS/CMU and ACMS are 
purchased directly by the airIbe and installed and certified on the airplane by Boeing as Buyer 
Furnished Equipment (BFE). 








It is hoped that the piodoct of t!ds Team DUTCH eflbrt «iD be the fu^ ccAified ATN compatiUc data 
liiik^einuangSATCOM. By the dmeoperatknalevahiatioa commences in 1993 both UAl^AAL 
and poteatiaUy other airhnesoiB have conduave^ dem o artrated the styerioriqr of SATCOM Data 
links over current HF voice lyrtema in the oceamc arena, and the ATC andiondes adU be rejMfy tnth 
the ground based networks to complete the fink between the airplanes and the Oceanic control centers. 
In addition to the physical is&astractare required to hnpkmeai data link sendees the operational 
coesmuni^, induding {ulots, conttbUers, and regnlatois, must work together to devel<^ the operadonal 
concepts and procedures that win allow the airlines to eiqptpit the economic benefits that thdr 
investment in data fink tedmolo^ promises. 

777 Data Unk Design 

The core of the 777Aviomes system is a dual cabinet arrangement of electronic modules wiudi is 
called Airplane Infoimatioa Management System (AIMS). This is & design generally m accordance 
with the AEEC Characteristic dSl for Int^ated Modtdar Agonies. It utilizes fault tolerant tedmique 
and integrates multiple functions in a few core computers o^ng robust partitioning techniques for 
sofnvare segregation and isoladon. 

The FMCS, the CMU Data Router, ACARS, and the ACMS are all ^joedons integrated bto AIMS. 
The scbedide for 777 requires mature systems by October of 1994 and certification u April of 199S. 

Figure 10 shows the 777 architecture from a data link perspective. Note that all phyacal interfaces 
outside of the airplane are via the AIMS cabinet ConnectM^ to the Electronic library System (RLS) 
and Cabin Management System (CMS) is via an on*board Fiber Distributed Data Interface (FDDI) 
Local Area Network. 

The AIMS design btegrates the following functions: 

Flight Displays 

Engbe Displays 

Crew Alerting 

Flight Management 

Thrust Management (Auto Throttle) 

Fault Monitoring and Reporting for Meunlenancc 
Signal Consolidation for Flight Recorder 

Automatic Checklists 
Software Data Load Gateway 

Signal Consolidation and Retransmission for Engbe and Flight Control Systems 
ATN Router 

Data Lbk Message Processor Includbg Flight Crew Display anH Control (formerly ACARS) 
Airplane Condition Monitorbg System (ACMS) 

The first group of functions have traditionally been prowded by Boebg as Seller Furnished Equipment 
(SFE) due to cither criticality, unique bierface or system architecture cbaractensdcs, or for 
proprietary considerations. The second group of functions are new to a Boebg airplane and are 
bcludcd b the SFE AIMS for the foUowbg reasons. Of the last group of functions ACARS and 
ACMS have traditionally been Buyer Furnished Equipment (BFE) specified and procured by the 
airlbes and installed, btegrated, te.sted, and ccrlificd by Boebg. 

For the 777 Boeing has chosen to blegrate these traditionally BFE functions bto the SFE AIMS 
cabbet. The AIMS design will accommodate the airline requirement for flexibUity b these functions 
by usbg a table-driven approach. Flexibility wiU be built b to the operational software. Specific 


392 







modifiable features «ili be lovoUd by customer generated tables tbat are loaded into AIMS via either 
the ouibosrd software data load^ or gatefink. The table driven approach will allow the operaring 
software to remain unchanged and therefore significantly reduce the cost assodated with recerrificarion 
of each new customer option. A ground-based software tool bdngderigned in conjunction with AIMS 
uqU be used by both Boeing and the airlines to generate the loadable tables that configure the AIMS 
optional features. 


393 






Industry Activi^ 

To mslcc the Aeronautical Telecommunications Network a reality re^uii^ intemabonal aod industry 
standards for desigUt certificaUony and interoperability. The miyor otganxzations and their primary 
activities and respon&bilities are listed below: 

FAA and Foreign Regulatory Agencies 

Origio/Destination of air/ground traffic related to Air Traffic Serrdce Communication 
(ATSC) inducUng Air Traffic Control (ATQand Highlit Information Service (FIS) 
bformadon 

Developet and operator of ground terminals connected to the ATN 

Key partidpant in industry activities to develop standardized means of representing 
A1^C information (Data Dictionary) 

Developer of airworthiness standards and certification requirements for airborne ATN 
components and installations. 

(Advisory Circular 25XX) 

MTTRE 

Program Manager for FAA sponsored ATN Demonstration Program 
AirUnes 

Origin and destination of Aeronautical IndustryScrvice Communication (AlSC) 
induding Aeronautical Operational Control (AOC) and Aeronautical Administrative 
Control (AAC) 

Defines functional requirements for BFE equipment 

Ultimate purchasors and operators of airborne ATN equipment. 

Developer and operator of ground terminals connected to the ATN 

Partidpants m Industry activities to develop standards for both airborne and ground ATN 
components and systems. 

Sponsors and/or partidpants b ATN demonstration programs 
Avionics Manufact'uers 

Designers and vendors of airborne ATN equipment 

Partidpants in Industry activities to develop standards for airborne ATN components and 
systems. 

Participants in ATN demonstration programs 


39A 






Aeronautical Radio Incoiporated (ARINC) 

Provider of ground-based network service* to transmit and route data between airborne 
ATN terminals and ground-based re^atoiy and airline computer systems. 

The Airlines Electronic En^eering Committee (AEEC) sponsors meetings of airlines 
and avionics and airfnune manufacturers to establidi consensus design standards for 
airborne ATN equipment Consensus design standards are published as ARINC 
Characteristics. 

Radio Techmeal Committee for Aeronautics (RTCA) 

Sponsors meetings (Special Comnuttees) composed of government and amtlon industry 
representatives to d^lop Minimum Operadonal Performance Standards (MOPS) for 
the endre ATN, network subsystems, and specific ATN applications. 

Intemadonal Civil Avdadon Organizadon (ICAO) 

Develops through Industry coordinadon and publishes Standards and Recommended 
Praedees (SARPS) defining the architecture and operadooal eharacterisdes required to 
achieve Intemadonal interoperabi% of the ATN. 

Participates m the definition and intemadonal coordination of addresses for all ATN 
ground elements, airplanes, and application functions. 

Air Transport Assodation / Intemadonal Air Transport Assodadon (ATA/IATA) 

Represents airlines in developing human factors requirements for ATN applications. 

Establishes communications protocols and standards for airline-specific ground-based 
ATN applications and coordinates address assignments. 

Airline Consultative Committee for Telecommuniation Systems (ACCTS) 

Involved in address assignments and the spedfic application of OSI standards to the 
ATN, 

These organizations have authorized the a large number of committees / working groups to develop 
spcdfic aspects of the ATN and Its applications. Figure 11 developed by the FaA shows the major 
organizations and the number of sub-groups bvolved. 

Conclusion 

Boeing foresees large'scale appheation of data link for Airline ■Operational Control and Air Traffic 
Control Boeing also endorses the standardization provided by ATN with its Open System 
Interconnection. The oceanic sector can be the first ATN application in 1993 using SATCOM Data 
Level 3, rMCS Package B and an ACARS/CMU. The technical issues to be resolved are manageable; 
the risk bvolves the schedule for definbg firm design requirements endorsed by the btemational 
aeronautical institutions. 


395 







Communication Needs of the Future - Air Ground interface 


I 


o 

2 

S E 

> o 

c g 
® o 

1 2 

> (D 

2 C 

2 o 
c 

0 

^ •S 

>« (Q 
O) C 
O O 


C O 

=* z 

£ c 0) 
£ <0 £ 

9. o o 

Vi % B 
z si* c 

0^2 
if^ (I) b 

£ S £ 

Q) C » 

® -2 g- 

a ‘5 £ 

o t i 

£ 3 C 

r; 00 n 

O TO w 

.£ c c 

£ .2 ® 


=s 2 o St •*-' 

5 > ’-S t: -5^ = 

m .3 o 2 S 


CO -= 
« 2 


MW «»« 

c/) 2 m 



396 


igure 1 ICAO Future Air Navigation System 
Fourth Meeting, May 1988 










Communication Needs of the Future - Air Ground Interface 



Figure 2 Projected Growth of Data Link Equipped Airplanes 












Needs of the Future - Air Ground Interface 




v/////mmMMmM^m 








wm^m^^zm 

^^m///////A 


\mz////////Am 


398 


1Q’91 2Q’91 














Communication Needs of the Future - Air Ground Interface 



Figure 4 - 747-400 SATCOM Antenna Installation 



























































































Communiaation Needs of the Future - Air Ground Interface 



Figure 5 - /47-400 SATCOM Avionics installation 


























Communication Needs of the Future -- Air Ground interface 



401 


SATCOM Svstem DfillvftriPR 



Communication Needs of the Future - Air Ground Interface 



Figure 7 747-400 Data Link Evolution to Support ATN 






















Communication Needs of the Future - Air Ground Interface 


c 

o 







3 

C 

(0 





E 

0) 

TJ 

C 

<D 

<D 

(0 

CO 






C 

(0 



o 

o 

c 

s 

a 



o 

o 




E 

E 


o 

o 


403 




Figure 8 747-400 Operational Limitation imposed by FAA 





Communication Needs of the Future - Air Ground interface 



Figure 9 Independent CMU Alternative Data Link Architecture 














r^rtmmunination Needs of the Future — Air Ground Interface 



Communications Management Functions & interfaces 






























Communication Needs of the Future - Air Ground Interface 


111 2 ts. 



/ <0 CO 

^ CO CO 
Q <0 <D 

lu cnTn 
jt: CO CO 
LU (O <0 

^ O to 
, CO CO 
V <D <0 


CO T- 
^ lO 
N t^. 

lO o 

tt lO 
N N- 

T“ C3> 

N N 


Om^Q-a. 

520o)£l 

^SSQOT 

Obi 




^^CDCOCDN* 

Pttttt 

Hooooo 
CCc/) <0(0 coco 






s 

q: 5 zq 

£ >ijj 

< 5 > 


lE 

go 


c 

o 

£ 

<D 

w .is 

5 

O O’ 
a> 

S cc 


o s 

t ^ 

ft ^ 


^co < \ 

UJCC H* K > 

ow c 5 < . 
59 

a:> O S H: 

luo zo*^ 

cott ttO y 

v / 


QZ“jm . 

! 5 i| -H 

IsiS 

<o 5 50 















SESSION FIVE: 

AIRLINE PROGRAM/OPERATIONS 



Renate J. Roske-Hofstrand 
Chief Human Factors Engineer 
CTA, Incorporated 


As Chief Human Factors Engineer, Dr. Renate J. Roske-Hofstrand coordinates CTA’s 
human factors efforts in support of the FAA Technical Center’s research and development 
in communication, navigation, surveillance, landing aids, and air traffic control. Based in 
McKee City, New Jersey, she serves as Task Manager for evaluation researeh in datalink 
systems. Dr. Roske-Hofstrand served on the FAA’s Scientific Task Planning Group for Air 
Traffic Control. 

Prior to joining CTA, Dr. Roske-Hofstrand served as Principal Investigator for human- 
computer interface issues and applied cognitive research in aviation at the NASA Ames 
Research Center, Moffett Field, California. She has conducted research as a visiting 
scientist at NASA-Langley in Hampton, Virginia and the National Transportation Safety 
Board in Washington, D.C. 

Dr. Roske-Hofstrand holds a Ph.D in cognitive psychology from New Mexico State 
University. She is a member of many professional organizations including the Human 
Factors Society, the Association of Aviation Psychologists, the ACM Special Interest Group 
on Computer-Human Interaction, the European Association for Cognitive Ergonomics, and 
the Air Traffic Control Association. 

Her publications on air traffic control have appeared in the proceedings of numerous 
conferences (e.g., the biennial International Symposium on Aviation Psychology, Conference 
on Human Factors Issues in the Use of Artificial Intelligence in Air Traffic Control, Annual 
Air Traffic Telecommunications symposium on Data Link Integration), Her book chapters 
appear in Pathfinder Associative Networks; Studies in Knowledge Organization and 
Handbook of Human-Computer Interaction . Her paper on cognitive networks was featured 
in Er gonomics (Special Issue on Aviation Psychology), Dr. Roske-Hofstrand holds a Private 
Pilot Certificate. 


408 






A Model Human Engineering Approach to the Development 
of Regulatory Standards for Digital Communication Technologies: 

Defining Safety from a Human*Machine Systems Perspective 

Renate Roske-Hofstrand, PhD. 

Jack Berkowitz 
CTA INCORPORATED 

and 

Albert Rehmann 
FAATC-ACD-320 

Abstract 

Thh report outlines the initiation of a comprehensive research program which will 
investigate the integration of digital communications into the flightdeck and will 
address specific safety considerations. First, a basic research scheme is 
described. Next, some preliminary results are presented. Finally, future 
directions, both within the current research scope and beyond, are discussed. 

1. Introduction 

The advent of digital communication technologies provides the systems design engineer with the 
unique opportunity to satisfy those functional requirements which are characteristic of optimal 
flight management, air traffic control and user interactions. Pilots and controllers are required to 
command an ever inaeasing number of integrated sub-systems in order to retain control of and 
manage the flightdeck and air traffic environment. A "glass" cockpit aircraft requires a myriad of 
information exchanges in the form of system commands and interactions with the aircraft's Flight 
Management System (FMS). Integrated system technology promises safe and efficient flight; 
however, each information exchange in this increasingly "automated" system must be viewed as an 
instance for potential error. From a human factors perspective these situations represent potential 
penalties on the debit side of the "balance sheet" for human cognition. 

2. Error Causes 

Errors are a generic term encompassing all those occasions in which a planned sequence of mental 
or physical activities fails to achieve its intended outcome, and when these failures can not be 
attributed to the intervention of some chance agency (Reason, 1990). The primary causal 
mechanisms for error fall into three major distinct categories: human tehavioral error factors, 
contextual and situational error factors, and cognitive and conceptual error factors. This paper will 
address only that class of human error which appears preventable due to our ability to identify 
characteristics in system design and its human interfaces. 

A number of human factors engineering studies have recently been initiated to investigate the 
relative efficacy of data link control and display alternatives. The research would typically 
investigate human behavioral error factors. Despite good progress in terms of defining the types of 
air traffic control services offered and specifying optimal display format configurations, little 
research has been done to address optimal integration of the various data link functions. Little 
attention has been paid to the systematic study of contextual/situational or human cognitive error 
factors. Only these factors will most directly help to identify any faults or potential human 
incompatibilities in system design. 


409 







3. Methods of Investigation 


The methods of investigating huma i error in aviation systems vary widely and currently only a 
hand fiiU of investigators have tackled this topic in aviation systems. The most familiar methods to 
the aviation community take the form of "data base accumulation" and "case studies". An example 
of the former is NASA's Aviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS) which encourages both pilots 
and controllers to report on known incidents (those which did not lead to catastrophic 
consequences). The basic rationale for this type of data collection is that the relatively minute 
irregularities in daily operations are a useful guide to the understanding of problems in the system. 
Appropriate analysis of this data can function as an early warning device for problems evolving in 
the entire aviation system. 

The National Transportation Safety Boaids's investigations following accidents are an example of 
the case study approach for investigating human error. The intensive study of a single given case 
can teach us something about a particular combination of contributing facton and about the limits 
of human performance. In terms of providing a complete record of events, accident reports fall 
short, mostly because they are concerned with attributing blame. 

4. A Model Approach 

Our own model human engineering approach to the investigation of human error is a 
comprehensive effort that attempts to combine the fields of system safety engineering with 
simulator studies. Our basic approach builds upon an understanding of human error gleaned from 
ASRS data, questionnaires, and case studies. With the new data link technologies, we can not 
benefit from a corpus of available data. Therefore we will make use of computer-based simulations 
which will create in a laboratory setting many of the dynamic features of real-life, complex tasks 
using initial new technology designs. These simulator studies will allow us to chart the discourse 
of error events and their consequences for purposes of defining system design guidelines. With 
the addition of digital communications into the existing automat^ navigation and flight regime and 
the current scarcity of human factors functional requirements, the process of safety assessment for 
air worthiness certification has gained several layers of complexity. The system to be evaluated and 
certified includes both airborne and ground-based computers which are capable of being linked or 
coupled to the primary flight computers. 

The FAA Technical Center has recently acquired a vital tool for the comprehensive investigation of 
error in this system environment. This tool, known as the Reconfigurable Cockpit Simulator (RCS) 
allows for the rapid configuration and re-configuration of flight-deck equipment and linkage to 
existing air traffic control simulation facilities. It enables us to run carefully designed and 
controlled scenarios with the intent to produce "error" situations which will test pilots and 
controllers. This approach will yield information regarding the relative severity of the consequences 
of "mistakes" with various interface design features. 

Human-machine interactions in complex and increasingly automated flightdeck and control room 
environments will change with the introduction of digital communication regimes. The new 
procedural discourse may differ greatly from current tasks yet individual human-machine action 
sequences are still critic^ in insuring or endangering safety. The consequences of failure in any 
one or all of the system elements may involve danger to human life, property. Of particular interest 
to our planned investigations will be an exploration of how humans tehave when things go wrong. 

5. Regulatory Standards and Certification Issues 

Accidents have traditionally been defined as unplanned events or series of events that lead to an 
unacceptable loss such as death, injury, illness, damage to or loss of equipment of property. 
Levinson (1991), in an article addressing software safety, points out that computers and their 


AlO 








displays by themselves are relatively safe devices: they rarely explode, catch on fire, or cause 
physical harm. The same can be said of the human sub-system: rarely do humans spontaneously 
combust. However, computers and their human operators on the flightdeck or on the ground can 
contribute substantially to accidents or incidents. 

The distinction between an accident and an incident is made by evaluating the relative severity of the 
consequences of a particular event. In terms of error categories a distinction can also be made 
between "active" errors, whose effects are felt almost immediately and "latent" errors whose 
adverse consequences may lie dormant within a system for a long time before they combine with 
other factors and breach a system's defenses. In general, active errors are associated with the 
performance of the front-line system operators: pilots and controllers. In contrast, latent errors are 
associated with system design flaws, i.e. design and engineering activities removed in both time and 
space from the eventual actual system operation. The certification process must deal with both 
categories of event consequence. This is difficult in the absence of sound functional and 
unambiguous implementation requirements for airframe and avionics manufacturers. The FAA 
Technical Center's Airborne data link human factors research program investigates the lifetime of 
sub-system errors and their consequences to fill this gap. 

6. Error Analysis and Resource Management Event Trees 

A critical first step in the FAA Technical Center's Airborne data link human factors research 
program involves "error life-time" analysis. This analysis focuses upon event sequences which lead 
to successful or unsuccessful flight episodes. Charting human action'sequences and their 
consequences as a result of specific precipitating conditions provides important information to both 
the system design engineer and the certifying authority. Central to the development of our error 
life-time analysis is the construction of operational resource management event trees. These trees 
are graphical desaiptions of human and system behavior, through which cockpit actions and results 
may be analyzed. The basic representational format is that of a fault-tree, using events linked 
through "and" and "or" gates. An entire integrated flightdeck may be assessed by constructing 
individual resource management trees for each subsystem. 

For purposes of illustration, a resource management event tree template is presented in Figure 2-1. 
This sample tree describes a "climbing" flight segment with requir^ input to a Flight Management 
System. The tree progresses from the overall goal of successful flight down (or up) through levels 
of aircraft system and user characteristics. The first level encompasses different desired flight 
execution phases; including climbing, transitioning, landing, and final approaches. Flight phases 
reference Iwth the vertical and horizontal components of flight control. 

The second level indicates the flightdeck subsystem of interest. Possible sub-systems considered 
include the FMS, altitude alerting systems, autopilot systems (when separated from FMC), voice 
radio, and data link. At this stage of development, the interactions between two or more subsystems 
are not broken out for separate analysis. 

The third level describes the user intent in executing inputs to the subsystem. Note that this level of 
classification concentrates on the intent of the user to perform the function, not whether or not the 
subsystem is capable of actually performing the function. This distinction is made in reference to 
the error analysis procedures used in conjunction with these event trees which will be discussed 
later in this paper. 

The fourth level describes, the specific user action followed to execute the user's intent. For the 
example diagram, "Action Series 2" refers to a sequence of key strokes which will arm the FMS. 
There may be other key stroke sequences which would also arm the FMS, and these are denoted by 
the different action series. 


All 








Figure 2-1. Generic Resource Management Event Tree. 

At the lowest level of the tree are the user actions which comprise the action series. Included at this 
level are both observable and inferable user behaviors which constitute a human action series. The 
actions include such behaviors as pushing function keys, turning dials, reading displays, and verbal 
output. These actions are classified to the lowest inteipretable level. For example, we utilize "Read- 
back assigned altitude" as opposed to indicating each phoneme separately. 

A key component of these trees is the ability to attach numerical probabilities of success to the 
different human and system events. The attached weighting parameters refer to non-observable 
human factors, such as the cognitive, perceptual, or physical effort required to perform the 
individual act. The weighting is assigned based on known cognitive and psychologic^ principles. 
Once validated through system simulations, the resource management event trees will be an asset to 
the FAA's certification effort. 

A second feature of the trees is the ability to pinpoint action errors in terms of the observable pilot 
behavior (the lowest level of the tree). By reviewing records of flightdeck incidents involving some 
type of "pilot" error and classifying these errors according to standardized human error categories, 
human error templates arise which correspond to the event trees. These categories will be described 
in detail later; however, the basic hypothesis is that the same form of "pilot" error occurs during a 
certain action series, and that this error "pattern" is repeated across different incident reports. 

A schematic of the data collection requirements for resource management event tree construction is 
presented in Figure 2-2. Currently, the program is progressing through analyses of the NASA 
Aviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS), a general investigation of human error classifications 
tailored to automated systems, and an adoption of generic human error types for use in the 
flightdeck analyses (the three boxes hilighted in the diagram). Additional data collection and 
validation will be accomplish^ through strucuired subject matter expert (SME) interviews, direct 
observation of flightdeck activities, and human factors experiments with the RCS simulator system. 

The eventual goal of this event tree construction is threefold. First, the event trees will provide a 
graphical analysis tool for human procedures, decisions, and actions within the flightdeck 

















































environment. Second, through the mathematical analysis of the trees, input to the FAA's 
certification authorities will be formulated, both in reference to human interaction with solitary sub¬ 
systems and to the integration of new sub-systems in the larger flight control system. Last, the 
event trees will aid in the generation of hardware and software guidelines for new data link 
implementations and services. 



Figure 2-2. Data Collection Requirements for Event Tree Construction. 

7. Initial Results from our ASRS Data Analysis 

In this section, a preliminary analysis of ASRS reports is described. First, the framework for the 
reports is detailed, and then some of the study's results are presented. 

7.1 Analysis Proggdurest 

ASRS database selections are provided by a NASA contractor in response to search requests. The 
search requests are usually centered about broadly defined categories of interest, with the 
contractor's personnel performing the actual search. 

Based on the a priori assumption that the addition of a new communication subsystem would add to 
pilot distraction, a search request was made using "Heads Down Incidents" as the central topic. 
"Heads Down Incidents" were operationally defin^ as the occurrence of an unsafe aircraft control 
event due to the pilot not maintaining a "normal" instrument scanning and control behavior either 
outside of or within the cockpit. This behavior alteration can be attributed to high workload levels, 
the occurrence of an extraordinary event (such as an equipment malfunction), the misuse or lack of 
acceptable procedures, or other distracting events. 

Key words used to search the database included: 


413 


















Heads Down 

Program 

Fli^t Grew IXstractioa 

Key 

Fl^it Grew Anemion 

FMU 

Flight Grew Pre-Occupied 

FMC 

b^ument Panel 

FMS 

Input 

EICAS 

Enter 

EFIS 

K^boaid 

APU 

Airaaft Eqi^ment ProUem 

INS 

IRS 

OMEGA 

GPS 

Aulof^ 

Altitude Alert 



At Ae tune ci the database seaiclu the ASRS database contained 33,045 full kngA incident iqxxts. 
These full length lepocts aie saniti^ to remove ai^ traceability of Ae iqxsited incident back to die 
pilot who ffled the reptut Included m the incident iqwrt are data on intent date, portion of the 
person filing the iqioit, the perscxis mvolved in Ae incident, the flight conditions, the kxadon of the 
incident, the aircraft type, Ae location of the aicraft, the altitude of the aircraft, and other items 
concerning boA die aircraft and the procedure being en^loyed. In addition, die report provides a 
narrative description the incident Udngthekey word seaidi, 160 inddentrqKUts were sekcled 
for furAo-analysis. These repwts were {sovided by the Battelle ASRS Office. 

7.1.2-Aircraft.Eteition Oasaficatiop- 

The narrative sections of the ASRS incident repwts were analyzed for contributing factrus to the 
head-down incident The mcident repwts were categorized according to seven aircrait position 
classification dimensions. Data fw Aese classifications were drawn from boA Ae narrative 
sections and Ae oAer incident report data fields. These Amensions included: 

a Type of Aircraft 

b. Aircraft Flight Riase (Vertical) 

c. Aircraft Flight Phase (Horizontal) 
d (jenttal Instrument Utilized 

e. Aircraft Position Ertw 

AlAough an in-depA explanation of Aese Amensions is beyond Ae scope of this paper, some 
general comments are possible. The Type of Aircraft reported was a general classiftcation of 
aircraft class based on t^eoff weight (as opposed to an aircraft model designator like B747-400). 
The Aircraft Flight Phases referred to aircraft maneuvers at Ae beginning of Ae reported incident 
The (Central Instrument Utilized sought to identify the one sub-system wiA which Ae re^rter 
seemed to have Afficulty, wiA which Ae reporter was preoccupied, or which Ae reporter utilized 
most ftequently throughout Ac duration of Ae episode. 

Category "e". Aircraft Position Error, classified Ae positional error of the aircraft in Ae incident 
There were four levels of Ais category. "Error - Altitude High" was recorded when Ae aircraft 
reached any altitude above the assigned altitude during any phase of flight "Error - Altitude Low" 
was recorded when Ae aircraft descended to any altitude below the assigned altitude. "Lateral 
deviation" was recorded when Ae aircraft was flown off course, or was lined up on the wrong 
ranway for takeoff or landing. 

For Ae positional errors, no reference was made in terms of Ae absolute altitude or heaAng 
assignments received by the pilots. Instead, Ae positional error referred to Ae relative position of 
Ae aircraft to Aeir assigned positions. For example, if an airaaft was 1000 feet above Ae assigned 
altitude of 18000 feet, what was recorded was Aat Ae plane was in an altitude bust situation, not Aat 





the plane was at any set altitude (say 18000 feet versus 360(X) feet). No indicaticm was given as to 
whether an air tr^fic conflict resulted if any sepaiadmi standards were violated. This 
information was not directly obtainalHe fiom the ASRS reptxts. 

7.1.3 Pilot Enor Classification. 

The narrative repmts were also categorized according to any pilot error that could be identified from 
therqxxt Admittedly, this analysis was someudiat subjective; however, the reports did provide an 
extensive amount of data on which to base categorization decisions. 

The etrcH* categories used were derived from application of standard human factors error schemes. 
These errors iiKluded: 


Commission Pilot performs unnecessary action. 

Generic Command Misapplicadcxi Pilot performs actions genoally known to achieve a 

function, but fail to work in the current situatitm. 


Goal Induced 
Incomplete Procedure 

Mode 

Omission 

Pre-Requisite Action Omission 
Option Identification 


The pilot correctly enters inapprqjriate command. 

Pilot begins proper command sequence, but escapes 
before completing the procedure. 

Pilot perfeams action when system is in the wrong 
mode to accept or execute the action. 

Pilot fails to perfonn a necessary action. 

Pilot fails to perform necessary selection (action) 
before proceeding with a planned action sequence. 

Pilot chooses a menu selection option to perform one 
action when in fact the selection performs another 
action. 


7.2 Results. 

The 160 ASRS incident reports were analyzed according to the method described above. In this 
analysis, only incidents which might have involved some degree of perceived pilot error were 
considered. Those which would not be involved with pilot actions were excluded from the analysis. 
Thus, only 144 of the incident reports were retained for further analysis. 

7.2.1 Statistical Use of ASRS Incident Reports . 

The incident reports provided by the Battelle office do not constitute a representative sample of all 
aircraft incidents. First, ih? use of the reporting system is voluntary, and thus not all incidents are 
reported. Second, the selection of the incident reports from the ASRS data base is dependent upon 
the selection key words which the research technician employs. A different research technician may 
submit a alternate key words for the search, and thus provide a slightly different selection of 
incident reports. With this caveat in mind, the statistical use of the ASRS reports is somewhat 
limited. The true power of their usage is derived through an analysis of the accompanying 
narratives. Although subjective, the analysis procedures provide a mcihod for the reduction and 
interpretation of the data. 


415 








The lesults presented below represent a sekcdon of data from the total database. As convoitioiial 
statistical tests are inai^m^aie f(x these analyses, die data presented are those OMiadaed relevant 
to die focus df the project 

7.2.2 Aircra ft Position Enors. 

The aircraft ^pe data indicated that the majraity of the incidoits reported woe connected to the 
Medium tran^xm aze type (30,000 - 150,(Xj0 lbs. taket^ weight) at 4S.1%, followed the Large 
transport size (150,000 to 300,000 lbs. takeoff weight) at 29%. Tbe central equipment 
classfficadon focussed on the main piece of equipment mentimied within the narrative section. The 
equipment type most frequently involved with rep<Hted incidents was the Flight Management 
System/Autopilot classification (37.5%); follow^ by the Altimeter/NAV aids classificadrai 
(29.9%). 

The horizontal flight phase classification revealed a slanted distribution of horizontal flight phase 
activity, with Straight flight accounting for 78.5% of die incident repmts versus 1\5% for Turning 
flight The vertical flight phase classification revealed a somewhat even distribution of vertical 
flight phase activity across the five classification levels, with the exception of Transitioning Up 
incidents (10.4% of the total number of reports). 

The aircraft position classiftcation revealed the following trends in the data. The majority of the 
reported incidents resulted in either an altitude high (43.1%) or a low (26.4%) error. Combined,, 
altitude errors contributed 67.5% of the total number of classifications. 

7.2.3 Pilot Error Classifications . 

Table 3-1 presents the frequency of occurrence of each pilot error classification across the 144 
reports reviewed. The results indicate the maj(aity.of the pilot error occurrences involved two pilot 
error classifications: Omission (27.1%), and Pre-Requisite Action Omission (29.2%). Combined, 
these two forms of omission accounted for 56.3% of Ae total pilot errors. 

In addition, there were a large number of incidents for which there was no pilot error involved or for 
which a possible pilot error could not be discerned from the narrative report The Not Applicable 
classification accounted for 22.2% of the total. The results of this analysis are presented in Figure 
3-1. 


50 



5 ! M ' 

I EnorTypa * ° 

Figure 3-1. Pilot Error Classification. 


416 






7.2.4 Interactions between Aircraft Pbation and Pilot Error Types 

In this section, the link between the different aircraft positicMi descriptors and the pilot error 
classificatitm is investigated. In the text, these relationships are referred to as interactitMis, even 
though the data were not utilized within a structured statistical analysis regime. 

The two-way interaction between aircraft Qpe and the central equiinnent utilized indicated that there 
are significant difficulties associated with the proper comm^ and control of on-board fli^t 
computers, particularly in the larger aircraft Qrpes. In particular, FMS/Autopilot difficulties 
accounted for the most errors across the larger transport airoaft types, followed by difficulties 
with Altimeters and NAV aids. Furthermore, difficulties with la&o Unctions did not seem to be as 
critical to the larger transport aircraft classifications. 

The two-way interaction between aircraft position errors and aircraft vertical flight phase was also 
investigated. Several interesting, although somewhat predictable, results were found through this 
analysis. First, altitude high errors are associated strongly with both climbing (takeoff) and 
transitioning up stages of flight These errors also occur frequently with transitioning down 
phases. Second, altitude low errors are associated with descending (landing) and transitioning 
down flight stages. Third, direction errors occur frequently in descending phases, as well as level 
flight Last a roughly even distribution of errors occurs during level flight with slightly more 
altitude high errors recorded than the other three classifications. 

The results of the two-way interaction analysis between aircraft position errors and pilot error 
classification were somewhat mixed. However, there were several trends in the data that are 
noteworthy. First, the data indicated that altitude high errors and direction errors were associated 
with Omission errors. In addition, altitude high errors and altitude low errors were associated with 
Pre-Requisite Action Omission errors. Last, all three classifications of position errors appeared to 
be associated with the Commission errors. The rest of the analysis indicated an even distribution of 
aircraft position errors across the different pilot error classifications. 

The two-way interaction between aircraft vertical flight phase and pilot error classification was also 
investigated. The results of this analysis are graphed in Figure 3-2. Again, the results of this 
analysis detected some significant trends. First, climbing and descending flight phases were 
associated with Pre-Requisite Action Omission errors and Omission errors. Second, level flight 
was associated with Omission errors, and to some degree Pre-Requisite Action Omission errors. 
Last, both transitioning phases of flight were somewhat spread in terms of the pilot error 
classifications, with a large degree of Not Assignable pilot errors associated with each. However, 
transitioning down was associated somewhat with Omission errors. 

8. Conclusions 

The results of our ASRS data analysis indicate some "typical" human factors problems within the 
flightdeck. For example, pilots committed many omission errors during classically busy phases of 
flight, and these errors involved data entry into FMS and other flightdeck systems. It is reasonable 
to expect that similar errors will occur in conjunction with a data link sub-system. In addition, the 
integration of the sub-system into the overall system may alter the procedural and operational 
human-machine and human-human relationships within the cockpit. 

The role of the FAA's airborne data link human factors effort is to provide inputs to certification. 
Through the decomposition and subsequent analysis of the flightdeck, recommendations can be 
formulated about proper integration practices. Included in these recommendations will be inputs 
about hardware/software design, sub-system integration, intra-cockpit procedures, and pilot-ATC 
integration procedures. 


417 








I 

E 

3 

z 


20 



ClinMns Descending Level Tiansiliohino Down Tranalioning Up 


Verticai Ri^t Phase 


Convncion 

Genenc Command Misapplication 
Goal induced 
incomplete Procedura 
Mode. 


_queite Action Ommewn 

Opinn IdenlSication 
Not Assignable 


Figure 3-2. Vertical Flight Phase by Pilot Error Classification 


As the program develops, other considerations will be incorporated into the general scope. Among 
these areas are the use of data link within special airspaces, such as oceanic sectors. Furthermore, 
the expansion of data link for direct aircraft-to-aircraft communication, and the implications of 
international data link standardization may be future areas for human factors input 

REFERENCES 

Levinson, N.G. (1991). Software Safety in Embedded Computer Systems. In; Communications of 
the ACM. Fet^ary. Vol. 34 . No. 2. 

Paradies, M. (1991). Root Cause Analysis and Human Factors. Human Factors Society Bulletin, 
34(8), August, 1-4. 

Reason, J. (1990). Human Error . Cambridge University Press, New York, NY. 

Roske-Hofstrand, R.J. (1988). Automation and Air-Ground Communication. In; S.Norman and 
H. Orlady (Eds.); Flightdeck Automation; Promises and Realities. NASA/FAA/Industry 
Workshop Report. Augu:t. 


A18 















Jack P. Berkowitz 
Staff Human Factors Engineer 
CTA, Incorporated 



Jack P. Beikoivitz is a human factors engineer supporting the FAA Technical Center’s 
airborne data link efforts. He is involved with the development and review of data link 
design alternatives and the formulation of input to the FAA’s certification effort. His 
additional projects include involvement in end-to-end air traffic control simulations and the 
development of optimal display techniques for air traffic displays. 

Mr. Berkowitz obtained a B.A. in Psychology from the College of William and Mary, and 
an M.S. in Industrial Engineering from Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 
where he performed research into control systems for manned vehicles. In addition, he has 
worked on control and display systems for remotely piloted vehicles. 


419 











Albert Rehmann 
Technical Program Manager 
FAA Technical Center 


Mr. Rehmann is the Technical Program Manager for the Airborne Systems Data Link 
Group at the FAA Technical Center. He holds the degrees of Bachelors and Masters of 
Science in electrical engineering from Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA and is a member 
of numerous government and industry organizations such as RTCA, ATA, SAE and AEEC. 
Mr. Rehmann has been the lead project engineer on TCASII development and coordinated 
its initial operational certification activities. 


^20 











ATC DATA COMMUNICATIONS 


OPERATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION 


Wayne W. Aleshire 
Senior Staff Representative 
Air Traffic Services 
United Airlines 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 


This paper provides an account of more than two 
years of system evaluation of data link 
communication, human machine interface (human 
factors), aircraft avionics suitability, satellite 
technology for Air Traffic Services, and an 
integration of advanced conceptual designs of 
Flight Management Systems and ATC data link. 

There are many outside resources from United 
Airlines that must be recognized for there 
asaiatance in making this paper possible. 


Aeronautical Radio Incorporated 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

The Mitre Corporation 

The Federal Aviation Administration 

The Boeing Company 

Honeywell Incorporated 

International Aix' Transport Association 
Air Transport Association of America 
Collins Inc 


421 


















OBJECTIVE 


I. Evaluate and demonstrate an improved communication 
performance of tactical ATC communioatlona and 
surveillance in the oceanic/non-radar environment 
through the provision of Automatic Dependant 
Surveillance (AOS) and direct pilot to controller data 
link communication. The link medium for this 
development has been satellite and/or VHP, depending on 
the location of communication facilities. The intent 
was to demonatrate data link for routine tactical and 
strategic ,Alr Traffic Control messages; optimize the 
existing'aircraft avionics systems; and substitute the 
current HF voice requirements with data link 
communication. Eventually, utilize satellite voioe for 
irregular and/or emergency ATC messages. 

II. The analysis from this operational development will be 
part of a continuing process of advanced avionics 
design, improvements to ATC and inflight operating 
procedures for advanced automation systems including 
(AERA3), and ultimately improving airspace capacity and 
system efficiency, 

11X4 Develop a phased transition plan of introducing ATC 
data link communications. The transition should 
include system requirement flexibility incorporating 
present ATC procedural standards, eventually evolving 
into an automated environment. 


422 








BACKGROUND 


The technical merit and utility of Data Communications 
for Air Traffic Control has been debated for many years. 

The introduction of predeparture clearance delivery (POO at 
Dallas/Ft Worth (DFW) and Chicago (ORD> has prompted the FAA 
and NASA to evaluate additional data link communications for 
tactical ATC utilization. The Air Transport Association 
(ATA> Airspace System Task Force (ASTF) evaluated various 
environments where ATC data link communications could best 
be utilized during early development, and determined the 
oceanic and other non radar environments would provide the 
most immediate benefit for international airlines. 

The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) 
Future Air Navigation Systems (FANS) documented the concept 
of utilizing satellite technology for air traffic services 
(ATS). The FANS concept focuses on improved riavigational 
performance from the global navigation satellite systems 
(GPS/GLONASS); ATC tactical communications, both data and 
voice, via satellite; and surveillance via data link of 
aircraft derived position (Automatic Dependent Surveillance) 
and radar where appropriate. Thus, all three elements 
necessary for air traffic control; communications, 
navigation, and surveillance (CNS) would be available with 
the aid of satellite technology and data link 
communications. 

SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT 

The development of ATC data communications must include 
many Human Factors issues associated with information 
transfer from visual and aural sources othex' than the normal 
radio telephony voice communications. The replacement of 
voice as the primary source of ATC communication will 
require the evaluation of many new system elements. The 
placement of the visual and aural cues, in conjunction with- 
the I'equired responses will be key to the success of this 
program. 


423 








The script for tactical ATC messages and requests must 
be thoroughly evaluated^ to exclude any possibility of 
misinterpretation o'_ the message by crewmembers or aii' 
traffic controllers, yet provide the essential elements of 
an ATC clearance. The message script roust include the 
ability to incorporate semi-automated functions for air crew 
and air traffic controllers. This may be accomplished 
through the use of a data library captured within the 
database of the Flight hanagement Systems <PKS) and ATC 
ground based computers. The message within the aircraft and 
ground based computers would be identical in text and 
function, however, the data link message would include a 
prescribed code for the message script followed by the value 
in a pre-programmed operational field in the FMS. <Example: 
script would be in lower case letters 'climb to and 
maintain' followed by the defined value in upper c^ase 
letters 'FL370') Appendix A has a complete description of 
the data library analysis. 

The response time by the flight crew is an important 
element in the operational development. Successful rapid 
message transfer between flight crews and the ATC service 
provider will speed the implementation process of oceanic 
ATC system automation and reduced separation standards. The 
shorter the response time, the more advantageous the ATC 
system automation will become. 

It was apparent during the evaluatiun, that 
modifications to the Flight Hanagement System (FHS) for 
incorporating ATC data link was essential. In addition, it 
became apparent that entry of data from the ATC UPLIKK would 
have to be simplified to exclude the possibility of entry 
errors by the flight crew. Furthermore, the actions by the 
flight crew to determine the proper page of data entry had 
to be simplified to reduce the workload and head-down time. 
The development of the data library created the direct 
relationship with the functions of the ATC UPLINK, the 
acceptance of the message by the flight crew, and its 
incorporation in the command functions of the FHS, thusly, 
enveloping the simplification process of the entry by the 
crew and reducing the possibility of errors. 

During this program, a desk top rapid proto-type work 
station was utilized to develop ATC message text, location 
of message information, location of visual alert 
requirements, and semi-automated functions for inflight 
procedures. This facilitated the modifications of the 
Flight Management Computer <FMC> MCDU, incorporating these 
modifications in an updated program for the B747/400 and 
B767/300ER FMC's (Package B>. The desk top work station 
affords the opportunity to investigate new concepts for 
message- content and interpretation by pilots and controllers 
on a real time basis. 


42A 







ATC DATA LINK TRANSITION 


The ability to Incorporate ATC data link will depend on 
many technical issues and the orchesti'ation of the entire 
concept will require many years of development and 
coordination of the required systems. There are four 
succinctly different areas of operational development. 

There is a very difficult coordination process by all 
participants to include this improved capability. 

Communications 
Satellite 
Mode S 
VHF 

Aircraft Avionics and Sub-systems 

Ground Based ATC Systems 

Air Traffic Control Procedures 

ATC DATA LINK PHASE I JUNE 1991 

The initial application of .\TC DOWNLINK communication 
for the oceanic/non radar environment includes the 
following: 

Progress Reports 
Altitude Change Request 
Climb 
Descent 
Block 

Speed Change Request 
Weather Deviation Request 

The initial application of ATC UPLINK communication for 
the oceanic/noA radar environment includes the following: 

Transfer of Communication 
Transfer of Control 
Oceanic Clearance Route 
Tactical Clearances 
Climb 
Descent 
Block 

Speed Change 
Weather Deviation 

Full description of procedures are provided in Appendix 


B. 


425 





ATC data link phase II 


JUNE 1993 


The next phase of development vill incorporate improved 
satellite capability INMARSAT II, B747/400 Avionics Package 
B, ATN communication compatibility, OSI system protocols, 
complete sphere of GNSS and improved aircraft navigation 
performance. The system must include the incorporation of a 
semi-automated environment including the development of the 
data dictionaries for ATC ground based systems and the FMS. 

ATC DOWNLINK SERVICES 

Automatic Dependant Surveillance (ADS) 

Pilot to Controller Communication (Routine) 


These elements are available in the B747/400 Avionics 
Improvement Package B Program and is expected to meet FAA 
certification in November 1992. (APPENDIX C) 

ATC UPLINK SERVICES 

Controller to Pilot Communications (Routine) 

These elements are available in the B747/400 Avionics 
Improvement Package B Program and is expected to meet FAA 
certification in November 1392. (APPENDIX D) 


SITUATIONAL AWARENESS 

The primary emphasis in the system development, 
centered on the flight crew and air traffic controller 
maintaining command and control of there immediate 
responsibility. No automatic functions will be incorporated 
between ATC and the aircraft without full crew awareness and 
specific enabling action by the crew. Every effort will be 
made to incorporate INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS to develop the 
overall system design and operating procedures. 

BENEFITS 

In the Asia Pacific Region, delays gaining access to 
the oceanic airspace are becoming common due to excessive 
separation standards and^communications congestion. ATC 
data link communications will provide the ATC service 
providers and international airlines with an added margin of 
safety and eventually permit reduced separation minima, 
allowing more aircraft into the environment without delay. 
Flight crews and ATC personnel will enjoy the unambiguous 
and additional flexibility of pre-formatted tactical ATC 
messages via data link as a supplement to the often 
unreliable, HF voice channel. Accurate interpretation of 
the message and timeliness of the ATC clearance vill improve 
both ATC efficiency and safety. 


426 


EVALUATION 


o Measure the response time of the complete ATC clearance 
process; 

o Measure avionic system integrity and reliability; 

o Determine accuracy and availability of the data 

communication system as compared to voice in the oceanic 
environment; 

o Investigate message interpretation; 

o Determine FMC MCDU functions as related to the ATC 
message and pilot Initiated control of the aircraft; 

o Seek inputs from flight crews regarding the use of the 
Mode Control Panel (MCP) or FMC MCDU. 

The B747/400 has been an ideal platform to conduct an 
evaluation of these parameters in the oceanic/non-radar 
environment to implement an operatibnal program. The 
operation in the Pacific provided the environment where time 
was not a critical factor and safety not jeopardized. 

ATC UPLINK EVALUATION 

The evaluation included an analysis of the five step 
ATC data communication process. The following defined the 
parameters of this assessment; 

ALERT. ... Visual and Aural cues to the flight crew. 

Determine the location of the VISUAL cues to alert the 
flight crew that an active tactical ATC data link message 
has been received. 

V 

Determine the AURAL cue for alerting the crew of an active 
tactical ATC clearance. 

For the initial demonstration. United Airlines provided the 
VISUAL alex-t on the upper EICAS, and the AURAL alert was the 
call chime. 


427 








RECOGNITIOH-Message Ic'cation. 


The locat-lon ox the tactical ATC Message vas on the center 
KCOU^ vhlch Is norasally utill 2 :ed lor all incoaing VKF and 
Satellite data link Messages. Any KCDli aay have been 
utilized by the flight crev for data link aessages, hovever 
until a standard location and Incorporation of the seal- 
automated data for flight crew utilization is agreed, it was 
px'udent to remain on a non active FKC KCbU. The printer was 
another source available for viewing the active ATC 
clearance and have been used as a backup. For the 
evaluation, the ACARS was used to receive all aTC uplink 
messages. 

All tactical aTC messages used complete words, with no 
abbreviations or acronyms. 

DECISION.Kessage content. 

All tactical ATC message formats utilized were in accordance 
with International ATC phraseology. 

There were no split words, with no more than 24 characters 
pel' line. The inbound ATC uplink message was structured to 
provide an instruction fallowed by an assigned value. For 
example, the message "climb to and maintain FLSSO" has an 
instruction of climb to and maintain followed by a 
definitive value. 

RESPONSE.Kessage acknowledgement. 

There were four responses available vo the flight crew for 
each tactical ATC message, ROGER, WILCO, UNABLE, and 
STANDSY- 

ROGER. P.oger means "1 have received and understand 
the message." 

WILCO. Wiico means "I understand the message and 
will comply with the ATC clearance. " 

UNABLE. Unable means "I am not able to comply with 
the ATC clearance." 

STANDBY. Standby means "I need some time to review my 
operating requirements and limitations. " 

The location and content of the response message was on the 
ACMS, ATC reply page, on the center tSCDU. 


428 








Iz because apparent durinij the ewaiuatiors, the word WILCO was 
*ised very iittie in the curj'ent ATC eavironeaent, and STAKDSY 
was used priaarily for flight crew verification of a 
proposed clearance. During the course of developeent, as 
autocation is iaproved, it is anticipated the use of STaKDBY 
and WILCO cay disappear. 

In the place of the norcial responses by the flight crews 
when receiving an ATC uplink clearance, the use of ACCEPT 
and REJECT, cay becone appropriate. 

EXECUTION..... Application and adhei'ence of message. 

AUTOMATIC DEPENDANT SURVEILLANCE 

The function of ADS performed by the flight crewmembers 
was non-sequential and procedures were totally transparent. 
The position report was automatically transmitted through 
the data link system {VHF or Satellite) to the ATC facility. 
Data collection by the FA.^ was performed on a not to 
interfere basis with the flight crew. The flight crew had 
the ability to initiate or terminate the use of ADS, 
however, normal operations had ADS automatically begin 
transmissions at 10000 FT pressure altitude in the climb and 
terminate during the descent at 10000 FT pressure altitude. 
Full ADS reports were available for the flight crew review 
on the AChS, located on the center IICDU. 

AIRCRAFT COMPONENTS AND FUNCTION 

There were no requirements to add any new avionics to 
the existing equipment suite on the B747/400 aircraft. 
However,- software programming of the Aircraft Condition 
Monitoring System (ACMS), and communications routing by 
ARINC was necessary- 

COMPONENTS 

EICAS DISPLAY Visual cue alerting the flight 

crew to an ATC message. 

ACARS MESSAGE" 

ACMS Software programming to provide 

pre-formatted outbound ATC messages, and the ADS 
report. (Appendix B) 

AURAL ALERT The flight crew will be alerted to an 

incoming message by the call-chime. This is the same 
chime currently in use for SELCAL. 

ACARS ACARS-ATC MESSAGE was utilized 

for the incoming ATC messages. 


429 









WCDU The ceAter MCDU vas utilized to 

display the A7C leessage. 


PRINTER A secondary source ior vieving the 

ATC message vas available. 

CERTIFICATION 

The FAA is currently monitoring the eiiorts of the ATA 
Airspace Systems Task Force (ASTF), Human Factors Task Force 
(HFTF), and the Information Transfer and Data Communication 
Working Group to determine certification requirements for 
tactical aTC Data Link Coromunicatlons. The FAA has made 
available for comment a Draft Advisory Circular {DEC 3/ 

1990) on certification requirements for tactical ATC data 
communications airborne equipment. 

It is anticipated, there will be little difficulty in 
obtaining the necessary approvals to implement the Initial 
program {PHASE I), providing the safeguards are in place. 

The necessary approvals include the following: 

A. Center MCDU for reception of ATC message, 

B. ACM3 for ATC data link request. 

C. Data Level 1 software for the SDU. 

D. Verifiable process for ensuring ATC UPLINK is 
correct and a proper response available to 
DOWNLINK to ATC. 

£. A bonafide backup system. (Voice) 

F. Inflight procedures for the data link system. 

A recent study of the ACaRS/ARINC data link service 
compared to the present HF Voice communications in the 
oceanic environment, indicated that data link communications 
were 10,000 times more reliable in the delivery of an error 
free message. 

INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS 

The FAA Technical Center- and The Mitre Cor-p provided 
the programming for ATC clearance uplink and downlink 
messages within the demonstration Air Traffic Control work 
station, and ARINC provided the routing requirements 
throughout the ADNS network. 


430 


SUMMARY 


The International Airlines and the Air Traific Service 
providers face a very difficult and challenging future. The 
passenger growth rate in the Asia Pacific Region is out¬ 
pacing the production of new aircraft- In a few years, the 
airspace in this region will become a priceless commodity, 
unless a pre-ordained and cooroxnated transition plan is 
adopted to improve the communication and navigation 
performance standards. Without these improvements, there 
will be limited relief from the archaic oceanic separation 
standards, and growth potential in the Asia Pacific Region 
will be stymied due to ATC services. 

The introduction of satellite data communications for 
tactical ATC messages will revolutionize the conduct of 
business in future cockpits and Air Traffic Control 
facilities- It may be as revolutionary as the transition 
from the piston powered transports to the jet powered 
aircraft of today. This will be the beginning of modern Air 
Traffic Control utilizing state of the art computer 
technology ioc communications and system automation. 

The lATA Asia Pacific Regional Technical Office in 
concert with the aTa Airspace System Task Force, established 
a goal of June, 1993, for operational use of automation in 
oceanic/noii-radar Air Traffic Control utilizing satellite 
technology. Separately, a goal to include GPS as a stand 
alone Class I navigation system was established for the same 
period. To process the required research, and run the 
bureaucratic gauntlet, we must begin the operational 
development of this new technology now. 


431 


SESSI(»IIIVE: 



Yueh-shiou Wu 
Member of the Technical Staff 
The MITRE Corporation 


Dr. Wu is a member of the MITRE Center for Advanced Aviation System Development in 
McLean, Virginia, where she has been employed since 1988. She has provided technical 
support in the development of Automatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS). She has been 
serving as a technical advisor to the U.S. member at meetings of the International Civil 
Aviation Organization (ICAO) ADS Panel, which is developing international standards for 
ADS. She is currently involved in the development of a message set for the oceanic ATC 
automation system. 

Prior to joining MITRE, she was a senior programmer/analyst with Planning Research 
Corporation from 1985 to 1988, and a systems engineer with the Singer Link Simulation 
Systems Division from 1983 to 1985. She received a B.S. degree in Computer Science and 
B.S., M.S. and Ph.D degrees in chemistry. 



A32 












GROUND AUTOMATION PROCESSING OF NEAR-TERM 
OCEANIC ATC DATA LINK MESSAGES 

Dr. Yueh-shiou Wu 

The MITRE Corporation, McLean, VA 


ABSTRACT 

Effective use of data link requires 
conpiiter-aided message creation and 
processing to alleviate the additional 
work load associated with data entry for 
both pilots and controllers. This paper 
describes how ground automation will 
process pre-defined fixed format oceanic 
data link messages in the near-term time 
frame. A message set consisting of 
message categories, message subcategories 
and message types is proposed. Required 
characteristics for this message set are 
discussed and some significant issues 
raised. This paper traces one downlink 
request message as it goes through the 
various steps of ground automation 
processing and eventually becomes an air 
traffic control clearance message 
delivered to the pilot. 

INTRODUCTION 

Current oceanic air-ground 
communications between the flight crew 
and an air traffic controller are 
conducted by voice using high frequency 
(HF) radio. Characteristically, HF is 
unreliable and subject to disturbances, 
with the result that flight safety and 
efficiency may be affected. 

Use of data link through satellites 
substantially improves the reliability 
of communications over the ocean. 
Effective use of this capability requires 
computer-aided message creation and 
processing to alleviate the additional 


work load associated with data entry for 
both pilots and controllers. To reach 
this goal, each message must be 
interpreted identically by both avionics 
and ATC automation. 

The Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) is currently developing the ground 
oceanic automation system that will 
implement satellite data link and 
additional oceanic automation. MITRE 
is assisting the FAA by preparing the 
functional specification for this system. 
The specification will contain or 
reference a detailed description of 
every uplink and downlink message, it 
will indicate what processing should be 
performed on each, it will define how the 
message should be displayed to the 
controller, and will describe how the 
controller will interact with the 
automation system. Certain requirements 
will be placed on the format and content 
of the data link message to allow maximum 
use of automated message processing. 
MITRE will identify these requirements 
so that they may be coordinated with the 
requirements from the controller's human 
computer interface development, the 
pilot's human computer interface 
development, and the cockpit message 
processing development. 

Currently, several organizations are 
integrating the various requirements to 
produce a standardized message set for 
data link applications. For example, 
the International Civil Aviation 
Organization (ICAO) Automatic Dependent 


433 




Surveillance Panel (ADSP) is in the 
process of producing Standards and 
Recommended Practices (SARPs) for 2\DS. 
In the ADS SARPs, messages needed to 
accorrplish the required operational 
capabilities will be identified and 
standardized. The Radio Technical 
Commission for Aeronautics (RTCA) 
recently established a special committee 
(SC169) to standardize data link messages. 

In this paper a proposed message set 
for oceanic application, at an early 
stage of development, is presented. 
This message set contains message 
categories, subcategories and message 
types. As development continues, it is 
likely that additional messages will 
need to be created and additional fields 
added to existing messages. It is not 
the purpose of this paper to define exact 
formats of the oceanic data link messages 
or encoding or compaction schemes for 
them. Such detailed definition will be 
done in a way consistent with that for 
domestic ATC data link as represented in 
the FAA's draft advisory circular, 
"Airworthiness Approval of Airborne 
Data Link System" and the associated 
document, "Data Link Design Guidelines" . 
It is assumed that these detailed 
definitions will provide a unique message 
identification for each message type and 
a fixed, complete definition of the 
message format, to include sequence of 
fixed and variable fields, scaling 
factors, units, etc. It is intended that 
these detailed definitions will make the 
message fully compatible with 
transmission over the Aeronautical 
Telecommunications Network. 

RATIONALE FOR A STANDARDIZED 
MESSAGE SET 

The following points support the 
establishment of a standardized message 
set 

• Lessons from the past : A famous 
Chinese proverb states "Don't forget 


the ejq^erience learned in a previous 
attenpt; use that as a gui'le for your 
future endeavors". Aeronautical Radio 
Incorporated (ARINC) Communications 
Addressing and Reporting System (ACARS), 
which uses character-oriented Very High 
Frequency (VHF) data link is probably 
the closest predecessor of the satellite 
data link environment. Lessons learned 
from ACARS will help avoid repeating the 
same mistakes again. Several persons 
familiar with the development of ACARS 
have indicated that the existence of so 
many different versions makes the 
implementation of ACARS expensive and 
difficult. To avoid having many 
operational versions of a data link 
message set, a globally standardized 
message set must be established in a 
coordinated fashion at an early stage. 

• Formatted, not free format messages 
are needed; One might consider 
transmitting uplink and downlink ATC 
messages as free format messages. But 
if this were done, it would be very 
difficult to do automatic processing. 

DEFINITION OF MESSAGE CATEGORY, 
MESSAGE SUBCATEGORY AND MESSAGE TYPE 

A message category is a group of 
messages that provides a related set of 
operational capabilities. Some message 
categories are further divided into 
subcategories while other categories 
have only one subcategory. Message 
subcategories contain individual message 
types. For example, CLEARANCE is a 
message category. ALTITUDE ASSIGNMENT 
is a subcategory of CLEARANCE and SIMPLE 
ALTITUDE ASSIGNMENT is a message type 
under ALTITUDE ASSIGNMENT. Each message 
type has required data elements and may 
have optional data elements. These data 
elements are either text or variable 
fields. The sequence of these fields 
is predefined. Associated with each 
message category are certain 
characteristics that dictate how each 
message in the message category will be 


43A 





processed for transmission and may also 
specify how the message will be displayed. 
The fields for message type SIMPLE 
ALTITUDE ASSIGNMENT are given below. 

DESCEND AND MAINTAIN (flxxx) 

[FOR TRAFFIC] 

In the example above, capital letters 
(DESCEND AND MAINTAIN) indicate a text 
field, small letters (flxxx) represent 
variable field and text inside the 
square bracket [FOR TR/iFFIC] is an 
optional field. Optional fields are 
explanatory only. They represent comments 
that may be added by the controller or 
the pilot. They are only displayed; 
they are not processed by the automation 
either in the avionics or on the ground. 

A PROPOSED MESSAGE SET 

A message set containing categories, 
subcategories, and message types has 
been proposed for near-term oceanic 
applications, This message set is based 
on the expected operational capabilities 
of the automated oceanic ATC environment 
in the 1995 time frame. This is a subset 
of the complete set of messages that 
would eventually be defined and proposed 
by near-term (prior to the Advanced 
Automation System) automation. 
Appendices A and B contain the individual 
message name, message content and example 
phraseology for each of the message 
types. 

REQUIRED CHARACTERISTICS 

OF DATA LINK MESSAGES 

Certain characteristics of data link 
messages and certain requirements on how 
they are processed and displayed need to 
be specified. These characteristics 
would be spelled out for each message 
category. All message types within the 
same category would have the same 
characteristics. Some of the 
characteristics to be specified include: 


• For a category of ground-to-air 
message, specify whether or not this 
category requires a pilot 
acknowledgement. 

• For a category of ground-to-air 
message, specify what alerting level 
should be used to alert the pilot on 
receipt of the message. Three alerting 
levels are proposed. 

• For both ground-to-air and air-to- 
ground messages, specify what 
communication priority should be applied. 
This allows messages of higher priority 
to be processed ahead of lower priority 
messages in the same queue. 

• For both ground-to-air and air-to- 
ground messages, specify the maximum 
acceptable delivery time. 

• For both ground-to-air and air-to- 
ground messages, specify the number of 
automatic retransmissions to be performed 
before the message is declared to be 
undeliverable. 

The last three of these 
characteristics are items that would be 
used to set parameters in the 
communication protocols being used to 
transmit the data link messages. 

ISSUES IN DEFINING THE OCEANIC ATC 
DATA LINK MESSAGE 

Our work to date has identified 
several issues that need to be addressed 
before the set of data link message types 
for oceanic ATC can be finalized. The 
more significant issues include the 
following: 

• Should the route of flight field in 

an ATC request message, an ATC clearance 
message or an oceanic clearance delivery 
message be encoded according only to 
ICAO rules or according only to U.S. 
rules or to both? Among other 

differences, ICAO rules permit the route 


435 





of flight to include different altitudes 
for different segments, while U.S. lales 
allow for only one altitude for the 
entire route of flight. 

• Should message types be added to 
allow for automatic read-out by the 
ground automation of the route of flight 
actually programmed in the aircraft's 
flight management computer? This has 
been proposed as a more direct way of 
detecting waypoint insertion errors 
than depending on observing the blunder 
flight path from ADS position reports. 
It has also been proposed as a substitute 
for read-back of route clearance or 
clearance delivery messages. Not all 
aircraft would have avionics able to 
support this automatic read-out from the 
ground. 

• Should message types be included 
that allow maneuvers at pilot's 
discretion? A related issue is whether 
the message set should include block 
altitude requests and clearances? If 
either message types are included, how 
does the ground automation system model 
the aircraft's future flight path? Does 
the automation system need to block all 
requested altitudes for the remainder of 
the flight in the FIR? 

• Do message types need to be included 
in either direction that can cancel a 
previous request or ATC clearance message? 

• Do compound messages need to be 
supported? Compound messages would 
include changes in more than one dimension 
in a single message. An example is a 
clearance to change the route and also 
to change the speed in the same message. 

• Will all aircraft flight path 
projections in the ground automation 
system be based on the aircraft's 
cleared route and speed and the ground's 
estimation of the winds aloft, or will 
they be based on the aircraft's estimate 
of time of arrival at future fixes? 


Some additional message types would need 
to be added to request the aircraft's 
time of arrival at a line of latitude or 
at a line of longitude or a named fix. 

GROUND AUTOMATION PROCESSING OF 
OCEANIC ATC DATA LINK MESSAGES 

A few significant features of the 
ground automation processing of oceanic 
ATC data link messages are described 
here. Both fixed format and free format 
messages are used. There is no automatic 
processing of free format messages. A 
free format message entered by the pilot 
is displayed verbatim as text to the 
controller and vice versa. 

Both the avionics and ground 
automation must operate according to the 
same data dictionary for fixed format 
messages. This data dictionary contains 
all defined message types and the format 
and characteristics for each. At 
present, only one data dictionary is 
being defined. When new features are 
incorporated into the ground automation, 
there will be a new data dictionary 
defined with some additional message 
types. It will be necessary for the 
ground automation system to then support 
both the old and new data dictionaries, 
since it would be impractical to require 
all aircraft to upgrade from the old to 
the new at the same time. 

When the ground receives a downlinked 
message, it first identifies the message 
type and performs a message validation 
process, where it checks that the 
messa;,e has all the required fields of 
the proper length and format. It then 
checks any variable fields in the 
message for reasonableness. Maximum 
and minimum reasonable values would be 
stored for each variable to support this 
process. A downlinked ATC request 
message will then be submitted to the ATC 
processing to determine if the requested 
flight path would cause a conflict. If 
the request involves a route change, the 


436 






requested route will first be processed 
to ensure that all named fixes and 
airways are recognized and that all 
elements in the route of flight can be 
interpreted. Depending on the result 
of the ATC processing, an appropriate 
ATC clearance message or an ATC request 
denied message will be prepared for the 
controller's approval for uplink. 

ADS position reports will be received 
at a nominal rate of one every five 
minutes. The automation processing 
will check each position report against 
the aircraft's planned flight path. If 
this processing finds that the aircraft 
has arrived at its reported position at 
a time sufficiently different from the 
expected time, it will correct the time 
base for the aircraft. It then executes 
a conflict probe to determine whether 
the changes in the planned flight path 
will place this aircraft in conflict 
with another aircraft. The controller 
will be alerted to the change in planned 
flight path only if the change leads to 
a conflict situation. If the processing 
of the position report determines that 
the aircraft has deviated sufficiently 
from the planned altitude or planned 
route, the controller will be alerted. 
The controller will also be able to view 
the current aircraft position on a 
situation display. 

For uplink messages, a set of pre¬ 
defined message templates or canned 
messages will be stored. The controller 
will be able to retrieve them either by 
choosing from a hierarchy of menus with 
function keys, or by typing a short alias 
name. The controller will type in the 
value of the required variable fields 
and the automation will check them for 
reasonableness as each one is entered. 
If the message is an ATC clearance 
message, it will be submitted for ATC 
processing to ensure that the clearance 
will not cause a conflict before it is 
uplinked. Once the ATC clearance 
message has been transmitted, an 


acknowledgement timer will be started. 
If the pilot has not acknowledged the 
clearance within a specified time, the 
controller will be alerted. If the 
pilot does acknowledge the clearance 
with a WILCO, the automation data base 
will be updated to account for the new 
clearance. 

AN EXAMPLE ILLUSTRATING GROUND 
AUTOMATION PROCESSING 

To illustrate the various steps in 
ground automation processing, this 
section describes how a Simple Altitude 
Change Request downlink is processed. 

Initial Processing 

The automation system (AS) determines 
Message Type from the Message Type 
Identifier (MI) field. 

If a match for message type is not 
found, the AS displays the entire 
contents of the message to a data edit 
position, a position able to be assigned 
to the computer operator' console, a 
flight data specialist's position, a 
supervisor's position, or a sector 
controller's position. 

If the message type is not Log-on, the 
Aircraft Identification (AI) is 
validated. 

If a match for AI is not found, AS 
displays the message at the flight data 
edit position with an error message 
indicating that the AI is unknown. 

The AS processes the message according 
to its message type. 

Altitude Change Request Proce.ssing 

The AS stores the message reference 
number from the downlink for use in the 
uplink message that responds to this 
request. 


437 






The AS checks the required fields 
based on the requirements specified for 
this message type. 

If the required fields for this 
message type are incorrect, an appropriate 
error message is displayed to the flight 
data edit position. 

The AS determines whether the 
recjuested altitude is reasonable based 
on airspace, aircraft type and current 
altitude 

The AS puts the request in the 
appropriate controller's input queue 
with the following options : "ACCEPT", 
"REJECT" and "DEFER". The controller 
is notified of the presence of the new 
ATC request message immediately. 

If option "REJECT" or "DEFER" is 
selected by the controller, the AS 
automatically formulates the correct 
response, either "ALTITUDE CHANGE REQUEST 
DENIED" or "ALTITUDE CHANGE REQUEST 
DENIED, REQUEST ON FILE". At his 
discretion, the controller can append an 
optional data field to either response 
with a free text explanation of the 
reason for denial. 

When "ACCEPT" is selected, the AS 
initiates a Trial Amendment for the AI 
and the requested altitude. The Trial 
Amendment function performs a conflict 
probe on the request without updating 
the data base. The response from a Trial 
Amendment may be an error message, an 
indication of no conflict, or an 
indication of a predicted conflict. 

If an error message, the controller 
can correct the message and resubmit it 
as a Trial Amendment, or he can send a 
free format message to the pilot. If 
there is no conflict indicated, the AS 
formulates an appropriate response, in 
this case an Altitude Assignment message, 
and presents it to the controller for 
approval for uplink. 


When the response is released by the 
controller, it will be transmitted with 
the priority and assurance levels of 
delivery associated with that message 
category. 

A timer will be initiated for the 
acknowledgement of this message. 

The AS blocks the airspace appropriate 
for that aircraft from the current 
altitude through the newly assigned 
altitude. 

If no acknowledgement is received 
after a parameter time, the AS will alert 
the controller. 

If a WILCO is received, the flight 
plan data base will be updated 
appropriately for the aircraft's new 
clearance. 

If an UNABLE is received, the 
controller is alerted and the reserved 
airspace will be freed. 

If a STANDBY is received, a new timer 
will be set to check for future 
acknowledgement. 

CONCLUSIONS 

Both ICAO and RTCA are in the process 
of standardizing the oceanic ATC data 
link message set. Both need to consider 
the requirements that affect the message 
set from four different perspectives: 

• What the controller needs to 
conduct his operation and satisfy his 
responsibilities. 

• What the pilot needs to conduct his 
operation and carry out his 
responsibilities. 

• What the ground automation system 
needs to provide maximum message 
processing support to the controller, 
while still keeping the controller 


438 






responsible for all ATC decisions. 

• What the aircraft avionics needs to 
provide maximum message processing 
support to the pilot, while still 
keeping the pilot responsible for 
approving all ATC instructions that 
affect his aircraft. 

This paper has described some of the 
current knowledge about the third item 
above. The work to date has shown the 
need for several new items to be added 
to the oceanic data link message set. 
One is to include message reference 
numbers in both uplink and downlink 
messages so that ATC clearance messages 
that are responses to requests can be so 
identified, and pilot acknowledgement 
can be linked to the proper ATC clearance 
message. Other new requirements on the 
message set are expected as the work to 
define ground automation processing 
continues. 

This process of arriving at a final 
set of messages needs to be an iterative 
one. A first set needs to be established 
based on c’n initial concept of operations 
as was done and reported in this paper. 
Then, as the processing of these messages 
is analyzed, new requirements are 
discovered. As these are reported and 
coordinated with the results of activities 
from the other three perspectives, yet 
more new requirements are identified and 
analyzed. The process iterates until 
a stable set of messages evolves. 


439 




Appendix A • ATC Uplink Messages 



440 
















441 































































y" 


' ' 



Jane Hamelink 
Group Leader, ADS Program 
The MITRE Corporation 


Jane Hamelink is a member of the Center for Advanced Aviation System Development of 
the MITRE corporation, where she has been employed since 1987. She has provided 
technical support to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) in the development of 
Aut omatic Dependent Surveillance (ADS). She is currently involved in the development and 
specification of the functional requirements for an air traffic control system using ADS and 
its associated two-way data link. 

From 1985 to 1987, Ms. Hamelink was a section manager at ST Systems. She was 
responsible for supporting the FAA in the development of the Flight Data Processing System 
for the Oceanic Display and Planning System (ODAPS). Prior to joining ST Systems, Ms. 
Hamelink worked for Sigma Data in support of NASA in the development of global weather 
models. Ms. Hamelink received a B.S. degree in mathematics from Calvin College in 
Grand Rapids, Michigan in 1977. 


443 

















SESSION FIVE: 

AIRLINE PROGRAM/OPERATIONS 



Virginia White 
Senior Staff Engineer 
Aeronautical Radio, Inc. 


Virginia White is a Senior Staff Engineer at Aeronautical Radio, Inc., responsible for 
leading the engineering efforts supporting ADS and two-way data communications system 
development. Ms. White is an active participant in AEEC, RTCA, and ICAO activities 
relating to ADS and has contributed to the initial success of the Pacific Engineering Trials 
while continuing to coordinate network, routing and processing requirements for the 
engineering trial activities. She holds a BSEE and recently received her Master’s of Science 
in Information Management from The George Washington University. 


444 














EVALUATION OF OCEANIC FUGHT DECK 
WORKLOAD AND ERROR REDUCTIONS THROUGH THE USE OF 
DATA COMMUNICATIONS 

Wliite/Rkliard E. Hdnrich 
Advanced Satellite Systems Engmeering 
Aermiautical Radio, In& 


ABSTRACT 

The use of oceanic data communications provides 
increased efGdendes to the fli^ deck for AOC/ATC 
communications. Through the use of automated and 
semi-automated systems supported by data link, the fli^ 
deck can adiieve both workload and enor reduction. 
Furthermore, data link can provide oceanic areas with 
improved error detection and tracldng capabilities that 
can drastically improve the current ^em. The industry, 
with the onset of Satcom in the past year, has undertaken 
studies, rapid prototypes and trials that have further 
highlighted data link’s potential and made oceanic data 
link a reality. 

INTRODUCTION 

The use of data link for flight deck communications 
promises to reduce the workload and source of error on 
the flight deck. The inherent reliability and integrity of 
data commimications supports the FANS conclusion that 
two-way data link provide the primary means of oceanic 
communications. This paper addresses two related topics. 
It illustrates the potential benefits to users that vill be 
achieved through the use of oceanic ATC data link. It 
then presents an overview of industry activities that have 
been directed toward understanding and developing end 
systems for data link operation in oceanic areas. 

DATA UNK BENEFITS TO USERS 

While it is true that current HF voice-based oceanic 
systems have supported users adequately in the past, ever 
increasmg traffic congestion and message throughput 
requirements will continue to strain this HF voice based 


^em. Not only will Data link communications serve to 
ease this strain, but it will also serve to benefit end users 
more directly than the current ^em. 

Automated Systems 

The flight deck benefits of data link are primarily 
focused upon the use of automated and semi-automated 
^tems. These systems refy on data link’s disaete and 
rapid processing and addressing capabilities. 

Semi-automated systems, such as waypoint position 
reporting, take advantage of the automatic call set-up 
capabilities of the data link to provide the flight aew 
with the ability to format messages with simple menu fill 
techniques. These messages can then be sent to the 
ground ^ a single button key stroke. New avionics 
systems will fully automate these processes to further 
reduce operational requirements and improve errors. 

Automatic systems, such as Automatic Dependent 
Surveillance, bypass the flight aew and transmit messages 
to the ground as a background process based on some 
predetermmed event. These events could be time based 
(specific content received at predetermined intervals) or 
sensor-based (event driven). Event driven reports would 
occur, for instance, by setting a flag in the Flight 
Management Computer to generate an event driven 
report to the mr traffic controller when the iurplane has 
reached a specified altitude. Weather information could 
be transmitted automatically based on a temperature 
aossmg or winds aloft change. 

Further automatlcn and reduction m workload will 
result with the integration of the communication systems 
with other airaaft subsystems such as the radio and 


445 




Fli^t Management Computer. In this way, subsystems 
can be direct^ updated based on ground-ori^nated data- 
link messages. For example, tactical redearances may be 
directly entered into the fli^t management computer 
upon the pilot’s acceptance and compliance. Additional^, 
transfer of communications, which is a continual flight 
deck workload conaderation, can be automated for 
frequent^ changes and re-addresdng of air traffic control 
messages. Figure 1 illustrates an integrated data link 
airplane. 

Workload Reduction 

By oEf loading manual tasks, the automated and 
semi-automated systems will result in flight deck 
workload reduction. A recent study by Marvin Waller at 
NASA Langley has shown data link, mtegrated into the 
cockpit to enable the automatic updating of subsystems, 
to be a significant flght deck time savings over voice 
exchanges followed by manual entry of smd commands 
[Ref. 1]. A previous study by NASA Langley, which 
utilized data link, but did not integrate it into any airaaft 
subsystems, had demonstrated a reduction in perceived 
copilot workload, although failed to prove a aefuutive 
reduction of pilot workload [Ref. 2]. 

It is important to note that all actual simulations to 
date have compared data link with VHF voice 
communications and not HF voice commimications. 
There are several flight deck operations specific to HF 
voice communications that do not exist in the VHF 
environment. For this reason, a genuine mterest of 
researchers analyzing data obtamed from the engmeering 
trials, is dedicated to studmg the delay associated with 
data link. 

For a more detailed look mto these simulations, 
three time periods need to be defined: the cockpit 
response time, network transmission time, and end-to-end 
message time. The cockpit response time is defmed as 
the period between the appearance of a data link 
message on the MCDU and the flight crew’s acceptance 
of the message. Network transmission time is the. round 
trip time needed for the message to traverse the data 
network. End-to-end message time is the time it takes 
once the controller has sent a message to the time a 
response (Roger or negative) returns to the controller. 


End-to-end message time is the sum of the netwenk 
transmisaon time and the cockpit resprmse time. 

Based cm the amulations to date, the avei^ 
cockjA response time to a data hnk message has been 
appronmately 10 seconds [Ret 3]. For the Umted 
Padfic Engineering Trials, utilizing satcom (600 bps) and 
the ARINC network, the average round trip successful 
transmisrion time has been approximate^ 20 seconds 
[Ref. 4]. This results m an end-to-end message time oi 
around 30 seconds for an existing oceanic data link. In 
the Emulations, this is at odds with end-to-end message 
VHF voice times of around 7 seconds [Ret 2]. However, 
conridering the indirect format of HF voice, where 
average end-to-end times average around 4 minutes [Ret 
S], data link is actually the faster form of 
communications. 

Additional HF related considerations include the 
need for inaeased dedication to open and mmntm 
channel commumcations and the potential for 
communication lapses. A reduction in the flight deck 
reporting and communication efforts required for these 
HF spedfic tasks will result in additional workload 
reduction. 

Error Reduction 

Not only wili Data link result m the reduction of 
errors that are inherent to any manual, voiced-based 
communications, espedally HF voice, but its error 
processing capabilities will serve to further reduce 
communication errors. 

A review of the current error soiuces from HF 
communications must focus on the general poor voice 
quality of narrow bandwidth channels located within a 
fading environment. Oceanic voice communications also 
offer potential language barrier problems. Addressing 
errors, call sign problems and congestion problems all 
serve to create additional errors [Ref. 6]. The discrete 
addressing capabilities and near negligible error 
probability of the data link will eliminate or drastically 
reduced these voice related errors. With the off-loading 
of communications into the data link, there will be a 
reduction of voice frequency congestion. This will benefit 
those flight decks that would still require the use of voice 
systems as a primary means of communications. It will 


4A6 






ARINC GROUND SUPPORT 
SUBNETWORK 



Figure 1: Integrated Two-way Data Link 













also serve to benefit all users with the ouisderadoo of 
distress and non-roudne traffic remaining a vc^ mode 
exchange. 

Current]^ in the cockj^ there is a need for either 
fliglit deck memorization or transcriptHm of vmce 
commands. This ^em offers the potendal for error 
based on anfidpadon and assumpdon [Ref. T\. Data link 
can provide the cockpit vnth dsual communicadons vnth 
message logging and retrieval capabilides. These feature 
allow the flight aew a continuous reference and past 
history for the aoss^eddng of controller instruedons. 

Due to the condstency of the supplied data, the 
more timely reporting of data through enhanced link 
availability, quicker message delivery times and the 
reduedon of missing data points attributed to human 
error, data link is a more reliable and faster form of 
communicadons than voice. Data link’s ability to drive 
end systems, coupled with these high reliance 
characterisdes, vnll result in improved error reduedon 
capabilides. These capabilities include better flight 
tracking, improved conflict resoludon and better blunder 
detecdon. 

INDUSTRY VAUDATION 

Various elements of industry have I>een evaluating 
the oceanic and VHP data link requirements from airline 
operadon/flight deck and ground system viewpoints. This 
secdon offers a brief overview of these efforts by 
referencing several studies that have been used to 
evaluate the human factors and workload reduedon 
issues. The efforts of prototype and simuladon stuches 
concerning the oceanic flight deck and groimd-based 
systems are reviewed. 

ARINC 

In order to obtain a view of the dynamics of 
communicadons in an oceanic environment, ARINC 
developed a Muld-Control Display Unit/Air Traffic 
Control (ATC)/ Airline Operadon Center (ACC) set of 
workst-adons. This system was designed to evaluate a 
typical transoceanic flight and the class of negotiadons 
that occur between air traffic control, the flight deck and 
dispatch. This system started to apply such human factor 
elements as guided message responses, (i.e. altitude 


presets based on diredion, airframe csqnlrili^, etc.). 
Since the ^em was based on menu driven message^ 
the flight deck was interested onfy in fiU elements. 
SimOarfy vnth the ground by addressing a flight number, 
fl^ht phm infonnatkm was made avmlaUe to the 
omtidler. This ba^ ^em was used for early 
reqiurements analysis the data link ^em to make 
sure that ptiorides (ff messages, message retrieval, system 
automadon, and ba^ human factors concerns could be 
evaluated in their entire^. Figure 2 iUustrates the 
ARINC workstadon prototypes. 

Unltsd Airlines 

United Airlines inidally provided a rapid prototype 
system that focused mmnly on the Muld-Control Display 
Unit for menu development. The empha^ was to 
minimize the number of page selecdons required, and to 
develop ease of flight deck message entry. While aeated 
independent of the ARINC system, this was done on a 
rapid prototype platform that would allow 
implementadon of pilot comments during the evaluadon 
phases of the system. It mduded separate pages for both 
the development of air traffic control and dispatch 
message formats. It contained a limited set of typical 
exchanges from the flight deck to the ground and fiom 
the ground back to the flight deck. 

Two featmes were inidated m this evaluadon. The 
Grst was the limiting of negodadon dialogue to the most 
common message exchanges, such as weather reporting 
and tacdcal rerouting. The second was the use of 
message compression. Message compression, m the form 
of three-letter codes, was employed once the flight deck 
inidated a message. This was done in order to minimize 
spectnun udlizadon and to optimize message throughput. 
The three character codes are being downlinked from the 
mraaft today during ATC data link commimicadon vmth 
the ground. The codes are expanded by a processor 
within the ARINC network prior to being received by the 
ground end system. 

MITRE 

On the ground side, Mitre developed a workstation 
for the oceanic ADS program that con-sists of a position 
reporting saeen and a data link generadon system. The 
data link generadon system is a pull down menu 







AIRPLANE FAA AIRLINE 

COCKPIT ARTCC OPERATIONS 








(OSBOIOIB 



O] B 01 (0 01 [0 


j—I @ © @ © © © 
^ @0 ©@0® 


©@ ®© ©o 

niz] ® © ©@ ©0 

nn @0 ©© @0 

nnnn®® 

1—ji—ii—II—1 © @ @ © 

□□□□©© ©o 


D 

Q 

O 



449 


Figure 2: ARINC’s MCDU\ATC\AOC workstations 
















































































































<»nroiimeiit osed as die baas for evahadoa of the 
AHINC message structures for air trafiBc cootroL 'fhe 
MITRE workstation is focused as an sur trafiGc contrd 
j^atform and atnadon display. 

Non-Oceanic Human Factors Studies/Shmiations 

NASA Langi^ has conducted several airborne 
human factms and data link validation studies on board 
their dual cockf^ 737. Th^ have integrated a data link 
^em for evaluation direct entry air trafiBc control 
commands through the data link enwonment right to 
fli ght control end elements. 

NASA’s Ames Research Center at MofiBtt Held, 
CA, has provided additional renew of human factors 
elements in terms of study programs and true control 
portion analysis. TheAir Transport Assodation Human 
Factors Task Force has pulled together the industry 
partidpants in the information transfer and data link 
human factors working group to further define the system 
reqmrements for data link and to pronde overall 
guidance for end system utilization both on the flight 
deck and for avionics manufacturers. Efforts continue in 
other groups headed by MTTRE, the Sodety of 
Automotive Engineers m their G-10 and S-7 worldng 
groups, RTCA, ICAO, Eurocontrol, and the FAA in 
terms of generation of data libraries and other automated 
control features that would further enhance the flight 
deck workload reduction. 

Oceanic Trials 

United has flown five 747-400 Satcom-equippcd 
airaaft that have partidpated in oceanic position 
reporting and have utilized satellite data link for airline 
operational data. United, through their partidpation in 
the Pacific En^eering Trials, has provided evaluations 
from both line pilot and test pilot comments and review 
of the data link in terms of the automatic position 
reporting and simulated air traffic control 
communications. These trials have mdicated a desire to 
be^ utilizing the end systems as soon as possible. 
United antidpates the use of data link in providing the 
benefit of priority routing because of improved message 
throughput. 


Farther trials for air trafiSc control win commenced 
in August 199L These trials are focaring on flie 
implementation of data fink for communicating tactica! 
redearances in the oceanic r^ion. 

CONCUUSION 

It is easy to recognize the qualities of data fink 
implementation over VHF/HF radio. Not rmly does data 
fink offer benefits, but it also serves to eliminate 
dravbacks inherent to v(Hce communications. When the 
comparison becomes focused on HF voice 
communications, data fink becomes that mudi more 
impresrive. Data fink promises to reduce errors and 
flight deck workload. With its improved reliaUlity and 
ability to drive end systems, it could lead to greatly 
enhanced error detection capabifities. With the right 
amount of attention and effort, data fink could make such 
items as reduced separation standards, flerible routing 
and improved redearances a reality. 

In the airline operational control of mrcraft, data 
fink already has all but eliminated the use of voice. 
Figure 3 illustrates the historic trends of ACARS versus 
ARINCs domestic voice network. There will always be 
a need for voice m the airline operational enrironment, 
but mostly for non-routine or distress communications. 
In the air traffic control environment, data link has been 
very slow m implementation, but, according to FANS, it 
vrill become the primary means of oceanic 
communications. With the advent of SATCOM in the 
past year, the airline industry has come a long way 
toward the realization of this goal. There have been 
numerous studies, working groups, rapid prototypes, and 
trials to help direct these efforts. Data link has recently 
accomplished a major milestone m air traffic services 
applications. In August, 1991, the engineering trials 
included validation efforts for implementation of ATC 
data link m place of HF voice. The trials continue, 
utiliring several United 747-400’s in the Padfic Ocean, 
communicating to the FAA through fhe ARINC network. 
For the first time, data fink may be used in an 
operational enrironment to proride the primary means 
of oceanic communications. 

References 


450 






yl 6NVr 
f -oeinr 
-osNvr 
-esnnr 
-ssNvr 
-88inp 

-88NVr 

-zsinr 

-z«Nvr 

o 

“98inp E 

u. 

-98NVP 
-98inP 
-98NVP 
-t^sinp 
-t^8NVP 
-88inp 
-88NVP 

-zannp 

-88NVP 

-tainp 

-I.8NVP 
-08inp 
-08MVP 

[-szinp 
l-ezNVp 


VHF VOICE & VHP ACARS TRfl 













L WaDer, M. C, March 1991, conversadoo 
Richard Wank. 

Z WaDer, M. C. and G. W. Lohr, February 1989, A 
Piloted Simulation of Data Link ATC Message 
Exchange, NASA Technical Paper 2859. 

3. Kearns, K, July 1990, Data Link Communications 
Between ControUers and Pilots: A Review and 
Synthesis of the Simulation Literature, MURE MP- 
90W00027. 

4. White, V., March 1991, Automatic Dependent 
Surveillance, Data link Symposium paper. 

5. Hospodor, A.T. and Sullivan JJ., November 1989, 
Applying Modem Communications Techniques to 
Improve Fligfit Safety. 

6. Monan, WP., January 1983, Addressee Errors in 
ATC Communications: The Call Sign Problem, 
NASA CR-166646Z 

7. Intcrservice Oceanic Working Group, 28 September 
1990, OCEANIC PROGRAM PLAN (DRAFT). 


Richard E. Heinrich is the Senior Manager of 
Transmission and Management Systems Engineering at 
Aeronauticai Radio where his responsibiiHies include 
the development of the satellite subnetwork to provide 
aeronautical satellite senrices. Rick has 13 years of 
experience in the design and development of 
communications equipment, systems, and networks in 
the military and commercial environment. He received 
his BSEE from Michigan Technological University in 
1978. 







453 






SESSION BiVE: 

AIRLINE PROGRAM/OPERATIONS 



Austin L. Snively 
Systems Engineer 
Communications 
American Airlines 


Austin Snively has been with American Airlines for 23 years and has been responsible for 
the development of air\ground datalink at American. Austin’s current responsibility 
consists of serving on industry activities for the development of future air\ground 
conuminications systems. Austin chairs several AEEC committees including the Datalink 
Subcommittee. He also participates in various RICA, lATA and ICAO committees 
responsible for developing international standards and policies. 


454 





POTENTIAL USE OF VHF DATAUNK (AVPAQ 
AS AN ALTERNATIVE TO SAVCOM 
Austin Snively 

American Airlines, Tulsa, Okla. 


INTRODUCTION 

We hear much about the benefits of Aeronautical 
Telecommunications Network (ATN). Open Systems 
Interconnect (OSI) protocols is the way of the future 
for data communications. The addressability of OSI 
provides for connectivity between any two end 
systems connected to ATN. Byte and code 
independence no longer restricts the communications 
to character oriented data, thus permitting transfer of 
binary data, graphics, FAX and encoded data. 
Universal standards such as OSI provides for the 
standardization of the communications system 
worldwide. 

However, one of the most important benefits of ATN 
is the fi-eedom of choice that it offers in selecting 
subnetworks. In the aeronautical arena this permits 
choice of air/ground subnetwork usage. A primary 
objective m the development of ATN has been to 
ensure this freedom of choice. The connectivity of 
end systems on the ATN provides for subnetwork 
transparency to the end user. 

SUBNETWORK CRITERIA 

Several air/ground subnetworks have been identified 
for which standards are being developed. Others may 
be potential candidates in the future. Each of these 
have their own characteristics which will be 
considered when subnetwork selections are made. 

SATCOM • SATCOM will be available worldwide 
with the exception of the polar regions. Performance 
of this ^/ground subnetwork wiU be good, however 
due to its physical requirements, the cost for both 
equipage and use is high. 

Mode-S Datalink • Mode-S datalink will be a civil 
aviation data communications system provided by the 
authorities for their usage. Its coverage will be 
restricted to land areas. Performance will be 


restricted due to the nature of the Mode-S scanners. 
However, the performance could be enhanced by the 
converaon to electronically scanned antennas which 
would be a very expensive undertaking. 

AVPAC - AVPAC is the second generation VHF 
datalink being developed to operate within the ATN. 
VHF datalink, better known as ACARS, is currently 
provided by service providers such as ARINC, SITA, 
Air Canada and Japan. AVPAC will be available 
over land areas where ground station provision are 
implemented. Performance of AVPAC is expected to 
be hi^ but with relatively low cost. 

Gatelink • Gatelink is being developed as a high 
volume datalink which will provide for efficient 
transfer of large databases between the airaaft and 
ground based end users. It will also provide for 
normal air/ground datalink functions while the 
aircraft is parked at the terminal The performance 
of Gatelink will be very high but its usage will be 
restricted to parked aircraft where connectivity is 
provided. 

HF - HF datalink is being evaluated as a future low 
cost air/ground subnetwork. Its coverage would be 
worldwide, however its performance may be mar^nal. 
It could have usage over the polar regions and as a 
potential backup to SATCOM. 

SELECTION CRITERIA 

Some areas of the world may have only one 
air/ground subnetwork available while others such as 
North America may have all to choose fi:om. 
Obviously, the first criteria of choice will be 
availability. Where multiple air/ground subnetworks 
are available, other selection criteria will consist of 
performance, cost, and institutional considerations. 
Institutional decisions will be based on contractual 
agreements and end user preference among others. 


455 




VHF CRITERIA 

Tbe new generation VHF dataEsi, AVPAC; is 
eaqpected to rate in ail cat^ories of selecting 
oiteiia. AVPAC'v^besiqipoctedinanaieaswitere 
the current VHF daf aBnlr, ACARS, is supported. As 
these areas of coverage are cootinnalljr bdng 
expanded, other potential pronders of senices nay 
alw ctihanre selectivity. AvaHatdity is emrentty 
dqendent on contractual arrangements, however, 
end users nuty determine to implenient thdr own 
tystems in tk future. Overall costs mduding 
equipage and us^ har/e the potential of being the 
lowest of all air/ground sutmetworks. Performance k 
expected to exceed all other vnth the exception of 
gatelinL 

VHF DIGITAL RADIO ENHANCEMENTS 

Along with the improvements in the protoeds and 
capabilities of AVPAC, the VHF air/ground 
subnetwork will be further enhanced noth the 
equipage of the new VHF Dijptal Radio, VDR, 
currently under development The VDR vnll provide 
for a more reliable mr/ground subnetwork. The 
transfer rate will approximate 24,000Bps in place 
the current 3400, w^ the potential of future upgrades 
to Ugher data rates. The prekey is expected to be 
reduced to three milliseconds versus the 53 to 19C ms 
in the current system. The VDR will monitor all 
available ground stations and manage their usage in 
coordination vnth the ground tystem in order to 
provide optimum connectivity. 

DIGITAL VOICE 

The VDR is also being designed to allow for digital 
voice, although its primary advantage will be for 
datalink transmission. This digital voice capability is 
plaimed to be packetized rather than circuit mode 
voice. Packetized voice provides for two potentially 


revolntioaaiy conoqits to tbe aeronautical 
community . One is that an end user could pass voice 
c o mmunic atiops dun tiie VHF ground seiwe 
promder aloi^ vndi data. The other is that aity end 
user impkmenting VDRs for voice communications 
would antooiatically have thdr own data&nk system. 

WHYVHFATADS/SATCOM 

SYMPOSIUM 

WIty should VHF datalink be rfisenssed at the 
ADS/SATCOM tymposhmu. Many areas of the worid 
for vdiich SATCOM is expected to be the sole 
air/ground datalink subnetwevk to be avaOaiUe vrill 
have qx)lty VHF datalink coverage. Examples of this 
are the oceanic areas. The Ncnth Atlantic has 
Greenland and Iceland already avmlablc. ThePadfic 
has islands scattered througbont vdiich have or vnU 
potentially have VHF coverage. The Caribbean is 
another example. It is a known fact that VHF 
datalink wiD be agnificanlly lower costs for usage. 
Vtith the freedom of dunce that ATM provides aiui 
the constant monitoring of connectivity by the VDR, 
AVPAC can and should be used in place of 
SATCOM for economic reasons as well as 
performance. This same concept applies equally well 
to land masses where accessibility is limited. 

SUMMARY 

AVPAC coupled with the VDR has the potential of 
being the most desirable air/ground datalink. It 
should be conddered a companion to SATCOM or 
any other datalink air/ground subnetwork for ADS 
and all other datalink communications. AVPAC is 
becoming a worldwide offidally recognized 
air/ground subnetwork for oflidal usage. ICAO plans 
to commence an aUidty to develop Standards And 
Recommended Practices, SARPS, for AVPAC. Now 
is the time to consider VHF as a companion to all 
other datalink tystems. 


456 













PANEL DISCLSI^^N: 
"What are the Mriines Doing?" 


PANEL MFAfRints 


William B. Cotton 

Manager 

Air Traffic Systems 
United Airlines 


Captain David R. Haapala 
Director of Flight Operations 
Northwest Airlines 


Robert Hester 
McDonald Douglas 


Anthony J. Martin 

Manager 

Flight Management System 
and Data Links 
Boeing 


Paul R, Ryan 

Manager 

Operations Systems Planning 
American Airlines 


Virginia L. White 

Senior Staff Engineer 
ARINC 


457 











Remarks of William M. Russell, m 
Director, Flight Technology 
Air Transport Association of America 

Recently a new Data Link Human Factors Team was established 1^ the 
industry/govemment Human Factors Task Force and given a priority to focus on system 
requirements and developing tasks for the data link portion of the FAA draft National Plan 
for Aviation Human Factors. In taking this action to more effectively manage the efforts 
on data link, the Task Force expressed confidence that experts with a broad range of needed 
skills would participate. The Team has now met twice and has begun to make substantial 
progress. 

The parent Human Factors Task Force is chartered to address steps needed to 
enhance safety and efficiency through improving the effecuN oness of humans in aviation and 
the way they are used in the system. Functioning with participation from experts in flight 
operations, air traffic control, work station design, and human factors research, it has served 
to coalesce industry and government views on the needs for human factors. In 1989 it issued 
a National Plan to Enhance Aviation Safely through Human Factors Improvements which 
was instrumental in elevating the focus on aviation human factors in the government. More 
recently, the Task Force established an informal liaison with the FAA R, E and D Advisory 
Committee, through its Human Factors Working Group in order to facilitate 
communication. 

Automatic Dependent Surveillance service, in addition to providing controllers with 
information on the position of aircraft, includes a means of communicating between the 
controller and the pilot. Currently, it is envisioned that this communication will be primarily 
via data link, although a voice backup is anticipated. The Data link Human Factors Team 
is considering the data link portion of automatic dependent surveillance along with the rest 
of its work on data link. Further, it currently appears that ADS and satellite data link will 
be the next data link service to be implemented, and its schedule is a driving function in the 
planning of all data link human factors work. On the other hand, operators would prefer 
some assurance that early implementations of data link will be suitable for anticipated 
future domestic applications. The juxtaposition of these two factors results in a sense of 
urgency for definition of future data link services and their related human factors 
considerations. 


458 














2 


WcVc mentioned that the Team was chartered to give priority consideration to two 
products. The first of these is to be a recommended statement of tasks to be added to the 
FAA draft National Plan for Aviation Human Factors. In the draft Plan, the ATC/Flight 
Deck portion (called an "environment") which covers data link is a generic approach to the 
conduct of a human factors research program. Yet there are numerous data link human 
factors issues which have been identified in various forums. In order to strengthen the Plan 
and provide a better road map for the data link work, the Team is developing more specific 
task statements which will describe the work to be done. This should be specific enough to 
support funding for the work. Currently the team is working with tasks in four areas, as 
follows; 

Procedures 

Errors 

Human Interface Design 

Situation Awareness 

A number of tasks in these areas relate to the anticipated near term implementations 
of satellite data link. 

The other area is system requirements, Systems analysis (or systems engineering) has 
become a viable tool for the development of systems such as data link when the human 
operators are considered part of the system. As data link is a large system with many nodes 
and end users, we have taken the view that a systems analysis should be conducted. 
However, in early work to address systems analysis, a problem developed. One of the first 
steps in conducting a systems analysis is to develop a statement of system requirements. In 
earlier work, we found great difficulty in establishing such a statement. If, for example, we 
chose a simplified near term requirement, it was criticized by those who said we would be 
implementing a system with known inadequacies when the anticipated future services 
become available. On the other hand, if requirements were attempted for the future, the 
large number of unknowns led to endless debates. At this time, the Team is focusing its 
initial work on developing the human requirements portion of the overall system 
requirements. It is hoped that through this process enough insight can be developed so that 
the risk of near term decisions can be reduced to an acceptable level. The product of this 
work is anticipated somewhat after the task statements discussed above. 

In addition, the Team is addressing data link human factors issues for new aircraft 
designs and retrofit installations. Also, it recently initiated an activity to develop 
recommendations on message display formats. 


459 






3 


It is dear that data link has significant potential for enhancing safety and efficiency 
of the airspace system through redudng voice congestion^ and insuring error free 
transmission and delivery of messages to the proper redpicnt On the other hand, it 
sidesteps a number of the mechanisms which have been used to overcome the errors in 
voice communications. If implemented incorrectly, data link also has the potential to reduce 
safety and efficiency in the event human partidpants do not get the right message, or should 
design features introduce additional errors, a possibility we all want to avoid. The Data 
link Human Factors Team believes it can m^e a sig^cant contribution by addressing 
means to avoid these potential undesireable conseqences. The products mentioned above 
should be a good start. 

In closing, let me emphasize that the success of the Team is a result of the efforts 
of the partidpants from industry and government, many of whom arc in this room today. 
Together, we can reach the goals of enhanced safety and efficiency. 


) 




460 



