AD-A271 909 



CONTRACT NO: DAMD17-91-C-1096 


TITLE: VASOPRESSIN RECEPTOR SIGNALING AND CYCLING OF WATER 

CHANNELS IN RENAL EPITHELIA (HBC) 

SUBTITLE: Retrieval of Water Channels in Toad Urinary Bladders 

Following Withdrawal of Vasopressin and Mezerein 


PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Dr. Abdul J. Mia 


CONTRACTING ORGANIZATION: Jarvis Christian College 

Academic Affairs 

P.O. Drawer G, Highway 80 

Hawkins, Texas 75765 


REPORT DATE: August 27, 1993 


TYPE OF REPORT: Annual Report 


f! \ £ 


r 



PREPARED FOR: U.S. Army Medical Research and 

Development Command, Fort Detrick 
Frederick, Maryland 21702-5012 


DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT: Approved for public release; 

distribution unlimited 


The views, opinions and/or findings contained in this report are 
those of the author(s) and should not be construed as an official 
Department of the Army position, policy or decision unless so 
designated by other documentation. 


93-26043 




93 lQ 27 002 










REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

Form Approved 

OMB No 0704 0188 

PudIic reporting burden <or this cotieoion of in?orm*u v n .* «r»itmaieQ to «*ei age • nou- r **.; «>por>e. inducing »h«. i,me ‘or . e.<«wmg MtsUoct.ons. inching «*,*•.(>* data sources, 
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and 'evewmg the collection of .niormanon Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this 
collection of information, ndudmg suggestions for reducing th*s Durden to Washington Headquarters Services. Directorate for information Operations and Reports. 12 IS Jefferson 
Oavis Highway. Suite '204 Arlington. 22202-4 302 and to the Office of Management and Budget. Paperwof* Reduction Project (0704 0108). Washington. DC 2QS03 

1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank) 2. REPORT DATE 3. REPORT TYPE ANO DATES COVERED 

27 August 1993 Annual Report (8/1/92 - 7/31/93) 

4. TITLE ANO SUBTITLE 

Vasopressin Receptor Signaling and Cycling of 
Water Channels in Renal Epithelia (HBC) 

S. FUNDING NUMBERS 

Contract No. 
DAMD17-91-C-1096 

61102A 

3M161102B515.CA 

WUDA335934 

6. AUTMOR(S) 

Dr. Abdul J. Mia 

Dr. Thomas Yorio 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) ANO ADORE SS(ES) 

Jarvis Christian College 

Academic Affairs 

P.O. Drawer G, Highway 80 

Hawkins, Texas 75765 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 

REPORT NUMBER 

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) ANO AODRESS(ES) 

U.S. Army Medical Research & Development Command 
Fort Detrick 

Frederick, Maryland 21702-5012 

10. SPONSORING /MONITORING 

AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 

11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

Subtitle: Retrieval of Water Channels in Toad Urinary Bladders 
Following Withdrawal of Vasopressin and Mezerein 

123. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimi 

I’b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 

:ed 

13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) 

The role of renal cortical epithelia in fluid reabsorption 
and regulation of urinary volume is crucial in maintaining 
homeostasis with the hormone vasopressin (ADH) playing a critical 
role. We have been studying the mechanisms of transmembrane 
water flow by exocytosis and retrieval of water channels by 
endocytosis as induced by vasopressin. Water flow processes are 
also induced by mezerein (MZ), an activator of protein kinase C 
(PKC) , in a manner very similar to what were produced by ADH. 

Scanning and transmission electron microscopy demonstrated that 
the membrane recovery process was associated with an induction of 
invaginations only at the apical plasma membranes involving many 
granular epithelial cells. During endocytosis, apical membranes 
underwent transition with a loss of both microridges and 
microvilli prior to membrane restoration to the unstimulated 

14. SUBJECT TERMS 

Water flow; ADA (vasopressin); Protein Kinase C; 
Endocytosis; Water Channels; Channel retrieval, 

RAD III 

15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

16. PRICE CODE 

17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

OF REPORT 

Unclassified 

18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

OF THIS PAGE 

Unclassified 

19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

OF ABSTRACT 

Unclassified 

20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 

Unlimited 


NSN 7540-01-280-5500 Standard form 298 {Rev 2-89) 


Prescribed by ANSI Std if39-10 
298-102 

























- 2 - 


Block 13. Abstract (continued) 


state. Time-course studies indicated that increases in cell- 
surface endocytosis were correlated with a decrease in water loss 
from the urinary bladder sacs. These observations suggested that 
the apical membrane remodeling was crucial for the restoration of 
membrane permeability following ADH or MZ-activation and 
termination, and further suggest that PKC may participate in the 
overall scheme of the cycling of water channels. 













foreword 


Opinions, interpretations, conclusions and recommendations are those of the 
authors and are not necessarily endorsed by the U.S. Army. 

(x) Where copyrighted material is quoted, permission has been obtained to use such 
material. 

(x) Where material from documents designated for limited distribution is quoted, 
permission has been obtained to use the material. 

(x) Citations of commercial organizations and trade names in this report do not 
constitute an official Department of Army endorsement or approval of the products 
or services of these organizations. 

(x) In conducting research using animals, the investigator(s) adhered to the "Guide 
for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals," prepared by the Committee on Care and 
Use of Laboratory Animals of the Institute of Laboratory Animal Resources, National 
Research Council (NIH Publication No. 86-23, Revised 1985). 

(NA) For the protection of human subjects, the investigator(s) have adhered to 
policies of applicable Federal Law 45 CFR 46. 

(NA) In conducting research utilizing recombinant DNA technology, the 
investigator(s) adhered to current guidelines promulgated by the National Institutes of 
Health. 



PI Signature 


Date 




RETRIEVAL OF WATER CHANNELS IN TOAD URINARY BLADDERS FOLLOWING 
WITHDRAWAL OF VASOPRESSIN AND MEZEREIN 

Abstract: Antidiuretic Hormone (ADH, vasopressin) increases transepithelial water 
flow in renal epithelia by a process that involves the insertion of water channels into 
the apical membrane. Presently, changes in surface structure in a ADH responsive 
tissue, the toad urinary bladder, were examined using the techniques of scanning 
electron microscopy under conditions that promote endocytosis of water channels 
during recovery from a hormonal challenge. Hemibladders were set up as sacs with 
an imposed osmotic gradient. The control sacs received no hormone treatment, 
whereas the other sacs were stimulated with 100 mU/ml ADH or Mezerein (MZ 10‘ 6 M) 
for 10 or 15 min to induce exocytosis and enhanced water flow. ADH or MZ was 
then washed from the tissues with fresh buffer rinses to abolish the hormone or MZ 
actions. These tissues were then allowed to recover for 5, 10, 15, 20, 30 and 60 
min. During these time periods, water channels gradually recovered intracellularly by 
a process of endocytosis. This time period was called the retrieval period. At speci¬ 
fied time intervals, tissues were fixed and processed for SEM or embedded in epon 
for ultrathin sectioning for TEM studies. Control tissues, regardless of the length of 
time, showed little or no sign of surface remodeling that was indicative of endocytosis 
during pre or post-buffer washes, whereas the ADH and MZ-treated tissues showed 
a time-dependent remodeling of the apical membrane during activation and following 
removal of the hormone and MZ during the retrieval period. At the 10 min retrieval 
period following withdrawal of ADH, greater than 47% of the granular cells showed 






extensive surface remodeling compared to 7.78% cells in MZ-exposed tissues. By 30 
and 60 min post hormone treatment during recovery, fewer than 23% of granular cells 
showed signs of surface membrane changes, indicating that the tissue was returning 
the apical membrane surface to the unstimulated state. During endocytosis, apical 
membranes undergo transition, with a loss of both microridges and microvilli prior to 
membrane restoration. These observations suggest that apical membrane remodeling 
is crucial for the restoration of membrane permeability following ADH or MZ-activation 
and termination, and further suggests that protein kinase C (PKC) may participate in 
the overall process of cycling of water channels (aggrephores) in toad urinary 
bladders. 

Introduction 

Eucaryotic cells, through the process of specialization, have acquired complex, 
yet integrated molecular and cellular machineries to recycle plasma membrane 
components and resident proteins, as a means to regulate a variety of cellular 
functions. Internal membrane shuttling in the amphibian urinary bladder, as well as 
in renal cortical cells, for the regulation of transepithelial water flow includes two 
important events: exo- and endocytosis (Fig. 1). The exocytotic process involves 
selective packaging of the water channel containing vesicles for export toward the 
apical membrane where they fuse following stimulation of bladder tissues with 
antidiuretic hormone (ADH, Vasopressin). The process of endocytosis is involved in 
ferrying the membranes as clathrin coated vesicles in the reverse direction, i.e. toward 
the cell interior following withdrawal of hormone (Schmid, 1992). In our laboratories, 


2 







we have conducted experimental studies on transmembrane osmotic water flow using 
toad urinary bladders, an ADH responsive tissue. A variety of electron microscopic 
techniques were used to gain insight into the underlying mechanism involved in the 
cellular processes of exo- and endocytosis as related to water transport. 

ADH through V 2 and V, receptors enhances the transmembrane osmotic water 
flow across the apical membrane of renal epithelia. ADH V 2 receptor transduction 
results in the stimulation of adenylate cyclase, an increase in cAMP and the activation 
of protein Kinase A (PKA) (Handler and Orloff 1973, 1981; Schlondorff and Levine, 
1985). These biochemical events are believed to induce shifts in the cellular 
ultrastructure that results in mucosal membrane reorganization to numerous microvilli 
from the normal phase of microridges (DiBona, 1981; Mia etal. 1983, 1988a,b; Mills 
and Malick, 1978; Spinelli et at., 1975). Propagation of microvilli occurs 
simultaneously with apical membrane fusion of proteinacious water channels. These 
water channels appear as specific aggregates of intramembrane particles arranged in 
stellar arrays when viewed by freeze-fracture (Chevalier et al., 1974; Hays et at., 
1985; Kachadorian et at., 1978; Miaefa/., 1991b; Wade etal., 1981). Amphibian 
epithelia also contain a vasopressin V, receptor coupled to phosphoinositide 
metabolism with the release of inositol trisphosphate, a mobilizer of intracellular 
calcium ions, and diacylglycerol, an activator of protein kinase C (PKC) (Yorio and 
Satumtira, 1989). Data from our laboratories suggests that the vasopressin V, 
receptor cascade may play an integral role in the insertion of water channels into the 
apical membrane, likely through activation of PKC. Scanning electron microscopic 





studies demonstrated the induction of microvilli at the apical membrane of the toad 
urinary bladders by mezerein, a non-phorbol activator of PKC (Mia et at., 1989). 
These observations coupled with freeze fracture studies and immunogold labeling of 
PKC isozymes (Mia et a/. 1991b, 1992), suggested that both ADH V 2 and V, 
receptors may participate in the overall scheme of increased osmotic water flow 
stimulated by hormone. Following the termination of the action of ADH, the granular 
cells of toad urinary bladders undergo membrane internalization through the transport 
of endocytic vesicles (see Brown, 1989; Coleman eta/., 1987; Schmid, 1992). Little 
is known about the mechanism of apical membrane remodeling that occurs during 
endocytosis (Mia et at. 1993a,b,c). Recently, we demonstrated that the membrane 
internaliation process, through the transport of endocytic vesicles, can be increased 
by actions following removal of mezerein (MZ) in a manner very similar to that 
produced by ADH. The present study uses techniques of scanning electron 
microscopy (SEM) combined with transmission electron microscopy (TEM) as a means 
to determine the surface and intracellular mechanisms associated with the regulation 
of membrane recycling in amphibian urinary bladders, a renal model epithelia, during 
endocytotic retrieval following removal of hormone, ADH or MZ. This report is part 
of our continuous effort in probing the overall mechanisms of the regulation of water 
flow by ADH. 

Methods 

Tropical toads, Bufo marinus . were purchased from NASCO, Ft. Atkinson, Wl 
or from Carolina Biological Supply House, Burlington, N.C., and were maintained at 


4 





28°C, fed live crickets biweekly and had f. ee access to water. 

Experimental Protocol: 

Whole Bladder Tissue 

Urinary hemibladders, surgically excised ,r om doubly-pithed toads, were set up 
as sacs at the ends of glass tubes such as in Figure 2, and were placed in aerated 
isotonic normal Ringer's solution as previously reported (Mia etal. 1983, 1991a). The 
composition of the Ringer's solution was as follows (in millimoles per liter): NaCI, 
111.0; KCI, 3.35; CaCI, 2.7: MgCI 2 , 0.5; NaHC0 3 , 4.0 and glucose, 5.0. 
Hemibladders were allowed to equilibrate for 30 min in isotonic Ringer's solution, and 
at time of experimental intervention, an osmotic gradient was instituted using 1/10 
dilution of Ringer's solution in the mucosal cavity. Control tissues were maintained 
in Ringer's solution, whereas experimental tissues received 100 mU/ml (ADH) or MZ 
10 6 M for 10 min. Following withdrawal of ADH or MZ after 10 min stimulation, by 
two quick buffer washes, tissues were allowed to incubate for 5,10 and 20 min 
without the hormone or mezerein allowing the apical membrane retrieval by 
endocytosis. A similar experiment was also conducted exposing toad urinary bladder 
sacs to 100 mU/ml ADH for 15 min, and then retrieved for 15, 30 and 60 min 
following withdrawal of vasopressin. During this retrieval period water loss from the 
sac was also measured using a gravimetric procedure (Bentley, 1958). At the end of 
the experimental procedure, hemibladder sacs were cut and immediately placed into 
2% glutaraldehyde fixative in PIPES buffer (0.02M) in individual glass vials. The 
fixative was then replaced with fresh glutaraldehyde and fixation was allowed to 


5 





continue for 1 hr. Post-fixation was carried out using 1 % osmium tetroxide for 1 hr. 
Fixed tissues, washeo in PIPES buffer, were processed for SEM and TEM. For SEM 
preparations, tissues were placed in glass vials and processed through exchanges of 
graded acetone and liquefied Peldri II for critical point drying. Dehydrated tissues 
were then submerged into fresh liquefied Peldri II and allowed to stand for 1 -2 hr for 
complete removal of acetone and impregnation of Peldri II for critical point drying. 
Liquid Peldri II was allowed to solidify in closed vials by the gradual dropping of 
temperature below 23°C (75°F). Once the Peldri II solidified, the vial caps were 
removed to allow slow sublimation either in a freeze drier or in a fume hood (Mia et 
a/., 1993a.b.c). Each dried tissue sample was mounted on an aluminum stub using 
silver paint and was surface coated with gold in a sputter coater in an argon 
environment for SEM observations. For TEM, fixed tissues were minced and 
dehydrated using exchanges of ethanol and propylene oxide prior to embedding in 
Luft's epon (Mia et at. 1987, 1991a). Ultrathin sections were prepared with a 
diamond knife using an ultramicrotome. These sections were placed on bare copper 
or nickel grids, stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and viewed in the 
transmission electron microscope. 

Determination of Surface Changes 

For morphometric quantitation, between four and six pictures for each 
treatment were taken at 1500X and 4000X magnifications using SEM. The total 
number of normal and treated cells in each picture image was counted and averaged 


6 




to show results in percentages. The statistical analysis of each treatment group 
(control versus ADH) was made on a Texas Instruments Professional Computer using 
the Trajectories statistical program (DBI Software, Mount Pleasant,Ml) as presented 
in Figure 3. The ANOVA and Fischer's PLSD (Protected Least Significant Difference) 
were performed with Stateview (Abacus Concepts, Inc., Berkeley, CA) on an Apple 
Macintosh llsi microcomputer. Descriptive statistical data were calculated using 
between 4 and 6 images, and the results presented are as mean _±. 1 standard 
deviation. The results of the ANOVA and Fischer's PLSD showed that there was no 
significant differenc? among the controls, whereas a significant difference at the 5% 
level was seen between the controls and the ADH-treated tissues. Figure 3 shows the 
percent of ADH and MZ-induced endocytosed cells against the control tissues. 
Drugs 

8-Arginine vasopressin was purchased from Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, 
MO. The concentration of ADH used in these experiments was 100 mU/ml, and was 
added to the serosal side of the hemibladder sacs and the concentration of MZ was 
10 6 M and was added to the urinary cavity. Control tissues were retained in Ringer's 
solution for comparative analysis. 


Results 

The technique of scanning electron microscopy was used to evaluate the 
surface substructure changes that occur following removal of hormone and mezerein 
subsequent to enhanced water flow in toad urinary bladder tissues. The main purpose 


7 






of this series of experimental studies was to probe into thn mechanism of membrane 
internalization following withdrawal of vasopressin and mezerein through a series of 
fresh buffer rinses, and to evaluate the role of protein kinase C in apical membrane 
retrieval through the process of endocytosis. Figures 4 and 5 depict the micro¬ 
structure environment of the apical membrane of the control tissues (no hormone. Fig. 
4) and ADH-exposed tissues (less than 1 min treatment. Fig. 5) in the presence of an 
osmotic gradient. At this time period, the control, as well as the ADH-exposed tis¬ 
sues, as expected, showed little or no visible changes in the apical surface 
microstructure, similar to what has been reported previously (Mia era/. 1983, 1987). 
Therefore, a vast majority of the cells had a mucosal plasma membrane of primarily 
a microridge structure. The granular cells, both in the control and ADH-stimulated 
tissues, showed little or no visible tissue swelling. However, the goblet cells, facing 
the urinary lumen, appeared to have puffed out, likely due to exposure of the tissues 
to the osmotic gradient. Granular cells, under an identical osmotic gradient, responded 
to challenges with 100 mU/ml ADH for 10 min with pronounced tissue swelling and 
the propagation of numerous microvilli over the entire apical membrane surface (Fig. 
6). Similarly, mezerein treatment induced microvilli formation very similar to what was 
produced by ADH stimulation (Fig. 7). Control tissues (no ADH or MZ), during this 
same time period and under an imposed osmotic gradient, tend to retain their normal 
unstimulated surface structure of predominantly microridges. These cells show little 
tissue swelling consistent with previous observations (Mia et at. 1983, 1987). 
Control tissues, retained in Ringer's solution for 10 min, also showed little or no 






evidence of apical membrane invaginations, whereas ADH stimulated tissues at 10 
min, with no buffer washes, showed 15 percent of the cells with evidence of apical 
surface invaginations (Fig. 3). Such membrane surface invaginations (Fig. 8), 
associated with continuous ADH-stimulation, may have been the result of 
down-regulation of the membrane permeability response. Such a down-regulation of 
membrane permeability was not usually evident at 10 min stimulation of tissues 
treated with MZ. 

In another series of experiments, both control and ADH-challenged tissues, 
following incubation for 15 min, received two quick fresh buffer rinses to abolish the 
hormone actions from the ADH-challenged tissues. These tissues were then allowed 
to retrieve for 15, 30 and 60 min. The SEM analysis of the apical surface morphology 
revealed that the control tissues, regardless of the length of time under an osmotic 
gradient showed little or no sign of apical membrane manifestations following buffer 
reinses during the retrieval period (Fig. 9). Many scanning electron micrographs of 
control tissues, representing each stage of 15, 30 and 60 min retrieval periods, were 
studied and found to show a general lack of apical membrane surface changes 
inH : ~ative of endocytosis (see Fig. 9). In contrast, comparable tissues, following 
removal of ADH or MZ resulted in apical membrane invaginations consistant with the 
retrieval of water channels by endocytosis. The molecular and cellular mechanisms 
that may interplay to induce this apical membrane remodeling is unknown. Figures 10 
and 11 depict the surface configuration, as displayed by ADH and MZ-stimulated 
tissues, during a 5 min retrieval period. A number of granular cells developed 


9 








prominent invaginations over the mucosal surface area. The percent of the granular 
cells showing the loss of surface villi as an index of endocytosis was 3.27% in control 
as opposed to 31.28% and 4.19% in the ADH and MZ-stimulated tissues respectively 
(Fig. 3). 

The apical membrane retrieval process in toad bladder tissues, as triggered by 
removal of hormone ADH or MZ, appeared to be progressive. Therefore, various 
stages of endocytosis during each retrieval period may be encountered in cells over 
a single tissue surface. The retrieval process begins with several slight surface 
invaginations each of which exhibits elevated margins (Figs. 10, 11). These 
invaginations, in most cells, were found to coalesce laterally to form a single large 
invagination across the entire membrane surface of the granular cells. Ultrathin sec¬ 
tions, through such membrane invaginations, when examined in the transmission 
electron microscope, demonstrated the presence of low surface invaginations (Fig. 
12), analogous to that seen in SEM (Fig. 10). At 10, 15 or 20 min retrieval periods, 
following withdrawal of ADH or MZ, the toad urinary bladder surfaces were seen to 
have a large number of endocytotic pits (Figs. 13,14). Although endocytosed pits 
were induced in MZ-treated tissues during post buffer washes, their appearance was 
slower compared to ADH-exposed tissues. Therefore, at 10 min retrieval, fewer cells 
in MZ-treated tissues showed surface invaginations (Fig. 15) in contrast to a greater 
number of ADH-treated cells (Fig. 13). Cell counts at 10 min retrieval, indicated that 
fewer than 8% of the cells'Tshowed surface invaginations and putative endocytosis in 
MZ-exposed tissues (n = 6), as compared to 45% of the cells in ADH-stimulated 


10 








tissues (n = 6). The incidence of proposed endocytosis in MZ and ADH-treated tissues 
reverses with time of retrieval. Therefore, at 20 min retrieval, 35% of the MZ cells 
showed endocytosis (Fig. 16) compared to 17% of the ADH-treated cells. Many 
endocytosed pits, which appear to be internalized into the cytoplasm, are large and 
can often be seen in the ultrathin sections of TEM (Fig. 17, arrows). These 
endocytotic pits are only found along the apical membranes and not associated with 
the basolateral or basal plasma membrane. However, coated vesicles, originating from 
the basal as well as the apical membrane, were seen to be present in the cytosol of 
some ADH-stimulated granular celts (Fig. 18, arrows). Due to the enlargement of 
endocytosed vacuoles, the nuclei in some cells may be pressed against the basal 
membrane, and, as a result, the nuclei may assume a variety of shapes surrounded 
by endocytotic vacuoles (Fig. 17). 

Control tissues, under an imposed osmotic gradient for 15 min, had an average 
fluid loss from the bladder sac of 2.1 ul/min (n =4), whereas ADH-challenged tissues 
had 41 ul/min fluid loss (n = 4). Apical membrane surface changes in ADH-stimulated 
tissues reached a peak at 10 or 15 min into the retrieval period, with a percent of cells 
involved at 45.9% and 63.7%, respectively. Whereas in the control tissues, less than 
1% of the cells were involved (Fig. 3). During the process of the formation of 
invaginations, apical membrane surfaces tend to undergo membrane remodeling with 
the loss of both microvilli and microridges in both ADH and MZ-stimulated tissues 
(Figs. 13,14,16, arrows) leaving flattened membrane surfaces with no visible 
microstructure. In ultrathin sections, such membranes appear to contain no micro- 


11 











ridges or microvilli (Fig. 17). This phase of membrane disposition may represent a 
membrane transition during transformation of microvilli into microridges. 

The recovery of the water channels from apical membranes in ADH or MZ- 
exposed tissues begins soon after the withdrawal of ADH or MZ. Such membrane 
remodeling, however, was gradual, as not ail the cells showed full restoration of the 
apical membrane even after 20, 30 or 60 min following withdrawal of ADH. Global 
surface views of apical membranes at 20, 30 and 60 min retrieval periods following 
ADH or MZ removal show that, although a large portion of the granular cells have 
restored surface morphology as in the pre-hormone normal state, a few cells still show 
the presence of surface remodeling (Fig. 19). A closer view is presented in Figure 20 
to demonstrate the membrane restoration in granular cells showing the reorganization 
pattern of the microridges surrounding the endocytosed pits. During the 20 min 
retrieval period, the number of individual cells showing endocytosis in MZ-stimulated 
tissues was found to be 17% and 35% respectively. During 30 and 60 min retrieval 
periods, the number of the involved cells in ADH- stimulated tissues was found to be 
27% and 23.12% respectively versus fewer than 2% cells in the control tissues (Fig. 
3). 

Discussion 

Several observations have prompted our attention to undertake this current 
series of experiments on the phenomenon of membrane retrieval and membrane 
remodeling in toad urinary bladder tissues. The cellular events leading to the process 
of endocytosis have been recently investigated and the biochemical characterization 







of the clathrin coated pits associated with endocytosis in a variety of tissues has also 
been described (Brown, 1989; Pearse and Crowther, 1987; Schmid, 1992). 
However, there has been little information on examining the process of endocytosis 
using the techniques of SEM to unveil the external membrane remodeling that may be 
associated with the endocytotic retrieval of membrane components, i.e. water 
channels, following removal of vasopressin (Brown, 1989, Brown et a/., 1990, 
Coleman et a/., 1987). In addition, it was not known if PKC was involved in the 
retrieval processduring endocytosis. The current observations suggest that the apical 
plasma membrane surface of toad urinary bladders, we found that the apical plasma 
membrane passes through stages of membrane remodeling that is coincident with the 
retrieval of water channels prior to the restoration of the membrane to its normal 
phase containing microridges. In addition, the processes of exo- and endocytosis, 
with reference to surface fine structures, have not been comparatively evaluated in 
time-course studies using a single tissue system. This is particularly relevant to these 
two processes involved in the overall intracellular cycling of water channels in ADH 
responsive tissue. Hence, the current research reports on both the processes of exo- 
and endocytosis using the toad urinary bladder tissues as an ADH responsive model 
membrane. 

The plasma membrane cycling of water channels in amphibian urinary bladder 
tissues, as well as in the renal cortical cells, stimulated by ADH, are accomplished by 
cellular events involving exo- and endocytosis. The process of exocytosis has 
received adequate attention and appears to involve the export of proteinacious water 


13 






channels or aggrephores, normally found in the cytosol of the unstimulated bladder 
tissues to the apical plasma membrane for incorporation as a means to enhance water 
flow upon stimulation by ADH (Humbert eta/., 1977; Muller and kachadorian, 1984; 
Wade, 1978). Enhanced apical membrane water permeability by ADH is correlated 
with a restructuring of the apical membrane microridges into numerous microvilli with 
an increase in membrane surface area (DiBona, 1981; DiBona eta/., 1969; Hays, 
1983; Spinelli et a/. 1975; Mia et a/. 1983, 1987, 1988a). These cellular 
ultrastructural events are thought to occur through ADH V 2 receptors coupled to the 
activation of adenylate cyclase, an increase in cAMP and the activation of protein 
Kinase A (Handler and Orloff 1973, 1981; Schlondorff and Levine, 1985). Amphibian 
epithelia also contain an ADH V 1 receptor coupled to phosphoinositide metabolism and 
inositol triphosphate release (Yorio et a/., 1985; Yorio and Satumtira, 1989), which 
appears to play a functional role in the overall scheme of transepithelial aqueous flow 
possibly through the activation of PKC. It has been shown that mezerein (MZ), a 
non-phorbol activator of PKC, increased transepithelial water flow when added to the 
mucosal surface. Although the magnitude of water flow was less, and occurred over 
a longer period as compared tc AOH-stimulated tissues, the response was reminiscent 
to that seen with hormone (Yorio and Satumtira, 1989). A series of ultrastructural 
experiments also revealed that this enhanced water flow induced by mezerein was 
indeed correlated with the propagation of apical microvilli and the change in the 
cellular distribution of PKC isozymes as determined by immunogo<d localization 
techniques (Mia et a/. 1991b, 1992). It has been proposed by our laboratory that part 


14 









of the initiation of transepithelial water flow by ADH involves V 1 receptors and the 
activation of PKC. The water channels (aggrephores) are likely transported from the 
cytosal to the apical membrane domain through an involvement of PKC. Our 
observations involving the role of PKC during enhanced transepithelial water transport 
correlated with cytomorphological changes and concurrent apical membrane surface 
remodeling, suggesting that PKC may play an integral role in the phenomenon of 
membrane recycling. 

The process of endocytosis in amphibian bladder tissues has been described 
(Muller and Kachadorian, 1984; Ding etal., 1985; Harris era/., 1986; Coleman era/., 
1987). Following stimulation of tissues by hormone, the membrane permeability to 
water declines with time and the tissue looses its responsiveness to ADH. During this 
period, membrane recycling takes place resulting in a membrane remodeling and a 
return of the apical membrane to the normal unstimulated state. During this 
membrane restoration process it is assumed water channels are retrieved by endo¬ 
cytosis. It has been predicted that the exocytotic membranes with intact particle 
aggregates may be retrieved during endocytosis. Several studies on endocytosis, 
using amphibian urinary bladders, have shown evidence of membrane retrieval of 
intact particle aggregates using specific protein markers as identification of aggregate 
proteins (Harris etal., 1986). Additional evidence for retrieval of water channels had 
come from ultrathin section and freeze fracture techniques using selectively labeled 
colloidal gold and horseradish peroxidase as tracers to localize membrane particle 
aggregates (Coleman et a!., 1987). While these studies involve the cellular 


15 






localization of retrieved aggrephores following withdrawal of ADH, there are no 
studies on surface changes during this process nor time-course studies reported. Our 
present time-course studies provide insight into the membrane surface behavior fol¬ 
lowing withdrawal of ADH. During this process, granular epithelial cell membranes 
tend to invaginate toward the cellular interior as an initial response to ADH 
withdrawal. This could result from the loss of membrane permeability to water, or as 
an initial cytosolic signal to begin the retrieval process. Since transepithelial water 
flow is maintained during the period, it is highly unlikely that it is due to changes in 
membrane permeability. The membrane internalization process appears to enter into 
transitional stages resulting in the loss of the surface microstructures (microvilli) prior 
to the restoration of the apical membrane to one predominantly containing 
microridges. The restoration of apical membranes is correlated with an inhibition of 
transepithelial water transport as expected across the plasma membrane. It is also 
noteworthy that even when hormone is continually present there appears to be a 
down-regulation of membrane permeability and an internalization of membrane water 
channels. Therefore, additional unknown mechanisms may act to bring about a return 
of the membrane to its normal state. The present observations also indicate and 
reinforce our previous observations that protein kinase C may be involved in the 
insertion of membrane water channenls during exocytosis, as similar endocytotic 
processing was seen following withdrawal of mezerein as occurred with ADH. 

Additionally, we are in search of a membrane model preferably renal cortical 
cells, grown in tissue culture, for utilization in studies of transepithelial water flow 


16 







involving both exo- and endocytosis. Such in vitro models will provide for biochemical 
as well as cytological studies, for a more accurate evaluation of the water transport 
process under controlled experimental conditions. 

References 

Bentley, P.J. 1958. The effects of neurohypophysial extracts on water transfer across 
the wall of the isolated urinary bladder of toad Bufo marinus . J. Endocrin., 17, 
201-209. 

Brown, D. 1989. Vesicle recycling and cell-specific function in kidney epithelial cells. 
Annu. Rev. Physiol., 51, 771-784. 

Brown, D., Verkman, A., Skorecki, K. and Ausiello, D. 1990. The cellular action of 
Antidiuretic Hormone. Meth. in Enzymology 191, 551-571. 

Chevalier, J., Bourguet, J. and Hugon, J.S. 1974. Membrane associated particles: 
distribution in frog urinary bladder epithelium at rest and after oxytocin treatment. 
Cell & Tissue Res., 152, 129-140. 

Coleman, R.A., Harris, W. Jr., and Wade, J.B. 1987. Visualization of endocytosed 
markers in freeze-fracture studies of toad urinary bladder. J. Histochem. Cytochem., 
35, 1405-1414. 

DiBona, D.R. 1981. Vasopressin action on the conformational state of the granular 
cell in the amphibian urinary bladder. In epithelial Ion and Water Transport (eds 
A.D.C. Macknight and J.P. Leader), 241-255, New York. 

DiBona, D.R., Civan, M.M. and Leaf, A. 1969. The cellular specificity of the effect 






of vasopressin on toad urinary bladder. J. Membrane Biol., 1,79. 

Ding, G., Franki, N. and Hays, R.M. 1985. Evidence of cycling of aggregate- 
containing tubules in toad urinary bladder. Biol. Cell, 55, 213. 

Handler, J.S. and Orloff, J. 1973. The mechanism of action of anti-diuretic hormone. 
Handbook of Physiol 8, 791-814. 

Handler, J.S. and Orloff, J. 1981. Antidiuretic hormone. Annu. Rev. Physiol., 43, 
611,624 

Harris, H.W., Wade, J.B. and Handler, J.S. 1986. Fluorescent markers to study 
membrane retrieval in ADH treated toad urinary bladder. Am. J. Physiol., 251, C274. 
Hays, R.M. 1983. Alteration of luminal membrane structure by antidiuretic hormone. 
Am. J. Physiol., 245, C289-C296. 

Hays, R.M., Chevalier, J., Gobin, R. and Bourguet, J. 1985. Fusion images and 
intramembrane particle aggregates during the action of antidiuretic hormone. A rapid 
freeze study. Cell Tissue Res., 240, 433-439. 

Humbert,F., Montesano, R., Grosso, A., DeSousa, R.C. and Orci, L. 1977. Particle 
aggregates in plasma and intracellular membranes of toad bladder (granular cells). 
Experientia,33, 1364. 

Kachadorian, W.A., Muller, J., Rudich, S.a nd DiScala, V.A. 1978. Time course of 
ADH-induced intramembrane particle aggregation in toad urinary bladder. Am. J. 
Physiol., 234, F461. 

Mia, A.J., Tarapoom, N., Carnes, J. and Yorio, T. 1983. Alteration in surface 
substructure of frog urinary bladder by calcium ionophore, verapamil and antidiuretic 


18 







hormone. Tissue & Cell 15, 737-748. 

Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X., Torres, !_., Herman, C. and Yorio, T. 1987. Morphometric 
analysis of epithelial cells of frog urinary bladder. I. Effect of antidiuretic hormone, 
calcium ionophore (A23187) and PGE 2 . Tissue & Cell 19, 437-450. 

Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X., Moore, T.M., Chang, P.H. and Yorio, T. 1988a. 
Morphometric analysis of epithelial cells of frog urinary bladder. II. Effect of ADH, 
Calcium Ionophore (A23187) and verapamil on isolated dissociated cells. Tissue & Cell 
20, 19-33. 

Mia, A.J. Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. 1988b. Effect of verapamil on cytoplasmic 
distribution of granules and microfilaments in amphibian urinary bladder. Proc. Elect. 
Microscopic. Soc. Am., 46, 324-325. 

Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. 1989. Alterations in surface substructures and 
degranulation of subapical cytoplasmic granules by mezerein (MZ) in toad urinary 
bladder epithelia. Proc. Elect. Microscopic. Soc. Am., 47, 916-917. 

Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X., Cammarata, P. and Yorio, T. 1991a. Modulation of 
cytoskeletal organization and cytosolic granule distribution by verapamil in amphibian 
urinary epithelia. Tissue & Cell., 23, 161-171. 

Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. 1991b. Role of PKC isozymes in water 
transport in toad urinary bladder. Proc. Elect. Microscopic. Soc. Am., 49, 302-303. 
Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X., Thompson, P.D., Ning, Z.H. and Yorio, T. 1992. Role of PKC 
isozyme III (alpha) in water transport in amphibian urinary bladder. Proc. Elect. 
Microscopic. Soc. Am., 50, 796-797. 


19 







Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X., Yancy, H.F., Davidson, A.D. and Yorio, T. 1993a. Evidence 
of endocytosis in toad urinary bladders as revealed by SEM. FASEB J., 7, A577. 
Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X., Hayes, S.C., Davidson, A.D. and Yorio, T. 1993b. 
Membrane dynamics during endocytosis in toad urinary bladders as visualized by SEM. 
Scanning 15 Suppl III, 110-111. 

Mia, A.J., Davidson, A.D., Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. 1993c. SEM studies of 
membrane endocytosis in toad urinary bladders following withdrawal of mezerein. 
Proc. Microscopy Soc. Am., 474-475. 

Mills, J.J. and Malick, L.E. 1978. Mucosal surface morphology of the toad urinen 
bladder. Scanning electron microscopic study of the nitriferic and hydro-osmotic 
response to vasopressin. J. Cell Biol., 77, 598-610. 

Muller, J. and Kachadorian, W.A. 1984. Aggregate-carrying membranes during ADH 
stimulation and washout in toad bladder. Am.J. Physiol., 247, C90-C98. 

Pearse, M.F. and Crowther, R.A. 1987- Structure and assembly of coated vesicles. 
Annu. Rev. Biophys. Chem., 16, 49-68. 

Schlondorff, 0. and Levine, S.D. 1985. Inhibition of vasopressin stimulated water flow 
in toad bladder by phorbol myristate acetate dioctanolgycerol and RHC-80267. J. Clin. 
Invest., 76, 1071-1078. 

Schmid, S.L. 1992. The mechanism of receptor mediated endocytosis: More 
questions than answers. BioEssays, 14, 589-596. 

Spinelli, F., Grosso, A. and DeSousa, R.C. 1975. The hydro-osmotic effect of 
vasopressin: a scanning electron-microscope study. J. Membrane Biol., 23, 139-156. 







Wade, J.B. 1978. Membrane structural specialization of the toad urinary bladder 
revealed by freeze-fracture technique. III. Location, structure and vasopressin 
dependence of intramembrane particle arrays. J. Membrane Biol., special issue, 281 
Wade, J.B., Stetson, D.L. and Lewis, J.A. 1981. ADH action: evidence tor a 
membrane shuttle mechanism. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., 322, 106-117. 

Yorio, T., Royce, R., Mattern, J., Oakford, L.x. and Mia, A.J. 1985. Inhibition of 
hydro-osmotic response to vasopressin and hypertonicity by phenothiazines and W7 
calmodulin antagonist. Gen. Pharmac., 164, 347-353. 

Yorio, T. and Satumtira, N. 1989. contribution of the vasopressin V, receptor to its 
hydro-osmotic response. Biol. Cell, 66, 7-12. 

Key to Figures 

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of unstimulated, ADH or MZ-stimulated and retrieval 
cells showing possible biochemical and cellular octivities involving the cycling of water 
channels in toad urinary bladders. 

Fig. 2. Schematic representation of toad urinary bladder set-up as sac for experiments 
for studying water transport process. 

Fig 3. Data showing the percent of the endocytosed cells in ADH and MZ-stimulated 
tissues versus control fnr 10 or 15 min with retrieval periods of 5, 10, 20, 30 and 60 
min. 

Fig. 4. Control toad urinary bladder with imposed osmotic gradient showing 
predominant microridges. X3,000. 


21 





Fig. 5. ADH-stimulated toad bladder tissue fixed immediately upon exposure to ADH 
and osmotic gradient showing tissue swelling and puffing of the goblet cells. X2,000. 
Fig. 6. Toad urinary bladder stimulated with 100 mU/ml ADH for 10 min showing 
propagation of numerous microvilli. X5,300. 

Fig. 7. Toad urinary bladder stimulated with MZ 10 6 M for 10 min showing numerous 
microvilli. X3,000. 

Fig. 8. Toad urinary bladder under osmotic gradient stimulated for 15 min showing 
membrane invagination due to down regulation of membrane permeability. X3 f 0G0. 
Fig. 9. Control toad urinary bladder under osmotic gradient for 15 min and then 
retrieved for 30 min showing no membrane invagination. X3,700. 

Fig. 10. Toad urinary bladder stimulated with lOOmU/ml ADH for 10 min and retrieved 
for 5 min showing initiation of membrane internalization for 10 min and retrieved for 
5 min. X5,360. 

Fig. 11. MZ-stimulated toad urinary bladder showing apical membrane invagination 
following withdrawal of MZ. X3,000. 

Fig. 12. Ultrathin section of load urinary bladder sac stimulated for 10 min with ADH 
and retrieved for 5 min showing the membrane internalization by endocytosis. 
XI 3,300. 

Fig. 13. Toad urinary bladder stimulated for 10 min with ADH and retrieved fo r 10 
min following withdrawal of ADH showing membrane internalization by endocytosis. 
X2,000. 

Fig. 14. Toad urinary bladder stimulated for 10 min with ADH and retrieved for 20 


22 










min showing various stages of endocytosis and membrane restoration. X930. 

Fig. 15. Toad urinary bladder stimulated by MZ for 10 min and retrieved for 10 min 
showing endocytosed cells. X3,000. 

Fig. 16. Toad urinary bladder sac stimulated by MZ for 10 min and retrieved for 20 
min showing endocytosis and restoration of membranes. X3,000. 

Fig. 17. Toad urinary bladder stimulated for 10 min with ADH and retrieved for 20 
min showing large internalized vacuoles and change in the nuclear shape in ultrathin 
sections. X6,650. 

Fig. 18. Toad urinary bladder stimulated with ADH for 10 min and retrieved for 20 
min showing coated vesicles (arrow) and budding of vesicle from the basal plasma 
membrane. X40,000. 

Fig. 19. Tissue stimulated with ADH for 15 min and retrieved for 30 min showing 
recovery of membrane with a few endocytosed cells. X2,000. 

Fig. 20. Toad urinary bladder treated with MZ for 10 min and retrieved for 20 min 
showing details of membrane restoration. X8,000. 


OTHER MILESTONES 

Under this research project on biomedicine, three African-American 
undergraduate students, Chasity Robinson, Kristi Henderson and Sharia Hood received 
training in cellular and endocrine biology, tissue culture, fluorescent and electron 
microscopy. During this summer, 1993, Chasity Robinson received training in water 


23 



transport studies under Dr. Thomas Yorio, Kristi Henderson in the refinement of the 
techniques of gel electrophoresis under Dr. James Dzandu, and Sharia Hood in the 
Health-Career Opportunity Program (HCOP), all at the University of North Texas Health 
Science Center at Fort Worth (TCOM), Texas. Three new students have undertaken 
research and career enrichment under Dr. A.J. Mia at Jarvis Christian College, and 
Amanda Davidson, Research Technician continues to assist in research and training 
students in the research laboratories. In addition, students receive training in 
computer use and data plotting, and photo printing techniques using light and electron 
micrographs. Students are also given independent research projects for publishable 
research contributions. Pamler Thompson, an African-American, received graduate 
training at the University of North Texas Health Science Center in Ft. Worth working 
under the mentorship of Dr. Thomas Yorio, the Co-PI. 

Research Contributions: 

Full-length paper accepted: 

Candia, O., Mia, A.J. and Yorio, T. 1993. Influence of filter supports on transport 
characteristics of cultured A6 Kidney cells. Am. J. Physiol, (in press). 


Full-length paper submitted: 

Mia, A. J., Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. 1993. Surface membrane remodeling following 
removal of vasopressin in toad urinary bladders. Tissue and Cell. 

Full-length paper in preparation: 

Role of protein Kinase C in recycling of water channels in toad urinary bladders. 


24 











Published Abstracts: 


a) Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T., 1992. Surface substructura! changes of 
renal A6 cells on filter supports following activation of PKC. Mol. Biol. Cell. 3, 228a. 

b) Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X., Finkley, A.E., Davidson, A.D. and Yorio, T. 1993. SEM 
studies of membrane recycling in vasopressin-stimulated toad urinary bladders. Proc. 
Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med. 203, 258. 

c) Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X., Yancy, H.F., Davidson, A.D. and Yorio, T. 1993. 
Evidence of endocytosis in toad urinary bladders as revealed by SEM. FASEB J. 7, 
A577. 

d) Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X., Hayes, S.C., Davidson, A.D. and Yorio, T. 1993. 
Membrane dynamics during endocytosis in toad urinary bladders as visualized by SEM. 
Scanning, 15, Suppl III, 110-111. 

e) Mia, A.J., Davidson, A.D., Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. 1993. SEM studies of 
membrane endocytosis in toad urinary bladders following withdrawal of vasopressin. 
Microscopic Soc. Am. 474-475. 

f) Mia, A.J., Gunter, S., Johnson, S., Franklin, J., Tuck, T., Gardner, D. and Yorio, 
T. 1993. Immunofluorescent detection of PKC alpha in A6 amphibian kidney cells. 
Submitted: Am. Soc. Cell Biol. 

g) Mia, A.J., Robinson, C., Bolden, A., Davidson, A.D., Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. 
1993. Membrane remodeling by endocytosis in toad urinary bladders under sustained 
osmotic gradient. Submitted: Am. Soc. Cell Biol. 

Research in Progress: 

a) Immunofluorescent detection of microfilaments in A6 cultured amphibian kidney 
cells. 

b) Possible induction of endocytosis in A6 cultured amphibian kidney cells. 

c) Immunofluorescent detection of Protein Kinase C beta and gamma isozymes in A6 
cultured amphibian kidney cells. 


25 














Wire hook for weighing of 
water loss using analytical 
balance 


T 



Glass tube 




Toad urinary bladder 


i 

I 


Test Tube 



Fig. 2. Schematic representation of experimental set-up of toad urinary bladder as sac at the end of a 
glass tube. 


27 







N 

s 

■a 

c 

co 

Z 

o 

< 

> 

.o 

T3 

® 

«■* 

a 

3 

E 

*3 

(A 

« s 

« 3 

O S 

« P 
0) 

S 2 

>■ c 
« ° 

•g° 

c o 

III +* 

«*- -3 
O ffl 

® m 

05 a 

S E 
c o 
« O 
o 

W 

® 

a. 


CO 

c 

e 

to 

« 

i— 

a 

® 

oc 


n 

05 




sisoiAoopug BuiMoqs S||oq % 


o 

to 


o 

n 


o 

CM 


tr> 


o 


28 


Time in Minutes 





29 

















































33 






