
N90- 22302 

SURE (Science User Resource Expert): A Science Planning and 

Scheduling Assistant for a Resource Based Environment 


Nancy E. Thalman Thomas P. Sparn 
Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics 
University of Colorado at Boulder 
Campus Box 10 
Boulder, Colorado 80309 


Abstract 

SURE (Science User Resource Expert) is one of three components that 
compose the SURPASS (Science User Resource Planning and Scheduling 
System). This system is a planning and scheduling tool which supports 
distributed planning and scheduling, based on resource allocation and 
optimization. The SURPASS written in Ada, uses a DEC windows user 
interface (X based), the INGRES database management system and the 
SURE system. The SURE system uses the CLIPS/Ada expert system 

production shell. SURPASS is designed to support a wide range of science 
applications and can be easily tailored via database modifications, DEC 
window updates and rule specifications for the SURE system. 

Currently SURE is being used within the SURPASS by the UARS 
(Upper Atmospheric Research Satellite) SOLSTICE instrument to build a 
daily science plan and activity schedule and in a prototyping effort with 
NASA GSFC to demonstrate distributed planning and scheduling for the 
SOLSTICE II instrument on the Eos platform. 

For the SOLSTICE application the SURE utilizes a rule-based system. 
Development of a rule-based program using Ada CLIPS as opposed to using 
conventional programing, allows for capture of the science planning and 
scheduling heuristics in rules and provides flexibility in inserting or 
removing rules as the scientific objectives and mission constraints change. 
An additional advantage of rule-based programming is that it facilitates 
the representation of the relationship between instrument operations and 
resources. SURE uses these rule sets to implicitly assist the science user in 
planning within the context of the science goals while optimizing 
instrument operations using the available resources. 

This paper describes the SURE system’s role as a component in the 
SURPASS, the purpose of the SURE planning and scheduling tool, the SURE 
knowledge base, and the software architecture of the SURE component. 


105 


PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED 


This is a synopsis of the paper which was unavailable at the time of 
publishing 


Introduction 

The Science Users Resource Expert, SURE is a resource-oriented, 
knowledge-based, planning and scheduling tool component designed for 
use by the science planner and instrument scheduler. The SURE system 
separates the Science Planning Context from the Resource Scheduling 
Context by allowing the user to plan and schedule instrument activities 
with respect to scientific goals while maximizing instrument activity with 
respect to available resources. 

The SURE system is currently being developed by the Laboratory for 
Atmospheric and Space Physics (LASP) at the University of Colorado in 
Boulder. The SURE system is used within the SURPASS(Science User 
Resource Planning and Scheduling System) by the SOLSTICE instrument to 
plan and schedule science experiments and instrument activities. The 
SOLSTICE will fly on the UARS(Upper Atmospheric Research Satellite) in 
1991 and Eos (Earth Observing System) in 1997. SURPASS is being 
developed jointly under the SCAN (Scheduling Concepts Architectures and 
Networks) study sponsored by GSFC code 522 and the UARS SOLSTICE 
project. The SURE component is being developed under the SCAN testbed 
study. 

The SURPASS system, as illustrated in Figure 1, is composed of three 
Ada language-based software components, one component being the SURE 
system, and the other two components, the User Interface(UI) and the 
Planning and Scheduling System(PASS) Manager. The User Interface is 
written using the X-based DEC windows package and contains timeline and 
application specific displays that display the planning and scheduling 
information within the science context. The PASS Manager component is 
responsible for data handling, communication, and transactions between 
the three SURPASS components. The SURE component is written using the 
CLIPS/Ada expert system production shell. The SURE system incorporates 
a rule base captured from the knowledge of the planning expert, the 
instrument engineers and the scientist. The rule base is intended to 
optimize resource utilization based on the desired science objectives. 

CLIPS/Ada is a forward chaining rule language based on the Rete 
algorithm and is written in Ada and developed by the NASA Johnson Space 
Center. Using the CLIPS/Ada expert system production shell has allowed 


106 


SCIENCE-ORIENTED RESOURCE-ORIENTED 



107 



rapid prototyping of an instrument planning and scheduling knowledge 
base. Since the User Interface and PASS Manager components are also 
written in Ada, this has allowed for easy interfacing and integration of the 
SURPASS components. 

The SURE system's goal is to produce a schedule of science activities 
and observations within a dynamic resource environment. These 
observations and activities are scheduled in a way that maximizes 
instrument activity and hence, the scientific results within the available 
resource envelopes. Using an expert system has allowed the user to plan 
science experiments which satisfy science observing objectives and still 
remain within the given resource constraints without having to schedule 
these activities based solely on resource availability. The SURE system also 
reschedules instrument activities based on changing or updated resource 
availability while maintaining the overall scientific objectives. 

Additional features of the SURE system include its ability to 
constraint check manually generated science plans. SURE will calculate 
resource requirements, check resource availability constraints, and 
attempts to reschedule an activity or request additional resources if 
needed. SURE notifies the user if the activity cannot be inserted into the 
schedule due to resource or constraint conflicts and may suggest alternate 
activities or actions. 


The SURE Knowledge Base 

Development of a knowledge-based system as opposed to using a 
conventional programming methodology, allows for the representation and 
capture of knowledge by the scientist, the instrument operator and 
planner, and the instrument engineers into rules. These rules combine to 
provide the translation of scientific goals, instrument operating modes and 
resource requirements, and operational constraints into a optimized 
resource based schedule and instrument sequence. These rules also allow 
flexibility as instrument operating characteristics and the instrument 
environment change requiring different resources levels. 

For this application, rules have been designed to select specific solar 
observation times from an initial preallocation of available solar resources 
and based on scientific goals, determine the solar experiments to be 
executed during the selected solar observation times. These experiments 
are selected to fit within available resource envelopes. If an experiment 
can not be found based on the scientific goals, increased resources may be 


108 



requested. The next step is to determine the stellar viewing periods and 
for each period select specific stars to be observed based on star 
observation statistics. 

Star observation statistics which reside in the data volume are the 
actual, scheduled, and planned experiment data maintained on each star. 
The observations statistics from the data volume guide the expert system's 
selection of star experiments. The goal is to equally observe each star and 
it's corresponding wavelengths, so that the data volume is uniformly dense 
throughout. The data volume concept is illustrated by Figure 2. 



Figure 2 DATA VOLUME CONCEPT 


109 



For the selected stars an optimal instrument tracking plan to 
minimize instrument dead time within operating resource envelopes is 
then determined. Once the maximum stellar dwell time is determined for 
each target, experiments are selected based on the scientific goals. If 
experiments do not fit with the determined time additional resources may 
be requested to increase the dwell time. The resulting schedule is an initial 
science plan with a optimal target acquisition sequence which contains 
scheduled solar and stellar experiments. This schedule is passed to the 
PASS manager and User Interface for the user to review. 

The schedule produced by the SURE system is based on broad 
scientific goals and may not reflect detailed short term changes to scientific 
objectives. The user may interact with the initial schedule generated by 
the SURE system through the User Interface to include enhanced science 
objectives. SURE aids the user interaction by constraint checking user 
inputs with respect to available resources. 


SURE Software Architecture 

The SURE software architecture, as illustrated in Figure 3, consists of 
a SURE task, several Ada packages, and the CLIPS/Ada expert system 
production shell. The SURE task is an Ada task containing a rendezvous for 
starting up the expert system. For the UARS SOLSTICE application this 
rendezvous is with the PASS Manager component of SURPASS. The 
SURE_INTERFACE_PKG contains procedures which are responsible for 
obtaining resource availability data and resource constraints from the 
STAR_INTERVALS_PKG. The SURE_INTERFACE_PKG procedures take the 
resource availability and constraint data and build facts for the expert 
system, load the SURE rule set into the CLIPS/Ada inference engine and 
start the execution of the expert system. Internally, the inference engine 
uses facts, available resources and star observation statistics, and tries to 
match these facts with rules from the knowledge base (see Figure 4). In 
the UARS SOLSTICE case, the expert system appropriately generates either 
scheduled solar and stellar experiments, scheduled slew times, or resource 
constraint error messages. These are transmitted from the SURE task via 
Ada rendezvous with the PASS Manager. These scheduled experiments are 
made available in working memory to the User Interface which displays 
the experiments on a timeline or in application specific windows. 

The SURE system uses the CLIPS/Ada production shell which 
contains a forward-chaining inference engine and the SURE rule set has 
been written using the CLIPS/Ada rule-based language. The SURE rule set 


110 



Figure 3 SCIENCE USERS RESOURCE EXPERT 
SOFTWARE ARCHITECTURE 



Figure 4 SOLSTICE EXPERT SYSTEM 


111 







is designed to select available resources needed for experiments and 
schedule resources in a manner which maximizes their usage. The SURE 
rule set or knowledge base can be modified and tailored for other 
applications by the development of a different rule base. 

As a planning/scheduling tool the expert system allows the user to 
spend more time concentrating on scientific goals and less time scheduling 
experimental activities and available resources. For the UARS SOLSTICE 
application, the human planner/scheduler takes approximately 6 hours to 
produce a 24 hour science plan. The SURE system using rules reduces the 
time to schedule a 24 hour day to only 30 minutes. This is a significant 
reduction in scheduling time. 


Conclusions 

Using an expert system such as the SURE knowledge-based 
application frees the user from becoming a planning or scheduling expert 
and allows the science user to plan and schedule instrument activities with 
respect to the project's scientific goals. The SURE expert planner/scheduler 
builds an experiment plan that is based upon scientific goals and takes 
care of the details of instrument operations and resources. The SURE expert 
system is an application independent scheduler and can be tailored and 
adapted for use with other instrument control systems. 


Acknowledgements 

The authors would like to thank and acknowledge the following 
persons for their suggestions and assistance in the preparation of the 
paper: Jeanette Fielden, Dan Gablehouse, David Judd, and Kristin Stordahl. 


References 

Giarratano, J. (August 1989). Clips User's Guide. Artificial Intelligence 
Section, Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. 

Hansen, E. R., Sparn, T. P., and Davis, R. L. (May 1988). Concepts for 
Planning and Scheduling in the Space Station Era. Laboratory for 
Atmospheric and Space Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, 
Colorado. 


112 



Hansen, E. R., and Sparn, T. P. (1989). Concepts in Distributed Scheduling 
and Control. Conference on Space Station Evolution: Beyond the 

Baseline. League City, Texas. 

Hull, L. (October 1989). Space Station A/D Program Trip Report. Goddard 
Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. 

Melebeck, C. J. (November 1989). Clips/ Ada Advanced Programming 

Guide. Barrios Technology, Houston, Texas. 


113 



