
NASA Technical Memorandum 105842 


// 1/-33 


/Z^&o / 

/t /o 


C’ -. erview and Evolution of the LeRC 
PMAD DC Testbed f 


James F. Soeder and Robert J. Frye 
Lewis Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 


(NASA-TM-105842) 

evolution of the 

TESTBED (NASA) 


OVERVIEW 
LeRC PMAD 
10 p 


AND 

DC 


N92-32867 


Unci as 


03/33 0117601 


August 1992 


1 





OVERVIEW AND EVOLUTION OF THE LeRC? 
PMAD DC TEST BED 

James F. Soeder and Robert J. Frye 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Lewis Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 44135 


ABSTRACT 

Since the beginning of the Space Station 
Freedom Program (SSFP), the Lewis Research Center 
(LeRC) has been actively involved in the development 
of electrical power system test beds to support of the 
overall design effort. Throughout this time, the SSFP 
Program has changed the design baseline numerous 
times, however, the test bed effort has endeavored to 
track these changes. Beginning in August 1989 with 
the baselining of an all DC System, a test bed was 
developed which supported this design baseline. 
However, about the time of the Test Bed’s 
Completion in December 1990, the SSFP was again 
going through another design scrub known as 
Restructure. 

This paper describes the LeRC PMAD DC 
Test Bed and highlights the changes that have taken 
place in the Test Bed configuration and design 
resulting from the SSFP Restructure Exercise in 
December 1990, These changes have principally 
included the reduction of primary power channel size 
with an accompanying reduction in the size of various 
power processing elements. In addition to the 
scrubbing of the channel size, a substantial reduction 
was made in the amount of flight software with the 
subsequent migration of these functions to ground 
control centers. The impact of these changes on the 
design of the power hardware, the controller 
algorithms and the control software along with a 
description of their current status is presented. 

An overview of the testing that has been 
conducted with the test bed during the last year is 
also highlighted. These tests include investigations of 
stability and source impedance, primary and 
secondary fault protection, and performance of a 
rotary utility transfer device. 

Finally, information is presented on the 
evolution of the test bed to support the verification 
and operational phases of the Space Station Freedom 
Program in light of these restructure scrubs. 


INTRODUCTION 

Although the SSFP Program has gone 
through numerous design changes since its beginning, 
it still will be the largest power system ever flown in 
space. Furthermore, it will be built and evolved 
incrementally and be "utility like" in its ability to 
accommodate changing loads much like a terrestrial 
power system. 

Finally, the system is characterized by its 
large numbers of power processing elements both in 
the source and distribution areas. Because of these 
unique characteristics, it is imperative that early 
experience be gained in the development and 
operation of systems of this type. Consequently, the 
Lewis Research Center in conjunction with its prime 
power system contractor, Rocketdyne, have had an 
aggressive test bed program underway since 1985. A 
detailed discussion of the history and the objectives of 
the Test Bed Effort at LeRC can be found in 
Reference [1]. 

KEY TEST BED OBJECTIVES 

To evaluate the unique requirements posed by the 
power system for the SSFP Application the following 
set of key objectives were established: 

Evaluate source / distribution system interaction 
with the solar array — This testing addressees the 
high power level of the SSFP power system and the 
higher than normal impedance characteristics of the 
source system, to provide early evaluation of true 
end-to-end system performance and behavior. 

Evaluate primary / secondary system protection 
concepts - This testing addressees the protection of 
the high power primary system as well as examining 
the unique challenges associated with the "current 
limited nature" of the secondary distribution power 
processing elements. 


Y 


1 


Evaluate primary / secondary power quality and 
user load interactions — This testing addresses the 
problems of conducted EMI along with the start-15), 
shutdown and interaction of user loads with the power 
distribution system. 

Evaluate control concepts and Ada software 
performance -- This development and testing 
provides early programming and implementation 
experience with a real time distributed control system 
using the Ada programming language. 

Generate early data to calibrate / validate system 
models and simulations - This testing provides early 
data to anchor and refine component and system 
models and simulations. 


TEST BED DEVELOPMENT APPROACH 

The development philosophy of the PMAD 
DC Test Bed is to replicate a significant enough 
portion of the Space Station Freedom PMAD System 
to investigate issues such as system stability, power 
quality, faults protection, and distributed control 
concepts. The current PMAD system for the Manned 
Tended Configuration consists of two 9.375 kW 
nominal / 12 kW peak power channels which 
distribute solar array or battery power via a primary 
distribution system to a set of DC to DC Converter 
units (DDCUs) and finally through a set of switching 
assemblies (SPDAs and TPDAs) to the user. As the 
Space Station Freedom continues to be evolve to its 
Permanently Manned Configuration, four additional 
9.375 kW Channels will be added to get to a 56 kW 
Space Station. Further information on the Space 
Station Power System Configuration can be found in 
Reference [2]. 

To develop a meaningful subset of the SSF 
electrical power system which can provide early test 
results and which can evolve as the SSF program 
matures, a phased development effort has been 
undertaken. In Phase A, a single end-to-end power 
channel of 9375 kW nominal, 123 kW peak is being 
assembled using "hardware of convenience." 
Hardware of convenience is considered to be 
functionally equivalent to the hardware which will be 
eventually used on the Space Station but more readily 
available. In some cases, the hardware contains 
additional functionality which may not necessarily be 
in the final flight system but allows the evaluation of 
alternate design options. Currently the test bed 
program has completed the Phase A In Phase B, the 


intent is to build a second power channel using copies 
of the breadboard hardware being built for the Space 
Station Freedom application. 


TEST BED DESCRIPTION 

Figure #1 shows a diagram of the PMAD DC 
Test Bed. Shown in the Diagram is the completed 
Phase A portion of the Test Bed as it currently exists 
with the restructure changes. The Phase B activity 
will add another channel similar to the one shown and 
is expected to be completed within the next calendar 
year. The test bed consists of two major elements, 
the power element and the control element. 


TEST BED POWER ELEMENT 

The source power for the test bed consists of 
an 82 string solar array switching unit which regulates 
the primarily bus to a nominal 160 Volts during solar 
insolation. The SSU regulates raw power either from 
the 35 KW LeRC Solar Array Field, or from the 
LeRC designed Solar Array Simulator. Further 
information on this simulator can be found in 
Reference [3], 

The power from the SSU flows into the 
Direct Current Switching Unit (DCSU). This unit 
consists of switches called Remote Bus Isolators or 
RBIs for power switching and source protection as 
well as a large capacitor (4000uf) to provide primary 
bus stabilization. The DCSU directs the power into 
energy storage through two Battery Charge / 
Discharge Units BCDUs. The BCDUs provide 
regulated current and voltage to charge the batteries 
during insolation and regulate the primary bus voltage 
during eclipse. Power from the DCSU flows though 
a rotary power transfer device (roll ring) into a Main 
Bus Switching Unit (MBSU). The MBSU also 
contains Remote Bus Isolators (RBIs) which are used 
to enable and disable power to the DC to DC 
Converter Units (DDCUs), as well as provide primary 
source protection. The DDCUs provide the interface 
between the primary distribution system and the 
secondary. At the interface the DDCUs convert the 
voltage from the nominal 160 Volts on the primary to 
120 Volts for use on the secondary. In addition, they 
provide EMI and grounding isolation between the 
primary and secondary distribution systems. 

The power out of the DDCUs energies the 
secondary distribution system which contains the 
Secondary and Tertiary Distribution Units (SPDAs 


2 


and TPDAs). The SPDA and TPDAs are made up of 
Remote Power Controllers (RPCs) that emulate the 
secondary and tertiary switching functions found 
inside a manned module. Finally, load convertets 
(LC) which are DC to DC converters and provide 
constant power loads are used to exercise the test bed. 

It is expected that a majority of the loads on the 
Space Station will be of the constant power type. 
Currently, the test bed contains ten, one kW, 120 
Volts to 28 Volt, load converters to provide loads of 
this type. These converters consist of a variety of 
different circuit topologies such as zero voltage 
switching, resonant and full bridge forward 
converters. These converters operate at a variety of 
switching frequencies and can therefore provide a 
realistic operating environment to test the system. 
Information on the characteristics and testing of these 
converters can be found in References [4-5]. 


IMPACT OF THE RESTRUCTURE CHANGES 
ON POWER ELEMENTS 

The restructuring of the Space Station 
Freedom Program in December of 1990 had some 
profound effects on the Space Station as whole. 
Specifically, the overall size of the station was 
reduced which subsequently forced a reduction in the 
overall size of the power system from 75kW to 
56kW. The result of this reduction in the overall size 
of the generation system was to reduce the channel 
size of the power system from 18.75kW to 9.375kW. 
Likewise, the ratings of the elements in the power 
distribution system were also reduced. Consequently, 
the DDCUs went from ratings of 12.5 KW to 6.25 
KW and were required to allow unit parallelling to 
maximize the power utilization in the Laboratory 
Modules. Finally, the secondary switchgear ratings 
were reduced to reflect the reduction in the amount of 
power available in the secondary channels and the 
expected load mix. 

The impacts on the Test Bed itself was to 
force a change in the DDCU and RPC Power 
Elements. In the case of the 12.5kW DDCUs, each 
one was composed of two 6.25kW Modules. 
Therefore, each DDCU could be separated into two 
units and appropriate parallelling circuitry added. 
Further information on these parallelling methods can 
be found in Reference [6]. In the case of the RPCs, 
the rating of the units were adjusted to reflect the 
revised ratings: 65, 12 and 4 Amps. 

All of these modifications have been 
completed, the results of which are shown in the 


following summary of the Test Bed Power 
Components. 

Test Bed Power Components 

The principal characteristics of the key components in 
the Restructured Phase A Test Bed Configuration are 
as follows. 

Solar Array Switching Unit (SSU) — The SSU is a 
shunt regulator. It regulates the output voltage by 
shunting solar array strings to ground and passing the 
output of the other strings to the load 

o 32KW Total Power Capability 

- 82 Solar Array Strings 

- Each String 2.5 Amps at 160 
VDC 

o Programmable Voltage, Current and 

Undervoltage Setpoints via Mil-STD-1553B 
Interface 

Battery Charge / Discharge Regulator (BCDU) -- 
The BCDU controls the charge and discharge current 
and voltage to the batteries from the main power bus 
and visa-versa. 

o Topology — Two Parallelled Bi- 

Directional 3.0 KW Buck / Boost Modules 
o Charge Mode 

- 120 to 157 Input Voltage 

- 90 to 130 Output Voltage 
o Discharge Mode 

- 75 to 150 Input Voltage 

- 120 to 157 Output Voltage 

0 MH-STD-1553B Interface for Data 
Monitoring and Commands 

DC to DC Converter Unit (DDCU) - The DDCU 
is a DC to DC Converter which converts the 160 
VDC primary power to 120 VDC for the secondary 
distribution. In addition, it provides EMI isolation 
and grounding between the primary and secondary 
distribution systems. 

0 Output power - 6.25 kW (Nominal) 
o Topology — One Resonant Modules 
o Input Voltage -- 125 - 170 VDC 
o Output Voltage — 120 - 128 VDC +/- 1 % 
Programmable 

o Efficiency full load ~ 91 % (excluding 
control power) 

o Current Limit - Programmable 


X 


3 


o Parallelling Capability -- 3 Methods 
Switch Selectable 

o MH-STD-1553B Interface for Data 
Monitoring and Commands 

Further Information on the SSU, BCDU and DDCU 
can be found in Reference [7]. 

Remote Bus Isolator (RBI) — The RBI are hybrid 
switching devices which contain a relay in parallel 
with a solid state switch to control DC current. The 
RBIs are the primary components used to construct 
the MBSU and DCSU. 

o 180 VDC 208 Amp Normal Operation 
o 400 Amp Interrupt Capability 
o 270 Volt / 208 Amp Dead Face Relay 
o Supports Overcurrent and Differential 
Protection 

o Settable Overcurrent Trip Points 
o Different Devices can Support both 
Unidirectional and Bi-Directional Capability 
o MH-STD-1553B Interface for Data 
Monitoring and Commands. 

Remote Power Controller (RPCs) — The RPC are 
solid state devices which control DC Current and 
limit current during a fault. The RPCs are the 
primary components used to construct the SPDAs and 
TPDAs. 

o Ratings 

- 4 Amps @120 Volts 

- 12 Amps @ 120 Volts 

- 65 Amps @ 150 Volts 

- 130 Amps @ 150 Volts 

- 150 Amps @ 150 Volts 

o Overcurrent and Undervoltage Protection 
o Settable Current Limiting 
o Mil-STD-1553b Interface for Data 
Monitoring and Commands 

Further Information on the RBI and RPC devices can 
be found in Reference [8]. 


TEST BED CONTROL ELEMENT 

The test bed control systems consists of 
hierarchically networked computers which simulate 
the Electric Power System Controllers which will 
exist on the actual station. The control software 
includes a set of control algorithms along with utility 


communication software, all of which is programmed 
in Ada. The hardware, controller algorithms and 
software development are outlined below. 

Test Bed Control Hardware 

The controller hardware consists of an 
Operator Interface System or OIS which provides the 
operator with command and display capability. This 
computer communicates with the Power Management 
and Control Computer (PMC), which oversees the 
operation of the overall Test Bed. The PMC then 
communicates with the Photovoltaic Controller, or 
PVC, and the Main Bus Controller, or MBC, over an 
IEEE 802.4 communications network. The PVC and 
MBC are the next layer in the control hierarchy. The 
PVC controls, monitors and passes setpoints to the 
SSU, DCSU and the BCDU over a Mil-Std-1553b 
data bus. Likewise the MBC performs similar 
functions to the MBSU and the DDCUs. 

Finally, the PMC communicates over a 
separate data link (802.4) to the Load Management 
Controller. The LMC provides the capability to 
communicate with the switches in the SPDAs and 
TPDAs as well as the load converters. The LMC 
functions, although not a LeRC Space Station Work 
Package (WP-04) responsibility, is required to address 
system level issues. 

The control hardware for the test bed is 
characterized by the need to be cost effective but also 
be as compatible as possible with the control 
hardware proposed for the SSF. This led to the 
utilization of Compaq 386/20e PCs. These computers 
are based on the 80386 processor and have a 20mHz 
clock rate. 


Test Bed Control Software 

The test bed control software is divided into 
two major categories, the utility software and the 
algorithm software. 

The design of the utility software provides 
the major communications for the test bed. The 
software is characterized by Five major modules: 1) 
a Router which directs both inter and intra processor 
communication; 2) a Text Interface which handles 
communication between the system and user; 3) a 
Network Interface which handles communication 
between the distributed computer controllers over the 
802.4 bus; 4) a Power Component Interface which 
handles communication between the controller and 


4 



power components over the 1553B bus; 5) an 
Algorithm Interface which provides the test bed 
designer and developers with a uniform link to 
exercise various control algorithms; and 6) a data 
collection function which is used to collect periodic 
snapshots of data for use by various algorithms and 
for operator display. Using just the utility software 
the test bed can be run in what is know as manual 
mode via the operator inputing commands directly to 
the power components. 

The test bed algorithm software consists of 
a series of functions that utilize the algorithm 
interface to facilitate the control of the test bed. 
When these algorithms are used, the test bed is 
considered to be in the Automatic Mode. In the 
automatic mode the operator has functions that 
provide for orderly start-up and shutdown of the test 
bed. In addition, the automatic mode has functions 
such digital filtering to smooth the sensed data, a state 
estimator to detect bad data, and fault detection 
algorithms to back-up the hardware fault protection 
system in the areas of overcurrent detection, 
undervoltage detection, and power interrupt detection. 
Further information on the design of the control 
system and software design can be found in 
References [9, 10, 11, 12] 

IMPACT OF RESTRUCTURE ON CONTROL 
ELEMENT FUNCTIONALITY 

With the exception of the start-up and 
shutdown functions, which are test bed specific, the 
use of the automatic mode functions for the on-board 
system is currently being assessed in light of the 
restructured program. The thrust of the restructure 
was to simplify all onboard systems to minimize the 
use of computing power on board the vehicle. This 
in turn translates into a savings in the amount of 
power required to run all of the station controls 
thereby providing more power for the users. In 
addition, considerable financial savings can be 
realized in the development of onboard software 
because of the simplified functions. However, many 
of the functions that have been scrubbed still have to 
performed, consequently, many of the control 
functions that were expected to be done on-orbit are 
being moved to the ground. Functions such as health 
monitoring, failure diagnostics, contingency analysis, 
load scheduling, and electrical power system state 
estimation are currently being planned for initial 
implementation in the ground based Space Station 
Freedom Control Center. 


The impact of this change in development 
philosophy on the Test Bed has been to continue 
analytical efforts in the critical areas but to more 
closely examine how to best implement the final 
algorithms to closely simulate the current SSF 
development philosophy. 


KEY TESTS PERFORMED 

During the past year many tests have been 
performed using the Test Bed to generate data on 
systems behavior. These test have included 
evaluation of primary and secondary of the Test Bed 
using appropriate output and input impedance 
measurements. The measurements are evaluated 
relative to the Middlebrook Stability Criterion. 
Further information on these tests can be found in 
Reference [13]. 

Another series of tests that have been 
performed is to evaluate the primary and secondary 
protection systems implemented in the test bed. 
These tests have demonstrated the robustness of the 
Primary System and Secondary System trip 
characteristics. Further information on these tests can 
be found in Reference [14]. 

Finally, a series of tests was run with a 
developmental model Alpha Utility Transfer 
Assembly. The transfer assembly consists of a series 
of power and data roll rings which allow the transfer 
of same across a rotating interface on the Space 
Station Freedom Truss Structure. This rotating 
interface is necessary to keep the Space Station 
modules in an inertial mode relative to the earth and 
allow the pointing of the solar arrays at the sun 
throughout the insolation period of the orbit. 

By conducting these tests using the test bed, it was 
possible to evaluate the device in a real system 
environment using real power sources, cable lengths, 
and loads. Results of the tests conducted proved to 
be very favorable. Further information on the test 
results can be obtained in Reference [15]. 


FUTURE TEST BED ROLES IN THE 
DEVELOPMENT OF SPACE STATION 
FREEDOM 

As the Space Station Program approaches its 
CDR in the Mid 1993, its final design is being firmed 
up. A key area which still needs to be addressed is 
that of high risk or edge of envelop testing of the 
system to support the CDR activity. However, much 


5 



of the initial testing to identify early system behavior 
is complete* In addition, other higher fidelity test 
beds will come on-line to support the final system 
verification. Therefore, supporting development test 
beds take on a different roles than earlier in the 
program. 

Much work still needs to be done in defining 
the operational procedures for the electric power 
system and for planning the evolution of the power 
system throughout its 30 year lifetime. Because of 
this, a key activity in the upcoming months is to 
completely link the test bed control system with the 
LeRC Engineering Support Center to allow the 
investigation of the control system scrub on the 
operation of the overall power system. In addition, 
work is expected to continue on the use of advanced 
automation tools for power utilization scheduling, 
power system and power component failure 
diagnostics and battery management. Use of this 
work in advanced automation will greatly reduce the 
power system operational costs. 

CONCLUSION 

The PMAD Test Bed has been operational at 
the Lewis Research Center since the fall of 1990. 
During that time, substantial efforts have been made 
to continue to track the Space Station Program and to 
make hardware and software changes which will 
allow the Test Bed to functionally represent the 
current design. In addition, it has provided valuable 
test data and much useful information relative to the 
operation of high power DC power systems. It is 
expected that its usefulness will continue through 
subsequent years. 

REFERENCES 

[1] J.F. Soeder, RJ. Frye and Rudy Phillips, "The 
Development of Test Beds to Support the Definition 
and Evolution of the Space Station Freedom Power 
System, 26th IECEC Conference, Boston 
Massachusetts, August 4-9, 1991. 

[2] Space Station Freedom Program Office, 
"Electrical Power System Architectural Control 
Document," SSP 30263. 

[3] T. Vasek, "Development of a Single String Solar 
Array Simulator," IECEC-91, August 4-6, 1991, 
Boston, MA. 


[4] R. C Lebron, A.C. Oliver, and R.F. Bodi, "Test 
and Evaluation of Load Converter Topologies Used in 
the Space Station Freedom Power Management and 
Distribution Test Bed," IECEC-91, August 4-6, 1991, 
Boston Ma. 

[5] R. C. Lebron, "Load Converter Interaction with 
the Secondary System on the Space Station Freedom 
PMAD DC Test Bed," IECEC-92, August 3-7, 1992, 
San Diego, Ca. 

[6] D. K. Decker, "Operation of High Power 
Converters in Parallel," BECEC-92, August 3-7, 1992, 
San Diego, Ca. 

[7] D. Decker and L. Inouye, "Multikilowatt Power 
Electronic Developments for Spacecraft," IECEC-91, 
August 4-9, 1991, Boston MA. 

[8] R. Thorton and D. Fox, "Power Management 
Westinghouse and Distribution Equipment Developed 
for Space Applications," IECEC-91, August 4-9, 
1991. 

[9] A. Baez and G. Kimnach, "Description of the 
Control System Design for the Space Station Freedom 
PMAD DC Test Bed," IECEC-91, August 4-9, 1991, 
Boston, MA. 

[10] K. Ludwig, M. Mackin, and T. Wright, 
"Description of a Real Time Ada Software 
Implementation of a Power System Monitor for the 
PMAD DC Test Bed. IECEC-91, August 4-9, 1991 
Boston, MA. 

[11] T. Wright, M. Mackin, and D. Gantose, 
"Development of Ada Language Control System for 
NASA Power Management and Distribution Test 
Bed," IECEC-89, August 6-11, 1989, Washington 
D.C. 

[12] G. L. Kimnach, and A. Baez "Power System 
Monitoring and Source Control of the Space Station 
Freedom DC Power System Test Bed,." IECEC-92, 
August 3-7, 1992, San Diego, Ca. 

[13] R. M. Button, "Stability Testing and Analysis 
of the PMAD DC Test Bed For the Space Station 
Freedom", IECEC-92, August 3-7, 1992, San Diego 
Ca. 


6 


[14] R. Beach and G. Kubat, "Description and 
Evaluation of Protection System Concepts Developed 
for the PMAD DC Test Bed," IECEC-92, August 3- 
7, San Diego Ca. 

[15] E. J. Yenni, "Electrical Characterization of a 
Space Station Freedom Alpha Utility Transfer 
Assembly," IECEC-92, August 3-7, San Diego, Ca. 



Figure 1 POWER MANAGEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 



8 









REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, Including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, 
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing me collection of information. Send comments regarding Jhis burden estimate or any other aspect of mis 
collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson 
Davis Highway. Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC 20503 

1. AGENCY USE ONLY {Leave blank) 12. REPORT DATE 

August 1992 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE | 5. FUNDING NUMBERS 

Overview and Evolution of the LeRC PMAD DC Testbed 


3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

Technical Memorandum 


Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 



WU -474— 42-10 

6. AUTHOR (S) 

James F. Soeder and Robert J. Frye 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESSEES) 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Lewis Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 44135-3191 

E-7285 

». SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAMES(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

10. SPONSORING/MONITORING 
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Washington, D.C. 20546-0001 

NASA TM- 105842 

11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

Prepared for the 27th Intersociety Energy Conversion Engineering Conference cosponsored by the ANS, SAE, ACS, AIAA, 
ASME, and IEEE, San Diego, California, August 3-7, 1992. James F. Soeder and Robert J. Frye, NASA Lewis Research Center, 
Cleveland, Ohio. Responsible person, James F. Soeder, (216) 433-5328. 

12a. DtSTRIBUTION/AVAILABILfTY STATEMENT 

12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 

Unclassified - Unlimited 
Subject Category 33 



13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) 

Since the beginning of the Space Station Freedom Program (SSFP), the Lewis Research Center (LeRC) has been actively involved 
in the development of electrical power system test beds to support of the overall design effort. Throughout this time, the SSFP 
Program has changed the design baseline numerous times, however, the test bed effort has endeavored to track these changes. 
Beginning in August 1989 with the baselining of an all DC System, a test bed was developed which supported this design baseline. 
However, about the time of the Test Bed’s Completion in December 1990, the SSFP was again going through another design scrub 
known as Restructure. This paper describes the LeRC PMAD DC Test Bed and highlights the changes that have taken place in the 
Test Bed configuration and design resulting from the SSFP Restructure Exercise in December 1990. These changes have principally 
included the reduction of primary power channel size with an accompanying reduction in the size of various power processing 
elements. In addition to the scrubbing of the channel size, a substantial reduction was made in the amount of flight software with the 
subsequent migration of these functions to ground control centers. The impact of these changes on the design of the power hardware, 
the controller algorithms and the control software along with a description of their current status is presented. An overview of the 
testing that has been conducted with the test bed during the last year is also highlighted. These tests include investigations of stability 
and source impedance, primary and secondary fault protection, and performance of a rotary utility transfer device. Finally, 
information is presented on the evolution of the test bed to support the verification and operational phases of the Space Station 
Freedom Program in light of these restructure scrubs. 


14. SUBJECT TERMS 

Space station power supplies; Test equipment 

15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

10 

16. PRICE CODE 

A02 

17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 

OF REPORT 

OF THIS PAGE 

OF ABSTRACT 


Unclassified 

Unclassified 

Unclassified 



NSN 7540-01-280-5500 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) 
Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-10 
298 102 













