August 1974 


NASA TECH BRIEF 

Langley Research Center 


B74-10091 




NASA Tech Briefs announce new technology derived from the U.S. space program. They are issued to encourage 
commercial application. Tech Briefs are available on a subscription basis from the National Technical Information 
Service, Springfield, Virginia 22151. Requests for individual copies or questions relating to the Tech Brief program may 
be directed to the Technology Utilization Office, NASA, Code KT, Washington, D.C. 20546. 


Prediction of Unsteady Aerodynamic Loadings Caused by Trailing-Edge 
Control-Surface Motions in Subsonic Compressible Flow 


The problem: 

It was necessary to develop a method for accurately 
determining the direct forces on lifting surfaces caused 
by the motions of trailing-edge control surfaces. 


The solution: 

A theoretical analysis and a corresponding computer 
program have been developed for the prediction of 
unsteady lifting-surface loadings caused by the motions 
of trailing-edge control surfaces having sealed gaps. 


How it’s done: 

The final form of the downwash integral equation has 
been formulated by isolating the singularities from the 
nonsingular terms and by establishing a preferred so- 
lution process to remove and evaluate the downwash 
discontinuities systematically. Comparisons of theoretical 
and experimental pressure data have been made for 
several control-surface configurations. The comparisons 
indicate that reasonably-accurate theoretical pressure 
distributions and generalized forces may be obtained 
for a wide variety of such configurations. 

The computer program developed is one of the few 
subsonic methods which determines direct surface load- 
ings, using pressure terms that correctly represent the 
known singularity functions around the boundaries of a 
wing with a control surface. The pressure distributions, 
when applied in the integral equation relating lifting 
pressure and downwash, produce the identical mathe- 
matical downwash discontinuities at wing and control- 
surface boundaries which are contained in the kinematic 
distribution. A preferred solution process is developed 
by subtracting the discontinuous mathematical down- 
wash distribution from the discontinuous kinematic 


distribution, resulting in a smooth downwash distri- 
bution for which standard lifting-surface solutions by 
downwash collocation can be applied. The resulting 
loadings are relatively insensitive to the locations and 
numbers of control points used in the analysis. 

The program is an extension of the analytical methods 
currently available, and it provides the numerical pre- 
diction of the unsteady loadings caused by control- 
surface motions. The following eight capabilities are 
available: 

1 . Wing leading and trailing edges can each be made up 
of from one to nine straight-line segments, with no 
segment offset chordwise. (Collocation points should 
not be located in any chordline passing through such 
breaks.) 

2. Up to four controls per half span. 

3. Deflection-mode data for up to 110 points on the 
half span are interpolated by a surface spline to up to 
72 downwash collocation points (on up to 9 span 
stations per half span and up to 8 points per span 
station) for up to 19 deflection modes. 

4. Parallel results can be obtained for two types of 
gust distribution: continuous sine-wave and oscillatory 
aircraft vertical translation. 

5. Spanwise symmetry and antisymmetry. 

6. Chordwise variation of V (free-stream velocity) in the 
downwash collocation value w/V (kinematic angle of 
attack or nondimensional normal wash) due to airfoil 
thickness distribution. 

7. Optional output of generalized forces, section general- 
ized forces, and chordwise distributions of pressure. 

8. Optional saving of input data and intermediate output 
data on tape files for economy of subsequent use. 



(continued overleaf) 


This document was prepared under the sponsorship of the National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration. Neither the United States 
Government nor any person acting on behalf of the United States 


Government assumes any liability resulting from the use of the 
information contained in this document, or warrants that such use 
will be free from privately owned rights. 



Notes: 

1. This program was written in FORTRAN IV (99%) 
and COMPASS (01%) for the CDC 6000-series 
computer. 

2. Inquiries concerning this program should be directed 
to: 

COSMIC 
112 Barrow Hall 
University of Georgia 
Athens, Georgia 30601 
Reference: LAR-11175 


Source: M. C. Redman, W. S. Rowe, and 
B. A. Winther of 
The Boeing Co. 
under contract to 
Langley Research Center 
(LAR-11175) 


B74-10091 


Category 09,03,06 



