A^"/^' 9<r- 2 o7168 /* ' ^ ' 



24 



ACCUMULATION OF DISSOLVED DMSP BY 
MARINE BACTERIA AND ITS 
DEGRADATION VIA BACTERIVORY 



Gordon V. Wolfe 

College of Oceanic and Atmospheric Sciences 
Oceanography Administration Bldg. 104 
Oregon State University 
Corvallis, Oregon 97331-5503 



SUMMARY 

Several bacterial isolates enriched from seawater using complex media were able to 
accumulate dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP) from media into cells over several hours 
without degrading it. Uptake only occurred in metabolically active cells, and was repressed 
in some strains by the presence of additional carbon sources. Accumulation was also more 
rapid in osmotically-stressed cells, suggesting DMSP is used as an osmotic solute. Uptake 
could be blocked by inhibitors of active transport systems (2,4-dinitrophenol, azide, arse- 
nate) and of protein synthesis (chloramphenicol). Some structural analogs such as glycine 
betaine and S-methyl methionine also blocked DMSP uptake, suggesting that the availability 
of alternate organic osmolytes may influence DMSP uptake. Stresses such as freezing, 
heating, or osmotic down shock resulted in partial release of DMSP back to the medium. 
One strain which contained a DMSP-lyase was also able to accumulate DMSP, and DMS 
was only produced in the absence of alternate carbon sources. Bacteria containing DMSP 
were prepared as prey for bacterivorous ciliates and flagellates, to examine the fate of the 
DMSP during grazing. In all cases, predators metabolized the DMSP in bacteria. In some 
cases, DMS was produced, but it is not clear if this was due to the predators or to associated 
bacteria in the non-axenic grazer cultures. Bacterivores may influence DMSP cycling by 
either modulating populations of DMSP-metabolizing bacteria, or by metabolizing DMSP 
accumulated by bacterial prey. 



INTRODUCTION 

Recent investigations have focused attention on the potential role of marine bacteria 
in the breakdown of phytoplankton-produced dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP) to di- 
methyl sulfide (DMS) and other products (8, 1 6, 1 7, 24, 25,38, 39). It is likely that bacteria 

Biological and Environmental Chemistry of DMSP and Related Sulfimium Compounds 

edited by Ronald P. Kiene et al. Plenum Press, New York, 1 996 277 



278 G. V. Wolfe 

are responsible for a substantial fraction of the DMS produced in the ocean. Since methy- 
lotrophic bacteria may also consume DMS in surface waters (18, 42), the balance between 
DMS production and removal, which affects DMS concentration, is strongly dependent on 
bacterial metabolism. 

Though not generally considered, other, indirect pathways for DMSP metabolism 
via bacterial uptake may exist. Much previous work has shown that many bacteria 
accumulate betaines and similar organic molecules from their environment for use as 
osmotic solutes (2, 4, 5, 13, 23, 30, 32, 33). Frequently, structurally-related compounds 
function equally well (1, 31), including DMSP and other sulfonium compounds (5), 
and further evidence suggests that DMSP added to growth media counteracts salt-stress 
in bacteria (8, 29). It is therefore possible that many marine bacteria may accumulate 
DMSP and other solutes from seawater without directly metabolizing them. However, 
this DMSP may still be metabolized by bacterivorous protists during grazing, as has 
been shown for herbivorous protists (43), thus representing an additional pathway for 
degradation of phytoplankton-derived DMSP. Predation may also influence the avail- 
ability of bacteria capable of scavenging and metabolizing DMSP and DMS, further 
mediating the abundance of those compounds. 

In this study, isolated marine heterotrophic bacterial strains, including one which 
produced DMS, were tested for their ability to accumulate DMSP from seawater. Bacteria 
which had accumulated DMSP were used as prey for bacterivorous ciliates and flagellates 
in order to examine the roles of bactervory in the cycling of this compound, and in the 
production of DMS. 



MATERIALS AND METHODS 

Media for Isolation of Bacteria 

Heterotrophic marine bacteria from phytoplankton cultures and Oregon coastal 
seawater (9- 1 2° C) were enriched and isolated by streaking on filtered-seawater agar ( 1 .5%) 
amended with 1% peptone, glucose, and 0.5% yeast extract. Cultures were incubated in the 
dark at room temperature and individual colonies were restreaked to purity. Bacteria were 
prepared for experiments by picking colonies from the plates, inoculating into 20-200 ml of 
similar liquid media, and incubating 1 -2 days on a shaker at 1 00 rpm. 

Selection of DMSP-Metabolizers 

Bacteria were isolated which either lysed or demethylated DMSP by taking 
advantage of the fact that the lysis reaction produces free acid (protons) and the 
demethylation reaction does not. Agar plates were prepared as follows: 1 liter of 
0.2-um filtered seawater was autoclaved with 15 g agar (Difco) and 10 mg bromthymol 
blue and then cooled to 60°C in a water bath. Two or 5 g (10 or 25 mM) DMSP-Br 
and 1.6 g Tris-OH (10 mM), were dissolved in 40 ml of cold, 0.2|im-filtered seawater 
and pH-adjusted as necessary to 7.6 with NaOH. This solution was sterile-filtered 
into the 60°C agar which was then poured immediately into sterile petri plates. Because 
DMSP showed thermal degradation to DMS and acrylate above 60°C, it was not 
autoclaved. Some plates were made with trace nutrients (0.01% glucose, peptone, and 
yeast extract) added as well to promote general heterotrophic growth or provide trace 
nutrients. 

Bromthymol blue, the pH indicator dye in these plates, is blue at pH 7.5, 
colorless at pH 6.5, and yellow at pH 6. Typically, colonies producing acid appear 



Accumulation of Dissolved DMSP 279 

green, since the yellow layer around the cells lies on top of a thicker layer of unmodified 
blue agar. DMSP-lysing colonies were easily detectable by this method, while other 
colonies (DMSP-demethylators or those growing on other trace carbon sources) ap- 
peared white or clear. DMS odor could be detected in all plates, including sterile, 
unstreaked controls, suggesting that some autolysis of DMSP occurred. This was a 
small fraction of the total and sterile plates did not shift color over several months 
or more; however, it did mask biological production of sulfur gases. Plates were 
streaked with various inocula and incubated at room temperature in the dark. 

Demonstration of DMSP Uptake by Bacteria 

Bacteria were either incubated 24-48 hours with lO-lOO^M dissolved DMSP 
during growth on complex substrates (peptone, glucose, yeast extract), or were cen- 
trifuged after growth, washed in filtered, autoclaved seawater (FASW), and resuspended 
in FASW with dissolved DMSP and incubated 4-24 hours at 100 rpm at room tem- 
perature. Typical bacterial densities were 1 7 - 1 8 ml" 1 . After incubation, bacteria were 
again centrifuged, and a subsample of the supernatent was assayed for remaining 
dissolved DMSP. The cells were then washed and resuspended in DMSP-free FASW, 
and a subsample assayed for accumulated DMSP. Samples were placed in 10-ml 
crimp-top vials, 2 ml ION NaOH was added by pipette and the vial was quickly 
capped with Teflon-lined septa. The bottles were incubated along with DMSP standards 
at room temperature for 2-24 hours and the DMS produced was sampled in 10-25^1 
headspace samples taken by gastight syringe. DMS was measured by GC-FPD detection. 

Bacterial uptake of DMSP was also measured by filtering cell solutions with 
GF/F or Millipore type HA 0.45um filters and measuring particulate DMSP retained 
on the filter. Samples were assayed as for centrifuged samples. Loss of cell DMSP 
was examined by similar methods after heating to 60, 80, or 100 "C for 2 hours, 
freezing, or other treatments. The effect of salinity changes on DMSP uptake was 
tested by growing cells in FASW, then centrifuging and resuspending them in FASW 
diluted with distilled water (hypotonic) or amended with 25 g liter" 1 sodium chloride 
(hypertonic), along with 10-100|iM dissolved DMSP. Release of DMSP due to salinity 
changes was measured by centrifuging DMSP-containing bacteria, then resuspending 
and incubating them in appropriate media. Salinity was measured by refractometer. 

Inhibitor studies. Inhibitors were prepared as 1 00 mM solutions in deionized water, 
except for chloramphenicol which was dissolved in ethanol, and then added to bacterial 
samples (strain 1030) at 1 mM final concentrations (final volume 2 ml). Ethanol was added 
to the no-inhibitor control as well to account for any solvent effect. 2,4dinitrophenol was 
dissolved by adding NaOH dropwise. Formalin used as a positive control was added directly 
to cultures to a final concentration of 3.7%. After adding inhibitors, samples were pre-incu- 
bated at room temperature in the dark with shaking for 0.5 hour, then DMSP was added to 
100(aM and the samples incubated overnight at room temperature in the dark with shaking. 
0.5-ml subsamples were removed at 0, 3, and 22.5 hours and centrifuged to remove cells. 
0.4 ml of the supernatent was assayed for remaining dissolved DMSP by headspace analysis. 

Ciliate and Flagellate Cultures 

Protists were enriched and cultured from seawater. Cultures were maintained on 
bacteria growing on sterilized wheat berries, or on bacterial strains heat-killed for 1 hr at 
80 °C. Cultures were grown in 0.25 or 0.5 L polycarbonate flasks in the dark. Prior to the 
experiments, the wheat berries were removed to allow the bacterivores to graze down their 



280 G. V. Wolfe 

prey as much as possible. The cultures were diluted into appropriate experimental samples 
with FASW and allowed to incubate overnight at 1 5°C before prey bacteria, DMSP, or other 
amendments were added. 

Bottle Incubations 

Protists and prey were incubated in 500- or 250-ml Nalgene polycarbonate flasks, 
filled completely to minimize headspace. Duplicate bottles of each treatment were prepared. 
Sampling during the experiments typically introduced headspace volumes less than 10% of 
the total bottle volume over several days. Bottles were handled gently to avoid aeration and 
were incubated in the dark at 15 °C. 

Cell Enumeration. Heterotrophic flagellate and bacterial prey cells were enumerated 
every 1 2-24 hours during incubations. 0.5-2 ml culture samples were preserved with alkaline 
Lugol's reagent (10(il ml 1 ) followed by sodium tetraborate-buffered formalin (3.7% final 
concentration). The Lugol's was bleached by the addition of 1 drop ml" 1 3% sodium 
thiosulfate (35). Samples were then stained with acridine orange (AO) or 4',6-diamidino-2- 
phenylindole (DAPI) and filtered onto black 0.2 or 0.8um membrane filters (Poretics, 
Livermore CA, #1 1053, 1 1021) immediately after preservation, and counted by epifluores- 
cence microscopy. Actively swimming ciliates were enumerated directly with a dissecting 
microscope (Wild M3Z, Leica, Inc.) in replicate l-20(il drops. Bacterial viability was 
determined during incubations by the Live/Dead® BacLight™ viability kit (Molecular 
Probes, Inc., #L-7007). 

Sulfur Analyses 

Sulfur analyses were made by GC using a Shimadzu GC- 1 4 chromatograph equipped 
with a flame photometric detector. The column packing was Chromosil 330 (Supelco, 
Bellefonte, PA), operated isothermally at 60 or 90°C. Helium was the carrier gas. Headspace 
samples (10-25ul) were collected by gastight syringe and injected onto the column (injector 
200°C) and were sampled in triplicate. Stock DMSP solutions were treated as other head- 
space samples for standards. For DMS analyses, 1- or 2-ml samples were sparged with He, 
cryotrapped in liquid nitrogen, and subsequently introduced onto the GC column with 
heating. For DMSP, a separate 1 -2 ml sample was filtered through a GF/F filter under gentle 
filtration, and the filter was placed in 10 N NaOH for at least 6 hours. A subsample of the 
NaOH was then sparged/cryotrapped for DMS produced from the alkaline hydrolysis of 
particulate DMSP. For dissolved DMSP, the filtrate was first sparged to remove DMS, and 
1 ml was then sparged with an equal volume of 10 N NaOH and cryotrapped as DMS. 
Minimum detection limit was approximately 100 pg S. For additional analytical details see 
(43). 

Chemicals. DMSPHC1 was obtained from Research Plus (Bayonne, NJ) and was 
prepared in concentrated solutions in water. Stocks were kept frozen until use, and after 
dilution into seawater the pH was checked to make sure samples were not acidified. Stocks 
for GC standards were further acidified with HC1 to prevent bacterial growth and stored at 
room temperature. DMSP-HBr (> 90% purity) used for isolation media was synthesized from 
DMS and 3-bromo-propionic acid (Aldrich) according to the method of Kondo (20) and was 
verified by melting point (1 12-1 13 °C) and NMR spectroscopy. Sources for inhibitors were: 
glycine betaine HC1, DL-S-methyl methionine, sodium azide, sodium arsenate, L-proline, 
and chloramphenicol, Sigma Chemicals; N,N-dimethyl glycine HC1, Aldrich Chemicals; 
2,4-dinitrophenol, Kodak Chemicals. 



Accumulation of Dissolved DMSP 



281 



RESULTS 

Marine Bacteria Accumulated Dissolved DMSP 

Five strains of marine heterotrophic bacteria were isolated on rich media. Four were 
gram-negative, and one (strain 0030) was gram-positive. All strains but 4030 readily took 
up most of the 10-100|aM dissolved DMSP from seawater (figure 1). In three strains the 
DMSP appeared to be stored inside cells rather than metabolized, and one accumulated 
DMSP with subsequent lysis to DMS (strain 001 0). Some cells appeared to increase DMSP 
uptake at higher salinity (figure 1 , strains 0030, 1010), suggesting an osmotic use, but others 
showed no such response (figure 1, strain 1030). 

One accumulator (strain 1030) and the lyser (strain 0010) were selected for more 
detailed studies. Uptake times typically ranged from minutes (figure 2) to hours (figure 4a). 
However, bacterial numbers or biomass were not constant between experiments, so rate 
comparisons are not meaningful. Uptake occurred both during growth on complex substrates, 
or following growth when washed cells were resuspended in seawater amended with 
10-100uM DMSP. Occasionally, bacteria appeared to take up DMSP more rapidly in the 
presence of other C compounds, but more typically strains accumulated DMSP more quickly 
in their absence. The additional carbon sources may have provided alternative osmolytes 
which competitively block uptake of DMSP (see below); this inhibition was overcome in 
many strains when bacteria were incubated in double-salinity seawater (data not shown). 
Uptake of 10-100^M dissolved DMSP resulted in internal cell concentrations of approxi- 
mately 10-100 mM, based on whole-cell volumes. 



.o 

a. 

s 

s 






■a 

0> 

■o 

T3 
M 

o 



100% 



80% 



« 60% 



40% " 



20% 



0% 




20 



30 



40 
salinity (psu) 



50 



60 



Figure 1. Example of cell uptake of dissolved DMSP. Dissolved DMSP was added to filtered, autoclaved 
seawater and assayed at time zero; bacterial culture (strain 0010) was added at 0.5 min (arrow). 



282 



G. V. Wolfe 




20 22 24 26 



time (min) 



Figure 2. Effect of salinity on accumulation of dissolved DMSP from seawater by marine bacteria. Bacteria 
were incubated with lO^M DMSP for 16 hr in either filtered, autoclaved seawater, seawater amended with 
NaCl, or seawater diluted with deionized water. 



50% 






0. 



c 



40% 



30% 



- 20% 

£3 



B 

•2 10% 
u 

« 

u 



0% 



seawater 
seawater + NaCl 




control formalin 



heat 



freeze upshock downshock 



Treatment 

Figure 3. Release of DMSP from bacteria following shock treatments, including poisons, heating, freezing, 
and osmotic downshock. More DMSP was released when cells were already osmotically stressed. Data are for 
strain 1030. 



Accumulation of Dissolved DMSP 283 

DMSP Uptake Could Be Blocked by Uptake Inhibitors and Other 
Osmolytes 

DMSP appeared to be taken up actively by cells. Formalin-treated bacteria did 
not take up DMSP from seawater and DMSP did not attach onto ion exchange resin 
particles such as Sephadex, so adsorption was probably not a factor. Cells heated 1-2 
hrs at 80 or 100"C showed no uptake, but cells heated to only 60 "C remained active 
(data not shown) and were capable of growth when plated onto rich media. Pre-in- 
cubating bacteria (strain 1030) with inhibitors of transport systems or protein synthesis 
generally prevented uptake (table 1 ). Some substrate analogs effectively blocked DMSP 
uptake (glycine betaine, S-methyl methionine) while other organic osmolytes had 
reduced (dimethyl glycine) or no (L-proline) effect . Staining cells with the BacLight™ 
viability kit showed that the glycine betaine was not lethal to cells, so uptake was 
presumably blocked by competition. 

DMSP could be stored inside cells for days without degradation, either in 
concentrated cell solutions or after cells were resuspended in seawater. In many in- 
stances, though, after resuspension and dilution of DMSP-containing cells, DMSP 
returned to the "dissolved" fraction over several days (see grazing results below). 
This may have been due to slight osmotic differences between the concentrated bacterial 
stock media and the seawater used for the grazing experiments, or possibly due to 
handling shock. Other stresses such freezing or heating cells resulted in release of 
DMSP to the media (figure 3). Poisons or osmotic down shock also resulted in release, 
while osmotic upshock did not. Greater release occurred in cells already stressed 
osmotically in seawater amended with NaCl (figure 3). 

A DMSP-Lysing Strain Also Accumulated DMSP Depending on 
External Conditions 

Strain 0010, able to cleave DMSP to form DMS, was able to accumulate and retain 
DMSP from solution as well. Uptake was greatest under conditions of osmotic stress (figure 
4a) and was partially repressed when other C substrates (peptone, yeast extract, glucose) 
were present. Production of DMS following uptake was greatest at higher salinities as well 
(figure 4b), but DMS production was completely suppressed when other carbon substrates 
were present. These observations suggest that some DMSP-lysing bacteria may also be able 
lo use DMSP as an osmolyte, and that cleavage to DMS and acrylate may depend on the 
presence of other carbon sources. 

Bacterivores Were Able to Utilize DMSP Accumulated in Their Prey 

When live, DMSP-containing bacteria were fed to a bacterivorous scuticociliate 
(Uronema sp.), bacterial cell numbers began to decline immediately due to grazing 
(figure 5b). After a 24-hr lag, ciliate numbers increased (figure 5a) and bacterial 
DMSP decreased (figure 6b). These results suggest that the grazers metabolized prey 
DMSP within 24 hr of ingestion. Ungrazed bacteria containing DMSP showed little 
decrease in cell number (figure 5b), but they did release DMSP to seawater (figure 
6a). However, in ungrazed bacteria, total DMSP was conserved and no DMS was 
produced (figure 6a). A small amount of DMS was produced in the grazed cultures, 
probably from bacterial associates of the scuticociliates, since scuticociliate cultures 
streaked onto DMSP agar plates gave positive results for lysers. No axenic ciliate 



284 



G. V. Wolfe 



(a) 



5 
a. 
Q 



100 



80 



60 



40 



20 . 




(b) 



6 
time (hr) 



12 



1/3 

s 

Q 




time (hr) 

Figure 4. Accumulation of DMSP by DMSP-cleaving bacterium (strain 0010), and dependence of DMS 
production on external conditions, (a): uptake of dissolved DMSP by strain 0010 was hastened when grown 
in 56 psu seawater compared to uptake in 32 psu seawater. Addition of other C sources (peptone, glucose, yeast 
extract) decreased uptake partially in all cases, but at higher salinities uptake still occurred, (b) production of 
DMS by 00 10 culture was completely suppressed by addition of other C sources and production was increased 
at higher salinities. Note different scales for two graphs. 



Accumulation of Dissolved DMSP 

(a) 



1000 r 



285 



800 



600 



400 



200 - 



(b) 



+ bacteria 
with DMSP 

+ bacteria 

without 

DMSP 




time (hr) 





>.U , 


i — 














— i ■■ 1 


1 no ciliates 


3 












© 


4.0 * 










X 






m ^ 












E 


3.0 


_ 








u 












V 












a. 












' — ■ 












.5 


2.0 


. 


•*■ ^ 




OJ 




















u 










as 










j: 


1.0 
n 






i . i 



24 



48 



72 



time (hr) 



Figure 5. Grazing by scuticociliate on bacterial strain 1030 prc-incubated with DMSP ( • ) or without DMSP 
( O ). (a): ciliate numbers vs. time; ( A ) are ciliates without added prey, (b): bacterial numbers vs. time; (■ ) 
is strain 1030 with DMSP ("1030+") but no ciliates. 



cultures were available to test whether the DMSP lysis might in fact be due to ciliates 
themselves. 

Similar results were also obtained in grazing experiments with a flagellate (Cafeteria 
sp., data not shown). Once again, although ungrazed bacteria released DMSP, total DMSP 
was conserved, as were bacterial numbers, while in the grazed samples both decreased. In 
this case, though, a fraction of DMSP was converted to DMS in both grazed and ungrazed 
samples. 

With both predators, bacteria which contained up to 100 mM internal DMSP were 
not grazed any faster than those without, nor did grazer appearance or the increase in grazer 
number vary with prey DMSP, suggesting that even high internal DMSP pools in bacterial 
prey made little nutritional difference to predators. 



286 



C. V. Wolfe 



DISCUSSION 

Accumulation of Dissolved DMSP by Marine Bacteria 

Bacteria are recognized to play a role in the cycling of phytoplankton-derived DMSP 
in marine systems. Most work on bacterial pathways for DMSP has focused on those which 
metabolize it as a carbon source, either by lysis to DMS and acrylate or by demethylation to 
3-methiol propionate (8, 16, 17, 24, 25, 38-40). Bacteria which could contribute to these 
pathways may be significant (10%) fraction of the total bacterial population in some marine 
surface waters (39), and several strains have been isolated. 

However, bacteria may also take up dissolved DMSP without metabolizing it, and 
this process has not been emphasized in studies of DMSP cycling in marine surface waters, 
despite the fact that much work has documented bacterial uptake of other osmotic solutes 
such as choline and glycine betaine (1, 4, 5, 22, 30-32). De novo synthesis of betaine is rare 



ungrazed 




DMSPp 




Figure 6. Sulfur pools for scuticociliate grazing on bacterial strain 1 030 pre-incubated with DMSP. Symbols: 
(■ ) DMSPp; (O ) DMSPd; (• ): DMS. (a) Bacteria without grazers. DMSPp in the bacteria leaked out over 
3 days to the dissolved pool but no DMS was formed, and there was no net loss of DMSP. (b) Bacteria with 
grazers. No dissolved DMSP appears but bacterial DMSP disappears as bacteria are grazed. 



Accumulation of Dissolved DMSP 287 

in eubacteria and seems limited to moderately or extremely halophilic eubacteria, especially 
phototrophs (41). More slightly halophilic eubacteria either accumulate betaine from their 
environment or produce it from externally-acquired choline (2, 12). Many eubacteria, 
particularly those in the Enterobacteriacae, accumulate these solutes but do not utilize them 
as carbon sources, while others such as Rhizobium can both accumulate and metabolize these 
solutes, depending on both salinity stress and nutrient needs (36). The non-metabolizers may 
also actively export these solutes to maintain osmotic balance (21, 37). In addition to the 
quaternary amines, enteric bacteria have been shown to accumulate DMSP and related 
sulfonium compounds (5, 3 1 ), and this study suggests that many marine bacteria may do so 
as well. Only one previous study (8) demonstrated that a marine bacterium could accumulate 
DMSP at high salinities, although that work focused on the ability of that strain to degrade 
DMSP at normal seawater salinities. 

The majority of bacterial strains in this study appeared to take upuM DMSP from 
seawater over a range of salinities (figures lb, 4a). Uptake rates varied among strains, and 
were influenced by environmental conditions such as the availability of alternate carbon 
substrates. In all cases, though, uptake appeared to be the result of active metabolism. Heat- 
or formalin-killed cells did not take up DMSP, and inhibitors of transport systems such as 
2,4-dinitrophenol, azide, or arsenate prevented uptake (table 1). 

DMSP was accumulated to mM internal concentrations, based on whole-cell volume 
calculations. However, it is possible that DMSP is stored in the cell periplasm or other 
sub-volume. Stresses such as freezing, heating, osmotic down shock, or poisoning all 
resulted in partial release of DMSP to the medium (figure 3), and frequently, dilution of 
concentrated cultures into seawater resulted in slow leakage of DMSP out of cells (figure 
6a). This may have been due to handling stress during dilution. However, strain 1030, which 
was used for most of the grazing experiments, was shown by fatty acid MIDI analysis to be 
an enteric, corresponding most closely to Enterobacter agglomerans (R. Herwig, personal 
communication). This strain did not appear to metabolize DMSP. Since export pumps for 
osmotic solutes such as glycine betaine are well known for enterics which do not further 
catabolize it as a carbon source (21, 37), the release of DMSP by this strain may also have 
been an osmoregulatory effect. 

Most of the strains appeared to retain DMSP without metabolism, but one DMSP- 
lysing strain (0010) also accumulated DMSP from the medium (figure 4a). Although the 
presence of other carbon sources slowed DMSP uptake, it did not prevent it. However, the 
production of DMS by this strain was completely blocked when other carbon sources were 



Table 1. Effect of inhibitors ( 1 mM) on accumulation of 100:M DMSP by strain 1030 



Metabolic type 


Compound 


% Inhibition ' 




Controls 


none (- control) 
formalin (+ control) 



100 




Uptake system poisons 


dinitrophenol 
sodium azide 


100 
100 






sodium arsenate 


81 




Protein synthesis inhibitor 
Substrate analogs 

Other osmolytcs 


chloramphenicol 

Glycine betaine 

S-methyl methionine 

dimethyl glycine 

L-proline 


100 

99 

86 

67 

n.s. 2 





percent reduction in regression slope of DMSP uptake over time relative to 
no-inhibitor control 
' not significantly different than no-inhibitor control 



288 



G. V. Wolfe 



available, suggesting a possible dual-role of DMSP as both an osmotic solute and a carbon 
source. This is similar to the use of glycine betaine by Rhizobium (36) which can exploit it 
for either purpose, depending on environmental conditions. 

These observations suggest that the role of marine bacteria in the cycling of 
phytoplankton-derived DMSP may be greater than previously suspected, since it is 
not limited only to those which can utilize DMSP as a carbon source. Furthermore, 
although lysis of DMSP is usually quite specific to that compound (7, 31), uptake of 
DMSP for use as an osmotic solute may be less tightly controlled, and may be influenced 
by the relative availability of DMSP and other organic solutes which can compete for 
uptake system proteins. Such competition has been demonstrated for glycine betaine 
and DMSP (1,5, 8), and other solutes present in seawater may also influence DMSP 
uptake. In this study, both glycine betaine and S-methyl methionine blocked DMSP 
uptake in strain 1030, while other solutes (L-proline, dimethyl glycine) did not. Glycine 
betaine has recently been used to inhibit bacterial DMSP lysis in seawater (19), and 
it is possible that this effect is due to competition for bacterial uptake systems rather 
than for the DMSP-lyase itself. The presence of yeast extract, known to be a rich 
source of glycine betaine (12), along with other carbon sources appeared to decrease 
uptake of DMSP by most strains, although this effect could be reduced when additional 
salt stress was imposed (data not shown). 

Fate of Bacterial DMSP during Grazing by Microzooplankton 

Although bacterial metabolism is probably a major sink for phytoplankton-derived 
DMSP, bacteria which accumulate DMSP without metabolizing it may also lead to its 
removal indirectly, during grazing by bacterivores. Similar to results with herbivorous 
flagellates (43), the passage of DMSP across trophic levels results in its degradation by 
bacterial grazers, including both ciliates and flagellates (figure 6). It is not yet clear whether 
the protists themselves are able to produce DMS from prey DMSP. Although DMS was 
produced in some grazing experiments, it may have been the result of other bacteria 
associated with the grazer cultures utilizing dissolved DMSP released from the test prey, 
since the grazer cultures tested positive for DMSP-lysing bacterial strains. 

Because DMSP and other osmotic solutes accumulate to high internal concentrations 
inside prey, it is possible that they may influence the nutritional quality of prey to predators. 
DMSP and betaine have been shown to function as methyl donors in plants (3), flagellates 
(15), fish and birds (28), and mammalian cells (9, 27, 28). Whether bacterivores can utilize 
DMSP as a methyl donor is not clear, but at least some appear to metabolize it without 
significant production of DMS, consistent with this function. It is therefore possible that 
prey containing large concentrations of these compounds might be nutritionally advanta- 
geous for predators. However, neither ciliates nor flagellates grazing on bacteria which 
contained up to 100 mM internal DMSP showed any increase in feeding or growth rates 
compared to those grazing on bacteria containing no DMSP (data not shown). It is unlikely 
therefore that DMSP confers any nutritional advantage to predators, especially in natural 
waters, where prey are less abundant and more heterogeneous. It is possible that uptake of 
organic solutes such as DMSP effects other changes in bacterial physiology (e.g. size, 
motility) which in turn influences their desirability as prey for bacterivores. 

Implications for DMSP Cycling in Marine Surface Waters 

There are two separate mechanisms by which DMSP accumulates in marine micro- 
organisms: (a) by biosynthesis, which to date has been shown only for phytoplankton and 
for one heterotrophic dinoflagellate (14); and (b) by uptake of dissolved DMSP for use as 



Accumulation of Dissolved DMSP 289 

osmotic solutes, without degradation. A third pool of accumulated DMSP resides in meso- 
and macroorganisms from DMSP ingested in the diet (see for example Iida (11), Levasseur 
(26), and Dacey (6) and references therein). Although the latter has received notice because 
it can lead to odor problems in commercial fish and shellfish, it is likely insignificant 
compared to the pool of DMSP in microorganisms. Similar accumulation in microzooplank- 
tonic herbivores and bactenvores may also occur, although cultures examined to date appear 
to metabolize the DMSP rapidly (43). 

Despite the evidence shown here that the bacterial uptake mechanism may occur, it is 
not at all obvious that it plays an important role in DMSP cycling in natural systems. In 
particular, there are three questions which need to be addressed: (I) Could DMSP accumulated 
in bacteria be a significant fraction of total DMSP? (ii) Does accumulation occur in natural 
waters where bacterial concentrations and DMSP concentrations are low? (iii) Could grazing 
of DMSP-containing bacteria be a major loss pathway for phytoplankton-derived DMSP? 

It is not clear whether a significant fraction of the "dissolved" or "particulate" DMSP 
measured in natural seawater might actually be DMSP stored in bacteria. Although the bacteria in 
this study were retained on GF/F filters, they were also extremely large cells, compared to typical 
marine bacteria. It is quite likely that some marine bacteria may pass through GF/F filters (nominal 
size retention 0.8um). However, these probably do not contribute significantly to the "dissolved" 
DMSP pool. For example, if 10% of the typical 10 6 bacteria ml" 1 contained 1 00 mM DMSP, and 
all these were spheres of diameter 0.8um and could pass through a GF/F filter, they would 
contribute about 2.7 nM DMSP to the "dissolved" pool. Since "dissolved" DMSP concentrations 
are frequently 10 nM or greater, this seems a small contribution, especially given the generous 
assumptions. Furthermore, filtration with 0.2um-pore filters and tests with dialysis membranes 
have shown that there really is a pool of dissolved DMSP, at least in some waters (R.P. Kiene, 
personal communication). Clearly, larger bacteria, as well as those attached to surfaces, will 
contribute to the particulate DMSP pool. But because particulate DMSP concentrations are 
usually greater than for dissolved DMSP, similar calculations show the bacterial contribution is 
again likely to be minor. However, it is still possible that in certain environments, bacterial DMSP 
may contribute significantly to either DMSP pool. 

Does bacterial accumulation of DMSP occur at the low dissolved DMSP concentra- 
tions (typically well below 0. 1 U.M) which occur in most marine environments? Accumulating 
DMSP against enormous concentration gradients from very dilute solutions is metabolically 
expensive. Furthermore, other solutes may be more abundant than DMSP in seawater and 
may compete with DMSP for cell receptor sites. Glycine betaine blocked accumulation of 
DMSP by some of the bacteria in this study (table 1 ), and betaine appears to block metabolism 
of dissolved DMSP by natural microbial assemblages ( 1 9), possibly by preventing its uptake 
into the cells. Betaine and choline probably occur in marine waters and sediments in 
concentrations similar to dissolved DMSP (34). Therefore, it is possible that accumulation 
of DMSP by marine bacteria may not occur to the degree indicated by these bottle 
experiments where both DMSP and bacterial concentrations were artificially elevated. 

Whether the bactivory pathway is an important sink for phytoplankton-derived 
DMSP in natural environments is difficult to evaluate. The great majority of marine bacteria 
do not appear to be metabolically active, based on selective staining techniques which 
measure respiratory activity (44) or DNA(45). Because DMSP uptake requires metabolically 
active cells, it is therefore likely that only a small fraction of marine bacteria may accumulate 
DMSP, even though many genera may be able to take up this compound. This seems to imply 
that if bacterivores utilize random selection of their prey, their chance of ingesting and 
degrading DMSP inside bacteria would be low. However, there is good evidence that some 
bacterivores do preferentially graze metabolically-active bacteria ( 1 0), raising the possibility 
that DMSP-containing bacteria might be preferentially selected, especially if DMSP confers 
any increase in size or motility to cells. It is also not yet clear whether many bacterivorous 



290 G. V. Wolfe 

ciliates and flagellates can metabolize DMSP in their prey, or whether they may produce 
DMS from this DMSP. 

Clearly, the experiments reported here, using high DMSP concentrations, high 
bacterial and bacterivore populations, and long incubation periods, present only the possi- 
bility that bacterial accumulation of DMSP and its subsequent degradation by bacterivores 
may be important in natural waters. Further work is needed to assess the importance of this 
mechanism on the removal of phytoplankton-produced DMSP in natural waters. 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This work was supported by NASA grant # NAGW-3737. Lynne Fessenden isolated 
protist cultures. Russell Herwig performed the fatty acid MIDI analysis. I thank Barry and 
Evelyn Sherr for discussions, and Ron Kiene for helpful comments and for sharing an 
unpublished manuscript. 



REFERENCES 

1. Abdel-Ghany, Y. S., M. A. Ihnat, D. D. Miller, C. M. Kunin and H. H. Tong. 1993. Structure-activity 
relationship of glycine betaine analogs on osmotolerance of enteric bacteria. J. Med. Chem. 36: 784-489. 

2. Boch, J., B. Kempf and E. Bremer. 1994. Osmoregulation in Bacillus subtilis: synthesis of the osmopro- 
tectant glycine betaine from exogenously provided choline. J. Bact. 176: 5364-5371. 

3. Byerrum. R. U.,C. S.Sato and C. D. Ball. 1956. Utilization of betaine as a methyl group donor in tobacco. 
Plant Physiol. 31: 374-377. 

4. Chambers. S. and C. M. Kunin. 1985. The osmoprotective properties of urine for bacteria: the protective 
effect of betaine and human urine against low pH and high concentrations of electrolytes, sugars, and 
urea. J. Infect. Dis. 152: 1308-1316. 

5. Chambers, S. T., C. M. Kunm, D. Miller and A. Hamada. 1987. Dimcthylthetin can substitute for glycine 
betaine as an osmoprotectant molecule for Escherichia coli. J. Bact. 169: 4845-4847. 

6. Dacey, J. W. H., G. M. King and P. S. Lobel. 1994. Herbivory by reef fishes and the production of 
dimefhylsulfide and acrylic acid. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 112: 67-74. 

7. de Souza, M. P. and D. C. Yoch. 1995. Purification and characterization of dimethylsulfoniopropionate 
lyase from an Alcaligenes-Mke dimethyl sulfide producing marine isolate. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 61: 
21-26. 

8. Diaz, M. R., P. T. Visscherand B. F. Taylor. 1992. Metabolism of dimethylsulfoniopropionate and glycine 
betaine by a marine bacterium. FEMS Micro. Lett. 96: 61-66. 

9. du Vigneaud, V, A. W. Moyer and J. P. Chandler. 1948. Dimethylthetin as a biological methyl donor. J. 
Biol. Chem. 774:477-480. 

10. Gonzalez, J. M., E. B. Sherr and B. F. Sherr. 1993. Differential feeding by marine flagellates on growing 
versus starving, and on motile versus nonmotile, bacterial prey. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 102: 257-267. 

1 1 . Iida, H., K. Nakamura and T. Tokunaga. 1985. Dimethyl sulfide and dimethyl-p-propiofhetin in shellfish. 
Bull. Jap. Soc. Sci. Fish. 51: 1145-1 150. 

12. Imhoff, J. F. 1986. Osmoregulation and compatible solutes in eubacteria. FEMS Micro. Rev. 39: 57-66. 

13. Imhoff, J. F. and F. Rodriguez- Valera. 1984. Betaine is the main compatible solute of halophilic eubacteria. 
J. Bact. 160: 478-479. 

14. Ishida, Y. and H. Kadota. 1967. Isolation and identification of dimethyl-p-propiothetin from Gyrodinium 
cohnii. Agr. Biol. Chem. 31: 765-767. 

15. Ishida, Y. and H. Kadota. 1968. Participation of dimethyl-p-propiothetin in transmethylation reaction in 
Gyrodinium cohnii. Bull. Jap. Soc. Sci. Fish. 34: 699-705. 

1 6. Kiene, R. P. 1990. Dimethyl sulfide production from dimethylsulfoniopropionate in coastal seawater and 
bacterial cultures. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 56: 3292-3297. 

17. Kiene, R. P. 1992. Dynamics of dimethyl sulfide and dimethylsulfoniopropionate in oceanic water 
samples. Mar. Chem. 37: 29-52. 

18. Kiene, R. P. and T. S. Bates. 1990. Biological removal of dimethyl sulfide from seawater. Nature 345: 
702-705. 



Accumulation of Dissolved DMSP 291 

19. Kicne. R. P. and G. Gerard. 1995. Evaluation of glycine betaineas an inhibitor of dissolved dimethylsul- 
foniopropionate degradation in marine waters. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Scr. 128: 121-131. 

20. Rondo, H. and M. Ishimoto. 1987. Thetin. Mcth. Enzymol. 143: 227. 

21. Koo. S.-P, C. F. Higgins and I. R. Booth. 1991. Regulation of compatible solute accumulation in 
Salmonella typhimurium: evidence for a glycine betaine efflux system. J. Gen. Micro. 137: 2617-2625. 

22. Lamark, T., O. B. Styrvold and A. R. Strom. 1992. Efflux of choline and glycine betaine from osmorcgu- 
lating cells of Escherichia coti. FEMS Micro. Lett. 96: 149-154. 

23. Le Rudulier. D. and B. Perroud. 1983. Glycine betaine, an osmotic effector in Klebsiella pneumoniae and 
other members of the Enterobacteriaceae. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 46: 152-159. 

24. Ledyard, K. M. and J. W. H. Dacey. 1994. Dimethylsulfidc production from dimethylsulfoniopropionate 
by a marine bacterium. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 110: 95-103. 

25. Ledyard, K. M., E. F. DeLong and J. W. H. Dacey. 1993. Characterization of a DMSP-degrading bacterial 
isolate from the Sargasso Sea. Arch. Microbiol. 160: 312-318. 

26. Levasseur, M., M. D. Keller, E. Bonneau. D. D'Amours and W. K. Bellows. 1994. Oceanographic basis 
of a DMS-related Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) fishery problem: blackberry feed. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. 
Sci. 51: 881-889. 

27. Maw. G. A. and V. du Vigneaud. 1948. Dimethyl-p-propiothetin, a new methyl donor. J. Biol. Chem. 174: 
381-382. 

28. Nakajima, K. 1993. Dimethylthetin- and betaine-homocystcine methyltransferase activities from livers 
offish, chicken, and mammals. Nippon Suisan Gakkaishi 59: 1389-1393. 

29. Paquet, L.. B. Rathinasabapathi, H. Saini, L. Zamir. D. A. Gage, Z.-H. Huang and A. D. Hanson. 1994. 
Accumulation of the compatible solute 3-dimethylsulfoniopropionate in sugarcane and its relatives, but 
not other gramineous crops. Aust. J. Plant Physiol. 21: 37-48. 

30. Patchett. R. A.. A. F. Kelly and R. G. Kroll. 1 994. Transport of glycine-betaine by Listeria monocytogenes. 
Arch. Microbiol. 162: 205-210. 

31. Peddie. B. A., M. Lever. C. M. Hayman. K. Randall and S. T. Chambers. 1994. Relationship between 
osmoprotection and the structure and intracellular accumulation of betaines by Escherichia coli. FEMS 
Micro. Lett. 120: 125-132. 

32. Perroud, B. and D. Lc Rudulier. 1985. Glycine betaine transport in Escherichia coli: osmotic modulation. 
J. Bact. 161: 393-401. 

33. Pocard,.l.-A..T. Bernard, L. T. Smith and D. Lc Rudulier. 1989. Characterization of three choline transport 
activities in Rluzobium meliloti: modulation by choline and osmotic stress. J. Bact. 171: 53 1-537. 

34. Roulier. M. A.. B. Palenik and F. M. M. Morel. 1990. A method for the measurement of choline and 
hydrogen peroxide in seawater. Mar. Chem. 30: 409-421. 

35. Sherr, E. B. and B. F. Shcrr. 1993. Preservation and storage of samples for enumeration of heterotrophic 
protists. In P. F. Kemp, B. F. Sherr, E. B. Sherr and i. ). Cole (ed.). Handbook of Methods in Aquatic 
Microbial Ecology. Pp. 207-212. Lewis Publishers. Boca Raton. 

36. Smith, L. T.. J. -A. Pocard, T. Bernard and D. Le Rudulier. 1988. Osmotic control of glycine betaine 
biosynthesis and degradation in Rhizobium meliloti. J. Bact. 170: 3142-3149. 

37. Snipes, W., A. Keith and P. Wanda. 1974. Active transport of choline by a marine pseudomonad. J. Bact. 
120: 197-202. 

38. Taylor, B. F. and D. C. Gilchrist. 1991. New routes for aerobic biodegradation of dimethylsulfonio- 
propionate. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 57: 3581-3584. 

39. Visscher, P. T.. M. R. Diaz and B. F. Taylor. 1993. Enumeration of bacteria which cleave or demethylate 
dimethylsulfoniopropionate in the Caribbean Sea. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 89: 293-296. 

40. Visscher, P. T. and B. F. Taylor. 1994. Demethylation of dimethylsulfoniopropionate to 3-mercapto- 
propionate by an aerobic marine bacterium. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 60: 4617-4619. 

41. Welsh. D. T. and R. A. Herbert. 1993. Identification of organic solutes accumulated by purple and green 
sulphur bacteria during osmotic stress using natural abundance l3 C nuclear magnetic resonance spectros- 
copy. FEMS Micro. Ecol. 13: 145-150. 

42. Wolfe. G. V. and R. P. Kienc. 1 993. Radioisotope and chemical inhibitor measurements of dimethyl sulfide 
consumption rates and kinetics in estuarine waters. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 99: 261-269. 

43. Wolfe, G. V, E B. Sherr and B. S. Sherr. 1994. Release and consumption of DMSP from Emiliania huxleyi 
during grazing by Oxyrrhis marina. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. ///: 111-1 19. 

44. Zimmcrmann. R., R. Iturriaga and J. Becker-Birck. 1978. Simultaneous determination of the total 
number of aquatic bacteria and the number thereof involved in respiration. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 36: 
925-935. 

45. Zweifel, U. L. and C. Hagstram. 1995. Total counts of marine bacteria include a large fraction of 
non-nucleoid-containing bacteria (ghosts). Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 61: 2180-2185. 



