cation of the user interface have all re- 
duced the required workforce to run 
70-meter antennas. The ALC also in- 
creases the antenna availability by re- 
ducing the time required to start up 
the antenna, to diagnose faults, and by 
providing additional insight into the 
performance of key parameters that 
aid in preventive maintenance to avoid 
key element failure. 

The ALC User Display (AUD) is a 
graphical user interface with hierarchi- 


cal display structure, which provides 
high-level status information to the op- 
eration of the ALC, as well as detailed in- 
formation for virtually all aspects of the 
ALC via drill-down displays. The opera- 
tional status of an item, be it a function 
or assembly, is shown in the higher-level 
display. By pressing the item on the dis- 
play screen, a new screen opens to show 
more detail of the function/assembly. 
Navigation tools and the map button 
allow immediate access to all screens. 


This program was written by Harlow 
Ahlstrom, Scott Morgan, Peter Hames, 
Martha Strain, Christopher Owen, and Ken- 
neth Shimizu of Caltech; Karen Wilson, 
David Shatter, and Said Doktormomtaz of 
Modern Technologies Corp.; and Patrick 
Leung of Northrop Grumman Corp. for 
NASA’s fet Propulsion Laboratory. 

This software is available, for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-44341. ' 


© Modeling Carbon and Hydrocarbon Molecular Structures in 
EZTB 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


A software module that models the 
electronic and mechanical aspects of 
hydrocarbon molecules and carbon 
molecular structures on the basis of 
first principles has been written for in- 
corporation into, and execution within, 
the Easy (Modular) Tight-Binding 
(EZTB) software infrastructure, which 
is summarized briefly in the immedi- 
ately preceding article. Of particular in- 
terest, this module can model carbon 
crystals and nanotubes characterized by 


various coordinates and containing de- 
fects, without need to adjust parame- 
ters of the physical model. 

The module has been used to study 
the changes in electronic properties of 
carbon nanotubes, caused by bending 
of the nanotubes, for potential utility 
as the basis of a nonvolatile, electric- 
charge-free memory devices. For exam- 
ple, in one application of the module, 
it was found that an initially 50-nm- 
long carbon, (10, 10) -chirality nan- 


otube, which is a metallic conductor 
when straight, becomes a semiconduc- 
tor with an energy gap of =3 meV when 
bent to a lateral displacement of 4 nm 
at the middle. 

This program was written by Seungwon 
Lee and Paul von Allmen of Caltech for 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds 
of the. California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-44781. 


© BigView Image Viewing on Tiled Displays 

Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California 


BigView allows for interactive panning 
and zooming of images of arbitrary size on 
desktop PCs running Linux. Additionally, it 
can work in a multi-screen environment 
where multiple PCs cooperate to view a sin- 
gle, large image. Using this software, one 
can explore — on relatively modest ma- 
chines — images such as the Mai's Orbiter 
Camera mosaic [92,160x33,280 pixels]. 


The images must be first converted 
into “paged” format, where the image 
is stored in 256x256 “pages” to allow 
rapid movement of pixels into texture 
memory. The format contains an 
“image pyramid”: a set of scaled ver- 
sions of the original image. Each 
scaled image is 1/2 the size of the pre- 
vious, starting with the original down 


to the smallest, which fits into a single 
256x256 page. 

This program was written by Timothy 
Sandstrom of Advanced Management 
Technology for Ames Research Center. For 
further information, access http:// 
opensource.arc.nasa.gov/ or contact the 
Ames Technology Partnerships Division at 
(650) 604-2954. ARC-15277-1 


© Imaging Sensor Flight and Test Equipment Software 

Marshall Space Flight Center, Alabama 


The Lightning Imaging Sensor (LIS) 
is one of the components onboard the 
Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission 
(TRMM) satellite, and was designed to 
detect and locate lightning over the 
tropics. The LIS flight code was devel- 


oped to run on a single onboard digital 
signal processor, and has operated the 
LIS instrument since 1997 when the 
TRMM satellite was launched. 

The software provides controller 
functions to the LIS Real-Time Event 


Processor (RTEP) and onboard 
heaters, collects the lightning event 
data from the RTEP, compresses and 
formats the data for downlink to the 
satellite, collects housekeeping data 
and formats the data for downlink to 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2007 


49 


the satellite, provides command pro- 
cessing and interface to the spacecraft 
communications and data bus, and 
provides watchdog functions for error 
detection. 

The Special Test Equipment (STE) 
software was designed to operate specific 
test equipment used to support the LIS 
hardware through development, calibra- 
tion, qualification, and integration with 
the TRMM spacecraft. The STE software 
provides the capability to control instru- 
ment activation, commanding (includ- 
ing both data formatting and user inter- 
facing) , data collection, decompression, 


and display and image simulation. 

The LIS STE code was developed for 
the DOS operating system in the C pro- 
gramming language. Because of the 
many unique data formats imple- 
mented by the flight instrument, the 
STE software was required to compre- 
hend the same formats, and translate 
them for the test operator. The hard- 
ware interfaces to the LIS instrument 
using both commercial and custom 
computer boards, requiring that the 
STE code integrate this variety into a 
working system. In addition, the re- 
quirement to provide RTEP test capa- 


bility dictated the need to provide sim- 
ulations of background image data with 
short-duration lightning transients su- 
perimposed. This led to the develop- 
ment of unique code used to control 
the location, intensity, and variation 
above background for simulated light- 
ning strikes at user-selected locations. 

This program was written by Kathleen Free- 
stone, Louis Simeone, Byran Robertson, 
Maytha Frankford, David Trice, Kevin Wal- 
lace, and DeLisa Wilkerson of Marshall 
Space Flight Center. Further information is 
contained in a TSP ( see page 1 ). AiFS- 
32339-1 


® Processing AIRS Scientific Data Through Level 2 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


The Atmospheric Infrared Spectro- 
meter (AIRS) Science Processing System 
(SPS) is a collection of computer pro- 
grams, denoted product generation ex- 
ecutives (PGEs) , for processing the read- 
ings of the AIRS suite of infrared and 
microwave instruments orbiting the 
Earth aboard NASA’s Aqua spacecraft. 
AIRS SPS at an earlier stage of develop- 
ment was described in “Initial Process- 
ing of Infrared Spectral Data” (NPO- 
35243), NASA Tech Briefs, Vol. 28, No. 11 
(November 2004), page 39. To recapitu- 
late: Starting from level 0 (representing 
raw AIRS data) , the PGEs and their data 
products are denoted by alphanumeric 
labels (1A, IB, and 2) that signify the 


successive stages of processing. The 
cited prior article described processing 
through level IB (the level-2 PGEs were 
not yet operational) . 

The level-2 PGEs, which are now oper- 
ational, receive packages of level-1 B ge- 
olocated radiance data products and 
produce such geolocated geophysical at- 
mospheric data products such as tem- 
perature and humidity profiles. The 
process of computing these geophysical 
data products is denoted “retrieval” and 
is quite complex. The main steps of the 
process are denoted microwave-only re- 
trieval, cloud detection and cloud clear- 
ing, regression, full retrieval, and rapid 
transmittance algorithm. 


This program was written by Robert 
Oliphant, Sung-Yung Lee, Moustafa 
Chahine of Caltech; Joel Susskind of God- 
dard Space Flight Center; Christopher Bar- 
net, Larry McMillin, and Mitchell Gold- 
berg of the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration; John Blais- 
dell of Science Applications International 
Corp; Philip Rosenkranz of Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology ; and Larrabee 
Strow of the University of Maryland, Balti- 
more County, for NASA’s Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory. 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds 
of the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-40459. 


Triaxial Probe Magnetic Data Analysis 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


The Triaxial Magnetic Moment Analy- 
sis software uses measured magnetic 
field test data to compute dipole and 
quadrupole moment information from 
a hardware element. It is used to support 
JPL projects needing magnetic control 
and an understanding of the spacecraft- 
generated magnetic fields. 

Evaluation of the magnetic moment 
of an object consists of three steps: ac- 
quisition, conditioning, and analysis. 
This version of existing softward was ex- 
tensively rewritten for easier data acqui- 
sition, data analysis, and report presenta- 
tion, including immediate feedback to 
the test operator during data acquisi- 


tion. 

While prior JPL computer codes pro- 
vided the same data content, this program 
has a better graphic display including 
original data overlaid with reconstructed 
results to show “goodness of fit” accuracy 
and better appearance of the report 
graphic page. Data are acquired using 
three magnetometers and two rotations of 
the device under test. A clean acquisition 
user interface presents required numeric 
data and graphic summaries, and the 
analysis module yields the best fit (least 
squares) for the magnetic dipole and/or 
quadrupole moment of a device. 

The acquisition module allows the user 


to record multiple data sets, selecting the 
best data to analyze, and is repeated three 
times for each of the z-axial and y-axial ro- 
tations. In this update, the y-axial rotation 
starting position has been changed to an 
option, allowing either the x- or z-axis to 
point towards the magnetometer. The 
code has been rewritten to use three si- 
multaneous axes of magnetic data (three 
probes) , now using two “rotations” of the 
device under test rather than the previ- 
ous three rotations, thus reducing han- 
dling activities on the device under test. 
The present version of the software gath- 
ers data in one-degree increments, which 
permits much better accuracy of the fit- 


50 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2007 


