HDVIS/StarDot Thu Sep 16 17:31:33 2010 Flight GRIF_5 
Exposure: 8 MAC QQ3QF4-D 1 127B 
Frame number 189802 
Internal T emperature 8,5°C 


The Waypoint Planning Tool: 

Real Time Flight Planning for Airborne Science 

Yubin He 1 , Richard B lakes lee 2 , Michael Goodman 2 , John Flail 1 

’University of Alabama in Huntsville7NASA Marshall Space Flight Center 


ABSTRACT 

Airborne real time observations are a major component of NASA's Earth Science research and satellite ground validation studies* For mission sdentists, planning a 
research aircraft mission within the context of meeting the science objectives is acomplextask because rt requires teal time situational awareness, of the weather conditions that 
affect theaincraFt track. Mufti pleaircraft are often involved in the NASA field campaigns.The coordination of the aircraft with satellite overpasses* other airplanes;, and the 
constantly evolving dynamic weather conditions often determine the success of the campaign. A flight planning tool is needed to provide situational awareness 
information to the mission sdentists and help them plan and modify the fl ight trac ks successfully. 

Sdentists at the University of Alabama-Huntsville and the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center developed theVfaypoint PlanningTool (WPD.an interactive software tool 
that enables scientists to develop their own flight pfans (also known as waypoints) with point-and-dick mouse capabilities on a digital map filled with real time raster and 
vector data. The development of this Waypoint Planning Tool demonstrates the significance of mission support in responding to the challenges presented during 
NASA field campaigns. Analyses during and after each campaig n helped identify both issues and new requi rements* initiating the next wave of development Currently 
the Waypoint PlamingTod has gone through three rounds of developmentand analysis processes, 

The development of this waypoint tool is directly affected by the technology advances on GIS/Mapping technologies. From the standalone Google Earth 
application and simple KML functionalities to the Google Earth Plugin and Java Web StartfApplet on web platform, as well as to the rising open source GIS tools with 
new JavaScript frameworks, the Waypoint Planning Tool has entered its third phase of technology advancement. The newly innovated, cross-platform, modular 
designed JavaScript-controlled Way Point Tool is planned to be integrated with the NASA Airborne Science Mission Tool Suite. Adapting new technologies for the 
Waypoi nt Planning Tool ensures its success in hel ping scientists reach their mission objectives. 


MOTIVATION 

* Airborne and spaceborne flights require well-developed flight plans 

- Includes waypoint location and time, flight pattern over target area, 
flight duration, etc 

- Emphasizes coordination between aircraft during planning 

- Can be quickly dianged if conditions are changed 

- Uses real time data to assist flight plan m ng 

- Emphasis on Web-based application is increasing 

- JavaScript-based Map Application is desirable 

■ No easy tools available far Mission Scientists 

- Aircraft navigation tool (FakonVfew) not suitable for mission planning 

- Other planning tools relied on Excef-type functions rather than point-and-cl Idt 
to create flight plans 

CAPABILITIES 

■ Easily creates updates, and publishes flight waypoints 

* ■ Provides situation awareness data, such as real time satellite imagery, satellite 

, [racking, storm tracking, etc 

■ Helps flight Coordination between multiple aircraft and multiple users 

* Delivers new plan to user via NASA's Real Time Mission Monitor (companion 
situational awareness tool) 


SUMMARY 

Waypoint PlanningTool provides a convenient way to create and update flight 
plans using a point-and-dick mouse interface 

* Assists in the coordination among multiple aircraft during pre-flight planning 

* Real time data ate used to help mission planners to make immediate decisions 

* Fits the need of various users, induding Mission Scientists* Mission Managers, 
Pitots* and others 

* Permits multiple waypoint input formats and can create multi-formatted 
output, as requested. Output formats include KML for visual ization and 
Falcon View, a navigation tool widely used by Pilots 

- Used in several multi-agency field campaigns for flight planning 

- Arctic Fteseatch of the Composition of the Troposphere from Aircraft and Satelites (ARCTASfc 
March-July20O8, NASA 

- Marshall Airborne Polarimetric Imaging Radiometer (Miapifs]: 
September-OcroberZDDfl, NASA 

- Genesis and Rapid Intensification Processes (GRIP) ; 

July - September 2010, NASA NQAA, N5F/NCAR AF Reserve 

- Mid-latttucte Airborne Cirrus Properties Experiment (WiSfAflJ, FebA)iar,2Gl t 

- MIZQPEX Dry Run 201 Z NASA 



Modular design thatcan be easily extended for adding components 
New JavaScript-based Web Application is developed 

Allows creating, updating multipl&flrght plans at the same time within one application 


This presentation will discuss the development processes of the Waypoint Planning Tool in responding to field campaign challenges* identifying new information 
technologies* and describing the capabilities and features of the Waypoint PlanningTool with the real time aspect* interactive nature, and the resultant benefit to the 
ai rborne science community. M 


During and early 2000s, mission scientists could use an Excel spreadsheet to calculate 
the Way Point parameters for aircraft flights. After Google Earth appeared, mission scientists 
would select their way points in Google Earth and then put their coordinates in Excel to calculate 
time, distance, etc. Each time a point was changed, the new values would have to be re-entered 
into the Excel spreadsheet. 


As the web technologies advance, the client-side JavaScript-based map applications that work in a wide 
variety of web browsers are gaining momentum. This new Way Point Tool is developed on top of DoJo 
JavaScript framework and OpenLayers Map APIs. With built-in layer management and map projection 
capabillties,this Way Point Tool can be tightly integrated with RTMM and other web applications, as well as 
with web-based Content Management Systems. 


3. Display Real Time HutricaneTracks 


■1? Set flight Parameters 


""" ” " 



■’ ' — r.T.TT.1 ~ 



. 

§ 'r r ■ 






1 l 





Sir ■ 1 



LSI 

| 

— - —— - 

• 


! 


In Cooperation With: 


Ack n owl edgements: 


Author Contact 


- The program managers and scientists from recent * The Waypoint Pfenning Tool iJ pant or the Bwl Time Minion Morals*, whose support 

NASA AfitTAS and GftlP Held campaigns. ii provided by NASA Science MJshgtv Directorate, Earth ScienceTechnology Office 

■ Users fwm NOAA and agencies. [ESTQ) as an Advanced: Information Systems Technology (AiSTj project 

- The Waypoint Planning Tool is optimized based on rhe feedback from Phil Halt 
Michael GSscfc, Scon Braun, Ed ZipSer a*«S mory Others. 


YUbin He mhe£ilsc.uah.edu 

filch BWcesfefc PcIrdilakeifeeWnasa^aw 

Pastercreator: Tammy Smith 


More Information: 

For more information please wait; 
hn pi/. 1 rt (nm.nssU.nasa.gov/wpU 
Of contact author. 



% UAHuntsville 

THE UNIVERSITY OF ALABAMA IN HUNTSVILLE 






