quired with no a priori knowledge in a 
Low-Earth-Orbit (LEO) scenario in less 
than one second]. Modeling has shown 
that Navigator will be capable of acquir- 
ing signals down to 25 dB-Hz, appropri- 
ate for HEO missions. Navigator is built 
using the radiation-hardened ColdFire 


microprocessor and housing the most 
computationally intense functions in 
dedicated field-programmable gate ar- 
rays. The high performance of the algo- 
rithm and of the receiver as a whole are 
made possible by optimizing computa- 
tional efficiency and carefully weighing 


tradeoffs among the sampling rate, data 
format, and data-path bit width. 

This work was done by Luke Wintemitz, 
Greg Boegner; and Steve Sirotzky of Goddard 
Space Flight Center. Further’ information is 
contained in a TSP (seepage 1 ). 
GSC-14793-1 


Format for Interchange and Display of 3D Terrain Data 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


Visible Scalable Terrain (ViSTa) is a 
software format for production, inter- 
change, and display of three-dimen- 
sional (3D) terrain data acquired by 
stereoscopic cameras of robotic vision 
systems. ViSTa is designed to support 
scalability of data, accuracy of displayed 
terrain images, and optimal utilization 
of computational resources. In a ViSTa 
file, an area of terrain is represented, at 
one or more levels of detail, by coordi- 
nates of isolated points and/or vertices 
of triangles derived from a texture map 
that, in turn, is derived from original ter- 


rain images. Unlike prior terrain-image 
software formats, ViSTa includes provi- 
sions to ensure accuracy of texture coor- 
dinates. Whereas many such formats are 
based on 2. 5-dimensional terrain mod- 
els and impose additional regularity con- 
straints on data, ViSTa is based on a 3D 
model without regularity constraints. 
Whereas many prior formats require ex- 
ternal data for specifying image-data co- 
ordinate systems, ViSTa provides for the 
inclusion of coordinate-system data 
within data files. ViSTa admits high- 
speed loading and display within a Java 


program. ViSTa is designed to minimize 
file sizes and maximize compressibility 
and to support straightforward reduc- 
tion of resolution to reduce file size for 
Internet-based distribution. 

This program was written by Paul Baches, 
Mark Powell, Marsette Vona, Jeffrey Norris, 
and fack Morrison of Caltech for NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. Further informa- 
tion is contained in a TSP (see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Don Hart of the Cal- 
ifornia Institute of Technology at (818) 393- 
3425. Refer to NPO-30600. ' 


#1 Program Analyzes Radar Altimeter Data 

Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland 


A computer program has been written 
to perform several analyses of radar al- 
timeter data. The program was designed to 
improve on previous methods of analysis of 
altimeter engineering data by ( 1 ) facilitat- 
ing and accelerating the analysis of large 
amounts of data in a more direct manner 
and (2) improving the ability to estimate 
performance of radar-altimeter instrumen- 
tation and provide data corrections. The 
data in question are openly available to the 
international scientific community and can 


be downloaded from anonymous file-trans- 
fer-protocol (FTP) locations that are acces- 
sible via links from altimetry Web sites. The 
software estimates noise in range measure- 
ments, estimates corrections for electro- 
magnetic bias, and performs statistical 
analyses on various parameters for com- 
parison of different altimeters. Whereas 
prior techniques used to perform similar 
analyses of altimeter range noise require 
comparison of data from repetitions of 
satellite ground tracks, the present soft- 


ware uses a high-pass filtering technique to 
obtain similar results from single satellite 
passes. Elimination of the requirement for 
repeat-track analysis facilitates the analysis 
of large amounts of satellite data to assess 
subtle variations in range noise. 

This program was written by Doug Vande- 
mark and David Hancock o/Goddard Space 
Flight Center and Ngan Tran of Raytheon 
Co. For further information, contact Nona 
Cheeks at Nona.K. Cheeks. 1 @gsfc. nasa.gov. 
CSC- 14664-1 


NASA Tech Briefs, December 2004 


7 


