pi, 

N90- 20938 


An Expert System for Wind Shear Avoidance 

Robert F. Stengel 1 and D. Alexander Stratton 2 
Princeton University 

Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering 
Princeton, NJ 


ABSTRACT 

A study of intelligent guidance and control concepts for 
protecting against the adverse effects of wind shear during air- 
craft takeoffs and landings is being conducted, with current 
emphasis on developing an expert system for wind shear 
avoidance. Principal objectives are to develop methods for 
assessing the likelihood of wind shear encounter (based on 
real-time information in the cockpit), for deciding what flight 
path to pursue (e.g., takeoff abort, landing go-around, or 
normal climbout or glide slope), and for using the aircraft's 
full potential for combating wind shear. This study requires 
the definition of both deterministic and statistical techniques 
for fusing internal and external information, for making 
”go/no-go"decisions, and for generating commands to the 
aircraft's autopilot and flight directors for both automatic and 
manually controlled flight. The program has begun with the 
development of the WindShear Safety Advisor, an expert sys- 
tem for pilot aiding that is based on the FAA Windshear 
Training Aid; a two-volume manual that presents an overview, 
pilot guide, training program, and substantiating data provides 
guidelines for this initial development. The WindShear Safety 
Advisor expert system currently contains over 200 rules and is 
coded in the LISP programming language. 


INTRODUCTION 

Flight in strong wind shears, especially microbursts, 
poses a unique and severe hazard to aircraft. The disturbance 
caused by the wind field may literally exceed the performance 
characteristics of the aircraft, making safe transit impossible 
even with optimal guidance and control strategies. An unusual 
degree of piloting skill may be required to successfully elude 
danger. Nevertheless, planes fly in moderate wind shear all 
the time; pilots learn to handle crosswinds, gustiness, and 
moderate frontal activity. The problem is that microbursts are 
random, rare phenomena; pilots do not develop the needed 
skills for coping with wind shear through normal experience. 
The typical pilot is likely to be confronted with a life threaten- 
ing wind shear only once or twice during an entire flying ca- 
reer; hence, it is unlikely that he or she can learn all the impor- 
tant signs of wind shear and maintain a high level of profi- 
ciency in the proper control procedures. 

On-board computation provides an excellent opportu- 
nity to assist the pilot in surviving encounters with severe 
wind shears, but the logic that must be executed in real time is 
complex and must have sufficient inputs for framing decisions 
about appropriate control actions. The computer program(s) 
and hardware to perform this task must have attributes of ex- 
pert systems and control systems, they must account for the 
limitations of aircraft performance, and they must operate in 
real time. At least as important as its technical specifications, 


1 Professor. 

2 Research Assistant. 


the on-board system must provide a satisfactory interface with 
the flight crew, which bears the ultimate responsibility for as- 
suring safety. This means not only that the system must de- 
duce near-optimal strategies and tactics for emergency situa- 
tions but that it must distinguish between truly hazardous con- 
ditions and the more likely alternatives associated with normal 
aircraft operations. 


Background on Wind Shear Encounter 

The microburst phenomenon can be visualized as a 
vertically descending column of air that spreads out upon hit- 
ting the ground [ 1 ,2] . In a typical scenario, the aircraft first 
experiences a headwind as it enters the outflow, causing the 
aircraft to balloon above the flight path if no corrective action 
is taken (Fig. 1). (This phase may be preceded by an en- 
counter with upflow and tailwinds at the edge of a ring vor- 
tex.) Just as the pilot is throttling back to accommodate the 
headwind, it diminishes and is replaced by a downdraft that is 
soon followed by a tailwind (and perhaps another ring vortex 
encounter). The rapid loss of airspeed and the low energy 
state of the aircraft both contribute to a trajectory undershoot 
that can lead to ground impact. 

A good deal of research has been conducted on the 
wind shear hazard during the past decade. Much of it deals 
with the meteorological details of the phenomenon or general 
treatments of aircraft stability and ad hoc piloting effects [3- 
14]. Linear-quadratic regulators with feedforward control that 
provided remarkably good results in reduced-order linear sim- 
ulations of wind shear encounter were developed [15]. This 
work illustrated the potential value of using "energy state", E 
= V 2 l2g + /t, either as a feedback variable or as an element of 
the quadratic cost function. 


1. Approach initially appeared notmal 

2. Increasing downdraft encountered at tnuirition 

3. Airspeed decrease c ombined with reduced 



Figure 1. Wind shear encounter during approach (from 
"Windshear Training Aid," Federal Aviation 
Administration, Washington, DC, Feb 1987). 

Additional applications of the energy state in aircraft 
guidance and control have been considered [16-22], and a 
Wind Shear Hazard Index that derives from the combined ef- 
fects of the vertical shear in headwind and the downdraft mag- 
nitude on dEldt was presented in Ref. 8. Following an exten- 
sive classical-control analysis, a feedback controller that dra- 
matically reduces wind shear response by feeding flight path 
angle and the product of dynamic pressure and angle-of-attack 
perturbation to elevator and E and dEldt to throttle was derived 


PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED 


183 


[23]. This study included realistic delays associated with 
short period, throttle, and elevator dynamics, which are im- 
portant in real-world implementation. 

Optimal flight paths and guidance strategies also have 
been suggested [24-29]. Knowing the optimal flight profiles 
corresponding to various wind fields is vitally important to 
designing and evaluating on-board systems to protect against 
wind shear, as survival may well depend on the specific con- 
trol profile chosen by the pilot. Sub-optimal systems can pro- 
vide an increased safety margin over conventional cockpit in- 
strumentation, and a number of wind-shear-waming systems 
are commercially available. Nevertheless, one would like 
much more than sub-optimal protection through systems that 
properly anticipate dangerous conditions before they occur and 
that provide near-optimal guidance in inadvertent encounters.lt 
is in this regard that concepts of machine intelligence may 
prove useful. 


Background on Intelligent Guidance and Control 

The human pilot is a most capable and robust con- 
troller, but the complexity, scope, and flight-criticality of 
making proper decisions and controlling the aircraft during 
wind shear encounter is an extreme challenge. The nature of 
the task is not, in any sense, beyond human understanding, 
but the need for assimilating a multitude of diverse data and 
taking correct actions may be beyond unaided human capabil- 
ity. Given time and information, an expert crew could arrive 
at a satisfactory solution; however, it is clear that computers 
could assess the quantitative aspects of the situation far more 
quickly than a human can. It would be desirable for a com- 
puter to evaluate symbolic, qualitative information as well, 
although the best way of doing this remains to be found. 

A dynamic expert system will form a critical part of an 
on-board system to counter wind shear effects. Whereas 
static expert systems may consider fixed vectors of informa- 
tion, many components of the dynamic expert system’s infor- 
mation vector are essentially rime-varying, increasing the di- 
mensionality of the information. As an example, consider the 
pattern-recognition problem. In the static case, a fairly 
straightforward discriminant function could be used to clas- 
sify information; while in the dynamic case, a discriminant 
function must be applied to time series of data. In this in- 
stance, the typical ”IF.. .THEN.. .ELSE" paradigm (in its 
simplest form) is inadequate, and hypothesis testing must be 
based on dynamic algorithms. 

There are two principal approaches to interconnecting 
machine intelligence and automatic control, based on federated 
systems and integrated systems. In federated systems, the 
goal is to provide a symbolic supervisory control for a large- 
scale process control system, as used, for example, in the 
chemical industry. A LISP processor performing the first 
class of tasks could be connected to a conventional computer 
performing the second set of tasks. This decoupling of fun- 
damentally different types of tasks provides good isolation for 
software development, and it facilitates the manual intervention 
of a skilled operator, should that be required. However, it is 
most appropriate for intrinsically slow operations. Integrated 
systems are Rule-Based Controllers (RBC) that combine sym- 
bolic and numeric processing in a highly integrated, parallel 
environment [30]. The principal characteristics of an inte- 
grated system are that numeric processes occur as side effects 
of forward and/or backward chaining, and the entire system is 
implemented for real-time execution in an array of similar pro- 
cessors coded with a procedural language. 

Three areas appear to be critical to successful real-time 
implementation of machine intelligence in wind shear en- 
counter. The first is acquisition of sufficient data on which to 


base a decision and to control the aircraft. The second is the 
definition of efficient hardware and software structures for a 
real-time expert system that addresses the wind shear problem. 
The third is the design of interfaces between the equipment and 
the pilot that are both complete and reasonable. 

A real-time expert system for fault-tolerant control that 
has many of the features needed for an intelligent anti-wind- 
shear system has been developed [30-32]. That system pro- 
vides a number of important pathfinders for such a system, 
including implementation of a controller with hierarchical 
structure, multiple cooperating expert systems in parallel mi- 
croprocessors, and closure of an intelligent feedback control 
loop at a high sampling rate. The system structure has been 
developed using LISP, then translated semi-automatically to 
Pascal code for real-time operation on three 80286/7 Multibus 
boards. There are equivalent expert systems in the two lan- 
guages, both of which access the same database and external 
simulation. 


FAA WINDSHEAR TRAINING AID 

The FAA Windshear Training Aid was prepared with 
the support of the Integrated FAA Wind Shear Program. This 
two-volume manual was written by a team from the airframe 
industry that interacted with airlines, government, and acade- 
mia [33]. Principal results are expressed in a variety of ways 
for executive review, training classes, and public information. 
One principal goal is to identify the logical connections be- 
tween pilot observations and pilot actions when wind shear is 
encountered. The functions that a jet transport aircraft crew 
should perform are summarized by a flow chart (Fig. 2). 



Figure 2. Model of flight crew actions, (from [33]) 

Flight crews are provided with guidelines that relate 
observations to wind shear probability along with examples 
of their use. If the probability of wind shear is LOW, standard 
procedures are recommended. If the probability is MEDIUM, 
the crew is instructed to consider precautions, including delay 
or alteration of terminal operations. If the probability is 
HIGH, delay or alteration of terminal operations is recom- 
mended, with specific actions guided by flight phase. If 
more than one observation suggests dangerous wind shear, the 
subjective probabilities should be added, although the guide- 
lines for the risk assessment and the probability addition are 
imprecise. For example, two LOWs equal a MEDIUM, and 
either two MEDRJMs or a LOW and a MEDIUM equal a 
HIGH. There is no guidance regarding spatial or temporal 
characteristics of the observations; issues of proximity and de- 
gree of intensity are left to the pilot’s judgment. 

Although the strongest suggestion for piloting strategy 
is ’’avoid, avoid, avoid,” recommended procedures for recov- 
ery or abort following wind shear encounter are given as 


184 



functions of flight phase. These strategies are sub-optimal, 
but they materially enhance the probability of survival, in 
comparison to standard piloting procedures. 

The FAA Windshear Training Aid is a significant 
achievement in the fight against the hazards of low-altitude 
wind shear. Nevertheless, it takes a high level of piloting 
awareness and skill to evaluate the situation and to execute the 
implied actions correctly and quickly enough to avert catastro- 
phe. To the extent that a computer can be fast and precise, it 
could assist the flight crew in this dangerous situation. 

In seeking to build a computer aid for wind shear 
avoidance, it is necessary to model the implied logical patterns 
that the flight crew must use and to quantify subjective rules 
for computation. Many factors related to situational aware- 
ness, limitations to effective action, and efficient decision 
analysis must be considered, for the computer cannot exert 
"sound judgment," as suggested in the Training Aid, without 
having been programmed to do so. 


WINDSHEAR SAFETY ADVISOR 


Functions of the WindShear Safety Advisor 

The WindShear Safety Advisor, in its current state, is 
principally a model of pilot and crew decision-making and 
control, as described in the FAA Windshear Training Aid. 
The four primary functions of the system are: 


MONITORING - Observe sensors, receive reports and 
flight-plan revisions, alerts, and 
warnings 

ASSESSMENT - Detect wind shear encounters, 

determine if there are signs of wind 
shear, and if it is safe to continue 


PLANNING - Recommend actions and precautions to 

betaken 


ACTION - In automatic mode, execute standard, 

recovery, and go- around procedures; in 
semi-automatic mode, issue commands 
to flight directors 


The WindShear Safety Advisor (WSA) is a computer 
program that uses concepts drawn from the world of artificial 
intelligence (AI) to assess the wind shear threat and to recom- 
mend safe piloting action (Fig. 3). The current version is an 

^ On-Board PatiT N 

Inertial Sensors 
Air Data Sensors 
Weather Radar 


Visual Observations 
^ Dx>k- Ahead Senso rsj 

njxtiTrnal Data " 

Weather Reports 
Tower Reports 
LLWAS 

PIREPs — 

SIGMETs 

NEXRAD 
TDWR 

v 

Figure 3. Structure of WindShear Safety Advisor. 


WindShear 

Safety 

Advisor 



interactive but non-real-time program for studying the input 
information and logic required to emulate and extend the FAA 
Windshear Training Aid to on-board computer systems. In 
particular, the WSA implements the stated rules of the Training 
f Aid, and its development is uncovering the unstated (but criti- 
cal) implications of the manual. The WSA, currently on a 
Symbolics 3670 LISP machine using the Genera environment, 
does not address important human factors issues, such as pre- 
sentation of information to the pilot and requests for pilot input 
or intervention, which would have little significance in non- 
real-time simulation. However, our goal is to identify a pro- 
gram structure that is appropriate for real-time use. 

As shown in Fig. 3, the WSA accepts data from 
sources that are external and internal to the aircraft. External 
sources include human controllers in an airport control tower, 
weather reporting systems, terminal doppler weather radar 
(TDWR), the low-level windshear alert system (LLWAS), and 
pilot reports (PIREPs). Internal data are transmitted from mo- 
tion sensors, weather radar, visual observations, and (in the 
future) "look- ahead" sensors such as infrared, radar, or laser 
devices. 


These functions are performed as side effects of a goal-di- 
rected search for parameter values in a set of rules. 

An on-board implementation of the WSA would be a 
Rule-Based Control (RBC) system having attributes of both 
expert systems and conventional controllers (Fig. 4). A deci- 
sion-making process implemented as an expert system may 
require that certain side tasks be accomplished, such as taking 



MEASUREMENTS 


Figure 4. Rule-based system for control. 

measurements, making estimates, computing control settings, 
and transferring commands to control effecters. This 
procedural, quantitative computation is done in a Side Effects 
Engine that calls on both the Data Base and an Algorithm Base 
for its knowledge. (Measurement and control are considered 
side effects of the request for information and the decision- 
making process.) 

Decision and control functions are readily separated in 
an RBC system, the former calling for symbolic computation, 
the latter for numeric computation. (In either case, the digital 
computer simply moves bits around; however, interpretations 
of the logical operations are different.) Not surprisingly, some 
computer programming languages are better than others at 
performing the two types of tasks, so it is most efficient to use 
different languages for decision and control during the devel- 
opment phase. For example, LISP is a good language for de- 
veloping logical relationships among strings of symbolic data, 
while Pascal or FORTRAN is a good language for numerical 


185 







computation. Consequently, LISP is the language of choice 
for current WSA development. Once decision and control 
functions have been defined, they must be merged (in some 
sense) in the RBC system. Development of a real-time version 
of an RBC system is thus aided by one or more language 
translators that efficiently transform subsets of the develop- 
ment languages into the final code. 


Expert System Techniques and Implementation 

An important feature of the RBC system is its use of a 
declarative representation of knowledge in a knowledge base. 
The rules and given facts are structured using frames. The el- 
ements of decision making needed for the WSA are illustrated 
by this simple example (Fig. 5). A parameter is a quantity that 


PARAMETER 


RULE 


- 

JSp 1 


OJ 

D 

3-S5 PARAMETER j 

f \ 

RULE 


NAME i ! 

NAME 

! '7f\ 


ACTION SeS Values 
of Parameters 


PREMISE Tests Values 
^ of Parameters 


EXAMPLE 



Figure 5. Graphical representation of knowledge. 


can have several values as well as an array of complicated 
properties (not shown). A rule accepts one or more parame- 
ters as its premise and performs the action of setting another 
parameter if the values of its input parameters make the rule 
true. For the premise to be true, it may be necessary that all 
multiple parameters take certain values (represented by the arc 
between connecting lines), or it may be sufficient for any par- 
ameter to take a certain value (represented by no arc between 
channels into the rule). 

The process of applying the knowledge base to given 
facts is known as inference. Given a base set of facts and 
rules, all of the facts that follow may be asserted by examining 
all the rules, in any order, repeatedly, until no new facts can be 
proven. However, the order in which the rules are tried can 
make a big difference in the efficiency of this process. With a 
large number of rules (which is always the case for any sub- 
stantial amount of expert knowledge), efficient inference in an 
expert system requires a strategy for deciding the order in 
which the rules are examined. 

Two different types of inference procedures are used in 
the WindShear Safety Advisor. These procedures can be dis- 
tinguished by how the expert system obtains facts from the 
user. With one type of procedure, the user gives a set of facts 


to the system, and the procedure works forward from these 
facts, deriving all the possible consequences of them. This 
type of procedure is called data-driven or forward-chaining in- 
ference. With the other type of procedure, the user directs the 
system to find the truth or falsehood of a goal parameter, and 
the search procedure works backward from this goal parame- 
ter, asking the user to supply values for parameters whose 
values are not known, relevant to the goal parameter, and can- 
not be given values by examining rules. This type of proce- 
dure is often called goal-directed or backward-chaining infer- 
ence. The WindShear Safety Advisor uses both types of pro- 
cedures. Taken together, these procedures are referred to as 
the inference engine. 

To demonstrate the actions of goal-directed inference, 
consider the following example (Fig. 6). The expert system is 


'IF monttor-procedures-complete 
EQUALS true, AND ...” 



7V\ 


* "IF current-flight-phase EQUALS prejl ig ht, 
AND new-information -received EQUALS true, 
THEN SET monltor-procedures-complete 
TO true." 


Figure 6. Graphical representation of goal -directed 
inference. 


invoked periodically from a simulation by directing the infer- 
ence procedure to get a value for the parameter "Executiye- 
procedures-complete". "Executive-procedures-complete" is 
set in the EXECUTIVE rule base by the top-most rule in the 
figure, which considers the truth or falsehood of the expres- 
sion, "Monitor-procedures-complete". To know this, we must 
find out what the flight phase is. Turning to the ^list of 
parameters, we find a parameter "Current-flight-phase that is 
set in the FLIGHT PHASE rule base. The rules within the 
FLIGHT PHASE rule base are examined next. When the 
flight phase has been determined, we return to considering the 
truth or falsehood of the first premise. If, for example, we 
determined that the flight phase was "Preflight," we would 
then consider whether or not new information had been re- 
ceived. Once this search is complete, the parameter 
"Executive-procedures-complete" is set to TRUE, and the top- 
level search is finished. 

A data frame is a structure that defines the attributes of 
objects, as well as their linkages to other frames in the knowl- 
edge base. We might, for example, describe a hazardous vol- 
ume of airspace as a sphere of given location and radius (Fig. 
7). The sphere frame has two slots: location of the center and 
radius. The latter is specified by a number, while the former is 
itself another frame that contains four slots, and so on. Each 
sphere is denoted by a frame instance , in which actual values 
appear in the slots. When a specific sphere is defined, it is 
said to be "instantiated." 


186 








Figure 7. Structuring data with frames. 


The WSA contains numerous other frames that de- 
scribe the aircraft's dynamic state and its so-called "world en- 
vironment." For example, the flight phase, event, and hazard 
frames are defined as follows, where terms in italics refer to 
specific data types: 

Right Phase Frame 

Type: f-xype 

Airport: airport 

Runways: rnwy-list 

Time interval: tinterval 

Nominal trajectory: tp-list 

Event Frame 

Type: event- type 

Reported by: info-source 

Intensity: int-metric 

Space-time description \std-type 

Hazard Frame 

Type: h-type 

Sphere: std-type 

Affected trajectory: t-points 

Risk factor: number 

Qualitative decisions must be made on the basis of in- 
formation contained in these frames, the risk of wind shear 
encounter providing a good example. An appropriate rule is 

IF there is an instance of event type microburst, 

AND we intersect it in the next flight phase, 
AND a value for severity is obtained from the 
microburst-indicator rule base, 

THEN a microburst hazard is instantiated, 

AND the risk factor is increased by the 
incremental severity value. 

The Windshear Training Aid guidelines provide ad hoc ways 
of determining incremental severity values, but a great deal is 
left to the implied good judgment of the human decision- 
maker. Computer-based decisions require an approach that is 
at least quasi-quantitative if not rigorously so. For example, 
the LOW-MEDIUM-HIGH descriptors of wind shear proba- 
bility can be equated to an ordinal (" 1-2-3") scale to implement 
the above logic. As increasingly numeric information is gath- 
ered about risk factors, fractional severity metrics then can be 


incorporated. Rainshowers on the flight path might reason- 
ably indicate a higher concern than showers near the path but 
not high enough to increment the risk factor by an integer 
value. 


Another important feature of any expert system is an 
interface to translate a user’s problem into a collection of sym- 
bols and to translate the results of inference back into a format 
the user can understand. The WindShear Safety Advisor 
Interface, used for logic development and demonstration, is a 
multiple-window interactive display (Fig. 8). The current ver- 
sion accepts keyboard and mouse input, with the results of in- 
ference displayed as text output. Execution of the system con- 
sists of an elementary dialogue between the program user and 
the expert system. As the user answers the system’s ques- 
tions, statements of applicable rules are typed out in one win- 
dow, while information about parameters is displayed in an- 
other. Special messages summarizing the system's advice are 
printed in a third window. 


Princeton WindSnee^ Safety Advisor interface 


Flight Pier Gel Value Of Make Message Presets (Menu Line) 


User Inte-ection Pone 

Peremeter informetion Pone 

Messages to program 
developer 

. Messages to crew, tower, etc. 
. Data and commands from 
program developer 

. Parameters that have changed 
values 

. Other parameters of interest 

Result Monitoring Pone 


.. Executive observations Planning activity 

Monitored information Recommended action 

.Status assessment .Current airport weather 


Figure 8. Development screen for WindShear Safety 
Advisor. 


CONCLUSIONS 

The WindShear Safety Advisor program implements 
the stated decision-making logic of the FAA Windshear 
Training Aid, as well as a set of unstated implications that are 
necessary for practical application. The WSA expen system 
contains over 200 rules that set over 80 parameters for terminal 
operations of jet transport aircraft. Future modifications will 
account for spatial and temporal variations of the aircraft and 
its meteorological environment, as well as for interfaces with 
the air traffic control system. The WindShear Safety Advisor 
sets the stage for cockpit simulation of logic for wind shear 
avoidance, which, in turn, will lead to practical systems for 
operational aircraft. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This research has been sponsored by the NASA Lang- 
ley Research Center under Grant No. NAG- 1 -834. 


REFERENCES 

1. Townsend, J., committee chairman, "Low-Altitude Wind 
Shear and Its Hazard to Aviation," National Academy Press, 
Washington, 1983. 

2. Stengel, R„ "Solving the Pilot’s Wind-Shear Problem," 
Aerospace America , Vol. 23, No. 3, Mar 1985, pp. 82-85. 


187 







3. Fujita, T., "Downbursts and Microbursts - An Aviation 
Hazard," Proceedings of the 19th Conference on Radar Me- 
teorology, Miami Beach, 1980, pp. 94-101. 

4. McCarthy, J., et al, "The Joint Airport Weather Studies 
(JAWS) Project," Bulletin of the American Meteorological 
Society , Jan 1982, pp. 15-22. 

5. Bray, R., "A Method for Three-Dimensional Modeling of 

Wind-Shear Environments for Flight Simulator Applications," 
NASA TM-85969, July 1984. * 

6. Zhu, S., and Etkin, B., "Fluid-Dynamic Model of a Down- 
burst," UTIAS Report No. 271, Apr 1983. 

7. Bach, R., Jr., and Wingrove, R., "The Analysis of Airline 
Flight Records for Winds and Performance with Application to 
the Delta 191 Accident," AIAA Paper No. 86-2227-CP, Aug 
1986. 

8. Bowles, R., "Fundamental Concepts for Wind Shear De- 
tection, Warning and Flight Guidance," presentation at Air- 
borne Wind Shear Systems Manufacturers Review," Hamp- 
ton, Oct 1986. 

9. Sherman, W., "A Theoretical Analysis of Airplane Longi- 
tudinal Stability and Control as Affected by Wind Shear," 
NASA TN D-8496, July 1977. 

10. Gera, J., "The Influence of Vertical Wind Gradients on the 
Longitudinal Motions of Airplanes," NASA TN D-6430, Sept 
1971. 

11. Frost, W., "Flight in Low-Level Wind Shear," NASA 
CR-3678, Mar 1983. 

12. Lehman, J., et al , "Simulation and Analysis of Wind 
Shear Hazard," FAA-RD-78-7, Dec 1977. 

13. Umes, J., et al , "H-Dot Automatic Carrier Landing Sys- 
tem for Approach Control in Turbulence," AIAA Journal of 
Guidance and Control , Mar- Apr 1981, pp. 177-183. 

14. Foy, W., "Airborne Aids for Coping with Low-Level 
Wind Shear," FAA-RD-1 17, July 1979. 

15. Rynaski, E., and Govindaraj, K., "Control Concepts for 
the Alleviation of Windshears and Gusts," NASA CR- 
166022, July 1982. 

16. Konig, R., et al , "Procedures to Improve Flight Safety in 
Wind Shear Conditions," Proceedings of the 12th Congress of 
the International Council of the Aeronautical Sciences , ICAS- 
80-22.3, Munich, Oct 1980, pp. 744-757. 

17. Lambregts, A., "Vertical Flight Path and Speed Control 
Autopilot Design Using Total Energy Principles," AIAA Pa- 
per No. 83-2239-CP, Aug 1983. 

18. Belcastro, C., and Ostroff, A., "Total-Energy-Rate Feed- 
back for Automatic Glide-Slope Tracking During Wind-Shear 
Penetration," NASA TP-2412, May 1985. 

19. Ostroff, A., et al , "Evaluation of a Total-Energy-Rate 
Sensor on a Transport Airplane," NASA TP-2212, Nov 1983. 

20. Jorck, H., "Design of Wind Shear Filters," NASA TM- 
77460, Nov 1984. 

21. Broussard, J., "Extensions to PIFCGT: Multirate Output 
Feedback and Optimal Disturbance Suppression," NASA CR- 
3968, Mar 1986. 


22. Hahn, K., ’Take-Off and Landing in a Downburst", Pro- 
ceedings of the 15th Congress of the International Council of 
the Aeronautical Sciences , ICAS-86-5.6.2, Sept 1986, pp. 
860-869. 

23. Psiaki, M., and Stengel, R., "Analysis of Aircraft Control 
Strategies for Microburst Encounter," AIAA Journal of Guid- 
ance, Control, and Dynamics , Vol. 8, No. 5, Sept-Oct 1985, 
pp. 553-559. 

24. Miele, A., Wang. T., and Melvin, W., "Optimal Take-Off 
Trajectories in the Presence of Windshear," Journal of Opti- 
mization Theory and Application , Apr 1986, pp. 1-45. 

25. Psiaki, M., and Stengel, R., "Optimal Flight Paths 
Through Microburst Wind Profiles," AIAA Journal of Air- 
craft , Aug 1986, pp. 629-635. 

26. Psiaki, M., "Control of Flight Through Microburst Wind 
Shear Using Deterministic Trajectory Optimization," Ph.D. 
Thesis, Princeton University, 1987. 

27. Miele, A., Wang, T., and Melvin, W., "Optimization and 
Gamma/Theta Guidance of Flight Trajectories in a Wind- 
shear," Proceedings of the 15th Congress of the International 
Council of the Aeronautical Sciences , ICAS-86-5.6.4, Sept 
1986, pp. 878-899. 

28. Stengel, R., "Optimal Control Laws for Microburst En- 
counter," Proceedings of the 15th Congress of the Interna- 
tional Council of the Aeronautical Sciences , 1CAS-86-5.6.3, 
Sept 1986, pp. 870-877. 

29. Psiaki, M., and Stengel, R. "Performance Limits for Op- 
timal Microburst Encounter, Proceedings of the 1988 AIAA 
Atmospheric Flight Mechanics Conference , Minneapolis, Aug 
1988, pp. 358-370. 

30. Handelman, D., and Stengel, R., "An Architecture for 
Rule-Based Control," Proceedings of the 1987 American 
Control Conference , Minneapolis, June 1987, pp. 1636-1642. 

31. Handelman, D., and Stengel, R., "Combining Quantitative 
and Qualitative Reasoning in Aircraft Failure Diagnosis," Pro- 
ceedings of the 1985 AIAA Guidance , Navigation, and Con- 
trol Conference , AIAA Paper No. 85-1905CP, Aug 1985. 

32. Handelman, D., and Stengel, R., "A Theory for Fault- 
Tolerant Control Combining Expert System and Analytical 
Redundancy Concepts, Proceedings of the 1986 AIAA 
Guidance, Navigation , and Control Conference , AIAA Paper 
No. 8 6- 2092 CP, Aug 1986. 

33. - , "Windshear Training Aid," Federal Aviation Adminis- 
tration, Washington, DC, Feb 1987. 


188 


