
y ' "k ' ‘' 












, i* r^-y ^:':\--’k*:y-'-''*'’.>r:.^^y''''':.''’\:^..';^-:'^i^'f!yk/^ 










* 


■REBOTION STATEMO^T.Jfe^:’ 


lcm| UBjtoH|e4 




.' 3 ^ 

^^■‘1 




laM 





Is 





& 



'M 

iferi 


III 



P 

& ^ 

1^1! 






















GAO 


United States 

General Accounting Office 

Washington, D.C. 20548 


National Security and 
International Affairs Division 

B-259389 


May 18,1995 

The Honorable Strom Thurmond 
Chairman 

The Honorable Sam Nunn 
Ranking Minority Member 
Committee on Armed Services 
United States Senate 


The Honorable Floyd Spence 
Chairman 

The Honorable Ronald Dellums 
Ranking Minority Member 
Committee on National Security 
House of Representatives 

This report presents the results of our review of the Department of the 
Army’s Comanche helicopter program. Because this program is the 
centerpiece of Army aviation modernization efforts and faces mayor 
funding shortages and restructuring, we focused our review on cost and 
technical issues. Because of your expressed interest in the Comamche 
program, we believe the information in this report wUl be useful as you 
review the Department of Defense’s (dod) plans for the program. 


Accesion For 


NTIS CRA&I 
DTIC TAB 
Unannounced 
Justification 


□ 


By_ 

Distribution / 


Availability Codes 


Dist 




Avail and/or 
Special 


Background 


The Comanche program was established in 1983 to replace the Army’s 
light helicopter fleet. The contractor team of Sikorsky Aircraft 
Corporation and Boeing Helicopter Company were expected to design a 
low-cost, lightweight, advanced technology helicopter capable of 
performing the primary missions of armed reconnaissance and attack. 
Critical to achieving these capabdities are the successful development of 
advanced technologies, including composite materials, advanced avionics 
and propulsion systems, and sophisticated software and hardware. The 
Army must meet ambitious maintainability goals in order to (1) realize 
significantly lower operating and support costs predicted for this program 
and (2) achieve a wartime operational availability for the Comanche of 
6 hours per day. 


In December 1994, the Secretary of Defense directed the Army to 
restructure the Comanche hehcopter program as part of efforts to meet 
budgetary constraints. The Secretary’s restructure decision reduced 
funding for the program from $4.2 bUlion to $2.2 biUion for fiscal years 

Distribution stXfEMaijf "!" 

Approved for public release; 

Distribution Unlimited 

Page 1 ' GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 








B-259389 


1996 through 2001. In addition to extending the development phase by 
3 years, it also called for two flyable prototypes to be produced and the 
Comanche production decision to be deferred. 

In response to the Secretary’s decision, the Army proposed a program 
restructure that would allow it to acquire, within the Secretary’s funding 
constraint, six aircraft in addition to the two prototypes by deferring 
developmental efforts to fiscal year 2002 and beyond, dod approved the 
proposal in March 1995. 


Results in Brief 


Under the Army’s restructured program, production decisions will be 
made before operational testing of the Comanche starts, thereby 
continuing the high degree of risks associated with concurrent 
development and production. However, the time provided by extending 
the development phase and the acquisition of the six additional aircraft 
under the restructure provides the Army with the opportunity to conduct 
operational testing before committing funds to any production decisions. 
Because of the Comanche program’s high costs and technical risks, we 
believe the Army should complete operational testing before long-lead and 
low-rate initial production decisions are made, thereby significantly 
reducing the risks from the program. 

The Comanche will be a much more expensive armed reconnaissance 
helicopter than the one originally justified to the Congress. The 
Comanche’s program acquisition unit cost^ has almost tripled in 10 years. 
It has increased from $12.1 million in 1985 to $34.4 million as of 
February 1995. Program acquisition unit cost increases occurred primarily 
because of program restructuring and a 74-percent decrease in the 
quantity of aircraft to be procured. Cost and program schedule will again 
be affected because of the decisions to restructure the program. 

After a decade of developing the Comanche, the Army continues to 
experience technical problems. The Army is experiencing software 
development and testing problems associated with electronic systems that 
affect the performance of the Comanche. All key aircraft maintainability 
requirements for the Comanche may not be achievable. Therefore, the 
Comanche’s ability to meet its wartime availability requirements and its 
objective of lower operating and support cost is questionable. On the 
positive side, the program is currently meeting its goals of reducing 


'Throughout this report, both the total program acquisition costs and program acquisition unit costs 
are depicted in current dollars and include research, development, and acquisition costs but exclude 
military construction costs. 


Page 2 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 


maintenance levels and keeping within acceptable limits of overall weight 
growth for the Comanche. 


Restructuring 
Continues Risks 


The Army’s restructuring of the Comanche program continues risks 
(1) associated with making production decisions before knowing whether 
the aircraft will be able to perform as required and (2) of higher program 
costs. 


Restructuring Continues 
Highly Concurrent 
Program 


According to dod’s April 1990 guidelines for determining degrees of 
concurrency, a program with high concurrency typically proceeds into 
low-rate initial production before significant initial operational test and 
evaluation is completed. Regarding the need to keep concurrency low, the 
guidelines note that establishing programs with no concurrency, or a low 
degree of concurrency, avoids the risks that (1) production items have to 
be retrofitted to make them work properly and (2) system design will not 
be thoroughly tested. As we recently reported, aircraft systems, including 
the T-45A and C-17, that entered low-rate initial production before 
successfully completing initial operational testing and evaluation 
experienced significant and sometimes costly modifications to achieve 
satisfactory performance.^ Under the Army’s restructured program, 
operational testing will not begin until after the low-rate initial production 
decision is made, continuing the risks associated with the highly 
concurrent Comanche program. 

In responding to the Secretary’s restructure decision, the Army proposed, 
and was subsequently granted approval, to buy six “early operational 
capability” aircraft, in addition to the two prototypes that were to be 
acquired under the Secretary’s decision. According to program officials, 
these aircraft are estimated to cost in excess of $300 million. The Army 
does not consider these aircraft as either prototype or low-rate initial 
production aircraft; however, program officials believe that when these 
aircraft are fielded, the Army will be able to better evaluate the 
Comanche’s mission capability. The Army intends to fund these aircraft by 
deferring additional developmental efforts to fiscal years 2002 and beyond. 

Under the Army’s restructured program, operational testing will not begin 
until well after funds are committed to buy production aircraft. Armed 
reconnaissance and attack mission equipment packages are to be 


^Weapons Acquisition: Low-Rate Initial Production Used to Buy Weapon Systems Prematurely 
(GAO/NSIAD-95-18, Nov. 1994). 


Page 3 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 







Comanche Costs Continue 
to Increase 


integrated into the six early operational aircraft by fiscal year 2004. The 
Army plans to use these aircraft to start operational testing by about 
August 2005. However, long-lead production decisions are scheduled for 
November 2003, and low-rate initial production is planned to start in 
November 2004, about 9 months before operational testing begins. 

According to dob’s guidehnes, the amount of risk associated with 
concurrency can be hmited by reducing production aircraft to the 
minimum necessary to perform initial operational testing. The Army 
maintains that under the stretched out program it can conduct initial 
operational testing with the six early operational aircraft. Because the 
restructure has provided the additional time and aircraft, the Army has an 
opportunity to significantly reduce or ehminate program concurrency and 
its associated risks by completing operational testing before committing 
funds to any production decisions. 


The Comanche was originally justified to the Congress as a relatively 
inexpensive aircraft. However, since 1985, the program has experienced 
significant increases in program acquisition unit cost. Funding reductions 
have caused the program to undergo significant restructuring, resulting in 
sharp decreases in planned acquisition quantities and lengthening of 
development schedules, thereby increasing Comanche program costs. 

In 1985, the Comanche had estimated total program acquisition costs of 
about $61 bUhon for 5,023 aircraft (or $12.1 miOion per aircraft). In 1992, 
we reported that (1) as of October 1991, the program acquisition unit cost 
had increased to $27.4 miUion, (2) acquisition quantities had been reduced 
to 1,292 aircraft, and (3) future increases in cost per aircraft were hkely.® 
As of February 1995, the Comanche’s estimated program acquisition unit 
cost was $34.4 miUion per aircraft, a 185-percent increase from the 1985 
estimate. The estimated total program acquisition cost for the planned 
acquisition of 1,292 aircraft is now more than $44 biUion. 

Both the Secretary’s decision and the Army’s restructure would extend the 
development program by about 3 years and, under either, increase the risk 
of higher total program cost and cost per aircraft. However, in reviewing 
the Army’s restructure proposal, DOD noted some concern over Comanche 
program costs for fiscal year 2002 and beyond and the large increase in 
investment programs projected to occur about that time. We are also 


^Comanche Helicopter Program Needs Reassessment Due to Increased Unit Cost and Other Factors 
(GAO/NSIAD-92-204. May 27, 1992). 


Page 4 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 


concerned that the Army’s plan to defer additional developmental efforts 
to fiscal year 2002 and beyond may increase the risk that needed funds 
may not be available to perform the deferred developmental effort. 


Technical Risks to Be 
Resolved 


The Comanche program’s uncertainties in software development and 
aircraft maintainability increase the risk that the aircraft will not perform 
successfully. We beheve the restructuring provides additional time to 
resolve these issues before the decision to enter production is made. 


Software Development Is The Comanche wUl be the most computerized, software-intensive Army 
at Risk helicopter ever built. The Army estimates that about 1.4 million lines of 

code are required to perform and integrate mission critical functions. With 
additional ground support and training software to be developed, the total 
program will have more than 2.7 million lines of code. This compares to 
about 573,000 lines of code for the upgraded Apache attack helicopter 
with fire control radar. The Army estimates 95 percent of the Comanche’s 
total software will be written in Ada, a DOD-developed programming 
language. 'The Army plans to demonkrate initial software performance 
with the mission equipment package, which includes the flight control 
system, during first flight of the Comanche, scheduled for November 1995. 

The development and integration of on-board, embedded computer 
systems is a significant program objective. The Comanche’s performance 
and capability depend heavily on these systems and efforts have been 
ongoing to solve the problems associated with these systems. 

Nevertheless, (1) software development problems still exist with the Ada 
compilation system, (2) delays in software development and testing are 
occurring, and (3) improvements are needed in configuration 
management. If these issues are not resolved, the aircraft’s performance 
and capability will be degraded and first flight could be delayed. 

Development Problems Remain Almost aU of the Comanche software will be developed in the Ada 

Unresolved for the Ada programming language; however, software developers are not using the 

Compilation System same version of the Ada compilation system. The Ada compilation system 

translates Ada code into machine language so that software can be used by 
the Comanche’s computers. For example, it is being used to help develop 
software for use on the mission equipment package that is critical for first 
flight. 


Page 5 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 






B-259389 


Delays in Software 
Development and Testing 


Subcontractors and the contractor team should be using the same, 
qualified version of this compilation system to ensure effective software 
integration. However, fixes to individual compiler software problems are 
not being shared with aU developers; therefore, they are not using a 
common compilation system. These problems have already delayed 
qualification testing of the compilation system by 1 year. 

The lack of a uniform, qualified compilation system among software 
developers could put first flight at risk, according to the Defense Plant 
Representative Office. Problems with software integration may show up 
once integration testing begins in the June to November 1995 time frame. 

If that occurs, there may not be time to fix problems prior to scheduled 
first flight. 

The program is experiencing high turnover of software engineers at one of 
the contractor team’s facilities. In its December 1994, monthly assessment 
report, the Defense Plant Representative Office, which is responsible for 
contract oversight, observed that high turnover of software personnel was 
putting scheduled first flight at risk. Loss of key personnel has already 
contributed to schedule slippage in several critical software development 
areas. Software development for the following areas has been affected: the 
airborne engine monitoring system, aircraft systems management, control 
database, and crewstation interface management. 

The contractor team has formulated a “get weU” plan that is dependent on 
being able to hire additional personnel in these areas. However, hiring 
additional qualified personnel is difficult, according to the Defense Plant 
Representative Office, because employment would be short term. 

The flight control system software verification testing is also being 
delayed. As of February 8, 1995, Boeing had conducted only 163 of 
approximately 500 tests originally planned to be completed by that date. 
The subcontractor responsible for developing this software has been late 
delivering software for testing and has provided faulty software to Boeing, 
according to the Defense Plant Representative Office. Boeing estabhshed a 
recovery plan for this area that would have resulted in a completion date 
in March 1995—about a 1-month delay from the original plan. However, in 
February 1995, the contractor revised the recovery plan to reflect a 
completion date of July 1995—a 5-month delay. 

The flight control system is critical to first flight, according to the Defense 
Plant Representative Office. However, because of delays with verification 


Page 6 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 






Improvements in Configuration 
Management Are Needed 


Key Maintainability 
Requirements at Risk 


Key Maintenance Goal May Not 
Be Realistic 


testing, the Defense Plant Representative Office is concerned that the 
remaining verification testing, as weU as, the validation and formal 
qualification testing will not be completed in a timely manner. As a result, 
first flight may be delayed. Boeing is scheduled to complete these tests 
prior to first flight. According to the program office, Boeing’s plan to 
complete the testing calls for it to be conducted concurrently. If mqjor 
problems occur in any one of the testing phases, there may not be enough 
time to fix the problem and complete aU testing before first flight. 

Configuration management is the discipline of applying technical and 
administrative direction and surveillance to (a) control the flow of 
information between organizations and activities within a project; 

(b) manage the ownership of, and changes to, controlled information; 

(c) ensure information consistency; and (d) enable product release, 
acceptance, and maintenance. The part of configuration management used 
to report software problems and changes among the contractor team and 
subcontractors has shortcomings that put software development at risk. 

In its November 1994 monthly assessment report, the Defense Plant 
Representative Office observed that the lack of a common problem 
reporting system made proper handling of software related changes 
difficult. Furthermore, the report noted that this situation could adversely 
impact scheduled first flight of the Comanche. As of February 1995, the 
contractor team stiU did not have a common, automated database 
available to track problem change reports. Thus, the contractor team, as 
weU as subcontractors, did not have visibility over changes made to 
software. 


Maintainability requirements are important to achieving lower operating 
and support costs and wartime availability goals. However, these goals are 
at risk because key maintainability requirements such as direct 
maintenance man-hours per flight hour (mmh/fh), the mean time to repair 
(ivirm), and fault isolation may not be achievable. Individually, failure to 
meet these parameters may not be a significant problem; however, 
collectively they affect the ability of the Comanche to achieve lower 
operating and support cost and wartime availability objectives. 

In March 1987, the Army established a 2.6 direct mmh/fh requirement for 
the Comanche. It represents the corrective and preventive maintenance 
per flight hour expected to be performed at the unit level. The Army 
formulated its planned wartime operating tempo for a Comanche battalion 


Page 7 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 






B-259389 


based on 6 hours a day per aircraft, or 2,200 flying hours per year. It then 
determined the maintenance factor needed to support this operating 
tempo— 2.6 mmh/fh. As the mmh/fh level increases, the number of 
maintainers needed to sustain the 2,200 wartime flying hour goal 
increases, as do operating and support costs. Conversely, if the Army 
could not increase the number of maintainers, the planned operating 
tempo would have to be reduced. 

The reasonableness of the Comanche’s 2.6 direct mmh/fh requirement has 
been debated for several years within the Army and dod. Representatives 
from the program office; the Army Materiel Systems Analysis Activity, 
which independently evaluates program testing results; the Office of the 
Assistant Secretary of the Army for Research, Development, and 
Acquisition; and the Army Cost and Economic Analysis Center met on 
October 28,1994, to discuss the direct mmh/fh goal for the Comanche 
program. They agreed that the 2.6-mmh/fh requirement was not a realistic, 
achievable goal. Consequently, Army officials reached consensus and 
agreed on 3.2 direct mmh/fh as the Army-wide position for this parameter. 
However, during these discussions. Army Materiel Systems Analysis 
Activity personnel noted that attaining a 3.2-mmh/fh goal represented a 
medium to high risk, while a 4.3-mmh/fh goal had a low to medium risk. 
Increasing the maintenance factor increased the number of maintainers 
needed and will increase estimated operating and support costs by about 
$800 million over a 20-year period. 

The direct mmh/fh requirement does not represent the total maintenance 
burden for the Comanche because it does not include indirect 
maintenance time. The Army does not normally collect data on indirect 
maintenance time. According to the program office, its best estimate of 
indirect maintenance time, following Army guidance, is 2.5 mmh/fh, and 
this figure has been used for calculating manpower needs for crew chief 
personnel on the Comanche. Thus, the total maintenance burden assumed 
for the Comanche is currently 6.7 mmh/fh (3.2 direct mmh/fh plus 
2.5 indirect mmh/fh). 

Repair Requirement May Not 
Be Met 


To minimize turnaround time for repairs at the unit and depot, the Army 
estabhshed mitr requirements of 52 minutes for repairs at the unit level 
and up to 12 hours at the depot level for the Comanche. These 
requirements represents the average time expected to diagnose a fault, 
remove and repair an item, and perform an operational check and/or test 
flight. We determined that any increase in mttr above 1 hour wUl begin to 


Page 8 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 





B-259389 


Key Diagnostic System 
Requirement May Not Be 
Achieved 


False Removal Rate Is High 
Risk 


impact the Army’s wartime availability goal of 2,200 hours per year, unless 
additional maintenance personnel are available. 

As of January 1995, the contractor team was estimating that the Army 
would achieve 59 minutes for unit level repairs. According to contractor 
team officials, the requirement was not being met because the cure time 
required for composite material used on the aircraft was greater than 
expected. The contractor team discussed changing the mttr requirement 
to 1 hour; however, the program office beheves the problem could be 
resolved and did not beheve the specification should be changed. The 
contractor team has not yet developed mttr estimates for depot-level 
repair. 

The Comanche’s diagnostic system is required to correctly isolate failed 
mechanical and electrical components at least 80 percent of the time with 
a high degree of accuracy. A high level of accuracy is essential as it allows 
maintainers to isolate and fix problems at the unit level. If the fault 
isolation requirement is not met, the Comanche is unlikely to achieve its 
MTTR requirement, thereby adversely affecting the Army’s ability to execute 
its maintenance concept and its wartime availability goals. 

Contractor team officials stated the fault isolation requirement was very 
optimistic, and although they are striving to meet this requirement, it may 
eventually have to be changed. As of January 1995, the contractor team 
predicted the system could achieve an overall 69-percent fault isolation 
rate; however, this rate would not meet the specification for mechanical 
and electrical component fault isolation. There are design limitations on 
two components, according to the program office, and changes to bring 
these components into conformance with specifications would be costly 
and increase the weight of the aircraft. Therefore, as of January 1995, the 
contractor team and the program office have agreed not to take action on 
these components. 

The Army established a requirement of a 1-percent false removal rate for 
the Comanche. A false removal occurs when apart removed from the 
aircraft shows no evidence of failure when tested. This requirement is 
dependent, to a large extent, on the success of the fault detection/isolation 
system in detecting and isolating failed components. Program personnel 
characterize the 1-percent requirement as stringent and one that will be 
challenging to achieve. An Army Materiel Systems Analysis Activity official 
beheves some design improvements have occurred in this area, but the 
risk associated with achieving this requirement stiU remains high. If the 


Page 9 


GAO/NSIAD-95-H2 Comanche Helicopter 






Comanche does not meet this requirement, estimated operating and 
support costs for the Comanche wUl be higher than previously predicted. 

The Army has not had good experience in developing fault 
detection/isolation and false removal systems for other aircraft. In 
September 1990, we reported that the fault detection and isolation system 
on the Apache aircraft did not always accmrately detect the component 
that caused a particular fault, and the system detected faults that did not 
actually exist about 40 percent of the time.^ As a result, Apache 
maintainers had to perform additional work to locate failed components. 
Recently, through a reliability program, the false removal rate for the 
targeting and night vision systems on the Apache improved to about 10 to 
15 percent, according to Army officials. This is still significantly higher 
than the 1-percent requirement established for the Comanche program. 


Some Program Goals 
Are Currently Being 
Met 


Although the program is experiencing technical problems, it is currently 
meeting its goals of reducing maintenance levels and keeping overall 
weight growth within acceptable limits for the Comanche. 

The Army’s maintenance concept for the Comanche program is predicated 
on two levels of maintenance—unit- and depot-level maintenance. This 
concept is important to achieving operating and support savings predicted 
for the program because it eliminates the intermediate level of 
maintenance. Unit-level maintenance entails removing and replacing 
components required to return the aircraft to a serviceable condition. 
Depot-level maintenance requires higher level maintenance skills and 
sophisticated capital equipment and facilities not found at the unit level. 
The Army traditionally uses a three-level maintenance concept that 
includes intermediate-level maintenance to handle component repairs. 
Intermediate-level maintenance is usually located close to the battalion. It 
is performed on components that cannot be easily repaired at the unit 
level and do not require the more sophisticated repairs done at the depot 
level. 


As of January 1995, no Comanche component had been designated for 
repair at the intermediate level, according to the program office. 
Contractor team personnel are conducting repair level analysis on 
Comanche components to determine whether components should be 
repaired at unit, intermediate, or depot facihties, according to program 


‘‘Apache Helicopter; Serious Logistical Support Problems Must Be Solved to Realize Combat Potential 
(GAO/NSIAD-90-294, Sept. 28, 1990). 


Page 10 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 






and contractor team officials. Any candidates identified for 
intermediate-level repair are reviewed for possible design changes that 
could allow maintenance at the unit or depot level. If economically 
feasible, the contractor team will make design changes to the component 
to preclude the need for intermediate-level repair. 

As of February 7,1995, the Comanche’s empty weight increased from its 
original specification of 7,500 pounds to 7,883 pounds. Although the 
Comanche’s weight continues to increase, it remains within the allowable 
design limit of 7,997 pounds. Weight increases affect vertical rate of chmb 
performance on the Comanche. 'The Army established a limit of 
500 feet-per-minute as the minimum acceptable vertical rate of cUmb 
performance.® If the Comanche’s weight exceeds 8,231 pounds, the engine 
will have to be redesigned to produce enough power at 95 percent 
maximum rated engine power to sustain the minimum 500 feet-per-minute 
vertical rate of climb requirement. 


Recommendation 


We recommend that the Secretary of Defense require the Army to 
complete operational testing to validate the Comanche’s operational 
effectiveness and suitability before committing any funds to acquire 
long-lead production items or enter low-rate initial production. 


Agency Comments 
and Our Evaluation 


DOD generally concurred with the findings and original recommendations 
in our draft report. In commenting on the draft report, dod offered 
explanations about why the problems that we identified were occurring 
and what they were doing to fix those problems, dod disagreed with the 
report’s conclusion about false removals and stated that we had not 
presented any evidence that the Comanche’s 1-percent false removal rate 
may not be achievable. We stiU beheve that the false removal goal is high 
risk and adjusted the report to more clearly reflect our concern. 

Regarding our draft report recommendation that dod develop program 
fixes that achieve program goals and reduce the risks we identified, dod 
concurred and noted that the approved restructuring will significantly 
reduce risk, dod concurred with our other draft recommendation not to 
commit production funds to the program until performance and mission 
requirements are met and noted that the program would be reviewed by 
DOD before approving the Army’s request to proceed to the engineering and 


^At 95-percent maximum rated engine power. 


Page 11 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 






Scope and 
Methodology 


manufacturing development phase—^the Milestone II decision scheduled 
for October 2001. 

Because dod concurred in our draft report recommendations and is taking 
action on them, we are no longer including them in this report. However, 
our analysis of information on the restructuring obtained after we had 
subnritted our draft report to dod has further heightened our concerns 
about the risk of concurrency; therefore, we have revised the report and 
added a new recommendation. Under the stretched out, restructured 
Comanche program, operational testing is not even scheduled to begin 
until after the low-rate initial production decision is made. This approach 
continues the risks associated with making production decisions before 
knowing whether the aircraft wiU be able to perform as required. 

Prior to the restructure, the Army planned to start operational testing with 
eight aircraft in May 2003. Under the restructured program, the Army plans 
to start operational testing with six hehcopters by about August 2005. We 
beUeve that the stretched out time frame and the six aircraft acquired 
under the restructure provide sufficient time and aircraft to operationally 
test the Comanche prior to making any production decisions. 

Additionally, because operational testing is not scheduled until about 
August 2005, DOD will not be in a position at Milestone II in October 2001 
to adequately address whether the Comanche program is meeting its 
performance requirements, dod’s comments are presented in their entirety 
in appendix I, along with our evaluation. 


To assess cost changes, software development, maintainability, and weight 
growth issues, we reviewed program documents and interviewed officials 
from the Department of the Army headquarters, Washington, D.C.; the 
Comanche Program Manager’s Office, St. Louis, Missouri; the U.S. Army 
Materiel Systems Analysis Activity, Aberdeen Proving Ground, Maryland; 
the Ada Vahdation Facility, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio; and the 
Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Program Analysis and 
Evaluation, Washington, D.C. We also reviewed program documents and 
interviewed contractor and Defense Plant Representative Office officials 
at the Boeing Helicopter Company, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; the 
Sikorsky Aircraft Corporation, Stratford, Connecticut; and the Comanche 
Joint Program Office, Trumbull, Connecticut. 


Page 12 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 







B-259389 


We conducted our review between August 1994 and February 1995 in 
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. 


We are also sending copies of this report to the Chairmen and Ranking 
Minority Members of the Senate and House Committees on 
Appropriations, the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs, and the 
House Committee on Government Reform and Oversight; the Director, 
Office of Management and Budget; and the Secretaries of Defense and the 
Army. We wfil also provide copies to others upon request. 

This report was prepared under the direction of Thomas J. Schulz, 
Associate Director, Systems Development and Production Issues. Please 
contact Mr. Schulz at (202) 512-4841 if you or your staff have any questions 
concerning this report. Other major contributors to this report are listed in 
appendix II. 



Louis J. Rodrigues 
Director, Systems Development and 
Production Issues 


Page 13 


GAO/NSlAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 






Contents 


Letter 

1 

Appendix I 

16 

Comments From the 


Department of 


Defense 



Appendix II 29 

Major Contributors to 
This Report 


Abbreviations 

DOD Department of Defense 

MTTR mean time to repair 

MMH/FH maintenance man-hours per flight hour 


Page 14 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 


Page 15 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 






Appendix I 


Comments From the Department of Defense 


Note: GAO comments 
supplementing those in the 
report text appear at the 
end of this appendix. 


See comment 1. 


See comment 2. 



ACQUISITION AND 
TECHNOLOGY 


OFFICE OF THE UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 

3000 DEFENSE PENTAGON 
WASHINGTON DC 20301-3000 


APR 2 0 199S 


Mr. Henry L. Hinton, Jr. 

Assistant Comptroller General 
National Security and International 
Affairs Division 
U.S. General Accounting Office 
Washington, D.C. 20548 


Dear Mr. Hinton: 



This is the Department of Defense (DoD) response to the 
General Accounting Office (GAO) draft report, "COMANCHE 
HELICOPTER: Opportunity to Reassess Costs and Technical Risks 

dated March 6, 1995 (GAO Code 707084), OSD Case 9877. The 
Department partially concurs with the GAO draft report. 

While the DoD agrees that the unit cost of the Comanche has 
increased, the GAO discussion of unit cost is somewhat misleading 
since it does not clearly define the term "unit cost" or state 
whether unit costs are being measured in constant or current year 
dollars. The DoD maintains that Comanche unit flyaway cost 
should be measured in constant FY 1988 base-year dollars, since 
that basis provides a more accurate measure of relative cost 
increases over time. 


The DoD also agrees that the software intensive nature of 
the Comanche will require that progressive software development 
be monitored and demonstrated. The Department recently approved 
a restructured Comanche program that will provide for additional 
operational experience during development and addressed overall 
program risk. Under that approach, production and weapon systems 
integration will be deferred until additional operational results 
are available, thereby significantly reducing technical risk. 

The Defense Acquisition Board will review the program to ensure 
that performance and mission requirements are satisfied before 
Comanche enters the Engineering and Manufacturing Phase. 

The detailed DoD comments on the report findings and 
recommendations are provided in the Enclosure. The Department 
appreciates the opportunity to comment on the draft report. 




George R. Schneiter 
Director 

Strategic and Tactical Systems 


Enclosure 



Page 16 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 




Appendix I 

Comments From the Department of Defense 


GAO DRAFT REPORT - DATED MARCH 6, 1995 
(GAO CODE 707084) OSD CASE 9877 

"COMAMCHE HELICOPTER: OPPORTUMITY TO REASSESS 
COSTS AND TECHNICAL RISKS” 

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE COMMENTS 


* • * * * 

FINDINGS 


o FINDING A t Comanche Is Mot a Low-Cost Aircraft . The GAO 
reported that in 1985, the Comanche had estimated total 
program costs of about $61 billion for 5,023 aircraft (or 
$12.1 million per aircraft). The GAO observed that in 1992, 

(1) program cost per aircraft had increased to $27.4 million, 

(2) acquisition quantities had been reduced to 1,292 aircraft, 
and (3) future increases in program cost per aircraft were 
likely. The GAO determined that as of February 1995, the 
Comanche's estimated program cost was $34.4 million per 
aircraft, a 185-percent increase from the 1985 estimate. 

The GAO also determined that the estimated total program cost 
for the planned acquisition of 1,292 aircraft is now more than 
$44 billion. 

The GAO reported that in December 1994, the Secretary of 
Defense directed the Army to restructure the Comanche 
helicopter program as part of efforts to meet budgetary 
constraints. The GAO noted that the Secretary’s decision 
(1) reduced funding for the program from $4.2 billion to 
$2.2 billion for FY 1996-FY 2001, (2) called for two 

flyable prototypes to be produced, and (3) deferred the 
Comanche production decision. 

The GAO reported that as an alternative to the Secretary's 
December 1994 restructuring decision, the Army is proposing to 
buy six "early operational capability" aircraft, in addition 
to the two prototypes, costing in excess of $300 million. 

The GAO noted that the Army does not consider those aircraft 
as either prototype or low-rate initial production aircraft; 
however, according to program officials when the aircraft are 
fielded, the Army will be able to better evaluate the 
Comanche's mission capability. The GAO further noted that an 
Army program official also indicated that the six aircraft can 
be acquired within the proposed $2.2 billion funding level by 
deferring additional developmental efforts. 

The GAO concluded that both the DoD and Army proposal will 
extend the development program by about three years and, under 


Page 17 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 






Appendix I 

Comments From the Department of Defense 


Now on pp. 3-5. 


See comment 1. 


either proposal, the overall cost of the program and cost per 
aircraft will likely increase. The GAO noted, however, that 
the DoD proposal provides an opportunity to reduce the risk 
that the Army will concurrently produce aircraft, while 
significant development efforts are ongoing. The GAO, 
nevertheless, pointed out that the Army proposal to defer 
additional developmental efforts to FY 2002 and beyond may 
increase the risk that needed funds may not be available then. 
The GAO noted that if that is the case, the Army may (1) 
further stretch out the program or (2) enter production before 
critical technology is fully developed. (pp. 2-7/GAO Draft 
Report) 

DOD RESPONSE S Partially concur. The DoD acknowledges that 
Comanche unit costs have increased. However, the GAO 
discussion of unit cost in the report is misleading, because 
it does not specifically define how "unit cost" is measured. 
There are many measures of unit cost, such as program 
acquisition unit cost, unit procurement cost, and average unit 
flyaway cost. It is unclear from the report which unit cost 
measure the GAO is using. In addition, the report does not 
recognize that the total production quantity and annual 
production rate reductions, along with changes in the fleet 
aircraft capability, have significantly increased unit cost by 
any measure. Since the mid-1980s, the total procurement 
quantity has been reduced from 5,023 aircraft to the 1,292 
aircraft planned today; the annual production rate has been 
reduced from 480 aircraft per year to a maximum of 120 
aircraft per year; and the utility version of the aircraft has 
been eliminated, leaving only the more complex and expensive 
reconnaissance/attack version. 

It also appears the GAO used current year or then year 
dollars, which include the affects of inflation, to report the 
unit costs. Comanche funding was reduced in the FY 1993 and 
the FY 1996 DoD budgets, resulting in program delays and 
restructuring. Those delays contributed to increased cost 
when measured in current year dollars due to increased 
inflation effects. A more appropriate measure for comparing 
the relative increase in Comanche unit cost is average unit 
flyaway cost, expressed in constant year dollars. Prior to 
1988, the program was in a conceptual stage, and the estimated 
flyaway cost fluctuated often, as design trades and user 
requirements were established. In 1988, Milestone I approval 
was granted, and the average unit flyaway cost was established 
at $7.5 million for a program with a total buy of 2,096 
aircraft produced at a rate of 216 aircraft per year. The 
last average unit flyaway cost estimate, established by the 
Army in 1993, is $10.5 million for 1,292 aircraft purchased at 
a rate of 120 aircraft per year. Both estimates are in 
constant FY 1988 dollars, the program's base year. 


Page 18 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 







Appendix I 

Comments From the Department of Defense 


See pp. 11-12. 


Now on p. 5. 


The DoD also acknowledges that should additional Comanche 
development efforts deferred until FY 2002 will have to 
compete for funds with other DoD programs. However, this 
necessarily increase the risk of funds not being available. 
However, the DoD does not support the GAO's contention that 
the program will stretch or enter production before critical 
technology is fully developed. The restructured program will 
put six Early Operational Capability aircraft in the hands of 
operational troops, and will provide an opportunity to have 
real world experience fed back into the aircraft developmental 
process. The Department will also evaluate the full potential 
of Comanche in future joint operations. The aircraft will be 
configured with key technologies, such as a second-generation 
Forward Looking Infrared device, advanced aided target 
detection, and low observables, which are critical to the 
accomplishment of the Comanche’s primary reconnaissance 
mission. In addition, the Defense Acquisition Board will 
review program status, acquisition strategy, risk, 
affordability, and demonstrated benefits of Comanche at 
Milestone II before approving the Army's request to proceed 
into the Engineering and Manufacturing Development Phase. 


o FINDING B ; Software Development is at Risk . The GAO reported 
that the Comanche will be the most computerized, software¬ 
intensive helicopter ever built. The GAO noted that the Army 
estimates that more than 1.3 million lines of code are 
required to perform and integrate mission critical functions. 
The GAO added that, with additional ground support and 
training software to be developed, the total program will have 
more than 2.7 million lines of code. The GAO added that the 
Army estimates 95 percent of the Comanche's total software 
will be written in Ada, a DoD-developed programming language. 
The GAO noted that the Army plans to demonstrate initial 
software performance with the mission equipment package, which 
includes the flight control system, during first flight of the 
Comanche, scheduled for November 1995. The GAO concluded that 
(1) software development problems still exist with the Ada 
compilation system, (2) delays in software development and 
integration are occurring, and (3) improvements are needed in 
configuration management. The GAO further concluded that if 
the issues are not resolved, the aircraft's performance and 
capability will be degraded. (pp. 7-8/GAO Draft Report) 

o DOD Response ; Concur. The DoD acknowledges that a program 
that includes an estimated 2.7 million lines of code will in 
involve some degree of risk. However, the Army has recognized 
the risks and has developed software engineering management 
and risk management plans to address the specific risk areas 
involved. 


Page 19 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 






Appendix I 

Comments From the Department of Defense 


Now on pp. 5-6. 


o riNDIHG C ; Development Problems Remain Unresolved for the Ada 
Compilation Svatem . The GAO asserted that, although almost 
all of the Comanche software will be developed in the Ada 
programming language, software developers are not using the 
same version of the Ada compilation system. The GAO stated 
that subcontractors and the contractor team should be using 
the same qualified version of the compilation system to ensure 
effective software integration. The GAO asserted, however, 
that fixes to individual compiler software problems are not 
being shared with all developers; therefore, they are not 
using a common compilation system. The GAO asserted that 
those problems have already delayed qualification testing of 
the compilation system by 1 year. 

The GAO reported that the lack of a uniform, qualified 
compilation system among software developers, could put first 
flight at risk, according to the Defense Plant Representative 
Office (DPRO). The GAO added that problems with software 
integration may show up once integration testing begins in the 
June to November 1995 time frame; and if that occurs, there 
may not be time to fix problems prior to the scheduled first 
flight. (pp. 8-9/GAO Draft Report) 

POD RESPONSE ; Partially concur. Unnecessary risk is incurred 
by the program if the vendors and subcontractors use variant 
Ada compilation systems. That is not necessarily an uncommon 
practice in such a large scale effort, with multiple 
developers working simultaneously, for different families of 
tools (including compilers) to be utilized. However, contrary 
to the GAO assertion, common updates to the Ada Compilation 
System are provided to all software developers whose software 
is co-resident in the same computer. Software developers then 
transition to the updated compilation system over a period of 
time compatible with their ongoing development efforts. The 
DoD agrees that compilation system qualification is a year 
behind the original schedule. The delay resulted from a 
conscious Army decision to put a higher priority on software 
development support over Ada compilation. The management 
decision was caused by a congressional funding reduction of 
$60 million in the FY 1994 President's budget. 


o FINDING D ; Delays in Software Development and Testing . The 

GAO reported that the program is experiencing high turnover of 
software engineers at one of the contractor team's facilities. 
The GAO found that loss of key personnel has already 
contributed to schedule slippage in several critical software 
development areas, such as the airborne engine monitoring 
system, aircraft systems management, control database, and 
crewstation interface management. The GAO noted that the 
contractor team has formulated a "get well" plan that is 
dependent on being able to hire additional personnel in those 


Page 20 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 



Appendix I 

Comments From the Department of Defense 


Now on pp. 6-7. 


areas. The GAO commented, however, that hiring additional 
qualified personnel is difficult, according to the DPRO, 
because employment would be short term. 

The GAO also found that the flight control system software 
verification testing is being delayed. The GAO noted that as 
of February 8, 1995, Boeing had conducted only 163 of 
approximately 500 tests originally planned to be completed by 
that date. The GAO observed that Boeing's latest recovery 
plan reflected a completion date of July 1995—a 5-month 
delay. The GAO noted that Boeing is scheduled to complete the 
tests prior to first flight. The GAO commented that according 
to the program office, Boeing's plan to complete the testing 
calls for it to be conducted concurrently. The GAO asserted 
that if major problems occur in any one of the testing phases, 
there may not be enough time to fix the problem and complete 
all testing before first flight. (pp. 9-11/GAO Draft Report) 

POD RESPONSE ; Concur. Some delays have been experienced as a 
result of personnel losses; however, those personnel have been 
replaced with qualified and experienced personnel. A behind- 
schedule condition existed while the replacement personnel 
were hired. The program is currently addressing the behind- 
schedule condition by the use of overtime, and by implementing 
process improvements to meet the November 1995 first flight 
date. 


Now on p. 7. 


FINDING e : Improvements in Configuration Management Are 
Needed . The GAO concluded that the part of configuration 
management used to report software problems and changes among 
the contractor team and subcontractors has shortcomings that 
put software development at risk. The GAO noted that in the 
November 1994 monthly assessment report, the DPRO observed 
that the lack of a common problem reporting system made proper 
handling of software related changes difficult. The GAO also 
noted that the report indicated that the situation could 
adversely impact scheduled first flight of the Comanche. The 
GAO added that as of January 1995, the contractor team still 
did not have a common, automated database available to track 
problem change reports. The GAO concluded, therefore, that 
the contractor team, as well as subcontractors, did not have 
visibility over changes made to software. (pp. ll-12/GAO 
Draft Report) 


POD RESPONSE ; Concur. Configuration Management system 
improvements—addressing the common problem reporting system 
and common, automated database concerns raised by the GAO—are 
being implemented and should be in place by the end of 1995. 


Page 21 


GAO/NSLAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 







Appendix I 

Comments From the Department of Defense 


Now on pp. 7-8. 


See comment 3. 


o FINDING F ; Key Maintenance Goal Hay Not Be Realistic . 

The GAO pointed out that the reasonableness of the Comanche's 

2.6 direct maintenance man-hours per flight hour (MMH/FH) 
requirement has been debated for several years within the Army 
and the DoD. The GAO noted that representatives from the 
program office, the Army Materiel Systems Analysis Activity, 
the Office of the Assistant Secretary of the Army for 
Research, Development, and Acquisition, and the Army Cost and 
Economic Analysis Center, met on October 28, 1994, and agreed 
that the 2.6 MMH/FH requirement was not a realistic, 
achievable goal. The GAO noted that, consequently. Army 
officials reached consensus and agreed on 3.2 direct MMH/FH. 
The GAO added that, however, during those discussions, Army 
Materiel Systems Analysis Activity personnel noted that 
attaining a 3.2 MMH/FH goal represented a medium to high risk, 
while a 4.3 MMH/FH goal had a low to medium risk. 

The GAO concluded that the direct MMH/FH requirement does not 
represent the total maintenance burden for the Comanche 
because it does not include indirect maintenance time. The 
GAO asserted that the Army does not normally collect data on 
indirect maintenance time. The GAO noted that according to 
the program office, its best estimate of indirect maintenance 
time, following Army guidance, is 2.5 MMH/FH, and that figure 
has been used for calculating manpower needs for crew chief 
personnel on the Comanche. The GAO indicated that, thus, the 
total maintenance burden assumed for the Comanche is currently 

5.7 MMH/FH (3.2 direct MMH/FH plus 2.5 indirect MMH/FH). The 
GAO asserted that increasing the maintenance factor to 5.7 
MMH/FH increased the number of maintainers needed and will 
increase estimated operating and support costs by about $800 
million over a 20-year period. (pp. 12-14/GAO Draft Report) 

DOD RESPONSE ; Partially concur. The DoD acknowledges that 
the Army decided to calculate maintenance manpower based on 
3.2 maintenance man-hours per flight hour instead of the 2.6. 
However, it should be recognized that the program office has 
not changed the design requirement. 

Further, current Army budget and plans are based on a 3.2 
direct maintenance man-hours per flight hour and 2.5 indirect 
maintenance man-hours per flight hour. Therefore, existing 
operating and support estimates take into account the higher 
direct maintenance man-hours per flight hour and would not 
need to be increased as stated by the GAO. 


o FINDING G : Repair Requirement May Not Be Met . The GAO 

reported that to minimize turn-around time for repairs at the 
unit and depot, the Army established mean time to repair 
(MTTR) requirements of 52 minutes for repairs at the unit 
level and up to 12 hours at the depot level for the Comanche. 


Page 22 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 



Appendix I 

Comments From the Department of Defense 


Now on pp. 8-9. 


See comment 3. 


Now on p. 9. 


The GAO noted that those requirements represent the average 
time expected to diagnose a fault, remove and repair an item, 
and perform an operational check and/or test flight. The GAO 
asserted that any increase in MTTR above 1.0 hours will begin 
to impact the Army wartime availability goal of 2,200 hours 
per year, unless additional maintenance personnel are 
available. 

The GAO noted that as of January 1995, the contractor team was 
estimating that the Army would achieve 59 minutes for unit 
level repairs. The GAO commented that according to contractor 
team officials, the requirement was not being met, because the 
cure time required for composite material used on the aircraft 
was greater than expected. The GAO indicated that the program 
office felt the problem could be resolved and did not believe 
the specification should be changed. The GAO added that the 
contractor team has not yet developed MTTR estimates for 
depot-level repair. (pp. 12-14/GAO Draft Report) 

POD RESPONSE ; Partially concur. The DoD concurs that any 
increase above 1.0 hour mean time to repair (MTTR) will impact 
operational availability. However, the Department does not 
agree with the GAO conclusion that the Comanche repair 
requirement of 1.0 hour may not be met. First, the Comanche 
prediction is meeting the 1.0 hour Operational Requirements 
Document (ORD) requirement. The shortfall is between the 
contractor prediction (0.98 hour) and the contractual 
specification (0.87 hour). Second, the contractor is actively 
addressing the shortfall. As noted by the GAO, composite 
materials cure time is a factor in meeting the repair 
requirement. Existing and emerging technologies and processes 
are being examined for systemic impacts in an effort to reduce 
cure times. Chemical, temperature, and magnetic-field-effect 
composite cure accelerators are among the technologies being 
explored. 


o FINDING H ; Key Diagnostic System Recruirement May Not be 

Achieved. The GAO reported that the Comanche's diagnostic 
system is required to correctly isolate failed mechanical and 
electrical components at least 80 percent of the time with a 
high degree of accuracy. The GAO noted that a high level of 
accuracy is essential as it allows maintainers to isolate and 
fix problems at the unit level. The GAO pointed out that, if 
the fault isolation requirement is not met, the Comanche is 
unlikely to achieve its MTTR requirement, thereby adversely 
affecting the Army's ability to execute its maintenance 
concept and its wartime availability goals. The GAO observed 
that the contractor team officials indicated the fault 
isolation requirement was very optimistic, and may eventually 
have to be changed, (pp. 15-16/GAO Draft Report) 


Page 23 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 




Appendix I 

Comments From the Department of Defense 


See comment 3. 


Now on pp. 9-10. 


See comment 4. 


POD RESPONSE ; Partially concur. Fault isolation is one of 
the key diagnostic system requirements. The DoD agrees that, 
if the fault isolation requirement is not met, the Comanche is 
unlikely to achieve its mean-time-to-repair requirement, 
thereby adversely affecting the Army ability to execute its 
two-level maintenance concept. However, achieving the Army 
wartime operational availability goals is not solely dependent 
on achieving the fault isolation requirement. 

The Army recognizes that the key diagnostic system require¬ 
ments are challenging and has established risk mitigation 
activities specifically intended to reduce the risk of not 
meeting diagnostic requirements. Diagnostics have been a key 
design area throughout the Comanche's development. The 
program office has included testability analysis, maintain¬ 
ability and logistics demonstrations, and separate diagnostic 
demonstrations to ensure the diagnostic requirements are met. 
Additionally, the Department has established an exit criterion 
on the successful completion of the electro-optical sensor 
system (BOSS) diagnostic demonstration before entering 
production. The BOSS system is considered the most complex 
and most representative subsystem of the complex Comanche 
design. 


o FINDING I ; False Removal Rate Probably Not Achievable . The 
GAO reported that the Army established a requirement of a 
1-percent false removal rate for the Comanche, The GAO noted 
that the program personnel characterize the 1-percent 
requirement as stringent and one that will be challenging to 
achieve. The GAO commented that according to an Army Materiel 
Systems Analysis Activity official, some design improvements 
have occurred in this area, but the risk associated with 
achieving the requirement still remains high. The GAO 
concluded that if the Comanche does not meet the requirement, 
estimated operating and support costs for the Comanche will be 
higher than previously predicted. The GAO asserted that the 
Army has not had good experience in developing fault 
detection/isolation and false removal systems for other 
aircraft. (pp, 16-17/GAO Draft Report) 

DOD RESPONSE ; Nonconcur. The DoD nonconcurs that the false 
removal rate requirement is "probably" not achievable. 

Although the false removal rate requirement is stringent and 
the Army has not had good experience in the past with false 
removals on other aircraft, there is no current evidence or 
test data to suggest that the requirement is "probably" not 
achievable. 

The Army has established a number of risk mitigation 
activities to help meet the requirement. Additionally, a 
Portable Maintenance Aid Instrumentation Pack (PIP) is being 


Page 24 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 



Appendix I 

Comments From the Department of Defense 


Nowon pp. 10-11. 


developed to test components on aircraft versus off the 
aircraft. The PIP addresses the historical problem of testing 
components off the aircraft and finding no evidence of failure 
(a false removal). The ability to test the component and the 
associated aircraft interfaces using the PIP will signifi¬ 
cantly reduce false removals and ensure the achievement of the 
false removal rate requirement. 


o FINDING J ; Soma Program Goals Are Currently Being Met . 

The GAO reported that although the program is experiencing 
technical problems, it is currently meeting its goals of 
reducing maintenance levels and keeping overall weight growth 
within acceptable limits for the Comanche. 

The GAO pointed out that as of January 1995, no Comanche 
component had been designated for repair at the intermediate 
level, according to the program office. The GAO reported that 
contractor team personnel are conducting repair level analysis 
on Comanche components to determine whether components should 
be repaired at unit, intermediate, or depot facilities, 
according to program and contractor team officials. The GAO 
noted that any candidates identified for intermediate-level 
repair are reviewed for possible design changes that could 
allow maintenance at the unit or depot level. The GAO also 
noted that, if economically feasible, the contractor team will 
make design changes to the component to preclude the need for 
intermediate-level repair. 

The GAO reported that as of February 7, 1995, the Comanche's 
empty weight increased from its original specification of 
7,500 pounds to 7,883 pounds. The GAO noted that, although 
the Comanche's weight continues to increase, it remains within 
the allowable design limit of 7,997 pounds. The GAO explained 
that weight increases affect vertical rate of climb 
performance on the Comanche. The GAO pointed out that the 
Army established a limit of 500 feet-per-minute as the minimum 
acceptable vertical rate of climb performance. The GAO 
asserted that if the Comanche's weight exceeds 8,231 pounds, 
the engine will have to be redesigned to produce enough power 
at 95 percent maximum rated engine power to sustain the 
minimum 500 feet-per-minute vertical rate of climb 
requirement. (pp. 17-19/GAO Draft Report) 

POD RESPONSE ; Concur. The DoD concurs that some program 
goals are currently being met. With specific regard to the 
Comanche weight requirement, the GAO is correct that the empty 
weight goal at Milestone I was 7,500 pounds. However, in 1993 
the Comanche empty weight contract specification was changed 
to 7,765 pounds. That change was attributed to incorporating 
provisions for Longbow; the heavier, more powerful T800 growth 


Page 25 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 






Appendix I 

Comments From the Department of Defense 


engine; and the redefinition of the empty weight calculation 
to include additional combat kits. 

The February 7, 1995, empty weight estimate (7,883 pounds) 
referenced by the GAO is the current estimate measured against 
the contemporary 7,765-pound goal. The 7,997 pounds 
referenced by the GAO is the value specified in a design 
flexibility clause in the contract. That value allows the 
contractor to propose cost versus performance tradeoffs up to 
that limit. The 500 feet-per-minute vertical rate of climb 
goal cannot be met with Longbow installed if the empty weight 
of the Comanche exceeds 8,231 pounds. 

***** 


Page 26 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 



Now on p. 


See pp. 11 


Now on p, 


See pp. 11 




Appendix I 

Comments From the Department of Defense 


12 , 


- 12 . 


12 . 


- 12 . 


RECOMMENDATIONS 


o RECOMMENDATION 1 : The GAO recommended that the Secretary of 

Defense assess the Comanche program to assure that the Army 
develops fixes that achieve program goals and reduce risk 
associated with the technical problems identified in this 
report and with the restructuring of the Comanche program. 

(pp. 19-20/GAO Draft Report) 

POD Response ; Concur. On March 21, the Department approved a 
restructured program which includes two prototypes and six 
Early Operational Capability aircraft in the hands of the 
troops for user evaluation. This approach defers production 
and weapon system integration, which will significantly reduce 
risk. 


o RECOMMENDATION 2 ; The GAO recommended that the Secretary of 

Defense assess the Comanche program to assure that the program 
meets performance and mission requirements before any 
production funds are requested. (pp. 19-20/GAO Draft Report) 


POD Response ; Concur. As explained in the DoD response to 
Recommendation 1, the revised Comanche development program 
will provide an opportunity for additional operational 
experience during Comanche development. Overall program 
results will be considered by the Defense Acquisition Board at 
the Milestone II review for approval to proceed into the 
Engineering and Manufacturing Phase. The Milestone II review 
is currently projected for October 2001. 


Page 27 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 








Appendix I 

Comments From the Department of Defense 


The following are gao’s comments on the Department of Defense’s (dod) 
letter dated April 20, 1995. 

1. As dod’s comments note, there are many measures of unit cost, such 
as average unit flyaway cost, program acquisition unit cost, and unit 
procurement cost. We believe that the program unit cost that we used in 
the report—^which the footnote in the report defines as total research, 
development, and acquisition costs in current dollars—is as valid as 
flyaway cost to portray program cost growth over time. We have ac^justed 
the report to more clearly define the basis of the unit cost we use. 

2. These comments are dealt with on pages 11 and 12 of the report and in 
our responses to the specific dod comments that foUow. Report material 
on costs and concurrency has been revised to reflect information obtained 
after our fieldwork had been concluded. 

3. The report does not say that maintainability goals will never be met. 
We pointed out that some key maintainability requirements are not being 
met and, therefore, there is a risk that the Army may not achieve the lower 
operating and support costs and wartime availability goals that it has 
established for this program. We also said that individually, failure to meet 
these parameters may not be a significant problem; however, collectively 
they affect the ability of the Comanche to achieve the cost and availability 
goals. This point is clearly illustrated in dod’s comments on the failure of 
the fault isolation system. According to dod, “Fault isolation is one of the 
key diagnostic system requirements. 'The dod agrees that if the fault 
isolation requirement is not met, the Comanche is unlikely to achieve its 
mean-time-to-repair requirement,...”. 

4. We stiU believe that this goal is very aggressive, dod acknowledges 
that this goal is stringent and the Army has not had good experience in the 
past with false removals on other aircraft. Additionally, as noted in the 
report. Army Materiel Systems Analysis Activity said the risk associated 
with achieving this requirement remains high. We changed the section 
heading to emphasize the high risk. 


Page 28 


GAO/NSIAD-95-112 Comanche Helicopter 




Appendix II 


Major Contributors to This Report 


National Security and 
International Affairs 
Division, Washington, 

D.C. 


Accounting and 
Information 
Management Division 


David Chao 


K^sas City Regional 

Office Lauri A. Bischof 

Michael W. Buell 
Karen A. Rieger 


(707084) 


Page 29 


GAO/NSIAD'95-112 Comanche Helicopter 





