
COMPUTER-AIDED StRUGTURAt 
ENGINEERING (C^i) l^tWEdT 

CONTRACT REPORT-ITL-92-2 



KNOWLEDGE-BASED EXRERT SYSTEM 
FOR SELECTION AND DESIGN 


OF RETAINING STRUCTURES 


by 

M. Afockiasamy, G. Sreenivasan, K. Shen 

Department of Ocean Engineering 
Florida Atlantic University 
Boca Raton, Florida 334^ 





SLECTE 

0Viei932 


I 

i 


BEST 

AVAILABLE COPY 



September 1992 
Final Report 


Approved For Public Roloaso; Distribution Is Unlimited 


Prepared for DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY 
US Army Corps bf Engineers 
Washington, DC 20314-1000 

Monitored by Information Technology Laboratory ' 

US Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station 
3909 Halls Ferry Rond, Vicksburg. Mississippi ' 39180-6199 

Ur^der Contract No. DACW39-90-R-0041 
















Destroy this report when no longer needed. Do not return 
it to the originator. 


The findings in this report ore not to be construed os an official 
Department of the Army position unless so designated 
by other authorized documents. 


This program is furnished by the Government and is accepted and used 
by the recipient with the express understanding that the United States 
Government makes no warranties, expressed or implied, concerning the 
accuracy, completeness, reliability, usability, or suitability for any 
particular .purpose of the information ond doto contained in this pro¬ 
gram or furnished in connection therewith, and the United States shall 
be under no liability whatsoever to any person by reason of any use 
mode thereof. The program belongs to the Government. Therefore, the 
-ecipient further agrees not to assert any proprietary rights therein orto 
represent this program to anyone os other than a Government program. 


The contents of this report ore not to be used for 
advertising, publication, or promotional purposes. 
Citation of trade names does not constitute on 
official endorsement or approval of the use of 
such commercial products. 





REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

Form Approved 

0MB No. 0704-01 $8 

Public reporting burdcfl for this colIcctioA of information is estimateo to average i hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, 
gath^ng and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the colleaion of information. Send comments reoarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this 
collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washir«gton Headquarters Services. Directorate for information Operations and Reports, I2ts Jefferson 
Oavis Highway. Suite 1204. Arlington, VA 22202*4302. and to the Office of Management and Budget. Paperwork Reduction ^oject (O/OA-OlBB), Washington. DC 20S03 

1. AGENCY USE ONLY (iMve blank) 2. REPORT DATE 3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

September 1992 Final reoort 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Knowledge-Based Expert System for Selection 
and Design of Retaining Structures 

S. FUNDING NUMBERS 

C DACW39-90-R-0041 

6. AUTHOR(S) 

M. Arockiasamy, G. Sieenivasan, K. Shen 

7. PERFORMING ORGANI2ATION NAME(S) AND AOORESS(ES) 

Department of Ocean Engineering 

Florida Atlantic University 

Boca Raton, FL 33431 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 

REPORT NUMBER 

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND AOORESS(ES) 

US Army Corps of Engineers, Washington, DC 20314-1000 

USAE Waterways Experiment Station, Information Technology 
Laboratory, 3909 Halls Ferry Road, Vicksburg, MS 39180-6199 

10. SPONSORING/MONITORING 

AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 

Contract Report 

ITL-92-2 

11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

Available from National Technical Information Service, 5285 Port Royal Road 

Springfield, VA 22161. 

12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 

13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) 

This report describes the development of a microcomputer-based prototype expert system (ES), 
RETAININGEARTH, for the selection and design of earth retaining structures. The ES 
RETAININGEARTH is an interactive menu-driven system and consists of two modules - the 
selection module, SELECTWALL, and the design module. SELECTWALL is developed using the 
rule-based M.1 knowledge engineering shell and it makes a choice of the most qipropriate retaining 
structure from a list of toi typical walls. A concise review of the design concepts related to the 
structures is presented together with the design flowcharts. The design module is then developed 
which consists of five independent design programs which perform detailed designs of the concrete 
gravity and cantilever waUs, gabions, reinforced earth and sheetpile structures. The SELECTWALL 
and the design module are linked by an M.1 external code EXT throu^ a control program CALL. 

All the design procedures are coded using the C programming language. The methodology of the 
development of die prototype ES 'RETAININGEARTH' is described together with illustrated 

(Continued) 

14. SUBJEa TERMS 

Knowledge-based expert system Structures 

Retaining walls 

IS. NUMBER OF PAGES 

368 

16. PRICE CODE 

17. SECURITY CUSSIFKATION 18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

OF REFORT OF THIS FAGE OF ABSTRAa 

unclassified_UNCLASSIFIED_ 

20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 


N$N 7540-01 •280-$$00 Standard Form 298 (Rav 2-89) 


^mcribcd by ANSI Std 


m-102 
















13. (Concluded). 

consultations and the hard copy of the codes developed for the selection and design modules are 
given in Appendices A-G. 





PREFACE 


This report presents a developmental prototype knowledge-based expert 
system (ES) RETAININGEARTH for the selection and design of earth retaining 
structures. This study will provide guidance for the selection of an appro¬ 
priate retaining structure, based on a given set of input conditions and 
the subsequent detailed design of the selected structure. Funding for this 
study was provided by Headquarters, US Army Corps of Engineers, and the study 
was monitored by the Information Technology Laboratory (ITL), US Army Engineer 
Waterways Experiment Station (WES), Vicksburg, Mississippi, Partial graduate 
assistantshlps were provided by the Department of Ocean Engineering, Florida 
Atlantic University, Boca Raton, Florida. 

The report was written by Dr. M. Arocklasamy as Principal Investigator 
with able assistance from graduate students. The computer code of the ES 
was developed by Girl Sreenivasan and Keling Shen who worked in this project 
as Graduate Research Assistants. Ms. Barbara Steinberg typed the report 
coordinating the text and tables layout. 

The work was monitored at WES by Mr. Michael E. Pace, under the 
general supervision of Mr. H. Wayne Jones, Chief, Scientific and Engineering 
Applications Center, and Dr. N. Radhakrlshnan, Director, ITL. 

At the time of publication of this report. Director of WES was 
Dr. Robert W. Whalln. Commander and Deputy Director was COL Leonard G. 
Hassell, EN, 


1 Aooession For | 

RTI3 6RA&1 

□ 

DTIC TAB 

□ 

Unannovuioed 

□ 

Justlfloatlon_ 



By- 

Distribution/ 


Aval lability Codaj^ 
jivaii and/or 
Spooial 





1 


1 


' 92-29521 



n 


\ 





ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 


The authors would like to thank Dr. N. Radhakrishnan, Chief, Information 
Technology Laboratory (ITL), US Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station 
(WES), Vicksburg, Mississippi (the sponsor of this project), for his valuable 
guidance, constructive criticism and cooperation. The authors sincerely 
appreciate the constructive and critical comments of Mr. Michael Pace, Civil 
Engineer, ITL at WES which were very valuable in revising the draft final 
report. Grateful acknowledgments are due to several researchers and 
organizations whose references have been adapted, used or reproduced freely in 
the preparation of this report. They wish to express their appreciation to 
Dr. S.E. Dunn, Professor and Chairman, Department of Ocean Engineering and Dr. 
Craig S. Hartley, Dean of Engineering, Florida Atlantic University for their 
support, continued interest and encouragement. 

Finally, Ms. Barbara Steinberg is acknowledged for her excellent and 
patient typing. 


ii 





TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PREFACE 

LIST OF FIGURES 
LIST OF TABLES 
SUMMARY 

1. INTRODUCTION.1-1 

1.1 INTRODUCTION TO EXPERT SYSTEMS.1-1 

1.2 ES APPLICATIONS TO RETAINING STRUCTURES.1-2 

1.3 OBJECTIVES.1-4 

2. FORMULATION OF THE KNOWLEDGE BASE FOR THE EXPERT SYSTEM.2-1 

2.1 KNOWLEDGE SOURCES.2-1 

2.2 KNOWLEDGE BASE ON EARTH RETAINING STRUCTURES.2-2 

2.2.1 General.2-2 

2.2.2 Earth Retaining Structures.2-2 

2.3 SELECTION CONSIDERATIONS .2-11 


iii 














3. KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION.3-1 

3.1 INTRODUCTION.3-1 

3.2 TYPES OF KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION.3-1 

3.2.1. Logic-based Representation.3-3 

3.2.2. Rule-based Representation.3-6 

3.2.3 Network-based Representation.3-8 

3.2.4 Schemas.3-9 

3.2.4.1 Frames and scripts.3-9 

3.3 COMPONENTS OF A KNOWLEDGE-BASED EXPERT SYSTEM.3-12 

3.3.1. Knowledge Base.3-12 

3.3.2. Context.3-12 

3.2.3. The Inference Mechanism.3-13 

3.3.3.1 Forward chaining.3-13 

3.3.3.2. Backward chaining.3-14 

3.3.3.3. Forward chaining vs. backward chaining.3-14 

3.3.4 User Interface.3-15 

3.3.5 Explanation and Knowledge Acquisition Facilities.3-15 

3.3.6 Certainty Factors.3-16 

3.4. KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION IN M.l.3-16 

4. SELECTION OF RETAINING STRUCTURES.4-1 

4.1 INTRODUCTION.4-1 

4.2 RETAINING STRUCTURE SELECTION FACTORS.4-1 

4.2.1. Ground.4-2 

iv 




























4.2.2. Groundwater.4-3 

4.2.3 Construction Considerations.4-3 

4.2.4 Right-of-way.4-4 

4.2.5 Aesthetics.4-4 

4.2.6. Environmental Considerations..4-5 

4.2.7 Durability and Maintenance.4-5 

4.2.8. Cost.4-6 

4.2.9 Risk.4-8 

4.2.10. Politics and Tradition.4-9 

4.3. FORMULATION OF THE KNOWLEDGE BASE FOR RETAINING STRUCTURE 

SELECTION.4-9 

4.3.1 Introduction.4-9 

4.3.2 Methodology of Knowledge Formulation in SELECTWALL.4-11 

5. LINKING PROCEDURE FOR THE SELECTION AND DESIGN MODULES.5-1 

5.1 INTRODUCTION.5-1 

5.2 LINKING PROCEDURE USING THE CONTROL PROGRAM.5-1 

5.3 OVERVIEW OF PROGRAM OPERATION.5-10 

6. CONCRETE GRAVITY RETAINING STRUCTURES.6-1 

6.1 INTRODUCTION.6-1 

6.2 DESIGN PRINCIPLES.6-3 

6.2.1 Earth Pressure.6-3 

6.2.2 External Stability.6-6 

6.3. INTERACTIVE MICROCOMPUTER BASED 'GRAVITY AND CANWALL' PROGRAM 

IMPLEMENTATION.6-10 

6.3.1 Concrete Gravity Retaining Wall.6-10 


V 





























6-10 


6.3.1.1. Program structure 

6.3.1.2. Input and output.6-11 

6.3.1.3. Design example.6-13 

6.3.2. Cantilever Retaining Wall.6-13 

6.3.2.1. Program structure.6-13 

6.3.2.2. Input and output. 6-17 

6.3.2.3. Design example.6-17 

7. GABION RETAINING STRDCTORES.7-1 


7.1. INTRODUCTION.7-1 

7.2. CHARACTERISTICS OF GABION AND FILLING MATERIALS.7-1 

7.3. CHARACTERISTICS OF GABION RETAINING STRUCTURES.7-3 

7.4. DESIGN CRITERIA.7-5 

7.4.1. Gabion Wall Types.7-5 

7.4.2. Loads Imposed by the Backfill.7-6 

7.4.3. Earth Pressure Due to Surcharge.7-8 

7.4.4. Stability Criteria for Gabion Walls.7-12 

7.4.4.1. Check for sliding.7-13 

7 .4.2. Check for overturning.7-13 

7.4.4.3. Check for overall stability.7-14 

7.4.4.4. Check on foundation bearing pressure.7-16 

7.5 INTERACTIVE MICROCOMPUTER BASED 'GABION' PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION..7-18 

7.5... Program Structure.7-18 

7.5.2. Input and Output.7-19 

7.5.3. Design Example.7-19 

vi 





























8. REINFORCED EARTH VALL 


8-1 


8 . 1 . 

8 . 2 . 

8 . 2 . 1 . 

8 . 2 . 2 . 

8.2.3. 

8.2.4. 

8.2.5. 

8.3. 

8.3.1. 

8.3.1.1. 

8.3.1.1.1. 

8 . 3 . 1 . 1 . 2 . 

8 . 3 . 1 . 1 . 3 . 

8 . 3 . 1 . 1 . 4 . 

8.3.1.2. 

8.3.1.3. 
8.3.2. 

8.3.2.1. 

8.3.2.2. 

8.3.2.2.1. 

8.3.2.3. 

8.3.2.3.1. 

8 . 3 . 2 . 3 . 2 . 


INTRODUCTION.8-1 

EARTH REINFORCEHENT SYSTEMS.8-1 

Strip Reinforcement.8-3 

Grid Reinforcement.8-3 

Sheet Reinforcement.8-5 

Rod Reinforcement.8-7 

Fiber Reinforcement.8-7 

DESIGN METHODOLOGY.8-7 


Design Approaches.8-7 

Design based on at-failure conditions.8-7 

Single-plane failure surfaces.8-8 

Infinite slope failure surfaces.8-8 

Two part wedge failure surfaces. 8-10 

Circular failure surfaces. \ .8-10 

Working stress considerations.8-10 

Finite element analysis.8-11 

Design Procedure. 8-11 

Site conditions and engineering properties of embankment materials 

or in-situ ground.8-11 

External stability.8-12 

Sliding failure along the wall base.8-13 

Internal stability.8-18 

Failure surface.8-18 

Earth pressure coefficient.8-19 


vii 






























8.3.2.3.3. Reinforcement rupture 


8-22 


8.3.2.3.4. Pullout capacity. 8-23 

8.3.2.3.5. Durability .8-23 

8.4. INTERACTIVE MICROCOMPUTER BASED EARWALL PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION.8-25 

8.4.1. Program Structure. . 8-25 

8.4.2. Input and Output. 8-27 

8.4.3. Design Examples. .8-27 

9. SHEET PILE WALLS.9-1 

9.1. INTRODUCTION.9-1 

9.2. BASIC THEORY.9-3 

9.2.1. Cantilever Sheetpiling.9-3 

9.2.1.1. Cantilever sheetpiling in granular soils.9-4 

9.2.1.2. Cantilever sheetpiling in cohesive soils.9-7 

9.2.2. Anchored Sheetpiling.9-9 

9.2.2.1. Rowes moment reduction method applied to anchored sheetpiling..9-14 

9.2.2.2. Design of wales. 9-15 

9.- INTERACTIVE MICROCOMPUTER BASED 'SHEETPILE' PROGRAM 

IMPLEMENTATION.9-17 

9.3.1. Program Structure.9-17 

9.3.2. Input and Output.9-19 

9.3.3. Design Example. 9-21 

10 CONCLUSIONS. 10-1 


vi i 1 

























APPENDICES 

APPENDIX A: M.l SELECTION MODULE, SELECTWALL.A-1 

APPENDIX B: CONTROL PROGRAM, CALL.B-1 

APPENDIX C: DESIGN OF CONCRETE GRAVITY WALL, GRAVITY.C-1 

APPENDIX D: DESIGN OF CANTILEVER WALL, CANWALL.D-1 

APPENDIX E: DESIGN OF GABION WALL, GABION. E-1 

APPENDIX F: DESIGN OF REINFORCED EARTH WALL, EARWALL.F-1 

APPENDIX G: DESIGN OF SHEETPILE WALL, SHEETPILE.G-1 










LIST OF FIGURES 


Figure 2.1 Classification Scheme for Earth Retaining Systems .2-3 

Figure 2.2a Typical Earth Retaining Systems (Externally Stabilized) .2-5 

Figure 2.2b Typical Earth Retaining Structures (Internally Stabilized)...2-6 

Figure 2.3 Gabions with Geogrid Tails.2-8 

Figure 2.4 Concrete Block Wall with Geogrid Tails .2-8 

Figure 2.5 Wall System with Concrete Blocks, Polymer Strips and 

Anchors.2-9 

Figure 2.6 Wall System with Facing Plates and Rectangular Anchors.2-9 

Figure 2.7 Anchored Earth with Triangular Rebar Reinforcement .2-10 

Figure 3.1 Block Diagram of an Expert System.3-2 

Figure 3.2 Reasoning by Logic.3-4 

Figure 3.3 Example of Representing Knowledge in Semantic Network.3-4 

Figure 3.4 Knowledge Representation by Frame.3-11 

Figure 4.1 Coos Bay Failure.4-10 

Figure 4.2 Basic Architecture of RETAININGEARTH.4-12 

Figure 4 3 M.l Code for Site Location.4-11 

Figure 4.4 M.l Code for Soil Properties.4-14 

Figure 4.5 Typical M.l Rule for Possible-Type Structure Selection.4-15 

Figure 4.6 Schematic Diagram Showing the Search Procedure for the 

'Possible-wall' Types in Phase 1.4-18 

Figure 4.7 Typical M.l Rule for Appropriate Wall Selection in the 

Second Phase.4-17 

Figu:- 4.8 Typical M.l Rule for Appropriate Structure Selection Based 

on Height Comparison.4-21 


X 
























Figure 4.9 Typical M.l Rule for Final Structure Choice.4-21 

Figure 5.1 Flowchart of ES RETAININGEARTH, Showing Linking of the M.l 

Selection Module with the Design Module.5-2 

Fig'tre 5.2 Photograph Showing the Various Menus at Start of 

RETAININGEARTH.5-3 

Figure 5.3 External Code EXT.5-4 

Figure 5.4 Example of Rules in M.l for Export of Information.5-7 

Figure 5.5 Function 'show' in Control Program CALL.5-9 

Figure 6.1 Loads on Retaining Walls.6-2 

Figure 6.2 Basis of Active and Passive Earth Pressure Computations.6-2 

Figure 6.3 Cantilever Retaining Structure Under the Action of Earth 

Forces.6-7 

Figure 6.4 Passive Resistance and Effect of Base Key .6-9 

Figure 6.5 Soil Pressure Distribution.6-9 

Figure 6.6 Flowchart of Program, GRAVITY, for Concrete Gravity 

Retaining Wall Design.6-12 

Figure 6.7 User-System Interactive Consultation for GEIAVITY.6-14 

Figure 6.8 Screen Display of Input Data for GRAVITY.6-14 

Figure 6.9 Output File of GRAVITY.6-15 

Figure 6.10 Flowchart of Program CANWALL for Cantilever Retaining 

Wall Design.6-16 

Figure 6.11 User-System Interactive Consultation for CANWALL.6-19 

Figure 6.12 Screen Display of Input Data for CANWALL.6-19 

Figure 6.13 Output File of CANWALL.6-20 

Figure 7.1a Typical Gabion Basket .7-2 

Figure 7.1b Detail of Wire Mesh .7-2 


XI 


























Figure 7.2 Diagram Showing the Determination of the Apparent Density 7 g 

of the Filled Gabion Given the Density yg of the Fill Material 

and the Porosity "n".7-4 

Figure 7.3 T 3 rpes of Gabion Wall: 

1) Gravity: 2) Semigravity; 3) Wall supporting sloping sur¬ 
charge; 4) Thin walls with tie-back mesh panels.7-7 

Figure 7.4 Schemes for the Backfilling of Gabion Structure [7.1] . 7-9 

Figure 7.5 Forces on the Gabion Retaining Structure According to 

Coulomb's Theory .7-10 

Figure 7.6a) Gabion Gravity Wall; b) Semi-gravity Gabion Wall; c) Semi¬ 
gravity Gabion Wall with Anchorage Heel.7-10 

Figure 7.7 Lateral Soil Pressure Distribution Due to a Uniform 

Surcharge.7-11 

Figure 7.8 Force to be Considered in Analysing the Resistance to 

Sliding.7-11 

Figure 7.9 Diagram for the Analysis of Overall Stability.7-15 

Figure 7.10 Characteristics of the Stresses Acting on the Foundation 

of a Gabion Structure.7-15 

Figure 7.11 Flowchart of Program, GABION, for Gabion Retaining 

Structure Design. 7-20 

Figure 7.12 User-System Interactive Consultation for GABION. 7-23 

Figure 7.13 Screen Display of Input Data for GABION. 7-23 

Figure 7.14 Output File of GABION. 7-24 

Figure 8.1 Schematic Diagram of a Reinforced Earth Structure Using 

Steel Strip Reinforcements....8-2 

Figure 8.2 Cross-section of a Nonmetallic Paraweb Strip .8-4 

xii 



















Figure 8.3 Flan View of a Geogrid Reinforcement .8-4 

Figure 8.4 Schematic Diagram of a Reinforced Soil Wall Using Geotextile 

Sheet Reinforcements .8-6 

Figure 8.5 Schematic Diagram of an Anchored Earth Retaining Wall.8-6 

Figure 8.6a Single-plane Failure Surface (Limit Equilibrium Analysis)....8-9 

Figure 8.6b Toe-part Wedge Failure Surface.8-9 

Figure 8.6c Logarithmic Spiral Failure Surface .8-9 

Figure 8.7 External Stability of an Earth Wall.8-14 

Figure 8.8 Stress Distribution Under an Earth Wall .8-17 

Figure 8.9 General Slope Stability of an Earth Wall.8-17 

Figure 8.10 In-situ Reinforced Slope Potential Failure Surface Versus 

Rankine and Bilinear.8-20 

Figure 8.11 Assumed Variation in Earth Pressure Coefficient with Depth 

for Different Wall Types.8-20 

Figure 8.12 Flowchart of Program EARWALL for Reinforced Earth Design..•.8-26 

Figure 8.13 User-System Interactive Consultation for EARWALL -Case 1....8-30 

Figure 8.14 Screen Display of Input Data for EARWALL - Case 1. 8-30 

Figure 8.15 Output File of EARWALL - Case 1. 8-31 

Figure 8.16 User-System Interactive Consultation for EARWALL -Case 2....8-38 

Figure 8.17 Screen Display of Input Data for EARWALL -Case 2. 8-38 

Figure 8.18 Output File of EARWALL -Case 2. 8-39 

Figure 8.19 User-System Interactive Consultation for EARWALL -Case 3....8-41 

Figure 8.20 Screen Display of Input Data for EARWALL -Case 3.8-41 

Figure 8.21 Output File of EARWALL-Case 3. 8-42 

Figure 8.22 User-System Interactive Consultation for EARWALL-Case 4. 8-49 

Figure 8.23 Screen Display of Input Data for EARWALL-Case 4. 8-49 

xiii 





















Figure 8.24 Output File of EARUALL-Case 4.8-50 

Figure 9.1 Typical Sheetpile Structures .9-2 

Figure 9.2 Assumed Elastic Line of Sheetpile.9-5 

Figure 9.3 Sheetpile Pressure Diagram for Granular Soil.9-5 

Figure 9.4 Sheetpile in Cohesive Soil.9-10 

Figure 9.5a Sheetpile in Granular Soil .9-11 

Figure 9.5b Anchored Sheetpile in Granular Soil Backfill and Cohesive 

Base.9-12 

Figure 9.6 Rowe's Moment-reduction Curves for the "Free-earth" Support 
Method, (a) Sheet Piles in Granular Soil; (b) Sheet Piles in 

Cohesive Soil.9-16 

Figure 9.7a Wale Design for Bending Assuming a Uniform Pressure from 

Anchor Rod.9-18 

Figure 9.7b Wale Location 

(1) Back of Sheet File Wall 

(2) Front of Sheet Pile Wall.9-18 

Figure 9.8 Flowchart of Program SHEETPILE for Sheetpile Design. 9-20 

Figure 9.9 User-System Interactive Consultation for SHEETPILE. 9-22 

Figure 9.10 Screen Display of Input Data for SHEETPILE. 9-23 

Figure 9.11 Output File of SHEETPILE. 9-24 



















LIST OF TABLES 


Table 1.1 Characteristics of traditional programs and expert systems (Maher, 

1987).1-1 

Table 2.1 Fill/Cut Structure Categorization [2.U] .2-2 

Table 4.1 Average Wall Costs in Northwest U.S.4-7 

Table 6.1 Unit Weights, Effective Angles of Internal Friction 0, and 

Coefficients of Friction With Concrete f.6-6 

Table 7.1 Density of Different Types of Stone.7-5 

e 

Table 7.2 Minimum Displacement and Rotation Required to Develop the Active 

Pressure in Retaining Structures.7-6 

Table 8.1 Internal Design Characteristics of Earth Walls.8-21 

Table 8.2 Pullout Capacity Design Equations. 8-24 


XV 













SUMHARY 


This report describes the development of a microcomputer based prototype 
expert system (ES), RETAININGEARTH, for the selection and design of earth 
retaining structures. The expert system RETAININGEARTH is an interactive 
menu*driven system and consists of two modules - the selection module, 
SELECTWALL and the design module. SELECTWALL is developed using the rule- 
based M.l knowledge engineering shell and it makes a choice of the most 
appropriate retaining structure from a list of ten typical walls. A concise 
review of the design concepts related to the structures is presented together 
with the design flowcharts. The design module is then developed which 
consists of five independent design programs which performs detailed designs 
of the concrete gravity and cantilever walls, gabions, reinforced earth and 
sheetpile structures. The SELECTWALL and the design module are linked by an 
M.l external code EXT through a control program CALL. All the design 
procedures are coded using the C programming language. The methodology of the 
development of the prototype ES 'RETAININGEARTH' is described together with 
illustrated consultations and the hard copy of the codes developed for the 
selection and design modules are given in Appendices A-G. 


XVi 




CHAPTER 1 


INTRODUCTION 


1.1 INTRODUCTION TO EXPERT SYSTEMS 


Knowledge-based expert systems (KBES) are computer programs based on 
artificial intelligence (AI) techniques, designed to reach the level of 
performance of a hviman expert in a specialized problem solving domain. Expert 
Systems (ES) have a great potential for practical use in ill-structured 
problem solving domain, such as retaining structure selection, where explicit 
algorithms do not exist. Table 1.1 shows the characterizing features of 
traditional programs and ES. 


Table 1.1. Characteristics of traditional programs and expert systems 
(Maher, 1987) 



Traditional Programs 

Expert Systems 

i) 

Representation and use of data 

Representation and use of 
knowledge 

ii) 

Knowledge and control integrated 

Knowledge and control separated 

iii) 

Algorithmic (repetitive) process 

Heuristic (inferential) process 

iv) 

Effective manipulation of large 
data bases 

Effective manipulation of 
knowledge bases 

V) 

Programmer must ensure uniqueness 
and completeness 

Knowledge engineer inevitably 
relaxes uniqueness and complete¬ 
ness restraint 

Vi) 

Midrun explanation impossible 

Midrun explanation desirable and 
achievable 

vii) 

Oriented toward ntimerical processing 

Oriented toward symbolic 
processing 


1-1 








1.2 ES APPLICATIONS TO RETAINING STRUCTURES 


Retaining structures are frequently used to support earth and maintain a 
difference in elevation of the ground surface. With a variety of earth 
retaining systems which are in practice, and with the rapid influx of new 
techniques, and the many restrictions imposed on construction, it is becoming 
more difficult for the design engineer/owner to determine which of the 
available systems is the most suitable one for a given set of site conditions. 
Selection of an appropriate and technically feasible structure for a given set 
of criteria requires considerable Judgement and expertise. ES technology 
provides a medium Chat formalizes heuristic and algorithmic techniques. By 
separating the knowledge from the control structure of the program, these 
Judgements and expertise can be incorporated into the knowledge base of the 
ES, where addition and modification of rules are easily accomplished. The 
rapid development of new techniques in the area of retaining structures leads 
to knowledge improvements and modifications to the state-of-the-art which 
could be advantageously exploited in the development of the ES. Discussions 
on the state-of-the-art of ES applications in the design of structures are 
presented in Reference 1.1. 

A wide choice of retaining wall types is available to a designer faced 
with an earth retention problem. The decision as to which type of wall is 
most appropriate for a particular situation depends on several factors, 
including wall height, soil conditions and the location of the wall. Although 
there is an abundance of literature available on design and construction 
details for each particular wall type, very little documentation exist on 
which wall type is better for a particular situation. Instead, designers have 


1-2 






to rely upon their own experience and expertise. The ES specifically 
addresses Che problem of choosing applicable wall types. 

An existing developmental prototype called RETWALL was developed in 
Quintus Prolog, which addresses the problem of choosing an appropriate wall 
type for a given set of conditions [1.2]. RETWALL is based on an ES shell 
called BUILD. The knowledge in Che system is represented as a series of 
production rules that exist in a separate module accessed by the BUILD shell. 
BUILD provides the control structure for Che overall system. BUILD consists 
of a series of production rules chat provide both goal driven and data driven 
control, in addition to an explanation facility. The system queries the user 
by stepping through the rules in a sequential manner. To obtain a second 
level of control within the knowledge base, advantage was taken of the 
sequential operation of the shell. By placing the rules in the knowledge base 
in an order that reflects the expert's preference of wall types, the system 
bases its recommendations on the first wall type that is considered 
acceptable. In its present state, RETWALL is able to make a choice among ten 
available wall types. Additionally the system will carry out the actual wall 
design for Che blockwork wall and provides the \iser with a set of construction 
drawings. 

Another developmental prototype ES [1.3] also presented a methodology for 
retaining wall selection and design in which the selection part was formulated 
in Che form of production rules using OPSS and the design part written in 
BASIC. This ES consists of Che selection and preliminary design modules. The 
selection part is composed of two modules for wall selection and comparison. 
The selection module chooses possible types of walls and the comparison module 


1-3 





selects the best wall if the selection module chooses more than one possible 
type of wall. 

1.3 OBJECTIVES 


The present study describes (i) the overall concept of the ES for the 
retaining structure selection, (ii) development of the higher level selection 
and design modules. The design modules present the detailed design of five 
different types of retaining structures. 


REFERENCES 


1.1 M. Arockiasamy & S. Lee, State-of-the-Art on Expert Systems Applications 
to the Design, Construction and Maintenance of Structures, Final Draft 
Report, U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Expt. Station, Vicksburg, 
Mississippi, 1989, pp. 150. 

1.2 PJ Hutchinson, An Expert System for the Selection of Earth Retaining 
Structures, M.S. Thesis, Dept, of Architectural Science, Univ. of 
Sydney, 1985, pp. 215. 

1.3 SJ Fenves, M.L. Maher and D. Srlram, Expert Systems: C.E. Potential, 
Civil Engineering, ASCE, October 1984, pp. 45-47.3 


1-4 







1.4 ML Maher, Expert System Components, ASCE Expert Systems Committee Report 


on Expert Systems for Civil Engineering; Technology and Application, 
1987. 


1-5 







CHAPTER 2 


FORMULATION OF THE KNOWLEDGE BASE FOR THE EXPERT SYSTEM 


2.1 KNOWLEDGE SOURCES 


The real problems involved in building expert systems are those related to 
knowledge representation. The emphasis in the building of expert systems 
always seems to be on investigating technical issues and the implementation of 
the knowledge already elicitated. The information on the knowledge base of 
the expert system can be obtained from two sources - literature and domain 
specific knowledge from experts. Literature sources include technical 
journals, textbooks, manuals, public and commerical documents and reports. A 
second source of domain specific knowledge is from experts to aid in the 
development of the system by providing their experience, intuition, judgments, 
rules of thumb, etc. 

In the domain of earth retaining structure selection the literature is 
fairly scant. However, a number of good references exist for the actual 
design of various types of earth retaining structures. The problems involved 
with the design of earth retaining structures are discussed in References 
2.1, 2.2, and 2.3. However, these references give the reader only little 
guidance as to the steps and factors involved in the selection of one type of 
earth retaining structure over another. 

The knowledge of human experts in the retaining structure construction 
industry, and public organizations has been reported in the recent conference 
on "Design and Performance of Earth Retaining Structures", organized by the 


2-1 






American Society of Civil Engineers (2.4). A major portion of the knowledge 
base for the selection module was formulated using the above reference. 
Numerous fact and rules were formulated using information gathered from 
various geotechnical and structural engineering text books and journals. 

2.2 KNOWLEDGE BASE ON EARTH RETAINING STRUCTURES 

2.2.1. General 

Selection of an earth retaining structure is influenced by many 
factors involving technical, practical, economical and political 
considerations. Earth retaining structures are widely used for support of 
cuts or fills in surface, marine and underground construction. Site 
conditions usually dictate the basic wall type and size. The typical 
structure types for the earth fill and cut situations are shown in Table 2.1. 

2.2.2. Earth Retaining Structures 

Depending on the basic mechanisms of support, retaining walls can be 
broadly classified under externally and internally stabilized systems. Fig. 
2.1 shows the classification scheme for earth retention systems. An 
externally stabilized system uses an external structural wall, against which 
stabilizing forces are mobilized whereas an internally stabilized system 
involves reinforcements installed within and extending beyond the potential 
failure wedge [2.5]. 


Table 2.1 Fill/Cut Structure Categorization [2.5] 


Fill Retention 

Cut Retention 

Mechanically Stabilized 

Permanent Ground Anchor (tiebacks) 

Crib 

Soil Nailing 

Metal Bin 

Reticulated Micro-Pile 

Gabion 

Slurry 

Gravity 

Cylinder Pile 

Cantilever 

Lagged Soldier Pile 

Counterfort 

Sheet Pile 

Deadman Anchor 



2-2 




EXTERNALLY STABILIZED SYSTEMS INTERNALLY STABILIZED SYSTEMS 


In-Situ 

Gravity 

Reinforced 

In-Situ 

Walls 

Walls 

Soils 

Reinforcement 


* timber 

* masonry 

* metallic. 

* soil nailing 

* precast concrete 

* concrete 

polymeric and 

* reticulated 

* sheet piles 

* cantilever 

organic 

micro piles 

* soldier piles 

* counterfort 

reinforcing 

* soil doweling 

* cast in-situ 

* gabion 

strips and 


- slurry wall 

* crib 

grids 


- secant pile 

♦bin 

* anchored earth 



- tangent pile 

* bored-in-place 

* soil-cement 


HYBRID SYSTEMS ~ SPECIAL MATERIALS 

Tied-back 

* tailed gabions * polymer impregnated 

* angered * tailed masonry soil 

* belled * low density fills 

* pressure - low density cement 

injected - expanded polystyrene 


Braced 

* cross-lot 

* rakers 





Figure 2.1 Classification Scheme for Earth Retaining Systems [2.5] 


2-3 




Virtually all traditional walls may be regarded as externally 
stabilized systems. These systems can further be classified into gravity 
walls and in-situ walls. The gravity walls, e.g. cantilever, 
counterfort, gabions, bins, cribs, etc. support the soil through weight 
and stiffness to resist sliding, overturning, and excessive shear and 
moments. The in-situ walls consist of timber, precast concrete, sheet 
piles, soldier piles, cast in-situ (slurry wall, secant pile, tangent 
pile), soil-cement, tied-back and braced structures. 

Internally stabilized walls consist of reinforced soils with 
horizontally layered elements, such as metallic strips or polymer grids, 
and soil nailing, in which metallic bars or dowels are installed during 
the in-situ construction. The reinforced soil systems consist of 
metallic, polymeric and organic reinforcing strips and grid types of 
reinforcements and anchored earth structures. The in-situ reinforcement 
systems consist of soil nailing, reticulated micro piles and soil 
doweling. A fundamentally new concept has been introduced in the area of 
internally stabilized systems in which the shear transfer is used to 
mobilize the tensile capacity of closely spaced reinforcing elements. 
This has eliminated the need for a structural wall in retaining 
structures and substituted instead a composite system of reinforcing 
elements and soil as the primary structural entity. Typical examples of 
externally and internally stabilized earth retaining structures are shown 
in Fig. 2.2. 

Hybrid systems have emerged as a result of the combination of both 
internally and externally supported systems. Examples include the 


2-4 







Gravity element (interlocking cribs) 



a) Cantilever b) Gravity Element 


Potential failure wedge 



c) Braced 


Figure 2.2a Typical Earth Retaining Systems (Externally Stabilized) [2.6] 


2-5 





Facing panels 


Strips or grids 



a) Reinforced soil 


b) Soil nailing 



c) Tied-back 


Figure 2.2b Typical Earth Retaining Structures (Internally Stabilized) [2.6] 


2-6 




gabions and masonry with geogrid tails (Fig 2.3.). polymer impregnated 
soils and low density fills using special materials like low density 
cement and expanded polystyrene. Such hybrid systems along with the 
reinforced soils and soil nailing provide economically attractive 
alternatives to the conventional methods and are, therefore, being 
increasingly used as earth retaining structures. 

The conventional retaining wall construction is combined with the 
concept of reinforced soil using concrete blocks and geogrids. The 
versatility of the block wall is improved by the provision of polymeric 
grid reinforcement, fixed either to the block or incorporated between 
blocks (Fig. 2.4). Anchored earth systems have been developed which 
involve aspects of reinforced soil and soil anchoring (Fig. 2.5 and 2,6). 
These applications utilize multiple layers of closely spaced 
reinforcement and these are similar in construction to the methods 
employed for reinforced soils. Fig 2.5 illustrates the application 
involving strips connected with concrete wall blocks and semicircular 
anchors whereas Fig. 2.6 shows the application which exploits the local 
passive resistance of small rectangular anchor plates. Fig. 2.7 
illustrates the method which employs reinforcing steel bent into 
triangular anchors. Pullout resistance is mobilized by friction along 
the straight portion of the steel and by passive pressure mobilized at 
the triangular anchor. 

The development of earth retention systems can be viewed as an 
evolutionary process in which methods for supporting soil have involved 
progressively more alterations and insertions of reinforcing elements. 


2-7 





Figure 2.4 Concrete Block Wall with Geogrid Tails [2.61 


2-8 









lnterlcx:king 



Figure 2.5 Wall System with Concrete Blocks, 
Polymer Strips, and Anchors. [2.6] 



Footing 

Figure 2.6 Wall System with Facing Plates and Rectangular 
Anchors [2.6] 


2-9 

















One of the goals of the development of earth retention systems has been 
to transform soil into an engineered medium because of enhanced 
mechanical properties. 


2.3 SELECTION CONSIDERATIONS 


The factors affecting the selection of an earth retaining structure 
have to be considered from technical, practical, economical and political 
view points. Gravity and cantilever types of earth retaining walls have 
been successfully used prior to 1970 in both cut and fill situations. 
Selection of a wall system today is considerably more complex than in 
1970 since an ever growing number of innovative alternates are now 
available to the designer in preference to the conventional gravity and 
cantilever walls. These alternate systems generally rely on either 
reinforcement of the earth mass to be retained or mobilization of the 
physical properties of the ground. Although the owners' objectives for a 
completed earth retaining structure are a pleasing architectural facade, 
low cost, a reasonable safety factor against failure and low maintenance 
cost over a long life, the major concern in selecting an alternate wall 
must be a comprehensive technical assessment of both the design basis and 
construction procedures. 


REFERENCES 


2.1 JE Bowles, Foundation Analysis and Design, 4th Ed., McGraw Hill Book 
Co., 1988, 530-642. 


2-11 





2.2 M Carter, Geotechnical Engineering Handbook, Pentech Press, Plymouth, 
1983. 

2.3 K Terzaghgi & RB Peck, Soil Mechanics in Engineering Practice, Wiley, 
New York, 1967. 

2.4 Design and Performance of Earth Retaining Structures, GSP 25, Ed PC 
Lambe & LA Hansen, ASCE, New York, 1990, pp. 904. 

2.5 RS Cheney, Selection of Retaining Structures: the Owner's Perspective, 
GSP 25, Proc. Conference on Design and Performance of Earth Retaining 
Structures, Ed PC Lambe & LA Hansen, ASCE, New York, 1990, 52-65. 

2.6 TD O'Rourke & CJFP Jones, Overview of Retention Systems: 1970 - 1990, 
GSP 25, Ed PC Lambe & LA Hansen, ASCE, New York, 1990, 22-51. 

2.7 JL Walkinshaw, Handout on Retaining Wall Alternates, FHWA - HST-09, San 
Francisco, CA 94105, April 1989. 


2-12 






CHAPTER 3 


KNOVLEOGE REPRESEMTATION 


3.1 INTRODUCTION 


Knowledge-based expert systems (KBES) are identified by their method of 
representing and processing domain-specific problem-solving knowledge. A 
general block diagram of an expert system (ES) is illustrated in Fig. 3.1. 
The essential components of an ES are the knowledge base, the inference 
engine, the context and the user interface. Each of these components is 
described in Section 3.3. 

The representation and management of knowledge form the core in artificial 
intelligence (AI) since a comprehensive collection of experiential/heuristic 
facts is the key to a high-performance intelligent system. Thus the purpose 
of knowledge representation is to organize required information in a form such 
that the ES can readily access it for making decisions, planning, analyzing 
scenes, recognizing objects and situations, drawing conclusions and other 
cognitive functions. 

3.2. Types of Knowledge Representation 

The main types of knowledge representation are logic-based, rule-based and 
network-based representations and schemes. 


3-1 






Knowledge 

base 

(facts, heuristics) 


Inference 

mechanism 



Knowledge 

acquisition 

facility 


Explanation 

facUity 


Knowledge source 
(literature, expert) 


User 

interface 



Help 

facility 


Figure 3.1 Block Diagram of an Expert System 














3.2.1 Logic-based representations 


A logic-based scheme is one in which knowledge is represented as 
assertions in logic, usually first-order predicate logic or a variant thereof 
[3.1]. This form of representation is generally coupled with an inference 
procedure based on theorem proofs. Logic-based language allows quantified 
statements and other well-defined formulae as assertions. PROLOG is an 
example of logic-based representation language. Overall, the flexibility and 
precision of mathematical logic make the logic-based representation both a 
useful tool and a standard of comparison for alternative knowledge 
representation schemes [3.2]. The rigor of logic has an advantage since it ir 
clear what is known and how that knowledge will be used. 

Fig. 3.2. illustrates the general form of a typical logical process in 
which the inputs to the logical process are called premises and the output 
(conclusions) as inferences. Both deductive and Inductive types of reasoning 
are used in logic to make inferences from premises. When a specific inference 
is obtained using general premises, the process is called deductive reasoning 
or deduction. A number of established facts or premises is used in inductive 
reasoning in order to draw some general conclusion. The conclusion is never 
final or absolute unless all possible facts are included in the premises. 

Computational logic is used to convert the deductive or inductive 
reasoning process into a form suitable for manipuxation by a computer. The 
two basic forms of computational logic are: 

1) propositional logic and ii) predicate logic. In propositional logic 
symbols such as letters of the alphabet are used to represent various 
propositions, premises or conclusions. More complex premises are formed 


3-3 







Logical process 


Input 

(premises) 


New facts 



Figure 3.2 Reasoning by Logic 



Figure 3.3 Example of Representing Knowledge 
in Semantic Network 


Output 

^ (conclusion) 


3 








combining two or more propositions using logical connectives. Predicate logic 
is a more sophisticated form of logic which has enhanced ability to represent 
knowledge in finer detail. It permits one to break a statement down into 
component parts namely an object, a characteristic of the object, or some 
assertion about the object. The use of variables and functions of variables 
in a symbolic logic statement leads to a more powerful knowledge 
representation scheme which is more directly applicable to practical problems 
to be solved on a computer. 

A valid combination of objects and constructor (quantifiers, 
connectivities, functions, and predicates) forms Well-Formed Formula (WFF) in 
logic. Two basic quantifiers are used in logic: V (for all) and 3 (there 
exists). Connectivities are A (and), V (or), —i (not), -► (implies), and ■ 
(equivalent). A function returns a value by defined function and its 
arguments. The function PLUS(2,4), for example, returns the sum of 2 and 4 if 
the function PLUS is defined as sum of first and second argument. The 
predicate gives a value of true or false: Examples of predicates are < (less 
than), - (equal to), > - (greater than or equal to). 

To illustrate the use of logic to represent knowledge, the following 
example is considered: 

Tied-back wall is a retaining wall. 

Every retaining wall has soil pressure. 

The abc/e facts are expressed in logic in the following form: 

retaining-wall (Tied-back-wall) 

V X retaining-wall (X) soil-pressure (X) 

By deductive reasoning, a new fact can be inferred as follows: 


3-5 




retaining-wall (Tied-back-wall) -► soil>pressure (Tied-back-wall). That is, 
tied-back-wall has soil pressure. 

3.2.2. Rule-based representation 

Most rule-based systems (RBS) can be classified as production systems. 
The core idea of these tools is that the domain knowledge is represented in 
the form of modular rules known as production rules. The first part of the 
rule, called the antecedent, expresses a situation or premise while the second 
part, called the consequent, states a particular action or conclusion that 
applies if the situation or premise is true. The most common forms of 
production rule are of these formats: 


ANTECEDENT CONSEQUENT 

SITUATION ACTION 


PREMISE CONCLUSION 


The first or left-hand part of the rule is a statement with the prefix IF. 
The second or right-hand part of the rule is a statement with the prefix 
THEN. The action, consequence or conclusion stated in the THEN part is valid 
if the IF part of the rule is true or meets certain conditions. Production 
rules are by far the most popular and widespread means of converting human 
knowledge into a format suitable for symbolic representation in a computer. 


3-6 





The first widely used ES shell was created by stripping the medical 
knowledge ban from MYCIN and called EMYCIN (for Essential MYCIN or Empty 
MYCIN) which was used to construct diagnosis systems. DENDRAL analyzes mass 
spectrographic, nuclear magnetic resonance, and other chemical experimental 
data nuclear magnetic resonance, and other checmical experimental data to 
infer the plausible structures of an unknown compound. CADUCEUS consists of 
an extremely large semantic network of relationships between diseases and 
symptoms in internal medicine. These systems were constructed using rule- 
based representations. In general , RBS have the advantages of homogeneity 
and simplicity which permit self-inspection (explanation, meta-rules, 
consistency and self-knowledge) and help with rule acquisition. The main 
drawback is that the ability to express general relations between pieces of 
knowledge is severely restricted. 


IF height of retaining wall exceeds 15 ft. and 

location of wall to be built is not building and 

foundation is good or poor and 

reinforced earth is aesthetically acceptable and 

enough excavation space exists and 


there is no future excavation behind the wall 
THEN reinforced earth is possible selection. 

A set of production rules forms a production system to define some domain 
knowledge accurately, and this results in the solution of the subproblem by 
inference which is the clue to the final solution. For example, a set of 
production rules may be of the form: 


3-7 




(a b c) ----> (d e) 


(d f) ----> (g) 

(g h i j) (k) 

These rules imply that if a, b, and c are true, d and e are fired. By 
using d which is obtained from the previous rule and f, new consequent g is 
generated. 

3.2.3. Network-based Representation 

Semantic networks are basically graphical representations of knowledge 
that show hierarchical relationships between objects. It is made up of a 
number of circles or nodes which represent objects and descriptive information 
about those objects. Objects can be any physical item and the nodes can also 
be concepts, events, or actions. The nodes in a semantic network are also 
interconnected by links or arcs. These arcs show the relationships between 
the various objects and descriptive factors. Some of the most common arcs are 
of the is-a or has-a type. Is-a is used to show class relationship; i.e., an 
object belongs to a larger class or category of objects. Has-a links are used 
to identify characteristics or attributes of the object nodes. 

The semantic network is a very flexible method of representing knowledge. 
Almost any kind of object, attribute or concept can be defined and the 
relationships created with links. Although the semantic network is graphic in 
nature the various objects and their relationships are stated in verbal terms 
and are programmed into the computer using one of several different kinds of 
languages, viz. C, PROLOG, LISP, COBOL, PLl and PASCAL. The computer uses 
various search and pattern matching techniques to look through the network 

3-8 




structure to identify the desired objects and determine their relationship as 
posed by the question. 

A simple semantic network is shown in Fig. 3.3. The ability of higher 
level nodes to pass down properties to lower level nodes is called 
inheritance. By establishing inheritance hierarchy in the network, a third 
statement can be inferred. In this example, one can infer chat "tied-back 
wall has soil pressure". Semantic network has an advantage that huge amounts 
of space are saved in the complex domain since information can be stored in 
one central location without repeating the information about similar nodes at 
each note. 

3.2.4. Schemas 

Stereo-typed knowledge which is based on previous exposure to typical 
objects and situations as well as experience with conventional unvarying 
processes is represented with schemas. A schema is a method of organizing, 
presenting and using stereo-typed knowledge for computer reasoning. Frames 
and scripts are the two basic types of schemas. 

3.2.4.1. Frames and scripts 

A frame is a relatively large block of knowledge about a particular 
object, event, location, situation, or other element. The frame describes 
that object in great detail. The detail is given in the form of slots which 
describe the various attributes and characteristics of the object or 
situation. It is a connection of nodes and relations organized in such a way 
that the higher level nodes represent general concepts and the lower nodes are 


3-9 





more specific to illustrate those concepts. In a frame system, the concepts 
include a number of attributes (e.g., location, purpose, height, length) 
called the slot and the values of those attributes (road, permanent, 32 ft, 
230 ft.) A set of procedures is attached to each slot to make a reasoning 
process by communication between higher and lower level information. The 
procedure uses the values in the higher level frame to fill the slot in the 
lower level frame. A new frame is selected and the filling process repeated 
until the frame has satisfactory results. Frames are usually used to 
represent stereotyped knowledge. Fig- 3.4 shows an example of knowledge 
representation by frames. In this figure, "gravity type" frame has seven 
slots to be filled. 

A script is a knowledge representation scheme similar to a frame but 
instead of describing an object, the script describes a sequence of events. 
The script, like the frame, portrays a stereotyped situation. Unlike the 
frame it is usually presented in a particular context. A sequence of events 
is described by the script using a series of slots containing information 
about the people, objects, and actions that are involved in the events. The 
elements of a typical script include entry conditions, props, roles, tracks 
and scenes. The entry conditions describe situations which must be satisfied 
before events in the script can occur or be valid. Props refer to objects 
which are used in the sequence of events that occur. Roles refer to the 
people involved in the script. The result is conditions which exist after the 
events in the script have occurred. Track refers to variations that might 
occur in a particular script. And finally, scenes describe the actual 
sequence of events that occur. A script is useful in predicting what will 
happen in a certain situation. Knowledge is stored in the computer in 


3-10 













symbolic form using LISP, or any other language which enables the use of the 
script. 

3.3 COMPONENTS OF A KNOWLEDGE-BASED EXPERT SYSTEM 

3.3.1 Knowledge Base 

The heart of any expert system is its knowledge base and there are many 
different methods for representing knowledge in artificial intelligence (AI) 
software. The knowledge base in the expert system contains the facts and 
heuristics associated with domain in which the expert system is applied. The 
designer can choose lists, frames, semantic networks, scripts, and production 
rules. The facts are typically represented as declarative knowledge whereas 
heuristics take the form of rules. Modification of the knowledge base is 
important in most engineering domains since knowledge is continually changing 
and expanding. Many expert system environments provide higher level 
representation schemes, such as rules or frames, in order to make the 
knowledge base as transparent as possible. [3.3]. 

3.3.2. Context 

The context (also called a global data base) contains a broad range of 
information about the current status of the problem being solved. The context 
is the component of the expert system which initially contains the information 
that defines the parameters of the problem. Prior to execution of the KBES 
the context is empty. As the KBES reasons about the given problem the context 
expands to include the information generated by the expert system to solve it. 


3-12 




At the completion of the problem-solving process, the context contains all the 
intermediate results of the problem-solving process as well as the solution. 
The context is a declarative form of the current state of the problems the 
expert system is solving. At the time the system terminates the contents of 
the context can be discarded or stored in an external file for later use. 
[3.3]. 

3.3.3 The Inference Mechanism 

The inference mechanism, also called a rule interpreter, is a software 
which implements a search and pattern matching operation. The inference 
mechanism contains the control information for the expert system and uses the 
knowledge base to modify and expand the text. It controls the reasoning 
strategy of the expert system through assertions, hypothesis and conclusions. 
The reasoning process is controlled by the inference mechanism at different 
levels. Vhen the inference mechanisms operates at very low levels, providing 
flexibility in solution strategy, the knowledge base will contain additional 
control information specific to the application domain. With a more specific 
inference mechanism, there will be less control information in the knowledge 
base. The expert systems adopt a variety of control strategies, each of which 
is a variation or combination of two fundamental strategies: data driven 

(commonly referred to as forward chaining) and goal driven (commonly referred 
to as backward chaining [3.3]. 

3.3.3.1. Forward chaining 

Forward chaining is one of the two basic approaches used to search for an 


3-13 





answer beginning with some initial information and working forward with an 
attempt to match that information with a rule. The rule interpreter attempts 
to match a fact or statement in the data base to the situation stated in the 
lefthand or IF part of the rule. Once a fact in the database has been matched 
to the IF part of the rule, the rule is fired and the action or consequent 
stated, could produce new knowledge which is stored in the knowledge base. 
This new fact can then be used to search out the next appropriate rule and 
this searching and matching process continues until a final conclusion rule is 
fired. 

3.3.3.2. Backward chaining 

The second basic approach to search for an answer is backward chaining 
wherein the rule interpreter starts with a fact (hypothesis) in the database. 
The rule inteirpreter then begins examining the right hand or THEN parts of 
rules looking for a match. The inference engine searches for evidence to 
support the original hypothesis. If a match is found, the database is 
updated, recording the conditions stated in the rule for supporting the 
matched conclusion. The chaining process continues with the system 

continuously attempting to match the right side of the rule against the 

current system status. The corresponding IF sides of the rules matched are 

used to generate new intermediate hypothesis or goal states which are recorded 

in the database. This backward chaining continues until the hypothesis is 
proved. 

3.3.3.3. Forward chaining vs. backward chaining 

The choice of a control strategy with either forward or backward chaining 


3-14 




is determined by the design of the system and the problem being solved. The 
forward chaining or data driven approach may be too slow in large systems with 
many rules since it will generate many sequences of rules. In such cases a 
backward chaining or goal driven approach may be more advantageous. On the 
other hand, depending on the rules themselves, the backward chaining process 
could get a fixation on a particular hypothesis and continue to explore it in 
spite of the data unavailability to support it. Some expert systems 
incorporate both backward and forward chaining which usually speeds up the 
process and ensures a solution. 

3.3.4 User Interface 

The user interface is a software in the expert system and it lets the user 
communicate with the system. The user interface asks questions or presents 
menu choices for entering initial information in the database. It provides a 
means of communicating the answer or solution once it has been found. 
Intermediate communications during the problem solving process are provided by 
the user interface. The user interface contains "canned" questions, 
statements or menu sequences. Information supplied by the user must usually 
be formatted in a special way or entered in a unique restricted S 3 mtax. 

3.3.5 Explanation and Knowledge Acquisition Facilities 

The explanation facility in an expert system provides answers to questions 
about the reasoning process used to develop a solution. A good explanation 
facility can explain to the user both why a certain fact is requested and how 
a certain conclusion was reached. The knowledge acquisition facility in an 
expert system is the component that facilitates the structuring and 


3-15 






development of the knowledge base. This facility acts as an editor, and the 
expert should be able to add to or modify the knowledge base as the expert 
system reveals gaps in the knowledge base. The knowledge acquisition facility 
understands the inference mechanism being used and can actively aid the expert 
in defining the knowledge base. 

3.3.6 Certainty Factors 

Expert systems have the ability to deal with incomplete or uncertain 
information. At times, the user does not have the answer to a question put 
forth by an expert system in gathering initial inputs. There are many 
situations where the information is known with less than lOOX confidence in 
its truthfulness. Under these circumstances, certainty factors are used with 
both the premise (IF) and conclusion (THEN) portions of a rule. 

3.4 KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION IN M.l 

H.l is a powerful PC-based knowledge system software tool, implemented in 
the C programming language, capable of developing and using knowledge systems 
up to 2500 rules. Knowledge systems built with M.l are designed around a 
knowledge base of facts and rules relating to a particular task or application 
and an inference engine that performs the reasoning process to solve specific 
problems in that application area. The M.l knowledge base consists of facts, 
rules and expressions which are formulated by the knowledge engineer in M.l 
syntax using a standard text editor. 

The M.l inference engine is activated when a consultation is initiated, 

3 - 16 : 





usually with the go command which clears any previous conclusions and begins 
the consultation. M.l then seeks the values for expressions that appear in 
the goal or initlaldata specifications within the knowledge. In the ES 
RETAININGEARTH the initial data is given as 

initialdata - (begin the consultation, end the consultation]. 

The above statement could also be represented as 
goal - end the consultation or 
goal - select-wall. 

The following example can be used to illustrate the M.l syntax: 
multivaluedClocation). 
question(locacion) - 

'Which of the following list of sites best describes the location of the 
proposed retaining structure?' 
legalvals(location) - 

[excavation, roadway, sidehill, abutment, forest-area, building-related- 
excavation, mountainous-terrain, waterfront-area, railway, building, marine]. 
automaticmenu(location). 
enumeratedanswers (location). 

explanation (location) - ('The location where the structure is to be built is 
a very important consideration in the selection of retaining walls, since the 
parameter location, when coupled with one or more parameters e.g., site 
geometry and height, yields a specific type of wall to be selected for that 
particular application. You may choose the site which is closest to one of the 
above locations.') 

The tern 'nultivalued (location)' means that the variable 'location' is 
multivalued in nature. The system asks the user to select the site which best 


3-17 




describes the location of the proposed retaining structure. The legal values 
or answers that the system accepts are given as an enumerated list which is 
automatically displayed on the screen along with the question. This is made 
possible by the command legalvals (location), automaticmenu (location) and 
entimeratedanswers (location). The user may respond to this question by 
entering either a number corresponding to his selection or by enteririg 
sufficient letters to unambiguously distinguish the response or type 'why' to 
get an explanation to the question being asked. 

A typical example of a rule formulated in M.l is shown below: 
rule-14: if site - fill and 

not (location — excavation) or 

not (location - building-related-excavation) and 

height - H and (H > 15 and H < -50) and 

(length - L and L> 0) and 

rway - no and 

soile - no and 

time - medium or 

time - long and 

soila - yes and 

foundation - good or 

foundation - poor and 

vertload - yes or 

vertload - no and 

noise - no 

then possible-wall - reinforced-earth-wall. 

For the possible-wall - reinforced-earth-wall to be activated or fired, 
all the conditions stated in the rule have to be satisfied. M.l examines each 


3-18 





condition in the rule and checks to see if there is a question in the 
knowledge base which relates to this condition. If so, this question is 
displayed to the user and the corresponding response is stored in the cache 
(or temporary memory location). Likewise, all the conditions are checked for 
and the facts are noted in the cache. If all the conditions are favorably 
answered, then the rule is fired or invoked. In this case the possible-wall - 
relnforced-earth-vall is displayed to the user and M.l then proceeds to the 
next stage of the selection. As stated before, the inference engine continues 
this process of searching the rules, during which it displays the intermediate 
results to the user, until the goal stated in the initial data is achieved. 
The process of the selection of retaining structures using M.l is discussed in 
detail in Chapter 4. 

REFERENCES 

3.1 BG Buchanan & RO Duda, Principles of Rule-Based Expert Systems, 

Technical Report HPP-82-14, Stanford Univ., Aug. 1982. 

3.2 RO Duda & EH Shortliffe, Expert Systems Research, Science 220, April 

1983, 261-268. 

3.3 ML Maher, Expert System Components, ASCE Expert Systems Committee Report 
on Expert Systems for Civil Engineering; Technology and Application, 
1987. 

3.4 H. Adeli, Expert Systems in Construction and Structural Engineering, 

Chapman and Hall, New York, 1988. 

3.5 F Hayes-Roth, DA Waterman and DB Lenat, Building Expert Systems, 
Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1983. 

3.6 WJ Rasdorf and SJ Fenves, Design Specifications Representation and 
Analysis, Proceedings of the Second Conference on Computing in Civil 


3-19 



Engineering, American Society of Civil Engineers, Baltimore, MD, June, 
1980, pp 102-111. 

3.7 tfJ Rasdorf and LM Parks, Expert Systems and Engineering Design 
Knowledge, Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on Electronic 
Computation, American Society of Civil Engineers, Birmingham, AL, 
February, 1986. 


3-20 





CHAPTER 4 


SELECTION OF RETAINING STRUCTURES 


4.1 INTRODUCTION 


The rapid influx of new techniques for retaining structure construction 
and the many restrictions associated with it have oiade it difficult to 
determine which of the available systems is the most suitable for a given 
situation. To determine the most appropriate structure, a thorough evaluation 
of the many factors involving the design, construction, use and maintenance of 
each system is required. Some of the most important factors affecting the 
selection, development methodology, and its implementation in M.l. are 
described in detail in the following sections. 

4.2 RETAINING STRUCTURE SELECTION FACTORS 


Selection of a retaining structure can be done from the point of view of 
the owner or the design engineer. The selection by an owner of a particular 
retaining structure type is motivated by various factors, such as, aesthetics, 
cost, risk and durability [4.1]. The important factors that affect the 
selection by a design engineer are the soil properties at site, construction 
considerations (availability of materials and labor, site accessibility, 
equipment availability, etc), groundwater, right-of-way, aesthetics, 
environmental concerns, durability and maintenance, cost, politics and 
tradition [4.2]. A brief description of some of the important factors 
affecting selection is given in the following sections: 


4-1 




4.2.1 Ground 


The selection of the retaining structure is very much influenced by the 
earth, the structure is designed to retain as well as the earth on which it 
rests. As discussed in Section 2.3, the ground or site geometry dictates the 
wall types that are best suited for either the fill or cut situations. Table 
2.1 shows the typical structure types for fill or cut situations. The soil 
properties also play a very important part in structure selection, especially 
when the retained earth itself has a major load-carrying function. In the 
case of walls, such as reinforced earth structures, the reinforcing elements 
have to develop sufficient pull-out force which is resisted by the friction 
along the soil-reinforcement interface and also by the passive resistance 
along the transverse members of the reinforcement, if any (e.g., grid 
reinforcement). The pull-out force of the reinforcing element is dependent on 
soil properties such as internal angle of friction. 

Strain compatibility is another important factor which is considered in 
the structure selection. For structures which utilize reinforcing elements 
(e.g., reinforced earth, tieback, soil nailing, etc.), the strains required to 
mobilize the full strength of the reinforcing elements are much smaller than 
those needed to mobilize the full strength of the soil. Thus these systems 
are not suitable for retaining soils with low residual strength. The 
possibility of saturation and creep in clayey soils are also factors that 
deter the selection of systems using reinforcing elements. Gravity 
structures, on the other hand, are less influenced by the soil properties. 
When the soils have large vertical and horizontal deformations, a flexible 
gravity system such as the gabion structure may be selected instead of a more 

4-2 






rigid system that resists large deformations. 

4.2.2. Groundwater 

The water table level in a region is an important consideration in 
retaining structure selection. Generally the groundwater table behind the 
earth retaining structure is lowered to reduce the hydrostatic pressure acting 
on the structure, and also to prevent saturation of the soil which increases 
displacements significantly leading to instability. Corrosion in the presence 
of groundwater is also an important parameter. The negative impact of 
groundwater can be reduced by using a free-drainage system in reinforced earth 
and gabion structures. In some cases it is desirable to keep the water table 
high to prevent settlement of adjacent structures or to protect the existing 
untreated timber pile foundations from fungus decay resulting from the 
exposure to oxygen. In such cases (e.g., slurry wall, tangent piles, etc.) a 
relatively rigid watertight structure capable of withstanding the full 
hydrostatic pressure is used. 

4.2.3 Construction Considerations 

The construction considerations for retaining structure selection include 
a construction schedule, availability of material, site accessibility, and 
equipment and labor availability. 

Conventional cast-in-place concrete structures generally take more time to 
construct and hence these structures are not considered when there is a 
constraint on project time. Earth reinforced walls are chosen under these 
conditions, since no form work is required. Furthermore they are more easily 


4-3 







constructed using the locally available backfill material. Another advantage 
of earth walls is that the construction can be accomplished regardless of the 
climatic conditions. 

Site inaccessibility to heavy construction equipment in high mountainous 
terrain/thick forest areas is a deciding factor in the choice of an 
appropriate retaining system. At the same time, material availability is also 
an important parameter. As an example, it can be cited that a gabion 
structure would be an ideal choice, when there is an abundance of suitable 
rock backfill. When suitable aggregate has to be hauled a long distance to 
the project site, concrete retaining structures are usually avoided. 

4.2.4 Right-of-way 

When there is insufficient space behind the structure face, reinforced 
compacted earth systems are not preferred since these require relatively large 
space behind the structure face (0.7 times the wall height) compared to that 
needed for the construction of conventional concrete structures. When there 
is a very little space, a top-down staged excavation and support system such 
as soil nailing may be chosen as a suitable alternative. The feasibility of 
such structures which involves reinforcing elements as part of the structure, 
is influenced by the availability of utilities, buried structures in the 
vicinity, and good soil. 

4.2.5 Aesthetics 

A pleasing architectural facade is usually mandated by environment impact 
statements on sensitive projects. Different types, shapes and color facings 


4-4 





are used in the construction of earth walls. The types of facings range from 
built on-site continuous facings (shotcrete, welded wire mesh, cast-in place 
concrete, etc.) to prefabricated concrete or steel panels. The aesthetic 
factor is extremely important when building a retaining structure in parks, 
forests and natural habitats. Under such circumstances walls such as the 
Evergreen walls, which consist of precast concrete units with open spaces at 
the faces into which shrubs, vines, etc may be planted, are the most 
attractive choices of structures. These shrubs within a few years with 
adequate water supply aid the walls to merge with the environment. 

4.2.6 Environmental Considerations 

The selection of an earth retaining system is influenced by its potential 
environmental impact during and after construction. If the construction site 
is in the vicinity of a hospital, library or a laboratory which houses sound 
sensitive equipment, then earth systems which use pile driving or heavy 
construction machinery may not be considered. Other important parameters 
would include the excavation and disposal of contaminated material and the 
discharge of large quantities of water at the project site. When the problem 
of noise reduction is the primary concern, then the gravity-type gabion 
structures/the Evergreen walls are the most suitable types. The open nature 
of the former and the presence of foliage covering in the latter are effective 
in absorbing the noise, making these structures acoustically superior to hard 
and smooth concrete structures. 

4.2.7 Durability and Maintenance 

The effects of corrosion and weathering have to be taken into account 
while determining the selection of the appropriate retaining structure. 


4-5 





Concrete retaining structures generally are more durable against weathering 
and corrosion effects than earth reinforced systems which utilize considerable 
reinforcing elements. Earth reinforced systems are not preferable if the 
corrosion in the site is a critical issue. Gabion walls have similar 
durability problems since the wire metal cages are susceptible to corrosion. 
V/hen geo-synthetics are used as reinforcement, their long term creep behavior 
and resistance to deterioration due to chemical attack and exposure to 
ultraviolet light are major concerns. Exposure of geotextile to ultraviolet 
radiation may significantly affect the structural strength of the system by 
way of reduction of tensile strength and elongation to failure of the 
geosynthetic structural elements. The durability of concrete structures is 
influenced by the quality of the aggregate and water used in the mix and the 
casting procedures adopted in the construction of the system. The durability 
factor is a very important consideration when the retaining structure is to be 
built in highly corrosive soils (with high acidic content) or non-conventional 
environments with waves, chemicals or marine borers. 

4.2.8. Cost 

Retaining wall costs are generally expressed per square foot of wall face. 
The major elements that contribute to the cost are wall materials, erection 
and select backfill for fill retention systems. The cost of wall materials 
and erection are relatively predictable for a particular wall type although 
backfill costs can vary dramatically depending on the quality of the backfill 
required and its local availability. In general, the construction cost of 
earth walls in fill areas is less than 60X that of conventional cast-in-place 
concrete walls. The non-conventional walls become more economical when the 


4-6 








wall is more than 10 ft. In height [4.2]. Table 4.1 presents the average costs 


in the North West United States. 

Table 4.1 Average Wall Costs in Northwest U 

Average Cost 

- Wall Type Wall.£ace 

Reinforced Earth 


Average Cost 

- Wall Type Wall Face 

VSL Retained Earth 
Wire Wall 

Geotextile Walls w/o Permanent Facing 

w/3" (76iiim) Shotcrete Face 
Tensar Walls w/o Permanent Facing 
w/ Permanent Facing 
Metal Bin Wall (H-10' [3m] to 30' [9m]) 

Gabion Wall (H-6' [1.8m] to 21' [6.4m]) 

Doublewall 

Criblock 

Permanent Tieback Walls 
Soil Nailed Walls 

(U.S. Experience is Limited) 

Temporary 

Permanent (Shotcrete Face) 

Permanent (Architectural Facing) 

Cantilever Soldier Pile w/Wood Lagging (H-S' [1.5m] to 
IS' [4.6m]) 

Cantilevtr Sheet Pile Wall (H-5' (1.5m) to 15' [4.6m)) 
Concrete Cantilever (H-6' [1.8m] to 30' [9.1m]) 


.S. 

in Dollars per S.F. 

$18 - $22 

in Dollars per S.F, 

$18 - $22 
$13 - $20 
$ 6 - $12 
$15 - $25 
$15 - $25 
N/A 

$20 - $40 
$18 - $35 
$20 - $25 
$12 - $25 
$45 - $60 

$17 - $25 
$25 - $30 
$35 - $50 

$12 - $18 
$12 . $18 
$25 • $40 


4-7 










NOTES; 


1. Average prices given above are total in-place costs including wall 

materials, erection, and select wall backfill. For mechanically stabilized 
earth walls, the select backfill is the backfill contained within the 

reinforced volume. Since excavation quantities can vary greatly job-to-job, 
excavation cost is not included. 

2. Unless otherwise noted, the prices given cover walls in the 10'[3m] to 40' 
[12m] height range. 

3. Alaska prices are higher. 

4. Not all systems listed above are marketed in all states. 

5. N/A denotes no cost experience to date in Region 10 [Northwest U.S.]. 

Estimation of the design life and a long term cost is more difficult for 

wall systems constructed with materials other than concrete, steel and wood. 
New wall materials such as plastics, fiber glass and other geos 3 mthetics 
require in-depth study of available performance history, current technical 
guidance can be obtained by contacting the relevant technical groups such as 
the AASHTO sub-committee on new materials for the latest technical information 
and specifications [2.7]. 

4.2.9. Risk 

An assessment of risk and safety aspects in both design and construction 
including Impact on adjacent facilities is necessary prior to the wall type 
selection. Particular wall types are better suited to certain sub-surface 
conditions than others. An adequate sub-surface investigation must be 
completed at the project site to assess the applicability of Individual 


4-8 







systems. The owner must establish formal guidelines for the design of 
alternate walls to mitigate risk and to equate the design of different 
alternate wall systems. The owner should be responsible for long term 
stability of the ground surrounding the retaining structure. In recent years 
several spectacular failures have occurred involving alternate earth retaining 
systems. Subsequent analysis has shown that latent subsurface conditions, 
not involved with internal wall stability, caused the failures. Fig. 4.1 
shows the failure which occurred on a highway project near Coos Bay, Oregon, 
involving a reinforced earth wall. The wall top moved out 18 feet and dropped 
12 feet, while the wall base translated 23 feet. Investigations disclosed 
that the failure surface was along a thin inclined seam of soft clay in the 
natural deposits below the wall base. The owner/designer should establish 
design criteria such as minimum safety factors for overturning and sliding, 
design life, maximum allowable bearing pressure, embedment depth, earth 
pressure magnitude and distribution. A comprehensive technical review must be 
done for the proposed system in addition to comparisons of risk elements. 
4.2.10 Politics and Tradition 

Political influences, trade practices and national policies affect the 
selection of structures. The selection also depends on the traditional 
practices in the region where the stiructure is to be constructed since the 
contractor in that region will be equipped to carry out the construction for 
the specific wall type under consideration. Moreover, construction 
familiarity and specialization on the designs of certain types of structures 
lead the contractor to select that particular structure type. 

4.3. FORMULATION OF THE KNOWLEDGE BASE FOR RETAINING STRUCTURE SELECTION 
4.3.1 Introduction 

Section 4.2 describes the factors affecting the selection of the most 


4-9 





V/all location as 


built 



FaUusc surface 


Figure 4.1 


Coos Bay 


Failure 1 , 2.51 



appropriate retaining structure. The following section describes the 
methodology of the formulation of this knowledge into the system using the M.l 
knowledge engineering shell. M.l is a powerful PC- based knowledge system 
which is implemented in the C programming language. The knowledge base is 
prepared using any standard text editor. The retaining structure selection 
module, SELECTUALL is developed in M.l syntax using Wordstar. The M.l 
inference enginer primarily uses a backward-chaining reasoning process to 
reach conclusions, although it also uses the forward-chaining reasoning. 

4.3.2 Methodology of Knowledge Formulation in SELECTWALL 

The selection module consists of three phases. In the first phase of the 
selection process the system objective is to eliminate a few of the retaining 
structures and present the user with the possible structure types which are 
most suitable for the existing conditions. The second phase investigates the 
selected structures in a greater detail and the objective of this phase is to 
indicate the most appropriate structure from among the selected possible 
types. The last phase confirms this selection through queries on aesthetics 
and familiarity of construction of the selected structure. A schematic 
representation of the selection module is shown in Fig. 4.2. 

Site location usually dictates the basic wall type and size. This portion 
of the knowledge is implemented in M.l as shown in Fig. 4.3. 

multivalued(location). 
question(location) « 

'Which of the following list of sites best describes the 
location of the proposed retaining structure?'. 
legalvals(location) « 

[excavation,roadway,sidehill,abutment,forest-area,buiding- 
related-excavation, mountainous-terrain,waterfront-area,railway, 
building,marine]. 
automaticmenu(location). 
enumeratedanswers(location). 

Fig. 4.3. M.l code for Site Location 


4-11 







4-12 


Figure 4.2 Basic Architecture of RETAININGEARTH 



















The features ' automaticmenu' and ' enumeratedanswers' enable the system to 
display an enumerated list of sites to the user. The user may input his 
choice by t)rping in either the number or sufficient alphabets to distinguish 
the response from the other sites displayed. The user could also seek an 
explanation to the question by typing 'why'. The explanation to question 
(location) is formulated in H.l. as shown below: 


explanation(location) > [ 

location where the structure is to be built is 
a very Important consideration in the selection of retaining 
Vou may choose (only one) location which is closest to the 
above locations.•]. 


The next question queries the user whether the site is situated in a 
comparatively inaccessible region (such as mountainous terrain). If the 
region has a difficult topography and potential access problems, it is 
favorable to adopt a top-down staged construction like the soil nailing, tied- 
back wall or reinforced earth structure. The consultation continues and the 
user is asked whether the construction of retaining stiructure is for an 
emergency situation (e.g., landslide of mountainside blocking the traffic). 
Under these circumstances the reinforced earth structure and the tied back 
wall are favorable choices. In most cases the reinforced earth structure has 
been found to be economical when the soil conditions are not favorable for 
drilling for installation of tiebacks. The next two questions involve the 
important parameters, height and length of the earth to be retained which 


4-13 





significantly control the cost of the structure. The wall height is an 
important variable for selecting the wall type since some structures have 
proven to be cost effective and structurally more compatible for a given 
height. The next few questions deal with the site geometry, right-of-way, 
soil t 3 rpe and project completion time. Site conditions usually dictate the 
basic wall type and size. The retaining structures are categorized broadly 
into two types (fills and cuts) as shown in Table 2.1. Right-of-way is also 
an important consideration in the selection of a structure especially in the 
case of systems which involve reinforcing elements (reinforced earth, tied 
back wall and soil nailing). Thus these structures cannot be considered if 
there is limited right-of-way at the site. The soil is also an important 
iactor which influences the selection of a structure. The user is asked 
several questions related to the soil properties at the possible site. An 
example of a typical question in shown in Fig. 4.4. 

question(soilb) « 

'Does the soil have the following properties: 

1.Soils of high plasticity. 

2.Granular soils with no coherance. 

3.Soils with much water content. 

4.Large size(boulders).-(yes/no)?'. 


legalvals(soilb) > [ yes,no ]. 


explanation(soilb) > [nl, 

'The data entered by you may lead to the selection of tied- 
back retaining structure, subject to favorable soil condition.A 
favorable soil for this type of retaining structure will NOT have 
the properties stated in this question.',nl]. 


Fig. 4.4 M.l Code for Soil Properties 


4-14 







The first ten rules in the ES lead to the selection of the 'possible-wall' 
types that are applicable for the given conditions. Each rule consists of all 
the aforementioned conditions. If these conditions are satisfied, the rule is 
activated or 'fired' and the particular 'possible-type' selected for 
consideration in the next phase. A typical example of a rule which leads to 
the possible-type structure selection is shown in Fig. 4.5. 


rul«-15: if site - fill and 

not(location « excavation) or 

not(location » building-related-excavation) or 

not(location * building) and 

height - H and 

(H > 6 and H < 34) and 

length « L and 

(L > 0) and 

rway * yes or 

rway » no and 

not(time = short) and 

soila * yes and 

soile « no and 

foundation * good or 

foundation « poor and 

vertload = yes or 

vertload = no 


then possible-wall ■ gabion-retaining-wall. 


Fig. 4.5. T 3 rpical M.l Rule for Possible Type Structure Selection 

The rule-15 is activated and the gabion-retaining-wall is chosen as the 
'possible-wall' if the following conditions in the above rule are satisfied: 

4-15 




i) if the site geometry belongs to the 'fill' category, 

ii) if the construction of the structure does not involve an emergency 
situation; 

iii) if the project location is not an excavation or building-related- 
excavation or building; 

iv) if the site is accessible/inaccessible (loc 2) (this rule has both 
yes and no for this factor because the ES is framed in such a 
manner that all 'possible types' of walls are to be considered in 
the first phase of the consultation). The gabion structure is to be 
considered as a 'possible-t 3 rpe' even if the site is accessible, 
although it is suitable even when the site is inaccessible; 

v) if the site involves a situation where traffic has to be maintained 
during construction; 

vi) if the height of the earth to be retained is > 10 and < 34 ft.; 

vii) if the length of the earth to be retained is >0; 

viii) if the right-of-way condition of the site is favorable or 
unfavorable; 

ix) if the duration of the time of the project is not short; 

x) if the soil is either firm or loose at the proposed site; 

xi) if the in-situ soil does not have a high acidic content; 

xii) if the foundation is good or poor; 

and 

xiii) if the proposed structure will be required to take vertical load/ 
surcharge. 


If the answers to all the questions related to the statements in rule-15 are 

favorable, then this rule is activated and the gabion structure is selected as 

4-16 




a possible-wall type. The first phase may result in more than one possible- 
wall type depending upon the response of the user. Once the consultation in 
the first phase is over, the ES checks each rule to see if the conditions in 
the rule are satisfied. If so, the rule is then activated and the structure 
selected as a possible-type. Thus at the end of the first phase, the ES has 
one or a list of possible-wall types to be considered for selection in the 
next phase of the consultation. 

A schematic procedure for the selection of the possible-type structures in 
the first phase of the selection module is shown in Fig. 4.6. If the list of 
possible-wall types selected consists only of one structure type, then the 
information related to the material required for the construction of this 
wall-type and the labor availability are asked by the system in the second 
phase of the selection process. This information is shown below (Fig. 4.7) in 
rule - 24, where gravity-retaining-wall is the possible type as recommended in 
the first phase; information regarding material and labor availability are 
sought by the system to justify its selection as the appropriate-structure. 


rule-24: if possible-wall is sought and 
user-infonned « yes and 

possible-wall « gravity-retaining-wall and 
fflaterialcg » yes and 
labora • yes and 
listof(possible-wall) * [ONE] 
then appropriate-structure - gravity-retaining-wall. 

Fig. 4.7 Typical M.l Rule for Appropriate Wall Selection in the 
Second Phase 


4-17 







Figure 4.6 Schematic Diagram Showing the Search Procedure for 
the ’ Possible-wall' Types in Phase 1. (continued) 


4-18 











Figure 4.6 Continued 


4-19 


















© 



Figure 4.6 Continued 


4-20 











If che list of possible-wall types consists of more than one structure, 
then a comparative evaluation based on the wall height is done and the 
appropriate wall chosen depending on this criteria. This part of the system 
in effect deals very briefly with cost comparison between various structure 
types. It is generally very economical to consider a concrete gravity wall 
when the height of the earth to be retained is less than 8 ft. The coding of 
the information in M.l is shown below in rule-42. 


nil«~42: if poMlbltt-vall • gravity-rataining-wall and 
usar-lnfornad « yas and 
Inforng « yes and 
height « H and 
( H < 5 ) and 

listof(possible-wall) > [ ONl,mo ] 


Fig. 4.8 Typical M.l Rule for Appropriate Structure Selection 


Based on Height Comparison 


The final phase of the selection module confirms the selection in che 
second phase and queries the user on details regarding construction 
familiarity for the selected structure and the associated aesthecical 
considerations. If the Information is favorably answered, then the 
appropriate structure selected in the second phase becomes the final choice 
for the given input. This is codified in M.l in rule-63 as shown in Fig. 4.9. 

rul«-€3: if appropriatw-sbructurw is sought and 
appropriats-structurs > X and 
tussr-infornad « yes and 
possible-wall is sought and 
possible-wall « X and 
laborb ■ yes and 
aesthetics * yes 
then selected-structure « X. 


Fig. 4.9. Typical M.l Rule for Final Structure Choice 


4-21 






After the final structure choice the system asks the user if he is 
satisfied with the selection. If the user is satisfied the consultation would 
end, or else the list of structures available on the system is displayed to 
the user and the user makes his choice. This provision enables the system to 
be more flexible and allows the user to choose any desired structure. Once 
this is done, the consultation in H.l ends and the system is linked to the 
design module where the design of the particular selected/chosen structure is 
then carried out. The details of the external code linkage between the 
selection and design modules are presented in Chapter 5. The complete listing 
of the M.l code SELECTWALL for the selection process is given in Appendix A. 

REFERENCES 

4.1 GA Munfakh, Innovative Earth Retaining Structures: Selection, Design & 
Performance, GSP 25, Ed PC Lambe & LA Hansen, ASCE, New York, 1990, 52- 
65. 

4.2 AR Schnore, Selecting Retaining Wall Type and Specifying Proprietary 
Retaining Walls in NYSDOT Practice, GSP 25, Ed PC Lambe & LA Hansen, 
ASCE, New York, 1990, 119-124. 

4.3 M.l Reference Manual for Software, Version 2.1, Teknowledge, Palo Alto, 
CA, Dec. 1988. 

4.4 H Schnabel, A Contractor's Perspective on Wall Selection and Performance 

Monitoring, GSP 25, Ed. PC Lambe & LA Hansen, ASCE, New York, 1990, 67- 

84. 

4.5 IK Lee, W White and OG Ingles, Retaining Structures, Geotechnical 

Engineering, Pitman, 1983, 245-278. 

4.6 JE Bowles, Foundation Analysis and Design, 4th Ed., McGraw Hill Book 


Co., 1988, 530-642. 


4-22 





CHAPTER 5 


PROCEDURE FOR LINKING THE SELECTION AND DESIGN MODULES 


5.1 INTRODUCTION 


The expert system RETAININGEARTH consists of the selection and design 
modules. This chapter deals with the formulation of the control program which 
permits the M.l selection module to link with the various design procedures in 
the design module, which enables the computation of the detailed design of the 
selected structure. Fig. 5.1 gives the general flowchart which shows the 
linkage of the five independent design programs in the design module with the 
M.l selection module through a control program. The following section 
describes the linking procedure using the control program. 

5.2 LINKING PROCEDURE USING THE CONTROL PROGRAM 


The control program CALL is developed in C and employs the menu-driven 
technique which makes the system-user interface very effective and easy to 
follow. The photograph of the screen showing the various menus, shown in 
Figure 5.2, appears at the start of the consultation with ES RETAININGEARTH. 
After the consultation with M.l, the program control returns to CALL, along 
with the height and type of the selected structure. The import of the two 
parameters, namely the wall height and type, from the M.l selection module is 
done by the external code EXT. EXT is developed in C conforming to the 
required M.l format. Fig. 5.3 shows the external code EXT. Some of the rules 
in the knowledge base in the selection module have to be prepared to permit 

5-1 






Figure 5.1 Rowchart of ES RETAININGEARTH, Showing Linking of 
the M.l Selection Module with the Design Module. 


5-2 




















6»sip 

OiutMetiN 

rziitit 


Hctf: Prfss the light Ifttfr for selection, design or 
canstniction. , . . ■ 


Figure 5.2 Photograph Showing the Various Menus at Start 
of RETAININGEARTH. 











-- 

/* M.1 EXTERNAL CODE */ 

/*_*/ 


> 


#includ I <stdio.h> 

#includc <signal.h> 

#include <iiiaA.h> 

#include <extif.h> 

★include <ct>pe.h> 

★include <string.h> 

★include <graph.h> 

★include <dos.h> 

★include <stdlib.h> 

★include <process.h> 
char bufI4000]; 
extInitO 
{ 

extern int addFuction(); 

extern int design(); 

addF unctionC'design", 1 .design); 

} 

FILE *fp,*fopen(); 

extern int intportQ: 
extern int expon(); 
extern int restoreScreen(); 
int get_rrxxle(); 

void setscreen(int),set_page(int),clear_screcn(),call(char *); 
int page.color.screen; 


designO 

{ 

intree; 
float h; 

long int type,y; 

long int choice; 

int oldrrxxle; 

saveScreen(buf); 

oidmode=get_modeO; 

setscreen(3); 

clear_scrcen(); 

_setvideorrxxleCDEFAULTMODE); 

set_page(0); 

import( 1 JTOAT.&h.O); 

import(2L^NG,&y,0); 

choice=y; 

expon( 13-OAT,&h); 


^=fopen("heitype","w"); 
fprintf(fp,"%.2f %dSn",h,y); 
fclose(fp); 

printf(’Nn\n The type of wall you have selected will be conveyed to designVn"); 


Figure 5.3 External Code EXT 


5-4 







printfC part. Please go to the main menu if you want to design ifvn"); 

printf("\nNn But first, please press any key to go back to M.l \n”); 

while(kbhitO=0) {;} 

setscreen(oldincde); 

restoreScreen(buf); 

return; 

) 

extExitO 


{ 

} 




int get.modeO 

{ 


union REGS intregs.outregs; 
intregs.h.ah=OxOf; 
int8^0xl0,&intregs,&outregs); 
retum(outregs.h.al); 

} 


^mtm***************************************/ 


void setscrcen(n) 
intn; 


{ 

union REGS intregs,outregs; 


screen=n; 

intregs.h.ah=0; 

intregs.h.al=n; 

int86(0x 10,&intregs,&outregs); 

1 


^mm*********0*******m*******************/ 


void set_page(p) 
intp; 

{ 

union REGS intregs,outregs; 
extern int page; 


pagc=p; 

incregs.h.ah=5; 

intregs.h.al=p; 

int8^0xl0,&intregs,&outregs); 

) 


p00*000m0000000000**000*00*0*****00******f 


void sct_color(f,b) 
int f,b; 


{ 

color*(f & 143)+((b«4) & 112); 

) 


^0000*0000000000***000***0**************^ 


void clear screenQ 

{ 

union REGS inregs,outregs; 
inregs.h.ah=^; 

Figure 5.3 Continued 


5-5 





inregs.h.al=0; 

inregs.h.bh=7; 

inregs.h.ch=0; 

inregs.h.cl=0; 

inregs.h.dh=24; 

inregs.h.dl=79; 

int86((}x 10,&inregs,&outFegs); 

} 


^********mtt*m****m**m*******************f 


void call(s) 
char *s; 


{ 

char far *filename=s; 
union REGS inregs.outregs; 
struct SREGS insreg; 
inregs.h.ah=0x4B; 
inregs.h.al=0; 

inregs.x.dx=I^_OFF(filename); 
insreg.ds=FP_SEG(filename); 
int86x(0x21 ,&inregs,&outregs,&insreg); 
) 


y Hi * « * *41 * * ])■ itt * * «If * 41«itt Kt« * «Ik * « 4t i|( Ht * * * * * * « « He« « He :tci|c«:(ci|c :|c :|i :|c :|i He * * * * * ^ 


Figure 5.3 Continued 


5-6 










rule-64: 


list=[ 
nl, 
nl, • 
nl, • 
nl, • 
nl. • 
nl, • 
nl, • 
nl, • 
nl, • 
nl, ' 
nl, • 
nl. 


if selected-structure is sought and 
selected-structure * X and 
listof(selected-structure) = [ONE] and 

display([nl,'The selected structure for the given condit 
continue and 
user-happy and 

display([nl,'I''m glad you are happy with my selection.nl] 
list*A and 


display(A) 

and 

height-H 

and 

choicel-Y 

and 


design(H,Y)-DESIGN 


then end the consultation. 


1. Gravity;', 

2. Cantilever;', 

3. Counterfort;', 

4. Gabions;', 

5. Slurry;', 

6. Tied-back;', 

7. Reinforced-earth;', 

8. Sheet-piles;', 

9. Crib-wall;', 

10.Soil-nailing.', 


nl]. 

nocache(list). 

question(choicel)-[nl,' Please confirm the number of the wall which you 


/* 

multivalued(fault). 
automaticmenu(fault). 
enumeratedanswers(fault). 

*/ 

question(fault) « 

['Which wall do you think is best for these conditions?']. 

/* 

legalvals(fault) - 

[gravity,cantilever,counterfort,gabions,slurry,tied- 
back, reinforced-earth,sheet-piles,crib-wall,soil-nailing]. 

*/ 

legalvals(fault)-integer. 
rule-65: if user*informed and 

possible-wall is sought and 
user-informed and 

appropriate-structure is sought and 
tuser-informed and 
selected-structure is sought and 
not(user-happy) and 


Figure 5.4 Example of Rules in M.l for Expon of Infoimation 


5-7 



list«F and 

display(F) and 

fault * Y and 

height=H and 

design(H,Y)=DESIGN 
then end the consultation. 

/* - */ 

rule-66: if external(design,[H,Y])=[DESIGN] and 

display(['The consultation is over. Press Alt + Q. Thank you 
then design(H,Y)*DESIGN. 

/**********************************************************★/ 

legalvals(choicel)»integer(l,10). 


Fig. 5.4 Continued 


5-8 







int show(sss) 
char *sss; 

( 

int c; 

clear_screen(); 
get_lines(sss); 
print_firstjpage(); 
locate(0,0); 
while(kbhit()»*0) {;} 
c»getkey(); 

while(c!»ESCKEY && c!»F2K£Y) 
{ 

switch(c) 

{ 

case UPARROW: 

scroll_page_do%m(l) ; 

locate(0,0); 

while(kbhit()«> 0 } {;} 

c«getkey(); 

break; 

case DOWNARROW: 

scroll_j)age_up(l) ; 

locate(0,0); 

while(kbhit()** 0 ) {;) 

c»getkey(); 

break; 

case PGUP: 

scroll_page_down(19); 

locate(0,0)7 

while(kbhit()»«« 0 ) {;) 

c«getkey(); 

break; 

case PGDN: 

scroll_j)age__up(19) ; 

locate(0,0); 

while()cbhit()««0) (;) 

c«getkey(); 

break; 

default: 

locate(0,0); 

while(kbhit()««0) (;} 

c«getkey(); 

break; 

} 

> 

return(c); 

} 


Figure 5.5 Function ’show’ in Control Program CALL 


5-9 





the EXT program to export information from the selection module SELECTWALL to 
the control program CALL. The representation of this information in M.l is 
shown by the rules in Fig. 5.4. The external code EXT opens a file called 
'heitype' and transports the wall height and the corresponding nvimbers 
representing the wall into 'heitype'. When the consultation in the M.l 
selection module is over the user exits the module and the main menu is 
displayed to the user. If the user desires the design of the selected 
structure, he enters the appropriate design program through the control 
program CALL. CALL opens the file 'heitype' and sequentially searches the 
various programs in the design module for the corresponding selected wall 
type, and then interacts with the user in the consultation for the detailed 
design of the structure. 

The other option available in the menu to the user is the help facility. 
If the user desires an explanation about the system, he could choose the 
'help' menu. The help facility gives the user a brief description about the 
system and its operational features. This facility is made possible by the 
function 'show' residing in the CALL program shown in Fig. 5.5. The advantage 
of this facility is that the explanation resides in an independent file and 
hence does not occupy useful space in the design module. The listing of the 
control program CALL is given in Appendix B. 

5.3 Overview of Program Operation 

1. Hake directory called WALL in root directoxry as follows: 

O mkdlr wall [enter] 

2. O cd wall [enter] 


5-10 





3. Copy all files from both the M.l diskettes to the directory WALL; 

C> copy a:*.* [enter] 

4. Copy the following files into the same directory WALL: 

(i) ml . c (ii) gravity.exe (iii) canwall.exe (iv) gabion.exe 
(v)earwall.exe (vi) sheet.exe 
(use same command as in 4). 

5. Start the consultation with RETAINZNGEARTH as follows: 

C> ml ml.c [enter] 

Press [F9] key. 

Enter go to begin the consultation. 

REFERENCES 

5.1 M.l Reference Manual for Software, Version 2.1, Teknowledge, Palo Alto, 
CA, Dec. 1988. 

5.2 Microsoft C 5.1, Optimizing Compiler, User's Guide Language Reference, 





CHAPTER 6 


CONCRETE GRAVITY RETAINING STRUCTURES 


6.1 INTRODUCTION 


Retaining structures are generally used to hold back the earth and 
maintain a difference in the elevation of the ground surface as shovm in Fig. 
6.1. The retained material exerts a push on a structure and tends to overturn 
or slide it or both. In highway construction, the retaining structures are 
used along cuts or fills where space is inadequate for the appropriate side 
slopes. Bridge abutments and foundation walls which must support earth fills 
are also designed as retaining walls. A gravity wall, which is usually of 
plain concrete, depends entirely on its weight for stability. It is used for 
walls upto about 10 ft. high. The cantilever retaining structure is commonly 
used for walls in the range of 10 to 25 ft. in height. The stem, heel and toe 
are the structural components and each acts as a cantilever beam. Counterfort 
walls are often economical for heights over about 25 ft; the stem and the slab 
are tied together by counterforts spaced at intervals which act as tension 
ties to support the stem wall. A buttress wall, which is similar to a 
counterfort wall, has transverse support walls located on the side of the stem 
opposite to the backfill; these support walls act as compression struts. The 
counterfort is more popular than a buttress because the counterfort is hidden 
beneath the backfill whereas the buttress occupies valuable space in front of 
the wall. The bridge abutment acts in the same way as the cantilever 
retaining wall except that the bridge deck provides an additonal horizontal 
restraint at the top of the stem. 


6-1 





Figure 6.1 Loads on Retaining Walls [6.3] 



Figure 6.2 Basis of Active and Passive Earth Pressure 
Computations 









The development of an integrated interactive microcomputer based analysis 
and design has been confined to typical concrete gravity and cantilever 
retaining walls. 

6.2. DESIGN PRINCIPLES 

6.2.1. Earth Pressure 

The earth pressure exerted by the backfill on the retaining wall increases 
proportionally to the depth and its magnitude is expressed as 

P^i - ko wh (6.1) 

where 

kg - a constant known as the coefficient of earth pressure at rest 
w - unit weight of the soil 

and 

h - distance from the surface. 

The value of kg is dependent on the nature of the backfill, the method of 
deposition and compaction. It rar'es between 0.4 and 0.5 for uncompacted non- 
cohesive soils such as sands and gravels whereas the value could be as high as 
0.8 for the same soil in a highly compacted state. Kq could be of the order 
of 0.7 to 1.0 for cohesive soils. 

The retaining walls which are constructed of elastic material deflect 
under the action of the pressure and since they rest on compressible soils 
they tilt and shift away from the fill. A sliding plane ab forms in the soil 
mass (Fig. 6.2) when the wall moves away from the fill. The wedge abc sliding 
along that plane exerts pressure against the wall. The angle d whose tangent 


6-3 







is equal to the coefficient of intergranular friction is known as the angle of 
Internal friction and the corresponding pressure is known as the active earth 
pressure. If the wall is pushed against the fill, a sliding plane ad is 
formed and the wedge acd pushed upward by the wall along that plane. The 
pressure which this larger wedge exerts against the wall is known as the 
passive earth pressure. 


The force due to active pressure, as determined from the Coulomb's 
equation can be written as 


( 6 . 2 ) 


coefficient of active pressure 


k - 

a 


sin ($ - _ 

sin^6 sin (6+6) [ 1 + 


sin + 6) sin • /3) 
sin (fi + 6) sin (6 • P) 


.(6.3) 


B angle of the pressure surface measured counterclockwise from 

the horizontal, 

^ - angle of internal friction of the soil, 

8 - angle of friction along the pressure surface (between soil 

and concrete), 

P -i angle of retained material with the horizontal, 
w - unit weight of the backfill. 


1 - vertical projection of the pressure surface. 

When the pressure surface is vertical {8 - 90*) and the friction on that sur- 


6-4 





face is such that B - 6, then k becomes 

a 


k “ cosfi 


2 2 
cosfi - J cos - cos <p 


[cos^ + J 


2^ 2 
cos p - cos 4 


(6.4) 


If the backfill is level - 0) then the coefficient of active pressure be¬ 
comes 


k - 

a 


1 - sin0 
1 + sin^ 


(6.5) 


The coefficient of passive pressure, k^ is given by 


k - cosB 
P 


2 2 
COS^ + JCOS cos (f) 


2 2 
l^cos/9 - Jcos 0 - cos 4 


and for 0^0, 


k - 

P 


1 - sin^ 
1 + sin^ 


( 6 . 6 ) 


(6.7) 


Backfills behind retaining walls are rarely uniform and dry. Proper 
drainage of the fill is vitally important to reduce pressures, but the 
pressure will temporarily increase during heavy storms or sudden thaws even in 
a well-drained fill since the water movement through the fill toward the 
drains causes additional seepage pressure. Frost action and other influences 
may also temporarily increase its value over that of the theoretical active 
pressure. Representative values for w and ^ often used in engineering 
practice are shown in Table 6.1. 


The values for the coefficient of friction between concrete and various 
soils are also shown in the table above. Soils of type 1 or 2 should be used 
for backfills of retaining walls wherever possible. Under saturated 
conditions, clays and silts may become entirely liquid, (i.e., ^ - 0). 


6-5 








Table 6.1 

Unit Weights, Effective Angles of Internal Friction and Coefficients of 

Friction With Concrete f 


Soil 

Unit weight, 
pcf 

<t>. 

degrees 

f 

1. Sand or gravel without fine particles. 

highly permeable 

110-120 

33-40 

0.5-0.6 

2. Sand or gravel with silt mixture, low 

permeability 

120-130 

25-35 

0.4-0.5 

3. Silty sand, sand and gravel with high 

clay content 

110-120 

23-30 

0.3-0.4 

4. Medium or stiff clay 

100-120 

25-35* 

0.2-0.4 

5. Soft clay, silt 

90-110 

20-25* 

0.2-0.3 


6.2.2 External Stability 


The principles discussed below are applicable to both the gravity and the 
reinforced concrete cantilever walls. The retaining wall proportions are 
first established such that the structure stability is ensured under the 
action of earth forces (Fig. 6.3). Three requirements for the structure 
stability must be satisfied: 

(i) the overturning moment (h'/3) must be more than balanced by the 
resisting moment, (W + Pa.y.1) to ensure an adequate factor of safety 
against overturning (usually about 2.0); 

(ii) The frictional resistance F in combination with any passive 
resistance Pp against the toe must be greater than P^^^ providing an adequate 
factor of safety (usually 1.5) against sliding; 

(iii) The base width 1 must be adequate to distribute the resultant 
vertical force R to the foundation soil without causing excessive settlement 
or rotation. 


For the Rankine pressure distribution, shown in Fi^. 6.3, the overturning 

6-6 






Figure 6.3. Cantilever Retaining Structure Under the 
Action of Earth Forces 


















































factor of safety (FS) is computed as 



where - the coefficient of friction between the soil and the footing. (Table 
6.1). When tan a is less than n, the angle of internal friction of the soil 
should be used, since failure will actually occur in the material rather than 
between the soil and the concrete. 

Passive pressure will develop in the soil in front of the wall if the con¬ 
crete had been placed without using forms for the toe and without disturbing 
the soil against which the concrete is placed. The ordinary passive resis¬ 
tance against the toe (Fig. 6.4) is expressed as 



( 6 . 11 ) 


When the base key is placed in an unformed excavation against undisturb¬ 
ed material, an additional passive force developed and a possible 

failure plane shifted from line 1 to line 2. This additional resistance is 


6-8 











surface 


Stem 




Figure 6.5 Soil Pressure Distribution. [6.1] 


6-9 







expressed as 


( 6 . 12 ) 



1 

2 


/v2 

Cp w (h 2 



The friction plane is moved from bd to ce and the frictional force developed 


along ce is based on the internal friction angle rather than the friction 
angle between soil and concrete. 


It is usually required that the resultant vertical force R should be inside 


the middle-third of the footing for sand and gravel subbases and within the 
middle-half for rock subbases and the maximum pressure may not exceed the 
allowable value. 


When the entire footing is under compression, the basic equation for com¬ 
bined bending and axial compression acting on one foot strip along the wall 
for all positions of R within the middle-third (Fig. 6.5a) is 


P " — ( 1 ± — ) .(6.13) 

1 1 

When the resultant R is outside the middle- third (Fig. 6.5b), vertical force 
equilibrium requires 

R - — (3x„) .(6.14) 

2 ^ 


for 0 < 3 X 2 < 1 


6.3 INTERACTIVE MICROCOMPUTER BASED 'GRAVITY' AND 'CANWALL' PROGRAMS 
IMPLEMENTATION 

6.3.1 Concrete Gravity Retaining Wall 

6.3.1.1 Program structure 

The program GRAVITY provides the design of the concrete gravity retaining 


6-10 





wall based on Che first principles. The user must provide the height of the 
earth to be retained, soil properties and live load. In designing the 

retaining wall, Che program accomplishes Che following; 
main dimensions of the wall 

- overturning and restoring moments, forces and factors of safety 
against overturning and sliding. 

The flowchart of the program GRAVITY is shown in Fig. 6.6. The listing of 
this program is given in Appendix C. 

6.3.1.2. Input and output 

The input parameters are given through an interactive system - user 
consultation. The required data comprises of the following: 
height of the earth to be retained; 
frost depth; 

live load surcharge pressure; 

unit weight of the soil; 

internal angle of friction of the soil; 

friction coefficient between the base and the soil; 

slope of the backfill; 

and 

allowable bearing pressure. 

The output file consists of the total horizontal thrust, base length of the 
retaining wall and the factors of safety against overturning and sliding. 
Both Che input and output are displayed on the screen and the design results 
can also be printed. 


6-11 





Figure 6.6 nowchart of Program .GRAVITY, for Concrete Gravity Retaining 
Wall Design. 


6-12 












6.3.1.3 Design example 


The design example of a concrete gravity retaining wall is illustrated in 
this section. The user-system interactive consultation for the design input 
is shown in Fig. 6.7. Fig. 6.8 shows the input data as displayed on the 
screen. 

The output file for the design example can be viewed on the screen as 
illustrated in Fig. 6.9. 

6.3.2 Cantilever Retaining Wall 

6.3.2.1 Program structure 

The program CANWALL designs the cantilever retaining wall based on the 
earth pressure theories, stability requirements and the strength method of ACI 
318-89. The user must provide strength properties for the concrete, 
reinforcing steel and soil. Additionally the user must specify the height of 
backfill, the surcharge, if any, and level of water table, etc. The program 
CANWALL gives the following final design results: 

main dimensions of the wall; 

determines the areas of steel required.to resist flexure (stem and 
base); 

- development length of bars; 

factors of safety against overturning and sliding. 

The flowchart of the program CANWALL is shown in Fig. 6.10 and Appendix-D 
gives the listing of the program CANWALL. 

6-13 






Oitr«t in file;?rivity.out 


pnio or m KCfiiNiNG nRucTORr 


Ukjt IS 4hf Slight ' •■ 

>> 11.5 

Idut IS rhf fryisf ier’.'. i" ivq'.:".’ 

>) 3.5 

Uut 15 tk live b?!'! ;‘I.'«:.bf-sf '■ 

)><« 

Ukit 15 the onit •eight ii.n hc: ' ’-v i'’ this regicit 

>>128 

lAit 15 the ingle (in leg.) of intcmai inctian of the 50 il^ 

>>38 

friction coefficienttif not knowi.gou wg give the wilitf 

>>8.5‘ 

is the slepe of the earth sarfacefin leg.)’ 


the allMBhle Warieg pmsm (it psf.)’ 


Figure 6.7 System-User Interactive Consultation for GRAVITy 


DDIGH OF IKE (JlftVIIV RHOIKIhC HISJailRI 


! N 


•eight of the Pi.Th •; : ii s^ ;• 

Frost lepfh in **' 1 : r^g:.'. ; •• 

Life loan sarchar^e ^r^ssir^ : liW ^ j-sf 
hit wight of f.he ; 0 i; in this .“<‘gion ; lit! «¥ 
hgle of internal friction of the so;i - ^ - 

lise friction coefficient : 8 58 
Slope of the earth surface : 8 88 3eg. 
hllotwhle hearing pressure : 8888.88 psf. 


% 


mom 




I!L*^* *LD »Gia 08TPBI Of Tif caWFTY Siwaun fS in nil » graoitg.oot 
* *"**ni**mni i miii ie«ii nnimo i mii ot mi iii oinin> f—** * * ******* ** 

D. 


Figure 6.8 Screen Display of Input Data For GRAVITY 


6-14 
























I DESIGN OF THE GRAVITY RETAINING STRUCTURE I 


Coefficient of active pressure = 0.3333 
Coefficient of passive pressure = 3.0000 
Total earth thrust« 6500.00 lb. 

Distance of earth's thrust from the base = 5.77 ft. 

Length of the base = 9.75 ft. 

Height of the structure = 15 ft. 

Distance of the resultant ftom the front edge = 3.47 ft — OK (inside middle-third). 
Overturning moment = 37500.00 ft.-lb. 

Restoring moment = 116883.84 ft.-Ib. 

Maximum bearing pressure = 4377.27 psf. 

Friction force = 11441.25 lb. 

Passive pressure = 720.00 lb. 

Factor of safety against overturning = 3.12 — > 2.0 .OK. 

Factor of safety against sliding * 1.87 — >1.5 .OK. 


Figure 6.9 Output File of GRAVITY 


6-15 






Selected Wall 


Input Data; 

(height of earth to be retained, the number of 
soil layers and their properties, fc of concrete 
and fy of steel, height of the water table, etc.) 


Increase base length 


Provide base key: 
CRSI design i 


Calculation of main dimensions of the wall: 
(base length, stem thickness, etc.) 



no _ Check foffactOTof safety against over turning:, 

* F.S.(overtuming ) > 2.0 - --- 

TyS 


Location of resultant and footing soil pressures 


Check for factor of safety against sliding: 

* F.S.(slidingj^_1.5 ——^ ' 



Design of heel cantilever 
(computes area of steel reinforcement required 
and selects the bar size and its development length) 


Design of toe cantilever: 

(computes area of steel reinforcement required 
and selects the bar size and its development length) 



Reinforcement for wall: 

(computes stem reinforcement, etc.) 


Temperature and shrinkage 
reinforcement calculation 


Provision for drainage of backfill 


Output 


Figure 6.10. Flowchart of Program CANWALL for 
Cantilever Retaining Wall Design 



















6.3.2.2. Input and output 


The input parameters are given through an interactive system-user 
consultation and the required data includes height of backfill to be retained, 
frost-depth, strength properties for the concrete and reinforcing steel, soil 
characteristics, surcharge load, backfill•slope, number of soil strata and 
properties, groundwater table level, etc. The output file gives the 
dimensions of the stem and footing, the resisting and overturning moments and 
the associated factor of safety, sliding stability computations, areas of 
steel required to resist flexure in the stem, toe and heel of the base and the 
development lengths of the bars. 

6.3.2.3. Design example 

The design example of a cantilever retaining wall is illustrated in this 
section. The design input through the system-user interactive consultation is 
shown in Fig. 6.11, Fig, 6.12 shows the input data as seen on the screen. 

Fig. 6.13 illustrates the output file for the design example. 

REFERENCES 

6.1 CK Wang & CG Salmon, Reinforced Concrete Design, 3rd Ed, Harper & Row, 
NY, 1979, 359-387. 

6.2 Building Code Requirements for Reinforced Concrete, ACI 318-89 Rev. 
1989, Detroit, MI 

6.3 HF Wlnterkom & HY Fang, Foundation Engineering Handbook, Van Nostrand 
Reinhold Co. 1975, 402-443. 


6-17 







6.4 AH Nilson & G. Winter, Design of Concrete Structures, McGraw-Hill Book 
Co., 1986, 488-509. 

6.5 GB Wynne, Reinforced Concrete Structures, Reston Publishing Co., 1981, 
287-348. 

6.6 JE Bowles, Foundation Analysis and Design, 4th Ed., McGraw Hill Book 
Co., 1988, 530-577. 


6-18 





Figure 6.USystem -User Interactive Consultation for CANWALL 



N p u r 


NfiQht of fjrth to i)f supported r 16.IH ft, 

inijlf •tiich the Uckf ill iwkps mth the hoeiiontil r I.K ie< 

Nfijht of the surehir^e : 8.88 ft. ^ 

Deesiti/ of the ^urchji^ Mterui r 128.88 pcf. a 

of intepnji friction of the surctur^ iwteri*- 3^ 8i ^ 
Coefficient of friction betneen lusonr] u8 soil rjlll 
CowinTssioe strength of concrete,fc : J.88 bi li 
Vielil strength of steel,fs c 48.88 bi. '* 

Hixinra soil heiriny ppessure : 3.88 bf. 

Height of inter tiile : 8.88 ft. ^ 

1-WPs of soil helM the eirth's snrfice : 1.8 


ft 


Figure 6.12 Screen Display of Input Data for CANWALL 



6-19 





















I DESIGN OUTPUT OF CANTILEVER RETAINING STRUCTURE I 


I INPUT DATA i 


Height of earth to be sun>oited = 16.00 ft. 

Angle which the backfill makes with the horizontal s 0.00 deg. 

Height of the surcharge = 8.00 ft 

Density of the surcharge material» 120.00 pcf. 

Angle of internal friction of the surcharge material = 3S.00 deg. 
Coefficimu of friction between masonry and soil s 0.40 
Compressive strength of concrete Jc « 3.00 ksi. 

Yield strength of steetfy = 40.00\si. 

Maximum soil inessure s S.OO ksf. 

Height of water table = 0.00 ft. 

Layers of soil below the earth's surface s 1.0 


I DESIGN OF CANTILEVER RETAINING STRUCTURE I 


Coefficient of acdve pressure s 0.2710 

Reinforcement ratiojio s 0.0139 

Strength coefficient of resistancejlu » 495.39 psi. 

Total height of wall(including frost penetration) = 20.00 ft 
Thickness of footing s 2.00 ft 
Coefficient of acdve pressure s 0.2710 
Base length of the foodng = 11.30 ft 


STEM DIMENSIONS : 


a) stem thickness at the bottom = 21 in. 

b) stem thickness at the top = 12 in. 

Overturning stability: 


Resisting moment = 194 52 ft-kips 
Overturning moment = 95.39 ft-ldps 

Factor of safety against overturning = 194.52 / 95.39 = 2.04 -OK~ (F.S. > 2.0) 


The resultant soil pressure lies 0.3 ia outside the middle-third, I owever,it is very close, and the iimiung 
condidon of zero stress at the heel is considered adequate. 


Sliding stability: 


Sliding force = 11.71 kips 

Resisting fence = 10.59 kips 

Facun of safety against sliding = 10.59 /11.71 = 0.90 

Key to be provided as factor of safety against sliding (0.90) is less than 1.5 


Figure 6.13 Output File of CANWALL 










Key dimciisions(aiSI Handbook):The key has a square section (16.0in. x 16.an.) 

Generally it is desirable to place the front face of the key about 5 in. in front of the back face of 
the stein.This will permit anchoring the stem reinforcement, if present, in the key. 


design of heel cantilever 


Heel thickness = 29 

Choose #8 @ 6 in.(As » U8 sq.in7fL) 

The required development length of the bars (at the top) is 32.31 in. into the toe of the footing measured 
from the stem reinforcemenLUse an embedment length of 3.1 ft from the backface of the wall. 


design of toe cantilever 


PhiVc(24.02 k.) > Vu(13 JO k.) — OK 
Choose #7 @ 6 in.(As s 1.20 sqJnVft) 

The required development length of the bottom bars is 24.54 in. 
Use an embedment length of 2 J ft from the front face of the wall 


design of reinforcement of wall 


Choose #11 @ 6 in.(As = 3.12 sq.in7rt) 

The required development length of the bottom bars is 63.80 in. 
Use an embedment length of 5.7 ft 


temperature and shrinkage reinforcement 


Amount of horizontal temperature and shrinkage steel required on the front face s 0.33 sq.in. 
Amount hwizontal temperature and shrinkage steel required on the back face = 0.16 sq.in. 

For the face side of the wall: 

Choose #6 @ 12 in.(As « 0.44 sq jn/ft) 

For the back side of the wall: 

Choose #4 @ 12 in.(As « 0.20 sq.inyft) 


Drainage: 

Adequate drainage of backflll must be inovided to prevent water from accumulating in the backfill 
material; a common minimum provision is to provide weep holes (4 in. diameter) every 10 to 15 ft along 
the waU. 

Figure 6.13 Continued 

6-21 






CHAPTER 7 


GABION RETAINING STRUCTURES 

7. 1 INTRODUCTION 

Gabion walls are 'cellular' structures formed with rectangular cages made 
of zinc coated steel wire mesh, filled with stone of the proper size and 
mechanical characteristics. The individual units are firmly tied to each 
other with zinc coated wire so as to form a monolithic structure. The wire 
mesh must have high mechanical resistance and high resistance to corrosion and 
good deformability. Hexagonal double-twisted wire mesh, either zinc coated or 
coated with zinc plus PVC meets all the above requirements. The gabion 
structures, which have flexibility and permeability are specially applicable 
in the cases of sites with unconsolidated soils with modest mechanical 
strength and subject to settlement. A retaining wall built of box gabions is 
a homogeneous monolithic stiructure which can function under tension and absorb 
unforeseen stresses. 

7.2. CHARACTERISTICS OF GABION AND FILLING MATERIALS 

The gabions are subdivided into cells by inserting diaphragms spaced at 
1 m. from each other to strengthen the structure and facilitate its assembly. 
The gabion's width would be 1 to 2 m. (Fig. 7.1a). The rectangular cages are 
made of doxible-twisted hexagonal mesh and high quality zinc coating. The 
double twisting ties together with the wires ensure that the mesh will not 
unravel even if one or more wires break (Fig. 7.1b). Zinc coating provides 

7-1 
















long term protection for steel wire against oxidation. The zinc coated wire, 
before being woven, can be coated with a special PVC (polyvinyl chloride) 0.4 
to 0.6 nuB thick and this additional coating protects from corrosion in marine 
or heavily polluted environment. 

The most commonly used materials to fill the gabion are round or quarried 
stones. The stones must be weather resistant, non-friable, insoluble and 
sufficiently hard to ensure the structure durability. Table 7.1 shows the 
densities of materials which are particularly preferable for the gravity 
structure in submerged condition or exposed to running water. The porosity of 
the gabion, n, generally varies from 0.30 to 0.40 depending on the hardness 
and angularity of the stone. Fig. 7.2 shows the relationship for the 
determination of the apparent density of the filled gabion, 7 g for a given 
density of the filling material, 7 'g and the porosity of the gabion, n. The 
most appropriate size for stone varies from 1 to 2 times the dimension D of 
the mesh (Fig. 7.1b) to ensure that the stone should be large enough to 
prevent its escape through the mesh. The use of smaller size stone, 1 to 
l.SD, enables an improved and more economical filling of the cage and also 
allows a better distribution of the imposed loads and structure adaptability 
to deformation. 

7.3. CHARACTERISTICS OF GABION RETAINING STRUCTURES 


The gabions are reinforced structxires which are capable of resisting any 
type of stress and especially tension and shear. Particular attention should 
be given to details such as the selection of the proper type of gabion, 
careful filling and correct lacing methods. The gabion structures are also 
deformable and permeable. The structure has the characteristics of a complex 


7-3 





2000 


=0.30 


Y, (kg/m 3) 


=0.35 


2500 


3000 


Y, (kg/iai3) 


Figure 7.2 Diagram Showing the Determination of the 
Apparent Density y* of the Filled Gabion Given 
the Density Yi of the Fill Material and the 
Porosity "n". [7.1] 







reinforced one capable of adapting to the redistribution of loads due to the 
movement of the stonefill. The distribution and the final value of the soil 
stresses depend on the manner these structures deform and on the extent of the 
deformation. The gabion retaining structures are capable of collecting and 
carrying away ground water, thus eliminating/attenuating one of the principal 
causes of soil instability. Auxiliary means should be installed for the 
disposal of the water collected through the structure. 

Gabion retaining structures have gained popularity due to i) long teirm 
durability, ii) ease of installation, ill) possible modification of the 
structure at a later date, iv) capacity for effective functioning and v) ease 
of maintenance. 


Table 7.1. Density of Different Types of Stone 


Type of rock 

Density 7s (kg/“^) 

Basalt 

2900 

Granite 

2600 

Hard limetone 

2600 

Trachytes 

2500 

Sandstone 

2300 

Soft limestone 

2200 

Tuff 

1700 


7.4 DESIGN CRITERIA 
7.4.1 Gabion Wall Types 

Gabion retaining structures can be classified into the following four 

7-5 







different types (Fig. 7.3); 

i) gravity retaining structures, 

ii) semi-gravity retaining structures, 

iii) embankment stabilization structures, 

and 

iv) thin walls anchored back into the soil by panels of hexagonal 
mesh. 

Gravity retaining structures are designed using traditional methods of 
analysis. Semi-gravity structures derive their resistance from the 
reinforcement provided by the mesh to an extent chat they could be considered 
as a special type of reinforced structure. Structures for the embankment 
stabilization may be treated as gravity structures. For proper functioning of 
gabion retaining structures, it is desirable chat the face should be battered 
at not less Chan 6 degrees, or should be stepped when the heights are greater 
chan 3 m (-10 ft.). 

7.4.2 Loads Imposed by the Backfill 

The loads imposed by the soil on a retaining wall depend not only on the 
internal angle of friction and cohesion of the soil, but also on Che extent to 
which the structure can deform. The active pressure in an earth retaining 
structure can only develop when the retaining structure has deformed 
sufficiently. Table 7.2 shows Che lower limits of movement necessary to bring 
into action the active pressure. 

Table 7.2 Minimum Displacement and Rotation Required to Develop the Active 
Pressure in Retaining Structures 


Type of Soil 

Deflection 

Rotation 


S 

e 

1) Non cohesive 

0.001 H 

0.001 

11) Cohesive 

0.004 H 

0.004 


7-6 








b 




Figure 7.3 Types of Gabion Wall: 

1) Gravity; 2) Semigravity; 3) Wall supporting sloping 
surcharge; 4) Thin walls with tie-back mesh panels. [7.1] 




Active pressure is usually computed using the well known Coulomb Wedge Theory. 
The pressure on the wall is essentially due to the fill only and it can, 
therefore be computed on the basis of the internal friction angle, ^ and 
cohesion, c of the fill (Fig. 7.4a). If the excavation is made with too steep 
a slope (> and the stability of the excavated force during construction is 
dependent on friction and/or cohesion, the loads are computed using &nd c of 
the weaker of the soils, the naturally occurring or the imported. For a 
sufficiently flexible wall the total thrust exerted by a cohesionless soil can 
be calculated based on the theory presented in Chapter 6 for concrete gravity 
retaining structures (Fig. 7.5).With silty soils and/or clay soils a limited 
amount of cohesion can be assumed and the active pressure computed as 


S 

a 


Vt« 


2 


2 c H J 

Ca 


(7.1) 


Three different types of walls frequently used in practice are shown in Fig. 
7.6. 

7.4.3. Earth Pressure Due to Surcharge 

The thrust from a distributed surcharge load on the horizontal backfill 
(Fig. 7.7) is computed as 

S - p H K . (7.2) 

a o a 

where 


7-8 











Figure 7.6 a) Gabion Gravity Wall; b) Semi-gravity Gabion Wall; 

c) Semi-gravity Gabion Wall with Anchorage Heel. [7.1] 


7-10 






Figure 7.7 Lateral Soil Pressure Distribution Due to a 
Uniform Surcharge. [7.1] 


Po 



Figure 7.8 Force to be Considered in Analysing the 
Resistance to Sliding. [7.1] 

7-11 








7.4.4 Stability Criteria for Gabion Vails 

The stability of the gabion retaining structure is checked for: 

i) sliding, 

ii) overturning, 

ill) overall stability of the wall and surrounding soil. 

7-12 


and 










7.4.4.1 Check for sliding 

The stabilizing forces, Fg resisting sliding (Fig. 7.8) are friction, 

/iN and cohesion, cB at the sliding surface, passive pressure Sp at the toe of 
the wall and anchorage forces, at the heel of the wall and Fg is expressed 
as 


Fg — /iN + cB + Sp cos5 + Sy . (7.6) 

The normal force N is the sum of the vertical forces perpendicular to the 
sliding surface, i.e. soil weight, wall weight, vertical component of the soil 
thrvist, and surcharge. In Eqn. 7.6, n is the coefficient of friction between 
soil and footing or between soil and soil and is given as 

H - tand . (7.7) 

and B is the length of the sliding surface. The horizontal thrust tending to 
produce sliding is expressed as 



(7.8) 


(7.9) 


For a retaining wall which is resisting active earth pressure by virtue of 


7-13 










The analysis for the retaining wall failure on a semi-circular slip 
surface located within the soil below and behind the wall is made by a search 
for the slip circle, which has the smallest safety against failure. In the 
special situation where the fill behind the wall consists of cohesionless 
soil, the failure surface can be assumed to be a plane inclined at an angle u 
with the horizontal. This surface is assumed to pass through point A, which 
is the lowest extreme point on the heel of the foundation as shown in Figure 
7.9. The angle u> is made to vary to find the failure plane with the lowest 
factor of safety against sliding. The critical surface for the whole mass is 
the one with the smallest factor of safety given by 


FS 


overall stability 



min ( i 1.2 ) 


(7.13) 


7-14 









c 



T S 


Figure 7.9 Diagram for the Analysis of Overall Stability. [7.1] 



Figure 7.10 Characteristics of the Stresses Acting on 
the Foundation of a Gabion Stmcture. [7.1] 


7-15 








7.4.4.4 Check on foundation bearing pressure 


Soil stresses transraitted locally at the base of the wall is checked 
especially in the case of relatively high retaining walls and where the angle 
of internal friction of the soil is low. Hanson's expression [7.2] for the 
ultimate pressure can be computed as • Fig. 7.10, 


p.. - cNd +qN d 1 

*^lim ^ - 


c c 


q q q 


where 


q - 7j.y 


7^ B N d i 
't 7 7 7 


(7.14) 


(7.15) 


i - 1 - 0,5 — .(7.16) 

^ N 

. 

d-d - 1 + 0.35 -X— .(7.18) 

^ ^ B 

- 1 .(7.19) 

and the coefficients N^, and are given by the following expressions: 

N - e*^ tan^ ^^^2 ^ . (7.20) 

^ 2 

Nc - * 1) cot 4 .(7.21) 

N - 1.8 (N - 1) tan^ .(7.22) 

7 q 

where the symbol e - 2.7183. 

The maximum soil pressure developed at the wall foundation is given by 

w V ^ . 

o o 

7-16 















The allowable soil bearing stress which must be lower than the maximum pres¬ 
sure is expressed as 


allowable 


(7.24) 


and for cohesionless soils 


allowable 


(7.25) 


When only a portion of the base section is in compression (eccentricity. 


e > , ) the soil stress can be evaluated as 
o 


(7.26) 


where 


(7.27) 


which indicates the distance from the normal force to the element under 
stress. 


7.4.4.5 Shear stress 


The shear stress developed is expressed as 


(7.28) 


and the allowable shear stress is given by 


T S a tan^ + c 


(7.29) 


where 


T - the tangential force , 











a - average normal stress at the section under consideration, 

— internal 'fictitious' angle of friction of the aggregate and is 
given by 


^ - 25 7 - 10* 

g 


in which 7 is the density of the filled gabions (t/m ), 
g 


c - 0.03 P - 0.05 

g 


where 


(7.30) 


(7.31) 


P 

u 


weight of the metallic mix per cubic meter of the wall express- 

3 2 

ed in kg/cm and c is expressed in kg/cm . 


7.5. INTERACTIVE MICROCOMPUTER BASED 'GABION' PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION 

7.5.1 Program Structure 

The program GABION provides the design of the gabion retaining wall based 
on the lateral forces imposed by the backfill, earth pressure due to 
surcharge, stability analyses considering sliding and overturning, overall 
stability, and foundation on bearing pressure. In designing the gabion wall 
the program gives the designer the following: 

the geometry of the cross-section of the gabion structure 
- factors of safety against sliding and overturning 
foundation bearing pressure 

and 


7-18 








check for overall stabilicy. 


The flowchart of the program GABION is given in Fig, 7.11 and the listing 
of the program in Appendix E. 

7.5.2. Input and Output 

The input parameters given through an interactive system-user consultation 
consist of the following: 

height of the earth to be retained; 
slope of the backfill 

internal angle of friction of the soil; 

unit weight of the backfill; 

dexislty of the gabion; 

angle of batter of the gabion face; 

surcharge load; 

cohesion factor. 

The output file consists of the number of gabion layers and their 
corresponding widths, coefficients of active and passive pressures, factors of 
safety against sliding and overturning, maximum soil pressure and shear stress 
and check on overall stability. 

7.7.5.3 Design Example 

The design example of a gabion retaining wall is illustrated in this 
section. The system-user interactive consultation for the design input is 


7-19 






M.I. 

selection 

module 


INPUT: 

Height of the earth to be 
retained, slope of backfill, 
angle of batter of wall face, 
properties of soil, surcharge 
load, density of gabion 


Estimation of gabion dimensions based on 
height computation of active pressure, 
Ka,Kp, overturning and restoring monwnts, 
forces causing sliding and forces resisting 
sliding. 


Lbasc=(Lbasc-K).5)in <CF-S^vcrtuming 



Lbaseg(Lbase-f0.5) m ^ >1-5 


Lbase=(Lbasc+0.5) m L—n 

1^ ^^^^nvcrall stabUity^-^ 


Calculate allowable and maximum soil pressure developed 


Figure 7.11 Flowchart of Program,GABION,for Gabion Retaining Structure 
Design(continued). 















Figure?. 11 Continued 


7-21 







shown in Fig. 7.12. Fig. 7.13 shows the input data as displayed on the 
screen. The output file for the design example as viewed on the screen is 
illustrated in Fig. 7.14. 


REFERENCES 

7.1 A Papetti, Flexible Gabion Structures in Earth Retaining Works, Officine 
Hacaferri Sip. A., Bologna, Italy, 1987. 

7.2 JE Bowles, Foundation Analysis and Design, 4th Ed., McGraw Hill Book 
Co., 1988, pp. 1007. 

7.3 IK Lee, U. White and OG Ingles, Geotechnical Engineering, Pitman, 1983, 
245-278. 


7-22 




icicH or nx cuioi btiirk naam 


it IS tk kifkt (ti ■.) tf tkr fjrtk U k siryark^ 


)>l 

15 tk 5ltr» ${ tk kctf itl> 

f ‘l» itjL (If Mt 5W 

))i 

IS tk «9lf (II ki.) tf littml fmtiM tf tk stil u k wUmJ? 

^ys tk ■iftin sntiunt lui <t/s,.t.) ttat tk stmtm hts U 

^ns tk k«5iti tf tk 9ak« (t/ci.«.)» 

fcns tk insiti tf tk kiekfill mi fMktiM stil(t/ei.B,)» 

^^Kt <t/s^.«.) tf tk ftftk ftp PKistact 


Figure 7.12 System -User Interactive Consultation for GABION 



: rV- 


-• : 38. 

• • rt : 1 ,- • 


.1 : : I-?* ’ , » 



Figure 7.13 Screen Display of Input Data for GABION 











I DESIGN OF THE GABION RETAINING STRUCTURE I 


Number of gabion layers = 8. 


GABION # WIDTH (m.) 


1 

1.00 

2 

1.00 

3 

1.50 

4 

1.50 

5 

2.00 

6 

2.00 

7 

2.50 

8 

4.50 


The position of the C.G. from the leftside of the bottom gabion = 2.00 m. 
The position of the C.G. from the topside of the bottom gabion = 1.94 m. 

The height of each gabion = 1.0 m. 

Active earth pressure = 22.46 t/m. 

Coefficient of active pressure,Ka = 0.2972 
Coefficient of passive pressure,Kp = 10.0951 


Factor of safety against sliding 


The sum of the forces causing sliding 19.45 t/m. 

The sum of the forces resisting sliding = 51.37 t/m. 

The factor of safety against sliding = 2.64- OK, since FS > 1.5 


Factor of safety against overturning 


Sum of overturning moment = -2.09 t-m7m. 

Sum of restoring moment = 147.47 t-m^m. 

Factor of safety against overturning is NOT calculated as there is no overturning 
mon»nt. 


Check on foundation bearing pressure 


Allowable soil bearing stress = 44.00 t/sq.m. 
Maximum soil pressure developed = 19.31 t/sq.m. 


Figure 7.14 Output File of GABION 


7-24 


















Design safe as the maximum soil pressure is less than the allowable soil bearing pressure. 
Check for overall stability 

Passive resistance developed by toe prism = 320.46 t/m. 

Thrust on the vertical plane of toe prism = 38.15 t/m. 

Factor of safety for overall stability = 8.40 — OK (since F.S. > 2.0) 

Figure 7.14 Continued 


7-25 









CHAPTER 8 


REINFORCED EARTH HALLS 


8 .1 INTRODUCTION 


The mechanically reinforced earth structure (Fig. 8.1) uses the principle 
of introducing reinforcing elements into a granular backfill via mechanical 
means such as metal strips and rods, geotextile strips and sheets, or wire 
grids. Reinforced embankments and rei^^forced soil structures must be designed 
to ensure both internal and external stability. Internal stability requires 
that the reinforced soil structures be coherent and self-supporting under the 
action of its own weight and any externally applied forces. 

Reinforced soil structures are subject to the same external design 
criteria as conventional retaining walls. The structure must be stable 
against sliding because of the lateral pressure of the soil retained by the 
structure; besides it must resist overturning about its toe, must be safe 
against foundation failure, and have overall slope stability. Classical 
methods of soil mechanics have been found satisfactory for analysis of the 
external stability of reinforced soil structures. 

8.2 EARTH REINFORCEMENT SYSTEMS 


An earth reinforcement system has three major components; reinforcements, 
backfill or in situ ground and facing elements. The reinforcement materials 
can be both metallic and non-metallic while the reinforcement geometries can 
be broadly categorized as strips, grids, sheets, rods and fibers. The type of 
backfill is an important variable in determining the performance of the 

8-1 







Figure 8.1 Schematic Diagram of a Reinforced Earth 
Structure Using Steel Strip Reinforcements. 


8-2 








composite reinforced soil structure. Facing elements are commonly provided to 
retain fill material at the face and prevent slumping and erosion of steep 
faces. Most common facing elements include precast concrete panels, 
prefabricated metal sheets and plates, gabions, welded wire mesh, shotcrete, 
inclusion of intermediate reinforcements between main reinforcement layers at 
the face, seeding of the exposed soil, and looping of geotextile 
reinforcements at the face [8.1]. 

8.2.1 Strip Reinforcement 

The strip reinforcements, either metal or plastic, are normally placed in 
horizontal planes between successive lifts of soil backfill. The strip 
reinforcement system in the reinforced earth (Fig. 8.1) uses either ribbed or 
smooth prefabricated galvanized steel strips. Facing panels fastened to the 
strips consist usually of either precast concrete panels or prefabricated 
metal elements. Plastic strips have been introduced in an effort to avoid the 
problems of metal corrosion in adverse environments. The only commercially 
available nonmetallic strips are the Paraweb strip (Fig. 8.2) in which the 
fibers are made of high tenacity polyester or polyaramid. The strips are 
fastened to wall facings, typically consisting of precast concrete panels. 
Soil backfill is generally granular, ranging in size from sand to gravel. 

8.2.2 Grid Reinforcement 

Grid reinforcement systems consist of metallic or polymeric tensile 
resisting elements which are arranged in rectangular grids placed in 
horizontal planes in the backfill to resist outward movement of the 


8-3 






Low density polyethylene 



Polyester or polyaramid fibers 


Figure 8.2 Cross-section of a Nonmetallic Paraweb Strip. [8.1] 



Figure 8.3 Plan View of a Geogrid Reinforcement. [8.1] 


8-4 









reinforcement soil mass. Grids transfer stress to the soil through passive 
soil resistance on transverse members of the grid and friction between the 
soil and horizontal surfaces of the grid. The Mechanically Stabilized 
Embankment (MSE) system employs prefabricated steel bar mat reinforcements at 
standard horizontal and vertical spacings and uses standard rectangular 
precast facing panels. The Welded Wire Wall and Reinforced Soil Embankment 
(RSE) systems employ standard welded wire mesh grid reinforcements within the 
backfill to constitute a reinforced soil structure. The two systems differ, 
however, in the facing arrangements. Grid reinforcement made of stable 
polymer materials may provide good resistance to deterioration in adverse soil 
and groundwater environments. Tensar Geogrids (Fig. 8.3) are high strength 
polymer grid reinforcements manufactured from high density polyethylene or 
polypropylene using a stretching process. 

8.2.3 Sheet Reinforcement 

Figure 8.4 shows continuous sheets of geotextiles laid down alternately 
with horizontal layers of soil to form a composite reinforced soil material. 
The mechanism of stress transfer between soil and sheet reinforcement is 
predominantly friction. Generally the geotextile fabrics used in soil 
reinforcement are made of polyester fibers. The backfill material typically 
consists of granular soil ranging from silty sand to gravel. Connection 
between the geotextile sheet and structural wall elements can be provided by 
casting the geotextile into the concrete, friction, nailing, overlapping, or 
other bonding methods. 


8-5 






Facing 


-^- 


einforcement 


Figure 8.4 Schematic Diagram of a Reinforced Soil Wall 
Using Geotextile Sheet Reinforcements. [8.1] 


Precast concrete facing 
panels __ 




Anchors 


Figure 8.5 Schematic Diagram of an Anchored Earth Retammg 
Wall.[8.1] 


8 










8.2.4 Rod Reinforcement 

Anchored Earth employs slender steel rod reinforcements bent at one end to 
form anchors (Fig. 8.5). Soil-to-reinforcement-stress transfer is primarily 
through passive resistance. This assumption employs that the system operates 
similar to tied-back retaining structures. Although Anchored Earth is not 
truly a reinforced soil system, friction should be developed along the length 
of the linear rod. 

8.2.5 Fiber Reinforcement 

Fibers can potentially provide reinforcement in three directions. The 
major limitation to use these fibers is the difficulty associated with 
efficient and economical mixing of the fibers uniformly into the backfill. 
The mixing process must be perfected before fiber inclusion can be used as an 
economically viable and routinely used reinforcement method. Materials for 
possible use include natural fibers (reeds and other plants), synthetic fibers 
(geotextile threads), and metallic fibers (small diameter metal threads). 

8.3 DESIGN METHODOLOGY 

8.3.1 Design Approaches 

8 .3.1.1. Design based on at-failure conditions 

Limit equilibrium analysis deals with the stability of a structure at 
incipient failure. The first type of limit analysis is based on the failure 

8-7 






mechanism observed' in laboratory models. The shape of the failure surface has 
conformed closely to a logarithmic spiral, and it coincides with locus of 
maximum tensile forces in the reinforcements. Failure is assvuned to be caused 
by progressive rupture of reinforcing strips. Full shear resistance of the 
soil is assumed to be mobilized along the failure surface. In the second type 
of limit analysis, the shearing, tensile, and pullout resistance of the 
reinforcement are considered when the reinforcement crosses a potential 
sliding surface. The possible potential sliding surface could be planes, 
wedges, circles, logarithmic spirals and non-circular shapes. 

8 .3.1.1.1 Single-plane failure surfaces 

The normal, N and tangential, T components of the force in the 
reinforcement are, added to the fully mobilized soil shear strength (Fig. 
8 .6a). Force in the reinforcement required to provide equilibrium is 
calculated for different slip plane angles [8.2]. The largest required force 
for maintaining equilibrium is determined together with the corresponding slip 
plane angle. This force is compared with the lesser of the reinforcement 
strength or the mobilized bond force to determine the factor of safety of the 
system. 

8 .3.1.1.2 Infinite slope failure surfaces 

The tangential component of the force in the reinforcement is neglected in 
the infinite slope calculation procedure for analysis of the stability of long 
shallow slopes reinforced with tensile members. The normal component, N (Fig. 
8 .6a) is added to an available resisting force contributed by the soil shear 


8-8 






Detail A. Components of the 
Reinforcement Forces 


Figure 8.6a Single-plane Failure Surface (Limit Equilibrium Analysis).[8.1] 




Figure 8.6b Toe-part Wedge Failure Surface. [8.1] 



Hgure 8.6c Logarithmic Spiral Failure Surface. [8.1] 

8-9 





strength to determine the reinforced slope factor of safety (FS) The factor 
of safety is given by 


S available resisting forces 
FS - -®- 

r disturbing forces 

8 .3.1.1.3 Two-part wedge failure surface 

The most critical failure mechanism for steep reinforced slopes can be the 
two-part wedge failure surfaces (Fig. 8 . 6 b). The required force in the 
reinforcement for equilibrium is calculated [8.3 and 8.4] assuming full soil 
shear strength mobilization and compared with the maximum available force to 
obtain the factor of safety. 

8 .3.1.1.4 Circular failure surfaces 

A number of design methods based on slip circles differs in the use of 
factors of safety. The soil strength and the factored force in the 
reinforcement are used to find the equilibrium safety factor for the 
embankment [8.5], The force in the reinforcement is assessed based on the 
reinforcement strength, which is reduced by a safety factor. Fig. 8 . 6 c shows 
a bilinear failure surface, which is used for the design of certain systems 
(e.g.. Reinforced Earth and VSL Retained Earth). The factor of safety for the 
different limit equilibrium design methods can be defined as the maximum 
available force in the reinforcement (working strength of the reinforcement) 
divided by the force required to provide stability. 

8 .3.1.2 Working stress considerations 

Design assumptions of the magnitudes and internal stress distributions are 

8-10 





based on field measurements in full-scale structures. It is assumed that 
lateral earth pressures are at rest, rather than active, for the design of the 
upper portions of Reinforced Earth and VSL Retained Earth. This assumption 
leads to stresses larger than those of the limit state active condition and 
hence it satisfies implicitly the limit state analysis. 

8 .3.1.3 Finite element analysis 

Different types of finite element analyses available for reinforced soil 
structures involve the subdivision of the soil into discrete elements, with 
properties specified for each. The reinforced soil mass is considered as a 
composite material [8.6] in certain methods, where each element in the soil 
reinforcement matrix is considered to have properties representative of the 
composite soil and reinforcement. In another approach, the soil and 
reinforcements are modelled separately as discrete materials [8.7 and 8.8 ]. 
The soil-reinforcement interaction is modelled using interface elements [8.9] 
and hyperbolic soil behavior is assumed to model the stress-strain 
characteristics of the soil [8.10], The computed stress in the reinforcements 
using this finite element method, compares very well with measured values from 
the field. 

8.3.2. Design Procedure 

8 .3.2.1 Site conditions and engineering properties of embankment material or 
in situ ground 

Settlement analysis should be performed to determine anticipated wall 


8-11 






settlements using measured or estimated soil properties. The foundation soil 
must be able to support the wall weight and any surcharge loading without a 
bearing capacity failure. The external stability conditions of the wall must 
be satisfied before a site can be considered acceptable for an earth wall. 

The backfill material must satisfy certain minimtun requirements to ensure 
adequate soil'to-reinforcement stress transfer. The grain size distribution, 
plasticity index, friction angle, and soil cohesion are often used to evaluate 
the reinforcement pullout resistance. The reinforcing system durability 
depends directly on the properties of the backfill. The change in pH, 
resistivity, chlorides, sulphates, grain size distribution, plasticity index, 
friction angle, cohesion, and unit weight must be assessed for the internal 
stability of an earth wall during the expected structure life. The external 
stability of an earth wall depends on the engineering properties of the in 
situ walls and the system geometry. 

8 .3.2.2 External stability 

The reinforced soil mass in an earth wall should withstand the external 
loads, the horizontal earth pressure from the soil being retained behind the 
wall and loads applied to the top of the wall without failure by one of the 
following mechanisms: 

i) sliding along the wall base or along any plane above the base; 

ii overturning about the wall toe; 

Hi) bearing capacity failure of the foundation soil; 

and 

iv) general slope stability failure. 


8-12 



Fig. 8.7 shows Che external loading of a C}rpical earth wall. 


8 .3.2.2.1 Sliding failure along Che wall base 

The shear strength of the backfill material and foiindation soil must be 
large enough Co withstand Che horizontal stresses applied to the reinforced 
soil mass from the retained soil and any additional live loads. Using a value 
of 1.5 for the factor of safety of an earth wall against sliding, the 
reinforcement length required for stability against sliding for a vertically 
. faced wall with surcharge loading is determined for granular backfills and 
given by 


L - 1.5 (q + (7H/2)) 

yCan^ 


where 


( 8 . 1 ) 


L - reinforcement length, 

- active earth pressure coefficient 

- tan^ (45 - ^^/2), 

q •• surcharge load, 

7 - unit soil weight, 

4 * Interaal friction angle of foundation soil or backfill, which 

ever is smaller, 

and 

- internal friction angle of Che soil retained by the wall. 


For cohesive foundation soils the effective cohesion of the soil could be 


added Co the denominator of Eqn. 8.1, if it can be relied on over sustained 

8-13 






Assumed for overturning 
stability & pullout 
resistance computations 



8-14 






time periods. 


Traffic loads which are created as uniform surcharge loads are assumed to 
act behind the reinforced soil mass for stability calculations and on top of 
the reinforced soil mass for maximum horizontal stress calculations (Fig. 
8.7). 

Failure due to overturning about the vail toe 

The reinforced soil walls are designed to have a factor of safety of at 
least 2.0 with respect to overturning and the factor of safety (FS) is given 
as 


FS £ 


Z M 


( 8 . 2 ) 


where 


•• sum of the resisting moments, 


and 


ZM^ - sum of Che driving moments. 
For the case shown in Fig. 8.7, 


and 




ZMd- 


P H 

q 

2 


+ 


3 


(8.3) 


(8.4) 


where 

P - resultant horiztonCal earth force from surcharge loading, 

q 


8-15 









resultant horizontal earth force from soil retained by earth 
wall, 


and 

W •• weight of reinforced soil mass. 

Bearing capacity failure 

The bearing capacity of the foundation soil must be checked to ensure that 
the vertical load exerted by the weight of the wall and surcharge is not 
excessive. The minimum factor of safety against this type of failure for 
reinforced soil walls is 2.0 and this is lower than that used for conventional 
reinforced concrete retaining walls because reinforced soil walls are flexible 
and able to function satisfactorily even after experiencing large differential 
settlements. This distribution of stress under a reinforced soil wall is 
represented using Meyerhof's stress distribution assumption of eccentrically 
loaded footings (Fig. 8.8). 


The eccentricity, e, which is determined by setting the sum of the moments 
about the centerline of the reinforced soil mass equal to zero is given by 
(Fig. 8.7), 


S Mp P ( H/2) + Pg (H/3) 

e > - - —3- 


where 

R - vertical reaction 

V 

- W + q L 


(8.5) 


The eccentricity, e, should be less than 1/6 the length of the 

8-16 





Uniform Trapezoidal After Meyeriiof 

Figure 8.8 Stress Distribution Under an Earth Wall. [8.1] 


Center of failure surface 



Figure 8.9 General Slope Stability of an Earth Wall. [8.1] 






reinforcement, L when using Meyerhof's stress distribution. Meyerhof's 
assumption of a uniform stress distribution is less reasonable for greater 
eccentricities which results in rapid increases in the bearing stress with the 
smaller effective contact area (L - 2e). 


Assuming the vertical stress at the wall bottom to act over a length of 
(L -2e), the foundation bearing stress magnitude, Ovb> given by 


vb 


W + qL 


( 8 . 6 ) 


L - 2e 

The factor of safety against bearing capacity failure is defined by 


FS 


bearing 


^ult 


vb 


(8.7) 


where - ultimate bearing capacity. The ultimate bearing capacity of the 

foundation soil is evaluated using classical soil mechanics methods. 

General slope stability 


General slope stability must be ensured in both in situ reinforced slopes 
and imported embankment earth walls. The reinforced soil mass is treated as a 
gravity retaining structure. The minimum overall factor of safety for general 
slope stability is determined using any appropriate slope stability analysis 
(Fig. 8.9). 


8 . 3 . 2 . 3 . 


Internal stability 


8.3.2.3.1 Failure surface 


The reinforced soil mass in both imported embankment earth walls (vertical 

8-18 









or sloping face) and in situ reinforced slopes can be divided into two 
regions, the active and resistant zones (Fig. 8.1). The reinforcement holds 
these two zones together making a coherent soil mass. The demarcation between 
these two zones is important to the designer because it determines the points 
of maximum tensile force in the reinforcements and it corresponds to the 
potential failure surface within the reinforced soil mass. The location of 
this failure surface is not well defined for all the different reinforcing 
systems used today. Fig. 8.10 shows potential failure surfaces and Table 8.1 
gives the shear assumed for design of the different available wall types. 

The current design of in situ reinforced slopes is based on a general 
stability analysis which considers potential failure surfaces which cross the 
reinforcements (Fig. 8.10). Numerous failure surfaces are analyzed and the 
potential failure surface is then defined as that surface which gives the 
lowest factor of safety. 

8.3.2.3.2 Earth pressure coefficient 

Designers of reinforcement systems have generally used the active earth 
pressure coefficient for determining horizontal stresses due to the scarcity 
of a large database of field instrumented walls. In Reinforced Earth and VSL 
Retained Earth systems a linear variation is assumed for the earth pressure 
coefficient, Kg (coefficient of earth pressure at rest) at the top of the wall 
to (active earth pressure coefficient) at some depth (e.g., 20 ft.) below 
the top of the wall. A value of K - 0.65 is used in Uelded Wire Wall; this 
value is larger than the at-rest earth pressure coefficient for the soils 
generally used in earth wall construction (Fig. 8.11). Table 8.1 also shows 


8-19 







Potential 
failure surface 


Failure surface 


Failure surface 



In-situ Failure Surface Ranldne Bilinear 


Figure 8.10 In-situ Reinforced Slope Potential Failure 
Surface Versus Rankine and Bilinear. [8.1] 



Geotextiles geogrid Welded wire Reinforced earth 

VSL retained earth 


Figure 8.11 Assumed Variation in Earth Pressure Coefficient 
with Depth for Different Wall Types. [8.1] 





Failure Surface I Earth Pressure coefficient I Durability 


s 

Degradation 
by ultraviolet 
light radiation 



X 


1 

1 


1 

1 

Relnforceiaent 
susceptible 
to corrosion 

X 

X 



1 

■ 

1 

B 

1 


Varying fron Kg at top 
of wall to K. 20 Ft 
below top 

X 

X 




X 

1 

1 

1 

o 





B 


1 

(S90) 

X 

1 

o 



X 







« 




X 



X 


X 


Wedge with 
varying angle 
froa horizontal 




X 

1 

1 


1 

1 

u 

m 

e 

c 

•H 

m 

X 

X 



■ 

■ 

1 

B 

fl 


V 

c 

M 

e 

n 

oc 



X 


1 


B 

■ 

B 

• 

1 

ii 

Reinforced 

Earth 

m 

u 

W 

m 

m 

Of 

Geotextllea 

Soil 

Nailing 

e 

u 

O M 
X ^ 
u u 

c « 

< W 

VSL 

Retained 

Earth 

NSE, GASE 

Welded Wire 
Wall 

Geogrld 

e 

s 

« 

u e 

u eu 

<M H 

6 

e 

etf 

Strip 

RelnforcesMnt 

Sheet 

Reinforcement 

Rod 

Reinforcement 

Grid 

Reinforcement 


8-21 















the earth pressure coefficient assumptions for design of the different 
reinforcing systems. 


8.3.2.3.3. Reinforcement rupture 


The reinforcement system should withstand the stresses transferred to it 
from the soil without breaking. The horizontal stress, at any depth within 
a wall is determined as, 




h 


K a 


V 


( 8 . 8 ) 


where 


and 


K — coefficient of horizontal earth pressure. 


o - vertical stress at any depth 


The vertical stress at any depth is determined by finding the eccentricity, e 
of the reactive force at that depth and then determining the vertical stress 
according to Meyerhof's stress distribution. The total horizontal load, FH 
to be resisted by a given reinforcement layer is expressed as 

™ - “h ^ .<»•’> 

where 


- vertical spacing between reinforcements. 


and 


- center-to-center horizontal spacing between reinforcements. 

The stress induced in the reinforcement from the horizontal load must be less 
than the allowable working stress of the tensile member to ensure adequate 
safety against rupture. 


8-22 






8.3.2.3.4 Pullout capacity 


The pullout capacity of any reinforcement system can be determined based 
on the following: 

i) analyses considering friction, 

ii) analyses considering passive resistance, 

and 

iii) aixalyses considering both frictional and passive resistance. 

The embedment length of the reinforcement, Lg (i.e., the length of the 
reinforcement behind the potential failure surface-Fig. 8.1) must be large 
enough to ensure the transfer of stress from the reinforcement to the soil 
without reinforcement pullout. Table 8.2 gives the pullout equations used in 
the design of various reinforcing systems. 

8.3.2.3.5 Durability 

The most critical forms of degradation for earth structures result from 
corrosion and exposure to ultra violet light radiation. Reinforcements which 
are made from metal (Reinforced Earth, Anchored Earth, VSL Retained Earth, 
Welded Wire Walls, Soil Nailing, etc.) are susceptible to corrosion. The 
service life of these reinforcement systems can be extended by adding 
additional 'sacrificial' steel to the reinforcement members. The life of 
these materials can be extended by also using zinc galvanizing or epoxy 
coatings. Geotextile reinforcement is protected from prolonged exposure from 
ultraviolet light radiation by using asphalt and shotcrete as a protective 
coating. The long term resistance of geotextiles to chemical and biological 


8-23 






Table 8.2. Pullout Capacity Design Equations 



8 - 2 - 


Geogrid 













attack is not known. Table 8.1 a.so gives the durability considerations 
pertinent to each type of reinforcement system. 

8.4 INTERACTIVE MICROCOMPUTER BASED 'EARWALL' PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION 

8.4.1 Program Structure 

The program EARWALL provides the design of a typical reinforced earth 
retaining structure for the following four different cases of backfill and 
loading conditions: 

i) wall with horizontal backfill, 

ii) wall with sloping backfill, 

iii) wall with viniform surcharge, 

and 

iv) wall with cohesive retained and foundation soils. 

The principles of the general design methodology discussed in Section 8.3 has 
been used to formulate the interactive program, EARWALL. The user must 
provide the case pertaining to the problem in hand (one of the four cases 
mentioned above), the height of the earth to be retained, soil properties and 
reinforcing strip spacings. In designing the reinforced earth structure, the 
program gives an output which includes the reinforcing strip dimensions, the 
factors of safety against sliding and overturning and the soil bearing 
capacity. The program checks the internal stability requirements of the wall. 
The flowchart of the program EARWALL is shown in Fig. 8.12 and the listing of 
the program is given in Appendix F. 


8-25 







Figure 8.12. Flowchart of Program EARWALL 
for Reinforced Earth Design. 


8-26 















8.4.2. Input and Output 


The input parameters are given through an interactive system-user 
consultation. The required input data are as follows: 

appropriate case relating to backfill/loading; 
height of the earth to be supported; 

internal angles of friction and specific weights of the special 
backfill and retained soil; 

size of the standard reinforcement strip used; 

horizontal and vertical spacings of the steel reinforcement 

strips; 

and 

- allowable tensile stress of the steel reinforcement strips. 

The results in the output file are given for both external and internal 
stability of the wall. The external stability calculations include checks for 
minimum factor of safety against sliding and overturning. The internal 
stability computations give the reinforcement length details and the tensile 
forces to be resisted by the reinforcement. The design program also checks to 
ensure that the tensile stresses in the reinforcement and at the connections 
are within the allowable limits. The output file shows the intermediate 
results of all the interactions with the program, the design details and 
calculations in the form of tables. 

8.4.3. Design Examples 

Examples for the four different cases of backfill and loading conditions 

8-27 





are presented in this section. The system-user interactive consultation for 
the design input, the input and output data as displayed the screen are 
presented for each case. 


REFERENCES 

8.1 JK Mitchell & WCB Vlllet; Reinforcement of Earth Slopes and Embankments, 
TRB 290, Washington, D.C., June 1987, pp. 323. 

8.2 UK Dept of Transportation. 

8.3 MF Stocker, GW Korber, G Gassier, and G Gudehus, Soil Nailing, Proc. 
International Conference on Soil RTeinforcement: Reinforced Earth and 
Other Techniques. Paris, Vol. I (Mar. 1979) pp. 469-474, 

8.4 KM Romstad, Z Al Yassin, LR Herrmann, and CK Shen, Stability Analysis of 
Reinforced Earth Retaining Structures. Proc. ASCE Symposium on Earth 
Reinforcement, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania (1978) pp. 685-713. 

8.5 TL Phan, P Segrestin, F Schlosser, and NT Long, Stability Analysis of 
Reinforced Earth Walls by Two Slip Circle Methods. Proc. International 
Conference Soil Reinforcement, Paris (1979) pp. 119-123. 

8.6 KM Romstad, LR Herrmann, and CK Shen, Integrated Study of Reinforced 

Earth-1: Theoretical Formulation, ASCE J. Geotech Eng. Div., Vol. 102, 

No. GT5 (May 1976) pp. 457-471. 

8.7 Al-Haussaini, and LD Johnson, Finite Element Analysis of a Reinforced 
Earth Wall, Technical Report S. 77, Soils and Pavements Design 
Laboratory, U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Station, Vicksburg, Miss. (May 
1977). 


8-28 





8.8 LR Hermann, and Z A1 Yassin, Numerical Analysis of Reinforced Earth 
Systems, Proc. ASCE Symposium on Reinforced Earth, Pittsburgh, Penn. 
(Apr. 1978) preprint 3125, pp. 428-457. 

8.9 RE Goodman, RL Taylor, and TL Brekke, A Model of the Mechanics of 
Jointed Rock. ASCE J. Soil Mechanics and Foundation Division, Vol. 94, 
No. SM3 (May 1968) pp. 637-659. 

8.10 JM Duncan, KS Wong, Hyperbolic Stress-Strain Parameters for Nonlinear 
Finite Element Analyses of Stresses and Movements in Soil Masses. 
Report E-74-3, College of Engineering, University of California, 
Berkeley (July 1976). 

8.11 GG Meyerhof, The Bearing Capacity of Foundations under Eccentric and 
Inclined Loads, Proc. 3rd International Conference on Soil Mechanics 
and Foundation Engineering, Zurich, Switzerland (1953) Vol. 1, pp. 440- 
445. 


8-29 







Litpr mite cf output fiIf:eirwlll. 0 Lt 
Output in fiie.fir*illl.out 


ISf REINFORCED EARTH is tHf »ost jppruprijtf 
tiyp# of structuTf thit IS suitfj for this ipplicition. 

Ihf dftiilfd dfsign of thf Rfinfortfd Eirth Struoturf follows: 


EKTER I IE CACE IS HORIZOKIAL WCKEILI. 

ENTER 2 IE CASE IS SLOPING SACKEILL. , 

ENTER 3 IE CASE HAS UNIEOI* SURCHARGE. 

ENTER 4 IE CASE HAS COHESIUE SOIL. 

1 

tout 15 tN* height (in ft.) of thf firth to he supported'’ 

,"I5 

kbit IS the ittglf of intemil friction (in deg) of the specul hickfill soil’ 

).'J5 

(Out IS the ingle of intemil friction (in deg) of the retimed soiP 

Uhit 15 the specific Height of the specul Uckfill soiKin pef.)'’ 

>)128 

kbit IS the specific Height of the retiii»d soiKin pcf.)’’ 

))12fl ^ 

Which one of the tno stindird reinfopte«ent strip sizes ire gou using! 

^ss L if the sue is AOmi x Smi OR press 2 if the size is (liw x Siw 

^t IS the horizontil spicing of the steel reinforceHent strips (in inches)’ 
If not iviilihle gou lug give the Vilue iS A8 in. 

>)4fi 

^t IS the verticil spicing of the steel reinforceHent strips (in inches)' 
If^not iuiilible gou nig give the vilue iS 38 in. 

IS the illoHiile tensile stress (in psi) of the steel 
reinforceHent strips 


Figure 8.13 System ‘User Interactive Consultation for EARWALL 
•Casel 


WALL «i:h horizontal backfill 




•INPUT DATA# 


Heij.hf of the firth to be supp 
Ang.p of i.ntemii friction of the special bickfill soil -35.1 deg, 
Angle of inlomai friction of the retimed soil ; 38.8 8*^ 

Specific Height of the special backfill soil : 128.8 pcf. 

Specific Height of the retimed soil : 128.8 pcf. 

Stindard size of remforcenent c t>%m x 5«»i. 

Horizontil spacing of the steel reinforcing strips : 48.1 ii, 
Ueriical spacing of the steel reinforcing strips c 38.8 ii. 
AlloHibip tensile stress of the steeiVemforcmg strips : 411 


I -35 

1 



CALCULATING . 

******************* *" * **'**** ************* *‘*** *™wngn gi I II I I 

OF the RiltfORCEDJJRTH is in FILE » firHilll.out 

o. 


Figure 8.14 Screen Display of Input Data for EARWALL 
- Case 1 


8-30 





















I DESIGN OF THE REINFORCED EARTH STRUCTURE I 


WALL WITH HORIZONTAL BACKFILL 


AAAAAAAAAAAAAAy^^AAAAAAAAAA 

EXTERNAL STABILITY 

AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA 

1.Sliding on Base. 


Coefficient of active pressure = 0.33 

The total hoiizcmtal active earth force acting on the back of the wallj^e - 4500.00 lb. 
For a minimum factor of safety of 1.5 against sliding: 

The minimum length of icinforcementf- = 6.50 ft. 

2.0vertuming about Toe. 

For a minimum factor of safety of 2.0 against overturning: 

The minimum base width of the wall = 7 ft. 

3.Bearing Capacity Failure. 


The eccentricity.e = 1.79 ft. is greater than the allowable value of e(=7/6.0) =1.17. 
Therefore the base width of the wall has to be increased. 

Recomputing the eccentricity with base width of wallf^b = 8 

The eccentricity,e = 1.56 ft. is greater than the allowable value of e(=8/6.0) = 1.33. 

Therefore the base width of the wall has to be increased. 

Recomputing the eccentricity with base width of wallf^b = 9 

The eccentricity.e = 1.39 ft is less than the allowable value of e(=Lb/6) = 1.50.-OK. 

Reqd. soil bearing capacity = 2603.57 lb./sq.ft. 


AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA 

INTERNAL STABILITY 

aaaaaaaa/wvaaaaaaaa/vaaaaaa 


Layer# 

Depth Z(ft.) 

1 

1.25 

2 

3.75 

3 

6.25 

4 

8.75 

5 

11.25 

6 

13.75 


Figure 8.15 Output File of EAR WALL- Case 1 

8-31 















1.Tensile forces to be resisted by the reinforcement: 


Layer Depth 
# [ft] 

Rv 

[Ib/ft] 

Pe 

Hb] 

e 

[ft] 

Sigv 

[lb/s.ft] 

K 

Sigh 

[lb/s.ft] 

FH 

[lb] 

1 

1.25 

1350.0 

31.2 

0.01 

150J 

0.4167 

62.6 

379.0 

2 

3.75 

4050.0 

2S12 

0.09 

458.9 

0.3973 

182.3 

1102.9 

3 

6.25 

6750.0 

781.2 

0.24 

792.5 

0.3779 

299.4 

1811.6 

4 

8.75 

9450.0 

1531.2 

0.47 

1173.2 

0.3584 

420.5 

2544.1 

5 

11.25 

12150.0 

2531.2 

0.78 

1633.6 

0.3390 

553.8 

3350.4 

6 

13.75 

14850.0 

3781.2 

1.17 

2227.8 

0.31% 

711.9 

4307.0 


2.Tensile stress in reinforcement: 


Strip# 

Tensile Stress 
[psi.] 

1 

815.0 

2 

2371.8 

3 

3895.8 

4 

5471.1 

5 

7205.1 

6 

9262.5 


TENSILE STRESS IN STRIP < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(40(XX).(X) psi.) OK. 


S.Tensile stress at connection: 


Strip # Tensile Stress 
[psi.] 


1 

910.0 

2 

2648.1 

3 

4349.8 

4 

6108.6 

5 

8044.7 

6 

10341.8 


TENSILE STRESS AT CONNECTION < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(40000.00 psi.) —- OK. 


Figure 8.15 Continued 


8-32 










4.Pullout of reinforcement: 


Strip# 

Le 

[ft.l 

P 

[lb.] 

FH 

Hb.] 

F.S. 

1 

4.50 

385.4 

379.0 

1.02 

2 

4.50 

1076.6 

1102.9 

0.98 

3 

4.50 

1661.4 

1811.6 

0.92 

4 

5.75 

2732.7 

2544.1 

1.07 

5 

7.05 

3934.6 

3350.4 

1.17 

6 

8.35 

5154.6 

4307.0 

1.20 


RECALCULATING WITH Lb = 10 as F.S.(PULLOUT) < 1.5 


1.Tensile forces to be resisted by the reinforcement; 


Layer Depth 
# [ft] 

Rv 

nwft] 

Pe 

[lb] 

e 

[ft] 

Sigv 

[lb/s.ft] 

K 

Sigh 

[lb/s.ft] 

FH 

[lb] 

1 

1.25 

1500.0 

31.2 

0.01 

150.3 

0.4167 

62.6 

378.8 

2 

3.75 

4500.0 

281.2 

0.08 

457.1 

0.3973 

181.6 

1098.8 

3 

6.25 

7500.0 

7812 

0.22 

784.0 

0.3779 

2%.2 

1792.3 

4 

8.75 

10500.0 

15312 

0.43 

1147.6 

0.3584 

411.3 

2488.6 

5 

1125 

13500.0 

2531.2 

0.70 

1570.9 

0.3390 

532.5 

3221.8 

6 

13.75 

16500.0 

3781.2 

1.05 

2088.8 

0.3196 

667.5 

4038.4 


2.Tensile stress in reinforcement: 


Strip # Tensile Stress 
[psi.] 


1 814.7 

2 2362.9 

3 3854.4 

4 5351.8 

5 6928.5 

6 8684.7 


TENSILE STRESS IN STRIP < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(400(X).00 psi.) — OK. 


Figure 8.15 Continued 


8-33 







B.Tensile stress at conneedem: 


Strip # 

Tensile Stress 
Ipsi.] 

1 

909.6 

2 

2638.3 

3 

4303.5 

4 

5975.4 

5 

7735.9 

6 

9696.7 


TENSILE STRESS AT CONNECTION < ALLOWABLE HENSILE STRESS(40000.00 psi.) OK. 

4.Pullout of reinforcement: 


Strip# 

Le 

[ft] 

P 

[lb.] 

FH 

[lb.] 

F.S. 

1 

5.50 

471.1 

378.8 

1.24 

2 

5.50 

1315.8 

1098.8 

1.20 

3 

5.50 

2030.6 

1792.3 

i.i: 

4 

6.75 

3208.3 

2488.6 

1.29 

5 

8.05 

4492.9 

3221.8 

1.39 

6 

9.35 

5772.0 

4038.4 

1.43 


RECALCULATING WITH Lb = 11 as F.S,(PULLOUT) < 1.5 


1.Tensile forces to be resisted by the reinforcement: 


Layer Depth Rv 
# [ftl nb/ft] 

Pc 

nb] 

e 

[ft] 

Sigv 

ab/s.fll 

K 

Sigh 

[lb/s.ft] 

FH 

[lb] 

1 

1.25 

1650.0 

31.2 

0.01 

1502 

0.4167 

62.6 

378.7 

2 

3.75 

4950.0 

281.2 

0.07 

455.9 

0.3973 

181.1 

1095.7 

3 

6.25 

8250.0 

781.2 

020 

777.9 

0.3779 

293.9 

1778.3 

4 

8.75 

11550.0 

1531.2 

039 

1129.4 

0.3584 

404.8 

2449.1 

5 

11.25 

14850.0 

2531.2 

0.64 

15273 

0.3390 

517.8 

3132.8 

6 

13.75 

18150.0 

3781.2 

0.95 

19%.6 

0.3196 

638.1 

3860.2 


Figure 8.15 Continued 


8-34 







2.Tensile stress in reinforcement; 


Strip# 

Tensile Stress 
[psi.] 

1 

814.4 

2 

2356.4 

3 

3824.3 

4 

5266.8 

5 

6737.2 

6 

8301.5 


TENSILE STRESS IN STRIP < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(40000.00 psi.) — OK. 
B.Tensile stress at connection: 


Strip # Tensile Stress 
[psi.] 


1 

909.3 

2 

2631.0 

3 

4269.9 

4 

5880.5 

5 

7522.3 

6 

9268.9 


TENSILE STRESS AT CONNECTION < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(40000.00 psi.) —- OK. 


4.Pullout of reinforcement: 


Stri )# 

Le 

[ft] 

P 

[lb.] 

FH 

[lb.] 

F.S. 

1 

6.50 

556.7 

378.7 

1.47 

2 

6.50 

1555.1 

1095.7 

1.42 

3 

6.50 

2399.8 

1778.3 

1.35 

4 

7.75 

3683.8 

2449.1 

1.50 

5 

9.05 

5051.2 

3132.8 

1.61 

6 

10.35 

6389.4 

3860.2 

1.66 


RECALCULATING WITH Lb = 12 as F.S.(PULLOUT) < 1.5 


Figure 8.15 Continued 


8-35 

















1.Tensile forces to be resisted by the reinforcement: 


Layer Depth 
# [ft] 

Rv 

[Ib/ft] 

Pe 

nb] 

e 

[ft] 

Sigv 

nWsit] 

K 

Sigh 

[lb/s.ft] 

FH 

[lb] 

1 

1.25 

1800.0 

31.2 

0.01 

150.2 

0.4167 

62.6 

378.6 

2 

3.75 

5400.0 

281.2 

0.07 

454.9 

0.3973 

180.7 

1093.5 

3 

6.25 

9000.0 

781.2 

0.18 

773.3 

0.3779 

292.2 

1767.8 

4 

8.75 

12600.0 

1531.2 

0.35 

1115.9 

0.3584 

400.0 

2419.8 

5 

11.25 

16200.0 

2531.2 

0.59 

1496.1 

0.3390 

507.2 

3068.4 

6 

13.75 

19800.0 

3781.2 

0.88 

1931.8 

0.3196 

6173 

3734.9 


2.Tensile stress in reinforcement: 


Strip# 

Tensile Stress 
[psi.] 

1 

814.2 

2 

2351.5 

3 

3801.7 

4 

5203.9 

5 

6598.6 

6 

8032.0 


TENSILE STRESS IN STRIP < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(40000.00 psi.) OK. 


B.Tensile stress at connection: 


Strip # Tensile Stress 
[psi.] 


1 909.1 

2 2625.5 

3 4244.7 

4 5810.3 

5 7367.5 

6 8%8.0 


TENSILE STRESS AT CONNECTION < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(40000.00 psi.) -- OK. 


Figure 8.15 Continued 


8-36 












4 Pullout of reiiif(m:einent: 


Strip# 

Le 

[ft] 

P 

[lb.] 

FH 

[lb.] 

F.S. 

1 

7.50 

-642.4 

378.6 

1.70 

2 

7J0 

1794.3 

1093J 

1.64 

3 

7S0 

2769.0 

1767.8 

1.57 

4 

8.75 

4159.4 

2419.8 

1.72 

5 

10.05 

5609J 

3068.4 

1.83 

6 

11.35 

7006.8 

3734.9 

1.88 


Figure 8.15 Continued 









in iilf 


rinMiu.ou; 


’)» SFIHFORCFD IdItTH islV iwst appi^prutf 
t^Pf cf stnicturr Ihjt is suitfi fop this ipplicition. 

Ihp .fptiiiftl dpsign of tl» RpinfortfiJ Firth Stmtupt folUr,: 


FMFS 1 !F mi IS HORITOWal BBCIFILL. 

WTfii 2 IF OJSF IS SLOPING WCXFILi- 
FNIFii 3 If CflSF HSS UNIFORN SUlWtAKT. 

FXIFJ \ IF CiiSF Has CONESIUF SOIL. 

7 

kKdf IS thf Hpiaht (in ft.) cf thr pipth to h# 5upp«ptp2' 

i ' I ‘s 

ii>ur is t)» inglp of intppnil friction (in Jpg) cf thp spfciil kickfill soiP 

k)ut IS thp inglp of intppril friction (in dpgl of tV pptiinpij soil' 

1' 3 (i 

Wut IS t)sp sppcific KPight of thp sppcul bickfill soiKin ptf 

>.'12^ 

Wut 15 thp sppcific npight of thp rptjinpJ soiKin pcf.)"’ 

^t IS thp inglp (in 8p?.) Ilut thp Uk/ill soil luJips pith ty ypizontjP 

^ich on? of th? tHo Winforctufti^^lnp ^iips iff you tiiintj' 

1 if ty SIZP IS 4tei X 5« OR prfss'2 if tV siz? is &eM> x W 

/ '-L 

u“' hofizontil spicing of thp stprl rpinfopcpupnt strios (in incl»s)’ 

>)<«°' ^ ^ is 4i in. 

spacing of ty stppl rpinfortpwnt strips (in incys)’ 
InS ' *''**^*^^' vilup is 38 in. 

i^nfo;>c\j„^ s?llr^‘' 


Figure 8.16 System -User Interactive Consultation for EARWALL 
• Case 2 



• ; M p y I D a T ft * 




po - 

V'’ 

i r<4' 
^7r: 


1 j."'l cf 

- ' 1 i i ' p ^• 


,y sjppoPtPd : !j88ft- 

n* ►( : :i «d»ps Kith ty horizo-.tjl r 21.8 2»n 
<ii .‘.-icticn of ly sppcHi hjcpfiil 9il ' j 5.8 dpg. 

!. friction of ty pptjinpJ soil ; 3ai ifpg. 
f tv '.preui hickfiil soil : 128. 
ty ytdinpd soil 128 8 pel. ^ 

‘•inforcpupnt biNi < Sw. W 

't ly sippl yi-.fcpcing strips r®.8 
f f.y sIppI yinfopcng strips ; S.8 in 
styss of ty slppl yinfontirg $tnps : 48^8.11 psi. 


in. 


2 a L C j L a T I N s. 

***** ...I.. 

.. PD ri'P^i :f iHF rf.'ntorcf: faRiH isiinii)' Pinuiic.oot 


w! 

»♦♦♦♦♦•#♦#»< H I fr»#i I n 


Figure 8.17 Screen Display of Input Data for EARWALL- Case 2 


















I DESIGN OF THE REINFORCED EARTH STRUCTURE I 


WALL WITH SLOPING BACKFILL 


AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA 

EXTERNAL STABILITY- 

AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA 

1.Sliding on Base. 

Horizontal component of the active earth pressure coeff.,Kah = 0.4668 
For a minimum factor of safety of 1.5 against sliding: 

The minimum length of reinforcement^ = 18 ft. 

2.0vertuming about Toe. 


For the reinftvcement length * 18 ft.; 

The factor of safety against overturning = 3.16-OK (since > 2.0) 

B.Bearing Opacity Failure. 


The moment around the centerline at the base = 99899.12 ft.lb. 

Vertical rection = 42120.00 lb. 

Eccentricity ,e = 2.37 

The length L s 18 ft. is sufficient to maintain the resultant within the middle third 
(since e = 2.37 ft < L / 6.0 = 3.00 ft,. 

AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA 

INTERNAL STABILITY 

AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA 

1.Rupture of reinforcement: 


Strip 

# 

Depth 

[ft] 

Vertical 

Load[lb.] 

Pe 

[lb.] 

Eccentricity 

[ft] 

Sigv 

[psf.] 

Sigh 

[psf.] 

FH 

[lb.] 

1 

1.25 

12420.0 

2942.6 

0.00 

589.3 

224.9 

1360.9 

2 

3.75 

17820.0 

4553.0 

0.00 

932.9 

338.0 

2045.0 

3 

625 

23220.0 

6513.5 

0.17 

1314.9 

450.8 

2727.6 

4 

8.75 

28620.0 

8824.2 

0.81 

1746.3 

564.8 

3417.2 

5 

11.25 

34020.0 

11484.9 

1.42 

2244.5 

682.4 

4128.4 

6 

13.75 

39420.0 

14495.7 

2.05 

2835.5 

807.0 

4882.1 


Figure 8.18 Output File of EARWALL-Case 2 


OK 


8-39 























l.Tcnsilc stress in reinforcement and at the connection & pullout of reinforcement; 


Strip 

# 

Depth 

[ft.] 

Stress in Stress @ 

Strip [psi.] Connection [psi] 

Mu* 

Le 

[ft] 

P 

[Ib] 

F.S. 

1 

1.25 

2926.7 

3267.8 

1.270 

12.15 

4190.9 

3.08 

2 

3.75 

4397.7 

4910.2 

1.170 

12.15 

5539.7 

2.71 

3 

6.25 

5865.7 

6549.2 

1.070 

13.45 

7305.3 

2.68 

4 

8.75 

7348.8 

8205.2 

0.970 

14.75 

8953.1 

2.62 

5 

11.25 

8878.3 

9912.9 

0.870 

16.05 

10388.1 

2.52 

6 

13.75 

10499.1 

11722.5 

0.770 

17.35 

11518.0 

2.36 


TENSILE STRESS IN STRIP < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(40000.(X) psi.) — OK. 
TENSILE STRESS AT CONNECTION < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(40(XX).00 psi.) — OK. 


Figure 8.18 Continued 


8-40 







Xiput in fi!f:fiP«Mll 3 .out 


'V S E I N F C R C E D E S R T H is thf wst jpTrupriitf 
•.Pf cf ;i."Lcturf !lut IS suilf^ fof tnis ppplicition. 

f.V dftiilfd dpsi?n of tV R^inforofJ EiftS Stwrturf follons: 


i)rER I !f «:e !3 HORi2oir«L ascxEia. 

2 If Q.'E i: :lcpiw; ancxEia. 

'.rfH 3 IE U'A. Has LllfOW SURaaKE. 
i.'nER i IE CaSE Has COHESIUE SOIL. 

•Kat is tSf Hfiijht (in ft.) af thf tipth to W supportpil'’ 

t 

■cMt IS t.hf af intfpnal friction (in Jf?) of thf spfcial fockfill s;iP 

A 

«.hjr IS thf of intfrnal friction (in Jfij) of thf pftainpd soiP 

Ilf 

K.hjt IS thf sprcific Kfi^ht of thf spfciil hackfill soiKin pcf.)’ 

:;ij 

a/ut IS thf sprcific i«fi<iht of thf spfcial hickfill saiKin pcf.in 

.'!2ii 

nhat IS thf liTiiforn vfPticil siipehir«jf loaiin; at thf top of thf valKin psf.)’ 

' diM 

Uhich onf of t.hp tao staniarj rfinforcramt strip sufs iff sou usino: 

Ppfss I if thf suf IS X Sm 01 pTfSS 2 if thf sur is bli«i x W 

^t IS thf horizontal spacing of thf stffl rrinforornfnt strips (in inchfs)’ 
If^ot aoailahir sou nas ?uf thf valuf as 4i in. 

-tut IS thf urrtical spacimj of thf strrl prinfortruMt strips (in inchfs)’ 
f not availaJilf sou lus siuf thf valuf as 38 in. 

' 38 

ahat is thf alloaailf trnsilf strfss (in psi) of tV strrl 
r«inforcfiifnt strips n 

fi _ 


Figure 8.19 System 'User Interactive Consultation for EARWALL 
■ -Case3 


afiLL ypH S^IOdRCE 


• 'H p j T Data* 

P tv V :iipc-tHE M ft 

"■ ,,"c.h,i,-<)r at tv top of t.hf vail W.8 Psf. 

- ! : - ■■‘f i, ! ric ti jn of tV sprcial hacxf i i! st|| : 'b 8 ir^. 

■a.a :f I'rytic-i of thf p*lainfd son ‘a. 

;!ic lart.-t :i 'v 'prcial tacifiii s.oil :;8,8 
,v:;Mc vfii.Ht cf t.Hf rrtainril soil 128 8 pcf. 
tinji.iM 'i.-H vnfppcfi^nt : t8w x ban. 

■■-:.''nia| nc;"':) of jv strrl .vinforcincj strip' SLl m. 

spi.si'j of thf s.trrl rrioforcinj strips : 38.1 in. 
t:,i»ahir strrss of thf strrl mnforcin^ stnu : 48ni.lM psi 


W.8 r 

f 


N r 




-t f.PaiLED :p;> CI the rEltp-RCES laRTH i: |h nit )> rar^iin.out 


Figure 8.20 Screen Display of Input Data for EARWALL-Case 3 

8-41 



















I DESIGN OF THE REINFORCED EARTH STRUCTURE I 


WALL WITH SURCHARGE 


AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA 

EXTERNAL STABILITY 

AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA 

1.Sliding on Base. 


Coefficient of active pressure = 0.33 
External horizontal force = 4500.00 Ibyft. 

Resultant horizontal force from .'iurcharge loading = 3000.00 Ib./ft. 

For a minimum factor of safety of 1.5 against sliding: 

The minimum length of reinforcementX = 8.1 ft. 

2.0vertuming about Toe. 


F.S.(overturning) - 1.76 —NG (since FS < 2.0). Recalculate with L = 8.4 
F.S.(overtuming) = 1.87 —NG (since FS < 2.0i Recalculate with L = 8.6 
F.S.(overtuming) = 1.98 —NG (since FS < 2.0). Recalculate with L = 8.9 
F.S.(overtuming) = 2.10 — OK (since FS > 2.0) 

3.Bearing Capacity Failure. 


Vertical reaction,Rv = 21285.57 lb. 

Eccentricity * 2.11 ft. 

Resultant outside middle third, (since 2.11 > (8.9/6.0 s 1.48)) 

Recompute with L = 9.1: 

Verticai reaction.Rv = 21885.57 lb. 

Eccentricity « 2.06 ft. 

Resultant outside middle third.(since 2.06 > (9.1/6.0 s 1.52)) 

Recompute with L » 9.4: 

Vertical reacdonRv s 22485.57 lb. 

Eccentricity « 2.00 ft. 

Resultant outside middle third.(since 2.00 > (9.4/6.0 « 1.56)) 

Recompute with L > 9.6: 

Vertical reactionRv * 23085.57 lb. 

Eccentricity * 1.95 ft 

Resultar outside middle third.(since 1.95 > (9.6/6.0 » 1.60)) 

Recompute with L * 9.9: 

Vertical reacdonRv > 23685.57 lb. 

Eccentricity * 1.90 ft. 

Resultant outside middle third.(since 1.90 > (9.9/6.0 » 1.64)) 

Figure 8.21 Output File of EARWALL-Case 3 


8-42 














Recompute with L = 10.1: 

Vertical reacdonjlv = 24285.57 lb. 

Eccentricity = 1.85 ft. 

Resultant outside middle third.(since 1.85 > (10.1/6.0 = 1.69)) 

Recompute with L = 10.4: 

Vertical rcaction,Rv = 24885.57 lb. 

Eccentricity = 1.81 ft. 

Resultant outside middle third.(since 1.81 > (10.4/6.0 = 1.73)) 

Recompute with L = 10.6: 

Vertical reactionjl. = 25485.57 Ib. 

Eccentricity = 1.77 ft. 

Resultant inside middle thiTd.(since 1.77 < (10.6/6.0 = 1.77))— OK. 
The ultimate bearing capacity of the foundation = 7191 psf. 

AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA 

INTERNAL STABILITY 

AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA 


1.Tensile stress in reinforcement and at connection: 
FOR RUPTURE: 


Reinf. Depth 
Strip 

# [ft] 

e 

[ft.] 

Sigv. 

[psf.] 

K 

Sigh. 

[psf.] 

FH 

[lb.] 

FT 

[lb.] 

FTc 

[lb.] 

F.S. 

1 

1.25 

0.02 

753.0 

0.417 

313.8 

1898.4 

4082.6 

4558.3 

8.78 

2 

3.75 

0.16 

1082.1 

0.397 

429.9 

2600.9 

5593.4 

6245.2 

6.40 

3 

6.25 

0.39 

1455.8 

0.378 

550.1 

3328.1 

7157.1 

7991.1 

5.01 

4 

8.75 

0.69 

1897.2 

0.358 

680.0 

4114.0 

8847.4 

9878.3 

4.05 

5 

11.25 

1.07 2441.9 

0.339 

827.8 

5008.2 

10770.2 

12025.3 

3.33 

6 

13.75 

1.52 

3149.7 

0.320 

1006.5 

6089.5 

13095.7 

14621.7 

2.74 


TeiSILE STRESS IN STRIP < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(40000.00 psi.) OK. 
TENSILE STRESS AT CONNECTION < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(40000.00 psi.) — OK. 


2.Pullout of reinforcement 

FOR PULLOUT: 

Reinf. Depth 
Strip 

# [ft] 

e 

[ft] 

Sigv. 

[psf.] 

Sigh. 

[psf.] 

FH 

[lb.] 

Mu* 

Le 

[ft.] 

P 

[lb.] 

F.S. 

1 

1.25 

0.11 

153.1 

63.8 

385.9 

1.5 

6.12 

523.8 

1.36 

2 

3.75 

0.37 

483.5 

192.1 

1162.1 

1.4 

6.12 

1463.2 

1.26 

3 

6.25 

0.69 

862.9 

326.1 

1972.7 

1.3 

6.12 2258.0 

1.14 

4 

8.75 

1.09 

1320.4 

473.2 

2863.2 

1.2 

7.37 

35C0.9 

1.22 

5 

11.25 

1.54 

1904.1 

645.5 

3905.0 

1.1 

8.67 4836.0 

1.24 

6 

13.75 

2.07 

2702.8 

863.7 

5225.5 

1.0 

9.97 

6151.0 

1.18 


Figure 8.21 Continued 

8-43 










Recalculating with L = 10.87 ft.as F.S.(pullout) < 1.5: 
1.Tensile stress in reinforcement and at connection : 
FOR RUPTURE: 


ReinfDepth 
Strip 

# [ft] 

e 

[ft] 

Sigv. 

[psf.] 

K 

Sigh. 

[psf.] 

FH 

[lb.] 

FT 

m 

FTc 

m 

F.S. 

1 

1.25 

0.02 

752.9 

0.417 

313.7 

1898.1 

4081.9 

4557.5 

8.78 

2 

3.75 

0.15 

1080.6 

0.397 

429.3 

2597.3 

5585.7 

6236.5 

6.41 

3 

6.25 

0.38 

1450.7 

0.378 

548.1 

3316.2 

7131.7 

1962.1 

5.02 

4 

8.75 

0.68 

1884.4 

0.358 

675.4 

4086.2 

8787.5 

9811.5 

4.08 

5 

11.25 

1.05 

2414.2 

0.339 

818.4 

4951.4 

10648.1 

11888.9 

3.36 

6 

13.75 

1.48 

3093.5 

0.320 

988.6 

5980.8 

12861.8 

14360.6 

2.79 


TENSILE STRESS IN STRIP < ALLOWABLE TENSmE STRESS(40000.00 psi.) — OK. 
TENSILE STRESS AT CONNECTION < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(40000.00 psi.) —- OK. 

2.Pullout of reinfof cement. 


FOR PULLOUT: 


Reinf. Depth 
Strip 

e 

Sigv. 

Sigh. 

FH 

Mu* 

Le 

P 

F.S. 

# 

[ft.] 

[ft.l 

[psf.] 

[psf.] 

[Ib.] 


[ft.] 

[lb.] 


1 

1.25 

0.10 

152.9 

63.7 

385.5 

1.5 

6.37 

545.2 

1.41 

2 

3.75 

0.36 

481.9 

191.4 

1158.2 

1.4 

6.37 

1522.9 

1.31 

3 

6.25 

0.68 

857.1 

323.8 

1959.2 

1.3 

6.37 

2350.3 

1.20 

4 

8.75 

1.06 

1305.1 

467.8 

2830.0 

1.2 

7.62 

3619.7 

1.28 

5 

11.25 

1.51 

1869.2 

633.6 

3833.5 

1.1 

8.92 

4975.5 

1.30 

6 

13.75 

2.02 

2626.6 

839.4 

5078.1 

1.0 

10.22 

6305.3 

1.24 


Recalculating with L = 11.12 fLas F.S.(pullout) < 1.5: 
1 .Tensile stress in reinforcement and at connection: 

FOR RUPTURE: 


Reinf Depth 
Strip 

# [ft.] 

e 

[ft.] 

Sigv. 

[psf.] 

K 

Sigh. 

[psf.] 

FH 

nb.] 

FT 

[lb.] 

FTc 

[ib.] 

F.S 

1 

125 

0.02 

752.7 

0.417 

313.7 

1897.7 

4081.2 

4556.7 

£.78 

2 

3.75 

0.15 

1079.2 

0.397 

428.8 

2594.0 

5578.4 

6228.5 

6.42 

3 

6.25 

0.37 

1445.9 

0.378 

546.3 

3305.3 

7108.1 

7936.4 

5.04 

4 

8.75 

0.66 

1872.6 

0.358 

671.2 

4060.5 

8732.3 

9749.9 

4.10 

5 

11.25 

1.02 2389.0 

0.339 

809.8 

4899.5 

10536.5 

11764.3 

3.40 

6 

13.75 

1.45 

3042.7 

0.320 

972.3 

5882.7 

12651.0 

14125.2 

2.83 


TENSILE STRESS IN STRIP < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(40000.00 psi.) -- OK. 

Figure 8.21 Continued 


8-44 

























TENSILE STRESS AT CONNECTION < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(4(XX)0.00 psi.) — OK. 
2Pullout of reinforcement 


FOR PULLOUT: 


Reinfi^epth 

Strip 

# [ft] 

e 

[ft] 

Sigy. 

[psf.] 

Sigh. 

[psf.] 

FH 

m 

Mu* 

Le 

[ft] 

P 

Pb.] 

F.S. 

1 

1.25 

0.10 

152.8 

63.7 

385.2 

1.5 

6.62 

566.6 

1.47 

2 

3.75 

0.35 

480.4 

190.8 

1154.6 

1.4 

6.62 

1582.7 

1.37 

3 

6.25 

0.66 

851.7 

321.8 

1946.9 

1.3 

6.62 

2442.5 

1.25 

4 

8.75 

1.04 

1291.1 

462.8 

2799.8 

1.2 

7.87 

3738.5 

1.34 

5 

11.25 

1.48 

1837.7 

623.0 

3769.0 

1.1 

9.17 

5115.0 

1.36 

6 

13.75 

1.98 

2559.2 

817.8 

4947.9 

1.0 

10.47 

6459.6 

1.31 


Recalculating with L = 11.37 ftas F.S.(pullout) < 1.5: 
1.Tensile stress in reinforcement and at connection: 


FOR RUPTURE: 


ReinfJDepth 

e 

Sigv. 

K 

Sigh. 

FH 

FT 

FTc 

F.S. 

# [ft] 

[ft] 

[psf.] 


[psf.] 

[lb.] 

[lb.] 

[lb.] 


1 1.25 

0.02 

752.6 

0.417 

313.6 

1897.4 

4080.5 

4556.0 

8.78 

2 3.75 

0.15 

1077.9 

0.397 

428.2 

2590.8 

5571.7 

6220.9 

6.43 

3 6.25 

0.36 

1441.4 

0.378 

544.6 

3295.1 

7086.2 

7912.0 

5.06 

4 8.75 

0.65 

1861.6 

0.358 

667.2 

4036.9 

8681.4 

9693.0 

4.13 

5 11.25 

1.00 

2365.8 

0.339 

802.0 

4852.0 10434.4 

11650.3 

3.43 

6 13.75 

1.42 

2996.8 

0.320 

957.7 

5793.9 12460.0 

13912.0 

2.88 

TENSILE STRESS IN STRIP < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(400(X).00 psi.) — 

OK. 

TENSILE STRESS AT CONNECTION < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(40000.00 psi.) — OK, 

2 Jhillout of reinforcement 







FOR PULLOUT: 








ReinfDepth 

e 

Sigv. 

Sigh. 

FH 

Mu* 

Lc 

P 

F.S. 

Strip 









# [ft] 

[ft] 

[psf.] 

[psf.] 

[lb.] 


[ft.] 

[lb.] 


1 1.25 

0.10 

152.7 

63.6 

384.9 

1.5 

6.87 

588.0 

1.53 

2 3.75 

0.34 

478.9 

190.3 

1151.2 

1.4 

6.87 

1642.5 

1.43 

3 6.25 

0.65 

846.7 

319.9 

1935.5 

1.3 

6.87 

2534.8 

1.31 

4 8.75 

1.02 

1278.4 

458.2 

2772.1 

1.2 

8.12 

3857.3 

1.39 

5 11.25 

1.44 

1809.3 

613.3 

3710.7 

1.1 

9.42 

5254.5 

1.42 

6 13.75 

1.93 

2499.3 

798.7 

4832.1 

1.0 

10.72 

6613.8 

1.37 


Figure 8.21 Continued 

8-45 































Recalculating with L = 11.62 ft.as F.S.(pullout) < 1.5: 
1.Tensile stress in reinforcement and at connection: 


FOR RUPTURE: 


ReinfDepth 
Strip 
# [ft] 

e 

[ft] 

Sigv. 

[psf.] 

K 

Sigh. 

[psf.] 

FH 

ab.] 

FT 

ab.] 

FTc 

[lb.] 

F.S. 

1 

1.25 

0.02 

752.5 

0.417 

313.6 

1897.2 

4079.9 

4555.3 

8.78 

2 

3.75 

0.14 

1076.7 

0.397 

427.8 

2587.9 

5565.4 

6213.9 

6.44 

3 

625 

0.35 

1437.3 

0.378 

543.1 

3285.6 

7065.8 

7889.2 

5.07 

4 

8.75 

0.63 

1851.5 

0.358 

663.6 

4014.9 

8634.3 

9640.4 

4.15 

5 

11.25 

0.98 

2344.5 

0.339 

794.8 

4808.4 

10340.5 

11545.5 

3.46 

6 

13.75 

1.39 

2955.1 

0.320 

944.3 

5713.2 

12286.4 

13718.1 

2.92 


TENSILE STRESS IN STRIP < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(40000.00 psi.) — OK. 
TENSILE STRESS AT CONNECTION < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(400(X).00 psi.) OK. 

2Pullout of reinforcement. 


FOR PULLOUT: 


ReinfDepth 

Strip 

e 

Sigv. 

Sigh. 

FH 

Mu* 

Le 


P 

F.S. 

# [ft] 

[ft.] 

[psf.] 

[psf.] 

[lb.] 


[ft] 

[lb.] 


1 1.25 

0.10 

152.6 

63.6 

384.6 

1.5 

7.12 

609.4 

1.58 

2 3.75 

0.34 

477.6 

189.8 

1148.0 

1.4 

7.12 

1702.3 

1.48 

3 6.25 

0.64 

842.0 

318.2 

1924.9 

1.3 

7.12 

2627.0 

1.36 

4 8.75 

0.99 

1266.6 

454.0 

2746.7 

1.2 

8.37 

3976.2 

1.45 

5 11.25 

1.41 

1783.5 

604.6 

3657.7 

1.1 

9.67 

5394.0 

1.47 

6 13.75 

1.89 

2445.7 

781.6 

4728.5 

1.0 

10.97 

6768.1 

1.43 

Recalculating with L 

= 11.87 ftas F.S.(pullout) < 1.5: 





1.Tensile stress in reinforcement and at ctmnection: 





FOR RUPTURE: 









ReinfDepth 

Strip 

e 

Sigv. 

K 

Sigh. 

FH 

FT 


FTc 

F.S. 

# [ft] 

[ft] 

[psf.] 


[psf.] 

nb.] 

[lb.] 


[lb.] 


1 1.25 

0.02 

752.4 

0.417 

313.5 

1896.9 

4079.3 

4554.7 8.78 

2 3.75 

0.14 

1075.6 

0.397 

427.3 

2585.2 

5559.5 

6207.3 6.44 

3 6.25 

0.35 

1433.4 

0.378 

541.6 

3276.8 

7046.9 

7868.0 5.08 

4 8.75 

0.62 

1842.1 

0.358 

660.3 

3994.6 

8590.5 

9591.6 4.17 

5 11.25 

0.96 

2324.9 

0.339 

788.1 

4768.1 

10254.1 

11448.9 3.49 

6 13.75 

1.36 

2917.0 

0.320 

932.2 

5639.5 

12128.0 

13541.3 2.95 


TENSILE STRESS IN STRIP < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(40000.00 psi.) — OK. 
TENSILE STRESS AT CCMWECTKW < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(40000.00 psi.) — OK. 


Figure 8.21 Continued 

8-46 






















2 J’uUout of reinforcemenL 


FOR PULLOUT: 


ReinfJ>epth e 
Strip 

# [ft] [ft] 

Sigv. 

[psf.] 

Sigh. 

[psf.] 

FH 

[lb.] 

Mu* 

Le 

[ft.] 

P 

[lb.] 

F.S. 

1 

1.25 

0.10 

152.4 

63.5 

384.3 

1.5 

7.37 

630.8 

1.64 

2 

3.75 

0.33 

476.4 

189.3 

1145.1 

1.4 

7.37 

1762.1 

1.54 

3 

6.25 

0.62 

837.8 

316.5 

1915.1 

1.3 

7.37 

2719.3 

1.42 

4 

8.75 

0.97 

1255.8 

450.1 

2723.2 

1.2 

8.62 

4095.0 

1.50 

5 

11.25 

1.38 

1759.9 

596.6 

3609.4 

1.1 

9.92 

5533.5 

1.53 

6 

13.75 

1.85 

2397.5 

766.2 

4635.3 

1.0 

11.22 

6922.4 

1.49 

Recalculating with L = 12.12 ftas F.S.(pullout) < 1.5: 





1.Tensile stress in reinforcement and at connection: 


FOR RUPTURE: 


ReinfDepth 

Strip 

# [ft.] 

e 

[ft] 

Sigv. 

[psf.] 

K 

Sigh. 

[psf.] 

FH 

nb.] 

FT 

[lb.] 

FTc 

[lb.] 

F.S. 

1 

1.25 

0.02 

752.3 

0.417 

313.5 

1896.6 

4078.8 

4554.1 

8.78 

2 

3.75 

0.14 

1074.5 

0.397 

426.9 

2582.6 

5554.0 

6201.1 

6.45 

3 

6.25 

0.34 

1429.8 

0.378 

540.3 

3268.5 

7029.1 

7848.2 

5.10 

4 

8.75 

0.61 

1833.4 

0.358 

657.1 

3975.7 

8549.9 

9546.2 

4.19 

5 

11.25 

0.94 

2306.8 

0.339 

782.0 

4731.0 

10174.2 

11359.8 

3.52 

6 

13.75 

1.33 

2882.1 

0.320 

921.0 

5572.1 

11983.0 

13379.3 

2.99 


TENSILE STRESS IN STRIP < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(40000.00 psi.) — OK. 
■TENSILE STRESS AT CONNECTION < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(40000.00 psi.) — OK. 

2.Pullout of reinforcemenL 


FOR PULLOUT: 


ReinfDepth 

Strip 

# [ft] 

e 

[ft] 

Sigv. 

[psf.] 

Sigh. 

[psf.] 

FH 

nb.] 

Mu* 

U 

[ft] 

P 

[lb.] 

F.S. 

1 

1.25 

0.09 

152.3 

63.5 

384.1 

1.5 

7.62 

652.3 

1.70 

2 

3.75 

0.32 

475.3 

188.8 

1142.4 

1.4 

7.62 

1821.8 

1.59 

3 

6.25 

0.61 

833.8 

315.0 

1906.0 

1.3 

7.62 

2811.6 

1.48 

4 

8.75 

0.95 

1245.9 

446.5 

2701.6 

1.2 

8.87 

4213.8 

1.56 

5 

11.25 

1.35 

1738.4 

5S9.3 

3565.2 

1.1 

10.17 

5673.0 

1.59 

6 

13.75 

1.81 

2354.0 

752.3 

4551.1 

1,0 

11.47 

7076.6 

1.55 


Figure 8.21 Continued 


8-47 
















Recalculating with L = 12.37 ftas F.S.(pullout) < 1.5: 
1.Tensile stress in reinforcement and at connection: 


FOR RUPTURE: 


ReinfJ^epth 

Strip 

# [ft.] 

e 

[ft] 

Sigv. 

[psf.] 

K 

Sigh. 

[psf.] 

FH 

ab.] 

FT 

Pb.] 

FTc 

[lb.] 

F.S. 

1 

1.25 

0.02 

1522 

0.417 

313.5 

1896.4 

4078.3 

4553.5 

8.78 

2 

3.75 

0.14 

1073.5 

0.397 

426.5 

2580.2 

5548.8 

6195.4 

6.46 

3 

6.25 

0.33 

1426.4 

0.378 

539.0 

3260.8 

7012.5 

7829.7 

5.11 

4 

8.75 

0.59 

1825.3 

0.358 

654.2 

3958.1 

8512.0 

9503.9 

4.21 

5 

11.25 

0.92 

2290.0 

0.339 

776.3 

4696.6 

10100.2 

11277.2 

3.55 

6 

13.75 

1.30 

2850.0 

0.320 

910.8 

5510.1 

11849.8 

13230.6 

3.02 


TENSILE STRESS IN STRIP < ALLOWABLE TENSE.E STRESS(40000.00 psi.) — OK. 
TENSILE STRESS AT CONNECTION < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(40(XX).00 psi.) — OK. 

2 Jhillout of reinforcement 


FOR PULLOUT: 


ReinfDepth 

Strip 

e 

Sigv. 

Sigh. 

FH 

Mu* 

U 

P 

F.S. 

# 

[ft] 

[ft] 

[psf.] 

[psf.] 

Pb.] 


[ft] 

[lb.] 


1 

1.25 

0.09 

152.2 

63.4 

383.8 

1.5 

7.87 

673.7 

1.76 

2 

3.75 

0.32 

474.2 

188.4 

1139.8 

1.4 

7.87 

1881.6 

1.65 

3 

6.25 

0.60 

830.1 

313.6 

1897.5 

1.3 

7.87 

2903.8 

1.53 

4 

8.75 

0.93 

1236.6 

443.2 

2681.6 

1.2 

9.12 

4332.7 

1.62 

5 

11.25 

1.33 

1718.6 

582.6 

3524.7 

1.1 

10.42 

5812.5 

1.65 

6 

13.75 

1.78 

2314.5 

739.6 

4474.7 

1.0 

11.72 

7230.9 

1.62 




Figure 8.21 Continued 


8-48 














Output in filf:fi«wll4.out 


Ihf REINFORCIB EHRIH isthf wst apprupriitf 
ti(pf of structiiTf that is suitfil fof this application. 

rv drtailpil <irsi7n of tV Rfinforcei Lafth Stractim follows: 


DfriT! I IF OISE IS HORIZOKTRL WOFIIl, 

DfiES I If CASE IS SLOPING BAOFIU. 

[vni ] IF CASE HAS lilllEOW SllRCHAiiCE. 

L'CE.R 4 IF CASE HAS COHESiUE SOIL. 

4 

ithat IS thf hfiqht (in ft.) of tho oarth to Lf suppopteHt 

/'IS 

Ithat 15 thf aoglf of intfmal friction (in Hr?) of the special Uckfill snip 

'j’S 

lAat IS thf anglf of intfpnal friction (in Hrg) of thr rftainfj soiP 
>' Si 

klut is thr specific wnght of ti* sp«ial kackfill soiUin pcf.)"* 

>/i;a 

kEut is tv specific (Wight of thw spfcial kackfill soiKin pcf.)’ 

>)1!» 

Uiich onr of tV two stanJarJ rfinformwnt strip sizrs arr gou using' 

^55 1 if tV sizf IS 41in X W 0* ptrss 2 if tV sizr is ham x W 

^t IS tv horizontal spacing of tV strfl rtinforcrwrnt strips (in incVs)’ 
If not availahlr gou Mg givr tV valor as 40 in. 

))40 

^t is tV vrrtical spacing of tV strrl rrinfortriwnt strips (in incVs)’ 
If,2®' ivailail# gou Mg givr tV valor as 30 in. 

Uhat 15 tv allowailr trnsilr strrss (in psi) of tV strrl 
rrinforcrwrnt strips ’ 

>/4000a. 


Figure 8.22 System -User Interactive Consultation for EARWALL 
- Casc4 


(*iLL UIIH COHECUF SOIL AKI fOUNDAII* 


• I h if 0 r B A I A # 

IV rj.-th to V Siifpcrtrd i 15 00 ft 
;'itpr<-(l frictizn c.' i.nr sprcia! satlifill soil : S.0 arg 
fr-.stien of tV rftair.pd '.oil ip 0 
ar; ;*t cf tV sp»cial haciflli soil : 120 0 PcP)" 

«*■: .■•: :f tnr rrtainrd soil ; 1:0 0 pci. 
i.'p C! mnforcrwrnt : bikm x 5iwi 
,Fis;"g jf tV '/irrl mrfopcing strips ' 40. 
t/iri'g of t.V strrl r»i.nforcing strips ; j0 0 ii. 

•i>n'.;[r strrss of tV strrl mnforcing strips rlWi.lS ps; 


f-M. 

I 


3 L : j _L_A_r i N c 

JD ItGilJt CF I“E CfltFIRCD FAiTH 


IN Fill )> rarwalM out 



Figure 8.23 Screen Display of Input Data for EARWALL- Case 4 

8>49 























1 DESIGN OF THE REINFORCED EARTH STRUCTURE I 


WALL WITH COHESIVE SOIL AND FOUNDATION 


AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA 

EXTERNAL STABILITY 

AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA 

1.Sliding on Base. 

Coefficient of active pressure = 0.49 
External horizontal force = 6067.35 IbVft. 

For a mi nimum factOT of safety of 1.5 against sliding: 
The minimum length of reinforcementX = 13.9 ft. 

2.0vertuming about Toe. 


F.S.(overtuming) = 5.73 — OK (since FS > 2.0) 

3.Bearing Capacity Failure. 

Vertical reaction Jlv = 25454.85 lb. 

Eccentricity = 1.19 ft. 

Resultant inside middle third.(since 1.19 < (14.1/6.0 = 2.36)V" OK. 
The ultimate bearing capacity of the foundation = 4329 psf. 


AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA 

INTERNAL STABIUTY 

AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA 


Layer# 

Depth Zfft.) 

1 

1.25 

2 

3.75 

3 

6.25 

4 

8.75 

5 

11.25 

6 

13.75 


Figure 8.24 Output Rle of EAR WALL- Case 4 


8-50 














1.Tensile forces to be resisted by the leinforcetnent: 


Layer Depth 
# [ft] 

Rv 

[Ib/ft] 

£1 

e 

[ft] 

Sigv 

[lb/s.ft] 

K 

Sigh 

[lb/s.ft] 

FH 

[lb] 

1 

1.25 

2121.2 

46.0 

0.01 

150.2 

0.42 

62.6 

378.6 

2 

3.75 

6363.7 

413.7 

0.08 

455.2 

0.40 

180.9 

1094.2 

3 

6.25 

10606.2 

1149.1 

0.23 

774.7 

0.38 

292.7 

1771.0 

4 

8.75 

14848.7 

2252.3 

0.44 

1120.1 

0.36 

401.5 

2428.8 

5 

11.25 

19091.1 

3723.1 

0.73 

1505.7 

0.34 

510.4 

3088.1 

6 

13.75 

23333.6 

5561.7 

1.09 

1951.5 

0.32 

623.6 

3773.0 


2.Tensile stress in reinforcement 


Strip # Tensile Stress 
[psi.] 


1 814.29 

2 2353.05 

3 3808.67 

4 5223.30 

5 6641.10 

6 8113.92 


TENSILE STRESS IN STRIP < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(40000.00 psi.) -- OK. 


3.Tensile stress at connection: 


Strip # Tensile Stress 
[psi.] 


1 

909.18 

2 

2627.24 

3 

4252.48 

4 

5831.96 

5 

7414.98 

6 

9059.42 


TENSILE STRESS AT CWNECTION < ALLOWABLE TENSILE STRESS(40000.00 psi.) — OK. 


Figure 8.24 Continued 


8-51 


















4.Pullout of reinforcement: 


Strip # 

Le 

[ftl 

P 

[lb.] 

FH 

[lb.] 

F.S. 

1 

9.64 

825.82 

378.65 

2.18 

2 

9.64 

2306.66 

1094.17 

2.11 

3 

9.64 

3559.74 

1771.03 

2.01 

4 

10.89 

5177.82 

2428.84 

2.13 

5 

12.19 

6805.05 

3088.12 

2.20 

6 

13.49 

8328.92 

3772.98 

2.21 




Figure 8.24 Continued 


8-52 







CHAPTER 9 


SHEET FILE WALLS 


9.1 INTRODUCTION 


Sheet: pile walls are widely used for both large and small waterfront 
structures. Sheetpiling is also used for beach erosion protection, to assist 
in stabilizing ground slopes, for shoring walls of trenches and other 
excavations, and for cofferdams. When the wall is under about 3 m in height 
it may be cantilevered, however, for larger wall heights it is usually 
anchored- termed anchored sheetpiling or anchored bulV'eads. Sheet piles 
generally resist horizontal pressures due to soil and water and derive their 
stability from the horizontal resistance of the ground into which they are 
driven and also from the horizontal support provided by any anchors, ties, or 
placed at a higher level. fig. 9.1 shows typical sheetpiling 
structures. 

Sheetpiling materials may be of tiniber, reinforced concrete or steel. 
Timber piling is often used as temporary braced sheeting in trenches to 
prevent side cave-ins during installation of deep water and sewer lines. If 
timber sheeting is used in permanent structures above water level, 
preservative treatment is necessary, and even so the useful life is seldom 
over 10 to IS years. 

Reinforced concrete sheet piles are precast concrete members usually with 
a tongue-and-groove joint. They are designed for the computed service 


9-1 




Deadznan 


Struts 



(a) 

Cantilever sheetpile 


(b) 

Anchored sheetpile 


(c) 

Braced sheeting 



(d) 

Anchored bulkheads 


Figure 9.1 Typical Sheetpile Structures. [9.1] 






stresses, but handling and driving stresses which are significant due to their 
weight must also be taken into account. They are relatively large in size; 
coupled with the high unit weight of concrete, the piles are quite heavy and 
may not be competitive with other types of piles unless they are cast in close 
proximity to the jobsite. 

Steel sheetpiling is the most common type used because of the following 
advantages over other materials: 

i) it is resistant to high driving stresses as developed in hard or 
rocky material; 

ii) it is of relatively light weight; 

iii) it may be reused several times; 

iv) it has a long service life either, above or below water with modest 
protection; 

v) the pile length can be increased by either welding or bolting; 

vi) joints are less likely to deform when wedged full with soil and 
stones during driving. 

In situations where large bending moments are to be resisted, the Z piles are 
used in anchored or cantilever walls. In cellular coffer dams, straight-web 
sheet piles are used where the web is subjected to tension. 

9.2 BASIC THEORY 

9.2.1. Cantilever Sheetpiling 

Cantilever sheet piles depend on adequate embedment into the dredge line 


9-3 




soil so that the wall is essentially a wide cantilever beam of length H, as 
shown in Fig. 9.1a. The stability of the cantilever sheet pile is largely 
dependent on embedment depth and hence it is important that the soil is stable 
below the dredge line. 

Current analysis methods may be divided into two groups: 

i) Discrete element methods - the finite difference and finite 
element approaches. 

ii) Classical methods - procedures which involve simplifying 
assumptions and rigid body statics. 

In this presentation, the classical method is used to analyse the cantilever 
sheet pile. The analysis of the cantilever sheet pile is dependent on the 
embedment soil type, viz., granular or cohesive. The following sections 
describe the designs of the cantilever sheet pile in granular and cohesive 
soils. 

9.2.1.1 Cantilever sheetpiling in granular soils 

The pile is subjected to active pressure to the dredge line, on the 
backfill side. Due to the active pressure the wall tends to rotate and 
develop passive pressure in front of the wall and active pressure behind the 
wall. At the pivotal point b of Fig. 9.2, the soil behind the wall goes from 
active to passive pressure, with active pressure in front of the wall for the 
remainder of the distance to the pile bottom. The soil mass above the point 
under consideration can be treated as a surcharge for computing active and 
passive pressures. It is assumed that the soil belov the dredge line has the 
sane internal angle of friction, 4 the backfill above the dredge line. 


9-4 




Pivot or 
rotation 
point 


\ 

\ 


Figure 9.2 Assumed Elastic Line of Sheetpile. [9.1] 



If ^ below the water table is the same 
as above, then = Kp and K'a = 






Fig. 9.3 shows the cantilever sheet pile pressure diagram for granular soil. 

First, all the forces above point 0 should be replaced by a single force 
resultant located a distance 'y' above this point. The point 0 is located 
at a distance 'a' below the dredge line, where the wall pressure is assumed to 
be zero, and is given by 



9-6 










where all the terms are shown in Fig. 9.3. The Eqn. 9.5 is solved by 
making the following assumptions: 
a - 0; 


y - distance from ground surface to R , where R is the force against 


and 


pole; 


Eqn. 



9.5 


0 

reduces 


to 


Y 


4 



Y 


12R y 
a ^ 


C 



(9.6) 


The above equation is solved by trial and error, with an initial starting 
value of Y - 0.75 H, since most cantilever walls require embedment depths of 
0.75 H to H. The total required length of the pile can be computed as 


L - H + D .(9.7) 

where 

0 • penetration depth 
- Y + a 


9.2.1.2 Cantilever sheet pile in cohesive soils - o) 

Treatment of sheetpiling in cohesive soils is similar to that in granular 
soils. There are, however, certain phenomena associated with cohesive soils 
which require additional consideration. For example, consolidation may occur 

in the passive-pressure zones. Tension cracks may form in the active zone and 
become filled with water, thus increasing the lateral pressure considerably. 


9-7 






as well as changing the location of the resultant. The clay may shrink and 
pull away from the wall, which also increases the lateral pressure. This 
latter problem may be allowed for in the design by neglecting the theoretical 
benefits of the wall adhesion. 

Referring to Fig. 9.4, 

o-qK-2cjK . (9.8) 

a ’ a _ a 

a-qK +2 cJk . (9.9) 

P P P 

At point A on the left side of the sheetpiling at the dredge line q - 0 and 
the net pressure at A is given by 

a - a • 2c - (q - 2c) - 4 c - q .(9.10) 

pa VT / -1 

which acts to the right, since K - K - 1.0. 

a p 

At point B the pressures are given by 


a - q + 7 D + 2c 
p ^ 'e 


which acts to the left, and 

a — 7 D - 2 c 

a e 

which acts to the right. 
Summing pressures (a - a^ , 


and equating to Eqn. 9.10, 


7 ^ D + q + 2 c - ( 7 ^ D - 2 c) - 4c + q 

which acts to the left. 

2 F„ - 0 for wall stability gives 
n 


(9.11) 


(9.12) 


(9.13) 


R +— (4c-q + 4c + q)-D(4c-q) - 0 

* 2 

Solving for z, 

^ _ D (4c-q) - ^a 
4c 


(9.14) 


(9.15) 


9-8 












Summation of the moments about the base gives 


R (y + D) - — (4c - q) + — (4c) - 0 .(9.16) 

^2 3 

Substituting Eqn. (9.15) into Eqn. (9.16) and collecting like terms and sim¬ 
plifying, 

(4c-q) - 2DR - a(12 cy + a) — _ ^ .(9.17) 

a 

2c + q 

All the terms are identified in Fig. 9.4 where q - the effective pressure at 
dredge line. 


9.2.2 Anchored Sheetpiling 

The free-earth and fixed-earth methods are the two classical methods used 
to design anchored sheet pile structures. In the design program SHEETPILE, 
developed for the anchored sheetpile design, the free-earth support method is 
used and hence discussion is limited to this method only. The free-earth 
method assumes that the piling is rigid and may rotate at the anchor-rod 
level, with failure occurring by rotation about the fixed anchor rod. Passive 
pressure develops in the soil in front of the piling, and active pressure 
develops behind the wall. After the theoretical embedment is computed, the 
value may be increased 20 to 40 percent or Kp may be divided by an appropriate 
safety factor prior to computation of the embedment length. The assumed 
pressure diagrams and definition of terms are illustrated in Fig. 9.Sa and 
9.5b. From Fig. 9.Sa the distance 'a' from the dredge line to the point of 
zero pressure is given by 


9-9 







Figure 9.4 Sheetpile in Cohesive Soil. [9.1] 










Anchor rod 


Gk=Y’K’ 

Rk = G X2/2 
K’ =(K'p*Ka) 




F 


i 


Figure 9.5a Sheetpile in Granular Soil. [9.1] 




Anchor rod 



Figure 9.5b Anchored Sheetpile in Granular Soil Backfill 
and Cohesive Base. [9.1] 


9-12 





p p 


7'K' G, 


(9.18) 


Summing the moments ebout the enchor rod and combining terms in descending 
powers of X, 


2X^ + 3X^ (h + a)- — - 0 


(9.19) 


The force in the anchor rod is obtained by summing horizontal forces as 


P - R - R 
ar a p 


(9.20) 


The embedment depth is given as 


D - X + a 


(9.21) 


For the case of cohesive soil below the dredge line (^ - 0 or undrained 
conditions - Fig. 9.5b), summation of moments about the anchor rod gives 


R^y - D(4c - q) (h 3 + il-) - 0 


(9.22) 


which may be rearranged in descending powers of D to give 


D‘ + 2Dh, 


- 0 


(9.23) 


4c - q 


The forces in the anchor rod can be computed by Eqn (9.20). From inspec¬ 
tion of Fig. 9.5b it can be seen that if the passive pressure ^ 0 the wall 

is unstable. This occurs at 


- - — ^ 0.25 


(9.24) 


9-13 












For a given backfill material, there is a critical value of H beyond which a 
stable wall cannot be constructed in clay. The ratio of c/q is termed the 
stability number. 


When the wall adhesion c^ is taken into account the stability number is 
approximated by 

S - J 1 + ^ .(9.25) 

n 

c 

q 

For c^ - 0.56c, the stability number becomes 


_ 125 c 

n 

q 


(9.26) 


For a safety factor (FS) of 1 and —- 0.25, the stability number becomes ap- 

q 

proximately 0.31 considering the wall adhesion. In sheet pile design in clay, 

the wall should have a stability number given by 

S - 0.3 X FS . (9.27) 

n 

9.2.2.1 Rowe's moment reduction method applied to anchored sheetpiling 


Rowe has proposed moment reductions for sheet pile designs based on the 
free'earth method. This technique may be used for uniform medium dense to 
dense silty sand or sand deposits. The Rowe moment-reduction theory is based 
on the following factors; 

i) The relative density of granular soil; 

ii) The stability number of cohesive soils given by Eqn. 9.26; 

iii) A flexibility number (derived for FPS units) 

4 4 

H ft 

p . - - 

El IK 4 2 

lb-in 


9-14 







where H - total length of piling in ft.; 

4 

E - modulus of elasticity in psi and I- moment of inertia in in , for a 
unit width of wall 

iv) The relative height of piling a and the relative freeboard of the piling p 
as shown in Fig. 9.6. 

Curves derived from experimental data [Rowe (1952, 1957)] have been 

published for selected values of S■^^, a, log p, and moment ratios. These 

curves are necessary for a design using this method, and presented in Fig. 

9.6a and b for both sand and clay soils 

Design by the moment-reduction method proceeds by first performing a free- 
earth analysis for the maximum bending moment Mq and the length of pile. Next 
the appropriate moment-reduction curve from Fig. 9.6 depending on the anchor- 
rod location, pile length, and soil type, is selected and this curve plotted. 
From a table of sheetpiling sections, the actual bending moments M of the 
piles can be computed as M > allowable steel stress x section modulus/unit 

width. The flexibility coefficient (p - hVeI) is also computed for the 

corresponding pile section. Using the H/Hq ratio and p, a second curve is 
plotted for the various sections and superimposed on the standard curve. The 
intersection of the two curves may not coincide with a pile section, but any 
pile section lying above the intersection is satisfactory to use, the pile 
closest to the intersection being the most economical. 

9.2.2.2. Design of wales 

Wales are longitudinal members running parallel with and in close contact 


9-15 









(«) 


Stability number S, 
(h) 


Figure 9.6 Rowe's Moment-reduction Curves for the " Free-earth 
Support Method, (a) Sheet Piles in Granulai Soil; 

(b) Sheet Piles in Cohesive Soil. [9.1] 





















with the wall as shown in Fig. 9.7. They may be located on either the front 
or backface of the wall. The backface location is desirable in certain cases 
for both appearance and clearance but will require adequate attachment to the 
wall by bolting or welding to support the anchor rod pull. Adequate 
attachment is usually obtained by field welding the wales to the backface. 
Wales on the front face are somewhat easier to install but also require a hole 
for the anchor rod through the wall. Wales are usually made of a pair of 
channels back to back with spacing for the anchor rod. Sometimes a pair of I 
beams are used, however, wide flange shapes are usually not suitable. Ten 
cross-sections of steel sections for steel pile are included in the data base. 

9.3 INTERACTIVE MICROCOMPUTER BASED 'SHEETPILE' PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION 

9.3.1. Program Structure 

SHEETPILE is an interactive program which gives the design of sheet pile 
structures and wales. The input data consist of the soil properties and 
height of earth to be retained; these are used in the computation of bending 
and toe failure resistances of the structure. 

After the user inputs the data, the system checks whether the data 
conforms to the following facts: 

i) If the height of the earth to be retained is less than 10 ft. , the 
cantilever sheetpile is selected and designed; if the height is 
greater than 10 ft. then the system chooses the anchored sheetpile 
for further detailed design computations; 

ii) The shear strength c divided by the effective pressure q at dredge 
line should be larger than 0.25; 


9>17 




Wale 




1 I 


Figure 9.7a Wale Design for Bending Assuming a Uniform 
Pressure from Anchor Rod. [9.1] 




Steel sheet pile wall 



Figure 9.7b Wale Location 

(1) Back of Sheet Pile Wall 

(2) Front of Sheet Pile Wall. [9.1] 


9-18 






iii) The anchor should be placed above the water table because of erosion 
problems; 

iv) The internal angle of friction ^ is to be between 30“ and 36“; 

v) The angle of friction 6, between soil and the wall, is to be 0.6 to 
0.8 times ^. 

If the aforementioned values are not satisfied then the system asks the user 
to repeat the input. This feature has been incorporated in SHEETPILE to 
eliminate the possibility of getting unreasonable values in the output. The 
database includes four cross sections of sheet piles viz. PZ40, PZ35, PZ27 and 
PZ22 and their section properties and also the cross sectional details of ten 
wale sections. 

The output consists of the dimensions of the structure and the minimum 
depth below the dredge line. The flowchart of the program SHEETPILE is given 
in Fig. 9.8. and the listing of SHEETPILE in Appendix G. 

9.3.2. Input and Output 

The input data is given through an Interactive system-user consultation as 
follows: 

- height of the earth to be retained; 

- properties of backfill and foundation soil; 

- surcharge load; 

and 

- height of water table. 

The output file consists of coefficients of both active and passive 


9-19 



















pressure, sections of sheet pile and wales, safety factors against bending and 
toe failure, maximum moment along sheet pile and pull force of anchor rod. 


9.3.3 Design Example 

The design of an anchored sheetpile is illxistrated here. The interface 
between the user and the system is implemented through a set of pre-defined 
questions shown in Fig. 9.9. Fig. 9.10 shows the input data as displayed on 
the screen. The design output is shown in Fig. 9.11. 

REFERENCES 

9.1 JE Bowles, Foundation Analysis and Design, 4th Ed., McGraw Hill, 1988, 
580-642. 

9.2 RB Peck, WE Hanson and TH Thomburn, Foundation Engineering, 2nd Ed., 
John Wiley & Sons, 1974, 514. 

9.3 IK Lee, W. White and OG Ingles, Retaining Structures, Geotechnical 
Engineering, Pitman, 1983, 245-278. 


9-21 





Oshfft 


TV foIloBin? consultition is for tl» i»si?ii of shoot 
pilo structupfs. 

floiso iiiSBOP tho folloKin? ^oostiws. 

Is this l.CiotilovfPfd shoot pilo; OP 

2. flnchopod shoot pilo. 

If tho hoi?ht of oAPth to ho potiiitod IS fpoitop tlua 11 ft, 
oou should chooso iochorod shoot pilo, othomiso tho sjston 
Kill cluiifo It ^utoiuticolly. 

)>2 

1. lifld; 

2. Cihosiuo soil; 

3. liod Ihioiifill on cohosivo soil. 


fpoo tho luon soil t'jpos. ontor tho ntuihor coirospondin? ' 
to tho ti(f>o of insitu soil. 

).'l 

iOut IS tho hoi?ht of tho mII (in ft) ■> 

))38 

iOwt IS tho hoight of tho wtop tihlo (in ft) ’ 

);22 

tfwt IS tho donsiti) of tho soil ihoto tho wtop tihlo (in kf) ’ 
))i.11 

IS tho intopnil friction iiiilo of tio soil (i* dotroo ) ’ 


li^t IS tho fpictioful iinlo hot«oo« soil ud iwlKin dotroo) 
Jhis uiliio could ho a.h - 8.1 of tho lotonul frictioTlulo. 

^^t IS tho hoiiht of tho iKhop (lo ft) ’ 


Wut IS tho surchipfo (m bf) t 

In this s-isto#, thopo ipo foop cptss soctiots for ^ sl*otpilo 


1. PZd8 Sc:68.78 I)c478 M 

2. ra3 Sxr«.48 C3h8 4i 

3. mi Sx:3i.28 c M'zi 

V mz SXZ18.18 

^p^iso input tho t|»ildio? stpossUii bi) 

Pitso of w«o«t (in y uvs):l,Sh, l»8(tl/n)(in i un) 

ritio of noaont (in V «is):8.97, lo?(H/II)(in i «i5) 

Pitio of aoaont (in y ijiis):8.38, Io5(H/II)(in y ixis) 


---3. 

:-3. 

--- 2 . 


;> 


Iho Sind IS donso or looso (d/'l) ’ 


I 

$ 

f 


# 



rv aost dpppoprutf cross soction is Ho. 4 uith 3rl8 18 Id* sa 
Tho fictop of Sifoti^ IS i.Sb iwn.JU 


In this systoB, 

t.horo i ."0 

10 cross sections 

I. Cl 8x30 

Cx 20 70 

lx 183 88 

2. C'CxCd.T 

lx 21.50 

lx 129 88 

3, ClCxC3 

Cx 24 10 

lx 144 88 

4, c!:..:0 

Tx 27 00 

lx 162.88 

1, »'i2x30.<i 

2x 20,00 

lx: 133 88 

h. HCiC.ic.y 

3x-j|.«0 

lx 191.* 

^ »C!2x3? 

Cx 24 20 

ix:285.n 

3, HCICxJb 

2x jft.l0 

Ix 21h.H 

r "CiCida 

:x-39 00 

Ix 234.W 

li. HCI2X43 

ix-'tc.da 

!x 252.* 


Ploiso input tho siold stposs of tir ailo.tin bi) 

Iho *st Jpn^FriJto cross soction for mIo is i piir of 

w 1 29.78 U 183,89 

chionols hick to hick «ith spicin? for tho inciwr rod. 

Tho fictor of sifot? is 1.89 

Pross in^ ko^ to contiouo. 


.'j 



V 




Figure 9.9 User-System Interactive Consultation for SHEETPILE 


9-22 








t 


« 





Vi^ht of t)w imII; 

28Ji 

ft 

of tl» iMtfr tiilf: 

22.ie 

ft 

of soil ^vf iMtrr ti^lr: 

i.n 

kf 

intfmil friction of soil: 

38 

iffrff 

friction anqlr k^tm tull still 

hriqht of tw tnchor: 

28 


2k.88 

ft 

swhifi* for ifsifn: 

8.58 

kf ^__ 


Figure 9.10 Screen Display of Input Data for SHEETPILE 







/♦.*/ 

/* I DESIGN OF SHEET PILES I */ 
/* ♦/ 


****4i*4i****4i*4i*4>4i4>«** 

* OUTPUT * 

********4i4i«***4i4u|i4i>** 

The minimum depth under dredge line: 9.72 ft 
The maximum moment: 67.38 kips-ft/ft 

The maximum moment occures at: 20.43 ft(firom the top) 

The pull force at anchor rod: 8.46 kips/ft 


The height of wall: 

The height of water table: 

The density of soil: 

The internal Mction angle of soil: 
The friction angle between 
soil and wall: 

The height of anchor 
The surcharge: 


30.00 ft 
22.00 ft 
0.11 kef 
30 degree 

20 degree 

26.00 ft 
0.50 ksf 


The following are the cross sections of sheet pile available in this system: 


1. PZ40 Sx=60.70 Ix=490.80 

2. PZ35 Sx=48.40 Ix=360.60 

3. PZ27 Sx=30.20 Ix=184.20 

4. PZ22 Sx=18.10 Ix=84.50 


The section suitable for this sheet pile is #4 (PZ22). 


The following are the cross sections of wale available in this system: 

1. C10x30 Sx=20.70 Ix*103.00 

2. C12x20.7 Sx=21.50 Ix=129.00 

3. C12x25 Sx=24.10 Ix*144.00 

4. C12x30 Sx=27.00 Ix»l62.00 

5. MC12x30.9 Sx=30.60 Ix=183.00 

6. MC12x32.9 Sx=31.80 Ix=191.00 

7. MC12x37 Sx=34.20 Ix=205.00 

8. MC12x35 Sx=36.10 Ix=216.00 

9. MC12x40 Sx=39.00 Ix=234.00 

10. MC12x45 Sx=42.00 lx=252.00 

The section suitable for the wale is #1 (C 10x30). 


Figure 9.11 Output File of SHEETPILE 


9-24 










CHAPTER 10 


CONCLUSIONS 

The expert system (ES) RETAININGEARTH, is a microcomputer-based 
developmental prototype which has the capability to select the most 
appropriate retaining structure from a list of ten typical structures for a 
given set of user input conditions. The organization of the knowledge base in 
the selection module, SELECTWALL permits the addition of more knowledge to the 
knowledge base. 

RETAININGEARTH is a rule-based expert system developed using the M.l 
knowledge engineering shell. The rules in this knowledge base show that rule- 
based systems provide an effective and easily readable means of encoding 
knowledge. The formulation of the knowledge base SELECTWALL and its link to 
the design module are presented together with the source code. A concise 
treatment of the design methodologies of the retaining structures, viz. the 
concrete gravity and cantilever walls, gabions, reinforced earth and sheet- 
pile structures is presented together with the design flowcharts. The 
development of a design module which consists of codes for the designs of five 
different structures, is presented with illustrations of case studies. 

The expert system RETAININGEARTH in its present form is a developmental 
prototype and addition of more heuristic knowledge into the knowledge base is 
desirable, as and when more knowledge becomes available, and this will make 
the system a more effective tool for the designer. The ES clearly 
demonstrates that both algorithmic and heuristic approaches involved in 
engineering design and decision making processes can be effectively coded into 

facts and rules in the knowledge base of the system. The degree of 

10-1 





uncertainty associated with parameters, viz. material/labor availability, 


equipment access to site, 
project construction, can 
process, using fuzzy logic 


and influence of climatic conditions favorable for 
be taken into account in the structure selection 
in the knowledge-based expert system. 


10-2 


APPENDIX A 


USTING OF M.1 SELECTWALL 





prefix begin, 
prefix the. 
prefix end. 

initialdata * [ begin the consultation, end the consultation ]. 

begin message « [ 
nl, ' 
nl, • 
nl, • 
nl, 
nl, • 
nl, • 
nl, • 
nl, ' 
nl,' 
nl, 
nl, 
nl, 
nl ]. 

nocache(begin message), 
question(begin signal) = 

[nl,'Are you ready to begin the consultation(yes/no)?',nl]. 
legalvals(begin signal) = [yes,no]. 
nocache(begin signal). 


SELECTION AND DESIGN OF RETAINING STRUCTURE 


This is an expert system for the selection and design', 
of retaining structures. This system helps to select', 
the most appropriate type(s) of retaining structure(s)', 
and then design the chosen structure.', 

You may type ''why''to get the explanation to any question.'. 


question(continue) * 

[nl,'Please type ''yes'' to continue !',nl]. 
legalvals(continue) = [yes], 
nocache(continue). 


rule-1: if begin message » M and 
display(M) and 
begin signal and 
display('\f') 

then begin the consultation. 
rule-2: if not begin signal and 

display("Issue the 'go' command when you are ready to begin.") and 
do(abort) 

then begin the consultation. 

/*-LOCATION-*/ 

multivalued(location). 
question(location) * 


A-1 









'Which of the following list of sites best describes the 
location of the proposed retaining structure?'. 
legalvals(location) = 

[excavation,roadway,sidehill,abutment,forest-area,buiding- 
related-excavation, mountainous-terrain,waterfront-area,railway, 
building,marine]. 
automaticmenu(location). 
enumeratedanswers(location). 

exp7 jnation(location) * [ 

•The location where the stjnacture is to be built is 
a very important consideration in the selection of retaining 
walls. You may choose (only one) location which is closest to the 
above locations.*]. 

/ *-CONSULTATION-*/ 

legalvals(height)=real. 
question(height) = 

'What is the height of the earth to be retained (in feet)?', 
question(length) = 

'What is the length of the structure (in feet)?'. 

/*-SITE-CONDITION-*/ 

question(site) = 

'Is the site a fill or cut situation ?'. 
legalvals(site) * [ fill,cut ]. 
automaticmenu(site). 
enumeratedanswers(site). 

explanation(site) * [ 

•Your response to this question leads you to the two major 
atagories under which the retaining stiTictures are 

..rouped. The fill category consists of the gravity,cantilever, 
counterfort,reinforced-earth,gabions and the crib walls.The cut 
situation consists of the sheet-pile,slurry wall, soil-nailed- 
system and the tied-back wall.']. 

question(bsiteb) * 

'Does the site in question have buildings around it (yes/no)?', 
legalvals(bsiteb) « [ yes,no ]. 

/*-MATERIAL-*/ 

question(materialcg) « 

'Is concrete and steel locally available(yes/no)?'. 
legalvals(materialcg) » [ yes,no ]. 

explanation(materialcg) « [nl, 

'The data entered by you may lead to the selection of 
concrete gravity, counterfort or cantilever retaining structures, 
subject to the availability of material in this region. 

Even if local material is not available, if the cost of 










material is low and the transportation easily done, then you may 
answer YES to this question.',nl]. 

question(materialcrb) = 

'Is granular backfill (minimum angle of internal frictioi;=28 
deg. or noncohesive clean broken stone or coarse sand and gravel 
soil locally available (yes/no)?', 
legalvals(materialcrb) = [ yes,no ]. 

explanation(materialcrb) = [nl, 

•The data entered by you may lead to the selection of 
the crib wall, siibject to the availability of material in this 
region. 

Even if local material is not available, if the cost of 
the material is low and the transportation easily done,then you 
may answer YES to this question.',nl]. 

question(materialreinf) = 

'Are the following materials locally available: 

1. Medium to fine grained sand, or silty sand to crushed 
sandstone, crushed dolerite, greystone gravel or screened 
ironstone. 

2. Backfill has not more than 15% passing 200um sieve. 

3. The angle of internal friction of backfill > 25 deg. 

4. Cranes for excavation. 

5. Compacting equipments. 

6. Thin metal strips or rods or geotextile strips, sheets or wire 
grids or other reinforcing strips. 

7. Facing units to prevent soil erosion between the reinforcement 

and for better appearance. - (yes,no)?'. 

legalvals(materialreinf) = [ yes,no t 

explanation(materialreinf) = [nl, 

'The data entered by you may lead to the selection of 
the reinforced-earth retaining structure, subject to the 
availability of materials in this region. 

Even if local material is not available, if the cost of 
material is low and the transportation easily done, then you may 
answer YES to this question.',nl]. 

question(materialgab) « 

'Are the following materials locally available: 

1. Gabion baskets(mesh) which must satisfy high 
mechanical resistance, high resistance to corossion, good 
deformability and should not unravel easily. 

2. 4" to 10" diameter stone which is non-friable, 
weather-resistant, and of high density. 

3. Bucket loader, back hoe, or clamshell for dumping 

stone into basket. - (yes/no)?'. 

legalvals(materialgab) > [ yes,no ]. 

explanation(materialgab) = [nl, 

'The data entered by you may lead to the selection of gabion 
retaining structure, subject to the availability of material in 


A-3 






this region. 

Even if local material is not available, if the cost of the 
material is low and the transportation easily done, then you may 
answer YES to this question.If it is a large project, you are 
advised to answer NO to this question, if the aforementioned 
materials are not available.',nl]. 

question(materialslur) = 

'Are the following materials locally available : 

1. Heavy density and sufficiently viscous liquid - like 
a mixture of barium sulphate and bentonite clay. 

2. Trench excavation equipments - includes 

grab, scoop, drilling rig, clamshell bucket, etc.-(yes/no)?'. 

legalvals(materialslur) = [ yes,no ]. 

explanation(materialslur) = [nl, 

'The data entered by you may lead to the selection of 
slurry-wall, subject to the availability of material in this 
region. 

Even if local material is not available, if the cost of the 
material is low and the transportation easily done, then you may 
answer YES to this question.',nl3. 

question(materialtied) = 

'Are soldier pile, auger, grouted material and tied material 
locally available (yes/no)?', 
legalvals(materialtied) = [ yes,no ]. 

explanation(materialtied) = [nl, 

'The data entered by you may lead to the selection of the 

tied-back wall, subject to the availability of material in this 

region. 

Even if local material is not locally available, if the cost 

of material is low and the transportation easily done, then you 

may answer YES to this question.',nl]. 

quest!on(materialpile) * 

'Are sheet piles of sufficient length available? Also, are 
equipments needed for driving piles ( like sheet-pile 
hammer, vibratory driving device, crane, etc. ) 
available (yes/no)?'. 
legalvals(materialpile) = [ yes,no ]. 

c tlanation(materialpile) = [nl, 

'The data entered by you may lead to the selection of 
the sheet-pile retaining structure, subject to the availability 
of construction material in this region. 

Even if local material is not available, if the cost of 
the material is low and the transpoirtation easily done,then you 
may answer YES to this question.',nl]. 

question(materialnail) = 

'Are the materials related to soil nailing available (yes/no)?', 
legalvals(materialnail) = [yes,no]. 





explanation(materialnail) = [nl, 

•The data entered by you may lead to the selection of 
the soil-nailed system, subject to the availability of constru¬ 
ction material in this region. 

Even if local material is not available, if the cost of 
the material is low and the transportation easily done,then you 
may answer YES to this question.',nl]. 

/ *-FOUNDATION-*/ 

question(foundation) = 

'How would you rate the foundation of the site?'. 
legalvals(foundation) - 
[ good,poor ]. 
automaticmenu(foundation). 
enumeratedanswers(foundation). 

/*-LABOR-*/ 

question(labora) = 

'Is skilled labor ( concretor, formworker, reinforcer and 
laborers) available (yes/no) ?'. 
legalvals(labora) = [ yes,no ]. 

question(laborb) » 

'Is this the type of wall that is locally constructed in this 
region under similar conditions (You are advised to read the 
explanation (type ''why'') before responding to this question) 
(yes/no) ?'. 

legalvals(laborb) = [ yes,no ]. 
explanation(laborb) = [nl, 

'This question is asked because if a similar wall is already 
existing in this region, then the contractor in this region has 
the experience to carry out the work. Besides this reason he will 
also be well equipped for undertaking this kind of 
construction.If this is a remote region and no retaining 
structure exists in the nearby region, then too you should answer 
YES to this question.',nl]. 

/*-VERTICAL LOAD-*/ 

question(vertload) = 

'Will the proposed wall be required to take vertical 
load(yes,no) ?'. 

legalvals(vertload) « [ yes,no ]. 
automaticmenu(vertload). 
enumeratedanswers(vertload). 

/*-AESTHETICS-*/ 

question(aesthetics) « 

'Is the building of the retaining structure aesthetically 
acceptable in this region(yes,no)?'. 

legalvals(aesthetics) » [ yes,no ]. 

explanation(aesthetics) « [nl, 

'It is necessary that the retaining structure be 


A-5 












aesthetically acceptable.lt should fit in the existing structure 
and environment. 

Generally, concrete structures do not fit well in 
rural settings.However, if appearance of the structure and 
landcape is not very important,you may answer YES to this 
question.Gabions have the added advantage of fitting in well both 
in urban as well as in rural settings - since their fillers are 
stones which allow natural vegetation.',nl]. 

/*-right-of-way-*/ 

question(rway) * 

'Is there a space restriction behind the structure face 
(yes/no) ?'. 

legalvals(rway) = [ yes,no ]. 
explanation(rway) = [nl, 

'When considering compacted earth systems, a relatively 
large space is required behind the structure face as compared to 
that needed for construction of conventional walls(the length of 
the reinforcijig elements is at least 0.7 times the wall height). 
Right-of-way is a very important consideration in the selection 
of retaining structures.',nl]. 

/*-soil-condition--*/ 

question(soila) - 

'Is the soil condition firm at the proposed site(yes/no)?'. 
legalvals(soila) = [ yes,no ]. 
explanation(soila) = [nl, 

'Since concrete gravity wall is a mass intensive 
structure,soil needs to have enough bearing capacity to withstand 
settlement.A firm soil is considered to be suitable for this 
type of retaining structure.',nl]. 

question(soilb) ^ 

'Does the soil have the following properties: 

1.Soils of high plasticity. 

2.Granular soils with no coherance. 

3.Soils with much water content. 

4.Large size(boulders).-(yes/no)?'. 

legalvals(soilb) « [ yes,no ]. 

explanation(soilb) » [nl, 

'The data entered by you may lead to the selection of tied- 
back retaining structure, subject to favorable soil condition.A 
favorable soil for this type of retaining structure will NOT have 
the properties stated in this c[uestion.' ,nl]. 

question(soilc) » 

'Is the subsoil suitable for driving sheet-piles (yes/no)?'. 


A-€ 









legalvals(soilc) « [ yes,no ]. 
explanation (soilc) [nl, 

'The data you have entered may lead to the selection of the 
sheet-pile retaining structure, subject to favorable soil 
condition.If the subsoil contains many boulders and is very 
dense,then this type of soil is not suitable for this structure. 
However, if a system of soldier beams and lagging can be used then 
you may answer YES to this question.•,nl]. 

question(soild) - 

'Is the soil capable of retaining itself unsupported (around 
5 ft. at a time)(yes/no)?'. 

legalvals(soild) * [ yes,no ]. 


question(soile) = 

'Do the in-situ soils have a highly acidic nature (yes/no)?', 
legalvals(soile) = [ yes,no ]. 

/*-construction-time-*/ 

multivalued(time). 

question(time) - 

'Which of the following briefly states the best relative 
construction time for the proposed project?'. 

legalvals(time) * [ short,medium,long ]. 

automaticmenu(time). 
enumeratedanswers(time). 

/*---noise-pollution---*/ 

question(noise) = 

'Is the site in the premises of a hospital or similar area 
where the noise of construction ( like drilling,hammmering,etc.) 
is a critical issue (yes/no) ?'. 

legalvals(noise) * [ yes,no ]. 

explanation(noise) « [nl, 

'Any present-day construction involves the use of heavy 
machinery which make a lot of noise while being operated. In 
certain areas, like in hospital premises, it is mandatory that 
the surrounding region be kept tranquil and peaceful. In such 
cases operations which make a lot of noise is to be kept 
minimum.',nl]. 

/*-SELECTION OF POSSIBLE TYPE OF RETAINING WALLS-*/ 

multivalued(possible-wall). 
rule-10: if site * fill and 


A-7 









not(location * excavation) or 
not(location * forest-area) or 

not(location = building-related-excavation) or 

not(location « mountainous-terrain) and 

(height = H and H <■ 5) and 

(length = L and L <= 150) and 

rway = yes or 

rway * no and 

time - long and 

soila = yes and 

not(foundation = poor) and 

vertload » yes or 

vertload « no and 

noise » yes or 

noise « no 

then possible-wall » gravity-retaining-wall. 

rule-11: if site = fill and 

not(location - excavation) or 
not(location ® forest-area) or 

not(location = building-related-excavation) or 

not(location = mountainous-terrain) and 

height « H and ( H > 5 and H < 10 ) and 

(length = L and L <= 150) and 

rway * yes or 

rway « no and 

time = long and 

soila » yes and 

not(foundation = poor) and 

vertload = yes or 

vertload * no and 

noise « yes or 

noise = no 

then possible-wall = cantilever-retaining-wall. 

rule-12: if site = fill and 

not(location ^ excavation) or 

not(location ® forest-area) or 

not(location « building-related-excavation) or 

not(location « mountainous-terrain) and 

(height » H and H > 15) and 

(length « L and L <»100) and 

rway •s yes or 

rway » no and 

time « long and 

soila « yes and 

not(foundation « poor) and 

vertload * yes or 

vertload « no and 

noise « yes or 

noise « no 

then possible-wall » counterfoxrt-retaining-wall. 

rule-13: if site » fill and 

not(location « excavation) or 


A-8 




not(location ® forest-area) or 

not(location * building-related-excavation) or 

not(location * waterfront-area) or 

not(location « mountainous-terrain) and 

height « H and 

H < 6 and 

length » l and 

L < 75 and 

rway = no and 

time = short or 

time » medium or 

time » long and 

soila = yes or 

soila - no and 

foundation « good or 

foundation » poor and 

vertload = no and 

noise » yes or 

noise = no 

then possible-wall = crib-retaining-wall. 

rule-14: if site * fill and 

not(location = excavation) or 

not(location = building-related-excavation) and 

(height * H and H < 20) and 

(length * L and L > 75) and 

rway = no and 

soile = no and 

time * mediiUD or 

time = long and 

soila >= yes and 

foundation » good or 

foundation » poor and 

vertload * yes or 

vertload = no and 

noise » no 

then possible-wall = reinforced-earth-wall. 

nile-15: if site = fill and 

not(location » excavation) or 

notlocation » building-related-excavation) or 

not(location « building) and 

height » H and 

(H > 6 and H < 34) and 

length « L and 

(L > 0) and 

rway * yes or 

rway « no and 

not(time « short) and 

soila « yes and 

soile * no and 

foundation « good or 

foundation * poor and 

vertload ** yes or 

vertload « no 





then possible-wall = gabion-retaining-wall. 

rule-16: if site « cut and 

not(location = roadway) or 

not (location ** railway) or 

not(location = forest-area) or 

not(location « mountainous-terrain) or 

not(location = waterfront-area) and 

(height « H and H > 10) and 

soila » yes and 

not(time * short) and 

soile » no and 

bsiteb - yes or 

bsiteb « no 

then possible-wall = slurry-retaining-wall. 

rule-17; if site » cut and 

not(location * abutment) or 

not(location * building-related-excavation) or 

not(location = building) or 

not(location * waterfront-area) and 

(height = H and H >= 15) and 

rway * no and 

not(time * short) and 

soilb » no 

then possible-wall * tied-back-retaining-wall. 

inile-18: if site » cut and 

location « excavation and 

time * short or 

time * long or 

time « medium and 

rway * no and 

soilb * no 

then possible-wall * tied-back-retaining-wall. 

rule-19; if site * cut and 

not(location » building) or 

not(location » forest-area) and 

(height > H and H <» 20) and 

rway - no and 

noise « no and 

not(time » short) and 

soile » yes and 

bsiteb a no 

then possible-wall « sheet-pile-retaining-wall. 

xnile-20; if site • cut and 

not(location - waterfront-area) or 

not (location marine) and 

noise « no or 

noise *> yes and 

rway » yes or 

rway * no and 

height « H and 


A-10 



( H > 5 ) and 

not(time * short) and 

solid * yes 

then possible-wall = soil-nailed-system. 

rule-21: if possible-wall is sought and 

listof(possible-wall) » [ONE] and 

display([nl,'The type of retaining wall which may be suitable for th 

continue and 

display('\f') 

then user-informed. 

rule-22: if possible-wall is sought and 

listof(possible-wall) = [ONE,TWO] and 
display([nl,'The possible types of retaining walls which suit t 
continue and 
display('\f') 
then user-informed. 

rule-23: if possible-wall is sought and 

listof(possible-wall) = [ONE,TWO,THREE] and 
display([nl,'The types of retaining walls which suit the mention 
continue and 
display('\f') 

then user-informed. 

rule-3: if possible-wall is sought and 

listof(possible-wall) * [ONE,TWO,THREE,FOUR] and 
display([nl,'The types of retaining walls which suit the 

mentioned conditions are ',ONE,',',TWO,',',THREE,* and ',FOUR,'. M.l is 
continue and 
display('\f') 

then user-informed. 

rule-4: if possible-wall is sought and 

listof(possible-wall) * [ONE,TWO,THREE,FOUR,FIVE] and 
display([nl,'The types of retaining walls which suit the mentio 
continue and 
display('\f') 

then user-informed. 

rule-5: if possible-wall is sought and 

listof(possible-wall) » [ONE,TWO,THREE,FOUR,FIVE,SIX] and 
display([nl,'The types of retaining walls which suit the mentio 
continue and 
display('\f') 

then user-Informed. 


/*-USER HAPPY WITH SELECTION-*/ 

question(user-happy) ■ [ 'Are you happy with this selection (yes/no)?'], 
legalvals(user-happy) «• [yes,no]. 


A-11 







/*- 

rule-24; 


USER INFORMED OF SELECTED WALL 


*/ 


if possible-wall is sought and 
user-informed « yes and 

possible-wall » gravity-retaining-wall and 
materialcg » yes and 
labora « yes and 
listof(possible-wall) * [ONE] 
then appropriate-structure * gravity-retaining-wall. 

rule-25: if materialcg « yes and 
labora * yes 
then informg. 

rule-26; if possible-wall * cantilever-retaining-wall and 
user-informed « yes and 
informg « yes and 
listof(possible-wall) = [ ONE ] 
then appropriate-structure = cantilever-retaining-wall. 

rule-27; if possible-wall = counterfort-retaining-wall and 
user-informed = yes and 
informg * yes and 
listof(possible-wall) = [ ONE ] 
then appropriate-structure * counterfort-retaining-wall. 

if possible-wall * crib-retaining-wall and 
user-informed = yes and 
materialcrb = yes and 
labora » yes and 
listof(possible-wall) = [ ONE ] 
then appropriate-structure « crib-retaining-wall. 

rule-29; if possible-wall * reinforced-earth-wall and 
user-informed » yes and 
materialreinf - yes and 
labora ■ yes and 
listof(possible-wall) = [ ONE ] 
then appropriate-structure = reinforced-earth-wall. 

rule-30; if possible-wall = gabion-retaining-wall and 
user-informed « yes and 
materialgab « yes and 
labora « yes and 
listof(possible-wall) » [ONE] 
then appropriate-structure » gabion-retaining-wall. 

rule-31; if possible-wall * tied-back-retaining-wall and 
user-informed * yes and 
materialtied » yes and 
labora « yes and 
listof(possible-wall) « [ONE] 
then appropriate-structure « tied-back-retaining-wall. 

rule-32; if possible-wall * slurry-retaining-wall and 


A-12 







user-informed yes and 
materialslur - yes and 
labora yes and 
listof(possible-wall) » [ONE] 
then appropriate-structure = slurry-retaining-wall. 

rule-33: if possible-wall * sheet-pile-retaining-wall and 
user-informed ® yes and 
materialpile = yes and 
labora * yes and 
listof(possible-wall) = [ONE] 
then appropriate-structure = sheet-pile-retaining-wall. 

rule-34: if possible-wall * soil-nailed-system and 
user-informed = yes and 
materialnail - yes and 
labora « yes and 
listof(possible-wall) = [ONE] 
then appropriate-structure = soil-nailed-system. 

rule-35: if materialcrb = yes and 
labora » yes 
then informcrb. 

rule“36: if materialpile = yes and 
labora * yes 
then informpile. 

rule-37: if materialslur = yes and 
labora = yes 
then informslur. 

rule-38: if materialnail * yes and 
labora » yes 
then informnail. 

rule-39: if materialreinf * yes and 
labora » yes 
then informerth. 

rule-40: if materialtied * yes and 
labora * yes 
then informtied. 

rule-41: if materialgab - yes and 
labora « yes 
then informgab. 

rule-42: if possible-wall * gravity-retaining-wall and 
user-Informed « yes and 
informg « yes and 
height « H and 
( H < 5 ) and 


listof(possible-wall) » [ ONE,TWO ] 



rule-43; 


then appropriate-structure = gravity-retaining-wall. 

if possible-wall = gravity-retaining-wall and 
user-informed = yes and 
informg - yes and 
informerth * yes and 
height = H and 
( H < 5 ) and 

listof(possible-wall) = [ ONE,TWO,THREE ] 
then appropriate-structure = gravity-retaining-wall. 

rule-44; if possible-wall = cantilever-retaining-wall and 
user-informed = yes and 
informg = yes and 
height « H and 
( H < 8 ) and 

listof(possible-wall) = [ ONE,TWO ] 
then appropriate-structure = cantilever-retaining-wall. 


rule-45; if possible-wall = cantilever-retaining-wall and 
user-informed « yes and 
informg = yes and 
height - H and 
( H < 8 ) and 

listof(possible-wall) = [ ONE,TWO,THREE ] 
then appropriate-structure = cantilever-retaining-wall. 

rule-46; if possible-wall = counterfort-retaining-wall and 
user-informed * yes and 
informg = yes and 
height = H and 
( H > 25 ) and 

listof(possible-wall) = [ ONE,TWO ] 
then appropriate-structure = counterfort-retaining-we11 

rule-47; if possible-wall = counterfort-retaining-wall and 
user-informed = yes and 
informg = yes and 
height - H and 
( H > 25 ) and 

listof(possible-wall) * [ ONE,TWO,THREE ] 
then appropriate-structure * counterfort-retaining-wall 


rule-48; if possible-wall = gabion-retaining-wall and 
user-informed » yes and 
informgab » yes and 
listof(possible-wall) * [ ONE,TWO ] 
then appropriate-structure = gabion-retaining-wall. 

rule-49; if possible-wall ■ gabion-retaining-wall and 
user-informed * yes and 
informgab « yes and 

listof(possible-wall) = ( ONE,TWO,THREE ] 
then appropriate-structure = gabion-retaining-wall. 


A-14 



rule-50: if possible-wall = reinforced-earth-wall and 
user-informed = yes and 
informerth = yes and 
listof(possible-wall) = [ ONE,TWO ] 
then appropriate-structure = reinforced-earth-wall. 

rule-51: if possible-wall = reinforced-earth-wall and 
user-informed = yes and 
informerth = yes and 

listof(possible-wall) = [ ONE,TWO,THREE ] 
then appropriate-structure = reinforced-earth-wall. 

rule-52: if possible-wall = crib-retaining-wall and 
user-informed - yes and 
informcrb = yes and 
listof(possible-wall) = [ ONE,TWO ] 
then appropriate-structure = crib-retaining-wall. 

rule-53: if possible-wall * crib-retaining-wall and 
user-informed = yes and 
informcrb = yes and 

listof(possible-wall) * [ ONE,TWO,THREE ] 
then appropriate-structure = crib-retaining-wall. 

rule-54: if possible-wall = tied-back-retaining-wall and 
user-informed = yes and 
informtied » yes and 
listof(possible-wall) = ( ONE,TWO ] 
then appropriate-structure = tied-back-retaining-wall. 

rule-55: if possible-wall = tied-back-retaining-wall and 
user-informed *= yes and 
informtied yes and 

listof(possible-wall) * [ ONE,TWO,THREE ] 
then appropriate-structure = tied-back-retaining-wall. 

rule-56: if possible-wall = slurry-retaining-wall and 
user-informed = yes and 
informslur « yes and 
listof(possible-wall) = [ ONE,TWO ] 
then appropriate-structure * slurry-retaining-wall. 

rule-57: if possible-wall = slurry-retaining-wall and 
user-informed « yes and 
informslur ^ yes and 

listof(possible-wall) = [ ONE,TWO,THREE ] 
then appropriate-structure = slurry-retaining-wall. 

rule-58: if possible-wall - sheet-pile-retaining-wall and 
user-Informed « yes and 
informpile yes and 
listof(possible-wall) * [ ONE,TWO ] 
then appropriate-structure * sheet-pile-retaining-wall. 

rule-59: if possible-wall * sheet-pile-retaining-wall and 


A-15 





user-informed * yes and 
informpile « yes and 

listof(possible-wall) = ( ONE,TWO,THREE ] 
then appropriate-structure = sheet-pile-retaining-wall. 

rule-60: if possible-wall = soil-nailed-system and 
user-informed = yes and 
informnail * yes and 
listof(possible-wall) = [ ONE,TWO ] 
then appropriate-structure = soil-nailed-system . 

rule-61: if possible-wall <■ soil-nailed-system and 
user-informed « yes and 
informnail yes and 

listof(possible-wall) = [ ONE,TWO,THREE ] 
then appropriate-structure = soil-nailed-system . 

rule-62: if appropriate-structure is sought and 
appropriate-structure = X and 
possible-wall is sought and 
possible-wall = X and 

listof(appropriate-structure) = [ONE] and 

display([nl,'The appropriate wall for the given conditions s 
continue and 
display('\f') 
then tuser-informed. 


rule-63: if appropriate-structure is sought and 
appropriate-structure = X and 
tuser-informed = yes and 
possible-wall is sought and 
possible-wall « X and 
laborb « yes and 
aesthetics - yes 
then selected-structure = X. 

rule-64: if selected-structure is sought and 
selected-structure - X and 
listof(selected-structure) = [ONE] and 

display([nl,'The selected structure fcr the given condit 
continue and 
user-happy and 

display([nl,'I''m glad you are happy with my selection.',nl] 


list»A and 
display(A) and 
heighten and 
choicel»Y and 


design(H,Y)^DESIGN 

then end the consultation. 


list*[ 


nl, 


nl, ' 

1. Gravity;', 

nl, • 

2. Cantilever;' 

nl, • 

3. Counterfort; 

nl, ' 

4. Gabions;', 


A-16 





nl,' 5. Slurry;', 

nl,' 6. Tied-back;', 

nl,' 7. Reinforced-earth;', 

nl,' 8. Sheet-piles;', 

nl,' 9. Crib-wall;', 

nl,' 10.Soil-nailing.', 

nl, 

nl]. 

nocache(list). 

question(choicel)=[nl,' Please confirm the number of the wall 

/* 

multivalued(fault). 
automaticmenu(fault). 
enumeratedanswers(fault). 

*/ 

question(fault) = 

['Which wall do you think is best for these conditions?']. 

/* 

legalvals(fault) = 

[gravity,cantilever,counterfort,gabions,slurry,tied- 
back, reinforced-earth, sheet-piles, crib-wall ,soil-nailing]. 

*/ 

legalvals(fault)“integer. 
rule-65: if user-informed and 

possible-wall is sought and 
user-informed and 

appropriate-structure is sought and 

tuser-infonned and 

selected-structure is sought and 

not(user-happy) and 

list=F and 

display(F) and 

fault “ Y and 

heighten and 

design(H,Y)“DESIGN 

then end the consultation. 


/* - */ 

rule-66: if external(design,[H,Y])“(DESIGN] and 

display(['The consultation is over. Press Alt + Q 
then design(H,Y)“DESIGN. 

/***********************************************************/ 
legalvals(choicel)“integer(1,10). 


which you 


Thank you 


A-17 






APPENDIX B 


LISTING OF CONTROL PROGRAM CALL 






/* - */ 

/♦ CONTROL PROGRAM */ 

/* - */ 


#include <stdio.h> 


#include <stdlib.h> 
^include <dos.h> 


#include <ctype.h> 

#include <string.h> 

#include <process.h> 
#include <signal.h> 

#include <graph.h> 

#include <inadi.h> 
#dcfineHOMEKEY 0x47 
#defmeENDKEY 0x4f 
#define UPARROW 0x48 
^define DOWNARROW 0x50 
#definc PGUP 0x49 
#definePGDN 0x51 
#define ESCKEY Oxlb 
#defineFlKEY 0x3b 


#define F2KEY 0x3c 
#defineALTP 0x19 
#dcfineALTE 0x12 
#dcfineALTS Oxlf 
#dcfmc MAX.UNE 600 
^define MAX.CHAR 80 
#defincF3KEY 0x3d 
#defuie F4KEY 0x3e 
#dcfincF5KEY 0x3f 
#dcfinc F6KEY 0x40 




voidsctscrecn(int),sct_color(int,int)4oca^int4nt); 

void sct_pagc(int),graph_print(int4nt),printstrg(int,int,char *); 

void clw_screcnO,scroll_window(int),get_Iincs(char *),call(char *); 

voidprint_first_page(),scroll_pagc_upO,scroll_page_down(),title(); 

void in|wt_tiaie(); 

void waittO; 

int show(char*); 

FILE ♦fp,*^l,*fopcn(); 
int keykb0,gctkcy(); 

int page,color,c,l^t_linc,first_linc,cur_first_linc,cur_last_linc; 

char line[MAX_LINE][MAX_CHARl; 

int screen,xloc,yloc; 

long int coiileur=7; 

floachh; 

intty; 


char *name[ 10]s {"Gravity","Cantilevcr","Countcrfort","Gabions","Slurry", 
"Tled-back","Reinforced-carth","Shectpile","Crib wall", 
"S<^*nailing"}; 


^***m***tinim****m****************m*m***************f 

mainO 


B-1 







{ 

int ij Jc; 
int c,cc,ccc; 

_sct^eomodeLMRES4COLOR); 

tideO; 

_sctbkcolorCLIGHTBLUE); 

set_pagc(l); 

locate(0,0); 

sct_color(couleur,0); 

locate(23,l); 

graph_print(205,77); 

locate(2,l); 

graph_print(205,77); 

set_color(0,l 1); 

printstrg( 10,24," Selection "); 

printstrg(12,24," Design "); 

printstrg( 14,24," Construction "); 
printstrg( 16,24," Fl:Explanation "); 
printstrg( 18,24," F2:Quit "); 

set_color(4,l 1); 
printstrg( 10,33,"S"); 
printstrg(12,33,"D"); 
printstig(14,33,"C"); 
printstrgC 16,33,"F1"); 
printstrg(18,33,"F2"); 
for(i=5;i<=10;i-H-) 

{ 

j=2*i-l; 

locate(j,23); 

graph_print(196,31); 

} 

sct_color(7,0); 

pimtstrg(24,l," Note: Press the light letter for selection, design or"); 

printstrg(25,l,' construction. "); 

iocate(0,0); 

while(kbttit()=0) {;} 

c=gctkcy0; 

k=0; 

while(c!=F2KEY) 

[ 

switch(c) 

{ 

caseESCKEY: 

_sctvidcoraodeCMRES4COI-OR); 

setscreen(3); 

_sctbkcolo^LIGHTBLUE); 

sct_page(l); 

set_color(couleur,0); 

locate(23,l); 

graph_print(205,77); 

locate(^l); 

graph_prim(205,77); 

set_color(0,l 1); 

printstrg(10,24," Selection ”); 


B-2 







printstrg(12^4," Design "); 

printsirg(14^4," Construction "); 

printstrg( 16,24," FlrExplanation "); 

printstrg( 18,24," F2:Quit "); 

sct_col^4,ll); 

printstrg(10,33,"S"); 

printstrg( 12,33,"D"); 

printstrg(14,33,"C"); 

printstrg( 16,33,T1"); 

printstrg( 18,33,'T2"); 

for(i=5;i<=10;i-H-) 

{ 

j=2*i-l; 
locate(j,23); 
graph_print( 1 %,31); 

} 

sct_color(7,0); 

printstrg(24,l," Note: Press the lighted letter for selection, design or"); 

printstrg(25,l," construction."); 

locate(0,0); 

while^bhit()==0) {;) 

c=getkeyO; 

break; 

case 's': 

_setvide(KnodeCDEFAULTMODE); 

systemC'ml"); 

printfCVsn Please press Esc key to continue our consultation !Nn"); 

while(kbhit()==0) {;} 

c=getkeyO; 

k*l; 

break; 

case'd': 

clear_screenO; 


if(k!=0) 

{ 

fp=fopen("heitype","r"); 
fscanf(fp,"%f %d",&hh,&ty); 
fclose(fp); 

if(fi3!=NULL) 

printf("\n\n HEIGHT=%.2f TYPE=%d [ %s ]\n",hh,ty,name|j-l]); 

) 

else goto si; 

I* 

piintf("\n\n Please press any key to ccmtinue !>n"); 

whilc(kbhit()=0) {;) 

if(fp=NULL) 

{ 

printfC^n Choose one type of wall you want to designXn"); 
printf(" 1. Gravity wall;Nn"); 
printf("2. Cantilever wall;V'); 
printf("3. Countrefon wall;\n"); 


B-3 






printf("4. Gabions;Nn"); 
printfC'5. Sluiiy;\n"); 
printf("6. Ticd-back carth;\n’’); 
printf("7. Rcinforce<i-carth;Nn"); 
printf(" 8. Shectpile;\n"); 
printfC’ 9. CMb wall;\n"); 
printf(" 10. Soil nailing;\^>"); 
scanf("%d",&ty); 

} 

*/ 

switch(ty) 

{ 

case 8: 

printf(" \n DESIGN OF SHEETPILENn’'); 
systcmC'shcct"); 

printfC Press Esc key to return to main menuNn"); 

while(kbhit()=0) {;} 

c=getkey0; 

break; 

1 * 

printfC ^n DESIGN OF GRAVITY WALLNn”); 
systemCgravity"); 

printfC ^ss Esc key to return to main menuVn"); 

while(kbhit()=0) {;) 

c=getkey0; 

break; 

printfC DESIGN OF CANTILEVER WALLVi”); 
sj^temCcant"); 

I^tfC Press Esc key to return to main menuNn'*); 

while(kbhit()s=0) (;} 

c=getkey0; 

brrak; 

case 4: 

printfC" DESIGN OF GABIONVi"); 
systemCgabion’’); 

printfC I^ss Esc key to return to main menuNn"); 
while(kbhit()=0) {;) 

c®getkey0; 

brotk; 

case?: 

printfC" DESIGN OF REINFORCED EARTHNn"); 
systemC"neinf’); 

printfC" Press Esc key to return to main menuNn"); 

whileCkbhitC>«0) {;) 

csgedteyO; 

brodc; 

case3: 

printfC" The program for this wall has not been installed.Nn"); 
printfC" Press Esc key to return to main menuNn"); 
whileCkbhitC)>»0) {;} 
c^getkeyO; 

case 5: 


B-4 



|nintf(" The program for this wall has not been installed.\n"); 

jffintfC’ Press Esc key to return to main menu\n"); 

while(kbhit()=0) {;} 

c=getkeyO; 

brrak; 

case 6: 

printfC The program for this wall has not been installed.\n"); 
printf(" Press Esc key to return to main menu.'«”); 
while(kbhit()=0) {;} 

c=getkeyO; 
bri^ 
case 9: 

printfC The program for this wall has not been installed.\n"); 

printfC Press Esc key to return to main menuNn"); 

while(kbhit()=0) {;} 

c=getkeyO; 

brrak; 

case 10: 

printfC The program for this wall has not been installed.Nn"); 

printfC Press Esc key to return to main menuNn”); 

while(kbhit()=0) {;} 

c=getkey0; 

break; 

default: 

while(kbhit()=0) {;} 

c=getkey(); 

break; 

} 

sl:if(k=0) 

( 

printf('\7"); 

printfCVnNn You are advised to go through the selection processIVi"); 
printfC Press Esc key.Nn"); 
while(kbhit()=0) {;) 
c*gctkey0; 

} 

break; 
case 'c': 
clcar_screenO; 

printfCViNn Tlie part is under developnient !\n"); 

inintfC Press Esc key to return to main menuNn"); 

while(kbhit()=0) {;) 

csgetkeyO; 

break; 

cascFlKEY: 

c*show("exp.cal"); 

set_col<^0,ll); 

tneak; 

default: 

whileOtbhit(>=0) {;} 
csgetkeyO; 

Iffodc; 

} 

} 


B-5 


if(fp!=NULL); 
systemC'del hcitypc"); 


_sctvidconiodcCDEFAULTMODE); 

) 


yi|t4i*4i4i4i****4i*****:»4>**4i4t4i*****4i*4i4i4i*4i*4i4i4i4i**4>*4i4»l>*4t********/ 


void printstrg (x,y,s) 
int x,y; 
char ♦$; 

{ 

union REGS intregs,outregs; 
extern int page,color; 
while(*s!=’VO’) 

{ 

intregs.h.ah=2; 

intregs.h.bh=page; 

intregs.h.dh=x-l; 

intregs.h.dl=y-l; 

int86(0xl0,d^tregs,&outregs); 

intregs.h.ah=9; 

intregs.h.al=*s&55; 

intregs.h.bh=page; 

intregs.h.bl=color, 

intregs.x.cx=0; 

int86(0xl0,&intregs,&outregs); 

y-H-; 

S++; 

} 


intregs.h.ahsl; 

intregs.h.bh=page; 

intregs.h.dh=x-l; 

intregs.h.dl=y-l; 

int8^0xl0,d^tregs,&outregs); 


y* 4i4i**4i***4i4i4i4i4i*4i4i4i4i«4i4i4i*«]»*4i*4i4i4i4i4i 414,41 


vend setscreen(n) 
intn; 

{ 

union REGS intregs,outregs; 


scree n= n; 

intregs.h.ahsl; 

intregs.h.alsn; 

int86(0x 10,&intregs,&outregs); 


^*4i*4i4i4i«4i4i4i4i***4i4i4i*4i****«*4i4i4i4i**4i4t4t4i4t4i*y 


vdd locate(x,y) 
int x,y; 

( 

union REGS intregs,outregs; 
xlocacx; 


B-6 





yloc=y; 

intregs.h.ahsl; 
intregs.h.bhspage; 
intr6gs.h.dh=xloc-1; 
iiitregs.h.dl»yloc; 
int86(0xl0,&intregs,&outregs); 
} 


fm0i,:ti^*m****m*******************************/ 


void graph_print(s 4 i_tiines) 
int s^i.tiines; 

{ 

union REGS intregs,outregs; 

intregs.h.ah=9; 

intregs.h.al=s; 

intregs.h.bhsO; 

intregs.h.bl=color, 

intregs,x.cx=n_times; 

int86(0xl0,&intregs,&outregs); 


) 


^*m**m**********************************/ 


void set_page(p) 
intp; 

{ 

union REGS intregs,outTegs; 
extern int page; 


page=p; 

intregs.h.ah=S; 

intregs.h.aisp; 

int86(0xl0,&intregs,&outregs); 

) 


^**m****m*****m********************m****f 


void set_colOT(f,b) 
int f,b; 

{ 

color^f & 143)+((b«4) & 112); 

} 


^**mm***********************************/ 


void clear_screenO 

{ 

unitMi REGS inregs,outregs; 

inregs.h.ahsS; 

inregs.h.alaO; 

inregs.h.bh«6; 

inregs.lLchsl; 

inregs.h.claO; 

iiuegs.h.dhs24; 

inregs.h.dl«79; 

int86(0xl0,&inregs,&outregs); 


jm0*00m0m*******m**********************************/ 


B-7 




void scioll.window(n) 
intn; 

{ 

union REGS inregs,outregs; 
if (n>=20) n=0; 
inregs.h.ah=((n>=0)? 6:7); 
inregs.h.al=((n>=0)? n:-n); 
inregs.h.bh:^; 
inregs.h.ch=0; 
inregs.h.cl=l; 
inregs.h.dhsiO; 
inrcgs.h.dl=79; 

int86(Qx 10,&inregs,&outregs); 


fmm*m****************************tt*****************************/ 


int keykbO 

{ 

union REGS inregs,outregs: 
inregs.h.ah=0; 

renim (int86(Qxl6,&inregs,&outregs)); 

l****tii***m*****************Jii*******************f 

int getkeyO 

( 

char al^,c; 

int key; 

key=keykbO; 

ah=<key » 8) & OxOOff; 

al^key&OxOOff; 

if(al=0) 

c^ah; 

else 


c=al; 

ietum(c); 

) 

jl**m********************m*******%******f 


void getjines(s) 
char*s; 

{ 

intUc; 

fi^fopen(s,"r"); 

fost.linesO; 

last.linesO; 

while((c»getc(fp))!='0') 

++last_line; 

i=0; 

whileCclsV) 

{ 

]ine[last_line- l][i]ss; 
i-H-; 


c*geic(fp); 

line[last_line- l][il*V; 


B-8 




) 

linc[last_linc][0]='0'; 

fclose(^); 

^**********************************************************/ 

void piint_first_pageO 

{ 

int i,c; 

cur_fiist_linc=first_line; 

cur_last_linc=-l; 

set_color(couleur,0); 

locate(l,l); 

graph_4)rint(196,72); 

while( 

(cur_last_line<last_line) && (cur_last_Iine<20)) 

{ 

■t-K:ur_last_line; 
locate((cur_last_line+2), 1); 
i=0; 

while((c=(line[cur_last_line][i] & 255))!='0' && c!='\n’) 

( 

graph_print(c,0); 

-H-yloc; 

locate(xloc,yloc); 

++i; 

) 

if(c='\n') 

graph_print(32,72-i); 
if (c='0') 
break; 

) 

locatc(cur_last_linc+3,1); 
graph j)rint(196,72); 

) 

j:Hi**m************************************************/ 

int show(sss) 
char *sss; 

( 

intc; 

clear_screenO; 

get_lines(sss); 

piint_first_pagcO; 

locate(0,0); 

whileCkbhdtO:^) {;} 

c=gctkeyO; 

whiIe(c!=ESCKEY && c!=F2KEY) 

{ 

switch(c) 

{ 

caseUPARROW: 
scroll_pagc_down( 1); 
k)cate(0,0); 
while^bidt()=0) {;) 

c«getkeyO; 


B-9 





break; 

cascDOWNARROW: 
scroll_pagc_up(l); 
locate(0,0); 
whilc^bhit()==0) {;) 

c=gctkeyO; 

break; 

case PGUP; 

scioU_page_down( 19); 

locate(0,0); 

while(kbhit()=0) {;} 

c=getkeyO; 

break; 

case TODN: 

scioll_page_up(19); 

locate(0,0); 

while(kbhit()=0) {;} 

c=getkey(); 

break; 

default: 

locate(0,0); 

while(kbhit()=0) {;) 

c=getkeyO; 

break; 

} 


} 

retum(c); 

) 

fmiti******0**m:ti*****000$,*0$,^f*0^,^n,^,^,^,^,m**:***********************i 


void scroU_page_down(n) 
intn; 

{ 

intc4: 

while( (n>0) && (cur_first_Une > first_line)) 

{ 

--cur_first_line; 

if((cur_last_line - cur_first_line) > 20) 
--cur_last_liiie; 


~n; 

scrolI_window(-1); 

locate(2,l); 

i=0; 

while( 

(c= (linc[cur_first_linel[i] & 255 )) !=’\n' && c!=0’) 

{ 

graph_print(c,0); 

-H-yloc; 

locate(xloc,yloc); 

-H-i; 

) 

if(c«*V) 

graph_print(32,72-i); 
if(c—’O') 

graph_print(32,72); 


B-10 




^mm********************************************************/ 

void scroll_page_up(n) 
intn; 


int c4; 

while( (n>0) && (cur_last_line < last_linc)) 

( 

++cur_last_linc; 

if(cur_last_linc-cur_first_line>l 80) 

++cur_first_line; 

-m 

scroll_window(l); 

locate(21,l); 

i=0; 

whilc((c=(line[cur_last_line][i] & 255)) !=’Vn’ && c!='0’) 

{ 

graph_print(c,l); 

++yloc; 

locate(xloc,yloc); 

++i; 

} 

if( css*^’) 
graph_print(32,72-i); 
if(c=’@') 
graph_print(32,72); 

} 

} 

ll******#*******mif***^,^,m**************t**#*************f 

void titleO 

{ 

inti4elayl,delay2,delay3,delay4,delay5,delay6,delay7,delay8,delay9; 

int delaylO,delay 1 l,delayi2,delay 13,delatl4; 

setscreen(3); 

.sctbkcolorLUGHTGREEN); 
sct_colOT(4,l 1); 
for(i=0;i<20;i++) 

printstrg(l+i,l," "); 

sct_col^4,7); 

printstrg(l,l," "); 

printstrg(2,l," "); 

primstrg(3,l," "); 

printstrg(4,l," RETAININGEARTH "); 

printstrg(5,l," "); 

printstrg(6,l." Expm System for Selection, Design and "); 
piintstrg^,!," Construction of Retaining Structures "); 
printstrg(8,l," "); 

printstrg(9,l," DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN ENGINEERING 
printstrgdO,!," FLORIDA ATLANTIC UNIVERSITY 
printstrgCll.l," JULY 1990 "); 

printstrg(12,l," "); 

printstrgdS,!," "); 

printstrg(14,l," 


B-11 






printstrg(15,l," "); 

locate(0,0); 

waittO; 

waittO; 

waittO: 

waittO; 

waittO; 

waittO; 

waittO; 

waittO; 

waittO; 

} 

j*iiijit;tt**m***m**********************************f 

^m**********m*******************tif*************m********f 


void waittO 

{ 

int delay 1,delay 2,delay3; 
for(delayl=0;dclayl<30000;dclayl++) {;} 
for(dclay2=0;dclay2<30000;delay2-H-) {;} 
for(dclay3=0;delay3<30000;delay3++) {;} 
) 


B-12 





APPENDIX C 


LISTING OF PROGRAM GRAVITY 





/* - */ 

/♦ I DESIGN OF TOE GRAVITY RETAINING STRUCTURE I */ 

/* - ♦/ 


#include <stdio.h> 

#include <niath.h> 

#include <ctype.h> 

tminO 

{ 

FILE *fopen(),*fp_out; 
char fh_out[12]; 

float 

h,surchp,gainat,angphi,angphil,mu,angdel,angdell,bearingp,cal,ca2,ca3,ca4,ca,cp; 
float surcht,p,y,ovemom,lbase,hl,wl,12,13,h2,h3,w2,w3,w4,w5,w6,wtot,x 1 ,x2,x3, 
x4,x5^6; 

float resmom,a,al l,a22,fsover^axbearp,fricf,passpr,slidefs,ss; 
intht; 

extern double sin(); 
extern double cos(); 

printfC'Enter name of output file:"); 
scanf("%s",fn_out,"w"); 
fp.out = fopen(fh_out,"w"); 
printfC'Output in file:%s\n\n\n",fn_out); 

fprintf(fp_out," - \n"); 

fprintf(fp_out," I DESIGN OF THE GRAVITY RETAINING STRUCTURE I 
Nn"); 

^rintf(^_out," - \n"); 

printfC - \n"); 

piintfC I DESIGN OF THE GRAVITY RETAINING STRUCTURE I \n"); 

printfC - \n\n\n"); 

printfCWhat is the height (in ft) of die earth to be retained?\n»"); 
scanf("%f',&h); 

piintfC'What is the frost depth (in ft) in this region?n»"); 
scanf("%r,&ss); 

printf("What is the live load surcharge pressure(in psf.)?'«»"); 
scanf("%r ,&surchp); 

piintfC’What is the unit weight (in pcf.) of the soil in this region?«»"); 
scanf("%f',&ganiat); 

printf("What is the angle (in deg.) of internal friction of the soil?Sn»"); 
scanf("%r,&angphi 1); 

piintfC'What is the base fiicdon coefficient(if not known,you may give the valueNn as 

0.5)?Sn»"); 

scanf("%f',&mu); 

piintfC'What is the slc^ of the earth suiface(in (teg.)?Sn»"); 
sciuif("%f',&angdel 1); 

printf(’'What is the allowable bearing pressure (in psf.)?\n»"); 
scanf("%f',&bearingp); 

printf(’>n\n CALCULATING ..\nNn\n"); 


C-1 













angphi = (3.1415926/ 180.0) * angphil; 
angdel = (3.1415926/ 180.0) * angdell; 

if (angdel !=0) 

gotoangl; 

else ca = (1 - sin(angphi)) / (1 + sin(angphi)); 
q)= 1/ca; 
goto ang2; 

anglical = pow((cos(angdel)),2); 
ca2 = pow((cos(angphi))^); 
ca3 = pow((cal - ca2),0.5); 
ca4 s cos(angdel); 
ca = ca4 * (ca4 - ca3) / (ca4 + ca3); 
cp = ca4 * (ca4 + ca3) / (ca4 - ca3); 
ang2:surcht = surchp / gamat; 
ht = h + ss; 

p = 0.5 ♦ ca * gamat * ht * (ht + 2*surcht); 
y = ((ht*ht) + (3*ht*surcht)) / (3*(ht + 2*surcht)); 
ovcmom = p * y; 

/* - ♦/ 

/* calculation of the weight and restoring moment */ 

/* - */ 

Ibase = 0.65 ♦ ht; 

hi = 2.00; 

hll:wl = ibase ♦ hi ♦ 150; 

12 = 1.5; 

13 = Ibasc -12 - 0.75; 
h2 = ht-hl; 

h3 = h2; 

w2*12*h2* 150; 

w3 = 13 *h3* 150*0.5; 

w4 * 13 * h3 * gamat * 0.5; 

w5 = 0.75 * h3 * gamat; 

w6 = (Ibase - 3) * surchp; 

wtot = wl + w2 + w3 + w4 + w5 + w6; 

xl = Ibase * 0.5; 

x2 = 1.5; 

x3 = (0.333 *13)+ 12+0.75; 
x4 = (0.667 * 13) +12 + 0.75; 
x5 = Ibase - 0.375; 
x6 * (Ibase - 2.25) * 0.5; 

resmom = (wl ♦ xl) + (w2 * x2) + (w3 * x3) + (w4 * x4) + (w5 * x5) + (w6 * x6); 
a = (resmom - ovemom)/wtot; 
al 1 = Itose / 3.0; 
a22 = 2*all; 
if (al 1 <= a && a <« a22) 
gotomp; 

Ibase »Ibase + 0.2; 
goto hi 1; 

n^tfsover s resmom / ovemom; 
if (fsovcr > 2.()0) 
gotompl; 

Ibase s Ibase + 0.2; 
goto hi 1; 


C-2 






n^lrmaxbeaip = ((4*lbasc)-(6*a))*wtt)t/0basc*lbase); 
fhcf = 0.5*wtot; 
passpr = 6 * gamat; 
slidefs = (ftirf + passpr)/p; 
if (slidcfs> 1.5) 
goto fin; 

Ibasc = Ibase + 0.2; 
goto hi 1; 

fin:^printf(fp_out,"Coefficient of active pressure = %.4fSn",ca); 
fpiintf(£p_out,"Coefficient of passive pressure = %.4f«",cp); 
fpnntf(f^_out,'Total earth thrust = %j2f lb.\n",p); 
lprintf(f^_out,"Distance of earth's thrust fiom Ae base = %.2f ft.\n",y); 
^pnntf(f^_out,"Length of the base = %.2f ft.\n"4base); 

^>rintf(^_out,"Height of the structure = %d ft.\n" Jit); 

^printf(f^)_out,"Distance of the resultant fiom the ^nt edge = %.2f ft. — OK (inside 
tniddle-thiid).\n",a); 

f^ntf(^_out, "Overturning moment = %.2f ft.-lb.Nn",ovemom); 
fprintf(fp_out, "Restoring moment = %.2f ft-lb.\n"^smom); 
fprintf(fp_out,"Maximum bearing pressure = %.2f psf.\n",maxbeaip); 
fpnntf(fp_out,"Friction force = %.2f lb.\n",fiicf); 

^>rmtf(^_out,"Passive pressure = %.2f lb.Nn",passpr); • 

fprintf(fi)_out,’Tactor of safety against overturning = %.2f — > 2.0 . 

OK.\n",fsover); 

fpnntf(fp_out,"Factor of safety against sliding = %.2f — > 1.5 .OK.\n",slidefs); 

^tf(" I DESIGN OF THE GRAVTTYRETAIND^j STRUCTURE I Nn"); 
printfC -Vi\n\n"); 


printfC 


* 4 >*«********* 1 ||]||*«\^»^. 


printfC" * INPUT *\n"); 


printfC ♦***************#^\,^t.j. 


printfCHeight of the earth to be retained = %.2f ft.\n" Ji); 
printf("Frost depth in this region = %.2f ft.\n",ss); 
printf("Live load surcharge pressure = %.2f psf.^",surchp); 
printfCUnit weight of the soil in this region = %.2f pcf.Nn",gamat); 
printf("Angle of internal friction of the soil = %.2f deg.\n"^gphil); 
prmtf("Base friction coefficient = %.2fvi"^u); 
pimtfCSlc^ of the earth surface = %.2f deg.'^",angdell); 
printf("Allowable bearing pressure = %.2f psf.\n\n\n",bearingp); 
printfC**********************'*"''***''"''****'*'**'''**'*'*'*'*'*"*"*"'"*'*’*"'"'' 
*4i**4i*****4i**«\n”); 

printfCTHE DETAIIJED DESIGN OUTPUT OF THE GRAVITY STRUCTURE IS IN 
FI1JE» %s\n"^n_out); 


fcloseCfy.out); 

retum(0); 

) 


C-3 




APPENDIX D 

USTING OF PROGRAM CANWALL 




^ I DESIGN OF CANTILEVER RETAINING STRUCTURE I */ 

/* _ */ 


noattable[5][3] = { 

{ 0.0278, 0.0206, 0.0160 }, 

{ 0.0325, 0.0241, 0.0187 ), 

{ 0.0371, 0.0275, 0.0214 ), 

{ 0.0437, 0.0324, 0.0252 }, 

{ 0.0491, 0.0364, 0.0283 } 

}; 

#mclude <stdio.h> 

#include <ctype.h> 

#include <niath.h> 
main() 

{ 

FILE *fopen(),*fp_out; 
char fh_out[15]; 

float h,surcht,gsur,g 1 ,alphas,alphal ,niiu,mu,maxspT,fc,fy,hw; 

float ca,alpha,deltab,u jn,layer,wsub 1 ,ru,ro,romax; 

float h 1 ,t,x 1 ,x2,p 1 ,p2,p,x,lbase,y,in 1 ,m2,tl,w 1 ,w2,w3,w4,w5,wtot; 

float Ievl,lev2,lev3,lev4,lev5,lev6,lev7,lev8,inwl,mw2,mw3,mw4,mw5,mwt,ywm, 

resmom,ovemom,fsover, 

float xbar,xbarl ,xbar2,xbar3,xbar4,fsldg,ffric,fssldg,ke,yy 1 ,yy2,yy3,yy4; 

float stemvu,sphivc,wu,wearth,wsurch,v^ooting,muw,vuw,dreq(l,ininro,reqdas,phivcw; 

float run 4 X>n,al I,al2,al3,al4,al5,al6,al7,phivc; 

float df,ldl,ld2,l^,ld,ldl,pll,pl2,pl3,x4,vutoe,mulI,mul2,mul3,d22; 

float ruwall,ronwall,wreqdas,reqdas3,aalpha,ddeltab,csd,csa,ca 1 ,ca2; 

float gw,gbl,hl I,p3,p4,m3,m4,tbt,w6,w7,mw6,mw7,wearthl,wearth2,x3; 

float g2,alpha2,h 12,x21,x22,x23,x8,ast,asfront,asback,a01 ,aa 1 ,ldl 1; 

float gb2,hl Iw,hwl2,htl2,x5,x56,x6,x7,p34,p5,p6,p7,m5,m6,m7; 

float 15x,l5y,15a,15c,15d,156a456aa,156b,156bb; 

float 156x,lev56,mw34,mw56,wcarth3,w34,w56; 

float h 121 ,xh4,xh5,xh6,w8,w9,w 10,lev9,lev 10,mw8,mw9,mw 10; 

int tb,tt,iJ,tln,nol,no2,no3: 

extern double cos(); 
extern double sin(); 
extern double sqrtQ; 
extern float ftotnaxO; 

printf("Enter name of output file:"); 
scanf("%s",fn_out,"w"); 
fp_out = fopen(fh_out,"w"); 
printfC’Output in file:%s\n\n\n"4h_out); 


printf(" - Nn"); 

printff I DESIGN OF CANTILEVER RETAINING STRUCTURE I \n"); 
printff" - \n\n\n"); 


printf("What is the height (in ft.) of the earth to be supportedTSn"); 
scanf("%f’, &h); 

printf("What is the angle (in deg.) which die backfill makes with the horizontal?\n"); 
scanf("%r,&deltab); 

printf("What is the height (in ft.) of the surchargeTSn"); 
scanf("%r, Asurcht); 

/* unit weight of water = 62.5 pcf ♦/ 


D-1 








if (suicht = 0) 
goto pi; 

printf("What is the density (pcf) of the surcharge materialTSn"); 
scanf("%f', &gsur); 

printf{’*What is the angle (in <teg.) of internal Motion of the surcharge materialTvn"); 
scanf("%f&alphas); 

pl:printf("What is the coefficient of Motion between masonry and soil? (if unknown, you 
may answer it as 0.40)\n"); 
scanf("%f&miu); 

printfC'What is the compressive strength, fc (in ksi) of concreteTSn"); 
scanf("%f •, &fc); 

printfC'What is the yield strength, fy (in ksi) of concrete?Sn"); 
scanf("%f', &fy); 

printfC'What is the maximum soil pressure (in ksf)?Sn”); 
scanf(”%f', &maxspr); 

printfC'What is the hei^t (in ft) of the water table in this rcgion?\n"); 
scanf("%r. &hw); 

pMtf(”How many layers of soil are there below the earth's surface(you are advised to 

give the value of 1 or 2)?Sn"); 

scanf("%f',&layer); 

fprintf(fp_out" -An"); 

fprintf(fp_out," I INPUT DATA hn"); 

fl)rintf(^_out" -An"); 

fi>rintf(fp_out"Height of earth to be supported = %.2f ft.\n"4i); 
f^ntf(fp_out"Angle which the backfill makes widi the horizontal = %.2f 
deg.\n",deltab); 

f^ntf(fp_out"Height of the surcharge = %.2f ftNn",surcht); 
f^ntf(^_out"Density of the surcharge material = %.2f pcf.Nn",gsur); 
fprintf(fp_out "Angle of internal Motion of the surcharge mateii^ * %2f deg.\n’’.alphas); 
^>nntf(^_out,"Coefficient of Motion between masonry and soil = %.2f«’’,miu); 
fprintf(^_out,’’Q)mpressive strength of concrete,fc = %.2f ksi.'«’’4c); 
f^ntf(fp_out,’'Yield strength of steel,fy = %,2f ksi.\n’’/y); 
fptintf(fp_out,"Maximum soil pressure = %,2f ksf.\n",maxspr); 

^ntf(^_out,"Height of water table = %.2f ft.\n",hw); 

^rintf(^_out,"Layers of soil below the earth's surface = %.lf\n",layer); 
aalpha » alphas * 3.1415926 /180.0; 
if (deltab = 0) 
goto cab; 

ddeltab » deltab * 3.1415926 /180.0; 
csd s cos(ddeltab); 
esa s cos(aalpha); 

cal » pow(((csd * csd) - (esa * csa)),0.5); 
ca2 s (csd - cal)/(csd + cal); 
ca = csd * ca2; 
goto cad; 

cab:ca »(1 - (sin(aalpha)))/(l 4- (sin(aalpha))); 

cad:fprintf(fp_out," -An"); 

fprintf(fp_ouC I DESIGN OF CANTILEVER RETAINING STRUCTURE hn ”); 

fprintf(f^_out," -^SnNn"); 

iprintf(f|>_out,”Coef!icient of active pressure « %.4fSn",ca); 

romax « froaiax(fc,fy); 

ro * 0.5 * romax; 

m«fy/((0.85)*(fc)); 

ru = ro * fy * 10(X) ♦ (1 - (0.5 ♦ ro * m)); 


D-2 








fprintf(^_out,"Reinfc»rcemcnt ratiojlo = %.4fSn"^); 

outf^Strength coefficient of resistance,Ru = %.2f psi.\n"^); 
hi = (h + 4); 

/* hi = total height of wall taking ftost penetration into account *! 
t = 0.1*hl; 

/♦ t = thickness of footing */ 

fprintf(fp_out,'Total height of wall(including frost penetration) = %.2f fL\n",hl); 
fprintf(fp_out,’Thickness of footing = %.2f fL\n",t); 
xl = ca * gsur * surcht; 
if (layer = 1) 

goto layer 1; 
if (layer = 2) 

goto layer2; 
if Gayer > 2) 

piintf("This program is not capable of handling more than 2 soil layers.SORRY!\n"); 
gotoendd; 

layerl^wintfCWhat is the density of the soil(in pef) below the earth's surfaceTSn"); 
scanf("%f'.&gl); 

piintf("What is the angle(in deg.) of internal friction of the soil below the earth's 

surfaceTSn"); 

scanf("%f'.&alphal); 

aalpha » alphal * 3.1415926 / 180.0; 

ca = (1 - (sin(aalpha)))/p (sin(aalpha))); 

fprintf(^_out,"Coefficient of active pressure = %.4fin",ca); 

if (hw != 0) 

goto hwll; 
x2 = ca * gl * hi; 
pi = xl ♦ hi; 
p2 = 0.5*x2*hl; 
p »(pi * hi * 0.5) + (p2 ♦ (hl/3)); 
wsubl * (surcht * gsur) + (gl * hi); 

X = sqrt((2 * p) / wsubl); 
goto lb; 

lbb:x = X + 0.2; 
lb:lbase = 1J5 * x; 

fprintf(fp_out,"Base length of the footing = %.2f fL\n\n",lbase); 
y = hl -t; 

ml = xl * 0.5 ♦ y * y; 

m2 = (x2*(y*y* y))/(6 * hi); 

mu «(1.7*(ml + m2)) /1000; 

tl » sqrt((mu * 12000)/(0.9 ♦ ru * 12.0)); 

tb = tl + 5; 

if(tb<12) 

tb » 12.0; 
tt = 12.0; 

fprintf(fp_out,"STEM DIMENSIONS:Nn"); 

^ntf(^_out,"-An"); 

fpnntf(fp_out," a) stem thickness at the bottom » %d in.\n",tb); 

fpnntf(fp_out," b) stem thickness at the tc^ s %d in.\nNn",tt); 

yyl «.825 * hi; 

yy2«yyl * yyl; 

yy3 = xl *yyl; 

yy4ssx2/hl; 

wl = (gsur/1000) surcht * (x -1); 


D-3 




w2 «(gl/1000) * y * (x-1); 

w3 = (0.15 - (gl/1000)) * y * ((tb - tt)/24); 

w4 * 0.15 * Ibase * t; 

w5®0.15*y; 

wtot = wl + w2 + w3 + w4 + w5; 

Icvl = (X -1) * 0.5; 
lev2 = Icvl; 

lcv3 = (2 • Icvl) - ((tb - tt) / 36.0); 

lcv4 = Qbasc * 0.5); 

lcv5 = (Icvl * 2.0) + 0.5; 

mwl = wl * Icvl; 

mw2 = w2 * lev2; 

inw3 = w3 * lev3; 

mw4 = w4 * lcv4; 

inw5 = w5 * lev5; 

mwt = (mwl + mw2 + mw3 + mw4 + mw5); 

ywm = mwVwtot; 

resmom = wtot * (Ibasc - m); 

ovcmom = ((pi * hi ♦ 0.. + (p2 ♦ (hl/3)))/1000.0; 

fsovcr = resmom/ovcmom; 

fprintf(fp_out,’‘Overturning stabilityfSn"); 

fprintf(^_out,"-An"); 

fprintf(fp_out,"Resisting moment = %.2f ft-kips\n" 4 «smom); 
^printf(fp_out,"Ovcrtuming moment = %.2f ft'kips\n”,ovemom); 
if (fsovcr < 2.0) 
goto Ibb; 
else 

xbar = (mwt + ovcmom) / wtot; 

xbarl = lbase/3.0; 

xbar2 = (2.0* Ibasc)/3.0; 

xbar3 = xbar + .08; 

xbar4 = (xbar - xbar2)*12.0; 

^}iintf(^_out,"Factor of safety against overturning = %.2f / %.2f = %.2f -OK- (F.S. > 

2.0)\n\n\n’'jesinora,ovcmom,fsovcr); 

if (xbar > xbarl && xbar < xbar2) 

fprintf(fp_out,''The position of the resultant soil pressure due to the service load was 
checked and found to be within the middle-third of the base — OKSnNn"); 
else if (xbar > xbarl && xbar < xbar3) 

fyrintf(^_out,'The resultant soil pressure lies %.lf in. outside the middle-third, 
howeverat is v^ close, and die limiting condition of zero stress at die heel is considered 
adequate.NnNnVn"ptbar4); 
if (xbar > xbarl && xbar > xbar3) 
goto Ibb; 

^P^tf(fp_out,"Sliding stability:\n"); 

flprintf(^_out,"-^\n"); 

fsldg«(pl+p2)/1000.0; 
ffric = miu * wtot; 
fssldg s f&ic / fsldg; 

fP>utf(fp_out,”Sli£ng force « %2{ kips\n"/sldg); 
fjpiwtf(fp_out,”Resisting force « %2{ kips\n",flric); 

^printf(fi)_out,Tactor of safety against sUding = %.2f / %.2f = 
%.2fsn"4&ic,hldgjrssldg); 
if (fssldg >1.5) 
gotosqp; 


D-4 




else fprinif(fp_out,'*Key to be provided as factor of safety against sliding (%.2f) is less 
than l.SVn",fssldg); 
ke = 8 * t; 

fprintf(^_out,"Key dimensions(CRSI Handbook):The key has a square section (%.lfin. 
X %.inn.)Vn"jce^e); 

tprmtf(fp_out," Generally it is desirable to place the front face of the key about 5 
in. in front of the back face of the stem.This will permit anchoring the stem reinforcement, 
if present, in the key.NriNriSn"); 
goto heel; 

stp:fprintf(fp_out,"— OK (F.S. > 1.5).\n\n\n"); 


heel:fprintf(fip_out,"-^\n"); 

fprintf(fp_out," design of heel cantilever \n"); 

fprintf(fp_out, " --\n\n"); 


wealth = gl ♦ y / 1000.0; 
wsurch = gsur * surcht / 1000.0; 
wfooting = 0.15 * t; 

wu = (1.4 * (wearth + wfooting)) + (1.7 * wsurch); 

lev6 = X - (tb / 12.0); 

muw = 0.5 ♦ wu * lev6 ♦ lev6; 

vuw = wu * lcv6; 

phivcw = 0.0204 * sqrt(fc ♦ 1000.0) * tb; 
if (phivcw < vuw) 

dreqd = (tb * vuw / phivcw) + 1.0; 
else goto com; 
tin = dreqd + 2.5; 

fprintf(fp_out,"Hecl thickness = %d\n",tln):, 
run = (muw * 12000) / (0.9 * 12.0 ♦ dr^d * dreqd); 
ron = (1.0 - sqrt(1.0 - (0.002 * m * run / fy)))/m; 
minro = 0.2 / fy; 
if (minro > ron) 

ron = 1.333 * ron; 
else ron = ron; 
goto comm; 
com: ron = ro; 
tin = t * 12.0; 

fprintf(^_out,"Heel thickness = %dVn”,tln); 

<heqd = (tin - 2.5); 

comm.'roqdas = ron * 12.0 * dreqd; 

al 1 s 0.62 - reqdas; 

al2 s 0.88 > reqdas; 

al3 s 1.20- reqdas; 

al4 = 1.58 - reqdas; 

al5 = 2.(X) - reqdas; 

al6 s 2.54 - reqdas; 

al7 = 3.12 - reqdas; 

if (al 1 > 0 && al 1 < (al2,al34il4,al5,al6,al7)) 
goto al 1; 

if (al2 > 0 && al2 < (al I,al3,al4,al5,al6,al7)) 
goioal2; 

if (al3 >0&& al3 < (al I4l2,al4,al5,al6,al7)) 
goto al3; 

if (al4 > 0 && al4 < (al I,al24il3,al5,al6,al7)) 
gotoaH; 

if (al5 > 0 && al5 < (al U12,al3,al44il6,al7)) 


D-5 






goto al5; 

if (al6 > 0 && al6 < (al U12,al3^14,al5,al7)) 
goto al6; 
if(al7>0); 

goto al7; 

all :fprintf(fp_out,"Choose 
gotobll; 

al2:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose 
goto bl2; 

al 3:^printf(fp_out,"Choosc 
goto bl3; 

a 14:fprintf(^_out,"Choose 
goto bl4; 

a 15 :fprintf(fp_out,"Choose 
goto blS; 

al6:fprintf(fjp_out,"Choosc 
goto bl6; 

a 17 :^printf(^_out,"Choosc 
goto bl7; 

bll:reqdas = 0.62; 
goto cl; 

bl2;reqdas = 0.88; 
goto cl; 

bl3:reqdas=: 1.20; 
goto cl; 

bl4;reqdas = 1.58; 
goto cl; 

bl5:reqdas » 2.00; 
goto cl; 

bl6:reqdas * 2.54; 
goto cl; 

bl7;req(las = 3.12; 
cl:df = sqrt(2.0 ♦ reqdas / 3.1415926); 

Idl = (20 * reqdas * fy)/(sqit(1000.0 * fc)); 

ld2 = 0.4 ♦ df * fy; 

if(ldl>ld2) 

ldf=:ldl; 
elseldf»ld2; 
ld = ldf*1.4; 

^ntf(fip_out,"Thc required development length of the bars (at the top) is %.2f in. into 
the toe of the footing measured from the stem reinforcement”,ld); 

Idll = (Id + 5.0)/12.0; 

fprintf(fp_out,"Use an embedment length of %.lf ft. from the backface of the 
wall.\n\n\n"4dll); 


fprintf(fp_out,"-^''n"); 

fprintf(fp_out," design of toe cantilever Nn"); 

fl«intf(fp_out,"--NnNn"); 


pi 1 = (2.0 * wtt)t)/lbase; 

x4 » 0.5 ♦ x; 

pl2 * X * pi 1 / Ibase; 

pl3 * (lba% - 1 ) * pi 1 / Ibase; 

vutoe * 1.7 * (((pl 1 + pl3) ♦ 0.5) - wfooting) * t; 

mul 1 = 0.5 ♦ pl 1 * x4 * x4 * 0.6667; 

mul2 » 0.5 * pl2 * x4 ♦ x4 * 0.3333; 


#5 <§> 6 in.(As = 0.62 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
#6 @ 6 in.(As = 0.88 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
#7 @ 6 in.(As = 1.20 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
#8 @ 6 in.(As = 1.58 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
#9 @ 6 in.(As = 2.00 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
#10 @ 6 in.(As = 2.54 sq.in./ft.)Sn"); 
#11 @ 6 in.(As = 3.12 sq.in./ft.)Nn"); 


D-6 









mul3 = 0.5 * wfooting * x4 ♦ x4; 
muw = 1.7 * (mull + mul2 - mul3); 
d22:d22 = (t * 12.0) - 2.5; 

phivc = 0.85 * 2.0 * sqrt(fc * 1000) * 12.0 * d22 / 1000.0; 
if (phivc > vutoe) 
goto run; 

else d22 = d22 +1.0; 
goto d22; 

run:fjpiintf(^_out,"PhiVc(%.2f k.) > Vu(%.2f k.) — OKNn",phivc,vutoe); 

run = (muw * 12000) / (0.9 * 12.0 ♦ d22 * d22); 

ron = (1.0 - sqrt(1.0 - (0.002 * m * run / fy)))/m; 

minro = 0.2 / fy; 

if (minro > ron) 

ron = 1.333 * ron; 
else ron = ron; 
gotocomml; 
coml:nm = ro; 

commlnoqdas = ron * 12.0 ♦ d22; 

al 1 = 0.62 - reqdas; 

al2 = 0.88 • reqdas; 

al3 = 1.20 - reqdas; 

al4 = 1.58 - reqdas; 

al5 = 2.00 - reqdas; 

al6 s 2.54 - reqdas; 

al7 = 3.12 - reqdas; 

if (al 1 > 0 && al 1 < (al2^13,al4^15,al6,al7)) 
goto a21; 

if (al2 > 0 && al2 < (al I,al2,al4,al5,al6,al7)) 
goto a22; 

if (al3 > 0 && al3 < (al 1^12^14^15,al6,al7)) 
goto a23; 

if (al4 > 0 && al4 < (al I,al2^13,al5^16,al7)) 
gotoa24; 

if (al5 > 0 && al5 < (al U12^13^14^16,al7)) 
gotoa25; 

if (al6 > 0 && al6 < (al U12,al3,al4^15,al7)) 
gotoa26; 
if(al7>0); 

gotoa27; 

a21:fprmtf(fp_out,"Choose #5 @ 6 in.(As = 0.62 sq.in./fL)\n"); 
gotob21; 

^2:f^ntf(fp_out,"Qioose #6 @ 6 in.(As = 0.88 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto b22; 

a23:fprii.tf(fp_out,"Qioose #7 @ 6 in.(As = 1.20 sq.in./fL)\n"); 
goto b23; 

a24;fjprintf(l^_out«"Choose #8 @ 6 in.(As = 1.58 sq.inyft.)\n"); 
goto b24; 

a25;fprintf(fp_out,"C^oose #9 @ 6 in.(As * 2.00 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
gotob25; 

a26:Q)rintf(fp_out,"Choose #10 @ 6 in.(As = 2.54 sq.in./ft)\n"); 
goto b26; 

a27:fprintf(i^_out,"Choose #11 @ 6 in.(As = 3.12 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto b27; 

b2l7eqdas « 0.62; 


D-7 




gotoc2; 

b22Teqdas = 0.88; 
gotoc2; 

b23:reqdas = 1.20; 
goto c2; 

b24:reqdas = 1.58; 
goto c2; 

b25:reqdas = 2.00; 
gotoc2; 

b26:reqdas = 2.54; 
eotoc2; 

b27:Tcqdas = 3.12; 

c2:df = sqn(2.0 * reqdas / 3.1415926); 

Idl = (20 * reqdas * fy) / (sqn(1000.0 ♦ fc)); 

ld2 = 0.4*df *fy; 

if(ldl>ld2) 

ldf=ldl; 
elseldf»ld2; 
ld = ldf* 1.4; 

^printf(fp_out,"The required development length of the bottom bars is %.2f in.\n",ld); 
Idl = (Id + 5.0)712.0; 

^prititf(fp_out,"Use an embedment length of %.lf ft. from the front face of the 
wairvn\n^"4dl); 


f^tf(fp_out,"-.\n"); 

^printf(fp_out," design of reinforcement of wall \n"); 

fprintf(fp_out,*'--\n\n"); 


vutoe = 1.7 ♦ (((pi 1 + pl3) * 0.5) - wfooting) ♦ t; 

mul 1 = 0.5 * pi 1 * x4 ♦ x4 * 0.6667; 

mu 12 = 0.5 * pl2 * x4 * x4 * 0.3333; 

mul3 = 0.5 * wfooting ♦ x4 * x4; 

muw = 1.7 * (mul 1 + mul2 - mul3); 

ruwall = mu ♦ 12000 / (0.9 * 12 * y * y); 

ronwall = (1 - sqrt(l.() - (0.002 * m * ruwall /fy))) / m; 

if (minro > ronwall) 

ronwall = 1.333 * ronwall; 
else ronwall = ronwall; 
reqdas = ronwall ♦ 12 * y; 
al 1 = 0.62 - reqdas; 
al2 s 0.88 - reqdas; 
al3 s 1.20 - reqdas; 
al4 = 1.58 - reqdas; 
al5 s 2.00 - reqdas; 
al6 a 2.54 - reqdas; 
al7 a 3.12 - reqdas; 

if (al 1 > 0 && al 1 < (al2^13^14^15^16,al7)) 
gotoaSl; 

if (al2 > 0 && al2 < (al U12^14,al5^16,al7)) 
gofeoa32; 

if (al3 > 0 && al3 < (al U12^14^15^16,al7)) 
gotoa33; 

if (al4 > 0 && al4 < (al U124il3^15^16,al7)) 
gotoa34; 

if (al5 > 0 && al5 < (al U124il3^14^16,al7)) 
9>tDa35; 


D-8 








if (al6 > 0 && al6 < (al 1^12^13^14^15,al7)) 
go{oa36; 
if(al7>0) 

gotoa37; 

a31:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #5 @ 6 in.(As = 0.62 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto b31; 

a32:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #6 @ 6 in.(As = 0.88 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto b32; 

i33:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #7 @ 6 in.(As = OO sq.in./fL)\n"); 
goto b33; 

a34:fiprintf(^_out,"Choose #8 @ 6 in.(As = 1.58 sq.in./ft)\n"); 
goto b34i 

a35:^ntf(fp_out,"Choosc #9 @ 6 in.(As = 2.00 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto b35; 

a36:^ntf(^_ out,"Choosc #10 @ 6 in.(As = 2.54 sq.in./fL)\n"); 
goto b36; 

a37:fpiintf(fi.'_out,"Choose #11 @ 6 in.(As = 3.12 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto b37; 
b31;reqdas = 0.62; 
goto c3; 

b32:reqdas = 0.88; 
goto c3; 

b33;reqdas = 1.20; 
goto c3; 

b34:Teqdas = 1.58; 
goto c3; 

b35:reqdas = 2.00; 
goto c3; 

b36;reqdas * 2.54; 
goto c3; 

b37:reqdas = 3.12; 

c3;df * sqrt(2.0 * reqdas / 3.1415926); 

Idl = (20 * reqdas * fy) / (sqrt(1000.0 * fc)); 

ld2 = 0.4*df*fy; 

if(ldl>ld2) 

Idf^ldl; 
else Idf = ld2; 
ld = ldf* 1.4; 

^’nntf(fp_out,'The required development length of the bottom bars is %.2f in.\n",ld); 
Idl»(Id + 5.0)712.0; 

fprintf(fp_out,"Use an embedment length of %.lf ft \n\n\n",ldl); 


93toIayer^, 

hwll:printf(" \n"); 

fpnntf(fp_out"-\n"); 

fpintf(fp_out" calculations for one layer with water-table '«"); 
fprintf(^_out"-\n"); 


gbl«gl-62.5; 
hll shl - hw; 
x2sgl *ca*hll; 
x3 » gbl ♦ hw ♦ ca; 
x4 » gw * hw; 
pl-xl*hll; 
p2»0.5*x2*hll; 
p3 »(xl + x2) * hw; 


D-9 








p4 — 0.5 * (x3 + x4) * hwj 

p = (pi ♦ (hw + hi 1/2)) +’(p2 * (hi 1/3 + hw)) + (p3 * I w/2) + (p4 * hw/3); 
wsubl = (suicht * gsur) + (gl * hll) + ((gbl+gw) * hw;, 

X = pow(((2 ♦ p) / wsubl),0.5); 
goto laylb; 

laylbb:printf(" Nn"); 

fprintf(^_out,"Recalculating as F.S. is below requirementINn"); 

X = X + 0.2; 

laylb:lbase = 1.5 * x; 

fp«intf(fp_out,"Base length of the footing = %.2f ft.\n\n'',lbase); 

ml = pi * (hi 1/2 + hw -1); 

m2 = p2 * (hi 1/3 + hw -1); 

m3 = (xl + x2) * (hw -1) * (hw -1) * 0.5; 

m4 = ((x3 + x4) * (pow((hw-t),3))) / (6 ♦ hw); 

mu = (1.7 * (ml + m2 + m3 + m4)) / 1000; 

tl = pow(((mu * 12000)/(0.9 ♦ ru * 12.0)),0.5); 

tb = tl + 5; 

if(tb<12) 

tb = 12.0; 
tt = 12.0; 

f^lf(fp_out,"STEM DIMENSIONS:\n"); 

^rintf(fp_out,"-An"); 

fpnntf(fi)_out," a) stem thickness at the bottom = %d in.\n",tb); 
fprimf(^_out," b) stem thickness at the top = %d in.^n\n",tt); 
wl = (gsur / 1000) * surcht * (x - 1), 
w2 = (gl/1000)*hll *(x- 1); 
w3 = (gbl / 1000) * (hw -1) * (X -1); 
tbt = tb - tt; 

w4 = (0.15 - (gl /1000)) * ((tbt * hi 1 * hi I) /(24 ♦ (hi -1))); 
w5 = (0.15 - (gbl / 1000)) * 0.5 * ((tbt/ 12) + (hll / (12 * (hi -1)))) * (hw - 1 ); 
w6 = 0.15 ♦ ibase * t; 
w7 = 0.15 * (hi -1); 

wtot = wl + w2 + w3 + w4 + w5 + w6 + w7; 
levl = (x -1) * 0.5; 

lcv4 = (2 * levl) - ((tbt * hi 1) / ((hi -1) * 36)); 

lev5 = (2 * levl) - ((tbt * hi 1) / ((hi -1) * 24)) - ((1 / 3) * ((tbt /12) - ((tbt * hi 1) / ((hi - 

t) * 36)))); 

lev6 = Ibase ♦ 0.5; 

lev7 = (levl * 2.0) + 0.5; 

mwl * wl ♦ levl; 

mw2 = w2 * levl; 

mw3 = w3 * levl; 

mw4 = w4 ♦ lcv4; 

mw5 = w5 ♦ lev5; 

mw6 = w6 ♦ lcv6; 

mw7 * w7 ♦ lcv7; 

mwt * mwl + mw2 + mw3 + mw4 + mw5 + mw6 + mw7; 

ywm = mwVwtot; 

resmom * wtot * (Ibase - ywm); 

ovemom = ((pi * (hi 1/2 + hw)) + (p2 * ((hi 1/3) + hw)) + (p3 * (hw/2)) + (p4 * 

(hw/3)))/l000.0; 

fsover = resmom/ovemom; 

^mf(fp_out,"Ovcrtuming stabilityfSn"); 
tprintf(fp_out,"-An"); 


D-10 







^ntf(fp_out,"Resisting moment = %.2f ft-kips'«" 4 'esmom); 
fprintf(f^_out,"Oveitiiming moment = %.2f ft-kips'«",ovemom); 
if (fsover < 2.0) 

goto laylbb; 
else 

xbar = (mwt + ovemofn) / wtot; 
xbarl = lbase/3.0; 
xbar2 = (2.0 ♦ Ibase) / 3.0; 
xbar3 = xbar + .08; 


xbar4 = (xbar - xbar2)*12.0; 

fprintf(fp_out,"Factor of safety against overturning = %.2f / %.2f = %.2f -OK- (F.S. > 

2.0)\n\n'^"jesmom,ovemom,fsover); 

if (xbar > xbarl && xbar < xbar2) 

fprintf(fp_out,"The position of the resultant soil pressure due to the service load was 
checked and found to be within the middle-third of the base — OKNnNn"); 
else if (xbar > xbarl && xbar < xbar3) 

fprintf(^_out,”The resultant soil {assure lies %.lf in. outside the middle-third, 
however^t is very close, and the limiting condition of zero stress at the heel is considered 
adequate.Nn\n\n",xbar4); 
if (xbar > xbarl && xbar > xbar3) 
goto laylbb; 

fprintf(^_out,"Sliding stability:\n"); 

fprintf(fp_out,"-^\n"); 

fsldg = (pi + p2 + p3 + p4) /1000; 
ffiric = miu * wtot; 
fssldg = ffiric / fsldg; 

fprintf(^_out,"Sliding force = %.2f kipsNn" Jsldg); 

^rintf(fi)_out,"Resisting force = %.2f kips\n”,ffnc); 
fprintf(fi)_out,'Tactor of safety against sliding = %.2f / %.2f = 

%.2f«’'.ffiric,ftldg.fssldg); 
if (fssldg > 1.5) 
gotostpl; 

else f^ntf(^_out,"Key to be provided as factor of safety against sliding (%.2f) is less 
than 1.5Nn",fssldg); 
ke = 8 * t; 

fpiintf(fp_out,"Key dimensions(CRSI Handbook):The key has a square section (%.lfin. 
X %.lfin.)\n"Jce,ke); 

^rintf(^_out," Generally it is desirable to place the front face of the key about 5 
in. in front of the back face of the stem.This will permit anchoring the stem reinforcement, 
if present, in the key.NnXriSn"); 
goto heell; 

stpl:fprintf(fp_out,"— OK (F.S. > 1.5).\n\ii\n'’); 

heell:fprintf(fp_out,"--\n"); 

fprintf(fp_out," design of heel cantilever Nn"); 

^rintf(fp_out, " --\n\n"); 

wearthl = gl * hi 1/1000.0; 
wearth2 = gbl * (hw -1) / 1()00.0; 
wsurch = gsur ♦ surcht / 1000.0; 
wfoodng = 0.15 ♦ t; 

wu = (1.4 ♦ (wearthl + wearth2 + wfoodng)) + (1.7 * wsurch); 

lev8 = X - (tb /12.0); 

muw * 0.5 * wu * lev8 * lev8; 

vuw = wu ♦ lev8; 

phivcw = 0.0204 * sqrt(fc ♦ 1000.0) * tb; 


D-11 








if (phivcw < vuw) 

dreqd = (tb * vuw / phivcw) + 1.0; 
else gotoccnnal; 
tin = dreqd + 2.5; 

i^printf(fp_oui,''Heel thickness = %dVn",tln); 
run = (muw ♦ 12000) / (0.9 * 12.0 * dreqd * dreqd); 
ron = (1.0 - sqrt(1.0 - (0.002 * m * run / fy)))/m; 
minro = 0.2 / fy; 
if (tninro > ron) 

ron = 1.333 * ron; 
else ton = ton; 
goto amunal; 
ccnnal; ion = ro; 

conunahreqdas = ron * 12.0 * dreqd; 

al 1 = 0.62 - reqdas; 

al2 = 0.88 - reqdas; 

al3 = 1.20 - reqdas; 

al4 = 1.58 - reqdas; 

al5 = 2.00 - reqdas; 

al6 = 2.54 - reqdas; 

al7 = 3.12 - reqdas; 

if (all > 0 && all < (al2,al3,al4,al5,al6,al7)) 
goto al 11; 

if (al2 > 0 && al2 < (al I,al3^14,al5,al6,al7)) 
goto al21; 

if (al3 > 0 && al3 < (al U12,al4.al5,al6,al7)) 
gotoal31; 

if (al4 > 0 && al4 < (al I,al2,al3,al5,al6.al7)) 
gotoal41; 

if (al5 > 0 && al5 < (all,al2,al3^14,al6,al7)) 
gotoal51; 

if (al6 > 0 && al6 < (al U12^13,al4,al5,al7)) 
goto al61; 
if (al7 > 0); 

gotoal71; 

al 1 l:fpnntf(^_out,"(3ioose #5 @ 6 in.(As = 0.62 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto bill; 

al21:fprintf(^_out,"(Zhoose #6 @ 6 in.(As = 0.88 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
gotobl21; 

al31:fiprintf(fp_out,"Choose #7 @ 6 in.(As = 1.20 sq.in./fL)Nn"); 
gotobl31; 

al41:fprintf(fp_out,"(rhoose #8 @ 6 in.(As = 1.58 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
gotobl41; 

al51:fprintf(fp_out,”Choose #9 @ 6 in.(As = 2.00 sq.in./ft.)Nn"); 
gotobl51; 

al61;^ntf(fp_out,"Choose #10 @ 6 in.(As = 2.54 sq.in./ft.)Nn"); 
gotobl61; 

al71;fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #11 @ 6 in.(Ab = 3.12 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto bl71; 
blllnrqdas sO.62; 
goto cl 1; 

bl21:Teqdas = 0.88; 
goto cl 1; 

bl31:reqdas = 1.20; 


D-12 






goto cl 1; 

bl41nieqdas = 1.58; 
goto cl 1; 

bl51:reqdas = 2.00; 
goto cl 1; 

bl6lTeqdas = 2.54; 
goto cl 1; 

blTlnxqdas = 3.12; 

cl l:df = sqrt(2.0 * reqdas / 3.1415926); 

Idl = (20 * reqdas * fy)/(sqrt(1000.0 * fc)); 

ld2 = 0.4*df*fy; 

if(ldl>ld2) 

ldf = ldl; 
else Idf = ld2; 
ld = ldf*1.4; 

fprintf(fp_out,"The required development length of the bars (at the top) is %.2f in. into 
the toe of the footing measured from the stem reinforcement",ld); 

Idll = (Id + 5.0)/12.0; 

fprintf(fp_out,"Use an embedment length of %.lf ft. from the backface of the 


wall.\ri\n\n",ldll); 

fprmtf(fp_out,"-^\n"); 

fprintf(fi)_out," design of toe cantilever \n"); 

^piintf(fp_out,"-^Nn\n"); 


pll = (2.0 * wtot)/lbase; 

x4 = 0.5 ♦ x; 

pl2 = x*pll/lbase; 

pl3 = (Ibax - 1 ) * pi 1 / Ibase; 

vutoc * 1.7 ♦ (((pi 1 + pl3) ♦ 0.5) - wfooting) * t; 

mul 1 = 0.5 * pi 1 * x4 * x4 * 0.6667; 

mul2 = 0.5 * pl2 ♦ x4 * x4 ♦ 0.3333; 

mul3 = 0.5 * wfooting * x4 ♦ x4; 

muw = 1.7 ♦ (mull + mul2- mul3); 

d221:d22 = (t * 12.0) - 2.5; 

phivc = 0.85 * 2.0 ♦ sqrt(fc * 1000) * 12.0 * d22 / 1000.0; 
if (phivc > vutoe) 
gotorunl; 

else d22 = d22 +1.0; 
gotod221; 

runl:fprintf(fp out,"PhiVc(%.2f k.) > Vu(%.2f k.) — OK\n",phivc,vutoe); 

run = (muw * 12000) / (0.9 * 12.0 * d22 ♦ d22); 

ron = (1.0 - sqn(1.0 - (0.002 * m * run / fy)))/m; 

minro = 0.2 / fy; 

if (minro > ron) 

ron = 1.333 * ron; 
else ron = ron; 
gotocommll; 
comllrronsro; 

comml Invqdas = ron 12.0 * d22; 

all - 0.62 - reqdas; 

al2 s 0.88 - reqdas; 

al3 s 1.20 - reqdas; 

al4 = 1.58 - reqdas; 

al5 = 2.00 - reqdas; 

al6 s 2.54 - reqdas; 


D-13 








al7 = 3.12 - reqdas; 

if (al 1 > 0 && al 1 < (al2^13^14,al5,al6.al7)) 
gotoa211; 

if (al2 > 0 && al2 < (al M12,al4,al5^16.al7)) 
gotoa221; 

if (al3 > 0 && al3 < (al U12^14,al5,al6,al7)) 
gotoa231; 

if (al4 > 0 && al4 < (al l,al2,al3,alS,al6,al7)) 

if (al5 > 0 && ais < (alU12^13^14.al6,al7)) 
gotoa251; 

if (al6 > 0 && al6 < (al U12^13^14^15,al7)) 
goto a261; 
if(al7>0); 

gotoa271; 

a211;^rintf(fp_out,"Choosc #5 @ 6 in.(As = 0.62 sq.in./fL)\n"); 
gotob211; 

a221:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #6 @ 6 in.(As = 0.88 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
gotob221; 

a231:^)rintf(fp_out,"Choose #7 @ 6 in.(As = 1.20 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
gotob231; 

a241:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #8 @ 6 in.(As = 1.58 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto b241; 

a251;^)rintf(^_out,"Choose #9 @ 6 in.(As = 2.00 sq.in./ft.)Nn"); 
gotob251; 

a261:fiprintf(fp_out,"<rhoosc #10 @ 6 in.(As = 2.54 sq.in./ft)\n"); 
gotob261; 

a271:fjprintf(^_out,"(rhoose #11 @ 6 in.(As = 3.12 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto b271; 
b211:req(ias = 0.62; 
goto c21; 

b221:reqdas = 0.88; 
goto c21; 

b231nTqdas = 1.20; 
gotoc21; 

b24lTeqdas = 1.58; 
goto c21; 

b251 .-reqdas = 2.00; 
gotoc21; 

b261 nreqdas = 2.54; 
goto c21; 

b271:rcqdas = 3.12; 

c21:df = sqrt(2.0 ♦ reqdas / 3.1415926); 

Idl = (20 * reqdas * fy) / (sqn(1000.0 * fc)); 

ld2 = 0.4 * df ♦ fy; 

if(ldl>ld2) 

ldf = ldl; 
elseldf = ld2; 
ld = ldf * 1.4; 

fprintf(fp out,'The required development length of the bottom bars is %.2f in.\n",ld); 
Idl = (Id + 5.0)/12.0; 

fprintf(^_out,"Use an embedment length of %.lf ft. from the firont face of the 
walI\n'«Nn",ldl); 

fprintf(fp_out,"--Nn"); 


D-14 




^printf(^_out," design of reinforcement of wall Nn"); 

fprintf(fp_out,"----Nn\n") 


vutoe = 1.7 * (((pi 1 + pl3) ♦ 0.5) - wfooting) * t; 

mul 1 = 0.5 * pi 1 * x4 * x4 ♦ 0.^67; 

mul2 = 0.5 * pl2 * x4 * x4 * 0.3333; 

mul3 = 0.5 * wfooting * x4 * x4; 

muw = 1.7 ♦ (mul 1 + mul2 - mul3); 

y = hl -t; 

ruwall = mu * 12(X)0 / (0.9 ♦ 12 ♦ y * y); 

ronwall = (1 - sqrt(1.0 - (0.002 ♦ m * ruwall / fy))) / m; 

if (minro > ronwall) 

ronwall = 1.333 * ronwall; 
else ronwall = nmwall; 
reqdas = ronwall ♦ 12 ♦ (hi -1); 
al 1 = 0.62 - reqdas; 
al2 = 0.88 - reqdas; 
al3 s 1.20 - reqdas; 
al4 = 1.58 - reqdas; 
al5 = 2.00 - reqdas; 
al6 = 2.54 - reqdas; 
al7 = 3.12 - reqdas; 

if (al 1 > 0 && al 1 < (al2^13,al4,al5^16,al7)) 
gotoa311; 

if (al2 > 0 && al2 < (al U12^14,al5,al6,al7)) 
gotoa321; 

if (al3 > 0 && al3 < (al U12,al4^15,al6,al7)) 
gotoa331; 

if (al4 > 0 && al4 < (al U12^13^15,al6,al7)) 
goto a341; 

if (al5 > 0 && al5 < (al U12^13,al4,al6,al7)) 
gotoa351; 

if (al6 > 0 && al6 < (al U12^13,al4,al5,al7)) 
goto a361; 
if(al7>0) 

gotoa371; 

a311:fpratf(fp_out,"Choose #5 @ 6 in.(As = 0.62 sq.in./fL)\n"); 
gotob311; 

a321:Q>rintf(fp_out,"Choose #6 @ 6 in.(As = 0.88 sq.in.^L)\n"); 
goto b321; 

a331:fprintf(fp_out,"(rhoose #7 @ 6 in.(As = 1.20 sq.in./ft)\n"); 
goto b331; 

a341:^ntf(^_out,"<rhoose #8 <g> 6 in.(As = 1.58 sq.in./fL)\n"); 
goto b341; 

a351:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #9 @ 6 in.(As = 2.00 sq.in./fL)Nn”); 
gotob351; 

a361 :finintf(^_out,"Choose #10 @ 6 in.(As = 2.54 sq.in.^L)Nn"); 
goto b361; 

a371:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #11 @ 6 in.(As = 3.12 sq.in./fL)\n"); 
goto b37l; 
b311a«qdas sO.62; 
gotoc31; 

b321neqdas = 0.88; 
gotoc31; 

b331n^das « 1.20, 


D-15 







gotoc31; 

b341:Teqdas = 1.58; 
gotoc31; 

b3Sl:reqdas = 2.00; 
goto c31; 

b361:reqdas = 2.54; 
gotoc31; 

b371:icqdas = 3.12; 

c31:df = sqrt(2.0 * reqdas / 3.1415926); 

Idl = (20 * reqdas * fy) / (sqrt(1000.0 * fc)); 

ld2 = 0.4*df*fy; 

if(ldl>ld2) 

ldf = ldl; 
elseldf = ld2; 
ld = ldf* 1.4; 

fprintf(^_out,"The required development length of the bottom bars is %.2f in.\n",ld); 
Idl = (Id + 5.0)/12.0; 

fprintf(fp_out,''Usc an embedment length of %.lf ft. \n\n\n",ldl); 
goto layer50; 


/♦ - */ 

I* calculadons for two layers without water-table *! 
/* - ♦/ 


laycr2.*printf(’'What is the depth of the first soil layer?yn"); 
scanf(”%f’,&hll); 

printf("What is the density of the soil in the first layerTSn”); 
scanf(”%r,&gl); 

printfC'What is the angle of internal friction of the soil in the first layerTSn"); 
scanf("%r,&alphal); 

printf("What is the density of the soil in the second laycrTVn"); 
scanf("%r,&g2); 

printf("What is the angle of internal fnction of the soil in the second layerTVn"); 

scanf(”%r,&alpha2); 

hl2*hl-hll; 

aalpha = alphal * 3.1415926 /180.0; 
ca = (1 - (sin(aalpha)))/p + (sin(aalpha))); 

^intf(fp_out,"Cocfficicnt of active pressure = %.4fsn",ca); 
if (hw != 0) 

goto hw22; 
x2 = ca * gl * hll; 
aalpha = alpha2 * 3.1415926 /180.0; 
ca = (1 - (sin(aalpha)))/(l + (sin(aalpha))); 

fprintf(fp_out,"-Nn"); 

lpnntf(^_out,” calculations for two layers without water-table Nn"); 

fprintf(^_out,"-Nn"); 

fprintf(fp_out,"COefficient of active pressure = %.4fNn",ca); 

x3 *ca * g2 * hl2; 

pl=xl*hll; 

p2 = 0.5*x2*hll; 

p3 = (xl +x2)*hl2; 

p4*0.5*x3*hl2; 

p * (pi * (hl2 + hi 1/2)) + (p2 * (hi 1/3 + hl2)) + (p3 ♦ hl2/2) + (p4 ♦ hl2/3); 
wsubl = (surcht ♦ gsur) + (gl ♦ hi 1) + (g2 * hl2); 


D-16 







X = pow(((2 * p) / wsubl),0.5); 
goto lay2b; 

lay2bb:^)rintf(^_out,"Recalculating as F.S. is below requirementlNn"); 

X = X + 0.2; 

lay2b:lbase = 1.5 * x; 

fprintf(^_out,"Base length of the footing = %.2f ft.Nn\n"4base); 

ml =xl *hll *(hll/2 + hl2-t); 

m2 = 0.5 ♦ x2 * hll * (hll/3 + hl2 -1); 

m3 = (xl + x2) * (hl2 -1) * (hl2 -1) * 0.5; 

m4 = 0.5 * ((hl2-t)*x3/hl2) *(hl2 -1) * (hl2 -1) * 0.3333; 

mu = (1.7 * (ml + m2 + m3 + m4)) / KXX); 

tl = sqrt((mu * 12000)/(0.9 * ru * 12.0)); 

tb = tl+5; 

if(tb<12) 

tb = 12.0; 
tt = 12.0; 

fprintf(^_out,"STEM DIMENSIONS:\n"); 

fpnntf(fp_out,"--\n"); 

fprintf(f^_out," a) stem thickness at the bottom = %d in.\n",tb); 
fprintf(fp_out," b) stem thickness at the top = %d in.Nn\n’’,tt); 
wl = (gsur / 1000) * surcht * (x -1); 
w2 = (gl/1000)*hll *(x-1); 
w3 = (g2/1000)*(hl2-t)*(x-1); 
tbt = * - tt; 

w4 = (0.15 - (gl /1000)) * ((tbt * hi 1 * hi 1) / (24 * (hi -1))); 
w5 = (0.15 - (g2 / 1000)) * 0.5 * ((tbt /12) + (hi 1 / (12 * (hi - 1 )))) * (hl2 - 1 ); 
w6 = 0.15 * Ibase ♦ t; 
w7 = 0.15*(hl -t); 

wtot = wl + w2 + w3 + w4 + w5 + w6 + w7; 
levl * (X. 1) ♦ 0.5; 

lev4 = (2 * levl) - ((tbt ♦ hi 1) / ((hi -1) * 36)); 

lev5 = (2 ♦ levl) - ((tbt * hi 1) / ((hi -1) * 24)) - ((1 / 3) * ((tbt / 12) - ((tbt * hi 1) / ((hi - 

t) ♦ 36)))); 

lcv6 = Ibasc * 0.5; 

lev7 = (levl ♦ 2.0) + 0.5; 

mwl = wl * levl; 

mw2 = w2 * levl; 

mw3 = w3 ♦ levl; 

mw4 = w4 ♦ lcv4; 

mw5 = w5 * lev5; 

mw6 * w6 ♦ lcv6; 

mw7 = w7 ♦ lcv7; 

mwt» mwl + mw2 + mw3 + mw4 + mw5 + mw6 + mw7; 

ywm = mwt/wtot; 

resmom = wtot * (Ibase - ywm); 

ovemom »((pi * (hi 1 /2 + hl2)) + (p2 * ((hll /3) + hl2)) + (p3 * (hl2/ 2)) + (p4 * 
(hl2 / 3)))/1000.0; 
fsover = resmom/ovemom; 

*printf(^_out,"C)vcrtuniing stability;\n"); 

fpnntf(^_out,"--Nn"); 

^prMtf(lp_out,"Resisting tnomcnt * %.2f ft-kipsNn”jcsmom); 
fprintf(^_out,"Overtuming nxnnent = %.2f ft-kipsNn",ovemom); 
if (fsover < 2.0) 

goto lay2bb; 


D-17 






else 

xbar = (mwt + ovemom) / wtot; 

xbarl s lbase/3.0; 

xbar2 * (2.0 ♦ Ibase) / 3.0; 

xbar3 « xbar + .08; 

xbar4 = (xbar - xbar2)*12.0; 

^rintf(fp_out,"Factor of safety against overturning = %.2f / %.2f = %.2f --OK- (F.S. > 

2.0)\n\n'«"^sinoni,ovemorii,fsover); 

if (xbar > xbarl && xbar < xbar2) 

fiprintf(^_out,"The position of the resultant soil pressure due to the service load was 
checked and found to be within the middle-thiid of the base — OKNnVn"); 
else if (xbar > xbarl && xbar < xbar3) 

fprintf(^_out,"The resultant soil pressure lies %.lf in. outside the middle-third, 
howevcr^t is very close, and the limiting ctxidition of zero stress at the heel is considered 
adequate.\n'«\n",xbar4); 
if (xbar > xbarl && xbar > xbar3) 
goto lay2bb; 

fprintf(^_out,”Sliding stability:\n"); 

^ntf(i^_out,'’-\n"); 

fsldg «(pi + p2 + p3 + p4) / 1000; 
fine = miu * wtot; 
fssldg = ffric / fsldg; 

fprintf(fjp_out, "Sliding force = %.2f kips\n"/sldg); 
f^ntf(fp_out,"Resisting force = %.2f kips\n",ffiric); 
f^ntf(fi)_out,’Tactor of safety against sliding = %.2f / %.2f = 
%.2f\n",ffric,fsidg,fssldg); 
if (fssldg > 1.5) 
goto stp2; 

else fpTintf(fp_out,"Key to be provided as factor of safety against sliding (%.2f) is less 
than 1.5Vn"/ssldg); 
ke * 8 ♦ t; 

fprintf(^_out,"Key dimensions(CRSI Handbook);The key has a square section (%. Ifin. 
X %.lfm.)\n",kc4te); 

fpnntf(fp_out," Generally it is desirable to place the front face of the key about 5 
in. in firont of the back face of the stem.This will permit anchoring the stem reinforcement, 
if present, in the key.NriVriSn"); 
goto heel2; 

stp2:fprintf(fp_out,"— OK (F.S. > 1.5).Nn\n\n"); 

I_1^-^_?_ ^ tt 


hecl2:fprintf(^_out,"--\n"); 

^printf(fp_out," design of heel cantilever \n"); 

^ntf(fp_out, " --\n\n"); 


wearthl=gl * hi 1/1000.0; 
wearth2 = g2 ♦ (hl2 -1) / 1000.0; 
wsurch = gsur ♦ surcht / 1000.0; 
wfootingaO.15 *t; 

wu = (1.4 ♦ (wearthl + wearth2 + wfooting)) + (1.7 * wsurch); 

lev8 = X - (tb / 12.0); 

muw = 0.5 * wu * lev8 ♦ lev8; 

vuw = wu ♦ Iev8; 

phivcw = 0.0204 ♦ sqrt(fc * 1000.0) * tb; 
if (phivcw < vuw) 

dreqd * (tb * vuw / phivcw) + 1.0; 
else goto conia2; 
tin = dreqd + 2.5; 


D-18 





foriiitf(fo out,"Hccl thickness = %dSn",tln); 
run = (muw * 12000) / (0.9 * 12.0 ♦ drcqd * dreqd); 
ron = (1.0 - sqrt(1.0 - (0.002 * m * run / 
miniD = 0.2 / fy; 
if (minro > ron) 

ron = 1.333 * ron; 
else ron = ron; 
goto coninia2; 
coma2: ion = ro; 

conmia2.Teqdas = nxi * 12.0 * dreqd; 

al 1 = 0.62 - reqdas; 

al2 = 0.88 - reqdas; 

al3 s 1.20 - reqdas; 

al4 = 1.S8 - reqdas; 

al5 s 2.00 - reqdas; 

al6 = 2.54 - reqdas; 

al7 = 3.12-reqdas; 

if (al 1 > 0 && al 1 < (al2,al3^14^154il6,al7)) 
goto al 12; 

if (al2 > 0 && al2 < (al U13^14^15^16,al7)) 
goto al22; 

if (al3 > 0 && al3 < (al U12^14^15^16.al7)) 
gotoal32; 

if (al4 > 0 && al4 < (al U12^13^15,al6,al7)) 
goto al42; 

if (al5 > 0 && al5 < (al U12^13^14^16.al7)) 
goto al52; 

if (al6 > 0 && al6 < (al I,al2^13,al4^15,al7)) 
goto al62; 
if(al7>0); 

goto al72; 

al 12:fi^tf(fp_out,"Choose #5 @ 6 in.(As = 0.62 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto bl 12; 

al22:fprintf(fp_out,''(rhoose #6 @ 6 in.(As = 0.88 sq.inyfL)\n"); 

gOiO bl22; 

al32;fprintf(fp_ouCChoose #7 @ 6 in.(As = 1.20 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto b 132; 

al42:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #8 @ 6 in.(As = 1.58 sq.inyfL)\n"); 
goto bl42; 

al52:fprintf(fp_out,”Choose #9 @ 6 in.(As * 2.00 sq.in./fL)'n"); 
goto bl52; 

al62:^printf(fp_out,"Choose #10 @ 6 in.(As = 2.54 sq.in./ft)\n"); 
goK)bl62; 

al72:fprintf(fp_out,"Qioose #11 @ 6 in.(As = 3.12 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto bl72; 
bl 12Teqdas = 0.62; 
gotocl2; 

bl22:reqdas = 0.88; 
gotocl2; 

bl32.Te(^ias = 120; 
gotocl2; 

bl42Teqdas = 1.58; 
goiocl2; 

bl52.*reqdas = 2.00; 


D-19 



goto cl2; 

bl62:reqdas = 2.54; 
goto cl2; 

bl72:reqdas = 3.12; 

cl2:df = s^(2.0 * reqdas / 3.1415926); 

Idl = (20 * reqdas * fy)/(sqrt(1000.0 * fc)); 

ld2 = 0.4*df*fy; 

if(Idl>ld2) 

ldf = ldl; 
elseldf»=ld2; 

ld»ldf* 1.4; . „ . 

fprintf(^_out,"Thc lequiied development length of the bars (at the top) is %.2f in. into 
the toe of the footing measured from the stem leinforcemenL'Md); 

Idll = (Id + 5.0)/12.0; 

fprintf(fp out,"Usc an embedment length of %.lf ft. from the backface of the 
wall.\n\n'«’Mdll); 

fprintf(^_out,"- - —-^"); 

forintf(fb out," design of toe cantilever Nn"); 

fprintf(^_out,"--\n\n"); 

pi 1 = (2.0 * wtot)/lbase; 

x4 ss 0.5 * x; 

pl2 = x*pll/lbase; 

pl3 = (Iba^ -1) * pi 1 / Ibase; 

vutoe = 1.7 * (((pi 1 + pl3) * 0.5) - wfooting) * t; 

mul 1 ss 0.5 * pi 1 * x4 ♦ x4 * 0.6667; 

mu 12 = 0.5 * pl2 * x4 * x4 ♦ 0.3333; 

mul3 = 0.5 * wfooting * x4 ♦ x4; 

muw = 1.7 * (mul 1 + mul2 • mul3); 

d222:d22 = (t * 12.0) - 2.5; 

phivc s= 0.85 * 2.0 * sqrt(fc * 1000) * 12.0 * d22 / 1000.0; 
if (phivc > vutoe) 
gotorunl; 

else d22 = d22 +1.0; 
goto d222; 

run2:fprintf(fp_out,''PhiVc(%.2f k.) > Vu(%.2f k.) — OK\n",phivc,vutoe); 

run = (muw * 12000) / (0.9 * 12.0 * d22 * d22); 

ron = (1.0 - sqrt(1.0 - (0.002 * m * run / fy)))/m; 

minro = 0.2 / fy; 

if (minro > ron) 

ron s= 1.333 * ron; 
else ron ss ron; 
gotocommll; 
coml2m>n ss ro; 

comml2:reqdas * ron * 12.0 * d22; 

al 1 s 0.62 - reqdas; 

al2 ss 0.88 - reqdas; 

al3 ss 1.20 - reqdas; 

al4 = 1.58 - reqdas; 

al5 s 2.00 - reqdas; 

al6 - 2.54 - reqdas; 

al7 ss3.i2>re(^ias; 

if (al 1 > 0 && al 1 < (al2,al34il4,al5,al6,al7)) 
gotoa212; 

if (al2 > 0 && al2 < (al I,al 24 il 44 il 5 ,al 6 ,al 7 )) 


D-20 



gotoa222; 

if (al3 > 0 && al3 < (al I,al2^14^15^16,al7)) 
goto a232; 

if (al4 > 0 && al4 < (al U12^134il5^16,al7)) 
gotoa242; 

if (al5 > 0 && al5 < (al U12,al3^144il6.al7)) 
goto a2S2; 

if (al6 > 0 && al6 < (al U12^13^14,al5,al7)) 
gotoa262; 
if(al7>0); 

gotoa272; 

a212;fi;^tf(fp_out,*'Choose #5 @ 6 in.(As = 0.62 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto b212; 

a222:^printf(fp_out,"(rhoosc #6 @ 6 in.(As = 0.88 sq.in./ft.)Nn’’); 
goto b222; 

a232:^printf(fp_out,"Choosc #7 @ 6 in.(As = 1.20 sq.in./fL)\n"); 
goto b232; 

a242:fprintf(fp_out,"Choosc #8 @ 6 in.(As = 1.58 sq.in./ft.)Nn"); 
goto b242; 

a252:Q}rintf(fp_out,"Choose #9 @ 6 in.(As = 2.00 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto b252; 

a262:fprintf(fp_out,"Choosc #10 @ 6 in.(As = 2.54 sq.in./fL)\n"); 
goto b262; 

a272:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #11 @ 6 in.(As = 3.12 sq.in./fL)\n"); 
goto b272; 
b212nvqdas « 0.62; 
goto c22; 

b222:reqdas » 0.88; 
goto c22; 

b232:reqdas » 1.20; 
goto c22; 

b242:reqdas -1.58; 
goto c? 2; 

b252nvqdas = 2.(X); 
goto c22; 

b262;Tcqdas = 2.54; 
gotoc22; 

b272:reqdas s 3.12; 

c22:df = sqn(2.0 * reqdas / 3.1415926); 

Idl = (20 * reqdas * fy) / (sqrt(1000.0 * fc)); 

ld2 = 0.4*df*fy; 

if(kll>ld2) 

Idf^^ldl; 
else Idf s ld2; 

Id»klf* 1.4; 

fprintf(^ out,"The lequiied development length of the bottom bars is %.2f in.\n"4d); 
Idl * Od + 5.0)/12.0; 

fjprintf(fp_out,”Use an embedment length of %.lf ft from the front face of the 
walNi^\n"Jdl); 


fiprintf(fp_out,"--\n"); 

^|»intf(fp_out," design of reinforcement of wall Nn"); 

f^rintf(fp_out,"---\n\n"); 


vutoe « 1.7 * (((pi 1 + pl3) ♦ 0.5) - wfooting) ♦ t; 
mul 1 = 0.5 * pi 1 * x4 ♦ x4 * 0.6667; 


D-21 






mul2 = 0.5 * pl2 * x4 * x4 * 0.3333; 
mul3 = 0.5 * wfooting ♦ x4 ♦ x4; 
muw = 1.7 * (mul 1 + inul2 - mul3); 
y = hl -t; 

ruwall = mu * 12000 / (0.9 * 12 ♦ y * y); 

ronwall = (1 - sqn(1.0 - (0.(X12 * m * ruwall / fy))) / m; 

if (minro > ronwall) 

ronwaU = 1.333 * ronwall; 
else rcMiwall = ronwall; 
reqdas = rraiwall ♦ 12 * (hi - 1 ); 
al 1 s 0.62 - reqdas; 
al2 - 0.88 - reqdas; 
al3 = 120 - reqdas; 
al4 = 1.58 - reqdas; 
al5 = 2.00 - reqdas; 
al6 = 2.54 - reqdas; 
al7 = 3.12 - reqdas; 

if (al 1 > 0 && al 1 < (al2.al3,al4,al5,al6.al7)) 
goto a312; 

if (al2 > 0 && al2 < (al U12,al4.al5,al6,al7)) 
goto a322; 

if (al3 > 0 && al3 < (al U12^14,al5,al6.al7)) 
goto a332; 

if (al4 > 0 && al4 < (al U12^13^15,al6.al7)) 
goto a342; 

if (al5 > 0 && al5 < (al I,al24il3^14^16,al7)) 
goto a352; 

if (al6 > 0 && al6 < (al I,al2,al3.al4,al5,al7)) 
goto a362; 
if(al7>0) 

goto a372; 

a312:fpnntf(fp_out,"Choose #5 @ 6 in.(As = 0.62 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto bM2; 

a322:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #6 @ 6 in.(As = 0.88 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto b322; 

a332:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #7 @ 6 in.(As = 1.20 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto b332; 

a342:fprintf(lp_out,"Choose #8 @ 6 in.(As = 1.58 sq.in.^t)\n"); 
goto b342; 

a352:fprintf(fp_out,"<rhoosc #9 @ 6 in.(As = 2.00 sq.in./ft)Nn"); 
goto b352; 

a362:fprintf(^_out,"Qioose #10 @ 6 in.(As = 2.54 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto b362; 

a372:^ntf(fp_oul,"Choosc #11 @ 6 in.(As = 3.12 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto b372; 
b312neqdas s 0.62; 
goioc32; 

b322Teqdas = 0.88; 
gotoc32; 

b332;reqdas = 120; 
gotoc32; 

b342:reqdas = 1.58; 
gotoc32; 

b352Teqdas = 2.00; 


D-22 







gou> c32; 

b362.ie^las = 2.54; 
gDtoc32; 

b372:reqdas = 3.12; 

c32:df = sqrt(2.0 * reqdas / 3.1415926); 

Idl = (20 * reqdas * fy) / (sqrt(1000.0 * fc)); 

ld2 = 0.4*df*fy; 

if(ldl>ld2) 

ldf = ldl; 
elseldf«ld2; 
ld = ldf*1.4; 

fprintf(j^ out,"Thc required development length of the bottom bars is %.2f in.\n",ld); 
Idl = (Id + 5.0)712.0; 

fprintf(^_out,"Use an embedment length of %.lf ft. \nNn\n",ldl); 

goto layer50; 

* 


/*_(when the water level is in the first layer)_*/ 

w22:fprintf(fp_out," 

if (hw <= hl2) 

goto hw222; 
gbl = gl - 62.5; 
gb2 = g2 - 62.5; 
hllw = hi - hw; 
hwl2 = hw - hl2; 
x2 = ca* gl *hllw; 
x3 = ca*hwl2*gbl; 
x4 = gw * hwl2; 

aalpha » alpha2 * 3.1415926 / 180.0; 
ca = (1 • (sin(aalpha)))/(l -f (sin(aalpha))); 

fprintf(fp_out,"-\n"); 

fpnntf(f^_out," calculations for two layers with water-table 'n"); 
fprintf(fi)_out," when the water level is in the first layer Nn"); 

fp™tf(^_out,"-Nn"); 

ti[jrintf(fip_out,"Coefficient of active pressure = %.4fVn”,ca); 

x5 =ca * gb2 * hl2; 

x6 = gw ♦ hl2; 

pi = xl * hllw; 

p2 « 0.5 *x2* hllw; 

p3 = (xl + x2) ♦ hwl2; 

p4 * 0.5 * (x3 + x4) * hwl2; 

p5 = (xl + x2 + x3 + x4) ♦ hl2; 

p6 * 0.5 * hl2 ♦ (x5 + x6); 

p = (pi ♦ (hl2 + hwl2 + hllw72)) + (p2 * (hllw/3 + hwl2 + hl2)) + (p3 * (hwl2/2 + 

hl2)) + (p4 * (hwi2/3 + hl2)) + (p5 ♦ hl2 * 0.5) + (p6 * hl2/3); 

wsubl »(suicht * gsur) + (gl ♦ hi Iw) + ((gbl+gw) ♦ hwl2) + ((gb2+gw) * hl2); 

X = pow(((2 * p) / wsubl ),0.5); 
goto lay21b; 

Uy21bbq)rintf(" Nn"); 

fp^tf(^_out,”Recalculating as F.S. is below lequirementlNn"); 

X = X + 0.2; 
lay21b:lbase « 1.5 * x; 

fp*intf(fp_out,"Base length of the footing = %.2f ftNriNn"4base); 


D-23 







ml = pi * (hllw/2 + hwl2 + hl2 > t); 
m2 = p2 * (hi lw/3 + hwl2 + hl2 -1); 
m3 » p3 * (hwl2/2 + hl2 -1); 
in4 = (p4 ♦ (hwl2/3 + hl2 -1)); 
m5 = p5 * (hl2/2 - 1 ); 
m6 = p6*(hl2/3-t); 

mu = (1.7 ♦ (ml + m2 + m3 + m4 + m5 + m6)) / 1(XX); 
tl = pow(((mu * 12000y(0.9 * ru * 12.0)),0.5); 
tb = tl + 5; 
if(tb<12) 

tb = 12.0; 
tt = 12.0; 

f^tf(fp_out,"STEM DIMENSIONSiNn"); 
fprintf(^_out,"--\n"); 

^rintf(fi)_out," a) stem thickness at the bottom = %d in.\n”,tb); 
fprintf(fp_out," b) stem thickness at the top = %d in.\n\n",tt); 
wl = (gsur / 1(X)0) * surcht * (x -1); 
w2 = (gl / 1000) * hi Iw * (X -1); 
w3 = (gbl / 1000) * hwl2 * (x -1); 
tbt = tb - tt; 

w34 = (gb2/ 1000) * (hl2 -1) ♦ (x - 1); 

w4 * (0.15 - (gl / 1000)) * ((tbt * hiIw * hllw) / (24 * (hi - 1))); 

15x = tbt * hi Iw / (hi -1); 

15y = tbt*hll/(hl -t); 

15a»(15x + 15y)*0.5*hwl2; 

I5c = 15x * I5x * hwl2 * 0.5; 

I5d » 0.5 * hwl2 * (15y - 15x) * (((15y - 15x)/3) + 15x); 

w5 = (0.15 - (gbl /1000)) * 15a; 

w56 = (0.15 - (gb2 / 1000)) * ((15y + tbt) * 0.5 ♦ (hl2 - 1 )); 

w6 = 0.15 * Ibase * t; 

w7=0.15*(hl-t); 

wtot = wl + w2 + w3 + w34 + w4 + w5 + w56 + w6 + w7; 
levl = (X -1) * 0.5; 

lev4 = (2 * levl) - ((tbt ♦hllw) / ((hl-t) * 36)); 
lcv5 = (2 * levl) - (05c + 15d) / 15a); 

156a = 15y*hl2; 

156aa = 15y *0.5; 

156b = (tbt - 15y) • hl2 * 0.5; 

156bb = 15y + ((tbt - 15y)/3); 

156x = ((156a ♦ 156aa) + (156b * 156bb)) / OSba + 156b); 

lev56 = (2 ♦ levl) - 156x; 

lev6 = Ibase * 0.5; 

lev7 = (levl ♦ 2.0) + 0.5; 

mwl = wl * levl; 

mw2 = w2 * levl; 

mw3='w3 *levl; 

mw34 = w34 * levl; 

niw4 = w4 * lev4; 

mw5 * w5 * lcv5; 

mw56 = w56 * lev56; 

mw6 * w6 * lev6; 

mw7 = w7 * lcv7; 

mwt = mwl + mw2 + mw3 + mw34 + mw4 + mw5 + mw56 + mw6 + mw7; 
ywm = mwt/wtot; 


D-24 





resmom = wtot * (Ibase - ywm); 

ovemom = ((pi * (hllw/2 + hwl2 + hl2)) + (p2 ♦ ((hllw/3) + hwl2 + hl2)) + (p3 * 
(hwl2/2 + hl2)) + (p4 * (hwl2/3 + hl2)) + (p5 * hl2 * 0.5) + (p6 * hi2/3))/1000.0; 
fsover = resmoin/oveinom; 
fprintf(fp_out,"Overtuining stability:Nn"); 

fprintf(fp_out,"--\n"); 

fprintf(fp_out,"Resisting moment = %.2f ft-kipsVn'Vesmom); 
fprintf(^_out, "Overturning moment = %.2f ft-kips'ui",ovemom); 
if (fsover < 2.0) 

goto lay21bb; 
else 

xbar = (mwt + ovemom) / wtot; 

xbarl = lbase/3.0; 

xbar2 = (2.0 * Ibase) / 3.0; 

xbar3 = xbar + .08; 

xbar4 = (xbar - xbar2)*12.0; 

^printf(fp_oui,"Factor of safety against overturning = %.2f / %.2f = %.2f -OK- (F.S. > 
2.0)\nNif«"jresmom,ovemom,fsover); 
if (xbar > xbarl && xbar < xbar2) 

fprintf(fp_out,"The position of the resultant soil pressure due to the service load was 
checked and found to be within the middle-third of the base — OK>n\n"); 
else if (xbar > xbarl && xbar < xbar3) 

fprintf(^_out,"The resultant soil pressure lies %.lf in. outside the middle-third, 
howeverdt is very close, and the limiting condition of zero stress at the heel is considered 
adequate.\n\n\n ",xbar4); 
if (xbar > xbarl && xbar > xbar3) 
goto lay21bb; 

fprintf(^_out,"Sliding stability;Nn"); 

^ntf(fp_out,"-^\n"); 

fsldg = (pi + p2 + p3 + p4 + p5 + p6) / 1000; 
fftic = miu * wtot; 
fssldg = ffric / fsldg; 

fprintf(fp_out,"Sliding force = %.2f kips\n",fsldg); 
fprintf(fp_out,"Resisting force = %.2f kips\n",fMc); 
fprintf(^_out,"Factor of safety against sliding = %.2f / %.2f = 
%.2f\n",ffric,ftldg,fssldg); 
if (fssldg > 1.5) 
gotostp21; 

else fprintf(fp_out,"Key to be provided as facmr of safety against sliding (%.2f) is less 
than i.5\n"/ssldg); 
ke = 8 ♦ t; 

fprintf(^_out,"Key dimensions(CRSI Handbook):The key has a square section (%.lfin. 

X %.lfin.)\n"Jce,ke); 

^rintf(fp_out," Generally it is desirable to place the front face of the key about 5 
in. in torn of the back face of the stem.This will permit anchoring the stem reinforcement, 
if present, in the key.\n\riSn"); 
gotoheeLZl; 

stp21:fprintf(^_out,"— OK (F.S. > 1.5).\n\n\n"); 

heel21 :fprintf(fp_out,"--\n"); 

fprintf(fp_out," design of heel cantilever \n"); 

fprintf(fp_out, " -^\n\n"); 

wearthl = gl ♦ hi Iw / 1000.0; 
weaith2 = gbl ♦ hwl2 / 1000.0; 
wearthS = gb2 ♦ (hl2 - 1 ) / 1000.0; 


D-25 









wsurch = gsur * surcht / 1000.0; 
wfoodng = 0.15 * t; 

wu = (1.4 ♦ (wearthl + wearth2 + wearthS + wfooting)) + (1.7 * wsurch); 

lcv8 = X - (tb /12.0); 

muw = 0.5 * wu * lev8 * lev8; 

vuw = wu * lev8; 

phivcw = 0.0204 * pow((fc * 1000.0),0.5) * tb; 
if (phivcw < vuw) 

dreqd = (tb * vuw / phivcw) + 1.0; 
else goto coina21; 
tin = dreqd + 2.5; 

^ntf(^_out,"Heel thickness = %d\n",tln); 
run = (muw * 12000) / (0.9 * 12.0 * dr^d * dreqd); 
ron = (1.0 - pow((1.0 - (0.002 * m * run / fy)),0.5))/m; 
minro = 0.2 / fy; 
if (minro > ron) 

ron = 1.333 * ron; 
else ron = ron; 
gotocomma21; 
coma21: ron = ro; 

comma21:reqdas = ron * 12.0 ♦ dreqd; 
al 1 = 0.62 - reqdas; 
al2 = 0.88 - reqdas; 
al3 = 1.20 - reqdas; 
al4 = 1.58 - reqdas; 
al5 = 2.(K) - reqdas; 
al6 = 2.54 - reqdas; 
al7 = 3.12 - reqdas; 
if (al 1 > 0 && al 1 < 
goto adl; 

if(al2>0&&al2< 
gotoad2; 

if (al3>0&&al3< 
goto ad3; 

if (al4 > 0 && al4 < 
goto ad4; 

if (al5 > 0 && al5 < 
goto ad 5 ; 

if (al6 > 0 && al6 < 
gotoad6; 
if(al7>0); 

goto ad7; 

adl:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #5 @ 6 in.(As = 0.62 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
gotobdl; 

ad2:f^ntf(fp_out,"Choose #6 @ 6 in.(As = 0.88 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto bd2; 

ad3:fprintf(fip_out,"Choose #7 <§> 6 in.(As = 1.20 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto bd3; 

ad4:fprintf(fp_out,"Qioose #8 @ 6 in.(As = 1.58 sq.in./ft.)Nn"); 
goto bd4; 

ad5:^ntf(fp_out,"Qioose #9 @ 6 in.(As = 2.00 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
gotobd5; 

ad6:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #10(2) 6 in.(As = 2.54 sq.in./ft.)Nn"); 
goto bd6; 


(al2,al3,al4,al5,al6,al7)) 

(all,al3,al4,al5,al6,al7)) 

(all,al2,al4,al5,al6,al7)) 

(all,al2,al3,al5^16,al7)) 

(alM12^13,al4,al6,al7)) 

(alU12^13,al4^15,al7)) 


D-26 






ad7:^)rintf(^_out,"Qioose #11 @ 6 in.(As = 3.12 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 

goto bd7; 

bdlrreqdas = 0.62; 

gotocl21; 

bd2:ieqdas = 0.88; 

gotocl21; 

bd3.Teqda5 = 1.20; 

gotocl21; 

bd4:reqdas = 1.58; 

gotocl21; 

bd5;reqdas = 2.00; 

gotocl21; 

bd6:Teqdas = 2.54; 

gotocl21; 

bd7:reqdas = 3.12; 

cl21:df = pow((2.0 * reqdas / 3.1415926),0.5); 

Idl = (20 * reqdas * fy)/(pow((l(X)0.0 ♦ fc),0.5)); 

ld2 = 0.4 * df * fy; 

if(ldl>ld2) 

ldf=ldl; 
elseldf = ld2; 
ld = ldf * 1.4; 


fprintf(fp_out,"The required development length of the bars (at the top) is %.2f in. into 
the toe of the footing measured from the stem reinfoicemenL''4d); 

Idll = (Id + 5.0)712.0; 

fprintf(fp_out,"Use an embedment length of %.lf ft. from the backface of the 
wall.NnNnNn'Mdll); 

^rintf(^_out,"--\n"); 

^printf(fij_out," design of toe cantilever Nn"); 

fprintf(^_out,"-^\n\n"); 

pi 1 = (2.0 * wtot)/lbase; 


x4 = 0.5 * x; 


pl2 = x * pll /Ibase; 

pl3 = Gba% -1) * pi 1 / Ibase; 

vutoe = 1.7 * (((pi 1 + pl3) ♦ 0.5) - wfooting) * t; 

mul 1 = 0.5 * pi 1 * x4 ♦ x4 * 0.6667; 

mu 12 = 0.5 * pl2 * x4 * x4 * 0.3333; 

mul3 = 0.5 * wfooting * x4 ♦ x4; 

muw = 1.7 * (mull + mul2 - mul3); 

d2221:d22 = (t * 12.0) - 2.5; 

phivc = 0.85 ♦ 2.0 * sqn(fc * 1000) * 12.0 * d22 / 1000.0; 
if (phivc > vutoe) 
goto runl, 

else d22 = d22 +1.0; 
gotod2221; 

run21:fprintf(fp_out,"PhiVc(%.2f k.) > Vu(%.2f k.) — OKSn",phivc,vutoe); 

run = (muw * 12000) / (0.9 * 12.0 ♦ d22 * d22); 

ron = (1.0 - sqn(1.0 - (0.002 * m * run / fy)))/m; 

minro = 0.2 / fy; 

if (minro > ron) 

ron = 1.333 * ron; 
else ron = ron; 
goto comml21; 
coml21:ron s ro; 


D-27 





coinml21:reqdas = ron ♦ 12.0 * d22; 

al 1 = 0.62 - reqdas; 

al2 = 0.88 - reqdas; 

al3 = 1.20 - reqdas; 

al4 = 1.58 - reqdas; 

alS = 2.00 • reqdas; 

al6 = 2.54 - reqdas; 

al7 = 3.12 - reqdas; 

if (al 1 > 0 && al 1 < (al2,al3^14,al5^16,al7)) 
gotoael; 

if (al2 > 0 && al2 < (al U12^14^15^16,al7)) 
goto ae2; 

if (al3 > 0 && al3 < (al U12,al4^15,al6,al7)) 
goto ae3; 

if (al4 > 0 && al4 < (al I,al2,al3,al5,al6,al7)) 
goto ae4; 

if (al5 > 0 && al5 < (al I,al2,al3,al4,al6,al7)) 
goto ae5; 

if (al6 > 0 && al6 < (al I,al2^13.al4,al5,al7)) 
goto ae6; 
if (al7 > 0); 

goto ae7; 

acl:fprintf(^_out,"Choose #5 @ 6 in.(As = 0.62 sq.in./fL)Nn"); 
goto bel; 

ae2:fprintf(^_out,"Choose #6 @ 6 in.(As = 0.88 sq.in./ft.)Nn"); 
goto be2; 

ae3:fprintf(fp_out,"Crhoose #7 @ 6 in.(As * 1.20 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto be3; 

ae4:fprintf(^_out,"Choose #8 @ 6 in.(As = 1.58 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto be4; 

ac5:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #9 @ 6 in.(As = 2.(X) sq.in./ft.)\n”); 
goto bc5; 

ac6:fprintf(fp_out,"Choosc #10 @ 6 in.(As = 2.54 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto be6; 

ac7;fprintf(fp_out,"(rhoosc #11 @ 6 in.(As = 3.12 sq.in./ft.)Nn"); 
goto be7; 

bel:Teqdas = 0.62; 
gotocZZl; 
be2:reqdas = 0.88; 
goto cZZl; 
be3:reqdas = 1.20; 
gotocZZl; 
be4:Teqdas = 1.58; 
goto c221; 
be5n^das = 2.(X); 
gotocZZl; 
be6:reqdas = 2.54; 
gotocZZl; 
be7:reqdas = 3.12; 

c221:df = sqrt(2.0 * reqdas / 3.1415926); 

Idl =( 20 * reqdas * fy) / (sqrt(1000.0 ♦ fc)); 

ld2 = 0.4*df*fy; 

if(ldl>ld2) 

ldf = ldl; 


D-28 






else Idf = ld2; 


fjprintf(fjp out,'Thc required development length of the bottom bars is %.2f in.Nn’Md); 
ldl = (Id + 5.0)712.0; 

^)rintf(fp_out,"Use an embedment length of %.lf ft. from the front face of the 


wall\n\n\n"4dl); 

fprintf(^_out,"- 

\n");fprintf(fp_out,'’ design of reinforcement of wallVn"); 

fprintf(fp_out,’’--NriSn"); 


vutoe = 1.7 ♦ (((pi 1 + pl3) * 0.5) - wfooting) * t; 

mul 1 = 0.5 ♦ pi 1 * x4 * x4 * 0.6661', 

mu 12 = 0.5 * pl2 * x4 * x4 ♦ 0.3333; 

mul3 = 0.5 * wfooting * x4 * x4; 

muw = 1.7 * (mul 1 + mul2 - mul3); 


y = hl -t; 

ruwall = mu * 12000 / (0.9 * 12 ♦ y ♦ y); 
ronwall = (1 - sqrt(1.0 - (0.(X)2 ♦ m * ruwall / fy))) 7 m; 
if (minro > ronwall) 

ronwall = 1.333 * ronwall; 
else ronwall = ronwall; 
reqdas = ronwall * 12 * (hi -1); 
all =0.62 - reqdas; 
al2 = 0.88 - reqdas; 
al3 = 1.20 - reqdas; 
al4 = 1.58 - reqdas; 
al5 = 2.00 - reqdas; 
al6 = 2.54 - reqdas; 
al7 = 3.12 - reqdas; 

if (all > 0 && all < (al2,al3.al4,al5^16.al7)) 
goto afl; 

if (al2 > 0 && al2 < (al I,al2,al4,al5,al6,al7)) 
gotoaf2; 

if (al3 > 0 && al3 < (al U12,al4,al5,al6,al7)) 
gotoaf3; 

if (al4 > 0 && al4 < (al U12^13,al5,al6,al7)) 
gotoaf4; 

if (al5 > 0 && al5 < (al M12^13^14,al6,al7)) 
goto af5; 

if (al6 > 0 && al6 < (al U12^13^14^15,al7)) 
goto af6; 
if (al7 > 0) 

gotoaf?; 

afl :f^ntf(fp_out,"Choose #5 @ 6 in.(As = 0.62 
goto bfl; 

af2:^)rintf(fp_out,"Choose #6 @ 6 in.(As = 0.88 
gotobf2; 

af3:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #7 @ 6 in.(As = 1.20 
goto bf3; 

rf4:^jrintf(fp_out,"Choose #8 @ 6 in.(As = 1.58 
goto bf4; 

af5:^ntf(fp_out,"Choose #9 @ 6 in.(As = 2.00 
goto bf5; 

af6:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #10 @ 6 in.(As = 2.54 sq.in.7ft.)\n"); 
goto bf6; 


sq.in.7ft.)Nn"); 

sq.in.7ft.)Nn"); 

sq.in.7ft.)Nn"); 

sq.in.7ft-)\n"); 

sq.in.7ft)Nn"); 


D-29 









af7:l^)rintf(fp_out,"Choose #11 @ 6 in.(As = 3.12 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto bf7; 

bflrreqdas = 0.62; 
gotoc321; 
bf2:reqdas = 0.88; 
gotoc321; 
bf3:req(las = 1.20; 
gotoc321; 
bf4nreqdas = 1.58; 
gotoc321; 
bfSnicqdas = 2.00; 
gotoc321; 
bf6:Teqdas * 2.54; 
gotoc321; 
bf7:reqdas = 3.12; 

c321:(Uf = sqrt(2.0 * reqdas / 3.1415926); 

Idl = (20 * reqdas ♦ fy) / (sqrt(1000.0 * fc)); 
ld2 = 0.4 * df * fy; 
if(ldl >ld2) 

ldf=ldl; 
else Idf = ld2; 
ld = ldf*1.4; 

fprintf(^ out,"The required development length of the bottom bars is %.2f in.Nn'Md); 
Idl = (Id + 5.0)712.0; 

fprintf(fp_out,"Use an embedment length of %.lf ft.\n\n\n",ldl); 
goto layer50; 


/* calculations for two layers with water-table */ 

/*_(when the water level is in the second layer)_*/ 

hw222:printf(" Nn"); 

^ntf(fp_out,"-Nn"); 

fprintf(fp_out," calculations for two layers with water-table Nn"); 
^printf(^_out," when the water level is in the second layer Nn"); 
fprintf(^_out,"-'«"); 


gb2 = g2 - 62.5; 

hl21 =hl2-hw; 

x2 = ca*gl *hll; 

aalpha = alpha2 * 3.1415926 /180.0; 

ca = (1 - (sin(aalpha)))7(l + (sin(aalpha))); 

flprintf(fip_out,"Coefficient of active pressure = %.4fyn",ca); 

x3 *ca * hl2i * g2; 

x4 = ca • gb2 * hw; 

x5 * gw * hw, 

x6 » x4 + x5; 

pl*xl*hll; 

p2 = 0.5*x2*hll; 

p3*(xl +x2)*hl21; 

p4 = 0.5*x3*hl21; 

p5 = (xl + x2 + x3) ♦ hw; 

p6 = 0.5 * hw * x6; 

p = (pi * (hl2 + hi 1/2)) + (p2 * (hi 1/3 + hl2)) + (p3 * (hl21/2 + hw)) + (p4 * (hl21/3 
+ hw)) + ^5 * hw * 0.5) + (p6 ♦ hw/3); 


D-30 










wsubl = (surcht * gsur) + (gl * hi 1) + (g2 * hl21) + (gb2 ♦ hw) + (gw * hw); 
X = pow((2 * p / wsubl),0.5); 
goto lay221b; 

lay221bb:printf(" Vn"); 

fprintf(^_out,"Recalculating as F.S. is below requirementIVn"); 

X = X + 0.2; 

lay221b:lbase = 1.5 * x; 

^rintf(^_out,”Base length of the footing = %.2f ft.\nNn",lbase); 

ml=pl *(hll/2 + hl2-t); 

m2 = p2*(hll/3 + hl2-t); 

ms = p3 * (hl21/2 + hw -1); 

m4 = (p4 * (hl21/3 + hw -1)); 

in5 = p5 * (hw/2 -1); 

m6 = p6 * (hw/3 -1); 

mu = (1.7 * (ml + m2 + m3 + m4 + m5 + m6)) / 1(XX); 
tl = pow(((mu * 12(XX))/(0.9 * ra * 12.0)),0.5); 
tb = tl + 5; 
if(tb<12) 

tb = 12.0; 
tt = 12.0; 

fprintf(fp_out,”STEM DIMENSIONS:\n"); 

fpiintf(^_out,"-An"); 

fprintf(fp_out," a) stem thickness at the bottom = %d in.\n",tb); 
f^ntf(fp_out," b) stem thickness at the top = %d in.\nNn",tt); 
wl = (gsur /1000) ♦ surcht * (x -1); 
w2 = (gl/1000)*hll *(x- 1); 
w3 = (g2/1000)*hl21 *(x. 1); 
tbt = tb - tt; 

w34 »(gb2 / 1000) * (hw -1) * (x - 1); 
xh4 = (tbt * hi 1 * hi 1)/ (24 * (hi -1)); 
w4 = (0.15 - (gl / 1000)) * xh4 * 0.5; 
w5 = (0.15 - (g2/1000)) ♦ xh4; 
xh6 = tbt * (hw - 1 ) / (hi -1); 
xh5 = tbt - xh6 - xh4; 

w6 = 0.5 * hl21 * xh5 * (0.15 - (g2/1000)); 
w7 = (tbt - xh6) ♦ (0.15 - gb2/1000) * (hw -1); 
w8 = xh6 * (0.15 - gb2/1000) * (hw -1) * 0.5; 
w9 = 0.15*(hl -t); 
wlO =0.15*t*Ibase; 

wtot» wl + w2 + w3 + w34 + w4 + w5 + w6 + w7 + w8 + w9 + wlO; 

levl = (x -1) ♦ 0.5; 

lcv4 = (2*lcvl)-(xh4/3); 

lcv5 = (2*levl)-(xh4/2); 

lcv6 * (2 ♦ lev!) - xh4 - (xh5 / 3); 

lcv7 = (2 * levl) - ((xh4 + xh5) * 0.5); 

lcv8 = (2 * levl) - (xh4 + xh5) - (xh6iG); 

lev9»(2*lcvl) + 0.5; 

levlO »Ibase ♦ 0.5; 

mwl * wl * levl; 

mw2s w2 * levl; 

mw3* w3 •levl; 

mw34 = w34 * levl; 

inw4 » w4 • lev4; 

mw5 « w5 ♦ lcv5; 


D-31 








mw6 = w6 * lev6; 
mw7 = w7 ♦ lcv7; 
mw8 = w8 * lcv8; 
mw9 = w9 * lev9; 
mwlO = wlO * levlO; 

mwt = mwl + mw2 + inw3 + mw34 + mw4 + mwS + niw6 + mw7 + mw8 + mwv + 
mwlO; 

ywm = mwt/wtot; 

resmom = wtot * (Ibase - ywm); 

ovemom = ((pi * (hi 1/2 + hw)) + (p2 * ((hi 1/3) + hw)) + (p3 * (hl21/2 + hw)) + (p4 * 
(hl21/3 + hw)) + (p5 * hw * 0.5) + (p6 ♦ hw/3))/1000.0; 
fsover = lesmom/ovemom; 
fprintf(^_out,"CKrertiiining stabilitytXn"); 

fprintf(^_out,"--n"); 

fprintf(^_out,’’Resisting moment = ii.2f ft-kips\n"jesinom); 
fprintf(f^_out,"(3venuming moment = %.2f ft-ldps\n",ovemom); 
if (fsover < 2.0) 

goto lay221bb; 

else xbar = (mwt + ovemom) / wtot; 

xbarl s lbase/3.0; 

xbar2 = (2.0 * Ibase) / 3.0; 

xbar3 = xbar + .08; 

xbar4 = (xbar - xbar2)*12.0; 

fprintf(fp_out,"Factor of safety against overturning = %.2f / %.2f = %.2f -OK- (F.S. > 

2.0)\riSn'«’’jresmom,ovemom,fsover); 

if (xbar > xbarl && xbar < xbar2) 

fprintf(^_out,’’The position of the resultant soil pressure due to the service load was 
checked and found to be within the middle-third of the base — OKSnNn"); 
else if (xbar > xbarl && xbar < xbar3) 

^)rintf(^_out,"The resultant soil {i^ssuie lies %.lf in. outside the middle-third, 
howeverdt is very close, and the limiting condition of zero stress at the heel is considered 
adequate.NnSn\n'’,xbar4); 
if (xbar > xbarl && xbar > xbar3) 
goto lay221bb; 

^ntf(^_out,’'Sliding stability;\n'’); 

fprintf(fp_out,’'-^Vn"); 

fsldg = (pi + p2 + p3 + p4 + p5 + ^) / 1(X)0; 
ffric = miu * wtot; 
fssldg s f&ic / fsldg; 

fprintf(fp_out,"Sli^g force = %.2f kips\n'’,fsldg); 

^printf(^_out,"Resisting force = %.2f kipsNn’’4ftic); 
f^ntf(f^_out,Tactor of safety against sliding = %.2f / %.2f= 
%.2f«'’4fTic,fsldg,fssldg); 
if (fssldg > 1.5) 

gotos^221; 

else fprintf(fp_out,’TCey to be provided as factor of safety against sliding (%.2f) is less 
than 1.5Sn",fssldg); 
kc * 8 * t; 

fprintf(fp_out,"Key dimensions(CRSI Handbook):The key has a square section (%.lfin. 

X %.l^.)\n"jtejcc); 

fpiintf(fp_ctit," Generally it is desirable to place the front face of the key about 5 
in. in firoit of the back face of the stcm.This will permit anchoring the stem reinforcement, 
if present, in the key.\n\n\n"); 
gotohee2121; 


D-32 







stp221 rprintfC-^Vn"); 

fiprintf(^_out,''— OK (F.S. > 1.5).\n\n\n"); 
hcc2121:printf("--\n"); 

fl>rii«f(^_out,"- 

fprintf(fp_out," design of heel cantilever \n"); 

fprintf(fp_out,”--Nn\n") 

wearthl = gl * hi 1 /1000.0; 
wearth2 = g2 * hl21 /1000.0; 
wealths = gb2 * (hw - 1 ) /1000.0; 
wsuich = gsur * surcht /1000.0; 
wfooting = 0.15 * t; 

wu = (1.4 ♦ (wearthl + wearth2 + wearthS + wfooting)) + (1.7 * wsurch); 

lev8 = X - (d) /12.0); 

muw = 0.5 * wu * lev8 * lev8; 

vuw = wu * lev8; 

phivcw = 0.0204 * sqrt(fc * 1000.0) * tb; 
if (phivcw < vuw) 

dreqd = (tb * vuw / phivcw) + 1.0; 
else goto conia221; 
tin = dreqd + 2.5; 

fprintf(fp_out,"Heel thickness = %dSn",tln); 
run = (muw * 12000) / (0.9 * 12.0 * drixid ♦ dreqd); 
ron = (1.0 - sqrt(1.0 - (0.002 • m * run / fy)))/m; 
minro = 0.2 / fy; 
if (minro > ron) 

ron = 1.333 * ton; 
else ron = ron; 
goto C(xnma221; 
coma221: ion ^ro; 

comma221:reqdas = ton ♦ 12.0 * dreqd; 

al 1 = 0.62 • reqdas; 

al2 = 0.88 • reqdas; 

al3 -1.20- reqdas; 

al4 = 1.58 - reqdas; 

al5 = 2.00 - reqdas; 

al6 = 2.54 - reqdas; 

al7 = 3.12 - reqdas; 

if (al 1 > 0 && al 1 < (al2^13^144il5^16,al7)) 
gotoagl; 

if (al2 > 0 && al2 < (al U13^14^15^16,al7)) 

gCMOS^ 

if (al3 > 0 && al3 < (al U12^14^15^16,al7)) 
g(^ag3; 

if (ai4 > 0 && al4 < (al M12^13^15^16,al7)) 
go{oag4; 

if (al5 > 0 && al5 < (al U123l3^14^16,al7)) 
goto ag5; 

if (al6 > 0 && al6 < (al U124il3^14^15,al7)) 
gotoagti; 
if(al7>0); 

gotoag7; 

agl:fprintf(fp_out,"Qioose #5 @ 6 in.(As = 0.62 sq.inyfL)\n"); 
goto 1^1; 

ag2;^[^tf(fp_out,"Choose #6 @ 6 in.(As * 0.88 sq.inyft.)\n"); 


D-33 










goto bg2; 

ag3:fiwintf(fp_out,"Choose #7 @ 6 in.(As = 1^0 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto bg3; 

ag4:fi^tf(fp_out,"Choose #8 @ 6 in.(As = 1.58 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto bg4; 

ag5:fpiintf(fp_out,"Choose #9 @ 6 in.(As = 2.00 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto bg5; 

ag6;fi^ntf(fp_out,"Choose #10 @ 6 in.(As = 2.54 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto bg6; 

ag7:^riiitf(^_out,"Choose #11 @ 6 in.(As = 3.12 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto bg7; 

bgl:reqdas = 0.62; 
gotoc2221; 
bg2.Teqdas = 0.88; 
gotoc2221; 
bg3;7eqdas = 1.20; 
gotoc2221; 
bg4.Teqdas = 1.58; 
gotoc2221; 
bg5;reqdas = 2.00; 
gotoc2221; 
bg6;reqdas = 2.54; 
gotoc2221; 
bg7:reqdas = 3.12; 

c2221:df = sqrt(2.0 * reqdas / 3.1415926); 

Idl = (20 * reqdas * fy)/(sqit(1000.0 * fc)); 

ld2 = 0.4*df*fy; 

if(ldl>ld2) 

ldf = ldl; 
elseldf«ld2; 

Id = ldf* 1.4; 

fprintf(fp_out,"The required development length of die bars (at the top) is %.2f in. into 
the toe of the footing measured firom the stem reinforcemenL"4d); 

Idll = (Id + 5.0)/12.0; 

fprintf(fp_out,"Usc an embedment length of %.lf ft from the backface of the 


waU.\n\n\n",ldll); 

fprintf(fp_out,"--\n"); 

fprintf(fp_out" design of toe cantilever \n"); 

fprintf(^_out,"--Nn\n"); 


pi 1 = (2.0 * wtot)/lbase; 

x4 = 0.5 * x; 

pl2 = x*pll/lbase; 

pl3 = ObaM - 1 ) * pi 1 / Ibase; 

vutoe * 1.7 ♦ (((pi 1 + pl3) * 0.5) - wfooting) * t; 

mul 1 = 0.5 * pi 1 * x4 * x4 * 0.6667; 

mul2 = 0.5 * pl2 * x4 * x4 ♦ 0.3333; 

mul3 •= 0.5 * wfoodng * x4 ♦ x4; 

muw = 1.7 * (mul 1 + mul2 - mul3); 

d2222:d22 = (t * 12.0) - 2.5; 

phivc » 0.85 * 2.0 * sqrt(fc * 1000) * 12.0 * d22 / 1000.0; 
if (phivc > vutoe) 
gotorun2: 

else d22 » d22+1.0; 
goto d2222; 


D-34 








run22:fprintf(fp_out,"PhiVc(%.2f k.) > Vu(%.2f k.) — OK\n",phivc,vutoe); 

run = (muw ♦ 12000) / (0.9 * 12.0 ♦ d22 * d22); 

ron = (1.0 - sqrt(1.0 - (0.002 * m * run / fy)))An; 

mimo = 0.2 / fy; 

if (mimo > ron) 

ron = 1.333 * ron; 
else Fcm = ron; 
goto comml22; 
coml22non = ro; 

coinml22.’teqdas = ron * 12.0 * d22; 

al 1 = 0.62 - reqdas; 

al2 s 0.88 - reqdas; 

al3 = 1.20 - reqdas; 

al4 = 1.58 - reqdas; 

alS = 2.00 - reqdas; 

al6 = 2.54 • reqdas; 

al7 = 3.12 - reqdas; 

if (al 1 > 0 && al 1 < (al2^13.al4,al5.al6.al7)) 
goto ahl; 

if (al2 > 0 && al2 < (al U12,al4,al5,al6,al7)) 
gotoah2; 

if (al3 > 0 && al3 < (al U12^14,al54l6,al7)) 
gotoah3; 

if (al4 > 0 && al4 < (al U12^13.al5^16,al7)) 
gotoah4; 

if (al5 > 0 && al5 < (al M12^13,al4^16,al7)) 
gotoah5; 

if (al6 > 0 && al6 < (al I,al2,al3,al4,al5,al7)) 
goto ah6; 
if(al7>0); 

gotoah7; 

ahl:fptintf(fp_out,"Qioose #5 @ 6 in.(As = 0.62 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto bhl; 

ah2:fprintf(fp_out,"Qioose #6 @ 6 in.(As = 0.88 sq.in./fL)\n"); 
gotobh2; 

ah3:fprintf(fip_out,"Qioose #7 @ 6 in.(As = 1.20 sq.in./fL)\n"); 
goto bh3; 

ah4:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #3 @ 6 in.(As = U8 sqin7ft.)\n"); 
goto bh4; 

ah5:fiprintf(fp_out,"Choose #9 @ 6 in.(As « 2.00 sq.inyft)\n"); 
gotobh5; 

aii6:fprintf(fp_out,"(rhoose #10 @ 6 in.(As = 2.54 sq.inyft.)Nn’’); 
goto bh6; 

Si7:^printf(^_out,”Qioose #11 @ 6 in.(As = 3.12 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 

gotoUi7; 

bhlrreqdas = 0.62; 

gotocZ22; 

bh2:reqdas > 0.88; 

EOtoc222; 
bh3n«qdas « 1.20; 
gotoc2^ 
bh4.Teqdas » 1.58; 
gotocZ22; 
bh5:te(plas « 2.00; 


D-35 




goto c222; 
bh6:reqdas = 2.54; 
gotoc2^; 
bh7:reqdas = 3.12; 

c222;df = sqn(2.0 ♦ reqdas / 3.1415926); 

Idl = (20 * reqdas * fy) / (sqrt(10(X).0 * fc)); 

ld2 = 0.4*df*fy; 

if(ldl>ld2) 

ldf = ldl; 
elseldf = ld2; 
ld = ldf*1.4; 

fprintf(fp_out,"The required development length of the bottom bars is %.2f in.\n",ld); 
Idl = (Id + 5.0)712.0; 

fprintf(^_out,"Use an embedment length of %.lf ft. from the front face of the 
wallsn^\n"jdl); 


fprintf(^_out,"-^Nn"); 

^)rintf(fp_out," design of reinforcement of wall Nn"); 

fprintf(^_out,"--\n\n"); 


vutoe = 1.7 ♦ (((pi 1 + pl3) * 0.5) - wfooting) * t; 

mul 1 = 0.5 * pi 1 * x4 * x4 ♦ 0.^67; 

mul2 = 0.5 * pl2 * x4 * x4 * 0.3333; 

mul3 = 0.5 * wfooting * x4 * x4; 

muw = 1.7 * (mul 1 + mul2 - mul3); 

y = hl -t; 

ruwall = mu ♦ 12000 / (0.9 ♦ 12 * y ♦ y); 

ronwall = (1 - sqrt(1.0 - (0.002 * m * ruwall / fy))) / m; 

if (minro > ronwall) 

ronwall * 1.333 ♦ ronwall; 
else ronwall» ronwall; 
reqdas = ronwall * 12 * (hi -1); 
all = 0.62 - reqdas; 
al2 = 0.88 - reqdas; 
al3 = 1.20 - reqdas; 
al4 = 1.58 - reqdas; 
al5 = 2.(X) - reqdas; 
al6 = 2.54 - reqdas; 
al7 = 3.12 - reqdas; 

if (all > 0 && all < (al2^13^14^15^16,al7)) 
goto ail; 

if (al2 > 0 && al2 < (al U12^14^15^16,al7)) 
gotoai2; 

if (al3 > 0 && al3 < (alU12^14^15^16,al7)) 
gotoai3; 

if (al4 > 0 && al4 < (al U124il3^15^16,al7)) 
gotoai4; 

if (al5 > 0 && al5 < (al U124il3^14^16,al7)) 
gDtDai5; 

if (al6 > 0 && al6 < (al U124il3^14^15.ai7)) 
gotoai6; 
if(al7>0) 

gotoai7; 

ail:fpimtf(fp_out,”Choosc #5 @ 6 in.(As = 0.62 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
gotobil; 

ai2:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #6 @ 6 in.(As = 0.88 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 

D-36 








goto bi2; 

ai3:fpMtf(^_out,"Choosc #7 @ 6 in.(As = 1^0 sq.in./ft-)Nn ’); 
goto bi3; 

ai4:fpratf(^_out,"Choose #8 @ 6 in.(As = 1.58 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto bi4; 

ai5:fp^tf(fp_out,"Choosc #9 @ 6 in.(As = 2.00 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto bi5; 

ai6:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #10 @ 6 in.(As = 2.54 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto bi6; 

ai7:fpMtf(fp_out,"Choose #11 @ 6 in.(As = 3.12 sq.in./ft.)Nn"); 
gotobi7; 

bilnvqdas s 0.62; 
gotoc322; 
bi2;reqdas = 0.88; 
goto c322; 
bi3:reqdas = 1.20; 
goto c322; 
bi4:reqdas =1.58; 
goto c322; 
bi5:ieqdas = 2.00; 
goto c322; 
bi6:reqdas = 2.54; 
goto c322; 
bi7:reqdas = 3.12; 

c322:df = sqrt(2.0 * reqdas / 3.1415926); 

Idl = (20 * reqdas * fy) / (sqn(l(X)0.0 * fc)); 

ld2 = 0.4*df*fy; 

if(ldl>ld2) 

ldf = ldl; 
elseldf = ld2; 
ld = ldf*1.4; 

fprintf(fp out,"The required development length of the bottom bars is %.2f in.\n",ld); 

Idl = (Id + 5.0)712.0; 

fiprintf(fp_out,"Use an embedment length of %.lf ft. \ri\n\n",ldl); 
layer50:printf(" \n"); 

fp™tf(^_out,"--Nn"); 

fl)rintf(f^_out," temperature and shrinkage reinforcement \n"); 

fi^tf(lp_out,"--Nn"); 

ast = 0.0025 * 6*(tb + tt); 
asftont = 0.6667 * ast; 
asback = 0.3333 * ast; 

fprintf(fp_out,"Amount of horizontal temperature and shrinkage steel required on the ftont 
face = %!2f«",as&ont); 

fprintf(fp.out,"Amount of horizontal temperature and shrinkage steel required on the back 

ftu» = %. 2 fVn" 4 isback); 

aal =0.11 - asftont; 

aOl = 0.20 - asftont; 

all =0.31 - asftont; 

al2 = 0.44 • asftont; 

al3 = 0.60 - asftont; 

al4 = 0.79 - asfiront; 

al5 = 1.00 - asftont; 

al6 = 1.27 > asftont; 

al7 » 1.56 - asftont; 


D-37 









fprintf(fp_out,'Tor the face side of the wallrNn"); 

^)rintf(fp_out,"-An"); 

if (aal > 0 && aal < (aOl^l I,al2,al3,al4,al5,al6,al7)) 
gotoabl; 

if (aOi > 0 && aOl < (aal,all,al2,al3,al4,al5,al6,al7)) 
goto ;d>2; 

if (all > 0 && all < (aal,a01,al2,al3,al4,al5,al6,al7)) 
goto ab3; 

if (al2 > 0 && al2 < (aal,aOi,alI,al2.al4,al5,al6.al7)) 
gotoab4; 

if (al3 >10 && al3 < (aal,a01.all.al2,al4.al5,al6,al7)) 
goto abS; 

if (al4 > 0 && al4 < (aal.a01.all,al2.al3,al5,al6,al7)) 
goto ab6; 

if (al5 > 0 && al5 < (aaU01,all,al2,al3.al4.al6,al7)) 
goto ab7; 

if (al6 > 0 && al6 < (aal.a01,al I,al2.al3,al4,al5,al7)) 
goto ab8; 
if(al7>0) 

goto ab9; 

abl:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #3 @ 12 in.(As = 0.11 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
gotocl3; 

ab2:fprintf(fp_out,'’Choose #4 @ 12 in.(As = 0.20 sq.in./fL)\n"); 
gotocl3; 

ab3:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #5 @ 12 in.(As = 0.31 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
gotocl3; 

ab4:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #6 @ 12 in.(As = 0.44 sq.in./ft.)\n”); 
gotocl3; 

ab5;fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #7 @ 12 in.(As = 0.60 sq.in./ft.)\n”); 
goto cl3; 

ab6:fprinti(^_out,"Choose #8 @ 12 in.(As = 0.79 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
gotocl3; 

ab7;fprintf(fp_out,"<rhoose #9 @ 12 in.(As = 1.00 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
gotocl3; 

ab8:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #10 @ 12 in.(As = 1.27 sq.in./ft.)Nn"); 
goto cl3; 

ab9:fprintf(fp_out,"(rhoose #11 @ 12 in.(As = 1.56 sq.injft-)\n"); 

cl3:aal = 0.11 - asback; 

aOl = 0.20 - asback; 

all =0.31 - asback; 

al2 = 0.44 - asback; 

al3 = 0.60 - asback; 

al4 = 0.79 - asback; 

al5 = 1.00 - asback; 

al6 = 1.27 - asback; 

al7 = 1.56 - asback; 

lprintf(fp_out,"NnFor the back side of the walkVi"); 

f^ntf(fp_out,"-An"); 

if (aal > 0 Sc& aal < (a01.all^l2^13,al4,al5,al6,al7)) 
gotoacl; 

if (aOl > 0 && aOl < (aal,all^l2^13,al4,al5,al6,al7)) 
gotoac2; 

if (all >0 '.Aall < (aal,a01^12^13,al4,al5,al6,al7)) 
go; jc3; 


D-38 







if (al2 > 0 && al2 < (aaM01^1M12,al4,al5,al6,al7)) 
gotoac4; 

if (al3 > 0 && al3 < (aal^01^11,al2,al4,al5,al6,al7)) 
goto ac5; 

if (al4 > 0 && al4 < (aal,aOUlU12.al3,al5,al6,al7)) 
gotoac6; 

if (al5 > 0 && al5 < (aaU01,al I,al2,al3,al4,al6,al7)) 
goto ac7; 

if (al6 > 0 && al6 < (aal,aOUl U12,al3,al4,al5,al7)) 
gotoacS; 
if(al7>0) 

gotoac9; 

acl:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #3 @ 12 in.(As * 0.11 sq.in./fL)\n"); 
goto cl 13; 

ac2:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #4 @ 12 in.(As = 0.20 sq.in./fL)\n"); 
goto cl 13; 

ac3:^>rintf(fp_out,"Choose #5 @ 12 in.(As = 0.31 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto cl 13; 

ac4:Q>rintf(fp_out,"Choose #6 @ 12 in.(As = 0.44 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto cl 13; 

ac5:^printf(^_out,"Choose #7 @ 12 in.(As = 0.60 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto cl 13; 

ac6:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #8 @ 12 in.(As = 0.79 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto cl 13; 

ac7:^printf(fp_out,"Qioose #9 @ 12 in.(As =1.00 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto cl 13; 

ac8:l^printf(fp_out,"Choose #10 @ 12in.(As= 1.27 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 
goto cl 13; 

ac9:fprintf(fp_out,"Choose #11 @ 12 in.(As = 1.56 sq.in./ft.)\n"); 

cl 13:^printf(f^_ouC^n--\n"); 

fiprimf(fp_out,’TDrainagc:Nn"); 
fpiwtf(fp_out,"--Vi"); 

^pnntf(^_out," Adequate drainage of backfill must be provided to prevent water 
firom accumulating in the t^kfill mate^; a common minimum provision is to provide 
weep holes (4 in. diameter) every 10 to 15 ft. along the wallVi"); 

fpiintf(fp_out,"--Nn"); 

printf("\n\n ♦************\n"); 
printf(" I N P U INn"); 
printfr ♦♦♦♦♦********\n\n"); 
printfC'Height of earth to be supported = %.2f ft.Nn",h); 
printf(”An^e which die backfill makes with die hnizontal = %.2f deg.\n",deltab); 
printf("Height of the surcharge = %.2f ft.\n",surcht); 
printf("Density of the surcharge material = %.2f pcf.Nn”,gsur); 
printfC'Angle of internal ftiction of the surcharge materid = %.2f deg.\n",alphas); 
piintfC'Co^cient of ftiction between masonry and soil = %.2fSn",miu); 
printf("0)mprcssive strength of concrete^^c = %.2f ksi.\n",fc); 
printf('Tield strength of steel^y = %.2f ksi.\n",fy); 
printf("Maximum soil bearing pressure = %.2f ksf.\n",maxspr); 
printf(”Height of water table = %.2f ft.\n"4iw); 
ptintf("Layers of soil below the earth's surface = %.lf\n"4ayer); 
if (layer = 1) 
goto calc; 

printfClDepth of the top soil layer = %.2f ft.\n"4il 1); 

printf("Angle of internal ftiction of soil in the top layer = %.2f deg.\n",alphal); 


D-39 








printf("Density of soil in the top layer = %.2f pcf.Nn",gl); 

printfC'Angle of internal firiction of soil in the lower layer = %.2f deg.Nn",alphas); 

printf('T)ensity of soil in the lower layer = %.2f pcf.Vn’’,g2); 

raifprintf(”\n^Vi********************************************************* 

**4t***l|l*«**«4Ay|j»y 

printfCTHE DETAiLeD DESIGN OF TOE CANTILEVER WALL IS IN FILE » %s 
^",fn_out); 

printf("******’'‘*’'‘*'i"*'**'i'*’i'*'*“*>***’*'*4«i'*4>***>i"i>*4“i»*>4»i»i»i"t”i>*>i“i»i‘>i>******’i‘**’)‘*’«**** 

endd.'fclose (fp_out); 
retum(0); 

) 

float froinax(fc4y) 
float fc,fy; 

intij; 
float ttt; 
if(fy = 40.0) 
j=0; 

if (fy = 50.0) 

j = i; 

if(fy = 60.0) 
j = 2; 
if (fc = 3.0) 
i = 0; 
if(fc = 3.5) 
i = 1; 
if(fc = 4.0) 
i = 2; 
if (fc == 5.0) 
i = 3; 
if (fc = 6.0) 
i = 4; 

ttt = table[i](j]; 
retum(ttt); 

} 


D-40 


APPENDIX E 


USTING OF PROGRAM GABION 




/*-*/ 

/* I DESIGN OF THE GABION RETAINING STRUCTURE I */ 

/*-*/ 


#include <stdio.h> 

#include <niath.h> 

WdefineLINESO 

#deEneROWSO 

float a[ROW][LINE]; 

mainO 

{ 

FILE *fopen(),*fp_out; 
char fii_out[12]; 

float h^epsln 1 .aalphaLangphi 1 ,angbet 1 ,unif^,gamag,ganiat,cofact,extn; 

float aq}sln^pha,angphi,angbet,aomega,angdel; 

float tota,totamx,totamy,xql,yql,we,wax,am;!ilcgm,ylcgm; 

float xm,ym,aa,aga,asoil,at,agamx,agamy,xtl ,ytl ,xt,yt,xq,yq,xn,yn,xd,yd; 

float yf 1 ,xf,yf,xa 1 ,ya 1 ,xa,ya,aqep,mqep,apnd,inpn(l,wm,inm,wt,mt,wc,mc,wf.ha; 

float xe,aoinegal ,c 1 ,c2,c3,ka,sa,sh,sv,ma,dl ,d2,d3,d31 Jq>; 

float sp 1 ,sph 1 ,spvl,mp 1 ,sp2,sph2,spv2,fi,fs2^s3,fs,etas; 

float mi,ms,etar,n,ec,zl,z2,t,ecl 1 l.ecl 12,ecll,ec22,nq,nc,ng,iq,ig,dq,dc,dg; 

float plim,zlim, 2 max,qn,xb,yb,ab,ctail,all,a22,wl,wlI,cal,w2,w3,bc; 

float w4,wi,s,yct^,etai,minetai,minaomega; 

int ngb,ngbl,i; 

extern double sinQ; 
extern double cos(); 
extern double sqrt(); 

printf("Enter name of ouq)ut file:"); 
scanf("%s",fh_out,"w"); 
fp_out = fopen(fh_out,"w"); 
l^tfC'Output in file:%s'«Vn\n"/n_out); 

fprintf(^_out,"--\n"); 

fprintf(fp_out,"l DESIGN OF THE GABION RETAINING STRUCTURE ISn"); 
fprintfffp.out,"-An"); 

printf("-An"); 

printf("l DESIGN OF THE GABION RETAINING STRUCTURE l\n"); 
printf("-^\n\n^"); 

/*-input-*/ 

piintfCWhat is the height (in m.) of the eardi to be suppottBd?Sn»"); 
scanf("%r,&h); 

printf(”What is Ae slope of the backfill?sn»”); 
scanf("%r,&aepsln 1); 


E-1 













printf("What will be the angle (in deg.) of batter of the structure (if not sure give the 
answer as 6.0)?Sn»"); 

scanf("%r,&aalphal); . , 

piintfC'What is the angle (in deg.) of internal friction of the soil to be rctained?\n» ); 
scanf("%f’,&angphil); 

printf("What is tiie uniform surcharge load (t/sq.m.) that the structure has to 

suppcm?Vn»"); 

scanf("%f',&unifpo); 

printf("What is the density of the gabion (t/cu.m.)?'n»"); 
scanf("%r,&gamag); 

printf("What is the density of the backfill and foundation soil(t/cu.m.)?Sn»"); 
scanf(”%f’,&gamat); 

printf("What is the cohesion factor (t/sq.m.) of the earth for resistanceNn against 

sliding?Sn»"); 

scanf("%f’,&cofact); 

printf(”Vi\n ♦********♦♦********♦*'«”); 

printff ♦ INPUT *\n"); 

printf(" ******’*'****4'*******’i<’i^n"); 

printf("Height of the earth to be supported = %.2f m.\n",h); 

printf("Slope of the backfill = %.2f deg.^",aepslnl); 

ptintf("Angle of batter of the structure = %.2f deg.Vn",aalphal); 

printf("Angle of internal friction of the soil to be retained = %.2f deg.Nn",angphil); 

printfOTJniform surcharge load that the structure has to support = %.2f 

t/sq.m.\n" ,uni^); 

printfC'Density of the fiU of gabion = %.2f t/cu.m.\n",gamag); 
printf("Density of the backfill and foundation soil = %.2f t/cu.iiLNn",gamat); 
printf("Ck>hesion factor of the earth for resistance against sliding = %.2f 
t/sq.m.\n\n\n",cofact); 

printfC CALCULATING ..\n\n’’); 

extn * 0.5; 
angbetl = 90.0; 
zertota = 0; 
totamxsO, 
totamy :s0; 

aepsln = (3.1415926/ 180.0) ♦ aepslnl; 
aalpha = (3.1415926 / 180.0) * aalphal; 
angphi = (3.1415926/ 180.0) * angphil; 
angbet = (3.1415926 / 180.0) * angbetl; 


/*-♦/ 

/* width of gabion structure */ 
/* -*/ 


ngb s h; 

if ((h - ngb) > 0) 

ngb = ngb + 1; 
else ngb s h; 

^ntf(fp_out,"\n\nNumbcr of gabion layers = %d.\n\n",ngb); 

fprintf(fp_out,"-An"); 

fprintf(fp_out," GABION# WIDTH(m.) \n"); 

f^intf(f^_out,"-An"); 

ngbl =ngb-1; 

for (i=l; i<=ngbl; i=i+2) 

( 

if (i isngbl) 
goto one; 


E-2 



else goto two; 

one:ai[i][l] = extn + (i + l)/4.0; 

fi^tf(Q)_out," %d %.2f\n",U[i][l]); 

if(i!=l) 

goto twoo; 
if(i = l) 

xql = (2 * extn) + a[i][l]; 

yql = h-1; 
twoo;a[i][2] = 1.0; 
a[i+l][2] = 1.0; 
a[i][3]=a[i][l]*a[i][2]; 
a(i][4) = a[i][l]/2.0 + 2*extn; 
if(i!=ngbl) 
gotothr, 

two:a[i][l] = extn + (i+l)/4.0; 
fprintf(j)_out," %<i %.2f\n".i,a[i][l]); 

a[i+l][l] = a[i][l] + 4*extn; 

fi^ntf(fip_out," %d %.2f\n",i+l,a[i+l][l]); 

a[i][3]=a[i][l]; 

a[i][4] = (a(i][l]*0.5) + (2*extn); 

a[i+l][3]=a[i+l]Ill; 

a[i+l][4] = a[i+l][l]/2.0; 

a[i][5]=0.5; 

ali+l][5] = -0.5; 

gotofou; 

thra[i+l][l]»a[i][l]; 

fprintf(fp_out," %d %.2f\n’*4+U[i+l][l]); 

a[i+l]l3] = a[i][3]; 

a(i+l][4]=a[i][4]; 

mi5] = yql - (i - 0.5); 

a[i+l]l5] = a[i][5] -1.0; 

fou:a[i][6]=a[i][3]*a[i][4]; 

a[i][7]=a[i][3]*a[i][5]; 

a(i+l][6] = a[i+l][3]*a[i+l][4]; 

a[i+l][7]=a[i+l][3]*a[i+l][5]; 

tota = lota + a[i][3] + a[i+l][3]; 

totamx s totamx + a[i][6] + a[i+l][6]; 

totamy = lotazny + a[i][7] + a(i+li[7]; 

if ((i !* (ngb-3)) && (i != (ngb-2))) 

goto fie; 

if (i = (ngb-3)) 
gotofiv; 
if (i (ngb-2)) 
goto six; 

fie:we * ap-i-lltl]; 
wax » a(i][l] + 2*extn; 
gotofiv; 

sbcrafi-t-^Kl] » a[i+l][l] + 4*extn; 

fprintf(fp_out," %d %.2f«"4+2^i+2][l]); 

wax « a(i+l][l] + 2*extn; 

wc*a[i+2][l]; 

fota s tota ->■ a(i'f2][l]; 

totamx »totamx + (we ♦we * 0J); 


E-3 




KHamy = totamy - (wc * 0,5); 
if (i = ngb - 2) 
gotosev; 
fiv:if (i =a= ngbl) 
goto sev; 

} 

sevram = tota; 

fprintf(fp_out,"--\n\n"); 

}dcgm = totann/tota; 
ylcgm = totamyAota; 

fprintf(fp_out,"The position of the C.G. firom the leftside of the bottom gabion = %.2f 
m.'«"^cgm); 

^pri®tf(^P_out,'The position of the C.G. from the topside of the bottom gabion = %.2f 
m.'«",ylcgm); 

^>rintf(fp_out,"The height of each gabion =1.0 m.\n\n"); 
angdel = angphi; 

xm = xlcgm*cos(aalpha) + ylcgm*sin(aalpha); 

yin = -xlcgm*sin(aalpha) + ylcgm*cos(aalpha); 

aa = (we - 2*exm) ♦ (h-1); 

aga = tota - we; 

asoil = aa - aga; 

at = asoil; 

agamx = ((tota*xlcgm)-(we*we*0.5))/aga; 

agamy = ((tota*ylcgm)-Kwe*0.5))/aga; 

xtl = ((aa*(((we-2*exm)*0.5)+2*extn))-(aga*agamx))/asoil; 

ytl = ((aa*(h-l)*0.5)-(aga*agamy))/asoil; 

xt = xtl*cos(aalpha)+ytl*sin(aalpha); 

yt = -xtl*sin(aalpha)+ytl*cos(aalpha); 

xq = xql*cos(aalpha)+yql*sin(aalpha); 

yq = 'xql*sin(aalpha)+yql*cos(aalpha); 

/* xnl =we & ynl =yql*/ 

xn = we*cos(aalpha)+yql*sin(aalpha); 

yn = -we*sin(aalpha)+yql*cos(aalpha); 

/*xdl = we & ydl =0 */ 

xd = wc*c<^aalpha); 
yd = -we*sin(aalpha); 
xe = xd; 
yfl = *1.0; 
xf = yfl*sin(aalpha); 
yf = 3rfl*cos(aalpha); 
xal = wc; 
yal = -1.0; 

xa = xal*cos(aalpha>fyal*sin(aalpha); 

ya = -xal*sin(aalpha)+yal'*'cos(aalpha); 

aqcp = ((xe-xq)*(xc-xq))*(tan(aalpha)+tan(acpsln))/2.0; 

mqep = aqcp*(xc-xf-((xe-xq)/3)); 

apnd = yql*yql*tan(aalpha)/2.(); 

mpnd = apnd*(xC'Xf+((xn-xc)/3.0)); 

wm = am*gaxnag; 

mm = wm*(xm-xf); 

wt»(aHaqep-tpxl^^gamat; 

mt * (at*(xt-xf)4fflqep-nq)nd)*gamat; 

wc » uni^*(xe-xq); 

me = wc*((xq-xf)+((xc-xq)/2)); 


E-4 




wf = ((xa-xf)*(xa-xf))*ganiat*tan(aalpha/2); 

ha = yq-Kxe-xq)*tan(aq>sln)-ya; 

aomegal * an^hil+(90-angl)etl); 

aomega = (3.141592^180)*aonnegal; 

cl = sin(angbet-angdel)*sin(angbet+aq)sln); 

c2 = sin(angphi+angdel)*sin(angphi-aepsln); 

c3 = (sin(angbct)*sin(angbet))*(sin(angbct- 

angdel))*(( 1 +(sqrt(c2/c !)))*( 1 -Ksqrt(c2/c 1)))); 

ka = (sin(angbct+angphi))*(sin(angbet+angphi))/c3; 

sa = (jganiat*ha*ha*lM*0.5) + (unii^*ha*ka); 

fprintf(fp_out,''Active earth presses = %.2f t/m.\n\n",sa); 

sh = sa*cos(aoinega); 

sv = sa*sin(aomega); 

ma = sh*((ha*(ha+3*unifixj/gamat)y(3*(ha+2*unifpo/gamat))-(yf-ya))-sv*(xd-xf); 
dl = sin(angphi+angdel)*sin(angphi+aepsln); 
d2 = sin(angbet4-angdel)*sin(angbet+aepsln); 
d31 = l-(sqrt(dl/d2)); 

d3 = (sin(angbet)*sin(angbet))*(sin(angbet+angdel))*d31*d31; 
kp = (sin(angbet-angphi))*(sin(angbet-angphi))/d3; 

^printf(fp_out, "Coefficient of active pressure,^ = %.4f\n"3ca); 
^ntf(fp_out,"Coefficient of passive pressure,Kp = %.4fVnNn" Jq)); 
spl = gainat*yf'yf'kp*0.5; 

^hl spl*cos(angphi); 
spvl = spl*sin(angphi); 
mpl = -sphl*yf/3.0; 
sp2 = gamat*ya*ya*kp*0.5; 

^h2 = sp2*cos(angphi); 

^v2 = sp2’''sin(angphi); 


fi = sh; 

^ntf(fp_out," -\n"); 

^’rintfC^.out," factor of safety against sliding 
fprintf(i^_out," -\n\n"); 


fprintf(fp_out,"The sum of the forces causing sliding = %.2f t/m.Nn",fi); 
fs2 = (wm+wt+wf+wc+sv-spv2)*tan(angphi); 
fs3 = cofact*wc*cos(aalpha); 
fs = (sph2 + fs3 + fs2); 

^>rintf(^_out,"Thc sum of the forces resisting sliding = %.2f t/m.\ri\n"^s); 
etas = fs^; 
if (etas > U) 
goto ten; 

else extn » exm -t- 0.5; 

fprintf(^_out,"Recalculating (as FS < 1.5) widi base length = %.2f m.\n\n",exm); 
^tozer, 

ten:^printf(fp_out,"The factor of safety against sliding = %.2f — OK, since FS > 

1.5VriSn'«",etas); 

mi = ma; 

ms = mm+mt-fmc+n^l; 

fpnntf(fp_out," -\n"); 

^>nntf(fp_out," factor of safety against overturning \n"); 

-Nn\n"); 

fp™tf(f^_out,"Sum of overturning moment = %.2f Mn./m.\n",mi); 
fprintf(fp_out,”Sum of restming moment = %2{ t-m.An.\n\n",ms); 

/* factor of safety against ovemiming */ 

E-5 






/* - ♦/ 

if (mi < 0) 

goioele; 

else etar « ms/mi; 
gotoeln; 

ele:fi>rintf(^_out,"Factor of safety against overturning is NOT calculated as there is 
noovertuming moment.\n\n"); 
gotoelvl; 
eln:if (etar > 1.5) 
goto elv; 

else exm » exm + 0.5; 

fprintf(^_out,"Recalculating (as FS < 1.5 ) with base length = %.2f m.\n\n",extn); 
gotozer, 

/* - */ 

/* check (Ml foundation bearing pressure */ 

/* - */ 

/* n = nOTinal force acting on the base section */ 

/* ec = eccentricity of the resultant */ 

/* zl & 22 are the principal stresses at the toe and heel respectively */ 
elv:fprintf(fp_out,"Factor of safety against overturning = %.2f — O.K., since FS > 
1.5Vri\n\n",etar); 

elv 1 :n = (wm+wc+wt)*cos(aalpha)+sa*sm(aomega+aalpha)-sp 1 *sin(angdel+aalpha); 
ec = (wc/2.0)-(nis-mi)/n; 
zl = (l+6*ec/we)*rj/wc; 
z2 = (l-6*ec/we)*n/we; 

fprmtf(fp_out,"-Nn"); 

fprintf(fp_out,"check on foundation bearing pressure \n"); 

fprintf(^_out,"-\n\n"); 

/* t = sh^ force acting on base section */ 

/* plim = limiting pressure */ 

t = -(wm+wt+wc)*sin(aalpha)+sa*cos(aalpha+aomcgal-spl*cos(angdel+aalpha); 

cell 1 =2.7183; 

eel 12 = 3.14159 ♦ tan(angphi); 

cell =pow(cclll,ecll2); 

cc22 = tan(0.7854+angphi/2)*tan(0.7854+angphi/2); 

nq = ccll*ec22; 

nc = (nq-l)/tan(angphi); 

ng= 1.8*(nq-l)*tan(angphi); 

iq = l-0.5*t/n; 

ig = iq*iq; 

dq = l-0.35*yf/wc; 

dc = dq; 

dg= 1; 

plim » cofact*nc*4c-yf*gamat*nq*dq*iq+0.5*gamat*we*ng*dg*ig; 
zlim = plim/3.0; 

/* zlim = allowable scnl bearing stress */ 

/* zmax = maximum soil pressure developed */ 
zmax = z2; 
if (zlim > zmax) 
gototwe; 

else exm = exm + 0.5; 

Q>rintf(j^_out,"Recalculating with base length = %2f m. as maximum soil pressure is 

greater than the allowable s<^ bearing ptessure.\nVn",exm); 

gotozer. 


E-6 








twc:fprintf(fp_out,"Allowable soil bearing stress = %.2f t/sq.m.\n",dim); 

fiprintf(fp_out,"Maximum soil pressure developed = %.2f t/sq.m.Nn",zniax); 

fprintf(^_out,"Design safe as the maximum soil pressure is less than the allowable soil 

bearing pressure.NnNn"); 

qn = sqn(pow((xn-xq)^) + pow((yn-yq),2)); 

xb - xn -t- qn*sin(aalpha -f aepsln) * sin(aalpha); 

yb = yn + qn*sin(aalpha + aepsln) * cos(aalpha); 

ab = sqn(pow((xa-xb),2) + pow((ya-yb),2)); 

etail = 100.0; 

al 1 = angphi + 0.0175; 

a22 = angphi + 0.2618; 

for (aomega = al 1; aomega <= a22; acxnega = (aomega + 0.0002917)) 

{ 

wl = qn*qn*tan(aalpha+aepsln)*gamat*0.5; 
wl 1 = 0.5 * gamat * ab ♦ ab; 

cal = cos(aalpha + aomega) * cos(aalpha + aepsln) / sin(aomega - aepsln); 

w2 = wl 1 * cos(aalpha + aepsln) * cos(aalpha + aomega) / sin(aomega - aepsln); 

w3 = pow((xa-xf),2) * (tan(aalpha) + tan(aomega)) * gamat * 0.5; 

be = ab * cos(aalpha + aomega) / sin(aomega - aepsln); 

w4 = ((xb-xq) + (bc*cos(aepsln)))*unifpo; 

wi = wl+w2+w3+w4+(asoil*gamat)+wm; 

s = wi*sin(aomega-angphi)/cos((2’'‘angphi)-aomega); 

yet = yf-(xa-xf)*(tan(^pha)+tan(aomega)); 

rp = yct*yct*kp*gamat*0.5; 

etai = rp/s; 

if (etai > etail) 

minetai = etail; 
gotoett; 
minetai» etai; 
etail =etai; 

ett'minaomega = aomega; 

1 

^rintf(fp_out," - \n"); 

fprintf(fp_out," check for overall stability \n"); 

^prmtf(^_out," -\riVi"); 

fprintf(^_out,"Passive resistance developed by toe prism = %.2f t/m.Nn"^); 
^rintf(ff)_out,"Thrust on the vertical plane of toe prism = %.2f t/m.\n\n",s); 
f|nintf(fp_out,"Factor of safety for overall stability = %.2f',etai); 
if (etai > 1.3) 
gotofif; 

else extn « exm + 0.5; 

fpiintf(fp_out," — NG (< 2.0). Recalculating with base length = %.2f m.\n\n",extn); 
goto 23^, 

^:fprintf(fp_out," — OK (since F.S. > 2.0 )\ri\n\n"); 

fl»intf(fp_out,"--\n\n"); 

printf(''************************4'4'*******'*"i"*'**’*'*************************''' 

piintfCTHE DETAILED DESIGN OUTPUT FOR THE GABION STRUCTURE IS IN 
FILE » %s\n"^n_out); 

p^(f^"4i****4i*****4i4i4i4i**)|i***4i*******«4i**4i4i**4i4i4i«******4>4i*4i««4r*4i4i**ik4>«**>l> 

**«**«*4t*4t*«\||”^. 

fclose(^_out); 

retum(0); 

} 


E-7 











APPENDIX F 


USTING OF PROGRAM EARWALL 






!* - */ 

/* I DESIGN OF THE REINFORCED EARTH STRUCTURE I */ 
/* - */ 


#include <stdio.h> 

#include <math.h> 

#inclu(le <ctype.h> 

#defincLINE50 
#dcfine ROW 20 
float a[ROW][LINE]; 
mainO 
{ 

FILE *fopen(),*fp_out; 
char fii_out[15]; 

float phi 11 ,phi 1 ,phi,kal Jca,angphi,angphi 1 ,q,gaina,h,pe,ealI,e,sigTnavb; 

float sv,sh,spp,kk,kt,k 1 ,acr,as,areiphi2,h 1 ,hh,ko 1 ,ko2,ar, 

float del,angdel,kahic2,k3,c,b,ml,ni2,fso,mcI,nic2,mc^,n6; 

float h3,h4,h5,pq,fsol,fso2,el,fs,gamal,phi3,l,type,size; 

float tens; 

int ns,i.lb.la,si^b; 

extern ^ubie sin(); 

extern double cos(); 

extern double tan(); 

extern double sqrt(); 

printfCEmer name of output file:"); 
scanf("%s",fn_out,"w"); 
fp-Out = fopcn(fn_out,"w"); 
printfC'Output in file:%sNnVi\n"4‘n_out); 

printfCThe REINFORCED EARTH is the nrost appropriateNn”); 
printfC'type of structure that is suited for this application.^\n"); 
printfCThe detailed design of the Reinforced Earth Structure follows:\n\riSn\n"); 


fprintf(fp_out," - \n"); 

fprintf(fp_ouC I DESIGN OF THE REINFORCED EARTH STRUCTURE 1 
>n"); 

fprintf(fp_out," - \n\n\n"); 


printfCENTER 1 IF CASE IS HORIZONTAL BACKFILL.NnENTER 2 IF CASE IS 
SLOPING BACKFILL.NnENTER 3 IF CASE HAS UNIFORM SURCHARGE.NnENTER 
4 IF CASE HAS COHESIVE SOIL.Nn"); 
scanf("%r,&typc); 

if (type = 1) goto one; 
if (type = 2) goto two; 
if (type = 3) fj- io three; 
if (type = 4) goto four. 


F-1 













one:printf("What is the height (in ft) of the earth to be supported?Vn»"); 
scanf("%r, &h); 

printfC’What is the angle of internal friction (in deg) of the special backfill soil?\n»"); 
scanf(”%f&angphi); 

printf("What is the angle of internal fnction (in deg) of the retained soil?vn»"); 
scanf("%f', &angphil); 

printf("What is the specific weight of the special backfill soil(in pcf.)?^n»"); 
scanf("%f’,&gama); 

printfC’What is the specific weight of the retained soii(in pcf.)?^n»"); 
scanf("%f’,&gamal); 

printfC’Which one of the two standard reinforcement strip sizes are you using:\nPiess 1 if 
the size is 40mm x Smm OR press 2 if the size is 60mm x 5mm\n»"); 
scanf("%f’,&size); 

printfC’What is the horizontal spacing of the steel reinforcement strips (in inches)?SnIf not 

available you may give the value as ^ in.\n»"); 

scanf("%f’,&sh); 

printfC’What is the vertical spacing of the steel reinforcement strips (in inches)?SnIf not 

available you may give the value as 30 in.\n»"); 

scanf("%f”,&sv); 

printfC’What is the allowable tensile stress (in psi) of the steel reinforcement strips 

?\n\n»"); 

scanf("%f’,&tens): 


printf("\ri\n'’); 

printfC’ 

printf(” 

printfC’ 


****4>*itt4t4t*i|t4i*4t***«**4>4iiti«** \n")' 
* INPUT DATA * V’); 


printf("Height of the earth to be supported = %.2f ft.\n",h); 

printf("Angle of internal friction of the spet^ backfill soil = %.lf deg.\n",angphi); 

printfC’An^e of internal hriction of the retained soil = %.lf deg.Nn",angphil); 

printf("Speciflc weight of the special backfill soil %.lf pcf.\n”,gama); 

printfC’Specific weight of the retained soil = %.lf pcf.\n”,gamal); 

if (size = 1) 

printf(”Standard size of reiribrcement = 40mm x Smm.Nn"); 
else printf(”Standard size of reinforcement = 60mm x Smm.Nn"); 
pTintf(’’Hotizontal spacing of the steel reinforcing strips = %.lf in.\n’’,sh); 
printf(’’Vertical spacing of the steel reinforcing strips = %.lf in.\n’’,sv); 
printfC’Allowable tensile stress of the steel reinforcing strips = %.2f psi.Nn’’,tens); 

printfC'-^\ri\n\n’’); 

printfC'C ALCULATING ..Nn’’); 

if (size = 1) 

as « 200; 
else as = 300; 
if (size =1) 

ared = 0.199; 
else ared = 0.354; 
phill = 45 - (angphil*0.5); 
phil =phill*(3.1415926/180.0); 
phi3 = angphil*(3.1415926^180.0); 
phi» angphi*(3.1415926/180.0); 
phi2 = (45 + angphi*0.5)*(3.1415926/180); 
del = angdel*(3.1415926/180.0); 
ka = (l-sin(phil))/(l+sin(phil)); 


F-2 




fprintf(fp_out," -^Nn"); 

lprintf(fp_out." : WALL WITH HORIZONTAL BACKFILL ;\n"); 

fprintf(^_out," --''n\n"); 


fnrintf^fh nilf '* AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAyV/VAAAAA\n*''V* 

EXTERNAL STABILITY NnV 

OUty" AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA^P^U**^* 

fprintf(^_out," 1.Sliding on Base.Nn"); 
fprintf(^_out,"-^\n"); 


pc = 0.5*ka*ganial*h*h; 

1 = 1.5*ka*h/(2*tan(phil)); 

fpnntf(fp_out,"Coefficicnt of active pressure = %.2fSn" Jca); 

fpnntf(fp_out,’The total horizcmtal active earth force acting on the back of the wallj^e 

%.2f lb.\n”,pe); 

fp™tf(fp_out,"For a minimum factor of safety of 1.5 against slidingrVn"); 
^>™tf(fp_out,’The minimum length of reinforcementX = %.2f ft.'«\n",l); 
fl)rintf(f|)_out," 2.0vertuming about Toe.Vn"); 

fprintf(fi)_out,"-^\n"); 

lb = sqrt(2*ka*h*h/3); 

fprmtf(^_out,"For a minimum factor of safety of 2.0 against overtuming:\n"); 
fprintf(fp_out,"The minimum base width of the wall = %d fLNn\n",lb); 
^printf(Ip_out," 3.Beaiing Capacity Failure.Nn"); 

fprintf(^_out,"-^\n"); 

c2:e=(ka*h*h)/(6*lb); 

eall=lb/6.0; 

if (e < call) 

goto el; 

else fprintf(fp_out,"Thc eccentricity,e * %.2f ft. is greater than the allowable value of 
e(=%d/6.0) = %.2f.\n",e4b,eall); 

fprintf(fp_out,"Thcrefore the bare width of the wall has to be increased.Nn"); 
lb = lb+l; 

fprintf(fp_out,"Recomputing the eccentricity witii base width of wallL>b = %(Ni",lb); 
goto c2; 

cl:^printf(^_out,"Thc eccentricity,e = %.2f ft. is less than the allowable value of 

e(=Lb/6) = %.2f.-OK.\n".e,eall); 

sigmavb = gama*lb*h/(lb-(2*c)); 

^rintf(fp_out,"Reqd. soil bearing capacity = %,2f lb./sq.ft.\ri\n\n",sigmavb); 
pfilloutf" aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa^u^*^- 

fprintf(fp_out," INTERNAL STABILITY V); 

f^ntf(^ out," AAAAAAAAAAAAAy\AAAAAAAAAAAA\n>^"); 

ns = h*127sv; 

fprintf(fp_out,"- 

fprintf(fp_out," Layer# Depth Z(ft.) \n"); 

fprintf(^_out,"--\n"); 

a[l][ll * h*0.5/ns; 
kl s 1 - sin(i^); 
kt = (l-sin(phi))/(l+sin(phi)); 
kkskl -kt; 

fprintf(fp_out," 1 %52f \n",a[l][13); 

spp*(h-(2*a[l][l]))/(ns-l); 

for (i a 2; i <= (ns-1); ++i) 

{ 

a[i][l] = a[i-l][l] + spp; 


F-3 











%5.2f 




fprintf(fp_out," %2d 

} 

a[ns][l] = h-a[l][l]; 
fprintf(fp_out," %2d %5.2f \n”,ns,a[ns][l]); 

fimntf(^_out,"-^VnVi"); 

e3:fprintf(fp_out,"l.Tensile forces to be resisted by the reinforcement:\n"); 

f^ntf(fp_out,"-^\n"); 

^rintf(^_out,"- 

-.Xn"); 

^ntf(fp_out,"Layer Depth Rv Pe e Sigv K 

Sigh FH\n"); 

fprintf(fp_out," # [ft.] Db/ft] [lb] [ft] [Ib/s.ft] [Ib/s.ft] 

[lb]Vn"); 

fprintf(fp_out,"- 

-.Xn"); 

for (i = 1 ; i <= ns ; -H-i) 

{ 

a[i][2]=gama*lb*a[i][ 1]; 

a[i][3]=gama*ka*a[i][l]*a[i][l]*0.5; 

a[i][4]=a[i][3]*a[i][lV(a[i][2]*3); 

a[i][5]=gaina*lb*a[i][l]/(lb-(2*a[i][4])); 

if(a[i][l]<20.0) 

a[i][6] = kl-(a[i][l]*kk/20); 
else a[i][6] = (1 - sin(phi))/(l + sin(phi)); 
if(a[i][l]> 20.0) 

a[i][7] = tan(phi); 

else a[i][7] = 1.5 - ((1.5-tan(phi))*a[i][l]/20); 

a[i][8]«a[i][6]*a[i][5]; 

a[i][9]«a[i][8]*6.05; 

fprintf(fp_out," %2d %5.2f %8.1f %8.1f %5.2f %8.1f %6.4f 

%8.1f %8.1f\n"4,a[i][l],a[i][2],a[i][3],a[i][4],a[i][5].a[i][6],a[i][8],a[i][9]); 

fprintf(fp_out,"- 

->n\n"); 

fprintf(fp_out,"2.Tensile stress in reinforceincnt:\n"); 

^printf(^_out,"--\n"); 

acr = as/(25.4*25.4); 

fprintf(^_out,"-\n"); 

fprintf(^_out," Strip# Tensile Stress'^"); 
fprintf(^_out," [psi.] Nn"); 

^ntf(^_out,"-Nn"); 

for (i = 1; i <= ns; ++i) 

{ 

a[i][I0]=a[i][9]/acr, 

fprintf(fp_out," %2d % 8 . 1 Pn",i 4 t[i][ 10 ]); 

fprintf(fp_out,"-Nn"); 

for (i = 1; i <= ns; -H-i) 

{ 

a[i][10]=a[i][9]/acr, 
if (^i][I0] <tens) 
gotoi^; 

fprintf(fb_out,"TENSILE STRESS IN STRIP > ALLOWABLE TENSILE 
STRESS(%.2f psi.)Nn",tens); 


F-4 

















sh = sh - 2; 
sv = sv - 2; 

^printf(jfp_out,"Recalculate using horizontal strip spacing = %.2f in. andNn 
vertical strip spacing = %.2f in.^'’,sh,sv); 
goto pall; 

} 

pal:fprintf(fp_oui,'TENSILE STRESS IN STRIP < ALLOWABLE TENSILE 
STRESS(%.2f psi.) — OK.\n\n",tcns); 
fprintf(fp_out,"lTensilc stress at connectionrVn"); 

1^ntf(^_out,"--\n"); 

fprintf(fp_out,'’-^\n"); 

fprintf(fJ)_out," Strip # Tensile Stress \n"); 
fprintf(fp_out," [psi.] Vji"); 

fprintf(^_out,"-^\n''); 

for (i = 1 ; i <= ns ; -H-i) 

{ 

a[i][ll]=0.85*a[i][8]; 

a[i][12] = a[i][ll]*6.05/ared; 

fprintf(fp_out," %2d %8.1fvn",i^[il[121); 

^rintf(fp_out,"--\n\n"); 

for (i = 1 ; i <= ns; -H-i) 

{ 

a(i][ll]=0.85*a[i][8]; 
a[i][12] = a[i][ll]*6.05/arcd; 
if(a[i][12]<tens) 
goto pi; 

fprintf(fp_out,’TENSILE STRESS AT CONNECTION > ALLOWABLE TENSILE 
STRESS(%.2f psi.)\n",tens); 
sh = sh - 2; 
sv = sv - 2; 

^p™tf(fp_out,"Recalculate using horizontal strip spacing = %.2f in. andNn 
vertical strip spacing = %.2f in.\n",sh,sv); 
goto pall; 

) 

pl:fprintf(fp_out,’TENSILE STRESS AT CONNECTION < ALLOWABLE TENSILE 
STRESS(%.2f psi.) — OK.\n\n",tens); 
ip™tf(fp_out,"4.Pullout of reinforccmcntiVi"); 
fprintfC^^out,"--Nn"); 

fprintf(fi)_out,"--Nn"); 

fprintf(fi)_ouL" Strip# Le P FH F.S. Nn"); 
fprintfffp^out," [ft.] [Ib.] [Ib.] Nn"); 

fprintf(fi>_out,"--Nn"); 

for (i s 1; i <« ns; -H-i) 

{ 

if(a[i][l]<=h/2) 

a[i][13]*=lb-0.3*h; 

else a(i][13] = lb - ((h-a[i][l])Aan(phi2)); 

a[i][14]» 2*0.1969*gama*a[i][l]*a[i][7]*a[il[13]; 

a[i][151 = a[i][14Va[i][9]; 

fprintfffp.out," %2d %5.2f %8.1f %8.1f 

%4.2fSn",i.a[i][13],a[i][14],a[i][9]^[i][151); 

) 

fprintf(fp_out,"--Nn"); 


F-5 














for (i = 1 ; i <= ns; -H-i) 

{ 

if(a[i][15]<=1.5) 
lb = lb+ 1; 

if(a[i][15]<=1.5) „ __ 

fprintf(^_out."RECALCULATING WITH Lb = %d as F.S.(PlJLLOUT) < 

1.5\n*Mb); 


if(a[i][15] <=1.5) 
goto e3; 

) 

goto end; 

two:printf("What is the height (in ft.) of the earth to be supported?Sn»"); 
scanf("%r, &h); . . 

printf("What is the angle of internal friction (in deg) of the special backfill soil?Vn»'); 
scanf("%f', &angphi); 

printf("What is the angle of internal friction (in deg) of the retained soil?Sn»"); 
scanf("%r, &angphil); 

printf("What is the specific weight of the special backfill soil(in pcf.)?Sn»"); 
scanf("%f',&gama); 

printfC’What is the specific weight of the retained soil(in pcf.)?Sn»"); 
scanf('’%f',&ganial); 

printf("What is the angle (in deg.) that the backfill soil makes with the horizontal?Sn»"); 
scanf("%f' ,&angdel); 

printfC'Which one of the two standard reinforcement strip sizes are you using:\nPress 1 if 
the size is 4()mm x 5mm OR press 2 if the size is bOmm x 5mm\n»"); 
scanf(”9fcf',&size); 

printfC'What is the horizontal spacing of the steel reinforcement strips (in inches)?SnIf not 

available you may give the value as 40 in.\n»"); 

scanf("%f",&sh); 

printf("What is the vertical spacing of the steel reinforcement strips (in inches)?snlf not 

available you may give the value as 30 in.\n»"); 

scanf("%f",&sv); 

printfC'What is the allowable tensile stress (in psi) of the steel reinforcement strips 

?Vn\n»"); 

scanf("%f',&tens); 

*«4i4i4i4i4t*4i4i4i*4i4>*4i*4i4i*4i*4>**4i \n"); 

printfC * INPUT DATA * \n"); 

pTintf(" *♦**♦♦*♦♦*♦♦*♦**♦♦**♦*♦♦♦♦ ^\n"); 


printf("Height of the earth to be supported = %.2f ft.\n",h); 
printfC'An^e that the backfill makes with the horizontal = %.lf deg.Nn",angdel); 
printfC'Angle of internal friction of the spet^ backfill soil = %.lf dcg.Nn",angphi); 
printfrAngle of internal friction of the retained soil = %.lf deg.\n"^gphil); 
printfrSpMnfic weight of the special backfill soil = %.lf pcf.'«",gama); 
printf("Specific weight of the retained soil * %.lf pcf.\n\n\n",gamal); 
if (size ** 1) 

printf("Standard size of reinforcement = 40mm x 5mm.\n"); 
else piintfCStandard size of reinforcement» 60mm x 5mm.Nn"); 
piintfClRnizontal spacing of the steel reinforcing strips = %.lf in.^",sh); 
printfC'Vcrtical spacing of the steel reinforcing strips = %.lf in.\n",sv); 
printfrAllowable tcn^e stress of the steel reinfoicing strips = %.2f psi.'«",tens); 

printfC-^VnNnNn"); 

printf("CALCULATING ..Nn"); 


F-6 





if (size = 1) 

as = 200; 
else as = 300; 
if (size = 1) 

ared = 0.199; 
else ared = 0.354; 
phil 1 = 45 - (angphi 1*0.5); 
phil =phill*(3.1415926/180.0); 
phi3 = angphil*(3.1415926/180.0); 
phi = angphi*(3.141592^180.0); 
phi2 = (45 + angphi*0.5)*(3.1415926/180); 
del = angdel*(3.1415926/180.0); 
ka = (l-siii(phil))/(l-fsin(phil)); 


^)rincf(^_out,"-Nn”); 

fprintf(fp_out," : WALL WITH SLOPING BACKFILL :V); 

fl)rintf(fp_out,"-^\n\n"); 

nut " AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA\n"V 

EXTCRNALSTABIUTY 

fprintf(^ out," AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA\n\n")j 

fE^tf(fp_out," 1.Sliding on Base.\n"); 

^printf(fp_out," --^\n"); 

kl = co^del); 
k2 = cos^hil); 
k3 = sqrt((kl*kl) - (k2*k2)); 
kah = kl*kl*((kl-k3)/(kl+k3)); 


fprintf(fp out,"Horizontal component of the active earth pressure coeff.,Kah 

%.4f\n"Jcah); 

la = 5; 

ll:c * la*gama*(h+(la*0.25))*tan(phil); 
b = 0.75*kah*gama*pow((0.5*la + h),2); 
if (c>= b) 

goto la; 
else la = la + 1; 
goto 11; 

la:^ntf(fy_out,Tor a minimum factor of safety of 1.5 against sliding;\n"); 
4>rmtf(fp_out,"The minimum length of leinfoiceimntj.^ = %d ftNn\n",la); 
Jprintf(^_out," 2.0veituming about Toe.Nn"); 

^rintf(^_out,"-^\n"); 

mml.*mi = (la*la*h*gama*0 J) + (la*la*la*garaa/6); 
in2 » kah*gama*pow((h + 0.5*la)3)/6; 
fso = mlAi^; 

{pnntf(fip_out,Tor the reinforcement lengdi - %d ft;\n”4a); 
fmntf(fp_out,"The factor of safety against overturning = %.2f‘,fso); 
if (fso >* 2.0) 
goto fso; 
else la = la -f 1; 

fprintf(fp_out,"-NG (since < 2.0).Nn”); 

fprintf(fp_out,”Recaknilating with reinforcement length = %d ft:\n"Ja); 
gocomml; 

fso.*fprintf(fp_out,"-OK (since > 2.0)\n\n"); 

4nintf(fp_out," 3.Bearing Capacity Failure.\n”); 

f^intf(l^_out,"-Nn"); 

hl-h + (la*0.5); 

mclrmcl =kah*gama*hl*hl*hl/6.0. 


F-7 







nic2 = gama*(hl-h)*la*la/12.0; 
inc = mcl -m^; 

fprintf(fp_out,”The moment around the centerline at the base = %.2f fLlb.Nn",mc); 
rv = (la*h*gama) + (0.25*la*la*gama); 
fiprintf(fp_out,"Vertical recdon = %.2nb.\n"jv); 

U6 = la/6.0; 
e = mcAv; 

fprintf(fp_out,"Eccentricity,e = %.2fsn",e); 
if (e < 116) 

goto la6; 

else ^printf(fp_out,"The length %d is NOT sufficient to maintain the resultant within the 
middle third — OK (since e = %.2f ft < (L/6.0) = %2f fL.\n’Ma,e,116); 
la = la+1; 

lpnntf(fp_out,"Therefore, RECALCULATE with length, L = %d ft.\n",la); 

^tomcl; 

la6:fl|Jiintf(fp_out,"The length L = %d ft. is sufficient to maintain the resultant within the 
middle third-OK (since e = %.2f ft. < L / 6.0 = %.2f ft..\n\n'Ma,e,116); 

ulltfprintf(fp out," AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA^’’^^ 

fprintf(4)_out!" INTERNAL STABILITY \n"); 
fprintf(^ out," aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa^^**^. 

ns = h*12/sv; 

a(l][l] = h*0.5/ns; 

kl = 1 - sin(phi); 

kt = (l-sin(phi))/(l+sin(phi)); 

kk = kl <kt; 


spp = (h.(2*a[l][l]))/(ns-l); 
for (i = 2; i <= (ns-1); ++i) 

a[i](l] = a(i-l][l] + spp; 

aInsHl] = h-a(l][l]; 

fprintf(fp_out,"LRupture of reinforcement:\n"); 

fpnntf(^_oat,"--Vi"); 

fpiintf(fp_out,"- 


- \a”); 

fprintf(^_out," Strip Depth Vertical 


FH \n"); 
^printf(fp_out," # 
[lb.] \n"); 
fprintf(fip_out,"- 

- \a”); 

hh«la*0.5; 


Eccentricity Sigv Sigh 


Load[lb.] Pb.] [ft] [psf.] [psf.] 


for (i=l; i<sns; ++i) 

{ 

a{i][16].hh + a(i][l]; 

a[i][17]«(a[i][16] + a[i][l]) • OJ *la * gama; 
a(i][18]» kah * gama * 0.5 * a(i][16] * a(i][16]; 

a(i][19J»((a(i][18J*a(iI[161/3) - ((la*0.5*gama*(a[i][16]-a[i)[l]))*(la/6)))/a[i][17]; 

ali][5]« a[i][17]/0a-(2*a(i](19])); 

if(a(i][19]<0) 

a{i][191«0; 

if(a[i][19]<0) 

ali][5]-a[i][17]/la; 
kol s 1 - sin^hi); 





ko2 = (1 - sin(phi))/(l + sin(phi)); 
a[i][20] = (hh*0.5) + apjfl]; 
if(a[il[l]<20.0) 

a[i][6] =kol - (a[i][20]*(kol-ko2)/20); 

else a[i][6] = (1 - sin(phi))/(l + sin(phi)); 

a[i][8]=a[i][6]*a[i][5]; 

ar = 6.05; 

a(i][91 = ar*a[i][8]; 

fprintf(fp_ouC %2d %5.2f %8.If %8.1f %5.2f %8.1f %8.1f 

%8.1f\n",U[i][l]4i[i][17].a[i][18].a[i][19].a[i][5].a[i][8].a[i][9]); 

acr = as/(25.4*25.4); 

a[i][10] = a[i][9]/acr, 

a[i][21] = 0.85*a[i][91A).354; 

h3 = hh+h; 

h4 = (h3+h)*0.5; 

h5 = h4*0.5; 

if(a[i][20]<=h5) 

a[i][22]=la-(0.3*h4); 
else a[i][22] = la - ((h4-a[i][20])/(tan(phi2))); 
if (aCi][l] > 20.0) 

a[i][7] = tan(phi); 

else a[i][7] = 1.5 - ((1.5-tan(phi))*a[il[20]/20); 
a[i][23] = 2*0.06*3.28*gama*a[i][20]*a[i][221*a[i][7]; 
a[i][15] = a[i][23]/a[il[91; 

} 

fprintf(fp_out,"- 

--\n\n"); 

fipnntf(^_out,"2.Tensile stress in reinforcement and at the connection & pullout of 
reinforcemencNn"); 

fprintf(fip_out,"- 

Nn"); 

fprintf(^_out,"- 

- sn”); 

ffmntf(fp_out," Strip Depth Stress in Stress @ Mu* Le P 
F.S. \n"); 

fprintf(^_out," # [ft] Strip [psi.] Connection[psi] [ft] [lb] 

Vi"); 

fprintf(fp_out"- 

-^Vn"); 

for (i*l; i<*ns; -H-i) 

( 

fprintf(fp_out" %2d %5.2f %8.1f %8.1f %6.3f %5.2f %8.1f 

%5.2f\n"4^[i][l]^[i][10]4t[i][21].a[i][7]^[i][22],a[i][23],a[i][15]); 

) 

fprintf(fp_out"- 

--\n"); 

fw (i»l; i<»ns; -H-i) 

{ 

(a[i][10] < tens) 
goto ul; 

^tf(fo out TENSED STRESS IN STRIP > ALLOWABLE TENSILE 
STR£SS(%.2f psi.)Nn",tens); 
sh B sh • 2; 
sv * sv - 2; 


F-9 

















^pnntf(fjp_out,‘'Recalculate using horizontal strip spacing = %.2f in. andNn 

vertical strip spacing » %2f in.^",sh,sv); 

gotoull; 

) 

ul:fprintf(fp_out,'TENSILE STRESS IN STRIP < ALLOWABLE TENSILE 
ST]teSS(%.2f psi.) — OK.\n\n",tcns); 
for (i=l; i<=ns; ++i) 

( 

if (a[i][21] < tens) 
goto ml; 

fprintf(^_out,’TENSILE STRESS AT CONNECTION > ALLOWABLE TENSILE 
STRESS(%.2f psi.)\n",tens); 
sh = sh - 2; 
sv = sv - 2; 

4>rintf(fp_out,"Recalculate using horizontal strip spacing = %.2f in. andNn 

vertical strip spacing = %.2f in.\n",sh,sv); 

gotoull; 

) 

ml:fprintf(fp_out,’TENSILE STRESS AT CONNECTION < ALLOWABLE TENSILE 
STRESS(%.2f psi.) — OK.\n\n",tcns); 
for (i = 1; i <= ns; ++i) 

{ 

if(a[i][15] <=1.5) 
la = la + 0.5; 
if(a[i][15]<= 1.5) 

fprintf(fp_out,"RECALCULATING WITH La = %d as F.S.(PULLOUT) < 
1.5\n’Ma); 
if(aUJ[15]<=:1.5) 
goto la6; 

} 

goto end; 

three:|wintf("What is the height (in ft.) of the earth to be supported?Sn»"); 
sctmf("%r, &h); 

printf("What is Ae angle of internal friction (in deg) of the special backfill soil7\n»"); 
scanf("%f&angphi); 

printf("What is the an^e of internal friction (in deg) of the retained soil?\n»"); 
scanf("%f', &angphil); 

printf("What is die spedfic weight of the special backfill sdl(in pcf.)?Nn»"); 
scanf("%r,&gama); 

printf("What is the specific weight of the special backfill soil(in pcf.)?\n»'’); 
scanf("%r,&gamal); 

printf(''What is the uniform vertical surcharge loading at the top of the wall(in 

psf.)?Nn»"); 

scanf("%r,&q); 

printf(”Which one of the two standard reinforcement strip sizes are you using:NnPress 1 if 
the size is 40mm x 5mm OR press 2 if the size is 60mm x 5mm\n»"); 
sc^("%r,^ize); 

printf(''What is the horizontal spacing of the steel reinforcement strips (in inches)?SnIf not 

available you may give the value as 40 in.\n»'*); 

scMf("%r,«ah); 

printf("What is die vertical spacing of the steel reinforcement strips (in inches)?SnIf not 

available you may give the value as 30 in.\n»"); 

scanf("%r,&sv); 


F-10 



primf("What is the allowable tensile stress (in psi) of the steel reinforcement strips 
?^\n»"); 


scanf("%f',&tens); 


printfC 

printfC’ 

piintf(" 


4i**********4i******4i**4i*«il»l> 


* INPUT DATA * \n"); 


\n"); 

\n\n"); 


printf("Height of the earth to be supported = %.2f ft.\n",h); 
printfC'Unifonn vertical surcharge at the top of the wall = %.lf psf.\n",q); 
printfC'Angle of internal friction of the special backfill soil = %.lf deg.\n",angphi); 
printfrAngle of internal friction of the retained soil = %.lf deg.\n"^gphil); 
printf("Sp«nfic weight of the spe^ backfill soil = %.lf pcf.Nn",gama); 
printfC'Specific weight of the retained soil = %.lf pcf.\nNn^n",gamal); 
if (size = 1) 

printfC'Standard size of reinforcement = 40mm x 5mm.Nn"); 
else printfC'Standard size of reinforcement = 60mm x Smm.\n"); 
printfCTlorizontal spacing of the steel reinforcing strips = %.lf in.\n",sh); 
printfC'Vertical spacing of the steel reinforcing strips = %.lf in.\n",sv); 
printfC'Allowable tensile stress of the steel reinforcing strips = %.2f psi.Nn",tens); 

printfC--\n\n\n"); 

printfC'C ALCULATING ..\n"); 

if (size = 1) 

as = 200; 
else as = 300; 
if (size = 1) 

ared = 0.199; 
else ared = 0.354; 


phil 1 = 45 - (angphi 1*0.5); 

phil = phil 1*(3.1415926/180.0); 

phi3 = angphil*(3.1415926/180.0); 

phi = angphi*(3.1415926/180.0); 

phi2 = (45 + angphi*0.5)*(3.1415926/180); 

del = angdcl*(3.1415926/180.0); 

ka = (l>sin(phil))/(l+sin(phil)); 

fprintf(fp_out," -^\n"); 

fprintf(fp_out," ; WALL WITH SURCHARGE 


fprintf(fp_out,"-^Nn\n"); 



fprintf(fp out," AAAAAAAAAAAA/VAAAAAAAAAAAAA\||”^. 

fprintf(f{irout," EXTERNAL STABILITY >«");’ 

fptintf(^ out," AAAAAAAAAAAAA/VVAAAAAAAAAAA\|j^")j 

pc = ka*gama*h*h*0.5; 
pq = q*ka*h; 

^]™tf(fp_out," 1.Sliding on Base.\n"); 

- 

1 = 1.5*(pe+pq)/(((gama*h)4q)*tan(phil)); 
fprintf(^_out,"CoefHcient of active pressure = 
fprintf(^_out,"Extcmal horizontal force = %.2f lb.^.\n",pe); 
fprintf(^_out,"Resultant horizontal force from surcharge loading = %.2f lbyfL\n",pq); 
f^tinflr(fp_out,"FQr a minimum factor of safety of 1.5 against slicEngrVn"); 
^wintf(^_out,"Thc minimum length of reinforcementX = %.lf ftNriSn",!); 
fprintf(^p_out," 2.C)vcrtuming about Toe.Nn"); 

^pinif(^_out,"-^Vn"); 

Izrfsol * (q+<gama*h))*l*l*0.5; 


F-11 









fso2 = (pc*h/3)+(pq*h*0.5); 
fso = fsol/fso2; 

fprintf(fp_out,'T.S.(ovcrtuming) = %.2f —",fso); 
if (fso > 2.0) 
goto fo; 
else 1 = 1 + 0.25; 
if (fso < 2.0) 

^»i^tf(fp_out,"NG (since FS < 2.0). Recalculate with L = %.lfSn",l); 
if (fso < 2.0) 
gotolz; 

fo:^ntf(^_out," OK (since FS > 2.0)\n\n"); 

Q)rintf(^_out," 3.Bearing Capacity Failure.Nn"); 

fprintf(^_out,”-^\n"); 

rvrrv = (q*l) + (h*l*gaina); 
e = ((pq*h*0.5) + (pe*h/3))Av; 
el = 1/6; 

^)rintf(^_out,”Vertical reaction,Rv = %.2f lb.\n",rv); 

^ntf(fp_out,"Eccentricity = %.2f ft.\n'‘,e); 
if (e < el) 

goto xl; 

else fprintf(fp_out,"Resultant outside middle third.(since %.2f > (%.lf/6.0 = 
%.20)Nn^”,e,l,el); 

1 = 1 + 0.25; 

fjprintf(^_out,'’Recoinpute with L = %.lf:\n"4); 
gotorv, 

xl:fprintf(fp_out;’Resultant inside middle third.(since %.2f < (%.lf/6.0 = %.2f))— 

OK.\n",e.l,el); 

sigyb = 2*rv/(l - (2*e)); 

fpnntf(fp_out,"The ultimate bearing capacity of the foundation = %d psf.'«”,sigvb); 

cll:fpnntf(^ out," AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA\n"). 

f^tf(fp_ouZ" INTERNAL STABILITY Nn"); 

^printf(^_OUt," AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAy\yW\\n\n")’ 

ns = h*12/sv; 

a[ll[l] = h*0.5/ns; 

kl = 1 - sin(phi); 

kt = (l-sin(phi))/(l+sin(phi)); 

kk = kl-kt; 

spp = (h-(2*a[l][l]))/(ns-l); 
for (i = 2; i <= (ns-1); ++i) 

{ 

a[i][l]« a[i-ll[l] + spp; 
alns][l] = h-a[l][l]; 

ffrfprintf(^_out,'T .Tensile stress in reinforcement and at connection :\n"); 

fpiintf(fp_out,"-\n"); 

fjprintf(fp_out,TOR RUPTURE:'«"); 

fprintf(^_out,"- 

-^Vn"); 

Q)rintf(fp_out," Reinf. Depth c Sigv. K Sigh. FH FT FTc 
F.S. \n"); 

Iprintf(^_out," Strip \n"); 

fprintf(Ip_out," # [ft] [ft] [psf.] [psf.] [lb.] [lb.] [lb.] 

Nn"); 


P-12 








--V0; 

for (i=l;i<=ns;++i) 

( 

a[i][24] = 0*gama*a[i][l])+(q*l); 

a[i][25] = ((ka*gaina*pow(a[i][l],3)/6.0) + (ka*q*pow(a[i][l]^)*0.5))/(a[i][24]); 

a[il[5] = a[i][24Va - (2*a(il[25])); 

if(a[i][l]<20.0) 

a[i][6] = kl-(a[i][l]*kk/20); 
else a[i][6] = (1 - sin(phi))/(l + sin(phi)); 
a[i][8] = a(i][6]*a[i][5]; 
a[i][9] = a(i][8]*6.05; 
acr = as/(25.4*25.4); 
a[i][10]=a[i][9]/aCT; 
a(i][26] = 4000(ya[i][10]; 
a[i][21]=0.85*a[i][9]; 
a[i][27] = a[i][211/0.354; 
a[i][28]=4000(ya[i][27]; 
if(a[i][26]<a(i][28]) 

a[i][29]=a[il[26]; 

elsea[i][29]=a(i][281; 

fprintf(fp_out," %2d %5.2f %5.2f %7.1f %.3f %7.1f %7.1f %7.1f 

%7.1f %4.2f\n".U[i][l].a[i][25].a[i][5],a[i][6].a[i][8].a[i][9],a[i][10].a[i][27].a[i][29]); 

fprintfC^ out,"- 

--\n\n"); 

for (i=l; i<=ns; -M-i) 

{ 

if (a[i][10] < tens) 
goto cl; 

^rintf(fp_out,'TENSILE STRESS IN STRIP > ALLOWABLE TENSILE 
STRESS(%.2f psi.)\n",tens); 
sh 3: sh - 2; 
sv = sv - 2; 

Ijpnntf(fy_out,"Recalculate using horizontal strip spacing = %.2f in. andNn 

vertical strip spacing = %.2{ in.^",sh,sv); 

gotocll; 

) 

cl:fprintf(fp_out,"TCNSILE STRESS IN STRIP < ALLOWABLE TENSILE 
STRESS(%2f psi.) — OK.\n\n",tcns); 
for (i=l; i<*ns; ++i) 

{ 

if(a(i][25]<tens) 

gotodl; 

fprintf(fp_out,"TENSILE STRESS AT CONNECTION > ALLOWABLE TENSILE 
STRESS(%.2f psi.)\n",tens); 
shssh-2; 
sv » sv - 2; 

Q>nntf(fp_out,"Recalculate using horizontal strip spacing = %.2f in. andNn 

vertical strip spacing « %2f in.^" 4 h,sv); 

gotocll; 

} 

dlrfprintf(fp_out,"TENSILE STRESS AT CONNECTION < ALLOWABLE TENSILE 
STRESS(%.2f psi.) — OK.\n\n",tens); 


F-13 










fprintf(fp_out,"2.Pullout of reinforceinent.\n'*); 

fprintf(fp_out,"--\n"); 

fprinif(fp_out,'TOR PULLOUTrNn"); 

^rintf(^_out," Reinf. Drath c Sigv. Sigh. FH Mu* Le P 
F.S. \n’’); 

^ntf(^_out," Strip \n"); 

fprintf(fp_out," # [ft.] [ft.] [psf.] [psf.] [lb.] [ft.] [lb.] 

Nn"); 

fprintf(fp_out,"- 

-^Vn"); 

for (i=l;i<=ns;++i) 

{ 

if(a[i][l]> 20.0) 

a[i][7] = tan(phi); 

else a[i][7] = 1.5 - ((1.5-tan(phi))*a[i][l]/20); 

if(a[i][l]<=h/2) 

a[i][13] = 1 - 0.3*h; 

else a[i][13] = 1 - ((h-a[i][l])/tan(phi2)); 

a[i][14] * 2*0.06*3.28*gama*a[i][l]*a[i][13]*a[i][7]; 

a[i][25] s ((ka*gama*pow(a[i][l].3)/6.0) + (ka*q*pow(a[i][l].2)*0.5))/(l*gama*a[i][l]); 

a[i][5] = (l*gama*a[i][l])/a - (2*a[i][25])); 

a[i][8] = a[i][6]*a[i][5]; 

a[i][9]=a[i][8]*6.05; 

a[i][15]*a[i][14]/a[i][9]; 

fprintf(fp_ouC %2d %5.2f %5.2f %7.1f %7.1f %7.1f %7.1f %5.2f 

%7.1f %4.2Ni".i,a[i][l].a[i][25],a[i][5],a[i][8].a[i][9],a[i][7],a[i][13],a[i][14],a[i][15]); 

fprintf(fp_out,"- 


for (i=l;i<=ns;++i) 

{ 

if (a[i][15] < 1.5) 

1 = 1+0.25; 
if (a[i][15] < 1.5) 

fprintf(fp_out, "Recalculating with L * %.2f ft,as F.S.(pullout) < 1.5:\n",l); 
if(a[i][15]<1.5) 
gotoff; 

) 

goto end; 

K)urprintf("What is the height (in ft.) of the earth to be supported?Sn»"); 
scanf("%r, &h); 

printf("What is the angle of internal ftiction (in deg) of the special backfill soil?Sn»"); 
scanf("%r, &angphi); 

printf("What is the an^e of internal friction (in deg) of the retained soil?Sn»"); 
scanf("%r, &angphil); 

printf("What is the specific weight of the special backftU soil(in pcf.)?\n»"); 
scanf("%r,&gama); 

printf("What is the specific weight of the special backfill scnKin pcf.)?Sn»"); 
scanf(”%r.&gama 1); 

printfrWhich one of the two standard reinforcement strip sizes are you using;\nPress 1 if 
the size is 40imn x 5inm OR press 2 if the size is bOnun x 5mm\n»"); 
scanf("%f’,&size); 


F-14 








printf("What is the horizontal spacing of the steel reinforcement strips (in inches)?vnlf not 

available you may give the value as 40 in.\n»"); 

scanf("%f,&sh); 

printf("What is the vertical spacing of the steel reinforcement strips (in inches)?SnIf not 

available you may give the value as 30 in.Nn»"); 

scanf("%f",&sv); 

printfC’What is Ae allowable tensile stress (in psi) of the steel reinforcement strips 

?Sn\n»"), 

scanf("%f',&tcns); 

nrintff" ***4i**4>4i4i4i*4i4i****4>«4i*****4i \n"V 

printfC * INPUT DATA * V); 

printf(" **********************mm** \n\n"); 


printfC'Height of the earth to be supponed = %.2f ft.\n",h); 

printfC'An^e of internal friction of the spet^ backfill soil = %.lf deg.\n",angphi); 

printf("An^e of internal friction of the retained soil = %.lf deg.'4i",angphil); 

printfC’Specific weight of the special backfill soil = %.lf pcf.\n",gama); 

printf(”Spccific weight of the retained soil = %.l{ pcf.Nn\n\n",gamal); 

if (size = 1) 

pTintfC'Standard size of reinforcement = 40mm x 5mm.\n"); 
else printfC'Standard size of reinforcement = 60mm x 5mm.\n"); 
printf("Horizontal spacing of the steel reinforcing strips = %.lf in.\n",sh); 
ptintfC’Vcrtical spacing of the steel reinforcing strips = %.lf in.\n",sv); 
printf("Allowable tensile stress of the steel reinforcing strips = %.2f psi.\n",tens); 

printfC--\n\n\n"); 

printf("C ALCULATING ..V); 

if (size == 1) 

as = 200, 
else as = 3(X); 
if (size = 1) 

arcd = 0-199; 
else arcd = 0.354; 
phil 1 = 45 - (angphi 1*0.5); 
phil = phill*(3.1415926/180.0); 
phi3 = angphil*(3.1415926/180.0); 
phi = angphi*(3.1415926/180.0); 
phi2 = (45 + angphi*0.5)*(3.1415926/180); 
del = angdel*(3.1415926/180.0); 
ka = (l-sin(phil))/(l+sin(phil)); 

^printf(fp_out," -\n"); 

fprintf($_out," : WALL WITH CXIHESIVE SOIL AND FOUNDATION :\n"); 
fprintf(^_out," -NriSn"); 


fnrintfrfri nut " AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA\n''V 

EXTERNAL STABILITY 

^jrintf(^ out," AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA\h\|^”). 

lu = pow(tan(phil),2); 
pc = ka*gainal*h*h*0.5; 
fprintf(fp_out," 1.Sliding ot Basc.\n"); 


fprintf(fjp_out,"-^Vn"); 

1 = 1.5*^(gania*h*tan(phi3)); 

fprintf(^_out,"Coefficient of active pressure = %2f\n"3ca); 
fprintf(fJ)_out,"Extemal horizontal force = %.2f lb./ft.\n",pe); 
^rintf(^_out,Tor a minimum factor of safety of 1.5 against sliding:\n"); 


F-15 










fprintf(fp_out,"The minimum length of reinforcement = %.lf ft.\n\n",l); 
fprintf(f5_out," 2.0vertuming about Toe.\n"); 

f^intf(fp_out,"-Nn”); 

arfs = 3*gama*l*l/(2*pe); 
fprintf(fjp_out,'T.S.(overturning) = %.2f —",fs); 
if (fso > 2.0) 
gotoao; 
else 1 = 1 + 0.25; 
if (fs < 2.0) 

^rintf(fp_out,"NG (since FS < 2.0). Recalculate with L = %.lf«",l); 
if (fs < 2.0) 

gotoaz; 

ao:fprmtf(^_out," OK (since FS > 2.0)\n\n"); 
fprintf(fp_out," S.Bearing Capacity Failure.\n"); 

fprintf(^_out,"-Nn"); 

avTv = gama*h*l; 
e = (pc*h)/(3*rv); 
el = V6; 

f^ntf(^_out, "Vertical reaction.Rv = %.2f lb.\n",rv); 
fprintf(fp_out,"Eccentricity = %.2f ft.\n",e); 
if (e <cl) 

goto axl; 

else fprintf(^_out,"Resultant outside middle third.(since %.2f > (%.lf^6.0 = 
%.2f))Nn\n",e,l,el); 

1 = 1 + 0.25; 

fprintf(fp_out, "Recompute wit’. L = %.lf:\n"J); 


gotoav; 

axl:fprintf(fp_out,"Resu’tant inside middle third.(since %.2f < (%.lf/6.0 = %.2f))™ 

OK.\n".e,l,el); 

sigyb = 2*rv/a-(2*e)); 

^ntf(fp_out,"The ultimate bearing capacity of the foundation = %d psf.\n",sigvb); 

ggl:fpr^tf(fp out," /\AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA\jj"); 

fprintf(fp_outr" ’ INTERNAL STABILITY \n"); 
fprintf(^ out," AAAAAAAAA/\AAAAAAAAAAAAAy\AA\n\n"); 

ns = h*12/sv; 

fprintf(fp_out,"--'«"); 

fprintf(fp_out," Layer# Depth Z(ft.) Nn"); 


Iprintf(^_out,"- 

a(l][l] = h*0.5/ns; 
kl = 1 • sin(phi); 
kt = (l-sin(phi)V(l+sin(phi)); 
kk = kl -kt; 

^ntf(fp_out," 1 %4.2f 

spp = (h-(2*a[l][l]))/(ns-p; 
for (i = 2; i <= (ns-1); ++i) 

{ 

a[i][l]»a[i-l)[l] + spp; 
f^ntf(fp_out," %2d %4.2f 

) 


—-Nn"); 


V’,a[ll[l]); 


Nn".i,ali][ll); 


a[ns][l]»h-a[l][l]; 

fiprintf(fp_ojt," %2d %4.2f Nn",ns,a[ns][l]); 

^ntf(^_out,"-NnNn"); 

tE3:fiwintf(fp_out,"l.Tensile forces to be resisted by the reinforcementtNn"); 
fprintf(fi>_out,"-^Nn"); 


F-16 








[lb/s.ft] 


^)rintf(^_out,"- 

fprintf(fp_out,"Laycr Depth Rv Pe c Sigv K Sigl 
FH\n"); 

fpiintf(fp_out," # [ft] [Ih/ft] Db] [ft] [lb/s.ft] [lb/s.ft] 

[IbJVn"); 

fprintf(fp_out,"- 

- 

for (i = 1 ; i <= ns; -H-i) 

{ 

a[i][ 2 ]=gaina*l*a[i][l]; 

a[i][3]=gaina*ka*a[i][l]*a[i][l]*0.5; 

a[i][4]=a[i][3]*a[i][l]/(a[i][2]*3); 

a[i][5]=gama*l*a[i][l]/a-(2*a[i][4])); 

if(a[i][l]< 20 . 0 ) 

a[i][ 6 ] = kl-(a[i][l]*kk/ 20 ); 
else a[i][ 6 ] = (1 - sin(phi))/(l + sin(phi)); 
if(a[i][l]> 20 . 0 ) 

a[i][7] = tan(phi); 

else a[i][7] = 1.5 - ((1.5-tan(phi))*a[i][l]/20); 

a[i][8]*a[i][6]*a[i][5]; 

a[i][9]=a[i][8]*6.05; 

fprintf(fp_out,*' %2d %5.2f %7.1f %7.1f %4.2f %7.1f %4.2f 

%7.1f %7,lf«"4,a[i][l],a[i][2]^[i][3],a[i][4].a[i][5],a[i][6],a[i][8],a[i][9]); 

fprintf(fp_out,"- 

—7 -^Vn\n"); 

Q)rintf(fp_out,"2.Tcnsilc stress in reinforcetnent:\n"); 

fprintf(l^_out,"-An"); 

acr = as/(25.4*25.4); 

fpimtf(fp_out,"-^\n"); 

f]jrintf(^_out," Strip# Tensile StressNn"); 
fi>rintf(fp_out," [psi.] \n"); 

fprintf(fp_out,"-^\n"); 

for (i = 1 ; i <= ns; ++i) 

{ 

a[i][10]=a[i][9]/aa; 

fprintf(fp_out," % 2 d % 8 . 2 f«",i,a[i][ 10 ]); 

Q)rintf(fp_out,"-^\n"); 

for (i=l; i<=ns; -H-i) 

{ 

if (a[i][ 10 ] < tens) 
gotogl; 

fprintf(fp_out,"TENSILE STRESS IN STRIP > ALLOWABLE TENSILE 
STRESS(%.2f psi.)\n",tens); 
sh s sh • 2 ; 
sv * sv - 2 ; 

fjpnntf(fpjout,"Recalculate using horizontal strip spacing = %.2f in. and^n 
vertical strip spacing = %. 2 f in.^",sh,sv); 
gotoggU 
) 

gI:fprintf(fp_out,’TENSILE STRESS IN STRIP < ALLOWABLE TENSILE 
STRESS(%.2f psi.) — OK.\n\n",tens); 


F~17 











fiprintf(fp_out,"3.Tensile stress at connection:\n"); 

f^intf(fp_out,"--\n"); 

f^rintf(^_out,"-Nn"); 

fprintf(fp_out," Strip# Tensile Stress Nn"); 
fprintf(^_out," [psi.] Nn"); 

fprintf(fp_out,"-^Nn"); 

for (i = 1; i <= ns; ++i) 

( 

a[i][ll]=0.85*a[i][8]; 

a[i][12] = a[i][ll]*6.05/arcd; 

fprintf(fp_out," %2d %8.2fNn",i,a[i][12]); 

^piintf(fp_out,"--NnNn"); 

for (i=l; i<=ns; -H-i) 

{ 

if (a[i][12] < tens) 
goto hi; 

fprintf(fp_out,*TENSILE STRESS AT CONNECTION > ALLOWABLE TENSILE 
STRESS(%.2f psi.)Nn",tens); 
sh = sh - 2; 
sv = sv - 2; 

fprintf(fp_out,"Recalculate using horizontal strip spacing = %.2f in. and^ 

vertical strip spacing = %.2f in.Nn",sh,sv); 

gotoggl; 

) 

hl:f^tf(fp_out,"TENSILE STRESS AT CONNECTION < ALLOWABLE TENSILE 
STRESS(%.2f psi.) — OK.NnNn",tcns); 
fprintf(^_out,"4.Pullout of reinforcenientrNn"); 


fprintf(^_out,"--Nn"); 

fptintf(fi)_out,"-An"); 

fprintf(^_out," Strip# Le P FH F.S. Nn"); 
fprintf(fp_out," [ft.] [lb.] [lb.] Nn"); 

fprintf(fp_out,"-An"); 

for (i = 1; i <= ns; ++i) 

{ 


if(a[i][l]<=h/2) 
a[i][13] = l-0.3*h; 

else a[i][13] = 1 - ((h-a[i][l])/tan(phi2)); 

a[i][14] = 2*0.19e9*gania*a[i][l]*a[i][7]*a[il[13]; 

a[i][15]«a[i][14]/a[i][9]; 

f]^tf(fp_out," %2d %4.2f %8.2f %8.2f 

%4.2f«".U[i][13].a[i][14].a[i][9]^[i][15]); 

} 

fpnntf(fp_out,"--Nn"); 

for (i * 1; i <* ns; ++i) 

{ 

if(a[i][15]<»1.5) 

1 = 1 + 1 ; 

if(a[i][15]<= 1.5) 

fprintf(fp_out,"RECALCULATING WITH L = %.2f ft. as F.S.(PULLOm’) < 
1.5Nn"4); 

if(a[i][15]<=1.5) 

gott>m3; 


P-18 













end‘printf("************************************************************* 

printf("THE DETAILED DESIGN OF THE REINFORCED EARTH IS IN FILE » 
%s \n",fh_out); 

pj^jf'^"************i|i***Ki************************************************ 

fclosc(fp_out); 

retum(0); 

) 


F-19 




APPENDIX G 


LISTING OF PROGRAM SHEETPILE 







DESIGN OF SHEET PILES 


/*- 

t* 

I* - 

#include <stdlib.h> 

#include <stdio.h> 

#include <ii]ath.h> 

#include <stdlib.h> 

#include <process.h> 

#include <graph.h> 

#include <^os.h> 

#include <signal.h> 
int faiu4ailV* These are for granular soil */ 
float This is for cohesive soil *! 
float hanchorjiwater^wall; 
int frictionwall; 
int aaa^Lch; 

float ganiau,ganial,shdepth,surcharge; 

float cJcJka^j£atlJcat2JcptlJq}t2,nim2,mpos; 

float a,pa,ppa,pp,ppp,pppp,ybar,capty; 

float rajp,par,pl,cl,c2,c3,c4,c5; 

float al,a2.a3,a4,a5,a6,a7,a8; 

float cl,c2,c3,c4,c5,y2,hhwall; 

float ioot40joot3()^t2(),gx(),gx3(); 

void check04nput(),output0: 

int get_aiode0.inomentO; 

void clear_screenO,setscreen(int),set_page(int); 

int oldinode,screen,page,color, 

intty; 

floaty; 

FILE *fopcn(),*^,*fpl; 

float nn[4],iDu[4];/* These are for sheet cross section s */ 
intcomi^; 

intcon^lO; 

float Iini604inl704inl8(),lind6(),lind704ind80; 
float Iincol0.1inco2(),linco30; 

float inater[4][2]s( 

{60.70,490.8}, 

{48.4,360.6}, 

{30.2,184.2}, 

{18.1,84.5} 

}; 

intshj,shjl; 

float tablel[10][2]»{ 

{103.0,20.7}, 

{129.0,21.5}, 

{144.0,24.1}, 

{162.0,27.0}, 

{183.0,30.6}, 

{191.0,31.8}, 

{205.0,34.2}, 

{216.0,36.1}, 


G-1 












int waj.wajl; 
int walesQ; 


{234.0.39.0). 

(252.0.42.0) 

); 


mainO 

( 

printf("\n\n"); 

printf(" The following consultation is for the design of sheet \n"); 

printf(" pile stnictures.Nn"); 

printf(" Please answer the following questions.\riSn"); 

printfC Is this 1.Cantilevered sheet pile; oiNn”); 

printf(" 2. Anchored sheet pile.Nn"); 

printfC If the height of earth to be retain^ is greater than 10 ft.\n"); 

printf(" you should choose anchored sheet pile, otherwise the systemNn"); 

printfC will change it autotnatically.\n»"); 

scanfC%d".&aal); 

printfC Nn"); 

printfC 1. Sand;\n"); 

prmtfC 2. Cohesive soil;\n"); 

printfC" 3. Sand backfill on cohesive soil.Nn\n"); 

prmtfC" From the given soil types, enter the number corresponding !Nn"); 

printfC to the type of insitu soil.Nn»"); 

scanfC%d",&ai^): 

if(aaa=l) goto wl; 

if(aaa=»=2) goto w2; 

if(aaa=3) goto w3; 

/* The following questions are for sand */ 
wl: ^fopen("heitype","r"); 

fscanf(fp,"%f %d",&hhwall,&ty); 

fclose(^); 

hwall>:l'''hhwall; 

if(fp=NULL) 

( 

IHintfC” What is the height of the wall (in ft) ? Nn»"); 
scanf("%r,&hwall); 

) 

if(hwall >= 10.0) aals2; 

printfC" What is the height of the water table (in ft) ? \n»"); 
scanf(”%r.&h water); 

printfC" What is the density of the soil above the water table (in kef) ?«»"); 
scanf("%r.&ganuui); 

grunalsgamau<0.0624; 

printfC" What is the internal friction angle of die soil (in degree) ?yn»"); 
scaitf("%d",&faiu); 

printfC What is the frictional angle between soil and wall(in degree) ?Sn"); 
printfC This value could be 0.6 - 0.8 of the internal friction angle.\n»"); 

G-2 




scanfr%d",&&ictionwall); 

if(aal»»2) 

printf(" What is the height of the anchor (in ft) ?Sn»”); 

scanf("%r,&hanchor); 

printfC' What is the surcharge (in ksf) ?«»"); 

scanf('*%f',&suicharge); 

) 

clear.screenO; 

inputO; 

dieckCh 

if(ch»l) goto wl; 

^*m*m*************************************/ 

/** The following is for sand ♦♦/ 
katl=(sin(3.14159/2+faiu*3.14159/180.0)); 
kat lspow(kat 1 ^.0); 

kat2sssin(3.14159*(faiu+fiictionwall)/180.0)*sin(faiu*3.14159/180.0); 

kat2=kat2/(sin(3.14159/2-fnctionwall*3.14159/180.0)); 

kat2=kat2/sin(3.14159/2); 

kat2ssqn(kat2>4-l; 

kat2spow(kat2,2.0); 

kat2=kat2*sin(3.14159/2-fnctionwall*3.14159/180.0); 
ka^kat l/kat2; 

kptla(sin(3.14159/2-faiu*3.14159/180.0)); 
kptlspow(kptl ,2.0); 

kpt2s<sin(3.14159*(faiu+fnctionwall)/l 80.0)*sin(3.14159*faiu/l 80.0); 
kpt2=kpt2/sin(3.14159*0.5+fnctionwall*3.14159/180.0); 
kpt2ssqn(lq)t2); 
kpt2sl>lq)t2; 

kpt2*pow(kpt2,2.0)*sin(3.14159*0.5+3.14159*fTictionwall/l 80.0); 

kpskptl/kpti; 

k=kp-ka; 

pa=((hwall-hwater)*gainau+hwater*ganial)*ka; 

if(aal»2) 

pa^(hwall-hwatBr)*ganiau+hwater*gainal)*ka+surcharge*ka; 

csk*gaiiial; 

»TM/c; 

if(aal»2) 

pftBpa-suicharge*ka; 

pl«gainau*(hwall-hwatBr)*ka; 

ra»pl*(hwall-hwatcr)/2.0^pl+pa)/2*hwatei+a/2*pa; 

if(aal»2) 

ra»pl*(hwall-hwatCT)/2.0+(pl+pa)/2.0*hwater+a/2.0*pa+surcharge*hwall*ka; 

al^'«^-hwatcr)/3.(Hhwater+a; 

a2*hwaici/3.0*(2*p 1 +pa)/(p 1 +pa)+a; 

a3-a*2/3‘ 

ybai^wall-hwater)*pl/2.0*al+(pl+pa)/2.0*hwater*a2+pa*a/2.0*a3; 

if(aal»«2) 

ybar»(hwall-hwatcr)*pl/2.0*al+(pl+pa)/2.0*hwatcr*a2+pa*a/2.0*a3+ 

suichi^*hwall*hwaU/2.0*ka; 

yban*ytoAa; 

if(aal*Mt2) goto al; 

ppKgaiiiau*(hwall-hwaier)+(hwatcr+a)*gamal)*kp-ganial*a*ka; 

cl»1.0; 


G-3 





c2^p/c; 

c3=-8*ra/c; 

c4=-6*ra/pow(c,2.0)*(2*ybar*c+pp); 

c5=-(6*ra*ybar*pp44*pow(ra^.0))^w(c,2.0); 

y2=hwall*1.0; 

printfC’ Please wait 
y=ioot4(y2); 
shdcpth=y+a; 
gotoa2: 
al: {;} 

ybar=hanchor-(ybar-a); 

CU2.0; 

c2=3.0*(hanchor+a); 

c3=0.0; 

c4=-6*ra*ybar/c; 
y2=hwall*1.0; 
printfC Please wait ...Nn"); 
y=root3(y2); 
shdepth=y-t-a; 
r]^*y*y/2.0; 
pararra-ip; 

a2: {;) 

momentO; 

outputO; 

complO; 

if(aal=2) 

walesO; 

gotoed; 

t** The above is for sand **/ 

/** The following is for cohesive soil ♦*/ 
w2: fp^open("heitype","r"); 
fscanf(fp,"%f %d",&hwall,&ty); 
fclose(fp); 
if(fp=NULL) 

I^tf(" What is the height of the wall (in ft)? \n»"); 
scanf("%r,&hwaU); 

} 

if(hwall >s 10.0) aals2; 

printfC" What is the height of the water table (in ft)? \n»"); 
scanf("%r^hwater); 

printfC What is the density of the soil above water table (in kef) ?\n»"); 
scanf("%r,&gaiiuui); 


gainakBgainau-0.0624; 

primf(" What is die shear strength of the sdl (in ksf) ?^>”); 
scaiifC%r,&cu); 


if(aal»-2) 

{ 


G-4 







printf(" What is the height of the anchor (in ft) ?«»"); 

scanf("%r,&hanchor); 

printfC What is the surcharge (in ksO ?Vn»”); 

scanf("%r,&surcharge); 

} 

clear_screenO; 

inputO; 

checkC); 


if(chs=l) goto w2; 

pn,mm*m*t*mm******************************************/ 


pas((hwall-hwater)*gainau+hwater*gamal); 

if(aal=2) 

pas((hwaU-hwater)*gamau't-hwater*gamal)-fsuicharge; 

ppaspa; /*** This is the effective pressure at dredge line ***/ 

p 1 sganiau‘''(hwall-hwater); 

ra=p 1 *(h wall-hwater)/2.CM-(p 1 +pa)/2.0*hwater, 

if(aal«2) 

ra=p 1 *(hwall-hwater)/2.0+(p 1 +pa-surcharge)/2.0*hwater+surcharge*hwall; 

al =(hwall-hwater)/3.()+hwater, 

a2=hwater/3.0*(2’^ 1 +pa)/(p 1 +pa); 

ybar»(hwall-hwater)*p l/2.()*a 1 +(p 1 +pa)/2.0*hwater*a2; 

if(aal=2) 

ybar=ybar+surcharge*hwall*hwalV2.0; 

ybarsybar/ra; 

gototol; 

cla*4*cu-pa; 

c2=-2’‘Ta; 

c3*-ra*( 12*cu*ybar+ra)/(2*cu+pa); 
y=root2(cl,c2,c3); 
shdepthsy; 
goto bb2; 
bbl: cl=1.0; 
c2=2.()*hanchor. 


c3=-2.()*ybar*ra/(4.0*cu-pa); 

y*root2(cl,c2,c3); 

rp*y*(4.0*cu-pa); 

shdepthsy; 


parsra-rp; 


bb2: {;} 


momentO; 

printft” l^ss any key to continue.Nn"); 

while(kbhit()=0) {;} 

ouqrutO; 

comp2(); 

if(aal»2) 

wdes(); 

gotoed; 

7^ The ftrik)wing is for sandlike backfill and o^esive base */ 
w3: fi^fOTcn("hcitypc","r"); 
fscanf(53,"%f %d",&hwall,&ty); 
fclose(^); 




if(fp=NULL) 

{ 

printfC What is the height of the wall (in ft) ?Sn»"); 
scanf("%f',&hwall); 

) 

printfC What is the height of the water table (in ft) ?Sn»"); 
scanf("%f’,&hwater); 

printfC' What is the density of soil above water table(in kef) ?Sn»"); 
scanfC%f',&gatnau); 


gamal=gamau-0.0624; 

printfC What is the shear strength of the soil below the dredge line (in ksi) ?\n»"); 
scanf("%f’,&cu); 

printfC What is the internal friction angle (in degree) ?Sn»"); 
scanfC%d",&faiu); 

printfC* What is the friction angle between wall and backfill (in degree) ?\n"); 
printfC Usually this angle is 0.6 - 0.8 of the internal friction angle.\n»"); 
scanf("%d" ,&Mctionwall); 
if(aal=2) 

{ 

printfC What is height of the anchor (in ft) ?Sn»"); 

scanf("%f',&hanchor); 

printfC What is the svr-harge (in ksf) ?\n»"); 

scanf("%r,&surti.a- gc); 

clear_screen(); 

inputO; 

checkO, 


if(ch=asl) goto w3; 

f*******m********$tit*tti***m************itt*m**************i 

katl*(sin(3.14159/2+faiu*3.14159/180.0)); 

katl=pow(katl,2.0); 

kat2=sin(3.14159*(faiu+frictionwall)/180.0)*sin(faiu*3.14159/180.0); 

kat2=kat2/(sin(3.14159/2-frictionwall*3.14159/180.0)); 

kat2=sqn(kat2)+l; 

kat2=pow(kat2^.0); 

kat2=kat2*sin(l 14159/2-frictionwall*3.14159/180.0); 


kaskatl/kat2; 

kptl=(sin(3.14159/2-faiu*3,14159/180.0)); 
kpt 1 s:pow(kptl ^.0); 

kpt2=ssin(3.14159*(faiu+frictionwall)/180.0)*sin(3.14159*faiu/180.0); 

l^t2*kpt^sin(3.14159*0.5+frictionwall*3.14159/180.0); 

I 9 t 2 =sqn(kpt 2 ); 

kpt2sl-lq)t2; 

kpt2spow(kpt2,2.0)*sin(3.14159*0.5+3.14159*frictionwall/l 80.0); 
kp=kptl/kpt2; 

plsgainau*(hwall-hwater)*ka; 

paa:gamal*hwater*ka+pl; 

if(aal«2) 

paspa+surcharge*hwall*ka; 

ppaspa; /*•* This is the effective pressure at dredge line ***/ 

ra=p 1 *(hwall-hwatcr)/2.0+(p 1 +pa)/2.0*hwatcr, 

if(aal**2) 

{ 


G-6 





pa=pa-surcharge*hwall*ka; 

ra=pl*(hwall-hwatcr)/2.0+(pl+pa)/2.0*hwater+surcharge*hwall*ka; 

) 

a 1 =(hwall-hwater)/3.0+hwatcr; 

a2=hwater/3.0*(2’^ 1 +pa)/(p 1 +pa); 

ybarasp 1 *(hwall-hwater)/2.0*al+(p 1 +pay2.0*hwatcr*a2; 

if(aal=2) 

ybar=ybar+surchargc*hwall*hwall/2.0*ka; 

ybarsybarAa; 

if(aal=2) goto ccl; 

cl=4*cu-paAca; 

c2=-2*ra; 

c3=-ra*(12*cu*ybar+ra)/(2*cu+pa/ka); 
y=root2(cl,c2,c3); 
shdq}th=y; 
goto cc2; 

ccl: paspa*t^urcharge*hwall*ka; 
ybar=hanchor-ybar; 
cl=1.0; 
c2s2*hanchor, 
c3=-2*ybar*ra/(4*cu-pa/ka); 
y=root2(cl,c2,c3); 
shdepthsy, 
rp=y*(4*cu-pa/ka); 
par=Ta-rp; 

cc2: {;) 

momentO; 

printfC Press any key to continuc.Nn"); 

while(kbhit0s=O) (;} 

outputO; 

conip20; 

if(aalaas2) 

walesO; 

ed: printf('^n The detail is in file sheetoutXn”); 

} 


^0**0**m$i****m0^*m*m*********************************f 

float root4(s) 
floats; 

{ 


float a,bl,aO; 
float fa,b4bl,hs0.01; 
float el«0.01; 
float fOjt,bb; 
ass/4.0; 
bb»s*1.0; 
fe=gx(a); 
glO:b^-fh; 
bl»b; 


G-7 





fbl=gx(bl); 

if(abs(fa)<=cl) goto gl6; 
if(abs(fbl)<=cl) goto gll; 
if(fa*fbl>=0.0) goto gll; 
g 12:a0=(a+b)/2.0; 
fO»gx(aO); 

if(abs(fO)<=cl) goto gl3; 
if(abs(b-aO)<=cl) goto gl3; 
if(fa*f0>=0.0) goto gl4; 

goto gl2; 
gl4;fasf0; 
a=aO; 
goto gl2; 
gl6:a0=^ 
gl3:Tt=aO; 

gl l:if(bl>bb) goto gl5; 
asbl; 
fasfbl; 
goto glO; 
glS:retum(rt); 

} 

l*********m*********m**^^m******************m***********f 
float gx(ss) 
float ss; 

{ 

float fff, 

fff=c 1 *pow(ss,4.0)+c2*pow(ss,3.0)+c3*pow(ss,2.0)+c4*ss+c5; 
retum(fff); 

} 

^**ttt*t^m0^itHim*jttmm*********m*>ii***********m*m****************f 

float ioot2(sl,s2,s3) 
float sl,s2^3; 


float a,b,c,x,xl,x2,x3; 
b=sqrt(s2*s2-4.0*s 1 *53); 
a=s2; 
c=2*sl; 
xl=<-a-byc; 
x2=(-a+b)/c; 
if(xl*x2<0) 
xainax(xl^); 
else 
{ 

x«inin(xl,x2); 

printfC* The solution is not unique.'^"); 

} 

retuni(x); 

} 

^*m*******m*m**********************************f 

fltMt root3<s) 
floats; 

( 


float a,bl 4 t 0 ; 


G-8 






float fa,b,fl)l,h=0.01; 
float el=0.01; 
float fO,rt,bb; 
a=s/S.O; 
bb=s*1.0; 
fa=gx3(a); 
glO:b=a+h; 
bl=b; 

fbl=gx3(bl); 
if(abs(fa)<=el) goto gl6; 
if(abs(fbl)<=cl) goto gl 1; 
if(fa*ftl>=0.0) goto gll; 
gl2:a0=(a+b)/2.0; 
fD*gx3(aO); 

if(abs(fO)<=el) goto gl3; 
if(abs(b-aO)<=el) goto gi3; 
if(fa*f0>=0.0) goto gl4; 
b=aO; 
goto gl2; 
gl4:fa=f0; 
a=aO; 
goto gl2; 
gl6;a0=a; 
gl3:rt=aft 

gll:if(bl>bb) goto gl5; 
a=bl; 
fa=fbl; 


goto glO; 
gl5:retum(rt); 

} 

^m*****************************************************^ 


float gx3(ss) 
float ss; 

{ 

float fff; 

ffF*c 1 ♦pow(ss,3.0)+c2*pow(ss^.0)+c3*ss+c4; 
retum(fff); 

} 


fHi^m**************************************************! 


void checkO 

{ 

ch=0; 

if(hwaU=0.0 II (hwaU<=6.0 II hwall>=35.0)) 

( 

primfr NnVn INPUT ERROR:\n"); 

printfC” The height of this type of wall should not be less than 4 ft oiNn"); 
pimtf(" greater than 35 ffSn"); 
piintfC” Please input again.Vn"); 
ch=l; 

} 


if(aal«2) 


G-9 




if(hwater=0.0 II hwater>=hanchor) 

{ 

printf("\n\n INPUT ERROR:V); 

printf(" Usually, the water table is below the anchor to avoid erosionXn"); 

printfC' Please input again.Nn"); 

ch=l; 

} 

} 

if(aal=2) 

{ 

if(hanchor=0.0 II hanchor>=hwall) 

{ 

printf("NriVn FATAL ERROR:\n”); 

printfC' The height of anchor is greater than the height of wall.Nn"); 

printfC' Please input again.Nn"); 

ch=l; 

) 

} 

if(gamau=0 II (gamau<=0.050 II gamau>=0.200)) 

{ 

piwtf("\n\n INPUT ERROR:Nn"); 

printfC' The density of soil is too small or largeNn"); 

printfC' Please input again.Nn"); 

ch=l; 

) 

if(gamal==0 II (gan)al<=0.020 II ganial>gamau)) 

{ 

printf("NnNn INPUT ERROR:Nn"); 

printfC The density of soil below the water table is usually smaller thanNn"); 
printfC that of soil above the water table.Nn"); 
printfC Please input again.NnNn"); 
ch=l; 

) 

if(aaa!=2) 

{ 

if(faiu«=0 II (faiu>=40 II faiu<=18)) 

{ 

prmtfCNnNn INPUT ERROR:Nn"); 

printfC The internal angle of friction of soil is too small or large.Nn"); 

printfC' Please input again.Nn"); 

ch=l; 

} 

) 

if(aaa!=2) 

( 

if(firictionwallsaO || (frictionwall<=10 II frictionwaIl>=faiu)) 

{ 

printfC NnNn INPUT ERROR;Nn"); 

G-10 



printfC The friction between wall and soil is too small or largeNn"); 

printfC’ Please input again.Nn"); 

ch=l; 

} 

) 

if(aal=2) 

{ 

if(suicharge<0.0 II surcharge>=3.0) 

( 

pimtf("\n\n INPUT ERRORrNn"); 

printf(" The surcharge for design is too largeNn"); 

printfC Please input again.Nn"); 

ch=l; 

) 

) 

printf("\n"); 

} 


^>tt*m******$i*********************************f 

int get_modeO 

( 

union REGS intregs,outregs; 

intregs.h.ah=OxOf; 

intS^Ox 10,&intregs,&outregs); 

retuin(outregs.h.al); 

} 

^^mittt^mjtittim^^ittm^tt*****************************^ 

void setscreen(n) 
intn; 

{ 

union REGS intregs,outregs; 
screen=n; 
intregs.h.ah=0; 
intregs.h.alsn; 

int86(0xl0,&intregs,&outregs); 

} 

^*^,*^t*m0tinimm**m**********************i**f 


void set j)age(p) 
intp; 

{ 

union REGS intregs,outregs; 
extern int page; 


pagc=p; 

intregs.h.ah^S; 

intregs.h.alsp; 

int86<0xl0,&intregs,&outregs); 

j^m**************************************/ 


void sct_color(f,b) 
int f,b; 


G-11 






{ 

color=(f & 143)+((b«4) & 112); 


void clcar_screenO 

{ 

union REGS inregs.outregs; 

inregs.h.ah=6; 

inTegs.h.al=0; 

inregs.h.bh=7; 

inregs.h.ch=0; 

inregs.h.cl=0; 

inTegs.h.dh=24; 

inregs.h.dl=79; 

int8^0xl0,&inregs,&outregs); 

} 

^^mm************************************/ 


void inputO 
( 

clear_screenO; 

printf("NriSn"); 

phntf(" ’i'******’i'‘*"i'*****4"*‘4'’i‘**\n"); 
printfC * INPUT ♦\n**); 

printf(" The height of the wall: %.2f ff«”,hwall); 

printf(" The height of the water table: %2{ ffsn’',hwater); 

printfC The density of soil above water table: %.2f kcfn",gamau); 
/* 

printfC The density of soil below water table: %.2f kcf\n",gamal); 

*/ 


if(aaa=l) 

printfC The internal friction angle of soil: degree\n",faiu); 

printfC The friction angle bewteen wall and soil: %d degree\n”,frictionwall); 

} 

if(aaa=2) 

printfC The shear strength of soil: %.2f ksf«",cu); 

} 

if(aaaa=3) 

printfC The mtemal friction angle of soil: %d degrce\n"^aiu); 
printfC The friction angle between wall and soil: degree\n",frictionwall); 

printfC The shear stiengdi below dredge line: %2f ksf\n",cu); 

} 

if(aai««2) 

printf(" The height of the anchor %.2f ft\n",hanchor); 

printfC The surcharge for design: %2f ksf«",surcharge); 

) 


^rintf("Vn"); 

j^^m******************************************************/ 


G~12 






intmomentO 

( 

intijjc; 

float inii]in,iiiml,xx,yy4xx; 

float np^nO; 

yy=hwall-hwater; 

dxx=(hwall-yy)/200.0; 

inin2=0.0; 

for(i=0;i<=200;i++) 

{ 

if(aaa—2) 

( 

ka=1.0; 

kp=1.0; 

} 

xx=yy+i*cixx; 

if(aal=2) 

{ 

mp=-par*(xx-(hwall-hanchor)); 

nrf)=surcharge*xx*xx/2.0*ka; 

1 

else 

{ 

inp=0.0; 

ni0=0.0; 

} 

inml=ni0+inp40.5*yy*gamau*yy*ka*(xx-2.0*yy/3.0)+gainau*yy*ka*(xx-yy)*(xx- 

yy)/2.0 

+0.5*(xx-yy)*gamal*(xx-yy)*ka*(xx-yy)/3.0; 

nmiii3^float)inax(fabs(niinl)J[abs(iniii2)); 

if(imnm>n]in2) 

{ 


mpos=xx; 

min2=aiinm; 

) 

} 


return; 


} 

^****mm***m**m****m******************m******************f 


vdd outputQ 
{ 

FILE *fbut,*fopenO; 
fout=fopen("sheeLout","w"); 


Iirintf("\n”); 

printfr *****************\n"); 

printf(" * OUTPUT: *\n"); 

printfr 

printfC" The miniinum depth under dredge line: %2f f^n"^hdepth); 
prwtfC" The maximum moment: %.2f kips-ft/fif^",mm2); 

printfr TIm maximum nxmient occures at* %2{ flNn'' 4 npos); 
if(aal«>i2) 

printfC" Tte pull force at anchored rod: %2f kips/flSn",par); 
if(aaa!s2) 


G-13 






ptintfC'Active soU pressure coefficient: %.2f \n"4ca); 
printfC'Passive soil pressure coefficient: %.2f Nn”Jq)); 

piintfC" The effetive pressure at dredge line: %^f ksf/fta",pa); 
piintf(" The resultant in active zone: %.2f kips/ffin",ra); 

if(aaa=l) 

{ 

printfC The pivot is below dredge line: %.2f ft\n",a); 
piintfC'The ann of resultant from pivot: %.2f ft\n",ybar); 

} 

if(aal=2) 

printfC The resultant in passive zone: %.2f kips/ftVn"^); 

fprintf(fout," ♦♦*******************Vn”); 
fprintf(fout," * OUTPUT *\n"); 
fprintf(fout," *********************\n"); 

f^rintf(fout," The minimum depth under dredge line: %.2f ft\n",shdepth); 
fprmtf(fout," The maximum moment: %.2f kips-ft/ffvn",mm2); 

fpiintf(fout," The maximum moment occures at: %.2f ft\n",mpos); 

if(aal*=2) 

fprintf(fout," The pull force at anchor rod: %.2f kips/f^n",par); 

£piintf(fout,"--'«iSn"); 

fprintfCfout," The height of wall: %-2f fiNn",hwall); 

^printfrfout," The height of water table: %.2f ft\n"hwater); 

^nintfCfout,” The density of soil: %.2f kcfsn",gamau); 

if(aaa=l) 

{ 

fprintf(fout," The internal friction angle of soil: %d degree'n";faiu); 
fpimtf(fout," The friction angle betweenVn"); 

^printf(fout," soil and wall: %d degree\n"4nctionwall); 

} 

if(aaa=:2) 

^ntfCfout," The shear strengdi of soil: %2f ksfSn",cu); 


if(aaa=®3) 

{ 

fprintf(fout," The internal friction angle: %d degieeVn",faiu); 

fprintf(fout," The friction angle betweenNn"); 

fprintf(fout," soil and wall: %d degree\n'',frictionwall); 

fprintf(fout," The shear strength of soil: %.2f ksf\n",cu); 

if(aal=s2) 

{ 

fprintf(fout," The height of anchor %.2f frSn"4ianchor); 

fpiintf(fout," The surcharge: %.2f ksfVn"^urcharge); 

} 


QrrintfCfout,”^ The following is the cross sections of sheet pile the system has:\n\n"); 


f^tf(fouC 1. PZ40 Sx»%.2f 
fprintf(fouC 2. PZ35 Sx*%.2f 
fjprintf(fout," 3. PZ27 Sx^%.2{ 
fprintfffout," 4. PZ22 Sx*%.2f 
if(shjl!sO) 


Ix=%2f«",mater[0][0],mater[0][ 1]) 
Ix=%^fVn",mater(l][01,matertl][l]) 
Ix=%.2f\n",matcr[2][0],mater[21[ 1]) 
Ix=%.2f\n",mater(3][0],matert31[l]) 


G-14 






^printf(fout,"\n Your choice is No. %dVn\n",shj); 
else 

fprintf(fout," No cross section is OK for your sheet pile.Nn"); 

if(aal=2) 

{ 

fprimf(fout," The following is the list of cross sections of wales in the systeni:Nn\n"); 
fprintf(fout," 1. C10x30 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2fVn".table 1[0][1],table 1[0][0]); 

fprintf(fout," 2. C12x20.7 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2f\n",tablel[l][l],tablel[l][0]); 
fprintfffouC 3. C12x25 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2fSn".tablel[2][ll,tablel[2][0]); 

fpiintfffout," 4. C12x30 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2f\n",tablel[3][l],tablel[3][0]); 

fprintfffout," 5. MC12x30.9 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2fSn",tablel[4][l],tablel[4][0]); 
fprintfffout," 6. MC12x32.9 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2f«",tablel[5][ll,tablel[5][0]); 
fpTintf(fout," 7. MC12x37 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2fSn",tablel[6][l],tablel[6][0]); 

fprintfffout," 8. MC12x35 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2fSn",tablel[7][l],tablel[7][0]); 

fprintf(fout," 9. MC12x40 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2fSn",tablel[8][l],tablel[8][01); 

f^tf(fout," 10. MC12x45 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2fSn".tablel[9][l],tablel[9][0]); 


if(wajl!=0) 

fprintf(fout,"Vn Your choice is No. %d\n\n",waj); 
else 

fprintfCfout," No cross section is OK for your wale.\n”); 

) 

^******miti*m$im******************************m0*****************i 

int keykbO 

{ 

union REGS inregs,outregs; 
inregs.h.ahso; 

return (int86(()xl6,&inregs,&outregs)); 

^*mm**m********m*******************m**mm*m*m*****************f 

int gctkeyO 

char al^,c; 

int key; 

key*keykb(); 

ah=(key » 8) & Oxff; 

al^key&QxOOff; 

if(ala^) 

csah; 

else 

csal; 

retum(c); 

) 

^0*^,00t,in,m********************************f 

intcompU) 

int i 
intci; 

float nny,m[4],mconisl00000.0; 

^*mm0m0**00m:ti^tm*0m*0*m********************f 

float alfa,acoinsl0000000.0; 
static float aconia[3]s{0.6,0.7,0.8}; 


G-15 






float fshcanl,fshcan2,safe; 


float eee=29000000.0,suin; 
float mpjy; 

/* 

static float niater[4][2]={{60.70,490.8),{48.4,360.6},{30.2,184.2},{18.1,84.5)} 


printf("Vn\n In this system, there are four cross sections fw your sheetpileNnNn"); 
nrintf(" 1. PZ40 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2fVn",inaterI0][0],mater[0][l]); 

printfr 2. PZ35 Sx*%.2f Ix=%.2f«",mater{l][0],matertl][l]); 

printfC’ 3. PZ27 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2f\n",matcr{21[0],mater[2][l]); 

printf(" 4. PZ22 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2f\n",inater{3][0],mater(3][l]); 


printfC Please input the yeilding stress! (in ksi)Nn»"); 
scanfC%f,&fy); 

if(aals=l) 

{ 

for(i*3;i>=0;i") 

{ 

fshcan2=0.65*fy; 
fshcanl=intn2* 12.0/mater[i][0]; 
if(fshcanl<sfshcan2) 

printfC Section No. %d could be your choice .Nn"4+1); 

fshcan 1 =fshcmi2/(fshcanl); 

prmtfC The safity factor is %.2f .'«",fshcanl); 

shj=i+l; 

gotoca; 

} 

} 

if(j==0) 

{ 

^jlaO; 

printf(" No cross section listed is OK fw your sheetpile.\n"); 
piintf(" I^bably, you have to increase the yielding stress oiNn"); 
printfC use anchored sheetpilc.\n"); 
gotoca; 

) 

} 

sumsshdepth* 1.4S+hwaU; 

/rn****** Safety factor is 1.45 ♦♦**♦♦***♦***♦♦***♦*****/ 

for(i«0;i<*3;i++) 

rou[i]»log 10(pow(suin,4.0y(ccc*inatcr[i][ 1])); 
inp-fy-0.65/12.0*(inatcrti][01); 


G-16 



nxi[i]»in|]/tnm2; 

) 

for(i=0;i<=3;i-H-) 

printfC ratio of moment (in Y axis)=%^f, log(H/EI)(in X axis)=%.2f\n"4Tn[i].rou[i]); 


^*#m*************************************f 

alfa=hwal]/(hwall+shdepth); 

for(i=0,i<=2;i++) 

{ 

if(abs(alfa-acoma[i])<acom) 

( 

acoiiisabs(alfa-acoma[il); 

k=i; 

} 


) 

acom=acoma[k]; 

pnntf(" \n The sand is dense or loose (d/1) ?Sn»"); 
ci=getkeyO; 


if(ci==:T) 

{ 

for(i=0;i<=3;i++) 

{ 

if(rou(i]>(.2.0) II rou[il<=(-3.5)) 

{ 

m[i]»0.0; 

gotoedl; 

} 

switch(k) 

( 

caseO: 

rmyalinl6(rou[i]); 

br^ 

case 1: 

rmyslinl7(rou[i]); 

bretdc; 

case 2: 

rmyslinl8(iou[i]); 

br^ 

default: 

(;) 

break; 

} 

if(rmy<«rm[i]) 

m[i]^m(i]; 

else 

in(i]-0.0; 

edl:{;) 

} 

for(i»0U<*3;i++) 

{ 

if(m(i]!-0.0) 


G-17 




{ 

if(in[i]<smcoin) 

{ 

j=i+l; 

nicoii^tn[i]; 

} 

} 

else {;} 

} 

ifO!=0) 

{ 

shj^; 

priiitf("\n\n The most appropriate cross section is No. %d with Sx=%.2f 
Ix=%.2fyn"o jnaterlj-1 ][0],mater|j-1 ] [ 1]); 
safe=mcoin/rmy; 

printfC* The safty factor is %.2f\n",safe); 

else 

(. 

printfC’SriSn No cross section listed is OK for your sheetpile !\n"); 
shjl=0; 

} 

} 


if(ci='d’) 

{ 

for(i»0;i<=3;i++) 

{ 

if(rou[i]>(-1.75) II rou[i]<=(-4.0)) 

{ 

m[i]*0.0; 

gotoed2; 

} 

switch(k) 

{ 

cased: 

rmyslind6<rou[i]); 

brudt; 

case 1: 

rmy«]ind7(rou[i]); 

break; 

case 2: 

rmy«lind8(rou[i]); 

brt^ 

ddault 

{;) 

break; 

) 

I* 

nny»lin2(rou[i]); 

*/ 

if(nny<*nn[i]) 

G-18 



in[i]=rm[i]; 

ftlsft 

m[i]=0.0; 

cd2:{;} 

} 

for(i=0;i<=3;i++) 

{ 

if(in[i]!*0.0) 

( 

if(m[i]<=TOCoin) 

{ 

j=i+l; 

nicofii3TO[i]; 

} 

) 

else {;} 

} 

if(j!=0) 

{ 

shj^; 

printf("Vn\n The most appropriate cross section is No. %d with Sx=%.2f 

Ix=%.2f\n" j^naterlj-1 ][0],mater[j-1 ] [ 1 ]); 

safe^mcom^y; 

printfC The factor of safety is %.2fSn",safe); 

) 

else 

{ 

printf("Vri\n No cross section listed is OK for your sheetpile IVi"); 
shjl=0; 

) 

) 


ca:{;} 

return; 


) 

^0****************#*****m***********************/ 

float linl7(s) 
floats; 


( 

float imy; 

if(s>=(-3.5) && s<=(-3.25)) 
rmy=(1.0-0.75)/(-3.5-(-3.25))*(s-(-3.25))+0.75; 

if(s>-3.25 && s<*-3.0) 

rmy=(0.75-0.6)/(-3.25-(-3.0))*(s-(-3.00))+0.60; 

if(s>-3.0 && s<»(-2.75)) 
rmy*(0.60-0.45)/(-3.00-(-2.75))*(s-(-2.75))+0.45; 

if(s>-2.75 && s<=(-2.50)) 
rmy-(0.45-0.36)/(-2.75-(-2.50))*(s-(-2.50))+0.36; 


if(s>-2.5 && s<*-2.25) 


G-19 




rmy=(0.36-0,33)/(-2.50-(-2.25))*(s-(-2.25))+0.33; 
if(s>-2.25 && s<=2.0) 

nny=(0.33-0.30)/(-2.25-(-2.00))*(s-(-2.(X)))+0.30; 


retuin(nny); 

) 

^*m***********************************/ 

float liiid7(s) 
floats; 

{ 

float nny; 


if(s>-4.0 && s<=-3.75) 

nny=(0.8-0.68)/(-4.00-(-3.75))*(s-(-3.75))+0.68; 
if(s>-3.75 && s<=-3.5) 

rmy=:(0.68-0.58)/(-3.75-(-3.5))*(s-(-3.50))+0.58; 
if(s>-3.5 && s<=-3.25) 

nny=(0.58-0.50)/(-3.5-(-3.25))*(s-(-3.25))+0.50; 

if(s>-3.25 && s<=-3.00) 
nny=(0.50-0.43)/(-3.25-(-3.00))*(s-(-3.00))+0.43; 

if(s>-3.00 && s<=-2.75) 
nny=(0.43-0.36)/(-3.00-(-2.75))*(S'(-2.75))+0.36; 

if(s>-2.75 && s<»-2.50) 
nny=(0.36-0.32)/(-2.75-(-2.50))*(s-(-2.50))+0.32; 

if(s>-2.50 && s<=-2.25) 
nny=(0.32-0.28)/(-2.50-(-2.25))*(s-(-2.25))+0.28: 

if(s>'2.25 && s<=-2.00) 
nny*(0.28-0.25)/(-2.25-(-2.00))*(s-(-2.00))+0.25: 


retum(nny); 

jm*^im********************************************/ 

float linl8(s) 

floats; 


( 

float nny; 

if(s>*(-3 J) && s<=(-3.25)) 
nny-(1.10-0.85)/(-3.5-(-3.25))*(s-(-3.25))+0.85; 

if(s>-3.25 && s<=-3.0) 

nny«(0.85-0.65)/(-3.25-(-3.0))*(s-(-3.00))+0.65; 

if(s>'3.0 && s<*(-2.75)) 
nny»(0.65-0.50)/(-3.00-(-2.75))*(s-(-2.75))+0.50; 


G-20 





if(s>-2.75 && s<=(-2.50)) 

nny=(0.50-0.41)/(-2.75-(-2.50))*(s-(-2.50))-K).41; 


if(s>-2.5 && s<=-2.25) 

nny=(0.41-0.37)/(-2.50-(-2.25))*(s-(-2.25))+0.37; 
if(s>-2.25 && s<=2.0) 

nny=(0.37-0.34)/(-2.25-(-2.00))*(s-(-2.00))+0.34; 


rctum(rmy); 

j**m*********************************************/ 

float linl6(s) 
float s; 


{ 

float my; 

if(s>=(-3.5) && s<=(-3.25)) 
nny=(0.89-0.70)/(-3.5-(-3.25))*(s-(-3.25))+0.70; 

if(s>-3.25 && s<=-3.0) 

rmy=(0.70-0.54)/(-3.25-(-3.0))*(s-(-3.00))+0.54; 
if(s>-3.0 && s<=(-2.75)) 

nny=(0.54-0.41)/(-3.00-(-2.75))*(s-(-2.75))+0.41; 


if(s>-2.75 && s<*(-2.50)) 
nny=(0.41.0.32)/(-2.75-(-2.50))*(s-(-2.50))+0.32; 


if(s>-2.5 && s<=-2.25) 

nny»(0.32-0.30)/(-2.50-'(*2.25))*(s-(-2.25))+0.30; 


if(s>-2.25 && s<=2.0) 

nny=(0.30-0.28)/(-2.25-(-2.00))*(s-(-2.00))+0.28; 


retumCmiy); 

^«4i4i****4i************4i4i4i*4i*******4i**4i*/ 

float Iind8(s) 
floats; 

{ 

float my; 


if(s>-4.0 && s<=-3.75) 

my»(0.90-0.74)/(-4.00-(-3.75))*(s-(-3.75))+0.74; 


if(s>-3.75 && s<=-3.5) 

my=(0.74.0.63)/(-3.75-(-3.5))*(s-(-3.50))+0.63; 


if(s>-3.5 && s<=-3.25) 

nny»(0.63-0.55)/(-3.5-(-3.25))*(s-(-3.25))+0.55; 


if(s>-3.25 && s<=-3.00) 


G-21 





rmy=(0.55-0.48)/(-3.25-(-3.00))*(s-(-3.00))+0.48; 
if(s>-3.(X) && s<=-2.75) 

nny=(0.48-0.43)/(-3.00-(-2.75))*(s-(-2.75))+0.43; 
if{s>-2.75 && s<=-2.50) 

nny=(0.43-0.37)/(-2.75-(-2.50))*(s-(-2.50))+0.37; 
if(s>-2.50 && s<=-2.25) 

rmy=(0.37-0.325)/(-2.50-(-2.25))*(s-(-2.25))+0.325; 
if(s>-2.25 && s<=-2.00) 

rmy=(0.325-0.30)/(-2.25-(-2.00))*(s-(-2.00))+0.30; 

retum(rmy); 

) 

^***>tim********'****m***********m*****m*f 

float Iind6(s) 
floats; 

{ 

float imy; 

if(s>-4.0 && s<=-3.75) 

nny=(0.70-0.60)/(-4.00-(-3.75))*(s-(-3.75))+0.60; 
if(s>-3.75 && s<=-3.5) 

nny=(0.60-0.50)/(-3.75-(-3.5))*(s-(-3.50))+0.50; 
if(s>-3.5 && s<=-3.25) 

nny=(0.50-0.42)/(-3.5-(-3.25))*(s-(-3.25))+0.42; 
if(s>-3.25 && s<=-3.00) 

nny=(0.42-0.35)/(-3.25-(-3.00))*(s-(-3.00))+0.35; 
if(s>-3.00 && s<=-2.75) 

nny=(0.35-0.30)/(-3.00-(-2.75))*(s-(-2.75))+0.30; 
if(s>-2.75 && s<=-2.50) 

nny=(0.30-0.28)/(-2.75-(-2.50))*(s-(-2.50))+0.28; 
if(s>-2.50 && s<=-225) 

nny=(0.28-0.25)/(-2.50-(-2.25))*(s-(-2.25))+0.25; 
iffs>-2.25 && s<=-2.00) 

rmy=(0.25-0.20)/(-2.25-(-2.00))*(s-(-2.00))+0.20; 


retumfnny); 

) 

^*4i4i«**i|i*4i****4i4i*****4i****«i*****4i***4i****4i*4>««*4>**4i***/ 

float lincol(s) 
float s; 


( 

float nny; 

Gt22 




if(s>=0.3 && s<=0.43) 
nny=(0.86-1.20)/(0.43-0.30)*(s-0.30)+l .20; 
if(s>0.43 && s<=b.50) 
rniy=(0.78-0.86)/(0.50-0.43)*(s-0.43)+0.86; 
if(s>0.50 && s<=0.60) 
rmy=(0.74-0.78)/(0.60-0.50)*(s-0.50)+0.78: 
if(s>0.60 && s<=0.75) 
nny=(0.70-0.74)/(0.75-0.60)*(s-0.60)+0.74: 
if(s>0.75 && s<=1.00) 
nny=(0.68-0.70)/(1.00-0.75)*(s-0.75)+0.70: 
if(s>1.00 && s<=1.25) 
rmy=(0.66-0.68)/(1.25-1.00)*(s-1.00)+0.68: 
if(s>1.25 && s<=1.50) 
nny=(0.64-0.66)/(1.50-1.25) *(s-1.25)+0.66: 
if(s>1.50 && s<=1.75) 
nny=(0.62-0.64)/(1.75-1.50)*(s-1.50)+0.64; 
if(s>1.75 && s<=2.00) 
nny=(0.60-0.62)/(2.00-1.75)*(s-1.75)+0.62: 

retum(nny); 

) 


float linco2(s) 
float s; 

{ 

float rmy; 

if(s>=0.35 && s<=0.43) 

nny=(0.80-1.00)7(0.43-0.35)*(s-0.35)+l .0; 

if(s>0.43 && s<=0.50) 
nny=(0.66-0.80)/(0.50-0.43)*(s-0.43)+0.80; 

if(s>0.50 && s<=0.60) 
nny=(0.60-0.66)/(0.60-0.50)*(s-0.50)+0.66; 

if(s>0.60 &A s<=0.75) 
rmy=(0.56-0.60)/(0.75-0.60)*(s-0.60)+0.60; 

if(s>0.75 && s<=1.00) 
nny*(0.54-0.56)/(1.00-0.75)*(s-0.75)+0,56; 

if(s>1.00 && s<«1.25) 
nny»(0.52-0.54)/(1.25-1.00)*(s-1.00)-t4).54; 

if (s>1.25 && s<«1.50) 
nny«(0.50-0.52)/(1.50-1.25)*(s-1.25)+0.52; 

if(s>1.50 &A s<=1.75) 
rmy=(0.48-0.50)/(1.75-1.50)*(s-1.50)+0.50; 


if(s>1.75 && s<»2.00) 


G-23 







rmy=(0.47-0.48)/(2.00-1.75)*(s-1.75)+0.48; 


retum(nny); 

) 


float linco3(s) 
float s; 

{ 

float imy; 

if(s>=0.40 && s<=0.50) 
rmy=(0.69-0.90)/(0.50-0.40)*(s-0.40)+0.90; 

if(s> 0.50 && s<=0.60) 
nny=(0.60-0.69)/(0.60-0.50)*(s-0.50)+0.69; 

if(s>0.60 && s<=0.75) 
nny=(0.55-0.60)/(0.75-0.60)*(s-0.60)+0.60; 

if(s>0.75 && s<=1.00) 
nny=(0.50-0.55)/(1.00-0.75)*(s-0.75)+0.55; 

if(s>1.00 && s<=1.25) 
nny=(0.48-0.50)/(1.25-1.00)*(s-1.00)+0.50; 

if(s>1.25 && s<=1.50) 
nny=(0.46-0.48)/(1.50-1.25)*(s-1.25)+0.48; 

if(s>1.50 && s<=2.00) 
rmy=0.46; 


retumfnny); 

) 

l)tt********mm*tit*m**********************mm**mi 


int comp2() 
{ 

int i j=0,k; 
intci; 


float rmy^yl^y2,rniy34n[4],stanutn; 
p^*mmm**m***m******************************f 

float eee=29000000.0,suin; 
float nq}^; 

static float mater[4][2]={{60.70,490.8),{48.4,360.6},{30.2,184.2},{ 18.1,84.5)}; 


float fshcanl,fshcan2; 


printf("Nn\n In this system, there are four cross sections for the sheetpile:Nn\n"); 
printfC 1. PZ40 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2f«",matcr[0][0l4nater[0][l]); 

printff" 2. PZ35 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2f\n",mater[l][01,mater(l][l]); 

printf(" 3. PZ27 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2fyn",matcr[2][0],mater[2][l]); 

printfC 4. PZ22 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2f«",matcr[3][0),mater[3][l]); 


G-24 




printfC Please input the yeilding stress! (in ksi)\n»"); 
scanf("%f',&fy); 


if(aal=l) 

{ 

for(i=3;i>=0;i-) 

{ 

fshcan2=0.65 *fy; 

fshcan 1 =inm2* 12.0Anater(i] [0]; 

if(fshcan 1 <=fshcan2) 

{ 

printfC’ Section No. %d could be your choice .\n"4+l); 

hhcan 1 =fshcan2/(fshcan 1); 

shj=i+l; 

printfC The safty factor is %.2f .\n",fshcanl); 

j=i; 

gotoca; 

) 

} 

ifC=0) 

{ 

shjl=0; 

printfC No cross section listed is OK for your sheetpile.Nn"); 
printfC Probally, you have to increase the yielding stress oi\n"); 
printfC use anchored sheetpile.Nn"); 
gotoca; 

) 


suni=shdepth* 1.45+hwall; 

/♦**♦**♦ Safety factor is 1,45 ************************/ 
for(i=0;i<=3;i++) 

{ 

rouIi]=log 1 (Xpow(sum,4.0)/(eec*niater[i] [ 1 ])); 
mp=^0.65/12.0*(inater(ij [0]); 
nn[i]=iiq)Anm2; 

} 

/* 


for (i*0;i<=3;i-H-) 

printfC ratio of moment (in Y axis)=%.2f, log(H/EI)(in X axis)=%.2f\n"^[i]^u[i]); 


f***0*************0m*******m**************^ 

stanumsl .2S*cu/ppa; 


/* 

printfC Sns%.2f\n",stanum); 

*1 

rmyl»lincol(staninn); 

Tmy2aiinco2(stanumV, 

rmy3»linco3(stanum); 


G-25 




for(i«3;i>=0;i-) 

{ 

if(rou[i]<=-3.1 II rou[i]>=-2.1) 

rmy=(rmyl-nny3)/(-3.10-(-2.(X)))*(rou[i]-(-2.(X)))+nny3; 
if(rou[i]>-3.10 && rou[i]<=-2.60) 
rmy=(rmyl-rmy2)/(-3.10-(-2.60))*(rou[i]-(-2.60))+rmy2; 
if(rou[i]>-2.60 && rou[i]<-2.(X)) 
nny=(nny2-nny3)/(-2.^-(-2.00))*(rou[i]-(-2.00))+rmy3; 

if(rmy<=nn[i]) 

printfC The most appropriate cross section is No. %d Sx=%.2f 
Ix=% ,2fsn" ,i+1 .mater [i] [0] .mater [i] [ 1 ]); 
shj=i+l; 

j*i; 

gotoec; 

) 

else 

{;) 

} 

ec:{;} 


if(j=0) 

{ . 

shjl=0; 

printfC No cross section listed is OK for your sheetpile. Nn"); 
printf(" You should probably increase the yield strees of steel.Nn"); 

ca;{;} 


return; 

} 


int walesQ 
{ 

int io.k=0; 

float qqq.mmid.sxc.sx.sxl; 
float deflc4efl; 
float fy^b; 

/* 


static float tablel[10][2]={ {103.0.20.7}, 

{129.0,21.5}, 

(144.0,24.1}, 

{162.0,27.0}, 

{183.0,30.6}, 

{191.0,31.8}, 

{205.0,34.2}, 

{216.0,36.1}, 

{234.0,39.0}, 

{252.0,42.0} 

}; 

*1 


G-26 




qqq=par/cos(20.0*3.14159/180.0); 

/* The space of anchored rods is 8 ft */ 
minid=qqq*8.0*8.0/10.0; 

/* m=qqq*l*yiO ♦/ 

printfC* In this system, there are 10 cross sections for your wale .\n\n"); 

printfC 1. C10x30 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2fSn".tablel[0][l],tablel[0][0]); 

printfC 2. C12x20.7 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2f«",tablel[l][l],tablel[l][0]); 
printfC 3. C12x25 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2fVn".tablell2][l],tablel[2][0]); 

printfC 4. C12x30 Sx=%.2f Ix=%,2fVn".tablel[3][l],tablel[3][0]); 

printfC’ 5. MC12x30.9 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2fn".tableU4][l].tablel[4][0]); 
printfC 6. MC12x32.9 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2fVn".tablel[51Ill,tablel[51[0]); 
printfC 7. MC12x37 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2f\n".tablel[6][l],tablel[61[0]); 

printfC 8. MC12x35 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2f\n",tablel[7][l],tablel[7][0]); 

printfC 9. MC12x40 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2f«",tablel[8][ll,tablel[8][0]); 

printfC 10. MC12x45 Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2f\n”,tablel[9][l],tablel[9][0]); 

printfCVn Please input the yield stress of the walc.(in ksi)Vn»"); 

scanfC%r,&fy); 

fb=0.75*fy; 

I* The allowable stress is 0.75fy ♦/ 

sx 1 =tnmid* 12.0/fb; 
sxc*sx 1/2.0; 

for(i=0;i<=9;i++) 

{ 

if(tablel[i][l]>sxc) 

{ 

k=l; 
goto pi; 

else {;} 

} 

pi:{;} 

if(k!=0) 

{ 

printfC The most appropnate cross section for wale is a pair of Nn"); 
prmtf(" No. %d Sx=%.2f Ix=%.2f\n"o+l.tablel[j][l],tablel[j][0]); 
printfC channels back-to-back with spacing for the anchor rod.Nn"); 
waj*j+l; 

sxcstablel[j][l]/sxc; 

printf(" The factor of safety is %.2fyn",sxc); 

) 


if(k»=0) 

{ 


G-27 



wajl=0; 

printfC No cross section listed is OK for your sheet pile.Nn"); 

} 

return; 


) 


G-28 




Waterways Exparlmant Station Catalo 0 lng<ln>Pul>llcatlon Data 
Arockiasamy, M. 

Knowledge-based expert system for selection and design of retaining 
structures / by M. Arockiasamy, G. Sreenivasan, K. Shen; prepared for 
Department Ot the Army, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; monitored by 
Information Technology Laboratory, U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Ex¬ 
periment Station. 

345 p.: II.; 28 cm. — (Contract report; iTL-92-2) 

1 . Retaining wals^ Data processing. 2. Stmctural design — Com¬ 
puter programs. 3. Expert sterns (Computer science) 4. Earthwork — 
Data prooesskig. I. SrMnivasan, Q. il. Shen, K. III. United States. 
Army. Corps of Engineers. iV. U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experi¬ 
ment Station. V. Computer-aided Stmctural Engineering Prpje^. VI. 
Title. VH. Series: Contract report (U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Ex¬ 
periment Station);; m.-92'2. 

TA7W34cno.lTL-92-2 



WATERWAYS EXPERIMENT STATION REPORTS 
PUBLISHED UNDER THE COMPUTER-AIDED 
STRUCTURAL ENGINEERING (CASE) PROJECT 


Technical Report K-78-1 
Instruction Report 0-79-2 

Technical Report K-80-1 
Technical Report K-80-2 

Instruction Report K-80-1 

Instruction Report K-80-3 
Instruction Report K-80-4 

Instruction Report K-80-6 
Instruction Report K 80 7 
Technical Report K-80-4 

Technical Report K-80-5 
Instruction Report K-81-? 

Instruction Report K-81 -3 
Instruction Report K-81 -4 
Instructron Report K-81-6 

Instruction Report K-81-7 
Instruction Report K-81-9 
Technical Report K-81 -2 
Instruction Report K-82-6 


Title 

List of Computer Programs for Computer-Aided Structural Engineering 

User’s Guide; Computer Program with Interactive Graphics for 
Analysis of Piane Frame Structures (CFRAME) 

Survey of Bridge-Oriented Design Software 

Evaluation of Computer Programs for the Design/Analysis of 
Highway and Railway Bridges 

User’s Guide; Computer Program for Design/Review of Curvi¬ 
linear Conduits/Culverts (CURCON) 

A Three-Dimensional Finite Element Data Edit Program 

A Three-Dimensional Stability Analysis/Design Program (3DSAD) 
Report 1; General Geometry Module 
Report 3; General Analysis Module (CGAM) 

Report 4; Special-Purpose Modules for Dams (CDAMS) 

Basic User’s Guide; Computer Program for Design and Analysis 
of Inverted-T Retaining Walls and Floodwalls (TWDA) 

User's Reference Manual; Computer Program for Design and 
Analysis of Inverted-T Retaining Walls and Floodwalls (TWDA) 

Documentation of Finite Element Analyses 
Report 1; Longview Outlet Works Conduit 
Report 2; Anchored Wall Monolith, Bay Springs Lock 

Basic Pile Group Behavior 

User’s Guide; Computer Program for Design and Analysis of Sheet 
Pile Walls by Classical Methods (CSHTWAL) 

Report 1; Computational Processes 
Report 2; Interactive Graphics Options 

Validation Report; Computer Program for Design and Analysis of 
Inverted-T Retaining Walls and Floodwalls (TWDA) 

User’s Guide; Computer Program for Design and Analysis of 
Cast-in-Place Tunnel Linings (NEWTUN) 

User’s Guide; Computer Program for Optimum Nonlinear Dynamic 
Design of Reinforced Concrete Slabs Under Blast Loading 
(CBARCS) 

User’s Guide; Computer Program for Design or Investigation of 
Orthogonal Culverts (CORTCUL) 

User’s Guide; Computer Program for Three-Dimensional Analysis 
of Building Systems (CTA6S80) 

Theoretical Basis for CTABS80; A Computer Program for 
Three-Dimensional Analysis of Building Systems 

User’s Guide; Computer Program for Analysis of Beam-Column 
Structures with Nonlinear Supporic (CBEAMC) 


Date 

Feb 1978 
Mar 1979 

Jan 1980 
Jan 1980 

Feb 1980 

Mar 1980 

Jun 1980 
Jun 1982 
Aug 1983 

Dec 1980 
Dec 1980 

Dec 1980 
Dec 1980 

Dec 1980 

Feb 1981 
Mar 1981 

Feb 1981 
Mar 1981 
Mar 1981 

Mar 1981 
Aug 1981 
Sep 1981 
Jun 1982 


(Continued) 







WATERWAYS EXPERIMENT STATION REPORTS 
PUBLISHED UNDER THE COMPUTER-AIDED 
STRUCTURAL ENGINEERING (CASE) PROJECT 


(Continued) 

Title 


Date 


Instruction Report K-82-7 
Instruction Report K-83-1 
Instruction Report K-83-2 
Instruction Report K-83-5 

Technical Report K-83-1 
Technical Report K-83-3 

Technical Report K-83-4 
Instruction Report K-84-2 

Instruction Report K-84-7 

Instruction Report K-84-8 

Instruction Report K-84-11 

Technical Report K-84-3 

Technical Report ATC-86-5 

Technical Report ITL-87-2 
Instruction Report ITL-87-1 
Instructiori Report ITL 87-2 
Technical Report ITL-87-6 
Instruction Report ITL-87-3 


User’s Guide: Computer Program for Beahng Capacity Analysis 
0 * onailow Foundations (CBEAR) 

User’s Guide: Computer Program with Interactive Graphics for 
Analysis of Plane Frame Structures (CFRAME) 

User's Guide: Computer Program for Generation of Engineering 
Geometry (SKETCH) 

User’s Guide; Computer Program to Calculate Shear, Moment, 
and Thrust (CSMT) from Stress Results of a Two-Dimensional 
Finite Element Analysis 

Basic Pile Group Behavior 

Reference Manual: Computer Graphics Program for Generation of 
Engineering Geometry (SKETCH) 

Case Study of Six Major General-Purpose Finite Element Programs 

User's Guide: Computer Program for Optimum Dynamic Design 
of Nonlinear Metal Plates Under Blast Loading (CSDOOR) 

User's Guide: Computer Program for Determining Induced 
Stresses and Consolidation Settlements (CSETT) 

Seepage Analysis of Confined Flow Problems by the Method of 
Fragments (CFRAG) 

User’s Guide for Computer Program CGFAG, Concrete General 
Flexure Analysis with Graphics 

Computer-Aided Drafting and Design for Corps Structural 
Engineers 

Decision Logic Table Formulation of ACI318-77, Building Code 
Requirements for Reinforced Concrete for Automated Con¬ 
straint Processing, Volumes I and II 

A Case Committee Study of Finite Element Analysis of Conaete 
Flat Slabs 

User’s Guide; Computer Program for Two-Dimensional Analysis 
of U-Frame Structures (CUFRAM) 

User’s Guido: For Concrete Strength Investigation and Design 
(CASTR) in Accordance with ACI 318-85 

Finrte-Element Method Package for Solving Steady-State Seepi .a 
Problems 

User’s Guide: A Three Dimensional Stability Analysis/Design 
Program (3DSAD) Module 
Report 1: Revision 1: General Geometry 
Report 2: General Loads Module 
Report 6: Free Body Module 


Jun 1982 

Jan 1983 

Jun 1983 

Jul 1983 

Sep 1983 
Sep 1983 

Oct 1983 
Jan 1984 

Aug 1984 

Sep 1984 

Sep 1984 

Oct 1984 

Jun1986 

Jan 1987 
Apr 1987 
May 1987 
May 1987 

Jun 1987 

Jun 1987 
Sep 1989 
Sep 1989 


(Continued) 




WATERWAYS EXPERIMENT STATION REPORTS 
PUBLISHED UNDER THE COMPUTER-AIDED 
STRUCTURAL ENGINEERING (CASE) PROJECT 


(Continued) 

Title 


Date 


Instruction Report lTL-87-4 User’s Guide: 2-D Frame Ar alysis Link Program (LINK2D) 


Jun 1987 


Technical Report lTL-87-4 


Instruction Report GL-87-1 


Finite Element Studies of a Horizontally Framed Miter Gate 

Report 1: Initial and Refined Finite Element Models (Phases 
A, B, and C). Volumes I and II 
Report 2: Simplified Frame Model (Phase D) 

Report 3: Alternate Ckinfiguration Miter Gate Finite Element 
Studies-Open Section 

Report 4: Alternate Configuration Miter Gate Finite Element 
Studies-Closed Sections 

Report 5: Alternate Configuration Miter Gate Finite Element 
Studies-Additional Closed Sections 
Report 6; Elastic Buckling of Girders in Horizontally Framed 
Miter Gates 

Report 7: Application and Summary 


User’s Guide: UTEXAS2 Slope-Stability Package; Volume I, 
User’s Manual 


Aug 1987 


Aug 1987 


Instruction Report ITL-87-5 
Instruction Report ITL-87-6 


Technical Report lTL-87-8 

Instruction Report ITL-88-1 

Technical Report ITL-88-1 

Technical Report ITL-88-2 

Instruction Report lTL-88-2 

Instruction Report lTL-88-4 

Instruction Report GL-87-1 

Technical Report ITL-89-3 
Technical Report ITL-89-4 


Sliding Stability of Concrete Structures (CSLIDE) 

Criteria Specifications for and Validation of a Computer Program 
for the Design or Investigation of Horizontally Framed Miter 
Gates (CMITER) 

procedure for Static Analysis of Gravity Dams Using the Finite 
Element Method - Phase la 

User’s Guide: Computer Program for Analysis of Planar Grid 
Structures (CGRID) 

Development of Design Formulas for Ribbed Mat Foundations 
on Expansive Soils 

User’s Guide; Pile Group Graphics Display (CPGG) Post¬ 
processor to CPGA Program 

User’s Guide for Design and Investigation of Horizontally Framed 
Miter Gates (CMITER) 

User’s Guide for Revised Computer Program to Calculate Shear, 
Moment, and Thrust (CSMT) 

User’s Guide: UTEXAS2 Slope-Stability Package; Volume II, 
Theory 

User’s Guide; Pile Group Analysis (CPGA) Computer Group 

CBASIN-Structural Design of Saint Anthony Falls Stilling Basins 
According to Corps of Engineers Criteria for Hydraulic 
Structures; Computer Program X0098 


Oct 1987 
Dec 1987 

Jan 1988 

Feb 1988 

Apr 1988 

Apr 1988 

Jun 1988 

Sep 1988 

Feb 1939 

Jul 1989 
Aug 1989 


(Continued) 





WATERWAYS EXPERIMENT STATION REPORTS 
PUBLISHED UNDER THE COMPUTER-AIDED 
STRUCTURAL ENGINEERING (CASE) PROJECT 


Technical Report ITL-89-5 

Technical Report ITL-89-6 
Contract Report ITL-89-1 
Instruction Report ITL-90-1 
Technical Report ITL-90-3 

Instruction Report ITL-90-6 
Instruction Report ITL-90-2 
Technical Report ITL-91-3 

Instruction Report ITL-91-1 

Instruction Report ITL-87-2 
(Revised) 

Technical Report ITL-92-2 
Technical Report ITL-92-4 
Instruction Report ITL-92-3 

Instruction Report ITL-92-4 
Instruction Report ITL-92-5 


(Continued) 

Title 

CCHAN-Structural Design of Rectangular Channels According 
to Corps of Engineers Criteria for Hydraulic 
Structures: Computer Program X0097 

The Response-Spectrum Dynamic Analysis of Gravity Dams Using 
the Finite Element Method; Phase II 

State of the Art on Expert Systems Applications in Design, 
Constructbn, and Maintenance of Structures 

User’s Guide: Computer Program for Design and Analysis 
of Sheet Pile Walls by Classical Methods (CWALSHT) 

Investigation and Design of U-Frame Structures Using 
Program CUFRBC 

Volume A: Program Criteria and Documentation 
Volume B; User's Guide (or Basins 
Volume C: User’s Guide for Channels 

User’s Guide; Computer Program for Two-Dimensional Analysis 
of U-Frame or W-Frame Structures (CWFRAM) 

User’s Guide: Pile Group-Concrete Pile Analysis Program 
(CPGC) Preprocessor to CPGA Program 

Application of Finite Element, Grid Generation, and Scientific 
Visualization Techniques to 2-D and 3-D Seepage and 
Groundwater Modeling 

User's Guide: Computer Program for Design and Analysis 
of Sheet-Pile Walls by Classical Methods (CWALSHT) 

Including Rowe's Moment Reduction 

User's Guide for Concrete Strength Investigatbn and Design 
(CASTR) in Accordance with ACI318-89 

Fiinite Element Modeling of Welded Thbk Plates for Bonneville 
Navigatbn Lock 

Introductbn to the Computatbn of Response Spectrum for 
Earthquake Loading 

Concept Design Example, Computer Abed Structural 

Modeling (CASM) 

Report 1; ^heme A 
Report 2: Scheme B 
Report 3; Scheme C 

User’s Gube: Computer-Aided Structural Modeling 

(CASM) - Version 3.00 

Tutorial Guide: Computer-Abed Structural Modeling 

(CASM) - Version 3.00 


Date 

Aug 1989 

Aug 1989 
Sep 1989 
Feb 1990 
May 1990 

Sep 1990 
Jun1990 
Sep 1990 

Oct 1991 

Mar 1992 
May 1992 
Jun 1992 

Jun 1992 
Jun 1992 
Jun 1992 

Apr 1992 
Apr 1992 


(Continued) 





WATERWAYS EXPERIMENT STATION REPORTS 
PUBLISHED UNDER THE COMPUTER-AIDED 
STRUCTURAL ENGINEERING (CASE) PROJECT 


(Concluded) 

Title 


Date 


Contract Report ITL-92-1 
Technical Report ITL-92-7 
Instruction Report GL-87-1 

Contract Report ITL-92-2 


Optimization of Steel Pile Foundtions Using Optimality Criteria 

Refined Stress Analysis of Melvin Price Locks and Dam 

User’s Guide; UTEXAS3 Slope-Stability Package; Volume IV, 
User's Manual 

Knowledge-Based Expert System for Selection and Design 
of Retaining Structures 


Jun 1992 
Sep 1992 
Sep 1992 

Sep 1992 



