AD-A227 597 


Copy 1 0 of 15 copies 



IDA MEMORANDUM REPORT M-408 


STARS REPOSITORY BIBLIOGRAPHY 

VERSION 1.1 


Catherine W. McDonald 
Teresa L. Anderson 


January 1988 


Prepared for 

STARS Joint Program Office 


OTIC 



tiLECTE 
% OCT 151990 

V 


D 


DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A 


Approved for pi. : die ''.-lease; 
Dl'.'ri■■■ N -K ,.i!cd 


INSTITUTE FOR DEFENSE ANALYSES 

I SO I N. Beaureijard Street. Alexandria. Virginia 22.111-1772 






C''SA. . 




IDA Log No. HQ 87-32924 






DEFINITIONS 

IDA publishes the following documents to report the results ot Its work. 


Reports 

Reports are the most authoritative and most carefully considered products IDA publishes. 
They normally embody results of major projects which (a) have a direct bearing on 
decisions affecting major programs, (b) address issues ot significant concern to the 
Executive Branch, the Congress and/or the public, or (c) address issues that have 
significant economic implications. IDA Reports are reviewed by outside panels ot experts 
to ensure their high quality and relevance to the problems studied, and they are released 
by the President of IDA. 

Group Reports 

Group Reports record the findings and results of IDA established working groups and 
panels composed of senior individuals addressing major issues which otherwise would be 
the subject of an IDA Report. IDA Group Reports are iewed by the senior individuals 
responsible for the project and others as selected by luA to ensure their high quality and 
relevance to the problems studied, and are released by the President ot IDA. 

Papers 

Papers, also authoritative and carefully considered products ol IDA. address studies that 
are narrower in scope than “'ose covered in Reports. IDA Papers are reviewed to ensure 
that they meet the high standards expected of refereed papers in professional journals or 
formal Agency reports. 

MemorandumReports 

IDA Memorandum Reports are used for the convenience ot the sponsors or the analysts to 
record substantive work done in quick reaction studies and major interactive technical 
support activities: to make available preliminary and tentative results ol analyses or of 
working group and panel activities: to forward information that is essentially unanalyzed 
and unevaluated: or to make a record of conferences, meetings, or briefings, or of data 
developed in the course of an investigation. Review of Memorandum Reports is suited to 
their content and intended use. 

The results of IDA work are also conveyed by briefings and informal memoranda to 
sponsors and others designated by sponsors, when appropriate. 



Approved for public release, unlimited distribution: 6 September 1990. Unclassified. 


















REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

Form Approved 

OMB No. 0704-0188 

Public reporting burden lor trite collection of Information te estimated to average 1 hour per response, including trie time for reviewing Instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and 
maintaining trie data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, 
including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for information Operations and Reports. 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway. Suite 1204, Arlington, 

VA 22202 - 4302 . and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188). Washington, DC 20503. 

1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank) 

2. REPORT DATE 

January 1988 

3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

Final 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 


STARS Repository Bibliography Version 1.1 


6. AUTHOR(S) 

Catherine W. McDonald, Teresa L. Anderson 


5. FUNDING NUMBERS 

MDA 903 84 C 0031 
A-134 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Institute for Defense Analyses 
1801 N. Beauregard St. 

Alexandria, VA 22311-1772 


9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

STARS Joint Program Office 
1400 Wilson Blvd. 

Arlington, VA 22209-2308 


8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 

IDA Memorandum Report 
M-408 


10. SPONSORING/MONITORING 
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 



12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABIUTY STATEMENT 


12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 


Approved for public release, unlimited distribution; 06 
September 1990. 


13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) 

IDA Memorandum Report M-408, STARS Repository Bibliography Version 1.1, provides 
bibliographic sources for the concept paper, STARS Repository Guidebook Version 1.1, IDA 
Memorandum Report M-385. The Software Technology for Adaptable, Reliable Systems 
(STARS) Program plans to establish a repository for the storage and distribution of reusable 
software modules, accompanying documentation, and software mangement tools. This 
bibliography includes supplemental references which may be of assistance to the STARS 
Program and the prime contractors in the establishment and maintenance of the STARS 
repository. 


14. SUBJECT TERMS 


Software Repository; Software Management Tools; Software Documentation; 
Software Libraries; Information Storage and Retrievel Systems. 


17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF REPORT 

Unclassified 


18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF THIS PAGE 

Unclassified 


19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF ABSTRACT 

Unclassified 


15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

50 


16. PRICE CODE 


20. LIMITATION OF 
ABSTRACT 

UL 


NSN 7540-01-280-5500 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) 
Proscribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18 
298-102 






















IDA MEMORANDUM REPORT M-408 


STARS REPOSITORY BIBLIOGRAPHY 

VERSION 1.1 


Catherine W. McDonald 
Teresa L. Anderson 


January 1988 _ 

; .'iron S3 ion For 

j MIS GFA&I 
I DTIC TAB 
1 Unannounced 
| Justification 


By - - 

Distribution/ _ 

Availability Codes 


j jAvcil and/or 

iDist I Special 





INSTITUTE FOR DEFENSE ANALYSES 

Contract MDA 903 84 C 003 I 
DARPA Assignment A-134 




ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The authors wish to thank a number of people who helped with this bibliography. 
The EDA library staff were extremely helpful initially. Ms. Pamela Charles was most 
valuable in the beginning stages of research; most of the references from DIALOG were 
obtained with her help. Mr. Richard Waychoff, of EDA, provided technical direction to the 
research. Ms. Katydean Price and Ms. Julia Sensiba, also from IDA, assisted with editorial 
aspects of the bibliography. The authors would also like to thank Dan Sehnal, of IDA, for 
his insight into the possible organization of the repository. 


v 





TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

1.0 INTRODUCTION. 1 

1.1 Purpose. 1 

1.2 Scope. 1 

1.3 Background. 2 

1.4 Approach. 2 

2.0 BIBLIOGRAPHY. 3 


vii 









1.0 INTRODUCTION 


1.1 PURPOSE 

The purpose of this IDA Memorandum Report is to provide bibliographic sources 
for the concept paper, STARS Repository Guidebook: Version 1.1, IDA Memorandum 
Report M-385. The Software Technology for Adaptable, Reliable Systems (STARS) 
project plans to establish a repository for the storage and distribution of reusable software 
modules, accompanying documentation, and software management tools. This repository 
will be maintained by a prime contractor who will be responsible for the upkeep of the 
repository, and although the repository will be primarily for the STARS community, it will 
also be made available to other interested parties. This bibliography includes supplemental 
references which may be of assistance to the STARS Program Office and the prime 
contractors in the establishment and maintenance of the STARS repository. 

1.2 SCOPE 

Research for the STARS repository was based on the stated requirements for the 
repository's operation, as detailed in IDA Memorandum Report, M-385, STARS 
Repository Guidelines, Version 1.1, Section 2.0. The research was limited primarily to 
the following areas: the Ada programming language, computer networks, information 
storage and retrieval, software libraries and library management, software reliability, 
software repositories, and software reusability. The following repositories were examined 
to determine their potential applicability to the STARS project: 

• Defense Data Network (DDN), the largest operational software 
repository, managed by the Defense Communications Agency (DCA), 

• Computer Software Management and Information Center (COSMIC), 
established by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
(NASA), and 

• National Software Works, a project at the Rome Air Development 
Center (RADC). 


1 





1.3 BACKGROUND 


As the cost of software development has escalated, the need for reliable software * 

components which are also reusable, has increased. The object of the STARS project is to 
provide a means whereby Ada software modules can be easily accessed and reused by the 
STARS community, thus reducing both development time and cost. The repository's 
prime contractor will be expected to host the repository in a MILNET-accessible * 

environment, and establish a viable method for searching, retrieving, and maintaining the 
software. Specific details of the repository requirements are in IDA Memorandum Report, 

M-385. 

4 

1.4 APPROACH 

In preparing the bibliography, research was conducted using engineering, computer 
science, and technical journal databases found on the DIALOG information retrieval 
system. Each reference was examined to determine its appropriateness to the repository's * 

development. When a certain degree of relevance was established, an entry was made in a 
master database. Each entry consisted of general bibliographic information, an abstract, 
keywoids, and an Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) classification. The 
abstract was taken from DIALOG when available, as were most of the keyword * 

assignments. For those references which did not have an abstract readily available, or a 
sufficient number of keywords, these were written by one of the authors. The ACM 
classifications were also assigned by one of the authors, based on the ACM Classification 
Scheme dated 15 Jan 1987. ^ 

Before defining the components of the STARS repository, several existing 
repositories were examined to determine the fundamental requirements for the repository. 

These other repositories will be described in detail in Section 4.0 of IDA Memorandum t 

Report, M-385, STARS Repository Guidelines: Version 1.2, scheduled for publication in 
April 1988. Several operational retrieval systems were evaluated to establish whether a 
current retrieval methodology was applicable to STARS, or if a new approach to the 
storage and retrieval concept was needed. This recommendation will also be made in IDA 
Memorandum Report, M-385, STARS Repository Guidelines: Version 1.2. 


2 





2.0 STARS REPOSITORY BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Allen, K.W. "Implementation and Management of a Software Lending Library." In 
SIGUCCS Newsletter 15/1. (Spring 1985): 26-29 Cornell University, Ithaca, 
NY 

The article discusses the problems of developing a software library, such as 
licensing laws. At Cornell University where the system was first implemented the 
response by the software industry as a whole was slow. However, the scheme is 
now a partial success. (ENSPEC - Database of Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
UK) 

KEYWORDS: Software Libraries 

ACM CLASS: H.3.4 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Systems and Software - 
Information Networks 

Anderson, C. "The Ins and Outs of Indexing." In PC (Independent Guide to IBM 
Personal Computers) 4/8. (April 16, 1985): 321-322 

Micro Indexing System ($600), from Compugramma, P.O. Box 60, Cranbury 
New Jersey 08512, facilitates the creation of book indexes. The program follows 
The Chicago Manual of Style, and is simple and flexible. Function keys speed up 
the processes of entering headings and subheadings. The index can be listed 
alphabetically a: any point. When all entries have been made, a menu allows a 
choice of methods of listing. (The Computer Database™) 

KEYWORDS: Indexing; Automatic Indexing; Citation Indexing; Index Generation; 
Document Preparation; Software 

ACM CLASS: H.3.1 [ Information Storage & Retrieval]: Content Analysis & 
Indexing - Indexing Methods 


3 






Association for Computing Machinery. "Additions from 1983 to 1987 Version of CR 
Classification Scheme". In ACM's Computing Reviews, 28/1. (January 1987): 5- 
46. 

The objectives of the original ACM Classification Scheme of 1982 were to provide 
a classification system which a) reflects the current state of the computer field; b) 
somewhat reflects the expectations of the field for the next ten years; and, c) 
contains a mechanism to easily change and improve the scheme without requiring a 
major overhaul. 

The classification system is based on a tree diagram with four levels of detail. This 
article contains the updates made to the 1983 scheme to make it current for 1987. 

KEYWORDS: Classification Scheme; Computer Terminology 

ACM: H.3.2 [Information Storage & Retrieval]: Information Storage - Record 
Classification 

Baldo, James Jr. and David O. LeVan. Effects of Transition from DoD to ISO OSI 
Communication Protocols. (July 1987): Institute for Defense Analyses, 
Alexandria, VA. 

The purpose of this paper is to provide the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Command Control 
and Communications System Joint Requirements Integration (C3SJ) effort with an 
analysis of the effects of the transition from Department of Defense communications 
protocols to the International Standards Organization (ISO) Open Systems 
Interconnect (OSI) communications protocols. 

KEYWORDS: Communication Protocols; Software Standards 

ACM CLASS: D.2.0 [Software Engineering]: General - Standards 

Biggerstaff,T. and C. Richter. "Reusability Framework Assessment, and Directions." In 
IEEE Software 4/2. (March 1987): 41-49. Microelectronics and Computer 
Technology Corp., Austin, Texas 

The authors address the question of software reusability from the technology 
viewpoint. They examine the technologies, either mature or emerging that are 
available to address reusability, how they work, and how they differ. A framework 
is given for classifying the available technologies into those that are compositional 
and those that are generational. (INSPEC - Database of Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, UK) 


4 





KEYVvORDS: Reusable Software 

ACM CLASS: D.2.m [Software Engineering]: Miscellaneous - Reusable Software 

Bills, R. "Setting Up an Electronic Bulletin Board." In Small Computers for Libraries 
6/7. (July-August 1986): 28-29. West Virginia College of Graduate Studies, 
Morgantown, WV 

The West Virginia College of Graduate Studies Library Services maintains an 
electronic bulletin board for the use of its faculty, staff, and students. The bulletin 
board allows posting of general bulletins, sending of public or private messages to 
any other user, and uploading or downloading of public domain software or other 
files. Setting up and running the board takes only a little effort and prior 
knowledge of microcomputers. Suggestions are given to help set up a bulletin 
board. (INSPEC - Database of Institute of Electrical Engineers, UK) 

KEYWORDS: Electronic Bulletin Board; Information Services 

ACM CLASS: D.4.4 [Operating Systems]: Communication Management - 
Message Sending 

Boutocoff, D.A. "DDN Evolves to Meet Interoperability, Security Needs." In Defense 
Electronics 18/4. (April 1986): 59-60. 

The Defense Data Network (DDN) is the DoD's worldwide packet-switched 
common-user network for data communications. The system represents an effort to 
build upon several existing military packet-switch networks and, reflecting an 
overall telecommunications trend, to interconnect previously isolated computer 
systems and local area networks into an integrated wide area network for long-haul 
data communications. (INSPEC - Database of Institute of Electrical Engineers, UK) 

KEYWORDS: Defense Data Network; Computer Security 

ACM CLASS: C.2.0 [Computer-Communication Networks]: General - Security 
and Protection 


5 




Brunelle, Bette S. "The Production of a Full-Text Database." In National Online Meeting 
Proceedings 1985. (April 30-May 2 1985): 71-78 

Outlines what a full text data base is in technical terms, how that may differ from a 
user's standpoint, and what the design issues are in either case. Discusses the 
implications of full text for electronic publishing-how print publishers will be 
changing editorial procedures to encompass standard and on-line publishing and 
how system designers will simultaneously have to view text as meaningful text, 
rather than as just lots of text. (LISA - Library Association Publications, LTD, UK) 

KEYWORDS: Automatic Indexing; Full Text Searching; Data Bases; Electronic 
Media; On-line Information Retrieval; Computerized Information Storage and 
Retrieval 

ACM CLASS: H.3.1 [Information Storage & Retrieval]: Content Analysis & 
Indexing - Indexing Methods 

Clapp, J. "Software Reusability: A Management View." In IEEE COMPSAC 
Proceedings. 479-480. MITRE Corp., Bedford, MA 

The author discusses some of the management issues involved in achieving 
widespread reuse of software. These include organizational issues, standards, and 
motivation. (COMPENDEX) 

KEYWORDS: Reusable Software; Software Management 

ACM CLASS: D.2.m [Software Engineering]: Miscellaneous - Reusable Software 

Cohen, L.S. and W.J. Miller. Defense Data Network Support Concept Analysis. 
(January 1985): 1-26. Dynamics Research Corp., Wilmington, MA. 

This final technical briefing presents an outline form of the data in the final report 
with the same name, dated 26 December 1984. 

KEYWORDS: Defense Data Network; Logistics Support 

ACM CLASS: A.2 [General Literature]: Reference - Conceptual Analysis 


6 







Conklin, Jeff. Hypertext: An Introduction & Survey.” In IEEE. (September 1987): 17- 
40. Microelectronics & Computer Technology Corp. 

Most modern computer systems share a foundation which is built of directories 
.ontaining files. The files consist of text which is composed of characters. The 
text that is stored within this hierarchy is linear. For much of our current way of 
doing business, this linear organization is sufficient. However, for more and more 
applications, a linear organization is not adequate. 

As workstations grow cheaper, more powerful and more available, new 
possibilities emerge for extending the traditional notion of "flat" text files by 
allowing more complex organizations of the material. Mechanisms are being 
devised which allow direct machine-supported references from one textual chunk to 
another; new interfaces provide the user with the ability to interact directly with 
these chunks and to establish new relationships between them. These extensions of 
the traditional text fall under the general category of hypertext (also known as non¬ 
linear text.) 

KEYWORDS: Non-Linear Text; Hypertext; Searching Methods 

ACM CLASS: H.2.1 [Database Management]: Logical Design - Data Models 

Conn, Richard. "Overview of the DoD Ada Software Repository." In Dr. Dobb's Journal 
11/2. (February 1986):60-61. 

Describes the types of information on Ada that can be found on the SIMTEL20 
computer on the Defense Data Network. Types include general information, 
reusable components, software development aids, communications software, 
graphics and display tools, and other topics. Reports on how to get software from 
the Ada Software Repository. (Microcomputer Index) 

KEYWORDS: Software Repositories; Ada Programming Language 

ACM CLASS: D.2.2 [Software Engineering]: Tools and Techniques - Software 
Libraries 





Conn, Richard. The Ada Software Repository and The Defense Data Network. New 
York, New York: Crane Duplicating Service, 1987. 

This book introduces its readers to the operation and resources of the Internet, with 
particular emphasis on the Ada Software Repository on SIMTEL20. The book 
provides current answers, and pointers to future answers, to such questions as: 
What facilities are available on the Internet? How can the user access them? How 
can the user keep up with them and adapt as they change? This book is not 
comprehensive; however, it does present answers to many fundamental questions 
and, perhaps more importantly, it provides pointers to the ways in which the reader 
will be able to use the available resources in order to find the answers to questions 
that have not been asked. 

KEYWORDS: Ada Software Repository; Defense Data Network 

ACM CLASS: D.2.2 [Software Engineering]: Tools and Techniques - Software 
Libraries 


Coombs, James H., Allen H. Renear, and Steven J. DeRose. "Markup Systems and the 
Future of Scholarly Text Processing". In Communications of the ACM. 30/11 
(November 1987): 933- 

In the last few years, scholarly text processing has entered a reactionary stage. 
Previously, developers were working toward systems that would support scholars 
in their roles as researchers and authors. Since the introduction of inexpensive and 
powerful personal computers, we have seen a change in focus away from 
developing such new strategies toward finding ways to do the old things faster. 

KEYWORDS: Text Processing; Computer Aided Searches 

ACM CLASS: 1.7.2 [Text Processing]: Document Preparation - Format & 
Notation 


8 





» 


ft 


Craven, Timothy C. "An On-Line Index Entry Format Based on Multiple Search Terms." 
In Journal of Documentation 43/1 (March 1987): 46-53. 

Describes a microcomputer-based string index format generated from concept 
networks using multiple search terms. Link weighting is highlighted as a method to 
decide which term appears first so the entry reflects the classification implied by the 
search specification. The computer software used for this system is briefly 
described. (ERIC, Department of Education) 

KEYWORDS: Automatic Indexing; Search Strategies; Weighted Term Searching 

ACM CLASS: H.3.3 [Information Storage & Retrieval]: Information Search & 
Retrieval - Search Process 

De Vere, R., M.S. Larow, K.A. Napier, and L. Passmore. DDN (Defense Data Network) 
Course. Fairfax, VA: Network Strategies, Inc., April 1986. 

The purpose of this course is to provide the DDN user community with sufficient 
technical and program information to enable the users to obtain effective data 
communications service through the DDN and to meet DoD interoperability 
requirements. The Course is organized into four sections: Functional 
Requirements for Data Communications; Introduction to Computer Network 
Architectures; The Defense Data Network and the DoD Protocol Suite; and the 
DDN: Strategies for Subscribers. 

KEYWORDS: Defense Data Network; Communications Networks 

ACM CLASS: A. 1 [General Literature]: Introductory and Survey - 
Communication Networks 


9 




Dennett, S.C., E.J. Feinler, F. Perillo, M.K. Stahl, and C.A. Ward. DDN (Defense Data 
Network) New User Guide. Menlo Park, CA: DDN Network Information Center, 
SRI International, December 1985. 

Information of interest to new users of the Defense Data Network (DDN) is 
contained in this document. It explains the DDN environment and the history in 
general first, then emphasizes points relevant to the MILNET network either 
through a terminal attached to a host computer or through a TAC (Terminal Access 
Controller). The need and process for registering users is explained. In addition, 
instructions are provided for taking advantage of some of the most useful network 
features, such as various mail systems, FTP (File Transfer Protocol), and Telnet. 
WHOIS, TACNEWS, NIC/QUERY, and other services provided by the Network 
Information Center (NIC) are detailed. Service centers an network contacts are 
discussed, a bibliography and glossary provided, and appendices discuss further 
areas of interest. 

KEYWORDS: Defense Data Network; User's Guide 

ACM CLASS: A.2 [General Literature]: Reference - User's Guide 

Dewey, P.R. "Searching for Software." In Popular Computing 3/13 (Mid-October 1984): 
137-141. 

Software directories have multiplied almost as fast as the number of software titles. 
When attempting to select a directory, you need to ask several important questions: 
Which directories are available for the machine you own? Which directories offer 
independent reviews of software? What kind of information do you need (how 
detailed, etc.) and how quickly do you need it? How current must the information 
be, and how exhaustive? Which directories offer updates? How much do they 
cost? Information is provided on various software directories available in the USA 
including: printed directories, on-line and off-line databases, catalogs, and public 
domain sources. (INSPEC - Database of Institute of Electrical Engineers, UK) 

KEYWORDS: Software Selection; Search Strategies 

ACM CLASS: H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval] Information Search and 
Retrieval - Search Process 

Duvall, Lorraine M. Software Data Repository Study. Chicago, EL: IIT Research 
Institute, December 1976 








ft 


ft 


ft 


» 


The purpose of the Software Data Repository is to upgrade the software 
development process through collection, analysis, and dissemination of software 
development experience. A functional definition of the repository including a 
discussion of the inputs, processes, and outputs is presented in this report. The 
input processing and the requirements of an information system for storing and 
processing the data is discussed, along with a presentation of the recommendations 
for the repository including the development and operation of a pilot facility and the 
expansion of this facility into a fully operational center. 

KEYWORDS: Software Repositories 

ACM CLASS: D.2.2 [Software Engineering]: Tools and Techniques - Software 
Libraries 

Edwards, B. "Software Library Management: An Expanding Role for the Information 
Professional." In Online Conference Proceedings, Weston CT (1985): 93-97. 
Codex Corp., Mansfield, MA 

In modern computer installations, the responsibility for ensuring that the 
information in a database is up to date and accurate is increasingly being assigned to 
a software librarian. He or she establishes controls for every type of transaction 
that results in a database change. Activities include categorizing information stored 
on magnetic disks and tapes; organizing system documentation; revising programs 
to ensure their validity; periodically backing-up programs and data. The necessary 
skills required and the methods by which a software librarian can bring order to an 
environment in need of controls is presented. Employers are benefiting from the 
fact that library trained personnel are now filling positions that once were solely 
offered to computer specialists. (INSPEC - Database of Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, UK) 

KEYWORDS: Software Libraries; Software Management 

ACM CLASS: K.6.3 [Management of Computer and Information Systems]: 
Software Management - Software Maintenance 


11 




Fidelman, M.R., J.G. Herman, and M.S. Baum. "Survivability of the Defense Data 
Network." In Signal 40/9 (May 1986): 148-150, 154-156. 

Explores the architectural foundations of the Defense Data Network (DDN) 
survivability and its impact on Department of Defense (DoD) data communications 
users; and provides a brief description of the network, followed by a description of 
the stress scenario that the network has been designed to meet. The survivability of 
the DDN’s basic technology, the specific survivability strategies built into the 
network and how the technology and strategies behave under simulated stress are 
discussed. Specific planning considerations for new subscribers are presented. 
The DDN is a packet switching data communications network intended to be DoD's 
primary wide area network for non-tactical applications. (INSPEC - Database of 
Institute of Electrical Engineers, UK) 

KEYWORDS: Defense Data Network; Software Reliability 

ACM CLASS: C.4 [Computer Systems Organization]: Performance of Systems - 
Reliability, Availability, and Serviceability 

Frost, Carolyn O. "Subject Searching in an Online Catalog." In Information Technology 
& Libraries (March 1987): 60-64. School of Information & Library Studies, 
University of Michigan 

This paper reports on one aspect of a larger study investigating student and faculty 
subject searching in a university on-line catalog. The research was conducted in 
May 1985 at the University of Houston-University Park (UH-UP) Library. 

KEYWORDS: Search Techniques; Cataloging & Retrieval 

ACM CLASS: H.3.3 [Information Storage & Retrieval]: Information Search & 
Retrieval - Search Process 




Ghisio, O., and S. Truzzi. "An Extended Approach to Ada Software Reusability." In 
CSELT (Technical Report) 15/1 (February 1987): 89-94. CSELT, Torino, Italy 

Describes on-going research carried out at CSELT, whose goal is to find a new 
concept of the reusable Ada-component and a new approach for the organization of 
reusable Ada-components into a library, in order to address widespread reusability 
promoting a manual adaptation approach. In particular, a new kind of reusable 
component is suggested, based upon the idea of additional information, and a new 
concept of the component library is proposed, providing a structured access to the 
additional information. (COMPENDEX) 

KEYWORDS: Reusable Software; Software Libraries 

ACM CLASS: D.2.m [Software Engineering]: Miscellaneous - Reusable Software 

Goguen, Joseph A., Karl N. Levitt. Report on Ada Program Libraries Workshop. Menlo 
Park, CA: Computer Science Laboratory, SRI International, 1-3 November 1983 

In order to better understand the idea of a library of software components and the 
re-utilization of these components, a workshop on Ada Program Libraries was held 
at the Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA, November 1-3,1983. The scope 
of the workshop included concepts, problems, and approaches relevant to an on¬ 
line library system for creating, documenting and maintaining Ada systems. 

KEYWORDS: Libraries; Ada Programming Language; Software Reusability 

ACM CLASS: D.2.m [Software Engineering]: Miscellaneous - Reusable Software 








Grabinger, R. Scott and Douglas Amedeo. "CRT Text layout: Prominent Layout 
Variables." In Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Association for 
Educational Communications and Technology Research and Theory Division. 
(January 1985). 

This study proposed to identify criteria used by people who view and make 
perceptual judgements about models of computer-generated text. To improve on 
the previous studies, this study used a complete set of carefully constructed stimuli 
and factor analysis techniques to analyze the resulting data. The goal was to 
identify criteria used by reader/perceivers to analyze the apparent effectiveness of 
several models of CRT screens, based on common text format variables. These 
criteria (factors or dimensions) can, in turn, be defined and eventually used as 
general design variables related to the perceptual/reading process rather than small, 
narrow typographical variables. 

KEYWORDS: Text Processing; Pattern Recognition 

ACM CLASS: H.3.1 [Information Storage & Retrieval]: Content Analysis & 
Indexing - Linguistic Processing 

Hall, Patrick A.V. "Adding Database Management to Ada." In ACM Ada Letters 2/4 
(January 1983): 88-91. 

Systems developed using Ada will clearly need to store complex data over long 
periods. There is a need for some database management capability. The traditional 
approach has been to develop separate packages for use alongside the main 
programming language (e.g., DATE 75, CODA 1). That is not me way forward. 

This paper outlines the approach required for Ada. The fundamental requirements 
for database implementations will be discussed in successive sections, and it will be 
shown how the requirement can be met within Ada as it is currently defined. 

KEYWORDS: Ada Programming Language; Database Management 

ACM CLASS: H.2.3 [Database Management]: Languages - Ada 


14 








Heffeman, Henry. "DoD to Publish Reusability Guidebook." In Government Computer 
News 5/21 (October 24, 1986): 70-71. 

The reuse of software parts makes system development and maintenance faster and 
more efficient. This is of particular interest in the area of mission-control computer 
applications. The Department of Defense (DoD) Software Technology for 
Adaptable, Reliable Systems (STARS) program sponsored four workshops. The 
DoD project on software reusability will publish a guidebook in December 1986. 
(The Computer Database™) 

KEYWORDS: Reusable Software; Software Design 

ACM CLASS: D.2.m [Software Engineering]: Miscellaneous - Reusable Software 

Heiden, H.B., and R.P. Bryan. "Defense Data Network: DoD Upgrades Its 
Communications." In Government Data Systems 14/1 (January 1985): 11-12, 14. 

The Defense Data Network may be the pacesetter for all computer networks. It is 
solving the problems of dissimilar hosts, gateways to other networks, threats from 
hackers and more. (INSPEC - Database of Institute of Electrical Engineers, UK) 

KEYWORDS: Defense Data Network; Communication Networks 

ACM CLASS: C.2.0 [Computer-Communication Networks]: General - Data 
Communications 

Herman, J.G., and S.L. Bernstein. "Monitoring, Control and Management of the Defense 
Data Network." In IEEE EASCON Proceedings, New York, NY 1982. 95-102. 
Bolt, Beranek and Newman (BBN), Inc., Cambridge, MA 

Facilities for monitoring, control, and management will be provided by a set of 
monitoring centers (MCs), implemented in hosts at various locations, including one 
in each subnetwork formed by cryptographic boundaries. The MCs provide 
services for failure detection, isolation and correction, network configuration 
monitoring and control, traffic and performance data collection, and software 
maintenance and distribution. The Nu System, running on top of a Unix operating 
system and written entirely in the C language, supplies all the functionality required 
by the MCs in a highly integrated and flexible design. (INSPEC - Database of 
Institute of Electrical Engineers UK) 






KEYWORDS: Defense Data Network; Network Management 

ACM CLASS: C.5.0 [Computer System Implementation]: General Management 

Horowitz, Ellis and John B. Munson. "An Expansive View of Reusable Software." In 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering.SE-10/5 (September 1984): 477-487. 

The present crisis in software development forces us to reconsider the fundamental 
ways in which programming is done. One often quoted solution is to exploit more 
fully the idea of reusable software. It is the purpose of this paper to examine this 
concept in all of its forms and to assess the current state of the art. In addition to its 
usual meaning of reusable code, reusability includes reusable design, various forms 
of specification systems, so-called application generators, and systems for 
prototyping. We examine each approach from the perspective of the practicing 
engineer, and we evaluate the work in terms of how it may ultimately improve the 
development process for large-scale software systems. 

KEYWORDS: Application Generators; Nonprocedural Languages; Prototyping; 
Reusability; Reusable Software; Specification; Specification Languages 

ACM CLASS: D.2.m [Software Engineering]: Miscellaneous - Reusable Software 

IEEE. IEEE Standard for Software Configuration Management Plans (ANSI/IEEE Std 
828-1983), Approved June 23, 1983. 

This standard provides minimum requirements for preparation and content of 
Software Configuration Management (SCM) Plans. SCM Plans document the 
methods to be used for identifying software product items, controlling and 
implementing changes, and recording and reporting change implementation status. 

KEYWORDS: Software Configuration; Standards 

ACM CLASS: D.2.9 [Software Engineering]: Management - Software 
Configuration Management 


16 






Information Standards Organization. "Information Processing - Text and Office Systems - 
Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML)." In ISO 8879 1/86 (October 
1986) 

This International Standard specifies a language for document representation 
referred to as the "Standard Generalized Markup Language" (SGML). SGML can 
be used for publishing in its broadest definition, ranging from a single medium 
conventional publishing to multi-media data base publishing. SGML can also be 
used in office document processing when the benefits of human readability and 
interchangability with publishing systems are required. 

KEYWORDS: Information Processing; Documentation Standards; Logical 
Structure; Artificial Languages 

ACM CLASS: D.2 O [Software Engineering]: General - Standards 

Jones, Bill, Steve Litvintchouk, Jerry Mungle, Herb Krasner, John Mellby, and Herb 
Willman. "Issues in Software Reusability." In ACM SIGSOFT Software 
Engineering Notes 10/2 (April 1985): 108-109. 

Discusses software reusability in terms of reusable componentry. The authors raise 
the issue of component specification and recommend that a language independent 
notation be developed. They also recommend that reusable components be 
designed at a high level of quality, reliability and maintainability as befitting 
expectancy of broader use. This raises issues of management intensities which are 
discussed. The state of practice is then discussed first considering experiences of 
NASA-Ames, then the Japanese software factory approach. The short term and 
long term thrusts for achieving the recommendation are then outlined. (INSPEC - 
Database of Institute of Electrical Engineers, UK) 

KEYWORDS: Software Reusability; Software Reliability 

ACM CLASS: D.2.m [Software Engineering]: Miscellaneous - Reusable Software 


17 




Kubat, Michael E. "Modularity is Key to Interfacing the Defense Data Network." In EDN 
(20 August 1987): 147-154. 

When designing an interface to connect to the DDN, you are better off using small 
independent software modules and separate hardware functions. The modules need 
to be flexible enough to adapt to future DDN modifications and the probable switch 
to OSI protocol standards. 

KEYWORDS: Defense Data Network; Modularity; Software Standards 

ACM: D.2.2 [Software Engineering]: Tools & Techniques - Modules & Interfaces 

Lubars, Mitchell D. "Affording Higher Reliability Through Software Reusability." In 
Software Engineering Notes 11/5 (October 1986): 39-42. Dept, of Computer 
Science, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61891 

The Japanese Software Factory example illustrates that significantly improved 
productivity can be achieved through software reuse. What is required is to 
generate code and abstractions (e.g., schemas and plans), which are developed with 
the intention of reusability. This will not only result in higher productivity, but 
higher reliability as well. In order to support these arguments, a simple economic 
model of reuse is introduced. We then use that model to show that much higher 
levels of reliability are feasible with highly reusable software. (INSPEC - Database 
of Institute of Electrical Engineers, UK) 

KEYWORDS: Software Reliability; Software Reusability 

ACM CLASS: D.2.4 [Software Engineering]: Program Verification - Reliability 




Lunsford, A. SL1B77: Source Library File Maintenance System. Department of Energy, 
Sacramento, CA, Western Area Power Administration 

SL1B77 is a source librarian program designed to maintain FORTRAN source code 
in a compressed form on magnetic disk. The program was prepared to meet 
program maintenance requirements for ongoing program development and continual 
improvement of very large programs involving many programmers form a number 
of different organizations. SLIB77 automatically maintains in one file the source of 
the current program as well as all previous modifications. Although written 
originally for FORTRAN programs, SLJB77 is suitable for use with datafiles, text 
files, operating systems, and other programming languages, such as Ada, C, and 
COBOL. It can handle libraries with records of up to 160 characters. Records are 
grouped into DECKS and assigned deck names by the user. SLIB77 assigns a 
number to each record in each deck. Records can be deleted or restored singly or as 
a group within each deck. Modification records are grouped and assigned 
modification identification names by the user. The program assign numbers to each 
new record with the deck. The program has two modes of execution, BATCH and 
EDIT. The BATCH mode is controlled by an input file and is used to make 
changes permanent and created new library files. The EDIT mode is controlled by 
interactive terminal input, and a built-in line editor is used for modification of single 
decks. Transferring of a library from one computer system to another is 
accomplished using a Portable Library File created by SLIB77 in a BATCH run. 
Other features of SUB77 include: user-controlled switches which can be used to 
control records being placed onto the compile file, the capability of reverting to an 
earlier library condition, options for controlling listings of deck records, provisions 
such that if a COMMON deck is modified all decks which call it will automatically 
be updated, and groups of records within a COMMON deck may be given a group 
name and selectively incorporated into any deck. 

KEYWORDS: Software Libraries; Software Maintenance 

ACM CLASS: D.4.3 [Operating Systems]: File Systems Management - 
Maintenance 


19 






Malone, Thomas W., Kenneth R. Grant, Franklyn A. Turbak, Stephen A. Brobst, and 
Michael D. Cohen. "Intelligent Information-Sharing Systems." In 
Communications of the ACM 30/5 (May 1987): 390-402. 

Much of the work that has been done on computer-mediated communication 
systems (e.g., electronic mail, computer conferencing, and electronic bulletin 
boards) has focused on technical capabilities and standards for transporting and 
storing messages. This paper will focus on a more general problem, the 
information-sharing problem, which has to do with disseminating information so 
that it reaches those people to whom it is valuable without interfering with those to 
whom it is not. Characterization of these approaches will be illustrated with 
examples from a series of informal studies that have been conducted on how people 
share information in organizations, and through a description of an intelligent 
information-sharing system that was developed called the Information Lens. 

KEYWORDS: Computer Networks; Artificial Intelligence 

ACM CLASS: H.4.3 [Information Systems Applications]: Communications 
Applications - Design 

Maybaum, F.L., and H.C. Duffield "Defense Data Network - An Overview." In IEEE 
MILCOM Proceedings. New York, NY. 1986 

The Defense Data Network (DDN), its scope and implementation strategy, are 
described. This is followed by a description of the DDN today in terms of its 
hardware elements, protocols, architecture and topology. Planned and projected 
improvements for the evolution of the DDN in the 1980s and its maturation in the 
1990s are reported. (COMFENDEX) 

KEYWORDS: Defense Data Network; Computer Networks 

ACM CLASS: C.2.0 [Computer-Communication Networks]: General - Data 
Communications 





McCain, R. A Software Development Methodology for Reusable Components, In 
Conference Proceedings. Houston, TX: Division of Federal Systems, IBM. pp 
319-324. 

Software reusability could potentially provide substantial economic benefits. 
Large-scale software component reuse, however, will not be possible without a 
software development approach that emphasizes the production of reusable 
software components. This paper defines the characteristics of reusable software 
and proposes a software development methodology that produces software 
components exhibiting these characteristics. The methodology is intended to 
supplement rather than replace other sound software development methodologies. 
In addition to describing the reusability-oriented thought process associated with the 
methodology, the paper suggests new work products and validation procedures to 
support the methodology. (COMPENDEXO 

KEYWORDS: Reusable Software 

ACM CLASS: D.2.m [Software Engineering]: Miscellaneous - Reusable Software 

McCune, Brian P., Richard M. Tong, Jeffrey S. Dean, and Daniel G. Shapiro. 
"RUBRIC: A System for Rule-Based Information Retrieval." In IEEE Trans 
Soft vare Engineering SE-11/9 (September 1985): 939-944. 

A research prototype software system for conceptual information retrieval has been 
developed. The goal of the system, called RUBRIC, is to provide more automated 
and relevant access to unformatted textual databases. The approach is to use 
production rules from artificial intelligence to define a hierarchy of retrieval 
subtopics, with fuzzy context expressions and specific word phrases at the bottom. 
RUBRIC allows the definition of detailed queries starting at a conceptual level, 
partial matching of a query and a document, selection of only the highest ranked 
documents for presentation to the user and detailed explanation of how and why a 
particular document was selected. Initial experiments indicate that a RUBRIC rule 
set better matches human retrieval judgment than a standard Boolean keyword 
expression, given equal amounts of effort in defining each. The techniques 
presented may be useful in stand-alone retrieval systems, front-ends to existing 
information retrieval systems, or real-time document filtering and routing. 








KEYWORDS: Rule-Based Retrieval; Artificial Intelligence; Evidential Reasoning; 
Expert Systems; Information Retrieval 

ACM CLASS: H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and 
Retrieval - Retrieval Models 

Meadow, C.T. "User Adaptation in Interactive Information Retrieval." In Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science 34/4 (July 1983): 289-291. Dialog 
Information Services, Inc., Palo Alto, CA 94304. 

A study into the behavior of users of an information retrieval system was done to 
measure changes in user performance and user attitude. Subjects were grouped by 
the level of their prior experience in the area, and by the complexity of the language 
they used. The major conclusions were that to be successful, languages must be 
designed with specific user groups and applications in mind, and that prior 
experience is the most consistent factor in predicting user performance. (LISA - 
Library Association Publications LTD, UK) 

KEYWORDS: Search Strategy; User/System Interaction; On-Line Searching; 
Query Languages; Performance; Measurement 

ACM: H.3.3 [Information Storage & Retrieval]: Information Search & Retrieval - 
Human Factors 

Metcalf, S.G. Software Library: A Reusable Software Issue. Monterey, CA: Naval 
Postgraduate School (MS Thesis), June 1984 

This thesis presents a conceptual view of a reusable Software Library. Issues 
concerning the software crisis and its subsequent impact on software development 
are reviewed. The traditional library is described for the purpose of comparison 
with the Software Library. A particular example of the Software Library, the 
Program Library, is described as a prototype of a reusable library. A hierarchical 
structure for a Program Library is discussed as an approach to making the library 
entities easily accessible and retrievable. The role of application generators in the 
Program Library is described. The special features of Ada that support 
programming libraries are described. Finally, noncode products in the Software 
Library are discussed. (DTIC) 






KEYWORDS: Reusable Software; Software Libraries 

ACM CLASS: D.2.m [Software Engineering]: Miscellaneous - Reusable Software 

Miller, R. K. Defense Data Network Service Access Protocols. McLean, VA: MITRE 
Corp., C3 Division, February 1984. 

This document presents the protocol specifications for the service access layer of 
the Defense Data Network (DDN) Host Front-end Protocol (HFP). The service 
access layer is responsible for the interpretation of the commands and the responses 
that are exchanged between a host and the Host Front End Processor (HFEP) 
configuration of the DDN Network Access Component. Specifications are defined 
to support communications with the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and the 
Internet Protocol (IP) implementation in the HFEP. 

KEYWORDS: Defense Data Network; Protocols 

ACM CLASS: C.2.2 [Computer-Communication Networks]: Network Protocols - 
Protocol Verification 

MITRE, Inc. Defense Data Network Subscriber Interface Guide . McLean, VA, July 
1983. 

Subscribers of the Defense Data Network (DDN) will be responsible for interfacing 
their host systems and terminals to the network. This Guide describes the methods 
of interconnection that are available to DDN subscribers and the strategies to obtain 
these inte faces. The Guide also describes the communications technology used by 
the DDN and provides a summary of the services offered by the network as well as 
the protocols that support these services. Appendix A is a detailed interface 
specification which could be included in subscriber acquisition packages. 

KEYWORDS: Defense Data Network; Interfaces; User Needs 

ACM CLASS: C.O [General]: - Hardware/Software Interfaces 


MITRE Inc. Defense Data Network Subscriber Security Guide. McLean, VA, November 
1983 


23 








This guide describes the security architecture now being implemented for the 
Defense Data Network (DDN). The architecture will be used until around 1987 
when improved security devices are expected to be available. The guide describes 
how the architecture will then evolve. 

KEYWORDS: Defense Data Network; Computer Security 

ACM CLASS: C.2.0 [Computer-Communication Networks]: General - Security 
and Protection 

MountainNet. AdaNET: The Advanced Development Network for Ada Software 
Applications. Dellslow, WV, October 1987. 

This pamphlet outlines the origins of AdaNET and gives some general insight into 
its development. Discusses effect on small businesses in local area which now 
have access to large mainframe capabilities, through MountainNET. 

KEYWORDS: Software Repositories; Ada Programming Language; Computer 
Networks 

ACM: D.2.2 [Software Engineering]: Tools & Techniques - Software Libraries 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration. COSMIC Software Submittal Guidelines. 
Athens, GA, January 1987. 

These guidelines detail the procedure for submitting software to the COSMIC 
software repository. Includes checklist and submittal form as well as general 
information about hardware!software specifications, documentation requirements, 
etc. 

KEYWORDS: Software Repositories; Software Standards 
ACM: D.2.0 [Software Engineering]: General - Standards 







Nourani, C.F., and G.A. Jones. Software Reusability - A Perspective, In Conference 
Proceedings 2. Waltham, MA: Computer Sciences Lab., GTE Laboratories. 

An overall methodology for program synthesis which emphasizes reusability is 
outlined. A case is made for techniques which combine generic modules with 
executable specifications. Specifications are combined and composed to produce 
new module specifications. Through minor modifications to the specifications, a 
new instance of a module is produced which can be used in (abstract) 
implementation and its relationship to reusability, thus defining reusable 
implementation. The methodology involves program transformation as well as 
instantiations of generic modules. Modules are first implemented abstractly and 
then transformed to efficient executable code through an iterative transformation 
process. Compiler optimization and code generation are examples of low level 
transformations. Instantiations of parameterized library code units, and mappings 
from higher level domain languages are examples of high level transformations. 
The methodology puts the recently highlighted goal of software reusability in a 
particular perspective. (COMPENDEX) 

KEYWORDS: Reusable Software; Generic Modules 

ACM CLASS: D.2.m [ Software Engineering]: Miscellaneous - Reusable 
Software 

Office of Under Secretary of Defense for Research & Engineering. Defense Science Board 
Task Force on DDN. Washington, D.C., 30 August 1985 

In May 1983, the Defense Science Board established a new Task Force to review, 
evaluate, and make recommendations concerning the continuing evolution of the 
Defense Data Network Program. Since that time, the DDN Task Force addressed a 
number of issues that have arisen as the Program has gained momentum, achieved 
new status, and encountered a number of plaguing problems. This report provides 
the observations and recommendations generated by that review. The most 
significant concern of the Task Force surrounds the DDN Security Architecture and 
the evolution of security may well be one of the most critical challenges facing 
DoD. DDN, as a global common-user data communications network, will be 
subject to this challenge as much as, if not more, than any other system. The Task 
Force has therefore recommended that major emphasis be placed on the DDN 
Security Architecture, a detailed security plan and on establishing an independent 







group to periodically review and assess the progress of the DDN and other relevant 
security programs in this area. 

KEYWORDS: Defense Data Network 

ACM CLASS: A.m [General Literature]: Miscellaneous - Background 

Palmer, James, D., and Tan Nguyen. "Systems Approach to Reusable Software 
Products." In IEEE Proceedings (1986): 1410-1414. George Mason University, 
Fairfax, VA 

A systems methodology has been utilized to investigate the potential of developing 
reusable software products and reducing the costs of software development. 
Through the application of delta chart procedures, the software life cycle has been 
analyzed and the concept of the reusable software module has been formulated. 
Within the reusability module, decision-support systems to aid the software 
engineer are proposed. These include knowledge-based systems, simple go-no-go 
gates, and traditional decision-support systems. (COMPENDEX) 

KEYWORDS: Software Reusability; Decision Support Systems 

ACM CLASS: D.2.10 [Software Engineering]: Design - Methodologies 

Penedo, Maria H., Steven P. Wartik. "Reusable Tools for Software Engineering 
Environments." In American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc. 
(1985): 465- . TRW; University of Virginia 

Software reusability is a key element for increasing the productivity of software 
projects. It is also one of the key requirements in the building of a software 
engineering environment. This paper describes two of the reusable tools which 
have been built as part of the TRW software development environment. The first 
tool is a man-machine interface package which supports a fill-in-the-blank user 
interface; the other tool is a general purpose Forms Management System which 
makes use of the man machine package. We also discuss our experiences in the 
building and use of these tools, emphasizing reusability and user interface aspects. 

KEYWORDS: Software Reusability; User Interfaces 

ACM CLASS: D.2.M [Software Engineering]: Miscellaneous - Reusable Software 

Plunkett, P.L. "The Defense Data Network: A New Look at the Host Interface." In IEEE 
EASCON Proceedings (1984): 55-59. 


26 







I 


» 


The Defense Data Network (DDN) has in two years evolved from roots in the 
Arpanet research community into a mission-oriented communications service for 
US Department of Defense (DoD) systems in the continental United States, Europe, 
and the Pacific, with near-term plans to expand to the Mediterranean and Panama. 
With some 400 host computers already registered for DDN service, an enormous 
growth is expected in the population of more than 400 hosts already on-line. The 
adoption by DoD of X.25 for the DDN, coupled with a discussion of the DDN 
internet functionality, provides the rationale for an alternate approach to building 
host interface products. The author describes a low-risk incremental approach 
vendors may take to provide a DDN interface capability within their X.25 standard 
product lines. (COMPENDEX) 

KEYWORDS: Defense Data Network; Interfaces 

ACM CLASS: C.O [Computer Systems Organization]: General - Hardware/ 
Software Interfaces 

Rothenberg, Laurence, Darrell L. Ward, and David J. Mishelevich. "The Logical Structure 
and Use of a Relational Clinical Data Management System." In Proceedings of the 
13th International Conference on System Science, Honolulu (1980): 159-168. 

The relational database environment is utilized to characterize the clinical data 
management model. The user perspective of the relational clinical database 
management system (CDMS) is described. The user interface within the system, 
Hypertext, is illustrated, as well as the components controlling data entry, update, 
patient inquiry and general reporting and retrieval functions. The patient collection 
component is presented emphasizing the data independence and features assisting 
the user in the entering of the clinical data. The implementation approach is briefly 
described in order to illustrate the general purpose nature of the system and the 
viability of quickly creating new applications within the clinical environment. The 
retrieval facility is addressed providing a clear view of the tools available to the 
clinician from a retrieval and reporting perspective. The feasibility of clinicians 
performing all retrieval functions independent of a database administrator or a 
sophisticated user is addressed for the model and environment presented herein. 
Finally, some areas where additional attention should be directed are indicated with 
emphasis on the usability of new tools by the end-user. 


27 




KEYWORDS: Relational Databases; Database Management; Hypertext; User 
Interfaces 


ACM CLASS: H.3.2 [Information Storage & Retrieval]: Information Storage - 
File Organization 

Ryder, Barbara G. and Marvin C. Pauli. "Elimination Algorithms for Data Flow 
Analysis." In ACM Computing Surveys 18/3 (September 1986): Department of 

Computer Science, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ. 

A unified model of a family of data flow algorithms, called elimination methods, is 
presented. The algorithms, which gather information about the definition and use 
of data in a program or a set of programs, are characterized by the manner in which < 

they solve the systems of equations that describe data flow problems of interest. 

The unified model provides implementation- independent descriptions of the 
algorithms to facilitate comparisons among them and illustrate the sources of 
improvement in worst case complexity bounds. This tutorial provides a study in 
algorithm design, as well as a new view of these algorithms and their 
interrelationships. 

KEYWORDS: Data Flow Analysis; Elimination Algorithms; Languages 

I 

ACM CLASS: D.3.4 [Programming Languages]: Processors - optimization 

Salton, G. "Another Look at Automatic Text-Retrieval Systems." In Communications of 
the ACM 29/7 (July 1986): 648-656. 

An automatic text-retrieval system is designed to search a file of natural-language 
documents and retrieve certain stored items in response to queries submitted by a 
user. Typically, each stored item is described by using — for content identification - 
- certain words contained in the documented texts, sometimes supplemented by 
additional related information. 


28 










The effectiveness of a retrieval system is usually evaluated in terms of a pair of 
measures, known as recall and precision. Recall is the proportion of relevant 
material actually retrieved from the file, while precision is the proportion of the 
retrieval material that is found to be relevant to the user's needs. In principle, a 
search should achieve high recall by retrieving almost everything that is relevant 
while at the same time maintaining high precision by rejecting a large proportion of 
extraneous items. 

This article presents some major experiments comparing automatic retrieval with 
manual, controlled vocabulary systems on large document collections. The theories 
underlying automatic indexing are addressed and a basic blueprint for implementing 
effective automatic retrieval systems is proposed. 

KEYWORDS: Text Retrieval; Automatic Indexing; Retrieval Methods 

ACM CLASS: H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and 
Retrieval - Retrieval Models 

Salton, G. and M. McGill. Introduction to Modern Information Retrieval. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1983. 

The text is aimed at increasing the understanding of modern information retrieval, 
and covers the basic aspects of information retrieval theory and practice. In 
addition, the various techniques used in the design and evaluation of complete 
retrieval systems are discussed. The text concentrates on the description of 
concepts, functions, and processes of interest in retrieval rather than on the detailed 
operation of any one existing retrieval system. 

The book can also serve the professional reader as an introduction to the design and 
operations of information retrieval and management information systems. 

KEYWORDS: Information Retrieval; Management Information Systems; Search 
Methods; Indexing Methods 

ACM: H.3.0 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: General - Introductory & 
Survey 






Schefter, Jim. "Super Searcher". In Popular Science (December 1987): 60-. 

Built initially for special military tasks, the Fast Data Finder can zip through 
phenomenally huge data bases at more than nine million characters a second, 
locating specific information. Now models are on the way for personal computers 
and commercial use. (INSPEC, The Computer Dababase™, Microcomputer Index, 
LISA, COMPENDEX) 

KEYWORDS: Search Models; Information Retrieval 

ACM CLASS: H.3.3 [Information Storage & Retrieval]: Information Search and 
Retrieval - Search Process 

Schneider, J.S., C.E. Bowen. "Using an Index for More Flexibility." In 80 Micro 59 
(December 1984): 136, 138-139. 

Through the use of automatic indexing techniques, data base information retrieval 
can be enhanced. The technique uses pointers to direct the search through a 
hierarchy of indices so that the entire data base does not have to be searched. The 
speed of indexing is increased through the use of Assembly Language Drivers, 
which are called from the main BASIC program. This application employs 48K of 
RAM and two disk drives. (The Computer Database™) 

KEYWORDS: Automatic Indexing; Personal Computers; Information Storage and 
Retrieval; Data Bases; On-Line Searching 

ACM CLASS: H.3.1 [Information Storage & Retrieval]: Content Analysis & 
Indexing - Indexing Methods 

Schobbens, Pierre-Yves. Reuse in a Project Support Environment (Draft Paper). Passau, 
Austria:Universitaet Passau , March 28, 1987 

This paper describes various existing and foreseen techniques for software reuse. 
It discusses the impact of those techniques on project support environments. 
(Author) 

KEYWORDS: Reusable Software 

ACM CLASS: D.2.m [Software Engineering]: Miscellaneous - Reusable Software 





STARS JPO. Software Technology for Adaptable, Reliable Systems (STARS) Competing 
Primes Contracts. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Defense, September 1987 

Several years ago, the DoD became painfully aware that software costs were far 
exceeding those of hardware. Further, the DoD was forced to manage a multitude 
of operating systems and software programs that were incompatible. In 1983, the 
STARS program was established to pursue the DoD goal of dramatically improving 
software quality while reducing associated costs. This Solicitation addresses the 
competing primes part of that effort. It consists of a basic contract and many 
individually awarded delivery orders which address specific topics. 

KEYWORDS: STARS; Software Technology; Software Reusability 

ACM CLASS: A.2 [General Literature]: Reference - Management 

STARS JPO. Software Technology for Adaptable, Reliable Systems (STARS) Program 
Management Plan. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Defense, 6 August 1986. 

Software Technology for Adaptable, Reliable Systems, or STARS, is the Defense 
Department's program to achieve dramatic improvements in software quality and to 
mitigate runaway software costs. The Under Secretary of Defense for Research 
and Engineering (USDRE) directed the STARS Program Director to expeditiously 
develop and annually update technical and management plans for approval by the 
STARS Executive Committee. This management plan responds to the USDRE 
direction. 

KEYWORDS: STARS; Software Technology; Software Reusability 
ACM CLASS: A.2 [General Literature]: Reference - Management 

STARS JPO. Software Technology for Adaptable, Reliable Systems (STARS) Technical 
Program Plan. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Defense, 6 August 1986. 

Software Technology for Adaptable, Reliable Systems, or STARS, is the Defense 
Department’s program to achieve dramatic improvements in software quality and to 
mitigate runaway software costs. The Under Secretary of Defense for Research 
and Engineering (USDRE) directed the STARS Program Director to expeditiously 
develop and annually update technical and management plans for approval by 
STARS Executive Committee. This technical plan responds to the USDRE 
direction. 




KEYWORDS: STARS; Software Technology; Software Reusability 
ACM CLASS: A.2 [General Literature]: Reference - Management 

Stone, David E., Margaret McMinn, Anita Marx, Larry Israelite and Lois Wilson. A 
Hypertext Electronic Job Aid. for Maintenance. McLean VA: Hazeltine 
Corporation, 30 November 1982 

One of the most important tasks facing the military services today is that of 
maintaining complex weapons systems. Unfortunately, this task is not always 
adequately performed despite its importance. Electronic job aids have the potential 
to help Army personnel significantly improve maintenance of complex equipment, 
provided that the technical information that they present is complete, accurate, and 
easy to understand and use. This report describes the use ofTICClT Hypertext 
Display System to permit technicians of varying levels of expertise to access 
technical information describing the M-l tank antenna maintenance procedure. 

KEYWORDS: Performance Maintenance; Computer-Aided Maintenance; 
Computer Graphics; Hypertext 

ACM CLASS: D.4.3 [Operating Systems]: File Systems Management - 
Maintenance 

Tesky, F.N. "Information Retrieval Systems for the Future." In Library and Information 
Research Report 26 (1984). British Library Lending Division, Boston Spa, 
Wetherby, West Yorkshire. 

The first part of this report describes those functions of free-text information 
retrieval systems which are regarded as fundamental by a number of users. In 
addition to these existing functions a number of future requirements for information 
retrieval systems are discussed. The second part of the report describes some 
existing and proposed hardware and software methods for implementing free-text 
information retrieval systems. Emphasis is placed on methods of improving the 
functionality of the system rather than on methods of increasing the performance. 
The third part of the report proposes a design for a new information retrieval 
system. The proposal is based on the use of the Binary Relationship Model for 
information storage and retrieval, and an interactive graphical display for the user 
interface. 




I 


» 


» 


» 


KEYWORDS: Text Retrieval; Information Retrieval Systems 

ACM CLASS: H.3 [Information Storage & Retrieval]: Information Search & 
Retrieval - Retrieval Models 

Volpano, Dennis M, and Richard B. Kieburtz. "Software Templates." In IEEE Software 
Engineering Proceedings (1985): 55-60. Oregon Graduate Center, Beaverton, OR. 

Software components often cannot be reused since the algorithms they realize are 
encoded in terms of particular implementations. An approach to reusability is 
presented in which algorithms and implementations are specified separately. An 
algorithm is specified by a sequence of recursion equations called a software 
template. Templates are defined over values of abstract data types whose 
implementations are specified separately and catalogues. When a template's data 
types are bound to catalogued implementation, the template is automatically 
translated into a component tailored to the chosen implementations, a process called 
template instantiation. Different implementations of an algorithm can be achieved 
by merely binding the data types of its template specification to different 
implementations. (COMPENDEX) 

KEYWORDS: Software Reusability; Software Templates 

ACM CLASS: D.2.m [Software Engineering]: Miscellaneous - Reusable Software 

Ward, Darrell L., Phillip L. Crews and Thomas C. Irby. An Organizational Model and 
Tool to Support Software Development. Denton, TX: North Texas State 
University. 

This paper describes the results of a software development project which used 
Hypertext on a microprocessor as a supporting organization and development tool. 
The development of the components of a system supporting data entry to a System 
2000 database is illustrated as they originated and grew within the Hypertext model. 
The resulting model is described to show the effectiveness of the organizational 
aspects of this tool. Finally, the efforts ongoing at North Texas State University to 
produce valuable information pertinent to the development of reliable and lasting 
software products are documented. 


33 




KEYWORDS: Hypertext; Information Retrieval; Software Development; Software 
Reliability 

ACM CLASS: D.2.2 [Software Engineering]: Tools & Technologies - User 
Interfaces 

Wong, W. Management Overview of Software Reuse. Washington, DC: National Bureau 
of Standards, (September 1986). 

With skyrocketing software costs, both Federal and private sector organizations are 
increasingly interested in finding ways to improve software quality and 
productivity, and reduce software risks. Software reuse is one promising method 
of accomplishing this objective. This report presents a management overview of 
the problems and issues related to software reuse. It provides a description of 
software reusability and its scope. The necessity of technical and management 
involvement to achieve greater levels of software reuse is emphasized. 

KEYWORDS: Reusable Software; Software Management 

ACM CLASS: D.2.m [Software Engineering]: Miscellaneous - Reusable Software 

Woodfield, S.N., D.W. Empley, G.L Stokes, and K. Zhang. "Assumption and Issues of 
Software Reusability" In IEEE COMPCOM Proceedings. Department of 
Computer Science, Brigham Young University, Provo UT 

Reuse of previously validated software components can significantly increase 
programming productivity. The authors discuss basic assumptions and address 
problems and issues encountered when trying to reuse software modules. They 
speculate on some possible solutions and on the type of tools which should be 
built. Finally, they describe some research being conducted at Brigham Young 
University. (COMPENDEX) 

KEYWORDS: Reusable Software; Software Tools 

ACM CLASS: D.2.m [Software Engineering]: Miscellaneous - Reusable Software 






Woodfield, Scott N. "Object Oriented Libraries." In IEEE Proceedings (1985): 42-45. 
Brigham Young University, Provo UT 

The author has developed a library system which allows the inclusion within the 
library of modules which may be functions or objects (represented by data 
abstractions). A description is given of the rationale behind the need for such a 
system, and also the need for the abstraction mechanisms, aggregation, 
classification, and generics. A prototype which has been built and tested to 
demonstrate these concepts is also described. (COMPENDEX) 

KEYWORDS: Object Oriented Languages; Software Libraries 

ACM CLASS: D.2.m [Software Engineering]: Miscellaneous - Reusable Software 

Yamamoto, Shuichiro; and Sadahiro Isoda. SoftDA - A Reuse Oriented Software Design. 
In IEEE COMPSAC Proceedings (1986): 284-290. NTT, Japan. 

A discussion is presented of the reuse-oriented software design system SoftDA 
(Software Design Automation), which provides extensive support for software 
reuse including revision of existing programs. The main objectives of this system 
are (1) to acquire related information that used to be lost in the course of 
conventional software development; (2) to store documents and program codes with 
their key elements interrelated in a network to facilitate software reuse. 
(COMPENDEX) 

KEYWORDS: Software Reusability; Software Design Automation 
ACM CLASS: D.2.10 [Software Engineering]: Design - Methodologies 


35 






Distribution List for IDA Memorandum Report M-408 
NAME AND ADDRESS NUMBER OF COPIES 

Sponsor 

Dr. John F. Kramer 4 

Program Manager 

STARS 

DARPA/ISTO 
1400 Wilson Blvd. 

Arlington, VA 22209-2308 

Other 

Defense Technical Information Center 2 

Cameron Station 
Alexandria, VA 22314 

IDA 


General W.Y. Smith, HQ 1 

Ms. Ruth L. Greenstein, HQ 1 

Mr. Philip L. Major, HQ 1 

Dr. Robert E. Roberts, HQ 1 

Ms. Catherine W. McDonald, CSED 2 

Dr. Richard J. Ivanetich, CSED 1 

IDA Control & Distribution Vault 2 


Distribution List-1 







