FINAL REPORT 
January 31, 2004 



MICROGRAVITY STUDIES OF LIQUID-LIQUID PHASE 
TRANSITIONS IN ALUMINA-YTTRIA MELTS 



Flight Definition, Materials Science 
Subdiscipline: Ceramics and Glasses 



NASA Contract Number NAS8-98092 
April 1998 to January 2004 



Principal Investigator: Dr. Richard Weber 
Co-Investigator: Dr. Paul Nordine 



Containerless Research, Inc. 

Evanston,IL 60201-3149 

Phone: 847/467-2678, Fax 847/467-2679 

email: weber@containerless.com 



COTR: Buddy Guynes 
George C. Marshall Space Flight Center 
Marshall Space Flight Center, AL 35812 



Project Summary : 

The scientific objective of this research is to increase the fundamental knowledge base for liquid- 
phase processing of technologically important oxide materials. The experimental objective is to 
define conditions and hardware requirements for microgravity flight experiments to test and 
expand the experimental hypotheses that: 

1. Liquid phase transitions can occur in undercooled melts by a diffusionless 
process. 

2. Onset of the liquid phase transition is accompanied by a large change in the 
temperature dependence of melt viscosity. 

Experiments on undercooled YAG (Y3AI5O12)- and rare earth oxide aluminate composition 
liquids demonstrated a large departure from an Arrhenian temperature dependence of viscosity. 
Liquid YAG is nearly inviscid at its 2240 K melting point. Glass fibers were pulled from melts 
undercooled by ca. 600 K indicating that the viscosity is on the order of 100 PaDs (1000 Poise) 
at 1600 K. This value of viscosity is 500 times greater than that obtained by extrapolation of 
data for temperatures above the melting point of YAG. These results show that the liquids are 
extremely fragile and that the onset of the highly non- Arrhenian viscosity-temperature 
relationship occurs at a temperature considerably below the equilibrium melting point of the 
solid phases. 

Further results on undercooled alumina-yttria melts containing 23-42 mole % yttrium oxide 
indicate that a congruent liquid-liquid phase transition occurs in the undercooled liquids. The 
rates of transition are inconsistent with a diffusion-limited process. 

This research is directed to investigation of the scientifically interesting phenomena of 
polyamorphism and fragility in undercooled rare earth oxide aluminum oxide liquids. The 
results bear on the technologically important problem of producing high value rare earth-based 
optical materials. 

Approach : 

The research is focused on the study of undercooled pseudo-binary alumina-yttria melts. 
Containerless techniques are being used to access non-equilibrium liquids and allow precise 
control of melt chemistry at high temperatures. Although the oxides of interest are extremely 
stable and exhibit only small oxygen composition changes, some properties of melts are very 
sensitive to the ambient oxygen pressure which must be controlled in order to investigate subtle 
effects in liquid oxides. 

Properties under investigation are the onset and kinetics of phase transitions in the liquid and the 
viscosity of the undercooled liquid as a function of the temperature. Earth-based research is 
being performed under conditions that meet some of the experimental constraints to provide the 

1 



design basis for microgravity experiments. Containerless experiments using aero-acoustic 
(AAL), aerodynamic (CNL) and electrostatic (ESL) levitation techniques achieve precise control 
of melt chemistry, access highly undercooled melts and glassy states, and control the effects of 
interaction with container walls on the evolution of morphology. Microgravity experiments will 
obtain the control of density-driven segregation, and especially of fluid flow required to test the 
experimental hypotheses and enable measurements of melt viscosity over the range of 
experimental conditions of interest. 

Ground-based containerless experiments employ CRTs aero-acoustic and aerodynamic levitation 
facilities with CO2 laser beam heating to investigate the effects of processing conditions on the 
compositions of interest. In these experiments, the melts are highly stirred by the aerodynamic 
and acoustic levitation forces and equilibrate rapidly with the process atmosphere. The 
experiments are performed in atmospheres with a controlled p(02), which (i) preserves the melt 
stoichiometry and avoids partial reduction of the oxides, and (ii) achieves conditions under 
which the liquid phase separation and glass formation occur in the YAG-composition liquid. 
Ground-based research using the ESL facility at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) is 
investigating the requirements for ESL experiments on oxides and defining boundary conditions 
for the flight experiments. 

The requirements for flight experiments are described in the Draft Science Requirements 
Document. Detailed designs for the space-based microgravity experiments will be developed in 
collaboration with NASA scientists and engineers. This work may include low gravity 
experiments aboard parabolic aircraft flights if the ESL becomes available for this purpose. 

Activities and Results : 

The major activities during this project were to: 

1 . Investigation of phase transitions in selected YA-composition materials. 

2. Sample preparation and planning for ESL experiments at MSFC. 

3. Publication of results. 

4. Complete an SCR. 

5. Issue press release. 

Analysis of Single and Two-phase Glasses: 

Here we briefly present and discuss investigation of single- and two-phase glass materials 
formed from alumina-yttria compositions. More detailed reports are provided in previous NASA 
reports, the NASA Taskbook and our published and in-preparation papers. 

SEM images of sectioned samples of YAG- and Y2O3 + 76 mole % AI2O3 (Y76A)-composition 
glasses are presented in Fig. 1 . The YAG-composition glass is clearly 2-phase containing 
spheroidal precipitates that have the same chemical composition as the matrix. This result is 
consistent with the interpretation that the liquid undergoes a partial phase transformation prior to 



vitrification. In more recent work we have concentrated on investigation of the Y76A materials 
that are at the limit of the glass forming range in the alumina-yttria system. As shown in Fig. 1. 
the Y76A-composilion materials form a single phase glass core surrounded by a thin dendritic 
crust. SEM analyses performed by Dr. Greg Jerman at NASA MSFC indicate that the core has 
the same chemical composition as the batch of material used to make the samples. The crust 
consists of alumina dendrites and a Y-rich phase. Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC), see 
Fig. 2, shows that the Y76A glass exhibits a glass transition at approximately 1 1 50 K followed 
by two exothermic events. The first exotherm releases about 40 % and the second about 50 % of 
the total heat released. Some additional heat is released during high temperature thermal events 
associated with densification of the crystalline phases. 




400 ^m 



50 pm 



Fig. 1: Top left, SEM image of Y62.5A (YAG-composition) glass spheroid showing 'droplet' 
phase in amorphous matrix, top right, close-up image of the droplets in the glass matrix. Bottom 
left, SEM image of Y76A glass spheroid, showing crystalline surface layer and amorphous core, 
and bottom right, close-up image of the crystalline surface layer. 

3 




1100 1300 




700 900 1100 1300 1500 

Temperature (K) 



Fig. 2a-c: Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) traces for (a) Y62.5A, (b) Y71.5A, and (c) 
Y76A, showing glass transition and exotherms. Insets show exotherms in their entirety; note the 
double exotherm for Y76A. Temperatures marked T2-T5 correspond to the temperatures at 
which samples were recovered for further analysis. (Tl, not marked, corresponds to the as-made 
glass.) 



X-ray diffraction analysis indicated that the materials are amorphous before and after the first 
exothermic event. The X-ray diffraction spectra show a few small peaks that could not be 
indexed, and were attributed to traces of crystals present in the as-made glasses. Nanocrystals of 
YAG (size ~ 18 nm) are formed in the second exothermic event, and grow to ~ 48 nm after 
heating to T5-1600K. 

Density measurements showed a 10% increase in density, from 3.8 to 4.2 g/cm 3 , after heating the 
as-synthesized material to T2. 

To further understand the nature of the effect that produces such a large evolution of heat during 
the first exotherm, heat treated samples were studied by high-field 27 A1 NMR, neutron 
diffraction and transmission electron microscopy, results are shown in Figs. 3,4 and 5 
respectively. 




l.iO 100 



50 



-50 -1 X) 



Fig. 3: High field 27 A1 MAS NMR spectra 
for as-made (Tl) and 'transformed' (T2) 
Y76A glass. Tl and T2 correspond to 
Y76A samples as illustrated in Figure 2c. 
Note the decrease in 4-coordinate and 
increase in 6-coordinate Al ions as a result 
of the structural rearrangements associated 
with the first exothermic event (T2) in 
Figure 2c. 



Che nncal Shift (ppm) 



AY76: as made glass 






CO 




-0.5 



-K 



Momentum Transfer Q (A" ) 



Fig. 4. Neutron diffraction spectra for the as-made and 'transformed' Y76A glasses. The peaks 
for the 'transformed' Y76A glass were indexed to cubic gamma- AI2O3. 

Al NMR reveals that heat treated glasses contains a much increased population of 6 coordinate 
aluminum ions compared to the as-made material. Neutron diffraction shows weak, broad Bragg 
peaks consistent with a nanophase component, indexing of the pattern indicates that the 
crystalline phases is metastable gamma-aluminum oxide. High resolution TEM imaging shows 
no evidence of crystals in the as-made glass core. After heating to T2, TEM shows a uniform 
distribution of nanoclusters of gamma-aluminum oxide in an amorphous matrix. If one assumes 
that the quantity of gamma alumina does not exceed that required to convert the matrix phase to 
the YAG composition, then the nanocrystalline gamma alumina would comprise up to 36 mol% 
of the sample on an M2O3 basis. Since (i) the transformed material density is ~ 4.2 g/cm 3 and (ii) 
the density of gamma alumina and as-synthesized YAG-composition glass are both ~ 4 g/cm 3 , it 
appears that a polyamorphic transformation of the matrix glass phase occurs together with the 
precipitation of gamma-alumina during the first exotherm. 



The detailed analyses of the metastable materials made under well controlled conditions by 
containerless processing has led to a new understanding of the liquid state. We are proposing an 
interpretation of the results that links the phenomena of polyamorphism, formation of glacial 
phases similar to those reported in organic systems, and quasicrystallization that is seen in 
metallic alloys. These phenomena are related effects that occur when highly metastable systems 
move towards equilibrium. The structural rearrangements that occur do not lead to formation of 
bulk crystalline materials, as the liquid structure relaxes, crystal-like phases occur along with 
restructuring of amorphous phases. These new ideas are being written up for submission to the 
journal Nature. 








(b) 

-. 



■7 ' 



50 nm 



10 nm 




d44 =0.140 



0.239 



d 5 „ =0.152 



Figure 5a-d: High resolution TEM images of as-made (a, b) and transformed (c, d) glasses. The 
diffraction rings for the as-made glass (b) are characteristic of amorphous material. The 
diffraction rings (d) for the 'transformed' Y76A (c) were indexed to cubic gamma-AbCb and are 
characteristic of a nanophase material. The gamma-AbC^ nanoclusters are seen as areas of dark 
contrast uniformly dispersed in the glass matrix, as shown in (c) the high-annual dark-field 
(HAADF)-STEM image. 



7 



Planned ESL Experiments at MSFC: 

Dr. Richard Weber visited NASA Marshall Space Flight Center during a recent trip to 
Huntsville. Dr. Tom Rathz hosted a tour of the new high pressure ESL facility which is being 
commissioned at MSFC. Discussions about viscosity measurements were held with Dr. Jan 
Rogers who is in charge of the ESL and Dr. Robert Hyers from the University of Massachusetts 
Amherst. Dr. Jan Rogers and Robert Hyers will be in the Chicago area during a visit to Argonne 
National Laboratory in mid- August. A meeting to discuss ESL experiments was held. 

CRI was selected for an NRA award to continue research on the oxide liquids. The new award 
NASA-NMM04AA23G is now in place. During this reporting period submission of several 
manuscripts was completed, a contract was made to engage Professor Robert Hyers at the 
University of Massachusetts Amherst to assist in measurements of melt density and viscosity 
that will be performed in the electrostatic levitator at Marshall Space Flight Center. Research 
towards the flight experiment is being continued under the new award. 

Publication: 

A total of 12 papers were published or are in process and approximately 20 presentations were 
made in connection with this project. 

Press Release: 

NASA and National Science Foundation will issue a joint press release on CRTs patented 
REA1™ Glass technology that was pioneered in this NRA projects. The press release has been 
written and is being processed, the NASA contact is Tracy McMahan (Media Writer (ASRI Inc.) 
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, (256) 544-1634. tracy.mcmahan@msfc.nasa.gov) . The 
release will be issued in mid-September with an associated press briefing at NASA Headquarters 
in Washington, DC. 

Current problems 

None 



Work to be performed during next reporting period 

The project is completed. 



Estimated percentage of physical completion of project 

The project is estimated to be 100% complete through the current reporting period. 

Statement on cumulative costs and physical completion 

The cumulative costs and physical completion of the project are approximately equal 
percentages of the total project cost and effort, respectively. 



Distribution, by contractor: 

NASA/MSFC 1 copy 

ATTN: GP3-F/ G. Franklin 

Marshall Space Flight Center, AL 35812 

NASA/MSFC 1 copy 

ATTN:SD41/B. Guynes 

Marshall Space Flight Center, AL 35812 

NASA/MSFC ^ copies 

ATTN: AD33D 

Marshall Space Flight Center, AL 35812 

NASA/MSFC 1 copy 

ATTN: ES75/ M. Robinson 

Marshall Space Flight Center, AL 35812 

NASA/MSFC 1 copy 

ATTN: SD46/ C. Sisk 

Marshall Space Flight Center, AL 35812 

NASA/MSFC 1 copy 

ATTN: LAIO/New Technology 
Marshall Space Flight Center, AL 35812 

NASA Center for AeroSpace Information 1 repro copy 

ATTN: Accessioning Dept 
7121 Standard Dr. 
Hanover, MD 21070-1320 



10 



