N96- 14977 


Network And User Interface For Pat Dome Virtual Motion Environment System 


J. W. Worthington, K. M. Duncan W. G. Crosier 
Krug Life Sciences 
1290 Hercules, Suite 120 
Houston, Texas 77058 


ABSTRACT 

The Device for Orientation and Motion Environments Preflight Adaptation 
Trainer (DOME PAT) provides astronauts a virtual microgravity sensory 
environment designed to help allieviate the symptoms of space motion sickness 
(SMS). The system consists of four microcomputers networked to provide real 
time control, and an Image Generator (IG) driving a wide angle video display 
inside a dome structure. The spherical display demands distortion correction. 
The system is currently being modified with a new graphical user interface (GUI) 
and a new Silicon Graphics IG. This paper will concentrate on the new GUI and 
the networking scheme. 

The new GUI eliminates proprietary graphics hardware and software , and 
instead makes use of standard and low cost PC video (CGA) and off the shelf 
software (Microsoft's Quick C). Mouse selection for user input is supported. 

The new Silicon Graphics IG requires an Ethernet interface. The microcomputer 
known as the Real Time Controller (RTC), which has overall control of the 
system and is written in Ada, was modified to use the free public domain NCSA 
Telnet software for Ethernet communications with the Silicon Graphics IG. The 
RTC also maintains the original ARCNET communications through Novell 
Netware IPX with the rest of the system. The Telnet TCP/IP protocol was first 
used for real-time communication, but because of buffering problems the Telnet 
datagram (UDP) protocol needed to be implemented. Since the Telnet modules 
are written in C, the Ada pragma "Interface" was used to interface with the 
network calls. 


INTRODUCTION 

The main purpose of the Preflight Adaptation Training (PAT) laboratory at the Johnson Space Center (JSC) is to 
help reduce or eliminate Space Motion Sickness (SMS) symptoms and to improve neurosensory performance 
during the initial days of flight as well as helping in readaptation to earth's gravity following a space flight The 
JSC PAT laboratory has two trainers; a Tilt-Translation Device (TTD) and the Device for Orientation and Motion 
Environments (DOME). This paper will discuss the networking scheme and graphical user interface (GUI) for the 
DOME system. 

The DOME system creates a virtual reality environment to simulate some of the sensory rearrangements that 
astronauts experience on-orbit A computer generated scene is projected onto the dome surface. Projection onto 
the dome surface requires distortion correction. The trainee can experience passive motion stimuli or can control 
his/her own motion with a sue degree of freedom hand controller. Head movements can also be enabled to drive 
the scene. The microcomputer kinematics control can be set to simulate various motion environments e.g. 
microgravity. 

Four microcomputers (PCs) and two Silicon Graphics (SGI) Crimson VGXT graphics computers, used as Image 
Generators (IG), drive the DOME system. The PCs communicate with each other over an ARCNET network 


15 



using calls to a proprietary virtual token ring network through the Novell Netware IPX kernel. One of the PCs 
also communicates with the SGI Crimsons using NCSA Telnet network calls over an Ethernet connection. The 
Ethernet also connects the SGI machines with each other. 

The instructor /operator selects various training environments using one PC which is known as the Instructor 
Operator Station (IOS). The IOS employs a graphical user interface with mouse selection. 

The other PCs are: the Real-Time ConroUer (RTC) which is the 'executive' or has basic control of the system and is 
the PC which communicates with the SGI Crimsons; the Real-Time Positioning System which accepts trainer 
device input from the trainee or instructor and provides kinematics processing; and the Data Logging and 
Display System (DLDS) which can display selected signals as on an oscilloscope. 

Problems with special hardware and proprietary software led to rewriting the software and changing the display 
for the IOS. The fact that the SGI machines use Ethernet for network communication required that the RTC be 
able to support an Ethernet connection as well as maintain the ARCNET communication with the rest of the 
system. Budget constraints forced a low cost solution for these items. 


GRAPHICAL USER INTERFACE 

History 

The original IOS used Multisynch monitors with a 768x1024 resolution for the user display. In order to generate 
this display special graphics boards were installed. These special graphics boards were accessed by making calls 
to special software written in FORTRAN; therefore, the original IOS was written in FORTRAN. 

The display output could best be described as pages rather than windows since they were static in nature and 
selection was a lot like turning to a page in a book. Several pages were provided by the subcontractor; they were 
quite detailed and the resolution allowed much information per page. Some of the pages were supposed to 
allow the user to change some of the parameters in the system’s computer kinematics and input control. 

Problems 

The subcontractor had originally expected to allow the user to select items by using a mouse. However, for some 
reason perhaps because of memory conflicts with the graphics boards and mouse driver, or interfacing the 
FORTRAN code with assembler calls to Int33H, the mouse never worked correctly. Our efforts in getting the 
mouse to work within this setup also failed. It was relativley time consuming to use cursor keys on these large 
display pages waiting for the cursor to arrive at the desired location. 

Changes that the user made to the DOME parameters on the IOS exhibited inconsistent results when sent to the 
RTC. Values were wrong or missing which meant the desired change was not made. The major problem 
appears to have been the difference in data representations in FORTRAN on the IOS machine transferring to Ada 
on the RTC machine. We made modifications that helped, but there were still inconsistencies. 

The special graphics cards failed. This would have left the DOME inoperable except that we had written a very 
terse non-graphic IOS using Ada which allowed system operation. This failure pointed out the dangers of relying 
on special hardware items. The manufacturer was a local business so the boards were repaired in less time than if 
they would have to have been shipped. Also, the graphics cards and software were geared to the Multisynch 
monitors only. Even though we have two of these monitors, each one failed and needed repair within a few 
weeks of each other. This again pointed out how much we were relying on special hardware. 

As trainer use increased we found parameters that we would like to add to the IOS to allow the 
instructor/operator to select. The acquisition of the SGI IGs along with Paradigm Simulation's VisionWorks 
software provided some new capabilities that the IOS needed to let the user select. The software code as received 


16 



from the subcontractor and the myriad FORTRAN graphics calls did not lend itself easily for modification. Also, 
most of the pages that were originally provided were now useless. 

Solution 

When the monitors failed it was time to find a new way to support the IOS. The terse Ada program was a place 
to begin, but interfacing it with C code graphics calls caused conflicts and did not work. We were also on a very 
limited budget at this time, so we needed to use materials we had on hand. We had a CGA monitor and 
graphics card and Microsoft Quick C which provides an extensive graphics library. A short test program proved 
that using Quick C with CGA would be fairly easy and very economical. 

Mouse support was easily implemented by using lnt33H functions called from the Quick C code. 

By this time the requirements for what the user would need to be able to select from the IOS were firmly 
established, although these requirements do change over time. The pages that allowed selection of unused items 
were eliminated. New pages were added to provide support for the new capabilities provided by the 
VisionWorks software and SGI IGs e.g. 'floating' models and 'spinning'. The display should still be thought of as 
pages, but with a modular programming structure new pages can be programmed quickly. The worst limit 
posed by the CGA graphics is the resolution. Selections have to be relatively large so items per page are limited 
more severely than with the previous system or EGA. 

The system allows user direct entry for some parameters. There has been no problem 'packaging' the C 
structured variables into a network packet that the Ada code on the RTC retrieves and uses, or vice versa. 

The current IOS greatly decreased the time required for the instructor/operator to set up a session in the DOME. 
The mouse selection is much faster than the cursor keys. By making the pages pertain to what is required, the 
instructor /operator upon selecting an option (eg 'spinning' the scene) allows the system to immediately respond 
only to that item, whereas before all parameters were passed to the RTC. Having modularized and well- 
commented code in a familiar language has made this possible. This also allows for easy modification - adding 
or deleting pages for desired functions, and there is no 'wasted' code for u necessary pages. 

Future 

In the near future we hope to incorporate the IOS onto a Macintosh. This will allow true windowing rather than 
displaying pages. The choice of the Macintosh over Windows on a PC also stems from what is on hand. We 
already have development tools and experience in Macintosh programming, but we would have to purchase the 
Windows Development Kit and learn it. Also, our end users (the neuro lab scientists) use Macintosh computers at 
their desks and are already familiar with its menu scheme, dialog boxes, scroll bars, etc. 

Modular programming structures will continue to be used; or perhaps object oriented class structures. Higher 
display resolution will be gained. It is also possible that we could combine the functions of the IOS and one of 
the other systems onto this single machine. 


NETWORKING DOME COMPUTERS 

History 

The DOME system is set up to use networked microcomputers to allow a degree of parallel processing for the 
real-time operation. The Real Time Positioning System (RTFS) receives input from the hand controllers and 
helmet position. It performs calculations relating to the orientation of the hand control to the subject, 
thresholding, and kinematics. Its output is a six degree of freedom vector of changes in position (Delta Position 
Vectors or DPVs) in body coordinates which it sends to the Real Time Controller (RTC) over the network. The 
RTC takes the DPVs from the RTFS and transforms them into world coordinates, integrates these into a new 
world position vector (eyepoint), and sends these eyepoints to the IG for display. Therefore, the RTPS can be 


17 



processing the next subject input while the RTC is finishing with the previous input. This turns out to be a low 
cost method of implementing parallel processing of the math intensive equations necessary for the real time 
operation of the trainer. Our original image generator had a PC front end which was connected to the same 
network in order to receive the eyepoints from the RTC. Additionally we have a Data Logging and Display 
System (DLDS) PC which can be used to show various signals in real-time. This PC is also connected to the 
network. 

The network architecture chosen by the subcontractor uses ARCNET cards and coaxial cable at the physical level. 
The network uses Novell Netware IPX as the kernel. The applications make calls to a library of functions which 
implement a proprietary virtual token ring network called Micronet developed by Microsim. The ARCNET has 
a throughput of about 25Mbps. 

Ongoing problems with the original 1G ultimately led to the acquisition of the two SGI Crimsons. 

Problems 

The specifications for acquiring the new SGI machines required that communication between them and our 
system be implemented with an Ethernet connection using the TCP/IP protocol. It was determined that the RTC 
would be the PC which would connect to the SGI. This raised several questions. What software would we need 
for Ethernet and TCP/IP on the PC? Would the RTC be able to maintain its ARCNET capabilities and take on the 
Ethernet connection? If not, would we need a bridge or some other interconnection device; or, as an alternative, 
would it be worth the time, effort and cost to modify the software in all of the PCs in order to have one Ethernet 
network? Would the RTC Ada code interface with the network software if it was not written in Ada? What 
would be the cost to modify the system? 

Solution 

Knowing the possibility that memory conflicts and Interrupt Request (IRQ) conflicts could occur we decided to 
go ahead and try to support both networks on the RTC. If it worked, fine; if not, we would still need the Ethernet 
and TCP/IP software for another PC, which would be used solely for communication with the SGI machines, or 
if we modified the system to use only Ethernet. 

An Ethernet card was ordered. It is supported by the NE2000 driver, could support both thin-net or thick-net 
cabling, and had four selectable IRQ lines. A transceiver for adapting from the AUI Ethernet port on the SGI to a 
BNC connection for thin-net was secured. 

The networking software required would only need to be a small subset of what was available. It would need to 
support creating a socket, opening a connection, sending packets, and receiving packets. It turned out that NCSA 
at the University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana, had TCP/IP software available in the public domain by the 
name of NCSA Telnet. The source code was provided and downloaded over the Internet. Only the necessary 
modules needed for the DOME system were compiled from the C source files and placed into a library along 
with the application functions that referenced the Telnet functions. 

In order for the Ada code in the RTC to access the network calls written and compiled into a C library, package 
ETHNET was created. This package contained Ada procedures for the Ethernet network and used pragma 
INTERFACE and pragma INTERFACE_NAME to access the C functions. The Ada code also had to be linked 
with the C library file. 

With the software installed and the hardware in place, a test was conducted between the RTC and an SGI 
Crimson. The proper IRQ line was finally set on the Ethernet card, a good address for installing the NE2000 
driver was selected, and the communication between the machines worked fine. Expanding the test to include 
the ARCNET calls to the other machines also worked fine; we did not have any conflicts by using two different 
network cards in the RTC PC. 


18 



While testing in real-time it was discovered that the SGI code was taking the TCP/IP packets and buffering them 
about three at a time. This slowed down the real-time performance and caused 'jerky' motion. It was finally 
decided to change from the TCP/IP protocol to the UDP (datagram) protocol because UDP is a 'don’t care if 
received’ type protocol and SGI would not buffer these packets. The NCSA Telnet code when compiled for the 
PC included the datagram service functions so this change was made quickly. The datagram service solved the 
real-time problem and is working very well. 

Future 

The current system PCs are 286 and 386 based machines running at 8 to 10 MHz. We hope to minimize the 
reliance on networking by combining the fucdonality of the RTC, RTPS, and IOS into one or two PCs since the 
power of PCs has greatly increased over what the current system has. 

Futhermore, we plan to have a single network supporting the datagram service and TCP/IP over the Ethernet. 
This will eliminate the proprietary network and enable greater control over the networking software. 


19 



