AD-A224 050 


IDA MEMORANDUM REPORT M-409 


Ada PROGRAM MANAGER ISSUES 


James P. Pennell 


December 1987 



Prepared for 
Ada Joint Program Office 



uBTWWirtloN st* 


Approved tar 
tMribafwi 



INSTITUTE FOR DEFENSE ANALYSES 

1801 N. Beauregard Street, Alexandria, Virginia 22311-1772 






DEFINITIONS 

IDA publishes tha following documents to report the results of lit wort. 


Reportt 

Reports are Dm most authoritative and most carefully coot!dared products IDA puklisiMS. 
They normally tmbody results ol ms|or prolacts wblcb (a) has* a direct boarini o* 
decisions stfoctinp ma|or progrems, (b) address Issans of significant concern te the 
Executive Branch, the Congress and/er the public, or (c) address issues that have 
significant economic Implications. IDA Reports are reviewed by outside panels of experts 
to ensure their high quality and relevance te the problems studied, and they are released 
by the President of IDA. 

Group Reports 

Group Reports record the findings and results of IDA established working groups and 
panels composed of senior Individuals addressing ma|or issues which otherwise would be 
the subject of an IDA Report. IDA Group Ruperts are revlewad by the senior individuals 
responsiblu lor the prelect and others as selected by IDA to ensure their high quality and 
relevance to the problems studied, and are released by the President of IDA. 

Papers 

Papers, also authoritative and carefully considered products of IDA, address studies that 
are narrower In scope than those covered in Reports. IDA Papers are reviewed to ensure 
that thoy moat the high standards expected of refereed papers in professional journals or 
formal Agency reports. 

Memorandum Report! 

IOA Memorandum Reports are used tar the earn*efface of the sponsors or the analysts to 
' record substantive work done in quick reaction studies and ma|or interactive technical 
support activities; to make available preliminary and tentative results of sea lyses or of 
working group and panel activities; to leeward Information that is essentially enanalyxed 
and unevaluated; or te make a record jf conferences, mootings, or briefings, or of data 
developed in the coarse of on investigation. Review ol Memorandum Reports is suited to 
their content and iutaaded use. 

The results of IDA work are also ceaveyod by briefings and iutermai memoranda to 
sponsors and others designated by s pon sors , when appropriate. 



iwwjMMd laa Jl^Jk^lBB ILniwilwd 


















REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 


Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 


Public reporting bunko for tha collection of uiformnion is •atimeted to >vrmg< 1 hot* p«r rcapooM, me iuding th* time for reviewin* imtructiom, searching existing d*u eourcee, 
gathering end maintaining the data needed, end completing and reviewing the co Heed an of imormedoa. Send comments regarding this burden sen mete or my other eepect of this 


collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services. Directorate for Informsdon Operation* end Reports. 1213 Jefferson 
Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington. VA 22202-4302. and to the Office of Management and Budget. Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188X Washington. DC 20503. 


1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank) 


2. REPORT DATE 

December 1987 


3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

Final 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 


Ada Program Manager Issues 


5. FUNDING NUMBERS 

MDA903 84 C 0031 
T-D5-306 


6. AUTHOR(S) 

James P. Pennell 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Institute for Defense Analyses (IDA) 

1801 N. Beauregard Street 
Alexandria, VA 22311-1772 


8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT 
NUMBER 

IDA Memorandum Report 
M-409 


9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO) 

Room 3E114, The Pentagon 
Washington, D.C. 20301-3081 


10. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY 
REPORT NUMBER 



12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release, unlimited distribution. 


12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 

2A 


13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) 

IDA Memorandum Report M-409, Ada Program Manager Issues, presents the findings of an investigation 
undertaken by the Institute for Defense Analyses (IDA) for the Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO) to determine 
if there is an unfulfilled need for AJPO assistance to project managers of major Ada software developments. 
The information provided in this report is intended to provide the AJPO with a indication of assistance that is 
available and used by managers, and an indication of how well this assistance matches the need, the 
investigation was limited in scope, that is, by time and effort, to quickly determine if there are major problems 
that should be investigated further. 


14. SUBJECT TERMS 15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

Ada Programming Language; Software Programs; Ada Technology Insertion; 18 

Software Engineering Institute (SEI); Army Light Helicopter (LHX); Real Time. 16 . price code 


17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 20. LIMITATION OF A BSTRACT 
OF REPORT OF Tl IIS PAGF1 OF ABSTRACT 

Unclassified_ Unclassified Unclassified 


NSN 73404) I -280-3300 SMmkrt Foim 298 (Rev. 2-89) 

Prescribed by ANSI Sid. Z39-18 
298-102 


























UNCLASSIFIED 


IDA MEMORANDUM REPORT M-409 

Ada PROGRAM MANAGER ISSUES 


James P. Pennell 


December 1987 



INSTITUTE FOR DEFENSE ANALYSES 

Contract MDA 903 84 C 0031 
Task T-D5-306 


UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 


PREFACE 

» 


This document reports the results of a preliminary investigation of reported issues that 
Ada program managers have encountered. This investigation was undertaken by IDA for 
the Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO) in partial fulfillment of IDA Task T-D5-306. 
Reviewers were Dr. Robert Winner, Dr. Joe Linn, and Ms. Audrey Hook. 


> 


* 


> 



Accession For_| 


BTIS GRAAI 
DTIC TAB 
Unannounced 
Justiricatlc 

mr 

□ 

□ 


By 

Distribution/ 

Availability Codas 

Dist 

r 1 

Avail 

Spec 

and/or 

Lai 


v 

UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 


CONTENTS 

1. Introduction. 1 

2. Scope.1 

3. Findings and Discussion .... 

3.1 Management Findings . . . 

3.2 Usage Issues. 

3.3 Policy . 

4. Conclusions and Recommendations.4 


vi 

UNCLASSIFIED 


^ W K) M 












UNCLASSIFIED 


1. Introduction 

This report presents the findings of an investigation undertaken by IDA for the Ada Joint 
Program Office to determine if there is an unfulfilled need for AJPO assistance to project 
managers of major Ada software developments. The information provided in this report 
is intended to provide the Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO) with an indication of 
assistance that is available and used by managers and an indication of how well this 
assistance matches the need. This report partially fulfills requirements of IDA task T- 
D5-306, Ada Technology Insertion. 


2. Scope 

The investigation was limited in scope (i.e., time and effort) to quickly determine if there 
are major problems that should be investigated further. Discussions were held with 
members of the software engineering staff at the Software Engineering Institute (SEI) 
concerning their knowledge of Service Ada project needs and with both contractors who 
are developing Ada software for the Army Light Helicopter (LHX). (The size of the 
LHX software effort, estimated to be in excess of 2,000,000 lines of source code, and the 
requirements for real-time, distributed, fault-tolerant mission equipment performance 
make the LHX a major Ada software development program.) Several documents 
produced by the SEI and the International Workshop on Real-Time Issues were also 
reviewed to obtain an overview of the program management help that is available or 
issues that are unresolved. 


3. Findings and Discussion 

The findings are presented in three sections—those dealing with Ada project 
management, those dealing with Ada usage, and validation policy. Management findings 
relate to the resources that are available for solving project management problems. The 
Ada usage finding relates to perceived implementation problems: the policy finding 
relates to the lack of policy for validation of hardware simulators. 


1 

UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 


3.1 Management Findings 

Finding: Two Air Force studies of Ada project manager needs have resulted in documents 
that address these needs. 

Discussion: The Air Force has already commissioned at least two studies of program 
management problems related to using Ada. One study was performed by SEI and is 
reported in “Ada Adoption Handbook: A Program Manager’s Guide,” 1 the other was 
commissioned by ESD and is summarized in “Program Office Guide to Ada.” 2 The 
author has reviewed both documents and finds them to be informative and valuable 
sources of information about issues of interest to project managers. A handbook or 
program office guide for each Service, s imil ar to the one developed by the Air Force, 
would be useful to provide general Ada guidance and Service specific information. 

Finding: Program managers have encountered life cycle management problems. 

Discussion: During a visit to the SEI, the author learned that members of the SEI staff 
have been asked to help resolve perceived technical problems with several military 
projects. These problems fell into a pattern of design deficiencies that led the people at 
SEI to infer that these problems were symptoms of poor software engineering and weak 
management. People who had participated in SEI assistance teams also expressed the 
opinion that earlier participation in system design reviews by independent software design 
review teams might have prevented many of the implementation problems that appeared 
insurmountable to the project manager. Although DoD-STD-2167A and MIL-STD- 
1521B provide for early review of the system requirements, design and specification, the 
experience of the SEI staff indicates that sometimes these reviews are not sufficient to 
identify fundamental weaknesses in the software design. In large development projects, 
it is often a major achievement to be able to recognize that a problem exists and to 
classify the problem. Prototyping can help uncover faulty design before there are 
implementation problems that make it more difficult to recognize a design problem. 
Once a problem has been recognized and classified by the project manager, the AJPO 
may be a resource for advice on particular aspects of the problem. For example, if the 
problem concerns compiler design or the performance of the run-time system, the AJPO 
may coordinate meetings between the compiler developer and the project manager, or 
may advise the project manager to obtain the Ada Compiler Evaluation Capability 
(ACEC), or may identify another project manager who has solved similar problems. If, 
however, the program is attempting to incorporate a design that is fundamentally flawed, 
then neither Ada, the AJPO, nor any panel of experts can prevent the design team from 
encountering problems. 


1. John Foreman and John Goodenough, "Ada Adoption Handbook: A Program Manager’s Guide,” 
Technical Report CMU/SEI-87-TR-9 ESD-TR-87-110, May 1987. 

2. C. N. Ausnit, E. R. Ansarov, and N. H. Cohen, "Program Office Guide to Ada, Edition I,” ESD-TR-86- 
282,17 September 1986. 


2 

UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 


Finding: The LHX contractors expressed satisfaction with the AJPO program guidance. 

Discussion: The LHX software design teams were pleased with the response and support 
that they received in obtaining compilers for their designs. Both designs included use of 
the MIL-STD-1750A computer standard on a hardware that was not yet available. 
Although such a situation could raise a problem in obtaining a validated compiler for the 
target system, such problems were avoided through use of a compiler that was validated 
by simulation. The AJPO guidance to use a simulator to validate the compiler for the 
MEL-STD-1750A target was essential for the LHX program. 

Finding: The LHX contractor teams have access to groups of experts for problem solving. 

Discussion: Both te ams of LHX contractors said that their parent companies had 
established connections to a network of experts who could be consulted for problem 
solving. The experts were used to review design decisions, to gather information about 
hardware and software design trends, and to serve as a mechanism for reporting troubles. 
The networks involved both a private consortium and a government agency. 
Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation (MCC) and Joint Integrated 
Avionics Working Group (JIAWG). 

3.2 Usage Issues 

Finding: Ada is being used for real-time embedded computer systems, with a distributed 
architecture, but implementation requires “work-around** techniques. 

Discussion: Like most languages, Ada is an imperfect match for programs based on 
monitor-style concurrency control or the object-oriented programming paradigm. 3 
However, program developers have developed techniques for working with the language 
to implement their designs. After learning the language, software developers appreciate 
the software engineering features of the language, but to attain the necessary 
performance, they restrict the use of certain features: 

a. tasking and rendezvous for distributed processing, 

b. exceptions—except for fatal conditions, and 

c. dynamic allocation. 

Both LHX development teams see the need for a “distributed-system” operating system 
to provide for interprocess communication, fault detection, and reconfiguration. One of 
the teams selected a particular compiler vendor and specified the semantics of run-time 
system interfaces. This team said that they would replace run-time system code with 
assembly code if necessary to achieve performance improvements. 


3. Joseph L. Linn, Cathy Jo Linn, Cy D. Ardoin, “Improving Ada tor Use in Embedded Systems and 
System Programming,” IDA Paper, to be published in March 1989. 


3 

UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


One of the LHX developers expressed an opinion that if Ada is not changed to make it 
more suitable for real-time distributed fault tolerant applications, then it will cease to be 
a viable alternative for weapon systems. The International Workshop on Real-Time Ada 
Issues, at the May 1987 meeting, identified 10 features that Ada should support. 4 
Research is being conducted on these topics within the SEI and by participants in the 
Real-Time Ada Issues working groups. 

3.3 Policy 

Finding: There is no formal procedure for validating the simulation of the MEL-STD-1750- 
A. 


Discussion: Although use of a simulation was essential for early validation of the 
compiler for programs that are using the 1750A architecture as a target, the simulation 
itself has not been subjected to a validation that is equivalent to the compiler validation. 
Without such a rigorous validation of the simulation, it may be possible to encounter 
problems with validated compilers when the hardware becomes available. 


4. Conclusions and Recommendations 

During this investigation, program management assistance resources were found to be 
available and examples of their use by managers of large Ada software development 
indicate that the issue is early detection and classification of a problem. The program 
management problems were not specific to usage of the Ada language but rather to a lack 
of software engineering and project management experience. Software engineering 
education and experience in applying software engineering principles using Ada may be 
the most significant problem area that requires attention from the Services. Ada usage 
problems are being addressed by research and the application of engineering solutions 
known as “work-arounds”. Information concerning these engineering solutions is being 
shared with participants in the working groups who are interested in them. The 
development community has not reported problems that preclude using Ada for the next 
generation of weapon systems although some members of both the development and 
research communities expect to participate in the language revision process to express 
their views of how the language should be changed so as to minimize implementation 
problems. The use of simulation models of hardware enables software development with 
a validated Ada compiler. A policy on the validation of simulated hardware target 
systems, particularly for a MIL-STD target computer, is needed to reduce the risk that the 
compiler and developed code will be unusable when the real hardware is delivered. The 
following recommendations apply to the AJPO in its DoD role: 

1. Continue to emphasize the use of prototyping in the software development life- 
cycle. 


4. Periodic tasks, sporadic tasks, fault tolerance, distributed systems, time abstraction, reconfiguration, 
dynamic binding, resource utilization, concurrency, and traceability 


4 

UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 


2. Encourage all DoD components to develop project manager handbooks. 

3. Encourage all DoD components to institutionalize independent software design 
reviews during the early stages of system acquisition. 

4. Continue support for Ada education and training. 

5. Encourage the Air Force to develop a policy for the validation of simulations of the 
MIL-STD-1750A. 


5 

UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 


Distribution List for IDA Memorandum Report M-409 
NAME AND ADDRESS NUMBER OF COPIES 

Sponsor 

Dr. John P. Solomond 2 

Director 

Ada Joint Program Office 
Room 3E114 
The Pentagon 

Washington, D.C. 20301-3081 

Other 

Defense Technical Information Center 2 

Cameron Station 
Alexandria, VA 22314 

IIT Research Institute 1 

4600 Forbes Blvd., Suite 300 
Lanham, MD 20706 
Attn. Ann Eustice 

CSED Review Panel 

Dr. Dan Alpert, Director 1 

Program in Science, Technology & Society 
University of Illinois 
Room 201 

912-1/2 West Illinois Street 
Urbana, Illinois 61801 

Dr. Thomas C. Brandt 1 

10302 Bluet Terrace 
Upper Marlboro, MD 20772 

Dr. Ruth Davis 1 

The Pymatuning Group, Inc. 

2000 N. 15th Street, Suite 707 
Arlington, VA 22201 

Dr. C.E. Hutchinson, Dean 1 

Thayer School of Engineering 
Dartmouth College 
Hanover, NH 03755 


Distribution List-1 
UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 


NAME AND ADDRESS NUMBER OF COPIES 

Mr. A.J. Jordano 1 

Manager, Systems & Software 

Engineering Headquarters 

Federal Systems Division 

6600 Rocldedge Dr. 

Bethesda, MD 20817 

Dr. Ernest W. Kent 1 

Philips Laboratories 
345 Scarborogh Road 
Briarcliff Manor, NY 10510 

Dr. John M. Palms, President 1 

Georgia State University 
University Plaza 
Atlanta, GA 30303 

Mr. Keith Uncapher 1 

University of Southern California 
Olin Hall 

330A University Park 
Los Angeles, CA 90089-1454 

IDA 


General W.Y. Smith, HQ 1 

Mr. Philip Major, HQ 1 

Dr. Robert E. Roberts, HQ 1 

Ms. Anne Douville, CSED 1 

Ms. Audrey A. Hook, CSED 2 

Mr. Terry Mayfield, CSED 1 

Dr. James P. Pennell, CSED 2 

Ms. Katydean Price, CSED 2 

Dr. Richard L. Wexelblat, CSED 1 

IDA Control & Distribution Vault 3 


Distribution List-2 
UNCLASSIFIED 





