N96- 70522 

COMET: First Mission Progress* /I/O A 

J. F. Pawliclr', E. G. Allee', and C. H. Myers* ^ ^ r^ O* 

- ^, 6^^ i 

University of Tennessee - Calspan ' 

Center for Space Transportation and Applied Researcli (CSTAR) ij o 

UTSI Research Park ^ "" 

Tullahoma, TN 3738S 

Abstract 

The COMmercial Experiment Transporter (COMET) is a set of hardware and related infrastructure used to 
support orbital experiments of the CCDS's and their industrial partners. During the nineteen months since the 
program started, contracts have been signed, design reviews conducted on all components, experiments selected 
for the first mission, almost all hardware has been manufactured, and a majority of components have completed 
testing. The Program Office and CCDS Monitors took an active role in the development, planning, and conduct 
of the actions leading to the first flight of COMET scheduled in the first quarter of J993. The Recovery 
System/Site has been exercised, and the Launch Facility is well on its way toward completion. As October came 
to a close, most of the major components of the COMET FreeFlyer have come together in League City, TXfor 
an integrated test. 

This report deals primarily with the programmatic issues which were resolved as the program matured. At times 
it is impossible to disassociate the technical from the programmatic and, in such cases, the technical material is 
presented to provide insight into the path selected by both the CCDS and Contractor Management. 



COMET Overview and Recovery System into a 300 nm circular orbit 

The COMET FreeFlyer will be launched with from the Conestoga Launch Vehicle. The non- 

CCDS payloads aboard both the Service Module recoverable Service Module will contain about 15 



' This work is supported by the Center for Space Transportation and Applied Research (CSTAR) under NASA Grant NAGW-1 195. 

' CSTAR/UTSI, Manager of Space Transportation 

= CSTAR/Calspan, COMET Chief Eneineer 

^ CSTAR/Caispan, Ope ratio tis Atialyst 
Other Contributors Include: 

Dr. F. WessHng, CMDS, University of Alabama, Huntsvitle 
Dr. M. Robinson, BioServe, Utiiversity of Colorado 
Mr. R. Martinez, CSP. Texas A & M University 
Mr. T. Gailimore, CMC, University of Alabama, BifTningham 
Mr. N. Cotnbs, SVEC, University of Houston 

1 



mnnrrftF '"''™ 




Figure 1 COMET's FreeFlyer 



cubic feet of payload volume while the Recovery 
System will have about ten cubic feet. Command 
and control of the FreeFlyer and experiment data 
communications will be controlled through a 
Commercial Payloads Operations Control Center 
(COMPOCC) in League City, TX. 

The Recovery System will separate from the 
FreeFlyer after about a month in orbit to be 
recovered near the Great Salt Lake Desert in the 
Utah Test and Training Range (UTTR). 

Programmatic Overview 

During the period of April 8, 1991, through 
October 30, 1992, the COMmercial E;tperiment 
Transporter progressed from Authorization to 
Proceed for the Contractors, Preliminary Design 
Reviews, Critical Design Reviews, Fabrication of 
almost all components, and testing of a majority of 
those components. 



The Service Module has developed from original 
design, through fabrication of all components, and 
has undergone extensive testing, which has 
culminated in its arrival in League City, TX, for 
Integrated Testing. The Recovery System has 
followed almost the same path, however, with some 
perturbations in the spin table design, 
avionics/software design, and de-spin mechanisms. 
It has completed most of its testing and is currently 
ready for Integration Testhig with the Service 
Module in League City, TX. The Commercial 
Payload Operations Control Center (COMPOCC) 
has developed into a ftiUy operational control 
center, ready for operational status, Payloads have 
been selected, and the majority of them have 
completed unit testing and are being integrated into 
the Recovery System and Service Module, The 
Launch Vehicle has matured through its design 
process, with the Star 48V ready for installation, 
the Castor lV*s being manufactured, the avionics 
ready for testing, and almost alt mechanical items 
completed and being integrated. The Flight and 
Ground Software has been completed and is 
undergoing testing. The Launch Pad started in July 
1992 and is ready for installation of the mechanical 
structures. The Recovery Site has been tested, and 
operational tests of the Recovery System have taken 
place. 

The COMET System, as a total, is coming together 
partially in League City, and appears to be heading 
for an on-time launch in the first quarter of 1993, 



COMET STATUS UPDATE 

Following is an update in the status of the COMET 

Program. 



COMET FREEFLYEBl 
CUTAWAV 




Figure 2 Payload Location 



Fayloads : 

Following are the payload s manifested for COMET 
Mission #1: 
Recovery System 

[I] Biomodule (Pmn State) 

(Z) Non Linear Organic Thin Films and Ciyslals <UAH) 

[3] MDA Minilab (UAH) 

[4] Animal Autonomous Space Suppon Module (BioServe) 

[5] Plant Auionomous Space Support Module (BioServe) 

(6] Protein Crystal Growth-Batch (PCG-M) (UAB) 

Uiiliiy - Acceleration Measurement System (AMS) (UAH) 

Service Module 

[7)OxygenAiomFluxMonitorsforSpacecraft(SURSAT) <CMDS) 

[8] * Autonomous Rendezvous and Docking (A RD) (SpARC) 
* Requires COMET Mission #2 for doclting. 

[9] Froiepipe (Froien Heal Pipe Experiment) (TeJias A&M - CSP) 

{10] LEOHX (Low Earth Orbii Cominunications) (Florida Atlantic) 



The Payloads have all been delivered to the 
Integration Contractor (SII) in League City, TX, 
and have undergone extetisive testing in anticipation 
of Integrated Systems Testing with the Service 
Module, the Recovery System, and the 
COMPOCC. 



The Autonomous Rendezvous and Docking 
Experiment (ARD) was delivered early to Space 
Industries, where it underwent fit checks and basic 
communication checks. ARD will remain on board 
the Service Module well past the 130 day mission 
with regular communication checks. It is only after 
the second COMET Service Module has been 
launched that this experiment will start its 
operation, being the target for the COMET ^ 
chase module. The chase module will target, 
operate, thrust, and observe the target vehicle 
without intervention from the ground, with an 
ultimate link-up and transfer of material, 

SURSAT is an atomic oxygen flux monitoring 
experiment desiring proximity to the atomic oxygen 
present in Low Earth Orbit. It will be placed on 
the outside face of the Service Module, in the ram 
direction, and will remain in operation for the 
duration of the spacecraft's orbital lifetime. 

Frozepipe is an experiment measuring the 
performance of heat pipes during extreme 



temperature variations. It is manifested to be 
installed on one of the outside experiment panels. 

LEOEX is a communications experiment testing 
various communication configurations in 
anticipation of future communications satellites. 

Biomodule, MDA, NLO, and PCG-M are all 
experiments dealing with the growing of crystals in 
a microgravity environment. 



Launch Vehicle 




COMET 
CONESTGOA LCLJncn v^hicte 
1650 Cofl^ pflLirat ion 



) 



um 



EEfl Sk^lCTB, |nc , ^Mce &«rv'ct^ 0-v 



Figure 3 Conestoga Launch Vehicle 



AMASS and PMASS deal with plant and small 
animal tissue changes that occur in a microgravity 
environment. 

One other component on the Recovery System is 
being provided by a CCDS, but is being flown as a 
utility on COMET, UAH is providing 
microgravity measurement equipment, similar to 
that flown on the Consort missions, to quantitize 
the microgravity disturbances during the mission. 
This is of particular importance to the crystal 
growing experimenters, who need to know the 
environmental conditions fairly accurately in order 
to assess the success of their experiments. 

The Pay load Integrators have integrated ail 
experiments into their respective mockups, have 
communicated with simulators where applicable, 
and at the time of this writing are in the stage of 
being integrated into the Service Module, and 
Recovery System for communication with the 
FreeFlyer command and telemetry system, as well 
as the COMPOCC. 



The Launch Vehicle has progressed from the initial 
design stage into (he Conestoga 1620 depicted in 
figure 3. The core motor is a Castor IVB with 
dirust vector control. Attached to the core motor 
are four Castor IVA's and two Castor IVB's, On 
top of the core motor is a Star 48V, also with 
thrust vector control. Wind tunnel tests were 
conducted on the Conestoga 1620, with the results 
feeding into the thermal design, as well as the 
trajectory design. 

Coordinationof the launch vehicle launch complex 
requirements with NASA has completed intense 
discussions, and on July 31, 1992, site construction 
commenced. The design of the Launch complex 
completed earlier this year; earthwork was finished 
in August, and pile driving/pile capping and 
strucmral concrete finished in mid October. The 
mechanical structures are nearing completion of 
fabrication and should start erection in November. 

"Hie Launch VehicJe Flight Software CDR was held 
m July, and Flight Software is undergoing the final 



stages of testing. There have been some interface 
issues concerning the IMU, but all ^>pears to be 
reaching a mutually agreeable solution. EER has 
elected to develop a state-of-the-art, AI based, 
Ground Control Software to relieve the burden on 
the launch control team from sifting through the 
myriad of status information provided shortly 
before launch. The system will be able to make 
intelligent choices on what data is important to the 
launch control team, and rapidly flag any out-of- 
nominal condition, as well as conditions where 
groups of data taken together indicate problems. 
The Ground Control Software will be ready for 
installation in December, 

All mechanical and electrical Launch vehicle 
assemblies are in fabrication, testing, or are being 
iniegrated with the launch vehicle. Most avionics 
assemblies are in testing. 

The Launch Vehicle appears to be on track for a 
first quarter launch. 




COMET SERVICE MODt^-E 
CUTAWAV 



Figure 4 Service Module 



Service Module 

The Service Module has progressed completely 
through all phases of design, manufacturing, and 
testing, and is currently involved in Integration & 
Test in League City, TX. The design and 
manufacture has progressed very smoothly, with 
only minor problems with power controllers and 
some specialized electronics equipment. 

One of the largest integration efforts on the 
COMET program involves the Capillary Pump 
Loop (CPL) - Thermal Control System that was 
provided to the COMET Service Module and 
Recovery System by OAO Corporation of 
Greenbeh, MD, under the supervision of Defense 
Systems Incorporated and Westinghouse. This 
effort took the technology from heat pipes, and 
some preliminary spaceflight results from OAO, 
and applied it to an engineering effort to develop a 
microgravjty adaptable thermal control system. 
The OAO CPL system utilizes no mechanical 
pumps except for priming the system; therefore, 
there are no mechanical disturbances to interfere 
with the microgravity environment, and in 
particular, the crystal growth experiments. What 
was even more demanding of diis integration effort, 
was the fact that the system is designed to operate 
in low gravity, and the passive-evaporation pumps 
do not work well in a one-gravity environment that 
they are tested in here on Earth, The program had 
a number of setbacks in fabricating and 
characterizing the system, but in the end, the 
OAO/DSI/Westinghouse team has delivered a 
unique system specifically adapted for the 



requirements of COMET. The Recovery System is 
also incorporating the OAO CPL system. 



8 



f>tiinMy Stnietura 




UojHa, Caafonii 



n L>ym Cg m pQiJH CofntMctor 



■ HactwilBnAiit£qu^iTiei<A>ilkU± 



- EichVgtildiliPniiCLMMTiiVfirly 



' UnllBI^TIncllDndCvbmFlm 



Figure 5 Recovery System Structure 

Recovery System 

The Recovery System is nearing completion, with 
most of the major components currently undergoing 
Integration and Test in League City, TX. The 
Avionics supplied by the SouthWest Research 
Institute have been integrated into the flight system 
along with SII supplied software, have undergone 
testing, and are being tested with the Recovery 
System experiments. 



8i 



Panchuta Deploymant SaqtMncc 



o 



-ai.ooon 

MSt. 



-lO.OOOft- 

MSL 




Figure 6 Recovery System Parachute 
Deployment 



The Parachute & Airbag systems have been 
extensively tested, starting with a 20-ft drop test to 
check the operation of the airbag. The next test 
involved dropping a protoffight model of the 
recovery system from a privately-owned Canberra 
from 20,000 feet. This test successfully tested the 
limits of the main chute and the deployment of the 
airbag. The most recent test involved dropping the 
protoflight unit from the Canberra in excess of 
50,000 feet to test the deployment of the drogue 
chutes, as well as the main chute and airbag. This 
test was conducted at UTTR and exercised the 
UTTR & SII Recovery Teams. The test was 
completed successful, with complete recovery and 
disassembly in less than four hours. 

Space Industries has studied the re-entry 
aerodynamics extensively, and determined that in 
order to meet the landing range dispersion 
requirements, the Recovery System will have to 
spin up before the retro-motor fires in order to 
compensate for off-axis thrust of the retro-motor. 
This, in turn, entails a de-spin mechanism be 
incorporated. SII has successfully designed, built, 
and tested a Yo-Yo de-spin system in record time 
in order to meet this required change. 



Another area of concern for SII has been the design 
of the spin table/spin bearing that mates the 
Recovery System to the Service Module and allows 
for the spin-up of the Recovery System just prior to 
separation. This item has been plagued by a 
number of engineering anomalies, and Space 




Figure 7 Landing Sequence 

Industries appears to have solved all of the major 
problems associated with the thermal expansion of 
the bearings and associated race-ways. 

Overall, the Recovery System appears to be ready 
for launch after Integration & Test. 



Orbital Operations 

The COMPOCC has evolved into a fully functional 

Satellite Control Center with fully operational 



software system. They have installed a fully 
operational Tracking, Telemetry, and Command 
system consisting of a Scientific Atlanta antenna 
and receiving station and have fully tested it with 
satellites on orbit and the COMET FreeFlyer in 
League City. 



Other Programmatic Issues 
Gunn Report 

In May. 1992, Mr. C. Gunn of NASA Code SV 
was asked to provide a non -advocate program 
review of COMET. On May 27 & 28, 1992, the 
COMET Management Team and the CCDS 
Monitors presented a technical overview of the 
complete COMET program, firom contraas & 
finance to ordnance system design. Overall, the 
review team was favorably impressed, and 
forwarded a set of 18 recommendations to Code C 
and the COMET Team. All the reccomendations 
have been reviewed and feedback provided to the 
Gunn Committee, 



8^ #f LH£ 


COMPOCC Liyoul 






J 






tE=} 




t~3 






O d C5 




/ 


^-.^ O d ^^ 















Figure 8 COMPOCC Layout 

workstations, computer networks, data storage 
facilities, and an operational conamand and control 



SUMMARY 

The COMET Program is in the midst of Integrating 
a myriad of different components from suppliers 
and contraaors scattered across the U.S., and has 
just started the testing of this collection of highly- 
technical components. To date, only minor 
problems have occurred, and the COMET Team 
has responded with one voice and quickly 
vanquished those marauding gremlins of doom. 
COMET nears its first launch, and from software, 



to hardware, to launch pad, the whole COMET 
team is pointing in the right direction, and it 
appears that we'll have a some real COMET carrier 
waves coming from 300 miles up before the end of 
March. 

List of Major COMET 
Contractors and Suppliers 

Service Module 

Westinghouse - Prime Contractor 

Defense Systems Inc. - Service Module 
Manufacturer 

OAO Inc. - Thermal Control System Supplier 

Space Sciences Corp. - Attitude Control Systems 

Kearfott'Siegler - IMU 

Recovery Svsiem 

Space Industries Inc. - Prime Contractor 
Pioneer - Parachute Systems 
Scaled Composites - RS Straaure 
Southwest Research Institute - Avionics 



Launch Vehicle 

EER Systems, Inc. - Prime Contractor 

Morton Thiokol - Motors 

Logicon Control Dynamics - Flight Software 

Altair Aerospace Corporation - Ground Control 
Software 

Tracor - Fairing 

Orbital Operations 

Space Industries Inc. - Prime Contractor 

Space Applications Corporation - Software 
Development 



Pavlo^ Integration 

Space Industries Inc. - Prime Contractor 

SouthWest Research Institute - Enviroimiental 
Testing 




