pie size over which the cross-correlation 
is measured to increase the accuracy of 
the measurement. This increases the ro- 
bustness of the measurement to variable 
magnitudes of inter-frame jitter. 

This work was done by Mordecai J. Waegell 
and David M. Palacios of Caltech for NASA’s 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory. For metre informa- 
tion, contact iaoffice@jpl.nasa.gov. 

This software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Daniel Broderick of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
danielb@caltech.edu. Refer to NPO-47215. 


M MSLICE Sequencing 

MSLICE Sequencing is a graphical 
tool for writing sequences and integrat- 
ing them into RML files, as well as for 
producing SCMF files for uplink. When 
operated in a testbed environment, it 
also supports uplinking these SCMF files 
to the testbed via Chill. 

This software features a freeform tex- 
tural sequence editor featuring syntax 
coloring, automatic content assistance 
(including command and argument 
completion proposals), complete with 
types, value ranges, unites, and descrip- 
tions from the command dictionary that 
appear as they are typed. The sequence 
editor also has a “Field mode” that allows 
tabbing between arguments and displays 
type/range/units/description for each 
argument as it is edited. Color-coded 
error and warning annotations on prob- 
lematic tokens are included, as well as 
indications of problems that are not visi- 
ble in the current scroll range. “Quick 
Fix” suggestions are made for resolving 
problems, and all the features afforded 
by modern source editors are also in- 
cluded such as copy/cut/paste, 
undo/redo, and a sophisticated fmd- 
and-replace system optionally using reg- 
ular expressions. 

The software offers a full XML editor 
for RML files, which features syntax col- 
oring, content assistance and problem 
annotations as above. There is a form- 
based, “detail view” that allows structured 
editing of command arguments and se- 
quence parameters when preferred. The 
“project view” shows the user’s “work- 
space” as a tree of “resources” (projects, 
folders, and files) that can subsequently 
be opened in editors by double-clicking. 


Files can be added, deleted, dragged- 
dropped/copied-pasted between folders 
or projects, and these operations are un- 
doable and redoable. 

A “problems view” contains a tabular 
list of all problems in the current work- 
space. Double-clicking on any row in the 
table opens an editor for the appropriate 
sequence, scrolling to the specific line 
with the problem, and highlighting the 
problematic characters. From there, one 
can invoke “quick fix” as described above 
to resolve the issue. Once resolved, sav- 
ing the file causes the problem to be re- 
moved from the problem view. 

This work was done by Thomas M. Crockett, 
foseph C. Joswig, Khawaja S. Shams, Jeffrey S. 
Norris, and John R. Morris oj Caltech for 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. For more in- 
formation, contact iaoffice@jpl.nasa.gov. 

This software is available for commer- 
cial licensing. Please contact Daniel 
Broderick of the California Institute of 
Technology at danielb@caltech.edu. 
Refer to NPO-47292. 


# EOS MLS Level 2 

Data Processing Software 
Version 3 

This software accepts the EOS MLS cal- 
ibrated measurements of microwave radi- 
ances products and operational meteoro- 
logical data, and produces a set of 
estimates of atmospheric temperature 
and composition. This version has been 
designed to be as flexible as possible. The 
software is controlled by a Level 2 Config- 
uration File that controls all aspects of 
the software: defining the contents of 
state and measurement vectors, defining 
the configurations of the various forward 
models available, reading appropriate a 
priori spectroscopic and calibration data, 
performing retrievals, post-processing re- 
sults, computing diagnostics, and out- 
putting results in appropriate files. 

In production mode, the software op- 
erates in a parallel form, with one in- 
stance of the program acting as a master, 
coordinating the work of multiple slave 
instances on a cluster of computers, 
each computing the results for individ- 
ual chunks of data. In addition, to do 
conventional retrieval calculations and 
producing geophysical products, the 
Level 2 Configuration File can instruct 


the software to produce files of simu- 
lated radiances based on a state vector 
formed from a set of geophysical prod- 
uct files taken as input. Combining both 
the retrieval and simulation tasks in a 
single piece of software makes it far eas- 
ier to ensure that identical forward 
model algorithms and parameters are 
used in both tasks. This also dramatically 
reduces the complexity of the code 
maintenance effort. 

This work was done by Nathaniel J. Livesey, 
W. Van Snyder, William G. Read, Michael J. 
Schwartz, Alyn Lambert, Michelle L. Santee, 
Honghanh T. Nguyen, Lucien Froidevaux, 
Shuhui Wang, Gloria L. Manney, Dong L. 
Wu, and Paul A. Wagner of Caltech; 
Christina Vuu of Raytheon; and Hugh C. 
Pumphrey of the University of Edinburgh for 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. For more 
information, contact iaoffice@jpl. nasa.gov. 

This software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Daniel Broderick of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
danielb@caltech.edu. Refer to NPO-47221. 


DspaceOgre 3D Graphics 
Visualization Tool 

This general-purpose 3D graphics vi- 
sualization C++ tool is designed for visu- 
alization of simulation and analysis data 
for articulated mechanisms. Examples of 
such systems are vehicles, robotic arms, 
biomechanics models, and biomolecular 
structures. DspaceOgre builds upon the 
open-source Ogre3D graphics visualiza- 
tion library. It provides additional classes 
to support the management of complex 
scenes involving multiple viewpoints and 
different scene groups, and can be used 
as a remote graphics server. 

This software provides improved sup- 
port for adding programs at the graph- 
ics processing unit (GPU) level for im- 
proved performance. It also improves 
upon the messaging interface it exposes 
for use as a visualization server. 

This work tuas done by Abhinandan Jain, 
Steven Myint, and Marc I. Pomerantz of 
Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Labora- 
tory. For more information, contact iaof- 
fice@jpl. nasa.gov. 

This software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Daniel Broderick of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
danielb@caltech.edu. Refer to NPO-47380. 


12 


NASA Tech Briefs, August 2011 


