NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL 
Monterey, California 






REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 


Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 


Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruction, 
searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send 
comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to 
Washington headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 
22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188) Washington DC 20503. 


1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank) 


2. REPORT DATE 

December 1999 


3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

Master’s Thesis 


5. FUNDING NUMBERS 


8. PERFORMING 
ORGANIZATION REPORT 
NUMBER 


10. SPONSORING/ 
MONITORING 

AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

MODELING AND SIMULATION SUPPORT FOR THE OPERATIONAL TEST AND 
EVALUATION OF A TACTICAL AIRBORNE RECONNAISSANCE SYSTEM 


6. AUTHOR(S) 

Schmidt, Kevin J. 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, CA 93943-5000 


9. SPONSORING / MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 
DOT&E 

1700 Defense Pentagon 
Washington, DC 20301-1700 


11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

The views expressed in this thesis are those of the author and do not reflect the official policy or position of the Department of 
Defense or the U.S. Government. 


12a. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 


13. ABSTRACT 

Today’s decreasing defense budget has forced the military to reduce its spending on operational testing of new equipment, among 
many other areas. Reduced testing has forced evaluators to focus their attention on possible sensitive issues prior to and during 
testing of new equipment. The Simulation, Test, and Evaluation Process implemented in 1995 to help reduce testing costs has been 
an integral part of the test and evaluation process. 

This thesis develops stochastic simulations to suggest the sensitive aspects of operating and maintaining a system of mobile 
reconnaissance platforms, specifically a helicopter force, (more specifically the RAH-66 Comanche) prior to and during actual 
testing. The simulation can also be implemented to compare the effectiveness of different mobile reconnaissance platforms to 
augment the conduct of side-by-side field testing of actual platforms. 

This simple, stochastic, event-driven simulation may be used to conduct sensitivity analysis on system design and operational 
issues, including attrition, for mobile reconnaissance platforms in order to focus the attention of the testers and evaluators on 
influential parameters during testing. It may also be used to inform force design decision-makers. 


14. SUBJECT TERMS 

Modeling and Simulation, Java, Simkit, Maintenance and Repair, Mobile Reconnaissance Platform, Attrition, 
Non-homogeneous Poisson Process, Operational Test and Evaluation 


15. NUMBER OF 
PAGES 


17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF 
REPORT 

Unclassified 


18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF 
THIS PAGE 

Unclassified 


19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF 
ABSTRACT 

Unclassified 


16. PRICE CODE 


20. LIMITATION 
OF ABSTRACT 


NSN 7540-01-280-5500 


Standard Form298 (Rev. 2-89) 
Prescribed by ANSI Std. 239-18 

































Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 


MODELING AND SIMULATION SUPPORT FOR THE OPERATIONAL TEST 
AND EVALUATION OF A TACTICAL AIRBORNE RECONNAISSANCE 

SYSTEM 


Kevin James Schmidt 
Lieutenant, United States Navy 
B.S., United States Naval Academy, 1993 


Submitted in partial fulfillment of the 
requirements for the degree of 


MASTER OF SCIENCE IN OPERATIONS RESEARCH 

from the 


NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL 
December 1999 



m 







ABSTRACT 


Today’s decreasing defense budget has forced the military to reduce its spending 
on operational testing of new equipment, among many other areas. Reduced testing has 
forced evaluators to focus their attention on possible sensitive issues prior to and during 
testing of new equipment. The Simulation, Test, and Evaluation Process implemented in 
1995 to help reduce testing costs has been an integral part of the test and evaluation 
process. 

This thesis develops stochastic simulations to suggest the sensitive aspects of 
operating and maintaining a system of mobile reconnaissance platforms, specifically a 
helicopter force, (more specifically the RAH-66 Comanche) prior to and during actual 
testing. The simulation can also be implemented to compare the effectiveness of different 
mobile reconnaissance platforms to augment the conduct of side-by-side field testing of 
actual platforms. 

This simple, stochastic, event-driven simulation may be used to conduct 
sensitivity analysis on system design and operational issues, including attrition, for 
mobile reconnaissance platforms in order to focus the attention of the testers and 
evaluators on influential parameters during testing. It may also be used to inform force 
design decision-makers. 


v 






THESIS DISCLAIMER 


The reader is cautioned that computer programs developed in this research may 
not have been exercised for all cases of interest. While every effort has been made, 
within the available time, to ensure that the programs are free of computational and logic 
errors, they cannot be considered validated. Any application of these programs without 
additional verification and validation is at the risk of the user. 


Vll 



viii 




TABLE OF CONTENTS 


I. INTRODUCTION.1 

A. GENERAL...1 

B. PROBLEM.2 

C. PURPOSE.3 

D. SCOPE.!..3 

n. BACKGROUND...7 

ffl. MODEL DEVELOPMENT.11 

A. OVERVIEW.11 

B. CLASS (ENTITY) DESCRIPTIONS.14 

1. Helicopter.14 

2. Helicopter Manager.16 

3. Threat Area Manager.16 

4. Maintenance Manager.17 

c. output.:. 18 

D. SETUP AND ASSUMPTIONS.19 

IV. MODELS IN WHICH THE TIMES BETWEEN MISSION-AFFECTING FAILURES ARE 

INDEPENDENT HAVING A WEIBULL DISTRIBUTION.23 

A. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS OF WEIBULL SHAPES.24 

B. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS FOR VULNERABILITY PARAMETERS.,1.28 

C. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS FOR TIME BETWEEN SCHEDULED MAINTENANCE 

ACTIONS.32 

D. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS FOR MEAN TIMES BETWEEN MISSION-AFFECTING 

FAILURES.,.36 

E. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS OF OVERHAUL TIMES.39 

F. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS ON THE NUMBER OF SCHEDULED MAINTENANCE 

FACILITIES.42 

G. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS FOR THE NUMBER OF REPAIR FACILITIES.46 

H. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS FOR PRIORITY MAINTENANCE. 49 

I. SUMMARY OF ANALYSIS FOR THE WEIBULL DISTRIBUTION.52 

V. MODELING SYSTEM AGING AND SCHEDULED MAINTENANCE.55 


IX 






























A. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS FOR VULNERABILITY PARAMETERS. 57 

B. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS FOR TIME BETWEEN SCHEDULED MAINTENANCE 

ACTIONS. . 

C. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS FOR FAILURE-RATE AGING.65 

D. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS FOR AVERAGE TIME BETWEEN MISSION- 

AFFECTING FAILURES.70 

E. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS OF OVERHAUL TIMES. 73 

F. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS OF THE EFFECT OF CHANGING NUMBERS OF 

SCHEDULED MAINTENANCE FACILITIES.76 

G. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS FOR THE NUMBER OF REPAIR FACILITIES.80 

H. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS FOR PRIORITY MAINTENANCE.83 

I. SUMMARY ANALYSIS FOR THE NON-HOMOGENEOUS POISSON 

(INCREASING FAILURE RATE) FUNCTION. 86 

VI. ADDITIONAL COMPARISONS OF SIMULATIONS.89 

A. COMARISON OF THE MODEL WITH HD TIMES BETWEEN FAILURES AND THE 

MODEL WITH A NON-HOMOGENEOUS POISSON FAILURE RATE.89 

B. ANALYSIS OF A LOWER FATALITY RATE FOR MISSION-AFFECTING 

FAILURES.. 

C. COMPARISONS BETWEEN THE COMANCHE AND THE KIOWA WARRIOR .... 95 

VH. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS. 99 

A. SUMMARY OF ANALYSIS. 99 

B. RECOMMENDATIONS. . 

1. Model Improvement. 100 

2. Further Studies and Analysis.101 

C. CONCLUSIONS. . 

LIST OF REFERENCES. . 

APPENDIX A: ANALYTICAL MODELS FOR COMPARISON.105 

APPENDIX B: SIMULATION DATA OUTPUT FOR WEEBULL DISTRIBUTION.109 

APPENDIX C: SIMULATION DATA OUTPUT FOR NON-HOMOGENEOUS FAILURE RATE PROCESS 
.127 

APPENDIX D: SIMULATION DATA OUTPUT FOR ADDITONAL COMPARISONS.147 


X 


























INITIAL DISTRIBUTION LIST 






LIST OF FIGURES 


Figure 1. Chart of the Operation Area.13 

Figure 2. Chart of the Model Flow.14 

Figure 3. MOEs for a Weibull Distribution with a Shape of 0.5.27 

Figure 4. MOEs for a Weibull Distribution with a Shape of 1.0.27 

Figure 5. MOEs for a Weibull Distribution with a Shape of 2.0.28 

Figure 6. MOEs with Low Vulnerability for a Model with Exponential Times between Failures.30 

Figure 7. MOEs with Medium Vulnerability for a Model with Exponential Times between Failures.31 

Figure 8. MOEs with High Vulnerability for a Model with Exponential Times between Failures.31 


Figure 9. MOEs for 300-hour Maintenance Policy for Model with Exponential Time between Failures.34 

Figure 10. MOEs for 400-Hour Maintenance Policy for Model with Exponential Time between Failures.. 35 
Figure 11. MOEs for 500-Hour Maintenance Policy for Model with Exponential Times between Failures 35 
Figure 12. MOEs with MTBMAF equal to 4.25 Hours for Model with Exponential Times between Failures 

.38 

Figure 13. MOEs with MTBMAF equal to 8.5 Hours for Model with Exponential Times between Failures 

.38 

Figure 14. MOEs with MTBMAF equal to 17.0 Hours for Model with Exponential Times between Failures 


.39 

Figure 15. MOEs with Short Overhaul Times for Model with Exponential Times between Failures.41 

Figure 16. MOEs with Medium Overhaul Times for Model with Exponential Times between failures.41 

Figure 17. MOEs with Long Overhaul Times for Model with Exponential Times between Failures.42 

Figure 18. MOEs with One Scheduled Maintenance Facility for Model with Exponential Times between 

Failures.44 

Figure 19. MOEs with Two Scheduled Maintenance Facilities for Model with Exponential Times between 

Failures.45 

Figure 20. MOEs with Four Scheduled Maintenance Facilities for Model with Exponential Times between 

Failures.45 

Figure 21. MOEs with a Single Repair Facility for Model with Exponential Times between Failures.48 

Figure 22. MOEs with Two Repair Facilities for Model with Exponential Times between Failures.48 

Figure 23. MOEs with Four Repair Facilities for Model with Exponential Times between Failures.49 

Figure 24. MOEs with Priority Maintenance for Model with Exponential Times between Failures.51 

Figure 25. MOEs with First-Come, First-Served, Maintenance for Model with Exponential Times between 

Failures.52 

Figure 26. MOEs with Low Vulnerability for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate Process.59 


Figure 27. MOEs with Medium Vulnerability for Model with a Non-homogenous Failure Rate Process.... 60 


Xlll 



























Figure 28. MOEs with High Vulnerability for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate Process.60 

Figure 29. MOEs with 300-Hour Maintenance Policy for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate 

Process. 64 

Figure 30. MOEs with 400-Hour Maintenance Policy for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate 
Process. za 


Figure 31. MOEs with 500-Hour Maintenance Policy for Model with a Non-Homogeneous Failure Rate 


Process. 65 

Figure 32. MOEs for Case I of the Varying Rate Functions. 68 

Figure 33. MOEs for Case II of the Varying Rate Functions.69 

Figure 34. MOEs for Case HI of the Varying Rate Functions.69 


Figure 35. MOEs with ATBMAF equal to 4.25 Hours for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate 

Process. 72 

Figure 36. MOEs with ATBMAF equal to 8.5 hours for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate 

Process. 72 

Figure 37. MOEs with ATBMAF equal to 17.0 Hours for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate 

Process. 72 

Figure 38. MOEs with Short Overhaul Times for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate Process.. 75 
Figure 39. MOEs with Medium Overhaul Times for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate Process 


Figure 40. MOEs with Long Overhaul Times for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate Process... 76 
Figure 41. MOEs with One Scheduled Maintenance Facility for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure 

Rate Process. 7 g 

Figure 42. MOEs with Two Scheduled Maintenance Facilities for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure 

Rate Process. 79 

Figure 43. MOEs with Four Scheduled Maintenance Facilities for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure 

Rate Process. 79 

Figure 44. MOEs with a Single Repair Facility for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate Process 82 
Figure 45. MOEs with Two Repair Facilities for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate Process... 82 
Figure 46. MOEs with Four Repair Facilities for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate Process... 83 
Figure 47. MOEs with Priority Maintenance for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate Process.... 85 
Figure 48. MOEs with First-Come, First-Served, Maintenance for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure 


Rate Process. 


Figure 49. MOEs for the Model with iid Times between Mission-Affecting Failures.91 

Figure 50. MOEs for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate Process.91 

Figure 51. MOEs with 10% of Mission-Affecting Failures Resulting in Fatalities. 94 

Figure 52. MOEs with 1 % of Mission-Affecting Failures Resulting in Fatalities. 94 

Figure 53. MOEs for the Comache Helicopter. 97 


XIV 























Figure 54. MOEs for the Kiowa Warrior Helicopter 


XV 






LIST OF TABLES 


Table 1. Description of Weibull Cases.24 

Table 2. Description of Vulnerability Cases for a Model with Exponential Times between Failures.28 

Table 3. Description of Different Maintenance Policies for a Model with Exponential Times between 

Failures.32 

Table 4. Description of MTBMAF for Model with Exponential Times between Failures.36 

Table 5. Description of Overhaul Times for Model with Exponential Times between Failures.39 

Table 6. Description of the Number of Scheduled Maintenance Facilities for Model with Exponential Times 

between Failures.42 

Table 7. Description of the Number of Repair Facilities for Model with Exponential Times between 

Failures.46 

Table 8. Description of Priority Maintenance Policies for Model with Exponential Times between Failures. 

.49 

Table 9. Description of Vulnerability Cases for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate Process.57 

Table 10. Description of Different Maintenance Policies for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate 

Process.61 

Table 11. Description of Aging Process for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate Process.66 

Table 12. Description of ATBMAF for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate Process.70 

Table 13. Description of Overhaul Times for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate Process.73 

Table 14. Description of the Number of Scheduled Maintenance Facilities for Model with a Non- 

homogeneous Failure Rate Process.76 

Table 15. Description of the Number of Repair Facilities for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate 

Process...80 

Table 16. Description of Priority Maintenance Policies for Model with a Non-homogenous Failure Rate 

Process.83 

Table 17. Description of Models being Compared.89 

Table 18. Description of the Percentage of Mission-Affecting Failures that are Fatal.92 

Table 19. Description of Differences between Two Helicopter Systems.95 

Table 20. Comparison of Simulation and Analytical Models.107 

Table 21. Data for Figure 3, Figure 9, Figure 13, Figure 17, Figure 18, and Figure 21.109 

Table 22. Data for Figure 4.110 

Table 23. Data for Figure 5.Ill 

Table 24. Data for Figure 6.112 

Table 25. Data for Figure 7.113 

Table 26. Data for Figure 8.114 


XVII 





























Table 27. Data for Figure 10.. 

Table 28. Data for Figure 11. 116 

Table 29. Data for Figure 12. \q 

Table 30. Data for Figure 14. lg 

Table 31. Data for Figure 15.H 9 

Table 32. Data for Figure 16.120 

Table 33. Data for Figure 19.121 

Table 34. Data for Figure 20.122 

Table 35. Data for Figure 22. 123 

Table 36. Data for Figure 23. 124 

Table 37. Data for Figure 24. 125 

Table 38. Data for Figure 25.126 

Table 39. Data for Figure 26. 128 

Table 40. Data for Figure 27. 128 

Table 41. Data for Figure 28. 129 

Table 42. Data for Figure 29, Figure 33, Figure 40, Figure 41, and Figure 44.130 

Table 43. Data for Figure 30.. 

Table 44. Data for Figure 31. 132 

Table 45. Data for Figure 32.. 

Table 46. Data for Figure 34. 134 

Table 47. Data for Figure 35. 135 

Table 48. Data for Figure 36. 136 

Table 49. Data for Figure 37.. 

Table 50. Data for Figure 38. 13 g 

Table 51. Data for Figure 39.:. 139 

Table 52. Data for Figure 42. 140 

Table 53. Data for Figure 43. 141 

Table 54. Data for Figure 45.. 

Table 55. Data for Figure 46. I 43 

Table 56. Data for Figure 47. I 44 

Table 57. Data for Figure 48. 145 

Table 58. Data for Figure 49, and Figure 51.. 

Table 59. Data for Figure 50. 14 g 

Table 60. Data for Figure 52. 149 

Table 61. Data for Figure 53. 150 

Table 62. Data for Figure 54. 151 


XVlll 







































EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 


The Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E) of a new weapon system is that part 
of the acquisition process that determines whether the weapon system is operationally 
effective and operationally suitable in the combat environment for which it was designed 
when operated by typical users. Because of the increasing costs of conducting tests, 
testers and evaluators must be focused on the important and highly sensitive operational 
issues needed to ensure successful fielding of a new weapon system. 

Modeling and Simulation (M&S) is a useful way of beginning to understand what 
a particular system will be able to accomplish, and can be used as an aid in the 
determination of sensitive operational issues. This thesis develops a simple, stochastic, 
event-driven simulation to identify sensitive aspects (parameters) of operating and 
maintaining a mobile reconnaissance platform, specifically a helicopter. The simulation 
has been built to provide support for the Operational Test and Evaluation of the RAH-66 
Comanche. Specifically, the simulation is used to identify the influential parameters 
involved in operating and maintaining the Comanche as a reconnaissance system by 
conducting sensitivity analysis of the input parameters to determine the effects of each on 
selected Measures of Effectiveness (MOE). 

One MOE used throughout this thesis is the mean percentage of time that a team 
of helicopters is on station providing reconnaissance coverage of a Named Area of 
Interest (NAI) on each day of the campaign. The MOE is the total amount of time per 
day that at least one helicopter is providing coverage of the NAI divided by the total 
amount of time in a day, averaged over numerous replications. Another MOE used is the 


xix 



mean number of helicopters surviving at the end of each day during the campaign. This 
measure of effectiveness shows the rate of decline in the number of helicopters over time 
resulting from attrition by enemy forces and helicopter crashes. Additional MOEs can be 
computed as determined by the needs of the user. 

Several parameters were varied in the conduct of sensitivity analysis for two 
models used to generate times between mission-affecting failures. One model, a Weibull 
distribution, demonstrated that not only is the mean time between mission-affecting 
failures an influential parameter, but that the shape of the distribution is highly influential 
as well. The shape of the Weibull distribution represents the type of failures that are 
predominately experienced. For a shape parameter less than one many short failure times 
are generated (infant failure), while a shape parameter greater than one (wear-out) will 
produce many failure times clustered around the mean of the distribution. 

The other model used to generate times between mission-affecting failures is a 
time dependent non-homogeneous Poisson process. This process represents aging of the 
helicopters. As more flight time is accumulated, shorter times between mission-affecting 
failures are generated and thus more mission-affecting failures occur. 

The vulnerability of reconnaissance platforms proved to have the largest effect on 
the MOEs in both models. In most instances the vulnerability parameters dominate 
effects of the other parameters. This suggests that the vulnerability of the helicopters 
needs to be addressed and monitored during operational testing. 

By obtaining information about the sensitive aspects of weapon system operations 
prior to actual testing, the testers and evaluators can design tests specifically to look at the 


xx 



above mentioned issues. This thesis demonstrates the use of a simple stochastic 
simulation to identify influential parameters involved in operating and maintaining a 
mobile reconnaissance platform. Its use can provide valuable insights into complex 
operational issues. 


xxi 





xxii 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


I would like to express my sincerest thanks to Professor Donald Gaver, Professor 
Patricia Jacobs, and Professor Arnold Buss. Without their vast knowledge, expertise, and 
guidance this work could not have been completed. I would also like to thank Colonel 
Wayland Parker and DOT&E for their support and guidance during my experience tour. 

Finally, I would like to thank my loving wife Libby, whose love and patience have 
shown no bounds throughout this endeavor. 


xxm 




XXIV 




I. INTRODUCTION 


A. GENERAL 

The Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E) of a new weapon system is that part 
of the acquisition process that determines whether the weapon system is operationally 
effective and operationally suitable in the combat environment for which it was designed, 
when operated by typical users. Because of the increasing costs of conducting tests, 
testers and evaluators must be focused on the important and highly sensitive operational 
issues needed to ensure successful fielding of a new weapon system. Sensitive 
operational issues are those aspects of the weapon system that, when changed slightly, 
cause a significant variation in the operational suitability and/or effectiveness of the 
weapon system. With their attention focused on the sensitive operational issues, testers 
and evaluators can plan tests more efficiently to examine a system’s operational 
performance with regard to several issues at once rather than conducting several tests to 
obtain all the required data for the analysis of the new weapon system. Modeling and 
Simulation can increase the efficiency and timeliness of the acquisition process. 

A primary OT&E issue is to decide whether a particular new or upgraded weapon 
system will be a valuable addition to the force, where value must include its general 
operational capability (including range, reliability, availability and maintainability) plus 
its life-cycle cost, compared with alternatives. Modeling and Simulation (M&S) is a 
useful way of beginning to anticipate what a particular system will be able to accomplish 
and cost, under realistic conditions. More importandy, M&S will help to focus attention 


1 



on possibly sensitive aspects of system design and operation prior to actual tests 
(Stoneman, 1998). 

This thesis develops a stochastic simulation to identify sensitive aspects 
(parameters) of operating and maintaining a mobile reconnaissance platform, specifically 
a helicopter, prior to and during actual field-testing. The simulation has been built to 
provide support for the Operational Test and Evaluation of the RAH-66 Comanche. With 
some parameter adjustments, the same simulation can be used to evaluate many other 
reconnaissance platforms. 

B. PROBLEM 

During OT&E, the Department of Defense (DoD) user must oversee the 
operational test of certain weapon systems to ensure that they meet operational 
requirements, defined during and before the developmental phase of the acquisition 
process. Many of these requirements are specifically designated in the Operational 
Requirements Document (ORD). It is the testers’ and evaluators’ responsibility to ensure 
that the platform is able to meet or exceed the requirements specified in the ORD. 

However, when initially entering the testing phase, the testers and evaluators may 
not know which aspects of the weapon system are of great importance to successful 
operation in the field. Prior to conducting actual tests, testers and evaluators, and the 
program manager and eventual user force, will have many questions about the operation 
and/or design of the weapon system, its operational sensitivities and their effect on 
mission accomplishment. Some of these questions can be answered using a stochastic 
simulation designed to conduct sensitivity analysis. The answers to these questions will 


2 



focus the attention of the testers and evaluators on issues of system design and operation 
prior to actual tests. By knowing what to look for during testing, the testers and 
evaluators will be able to focus on the significant operational issues and ensure that the 
weapon system meets its specified requirements during operational testing. Properly 
employed, system modeling and simulation will assist in cost-effective fielding of new 
and upgraded weapons. 

C. PURPOSE 

The purpose of this thesis is to aid in the Operational Test and Evaluation of the 
RAH-66 Comanche helicopter using a simple, event-step, stochastic simulation. The 
simulation, developed for this thesis, will be used to identify influential parameters 
involved in operating and maintaining the RAH-66 Comanche as a reconnaissance 
platform system prior to, and during, operational testing (OT). The question being 
answered is: 

Which aspects of operation and maintenance of the Comanche helicopter 

greatly affect its ability to perform the reconnaissance mission? 

The model developed for this purpose can also be used for many other similar 
purposes, and analogous situations and systems: for T&E guidance and force design for 
force elements that are failure-susceptible, vulnerable, and of limited endurance. 

D. SCOPE 

The scope of this thesis is to determine how variations of the input parameters 
affect a measure of effectiveness. One measure of effectiveness (MOE) used throughout 


3 




this thesis is the mean percentage of time that a helicopter or team of helicopters is on 
station providing reconnaissance coverage of the search area or Named Area of Interest 
(NAI) on each day of the campaign. The MOE is the total amount of time per day that at 
least one helicopter or team of helicopters is providing coverage of the NAI divided by 
the total amount of time in a day, averaged over numerous runs. Another MOE used is 
the mean number of helicopters surviving at the end of each day during the campaign. 
This measure of effectiveness shows rate of decline in the number of helicopters over 
time resulting from attrition by enemy forces and helicopter crashes. The mean number is 
also augmented by selected (25%, 50% and 75%) percentiles of those surviving to portray 
risk. 

To facilitate understanding, several input parameters are varied to determine the 
extent of each varied parameter’s effects on the measures of effectiveness. Plausible 
alternatives for generating the random times between mission-affecting failures are 
modeled for their effect on the results, as are alternative maintenance strategies and 
capabilities. It is shown that changes in the distribution of time to failure can importantly 
affect overall system performance; these sensitivities can be efficiently discovered by 
simulation (Stoneman, 1998). 

By using a simple stochastic simulation to discover the sensitive issues of the 
RAH-66 Comanche helicopter system, testers and evaluators can effectively plan tests 
and make better use of output data from such tests. The data collected during each test 
run of the helicopter system can be used to verify the predictions of the simulation and 
modify the simulation model, if necessary, for future simulations prior to further 


4 




operational testing. This is an example of the “model, test, modify, and (re)model, 
test.paradigm of modem Test and Evaluation. 


5 



6 



II. BACKGROUND 


Operational Test and Evaluation is traditionally defined as the field test, under 
realistic combat conditions, of any system of weapons, equipment, or munitions for the 
purpose of determining the Effectiveness and Suitability of the weapons, equipment, or 
munitions for use in combat by typical military users, and the evaluation of the results of 
such a test (DoDD 5141.2, 1989). This is as defined in DoDD 5141.2, "Director of 
Operational Test and Evaluation," which establishes and defines the responsibilities for 
the Director, Operational Test and Evaluation (DOT&E). Operational Test and 
Evaluation is performed to ensure that before accepting delivery and offering complete 
payment for the systems, DoD has tested them to ensure that they are operationally 
effective and operationally suitable in the intended combat environment when operated 
by typical users. From this precept has sprung an extensive policy directing how and 
when such testing must be done, and by whom (Carter, 1998). 

Operational Effectiveness represents the overall degree of mission 
accomplishment of a system when used by representative personnel in the environment 
planned or expected (e.g., natural, electronic, threat) for operational employment 
considering organization, doctrine, tactics, survivability, vulnerability, and threat 
(http://web.nps.navy.mil/~orfacpag/resumePages/gaver/planning.htm). Operational 

Suitability suggests the degree to which a system can be placed satisfactorily in field use 
with consideration given to availability, compatibility, transportability, interoperability, 
reliability, wartime usage rates, maintainability, safety, human factors, manpower 


7 



supportability, logistics supportability, natural environmental effects and impacts, 
documentation, and training requirements 

(http://web.nps.navy.mil/~orfacpag/resumePages/gaver/planning.htm). 

Even though much of the testing is directed by policy, the detailed focus of the 
tests is not always straightforward. Since 1995, the Simulation, Test and Evaluation 
Process (STEP) has been a required, integral part of the test and evaluation process. The 
STEP process, a repetitive cycle of "model, test, model," allows the testers and evaluators 
to gain insight into the system prior to conducting any actual field tests. Modeling and 
Simulation (M&S) is used to gain insights into operational consequences (O’Bryan, 
1998). A simulation is formulated to represent the system and then run numerous times 
to gain an understanding of the mean and variability of measures of operability for the 
actual system and its characteristics. The simulation focuses the attention of the testers 
and evaluators on sensitive issues that should be addressed or monitored during actual 
testing. As Mr. Philip E. Coyle, current Director, Operational Test and Evaluation in 
OSD, said in a presentation, “Modeling and Simulation and testing are intertwined; when 
they are not, neither is effective” (Coyle, 13 May 1999). 

The following quote shows that the entire acquisition community has been 
directed to implement and use modeling and simulation throughout the entire acquisition 
process. "Test and evaluation programs shall be structured to integrate all developmental 
test and evaluation (DT&E), operational test and evaluation (OT&E), live-fire test and 
evaluation (LFT&E), and modeling and simulation (M&S) activities conducted by 
different agencies as an efficient continuum. All such activities shall be part of a strategy 


8 




to provide information regarding risk and risk mitigation, to provide actual data to 
accredit models and simulations, to permit an assessment of technical performance 
specifications and to determine whether systems are operationally effective, suitable and 
survivable for intended use" (DOD 5000.2-R, Section 3.4,1999). 

Many models and simulations are available for use. Some are high-resolution 
models, with a narrow focus, which are often costly to operate and reprogram to represent 
operational situations. Examples of high-resolution models are FAST3D and 
PARACOMT. Both model the effects of chemical and biological warfare by providing 
high-fidelity assessments of chemical agent cloud movements and target area coverage 
along with personnel casualty estimates respectively 

(https://www.msrr.dmso.mil/KevwordMain.htm~) . Models of this nature provide more 
detail than is necessary to gain an understanding of the underlying processes that are 
important to the operational effectiveness of a system. More often than not, these types 
of models require a vast amount of computing power as well as a great deal of time to 
provide useful output. 

Other models are very low resolution; they do not provide a detailed enough view 
of a specific "piece of the action," but provide a big picture overview of everything. 
Examples of low-resolution models are CEM and DDAGAM. These are both 
deterministic theater-level models of ground and air-combat whose basic units are either a 
division or brigade (Hartman, Parry, Caldwell, 1992). These types of models may not 
have sufficient detail to answer the questions posed by weapon system developers, testers 
and evaluators. 


9 


Many times the model or simulation needed to study the contribution of a specific 
system does not exist. In this case, new models or simulations can be constructed quickly 
and inexpensively, and run on a personal computer to provide an analysis tool that fits the 
tailored needs of the current weapon system being tested. Models of this type are very 
inexpensive to operate, can be distributed to many users to allow increased analysis, and 
are tailored to answer the exact questions that have been posed by the decision-makers. 
One such question addressed by the current model is: "How does attrition by enemy 
forces affect mission accomplishment?" Models, such as MASS and UAVSim, have 
been developed to study area coverage and maintenance policies for various platforms 
(Stoneman, 1998; Heath, 1999). Neither of the previous models has addressed the issue 
of attrition. Attrition reduces the number of available platforms and thereby affects 
mission accomplishment. The current model addresses this issue and its effects. 

Even though a model is "unaccredited," i.e., not officially approved for use, it can 
still produce valuable insights into testing (Coyle, 1998). It is this type of model that is 
created and exercised (used to provide test design insights) in this thesis. 


10 




III. MODEL DEVELOPMENT 


A. OVERVIEW 

The model developed is realized as a stochastic, event-driven simulation, which 
simulates the operation of a tactical reconnaissance platform, e.g., a helicopter (but not 
exclusively). The model is programmed in Java using the simulation package Simkit that 
was developed by Arnold Buss and Kirk Stork (Stork, 1997). The model consists of four 
Java classes or entities: 

1) Helicopter 

2) Helicopter Manager 

3) Threat Area Manager 

4) Maintenance Manager 

The objective of the model is to represent an operation that sends reconnaissance 
assets, i.e., helicopters traveling in pairs, from a home base to a search area via waypoints 
to conduct a search of a Named Area of Interest (NAI). While in transit to and from the 
search area the helicopters are subject to mission-affecting failures, and are also 
vulnerable (can be shot down by enemy forces) to differing degrees in different areas, as 
shown in Figure 1. Retaliation or suppression of Red enemy defensive fire is not 
modeled here, but its effect may be represented by reducing the vulnerability rate. If a 
helicopter experiences a mission-affecting failure, it immediately returns to its home base 
for repairs. If a helicopter is shot down, it is assumed lost and removed from the 
simulation. Further losses from pilot rescue are also not modeled here. Once a helicopter 


11 




completes a mission or returns to its home base due to a mission affecting-failure, it is 
sent to the maintenance facility for repairs, rearming and refueling. The number of 
mission-affecting failures that the helicopter experienced during its previous mission as 
well as additional turn-around time (rearming and refueling) determines the time spent in 
the maintenance facility for repairs. The model also monitors total flight time for each 
helicopter and after a specified number of flight hours (e.g., 300 hours) each helicopter is 
sent to the maintenance facility for scheduled maintenance. The scheduled maintenance 
period is an extended period of time (e.g., 7 days) during which the helicopter is 
overhauled. Such overhaul reduces system failure rate to its initial level. A chart 
depicting the flow of model operation is shown in Figure 2. 


12 





Figure 1. Chart of the Operation Area. The home base is located at the origin with the 
search area in the high threat region. The ingress and egress waypoints are located in the 
low threat regions. 

One prominent measure of effectiveness (MOE) used to compare different 
platforms, different initial conditions, and different operational policies is the mean 
percentage of time that a group of such reconnaissance platforms, operating 
cooperatively, can maintain coverage over the search area. Another MOE used is the 
mean number of helicopters surviving at the end of each day. Other measures can also be 
studied using the model’s software to extract the necessary data from the simulation. 


13 





Figure 2. Chart of the Model Flow. This chart depicts the flow of the model as it 
directs helicopters to accomplish the mission of maintaining coverage over the search 
area. 


B. CLASS (ENTITY) DESCRIPTIONS 

1. Helicopter 

Each reconnaissance asset (helicopter) can ingress to the search area, search the 
search area, egress from the search area, fail, be shot down, be refueled and rearmed, be 
repaired, overhauled, and often it must, by doctrine, be assigned a partner or wingman. 

When a helicopter experiences a mission-affecting failure, it either forces the 
helicopter to return to its home base or destroys the helicopter at the time of failure 


14 


















(crashes). The times between mission-affecting failures (MAF) can be modeled using 
various potentially appropriate stochastic processes. One of the processes examined in 
this thesis assumes the times between MAF are independently and identically distributed 
having a Weibull distribution (specified by shape and scale parameters and hence a 
specified mean time to failure). Another process examined assumes the times between 
MAF are the times between arrivals of a non-stationary Poisson process that emulates the 
effects of aging which can be reversed by periodic overhauls. These distributions were 
created in separate Java classes for use with Simkit. When a helicopter is shot down, it is 
simply removed from the simulation. Helicopter replacements and reinforcements are not 
modeled at present. While performing a mission, each helicopter is assigned a partner or 
wingman. If the helicopter’s partner experiences a mission-affecting failure or is shot 
down, the surviving helicopter is notified of this event and in both cases is directed to 
return to its home base. 

Each helicopter monitors and updates its state variables as it progresses through 
the simulation. The state variables monitored are the number of mission-affecting 
failures per mission, state of helicopter flight (ingress, search, or egress), total flight time 
or flight hours, whether the helicopter is dead or alive, and the state of the helicopter’s 
partner or wingman while in flight. At the start of each simulation, each helicopter’s 
initial flight hours are set such that the arrival of helicopters to the maintenance facility 
for periodic overhauls is staggered. This practice of staggering periodic overhauls is 
normal for actual helicopters or any other equipment that periodically requires time 
intensive maintenance. 


15 




2. Helicopter Manager 

The helicopter manager controls the movement of all the helicopters that are 
created for the simulation. If any event or movement occurs to a helicopter, the 
helicopter manager controls it. The helicopter manager directs the helicopters to and 
from their search area via the helicopter’s ingress and egress waypoints. It also directs 
the helicopters to return to their home base via the most direct route in the event of a 
mission-affecting failure. The helicopter might also divert if the enemy were known to be 
dense along the direct route; this is not represented here. If a helicopter is shot down, the 
helicopter manager directs the surviving helicopter to return to its home base via the most 
direct or minimum-risk route. Barring any failures or attrition, the helicopter manager is 
designed to control the helicopters to maintain continuous coverage of the search area. 

The helicopter manager also directs the helicopters to the maintenance manager 
for failure repairs or periodic maintenance. Before sending a helicopter on a mission, the 
helicopter manager compares the helicopter’s flight hours to its periodic scheduled 
maintenance time. If the helicopter has sufficient flight hours remaining to complete 
another mission, it is sent on the mission. Otherwise the helicopter is sent to the 
maintenance manager for scheduled maintenance. Upon completion of the repairs or the 
scheduled maintenance, the helicopter is returned to the helicopter manager where it 
awaits assignment of its next mission. 

3. Threat Area Manager 

The threat area manager is a simulation program entity that keeps track of where 
the helicopter is in relation to pre-assigned threat areas and assigns times until the 


16 



individual helicopters get shot down. A threat area manager is assigned to each 
helicopter. 

The time until being shot down in a threat area is modeled with an exponential 
distribution specified by the assumed mean time until an individual helicopter is shot 
down in that area. As the helicopter enters and leaves the pre-assigned threat areas, its 
threat area manager will change the time until the helicopter is shot down based on the 
threat area that the helicopter is entering. If a helicopter is shot down, both the helicopter 
and its threat area manager are removed from the simulation. Occasional recovery of 
crashed helicopters (certainly their surviving crew) is plausible, but not covered by the 
present models. 

4. Maintenance Manager 

The maintenance manager (a simulation device, but one that reflects and 
approximates the actions of an actual scheduler) is responsible for generating the repair, 
turnaround, and scheduled maintenance times for the helicopters. The turnaround time is 
the time to refuel and rearm the helicopter to prepare it for its next flight. The 
maintenance system is a specialized multi-type customer and server queuing system; it is 
a complicated “repairman problem,” (Feller, 1967). Separate servers are used for the 
repair (includes turnaround) and scheduled maintenance systems that the maintenance 
manager controls. 

As each helicopter enters the repair system, it is assigned a repair time for each of 
its failures, and a turnaround time. In the present model, both of these times are 
exponentially distributed, but other distributions may be easily substituted. The repair 


17 





system can be operated on a first-come, first-served basis or, more realistically, it can be 
set up as a priority queuing system that might start repair on the helicopter in the queue 
with the shortest total repair and turnaround time. This assumes that the repair times for 
each of the helicopters in the queue are known. This is a reasonable assumption due to 
the high technological systems of modem day equipment with sophisticated and reliable 
fault detection. The repair system can also be set up with multiple repair facilities. 

The maintenance manager also controls the helicopters that require scheduled 
maintenance. Each helicopter that enters the maintenance system for scheduled 
maintenance is assigned a random maintenance time, taken to be uniformly distributed 
over an interval restricted around seven days. The maintenance times are generally many 
times greater than the repair times since the scheduled maintenance simulates the 
helicopters being periodically overhauled. Once a helicopter completes its scheduled 
maintenance, it is returned to the helicopter manager. The model can be set up so that, 
upon completing scheduled maintenance, the helicopter is returned to the helicopter 
manager in perfect condition or near-perfect condition. Either way, the helicopter is 
always returned to service in much better condition (lower failure rate) than when it 
entered the maintenance facility for scheduled maintenance. 

C. OUTPUT 

The model writes its output to a text file. The file lists, for each ran, the fraction 
of time per day that at least one helicopter-team is searching over the named area of 
interest (NAI) and the number of helicopters surviving at the end of each day. The times 
are then combined to provide the mean percentage of time per day that helicopter-teams 


18 



are providing coverage over the NAI. Note: The 25 th , 5Cf h , and 75 ,h percentiles of the 
distribution of percent coverage of the NAI are also computed; the results appear in 
Appendix B, Appendix C, and Appendix D. Helicopter Survivability is also tabulated 
similarly. The number of helicopters surviving each day is also combined to provide a 
mean number of helicopters alive at the end of each day. These are the two primary 
Measures of Effectiveness (MOE) used to make comparisons among the different 
simulations. By comparing the data for different platforms as well as different initial 
conditions, T&E decision makers are able to determine which input parameters are highly 
influential and need to be monitored or tested during field operational testing. 

D. SETUP AND ASSUMPTIONS 

The purpose of the simulation model is to usefully represent the behavior of actual 
helicopters in the field. The first item of concern is the helicopter units used for each 
replication. The doctrine being written for the RAH-66 Comanche helicopter currently 
calls for three Air Calvary Troops consisting of eight Comanche helicopters each to make 
up one Division Calvary Squadron. There is one Calvary Squadron per Army Division 
for a total of 24 RAH-66 Comanche helicopters. Actual practice dictates that the total 
flight hours of each helicopter be staggered such that the helicopters each enter scheduled 
maintenance sequentially staggered and not all at once. With this in mind at the start of 
each simulation replication, the total flight hours for each helicopter are uniformly 
staggered between zero and the time between scheduled maintenance actions. This 
means that for 24 helicopters, operating with a scheduled time between maintenance of 
300 hours, each helicopter’s flight hours are staggered by 12.5 (300/24) hours. 


19 




The operation of the maintenance and repair facilities is also set up to reflect 
actual practices in the field. There is a separate scheduled maintenance facility and a 
repair facility that operate independently of each other. In the model, the scheduled 
maintenance facility, which corresponds to depot level maintenance, is strictly 
responsible for the conduct of overhauls, while the repair facility is strictly responsible for 
the repair of mission-affecting failures as well as turnaround of the helicopters. In real 
life this may not always be the case as the company’s repair department can become 
overwhelmed, at which point the commander can request additional help from depot level 
maintenance. The model is also set up to reflect imperfect repair of failures. When a 
MAF occurs, a new MAF time is generated from the applicable distribution. Once the 
helicopter reaches its home base, it is immediately sent to the repair facility to be 
repaired. The helicopter retains the scheduled time of the next MAF for use on its next 
mission. Once repairs are complete and the helicopter begins a new mission, a MAF time 
is not generated. The remaining time until the next MAF that was scheduled is now used 
as the time until the next MAF for the helicopter. If the helicopter is returning from 
scheduled maintenance, the previous mission-affecting failure time is disregarded and a 
new failure time is generated. 

The current simulation only generates mission-affecting failures. Non-mission 
affecting failures are not represented in the present model. The non-mission-affecting 
failures can be thought of as failures of components or systems with built in redundancy. 
They could degrade, but possibly not completely eliminate the operational performance of 
the helicopter since the helicopter would not be forced to abandon its mission. The non- 
mission-affecting failures would increase the amount of time spent in the repair system. 


20 




as these failures should be repaired prior to sending a helicopter on its next mission. The 
impact of non-mission-affecting failures can be included later, but the mission-degrading 
tendency should be followed during OT&E. 

The mission of the helicopters is to maintain continuous coverage on a Named 
Area of Interest for a 2 or 3 week period. This is an exceptionally long period of time to 
attempt to maintain continuous coverage. During that time, the NAI may have lost its 
significance or even been destroyed, at which point, coverage would no longer be 
necessary. The model makes the assumption that the NAI is significant and coverage 
needs to be maintained for the entire time period. If this is not the case, as is typical, the 
reader can assume that other Named Areas of Interest have been selected that are located 
at roughly the same distance and flying time from the helicopter’s home base, and that 
coverage of these is the scouting mission. 

The base unit of time in the simulation model is the hour. All time measurements 
are reflected in hours and each day is 24 hours long. The MOEs used, the mean percent 
coverage of the NAI per day and the mean number of helicopters surviving at the end of 
each day, have each incorporated the events of the previous 24 hour time-period for 
which it is reporting data. 


21 



22 




IV. MODELS IN WHICH THE TIMES BETWEEN MISSION- 


AFFECTING FAILURES ARE INDEPENDENT HAVING A 
WEIBULL DISTRIBUTION 

The Weibull distribution may be used to model the random times between 
mission effecting failures. This distribution is very versatile and useful for a wide range 
of applications related to system or component failures. The Weibull distribution is 
specified with shape and scale parameters (always greater than zero) that implicitly define 
the mean and variance for the distribution. It is generally used to represent time-stable 
random times between failures of a component or system; such a model does not 
represent wear-out or aging (this is done next). The Weibull distribution is used for that 
purpose in this thesis. All values generated by the distribution are greater than zero and 
the simplest, and most recognized Weibull distribution is that with a shape parameter of 
one. The mean for this distribution is equal to the scale parameter and the distribution is 
more commonly referred to as the exponential distribution. The versatility of a Weibull 
distribution is realized by changing the shape parameter in order to obtain different 
behaviors by the random numbers generated from the distribution. With a shape 
parameter less than one, the Weibull distribution generates many small, but positive, 
values, balanced by some that are quite long to obtain a required mean. This type of 
behavior is referred to as inf ant failure since many short failure times are generated. 

Setting the shape parameter greater than one will result in a distribution centered 
about the value of the scale parameter. This type of behavior is referred to as wear-out 


23 




since few short failure times are generated with many longer failure times generated near 
the mean of the distribution. 

The MOEs displayed in this chapter are the mean percent coverage per day of the 
NAI and the mean number of helicopter surviving at the end of each day. The 25 th , 50 th , 
and 75 th percentiles for each of the MOEs appear in Appendix B. Appendix B also 
displays for a campaign the mean number of MAF, mean number of fatal failures, and 
mean number of helicopters shot down. The mean repair and turnaround time, mean 
number of missions started, probability of returning to base safely, mean time spent in the 
high threat regions, mean survival time of individual helicopters, and the mean number of 
helicopters in the repair system for each campaign are also displayed in Appendix B. 


A. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS OF WEIBULL SHAPES 

The shape of the Weibull distribution, used to model the mean time between 
mission-affecting failures, determines the type of behavior that the failures will exhibit. 
Using the same mean time between mission-affecting failures (MTBMAF), this section 
examines the effects of different shapes of the Weibull distribution on MOEs. The cases 
chosen for comparison are shown below in Table 1. 




Scale 

Mean 

Case I 

0.5 

4.25 

8.5 Hours 

Case II 

i.o 

8.5 

8.5 Hours 

Case HI 

2.0 

9.591223 

8.5 Hours 


Table 1. Description of Weibull Cases. 


The other inputs, which remain constant, are as follows: 


24 



















Numerical Illustration 


=> 24 

=» 160 

=» 300 

=> 40 

=> 80 

=> 1 

=> 1 

=> 1 

=> 0.25 

=> 144-192 

=> 0.1 


Number of Helicopters 
Speed of Helicopters (knots) 

Time between Scheduled Maintenance Actions (flight hours) 
High-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Low-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Repair Facilities 

Scheduled Maintenance Facilities 

Mean Time to Repair a Failure (hours-Exponentially Distributed) 
Mean Time of Helicopter Turnaround (hours-Exponentially 
Distributed) 

Minimum/Maximum Time to Complete Scheduled Maintenance 
(hours-Uniformly Distributed) 

Probability of a failure being fatal (Crash) 


One hundred runs of the simulation were conducted for a two-week campaign to 


observe the effects of the varying Weibull distribution shapes on the mean percent 
coverage per day of the NAI as well as the mean number of helicopters surviving at the 
end of each day. Figure 3, Figure 4, and Figure 5 graphically show how the mean percent 
coverage varied per day as well as the mean number of helicopters remaining at the end 
of each day. The vertical bars display the mean percent coverage per day of the NAI with 
the values located on the left vertical axis. The line graph displays the mean number of 
helicopters that are still alive at the end of each day with the values located on the right 
vertical axis. The error bars are set at plus and minus one standard error to indicate the 


variability of the simulation results. 


The results show that as the shape of the Weibull distribution increases (the 
behavior shifts from infant failure to wear-out) the mean number of failures decreases. A 
significant difference in the mean percent coverage of the NAI and the mean number of 


25 



helicopters surviving is shown for the first two days of the campaign. This large 
difference in mean percent coverage of the NAI is a direct result of the shape of the 
Weibull distribution. For the case using a shape parameter of 0.5, the helicopters 
experience infant failures that prevent many of the helicopters from completing their 
assigned mission. This then results in less coverage of the NAI. The higher number of 
infant failures also accounts for the lower mean number of helicopters surviving. With 
more mission-affecting failures occurring initially, more of these failures will result in the 
helicopters crashing and thus decreasing the mean number of helicopters surviving. As 
the campaign continues, the wear-out mission-affecting failures for Case HI begin to take 
their toll on the helicopters so that by the end of the campaign there is very little 
difference in the mean percent of coverage or the mean number of helicopters surviving 
compared to the other cases. This emphasizes the fact that the type of failures 
experienced (in part, the shape of the time-to-failure distribution) is just as important as 
the mean time between mission-affecting failures. Note that all numbers given are 
notional and illustrative only, but the results point to effects to become aware of during 
OT&E. 


26 




100 . 00 % 

90.00% 

80.00% 

70.00% 

60.00% 

c 

s 50.00% 

o 

CL 

40.00% 

30.00% 

20 . 00 % 

10 . 00 % 

0 . 00 % 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 

Day 



Figure 3. MOEs for a Weibull Distribution with a Shape of 0.5. Case I from Table 1 
that shows the effects of a Weibull distribution with a shape parameter of 0.5 and a 
MTBMAF of 8.5 hours on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of surviving 
helicopters. 



Day 


Figure 4. MOEs for a Weibull Distribution with a Shape of 1.0. Case n from Table 1 
that shows the effects of a Weibull distribution with a shape parameter of 1.0 and a 
MTBMAF of 8.5 hours on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of surviving 
helicopters. 


27 





100 . 00 % 

90.00% 

80.00% 

70.00% 

60.00% 

c 

« 50.00% 

o 
a 

40.00% 

30.00% 

20.00% 

10 . 00 % 

0.00% 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 

Day 



Figure 5. MOEs for a Weibull Distribution with a Shape of 2.0. Case HI from Table 1 
that shows the effects of a Weibull distribution with a shape parameter of 2.0 and a 
MTBMAF of 8.5 hours on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of surviving 
helicopters. 

B. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS FOR VULNERABILITY PARAMETERS 

The vulnerability of the helicopters is modeled as an exponential random variable 
representing the mean time until a helicopter is shot down when in particular regions. 
The cases chosen for comparison are shown below in Table 2. 



Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down while in a Low Vulnerability 
Region 

Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down while in a High Vulnerability 
Region 

Case I 

320 Hours 

160 Hours 

Case II 

160 Hours 

80 Hours 

Case El 

80 Hours 

40 Hours 


Table 2. Description of Vulnerability Cases for a Model with Exponential Times 

between Failures. 


The other inputs, which remain constant, are as follows: 


28 







Numerical Illustration 


=> 24 

=> 160 

=> 300 

=> 1 

=> 1 

=> 1 

=> 0.25 

=> 144-192 

=> 8.5 

=> 1.0 

=> 0.1 


Number of Helicopters 
Speed of Helicopters (knots) 

Time between Scheduled Maintenance Actions (flight hours) 
Repair Facilities 

Scheduled Maintenance Facilities 

Mean Time to Repair a Failure (hours-Exponentially Distributed) 
Mean Time of Helicopter Turnaround (hours-Exponentially 
Distributed) 

Minimum/Maximum Time to Complete Scheduled Maintenance 
(hours-Uniformly Distributed) 

Mean Time Between Mission-Affecting Failures (hours) 

Shape of Weibull Distribution Modeling MAF 
Probability of a failure being fatal (Crash) 


One hundred runs of the simulation were conducted for a three-week campaign to 


observe the effects of the varying vulnerability rates on the mean percent coverage per 
day of the NAI as well as the mean number of helicopters surviving at the end of each 
day. Figure 6, Figure 7, and Figure 8 show how the mean coverage varied per day over 
the three-week period as well as the mean number of remaining helicopters at the end of 
each day. The results support what would be expected. As the vulnerability increases, 


the ability of the helicopters to maintain coverage decreases, along with the mean number 
of surviving helicopters for each day. With the low vulnerability rate, the helicopters are 
nearly able to maintain mean coverage of the NAI above 50% for almost two weeks. 


With the medium vulnerability rate, the helicopters can no longer maintain mean 


coverage of the NAI above 50% after ten days. With the high vulnerability rate, the 


helicopters are only able to maintain mean coverage above 50% for seven days. This 
emphasizes the fact that sufficient helicopters are necessary to sustain a prolonged 
operation, or that operational action by Blue is essential to successfully suppress enemy 


29 



(Red) defensive actions. It also informs T&E decision-makers that the vulnerability of 
the helicopters is a significant issue that dramatically affects the MOEs and needs to be 
carefully and thoroughly considered during operational field-testing. 

As the vulnerability increases, the rate of decrease in the number of helicopters 
surviving increases as the time progresses since fewer helicopters are available to perform 
the mission. This causes the remaining helicopters to fly more missions and reach their 
scheduled maintenance flight hour limit sooner than normal. , The helicopters are then 
temporarily no longer flying, but rather waiting in the scheduled maintenance queue. 
This pattern will continue unless the scheduled maintenance duration (overhaul time) is 
deliberately shortened or eliminated. In that case, the increasing occurrence of random 
failures will rapidly degrade coverage of the NAI. 

100.00% 

90.00% 

80.00% 

70.00% 

60.00% 

c 

s 50.00% 

S. 

40.00% 

30.00% 

20 . 00 % 

10 . 00 % 

0.00% 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 

Day 

Figure 6 . MOEs with Low Vulnerability for a Model with Exponential Times 
between Failures. Case I from Table 2 showing the effects of a low vulnerability rate on 
the mean percent coverage and the mean number of surviving helicopters. 



30 



100 . 00 % 

90.00% 

80.00% 

70.00% 

60.00% 

c 

s 50.00% 

o 

a 

40.00% 

30.00% 

20 . 00 % 

10 . 00 % 

0.00%. 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 

Day 

Figure 7. MOEs with Medium Vulnerability for a Model with Exponential Times 
between Failures. Case II from Table 2 showing the effects of a medium vulnerability 
rate on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of helicopters surviving. 

100.00% 

90.00% 

80.00% 

70.00% 

60.00% 

c 

3 50.00% 

e 
o. 

40.00% 

30.00% 

20 . 00 % 

10 . 00 % 

0.00% 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 

Day 

Figure 8. MOEs with High Vulnerability for a Model with Exponential Times 
between Failures. Case HI from Table 2 showing the effects of a high vulnerability rate 
on the percent coverage and the number of helicopters surviving. 




31 




C. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS FOR TIME BETWEEN SCHEDULED 

MAINTENANCE ACTIONS 

The time between scheduled maintenance actions is the number of flight hours, 
T s , which a helicopter accumulates before being overhauled. Recall the initial flight 
hours for each helicopter are staggered to allow a sequential progression of helicopters 
into the scheduled maintenance facility. As the time between scheduled maintenance 
actions is adjusted, so too is the staggering of the individual helicopter’s flight hours. For 
each case examined, the initial stagger between each helicopter’s flight hours is the time 
between scheduled maintenance actions divided by the number of helicopters. The cases 
chosen for comparison are shown below in Table 3. 



Time between Scheduled Maintenance Actions 

Case I 

300 Hours 

Case II 

400 Hours 

Case HI 

500 Hours 


Table 3. Description of Different Maintenance Policies for a Model with Exponential 

Times between Failures. 

The other inputs, which remain constant, are as follows: 


32 





Numerical Illustration 


=» 24 

=> 160 

=> 40 

=> 80 


1 

1 

1 

0.25 


=> 144-192 


=> 8.5 

=» 1.0 

=> 0.1 


Number of Helicopters 
Speed of Helicopters (knots) 

High-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Low-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Repair Facilities 

Scheduled Maintenance Facilities 

Mean Time to Repair a Failure (hours-Exponentially Distributed) 
Mean Time of Helicopter Turnaround (hours-Exponentially 
Distributed) 

Minimum/Maximum Time to Complete Scheduled Maintenance 
(hours-Uniformly Distributed) 

Mean Time between Mission-Affecting Failures (hours) 

Shape of Weibull Distribution Modeling MAF 
Probability of a failure being fatal (Crash) 


One hundred runs of the simulation were conducted for a two-week campaign to 


observe the effects of the different maintenance policies on the MOEs. Figure 9, Figure 
10, and Figure 11 show the results of the varying maintenance policies. The only 
significant differences between the cases are between the 300-hour and 500-hour 
maintenance policies about halfway through the campaign. The longer time between 
maintenance actions allows for a slightly higher mean percentage of coverage for the 7 th , 
8 th and 9 th days. This results from the helicopters flying more missions before reaching 
their flight hour limit for scheduled maintenance. By being able to continue flying for 
longer periods of time, the helicopters are able to maintain a higher mean percent 
coverage of the NAI. This ability to continue flying longer is also detrimental to the 
helicopters. While the helicopters are flying, they are still experiencing failures, some of 
which are fatal, as well as being subjected to enemy fires. This additional flight time 


causes the loss of more helicopters and hence the longer maintenance policy ends the 


33 



campaign with fewer helicopters than the shorter maintenance policies. The shorter 
maintenance policies force the helicopters to reach their flight hour limit for scheduled 
maintenance sooner and are forced to end the campaign on the ground waiting for 
scheduled maintenance. The establishment of an intelligently adaptable maintenance 
schedule is an open problem. 

In the model as implemented, the rate at which helicopters are killed dominates all 
other factors. This dominant effect may be masking other outcomes of interest. Keeping 
this in mind, the results attributed to the change in maintenance policies may be more 
pronounced or significant for a lower vulnerability rate. Effort spent decreasing the 
attrition rate should be well rewarded. 



Figure 9. MOEs for 300-hour Maintenance Policy for Model with Exponential Time 
between Failures. Case I from Table 3 that shows the effects of 300 hours between 
scheduled maintenance activities on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of 
helicopters surviving. 


34 





Figure 10. MOEs for 400-Hour Maintenance Policy for Model with Exponential 
Time between Failures. Case II from Table 3 that shows the effects of 400 hours 
between scheduled maintenance activities on the mean percent coverage and the mean 
number of helicopters surviving. 



Day 


Figure 11. MOEs for 500-Hour Maintenance Policy for Model with Exponential 
Times between Failures. Case HI from Table 3 that shows the effects of 500 hours 
between scheduled maintenance activities on the mean percent coverage and the mean 
number of helicopters surviving. 


35 



D. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS FOR MEAN TIMES BETWEEN MISSION- 
AFFECTING FAILURES 

This section examines the effect that different mean times between mission- 
affecting failures have on the MOEs. The cases chosen for comparison are shown below 
in Table 4. 




Scale 

Mean Time between Mission-Affecting Failures 

Case I 

1.0 

4.25 

4.25 Hours 

Case II 

1.0 

8.5 

8.5 Hours 

Case III 

1.0 

17.0 

17.0 Hours 


Table 4. Description of MTBMAF for Model with Exponential Times between 

Failures. 


The other inputs, which remain constant, are as follows: 

Numerical Illustration 

Number of Helicopters 
Speed of Helicopters (knots) 

Time between Scheduled Maintenance Actions (flight hours) 
High-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Low-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Repair Facilities 

Scheduled Maintenance Facilities 

Mean Time to Repair a Failure (hours-Exponentially Distributed) 
Mean Time of Helicopter Turnaround (hours-Exponentially 
Distributed) 

=> 144-192 Minimum/Maximum Time to Complete Scheduled Maintenance 

(hours-Uniformly Distributed) 

=> 0.1 Probability of a failure being fatal (Crash) 

One hundred runs of the simulation were conducted for a two-week campaign to 
observe the effects of the different MTBMAF on the MOEs. Figure 12, Figure 13, and 
Figure 14 show the results for each of the different MTBMAF. The mean time between 
mission-affecting failures has a significant effect on both the mean percent coverage of 


=> 24 

=> 160 

=> 300 

=> 40 

=> 80 

=> 1 

=» 1 

=> 1 

=> 0.25 


36 

















the NAI per day and the mean number of helicopters surviving at the end of each day. As 
the MTBMAF increases, on the average fewer failures are experienced during the 
campaign, which results in several areas of performance in the system improving. With 
fewer failures, more helicopters are able to successfully complete an entire mission 
without having to return to home base for repairs. This results in more and longer times 
on station for each helicopter pair, thus improving the mean percent coverage of the 
Named Area of Interest. However, more helicopters are subject to enemy action. The 
diminished mean number of failures also results in less time being spent in the repair 
facility and more helicopters being available to perform the assigned mission. Also as 
fewer failures are experienced, fewer crashes (modeled as 10% of the number of MAF) 
occur. This results in a lower total attrition rate for the helicopters during the campaign 
and significantly more helicopters surviving at the end of each day. Thus, the MTBMAF 
needs to be well estimated during actual field-testing, along with the shape of the time to 
failure. Note that the MTBMAF may well decrease during testing if failure modes are 
discovered and rectified. 


37 




Figure 12. MOEs with MTBMAF equal to 4.25 Hours for Model with Exponential 
Times between Failures. Case I from Table 4 that shows the effect with a MTBMAF 
equal to 4.25 hours on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of helicopters 
surviving. 



Figure 13. MOEs with MTBMAF equal to 8.5 Hours for Model with Exponential 
Times between Failures. Case II from Table 4 that shows the effect with MTBMFAF 
equal to 8.5 hours on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of helicopters 
surviving. 


38 




9 10 11 12 13 14 


Day 


Figure 14. MOEs with MTBMAF equal to 17.0 Hours for Model with Exponential 
Times between Failures. Case HI from Table 4 that shows the effect with MTBMAF 
equal to 17.0 hours on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of helicopters 
surviving. 


E. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS OF OVERHAUL TIMES 

The overhaul time is that amount of time needed to complete scheduled 
maintenance on a helicopter and return it to service. It is being modeled with a uniform 
distribution that specifies the minimum and maximum times to complete the scheduled 
maintenance. This section examines the effects of different overhaul times on the MOEs. 
The cases selected for comparison are listed below in Table 5. 



Minimum Overhaul Time 

Maximum Overhaul Time 

Case I 

48 Hours 

96 Hours 

Case II 

96 Hours 

144 Hours 

Case III 

144 Hours 

192 Hours 


Table 5. Description of Overhaul Times for Model with Exponential Times between 

Failures. 

The other inputs, which remain constant, are as follows: 


39 
















Numerical Illustration 


Number of Helicopters 
Speed of Helicopters (knots) 

Time between Scheduled Maintenance Actions (flight hours) 
High-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Low-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Repair Facilities 

Scheduled Maintenance Facilities 

Mean Time to Repair a Failure (hours-Exponentially Distributed) 
Mean Time of Helicopter Turnaround (hours-Exponentially 
Distributed) 

Mean Time between Mission-Affecting Failures (8.5 hours) 

Shape for MTBMAF 

Probability of a failure being fatal (Crash) 

runs of the simulation were conducted for a two-week campaign to 
observe the effects of the different overhaul times on the MOEs. In each case, one 
scheduled maintenance facility was available for overhaul. There is also a separate 
facility to repair MAF and turn around helicopters. Figure 15, Figure 16, and Figure 17 
show the results for the different overhaul times. The effect of the different overhaul 
times begins to show up after four days. The longer overhaul times result in fewer 
helicopters being available once they reach their flight hour limit since they are now 
sitting on the ground waiting for the maintenance facility to begin the overhaul. This 
results in fewer helicopters flying the assigned mission until each of their flight hour 
limits is reached, and thus less coverage of the NAI being provided. The longer overhaul 
times do result in more helicopters surviving at the end of the campaign. This is once 
again due to the helicopters being backed up in the maintenance facility, fewer helicopters 
flying missions, and thus fewer helicopter crashes and attrition. 


24 

160 

300 

40 

80 

1 

1 

1 

0.25 

8.5 

1.0 

0.1 


One hundre 


40 




Figure 15. MOEs with Short Overhaul Times for Model with Exponential Times 
between Failures. Case I from Table 5 that shows the effects of a short overhaul time on 
the mean percent coverage and the mean number of helicopters surviving. 



Figure 16. MOEs with Medium Overhaul Times for Model with Exponential Times 
between failures. Case II from Table 5 that shows the effects of a medium overhaul time 
on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of helicopters surviving. 


41 




O 50 . 00 % 


20.00% 



Figure 17. MOEs with Long Overhaul Times for Model with Exponential Times 
between Failures. Case IE from Table 5 that shows the effects of long overhaul times on 
the mean percent coverage and the mean number of helicopters surviving. 


F. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS ON THE NUMBER OF SCHEDULED 
MAINTENANCE FACILITIES 

This section examines the effect that different numbers of scheduled maintenance 
facilities have on the MOEs. Recall from Chapter 3, Section D on page 19 that the 
maintenance facility is utilized exclusively for scheduled overhaul maintenance. The 
cases chosen for consideration are shown below in Table 6. 



Number of Scheduled Maintenance Facilities 

Case I 

1 

Case II 

2 

Case IE 

4 


Table 6. Description of the Number of Scheduled Maintenance Facilities for Model 
with Exponential Times between Failures. 

The other inputs, which remain constant, are as follows: 


42 











Numerical Illustration 


=> 24 

160 

=» 300 

=> 40 

=> 80 

=> 1 

=> 1 

=> 0.25 

=> 8.5 

=> 1.0 

=> 144-192 

=> 0.1 


Number of Helicopters 
Speed of Helicopters (knots) 

Time between Scheduled Maintenance Actions (flight hours) 
High-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Low-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Repair Facilities 

Mean Time to Repair a Failure (hours-Exponentially Distributed) 
Mean Time of Helicopter Turnaround (hours-Exponentially 
Distributed) 

Mean Time between Mission-Affecting Failures (8.5 hours) 

Shape of Weibull Distribution Modeling MAF 
Minimum/Maximum Time to Complete Scheduled Maintenance 
(Uniformly Distributed) 

Probability of a failure being fatal (Crash) 


One hundred runs of the simulation were conducted for a two-week campaign to 


observe the effects of the different number of scheduled maintenance facilities on the 


MOEs. Figure 18, Figure 19, and Figure 20 show the results for each of the different 
cases. The results show that as the number of scheduled maintenance facilities increases, 
the helicopters are able to maintain a higher mean percentage of coverage later in the 
campaign. In the short term, the number of maintenance facilities has very little effect. 
As time progresses and more helicopters are sent in for overhaul, the number of 
scheduled maintenance facilities has a large impact. On the last day of the campaign, 
mean coverage more than doubled from 2.5% with one scheduled maintenance facility to 
over 8% percent for just one additional facility and to better than 10% with an additional 
three facilities. This does take a toll on the number of helicopters remaining at the end of 
the campaign since fewer helicopters will be waiting in the maintenance facilities and 


43 



more are returned to conduct the assigned mission in a timely manner. These helicopters 
are once again subjected to attrition from enemy action and can also crash. 

If these effects are to be seen during actual testing, the tests will need to be of 
longer duration, and tests cannot be conducted with helicopters that have all just 
completed an overhaul. The helicopters used in the operational tests should be similar to 
those used in the field, which have staggered flight hours to facilitate staggered overhauls. 


100 . 00 % 

90.00% 

80.00% 

70.00% 

60.00% 

c 

« 50.00% 

a 

40.00% 

30.00% 

20.00% 

10 . 00 % 

0 . 00 % 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 

Day 

Figure 18. MOEs with One Scheduled Maintenance Facility for Model with 
Exponential Times between Failures. Case I from Table 6 that shows the effects of one 
scheduled maintenance facility on the mean percent coverage and the number of 
helicopters surviving. 



44 




100.00% 


24 


Q. 


90.00% 


80.00% 



-L 


21 


18 


70.00% 

60.00% 

50.00% 

40.00% 

30.00% 

20 . 00 % 

10 . 00 % 



1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 


Day 


Figure 19. MOEs with Two Scheduled Maintenance Facilities for Model with 
Exponential Times between Failures. Case II from Table 6 that shows the effects of 
two scheduled maintenance facilities on the mean percent coverage and the number of 
helicopters surviving. 


100 . 00 % 

90.00% 

80.00% 

70.00% 

60.00% 

c 

S 50.00% 

2 . 

40.00% 

30.00% 

20 . 00 % 

10 . 00 % 

0.00% 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 

Day 



Figure 20. MOEs with Four Scheduled Maintenance Facilities for Model with 
Exponential Times between Failures. Case DI from Table 6 that shows the effects of 
four scheduled maintenance facilities on the mean percent coverage and the mean number 
of helicopters surviving. 


45 



G. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS FOR THE NUMBER OF REPAIR FACILITIES 


This section examines the effect that different numbers of repair facilities have on the 
MOEs. Recall from Chapter 3, Section D on page 19 that the repair facility is used 
exclusively for repair of random mission-affecting failures and helicopter rearming and 
refueling. The repair facilities operate on the basis of priority maintenance in which the 
helicopter in the repair facility with the shortest repair time will be serviced first. The 
cases selected are shown below in Table 7. 



Number of Repair Facilities 

Case I 

1 

Case II 

2 

Case in 

4 


Table 7. Description of the Number of Repair Facilities for Model with Exponential 

Times between Failures. 

The other inputs, which remain constant, are as follows: 

Numerical Illustration 


=> 24 

=» 160 

=> 300 

=> 40 

=> 80 

=> 1 

=> 1 

=> 0.25 

=> 8.5 

=> 1.0 

=> 144-192 

=> 0.1 


Number of Helicopters 
Speed of Helicopters (knots) 

Time between Scheduled Maintenance Actions (flight hours) 
High-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Low-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Scheduled Maintenance Facilities 

Mean Time to Repair a Failure (hours-Exponentially Distributed) 
Mean Time of Helicopter Turnaround (hours-Exponentially 
Distributed) 

Mean Time between Mission-Affecting Failures (hours) 

Shape of Weibull Distribution Modeling MAF 
Minimum/Maximum Time to Complete Scheduled Maintenance 
(hours-Uniformly Distributed) 

Probability of a failure being fatal (Crash) 


46 




One hundred runs of the simulation were conducted for a two-week campaign to 
observe the effects of the different number of repair facilities on the MOEs. Figure 21, 
Figure 22, and Figure 23 show the results for each of the different numbers. The results 
show that the number of repair facilities has little effect on either of the MOEs. This is 
the result of there being a sufficient number of helicopters at the beginning of the 
campaign to overcome any delays in the repair facilities. Even if the single repair facility 
case has a queue of helicopters, it is able to complete the repairs before the repair backlog 
causes a detrimental problem. 

The reader is cautioned that for the parameters chosen for these cases, the repair 
facilities were never challenged. For the 3 cases observed, the mean number of non-fatal 
mission-affecting failures experienced per campaign was 72.42. This means that on 
average there were approximately 5.17 MAF that needed to be repaired per day. Using 
the mean time to repair of 1.0 hours, the repair facility was busy repairing a mission- 
affecting failure on average just over 5 hours per day. The average time needed to rearm 
and refuel all 24 helicopters using a mean turnaround time of 0.25 hours is 6 hours. Even 
if all 24 helicopters need to be reamed and refueled on any given day, the average time 
that the repair facility is busy is just over 11 hours per day. 

The cases analyzed are far from stretching the limits of one repair facility, let 
alone two or four. More analysis needs to be done in this area by looking at longer repair 
times, fewer helicopters, or a completely different distribution for the repair times. In 
these cases reduction in force size of one or two helicopters being in the repair facility 
may dramatically affect the MOEs. 


47 




Day 


Figure 21. MOEs with a Single Repair Facility for Model with Exponential Times 
between Failures. Case I from Table 7 that shows the effects of a single repair facility 
on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of helicopters surviving. 



1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 


Day 


Figure 22. MOEs with Two Repair Facilities for Model with Exponential Times 
between Failures. Case 13 from Table 7 that shows the effects of two repair facilities on 
the mean percent coverage and the mean number of helicopters surviving. 


48 



Figure 23. MOEs with Four Repair Facilities for Model with Exponential Times 
between Failures. Case El from Table 7 that shows the effects of four repair facilities on 
the mean percent coverage and the mean number of helicopters surviving. 

H. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS FOR PRIORITY MAINTENANCE 

Priority maintenance is the maintenance policy of determining the helicopter in 
the repair queue with the shortest repair time and conducting repairs on this helicopter 
first. If the priority maintenance policy is not in effect, the repair system operates on a 
first-come, first-served, basis. This section examines the effects of the two different 
maintenance policies on the MOEs. The cases chosen for consideration are shown below 
in Table 8. 



Priority Maintenance 

Case I 

TRUE 

Case II 

FALSE 


Table 8. Description of Priority Maintenance Policies for Model with Exponential 

Times between Failures. 

The other inputs, which remain constant, are as follows: 


49 





Numerical Elustration 


=> 24 

=> 160 

=> 300 

=> 40 

=> 80 

=> 2 

=> 2 

=> 1 

=> 0.25 

=> 8.5 

=> 1 

=> 144-192 

=> 0.1 


Number of Helicopters 
Speed of Helicopters (knots) 

Time between Scheduled Maintenance Actions (flight hours) 
High-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Low-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Scheduled Maintenance Facilities 
Repair Facilities 

Mean Time to Repair a Failure (hours-Exponentially Distributed) 
Mean Time of Helicopter Turnaround (hours-Exponentially 
Distributed) 

Mean Time between Mission-Affecting Failures (hours) 

Shape of Weibull Distribution Modeling MAF 
Minimum/Maximum Time to Complete Scheduled Maintenance 
(hours-Uniformly Distributed) 

Probability of a failure being fatal (Crash) 


One hundred runs of the simulation were conducted for a two-week campaign to 


observe the effects of the different maintenance policies on the MOEs. Figure 47 and 


Figure 48 show the results for each of the different policies. As expected from the 


previous section, there is very little difference between the results for the two different 


maintenance policies. The mean numbers of surviving helicopters are comparable 
throughout the campaign, as is the mean percent coverage per day of the NAI. There is 
essentially no difference between the two policies as far as the two observed MOEs are 
concerned since the repair facilities are not saturated. 


As previously discussed in Section G on page 46 the cases analyzed do not test the 
repair facilities to its limits. Here again the repair facility spends on average just over 5 
hours per day performing repairs. In order to see the effects of priority maintenance, the 
repair facility must first be tested near its limits. This can be accomplished by increasing 


50 



the number of failures or by increasing the average amount of time necessary to complete 
a repair of a mission-affecting failure. 



1 2 3 4 S 6 7 8 

Day 


10 11 12 13 14 


Figure 24. MOEs with Priority Maintenance for Model with Exponential Times 
between Failures. Case I from Table 8 that shows the effects of priority maintenance on 
the mean percent coverage and the mean number of helicopters surviving. 


51 



100 . 00 % 


24 


90.00% 

80.00% 

70.00% 

60.00% 

c 

S 50.00% 

o 

Q. 

40.00% 

30.00% 

20 . 00 % 

10 . 00 % 

0 . 00 % - 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 

Day 

Figure 25. MOEs with First-Come, First-Served, Maintenance for Model with 
Exponential Times between Failures. Case II from Table 8 that shows the effects of 
non-priority maintenance on the mean percent coverage and the number of helicopters 
surviving. 

I. SUMMARY OF ANALYSIS FOR THE WEIBULL DISTRIBUTION 

This chapter focused on the behavior of the MOEs when the Weibull distribution 
was used as the underlying distribution for the mean time between mission-affecting 
failures. The dominant sensitivities, as determined by the simulation, were the 
vulnerability rates for each region, the mean time between mission-affecting failures, and 
the shape of the distribution. The shape of the distribution can be thought of as 
representing the type of failures (“infant mortality” or “wearout” or other) that tend to 
occur. This indicates that the types of failures experienced are just as important as the 
mean time between mission-affecting failures. The vulnerability rates for each area had a 
large effect on the MOEs. This indicates that the vulnerability of the helicopter must be 



52 




analyzed to minimize its effects on mission accomplishment. Vulnerability can possibly 
be managed by tactics. Loss of sensor capability may well increase vulnerability. 


53 




54 




V. MODELING SYSTEM AGING AND SCHEDULED 


MAINTENANCE 

In this chapter a non-homogeneous increasing-rate Poisson process is used to 
model the rate of occurrence of mission-affecting failures (MAF) when aging is assumed 
(failures, predominantly of the platform, occur more frequently as time elapses) (Ross, 
1997). The following specific and convenient (but only illustrative) intensity function for 
the non-homogeneous Poisson process is used: 

X(t) = Aj + + , where p = 1 (V-l) 

The mean value function for the non-homogeneous Poisson process is: 

A (t) = A ] t + A 2 M + 1) (V-2) 

The average time between mission-affecting failures (ATBMAF) is approximated 
by dividing the specified time between scheduled maintenance actions, denoted by Ts and 
taken as fixed, by the expected number of failures to occur in the time between scheduled 
maintenance actions, as shown below. 

T 1 

ATBMAF =-^-- =- (V-3) 

Vs +X 2 T s 1 A 

This formula shows that the average rate of failure occurrence, (ATBMAF )' 1 , increases 
(linearly) with time. The parameters for the ATBMAF are chosen by setting Ts equal to 
the time between scheduled maintenance actions, setting the ATBMAF to a specified 
level, and then fixing one of the parameters to solve for the other parameter. 


55 



The non-homogenous Poisson failure process used provides the analyst and 
planner the ability to understand the possible effects of aging on the helicopters. As the 
helicopters age (more flight hours) the times between mission-affecting failures tend to 
decrease. This means that the helicopters generally will have more mission-affecting 
failures just prior to entering scheduled maintenance than they will have upon exiting 
scheduled maintenance. The model, utilizing the non-homogeneous Poisson failure 
process, has been set up to provide helicopters that are “as good as new” upon completing 
an overhaul (there is no post-overhaul infant failure, although this is a practical 
possibility). The model also is set up to reflect imperfect repairs. This means that when a 
helicopter completes repair of a non-scheduled random failure, a new independent failure 
time is not generated. Rather, the time until its next failure is carried forward from its 
previous generated failure time, unless the helicopter has just completed scheduled 
maintenance. 

The model also makes the assumption that the initial flight hours for each 
helicopter are staggered so that the helicopters sequentially and periodically enter the 
scheduled maintenance facility as discussed in Chapter 3, Section D on page 19. 

The MOEs displayed in this chapter are again the mean percent coverage per day 
of the NAI and the mean number of helicopter surviving at the end of each day. The 25 th , 
50 th , and 75 th percentiles for each of the MOEs appear in Appendix C. Appendix C also 
displays for a campaign the mean number of MAF, mean number of fatal failures, and 
mean number of helicopters shot down. The mean repair and turnaround time, mean 
number of missions started, probability of returning to base safely, mean time spent in the 


56 


high threat regions, mean survival time of individual helicopters, and the mean number of 
helicopters in the repair system for each campaign are also displayed in Appendix C. 


A. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS FOR VULNERABILITY PARAMETERS 

The vulnerability of the helicopters is again modeled as an exponential random 
variable specified by the mean time until a helicopter is shot down when in particular 
regions. Note that the reduction of threat to helicopters by pausing to fire back is not 
represented here. This tactic may be very profitable, and should be modeled in follow-on 
work. The cases chosen for comparison are shown below in Table 9. 



Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down while in a Low Vulnerability 
Region 

Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down while in a High Vulnerability 
Region 

Case I 

320 Hours 

160 Hours 

Case II 

160 Hours 

80 Hours 

Case m 

80 Hours 

40 Hours 


Table 9. Description of Vulnerability Cases for Model with a Non-homogeneous 

Failure Rate Process. 


The other inputs, which remain constant, are as follows: 


57 














Numerical Illustration 


=> 24 

=> 160 

=> 300 

=> 1 

=* 1 

=> 1 

=> 0.25 

=» 144-192 

=> 0.1 

=> 5.8824e-5 

=> 0.1 


Number of Helicopters 
Speed of Helicopters (knots) 

Time between Scheduled Maintenance Actions (flight hours) 
Repair Facilities 

Scheduled Maintenance Facilities 

Mean Time to Repair a Failure (hours-Exponentially Distributed) 
Mean Time of Helicopter Turnaround (hours-Exponentially 
Distributed) 

Minimum/Maximum Time to Complete Scheduled Maintenance 
(hours-Uniformly Distributed) 

X\ (Average Time between Mission-Affecting Failures = 8.5 hours) 
X .2 (Average Time between Mission-Affecting Failures = 8.5 hours) 
Probability of a failure being fatal (Crash) 


One hundred runs of the simulation were conducted for a three-week campaign to 


observe the effects of the varying vulnerability rates on the mean percent coverage per 


day of the NAI as well as the mean number of helicopters surviving at the end of each 


day. Figure 26, Figure 27, and Figure 28 graphically show how the mean coverage varied 
per day over the three-week period as well as the mean number of remaining helicopters 
at the end of each day. The vertical bars display the mean percent coverage per day of the 
NAI with the values located on the left vertical axis. The line graph displays the mean 
number of helicopters that are still alive at the end of each day with the values located on 
the right vertical axis. The error bars are set at plus and minus one standard error to 


indicate the variability of the simulation results. 


The results support what would be expected. As the vulnerability increases, the 
ability of the helicopters to maintain coverage decreases, along with the mean number of 
helicopters alive at the end of each day. With the low vulnerability rate, the helicopters 
are nearly able to maintain mean coverage of the NAI above 50% for almost two weeks. 


58 



With the medium vulnerability rate, the helicopters are no longer able to maintain mean 
coverage of the NAI above 50% after eleven days. With the high vulnerability rate, the 
helicopters can only maintain mean coverage of the NAI above 50% for 7 days. This 
emphasizes the fact that sufficient helicopters are necessary to sustain a prolonged 
operation, unless the Red threat is suppressed. It also informs T&E decision-makers that 
vulnerability of the helicopters is an important issue that dramatically affects the MOEs 
and needs to be carefully and thoroughly considered during operational field-testing. 



Figure 26. MOEs with Low Vulnerability for Model with a Non-homogeneous 
Failure Rate Process. Case I from Table 9 showing the effects of a low vulnerability 
rate on the mean percent of coverage and mean number of surviving helicopters. This 
graph can be compared to the iid times between failures in Figure 6. 


59 




100 . 00 % 


24 



Figure 27. MOEs with Medium Vulnerability for Model with a Non-homogenous 
Failure Rate Process. Case II from Table 9 showing the effects of a medium 
vulnerability rate on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of helicopters 
surviving. This graph can be compared to the iid times between failures in Figure 7. 



Figure 28. MOEs with High Vulnerability for Model with a Non-homogeneous 
Failure Rate Process. Case m from Table 9 showing the effects of a high vulnerability 
rate on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of helicopters surviving. This 
graph can be compared to the iid times between failures in Figure 8. 


60 



As the vulnerability increases, the rate of decrease in the number of helicopters 
surviving increases as time progresses since fewer helicopters are available to perform the 
mission. This causes the remaining helicopters to have to fly more hours and thus reach 
their scheduled maintenance flight hour limit sooner than normal. The helicopters are 
then temporarily no longer flying, but rather waiting in the scheduled maintenance queue 
for scheduled maintenance unless that scheduled maintenance duration is deliberately 
shortened or eliminated. In that case, the increasing occurrence of random failures will 
rapidly degrade coverage of the NAI. 


B. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS FOR TIME BETWEEN SCHEDULED 
MAINTENANCE ACTIONS 

The time between scheduled maintenance actions is the number of flight hours, 
Ts, which a helicopter accumulates before being overhauled. This section examines the 
effect that different maintenance policies have on the MOEs. The cases chosen for 
comparison are shown below in Table 10. 



Time between Scheduled Maintenance Actions 

Case I 

300 Hours 

Case II 

400 Hours 

Case El 

500 Hours 


Table 10. Description of Different Maintenance Policies for Model with a Non- 

homogeneous Failure Rate Process. 

The other inputs, which remain constant, are as follows: 


61 







Numerical Illustration 


=> 24 

=> 160 

=> 40 

=> 80 

=> 1 

=> 1 

=> 1 

=> 0.25 

=> 144-192 

=> 0.1 

=> 5.8824e-5 

=> 0.1 

One hundred runs of the simulation were conducted for a two-week campaign to 
observe the effects of the different maintenance policies on the MOEs. Figure 29, Figure 
30, and Figure 31 show the results of the varying maintenance policies. As the time 
between scheduled maintenance actions increases, the first four or five days of mean 
coverage do not change much between the different maintenance policies. As time 
progresses, the mean coverage over the NAI improves as the time between scheduled 
maintenance actions increases. The mean coverage does not drop off as rapidly in the 
beginning of the second week for the longer maintenance policies. By the end of the 
second week mean coverage does not change when taking into account the variability of 
the simulation as shown on the graphs by the error bars. Even though an improvement is 
shown in the mean coverage provided during the second week, more helicopters are being 
lost because of fatal mission-affecting failures and being shot down while attempting to 
provide this extra coverage. The average number of helicopters that finished the second 


Number of Helicopters 
Speed of Helicopters (knots) 

High-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Low-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Repair Facilities 

Scheduled Maintenance Facilities 

Mean Time to Repair a Failure (hours-Exponentially Distributed) 
Mean Time of Helicopter Turnaround (hours-Exponentially 
Distributed) 

Minimum/Maximum Time to Complete Scheduled Maintenance 
(hours-Uniformly Distributed) 

(Average Time between Mission-Affecting Failures = 8.5 hours) 
%2 (Average Time between Mission-Affecting Failures = 8.5 hours) 
Probability of a failure being fatal (Crash) 


62 



week alive decreased from 2.2 with the 300-hour maintenance policy to 1.6 with the 500- 
hour maintenance policy. As attrition and fatal mission-affecting failures kill more 
helicopters, the remaining helicopters must fly more missions. If the maintenance policy 
uses a shorter time period between scheduled maintenance actions, the helicopters reach 
their flight hour limi t sooner and finish up the two-week period sitting on the ground 
waiting for scheduled maintenance. If the maintenance policy uses a longer time period 
between scheduled maintenance, the helicopters do not reach their flight hour limit as 
soon, more helicopters continue flying and are susceptible to being shot down and having 
fatal mission-affecting failures. In the model as currently formulated, the vulnerability of 
the helicopters does not decrease as the helicopter numbers decrease. Of course in 
practice, the Red force may diminish its defense when it observes a great decrease in 
helicopter reconnaissance. Perhaps a policy that "manages" the overhaul so that 
helicopters are sometimes overhauled before they need it would be appropriate. 


63 




Figure 29. MOEs with 300-Hour Maintenance Policy for Model with a Non- 
homogeneous Failure Rate Process. Case I from Table 10 that shows the effects of 300 
hours between scheduled maintenance activities on the mean percent coverage and the 
mean number of helicopters surviving. This graph can be compared to the iid times 
between failures in Figure 9. 


100 . 00 % 

90.00% 

80.00% 

70.00% 

60.00% 

S 50.00% 

a 

a. 

40.00% 

30.00% 

20 . 00 % 

10 . 00 % 

0 . 00 % ■ 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 

Day 


N 



Figure 30. MOEs with 400-Hour Maintenance Policy for Model with a Non- 
homogeneous Failure Rate Process. Case II from Table 10 that shows the effects of 
400 hours between scheduled maintenance activities on the mean percent coverage and 
the mean number of helicopters surviving. This graph can be compared to the iid times 
between failures in Figure 10. 


64 







1 2 3 4 S 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 

Day 

Figure 31. MOEs with 500-Hour Maintenance Policy for Model with a Non- 
Homogeneous Failure Rate Process. Case IH from Table 10 that shows the effects of 
500 hours between scheduled maintenance activities on the mean percent coverage and 
the mean number of surviving helicopters. This graph can be compared to the iid times 
between failures in Figure 11. 

C. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS FOR FAILURE-RATE AGING 

The intensity function of the non-homogeneous Poisson process is determined by 
the numerical values assigned to X\ and X 2 in Equation V-l. The intensity function of the 
process refers to the rapidity at which the expected number of failures per unit time 
changes from the initial time until the final time. In this case, the initial time is To = 0.0, 
respectively the final time is 7$ = 300.0 hours. These times correspond to a brand-new 
helicopter with an instantaneous failure rate equal to A,i, and a helicopter just entering 
scheduled maintenance with an instantaneous failure rate equal to X\+lk 2 Ts, respectively. 
The value for A.i is the initial failure rate for the helicopter, while the value for X 2 
represents the effect of aging on the helicopter’s failure rate. Therefore, the lower the 
initial rate, the faster the rate function will have to increase (the larger X 2 must be) to 


65 


result in a ATBMAF of 8.5 hours, as used in this analysis. Note that X 2 is the “age 
effect;” the larger the value of X 2 , the greater the aging effect. Other functions can be 
used to induce sharper age dependence (Crowder, 1991). 

This section examines the effect that different intensity functions, with the same 
calculated ATBMAF, have on the MOEs. The cases chosen for comparison are shown 
below in Table 11. 



X] 

X2 

Case I 

0 

3.92157xl0‘ 4 

Case II 

0.1 

5.8824xl0‘ 5 

Case HI 

0.117647 

1.96078xl0' 10 


Table 11. Description of Aging Process for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure 

Rate Process. 

Note that Case I illustrates a maximum aging effect, Case II an intermediate aging 
effect, and Case HI a minimum aging effect (comparable to iid Weibull with shape 
parameter one, i.e., exponential). 

The other inputs, which remain constant, are as follows: 


66 





Numerical Dlustration 


=» 24 

=> 160 

=> 300 

=> 40 

=> 80 

=> 1 

=> 1 

=> 1 

=> 0.25 

=> 144-192 

=> 0.1 


Number of Helicopters 
Speed of Helicopters (knots) 

Mean Time between Scheduled Maintenance Actions (flight hours) 
High-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Low-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Repair Facilities 

Scheduled Maintenance Facilities 

Mean Time to Repair a Failure (hours-Exponentially Distributed) 
Mean Time of Helicopter Turnaround (hours-Exponentially 
Distributed) 

Minimum/Maximum Time to Complete Scheduled Maintenance 
(hours-Uniformly Distributed) 

Probability of a failure being fatal (Crash) 


One hundred runs of the simulation were conducted for a two-week campaign to 


observe the effects of the differing Poisson process intensity functions on the MOEs. 
Figure 32, Figure 33, and Figure 34 show the results for the different intensity functions. 
The effects of the different aging models can be seen in how soon the mean percent 


coverage of the NAI begins to decline. Case I (Xi = 0) begins to reduce mean coverage 


after six days while for Case II and Case IE mean coverage reduction begins after 4 or 5 
days. There is also a negligible difference in the number of helicopters surviving at the 
end of each day. This is a result of little change in the mean number of failures 
experienced per campaign for each case examined. The values for the mean number of 
failures per campaign are 78.28, 78.07, and 80.52 for Case I, Case II, and Case EDI 
respectively. This corresponds to losing an average of 8 helicopters (10% of the mission- 
affecting failures) due to fatal mission-affecting failures. The mean number of 
helicopters shot down was about the same for each case as well. This results in 


67 




approximately the same total attrition rate for the helicopters in each case. Therefore, 
some of the differences in mean percent coverage of the NAI can be attributed to the rate 
at which the failures occur due to the different aging processes. The model used for the 
aging process does not have a strong age effect as can be seen by the low values used for 
A- 2 . Even with this low age effect, differences can be seen in the percent coverage of the 
NAI. If an aging model with a stronger age effect were used, even greater differences in 
the percent coverage would be expected. Hence, the rate of aging is a parameter that 
affects the MOEs and should be addressed. 



Figure 32. MOEs for Case I of the Varying Rate Functions. Case I from Table 11 that 
shows the effects of aging on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of 
helicopters surviving with an initial rate of failure set to zero and the mean number of 
failures over 300 flight hours equal to 300/8.5. 


68 




100 . 00 % 


24 


90.00% 


21 


80.00% 


70.00% 



18 



1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 


Day 


Figure 33. MOEs for Case II of the Varying Rate Functions. Case II from Table 11 
that shows the effects of aging on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of 
helicopters surviving with an initial rate function set equal to 0.1 and the mean number of 
failures over 300 hours equal to 300/8.5. 



2 3 4 5 6 7 


9 10 11 12 13 14 


Day 


Figure 34. MOEs for Case III of the Varying Rate Functions. Case IE from Table 11 
that shows the effects of aging on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of 
helicopters surviving with a negligible aging effect, an initial failure rate set equal to 
0.117647 and the mean number of failures over 300 hours equal to 300/8.5. 


69 


D. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS FOR AVERAGE TIME BETWEEN MISSION- 
AFFECTING FAILURES 

This section examines the effect that different average times between mission- 
affecting failures have on the MOEs. The cases chosen for observation are shown below 
in Table 12. 





Average Time between Mission-Affe 

( \ 
- 300 

hailiiTW 

acting 

Aj (300) + ^ (300) 2 ^ 

Case I 

0.01 

7.50980xl0‘ 4 

4.25 Hours 

Case II 

0.01 

3.5824xl0' 4 

8.5 Hours 

Case IQ 

0.01 

1.62745x10' 4 

17.0 Hours 


Table 12. Description of ATBMAF for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate 

Process. 


The other inputs, which remain constant, are as follows: 
Numerical Illustration 


=> 24 

=> 160 

=* 300 

=» 40 

=> 80 

=> 1 

=> 1 

=> 1 

=> 0.25 

=> 144-192 

=> 0.1 


Number of Helicopters 
Speed of Helicopters (knots) 

Time between Scheduled Maintenance Actions (flight hours) 
High-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Low-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Repair Facilities 

Scheduled Maintenance Facilities 

Mean Time to Repair a Failure (hours-Exponentially Distributed) 
Mean Time of Helicopter Turnaround (hours-Exponentially 
Distributed) 

Minimum/Maximum Time to Complete Scheduled Maintenance 
(hours-Uniformly Distributed) 

Probability of a failure being fatal (Crash) 


One hundred runs of the simulation were conducted for a two-week campaign to 


observe the effects of the different ATBMAF on the MOEs. Figure 35, Figure 36, and 


70 



Figure 37 show the results for each of the different ATBMAF. The average time between 
mission-affecting failures has a dramatic effect on both the mean percent coverage of the 
NAI per day and the mean number of helicopters surviving at the end of each day. As the 
ATBMAF increases, on the average fewer failures are experienced during the campaign, 
which results in several areas of performance of the system improving. With fewer 
failures, more helicopters are able to successfully complete an entire mission without 
having to return to home base for repairs. This results in more and longer times on 
station for each helicopter pair, thus improving the mean percent coverage of the Named 
Area of Interest. The diminished mean number of failures also results in less time being 
spent in the repair facility and more helicopters being available to perform the assigned 
mission. Also as fewer failures are experienced, fewer crashes (modeled as 10% of the 
number of MAF) occur. This results in a lower total attrition rate for the helicopters 
during the campaign. Thus, the ATBMAF needs to be well monitored during actual 
field-testing. It may well increase as failure modes are discovered and rectified. 
Response of this parameter to environmental influences must also be tested and 
monitored. 


71 



Day 


Figure 35. MOEs with ATBMAF equal to 4.25 Hours for Model with a Non- 
homogeneous Failure Rate Process. Case I from Table 12 that shows the effects with 
an ATBMAF equal to 4.25 hours on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of 
helicopters surviving. This graph can be compared to the iid times between failures in 
Figure 12. 

100 . 00 % 

90.00% 

80.00% 

70.00% 

60.00% 

c 

5 50.00% 

• 

CL 

40.00% 

30.00% 

20 . 00 % 

10 . 00 % 

0 . 00 % ■ 

1 2 3 4 s 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 

Day 

Figure 36. MOEs with ATBMAF equal to 8.5 hours for Model with a Non- 
homogeneous Failure Rate Process. Case II from Table 12 that shows the effects with 
an ATBMAF equal to 8.5 hours on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of 
helicopters surviving. This graph can be compared to the iid times between failures in 
Figure 13. 



72 




100 . 00 % 


24 


90.00% 

80.00% 

70.00% 

60.00% 

c 

S 50.00% 

© 

CL 

40.00% 

30.00% 

20 . 00 % 

10 . 00 % 

0 . 00 % 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 

Day 

Figure 37. MOEs with ATBMAF equal to 17.0 Hours for Model with a Non- 
homogeneous Failure Rate Process. Case HI from Table 12 that shows the effects with 
an ATBMAF equal to 17.0 hours on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of 
helicopters remaining. This graph can be compared to the iid times between failures in 
Figure 14. 

E. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS OF OVERHAUL TIMES 

The overhaul time is that amount of time needed to complete scheduled 
maintenance on a helicopter and return it to service. It is being modeled with a uniform 
distribution specified by the minimum and maximum times to complete the scheduled 
maintenance. This section examines the effects of different overhaul times on the MOEs. 
The cases chosen for comparison are listed below in Table 13. 




Minimum Overhaul Time 

Maximum Overhaul Time 

Case I 

48 Hours 

96 Hours 

Casell 

96 Hours 

144 Hours 

Case EH 

144 Hours 

192 Hours 


Table 13. Description of Overhaul Times for Model with a Non-homogeneous 

Failure Rate Process. 


73 















The other inputs, which remain constant, are as follows: 


Numerical Illustration 


=> 24 

=> 160 

=> 300 

=> 40 

=> 80 

=> 1 

=>• 1 

=> 1 

=> 0.25 

=> 0.1 

=> 5.8824e-5 

=> 0.1 


Number of Helicopters 
Speed of Helicopters (knots) 

Time between Scheduled Maintenance Actions (flight hours) 
High-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Low-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Repair Facilities 

Scheduled Maintenance Facilities 

Mean Time to Repair a Failure (hours-Exponentially Distributed) 
Mean Time of Helicopter Turnaround (hours-Exponentially 
Distributed) 

(Mean Time between Mission-Affecting Failures = 8.5 hours) 

A .2 (Mean Time between Mission-Affecting Failures = 8.5 hours) 
Probability of a failure being fatal (Crash) 


One hundred runs of the simulation were conducted for a two-week campaign to 


observe the effects of the different overhaul times on the MOEs. In each case, one 
scheduled maintenance facility was available for overhaul. Figure 38, Figure 39, and 


Figure 40 show the results for the different overhaul times. The effect of the different 


overhaul times begins to show up after four days. The longer overhaul times result in 
fewer helicopters being available once they reach their flight hour limit since they are 
now sitting on the ground waiting for the maintenance facility to begin the overhaul. This 
results in fewer helicopters flying the assigned mission, and thus less mean coverage of 
the NAI being provided. The longer overhaul times do result in more helicopters 
surviving at the end of the campaign. This is once again the result of helicopters being 
backed up in the maintenance facility, which results in fewer helicopters flying missions, 
and thus fewer helicopter crashes and lower attrition due to enemy action. 


74 




Figure 38. MOEs with Short Overhaul Times for Model with a Non-homogeneous 
Failure Rate Process. Case I from Table 13 that shows the effects of a short overhaul 
time on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of helicopters surviving. This 
graph can be compared to iid times between failures in Figure 15. 



Figure 39. MOEs with Medium Overhaul Times for Model with a Non- 
homogeneous Failure Rate Process. Case II from Table 13 that shows the effects of a 
medium overhaul time on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of helicopters 
surviving. This graph can be compared to iid times between failures in Figure 16. 


75 







IS 

£ 

s> 

12 o 


9 10 11 12 13 14 


Day 


Figure 40. MOEs with Long Overhaul Times for Model with a Non-homogeneous 
Failure Rate Process. Case m from Table 13 that shows the effects of a long overhaul 
time on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of helicopters surviving. This 
graph can be compared to iid times between failures in Figure 17. 

F. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS OF THE EFFECT OF CHANGING NUMBERS 

OF SCHEDULED MAINTENANCE FACILITIES 

This section examines the effect that different numbers of scheduled maintenance 
facilities have on the MOEs. A scheduled maintenance facility is one for which the 
maintenance manager directs helicopters that require overhaul. The helicopters are 
initially setup such that their entrance into the maintenance facility is periodically 
staggered. The cases chosen for comparison are shown below in Table 14. 



Number of Scheduled Maintenance Facilities 

Case I 

1 

Case II 

2 

Case in 

4 


Table 14. Description of the Number of Scheduled Maintenance Facilities for Model 
with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate Process. 

The other inputs, which remain constant, are as follows: 


76 










Numerical Illustration 



24 

Number of Helicopters 


160 

Speed of Helicopters (knots) 

=> 

300 

Time between Scheduled Maintenance Actions (flight hours) 

=> 

40 

High-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

=> 

80 

Low-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 


1 

Repair Facilities 

=> 

1 

Mean Time to Repair a Failure (hours-Exponentially Distributed) 


0.25 

Mean Time of Helicopter Turnaround (hours-Exponentially 
Distributed) 

=> 

0.1 

(Mean Time between Mission-Affecting Failures = 8.5 hours) 

=> 

5.8824e-5 

X 2 (Mean Time between Mission-Affecting Failures = 8.5 hours) 

=> 

144-192 

Minimum/Maximum Time to Complete Scheduled Maintenance 
(hours-Uniformly Distributed) 

=> 

0.1 

Probability of a failure being fatal (Crash) 


One hundred runs of the simulation were conducted for a two-week campaign to 


observe the effects of the different numbers of scheduled maintenance facilities on the 
MOEs. Figure 41, Figure 42, and Figure 43 show the results for each of the different 
numbers. The results show that as the number of scheduled maintenance facilities 
increases, the helicopters are able to maintain a higher percentage of coverage later in the 
campaign. In the short term, the number of maintenance facilities has very little effect. 
As time progresses and more helicopters are sent in for overhaul, the number of 
scheduled maintenance facilities has a large impact. On the last day of the campaign, 
mean coverage more than doubled from 3% with one scheduled maintenance facility to 
over 7% percent for just one additional facility and to nearly 10% with an additional three 
facilities. This does take a toll on the number of helicopters remaining at the end of the 
campaign since fewer helicopters are waiting in the maintenance facilities and more are 


77 



returned to conduct the assigned mission in a timely manner. These helicopters are once 
again subjected to attrition from enemy action and crashes. 

If these effects are to be seen during actual testing, the tests will need to be of long 
enough duration, and tests should not be conducted with helicopters that have all just 
completed an overhaul. The helicopters should be similar to those that would be used in 
the field, which have staggered flight hours to facilitate staggered overhauls. 

24 

21 

18 

15 

«} 

X 

9 

6 

3 

0 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 

Day 

Figure 41. MOEs with One Scheduled Maintenance Facility for Model with a Non- 
homogeneous Failure Rate Process. Case I from Table 14 that shows the effects of one 
scheduled maintenance facility on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of 
helicopters surviving. This graph can be compared to the iid times between failures in 
Figure 18. 



78 




1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 

Day 


Figure 42. MOEs with Two Scheduled Maintenance Facilities for Model with a Non- 
homogeneous Failure Rate Process. Case II from Table 14 that shows the effects of 
two scheduled maintenance facilities on the mean percent coverage and the mean number 
of helicopters surviving. This graph can be compared to the iid times between failures in 
Figure 19. 



1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 

Day 


Figure 43. MOEs with Four Scheduled Maintenance Facilities for Model with a 
Non-homogeneous Failure Rate Process. Case HI from Table 14 that shows the effects 
of four scheduled maintenance facilities on the mean percent coverage and the mean 
number of helicopters surviving. This graph can be compared to iid times between 
failures in Figure 20. 


79 



G. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS FOR THE NUMBER OF REPAIR FACILITIES 


This section examines the effect that different numbers of repair facilities have on 
the MOEs. A repair facility is one in which the maintenance manager directs helicopters 
that have experienced a MAF and need to be repaired. The repair facility also conducts 
helicopter turnaround tasks (rearming and refueling). The repair facilities in this analysis 
operate using a priority maintenance policy that selects the helicopter in the repair facility 
with the shortest repair/tumaround time to be serviced first. The cases chosen for 
observation are shown below in Table 15. 



Number of Repair Facilities 

Case I 

1 

Case II 

2 

Case HI 

4 


Table 15. Description of the Number of Repair Facilities for Model with a Non- 

homogeneous Failure Rate Process. 

The other inputs, which remain constant, are as follows: 

Numerical Illustration 


=> 


24 Number of Helicopters 

160 Speed of Helicopters (knots) 

300 Time between Scheduled Maintenance Actions (flight hours) 

40 High-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 

Down in Region) (hours) 

80 Low-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 

Down in Region) (hours) 

1 Scheduled Maintenance Facilities 

1 Mean Time to Repair a Failure (hours-Exponentially Distributed) 

0.25 Mean Time of Helicopter Turnaround (hours-Exponentially 

Distributed) 

0.1 (Mean Time between Mission-Affecting Failures = 8.5 hours) 

5.8824e-5 X 2 (Mean Time between Mission-Affecting Failures = 8.5 hours) 
144-192 Minimum/Maximum Time to Complete Scheduled Maintenance 

(hours-Uniformly Distributed) 

0.1 Probability of a failure being fatal (Crash) 


80 




One hundred runs of the simulation were conducted for a two-week campaign to 
observe the effects of the different numbers of repair facilities on the MOEs. Figure 44, 
Figure 45, and Figure 46 show the results for each of the different numbers of repair 
facilities. The results show that the number of repair facilities has little effect on either of 
the MOEs. This is because of a sufficient number of helicopters at the beginning of the 
campaign, and attrition of helicopters during the campaign. Even if the single repair 
facility case has a queue of helicopters, it is able to complete the repairs prior to the repair 
backlog causing a detrimental problem. The current repair rate is too high to be 
influential. 

Once again, the reader is reminded that for the parameters chosen for these cases, 
the repair facilities were never challenged. For the 3 cases observed, the mean number of 
non-fatal mission-affecting failures experienced per campaign was 70.75. This means 
that on average there were approximately 5.05 MAF that needed to be repaired. Using 
the mean time to repair of 1.0 hours, the repair facility was busy repairing a mission- 
affecting failure on average just over 5 hours per day. The average time needed to rearm 
and refuel all 24 helicopters using a mean turnaround time of 0.25 hours is 6 hours. Even 
if all 24 helicopters need to be reamed and refueled on any given day, the average time 
that the repair facility is busy is just over 11 hours per day. 

The cases analyzed are far from stretching the limits of one repair facility, let 
alone two or four. More analysis needs to be done in this area by looking at longer repair 
times or fewer helicopters. In such cases the reduction in force size due to one or two 
helicopters being in the repair facility may dramatically affect the MOEs. 


81 


100 . 00 % 

90.00% 

80.00% 

70.00% 

60.00% 

c 

S 50.00% 

© 

Q. 

40.00% 

30.00% 

20 . 00 % 

10 . 00 % 

0 . 00 % 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 

Day 

Figure 44. MOEs with a Single Repair Facility for Model with a Non-homogeneous 
Failure Rate Process. Case I from Table 15 that shows the effects of a single repair 
facility on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of helicopters surviving. 
This graph can be compared to iid times between failures in Figure 21. 

100 . 00 % 

90.00% 

80.00% 

70.00% 

60.00% 

c 

S 50.00% 

£. 

40.00% 

30.00% 

20 . 00 % 

10 . 00 % 

0 . 00 % 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 

Day 

Figure 45. MOEs with Two Repair Facilities for Model with a Non-homogeneous 
Failure Rate Process. Case II from Table 15 that shows the effects of two repair 
facilities on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of helicopters surviving. 
This graph can be compared to iid times between failures in Figure 22. 




82 



Figure 46. MOEs with Four Repair Facilities for Model with a Non-homogeneous 
Failure Rate Process. Case HI from Table 15 that shows the effects of four repair 
facilities on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of helicopters surviving. 
This graph can be compared to iid times between failures in Figure 23. 

H. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS FOR PRIORITY MAINTENANCE 

Priority maintenance is the maintenance policy of determining the helicopter in 
the repair queue with the shortest repair/tumaround time and conducting repairs or 
services on this helicopter first. If the priority maintenance policy is not in effect, the 
repair system operates on a first-come, first-served, basis. This section examines the 
effects of the two different maintenance policies on the MOEs. The cases chosen are 
shown below in Table 16. 



Priority Maintenance 

Case I 

TRUE 

Case II 

FALSE 


Table 16. Description of Priority Maintenance Policies for Model with a Non- 

homogenous Failure Rate Process. 

The other inputs, which remain constant, are as follows: 


83 



Numerical Illustration 


=> 24 

=> 160 

=> 300 

=> 40 

=> 80 

=> 2 

=> 2 

=> 1 

=> 0.25 

=> 0.1 

=> 5.8824e-5 

=> 144-192 

=> 0.1 


Number of Helicopters 
Speed of Helicopters (knots) 

Time between Scheduled Maintenance Actions (flight hours) 
High-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Low-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Scheduled Maintenance Facilities 
Repair Facilities 

Mean Time to Repair a Failure (hours-Exponentially Distributed) 
Mean Time of Helicopter Turnaround (hours-Exponentially 
Distributed) 

(Mean Time between Mission-Affecting Failures = 8.5 hours) 

X 2 (Mean Time between Mission-Affecting Failures = 8.5 hours) 
Minimum/Maximum Time to Complete Scheduled Maintenance 
(hours-Uniformly Distributed) 

Probability of a failure being fatal (Crash) 


One hundred runs of the simulation were conducted for a two-week campaign to 
observe the effects of the different maintenance policies on the MOEs. Figure 47 and 


Figure 48 show the results for each of the different policies. As expected from the 


previous section, there is very little difference between the results for the two different 


maintenance policies. The mean numbers of surviving helicopters are comparable 
throughout the campaign, as is the mean percent coverage per day of the NAI. There is 
essentially no difference between the two policies as far as the two observed MOEs are 
concerned since the repair facilities are not being challenged. 


As previously discussed in Section G on page 80 the cases analyzed do not test the 
repair facilities at its limits. Here again the repair facility spends on average just over 5 
hours per day performing repairs. In order to see the effects of priority maintenance, the 
repair facility must first be tested near its limits. This can be accomplished by increasing 


84 



the number of failures or by increasing the average amount of time necessary to complete 
a repair of a mission-affecting failure. 


« 50.00% 


40.00% ■ 


30.00% • 


20 . 00 % 



Figure 47. MOEs with Priority Maintenance for Model with a Non-homogeneous 
Failure Rate Process. Case I from Table 16 that shows the effects of priority 
maintenance on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of helicopters 
surviving. This graph can be compared to iid times between failures in Figure 24. 


85 



90 . 00 % 



10 . 00 % 


10 11 12 13 14 


Figure 48. MOEs with First-Come, First-Served, Maintenance for Model with a 
Non-homogeneous Failure Rate Process. Case II from Table 16 that shows the effects 
of non-priority maintenance on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of 
helicopters surviving. This graph can be compared to iid times between failures in Figure 
25. 

I. SUMMARY ANALYSIS FOR THE NON-HOMOGENEOUS POISSON 

(INCREASING FAILURE RATE) FUNCTION 

This chapter focused on the behavior of the MOEs with the underlying 
distribution for the mission-affecting failures as a non-homogeneous Poisson Process that 
represents the aging of equipment by decreasing the time between failures as age 
increases. This results in more failures per unit time as the equipment ages. The 
dominant sensitivities from the analysis were once again the vulnerability of the 
helicopters, and the mean time between mission-affecting failures. The aging effect, as 
modeled here, did not produce any drastic changes in the MOEs. This was expected since 
the aging effect Q2) is such a small number (on the order of 10" 5 ) for most cases. Other 


86 





aging models can have a more influential effect. The lesson for OT&E is to monitor 
time-between-failure data to detect the extent of an aging effect. 


87 




vi. ADDITIONAL COMPARISONS OF SIMULATIONS 


The MOEs displayed in this chapter are the mean percent coverage per day of the 
NAI and the mean number of helicopter surviving at the end of each day. The 25 th , 50 th , 
and 75 th percentiles for each of the MOEs appear in Appendix D. Appendix D also 
displays for a campaign the mean number of MAF, mean number of fatal failures, and 
mean number of helicopters shot down. The mean repair and turnaround time, mean 
number of missions started, probability of returning to base safely, mean time spent in the 
high threat regions, mean survival time of individual helicopters, and the mean number of 
helicopters in the repair system for each campaign are also displayed in Appendix D. 

A. COMARISON OF THE MODEL WITH IID TIMES BETWEEN 
FAILURES AND THE MODEL WITH A NON-HOMOGENEOUS 
POISSON FAILURE RATE 

This section compares the model with independent identically distributed times 
between mission-affecting failures to a model with a non-homogeneous Poisson 
Failure Rate process. The cases chosen are shown in Table 17. 



Parameters 

Model with iid Times between Failures 

Shape = 1.0, Scale = 8.5 

Model with Non-homogeneous Poisson 
Failures 

X, =0.1,X 2 = 5.8824x10- 3 


Table 17. Description of Models being Compared. 


The other inputs, which remain constant, are as follows: 


89 





Numerical Illustration 


=> 24 

=> 160 

=» 300 

=» 40 

=» 80 

=> 1 

=» 1 

=> 0.25 

=> 8.5 

=> 144-192 

=> 0.1 


Number of Helicopters 
Speed of Helicopters (knots) 

Time between Scheduled Maintenance Actions (flight hours) 
High-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Low-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Scheduled Maintenance Facilities 

Mean Time to Repair a Failure (hours-Exponentially Distributed) 
Mean Time of Helicopter Turnaround (hours-Exponentially 
Distributed) 

Mean Time between Mission-Affecting Failures (hours) 
Minimum/Maximum Time to Complete Scheduled Maintenance 
(hours-Uniformly Distributed) 

Probability of a failure being fatal (Crash) 


One hundred runs of the simulation were conducted for a two-week campaign to 


observe compare the effects of the two separate models. Figure 49 and Figure 50 show 


the results of the simulations for comparison. There is not much difference between the 


output for the two models. This is an expected result since the aging effects are not very 


strong in the non-homogeneous Poisson failure time model. As the strength of the aging 


effect decreases (k 2 approaches zero), the non-homogeneous Poisson failure time model 
approaches the model with iid times between failure, here an exponential distribution. 
The Wiebull distribution with a shape parameter of one is also an exponential 
distribution. This explains why there is very little difference between the two models 
shown. 


90 




3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 

Day 


24 


21 


18 


15 



9 


6 


3 


0 


Figure 49. MOEs for the Model with iid Times between Mission-Affecting Failures. 

This graph shows the effects on the results of the simulation for the model using a 
Weibull distribution to generate times between mission-affecting failures. 


100 . 00 % 

90.00% 

80.00% 

70.00% 

60.00% 

c 

S 50.00% 

« 

CL 

40.00% 

30.00% 

20 . 00 % 

10 . 00 % 

0.00% . 

, 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 

Day 



Figure 50. MOEs for Model with a Non-homogeneous Failure Rate Process. This 
graph shows the effects on the results for the model using a non-homogeneous Poisson 
process to generate times between mission-affecting failures. 


91 





B. ANALYSIS OF A LOWER FATALITY RATE FOR MISSION- 
AFFECTING FAILURES 

Recent analysis of historical data for the percentage of mission-affecting failures 
resulting in a fatality has resulted in an estimate of approximately 1% vice 10% as has 
been modeled previously. This section compares the two different percentages for fatal 
mission-affecting failures. The cases chosen for comparison are shown below in Table 
18. 



% of Mission-Affecting Failures Resulting in Fatalities 

Case I 

10% 

Case II 

1% 


Table 18. Description of the Percentage of Mission-Affecting Failures that are Fatal. 

The other inputs, which remain constant, are as follows: 

Numerical Illustration 


=> 24 

=> 160 

=» 300 

=> 40 

=> 80 

=> 1 

=> 1 

=» 1 

=> 0.25 

=> 144-192 

=> 8.5 

=> 1.0 


Number of Helicopters 
Speed of Helicopters (knots) 

Time between Scheduled Maintenance Actions (flight hours) 
High-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Low-Threat Vulnerability (Mean Time until a Helicopter is Shot 
Down in Region) (hours) 

Repair Facilities 

Scheduled Maintenance Facilities 

Mean Time to Repair a Failure (hours-Exponentially Distributed) 
Mean Time of Helicopter Turnaround (hours-Exponentially 
Distributed) 

Minimum/Maximum Time to Complete Scheduled Maintenance 
(hours-Uniformly Distributed) 

Mean Time between Mission-Affecting Failures (hours) 

Shape of Weibull Distribution Modeling MAF 


92 



One hundred runs of the simulation were conducted for a two-week campaign to 
compare the results for the different percentages of fatal mission-affecting failures. 
Figure 51 and Figure 52 show the results of the simulations for the different percentages 
of mission-affecting failures resulting in fatalities. The graphs show that with the lower 
percentage of mission-affecting failures resulting in fatalities, the helicopters are able to 
provide increased coverage for a longer period of time. With 1% of the mission-affecting 
failures ending in a fatality, the helicopters are able to maintain a mean percent coverage 
of the NAI greater than 80% for a week. The mean number of helicopters does not 
decline as rapidly for the 1-percent case either. At the end of the 2-week campaign the 
mean number of helicopters surviving is 4.22 while still maintaining a mean percent 
coverage per day of almost 24%. The percentage of mission-affecting failures ending 
fatally needs to be addressed and considered during an operational test. A variation in 
this parameter can produce dramatic effects on the performance of the system being 
evaluated. 


93 



100 . 00 % 

90.00% 

80.00% 

70.00% 

60.00% 

c 

8 50.00% 

0 
Q. 

40.00% 

30.00% 

20.00% 

10 . 00 % 

0 . 00 % 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 

Day 

Figure 51. MOEs with 10% of Mission-Affecting Failures Resulting in Fatalities. 

Case I from Table 18 that shows the effects for 10% of mission-affecting failures 
resulting in fatalities on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of helicopters 
surviving. 

100 . 00 % 

90.00% 

80.00% 

70.00% 

60.00% 

c 

8 50.00% 

o 
CL 

40.00% 

30.00% 

20.00% 

10 . 00 % 

0 . 00 % 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 

Day 

Figure 52. MOEs with 1% of Mission-Affecting Failures Resulting in Fatalities. 

Case II from Table 18 that shows the effects with 1% of mission-affecting failures 
resulting in fatalities on the mean percent coverage and the mean number of helicopters 
surviving. 




94 







C. COMPARISONS BETWEEN THE COMANCHE AND THE KIOWA 

WARRIOR 

The RAH-66 Comanche is being acquired to replace the OH-58D Kiowa Warrior. 
A big question that is always asked when purchasing a new weapon system to replace an 
older system is, “How does the new system compare to the old system?” Using the 
simulation, and changing the parameters to fit those of the Kiowa Warrior, a comparison 
between the two weapon systems can be made. 

In performing these comparisons, the assumption was made that the Comanche 
was twice as stealthy as the Kiowa Warrior. This results in the vulnerability rates for the 
Comanche being half that of the Kiowa Warrior. It was assumed for the simulation that 
except for the speed and vulnerability of the helicopters the other parameters are the same 
for the two helicopters. The different parameters for each helicopter are shown below, in 
Table 19. 



Speed 

Mean Time until a 
Helicopter is Shot Down 
while in a Low 
Vulnerability Region 

Mean Time until a 
Helicopter is Shot Down 
while in a High 
Vulnerability Region 

Comanche 

160 Knots 

320 Hours 

160 Hours 

Kiowa Warrior 

110 Knots 

160 Hours 

80 Hours 


Table 19. Description of Differences between Two Helicopter Systems. 


The other inputs, which remain constant, are as follows: 


95 




Numerical Illustration 


=> 24 

=> 300 

=> 1 

=» 1 

=> 1 

=> 0.25 

=> 144-192 

=> 8.5 

=> 1.0 

=> 0.1 


Number of Helicopters 

Time between Scheduled Maintenance Actions (flight hours) 
Repair Facilities 

Scheduled Maintenance Facilities 

Mean Time to Repair a Failure (hours-Exponentially Distributed) 
Mean Time of Helicopter Turnaround (hours-Exponentially 
Distributed) 

Minimum/Maximum Time to Complete Scheduled Maintenance 
(hours-Uniformly Distributed) 

Mean Time between Mission-Affecting Failures (hours) 

Shape of Weibull Distribution Modeling MAF 
Probability of a failure being fatal (Crash) 


One hundred runs of the simulation were conducted for a two-week campaign to 


compare the effects on the MOEs for the two different helicopters. Figure 53 and Figure 


54 show the results of the simulations. It is apparent that the Comanche helicopter 
outperforms the Kiowa Warrior in this scenario. The Kiowa Warrior is able to main tain 


mean coverage of the NAI above 50% for about 6 days, while the Comanche is able to 
maintain mean coverage of the NAI above 50% for over 13 days. During the last week of 
the campaign, the Kiowa Warrior provides very little mean coverage, while the 
Comanche is able to provide nominal mean coverage that never drops below 12%. 
Another large difference between the two helicopters is the mean number of helicopters 
surviving. The Comanche finished the campaign with a mean of 3.66 helicopters 
surviving, while the Kiowa Warrior finished with a mean of 2.53 helicopters. This may 
not seem like a big difference; but in the last week, the Comanche on average, lost almost 
as many helicopters as the Kiowa Warrior was able to keep alive. The Comanche still 
finished the campaign with a greater mean number of helicopters surviving than did the 
Kiowa Warrior. 


96 




The reader is cautioned about placing too much emphasis on this one scenario. 
The simulation operates both helicopters according to the same tactics, but in reality there 
is nothing that say the helicopters must be operated in the same manner to accomplish the 
mission. It is possible that other tactics may be employed by the Kiowa Warrior that 
would allow it to outperform the Comanche. This is just one scenario to illustrate the use 
of the simulation to aid in side-by-side testing of platforms. 


90.00% 


o 50.00% 


30.00% 


HJ 



18 


123456789 


10 11 
Oay 


12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 


Figure 53. MOEs for the Comache Helicopter. This graph show the results of a 
simulation for the Comanche helicopter for a three-week campaign. 


97 





Figure 54. MOEs for the Kiowa Warrior Helicopter. This graph shows the results of a 
simulation for the Kiowa Warrior helicopter for a three-week campaign. 


98 


Helicopters 



VII. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 


A. SUMMARY OF ANALYSIS 

The analysis of the RAH-66 Comanche produced several insights about the 
operation and maintenance of the reconnaissance system. The insights gained are not just 
Comanche-specific, but rather can be extended to a variety of mobile reconnaissance 
systems. 

A few of the parameter changes examined resulted in large variations in the 
measures of effectiveness for both models used in the analysis. The vulnerability of the 
reconnaissance platforms proved to have the largest effect on the MOEs in both models. 
Another parameter that resulted in dramatic changes in the output was the mean time 
between mission-affecting failures. The model utilizing independent identically 
distributed times between mission-affecting failures also indicated that the type of failures 
(i.e., infant or wear out) experienced was an important issue that should be addressed by 
T&E decision-makers. The previously mentioned parameters should all be addressed 
during actual field testing of the Comanche helicopter. The results produced changed 
dramatically for each variation of the parameters. These parameters and the physical and 
operational effects that they represent should be further analyzed and scrutinized to more 
accurately determine their effects on the operation and maintenance of the platform and 
the entire system. 

Other parameters, such as the time between scheduled maintenance activities, the 
number of scheduled maintenance facilities, the overhaul times, and the aging effects 


99 



produced slight variations in the MOEs. These parameters deserve additional analysis. It 
is possible that the results observed for them are a result of the scenario chosen to 
represent a plausible mission for the analysis. Under another set of circumstances and 
mission characteristics, these parameters are likely to produce completely different 
results. The new results and conclusions may well indicate that the parameters do need to 
be addressed during operational testing. 

Additionally, more analysis must be done on those parameters such as the number 
of repair facilities and priority maintenance, which did not produce any noticeable effect 
on the MOEs. The scenarios and/or other parameters should be adjusted so that the 
model is stressed with respect to the parameters being observed. Under new conditions 
and stresses, these parameters may prove to be interesting and warrant additional 
consideration in operational testing. 

B. RECOMMENDATIONS 

1. Model Improvement 

Several improvements and additions to the simulation model can be incorporated 
for future studies. The current model only examines some of the aspects of moving the 
reconnaissance assets to and from a Named Area of Interest. An improvement would be 
to incorporate an analysis of events occurring while a helicopter pair reconnoiters the 
NAI. This should include an analysis of the sensors carried onboard the reconnaissance 
platforms by explicitly including the sensors in the model to represent sensing, detection, 
and identification of enemy units. Additional improvements include providing the ability 


100 





for armed reconnaissance platforms to react to a threat while transiting to and from the 
NAI, as well as incorporating a means for monitoring several NAIs at once. 

2. Further Studies and Analysis 

Current ongoing studies continue to analyze the capabilities and limitations of the 
RAH-66 Comanche helicopter. Future studies conducted, as a follow on to this thesis, 
will provide additional relevant information that may be incorporated into or even 
amplify the results of current studies. Additional study and analysis is needed concerning 
the sensor packages that are being incorporated into the Comanche helicopter. Specific 
items of study would include sensor failures (which are incorporated in the MTBMAF in 
this study), the capabilities of individual sensors, the combined capabilities of multiple 
sensors, the effects of any redundancy that may be incorporated into the sensor systems, 
and the interaction between the sensors and the platform. Additionally, the ability of a 
platform to communicate information obtained from its sensors to other assets working in 
conjunction with it, as well as commanders and other units in need of the acquired 
information, should also be studied using modeling and simulation. Any operation that 
employs a reconnaissance asset is also open to studies of the type described here. 

C. CONCLUSIONS 

This thesis has demonstrated the use of a simple, event-step, stochastic simulation 
to identify influential parameters involved in operating and maintaining a mobile 
reconnaissance system. Through the conduct of sensitivity analysis by varying input 
parameters to observe the effects on the output, influential parameters (and distributional 


101 




forms) were investigated. The influential parameters determined should be monitored 
and scrutinized during Operational Tests of the platform of interest. 

The simulation was exercised by conducting sensitivity analysis on several input 
parameters that correspond to actual operational parameters for the RAH-66 Comanche 
helicopter. The analysis performed with the simulation can be used to aid in the 
preparation of the Test and Evaluation Master Plan (TEMP) and conduct of the 
Operational Test and Evaluation of the Comanche helicopter. Two hypothetical 
distribution models were used to represent the times between mission-affecting failures to 
show the versatility that can easily be incorporated into a simulation designed for use on a 
personal computer. 

In addition to the above-mentioned application, the simulation can also be used to 
assist in the conduct of side-by-side testing of competing reconnaissance platforms by 
manipulating the input parameters to correspond to the competing platforms. Another 
possible application for its use would be to analyze the capabilities of different sized units 
to provide information for force structure decisions. 


102 




List of References 


Carter, T., 1.2.2.8.4 "Plan Operational Test & Evaluation", Defense Acquisition 
Deskbook, 18 Dec 1998. 

Coyle, P. E., presentation at Modeling and Simulation Conference, Huntsville, Alabama, 
May 13, 1998, [www.dote.osd.mil/pubs.html]. Date Accessed: 25 October 1999. 

Crowder, M. J., and others. Statistical Analysis of Reliability Data , Chapman & Hall, 
1991. 

DOD 5000.2-R, "Mandatory Procedures for MDAPs and MAIS Acquisition Programs", 
11 May 1999. 

DoD Directive 5141.2, “Director of Operational Test and Evaluation”, 17 January 1989. 

Feller, W. (1967), An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications, Vol. 1, 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York 

Gaver, D. P., "Planning and Conducting T&E", 

fhttp://web.nps.navv.mil/~orfacpag/resumePafes/gaver/planning.html . Date Accessed: 25 
October 1999. 

Hartman, James K., Parry, Sam H., Caldwell, William J., Aggregated Combat Modeling, 
7 December 1992. 

Heath, G. D., Simulation Analysis of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV), Master’s Thesis, 
Operations Research Department, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, California, June 
1999. 

Law, A. M. and Kelton (1991), Simulation Modeling and Analysis, 2 nd ed., McGraw-Hill, 
Inc. 

O'Bryan, James F., M&S Facing Reality, presentation at Francis Scott Key ITEA Chapter, 
Aberdeen Proving Ground, Maryland, 16 July 1998, 
[http://www.dote.osd.mi1/lfte/articles/MSREAL/MSREAL.HTM#T able of Contents], 
Date Accessed: 30 October 1999. 

Ross, Sheldon M., Introduction to Probability Models, 6 th ed.. Academic Press, 1997. 

Stoneman, J. G., Operational Analysis of the Sustainability of a Mobile Military 
Platform, Master’s Thesis, Operations Research Department, Naval Postgraduate School, 
Monterey, California, September 1998. 


103 



Stork, Kirk A., Sensors in Object Oriented Discrete Event Simulation, Master’s Thesis, 
Operations Research Department, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, California, 
September 1996. 

[https://www.msrr.dmso.mil/KeywordMain.htm], Date Accessed: 15 November 1999. 


104 



APPENDIX A: ANALYTICAL MODELS FOR COMPARISON 


In order to check the validity of the simulation model, a comparison was made to 
analytical models developed by Professor Patricia A. Jacobs. The analytical models 
calculate the expected time spent by an individual helicopter over the high-threat region 
given that it entered the high-threat region, and the probability of an individual helicopter 
returning to its home base given that it started a mission. Exponential distributions were 
assumed for all times to failures and repairs. 

Parameters: 

A. = Rate of all Mission-affecting Failures 

Xo = Rate of Non-fatal Mission-affecting Failures 

Xf = Rate of Fatal Mission-affecting Failures 

Ko = Kill Rate over Ingress Route (attrition and crashes)—Low Threat Region 
Ki = Kill Rate over Egress Route (attrition and crashes)—Low Threat Region 
K 2 = Kill Rate in High Threat Area (attrition and crashes)—High Threat Region 
To = Ingress Time (hours) 

Ti = Egress Time (hours) 

T 2 = Time in High Threat Region (hours) 


In order to compare the analytical models to the simulation, the values for each of 
the parameters are set equal to the corresponding value in the simulation. The rate of non- 
fatal mission-affecting failures (Ao) is equal to the percentage of mission-affecting failures 
that are non-fatal (here assumed to be 90%) multiplied by the mission-affecting failure 
rate (A = 1/8.5). The fatal mission-affecting failure rate is calculated in the same fashion. 
The kill rates for each region are calculated by taking the inverse of the mean time until 
an individual helicopter is shot down in the respective region. The values for each of the 
parameters are listed below. 


105 




X =0.1176 
Xq =0.1059 
X f =0.01176 
K0 = 0.0125 
Kl =0.0125 
k 2 = 0.025 
x0 = 0.5675 
tl= 0.4156 
x2 = 2.0169 


Rate of all Mission-affecting Failures 

Rate of Non-fatal Mission-affecting Failures 

Rate of Fatal Mission-affecting Failures 

Kill Rate over Ingress Route (attrition)—Low Threat Region 

Kill Rate over Egress Route (attrition)—Low Threat Region 

Kill Rate in High Threat Area (attrition)—High Threat Region 

Ingress Time (hours) 

Egress Time (hours) 

Time in High Threat Region (hours) 


Conditional Expected Time Over High Threat RegionIGiven the High Threat Region Was 
Entered = 

(1-exp (~(A + ic 2 )t 2 )) 

(X + fc 2 ) 


Equation (A-1) 


Probability of Mission Survival = 


0 


A + Ay + 2/Cq 


r 

r 

1-exp 

— 

V 

1 V 


A + Ay + 2X"q 


A Y\ 


0 


JJ 


Probability that a mission - affecting failure occurs 
during ingress and platform returns to base. 

exp(- (a + k q )r Q )— ^ exp(-(A f +^)^ )(l - exp(- (a + ^ )r 2 )) 


Probability that a mission - affecting failure occurs in 
the high threat region and platform returns to base. 

exp(-( A + k q )t q ) exp(-( A + )t 2 ) exp(-(Ay + ^ )t j (l - exp(- A q t 1 


+ 


Probability that a mission - affecting failure occurs 
during egress and platform returns to base. 
exp(- (A + k q )t q )exp(-(A + k 2 \ 2 ) exp(-(A + k { ^)] 

--—-v---- — 1 1 J 

Probability that no events occur during the mission flight. 
Equation (A-2) 


106 



The results from the simulation and the analytical models are shown below in 
Table 20 and add credibility to the validity of the simulation results. In the simulation 
helicopters move via waypoints when no failures occur, but when a failure occurs, the 
helicopter returns to the home base via the most direct route. Thus the time it takes to 
leave an area because of a failure will be somewhat less than the time it took to get into 
the area. Therefore, and as expected, the simulated probability of return to the home base 
will be slightly greater than that for the analytical model. 

The simulated expected time over the high threat region is slightly higher than the 
analytical model because of an assumption made in the analytical model. If a helicopter 
fails while in the high threat region, it immediately and instantaneously moves to the 
egress route, which is located in a low threat region. The simulation must (realistically) 
fly each helicopter out of the high threat region if it experiences a mission-affecting 
failure. This additional time in the high threat region for the simulation model accounts 
for the difference in the expected time over the high-threat region between the two 
models. 



Simulation 

Analytical Model 

Probability of Returning to Home 
Base given a Helicopter Launch 

0.927 (0.0046) 

0.918 

Expected Time Over High-Threat 
Region during a Mission given 
High-Threat Region was Entered 

1.774 (0.005) Hours 

1.753 Hours 


Table 20. Comparison of Simulation and Analytical Models. 


107 












108 



APPENDIX B: SIMULATION DATA OUTPUT FOR WEIBULL 


DISTRIBUTION 


The following tables list extended output results from each of the simulations 
conducted for this thesis: They summarize measures of variability between hypothetical 
campaigns (100 campaigns/replications). 



Coverage 

Helicopters 


Percentiles 



Percentiles 

Day 

25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 

Surviving Helos 

se 

25% 

50% 

75% 

1 

72.42% 

78.04% 

81.99% 

0.63% 

77.37% 

21.56 

0.16 

21 

22 

23 

2 

75.31% 

80.70% 

86.65% 

0.79% 

80.96% | 

19.2 

0.22 

17 

20 

21 

3 

77.08% 

80.97% 

86.26% 

% 0.72% 

81.28% 

16.59 

0.27 

15 

17 

18 

4 

77.41% 

82.14% 

85.61% 

0.70% 

81.38% 

14.01 

0.28 

13 

14 

16 

5 

74.75% 

80.94% - 

84.77% 

0.85% 

79.60% 

11.4 

0.33 

9 

12 

14 

6 

69.67% 

77.67% 

84.12% 

1.26% 

74.92% 

8.96 

0.31 

7 

9 

11 

7 

52.69% 

71.45% 

82.37% 

2.36% 

64.64% 

6.79 

0.30 

4 

6.5 

9 

8 

33.47% 

53.14% 

73.72% 

2.69% 

49.92% 

5.21 


3 

5 

7 

9 

9.66% 

33.02% 

57.20% 

2.74% 

34.83% 

4.27 

0.20 

3 

4 

6 

10 

0.00% 

20.66% 

39.82% 

2.36% 

24.72% 

3.39 

0.16 

2 

3 

5 

11 

0.00% 

7.78% 

26.86% 

1.69% 

15.09% 

2.83 

0.13 

2 

2 

4 

12 

0.00% 

0.00% 

14.33% 

1.41% 

8.83% 

2.57 

0.11 

2 

2 

3 

13 

0.00% 

0.00% 

6.97% 

1.15% 

6.09% 

2.35 

0.11 

1.75 

2 

3 

14 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.71% 

2.56% 

2.23 

0.10 

1 

2 

3 

Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

81.28 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

8.1 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

13.67 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.511009 

0.004458 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

150.66 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.927751 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

17.3114 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entiy 

1.597238 

0.003787 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

260.12 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

131.9227 

1.925418 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

1.091719 

0.03096 


Table 21. Data for Figure 3, Figure 9, Figure 13, Figure 17, Figure 18, and Figure 

21 . 


109 




















































































































































































Coverage 

Helicopters 


Percentiles 





Percentiles 

Day 

25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 

Surviving Helos 

se 

25% 

50% 

75% 

1 

62.45% 

67.38% 

71.47% 

0.67% 

67.23% 

20.13 

0.20 

19 

20 

22 

2 

76.72% 


85.18% 

0.66% 

80.79% 

16.95 

0.24 

15 

17 

19 

3 

76.53% 



0.79% 

81.30% 

14.1 

0.29 

12 

14 

mm 

4 

76.05% 

81.81% 

87.55% 

1.03% 

80.31% 

11.27 

0.32 

9 

11 

mm 

5 

66.04% 

77.83% 

85.36% 

1.32% 

76.31% 

8.81 

0.31 

7 

8.5 


6 

49.99% 

67.47% 

82.95% 

1.96% 

65.86% 

6.87 

0.29 

5 

7 

8.25 

7 

40.94% 

59.34% 

73.31% 

2.57% 

55.59% 

5.46 

0.26 

3 

5 

7 

8 

19.13% 



2.94% 

41.18% 

4.29 

0.20 

3 

4 

5 

9 

0.00% 

29.71% 

48.07% 

2.68% 

29.64% 

3.59 

0.18 

2 

3 

5 

10 

0.00% 

13.69% 

33.88% 

2.14% 

18.86% 

2.93 

0.15 

2 

3 

4 

11 

0.00% 


25.66% 

1.77% 

13.05% 

2.52 

0.13 

2 

2 

3 

12 

0.00% 

0.00% 

8.54% 

1.57% 

8.58% 

2.26 

0.11 

1 

2 

3 

13 

0.00% 



1.24% 

5.29% 

2.1 

0.10 

1 

2 

3 

14 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

1.24% 

4.06% 

1.98 

0.09 

1 

2 

3 


Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

95.52 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

9.42 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

12.6 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.558162 

0.005323 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

147.21 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.925209 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

15.89311 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.617756 

0.003979 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

235.78 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

113.8934 

1.943627 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

j 1.714299 

0.063173 


Table 22. Data for Figure 4. 


110 























































































































































Coverage 


Helicopters 



Percentiles 

Percentiles 

Day 

25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 

Surviving 

Helos 



50% 

75% 

1 

83.46% 

86.29% 

89.31% 

0.47% 

86.22% 

21.92 

0.14 

21 

22 

23 

2 

79.37% 

84.62% 

89.03% 

0.67% 

84.23% 

19.47 

0.22 

18 

19 

21 

wm 

76.60% 

81.54% 

84.66% 

0.66% 

81.18% 

16.59 

0.26 

15 

17 

18 

4 

77.53% 

81.87% 

85.44% 

0.66% 

81.19% 

13.95 

0.29 

12 

14 

16 

5 

74.62% 

80.87% 

84.82% 

0.93% 

79.05% 

11.29 

0.31 

9.75 

11.5 

13 

6 

69.28% 

76.72% 

82.05% 

1.56% 

73.07% 

8.86 

0.32 

7 

9 

10.25 

HQII 

54.21% 

65.29% 

78.98% 

2.13% 

63.33% 

6.86 


5 

6 

9 

8 

31.54% 

45.83% 

71.16% 

2.60% 

47.47% 

5.2 


3.75 

5 

1 

9 

9.39% 

34.76% 

47.67% 

2.46% 

33.08% 

4.2 

0.18 

3 

4 

5 

10 

5.06% 

22.03% 

35.77% 

1.93% 

22.51% 

3.41 

0.15 

2.75 

3 

4 

11 

0.00% 

13.73% 

31.95% 

1.81% 

17.84% 

2.85 

0.13 

2 

3 

4 

12 

0.00% 

0.00% 

16.42% 

1.52% 

10.09% 

2.54 

0.12 

2 

2 

3 

13 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

1.12% 

5.28% 

2.43 

0.11 

2 

2 

3 

14 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.92% 

3.66% 

2.29 

0.11 

2 

2 

3 

Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 



Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

7.46 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

14.25 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.49884 

0.004345 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

146.93 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.926121 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

17.42838 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.611129 

0.003711 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 



Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

259.62 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

132.5984 

1.913532 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

0.978329 

0.027694 


Table 23. Data for Figure 5. 


Ill 














































































































































































Helicopters 



12 

52.96% 

13 

36.51% 

14 

28.05% 

15 

12.27% 

16 

0.00% 

17 

0.00% 

18 

0.00% 

19 

0.00% 

20 

0.00% 

21 

0.00% 


23.40% 


13.96% 


11.18% 


0 . 00 % 


86.23% 


87.22% 


83.70% 


79.22% 


71.22% 


67.14% 


51.29% 


41.33% 


41.20% 


36.14% 


34.04% 


27.47% 


Total Runs 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 21.0 Days 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 21.0 Days 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 21.0 Days 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 


Mean Missions Started per campaign of 21.0 Days 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 21 .ODays 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 


Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 21J 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 21.0 Days 


Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 21.0 Days 


50% 

75% 

23 

23 

21.5 

23 

20 

mm 



17 

19 



15 

16 

13 

15 


mm 

10 

13 

9 

11 

8 

10 



100 


143.01 


14.14 


6.2 


0.5096881 0.003339 


259.82 


0.960858 


31.16501 


1.651637 


2.01686 


452.86 


236.6388 


1.3285281 0.0323461 



Table 24. Data for Figure 6. 


112 




































































































































































































Coverage 


Helicopters 


Percentiles 


25% ! 

50% 1 

75% 

se 

73.26% 

77.98% 

81.99% 

0.61% 

77.83% 

82.36% 

86.50% 

0.63% 

79.50% 

82.69% 

87.91% 

0.63% 

78.25% 

82.98% 

87.49% 

0.66% 

79.80% 

83.47% 

87.27% 

0.63% 

78.68% 

82.76% 

85.60% 

0.79% 

75.82% 

82.32% 

86.99% 

0.93% 

69.12% 

81.18% 

86.92% 

1.73% 

53.06% 

71.11% 

82.34% 

2.16% 

41.12% 

68.94% 

81.11% 

2.69% 

32.20% 

49.69% 

66.00% 

2.59% 

22.52% 

41.76% 

60.87% 

2.72% 

0.00% 

31.73% 

44.02% 

2.65% 

0.00% 

23.48% 

41.20% 

2.40% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

32.37% 

2.14% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

15.08% 

1.80% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

14.14% 

1.37% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

20.60% 

1.61% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

19.10% 

1.57% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

2.87% 

1.19% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

1.24% 


Percentiles 


Percent Coverage 


77.78% 


82.10% 


83.28% 


82.65% 


83.54% 


81.71% 


80.81% 


75.11% 


66.79% 


59.86% 


48.75% 


41.59% 


30.30% 


23.67% 


15.96% 


10.25% 


9.78% 


11 . 12 % 


10.78% 


6.24% 


5.16% 


Surviving 

Helos 


22.23 


9 


10 


11 


12 


13 


14 


15 


16 


17 


18 


19 


20 


21 


Total Runs 

Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 21.0 Days 

Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 21.0 Days 

Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 21.0 Days 

Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 21.0 Days 

Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 21 .ODays 

Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 


Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 21.0 Days 


Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 21.0 Days 


25% 

50% 

75% 

22 

22 | 

23 

19 

20 

21 

17 

18 

20 

15 

17 

18 

13 

16 

17 

11 

13 

15.25 

9 

11.5 

14 


of 21.0 Days 


3.5 


3 


3 


3 


3 


2.5 


100 


115.05 


11.46 


10.02 


0.50974 0.003723 



24.97815 


1.636928) 0.003079 


2.01686 


366.22 


191.8066 3.016142 


1.025909 0.028804 


Table 25. Data for Figure 7. 


113 

















































































































































































































































25% 


75% 

se 

Percent Coverage ' 

71.56% 

75.89% 

80.66% 

0.62% 

75.85% 

76.67% 

81.54% 

86.05% 

0.67% 

81.53% 

78.51% 

82.15% 

86.24% 

0.66% 

£1.76% 

77.38% 


0.66% 

82.27% 

76.31% 

80.91% 

84.86% 

0.90% 

79.63% 

67.40% 

76.61% 

83.77% 

1.21% 

74.04% 


8 

34.28% 


2.42% 

49.70% 

5.15 

0.27 

3 

9 

8.56% 

29.04% 

43.10% 

2.52% 

30.64% 

4.18 

0.23 

3 

10 

0.00% 

12.60% 

34.15% 

2.44% 

20.82% 

3.46 

0.18 

2 



11.99% 

27.83% 



2.85 


2 

12 

0.00% 

0.00% 

16.51% 

1.47% 

9.49% 

2.53 

0.11 

2 




19 

0.00% 

0.00% 

iSISIBill 

5.61% 

1.59 

20 


0.00% 

0.99% 

3.52% 

1.51 

21 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.79% 

2.52% 

1.47 



Total Runs 

100 

Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 21.0 Days 

84.26 

Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 21.0 Days 

8.35 

Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 21.0 Days 

14.18 

Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.510947 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 21.0 Days 

155.77 

Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.927682 

Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 21 .ODays 

17.84127 

Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.596653 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 

Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 21.0 Days 

268.18 

Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 21.0 Days 

142.676 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 21.0 Days 

0.735119 




2.600398 


0.019189 


Table 26. Data for Figure 8. 


114 
































































































































































































Coverage 


Helicopters 


Percentiles 


25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

73.47% 

77.22% 

80.99% 

0.61% 

75.89% 

81.20% 

86.61% 

0.69% 

77.70% 

82.31% 

85.88% 

0.63% 

77.63% 

82.30% 

87.31% 

0.63% 

77.50% 

83.35% 

86.54% 

0.86% 

71.23% 

79.90% 

86.02% 

1.39% 

56.51% 

71.63% 

82.35% 

2.12% 

39.57% 

57.98% 

71.72% 

2.51% 

0.00% 

36.03% 

57.20% 

2.79% 

0.00% 

15.04% 

37.63% 

2.42% 

0.00% 

6.87% 

30.81% 

2.03% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

17.36% 

1.69% 

0.00% 

| 0.00% 

6.87% 

1.29% 

0.00% 

1 0.00% 

0.00% 

0.98% 



77.04% 


81.56% 


81.70% 


81.98% 


81.25% 


76.52% 


66.23% 


52.83% 


34.84% 


21.94% 


16.60% 


11.17% 


6.89% 


2.89% 


8 


9 


10 


11 


12 


13 


14 


Total Runs 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 


Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 


Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.( 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


Percentiles 

25% 

50% 

75% 

21 

22 

23 

18 

19 

21 



100 


81.88 


8.04 


14.15 


0.50788 0.004401 


153.54 


0.927739 


17.58288 


1.603058 0.003761 


2.01686 


263.24 


129.881 


1.093224 0.031916 



Table 27. Data for Figure 10. 


115 































































































































































































Coverage 


Percent Coverage 



Helicopters 


Percentiles 


81.46% 


81.57% 


77.53% 


67.17% 


54.78% 


39.87% 


25.99% 


14.21% 


11.47% 


7.48% 


3.44% 


Surviving 

Helos 

se 

25.00% 

50.00% 

21.56 

0.17 

21 

22 

18.85 

0.22 

18 

19 

16.29 

0.26 

15 

17 

13.85 

0.30 

12 

14 

11.53 

0.34 

9 

12 

9.09 

0.35 

7 

9.5 


Total Runs 


75.00% 


23 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 


Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 


Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


Table 28. Data for Figure 11. 



0.927963 


17.90625 


1.6013941 0.0037191 


2.01686 


268.3 


128.1642 


1.124213 


1.825705 


0.032688 



116 







































































































































Percentiles 


Coverage 


Helicopters 


Percentiles 


Day 

25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 

Surviving Helos 

se 



75% 

1 

60.90% 

65.27% 

68.60% 

0.69% 

65.25% 

20.61 

0.19 

19 

21 

22 

2 

64.50% 

68.77% 

74.98% 

0.80% 

69.66% 

17.17 

0.27 

15 

18 

19 

3 

63.95% 

68.87% 

76.21% 

0.92% 

69.41% 

14.02 


12 

14 

16 

4 

50.06% 

63.21% 

69.33% 

1.31% 

60.02% 

10.86 

0.32 

8 

11 

13 

5 

39.04% 

49.89% 

61.59% 

1.52% 

48.84% 

8.2 

0.30 

6 

8 

11 

6 

26.25% 

42.32% 

52.53% 

1.74% 

39.87% 

6.38 

0.28 

4 

6 

8 

7 

20.76% 

32.68% 



31.04% 

4.86 

0.24 

3 

5 

6.25 

8 

1.06% 

22.83% 

36.15% 

1.68% 

22.07% 

3.9 

0.22 

2 

4 

5 

9 

0.00% 

10.34% 

26.87% 

1.83% 

15.54% 

3.2 

0.18 

2 

3 

4 

10 

0.00% 

1.82% 

14.94% 

1.43% 

9.96% 

2.7 


2 

2 

3 

11 

0.00% 

0.00% 



7.10% 

2.17 

0.12 

1 

2 

3 

12 

0.00% 

0.00% 



4.54% 

1.97 

0.10 

1 

2 

3 

13 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.89% 

3.17% 

1.83 

0.09 

1 

2 

2 

14 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.73% 

2.64% 

1.74 

0.09 

1 

2 

2 

Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

121.22 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

12.06 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

10.2 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.678439 

0.005747 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

137.56 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.91909 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

11.80142 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.363013 

0.004639 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

207.8 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

110.3635 

1.851948 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

2.322277 

0.109045 


Table 29. Data for Figure 12. 


117 















































































































































































Percentiles 


Coverage 


Helicopters 


Percentiles 


Eslf 

25% 


IBB 

se 

Percent Coverage 

Surviving Helos 

se 

25% 

50% 


1 

78.39% 

83.27% 

86.60% 


82.45% 

21.87 

0.12 

21 

22 

23 

2 

85.20% 



0.52% 

88.89% 

19.77 


oo 

20 

21 

3 

85.45% 

88.90% 

92.68% 

0.50% 

88.89% 

17.51 

0.23 

16 

17 

19 

4 

84.58% 

89.65% 

93.40% 

0.64% 

88.87% 


0.27 

14 

15 

17 

5 

85.80% 

89.81% 

92.63% 

0.59% 

89.24% 

13.11 

0.29 

11 

13 

15 

6 

81.93% 

87.53% 

92.32% 


86.87% 

10.87 

0.32 

8.75 

11 

12.25 

7 

77.46% 



1.48% 

82.49% 

8.79 


6 

9 

11 

8 

65.53% 

81.06% 

88.29% 



6.79 

0.31 

4.75 

6 

8 

9 

35.50% 



2.98% 

55.23% 

5.45 


3.75 

5 

7 

10 

10.24% 

42.62% 

61.63% 

3.07% 

40.44% 

4.21 

0.22 

2.75 

4 

5 

11 

0.70% 



2.75% 


3.5 

0.16 

2 

3 

4 

12 

0.00% 

6.14% 

36.60% 

2.16% 

17.48% 

2.92 

0.13 

2 

3 

4 

13 

0.00% 




10.14% 

2.65 

0.11 

2 

3 

3 

14 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

1.31% 

5.96% 

2.48 

0.10 

2 

2 

3 


Total Runs 

_L. 

100 


Mean Number of MAP per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

47.91 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

4.76 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

16.76 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.39834 

0.003481 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

156.63 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 



Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

20.99556 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.742852 

0.003101 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

289.12 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

146.0683 

1.985407 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

0.714974 

0.018502 


Table 30. Data for Figure 14. 


118 







































































































































Coverage 1 

Helicopters 


Percentiles 

Percentiles 

Day 

25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent 

Coverage 

Surviving 

Helos 

se 

25% 

50% 

75% 

1 

72.48% 

76.59% 

80.63% 

0.60% 

76.19% 

21.39 

0.16 

20 

21 

23 

2 

76.71% 

81.23% 

86.23% 

0.71% 

81.32% 

18.64 

0.23 

17 

19 

20 

3 

78.07% 

82.68% 

86.70% 

0.67% 

82.22% 

15.66 

0.30 

14 

16 

18 

4 

77.78% 

82.77% 

87.21% 

0.86% 

81.66% 

13.08 

0.32 

11 

13 

15 

5 

72.44% 

80.54% 

85.53% 

1.16% 

77.84% 

10.31 

0.35 

7.75 

11 

13 

6 

64.38% 



1.84% 

69.67% 

8.14 

0.36 

5 

8 

11 

7 

42.35% 

66.58% ; 

80.96% 

2.43% 

61.19% 

6.12 

0.32 

4 

5.5 

8 

8 

30.27% 

50.46% 

70.34% 

2.63% 

48.75% 

4.54 

0.27 

2.75 

4 

6 

9 

16.64% 

34.54% 

54.37% 

2.59% 

36.02% 

3.36 

0.21 

2 

3 

4 

10 

0.68% 

24.63% 

37.12% 

2.37% 

25.58% 

2.5 

0.17 

1 

2 

3 

11 

0.00% 

6.24% 

30.86% 

2.03% 

16.12% 

1.92 

0.13 

1 

2 

2 

12 

0.00% 

0.00% 

21.60% 

1.78% 

11.23% 

1.66 

0.10 

1 

1 

2 

13 

0.00% 

0.00% 

13.90% 

1.60% 

9.18% 

1.41 

0.08 

1 

1 

2 

14 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

1.22% 

5.96% 

1.22 

0.06 

1 

1 

1 

Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

81.73 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

8.2 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

14.58 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.511008 

0.004428 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

151.77 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.924952 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

17.32763 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.593956 

0.003789 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 

14.0 Days 

260.9 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

121.0823 

1.772463 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

1.077279 

0.033694 


Table 31. Data for Figure 15. 


119 


















































































































































































Coverage 


Helicopters 


Percentiles 


Percentiles 


Day 


25% 


50% 


75% 


Percent Coverage 


Surviving 

Helos 


25% 


50% 


75% 


72.66% 


76.36% 


79.95% 


0.63% 


76.25% 


21.46 


0.16 


21 


22 


23 


76.65% 


81.82% 


85.74% 


0.66% 


80.99% 


18.63 


0.23 


17 


19 


20 


77.34% 


81.23% 


86.87% 


0.66% 


81.75% 


16.21 


0.28 


14 


16 


18 


77.59% 


82.45% 


86 . 12 % 


0.72% 


81.71% 


13.25 


0.33 


11 


13 


15.25 


75.23% 


81.03% 


85.38% 


1.04% 


79.27% 


10.67 


0.35 


11 


13 


64.48% 


77.39% 


82.44% 


1 . 68 % 


72.07% 


8.36 


0.33 


11 


45.49% 


68.89% 


80.16% 


2.29% 


63.16% 


6.53 


0.31 


8.25 


30.57% 


50.15% 


72.14% 


2.55 % 


49.25% 


5.06 


0.27 


13.60% 


33.41% 


54.11% 


2.59% 


36.03% 


3.96 


0.23 


10 


0.00% 


22.51% 


37.39% 


2.42% 


24.84% 


3.29 


0.20 


11 


0 . 00 % 


2.38% 


25.79% 


2 . 00 % 


14.23% 


2.69 


0.16 


12 


0.00% 


0.00% 


12.88% 


1j 


9.70% 


2.34 


0.13 


13 


0.00% 


0 . 00 % 


9.48% 


1.35% 


7.55% 


2.09 


0.11 


14 


0 . 00 % 


0 . 00 % 


7.87% 


1.07% 


5.94% 


1.79 


0.10 


2.25 


Total Runs 


100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


81.38 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


8.08 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


14.13 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 


0.509968 


0.004 


Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 


151.22 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 


0.926564 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 


17.33481 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 


1.594861 


0.004 


Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 


2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


260.86 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


127.1746 


1.901 


Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


1.079734 


0.038 


Table 32. Data for Figure 16. 


120 






















































































































































i 

Coverage 

—r-r 

Percentiles 




10 


11 


12 


13 


14 


71.43% 


76.10% 


79.39% 


77.88% 


75.13% 


69.68% 


47.93% 


33.65% 


7.55% 


0 . 00 % 


0 . 00 % 


0 . 00 % 


0 . 00 % 


0 . 00 % 


77.62% 


80.81% 


82.31% 


82.17% 


81.72% 


79.68% 


69.15% 


51.96% 


34.33% 


25.79% 


13.78% 


0 . 00 % 


0 . 00 % 


0.00% 


81.28% 


84.38% 


85.98% 


87.14% 


85.72% 


85.74% 


81.05% 


73.17% 


53.63% 


40.54% 


30.03% 


0.69% 


0.61% 


0.59% 


0.77% 


1.18% 


1.64% 


2.15% 


2.62% 


2.63% 


76.26% 


80.43% 


82.45% 


81.74% 


78.71% 


75.32% 


64.13% 


50.40% 


34.51% 


2.43% 


2 . 02 % 


25.19% 


13.73% 


14.64% 1.33% 


1 . 68 % 


1.55% 


26.56% 


19.20% 


12.97% 


9.09% 


8.76% 


Helicopters 


Surviving 

Helos 


21.61 


18.88 


16.18 


13.59 


11.24 


9.03 


6.91 


5.35 


4.23 


3.53 


2.76 


2.39 


2.1 


1.79 


0.15 


0.23 


0.27 


0.32 


0.34 


0.34 


0.32 


0.28 


0.23 


0.19 


0.15 


0.14 


0.12 


0.09 


Percentiles 


25% 


21 


18 


15 


12 


50% 


22 


19 


16 


14 


11 


2.5 


75% 


23 


21 


18 


15.25 


14 


11 


4.25 


Total Runs 

-1_ 

100 

_1_ 

Mean Number of MAP per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

83.4 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

8.27 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

13.94 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.509845 

0.004 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

154.93 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.928322 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

17.75947 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.601756 

0.004 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

266.1 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

130.541 

1.91 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

1.098508 

0.027 


Table 33. Data for Figure 19. 



















































































































































































Coverage 



Helicopters 


Percentiles 


50% 



80.91% I 0.70% 


77.89% 81.94% 86.21% 0.64% 



Percent Coverage 

Surviving 

Helos 

se 

76.03% 

21.42 

ES 


Percentiles 


50% 75% 



Total Runs 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 


Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 


Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


14.0 Days 


3 


3 


3 


2 


2 


100 


83.17 


8.3 


13.89 


0.509319 


154.84 


0.928345 


17.73118 


1.610461 


2.01686 


264.24 


130.4998 


1.110804 



Table 34. Data for Figure 20. 


122 

























































































































































Percentiles 


Coverage 


Helicopters 


Percentiles 


Day 

25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 

Surviving Helos 

se 



75% 

1 

73.58% 

77.66% 

81.73% 

0.59% 

77.67% 

21.65 

0.16 

21 

22 

23 

2 

76.97% 

82.93% 

86.96% 

0.72% 

82.26% 

19.02 

0.22 

17.75 

19 

20 

3 

77.46% 

81.82% 

88.22% 

0.73% 

82.00% 

16.23 

0.26 

14 

16 

18 

4 

76.62% 

82.02% 

87.11% 

0.71% 

81.84% 

13.49 

0.34 

11 

13.5 

16 

5 

75.62% 

80.95% 

86.63% 

0.81% 

80.57% 

10.82 

0.38 

7.75 

11 

13 

6 

68.89% 

79.71% 

83.88% 

1.87% 

73.22% 



6 

8 

11 

7 

48.26% 

71.80% 

82.02% 

2.90% 

61.40% 

6.46 

0.34 

4 

5 

9 

8 

13.24% 

46.43% 

78.38% 

3.31% 

45.58% 

5.26 

0.31 

3 

4 

8 

9 i 

0.00% 

26.30% 

65.03% 

3.27% 

32.52% 

4.11 

0.23 

3 

3 

5 

10 

0.00% 

8.64% 

44.81% 

2.88% 

24.23% 

3.41 

0.18 

2 

3 

4 

ii 

0.00% 

3.14% 

26.62% 

2.26% 

16.01% 

2.8 

0.15 

2 

2.5 

3 

12 

0.00% 

0.00% 

12.82% 

1.78% 

9.73% 

2.5 

0.14 

2 

2 

3 

13 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

1.48% 

5.72% 

2.33 

0.12 

2 

2 

3 

14 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

1.20% 

3.56% 

2.24 

0.11 

2 

2 

3 

Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

80.74 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

8.02 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

13.74 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.513323 

0.005 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

148.63 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.926798 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

17.13487 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.605892 

0.004 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

256.08 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

129.3895 

1.924 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

0.486483 

0.013 


Table 35. Data for Figure 22. 


123 




















































































































































































Percentiles 


Coverage 


Helicopters 


Percentiles 



25% 


75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 

Surviving 

Helos 

se 

25% 

50% 

75% 

1 



81.40% 

0.61% 

76.71% 

21.28 

0.16 

21 

21.5 

22 

2 

77.20% 

82.20% 

86.69% 

0.74% 

81.72% 

18.71 

0.22 

17 

19 

20 

3 

77.09% 

81.36% 

86.54% 

0.63% 

81.78% 

16.2 

0.27 

15 

16 

■EH 

4 

75.70% 

80.79% 




13.52 

0.31 

11 

14 


5 

75.99% 

82.03% 

86.37% 

1.06% 

80.23% 

11.04 

0.34 

9 

11 

13 

6 

74.65% 

78.65% 

83.60% 

IPpiJ 


8.39 

0.31 

6 

9 

10.25 

7 


76.68% 



65.61% 

6.37 

0.32 

4 

6 

8 

8 

23.83% 



3.11% 

48.23% 

4.62 

0.25 

3 

4 

6 

9 


25.05% 

47.15% 



3.68 

0.22 

2 

3 

5 

10 




2.47% 

18.77% 

2.98 

0.17 

2 

3 

4 

11 

0.00% • 

0.05% 

23.09% 

2.07% 

14.24% 

2.55 

0.13 

2 

2 

' 3 

12 

0.00% 

0.00% 

10.93% 


8.64% 

2.28 

0.11 

1 

2 

3 

13 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

1.06% 

3.29% 

2.12 

0.11 

1 

2 

3 

14 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.46% 

1.10% 

2.06 

0.11 

1 

2 

3 


Total Runs 

-1 

100 

— 

Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

79.26 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

7.89 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

14.05 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.509588 

0.004 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

147.76 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.925758 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

16.88499 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.597319 

0.004 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

253.7 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

126.432 

1.882 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

0.416127 

0.008 


Table 36. Data for Figure 23. 


124 


































































































































Coverage 


Helicopters 



Percentiles 

Percentiles 

Day 

25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 

Surviving 

Helos 

se 

25% 

■ 

75% 

1 

72.56% 

76.47% 

80.01% 

0.59% 

75.86% 

21.51 

0.15 

20 

22 

23 

2 

77.01% 

81.18% 

87.07% 

0.77% 

81.48% 

18.81 

0.19 

18 

19 

20 

3 

78.55% 

82.01% 

86.77% 

0.69% 

82.19% 

16.21 

0.24 

14 

16 

18 

4 

78.78% 

82.72% 

87.14% 

0.61% 

82.52% 

13.58 

0.29 

11 

13.5 

16 

5 

75.87% 

81.18% 

85.18% 

0.81% 

80.25% 

10.82 

0.33 

8.75 

11 

13.25 

6 

75.33% 

81.11% 

85.80% 

1.63% 

76.76% 

8.42 

0.33 

6 

8 

11 

n 

55.03% 

71.47% 

81.99% 

2.45% 

65.51% 

6.22 

0.29 

4 

6 

8 

8 

28.24% 

48.07% 

71.18% 

2.73% 

47.68% 

4.79 

0.25 

3 

4 

6 

9 

0.00% 

27.88% 

47.91% 

2.79% 

30.52% 

3.88 

0.20 

3 

3 

5 

10 

0.00% 

14.37% 

41.76% 

2.36% 

21.74% 

3.22 

0.15 

2 

3 

4 

11 

0.00% 

10.98% 

28.57% 

1.78% 

16.07% 

2.65 

0.13 

2 

3 

3 

12 

0.00% 

0.00% 

20.60% 

1.66% 

11.19% 

2.25 

0.10 

2 

2 

3 

13 

0.00% 

0.00% 

18.02% 

1.35% 

9.96% 

1.95 

0.08 

1 

2 

2 

14 

0.00% 

0.00% 

9.14% 

1.16% 

6.61% 

1.71 

0.07 

1 

2 

2 

Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

81.1 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

8.02 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

14.27 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.508082 

0.004 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

152.05 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.926702 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

17.45606 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.599456 

0.004 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

261.93 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

127.0269 

1.876 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

0.491271 

0.011 


Table 37. Data for Figure 24. 


125 























































































































































































Coverage 

Helicopters 


Percentiles 




Percentiles 

Day 

25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent 

Coverage 

Surviving 

Helos 

se 


50% 

75% 

1 

72.73% 

76.49% 

80.36% 

0.58% 

76.49% 

21.41 

0.17 

20 

22 

23 

2 

76.39% 

80.97% 

85.53% 

0.67% 

81.20% 

18.78 

0.22 

17 

19 

20 

3 





82.01% 

15.99 


14 

16 

18 

4 

76.36% 

83.29% 

87.98% 

0.75% 

82.19% 

13.4 

0.32 

11 

13.5 


5 

76.43% 



1.05% 

80.75% 

11.03 

0.34 

8 

11 


6 

73.21% 



1.33% 

77.17% 

8.55 

0.34 

6 

8 

11 

7 

54.30% 

74.18% 

83.22% 

2.30% 

65.38% 

6.45 


4 

6 

9 

8 




3.01% 

50.70% 

5.08 

0.26 

3 

4 

7 




55.42% 

3.05% 

33.44% 

4.02 

0.21 

^ 3 

4 

5 



15.79% 



23.49% 

3.26 

0.16 

2 

3 

4 


0.00% 

10.46% 

27.46% 

1.81% 

15.38% 

2.7 

0.12 

2 

3 

3.25 

12 

0.00% 

0.00% 

19.18% 

1.56% 

10.41% 

2.38 


2 

2 

3 

13 

0.00% 

0.00% 

16.14% 

1.37% 

8.97% 

2.08 

0.10 

1 

2 

3 

14 

0.00% 

0.00% 

7.17% 

1.25% 

6.56% 

1.91 

0.09 

1 

2 

2 

Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

82.96 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

8.2 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

13.89 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.510884 

m 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

153.39 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.927994 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 



Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.601278 

0.004 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

263.84 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

127.6001 


Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

0.51488 

0.011 


Table 38. Data for Figure 25. 


126 


































































































































APPENDIX C: SIMULATION DATA OUTPUT FOR NON 


HOMOGENEOUS FAILURE RATE PROCESS 


The following tables list extended output results from each of the simulations 
conducted for this thesis: They summarize measures of variability between hypothetical 


campaigns (100 campaigns/replications). 


Percentiles 


Coverage 


Helicopters 


Percentiles 


Day 

25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage j 

Surviving Helos 

se 

25% 

50% 

75% 

1 

74.57% | 

79.58% 

82.59% 

0.66% 

78.30% 

22.49 


22 

23 

23 

2 

81.00% | 

85.00% 

88.61% 

0.66% 

84.47% 

21.11 

H^yg 

20 

21 

22 

3 

79.75% 

84.45% 

88.15% 

0.62% 

83.61% 

19.72 

0.23 

19 

20 

22 

4 

80.23% 

85.21% 

89.54% 

0.66% 

84.53% 

18.31 

0.26 

17 

18.5 

20 

5 

79.30% 

83.59% 

88.17% 

0.68% 

83.11% 

16.89 

0.27 

15 

17 

19 

6 

78.30% 

82.66% 

87.81% 

0.72% 

82.99% 

15.44 

0.29 

14 

15 

18 

7 

78.29% 

82.50% 

87.99% 

0.74% 

82.62% 

14.09 

0.31 

12 

14 

16.25 

8 

77.35% 

83.72% 

87.52% 

1.05% 

80.89% 

12.7 

0.33 

10.75 

13 

15.25 

9 

74.99% 

82.98% 

87.00% 

1.27% 

79.48% 

11.33 

0.33 

9 

11 

14 

10 

68.50% 

79.83% 

87.05% 

1.65% 

75.95% 

10.05 

0.32 

8 

10 

12.25 

11 

64.70% 

73.88% 

80.79% 

1.76% 

70.46% 

9.03 

0.33 

7 

9 

11 

12 

53.62% 

73.13% 

81.83% 

2.35% 

66.28% 

8.08 

0.32 

6 

8 

10 

13 

41.99% 

61.48% 

79.10% 

2.49% 

57.60% 

7.04 

0.31 

5 

7 

9 

14 

32.84% 

48.11% 

70.47% 

2.73% 

47.69% 

6.21 

0.28 

4 

6 

8 

15 

16.55% 

37.63% 

59.82% 

2.82% 

38.79% 

5.58 

0.26 

4 

5 

7 

16 

0.00% 

27.47% 

42.45% 

2.49% 

28.14% 

5.1 

0.23 

3 

■gfl 

6 

17 

0.00% 

29.20% 

43.30% 

2.52% 

27.03% 

4.77 

0.21 

3 

4 

6 

18 

0.00% 

22.57% 

38.31% 

2.24% 

24.53% 

4.37 

0.20 

3 

4 

6 

19 

0.00% 

18.19% 

36.55% 

2.06% 

20.67% 

3.96 

0.17 

3 

4 

5 

20 

! 0.00% 

0.00% 

| 33.82% 

1.94% 

15.02% 

3.73 

0.17 

3 

3 

5 

21 

! 0.00% 

0.00% 

24.36% 

1.79% 

11.70% 

3.57 

0.16 

3 

3 

4 


Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 21.0 Days 

144.12 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 21.0 Days 

14.34 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 21.0 Days 

6.09 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.512936 

0.003354 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 21.0 Days 

258.6 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.960499 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 21 .ODays 

30.95233 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.651085 

0.002744 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 21.0 Days 

449.92 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 21.0 Days 

233.5836 

3.25317 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 21.0 Days 

1.329924 

0.035045 


127 

































































































































































































































































Table 39. Data for Figure 26 


Percentiles 


Coverage 


Helicopters 


Percentiles 


Day 

25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 

Sun/iving Helos 

se 

25% 



1 

74.91% 

78.29% 


IBB 

78.37% 

22.51 

0.14 

22 

mrmi 


2 

78.34% 

84.61% 

88.17% 

0.66% 

83.85% 

20.64 

0.22 

19.75 

21 

22 

3 

79.71% 

83.37% 



83.30% 

18.72 

0.27 

17 

19 

20.25 

4 

78.35% 

83.21% 

86.73% 

0.65% 

82.36% 

16.84 

0.32 

15 

17 

19 

5 





82.73% 

14.87 

0.34 

13 

16 

17 

6 

75.28% 

80.35% 



79:59% 

13.14 

0.37 

11 

14 

15 

7 



85.65% 

1.39% 

78.26% 

11.5 

0.40 

9 

12 

14 

8 

68.67% 

77.18% 

85.72% 

2.02% 

72.39% 

10.03 

0.39 

7 

10 

13 

9 

57.59% 

77.50% 



68.36% 

8.57 

0.37 

6 

8.5 

11 

10 



80.23% 

2.55% 

60.81% 

7.37 

0.35 

5 

7 

9.25 

11 

32.75% 

53.21% 

75.88% 

2.82% 

51.55% 

6.16 

0.32 

4 

6 

8 

12 

21.75% 

39.95% 



44.53% 

5.16 

0.29 

3 

4 

7 

13 

0.00% 

29.52% 

52.93% 

2.92% 

32.53% 

4.44 

0.25 

3 

4 

6 

14 



43.17% 

2.66% 

25.33% 

4 

0.23 

2 

4 

5 

15 

0.00% 

0.00% 

34.23% 

2.54% 

18.90% 

3.66 


2 

3 

4.25 

16 



28.41% 

2.12% 

15.17% 

3.38 

0.18 

2 

3 

4 

1 17 

0.00% 

0.00% 



12.88% 

3.12 [ 

0.16 

2 

3 

4 

18 

0.00% 

12.75% 

25.75% 

1.65% 

14.68% 

2.88 

0.15 

2 

3 

4 

19 



26.16% 

1.60% 

11.70% 

2.62 

0.14 

- 

2 


20 

0.00% 

0.00% 

10.86% 

1.40% 

7.51% 

2.48 

0.13 

1 

2 


21 



0.00% 

1.00% 

4.26% 

2.37 

0.13 

1 

2 

3 


— — 1 -*- - - 1 - 1 -J - 1 -1- 

Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 21.0 Days 



Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 21.0 Days 



Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 21.0 Days 

9.93 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.51207 

0.003693 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 21.0 Days 

216.25 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.949988 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 21 .ODays 

25.55777 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 



Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 21.0 Days 



Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 21.0 Days 

195.1438 

2.969122 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 21.0 Days 




Table 40. Data for Figure 27. 


128 


































































































































































































Coverage 


Helicopters 


Percentiles 


25% 

50% 

72.61% 

77.36% 

77.32% 

81.43% 

76.46% 

80.82% 

77.06% 

81.60% 

74.44% 

80.87% 

70.08% 

77.57% 

53.50% 

68.55% 

22.58% 

49.66% 

5.15% 

34.02% 

0.00% 

26.02% 

0.00% 

13.73% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

! 0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 


75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 

81.97% 

0.62% 

76.93% 

86.80% 

0.69% 

81.82% 

85.83% 

0.69% 

80.72% 

86.14% 

0.70% 

81.90% 

85.48% 

1.04% 

78.98% 

84.78% 

1.33% 

75.47% 

78.93% 


64.12% 

68.11% 

2.77% 

45.46% 


33.22% 


Percentiles 





18.83% 


11.57% 


5.98% 


2.29% 


1.98% 


1.87% 


4.12% 


5.51% 


4.56% 


3.72% 


3.04% 



Total Runs 

100 

Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 21.0 Days 

83.12 

Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 21.0 Days 

8.32 

Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 21.0 Days 

14.22 

Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entiy into the Repair System 

0.506872 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 21.0 Days 

155.67 

Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.927603 

Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 21.0Days 

17.95225 

Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.602641 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 

Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 21.0 Days 

268.84 

Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 21.0 Days 

141.4759 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 21.0 Days 

0.734868 



Table 41. Data for Figure 28. 


129 


















































































































































































































































Coverage 


Helicopters 



Percentiles 





Percentiles 

Day 

25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 

Surviving Helos 

se 

25% 

50% 

75% 

1 

73.17% 

76.84% 

81.77% 

0.67% 

77.05% 

21.4 

0.17 

20.75 

22 

23 

2 

78.68% 

82.56% 



81.78% 

18.73 

0.25 

17 

19 

21 

3 

78.33% 

80.96% 

85.63% 

0.69% 

81.77% 

15.7 

0.32 

14 

16 

18 

4 

76.21% 



0.78% 

80.79% 

13.14 

0.37 

11 

13 

mm 

5 

73.64% 

78.89% 

86.38% 

1.26% 

77.50% 

10.79 

0.42 

8 

11 

mm 

6 

63.92% 

77.97% 

84.51% 

2.10% 

70.76% 

8.55 

0.39 

5 

9 


7 

47.30% 

67.79% 

80.75% 

2.81% 

60.26% 

6.84 

0.36 

4 

7 

9 

8 

6.87% 

55.46% 

73.21% 

3.22% 

46.29% 

5.33 

0.31 

3 

5 

7 





3.03% 

33.24% 

4.28 

0.25 

2 

4 

6 


0.00% 

10.13% 



23.48% 

3.51 

0.20 

2 

3 

a 

11 

0.00% 

15.14% 

34.38% 


18.54% 

2.89 

, 0.17 

2 1 

3 

Ml 

12 

0.00% 

0.00% 

19.17% 


11.22% 

2.55 

0.14 

1 

2 

3 

13 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

1.22% 

5.49% 

2.33 

0.12 

1 

2 

3 

14 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.98% 

3.05% 

2.23 

0.11 

i 

P 2 f " 

3 


Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14:0 Days 

78.07 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

7.82 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

13.95 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.505559 

0.00445 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

147.2 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.926053 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 



Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.607571 

0.003777 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

253.92 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

129.0415 

1.956605 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

1.052113 

0.037308 


Table 42. Data for Figure 29, Figure 33, Figure 40, Figure 41, and Figure 44. 


130 




































































































































Coverage 


Helicopters 



Percentiles 



HjjgjjjM 

■1 

Percentiles 

Day 

25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 



25% 

50% 

75% 

1 

73.19% 

76.79% 

81.26% 

0.64% 

77.05% 

21.39 

0.15 

20 

22 

22 

2 

77.55% 

82.97% 

86.75% 

0.67% 

82.15% 

18.96 


oo 

19 

21 

3 

76.60% 

81.86% 

86.39% 

0.72% 

81.85% 

16.21 

0.26 

15 

16 

18 

4 

76.44% 

82.22% 

85.62% 

0.74% 

81.14% 

13.38 

0.29 

11 

13 

16 

5 

73.38% 

80.00% 

85.97% 

0.99% 

78.84% 

10.88 

0.35 

9 

11 

13 

6 

67.39% 

78.46% 

84.28% 

1.63% 

74.02% 

8.55 

0.34 

6 

9 

11 

7 

56.35% 

70.31% 

80.20% 

2.29% 

63.63% 

6.39 

0.31 

4 

6 


8 

33.58% 

49.22% 

74.11% 

2.81% 

49.23% 

4.75 

0.26 

3 

4 

6.25 

9 

3.56% 

30.24% 

57.38% 

2.70% 

32.81% 

3.64 

0.20 

2 

3 

5 

10 

0.00% 

13.73% 

34.78% 

2.35% 

21.26% 

2.99 

0.16 

2 

3 

4 

11 

0.00% 

7.86% 

34.38% 

2.06% 

17.45% 

2.61 

0.13 

2 

2 

3 

12 

0.00% 

2.05% 

16.91% 

1.73% 

11.75% 

2.05 

0.11 

1 

2 

3 

13 

0.00% 

0.00% 

6.87% 

1.41% 

6.77% 

1.82 

0.09 

1 

2 

2 

14 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

1.05% 

4.18% 

1.7 

0.08 

1 

2 

2 

Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

79.86 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

7.96 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

14.34 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.507085 

0.004426 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

150.3 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.925815 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

17.31263 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.594655 

0.003804 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

260.56 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

126.1536 

1.84997 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

1.062289 

0.035139 


Table 43. Data for Figure 30. 


131 

















































































































































































Coverage 

Helicopters 

\mm 

■■ 

Percentiles 





Percentiles 

|e?i 


■a 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 

Surviving Helos 

se 

25% 

50% 

75% 

1 

13.22% 

77.20% 

81.01% 

0.62% 

77.33% 

21.51 

0.16 

20 

22 

23 

2 

77.32% 



0.76% 

81.90% 

19.1 

0.22 

17.75 

19 

21 

3 

77.67% 

82.32% 

87.33% 

0.73% 

82.16% 

16.53 

0.23 

15 

17 

18 

4 

77.86% 

82.38% 


0.69% 

82.22% 

13.9 

0.27 

12 

14 

15 

5 

77.29% 



0.77% 

81.29% 

11.28 

0.28 

10 

11 

13 

6 

71.50% 

79.40% 

84.36% 

1.32% 

76.69% 

8.74 

0.28 

7 

9 

11 

7 

60.84% 

74.88% 

82.09% 

1.90% 

68.87% 

6.61 

0.27 

5 

7 

9 

8 

33.37% 

55.33% 

73.95% 

2.52% 

51.98% 

4.7 

0.24 

3 

4 

6 

9 



56.59% 

2.90% 

37.22% 

3.55 

0.18 

! 2 

3 

5 

10 




2.65% 

23.21% 

2.87 

0.15 

2 

3 

3 

11 



28.52% 

2.12% 

14.81% 

2.38 

0.11 

2 

2 

3 

12 

0.00% 

0.00% 

21.27% 


10.79% 

2.02 

0.10 

1 

2 

3 

mm 

0.00% 

0.00% 

12.19% 

1.54% 

8.45% 

1.76 

0.09 

1 

2 

2 

mm 

0.00% 



1.05% 

4.43% 

1.59 

0.07 

1 

1 

2 


Total Runs 


100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


82.21 


8.18 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


14.23 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 


0.50807 


0.00438 


Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 


154.04 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 


0.927259 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 


Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 


17.7887 


1.603188 


0.003694 


2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


266.3 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


127.4619j 


1.824358 


Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


1.113123 


0.028968 


Table 44. Data for Figure 31. 


132 

























































































































Coverage 


Helicopters 



Percentiles 





Percentiles 

Day 

25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 

Surviving Helos 

se 

25% 

50% 

75% 

1 

75.65% 

79.73% 

83.60% 

0.60% 

79.54% 

21.53 



22 

23 

2 

79.42% 

82.55% 

87.60% 

0.66% 

82.83% 

19.14 

0.23 

18 

19 

21 

3 

77.28% 

82.17% 

87.08% 

0.68% 

81.70% 

16.53 


15 

17 

19 

4 

77.59% 

82.22% 

88.20% 

0.72% 

82.77% 

14.18 

0.28 

12.75 

14 

. ... 

16 

5 

75.60% 

80.80% 

85.65% 

0.84% 

80.71% 

11.55 

0.31 

9.75 

11.5 

14 

6 

73.01% 

81.37% 

85.64% 

1.28% 

77.90% 

9.04 

0.31 

7 

9 

11 

7 

58.09% 

72.08% 

80.15% 

1.84% 

67.36% 

6.74 


5 

7 

8 

8 

36.77% 

51.78% 

68.73% 

2.31% 

50.98% 

4.98 

0.26 

3 

5 

7 

9 

11.71% 

37.26% 

53.34% 

2.42% 

34.85% 

3.81 


2 

3.5 

5 

10 

0.00% 

18.30% 

35.67% 

2.28% 

21.82% 

3.13 

0.20 

2 

3 

4 

11 

0.00% 

7.61% 

28.82% 

2.12% 

16.93% 

2.6 

0.14 

2 

2 

3 

12 

0.00% 

0.00% 

21.22% 

1.68% 

10.98% 

2.22 

0.10 

2 

2 

3 

13 

0.00% 

0.00% 

6.87% 

1.16% 

6.08% 

1.99 

0.09 

1 

2 

3 

14 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.90% 

3.03% 

1.91 

0.09 

1 

2 

2 

Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

78.28 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

7.67 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

14.42 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.499622 

0.004377 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

151.43 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.927062 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

17.66401 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.61119 

0.00375 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

263.12 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

130.1922 

1.862963 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

1.043132 

0.03002 


Table 45. Data for Figure 32. 


133 

















































































































































































Coverage 

Helicopters 


Percentiles 





Percentiles 

Day 

25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 

Surviving Helos 

se 

25% 

50% 

■BES 

1 

74.21% 

76.94% 

81.00% 

0.53% 

77.67% 

21.63 

0.16 

20.75 

22 

23 

2 

79.10% 

83.37% 



82.94% 

18.92 

0.24 

17 


Kill 

3 



84.69% 

0.69% 

80.95% 

16.24 

0.31 

14 

16 

19 

4 

75.58% 

81.85% 

86.02% 

0.74% 

80.82% 

13.59 

0.37 

11 

13 

17 

5 



84.69% 

0.89% 

78.22% 

11.17 

0.38 

8 

11 

14 

6 


77.88% 

83.52% 

1.67% 

72.38% 

8.75 

0.38 

6 


11.25 

7 

44.88% 

68.65% 



62.10% 

6.95 

0.35 

4.75 


9 

8 



70.21% 

2.77% 

47.50% 

5.58 

0.30 

3.75 

5 

7 

9 



63.21% 

2.87% 

34.63% 

4.57 

0.26 

3 

4 

6 

10 





25.50% 

3.9 

0.23 

2 

4 

4.25 

11 

0.00% 

13.73% 

34.17% 

2.35% 

20.74% 

3.18 

0.18 

2 

3 

4 

12 





12.59% 

2.79 

0.15 

2 

3 

3 

13 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

1.48% 

6.56% 

2.57 

0.14 

2 

2 

3 

14 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

1.17% 

4.01% 

2.46 

0.13 

2 

2 

3 

Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 



Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

8.03 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

13.51 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.507964 

0.004445 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

150.68 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.928524 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

17.4107 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.605289 

0.003744 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

260.3 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

132.8203 

1.990931 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

1.092635 

0.03709 


Table 46. Data for Figure 34. 


134 







































































































































Coverage 

Helicopters 


Percentiles 





Percentiles 

Day 

25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 



25% 

50% 

75% 

1 

67.03% 

71.09% 

75.25% 

0.64% 

70.74% 

20.93 

0.18 

20 


22 

2 

68.02% 

72.27% 

76.39% 

0.63% 

71.77% 

17.5 


16 

18 

19.25 

3 

66.48% 

71.33% 

76.07% 

0.75% 

71.15% 

14.23 

0.31 

12 


16 

4 

59.35% 

67.40% 

76.69% 

1.33% 

66.43% 

11.25 

0.33 

9 

11 

13.25 

5 

44.75% 

62.08% 

70.77% 

1.66% 

57.01% 

8.66 

0.32 

6.75 

9 

11 

6 

31.63% 

43.81% 

62.06% 

1.98% 

46.06% 

6.48 

0.30 

4 

mm 

9 

7 

25.44% 

35.61% 

47.97% 

1.86% 

35.04% 

4.57 

0.25 

3 

4 

6 

8 

7.60% 

23.97% 

35.46% 

1.74% 

23.23% 

3.37 

0.20 

2 

3 

4 

9 

0.00% 

8.42% 

22.32% 

1.64% 

14.07% 

2.59 

0.17 

2 

2 

3 

10 

0.00% 

0.00% 

12.46% 

1.22% 

7.94% 

2.16 


1 

2 

2 

11 

0.00% 

0.00% 

13.28% 

1.28% 

7.60% 

1.9 

0.11 

1 

2 

2 

12 

0.00% 

0.00% 

6.87% 

1.01% 

5.35% 

1.62 

0.09 

1 

1 

2 

13 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.97% 

4.35% 

1.46 

0.07 

1 

I 

2 

14 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.71% 

2.29% 

1.33 

0.06 

1 

1 

2 

Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

118.18 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

11.67 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

11 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.656172 

0.006 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

141.33 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.919798 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

12.63148 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.390877 

0.005 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

217.96 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

109.0396 

1.741 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

2.046475 

0.084 


Table 47. Data for Figure 35. 


135 

















































































































































































Coverage 


Helicopters 



Percentiles 





Percentiles 

Day 

25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 

Surviving Helos 

se 

25% 

50% 

75% 

1 

76.57% 

79.92% 

82.58% 

0.55% 

_ 

79.75% 

21.45 

0.16 

21 

22 

23 

2 

78.38% 

82.56% 



82.66% 

18.85 

0.22 

18 

19 

20 

3 

78.16% 

82.54% 

87.33% 

0.68% 

82.89% 

16.14 

0.25 

15 

16 

18 



82.07% 

85.79% 

0.69% 

81.67% 

13.51 

0.30 

11 

14 

16 

5 



87.30% 

1.02% 

81.00% 

11.07 

0.33 

9 

11 

14 

6 





75.29% 

8.64 

0.35 

6 

9 

11 

7 

48.51% 

68.84% 



63.05% 

6.75 

0.33 

4 

7 

9.25 

8 

27.57% 

53.51% 

73.47% 

2.81% 

48.84% 

5.18 

0.28 

3 

5 

7 

9 

3.45% 

34.84% 

53.42% 

2.76% 

34.72% 

4.03 

0.24 

2 

3.5 

5 

10 

0.00% 

27.07% 

43.03% 

2.48% 

26.57% 

3.32 

0.19 

2 

3 

4.25 

11 

0.00% 

17.36% 

36.85% 

2.12% 

20.38% 

2.74 

0.14 

2 

3 

4 

12 

0.00% 

1.83% 

26.36% 


13.90% 

2.2 

0.11 

1 

2 

3 

13 

0.00% 

0.00% 

9.49% 

1.17% 

6.47% 

1.97 

0.10 

1 

2 

2 

14 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

1.25% 

5.73% 

1.84 

0.09 

1 

2 

2 

Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

80.21 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

7.88 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

14.28 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.504024 


Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

152.32 

■ 

Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.927258 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

17.8017 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.611135 

0.003693 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

265.18 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

128.6829 

1.893625 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

1.048617 

0.031614 


Table 48. Data for Figure 36. 


136 
















































































































































Coverage 


Helicopters 



Percentiles 





Percentiles 

B 


50% 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 


se 

25% 

50% 

75% 

1 


85.51% 

88.44% 

0.50% 

85.04% 

22.18 

0.14 

22 

22 

23 

2 


88.23% 

92.95% 

0.52% 

88.93% 

| 19.97 


19 

20 

21 

3 

84.67% 

88.52% 

92.31% 

0.55% 

88.64% 

17.51 

0.24 

16 

17 

19 

4 

84.15% 

89.14% 

92.42% 

0.65% 

88.51% 

15.34 

0.27 

14 

15.5 

17 

5 

84.84% 

89.08% 

92.71% 

0.62% 

88.31% 

13.06 

0.31 

11 

13 

15.25 

6 

84.10% 

87.62% 

91.61% 

0.80% 

87.05% 

10.84 

0.33 

9 

11 

13 

7 

76.26% 

84.73% 

90.96% 

1.65% 

80.79% 

8.74 

0.34 

6 

9 

11 

8 

60.07% 

81.69% 

89.19% 

2.46% 

72.40% 

7.04 

0.31 

5 

7 

9 

m 

41.25% 

59.10% 

83.20% 

3.03% 

58.29% 

5.48 

0.28 

3 

5 

7 

■a 

23.30% 

43.23% 

71.01% 

2.93% 

43.97% 

4.28 

0.23 

3 

4 

6 

ii 

9.27% 

30.37% 

48.28% 

2.66% 

33.16% 

3.54 


2 

3 

5 

12 

0.00% 

20.60% 

43.35% 

2.78% 

25.94% 

3.01 

0.17 

2 

3 

4 

13 

0.00% 

0.00% 

29.89% 

2.20% 

15.40% 

2.66 


1.75 

2 

3 

14 

0.00% 

0.00% 

13.73% 

1.83% 

9.42% 

2.46 

0.14 

1 

2 

3 

Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

47.76 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

4.77 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

16.77 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.394097 

0.003 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

160.09 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.932725 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

21.58729 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.749848 

0.003 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

296.08 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

146.9172 

1.983 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

0.717077 

0.019 


Table 49. Data for Figure 37. 


137 












































































































































































Coverage 


Helicopters 



Percentiles 





Percentiles 

Day 




se 

Percent Coverage 

Surviving Helos 

se 

25% 

50% 

75% 

1 

72.14% 



0.54% 

76.49% 

21.27 

0.15 

20 

21 


2 

79.74% 

83.54% 

86.79% 

0.57% 

83.30% 

18.68 





3 

77.93% 

82.91% 

87.23% 

0.82% 

82.45% 

16.08 


14 

16 

18 

4 

77.56% 

82.99% 

87.03% 

0.75% 

82.68% 

13.56 


12 

13.5 

16 

5 

73.51% 

80.21% 

84.22% 

0.90% 

78.96% 

10.98 


9 

11 

14 

6 

68.92% 



1.30% 

74.48% 

8.88 

0.33 

6 

9 

11 

7 



82.26% 

1.95% 

66.92% 

6.85 

0.32 

4 

7 

9 

8 

41.20% 

59.56% 

73.17% 

2.28% 

55.57% 

5.12 

0.27 

3 

5 

7 

9 

21.56% 

41.09% 

62.32% 

2.56% 

41.53% 

3.68 


2 

3 

5 

10 

6.14% 

31.89% 

43.84% 

2.42% 

29.72% 

i 2.7 

0.17 

1 

2 

3 

11 

0.00% 



2.33% 

19.40% 

2.18 

0.13 

1 

2 

3 

12 

0.00% 

0.98% 

27.89% 

1.84% 

14.39% 

1.77 

0.10 

1 

1 

2 

13 

0.00% 

0.00% 

16.19% 

1.41% 

9.06% 

1.54 

0.08 

1 

1 

2 

14 

0.00% 



1.25% 

6.63% 

1.35 

0.07 

1 

1 

1 


Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

84.02: 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

8.35 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

14.3 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.505856 


Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

158.3 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.928459 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

18.29522 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.604257 


Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 

■■■ 

Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

273.7 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

125.698 

1.821 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

1.118063 

0.031 


Table 50. Data for Figure 38. 


138 





























































































































Coverage 


Helicopters 



Percentiles 





Percentiles 

Day 

25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 


se 

25% 

50% 

75% 

1 

72.68% 

76.14% 

81.66% 

0.59% 

76.56% 

21.42 

0.15 

20 

22 

22.25 

2 

77.63% 

82.90% 

87.84% 

0.67% 

82.71% 

18.77 

0.23 

17 

19 

20.25 

3 

76.67% 



0.67% 

81.61% 

16.09 

0.26 

15 

16 

18 

4 

76.84% 

82.37% 

88.52% 

0.73% 

82.18% 

13.54 

0.30 

12 


15.25 

5 

74.32% 

81.64% 

85.18% 

0.92% 

79.68% 

11.18 

0.30 

9.75 

12 

13 

6 


80.77% 

87.26% 

1.48% 

76.45% 

8.84 

0.33 

7 

9 

11 

7 

53.03% 

68.90% 

80.43% 

2.08% 

64.81% 

6.75 

0.33 

4 

6 

9 

8 

25.27% 

51.17% 

69.43% 

2.72% 

48.02% 

5.09 

0.28 

3 

5 

7 

9 

13.22% 

36.93% 

60.51% 

2.80% 

38.63% 

3.91 

0.22 

2 

4 

5 

10 

0.00% 

27.00% 

46.99% 

2.53% 

27.32% 

3.2 

0.18 

2 

3 

4 

11 

0.00% 

7.84% 

32.00% 

2.04% 

17.65% 

2.74 

0.15 

2 

2 

4 

12 

0.00% 

0.00% 

23.07% 

1.66% 

12.18% 

2.32 

0.11 

1 

2 

3 

13 

0.00% 

0.00% 

7.68% 

1.38% 

7.65% 

2.04 

0.11 

1 

2 

3 

14 

0.00% 

0.00% 

6.87% 

1.26% 

6.56% 

1.77 

0.09 

1 

1.5 

2 

Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

81.72 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

8.17 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

14.06 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.504628 

0.0049 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

154.71 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.928156 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

17.80353 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.605006 

0.004 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

266.22 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

128.6419 

1.897 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

1.100086 

0.034 


Table 51. Data for Figure 39. 


139 


















































































































































































Coverage 

Helicopters 


Percentiles 





Percentiles 

Day 

25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 

Surviving Helos 

se 

25% 

50% 

75% 

1 

73.29% 



0.61% 

77.25% 

21.31 


20 

22 

22 

2 

78.27% 

81.29% 

85.79% 

0.64% 

82.14% 

18.75 

0.20 

17 

19 

20 

3 

77.83% 

81.89% 

85.78% 

0.61% 

81.67% 

16.33 


15 

16 

18 

4 

76.88% 

81.48% 

87.75% 

0.74% 

82.19% 

13.76 


13 

14 

■EE9 

5 

75.76% 

81.15% 

86.56% 

0.98% 

79.56% 

11.4 

0.33 

9 

12 

13 

6 

68.29% 

78.07% 

84.68% 


74.19% 

8.93 


7 

9 

10 

7 

51.46% 

70.13% 

79.60% 

2.17% 

63.24% 

6.68 


5 

6 

8.25 

8 

32.33% 

48.07% 

66.92% 

2.41% 

46.90% 

5.06 

0.25 

3 

5 

6 

9 

2.54% 

30.13% 

50.09% 

2.72% 

31.80% 

4.04 

0.19 

3 

4 

5 

10 

0.00% 

17.60% 

34.50% 

2.12% 

20.81% 

3.39 

0.15 

2 

3 

4 

11 

0.00% 

11.75% 

30.12% 

1.96% 

17.62% 

2.79 


2 

2.5 

4 

12 

0.00% 

3.31% 

22.90% 

1.69% 

12.39% 

2.42 

0.11 

2 

2 

3 

13 



20.27% 

1.49% 

10.38% 

2.1 

0.09 

1 

2 

3 

14 

0.00% 

0.00% 

9.99% 

1.18% 

7.34% 



1 

2 

2 

Total Runs 

100 



Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days ! 

80.64 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

8 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

14.13 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 


0.004 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

151.42 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.926925 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

17.44083 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.60081 

0.004 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

261.48 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

KHHS 


Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

1.073486 

0.032 


Table 52. Data for Figure 42. 


140 






















































































































































Coverage 

Helicopters 


Percentiles 




Percentiles 

Day 

25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 

Surviving Helos 

se 

25% 

50% 

75% 

1 

74.83% 

78.41% 

81.99% 

0.53% 

78.14% 

21.53 

0.16 

21 

22 

23 

2 

77.59% 

82.20% 

85.99% 

0.69% 

82.27% 

18.94 


18 

19 

21 

3 

77.27% 

82.04% 

87.66% 

0.67% 

82.12% 

16.51 

0.23 

15 

16.5 

18 

4 

78.83% 

81.74% 

87.49% 

0.70% 

82.30% 

14.08 

0.25 

13 

14 

16 

5 

75.75% 

81.01% 

86.14% 

0.89% 

80.00% 

11.57 

0.29 

10 

12 

13.25 

6 

70.59% 

79.98% 

84.96% 

1.51% 

75.45% 

9.15 

0.28 

7 

9 

11 

7 

60.49% 

72.05% 

81.04% 

1.95% 

67.31% 

7 

0.25 

5.75 

7 

8.25 

8 

35.49% 

53.50% 

69.07% 

2.27% 

51.85% 

5.34 


4 

5 

7 

9 

13.73% 

31.74% 

49.63% 

2.56% 

34.13% 

4.2 

0.22 

3 

4 

5 

10 

0.00% 

18.37% 

34.78% 

2.40% 

23.68% 

3.45 

0.18 

2 

3 

4 

11 

0.00% 

10.62% 

28.95% 

1.89% 

16.98% 

2.78 

0.14 

2 

3 

4 

12 

0.00% 

1.10% 

26.69% 

1.66% 

12.37% 

2.41 


2 

2 

3 

13 

0.00% 

0.00% 

18.34% 

1.33% 

9.30% 

2.14 

0.12 

1 

2 

3 

14 

0.00% 

0.00% 

19.08% 

1.41% 

9.93% 

1.82 

0.10 

1 

2 

2 

Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

83.13 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

8.25 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

13.93 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.507812 

0.004 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

155.34 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.928608 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

17.90018 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.599778 

0.004 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

268.54 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

131.7001 

1.910 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

1.105218 

0.030 


Table 53. Data for Figure 43. 


141 

























































































































































































Coverage 

Helicopters 


Percentiles 





Percentiles 

Day 

25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 

Surviving Helos 

se 

25% 

50% 

75% 

\mm 

71.02% 

75.76% 

79.60% 

0.60% 

75.53% 

21.47 

0.15 

21 



In 


82.90% 

87.23% 


82.09% 

18.88 

0.22 

17 

19 

20 

3 

75.87% 

81.21% 

85.78% 

0.67% 

81.00% 

16.35 

0.29 

15 

17 

18 

4 


82.28% 

86.33% 

0.66% 

81.79% 

13.57 

0.36 

12 



5 

76.27% 

81.35% 

84.93% 

0.83% 

79.71% 

10.91 

0.37 

8 


n 

6 


79.11% 

85.82% 

1.67% 

75.18% 

8.55 

0.36 

5 

9 


7 

50.32% 

72.09% 

83.49% 

2.41% 

64.23% 

6.25 

0.30 

4 

6 

9 

8 

16.22% 

46.77% 

77.28% 

3.14% 

46.08% 

4.79 

0.25 

3 

4 

6 


0.00% 

18.45% 

54.58% 

3.03% 

29.37% 

3.77 

0.19 

2 

3 

4.25 

n 


6.63% 



20.08% 

3.2 

0.17 

! 2 

3 

4 

ii 




2.25% 

17.34% 

2.71 

0.12 

2 

2.5 

3 

12 

0.00% 

0.00% 

22.80% 

1.63% 

11.18% 

2.36 

0.11 

2 

2 

3 

13 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

1.21% 

5.04% 

2.19 

! 0.10 

1 

2 

3 

m 

0.00% 



0.89% 

3.20% 

2.08 

0.09 

1 

2 

3 


Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

79.28 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

7.94 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

13.98 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.508803 

0.004 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

147.97 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.925931 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

17.04725 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.595438 

0.004 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

256.44 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

: 127.994 

1.895 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

0.477403 

0.012 


Table 54. Data for Figure 45. 


142 


















































































































































Coverage 

Percentiles 


25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage J 

73.10% 

77.79% 

81.78% 

0.59% 

77.54% 

77.56% 

82.53% 

87.04% 

0.67% 

82.16% 

75.76% 

81.83% 

85.94% 

0.67% 

81.04% 

77.99% 

82.21% 

87.51% 

0.72% 

82.29% 

76.25% 

80.48% 

84.79% 

0.79% 

80.23% 

70.59% 

79.89% 

86.11% 

1.67% 

75.52% 

51.06% 

69.29% 

81.76% 

2.52% 

62.23% 

22.67% 

45.01% 

73.24% 

2.92% 

45.42% 

0.00% 

27.00% 

46.05% 

2.75% 

28.69% 

0.00% 

14.44% 

30.77% 

2.35% 

20.35% 

0.00% 

6.79% 

31.29% 

1.87% 

14.79% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

20.24% 

1.64% 

10.27% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

1.16% 

5.42% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.79% 

2.47% 


Helicopters 


9 


10 


11 


12 


13 


14 


Total Runs 

Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 


Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 


Mean Survival Time of individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 



14.0 Days 


0.926117 


16.95767 


1.595765 


2.01686 


255.04 


126.6131 


0.414009 


Table 55. Data for Figure 46. 


143 
















































































































































































Coverage 


Helicopters 



Percentiles 





Percentiles 

Day 

25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 

Surviving 

Helos 

se 

25% 

50% 

■gx 

1 





76.89% 

21.22 

0.15 

20 

21 

22 

2 

76.98% 

81.93% 

85.47% 


81.27% 

18.56 

0.24 

17 

19 

21 

3 

78.38% 

81.61% 

86.81% 

0.62% 

81.97% 

15.95 


14 

■9 

18 

4 





82.63% 

13.29 


11 


16 

5 



84.51% 


79.77% 

10.77 

0.37 

8 

11 

13 

6 

70.93% 

77.27% 

85.35% 

1.91% 

74.31% 

8.45 

0.37 

6 

8 

11 

7 

48.99% 

69.90% 

79.39% 


61.81% 

6.2 

0.34 

4 

5.5 

8 

8 

23.54% 

46.43% 

69.36% 

2.89% 

44.46% 

4.67 

0.27 

3 

4 

6 



26.06% 

51.26% 

2.79% 

28.87% 

3.64 

0.21 

2 

3 

4 

S3 

0.00% 

6.87% 

32.70% 

2.52% 

19.20% 

3.07 

0.16 

2 

3 

4 

ii 

0.00% 

5.93% 

28.12% 

1.84% 

14.29% 

2.65 

0.14 

2 

2.5 

3 

12 

0.00% 

0.00% 

12.19% 

1.38% 

8.06% 

2.34 

0.12 

1 

2 

3 

13 

0.00% 

0.00% 

15.08% 

1.54% 

9.58% 

2.13 

0.11 

1 

2 

3 


0.00% 

0.00% 

13.73% 

1.35% 

9.06% 

1.73 

0.09 

1 

1 

2 

Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

78.8 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

7.89 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

14.38 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.506629 

0.004 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

148.8 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 



Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

17.05889 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.594413 


Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 

wggm 

Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

256.78 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

125.4098 

■i 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

0.47881 

0.011 


Table 56. Data for Figure 47. 


144 
























































































































































Coverage 


Helicopters 


Percentiles 

25% 

50% 

75% 

71.59% 

76.56% 

80.47% 

77.79% 

81.60% 

86.75% 

75.75% 

80.79% 

85.78% 

77.62% 

82.78% 

87.35% 

75.88% 

82.90% 

88.37% 

74.25% 

81.40% 

86.51% 

53.93% 

74.58% 

82.20% 

32.57% 

58.72% 

74.91% 

0.00% 

28.37% 

50.35% 

0.00% 

14.05% 

37.68% 

0.00% 

6.87% 

30.78% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

20.43% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

20.60% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

6.87% 



9 


10 


11 


12 


13 


14 


Total Runs 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 


Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 


Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


Percentiles 

25% 

50% 

75% 

20 

22 

23 

17 

19 

21 

14 

16 

18 

11.75 

13.5 

15 

9 

11 

13 

7 

9 

11 

4 

6 

9 

3 

5 

7 

2 

3.5 

5 

2 

3 

4 

2 

3 

3 

1 

2 

3 

1 

2 

3 

1 

mm 

2 



153.26 


0.927444 


17.68068 


1.60466 


2.01686 


264.44 


127.0618 


0.510185 


Table 57. Data for Figure 48. 


145 





















































































































































































146 




APPENDIX D: SIMULATION DATA OUTPUT FOR ADDITONAL 

COMPARISONS 


The following tables list extended output results from each of the simulations 
conducted for this thesis: They summarize measures of variability between hypothetical 
campaigns (100 campaigns/replications). 



Coverage 

Helicopters 


1 Percentiles 



Percentiles 

Day 

25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 

Surviving Helos 

se 

25% 

50% 

75% 

1 

72.42% 

78.04% 

81.99% 

0.63% 

77.37% 

21.56 

0.16 

21 

22 

23 

2 

75.31% 

80.70% 

86.65% 

0.79% 

80.96% 

19.2 

0.22 

17 

20 

21 

3 

77.08% 

80.97% 

86.26% 

. 0.72% 

81.28% 

16.59 


15 

17 

18 

4 

77.41% 

82.14% 

85.61% 

0.70% 

81.38% 

14.01 

0.28 

13 

14 

16 

5 

74.75% 

80.94% ■ 

84.77% 

0.85% 

79.60% 

11.4 

0.33 

9 

12 

14 

6 

69.67% 

77.67% 

84.12% 

1.26% 

74.92% 

8.96 

0.31 

7 

9 

11 

7 

52.69% 

71.45% 

82.37% 

2.36% 

64.64% 

6.79 

0.30 

4 

6.5 

9 

8 

33.47% 

53.14% 

73.72% 

2.69% 

49.92% 

5.21 

0.24 

3 

5 

7 

9 

9.66% 

33.02% 

57.20% 

2.74% 

34.83% 

4.27 

0.20 

3 

4 

6 

10 

0.00% 

20.66% 

39.82% 

2.36% 

24.72% 

3.39 

0.16 

2 

3 

5 

11 

0.00% 

7.78% 

26.86% 

1.69% 

15.09% 

2.83 


2 

2 ■ 

4 

12 

0.00% 

0.00% 

14.33% 

1.41% 

8.83% 

2.57 


2 

2 

3 

13 

0.00% 

0.00% 

6.97% 

1.15% 

6.09% 

2.35 

0.11 

1.75 

2 

3 

14 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.71% 

2.56% 

2.23 

0.10 

1 

2 

3 

Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

81.28 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

8.1 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

13.67 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.511009 

0.004 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

150.66 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.927751 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

17.3114 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.597238 

0.004 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

260.12 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

131.9227 

1.925 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

1.091719 

0.031 


Table 58. Data for Figure 49, and Figure 51. 


147 

















































































































































































Coverage 

Helicopters 


Percentiles 





Percentiles 


25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent Coverage 

Surviving Helos 

se 

25% 

50% 

75% 

1 

73.17% 

76.84% 

81.77% 

0.67% 

77.05% 

21.4 

0.17 

20.75 

22 

23 

2 

78.68% 

82.56% 

86.07% 

0.69% 

81.78% 

18.73 

0.25 

17 

19 

21 

3 

78.33% 

80.96% 

85.63% 

0.69% 

81.77% 

15.7 

0.32 

14 



4 

76.21% 



0.78% 

80.79% 

13.14 

0.37 

11 

mm 

16 

5 

73.64% 

78.89% 

86.38% 

1.26% 

77.50% 

10.79 

0.42 

8 

mm 

14 

6 



84.51% 

2.10% 

70.76% 

8.55 

0.39 

5 

9 

12 

7 

47.30% 

67.79% 

80.75% 

2.81% 

60.26% 

6.84 

0.36 

4 

7 

9 

8 




3.22% 

46.29% 

5.33 

0.31 

3 

5 

7 

9 

0.00% 

34.51% 

57.71% 

3.03% 

33.24% 

4.28 

0.25 

2 

4 

6 





2.69% 

23.48% 

3.51 

0.20 

2 

3 

4.25 

11 

0.00% 

15.14% 

34.38% 

2.01% 

18.54% 

2.89 

0.17 

2 

3 

4 

12 

0.00% 



1.77% 

11.22% 

2.55 

0.14 

1 

2 

3 

13 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

1.22% 

5.49% 

2.33 

0.12 

1 

2 

3 

14 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.98% 

3.05% 

2.23 

0.11 

1 

2 

3 


Total Runs 


100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


78.07 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


7.82 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


13.95 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 


0.505559 


0.004 


Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 


147.2 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 


0.926053 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 


17.0081 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 


1.607571 


0.004 


Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 


2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


253.92 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


129.0415 


1.957 


Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 


1.052113 


0.037 


Table 59. Data for Figure 50. 


148 


















































































































































Coverage 

Helicopters 


Percentiles 

Percentiles 

Day 

25% 

50% 

75% 

se 

Percent 

Coverage 

Surviving 

Helos 

se 

25% 

50% 

75% 

1 

72.62% 

76.27% 

80.91% 

■B9 

76.41% 

22.1 

0.13 

21 

22 

23 

2 

76.74% 

81.25% 

85.17% 

■ 

81.15% 

20.3 


19 

20 

22 

3 

78.81% 

82.06% 

87.48% 

0.61% 

82.75% 

18.46 

0.21 

17 

19 

20 

4 

77.58% 

82.56% 

86.47% 

0.77% 

81.77% 

16.79 

0.23 

15 

17 

18 

5 

76.75% 

80.51% 

85.46% 

0.69% 

80.97% 

15.02 

0.28 

13 

15 

17 

6 

76.47% 

81.33% 

86.46% 

0.81% 

80.63% 

13.53 

0.29 

12 

14 

16 

7 

75.25% 

81.10% 

86.82% 

1.01% 

80.02% 

11.9 

0.31 

10 

12 

14 

8 

73.10% 

79.10% 

85.32% 

1.42% 

76.15% 

10.37 

0.32 

8 

10 

13 

9 

58.88% 

73.80% 

81.95% 

1.84% 

68.99% 

9.02 

0.32 

7 

9 

11 

10 

49.05% 

68.69% 

79.39% 

2.16% 

63.08% 

7.76 


5.75 

7 

10 

11 

38.90% 

58.31% 

77.18% 

2.45% 

55.47% 

6.52 

0.26 

4 

6 

8 

12 

24.94% 

43.59% 

65.67% 

2.55% 

44.20% 

5.31 

0.22 

4 

5 

6 

13 

17.96% 

34.06% 

45.89% 


32.32% 

4.69 


3 

4 

6 

14 

0.00% 

18.86% 

36.16% 


23.96% 

4.22 


3 

4 

5 

Total Runs 

100 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

110.14 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

1 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

18.78 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 

0.531692 

0.004 

Mean Missions Started per campaign of 14.0 Days 

204.53 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 

0.950562 

9.55E-04 

Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 14.0Days 

23.56841 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 

1.603748 

0.003 

Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 

2.01686 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 
14.0 Days 

352.7 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

175.7121 

2.243 

Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 14.0 Days 

1.706844 

0.047 


Table 60. Data for Figure 52. 


149 


































































































































































Coverage 


Helicopters 


Percentiles 




8 

76.03% 

84.19% 

9 

75.73% 

81.72% 

10 

67.23% 

79.61% 

11 

65.08% 

78.36% 

12 

52.96% 

71.22% 

13 

36.51% 

63.37% 

14 

28.05% 

53.70% 

15 

12.27% 

39.98% 

16 

0.00% 

33.79% 

17 

0.00% 

28.64% 

18 

0.00% 

23.40% 

19 

0.00% 

13.96% 

20 

0.00% 

11.18% 

21 

0.00% 

0.00% 


51.29% 


41.33% 


41.20% 


36.14% 


34.04% 


27.47% 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 21.0 Days 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 21.0 Days 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 21.0 Days 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 


Mean Missions Started per campaign of 21.0 Days 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 21 .ODays 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entry 


Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 21J 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 21.0 Days 


Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 21.0 Days 


14.14 


6.2 


0.509688 


259.82 



1.328528 


Table 61. Data for Figure 53. 


150 




















































































































































































































Coverage 



Helicopters 


Percentiles 


25% 

50% 

75% 

67.49% 

72.24% 

76.31% 

72.25% 

78.33% 

81.82% 

69.94% 

77.87% 

81.88% 

63.77% 

72.35% 

77.96% 

51.67% 

60.91% 

70.67% 

44.95% 

51.68% 

61.45% 

38.72% 

45.57% 

58.11% 

22.74% 

34.34% 

47.61% 

17.23% 

30.12% 

43.44% 

9.65% 

23.60% 

34.86% 

0.01% 

18.18% 

25.86% 

0.00% 

8.93% 

23.12% 

0.00% • 

0.00% 

17.91% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

1.78% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

9.48% 

0.00% 

2.03% 

12.92% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

12.92% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

11.54% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 

0.00% 



30.65% 


25.05% 


18.96% 


14.28% 


8.55% 


4.84% 


2.83% 


5.06% 


7.16% 


6.49% 


5.27% 


3.45% 


1.89% 


Surviving 

Helos 

se 

25% 

21.48 

0.15 

20.75 

18.75 

0.21 

18 

16.14 

0.26 

14 

13.66 

0.30 

11 

11.5 

0.32 

9 

9.73 

0.31 

7 

! 8.26 

0.29 

6 

7.02 

0.28 

5 


15 


16 


17 


18 


19 


20 


21 


Total Runs 


Mean Number of MAF per Campaign of 21.0 Days 


Mean Number of Fatal Failures (Crashes) per Campaign of 21.0 Days 


Mean Number of Helicopters Lost to Enemy Action per Campaign of 21.0 Days 


Mean Repair and Turnaround Time per Entry into the Repair System 


Mean Missions Started per campaign of 21.0 Days 


Prob of Returning to Base Safely given started a mission 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Helicopter per Campaign of 21.0Days 


Mean Time in High Threat Region per Entiy 


Scheduled Time in High Threat Region 


Mean Number of Times Individual Helicopters entered High Threat Region per Campaign of 
21.0 Days 


Mean Survival Time of Individual Helicopters per Campaign of 21.0 Days 


Mean Number of Helicopters in Repair System per hour per Campaign of 21.0 Days 



100 


119.93 


11.97 


9.5 


0.516965 


213.48 


0.947545 


19.79818 


1.362338 


1.569978 


348.78 


164.2024 


1.705343 


Table 62. Data for Figure 54. 


151 
























































































































































































































































152 



INITIAL DISTRIBUTION LIST 


1. Defense Technical Information Center.2 

8725 John J. Kingman Rd., STE 0944 

Ft. Belvoir, VA 22060-6218 

2. Dudley Knox Library.2 


Naval Postgraduate School 
411 Dyer Road 
Monterey, CA 93943-5000 

3. Professor Donald P. Gaver.1 

Code OR/Gv 

Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, CA 93943-5101 

4. Professor Patricia A. Jacobs.1 

Code OR/Jc 

Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, CA 93943-5101 

5. Professor Arnold H. Buss.1 

Code OR/Bu 

Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, CA 93943-5101 

6. Dr. Ernest Seglie.. 1 

Science Advisor 

Director, Operational Test & Evaluation 
1700 Defense, The Pentagon 
Washington, DC 20301-1700 

7. COL Wayland E. Parker.1.3 

DOT&E 

Room 1C730 
The Pentagon 

Washington, DC 20301-1700 

8. DeanDeWolfe.1 

Institute for Defense Analysis 

1801 Beauregard Street 
Alexandria, VA 22311-1772 


153 















