DAIDALUS 


Detect & Avoid Alerting Logic for Unmanned 

Systems 1 


Cesar Munoz 

NASA Langley Research Center 


Dagstuhl Seminar: Qualification of FM Tools 
April 28, 2015 


1 The DAIDALUS logo was designed by M. Malekpour. 


See and Avoid 

Michael Huerta, Administrator, Federal Aviation Administration 
A bedrock principle of aviation is see and avoid. And if 
you don't have a pilot on board the aircraft, you need 
something that will substitute for that, which will sense 
other aircraft, and we can ensure appropriate levels of 
safety. 




Detect and Avoid 3 


Detect and Avoid (DAA) was defined by the FAA sponsored SAA 
for UAS (First) Workshop Final Report published in October 9, 
2009 as the combination of UAS Self-Separation (SS) plus 
Collision Avoidance (CA) as a means of compliance with 14CFR 
Part 91, §91.111 and §91.113. 


3 Formerly called Sense and Avoid. 


3/22 


14CFR Part 91 


► 91.111 (a) No person may operate an aircraft so close to 
another aircraft as to create a collision hazard. 

► 91.113 (b) General. When weather conditions permit, 
regardless of whether an operation is conducted under 
instrument flight rules or visual flight rules, vigilance shall be 
maintained by each person operating an aircraft so as to 
see and avoid other aircraft. When a rule of this section 
gives another aircraft the right-of-way, the pilot shall give way 
to that aircraft and may not pass over, under, or ahead of 
it unless well clear. 


4/22 


Requirements for DAA Concept 


Concept shall . . . 

► provide a geometric means to determine well-clear status, 

► enable self-separation capabilities, 

► avoid undue concern for traffic aircraft, 

► interoperate with existing collision avoidance systems, e.g., 
TCAS. 


5/22 


Well Clear 


► Two aircraft are well clear if appropriate distance and time 
variables determined by their states remain outside a set of 
predefined threshold values. 

► A well-clear violation occurs when: 

► horizontal range is less than DMOD or ( distance at time of 
CPA is less than HMD and modified tau is less than 
TAUMOD ) and 

► relative altitude is less than ZTHR or time to co-altitude is less 
than TCOA. 

► Concrete values for threshold values is matter of on-going 
research. Current values by poposed by the Sense and Avoid 
Science Research Panel (SARP): HMD = DMOD = 4000 ft, 
TAUMOD = 35 s, ZTHR = 450 ft, and TCOA = 0 s. 


6/22 


y (nmi) 


Well-Clear Violation Volume 

Top View of an Example Encounter 



7/22 


Well-Clear Properties 

► Inclusion: For an appropriate choice of threshold values, the 
well-clear violation volume is larger than the TCAS volume. 

► Symmetry: In a pair-wise situation, both aircraft make the 
same determination about their well-clear status. 

► Local Convexity: In a non-maneuvering trajectory, there is at 
most one time interval where the aircraft are in well-clear 
violation. 

These properties were . . . 

► proposed by the FM group at NASA LaRC and formally 
verified in the Prototype Verification System (PVS) for a 
family of well-clear concepts, 

► considered to be necessary conditions by SARP for any 
well-clear definition, and 

► helped to discard 2 of 3 proposed definitions of the well-clear 
violation volume. 


8/22 


DAIDALUS 

Detect and Avoid Alerting Logic for Unmanned Systems 


► DAIDALUS is an implementation in Java, C++, and PVS, 
developed by the FM group at NASA LaRC, of SARP’s DAA 
concept. 

► DAIDALUS provides algorithms for 

► Checking and predicting loss of well clear (lxl) 

► Computing alert level (lxl) 

► Computing conflict and recovery bands (lxn) 



9/22 



What’s in a Name? 


► DAIDALUS is a reference to the craftsman of Greek 
mythology, Daedalus, the father of Icarus. 

► Daedalus made wings for himself and for Icarus and warned 
Icarus not to fly too high, because the heat of the sun would 
melt the wax, nor too low, because the sea foam would soak 
the feathers. 



4 lmage taken from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daedalus. 


10/22 


Well-Clear Algorithms: Time To Violation 


► Given ownship and intruder state information and a lookahead 
time, return the time interval of well-clear violation assuming 
non-maneuvering trajectories. 

► Return the empty interval when aircraft are not predicted to 
be in well-clear violation within the lookahead time. 

► Return an interval that contains 0 (current time) when 
aircraft are currently in well-clear violation. 


11/22 


Well-Clear Algorithms: Conflict Bands 


► Given ownship and traffic state information and a lookahead 
time, compute ranges of track, ground speed, vertical speed, 
and altitude that lead to well-clear violation within lookahead 
time. . . 

► . . . assuming a kinematic trajectory for the ownship and 
non-maneuvering trajectories for the traffic aircraft. 


12/22 


Preventive Bands 

Bands outside current trajectory of the aircraft 


Corrective Bands 

Bands in current trajectory of the aircraft: 











7 




















? 40»®9 

/ 

j fT 

•- 




, ' 



1 - 




1 




14/22 


Recovery Bands 

Aircraft are (about to be) in well-clear violation 


Well-Clear Algorithms: Alerting Logic 


► Given ownship and intruder state information, return an alert 
level (numerical value) indicating severity of potential loss of 
well clear. 

► Two alerting schemas are supported (matter of on-going 
research): 

► Thresholds-based. 

► Bands-based. 


16/22 


Research Outcomes 


► Mathematical definition (in PVS) of a family of well-clear 
concepts. 

► Formally verified algorithms (in PVS) for maintaining 
well-clear and recovering from well-clear losses. 

► Software implementations (in Java and C++) of SARP’s 
well-clear concept released under NASA's Open Source 
Agreement. 

DAIDALUS has been tested in flight experiments conducted under 
NASA's UAS in the NAS Project. 


17/22 


Unexpected Outcomes 


► DAIDALUS is being considered for inclusion as DAA reference 
implementation in the appendix of RTCA Special Committee 
228 Minimum Operational Performance Standards (MOPS) 
for Unmanned Aircraft Systems. Ref. Don Walker (FAA). 

► DAIDALUS is being considered by FAA Tech Center for flight 
test study to determine the minimum pilot interface 
requirements for DAA. Ref. Kevin Williams (FAA). 

► Mathematical framework was used in the development of SAA 
concept by General Atomics Aeronautical Systems (GA-ASI). 
Ref. Brandon Suarez (GA). 


18/22 


On-Going Work 


► Validation of software implementation against formal models 

► Test cases are automatically generated. 

► Software outputs are checked against outputs of executable 
formal models for different degrees of accuracy. 

► Validation of software implementation against performance 
metrics. 

► What is a stressing case? 


References (I) 

► C. Munoz, A. Narkawicz, G. Hagen, J. Upchurch, A. Dutle 
and M. Consiglio, Detect &. Avoid Alerting Logic for 
Unmanned Systems (DAIDALUS), submitted 2015. 

► J. Upchurch, C. Munoz, A. Narkawicz, M. Consiglio, and J. 
Chamberlain, and M. Consiglio, Characterizing the Effects of 
a Vertical Time Threshold for a Class of Well-Clear 
Definitions, submitted, 2015. 

► J. Upchurch, C. Munoz, A. Narkawicz, J. Chamberlain, and 
M. Consiglio, Analysis of Well-Clear Boundary Models for the 
Integration of UAS in the NAS, Technical Memorandum, 
NASA/TM-2014-218280, June 2014. 

► C. Munoz, A. Narkawicz, J. Chamberlain, M. Consiglio, and J. 
Upchurch, A Family of Well-Clear Boundary Models for the 
Integration of UAS in the NAS, Proceedings of the 14th AIAA 
Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations (ATIO) 
Conference, AIAA-2014-2412, Atlanta, Georgia, 2014. 


20/22 


References (II) 


► A. Narkawicz, C. Munoz, J. Upchurch, J. Chamberlain, and 
M. Consiglio, A Well-Clear Volume Based on Time to Entry 
Point, Technical Memorandum, NASA/TM-2014-218155, 
January 2014 

► C. Munoz, A. Narkawicz, and J. Chamberlain, A TCAS-II 
Resolution Advisory Algorithm, Proceedings of the AIAA 
Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference (GNC), 
AIAA-2013-4622, Boston, Massachusetts, August 2013. 

► M. Consiglio, J. Chamberlain, C. Munoz, and K. Hoffer, 
Concept of integration for UAS operations in the NAS, 
Proceedings of the 28th International Congress of the 
Aeronautical Sciences (ICAS 2012), 2012. 


21/22 


Software Releases Under NASA’s Open Source Agreement 


► ACCoRD C Bands C Chorus C Stratway: 

http : //shemesh. larc .nasa.gov/fm/fm-at-codes .html. 


► Well-Clear: http://github.com/nasa/WellClear. 


► DAIDALUS C Stratway U Well-Clear. 


22/22 


