REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

Pubic reporting burden for this collection of infomiatjon is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for revtewr^ 
needed axf completing and reviewing this collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other a 
burden to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports. 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway. 
Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188). Wash not or DC 20503 

1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank) I 2. REPORT DATE I 3. REPORT TYPE 


1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank) 2. REPORT DATE 

May 17, 1999 »■■■•■- M 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

A Real-Time Multi-Processor for Adaptive 
Control Experiments 


6. AUTHOR(S) 

Dennis Bernstein 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Department of Aerospace Engineering 

University of Michigan 

Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-2140 


9. SPONSORING / MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Marc Jacobs 

Air Force Office of Scientific Research 
801 North Randolph Street, Room 732 
Arlington, Virginia 22203-1977 


3/1/98 


AFRL-SR-BL-TR-99- 

" Raja I i e<- 


5. FUNDING NUMBERS 

F49620-98-1-0224 


8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 


10. SPONSORING / MONITORING 
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 



12a. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 


APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE; DISTRIBUTION UNLIMITED. 


12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 


13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 Words) 

The objective of this project was to acquire instrumentation that will advance the state-of-the-art in real¬ 
time control and enhance the transition of new adaptive control techniques to DOD laboratories and 
industry. The instrumentation is portable in order to permit travel to DOD laboratories and industry to 
implement innovative controllers on their experimental testbeds. The key instrumentation is a special- 
purpose multi-processor configuration based on 4 Texas Instruments TMS320C40 60 MHz DSP processors 
and 4 DEC Alpha AXP 21164 500 MHz processors with 32 input channels and 32 output channels. The 
performance of this instrumentation extends the state-of-the-art in real-time computing for feedback control 
applications. A unique feature of this instrumentation is the fact that it is self-contained and fully 
transportable to allow on-site research in DOD laboratories and industry. The principal instrumentation 
was supplied by dSPACE, Inc., a vendor of real-time control processors. Of critical importance is their 
software interface to the Matlab real-time C code generator as well as their convenient diagnostic and 
interface software. Their multi-processor architecture allows real-time computing capability for feedback 
control beyond anything else currently available. 


14. SUBJECT TERMS 



15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

n - -. 




16. PRICE CODE 

17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 

OF REPORT 

OF THIS PAGE 

OF ABSTRACT 


UNCLASSIFIED 

UNCLASSIFIED 

UNCLASSIFIED 

UL 


NSN 7540-01-280-5500 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) 

Proscribed by ANSI Std. 239-18 


fcTic quality inspected 

















A Real-Time Multi-Processor for 
Adaptive Control Experiments 


Award Reference Number F49620-98-1-0224 


Principal Investigator: 

Dennis S. Bernstein 
Department of Aerospace Engineering 
University of Michigan 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2140 
(313) 764-3719 
(313) 763-0678 (fax) 
dsbaero@umich.edu 


Final Technical Report for 
Period 3/1/98 to 2/28/99 Submitted to: 

Dr. Marc Jacobs 

Air Force Office of Scientific Research 
801 North Randolph Street, Room 732 
Arlington, VA 22203-1977 


May 17, 1999 

19990/14 019 



1 Overview of the Project 

During the past two decades there have been enormous advances in control theory due 
largely to DOD funding in mathematics and related fields. This grant was used to purchase 
instrumentation for experimental control activities for facilitating the transition of these and 
future developments to real-world applications. 

The objective of this project was to acquire instrumentation that will advance the 
state of the art in real-time control and enhance the transition of new adaptive control 
techniques to DOD laboratories and industry. The instrumentation is portable in order to 
permit travel to DOD laboratories and industry to implement innovative controllers on their 
experimental testbeds. 

The key instrumentation we have purchased is a special-purpose multi-processor con¬ 
figuration based on 4 Texas instruments TMS320C40 60 MHz DSP processors and 4 DEC 
Alpha AXP 21164 500 MHz processors with 32 input channels and 32 output channels. The 
performance of this instrumentation extends the state of the art in real-time computing for 
feedback control applications. A description of the project objectives is given later in the 
report. 

A unique feature of this, instrumentation is the fact that it is self-contained and 
fully transportable to allow on-site research in DOD laboratories and industry. We have 
already visited the Air Force Research Laboratory in Albuquerque, NASA Langely, and 
Lord Corporation. These visits allowed me to interact with DOD and industry personnel by 
exchanging ideas and undertaking joint research projects. 

The principal instrumentation was supplied by dSPACE, Inc., a vendor of real-time 
control processors. dSPACE has an excellent understanding of real-time control require¬ 
ments, and their processors are widely used in DOD and industry laboratories. Of critical 
importance is their software interface to the Matlab real-time C code generator as well as 
their convenient diagnostic and interface software. 

dSPACE, Inc., has continually advanced the state of the art in real-time processing 
for feedback control applications. Their use of the DEC Alpha AXP 21164 processor in 
conjunction with the TI TMS320C40 processor provides considerable speedup over the use 
of the C40 alone. In addition, their multi-processor architecture allows real-time comput¬ 
ing capability for feedback control beyond anything else available. This technology is the 
principal component of the DURIP instrumentation. 

The Principal Investigator for this grant is Professor Dennis S. Bernstein. He is 
currently supported under grant F49620-98-1-0037 entitled “Experimental and Theoretical 
Techniques for Nonlinear Identification and Adaptive Cancellation.” This grant has benefited 
from the acquired instrumentation. 


1 



2 Relevance of the Acquired Instrumentation to the 
DOD Mission 

Control-system technology is essential for virtually all high-performance vehicles. Ac¬ 
cordingly, advances in control-system engineering impact many of the concepts described in 
the New World Vistas report [1]. The report identifies the following technological advances 
as being important for the effectiveness and affordability of the Air Force of the future: 

Large lightweight space structures. Such structures would provide 
the means for low-power, high resolution radar. 

Laser satellite communication. This technology would provide 
high-bandwidth, unjammable, non-interceptible communcation be¬ 
tween space assets. 

High aspect-ratio wings. This is an enabling technology for dra¬ 
matic improvements in heavy lift aircraft approaching 1,000,000 lbs. 

Increased engine efficiency. Increasing engine efficiency by 20% is 
viewed as a feasible goal that would reduce the need for refueling and 
therefore increase global mobility. 

Precision airdrop. The ability to deliver cargo from up to 20,000 ft 
with 50 ft accuracy would contribute to resupply and maneuver effec¬ 
tiveness. 

All of these technological objectives depend upon control-system technology. In fact, 
the ability to realize many of these objectives will most likely depend upon major advances 
in control theory, algorithms, software, and hardware. 

The New World Vistas report [1] focuses on “revolutionary” technologies that can 
provide a “quantum enhancement” to current capabilities. The report stresses that such 
enhancements correspond to a phase of development that often occurs 40-50 years after the 
introduction of a new technology. This observation applies as well to the development of 
control-system technology. 

While current technology is the beneficiary of remarkable advances in control theory 
and technology, the implementation, tuning, and validation of control laws remains an ex¬ 
pensive, difficult, and time-consuming task. Every system has different characteristics and 
every copy of the system requires careful, individualized tuning. I therefore believe it is 
time for a revolution in control technology that exploits the promise of adaptive control, that 
is, control algorithms that have the ability to learn and change in response to unexpected 
changes in the system and its environment. This ability would provide a “coming of age” 
for control technology without parallel since the advances in control made during WWII. 

In practice, control-system engineers rely upon analytical and numerical models to 
understand the qualitative behavior of a system before it is built, and detailed empirical 


2 



data to predict the behavior of the actual system once it has been constructed. For air¬ 
craft, these phases correspond to computational fluid dynamics and finite element analysis 
before construction and wind tunnel and flight testing after construction. Adaptive control 
can simplify both of these engineering phases by overcoming the need for highly detailed 
dynamical models. 

The benefits of adaptive control for aerospace applications, in particular, to the objec¬ 
tives from [1] listed above, can be enormous. Adaptive controllers can reduce cost, improve 
performance, and increase flexibility for all of these systems. For example, the need for 
detailed modal analysis of large space antennas and high aspect-ratio wings can be reduced, 
as can tedious mass properties analysis of spacecraft for precision pointing and air-dropped 
supplies for precision landing. In this way, adaptive control can have a major impact on the 
future effectiveness of the Air Force. 


3 Prior Accomplishments in Experimentally Based Con¬ 
trols Research 


The greatest challenge facing control researchers is the need to transition theoretical 
advances to operational systems. Therefore, in conjunction with my theoretical research, I 
have developed a laboratory for experimentally based control-system research. These activ¬ 
ities have helped me to address implementation and hardware issues, and they have focused 
my theoretical research on problems of interest to DOD and industry. In addition, control 
experiments have frequently suggested new control techniques and basic research directions 
that might otherwise have been overlooked. 

We have developed several control experiments to demonstrate and validate new 
control concepts, and we expect these activities to have a major impact on transitioning 
these ideas to applications. We have learned that experiments involving new control methods 
can reveal hidden strengths and weaknesses that are not apparent from theoretical analysis. 
What we learn from control experiments is invaluable for transitioning new ideas to practice. 

The experiments we have developed include noise and vibration control experiments 
as well as rotating imbalance experiments. These experiments, which are described in the 
following section, comprise a diverse collection of challenging testbeds with relevance to DOD 
and industrial applications. 


3.1 Acoustic and Structural Control Experiments 

Active suppression of acoustic noise and structural vibration has undergone consid¬ 
erable development over the past two decades [2-14]. These problems are closely related and 
differ primarily in the frequency ranges and choice of sensors and actuators. Acoustic noise 
control involves the motion of fluids, while structural vibration control is primarily concerned 
with the motion of solids. Many applications involve both aspects through structural-acoustic 


3 



interaction. Potential and current applications of acoustic noise control technology include 
aircraft engine noise, submarine acoustic radiation, automobile interior noise, heating and 
air conditioning system noise, industrial machinery noise, and many other applications. 

Active structural vibration control is directly relevant to New World Vistas objec¬ 
tives involving large lightweight space structures and high aspect-ratio wings. Both of these 
applications involve large flexible structures that are sensitive to disturbances. As another 
example, precision optical components, whether they be located on the ground, in the atmo¬ 
sphere, or in space, are sensitive to disturbances that can adversely affect phase properties. 
For example, systems such as airborne laser (ABL) can benefit from the use of active struc¬ 
tural control to counteract the effects of vibration due to the aircraft engines, turbulence, 
and other disturbance sources. 


3.1.1 Noise Control Experiments 

Our experimental activities in active noise control have involved various acoustic con¬ 
figurations to investigate robust controllers on high-order lightly damped systems. To obtain 
model-based controllers we derived analytical models [15-17], and we applied identification 
techniques which proved.to be efficient for controller design [18,19]. 

For noise control the most widely used techniques are based upon adaptive signal 
processing techniques [2-4,8,10,13]. Because these methods often utilize measurements of the 
disturbance, they are traditionally viewed as feedforward rather than feedback algorithms. 
Although feedback techniques have seen limited application to noise control problems, there 
is increasing interest in this approach [6,7,9]. 

The acoustic duct experiment helped us to understand the relationship between the 
feedforward and feedback control paradigms. Specifically, in [20] we showed that the physical 
arrangement of speakers and microphones in the standard feedforward setup effectively cir¬ 
cumvents the limitations imposed by the Bode integral by minimizing the gain of the spatial 
component of the closed-loop transfer function. In fact, feedforward control strategies for 
minimizing the spatial component of the closed-loop transfer function have been used in the 
feedforward literature for broadband suppression [5]. 

From a feedback point of view, the post-adaptation performance of feedforward algo¬ 
rithms can be attributed to the “acoustic feedforward” arrangement of the measurement, con¬ 
trol, disturbance, and performance signals, where typically the measurement is located near 
the disturbance and the control is located near the performance. This arrangement precludes 
nonminimum phase zeros in the disturbance-to-measurement and control-to-performance 
paths and thus permits asymptotically perfect cancellation as predicted by singular LQG 
theory. These fundamental observations have ramifications for the placement of sensors and 
actuators in noise and vibration control applications. 

In control experiments we considered the case of noise in an acoustic duct, which 
can be viewed as a one-dimensional acoustic field. However, many real-world applications 
involve three-dimensional acoustic fields. While the basic physics is common to both cases, 
noise control in three-dimensions is significantly more challenging than in one dimension for 


4 



several reasons. First, a three-dimensional field has significantly higher modal density than 
a one-dimensional field. Specifically, whereas the number of modes in a given frequency 
band in a one-dimensional duct is proportional to the width of the frequency band, in three 
dimensions the number of modes per unit bandwidth is proportional to the cube of the 
frequency band. Thus the number of acoustic modes below 10 kHz in a typical room is 
enormous. In addition, the problem of suppressing noise in a three-dimensional acoustic 
space exacerbates the problem of “spatial spillover,” that is, the inability to suppress noise 
uniformly throughout a three-dimensional volume. 

In more recent work on active noise control we have focused on adaptive feedback 
disturbance rejection. In applications disturbances may arise from a wide variety of sources 
such as rotating machinery, which can cause tonal or multi-tone disturbances, as well as 
turbulence, which gives rise to broadband noise. Since modeling and identification are often 
difficult and expensive, and since the plant dynamics and disturbance spectrum may change 
during operation, our goal is to reduce the dependence of the control law on plant model¬ 
ing requirements. This objective motivated our research on adaptive disturbance rejection 
reported in [21], which is based on an adaptive ARMA-type controller with recursive gain 
update. The attractive feature of the ARMARKOV adaptive control algorithm is the fact 
that it requires knowledge of only the transfer functions from the control inputs to the per¬ 
formance or error variables. Knowledge of the disturbance spectrum and transfer functions 
to other feedback sensors is not needed. 

We have implemented the ARMARKOV adaptive control algorithm on an acoustic ex¬ 
periment with a variety of input disturbances. As shown in [21], with unknown single-tone 
and dual-tone disturbances, the experimentally measured closed-loop performance shows 
that the algorithm is highly effective in the presence of limited modeling information. For 
these experiments the controller was given no prior information about the disturbance spec- 
.trum, and only the transfer function from control to performance was identified prior to 
controller implementation. Experiments with sine swept disturbances showed that the al¬ 
gorithm has the ability to adapt rapidly to nonstationary disturbances. A numerical study 
reported in [22] shows that the algorithm possesses a high degree of robustness to modeling 
errors. In particular, we studied the case of a mismatch of the modal frequencies of the 
actual secondary path transfer function and the model used by the algorithm. While these 
numerical simulations indicated performance degradation, instability was not observed. 

To achieve an even greater reduction in the need for off-line modeling, the acquired 
instrumentation has allowed us to implement more sophisticated adaptive disturbance rejec¬ 
tion controllers. To do this, we implemented the ARMARKOV adaptive control algorithm 
with concurrent (that is, simultaneous) identification of the secondary path transfer func¬ 
tion [23]. This implementation was achieved by dedicating one Alpha processor to adaptive 
gain update while another Alpha processor was devoted to secondary path transfer function 
identification as well as supervisory functions. The supervisory controller developed in [23] 
performs mode switching between control on/off, adaptation on/off, identification on/off, 
and control gain resetting. The resulting control algorithm can be implemented without 
prior identification of any kind so that it is effectively fully adaptive. While convergence 
results have not been developed for this hybrid direct/indirect algorithm, extensive simula¬ 
tion was carried out in [23] to illustrate its operation. Both the simulation and experiment 
showed promising results under a wide range of abrupt plant and disturbance perturbations. 


5 



The most challenging aspect is the importance of distinguishing between a significant change 
in the disturbance spectrum and a change in the secondary path transfer function. In the 
latter case, the supervisory controller employs an identification signal to update the model 
of the secondary path transfer function. 


3.1.2 Electrostatically Controlled Membrane Experiment 


In conjunction with Professor P. D. Washabaugh of the Aerospace Engineering De¬ 
partment of the University of Michigan, we developed a control experiment relating to 
lightweight precision optics. In this experiment an electrostatic potential of up to 2 kV 
is applied to a reflective mylar membrane to induce parabolic deflection of the membrane. 
Details of the experiment are given in [25]. The deformed membrane is intended to be useful 
as a reflective mirror surface [26,27]. 

In this application a challenging control problem arises from the fact that at large 
deflections (and small distances from the electrode) the membrane equilibrium is unstable. 
When instability occurs, the membrane contacts the electrode and a significant amount of 
current is discharged, thus damaging the membrane. 

To obtain a better understanding of the control-system requirements for this kind 
of system, we developed an analogous experiment involving electromagnetic actuation and 
a restoring force provided by a spring. Because of the inverse-square-law nonlinearity of 
the electromagnet, this experiment captures the essential characteristics of the membrane 
instability. 

We have already carried out control experiments on both the electromagnet and 
membrane testbeds. These control experiments have motivated the development of adaptive 
stabilization algorithms that are robust to unmodeled static nonlinearities [28,29]. The re¬ 
sults given in [28] show that the adaptive stabilization algorithm gives excellent performance 
and robustness for a large class of nonlinear oscillators, while the experimental results given 
in [29] show that the controller is effective for the electromagnetically controlled oscillator 
in the presence of unknown inertia, damping and stiffness as well as input nonlinearities. 


3.2 Rotating Imbalance Experiments 

We have developed a series of experiments that address fundamental theoretical and 
practical issues that arise in rotational motion. In particular, we are interested in the use of 
active control methods for suppressing the effects of rotor imbalance. These experiments help 
to advance the state of the art in nonlinear and adaptive control while developing techniques 
for DOD and industrial applications. 


6 



3.2.1 Rotating Actuator Experiment 

The purpose of this experiment is to investigate the effectiveness of nonlinear control 
techniques for stabilizing oscillatory motion. The novel feature of this experiment is the 
use of a rotational actuator coupled to translational motion which introduces a kinematic 
nonlinearity [30]. Since the rotational actuator has no stroke limitation, it has potential 
advantages over linear proof mass actuators. 

The experimental testbed involves a linear air slide with 4” of travel upon which is 
mounted a DC motor with an eccentric proof mass. Translational and rotational motion are 
measured using an LVDT (linear variable displacement transducer) and an optical encoder. 
Motor torque is commanded by means of a current-regulated servoamplifier, which in turn 
is commanded by a real-time control processor. 

A wide range of control laws have been implemented on this experiment, including 
passivity-based designs, integrator backstepping, and virtual absorbers [31,32]. This experi¬ 
ment was also the focus of a Special Issue on a Nonlinear Benchmark Problem [33] which I 
edited for the International Journal on Robust and Nonlinear Control. This problem is also 
being used by researchers as an informative illustration of nonlinear control-design techniques 
[34]- 

3.2.2 Magnetic Bearing Experiment 

Rotor imbalance induces vibrations through support bearings and thus is a universal 
problem in rotating machinery. Numerous techniques have been developed for addressing this 
.problem within the context of magnetic bearing technology [35,36]. To investigate techniques 
for actively suppressing the effects of rotor imbalance, we developed a rotating imbalance 
experiment. In this experiment a shaft is spun at a high rate and a magnetic bearing is 
used to apply forces to the shaft to counteract the effects of imbalance. In our experimental 
setup we mounted the shaft vertically to avoid the need for shaft levitation and to focus on 
imbalance compensation. 

In developing viable controllers for imbalance compensation we realized that accurate 
estimates of the inertia matrix of the shaft were difficult to obtain. In fact, any useful control 
strategy for counteracting rotor imbalance must be effective in the presence of unknown and 
possibly changing inertia. The strategy we adopted was physically motivated and sought to 
emulate the motion of passive weights confined to a fluid-filled annulus surrounding the shaft. 
While mechanical autobalancing devices based on this principle have been known since the 
1930’s, we developed an adaptive virtual autobalancing feedback algorithm based on this 
idea [37-39]. The analysis in [37] shows that this algorithm incorporates an internal model 
of the disturbance arising from the mass imbalance. A more general technique developed in 
[40] is based upon Lyapunov function methods. 

We experimentally implemented the adaptive virtual autobalancing algorithm on the 
rotating shaft experiment to assess its performance properties. In one experiment [39], we 
enabled the controller during spinup when the shaft reached 250 rpm, and then continued 


7 



spinup until the shaft reached 1000 rpm. This experiment shows the ability of the algorithm 
to suppress the effects of rotor imbalance without prior or explicit on-line identification. 


3.2.3 Control-Moment Gyro Experiment 

As an extension of the work described above, we designed and constructed an actively 
controlled control-moment gyro (CMG). This testbed, which is described in [41,42], is a 
multibody dynamics and control experiment. Attached to a spacecraft and with a rapidly 
spinning rotor, a CMG uses nonlinear gyroscopic effects to provide stiffness for the spacecraft 
and, by applying torques to the gimbals, can be used to perform slewing maneuvers. In 
practice, however, CMG’s often cause “wheel noise” due to imbalance which can impart 
disturbance forces to a spacecraft. 

As can be seen in [41,42], the CMG involves an outer gimbal and an inner gimbal, 
both of which are actuated by motors. The inner gimbal is controlled by a matching pair 
of motors to double the available torque and to balance the motor mass. Attached to the 
inner gimbal is a fourth motor that drives a rotor. For control experiments, we can attach 
imbalance masses to the rotor to perform a variety of experiments including slewing and 
imbalance compensation. 

The CMG experiment represents a significant control challenge. First, the physical 
device includes added mass and stiffness due to cables and connectors which are extremely 
difficult to model to a fine level of detail. This added mass and stiffness is expected to 
impact the dynamics of the system and thus must be accounted for by either identification 
or adaptive control. For a rotating spacecraft we have also developed a Lyapunov-based 
approach for adaptive command following that does not require prior identification of the 
' inertia properties [43]. 

Another challenging aspect of the CMG experiment is the fact that it involves a system 
of rigid bodies whose inertia is not constant. Hence the dynamics of the CMG include both 
kinematic and gyroscopic nonlinearities. This challenge is more than academic since CMG’s 
that are built for spacecraft are often limited in angular displacement to less than 20 degrees 
in order to reduce the complexity of the multi-body dynamics. In fact, allowing a larger 
range of motion would be useful for increasing the control authority of the CMG, while a 
full-range-of-motion CMG would alleviate the need for fuel to reset the wheel position. The 
CMG experiment thus has a direct connection to a problem of practical significance. 


4 References 

1. G. H. McCall and J. A. Dorder, ’’New World Vistas Air and Space Power for the 21st 
Century,” Scientific Advisory Board, 1995. 

2. B. Widrow et al, “Adaptive Noise Cancelling: Principles and Applications,” Proc. IEEE, 
Vol. 63, pp. 1692-1716,1975. 


8 



3. S. J. Elliot, I. M. Stothers and P. A. Nelson, “A Multiple Error LMS Algorithm and its 
Applications to the Active Control of Sound and Vibration,” IEEE Trans. Acoustics, Speech 
and Signal Processing, Vol. ASSP-35, pp. 1423-1434, 1987. 

4. C. R. Fuller, C. A. Rogers and H. H. Robertshaw, “Control of Sound Radiation with Ac¬ 
tive/Adaptive Structures,” J. Sound and Vibration , Vol. 157, pp. 19-39, 1992. 

5. P. A. Nelson and S. J. Elliott, Active Control of Sound, Academic Press, 1993. 

6. A. J. Hull, C. J. Radcliffe and S. C. Southward, ’’Global Active Noise Control of a One 
Dimensional Acoustic Duct Using a Feedback Controller,” J. Dynamic Systems, Measurement 
and Control, Vol. 115, pp. 488-494, 1993. 

7. Yang et al, “Modeling, Identification, and Feedback Control of Noise in an Acoustic Duct,” 
Proc. Amer. Contr. Conf., pp. 1-7, San Francisco, CA, June 1993. 

8. M. Bodson, A. Sacks and P. Khosla, “Harmonic Generation in Adaptive Feedforward Can¬ 
cellation Schemes,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Contr., Vol. 39, pp. 1939-1944, 1994. 

9. R. L. Clark, D. G. Cole, and K. D. Frampton, “Phase Compensation for Feedback Control 
of Enclosed Sound Fields,” J. Sound Vibr., Vol. 195, pp. 701-718, 1996. 

10. S. M. Kuo and D. R. Morgan, Active Noise Control Systems, Wiley, New York, 1996. 

11. C. R. Fuller, S. J. Elliott, and P. A. Nelson, Active Control of Vibration, Academic Press, 
1996. 

12. R. L. Clark, “Approximating the Response of Reverberant Systems: Applications to Propor¬ 
tional Damping, Added Impedance and Feedback Control,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., Vol. 99, 
pp. 627-630, 1996. 

13. B. Widrow and E. Walach, Adaptive Inverse Control, Prentice Hall, 1996. 

14. M. Bodson and S. C. Douglas, “Adaptive Algorithms for the Rejection of Sinusoidal Dis¬ 
turbances with Unknown Frequency,” Proc. 13th I FAC World Congress, pp. 229-234, San 
Francisco, CA, June 1996. 

15. J. Hong, J. C. Akers, R. Venugopal, M.-N. Lee, A. G. Sparks, P. D. Washabaugh, and D. S. 
Bernstein, “Modeling, Identification, and Feedback Control of Noise in an Acoustic Duct,” 
IEEE Trans. Contr. Sys. Tech., Vol. 4, pp. 283-291, 1996. 

16. R. Venugopal and D. S. Bernstein, “State Space Modeling of an Acoustic Duct with an 
End-Mounted Speaker,” ASME Trans. J. Vibr. Acoustics, Vol. 120, pp. 770-775, 1998. 

17. H. Sane, D. S. Bernstein, and K. Grosh, “State Space and Transfer Function Modeling of 
Evanescent Waves in Two-Dimensional Acoustics,” Proc. Amer. Contr. Conf, pp. 1080- 
1084, Philadelphia, PA, June 1998. 

18. J. C. Akers and D. S. Bernstein, “Time-Domain Identification Using ARMARKOV/Toeplitz 
Models,” Proc. Amer. Contr. Conf, pp. 191-195, Albuquerque, NM, June 1997. 

19. T. Van Pelt and D. S. Bernstein, “Least Squares Identification Using //-Markov Parameteri- 
zations,” Proc. Conf. Dec. Contr., pp. 618-619, Tampa, FL, December 1998. 

20. J. Hong and D. S. Bernstein, “Bode Integral Constraints, Colocation, and Spillover in Active 
Noise and Vibration Control,” IEEE Trans. Contr. Sys. Tech., Vol. 6, pp. 111-120, 1998. 


9 



21. R. Venugopal and D. S. Bernstein, “Adaptive Disturbance Rejection Using ARMARKOV 
System Representations,” Proc. IEEE Conf. Dec. Contr., pp. 1884-1889, San Diego, CA, 
December 1997; IEEE Trans. Contr. Sys. Tech., to appear. 

22. H. Sane, R. Venugopal, and D. S. Bernstein, “Robustness of ARMARKOV Adaptive Control 
Disturbance Rejection Algorithm,” Proc. Amer. Contr. Conf., San Diego, CA, June 1999. 

23. H. Sane, R. Venugopal, and D. S. Bernstein, “Disturbance Rejection Using Self-Tuning AR¬ 
MARKOV Adaptive Control with Simultaneous Identification,” Proc. Amer. Contr. Conf, 
San Diego, CA, June 1999. 

24. R. Venugopal and D. S. Bernstein, “Full State Feedback Discrete-Time Adaptive Stabiliza¬ 
tion,” Proc. Conf. Dec. Contr., Phoenix, AZ, December 1999 (submitted). 

25. J. Hong, I. A. Cummings, P. D. Washabaugh, and D. S. Bernstein, “Stabilization of a Mass 
and Spring System with Electromagnetic Actuation,” Proc. Conf. Contr. Appl., pp. 189-194, 
Hartford, CT, October 1997. 

26. D. J. Mihora and P. J. Redmond, “Electrostatically Formed Antennas,” J. Spacecraft, Vol. 
17, pp. 465-473, 1980. 

27. J. H. Lang and D. H. Staelin, “Electrostatically Figured Reflecting Membrane Antennas for 
Satellites,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Contr., Vol. AC-27, pp. 666-670, 1982. 

28. J. Hong and D. S. Bernstein, “Adaptive Stabilization of Nonlinear Oscillators Using Direct 
Adaptive Control,” Proc. Conf. Dec. Contr., Phoenix, AZ, December 1999 (submitted). 

29. J. Hong and D. S. Bernstein, “Experimental Application of Direct Adaptive Control Laws 
for Adaptive Stabilization and Command Following,” Proc. Conf. Dec. Contr., Phoenix, 
AZ, December 1999 (submitted). 

30. C.-J. Wan, D. S. Bernstein, and V. T. Coppola, “Global Stabilization of the Oscillating 
Eccentric Rotor,” Nonlinear Dynamics, Vol. 10, pp. 49-62, 1996. 

31. R. T. Bupp and D. S. Bernstein, “Experimental Implementation of Integrator Backstepping 
and Passive Nonlinear Controllers on the RTAC Testbed,” Int. J. Robust Nonlinear Contr., 
Vol. 8, pp. 435-457, 1998. 

32. R. T. Bupp, D. S. Bernstein, V.-S. Chellaboina, and W. M. Haddad, “Resetting Virtual 
Absorbers for Vibration Control,” Proc. Amer. Contr. Conf., pp. 2647-2651, Albuquerque, 
NM, June 1997; also, J. Vibration and Control, to appear. 

33. R. T. Bupp, D. S. Bernstein, and V. T. Coppola, “A Benchmark Problem for Nonlinear 
Control Design,” Int. J. Robust Nonlinear Contr., Vol. 8, pp. 307-310, 1998. 

34. M. Jankovic, D. Fontaine and P. V. Kokotovic, “TORA Example: Cascade- and Passivity- 
Based Control Designs,” IEEE Trans. Contr. Sys. Tech., Vol. 4, pp. 292-297, 1996. 

35. C. R. Knospe and R. R. Humphris, “Control of Unbalance Response with Magnetic Bearings,” 
Proc. Amer. Contr. Conf, pp. 211-217, 1992. 

36. B. Shafai, S. Beale, P. LaRocca and E. Cusson, “Magnetic Bearing Control Systems and 
Adaptive Forced Balancing,” IEEE Contr. Sys. Mag., Vol. 14, pp. 4-13, 1994. 

37. K.-Y. Lum, D. S. Bernstein, and V. T. Coppola “Global Stabilization of the Spinning Top 
with Mass Imbalance,” Dynamics and Stability of Systems, Vol. 10, pp. 339-365, 1995. 


10 




38. K.-Y. Lum, V. T. Coppola, and D. S. Bernstein, “Adaptive Autocentering Control for an 
Active Magnetic Bearing Supporting a Rotor with Unknown Mass Imbalance,” IEEE Trans. 
Contr. Sys. Tech., Vol. 4, pp. 587-597, 1996. 

39. K.-Y. Lum, S. P. Bhat, V. T. Coppola, and D. S. Bernstein, “Adaptive Virtual Autobalancing 
for a Magnetic Rotor with Unknown Mass Imbalance: Theory and Experiment,” ASME 
Trans. J. Vibr. Acoustics , Vol. 120, pp. 557-570, 1998. 

40. J. Ahmed and D. S. Bernstein, “Adaptive Stabilization of an Unbalanced Rotor,” Proc. Conf. 
Dec. Contr., Phoenix, AZ, December 1999 (submitted). 

41. J. Ahmed, R. H. Miller, E. H. Hoopman, V. T. Coppola, T. Andrusiak, D. Acton, and D. S. 
Bernstein, “An Actively Controlled Control Moment Gyro/GyroPendulum Testbed,” Proc. 
Conf. Contr. Appl-, pp. 250-252, Hartford, CT, October 1997. 

42. J. Ahmed and D. S. Bernstein, “Adaptive Control of a Dual-Axis CMG with an Unbalanced 
Rotor,” Proc. Conf. Dec. Contr., pp. 4531-4536, Tampa, FL, December 1998. 

43. J. Ahmed, V. T. Coppola, and D. S. Bernstein, “Asymptotic Tracking of Spacecraft Attitude 
Motion with Inertia Identification,” AIAA J. Guid. Contr. Dyn., Vol. 21, pp. 684-691, 1998. 


5 Acquired Instrumentation 


The instrumentation listed below was acquired under this grant. The associated costs 
are approximate. The Final Fiscal Report should be consulted for precise cost data. 


1. Real-time parallel processor for controller implementation. Four TI TMS320C40 DSP 
60 MHz processor boards, four DEC Alpha AXP 21164 500 MHz processor boards, 
32-channel A/D board and 32-channel D/A board. 20-slot chassis. Cockpit and Trace 
software for control experiments. dSPACE, Inc. $93,300. 

2. Scientific software for use with the dSPACE system. Mathworks, Inc. $1,000. 

3. Shipping cases for real-time control processor (2). Custom designed to accommodate 
alternative equipment shipping configurations. Hardigg. $1,100. 

4. PC laptop host for off-site control experiments. 166 MHz Pentium, 2.1 Gbyte hard 
drive, 16 Mbyte RAM. Toshiba model Tecra CDT. $3,850. 

5. Data acquisition system. 4-channel input, 2-channel output, 32 MB memory, 102 kHz 
sampling rate. DSP Technology. Model Siglab 20-42. $8,300. 

6. Low distortion function generator. Stanford Research Systems model DS360. $2,400. 

7. Instrumentation amplifier, 3 channel, 200 kHz bandwidth, DC response. Endevco. 

$ 2 , 000 . 

8. Microphone preamplifier (3), 8 channels. Tascam model $1,000. 


11 


