m Software 


Automatic Focus Adjust- 
ment of a Microscope 

AUTOFOCUS is a computer program 
for use in a control system that automat- 
ically adjusts the position of an instru- 
ment arm that carries a microscope 
equipped with an electronic camera. In 
the original intended application of 
AUTOFOCUS, the imaging microscope 
would be carried by an exploratory ro- 
botic vehicle on a remote planet, but 
AUTOFOCUS could also be adapted to 
similar applications on Earth. Initially 
control software other than AUTOFO- 
CUS brings the microscope to a position 
above a target to be imaged. Then the 
instrument arm is moved to lower the 
microscope toward the target: nomi- 
nally, the target is approached from a 
starting distance of 3 cm in 10 steps of 3 
mm each. After each step, the image in 
the camera is subjected to a wavelet 
transform, which is used to evaluate the 
texture in the image at multiple scales to 
determine whether and by how much 
the microscope is approaching focus. A 
focus measure is derived from the trans- 
form and used to guide the arm to bring 
the microscope to the focal height. 
When the analysis reveals that the micro- 
scope is in focus, image data are 
recorded and transmitted. 

This program was written by Terrance 
Huntsberger of Caltech for NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. Further informa- 
tion is contained in a TSP ( see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(818) 393-2827. Refer to NPO-30531. ' 


@ FastScript3D — 

a Companion to Java 3D 

FastScript3D is a computer program, 
written in the Java 3D™ programming 
language, that establishes an alternative 
language that helps users who lack ex- 
pertise in Java 3D to usejava 3D for con- 
structing three-dimensional (3D)-ap- 
pearing graphics. The FastScript3D 
language provides a set of simple, intu- 
itive, one-line text-string commands for 
creating, controlling, and animating 3D 
models. The first word in a string is the 
name of a command; the rest of the 
string contains the data arguments for 
the command. The commands can also 


be used as an aid to learningjava 3D. De- 
velopers can extend the language by 
adding custom text-string commands. 
The commands can define new 3D ob- 
jects or load representations of 3D ob- 
jects from files in formats compatible 
with such other software systems as X3D. 
The text strings can be easily integrated 
into other languages. FastScript3D facili- 
tates communication between scripting 
languages [which enable programming 
of hyper-text markup language (HTML) 
documents to interact with users] and 
Java 3D. The FastScript3D language can 
be extended and customized on both the 
scripting side and the Java 3D side. 

This program was written by Patti Koenig 
of Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Lab- 
oratory. Further information is contained 
in a TSP (see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(818) 393-2827. Refer to NPO-30592. 


Generating Mosaics of 
Astronomical Images 

“Montage” is the name of a service of 
the National Virtual Observatory (NVO), 
and of software being developed to imple- 
ment the service via the World Wide Web. 
Montage generates science-grade custom 
mosaics of astronomical images on de- 
mand from input files that comply with 
the Flexible Image Transport System 
(FITS) standard and contain image data 
registered on projections that comply 
with the World Coordinate System (WCS) 
standards. “Science-grade” in this context 
signifies that terrestrial and instrumental 
features are removed from images in a 
way that can be described quantitatively. 
“Custom” refers to user-specified parame- 
ters of projection, coordinates, size, rota- 
tion, and spatial sampling. The greatest 
value of Montage is expected to lie in its 
ability to analyze images at multiple wave- 
lengths, delivering them on a common 
projection, coordinate system, and spatial 
sampling, and thereby enabling further 
analysis as though they were part of a sin- 
gle, multi-wavelength image. Montage will 
be deployed as a computation-intensive 
service through existing astronomy por- 
tals and other Web sites. It will be inte- 
grated into the emerging NVO architec- 
ture and will be executed on the 
TeraGrid. The Montage software will also 


be portable and publicly available. 

This program was written by Attila Bergou, 
Bruce Borman, John Good, Joseph Jacob, 
Daniel Katz, Anastasia Laity, Thomas Piince, 
and Roy Williams of Caltech for NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. Further informa- 
tion is contained in a TSP (seepage 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(818) 393-2827. Refer to NPO-40297. 


© Simulating Descent and 
Landing of a Spacecraft 

The Dynamics Simulator for Entry, De- 
scent, and Surface landing (DSENDS) soft- 
ware performs high-fidelity simulation of 
the Entry, Descent, and Landing (EDL) of 
a spacecraft into the atmosphere and onto 
the surface of a planet or a smaller body. 
DSENDS is an extension of the DShell and 
DARTS programs (described in prior 
NASA Tech Briefs articles) , which afford ca- 
pabilities for mathematical modeling of the 
dynamics of a spacecraft as a whole and of 
its instruments, actuators, and other subsys- 
tems. DSENDS enables tire modeling (in- 
cluding real-time simulation) of flight-train 
elements and all spacecraft responses dur- 
ing various phases of EDL. DSENDS pro- 
vides high-fidelity models of die aerody- 
namics of entry bodies and parachutes plus 
supporting models of aunospheres. Terrain 
and real-time responses of terrain-imaging 
radar and lidar instruments can also be 
modeled. The program includes modules 
for simulation of guidance, navigation, hy- 
personic steering, and powered descent. 
Automated state-machine-driven model 
switching is used to represent spacecraft 
separations and reconfigurations. Models 
for computing landing contact and impact 
forces are expected to be added. DSENDS 
can be used as a stand-alone program or in- 
corporated into a larger program that sim- 
ulates operations in real time. 

This program was written, by J. Balaram, Ab- 
hinandan Jain, Bryan Martin, Christopher 
Lim, David Henriquez, Elihu McMahon, Garett 
Sold, Pranab Banerjee, Robert Steele, and Timo- 
thy Bentley of Caltech, and Scott Striepe and Brett 
Starr of Langley Research Center forN ASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. Further information 
is contained in a TSP (see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(818) 393-2827. Refer to NPO-30486. 


NASA Tech Briefs, April 2005 


13 


