Electronics/Computers 


Spaceborne Hybrid-FPGA System for Processing FTIR Data 

N A SA'sJdt Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


Progress has been made in a continu- 
ing effort to develop a spaceborne com- 
puter system for processing readout data 
from a Fourier-transform infrared 
(FTIR) spectrometer to reduce the vol- 
ume of data transmitted to Earth. The 
approach followed in this effort, ori- 
ented toward reducing design time and 
reducing the size and weight of the spec- 
trometer electronics, has been to exploit 
the versatility of recently developed hy- 
brid field-programmable gate arrays 
(FPGAs) to run diverse software on em- 
bedded processors while also taking ad- 


vantage of the reconfigurable hardware 
resources of the FPGAs. 

The specific FPGA/ embedded-proces- 
sor combination selected for this effort is 
the Xilinx Virtex-4 FX hybrid FPGA with 
one of its two embedded IBM PowerPC 
405 processors. The effort has involved 
exploration of various architectures and 
hardware and software optimizations. By 
including a dedicated floating-point unit 
and a dot-product coprocessor in the 
hardware and utilizing optimized single- 
precision math library functions and a 
modified PowerPC performance library 


in the software, it has been possible to re- 
duce execution time to an eighth of that 
of a non-optimized software-only imple- 
mentation. A concept for utilizing both 
embedded PowerPC processors to fur- 
ther reduce execution time has also been 
considered. 

T his work was done by Dmitriy L . Bekker, 
Jean-Francois L . Blavier, and Paula ]. Pin- 
gree of Caltech and M arcin Lukowiak and 
M uhammad Shaaban of Rochester Institute 
of Technology for NASA's Jet Propulsion L ab- 
oratory. For more information, contact iaof- 
fice@jpl.nasa.gov. NPO-45957 


FPGA Coprocessor for Accelerated Classification of Images 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


An effort related to that described in 
the preceding article focuses on develop- 
ing a spaceborne processing platform for 
fast and accurate onboard classification 
of image data, a critical part of modern 
satellite image processing. The approach 
again has been to exploit the versatilityof 
recently developed hybrid Virtex-4FX 
field-programmable gate array (FPGA) to 
run diverse science applications on em- 
bedded processors while taking advan- 
tage of the reconfigurable hardware re- 
sources of the FPGAs. In this case, the 
FPGA serves as a coprocessor that imple- 
ments legacy C-language support-vector- 
machine (SVM) image-classification algo- 
rithms to detect and identify natural 


phenomena such as flooding, volcanic 
eruptions, and sea-ice break-up. The 
FPGA provides hardware acceleration for 
increased onboard processing capability 
than previously demonstrated in software. 

The original C-language program — 
demonstrated on an imaging instrument 
aboard the Earth Observing-1 (EO-1) 
satellite — implements a linear-kernel 
SVM algorithm for classifying parts of 
the images as snow, water, ice, land, or 
cloud or unclassified. Current onboard 
processors, such as on EO-1, have lim- 
ited computing power, extremely lim- 
ited active storage capability and are no 
longer considered state-of-the-art. 
Using commercially available software 


th at tran si ates C -I an gu age p rograms i n to 
hardware description language (HDL) 
files, the legacy C-language program, 
and two newly formulated programs for 
a more capable expanded-linear-kernel 
and a more accurate polynomial-kernel 
SVM algorithm, have been implemented 
in the Virtex-4FX FPGA. In tests, the 
FPGA implementations have exhibited 
significant speedups over conventional 
software implementations running on 
general-purpose hardware. 

This work was done by Paula J, Pingree, 
Lucas ]. Scharenbroich, and Thomas A. 
I/I /erne of Caltech for NASA's Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory. For more information, contact 
iaoffice@jpl.nasa.gov. NPO -45961 


SiC JFET Transistor Circuit Model for Extreme Temperature Range 

Simple modifications of common silicon model provide reasonable approximation from 25 to 500 °C . 

John H. Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio 


A technique for simulating extreme- 
temperature operation of integrated cir- 
cuits that incorporate silicon carbide 
(SiC) junction field -effect transistors 
(JFETs) has been developed. The tech- 
nique involves modification of 
NGSPICE, which is an open-source ver- 
sion of the popular Simulation Program 


with Integrated Circuit Emphasis 
(SPICE) general-purpose analog-inte- 
grated -ci rcu i t-si m u I ati n g software. 
NGSPICE in itsunmodified form isused 
for simulating and designing circuits 
made from silicon-based transistors that 
operate at or near room temperature. 

Two rapid modifications of NGSPICE 


source code enable SiC J FETs to be sim- 
ulated to 500 °C using the well-known 
"Level 1" model for silicon metal oxide 
semiconductor field-effect transistors 
(MOSFETs). First, the default value of 
the MOSFET surface potential must be 
changed. In the unmodified source 
code, this parameter has a value of 0.6, 


NASA Tech Briefs, December 2008 


9 



