Software 



@ Key Decision Record Cre- 
ation and Approval Module 

Retaining good key decision records is 
critical to ensuring the success of a proj- 
ect or operation. Having adequately doc- 
umented decisions with supporting doc- 
uments and rationale can greatly reduce 
the amount of rework or reinvention 
over a project’s, vehicle’s, or facility’s 
lifecycle. Stennis Space Center devel- 
oped and uses a software tool that auto- 
mates the Key Decision Record (KDR) 
process for its engineering and test proj- 
ects. It provides the ability for a user to 
log key decisions that are made during 
the course of a project. By customizing 
Parametric Technology Corporation’s 
(PTC) Windchill product, the team was 
able to log all information about a deci- 
sion, and electronically route that infor- 
mation for approval. Customizing the 
Windchill product allowed the team to 
directly connect these decisions to the 
engineering data that it might affect and 
notify data owners of the decision. The 
user interface was created in JSP and 
Javascript, within the OOTB (Out of the 
Box) Windchill product, allowing users 
to create KDRs. Not only does this inter- 
face allow users to create and track 
KDRs, but it also plugs directly into the 
OOTB ability to associate these decision 
records with other relevant engineering 
data such as drawings, designs, models, 
requirements, or specifications. 

This work was done by Bartt Hebert and 
Elizabeth A. Messer of Stennis Space Center; 
Colby Albasini of Computer Sciences Carp.; and 
Thang Fe, William ORourke, Sr., Tim Stiglets, 
and Ted Strain of Sai Tech Inc. Inquiries con- 
cerning rights for the commercial use of this in- 
vention should be addressed to the Intellectual 
Property Manager at Stennis Space Center 
(228) 688-1929. SSC-00338 


Enhanced Graphics for 
Extended Scale Range 

Enhanced Graphics for Extended Scale 
Range is a computer program for render- 
ing fly-through views of scene models that 
include visible objects differing in size by 
large orders of magnitude. An example 
would be a scene showing a person in a 
park at night with the moon, stars, and 
galaxies in the background sky. Prior 
graphical computer programs exhibit 


arithmetic and other anomalies when ren- 
dering scenes containing objects that dif- 
fer enormously in scale and distance from 
the viewer. 

The present program dynamically 
repartitions distance scales of objects in 
a scene during rendering to eliminate al- 
most all such anomalies in a way compat- 
ible with implementation in other soft- 
ware and in hardware accelerators. By 
assigning depth ranges corresponding 
to rendering precision requirements, ei- 
ther automatically or under program 
control, this program spaces out object 
scales to match the precision require- 
ments of the rendering arithmetic. This 
action includes an intelligent partition 
of the depth buffer ranges to avoid 
known anomalies from this source. The 
program is written in C++, using 
OpenGL, GLUT, and GLUI standard li- 
braries, and nVidia GEForce Vertex 
Shader extensions. The program has 
been shown to work on several comput- 
ers running UNIX and Windows operat- 
ing systems. 

This program was written by Andrew f. 
Hanson and Philip Chi-Wing Fu of Indiana 
University for Goddard Space Right Center. 
Further information is contained in a TSP 
(seepage 1). GSC-14819-1 


Debris Examination 
Using Ballistic and Radar 
Integrated Software 

The Debris Examination Using 
Ballistic and Radar Integrated Software 
(DEBRIS) program was developed to 
provide rapid and accurate analysis of 
debris observed by the NASA Debris 
Radar (NDR). This software provides a 
greatly improved analysis capacity over 
earlier manual processes, allowing for 
up to four times as much data to be ana- 
lyzed by one-quarter of the personnel re- 
quired by earlier methods. There are 
two applications that comprise the DE- 
BRIS system: the Automated Radar De- 
bris Examination Tool (ARDENT) and 
the primaiy DEBRIS tool. 

The debris radars were established to 
provide insight into debris events for all 
future space shuttle flights. Often, the de- 
bris particles are either too small or mov- 
ing too quickly to be accurately character- 
ized in any other way. Data must be 
rapidly and accurately analyzed in order 


to assess the threat environment from as- 
cent debris. The DEBRIS tools offer that 
capability, and were specifically tailored to 
the needs of the debris analysis mission. 

The ARDENT application is intended 
to autonomously identify, characterize, 
annotate, and perform statistics on de- 
bris tracks from 150 seconds after 
launch to loss of signal at the far hori- 
zon. The DEBRIS application is in- 
tended primarily for analysis of the data 
within the first 150 seconds of flight. It 
allows the user to explore the available 
data and annotate observed debris 
events and tracks. It also allows ballistic 
analysis of an annotated event, and al- 
lows the user to display all annotated 
events for the mission and the associated 
meta information for those events. 

The ARDENT debris detection algo- 
rithm uses a Multi-scale Localized 
Radon Transform (MSLRT) optimized 
for this application. The MSLRT com- 
putes a localized Radon transform of 
blocks of the data for multiple block 
sizes (or scales) to form an aggregated 
(across scales) debris track detection 
map based on identifying piece-wise lin- 
ear features in the data. The DEBRIS 
tool consolidates and extends the capa- 
bility of several discrete applications de- 
veloped early in the NDR technology 
maturation process; specifically, data 
viewing, annotation of candidate debris 
events, and various elements of trajec- 
tory analysis. This consolidation dramat- 
ically streamlines the analysis process 
and the amount of overhead in both 
time and effort needed to fully process 
the debris risk portion of the shuttle as- 
cent. 

The ballistic and radar signature prod- 
ucts of these tools allow assessment of de- 
bris material type, shape, size, and release 
location — information that is used to de- 
termine threat to the current mission as 
well as flight safety for future missions. 
The analysis efficiencies afforded by these 
tools allow detailed threat assessment of 
tens of gigabytes of data within three days 
of launch. 

This work was done by Anthony Griffith, 
Matthew Schottel, David Fee, Robert Scully, 
and Joseph Hamilton of Johnson Space Center; 
Brian Kent, Christopher Thomas, Jonathan 
Benson, and Eric Branch of the U.S. Air Force; 
and Paul Hardman and Martin Stuble of 
NAVAIR (Patuxent) Department of the Navy. 
MSC-24827-1 


NASA Tech Briefs, January 2012 


17 



