make the transition to any of the 
other three modes. 

• Diagnostic — This mode provides ac- 
cess to all sensory data in real time and 
is intended for use in diagnosis of sen- 
sor anomalies. 

This program was written by Drew P. Hall, 
Richard T. Howard, William C. Ly, John M. 
Rakoczy, and John M. Weir of Marshall 
Space Flight Center. For further informa- 
tion, contact Jim Dowdy, Commercialization 
Project Lead, at Jim.Dowdy@nasa.gov. 
MESH 18 35-1 


© Simulation of 

Dropping of Cargo 
With Parachutes 

Decelerator System Simulation 
(DSS) is a computer program for pre- 
dicting and analyzing the dynamics of a 
load of cargo dropped with parachutes 
from an aircraft. A DSS simulation runs 
from the first motion in the aircraft 
until the payload reaches the ground. 
Intended for use in support of airdrop 
tests for the X-38 program, DSS was de- 
veloped by modifying and augmenting 
an older program, denoted UD233A, 
used for simulating the dynamics of a 
space-shuttle solid rocket booster 
falling with a parachute. The main ef- 
fort in converting UD233A into DSS in- 
volved development of computational 
models for simulating the inflation of 
one or more parachute (s) , the dynam- 
ics of the payload and the slings con- 
necting the parachute (s) with the pay- 
load, and the extraction of the payload 
and parachutes from the aircraft. 

This program was written by Peter Cuth- 
bert o/Johnson Space Center. For further 


information, contact the Johnson Technology 
Transfer Office at (281 ) 483-3809. 
MSC-2363 


@ DAVE-ML Utility Programs 

DAVEtools is a set of Java archives 
(*.jar files) that embodies tools for ma- 
nipulating flight-dynamics models that 
have been encoded in dynamic aero- 
space vehicle exchange markup lan- 
guage (DAVE-ML). [DAVE-ML is an ap- 
plication program, written in 
Extensible Markup Language (XML), 
for encoding complete computational 
models of the dynamics of aircraft and 
spacecraft. The goal in the continuing 
development of DAVE-ML is to expe- 
dite the exchange and validation of dy- 
namical models, via the Internet, in a 
manner that is consistent and is inde- 
pendent of computational-simulation 
facilities, computing languages, and 
simulation software.] At present, DAVE- 
tools includes two tools: 

• dave (a basic DAVE-ML parser) , which 
generates a Java-based version of a 
model encoded in DAVE-ML and 

• dave2sl, which builds on dave to create 
Simulink® representations of models 
encoded in DAVE-ML. 

The manipulations that can be per- 
formed at the present early stage of de- 
velopment are rather limited. More im- 
portantly, DAVEtools serves as an example 
of how to write an import software tool 
for a DAVE-ML file. 

This prog am was mitten by Bruce Jackson 
of Langley Research Center. For further in- 
formation, access http://daveml. nasa.gov. 
LAR-16879-1 


Robust Control for the 
Mercury Laser Altimeter 

Mercury Laser Altimeter Science Al- 
gorithms is a software system for con- 
trolling the laser altimeter aboard the 
Messenger spacecraft, which is to 
enter into orbit about Mercury in 
2011. The software will control the al- 
timeter by dynamically modifying 
hardware inputs for gain, threshold, 
channel-disable flags, range-window 
start location, and range-window 
width, by using ranging information 
provided by the spacecraft and noise 
counts from instrument hardware. In 
addition, because of severe bandwidth 
restrictions, the software also selects 
returns for downlink. To reduce mis- 
sion risk, the software incorporates 
three different modes of operation. 
The three modes are denoted as fixed, 
range-driven, and closed-loop (or 
adaptive). The fixed mode provides 
fixed hardware inputs for all but the 
threshold. The range-driven mode re- 
ceives and utilizes ranging informa- 
tion from the spacecraft regarding its 
slant range to the planet or asteroid. 
The adaptive mode is capable of im- 
proving upon the ranging information 
provided by the spacecraft by use of a 
closed-loop range-estimation algo- 
rithm. The software is sufficiently ro- 
bust that it could be used on other 
missions, and in fact, this has already 
been proposed. 

This program was written by Jacob S. 
Rosenberg of Goddard Space Flight Cen- 
ter. Further information is contained in a 
TSP (see page 1). 

GSC-14876-1 


16 


NASA Tech Briefs, May 2006 


