STINFO COPY 



AFRL-HE-\VP-JA-2007-0007 

Integrated Modeling Framework for 
Anthropometry and Physiology 
Virtual Body 


Patrick Wilkerson 
Andrzej Przekwas 

CFD Research Corp. 

215 Wynn Drive 
Huntsville AL 35805 


June 2007 

Interim Report for April 2006 - May 2007 


Approved for public release; 
distribution is unlimited 


Air Force Research Laboratory 
Human Effectiveness Directorate 
Biosciences and Protection Division 
Biomechanics Branch 
Wright-Patterson AFB OH 45433-7947 


20070927451 






NOTICE AND SIGNATURE PAGE 


Using Government drawings, specifications, or other data included in this document for 
any purpose other than Government procurement does not in any way obligate the U.S. 
Government. The fact that the Government formulated or supplied the drawings, 
specifications, or other data does not license the holder or any other person or corporation; 
or convey any rights or permission to manufacture, use, or sell any patented invention that 
may relate to them. 

This report was cleared for public release by the Air Force Research Laboratory Wright Site 
Public Affairs Office and is available to the general public, including foreign nationals. 
Copies may be obtained from the Defense Technical Information Center (DTIC) 
(http://www.dtic.mil). 

THIS TECHNICAL REPORT (AFRL-HE-WP-JA-2007-0007) HAS BEEN REVIEWED AND 
IS APPROVED FOR PUBLICATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH ASSIGNED DISTRIBUTION 
STATEMENT. 


FOR THE DIRECTOR 
//SIGNED// 


Malic M. Hoffrnan 

Deputy Chief, Biosciences and Protection Division 
Air Force Research Laboratory 


This report is published in the interest of scientific and technical information exchange, and its 
publication does not constitute the Government’s approval or disapproval of its ideas or findings. 



REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

Form .Approved 

0MB No. 074-0188 

The public repelling burden for collection d( Information i» estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the lime ^ reviewing Instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering end 

malniaining the deta needed, and completing and reviewing this collection of information Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this oollectioo of information. Including 
suggestions tor reduclog this burden, to Oepahment of Defense, Washingion Headquaners Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports (0704-01BBK 1215 Jefferson Oavla Highway, 

Suite 1204, Ailngton VA 222024302. Respondents should be aware lhal notwithstanding any offier provision of law. no person shall be subject to any penalty for failing lo comply with a collection of 
information tf It dcTes not display a currently valid OMB control number 

PLEASE DO NOT RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS. 

1. REPORT DATE (DD MMM-YYYY) 2. REPORT TYPE 

2007 Interim Report 

3. DATES COVERED {From - To) 

April 2006 to May 2007 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Integrated Modeling Framework for Anthropometry and Physiology 
Virtual Body 

5a. cor 

iJTRACT NUMBER 

FA8650-06-M-6707 

5b. GRANT NUMBER 

Sc. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 

62202F 

6. AUTHOR(S» 

Patrick Wilkerson, Andrzej Przekwas 

5d. PROJECT NUMBER 

3005 

5e. TASK NUMBER 

HP 

5f. WORKUNIT NUMBER 

60 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADORESStES) 

CFD Research Corp. 

215 Wynn Drive 

Huntsville AL 35805 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 

REPORT NUMBER 

9. SPONSORING / MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADORESStES) 

Air Force Materiel Command 

Air Force Research Laboratory 

Human Effectiveness Directorate 

Biosciences & Protection Division 

Biomechanics Branch 

Wright-Patterson AFB OH 45433-7947 

10. SPONSOR / MONITOR'S ACRONYM 

AFRL-HE-WP-JA-2007-0007 

11, SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBERIS) 


12. DISTRIBUTION I AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 


13, SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

AFRLAVS-07-1311 approved by AFRL/WS PA on 4 Jun 2007 _ 

14. ABSTRACT 

This paper presents a software framework for visual manipulation and processing of human body anthropometric, 
skeletal, vascular and other anatomical databases. 


15. SUBJECT TERMS 


Computational Medicine and Biology (CFDRC), virtual humans, virtual body 


16, SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF^ 

17, LIMITATION OF 

18, NUMBER 

OF 

PAGES 

19a. NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON: 

a. REPORT 

b. ABSTRACT 

C, THIS PAGE 

ABSTRACT 

Huaining Cheng 

u 

U 

U 

SAR 

12 

19b. TELEPHONE NUMBER (Include area code! 


Standard Form 2d8 (Rev 0/98) 
PreacnPri Dv ANSI Slfl. £39-16 


1 




































THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


11 


07DHM-49 


Integrated Modeling Framework For Anthropometry and Physiology 

Virtual Body 

Patrick Wilkerson and Andrzej Przekwas 

CFD Research Corporation 


Copyright © 2007 SAE Inlemationai 


ABSTRACT 

We believe that the future of human body testing in 
military and civilian applications is in using a new 
generation of “dummies" - “virtual humans". CFDRC’s 
CMB (Computational Medicine and Biology) research 
group has developed an integrated bioinformatics 
software framework for intelligent analysis of biomedical 
databases, generation of geometrical models for 
simulations, and modeling setup for human 
biomechanical and physiological performance. The 
integrated 3D Java based software framework is a fully 
user-interactive Virtual Body framework for creation and 
editing the Virtual Body and acting as a front end for 
multi-scale anthropometry/anatomy physics based 
simulation software. This paper presents a software 
framework for visual manipulation and processing of 
human body anthropometric, skeletal, vascular and other 
anatomical databases. We have demonstrated the 
framework for scan/anatomy based virtual human body 
model generation and predictive simulation of 
cardiovascular system responses to high-g aircraft 
maneuvers. The fully developed Virtual Body will allow 
for complete user control and editing of morphing 
capabilities of various anatomical systems, including 
current skeletal and vascular systems, with a framework 
designed for additional anatomical systems such as 
muscular, skin, and organs. It provides the capability to 
generate/edit the static/dynamic human body models 
from laser scans, anthropometric databases, and other 
image based anatomical techniques, for predictive 
modeling of human body performance. The Virtual Body 
also acts as a data-generator/preprocessor for available 
human body simulation software including biomechanics, 
ergonomics, cardiopulmonary physiology, blast injury and 
other simulators. 

INTRODUCTION 

The conventional approach for human body performance 
analysis in ergonomic, apparel, car safety, military 
performance, de-mining, ballistic protection, and other 
disciplines is to construct a human "dummy" - a 


mechanical surrogate of the human body. Nowhere else 
have dummies gained more popularity and respect than 
in car crash safety. Mechanical dummies have been also 
used by the US Air Force Research Laboratory Human 
Effectiveness Directorate (AFRUHE) on sled tests 
replicating pilot emergency ejection events from aircraft 
cockpits to improve pilot safety [1]. Figure 1 presents 
classical car crash dummies (HYBRID III and THOR) 
and a state of the art instrumented thorax for blast 
explosion testing (HSTM-Johns Hopkins University), 


Figure 1. Examples of mecharjicat dummy models 
HYBRID III and THOR for car crash safety. 

Despite the fact that test dummies have provided 
invaluable safety data, contributed to vehicle design, and 
saved millions of lives, they have reached a point of 
reduced data return as they contain no integrated human 
physiological systems, capable of only measuring 
mechanical forces experienced by the dummy. Similar 
limitations relate to testing on cadavers (good anatomy 
but no physiology and poor repeatability, i.e, each 
cadaver is different) and on animal "models" (good 
physiology, but wrong anatomy and ethical issues). We 
believe that the future of human body testing in military 
and civilian applications is in using a new generation of 
"dummies" - "virtual humans”. The work presented in 
this paper is making a major contribution in that quest, 
which has been ongoing, with initial emphasis on aviation 
safety. 

For years, modeling and animation of the human being 
has been an exclusive research goal in computer 
graphics. Early humans were represented as simple 
articulated bodies made of segments and joints with a 




1 




kinematica! model to simulate them, But simple skeleton- 
based models are too limited for realistic human 
simulation. Recent advances in computer graphics, 
computing hardware, and bioinformatics have increased 
the practicality of using computers for multidisciplinary, 
multi-scale modeling of a human body. The combination 
of medical imaging, computer graphics, anthropometry, 
anatomy based image processing, availability of 
physiological and biological data, and biomedical 
modeling tools allows for the advancement of predictive 
tools of functional performance of human beings in 
various scenarios. The potential in commercial and 
military applications of human body modeling and 
bioinformatics software is phenomenal. 

Human biology and physiology can be analyzed and 
simulated using either a "bottom up" approach starting 
from small scale and building to larger scale (i.e. 
genome}, subcellular structures (organelles), cellular 
pathways, tissue, organ, organ system, and whole body 
organism - or in the opposite way by using a "top down" 
approach. Most of the bioinformatics research follows 
the former ^proach, primarily because of the revolution 
in experimental biology. We believe that there are great 
scientific, commercial, and milita^ opportunities in 
establishing a top-down bioinformatics data processing 
and modeling framework. We envision a bioinformatics 
framework coupling interfaces to experimental data, data 
analysis software tools, and multi-scale top-down 
modeling of the whole-body biomechanics, physiology, 
and injury. The human body model could be “immersed" 
in a virtual environment relevant to military and 
commercial medicine. CFDRC’s current Virtual Body 
software framework is a first step in this direction 

3D JAVA BASED VIRTUAL BODY FRAMEWORK 

CFDRC has developed an integrated Virtual Body 
bioinformatics software framework for intelligent analysis 
of biomedical databases, generation of geometrical 
models for simulations, modeling setup for human 
biomechanical and physiological performance, and 
launching/monitoring such simulations. The developed 
software is a novel “top-down" multi-scale modeling 
approach of the human body that allows for integration of 
systemic, organ, tissue, cellular, and biochemical 
pathways through the Virtual Body framework and 
modeling through available CFDRC simulation software. 

The Virtual Body framework allows for full 3D generation 
and editing of anatomical systems such as vasculature 
and the skeleton. All anatomical systems are mapped to 
an underlying baseline skeleton framework. Such 
mapping of the anatomical systems to the baseline 
skeleton allow for automated morphing of all anatomical 
systems when the baseline skeleton is moved. In 
addition, the design of the system allows for future 
development of additional anatomical systems, including 
muscles, organs, skin, lymphatics, etc. As well as 
generation and editing capabilities of the system, the 
user may import previously saved anatomical systems or 
system components, to include in the Virtual Body 


system as desired. Additional file format support is 
continuously being developed to allow for the importing 
of system components, such as data extracted from 
medical images. With full user 3D interactive editing 
capabilities for all the systems in the Virtual Body, the 
user Is thus able to setup a desired anatomical system 
for biomechanical and physiological simulations. Such 
simulations include using CFDRC’s CoBi (Computational 
Biology) software for fully coupled fluid flow, heat 
transfer, biomechanics, and biochemistry. 

Future development of the Virtual body framework will 
include a component model library of system 
components, links to anthropometric and biochemistry 
databases, additional anatomical systems support, and 
integration to additional biomechanical and 
physiology/injury simulation software such as AFRL’s 
ATB [2], Figure 2 illustrates the overall framework of the 
Virtual Body and related components. Figure 3 illustrates 
a screen shot of the Virtual Body in it's current state, 
showing a closed loop human vasculature and baseline 
skeleton framework in a seated posture. Detailed below 
are several of the major components of the current 
Virtual Body framework, followed by an illustrative 
simulation example. 


Utw I 



Figure 2. Virtual Body software framework design 
(current and planned capabilities). 



Figure 3. Screenshot of current version of Virtual Body 
with a skeletonA/ascular network in a sitting posture 
(2D image included for reference). 


2 








































VASCULAR NETWORK EDITOR 

The 3D Java based Virtual Body software enables the 
user to generate any vascular network desired. The 
vasculature consists of vessel components, which are in 
turned composed of node components. The nodes basic 
definition includes it's 3D spatial coordinates and radius. 
Groups of nodes therefore make up a vessel, and 
vessels may be connected to one another through their 
individual nodes, allowing for creation of a vascular 
network. Thus, control of the nodes controls the shape, 
size, and connectivity of the desired vasculature. The 
generated vasculature is visually represented in the 
Virtual Body software in two separate ways; (1) a 
hierarchical tree representation of the vascular network 
is visualized showing all vessel and node components 
and their parent/child relationship to one-another, and (2) 
visualized on the 3D Java canvas which allows for user 
interactive rotation, translation, and zooming of the 
complete generated Virtual Body structure via traditional 
user controlled mouse movements. The 3D canvas and 
tree representations of the generated vasculature can be 
seen in the screen shot in Figure 3 with the tree in the 
upper right hand panel of the screen and the canvas on 
the left side of the screen. 

Full editing capabilities are available of the generated 
vasculature. Editing can be accomplished by selecting 
either a vessel or node, by either selecting the 
component from the tree or interactively selecting the 
component from the 3D Java Canvas. Once selected, 
details of the vessel or node component may be edited 
by the user. Such editing capabilities include, but are not 
limited- to; changing coordinates, radius, parent/child 
connectivity, grid resolution (for when grid generated), 
mapping to skeleton baseline (detailed later in paper), 
visibility/pickability on Canvas, color, etc. Additional 
editing capabilities for generated vasculature are 
available, such as scaling and rotation of individual 
components or the entire geometry. Such editing control 
by the user allows for very simple or very complex 
vascular networks to be generated as desired. The full 
connectivity of the vessels also allows for closed loop 
vascular networks and/or connectivity points to other 
components, such as compartmental models in 
simulation software. Figure 4 illustrates a closed loop 
vascular network of the human body, showing the arterial 
network, venous network, and combined arterial/venous 
closed loop network (with zoomed in view). 

In addition, when a node is selected by the user, clicking 
on (left mouse click) and holding the node in the canvas 
allows the user to move the node on the canvas by 
simply moving the mouse as desired. The selected node 
is moved and relative movement of that node's vessel 
and all children vessels below are translated accordingly. 
More detailed movement control (if desired) can be 
accomplished by first selecting nodes (right mouse click) 
on either side of the desired node to be fixed in place. 
Then translation of the selected node and it’s relative 
motion of neighboring nodes will be limited between any 


selected fixed nodes. This allows for large control of 
moving nodes on the canvas manually. 

Once a vasculature has been generated, either from 
user generated vessels or imported vasculature 
extracted from medical imagery, it may be saved and 
reopened at a later date. Whenever the generated 
Virtual Body geometry is saved, a 1D wire grid mesh is 
generated and saved which can be used for simulations 
with CFDRC’s CoBi simulation software, Finally, a 
critical component of the vasculature generation 
capabilities described above, is the ability for additional 
anatomical systems to be easily generated in the same 
way. Anatomical systems such as muscles, 
tendons/ligaments, bones, digestive tract, lymphatics, 
nerves, etc. can be generated and edited in the same 
manner. 


BASELINE SKELETON FRAMEWORK 

A 3D baseline skeletal model was generated to provide 
an under-lying “backbone" for the virtual human model 
simulations. This baseline skeleton model is built from 
the vessel/node elements, therefore it is capable of being 
scaled and manipulated (re-positioned) as desired by the 
user in the 3D environment. In addition, the most 
important capability of the baseline skeletal model is that 
it can can be mapped/linked to by the vascular network, 
as well as other user developed anatomical systems. 

The developed baseline skeletal model consists of 21 
segments, consiting of two nodes apiece. The segments 
are joined at locations representing the physical joints of 
the human body. These 21 segments allow for unlimited 
movement and re-positioning of the virtual human model. 
The developed baseline skeletal framework serves as 
the underlying framework of the virtual human 
generated. The baseline skeletal framework and 
vascular network (as well as other developed anatomical 
systems) can be mapped/linked together (described later 
in paper), allowing for scaling and deforming of the 
virtual body as desired by the user by simply 



Figure 4. Vascular rretwork of human body showing from 
left to right: arterial network, venous network, combined 
closed/loop arterial/venous network, and zoomed in view 
of closed arterialA/enous network. 


3 













manipulating the baseline skeletal Iramework as 
described in the vascular network editor above. Figure 
5a illustrates a schematic of the 21 segment CFDRC 
designed baseline skeletal model (shown on top of a 
skeletal surface model, for reference). Figure 5b 
illustrates an image taken from CFDRC’s Virtual Body 
editor with the developed baseline skeleton framework 
overlayed on a skeleton image, while Figure 5c shows 
the same baseline skeleton framework along with a 
closed loop arterial-venous vascular network. As seen in 
Figure 5 and Figure 3 (previously), 2D images may also 
be imported into the Virtual Body editor for reference. If 
a 2D image has been imported, the image may be 
selected (or de-selected) by the user in the GUI. Once 
selected, when the user clicks on a node and begins 
translation, the node will be able to freely move two- 
dimensionally, parallel with the image plane (i.e. the node 
does not have to be In the image plane, it is just forced to 
translate in a plane parallel with the selected 
image/plane). The selected node is projected onto the 
2D image as a reference for the user. This is especially 
helpfull when translating 3D geometries which are not in 
the 2D image plane, and the user wants to move the 
selected node following a portion of the reference 
imported image. 



as the vascular network or other developed systems 
(bones, skin, organs, muscles, etc.) which are included 
in the developed geometry. It can serve as the 
backbone because all other elements in the geometry 
will be mapped/linked to a specific skeleton segment. As 
Figure 6 illustrates, a vascular network can be mapped 
to the baseline skeleton framework, and then the entire 
combined system can be scaleable and deformable by 
simply editing/morphing the baseline skeleton framework 
in 3D. 

The linking/mapping of the vascular system (or other 
anatomical systems) to the baseline skeleton framework 
Is handled by identifying each vascular vessel's 
corresponding baseline skeleton segment. This is done 
when creating (or later editing) each vascular vessel. 
The actual mapping/linking of the two systems is then 
handled automatically by the Virtual Body software, 
determining the closest skeleton node on the linked 
skeleton segment for each node of every vessel. 
Automatically determining which skeleton segment each 
vessel should be linked to was initially attempted, so as 
to remove any human involvement, but no algorithm 
could be developed to prevent vessels from one part of 
the body (i.e. hand) being linked to skeleton vessels from 
another segment (i.e. upper leg). By specifying which 
baseline skeleton segment each vessel is linked with, 
this problem was overcome. With linking/mapping of the 
anatomical systems to the baseline skeletal framework, 
automated morphing of the anatomical systems can be 
accomplished by simply moving the underlying baseline 
skeleton framework. The technique for such morphing is 
detailed below. 



(a) (b) (c) 

Figure 5. (a) CFDRC developed 3D baseline skeletal 
model shown in standing posture; (b) 3D baseline 
skeletal model in Virtual Body; (c) 3D baseline 
skeleton and ctosed-ioop arten'al/venous vascular 
network in Virtual Body. 


Figure 6. Schematic representation of baseline skeleton 
framework mapped to vascular network, allowing for 
scalability and detormabiiity. 

AUTOMATED MOVING/MORPHING OF 
VASCULATURE LINKED TO SKELETON 
FRAMEWORK 


LINKING/MAPPING VASCULATURE TO SKELETON 
FRAMEWORK 

A 3D baseline skeleton framework was developed and 
integrated into the Virtual Body Editor. The purpose of 
the baseline skeleton framework is schematically 
illustrated in Figure 6. The skeleton framework serves 
as the 'backbone' of all other anatomical systems, such 


Mapping/linking of the vascular system to the baseline 
skeleton framework was described in the previous 
section. The purpose of such a finking system is to allow 
morphing of the overall system through morphing of the 
skeleton framework atone. Specifically, if the user wants 
to morph a standing soldier to a sitting position, simply 
moving the skeleton arms and legs would be much more 
efficient than moving all arteries, veins, capillaries. 


4 





























organs, etc. along with the skeletal segments. Through 
the linking process and the Virtual Body's editing 
capabilities, such as moving nodes and vessels, this 
process has been accomplished. Figure 7 illustrates 
such a process, with Figure 7a showing a full 
skeleton/vascular network of a standing soldier. Figure 
7b is a zoomed In view of the geometries left lower leg. 
Note that the last node of the lower leg has been 
selected (green ball). Rotating this node 30 degrees 
counter-clockwise (translation would work as well) 
results in the skeleton framework moving along with the 
linked vascular vessels and nodes, as seen In Figure 7c. 

The morphing capabilities illustrated in Figure 7 show the 
basic principles and capabilities that have been built into 
the Virtual Body Editor, improvements still need to be 
made to handle more accurate real-world morphing. For 
instance, if a user wants to rotate the lower arm 90 
degrees, the lower arm and its linked vasculature will 
morph fairly accurately. But, the attached hand to the 
lower arm will simply be translated along with the hand, 
not rotating itself as well, thus leaving the hand and its 
linked vessels positioned awkwardly. Another issue is 
that the linked vasculature is morphed by translating 
nodes of the vasculature along with the morphing 
skeleton framework, which may not keep all nodes 
relative positions with the framework with which it is 
linked. Issues such as these can currently be handled by 
then morphing the hand or linked vessels, but could be 
handled automatically with more sophisticated morphing 
capabilities in the future. Such issues are currently being 
addressed. Further, the morphing of the baseline 
skeleton framework Is currently not limited in any way, 
i.e. no constraints on how the body can be manipulated. 
Thus, currently the body can be manipulated into 
configurations which are not realistic (i.e. elbow or knee 
bending backwards). Work in the coming year will 
introduce joint restraints to limit manipulation of of the 
framework to desired human joint limitations. 



(a) (b) (c) 


Figure 8 illustrates these linking/mapped morphing 
cap^ilities by looking at two different postures of a 
soldier (obtained from 3D laser body scans). A standing 
soldier vasculature was developed first in the Virtual 
Body software to mimic the standing posture. Then the 
sitting soldier posture vasculature was generated by 
morphing/deforming the generated standing vasculature. 



Figure 8. Example generated Virtual Body 
vasculature (mapped to baseline skeleton 
framework) of standing body posture and resulting 
Virtual Body morphed/deformed vasculature. Full 
body scans from the CAESAR Database [3]. 

ADDITIONAL ANATOMICAL SYSTEM SUPPORT 

As described previously, the Virtual Body software has 
been designed to handle various anatomical systems, 
such that they can be defined in segments (vessels and 
nodes). One such example would be 3D surface models 
of the body, i.e. CAESAR database [3,4] and the human 
skeleton. Such skeleton surface models are available, 
such as the BEL (Biomechanics European Laboratory) 
[5] database. Figure 9 illustrates this 101 segment 
human skeleton bone database. The bones can be 
converted to STL (Stereolithography) file format [6] and 
imported into the Virtual Body framework using the STL 
file import capabilities present. Additional file format 
importers are present and planned in the future. 



Figure 9. Illustrative snapshots of BEL detailed 101 
bone skeletal surface image dafabase and single 
bone imported to Virtual Body software framework. 


Figure 7. (a) Full body model; (b) Left lower leg 
before and (c) after rotation {2D skeletal image for 
reference). 


5 


Additional anatomical systems which could be 
generated/imported could be (but not limited to): organs 
(lungs, liver, kidneys, digestive tract, etc.}, muscles. 












ligament/tendons, nerves, and skin. Each of these 
systems could be linked to the underlying baseline 
skeleton framework and morphed as desired by the user. 
Advanced morphing capabilities will need to be 
completed to maintain relative positions of such systems 
as organs and the skin, but such technologies are under 
development at both CFDRC and other research 
facilities. Integration of these capabilities is currently 
underway and presents exciting capabilities for the 
developed Virtual Body framework. 

SIMULATION EXAMPLES 

Following are several examples of simulations conducted 
using Virtual Body generated closed loop vasculature 
geometries. These simulations were conducted utilizing 
the Virtual Body for geometry and mesh generation, 
simulation setup (boundary/volume/initial conditions, 
solver settings, etc.) and CFDRC’s CoBi (Computational 
Biology) solver was used (solving fluid flow in the 
vessels, fully integrated cardiopulmonary compartmental 
model, and elastic vasculature tissue walls). 

CLOSED LOOP ARTERIAL/VENOUS CIRCULATORY 
SIMULATIONS 

Utilizing the Virtual Body Editor, a full closed loop 
arterial/venous circulatory simulation was generated. 
The simulation included a cardiopulmonary heart/lung 
compartmental model, an arterial vessel tree starting 
from the exit of the left ventricle from the heart, a venous 
tree returning flow to the right atrium of the heart, and 
capillary vessels connecting the arterial and venous 
trees. After generating the circulatory vessel structure in 
the Virtual Body, the file was saved and the wiregrid 
mesh was automatically generated. Transient 
simulations using CFDRC’s CoBi simulation software 
were conducted with a heart beat of 75bpm, driving the 
pulsatile blood flow through the elastic vasculature. The 
results from the standing soldier simulation qualitatively 
agreed with anticipated results. Figure 10a illustrates the 
closed loop vasculature, 10b the generated mesh 
(zoomed in for viewing), and 10c the resulting pressure 
distribution in the vasculature at a given instant in time of 
the pulsatile simulation without and with gravity. 

CIRCULATORY SIMULATION OF SOLDIER; SLED 
TEST ACCELERATION 

A circulatory simulation utilizing sled test acceleration 
data from AFRL’s Biodynamic Database [7] was 
conducted. The data was obtained from the BDB 
database, test case HIA0921 (Horizontal Impulse 
Accelerator). The simulation conducted consisted of a 
soldier in the sitting position, subject to sled acceleration 
data from the BDB database. Before running simulations 
with the applied BDB HIA accelerations, the standard 
geometry was simulated with and without gravity, to 
insure the mesh was adequate and the simulation with 



(c) 

Figure 10. (a) Closed loop vasculature; (b) Zoomed h 
view of mesh; (c) Resulting pressure distribution without 
and with gravity turned on. 

gravity resulted in pressure readings throughout the 
body, such as in the upper arm of approximately 120/80 
mmHg. The baseline skeleton and vascular networks 
were generated in the Virtual Body software by morphing 
the previously generated standing soldier vasculature. 
Figure 11 illustrates the sitting soldier vasculature (1 la), 
generated mesh (lib), and resulting pressure 
distribution for a given instant in time without (11c) and 
with (lid) gravity activated for the transient simulations. 


6 

















Figure 11. (a) Closed loop vasculature of sitting soldier, 
(b) generated mesh, and pressure distribution (c) 
without and (d) with gravity turned on for a given instant 
in time of transient simulation. 


Experimental sled acceleration data taken from the BDB 
database, case number HIA0921, is plotted in Figure 12 
along with the applied acceleration data for the 
simulation. The acceleration was applied after 15 
seconds to allow the simulation to settle to a cycle 
independent solution. Also in Figure 12 can be seen 
pressure traces taken from various locations in the 
vascular network with gravity. Note that the applied 
acceleration occurs between 15 and 15.1 seconds. The 
pressure traces show several heart beats before and 
after the acceleration event (at time equal 15 seconds). 
Note when the acceleration occurs, the resulting 
pressure traces are dramatically altered with even such a 
short acceleration event (100 milliseconds). The 


pressure traces regain their repeatable behavior within 
approximately two heartbeats. This quick recovery can 
primarily be attributed to the fact only physical flow is 
being modeled, with no biochemistry. Biochemical 
reactions to such an event would release 
vasoconstrictors, adrenaline, endorphins, etc. which 
would most likely cause the repercussions of the event 
on the circulatory flow system to be felt for a longer 
amount of time, affecting the heart rate and vasculature 
tone. Future such simulations with metabolic reaction 
will be conducted in the near future. 



(a) 


(b) 







1U 14 14.1 It IfJ II 1I.I IT tTI 


(C) 

Figure 12. (a) BDB Sled acceleration experimental data, 
(b) Applied acceleration data, (c) Various pressure fraces 
from different locations in the vascu/afure of the sitting 
soldier circulation with gravity and applied acce/era/;on. 

CONCLUSION 

CFDRC’s developed 3D Java based Virtual Body 
software framework allows a user to generate and 
manipulate anatomical systems of a virtual body in a 
user friendly environment. With the advances and 
availability of anatomical data from medical imagery and 
available databases, such a tool will be useful to 
researchers in integrating various detailed anatomical 
systems into a single environment. The linkedymapped 
framework between the baseline skeleton framework 
and generated anatomical systems allows for the 
morphing of the entire geometry through simple 
morphing of the baseline skeleton framework alone. 


7 




























































Future integration and enhancements of additional 
anatomical systems and components will further 
enhance the capabilities of the Virtual Body software 
framework. And finally, the Virtual Body’s integrated 
capability to work with simulation packages, such as 
CFDRC’s CoBi (flow, heat transfer, FEM, biochemistry) 
and other solvers in the near future, allow for fully 
integrated body geometry generation/editing and 
simulation analysis. The capabilities of the Virtual Body 
software presented in this paper represent just the 
starting point of the overall desired package and will be 
continually developed in the near future. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Partial funding for the development of the Virtual Body 
software package and CoBi solver came from the 
DARPA BioSpice Program and AFRLVHE SBIR Phase I 
project contract FA865006M6707 (AFRL's Huaining 
Cheng, Ted Knox, Kathleen Robinette, Joseph Pellettiere 
and Nathan Wright). 

REFERENCES 

1. CFDRC team tour of AFRL7HE test facilities 2006. 

2. ATB 1998, Articulated Total Body Model Version V 

Users Manual: 


http ://vww.biodyn.wpafb,af.mil/Reference/atbusrguid 
e.pdf 

3. CAESAR 3D Anthropometric Database: Civilian 
American and European Surface Anthropometry 
Resource Project, 2006: http://store.sae.org/caesar/ 

4. Robinette K.M., Daanen Fi.A.M., (2006) “Precision of 
the CAESAR scan-extracted measurements", 
Applied Ergonomics 37, 259-265, 200 

5. BEL 2006: Biomechanics European Laboratory; 
http://www.tecno.ior.it/VRLAB/researchers/repository 
/BE L_repository.html 

6. STL 2006, Stereolithography Final Format: 
http ://www.ennex.com/~fabbers/StL. asp 

7. BOB 2006, AFRL Bioynamics Database: 
http ://www. biodyn. wpaf b.af .mil/ 

CONTACT 

Patrick Wilkerson 
Principal Research Engineer 
CFD Research Corporation 
215 Wynn Drive 
Huntsville, AL 35805 

Email; pww@cfdrc.com 
Website: www.cfdrc.com 
Phone: 256-726-4857 
Fax: 256-726-4806 


8 


