N89-16351 


AN APPROACH TO KNOWLEDGE STRUCTURING 
FOR ADVANCED PHASES OF THE 
TECHNICAL AND MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM (TMIS) 


H. T. Goranson, Sirius Incorporated 
P.O. Box 9258, Virginia Beach, VA 23452 

ABSTRACT: TMIS must employ an enlightened approach to its 

"object" structure , but basic issues in conceptual 
structuring remain to be resolved. Sirius out- 
lines the necessary agenda and reports on progress 
toward solutions. 

INTRODUCTION 

Sirius is a small group which has traditionally focused on advanced 
solutions to troublesome issues in knowledge representation. Its prior work 
has primarily been for larger firms addressing problem spaces in the defense 
community. Recently, the group has been working in areas directly applicable 
to the specific problems of object/meta-data/knowledge representation faced by 
Space Station planners. A relatively mature paradigm is emerging which can be 
of use in the planning now being done. 

THE SPACE STATION INFORMATION SYSTEM (SSIS) 

SSIS has embraced the ADA philosophy, which is good. Study groups, 
particularly the one here at Clear Lake, have developed an agenda and strawman 
models. Insofar as we at Sirius have seen, the thinking is clear and has led 
to several early conclusions which we hope will not be diluted as activity 
increases and more interests become involved. In particular, there is a 
consensus that a Network Information System (NIS) entity be created and 
distributed in various incarnations throughout the system to work with (and 
allow a high level of independence of) "application" systems and communication 
systems. 

Considerations of this NIS are intimately bound with another healthy 
emerging consensus: before architectures are considered, before coding, 

module or task planning is begun, even before the development agenda is 
formalized, a comprehension of the structure of the representation universe 
must be set. This universe must deliberately and circumspectly be engineered 
as a logical first step in the comprehensive life-cycle planning of the entire 
system. 

This has truly never been faced squarely before, because prior require- 
ments were narrow in comparison and allowed compromise. But SSIS-related 
issues are too broad, too deep, indeed too expensive and important to allow 
less than our best efforts in this matter. 

The problem is: we immediately run up against the same fundamental, 

unresolved philosophical issues which have plagued the Knowledge Representa- 
tion community for decades. There is traditional deadlocked contention among 


E.4.4.1 


workers in the fields of Artificial Intelligence (AI), Programming Language 
(PL), and Database (DB) researchers which each represent justifiable perspec- 
tives. 

The good news is that recent successful studies into the mathematical 
foundations of allied fields give us a whole new world of tools to work with, 
tools which allow us to transcend PL/DB/AI localizations and start to put our 
arms around the science required. This is fully in harmony with the ADA 
culture, and in fact our group has some ADA-based research underway in this 
area. 


The bad news, at least so far, involves the Technical and Management 
Information Systems (TMIS), a system planned to support many facets of Space 
Station development. 

TECHNICAL AND MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM 


While there are major differences between TMIS and SSIS, the TMIS object 
specification would rightly be placed before nearly all SSIS Engineering tasks 
(Engineering in the ADA sense). TMIS is now in a Phase I ad hoc configuration. 
Future phases will be competed shortly. What makes the TMIS problem so dif- 
ficult, and so interesting is the manner in which it must evolve. Each user 
group will continue to work with his existing and pTanned environments, 
constantly adding to the data, information, and knowledge pools. 

So the problem, the challenge of TMIS is to develop a conceptual universe 
which satisfies today's TMIS needs while building the object/representation/ 
meta-data schema, which for simplicity we will call an Integrated Conceptual 
Environment (ICE). This ICE should be optimized for the emerging ADA centered 
SSIS, which includes AI interfaces, knowledge representation subsets, and 
anticipation of future (30 year horizon) technologies. 

ISSUES: GENERAL 


Basic issues involve ADA language and environment concerns, very large 
database theory and AI requirements. 

Programming Language issues include a complete data and abstract data 
type specification, associative potential processing topology, as well as many 
inherent characteristics, such as fault recovery, fault tolerance and fault 
avoidance. With respect to issues in Programming Language (PL) design, a 
candidate representational formalism for SSIS characteristics should include 
constructs that allow a user to capture intuitions about the structure of the 
domain(s) of application - for example, intuitions about (or clustering 
operands for) the appropriate conceptualization of the objects, properties, 
and relations of the domain. The motivation for much of the prior research on 
incorporating abstract data typing facilities such as ANNA into the ADA 
programming language has resulted from this incidental requirement. Indeed, 
in the most general sense, it was this motivation that led to the development 
of high level programming languages, among them ADA, in the first place. 

But neither the syntax nor the "general" semantics of first order lan- 
guages will recognize the distinction between two types of abstracts, a 
frequently encountered phenomenon in an anticipated SSIS environment. Things 
of both types will simply be values of individual variables, and arguments of 


E.4.4.2 



predicates (and function-symbols). To some extent, the analogue of this 
particular semantic inadequacy in programming languages, which is meant to be 
handled by the introduction of data types and typing facilities, can be 
treated within higher order calculus languages by introducing sortal quanti- 
fication and by other tedious methods. But this is unacceptable for relating 
a potentially large abstract vocabulary in a KR context. 

Our proposed approach extends a potential semantic capability of ADA into 
a semantic net operator set, in order to allow creation of a test bed for TMIS 
development, using current environments. 

Concerning DB theory, one of the most striking features of the current 
explorations in ICEs is the attempt to deploy concepts and techniques from the 
field of Knowledge Representation, and especially from work on semantic net- 
works, in combination with relational databases. However, one can see some- 
thing of a paradox in the focus on current network-type formalisms. The back- 
bones of most formalisms are taxonomic hierarchies, sometimes generalized to 
deal with multiple inheritance. A governing design requirement of TMIS is to 
capture semantic interdependencies (both inclusions and exclusions) among the 
various kinds of things (or "concepts") with which they have dealt. But the 
explicit embodiment of such interdependencies seems to be ruled out by the 
hierarchical relational model. 

Given the structural limitations of existing ICE work, it is hard to see 
how such notions as type hierarchies, inheritance, and exclusion can be im- 
ported within the boundaries of the relational model. One proposed handling 
of hierarchies and inheritance is part of a reconstruction of database theory, 
from within the theory of first-order logic. TMIS runs the risk of adopting 
this default position without looking at a higher structural level. 

It seems more natural to think about relational databases (especially as 
conceived of originally) as models of kinds of first and second order theo- 
ries. It is instructional in the present context to propose extending the 
relational database concept in terms of locally finite dimensional cylindrical 
algebras. These would be algebras whose elements are sets of finite sequences 
of objects/attributes, rather than in terms of first or second order theories. 
We are in fact drawn more to the algebraic, morphological and semantic than to 
the syntactic, proof-theoretic, account of the relational model in this work. 
Of course, there are intimate connections between the morphological cylindri- 
cal calculus and algebras which our current research exploits, specifically 
within the unique TMIS universe. 

ISSUES: NETS 


There has been a long and continuing debate within the AI world on the 
relative merits and expressive power of representational languages based on 
Logic on one hand and semantic networks on the other. It is apparent that 
semantic nets have often been used as a notational rather than as a repre- 
sentational language. Logic, on the other hand, enjoys a well accepted seman- 
tics, but its support as a knowledge representation scheme is left unclear as 
to which aspects of which Logic it proposes to use. 

In considering semantic networks, it should be noted that there has been 
considerable migration of techniques from semantic networks to data models in 


E.4.4.3 



the VLD context. Net researchers are just now talking about multiple inherit- 
ance, whereas KB researchers have been involved for quite some time. One fea- 
ture of semantic networks in a purely digital environment that needs to be 
considered by a data model is the genetics of cluster forces, over a KB life 
cycle. 

A dispassionate observer may question why semantic networks haven't been 
used more directly for ICE purposes. Semantic networks and semantic data 
models are in a sense equally powerful, but they have been intended in the 
past for applications that have different and more linear characteristics. 
There j_s a trend in this research to deal with applications that involve an 
ever increasing number of types, and the gap in intended applications between 
data models and semantic networks seems to be narrowing. Especially inter- 
esting in this case are embryonic studies for photonic machines which appear 
to be providing a lead in this science of semantic nets. 

TMIS will have to consider many possible uses for a database, only some 
of which would be of relevance to the ICE concerns of SSIS. Their approach is 
expected to be to determine the least common denominator of all these appli- 
cations and then provide implementation. Although requirements for databases 
and VLDs have changed during the last few years, it is not obvious that the 
least common denominators for frameworks that handle photonic forms, visual 
and speech data, text messages, etc., are semantic networks. 

The principals of Sirius, however, represent the philosophy of those who 
promote the use of nets without the restriction of logic-bound notations, and 
maintains the pre-eminence of this approach over the other, more constrained 
historical approaches. 

KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION (KR) NETS AND LOGIC MATRICES 


The theoretical limits of logic-based semantic nets are most clearly seen 
via properties of topologically isomorphic representations of the data struc- 
ture. It is easily shown that the generalized map of each is a matrix (for 
the rule-based "truth table" approach) or a hierarchical structure (for the 
logic-driven "list processing approach"). The hierarchical geometries are 
often morphologically classed for queuing purposes and are often related, via 
pattern recognition layers, as the corners of an all logical space-filling 
regular three-dimensional tessellation. A commonly encountered example of 
this method of analysis can be seen in the oct-tree or quad-ternary-like types 
of machine-level conceptual structures now being investigated by Sirius and 
other workers in integrated photonics. By examining the morphology of exist- 
ing Lisp-based methods, it can likewise be demonstrated that a ceiling of com- 
plexity results from commonplace simple hierarchical (read "list, stack, or 
string" processing) building techniques, as expressed in this conventional 
language syntax. 

Consequently, some investigators have applied ingenious techniques to 
create, access, and manipulate structures of higher morphological complexity. 
Typical of the approaches is that of Lipski (1978) which advances the avail- 
able geometry of the data lattices by placing matrix nodes in an ordering 
which emulates the hierarchical lattice of normal use. This, in fact, paral- 
lels a similar synthesis in generating grammars by Paz (1976). In turn, an 
associative transformational threading is allowed through the lattice, using 
recursive operators which give the combined structure great conceptual power. 


E.4.4.4 



But the theoretical limit on strictly hierarchical geometries remains low in 
morphological complexity and is limited to those of 3-D, orthagonal , regular 
tessellation. 

Nets of much greater complexity have been used for decades by scientists 
and mathematicians, especially those involved in work for target image sensor 
fusion. Recently, the regular, infinite structures that are generatable by 
periodic recursion have been categorized by Goranson (1981), Burt/Wachman 
(1974), and Lalvani (1986). The approach to establishing a baseline vocabu- 
lary for the ICE comparative optimization studies selects a structure for the 
knowledge representation lattice based on the desired properties of the task 
and nature of the diversity of the source data and internal translative types. 

This "Top Down" approach gives many advantages relevant to related 
connection biased theories. Major advantages for this proposed approach 
include related reduction of a meta-operator set (using primitive and re- 
cursive transforms) to a few mathematical symmetry operations to which we can 
apply several optimization techniques. Greatly increased density and organi- 
zation of the information in the abstracted knowledge bases is achieved. This 
latter advantage allows a suitable level of abstraction to be combined with 
clustering of related elements (which can be seen as extended "frames"), a 
desirable effect which addresses suitability for local TMIS users. Memory 
requirements are greatly reduced in size. Elements which express cluster 
characteristics are typically quite large in number when narrow in scope and 
are well ordered for logical calculus interface. The resultant partitions are 
attractive for concurrent and parallel processing algorithms on a level low 
enough to include technologies projected for SSIS use. 

IMPLICATIONS FOR THE PRESENT PROBLEM 


The requirement is for an approach which: 

a. Will provide a basis for synthetic studies of applicable technolo- 
gies and methods across a wide spectrum, in short: a descriptive 

ICE nomenclature. 

b. By virtue of providing a high level scientific description of the 
laws at work, will provide a unified means for integrating this 
diversity. 

c. Allow an approach to optimizing ICE specification, design and 
hosting, provide for future generation computing requirements in 
terms of processing, large information sources, and reconfigura- 
bil ity. 

d. Direct specification for hosting and testing of these issues. 

GENERAL TOOLS 


Sirius works with a set of morphological expressive laws which describe 
all possible global model schema. This morphology is currently embedded in a 
set of programs developed over time and currently used for internal research 
and is strictly within the ADA philosophy. 


E.4.4.5 



A specific tool cited, ALICE, described here as central to the approach 
is a method of machine hosting ICE morphological operators in ADA. This 
allows any high level semantic net to be quickly defined and tessellated among 
attributed space. While the geometries involved originate in Euclidean 
lattices, restrictions on three dimensional analogues disappear so the number 
of dimensions addressed is limited only by practical considerations of the 
size of the symmetry tensor used. Because TMIS requires operations that do 
not exclude direct microcoding in embedded systems, the number of dimensions 
is practically limited to 16 based on anticipated hardware, assuming that the 
lattice chosen has less than 3 symmetry characteristics. (Some work has been 
done by Sirius using linear infinite polyhedral geometries, hosted on fine- 
grained arrays, but the hardware required is specialized, and beyond the scope 
of this TMIS work.) 

Major VLD and DB investigative interface tools are DAVID (from Goddard) 
and TIPS (from DoD). For determining the lattice geometries, the work of 
Lalvani and Burt forms the basis for long term studies by Sirius, and are 
employed here, following the symmetry operators proposed by Schoen (1970) and 
Wells (1977). The basic research of Brisson is the source for the multi- 
dimensional holomorphic linearizations required, as well as a source of 
understanding higher dimensional clustering effects when mapped to lower level 
matrices, which in turn follows a suggestion of Williams (1969). 

Key to the approach is the intersymmetry minimal surface operator, an 
approach devised by Burt for the generic translation of intersymmetry groups. 
A complementary approach utilizing added dimensions of symmetry variables is 
used to annotate the entity attributes/relationship attribute from Lalvani. 

The minimal surface operator methods themselves follow closely the trends 
established by Jenkins (1966), after Blatter (1971) and Voss. The actual 
trace algorithms were suggested and bounded by Rahimi (1972) and Barber 
(1970). The reflexive nature of that algorithm which reflects the Lalvani 
transpolyhedra loosely follows the technique applied by Yoshizawa (1982) to a 
similar problem in dynamics. Provisions for fractal doubt, not discussed 
here, come straight "out of the book" from McClure, as well as a few other 
specialists, not currently in the free world. 

Lacking full-time access to supercomputer facilities, the present capa- 
bility for VLD simulation and storage of multidimensional matrices that Sirius 
possesses is inadequate. A satisfactory, and expedient cost effective solu- 
tion to this inadequacy has been found in the N-Dimensional Data Base System. 
This software exploits a special case of the symmetry storage case, namely the 
Generalized Balanced Ternary. It has been determined that the restrictions 
imposed on VLD research are far outweighed by the availability of this tool 
for the early phases of the effort. Rehosting overlays to TMIS host systems 
should be straight forward. 

OVERVIEW OF ALICE 


Sirius has been working this problem for some time. As described, a 
high-level conceptual language is required, for this type of effort reflecting 
the ponderous capabilities implicit in the problem. The result of Sirius' 
work is ALICE (ADA/Lattice Integrated Conceptual Environment). ALICE is coded 
in ADA, of course, and uses as operators, translation sets which are created 
by the abstraction tools described. 


E.4.4.6 



An outline of the features of ALICE: 


a. The relational function set is extended into a primitive operator 
language. This language has a base logic of some order and has a 
mapping to the network lattice transforms. 

b. These transforms have topological equivalences, a unique and inter- 
esting feature which allows the rules for operation among the fabric 
to be ambiguous when mapping "up", but precise when mapping "down", 
or out of abstracted spaces. 

c. The topological equivalence also allows resolution into a few simple 
operations (which include photonic operators) which can be matrixed 
and solved by arithmetic array processors. This holds promise for 
high speed, concurrent AI processing using VHSIC; Reduced Environ- 
ment Math processor arrays. 

Having established a meta-language with a corresponding meta-net, and 
formal methodology the ICE researcher is faced with several exciting possi- 
bilities. Knowledge of any kind can be "fused" by simple procedures if the 
source calculus is descended from the universal structure employed. 

For example, image data, graphic modeling information, engineering data 
(which may not necessarily be geometry dependent) and performance information 
can be all imposed on the same ICE. As relationships are established, the 
diverse information becomes fused, and is actually aggregated by virtual 
proximity; Virtual Proximity is defined as relation by a critical set of 
algebraic operators defined by the sliding threshold factors of the periodic 
lattice matrix. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Lipski, W. , "On Semantic Issues Connected with Incomplete Information 
Bases", TODS 4 (3), 1978. 

Paz Azaria, "Multidimensional Parallel Rewriting Systems:, in "Automata, 
Languages, Development", ed Aristid Lindenmayer and Grzegorz Rosenberg, North 
Holland, 1976. 

Goranson, H.T., "Periodic Recursion Dynamics in Large Integrated Con- 
ceptual Environments", Sirius, 1981 

Wachman, A., M. Burt, and M. Kleinman, "Infinite Polyhedra", Technion, 
Haifa, Israel, 1974. 

Lalvani, Haresh, "Structures on Hyperstructures", Privately Published, 

1982. 


Lalvani, Haresh, "Transpolyhedra" , Privately Published, 1977. 

Schoen, Alan H. , "Infinite Periodic Minimal Surfaces Without Self Inter- 
sections", NASA TN D-5541, 1970. 

Schoen, A.H., "Infinite Quasi-Regular Warped Polyhedra and Skewness of 
Regular Polygons", Not. Amer. Math. Soc., Vol . 15, 1968, pp 801. 


E.4.4.7 


Wells, A.F., "Three-Dimensional Nets and Polyhedra", (Chapters 19 & 20), 
Wiley, Interscience, 1977. 

Brisson, David W. , "A Definition of Distance and Method of Making Space- 
Time Measurements", Speculations in Science and Technology, Vol , 3, #5, 1980 
pp 579-586. 

Williams, Robert Edward, "Dimension as Level" in "Hierarchical Struc- 
tures", ed. Whyte, Wilson and Wilson, American Elservier, 1969. 

Jenkins, Howard and James Serrin, "Variational Problems of Minimal 
Surface Type III, the Dirichlet Problem with Infinite Data" Archive for 
Rational Mechanics and Analysis, Vol 21, #4, 1966. 

Blatter, J. , and E.W. Cheney, "Minimal Projections of Hyperplanes in 
Sequence Spaces" AF0SR-2130-71, Report NTIS AD 735 759 1971. 

Rahimi , A. and R.W. Brokett, "Homotopic Classification of Minimal Peri- 
odic Realizations of Stationary Weighting Problems", SIAM Jour Applied Math 
22, #3, pp 481-486, 1972. 

Barber, M.N. and B.W. Ninham, "Random and Restricted Walks: Theory and 

Applications", Gordon and Breach, 1970. 

Yoshizawa, T. , "Stability Theory and the Existence of Periodic Solutions 
and Almost Periodic Solutions", Applied Mathematical Sciences #14, Springer- 
Verlag. 

McClure, Donald E. , "Image Models in Pattern Theory", Computer Graphics 
and Image Processing, Vol. 12, pp 309-325, 1980. 


E.4.4.8 



