Information Sciences 



@ Secure Peer-to-Peer Networks for Scientific Information Sharing 

This technique combines advantages of social networks with peer-to-peer file sharing. 

Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland 


The most common means of remote 
scientific collaboration today includes 
the trio of e-mail for electronic communi- 
cation, FTP for file sharing, and personal- 
ized Web sitesfor dissemination of papers 
and research results. With the growth of 
broadband I nternet, there has been a de- 
sire to share large files (movies, files, sci- 
entific data files) over the Internet. E- 
mail haslimitson the size of files that can 
be attached and transmitted. FTP isoften 
used to share large files, but this requires 
the user to set up an FTP site for which it 
is hard to set group privileges, it is not 
straightforward for everyone, and the 
content is not searchable. 

Peer-to-peer technology (P2P), which 
has been overwhelmingly successful in 


popular content distribution, isthe basis 
for development of a scientific col labo- 
ratory called Scientific Peer Network 
(SciPerNet). This technology combines 
social networking with P2P file sharing. 
SciPerNet will be a standalone applica- 
tion, written in Java and Swing, thus in- 
suring portability to a number of differ- 
ent platforms. Some of the features 
include user authentication, search ca- 
pability, seamless integration with a data 
center, the ability to create groups and 
social networks, and on-line chat. 

In contrast to P2P networks such as 
Gnutella, Bit Torrent, and others, 
SciPerNet in corporates three design ele- 
ments that are critical to application of 
P2P for scientific purposes: 


• User authentication, 

• Data integrity validation, 

• Reliable searching 

SciPerNet also provides a complemen- 
tary solution to virtual observatories by en- 
abling distributed collaboration and shar- 
ing of downloaded and/ or processed data 
among scientists Thiswill, in turn, increase 
scientific returns from NASA missions As 
such, SciPerNet can serve a two-fold pur- 
pose for NASA: a cost-savings software as 
well asaproductivitytool for scientists work- 
ing with data from NASA missions. 

T his work was done by H oma K arimabadi 
of Sci berQ u est, Inc. for Goddard Space Flight 
Center. For further information, contact the 
Goddard Innovative Partnerships Office at 
(301) 286-5810. GSC-15396-1 


©Multiplexer/ Demultiplexer LoadingTool (MDMLT) 

T his is a readily modifiable tool designed for any facility requiring the loading of computers. 

Lyndon B. Johnson SpaceCenter, Houston, Texas 


The purpose of the M DM LT is to im- 
prove the reliability and speed of load- 
ing multiplexers/ demultiplexers 
(MDMs) in the Software Development 
and Integration Laboratory (SDIL) by 
automating the configuration manage- 
ment (CM) of the loads in the MDMs, 
automating the loading procedure, and 
providing the capability to load multiple 
or all MDMs concurrently. This loading 
may be accomplished in parallel, or sin- 
gle MDMs (remote). The MDMLT is a 
Web-based tool that is capable of load- 
ing the entire International Space Sta- 
tion (ISS) MDM configuration in paral- 
lel. It is able to load Flight Equivalent 
Units(FEUs), enhanced, standard, and 
prototype MDMs as well as both EEP- 
ROM (Electrically Erasable Programma- 
ble Read-Only Memory) and SSMMU 
(Solid State Mass Memory Unit) (MASS 
Memory). This software has extensive 
configuration management to track 
loading history, and the performance 
improvement means of loading the en- 
tirelSSMDM configuration of49MDMs 


in approximately 30 minutes, as op- 
posed to 36 hours, which is what it took 
previously utilizing the flight method of 
S-Band uplink. The laptop version re- 
cently added to the MDMLT suite allows 
remote lab loading with the CM of infor- 
mation entered into a common data- 
base when it is reconnected to the net- 
work. This allows the program to 
reco n f i gu re th e test ri gs q u i ckl y between 
shifts, allowing the lab to support a vari- 
ety of onboard configurations during a 
single day, based on upcoming or cur- 
rent missions. 

The MDMLT Computer Software Con- 
figuration Item (CSCI ) supports a Web- 
based command and control interface to 
the user. An interface to the SDIL File 
Transfer Protocol (FTP) server is sup- 
ported to import Integrated Flight Loads 
(IFLs) and Internal Product Release Notes 
(IPRNs) into the database. An interface to 
the Monitor and Control System (MCS) is 
supported to control the power state, and 
to enable or disable the debug port of the 
MDMsto be loaded. Two direct interfaces 


to the MDM are supported: a serial inter- 
face (debug port) to receive MDM mem- 
ory dump data and the calculated check- 
sum, and the Small Computer System 
Interface (SCSI) to transfer load files to 
MDMs with hard disks. File transfer from 
the MDM Loading Tool to EEPROM 
within theMDM isperformed viatheMIL- 
STD-1553 bus, making use of the Real- 
Time Input/ Output Processors (RTIOP) 
when using the rig-based M DM LT, and via 
a bus box when using the laptop M DM LT. 
Thebusboxisa cost-effecti ve al tern ati ve to 
PC-1553 cardsfor the laptop. 

It isnoted that this system can be mod- 
ified and adapted to any avionic labora- 
tory for spacecraft computer loading, 
ship avionics, or aircraft avionics where 
multiple configurations and strong con- 
figuration management of software/ 
firmware loads are required. 

T his work was done by Lenox Allen Brewer 
of Johnson SpaceCenter; Elizabeth Hale and 
R obertM artella of Cimarron; and R yan Gyorfi 
of The Boeing Co. Further information is con- 
tained in aTSP (see page 1). M SC-24480-1 


NASA Tech Briefs, March 2012 


23 



