/ 



/ ' ' ' 



J HELIUM/ 4 HELIUM DILUTION CRYOCOOLER FOR SPACE 



CONTRACT NO. NAS8-37437 



FINAL REPORT 

for contract period 

July 12, 1989 through February 12, 1991 



PREPARED FOR: 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

Marshall Space Flight Center 

Huntsville, AL 35812 



PREPARED BY: 

Dr. John B. Hendricks, Principal Investigator 
Dr. Michael L. Dingus, Program Manager 

Alabama Cryogenic Engineering, Inc. 

P.O. Box 2470 

Huntsville, AL 35804 



March 11, 1991 



I n r 

• - } _ , 

in' r i •"' ,1 



! A 

..I ., 



f in-,'! "v.'nort, 1 .- Jul . 

' A 1 .A s : ' - trf nic 

A " L. I 1 .; ° 



Unci 



/^■" 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

LIST OF FIGURES 1V 

PROJECT SUMMARY V1 n 

INTRODUCTION l 

Basic Principles of Dilution Cryocooler Operation 1 

The Solution Refrigerator 3 

The 3 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler 8 

The 4 He Circulation, "Leiden" Dilution Cryocooler 11 

The 4 He Circulation, "ACE, Inc." Dilution Cryocooler 15 

Operation of Dilution Cryocoolers in Zero Gravity 18 

Operation of a 3 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler in Zero 

Gravi ty • * 8 

Zero-Gravity Operation of the "Leiden" Dilution Cryocooler ... 24 

Zero-Gravity Operation of the "ACE, Inc." Dilution Cryocooler. 26 

TEST FACILITY 28 

oo 

Design co 

Gas Handl i ng System 28 

Cryostat i>l 

Instrumentation 33 

OPERATION 36 

Leak Detection 36 

Cool down 3 ' 

DATA AND RESULTS 38 

Vortex Cool er Tests 38 

3 He Ci rcul ati on Di 1 uti on Cryocool er Tests 48 

Testing the 3 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler 50 

Still Phase Separator Tests 51 

4 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler Results 74 

CONCLUSIONS 81 



1 1 



TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued) 

RECOMMENDATIONS 82 

3 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler 82 

Thermometry 82 

Liquid Level Sensors 82 

Real Time Evaluation of Sample Concentration 82 

4 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler 83 

REFERENCES 84 

APPENDIX A: DILUTION CRYOCOOLER PHASE SEPARATORS FOR 3 HE 86 

Test Facility and Instrumentation 89 

Basic Cryostat 89 

Electronic Instrumentation 91 

Pumping and Gas Handling System 92 

Porous Metallic Sponge Assembly 94 

Porous Trapping Plug 96 

Results and Discussion 98 

Preliminary Test: Pure 4 He 98 

Conclusions 107 

REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 109 



m 



Fi 

Fi 

Fi 

Fi 

F 

F 

F 

F 



LIST OF FIGURES 

gure 1 The 3 He/ 4 He Phase Separation Diagram 2 

gure 2 Basic Solution Refrigerator Cycle 4 

gure 3 Solution Refrigerator Using Superleaks and He II Circulation .. 6 

gure 4 Osmotic Pressure as a Function of Temperature and Concentration. 7 

gure 5 The 3 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler 10 

gure 6 The "Leiden" Dilution Cryocooler 12 

gure 7 The "ACE, Inc." Dilution Cryocooler 16 

gure 8 Schematic Diagram of the Superfluid Phase Separator (SPS) 23 

Figure 9 Two Possible Arrangement of Phases in a Zero-Gravity Solution 

Refrigerator 25 

gure 10 Gas Handl ing System 29 

gure 11 Schematic Layout of the Cryostat 32 

gure 12 Configuration of 4 He Pot and 3 He Pot 34 

gure 13 Schematic Representation of a Vortex Cooler 40 

gure 14 Scale Drawing of Finalized ACE, Inc. Vortex Cooler Design 41 

gure 15 Scale Drawing of Finalized ACE, Inc. Fountain Pump 43 

gure 16 4 He Pot Coiled Heat Exchanger 44 

gure 17 Fountain Pump/Vortex Cooler Configuration 45 

igure 18 Temperature of Vortex Cooler vs. Power Input to the Fountain 



Fi 

Fi 

Fi 

F 

F 

F 

F 

F 

F 



Pump 46 



Figure 19 12-29-89 Data Temperature of Vortex Cooler vs. Heat Load 47 

Figure 20 (a) 3 He Circulation Dilution Refrigerator Test Configuration 

(b) "Still Only" Test Configuration 49 

Figure 21 11-21-90A 3 He Circulation Dilution Refrigerator Still Only 52 

Figure 22 11-21SUZ 3 He Circulation Dilution Refrigerator Still Only 54 

Figure 23 11-21P 3 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler - Still Only 55 

Figure 24 11-21PZ 3 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler - Still Only 57 

iv 



LIST OF FIGURES (continued) 

Figure 25 11-21B 3 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler - Still Only 58 

Figure 26 11-21BP 3 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler - Still Only 59 

Figure 27 11-21B 3 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler - Still Only 60 

Figure 28 11-21BPZ 3 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler - Still Only 61 

Figure 29 11-28BA 3 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler - Still Only 63 

Figure 30 11-28BP 3 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler - Still Only 64 

Figure 31 11-28BSUZ 3 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler - Still Only ... 66 

Figure 32 11-28BPZ 3 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler - Still Only 67 

Figure 33 11-28BHU Heat U-Tube Only 68 

Figure 34 11-28BHS Heat Still Only 69 

Figure 35 11-30A 3 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler - Still Only 70 

Figure 36 11-30P 3 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler - Still Only 71 

Figure 37 11-30SUZ 3 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler - Still Only 72 

Figure 38 11-30PZ 3 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler - Still Only 73 

Figure 39 ACE, Inc. 4 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler Prototype 75 

Figure 40 1-30-91A Test of 4 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler 77 

Figure 41 1-30-91A Test of 4 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler 78 

Figure 42 1-30-91C 4 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler 79 

Figure 43 1-30CP 4 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler 80 

Figure A-l The 3 He/ 4 He Phase Separation Diagram 87 

Figure A-2 Schematic View of Cryostat 90 

Figure A-3 3 He- 4 He Mixture Gas Handling and Pumping System 93 

Figure A-4 Scale Drawing of 3 He Trapping Sponge Test Cryostat 95 

Figure A-5 Schematic View of Trapping Sponge Holder 97 

Figure A-6 Temperature of Sponge and Below the Sponge vs. Time for 

a 50% 3 He- 4 He Mixture Run 100 

v 



LIST OF FIGURES (continued) 

Figure A-7 Pressure above the sponge as a function of time for the 

50% 3 He- 4 He mixture test shown in Figure A-6 102 



Figure A-8 Temperature vs. time for another 50% 3 He- He mixture 
test run 



104 



Figure A-9 Pressure above the sponge vs. time for the run shown in 

Figure A-8 105 

Figure A-10 Temperature vs. heat input to each station when the 

sponge is running in continuous mode 106 



VI 



PROJECT SUMMARY 

NASA Astrophysics programs require very sensitive sensors for detecting 
millimeter and sub-millimeter wavelength radiation. The noise equivalent 
power (NEP) of these sensors, called bolometers, can be increased by a factor 
of 1000 by operating at 0.1 K instead of 1.5 K. 

Two potential methods for cooling sensors to 0.1 K exist; dilution 
refrigeration and adiabatic demagnetization refrigeration (ADR). The ADR 
cycle can work independent of a gravitational field. However, the weight, 
electrical requirements, and fringing magnetic field of an ADR system cause 
substantial disadvantages for spacecraft applications. A standard dilution 
refrigeration cycle is gravity dependent, but does not have the negative 
impact on spacecraft operation present with the ADR. NASA has funded ACE, 
Inc. under NASA contract no. NAS8-37260 to investigate dilution cooling cycles 
for low gravity environments. As a result of these studies, two potential 
zero gravity dilution refrigeration cycles were identified (Hendricks, et al . 
1988). 

The purpose of this effort has been to design, construct and test 
prototype dilution cryocoolers based on these two cycles. Although the 
devices we built and tested did not operate as fully functional dilution 
cryocoolers, important information was gathered. The porous metal phase 
separator was demonstrated to operate in the -1-g configuration; this phase 
separation is the critical element in a 3 He circulation dilution cryocooler. 
Improvements in instrumentation needed for additional tests and development 
have been identified. 

vii 



INTRODUCTION 

This section, and the section on the operation of dilution cryocoolers in 
zero gravity, serve as an introduction to the basic technical issues of this 
project. These sections are excerpts from Hendricks et al . , 1988 and are 
included here for completeness. 

Basic Principles of Dilution Crvocooler Operation 

The "dilution" cryocooler is based on three basic principles. The first 
principle is the heat of mixing of 3 He in 4 He. The reversible dilution of 3 He 
into 4 He produces a cooling effect. This cooling is the basis of a "solution" 
refrigerator using the two liquid helium isotopes. The second basic principle 
is the phase separation of liquid 3 He and 4 He below 0.87 Kelvin. The third 
basic principle is that the "dilute solution" contains roughly 6.4 % of 3 He, 
even at zero temperature. Thus, the heat of mixing is available even at very 
low temperatures. The phase separation diagram of the two helium isotopes is 
shown in Figure 1. 

A fourth principle, that is not used in the conventional 3 He circulation 
dilution cryocooler, is useful for alternate cycles. This is the fact that 
the two isotopes can be easily separated using a "superleak". This is only 
possible below the superfluid transition temperature of 4 He. The superleak 
can serve as a separation membrane in the solution refrigerator. 

In this section we will review the basic operation of the solution 
refrigerator. We will then give a brief analysis of the two currently proven 

1 



i — i — i — i — i — i — i — i i ■ r 



t — r 




| i ■ ■ I ■ i — i — I — i — i — i — I — i — l 



0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 

X 



1.0 



Figure 1 The 3 He/ 4 He Phase Separation Diagram 



(x - n 3 /n 3 + "4) 



dilution cryocooler cycles. The 3 He circulation machine is the commercially 
available unit, and is almost universally used for laboratory studies in the 5 
mK to 300 mK temperature range. The 4 He circulation, "Leiden" type dilution 
cryocooler has been developed in the laboratory. It can operate over the same 
temperature range as the 3 He circulation machine, but has not been 
commercially produced. 

In the final section, a new dilution cryocooler cycle will be described. 
This machine will be called the "ACE, Inc." 4 He circulation, dilution 
cryocooler cycle. Even though it was specifically developed for zero gravity 
use, it can also operate in gravity, and is a possible replacement for the 
current commercial models. 

The Solution Refrigerator. The solution refrigerator is discussed by 
Radebaugh in Chapter 11 of Walker's (1983) monograph on cryocoolers. The 
basic cycle is shown in Figure 2. The key to the device is availability of a 
permeable membrane (G) that will allow the free circulation of one component 
(Aj) by restricting the movement of the second component (A 2 ). The heating 
and cooling effects at the two membranes will be approximately 

Q = TAS (1) 

As the solution refrigerator operates, there is a continuous injection of 
Aj at the input and a removal of Aj at the output. This means that if Aj and 
A 2 are miscible, A 2 will take part in the mass transport from the input to 
output membrane. However, since the net mass flow of A 2 must be zero over 




PUMP 
AP=TT -7T 



Figure 2 " Basic Solution Refrigerator Cycle. 



time, there must be a countercurrent of A 2 . This counter-current will be by 
diffusion, through the moving mixture. The diffusion can be driven by: 

i. concentration gradients, 
ii. temperature gradients, 
iii. osmotic pressure gradients, or 
iv. a combination of the above. 

If the circulating fluid is superfluid 4 He, and the stationary fluid is 
liquid 3 He, then the solution refrigerator is closely related to the dilution 
cryocooler. However, as stated above, the simple analysis is only applicable 
above the phase separation temperature (0.87 K) . Therefore, we will restrict 
the liquid helium solution refrigerator to temperatures above 0.87 K. 

Packed, fine insulating powders can separate the two isotopes easily. 
These superleaks transmit almost no 3 He, and can be used to purify He. The 
superleaks are connected in series with a drift tube (T) as shown in Figure 3. 
A "fountain pump" or other circulator provides the pressure necessary to drive 
the superfluid through the device. 

The 3 He concentration in the drift tube will change with temperature. 
Radebaugh (1967) has shown that the osmotic pressure in the drift tube will 
remain constant. This is true only for small relative velocities, however. 
For a discussion of cases where the mutual friction can become important, see 
deWaele et al . (1984). A chart of osmotic pressure vs. concentration and 
temperature is given in Figure 4. 



LOAD 



"MIXTURE" TUBE 
HEAT SINK 




FOUNTAIN PUMP 



Figures Solution Refrigerator Using Superleaks and He II Circulation, 



1000 



100 — 



10 



o 



0.1 



.01 





i 1 1 1 1 1 1 II 1 III 


l!ll| 






1 


1 


Mill 














X 


* 0.3,7 


^_ 










X* 


O.I 


^t^^"^ - 


— 


IDEAL FERMI-DIRAC GAS X*.064 


<-- , 


^~~ 


^ 


<^. 




^S— 




X-.064 __ 












^ — 


— . 


X* CM 


— 


*-.0/_— - -"""■■"" 












^1 

r 
/ - 






























— 
















^_ 


X-.OOI^ 
























/ 




"~~ 




X * 


I0~*S 






/ 














/ 
/ 


— 


— 






1 1 I 1 1 1 III 1 \ \ J, 


tT ill 


1 




/I 


1 


Mill 



.001 



T.'K 



1.0 



Figure 4 Osmotic Pressure as a Function of Temperature and Concentration 



A demonstration calculation of a solution refrigerator will be given as 
an example. Assume end temperatures of 1 K and 1.5 K, and that the He 
concentration at the 1 K end is 0.10. The osmotic pressure corresponding to T 
= 1 K and x = 0.1 is 208.6 Torr. The concentration corresponding to it = 208.6 
Torr and T = 1.5 K is 0.064. Therefore: 

Qj = T 1 LS l = (1) (3.247) J/mol (2) 

-Q 2 = T 2 AS 2 = (1.5) (3.315) J/mol (3) 

For a Carnot engine operating between the same two limits, we have 

$2 Icarnot = <V T 1> &1' (4) 

but (1.5)(3.315) > (1.5/1) (1) (3.247) 

so the solution refrigerator is less efficient than a Carnot refrigerator, as 

we would expect. In the above we have used the tables given in Radebaugh 

(1967). 

The 3 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler. A detailed discussion of the 
conventional 3 He circulation dilution cryocooler is not necessary for the 
purposes of this report. For a complete discussion, the reader is referred to 
Lounaasma (1974), Radebaugh's chapter in Walker (1983), Betts (1976), or 
Richardson and Smith (1988). All these authors use the same basic techniques 
and only differ in small details. The theory of the 3 He dilution cryocooler 
is well established, and has been supported by over twenty years of laboratory 
experience. 



The basic cycle of the 3 He circulation machine is illustrated in Figure 
5(a). 3 He vapor is brought from room temperature and condensed to liquid in 
the condenser. The liquid is then cooled, first in the still, and then in the 
heat exchanger, before it is injected into the mixing chamber. The He 
diffuses from the almost pure 3 He floating on the top of the mixing chamber 
into the dilute solution in the lower part of the mixing chamber. Below 0.1 
K, the concentration of the dilute solution remains almost constant at 6.4% 
3 He, independent of temperature. The "heat of mixing" of the 3 He into the 
dilute solution provides the cooling power of the refrigerator. 

A continuous column of dilute solution connects the mixing chamber to the 
still. At the liquid interface, the 3 He is removed by evaporation. At 
temperatures below 0.7 K, almost pure 3 He is evaporated, with no 4 He removed 
in the vapor. Thus the 4 He can be seen as a fixed "mechanical vacuum", with 
the 3 He moving through it with no significant interaction. The dilute 
solution fills the other side of the heat exchanger, and the exchange of heat 
between the dilute solution and the incoming 3 He forms one of the most 
difficult technical problems in the design of the dilution cryocooler. A 
discussion of this problem is outside the purpose of this report, but is well 
covered in the previously cited literature. 

The 3 He concentration in the dilute solution follows the constant osmotic 
pressure law. This was discussed in the section of the solution refrigerator. 
For a 6.4% 3 He concentration in the mixing chamber, we expect a 1% He 
concentration in the still, for a still temperature of 0.7 K. Since there 
will be a deficit of 3 He in the still, due to evaporation, and an excess of 
3 He in the mixing chamber due to inward diffusion; the 3 He will flow from the 

9 




o 



C7> 



m 

t_ 

QJ 
Q. 

O 

OJ 

u 
>> 
(_) 



» '1 



OJ 

o 
o 
u 
o 
>> 
$- 

<_3 

c 
o 



c 
o 



<0 



0. 

3 
o. 
2* 

< 

>s 



a:* 


cc 

O 


i*^ 


0. 

< u 


z - 


>u 


UJ 


\5 


1 


oht 


z 


— a 


Ooo 


?5 






I 

I 



z 
g 

t- 
< 

< 
CL 



CD 

2 



3 
U 

s- 



CO 

ai 



x 




t- 
3 

en 



+-> 

«0 

E 
OJ 

f 
o 

«/) 

OJ 

u 
>> 



10 



mixing chamber to the still. This is a diffusion current, driven by the 
constant osmotic pressure requirement. The cycle is shown in Figure 5(b). 

The cooling power of a 3 He circulation machine, with the flow of 3 He 
returning to the cryocooler shut off (non-continuous operation) is 

% - 84 n 3 T m 2 J / sec (5) 

Circulation of 3 He will reduce this cooling power, depending on the 
effectiveness of the heat exchanger. This can be used as a limiting value for 
comparison to other dilution cycles. Since the cooling power is directly 
proportional to the 3 He circulation rate, n 3 , it is important to make this as 
large as possible. However, this is set by the capacity of the room 
temperature pump. Modest vacuum pumps will have a speed of 5 liter/sec, 
correspond to n 3 = 30 x 10" 6 mole/sec. In order to get large flow rates, 
Roots blowers and other high capacity vacuum pumps are employed. Circulation 
rates of 2 x 10" 3 mole/sec have been used, but these are extreme values due to 
the pumping problems. 

The 4 He Circulation, "Leiden" Dilution Cryocooler. In the "Leiden" type 
dilution cryocoolers, liquid 4 He is circulated, rather than 3 He. The Leiden 
machine uses superleaks for injecting and withdrawing superfluid 4 He from the 
unit. A schematic of the cycle is shown in Figure 6(a). The system is 
arranged so that phase boundaries exist in both the mixing and the demixing 
chambers. The dilute solution in the mixing chamber is trapped below the 
"lip" of the counterflow tube. The 3 He floats on top of the dilute solution, 
and fills the counterflow tube down to the demixing chamber. In the demixing 

11 




(0 


«/> 




o 


c 

o 

a. 




10 


c 




o 


-t-> 




X 


ai 

o. 
o 




■» 






o 


CJ 


i- 




o 


0> 




>, 


r— 




<_> 


o 
o 




^-* 


o 




-O 


o 




■*. - 


>> 


o 




1- 

c 
o 

•r- 

+-> 

3 



» '1 



c 




ai 



0) 

s- 

3 

CD 



u 



re 

E 
ai 

o 
in 

QJ 

(J 
>> 
(_) 



12 



chamber, the 3 He floats on top of the dilute mixture in the lower chamber. 
Pure 4 He is injected through the inlet superleak, and forms more dilute 
solution in the mixing chamber. This process is accompanied by cooling. As 
excess dilute solution is formed in the mixing chamber, it "pours" over the 
lip and falls through the counterflow tube as drops of dilute solution or as a 
sheet of dilute solution covering the walls of the tube. The cold dilute 
solution exchanges heat with the 3 He as the drops fall. The 4 He is removed 
from the tube by an exit superleak that is placed in the dilute solution in 
the demixing chamber. Heat is given off as the demixing takes place. This 
heat must be removed by an external cooler at a temperature below the phase 
separation point. This is typically done with a 3 He vapor cycle refrigerator. 

The cycle is indicated on a phase diagram in Figure 6(b). The entire 
process in the counterflow tube is in phase equilibrium, so the state path is 
along the phase separation line. As the temperature changes, 3 He must diffuse 
into the falling drops to increase the concentration. As the He rich 
solution increases in temperature, the 4 He fraction increases also. This 
means that the 3 He rich phase has an increasing density as we move down the 
tube. Therefore, there is no gravitational instability in this cycle. 



One of the basic problems with the Leiden cycle machine is the outlet 
upet 



superleak. The superfluid 4 He is removed from a solution containing roughly 



40% 3 He. Therefore, as the 4 He is removed, a relatively large amount of 3 He 
must be removed, and must "diffuse" away from the superleak. If 3 He builds 
up, it can form a blockage, and stop the superfluid 4 He removal. This is a 
limiting factor on the circulation rate of the machine. 



13 



2 
The Leiden machine cooling power can be calculated from the He 

circulation machine equation. For temperatures below 0.1 K, the He rate can 
be written as: 



n 4 = [(1.0 - 0.064)/0.064]n 3 = 14.6 n 3 (6) 

Therefore, the maximum refrigeration rate according to Eqn. (5) will be: 

Q m = 5.7 n 4 T 2 m J/sec (7) 

It is much easier to get large 4 He circulation rates, as the entire 
circulation circuit can be maintained at superfluid temperatures, and the flow 
can be driven by a "fountain pump". Rates as high as 2 x 10" 3 mole/sec are 
easily obtained using this method. 

The main drawback to the Leiden machine is the precooler requirement. 
Since a 3 He vapor cycle is required, we have gained no real advantage over the 
3 He circulation machine. All the external vacuum pumps are still required. 
The primary advantage in the Leiden cycle is the elimination of the 
recuperative heat exchangers in the low temperature section. This can lead to 
a considerable simplification in the design of the cryogenic section. 

The Leiden dilution cryocooler is described in detail in the same 
references that were given for the 3 He circulation machine. A recent paper by 
Satoh, et al . (1987) contains a description of the best machine built to date. 
A base temperature of 3.4 mK was reached at a circulation rate of 3.5 x 10 

•5 

mole/sec. This base temperature compares well with typical He machines. 

14 



The 4 He Circulation, "ACE, Inc. Dilution Cryocooler" . The schematic of 
the "ACE, Inc." cycle is shown in Figure 7(a). The cycle is similar to the 
Leiden cycle, as 4 He is circulated through superleaks. However, it is 
different because there is only one phase boundary, and that is in the mixing 
chamber. The principal differences between the Leiden and ACE, Inc. cycles 
can be seen on the phase diagram, Figure 7(b). Only the mixing chamber 
operating point is on the phase separation line. The rest of the dilute 
solution in the counterflow tube and the demixing chamber has sub-critical He 
concentration. The relative concentrations of 3 He in the mixing and demixing 
chambers are set by the "constant osmotic pressure" requirement, as in the He 
circulation cycle. 

A substantial advantage of the ACE, Inc. cycle over the Leiden cycle is 
that the demixing chamber can operate at temperatures above the phase 
separation point. A higher demixing temperature will lower the overall cycle 
efficiency. However, if the requirement of a 3 He vapor cycle precooler can be 
eliminated, it can result in a much simpler machine. 

The 3 He will be removed from the dilute solution in the demixing chamber. 
Therefore, an excess concentration of 3 He will exist there. This excess will 
diffuse up the counterflow tube, then replenish the 3 He being absorbed in the 
mixing chamber. This diffusion is similar to the diffusion that takes place 
between the mixing chamber and still of the 3 He circulation machine. It is in 
the opposite direction, however; and it moves against the mass transport 
velocity, v, of the dilute mixture. From the experiments of Satoh, et al . 
(1982) on vortex cryocoolers, we know that the 3 He will be swept out of the 



15 







o 
a. 



en 



a> 
o. 
o 

u 
>> 
<_> 



o 
o 
o 
o 
>> 
t. 
(-) 

c 
o 



* '1 



u 







0) 



O) 

t- 



ra 

E 
a> 
je 
o 

o 

u 

>> 



16 



counterflow tube if the velocity exceeds the critical value. If we take the 
critical velocity to follow: 

v c = 10" 6 /d m/sec. 



then: n 4 < 2.8 x 10~ z d 



(8) 



where d is in meters and n 4 is in mole/sec. Therefore, 



Q m < 0.16 dT m 2 



(9) 



However, the counterflow tube also conducts heat. This is calculated from 



Q r = k (A/L) AT 



(10) 



Experimentally, the thermal conductivity values for solutions from 1.3% to 
6.4%, lie in the k = 0.1 W/mK range. Also, AT = T D - T m = T D , so we can write 
the available cooling power as: 



Q a = % " Qc - 0.16 d[T m 2 - .49(d/L) T ] 



(11) 



we can define a critical value when Q a = 0. The value of (d/L) corresponding 
to the critical value is: 



(d/L) c = V/.49T D 

= 2.04 x 10" 2 for T m = 0.1 K and T n = 1 K 



(12) 



17 



To insure that the conduction term is negligible, d/L should be less than one 
tenth (d/L) . Given this requirement, then the maximum cooling power is 

QaUax = <>- 16 d V (13) 

With a 4 mm tube, and T m = 0.1 K, the maximum cooling power is 6.4 micro-watt. 
The drift tube length, L, is 2 meters. 

The above analysis depends critically on the critical velocity equation. 
There is almost no data available on superflow at temperatures below 1 Kelvin. 
The temperature dependence is also unknown, except that theory indicates a 
constant value with temperature. Finally, the mutual friction between the 
superfluid and the 3 He is not well known. Castelijns, et al . (1984) has 
considered the effect of the 3 He velocity on the performance of the 3 He 
circulation dilution cryocooler. The velocity of J He in the ACE, Inc. 
cryocooler is not much larger than in the 3 He circulation cycle, so we suspect 
this effect is not important. If the critical velocity becomes the limiting 
element, the drift tube can be split into a number of parallel tubes having 
small diameters. This increases v c for a given cross-sectional area. 

Operation of Dilution Crvocoolers In Z ero Gravity 

In this section we will develop the theory of machines that will operate 
in zero gravity. One approach to the problem is to provide an artificial 
gravity. This could be done by rotation of the device (centrifugal forces) or 
by use of electric fields. The latter method has been demonstrated in models 
by the group at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Israelsson (1988). We have 

18 



rejected this approach in this effort. We intend to design a machine for zero 
gravity operation without artificial gravity. 

For the design studies we have selected the baselined specifications 
given in Table 1. The specifications are based on the Adiabatic 
Demagnetization Refrigerator (ADR) systems that have been developed for space 
based sensor systems and represent the current state of the art in detector 
technology. The three dilution cryocooler types that were presented earlier 
will be discussed in turn. The solution refrigerator does not depend on 
gravity in any way, so it will not be covered further. 

Operation of a 3 He Circulation Dilution Cryocooler in Zero Gravity. The 
3 He circulation dilution cryocooler, Figure 5(a), has three phase boundaries. 
These include: 

i. The vapor/liquid interface in the 3 He condenser. 

ii. The "dilute solution"/"concentrated solution" interface in the 
mixing chamber. 

iii. The vapor/liquid interface in the still. 
Each interface will be discussed in turn. 



TABLE 1 
Baseline Specifications for a Space Based 3 He/ 4 He Dilution Cryocooler 



Operating Temperature 0.1 K 

Operating Heat Load 10 /iW 

Heat Sink Temperature (Superfluid Helium Dewar) 1.5 K to 1.8 K 

19 



The vapor/liquid interface in the condenser is set by the thermal 
gradient in the condenser. Above the cold condenser section, the pressure is 
below that saturation pressure at the wall temperature. The tube is thus 
acting as a heat exchanger to cool the vapor. When the vapor reaches the 
condenser, the wall temperature falls rapidly, over a short section, to a 
value that is below the saturation temperature corresponding to the line 
pressure. Thus the fluid goes from single phase vapor to single phase, over 
pressurized liquid over a short distance. In addition, the tube has a small 
diameter so the fluid in the tube is roughly isothermal. Under these 
conditions gravity is not an important factor. The zero gravity heat transfer 
coefficients are probably different from the one g values, but not drastically 
so. We don't expect any free convective effects in such a confined space, so 
this indicates no important gravity effects. In conclusion, we do not expect 
the condenser to be a problem in a zero gravity 3 He circulation dilution 
cryocooler. 

The next interface that we reach in the circuit around the refrigerator 
is the phase boundary in the mixing chamber. This boundary is where the 
actual cooling effect is produced, so in order to make use of the cooling 
power, we must make thermal contact to the phase boundary. The usual 
schematic of the 3 He circulation unit shows the 3 He being introduced into the 
concentrated phase, and indicates "diffusion" across the phase boundary. As a 
matter of fact, the 3 He is usually introduced into the dilute solution 
directly. This encourages stirring, and maintains concentration equilibrium 
in the mixing chamber. This experimental evidence supports the conclusion 
that a clear, defined phase interface is not a requirement for dilution 
cryocooler operation. The thermal contact requirement is the vital one. 

20 



The position of the phase boundary in the mixing chamber is set by the 
amount of 4 He in the system. To first order, the 4 He serves as a "mechanical 
vacuum". If the 4 He phase boundary in the "still" is fixed, then the position 
of the phase interface will be fixed, depending on the volumes of the parts. 
In this way we can insure that the still and connecting lines are full of 
dilute solution, and that the phase boundary is somewhere in the mixing 
chamber. 

The phase arrangement in the dilute solution channel will be self 
correcting. The 3 He is being injected in the mixing chamber and removed in 
the still. Therefore, we expect the mixing chamber to be colder than the 
still with circulation on. Assuming such stable operation, now place a "blob" 
of pure 3 He in the dilute solution channel. The temperature in the channel 
will be somewhere between the still temperature, T s , and the mixing chamber 
temperature, T m . Therefore, the particular point should be somewhere between 
points A and B on the phase diagram, Figure 5(b). Now all these points are in 
the dilute phase, and are not in equilibrium with the concentrated phase. 
Therefore, we expect the "blob" to slowly "evaporate" into the dilute mixture 
and cease to exist. The only place where concentrated solution can exist is 
in the coldest part of the cryocooler; that is, in the mixing chamber. 

The final phase boundary is in the still. Here, the problem is much more 
complex. In the still the dilute solution is a superfluid. This means that 
the walls of the still are coated with a superfluid film (Rollin film). This 
film can creep into the pumping lines and can contribute a substantial He 
circulation to the cryocooler. This 4 He will reduce the cooling power of the 
machine, so some method of controlling the film is usually included in the 

21 



still. In zero gravity the situation is much worse. The creeping 4 He film 
could reach throughout the cold section of the pumping lines and the 4 He level 
would be much higher than in one g operation. Therefore, the phase boundary 
in the still must be controlled for successful zero gravity operation. 



A similar control problem with superfluid helium exists for dewars filled 
with He-II and operated in space. A device, called the superfluid porous plug 
has been developed that controls the superfluid. A device, based on similar 
principles can operate as a still phase separator (SPS). The SPS will be 
formed of a relatively high thermal conductivity material. This could take, 
the form of a plate perforated by small holes, or a pressed, sintered, porous 
metal disk. A schematic is shown in Figure 8. The passages in the SPS are 
represented by a uniform circular tube with diameter d. The matrix is 
represented by the disk, having an effective thermal conductivity, k. The 
disk will have n passages per unit area, and the effective length of the 
passages is L. 

A qualitative description of the device follows. The dilute solution, at 
a temperature of 0.6 K to 0.8 K is on the upstream side to the plug. The 
downstream side is connected to a pumping line, and the pressure on the 
downstream side is reduced. Since it is a superfluid, a certain portion of 
the dilute solution will leak through the plug. The 3 He in the dilute 
solution will evaporate and the liquid will cool. A fountain pressure, 

P f = pS AT (H) 



22 



BLOB OF 
SUPERFLUID 




HIGH 



+ + . 1 1— r 

+ + + + + + + + 
+ + + + + ♦ + ♦ 
+ + + + + + + + + 
► + + + + + + + + + 




POROUS 
PLUG 



MATERIAL WITH 
HIGH THERMAL 
CONDUCTIVITY (K) 



Figure 8 Schematic Diagram of the Superfluid Phase Separator (SPS). 
Surface tension in the pores prevents the liquid from 
escaping from the high pressure area PHigh t0 the down " 
stream low pressure Pj_ ow . 



23 



will be generated that tends to drive the superfluid towards the hotter end of 
the plug; that is, back into the SPS. In steady state, the downstream end of 
the plug will be slightly colder, due to the 3 He evaporation. Heat will be 
removed from the dilute solution on the upstream end, and transmitted through 
the SPS to the evaporating interface. 

The holes in the SPS should have a small diameter, so that the surface 
tension force 

20" 
P st = _ (15) 

s d 

is relatively large. This will assist in the definition of the evaporation 
interface. However, the holes should be large enough to allow the He to pass 
through with a relatively small pressure drop. According to the mechanical 
vacuum model, we can treat the 3 He as a vapor, except that we replace the free 
mass, m 3 , by an effective mass m 3 *. For stable operation, the sum of the 
surface tension pressure and the fountain pressure should be much greater than 
the pressure drop of the 3 He passing through the SPS. 

This device is related to the normal fluid phase separator that was 
developed by Alabama Cryogenic Engineering, Inc. in an earlier research 
effort. 

Zero-Gravity Operation of the "Leiden" Dilution Cryocooler. According to 
our analysis performed during this research program, the "Leiden" cycle is not 
applicable in zero gravity. To illustrate, consider the situation shown in 
Figure 9(a). We assume that a solution type refrigerator device is filled 

24 




0.1 K °; 6K 

4 He + 



ENTRANCE SUPERLEAK 




EXIT SUPERLEAK 



q) "Unstable" Phase Arrangement 



m 



0.1K 



ENTRANCE SUPERLEAK 



0.6K 




4 H e + 




EXIT SUPERLEAK 



b) "Stable" Phase Arrangement 



Figure 9 



Two Possible Arrangement of Phases in a Zero-Gravity Solution 



Refrigerator. 



25 



with 3 He/ 4 He mixture, and the end temperatures are set to the values shown. 
Is the indicated phase arrangement stable? There are two separate 
requirements: 

i. The concentrations along the phase boundary must following the phase 

separation line, 
ii. The osmotic pressure in the dilute solution must be constant. 

Reference to the property tables indicates that these two conditions cannot be 
met at the same time. An additional indication that this is not an 
equilibrium state is a calculation of the cooling power with circulation of 
3 He through the superleaks. We find that Q out at 0.6 K is less than Q in at 
0.1 K. Thus, the second law is violated. 

The solution to the problem is shown in Figure 9(b). An internal 
"convection" will take place, driven by the osmotic pressure. The 3 He will 
thus collect at the cold end of the tube, and the dilute solution will fill 
the remaining space. Therefore, the "Leiden" machine becomes the ACE, Inc. 
cycle. We conclude that the "Leiden" cycle is only possible in gravity, and 
is not a candidate for zero gravity operation. 

Zero-Gravity Operation of the ACE, Inc. Dilution Cryocooler. The ACE, 
Inc. cycle avoids the problems of the Leiden cycle by having a phase boundary 
only in the mixing chamber. Since this is the coldest region in the unit, the 
3 He phase can exist there stably at all temperatures. The arrangement of the 
phases is similar to the 3 He circulation dilution cryocooler. To simplify 
things, the amount of 3 He in the active region could be reduced, so that at 

26 



the lowest temperatures there would be not concentrated °He phase. This is 
possible, but it will reduce the cooling power at temperature higher than 0.1 
K. For maximum refrigeration power there should be enough 3 He to provide a 
phase separation at a relatively high temperature. This will speed up the 
cooldown process, and insure that the full cooling power is available at the 
lowest temperatures. 

Since the ACE, Inc. cycle is new, the question of testing for zero 
gravity arises. As with all the dilution cycles there is a strong effect of 
gravity. The pure 3 He is much lighter than the dilute solution, so it tends 
to raise to the highest point in the machine. In addition, if the J He 
concentration changes along the counterflow tube, then the density also will 
change. A "gravitational instability" of this type must be suppressed in the 
3 He circulation cycle. This is usually done by adding a "U-Tube" trap at the 
exit of the still . 

For testing in gravity, the ACE, Inc. unit must be in one of two 
positions. Either the mixing chamber must be higher than the demixing chamber 
or they must be at the same height (horizontal operation). If the demixing 
chamber is above, a gravitational instability will occur, and the unit cannot 
operate stably. 



27 



TEST FACILITY 

The test facility is comprised of several components. These components 
include; gas handling system, cryostat and instrumentation. A description of 
each component is included in the following sections. 



Design 



A major concern in the overall design is to ensure long term leak-free 
operation. Welded stainless steel construction was used wherever feasible. 
If welding was impractical, components were brazed, as when joining Cu to 
stainless steel. The use of PbSn solder was limited to electrical wiring. 

Gas Handling System. This system is used to contain supplies of 3 He gas 
and 3 He- 4 He mixture and to move them around where needed. As the cost of 3 He 
is approximately $150 per standard liter there is also a financial incentive 
for keeping the system leak tight. Figure 10 contains a schematic of the 
system. There are two gas panels, each panel controls the flow from a 
separate reservoir of 3 He. The two panels are connected together through a 
Metal Bellows Corporation model MBC-135 bellows pump, so that 3 He can be moved 
between reservoirs. 

The valves on the gas panels are Nupro model SS-4D4L-V51 packless metal 
diaphragm valves with VCR fittings. When a valve fails, usually from an 
overtightened seat, it can be repaired and reinstalled without having to cut 
out any welded sections. We use Ag plated Ni gaskets and have had no trouble 
with the VCR fittings. 

28 



^f^^^^ 



-UNISTRUT FKXME 




Figure 10 Gas Handling System 



29 



Gas panel No. 1 is used to control the flow of pure 3 He or 3 He- 4 He 
mixture being pumped on. An Alcatel model 2033H hermetically sealed two-stage 
rotary pump is used to pump on the 3 He pot. During the latter part of the 
program, a failure in the 2033H pump required that it be temporarily replaced 
by a similar, smaller model (the Alcatel 2012AH). This pump was large enough 
to adequately serve as an emergency replacement. The pumps are operated at 6 
psia or less for two reasons. If an Alcatel pump is operated above 7.3 psia, 
some leakage develops in the seals. Also, if a leak does develop, say for 
example in the reservoir, air leaks into the system and the 3 He does not 
escape. The resulting mixture can be purified by running it through a 4 K bath 
and freezing out all contaminants. Operating above atmospheric pressure would 
result in the 3 He venting to the atmosphere in the event of a leak. 

The pumping line on the inlet of the Alcatel pump is a 1.5" O.D. 
stainless tube. There is a 1.5" high vacuum valve is on the inlet and outlet 
of the pump, to isolate it when performing maintenance or repairs. The 
demountable connections use conflats, to prevent unintended removal possible 
when using quick flange type fittings. The pumping system is provided with a 
foreline trap on the inlet and an, oil mist eliminator filter and LN 2 trap on 
the outlet. 

Gas panel No. 2 is used to meter quantities of 3 He and 3 He- 4 He mixture 
into the dilution test cell. Only small amounts of 3 He are consumed per run. 
The resulting 3 He - 4 He mixture is allowed to vent to the atmosphere in the 
case of the 4 He circulation cryocooler as the dilution test cell warms up. 
3 He or 3 He- 4 He mixture is thus loaded into the test cell by the pressure 
differential between reservoir No. 2 and the test cell; loading occurs with 

30 



the cell at a temperature of 1.0 K. Pressure sensors were installed on each 
of the gas panels. Both panels have one absolute pressure sensor (0-25 psia, 
Setra model 204). 

Cryostat. The cryostat is designed to fit inside a 7.5" I.D. by 42" deep 
magnet dewar. A 3" thick Al hex flange mounts on top of the dewar, providing 
additional feedthroughs. A relief valve, cracking pressure set to 1 psig, is 
mounted on this flange along with a 3/4" ball valve. The cryostat mounts on 
top of the hex flange. An illustration of the cryostat is shown in Figure 11. 

There are three main pumping lines, one each for the vacuum can, He pot 
and 3 He pot, running through the top flange. Both lines for the helium pots 
are 1.5" O.D., the vacuum can pumping line is 2" 0D. A hermetic 32 pin 
feedthrough is mounted onto the tee of the vacuum can line. Instrumentation 
leads are run through this line, avoiding cold feedthroughs. The pumping 
lines are graded inside the dewar; starting at 1.5" O.D. at the top flange, 
they are reduced to .75" O.D. on top of the vacuum can lid. As shown in 
Figure 11, the lines are offset through 45° ell fittings, forming a light trap 
to keep room temperature thermal radiation from impinging directly into the 
liquid pots and the vacuum can. Additional feedthroughs on the top flange are 
through Cajon Ultra-Torr fittings. The liquid helium level detector, He 
filling capillary and liquid helium transfer line run through these fittings. 
Unused ports are blanked off with brass plugs. Four Al radiation shields are 
anchored to the pumping lines keep thermal radiation from the top flange from 
impinging on the liquid helium in the dewar. 



31 



4 He POT PUMPING LINE 
(QF40 FLANGE) 



ULTRA TORR FITTINGS 



TOP FLANGE 



AL RADIATION SHIELD 
4 PLACES 



UNUSED VALVE 
4 He PUMPING LINE 

VACUUM CAN 




32 PIN ELECTRICAL 
FEEDTHROUGH 



VACUUM CAN PUMPING LINE 
(QF50 FLANGE) 

3 He FILL CAPILLARY 

4 He POT FILL VALVE 

3 He POT PUMPING LINE 
(CONFLAT FLANGE) 



3 He PUMPING LINE 

* He POT FILL VALVE 
CONFLAT FLANGE 



INDIUM SEALED FLANGE 



Figure 11 Schematic Layout of the Cryostat 



32 



The liquid pots are insulated from the 4 K bath by a vacuum can. Its 
dimensions are 6" O.D. by 11.5" high. Figure 12 shows the configuration 
inside the vacuum can. Copper cold fingers are welded into the vacuum can lid 
to provide 4 K heat sinks (not shown). The 3 He and 4 He pumping lines, 3/4" 
O.D. by .012" wall thickness, are attached by conflat flanges to the top of 
the vacuum can lid and to the top of the 4 He pot. The 3 He pumping line runs 
through the 4 He pot and out the bottom, where it is brazed in place. The He 
pot connects to the pumping line with a conflat flange. Conflats and VCR 
fittings are welded to the top and bottom of the 4 He pot. The top and bottom 
of the 4 He pot are stainless steel plates, which have been brazed to the 
copper pot wall. These joints have been very robust, and no leaks have 
developed in the course of our work. 

Both helium pots were fabricated with of 101 alloy Cu. The 4 He pot was 
built in three pieces; the top, bottom and body are separate. After welding 
the fittings in place in the top and bottom, the stainless steel lids were 
brazed in place to the body. The 3 He pot has a lid, into which was brazed a 
.75" O.D. stainless steel pumping line, and a chamber. The lid and chamber 
are sealed with In. The bottom of the chamber has tapped mounting holes for 
attaching and thermally anchoring the test cell to the 3 He pot. There have 
been no leaks associated with the 3 He pot and pumping line. 

Instrumentation. Several thermometers are used when running the 
cryostat. The 4 He pot temperature can be regulated with a Lake Shore 
Cryotronics model DRC-81C temperature controller. Temperature measurements 
were made with calibrated Germanium thermometers manufactured by LakeShore 
Cryotronics, Inc. Three model GR-200A-50 thermometers were used throughout 

33 



Indium Seal 



4 He Fill Lin 



Conflai Flange 



>He Pot 




Conflat Flange 



4 He Pot 



VCR Fitting 
3 Places 



Vacuum Can 



Figure 12 Configuration of He Pot and He Pot 



34 



the experimental program. These calibrated devices provide an experimental 
accuracy of approximately ± 1 mK over their entire calibrated range of 
operation. A mounting through hole was drilled into OFE copper, and the 
resistor was then inserted with a coating of vacuum grease, to insure a good 
thermal contact. The leads of each resistor were also carefully heat sunk for 
a length of - 50 cm at the resistor mounting location. 

Wiring throughout the cryostat was done with 0.005" diameter Manganin 
wire. This choice of material results in very small heat leaks due to thermal 
conduction along the wires length. The lead wire had a typical electrical 
resistance of 11 ohm/ft. 

At each thermal station, these lead wires were carefully heat sunk. This 
included heat sinking of the wires at the helium both temperature (4.2 K) ; at 
the 4 He pot temperature (1.0 K), and at the 3 He pot temperature (0.5 K - 0.3 
K). Temperature sensors are read with a Biomagnetics Technology Inc. 
model 1000 conductance bridge. The excitation voltage is 100 /zV. At this 
excitation level, sensor self heating has not been observed. All conductance 
measurements are made using the 4-wire method. The AC excitation voltage of 
the bridge eliminates contributions from thermal emfs. 



35 



OPERATION 

The basic operation of the test facility is considered during leak 
detection and cooldown procedures. 

Leak Detection 

The most sensitive way to leak check the cryostat is with it mounted in 
the dewar. With the vacuum can in place (the indium seal having been 
previously leak checked), the 3 He pot, 4 He pot and vacuum can are evacuated 
with the high vacuum system. The leak detector is hooked to the He pot and a 
small quantity of helium gas is admitted to the vacuum can. If the leak rate 
does not change over a period of 15 minutes, the 4 He pot is leak free. The 
leak detector is connected to the 3 He pot and helium is admitted to the He 
pot. The entire 3 He pumping line is thus leak checked. 

Having the vacuum can evacuated is essential for leak checking the He 
circulation dilution test cell. In the test cell there are two superleaks in 
series, resulting in a very large flow impedance. During leak testing, the 
leak detector also pumps on the 3 He fill capillary. By evacuating the vacuum 
can, much lower background signal is present in the leak detector when a leak 
is present. Adding helium gas to the vacuum would then produce a noticeable 
increase in the leak detector signal. Unfortunately, this method does not 
pinpoint the leak location so further work is required. However, it is the 
best way to determine if a leak is present. 



36 



Cool down 

If no leaks are found in the cryostat, it is pre-cooled with LN 2 - The 
helium gas in the vacuum can from the leak test remains and acts as a heat 
exchange medium. Once the 4 He pot temperature, as read from the temperature 
controller, is near 80 K, the remaining LN 2 is blown out with helium gas. The 
4 He pot is pressurized with helium to about 4 psig and the fill valve is then 
left open. We then proceed to transfer LHe in the normal manner. When the 
4 He pot temperature reads < 5 K, the exchange gas is pumped out. The vacuum 
can is pumped out overnight to ensure a good quality vacuum is attained. 



37 



DATA AND RESULTS 

In the original design for the 3 He circulation dilution cryocooler, a 
vortex cooler was to be used to precool the incoming J He and to cool the 
dilution flow circuit to 1 K. Due to very good performance of our 4 He pot, 
which reached temperatures as low as 0.95 K, the vortex cooler system was not 
needed; the 4 He pot served very well as a precool er. However, a vortex cooler 
system was developed and tested, since it would be an important element in a 
system with a lower performance 4 He pot. A brief description of the operation 
of a vortex cooler system will now be presented, along with a summary of the 
ACE, Inc. vortex cooler design parameters and data showing the performance of 
this device. 

Vortex Cooler Tests 

The concept of forcing superfluid helium through a tightly packed solid 
powder to achieve cooling was first proposed by Kapitza in 1941. In 1967, 
Olijhoek performed the first experiments to verify the feasibility of this 
idea. The experiments were repeated by Staas and Severijns (1969), who named 
this type of device the vortex cooler. Other work followed (Olijhoek et al . , 
1973, 1974 and Satoh et al . , 1982, 1983), but the device has not gained wide 
spread use simply because its operating temperature range, 0.7 - 2.2 K, can be 
covered easily in terrestrial laboratories by more standard means, such as 
with 3 He evaporative refrigeration. However, the vortex cooler has the unique 
advantage over other cooling cycles that it does not involve a liquid-vapor 
phase separation; it is therefore ideally suited for zero gravity work. 

38 



In Figure 13 a schematic diagram of a vortex cooler is given. Superfluid 
helium is forced to flow through a superleak made of very fine packed powder. 
According to the two fluid model, the super component of the fluid is inviscid 
and will pass through the superleak while the normal component will not. 
Driving superfluid through the superleak thus should result in lowering the 
entropy of the fluid in the cooling chamber; a cooling effect is observed. 
Excitations are swept away from the cooling chamber by the flow through the 
small diameter exit capillary. Cooling of the chamber at the end of the 
superleak is thus achieved. 

In Figure 14 a drawing of the finalized ACE, Inc. vortex cooler is show. 
This figure is a cross-sectional cutaway representation; all of the parts used 
to assemble the vortex cooler have cylindrical symmetry. 

Both the top and bottom plugs were made from OFE copper to insure low 
thermal gradients across them. VCR detachable fittings were installed at the 
fluid inlet and outlet to allow easy replacement of capillaries, vortex 
coolers, or heat exchangers. The superleak consisted of a 1/4" diameter 
stainless steel tube with 0.010" wall thickness. This tube was 1 3/4" long 
and packed with jeweler's rouge (iron oxide) powder. The vortex cooler top 
plug was attached to a mini-conflat flange that fastened to the underside of 
the 4 He pot. Superfluid helium could pass through the flange into a dead-end 
chamber in the top plug to assure that the top plug is adequately heat sunk to 
the 4 He pot. A tapped hole in the bottom of the bottom plug allowed screw 
attachment of heaters or other devices to the bottom of the vortex cooler. A 
12" long, 0.028" I.D. stainless steel capillary served as the inlet to the 

vortex cooler. 

39 



SUPERFLUID INLET SUPERFLUID OUTLET 

t 



SUPERLEAK 



EXIT CAPILLARY 



COOLING CHAMBER 



Figure 13 Schematic Representation of a Vortex Cooler 



40 



MINI-CONFLAT 
FLANGE 



RESISTIVE THERMOMETER 
MOUNTING HOLES 



COOLING CHAMBER 



RESISTIVE THERMOMETER 
MOUNTING HOLES 




TOP PLUG 

INPUT VCR FITTING 

SUPERLEAK 
BOTTOM PLUG 



OUTPUT VCR FITTING 



TAPPED ATTACHMENT 
SURFACE 



Figure 14 Scale Drawing of Finalized ACE, Inc. Vortex Cooler Design 



41 



In Figure 15 a drawing of the fountain pump is shown. It is structurally 
very similar to the vortex cooler previously described. In the fountain pump, 
the top plug and mini-conflat flange are completely drilled through, allowing 
superfluid to flow from the 4 He pot directly into the fountain pump superleak. 
A heater to run the pump was screwed to the fountain pump bottom. The 
fountain pump superleak was made from the same materials as the vortex cooler 
superleak, but was 2 1/4" long. A 12" long, 0.028" I.D. stainless steel 
capillary exited the fountain pump. For an introduction to the operation of 
fountain pumps, see Guenin and Hess (1980). 

Figure 16 shows a cross-sectional view of the 4 He pot coiled heat 
exchanger. Fluid from the fountain pump is admitted to the coils in the 
exchanger, which are bathed in superfluid from the 4 He pot. After traveling 
through these coils, the fluid is cooled from the temperature at the exit of 
the fountain pump back down to the 4 He pot temperature. The heat exchanger 
coil consists of a 5 foot length of 1/16" diameter copper tubing. Although 
they are not shown in Figure 16, 1/8" VCR fittings are used for connection to 
the vortex cooler and fountain pump capillaries. In Figure 17 a schematic 
view of the vortex cool er/fountain pump/heat exchanger system is shown. 

Figure 18 shows the temperature obtained by the vortex cooler as a 
function of input power to the fountain pump. The vortex cooler reached a 
minimum temperature near 0.8 K and had a power handling capacity of - 0.7 mW 
at 1.0 K. Figure 19 shows the equilibrium temperature of the vortex cooler as 
a function of load heat input, with a fixed fountain pump power input of 84 
mW. 



42 



MINI-CONFLAT 
FLANGE 




RESISTIVE THERMOMETER 
MOUNTING HOLES 



INPUT ORIFICE 



TOP PLUG 




SUPERLEAK 



BOTTOM PLUG 



OUTPUT VCR FITTING 



TAPPED ATTACHMENT 
POINT FOR HEATER 



Figure 15 Scale Drawing of Finalized ACE, Inc. Fountain Pump 



43 



Bath Fluid Connection 



Mini-Con'flat Flange 




Coiled Copper Tubing 



Fl 



uid Inlet ' *■ 



■Fluid Outlet 



Figure 16 4He Pot Coiled Heat Exchanger 



44 



UUc POT 



Fountain 

Pump 

Superleak 



Liquid 
Helium Bath 
Intermediate 
Heat Exchanger 



Inlet Outlet 



'"'"" "'"' 




-Vortex Cooler 
Capillary 



Vortex Cooler 
Superleak 



Vacuum Can 



Vortex Cooler 
Cooling Chamber 



Figure 17 Fountain Pump/Vortex Cooler Configuration 



45 



12/27/B9 and 12/28/89 Data 



1.05 



* 



v 

i— i 
o 
o 
o 

M 
0) 

u 
o 

> 



a) 



1.00 



0.95 - 



0.90 - 



0.85 - 




20 40 60 80 

Power to Fountain Pump (mW) 



Figure 18 Temperature of Vortex Cooler vs. Power Input to 
The Fountain Pump 



46 



12-29-80 Data Temperature of Vortex 

Cooler versus Heat Load 

(Fountain Pump Power fixed at 84 ml) 



1.05 



1.00 



tt 



o 

> 

Eh 



0.95 - 



0.90 - 



0.85(f 



0.0 




0.2 



0.4 0.6 0.8 

Pvc (mW) 



Figure 19 



47 



^ He Circulation Dilution Crvocooler Tests 

The prototype dilution cryocooler for 3 He circulation tests was 
constructed as shown schematically in Figure 20(a). The idealized operating 
cycle of the refrigerator was as follows. 3 He from room temperature was 
returned by the hermetic pump, and passed through a liquid nitrogen 
temperature charcoal trap. This trap removed any impurities picked up by the 
3 He gas from the pump. The gas then traveled down the dewar via capillary to 
the 4.2 K heat sink coil, which consisted of a 3' length of 1/8" O.D., copper 
refrigerator tubing immersed in the 4.2 K helium bath. The gas then entered 
the 4 He pot heat exchanger. This exchanger consisted of a 1/16" O.D., 0.020" 
I.D. copper capillary 5' long, immersed in a tube containing 1.0 K superfluid 
4 He from the 4 He pot. The incoming 3 He then passed through one tube of the 
main heat exchanger. This exchanger consisted of two capillaries 18" long, 
with one nested concentrically inside the other. The outer capillary had an 
outside diameter of 0.060", with a 0.009" thick wall; the inner one had a 
0.025" O.D., with 0.006" wall. Both capillaries were stainless steel, to cut 
down on longitudinal heat conduction. This exchanger was designed to 
approximate the specifications of the heat exchanger in the S.H.E. corporation 
mini-fridge (See Lounasmaa, p. 49). The inlet capillary then entered the 
mixing chamber, which was an 0FE copper vessel with an internal volume of 0.79 
cm 3 . Here the 3 He mixes with the 3 He- 4 He mixture to produce cooling. The He 
then traveled back through the main heat exchanger up to the still. In the 
still, the liquid 3 He- 4 He mixture was trapped by the porous silver trapping 
sponge. The trapping sponge was designed to hold the liquid via surface 
tension, thus preventing the liquid from falling through and thus establishing 
a phase boundary for evaporation of the 3 He. After evaporating from the 

48 



o 




c 
o 

•c- 
4-> 

to 

s- 



c 
o 



CO 



o 



c 



c 

'o. 
E 

3 

a. 








c 








o 








•r— 








-l-> 








KJ 








S- 








3 








CD 


o 






•r— 


OJ 






t- 








C 


CD 


t_ 




o 


S_ 


V 




c_j 


3 


o> 






CD 


c 




+j 


■r— 


o 




to 


U_ 


£ 




CD 




u 




1— 




X 








LJ 




O 




w 




4-> 




m o 




rtl 




X <u 


k_ 


i- 




- X 


0) 


0) 






JD 


en 




— c 
'a 


£ 

o 


s_ 

q- 




2 


.C 


ai 




I 


o 


a: 




j 


o> 


c 




/ 


c 


o 





B 5 

1 
1 


^ 


1 


c 
o 

+-> 


d^HH 


3 


NWM 










zsz 



49 



downstream side of the plug, the 3 He returned to room temperature via the 3 He 
pumping line. The trapping sponge was prepared similarly to those tested in 
the ACE, Inc. development program for a zero-g pure 3 He refrigerator 
(Hendricks and Dingus, 1987). 

First, 400 Angstrom silver powder was compressed into the copper mount 
that made up the body of the still. Stainless steel pistons and a hydraulic 
press were used to accomplish this. Then , the plug was sintered in place in 
the copper mount by putting the entire assembly into a vacuum furnace. The 
plug was then heated to 200 C in forty minutes, and kept at 200 C for 1.5 
hours. At this time, the oven was shut off and allowed to return to room 
temperature. During sintering, the plug was confined in a jig between two 
teflon cylinders. As the plug was heated, the teflon expanded, applying 
pressure to the plug material. This prevented the plug from breaking loose 
from the mount wall due to contraction during sintering. This method of 
sintering silver was similar to that used by Franco (1984) and resulted in a 
plug with a packing fraction of approximately 50%. The void volume of the 
plug was found to be 0.080 cm 3 , and the volume of the still chamber above the 
plug was measured to be 0.709 cm . 

Testing the 3 He Circulation Dilution Crvocooler 

A 50% test mixture of 3 He- 4 He was prepared to use in the cryocooler 
cycle. The sample mixture was condensed into the sample according to standard 
procedure for operation of dilution cryocoolers (See Lounasmaa, p. 23). 
However, several different test runs failed to produce cooling of the dilution 
chamber when heat was applied to the still. After these attempts were made, 

50 



it was decided to look at the behavior of the separate components that made up 
the device, in order to understand what problems existed that were preventing 
operation of the whole system. The most complex part of the system was the 
still; thus, the decision was made to first carefully evaluate the performance 
of the still as a phase separator in an attempt to understand more about the 
behavior of the whole system. 

Still Phase Separator Tests 

To test still phase separator only, the apparatus was modified as shown 
in Figure 20(b). Essentially, the dilution chamber and main heat exchanger 
were removed. An input capillary 8" long, made from 0.004" I.D. stainless 
steel was installed between the 4 He pot heat exchanger and the still. 
Thermometers were used to monitor the temperatures of the He pot, the still 
itself, and the lowest point at the bend of the pumping line below the 
trapping sponge, which we referred to as the u-tube. Heater coils were 
installed at both the still and u-tube locations, so that the effects of 
applying a known heat flux to these locations could be observed. 

Figure 21 shows the results of a test run using this configuration. At 
time t=2.83, a sample mixture of 50% 3 He- 4 He was admitted to the input 
capillary of the sealed and evacuated still. In -10 minutes, the system 
reached equilibrium, with the sample condensed into the still. At t=3.40, the 
hermetic pump was engaged and opened to the still pumping line. Immediately, 
the temperature of the still and u-tube fell to -0.5 K. During this cooldown, 
the input capillary to the still was left open. By t-4.0, equilibrium had 
been reached, with the still acting as a continuous mode 0.5 K cryocooler. 

51 



11-21-90A 3He Circ Dil Fridge Still Only 



1.2 



1.0 - 



W 



2 0.8 



d 
j_ 
v 
Pi 
6 0.6 

E- 



0.4 



0.2 




4 5 

Time (Hours) 



Figure 21 



52 



At 0.5 K the vapor pressure of 4 He is negligible, while the vapor 
pressure of 3 He is still significant (P s = 0.2 Torr) . With the still 
operating at this temperature, the pump should be continuously circulating 
almost pure 3 He. At t=4.92, the input capillary was closed off, so that no 
more circulation occurred. A very slight cooling of the still was then 
evident. This cooling should be expected, since "warm" 1.0 K 3 He was no 
longer being pumped into the still. Figure 22 shows the data during this part 
of the run on a more sensitive scale. Also, the 4 He pot was seen to cool 
slightly at t=5.00, since it no longer had to bear the burden of liquifying 
the incoming 3 He. The still stayed in rough equilibrium until t=5.50, at 
which time an unexpected decrease in the temperature of the still began. A 
decrease in the mass flow out of the system also occurs as is evident from 
Figure 23. In this figure, the pressure of the 4 He- 3 He mixture contained in 
the fixed effective storage volume V=7.72 1 is shown. The volume, V, is the 
sum of the storage tank volume and the volume of the output side of the pump 
and connecting lines, and was carefully measured and calculated. The product 
of the effective volume, V, and the pressure shown in Figure 23 give the total 
amount of gas in the system present at room temperature. Thus, as the amount 
of mixture present in the still decreases by being pumped away, the pressure 
in V is seen to rise. A decrease in the slope of the graph dp/dt means a 
slowing of the rise of mixture boiling off in the cell. A reduced boiloff 
rate of mixture in the cell implies a reduced heat load to the still. 

This is true since the mass flow m of material evaporating is described by 

Qload - iL (> 6 > 

where Q load is the heat load and L is the latent heat of vaporization. 



53 



11-21SUZ 3He Circ Dil Fridge Still Only 



0.50 



* 0.45 
v 

L. 

■*-• 
O 

i_ 

03 
O. 

E 

£ 0.40 



0.35 



t 1 r 



°ISoedo c665flr; 



t r 



O 



% 



■ Still 
O U-Tube 




■ i l _J 1 L 



4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2 
Time (Hours) 



Figure 22 



54 



1 1 —21 P 3He Circ Dil Cryo - Still only 
Tank Pressure vs. Time 



250 



200 - 



o 150 - 



<L> 

V) 
(0 




100 



4 5 

Time (Hours) 



Figure 23 



55 



From Figure 24 it can thus be seen that the drop in still temperature 
that occurs at t=5.50 is associated with a corresponding decrease in the heat 
leak to the still. Figure 23 shows pressure variations over the entire 
duration of the experiment, including the pressure drop associated with 
filling the still with liquid. It is not clear why the spontaneous cooling 
occurred at t=5.50. If the breakout pressure of the porous plug was exceeded, 
3 He- 4 He mixture could be forced through it. If this occurred, then one 
possible explanation for the apparatus staying at 0.5 K is that 4 He superfluid 
film traveled up the pumping line, evaporating at a much higher temperature. 
This phenomenon could limit the ultimate lowest pressure obtained at the 
evaporative interface with the 3 He in the still. 4 He at T=1.0 K has the same 
vapor pressure as 3 He at T=0.5 K. Thus, film flow up the pumping line to the 
4 He pot could limit the temperature reached by the still to T sti -|i=0.5 K until 
the 4 He disappeared from the system. Then, the still would be allowed to cool 
down further unencumbered. Verification of the above conjecture could be made 
simple if the 3 He concentration of the gas being removed by the pump at a 
given time could be measured. Unfortunately, the equipment necessary to make 
such measurement was not available. 

Figure 25 shows temperatures of the still, 4 He pot and u-tube versus time 
for another run with the same experimental configuration. Initially, 
equilibrium existed at 4.2 K, before pumping on the 4 He pot began. At 
t=11.47, the 4 He pot had been pumped and had reached 1.0 K; the inlet 
capillary was then opened. Figure 26 shows the pressure of the sample, which 
was stored in the effective volume V, drop as the sample liquifies into the 
still. At t=13.58, pumping was applied to the mixture in the still and 
immediate cooling was observed. Figures 27 and 28 show this portion of the 

56 



11-21PZ 3He Circ Dil Cryo - Still only 
Tank Pressure vs. Time 



120 



100 - 



3 
CO 
CO 

0_ 




4.8 



5.0 



5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 
Time (Hours) 



6.0 



Figure 24 



57 



11 -2 IB 3He Circ Dil Cryo - Still only 
All Points Shown 



w 
0) 

-4-> 

CO 

u 

a 



4 - 



3 - 



2 - 



1 - 







I 

_ ^8 


i 


i i 

O Still 

• 4He Pot 


- 






V U-Tube 


_ 




o 






i 




i i 


- 



8 



10 12 14 

Time (Hours) 



16 



18 



Figure 25 



58 



11-21BP 3He Circ Dil Cryo - Still Only 
All Points Shown 



-t-> 

CO 

u 

a 

H 



350 



300 - 



250 - 



200 




150 - 



100 



8 



10 12 14 

Time (Hours) 



Figure 26 



59 



11 -2 IB 3He Circ Dil Cryo - Still only 



0.60 



0.55 - 



QJ 

a 



QJ 



0.50 - 



0.45 



0.40 - 



1 

o 


1 1 1 
O Still 


i 




V 


V U-Tube 






o 








"q9) ®% 


5 e 9 






- 


9 




- 


1 


i i i 


©i 


1 



13.5 14.0 14.5 15.0 15.5 16.0 

Time (Hours) 



16.5 17.0 



Figure 27 



60 



11-21BPZ 3He Circ Dil Cryo - Still Only 



200 - 



M 



(-, 

fl) 
p. 

6 



150 - 



100 



50 - 




13.5 14.0 14.5 15.0 15.5 16.0 16.5 17.0 
Time (Hours) 



Figure 28 



61 



run on expanded scales. By t=13.75, equilibrium had been reached at roughly 
0.48 K. This temperature equilibrium continued until t=15.40. During this 
time, the pressure versus time graph revealed that more material was leaving 
the still than was condensing down the input capillary, causing P to rise 
steadily. Suddenly, at t-15.40, a spontaneous cooling of both the sponge and 
u-tube occurred. At the same time, a decrease in the boiloff rate, which is 
proportional to dp/dt, took place. This trend continued until t~16.00, when a 
massive, spontaneous liquification of the sample occurred, as evidenced by the 
plunge in pressure. Correspondingly, both the still and u-tube warmed up 
dramatically. 

The origin of the spontaneous cooling and liquifaction effects, which had 
been previously observed, remains unclear. This phenomenon is likely related 
to the time evolution of distribution of liquid in various parts of the 
system. The 1.0 K condenser chamber above the sponge, the sponge itself, the 
bend in the pumping line at 1.0 K, and in the u-tube below the sponge are all 
possible locations for liquid distribution. Without better instrumentation, 
it was very difficult to measure the quantity of liquid in any given place. 

In Figure 29 and 30 another run of the still configuration is shown where 
heating tests were conducted in order to determine whether or not liquid was 
retained in the trapping plug. Before the test, the system was allowed to run 
overnight after filling the still with liquid, then applying pumping. The 
still was then operating in continuous mode when data taking began at t=8.5. 
Between t=8.5 and t=8.9. helium was transferred into the dewar. During the 
period between t=8.9 and t=14.25 the still and u-tube temperatures first rose 
slightly, then fell. During this time, the pressure of the helium in the 

62 



11-28BA #He Circ Dil Cryo - Still Only 
All Points 



U 



a; 



1.2 



1.0 



O.J 



0.6 



0.4 



0.2 



V 



v 



O Still 

• 4He Pot 

V U-Tube 



• •• • 



12 14 

Time (Hours) 



O 



O 






,v 



V 



16 



18 



Figure 29 



63 



o 



3 

w 
dJ 



11-28BP 3He Dil Cryo - Still Only 
All Points 



225 



200 - 



175 - 



150 



I I 


1 


1 o 






o 


1 




o 

o 


- \ 


o 


- 


v -o 

1 1 


1 


1 



10 12 14 

Time (Hours) 



16 



Figure 30 



64 



fixed volume V first decreased, then increased. Both of these effects were on 
the order of 25%, and were possibly due to the thermal disturbance of the 
system caused by helium transfer. From t=14.25 until t=16.8, heat was applied 
first to the u-tube, then to the still. The temperature and pressure 
measurements taken during this period are shown in more detail in Figure 31 
and 32. The purpose of these heating tests was to determine whether the 
liquid mixture in the still was being trapped by surface tension in and above 
the porous sponge, or forced through the sponge into the u-tube. If liquid is 
present where heat is applied, little temperature rise should be seen, since 
heat is taken away by the accelerated boiling of the liquid. However, if no 
liquid is present, a sharp temperature rise should be seen when low heats are 
applied. In Figure 33 the temperatures of the sponge and u-tube are shown as 
a function of input power to the u-tube. Little rise in temperature is seen 
in Figure 33 indicating the presence of liquid in the u-tube. In Figure 34, 
temperatures of the still and u-tube are shown as a function of heat applied 
to the still. Notice the marked rise in temperature of the still for 
relatively low input powers. This clearly illustrates that no liquid was 
present in the still at this time. 

A very different situation is illustrated in Figures 35 and 36 when a 
different procedure was used to load the still. First, the still was 
completely evacuated. Then at t=10.03, the inlet capillary was opened to 
admit the sample to the still while the mixture pumping remained fully open. 
Figures 37 and 38 show temperature and pressure during this time on an 
expanded scale. Note that throughout the run, the temperature of the still 
remains substantially below that of the u-tube. This can only occur if liquid 
is present in the still only. Thus, these graphs represent proper continuous 

65 



11-28BSUZ #He Circ Dil Cryo - Still Only 
All Points 



u 

3 






E- 



1.2 



1.0 



0.8 - 



0.6 - 



0.4 ^ 



0.2 




14.0 



14.5 



15.0 15.5 16.0 
Time (Hours) 



16.5 



Figure 31 



66 



u 
u 
o 

E- 

u 

n 
m 
Q) 
J-. 
Pl, 



11-28BPZ 3He Dil Cryo - Still Only- 
All Points 



220 


I I 


210 




200 




190 


- 


1 an 


rt£ 



a^ 



o 



o 



o 



o 



14.0 14.5 15.0 15.5 16.0 

Time (Hours) 



16.5 17.0 



Figure 32 



67 



11-28BHU Heat U-Tube Only 



1.0 



0.9 



0.8 



« 



u 0.7 
td 

I 0.6 



QJ 
E- 



0.5 - 



0.4°-« • 



0.3 







O Still 
• U-Tube 



20 40 60 

P (Microwatts) 



80 



100 



Figure 33 



68 



11-28BHS Heat Still Only 





1 .U 

0.9 


- 


i I 




0.8 




O 




0.7 


- 




u 








3 










0.6 


_ 




a; 








P. 








a 








E- 


0.5 


— 





0.4 



o 



0.3 







O 



O Still 
• U-Tube 



20 40 60 

P (Microwatts) 



80 



100 



Figure 34 



69 



11-30A 3He Circ Dil Cryo 
All Points 



Still Only 



2.0 



u 
(0 



E- 




O Still 

• 4He Pot 

7U-Tube 



0.0 



10 



12 14 

Time (Hours) 



16 



Figure 35 



70 



11-30P 3He Circ Dil Cryo - Still Only 
All Points 



o 



u 
m 

CO 

v 
u 

PL, 



315 



310 



305 - 



300 - 



295 - 



290 




10 11 



12 13 14 15 
Time (Hours) 



Figure 36 



71 



11-30SUZ 3He Circ Dil Cryo - Still Only 



(V 



QJ 



1.5 



1.0 



0.5 



10 



I 


I 


I 
O Still 






• U-Tube 




§ 


8 8 


• 

o 




i 



12 14 

Time (Hours) 



16 



Figure 37 



72 



11-30PZ 3He Circ Dil Cryo - Still Only 



320 



o 

E-<_ 

QJ 

w 

V} 

cu 

Oh 



300 



280 




10 



12 U 

Time (Hours) 



Figure 38 



73 



mode operation of the porous sponge phase separator in the negative, or -lg 
configuration. The order of filling and pumping the cell seems to be very 
important in avoiding liquid breakout through the trapping plug. 

4 He Circulation Dilution Crvoc ooler Results 

The 4 He circulation dilution cryocooler configuration is shown in Figure 
39. To prepare for a test run, the 4 He and 3 He pots were first cooled to 1.0 
K and 0.4 K, respectively. Exchange gas was admitted to the exchange gas 
sleeve. This column of gas acted as a weak thermal link between the 1.0 K He 
pot and the cooling chamber, and prevented rapid warmup of the cooling chamber 
when sample was admitted to it. 3 He was then condensed into the cooling 
chamber, filling the drift tube and other tubing between the superleaks. 
Since superleaks prevent 3 He flow, the sample was trapped. At this time, He 
was admitted to the input, filling up the input and output capillaries and 
filling the remainder of the cooling chamber and drift tube with He. The 
exchange gas was then pumped from the exchange gas sleeve, and 4 He could then 
be circulated through the device, with cooling of the dilution chamber 
expected. 

Dimensions of the components used to construct the 4 He circulation 
dilution cryocooler are as follows. The inlet superleak was fabricated from a 
2 1/4" length of 1/4" O.D., 0.010" wall stainless steel tubing packed with 0.5 
micron alumina powder. The outlet superleak was made from the same 
materials, but was 2 1/4" long. The drift tube consisted of a 50cm length of 
0.1mm I.D. stainless steel capillary. This tube could be easily interchanged 
with other drift tubes, if needed. 8" lengths of 0.1mm stainless steel 

74 



To Concentric Tube 
Heat Exchanger 



3 He Pot 
Pumping 
Line 



4 He Pot 
1.0K 



JHe Pot 
0.4K 



1 i 



*He 
4 Output 



4 He Pot 
Pumping 
Line 




Exchange Gas Sleeve 
Input / Output 



3 He- 4 He 
Mixture 
Fill Line 



Cooling Chamber 
ft Tube 
Superleaks 



VCR Fitting 



0.4K Heat Sink 
Block 



Figure 39 ACE, Inc. He Circulation Dilution 



Cryocooler Prototype 



75 



capillary carried the 4 He from the 4 He pot heat sink into and out of the 
cryocooler. 

In Figures 40 and 41 a preliminary test of the 4 He circulation dilution 
cryocooler is shown. In this test, the exchange gas sleeve, the cooling 
chamber and the input/output 4 He capillaries were evacuated. A 50% 3 H3- He 
mixture was used to fill the 3 He pot. This was done to observe the 
differences in mixture behavior between the -1-g configuration and normal 
evaporative cooling arrangements. The 3 He pot was a closed cylindrical copper 
vessel with the same silver powder used to make up the still trapping sponge 
sintered in a layer at its bottom. From the results, it is seen that an 
anomalous spontaneous cooling occurs at t-2.5 and that the boiloff rate in the 
pot suddenly decreases then. This is very similar to the anomalous behavior 
seen in the still tests conducted in the -lg configuration. This fact 
suggests that the source of the anomaly is not due to use of the phase 
separator in the -lg configuration. It may occur due to liquid present at 1.0 
K inside the 3 He pumping line bend. When the 4 He disappears from its 
evaporation point at 1.0 K, the temperature of the device then falls. 

In Figures 42 and 43, the results of a test with 3 He trapped between the 
superleaks is shown. 3 He was admitted between the superleaks in the form of 
50% 3 He- 4 He mixture. Then, 4 He was admitted to the 4 He inlet line. Pumping 
on the 3 He- 4 He mixture in the 3 He pot at t-2.6 cooled the pot down to - 0.5 K. 
The dilution chamber then began to cool very slowly, but the time constant for 
this cooling was so large that the temperature of phase separation of the 
mixture was never obtained. Thus, the tests of the 4 He circulation dilution 
cryocooler apparatus were inconclusive. 

76 



1-30-91A test of 4He circ dil cryo 

Dil chamber empty; 50% mix in 3He Pot 



1.4 



0) 
i- 

3 
CO 

J- 

0) 



0) 



1.0 



0.8 



0.6 



0.4 



Q 




0.2 



v 
\ 



Dil Chamber 



-O O 



4 He Pot 



W7-V-V-V 
\ 



-O 



V, 3 He Pot (Mix inside) 

^7V-V-V-V V V V 



1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 
Time (Hours) 



Figure 40 



77 



1-30-91A test of 4He circ dil cryo 

Dil chamber empty; 50% mix in 3He Pot 



o 



CL 



300 



250 



200 



150 



100 - 



50 








O 



1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 
Time (Hours) 



4.5 



5.0 



Figure 41 



78 







E- 



1-30-91C 4He Circ Dil Cryo 

50% Mix in 3He Pot; 50% Mix in Dil Chamber 

4He flow attemped, but apparently blocked 



3.5 



3.0 



2.5 



2.0 



1.5 



1.0 



0.5 



0.0 



Dil Chamber 

cxnxj o — o 



2.5 



4He Pot 



3He Pot (Mix Inside) 




7-v v V- 



-v 



3.0 3.5 

Time (Hrs) 



4.0 



Figure 42 



79 



1-30CP 4He Circ Dil Cryo 

50% Mix in 3He Pot; 50% Mix in Dil Chamber 

4He flow atempted but apparently blocked 




2.5 



3.0 3.5 

Time (Hours) 



4.0 



Figure 43 



80 



CONCLUSIONS 

The primary conclusion of this research program is that a zero gravity 
cryocooler using the principle of the 3 He/ 4 He dilution refrigerator is 
feasible. Tests of the porous metal phase separator show that trapping of a 
3 He- 4 He mixture against gravity can be achieved. 

It was shown by Hendricks, Nilles and Dingus (1988) that the critical 
phase interface that must be controlled in the 3 He circulation dilution 
cryocooler is in the still. It has been demonstrated in this effort that such 
phase interface control can be established since continuous operation of the 
still with 3 He- 4 He mixture confined on or above the phase separator against 
gravity has been observed. 

It has also been shown that a good deal of experimental complexity is 
involved in conducting experiments with time dependent concentrations of He 
mixtures as the test fluid. A need exists for apparatus permitting the real 
time evaluation of mixture concentration during circulation tests. 



81 



RECOMMENDATIONS 



^He Circulation Dilution Ovocooler 



The feasibility of a 3 He circulation dilution cryocooler for zero gravity 
has been demonstrated by tests that show a porous still phase separator that 
operates in -lg. Development of a fully functional dilution refrigerator for 
zero gravity could provide substantially improved performance over the 
currently available adiabatic demagnetization refrigerator (ADR). To fully 
understand the operation of the elements that make up a 3 He circulation 
dilution cryocooler, and to successfully coordinate these parts into a working 
whole requires more tests with enhanced instrumentation. Additional 
instrumentation required is as follows. 

Thermometry. To evaluate temperatures along pumping and input lines, in 
order to detect changes in thermal profile that might indicate film flow and 
liquid level changes, more thermometers are required. 

Liquid Level Sensors. The level of liquid helium in a test cell can be 
monitored via open gap capacitors (See Dingus, 1986). A capacitance bridge 
with resolution of one part in 10 5 is required to measure capacitance changes 
as liquid moves between the capacitor plates. This high resolution is needed 
due to the small dielectric constant of liquid helium. 

Real Time Evaluation of Sample Concentration. It is highly desirable to 
be able to measure the relative amounts of 3 He and 4 He circulating in the 
system at a give time. Also, a measurement of the 3 He concentration of the 

82 



sample left at room temperature would reveal the 3 He concentration of material 
down inside the cryocooler, since the total net sample concentration is fixed. 

A mass spectrometer is needed to perform analysis between the isotopes 
3 He and 4 He. As an example, a helium leak detector sensitive to both He and 
4 He could be used. Calibrated standard leaks are available that can be filled 
with pure 3 He, pure 4 He or mixtures to provide fixed points. With these 
tools, a definitive study of the 3 He circulation dilution cryocooler can be 
made. 

4 He Circulation Dilution Crvocooler 

Further work is also needed on the 4 He circulation dilution cryocooler. 
A thermal switch is needed between the dilution cooling chamber and the He 
pot to allow the system to reach equilibrium in a reasonable time and to 
permit cooling tests to be carried out. More detailed testing of this cycle 
would also benefit from the additional instrumentation described in the 
previous section. 



83 



REFERENCES 

Bertran, B. and Kitchens, T.A., (1968) "Heat Transport in Superfluid Filled 
Capillaries", Cryogenics 8, 36. 

Betts, D.S., Brewer, D.F., and Lucking, R. (19 ) "Effective Viscosity of 
Liquid Helium Isotope Mixtures", Low Temp. Physics-LT13,1, 559. 

Castelijris, C.A.M., Kuerten, J..G.M., de Waele, A.T.A.M., and Gijsman H M. 
(1985) " 3 He Flow in Dilute ^He- 4 He Mixtures at Temperatures Between 10 and 150 
mK," Phys. Rev. B 32, 2870. 

de Waele, A.T.A.M., Keltjens, J. CM., Castelijns, C.A.M., and Gijsman, H.M., 
(1983), "Flow Properties of He-3 Moving Through He-4 II at Temperatures Below 
150 mK", Phys. Rev. B, 28, 5350. 

Dingus, M.L., (1986) "Thermal Transport in Very Dilute 3 He- 4 He Mixtures Near 
the Superfluid Transition", Duke Univ. Doctoral Dissertation, 44-59. 

Franco, H. (1984), Cryogenics , 477. 

Guenin, B.M. and Hess, G.B., (1980) "Liquid Helium II Counterflow in a Tube 
Packed with Angular Particles and Application as a Superfluid Pump , Physica 
101B, 285. 

Hendricks, J.B., Nilles, M.J., and Dingus, M.L., (1988) "A Helium-3/Helium-4 
Dilution Cryocooler for Operation in Zero Gravity", Final Report, NASA 
Contract No. NAS8-37260. 

Hendricks, J.B. and Dingus, M., (1987) "Long Lifetime, Spaceborne, Closed 
Cycle Cryocooler", Final Report, NASA Contract No. NAS8-35254. 

Hendricks, J.B. and Karr, G.R. (1986), "Comparison of Flow States in the 
Porous Plug and the Active Phase Separator", Proc. ICEC 11, 331. 

Kapitza, P., (1941) J. Phys. USSR 5, 59 and (1941) Phys. Rev. 60, 354. 

Lounasmaa, O.V. (1974) Experimenta l Principles and Methods Below 1 K. 

Olijhoek, J.F., Hoffer, J.K., Von Beelen, H., de Bruyn Oubouter, R., ^ and 
Taconis, K.W., (1973) "Cooling by Convective Heat Transport in Superfluid 
Helium", Physica 64, 289. 

Olijhoek, J.F., Von Beelen, H., de Bruyn Oubouter, R., and Taconis, K.W., and 
Koops, W., (1974a) "Thermal Effects in Adiabatic Flow of He II - Part I , 
Physica 72, 355. 

Olijhoek, J.F., et al . (1974b) "Thermal Effects in Adiabatic Flow of He II - 
Part II", Physica, 72, 381. 

Radebaugh, R. (1967), Thermodynam i c Properties of He-3/He-4 Solutions with 
Applications to the Dilution Refrigerator , NBS Tech. Note 362. 

84 



Richardson, R.C. and Smith, E.N., ed. (1988) Experimental Techniques in 
Condensed Matter Phvsics at Low Temperatures , Frontiers in Physics Lecture 
Notes Series, Addi son-Wesley Pub! . Company. 

Satoh, N., Satoh, T., Ohtsuka, T., Fukujawa, N. and Satoh, N (1987) 
"^He-Circulating Dilution Refrigerator," Journal of Low Temp. Phys. 57, 19b. 

Satoh, T. and Satoh, T (1983) "Studies of Cooling Effects in a Vortex Cooler," 
Proc. ICEC , 279. 

Satoh, T., Shinada, H., and Satoh, T., (1982) "Turbulence and Cooling Effect 
in Adiabatic Flow of Hell," Physica 114B, 167-173. 

Staas, F.A. and Severijns, A. P. (1969) "Vorticity in He II and Its Application 
in a Cooling Device", Cryogenics, 9, 422. 

Walker, G. (1983), Crvocoolers , Plenum Press, New York. 

Wilks, J. (1967), The Properties of Liquid and Solid Helium , Clarendon Press, 
Oxford. 



85 



APPENDIX A 
DILUTION CRYOCOOLER PHASE SEPARATORS FOR 3 HE 

Below 0.86 K, 3 He - 4 He mixtures undergo a phase transition that results 
in the creation of a 3 He rich and a 4 He rich phase. This transition is 
illustrated in the phase diagram presented in Figure A-l. For the traditional 
earth-based dilution refrigerator to operate gravity is used to separate these 
two phases. The 3 He rich phase floats on top of the 4 He rich phase due to the 
mass density difference between the two isotopes. In space based 
applications, gravity will not be available to provide this needed phase 
separation. 

A possible alternative method would be to utilize surface tension to 
separate the two phases. The surface tension of 4 He is approximately 2.3 
times as large as that of 3 He at 0.5 K (wilks, 1967, pg. 422). As the 
temperature goes toward absolute zero, the 3 He rich phase approaches pure He, 
and the 4 He rich phase decreases the concentration of 3He asymptotically to 
6.4% 3 He. Thus, separation of these two phases via their differences in 
surface tension should be achievable. 

A promising method for achieving phase separation for both binary liquid 
and liquid-vapor systems involves using a porous metallic matrix to retain 
liquid in zero gravity. Such a trapping method has been successfully 
demonstrated by ACE, Inc., for pure 3 He for the -1-g "inverted" configuration 
(see NASA contract # NAS8-35254 Final Report, Long Lifetime, Spaceborne, 
Closed Cycle Cryocooler). In this application, the porous matrix or "sponge" 

86 




X 



3., ,4, 



Figure A-l The He/ He Phase Separation Diagram 
(x = n 3 /n 3 + n 4 ) 



87 



was used to trap liquid in a liquid-vapor phase separator. This sponge 
corresponds to the still phase separator (SPS) discussed earlier. 

Since 3 He has the lowest surface tension of the two isotopes, successful 
trapping of 3 He indicates that trapping should be achievable for either the 
3 He rich phase or the 4 He rich phase. Since the 4 He rich phase has the higher 
surface tension, it should cling more strongly to the porous material. The 
exact distribution between the 3 He rich and 4 He rich components within the 
pores is difficult to predict beyond the expected preferential attraction of 
4 He to the pore walls. 

Phase separation between liquid and vapor must occur in the still of the 
dilution refrigerator. In the still, pumping is applied to the liquid mixture 
of 3 He- 4 He to remove the 3 He from the still for recirculation. Because of the 
high partial pressure of 3 He at this temperature, nearly pure 3 He is removed 
from the still. This 3 He is circulated and introduced to the mixing chamber 
to provide the cooling action of the refrigerator. In zero gravity, the 
liquid must be prevented from escaping the system through the pumping lines. 
Furthermore, the method used to achieve liquid-vapor phase separation in the 
still must not interfere with the evaporation of the 3 He. To explore the idea 
of using the porous matrix to trap the mixture in the still, experiments with 
3 He- 4 He mixtures as the working fluid were conducted using the -1-g test 
apparatus that was designed for the pure 3 He experiment. What follows now is 
a description of this test apparatus, followed by a presentation of the 
mixture test data. 



88 



Test Facility and Instrumentation 

This section will describe the test facility that was used for the 
surface tension phase separation tests for both pure 3 He and 3 He- 4 He mixtures 
and for the solution refrigerator tests. A description will be given of the 
basic cryostat and dewar configuration, as well as the electronic 
instrumentation. 

Basic Cryostat. Figure A-2 shows a schematic diagram of the basic 
cryostat configuration. The cryostat consisted of a 6 liter liquid helium pot 
which was suspended in a liquid nitrogen cooled Cryofab, Inc., model CSM-85 
dewar. The space around the 4 He pot was supported from the dewar top flange. 
A thin walled stainless steel pumping line served as a helium vapor exhaust 
port. A large capacity mechanical pumping system was used to pump the He pot 
down below the lambda transition to a minimum temperature of 1.4 K. At the 
bottom of the superfluid pot 4 mini-conflat connectors made access to the 
liquid helium in the pot possible. These connectors were welded to the pot 
and provide access to the liquid. The 4 He pot had a removable copper 
radiation shield attached to it to protect the experimental space from 
radiation leaks due to the dewar's 77 K walls. Copper radiation baffle plates 
attached to the pumping line reduced radiation leaks to the pot from the room 
temperature dewar top flange. 

All electrical leads were of 0.005" manganin wire, and were passed 
through the dewar top flange via room temperature ceramic feed-throughs. 
These leads were well heat sunk on the pumping line. This made use of the 
cold helium gas being removed from the system to minimize the heat leak to the 

89 



He 
PUMPING 

LINE 



DEWAR 

TOP 

FLANGE 




HIGH VACUUM 
CONNECTION 



LN COOLED 
DEWAR 



SUPERFLUID 
BATH 



SUPERFLUID 
CONNECTION 



EXPERIMENTAL 
SPACE 

RADIATION 
SHIELD 



Figure A-2 Schematic view of cryostat. 



90 



pot via the leads. All capillaries and electrical leads were also well heat 
sunk to the superfluid pot itself. 

When the cryostat radiation shield was in place, a thermal blanket 
consisting of 20 layers of NRC-2 superinsulation was wrapped around the pot 
and radiation shield to reduce the radiation leak to the pot from the 77 K 
dewar walls. The pot walls and radiation shield were also covered with a 
single layer of 3M No. 425 aluminum tape. Shu, Fast and Hart (1986) have 
shown that this combination of superinsulation and aluminum tape can 
significantly decrease heat leaks in cryogenic environments. With these 
precautions taken, the 6 liter helium pot could hold liquid for up to 24 
hours. 

The experimental space inside the copper radiation shield was a 
cylindrical chamber 7" in diameter and 11" in length. This space provided 
adequate room mounting the cryocooler and associated hardware. 

One final feature of the cryostat design that facilitated modification of 
the apparatus was that the entire cryostat could be decoupled from support 
vacuum lines and electrical leads and be lifted from the dewar. Also, the 
dewar could be lowered as an optional method of obtaining access to the 
experimental space. 

Electronic Instrumentation. The heart of the electronic instrumentation 
system is a Biomagnetic Technologies Potentiometric Conductance Bridge (PCB). 
This bridge was used to measure the resistance of Cryocal Model CR100 and Lake 
Shore Cryotronics Model GR-200A-100 Germanium Thermometers. The PCB applies 

91 



very small load currents (picowatts) to the resistors, and thus avoids 
self -heating in the thermometer elements. 

Hastings ST Series mass flowmeters were used to measure the helium gas 
flow rates. These gauges give a 0-5 volt D.C. output that is linear with mass 
flow over their calibration range; also, these devices are pressure 
independent. Setra Pressure gauges were used to monitor pressures to the 
system. These gauges give out a 0-5 volt D.C. voltage that is linear with 
pressure. 

Pumping and Gas Handling System. In Figure A-3 a schematic 
representation of the pumping system is given. In normal operation, the 
nearly pure 3 He vapor was removed by the pump via the "out" port of the sponge 
chamber. The vapor then passed through a low impedance cold trap designed to 
prevent back streaming of pump oil into the chamber. The pumping speed is 
then regulated by the block and metering valves shown at the pump inlet. 
After passing through the Alcatel Model 2012H hermetically sealed pump, the 
3 He vapor passes through an oil mist eliminator, and into a charcoal cold 
trap. The output of the pump is then measured with a Hastings ST-10 mass 
flowmeter. The gas then enters the main body of the gas panel, where pressure 
monitoring is done with Setra pressure gauges. After passing through a needle 
metering valve, the 3 He enters a Hastings ST-10 mass flowmeter, and then back 
into the cryocooler via a return line. This is the typical configuration used 
during a continuous cycle run. 

Other important features of the system are a 37.4 liter storage volume, 
where the 3 He- 4 He sample is stored. A Metal Bellows hermetically sealed pump 

92 




TT Mock V«lvt 



/Oi Flowmeter 
^(O-IOOO SCCH) 



To 
Cryocooler 



6d — chm/riii 

^ ?ort 



/\Out V l" 



Return lint 



Refrigerator 



Figure A-3 He- He mixture gas handling and 
pumping system. 



93 



is also attached to the gas handling panel to facilitate removal of the gas 
from the storage can during its condensation into the trapping sponge. This 
gas handling and pumping system offered great flexibility in controlling the 
refrigeration cycle and in monitoring system parameters. 

Porous Metallic Sponge Assembly 

Figure A-4 shows a scale drawing of the trapping sponge, pumping line, 
and return capillary. 3 He- 4 He mixtures entered the system via a 10 feet 
length of coiled stainless steel capillary that passed through one of the 
superfluid pot pumping lines. This scheme is designed to make use of the cold 
4 He vapor coming out of the superfluid pot to precool the incoming gas in the 
capillary. The capillary is coiled to increase its total surface area, thus 
improving heat transfer. 

After it passed through the pumping line, the capillary entered the He 
bath, where it was well heat sunk to the bath temperature by contact with the 
high conductivity superfluid. In this region of the capillary, the incoming 
gas condensed to form liquid, which trickled down below the bath. 

After passing through the bath, the liquid then dripped into the upper 
chamber, where it was trapped by the porous sponge. A 1/2" diameter thin 
walled stainless steel pumping line was used to remove the vapor from the 
cryocooler. This line was firmly heat sunk to the 1.5 K bath at 4 He pot 
level, and had bends to eliminate radiation leaks from room temperature. 
Finally, the 1.5 K radiation shield described in the cryostat section 
surrounded the entire sponge assembly to block radiation leaks from the 77 K 

94 




o 
o 






<v 
en 
c 
o 
o. 
to 

CD 

c 

o. 
o. 
re 

s- 



Cn 

c 

5 

re 
i- 
■o 

re 
o 



i 

QJ 

t- 

en 



ORIGINAL PAGE !S 
OF POOS QUALITY 



walls of the nitrogen dewar after moving through the bath. Then the fluid 
collected in the chamber above the sponge. This fluid was drawn into the 
porous silver trapping sponge by capillary action. Evaporation then occurred 
at the lower face of the sponge. 

If a loss of trapping occurred, some or all of the fluid above the sponge 
would fall into the lower chamber. This chamber was thermally isolated from 
the liquid reservoir held above the sponge by the low thermal conductivity of 
its stainless steel walls. The lower chamber and U-shaped tube below the 
chamber were all made of copper and were isothermal. Thus, the device is 
schematically represented as previously shown in Figure A-5. Presence of 
liquid in either the upper or lower chamber is determined by applying heat 
loads to heaters shown and measuring the temperatures of the chambers with 
resistive thermometers. 

Porous Trapping Plug 

The porous sponge used in the device was prepared in the following 
fashion. First, 400 A silver powder was compressed to 3000 psi with a 
hydraulic press. The powder was contained in a stainless steel jig and 
compressed with a stainless steel piston. This jig produced compressed 
cylindrical silver plugs approximately 1/4" in thickness and 3/4" in diameter. 
These plugs were then placed in a vacuum oven, which was evacuated and then 
backfilled with helium gas. The plug was then heated to 200 C in forty 
minutes and kept at 200 C for 1-1/2 hours. At this time, the oven was turned 
off and allowed to cool slowly to room temperature. This method was similar 
to that used by Franco (1984), and resulted in plugs with a packing fraction 

96 



a) Trapping 



I liquid input 




He^= 



low thermal • 

conductivity walls 

Qbs— 



\ \ \ \ 



«^ upper chamber 

porous sponge 



'>/////////////, 



J 



^==^ to pump 

•* lower chamber 



BS 



b) Loss of 
trapping 




liquid input 

^ upper chamber 

porous sponge 



z* to pump 

lower chamber 



"BS 



Fi 



qure A-5 Schematic view of trapping sponge holder 

(a) retention of liquid against gravity l-l-g) 
is shown. . 

(b) depicts the situation occurring with a 
loss of liquid trapping. 



97 



of approximately 50%. The resulting plug was then epoxyed into an OFHC copper 
plug holder with Stycast 2850GT epoxy. 



Results and Discussion 

O A 

In this section, the results of the -1-g trapping tests of He- He 
mixtures in the porous silver sponge will be discussed. After the data is 
presented, conclusions drawn from the tests will be given. 

Preliminary Test: Pure 3 He. To verify that the trapping plug apparatus 
was working properly, tests were conducted with pure 3 He. These results 
agreed well with previous tests that demonstrated the sponge's ability to trap 
3 He against gravity (See NASA Contract No. NAS8-35254). After condensing 
liquid 3 He above the trapping sponge, pumping from below the sponge was 
applied, and cooling occurred until a steady equilibrium was reached at T * 
0.6 K. This temperature was maintained until the 3 He was completely exhausted 
from the sponge. The mass flow into and out of the sponge assembly was 
measured, along with the pressure above the sponge and the temperature of both 
the sponge (T s ) and the chamber below the sponge (T BS ). Loss of trapping 
could be detected by observing the drop of T BS below T s and by applying heat 
to each station. If liquid was present in either station, the mass flow was 
seen to follow the latent heat relation 

Q = mL (A' 1 ) 

where Q is the heat input, m is the mass flow out, and L is the latent heat of 
vaporization. Using this technique, loss of liquid trapping or film flow 
through the plug could be easily detected. 



98 



Trapping Plug Results for 3 He - 4 He Mixtures. In Figure A-6, the 
temperature of the sponge station and the temperature of the station below the 
sponge are shown as a function of time for a test run with molar concentration 
X=0.5. Here we define the molar concentration x as 

x = N 3 /(N 3 + N 4 ) ( A ~ 2 ) 

where N 3 is the number of moles of 3 He in the sample and N 4 is the number of 
moles of 4 He. First, the sample was admitted above the sponge. Care was 
taken to avoid fractionation of the mixture so that the concentration of the 
sample would be well defined. After pumping was applied below the sponge the 
system rapidly cooled to T = 0.6 K and stayed constant in temperature for 
approximately one hour. During this time, nearly pure 3 He was being pumped 
from the system due to the high partial pressure of the 3 He in the mixture. 
It should be noted that the same minimum temperature was reached during this 
part of the run as was achieved using pure 3 He as the working fluid. This is 
because the 4 He acts like a mechanical vacuum due to its low partial pressure, 
and does not appear to interact with the mechanism of transport of 3 He through 
the sponge. During this phase, the sponge temperature is somewhat lower than 
the temperature below the sponge, indicating that liquid had not broken 
through. Liquid trapping was confirmed using the mass flow test described 
previously. 

At T * 160 minutes, a sharp rise begins in the temperature of both the 
sponge and below the sponge. This temperature rise is due to the exhaustion 
of the 3 He from the liquid mixture, leaving only 4 He trapped by the sponge. 
Since the vapor pressure of 4 He is much less than that of 3 He at 0.6 K, the 

99 



u 
a: 

LiJ 






1.30- 



1.10-- 



0.90-- 



0.70 -- 



0.50 



X=0.5 

NO HEATING TO EITHER STATION 



O 
t) 



O -SPONGE TEMP 
♦ -BELOW SPONGE 



^D 



& 



/ 



^ 



«•*» •* 



9 



100 200 

TIME (MIN) 



300 



Figure A- 6 Temperature of sponge and below the sponge versus time for 
a 50% 3 He- 4 He mixture run. 



100 



system temperature rises due to the insufficient cooling power of the He. 
Temperature equilibrium is again reached at T ~ 1.0 K, which is the often 
observed practical minimum cooling temperature of 4 He evaporative coolers. 
The slight drop in temperature at the end of the run is not well understood, 
but is thought to be due to a thin layer of 3 He which phase separated when the 
mixture was colder, and was excluded from the plug due to the surface tension 
of the 4 He rich phase. It should be noted that after the 3 He is exhausted 
from the system, the temperature of the station below the sponge decreases to 
a lower value than the sponge. Also, heat tests then reveal the presence of 
liquid in the station below the sponge. We believe that superfluid film flow 
accounts for these effects. When 3 He is present, the thermal conductivity of 
the liquid mixture is greatly reduced, and the temperature gradient across the 
sponge is relatively large. Thus, the sponge acts like a porous plug phase 
separator (See Hendricks and Karr, 1986) when 3 He is present, and all liquid 
is retained by the sponge. It is important that no film flow is seen when He 
is present because downstream film flow in the still of dilution refrigerator 
serves to introduce heat leaks into the system and decreases the rate of He 
being pumped from the still. 

In Figure A-7, the pressure above the sponge is shown as a function of 
time for the same run illustrated in Figure A-6. After initially pumping down 
the system, the pressure reaches a minimum value and stays at that minimum 
throughout the duration of the run. This minimum pressure is somewhat higher 
than the vapor pressure at T s due to the pressure drop across the sponge. The 
fact that the equilibrium temperature rises when the pressure remains constant 
is another direct indication that 3 He is pumped away from the mixture first. 



101 



X=0.5 

NO HEATING TO EITHER STATION 



100 



a: 
o 



80- 



60 



40-- 



20-- 



O 



PRESSURE ABOVE SPONGE 







O 



% 




QjgXnDCffiDOOCKXXEE) OQDOD 



+ 



100 200 

TIME (MIN) 



300 



Fiqure A-7 Pressure above the sponge as a function of time for the 50% 
3He- 4 He mixture test shown in Figure A-6. 



102 



Figure A-8 shows the results from another test of the X=0.5 mixture. 
Here, the general performance is the same as in Figure A-6, but a lower 
minimum temperature is reached. This graph is on a shorter time scale than 
Figure A-6; equilibrium at a higher temperature is not shown. Figure A-9 
shows the pressure above the sponge as a function of time for this test run. 

Additional tests were conducted with a mixture concentration of 75% He 
(X=0.75). Very similar results were obtained with this concentration to the 
data from the X=0.5 test runs. The only difference in the results was that 
the portion of the run with T * 0.6 K lasted much longer, since more 3 He was 

•5 

available. These results substantiate the observation that all the He is 
preferentially removed from the sponge before the 4 He in the mixture is 
expelled. 

The previous results were obtained by filling the chamber above the 
sponge, shutting off the input mass flow, and then pumping on the sponge from 
below. In an actual dilution cryocooler application, continuous circulation 
of 3 He through the system is required to provide constant operation. To test 
the feasibility of continuous operation, the trapping sponge was filled with 
mixture, and pumping started from below while the output flow from the pump 
was brought to room temperature, sent back into the cryostat to recondense, 
and fed back into the chamber on top of the sponge. This arrangement led to a 
steady minimum temperature of the sponge that could be maintained 
indefinitely, since the 3 He was not depleted. In Figure A-10, typical results 
for such a continuous cycle run are shown. Equilibrium temperatures for each 
station are plotted as a function of heater power applied to that station for 
both the sponge and below the sponge. The rapid increase in the temperature 

103 



X=0.5 

ALL POINTS SHOWN 
O -SPONGE • -BELOW SPONGE 



0.8 



0.7-- 



Ixl 

on 

I 0.6- 

01 
UJ 
D- 



O 



O O O O GD 



UJ 

•- 0.5 + 



Oo O 



0.4 



O 



O 



O 



OS) 



o 



1 h- 

20 40 



H 1 H 



60 80 100 
TIME (MIN) 



120 140 160 



. 3... 4, 



Figure A-8 Temperature vs. time for another 50% He- He mixture test run 



104 



14.0 



0£ 
O 



12.0- 



10.0-- 



o_ 8.0-- 



6.0-- 



4.0 



O 



X=0.5 

NO HEATING 



PRESSURE ABOVE SPONGE 



O 



OO O o O 



O 



H 1 1 H 



20 40 



60 80 100 120 
TIME (MIN) 



140 160 



Figure A-9 Pressure above the sponge versus time for the run shown in 
Figure A-8 



105 



Ld 
CC 

z> 

DC 
Ld 
Q_ 

u 



0.90 



X=0.5 
EACH STATION HEATED SEPARATELY 
CONTINOUS MODE 




1.0 
HEAT (mW) 



2.0 



O -SPONGE 



♦ -BELOW SPONGE 



Fiaure A-10 Temperature versus heat input to each station when the sponge 
Figure A 10 jemperau.^ ^ ^.^ mode (mass flux in = mass flux out). 



106 



of the station below the sponge for a given input heat flux is proof that loss 
of liquid trapping has not occurred, and that the liquid mixture is being held 
above the sponge against gravity. 

Conclusions 

The following conclusions have been reached based on the results of the 
surface tension phase control test program for 3 He- 4 He mixtures: 

1. That a highly conductive, porous metallic matrix can be used to retain 
liquid mixtures of 3 He- 4 He against the pull of gravity (-1-g) provided 
that the 3 He concentration of the mixture is not severely depressed. 

2. The above result implies that the porous metallic matrix method can be 
used to achieve liquid-vapor phase separation in zero gravity, since 
zero-g operation is a less strenuous requirement than the inverted (-1-g) 
configuration. 

3. That the above mentioned phase separation technique was successfully 
tested in a continuous operation mode, where 3 He was reintroduced as 
liquid above the porous sponge at the same rate 3 He vapor was drawn from 
the sponge by pumping from below. 

4. The results listed above demonstrate the feasibility of operating the 
"still" portion of a 3 He circulation dilution cryocooler in zero gravity. 

5. That the 3 He rich - 4 He rich phase separation that must occur in the 
mixing chamber of the dilution cryocooler can be accomplished using 
porous matrix phase separation techniques. It should be noted that 
direct testing of this concept was not carried out, but the differences 



107 



in the surface tension of the two phases indicates that it should be 
possible. 
6. That a 3 He circulation dilution refrigerator that operates in zero 
gravity is a viable technology that can be successfully achieved. 



108 



NASA 



Report Documentation Page 



1. Report No. 

Final 



2. Government Accession No. 



4. Title end Subtitle 

Helium-3/He1ium-4 Dilution Cryocoolers for Space 



7. Author(s) 



Dr. John B. Hendricks, PI and 
Dr. Michael L. Dingus, PM 



3. Recipient's Catalog No. 



5. Report Dele 

March 11, 1991 



6. Performing Organization Code 



8. Performing Organization Report No. 



10. Work Unit No. 



9. Performing Orgaruat.on Name anu t-.h ■■• 

Alabama Cryogenic Engineering, Inc. 
P.O. Box 2470 
Huntsville, AL 35804 



12. Sponsoring Agency Name and Address 

NASA/Marshall Space Flight Center 
Marshall Space Flight Center, AL 35812 



II Contract or Giant No. 

NAS8-37437 



13. Type of Report and Period Covered 

Final R&D 
7/13/89 - 2/12/91 



14. Sponsoring Agency Code 



15. Supplementary Notes 



16. Abstract 

The purpose of this effort has been 
dilution cryocoolers based on dilution 
tion refrigeration (ADR) cycles. Alth 
not operate as fully functional diluti 
was gathered. The porous metal phase 
in the -1-g configuration; this phase 
a 3 He circulation dilution cryocooler. 
needed for additional tests and develo 



to design, construct and test prototype 

refrigeration and adiabatic demagnetiza- 
ough devices we built and tested did 
on cryocoolers, important information 
separator was demonstrated to operate 
separation is the critical element in 

Improvements in instrumentation 
pment have been identified. 



17. Key Words (Suggested by Authorlsll 



18. Distribution Statement 



Unclassified 



19. Security Classif. (of this report) 

Unclassified 



20 Securuy Class.l lof this pogcl 

Unclassified 



21. No of pagos 
111 



22. Price 



NASA FORM 1626 OCT IV, 



109 



