Technical Report SL-95-21 
January 1997 


US Army Corps 
of Engineers 

Waterways Experiment 
Station 



Development of a Multispectral Signatures 
Database (MSD) for the Camouflage, 
Concealment, and Deception Design and 
Evaiuation Environment (C2D2E2) 

Report 2 
User’s Manual 

by Gerardo I. Velazquez, WES 

Sandy D. Bratcher, Douglas P. Roussell, 

Nichols Research Corporation 



Approved For Public Release; Distribution Is Unlimited 


19970715 222 


Due 




Prepared for Headquarters, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 












The contents of this report are not to be used for advertising, 
publication, or promotional purposes. Citation of trade names 
does not constitute an official endorsement or approval of the use 
of such commercial products. 

The findings of this report are not to be construed as an 
official Department of the Army position, unles so desig¬ 
nated by other authorized documents. 


PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER 



Technical Report SL-95-21 
January 1997 


Development of a Multispectral Signatures 
Database (MSD) for the Camouflage, 
Concealment, and Deception Design and 
Evaluation Environment (C2D2E2) 

Report 2 
User’s Manual 

by Gerardo I. Vel^quez 

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 
Watenways Experiment Station 
3909 Halls Ferry Road 
Vicksburg, MS 39180-6199 

Sandy D. Bratcher, Douglas P. Roussell 

Nichols Research Corporation 
P.O. Box 820186 
Vicksburg, MS 39182-0186 


Report 2 of a series 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 


Prepared for U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 
Washington, DC 20314-1000 


Under 


Contract No. DACA39-91-C-0042 


iilll i 


US Army Corps 

of Engineers 

Waterways Experiment 
Station 








r\. 


HEADQUARTERS^ 

BWJDWO--^ 


^IVnONM^AL 
UWORATORY—' 


I^CO«ST«.l< 

.. ^ feC-HYORAUUCS ^ 





31 


TlO] 

|j 

1 

f 

pr 



1 


•rORMATKM 

TECwwioeY 

UBORATOWf 



i 


- GEOTECHNCM. 
lABORATOBY 




FOR INFORMATION CONTACT: 

PUBUC AFFAIRS OFFICE 
U.S. ARMY ENGINEER 
WATERWAYS EXPERIMENT STATION 
3909 HALtS FERRY ROAD 
\^CKSBURG, MISSISSIPPI 39180-6199 
PHONE: (601) 634-2502 


-STRUCTURES 


AREA OF RESERVATIOM = S.r (A)»« 


Waterways Experiment Station Cataloging-in-Pubiication Data 

Velazquez, Gerardo I. 

Development of a multispectral signatures database (MSD) for the Camouflage, 
Concealment, and Deception Design and Evaluation Environment (C2D2E2). Report 2, 
User’s manual/by Gerardo I. Velazquez, Sandy D. Bratcher, Douglas P. Roussell; prepared 
for U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 

93 p.: ill.; 28 cm. — (Technical report; SL-95-21 rept.2) 

Includes bibliographic references. 

Report 2 of a series. 

1. Camouflage (Military science) — Computer programs. 2. Deception (Military science) 
— Computer programs. 3. Image processing — Digital techniques. I. Bratcher, Sandy D. 
II. Roussell, Douglas P. III. United States. Army. Corps of Engineers. IV. U.S. Army Engineer 
Waterways Experiment Station. V. Structures Laboratory (U.S, Army Engineer Waterways 
Experiment Station) VI. Title. VII. Series: Technical report (U.S. Army Engineer Waterways 
Experiment Station); SL-95-21 rept.2. 

TA7 W34 no. SL-95-21 rept.2 








Contents 


Preface. vi 

1— ^Introduction.1 

2— Installation.3 

Hardware and Software Requirements.3 

Configuration.4 

Invocation .4 

3— Using the MSD Software.5 

Document Conventions .5 

Description of the MSD Menu.5 

Initial MSD Menu. 6 

Database Selection/Creation Menu .7 

Database Command Selection Menu.9 

Record Selection Menu . 10 

Adding a Record. 11 

Adding a Data Collection Effort Record .11 

Adding a Site Record .11 

Adding a Scene Record. 12 

Adding an Images Record.13 

Adding an Object Record .14 

Adding Data Records .15 

Deleting a Record. 17 

Deleting a Data Collection Effort Record .17 

Deleting a Site Record .17 

Deleting a Scene Record.17 

Deleting an Images Record .17 

Deleting an Object Record.17 

Deleting a Data Record. 18 

Querying a Record . 18 

Querying a Data Collection Record.18 

Querying a Site Record. 18 

Querying a Scene Record . 18 

Querying an Images Record. 19 

Querying an Object Record.19 

Querying a Data Record .19 

Viewing an Image. 19 







































Preprocessor Utility.20 

Main Menu .20 

Data Entry Menu .21 

File Browser.22 

4 — ^File Descriptions .23 

5— ^Error Messages .28 

6— Data Forms .34 

Actions to Complete BEFORE the Data CoDection Effort.35 

Actions to Complete DURING the Data Collection Effort.37 

Actions to Complete AFTER the Data Collection Effort .39 

Actions to Complete BEFORE Data Entry into the MSD.42 

7— ^Formatting Data Files.43 

8— Analog Data Format.44 

9— ^Micrologger Setup .46 

Micrologger Setup for Weather Station Data .46 

Air Temperature and RH Probe Wiring Diagrams (Model 207) — . . . 46 

Rain Bucket Wiring Diagrams -- .47 

Solar Pyranometer Wiring Diagrams —.47 

R. M. Yound Wind Sentry Set Wiring Diagrams —.47 

Micrologger Setup for Calibration Panel Data.48 

Calibration Panel Wiring Diagram --.48 

Solar Pyranometer Wiring Diagrams —.49 

Micrologger Setup for Radiometer Data.49 

Radiometer Wiring Diagrams —.49 

Mircologger Setup for Thermistor Data.50 

Thermistor Wiring Diagrams (Model 107 Temperature Probe) - ... 50 

Solar Pyranometer Wiring Diagrams —.50 

10— Summary.51 

11— ^References.52 

Appendix A: MSD Data Forms .A1 

Data Collection Effort.A2 

Area of Interest.A4 

Scene/Images .A6 

Object.A8 

Scene/Objects.AlO 

Video Data.A12 

Prinl/Slide Data.A14 

PrinVSlide GPS Data.A16 

Meteorological Data .A18 

Calibration Panel Data.A20 

Radiometer & Thermistor Data. A22 

Gloss Meter Data .A24 

Spectral Radiometer Data.A26 


IV 













































Chromatic Data.A29 

Appendix B: Data Collection Equipment Description.B1 

Weather Station Equipment .B1 

Calibration Station Equipment .B2 

Spectral Equipment.B3 

Airborne Data Collection Equipment.B3 









Preface 


This study was conducted by personnel of Nichols Research Corporation, 
Vicksburg, MS, under Contract No. DACA39-91-C-0042, and the U.S. Army 
Engineer Waterways Experiment Station (WES). The study comprises part of 
Department of the Army Project No. P4A162784AT40, Task CO, Work 
Unit 026, Fixed-Facility Camouflage, Concealment, and Deception (CCD) 
Design & Evaluation Environment Technologies, which is sponsored by Head¬ 
quarters, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 

The report was prepared by Messrs. Sandy D. Bratcher and Douglas 
Rousell, Nichols Research Corporation, and Mr. Gerardo I. Velazquez, CCD 
Research Group (CCDRG), WES; under the direct supervision and assistance 
of Mr. Kenneth G. Hall, Chief, CCDRG, Structures Laboratory (SL), WES. 

The authors were also assisted by Messrs. Gene Barnett, Runn L. Gunn, 

Jerry L. Stringer, Nichols Research Corporation, and Mr. Bartley P. Durst and 
Ms. Eva J. Farmer, CCDRG. 

The study was conducted at WES during the period May 1991 to June 1992 
under the general supervision of Dr. John W. Keeley, Director, Environmental 
Laboratory (EL); Dr. Victor E. LaGarde HI, Chief, Environmental Systems 
Division (ESD), EL; and under the direct supervision of Mr. Hall. During the 
period June 1992 to July 1995, the study was conducted under the general 
supervision of Mr. Bryant Mather, Director, SL, Dr. Jimmy P. Balsara, Chief, 
Geomechanics and Explosion Effects Division, and Dr. Reed L. Mosher, Chief, 
Structural Mechanics Division, and under the direct supervision of Mr. Hall. 
The Technical Monitors were Mr. A1 Knoch, Headquarters, U.S. Army Corps 
of Engineers, and Mr. Bruce Walton, U.S. Army Engineer District, Omaha. 

During the preparation of this report. Director of WES was Dr. Robert W. 
Whalin. Commander was COL Bruce K. Howard, EN. 

This report should be cited as follows: 

Bratcher, S. D., Rousell, D. P., Velazquez, G. I. (1997). 

“Development of a Multispectral Signatures Database (MSD) for 
the Camouflage, Concealment, and Deception Design and Evalu¬ 
ation Environment (C2D2E2): Report 2-User’s Manual,” 



U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station, Vicksburg, 
MS. 


The contents of this report are not to be used for advertising, publication, 
or promotional purposes. Citation of trade ruimes does not constitute an 
official endorsement or approval of the use of such corrmercial products. 



1 Introduction 


The U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station (WES) 
Camouflage, Concealment, and Deception (CCD) Research Group provides 
CCD for fixed tactical assets. Worldwide Department of Defense assets 
include installations such as logistics bases, supply depots, and other per¬ 
manent and semimobile assets. As part of this mission, the CCD Research 
Group has been actively gathering multispectral imagery of fixed and semi¬ 
fixed facilities for several years. With this imagery there are groimd truth and 
physical data collected relating to the visual, near infrared, thermal, and radar 
bands. Similar data have been collected within other agencies and accumu¬ 
lated in existing Government databases. The Camouflage, Concealment, and 
Deception Design and Evaluation Envirorunent (C2D2E2) is being developed 
as a unique group of integrated software applications designed specifically to 
address this challenge. As part of this effort, WES has begun the development 
of a multispectral signatures database (MSD) to handle all the data available. 

CCD analysts and engineers defined data requirements (image attributes) 
and high-level operational requirements for this database to handle the great 
amount of information available at WES and other Government agencies. 
High-level operational requirements included: organizing and cataloging a 
large number of images, associating appropriate attribute data with each image, 
associating images of the same scene in different spectral bands, and retrieval 
of related images and their respective attribute data. Raima Data Manager 
(RDM) was used for the underlying Database Management System. The net¬ 
work technology provided by RDM was used to support complex relationships 
such as object signatures in a large number of scenes. These relationships are 
very inefficient and sometimes not configurable with typical relational 
technology. For image storage, a 24-bit color Tagged Image File Format was 
used due to the flexibility and wide support for this format. 

The MSD is hosted on a 486 IBM PC and has imdergone development in 
the ANSI C language. The network technology provided by RDM was used 
due to its support of complex relationships that are not efficiently represented 
with typical relational technology. For image storage, a 24-bit color Tagged 
Image File Format (TIFF) was used due to the flexibility and support for this 
format A single-user menu interface is provided for the management of the 
database. Some of the operational requirements that were defined for this user 
interface include: organizing and cataloging a large number of images; 


Chapter 1 Introduction 


1 



associating appropriate attribute, ground truth, and physical data with each 
image; associating images of the same scene in different spectral bands; and 
the ability to retrieve/display images and their respective data. 

This report summarizes the installation, data forms required and the proce¬ 
dures for collecting the data required for the population of the MSD. 


2 


Chapter 1 


Introduction 



2 Installation 


Hardware and Software Requirements 

The MSD software is hosted on a 486DX IBM-compatible PC with 
MS-DOS version 6.0 and 8 MB RAM. A VESA SVGA or a Paradise SVGA 
video card and a minimum of 4 MB of expanded memory is required only for 
image display. 

To run the MSD software, 600 KB hard disk space is required plus a mini- 
miun of 75 KB for each database created. The MSD source code and libraries 
needed for recompiling the MSD require an additional 2.2 MB hard disk space. 

The following software is also required ONLY to maintain or modify the 
MSD software; 

• Microsoft C version 6 (compiler). 

• Plink86 version 2.3 by Sage Software (used for overlay linker). 

• Raima Data Manager System in version 3.21 - Single user version for 
Microsoft C 6.0 (RDM library to link with MSD software). 

• db_QUERY version 2.21 (db_QUERY library to link with MSD 
software). 

• db_REVISE version 1.04 (db_REVISE utility to revise the database 
schema). 

NOTE: Only the Database Administrator should make changes to the 
database schema. Changes to the database schema will require corre¬ 
sponding changes to the MSD software!!! 

• Victor Image Processing Library version 2.2 by Catenary Systems 
(image display library to link with MSD software). 

• TLIB Version Control software version 4.12 by Burton Systems Soft¬ 
ware (for source code configuration). 


Chapter 2 Installation 


3 



To install the MSD software on another PC, an installation disk can be 
created by copying the following files from your MSD root directory onto a 
diskette: 


UI.EXE 

IMAGEDBS.DBD 


DB QUERY.DBD 


MSD System Executable 

MSD Data Dictionary. The environment vari¬ 
able DBDPATH is set by the MSD software to 
the MSD root directory to indicate where the 
data dictionary file for the MSD is located. 

db_QlJERY Temporary Sort Database Data 
Dictionary. The environment variable 
QBDPATH is set by the MSD software to the 
MSD root directory to indicate where the data 
dictionary file for the db_QUERY temporary 
sort database is located. 


PREPROC.EXE 


BROWSE.COM 


MSD Preprocessor. Stand-alone utility for 
formatting MSD data files before entry into 
MSD. 

File browser called from within MSD. 


To install, simply create an MSD root directory and copy the files from the 
diskette into your new directory. 


Configuration 

Because of the number of database files associated with the MSD, the file 
limit imposed by DOS must be increased. This limitation can be increased by 
setting “files=100” in your system configuration file (CONFIG.SYS). Reboot 
the system if you must edit the CONFIG.SYS file to adhere to this 
requirement. 


Invocation 

To invoke the MSD software, set the default directory to the MSD root 
directory and then enter “UI” at the DOS prompt as follows; 

c:\msd> UI 

NOTE: It is imperative that the system administrator make regular backups 
of database files and image files because of the possibility of database corrup¬ 
tion if the system malfunctions during MSD software execution. 


Chapter 2 Installation 



3 Using the MSD Software 


The following section describes the MSD user interface. 

Document Conventions 

“prompts”—^prompts are bolded and in double quotes 
menu commands—^menu commands arc bolded 


Description of the MSD Menu 

As depicted in Figure 1, each menu displayed in the MSD application con¬ 
sists of four functional areas (from top to bottom): the menu line, the prompt 
line, the data entry/display area, and the status display area. 

Selection Line The Selection Line displays user selections that navigate the 
user through the MSD application as selections are made. 
There are two methods available to the user for making 
selections. The first method is to use the left and right 
arrows keys. The arrow keys move through the available 
selections, highlighting the current selection. When the 
desired selection is highlighted, the “Enter” key may be 
pressed to initiate the selection. The second method is to 
enter a single character. Each available selection on the 
Selection Line contains one capital letter. The capital letter 
can be entered to go directly to that selection, making it the 
current selection. When the desired selection is highlighted, 
the “Enter” key may be pressed to initiate the selection. The 
two methods described for making user selections may be 
used interchangeably. Currently, the mouse cannot be used 
to make selections. When a selection is made, either a new 
Selection Line will be displayed or a prompt will appear. To 
abort a selection, the “Esc” key will frequently suffice, 
although sometimes a required data entry or “Enter” may be 
needed. 


Chapter 3 Using the MSD Software 



Prompt Line The Prompt Line is used as a message display area. On the 
I*iDmpt Line, a prompt may be displayed indicating the next 
required data entry to the user. Also the Prompt Line is used 
to display informational messages and error messages. 
Descriptions of error messages can be found in Section 5. 


Data Entry/ 
Data Display 
Area 


The Data Entiy/Display Area is used to collect data 
entry values and to display data values. During data 
entry, data items are displayed one at a time for which data 
entry is either required or optional. Data items that are dis¬ 
played with a preceding are data items for which data 
entry is required; data entry for other data items is optional. 


Status The Status Display Area lists the current User, the 

Display Area current Operation, and the Database (DB_FILE) currently in 
use. 


Initial MSD Menu 


When the MSD software is invoked, the initial MSD menu is displayed 
(Figure 2). 

The user is prompted to enter a valid username at the USER prompt in the 
Status Display Area. The usemamei/^assword function was not implemented 
due to memory and time constraints. The only valid username is “ccd” or 


Chapter 3 Using the MSD Software 











Figure 2. Initial MSD menu 


“CCD.” Next, the user is prompted to enter a password at the Prompt Line. 
The only valid password is “ccd” or “CCD.” 


Database Selection/Creation Menu 

After entering a valid username and password, the Database Selection/ 
Creation menu is displayed (Figure 3). 

The user must first select the MSD with which to work. Descriptions of 
the available commands follow. 

Open_DB This command may be selected to open an existing MSD that 
has already been created by the MSD application in a previ¬ 
ous session. The current directory path is displayed on the 
Selection Line. Available databases in the current directory 
are displayed in the Data Entry/Data Display Area. The 
following prompt is displayed on the Ih-ompt Line: “Select 
database to open or PgUp to enter new path.” The user 
may select one of the databases displayed in the current 
directory. Or the user may press the “Page Up” key to enter 
a different directory path and then select one of the databases 
displayed from the new directory. After a database is 
selected, the Database Conunand Selection Menu is 
displayed. 


Chapter 3 Using the MSD Software 




















Open_DB Create_DB eXit_DB 


Welcome to the USAE WES Multispeciral Signatures Database 




USER: ccd 

OPERATION: Open/Create DB files 

DB_FILE: 


Figure 3. Database selection/creation menu 


Create_DB This command may be selected to create a new MSD. A 

“path:” prompt is displayed on the Selection Line. The user 
may press “return” to accept the current path (although it is 
not displayed) or the user may enter a new path and then 
press “return.” The user is then prompted on the Selection 
Line to “Enter database filename < 8 characters or less>.” 
A database name should be entered on the Prompt Line in 
eight or less characters. The eight-character filename limit is 
a DOS limitation because flie database name wiU be created 
as a subdirectory with a “.DDD” extension. This subdirec¬ 
tory wiU be used to store all database files for this database. 

NOTE: There can be multiple MSD containing data col¬ 
lected from different data collection efforts. However, 
queries cannot be made across multiple databases. With this 
in mind, be careful in selecting how to partition your data 
into separate databases. Also note that in general the larger 
the database, the slower the response time when querying the 
database. 

eXit_DB This command may be selected to exit the MSD application 

and return to the DOS prompt. 


8 


Chapter 3 Using the MSD Software 





Database Command Selection Menu 


After the MSD is selected, the Database Command Selection menu is dis¬ 
played (Figure 4). 


Add Delete Query mOdlfy View eXit 



USER; ccd 

OPERATDN: Command Input 
DB FILE: TEST.DDD 


Figure 4. Database Command Selection Menu 

A database operation to perform should be selected. A description of the 

available database commands follow. 

Add The ADD command may be selected to add a new record to the 
current MSD. 

Delete The DELETE command may be selected to delete an existing 
record from the ciurent MSD. 

Query The QUERY command may be selected to query for all records of 
a particular record type. This query cannot be customized. 

modify The MODIFY command was not implemented due to memory and 
time constraints. 

View The VIEW command may be selected to view images that have 
been added to the view file, viewimgs.dat . Images are added to 
the view file during the Query command operation where the user 
is given the option to write image data to the view file. Therefore, 
the Query command would have to have been selected and at least 
one image added to the view file before selecting this View 
command. 


Chapter 3 Using the MSD Software 


9 










exit 


The EXIT command may be selected to close the current database 
and return to the Database Selection/Creation menu. 


Record Selection Menu 


upon selection of a database command (other than View or eXit), the 
Record Selection menu is displayed (Figure 5). 



Figure 5. Record selection menu 


DCE The Data Collection Effort (DCE) record type may be selected to 
perform one of the database maintenance fiinctions (Add, Delete, 
or Query) on a DCE record for the currently opened MSD 
database. 

Site The Site record type may be selected to perform a database 

maintenance operation on a Site record for the currently opened 
MSD. 

Scene The Scene record type may be selected to perforai a database 

maintenance function on a Scene record for the currently opened 
MSD. 

Images The Images record type may be selected to perform a database 
maintenance function on an Images record for the current MSD. 


Chapter 3 Using the MSD Software 




Object The Object record type is selected to perform a database main¬ 
tenance operation on an Object record for the currently opened 
MSD. 

Data The Data record command may be selected to perform a database 
maintenance function on a Data record for the currently opened 
MSD. Data records include Ground Truth Data (Meteorological or 
Calibration Panel Data files) and Physical Data (Chromatic, Gloss 
Meter, Radiometer, or Spectral Radiometer Data files). 


Adding a Record 

To add a record to the currently opened MSD, select the Add command 
from the Database Commands Menu. The user wiU then be taken to the 
Record Selection Menu. Select the appropriate record type for the record to be 
added to the current MSD and foUow the instructions below. 


Adding a Data Collection Effort Record 

Selecting DCE from the Record Selection Menu allows the user to add a 
new Data Collection Effort record to the current MSD. The MSD command 
interface will respond to this request by prompting the user to input data for 
each of the DCE fields. These input fields are shown below: 

*Data Collection Effort Name: 

Example: 21st TAACOM Conspicuity Analysis 
Date begun (YYYY/MM/DD): 

End date (YYYY/MM/DD): 

Note: Input fields denoted by (*) are required. The MSD interface will not 
allow the user to leave these input fields blank. All other input fields are 
optional. 

Once the <Enter> key is pressed in the End date field, the new Data Col¬ 
lection Record is entered into the current MSD, or an error message is dis¬ 
played on the Prompt/Message line upon encountering an error in adding the 
record. At any point prior to pressing <Enter> on the End date field, the user 
may abort the operation by hitting the <Esc> key. 


Adding a Site Record 

A new Site record may be added to the MSD by choosing Site from the 
Record Selection Menu. 

Since each Site record must be owned by a Data Collection Effort record, 
the user begins by selecting the appropriate Data Collection Effort to which the 


Chapter 3 Using the MSD Software 



new Site record will belong. Next, the user is given the option of selecting an 
existing Site Name or entering a new Name and Location for the Site to be 
added. The remaining Site fields, a one-line description of the Area of Inter¬ 
est, and the Date Begun and End Date, are entered, and the Site record is 
added to the currently opened database (or an error message is displayed on 
the Prompt/Message line if an error is encountered). 

The iiq)ut fields for a Site record are shown below: 

*Site Name: 

Example: Miesau Army Depot 
*Site Location: 

Example: Miesau, Germany 
*Enter a one-line description of Area of Interest: 

-> 

Example: Pomcus buildings 

Note: One Site may have one or more Areas of Interest. For example, 
the above Site (Miesau, Germany) may have a second Area of Interest, 
say, “Underground bunkers.” 

Date begun (YYYY/MM/DD): 

End date (YYYY/MM/DD): 

The user may abort the operation at any point before End Date is entered 
by pressing <ESC>. 


Adding a Scene Record 

To add a Scene record to the current MSD, select sCene from the Record 
Selection Menu. 

Any Scene record added to a database must have an owner Site record. 
The user may select this Site record either directly by Site Name or by first 
selecting a DCE and then a Site. Once the owner Site has been selected, the 
contents of the Scene record’s fields can be entered. These input fields are 
shown below: 

*Enter a one line Scene description: 

-> 

Example: Qam shelter w/o camouflage, 1,000 m 

*Date captured (YYYY/MM/DD): 

*Season captured: Spring Summer Fall Winter 

Image collection platform Latitude (degrees): 

Example: 30.0 

Image collection platform Longitude (degrees): 

Example: 30.0 

Image collection platfonn Altitude (meters): 

Example 1000.0 


12 


Chapter 3 Using the MSD Software 



Image collection platform Boresight Azimuth (degrees from magN or ~dir): 

Example: 230.0, or ~SW 

Pressing <Entei> at the last field adds the new Scene record to the MSD 
database. At any point prior to this, the user may abort the transaction by 
hitting the <Esc> key. Upon addition of a new Scene record, a success mes¬ 
sage wiU be displayed, or if an error is encountered, an error message will 
appear on the Prompt/Message line. 


Adding an Images Record 

A new Images record may be added to the database by selecting Images 
from the Record Selection Menu. Images introduced into an MSD must be in 
TIFF file format Each Images record must have an owner Scene record. The 
user may select the owner Scene by traversing the MSD hierarchy from DCE 
or Site down to Scene. Next, a list of available Images spectra is displayed, 
and the appropriate spectrum is selected. The MSD will allow at most one 
image of a particular spectrum to be associated with each Scene (i.e., one of 
each of the following: Visual, Infrared 3-5, Infrared 8-12, Near IR, and Low- 
light for a maximum of five Images per Scene). 

The data fields for each Images record are listed below: 

Available analog formats: 

Enter S in the first blank if Slide media is available - 

X if not 

Enter P in the second blank if Print media is available - 

X if not 

Enter V in the third blank if Video media is available - 
X if not 

Example: If Print and Video media is available, but Slide is not the user 
would enter: 

XP V 

Type of recording media: 

Example: Medium format 

Time captured (HH:MM:SS:FF): 

Example: 11:30:00:05 

(Time captured is 11:30am and 00 seconds, and frame is number is 5). 

*Destination volume: 

Example: IMAGEVOL 

(The volume name of the destination volume, which must be the LAST 

drive). 

*Image file name to add (fuU file spec) : 

Example: C:\CLAMSHEL\CLAM.TIF 

Reminder: Image must be in TIFF file format. 


Chapter 3 Using the MSD Software 



After a valid response is made to aU required fields, the new Images record 
is added to the MSD database and the image specified by the given file spec is 
moved to the destination volume. An error message will be displayed on the 
Prompt/Message line if an error is encountered during this transaction. At any 
point before the specification of the input image, the Add operation can be 
aborted by hitting the <Esc> key. 


Adding an Object Record 

New Object records are added by choosing Object from the Record Selec¬ 
tion Menu. 

Each Object added to an MSD database is linked to a Scene in that data¬ 
base through the Scene-Object Intereect record, which contains two fields: the 
Slant-range field and Look-angle field. 

The user may select the Object to be added to the selected Scene fi’om a list 
of available Objects (i.e.. Objects in the database which are not already in the 
Scene), or hit the <Page Up> key to enter a new Object. If a new Object is 
to be added, data for the Object is entered in the fields shown below: 

^Object class: User may select one of the following: 

Data Collection Activity 
Fixed Facility with Camouflage 
Fixed Facility without Camouflage 
Mobile Systems with Camouflage 
Mobile Systems without Camouflage 

*Object group: User may select from a list of available groups or enter a 
new group by hitting <Page Up> 

Example: Apache 

*Object Name: 

Example: Apache 1 (near treeline) 

Object Size (LxWxH in meters): 

Example: 3.6h x 7.6w x 24.4d 

*Slant range to Image Collection Platform(meters): 

Example: 750.0 

Object Latitude (degrees): 

Object Longitude (degrees): 

Object Altitude (meters): 

*Look angle from Image Collection Platforai (degrees): 

Example: 35.0 

If Object employs camouflage, the Object’s CCD information must also be 
entered: 


14 


Chapter 3 Using the MSD Software 




CCD Type: Select or <Page Up> to enter new type. 

Example: Net 

CCD Identifier: Select or <Page Up> to enter new ID. 

Example: TBE visual/thermal green 
Visual Properties: 

Example: Olive green 
Thermal Properties: 

Example: Ambient air flow 
Radar Properties: 

Example: Radar-scattering carbon filaments 
Other Properties: 

Otherwise, if the Object selected was an existing Object, the user need only 
specify the Slantrange and Look angle relative to the Image Collection Plat¬ 
form, which link the Object to the selected Scene record. 

When data entry is complete, the Object record is added to the currently 
opened MSD database, or an error message is displayed on the Message line if 
an error is encountered during the operation. The Add operation can be 
aborted at any point during data entry by hitting the <Esc> key. 


Adding Data Records 

Data records can be introduced into an MSD by selecting Data firom the 
Record Selection Menu. Data records are divided into two classes. Ground 
Truth Data, consisting of Meteorological and Calibration Panel Data, and Phys¬ 
ical Data, which includes Chromatic, Gloss Meter, Radiometer, and Spectral 
Radiometer Data records. Meteorological, Calibration Panel, and 
Radiometer/Thermistor Data records consist of text files containing microlog¬ 
ger data which must be formatted using the preprocessor utility included with 
the MSD. Spectral Radiometer data records consist of text files containing 
filenames of one or multiple such micrologger data files. Gloss Meter and 
Chromatic Data records consist of text files which can be created using the 
data entry option of the preprocessor utility, or with any text editor. See the 
documentation of preproc.exe. the preprocessor, for additional information on 
using this utility. 


Meteorological Data. Meteorological Data are generated by microloggers 
and must be formatted with preprocessor utility before being added to the 
MSD database. 

A Met Data record can be associated with one or more Site records. The 
Add Met Data submenu consists of two options, one for adding a new Met 
record and one for associating an existing record with an additional Site. 

Calibration Panel Data. Micrologger Data; must be formatted with pre¬ 
processor before entry into MSD. 


Chapter 3 Using the MSD Software 



A Cal Panel record can be associated with one or more Site and Scene 
records. The Add Cal Panel submenu contains three options, one for adding a 
new Cal Panel record, one for associating an existing record with an additional 
Site, and a third for associating the record with a Scene record. 

Chromatic Data. Chromatic Data are contained in a text file created with 
the preprocessor data entry option or text editor from chromatic measurements 
gathered during data collection effort. 

A Chromatic record will have an owner Site record, selected when the 
record is introduced into the MSD. In addition, the Chromo record may be 
associated with 0 or more Object records. The Add Chromo submenu will 
have two options, one for adding a new Chromo record and one for associating 
an existing record with an additional Object. 

Gloss Meter Data. A Gloss Meter Data file is a text file created with 
preprocessor data entry option or text editor from gloss measurements taken 
during data collection. 

A Gloss Meter record will be owned by exactly one Site record, which is 
selected when the record is introduced into the MSD. In addition, the Gloss 
record may be associated with 0 or more Object records. The Add Gloss 
submenu will have two options, one for adding a new Gloss Meter record, and 
a second for linking an existing record to an additional Object. 

Radiometer/Thermistor Data. Rad/Therm Data are generated by micro¬ 
loggers. Rad/Therm files must be properly formatted using the preprocessor 
utility before being added to the MSD. 

A Radiometer/Thermistor record will be owned by exactly one Site record, 
which is selected when the record is added to the database. In addition, a 
Rad/Therm record can be owned by 0 or 1 Object records. The Add Rad/ 
Therni submenu will have two options, one for adding a new Rad/Therm Data 
record, and a second for associating an existing Rad/Therm record with an 
Object record. 

Spectral Radiometer Data. Spectrad Data is contained in multiple files 
generated by microloggers. The file that is stored in the MSD is actually a file 
containing the list of filenames in which the Spectral Radiometer data resides. 
This file list should be generated by an ordinary text editor, or via the prepro¬ 
cessor data entry option. 

A Spectral Radiometer record will be owned by exactly one Site record, 
which is selected when the record is added to the database. In addition, a 
Spectral record can be associated with 0 or more Object records. The Add 
Spectrad submenu has two options, one for adding a new Spectrad record, and 
a second for associating an existing record with a selected Object record. 


Chapter 3 Using the MSD Software 



Deleting a Record 


To delete a record from the currently opened MSD, select the Delete com¬ 
mand from the Database Commands Menu. Next, select the appropriate record 
type from the Record Selection Menu and follow the instructions below. 


Deleting a Data Collection Effort Record 

Selecting DCE from the Record Selection Menu wiU allow the user to 
delete a Data Collection Effort record from the currently opened MSD data¬ 
base. Select the appropriate DCE name and type ’D’ at the prompt to delete 
the record. 


Deleting a Site Record 

Select Site from the Record Selection Menu to delete a Site record from the 
current MSD. Next, select the appropriate record by Site Name, and type ’D’ 
to delete the record from the database. 


Deleting a Scene Record 

Choose the sCene option to delete a Scene from the MSD. The user may 
select the Scene record to be deleted either by DCE or by Site Name. The 
Scene record is selected by first indicating the owner DCE and Site records 
and finally selecting the Scene record to be deleted from the database. To 
carry out the operation, type ’D’ at the prompt. 


Deieting an images Record 

Select Images to delete an Images record from the MSD. To indicate the 
Images record to be deleted, traverse the database hierarchy by selecting the 
owner DCE, Site, and Scene records, and choose the appropriate Images record 
by spectrum. 

Before completing the delete operation, the user may display the selected 
Image by typing ’D’ at the display prompt. Next, to carry out the delete oper¬ 
ation, hit ’D’ at the delete prompt. The user will have the option to (C)opy 
the Image file to a new filename before deleting, or to perform (D)elete only. 


Deleting an Object Record 

Select Object to delete an Object record from the MSD. As above, an 
Object record may be selected by traversing the currently opened database 
hierarchy indicating the owner DCE, Site, and Scene records, and then 


Chapter 3 Using the MSD Software 



choosing the Object to be deleted. To carry out the operation, hit ’D’ or any 
other key to abort the transaction. 


Deleting a Data Record 

Qioose the Data option to delete Data records from the MSD. Ground 
Truth and Physical Data records may be selected by record Description. The 
user wiU be given the option to (C)opy the Data file to a new filename before 
deleting the file from the MSD, or to perform the (D)elete operation only. 


Querying a Record 

To display a record from the currently opened MSD database, select the 
Query command from the Database Commands Menu. Next, select the appro¬ 
priate record type from the Record Selection Menu and follow the instructions 
below. 


Querying a Data Collection Effort Record 

To display the contents of a Data Collection Effort record, simply select the 
appropriate record by DCE Name. 


Querying a Site Record 

The contents of a Site record may be displayed by selecting the appropriate 
record from a list of Site Names in the currently opened MSD. 

In addition, the user may browse any Data files associated with the selected 
site by hitting the <F1> key at the prompt and choosing the file to be browsed. 


Querying a Scene Record 

Scene record can be queried by DCE or by Site. After choosing the owner 
DCE and Site records, select the Scene to be displayed and hit <Enter> to 
display its contents. The user may also browse any Data files associated with 
this Scene by hitting <F1> at the prompt. 


18 


Chapter 3 Using ttie MSD Software 




Querying an Images Record 


An Images record can be queried by DCE, by Site, or by indicating Objects 
contained in the Image. To query an Images record by Object(s), select one or 
more Objects horn a list of available Objects by using the <Space> key. The 
user win then be presented with a list of Scenes containing these Objects, and 
upon selection of the Scene, the available image spectrum types for the Scene 
are presented. Selecting the desired spectrum will allow the user to view the 
corresponding Image. 

Alternatively, the user may choose an Image to be displayed by first select¬ 
ing the owner DCE, Site, and Scene records and then indicating the appropri¬ 
ate spectrum. 

The user will also have the option to write the currently selected Image to 
the MSD View file for quick retrieval using the View function discussed 
below. 


Querying an Object Record 

An Object record can be queried by traversing the database hierarchy, 
selecting the owner DCE, Site, and Scene records. Next, select the Object 
record to be displayed. Data records associated with the selected Object can 
be browsed by hitting the <F1> function key. 


Querying a Data Record 

Performing a Query operation on Physical and Ground Truth Data records 
allows the user to browse the text files containing the data measurements. 
After selecting the appropriate file and entering the browser, the cursor keys 
can be used to navigate through the textfile, and the <Esc> key to exit the 
browser back into the MSD command interface. 


Viewing an Image 

Selecting the View command from the Database Commands Menu enables 
the user to quickly view Images which have been introduced into the MSD 
View file viewimgs.dat. Images are written to this file through the Query 
Images function described above, and can subsequently be selected by Scene 
Name and Spectmm type for display through this View function. 

In addition, the View function allows a selected Image to be written to an 
output file, so that the Image can be exported (in TIFF format) from the MSD. 


Chapter 3 Using the MSD Software 



Preprocessor Utility 


The file preproc.exe is a preprocessing utility for formatting physical and 
ground truth data for entry into the MSD. All Meteorological, Calibration 
Panel, and Radiometer/Thermistor data files must first be formatted by this 
utility prior to introduction into the MSD. In addition, the preprocessor also 
includes data entry routines for creating Chromatic and Gloss Meter data files 
and to start the preprocessor, type PREPROC.EXE from the DOS command 
prompt. 


Main Menu 

a. Concatenate multiple files into one. This function accepts a list of 
input filenames and an output filename and creates an output file con¬ 
sisting of the contents of the input files concatenated together. The 
user selects from the file list the files to be concatenated. Each file 
selected appears in the list at the top of the screen. When aU desired 
files are selected, hitting <ESC> will prompt the user for the name of 
the output file. This file will contain the concatenated contents of the 
selected input files. 

b. Generate micrologger file with common Ids. AU micrologger files 
(including meteorological, calibration panel, and radiometer/thermistor 
files) must be processed using this option before being introduced into 
an MSD. Raw micrologger data files consist of multiple rows of values 
separated by commas. The first three values in each row are record ID, 
Julian day, and time fields, respectively. The remaining fields wiU vary 
depending upon the micrologger file type. 

The purpose of this option is to generate a file which consists of only those 
micrologger records with a selected record ID. In addition, this function 
includes a header with each output file consisting of the number of rows, the 
number of columns, and the names of each field in the record, as defined by 
the user. 

To process a micrologger file, select an input file from the file list and 
press <ENTER>. Next, hit <ESC>. The user wiU then be asked for an output 
filename. After a valid filename is entered, the program wiU then sort the 
records and display a list of aU record ID's contained in the input file, prompt¬ 
ing the user for a record ID. Finally, the user is then asked to specify the 
name of the fields present in the file (starting with field 4, as fields 1-3 are the 
same for aU file types). 

c. Create gloss meter! chromatid spectral radiometer datafile. This option 
brings up the data entry menu, to be described below. 

d. Quit. Exit preprocessor and return to DOS. 


20 


Chapter 3 Using the MSD Software 



Data Entry Menu 

The purpose of the Data Entry function is to allow the user to enter data 
from gloss meter, chromatic, and spectral radiometer measurements into a 
formatted text file, which can then be introduced into the MSD. By selecting 
options 1-3 from this menu, the user will be prompted for an output filename 
and the date on which the data collection was performed. Next, the data input 
form for the selected record type will appear on the screen. 

a. Create Gloss Meter Data File. Gloss meter data consists of from one 
to four separate values for both 20-deg and 60-deg measurements, along 
with a description of items from which gloss meter data was collected 
(e.g., “oUve green fiom rotor blade of Apache”). 

The user enters the data into the appropriate input fields, and hits <F1> to 
accept the current record, which is then written to the output file. When aU 
data has been entered, «iF10> is hit to indicate the end of the input, and the 
output file is closed. Once an output file is closed, it cannot be reopened for 
editing through the preprocessor (although, because it is an ordinary text file, it 
can be modified with any text editor). 

IMPORTANT: Be sure to press <ENTER> after entering a value into each 
input field! If <ENTER> is not pressed, the contents of an input field will not 
be accepted. In addition, an empty description field will not be accepted by 
the data entry utility. If <F1> is pressed and nothing happens, check the 
description field and make sure it is not empty and that input was terminated 
by hitting <ENTER>. Lastly, any numerical fields left blank will be assumed 
to contain the value 0.0. 

b. Create Chromatic Data File. Chromatic data consist of a description 
and three numerical values, (Y x y) for each data sample. After enter¬ 
ing the data into the appropriate fields, <F1> writes the data to the 
output file and readies the input fields for the next sample, and <F10> 
indicates the end of the input data. Again, only a nonempty description 
will be accepted, and an unspecified value for Y, x, or y will be 
assumed 0. 

c. Create Spectral Radiometer Data File. Spectral radiometer data from a 
data collection will be contained in multiple files, one per sample. The 
file that is entered into an MSD will consist of a list of these filenames, 
along with their corresponding descriptions. The filename and descrip¬ 
tion of each spectral radiometer sample, along with the sensor head 
type with which the measurements were made (UV for ultraviolet and 
WB for wide-band) are written to the output file by way of this data 
entry form. 


d. Exit/Previous Menu. Return to main menu. 


Chapter 3 Using the MSD Software 



File Browser 


To display the contents of physical and ground truth data files, the MSD 
software makes calls to the file browser browse.com which is located in the 
MSD root directory. The user can navigate a data file from within the browser 
with the cursor keys and the <Page Up>, <Page Down>, <Home>, and <End> 
keys. To exit the browser and return to the MSD command interface, hit the 
<Esc> key. 


Chapter 3 Using the MSD Software 



4 File Descriptions 


Below are descriptions of each of the files that may be created during exe¬ 
cution of the MSD software. 

The following file is created in the MSD root directory upon initiation of 
the MSD software: 

dbs_errs.log Log file to which all database errors are written 

This log file is created by the MSD software if it does not already exist If 
it does exist, error messages are appended to the end of the file; therefore, the 
size of this file will continue to increase as error messages are written to it. 
This file should be deleted on a regular basis to control its size. 

The environment variables, DBTAF and DBLOG, are set by the MSD 
software to the MSD toot directory so that the transaction activity file and the 
database log file, respectively, will be created in that directory. These files are 
created upon initiation of the MSD software because transaction processing is 
used by the MSD software: 

vista.taf Transaction activity file used for automatic database recovery 

dbqueryJog Database log file used for automatic database recovery 

These transaction processing files are created and maintained by Raima 
Data Manager. These files should not be deleted! Transaction processing is 
used in the MSD software to maintain the logical consistency of the database 
by allowing multiple, related updates to be grouped together and then written 
to the database as a unit at the end of the transaction. Either all of the updates 
will be made to the database successfully or none of the updates wiU be made. 
For example, if an OBJECT with CCD is added to the database and the 
OBJECT record is created successfully but an error occurs creating the CCD 
record, then the transaction will be aborted and neither of the records wiU be 
created. This process leaves the database in a consistent state. 

The environment variable QDFPATH is set by the MSD software to the 
MSD root directory so that the data and key files for the db_QUERY tempo¬ 
rary sort database (DB_QUERY.DBD) will be created in that directory. These 
files are created when an MSD is opened: 


Chapter 4 File Descriptions 



db_query.qsd 

db_query.qsk 

db_query.qgd 

db_query.qgk 


Temporary sort data file 
Temporary sort key file 
Temporary group data file 
Temporary group key file 


These database files are temporary; they are created by Raima Data Man¬ 
ager when a database is opened, and they are deleted when the database is 
closed. However, if an RDM error occurs, these files may not be deleted by 
RDM. In this case, the user can delete the files. 

The following subdirectory file is created in the directory specified by the 
user at run-time when a new database is created: 


<database_name>.DDD 

For example, if a database named “APDI” was created, the following sub¬ 
directory would be created in the MSD root directory (e.g., C:\MSD); 

C:\MSD\APDI.DDD\ 


There can be multiple MSD databases containing data collected from dif¬ 
ferent Data Collection Efforts. However, the MSD software does NOT allow 
queries to be made across multiple databases. With this in mind, be carefiil in 
selecting how to partition your data into separate databases. Also note that in 
general, the larger the database, the slower the response time when querying 
the database. 


The environment variable DBFPATH is set by the MSD software to the 
database subdirectory so that all of the database data and key files defined in 
the MSD DDL specification wiU be created in that subdirectory when a new 
database is created. Those data and key files are listed below: 


ddceftrtdat 

dsite.dat 

dscene.dat 

diinages.dat 

dscenobj.dat 

dobjectdat 

dccd.dat 

dmetdata.dat 

dcalpanLdat 

dgIoss.dat 

dspectrd.dat 

dchromo.dat 

dradthm.dat 

cd_site.dat 

cd_objcl.dat 

cd_objgr.dat 

cd_ccdtp.dat 


cd_ccdid.dat 

cd_spect.dat 

kdcename.key 

kinisc.key 

ksite.key 

kobjclas.key 

kobjgrp.key 

kobjname.key 

kccdtype.key 

kccdid.key 

kscndesc.key 

kdatecap.key 

kseason.key 

ksceneid.key 

kmetdesc.key 

kcaldesc.key 

kchrdesc.key 


24 


Chapter 4 File Descriptions 




kglsdesc.key 

kspcdesc.key 

kraddesakey 

The following file is created in the MSD root directory upon addition of the 
first SCENE record to any MSD: 

iinagedbs.sys Binary file used to store imique ID’s associated with 
SCENE'S (across all MSD databases) 

When a new Scene is added to an MSD, a unique “Scene ID” is retrieved 
from this file and the Scene ID in this file is incremented by 1. This Scene ID 
is later used to create unique image filenames when IMAGES associated with 
a SCENE are added to an MSD. The “Scene ID” is not stored as data within 
an MSD, because it is used to store UNIQUE ID's for SCENE records across 
“aU” MSD. This file should NOT be deleted. 

The following file is created in the Images directory upon addition of an 
IMAGES record to an MSD: 

<image_filename>.tif Image file in TIFF format associated with an 

IMAGES record in an MSD. 

This file is copied fiom the input image file entered by the user to the 
Images directory. This file should NOT be deleted. 

The following “View file” is created in the MSD root directory the first 
time a user chooses to write Image data for an Image being queried to this 
view file: 

viewimgs.dat Binary file containing a list of Images that can be viewed 
(displayed) using the VIEW operation. 

This file contains a scene description, the spectrum in which the Image was 
captured, the volume where the image is stored, and the image filename for 
each image written to it. This file can be deleted anytime. 

The following file is created in an MSD subdirectory upon addition of a 
MET_DATA record to an MSD: 

METnnnnn.MET Text file containing Meteorological Data associated 
with a MET_DATA record in an MSD. 

This file is copied from the input Met Data filename entered by the user to 
the database subdirectory (e.g., \APDI.DDD) and assigned a unique filename 
for that database. The nnnnn portion of the filename is a 5-digit number 
(beginning with 00001) unique to all MET DATA files in that database sub¬ 
directory. Met Data files are created from microloggers and MUST be 
formatted properly using the preprocessor provided before being added to an 


Chapter 4 File Descriptions 


MSD. Details on using the preprocessor can be found in the text file 
PREPROC.DOC in the PREPROC directory. This file should NOT be deleted. 

The following file is created in an MSD subdirectory upon addition of a 
CAL_PANEL_DATA record to an MSD: 

CALnnnnn.CAL Text file containing Calibration Panel Data associated 
with a CAL_PANEL_DATA record in an MSD. 

This file is copied from the input Cal Panel Data filename entered by the 
user to the database subdirectory (e.g., \APDI.DDD) and assigned a unique 
filename for that database. The nnnnn portion of the filename is a five-digit 
number (beginning with (XXX)1) unique to all CAL PANEL DATA files in that 
database subdirectory. Calibration Panel Data files are created fiom microlog¬ 
gers and MUST be formatted properly using the preprocessor provided before 
being added to an MSD database. Details on using the preprocessor can be 
found in the text file PREPROC.DOC in the PREPROC directory. NOTE that 
a CAL_PANEL_DATA file should contain the data for aU 3 cal_panels (low, 
medium, and high emissivity) if they were aU used. This file should NOT be 
deleted. 

The following file is created in an MSD subdirectory upon addition of a 
RADIOMETER/THERMISTOR DATA (RAD_THERM_DATA) record to an 
MSD database: 

RADnnnnn.RAD Text file containing Radiometer/Thermistor Data asso¬ 
ciated with a RAD_THERM_DATA record in an MSD 
database. 

This file is copied from the input RadyTheim Data filename entered by the 
user to the database subdirectory (e.g., \APDI.DDD) and assigned a unique 
filename for that database. The nnnnn portion of the filename is a five-digit 
number (beginning with 00001) unique to aU RADIOMETER/THERMISTOR 
DATA files in that database subdirectory. Radiometer/Thermistor Data files 
are created from microloggers and MUST be formatted properly using the 
preprocessor provided before being added to an MSD database. Details on 
using the preprocessor can be found in the text file PREPROC.DOC in the 
PREPROC directory. This file should NOT be deleted. 

The foUowing file is created in an MSD subdirectory upon addition of a 
GLOSS_DATA record to an MSD: 

GLOnnnnn.GLO Text file containing Gloss Meter Data associated with a 
GLOSS_DATA record in an MSD. 

This file is copied from the input Gloss Data filename entered by the user 
to the database subdirectory (e.g., \APDI.DDD) and assigned a unique filename 
for that database. The nnnnn portion of the filename is a five-digit number 
(beginning with 00001) unique to aU GLOSS DATA files in that database 


26 


Chapter 4 File Descriptions 



subdirectory. Gloss Meter Data ares recorded to Gloss Meter forms during 
data collection and MUST be formatted properly using the preprocessor pro¬ 
vided before being added to an MSD database. Details on using the prepro¬ 
cessor can be found in the text file PREPROC.DOC in the PREPROC 
directory. This file should NOT be deleted. 

The following file is created in an MSD database subdirectory upon addi¬ 
tion of a SPECTRAL RADIOMETER DATA (SPECTRAD_DATA) record to 
an MSD: 

SPEnnnnn.SPE Text file containing Spectral Radiometer Data file¬ 
names associated with a SPECTRAD_DATA record in 
an MSD. 

This file is copied fiom the input Spectral Radiometer Data filename 
entered by the user to the database subdirectory (e.g., \APDI.DDD) and 
assigned a unique filename for that database. The nnnnn portion of the file¬ 
name is a five-digit number (beginning with (XXX) 1) unique to all SPECTRAL 
RADIOMETER DATA files in that database subdirectory. Spectral Radio¬ 
meter Data are written to files whose filenames MUST be entered using the 
preprocessor provided before being added to an MSD database. Details on 
using the preprocessor can be found in the text file PREPROC.DOC in the 
PREPROC directory. This file should NOT be deleted. 

The following file is created in an MSD subdirectory upon addition of a 
CHROMATIC DATA (CHROMO_DATA) record to an MSD database: 

CHRnnnnn.CHR Text file containing Chromatic Data associated with a 
CHROMO_DATA record in an MSD. 

This file is copied from the input Chromo Data filename entered by the 
user to the database subdirectory (e.g., \APDI.DDD) and assigned a rmique 
filename for that database. The nnnnn portion of the filename is a five-digit 
number (beginning with 00001) unique to aU CHROMO DATA files in that 
database subdirectory. Chromo Data are written to printouts and MUST be 
formatted properly using the preprocessor provided before being added to an 
MSD. Details on using the preprocessor can be found in the text file 
PREPROC.DOC in the PREPROC directory. This file should NOT be deleted. 


Chapter 4 File Descriptions 



5 Error Messages 


The following section contains a description of aU error messages that may 
be displayed by the MSD software. 

101: Error initializing database files. 

Raima has returned an error code while attempting to initialize the 
database files when creating a new MSD. See the error log file 
dbs_errs.log in the MSD root directory for a description of the 
error. 

102: Error opening database files...See System Administrator. 

Raima has returned an error message in attempting to open MSD. 
See error log file dbs_errs.log for a description of the error. 

103: Error creating database directory...See System Administrator. 

MKDIR command failed in attempting to create database directory 
(.DDD) in the current data path. 

104: Error copying file *- access denied. 

DOS returned ACCESS DENIED error in attempting a file copy 
operation on an Image or Physical/Ground truth data file. 

105: Error creating destination file — directory full. 

DOS reports an attempt to copy Image or Physical/Ground Truth 
data file into full directory. 

106: Error...insufficient space. 

Insufficient space on destination disk to create Image or Physical/ 
Ground Truth data file. 

107: Error finding drive. 

Images are stored on the last drive (which should always be the 
optical drive). 

108: Incorrect volume inserted...check volume name. 

The volume name of the last drive does not match the volume 
name stored for the Images record. 


Chapter 5 Error Messages 




109: Error creating (record type) filename. 

Attempt to create Image or Hiysical/Ground Truth Data file has 
failed. 

110: Path does not exist. 

Attempt to set MSD data path to a path name which does not 
exist, or to copy a file to a nonexistent destination path. 

Ill: Error changing the file protection on file. 

DOS function chmod reports an error changing file permissions. 

112: Error cop)dng file -- invalid file handle. 

DOS reports an invalid file handle in performing file copy 
operation. 

113: Error copying file. 

DOS reports an error copying file. 

114: Error deleting file - read-only file. 

Attempt to delete a file without write permission. 

115: Error deleting file. 

DOS reports an error deleting file. 

116: Error -- file not found. 

If this error is encountered while attempting to add an new Image 
or Ground/Physical Data file, check that the file exists and the file 
specification was entered correctly. If the error occurs during a 
Query, however, it could be serious! It could mean that an Image 
or Data file previously added to a database were inadvertently 
deleted. 

117: Error - file already exists. 

A file of the same name already exists in the target directory. 

118: Error - too many open file handles. 

The maximum number of file handles has been reached. See DOS 
and Microsoft C 6.0 documentation for increasing the number of 
available file handles. 

119: Error creating file. 

DOS reports an error creating file. 

120: Error opening source file. 

DOS reports an error opening source file. 

121: Error...invalid TIFF file. 

Image file is not in TIFF format, or is corrupted. 


Chapter 5 Error Messages 



122: VESA mode 0x101 is not supported. 

Host computer does not support graphics mode required by MSD 
for image display. 

123: Error creating error log file. 

DOS reports an error creating the error log file, dbs_errs.log , 
which is located in the MSD root directory. 

124: Error getting Scene ID from System file...See System 

Administrator. 

The MSD System file, imagedbs.sys, is created in the MSD root 
directory upon addition of first Scene record of ANY MSD data¬ 
base. This file is used to store unique Scene ID’S across all data¬ 
bases. (For a more detailed description of this file, see Chapter 4 
of this Document, File Descriptions). 

125: Error opening/creating View file — viewimgs.dat. 

DOS reports an error opening or creating viewimgs.dat, which is 
located in the MSD root directory. 

126: Error reading fiom View file. 

DOS reports an error reading from the View file, viewimgs.dat. 

127: Error writing to View file. 

DOS reports an error writing to the Image View file, 
viewimgs.dat. 

128: NO Images data in the View file — Select QUERY command first. 

MSD View file, viewimgs.dat, does not contain any images. To 
add an image to the View file, execute a Query function on the 
image. Upon completion of a Query, the user wiU be allowed to 
add the image to the View file. 

201: Error beginning new transaction to (add/delete) record. 

Raima reports an error beginning a new transactioa 

202: Error ending transaction...record not (added/deleted). 

Raima reports an error during an add/delete operation which 
causes the transaction to be aborted. See error log file, 
dbs_errs.log, for possible cause. Also, check available space on 
destination disk where MSD files reside. 

301: Error adding record ~ duplicate key. 

Attempt to add two records to an MSD with a duplicate key field. 

302: Error adding record to database...See system administrator. 

Raima reports an error adding record to database. See error log 
file, dbs_enrs.log, for possible cause. 


30 


Chapter 5 Error Messages 




303: Error associating (record type 1) record with (record type 2). 

Raima reports an error forming link between (record type 1) and 
(record type 2). Check MSD error log file, dbs_errs.log, for pos¬ 
sible cause. 

304: Selected (record type 1) record already associated with (record 

type 2). 

Record of type 1 can be associated with at most one record of 
type 2. For example, a Radtherm data record can be owned by at 
most one Object record. An attempt to associate a Radtherm 
record which is already owned by an Object with another Object 
will result in the above error message. 

305: Error creating analog data name. 

Error creating analog data name for Images record. Check MSD 
error log file, dbs_errs.log, for possible cause. 

401: No (record type) record found. 

No records were found in the MSD of the selected record type. 

402: Error getting (record type) record. 

Raima returned error getting record. See error log file, 
dbs_errs.log. 

403: Error finding first (record type 1) record for (record type 2) record. 

Raima system error returned from d_findfm in attempting to find 
the first member record of (record type 1). See MSD error log 
file, dbs_errs.log, for possible cause. 

404: Error executing file browser. 

DOS call systemO returns an error trying to execute file browser. 

405: Error checking (record type 1) record for owner (record type 2) 

record. 

Raima system error checking record for owner. See MSD error 
log file, dbs_errs.log, for possible cause. 

406: Error setting owner of (Set). 

Raima system error setting owner of set. See error log file 
dbs_errs.log. 

407: Error getting owner records...See System Administrator. 

Raima returns error getting owner records of current record. See 
MSD error log file, dbs_errs.log. 

408: No (record type 1) record owned by this (record type 2) record. 

In the database hierarchy, the current record has no member 
records of the specified record type. 


Chapter 5 Error Messages 



409: 

Error checking for member (record type) records. 

Raima returns error checking for member records of (record type) 
for current record. 

410: 

Error getting count of members of (Set). 

Raima function d_members0 returns error getting cormt of current 
set members. Check MSD error log file, dbs_erTs.log. 

411: 

No available spectrums for this Scene. 

Attempt to add an Images record to a Scene when there already 
exists an Image record for each valid spectrum type. 

412: 

Error getting available spectrums for this Scene. 

MSD was unable to retrieve available spectrums for current Scene. 

Check MSD error log file, dbs_erTs.log. 

501: 

Error deleting (record type) record. 

Raima encountered an error deleting record. Check MSD error log 
file, dbs_erTs.log. 

502: 

Record cannot be deleted...delete member (record type) record(s) 
first. 

User attempted to delete a DCE, Site, or Scene record which has 
member records. These member records must be deleted before 
the record can be deleted. For example, before a DCE record can 
be deleted, all member Site records must first be deleted. Simi¬ 
larly, member Scenes must be deleted from a Site record before 
the Site record can itself be deleted, and member Images before a 

Scene can be deleted. 

503: 

Error discormecting (record type 1) record fiom (record type 2) 
record. 

Raima reports an error discormecting link between (record type 1) 
record and (record type 2) record. Check MSD error log file for 
cause. 

601: 

Error allocating memory for (record type) records...See System 
Administrator. 

DOS reports an error allocating memory for the indicated record 
type. Likely caused by insufficient memory available for record 
list 

602: 

Not enough memory to execute file browser. 

The MSD software invokes the stand-alone file browser by way of 
the DOS system call. If this error is encountered, try rebooting 
computer with TSR programs removed from boot configuration. 

701: 

No valid codelist values...See System Administrator. 

Check MSD error log file. 

32 

Chapter 5 Error Messages 




702: No available codeUst values...See System Administrator. 

Check MSD error log file. 

703: Error adding (codelist record type) codelist record -- exceeds 

65,535 records. 

There can be a maximum of 65,535 codelist records in any code- 
list Further attempts to add a new record to the codelist will 
result in the above error. 

704: No corresponding codelist records...See System Administrator. 

No corresponding codelist record for given code number. Check 
MSD error log file for possible cause. 

705: Error getting codelist values. 

Raima reports error retrieving codelist values. Check MSD error 
log file. 

706: Invalid spectrum codenum. 

Codenum does not correspond to one of the predefined Image 
spectra. 


Chapter 5 Error Messages 



6 Data Forms 


Data Foims have been provided to aid in gathering data both during and 
after the Data Collection Effort Following is a complete list of data forms 
provided. These forms can be found in Appoidix A. Appendix B describes 
the data collection equipment requirements for this effort 

a. Data Collection Effort. 

b. Area of Interest 

c. Scene/lmages. 

d. Object 

e. Scene/Objects. 

/. Video Data. 

g. Print^Slide Data. 

h. Print/Slide Gps Data. 

i. Meteorological Data. 

j. Calibration Panel Data. 

k. Radiometer & Thermistor Data. 

/. Gloss Meter Data. 

m. Spectral Radiometer Data. 

n. Chromatic Data. 


34 


Chapter 6 Data Forms 




Actions to Complete BEFORE the Data Collection 
Effort 


NOTE: For all data collection efforts, all team members should be familiar 
with how to complete the Data Forms in which they will be responsible 
BEFORE the Data Collection Effort begins. 

a. Data Collection Effort. The Data Collection Effort name should be 
decided as soon as possible because it wiU be used throughout the data 
collection reporting process. The begin and end dates, however, may 
not yet be known and therefore may be completed later. 

b. Area of Interest. If the Areas of Interest / Sites in which data are going 
to be collected are kiwwn, then complete this form(s). “DCE Area #”s 
should be assigned to each Area of Interest; these numbers will be used 
throughout the data collection reporting process. Areas of Interest may 
be partitioned in different ways; that is, one Site may correlate to one 
Area of Interest or there may be two or more Areas of Interest within a 
Site. It is important that during the Data Collection Effort, the “DCE 
Area #”s associated with the Areas of Interest be used consistently on 
all Data Forms. The begin and end dates, however, may not yet be 
known and therefore may be completed later. 

c. Scenellmages. No actions required. 

d. Object. No action required. 

e. Scene/Objects. No action required. 

/. Video Data. Label as many video tapes (both VHS and 8mm if neces¬ 
sary) as may be needed with a temporary label as follows (depending 
upon the spectrum in which the data of the tape will be captured): 

VISUAL #<#> or 
IR3-5#<#> or 
IRS-12 #<#> or 
LowLight #<#> 

The label should appear on both the tape and the tape case and should be 
designated as an “Original.” The number portion of the label name should be 
duplicated for the same data in different spectrums; however, the number 
should be unique (beginning with “1” for sets of data that are not the same). 
For example, if video data were collected from 10:00 to 12:00 in three spec¬ 
trums, there would be three tapes labeled “VISUAL #1,” “IR3-5 #1,” and 
“IR8-12 #1;” then if video data were collected from 2:00 to 4:00 in two spec¬ 
trums, there would be two tapes labeled “VISUAL #2” and “IR8-12 #2.” AH 
other data associated with these video tapes (e.g., date, times, etc.) wiU be 


Chapter 6 Data Forms 


35 



logged on the Video Data form and transferred to permanoit labels after the 
Data Collection Effort is complete. 

g. PrintlSlide Data. Label as many rolls of film (both 35nun and medium 
format) as may be needed as follows: 

PRINT/SLIDE DATA 
ROLL #<#> 

The number portion of the label should be a unique number beginning with 
“1” (e.g., “ROLL #1,” “ROLL #2,” etc.). Only one roll of film will be placed 
in each baggie during data collection. All other data associated with these 
rolls of film (date, spectrum, etc.) will be logged on the PRINT / SLIDE 
DATA form during the Data CoUection Effort. 

h. Print / Slide Gps Data. No action required. 

i. Meteorological Data. Label as many diskettes as may be needed to 
store meteorological data files with a label as follows: 

METEOROLOGICAL DATA for 
<Data Collection Effort Name> 

<month> <year> 

j. Calibration Panel Data. Label as many diskettes as may be needed to 
store calibration panel data files with a label as follows: 

CALIBRATION PANEL DATA for 
<Data Collection Effort Name> 

<month> <year> 

k. Radiometer & Thermistor Data. Label as many diskettes as may be 
needed to store radiometer and thermistor data files with a label as 
follows: 

RADIOMETER & THERMISTOR DATA for 
<Data CoUection Effort Name> 

<month> <year> 

/. Gloss Meter Data. No action required. 

m. Spectral Radiometer Data. Label as foUows: 

SPECTRAL RADIOMETER DATA for 
<Data CoUection Effort Name> 

Label as many spectral radiometer tapes as may be needed to store spectral 
radiometer data as foUows: 


36 


Chapter 6 Data Forms 




TAPE#<#> 


The number portion of the label should be a unique number beginning with 
“1” (e.g., “TAPE #1,” “TAPE #2 ” etc.). All other data associated with these 
spectral radiometer tapes (date, descriptions of readings, etc.) will be logged on 
the SPECTRAL RADIOMETER DATA form during the Data Collection 
Effort. 


n. Chromatic Data. Label folders for as many printouts of chromatic data 
as may be needed as follows: 

CHROMATIC DATA 
BAG#<#> 

The number portion of the label should be a unique number beginning with 
“1” (e.g., “BAG #1,” “BAG #2,” etc.). Only one chromatic data printout will 
be placed in each folder during data collection. AH other data associated with 
these chromatic data printouts (date, descriptions of readings, etc.) will be 
logged on the CHROMATIC DATA form during the Data Collection Effort 


Actions to Complete DURING the Data Collection 
Effort 

NOTE: Each data form has a Data Fonn Description to aid in gathering 
the correct information for the form. 

a. Data Collection Effort. Update this form by adding or updating it with 
the correct begin and end dates, if necessary. 

b. Area of Interest. If this form has been completed for all Areas of Inter¬ 
est, then update it with the correct begin and end dates, if necessary. If 
not, then complete this form as the Areas of Interest become known. 
“DCE Area #'s” should be assigned to each Area of Interest as soon as 
possible, because these numbers will also be used throughout the data 
collection reporting process. Areas of Interest may be partitioned in 
different ways; that is, one Site may correlate to one Area of Interest or 
there may be two or more Areas of Interest within a Site. It is impor¬ 
tant that during the Data Collection Effort, the “DCE Area #'s” asso¬ 
ciated with the Areas of Interest be used consistently on aU Data 
Forms. 

c. Scene/Images. This form cannot be completed until AFTER the Data 
Collection Effort when specific scenes are selected from the data set for 
entry into the MSD. 


Chapter 6 Data Forms 


37 



d. Object. This form should be completed for each Object for which data 
(including video, print/slide, physical, ground truth data) are collected 
at each Area of Interest. 

e. Scene/Objects. This form carmot be completed until AFTER the Data 
Collection Effort when specific scenes are selected from the data set for 
entry into the MSD database. 

/. Video Data. Verify that clocks on aU recording devices are in sync. 
Verify that the collection of GPS data is woridng properly. Use tapes 
that are labeled ^propriately in the different recorders; that is, tapes 
used consecutively should have the same label #’s. For example, if the 
tape used in the Visual recorder is labeled “VISUAL #1,” then the tape 
used in the IR 8-12 recorder should be labeled “IR8-12 #1.” Complete 
this form before the video data are actually collected, with the excep¬ 
tion of the ‘TO TIME” column which may be logged after the video 
data are collected. A separate form should be completed for each Area 
of Interest. 

g. PrintlSlide Data. After each roll of print/slide film is taken, place the 
roll of film into one of the prelabeled “PRINT/SLIDE DATA” con¬ 
tainers. Note the ROLL # on the container. Complete this form. As 
an extra precaution, the roll # could be also copied to the film canister. 
Also note instructions on PRINT/SLIDE GPS DATA form. A separate 
form should be completed for each Area of Interest. 

h. PrintlSlide Gps Data. Complete this form when taking print/slide data 
for correlation with GPS positional information. It is pertinent that this 
form be completed for each exposure on each roll of film in which 
GPS positional information is necessary. GPS positional information is 
optional data that can be stored with an image in the Multispectral 
Signatures Database; however, GPS positional information is 
REQUIRED for accurate image analysis. A separate form should be 
completed for each Area of Interest. 

i. Meteorological Data. Verify operation of meteorological data micro¬ 
logger station and sensors. After Met Data have been collected and are 
ready to be downloaded to the PC, create a download file with a unique 
filename, (which will be used on this form). Then download the Met 
Data from the micrologger to the PC. After data are downloaded to the 
PC, complete this form. Copy the Met Data file to the diskette prela¬ 
beled for Met Data. 

j. Calibration Panel Data. Verify operation of calibration panel data 
micrologger station and sensors. After Cal Panel Data have been col¬ 
lected and are ready to be downloaded to the PC, create a download 
file with a unique filename (which will be used on this form). Then 
download the Cal Panel Data from the micrologger to the PC. If 
another calibration panel data micrologger station is logging data for 


38 


Chapter 6 Data Forms 



other calibration panels for the same Area of Interest, the cal panel data 
from the other cal panel data micrologger station will also be down¬ 
loaded to the PC. In this case, when more than one micrologger is 
used for multiple cal panels in the same Area of Interest, be sure to 
assign UNIQUE filenames to both cal panel data files. After data are 
downloaded to the PC, complete this form. If another calibration panel 
data micrologger station is logging data for other calibration panels for 
the same Area of Interest, note the micrologger set # on this form and 
complete a separate Cal Panel Data form for that micrologger set #. 
Copy the Cal Panel Data file(s) to the diskette prelabeled for Cal Panel 
Data. 

k. Radiometer & Thermistor Data. Verify operation of radiometer/ 

thermistor micrologger station and sensors. Complete this form before 
collecting the rad/therm data with the exception of the “download file¬ 
name.” After the Rad/Therm Data have been collected and are ready to 
be downloaded to the PC, create a download file with a unique file¬ 
name (which will be used on this form). Then download the Rad/ 
Therm Data from the micrologger to the PC. After data are down¬ 
loaded to the PC, update this form with the name of the download file 
created. Copy the Rad/Therm Data file to the diskette prelabeled for 
Rad/Therm Data. A separate form should be completed for each Area 
of Interest. 

/. Gloss Meter Data. Complete this form while collecting the Gloss 
Meter data. A separate form should be completed for each Area of 
Interest. 

m. Spectral Radiometer Data. Insert a blank spectral radiometer tape on 
Side A and collect data for the Wide-Band Sensor. Note the tape # 
used on this form (Side A). (Complete this form (Side A). Insert the 
same spectral radiometer tape on Side B and collect data for the Ultra¬ 
violet Sensor. Note the tape # used on this form (Side B). Complete 
this form (Side B). A separate form should be completed for each Area 
of Interest. 

n. Chromatic Data. Reset Chromameter so that sample numbers will 
begin at 1. Complete this form while collecting the chromameter data 
with the exception of the Bag Label #. A separate form should be 
completed for each Area of Interest. 


Actions to Complete AFTER the Data Collection 
Effort 

General Notes: 

Put all forms together in a master binder. Label this binder as follows: 


Chapter 6 Data Forms 


39 



MASTER BINDER FOR 
<Data_CoUeclion_Effort_Name> 

<Begin_Date_of_DCE> - <End_Date_of_DCE> 

Also place site and area maps for all Sites in which data were collected. 

NOTE: If there are a lot of data, data can be separated by Sites and multi¬ 
ple binders could be used for each Site; in this case, the Site Name should be 
included after the Data Collection Effort Name on the binder label as follows: 

MASTER BINDER FOR 
<Data_Collection_Effort_Name> 

<Site_Name> 

<Begin_Date_of_Site> - <End_Date_of_Site> 

The Master Binder should include a Table of Contents and index labels 
should be used to separate each section. 

a. Data Collection Effort. No processing required. Form(s) have been 
completed. 

b. Area of Interest. No processing required. Form(s) have been com¬ 
pleted. 

c. Scenetlmages. No processing required. Form(s) to be completed later. 

d. Object. No processing required. Fonn(s) have been completed. 

e. Scene/Objects. No processing required. Form(s) to be completed later. 

/. Video Data. Form(s) have been completed. The temporary labels on 
both the video tapes AND the tape cases should be replaced by perma¬ 
nent labels formatted as follows: 

ORIGINAL 

<Data_Collection_Effort_Name> 

<Site_Names> 

(in order in which video data were collected) 
<Date>/<Begin_Time> - <End_Time> 

<Spectrum> 

Organize video tapes of the same area-of-intererest but different spectrums 
together. Place video tapes in location designated for this Data Collection 
Effort. 

g. PrintlSlide Data. Fonn(s) have been completed. Film must be sent for 
processing. Before film is sent out for processing: 

Slides: 


40 


Chapter 6 Data Forms 




Text can be added to the slide frame during process¬ 
ing (must the same text for all esqwsures in a roll). 
The text should include: 1) site name, 2) date 
(month, year), and 3) loU#. 


Prints: 

Instmctions should include -> Prints processed 
MUST be returned such that all exposures from 
each roll of film are together, and the roll # MUST 
be denoted on each set of exposures. 

When film is returned from processing: 

SUdes: 

Place slides in slide binder deeves for inclusion in 
the SLIDES binder described below. 

Prints: 

The following information should be placed on the 
back of each print: 

Roll# 

Site Name 
Date 

- Put all prints/slides in one or more binders, separated by 
Site Name. Label each binder as follows: 

PRINTS <and/oi> SLIDES FOR 
<Data_Collection_Effort_Name> 

<Site_Name> 

<Begin_Date_of_Site> - <End_Date_of_Site> 

BOOK n OF n 

If more than one binder is needed per Site, label the binder # (BOOK n OF n). 

h. PrintlSlide Gps Data. No processing required. Form(s) have 
been completed. 

i. Meteorological Data. Form(s) have been completed. Place 
diskettes in diskette binder sleeves and insert into appropriate 
location in the Master Binder. 

j. Calibration Panel Data. Form(s) have been completed. Place 
diskettes in diskette binder sleeves and insert into appropriate 
location in the Master Binder. 

k. Radiometer & Thermistor Data. Form(s) have been com¬ 
pleted. Place diskettes in diskette binder sleeves and insert 
into impropriate location in the Master Binder. 

/. Gloss Meter Data. Form(s) have been completed. 


Chapter 6 Data Forms 


41 



m. Spectral Radiometer Data. Form(s) have been completed. 
Place spectral radiometer tapes in location designated for this 
Data Collection Effort. 

n. Chromatic Data. Form(s) have been completed. Place 
chromameter printouts in binder sleeve and insert into appro¬ 
priate location in the Master Binder. 


Actions to Complete BEFORE Data Entry into the 
MSD 


• Select scenes from prints/slides or video to include in an MSD 
database. 

• Digitize selected scenes into TIFF 24-bit RGB uncompressed 
format 

• Also digitize (scan) all or portion of the site map for each Site 
(to clarify references to boresight azimuths in SCENE records). 
A “Site Map” image should be added to the MSD for each Site 
of each Data Collection Effort 

• All data fonns should have already been completed with the 
exception of the following two. Complete these forms now for 
each SCENE selected: 

a. Scene/Images 

b. Scene/Objects 

• Data files should be created using the preprocessor, 
PREPROC.EXE, provided with the MSD. 

• Any graphs that are generated from the ground and physical 
data or other miscellaneous printouts should be stored in the 
Master Binder. 

• When an image is added to an MSD, an analog data name is 
assigned to that Scene. If the image was digitized from a print 
or slide, label the print or slide in the PRINTS/ SLIDES binder 
with the analog data name that was assigned to it. This analog 
data name can be used to find the print or slide later. 

NOTE: Replace print/slides or video in their appropriate 

locations after they have been digitized and labeled 
with the appropriate analog data name. 


Chapter 6 Data Forms 



7 Formatting Data Files 


Before entry into the MSD, all physical and ground truth data files must be 
in proper fonnat. MET, CAL PANEL, and RADIOMETER/THERMISTOR 
data files are created from microloggers and must be formatted using the pre¬ 
processor utility PREPROC.EXE. CHROMO and GLOSS METER data files 
are hand recorded on the data forms provided and must be saved to text files 
via the preprocessor data entry routines or a text editor before being introduced 
into the database. SPECTRAL RADIOMETER data are recorded on tapes and 
should be written to PC files, one file per sample, whose filenames must be 
entered via the preprocessor data entry function or a text editor. The resulting 
file of these filenames will be entered into the database. 

Details on using the preprocessor can be found in the text file 
PREPROC.DOC in the PREPROC directory. 


Chapter 7 Formatting Data Files 



8 Analog Data Format 


An analog data name is assigned by the MSD software and stored in the 
database for each image that is added to the database. This name designates 
what types of analog data are available and the location of that data. Analog 
data are captured from different types of media and produced in the forms of 
slides, prints, and/or video. This analog data name can be useful in locating 
images (both analog and digital) that have been added to an MSD database. 
The analog data name consists of a 30-character field as denoted below; 

<scenejd> -SPV-YYYYMMDD - <dbs_name> 


For example: 

00000035-XXV-19921006-REFORG92 
00000026-XPX-19910815-APDI91 

The table below describes the format of the analog data name on a colunm- 
by-column basis: 


Columns 

Description 

1 -8 

Scene ID (unique number assigned to each scene) 

9 

Hyphen Separator 

10 

S if a 9ide exists for this image; X, othenivise 

11 

P if a£rint exists for this image; X, othenvise 

12 

V is this image can be found in a Video; X, otherwise 

13 

Hyphen Separator 

14-21 

The date this image was captured (YYYYMMDD) 

22 

Hyphen Separator 

23-30 

MSD name where image was added 


44 


Chapter 8 Analog Data Format 






There are several uses of the analog data name as described below: 

a. From the MSD, the analog data name could be used to identify what 
forms of analog data exist for a particular image (using SPV portion of 
the analog data name) and to identify the binder that contains the asso¬ 
ciated analog data (using other information stored in the database about 
a particular image such as the Data Collection Effort Name, the Site 
Name, and the Date; binders wiU be labeled accordingly). 

b. Given a print or slide that has been tagged with the appropriate analog 
data name, one could find the corresponding image in the image data¬ 
base (using the Database Name portion of the analog data name to 
know which database to query; then using the Data Collection Effort 
name, the Site Name, and the Date from the label of the binder that the 
slide or print was associated with to narrow down the query; then using 
either the complete analog data name to find the specific IMAGES 
record or using just the scene_id portion of the analog data name to 
find the associated SCENE record and all corresponding IMAGES for 
that SCENE). 

c. The analog data name could also be used to at least narrow the search 
of where to replace a slide or print that has been taken from its binder 
(using the date and matching the analog data name on the print or slide 
to an empty slot in a binder with that same analog data name). 


Chapter 8 Analog Data Format 



9 Micrologger Setup 


The microloggers used by the WES CCD team have different setups 
depending upon the type of data to be collected. There are four different types 
of data collected by the microloggers: (a) Weather Station (Meteorological) 
Data: (b) Calibration Panel Data; (c) Radiometer Data; and (d) Thermistor 
Data. Appendix B describes all the components of the data collection package 
by manufacturer. Following are wiring diagrams for setting up the microlog¬ 
gers based upon the type of data to be collected. 


Micrologger Setup for Weather Station Data 


Air Temperature and RH Probe Wiring Diagrams (Model 207) - 


Micrologger to Plug 

Micrologger Connection 

5-Pin Plug Location 

Wire Color 

2 Low 

A 

Red 

Excitation 2 (lower) 

B 

Black 

2 Ground 

C 

Orange 

2 Hi 

D 

White 

Excitation 2 Ground 

E 

Blue 


Air Temperature and RH Probe 

Air Temp, and RH Probe Connection 

5-Pin Plug Location 

Wire Color 

Temp 

A 

Red 

Excitation 

B 

Black 

Analog Ground 

C 

Purple 

RH 

D 

White 

Ground 

E 

Clear 


Chapter 9 Micrologger Setup 





Rain Bucket Wiring Diagrams - 


Microiogger to Piug 

Microloggar Connection 

2-Pin Plug Location 

Wire Color 

Pulse 2 Ground 

A 

Red 

Pulse 2 Input 

B 

Black 


Rain Bucket to Piug 

Rain Bucket Connection 

2-Pin Piug Location 

Wire Color 

Ground 

A 

White 

Pulse Input 

B 

Black 


Soiar Pyranometer Wiring Diagrams - 


Microiogger to Piug 

Microiogger Connection 

3-Pin Plug Location 

Wire Color 

1 Hi 

A 

Red 

1 Ground 

B 

Black 

1 Ground 

C 

White 


Soiar Pyranometer to Piug 

Solar Pyranometer Connection 

3-Pin Plug Location 

Wire Color 

Hi 

A 

Red 

Ground 

B 

Black 

Ground 

C 

Clear 


R. M. Young Wind Sentry Set Wiring Diagrams - 


Microiogger to Plug (Anemometer) 

Microiogger Connection 

3-Pin Plug Location 

Wire Color 

1 Pulse Input 

A 

Black 

1 Pulse Ground 

B 

Orange 

12v Ground (front panel) 

C 

White 


Chapter 9 Micrologger Setup 





Anemometer to Plug 

AiMmometer Coniwclion 

3-Pin Plug Location 

Wire Color 

Pulse 

A 

Black 

Pulse Ground 

B 

Clear 

Earth Ground 

C 

White 


Micrologger to Plug (Wind Vane) 

Micrologger Connection 

4-Pin Plug Location 

Wire Color 

1 Low 

A 

Red 

Excitation 1 (lower) 

B 

Black 

12v Ground (lower) 

C 

Orange 

1 Ground 

D 

White 


Wind Vane to Plug 

Wind Vane Connection 

4-^n Plug Location 

Wire Color 

Hi or Low 

A 

Red 

Excitation 

B 

Black 

Ground 

C 

White 

Shield (Ground) 

D 

Clear 


Micrologger Setup for Calibration Panel Data 


Calibration Panel Wiring Diagram - 


Micrologger to Plug (Plugs directly into cal panel) 

I Micrologger Connection 

2-Pin nug Location 

Wire Color 

I Hi or Low (1-8) 

Small Copper Pin 

Black 

Hi or Low (1-8) Ground 

Large Silver Pin 

Clear 


Chapter 9 Micrologger Setup 












































































Micrologger Setup for Thermistor Data 

Thermistor Wiring Diagrams (Modei 107 Temperature Probe) - 


Microiogger to Piug 

Microloggar Connection 

3-Pin Plug Location 

Wire Color 

Hi or Low (1-8) 

A 

Red 

Negative Ext Battery 

B 

Black 

Hi or Low (1-8) Ground 

C 

Clear or White 


Thermistor to Piug 

Thermistor Connection 

3-Pin Plug Location 

Wire Color 

Hi 

A 

Red 

Excitation 

B 

Black 

Ground 

C 

Clear and Purple 


Soiar Pyranometer Wiring Diagrams 


Microiogger to Piug 

Microiogger Connection 

3-Pin Piug Location 

Wire Color 

1 Hi 

A 

Red 

1 Ground 

B 

Black 

1 Ground 

C 

White 


Soiar Pyranometer to Piug 

Solar Pyranometer Connection 

3-Pin Piug Location 

Wire Color 

Hi 

A 

Red 

Ground 

B 

Black 

Ground 

C 

Clear 


Chapter 9 Micrologger Setup 






10 Summary 


Design and development of the MSD in PC environment have been 
completed. The MODIFY command was not implemented due to memory 
constraints in the PC environment. There is a known memory error in the 
Victor image display library in which the operation of one of the display 
functions is in conflict to its stated operation. This error causes the MSD 
software to report a Victor library error allocating memory when attempting to 
display an image. This error usually occurs only after several successive exe¬ 
cutions of the image display function. An attempt to resolve this eiror was 
made by contacting Cantenary System’s Customer Support, but no resolution 
to the problem was identified at the release of this report. This problem was 
resolved in the version of the MSD ported to the Silicon Graphics environ¬ 
ment, which stiU under development 

The data collection effort described in this report is a compilation of field 
tested methodology used by the CCD Research Group over the last 10 years. 
Some of the equipment described are highly customized versions of commer¬ 
cially available hardware. Data from different sources may require reformating 
prior to input into the MSD. 


Chapter 10 Summary 



11 References 


Campbell Scientific Inc. (1990). 21XL operator manual. Logan, UT. 

Catenary Systems. (1992). Victor Library r^erence manual. St. Louis, MO. 

Everest Interscience Inc. (1990). Model 4000A infrared temperature trans¬ 
ducer manual. Fullerton, CA. 

Labsphere Inc. (1990). Reflectance Technologies - r^ectance calibration 
standards. North Sutton, NH. 

LI-COR Inc. (1986). U-COR radiation sensors. Lincoln, NE. 

Microsoft Corporation, (1990). Microsoft C reference manual, version 6.0. 
Redmond, WA. 

Minolta Corporation. (1989). Chroma Meter incident operation manual. 
Ramsey, NJ. 

Raima Corporation. (1991). DBjyiSTA reference manual, version 3.2.1. 
Bellevue, WA. 

_. (1991a). DB VISTA user’s guide, version 3.2.1. Bellevue, WA. 

_. (1991b). DB_QUERY user’s guide, version 3.2.1. Bellevue, 

WA. 


_. (1991c). DB_REV1SE user’s guide, version 3.2.1. Bellevue, 

WA. 

Tracer GIE Corporation. (1990). Instruction Manual for RST-7601 Resolution 
Target. Provo, UT. 


52 




Appendix A 
MSD Data Forms 


Appendix A MSO Data Forms 



Data Collection Effort 


From 


To 


Appendix A MSO Data Forms 



Data Collection Effort 
Data Form Description 


Fonn Description : 

Complete this form for each Data Collection Effort. 


Field Descriptions : 

Data Collection Effort: Denotes the name of the Data Collection Effort; for 

example, “21st TAACOM Conspicuity Analysis.” 
This name should be unique for each Data Collec¬ 
tion Effort. 

From Date: Denotes the first day that data were collected for 

this Data Collection Effort. 

To Date: Denotes the last day that data were collected for 

this Data Collection Effort. 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 



AREA(S) OF INTEREST 


Data Collection Effort Name : 

DCE Area # _ 

Site Name _ 

Site Location _ 

Area of Interest 


Begin Date _ End Date : 

Notes ; _ 


DCE Area # 
Site Name 
Site Location 
Area of Interest 


Begin Date _ End Date: 

Notes : _ 



A4 


Appendx A MSD Data Forms 



Area of Interest 
Data Form Description 


Form Description : 


Complete this form for each Area of Interest within a Data Collection 
Effort. 


Field Descriptions : 


DCE Area #: A unique number used to identify each Area of 

Interest. This number must be unique within a 
Data Collection Effort. 


Site Name: Denotes the name of the Site where this Area of 

Interest is located; for example, “Miesau Army 
Depot” 

Site Location: Denotes the location of the Site; for example, 

“Miesau, Germany.” 

Area of Interest: Description of the Area of Interest for a particular 
Data Collection Effort. 


NOTE: One Site may have one or more Areas of 
Interest. For example, the site, “Miesau Army 
Depot” may have two Areas of Interest, “Pomcus 
buildings” and “Underground bunkers.” 

NOTE: The maximum length of this field is 80 
characters. 


Begin Date: Denotes the first day that data were collected at 

this Area of Interest 


End Date: Denotes the last day that data were collected at this 

Area of Interest Note that the begin and end dates 
should be inclusive of the begin and end dates 
specified for the Data Collection Effort for which 
this Area of Interest belongs. 

Notes: Any miscellaneous notes that further describe the 

Area of Interest 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 



DCE Area # 


SCENE / IMAGES 

Scene Description : _ 


Date Captured : __ 

Season : Spring Summer Fall Winter 

Image Collection Platform 

Latitude : _ 

Longitude : _ 

Altitude : 


Boresight Azimuth 


Images Associated with this Scene 


IMAGE 

SPECTRUMS 

IMAGE 

AVAILABLE 

FOR Tms 

SCENE? 

(Y/N) 

AVAIL 

MEDI/i 

S 

.ABLE 

L 

P 

4 

V 

RECORDING 

MEDIA 

TIME 

CAPTURED 

IMAGE 

FILENAME 

VISUAL 



■ 





IR3-5 



■ 





1R8-12 



■ 








■ 





LOW-LIGHT 



■ 






A6 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 



















Scene / Images 
Data Form Description 


Form Descriotion: 


Complete this form for 

each Scene and its associated Images within a Data Collection Effort. 

Field Descriptions: 


DCE Area #: 

Number that was assigned to the Area of Interest (on the Area of Interest Data Form) to 
which the Scene is associated. 

Scene Description: 

Description of the Scene. 

Date Captured: 

Denotes the date that this Scene was captured. 

Season: 

Denotes the season that this Scene was captured. 

Circle one. 

Image Collection Platform 

Latitude: 

Latitude of the Image Collection Platform. 

Longitude: 

Longitude of the Image Collection Platform. 

Altitude: 

Altitude of the Image Collection Platform. 

Boresight Azimuth: 

Boresight Azimuth of the Image Collection Platform. 

Images Associated with this Scene 

Image Available for this 

Scene? (Y/N): For each available Image spectrum, enter “Y” (Yes) if an image was captured for this 

Scene in the specified spectrum; enter “N” (No) otherwise. 

Available Media: 

For each Image file associated with this Scene, check “S” if a Slide is available of this 
Image; check “P” if a Print is available of this Image; check “V” if Video is available 
containing this Image. 

Recording Media: 

For each Image file associated with this Scene, indicate the type of recording media 
used to capture this Image in this spectrum; for example, “VHS video,” “8mm video,” 
“35mm print or slide,” “Medium Format slide,” etc. 

Time Captured: 

Time that this Image was captured, in the form HH:MM:SS:FF, where FF denotes the 
frame number. 

Image Filename: 

Full file specification of the Image file associated with this Scene in the specified spec¬ 
trum. NOTE that this Image file MUST be in TIFF format. 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 


A7 



Object Class 
Object Group 
Object Name 


DCA 


Object Size : 

Object Latitude : 

Object Longitude : 

Object Altitude : 

If an object has CCD applied — 
CCD Type : 

CCD Identifier : 

Visual Properties ; 

Thermal Properties : 

Radar Properties : _ 

Other Properties : _ 


A8 


DCE Area # 


OBJECT 

FFWIC FFWOC MSWIC MSWOC 


H X_W X_L (in Meters) 



Appendix A MSD Data Forms 





Object 

Data Form Description 


Form Etescription : 

Complete this form for each Object (target) for which associated data will be collected. 


Field Descrit?tions : 
DCE Area #: 

Object Class: 


Object Group: 
Object Name: 


Object Size: 
Object Latitude: 
Object Longitude: 


Number that was assigned to the Area of Interest (on the Area of Interest Data Form) 
where this Object is located. 

Denotes the class in which this Object can be classified. Circle one of the available 
options: 

1) Data Collection Activity (DCA) 

2) Fixed Facility With Camouflage (FFWIC) 

3) Fixed Facility WithOut Camouflage (FFWOC) 

4) Mobile Systems With Camouflage (MSWIC) 

5) Mobile Systems WithOut Camouflage (MSWOC) 

Denotes the group in which this Object can be classified. Groups are user-definable; 
examples are “pomcus warehouse,” “hemtt tanker,” “apache,” etc. 

Denotes the unique name/description for this Object. Note that a target with CCD has a 
different Object Name than that of the same target without CCD because there would be 
different sets of data associated with that target with and without CCD. Example Object 
Names are “building 1(X)1 with net,” “building 1001 without net,” “apache 1 (near tree¬ 
line),” etc. 

Size of the object (height x width x length in meters); for example, “3.6h x 7.6w x 24.4d.’ 
Latitude of the approximate center of the Object. 

Longitude of the approximate center of the Object. 


Object Altitude: Altitude of the approximate center of the Object. 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 


A9 



SCENE / OBJECTS 


DCE Area #: 


Scene Description : 




Object Name 
Slantrange 
Locric Angle 


Object Name 
Slantrange 
Look Angle 


Object Name 
Slantrange 
Look Angle 


Object Name 
Slantrange 
Look Angle 


A10 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 






Scene / Objects 
Data Form Description 


Form Description : 

Complete this form for Object(s) within a Scene. 


Field Descriptions: 
DCE Area #: 

Scene Description; 
Object Name; 
Slantrange; 

Look Angle ; 


Number that was assigned to the Area of Interest (on the Area of Interest Data Form) to 
which the Scene is associated. 

Description of the Scene (on the SCENE / IMAGES Form) 

Unique name of the Object (on the OBJECT Form) contained in this Scene. 

Distance from the Image Collection Platform to the specified Object. 

Angle formed by the line fi'om the Image Collection Platform to the specified Object and 
the line from the Image Collection Platform parallel to the ground. 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 


A11 



VIDEO DATA 


DCE Area #: 



Time 


Video Tape Label # 

Format 

Date 







(check one) 


From 

To 

Visual 

1 IR3-5 

IR8-12 

LowLight 

1 8mm 

VHS 1 

sn4 \ 

1400 

1600 

m 

1 

m 



Description: Apaches mFARP 





1 

rirz 




__ i 


Description: || 

1 

II 



1 


Description: || 

1 

1 






Description: | 

1 1 

■ I 



1 


Description: | 

1 1 

I 



1 


Description: | 

1 

1 



1 


Description: |j 

1 1 

1 



_ 1 


Description: || 

1 1 

1 



1 


Description: | 

1 1 

1 



1 



Description: 


A12 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 


























































Video Data 

Data Form Description 


Form Description : 

Complete this form for all Video Data collected at an Area of Interest. 


Field Descriptions : 

Date: 

Time: 


Date that data were recorded on the specified video tape. 


Begin and End times that data were recorded on the specified video tape; for example, 
fi'om 1200 to 1400. 


Video Tape Label #: Number labeled on the video t^)e(s) in which data were recorded at the specified date 

and time. The label # should be denoted on this form for each spectrum of data that 
were collected. This label number should be the same for the same video data recorded 
in different spectrums (at the same date and time). For example, if the same video data 
were collected in the Visual and IR 8-12 spectrums, then the video tapes used to record 
the data must have the same label # (e.g., “VISUAL #1” and “IR8-12 #1”). 

If data were not captured for one of the available spectrums, then leave the box for that 
spectrum blank. 


Format: Format of video data; check either “8mm” or “VHS.” 

Description: Description of video data collected at that date and time. 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 


A13 



PRINT / SLIDE DATA 


DCE Area #; 


Date 

Roll 

# 

For 

(check 

35inm 

mat 

one) 

Med 

Fmt 

# 

Exp 

Spectrun 
(check on< 

Visual 

n 

J) 

Near 

M 

(chec 

Print 

edia 
k one) 

SUde 

B&W 

Color 

IR 

sn4 

m 


— 

24 



X 


DescripUon: Apaches on FARP 

■HI 











Description: || 


I 







II Description: || 

I I 








Description: | 




__ _ 





Description: | 




i 

I 



I 


Description: || 


I 

_ 



I 



Description: || 



_ 

J 


1 


Description: || 

I f 

I 

r I 


1 


Description: 

czu 


_ 

I 


1 



Description: 


A14 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 




























































































Print / Slide Data 
Data Form Description 


Form Description : 

Complete this form for all Print / Slide Data collected at an Area of Interest. 

NOTE: The PRINT / SLIDE GPS DATA form must also be completed for each exposure on each roll of film 
in which GPS positional information is necessary. GPS positional information is optional data that can be 
stored with an image in the Multispectral Signatures Database; however, GPS positional information is required 
for accurate image analysis. 


Field Descriptions : 

Date: Date that data were taken on the specified roll #. 

Roll #: Roll number associated with print/slide (labeled on baggie). 

Format: Check appropriate format, “35mm” or “Med Fmt” (medium format). 

# Exp: Number of exposures on roll of film. 

Spectrum: Check appropriate spectrum, “Visual Black and White,” “Visual Color,” or “Near IR.’ 

Media: Check appropriate media, “Print” or “Slide.” 

Description: Description of print/slide data on that roll of film. 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 


A15 



PRINT / SLIDE GPS DATA 


DCE Area # 


Roll# 


Exposure # 


GPS Time 


A16 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 



Print/Slide GPS Data 
Data Form Description 



Complete this form when taking still imagery for correlation with GPS positional information. It is 
pertinent that this form be completed for each exposure on each roll of film in which GPS positional 
information is necessary. GPS coordinates information is optional data that can be stored with an 
image in the Multispectral Signatures Database; however, GPS positional information is REQUIRED 
for accurate image analysis. 



DCE Area #: Number that was assigned to the Area of Interest (on the Data Collection Effort data 
form) in which these prints/slides are being taken. 

Roll #: A unique number assigned to each roll of film (on the Print / Slide data form) for 

the Data Collection Effort from which the roll of exposed film can be identified and 
referenced. 


Exposure #: Exposure number on the specified roll of film for which the GPS time will be 

logged. 

GPS Time: GPS time at which the exposure on the specified roll of film was taken. This GPS 

time will act as reference to a corresponding GPS position stored on other recording 
media. 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 


A17 



METEOROLOGICAL DATA 


DCE Area #(s) 


Date 

Micrologger Set # : 
Filename : 


A18 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 



Meteorological Data 
Data Form Description 


Form Description : 

Complete this form when setting up, moving, or downloading data from each Meteorological data Micrologger. 


Field Descriptions : 
DCE Area #(s): 

Date: 

Micrologger Set #: 
Filename: 


Numberfs) that were assigned to the Areas of Interest (on the Area of Interest Data 
Form) for which this met station data will be used. 

Denotes the day the micrologger was set up, moved, or data were downloaded. 

Denotes which Meteorological micrologger this is; for example, “MET-1.” 

Unique filename denoting the file in which the data logged by the micrologger were 
downloaded. 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 


A19 



CALIBRATION PANEL DATA 


DCE Area #(s) 


Date :_ 

Micrologger Set # :_ 

Filename :_ 

Associated Micrologger Set #: 
(if applicable) 


A20 


Appendx A MSD Data Forms 



Calibration Panel Data 
Data Form Description 


Fonn Description : 

Complete this form when setting up, moving, or downloading data from each Calibration Panel Data Micro¬ 
logger. 


Field Descriptions : 

DCE Area #(s): Number(s) that were assigned to the Areas of Interest (on the Area of Interest Data 

Form) for which this calibration panel data will be used. 


Date: 

Micrologger Set #: 
Filename: 


Denotes the day the micrologger was set up, moved, or data were downloaded. 

Denotes which Calibration panel micrologger this is; for example, “CAL-1.” 

Unique filename denoting the file in which the data logged by the micrologger were 
downloaded. 


If more than one Calibration Panel micrologger is being used in the same Area of 
Interest: 

Associated 

Micrologger Set #: Denotes the Calibration panel micrologger which is logging data corresponding to the 

same Area of Interest. 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 


A21 



RADIOMETER & THERMISTOR DATA 

DCE Area # : 

Date : _ 

Object Name : _ 

Micrologger Set # : ___ 

Filename : 


Descriptions 
Radiometer Set #1 : 


Radiometer Set #2 : 


Radiometer Set #3 : 


Radiometer Set #4 : 


Thermistor #1 : 


Thermistor #2 : 


Thermistor #3 : 


Thermistor #4 : 


A22 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 





Radiometer & Thermistor Data 
Data Form Description 


Form Description : 

Complete this form when setting up or moving each Radiometer and Thermistor Micrologger. 


Field Descriptions : 
DCE Area #; 

Date: 

Object Name: 

Micrologger Set #: 
Filename: 


Number that was assigned to the Area of Interest (on the Area of Interest Data Form) in 
which these measurements are being taken. 

Denotes the day the micrologger was set up or moved. 

Unique name of object (on the Object Data Form) about which the radiometer/thermistor 
data were collected. 

Denotes which Radiometric micrologger this is; for example, “RAD-1.” 

Unique filename denoting the file in which the data logged by the micrologger was down¬ 
loaded. 


Descriptions: Description of items for which the radiometers and thermistors are collecting data; for 

example, “brown dirt,” “short grass,” “evergreens,” etc. 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 


A23 



GLOSS METER DATA 


A24 


DCE Area # 


Date : 

Object Name(s) : 


Description 


Readings : 20^ 60^ 


Description 


Readings : 20 ° 60° 


Description 


Readings : 20° 60° 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 



Gloss Meter Data 
Data Form Description 


Form Description: 


Complete this form when taking gloss meter measurements. 



DCE Area #: Number that was assigned to the Area of Interest (on the Area of Interest Data Form) in 

which these measurements are being taken. 

Date: Denotes the day that chromatic data were collected for this DCE Area #. 

Object Naiiie(s): Unique name of object(s) (on Object Data Form) about which the gloss meter data were 
collected. 

Description: Description of items from which gloss data were collected; for example, “olive green fiom 

rotor blade of Apache.” 

Readings •• 

20 Degrees: Values from four(4) separate 20-deg measurements. 

60 Degrees: Values from four(4) separate 60-deg measurements. 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 


A25 



SPECTRAL RADIOMETER DATA 
Side A / Wide-Band Sensor 


A26 


DCE Area # : 


Date : 

Object Name(s) : 


Tape # : _ 

Side/Sensor : A / WB 

Sample # Description 


1_ CLOSED 


2 

2% 

3 

50% 

4 

75% 

5 

99% 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 




SPECTRAL RADIOMETER DATA 
Side B / Ultraviolet Sensor 

DCE Area # : 


Date : 

Object Name(s) : 


Tape # : _ 

Side/Sensor : B / UV 

Sample # Description 

1 CLOSED _ 

2 2%_ 

3 50% _ 

4 75% _ 

5 99%_ 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 


A27 








Spectral Radiometer Data 
Data Forms Description 


Form Description : 

Complete these forms when taking spectral radiometer measurements. 


Field Descriptions : 

DCE Area #: Number that was assigned to the Area of Interest (on the Area of Interest Data Form) in 

which these spectral radiometer measurements are being taken. 

Date: Denotes the day that spectral radiometer data were collected for this DCE Area #. 


Object Naine(s): Unique Object name(s) (on Object Data Form) about which this spectral radiometer data 
were collected. 


Tape #: Unique tape number for this E>CE. 

Side/Sensor: Side of tape that measurements are currently being stored upon (i.e., “A” or “B”) and whicl 

sensor head is currently attached to the spectral radiometer (i.e., “WB” for wide-band or 
“UV” for ultraviolet). Side “A” should always used for the “WB” sensor, and side “B” 
should always be used for the “UV” sensor. 

NOTE : The spectral radiometer needs to be recalibrated every time the sensor head is 
changed, as well as every time that it is powered oa The calibrations must be performed ii 
the following order: 
closed sensor, 2%, 50%, 75%, 99%. 


Sample #: Unique, consecutive sample number. 

NOTE : It is very important that every sample be accoimted for, since this number (n) cor¬ 
responds to the n* sample record on the tape. 

Description: Description of items from which spectral data were collected; for example, “olive green froi 

rotor blade of Apache.” 


A28 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 



CHROMATIC DATA 


DCE Area # : 


Date : 

Object Name(s): 


Bag Label # : _ 

Sample # Description 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 


A29 



Chromatic Data 
Data Form Description 



Field Descriptions : 

DCE Area #: Number that was assigned to the Area of Interest (on the Area of Interest Data Form) in 

which these measurements are being taken. 


Date; 


Denotes the day that chromatic data were collected for this DCE Area #. 


Object Name{s): Unique name of object(s) (on Object Data Form) about which this chromatic data were 
collected. 


Bag Label #; Number labeled on the bag where the chromo-meter printout will be stored. 

Description: Description of items from which chromatic data were collected; for example, “olive green 

from rotor blade of Apache.” 

NOTE : Be sure that the measurement number that prints from the Minolta Chromo Meter 
matches the description number. 


A30 


Appendix A MSD Data Forms 



Appendix B 

Data Collection Equipment 
Description 


Weather Station Equipment 


The typical weather station consists of the following instruments: 


Description 

Model 

Manufacturer 

Micrologger/Datalogger 

21XL 

Campbell Scientific Inc. 

Storage Module 

SMI 92/716 

Campbell Scientific Inc. 

Tripod 

CM10/6 

Campbell Scientific Inc. 

Solar Panel 

MSX-10 

Campbell Scientific Inc. 

Temperature/Relative Humidity Probe 

HMP-35C 

Vaisala Inc. 

Tipping Bucket Rain Gage 

TE525 

Campbell Scientific Inc. 

Solar Pyranometer Sensor 

LI-200SZ 

LI-COR Inc. 

Wind Sentry 

03001-5 

R.M. Young 

Temperature Probe 

107 

Campbell Scientific Inc. 


Appendix B Data Collection Equipment Description 



Calibration Station Equipment 


The typical calibration station consists of the following instruments: 


Description 

Model 

Manufacturer 

Micrologger/Datalogger 

21XL 

Campbell Scientific Inc. 

Storage Module 

SM192/716 

Campbell Scientific Inc. 

Infrared Temperature Transducer 

4000A 

Everest Interscience Inc. 

Solar Panel 

MSX-10 

Campbell Scientific Inc. 

Relay Driver 

A21 REL 

Campbell Scientific Inc. 

Passive Infrared Target System; 

Low Emissivity Panel 

PITS-L 

Tracer GIE 

Passive Infrared Target System; 

High Emissivity Panel 

PITS-H 

Tracer GIE 

Solar Pyranometer Sensor 

LI-200SZ 

LI-COR Inc. 

Temperature Probe 

107 

Campbell Scientific Inc. 

Radometric Contrast Target 

RST-7691 

Tracer GIE 

Six Step Color Scale Target 

RST-7611 

Tracer GIE 

Six Step Gray Scale Target 

RST-7605A 

Tracer GIE 

Resolution Tri-Bar Target 

RST-7601 

Tracer GIE 



B2 


Appendix B Data Collection Equipment Description 




Spectral Equipment 


The following table describes aU the instnimentation for spectral data 
gathering: 


Description 

Model 

Manufacturer 

Gloss Meter 

Novo-Gloss 

Macbeth Inc. 

Chroma Meter 

CR-231 

Minolta Corp. 

8° Hemispherical Spectral Reflectance Plate, 2% 

SRT-02-050 

Labsphere Inc. 

8° Hemispherical Spectral Reflectance Plate, 50 

SRT-50-050 

Labsphere Inc. 

8° Hemispherical Spectral Reflectance Plate, 75 

SRT-75-050 

Labsphere Inc. 

8° Hemispherical Spectral Reflectance Plate, 99% 

SRT-99-050 

Labsphere Inc. 

Spectroradometer 

CE500 

Spectron Engineering 

Infrared Pyranometer 

OS-2103S 

Omega Inc. 

Temperature Probe & Sensor Kit 

TK-2-1 

Omega Inc. 

Thermometer 

HH22 

Omega Inc. 


Airborne Data Collection Equipment 


The following table describes all the instrumentation for airborne data col¬ 
lection system: 


Description 

Model 

Manufacturer 

Medum Format Camera 

645 Super 

Mamiya Inc. 

35mm Camera 

T-70 

Canon Inc. 

Gated Intensified CCD Camera 

ISG-250 

Xybion Inc. 

Low Light High Resolution Camera 

ITC-510 

Ikegami Inc. 

HI-8 VCR 

V80ABF 

TEAC America 

Airborne Video Insertion Generator 

9991 

ITS Inc. 

SMPTE Time Code Generator 

ES-488 

ESE Corp. 

Night Vision Lens 

P2000A 

EEV Inc. 

Serial Control Titier 

SCT-50 

Horita Inc. 

GPS/SMPTE Time Code Generator 

GPS2 

Horita Inc. 

Global Positioning System 

XAB9434 

SSI 

Vibration Stabilization Unit 

EFP 

Cinema Products 


Appendix B Data Collection Equipment Description 



REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 


Form Approved 
OMBNo. 0704-0188 


Public reporting burden for this coliBctior of infotmalion is astmafed to average 1 hour per response, including the time for revrewng 

and maiSng the data needed, and cornpleBng and reviewing the colloction of information. Send comments regarding this^rden estmate or a^ n^^JIrv 

information, induding suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Servii^ Kr^rate ^ Highway, 

Suite 1204, Artington, V A 99902-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC 20503. __ 

1. AGENCY USE ONLY (leaire b/an/O I2. REPORT DATE 3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 


TITLE AND SUBTITLE 


January 1997 


3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

Report 2 of a series 

Is. FUNDING NUMBERS 


Development of a Multispectral Signatures Database (MSD) for the Camouflage, Conceal- 
menL and Deception Design and Evaluation Environment (C2D2E2); Report 2, User s Manual 

6. AUTHOR(S) 

Gerardo I. Velazquez, Sandy D. Bratcher, Douglas P. Roussell 


Contract No. DACA39-91-C- 
0042 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

I U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station 
3909 Halls Ferry Road, Vicksburg, MS 39180-6199; 
Nichols Research Corporation 

P.O. Box 820186, Vicksburg, MS 39182-0186 _ 

9. SPONSORING/MONfTORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 
Washington, DC 20314-1000 


8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 

Technical Repprt SL-95-21 


10. SPONSORING/MONITORING 
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 


11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

Available from National Technical Information Service, 5285 Port Royal Road, Springfield, VA 22161. 


12a. DISTRIBURON/AVAILABILfTY STATEMENT 

12b. DISTRIBURON CODE 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 



13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) 

This report summarizes the installation, data forms required, and the procedures for coUecting the data required for 
the population of the Multispectral Signature Database (MSD) developed by the USAE Waterways Experiment Station 
(WES). The MSD is hosted on a 486 IBM PC and has undergone development in the ANSI C language. Raima Data 
Manager System m (RDM) was used as the underlying Database Management System. For image storage, a 24-bit 
color Tagged Image File format (TIFF) was used due to the flexibiUty and support for this format. A single-user menu 
interface is provided for the management of the database. Some of the operational requirements that were defined for 
this user interface include: organizing and cataloging a large number of unages; associating appropriate attribute, 
ground truth, and physical data with each image; associating images of the same scene in different spectral bands, and 
the ability to retrieve/display images and their respective data. 


14. SUBJECT TERMS 

Camouflage materials 
Database 

Database management 


Database model 
Materials properties 
Multispectral data 


TIFF images 


15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

93 

16. PRICE CODE 


17. SECURITY CLASSIFICARON 
OF REPORT 

UNCLASSIFIED 

NSN 7540-01-280-5500 


18. SECURITY CLASSIFICARON 
OF THIS PAGE 

UNCLASSIFIED 


19. SECURITY CLASSIRCARON 20. UMITARON OF ABSTRACT 
OF ABSTRACT 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18 
298-102 

















Destroy this report when no longer needed. Do not return it to the originator. 




