ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 


N89- 19886 


AN EXPERT SYSTEM FOR RESTRUCTURABLE CONTROL 


Jonathan Li tt 
Propulsion Directorate 

U.S. Army Aviation Research and Technology Acti vi ty-AVSCOM 
Lewis Research Center 
Cleveland, OH 44135 


ABSTRACT 

Work in progress on an expert system which 
restructures and tunes control systems on- 
line in real-time is presented. The expert 
system coordinates the different methods 
involved in redesigning and implementing 
the control strategies due to plant 
changes . 

INTRODUCTION 

A restructurable control system has the 
ability to redesign itself on-line to 
compensate for a significant change in the 
plant. Restructurabi 1 i ty is a valuable 
feature because it allows a closed-loop 
system to continue operating in an 
acceptable manner even in the face of major 
changes to the plant. Examples of plants 
with major changes are aircraft with battle 
damage or engines with foreign object 
damage. With an invariant control system 
designed for the original plant, an 
aircraft that experienced battle damage may 
now only be able to limp home. In the 
worst case it would be unstable and crash. 
With a redesigned control system for the 
new, altered plant, the plane may be able 
to carry out all or part of its mission 
with only slightly reduced capabilities and 
it is more likely that it will return 
safely. 

Restructurable control is applicable to 
mechanical problems such as actuator or 
control surface failures. Most of the 
redesign strategies in the literature work 
by redistributing the forces and moments of 
the failed actuator or missing surface over 
the remaining components to compensate for 
the lost components. The research by 
Looze, et al has concentrated on a linear 
quadratic approach to the redesign 
procedure [1] . Horowitz, et al have 
applied quantitative feedback theory to 


control system reconfiguration [2]. Raza 
and Silverthorn have used the pseudoinverse 
of the control matrix and generalized input 
vectors to achieve the desired responses 
along orthogonal axes [3]. The technique 
in [3] is similar to the control mixer 
concept for reconfiguration described by 
Rattan [4] . 

The goal of this paper is to describe a way 
to tie together some of the previous work 
in the field so as to achieve a highly 
survivable control system. A highly 
survivable system can successfully 
restructure in response to a multitude of 
different failures. In general, previous 
restructurable controllers have been 
specifically designed for a single failure 
type. Each design method used is valid for 
its specific application. However, none is 
"optimal" nor even applicable in all 
situations. Thus, to achieve a highly 
survivable system, it is necessary to 
identify the current dynamic 
characteristics of the plant and to 
determine which of the possible solutions 
is the best in some sense under the given 
circumstances. To accomplish this decision 
making in an uncertain environment with 
potentially conflicting mission objectives, 
some type of intelligence will be required. 
Hence the concept of an expert system to 
coordinate the different redesign 
strategies is proposed. 

An expert system consists of three 
independent parts: an inference engine, a 
rule base, and a knowledge base. The rule 
base is a set of heuristics or rules-of- 
thumb which apply to the type of problem at 
hand. The knowledge base is a collection 
of information specific to the current 
situation. The inference engine is a 
program which applies the rules to the 
knowledge base in order to glean new 
information or to determine if an 
assumption is justified. When new 


503 


PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED 


information is asserted, it is stored in 
the knowledge base. 

BACKGROUND 

The idea of restructurable control has 
appeared recently, mainly with respect to 
aircraft. Battle damage has been 
considered a perfect application for the 
research. Commercial airliners are also a 
possible vehicle for the work. Several 
accidents and near accidents where the 
pilot was able to recover and land the 
plane after analyzing the problem have been 
discussed in relation to restructurable 
control [5] . 

Thus this strategy is very attractive for 
both civilian and military aeronautics and 
propulsion applications. Creating the 
ability in a plane to restructure its 
control system after damage to continue at 
a level of performance similar to its 
original design specifications is highly 
desirable. It is also important to 
remember that the main ideas here are not 
limited to airplanes. They can be applied 
to a wide variety of systems with inherent 
redundancy. 

EXPERT SYSTEM COMPONENTS 

The proposed overall structure of the 
expert system is shown in Figure 1. It 
consists of (1) an inference engine, (2) a 
control system restructuring knowledge and 
rule base, and (3) a controller tuning 
knowledge and rule base. The control 
system restructurer is already partially 
implemented. In the future we plan to 
incorporate an on-line controller tuning 
expert system into the overall system. It 
will share the inference engine with the 
reconfiguration expert system. 

An inference engine can work with any 
appropriately structured knowledge base and 
rule base; it is not linked in any way to 
the application. Likewise, a rule base can 
be used with any appropriate knowledge 
base. 

The inference engine developed for this 
application is capable of performing 
symbolic and numerical calculations 
required to evaluate certain rules. It can 
also execute generalized rules with 
previously established facts from the 
knowledge base to infer new facts. In 
addition, it has the ability to perform 
what-if type reasoning by trying different 
scenarios if more than one is appropriate. 

The knowledge base of the restructurable 


control system consists of information 
about the plant and control systems. For 
a linear system such parameters as the 
system matri ces and the original controller 
gains are stored. There are also 
specifications on the actuators such as 
linear ranges and characteristics. 
Information stored here can change in 
response to plant changes. It is changed 
or updated as new facts become available. 

The rule base of the control system 
restructurer contains rules about control 
system design. These range from top-level 
control design methods to low-level details 
such as definitions of controllability and 
observability. The rules may contain 
numerical expressions to be evaluated (such 
as whether a realization is minimal) and 
may contain variables to be given values by 
the inference engine during the discovery 
of new facts. 

A separate knowledge base will be required 
for the tuning system. It will contain 
response characteristics associated with a 
well -tuned loop of the type in question. 
It also will have data on the previous 
responses obtained in the tuning process. 

A rule base for controller tuning will be 
created also. The heuristics will use the 
previous tuning and plant information to 
determine an appropriate tuning paradigm. 

Figure 2 shows the interaction of the two 
expert systems with the overall system. 

SYSTEM CAPABILITIES 

Figure 3 shows the anticipated future setup 
of the overall system. It shows a 
hierarchy with an expert system receiving 
information from a system identifier and a 
pattern extractor. This information is 
used in the restructuring of the controller 
for the altered plant. In the current 
setup, the plant simulation, the 
controller, and the expert system are all 
written in compiled LISP running on an LMI 
Lambda LISP machine. The system identifier 
and the pattern extractor are not yet 
implemented. The simulation consists of a 
realization of a linearized system in the 
form of matrices (A,B,C,D) and the states 
are evolved using Euler integration. 
Presently the expert system uses a model of 
the plant directly from the simulation. 
The linear model is of the form 

x = Ax + Bu 

y = Cx + Du 


504 



A change in the model prompts the expert 
system to analyze and redesign the control. 
The new controller replaces the old one in 
the simulation and the states continue to 
evolve. 


The restructuring strategies that the 
expert system can currently use involve the 
pseudoinverse of B [3,4] . The expert 
system takes a realization (A,B,C) and 
manipulates it, using the Kalman Structure 
Theorem for instance, until it is minimal 
and B t B has full rank. If the expert system 
can achieve this goal, the equation 

K = (B t B)' 1 B t (A - (A 0 - B 0 K 0 ) ) 


is used to determine the new controller 
matrix. Here A and B are the altered 
system matrices and (A 0 - B 0 K„) is the 
reduced order version of the closed-loop 
system matrix of the full order model. 


CONCLUDING REMARKS 

The expert system is able to handle a 
variety of reconfiguration situations. For 
these cases, the new controller is designed 
and implemented in a matter of seconds. 
Naturally the redesign time depends on the 
order of the system. 

At present a few of the control design 
algorithms from the literature have been 
implemented. More have to be included in 
addition to incorporating any other work, 
both new and existing, that is deemed 
necessary for the system to work well. 

Some work has been done in the area of 
controller tuning by pattern recognition 
techniques for single-input single-output 
systems [6]. We intend to extend the 
methodology to multiple-input-multiple- 
output systems. 


Examples of the heuristics used in the 
situation described above are: 

1. if (A,B,C) is controllable and 

observable 

then realization is minimal 

2. if B t B is full rank 

then pseudoinverse of B exists 

3. if (A,B,C) is not minimal and 

(A,B,C) is minimum phase 
then find a minimal realization 

4. if pseudoinverse of B exists and 

realization is minimal 
then 

K = (B t B) _ 1 B t (A - (A 0 - B 0 K 0 ) ) 

These rules, presented here in pseudo-code, 
are the type of heuristics contained in the 
rule base. 

A user interface exists for use in the 
development stage. In a delivery system 
there will be no need for such an 
environment as the system will run without 
human intervention. 

The expert system runs only when invoked, 
for example when the control needs to be 
redesigned. Currently, it is invoked by 
manually stopping the simulation and 
running the expert system. The simulation 
must then be restarted. This is necessary 
at present because the simulation and the 
expert system both run on the same 

processor and no system identification 
scheme has yet been implemented. In the 
future the identifier will communicate with 
the expert system and cause it to start 
redesigning when a significant change in 
the system matrices occur. 


Currently the LISP machine is doing the 
numerical calculations. For the system to 
run in real time, the number crunching will 
have to be moved off the LISP processor to 
a numeric processor such as an array 
processor. 

A system identifier will be implemented in 
the future. In the near term one might be 
implemented on the LISP machine. 
Eventually a microprocessor-based system 
identifier should be connected to the plant 
and signal the expert system if a 
significant change occurs in the model. 

An on-line pattern extractor which will 
determine the response features will also 
have to be developed. These features will 
be passed to the knowledge base of the 
tuning expert system. 

The simulation currently residing within 
the Lambda will be moved to an Applied 
Dynamics AD100 simulation computer. This 
will allow a full nonlinear simulation to 
be implemented and it will run in real 
time. When the interface between the two 
is completed, the capability will exist to 
test the expert system in a realistic 
situation. 

REFERENCES 

1. Looze, D. P., Weiss, J. L., Eterno, J. 
$., Barrett, N. M., "An Automatic Redesign 
Approach for Restructurabl e Control 
Systems," Proceedings of the IEEE National 
Aerospace and Electronics Conference 1985, 
Dayton, OH, 1985. 


505 



2. Horowitz, I., Arnold, P. B., Houpis, C. 
H., "YF16CCV Flight Control System 
Reconfiguration Design Using Quantitative 
Feedback Theory,” Proceedings of the IEEE 
National Aerospace and Electronics 
Conference 1985, Dayton, OH, 1985. 

3. Raza, S. J., Silverthorn, J. T., "Use of 
the Pseudo-Inverse for Design of a 
Reconfigurable Flight Control System," 
Proceedings of the AIAA Guidance, 
Navigation and Control Conference, 
Snowmass, CO, 1985. 

4. Rattan, K. S., "Evaluation of Control 
Mixer Concept for Reconfiguration of Flight 
Control System," Proceedings of the IEEE 
National Aerospace and Electronics 
Conference 1985, Dayton, OH, 1985. 


5. Montoya, R. J., Howell, W. E., Bundick, 
W. T., Ostroff, A. J., Hueschen, R. M., 
Belcastro, C. M., "Restructurabl e 
Controls," NASA Conference Publication 
2277, NASA Langley Research Center, 1982. 

6. Litt, J., "An Expert System for Adaptive 
PID Tuning Based on Pattern Recognition 
Techniques," Proceedings of the ISA North 
Coast Conference, Cleveland, OH, 1986. 



Figure 1 — Structure of the Expert Systems 


506 




RESTRUCTURABLE CONTROL 


INITIAL 
REALIZATION 
Ad ,Co ,Q> ,Kd 



PHYSICAL PLANT 
AND CONTROL 


IDENTIFY SYSTEM 
CURRENT A.B 


IS THIS\ 
A NEW CONTRO 
DESIGN AND IS 
TUNING 

\ NEEDED? ^ 


IMPLEMENT 
CONTROL DESIGN. 


TUNE CONTROLLER 

K 1 

WITH EXPERT SYSTEM 





I/SIGNIFICANT\ 

K T< CHANGES IN >33— 
NO\ PLANT? / YES 


REDESIGN 
CONTROLLER WITH 
EXPERT SYSTEM 


A. NEW Ao,a I UPDATE L*J 

REFERENCE MODELP 

Figure 2 — Expert System Interaction with Overall System 


EXPERT 

SYSTEMS 


NUMERIC 

CALCULATIONS 


SYSTEM 

IDENTIFIER 


PATTERN 

EXTRACTOR 


CONTROLLER 


PLANT OR 
SIMULATION 


Figure 3 — Overall Hardware Configuration 


507 














