into elements susceptible to independ- 
ent verification and validation, in such a 
manner that scaling issues are mini- 
mized, so that relatively large software 
systems can be aggressively verified in a 
cost-effective manner. 

This work was done by William Reinholtz 
and Daniel Dvorak of Caltech for NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. Further informa- 
tion is contained in a TSP ( see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of the 
California Institute of Technology at (818) 
393-2827. Refer to NPO-40842. 


Tool for Ranking Research 
Options 

Tool for Research Enhancement Deci- 
sion Support (TREDS) is a computer pro- 
gram developed to assist managers in 
ranking options for research aboard the 
International Space Station (ISS). It 
could likely also be adapted to perform 
similar decision-support functions in in- 
dustrial and academic settings. TREDS 
provides a ranking of the options, based 
on a quantifiable assessment of all the rel- 
evant programmatic decision factors of 
benefit, cost, and risk. The computation 
of the benefit for each option is based on 
a figure of merit (FOM) for ISS research 
capacity that incorporates both quantita- 
tive and qualitative inputs. Qualitative in- 
puts are gathered and partly quantified 
by use of the time-tested analytical hierar- 
chical process and used to set weighting 
factors in the FOM corresponding to pri- 
orities determined by the cognizant deci- 
sion maker(s). Then by use of algorithms 
developed specifically for this applica- 
tion, TREDS adjusts the projected benefit 
for each option on the basis of levels of 
technical implementation, cost, and 
schedule risk. Based partly on Excel 
spreadsheets, TREDS provides screens 
for entering cost, benefit, and risk infor- 
mation. Drop-down boxes are provided 
for entry of qualitative information. 
TREDS produces graphical output in 
multiple formats that can be tailored by 
users. 

This program was written by James N. 
Ortiz o/ johnson Space Center, Kelly Scott 
of Booz Allen Hamilton Inc., and Harold 
Smith of Raytheon Co. For further informa- 
tion, contact the Johnson Technology Transfer 
Office at (281) 483-3809. 

MSC-23744 


M I Enhanced, Partially 
Redundant Emergency 
Notification System 

The Johnson Space Center Emergency 
Notification System (JENS) software uti- 
lizes pre-existing computation and com- 
munication infrastructure to augment a 
prior variable-tone, siren-based, outdoor 
alarm system, in order to enhance the abil- 
ity to give notice of emergencies to employ- 
ees working in multiple buildings. The 
JENS software includes a component that 
implements an administrative Web site. 
Administrators can grant and deny access 
to the administrative site and to an origina- 
tor Web site that enables authorized indi- 
viduals to quickly compose and issue 
alarms. The originator site also facilitates 
maintenance and review of alarms already 
issued. A custom client/ server application 
program enables an originator to notify 
every user who is logged in on a Microsoft 
Windows-based desktop computer by 
means of a pop-up message that interrupts, 
but does not disrupt, the user’s work. Alter- 
natively or in addition, the originator can 
send an alarm message to recipients on an 
e-mail distribution list and/or can post the 
notice on an internal Web site. An alarm 
message can consist of (1) text describing 
tire emergency and suggesting a course of 
action and (2) a replica of the correspon- 
ding audible outdoor alarm. 

This program was mitten by Clark D. 
Pounds of Science Applications International. 
Coip. for Johnson Space Center. For further 
information, contact the Johnson Technology 
Transfer Office at (281 ) 483-3809. 
MSC-23773 


Close-Call Action Log Form 

“Close Call Action Log Form” 
(“CCALF”) is tire name of both a computer 
program and a Web-based service provided 
by the program for creating an enhanced 
database of close calls (in the colloquial 
sense of mishaps that were avoided by small 
margins) assigned to the Center Opera- 
tions Directorate (COD) at Johnson Space 
Center. CCALF provides a single facility for 
on-line collaborative review of close calls. 
Through CCALF, managers can delegate 
responses to employees. CCALF utilizes a 
pre-existing e-mail system to notify man- 
agers that there are close calls to review, but 
eliminates the need for die prior practices 
of passing multiple e-mail messages around 


the COD, then collecting and consolidat- 
ing them into final responses: CCALF now 
collects comments from all responders for 
incorporation into reports that it generates. 
Also, whereas it was previously necessary to 
manually calculate metrics (e.g., numbers 
of maintenance-work orders necessitated 
by close calls) for inclusion in the reports, 
CCALF now computes the metrics, summa- 
rizes them, and displays them in graphical 
form. The reports and all pertinent infor- 
mation used to generate the reports are 
logged, tracked, and retained by CCALF 
for historical purposes. 

This work was done by Linda M. Spuler 
and Patricia K. Ford o/Johnson Space Cen- 
ter and Darren C. Skeete, Scot Hershman, 
Push.pa Raviprakash, John W. Arnold, Victor 
Tran, and Mary Alice Haenze oj Science Ap- 
plications International Carp. For further in- 
formation, contact the Johnson Technology 
Transjer Office at (281 ) 483-3809. 
MSC-23808 


Task Description Language 

Task Description Language (TDL) is an 
extension of the C++ programming lan- 
guage that enables programmers to 
quickly and easily write complex, concur- 
rent computer programs for controlling 
real-time autonomous systems, including 
robots and spacecraft. TDL is based on 
earlier work (circa 1984 through 1989) on 
the Task Control Architecture (TCA). 
TDL provides syntactic support for hierar- 
chical task-level control functions, includ- 
ing task decomposition, synchronization, 
execution monitoring, and exception 
handling. AJava-language-based compiler 
transforms TDL programs into pure C++ 
code that includes calls to a platform-in- 
dependent task-control-management 
(TCM) library. TDL has been used to con- 
trol and coordinate multiple heteroge- 
neous robots in projects sponsored by 
NASA and the Defense Advanced Re- 
search Projects Agency (DARPA). It has 
also been used in Brazil to control an au- 
tonomous airship and in Canada to con- 
trol a robotic manipulator. 

This program was written by Reid Simmons 
and David Apfelbaum of Carnegie Mellon 
University for Johnson Space Center. For 
further information, contact the Johnson Tech- 
nology Transjer Office at (281 ) 483-3809. 
MSC-23460 


16 


NASA Tech Briefs, December 2005 


