Software 


0 PixelLearn 

PixelLearn is an integrated user-inter- 
face computer program for classifying pix- 
els in scientific images. Heretofore, train- 
ing a machine-learning algorithm to 
classify pixels in images has been tedious 
and difficult. PixelLearn provides a graph- 
ical user interface that makes it faster and 
more intuitive, leading to more interactive 
exploration of image data sets. PixelLear n 
also provides image-enhancement con- 
trols to make it easier to see subde details 
in images. PixelLearn opens images or sets 
of images in a variety of common scientific 
file formats and enables die user to inter- 
act widi several supervised or unsuper- 
vised machine-learning pixel-classifying al- 
gorithms while the user continues to 
browse through the images. The machine- 
learning algoridims in PixelLearn use ad- 
vanced clustering and classification meth- 
ods that enable accuracy much higher 
than is achievable by most odier software 
previously available for this purpose. Pixel- 
Learn is written in portable C++ and runs 
natively on computers running Linux, 
Windows, or Mac OS X. 

The program was written by Dominic Maz- 
zoni, Kiri Wagstaff, Benjamin Bomstein, 
Nghia Tang and Joseph Roden of Caltech for 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Further 
information is contained in a TSP (seepage 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-42082. 


01 New Software for Predicting 
Charging of Spacecraft 

The NASA/ Air Force Spacecraft 
Charging System Analyzer Program 
(Nascap-2K) is a comprehensive update, 
revision, and extension of several NASA 
and Air Force codes for predicting electri- 
cal charging of spacecraft. Nascap-2K in- 
tegrates the capabilities and models in- 
cluded in four independent programs: 
NASCAP/LEO for low-Earth orbits, 
NASCAP/GEO for geosynchronous or- 
bits, POLAR for auroral charging in polar 
orbits, and DynaPAC (Dynamic Plasma 
Analysis Code) for time-dependent 


plasma interactions. While each of the 
earlier codes works well for the range of 
problems for which it was designed, by 
today’s standards these codes are difficult 
to learn, cumbersome to use, and overly 
resU'ictive in their geometric modeling ca- 
pabilities. Nascap-2K incorporates these 
models into a single software package that 
includes spacecraft surface modeling, spa- 
tial gridding, environmental specifica- 
tions, calculating scripting, and post-pro- 
cessing analysis and visualization. The 
provided material properties database in- 
cludes values from earlier programs as 
well as values from recent measurements. 
Development of Nascap-2K continues 
with future capabilities to include interac- 
tions with dense plasma such as those pro- 
duced by electric propulsion. 

This work was done by Myron Mandell 
and Victoria Davis of Science Applications 
International Corp. (SAIC), and Jeffrey 
Hilton, formerly of SAIC, for Marshall 
Space Flight Center. For further informa- 
tion, contact Barbara Gardner at SAIC, Bar- 
bara. Gardner@saic. com. 

MFS-3 1939-1/2056-1 


0 Conversion Between 
Osculating and Mean 
Orbital Elements 

Osculating/Mean Orbital Element Con- 
version (C version) (OSMEANC) isaC-lan- 
guage computer program drat perfonns 
precise conversions between osculating 
and mean classical orbital elements. OS- 
MEANC can be used for precise design of 
spacecraft missions and maneuvers and 
precise calculation of planetary orbits. The 
program accounts for the full complexity of 
gravitational fields, including aspherical 
and third-body effects. In comparison with 
prior software used for the same purposes, 
OSMEANC offers greater accuracy in con- 
version: By virtue of inclusion of high-order 
gravitational and third-body effects, varia- 
tions in semimajor axes are calculated to 
meter-level accuracy. OSMEANC is deliv- 
ered as a callable shared library. It can be 
built for any platform wkh a C compiler. 
The user interface is via a Pydion-language 
wrapper script that can be replaced by die 
user. OSMEANC is mature and is the prod- 


uct of a significant upgrade from a Fortran 
version that has been in use since 1991. 

This program was written by Joseph Guinn, 
Min-Kun Chung, and Mark Vincent of Cal- 
tech for N ASA’ s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 
Further information is contained in a TSP 
(see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(818) 393-2827. Refer to NPO-411H.' 


© Generating a 2D Represen- 
tation of a Complex Data 
Structure 

A computer program, designed to assist 
in the development and debugging of other 
software, generates a two-dimensional (2D) 
representation of a possibly complex n- 
dimensional (where n is an integer >2) data 
structure or abstract ran k-ra object in that 
other software. The nature of die 2D repre- 
sentation is such that it can be displayed on 
a non-graphical output device and disuib- 
uted by non-graphical means. The pur- 
pose served by this representation is to as- 
sist the user in visualizing and 
understanding the complex data sttucture 
or arbitrarily dimensioned object. This is 
the only known program that enables a 
programmer to map an rc-dimensional data 
structure to a flat 2D space. This program 
does not depend upon the hardware char- 
acteristics of a particular output device, 
and can be executed on a variety of com- 
puters from different manufacturers. It 
can be distributed in source-code or bi- 
nary-code form. It requires a Lisp com- 
piler. It has no specific memory require- 
ments and depends upon the other 
software with which it is used and applica- 
tion programs running in it. This software 
is implemented as a library diat is called by, 
and becomes folded into, the developmen- 
tal other software. 

This work was done by Mark James of Cal- 
tech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Labora- 
tory. Further information is contained in a 
TSP (see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(818) 393-2827. Refer to NPO-42076. ' 


NASA Tech Briefs, November 2006 


17 


