Ultrasonic Data Display and Analysis 
System Developed (Including Fuzzy Logic 
Analysis) for the Windows-Based PC 


14 t mv* *-■■**>£ 

tb| EL £> L '' ''■» 1 f“ 4)Oit) » *' V 

L* •; h -jy *1 


)i v wa w*k>. 



Ultrasonic data display and analysis screen elements. 


Post-Scan Interactive Data Display (PSIDD) III is a user-oriented Windows-based system 
that facilitates the display and comparison of ultrasonic contact measurement data 
obtained at NASA Glenn Research Center's Ultrasonic Nondestructive Evaluation 
measurement facility. The system is optimized to compare ultrasonic measurements made 
at different locations within a material or at different stages of material degradation. 
PSIDD III provides complete analysis of the primary waveforms in the time and frequency 
domains along with the calculation of several frequency-dependent properties including 
phase velocity and attenuation coefficient and several frequency-independent properties, 
like the cross correlation velocity. The system allows image generation on all the 
frequency-dependent properties at any available frequency (limited by the bandwidth used 
in the scans) and on any of the frequency-independent properties. From ultrasonic contact 
scans, areas of interest on an image can be studied with regard to underlying raw 
waveforms and derived ultrasonic properties by simply selecting the point on the image. 
The system offers various modes of indepth comparison between scan points. Up to five 
scan points can be selected for comparative analysis at once. The system was developed 
with Borland Delphi software (Visual Pascal) and is based on an SQL data base. It is ideal 
for the classification of material properties or the location of microstructure variations in 
materials. Along with the ultrasonic contact measurement software that it is partnered 
with, this system is technology ready and can be transferred to users worldwide. 

This software culminates over 10 years of work from inception to finish. The original 
implementation was on a VAX computer system custom to Glenn's nondestructive 
evaluation laboratory, and it did not include fuzzy logic analysis capability. In 1997, we 
decided to port the entire system to Windows running on an IBM-compatible personal 
computer (PC). As such, PSIDD III would enjoy the benefits of a graphically oriented 


environment. This would allow information to be seamlessly passed between PSIDD and 
other systems for reporting or presentation use. Also, the interface would be much simpler 
for the end user by replacing the original cursor control unit with a mouse. PSIDD III was 
developed jointly by Glenn and the University of Toledo. 

Bibliography 

Lovelace, Jeffrey J., et al.: PSIDD3: Post-Scan Ultrasonic Data Display System for the 
Windows-Based PC Including Fuzzy Logic Analysis. NAS A/TM— 2000-210065, 2000. 
http://gltrs.grc.nasa.gov 

Glenn contact: Dr. Don J. Roth, 216-433-6017, Don.J.Roth@grc.nasa.gov 
Authors: Jeffrey J. Lovelace, Krzysztof J. Cios, Dr. Don J. Roth, and Wei N. Cao 

Headquarters program office: OAT 
Programs/Projects: HITEMP, UEET 



