Proof compression and the Mobius PCC architecture for 

embedded devices 

Thomas Jensen 
CNRS 

IRISA, Campus de Beaulieu, F-35042 Rennes, France 

The EU Mobius projecf] has been concerned with the security of Java applications, and of mobile 
devices such as smart phones that execute such applications. In this talk. I’ll give a brief overview of the 
results obtained on on-device checking of various security-related program properties. I'll then describe 
in more detail how the concept of certified abstract interpretation and abstraction-carrying code can be 
applied to polyhedral-based analysis of Java byte code in order to verify properties pertaining to the usage 
of resources of a down-loaded application. Particular emphasis has been on finding ways of reducing the 
size of the certificates that accompany a piece of code. 

Such analyses will produce program invariants in the form of fixpoints of abstract transfer functions 
and the present work has been concerned with several aspects of how to simplify and reduce the size of 
these fixpoints: 

• Abstract interpretations will often produce more information that necessary for proving a par- 
ticular program property. I will introduce the notion of a witness of a property together with a 
technique for pruning program invariants to provide the minimum information necessary to prove 
a particular property. 

• In the context of polyhedral-based abstract interpretation, an essential part of verifying a proposed 
invariant is the checking of polyhedral inclusions. I’ll describe a notion of certificate for checking 
polyhedral inclusions based on a use of Farkas’ lemma that reduces inclusion checking to a few 
simple matrix computations. 

• The checking of a proposed invariant involves a certain amount of re-computing the invariant. It 
is therefore possible to reduce the amount of information that is being transmitted in the certificate 
because the checker will reconstruct it anyway. This leads to general fixpoint reconstruction 
algorithms that generalize the dedicated algorithms from lightweight bytecode verification. 

Checkers of such compressed certificates have been developed in the proof assistant Coq and extracted 
to be executed on several types of mobile devices. 

References 

Eva Rose. Lightweight bytecode verification. J. Autom. Reason., 3 1 (3-4):303— 334, 2003. 

Frederic Besson, Thomas Jensen, and David Pichardie. Proof-Carrying Code from Certified Ab- 
stract Interpretation and Fixpoint Compression. Theoretical Computer Science, 364(3):273-291, 
2006. 

Frederic Besson, Thomas Jensen, Tiphaine Turpin. Small witnesses for abstract interpretation 
based proofs. In Proceedings of the 16th European Symp. on Programming (ESOP 2007), Springer 
LNCS vol. 4421, 2007. 


E. Denney, T. Jensen (eds.); The 3rd International Workshop on Proof Carrying Code and Software Certification, 
pp. 33l33| 


'This work was partialy supported by the EU FET project FP6-015905 Mobius 


33 


