Information Technology 



© Determining Temperature Differential to Prevent Hardware 
Cross-Contamination in a Vacuum Chamber 

Goddard, Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland 


When contamination-sensitive hard- 
ware must be tested in a thermal vac- 
uum chamber, cross-contamination 
from other hardware present in the 
chamber, or residue from previous tests, 
becomes a concern. Typical mitigation 
strategies involve maintaining the tem- 
perature of the critical item above that 
of other hardware elements at the end 
of the test. 

A formula for relating the pumping 
speed of a chamber, the surface area of 
contamination sources, and the tempera- 
tures of the chamber, source, and con- 


tamination-sensitive items has been devel- 
oped. The formula allows the determina- 
tion of a temperature threshold about 
which contamination will not condense 
on the sensitive items. It defines a param- 
eter alpha that is the fraction given by 
(contaminant source area) /[chamber 
pumping speed x (time under vac- 
uum) 05 ]. If this parameter is less than 
10 -6 , cross-contamination from common 
spacecraft material will not occur when 
the sensitive hardware is at the same 
te,mperature as the source of contamina- 
tion (The chamber is isothermal within 5 


°C.). 

Knowing when it becomes safe to have 
the hardware isothermal permits faster 
and easier thermal transitions when 
compared with maintaining an arbitrary 
temperature differential between parts. 
Furthermore, the standard temperature 
differential may not be adequate under 
some conditions (alpha>10 -4 ). 

This work was done by David Hughes of God- 
dard Spare Flight Center. For further informa- 
tion, contact the Goddard Innovative Partner- 
ships Office at (301) 286-5810. GSC-16244-1 


© SequenceL: Automated Parallel Algorithms Derived from 
CSP-NT Computational Laws 

Chip manufacturers and developers of parallel and/ or safety-critical software could 
benefit from this innovation. 

Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland 


With the introduction of new par- 
allel architectures like the cell and 
multicore chips from IBM, Intel, 
AMD, and ARM, as well as the petas- 
cale processing available for high- 
end computing, a larger number of 
programmers will need to write par- 
allel codes. Adding the parallel con- 
trol structure to the sequence, selec- 
tion, and iterative control constructs 
increases the complexity of code de- 
velopment, which often results in in- 
creased development costs and de- 
creased reliability. 

SequenceL is a high-level program- 
ming language — that is, a program- 
ming language that is closer to a 
human’s way of thinking than to a ma- 
chine’s. Historically, high-level lan- 
guages have resulted in decreased devel- 
opment costs and increased reliability, 
at the expense of performance. In re- 
cent applications atJSC and in industry, 
SequenceL has demonstrated the usual 
advantages of high-level programming 
in terms of low cost and high reliability. 


SequenceL programs, however, have 
run at speeds typically comparable with, 
and in many cases faster than, their 
counterparts written in C and C++ when 
run on single-core processors. More- 
over, SequenceL is able to generate par- 
allel executables automatically for mul- 
ticore hardware, gaining parallel 
speedups without any extra effort from 
the programmer beyond what is re- 
quired to write the sequential/ single- 
core code. 

A SequenceL-to-C++ translator has 
been developed that automatically ren- 
ders readable multithreaded C++ from a 
combination of a SequenceL program 
and sample data input. The SequenceL 
language is based on two fundamental 
computational laws, Consume-Simplify- 
Produce (CSP) and Normalize-Trans- 
pose (NT) , which enable it to automate 
the creation of parallel algorithms from 
high-level code that has no annotations 
of parallelism whatsoever. In our anec- 
dotal experience, SequenceL develop- 
ment has been in every case less costly 


than development of the same algo- 
rithm in sequential (that is, single-core, 
single process) C or C++, and an order 
of magnitude less costly than develop- 
ment of comparable parallel code. 
Moreover, SequenceL not only automat- 
ically parallelizes the code, but since it is 
based on CSP-NT, it is provably race free, 
thus eliminating the largest quality chal- 
lenge the parallelized software devel- 
oper faces. 

Compiling functional code to C++ is 
not new. Compiling functional code to 
readable C++ that runs in parallel is 
much more of a challenge, and that was 
the majority of this effort. For current 
purposes in this effort, readability of the 
generated code is crucial, in case the 
human programmer wishes to add anno- 
tations, or to inspect the code for verifi- 
cation purposes. Moreover, by compiling 
to C++ it is assured that SequenceL can 
be used in any application where C++ 
could be used. 

SequenceL has been found to dis- 
cover all potential parallelisms automat- 


NASATech Briefs, March 2013 


29 



ically in relatively complex algorithms 
(involving multiple threads), and thus 
shows the potential to relieve more of 
the programmer’s cognitive load as the 
problem grows in complexity. Sequen- 


ceL’s runtime environment then selects 
which parallelisms to actually exploit, 
with the aim of maximum overall speed 
when considering communication costs 
between processes. 


This work was done by Daniel Cooke and J. 
Nelson Rushton of Texas Tech University for 
Goddard Space Flight Center. Further informa- 
tion is contained in a TSP ( seepage 1 ). GSC- 
15859-1 


©Remote Data Exploration with the Interactive Data 
Language (IDL) 

Goddard. Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland 


A difficulty for many NASA researchers 
is that often the data to analyze is located 
remotely from the scientist and the data 
is too large to transfer for local analysis. 
Researchers have developed the Data Ac- 
cess Protocol (DAP) for accessing remote 
data. Presendy one can use DAP from 
within IDL, but the IDL-DAP interface is 
both limited and cumbersome. A more 
powerful and user-friendly interface to 
DAP for IDL has been developed. 

Users are able to browse remote data 
sets graphically, select partial data to re- 
trieve, import that data and make cus- 
tomized plots, and have an interactive 


IDL command line session simultaneous 
with the remote visualization. All of 
these IDL-DAP tools are usable easily 
and seamlessly for any IDL user. 

IDL and DAP are both widely used in 
science, but were not easily used to- 
gether. The IDL DAP bindings were in- 
complete and had numerous bugs that 
prevented their serious use. For exam- 
ple, the existing bindings did not read 
DAP Grid data, which is the organiza- 
tion of nearly all NASA datasets cur- 
rently served via DAP. 

This project uniquely provides a fully 
featured, user-friendly interface to DAP 


from IDL, both from the command line 
and a GUI application. The DAP Ex- 
plorer GUI application makes browsing 
a dataset more user-friendly, while also 
providing the capability to run user-de- 
fined functions on specified data. Meth- 
ods for running remote functions on the 
DAP server were investigated, and a 
technique for accomplishing this task 
was decided upon. 

This work was done by Michael Galloy of 
Tech.-X Corporation for Goddard Space Flight 
Center. Further information is contained in a 
TSP (see page 1 ). GSC-1 6021-1 


Q Mixture-Tuned, Clutter Matched Filter for Remote Detection of 
Subpixel Spectral Signals 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


Mapping localized spectral features in 
large images demands sensitive and ro- 
bust detection algorithms. Two aspects of 
large images that can harm matched-fil- 
ter detection performance are addressed 
simultaneously. First, multimodal back- 
grounds may thwart the typical Gaussian 
model. Second, outlier features can trig- 
ger false detections from large projec- 
tions onto the target vector. 

Two state-of-the-art approaches are 
combined that independently address 
outlier false positives and multimodal 
backgrounds. The background cluster- 
ing of Funk et al. models multimodal 
backgrounds, and the mixture tuned 
matched filter (MT-MF) of Boardman 


et al. addresses outliers. Combining 
the two methods captures significant 
additional performance benefits. The 
resulting mixture tuned clutter 
matched filter (MT-CMF) shows effec- 
tive performance on simulated and air- 
borne datasets. 

The classical MNF transform was ap- 
plied, followed by k-means clustering. 
Then, each cluster’s mean, covariance, 
and the corresponding eigenvalues were 
estimated. This yields a cluster-specific 
matched filter estimate as well as a clus- 
ter-specific feasibility score to flag outlier 
false positives. 

The technology described is a proof 
of concept that may be employed in fu- 


ture target detection and mapping ap- 
plications for remote imaging spec- 
trometers. It is of most direct relevance 
to JPL proposals for airborne and or- 
bital hyperspectral instruments. Appli- 
cations include subpixel target detec- 
tion in hyperspectral scenes for 
military surveillance. Earth science ap- 
plications include mineralogical map- 
ping, species discrimination for ecosys- 
tem health monitoring, and land use 
classification. 

This work was done by David R. Thomp- 
son, Lukas Mandrake, and Robert O. Green 
of Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Labora- 
tory. For more information, contact iaoffice@ 
jpl.nasa.gov. NPO-48663 


30 


NASA Tech Briefs, March 2013 


