AD-A226 725 


OTIC FILE COPY Special Report 

SEI-90-SR-10 

Carnegie-Mellon University 

Software Engineering Institute 



♦ 

♦ 


Understanding the Adoption of Ada: 
Results of an Industry Survey 



Marthena Carlson 
Gordon N. Smith 

May 1990 



♦ ♦ ♦ 






This Page 

Reproduced From 
Best Available Copy 


The fdtevwng statement of osiurnncn is more than a statement required to comply with tho federal taw This a s-ocom j.feKtmtnt r>y the. ievkro.iv to «i't 

people flro .ocluded >n the diversity which makes Carnegie Melton m exciting pfeco Cvncgtt* Motion w>shrs to »*v:hk?<> rsNtnte »«hmm U> »#-* 0^- vitMi 
origin, se*, handicap, religion, creed, ancestry, belief, ago, veteran status or se*ual orientation 

Carnegie Mellon University does not discriminate and Carnegie Melton Unrw*?»ty <s required not to reacr^rvite *n oriels nos ,t;ni r«v',vw-i on tiv t*.« : •*. • vr 

cm»v. not one! onyin sex or heniV.ap in vicfalionol Tide VI u* ih« C.sM H.phle Act ui itiM 1-?lo t\ o’ the l ituret-enaJ A»*if»vt-*’r« ’-s ,•» * oy.v.o'-o. 4 - 

RonaW'talion Ac! of 1973 or other fedn’Ai. slate, or meet lows or ««*;u!iveorders tn million Cemeg-e Mefcv* dt'enivl * 1 *•»*»*•*vwr- »> r»- 1 * -- ; - •• .* 

the ixms of reiig.on. creed ancestry .belief, ego. v*K*nn status or tuwuai onontat^n «n v.Naison < 7 * ary »o«l*>»a> slate. *v hn r»rr ..* v r 

mgepolcatidnof !•’spotiovsht«i'<!t»e d-'eideiHothef-‘r{?v^)st. Ca f nog»eMotion univ^rsty 5*’XXli-‘o»t)r>i5 I'ttxja-igh pa 1 • •••!•;• * .■■> ■ 

V** l*reSKier«t for rnroflment Carneg<e Motion Uneven? ty, ?>000 f rvlms Avenue. PitisUirgh PA tr.vnJ'>o , ie <4t;n ;v«n ,v*«t 




Special Report 

SEI-90-SR-10 
May 1990 


Understanding the Adoption of Ada: 
Results of an Industry Survey 


Marthena Carlson 

Visiting Scientist 

Gordon N. Smith 

Southern Methodist University 

ias-sf-z-coo-i 


Approved for public release. 
Distribution unlimited. 


Software Engineering Institute 

Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213 





This technical report was prepared for the 

SEI Joint Program Office 
ESD/AVS 

Hanscom AFB, MA 01731 

The ideas and findings in this report should not be construed as an official 
DoD position. It is published in the interest of scientific and technical 
information exchange. 

Review and Approval 

This report has been reviewed and is approved for publication. 


FOR THE COMMANDER 



Karl H. Shingler O 

SEI Joint Program Office 


* 


This work is sponsored by the U.S. Department of Defense. 

Copyright © 1990 by Carnegie Mellon University. 


This cocvnent is available through the Defense Technical Information Center DTIC provides access to and transfer of 
scientific and technical iniormatiun for ZjZ j orsmoel °nO contractors and potential contractors, and other U S Government 
agency personnel and their contractors To obtain a copy, please contact uTIC directly Defense Technical Information 
Center, Attn FORA, Cameron Station, Alexandria. VA 22304-6145 

Copies of this document are also available through the National Technical Information Service For information on ordenng, 
please contact NTIS directly National Technical Information Service, U.S Oeoadment of Co.T.rr.eice Springfield. VA 22161 

Use ot any trademarks in this report is not intended m any way to infringe on the rights of the trademark holder 


Table of Contents 


Acknowledgements 1 

1. Study Background 3 

1.1. Introduction 3 

1.2. Survey Design and Methodology 4 

1.2.1. Description of the Respondents 4 

2. Characterization of the Business Units 7 

2.1. Products 7 

2.2. Research and Development Expenditures 7 

2.3. Contracts Characterized 8 

2.4. Factors Influencing Contract Award 9 

2.5. Technical Aspects of Products: Language, Response Mode, 10 

Interfaces, and Constraints 

2.6. Software Process: Practices and Procedures 12 

3. Ada Use 15 

3.1. Primary Customer's Attitude 15 

3.2. Ada Use in the Business Units 15 

3.3 Ada Contracts 16 

3.4. Ada Trained Personnel 16 

3.5. Expected Effects of Ada Use During Production 17 

3.6. Acquisition of Ada Tools and Use of Ada Features 17 

3.7. Comparison of Ada Compilers With Other Compilers 19 

3.8. Comparison of Units With and Without Ada Contracts 19 

References 23 

Appendix A. Overview of Ada and MCCR Software 25 

A.a. Procurement of Military Software 26 

A.b. Contract Types 27 

Appendix B. Questionnaires 29 


SEI-90-SR-10 






List of Tables 


Table 1-1: Description of the Respondents 6 

Table 2-1: Rating of Contract Award Factors 9 

Table 2-2: Process Score for Each Maturity Level 13 

Table 2-3: Software Development Capabilities 13 

Table 3-1: Language Used and Proposed for New Contracts 18 

Table 3-2: Mean Rating of Ada Compilers or Tools 19 




Acknowledgements 

We thank those firms and individuals who gave so freely of their time, ideas, and experi¬ 
ences to clarify and further develop our understanding of Ada, the defense industry, and 
technology adoption decisions. In particular, we wish to thank Richard Martin. William 
Hefley, and Jane Siegel for sponsoring this study and for their valuable advice and assis¬ 
tance. We also wish to thank John Foreman and David McKeehan for their assistance in 
the formulation stage of this research, Maya Sternberg for data assistance, our research 
assistants, and several reviewers within the SEI for their help during various stages of this 
study. 





SEI-90-SR-10 






Understanding the Adoption of Ada: 
Results of an Industry Survey 


Abstract: In 1983, the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) established a policy 
requiring the use of a new programming language, Ada, for the development of all 
new Mission-Critical Computer Resource (MCCR) software that it purchases. 
Firms that supply the DoD with these systems have shown considerable variation 
in their decisions to incorporate this new technology into their products and pro¬ 
duction processes. This survey is part of a multi-stage research project that 
sought to understand the variability in firms' adoption and use of new information 
technologies. The present report is a follow-up and elaboration on a case study of 
the adoption of Ada which is described in CMU/SEI-89-TR-28, Understanding the 
Adoption of Ada: A Fiejd Study Report. 

Participants in the survey were 123 business and technical people f rom 69 busi¬ 
ness units that supply the DoD with MCCR software systems and services. The 
survey explored factors pertaining to respondents' technical and market environ¬ 
ments in an attempt to describe depth of adoption and to describe the differences 
between the firms with active Ada contracts and those without active contracts. 
For firms that have adopted Ada the report describes aspects of the language and 
tools that are considered most useful in different application areas. At present, 
85% of the units have proposed to use Ada as a primary implementation lan¬ 
guage, and 70% have been awarded a contract in which Ada is the primary imple¬ 
mentation language. Within the context of this study, Ada contract awards have 
been in the following application areas: aircraft engines, attack radar, display 
processors, flight control, flight trainers, ground control vehicles, night vision, radar 
warning receivers, missiles, space command and control, and tactical command 
and control. Survey participants reported that Ada is being used in 50% of the 
new development contracts and is being proposed for use in 60% of the contracts 
in the proposal stage. 


1. Study Background 

1.1. Introduction 

Like other new technologies, software engineering innovations have been subject to sub¬ 
stantial delays in their adoption and use [Redwine 85, ACMSIGSOFT 84], The potential im¬ 
portance of this class of information technologies, and the importance of understanding 
firms’ technology adoption decisions in general are the motivating factors for the present 
study and its predecessor, a case study. Previously, Smith et al [Smith 89] conducted a 
case study of seven business units from DoD contractors that made decisions about the 
adoption and use of Ada. Their findings indicated that contractor decisions about adopting 
Ada were influenced by: 


SEI-90-SR-10 


3 






1. The technical merits of the language. 

2. The software development expertise of the staff. 

3. Their perceptions of customer demand for Ada systems. 

The present study extended the scope of the case study to a larger set of factors associated 
with Ada adoption and to a more extensive list of business units and application areas. For 
an explanation of the history of Ada, a further characterization of MCCR software, and the 
stages of military software procurement, see Appendix A. 


1.2. Survey Design and Methodology 

Although Ada is a general-purpose, hgh-order programming language, in the U.S. it has 
been MCCR firms and industries in which this new information technology has been most 
aggressively evaluated, adopted, and used. The pool of potential respondents was drawn 
from firms supplying 13 different types of MCCR software and systems to the DoD. Appli¬ 
cation areas were chosen to assure variation across some key industry-level factors—such 
as business unit size, expertise ,i the application area, number of competitors, and primary 
customer—in order to explore the potential effects that these factors have on firms' Ada 
adoption decisions. We sought the perspectives of senior business and technical pe r sonnel 
within -ich busineoS unit. The 13 application areas chosen were: aircraft engines, attack 
radar, d'splay processors, flight control, flight trainers and simulators, ground control 
vehicles, ground survei'lance radar, missiles, night vision, radar warning receivers, space 
command and control, tactical command and control, and torpedoes. 

Firms operating in each application area were identified using multiple sources, including 
trade association directories, industry journals, the Corporate Technology 
Directory [CorpTech 83], and SEI technical staff recommendations. Also, survey respon¬ 
dents were asked to identify their competitors and those organizations were also contacted 
about survey participation. 

Each firm .vas telephoned to identify contacts within the business umt(s) of interest. In¬ 
dividuals we re contacted, given a brief introduction to the survey, and asked to participate 
by scheduling a time to conduct the interview. Respondents received a packet containing 
the appropriate questionnaire (business or technical and tailored to the application area) 
along with a cover letter reviewing the purpose, procedures, and confidentiality of the study. 
A copy or each questionnaire is in Appendix B. Of the 123 respondents, 82% were inter¬ 
viewed by te'ephone and 18% chose .o mtum the completed questionnaire by mail. 

1.2.1. Description of the Respondents 

The questionnaire was completed by 55 business respondents and 68 technical respon¬ 
dents. There were 51 pairs of respondents, meaning that both a technical and a business 
person from the same company and application area completed the forms. Table 1-1 
shows, by application area, the number of respondents and the minimum and maximum 
values for a selected set of business unit variables that characterize the firms. The vari- 
ab'es sel ?cted were: 


4 


SEI-90-SR-10 






» Business unit revenues. 

• The average number of contractors that compete in the market. 

• The number of years the urn't has oeen developing software in the application 
area. 

• The number of software personnel in the business unit. 

• The percentage of the market share that the business unit has in the application 
area. 

Some of the individuals responding were not included m Table 1-1 because there were too 
few participants in that application area to guarantee anonymity of the data. All responses 
from all individuals are reported in ether analyses and tables unless otherwise noted. 

Locking at Table 1-1, we see the revenues of the business units range from $5 million to $7 
billion, the number of software personnel ranges from a minimum of 2 to a maximum of 
6500, and the market share ranges from 1% to 100%. Some firms began supplying soft¬ 
ware in their application areas from the beginning of software use, while others are relatively 
new participants in t^eir fields. Ti.e column showing the numbe- of contractors competing in 
an application area can be used to illustrate that some application areas are more competi¬ 
tive than others and also as an indication of the representativeness of this sample in the 
different application areas. The responses to 50 questions that were common to both ques¬ 
tionnaires were examined to see if there were differences between business and technical 
respondents. The results were nearly identical and do not require separate reporting. 


SEI-90-SR-10 


5 


Business Unit f v rs AcDve 

Revenues * ol in Software «of Software % Market 

Respondents <n Millions ol $$ Competitors Development Personnel Share 


Table 1-1 


Description of the Respondents 


Mm Max 

50 

50 

99 

40 

CM 

** 

100 

20 

40 

80 

50 

20 

m 

09 

40 

30 

30 


m 

60 

o 

R 

CM 

30 

CO 

_ 

■ 

in 

Mm Max 

3500 

500 

50 

09 

300 

50 

80 

m 

06 

120 

600 

6500 

30 

20 

m 

rv 

30 

m 

o 

40 

CM 

m 

O 

m 

O 

20 

m 

X 

1 

C 

5 

CM 

29 

Ol 

cm 

CM 

o 

CM 

27 

m 

8 

CO 

29 

30 


H 

fl 

■ 

o> 

CM 

eg 

(0 

m 

CM 

■ 

CM 

■ 

CM 

Mm Max 

■ 

m 

<0 

o 

25 

m 

co 

(0 

■«r 

in 

<0 

20 

■ 


■ 

*n 

m 


m 

■ 

m 

■ 

■ 

m 

m 

CM 

M 

3 

c 

2 

7000 

500 

125 

300 

s 

m 

150 

t 

20 

300 

450 

300 

650 

350 

7000 

co 

125 

170 

R 

m 

in 

20 

30 

rv 

150 

m 

CM 

■V 

■C 

8 

H 

* 

1/1 

3 

CO 

at 

CM 

1 

eg 

CO 

<0 

CM 

1 

CM 

■ 

1 

<0 

c0 

CO 

CM 

eg 

eg 

(0 

<0 

CM 

B 

CM 

CO 

CO 

B 

H 

CO 

C 

s 

3 

& 

< 

15 

b » 

45 

% 

15 

I 

Display 

Processors 

Flight Control 

Flight Trainers 

Ground Control 
Vehicles 

3 

a 

8 

J 

la' 

Night Vision 

Radar Warning 
Receivers 

Missiles 

Spacecraft Command 
and Control 

Tactical Command 
and Control 

Torpedoes 


t 


6 


SEI-90-SR-10 


The percentage of market share columns can exceed 100% overall because a firm may make a specific product line within an applicabon area 
For example, the ground control vehicle application area includes companies lhal make distinct products such as tanks or personnel earners 




















































































































































2. Characterization of the Business Units 


2.1. Products 

One way to characterize the firms participating is to describe the number of MCCR markets 
a firm supplies, the type of multiple product lines, if any, the firm produces, the extent to 
which sales of non-software components depend on the ability to supply the software, and 
the extent to which sales of non-software components influence the software contracts on 
which a business unit bids. 

For the 51 business units in the 13 selected application areas, the number of MCCR mar¬ 
kets supplied ranges from 8 to 450. Components in addition to the software are manufac¬ 
tured by 93% of the firms. Below are the percentages of respondents manufacturing various 
components. 


60% Manufacture the computer hardware on which the software runs. 

39% Manufacture peripheral equipment. 

17% Manufacture a weapon system platform. 

18% Manufacture some other component, such as: 

Test equipment. 

Computer based training. 

Payloads. 

Expendable decoys or compressors. 

According to 55% of the respondents, sales of non-software products depended on the abil¬ 
ity of firms to supply the software; 43% said that potential sales of non-software products 
influenced the choice of software contracts on which they bid. 


2.2. Research and Development Expenditures 

The average research and development (R&D) expenditures of the participating firms were 
about $38 million with a standard error 1 of $26 million. R&D expenditures represent an 
average of 5.3% of business unit revenues. An average of 28% of the R&D budget is spent 
on software development and 29% of the software research budget is directed toward devel¬ 
oping Ada capabilities. Business unit R&D funds used for software development come from 
the followmg sources: 


'A standard error is a measure of the variability of the mean of a distribution. 


SEI-90-SR-10 


7 




56% From independent research and development (IR&D) funds. 
27% From contract awards. 

16% From company sponsored funds. 

1% From other sources. 


2.3. Contracts Characterized 


These contract terms are commonly in use among the 51 organizations for the development 
of software systems: 

60% Firm fixed price. 

1 1 % Cost plus award fee. 

9% Cost plus fixed fee awards. 

7% Cost plus incentive. 

6% Fixed price plus incentive. 

7% No response. 


The average dollar value of a contract over the last three years ranges from some small 
contracts (less than 1 million dollars) in night vision and ground surveillance radar to the 
very large contracts (over $100 million and up to $650 million) in ground surveillance radar, 
attack radar, missiles, tactical command and control, and torpedoes. The dollar value of 
contracts is thought to have decreased in value since 1985 in missiles and spacecraft com¬ 
mand and control. The dollar value of contracts is thought to have increased in the other 10 
application areas. Flight control was named as an application where some respondents felt 
the dollar value of contracts had increased and others thought it had decreased. Over the 
next three years, the dollar value of contracts is expected to decrease in the areas of attack 
radar and missiles. Increases in the dollar value of contracts are expected by 67% of the 
respondents and decreases are expected by 33% in ground surveillance radar, radar warn¬ 
ing receivers, and flight trainers/simulators. In both spacecraft and tactical command and 
control, 50% of the respondents felt that the dollar value of contracts would increase over 
the next three years and 50% thought the dollar value would decrease. Increased expen¬ 
ditures are expected in the areas of aircraft engines, flight control, and night vision. Ground 
control vehicles, display processors, and torpedoes expect the dollar value to remain about 
the same as it is now. 

The majority, 65%, said that from 2 to 10 contracts had been awarded over the last three 
years in their application areas. The range on the number of contracts awarded was from 0 
to 30; 21 individuals did not know how many contracts had been awarded. New programs 
are started in a range from every 4 months up to every 30 years; however, 40% of respon¬ 
dents reported new programs are started every 1 to 3 years. 

According to 53% of respondents, a delivered system is expected to be in a customer's 
operational inventory for about 15-20 years. Some systems are expected to remain only 5 
years and others as long as 40 years. The current percentage of project cost that is attri- 


8 


SEI-90-SR-10 




buted to the development of software is from 5% to 80%, with a mean of 37%. Three years 
ago the mean was 30% and three years from now it is expected to be about 43% of the 
project cost. Regardless of the value cited, all expect the percentage of cost attributed to 
software to increase in the next three years. 

When asked to name the percentage of expenditures over the lifetime of a system that 
might be spent on the initial development and production of the software, and the percent¬ 
age that would be spent on modification, enhancements, and maintenance, individuals re¬ 
ported a wide range of values. The values reported ranged from 15% for initial development 
and 85% for modification up to 90% for initial development and 10% for modification. 


2.4. Factors Influencing Contract Award 

Individuals were asked to rate 10 factors that might influence their primary customer’s 
choice of firm when awarding contracts. The factors were rated using a 7 point scale, where 
1 meant "to no extent," and 7 meant "to a great extent." The factor rated of greatest impor¬ 
tance in contract award was overall project cost, with proposed product performance, con¬ 
tractor experience in the application domain, and timeliness of projected product delivery as 
other variables that influenced the customer to more than a moderate extent in awarding 
contracts. Contractor software capability and projected software development cost were felt 
to exert a moderate influence. The factors thought to be of least importance in awarding 
contracts were software portability, ease of software maintenance, and expected cost of 
software maintenance. The factors and their mean rating were as follows: 

Table 2-1 : Rating of Contract Award Factors 


Overall project cost 6.24 

Proposed product performance 5.52 

Contractor experience in area 5.50 

Timeliness 5.30 

Last contract an advantage 4.84 

Project software development cost 4.63 

Contractor software capability 4.44 

Ease of software maintenance 3.41 

Software maintenance cost 3.33 

Software portability 2.91 


Additionally, respondents reported that they did not think their primary customer would be 
willing to trade lower costs in the long run for greater costs during project procurement, fur¬ 
ther emphasizing the importance of short-term costs in contract award. 


SE1-90-SR-10 


9 






2.5. Technical Aspects of Products: Language, Response 
Mode, Interfaces, and Constraints 

Languages used most over the last three years were reported to be Assembly, Ada, Fortran, 
C, Jovial, and Pascal. Operational software ran on an average of 7 processors, with the 
range being from 2 to 40. There were an average of 160,000 Delivered Source Instructions 
(DSI) in the operational software and an average of 6 Computer Software Configuration 
Items (CSCI) 2 per project. The number of CSCI ranged from 1 to 43. 

Other software characterizations are presented below with a format of question asked and 
then a summary of the percentage of respondents choosing each option. 

Which description best characterizes the required system response mode of operational 
software? 


88% Real time: Software must complete processing in 

response to an event prior to the occurrence of the next 
event. Arrival of the data and occurrence of events is not 
under the control of the software. 

7% Online software must respond within human 

compatible time frame, usually within seconds. 

5% Time constrained: Software must complete processing 
within a specified time frame. Time lines are on the 
order of minutes to hours; sometimes a clock time is 
specified for process completion. 

Which description best characterizes the effect of failure in the operational software? 

51% The effect can be the loss of human life. 

22% The effect is a moderate loss to users, but a situation 
from which one can recover with moderate penalty. 

22% The effect can be a major financial loss or a massive 
human inconvenience. 

3% The effect is a low level, easily recoverable loss to users. 

2% The effect is simply the inconvenience required of the 

developers to fix the fault. 


2 The reported mean of 6 CSCI and the range of CSCI was calculated after withholding one value of 2500 
CSCI. 


10 


SEI-90-SR-10 







Which description best characterizes the complexity of the interfaces? 

57% Interfaces are moderately complex. 

25% Interfaces are very complex; implementation of module 
design generally requires extensive knowledge of the 
implementation and design of other modules. 

18% Interfaces between software modules are simple and direct. 

Which description best characterizes the measures that your firm takes to deal with proc¬ 
essing constraints in the development of operational software? 

50% Performance analysis considerations are standard; 
usually addressed in the design phase. 

35% Performance analysis considerations are standard; 
considerations generally require extensive use of 
analysis tools for both the design and the development 
of the software. 

10% Performance analysis considerations are standard; 
usually addressed during later stages of 
development—for example, during validation 
and testing. 

5% No or limited performance analysis considerations 
are needed. 

The typical percentage of available processor execution time used by operational software 
is: 


23% 

<50% 


38% 

50% - 

70% 

19% 

71% - 

85% 

16% 

86%- 

95% 

3% 

>95% 



SEI-90-SR-10 


11 



Typical percentage of processor main storage used by the operational software is: 

18% <50% 

42% 50% - 70% 

25% 71%-85% 

9% 86% - 95% 

5% >95% 

Measures used to deal with memory constraints in the development of operational software: 

38% Some overlaying or segmentation 
27% No memory constraints 
24% Complex memory management and 
economic measures 

11% Extensive overlaying and segmentation 

2.6. Software Process: Practices and Procedures 

Technical personnel were asked to describe the software development process of their proj¬ 
ects in two ways. One question asked them to select a description that best characterized 
the general software development process of their business unit. The descriptions cor¬ 
respond to the five levels of software process maturity described by Humphrey in 
Characterizing the Software Process: A Maturity Framework [Humphrey 89], The other way 
of describing the software development process consisted of a set of 20 questions 3 selected 
from A Method for Assessing the Software Engineering Capability of Contractors [Humphrey 
87], The responses to the 20 questions were combined into an overall software develop¬ 
ment score, where 20 would be the highest score, corresponding to an interpretation of ade¬ 
quate high-level software development practices. 

A "yes" answer to a question indicates that the procedure or activity is one that the business 
unit uses in its software development process. The percentage of the 68 respondents falling 
within specific ranges is as follows: 

53% 11-15 questions answered yes 

37% 16-20 questions answered yes 
10% 10 or fewer questions answered yes 

On the descriptor chosen as characterizing the software development process and the total 
score on the 20 process questions, results were similar. Those who characterized the de¬ 
velopment process as less mature had lower process scores and those who characterized 
the software development process as fairly mature had higher process scores. The mean, 


3 The 20 questions were selected from a total of 101 questions on two bases: (1) they represent the key 
practices adequately, and (2) they did well with respect to internal consistency. 


12 


SEI-90-SR-10 






standard deviation of the process score and number of people choosing each level of the 
maturity characterization is shown in Table 2-2. 

Table 2-2: Process Score for Each Maturity Level 



Mean 

Standard 

Deviation 

Number of 
Respondents 

Initial 

10.7 

4.07 

14 

Repeatable 

14.3 

2.57 

35 

Defined 

15.7 

3.17 

12 

Managed 

18.7 

2.31 

3 

Optimized 

20.0 

-- 

1 


The items that were most frequently answered "no" and the percentage of individuals choos¬ 
ing that response were as follows: 

1. Is a mechanism used for initiating error prevention action? (70%) 

2. Is a mechanism used for error cause analysis? (69%) 

3. Are the error causes reviewed to determine the process changes required to 
prevent them? (57%) 

4. Is software productivity analyzed for major process steps? (52%) 

Individuals were asked to compare the software development capabilities of their business 
unit with that of their competitors. The process score for the different comparisons were 
again similar, meaning that those who rated the capabilities of their business unit as some¬ 
what below those of their competitors had lower process scores than those who rated the 
capabilities of their business unit as better than average. The values are summarized in 
Table 2-3. 


Table 2-3: Software Development Capabilities 


Process Score 


Comoarison to Comoetitor 

Mean 

Standard 

Deviation 

Number of 
ResDondents 

Below Average 

10.4 

2.12 

5 

About Average 

13.4 

3.16 

14 

Better than Average 

15.0 

3.21 

37 


SEI-90-SR-10 


13 




3. Ada Use 


3.1. Primary Customer’s Attitude 

Business respondents were asked their perception of their primary customer’s attitude 
toward the use of Ada for the development of software systems. The results were as fol¬ 
lows: 


55% Rate their customer as preferring Ada 
but willing to consider other languages. 

17% Report that their customer insists on Ada. 

17% Rate their customers as indifferent to language used. 

11% Rate their custom ers as against or 
adverse to the use of Ada. 

Respondents also gave their perceptions of their customer's attitude toward language use 
three years ago and three years in the future. There is a definite change in attitude toward 
language use across that time period. Approximately 45% of the customers were perceived 
as being adverse to Ada use three years ago, declining to only 2% expected to remain ad¬ 
verse to Ada three years from now. Respondents were further asked their expectation of 
the percentage of new development contracts for which Ada will be the required language in 
1989, 1990, and 1991. While not as pronounced as the expectations of attitude toward 
language used, there is still an increase in the percentage of contracts expected to require 
Ada. Respondents expect 56% of their contracts to require Ada use in 1989, 67% in 1990, 
and 76% in 1991. They further estimated that during the past three years about 37% of the 
contracts had been awarded to companies proposing to use Ada as the primary implemen¬ 
tation language. 


3.2. Ada Use in the Business Units 

Some other characteristics of the business units reported by the technical respondents are 
as follows: 


85% Have proposed to use Ada as the primary implementation 
language 

72% Have used an Ada PDL 

71% Have built Ada software as part of an R&D project 
69% Have been contracted to develop a system using Ada 
34% Of the software development efforts within a business 
unit use an Ada PDL 

28% Were funded by a customer for the R&D project 
The number of Ada R&D projects undertaken per organization range from 1 to 25, with 35% 


SEI-90-SR-10 


15 





not responding. Of those who answered, 54% have done 1 or 2 projects, while 44% have 
done from 3 to 6 projects. Only one person responded that his business unit had under¬ 
taken 25 R&D projects. The range of lines of executable code (LOC) for the largest single 
Ada R&D project undertaken by the various business units was from 2,000 to 1,200,000 
LOC. The average size was 78,000 LOC. 

3.3. Ada Contracts 

The year named, the number of respondents, and the application for the first contract 
awarded to a firm that proposed to use Ada as the primary implementation language was as 
follows: 


1981 

1 

Tactical command and control (C 2 ) 

1982 

1 

Tactical C 2 

1983 

2 

Tactical C 2 

1984 

2 

Night vision, spacecraft C 2 

1985 

5 

Display processor, ground control vehicles, 
flight trainers, spacecraft C 2 . 
tactical C 2 

1986 

7 

Aircraft engines, tactical C 2 , 
flight trainers 

1987 

5 

Attack radar, torpedoes, missiles, 
flight control, spacecraft C 2 

1988 

8 

Missiles, flight trainers, ground control 
vehicles, radar warning receivers, 
flight control, spacecraft C 2 

1989 

4 

Flight control, radar warning receivers, 
spacecraft C 2 


In addition to the numbers above, 10 (18%) said that as yet no contract had been awarded 
that required Ada as the primary implementation language and 18% said they didn’t know 
when the first contract requiring Ada had been awarded in their application area. For this 
group of respondents, the first Ada contracts were awarded in the area of tactical command 
and control. It was reported that in 1988 an Ada contract was awarded in the radar warning 
receivers area. This information on contracts requiring Ada use, also gives an indication 
that Ada is being used in a variety of application areas. 

3.4. Ada Trained Personnel 

Technical personnel were asked how much more difficult it was to hire technical staff with 
Ada capabilities. They reported that it is moderately difficult to hire programming staff and 
much more difficult to hire software/systems designers with Ada capabilities. When asked 
how much of a salary premium, if any, is commanded by newly hired staff with Ada capabil- 




ities, 35% of the respondents said a premium would be paid. The average value of the 
premium reported was 12%, with a range from 5% to 40%. Conversely, 65% of the respon¬ 
dents said no salary premium would be paid for Ada capabilities. Several respondents also 
commented that experience in the application area was equally important and necessary. 


3.5. Expected Effects of Ada Use During Production 

Respondents were asked their expectations of the effect of Ada use on time and cost 
changes at specific development stages. Since responses were very similar for time and 
cost they are reported together. Respondents expect that more time and cost will be re¬ 
quired during top-level design and detailed design stages. Time and cost are expected to 
be less during full-scale development, integration and test, and production support. Code 
and unit test are expected to take about the same time and cost as development in another 
language. The respondents categorized the expected effect of Ada use on overall time and 
overall cost to develop a system as follows: 

Overall Effect on Time 

33.3% Expect the time required to decrease an average of 24%. 

33.3% Expect the time required to increase an average of 18%. 

33.3% Expect the time required to about the same as in another language. 

Overall Effect on Cost 

33.3% Expect the cost to decrease an average of 21%. 

33.3% Expect the cost to increase an average of 19%. 

33.3% Expect costs to be about the same. 

Other Expected Effects of Ada Use 

Compared to similar systems implemented in other languages: 

75% Expect that Ada will decrease overall post-development 
support costs by an average of 25%. 

74% Expect that the number of Class II errors will be lower. 

73% Expect that the number of Class I errors will be lower. 

59% Expect that Ada direct iabor costs will be lower. 

3.6. Acquisition of Ada Tools and Use of Ada Features 

An Ada compiler was first acquired in 1981 by one of the firms; however, 93% first acquired 
an Ada compiler between 1983 and 1988. Among respondents, 43% acquired the compiler 
for a specific project, but 57% did not. The compiler was sufficiently mature and could be 
used without customization at the time of its first use for 24% of the respondents. The Ada 


SEI-90-SR-10 


17 





compilers were reported as validated when first acquired by 65% of the respondents. Ade¬ 
quate Ada vendor support was reported by 70% of respondents, and 22% have established 
some kind of long-term relationship with an Ada vendor. 


Technical individuals whose business units have designed or developed a system in Ada 
were asked the extent to which they found certain features of Ada useful. The features 
asked about were: 

• Generics 

• Packages 

• Private types 

• Derived types 

• Access types 

• Exceptions 

• Record types 

Those cited as being .sed more than moderately were record types and packages. The 
least used feature was generics. Of the respondents, 47, or 72%, used ail 8 of the Ada 
language features and can be considered adopters of Ada. Of the 47 respondents. 41 also 
gave the month and year they had started to develop Ada capabilities in their staff and had 
acquired an Ada compiler. Of those supplying the time information, 42% trained staff before 
acquiring an Ada compiler. There were 31 technical respondents who supplied month and 
year data for acquiring a compiler and f or the first proposal to use Ada. It was surprising to 
note that 25% had proposed to develop a program in Ada before acquiring a compiler. This 
observed time sequence differs somewhat from a supposed adoption model of acquiring a 
compiler, training staff, proposing to develop a project, and receiving a contract. 

Respondents were asked for the percentage of new development contracts they are im¬ 
plementing in Assembly, Ada, and other high-order languages and for the percentage of 
new development contracts they propose to develop in those languages. The results are 
shown m Table 3-1. 

Table 3-1 : Language Used and Proposed for New Contracts 



Imolemented 

Pl.QPQS.6d 

Ada 

50% 

66% 

Assembly 

15% 

11% 

Other 

35% 

23% 


The other languages used and proposed for use in order of decreasing frequency cited were 
C. Fortran, Pascal, and Jovial. 




3.7. Comparison of Ada Compilers With Other Compilers 

Respondents were asked for their opinion of Ada compilers and tools compared to other 
available compilers and tools at three points in time: 

• Three years ago. 

• At the present time. 

• Three years from now. 

They rated the comparable quality using a 7 point scale where "1" meant significantly infe¬ 
rior, "4" meant approximately the same, and "7" meant significantly superior. 

The average rating of Ada compilers or tools compared to other compilers or tools at three 
time periods is shown in Table 3-2. 

Table 3-2: Mean R 'ting of Ada Compilers or Tools 


Compared to Other 

3 Years Auo 

Now 

3 Years from Now 

Ada Compilers 

1.73 

3.61 

5.17 

Ada Tools 

1.75 

3.52 

5.16 


When they compared today's Ada compilers and tools to Ada compilers and tools available 
at two other time periods the ratings were 1.57 for three years ago and 5.56 for three years 
in the future. Thus it seems that 'da compilers and tools have improved from three years 
ago, that they are now viewed as of comparable quality to other compilers and tools, and 
that it is expected that they will oe somewhat superior to other compilers and tools three 
years from now. 


3.8. Comparison of Units With and Without Ada Contracts 

A further indication of the extent of Ada acceptance is that all but 4 (7%) business units own 
an Ada compiler. Only 3 (5%) say they have not developed Ada capabilities in their staff, 
and only 5 (9%) have not proposed to build a system in which Ada is the primary implemen¬ 
tation language. At present, 37 (70°'o) 4 of all business units responding have been awarded 
a contract to develop a system using Ada as the primary implementation language. Of 
those 37 contractors with an Ada contract, 37% considered the Air Force their primary cus¬ 
tomer, 35% considered the Navy their primary customer, and 17% considered the Army 
their primary customer. The other contractors either deal equally with all branches, another 
DoD or federal agency or work primarily in the commercial market. The market share of 
these with Ada contracts range from 2% to 60% with a mean of 19%. 


’This figure differs from the 69% reported by the technical respondents on page 17 because of the difference 
in the number of respondents in each group. 


EI-9C SFI-10 


19 






Of the 16 contractors who have not yet been awarded an Ada development contract, 5 are 
in either the radar warning receivers or torpedoes application areas. The other business 
units not having an awarded contract in Ada are scattered across the other application 
areas. Of those without an Ada contract, 24% consider the Air Force as their primary cus¬ 
tomer, 18% consider the Navy their primary customer, and 12% consider the Army their 
primary customer. The market share of this group in their respective application areas 
ranges from 5% to 80% with a mean of 30%. 

Several other variables were examined to see if there were any differences between those 
who have Ada contracts and those who do not. A summary of six variables on which the 
two groups differed follows. 

For the group with contracts: 

1. The average dollar value of a contract is $54 million. 

2. An average of 8 new contracts was awarded in the last 3 years. 

3. New programs are started on an average of every 37 months. 

4. A system remains in the customer's inventory about 17 years. 

5. The average cost of an Ada compiler, linker, and loader is $95,000. 

6. 31% of the software staff have experience developing Ada software systems 
in the application area. 

For the group without Ada contracts: 

1. The average dollar value of a contract is $83 million. 

2. An average of 5 new contracts per year were awarded in the last 3 years. 

3. New programs are started on an average of every 75 months. 

4. A system remains in the customer's inventory about 21 years. 

5 The average cost of an Ada compiler, linker, and loader is $67,000. 

6. 10% of the software staff have experience developing Ada software systems 
in the application area. 

The cost (purchase price, plus the cost of customization) to acquire a production quality Ada 
compiler, linker, and loader was rrom a minimum of $8,000 up to a maximum of $300,000 
for those with an Ada contract and from a minimum of $8,000 to a maximum of $150,000 for 
those without a contract. 


20 


SEI-90-SR-10 



The variables examined on which the two groups did not differ were: 

1. The turnover rate of their software personnel. 

2. The rating on their group's software process capabilities. 

3. The percentage of the project cost attributed to software. 

4. The primary customer’s attitude toward Ada use. 

5. The percentage of software personnel receiving their Ada training in courses 
sponsored or paid for by the firm. 

6. The percentage of software personnel that can design and code in Ada. 

7. The cost to train staff to design and implement in Ada. 

Correlations were calculated between firm size, market share, primary customer, number of 
competitors, and having or not having an Ada contract. The results indicated: 

1. A significant correlation between: 

• Number of competitors and percentage of Army contracts, r= .44. 

• An Ada contract and market share, r= -.49. 

2. Some, but not a significant relationship between: 

• Number of competitors and an Ada contract, r= .30. 

• Number of competitors and market share, r= -.32. 

3. There was no correlation between: 

• Firm size variables and an Ada contract. 

• Firm size and market share. 

• Primary DoD customer and an Ada contract. 

The conclusion from these calculations is that: 

1. Firms with the larger market share tend not to have an Ada contract. 

2. Firms with more competitors tend to have Ada contracts. 

3. Having an Ada contract is not related to firm size variables or primary cus¬ 
tomer. 

In summary, the characterization of firms with Ada contracts, when compared to those with¬ 
out contracts, is that firms with Ada contracts operate in a more competitive arena, where 
contracts have lower dollar value, and are awarded more frequently for systems that stay in 
the customer’s inventory an average of 4 fewer years. Further, firms with Ada contracts 
have a larger percentage of staff with experience developing Ada software systems in the 
application area. 


SEI90-SR-10 


21 






References 


[ACMSIGSOFT 84] 

ACMSIGSOFT. 

The Magic Number Eighteen Plus or Minus Three: A Study of Software 
Technology Maturation. 

Software Engineering Notes. 

April. 1984 

[CorpTech 89] CorpTech. 

Corporate Technology Directory. 

4th Edition. 

1989 


[Humphrey 87] 


[Humphrey 89] 


[Redwine 85] 


[Smith 89] 


Humphrey, W. S. and-Sweet, W. L. 

A Method for Assessing the Software Engineering Capability of 
Contractors. 

Technicai Report CMU/SEI-87-TR-23, ESD7TR-87-186, ADA187230, SEI 
'lechnical Report, September, 1987. 

Humphrey, W. S. 

Characterizing the Software Process: A Maturity Framework. 

IEEE Software , March, 1989. 

Redwine, S. T., Jr. and Riddle, W. E. 

Software Technology Maturation. 

IEEE - Proceedings-8th International Conference on Software Engineer¬ 
ing. 

August, 1985 

Smith, G. N., Cohen, W. M., Hefley, W. E. and Levinthal, D. A. 

Understanding the Adoption of Ada: A Field Study Report. 

Technical Report CMU/SEI-89-TR-28, ESD-TR-89-37, ADA219188, SEI 
Technical Report, 1989. 


SEI-90-SR-10 


23 






Appendix A: Overview of Ada and MCCR Software 

Nominally, Ada is a general purpose programming language 5 . Like other programming lan¬ 
guages, it is a collection of syntactical rules, constructs, functions, abstractions, etc., that 
can be used to model a problem and its solution. Ada is unlike other languages, however, in 
the degree to which it fosters and supports the practice of software engineering principles. 6 
These design principles are believed to lower software development costs, increase soft¬ 
ware quality, and lower maintenance costs, especially for large or complex systems. In ef¬ 
fect these features and the structure of the language make it easier to develop software that 
is more understandable and more maintainable. 7 

In addition to being another programming language, Ada is also being promoted as the stan¬ 
dard language for the largest class of DoD software applications. Standardization on a 
handful of high-order languages (HOLs) for the development of military software was ex¬ 
pected to have at least three major benefits for the DoD. First, software personnel in both 
the DoD and its contractors had become fragmented over the large number of languages. 8 
This meant that software professionals were not readily able to move from project to project. 
Second, the proliferation of languages meant that the DoD had great difficulty transporting 
software across computer environments. In addition to the costs of rehosting software, the 
diversity of development languages meant that the DoD could not readily utilize the software 
that it already had as a capital stock of predeveloped, pretested software components avail¬ 
able for reuse in other systems. Finally, the large number of languages meant that few 
commercial software tools were available for any given language. Just as software profes¬ 
sionals had become fragmented, the efforts of tool suppliers were being spread across nu¬ 
merous small language markets. If the DoD, itself a consumer of considerable amounts of 
software, could limit the number of languages it used, tools vendors would have relatively 
larger markets on which to concentrate their efforts. Presumably, with bigger potential mar¬ 
kets these vendors would have incentives to produce more and better tools for the DoD and 
its contractors. In summary, the DoD foresaw significant savings in the personnel, tools, 
software reuse, and training if the number of languages it supported were reduced. 


5 Ada is defined in ANSI/MIL-STD-1815A. 

Specifically, the language was designed and developed to support structured constructs, strong typing, 
relative and absolute precision specification, information hiding and abstraction, concurrent processing, excep¬ 
tion handling, generic definition, and machine-dependent facilities. 

7 Although the language does have constructs that support requirements such as exception handling, it is 
reasonable to assume that the greatest benefits that may come from using Ada are not because of the language 
per se. but because it facilitates more disciplined software development practices. It is important to note that 
while Ada is a tool that fosters better development practices, the language itself neither makes a programmer 
into software engineer, nor does it automatically increase the “quality" of software. It is possible to use Ada 
syntax without producing a well engineered system. In a very real sense, the effect that Ada use will have on 
software costs and quality depends on firms’ abilities to exploit the features of the language. 

8 ln 1973, it was estimated that the DoD was using and maintaining systems written in 450 different languages 
and dialects. Further, half of these were assembly languages. 


SEI-90-SR-10 


25 







Mission-Critical Computer Resource (MCCR) covers a wide range of applications from small 
systems used to monitor engine performance to multi-million line systems used to coor¬ 
dinate military commands across the globe. 9 If we were to characterize the software in these 
systems in general, it tends to be large, real-time, long-lived, and subject to continuous 
change. In addition, because of the environments in which it operates, MCCR system soft¬ 
ware must almost always be highly fault tolerant, and the systems themselves are frequently 
hardware resource constrained. Together, characteristics of the software (large, processing 
and communication intensive) and characteristics of the environment (long operating life, 
constant change, high cost of software failure, resource constrained) put severe demands 
on MCCR software performance, and in turn, on suppliers of these systems. Ada’s devel¬ 
opment was initiated and sponsored largely in response to the DoD's perceived need for a 
tool with which software contractors could better meet the increasing demand for and strin¬ 
gent requirements of this large and important class of systems. 

However, the accelerated adoption of Ada in MCCR applications is not simply a function of 
its demonstrated or expected technical superiority over languages that are currently being 
used by contractors. In part, firms are also reacting to a DoD policy that mandates Ada use 
for the development of MCCR applications. Because of this policy, firms that develop 
MCCR products have had to carefully evaluate Ada in light of its potential effects as both a 
new production process and as a new product. While the policy has made contractors 
aware of Ada, the effect that the mandate has had on determining firms’ adoption decisions 
should not be overstated. The policy has not established a uniform demand for Ada sys¬ 
tems across MCCR product markets. Implementation of the DoD directive at the operational 
level has shown a great deal of variance in customers' demand for, or even willingness to 
consider, systems written in this relatively new and unproven programming language. As a 
consequence, firms have been evaluating, adopting, and not adopting Ada in a large variety 
of markets and technical environments. 

I.a. Procurement of Military Software 

Military procurement is generally defined by the weapon system life cycle and the type of 
contract terms. The weapon system acquisition life cycle is a five phase process with a 
contract typically awarded at the beginning of each phase. The phases, concept explora¬ 
tion, demonstration and validation, full-scale development, production, and deployment, are 
nominally separate steps, although some overlap of phases may occur. 

Concept exploration: This initial phase in the acquisition process is preceded by the identifi- 


9 MCCR is properly defined in DoD Directive 5000.29 to include the following applications: intelligence activi¬ 
ties, cryptologic activities for national security, command and control, equipment integral to a weapon system 
(i.e., embedded systems), and resources critical to military and intelligence missions. Computers integral to 
weapon systems are described as follows: (a) physically a part of, dedicated to, or essential in real- time to a 
performance of the mission of a weapon system, (b) used for specialized training, diagnostic testing and 
maintenance, simulation, or calibration of weapons systems, (c) used for research and development of a weapon 
system. 


26 


SEI-90-SR-10 




cation and approval of a mission that is not adequately being met by the present systems. 
In the concept exploration phase a number of alternatives for meeting the mission need are 
developed and explored. Alternative solutions include not only the development of new sys¬ 
tems, but also the modification of existing equipment. Recommendations in the form of a 
written document are then passed up the chain of command for consideration. The final 
review and decision to continue to the next phase is called Milestone I. 

Demonstrations and Validation: If the decision at Milestone I is to continue development of 
a new system, the program moves to the demonstration and validation phase. The purpose 
of this phase is to further define alternatives developed in concept exploration. Definition 
usually involves paper studies, but in the extreme may include the development of complete 
working prototypes of competing alternative designs. During this phase, source selection 
between two or more competing contractors is made. Milestone II, a review process, ends 
this phase. 

Full-Scale Development (FSD): During FSD all equipment essential for the manufacture 
and maintenance of the system is designed, fabricated, and tested. The outcome of the 
FSD phase is the production of one or more preproduction models of the proposed system. 
It is during this phase that the system software is developed and tested. After FSD, the 
program is again reviewed and a decision is made to cancel or to go to full production of the 
program. At this time, Milestone III, a decision is made about the number of systems to be 
produced. 

Production/Deployment: The final two stages of the process are as their names imply. A 
series of contracts for production lots may be awarded over the production lifetime of the 
system. Recently, DoD has made a concerted effort to give production contracts to more 
than one contractor in order to maintain some level of competition for contracts. In deploy¬ 
ment, the systems and all supporting equipment are turned over to the command units for 
their use. 

At any one of these phases a contractor may be eliminated from contract competition. Once 
a contractor is eliminated, it is difficult, though not impossible, to become involved in subse¬ 
quent stages of that particular project. 


I.b. Contract Types 

DoD contracts for weapon system procurement generally are either fixed price or cost reim¬ 
bursement. 

Fixed-price contracts are used when contract performance costs can be accurately es¬ 
timated ex ante, and when the terms for contract completion are sufficiently specific. In the 
extreme firm fixed-price contract, the contractor agrees to deliver a specified item(s), at a 
specified time, and for a specified price. Variants of the fixed-price contract exist in which 
the contractor and the DoD share realized cost savings or overruns. 


SEI-90-SR-10 


27 






Cost-reimbursement contracts are used when cost, performance, or schedule uncertainties 
for contract completion are more significant. Under the terms of a cost-reimbursement con¬ 
tract, the DoD agrees to pay some portion of the contractor’s project related expenses, plus 
a fixed or variable fee. 

The type of contract used for a procurement is dictated by the DoD, and is a function of the 
anticipated risks of contract completion. As risks increase, the DoD tends to take a greater 
share of the risks through the use of cost-reimbursement contracts. Almost by definition, 
shifting the burden of risk between the contractor and the DoD can significantly change the 
contractors' incentives as well as their exposure to risk. 


28 


SEI-90-SR-10 








Appendix B: Questionnaires 


Technical Questionnaire 


A. Application Software Information: Questions on the next three pages are Intended to elicit 
a general characterization ot (APPLICATION AREA) software and systems. Your answers should 
reflect, as best as possible, estimates baaed on recent (APPLICATION AREA) systems with 
which you are familiar. 


A.i . Languages and Processors: 

1. Over the last three years, what three languages has your business unit used most to develop software tor 
(APPLICATION AREA) systems’: (please list in decreasing order of use. it assembly language, please indicate 
processor) 

(«)■ 

(b).___ 

«:)• _ 

2. For what three target processors (e g 17S0A, 68010, 80286) has your firm's (APPLICATION AREA) business unit 
developed the most software over the past three years?: (please list in decreasing order of use) 

(«)• _ 

(b)-_ 

(<:)•__ _ 

3. In the operating (target) environment, does the (APPLICATION AREA) software that your firm develops run on multiple 

processors’: Yes _ No:_ 

If No: Please skip to the top of the next page. 

If Yes: Please answer 3.a. and 3.b.. 

3.a. Disregarding the types of processors, on approximately how many total processors does (APPLICATION 
AREA) operational software run?:_ 

3.b. Which ot the descriptions below best characterizes the degree ot coupling between processors in 
(APPLICATION AREA) systems?: (choose one) 

. Processors are independent with each having its own memory and storage resources. 

_. Processors are largely independent, but share some global memory. 

_. Processors are coupled by sharing common memory and'or storage 

_: Processors are coupled by passing messages (e g task completion) 

_: Processors are coupled through shared tasks. 

_: Other (please briefly descrfoe):_ 


Don't Know 


SEI-90-SR-10 


29 






A. Application Sottwara Information: (cont'd) 

A.2. Software Size/ Effect* on Software Design: 

1. Approximately, how many Delivered Source Instructions are there in the operational software lor a (APPLICATION 
AREA) system’: ___ 


2. Approximately, into how many Computer Software Configuration Items (CSCI) is the operational software in a 

(APPLICATION AREA) system divided?:_ 

3. What is the typical percentage of available processor execution time used by operational software in (APPLICATION 
AREA) systems?: (choose one) 

_: <50% 

_: 50% - 70% 

_: 71%-85% 

_: 86% - 95% 

_: >95% 

_: Don! Know 


4, Which of the descriptions below best characterizes the measures that your firm takes to deal with processing 
constraints in the development of operational software for (APPLICATION AREA) systems’: (choose one) 

_: No or limited performance analysis considerations are needed 

_: Performance analysis considerations are standard; usually addressed during latter stages of 

development (e g validation and testing stages). 

_: Performance analysis considerations are standard; usually addressed in the design phase 

_. Performance analysis considerations are standard; considerations generally require extensive use of 

analysis tools for both the design and the development of the software 
Donl Know 


5. What is the typical percentage of processor mam storage (i e , direct random access storage) used by the operational 
software in (APPLICATION AREA) systems? (choose one) 

_: <50% 

_: 50% - 70% 

_. 71%-85% 

_: 86% - 95% 

_: >95% 

_■ Donl Know 

6. Which of the descriptions below besl characlenzes the measures that your firm takes to deal with memory constraints 
in the development of operational software for (APPLICATION AREA) systems’ (choose one) 

_: No memory constraints 

: Some overlaying or segmentation. 

_: Extensive overlaying and segmentation. 

_: Complex memory management and economic measures. 

Don! Know 






T 


! 


i 

A. Application Sottwara Information: (cont'd) 

A.3. Software Complexity; 

1. Which ol Ihe descriptions below best characterizes the required system response mode ol operational software for 
(APPLICATION AREA) systems: (choose one) 

_Non-time critical: No timo constraint (or the completion ot processing. 

_: Time-constrained: Software must complete processing within a specified time frame. Time lines are 

on the order of minutes to hours; sometimes a dock time is specified for process completion. 

_: On-line: software must respond wrthin human compatible time frame, usually within a few seconds 

_: Real-time. The software must complete processing in tesponse to an event prior to the occurrence of 

the next event. Arrival of the data and occurrence of events is not under the control of the software 

Don't Know 


2. Which of the descriptions below best characterizes the effect ol failure in the operatonal software for (APPLICATION 
AREA) systems? (choose one) 

_ The effect of a software failure is simply the inconvenience required of the developers to fix the fault 

_. The effect of a software failure is a low level, easily recoverable loss to users. 

_: The effect of a software failure is a moderate loss to users, but a situation from which one can recover 

with moderate penalty. 

_: The effect of a software failure can be a mapr financial loss or a massive human inconvenience 

_: The effect of a software failure can be the loss of human life 

_Don't Know 


3. Which of the descriptions below best characterizes the complexity ot the interfaces in the (APPLICATION AREA) 
software that your firm develops 7 : (choose one) 

_: Interfaces between software modules are simple and direct, implementation of software module 

design can usually be done with only highly abstracted knowledge of other software modules. 

_ Interfaces between software modules are moderately complex; some knowledge ot other software 

modules' design is often needed in order to implement software module design; 

_ Interfaces between software modules are very complex; implementation of software module design 

generally requires extensive knowledge of other modules' implementation as well as their designs 

_Dont Know 


4. Over the lifetime of a (APPLICATION AREA) system, what percentage of DoD expenditures tor system software may 
be expected to be for 

_%, Initial Development/Producton of Software up to ns Acceptance/Deployment 

_%. Modificatons, Enhancements, and Maintenance of the Software afler Inmal 

Acceplance/Deployment 


SEI-90-SR-10 


31 


B. Software Development Organization: in thl» *ectlon we a*k question* Intended to get e 
general picture of the eoftware pereonnsl and procedures In the part of your firm that produces 
software for (APPLICATION AREA) systems. 


t. Approximately, how many software personnel are currently employed by your firm's (APPLICATION AREA) business 
unit?:_ (do not induce temporary personnel that may be contracted to cover peak staffing on projects) 

2. Approximately, how many software personnel were employed by your firm's (APPLICATION AREA) business unit 

three years ago 7 :_ Don't Know:_ Not Applicable:_ 

3. What percentage of the software personnel in your firm's (APPLICATION AREA) business unit have earned the 
following university degrees with majors in Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, Computer Engineering, Information 
Science, or Software Engineering 7 What percentage have degrees in other majors or no degrees 7 : 

(the summation ot percentages should be approximately equal to 100) 

_% PhD/Doctorate 

% MS/Masters Majors in Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, Computer Engineenng 

_% Bachelors Information Science, Software Engineering 

_Degrees m other majors; 

_No degree 

3 100 % 

4. Wha' percentage ot the software development staff m your firm's (APPLICATION AREA) business unit have the 
following years ot industry software development experience 7 (the summation of percentages should be approximate"/ 
equal to 100) 

_% 0 - a 2 years 

_% 2 a 4 years 

_% 4 • < 6 years 

_% 5 - < 8 years 

_% 8 - a 10 years 

_*4 10 years or more 

= 100 X 

5. What is the average tenu'e (years employed by your company) oI the software development staff in your business 
unit’ (choose one) 

_ 0 - a 2 years 

__ 2 a 4 years 

_4 < 6 years 

_ 6 • a 8 years 

_ 8 • a 10 years 

_, 10 years or more 

5.a. How does your business unit's turnover rate ot software personnel compare to the firms with wheh you 
compete for (APPLICATION AREA) development contracts 7 Is the turnover rate cn your (irm's (APPLICATION 
AREA) business unit: (choose an integer from 1 to 7, "OK" tor Dont Know, or 'N/A‘ for Not Applicable) 


Significantly About Significantly 

Lower than Average. Average .Higher than Average 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 D/rC N/A 





B. Software Development Organization: (cont'd) 


8.2. Business Unit Software Practice* and Procedures: To the right ol each question below ere 
(our responses: "YES", "NO", "Don't Know", and "Not Applicable" As you read each question, 
consider how It pertains to recent (APPLICATION AREA) projects with which you are familiar. II 
you feel the practice referenced In the question I* generally a part of the software development 
procedures In your firm's (APPLICATION APEA) software development project*, choose "YES”. If 
the practice Is not generally part of software development procedure, choose "NO". If you do not 
know If a practice Is generally part of software development procedures for projects, choose 
"D/K". If you feel that a question la not applicable to sollwar* developments, or If you do not 
understand a question, choose "N/A". 

(a) Is there a software configuration control function 


for projects that involve software development?: 

YES 

NO 

D/K 

N/A 

(b) Is a mechanism used for managing and supporting the 
introduction of new technologies'?: 

YES 

NO 

D/K 

N/A 

(c) Does the software organization use a standard zed and 
documented software development process on projects?: 

YES 

NO 

D K 

N/A 

(d) Are standards used for the content of software development 
files/lolders?: 

YES 

NO 

D/K 

N/A 

(•) Are coding standards applied to software development projects' 5 : 

YES 

NO 

D/K 

N/A 

(f) A(e internal design review standards applied to software 
development projects' 5 : 

YES 

NO 

D/K 

N/A 

(g) Are code review standards applied to software development projects' 5 : 

YES 

NO 

D/K 

N/A 

(h) Are profiles maintained over time of actual versus planned 
software units completing unit testing' 5 : 

YES 

NO 

D/K 

N/A 

(1) Are target computer memory utilization estima'es and actuals tracked* 5 

YES 

NO 

D/K 

N/A 

(J) Are the action items resulting from code reviews tracked to closure -5 : 

YES 

NO 

D/K 

N/A 

(k) Is a mechan-sm used for error nause analysis' 5 

YES 

NO 

D/K 

N/A 

(H \re the error causes reviewed to determine the 
orocoss changes required to prevent them* 5 

YES 

NO 

D/K 

N/A 

(m) Is a mechanism used fur initiating error prevention acton? 

YES 

NO 

D/K 

N/A 

(n) Is software productivity analyzed for ma,jf process steps' 5 

YES 

NO 

D'K 

N/A 

(o) Does senor management regularly review the status of 
software development projects' 5 

YES 

NO 

D/K 

N/A 

(p) Is a mechanism used for periodically assessing the software engineering 
process and implementing indicated improvements' 5 . 

YES 

NO 

D/K 

N' A 

(q) Is a mechanism used for ensuring compliance with 
the software engineering standards' 5 : 

YES 

NO 

D/K 

N/A 

(r) Is a mechanism used for controlling changes to the software 
requirements?: 

YES 

NO 

D/K 

N/A 

(s) Is a mechanism used for ensuring traceability between 
the software detailed des^n and the code 7 : 

YES 

NO 

D/K 

N/A 

(t) Is a mechanism used for controlling changes to the code?: 

YES 

NO 

D/K 

N/A 


(i e., who can make changes under what circumstances) 


SEI-90-SR-10 


33 







B Software Development Organization: (conl'd) 
B.2. Byalnoaa Unit Software Practices and Proc; 


(cont'd) 


2. Of the live dascnplions below (A-E), which most accurately characterizes your business unit's general software 
development environment?: (choose one) 

_ A Procedures and controls over software development efforts are loosely defined and are applied on a 

protect by protect basis. The software development process varies widely between projects. 

_8 Standard methods and practioes are uniformly applied to development efforts. The management of 

software development includes cost and schedule estimation, control of requirements changes, code 
changes and status reviews. Development procedures used by different groups within the business unit 
would be approximately tha same. 

_C. The software development process is defined and understood. Projects regularly conduct design and 

code reviews, training programs for project leaders and programmers with specific focus on software engineering 
principles and practices. The development process is reviewed by a software engineering process group that 
suggests changes in practices and procedures. 

_D The software development process is understood, quantified, measured, ind controlled. Operating 

decisions are based on quantitative process data that has been gathered during software reviews and 
tests Tools are frequently used to manage the design process, including the gathering and analysis of 
data. 

_:£ The software development process is highly controlled and there is a considerable effort to further 

improve the process through extensive cost, scheduling, and error analyses of current and past projects. 
Quantitative data from past protects aie routinely usee to identify and eliminate processes that are prone to 
introduce errors. 

3. Which of the five descriptions above most accurately characterizes your business unit's general software 
development environment three years aoo 7 : (choose one lerter (A-E), 'D/K* for Deni Know, or 'N/A' for Not Applicable) 

A B C 0 E D/K N/A 


4. Compared to the firms with which you compete for (APPLICATION AREA) software development contracts, how would 
you rate your business unit's software development capabilities 7 Are your business unil's software development 
capabilities (choose an integer between 1 and 7. "D/K* for Don’t Know, o» 'N/A' for Not Applicable) 

Significantly About Significantly 

Worse than Average.Average .Better than Average 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 D/K N/A 






Section C. Ada and Personnel: 

C.i. Ada and Personnel: In Your Firm's (APPLICATION AREA) Business Unit 


1. Has your business unit developed (via new hires or training programs) Ada capabilities in your software development 

staff?; Yes:_ No;_ Don't Know;_ 

If No or Don't Know: Please skip to question 2 
If Yet: Please answer questions l.a. through l.a. 

l.a. Approximately, when did you begin to develop Ada capabilities in your business unit's software 
development staff?: 

_{month)_(ysar) 

l.b. Of the Ada trained software personnel in your business unit, what percentage received their primary Ada 
training in courses sponsored or paid for by your firm:_% 

l.c. Currently, what percentage of all software personnel in your business unit have enough training in Ada 
such that they could be used to generate code on an Ada software development program?;_% 

t.d. Currently, what percentage of a,I software designers in your business unit have enough training in Ada 
such that they could develop dosigns for an Ada software development program?:_ % 

1.#. Currently, what percentage of your software staff has experience developing Ada software systems in the 
(APPLICATION AREA) domain?:_% 

2. Approximately, what do you expect is the per capita cost to tram your software personnel to design and implement 

(APPLICATION AREA) software systems in Ada?: $_/person Don't Know:_ 

c. 2 . Ada and.Paraonntl:_Extarnal. labor MarKtli 

1. Compared to software personnel with otherwise similar abilities and experience, how much more difficult is it to hire 
programming staff and sotfware/system designers with Ada capabilities 7 (choose an integer between 1 and 7, "D/K" for 


Dom Know, or "N/A" lor Not Applicable) 

No Mora 

Moderately 

Significantly 

Mora 


Difficult 

Mora Difficult 

Difficult 


(a) Progiammmg Staff: 

1 2 

3 4 5 

6 7 

D/K N/A 

(b) Software/System Designers: 1 2 

3 4 5 

6 7 

D/K N/A 


2. How much of a salary premium is commanded by programming staff and soflware/system designers with Ada 
capabilities 7 , (please estimate to nearest 5%) 

(a) On average, programming staff with Ada capabilities may expect_% of the salary of 

programming staff with otherwise similar abilities and experience. 

(b) On average, sotfware/system designers with Ada capabilities may expect_% of the salary of 

soflware/system designers with otherwise similar abilities and experience 


SEI-90-SR-10 


35 






Section D. 


Ada Compllers/Tools: 


0.1. Ada Compiler* and Tools: Companions with Other Languages- Questions In subsection D.l. 
bsk for comparison* of Ads compiler* and tools versus compilers and tools for language* that 
your business unit might otherwise us* to develop (APPLICATION AREA) software. We ask for 
comparisons at three different times: now, three years in the past, and your expectations for 
three years In the future. Using the seven point scale below, where 1 means "Significantly 
Inferior", 4 means "Approximately the Same", end 7 mean* "Significantly Superior", pleas* 
respond to the following question*. 

1. How do available Ada compilers compare to available compilers for other languages used to develop (APPLICATION 
AREA) software?: (choose an integer between 1 and 7, or *D/K* for Don't Know) 


Significantly 

Approximately 


Significantly 


(a) At the present time, 

Ada compilers are. 

Inferior 

1 2 

the Sam* 

3 4 5 

6 

Superior 

7 

D/K 

(b) Three years ago, 

Ada compilers were 

1 2 

3 4 5 

6 

7 

D/K 

(c) Three years from now, 

Ada compilers will likely be 

1 2 

3 4 5 

6 

7 

D/K 


2. How do available Ada software tools compare to available software tools for other languages used to develop 
(APPLICATION AREA) software"? (choose an integer between 1 and 7. or *D/K‘ for Don't Know) 



Significantly 

Approximately 

Significantly 

(a) Al the present time, 

Inferior 

the Sam# 

Superior 

Ada software tools are 

1 2 

3 4 5 6 

7 D/K 

(b) Three years jgo. 

Ada software tools were 

(c) Three years from now. 
Ada software tools 

1 2 

3 4 5 6 

7 D/K 

wtll likely t»e 

1 2 

3 4 5 6 

7 D/K 

Ada, Complltr a. and Taola; 

Comparlaorta 

Over Time- Ualno the earn# 

seven point scale, 


please compare the Ada compilers and toola that are currently available to thoe# available three 
years In the past, and your axpectatlons of them three year* In the future? 

1. Compared to Ada compilers that are currently available (choose an inleger between 1 and 7, or 'D/K" for Dom Know) 


(*) Three years ago. 

Ada compilers were 

Significantly 

Inferior 

1 2 

Approximately 
the Sam* 

3 4 5 

Significantly 

Superior 

6 7 D/K 

(b) Three years from now. 

Ada compilers will likely be 

: 1 2 

3 4 5 

6 7 D/K 


36 


SEI-90-SR-10 



Section D. Ada Compllers/T^.*: (cont'd) 

0.2. Ada Co mpilers and Tools: Comparisons Over Time (corn'd) 


2. Compared to Ada software tools that are currently available: (choose an integer between 
Know) 

Significantly Approximately 

Interior the Same 


and 7. or "D/K‘ tor Don't 

Significantly 

Superior 


(a) Three years ago, 

Ada software tools were: 


2 3 4 S 6 


7 D/K 


(b) Three years from now, 

Ada software tools 

will likely be. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 D/K 


O 3. Ada Compilers and Tools: Costs 
Currant Acquisition Costa 

1. Approximately, what can a firm that builds (APPLICATION AREA) software expect to spend (purchase prce, plus the 
cost of customization if needed) to acquire a production quality Ada compiler, linker, and loader?: 

S_ Don't Know:_ 

2. In addition to the costs of the minimal set of tools (compiler, linker and loader), how much can a tirm that builds 

(APPLICATION AREA) software expect to spend on other Ada specific software development tools and addrtonal 
computing facilities?: $_ Don't Know._ 

AcguliWon CoeU Over Time 

3. Compared to Ada software tools (including compilers) that are currently available (choose an integer between 1 and 
7, or "O/K" tor Dent Know) 



Significantly 

Approximately 

Significantly 

(a) Three years ago, 

Laaa Expenalva 

the Same 

Mora Expenalva 

Ada software tools ware: 1 2 

(b) Three years from now, 

Ada software tools 

3 4 5 

6 7 D/K 

will likely be. 

1 2 

3 4 5 

6 7 D/K 


SEI-90-SR-10 


37 





Section D. Ada Cotnpllara/Toola: (cont'd) 

0.4. Ada Compilers): Acaulaltlon bv Your Firm's. (APPLICATION AREA) Business Unit 

1. Has your business unit acquired (e g. purchase, lease.rent, time share, or develop) an Ada compiler’. 

Yes:_ No_ 

If No: Please answer question l.a. 

If Yes: Please answer questions l.b. through l.a. 

l.a. Do you anticipate that your business unit will acquire an Ada compiler within the next 12 months? 

Yes: No:_ Don't Know:_ 

If you expect that your firm will acquire an Ada compiler in the next 12 months, approximately when will that 
be’: _(month)_(year) 

Please skip to question 3 below. 

l.b. Approximately, when did your business unit first acquire an Ada compiler?: 

_(n.nnth)_(year) 

l.c. Was the first Ada compiler acquired in in order to execute a specific software development project? 

(i.e., m contrast to a general, not project specific, need) 

Yes: No:_ Don't Know._ 

l.d. At the time of its acquisition, was the first Ada compiler sufficiently mature such that it could be used 
without customisation (e g. changes in run-time software) in your production environment’: 

Yes_ No:_ Oont Know _ 

1 ,e. At the time of its acquisition, was the first Ada compiler validated’: 

Yes_No:_ Don't Know _ 


2. Approximately, how many different Ada compilers* are either currently in use, or have been used by your business 

unit in a production environment’:_ (* - Vendor/ target/ host combinations, do not include multiple versions ot 

the same compiler) 

3. Approximately, how many different Ada compilers has your business unit evaluated for use in a production 

environment’:_( - Vendor/ target/ host combinations, do not include multiple versons ot the same compiler) 


38 


SEI-90-SR-10 




Section 0. Ada Compllere/Toole: (confd) 


0.5. Flrm/Bualnasa Unit Relationship with Vandors: II your bualnesa unit haa not commlted funda 
to acquire althar Ada compllara or toola, plaaaa aklp to tha next paga. II your bualnaaa unit haa 
commltad (unda to acqulra althar Ada compllara or toola, plaaaa answer tha following questions. 

1. For the Ada compilers/lools that your business unit purchases from vendors, do you (eel that you get adequate 

support from the vendor after the sale?: Yes:_ No:_ Don't Know:_ 

2. Briefly, what if any type of vendor support has your business unit requested or needed?: 


3. From what vendors has your firm's (APPLICATION AREA) business unit purchased Ada compilers/tools? 


4. Has your business unrt or corporation established a formal long-term relationship with any Ada tool vendors 7 : 
Yes:_No:_ 

If No: Please skip to the top of the next page. 

If Yes: Please answer questions 4.a. through 4.e. 

4.a. With how many vendors nas your business unit established long-term relations?:_ 

4 b. The nature of the raWn ship(s) is: (choose those that apply) 

_: Business unit or corporation has a long term contract with an Ada vendor 

_: Business unit or corporation has purchased a significant amount of stock in an Ada tool 

vendor. 

_: Business unit or corporation has acquired an Ada tool vendor. 

_: Other (please describe briefly ): ___ 


4.c. When was the first long-term relationship established?: _(month)_(year) 


1 


SEI-90-SR-10 


39 




Section E. Ada Use In Your Firm's [APPLICATION AREA) Business Unit: 
E.l. Pre-procurement Use: 

1. Has your business unit used an Ada Program Design Language (POL) 7 : Yes:_ No:_ 

If No: Please answer l.a. 

It Yes: Please answer f.b and l.c. 

l.a. Briefly, why has your business unit chosen not to use an Ada POL 7 


Please skip to question 2 

l.b. Approximately, when did your business unit first use an Ada PDL?: _(month! (year) 

1. c. Approximately, on what percentage of software development efforts in your business unit do you 

currently use an Ada PDL?:_% 

2. Has your business unit built any Ada software systems as part of either government or self-sponsored R&D 7 . 

Yes:_ No:_ 

If No: Please skip to the next page. 

If Yes: Please answer questions 2.a. through 2 d. 

2. a. Approximaiely, when did your business unit begin its first Ada R&D proiect?:_(month)_(y 8ar ) 

2.b. Was the first Ada R4D project funded by one of your customers?: Yes:_ No _. 

2.C. To date, how many Ada R&O projects has your business unit undertaken?:_ 

2.d. The largest single Ada R&O project was approximately__lines of executable code. 

E.2. Proposed Use of Ada: 

1. Has your business unit proposed to use Ada as the primary implementation language for the full-scale development of 
a (APPLICATION AREA) system?: Yes:_No:_ 

If No: Ple-se skip to question 2 
If Yea: Please answer question l.a. 

1,a. When did your business unit first propose lo use Ada as the primary implementation language on a 
(APPLICATION AREA) development contract 7 :_(month)_(year) 

2 Currently, approximately whal percentage of new development contracts does your firm's (APPLICATION AREA) 
business unit propose to implement primanly in: 

Assembly languages 
Ada 

Other High-order languages (please specify language if more than ten percent) 


Total 


% 

% 

% 

% 

> 

% 


40 


SEI-90-SR-10 



Section E. Ada Use In Your Firm's (APPLICATION AREA) Business Unit: (cont'd) 

E.3. Ada Use on Contracts: 

1. Has your business unit been contracted to develop a (APPLICATION AREA) system tor which Ada was the primary 
implementation language?: Yes:_ No:_ 

If No: Please skip to question 2 
If Yes: Please answer question l.a. 

I.a. Approximately when did your business unit begin to develop a (APPLICATION AREA) system in Ada?: 
_(month)_(year) 


2. Currently, approximately what percentage of new development contracts does your firm's (APPLICATION AREA) 
business unit implement primarily in: 

_% Assembly language 

_% Ada 

Other high-order languages (please specify language if more than ten percent) 

_ % _ 

_ % _ 

_ % _ 

% _ _ 


s 100 % Total 

E.4. Ada Use: Language Features If your firm's (APPLICATION AREA) business unit has neither 
designed nor developed a software system In Ada, please skip to the next page. 

To answer the following questions, please respond with a number between 1 and 7 where 1 means 
"To no extent", 4 means "To a moderate extent", and 7 means "To a great extent". If you do not 
know how a question should be answered , please choose "D/K”. If a question Is not applicable, 
choose "N/A". 

1. To what extent does your business unit use each of the following features of Ada in the design and development of 
(APPLICATION AREA) systems 7 : (choose an integer between l and 7, 'D/K' tor Don't Know, or "N/A* lor Not Applicable) 



To no 


To 

a moderate 


To a great 



(a) Generics . 

•xt«nt 

.1 

2 

3 

extent 

4 

6 

6 

extent 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(b) Packages:. 

.1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(c) Private Types:. 

.1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(d) Derived Typos:. 

.1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(e) Access Types:. 

.1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(0 Exceptions:. 

.1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(g) Record Types:. 

.i 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 


SEI-90-SR-10 


41 










Section F. Effects of Ada Use: 

F.i. Expected Effects of Ada Use During Production: 


1. Currently, for each ol the software development stages below, what do you expect will be the effect of using Ada on 
the cost and time to develop new (APPLICATION AREA) software systems? Compared to development in the language(s) 
you might otherwise use,; 


L - Ada use will take less time 
S • Ada use will take about the same time 
M- Ada use will take more time 
D/K- Don't know 


L- Ada use will lower cost 
S- Ada use will cost about the same 
M- Ada use will increase cost 
D/K- Don't know 


Iim# 


Co il 


(a) Requirements Analysis 

Top Level Design:. 

(b) Detailed Design:. 

(c) Code Unit Test:. 

(d) Integration and Test: 

(e) Delivery and Initial 

PSD Support:. 

(f) Production Support . . 


2. Currently, what do you expect will be the effect of using Ada on the overall time to develop new (APPLICATION AREA) 
software systems? Compared to the language(s) your business unit might otherwise use, using Ada will most likely : 
(choose one) 

_: Increase overall software development time by_% 

_. Have no effect on overall software development time 

_: Decrease overall software development time by_% 

: Don’t Know 


3. Currently, what do you expect will be the effect of using Ada on the overall cost to develop new (APPLICATION AREA) 
software systems? Compared to the language(s) your business unit might otherwise use, using Ada will most likely : 
(choose one) 

. Increase overall software development cost by_% 

_ Have no effect on overall software development costs 

_: Decrease overall software development cost by_% 

_: Don? Know 


4. How certain are you of the changes in overall software development oosts that currently can be expected to come 
from the use of Ada to develop new (APPLICATION AREA) software systems?: (choose an integer between 1 and 7, or 
'D.K' for Don't Know) 


Not at all 
Certain.. 


Moderately 
..Certain... 


Extremely 

Certain 












Section F. Effects of Ada Use: 

F.i. Expected Effects of Ada Use Purina Producllon:(cont'd) 


5. Three years from now. what do you expect will be the effect ot using Ada on the overall cost to develop new 
(APPLICATION AREA) software systems 7 Compared to the language(s) your business unit might otherwise use. using 
Ada will most likely: (choose one) 

_: Increase overall software development costs by_ % 

_: Have no effect on overall software development costs 

_: Decrease overall software development costs by__% 

_: Don't Know 


6. How certain are you of your expectations of changes in overall software development costs that would oome from the 
use of Ada to develop new (APPLICATION AREA) software systems three years from now?: (choose an integer between 1 


and 7, or ’D/tC for Dont Know) 

Not at all 

Certain. 


Moderate^ 
.Certain. 



Extremely 
.Certain 

1 2 

3 

4 

5 

S 

7 D/K 


F-2. Expected Effects of Ada Use After Development: 

1. Compared to similar systems implemented in other languages, what do you expect to be thr- sheet ot the use of Ada 
on your software sustaining direct labor costs?: (choose one) 

_: Expectations are that Ada sustaining costs will be higher 

_: Expectations are that Ada sustaining costs will be about the same 

_: Expectations are that Ada sustaining costs will be lower 

_: Oont know 


2. Compared to similar systems implemented in other languages, what do you expect to be the effect of the use of Ada 
on the number ot Class I errors filed against the systems you develop?: (choose one) 

_: Expectations are that the number of errors using Ada will be higher 

: Expectations are that the number of errors using Ada will be about the same 

_: Expectations are that the number of errors using Ada will be lower 

_: Don't know 


3. Compared to similar systems implemented in other languages, what do you expect to be the effect of the use of Ada 
on the number of Class II errors tiled against the systems you develop?: (choose one) 

_: Expectations are that the number of errors using Ada will be higher 

_: Expectations are that the number of errors using Ada will be about the same 

_: Expectations are that the number ot errors using Ada will be lower 

_: Don't know 


4. What do you expect the use of Ada for Ihe development ol a (APPLICATION AREA) system will have on post- 
development software support costs 7 Compared to the language(s) your business unit might otherwise use, using Ada 
for the development of (APPLICATION AREA) software will most likely: (choose one) 

: Increase overall post-development soft'* no support costs by_% 

_: Have no effect on overall software development costs 

_: Decrease overall post-development software support costs by ___% 

_: Don't Know 








Section G. Factors Affecting the Adoption or Nonadoption of Ada In Your Firm’s 
(APPLICATION AREA) Business Unit 


1. For your firm's (APPLICATION AREA) business unit, to what extent has the decision of whether or noi to arinnt Ada 
been responsive to each of the following factors 7 : (for each factor below choose an integer between 1 and 7, "D/K“ for 
Don't Know, or ’N/A* if the question is not applicable) 


To no 
extent 


To e moderate 
extent 


To e great 
extant 


(a) Current customer demand 


for Ada: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(b) Expected future demand for 
Ada: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

S 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(c) Uncertainty about expected 
demand lor Ada: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(d) Current software develop¬ 
ment costs using Ada: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

S 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(e) Expected future software 
development costs 
using Ada: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

S 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(f) Current costs of acquiring Ada 
capabilities: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(g) Expectation that Ada adoption 
costs are declining with time: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

S 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(h) Fear of being left behind com¬ 
petitors in developing Ada 
capabilities: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

S 

S 

7 

D/K 

N/A 


If your flrm'e (APPLICATION AREA) busineaa unit hat made Investmente to develop Ada 
capabllltlee, please answer the following question. 


2. To what extent has the level o( investment in Ada personnel, tools, RSD, e.c made by your firm's (APPLICATION 
AREA) business unit been responsive to each of the following factors?: (for each factor below choose an Integer between 
1 and 7. ’0/K’ for Donl Know, or "N/A" if the question is not applicable) 


To no 
extent 


To a moderate 


ext 


nt 


To a great 
extent 


(a) Current customer demand 


for Ada: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

8 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(b) Expected future demand tor 
Ada: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(c) Uncertainty aboul expected 
demand for Ada. 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

8 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(d) Current software develop¬ 
ment costs using Ada 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(e) Expected future software 
development costs 
using Ada: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(0 Current costs of acquiring Ada 
capabilities: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(g) Expectation that Ada adoption 
costs are declining with time: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(h) Fear of being left behind com¬ 
petitors in developing Ada 
capabilities: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

$ 

6 

7 

O/K 

N/A 


Thank you again for your participation In this research. 


44 


SEI-90-SR-10 







Business/Market Questionnaire 


f 

: Section A. Firm Size: Questions In the first section ol this questionnaire sre Intended to elicit 

measures of the size of your firm, the scope of your firm’s activities, and the software 
development environment In that pert ol your firm (business unit) that makes (APPLICATION 
AREA) systems and software. 

A.1. Business Unit Size: 

1. Approximately, what were the revenues of your firm's (APPLICATION AREA) business unit last year? 

$ _ 

2. Approximately, how many people are employed by that business unit?_ 

3. How many (APPLICATION AREA) contracts are currently active in the business unit?:__ 

A. 2. Division Sl 2 e: (II applicable) 

1. Approximately, what were the revenues of the division last year?: S__ 

2. Approximately, how many people are employed by the division?: __ 

3. Approximately, how many different MCCR product markets (i a , distinct applications or types of systems) 

does the division supply?:__ 


A.3. Corporate'Companv Size: (If applicable) 

1. Approximately, what were the revenues of the company last year?: $_ 

2. Approximately, how many people are employed by the company?; __ 

3. Approximately, how many different MCCR product markets (i.e . distmo applicatons or types of systems) 
does the company supply?: 


I 


SEI-90-SR-10 


45 





Section A. Firm Size: (cont'd) 

A.4. Scope of Firm Activit ies In (APPLICATION AREA) Market: 

Software/ Hardware Componenla: 

1. In what year did your firm begin supplying software (or (APPLICATION AREA) applications 7 _ 

2. In addition to softwai a, what other components associaled with (APT ICATION AREA) systems does your tirm 
manufacture: (choose those that apply) 

_: Firm does not manufacture other components; Please go to the questions on RSD below 

_: Computer hardware on which the software runs 

_: Peripheral equipment (e g. sensors, displays) 

_ Weapon system platform 

_Other (please specify) 


2 a. To what extent do your firm's potential s ’les of non-software (APPLICATION AREA) components depend 
upon your firm's ability to supply the software romponent?: (choose an integer from 1 to 7. or "O/K' for Don't 
Know) 

To no To a moderate To a great 

extent ... extent. . extent 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 D/K 

2.b. To what extent da potential sales of non-software components influence the choice of (APPLICATION 
AREA) software contracts on which your business unit bids 7 (choose an integer from 1 to 7, or "D/K* tor Dont 


Know) 

To no 

extent. 



To a rrocteraJe 
.axt«nt. 



To a great 
.extent 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 D/K 


Ba searih and. Development (H&D): 

1, Over the past three years, what has been the average annual expenditure for research and developmer' (RSD) by 
your firm's (APPLICATION AREA) business unit 7 (Please include both company and government financed RSD): 

S _/ year Don't Know:_ 

2. Approximately, what percentage of the busCess unit's RSD expenditures have been applied to the development of 

software technology? _% Don't Know:_ 


2 . 1 . In turn, what percentage of these RSD expenditures on software have been targeted for developing Ada 
capabilities?: _% Don't Know:_ 















A - 4 SC0 P.«..a t Firm Activities In (APPLICATION AREA) Market: (cont'd) 
R93t» rch ICl development (R&DI: 


3. Approximately, what percentage of the business unit's total RAD expenditu.es comes trom each ol the tollowing 
sources?- (the summation of percentages should be approximately 100%) 

_% Contract awards for RAO 

_% Company sponsored RAD funds (excluding IRAD) 

_% IRAD funds 

Other sources (Please specify if more than 10%) 

_ % _ 

_ % _ 

_ % _ 

% _ _ 


= 100 % Totai 


B. Software Development Organization: In this section we ask questions Intended to get a 
general picture of the personnel and overall capabilities In the part of your firm that produces 
software for (APPLICATION AREA) nystema. 

1. Approximately, how many software personnel are currently employed by your firm's (APPLICATION AREA) business 

unit?:,_ (do not include temporary personnel that may be contracted to cover peak staffing on proiects) 

2. Approximately, how many software personnel were employed by your firm's (APPLICATION AREA) business unit 

three years ago 1 _ Don't Know:_ Not Applicable;_ 

3. What is the average tenure (years employed by your company) ot the software development staff in your business 
unit’, (choose one) 

_ 0 ■ < 2 years 

_ 2 <4 years 

_ 4 < 6 years 

_ 6-< 8 years 

_: 8 - < 10 years 

_: 10 years or more 

3.a. How does your business unit's turnover rate of software personnel compare to the firms with which you 
compete for (APPLICATION AREA) development comracts? Is the turnover rate in your firm's (APPLICATION 
AREA) business unit: (choose an integer from 1 to 7, "D/K* for Don't Know, or ’N/A' for Not Applicable) 

Sgnifearrtfy About Significantly 

Lower than Average . ... Average.Higher than Average 

1 2 3 * 5 6 7 D/K N/A 

4. Compared to the firms with which you compete for (APPLICATION AREA) software development contracts, how would 
you rate your business unit's software development capabilities 7 Are your business unit’s softwarr development 
capabilities (choose an integer between 1 and 7, ’D/K' for Don't Know, or "N/A*for Not Applicable) 

Significantly About Significantly 

Worse than Average.Average.Better than Average 

1 2 3 * 5 6 7 D/K N/A 


SEI-90-SR-10 


47 











Section C. Competitors and the Market tor (APPLICATION AREA) Systems: 

C.l. Competing Flrmt: 

1. Currently, how many contractors can creditably compete lor contracts to develop (APPLICATION AREA) systems 7 
_________ (please include your own firm in the count) 

2. How does the number of competing contractors today compare to the number ot contractors three years ago? Was 
the number ol competing contractors three years ago. (choose one) 

_■ Higher than today 

_ About the same as today 

_, Lower than today 

Don! know 


2.b. It the number o( competing contractor* three years ago was either higher or lower: 

Approximately, how many contractors were competing for contracts to develop (APPLICATION AREA) systems 
three years ago?:_ 

3. In three years the number of contractors competing to develop (APPLICATION AREA) systems will most likely be: 
(choose one) 


_ Higher than today 

_ About the same as today 

_ Lower than today 

_. Dom know 

3 b. It you think the number ot competing contractor! In three year* will likely be either 
higher or lower: 

Approximately, how many contractors will most likely be competing tor contracts to develop (APPLICATION 
AREA) systems three years from now?:_ 

4. Currently, what firms do you directly compete with tor (APPLICATION AREA) contracts?: 

Company Name and Division Name (it applicable): 


C.2. Market ^ ntrea: 

1. The firm with the largest market share supplies approximately what percenlage of the (APPLICATION AREA) market 7 

_ % 

2. T^e firm with the second largest market share?:_% 

3. Combined, the four firms wrlh the largest market shares suppfy approximately what percentage of the (APPLICATION 

AREA) market?. _ % 

4. Approximately, what percentage of the (APPLICATION AREA) market does your company supply?:_% 


48 


SEI-90-SR-10 



Section D. 


(APPLICATION AREA) Market Size and Activity: 


1. Since 1985. the average dollar value ot a single (APPLICATION AREA) development contract has been 

approximately: $_ 

2. Since 1985, annual customer expenditures (or the development o( (APPLICATION AREA) systems have been 

approximately: $__/year 

2.b. In terms of the dollar value ol contracts awarded, the market for (APPLICATION AREA) systems since 
1985 has: (choose one) 

__: Decreased approximately _ \ 

_ Stayed about the same 

_ Increased approximately % 

2,c. What are your expectations of customer expenditures for (APPLICATION AREA) systems over the next 
three years? Expenditures will: (choose one) 

_Decrease approximately_% 

_: Stay about the same 

_: Increase approximately _% 

3. Approximately, how many contracts for the development of new {APPLICATION AREA) software have been let over 

the past three years’: ___ 

4. On average, how frequently are new (APPLICATION AREA) programs started’: __ (Approximate lime 

between RFPs for the development of new systems expressed in either months or years) 

5. A delivered (APPLICATION AREA) system may be expected to be in the customer's operational inventory for 

approximately_years. (Time from first system deployed to last system taken out of operational duty ) 

6. Currently, what percentage of project cost on a (APPLICATION AREA) development contract can be attributed to the 

development of software?:_% 

6,b. Three years ago the percentage of project cost on a (APPLICATION AREA) development contract that 
could be attributed to the development of software was approximately : _%. 

6.C. Three years from now the percentage of project cost on a (APPLICATION AREA) development contract 
that may be attributed to the development of software will approximately be: _%. 

7. Over the Irfetime of a typcal (APPLICATION AREA) system, DoD expenditures for system software may be divided 
approximately as follows: 

Sk: Initial Development/Production of Software up to its Acceptance/Deployment 

__% Modifications. Enhancements, and Maintenance of the Software after 

Initial AcceptancefOeployment 


SEI-90-SR-10 


49 







Section E. Contracting Conditions and Customer: 

E.1. Contracting Conditions: 

1. Over the past three years. tha most common contract terms tor the development ol new (APPLICATION AREA) 
software systems has bean: (chcose one) 

_ Firm Fixed-Price 

_ Cost Plus Award Fee 

_: Fixed Prce Incentive 

_: Cost Plus Incentive Fee 

_: Cost Plus-Fixed-Fae 

_: Other (please specify)_ 

2. When your company supplies (APPLICATION AREA) software, what percentage of the time does it a cl as 
(the summation ol percentages should be approximately equal to 100) 

__% Prime contractor 

_% Subcontractor 

_% Team member 

_% Other arrangements (please specify)__ 


= 100 % 

2.a. If your firm acts as a subcontractor more than 20% of the time, what companies are likely to be the prime 
contractor? 

Company Name and Division Name (if applicable): 


1. Over last three years, approximately what percentage of the (APPLICATION AREA) systems that your company has 
built has been for use by the following: 

_% U S Air Force 

_% U S. Army 

_%U.S Navy 

_% Other DoO agencies 

__% Other Federal agencies or departmenls (i e , excluding DoD) 


2. Based on your experiences and the descriptions below, how would you characterize your primary customer's 
understanding of the software development process? (choose an integer from 1 to 7, or ’D/K’ lor Don't Know) 

1 No understanding: software is essentially a "black box" to Ihe customer, 

4 Moderate understanding: the customer has some appreciation ol the software development, but may not 
fully understand the difficulties of developing software in the application area 

7 Complete understanding: the customer is extremely knowledgeable about Ihe development of software and 
the tradeoffs that are made during design and development 

1 2 3 4 5 8 7 D/K 


50 


SEI-90-SR-10 







Section E. Contracting Conditions and Customer 
E-2. Customer: (cont'd) 


3. Using the scale below, indicate to what aidant you believe the following factors influence your pnmary customer's 
choice of firm when awarding contracts for the development of new (APPLICATION AREA) software or systems?: 

(for each factor below, choose an integer from t lo 7. or •DAO for Don? Know) 


To no 
extant 


(a) Contractor experience 

in the application domain: 1 2 

(b) Overall project cost: 1 2 

(c) Timeliness of projected pro|ect 

delivery: 1 2 

(d) Proposed product 

performance: 1 2 

(e) Contractor software 

capabilities: 1 2 

(f) Projected software develop¬ 

ment cost: 1 2 

(g) Expected costs of software 

maintenance: 1 2 

(h) Ease of software 

maintenance: 1 2 

(I) Software portability: 1 2 


To a moderate 
extent 

3 4 5 

3 4 S 

3 4 5 

3 4 5 

3 4 5 

3 4 5 

3 4 5 

3 4 5 

3 4 5 


To a great 
extent 

6 7 

6 7 

8 7 

6 7 

6 7 

6 7 

6 7 

6 7 

6 7 


D/K 
Of K 

D/K 

D/K 

D/K 

D/K 

D/K 

D/K 

D/K 


(J) Briefly, what other factors seem to be imponant lo your primary customer in awarding (APPLICATION AREA) 
development proiect contracts? 


4. To what extent does the contractor who developed the last (APPLICATION AREA) system have an extra advantage in 
getting the next (APPLICATION AREA) development contract'’: (choose an integer from 1 to 7, or 'D/K' for Don't Know) 

To no To a moderate To a great 

extent.extent.extent 

1 2 3 4 5 8 7 D/K 

5. To what extent do you believe your primary customer for (APPLICATION AREA) systems would be willing lo trade 
lower costs in the long-run tor greater costs dunng project procurement/development?: (choose an integer from 1 to 7. or 
"D/K* lor Don't Know) 

To no To a moderate To a great 

extent.extent.extent 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 D/K 

6. To what extent do you believe your primary customer for (APPLICATION AREA) systems would be willing to trade 
lower costs in the long-run lor greater short-term schedule and cost risks during project procurement/development?: 
(choose an integer from 1 to 7. or *0/10 for Don't Know) 

To no To a moderate To a great 

extent.extent.extent 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 D/K 


SEI-90-SR-10 


51 











Section F. Demand Conditions In the (APPLICATION AREA) Market: 


t. Suppose that your firm could reduce the costs o( developing the software lor (APPLICATION AREA) systems by 25%. 
Holding all other factors constant, what would be the effect on the revenues that your firm could expect from a single 
(APPLICATION AREA) development contract? (choose one) 

_: Revenues would decrease approximately_% 

_: Revenues would be approximately the same 

_: Revenues would increase approximately _ _% 


2. Suppose that your firm could roduco the once that your customer pays for software development services by 25%. 
Allowing only for a change in demand (either more systems or more elaborate systems) what do you expect would be the 
net change to revenues that your business unit could expect from (APPLICATION AREA) development contracts', 
(choose one) 

_: Revenues would decrease approximately _% 

_: Revenues would be approximately the same 

_. Revenues would increase approximately_% 

3. Suppose that your firm could lower the costs of maintaining (APPLICATION AREA) software by 2S% Holding 
software production costs constant, what do you believe would happen to the demand (either more systems or more 
elaborate systems) for new software in your application area?: (choose one) 

_: Demand would decrease approximately_% 

_: Demand would be approximately the same 

_: Demand would increase approximately_% 


4. Suppose it cost your firm one hundred thousand dollars less to develop software for a (APPLICATION AREA) system. 
How much of that the $100,000 could your firm keep, and how much of rt would be passed along to your customer through 
a lower price?: (summation of values should be approximately $100,000) 

$_: Firm Keeps 

$ _ Customer Gets 


52 


SEI-90-SR-10 







Section G. Ada In the (APPLICATION AREA) Market: 


1. Approximately, whan was the lirst contract awarded to a firm that proposed to use Ada as the primary implementation 
language lor the development of a (APPLICATION AREA) system?: 

_(month)_(year) 

_: Has not happened 

2. During the calender years 1986-1989, the percentage ol new (APPLICATION AREA) development contracts that have 

been awarded to contractors proposing to use Ada as the primary implementation language was:_% 

3. What are your expectations of the percentage ol new development contracts in the application area tor whch Ada will 
be the required language in each of the three calender years: 

_% 1989 

_% 1990 

_% 1991 

4. How certain are you of your primary customer's demand for Ada software in this application area over the next three 
years’: (choose an integer from 1 to 7, or ‘D/K‘ for Don't Know) 

Not at al Moderately Extremely 

Certain.Certain.Certain 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 D/K 

5. What is your perception of your primary customer's present attitude toward the use of Ada for the development of 
software for (APPLICATION AREA) systems’: (choose an integer from 1 to 7. or ’D/K" for Don't Know) 

1 The customer is extremely adverse to the use of Ada for the development of systems in this application 
area: very unlikely to buy a system written in Ada: 

2 The customer prefers to use another language for the development of systems in this application area but 
would consider using Ada if there were strong evidence that use of Ada would have significant 
product/project benefits; 

4 The customer is indifferent to the language used for the development of systems in this application area: 
choice of language is strictly based on the effect of the languages' abilities to meet implicit and explicit 
product/proiect specifications; 

5 The customer prefers the use of Ada, but would consider using other languages for the development of 
parts of systems if there is strong evidence that their use would have significant producVproiect benefits; 

7 The customer insists on the use of Ada for all software in this applicaton area. 


12 3 4 5 6 7 D/K 

6. Based on the descnfXions above, what was your primary customer's attitude toward the use of Ada for the 
development of software for (APPLICATION AREA) systems’ (choose an integer from 1 to 7, or 'D/K* for Dont Know) 

One year ago’: _ 

Three years ago’: _ 

H applicable, at the time of your business unit's first use of Ada’: _ 

Three years from now?:_ 


SEI-90-SR-10 


I 


53 







Section H. Ada Use In Your Firm's (APPLICATION AREA) Business Unit: 

H. l. Ada Compiler!*): Acquisition 

I. Has your firm's (APPLICATION AREA) business unit acquired (e g. purchase, lease.rent, time share, or develop) an 
Ada compiler?: 

Yes,__ No:_ 

If No: Please answer question l.a. 

It Yes: Please answer questions l.b. through l.d. 

l.a. Do you anticipate that the business unit will acquire an Ada compiler within the next 12 months? 

Yes._ No:_ Don't Know:_ 

If you expect the business unit will acquire an Ada compiler in the next 12 months, approximately when will 

that be?: _(month)_(year) 

Please skip to question 3 below. 

l.b. Approximately, when did the business unit first acquire an Ada compiler?: 

_(month)_(year) 

1,0. Was the first Ada compiler acquired in order to execute a specific software development project? 

(i s . in contrast to a general, not project specific, need) 

Yes__ No: Don't Know:_ 

l.d. At the time of ns acquisition, was the first Ada compiler validated?: 

Yes No Don't Know:_ 


2. Approximately, how many different Ada compilers" are either currently in use, or have been used by your firm's 

(APPLICATION AREA) business unit in a production environment?:_ (’ - Vendor/ target/ host combinations, do 

not mdude multiple versions of fhe same compiler) 

3. Approximately, how many different Ada compilers has your firm's (APPLICATION AREA) business unit evaluated for 

use in a production environment?._(* • VendoinargeV host combinatons; do not include multiple versions of 

the same compiler) 

H -2- Mi .C9ir.Ell9ra,-tnfl Jasla;_ Co tta 

Currant A cavlaiilaTL^C/aLi 

1. Approximately, what can a firm that builds (APPLICATION AREA) software expect lo spend (purchase price, plus the 
cost of customization if needed) to acquire a production quality Ada compiler, linker, and loader 7 : 

$_, Donl Know:_ 

2. In addition to the costs of the minimal set of tools (compiler, linker and loader), how much can a firm that builds 

(APPLICATION AREA) software expect to spend on other Ada specific software development tools and additional 
computing facilities?: _ DonT Know:_ 

Ar:avbHlon-C,paU QxejJDmi 

3. Compared to Ada software tools that are currently available, (choose an integer between 1 and 7, or 'DAO lot Don? 


Know) 

Significantly 

Approximately 

Significantly 

Lass Expensive 

the Same 

Mora Expensive 

(a) Three years ago, 

Ada software tools were. 1 2 

3 4 5 

6 7 D/K 

(b) Three years from now, 

Ada software tools will 

most likely be: 12 

3 4 5 

6 7 D/K 


54 


SEI-90-SR-10 




r 


Section H. Ada Use In Your Firm's (APPLICATION AREA) Business Unit: (cont'd) 

H. 3. Ada and Personnel: In Your Firm's (APPLICATION AREA) Business Unit 

I . Has your business unit developed (e g. new hires or training programs) Ada capabilities in your software development 

staff 7 : Yes:_ No: ___ Don't Know:_ 

If No or Don’t Know: Please skip to question 2 
If Yes: Please answer questions l.e. through l.e. 

I.a. Approximately, when did you begin to develop Ada capabilities in your business unit's software 
development staff 7 : 

_(month)_(year) 

l.b. 0< the Ada trained software personnel in your business unit, what percentage received their primary Ada 
training in courses sponsored or paid for by your firm:_% 

l.e. Currently, what percentage of all software personnel in your business unit have enough training in Ada 
such that they could be used to generate code on an Ada software development program 7 : __% 

l.d. Currently, what percentage of all software designers in your business unit have enough training in Ada 
such that they could develop designs lor an Ada software development program?: % 

l.e. Currently, what percentage of your software staff have experience developing Ada software systems in the 
(APPLICATION AREA) domain?:_% 


2. Approximately, what do you expect is the per capita cost to train your software personnel to design and implement 
(APPLICATION AREA) software systems m Ada?: $_/person Don? Know:_ 


H.« Ada and Personnel: External Labor Markets 


1. Compared to software personnel with otherwise similar abilities and experience, how much more difficult is it to hire 
programming staff and sottware/system designers with Ada capabilit.es? (choose an integer between 1 and 7. *D/K* for 
Don? Know, or 'N/A" for Not Applcable) 


(a) Programming Staff: 


No More 
Difficult 

1 2 3 


Moderately Slg 

More Difficult 

4 S 8 


Iflcantly More 
Difficult 

7 D/K N/A 


(b) Software/System Designers: 


2 


3 4 5 6 7 


D/K N/A 


2. How much of a salary premium is commanded by programming staff and software/system designers with Ada 
capabilities 7 : (please estimate to nearest 5%) 


(a) C.i ave, p.ugi arm rung s;atf w.... Ada capabilities may expect_of the salary of 

programming staff wrth otherwise similar abilities and expenencs. 


(b) On average, software/system designers with Ada capabilities may expect_% ol the salary of 

software/system designers with otherwise similar abilities and expenence. 


3. Compared to current costs of hirmgflraming Ada personnel: (choose an integer between 1 and 7. or "DAO for Don? 
Know) 


Significantly 

Approximately 

Significantly 

Last Expensive 

the Same 

More Expensive 

(a) Three years ago, 

Ada personnel costs were: f 2 

3 4 5 

S 7 D/K 

(b) Three years from now, 

Ada personnel costs will 

most likely be: ? 2 

3 4 5 

6 7 D/K 


SEI-90-SR-10 


55 



Section H. Ads Uss In Your Firm's (APPLICATION AREA) Buslnsss Unit: (cont'd) 
H.5. Ads List: Prooossd/ Implemented 
Proposed Uss of Ada: 


1. Has your business unit nronnsed to use Ada as the primary implementation language lor the lull-scale development ol 

a (APPLICATION AREA) system?: Yes:_No:_ 

If No: Plasss skip to qusstlon 2 
If Yss: Plsass answer question l.a. 

I.S. When did your business unit first nrooosa to use Ada as the primary implementation language on a 
(APPLICATION AREA) development contract?: _(month)_(year) 

2. Currently, approximately what percentage of new development contracts does your firm's (APPLICATION AREA) 
business unit propose to implement primanly in: 

_% Assembly languages 

_% Ada 

Other High-order languages (please specify language if more than ten percent) 

_ % _ 

_ % _ 

_ X _ 

_ % _ 


a 100 % Total 

Ada Use on Contracts: 

1. Has your business unit been contracted to develop a (APPLICATION AREA) system for which Ada was the pnmary 
implementation Language 9 Yes'_ No:_ 

If No: Please skip to question 2 
If Yes: Please answer question l.a. 

I.A. Approximately when did your business unil begin to develop a (APPLICATION AREA) system in Ada 9 
_(month)_(year) 


2. Currently, approximately what percentage of new development contracts does your firm's (APPLICATION AREA) 
business unit implement primarily in: 

_ X Assemoly languages 

_% Ada 

Other high-order languages (please specify language if more than ten percent) 

_ % _ 

_ X _ 

_ % _ 

_ X __ 


s 100 % Total 


56 


SEI-90-SR-10 




Section I. Effects of Ada Use: 


l.i. Expected Effects of Ada Use Purina Production: 


1. Currently, for each of the software development stages below, what do you expect will be the effect of using Ada on 
the cost and time to develop new (APPLICATION AREA) software systems? Compared to development in the language(s) 
you might otherwise use,: 


L • Ada use will taka less time 
S ■ Ada use will take about the same time 
M- Ada use will take more time 
0/K- Don't know 


L- Ada use will lower cost 
S- Ada use will cost about the same 
M- Ada use will increase cost 
D/K- Don't know 


Ilmi 


(a) Requirements Analysis 

Top Level Design:. 

(b) Detailed Design:. 

(c) Code Unit Test:. 

(d) Integration and Test:. 

(e) Delivery and Initial 

PSD Support'.. 

(f) Production Support:... 


Cb?l 


2. Currently, what do you expect will be the effect of using Ada on the overall time to develop new (APPLICATION AREA) 
software systems? Compared to the language(s) your business unit might otherwise use, using Ada will most likely : 
(choose one) 

__ Increase overall software development time by_% 

__: Have no effect on overall software development time 

_: Decrease overall software development time by_% 

_: Don't Know 


3. Currently, what do you expect will be the effect of using Ada on the overall cost to develop new (APPLICATION AREA) 
software systems? Compared to the language(s) your business unit might otherwise use. using Ada will most likely : 
(choose one) 

_: Increase overall software development cost by_H 

_: Have no effect on overall software development costs 

_: Decrease overall software development cost by_% 

_Don't Know 


4. How certain are you of the changes in overall software development costs that cunently can be expected to come 
from the use of Ada in your application area?, (choose an integer between 1 and 7, or ‘D/K’ for Don't Know) 

Not at ail Moderately Exl/emely 

Certain.Certain. Certain 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 D/K 













Section I. Effects of Ada Uaa: 

1.1. Exoactad Effects of Ada Use During Productlon:(com'dl 

5. Threa years from now, what do you expect will be the effect of using Ada on the overall cost to develop new 
(APPLICATION AREA) software systems? Compared to the language(s) your business unit might otherwise use. using 
Ada will most likely: (choose one) 

_: Increase overall software development cost by_% 

_: Have no effect on overall software development costs 

_: Decrease overall software development cost by_% 

: Don! Know 


6. How certain are you of your expectations of changes in overall software development costs that are expected to come 
from the use of Ada in your application area three years *rom now?: (choose an integer between 1 and 7. or "D/K* for Don? 
Know) 


Not at all Moderately Extremely 

Certain.Certain.Certain 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 D/K 


1.2. Expected Effects of Ada Use After Development: 

1. Compared to similar systems implemented in other languages, what do you expect to be the effect of the use of Ada 
on your software sustaining direct labor costs? (choose one) 

_: Expectations are that Ada sustaining costs will be higher 

: Expectafions are that Ada sustaining costs will be about the same 

_: Expectations are that Ada sustaining costs will be lower 

_ Don? know 


2. Compared to similar systems implemented in other languages, what do you expect to be the effect of the use of Ada 
on the number of Class I errors filed against the systems you develop 7 :(choose one) 

_; Expectations are that the number of errors using Ada will be higher 

_: Expectations are that the number of errors using Ada will be about the same 

_■ Expectations are that the number of errors using Ada will be lower 

_Don? know 


3. Compared to similar systems implemented in other languages, whaf do you expect to be the effect of the use of Ada 
on the number of Class II errors filed against the systems you develop?: (choose one) 

_: Expectations are that the number of errors using Ada will be higher 

_: Expectations are that the number of errors using Ada will be about the same 

_: Expectations are that the number of errors using Ada will be lower 

_: Oon? know 


4. What do you expect the use ol Ada for the development of a (APPLICATION AREA) system will have on post- 
development software support costs? Compared lo the tanguage(s) your business unit might otherwise use, using Ada 
for the development of (APPLICATION AREA) software will most likely : (choose one) 

_: Increase overall post-development software support costs by_% 

_: Have no effect on overall software development costs 

_: Decrease overall post-development software support costs by_% 

_ Don? Know 


58 


SEI-90-SR-10 









Section J. Factors Affecting the Adoption or Nonadoption of Ada In Your Firm’s 
(APPLICATION AREA) Business Unit 


1. For your lirm's (APPLICATION AREA) business unit, to what extent has the decision ol whether or not to adopt Ada 
been responsive to each of the following factors?: (for each factor below choose an integer between f and 7. •0/K* for 
Don't Know, or "N/A* if the question is not applicable) 


To no 
extent 


To e moderate 
extent 


To a great 
extent 


(a) Current customer demand 


lor Ada: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

s 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(b) Expected future demand for 
Ada: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(c) Uncertainty about expected 
demand for Ada: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(d) Currenf software develop¬ 
ment costs using Ada: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(e) Expected future software 
development costs 
using Ada: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(f) Current costs ol acquiring Ada 
capabilities: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

0/K 

N/A 

(g) Expectation that Ada adoption 
costs are declining with time; 

1 

2 

3 

4 

S 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(h) Fear ol being left behind com¬ 
petitors in developing Ada 
capabilities: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 


If your flrm’e (APPLICATION AREA) business unit has not made Investments to develop Ada 
capabilities, please skip to the next page. 


If your firm’s (APPLICATION AREA) business unit has made Investments to develop Ada 
capabilities, please answer the following question. 


2. To what extent has the level of investment in Ada personnel, tools. R4D, etc. made by your firm's (APPLICATION 
AREA) business unit been responsive to each of the following factors?: (tor each taclor below choose an integer between 
1 and 7. ’D/K' lor Don't Know, or "N/A" if the question is not applicable) 


To no 
extent 


To s moderate 


ext 


nt 


To a great 
extent 


(e) Current customer demand 


for Ada: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

s 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(b) Expected future demand for 
Ada. 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(c) Uncertainty aboul expected 
demand for Ada 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(d) Current software develop¬ 
ment costs using Ada 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(e) Expected future software 
development costs 
using Adi: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(t) Current costs ot acquiring Ada 
capabilities: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

S 

« 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(g) Expectation that Ada adoption 
costs are declining with time: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 

(h) Fear ot being left behind com¬ 
petitors in developing Ada 
capabilities: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

S 

6 

7 

D/K 

N/A 


SEI-90-SR-10 


59 





Section J. Factor* Affecting the Adoption or Nonadoption of Ade In Your Firm'* 
(APPLICATION AREA) Busin*** Unit (eont'd) 


3. To what extent do you believe firms m the (APPLICATION AREA) market that currently have Ada capabilities have or 
will have an extra advantage <n getting new development contracts 7 (choose an integer from 1 to 7. or *D/K" for Don't 
Know) 


To no 



To a moderate 


To a great 

extent. 



extent. 


.extant 

1 

2 

3 

4 5 

S 

7 D/K 


4. To what extent do you believe firm* m the (APPLICATION AREA) market that develop Ada capabilities later than their 
competitors are or will be at an extra disadvantage in getting new development contracts?: (choose an integer from f to 7. 


or # 0/K* for Oont Know) 

To no To a moderate To a great 

extent. .extent . . extent 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 D/K 


Thank you again tor your participation In this research. 






