Computer 

Technology 


Expert 

System 

Software 



To help boost national productivity, NASA offers 
assistance to computer-using American busi- 
nesses by providing a way to effect significant 
reduction of automation costs: use of govern- 
ment-developed computer programs that can 
be adapted to secondary usage, NASA's mecha- 
nism for making such programs available to the 
private sector is the Computer Software Man- 
agement and Information Center (COSMIC)*, 
located at the University of Georgia. 

An example of a widely-used COSMIC 
program is CUPS (C Language Integrated Pro- 
duction System), a software shell for develop- 
ing expert systems. Originally developed by 
Johnson Space Center, CLIPS is designed to 
allow research and development of artificial 
intelligence on conventional computers. CLIPS 
enables highly efficient pattern matching. A 
collection of conditions, and the actions to be 
taken if these conditions are met, is built info a 
rule network; additional user-supplied facts 
pertinent to a particular problem are matched 
to this rule network. CLIPS' versatility has made 
it a valuable research tool for a variety of appli- 
cations. Some examples: 

Chemical production machines at Ed. 
DuPont de Nemours & Company, Wilming- 
ton, Delaware require constant monitoring of 
product quality and quantity. The company 
has embedded a watchdog expert system in the 
CLIPS she! 1. Use of CLI PS allows a user to isolate 
productivity problems and work toward their 
solutions in the absence of a machine expert. 

Under a grant from IBM, the Computer- 
Aided Productivity Center at California Poly- 
technic State University is investigating the 
role of artificial intelligence in computer-aided 
design. CLIPS has been interfaced to a knowl- 
edge base of design rules and solutions. Through 
question and answer sessions, CLIPS responds 
to requests for information and provides con- 
tinuous background monitoring of an evolving 
design. 

Too 


Mentor Graphics, San Jose, California used 
CLIPS as the developmental core of a new 
Circuit Synthesis System. The system employs 
a series of "knowledge modules" that provide 
expertise in disciplines that a user engineer 
lacks; for example, it al lows a digi tat engineer to 
synthesize many analog schematic designs; 
above, Mentor employee Richard Aikers is us- 
ing the system to generate a schematic that im- 
plements the design specifications he has typed 
on the screen. The Contour program queries 
the designer for pertinent circuit data and uses 
a selected knowledge module to synthesize the 
schematic. CLIPS acts as an interpreter between 
the user inputs and the knowledge base. 

Tom Brooke of the China Grove, North 
Carolina law firm of Brooke & Brooke uses 
CLIPS to help him decide which facts from a 
casefile are most pertinent and should be in- 
cluded in his legal pleading for the court, CLIPS 
is interfaced to a word processor and a file of 
case facts; in question/answer exchange, CLIPS 
selects facts to be merged with paragraphs in 
the files that are to be included in the pleading. 


•COSMIC is a registered trademark of the National Aeronau- 
tics and Space Administration. 



