Source of Acquisition 
NASA Johnson Space Center 



Thermoregulatory and Orthostatic Responses to Wearing the Advanced Crew Escape Suit 

Stuart M.C. Lee, M.S. 1 , Tamara N. Jacobs, M.D. 2 , 
Angela McDaniel, B.A. 3 , and, Suzanne M. Schneider, Ph.D. 4 

x Wyle Laboratories, Life Sciences and Systems Division, Houston, TX 

2 Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 

3 Duke University, Durham, NC 

4 University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 



Running Title: ACES and Thermoregulation 



Please address all correspondence to: 

Stuart M. C.Lee, MS 

Wyle Laboratories, Life Sciences Systems and Services Division 

1290 Hercules Blvd. 

Houston, TX 77058 

Voice: (281) 483-3726 

FAX: (281) 483-4181 

e-mail: sleel@ems.jsc.nasa.gov 



ACES and Thermoregulation 2 

ABSTRACT 

INTRODUCTION: Current NASA flight rules limit the maximum cabin temperature 
(23.9 °C) during re-entry and landing to protect crewmembers from heat stress while 
wearing the Advanced Crew Escape Suit (ACES) and Liquid Cooling Garment (LCG). 
The primary purpose of this ground-based project was to determine whether the LCG 
could provide adequate cooling if ambient temperature reached 26.7 °C. The secondary 
objective was to determine whether there would be a graded effect of ambient 
temperature profiles with maximum temperatures of 23.9 (LO), 26.7 (MID), and 29.4 °C 
(HI). METHODS: Eight subjects underwent a 5-h temperature profile (22.8 r 26.7 °C) in 
an environmental chamber while wearing the ACES and LCG. Subjects controlled the 
amount of cooling provided by the LCG. Core (T core ), skin temperatures (T S k), and heart 
rate (HR) were measured every 15-min. A 10-minute stand test was administered pre- 
and post-chamber. Additionally, 4 subjects underwent the three 5-h temperature profiles 
(LO, MTD, and HI) with the same measurements. RESULTS: In the 8 subjects 
completing the MTD profile, T cor e and T S k decreased from the start' to the end of the 
chamber stay. Subjects completed the stand test without signs of orthostatic intolerance. 
In the 4 subjects who underwent all 3 profiles, there was no discernible pattern in T core , 
T s k, and HR responses across the temperature profiles. CONCLUSIONS: In the range of 
temperatures tested, subjects were able to sufficiently utilize the self-selected cooling to 
avoid any potential deleterious effects of wearing the ACES. However, these subjects 
were not microgravity exposed, which has been suggested to impair thermoregulation. 
Key Words: microgravity, spaceflight, protective garment, heat stress 



ACES and Thermoregulation 3 

INTRODUCTION 

Since 1988, all crewmembers have been required to wear a protective garment during 
Space Shuttle launch and landing (Bishop et al., 1999). The primary purpose of this 
garment is to provide protection against rapid decompression at high altitude, against 
hypothermia in case of bailout over cold water, and against toxic gases that may be 
emitted from the Orbiter after landing. The current garment, the Advanced Crew Escape 
Suit (ACES), is comprised of an outer garment of a single layer of Nomex™, interlayer 
of Nylon reinforcement, and a gas container (i.e., bladder) consisting of a single layer of 
Goretex™. In addition, the ensemble includes a non-conformal (bubble-style) helmet, a 
lower body positive pressure garment (anti-gravity suit; g-suit), boots, and polypropylene 
undergarments (Figure 1). 

INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE 

In the effort to provide the desired protection, an unintended side effect of wearing the 
ACES was body heat retention. Elevated core and skin temperatures would be expected 
to exacerbate the microgravity-induced reduction in exercise capacity (Levine, 1996; 
Moore, 2003) and orthostatic tolerance observed following short- and long duration space 
flight (Buckey et al., 1996; Fritsch-Yelle et al., 1996; Meek et al., 2001). An elevated 
core temperature has been suggested to be the cause of an increase in orthostatic 
intolerance following the adoption of this protective clothing during landing (Nicogossian 
et al., 1995). Additionally, increased core temperature may impair cognitive vigilance 
(Fabrevik, 2003). 



ACES and Thermoregulation 4 



To minimize heat retention, an attempt was made to ventilate the protective suit with 
cabin air, but was proven to be ineffective (Pandolf et al., 1995; Sawin et al., 1998). In 
1994, plastic tubes were integrated into Capilene™ underwear such that cool water could 
be circulated near the skin surface so that body heat could be removed to the cabin air 
(Perez et al., 2003); this became known as the Liquid Cooling Garment (LCG). The 
water circulated from the suit was passed through a thermoelectric cooling unit external 
to the protective garment where the heat was transferred from the water lines to the 
ambient air. Originally, two crewmembers shared each cooling unit. At present, 
individual Cooling Units (ICU) are used to remove heat from the LCG water lines. 

NASA flight rules limit the maximum allowable cabin temperature prior to and during re- 
entry to protect crew health and comfort. Heat in the crew compartment is primarily the 
result of heat retained by the Shuttle itself during re-entry, but is further increased by 
hardware and avionics in operation as well as the metabolic heat produced by the 
crewmembers. The Shuttle payload doors are left open until just before de-orbiting to 
radiate as much heat as possible and decrease cabin temperature. At present, the upper 
limit of allowed temperature during descent and landing is 23.9 °C (75 °F). However, to 
meet the demands of mission objectives, flight controllers may consider waivers to allow 
higher cabin temperatures so that additional hardware can be in operation during descent. 

The purpose of this project was to evaluate the cooling capabilities of the ACES 
ensemble, including the LCG, in normal subjects exposed to simulated cabin temperature 



ACES and Thermoregulation 5 

profiles similar to that experienced by Space Shuttle crewmembers during re-entry and 
landing. The primary objective was to determine whether subjects wearing the ACES 
ensemble could tolerate a temperature profile with a higher maximum cabin temperature 
of 26.7 °C (80 °F). We hypothesized that subjects would be able to self-regulate their 
cooling with the LCG so as to prevent a rise in body temperature and heart rate. Further, 
we hypothesized that heart rate and blood pressure responses to standing would not be 
altered after this simulated landing temperature profile. Secondarily, we sought to 
characterize the body temperature and heart rate responses in a subgroup of subjects 
across a range of ambient temperature profiles while wearing the ACES ensemble. The 
temperature profiles examined include the currently allowed maximum temperature of 
23.9 °C (75 °F) and two higher profiles with maximum temperatures of 26.7 °C (80 °F) 
and29.4°C(85°F). 

METHODS 

Overall Protocol 

Eight subjects, four men and four women, participated in this investigation (33.6±6.1 yr, 
67.3±2.7 kg, 155.5±24.8 cm). All eight subjects participated in testing to meet the 
primary objective of this project in which subjects were exposed to a temperature profile 
with a peak temperature of 26.7 °C (80 °F). To meet the secondary objective of this 
project, four of the eight subjects (two men and two women) were exposed to three 
temperature profiles (Table 1): one which simulates the currently allowed peak 
temperature of 23.9 °C (75 °F; LO), one in which the peak temperature was 26.7 °C (80 
°F; MID) and one in which the peak temperature was 29.4 °C (85 °F; HI). 



ACES and Thermoregulation 6 



INSERT TABLE 1 HERE 

All subjects passed a modified Air Force Class UI physical, and were screened for illicit 
drug usage and for HTV and hepatitis antibodies. Testing procedures were fully explained 
to the test subjects, and written informed consent was obtained from each subject prior to 
participation in this study. The testing protocol and procedures were reviewed and 
approved by the NASA Johnson Space Center Institutional Review Board. 

Subjects were dressed in the ACES ensemble and remained within an environmentally- 
controlled chamber for five hours. Temperature and humidity were controlled to simulate 
environmental conditions to which crewmembers are exposed during re-entry and 
landing. Temperature profiles were patterned from actual Shuttle re-entry and landing 
data provided by NASA Crew and Thermal Systems Division personnel. Prior to and 
immediately after chamber exposure, subjects performed a 10-minute stand test while 
wearing the ACES as a test of orthostatic tolerance. The overall subject timeline is 
described in Figure 2. 

INSERT FIGURE 2 HERE (Test Timeline) 

The schedule of the temperature profile was based upon several assumptions. First, the 
total amount of time spent wearing the ACES reflected that of the commander and pilot. 
The commander and pilot don their suits approximately two hours before de-orbit burn. 



