Software 



©TEAMS Model Analyzer 

NASA's Jet Propulsion Labordtory, Pasadena, California 


The TEAMS model analyzer is a sup- 
porting tool developed to work with 
modelscreated with TEAMS (Testability, 
Engineering, and Maintenance System), 
which was developed by Q SI . 

In an effort to reduce the time spent in 
the manual process that each TEAMS 
modeler must perform in the preparation 
of reporting for model reviews, a new tool 
has been developed as an aid to models 
developed in TEAMS. The software allows 
for the viewing, reporting, and checking 
of TEAMS models that are checked into 


theTEAMSmodel database. The software 
allows the user to selectively model in a hi- 
erarchical tree outline view that displays 
the components, failure modes, and 
ports. The reporting features allow the 
user to quickly gather statistics about the 
model, and generate an input/ output re- 
port pertaining to all of the components. 
Rules can be automatically validated 
against the model, with a report gener- 
ated containing resulting inconsistencies 
In addition to reducing manual effort, 
this software also provides an automated 


process framework for the Verification 
and Validation (V&V) effort that will fol- 
low development of these models. The 
aid of such an automated tool would have 
a significant impact on the V&V process. 

T his work was done by Raffi P. T ikidjian 
of Caltech for NASA's Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory. Further information is contained 
in a TSP (seepagel). 

T his softwareis available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Daniel Broderick of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
danielb@caltech.edu. Refer to N PO-46842. 


@ Probabilistic Design and Analysis Framework 

John H . Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio 


PRODAF is a software package de- 
signed to aid analysts and designers in 
conducting probabilistic analysis of com- 
ponents and systems. PRODAF can inte- 
grate multiple analysis programs to ease 
the tedious process of conducting a 
complex analysis process that requires 
the use of multiple software packages. 
The work uses a commercial finite ele- 
ment analysis (FEA) program with mod- 
ules from NESSUS to conduct a proba- 
bilistic analysis of a hypothetical turbine 
blade, disk, and shaft model. PRODAF 
applies the response surface method, at 
the component level, and extrapolates 
the component-level responses to the 
system level. FI ypothetical components 


of a gas turbine engine are first 
deterministically modeled using FEA. 
Variations in selected geometrical di- 
men sionsand loading conditionsare an- 
alyzed to determine the effects of the 
stress state within each component. 

Geometric variations include the cord 
length and height for the blade, inner 
radius, outer radius, and thickness, 
which are varied for the disk. Probabilis- 
tic analysis is carried out using develop- 
ing software packageslike System U ncer- 
tainty Analysis (SUA) and PRODAF. 
PRODAF was used with a commercial 
deterministic FEA program in conjunc- 
tion with modules from the probabilistic 
analysis program, NESTEM, to perturb 


loads and geometries to provide a relia- 
bility and sensitivity analysis. PRODAF 
simplified the handling of data among 
the various programs involved, and will 
work with many commercial and open- 
source deterministic programs, proba- 
bilistic programs, or modules. 

This work was done by William C. Strack 
andVinod K. Nagpal ofN& R Engineering for 
Glenn Research Center. Further information is 
contained in a TSP (seepagel). 

Inquiries concerning rights for the commer- 
cial use of this invention should be addressed to 
NASA Glenn Research Center, Innovative 
Partnerships Office, Attn: Steve Fedor, Mail 
Stop 4-8, 21000 Brookpark Road, Cleveland, 
Ohio 44135. Refer to LEW -18372-1. 


4 Excavator Design Validation 

John H . Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio 


The Excavator Design Validation tool 
verifies excavator designs by automatically 
generating control systems and modeling 
their performance in an accurate simula- 
tion of their expected environment. Part 
of this software design includes interfac- 
ing with human operations that can be in- 
cluded in simulation-based studies and 
validation. This is essential for assessing 
productivity, versatility, and reliability. 


This software combines automatic con- 
trol system generation from CAD (com- 
puter-aided design) models, rapid valida- 
tion of complex mechanism designs, and 
detailed models of the environment in- 
cluding soil, dust, temperature, remote 
supervision, and communication latency 
to create a system of high value. Unique 
algorithms have been created for control- 
ling and simulating complex robotic 


mechanisms automatically from just a 
CAD description. These algorithms are 
implemented as a commercial cross-plat- 
form C++ software toolkit that is config- 
urable using the Extensible Markup Lan- 
guage (XML). 

The algorithms work with virtually any 
mobile robotic mechanisms using mod- 
ule descriptions that adhere to the X M L 
standard. In addition, high-fidelity, real- 


N ASA Tech Briefs, September 2010 


33 



time physics-based simulation algo- 
rithms have also been developed that in- 
clude models of internal forces and the 
forces produced when a mechanism in- 
teracts with the outside world. Thiscapa- 
bility is combined with an innovative or- 
ganization for simulation algorithms, 
new regolith simulation methods, and a 
unique control and study architecture to 
make powerful tools with the potential 
to transform the way NASA verifies and 
compares excavator designs. 

Energid's Actin software has been 
leveraged for this design validation. 
The architecture includes parametric 
and Monte Carlo studies tailored for 


validation of excavator designs and 
their control by remote human opera- 
tors. It also includes the ability to inter- 
face with third-party software and 
human-input devices. Two types of sim- 
ulation models have been adapted: 
high-fidelity discrete element models 
and fast analytical models. By using the 
first to establish parameters for the sec- 
ond, a system has been created that can 
be executed in real time, or faster than 
real time, on a desktop PC. This allows 
Monte Carlo simulations to be per- 
formed on a computer platform avail- 
able to all researchers, and it allows 
human interaction to be included in a 


real-time simulation process. Metrics 
on excavator performance are estab- 
lished that work with the simulation ar- 
chitecture. Both static and dynamic 
metrics are included. 

T his work was done by Chalongrath Phol- 
siri, James English, Charles Seberi no, andYi- 
JeLim of Energid Technologies for Glenn Re- 
search Center. Further information is 
contained in a TSP (see page 1). 

Inquiries concerning rights for thecommer- 
cial use of this invention should beaddressed 
to NASA Glenn Research Center, Innovative 
Partnerships Office, Attn: Steve Fedor, Mail 
Stop 4-8, 21000 Brookpark Road, Cleve- 
land, Ohio 44135. Refer to LEW-18522-1. 


@0 bserving System Simulation Experiment (0 SSE) for the 
HyspIRI Spectrometer Mission 

NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


The OSSE software provides an inte- 
grated end-to-end environment to simu- 
late an Earth observing system by itera- 
tively running a distributed modeling 
workflow based on the HyspIRI Mission, 
including atmospheric radiative transfer, 
surface albedo effects, detection, and re- 
trieval for agile exploration of the mission 
design space. 

The software enables an Observing 
System Simulation Experiment (OSSE) 
and can be used for design trade space 
exploration of science return for pro- 
posed instruments by modeling the 
whole ground truth, sensing, and re- 
trieval chain and to assess retrieval accu- 
racy for a particular instrument and al- 
gorithm design. The OSSE 
infrastructure is extensible to future Na- 
tional Research Council (NRC) Decadal 
Survey concept missions where inte- 
grated modeling can improve the fi- 
delity of coupled science and engineer- 
ing analyses for systematic analysis and 


science return studies. 

This software has a distributed archi- 
tecture that gives it a distinct advantage 
over other similar efforts. The workflow 
modeling components are typically 
legacy computer programs imple- 
mented in a variety of programming lan- 
guages, including MATLAB, Excel, and 
FORTRAN. Integration of these diverse 
components is difficult and time-con- 
suming. In order to hidethiscomplexity, 
each modeling component is wrapped 
as a Web Service, and each component is 
able to pass analysis parameterizations, 
such as reflectance or radiance spectra, 
on to the next component downstream 
in the service workflow chain. In this 
way, the interface to each modeling 
component becomes uniform and the 
entire end-to-end workflow can be run 
using any existing or custom workflow 
processing engine. The architecture lets 
usersextend wo rkflowsasnew modeling 
components become available, chain to- 


gether the components using any exist- 
ing or custom workflow processing en- 
gine, and distribute them across any I n- 
ternet-accessible Web Service endpoints. 

The workflow components can be 
hosted on any Internet-accessible ma- 
chine. This has the advantages that the 
computations can be distributed to 
make best use of the available comput- 
ing resources, and each workflow com- 
ponent can be hosted and maintained 
by their respective domain experts. 

This work wasdonebyM ichael J. Turmon, 
GaryL. Block, RobertO. Green, HookHua, 
Joseph C. Jacob, Harold R. Sobel, and Paul L. 
Springer of Caltech and Qingyuan Zhang of 
the University of Maryland, Baltimore 
County (UMBC) for NASA's Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory. Further information is contained 
in a TSP (seepagel). 

T his softwareis available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Daniel Broderick of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
danielb@caltech.edu. Refer to N PO-47048. 


4 Momentum Management Tool for Low-Thrust Missions 

NASA'sJet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


A momentum management tool was 
designed for the Dawn low-thrust inter- 
planetary spacecraft en route to the as- 
teroids Vesta and Ceres, in an effort to 
better understand the early creation of 
the solar system. Momentum must be 
managed to ensure the spacecraft has 


enough control authority to perform 
necessary turns and hold a fixed iner- 
tial attitude against external torques. 
Along with torques from solar pressure 
and gravity-gradients, ion-propulsion 
engines produce a torque about the 
thrust axis that must be countered by 


the four reaction wheel assemblies 
(RWA). 

MomProf is a ground operations tool 
built to address these concerns. The mo- 
mentum management tool wasdeveloped 
during initial checkout and early cruise, 
and has been refined to accommodate a 


34 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2010 


