NASA Contractor Report 185218 - /t?'Cr>(^y^ 

Saturated Fluorescence Measurements 
of the Hydroxyl Radical in Laminar 
High-Pressure Flames 



Campbell D. Carter, Galen B. King, and 
Normand M. Laurendeau 

Purdue University 
West Lafayette, Indiana 



February 1990 



Prepared for 

Lewis Research Center 

Under Grant NAG3-351 



IWNSA 

National Aeronautics and 

Space Administration ^___ ^ 

^.-.3% QATtiRATFD FLunaesctNCE ^'^ 

^''-';r«;i?rn?'THE HYU*ax?L^ADICAL IN 
MEASUREMENTS OF •"'^„"^" . „p ,. pinal Report 

LAHINAR HIGH-PRESSURE FLAMES F«na1 p^^ ^^^ ^"^l^L 

(Purdue Univ.) 122 p G3/35 0Z7566^ 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Page 

LIST OF SYMBOLS '" 

ABSTRACT viii 

CHAPTER 1 - INTRODUCTION 1 

1.1 Background ^ 

1.2 Thesis Contents ^ 

CHAPTER 2 - LITERATURE REVIEW 7 

2.1 Laser-Saturated Fluorescence 7 

2.2 Other Methods 19 

CHAPTERS - FEASIBILITY OF HYDROXYL CONCENTRATION MEASUREMENTS BY 

LASER-SATURATED FLUORESCENCE IN HIGH-PRESSURE FLAMES 23 

3.1 Introduction 23 

3.2 Adequacy of the Rate-Equation Approach 24 

3.3 The LSF Method 25 

3.4 Laser-Excitation Dynamics 30 

3.4.1 Rotational Relaxation Model 31 

3.4.2 Electronic Quenching Model 33 

3.4.3 Vibrational Relaxation Model 33 

3.4.4 Excitation Model 34 

3.5 Test of Rotational Relaxation/Electronic Quenching Models 35 

3.6 Results and Discussion 38 

3.7 Conclusions 52 

CHAPTER 4 - EXPERIMENTAL APPARATUS 54 

4.1 Combustion Facility for High-Pressure Flame Studies 54 

4.1.1 Introduction 54 

4.1.2 High-Pressure Facility 55 

4.1.3 Areas for Improvement 63 

4.2 Spectroscopic Equipment 64 

4.2.1 Fluorescence Experiments 64 

4.2.2 Absorption Experiments 75 



Page 

CHAPTERS - LASER-INDUCED FLUORESCENCE MEASUREMENTS OF OH IN LAMINAR 

C2H6/O2/N2 FLAMES AT HIGH PRESSURE 81 

5.1 Introduction 81 

5.2 Experimental Apparatus 81 

5.3 Results and Discussion 85 

5.4 Summary 96 

CHAPTERS - SATURATED FLUORESCENCE MEASUREMENTS OF THE HYDROXYL 

RADICAL IN UMINAR HIGH-PRESSURE CgHs/Oz/Na FLAMES 98 

6.1 Introduction 98 

6.2 Theory 99 

6.3 Experimental Apparatus 102 

6.4 Results and Discussion 108 

6.4.1 Saturation Measurements 108 

6.4.2 Fluorescence/Absorption Measurements 114 

6.5 Conclusions 125 

CHAPTER 7 - QUENCHING-INDEPENDENT SATURATED FLUORESCENCE MEASURE- 
MENTS OF THE HYDROXYL RADICAL IN LAMINAR HIGH-PRESSURE 127 
C2H6/O2/N2 FLAMES , 

7.1 Introduction 127 

7.2 Theory 128 

7.3 Experimental Apparatus 133 

7.4 Results and Discussion 138 

7.5 Conclusions , 152 

CHAPTERS - CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 154 

8.1 Conclusions 154 

8.2 Recommendations 156 

LIST OF REFERENCES 159 

APPENDICES 

Appendix A - Flow Control Routine 165 

Appendix B - Absorption Theory and Sensitivity Analysis for Collisional Linewidths 1 84 

Appendix C - Error Analysis of Absorption Measurements 200 

Appendix D - Saturation of an Inhomogeneously-Broadened A^E+^-X^n (0,0) Trans- 
ition of OH 202 

Appendix E - Gaussian Quadrature Formula for the Weighting Function 

W{x) = 1/(1 + x2) 212 



LIST OF SYMBOLS 

English Symbols 

Symbol Description ynjis 

A Parameter in Chan-Daily-Crosley model cm 

A Integrated absorption cm-i 

a Line broadening parameter 

Af Einstein coefficient for thie observed fluorescence transition s' 

A(i,j) Einstein coefficient for spontaneous emission from energy level s-i 

I to energy level j 

A^ Spectral absorption 

B Function in Chan-Daily-Crosley model cm2 

Biu Einstein coefficient for absorption from level / to level u cm3-cm- VJ-s 

Bui Einstein coefficient for stimulated emission from level u to level / cm3-cm- VJ-s 

c Speed of ligfit cm/s 

d Laser probe diameter cm 

E(i) Energy of rotational level i cm-i 

Fi and F2 Notation for spin split rotational energy levels 

f Parameter in Chan-Daily-Crosley model 

fe Change in the Boltzmann fraction relative to the calibration 

condition 

ft, Fraction of population in the excited electronic state quenched 

to the vibrational bath levels (v" > 0) 

(Fc) Spatially-averaged depletion of the laser-coupled levels 

fc Fluorescence calibration factor cm-3/V 

fg Fluorescence correction factor for linewidth variation relative to 

the calibration condition 

F/B Boltzmann fraction of lower laser-coupled level 



111 



Symbol 

fQ 

FWHM 
9/ 

g(i) 
gM 

H 
h 

If 

I? 

Il 



K 

k 

I 

Leff 

m 

N 

Nc 
hq 
N/ 

N? 

n/(iy) 



Description 

Ratio of rale coefficients for (1 ) transfer from v" > to v" = and 
(2) electronic quenching (Qe) 

Fluorescence quenching correction factor 

Full width at half maximum 

Degeneracy of rotational level / 

Degeneracy of rotational level u 

Degeneracy of rotational level i 

Normalized slit function 

Height of monochromator slit image at the laser beam 

Plank constant 

Fluorescence intensity 

Fluorescence intensity at coordinates (y=0,z=0) 

Laser irradiance 

Laser irradiance at the beam center line and temporal peak 

Rotational quantum number. J" and J' are the respective 
rotational quantum numbers in the ground and excited electronic 
states. 

Absorption parameter 

Boltzmann constant 

Absorption coefficient 

Lower laser-coupled rotational level 

Effective path length for absorption 

Mass of species of interest 

Rotational quantum number. N" and N' are the respective 
rotational quantum numbers in the ground and excited electronic 
states. 

Population in the collisionally-excited rotational energy levels 

Number of ground-state rotational levels modelled 

Population of the lower laser-coupled rotational energy level 

Population of the lower laser-coupled rotational energy level at 
equilibrium 

Spectral population of the lower laser-coupled rovibronic level 



Units 



1/cm-i 

cm 

J-s 

W/cm2-sr 

W/cm2-sr 

W/cm2 

W/cm2 



J/K 
cm-1 

cm 

g 



1/cm3 

1/cm3 
l/cm3 

1/cm3-cm-i 



1v 



Symbol Description kiQils 

n ?(y) Spectral population of the lower laser-coupled rovibronic level 1/cm3-cm-i 

at equilibrium 

Nu Population of the upper laser-coupled rovibronic level 1/cm3 

N ^ Normalized population of the upper laser-coupled rovibronic 

level 
nu(i/) Spectral population of the upper laser-coupled rovibronic level l/cm3-cm-i 

Nj Total species population l/cm^ 

P Pressure alrn 

Qc Frequency of dephasing collisions s-i 

Qp Frequency of Doppler-changing non-quenching collisions s-i 

Qe(i,j) Rate coefficient for electronic quenching from level i to level j s-i 

Qe(i) or Qe Rate coefficient for electronic quenching from level i s-i 

Qg„ Effective rate coefficient for collision-induced transfer from s-i 
excited rotational level u 

Qr(i,j) Rate coefficient for rotational energy transfer from level i to level s-i 

i 

Rate coefficient for rotational energy transfer from level i s-i 

Rate coefficient for vibrational energy transfer from level i to level s-i 

J 

Rate coefficient for vibrational energy transfer from level i s-i 

Radial distance from laser beam center line cm 

Fluorescence signal V 

Fluorescence signal at maximum laser power V 

Temperature K 

Time s 

Time at which the laser pulse peaks s 

Upper laser-coupled rotational level 

V Vibrational quantum state. V" and V' are the respective vibrational 

states in the ground and excited electronic states. 

V(y;a) Voigt function 

V, Average relative velocity between species of interest and species cm/s 

q 

W Width of monochromator slit image at the laser beam cm 



Qr(i) or 


Qr 


OM 




Qv(i) or 


Qv 


r 




Sf 




Sf,m 




T 




t 




tp 




u 





Symbol Description Units 

w Halfwidth of the laser irradiance profile cm 

W Saturation parameter 

Wp' Saturation parameter at the laser beam center line and temporal 

peak 

Wf' Relative saturation parameter 

Wj,' and Wy' Spectral saturation parameter as a function of frequency v or 
nondimensional frequency y, respectively 

W/^ Rate coefficient for laser absorption from level / to level u s-i 

\V !"„ Rate coefficient for absorption (from levels / to u) at the laser 

beam center line and temporal peak 

Wu/ Rate coefficient for stimulated emission from level u to level / s-i 

X Lateral distance across laser beam cm 

Xj Mole fraction of i-th species 

Y(y;a) Normalized line profile 1/cm-i 

y Nondimensional frequency 

yLm Nondimensional central frequency of the m-th laser mode 

Ayim Nondimensional spectral separation of the laser modes 

yLc Nondimensional central frequency of the laser spectral profile 

Greek Symbols 

Symbol Description Units 

ojat Degree of saturation 

a ^a , Degree of saturation at the laser beam center line and temporal 

peak 

r Function in Chan-Daily-Crosley model 

7 Local depletion of the laser-coupled levels 

2r, Broadening coefficient for the i-th collision partner cmVatm 

S Absolute uncertainty 

f Relative uncertainty 

f o Ratio of the B-parameter in the ground electronic state to that in 

the excited state 



vi 



• * 



XVI 






Symbol Descriotion iiQ!l5 

n Efficiency of the fluorescence detection system, wfiich V/W 

incorporates (1) tfie efficiency the fluorescence optics (including 
the lenses, mirrors, and grating), (2) the spectral efficiency (i.e., 
the fraction of the spectral profile passed by the exit slit), and (3) 
the sensitivity of the PMT (V/W). 

e Parameter in Chan-Daily-Crosley model 

X Wavelength "f" 
V Frequency ^'^' 
Central frequency of the transition of interest cm- 
Central frequency of the observed fluorescence transition cm- 
Central frequency of the m-th laser mode cm- 
Ai/Lm Spectral separation of the laser modes cm- 
,/Lc Central frequency of the laser spectral profile cm- 
Ai^c Collisional linewidth (FWHM) cm-i 
Ai/D Doppler linewidth (FWHM) cm-i 
Ai^L Laser linewidth (FWH(^) cm-i 
Ai^N Natural linewidth (FWHM) cm- 
Ai/* Monochromator resolution cm-i 
Energy density of the central mode of the laser spectral profile J/cm3 
Energy density of the m-th laser mode vJ/cm3 
Spectral energy density J/cm3-cm-i 

£j^(ij) Collisional cross section for electronic quenching from level i to cm2 

level j 

ae(i) or (7e Collisional cross section for the total electronic quenching from cm2 

level i (for a specific species) 

(7^(i,j) Collisional cross section for rotational energy transfer from level cm2 

i to level j 

crr(i) or a, Collisional cross section for the total rotational energy transfer cm2 

from level i (for a specific species) 

<j^ (i,j) Cross section (for transfer from level i to level D describing cm2 

collisions with species q and energy transfer mode m (with m = 
e. v, or r) 

^ Parameter in Chan-Daily-Crosley model 

^ Equivalence ratio 

n Solid angle ^^ 



vil 



Pm 
Pv 



ABSTRACT 

We have investigated theoretically and experimentally the efficacy of laser-saturated 
fluorescence (LSF) for OH concentration measurements in high-pressure flames. Using a numerical 
model describing the interaction of hydroxyl with nonuniform laser excitation, we have studied the 
effect of pressure on the validity of the balanced cross-rate model and the sensitivity of the 
depopulation of the laser-coupled levels to the ratio of rate coefficients describing (1) electronic 
quenching to 2e+(v">o) and (2) vibrational relaxation from v">0 to v"=0. At sufficiently high 
pressures and near-saturated conditions, the total population of the laser-coupled levels reaches 
an asymptotic value, which is insensitive to the degree of saturation. When the ratio of electronic 
quenching to vibrational relaxation is small and the rate coefficients for rotational transfer in the 
ground and excited electronic states are nearly the same, the balanced cross-rate model remains 
a good approximation for all pressures. When the above ratio is large, depopulation of the 
laser-coupled levels becomes significant at high pressures, and thus the balanced cross-rate model 
no longer holds. Under these conditions, however, knowledge of the depletion of the laser-coupled 
levels can be used to correct the model. 

A combustion facility for operation up to 20 atm was developed to allow LSF measurements 
of OH in high-pressure flames. Using this facility, we achieved partial saturation in laminar 
high-pressure (< 12.3 atm) C2H6/O2/N2 flames. To evaluate the limits of the balanced cross-rate 
model, we compared absorption and calibrated LSF measurements at 3.1 and 6.1 atm. The 
fluorescence voltages were calibrated with absorption measurements in an atmospheric flame and 
corrected for their finite sensitivity to quenching with (1) estimated quenching rate coefficients and 
(2) an in situ measurement from a technique employing two fluorescence detection geometries. 
While the absorption and calibrated fluorescence measurements compare well at 3.1 atm, the OH 
fluorescence values are -25% below the absorption measurements at 6.1 atm, indicating an 
effective error of -25% in the balanced cross-rate model. We anticipate that with 
atmospheric-pressure fluorescence calibration and a measurement or a reasonable estimate of 
the quenching correction factor, one can measure OH concentrations within ±50% at pressures 
up to 1 atm. 



vin 



CHAPTER 1 
INTRODUCTION 

1.1 Background 

Measurements of flame species by optical methods, such as laser-induced fluorescence 
(LIF) , have proved valuable in elucidating chemical and physical processes occurring in combustion 
environments (Eckbreth, 1988). Fluorescence measurements are relevant to the study of a broad 
range of practical combustion topics including turbulent flames, engine knock, pollutant formation. 
and flame stability. Linear fluorescence methods are particularly useful for turbulent flames, where 
2-D images oUelative species concentrations can yield insight into the complex interaction between 
chemistry and the flow field. In comparison, laser-saturated fluorescence (LSF), which is currently 
limited to point-wise or perhaps 1-D measurements, is attractive because it can provide reliable 
absolute species concentrations. Moreover, unlike linear fluorescence, LSF measurements are 
insensitive to the rate coefficients for both laser excitation and collisional de-excitation. As a 
consequence, in situ calibration of the fluorescence signal is not necessary: a calibration factor 
determined in one flame (through techniques such as Rayleigh scattering or absorption) can more 
easily be applied to other flames where calibration is more difficult or perhaps impossible [e.g., 
turbulent or sooting flames (Lucht et al., 1984, 1985; Drake et al., 1984, 1985)]. 

Since LSF was first proposed as a combustion diagnostic (Piepmeier, 1972a; Daily. 1977), it 
has been used to detect the diatomic molecules C2 (Baronavski and McDonald, 1977; Mailander, 
1 978), MgO (Pasternack et al.. 1 978), ON (Bonczyk and Shirley, 1 979; Verdieck and Bonczyk, 1 981 ), 
CH (Mailander, 1977; Bonczyk and Shirley, 1979; Verdieck and Bonczyk, 1981; Kohse-Hoinghaus 
etaL, 1983, 1984;Takuboetal., 1983), OH (Lucht etal., 1978. 1983, 1984, 1985; Kohse-Hoinghaus, 
1 983, 1 984. 1 986; Drake et al., 1 984, 1 985; Salmon and Laurendeau. 1 985a, 1 985b) and NH (Salmon 
et al., 1984) in subatmospheric and atmospheric flames. Initial experiments (Pasternack et al., 
1978; Bonczyk and Shirley. 1978; Verdieck and Bonczyk. 1981) showed significant disagreement 
between fluorescence and independent absorption measurements. Later, however, Lucht et al. 



(1983) and Salmon and Laurendeau (1985a) compared LSF measurements of OH concentration 
(calibrated using Rayleigh scattering) with independent absorption measurements in low-pressure 
(72 torr) laminar Hj/Og/Ar flames and demonstrated that saturation can be used to obtain accurate 
number densities (±15-25%) under these conditions. 




M 







Figure 1 . 1 Energy level structure and population transfer mec hanism s. W/y and Wy/ are the rate 
coefficients for a¥so7ptibri arid stimulated emissionTrespeclively. Q,, Qy. and Qe are 
the rate coefficients for rotational relaxation, vibrational relaxation, and electronic 
quenching, respectiveiy. 



In a typical experiment employing LSF, molecules initially in a rotational level within the lowest 
vibrational level of the ground electronic state are excited through absorption to a rotational level 
in the V' = level of an excited electronic state (Fig. 1.1). Spontaneous emission, stimulated 
emission, and the collisional energy exchange processes-rotational relaxation, vibrational 
relaxation, and electronic quenching-transfer population from the upper laser-coupled level to other 



rovibronic levels of the excited and ground electronic states. Likewise, in the ground state, the 
lower laser-coupled level is re-populated by these same process. The rate equation describing the 
population of the upper laser-coupled level is 

where N^ and N; are the instantaneous populations of the upper and lower laser-coupled levels, 
respectively, and W/u and W^/ are the respective rate coefficients for absorption and stimulated 
emission. Qeff, the effective rate coefficient for collisional depopulation of the directly-excited level, 
includes contributions from rotational and vibrational energy transfer, electronic quenching and 
spontaneous emission. When the population of the directly-excited rotational level peaks during 
laser excitation, steady-state conditions apply, and we can write 

^ = I . (1.;^) 

where g/ and g^ are the respective degeneracies of levels / and u and guW^; = gi^iu- In general, 
the population N^ can be related to N °, the desired unperturbed population of level /, by 

A/„ + /V, = (l -Y)A/? • C'^) 

The population N ? is related to the species number density through the Boltzmann fraction, and 

the parameter 1 - 7 is the fraction of the original population remaining in the laser-coupled levels 
and is determined by the collision environment (i.e., the temperature and concentrations of the 
collision partners for the molecule of interest). Combining Eqs. (1 .2) and (1 .3) gives 

A'„ = -^^/V?(l-Y)a,„, . (1.1) 



where osat. tf>e degree of saturation, is given by 



1 + - 



- 1 



(1.5) 



w 
and W s W/„/Qeff is the saturation parameter. We note that when g^ = g/ and W' > 10, then asat > 

95%. 

The fluorescence signal is given by the integral of the local excited-state population over the 

imaged volume; i.e., 



S,= ' H ^n) NAx,y,z}dV . (1.6) 

4Jt Jv 

where i^f (cm-') is the frequency of the observed transition, Af (s-i) is the Einstein coefficient for 
spontaneous emission, rj is the net efficiency of the detection system, and n is the solid angle 
defined by the collection optics. When the unperturbed number density N ?does not vary throughout 
the imaged volume, we can solve for this quantity and obtain 

n gi + ffu 4nS, 

N°' jr-^ . (!./) 

By rearranging this equation we obtain 

<F,>^^-^ = ^i^^ HHlLSLi , (1.8) 

which represents the spatially-averaged fraction of population remaining in the laser-coupled levels. 
Note that insofar as W/o Is independent of x (e.g., along the beam center line), (Fg) reduces to 1 - 
7. The influence of the spatial profile of the laser beam and the degree to which 7 deviates from 
zero complicates LSF measurements. These complications become more important at high 
pressure. 

1 .2 Contents of Report 

In this report, we focus on the efficacy of the LSF method for measurement of OH concentration 
in high-pressure flames. In particular, we have investigated theoretically and experimentally the 
validity of the balanced cross-rate model (Lucht et al., 1 980), which Lucht et al. (1 983) and Salmon 
and Laurendeau (1985a) used successfully at low pressure to relate the measured quantity N^ to 
the unperturbed number density N ? . in essence, the model states that the laser-coupled levels 
experience approximately no net depletion; i.e., 

N,-^N,"N° . (1.9) 

The utility of this model, as opposed to Eq. (1 .3), is that it requires no knowledge of the collisionai 
environment; consequently, fluorescence measurements can be related more easily to the desired 



species number density. When Eq. (1.9) cannot be used due to depletion of the laser-coupled 
levels and this depletion cannot be accurately measured, LSF can lose much of its attractiveness 
over linear fluorescence methods. 

In the following chapter, we review the literature, with a focus on recent studies involving 
laser-saturated fluorescence. This review also describes some alternate methods for making 
quenching-insensttive concentration measurements in flames. Chapters 3 through 7 contain 
papers which have been published, recently submitted, or are in preparation for publication in 
refereed journals. In Chapter 3, which was published in Applied Optics (Carter et al., 1987), we 
perform a feasibility study on the application of LSF to the measurement of OH concentration in 
high-pressure flames. Using a numerical model for the cotlisional dynamics of the OH molecule 
under nonuniform laser excitation, we investigate the effect of pressure on the validity of the balanced 
cross-rate model and the sensitivity of the depopulation of the laser-coupled levels to the ratio of 
rate coefficients describing (1) electronic quenching to the ground-state vibrational levels for which 
v" > and (2) vibrational relaxation from v" > to v" = 0. 

In Chapter 4, we describe the experimental apparatus. This includes a description of the 
high-pressure combustion facility, which we have developed in the course of this work and which 
will be used in future high-pressure combustion studies employing spectroscopic methods; this 
section of Chapter 4 was published in the Review of Scientific Instruments (Carter, et al., 1 989). In 
Chapter 5, we present relative concentration measurements of OH in lean premixed C2H6/O2/N2 
flames at high-pressure (P < 12.6 atm). For this experiment we made no explicit use of saturation 
of the transition; rather, we were interested in the feasibility of probing the reaction zone in 
high-pressure laminar flat flames, thereby potentially allowing the study of high-pressure flame 
chemistry. We also discuss problems encountered using LIF under these conditions. This chapter 
has been accepted for publication as a short communication in Combustion Science and 
Technology. 

In Chapter 6, we describe experiments to evaluate the efficacy of LSF for OH concentration 
measurements in high-pressure combustion environments. In addition to demonstrating that 
saturation is possible in high-pressure C2H6/O2/N2 flames, we evaluate the limits of the balanced 
cross-rate model, Eq. (1.9), by comparing absorption and calibrated LSF measurements up to a 
pressure of ~6 atm. The fluorescence measurements are calibrated with absorption measurements 
at 1 atm, and in this way, we compare (Fc)p. the spatially-averaged population fraction of the 



laser-coupled levels at pressure P, to (Fc)i, the population fraction at atmospheric pressure. We 
also present absolute OH concentration profiles for lean flames at about 1, 3, 6, 9 and 12 atm; to 
our knowledge, these are the first high-pressure absolute concentration measurements of OH 
performed with LIF. Chapter 7 describes the use of a method suggested by Cottereau (1986) for 
making quenching-independent measurements with LSF. This technique employs two detection 
geometries, including two monochromators. The ratio of the resulting fluorescence signals can be 
used to correct the fluorescence signals for their finite sensitivity to quenching. Finally, Chapter 8 
presents conclusions and recommendations for future work with LSF. 



CHAPTER 2 
LITERATURE REVIEW 

2.1 Laser-Saturated Fluorescence 

Utilization of laser-saturated fluorescence (LSF) as a diagnostic tool for concentration 
measurements was initially proposed by Piepmeier (1 972a), who noted that saturation of an atomic 
transition would have the benefit of greatly increasing the fluorescence emission, while reducing 
the dependence of the emission on changes in laser irradiance and collisional quenching. Daily 
(1977) also realized the potential of the LSF technique to circumvent the so-called quenching 
problem, thus allowing concentration measurements of atomic and molecular species in complex 
reacting flows. Because of their simpler energy level structure and larger absorption cross section, 
saturated fluorescence was initially applied to atoms, with the majority of experiments using sodium 
(Lucht et al., 1983; Alkemade, 1985). 

The LSF method has been applied to the diatomic molecules C2, CN, CH, MgO, OH, and NH. 
The aim of the initial experiments (see Table 2. 1 ) was to make absolute concentration measurements 
in flames; some of the deficiencies of these experiments included the following: 

1 . an inability to adequately determine experimental parameters such 
as effective probe volume, photomultiplier gain, and detection 
efficiency; 

2. the use of a relatively high pressure, i.e., 1 atm, and excitation with 
laser pulses of long temporal width, e.g. > l/xs, which can enhance 
noncyclic processes such as laser-induced photochemistry and the 
population of bath energy levels; 

3. the lack of spectral, temporal, and spatial resolution, thus making 
absolute concentration measurements difficult if not impossible. 



Furthermore, as observed by Lucht (1981), since none of these experiments used more than one 
flame condition, the dependence of the saturated fluorescence measurements on collisional 
de-excitation could not be assessed. 

Table 2. 1 Initial experiments with laser-saturated 
fluorescence. 



Molecule Investigators 



C2 Baronavski and McDonald (1 977) 

Mailander(1978) 

CH Mailander(1978) 

Bonczyk and Shirley (1979) 
Verdieck and Bonczyk (1981) 

CN Bonczyk and Shirley (1 979) 

Verdieck and Bonczyk (1981) 

MgO Pasternack et al. (1 978) 

OH Lucht etal. (1978) 

In 1980, Lucht et al. (1980b) used a set of rate equations, each describing the population of 
a rotational level in either the X2n(v"=0) or A2e-*-(v'=0) states of the OH molecule, to determine 
the validity of the so-called balanced cross-rate model, which states that the population in the 
laser-coupled levels remains approximately constant (and equal to the initial population of the lower 
level), since the rates of transfer into and out of the coupled levels are balanced. That is, 

N,^N,'N° , (^.1) 

where N^ and N/ are the respective populations in the upper and lower laser-coupled levels and 
N ? is the initial population of level /. For the simulated conditions of the burnt-gas region in an 
atmospheric-pressure H2/air flame, they found that with a nanosecond pulse-length laser, the 
depopulation of the laser-coupled levels is small. 

By employing the balanced cross-rate model, Lucht et al. (1981,1983) subsequently verified 
experimentally that saturation of a molecular transition could yield accurate, absolute number 
densities in low-pressure flames. Saturation of OH molecules was effected in flat laminar 
subatmospheric H2/O2 flames (diluted with either Ar or N2) by using a Nd.YAG-pumped dye laser 
with a pulse energy of -4 mJ at —310 nm and a nominal pulse length of 10 ns. To resolve the 
temporal peak of the fluorescence pulse and thereby ensure steady-state conditions as well as 



obtain a fluorescence signal at peak saturation, the 350 ps window of a 1 -GHz sampling oscilloscope 
was positioned at the temporal maximum of the fluorescence signal. The small spectral (~2 cm-i) 
and spatial (45 ^m x 3 mm) windows, provided by the monochromator exit and entrance slits, 
respectively, enhanced the observed saturation. By pumping the Pi(5) and Qi(lO) lines (and 
obsen/ing fluorescence from the Ri(3) and Pi (11) transitions, respectively) Lucht et ai. (1983) were 
able to achieve a degree of saturation estimated at 90-95%. This value, however, was uncertain 
because the degree of saturation is difficult to estimate owing to nonuniform illumination of the 
sampling volume (Salmon and Laurendeau, 1985a). 

The detection parameters forthe LSF measurements were obtained using Rayleigh scattering 
(Lucht, 1981). The depth of the scattering volume, assumed to be equivalent to the height of the 
volume, was estimated by opening the entrance slit until the signal became constant; the depth of 
the fluorescence probe volume was also obtained in this way. To evaluate the efficacy of the LSF 
method and the calibration procedure employing Rayleigh scattering, the fluorescence 
measurements, each an average of 1200 laser shots, were compared with absorption 
measurements at 72torr in lean, stoichiometric, and rich Hs/Oa/Ar flames. Figure 2.1 shows profiles 
of OH number density for the lean flame determined from LSF and absorption measurements, and 
the results from a calculation using a one-dimensional code for reacting flows (Peterson, 1981). 
The OH concentrations derived from the Qi(10)/Pi(11) excitation/detection scheme were 30% 
higher than values from the Pi (5)/Ri (3) scheme; the profile shown in Fig. 2.1 is the average of the 
two curves. The saturated fluorescence measurements were also corrected using a factor obtained 
by matching the uncorrected measurement at the peak of the absorption profile with the 
corresponding absorption concentration. At this peak, the LSF (uncorrected) and absorption 
measurements were within 15%; however, the estimated path length was an important source of 
uncertainty in the absorption measurements. In addition to the absolute concentration 
measurements, Lucht et al. (1983) showed that over the range of 30 to 242 torr (in an H2/O2/N2 
flame), the ratio of number densities from saturated fluorescence and absorption was approximately 
constant, which shows that sensitivity to quenching has been reduced significantly. 

Lucht et al. (1982) also made temperature measurements in the 72-torr. Ha/Oa/Ar flames 
described above using the LSF method. As with concentration measurements with LSF. each 
excitation/fluorescence line pair should have good spectral isolation in absorption and emission; 
an additional constraint is that the two lower laser-coupled rotational levels must have a large energy 
difference to reduce the sensitivity to systematic errors. Lucht et al. (1982) determined two 



1- -1500 



I 

£ 
u 

m 
O 



c 

O) 

Q 

w 
<U 
£i 

E 

3 



X 

o 




-1000 



o Absorption 

• Saturated Fluorescence 

A Corrected Saturated Fluorescence 

□ Theory ( Peterson, 1981) 

— -— Terr^perature 



3 

O 

w 

o. 

e 



500 



Distance Above Burner (mm) 



Figure 2. 1 Hydroxy! number density profiles in a lean Hji/Oa/Ar flame at a pressure of 72 torr and 
an equivalence ratio of 0.6 (Lucht et al, 1981). The error bar on the absorption cuA^e 
corresponds to the standard deviation of the OH number densities calculated from ten 
absorption lines. 



10 



temperature profiles from LSF in each of the lean, stoichiometric, and rich flames using the following 
excitation/detection transitions: (a) Pi(5)/Ri(3) and Qi(13)/Pi(14); (b) Q,(10)/Pi(16) and 
Qi(13)/Pi(14). The temperature profiles from LSF were compared with those calculated from 
absorption and thermocouple measurements and from the one-dimensional chemical kinetics code 
(Peterson, 1981). In the burnt-gas region of the lean and stoichiometric flames, temperatures 
determined from scheme (a) consistently gave values 100-200 K higher than those from the other 
methods, while measurements from scheme (b) yielded temperatures in good agreement with those 
from absorption, thermocouples and numerical computation. However, in the burnt-gas region of 
the rich flame, both LSF schemes gave temperatures higher than those obtained with 
thermocouples and the calculations. 

Based on the above experiments, Lucht et al. (1983) postulated that a significant source of 
error in the LSF measurements could arise from polarization effects. In an anisotropic magnetic or 
electric field, the total angular momentum J of a molecule is spatially quantized, and as a 
consequence, under excitation by a linearly polarized source, fluorescence from the pumped level 
can be significantly polarized. However, Altkorn and Zare (1 984) show that for an isotropic molecular 
distribution of the J vectors, saturation decreases the degree of polarization. Furthermore, collisions 
also reduce the fluorescence polarization, though both Doherty and Crosley (1984) and Zizak et 
al. (1986) observed polarized fluorescence from the directly -excited level in atmospheric-pressure 

flames. 

Kohse-Hoinghaus et al. (1983,1984) used the LSF method to measure CH and OH 
concentrations in a laminar premixed C2H2/O2 flame at 10 torr. To obtain concentrations from the 
measured fluorescence signal, they (1) used the balanced cross-rate model and (2) solved 
analytically the rate equation describing N^ [Eq. (1.1)] for a rectangular laser irradiance pulse, 

/^ =/f < / < T, (2.?) 

/, =0 t > r, . 

where I [ is the peak irradiance produced by the laser system and tl was chosen so that the 

rectangular pulse had the same energy flux (J/cm2) as the actual pulse. Comparing the results 
from this model with one which used a more realistic laser pulse showed that this model 
approximates well the saturation characteristics of a two-level system. The effective saturation 
volume, 

V.,,' JiN^/N'Ddxdydz , (2.3) 



11 



was then obtained using the irradiance distribution of the laser and the analytical expression for 
N^,. This method does not make explicit use of the saturation condition, W > 1; rather, 
Kohse-Hoinghaus et al. (1983,1984) extracted the effective quenching rate Qeff by monitoring the 
fluorescence decay. The success of this model is, of course, due in part to the reduced sensitivity 
of Vetf to the modelling parameters [e.g., the energy density (J/cm3) under saturated conditions]. 
Kohse-Hoinghaus et al. (1983,1984) verified their procedure by demonstrating good agreement 
betvi/een the number density of OH determined from LSF and that measured from a fluorescence 
method suggested by Stepowski and Cottereau (1979). 

To build a data base of OH concentration measurements (for later comparison with calculated 
values), Kohse-Hoinghaus et al. (1986) applied their saturated fluorescence technique to lean and 
rich laminar premixed H2/02(/Ar), CH4/O2, and C2H2/O2 flames at low pressure (30 and 72 torr). 
To calibrate the fluorescence signals, they employed two independent methods: (1) measuring a 
signal of known intensity produced by scattering the laser beam from a ground quartz disk: (2) 
measuring Raman scattering from the branch of N2. The two methods gave the same calibration 
constant within 5%. As explained above, this saturated fluorescence approach relies on a 
measurement of Qetf. the effective quenching rate; in the 30 torr flames, the variation of Qetf with 
position and equivalence ratio was less than 30%. In addition to the concentration measurements, 
Kohse-Hoinghaus et al. (1986) measured temperature profiles in each of the flames using 
laser-induced fluorescence (LIF). This was accomplished by delaying the fluorescence 
measurements-relative to the laser pulse-until thermalization of the excited-state rotational 
population had occurred; in the 72 torr flame, for example, Kohse-Hoinghaus et al. waited 60 ns to 
collect fluorescence. Comparison of the OH concentration profile in the H2/02/Ar flame (at 72 torr) 
to calculated values (using the measured temperature profile) show good agreement. 

Lucht et al. (1 985) applied the LSF method to measurement of OH in near-sooting and sooting, 
flat, laminar, atmospheric-pressure CH4/O2/N2 flames. The LSF signals were calibrated using a 
combined absorption/fluorescence method applied in a lean flame (^ = 0.78), where the OH 
concentration was much greater; the LSF method could then be used to determine number densities 
in three rich flames {<f> = 1.68, 1.85, and 2.02). WitTi the absorption/fluorescence technique (Fig. 
2.2). the total number density, Nj, at position x is determined from the path-integrated number 
density by 



Nt(>--) = ~[ f^ra)di, , (2.4) 



12 



where, L^, , the effective path length for fluorescence measurements at position x, Is derived from 
the radial dependence of the normalized OH fluorescence signal, i.e., 

Lucht et al. (1985) used the 0,(8) and Pi(9) lines for excitation and detection, respectively, since 
the population in the ground-state rotational level varies only 10% between 1000 and 2600 K. For 
the rich flames, the principal source of interference-which determined the detection limit -for the 
fluorescence measurements was rotational Raman scattering from N2, which was observable as a 
consequence of the small OH concentration. 

Absorption Beam 




Burner 



Laser Beam 



t 



Figure 2.2 Absorption/fluorescence sampling geometry. 

A single-shot, LSF method has also been developed for application in turbulent flames (Lucht 
et al., 1984; Drake et al.. 1984). Hydroxy! concentration measurements were made at atmospheric 
pressure in an Hg/air, turbulent, diffusion flame with a spatial and temporal resolution of -0.1 mm3 
and ~2 ns, respectively, and an estimated accuracy of ±30%. As with the experiments in the rich 
CH4/O2/N2 flames, the Qi(8)/Pi(9) excitation/detection line pair was used to minimize the 



13 



dependence of n o on temperature. The calibration factor for the measurements in the turbulent 
flames was obtained by replacing the nonpremixed burner with a laminar flat-flame burner and 
comparing a concentration determined from the combined absorption/fluorescence method with 
the relative concentration determined from the signal-averaged, LSF method. Probability density 
functions of OH concentration from the laminar flame gave a relative standard deviation of about 
7%; attenuating the fluorescence signal by a factor of 1 increased this figure to 25%, implying that 
the precision of the single-shot data was limited by the number of photons collected. Examination 
of the radial profiles of OH concentration in the laminar diffusion flames led Lucht et al. (1 984) to 
also conclude that at least in these flames, variation in the index of refraction was not great enough 
to cause significant beam steering or defocusing. The LSF technique was then used to make 
absolute concentration measurements in laminar (Reynolds number, Re = 660), transitional (Re 
= 1600), and turbulent (Re = 8500) diffusion flames. These measurements confirmed, for the first 
time, the existence of a superequilibrium concentration of OH in turbulent nonpremixed flames. 

Drake et al. (1 985) used these OH concentration measurements to compare the LSF method 
with planar laser-induced fluorescence (PLIF) measurements. With PLIF, one expands the laser 
radiation into a sheet and then detects fluorescence from the molecules in the plane of the beam. 
In this experiment, fluorescence was detected with a 1 00 by 1 00 photodiode array camera system, 
which imaged a 30 x 30 mm area of the flame and gave a spatial resolution of 0.3 x 0.3 x 0.4 mm. 
The PLIF measurements were calibrated at the peak of the average fluorescence intensity by the 
corresponding average OH concentration obtained with LSF. Once normalized in this way, the 
agreement between average concentrations of OH from PLIF and LSF was surphsingly good in the 
laminar, transitional, and turbulent flames, with the only significant disagreement occurring in the 
fuel rich portion of the flame zone, where the electronic quenching rate (and therefore the 
fluorescence yield) may change significantly. This conclusion was strengthened by calculations 
of the variation in quenching as a function of the mixture ratio for an Hj/air diffusion flame. These 
calculations-using published collision cross sections and assumed temperature 
dependencies-showed that indeed under these conditions the net electronic quenching rate is 
sensitive to the local mixture ratio in the rich region of the flame. In the turbulent flame, agreement 
between measurements of the rms fluctuations in OH concentration from the two methods was 
also very good; in the laminar and transitional flames, however, the rms fluctuations measured by 
PLIF gave values about twice those from LSF. Drake et al. (1985) suggested that the higher 



14 



fluctuations in the laminar and transitional flames resulted from noise in the PLIF detection system; 
the fluctuations of OH concentraion in the turbulent flame, however, were sufficient to overcome 
the noise in the detection system. 

Salmon et al. (1 984) appliedthe LSF method to measurement of NH concentration in a laminar. 
premixed. CH^NgO/Ar flat flame at a pressure of 50 torr. As with the previous experiments of Lucht 
et al. (1983,1984,1985), they used the balanced cross-rate model to relate the population in the 
upper laser-coupled level to the population originally in the lower laser-coupled level. Excitation of 
rotational transitions in the A3n-X3E-(0,0) band of NH was accomplished by Raman shifting the 
frequency-doubled output of the Nd:YAG-pumped dye laser system; this gave a pulse energy of 
about 2.5 mJ at 337 nm. Salmon et al. used the Pi(5)/Ri(3), Pi(7)/Ri(5), and Pi(11)/Ri(9) 
excitation/detection line pairs, and optical detection parameters were determined with Rayleigh 
scattering measurements. In addition, for accurate calibration using Rayleigh scattering, they made 
corrections to the fluorescence measurements to account for poor saturation in the wings of the 
laser profile (Salmon et al., 1985a). The resulting number densities were compared with those 
calculated from the absorption/fluorescence method. At the peak NH concentration, measurements 
from absorption and LSF agreed to within about 20%. 

Salmon and Laurendeau (1 985a), in the first paper of a two-part study, presented a calibration 
technique for LSF using Rayleigh scattering. The technique, which eliminates the dependence of 
LSF on absorption measurements, makes use of an Abel transformation to extract £f(0,0), the 
fluorescence emission at the beam center line, from lf(y) [s /e,(x,y)dx], the fluorescence intensity 
profile, i.e., 



c.(0,0) = ( — 

' ' nrdr 



L 



V(y^-r^) 



(?.6) 



where r is the distance from the beam center line and R is the extent of the measured fluorescence 
intensity profile. The new calibration method was applied to LSF measurements of OH concentration 
in a 72 torr H2/02/Ar flame; these measurements were compared with those determined from the 
combined absorption/fluorescence method described above, though the effective path length was 
determined only at 5 mm above the burner. The absorption and LSF measurements showed good 
agreement (within ±10%) to a height of -8 mm; thereafter, the two concentration measurements 
showed increasing disagreement. Salmon and Laurendeau (1 985a) attributed this deviation to 
entrainment of the N2 guard flow. Presumably, then, this disagreement between the LSF and 



15 



absorption measurements would be reduced by determining the effective patfi length LeH at heights 
greater than 8 mm. Salmon and Laurendeau (1 985a) also noted that the good agreement between 
number densities derived from absorption and LSF suggests that the fluorescence was not 
significantly polarized; however, they did not measure the degree of polarization. 

In their second paper, Salmon and Laurendeau {1985b) presented an investigation of the 
effects of nonuniform irradiance of the laser probe volume on LSF measurements. Using a measured 
Rayleigh scattering profile and the assumption of an axisymmetric laser irradiance profile, they 
deduced that the spatial dependence of the Irradiance could be described with a Gaussian or a 
quasi-Lorentzian function. To model the saturation effects within the probe volume, they employed 
both a steady-state two-level and a time-dependent four-level model-two levels describing the 
laser-coupled levels and two levels describing neighboring rotational levels in the respective ground 
and excited electronic states. Salmon and Laurendeau were able to compare the relative saturation 
along the center line of the laser beam with that averaged throughout the probe volume for spatial 
excitation profiles described with Gaussian and quasi-Lorentzian functions. The saturation behavior 
and the sensitivity to the center-line laser irradiance determined from the experimental data of Lucht 
et al. (1 981 , 1 983) were bracketed by the curves calculated using the Gaussian and quasi-Lorentzian 
excitation functions. Salmon and Laurendeau noted that failure to account for the effect of the 
wings can lead to erroneous results when the transition is assumed to be well-saturated and the 
measurements are calibrated by a method that does not give an absolute number density (e.g., 
Rayleigh scattering). 

To test the validity of the balanced cross-rate model, Salmon and Laurendeau (1985b) 
proposed constructing curves of lf(0)/(f(0,0), the effective depth of the probe volume at the beam 
center line, versus W/u/QeH, prepared by (1) varying the laser irradiance (and thus W/J at constant 
pressure and (2) varying the pressure (and thus Qetf) at constant laser irradiance. This effective 
depth, D" , is proportional to the spatially-averaged population fraction remaining in the 
laser-coupled levels, 



D 



]- j(l-y)a,,,(x.O)dx . (2.7) 



Here, 1 - ^ is the fraction of the original population remaining in the laser-coupled levels and Qsat 
is the degree of saturation, 



gu/(gj-^gu) 

I.' ' 



16 



(2.8) 



where W = WjQeff is the saturation parameter. Consequently, for the same saturation parameter 
the ratio of D ; at two different pressures gives the ratio of the spatially-averaged population fraction 
(see Eq. 1.8), i.e., 

1(1 -y)oisa,dx/ a,a,dx 



[D'c] 



(I - Y)a,<„d.v/ a,„d-v 



[</^c>]| 



The ratio of (Fc) as a function of pressure to (Fc) at the calibration condition, and not the magnitude 
of (Fc), is perhaps the more important parameter, since the variation of this ratio with ccllisional 
environment increases the uncertainty of any number density measurement (when the calibration 
and the desired measurements are performed under different conditions). One difficulty with this 
approach, however, is assuring that V^JQen is constant at different pressures, since the nature of 
the broadening changes from predominantly Doppler (heterogeneous) broadening at 1 atm to a 
combination of collisional (homogeneous) and Doppler broadening at higher pressures. Hence, 
with increasing pressure, one cannot assure that W/u/Qeti will remain constant when \JQen is kept 
constant. A similar qualitative approach is to simply compare the shape of the saturation curves 
at different pressures. At pressures where depletion of the laser-coupled levels is significant, a 
decrease in the slope of the curve at a high degree of saturation may be observable. 

Using a rate-equation model, Campbell (I984a,l984b) simulated the dynamics of the OH 
molecule for excitation of an isolated transition in the (0,0) and (0,1) bands of the A2E+-X2n 
electronic transition. The model included about 40 rotational energy levels in each of the three 
lowest vibrational levels (v=0,1,2) of the ground and excited electronic states. The resulting 232 
rate equations were solved and N^, the population determined from the multilevel model, was 
compared to Nj;,2. the population predicted from the simple two-level model (i.e., the balanced 
cross-rate model). The conditions for the calculations simulated the burnt-gas region of a 
stoichiometric CH4/air flame at 2000 K. Though collisional energy exchange processes in the 
hydroxyl molecule have been studied extensively, in general, they are not yet described well by 
theory or experiment. Therefore, Campbell studied the sensitivity of the ratio of populations K/K.2 
to the rate coefficients describing the various collisional energy exchange processes (i.e., electronic 
quenching and rotational and vibrational relaxation). The results show that prediction of species 
number densities with the balanced cross-rate model can result in significant errors, particularly at 
pressures of 1 atm and above. However, because Campbell used low excitation energies for many 



17 



of his cases, predicted errors using the two-level model arise from both depopulation of the 

laser-coupled levels and a low degree of saturation. Nevertheless, Campbell's (1 984a) results show 

that the depopulation of the laser-coupled levels can be significant for high pressure or for long 

temporal pulse lengths. 

Cottereau (1986) suggested an alternative procedure which accounts for 

spatially-nonuniform saturation. This technique, which could be used for single-shot LSF 

measurements, requires two monochromators for the detection of the fluorescence-one with the 

slit axis parallel (scheme A) and the other with the slit axis perpendicular (scheme B) to the laser 

beam axis~to measure the fluorescence. The two detection schemes yield different saturation 

functions, with the geometry having the slit axis parallel to the beam axis giving the higher degree 

of saturation for equivalent slit dimensions (Daily, 1978). For scheme A, the fluorescence signal 

can be obtained by combining Eqs. (1.4)-(1.6). Thus, 

f (1 - Y)I.''(r)/U'/dr 
5,. = CA'?(n .1/. D J 2jxr ^^ — —^ . (2.10) 

while for scheme B the signal is similarly given by 

. f i\-y)W(r}/W/dr 

^'■-"^''^'^''■''"'a V-(r)/i/.-.3./ri.,(.,.g.)i ■ <="' 

where C accounts for constants such as the Einstein A-coefficient, r?A and tjb are the net efficiencies 
of the respective fluorescence detection systems, Qa and fie are the solid angles of fluorescence 
collection for the two geometries, and Wa, Hb and Wb are the relevant probe dimensions for the 
two geometries. Consequently, the ratio of the two relationships is a function only of the center-line 
saturation parameter, Wp', the spatial dependence of the saturation parameter, W'(r)/Wp', and the 
ratio of the detection parameters for the two geometries, K; i.e., 



where the relationship 



t-.-'['-'''--T7^y'^ ■ ''■"' 



/i(r) l/'(r) 

J-^—i-> 5^ (2.13) 

/,(0) I// 

has been used. Insofar as the detection parameters and Il('')/Il(0). the spatial dependence of the 
laser irradiance, remain constant, SfA/SfB depends only on the center-line saturation parameter. 
Applying this method requires the following procedure. 



18 



1. Select a flame and calibrate the fluorescence signals from both 
geometries (with measurements from absorption spectroscopy or 
Rayleigh scattering, for example). 

2. In the calibration flame, generate saturation curves for the two 
geometries by varying the laser irradiance, being careful not to 
change the spatial dependence of It. Since the relative laser 
irradiance is approximately equivalent to the relative saturation 
parameter, Wr', when Qeff is constant, the cun/e S^SfB versus It 
defines the calibration function Wr'(SfA/SfB). This function should be 
defined over the range of expected values of Wr'. 

3. At the condition of interest, measure S<a and Sfs; from the calibration 
curve Wr'(SfA/SfB) determine the value of W/. With this value and 
either saturation curve SiA(Wr') or S^eiyJ,'), determine the fractional 
change in fluorescence intensity due to the change in the relative 
saturation parameter. This value (for geometry A or B) is then used 
to correct the fluorescence signal (from geometry A or B) for any 
change in the saturation parameter between the calibration flame 
and the flame of interest. 

Thus, at the condition of interest, the number density Nj is given by 



N 



where fc (cm-3/V) is the calibration factor (determined in step 1), f© is the quenching correction 
factor, which accounts for the fractional change in W,'. and the fj are additional correction factors 
(for variations in Boltzmann fraction, etc.). Use of this technique is discussed in detail in Chapter 
7. 

2.2 Other Methods 

We now discuss alternate optical methods for quantitative detection of molecular species 
such as OH in practical combustors; like LSF. these methods potentially circumvent the so-called 
quenching problem. First, Barlow et al. (1989a, 1989b) reported single-shot measurements of OH 
using simultaneous linear LIP and vibrational Raman-scattering of H2, O2, N2, and H2O (using the 
Stokes bands) in nonpremixed turbulent jet flames. The N2 anti-Stokes and Rayleigh scattering 



19 



signals were monitored; flame temperatures could then be calculated from the Nj Raman 
measurements or more accurately from the ideal gas law, by using the total number density derived 
from the Raman measurements. Two lasers, with colinear beams, were used: (1) DIANA, a 
flash-lamp-pumped dye laser (A = 532 nm, with 1 J for each 2-/iS pulse) for the scattering 
measurements, and (2) a Nd:YAG-pumped, frequency-doubled dye laser for the OH fluorescence 
measurements. To ensure operation in the linear fluorescence regime, Barlow et al. employed a 
large beam diameter at the probe volume and excited the Sgi (8) transition [of the (v'= 0, v"= 0) band] 
using ~0.1 mJ per pulse. Rather than monitoring the P- or Q-branches, they detected the weaker 
R-branch to reduce fluorescence trapping; the peak fluorescence signals in the turbulent flame 
corresponded to -600 photoelectrons. In addition, part of the UV laser beam was split off and sent 
to a laminar flame where the fluorescence was monitored to ensure that the laser wavelength was 
centered on the S21 (8) line. The 1 signals (6 scattering, 2 fluorescence, and 2 photodiode signals) 
were each recorded with a gated integrator, and the signals were then processed with a computer. 
To accurately calculate OH number densities, correction factors were applied to the recorded 
fluorescence signals (on a shot-by-shot basis) to account for variations in quenching and the ground 
state Bottzmann fraction. In addition Barlow et al. (1989a, 1989b) applied a correction factor for 
the average amount of fluorescence trapping; this was estimated from horizontal fluorescence 
scans across the turbulent flame. This problem could be avoided by exciting transitions in the (1 ,0) 
band and detecting (1,1) band fluorescence; however, sufficient quenching data is not available 
for the A2E+ (v=1) state. To correct the fluorescence yield for changes in electronic quenching. 
Barlow et al. fit collisional cross sections calculated by Garland and Crosley (1 986) to a relationship 
of the form 

o(T)-A^-A,e-^"°°°-A^e-''''°° (2.15) 

where T (K) is the flame temperature. The resulting quenching correction factor was small when 
the flame was locally lean and increasingly large when the flame was locally fuel-rich. 

Andresen et al. (1 988) discussed the potential of reducing the sensitivity of LIF measurements 
to quenching by exciting the molecule of interest to a fast predissociating state. Predissociation is 
a process whereby a molecule undergoes a radiationiess transition from a discrete state to a 
continuous state-one corresponding to dissociation--at the same energy (Herzberg, 1950). 
Sensitivity to quenching is reduced when the time for predissociation is short compared to the time 
for collisional quenching. Though Andresen et al. (1988) focus on the efficacy of this approach for 



20 



temperature measurements, the same technique could be applied to concentration measurements 
as well. In particular, Andresen et al. (1 988) suggest that a KrF excimer laser, with a tunable range 
from 248.0 to 248.9 nm, could be used to detect the OH, O2, and H2O molecules. With the high 

t 

energies per pulse of excimer lasers (e.g., 400 mJ/pulse in a bandwidth of 0.5 cm-i with their KrF 
laser), 2-D concentrations or temperatures could be obtained even while exciting very weak 
transitions. For OH, the KrF laser was employed to excite a number of transitions in the 
A2i;+«-X2n(3,0) band; flame temperatures were obtained from excitation spectra, while monitoring 
fluorescence only from the (3.2) P-, Q-, or R-branch transitions originating from the directly-excited 
rotational level. To minimize polarization effects, fluorescence was measured from (1) P- or R-branch 
transitions when a Q-branch transition was excited or (2) a Q-branch transition when P- or R-branch 
transitions were excited. Andresen et al, (1988) note that accurate single-shot temperature 
measurements may be possible with O2 and OH by excitation of two closely-lying lines. For instance, 
they observe that the P2(8) (A = 248.457 nm) and the Ri(15) (A = 248.476 nm) lines of OH could 
be excited simultaneously with a broad-band excimer laser; because the ground states of these 
transitions are separated by -3000 cm-i, the method offers good sensitivity to temperature. 
However, measurements of OH fluorescence spectra show some rotational and vibrational energy 
transfer within the 2E+ state in H2/O2 and G4H10/O2 flames, demonstrating that the fluorescence 
measurements are somewhat sensitive to quenching. In addition, with an assumed temperature 
and rotational energy transfer cross section (in the V=3 state), Andresen et al. estimated the 
predissociation time to be 1 00 ps. Predissociation times for the 2E + , V = 5 and 6 states have been 
determined to be less than 10 ps (Carlone and Dalby, 1969). 

Schwarzwald et al. (1987,1988) reported measurements of quenching lifetimes for OH 
(1987.1988) and ON (1988) in atmospheric-pressure flames with a streak camera and a home-built 
picosecond laser. The laser system included an excimer laser (delivering 8 ns pulses at 308 nm), 
which pumped a quenched transient dye laser (QTDL). The 200-ps pulses from the QTDL laser 
then pumped a distributed feedback dye laser (DFDL); the resulting laser pulses had a temporal 
width of 20-40 ps and a bandwidth of 0.003 nm. Wavelength tuning the laser system over a range 
of several nm was achieved via rotation of a mirror system in the DFDL (Schwarzwald et al.. 1 988). 
The output of the DFDL was then frequency doubled using a /?-BaB204 crystal, yielding an energy 
of 15 /iJ 'or OH excitation and 5 to 20 /xJ for ON excitation. For OH, fluorescence lifetimes, which 
were averaged over 50 to 1 00 laser shots, of the N = 5 rotational level in the 21;+ state were ~2 ns 
over a range of equivalence ratios and throughout the burnt-gas region in premlxed CH^air flat 



21 



flames. Though this method can be applied to laminar high-pressure (>1 atm) flames to correct 
fluorescence yields for quenching variations, it cannot currently be applied to turbulent flames, 
since single-shot fluorescence lifetime measurements are required. 

Elzinga et al. (1987) and Fiechtner et al. (1988,1989) described the asynchronous optical 
sampling (ASOPS) method, which unlike fluorescence techniques uses a coherent beam to carry 
the signal. The ASOPS method is similar to the conventional pump/probe technique, but it employs 
two dye lasers (a pump and a probe laser), each of which is synchronously-pumped by the second 
harmonic of a mode-locked Nd:YAG laser. By mode-locking the two NdiYAG lasers at slightly 
different frequencies, the picosecond pulses of the pump and probe lasers walk in and out of phase 
at the beat frequency. This provides a method whereby sub-nanosecond events are mapped into 
the millisecond regime, thus obviating the need for fast detection electronics. The method not only 
allows measurement of collisional quenching rates, but also a means to make quenching-corrected 
concentration measurements on a time scale shorter than that for turbulent fluctuations. One goal 
of this work is to detect important flame radicals such as OH, though to date detection only of 
rhodamine B (Elzinga et al., 1987) and sodium (Fiechtner et al., 1988; 1989) has been reported. 
Recent experiments (Fiechtner et al. 1 989) used mode-locking frequencies of -82 MHz and a beat 
frequency of -10 kHz to measure the quenching rate coefficient of the 3P state of sodium in a 
laminar C2H4/O2/N2 flame. The pump and probe beams were crossed at -5°, resulting in an 
estimated interaction length of 0.5 mm. In one arrangement, the pump laser was tuned to the 
3S,;2-'3P3/2 transition (589.0 nm), while the probe laser was tuned to the 3Pi/2-»5Si/2 transition 
(615.4 nm). To increase the signal-to-noise ratio a dual-photodiode voltage-subtraction detector 
(i.e., a differential detector) was used. A portion of the probe beam (A) was picked off before 
interaction with the pump beam in the flame. Its intensity (measured by one of the photodiodes) 
was then adjusted to equal the intensity of the signal-carrying probe beam (beam B. measured by 
the other photodiode) with no sodium present in the flame; to derive the absorption signal, the 
intensity of beam A was then subtracted from that of beam B. Using this differential detector and 
a digitizing oscilloscope, Fiechtner et al. (1 989) were able to measure quenching rate coefficients 
by averaging only 256 decay curves. A typical value for this flame was 1 .8 x 1 0^ s-^ , with the average 
decay curve exhibiting 0.4% relative error. 



22 



CHAPTER 3 

FEASIBILITY OF HYDROXYL CONCENTRATION MEASUREMENTS 

BY LASER-SATURATED FLUORESCENCE IN HIGH-PRESSURE FLAMES 

3.1 Introduction 

Since laser-saturated fluorescence (LSF) was first proposed as a combustion diagnostic 
(Piepmeier, 1972; Daily, 1977), the method has been used to detect the diatomic molecules C2 
(Baronavski and McDonald, 1 977), MgO (Pasternack et al., 1 977), ON (Verdieck and Bonczyk, 1 981 ), 
CH (Verdieck and Bonczyk, 1981; Kohse-Hoinghaus et al.. 1983), OH (Kohse-Hoinghaus et a!., 
1983; Lucht et al., 1983; Salmon and Laurendeau, 1985a), and NH (Salmon et al., 1984) in 
atmospheric and subatmospheric flames. Although initial experiments disagreed with absorption 
measurements by factors of two or more, recent experiments provide results which show agreement 
within 15-25% (Lucht et al., 1983; Salmon and Laurendeau, 1985a; Salmon et al., 1984). 

The saturated fluorescence method is attractive because, in principle, one can eliminate a 
pnmary difficulty of linear fluorescence~the dependence of the fluorescence signal on both the 
collisional environment and the laser power fluctuations. In typical laboratory experiments using 
nonsooting laminar flat flames, one can usually calibrate fluorescence measurements using 
absorption, and thus the LSF method offers no substantial advantage. For nonpremixed flames, 
planar fluorescence (which is a linear technique because of the low Irradiance of the expanded 
beam) can provide 2-D images of the reaction zone in a single laser shot (Lee et al., 1 986). However, 
in turbulent flames, particularly in rich conditions (Drake and Pitz, 1985), characterization of the 
collisional environment can be difficult if not impossible. Consequently, the LSF method is valuable 
for quantitative concentration measurements in such practical systems. 

Although saturated OH fluorescence has been applied at atmospheric pressure to sooting 
laminar flames (Lucht et al., 1985) and to turbulent nonpremixed flames (Drake et al.. 1984; Lucht 
et al., 1 984), the method requires further study for application in complex high-pressure combustion 
environments. In this chapter, we present the results of a numerical investigation into the effect of 



23 



pressure on the efficacy of the balanced cross-rate model and thus on the potential for saturated 
fluorescence measurements at pressures > 1 atm. So that the sole collision partner for the OH 
radical is HjO, we performed the calculations for the burnt-gas region of a stoichiometric H2/O2 
flame at 2000 K. 

3.2 Adequacy of the Rate-Equation Approach 

The rate-equation approach, which we have used to model the excitation dynamics of the 
OH molecule, is conceptually as well as mathematically simpler than the quantum-mechanical 
density-matrix approach. Unfortunately, modelling the excitation process with rate equations fails 
to account for optical nutations which can arise during excitation by coherent radiation. Such 
coherent transients, i.e., oscillations of the excited-level population, will not be observed when (1) 
the effective coherence time of the excitation source is short compared to the reciprocal of the 
absorption or stimulated emission rate coefficient (Altkorn and Zare, 1 984), or (2) the characteristic 
time for damping Is short compared to the smallest time interval which can be resolved with the 
detection system (Macomber, 1968). A second complication is that our rate-equation approach 
fails to deal with the distribution of modes characteristic of Nd.YAG-pumped dye lasers. When the 
distribution of energy among the modes varies either from pulse to pulse or during an individual 
pulse, fluctuations in the excited-level population can occur. This Is particularly true at 
subatmospheric pressure since the linewidth of the excited transition is narrow and primarily Doppler 
broadened. 

At sufficiently low pressure, the characteristic time for damping is long, and thus the 
rate-equation approach might not be expected to adequately model the population in the 
laser-coupled energy levels. However, as observed by Altkorn and Zare (1984), the utility of the 
rate equations Is not as limited as the above criteria suggest. First, because the spatial profile of 
pulsed dye lasers is inhomogeneous, the integration of fluorescence across the probe volume will 
usually mask coherent effects. Second, averaging of the fluorescence signal over many laser shots 
will also mask fluctuations in the excited-state population, thus ensuring the adequacy of the 
rate-equation approximation even In cases where it is Inappropriate for individual laser shots. 

At higher pressures the collision frequency rises; hence, the characteristic time for damping 
decreases and the transition linewidths are broadened. One important consequence is that the 
population of the excited level becomes less sensitive to the distribution of mode intensities since 
more modes are now connected to the excited transition. A second consequence is that the larger 



24 



number of exciting modes decreases the effective coherence time of the laser. A third consequence 
is that with the greater collision frequency, oscillations in the excited-state population are more 
quickly damped out. Thus, with increasing pressure, the rate-equation approach more closely 
approximates the density-matrix approach. We also note that Lucht et al. (1984) have made 
single-shot LSF measurements of OH concentration in a laminar, atmospheric, Hj/air flame. 
Examination of the measured probability density function demonstrates that significant fluctuations, 
owing to erther coherent effects or variations in the modal intensity distribution, were not present 
at the peak of the fluorescence pulse. 

3.3 The LSF Method 

During laser excitation, molecules initially in a rotational energy level within the lowest 
vibrational level of the ground electronic state are excited through absorption to a rotational level 
in the ground vibrational level of an excited electronic state. Spontaneous emission, stimulated 
emission, and collisional energy-exchange processes-rotational relaxation, vibrational relaxation, 
and electronic quenching-transfer population from the directly-excited rotational level to other 
rotational levels in the upper and the ground electronic states (Fig. 3.1). 

The rate equation for the population of the upper laser-coupled level is 

^=/V,l/,„-/V.(l/„,-Q.„) , (3.1) 

dt 

where N/ and N^ are the populations of the lower and upper laser-coupled rotational levels. 

respectively, W/u and Wu/ and are the respective rate coefficients for absorption and stimulated 

emission, and Qeff is the effective rate coefficient for depopulation of the directly-excited level by 

both collisional-processes and spontaneous emission. Upon laser excitation, the population peaks 

and steady -state conditions apply, so that Eq. (3.1) becomes 

—H^ 1 , (3.2) 

where g^ and g, are the respective degeneracies of the upper and lower laser-coupled levels and 

The population of the laser-coupled levels can be related to the unperturbed population N ? 
of the lower laser-coupled level by 



25 




^' 

m. 



qZCT 



Figure 3.1 Energy level structure and population transfer mechanisms. W/o and W^/ are the rate 
coefficients for absorption and stimulated emission, respectively. Q,, Qy, and Qe are 
the rate coefficients for rotational relaxation, vibrational relaxation, and electronic 
quenching, respectively. 



N„ + /V, = (1-Y)N? • (3.3) 

Here, 1 - ^ is the fraction of the original population remaining in the laser-coupled levels, and K ° 

is related to the desired species number density through the Boitzmann fraction. At low pressures, 
7 « and Eq. (3.3) reduces to the familiar balanced cross-rate model, N^ -f- N/ « N ? (Salmon and 
Laurendeau, 1985; Lucht et al., 1980). Combining Eqs. (3.2) and (3.3) yields 



N. 



gi*gu 



w?(i-Y)a„, , 



(3.4) 



where osat. the degree of saturation, is 



26 



a„, = 



1 + 



gu^igi-" 9u) 



(3.1>) 



and the saturation parameter W is given by 

Equation (3.4) demonstrates that the species number density can now be calculated from N ? by 

determining N^, from the measured fluorescence signal and accounting for Osat and -y. 

Because the spatial irradiance profile of the laser is nonuniform, the population in the upper 
laser-coupled level will vary with position. Consequently, the fluorescence intensity across the 
entrance slit to the monochromator must be expressed through an appropriate integral of N^. Figure 
3.2 shows the fluorescence collection volume as determined by the image of the monochromator 
entrance slit along the laser beam. For this geometry, the fluorescence intensity (W/cm2-sr) across 
the image of the slit is given by 

//(y.2) = -^^J A'„(.v,y.=)d.v . (3.7) 

where v^ (cm-i) is the frequency of the observed transition, Af (s-i) is the rate coefficient for 
spontaneous emission, and Nj;(x.y.z) is the local number density of the upper laser-coupled level. 
If the dimensions of the slit imaged on the laser beam are small compared to the characteristic 
dimensions forthe radial and longitudinal variation in laser irradiance, then the fluorescence intensity 
can be taken as approximately uniform across the monochromator slit [i.e., If(y.z) « I ?= lf(0,0)]. 
Under these conditions, Eqs. (3.4) and (3.7) can be combined to obtain 



/v? 



9i*Q<^ 



4n/^ 



he 



^,^fj 



(3.8) 



(1 -Y)a.a,rfv 



where /(1 - 7)Q8atdx is the effective depth of the collection volume (i.e., the depth for which the 
fluorescence signal is equivalent to that resulting from complete saturation and no depopulation 
from the laser-coupled levels) (Salmon and Laurendeau, 1985). Hence. Eq. (3.8) finally expresses 
the unperturbed number density N ?as a function of the measured fluorescence intensity I ? . 
Further understanding can be gained by rearranging Eq. (3.8) to give 



27 




Figure 3.2 Geometry of the fluorescence collection volume. 



/ 



(1 -Y)a,„,rf.v 



A'?=^^il^ 



4n/° 



a,„,d.v 



^" hcv,A, I a,o,r/.v 



(3.9) 



The right-hand side of Eq. (3.9) does not depend explicitly on the depopulation of the laser-coupled 
levels. Rather, depletion is reflected in a decrease in! ? , and because N ° is unaffected, (Fg) ~ 
[/(1-7)Qsatdx//asatdx] represents the spatially-averaged population fraction remaining in the 
laser-coupled levels. Along the center line of the laser irradiance profile, (Fc) reduces to 1 - 7, 
which is equivalent to the ideal case of a spatially-untform irradiance profile. 

The parameter 1 - 7 is approximately unity, and thus the balanced cross-rate model is valid 
at time r, if the integrated population transfer rates into (Rin) and out of (Rom) the laser-coupled 
levels are balanced, i.e.. 



Jo 



(3.10) 



28 



For an ideal two-level system. Rjn = Rout, and Eq. (3.10) holds exactly; however, for real multilevel 
systems, the rates are not likely to equal one another. Hence, those processes which transfer 
population to levels other than the laser-coupled levels complicate the use of LSF for measurement 
of species concentrations. 

Whereas rotational energy transfer in the ground electronic state replenishes the 
laser-coupled levels, rotational transfer in the excited electronic state depletes the laser-coupled 
levels. Rotational transfer to the nearby rotational levels of the excited state provides additional 
pathways for electronic quenching to the ground state. Those molecules quenched into the v" = 
level are again part of the rotational reservoir for the laser-coupled levels; however, the molecules 
quenched to the v" > levels may cascade slowly to the ground vibrational level, thus further 
depleting the laser-coupled levels. Consequently, the fractional depopulation 7 is sensitive to the 
rate coefficient for rotational energy transfer in the excited electronic state for two reasons. First, 
an increase inQr, the ratecoefficientfortransferfromthe upper laser-coupled level, furtherpopulates 
the surrounding rotational manifold resulting in a depletion of the v" = level and therefore the 
laser-coupled levels. Second, an increase in Q,(u) provides more molecules that can be quenched 
to the V" > levels, again resulting in a depletion of the laser-coupled levels. 

The condition for saturation at any location is given by W > 1 . Thus, from Eqs. (3.4) and 
(3.5), osat -» 1 anci 

When W' > 10 and g^ = g/, the degree of saturation is greater than 95%. Also, when the spectral 
irradiance profile of the laser is broad compared to the absorption profile, the saturation parameter 
is nearly proportional to the ratio of laser irradiance (W/cm^) to pressure, and therefore the laser 
irradiance must increase approximately linearly with pressure to maintain the same degree of 
saturation. For example, with an Hg/Og/Ar flame at atmospheric pressure and a laser pulse 
containing -4 mJ of energy, the maximum saturation parameter achievable along the center line 
of the beam with our Molectron Nd:YAG/dye laser system and a focused spot size of about 0.4 mm 
is estimated to be 40 (Salmon and Laurendeau, 1985b). To ensure that at peak excitation W' > 
10 in this flame at pressures above about 4 atm, we would need to increase the laser irradiance by 
decreasing the focused spot size of the beam. 



29 



3.4 Laser-Excitation Dynamics 

We liave modeledthe population transferbetween and within the A2i;+ and the X2n vibrational 
manifolds of OH using a linear system of rate equations. The upper electronic manifold is described 
by a single vibrational level, v' = 0, containing 29 rotational levels (N' = to N' = 14; J' = N' ± 1/2). 
The lower electronic manifold has two vibrational levels, one being the v" = level, containing 26 
rotational levels N" = 1 to N" = 13; J" = N" ± 1/2), and the other being a vibrational bath level v" 
> with no rotational levels. Modelling the v" > levels as a single level is a consequence of the 
dearth of experimental and theoretical data describing quenching into and vibrational transfer within 
and out of the v" > levels of the hydroxyl molecule at flame temperatures. 

A general FORTRAN 77 program, compatible with the Cyber 205 at Purdue University, was 
written to set up the Jacobian matrix describing the system of 56 rate equations for this model. To 
account for the effect of the temporal and spatial dependence of the irradiance for a laser pulse, 
the rate equations are integrated temporally for each specified spatial location. The 
spatially-averaged population fraction in the laser-coupled levels, (Fc). can then be obtained from 

<f^> = yi_£ji:L^ . (3.12) 

which is derived by combining Eqs. (3.7) and (3.9). 

For the rotational levels not coupled by the laser (i#u,/) the generalized rate equation at any 
location is 

^^-l[NU)QU-0]-N(i)TQ(i.j) . (3.13) 

where i and j refer to all energy levels in both the upper and lower electronic states. Q(i,j), the rate 
coefficient for transfer from level i to level j, is the sum of rate coefficients for spontaneous emission, 
electronic quenching, rotational relaxation, and vibrational relaxation, 

QiiJ)-A(i,j)^Q.(i.j)^Qr(iJ)*QAiJ) ■ (31^) 

The above rate coefficients are nonzero only when levels i and j are physically connected. For 
example, the rate coefficient for spontaneous emission A(i,j") # only when level i is radiatively 
coupled to level j. 

Similarly, for the upper laser-coupled level (i=u) the local rate equation is 



30 






Z[A'(y)Q(y.'0]^A'(Oi''',.-A'('0 



I<3(".y)^i'^, 



(:3.ii)) 



Comparing Eqs. (3.1) and (3.15), the effective rate coefficient for depopulation of the upper 
laser-coupled level is given by 



For the lower laser-coupled level (i=/), 



dNjJJ ^Y^^, ^^^^^j j^^, j^ ^^^^y ^^_ f^ (^l^ 
dt V 



I (?(/.;)* I'',. 



(3.16) 



(3.1/) 



3.4.1 Rotational Relaxation Model 

Lengel and Crosley (1 977) initially suggested empirical equations for rotational energy transfer 
in OH at room temperature, and later, Chan and Daily (1980) modified these equations for use at 
flame temperatures. Recently, Lucht et al. (1986) further modified the relations and provided 
parameters for collisions with water vapor fTable 3.1), which were derived from a comparison of 
experimental spectra and synthetic spectra generated with a dynamic model similar to the one 
described in this paper. The comparison employed experimental spectra from excitation of the 
Pi(2), Pi (5), R2(4), and Qi(10) lines of OH in an H2/02/N2 flame (Dieke and Crosswhite, 1962). 

The empirical equations describing the collisional cross section for upward rotational transfer 
from level i to level j [E(j) > E(i)] are 

cr.('.;)=fi[A^'(0]g(y)exp[r(A/V',AJ')-/l(300/7)''Af] (3.18) 

for transfer with AN' # 0, and 

Ori^.n- fB{N'{i)]g{j){T/300y (3.19) 

for transfer with AN' = 0. Briefly, B[N'(i)] (cm2) accounts for the variation in cross section with initial 
rotational quantum number N'(i), r( AN', AJ')accounts for changes in the quantum numbers N' and 
J' during collisions, and A (cm) and e determine the dependence of the cross section on the energy 
difference AE (cm-i) between levels I and j. For the AN' - case, the constant f corrects the 
B[N'(i)] values and ^ accounts for the influence of flame temperature. Though these parameters 
were determined for rotational energy transfer in the excited electronic state, we use them to describe 
rotational transfer in the ground electronic state, since the rotational constants for these two states 
are nearly the same for the hydroxyl radical. 



31 



Table 3.1 Optimized rate parameters for rotational transfer in A2i:+(v=0) OH 
for collisions with H2O (Lucht et a!., 1986). a 



A = 0.0060 cm 


f = 0.10 


e = 


= 0.7 


<^ = 0.8 


N' or 


B[N'] 


r(AN'=AJ') 


rCAN^AJO 


CTr(i) 


AN' 


10-16 cm2 






10-16 cm2 





1.60 


-- 


- 


85 


1 


1.60 


1.40 


-0.50 


117 


2 


1.45 


1.20 


-1.00 


145 


3 


1.30 


0.30 


-1.30 


167 


4 


1.20 


-0.25 


-1.50 


184 


5 


1.20 


-1.20 


-2.00 


204 


6 


1.00 


-1,90 


-2.50 


203 


7 


0.85 


-3.00 


-3.00 


194 


8 


0.70 


-3.80 


-3.80 


176 


9 


0.50 


-4.70 


-4.70 


148 


10 


0.40 


-6.00 


-6.00 


122 


11 


0.40 


-6.00 


-6.00 


108 


12 


0.40 


-6.00 


-6.00 


102 


13 


0.40 


-6.00 


-6.00 


92 


14 


0.40 


-6.00 


-6.00 


66 



« CTf(i), the total cross section for rotational transfer from level i [oS) = Z 
ar(i,J)], Is calculated from the listed parameters and a temperature of 2000 K. 

The collisional rate coefficient for any population transfer process is related to the respective 
cross section by 

where Nq (cm-3) is the number density of the collision partner q, al (i,j) (cm2) is the cross section 

for collisions with species q, v , (cm/s) is the average relative velocity between OH and species q, 
and the subscript m denotes the mode of energy transfer (e, r, v). Note that Eq. (3.20) accounts 
forthe influence of pressure on the LSF signal through the number density Nq. For upward rotational 
relaxation, Q,(i,j) is obtained by substitution of Eqs. (3. 1 8) or (3. 1 9) into Eq. (3.20) , and for downward 
rotational transfer, the rate coefficients are calculated using the principle of detailed balancing with 
a translational temperature of 2000 K. 



32 



3.4.2 Electronic Quenching Model 

To our knowledge, the distribution of electronic quenching to the vibrational energy levels ot 
the ground electronic state of the hydroxyl radical is not adequately described by theory or 
experiment. Thus, to study this distributive effect, we formulate electronic quenching as a function 
of the parameter fb, the fraction of molecules quenched to the vibrational bath level. For transfer 
to V" > 0. 

and for transfer to v" = 0, 

(?.('.y)=(l-/J<?.(')/nc . J*b {3.77) 

where Qe(i) is the total rate coefficient for electronic quenching from rotational level i in the excited 
electronic state, and no is the number of rotational levels in v" = 0. Thus, we assume that quenching 
is equally likely to each rotational level of v" = 0. Copeland et al. (1985) have measured the 
dependence of quenching on rotational level for A2S+(V=0) OH with several collision partners at 
room temperature. However, the effect of flame temperature on the observed rotational-level 
dependence is uncertain. Hence, we use quenching rate coefficients that are Independent of N'. 
Fairchild et al. (1 983) measured electronic quenching cross sections for collisions of OH with 
several species al elevated temperatures (~ 1 000-1 500 K). We have extrapolated the average cross 
section for collisions with H2O, a, = 26.3 x IO-16 crT^z at about 1200 K, to a temperature of 2000 K 
by using the approach of Drake and Pitz (1985). 

0.(2000)= a, (1200)(1200/2000)"' . (3.23) 

The resulting cross section for electronic quenching is 20 x IO-16 cm2; the rate coefficient Qe is 
obtained from a^, via Eq. (3.20). 

3.4.3 Vibrational Relaxation Model 

The existing experimental data for vibrational energy transfer within the OH molecule are from 
studies of the A2E+ state (Schofield, 1979; German, 1976; Lengel and Crosley, 1978; Smith and 
Crosley, 1983). Consequently, as with rotational relaxation, one can only infer rate coefficients for 
vibrational transfer in the ground ^n state. In an experiment performed at room temperature, Lengel 
and Crosley (1978) determined cross sections for vibrational transfer in the excited state of OH due 
to collisions with atomic and diatomic species. They suggest that energy transfer between OH and 



33 



the diatomic collision partners takes place during long-lived collisions, resulting in efficient transfer 
of vibrational energy (e.g., with Ng as the collision partner, cry " 24.7 x 10-16 cm2 for v" = 1 — 
transfer). Recently, Crosley and Smith (1983) investigated vibrational transfer in the burnt-gas 
region of aCH4/airflame (T = 1900 K) and deduced the Qv/Qe ratio for A2E+ (v"=1— 0) as a function 
of rotational quantum number N' in v' = 1 . The values of QJQe were found to decrease with 
increasing N', ranging from about 0.65 at N' = 1 to about 0.4 at N' = 1 5. 

Because of the uncertainty in the cross sections for electronic quenching to the v" = level 
and for vibrational transfer in the ground state of OH, we found it convenient to express the rate 
coefficient for vibrational relaxation from the bath level to the v" = level in terms of the parameter 
fv and the quenching rate coefficient Qg. As with quenching to v" = 0, we assume that the population 
transfer is independent of the rotational level in v" = 0; therefore, 

Q.(b,j) = f^Q./nc . (3.24) 

Consequently, the effect of quenching to the v" > vibrational levels is qualitatively described by 
the parameters fb and fy. Because the path by which molecules excited to the upper electronic 
state return to the v" = level of the ground electronic state can be complicated, we do not attempt 
to attach a strong physical meaning to that portion of the dynamic model describing the bath level. 
If, for instance, the distribution of OH molecules quenched to the ground electronic state changed 
to favor the higher vibrational levels, the net rate of population transfer back to v" = might decrease, 
resulting in a larger population in the vibrational bath level and thus a greater depopulation of the 
directly-excited levels. 

3.4.4 Excitation Model 

The frequencies of the OH transitions for spontaneous emission are tabulated in Dieke and 
Crosswhite (1962). and the associated rate coefficients for spontaneous emission, A(i,j), are taken 
from Dimpfl and Kinsey (1979). For each of the computational runs, the transition is excited with a 
pulse described by a Gaussian dependence in both space and time, 

i^,AxJ)-Wlexp(-x'/rl)exp[-(t-t,f/tl] . (3.25) 

Here, x is the lateral distance from the center line of the irradiance profile (see Fig. 3.2), tp is the 
time at which the pulse peaks, and W L is the peak rate coefficient for excitation. The spatial and 
temporal halfwidths, r,^ and t„, respectively, were chosen to be consistent with our laser system 
(r^ = 0.2 mm, ty», = 1.8 ns). Temporal integration of the rate equations was performed with the 



34 



routine DGEAR (IMSL, Houston, TX). Since the spatial dependence of the excitation function is 
Gaussian, a Gauss-Hermite quadrature formula with a 20th degree Hermite polynomial (Korn and 
Korn, 1968; Abramowitz and Stegun, 1968) was used for spatial integration of Nu(x) and asatM- 

In principle, the peak excitation rate coefficient can be related to the spontaneous emission 
rate coefficient, A(u,/), and the peak irradiance of the focused laser beam by assuming, for example, 
a Lorentzian spectral profile that is much greater than the absorption linewidth [Salmon and 
Laurendeau, 1985b; see also Eq. (6.14)]; however, we have made no attempt here to determine 
the excitation rate coefficient from the irradiance of our laser system. Instead, we specify a peak 
center-line saturation parameter Wp' = ViVOen > 10. which assures that at x = and t = tp the 
transition is well saturated. 

3.5 Test of Rotational Relaxation/Electronic Quenching Models 

Recently, Zizak et al. (1986) measured the relative excited-state, rotational-level population 
of OH in the burnt-gas region of three atmospheric, laminar, premixed flames using linear, 
laser-induced fluorescence (see Table 3.2). The distribution of population among the rotational 
levels depended strongly on the directly-excited level but was relatively independent of temperature 
and flame type. Given the relative, steady-state populations in the rotational levels of A2E+ (v'=0), 
Zizak et al. (1 986) determined the ratio between N^, the population in the directly-excited level, and 
Nc the total population of the neighboring rotational levels. The ratio N^/Nc characterizes the 
collisional processes in the excited state, and therefore comparison of these experimental values 
to calculated Ny/Nc values for the simulated H2/O2 flame provides a test of the reasonableness of 
our models for electronic quenching and rotational relaxation. 

The rotational distributions for the simulated H2/O2 flame were obtained at atmospheric 
pressure and at the temporal and spatial peak of the excitation pulse. As with the experimentally 
determined distributions, the calculated populations had reached their steady-state values. Note 
that since the relative steady-state populations, N(i)/N(u), are determined solely by the collisional 
rate coefficients for v', there is no difference between relative rotational distributions produced under 
linear and saturated conditions. 

Figure 3.3 shows the variation in the calculated and experimental values of Ny/Nc with the 
excited Fi(N') levels. The uncertainty in the calculated N^/Nc ratio due to the limited number of 
rotational levels (0 < N' < 1 4) increases with the pumped quantum number; therefore, we performed 
the calculations only for N ' < 12. Also shown In Fig. 3.3 are similar measurements made by Smith 



35 



0.3 



0. 1 



1 — \ — \ — \ — r 



1 — \ — I — r 




D 
H D 



J__l I I L 



A CH4-02-Ar 
■ CH4-air 
♦ CgHg-air 
D CH4-air 

I I I \ I \ — i — L 







5 10 

Excited rotational level (N') 



15 



Figure 3.3 Comparison of calculated and experimental ratios (see Table 3.2) of the population 
in the directly-excited level, N^, to the total population of the collisionally-excited, 
neighboring rotational levels, Nc as a function of the pumped rotational level. The 
closed symbols are the data of Zizak et al. (1986), wrhile the open symbols are the 
data of Smith and Crosley (1981). 



36 



O' 



Figure 3.4 







-1 



■^ -2 



-3 



-4 



32 



Rotational level (N') 
5 10 



15 



II I I I r 



1 — \ — I r 



▲^ 



^1 



v. 



d 



^A A ^^ ^ ^ 






A^ 



i-^ 



^& 



A 



H2-O2 flame 
A F, levels 
■ F2 levels 

CH4-air flame 
A F| levels 
D Fg levels 






1 



± 



1 



33 34 

Energy (cm'') * 10 



35 



36 



37 



Comparison of the relative rotational-level populations in the simulated H2/O2 flame 
and in the experimental CH^air flame (Zizak et a!., 1 986) for excitation of the Qi (1 0) 
line. The Boltzmann distribution at 2000 K is shown by the dashed line. For comparative 
purposes, the experimental distribution has been normalized so that for the excited 
Fi(10) level. NT" -N'„"S 



37 



Table 3.2 Flames used for comparison of the 

calculated and experimental ratios N^/Nc.^ 



Flame 


<f> 


T{K) 


CH^airb 


1.1 


1950 


CH^Os/Arb 


1.0 


1950 


C2H2/airb 


1.25 


2380 


CH^airc 


0.86 


1900 


H2/O2 


1.0 


2000 



8 The equivalence ratio is denoted by ^. 

bZizaketal. (1986) 

c Smith and Crosley (1981) 

and Crosley (1981) in a CH4/air flame (see Table 3.2). For N' > 5, the calculated and experimental 
values compare v^^ell, both showing a rise in N^/Nc with increasing N'. However, for low N', 
considerable differences exist in the experimental data among the different flames. The higher 
Nu/Nc values for the simulated H2/O2 and experimental CHVOg/Ar flames might be related to the 
lack of N2 compared to the CH^air and C2H2/air flames. Since NJN^ is sensitive to the QJ I Q,(t;, j) 
ratio, Ny/Nc could increase at lower N' owing to enhanced quenching or reduced rotational 
relaxation. 

In Fig. 3.4, we compare the relative rotational-level populations from the experimental CH^air 
flame (Zizak et al., 1986) with the populations from the simulated H2/O2 flame for excitation of the 
Qi (1 0) line. The calculated populations agree well with those measured by Zizak et al. (1 986). For 
excitation of low N' levels, the populations do not agree as well, which is expected from comparison 
of the calculated and experimental hiJNc values in Fig. 3.3. In general, however, the good agreement 
between our calculated results and the experimental data of Zizak et al. (1986), as demonstrated 
in Figs. 3.3 and 3.4, provides confidence in the utility of the dynamic model for analysis of the 
laser-saturated fluorescence method at high pressure. 

3.6 Results and Discussion 

The following calculations were carried out for excitation of the Pi (5) transition [0^(0) = 1 84 x 
1 0-16 cm2] . Figure 3.5 shows the temporal dependence along the center line of the excitation profile 
for (1) the normalized number density in the directly-excited level, (2) the population fraction In the 
laser-coupled levels, and (3) the normalized excitation rate coefficient. The assumed conditions 
correspond to atmospheric pressure, a peak center-line saturation parameter Wp' = 10, and no 



38 



quenching to the vibrational bath level (fb = 0). For convenience, the number density of the 
directly-excited level is normalized so that at peak excitation (t = tp), the normalized population 
equals the population fraction 1 - ^(O.tp). Hence, from Eq. (3.4), 

Nu g,*guN,/N° (l-Y)a,o, (3.76) 

where a ^a, is the degree of saturation at the temporal and spatial peak of the irradiance pulse. 

Figure 3.5 shows that under the above conditions, the population of the upper laser-coupled 
level approaches steady state while the excitation rate coefficient is still increasing. At the peak of 
the excitation pulse where the LSF signal is monitored, about 92% of the population remains in the 
two laser-coupled levels at the center line. Thus for ft = and atmospheric pressure, the model 
shows that to a good approximation the balanced cross-rate model can be used for OH 
measurements. 

Figure 3.6 demonstrates the spatial dependence at the temporal peak of the excitation pulse 
for (1) the normalized number density in the directly-excited level, (2) the degree of saturation. (3) 
the population fraction in the laser-coupled levels, and (4) the normalized excitation rate coefficient 
at the same conditions as in Fig. 3.5. Because of the large value of Wp', the number density in the 
directly-excited level remains near its center-line value at substantial lateral distances. As shown 
by Eq. (3.26), the spatial profile of N „ / a ^„ is dominated by the behavior of Ojat. which approaches 
96% at the center line of the spatial irradiance profile. The normalized number density and the 
degree of saturation are equivalent at large lateral distances since 7 -» 0. 

To investigate the effect of pressure on the balanced cross-rate model, we computed the 
population fraction remaining in the laser-coupled levels as a function of pressure for a constant 
value of the saturation parameter. Figure 3.7 shows the value of 1 - ^ at the temporal and spatial 
peak of the irradiance profile for four of the cases summarized in Table 3.3. At lower pressures, 
the populations in the vibrational bath level and in the rotational levels of the excited electronic state 
increase with increasing pressure. The result is a depletion of the v" = manifold with increasing 
pressure, and hence a depletion of the laser-coupled levels. 

Figure 3.7 also shows that as pressure is increased, the population N^ -i- N/ = (1 - 7) N ? 

approaches an asymptotic value which depends on the ratio fb/fy. This assertion is confirmed by 
comparing cases C and D, which have different absolute values of fb and fy but the same ratio fb/fy 



39 




Figure 3.5 Temporal dependence along the center line for (1) the normalized population. 
N „(0,t)/a ^,, , (2) the population fraction in the laser-coupled levels, 1 - 7(0,t), and (3) 

the normalized excitation rate coefficient, W/u(0,t)/W ?„ , at conditions corresponding 

to atmospheric pressure, a peak center-line saturation parameter of Wp' = 10, and 
no quenching to the bath level (fb = 0). 



40 




0.2 0.4 0.6 0. 

Lateral distance (mm) 



8 



Figure 3 6 Spatial dependence at the temporal peak of the excitation pulse for (1) the normalized 
population, N „(x,tp)/a^., , (2) the degree of saturation, Qsat(x.tp), (3) the population 
fraction in the laser-coupled levels, 1 - 'y(x,tp), and (4) the normalized excitation rate 
coefficient, W;u(x,tp)/W ?„ . at the same conditions as In Fig. 3,5. 



41 



I 



1. u 




1 1 


1 


1 1 1 1 


1 1 


I 






Case A 


— 


0.9 










— 


0.8 


! 






B 


— 


0. 7 










0.6 


- 


c^-- 


\D 




— 


0.5 




— 






I 1 


i 


1 1 1 1 


1 1 







8 



12 



16 



20 



Pressure (atm) 



Figure 3.7 Dependence of 1 - 7(0,tp), the population fraction at the temporal and spatial peak 
of the irradiance profile, on pressure for cases A, B, C, and D (see Table 3.3). 



42 



Table 3.3 Summary of cases describing depopulation of the laser-coupled levels for 
Pi(5) excitation, a 



Case 


fb 


fv 


Wp' 


1 - 'T(0,tp) 


(Fj(tp)) 


A 





— 


10 


0.92 


0.93 


B 


0.50 


0.25 


10 


0.71 


0.75 


C 


0.50 


0.10 


10 


0.53 


0.58 


D 


0.25 


0.05 


10 


0.53 


0.58 


E 


0.50 


0.10 


100 


0.52 


0.55 



a The parameters 1 - 7(0,tp) and (Fc(tp)) are the respective asymptotic values of the 
center-line and spatially-averaged population fraction in the laser-coupled levels at peak 
excitation (see Figs. 3.7 and 3.8). 

The asymptotic value is attained when the vibrational bath level and the rotational levels of the 
excited electronic state reach a sufficiently high population that the rates for transfer into and out 
of the laser-coupled levels are equal. When the transition is well saturated, as happens when Wp' 
> 1 0, the asymptotic value of 1 - 7 is insensitive to Wp'; this is borne out by the comparison between 
cases C and E of Table 3.3. 

Figure 3.8 shows the effect of a Gaussian irradiance profile on the spatially-averaged 
population fraction in the laser-coupled levels for cases A, B, and C. The degree of saturation 
decreases with increasing distance from the center line of the irradiance profile (see Fig. 3.6); 
consequently, the population in the laser-coupled levels away from the center line more closely 
represents the unperturbed population in the ground state. Hence, the spatially-averaged 
depopulation is less than the depopulation at the center line of the irradiance profile. The resulting 
increase in the asymptotic value for the spatially-averaged population in the laser-coupled levels 
is detailed in Table 3.3. Because of the greater center-line saturation in case E, the spatial 
dependence of Qs,, more closely approximates that resulting from spatially uniform excitation; thus, 
the effective population fraction more closely approximates the population fraction along the center 

line. 

Figure 3.9 shows the asymptotic value of both the spatially-averaged and center-line 
population fractions as a function of the ratio fb/fy for Wp' = 1 0. Depopulation of the laser-coupled 
levels clearly becomes more problematic as f b/fy increases ; however, the sensitivity of the population 
fraction to changes in the ratio fb/fy decreases with larger ijiy. As yU increases, population within 
V" > increases; depletion of the laser-coupled levels follows since replenishment via rotational 
transfer is limited by depletion of v" = 0. 



43 



A 
V 



i. u 


1 1 


1 1 1 1 1 
Case A 


1 1 




r - ' 


0.9 






— 




A 




— 


0.8 






— 




\\ \.,..^__^ 


B 






8 12 

Pressure (atm) 



Figure 3.8 Dependence of (Fc(tp)), the spatially-averaged population fraction at the temporal 
peak of the irradiance profile, on pressure for cases A, B, and C (see Table 3.3). The 
population fraction at the center line, 1 - ^(O.tp) ( — ), from Fig. 3.7 is included for 
comparison. 



44 




Mgure 3.9 Dependence of (Fc(tp)), and 1 - ^(tp) (— ). the respective spatially-averaged and 
center-line values of the population fraction, on the ratio fb/fv tor Wp =10. 



45 



The results in Fig. 3.9 for large fb/fy values are in qualitative agreement with those of Campbell 
(1 984), who used a similar dynamic model to show that prediction of species number densities with 
the balanced cross-rate model can result in significant errors at higher pressures. However, because 
Campbell (1984) used lower values of the saturation parameter for many of his cases (e.g., Wp' w 
1). predicted errors using the two-level model arise from both depopulation of the laser-coupled 
levels and a low degree of saturation. Our approach has been to assure that the transition is well 
saturated and then to determine the depopulation. The error resulting from the balanced cross-rate 
model at the center line, ^(tp), and averaged throughout the probe volume, 1 - (Fc(tp)), is shown 
in Figs. 3.7 through 3.9. 

Table 3.4 Sensitivity of the population fraction to changes in rate coefficients for 
rotational energy transfer in the ground electronic state.* 



fb/fc 


Tg 


1 - 7(0,tp) 


(Fc(tp)) 





0.5 


0.68 


0.72 




1.0 


0.92 


0.93 




2.0 


1.10 


1.09 


2 


0.5 


0.56 


0.61 




1.0 


0.71 


0.75 




2.0 


0.81 


0.84 


5 


0.5 


0.44 


0.50 




1.0 


0.53 


0.58 




2.0 


0.59 


0.64 



a Cg is the ratio of the B-parameter in the ground state to that in the excited 
electronic state [Eqs. (3.18) and (3.19); Table 3.1], The parameters 1 - ^(O.tp) 
and (Fc(tp)) are the respective asymptotic values of the center-line and 
spatially-averaged population fraction In the laser-coupled levels at peak excitation 
(Wp' = 10; see Figs. 3.7 and 3.8). 

Depletion of the laser-coupled levels may also occur via reduced rate coefficients for rotational 
transfer in the ground electronic state compared to the excited state. Table 3.4 summarizes the 
sensitivity of the asymptotic center-line and spatially-averaged population fractions to variations in 
the rate coefficients for rotational transfer in the ground state. Note that at high pressure, 
overpopulation of the laser-coupled level can occur if the influence of the vibrational bath levels is 
small (fb/fv « 0) and if the effective rate coefficient for rotational replenishment of the ground state 
is substantially larger than that for rotational depletion in the excited state. At lower pressure, where 



45 



the time scale for collisional depopulation is longer than that for excitation (ty^), the deviation from 
Ni; + N/ = N ? will be small. At sufficiently high pressure, where the time scale for collisional 
depopulation is much shorter than tw, the population fraction in the directly-excited levels reaches 
an asymptotic value before the temporal peak of the laser pulse. 

Figure 3.10 shows the spatially-integrated, temporal profiles of the normalized population in 
the upper laser-coupled level for case A. This normalized population is equivalent to (FJtp)) at 
peak excitation (t = tp = 5 ns). When polarization effects are small (Altkorn and Zare, 1984), such 
profiles are proportional to the measured fluorescence signal. Because the depopulation for case 
A is small, little difference exists in the profiles at the various pressures. At 0.1 atm, the peak of the 
fluorescence profile lags the excitation peak; however, as pressure increases, the profiles more 
closely follow the excitation pulse. 

The spatially-integrated population profiles for case C are shown in Fig. 3.1 1 . The effect of 
depopulation of the laser-coupled levels is evident, and as with case A, the profile at 0.1 atm lags 
the excitation pulse. However, at 1 atm, the population profile peaks before the excitation pulse. 
This behavior occurs when the characteristic time for collisional depopulation of the laser-coupled 
levels is comparable to the characteristic time for excitation. When the characteristic collisional 
time is much shorter than t„, depopulation of the laser-coupled levels occurs earlier in the irradiance 
pulse, as demonstrated by the fluorescence profile at 10 atm. 

The effect of depleting the laser-coupled levels is much more distinctive along the center line, 
as shown in Fig. 3.12 for case C. As pressure increases and the characteristic time for collisional 
depopulation becomes much smaller than \^, the saturated value of N^, -i- N, is approached, which 
flattens the temporal population profile. The flat temporal profile at 1 atm shows that the center-line 
population fraction has reached its asymptotic value (see Fig. 3.7), and no further depopulation of 
the laser-coupled levels will occur with increasing pressure. 

The effect of depopulation on the excited-state rotational levels at the spatial and temporal 
peak of the irradiance profile is shown in Fig. 3. 13. For convenience, we show only the populations 
in the Fi levels, and lines are drawn between the rotational-level populations. As with the temporal 
profiles described above, the population in the upper laser-coupled level decreases with increasing 
pressure. At pressures of 1 atm and above, the relative populations [i.e., N(i)/N(u)] are at steady 
state. For N' > 4, the populations have an approximately Bottzmann distribution, but with a 
temperature (-1130 K) lower than the ground-state rotational temperature of 2000 K. Similar 



47 



1.0 



1 r 



1 r 




Figure 3.10 Temporal profiles of the spatially-integrated, normalized population in the upper 
laser-coupled level for case A at pressures of 0.1, 1, and 10 aim. 



48 



X 



o 
•I 

a 



■D 




Figure 3.11 Temporal profiles of the spatially-integrated, normalized population in the upper 
laser-coupled level for case C at pressures of 0.1 , 1 , and 1 atm. 



49 



1.0 



T \ \ \ 1 \ r 




Time (ns) 

Figure 3. 1 2 Temporal profiles of the center-line, normalized population in the upper laser-coupled 
level for case C at pressures of 0. 1 , 1 , and 1 atm. 



50 



Rotational level (N') 



o> 







5 10 








nil II 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 




1 








^~ 










A 






— 









— 




~ 


i 


^ 






1 










— 


^■<s\.^l aim 


•— 


2 


— 




— 




_ 


N N \. 


_ 






'^ '^^ ^V 




3 


- 




— 




_ 


\ N \^ 


— 






^ ''^- ^s. 




4 


- 


N 10 atm-^ 


— 




— 


N 


~~ 


5 


— 




— 




— 


0.1 atm"^ 


— 


6 


— 


1 1 1 1 1 1 . L ^ L.. 


"" 



32 



33 



34 



35 



36 



Energy (cm"') >< lO' 

Figure 3.13 Rotational-level populations of the Fi component at the spatial and temporal peak 
of the irradiance profile for case C at pressures of 0.1, 1, and 10 atm. 



51 



distributions were obtained by Zizaketal. (1 986) for excitation of transitions with N' = 5. At pressures 
above ~5 atm, where the population fraction in the directly -excited levels has reached its asymptotic 
value, the population distributions coincide. 

We now use the results of our analysis to make some important observations regarding the 
balanced cross-rate model. First, tfte state-to-state dynamic calculations show that rotational 
relaxation in the excited state plays only a small role in direct depopulation of the v " =0 level, even 
at high pressures (case A). However, rotational relaxation within the excited electronic state can 
play a larger indirect role by increasing the number of pathways for electronic quenching to the v" 
> levels. Second, under conditions where fb/fy is small and the rate coefficients for rotational 
transfer in the ground state are approximately equal to those of the excited state, the balanced 
cross-rate model should remain a good approximation regardless of pressure. Conversely, for large 
f b/fv ratios, the balanced cross-rate model becomes a poorer approximation at high pressure. Third, 
at sufficiently high pressure the population of the laser-coupled levels attains an asymptotic value, 
which is insensitive to both pressure and the saturation parameter. Hence, one would expect that 
Eq. (3.3) could be used as a modified balanced cross-rate model if 1 - 7 exhibited small sensitivity 
to both the flame temperature (-1000-2500 K) and the identity of the primary collision partners. 
For excitation by a nonuniform irradiance profile, Eq. (3.8) shows that the LSF method can be used 
at high pressure if /(1 - '/)asatdx (and not 1 - 7 alone) displays low sensitivity to the collision 
environment. 

3.7 Conclusions 

We have examined the effect of pressure on the LSF method for measurement of OH 
concentration. A numerical model of the excitation dynamics of OH has been developed to explore 
the validity of the balanced cross-rate model at higher pressures. Using this model, we have shown 
that the depopulation of the laser-coupled levels is sensitive to collisions which depopulate v" = 
and to rate coefficients for rotational transfer in the ground state which are smaller than those in 
the excited state. In particular, we have shown that the depopulation of v" = 0, and hence the 
laser-coupled levels, depends on the probability of (1) electronic quenching to vibrational levels for 
which V" > and (2) vibrational relaxation to v" = 0. At sufficiently high pressures, regardless of 
the reason for depopulation, the total population of the laser-coupled levels reaches an asymptotic 
value, which occurs when the collisionally-excited rotational and vibrational energy levels attain 
enough population to balance the population transfer rates into and out of the laser-coupled levels. 



52 



When f b/fv < 1 and the rotational transfer rate coefficients within the ground and excited states 
are comparable, the laser-coupled levels are not significantly depopulated, and therefore the 
balanced cross-rate model is a good approximation at all pressures. However, when fb/fv 's large, 
the depopulation of the laser-coupled levels will be significant at higher pressures, and thus the 
balanced cross-rate model will no longer be valid. At sufficiently high pressures, a modified balanced 
cross-rate model, Eq. (3.3), could be useful for making measurements of OH concentration if the 
asymptotic value of the population fraction is insensitive to temperature and the collisional 
environment. 



53 



CHAPTER 4 
EXPERIMENTAL APPARATUS 

4.1 Combustion Facility for High-Pressure Flame Studies 
4.1.1 introduction 

Measurements of flame species by optical methods, such as laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) 
and coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy (CARS), have proved valuable in elucidating 
chemical and physical processes occurring in combustion environments (Eckbreth, 1988), While 
much developmental work on optical methods has been done in low pressure (< 1 atm) flames, 
most combustors of practical importance operate at high pressure. Since the width of the flame 
front decreases with increasing pressure, physical probes are even more likely to perturb the flame 
front; hence utilization of optical methods becomes a necessity for many high-pressure studies. 
Such measurements could prove useful for a broad range of topics including (1) turbulent flames, 
(2) engine knock, (3) pollutant formation (e.g., soot and NO production), and (4) flame extinction 
and stability. In this chapter, we describe a high-pressure combustion facility designed for (1) the 
development of optical diagnostic methods in high-pressure flames and (2) the study of practical 
combustion phenomena by optical methods. 

In previous work, Flower and Bowman (Flower and Bowman, 1 984; Flower, 1 986; Flower and 
Bowman, 1986; Flower, 1988) and Edwards et al. (1985, 1987) have described special facilities 
designed for optical measurements in high-pressure flames. Flower and Bowman have used laser 
scattering and attenuation plus laser-Doppler anemometry to study soot production in laminar and 
turbulent diffusion flames. Their facility includes a rectangular stainless steel chamber, with an 
optical access port on each of the four sides. The vessel is designed to accommodate flames at 
pressures to 1 atm, and spatial profiles of the flame are obtained by translating the entire chamber. 
Edwards et al. (1 987) report LIF measurements of OH and CN in solid propellant flames at pressures 
to 35 atm. The combustor used in this facility is a modification of a high-pressure window bomb. 



54 



and it includes a servomechanism to keep the surface of the solid propellant at a constant height 
during combustion (Edwards et al. , 1 985) . Our design, while emphasizing flexibility and thus allowing 
a variety of laser diagnostic methods with laminar or turbulent flames, also stresses low cost by 
employing cornmercially available components (where practical) in the facility. 

4.1.2 High-Pressure Facility 

Our high-pressure combustion facility includes (1) the pressure vessel, (2) the burner 
translation system, (3) two flat-flame burners, and (4) the gas control system. To reduce the cost 
of the combustion facility, the pressure vessel was constructed from standard stainless steel pipe 
(AISI 316, schedule 40). The main body of the pressure vessel (Fig. 4.1) is 109 cm long by 20 cm 
ID, with large diameter slip-on flanges welded to either end and blind flanges for the seals. Copper 
tubing is coiled around the main body; thus, one can reduce the vessel temperature (if necessary) 
by flowing water through the tubing. 

Four optical access ports, fabricated from 6.4 cm ID pipe and small-diameter slip-on flanges, 
are welded to the main body; the seals are provided by small-diameter blind flanges, each of which 
is machined to accommodate a window housing. Each window, 3.8 cm diameter by 1 .25 cm thick, 
is seated in the housing against an O ring and is kept dry and free of particles by flowing dry nitrogen 
through a system of jets in the housing. The inner face (which holds the window housing) of one 
blind flange is machined at 10°; thus, for optical measurement techniques such as UF. this outer 
flange can be used as the laser beam exit port to keep reflected light away from the sampling 
volume. On completion, the pressure vessel was hydrostatically tested to 60 atm. 

The translation mechanisms are located within the pressure vessel, thus further reducing the 
cost of the facility since only the burner and not the entire vessel is moved. The vertical translation 
system uses three Unislide assemblies, which are mounted to the bottom blind flange, and a small 
stepper motor (Slo-Syn ivlodel M061 -FD02) and a timing belt to drive the three units (Fig. 4.2). The 
Unislide assemblies carry a platform (Fig. 4.3) on which the horizontal translation mechanism and 
the burner are mounted. Like the vertical system, the horizontal system uses a small stepper motor 
(Slo-Syn Model M061 -FD02) and a timing belt to drive the optical translation stage (Newport model 
N/I-420-1S) carrying the burner. The range of movement for the vertical and horizontal systems is 
about 11 and 2.8 cm, respectively, while the associated single-step resolution (at 200 
steps/revolution) is about 2 and 1 /im, respectively. Two linear variable differential transformers 



55 




Figure 4. 1 Cutaway view of the pressure vessel and components. 



56 



Unislide 
Assembly 
(i of 3) 



Pressure 
Tronsducer 



LVDT 



Belt 
^f-p, Tensioner 




Connector 
(I of 2 ) 



Pressure 
Relief Valve 



Figure 4.2 Exploded view of bottom flange and components. 



57 



Translation Stage 



Translation 
Platform 



Stepper 
Motor 



LVDT 




Figure 4.3 Exploded view of horizontal translation system. 



58 



(LVDTs) are used to monitorthe approximate absolute position of the burner; however, to accurately 
position the burner relative to the selected zero location, the motors are stepped through a 
microcomputer. 

In addition to supporting the translation system, the bottom flange supports an electronic 
pressure transducer and a pressure relief valve (set for 24 atm) and provides the ports that are 
used for electrical wiring and fluid connections. Two Conax connectors are used to bring electrical 
signals to and from the vessel. During operation at high pressure (or even atmospheric pressure), 
the interior surfaces of the vessel can remain below the dew point, even without cooling the vessel, 
and thus water vapor from combustion can condense on these surfaces. Because some of the 
water collects on the bottom flange, We had to (1) isolate exposed electrical wiring from moisture 
(the wires were stripped to obtain a seal in the Conax connectors) and (2) provide a suitable water 
trap at the bottom flange. The former was achieved using a silicon elastomer to fill the dead space 
in the electrical access ports where the wires were exposed and water could collect; the latter was 
achieved by attaching a closed section of pipe underneath the flange. 

The pressure vessel is supported by a steel-frame table; the table also supports optical 
breadboards located on either side of the vessel. To provide access to the bottom flange and the 
various components, the pressure vessel is moved by a Unistrut trolley and winch system which 
mounts to the table. In front of each optical access port is a Lexan shield to protect laboratory 
personnel should the windows fail. 

Though the vessel was designed to accommodate turbulent flames, we have initially used 
only premixed laminar flames. The primary burner (Fig. 4.4) was constructed especially for us by 
fvicKenna Products, Inc. (Pittsburg, CA) and includes a 2.5 cm diameter, water-cooled, sintered 
bronze flameholder surrounded by a guard ring, also made of sintered bronze, for isolating the 
flame from the ambient gases. The principal advantage of the cooled bronze flameholder is that it 
affords a wide range of flow rates for which the flame remains attached to the burner without 
sustaining damage; additionally, the cooled plug provides a uniform boundary condition which 
results in a flat flame. Radial LIF measurements of the relative OH concentration at pressures to 
-12 atm show that the flame is flat typically to within about ±10% (see Chapter 5). Originally we 
employed a similar McKenna burner using a stainless steel flameholder. This design was tried 



59 



Sintered Bronze Ring 
Sintered Bronze Plug 




Sleeve 



Cooling Lines 



Guard Flow- 
Housing 



Guard Flow 
Inlet 

Burner Gas 
Inlet 



Figure 4.4 McKenna flat flame burner and guard flow housing. 



60 



Hostel loy X Plug 




\^ — Sleeve 

Sintered Metal 
Disk 

Plug Spacer 



0-Ring 



Swagelok Fitting 



Figure 4.5 Hastelloy flat flame burner. 

because a stainless steel plug was assumed to be more durable than the bronze plug; however, 
as a result of the low thermal conductivity of the stainless steel, the burner was easily damaged by 
the large heat fluxes which result at high flow rates of the fuel and oxidizer. 

The secondary burner (Fig. 4.5) is similar in size and shape to the McKenna burner, but it 
uses an uncooled hexagonal-pattern plug made of Hastelloy X (a high-temperature, nickel-rich alloy 
manufactured by Kentucky Metals, New Albany, IN) for flame stabilization. The low surlace area 
of this flameholder (as seen by the flame) makes cooling unnecessary; however, the flame can 
stabilize below the burner surface since the pore width (-0.8 mm) is not small enough to quench 
the flame. Though this burner was difficult to use because of its restrictive operating conditions, it 
did prove to be durable; an added advantage is that the large pore size of this flameholder would 
allow seeding of the flame. 



61 



A significant feature of the observed high-pressure premixed laminar flames is flame jitter-low 
frequency (-10 Hz) flame oscillations-the amplitude of which increases with pressure for a constant 
mass flow rate of the combustible mixture. Preliminary measurements at ~6 atm were made using 
a beam derived from a xenon arc lamp. The small-diameter (~1 mm) beam was first passed through 
the flame; the beam cross section was then rotated by 90° so that vertical disturbances such as 
flame jitter would deflect the beam along the horizontal axis. The beam was subsequently focused 
on the entrance slit of a monochromator, and the beam intensity (passed by the slit), which varied 
because of flame jitter, was sampled at 1 kHz. These measurements show that the amplitude 
increases, while the frequency of the oscillations decreases, with decreasing mass flow rate of the 
combustible mixture. 

Flow rates of fuel, oxidizer, diluent, and bath (or guard-ring) gases are metered with four Linde 
flow control modules (models 15C, 14C, 16C, and 18C, respectively) and an associated Linde 
readout and control (ROC) box, For each module, a high-pressure regulator is used to control the 
inlet gas pressure, and a back-pressure regulator is used at the exit to limit the pressure drop. The 
ROC box is interfaced to an IBM PC-compatible microcomputer via RS 232 ports on the ROC box 
and the microcomputer, and a special communications program was written to control the flow 
streams (see Appendix A). In addition to displaying the set and read flow rates (and the vessel 
pressure), the menu-driven program includes options for (1) setting each flow stream, (2) zeroing 
all four streams or just the three streams for the flame, (3) making minor adjustments to individual 
streams or combinations of streams (e.g., fuel and oxidizer or fuel, oxidizer, and diluent), (4) 
automatically changing the equivalence ratio (according to a prescribed formula), and (5) 
automatically changing the flow rates of the combustible gases (according to a prescribed formula) 
in response to pressure changes. This last option is useful even with the McKenna burner since 
flame stability is enhanced by increasing, with pressure, the mass flow rate of the combustible 
mixture. We use a formula based on a description of adiabatic flame speed versus pressure of 
CH4-air mixtures (Hjima and Takeno, 1 986) to scale the mass flow rate of the combustible mixture. 

The pressure within the vessel is controlled with a back-pressure regulator (Fairchild Industrial 
Products, Winston-Salem, NC), which is located on the exhaust line, far enough downstream of the 
vessel that the gases are sufficiently cool. Typically, during the course of a three-hour experiment, 
the vessel pressure was held to within 1 % of the set point, with only occasional minor adjustments 
made to the regulator. Upstream of the back-pressure regulator on the exhaust line are a condenser 



62 



and water trap; thus, with this trap (and the one underneath the bottom flange), much of the water 
produced during combustion is eliminated from the pressure vessel. In parallel with this regulator 
is a valve that can handle large flow rates and can quickly depressurize the vessel. A high-pressure 
flame is obtained with the following procedure: (1) the burner is lit from an optical access port using 
a torch; (2) the port is then sealed, a bath-gas flow rate of 20 to 40 sipm is programmed, and the 
pressurizing option on the interfacing program is selected; and (3) the depressurizing valve is shut, 
and the back-pressure regulator is adjusted to the desired pressure. 

4.1 .3 Areas for Improvement 

From our experience with the high-pressure combustion facility, we make the following 
suggestions for an improved design. 

1 . Using the condenser and water trap on the exhaust line, the water 
was effectively eliminated from the exhaust system; however, for the 
pressure vessel a drainage system should be designed to direct the 
water collecting on the interior surfaces to the trap beneath the 
bottom flange. This would ensure that the accumulation of water 
does not interfere with the operation of the burner or the electronic 
components. (To prevent water that condensed on the top flange 
from falling on the burner, we attached a steel plate to the burner 
housing about 1 5 cm above the burner.) 

2. Though the optical translation stage used for horizontal movement 
is adequate for most purposes, it does exhibit significant side-play; 
for more accurate positioning of the burner, the current translation 
stage should be replaced by a system with reduced side-play (for 
instance a Newport model M-425-1S stage or a linear bearing/shaft 
arrangement). 

3. The width of the burner guard ring (Fig. 4.4) should be reduced to 
allow a highervelocity of guard flowforthe equivalent volumetric flow 
of gas. This becomes increasingly important at high pressures, since 
gas consumption can be large. Finally, for modelling purposes (i.e., 
providing a tractable boundary condition), the grain size of the 



63 



sintered bronze flame holder (-100 nm) should be reduced, since 
this dimension should be small compared to the flame stand-off 
distance (Ferguson and Keck, 1979). 

4.2 Spectroscopic Equipment 

4.2.1 Fluorescence Experiments 

Forthe LIF experiments (Fig 4.6), the second harmonic (at 532 nm) of a Quanta-Ray DCR-3G 
Nd:YAG laser is used to pump a PDL-2 dye laser, which includes transversely-pumped oscillator 
and preamplifier stages along with a longitudinally-pumped amplifier stage. To produce UV 
radiation, the output of the dye laser is sent to a Quanta-Ray Wavelength Extender (WEX-1 ), where 
the light is frequency doubled; the active control circuit of the WEX is used to continuously adjust 
the angle of the doubling crystal to obtain the maximum doubled output. For the saturated 
fluorescence measurements (Chapters 6 and 7), we used the fast pulse option of the DCR-3G. A 
so-called fast pulse was obtained by adjusting the Q-switch delay (relative to the flash-lamp trigger 
pulse) while monitoring the laser output. A Q-switch delay was used that resulted in two principal 
temporal modes each about 3 ns in width. (An example of the average temporal dependence of 
the UV pulse is descrlFed below and shown iriTlg. 4.10.) 

To achieve high conversion efficiency of the 532 nm radiation, the dye laser uses a mixture 
of Exciton DCM and Sultorhodamine 640 (SR640) dyes. To obtain the optimum mixture, we used 
the following procedure. 

1 . Dye concentrations recommended by Quanta-Ray for the oscillator 
and the amplifier were prepared for both DCM and SR640. 

2. Initially, only the DCM solutions were employed, with the PDL-2 lasing 
at the wavelength of interest (-620 nm). 

3. The mixtures of SR640 for the oscillator and amplifier were then 
added to the DCM mixtures (separately, but for both the oscillator 
and amplifier) in 50 ml increments while monitoring the laser energy. 
This was continued for the oscillator and amplifier until in each case 
the laser energy peaked. 

Using this procedure, we obtained a laser energy of about 95 mJ/pulse at 620 nm, with an input 
energy of about 380 mJ/puIse at 532 nm (an efficiency of -25%). 



64 




Monochromator 
A 



Sampling 
Modules 



Computer 



Figure 4 6 Schematic for LIF experiments. Components: A - aperture; BD - beam dump; BS 
beam splitter; BSA - beam steering assembly; FB - fluorescence block; L - lens; MA ■ 
image rotating mirror assembly; PD - photodiode; PMT - photomultipiier tube; PP 
Pyrex plate(s); PV - pressure vessel. 



65 




0. 1 0. 2 

Scan Distance (mm) 



0. ? 



Figure 4.7 Integrated irradiance of UV beam measured by scanning a knife edge across tfie beam 
at the focus. 



66 



1 .0 



0. 8 



(0 

c 
en 



^ 0.6- 



> 



"» 0. 4- 



a> 



Id. 2 



0. 0^ 



A 
D 
V 



O 

A 

9 



o 

A 

9 



2 
^ ^ 

9 



J u 







8 



- 


- 1 a t m 


A - 


- 3 a t m 


D - 


- 6 a t m 


V • 


- 12 aim 



J L 



30 60 90 120 150 

Exit Silt Width ( /iiD ) 



Figure 4.8 Dependence of fluorescence signal of monochromator B on exit slit width and 
pressure. 



67 



A Pellin-Broca prism was used in the WEX to disperse the visible and UV beams after the 
doubling crystal, and a small portion of either the visible or UV beam was then picked off and directed 
to the triggering photodiode with a fused silica beam splitter. The UV beam was raised to the 
appropriate height with a beam steering assembly; the resulting polarization of the radiation was 
vertical. The beam was attenuated when necessary with Pyrex plates and focused over the burner 
with a 250 mm focal-length fused silica lens. The approximate spot size of the UV beam over the 
burner was measured by scanning a knife edge across the focused beam--which had been 
attenuated with a Pyrex plate. The integrated beam Irradiance, iLy = /?./." I l ( v , y ) f/ v d y. was 
then monitored with a photodiode, and an example of a scan is shown in Fig. 4.7. Though l^y shows 
good symmetry about the center line, we did observe some nonuniformity in ItCx.y), the irradiance 
distribution; at least part of the observed nonuniformity arises in the oscillator of thetfye laser. Two 
additional factors which led to some nonuniformity in the UV beam were (1) slight damage to the 
doubling crystal and (2) damage to a 180° turning prism in the Quanta-Ray Prism Harmonic 
Separator (PHS) box (where the 1064 and 532 nm beams are separated). 

Fluorescence was collimated with a second 250 mm focal-length lens. In experiments where 
two monochromators were used, the first reflector of the image rotating mirror assembly was a 
beam splitter, which allowed part of the fluorescence to pass to monochromator A. The remaining 
fluorescence was rotated by 90° (with a mirror assembly) and imaged on the entrance slit of 
monochromator B. Two Spex 3/4 m Czerny-Turner monochromators were used in the experiments: 
(A) a model 1700 which employed a grating blazed a 1 ^m (and was used in third order); (B) a 
model 1800-11, which employed a grating blazed a 300 nm (and was used in first order). 
Monochromator B was converted from a spectrometer by fabricating a plate for mounting the exit 
slit; however, the exit plane was slightly off the position of the focal plane, and as a consequence 
the image of the entrance slit was blurred at the exit plane. To quantify this effect, the fluorescence 
signal was measured as a function of exit slit width for the pressures of interest: 1 , 3.1 , 6.1 , 9.2, 
and 12.3 atm. The results for 1 , 3.1 , 6.1, and 12.3 atm are shown in Fig. 4.8; the effect of collisional 
broadening is to further broaden the spectral fluorescence profile, and in comparing the 
fluorescence signal at different pressures, this broadening must be taken into account. 

To align the optics for fluorescence measurements, we devised a simple procedure which 
does not require opening the vessel (i.e., taking off any of the flanges). This scheme consists of 
the following steps. 



68 



1 . In the lens-holding mounts outside the optical access ports, we place 
iris diaphragms. The lens holders are approximately centered with 
respect to the ports. The irises are then set at identical heights using 
a cathetometer (and closing the iris to mark the center). 

2. We direct the (attenuated) UV beam through the laser entry and exit 
ports, using the Irises to ensure that the beam passes through the 
center of both lens holders (and thus the lenses). Also, at this time 
we adjust the horizontal position of the lens holders to ensure that 
the beam passes above the center of the burner (when the burner 
is centered). 

3. Through the opposite ports, we direct the beam from a He-Ne laser. 
The irises are again used to ensure that the beam is level and that 
it is passing through the center of both lens holders. To ensure the 
beam crosses the central chord of the burner, we again adjust the 
horizontal position of the lens holders. Finally, we align the 
fluorescence optics to so that the He-Ne beam strikes the center of 
each optic (including those in the monochromator). 

By opening the monochromator slits and making only minor adjustments to the collection optics, 
particularly the collection and focusing lenses, we are then able to find a Rayleigh scattering or 
fluorescence signal (when the laser is at an appropriate wavelength). 

The monochromators employed inexpensive photomultiplier tubes (RCA model 1P28B) 
specially-wired for fast response (Harris et al., 1976) for detection of the spectrally-resolved 
fluorescence signals. The average temporal response of each PI^T was tested using Rayleigh 
scattering (Fig. 4.9). These waveforms can be compared to the average temporal signal obtained 
with a Texas Instruments TIED56 silicon avalanche photodiode (Fig. 4.10), which has a reported 
temporal response of -200 ps (Harris et al., 1980). These waveforms were recorded by repetitively 
scanning in time over the signal, using the 200 ps sampling gate of a Stanford Research Systems 
fast sampler (SR255), and a scanning voltage supplied by the SR245 computer interface module. 
The data was then digitized and displayed with the SR245 using the SR265 software package, which 
also controlled the experiment. The average laser pulse shown in Fig. 4. 1 has two temporal modes 
each with an -2.5 ns FWHM; this average pulse was obtained consistently from day to day without 



69 



D 

C 
Ul 

■r-t 

LD 

U) 

C 

•rH 

L 
01 

4-) 
O 

o 

j: 

m 

•1-1 

I — • 

D 

cn 
> 

•rH 

D 
r— I 



m 







• • 




1.0 


— 














0.8 


- 


•• 






— 


/■ '. 




0.6 




• 








* * 


. • 






AV^ 1 




■• 




t 


0.4 


- 


• 


^ 






• 


'. 




— 


• 


V 






t 


,* 


0.2 


- 


y 


V 




- 




>^-*tt»»^ 


n n 


Ui-f 


^ 1 1 1 1 


i 1 



Ql 



1. 

0. 
0. 
0. 
0. 
0. 



1 1 1 


« 
•• 

* *. • 

• 


1 1 


\ 
V 


V 
* 

• 

4- 


•A 
v. 




1 1 1 -I - 



5 10 

Time (nsec) 



15 



Figure 4.9 Average temporal response of PMT A and B to UV beam using Rayleigh scattering; 
the profiles are averages of 45 (PMT A) and 30 (PMT B) temporal scans. 



70 








10 
Timo (nsQc) 



15 



Figure 4.10 Average temporal dependence of the UV beam in-adiance measured with silicon 
avalanche photodiode; the profile Is the average of 10 temporal scans. 



71 



additional adjustment of the Q-switch delay. Both PMTs, which used a 1 000 V supply voltage, show 
good temporal resolution (Fig. 4.9), though the slower response (compared to that of the fast 
photodiode) does result in distortion of the waveform. 

The linearity of the PMTs and the respective circuits was determined using a Rayleigh 
scattering signal, which was attenuated with calibrated neutral density filters. The attenuation was 
progressively decreased, and the subsequent signal was recorded; the results (Fig. 4.11) show 
that both PMTs have a linear range of about 0,5 V or greater. 

In addition to the aforementioned PMTs and fast photodiode, two silicon UV-sensitive PIN 
photodiodes (Hamamatsu S 17722-02) were employed to (1) trigger the detection electronics and 
(2) monitor the shot-to-shot UV beam energy. These photodiodes were not fast enough to resolve 
the temporal features of the UV pulse, and consequently they were used only to record the laser 
energy per pulse rather than the peak laser power. However, because of their large sensitive area, 
these photodiodes were especially valuable when it was necessary or helpful to measure the 
integrated beam irradiance (e.g., in the experiment where the knife edge was scanned across the 
beam). The monitoring photodiode was also used to level and position the burner relative to the 
laser beam. For both exercises, an aperture in front of the focusing lens can be used to ensure 
that the beam width is small and approximately constant while crossing the burner. To level the 
burner, the burner is first translated upward to partially obscure the beam and then translated from 
side to side while adjusting its tilt; it is considered level when the photodiode signal is approximately 
constant as the burner is translated horizontally. To find the zero vertical position, the burner is 
first positioned to totally block the beam. It is then moved downward until the signal at the photodiode 
is half the unblocked value; this is then recorded on the computer as the zero vertical position of 
the burner. Though vertical fluorescence profiles taken consecutively (under the same conditions) 
show little or no shift, the zero position typically varied 50 to 100 ^m from day to day. 

The Pf^ and photodiode signals were recorded with gated integrators; for the saturated 
fluorescence experiments, each PMT signal was resolved with the 200 ps sampling gate of a Stanford 
Research Systems SR255 fast sampler, which was temporally centered at the peak of the 
fluorescence pulse using an SR200 gate scanner. The voltage output from the SR255 was then 
digitized and stored with the SR245 computer interface module and the SR265 software package. 



72 



> 



0) 

m 
o 

I— I 
o 

> 

-p 

D 

o 

L 

•rH 
U 

L 
0^ 



a. 



D 
E 
O 

O 

Q_ 



CD 



Q. 



1.0- 
0.8- 
0.6- 
0.4- 
0.2- 
0. Ol^ 

1.0- 

0.8- 

0.6 

0.4- 

0.2- 



I I ' ' I I I I 1 L 



cf 



n nl I I I I ' ' ' »— -■ •— 

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

RGlative RaylQigh ScattQring 



Figure 4.1 1 Linearity of PMT circuits A (top graph) and B (bottom graph). 



73 



For both the monitoring photodiode and the PMTs, when wide-band temporal detection was desired 
(Chapter 5), we used the SR250 gated integrator and boxcar averager; sampling gates greater than 
2 ns could then be selected for detection of the signal. 

One of the modifications made to the SR265 software includes a stepper motor interface 
package. The package consists of two parts: the first, which was written in FORTRAN to be 
compatible to the SR265 software, displays the menu options; the second communicates with the 
motor translators through a digital I/O card. This entailed sending to the motor translator box an 
8-bit word, specifying the motor and step direction; this section was written in the C programming 
language for greater speed. Some of the features of the package are listed below. 

1 . The user can move any motor connected to the two translator boxes. 
(Up to 1 6 motors can be addressed.) 

2. The user can access a file (supplied by the user), which contains 
information on the motors and number of steps (for each motor) to 
be moved after each scan. (A scan is defined as a set of samples 
taken by the SR245 computer interface.) 

3. The user can access a memory file, which keeps track of motor 
positions relative to a specified zero. A menu command also allows 
the user to send the motor to its zero position with the backlash of 
the system automatically removed. 

4. The user can specify a motor and the number of steps to be moved 
after each sample recorded by the SR245 module. Additional options 
allow the user to (1) reverse the direction of the motor on each 
subsequent scan (to backtrack over the motor's path) or (2) move 
the motor back to its zero position before each subsequent scan (so 
that the scans can be averaged point by point, for example). 

The last option is useful in experiments for which one wants to synchronize the movement of a 
stepper motor with data collection. It can be employed, for example, in scanning (1) a knife edge 
across the laser beam, (2) the monochromator grating for collection of absorption or fluorescence 
spectra, and (3) the grating of the dye laser for collection of excitation spectra. The principal limitation 
with this setup is the maximum stepping frequency of about 200 steps/s; however, this is not a 
significant limitation for many experiments. 



74 



4.2.2 Absorption Experiments 

Figure 4.12 shows a schematic of the optical layout for the absorption experiments. The 
output of a 150-W xenon arc lamp plus two lenses and two apertures were used to produce a 
collimated beam, which was directed over the center line of the burner; apertures were also used 
after the burner to minimize detected flame emission. By scanning the burner through the beam, 
the average beam width was determined to be less than about 200 /im. A Spex 3/4 m 
monochromator, with a grating blazed at 1 /zm (monochromator A described above), was used in 
3rd order to resolve the absorption spectra. Spectral scans were obtained by using a 
specially-designed gearbox (employing an anti-backlash worm gear arrangement) with a 50:1 gear 
ratio in conjunction with a stepper motor (Slo-Syn IVIodel M061-FD02. which has a single-step 
resolution of 1.8°). This design-which also included a damper to reduce vibration, especially 
noticeable at low stepping frequencies-allowed good spectral resolution. Typically, a complete 
absorption scan consisted of 21 000 or 28000 data points (3 or 4 scans each of 7000 points-a limit 
imposed by the SR265 program). Each scan began before the Pi(2) line (Dieke and Crosswhite. 
1 962) and ended beyond the Qi (1 5) or P, (1 0) line (see Table 4.1). Each data point is the result of 
30 boxcar samples, using the built-in exponential averager to average individual samples. The 
computer interface module was then set to sample 1 in 60 boxcar triggers (with a command in the 
SR245 routine), thus resulting in some correlation (albeit a small one) between consecutive data 
points. Figure 4.13 gives an example of a typical scan from an atmospheric-pressure flame. 

The transmitted light was measured with a PMT using a supply voltage of 700 V; this signal 
was processed with the SR250. using an enlarged sampling gate of 75 ^ls (the gate, normally limited 
to 15 us, was enlarged by adding a capacitor to the sampling circuit of the SR250 module). The 
PMT output was connected directly to the SR250 input, which has an input impedance of 1 Mn, 
and the boxcar output voltage was tested for a linear dependence on the beam intensity using 
calibrated neutral density filters to attenuate the beam. Ideally, however, one would use a 
current-to-voltage conversion circuit to prevent loading of the PI^T circuit. 

A significant increase in the signal-to-noise ratio of the absorption measurements was 
obtained by repetitively scanning over a portion of the spectrum and averaging the individual scans. 
This was accomplished by sending the monochromator stepper motor to its zero position after 
each scan-which was done automatically by selecting the appropriate option in the mojor interface 
menu. Multiple scans could then be run. and the SR265 routine would continually average the 



75 




A- 



L(250) 



PMT 



MA 



L(180) CC 



1 

A 



Monochromator 



BF 



Figure 4.12 Schematic of absorption experiments. Components: A - aperture; BF - bandpass 
filter; L - lens; MA - image rotating min'or assembly; PMT - photomultiplier tube; PV 
- pressure vessel. 



76 







_ CD CD ^ TJ CD 

-I d CD d CD d 



■2 Q- 



co 

0) 

w 



77 



Table 4.1 Lines used in absorption analysis. 



Line 


Wavelength (nm) 


Pi (2) 


308.729 


Qi(6) 


308.824 


Qi(8) 


309.329 


Q2(6) 


309.369 


Q2(7) 


309.552 


Qi(9) 


309.624 


Q2(8) 


309.773 


Qi(10) 


309.949 


Pi (5) 


310.213 


Q2(11) 


310.657 


Pi (6) 


310.745 


Q2(12) 


311.024 


Qi(13) 


311.113 


Qi(15) 


312.058 


Pi (9) 


312.485 


Pi(10) 


313.119 



results of the current scan with previous scans. An example from an atmospheric-pressure flame 
is shown in Fig. 4.14, where two profiles of the strong Qi{6) line are shown: one, a single scan and 
the other the average of 5 consecutive scans. Typically, the only obsen/abje tracking error occurred 
in going from the first to the second scan; the remaining scans accurately followed the second 
scan. 

To aid in data reduction of the absorption spectra, we again modified the SR265 software 
package to integrate the absorption profiles; this included the following steps. 

1 . The user selects a portion of the spectrum that includes the line or 
lines of interest from the main window containing, for example, a 
7000-point scan; this section of the spectrum is then removed to a 
second window. 

2. Control is transferred to the second window, and the user is 
prompted to make measurements of the baseline by bracketing the 
region with two cursors. 



78 




308. 80 



308. 84 
WavQ length (nm) 



308. 88 



Figure 4.14 Example of improved signal-to-noise ratio in an absorption spectrum obtained by 
repetitively scanning over the Qi (6) line in an atmospheric-pressure flame; also 
included in the scan is the Qi2{6) satellite transition. The multiple-scan profile (A), 
which is the average of 5 consecutive scans, has been offset from the single-scan 
profile (B) for convenience. 

3. The user is then prompted to make the absorption measurement by 
again bracketing the region of the spectrum with the two cursors; 
the program calculates the absorption integral, using the trapezoidal 
rule. 

4. Finally, control is returned to the main window and the user is 
prompted to exit the analysis loop or select another portion of the 
spectrum. 

With this software, analysis of absorption spectra is fast and accurate. In particular, with this 
approach one does not rely on the triangular approximation [i.e., approximating the profile as a 
triangle (Lucht, 1 978; Salmon, 1 986a)] for integration of absorption profiles. For this approximation 



79 



to be valid, (1) the convolution of the transmission functions of the entrance and exit slits should 
approximate a triangular function, (2) the width of this function should be much greater than the 
transition linewidth, and (3) the linewidth should have only a small fraction of its total absorption in 
the wings of the profile. Consequently, while the triangular approximation can be accurate for a 
predominantly Doppler-broadened profile, its accuracy will decrease with increased collisional 
broadening. 

After having obtained the integrated absorption, the number densities were calculated 
employing a FORTRAN routine, which solved the absorption equation (see Appendix B) using the 
curve-of-growth method (Lucht, et a!., 1978) and fit the data to a Boltzmann curve with a nonlinear 
least squares algorithm (Salmon, 1986a). The routine also gives the 95% confidence interval for 
the two parameters, temperature and number density; typical uncertainties for the temperature and 
number density were 30 to 50 K and 5 to 10%, respectively. 



80 



CHAPTER 5 

LASER-INDUCED FLUORESCENCE MEASUREMENTS OF OH 

IN LAMINAR C2H6/O2/N2 FLAMES AT HIGH PRESSURE 

5.1 Introduction 

Measurements of flame species by optical methods, such as laser-induced fluorescence 
(LIF), have proved valuable in elucidating chemical and physical processes occurring in combustion 
environments (Eckbreth. 1 988). Until recently (Edwards at a!., 1 987; Felton et al., 1 988), most work 
using LIF has been done in low-pressure (<1 atm) flames, though most combustors of practical 
importance operate at high pressure. Since the width of the flame front decreases with increasing 
pressure, physical probes are even more likely to perturb the flame front; hence, utilization of optical 
methods may be a necessity for many high-pressure studies. Such measurements could prove 
useful for the study of a broad range of topics including (1) turbulent flames, (2) engine knock, (3) 
pollutant formation (e.g., soot and NO production), and (4) flame extinction and stability. While 
high-pressure turbulent combustion environments allow analysis of the complex interaction 
between chemistry and the flow field, high-pressure laminar environments should also have an 
important role: allowing the study of pressure-dependent flame chemistry. Thus, we have examined 
laminar flame structure at high pressure using relative LIF measurements of the OH molecule. We 
describe fluorescence profiles at 4 pressures~3.2, 6.3, 9.5, and 12.6 atm~in flat premixed 
C2H6/O2/N2 flames, and we discuss problems associated with high-pressure LIF measurements. 

5.2 Experimental Apparatus 

Our combustion facility, which is designed for study of high-pressure flames by spectroscopic 
methods (Chapter 4), includes the following: (1) a pressure vessel constructed from standard 
stainless steel piping components (Fig. 5.1); (2) an electronic gas delivery system, which is 
interfaced to a microcomputer; (3) a sintered bronze water-cooled burner (2.5 cm in diameter, 
constructed by McKenna Products. Inc, Pittsburg, CA), which we used without the guard ring to 



81 



allcfw better optical access to the flame; and (4) an internal x-y burner translation system employing 
stepper motors. The range of movement of the vertical and horizontal translation mechanisms is 
about 1 1 and 2.8 cm, respectively, while the associated single-step resolution is about 2 and 1 /^m, 
respectively. Because the motors are steppedthrough a microcomputer, we can accurately position 
the burner. 

The optical layout for the LIF experiment is shown in Fig. 5.2. The Quanta-Ray PDL-2 dye 
laser is pumped by the frequency-doubled output of a Quanta-Ray DCR-3G Nd:YAG laser; to 
produce UV radiation, the output of the dye laser is sent to the Quanta-Ray Wavelength Extender 
(WEX-1), where the laser light is frequency doubled. The dye laser is normally tuned to the Qi(8) 
transition (A = 309.3 nm) of the A2E+-X2n(0,0) band (Dieke and Crosswhite, 1962); this line was 
chosen for excitation because the Boltzmann fraction of the lower rotational level varies by only 
10% over a temperature range of 1000-2600 K (Lucht et al., 1984). For this experiment, the pulse 
width and repetition rate of the dye laser were ~8 ns and 10 Hz, respectively. 

A small portion of the UV beam is first picked off with a quartz beam splitter and sent to a 
UV-sensttive photodiode which produces the signal used for triggering the detection electronics. 
The beam Is then raised to the appropriate height with a beam steering assembly; the resulting 
polarization of the radiation is vertical. The beam Is attenuated if necessary with Pyrex plates and 
then focused over the burner with a 250 mm focal-length fused silica lens giving a focused spot 
size of -100 /im. For this experiment, the laser energy after attenuation was ~1 mJ/pulse. With 
the resulting laser power and the small spot size, we observed partial saturation of the transition, 
particularly when using a small temporal sampling gate (e.g., 200 ps). Using saturation 
spectroscopy was not our intention for this experiment, however, and we report further on the 
saturation behavior of OH at high pressure in Chapters 6 and 7. After leaving the exit port, the 
beam is collimated, and another portion is picked off and focused on a pinhole aperture in front of 
a second UV-sensitive photodiode. This photodiode allows us (1) to assess laser power fluctuations 
and beam steering and (2) to level and position the burner relative to the laser beam. Though 
vertical fluorescence profiles taken consecutively (underthe same conditions) show little or no shift, 
the zero position typically varied 50 to 1 00 fim from day to day. 

The OH fluorescence is collected with a 250 mm focal-length collimating fused silica lens 
through a port adjacent to the beam entrance and exit ports; the optical access ports have a limiting 
f-number of about f/9. The laser axis of the fluorescence sampling volume is then rotated from 
horizontal to vertical with two mirrors, and the fluorescence is focused on the entrance slit of a Spex 



82 




Figure 5.1 Cutaway view of pressure vessel and associated components. 



83 



DCR-3G 



TTIT 



PDL-2 



WEX-1 



Monochromator 



L 




Gated 
Integrators 



Computer 



Figure 5.2 Schematic of LIF experiment. Components: BD - beam dump; BS - beam splitter; 
BSA - beam steering assembly; L - lens; MA - image rotating mirror assembly; PD - 
photodiode; PMT - photomultiplier tube; PP - Pyrex plate(s); PV - pressure vessel. 



84 



3/4 meter monochromator. The fluorescence signal is then detected with an RCA 1P28B 
photomuttiplier, and the resulting electronic signal along with the photodiode signal are processed 
with two Stanford Research Systems SR250 gated integrators using sampling gates of 6 and 1 ns 
for the photomultiplier and photodiode signals, respectively (the wider gate for the photodiode 
reflecting its slower response). The data is then digitized and stored on an IBf^ PC using the Stanford 
Research Systems SR245 computer interface and the SR265 software package, which we modified 
to allow programmed movement of the stepper motors. 

5.3 Results and Discussion 

A significant feature of the high-pressure flames we observed is flame jitter--low frequency 
(-10 Hz) flame oscillations--the amplitude of which increases with pressure for a constant mass 
flow rate of the combustible mixture. We also noticed a reduction in flame noise when using a guard 
flow (Matsumoto et a!., 1982); however, this surrounding flow did not eliminate the flame jitter 
observed at high pressures. (Measurements of the jitter intensity and frequency at 6.3 atm were 
made using a small-diameter beam produced from a xenon arc lamp. The beam was passed 
through the flame, and its cross section was rotated by 90° so that vertical disturbances such as 
flame jitter deflected the beam along the horizontal axis. The beam was subsequently focused on 
the entrance slit of a monochromator, and the intensity was sampled at 1 kHz. The measurements 
showed that the amplitude increases, while the frequency of the oscillations decreases, with 
decreasing mass flow rate of the combustible mixture. 

The flame jitter was reduced by placing a screen about 8 mm above the burner surface. We 
note, however, that the problem of flame jitter is exacerbated by the increase in the index of refraction 
with pressure; as a result, the laser beam is more likely to be steered away from the fluorescence 
collection window (as defined by the monochromator entrance slit) at high pressures by fluctuations 
in the gas density. A similar problem is encountered with spatial gradients in the refractive index: 
the beam can be displaced relative to the fluorescence collection window as it moves through the 
flame. This effect was indeed observed near the flame front (where the temperature gradient is 
large) of these high-pressure flames. The problem is perhaps ameliorated by the one-dimensional 
geometry of the flame, at least insofar as the laser beam and the entrance slit image are displaced 
by the same amount. Even when the beam and slit image do not suffer relative displacement, a 
refractive index gradient can still lead to a spatially distorted LIF profile. 



85 



Rather than collecting fluorescence from the entire (v'=0, v"=0) band we used a 
monochromator to isolate appropriate transitions. Although this approach gives a lower 
fluorescence signal, it has two advantages: (1) self-absorption can be reduced through selection 
of the detected line; and (2) detection of Rayleigh scattering or scattering from the burner surface 
can be eliminated. Though this method proved satisfactory, perhaps a better excitation/detection 
scheme for our conditions would include (1,0) excitation and (1,1) wide-band detection (Laurendeau 
and Goldsmith, 1 989). In addition to satisfying the criteria of minimal self -absorption and detected 
scattering, this method does not require a monochromator, thus yielding a higher fluorescence 
collection efficiency. 

We now make the following obsen/ations regarding the effect of collisions on our relative 
fluorescence signals. When rotational equilibrium-that is, steady state of the relative populations 
of the rotational levels-in the A2i;+(v=0) state of OH is established, the ratio of population in the 
directly-excited rotational level to that in the neighboring rotational levels is insensitive to gas 
composition and temperature (Smith and Crosley, 1981 ; Zizak et al., 1986). Thus, we expect that 
the fluorescence collected from the directly-excited rotational level will be as insensitive to the 
collisional environment as fluorescence from the entire (0,0) band. In addition, we expect some 
change in the quenching rate at constant pressure through the reaction zone and from flame to 
flame insofar as the concentration of quenching species and temperature change. However, as 
shown in two previous experiments, over the range of mixture ratios and temperatures expected, 
this variation in electronic quenching may not be large. First, Stepowski and Cottereau (1981), 
using three low-pressure C3He/02 flat flames (equivalence ratios 0.55, 1 .0, and 1 .25), showed that 
for a given flame, the net electronic quenching of OH is approximately constant from the burnt-gas 
zone to below the luminous region. Also, at a constant height above the burner, the variation in 
quenching rate among the three flames was within about 20% of the maximum value (which was 
found in the stoichiometric flame). Second, Schwarzwald et al. (1988) measured electronic 
quenching rates of OH in atmospheric-pressure CH^air flat flames (equivalence ratios from 0.77 
to 1.43). Not surprisingly, the electronic quenching was approximately constant in the burnt-gas 
region (y = 0.5 - 20 mm) of each flame; in addition, at a constant height (y = 20 mm), there was no 
discernable difference in quenching over the range of equivalence ratios studied. 



• # 



86 



CO 

m 

CD 

o 

CD 
O 
Ul 
CD 

o 



CD 

> 
• I— t 

cd 

(—1 

CD 



1.0 - 



0.8 - 



0.6 - 



0.4 - 



0.2 - 



0.0 



- 


1 


1 1 






• 


• 
• 


• 
• 

■ ■ 


•••• .-■■■' 

■ ■ 
■ ■■■ 


■ 


■ " 


■ ■ 


■ ■ 






• 








• 


-A 




■ 


- B 


• 


..,,1 


1 -1 — 







5 10 15 20 25 

Distance From Edge (mm) 



Figure 5 3 Horizontal fluorescence profiles 1.5 mm above the burner at (A) 12.6 and (B) 3.2 atm 
obtained by detecting the Oi2(1 0) transition. The bracl<eted region denotes the range 
of horizontal locations for the vertical profiles in Figs. 5.4-5.9. 



87 



CO 

CD 

o 

o 
in 

U 
O 

13 



CD 
> 

• f-H 

cd 

f-H 

CD 





' 1 






1" 


T 1 


' 1 

• - A 


1.0 


■ • 


• 


• 


m 




■ - B 




■ ■ 






• 


• 

• 


A - c 
▼ - D 


0.8 










• 

• 


• 
• 


0.6 




■ 








• _ 




■ ^\ 


▲ 


■ 


■ 




- 




A T 




▲ 


■ 






0.4 


• ▼ 
▼ ▼ 








■ 


- 




■ 


T 


▼ 


T _ 


^ A A 


'\'" 


0.2 
n n 


▼ 

1 






▼ 
1 


▼ ▼ 

^ ▼ ▼ 

1 


1 



0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 

Distance From Burner (mm) 

Figure 5.4 Vertical fluorescence profiles at 3.2 atm. Flow rates of C2H6/O2/N2 (sipm): (A) 
0.16/0.75/2.2 (1 atm); (B) 0.29/1.17/3.87; (C) 0.23/0.95/3.42; (D) 0.20/0.87/3.11. 



88 



^ 1.0 


— 1 1 — 








-I 1 1 ' 1 


c 










■ - B 


ClO 


L B^ia 








. 


•1— 1 

C/3 


- "a 








D - E 


CD 0.8 


. ■ ■□ 








- 


o 


^ 










a 


■D 








■ 


w 0.6 


■y 


D 






- 


CD 
O 

i 0-4 


- 


■ 


■ 


E 


D 

■■"ii. 


> 

.1—1 


• 











* °-2 


- 








^ 














'o) 










■ 


n n 


1 








1 , 1.. ,._. L_ 



0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 

Distance From Burner (mm) 

Figure 5.5 Vertical fluorescence profiles at 3.2 aim. Flow rates of CgHg/Oa/Na (sipm): (B) and 
(E) 0.29/1.17/3.87. 



89 



For each of the following vertical fluorescence profiles, the monochromator was tuned to 
detect the P^ (9) transition (A = 312.5 nm). The entrance and exit sl'rt widths were 30 /im, while the 
entrance sirt height was 2 mm; the resulting spatial resolution is about 42 ^m by 2.9 mm, and the 
theoretical spectral resolution is 0.03 nm. For all measurements shown below, each data point is 
the average of the fluorescence signal from 600 laser shots. Because self-absorption of the Pi (9) 
fluorescence was evident in atmospheric-pressure flames, the burner was positioned horizontally 
such that the laser probe was at the near edge of the flame (about 3-5 mm from the edge of the 
burner). With this approach, we can reduce the effect of self-absorption on the relative profiles, 
and we can probe closer to the burner without blocking portions of the fluorescence signal. 
Normally, we did not probe closer than -0.35 mm above the burner surface; when measurements 
closer to the surface were desired, we blocked the lower half of the fluorescence cross section to 
eliminate vignetting of the fluorescence profile. Using this method, we probed to within -0.2 mm 
above the burner. In addition, the flames examined were lean, ranging in equivalence ratio from 
about 0.54 to 0.94. 

Though monitoring the Pi (9) line was satisfactory for the vertical fluorescence profiles, for 
horizontal profiles the monochromator was tuned to the Oi2(10) line {X - 316.5 nm); this line has 
a much lower absorption cross section (Dimpfl and Kinsey, 1 979), and thus fluorescence from this 
line is not significantly affected by self-absorption. Figure 5.3 shows typical horizontal fluorescence 
profiles (which have been scaled for convenience) in the burnt-gas region (y = 1 .5 mm above the 
burner) for flames at 3.2 and 1 2.6 atm. At this height in these flames, the OH concentration gradient 
is small; consequently, the monochromator slits were opened to 140 ^m (for the measurement at 
3.2 atm) and 200 ^m (at 1 2.6 atm) to collect more photons per laser shot. Though the fluorescence 
was primarily from the Oi2(10) line, the P2(14) and the Pi (15) lines-which are about equidistant 
from the Oi2(10) line-give a small contribution to the total signal. At both pressures, the profiles 
show a rise in the fluorescence signal at about 1 cm from the burner edge; this nonuntformity, which 
was always observed in the horizontal profiles, probably results from a defect in the burner design 
or construction. In addition, at 12.6 atm, the photodiode signal decreased near the far edge of the 
flame, indicating that the beam was suffering some displacement; the sharp drop in fluorescence 
at this edge suggests that beam steering was also distorting the relative concentration profile. 



90 



Vertical profiles of the relative OH concentration at 3.2 atm are shown in Figs. 5.4 and 5.5; 
profiles B through D were taken consecutively and are compared to profile A from an 
atmospheric-pressure flame. At this pressure over a range of flow rates, we were able to probe 
within the flame reaction zone, where much of the interesting chemistry takes place; we were aided 
in this effort by our ability to probe very close to the burner surface. For adequate resolution near 
the flame front of the high-pressure flames, the burner was translated -50 /xm after each data point; 
away from the flame front the data points are separated by -100 /im. Comparison between the 
atmospheric profile and those at 3.2 atm shows, as expected, a significant reduction in the flame 
thickness (Williams, 1 985). Because the flow rates of fuel and oxidizer are below the values at which 
the minimum stand-off distance is obtained, a decrease In their flow rate increases the stand-off 
distance (Ferguson and Keck, 1979; Chao and Law, 1988); decreasing the Ng diluent flow rate, 
however, has the opposite effect. With the changes in flow rates we find a decrease in the 
fluorescence signal. At least part of this reduction is probably due to the lower flame temperature 
[which we would expect from a reduction in the CgHe and O2 flow rates (Ferguson and Keck, 1 979)] 
and the concomitant decrease in equilibrium and superequilibrium OH; note, however, that a 
decrease in temperature could also lead to an increase in electronic quenching of the excited OH 
(Garland et al., 1 986; Jeffries, et al., 1 988) and hence a decreased fluorescence yield. An additional 
effect of reducing the flow rate of the mixture is that the diameter of the flame decreases slightly: 
consequently, when sampling near the edge of the burner, the flame position can change with 
respect to the probe volume. This may have happened with profile D, where the fluorescence signal 
is lower than expected in comparison to profiles B and C. 

After the completion of each profile, the burner was translated back to the initial position (y 
= 0.2 mm), with the backlash from the translation system first being removed, and the next set of 
measurements was begun. Figure 5.5 demonstrates the repeatability of the measurements; curves 
B and E, which have the same flow rate, were taken consecutively. The small decrease in signal 
from flame E to B probably results from drift of the laser wavelength from the peak absorption 

wavelength. 

Vertical OH fluorescence profiles taken consecutively in flames at 6.3 atm are shown in Figs. 
5.6 and 5.7. With large reductions in the C2H6 and O2 flow rates (and a smaller reduction in the N2 
flow rate) the flame front moves away from the burner; thus for profiles C and D the reaction zone 
is observable. Profiles A, B. and C were taken consecutively, while profile D (Fig. 5.7) was recorded 
two days later under the same conditions as C to assess its repeatability. For these measurements. 



91 



1.0 - 



a 
•I— I 

in 

CD 

o 

d 

CD 
O 

m 

CD 

o 
t 0.4 h 



0.8 - 



0.6 - 



> 
cd 

(D 



0.2 - 



0.0 




0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 

Distance From Burner (mm) 

Figure 5.6 Vertical fluorescence profiles at 6.3 atm. Flow rates of C2H6/O2/N2 (sipm): (A) 
0.38/1.46/6.38; (B) 0.29/1.17/5.63; (C) 0.20/0.86/4.92. 



92 



•i-H 

Q) 
O 

o 

CO 

o 

US 



CD 

> 

• I— I 

(d 

I— < 

CD 



1.0 


1 1 1 


1 ' 


1 1 , - 

A - c 




AA 




A - D 




A 






0.8 


A 
A 




- 




A 




. 




ft '^ 






0.6 


A 




- 




^ A 








aa 








A 






0.4 


A 

A 


A 


" 




• 


A 
^A 


■ 


0.2 
n n 


1 


1 


1 . 1 



0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 

Distance From Burner (mm) 

Figure 5.7 Vertical fluorescence profiles at 6.3 atm. Flow rates of C2H6/O2/N2 (sipm): (C) and 
(D) 0.20/0.86/4.92. 



93 



1.0 - 



cd 

a 

• 1—1 

m 
o 

o 

<D 
Jh 
O 

g 0.4 h 



0.8 - 



0.6 - A 



> 
.p— I 

Cd 

r-H 



0.2 - 



0.0 




0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 

Distance From Burner (mm) 

Figure 5.8 Vertical fluorescence profiles at 9.5 atm. Flow rates of CjHe/Os/Na (sipm): (A) 
0.54/3.12/10.3; (B) 0.40/2.58/8.06; (C) 0.40/2.58/8.85. 



94 



m 
o 

a 

o 
m 

CD 

o 

I— I 

CD 

> 

• I— ( 



1.0 - 



0.8 - 



0.6 



0.4 - 



0.2 - 



0.0 




0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 

Distance From Burner (mm) 



Figure 5.9 Vertical Fluorescence profiles at 12.6 atm. Flow rates of C2H6/O2/N2 (sipm): (A) 
0.65/2.43/12.2; (B) 0.43/2.20/7.94. 



95 



the collection cross section was not blocked; thus the initial height above the burner for profiles A, 
B, and C is 0.4 mm. For profile D in Fig. 5.7 the initial height is 0.35 mm, and the first 17 points are 
separated by only —25 ^ivn. Near the flame front, the shot-to-shot noise of the fluorescence signal 
for profiles C and D was larger than would be expected from Poisson statistics; this undoubtedly 
is due in part to the large gradients of temperature and concentration in this region. As noted above, 
we did observe some displacement of the beam relative to the sampling window. We have made 
no attempt in these measurements, however, to quantify or remedy this effect. 

Profiles from flames at 9.5 atm, which were taken on the same day (with profiles B and C 
taken consecutively), are shown in Fig. 5.8. Starting with flame B we attempted to probe the reaction 
zone by slightly increasing the diluent flow rate; the result is shown as profile C. At these conditions, 
further increase in the diluent flow rate resulted in a wrinkled flame, indicating that the flame was 
near its blow-off limrt. As with measurements at 3.2 atm, the collection cross section was blocked 
and an initial height of 0.2 mm was used; furthermore, the initial 9 data points are separated by ~25 
^m. As expected, flames B and C, differing only slightly in the diluent flow rate, have similar levels 
of OH in the burnt-gas region. (The flame temperature will decrease with increasing diluent flow, 
but only weakly since the flame will stabilize further from the burner where its conductive heat loss 
is less.) As was observed in profiles C and D at 6.3 atm, the noise in the fluorescence signal (for 
all 3 profiles) at 9.5 atm was significant below about 0.5 mm, where the [OH] gradient is very large. 
Because of the higher net reaction rate at greater pressure, equilibration also occurs at smaller 
distances from the burner surface (e.g., < 1 .5 mm for OH). 

In Fig. 5.9, we show the OH measurements for 2 flames at 12.6 atm; the profiles, which were 
taken on separate days, have been scaled for convenience. With B the fluorescence cross section 
was blocked, while for A it was not. As expected, the larger flow rate acts to spread out the 
recombination zone. These profiles also point to a limitation of this particular burner; the flame 
stand-off distance may be on the order of the grain size of the sintered metal (~1 00 /im). Finally, 
the flames became Increasingly unstable with increasing pressure; because we sought quiescent 
conditions in which to make LIF measurements, this is the highest pressure at which we chose to 
take data. Nevertheless, higher pressure flames were easily obtained with the McKenna burner. 

5.4 Summary 

We have presented measurements of relative OH concentration using the LIF method in flat 
laminar, lean premlxed C2H6/O2/N2 flames at 3,2, 6.3, 9.5. and 12.6 atm. At these pressures, we 



96 



have measured vertical fluorescence profiles over a range of flow rates of the combustible mixture 
and have demonstrated that in some cases the reaction zone can be probed. In comparison to 
atmospheric-pressure flames, we observed that at high pressure the reaction zone was small and 
accordingly vertical gradients of temperature and concentration could be very large (in the reaction 
zone, as well as in the recombination zone). One result of the large gradients was an increase in 
the noise of the fluorescence signal even from small flame disturbances. An impediment to making 
measurements in these experiments was beam steering (of the laser beam relative to the 
fluorescence collection window), which arose from flame oscillations and increased with pressure. 
Because we were interested in making measurements under steady, laminar conditions, we chose 
not to make measurements in flames above 12.6 atm. 



97 



CHAPTER 6 

SATURATED FLUORESCENCE MEASUREMENTS OF THE HYDROXYL 

RADICAL IN LAMINAR HIGH-PRESSURE CzHg/Oz/Nz FLAMES 

6.1 Introduction 

Measurements of flame species by optical methods, such as laser-induced fluorescence 
(LIF), have proved valuable in elucidating chemical and physical processes occurring in combustion 
environments (Eckbreth, 1988). Fluorescence measurements are relevant to the study of a broad 
range of practical combustion topics including turbulent flames, engine knock, pollutant formation, 
and flame stability. Linear fluorescence methods are particularly useful for turbulent flames, where 
2-D images of relative species concentrations can yield insight into the complex interaction between 
chemistry and the flow field. In comparison, laser-saturated fluorescence (LSF), which is currently 
limited to point-wise or perhaps 1 -D measurements, is attractive because it can provide reliable 
absolute species concentrations. Moreover, unlike linear fluorescence, LSF measurements are 
insensitive to the rate coefficients for both laser excitation and coliisional de-excitation. As a 
consequence, in situ calibration of the fluorescence signal is not necessary: a calibration factor 
determined in one flame (through techniques such as Rayleigh scattering or absorption) can more 
easily be applied to other flames where calibration is more difficult or perhaps impossible [e.g., 
turbulent or sooting flames (Luchtetal., 1984, 1985; Drake etal., 1984, 1985)]. 

Since LSF was first proposed as a combustion diagnostic (Piepmeier, 1972a; Daily, 1977), it 
has been used to detect the diatomic molecules C2 (Baronavski and McDonald, 1977; Mailander, 
1 978), MgO (Pasternack et al., 1 978), ON (Bonczyk and Shirley, 1 979; Verdieck and Bonczyk, 1 981 ), 
OH (Mailander, 1977; Bonczyk and Shirley, 1979; Verdieck and Bonczyk, 1981 ; Kohse-Hoinghaus 
etal., 1983, 1984; Takubo eta!., 1983), OH (Luchtetal., 1978, 1983. 1984, 1985; Kohse-Hoinghaus, 
1 983, 1 984, 1 986; Drake et al., 1 984, 1 985; Salmon and Laurendeau, 1 985a, 1 985b) and NH (Salmon 
et al., 1984) in both subatmospheric and atmospheric flames. Initial experiments (Pasternack et 
al., 1 978; Bonczyk and Shirley, 1 978; Verdieck and Bonczyk, 1 981) showed significant disagreement 



98 



between the fluorescence and independent absorption measurements. Later, however, Lucht et 
al. (1 983) and Salmon and Laurendeau (1 985a) compared LSF measurements of OH concentration 
(calibrated using Rayleigh scattering) with independent absorption measurements in low-pressure 
(72 torr) laminar Ha/Oa/Ar flames and demonstrated that saturation can be used to obtain accurate 
number densities (±15-25%) under these conditions. 

In this chapter, we discuss the efficacy of the LSF method for measurement of OH 
concentration in high-pressure (P > 1 atm) flames. We first describe our efforts to achieve saturation 
of an OH transition in a series of C2H6/O2/N2 flames. We then test the adequacy of the balanced 
cross-rate model at high pressure. This model was used successfully by Lucht et al. (1 983) and 
Salmon and Laurendeau (1985a) at low-pressure to relate the population of the laser-coupled 
rovibronic level in the excited state to the unperturbed population of the laser-coupled rovibronic 
level in the ground state. In essence, the model states that 

N„ + A/,-N? . (6.1) 

where N^ and N; are the instantaneous populations of the upper and lower laser-coupled rovibronic 
levels, respectively, and N ? is the unperturbed population of level /. To evaluate the adequacy of 
Eq. (6.1), we compare absorption and calibrated LSF measurements up to a pressure of ~6 atm. 
We also present absolute OH concentration profiles for lean flames at about 1, 3, 6, 9, and 12 atm; 
to our knowledge, these are the first absolute concentration measurements of OH in high-pressure 
flames made with LIF. 

6.2 Theory 

During laser excitation the population of the directly-excited rovibronic level N^ peaks and 
steady-state conditions apply. Thus, from the rate equation describing the upper laser-coupled 
level (Chapter 3), 

Hi ! . (6.2) 

where g/ and Qu are the respective degeneracies of levels / and u, and W/^ is the rate coefficient for 
absorption. Qe«, the effective rate coefficient for collisional depopulation of the directly-excited 
level, includes contributions from rotational and vibrational energy transfer, electronic quenching 
and spontaneous emission. In general, the population of N^ can be related to N ?by 

A/« + N, = (l -Y)^? (6-3) 



99 



where 1 - 7 is the fraction of the original population remaining in the laser-coupled levels, and N ° 

is related to the species number density through the Boltzmann fraction. Combining Eqs. (6.2) and 
(6.3) gives 

/V„ = -|^A'?(1-Y)a„, , (6.4) 

where Q«t. the degree of saturation, is given by 



1 + 



(6.5) 



W 

and W 3 W/u/Qeff is the saturation parameter. 

The observed fluorescence signal is given by the integral of the local excited-state population 

over the imaged volume; i.e., 

hcv.A. r 

S,= ' ' (nn) N,(x,y,z)dV , (6.6) 

4 It Jv 

where uf (cm-i) is the frequency of the observed transition, Af (s-i) is the Einstein coefficient for 
spontaneous emission, tj (V/W) is the net efficiency of the detection system, and fl (sr) is the solid 
angle defined by the collection optics. In this experiment, the image of the monochromator entrance 
slit was rotated by 90° so that the slit width was perpendicular to the direction of travel of the beam 
(Fig. 6.1). If the dimensions of the slit imaged on the laser beam, H and W, are small compared to 
variations in the local excited-state number density, then jN^dV = HW/N^dx. When N ?does not 
vary with the depth of the beam, we can solve for the unperturbed number density via Eq. (6.4) to 
obtain 

^o.yi^yjL 1 , (6.7) 

By rearranging this equation we obtain 

<F,>' p: • 7 . (6.8) 

j^a„,dx ^'' /icv,/l/(//l/Tifi)j^a.„,dA- 

which represents the spatially-averaged fraction of population remaining in the laser-coupled levels 
(Chapter 3). Note that insofar as W/u is independent of x (e.g., along the beam center line), (Fc) 
reduces to 1 - 7. 



100 




Laser Beam 



Fluorescence 



Figure 6.1 Geometry of the fluorescence collection volume. 

The parameter 1 - 7 is approximately unity and the balanced cross-rate model is valid when 
the population transfer rates into (Rjn) and out of (Rout) the laser-coupled levels are balanced, i.e., 



Jo 



(6.9) 



where t = and t = t represent the start of laser excitation and the observation time, respectively. 
On the other hand, for the OH molecule with A2E+^X2n(0,0) excitation, a likely scenario for 
depletion of the laser-coupled levels includes (1) electronic quenching from 2e+{v'=0) to the 
2n(v">0) levels followed by (2) slow vibrational transfer to v" = (Campbell, 1984a; Rensberger 
et al., 1989; Wysong et al., 1989). Following the approach used in Chapter 3. the rate coefficient 
for quenching from rovibronic level i to the vibrational bath level (a composite of the v" > levels) 
is modelled as a fraction fb of the total population leaving rovibronic level i, 

<?.('. b)=/,Q. . (6.10) 



101 



where we use the notation Qe instead of Qe(i), since we assume that the rate coefficient for electronic 
quenching is independent of rotational level i (Kohse-Hoinghaus et al., 1988). Similarly, the rate 
coefficient for vibrational transfer from v" > to v" = is expressed as a fraction fy of Qe, 

Q.ib)-f,Q. . (6.11) 

When the ratio fb/fy is large, the population of the vibrational bath level will be large at high pressures 
(i.e.. when a sufficient number of collisions have taken place), and thus It is likely that the 
laser-coupled levels will be depleted. Consequently, the balanced cross-rate model will not be 
strictly valid. However, at sufficiently high pressures, the local depletion 1 - 7 reaches an asymptotic 
value, which occurs because the collisionally-excited rotational and vibrational energy levels attain 
sufficient population to balance the population transfer rates into and out of the laser-coupled levels 
(see Chapter 3). Therefore a modified balanced cross-rate model, Eq. (6.3), could be useful for 
making concentration measurements if the spatially-averaged population fraction, (Fc), is 
reasonably insensitive to the collisional environment. In other words, by calibrating fluorescence 
measurements with a method which gives an absolute concentration (e.g., absorption), (Fc) is 
automatically accounted for in the calibration factor. Fluorescence measurements calibrated with 
a method such as Rayleigh scattering (Salmon and Laurendeau, 1 985a, 1 985b; Kohse-Hoinghaus, 
1983, 1984), however, will be in error by 1 - (Fg). 

6.3 Experimental Apparatus 

Our high-pressure combustion facility includes the following: (1) a pressure vessel 
constructed from standard stainless steel piping components (Fig. 6.2); (2) an electronic gas delivery 
system, which is interfaced to a microcomputer; (3) a sintered bronze water-cooled flat-flame burner 
(2.5 cm in diameter) surrounded by a guard ring; and (4) an internal x-y burner translation system 
employing stepper motors. The range of movement of the vertical and horizontal translation 
mechanisms is about 1 1 and 2.8 cm, respectively, while the associated single-step resolutions are 
about 2 and 1 /xm. The motors are stepped using a microcomputer, and thus we can accurately 
position the burner. Because flow instabilities in the burnt-gas region of the flame increased with 
increasing pressure, a screen was attached to the burner housing ~8 mm above the burner surface. 
This provided a significant improvement in flame stability. Further details of the combustion facility 
are given in Chapter 4. 



102 




Figure 6.2 Cutaway view of the pressure vessel and components. 



103 




TTTT 



PDL-2 



Monochromator 



WEX-1 



t-' 



"I 




Sampling 
Modules 



Computer 



Figure 6.3 Schematic for LSF experiments. Components: A - aperture; BD - beam dump; BS 
beam splitter; BSA - beam steering assembly; FB - fluorescence block; L - lens; MA 
image-rotating mirror assembly; PD - photodiode; PMT - photomultiplier tube; PP 
Pyrex plate{s); PV - pressure vessel. 



104 



The optical layout for the fluorescence measurements is shown In Fig 6.3. The second 
harmonic (at 532 nm) of a Quanta-Ray DCR-3G Nd:YAG laser is used to pump a PDL-2 dye laser, 
which includes transversely-pumped oscillator and preamplifier stages along with a 
longitudinally-pumped amplifier stage. To achieve high conversion efficiency of the 532 nm 
radiation, the dye laser employs a mixture of Exciton DCM and Sulforhodamine 640 dyes. Using 
this procedure, we obtained a laser energy of -95 mJ/pulse at 620 nm, with an input energy of 
-380 mJ/pulse at 532 nm. The output of the dye laser is frequency doubled in the Quanta-Ray 
Wavelength Extender (WEX-1). The visible and UV beams are dispersed with a Pellin-Broca prism, 
with a portion of the visible beam (not shown in Fig. 6.3) used to trigger the detection electronics. 
We obtained as much as 20 mJ/pulse of UV energy at -31 nm, though this value dropped to about 
1 5 mJ/pulse over the course of the experiment. The UV beam was raised to the appropriate height 
with a beam steering assembly; the resulting polarization of the radiation was vertical. The UV beam 
was also attenuated when necessary with Pyrex plates, and an aperture placed before the focussing 
lens was used to block scattered radiation. We used a 250-mm focal-length fused silica lens to 
focus the beam over the burner and a second 250-mm focal-length lens to collimate the beam after 
the exit port. At the exit port, the vessel window is fixed at a 10° angle so that light reflected from 
the window surfaces is directed away from the laser probe volume. Finally, a portion of the beam 
was directed to a silicon UV-sensitive PIN photodiode (Hamamatsu S1 7722-02), which monitored 
the shot-to-shot fluctuations of the UV beam energy. Though somewhat slow, this photodiode, 
because of its large sensitive area, was especially valuable when measuring the integrated beam 
intensity; for example, we employed this photodiode when positioning the burner relative to the 
laser beam to determine the burner zero position. 

Fluorescence was collimated with another 250-mm focal-length lens and was rotated by 90° 
with a mirror assembly; the fluorescence was then focused on the entrance slit of a 3/4 meter 
monochromator. For the saturated fluorescence measurements, the slit width and height were 30 
/im and 2 mm, respectively; this resulted in a spatial resolution of 42 /im by 2.9 mm. For 
measurements close to the burner surface, we blocked the lower half of the fluorescence beam 
prior to the image rotating mirror assembly; thus we could probe close to the burner without 
vignetting the fluorescence profile. The Spex 1800-11 monochromator employed a specially-wired 
RCA 1 P28B photomultiplier tube (Harris et al., 1 976) with a 1 000 V supply voltage for detection of 
the spectrally resolved fluorescence signals. 



105 



1.0 


■ • 

■J. 

•• 




0.8 






D 
CL 

^0.6 
a 

|0.4 


• * 

■Si 

.' '. 

V 




0.2 






n n 




U-. 




Figure 6.4 Average temporal intensity (30 scans) of tlie UV beam measured with the 
photomultiplier tube using Rayleigh scattering (top); average temporal intensity (10 
scans) of the UV beam measured with the avalanche photodiode (bottom). 



106 



The PMT and photodiode signals were recorded with equipment from Stanford Research 
Systems; for the saturated fluorescence experiments, the PMT signal was resolved with the 200 ps 
sampling gate of the SR255 fast sampler, which was set at the peak of the fluorescence pulse using 
an SR200 gate scanner. The voltage output from the SR255 was then digitized and stored with the 
SR245 computer interface module and the SR265 software package, which we modified to allow 
programmed movement of laboratory stepper motors. For the PIN photodiode, we used a 10 ns 
gate of the SR250 gated integrator and boxcar averager. 

The average temporal response of the PMT using Rayleigh scattering is compared in Fig. 6.4 
to the average intensity profile obtained with a silicon avalanche photodiode (Texas Instruments 
TIED56). which has a temporal response of -200 ps (Harris et al., 1980). These waveforms were 
recorded by repetitively scanning in time over the signal, using the 200 ps sampling gate of the fast 
sampler (SR255), and a scanning voltage supplied by the SR245 computer interface module. The 
average laser pulse has two temporal modes, each with -2.5 ns FWHM. The relative intensity 
profile recorded by the PMT compares well with that from the avalanche photodiode, though the 
slower PMT response does result in distortion of the waveform. 

The power at the peak of the first temporal lobe can be estimated by dividing the average 
energy per pulse by the integrated area under the normalized temporal profile (Fig. 6.4); from this 
procedure, using a pulse energy of 15 mJ, we calculate a peak power of -3.3 x 10^ W. The 
associated maximum UV irradiance (W/cm2) can be estimated assuming the spatial dependence 
of the focused beam is described by an axisymmetric Gaussian function with a FWHM of 1 10 /im 
(see Chapter 4). The approximate spot size of the UV beam at the burner was determined by 
scanning a knife edge through the focused beam; though the spatial irradiance profile could not 
described perfectly by an axisymmetric Gaussian function, this is a convenient approximation for 
extracting the center-line irradiance. The resulting peak in-adiance is -2.6 x 1010 w/cm2. By using 
this small spot size, we can increase the center-line saturation parameter; however, we also 
decrease the total number of excited molecules (integrated throughout the probe volume) and 
therefore the fluorescence signal. 



107 



6.4 ResuKs and Discussion 

6.4.1 Saturation IMeasurements 

For the fluorescence experiments, we used the Qi(8)/Pi(9) excitation/detection line pair. 
These lines are suitable since they are isolated from neighboring lines; in addition, the population 
of the N" = 8 level varies by only -10% over 1 1 00 to 2600 K (Lucht et al., 1 984). To attenuate the 
laser intensity, we used Pyrex plates which had been calibrated using Rayleigh scattering. To 
account for possible variations in transmission with position, we keyed the plates, and thus we 
could place them in the same orientation each time. Because the plates steer the laser beam to 
different locations in the flame, the fluorescence focusing lens, Lf, was positioned to maximize the 
signal with each change of attenuation; in addition, a dial gage was used to measure the relative 
displacement of this lens, which equals (when multiplied by the system magnification) the 
displacement of the beam in the flame. Thus, in obtaining vertical profiles of OH concentration, we 
could correct the fluorescence signal, if necessary, for the change caused by beam steering. The 
five flames used in this study are described in Table 6.1 . 

Table 6.1 Description of C2H6/O2/N2 flames used in experiments. 



Flame 


Pressure 
(atm) 


Equivalence 
Ratio 


Dilution 
Ratio 


Total Flow 
Rate (sipm) 


A 


0.98 


0.77 


3.0 


3.15 


B 


3.1 


0.76 


3.1 


4.61 


C 


6.1 


0.91 


3.1 


6.45 


D 


9.2 


0.92 


3.1 


8.21 


E 


12.3 


0.92 


3.1 


8.21 



The saturation cun/e obtained in the atmospheric-pressure flame is shown in Fig. 6.5. When 
plotted on a log-log scale, we obsen/e that partial saturation Is achieved over a large range of laser 
powers. In addition, the slope is approximately constant (within the accuracy of the measurements) 
on a log-log plot, even with the laser power attenuated by two orders of magnitude. Hence, over 
a wide range of laser attenuation, the sensitivity to laser fluctuations is 0.18 (versus 1 for linear 
fluorescence). This is the same sensitivity Salmon and Laurendeau (1985b) report for saturation 
of OH in a low-pressure (242 torr) Hg/Oa/Ar flame. 



108 



c 

D) 

C/) 

CD 
O 

c 

0) 

o 

CO 

o 

3 



> 

q: 





0.01 0.1 1 

Relative Laser Power 



Figure 6.5 Saturation curve for atmospheric C2H6/O2/N2 flame. The solid line shows the 
saturation behavior for a simple two-level model using the spatial irradiance function 
described by Eq. (6.12). 



109 



Using a simple two-level model (7 = 0), the predicted relative saturation curve from Eq. (6.7) 
becomes 



I a sat 

/ J It 



dx 

, (6.1?) 



where Sf,m refers to the fluorescence signal at maximum laser power and Qgat is given by Eq. (6.5). 
As shown in Fig. 6.5, good agreement between the theoretical and experimental saturation curves 
results when using the spatial excitation function 

where W ?„ is the absorption rate coefficient at the beam center line, x is the displacement from the 

center line, and w is the beam halfwidth. We should note that with a large center-line saturation 
parameter, the slope of the saturation curve is especially sensitive to the wings of the spatial 
irradiance profile and not to the spatial irradiance distribution at the central core of the profile, even 
though this core contains most of the laser energy. 

To obtain a realistic center-line saturation parameter in Eq. (6.5), we used the peak center-line 
irradiance I [= 2.6 x IO10 w/cm2. In addition, we employed a dynamic model (see Chapter 3) with 
suitable rate coefficients forelectronic quenching and rotational energy transferto obtain Qetf (where 
Qeff is essentially independent of fy and fb). For the burnt -gas region of an atmospheric C2H6/O2/N2 
flame, the rate coefficient for electronic quenching, Qe, at -1750 K (as derived from 
radiation-corrected thermocouple measurements) was calculated using equilibrium concentrations 
of the collision partners and the collision cross sections suggested by Garland and Crosley (1 986). 
With this procedure, we calculate a relaxation time for electronic quenching of —2.2 ns. This 
compares favorably with the value of -2 ns measured by Schwarzwald et al. (1 988) in atmospheric 
CH4/air flames. 

To estimate the rate coefficients Qr(i,j) for rotational energy transfer, we rely on the observation 
of Zizak etal. (1 986), that when rotational equilibrium-steady state among the relative rotational-level 
populations during the laser pulse-is achieved, the ratio HJH^ [where N^ is the population of the 
collisionally-excited neighboring rotational levels in the 2e+(v=0) state] is sensitive to the 
directly-excited rotational level Ne but apparently insensitive to flame composition and temperature 



for larger values of Ne- Since the ratio NJNc is determined by the ratio of rate coefficients for (1) 
Q,{u), the total rotational energy transfer from level u and (2) Qe, the thermally-averaged electronic 
quenching, we can use the ratio Hu/^c to estimate QM- For Ne = 8 in the burnt-gas region of a 
CH4/air flame, Zizak et al. (1986) found N„/Nc =: 0.2; modelling the excitation dynamics in a flame, 
while using the Qr(i,j)/Qr(u)--the relative distribution of the rate coefficients-deduced by Lucht et al. 
(1986) for an H2/O2/N2 flame (see Chapter 3), we find that a value of Q,{u)/Qe = 8.4 gives N^/Nc ^ 
0.2. The resulting effective quenching rate coefficient [Eq. (3.16)] at atmospheric pressure is Qeff 
= 2.9 X 109 s-1 at the laser center line. 

Table 6.2 Modelling parameters describing Qi (8) laser 
excitation and collisional quenching of OH in 
an atmospheric flame. » 



E 


1 5 mJ/pulse 


Pl 


3.3x 106W 


IE 


2.6x1010 w/cm2 


VQ 


32328 cm-1 


Al^L 


0.5 cm-1 


A/u 


6.399 X 105 s-1 


w?„ 


4.2 X 1013 s-1 


Qeff 


2.9x109 s-1 


Wp' 


15x103 



« The laser energy used is the value estimated to reach 
the burner (accounting for optical losses) starting with a 
beam energy of 18 mJ/pulse. 

Finally, assuming the gain curve of the dye laser is described by a Lorentzian profile which 
is much broader than the absorption linewidth width, we can estimate the saturation parameter as 

^la (.gu^gi^fi^iu (6.14) 

where uo (cm-i) is the absorption frequency, A^, is the Einstein coefficient for spontaneous emission 
from level (; to/, and Ai/l (cm-i) is the spectral width (FWHM) characterizing the Lorentzian function. 
Equation (6.14) gives a peak saturation parameter Wp' « 15 x 103. The relevant information is 
summarized in Table 6.2. 



11 



c 

D) 

C/) 

CD 
O 

c 

O 
CO 
0) 

o 

LL 

CD 
> 

CD 

DC 



0.2 



o 


-A 
C 


D 


D 


A 


E 




s 



I 1 I I I I 



_l 1 1 L. 



0.01 



0.1 



Relative Laser Power 



Figure 6.6 Saturation curves for high-pressure C2H6/O2/N2 laminar flames. The curve from the 
atmospheric flame is shown for comparison. 



112 



03 

C 

in 

o 

c 

03 
(J 
CO 

o 

U. 


> 



1.0 



0.5 




1.0h 



0.5 



1.0- 



0.5- 






D 









_al L 






J I- 






-t-r-r 

• • 









.' 



V 

••• 

••• .• 



'S.\'. 



.< 




10 15 

Time (ns) 



Figure 6.7 Average temporal intensity of fluorescence signal for flames A (30scans), C (SOscans). 
and D (80 scans). 



113 



From Fig. 6.5, we expect that partial saturation will also be obtained over a large range of 
pressures; this is borne out in Fig. 6.6, which shows saturation curves in three high-pressure flames 
(see Table 6.1), compared to that obtained in the atmospheric flame. The high-pressure curves 
show a reduced slope at the highest laser powers; at lower powers, the fluorescence approaches 
linear behavior and the slope increases. Since the laser-coupled levels are progressively depleted 
as the laser power is increased, the fluorescence signal does not rise as it otherwise would. Thus, 
depletion of the laser-coupled levels results in a decreased slope of the saturation curve, both along 
the center line and averaged throughout the probe volume. Because of masking by the wings of 
the profile, the spatially-averaged depletion of the laser-coupled levels will always be less than, and 
perhaps significantly less than, the value along the beam center line (see Chapter 3). 

The effect of saturation on the temporal fluorescence profile is shown for flames A, C, and D 
in Fig. 6.7: the profiles are broadened compared to the laser profile (Fig. 6.4). These profiles also 
give insight with respect to the depletion of the laser-coupled levels (Salmon and Laurendeau, 
1 985b). By comparing the relative heights of the two temporal modes, one can estimate the depletion 
of the laser-coupled levels at the second mode relative to that at the first. One would also need (1 ) 
a reliable measurement of the relative intensities of the two laser modes and (2) a saturation curve 
to describe the sensitivity of the fluorescence signal to W. Furthermore, with a dynamic model 
similar to the one we have used, one could perhaps estimate (Fc) from the fluorescence profile. 
Though we do not have a reliable measurement of the temporal dependence of the laser irradiance 
for these cases, we can compare the profiles taken in flames A and D (since the temporal 
dependence of the laser was consistent from day to day). From this comparison, we observe that 
at the second temporal mode, the laser-coupled levels have undergone a spatially-averaged 
depletion of -10% at 9.2 atm relative to the second mode in the atmospheric flame. 

6.4.2 Fluorescence/Absorption Measurements 

To evaluate the efficacy of the balanced cross-rate model [Eq. (6.1)] for predicting number 
densities, we compare calibrated fluorescence measurements at high pressure with those from 
absorption. The calibration factor for the high-pressure fluorescence profiles is derived from 
absorption measurements in the atmospheric-pressure flame (A in Table 6,1). In this way we use 
the balanced cross-rate model implicitly, since we do not calculate absolute concentrations directly 



114 



from the fluorescence voltages. At higher pressures, the difference between the calibrated 
fluorescence and absorption measurements represents the depletion of the laser-coupled level 
beyond that in the atmospheric flame. 

The absorption measurements were performed with a 150-W xenon arc lamp. The 
small-diameter beam, which was derived with a set of apertures, entered the high-pressure chamber 
through the optical access port opposite to the fluorescence collection port (Fig. 6.3), The same 
optics used for fluorescence collection were then used to direct the beam to the monochromator. 
The effective absorption beam width (i.e., the dimension in the flame stream-wise direction) was 
measured to be < 200 nvn by translating the burner through the beam; the dimension in the 
horizontal direction was ~ 1 mm. To accurately calculate the OH number density from the measured 
integrated absorption (cm-i). we measured an effective absorption path length using horizontal OH 
fluorescence scans (Fig. 6.8). The total number density, Nj, at radial position x along the absorption 
path is determined from the path-integrated number density by 

NT'-;^f'NAK)d% , (6.15) 

where L^, , the effective path length, is derived from the radial dependence of the normalized 

fluorescence signal, i.e., 

£:/,-/]s,(^)/S/(x)d? ■ ^^"'^^ 

To avoid self absorption-which was evident in the atmospheric flame with the Qi(8)/Pi(9) 
excitation/detection scheme~we detected fluorescence from the Oi2(1 0) line (while still exciting the 
Qi (8) transition). Because of the reduced signal resulting from the smaller A-coefficlent, we opened 
the monochromator entrance and exit slits to 200 ^m (250 (ivn in some cases); consequently, the 
P2(14) and Pi(15) lines, which are about equidistant from the Oi2(10) transition, provide a small 
contribution to the total signal. In doing this, we increased the sensitivity to Q,ff; however, except 
at the burner periphery, where the temperature change is large, the variation in Q^ with horizontal 
position should be small. To ensure that the laser probe was similar in diameter to the absorption 
beam, we used a 1 -mm slit height; the resulting probe dimensions were 290 (or 360) nmx^A mm. 
For flames A, B, and C, horizontal scans were made at two or more vertical positions to assess the 
variation of L*,, with distance above the burner. Typically, for the central chord of the burner we 
found L^, to be ~24 mm for x s; -9.5 mm (see Fig. 6.8). 



15 



1.0 



o o "^ o o o 



o " o o 



oo 



0.5 



y = 3.6 mm 



03 

c 

CD 

0) 

o 

c 

0) 

o 

CO 
0) 

o 

LL 
> 

CD 




1.0 



J I i_ 



J > L 



_I I L. 



0.5 







1.0 






y = 2.4 mm 



J 1 L 



0.5 







,oOOo,^^,o°°-°oo,,^ 



. 



y = 1.0 mm 



I I u 



_I I L. 



-15 -10 -5 5 10 15 

Distance From Center (mm) 



Figure 6.8 Relative horizontal OH fluorescence profiles from the atmospheric flame using 
Qi (8)/Oi2(1 0) excitation/detection as a function of position above the burner surface. 
The horizontal position for the vertical profiles is x ~ -9.5 mm. 



116 



1.5 



1.0 



CO 

f 

E 
o 

CO 

X 
X 

O 



0.5 



T T 



T — r 



T — r 



-1 — I — r 




- O 







2000 



1500 



CO 

k- 

CD 
Q. 

E 

CD 



- 1000 



o Fluorescence 

D Abs. (Cone.) 

O Abs. (Temp.) 

-♦- Thermocouple 



1 



1 ■ ■ ■ ' I ■ ■ ■ ■ ' ' 500 

2 3 4 



Distance from Burner (mm) 



Figure 6.9 



Calibration of relative OH fluorescence measurements [Qi(8)/Oi2(l0) 
excitation/detection] using absorption measurements in atmospheric-pressure 
C2H6/O2/N2 flame (flame A in Table 6.1). Multiple data points (for absorption) at the 
same height represent measurements made on different days. Temperatures from 
(1) absorption and (2) radiation-corrected thermocouple readings are also shown. 



117 



The SR265 software package was modified to integrate the absorption profiles (Chapter 4); 
with this software, analysis of the absorption spectra is fast and accurate. In particular, one need 
not rely on the triangular approximation for spectral integration of an absorption line (Lucht et al., 
1978). This becomes important at higher pressures, since an increasing fraction of the total 
absorption occurs in the wings of the profile. When using 1 or more absorption lines (which was 
typical in flames A and B), the OH number density and temperature could be calculated by using 
the curve-of-growth method (Lucht et al., 1978), and fitting the integrated absorptions with a 
nonlinear least-squares algorithm (Salmon, 1986a). This routine also employed the data of Rea et 
al. (1987, 1989) for calculation of collisional linewidths (see Appendix B). 

We now compare the calibrated fluorescence measurements in flames B and C with 
absorption measurements obtained in these same high-pressure flames. The fluorescence 
voltages were calibrated using the atmospheric-pressure flame (A) by comparing the relative OH 
fluorescence profile with the absolute number-density profile measured by absorption (Fig. 6.9). 
For completeness, we also include OH rotational temperatures calculated from the absorption data 
and radiation-corrected temperatures from silica-coated thermocouples (see Appendix C). The 
uncertainties in the absorption concentrations reflect contributions from (1) the least-squares fit 
(the 2-a uncertainty which includes the temperature uncertainty), (2) the collisional linewidths, and 
(3) the path-length measurement. To calculate number densities Nt at higher pressure P, we employ 
the relation 

NAP)-fJBfQ(P)f.(P)-S,iP) , (6.17) 

where fc (cm-3/V) is the calibration factor, Sf(P) is the fluorescence voltage at pressure P, and the 
correction factors fe, fo, and fe describe changes in the fluorescence signal due to variations in the 
Boltzmann fraction, the effective quenching rate coefficient, and the fluorescence collection 
efficiency, respectively. The factor fe accounts for the decrease in detected fluorescence 
accompanying increased collisional broadening (see Appendix B), which can cause more 
fluorescence to fall outside the spectral detection window. For our experiment, the problem is 
perhaps exacerbated by a slight misfocus of the entrance slit image at the exit plane (see Chapter 
4); nonetheless, we accounted for this effect by measuring the fluorescence signal as a function 
of exit slit width in all five flames. The factor fe is defined as the ratio of fluorescence signals at 30 
fiO) and 90 urn, compared at pressure P and 1 atm (flame A); i.e., 



118 



[5^(30 nm)/S^(90 iim)], ^^^^^ 

Because of the finite slit width (90 fim), U probably underestimates the correction factor. When the 
detected lir>e is well isolated, this correction factor can be reduced or eliminated by increasing the 
exit slit width with respect to the entrance slit width. 

To adequately evaluate the effect of pressure on the efficacy of the balanced cross-rate model, 
we also correct the fluorescence signal for its dependence on Qeff. We thus estimate the change 
in Qeff and then determine fo from the atmospheric-pressure saturation curve. In principle, this 
correction factor can be calculated from an in situ measurement, employing the method suggested 
by Cottereau (1986); in Chapter 7, we apply this method to our high-pressure laminar flames. The 
approach we use here is approximate, since the coupling of the laser and the transition depends 
on pressure through the frequency of dephasing collisions (Piepmeier, 1972a, 1972b). 
Consequently, while the atmospheric saturation curve represents the sensitivity to laser power, it 
only approximates the sensitivity to the collisional environment (see Appendix D). The problem of 
calculating fo is made worse when depletion of the laser-coupled levels accompanies the variation 
in laser power. Here, we have assumed that at atmospheric pressure, the saturation curve is 
unaffected by depletion of the coupled levels. To estimate Qeff, we take the same approach 
described above for the atmospheric-pressure flame. We calculate Qe [again based on equilibrium 
concentrations of the collision partners and the respective cross sections suggested by Garland 
and Crosley (1 986)], and we again use Q,(u) = 8.4 x Qe- With the dynamic model, we then calculate 
the ratio (Q«ff]p/IQeff]i- Not surprisingly, the calculations show that the variation in [Qeff]p/[Qeff]i 
is determined primarily by the pressure ratio for these lean flames. While the error in the calculated 
value of Qeff might be large, we expect the error in the ratio [Qefflp/[Qeff]i to be small, since the 
flames are similar in equivalence ratio, dilution ratio, and temperature (in the burnt-gas region). 
Furthermore, because of saturation, the correction factor fo is not sensitive to errors in [Qeff] p/[Qen] i ■ 
All of the correction factors for the high-pressure flames are summarized in Table 6.3. For 
comparison, the correction factor fo Is also calculated from the high-pressure saturation curves; 
the difference between the two values for P < 9.2 atm is < 1 0%. 

Figures 6.10 and 6.1 1 compare fluorescence measurements with absorption measurements 
for flames B and C. respectively. In addition, in Fig. 6.12. we show hydroxyl concentration profiles 
for flames D and E. In flames B through E, the reaction zone was not observed; however, under 



119 



1.5 



1.0 - 



CO 

E 
o 

CO 



0.5 



1—1 — I — I — I — I — I — I — I — I — I — I — f 



T ' V 'I — r— p- 



o 



OoO 





o Fluorescence 
D ■ Abs. (Cone.) 

O Abs. (Temp.) 
— ♦— Thermocouple 




_l L. 



2000 



1500 



0) 
Q. 

E 



1000 



500 



12 3 4 

Distance from Burner (mm) 



Figure 6.10 Comparison between relative OH fluorescence measurements and absorption 
measurements in 3.1 atm C2H6/O2/N2 flame (flame B in Table 6.1). The open and 
closed squares represent absorption measurements using (1) 10 or more lints and 
(2) only the Qi(6) and Qi2(6) lines, respectively. Temperatures from absorption and 
radiation-corrected thermocouple readings are also shown. 



120 



CO 

E 
o 

CD 



o 



1.5 



1.0 



0.5 



1—1 — r 



T — I — r 



»♦♦♦♦♦- 




o Fluorescence 
D Absorption 
-♦— Thermocouple 



t'i 



CD. 



-I L. 



2000 



1500 




Q. 

E 



1000 



500 



1 2 3 

Distance from Burner (mm) 



Figure 6.11 Comparison between relative OH fluorescence measurements and absorption 
measurements in 6.1 atm CzHe/Og/Na flame (flame C in Table 6.1). The absorption 
measurements were made using only the Qi (6) and Qi2(6) lines. Radiation-corrected 
temperatures from a thermocouple are also shown. 



121 



CO 

I 

E 
o 

CO 



X 

O 



1.5 



1.0 



0.5 



' • ' I 



T — I — I — I — I — r 



-i — r 



»♦»» 



•O 



o Fluorescence (D) 
• Fluorescence (E) 
>- Thermocouple 



•CO, 



-t I I L. 



_l I I L. 



_l I I L. 



2000 



1500 



0) 

V— 

^— ' 

u- 
0) 
Q. 

E 



1000 



500 



1 



Distance from Burner (mm) 



Figure 6.12 Fluorescence measurements for flame D (9.2 atm) and E (12.3, Table 6.1) calibrated 
from absorption and fluorescence measurements in flame C. Radiation-corrected 
temperatures from a thermocouple are also shown for flame D. 



122 



Table 6.3 Correction factors for high-pressure flames." 



Flame 


[Qeff]p/[Qeff]l 


to 


fe 
1.08 


fB 


B 


3.2 


1.30 


1.00 


C 


6.6 


1.56 
(1.42)b 


1.14 


1.00 


D 


10.1 


1.70 
(1.53)b 


1.20 


1.00 


EC 


-13.5 


1.85 


1.22 


-1.0 



a Quenching rate coefficients and Boltzmann fractions were based on 
thermocouple measurements at y = 1 mm. 

b Values for fQ calculated from the high-pressure saturation data. 

c Temperatures were not measured for this flame (though the flow rate is 
the same as for flame D); the value of fo is based on the pressure relative to 

flame D. 

certain conditions at high pressure, we were able to probe beneath the flame front (Chapter 5). For 
flames B and C, the fluorescence voltages were calibrated using the atmospheric flame (fc = 1 .24 
± 0.06 X 1016 cm-3V-i) and the correction factors shown in Table 6.3. For flames D and E. the 
fluorescence signals were calibrated by comparing the relative fluorescence profiles to the 
absorption measurements in flame C (fc = 2.92 x 10^6 cm-3V-i); the correction factors were then 
calculated relative to flame C (rather than relative to flame A). 

Figure 6.10 shows good agreement between the absorption and fluorescence 
measurements, with the calibrated fluorescence measurements yielding a slightly higher 
concentration than the absorption measurements. Three of the absorption measurements 
(indicated in the figure) are the result of repetitively scanning over only the Qi (6) and the satellite 
Qi2(6) transitions (which was made possible by computer control of the scanning process). This 
approach was used because flame jitter (which increased with downstream position) and 
subsequent beam steering reduced the signal-to-noise ratio of the individual absorption lines; the 
effect of flame jitter is especially evident with the absorption temperatures. With the multiple scans, 
we increased the signal-to-noise ratio of the absorption measurements, since the Qi (6) line had 
the largest absorption of the lines analyzed. To extract the total number density from the integrated 
absorption, we used temperatures derived from the radiation-corrected thermocouple 
measurements. The OH absorption uncertainties (Appendix C) indicated in Fig. 6.10 include 
contributions from the uncertainties in (1) collisional linewidths (2) the effective absorption path 



123 



length, (3) the integrated absorption (due to the noise in the profile and baseline) and (2) the 
temperature (±50 K). In addition, we show the fluorescence uncertainty, reflecting contributions 
from drift of the laser frequency (away from i^o) and the uncertainty in calibration and correction 
factors. 

For flame C, absorption measurements of OH concentration were obtained by averaging over 
9 to 34 scans of the Q, (6) and Qi2(6) lines at a given height above the burner. At higher pressure, 
greater flame instability discouraged us from attempting further absorption measurements. As 
shown in Fig. 6.1 1 , the calibrated fluorescence measurements in flame C are about 25% beiow the 
absorption values. This difference is presumably due to depletion of the laser-coupled levels beyond 
that in flame A. This conclusion is consistent with results from the high-pressure saturation curves 
(Fig. 6.6) and the temporal profiles of fluorescence (Fig. 6.7). 

Table 6.4 Input parameters for OH dynamic model.a 



Wf„ 4.2x10i3s-i 

Qr(u)/P 3.8x 109S-1 atm-1 

Q^P 0.45 X 109 s' atm-1 

fb 0.2 

fv 01 

a In addition to scaling the rate coefficients for rotational 
energy transfer in the A2e+(v'=0) state, the value of Qf{u) 
was also used to scale the Qr(i,j) in the X2n(v"=0) state 
(see Chapter 3). 

Table 6.5 Results of model calculations using the parameters listed in 
Table 6.4. The center-line and spatially-averaged 
population fractions are values evaluated at the temporal 
peak of the excitation pulse. 

Pressure (atm) W£ (Fc) 1 - n 



1 


17.4x103 


0.90 


0.85 


6 


2.96x103 


0.80 


0.67 


12 


1.48x103 


0.71 


0.52 



Further insights on LSF measurements at high pressure can be obtained by employing the 
OH dynamic model (see Chapter 3 for details of the modeO- Input parameters for the model are 
listed in Table 6.4. The value of fy appears reasonable for ourflame based on recent measurements 



124 



of vibrational energy transfer in the 2n+ state at room temperature (Rensberger et al.. 1 989; Wysong 
et al., 1989). The value of fb is not based on measurements; rather, It was chosen to obtain a large 
center-line depletion of the laser-coupled levels. We use Eq. (6.13) to describe the spatial 
dependence of the excitation function and a Gaussian quadrature formula to perform the spatial 
integration (see Appendix E). The temporal dependence of the excitation pulse is described by a 
Gaussian function, with a 2.5 ns FWHM. The remaining input parameters are shown in Table 6.4. 
The calculations were performed for flame pressures of 1 , 6, and 1 2 atm, and the results are shown 

in Table 6.5. 

As noted previously, when (Fc) has a small sensitivity to pressure, Eq. (6.3) can be used to 
relate the measured signal to the unperturbed ground-state population. Despite the large center-line 
depletion at 12 atm (-y = 0.48), the relevant spatially-average quantity is [(Fc)p - (Fc)il/(Fc)i = 
-0.21. This is the error one would incur at this pressure in using Eq. (6.3), when calibration is 
performed at 1 atm with absorption or some other method yielding an absolute number density. 

6.5 Conclusions 

In this chapter, we have demonstrated saturation of the Q, (8) transition in the (0,0) manifold 
of the OH molecule in high-pressure flames. In particular, we have obtained saturation curves in 
C2H6/O2/N2 laminar flames at 1, 6.1, 9.2 and 12.3 atm. Based on these high-pressure curves, 
saturation could be attained at pressures > 20 atm in C2H6/O2/N2 flames. We have also presented 
calibrated fluorescence measurements of OH number density at pressures to 12.3 atm; to our 
knowledge, these are the first absolute concentration measurements of OH obtained at high 
pressure with LIF. To assess the efficacy of the balanced cross-rate model for high-pressure flames, 
we have compared LSF measurements, which were calibrated in an atmospheric-pressure flame, 
to absorption measurements at 3.1 and 6.1 atm. The high-pressure fluorescence signals were 
corrected for both the fluorescence collection efficiency and the finite sensitivity to Qeff. At 3.1 atm 
the absorption and fluorescence measurements compare well, with the fluorescence number 
densities slightly higher than those from absorption. At 6.1 atm. the concentrations given by the 
LSF measurements are -25% lower than the absorption values, indicating a depletion of the 
laser-coupled levels beyond that at atmospheric pressure. The temporal fluorescence waveforms 
and the high-pressure saturation curves also suggest a depletion of the laser-coupled levels. The 
extent to which the laser-coupled levels continue to deplete with increased pressure is uncertain. 



125 



and in applying the method to high-pressure flames, it is best to calibrate under conditions similar 
to the ones of interest. Nonetheless, we have shown that at moderately high pressures, the LSF 
method, when applied to the OH molecule, can give reasonably accurate number densities, even 
when calibrating at conditions significantly different from the conditions of interest. We anticipate 
that given a reasonable estimate for the finite sensitivity to Qetf (i.e., accuracy within ±10% for the 
estimated fa), fluorescence measurements accurately calibrated at 1 atm can be applied to flames 
at -10 atm with absolute errors within ±50%, 



126 



CHAPTER 7 

QUENCHING-INDEPENDENT SATURATED FLUORESCENCE MEASUREMENTS OF THE 

HYDROXYL RADICAL IN LAMINAR HIGH-PRESSURE CzHe/Oj/Nz FLAMES 

7.1 Introduction 

Measurements of flame species by optical methods, such as laser-induced fluorescence 
(LIP) , have proved valuable in elucidating chemical and physical processes occurring in combustion 
environments (Eckbreth, 1988). Fluorescence measurements are relevant to the study of a broad 
range of practical combustion topics including turbulent flames, engine knock, pollutant formation, 
and flame stability. Linear fluorescence methods are particularly useful for turbulent flames, where 
2-D images of relative species concentrations can yield insight into the complex interaction between 
chemistry and the flow field. In comparison, laser-saturated fluorescence (LSF), which is currently 
limited to point-wise or perhaps 1-D measurements, is attractive because it can provide reliable 
absolute species concentrations. Moreover, unlike linear fluorescence, LSF measurements are 
insensitive to the rate coefficients for both laser excitation and collisional de-excitation. As a 
consequence, in situ calibration of the fluorescence signal is not necessary: a calibration factor 
determined in one flame (through techniques such as Rayleigh scattering or absorption) can more 
easily be applied to other flames where calibration is more difficult or perhaps impossible [e.g., 
turbulent or sooting flames (Lucht et al., 1984, 1985; Drake et al., 1984, 1985)]. 

Since LSF was first proposed as a combustion diagnostic (Piepmeier. 1972a; Daily, 1977), it 
has been used to detect the diatomics C2 (Baronavski and McDonald, 1 977; Mailander, 1 978). MgO 
(Pasternack et al., 1978), CN (Bonczyk and Shirley, 1979; Verdieck and Bonczyk, 1981), CH 
(Mailander, 1977; Bonczyk and Shirley, 1979; Verdieck and Bonczyk, 1981; Kohse-Hoinghaus et 
al., 1983, 1984; Takubo et al.. 1983). OH (Lucht et al.. 1978, 1983, 1984. 1985; Kohse-Hoinghaus, 
1 983, 1 984, 1 986; Drake et al., 1 984, 1 985; Salmon and Laurendeau, 1 985a, 1 985b) and NH (Salmon 
et al.. 1984) in both subatmospheric and atmospheric flames. Initial experiments (Pasternack et 
al.. 1 978; Bonczyk and Shirley. 1 978; Verdieck and Bonczyk, 1 981) showed significant disagreement 



127 



between fluorescence and independent absorption measurements. Later, however, Lucht et al. 
(1983) and Salmon and Laurendeau (1985a) compared LSF measurements of OH concentration 
(calibrated using Rayleigh scattering) with independent absorption measurements in low-pressure 
(72 torr) laminar Hj/Oz/Ar flames and demonstrated that saturation can be used to obtain accurate 
number densities (±15-25%) under these conditions. 

Because of the lower intensity in the wings of the laser spatial irradiance profile, the 
fluorescence signal will always have a finite sensitivity to laser power and quenching. When the 
transrtion is well saturated along the central core of the beam, the sensitivity will be dominated by 
the fraction of energy in the wings of the spatial profile. Hence, some error is always incurred when 
applying a calibration factor determined in a different collisional environment; the greater the 
difference in the effective quenching rate coefficient between the calibration flame and the one of 
interest, the greater will be this error. 

In this chapter, we describe experimental results using an alternate method first suggested 
by Cottereau (1986). This method involves the use of two fluorescence collection geometries for 
making quenching-independent measurements using saturated fluorescence. We have applied 
the Cottereau approach for concentration measurements of hydroxyl in laminar high-pressure 
CjHe/Oj/Ng flames. 

7.2 Theory 

During laser excitation, the population of the directly-excited rotational level peaks and 
steady-state conditions apply. From the rate equation describing the population of the upper 
laser-coupled level, we have 

Hl^ 1 . (7.1) 

where N^ and N/ are the respective populations of the upper and lower laser-coupled rotational 
levels, Qu and g^ are the respective degeneracies of levels / and u, and W/^, is the rate coefficient for 
absorption. Qe«, the effective rate coefficient for collisional depopulation of the directly-excited 
level, includes contributions from rotational and vibrational energy transfer, electronic quenching 
and spontaneous emission. In general, the population N^ can be related to N ° the unperturbed 
population of level /, by 

N^^N,'(\-y)N° (7.2) 



128 



where 1 - ^ is the fraction of the original population remaining in the laser-coupled levels, and N " 

is related to the species number density through the Boltzmann fraction. When the rates of transfer 
into and out of the laser-coupled levels are balanced at the observation time t, 

'(/?,„ -/?oa,)d/*0 , (7.3) 



L 



then 1 - 7 « 1 , and the so-called balanced cross-rate model (Lucht et a!., 1 980, 1 983) is valid. We 
note that for OH molecules with X2n{v"=0)-^A2i;+(v'=0) excitation, a likely scenario for depletion 
of the laser-coupled levels includes population of the v" > levels through (1) quenching from the 
2E+(V=0)tothe2n(v">0) levels and (2) slow vibrational transfer to v" = 0(Rensbergeretal., 1989; 
Wysongetal., 1989). 

The influence of depletion on quantitative LSF measurements has been treated theoretically 
and experimentally in Chapters 3 [see also Campbell (1 984a)] and 6, respectively. In an experiment 
described in Chapter 6, we calibrated fluorescence measurements at high pressure in a flat laminar 
atmospheric C2H6/O2/N2 flame using absorption; we then compared calibrated fluorescence 
profiles with absorption profiles in C2H6/O2/N2 flames at 3 and 6 atm. In the 3-atm flame, the two 
measurements showed good agreement, while at 6 atm the fluorescence measurements were 
-25% below the absorption measurements. Since the fluorescence values were corrected for their 
finite sensitivity to quenching, the -25% disparity at 6 atm presumably arises from a loss of 
population from the laser-coupled levels. The saturation cun/es and the temporal fluorescence 
profiles were also found to display qualitative behavior consistent with partial depletion of the 
laser-coupled levels. 

Combining Eqs. (7.1) and (7.2) gives 

/V„ = -^^N?(1-Y)a,<., . (7.4) 

where a^ax, the degree of saturation, can be defined in terms of the saturation parameter, W' s 

W,„/Qeff, by 

W 



W'^gJ{g,*g^) 



(7.5) 



or 



W/W ^■ 



" l/'/l// + g„/[l//(g,*g„)] 



(7.6) 



129 



where Wp' is the center-line saturation parameter. 

The observed fluorescence signal is given by the integral of the local excited-state population 
over the imaged volume; i.e., 



S, = — -^-^(nH) /V'„(.v.y,::)rfK , {7-7) 

' 4Jt ^1 

where t^f (cm-') is the frequency of the observed transition, Af (s-i) is the Einstein coefficient for 

spontaneous emission, r? (V/W) is the net efficiency of the fluorescence detection system, and n is 

the solid angle defined by the collection optics. For geometry A (Fig. 7.1), when the image of the 

slit width (Wa) is small compared to variations in the local excited-stated number density, then 

jNudV = WAjNodAc where Ac is the cross-sectional area of the laser probe. The measured 

fluorescence signal is therefore given by 

^'^:i^m.\^.njf NAx.y)dA, . (7.8) 

rXt J A, 



^" 43 



Likewise for geometry B (Fig. 7.1), when the dimensions of the slit imaged on the laser beam, Hg 
and Wb, are small compared to variations in the local excited-state number density, then jN^dV = 
HeWe/Nudx. The measured fluorescence signal is thus 

S,, = ^^^^^(Ti,//,I/«fi,)£/V„(.v)d.v . (7.9) 

If N ?is constant throughout the probe volumes, the ratio of the signals is 

Ti.U^fi, f (1 -y)a,,,dA, 

{^ 

When the depletion of the laser-coupled levels is small (rt « 0) and the spatial dependence 
of the saturation parameter corresponds to that of the laser irradiance (i.e., Qetf does not vary within 
the imaged volume), 



£ii--_ l^li- . (7.10) 

S, 



then we can write 



^'/ /f 



|^./{^/.f|:A) . (Z.,2, 



130 



Geometry A 




Laser Beam 



Fluorescence 




Laser Beam 



Geometry B 



Wp Fluorescence 



Figure 7.1 Fluorescence collection geometries: top, geometry A; bottom, geometry B. 



131 



Thus, the ratio of the two signals is a function of the center-line saturation parameter, the spatial 
dependence of the laser irradiance, and K, the ratio of detection parameters for the two geometries. 
Insofar as the detection parameters and the spatial dependence of the laser irradiance are invariant, 
the ratio SfA/SfB will depend only on Wp'. This being the case, the curve of SfA/Sfg versus laser 
power defines the relative saturation parameter, 

l..'/=/(|^) , (7.13, 

which acts as a quenching calibration function, since Sfg = N ? ■fgON,') for g = A, B. 

The Cottereau technique is then applied using the following steps. 

1. Select a flame and calibrate the fluorescence signals from both 
geometries (with measurements from absorption spectroscopy or 
Rayleigh scattering, for example). 

2. In the calibration flame, generate saturation curves for the two 
geometries by varying the laser irradiance, being careful not to 
change the spatial dependence of II. Since the relative laser 
irradiance is approximately equivalent to the relative saturation 
parameter, Wr', when Qgtf is constant, the curve SfA/Sfs versus II 
defines the calibration function Wr'(Sf a/Sib). This function should be 
defined over the range of expected values of W/. 

3. At the condition of interest, measure SfA and Sfe; from the calibration 
cun/e Wr'(S<A/SfB) determine the value of W,'. With this value and 
either saturation curve SfAO/VrO or Sie(}N,'), determine the fractional 
change in fluorescence intensity due to the change in the relative 
saturation parameter. This value (for geometry A or B) is then used 
to correct the fluorescence signal (from geometry A or B) for any 
change in the saturation parameter between the calibration flame 
and the flame of interest. 

Thus, at the condition of interest, the total number density Nj can be described by 

Nr'S,fJ,-Y]f, , (7.14) 



132 



where fc (cm-3/V) is the calibration factor (determined in step 1), fo is the quenching correction 
factor, which accounts for the fractional change in W^', and the fi are additional correction factors 
(accounting for variations in the Boltzmann fraction, etc.). To illustrate this technique, we consider 
Fig. 7.2, where the squares and triangles represent measurements in the calibration flame and the 
flame of interest, respectively. In the flame of interest, the measurement of SfA/Sfs = 0.70 (relative 
to SifJSiB = 1.0 in the calibration flame) gives W^' = 0.22. From the saturation curves, W,' = 0.22 
corresponds to quenching correction factors (fo = 1/Sf for these normalized saturation curves) of 
2.13 and 1.49 for geometries A and B, respectively. 

7.3 Experimental Apparatus 

Our high-pressure combustion facility includes the following: (1) a pressure vessel 
constructed from standard stainless steel piping components; (2) an electronic gas delivery system, 
which is interfaced to a microcomputer; (3) a sintered bronze water-cooled flat -flame burner (2.5 
cm in diameter) surrounded by a guard ring; and (4) an internal x-y burner translation system 
employing stepper motors. The range of movement of the vertical and horizontal translation 
mechanisms is about 1 1 and 2.8 cm, respectively, while the associated single-step resolution is 
about 2 and 1 /im. The motors are stepped through a microcomputer, and thus we can accurately 
position the burner. Because flow instabilities in the burnt-gas region of the flame increased with 
increasing pressure (Chapter 5), we attached a screen to the burner housing ~8 mm above the 
burner surface. This provided a significant improvement in flame stability. Further details of the 
combustion facility are given in Chapter 4. 

The optical layout for the fluorescence measurements is shown in Fig 7.3. The second 
harmonic (at 532 nm) of a Quanta-Ray DCR-3G Nd:YAG laser is used to pump a PDL-2 dye laser, 
which includes transversely-pumped oscillator and preamplifier stages along with a 
longitudinally-pumped amplifier stage. The output of the dye laser is frequency doubled in the 
Quanta-Ray Wavelength Extender (WEX-1 ), and the visible and UV beams are then dispersed with 
a Pellin-Broca prism; though not shown exactly in Fig. 7.3, a portion of the visible beam is then used 
to trigger the detection electronics. For this experiment we employed ~1 8 mJ/pulse of UV energy. 
The UV beam was raised to the appropriate height with a beam steering assembly; the resulting 
polarization of the radiation was vertical. The beam was attenuated when necessary with Pyrex 
plates, and an aperture placed before the focussing lens was used to block scattered radiation. 



133 



n Calibration Flame 
A Flame of Interest 




Geom. A 

Geom. B 



I ■ ' I L-L. 



0.01 



0.1 

w: 



Figure 7.2 Hypothetical saturation curves and the corresponding quenching calibration curve. 



134 



DCR-3G 



tttt: 



PDL-2 



WEX-1 



r 

In 



Trigger 

pdV 




1-,B 

Monochromator J~ \ - 



MA/ 
BS 



PMT 




PMT 



Monochromator 
A 



Sampling 
Modules 



Computer 



Figure 7.3 Schematic for LSF experiments. Components: A - aperture; BD - beam dump; BS 
beam splitter; BSA - beam steering assembly; FB - fluorescence block; L - lens; MA 
image rotating min'or assembly; PD - photodiode; PMT - photomuftiplier tube; PP 
Pyrex plate(s); PV - pressure vessel. 



135 



We used a 250-mm focal-length fused silica lens to focus the beam over the burner and a second 
250-mm focal-length lens to collimate the beam after the exit port. At the exit port, the vessel window 
is fixed at a 10° angle so that light reflected from the window surfaces is directed away from the 
laser probe volume. Finally, a portion of the beam was directed to a silicon UV-sensitive PIN 
photodiode (Hamamatsu S1 7722-02), which monitored the shot-to-shot fluctuations of the UV beam 
energy. 

Fluorescence was collimated with a 250-mm focal-length lens, and was split with a UV 
beam-splitting plate. The fluorescence transmitted by the plate was focused on the entrance slit 
of monochromator A. The beam-splitting plate, which had a transmission and reflectance of -30%, 
also acted as the first reflector of the Image rotating assembly, which rotated by 90" the fluorescence 
image; the fluorescence was then focused on the entrance slit of monochromator B. This 
arrangement-rather than one with monochromators on either side of the flame-was used so that 
the two fluorescence signals would be affected equally by self absorption, which was evident in our 
flames. For monochromator A (a Spex 1700), which employed a grating blazed at 1 nm (and was 
used in third order), we used an entrance (and exit) slit width and height of 300 /xm and 1 .2 mm, 
respectively. The imaged volume is the disk defined by the width of 500 fim and the diameter dA 
of the laser probe (as seen by geometry A). Though the beam width was measured to be about 
0.1 mm (see Chapter 4), with saturation, the apparent probe diameter can be much larger (Salmon 
and Laurendeau, 1 985a). For monochromator B (a Spex 1 800-11), which employed a grating blazed 
at 300 /im (and was used in first order), we used an entrance slit width and height of 30 /xm and 2 
mm, respectively, and the associated spatial resolution was 42 /^m x 2.9 mm x 6q. To increase the 
signal for this geometry, we used an exit slit width of 60 ^m; this also decreased the sensitivity of 
the signal to variations in line broadening concomitant with pressure variations (and noticeable 
especially at high pressures). For measurements close to the burner surface, we blocked the lower 
half of the fluorescence beam prior to the image rotating mirror assembly; thus we could probe 
close to the burner without vignetting the fluorescence profile. The monochromators employed 
specially-wired RCA 1P28B photomultiplier tubes (Harris et al., 1976) each with a 1000 V supply 
voltage for detection of the spectrally resolved fluorescence signals. 

The PMTand photodiode signals were recorded with Stanford Research Systems equipment; 
the two fluorescence signals were resolved with the 200 ps sampling gates of two SR255 fast 
samplers, which were set at the peak of the respective fluorescence pulses using SR200 gate 



136 



(0 

c 
CD 

> 



(0 




Time { ns ) 

Fiaure 7 4 Average temporal irradiance of the UV beam measured with the TIED56 avalanche 
photodiode and the photomultipliertubes for monochromators A and B using Rayleigh 
scattering. 



137 



scanners. The measured voltages from the fast samplers were digitized and stored with the SR245 
computer interface module and the SR265 software package. Typically, for this experiment we 
averaged the fluorescence signal for 600 to 1200 laser shots. For the PIN photodiode we used a 
10 ns gate of the SR250 gated integrator and boxcar averager. We note that on the average, only 
a small number of fluorescence photons were collected for each laser shot; however, with increases 
in focussed beam width, the collection solid angle (n « 0.006 sr for our experiment), and the 
efficiency of some of the optical components (e.g., the beam splitter), single-shot measurements 
would be possible. 

In Fig. 7.4, the average temporal responses of the PMTs using Rayleigh scattering are 
compared to the average intensity profile obtained with a silicon avalanche photodiode (Texas 
Instruments T1ED56), which has a temporal response of -200 ps (Harris et al., 1980). These 
waveforms, which were taken consecutively rather than simultaneously, were recorded by 
repetitively scanning in time over the signal, using the 200 ps sampling gate of the fast sampler 
(SR255), and a scanning voltage supplied by the SR245 computer interface module. The PMTs 
show good temporal resolution, though the convolution of the detector response and the true 
temporal profile does result in some distortion of the profile features. 

7.4 ResuKs and Discussion 

For the fluorescence experiments, we used the Qi(8)/Pi(9) excitation/detection line pair. 
These lines are suitable since they are isolated from neighboring lines; in addition, the population 
of the N" = 8 level varies by only -10% from 1 100 to 2600 K. To attenuate the laser irradiance, we 
used Pyrex plates of different thickness; these plates were calibrated against neutral density filters 
(inserted in the fluorescence optical train) by using Rayleigh scattering with geometry A, since the 
detected signal with this geometry should be insensitive to beam steering caused by the plates. 
(We note that Pyrex is not the ideal attenuating material for A ~ 31 nm because the transmission 
is a strong function of wavelength.) To account for possible variations in transmission with position, 
we keyed the plates, and thus we could put them in the same orientation each time. Because the 
plates steer the laser beam to different locations in the flame, the fluorescence focusing lens for 
monochromator B, LfB (see Fig. 7.3), was positioned to maximize the signal with each change of 
attenuation; the lens for monochromator A required no adjustment since the probe diameter was 
smaller than the slit height. In addition, for lens Lfg, a dial gage was used to measure the relative 



138 



displacement of this lens, which equals (when multiplied by the system magnification) the 
displacement of the beam in the flame. Using the vertical fluorescence profile, the saturation curves 
could then be corrected for beam displacement. Although the saturation curves are affected by 
beam steering, the ratio of the signals SfA/S,B is not affected insofar as Qeff does not vary over the 
region probed by the beam. 

Because of saturation, the fluorescence signal can also be adversely affected by scattered 
or reflected radiation. To block some of this radiation, we placed an iris diaphragm directly before 
the laser focussing lens, with the iris opened just wide enough to allow the beam to pass. In addition, 
with detection geometry A, we noticed a significant improvement in the vertical resolution of the 
atmospheric fluorescence measurements when the window at the laser entry port was removed; 
this indicates that the effective probe diameter was increased by the scattered and reflected radiation 
from the window. Consequently, we were careful to keep this window clean, thus minimizing the 
scattered radiation. This situation could be ameliorated further with anti-reflection coatings on the 
windows. 

Table 7.1 Description of CzH^Ozl^^z flames used in experiments. 



Flame 


Pressure 
(atm) 


Equivalence 
Ratio 


Dilution 
Ratio 


Flow Rate 
(sipm) 


A 


0.98 


0.77 


3.0 


3.15 


A' 


0.98 


0.91 


3.0 


3.2 


B 


3.1 


0.76 


3.1 


4.6 


C 


6.1 


0.91 


3.1 


6.45 


D 


9.2 


0.92 


3.1 


8.2 



The C2H6/O2/N2 flames used in these experiments are listed in Table 7.1. The saturation 
curves obtained at atmospheric pressure are shown in Fig. 7.5. Partial saturation is achieved over 
a large range of laser powers with both geometries; this is especially evident on the log-log scale 
where the sensitivity of the fluorescence signal to laser power is shown to be approximately constant 
over two orders of magnitude of II- Because of the large effective probe diameter for geometry A 
and the large vertical gradient in OH concentration, some spatial averaging in the vertical 
fluorescence profile was evident in flame A with this geometry. Consequently, to generate the 
atmospheric saturation curves (and the quenching calibration curve) we used a richer flame (flame 
AO, where the OH concentration gradient was less than for flame A. 



139 



c 

D) 
CO 



o 

c 

o 

C/) 
O 

0) 
> 



DC 




0.1 



O Geom. A 
• Geom. B 



o Geom. A 
• Geom. B 



1.0 




■ I I I 1— I 



I ■ I I I I ] I 



0.01 0.1 

Relative Laser Power 



Figure 7.5 Saturation curves In an atmospheric C2H6/O2/N2 flame (flame A' in Table 7.1). The 
solid lines show the saturation behavior for a simple two-level model using a spatial 
irradiance function described by Eq. (7.16). For geometry A, we assume that the 
spatial irradiance function is axisymmetric. 



140 



Table 7.2 Parameters describing laser excitation and 
collisional quenching."''' 



E 15mJ 

Pl 3.3 X 106 W 

IP 2.6 X 1010 W/cm2 

Wf^ 4.2 X 1013 s-1 
i/Q 32328 cm-1 
A/jy 6.399x105 3-1 
Qgff 2.9x109s-i 
Ai/u 0.5 cm-1 
VV 15x103 

a The energy used in the calculation is the value estimated to 
reach the burner, accounting for optical losses, when starting 
with18mJ/pulse. 

b Ai^L denotes the laser spectral width (FWHM). 

Using a simple two-level model (7 = 0), the predicted relative saturation curve from Eqs. (7.4) 
and (7.7) becomes 



X"-- 



^/•'" ( a„, „dK 



(7.15) 



where Sfm refers to the fluorescence signal at maximum laser power. For geometry B, good 
agreement between the theoretical and experimental saturation cun/es results when using the 
spatial excitation function 

W.(r) = — , (7.16) 

[1 ■'■{r/wy] 

where W ?„ is the absorption rate coefficient at the beam center line, r is the radial position, and w 

is the beam halfwidth. Calculation of the maximum center-line rate coefficient, W ?„ , is summarized 
in Table 7.2; the resulting maximum saturation parameter is 15 x 103. Estimation of W L and Wp' 
from the laser parameters in Table 7.2 is discussed in detail in Chapter 6. To model the saturation 
behavior of geometry A, we again use Eq. (7.16) with the assumption that the excitation profile is 
axisymmetric (though we did observe some asymmetry in the beam profile). The resulting saturation 
curve (Fig. 7.5) is in reasonable agreement with the experimental data for geometry A. 



141 



(0 

c 
en 

(-0 

0) 

u 

c 

(D 
(J 
U) 

a> 

c_ 
o 

13 



> 



(0 

a> 
ct: 





"1 r— X 1 1 


r i 1 


- 








• -V •• •; 






• * 




" 


■ 






, 






• 


A 










■ 


• 


- 


; 


• 




• 


t 


- 


» 


V 
7»' 


_ 


^ 


•*\*. 




• 


••'., 




^' Flame 


D 






« 


- 


' G e m . 


A N 
















i" 






1 r. — ! i 1 r 



V -.A 



*A ^ 



.»* 



Flame D '». 
G e ffl • D *ia^ 






\ 



r 






i 



Flame 
G e ffl . 



A 
B 



V 



-I L 



15 20 5 
Time ( n s ) 



10 15 20 



Figure 7.6 Average temporal intensity of fluorescence signal for flames A (30 scans) and D (80 
scans). 



142 




0.01 



Relative Laser Power 



Figure 7 7 Quenching calibration curve derived from the atmospheric saturation curves (Fig. 7.5) 
in flame A' (see Table 7.1). Multiple data points at the same laser power are repeated 
measurements. 



143 



Figure 7.6 shows temporal fluorescence profiles for the two geometries taken at 1 and 9.2 
atm (flames A and D). As discussed in Chapter 6, depletion of the laser-coupled levels can be 
observed (at the second temporal lobe relative to the first) when comparing profiles at 1 and 9.2 
atm. This is especially evident with geometry B, where we expect a larger spatially-averaged 
depletion of the laser-coupled levels. 

In Fig. 7.7, we show SfA/S<B versus relative laser power obtained from the atmospheric 
saturation curves. Though we refer to this curve as the quenching calibration curve, we emphasize 
that the corrections derived from the curve take into account variations in laser power as well as 
the effective quenching rate coefficient. We now make two observations regarding the quenching 
correction curve. First, any depletion of the laser-coupled levels will result in a larger SiA/Sfs, since 
geometry B (with a smaller contribution from the wings of the fluorescence profile) will show a larger 
spatially-averaged depletion than geometry A. Consequently, the measured Sf/v/StB yields an 
underestimate of the true quenching correction, since a smaller S^a/Sib ratio corresponds to a larger 
Qeff. Second, the coupling between the laser and the OH molecules depends on (1) the spectral 
width of the absorption line relative to that of the laser line and (2) the mode structure of the UV 
beam. As the absorption line broadens with increasing pressure (from increased collisional 
broadening) and overtakes the spectral width of the laser beam, the molecules will, on the average, 
absorb less laser energy (i.e., the coupling between the laser and the transition will become less 
efficient). An important consequence is that while the saturation curves describe the sensitivity of 
the fluorescence signal to laser power, they show only approximately the sensitivity to collisional 
environment. To investigate this difference, we have modelled the excitation process with rate 
equations for levels / and u using an approach similar to the one taken by Piepmeier (1 972a, 1 972b); 
we have also included the effect of the spatial excitation profile using Eq. (7.16). With this model, 
we calculated the sensitivity of the fluorescence signal to both laser power and pressure. The 
results suggest that the Cottereau method provides a good estimate of the quenching correction 
factor, fo, which accounts for variations in coupling efficiency as well as quenching and laser power 
(Appendix D). 

The fluorescence voltages for geometries A and B were calibrated at atmospheric pressure 
using flame A by comparing the relative OH fluorescence profiles with a profile of absolute OH 
number density derived from absorption measurements (Fig. 7.8). To minimize the effect of self 
absorption on the profiles, fluorescerrce was collected at the near edge of the burner; comparison 



144 



CO 

I 
B 

o 

CD 

o 

X 

o 



1.2 



1.0 



0.8 



0.6 



0.4 



0.2 



0.0 



-I — I — I — I — r 



-t—^ 



-I 1 1 1 1 1 r- 



n Absorption 
o Fluorescence (A). 
'•J • Fluorescence (B) 



► O ""^Oo •□ 
o o o • 



-I I 1 L. 



*se 






I 11 ■ ^ 



1 2 3 4 

Distance from Burner (mm) 



Figure 7.8 Calibration of relative OH fluorescence measurements using absorption 
measurements in an atmospheric-pressure CaHe/Oa/Na flame (flame A in Table 7.1). 
Multiple data points (for absorption) at the same height represent measurements 
made on different days. 



145 



of the absorption profile with the relative fluorescence profile from geometry B demonstrates that 
the fluorescence signal is not measurably affected by self absorption. Comparing the ratios of 
SfA/SfB in flames A and A' (see Table 7.3) indicates a slightly larger Qetf for flame A' (relative to A); 
consequently, we extrapolated the quenching calibration cun/e (Fig. 7.7) to obtain the reference 
value of Wf' in flame A (where we calibrated the fluorescence voltages with absorption). The effect 
of spatial averaging when using geometry A is evident in Fig. 7.8; near the burner, where the OH 
concentration varies strongly with position, the fluorescence profiles A and B deviate significantly. 
Profile B, because of the small vertical dimension of the sampling volume (42 nm), is not significantly 
affected by spatial averaging. 

The absorption measurements in Fig. 7.8 were performed with a 1 50-W xenon arc lamp, and 
the effective absorption path length was calculated from horizontal fluorescence scans across the 
burner (see Chapter 6). For the absorption measurements in flames A and B, we typically used 1 
or more absorption lines and the curve-of-growth method (Lucht et al., 1978) to calculate the total 
OH number density. In a few of the absorption measurements at 3. 1 atm and all the measurements 
at 6.1 atm, we repetitively scanned over the Qi (6) [and the satellite Qi 2(6)] line. This approach was 
used because flame jitter (which increased with pressure) and subsequent beam steering reduced 
the signal-to-noise ratio of the individual spectral absorption profiles. With the repetitive scans, we 
Increased the signal-to-noise of the integrated absorption, since the Qi (6) line had the largest 
absorption of the lines analyzed. A significant feature of this approach is that scans affected by 
severe noise (e.g., those resulting from arc-lamp fluctuations) can be easily eliminated from the 
average. To extract the total number density from the integrated absorption, we used temperatures 
derived from silica-coated thermocouple measurements. The uncertainty in the absorption 
measurements denoted in Fig. 7.8 reflect uncertainty contributions from (1) the integrated 
absorption (cm-i), (2) temperature (3) the collisional linewidths, and (4) the effective absorption 
path-length (see Appendix C) . In cases where 1 or more lines were used to obtain tfie total number 
density, we calculated the 95% confidence interval, which includes uncertainties from the calculated 
temperature and the variation in concentration calculated from the individual lines. 

To calculate the number densities Nt at a higher pressure P, we used the relation 



146 



Table 7.3 Quenching calibration parameters at maximum 
laser power.«.'> 



Flame 


S<A/SfB 


W,' 


1/(Wr') 


A 


5.02 


1 


1 


A' 


4.87 


0.95 


1.05 


B 


3.96 


0.42 


2.4 
(3.2) 


C 


2.88 


0.14 


6.9 
(6.7) 


D 


2.24 


0.062 


16 
(10.2) 



« We define W/ m 1 in flame A. 

b The 1/Wf' values in parentheses are estimated from 
experimental data describing electronic quenching 
(Garland and Crosley, 1986) and rotational energy 
transfer (Zizak et al., 1986; Lucht et al., 1986). See 
Chapter 6 for a description of the calculation of this 
quantity. 

Table 7.4 Correction factors for flames B, C, and D.^^ 



Flame fe Geometry A Geometry 8 



fQ fe ^Q *e 



1.00 1.57 1.0 1.21 1.05 

(1.30) 

1.00 2.69 1.0 1.56 1.08 

(1.56) 

1.00 4.17 1.0 1.90 1.09 

(1.70) 



• The fQB in parentheses are the quantities derived from the estimated 
1/W,' (see note b for Table 7.3). 

b The fluorescence calibration factors from flame A are fcA = 0.556 ± 
0.028 X 1016 cm-3/V and fcB = 2.79 ± 0.14 x 1016 cm-3A/. 

NAP)'fjBfQinfsns,{P) , (7.17) 

where the correction factors fe and f, describe changes in the fluorescence signal due to variations 
in the Boltzmann fraction and the fluorescence collection efficiency, respectively. The factor f, 
accounts for the decrease in detected fluorescence accompanying increased collisional 
broadening; i.e., with increased collisional broadening more fluorescence will fall outside the 
spectral detection window. For geometry A, with the larger spectral width, we assumed fe to be 



147 



constant; for geometry B, we measured the fluorescence signal as a function of exit slit width in 

flames A-D, and the factor fe represents the ratio of signals at 60 /im and 90 /zm, compared at 

pressure P and 1 atm (flame A); i.e., 

[5/(60 nm)/S, {90 \im)], 
^'°[S/(60 [imySi(90 \im)], ' (^18) 

Because of the finite slit width Wb = 90 ^im, this is an underestimate of the correction factor. We 
also note that SfA/SfB was calculated subsequent to correcting S^b for increased collisional 
broadening. In addition, for all the flames, the quenching correction factor was derived from an 
average of several SfA/SfB values in the burnt-gas region, where the variation in Q^ff should be small. 
Averaging these values was not necessary, but it did improve the signal-to-nolse ratio of the SfA/SfB 
measurement. As discussed above, once SfA/Sfe has been calculated, Wf' (see Table 7.3) can be 
found from the quenching calibration curve (Fig. 7.7), and the fQ can then be determined from the 
saturation curves (Fig. 7.5). Values for fs, fQ, and fe for flames B, C, and D are listed in Table 7.4. 

The resulting vertical OH concentration profiles for flames B, C and D are shown in Figs. 
7.9-7.11. As expected from the measurements described in Chapter 6, the fluorescence and 
absorption measurements compare well at 3.1 atm (Fig. 7.9). As at atmospheric pressure, 
fluorescence profile A is distorted near the burner surface where the OH concentration is a strong 
function of position. At 6.1 atm, the calibrated fluorescence measurements are —25% below the 
absorption measurements. This is also the result obtained in Chapter 6, and as we noted above, 
it is apparently due to the spatially-averaged depletion of the laser-coupled levels beyond that at 
atmospheric pressure. For the measurements at 9.2 atm (Fig. 7.1 1), we derived fcA and fcB from 
the comparison of fluorescence and absorption in flame C (rather than in flame A); the other 
correction factors were also referenced to those in flame C. This approach was taken for flame D, 
because of the depletion of the laser-coupled levels observed at 6.1 atm. 

In addition to the measured W/ in Table 7.3, we also include the corresponding values 
estimated from data describing electronic quenching (Garland and Crosley, 1 986) and rotational 
energy transfer (Zizaketal., 1986;Luchtetal., 1986; see Chapter 6 for details). The apparent errors 
in the estimated Wr' are probably due to (1) uncertainties in the calculation of rotational energy 
transfer and (2) omission of the coupling efficiency between the laser and the transition. We also 
note that the quenching calibration curve (i.e., SfA/SfB versus laser power) and thus the measured 
Wf' may be affected slightly by some spatial averaging (with geometry A) in flame A'. Nevertheless, 



148 



CO 

I 
6 

o 

CD 

T— I 

o 

tH 



o 



1.4 
1.2 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0.0 



-r— — I 1 1 T 



-I 1 1 1 1 1 ' ' I 

D," Absorption 

o Fluorescence (A) 

• Fluorescence (B) 



OqD* 



'I. 



! 



Jl I 1- 



e 



I I 1 1 L 



12 3 

Distance from Burner (mm) 



Figure 7 9 Comparison between relative OH fluorescence measurements and absorption 
measurements in 3. 1 atm C2H6/O2/N2 flame (flame B in Table 7. 1 ) . The closed squares 
represent absorption measurements using the Qi(6) and Qi2(6) lines. 



149 



1.2 



CO 1.0 - 



B 

O 
CD 
O 

T-H 

X 

o 



0.8 - 



0.6 - 



0.4 - 



0.2 - 



0.0 



-r 1 1 1 r 



_l , p. 



-1 1 1 r 



D Absorption 

o Fluorescence (A) 

• Fluorescence (B) 



t 



D 
D 



m 



8 B 



T 

5 



• t « 



• • i 



_i L 



J L. 



1 2 3 

Distance from Burner (mm) 



Figure 7.10 Comparison between relative OH fluorescence measurements and absorption 
measurements in 6.1 atm C2H6/O2/N2 flame (flame C in Table 7.1). The absorption 
measurements were made using multiple scans of the Qi (6) and Qi2{6) lines. 



150 



CO 

I 

e 

o 

CD 

o 

X 

o 



1.6 
1.4 
1.2 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0.0 



-r — T r- 



-I 1 r- 



o Fluorescence (A) 
• Fluorescence (B) 



8o 



«• 



i • 



8 8 



12 3 

Distance from Burner (mm) 



Figure 7. 1 1 OH fluorescence measuremerrts in a 9.2 aim C2H6/O2/N2 flame (flame D in Table 7.1). 
The fluorescence calibration factor was derived from a comparison of LSF and 
absorption measurements in flame C (see Table 7.1). 



151 



though the difference in the estimated and measured W/ may be large, the difference in fo is small 
due to saturation (see Tables 7.3 and 7.4). Thus, in some cases one may preferto apply a quenching 
correction factor based solely on the estimated ratio of saturation parameters (which in this case 
is close to the pressure ratio). We also note that the Cottereau method is a potential alternative to 
the procedure described by Barlow et al. (1 989a, 1 989b) for absolute concentration measurements 
of OH. With this approach, Barlow et al. used two lasers to measure simultaneously (1) the relative 
OH concentration using LIF and (2) Hg, O2, Ng, and H2O concentrations using vibrational Raman 
scattering. With the measured concentrations of the OH-collision partners (i.e., H2, O2, N2, and 
H2O) the OH fluorescence voltages were corrected for variations in the electronic quenching rate 
coefficient in a nonpremixed turbulent jet flame (on a shot-by-shot basis) using quenching cross 
sections recommended by Garland and Crosley (1986). The Cottereau approach has the 
advantages of greater simplicity and an in situ measurement of the quenching correction factor; 
however, this method is limited by the accuracy of (1) the balanced cross-rate model and (2) the 
saturation and quenching calibration curves. 

7.5 Conclusions 

We have successfully employed a method for making quenching-independent LSF 
measurements of hydroxyl concentration in high-pressure laminar C2H6/O2/N2 flames. With this 
technique, one uses two fluorescence detection geometries; the ratio of the two fluorescence signals 
is a function of the quenching rate coefficient and the spatial dependence of the laser irradiance. 
As long as the laser spatial irradiance profile is invariant, the ratio of the two fluorescence signals 
depends only on (1) the center-line saturation parameter and (2) the coupling efficiency between 
the laser and the transition. Using the Cottereau method, the fluorescence signals from either 
geometry, which have been calibrated at one condition, can be corrected for their finite sensitivity 
to quenching via this in situ measurement. At atmospheric pressure, we have calibrated the 
fluorescence signals with absorption measurements; we have also generated the quenching 
correction function from the corresponding saturation curves in an atmospheric flame. The 
fluorescence voltages from the flames at 3.1, 6.1 and 9.2 atm have been adjusted for changes in 
quenching relative to the atmospheric flame, using the experimentally-determined relative 
quenching rate coefficients; with this procedure, we have obtained absolute concentration profiles 
of OH in high-pressure flames. The Cottereau method is still affected by the inaccuracy of the 



152 



balanced cross-rate model; moreover, the fluorescence profiles from imaging geometry A are 
adversely affected by scattered and reflected light. Nonetheless, use of this method can further 
reduce uncertainty in calibrated fluorescence measurements, especially w^hen attempting to obtain 
absolute number densities under flame conditions significantly different than the calibration 
condition. 



153 



CHAPTER 8 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

8.1 Conclusions 

In this report, we have focused on the efficacy of the LSF method for measurement of OH 
concentration in high-pressure flames. We have Investigated theoretically and experimentally the 
validity of the balanced cross-rate model (Lucht et al., 1980, 1983), which relates the measured 
quantity Nu to the unperturbed number density N ? . In essence, the model states that the 
laser-coupled levels experience approximately no net depletion; i.e., 

/V„ + A/,"A/? . (8.1) 

The utility of this model is that it requires no knowledge of the collisional environment; consequently, 
fluorescence measurements can be related more easily to the desired species number density. 
When this relationship cannot be used due to depletion of the laser-coupled levels and this depletion 
cannot be accurately measured, LSF can lose much of its attractiveness over linear fluorescence 
methods. 

In the course of this work, we have developed a high-pressure combustion facility, which will 
be used in future high-pressure combustion studies employing spectroscopic methods. This facility 
includes the following: (1) a pressure vessel constructed from standard stainless-steel piping 
components; (2) an internal x-y burner translation system employing inexpensive stepper motors 
and translation mechanisms; (3) two flat flame burners; and, (4) an electronic gas control system, 
which is interfaced to a microcomputer. Though the vessel was designed to accommodate turbulent 
flames, we have used only premixed laminar flames for the present study. To test the facility, we 
used the laser-induced fluorescence method to measure relative concentrations of OH in lean 
premixed C2H6/O2/N2 flames at 3.2, 6.3, 9.5, and 12.6 atm. By employing a range of flow rates of 
the combustible mixture, we demonstrated that the reaction zone can be probed at these pressures. 
In comparison to atmospheric flames, the reaction zone was small and accordingly, the [OH] 
gradient was large; we also obsen^ed large gradients in the OH recombination zone. 



154 



we have also performed a theoretical feasibility study on the application of LSF to the 
measurement of OH concentration in high-pressure flames. Using a numerical model for the 
collisional dynamics of the OH molecule under nonuniform laser excitation, we investigated the 
effect of pressure on the validity of the balanced cross-rate model and the sensitivity of the 
depopulation of the laser-coupled levels to the ratio of rate coefficients describing (1) electronic 
quenching to the ground-state vibrational levels for which v" > and (2) vibrational relaxation from 
V- > to V" = 0. At sufficiently high pressures under near-saturated conditions, the total population 
of the laser-coupled levels reaches an asymptotic value, which is insensitive to the degree of 
saturation. When the ratio of electronic quenching to vibrational relaxation is small and the rate 
coefficients for rotational transfer in the ground and excited electronic stales are nearly the same, 
the balanced cross-rate model remains a good approximation for all pressures. When the above 
ratio is large, depopulation of the laser-coupled levels becomes significant at high pressures, and 
thus the balanced cross-rate model no longer holds. Under these conditions, however, knowledge 
of the depletion of the laser-coupled levels could be used to correct the balanced cross-rate model. 

We have performed experiments to evaluate the efficacy of LSF for OH concentration 
measurements in high-pressure combustion environments. First, we demonstrated that saturation 
is possible in high-pressures C2H6/O2/N2 flames by generating saturation curves at pressures as 
high as -12 atm; these curves suggest that partial saturation can be achieved at pressures > 20 
atm. To evaluate the limits of the balanced cross-rate model, we compared absorption and 
calibrated LSF measurements at 3.1 and 6.1 atm. The fluorescence measurements were calibrated 
with absorption measurements in an atmospheric flame and corrected for their finite sensitivity to 
quenching with an estimated quenching rate coefficient. In this way. we compared the 
spatially-averaged depletion of the laser-coupled levels (and the effective deviation from the 
balanced cross-rate model) at 3.1 and 6.1 atm. to the value at atmospheric pressure. While the 
absorption and calibrated fluorescence measurements compare well at 3.1 atm. the OH 
fluorescence values are -25% below the concentrations from absorption at 6.1 atm. indicating an 
effective error of -25% in the balanced cross-rate model beyond that in the atmospheric flame. 
We anticipate that with a reasonable estimate of the quenching correction factor, one can measure 
OH concentrations within ±50% up to pressures of ~1 atm. We have also presented absolute OH 
concentration profiles for lean laminar flames at 1. 3.1. 6.1. 9.2 and 12.3 atm; to our knowledge, 
these are the first high-pressure absolute concentration measurements of OH perfomied with LIF. 



55 



Finally, we have employed a method for making quenching-independent LSF measurements 
in our CzHqIOzI^z flanies. With this technique, one uses two fluorescence detection geometries; 
the ratio of the two fluorescence signals is a function of the quenching rate coefficient and the spatial 
dependence of the laser irradiance. As long as the laser spatial profile is invariant, the ratio of the 
two fluorescence signals depends only on the relative quenching rate coefficient. Thus, the 
fluorescence signals from either geometry, which have been calibrated at one condition, can be 
corrected for their finite sensitivity to quenching from this in situ measurement. In this work, we 
calibrated the fluorescence signals with absorption measurements at 1 atm and generated the 
requisite quenching correction function from saturation curves. The fluorescence voltages from 
flames at 3. 1 , 6. 1 and 9.2 atm were adjusted for changes in quenching relative to the atmospheric 
flame, using the experimentally-determined correction factor. The resulting absolute OH 
concentration profiles agreed well with those determined by the standard LSF methodology. 

8.2 Recommendations 

For the high-pressure combustion facility, we make the following recommendations for an 
improved design. 

1 . Using the condenser and water trap on the exhaust line, the water 
was effectively eliminated from the exhaust system; however, for the 
pressure vessel a drainage system should be designed to direct the 
water collecting on the interior surfaces to the trap beneath the 
bottom flange. This would ensure that the accumulation of water 
does not interfere with the operation of the burner or the electronic 
components. 

2. Though the optical translation stage used for horizontal movement 
is adequate for most purposes, it does exhibit significant side-play; 
for more accurate positioning of the burner, the current translation 
stage should be replaced by a system with reduced side-play (for 
instance a Newport model M-425-1S stage or a linear bearing/shaft 
arrangement). 



156 



3. The width of the burner guard ring (Fig. 4.4) should be reduced to 
allow a higher velocity of guard flowforthe equivalent volumetric flow 
of gas. This becomes increasingly important at high pressures, since 
gas consumption can be large. Finally, for modelling purposes (i.e., 
providing a tractable boundary condition), the grain size of the 
sintered bronze flameholder (-100 nm) should be reduced, since 
this dimension should be small compared to the flame stand-off 
distance. 
We also note that with LSF (where only a small amount of the total fluorescence is observed), 
single-shot measurements using our facility were not possible for OH number densrties < 1 0^6 cm-3, 
because of the small solid angle of fluorescence collection afforded by placing the fluorescence 
collection lens outside the pressure vessel. However, single-shot measurements would be more 
feasible by mounting the fluorescence collection lens inside the vessel on the window-housing 
flange; this could result in a 10 to 20-fold increase in signal. An additional increase in signal can 
be obtained by opening the monochromator exit slit; the maximum width, of course, is limited by 
the requirement for spectral isolation of the detected transition. This approach also has the 
advantage of decreasing the sensitivity of the fluorescence signal to collisional broadening. 

Improved flame stability for the flat flame burner would allow absorption measurements at 
pressures higher than 6 atm. Consequently, one could further characterize the depletion of the 
laser-coupled levels as a function of pressure; this would be useful when trying to apply LSF for 
OH measurements at pressures to 20 atm, for example. As noted in Chapter 6. one can potentially 
estimate the spatially-averaged depletion of the laser-coupled levels from the temporal fluorescence 
profile. This would require an OH dynamic model, albeit a simpler one (using perhaps only a few 
energy stales) than that described in Chapters 3 and 6. This modelling is of course made easier 
when the temporal pulse is distinctive (i.e., containing two or more temporal lobes, which for the 
Quanta-Ray Nd:YAG is obtainable through the setting of the Q-switch delay). The necessary input 
to the model would include descriptions of the laser temporal and spatial profiles and a rough 
estimate of the center-line laser irradiance; the spatial profile could perhaps be obtained from a 
saturation curve (as we did in Chapter 6). The spatially-averaged depletion could then be found 
by matching the experimental temporal profile with the computational profile for a specific 
spatially-averaged depletion. 



157 



Finally, for the quenching-independent measurements employing the two detection 
geometries (Chapter 7), we expect a significant improvement in spatial resolution upon reducing 
reflected UV radiation from the windows. This could be accomplished with the appropriate 
anti-reflection coatings for the laser entry and exit windows. For the high-pressure facility, an 
anti-reflection coating is preferable to a Brewster-angle window, because of the large displacement 
of the laser beam accompanying insertion of a Brewster window (thus making the optical alignment 
more difficult). In addition, the Cottereau method would be improved with the use of 
volume-absorbing neutral density filters appropriate for the UV. This would eliminate much of the 
uncertainty in the quenching calibration and saturation curves. With good spatial resolution and 
accurate quenching calibration and saturation cun/es, the Conereau method is a good alternative 
to the method used by Barlow et al. (1 989a, 1 989b; see also Chapter 2), potentially offering greater 
accuracy and reduced complexity for absolute concentration measurements of OH in turbulent 
flames. 



158 



LIST OF REFERENCES 



Abramowitz, M. and Stegun, I.A. (1968). Handbook of Mathematical Functions, Dover Publications, 
New York. 

Alkemade, C.Th.J., (1985). Anomalous saturation curves in laser-induced fluorescence. 

Spectrochim. Acta 40B, 1331. 
Altkorn, R. and Zare. R.N. (1984). Effects of saturation on laser-induced fluorescence measurements 

of population and polarization. Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 35, 265. 

Andresen. P.. Bath, A., Groger, W., Lutf. H.W.. Meijer, G., andter Meulen, J.J. (1988). Laser-induced 
fluorescence writh tunable excimer lasers as a possible method for instantaneous temperature 
field measurements at high pressures: checks with an atmospheric flame. Appl. Opt. 27, 
365. 

Armstrong, B.H. (1967). Spectrum line profiles: the Voigt function. J0SflT17, 61. 

Barlow, R.S., Dibble, R.W., Chen J.Y., Lucht, R.P. (1989). Effect of Damkohler Number on 
superequilibrium OH concentration in turbulent nonpremixed jet flames. AIAA-89-0061. 

Barlow. R.S., Dibble, R.W., Lucht. R.P. (1989). Simultaneous measurement of Raman scattering 
and laser-induced OH fluorescence in nonpremixed turbulent jet flames. Opt. Lett. 14, 263. 

Baronavski. A.P. and McDonald, J.R. (1977). Measurement of Cj concentrations in an 
oxygen-acetylene flame: an application of saturation spectroscopy. J. Chem. Phys. 66, 3300. 

Bonczyk, P.A. and Shirley, J.A. (1979). Measurement of CH and CN concentration in flames by 
laser-induced saturated fluorescence. Combust. Flame 34, 253. 

Bradley, D. and Matthews K.J. (1968). Measurement of high gas temperatures with fine wire 
thermocouples. J. Mech. Eng. Sci. 1 0, 299. 

Breene. R.G. (1 961 ). The Shift and Shape of Spectral Lines, Pergamon, New York. 

Campbell, D.H. (1984a). Collisional effects on laser-induced fluorescence measurements of 
hydroxide concentration in a combustion environment. 1: effects for v'=0 excitation. Appl. 

Opt. 23. 689. 

Campbell, D.H. (1984b). Collisional effects on laser-induced fluorescence measurements of 
hydroxide concentration in a combustion environment. 2: effects for v'=1 excitation. Appl. 

Opf. 23. 1319. 
Carlone, C. and Dalby, F.W. (1969). Spectrum of the hydroxyl radical. Can. J. Phys. 47. 1945. 

Carter. CD.. Salmon, J.T., King. G.B., and Laurendeau, N.M. (1987). Feasibility of hydroxyl 
concentration measurements by laser-saturated fluorescence in high-pressure flames. Appl. 
Opf. 26, 4551. 



159 



Carter, CD., King, G.B., and Laurendeau, N.M. (1 989). A combustion facility for higfi-pressure flame 
studies by spectroscopic methods. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 60, 2606. 

Chan, C. and Daily, J.W. (1980). Laser excitation dynamics of OH in flames. Appl. Opt. 19, 1357. 

Chao, B.H. and Law, C.K. (1988). Duality, pulsating instability, and product dissociation in burner 
stabilized flames. Combust. Sci. Tech. 62, 21 1 . 

Copeland, R.A., Dyer, M.J., and Crosley, D.R. (1985). Rotational-level-dependent quenching of 
A2E+ OH and OD. J. Chem. Phys. 82, 4022. 

Cottereau, M.J. (1986). Single-shot laser-saturated fluorescence measurements: a new method. 
Appl. Opt. 25. 744. 

Daily, J.W. (1977). Saturation effects in laser induced fluorescence spectroscopy. Appl. Opt. 16, 
568. 

Daily, J.W. (1978). Saturation of fluorescence in flames with a Gaussian laser beam. Appl. Opt. 
17,225. 

Dieke, G.H. and Crosswhite, H.M. (1962). The ultraviolet bands of OH. JQSRT 2, 97. 

Dimpfl, W.L and Kinsey, J.L (1979). Radiative lifetimes of 0H(A2E) and Einstein coefficients for 
the A-X system of OH and OD. JQSRT 25, 1 1 1 . 

Doherty, R.M. and Crosley, D.R. (1984). Polarization of laser-induced fluorescence in an 
atmospheric pressure flame. Appl. Opt. 23, 713. 

Drake, M.C. and Pitz. R.W. (1985). Comparison of turbulent diffusion flame measurements of OH 
by planar fluorescence and saturated fluorescence. Experiments in Fluids 3, 283. 

Drake, M.C, Pitz, R.W., Lapp, M., Fenimore, C.P., Lucht, R.P., Sweeney, D.W., and Laurendeau, 
N.M. (1984). Measurements of superequilibrium hydroxyl concentrations in turbulent 
nonpremixed flames using saturated fluorescence. Twentieth Symposium (International) on 
Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, 327. 

Eckbreth, A.C. (1 988). Laser Diagnostics for Combustion Temperature and Species, Abacus Press, 
Cambridge. 

Elzinga, P.A.. Kneisler, F.J., Lytle, F.E., Jiang, Y. King, G.B., and Laurendeau N.M. (1987). 
Pump/probe method for fast analysis of visible spectral signatures utilizing asynchronous 
optical sampling. Appl. Opt. 26, 4303. 

Engleman, R. (1969). Collision broadening of transient absorption spectra. JQSRT 9, 391. 

Edwards, T., Weaver, D.P., Adams, R.. Hulsizer, S., and Campbell, D.H. (1985). High-pressure 
combustor for the spectroscopic study of solid propellant combustion chemistry. Rev. Sci. 
Instrum. 56, 2131 (1985). 

Edwards, T., Weaver, D.P.. and Campbell D.H. (1 987). Laser-induced fluorescence in high pressure 
solid propellant flames. Appl. Opt. 26, 3496. 

Fairchild, P.W., Smith, G.P., and Crosley, D.R. (1 983). Collisional quenching of A2x:+ OH at elevated 
temperatures. J. Chem. Phys. 79, 1795. 

Felton, P.G., Mantzaras, J., Bomse, D.S., and Woodin, R.L (1988). Initial two-dimensional 
laser-Induced fluorescence measurements of OH radicals in an internal combustion engine. 
SAE Technical Series Paper 881 63. 



160 



Fiechtner, G.J., Jiang. Y., King, G.B., Kneisler, R.J.. and Lytle, F.E. (1988). Determination of relative 
number density and decay rate for atomic sodium in an atmosplneric premixed flame by 
asynchronous optical sampling. Twenty-Second Symposium (International) on Combustion, 
The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh. 1915. 

Fiechtner, G.J. (1989). Measurements of atomic sodium in flames by asynchronous optical 
sarnpling. Ph.D. Thesis. School of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue University. West 
Lafayette, Indiana. 

Flower, W.L and Bowman, C.T. (1984). Measurement of the structure of sooting laminar diffusion 
fiames at elevated pressures. Twentieth Symposium (International) on Combustion, The 
Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1035. 

Flower, W.L (1986). The effect of elevated pressure on the rate of soot production in laminar 
diffusion flames. Combust Sci. Tech. 48. 31 . 

Flower, W.L and Bowman, C.T. (1986). Soot production in axisymmetric laminar diffusion flames 
at pressures from one to ten atmospheres. Twenty-first Symposium (International) on 
Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1115. 

Flower, W.L (1986). An investigation of soot formation in axisymmetric turbulent diffusion flames 
at elevated pressure. Western States Section/The Combustion Institute, Paper WSS/CI 88-29, 
Salt Lake City, Utah. 

Garland. N.L and Crosley, D.R. (1986). On the collisional quenching of electronically excited OH, 
NH, and CH in flames. Twenty-First Symposium (International) on Combustion, The 
Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1693. 

German. K.R. (1976). Collision and quenching cross sections in the A2E+ state of OH and OD. J. 
Chem. Phys. 64, 4065. 

Harris, J.M., Lytle, F.E., and McCain, T.C. (1976). Squirrel-cage photomultiplier base design for 
measurement of nanosecond fluorescence decays. Anal. Chem. 48, 2095. 

Harris, J.M., Barnes, Jr., W.T., Gustafson. T.L. Bushaw, T.H.. and Lytle, F.E. (1980). Simple, 
inexpensive photodetector for subnanosecond sources. Rev Sci. Instrum. 51 , 988. 

Harris, M.M. (1985). Effects of temperature and hydroxyl concentration on incipient soot formation 
in premixed flames. M.S. Thesis, Purdue University. W. Lafayette. Indiana. 

Herzberg. G. (1950). Spectra of Diatomic Molecules, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York. 405-435. 

Hinze. J.O. (1975). Turbulence, McGraw-Hill. New York, 85-91. 

Hjima,T. andTakeno.T. (1986). Effects of temperature and pressure on burning velocity. Combust 
Flame 65, 35. 

Hui. A.K.. Armstrong. B.H.. and Wray. A.A. (1978). Rapid computation of the Voigt and complex 
enror functions. JOSflT 19. 509. 

Humlicek. J. (1979). An efficient method for evaluation of the complex probability function: the 
Voigt function and its derivatives. JQSRT 21 , 309. 

Jeffries. J.B.. Kohse-Hoinghaus, K.. Smith, G.P.. Copeland, R.A., and Crosley. D.R. (1988). 
Rotational-level-dependent quenching of 0H(A2E+) at flame temperatures. Chem. Phys. Lett. 
152. 160. 



161 



Kohse-Hoinghaus, K., Perc. W., and Just, Th. (1983). Laser-induced saturated fluorescence as a 
method for determination of radical concentrations in flames. Ber. Bunsenges. Phys. Chem. 
87, 1052. 

Kohse-Hoinghaus, K., Perc, W., and Just, Th. (1984). Determination of absolute OH and CH 
concentrations in a low pressure flame by laser-induced saturated fluorescence. Nineteenth 
Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1177. 

Kohse-Hoinghaus, K., Koczar, P., and Just, Th. (1986). Absolute concentration measurements of 
OH in low-pressure hydrogen-oxygen, methane-oxygen, and acetylene-oxygen flames. 
Twenty-First Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, 
1719. 

Kohse-Hoinghaus, K.. Jeffries, J.B., Copeland, R.A., Smith, G.P., and Crosley, D.R. (1988). The 
quantitative LIF determination of OH concentrations in low-pressure flames. Twenty-Second 
Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1 857. 

Korn, A.K. and Korn, T.M. (1 968). Mathematical Handbook for Scientists and Engineers, McGraw-Hill, 
New York. 

Kramers, H. (1946). Heat transfer from spheres to flowing media. Physica 12, 61. 

Laurendeau, N.M., Goldsmith, J.E.M. (1989). Comparison of hydroxyl concentration profiles using 
five laser-induced fluorescence methods in a lean subatmospheric-pressure H2/02/Ar flame. 
Combust. Sci. Tech. 63, 139. 

Lee, M.P., Paul, P.H., and Hanson, R.K. (1986). Laser-fluorescence imaging of O2 in combustion 
flows using an ArF laser. Opt. Lett. 11,7. 

Lengel, R.K and Crosley, D.R. (1977). Energy transfer in A2E+ OH. I. rotational. J. Chem. Phys. 

67, 2085. 

Lengel, R.K. and Crosley, D.R. (1978). Energy transfer in A2E+ OH. II. vibrational. J. Chem. Phys. 

68, 5309. 

Lucht, R.P., Peterson, R.C., and Laurendeau, N.M. (1978). Fundamentals of absorption 
spectroscopy for selected diatomic flame radicals. Report PURDU-CL-78-06, School of 
Mechanical Engineering, Purdue University. West Lafayette, Indiana. 

Lucht. R.P., Sweeney, D.W., and Laurendeau. N.M. (1980a). In Laser probes for combustion 
chemistry. D.R. Crosley (Ed.). American Chemical Society. ACS Symposium Series, 
Washington, D.C., 134, 145. 

Lucht. R.P., Sweeney, D.W., and Laurendeau, N.M. (1980b). Balanced cross-rate model for 
saturated fluorescence in flames using a nanosecond pulse length laser. Appl. Opt. 1 9, 3295. 

Lucht, R.P. (1981). Experimental and theoretical investigations of laser-saturated OH fluorescence 
inflames. Ph.D. Thesis, School of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, 
Indiana. 

Lucht, R.P.. Sweeney. D.W., and Laurendeau, N.M, (1 982). Temperature measurements by two-line 
laser-saturated fluorescence in flames. Appl. Opt. 21 . 3729. 

Lucht, R.P.. Sweeney, D.W., and Laurendeau. N.M. (1983). Laser-saturated fluorescence 
measuremertts of OH concentration in flames. Combust. Flame 50. 189. 



152 



Lucht, R.P., Sweeney, D.W., Laurendeau, N.M., Drake, M.C., Lapp, M., and Pitz, R.W. (1984). 
Single-pulse, laser-saturated fluorescence measurements of OH in turbulent flames, Opt. 
Lett. 9. 90. 

Lucht RP., Sweeney. D.W., and Laurendeau, N.M. (1985). Laser-saturated fluorescence 
measurements of OH in atmospheric pressure CH4/O2/N2 flames under sooting and 
non-sooting conditions. Combust. Sci. Tech. 42, 259. 

Lucht, R.P.. Sweeney, D.W., and Laurendeau, N.M. (1986). Time-resolved fluorescence 
investigation of rotational transfer in A2E+ (v=0) OH. Appl. Opt. 25, 4086. 

Macomber, J.D. (1968). A bibliography of transient effects in resonant elastic response of matter 
to an intense light pulse. IEEE J. Quant. Bee. QE-9, 1. 

Mailander, M. (1978). Determination of absolute transition probabilities and particle densities by 
saturated fluorescence excitation. J. Appl. Phys. 49, 1 256. 

Matsumoto, R.. Nakajima, T, Kimoto. K. Noda, S., and Maeda, S. (1982). An experimental study on 
low frequency oscillation and flame-generated turbulence in premixed/diffusion flames. 
Combust. Sci. Tech. 27, 103. 

Pasternack. L. Baronavski, A.P., and McDonald, J.R. (1 978). Application of saturation spectroscopy 
for measurement of atomic Na and MgO in acetylene flames. J. Chem. Phys. 69, 4830. 

Penner. S.S. (1959). Quantitative Molecular spectroscopy and Gas Emissivities, Addison-Wesley, 
Reading, Mass. 

Peterson, R.C. (1981). Kinetics of hydrogen-oxygen-argon and hydrogen-oxygen-argon-pyridine 
combustion using a flat flame burner. Ph.D. Thesis, School of Mechanical Engineering, 
Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana. 

Peterson, R.C. and Laurendeau, N.M. (1985). The emittance of yttrium-beryllium oxide 
thermocouple coating. Combust. Flame. 60, 279. 

Piepmeier, E.H. (1972a). Theory of laser saturated atomic resonance fluorescence. Spectrochim. 
Acta 27B,A3A. 

Piepmeier. E.H. (1972b). Influence of non-quenching collisions upon saturated resonance 
fluorescence. Spectrochim. Acta 27B, 445. 

Press, W.H., Flannery, B.P., Teukolsky, S.A., and Vetterling, W.T. (1 986). Numerical Recipes: The 
Art of Scientific Computing, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 

Rea. E.C., Chang, A.Y., and Hanson, R.K. (1987). Shock tube study of pressure broadening of the 
A2E+-X2n (0,0) band of OH by Ar and N2. JQSRT 37, 1 1 7. 

Rea, E.C.. Chang. A.Y., and Hanson, R.K. (1989). Collisional broadening of the A2E+^X2n (0,0) 
band of OH by HgO and CO2 in atmospheric-pressure flames. JQSRT 41 , 29 

Rensberger, K.J., Jeffries. J.B.. and Crosley. D.R. (1989). Vibrational relaxation of OH (X2ni. v=2). 
J. Chem. Phys. 90. 2nA. 

Salmon, J.T.. Lucht. R.P.. Sweeney. D.W.. and Laurendeau. N.M. (1984). Laser-saturated 
fluorescence measurements of NH in a premixed subatmospheric CH4/N20/Ar flame. 
Twentieth Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute. Pittsburgh. 
1187. 

Salmon. J.T. and Laurendeau, N.M. (1985a). Calibration of laser-saturated fluorescence 
measurements using Rayleigh scattering. Appl. Opt. 24. 65. 



163 



Salmon, J.T. and Laurendeau, N.M. (1985b). Analysis of probe volume effects associated with 
laser-saturated fluorescence measurements. Appl. Opt. 24, 1313. 

Salmon, J.T. (1986a). Quantitative fluorescence measurements of atomic hydrogen in flames via 
two-photon absorption. Ph.D. Thesis, School of Mechanical Er^ineering, Purdue University, 
West Lafayette, Indiana. 

Salmon. J.T. (1986b). Private communication. 

Schofield, K. (1979). Rate constants for reactions of excited species. J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data. 8, 
763. 

Schwarzwald, R., Monkhouse, P., and Wolfrum, J. (1987). Picosecond fluorescence lifetime 
measurement of the OH radical in an atmospheric pressure flame. Chem. Phys. Lett. 142, 
15. 

Schwarzwald, R.. Monkhouse, P., and Wolfrum, J. (1988). Fluorescence studies of OH and CN 
radicals In atmospheric pressure flames using picosecond excitation. Twenty-Second 
Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1413. 

Smith, G.P. and Crosley, D.R. (1981). Quantitative laser-induced fluorescence in OH: transition 
probabilrties and the influence of energy transfer. Eighteenth Symposium (International) on 
Combustion. The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1511. 

Smith, G.P. and Crosley, D.R. (1983). Vibrational energy transfer in A2E+ OH in flames. Appl. Opt. 
22, 1428. 

Stepowski, D. and Cottereau, M.J. (1 979). Direct measurement of local OH concentration in a flame 
from the fluorescence induced by a single laser pulse. Appl. Opt. 18, 354. 

Stepowski, D. and Conereau, M.J. (1981). Study of the collisional lifetime of hydroxyl (22+, v'=0) 
radical in flames by time-resolved laser-induced fluorescence. Combust. Flame 40, 65. 

Takubo, Y., Yano. Matsuoka, H., and Shimazu, M. (1 983). Saturation behavior of laser-induced CH 
fluorescence in a propane-air flame. JQSRT 30, 163. 

Varghese, P.L and Hanson, R.K. (1984). Collisional narrowing effects on spectral line shapes 
measured at high resolution. Appl. Opt. 23, 2376. 

Verdieck, J.F. and Bonczyk, P.A. (1981). Laser-induced saturated fluorescence investigations of 
Chi, CN, and NO in flames. Eighteenth Symposium (International) on Combustion, The 
Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1559. 

Wang, C.C, Killinger, D.K., and Huang, C. (1980). Rotational dependence in the linewidth of the 
ultraviolet transitions of OH. Phys. Rev. A 22, 188. 

Williams, F.A. (1985). Combustion Theory, The Benjamin/Cummings Publishing Co., Menio Park, 
California, 130. 

Wysong, I.J., Raiche, G.A., Jeffries, J.B., and Crosley, D.R. (1989). Quenching and energy transfer 
in OH. Western States Section/The Combustion Institute, Paper WSS/CI 89-43. Livermore, 
Cal'ifornia. 

Zizak, G., Lanauze, J.A., and Winefordner. J.D. (1986). An experimental study of the excited state 
rotational population of OH in flames using laser induced fluorescence. Combust. Flame 65, 
203. 



164 



Appendix A - Flow Control Routine 

In this appendix, we include a listing of the flow control program described in Chapter 4. The 
routine has four major sections, the purposes of which are as follows: (1) the main routine, which 
handles the selection of menu options; (2) the display package, which initializes and updates the 
primary display (including the flow rates) and handles some I/O functions; (3) the communications 
package, which controls RS232 communications with the Linde Readout-and-Controi (ROC) box, 
including conversion between ASCII strings and floating-point numbers; and (4) the package for 
scaling the flow rates with changes in pressure (see Chapter 4). The routine automatically detects 
the graphics display adaptor and will thus work on most IBM PC compatibles. The package was 
written using Turbo C and may employ some library functions which are unique to this product. 



/* Section 1 

,*«*••••*•*••********•••***•*********•*••*•*•****♦*****•**•**•*******•*******/ 

, .„„„........««*««»..........«..«. V 

/* ROUTINE HAINO J 

I* J 

I* PURPOSE: To control the ROC box *l 

/..***•*••*«•*♦****••**•**********•*•••****•*********************************/ 

finclude <stdio.h> 
(Hinclude <conio.h> 
#include <m8th.h> 
#include <stdlib.h> 
•include <dos.h> 

#define LINE 23 

#define NORM 7 

•define REVERSE 112 
•define ESC Oxib 

•define ON 1 
•define OFF 

•define INC 1 

•define DEC 

•define ETHNOX 3.5 

struct text info initial; 

float llowC] = {0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0>; 

float flow_tttp[] = {0.0, 0.0. 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0); 

int iorocCchar, char []); 

void cstringCchar [] , float []); 

void led(float []); 

void pled(float); 

void adpres_int(int); 

void adpres(float •); 

void myputC int, int, int, char []); 

int myuetsCchar []); 

void incr«nent{int, float); 

void fspd rd(int *); 

void fspdIcaU float, float, float *, float •); 

void fspd_cl(); 

int cursor(int); 



165 



!in() 



FILE •free; 

char key, stIOO], buf [80*25*2] ; 

int i, ], direction, fspeed_file, frec_file, chan, 

channel [5] , power = OFF; 
float pressure, pressure_old; 
float inc. kO, k1, k2, rfO, rf2, phi, phi_trg, phi_stp; 

static char rtienu[5] [85] = { 
{" HAIM: <B> <H> <M> <P> <Q> 
(" SET LOOP: <1> <2> <3> 
(" TWEAK LOOP: <1> <2> <3> <4> <5> 
{" MIXTURE LOOP: <H> 

(" PRESSURE LOOP: <H> 

>; 

static char label [19] [85] = { 



<R> <S> <T> <V> <Z> 




<4> <H> <R> <ESC> 




<6> <H> <I> <D> <R> <ESC> 




<ESC> 




<ESC> 





{"(DFUEL 


(2)0XYGEH (3)DILUENT (4)BATH 


•■>. 


{"(l)FUEL 


(2)0XYCEN {3>DILUENT {4)BATH {5>FUEL/0X (6)0X/DIL (7)FUEL/0X/DIL 


">. 


t"( DFUEL 




">, 


<" 


(2)0XYGEN 


">, 


{" 


{3)DILUENT 


">. 


{" 


(4)BATH 


">, 


<" 


C5)FUEL/0X 


">. 


{" 


(6)0X/DIL 


">, 


{" 


(7)FUEL/0X/DIL 


"), 


{»+ + ♦ + 


+ + + + + + + + + + + + + + ♦ + + + + + + ♦ + ♦ + + ••• + + + + + + ♦♦ + 




<:■' 


READ THE CONTROL VALVE FLOW RATES 


{" ERROR: A/0 CHANNEL FOR PRESSURE SIGNAL HAS NOT BEEN SPECIFIED -> REBOOT 


">. 


{" 


TARGET EQUIVALENCE RATIO HAS BEEN REACHED 


">, 


f" 


PRESSURIZE THE VESSEL 


">, 


{" 


ZERO THE CONTROL VALVE FLOW RATES 


">, 


<" 


BOOT UP THE CONTROL PROGRAM 


">, 


{" 


VENT THE PRESSURE VESSEL 


">, 


{" 


PRESSURE CHANGE TOO LARGE -> VENT THE PRESSURE VESSEL 


") 



J; 

/***♦*****••••*********••**••*******•*•******♦****************************•**/ 

/• Begin the loop for control of the floM rates */ 

/•*♦**************•****♦******•**********••••***♦*******•********************/ 

gettextinfo(tinitial); 

gettextd, 1, 80, 25, buf); 

displayO; 

windowd, 1, 80, 25); 

myputd, 1, REVERSE, menulO]); 

for(;;)t 

key = getchO; 
/••******•*»*♦*******•****•******♦*****************•*********************••*•/ 
/* If '0' or 'q' has been entered QUIT the program */ 

/••*****•*•••••••***••*»*•************••**************************•*♦*****••*/ 

if (key « '0' || key == 'q')t 
elrscrO; 

puttextd, 1, 80, 25, buf); 
gotoxydnitial.curx, initial.cury); 
cursor (ON); 
break; 
J 
/♦****•••••♦*♦******•***»•********•***************************••********•***•/ 

/• If 'B' or 'b' has been entered BOOT up the program */ 

/♦»******•*************••♦*********••*******************•********************/ 



166 



if (key == 'B' || key == 'b')<: 

iorocCR', s); 

cstringCs, flow); 

led(floH); 

myputCLINE, 1, REVERSE, label [16]); 

/„.««**«««...*..**« ********** *". ""* * V 

/• Get the channel for the pressure transducer */ 

,t***************************************************************************/ 

niyput(LINE+2, 1, NORM, "Pressure signal channel (1-6): "); 
if(inygets<s) == 0«){ 
Chan = atoi(s); 
if (Chan >= 1 W chan <= 6) C 
power = ON; 
adpres_int(chan); 
adpres(&pressure); 
pled (pressure); 
> 
} 
> 

,**********.** . ************** . *" *"."* "/ 

/• If iRi or 'r' has been entered, read and display the */ 

/* set and measured flow rates and pressure */ 

,*•**•*****•***♦********••**••**•************••**••************•*************/ 

else if(key == 'R' || key == 'r') { 
iorocCR', s); 
cstring(s, flow_tmp); 
for(i=5; i <= 8 ;i++) 

flow[i-1] = flow_tmp[i-1]; 
led(flow); 

/* Read and display the pressure (if POWER = ON) */ 

; — ******** — ******** — — "•" * — V 

if{poMer »= 0N){ 

adpres(&pressure); 

pi ed( pressure); 
> 



/• If «$" or 's' has been entered, set the flow rate */ 

/♦*******•»•******•**••*•••••****•*•**********•***************************•**/ 

else if(key == 'S' || key == 's'){ 

myputd, 1, REVERSE, iiienu[1]); 
/•. ************** ********* ************* V 

/* Get the character and set the CHANNEL [] array V 

/♦*«•******••••********••**••*****♦♦*•***•**•••***••**********••*************/ 

for(;;){ 

myputdlNE, 1, REVERSE, label [0]); 
for(i=1; i <= 4 ;i*+) 

channel [i] = OFF; 
key = getchO; 

if(key >= '1' M key <= '«'){ 
gotoxy(1,25); 
clreoU); 
if (key " '1'){ 

channeltl] = ON; 

myputdlNE, 1, REVERSE, label [2]); 

) 

else If (key == ■2')<: 

channel [2] = ON; 

myputdlME, 1, REVERSE, label [3J); 
> 



167 



else if (key == 'S'X 

channel [3] = ON; 

myputdlNE, 1, REVERSE, labeU4] ); 
> 
else if(key == '«•)< 

channel t4] = ON; 

myputdlME, 1, REVERSE, label [5]); 
} 
/•*♦♦*****•••*»•*****♦****************************•*************♦************/ 
/* Get and set the flow rates */ 

/**•»****•*****♦*••*********************♦*******•***********************•****/ 

inyput(LINE+2, 1, NORM, "FLOW RATE (LPM): "); 
if{ niygets(s) == 0N)<: 

for{i = 1; i <= A ;i++)<: 

if (channel [i] == OH)C 

flowti-13 = atof(s); 
increnient( i , flou[i-1]); 
) 
J 

led(flow}; 
} 

gotoxy(1,25); 
clreolO; 
> 
/*♦***••*••*•********•****•********••••*****•••*************•••************•*/ 
/• If 'R' or 'r' has been input read the */ 

/• flow rates and pressure */ 

else if(key == 'R' || key == T'X 
iorocCR', s); 
cstring(s, floH_tmp); 
for(i=5; i <= 8 ;i++) 

flowti-l) = flow_trop[i-1]; 
led(ftow}; 
if (power == OMX 

Bdpres(&pressure); 
pi ed( pressure); 
> 
> 
/•♦♦*♦♦***••*******♦♦******•**•*******♦*******************••************••***/ 

/• If ESC is hit, escape from the SET loop •/ 

^•****»»***************»*****************************************************/ 

else if(key « ESC){ 

myputd, 1, REVERSE, menutO]); 
break; 
> 
> 
> 
/**♦******••***•*********•***♦**•♦♦*****************•*****************•******/ 

/* If 'T' or 't' has been entered TUEAK the control valves V 

y***********»*************************************************************»**/ 

else ifCkey == 'T' || key == 't'){ 

myputd, 1. REVERSE, menuCZ]); 
for(i=0; i <- 4 ;i**) 

channel [i] = OFF; 

»»**•****•*••*•**•**********••*•*•*************•***♦»•*•••*****•*********/ 

/• Get the increment character string */ 

/**♦*•**••**•*•*************••*•***♦***************••••••****************/ 



168 



lltyput(LlNE+2, 1, NORM, "FLOW RATE INCREMENT (1.0 > INC > 0.0): "); 
if( inygets(s) == 0N){ 

inc = atof<s); 

ifd'nc < II inc > 1.0) 
break; 

myputdlNE, 1, REVERSE, label t1]); 

/• Beflin Increment loop */ 

for{;;){ 

key = flctchO; 

/* If "1" through "7" has been input •/ 

/* set the logic array CHANNEL "/ 

if (key >= '1' M key <= '7'){ 
for(i=1; i <= 4 ;i++) 

channel [i) = OFF; 
if (key == '!'){ 

channel t1] = ON; 

niyput(LINE, 1, REVERSE, label (2)); 
> 
else if (key == '2'){ 

channel t2] = ON; 

iTiyput(LINE, 1, REVERSE, label [3]); 
> 
else if (key == '3'){ 

channel [3] = ON; 

n]yput(LINE, 1, REVERSE, label [A]); 
> 
else if(key == '4"){ 

channel [4] = ON; 

myput(LlNE, 1, REVERSE, label 15)); 
> 
else if (key «= '5')<: 

channel [1) = ON; 

channel [2] = ON; 

i!iyput(LINE, 1, REVERSE, label [6]); 
) 
else if (key « '6'){ 

channeU2] = ON; 

channel [3] = ON; 

■VputCLINE, 1, REVERSE, label 17]); 
> 
else if(key « '7'){ 

channel [1] = ON; 

channel [2] = ON; 

channel [31 = ON; 

iiiyput(LINE, 1, REVERSE, label [8] ); 
) 
> 

/• If 'R' or 'r' has been input */ 

/* read the flow rates ar>d pressure */ 

else if (key «= 'R' || key « 'r'){ 

niyput(LINE+1, 1, REVERSE, label [11]); 
iorocCR', s); 
cstring(s, flow_ti«p); 
for{i=5; i <= 8 ;i++) 

floMti-1] « flow_tmp[i-1]; 
led(flow); 



169 



if (power == ONK 

adpres(&pressure}; 
pled(pressure); 
> 
> 
/♦**********♦**♦*****•••**********************♦****************♦*********/ 
/* If 'I' or 'i' has been input increnient the */ 

/• flows V 

#**♦*♦•*•*»••••♦**************•***********•***************•*************•/ 

else if (key == M' || key == 'i'X 

myputdlNE+l, 1, REVERSE, label t9]); 
for{i=1; i <= A ;i++){ 

if(channelti] == 0N){ 

flow[i-1] = floH[i-1]*(1 + inc); 
incremenKi, floH[i-1]); 
) 
> 

ledCflow); 
} 
/•****♦***••*•********************♦******************************♦*******/ 
I* If 'D' or 'd' has been input decrement the •/ 

/• flows •/ 

/••*••****♦******************•***************•*******♦******•••*•********/ 

else if (key == 'D' || key == "d'X 

myput(L!NE*1, 1, REVERSE, label [10) ); 
for(i=1; i <= U ;i++)< 

if(channel[i] == ON)t 

flow[i-1] = flow[i-1]*(1 - inc); 
increnient(t, flow[i-1]); 
> 
> 

led(flow); 
} 
/*♦**♦♦*••********♦******•****••*•**********•*****•**********************/ 
/• If ESC is hit, escape from the loop */ 

/««««*♦♦«**••*•**♦♦*♦*********•********♦**♦****♦*•••*•**•****************/ 

else if(key == ESC){ 

myputd, 1, REVERSE, menutO]); 
break; 
} 
} 
} 
> 
/♦***♦***•♦•*•***********•*****♦*********••*******••*********************/ 
/• If 'M'or 'm' has been entered, change the equivalence ratio •/ 

else if (key « 'M' || key " 'm') { 

if(flowt1] == 0.0 II flowtOJ == 0.0)C 

mvput(LINE+1, 27, REVERSE, 

"FLOW RATES CANNOT BE ZERO"); 

delaydOOO); 

break; 
> 
if(power == OFF) t 

myputdlNE, 1, REVERSE, label 1121); 

delaydOOO); 

break; 
} 

fspd rd(Sfspeed_f ile); 
if(fspeed file == OFF)<; 

myputdlNE, 24, REVERSE, 

"FLAME DATA FILE CANNOT BE OPENED"); 



170 



break; 
> 
Ihyputd, 1, REVERSE, merHJ[3]); 

/• Check if the A/D channels have been specified */ 

/• properly. If not, break from the loop */ 

/****•**♦**•**»•*••****•••****♦*********•***•*********••**••********•****/ 

phi_stp = 0.0005; 

phi = (flow[0]/flowt1]) • ETHMOX; 

sprintf(s, "Equivalence ratio X«.2f; target value: ", phi); 

myputdlNE, 1, NORM, s); 

if{ niygets(s) == OFF) 

break; 
phi_trg = atof(s); 
if(phi_trg <= 0) 

break; 
if(phi_trg > phi) 

direction = INC; 
else 

direction = DEC; 
adpresC&pressure); 

fspd cal (pressure, phi, irfO, 4rf2); 
kO =~flowtO]/rfO; 
k1 = flowt1]/rfO; 
k2 = flow[2]/rf2; 
phi = phi + phi_stp; 
for(;;) { 

/• If ESC is hit, exit from MIXTURE option •/ 

ifCkbhitO &£ getchO == ESC) { 
fspd cU); 

myputd, 1, REVERSE, menutO)); 
break; 
) 

/ *««. .. *«...*«..«**..*..»«....*.. .. "../ 

/• Execute the logic sequence to step the */ 

/* equivalence ratio */ 

if(direction « INC) { 

if(phi >= phi_trg) { 

myputdlNE, 1, REVERSE, label [13]); 

myputd, 1, REVERSE, menutO)); 

break; 
> 
else if(phi + phi_stp > phi_trg) 

phi = phi_trg; 
else if(phi + phi_stp <= phi_trg) 

phi = phi + phi_stp; 

> 
else { 

if(phi <= phi trg) { 

myputCUNE, 1, REVERSE, label [13]); 

myputd, 1, REVERSE, menu[0]); 

break; 
} 
else if<phi - phi_stp < phi_trg) 

phi = phi_trg; 
else if(phi - phi_stp >« phi_trg) 

phi = phi - phi_stp; 



171 



/*♦*****•*********♦****•****♦***♦♦***************************************/ 
/* Determine the flame speed ratio for the */ 

/* pressure and equivalence ratio. Update •/ 

/• the flow array */ 

»********♦*♦****»*********************♦*♦*******••*******************•***/ 

fspd caUpressure, phi, &rfO, &rf2); 

flowTO] = rfO * kO; 

flowtl] = floHlO] * ETHNOX/phi; 

flow[2] = flowCl] * k2/k1; 

for{i=1; i <= 3; i++) 

incrementCi, floM[i-1]); 

led(ftow); 

pled(pressure); 

k1 = flowC1]/(flow[0] + flowtl] + fl0H[2]); 

k2 = flow[21/{flow[0] + flowtl] ♦ flow[2]); 

delay(IOO); 
) 
> 
/•***•*•**********•****♦*♦***••*****••******♦****•••******************•**/ 
/* If "pi or 'p' has been entered, pressurize the vessel •/ 

/**«*«********************♦♦*****•*•****************************♦*****••*/ 

else ifCkey == 'P' || key == 'p'){ 

if(flow[0] == 0.0 II flow[1] == 0.0){ 
iTiyput(LINE*1, 27, REVERSE, 

"FLOW RATES CANNOT BE ZERO"); 
break; 

} 

f spd_rd(&f speed_f i le); 

if(fspeed_file == OFF){ 

BiyputfLINE+l, 24, REVERSE, 

"FLAME DATA FILE CANNOT BE OPENED"); 

delay(IOOO); 

break; 

} 

if(power == OFF) { 

myput(LINE+1, 1, REVERSE, label [12]); 
delay(IOOO); 
break; 
) 

myputd, 1, REVERSE, n«enu[4]); 
if< (free * fopen("flame.rec", "a") ) == NULDt 
free file = OFF; 
niyput<LlNE, 1, REVERSE, 

"RECORD FILE CANNOT BE OPENED"); 
del ay (2000); 
> 
else 

frec_file = ON; 
fprintf(frec, "Pressure fuel Oxygen Diluent rfO rf2\n"); 
myput(LIHE, 1, REVERSE, label [U]); 
/*********♦*********••***************•••**•*•*************•*********•***•/ 
/* Begin the loop for incrementing the flow rates •/ 

/**************♦*****•••*•************•**•******************************•/ 

adpr es ( (pressure ) ; 

phi = flo«[0]/flowC1] * ETHNOX; 

fspd caUpressure, phi, &rfO, &rf2); 

kO «~flow[0]/rfO; 

k1 = flowri]/rfO; 

k2 = flow[2]/rf2; 

pressure old = pressure; 

for{;;)r 

if(kbhit())< 



172 



if< {key=getch{) ) == ESOC 
fspd_cU); 
if{frec_file == ON) 
fclose(frec); 
myputd, 1. REVERSE, menu[0]); 
break; 
> 

else if (key == -R' || key == T'X 
iorocCR', s); 
cstring(s, flow_tinp); 
for(i=5; i <= 8 ;i++) 

flowti-1] = flow_tmpti-l]; 
led(flow); 
> 
) 
adpresC&pressure); 



I* Vent if pressure change is 1 atm or more */ 



if(pressure-pressure_old >= 1-0 || 
pressure- pressure old <= -1.0){ 

myputdlNE, 1, "REVERSE, label [18] ); 
for(i=1; i <- 3 ,m"++){ 

flow[i-1] = 0.0; 

increment(i, flow[i-1)); 
> 

iorocC'R", s); 
cstring(s, flo«_tmp); 
for(i=5; i <= 8 ;i++) 

flo«ti-1] = flow_tinp[i-1]; 
led(flow); 
break; 

} 

if(pressure-pressure_old >= 0.1 || 
pressure-pressure_old <= -0.1 )< 

fspd_cal (pressure, phi, fcrfO, &rf2); 
flowTo] = (rfO • kO); 
floHdl = (rfO • kl); 
flowCZ] = <rf2 • k2); 
for(i=1; )<= 3; i*+) 

incrementCi.f low(i-1] ); 
led{flow); 
pled(pressure); 
pressure old = pressure; 
if(frec_?ile == ON) 

fprintf(frec, 

"X7.4f X7.4f X7.4f X7.4f X7.Af X7.4f\n", 

pressure, floH[0],floHt1),flow[2],rfO,rf2); 



/• If 'V or 'V has been entered vent the pressure vessel 



else if (key »= 'V || key « 'VX 

inyputdlNE, 1, REVERSE, label [17]); 
for(i=1; i <= 3 ;i*+){ 

flow[i-1] = 0.0; 

irKreflient(i, flo«[i-1]); 
> 

iorocCR', s); 
cstring(s, flo«_t«np); 
for(i=5; i « 8 ;i**) 



173 



flo«[i-13 = flow_tmp[i-1]; 
led(flow); 
de I ay (500); 
} 
/********•**************••*****♦♦*************************•*********•**••/ 
/• If 'Z' or '2' has been entered, zero the control valves */ 

else if (key == 'Z- || key == 'z'){ 

myputdlNE, 1, REVERSE, label [15] ); 
for(i=1; i <= 4 ;i++){ 
fl0H[i-1] = 0.0; 
incrementd", flowli-l]); 
> 

iorocCR', s); 
cstringCs, flow_tmp); 
for(i=5; i <= 8 ;i++) 

flowCi-1) = flow_ttnp[i-1]; 
led(flo«); 
delay(500); 
> 
/*******♦*♦*••**•****♦*•••******••*♦***♦************♦♦*******•******•****/ 

/* Reset the screen */ 

,*«*****♦****«•*************••***•••********•******•*******************•*/ 

windowd, LINE, 80, 25); 
clrscrO; 

windowd, 1, 80, 25); 
> 
/♦****••••*•♦*♦*****••***************•******************************•****/ 

/* End of routine MAIN */ 

/•************•******•******♦***************************•***********•••*•/ 



/***♦********♦*****♦****•*•**********************************************/ 

/• Section 2 */ 

/•****♦***•*****♦♦****♦***********•*♦♦********•••************************/ 



^include <conio.h> 
iKinclude <stdio.h> 
#include <stdlib.h> 
iKinclude <dos.h> 
#define ON 1 
mdefine OFF 
#def)ne ESC 
#define NDEC 
iVdefine COLUMN 1 
#definc START 3 
dWefine WIDTH 
iKdefine NORM 
tUdefine MAX 
#define FULL 
DUefine HALF 
^define BLANK 
lUdefine ZERO 





Oxib 

5 



4 

7 

80 

219 

221 

I I 

222 



/• Number of significnat digits •/ 



/* Starting column * 

/* Width of channel info 
/• Normal attribute 
/* MaximiBi label length 
/* Full square character 
/* Half square character 
/* Blank square character 



void mypot{int, int, int, char []); 



ROUTINE DISPLAYO 



/ 

/ 

/• 

/• PURPOSE: 



To Initialize the display 



•/ 
*/ 
V 



/*****•♦♦**********************•**********************************••*•***/ 



174 



void displayO 

int i, v_mode, line; 
char st10]~ 
/«««.««...*««....«.*«.««.«..."**.**""" ""/ 

/• Define the Initialization character strings */ 

/••♦....•.*.•..♦**...•*•••••»♦♦♦*******••••*••****••**•••••*******••••***/ 

static char label [5] tMAX+1] = { 

f'FUEL 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 l.Z ">, 

{"OXYGEN 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 ">, 

{"DILUENT 2 A 6 8 10 12 U"), 

{"BATH 5 10 15 20 25 30 35"), 

{"PRESSURE 5 10 15 "> 

>; 

static char ticlc[2] [MAX+1] = { 

{"(LPM) ">. 

{"(ATM) "> 

); 

cursor(OFF); 
clrscrO; 

uindowd, 1, 80, 25); 
/««♦..«..«.....*.............*« *.*..««..**... ............./ 

/• Print out header character strings */ 

/.*..«..««.«.«««.......«.....«.".....***....*"".."***."""/ 

for(i=0, line=START; i <= 4 ;i++, line=line*WIDTH) 
myputdine, COLUMN, NORM, label [i]); 

/* Print out tick marks */ 

for(i=1; i <* 8 ;i++) 

tick[0]t(10*i)-1] = 31; 
for(i=1; i <* 8 ;i+*) 

tick[1][{10*i)-1] = 31; 
for(i=0; i <* 4 ;i++>{ 

line = (START + 1) + (i * WIDTH); 

if(i<=3) 

myputdine, COLUMN, NORM, tick[0]); 

else 

myputdine, COLUMN, NORM, ticktl]); 
) 

/• End of routine display */ 

> 

/• INT MYGETS{CHAR S[]) */ 

/• */ 

/• PURPOSE: To fill a character array until the RETURN key is */ 
/• entered. All characters input are echoed on the */ 
/* screen until the RETURN key is hit. */ 

/«..«..*««««..«..««..*.•••"**..*.*..«"....."".«*"".""*/ 

int iiiy0ets(char s[]> 
{ 

unsigned char i, key; 

struct text_info initial; 

gettextinfo(&initial); 

/* Get the character string froai the key board */ 



175 



cursor (ON), ■ 

for(i«0; i < MAX ; ){ 

if( (keysgetehO ) == ESC){ /* if escape return */ 
cursor(OFF); 
return{OFF); 

> 

else if (key == '\b'){ /* if backspace backi^j V 
if(i >= IX 

putch('\b"); 

putchC ■); 

gotoxyCinitial.curx + --i, initial .cury); 
> 
else 

key = 'NO'; 

) 

else if(key == '\r')<: /* if return finished */ 
s[j] = '\0'; 
cursor (OFF), ■ 
if(i==0) 

return(OFF); 
return(ON); 

> 

eise< /* else store character */ 

potch(key); 
s[i] = key; 
♦+i; 
> 
) 
/**♦*****•***********••***•****♦********************•*****************•••/ 

/• End of routine MYGETSO */ 

/*♦*********»•♦*•♦*********************•*****•**********•**•*********••••/ 

> 

»*•**♦♦**•**•**♦***•***************************************************••/ 
/* VOID MYPUTdNT LINE, INT COLUMN, INT ATTRIB. CHAR SH) */ 

I* y 

I* PURPOSE: To direct the cursor position and then write / 

/* information to the CRT display */ 

/••••*******«•*•***••*************♦*************••**•********************/ 

void myput(int line, int column, int attrib, char s[]) 

< 

i nt i ; 

gotoxy(colum, line); 
textattr(8ttrib>; 
cputs(s); 

/*****♦*••♦••******************♦*********•••***•***********************••/ 

/♦ End of routine MYPUT */ 

/♦*♦*♦••••**•******•••••*****************•**•****************************/ 

textattr(NORM); 
) 

/****♦♦******•••*♦*•*********•*•*•***********•*•****••*•*****************/ 
/* VOID LEO( FLOAT FLOW) */ 

/• */ 

/* PURPOSE: To construct the character strings representing the •/ 
/• flow readings and settings */ 

/*♦****♦**•******•*•*•*************•**********************************•**/ 

void led(float flown) 

{ 

int i, j, k, line, x, bar_st[4], bar_rdI41; 

char tenpdO], sWCHAX+1); 

static float scale[4] = {100, 40, 10, 4>; 



176 



/ *«...«...* « ...„..««..**«...** ....*. ..V 

/* Convert the flow rates to character strings and put the strings */ 
/• into the display String, S */ 

/•••***♦****••*•***♦***•*••****•*********•**•***•*********•***•**********/ 

for(i=0, line=START+2; i <= 3; i++, line=line+UIDTH){ 
sliltO] = 'S'; 
sliim = ':'; 

gcvt( (double) flowtil, NDEC, tenp); 
for(j=0; j < NDEC; j*+)C 

if(te(rp[j] « '\0') 
break; 

s[il[j+2) = tempCj]; 
> 
for(k=j; k < MDEC+2; k++) 

s[i]lk+2) = ' ■; 
s[i] t9] = ZERO; 

bar_stti] = flowCi] • scaleti]; /'scale flowti] *t 

bar rdCil = fl0H[i*4] * scaleti]; 

/« — „.„..:«**.«..*.*...«....«.«.««.«...«"...***"""""•/ 

/• Construct the flow rate charcter strings given the */ 
/• scaled flow rates */ 

for(j=10; j <= 79 ;j++){ 
X = 2*j - 17; 

/.«. .**«.«*.... *.« ... ........ .. / 

/. Execute logic for displaying the measured flow */ 
/.•......................... ........................ .. / 

if (bar rdCi] < x M bar_rdti] >= (x-1) ) 

s~[i] [j] = HALF; 
else if(b8r rd[i] < x) 
s[i] tj] = BLANK; 
else ifdsar rd[i] >= x) 
sCi][j] = FULL; 

/«........................................................ *" "•/ 

/. Execute logic for displaying the set flow rates •/ 

if (bar_stti] < x M bar_stti] >= (x-2) ) 
s[i][j] = HALF; 
) 
/«.............................................. ............. / 

/• Write the string to the screen */ 

/ ................................... .. .../ 

s[i][80] = '\0'; 
got oxy( COLUMN, line); 
for(j=0; j <= HAX-1 ;j*+) 
putch(sti3 [j]); 

/............................................ — ....... "• "V 

/• End of routine LED / 

/« ............... ....... .../ 

) 

/......... .......... ......... ....... ..... ....../ 

/* VOID PLED( FLOAT PRESSURE) */ 

/• *' 

I* PURPOSE: To construct the character string representing the */ 
/. pressure */ 



/* 



V 



177 



void pled(ftoat pressure) 
{ 

float scale » 8; 

int i, J, k, X, bar; 

char tewptlO), s[MAX+1]; 

/* Initialize the character string for the pressure */ 

/•*****♦**♦******•***********•*****•*************************************/ 

stO] = 'R'; 
sCI] = ■:•; 

gcvt( (double) pressure, NDEC, temp); 
for(j=0; j < NDEC; j++)C 
tf{tefflp[j) == 'NO') 

break; 
stj+2] = tenptj:; 
> 

for(k=j; k < NDEC+2; k++) 
s[k+2] = ' '; 
s[9] = ZERO; 
bar = pressure * scale; 
/**•♦*♦**•••••••*♦**•*****••*******♦****••***************************••••/ 

/* Construct the pressure charcter string given the scaled value */ 

,♦«♦««••**««*••*•♦*♦***«*****•**♦♦***************•♦***************♦******/ 

for{i=10; i <= 79 ;i++){ 
X = 2*1 - 17; 
ifCbar < x M bar >= (x-1) ) 

s[i] = HALF; 
else if(bor < x) 

sCi] = BLANK; 
else if(bar >= x) 
Sti] = FULL; 
> 

s[80] = '\0'; 
gotoxy< COLUMN, START+18); 
for(i=0; i <= HAX-1 ;i*+) 
putch(s[i3); 
,«««««««♦**♦**«**»*•••••••***♦****•*•*••***********•**••***•********••*••/ 

/* End of routine PLED *l 
I* """ ' 

) 

/******•**•***♦******•*•***•**************•*****♦**********•************•/ 
/* INT CURSORCINT TOGGLE) */ 

/* \l 

/* PURPOSE: To turn the cursor on and off */ 

#define VIDEO 0x10 
HWefine TOP 6 
dWefine BOT 7 

int cursor(int toggle) 

union REGS regs; 
regs.h.ah = 1; 
ifCtoggle »= OtJ)t 

regs.h.ch = TOP; 

regs.h.cl = BOT; 

else if(toggle == OFF>{ 

regs.h.ch = -TOP; 

regs.h.cl = -BOT; 
) 



/****•**••*♦•*************••***********•*****•*************************••/ 



178 



*•• / 



else 

return; 
int86(VIDE0, lreg%, liregs); 

/*..*.***.*•*♦♦*«•••**••**•••••****•*••••••*••••*****•*••••••••*** 

/* End of routine cursor */ 

) 

/... • .... ...... * y 

/. Section 3 / 



#include <stdio.h> 

#inctude <conio.h> 

#include <stdlib.h> 

^include <fflath.h> 

#d€fine THR 0x3fB /* Transmitter Holding Register address •/ 

#define RBR 0x3f8 /• Receiver Buffer Register address */ 

#define MCR 0x3fc /• Modem Control Register address */ 

idefine LSR 0x3fd /* Line Status Register address */ 

#define MAX 80 

#define WAIT 2000 

int iorocCchar, char U); 

/...« . . .«..................*.. ...... ... ../ 

/. VOID CSTRINGCCHAR S[], FLOAT *P_FLOW) */ 

/• " */ 
/. PURPOSE: To convert the character string of numbers */ 
/. (terminated by a \0) to a floating point array. V 
/.«..*......*................ ................................. / 

cstring(char stl, float *p_flow) 
( 

int i, j, k, I; 

char tempCS]; 

static float scaletS] = {0.001, 1, 1, 1, 0.001, 1, 1, 1>; 

/. ..„„.„«.««.......*........................................./ 

/• Begin the loop to convert the character string to ntfbers */ 

for(i«0, j=0. 1=0; ;i*+){ 

if(s[i] == '\0') /* Break if end of string */ 

break; 

/.« .. ........ .............. ................ ..../ 

/. If character s[i] is a period or a number store in •/ 
/. character string TEMP */ 
/««.««............................... ........ / 

else if(s[i] «= '.' || (sti] >= '0' U s[i] <= ■9') ){ 
tempCj] = s[i]; 

> 

/..... «.««..... ............ ............. .../ 

/. When S is a comma or a carriage return, then it has a */ 
/. complete number. Convert the character string TEMP */ 
/. to an integer, INTGR */ 

/♦*.........**....**....*......***........................*....♦*********/ 

else if<s[i] « ',' || (s[i] == '\n' M (l == 3 1 1 I == 7) ) ){ 
tempCj] « '\0'; 

*p_flow = atof<te»np) * scaled]; 
p f low^; 
}'0; 



179 



> 
> 

/********♦****•**♦*•*****•*••***********♦*************♦*****••****♦******/ 

/* End of routine CSTRING */ 

/♦*♦***•••»♦♦*****•***•♦*****•*•************•**•******************•******/ 

) 

/♦*♦*****•♦*♦*♦***********•********••**•***************•********••••*•***/ 

/• ROUTINE IMCREMENTdNT I, FLOAT FLOW) */ 

/• V 

/* PURPOSE: To take channel CHAN and flow rate set-point FLOW •/ 
/* convert them into ASCII characters, and send them •/ 

/♦ to the ROC lx)x */ 

/♦***•***•♦****•*••••**♦******•*•****************************************/ 

void increment(int chan, float flow) 
{ 

char st10], intlOO]; 

int i, pad; 

static float scalet4] = ClOOO, 100, 100, 100); 

/***•♦*****••***♦♦***•***•*********♦*******•*•***********************♦♦**/ 

/* Send the control character 'C and the channel number */ 

/«♦•••••*♦♦********•**♦*♦***•••••••*•****♦****************♦***********•**/ 

ioroc<'C', in); 
itoa(chan, s, 10); 
iorocCsCO], in); 
/•******••******•*••**•**•*****************•*••*•***••*••*••••***•**•*••*/ 

/* Send the control character 'S' and the new flow rate set-points */ 
/*****•******♦*•***♦•♦******•***************••***•••*••*****••*•*•*******/ 

iorocCS', in); 

itoa((int) (f low*scaletchan-1] ), s, 10); 

for(i=0; sti) >= '0' M s[i] <= '9" ;i++) 

r 

pad = 4 - i; 

for(i=0; i < pad ; 1++) 

iorocCO", in); 
for<ix0; i <= O-pad) ;i++) 

ioroc{s[i], in); 
/*•*•••••••*****•**••»*•*♦***********••***•••****************♦********•*•/ 

/* End of Routine INCREWEHT */ 

/**♦*****************»•******•***♦******•******♦**********•*************•/ 

) 

/•*******«***•**********•*********♦****************************•••**•****/ 

/* INT IOROC(CHAR PROMPT, CHAR RESPONSEH) */ 

/* V 

/* PURPOSE: To send the ROC control character and retrieve the ROC */ 

/* response through the COMI port. */ 

/**••***•♦*********••**••****♦*♦*♦*****••*****••♦♦♦*******»*•************/ 

int ioroc(char prcnpt, char responseC]) 
{ 

int i, j; 

^*«*«******»*****»*******************************************************/ 

/* Send the character to the ROC box "/ 

/***•••**•******♦*•***•♦*****•**•***•••***•***************•****••****•*••/ 

outportbCMCR, 0x01); /* Send the lo RTS signal */ 

while( (inportb(LSR) & 0x20) != 0x20 ) /* Wait for hi THRE signal*/ 

f 

outportb(THR, prompt); 

whileC (inportb(LSR) & 0x60) != 0x60 ) /* wait for hi THRE & TSRE*/ 



180 



/*•*•*******••*••**••*•*•*****••••**♦*•**********••*************•**•••***/ 
/* Get the characterCs) sent in response by the ROC box •/ 

outportb(HCR, 0x03); /* Send the hi RTS signal •/ 
for{i=0; t < MAX ;i++){ 

/* Wait for conplete character from ROC box before preceding •/ 

for(j=0; (inportb(LSR) & 0x01) != 0x01; j+*){ 
if(j > UAIT){ 

outportbCMCR, 0x01); 
response [i] = '\0'; 
return(i); 
> 
> 

response[i] = inportb(RBR); 
> 

/• End of routine ioroc */ 

> 

/..**.........«....««.**«...«.***♦...............«... / 

/• Function »dget(int channel, float *pvalue) •/ 

/• V 

/• Purpose: To get values from the HetraByte A to D converter. */ 
/• The syntax of the calling statement should be •/ 

/* */ 

/* 8dget< channel, tvalue); */ 

/• •/ 

/• where channel is the channel (0-15) of the A/D */ 

/• pvalue is the pointer to value */ 

/••♦***«•*•••♦*♦***•******•»***•*•••****•***•***•»*******************•***/ 

#include <d08.h> 
•define AOC_LO 0x300 
•define AOC_HI 0x301 
•define STATUS ~0x302 

void adgetCint chan, float *pvolt) 

{ 
/....*«..**.•......«.......*.....*..........".........""*•*♦*"•."•/ 

/• Start A/D conversion process. A/D conversion will be complete •/ 
/• when the value of the MSB of the status register is low •/ 

/«««...«.«...«.«.«.....»•»..«..***...»..«."..."".....*..""/ 

outportW STATUS, chan); 
outportb(AOC_HI, 0x00); 
Hhile( (inportW STATUS) & 0x80) == 0x80) 

/..««.«.......«««««.«.*...*.*...**..........."".."..".."."/ 

/* Cet the low and high bytes describing the voltage signal. •/ 
/«...«««.....**.«.««.*.«......*.....«.».«""..."."....•""./ 

•pvolt = (float) ( ( (inportb(ADC_HI) « 4) & OxffO) + 

( (inportb(AOC_LO)"» 4) t OxOOf) ); 
*pvolt = 10.0 * (*pvolt/4096)~- 5.0; 
/....«...«..*»«.««....««**•«.......*.«"""*•*»*...".."."***/ 

/* End of function adget V 

/*.*.....»...»».*•...**••••**•»••*•••••*..*•**•••»»**»»*•*•»****/ 

> 



181 



/♦♦♦****••♦••****************••********************************••••*****•/ 
/• Section A */ 



^include <conio.h> 
(Kincludc <stdlib.h> 
#includ« <stdio.h> 
iDinclude <niath.h> 
#define ON 1 
lUdefine OFF 

float amax. 8t2}, bC2], c[2]; 

FILE *fdat; 

/**»•*••♦♦***•••*********•*••*••***************♦♦**********•*******••*•••/ 
/* ROUTINE FSPD RD(INT *P FSPEED FILE) */ 

/• " V 

/• PURPOSE: To read the flame speed data file */ 

/**♦♦*****•********•*********************♦*****«**********♦******•**••***/ 

void fspd_rd(int *p_fspeed_f i le) 
{ ~ ~ 

char s[80]; 

/*••**♦*♦*«*******♦♦*♦*******•*♦♦**********•••**•*********•*•***********•/ 

/* Read the data file FLAME.DAT */ 

/*»*••******♦•*••****♦♦***•**•****************•**»****♦*♦****•••••••****•/ 

*p_f speed file = ON; 

if< (fdat~= fopenC'flame.dat", "r")) == NULL){ 

*p_fspeed_f ile = OFF; 

return; 
> 

fgets(s, 80, fdat); 

sscanf(s, " Xf Xf Xf ".fiatO], &a[1], iamax); 
fgets<s, 80, fdat); 
sscanf(s, " Xf Xf ",&btO] , Sbtl] >; 
fgets(s, 80, fdat); 
sscanf(s, " Xf Xf ",&c[0], &c[1]); 
/*************♦******•****•****************•***♦*************************/ 

/* End of routine FSPD_RD */ 

/**♦♦♦♦♦***•*•***♦**********•*********♦******•***************************/ 

} 

/******♦****♦***•»*»»*•***♦******•*•*••***************************•****•*/ 
/* ROUTINE FSPD CLO */ 

/* ' •/ 

/* PURPOSE: To close flame speed data file •/ 

/♦*♦**«♦****••*•*********••*****»♦**********•*••************************•/ 

void fspd_cl() 
t 

fclose(fdat); 

/»**••**•*♦*♦***********♦**•************•***********•••••••**♦*****••••••/ 

/* End of routine FSPD CL */ 

/»♦•**«****•**♦*♦*******•**•••*****♦****•*****•*************•*••*****•*••/ 

) 

/*•***•*♦*****••*•**♦******«**•••*•*•********•••****************••**•****/ 

/• ROUTINE FSPD CALCFLOAT PRESSURE, FLOAT PHI, FLOAT *PFO. FLOAT 'PFZ)*/ 

/* " V 

/* Purpose: Calculate the fuel and oxydant flow rates */ 

/•***********♦******••**********«****•••**•******************•******•••••/ 

void fspd_c8l( float pressure, float phi, float *pfO, float *pf2) 
{ 

float xsqr, xcbe, phat; 

double exp(double); 



182 



/• Calculate the various parameters and the fuel/oxygen float rate */ 
/••••••***♦•*****♦*••*******•*•************•***••***•***********•*•******/ 

xsqr = (phi-amax) • (phi-amax); 

xcbe = (phi-amax) • xsqr; 

•pfO = 1.0 - a[0] * xsqr - all) • xcbe; 

phat = b[1] * (1.0 - pressure); 

•pfO = 'pfO * (1.0 + (b[0] - 1) * (1 - exp( (double) phat ) ) ); 

/* Calculate the diluent flow rate */ 

phat = ctl) * (1.0 - pressure); 

*pf2 = 1.0 + (c[0) - 1) * (1 - exp( (double) phat) ); 
/.*«.«........*.«.......*.«»«**«..."""....♦*.*..""""""""/ 

/• End of routine FSPO CAL */ 

/«.«......«....«....«..«..«*...«....""."."..."."" V 

) 



183 



Appendix B - Absorption Theory and Sensitivity Analysis for Collisional Linewldths 
B.1 introduction 

In this appendix, we first present the theory for absorption measurements. We then 
discuss collisional broadening of OH at flame temperatures, and we compile data on the 
broadening of ASE+^-X^n (0,0) transitions of OH based on recent measurements by Rea et al. 
(1986, 1989). This data base was used to calculate number densities from absorption 
measurements in the flames we described in Chapters 6 and 7. In the final section, we present 
calculations of the sensitivity of absorption number densities to line broadening. These 
calculations were performed for simulated flames at 1, 3, 6, and 12 atm, with the input 
parameters based on the C2H6/O2/N2 flames in Chapters 6 and 7. 

8.2 Theory 

The spectral absorption at the exit slit of the monochromator, A^, is given by (Penner, 1 959) 

f^ /..(i)'g(|V-v|)f/v- 
r '] /v.(0)-g(|v'-v|)dv- 

■^ V - A V 



where Ai/* (cnri) is the spectral width of the exit slit, l^^(O) and l^(L) are the respective spectral 
irradiances entering and leaving the absorbing medium, and g( | j^' - 1/ 1 ) is the normalized slit 
function for which 



I gd V - v|)dv' = 1 



(B.2) 



With broad-band excitation, 1^/(0) is approximately constant over the limits of integration, and 
therefore 



A^= \- f exp - f k(x*v}ds 



g(T)rfT , (fi.3) 



where t s u' - i^ and L is the path length. The spectral absorption coefficient k(i/) is related to the 
normalized line profile Y(j/) and the population in the coupled levels, N/ and N^, by 

fc(v)=(^^jr(v)fA^,5,„-A?„B„,] , (B.4) 



184 



where vq (cm-i) is the central frequency of the transition and Biu and Bui (cm3-cm-VJ-s) are the 
respective Einstein coefficients for absorption and stimulated emission. Note that the absorption 
coefficient k(i/) is integrated over the absorption path to account for variations in the population 
and linewidth; also, for electronic transitions under conditions of local thermodynamic equilibrium, 
Njy i2 0. At higher pressures, Y(u) results from a convolution of the collisional and Doppler broadening 
profiles; thus, in terms of the nondimensional frequency $• = 2 v/OnS) (u - ijq)/Ai>o 

VnAvp 
2/7^ 3 r- exp(-y^)dy ^^ ^^ 

Here, the Doppler linewidth (FWHN^), Af p. is given by 



where k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the translational temperature, and m is the mass of the 
absorbing species; V(f;a) is known as the Voigt function and also the real part of the complex error 
function (Abramowitz and Stegun, 1968; Armstrong, 1967; Hui et a!., 1978; Humlicek, 1979). 
The broadening parameter, 

Avo 
describes the relative influences of the two homogeneous processes, natural and collisional 
broadening, and the inhomogeneous process, Doppler broadening. The natural linewidth, Ai/n, 
is the broadening of the transition due to spontaneous emission, while the collisional linewidth, 
Ai^c. is the broadening of the transition due to dephasing collisions; at 1 atm and above for the 
hydroxyl radical, collisional broadening is much greater than natural broadening. The collisional 
broadening is expressed as a sum of the contributions of the gas constituents; i.e., 

where P is the total pressure, and Xj and 2-71 (cm-Vatm) are the mole fraction and broadening 
coefficient, respectively, of the i-th constituent. Finally, note that at higher pressures, with the 
increased contribution from collisional narrowing, the Voigt profile may not adequately describe the 
linewidth (Varghese and Hanson, 1984; Rea et al. 1986). 

The effect of the slit function is to spread the profile over a wider range of frequencies; thus 



185 






g(T)c/T dv , (fl.9) 



where the limits of integration, i/^ and 1/2, are chosen to be sufficiently large to include most of the 
line but not adjacent lines. The total energy absorbed, though, remains constant (Penner, 1959), 
and hence, for a particular transition, integration over the line profile gives 



= r I 1 -exp -J fc(v)ds 



dv . (5.10) 



Thus, as long as one integrates over the broadened line, knowledge of the slit function is 
unnecessary. 

The curve-of-growth method represents the solution of Eq. (B.1 0) for the parameter K (Lucht 
etal., 1978) 

^-(u^ J^-A^^,^^^fiE!l . (5.11) 



as a function of the total absorption and the broadening parameter; if the temperature is known. 
the total number density, N-p = N//F/B, can then be found from K. If the total absorption from two 
or more energy levels is known, then both the rotational temperature and the total number density 
can be calculated by comparing the measured spectra with the spectra calculated from the 
curve-of-growth method (Salmon. 1986a). We note that for weak absorption, /ok(i/)ds < 1, the 
integrated absorption A is insensitive to a; however, when /ok(i/)ds > 1, accurate determination 
of Nt is limited by the uncertainty in a. 

B.3 Collislonal Broadening of OH 

The principal difficulty in calculating the parameter a lies in determining the temperature 
dependence of the linewidth A^c for interactions with the main collision partners. In a 
room-temperature experiment at subatmospheric pressure, Engleman (1969) measured 
broadening of the A2E+,-X2n (0,0) transitions of OH and found similar linewidths for collisions with 
molecules such as O2, N2, and CO2. Moreover, unlike interactions of OH wKh these collision 
partners, those with H2O showed a dependence on OH rotational level. In a later high-temperature 
experiment (T « 1300 K), Wang et al. (1980) measured the homogeneous linewidths for collisions 
with O2 and H2O at subatmospheric pressures, again finding a dependence on OH rotational level 
for interactions with H2O. This behavior, they concluded, is the result of rotational transitions of 

186 

C-5 



HjO in near resonance with those of OH. Recently, Rea et al. (1986, 1989) measured collisional 
broadening of the electronic transitions of OH by Ar, Ng, HgO, and CO2, and fit the temperature 
behavior of the broadening coefficients to the exponential relation, 



2y, = 2y< 



T 



iB.\2) 



which follows from a simple hard-sphere collision model where the exponent is 1/2. 



Table B.I Summary of the reference linewidth coefficients and temperature exponents (from Rea 
etal. (1986, 1989)]. 



J 


H2O 




CO2 






N2 






O2 






CTref= 
270 


= 1620 K) 
n 
0.9 


(1680 ^ 

270 
0.108 


<) 


(2000 K) 


(2000 K) 




n 


270 




n 


270 




n 


1.5 


0.155 


1.2 


0.050 




0.8 


0.033 




0.8 


2.5 


0.160 




1.0 


0.092 


1.2 


0.047 




0.8 


0.033 




0.8 


3.5 


0.160 




0.9 


0.067 


1.2 


0.045 




0.8 


0.032 




0.8 


4.5 


0.165 




0.7 


0.060 


1.2 


0.043 




0.8 


0.032 




0.8 


5.5 


0.160 




0.6 


0.054 


1.2 


0.042 




0.8 


0.032 




0.8 


6.5 


0.145 




0.4 


0.050 


1.2 


0.040 




0.8 


0.032 




0.8 


7.5 


0.125 




0.35 


0.048 


1.2 


0.039 




0.8 


0.032 




0.8 


8.5 


0.115 




0.35 


0.048 


1.2 


0.038 




0.8 


0.032 




0.8 


9.5 


0.110 




0.35 


0.048 


1.2 


0.037 




0.8 


0.032 




0.8 


10.5 


0.105 




0.25 


0.048 


1.2 


0.037 




0.8 


0.032 




0.8 


11.5 


0.100 




0.2 


0.048 


1.2 


0.037 




0.8 


0.032 




0.8 


12.5 


0.095 




0.1 


0.048 


1.2 


0.037 




0.8 


0.032 




0.8 


13.5 


0.095 




0.1 


0.048 


1.2 


0.037 




0.8 


0.033 




0.8 


14.5 


0.090 




0.0 


0.048 


1.2 


0.037 




0.8 


0.033 




0.8 


15.5 


0.090 




0.0 


0.050 


1.2 


0.037 




0.8 


0.034 




0.8 



Table B.2 Relative (t) and absolute (5) uncertainties in the 
broadening coefficient for J = 5.5 at a flame 
temperature of 1800 K [from Rea et al. (1986, 1989)]. 



Collision Partner 


€(27) 


6(27) 
(cmVatm) 


CO2 


0.17 


0.0085 


H2O 


0.08 


0.012 


N2 


0.12 


0.0053 


O2 


0.20 


0.0070 



187 



The linewidths resulting from OH-Ar and OH-N2 collisions were first measured in a sfiock tube 
over a temperature range of 1 400 to 41 00 K. A rapid-tuning frequency -doubled ring dye laser was 
used to resolve lineshapes behind reflected shock waves In weak mixtures of H2 and O2 diluted 
with N2 or Ar; these measurements show a small dependence on rotational level, though this 
dependence is within the uncertainty of the measurements. For broadening by H2O and CO2, Rea 
et al. (1 989) used a flat flame burner and a diffusion burner to assess the low and high-temperature 
behavior, respectively, of the collisional linewidths. To estimate the contribution from O2, Rea et 
al. assumed that O2 and Ar broaden the OH transitions by the same amount. This hypothesis was 
based on the measurements of Engleman (1969) and Shirinzadeh et al, (1985) and was tested 
using the measured linewidths and temperature exponent for Ar; the two values compared well and 
Rea et al. used the linewidth data for Ar to calculate the small contribution from O2 in their lean 
flames. 

The 2r, of the principal collision partners for our lean C2H6/O2/N2 flames are listed in Table 
B.I. These values are based on the measurements of Rea et al. (1986, 1989); the broadening 
behavior of O2 was assumed to be the same as that for Ar. Table B.2 lists the approximate 
uncertainties in the 2y, values, which are based on reported uncertainties for the J = 5.5 rotational 
level. Though 27(62) was not measured, we have assigned a relative uncertainty of 20%; 
nonetheless, the total uncertainty is insensitive to this value since the concentration of O2 is small 
in the burnt-gas region. 

Table B.3 Total and partial uncertainties in the collisional linewidth for J = 5.5 and the flames A, 
B, and C described in Chapters 6 and 7. The collisional linewidth and the associated 
total uncertainty [calculated from Eq. (B.I 3)] are listed under the column labeled Ai/c- 



p 

(atm) 


At-c 
(cm-1) 


P{E[ 


Xi 5(27i)]2}1/2 
(cm-1) 


PE5Xi (2^1) 
(cm-1) 


SPSXi (27i) 
(cm-1) 


0.98 
±0.01 


0.0592 
± 0.0046 




0.0041 


0.002 


0.0006 


3.1 
±0.14 


0.184 
±0.017 




0.013 


0.006 


0.0083 



6.1 0.383 0,0264 0.012 0.0126 

±0.20 ± 0.032 



188 



In addition to the uncertainties in Table B.2, uncertainties in the pressure and species 
concentrations also contribute to the total uncertainty in At^c- Thus, the total uncertainty is 

Z \ 1/2 



6(AvJ.{/'^I[x.■5(2Y,)]^^[^I^-V(2Y,)]^[6PZx,•(2Y.) 



(5.13) 



Since the mole fractions are correlated (i.e., the sum must equal unity), they cannot be handled 
individually, as if they were random errors. Instead, to estimate the uncertainty in A^c due to 
uncertainties in the mole fractions, we have calculated the term PE5Xi(27i) for the case where x(C02) 
and x(H20) are 10% below their expected equilibrium values, and we have assumed that the 
unknown species making up this deficit broaden the OH transitions weakly as does Ar. In estimating 
the total uncertainty in the collisional linewidth, we have used flames A, B, and C described in 
Chapters 6 and 7. This result and the summary of the terms in Eq. (B.13) are shown in Table B.3. 
The values are calculated for the pressure and mole fractions in the absorption measurements. 
These calculations for the J = 5.5 rotational level show that the net uncertainty in the collisional 
linewidth is < 10%. In general, we expect an uncertainty of -10% in the calculation of Ai^c for the 
lines we have used for absorption measurements in our C2H6/O2/N2 flames. 

B.4 Calculations 

For the calculations described below, Eqs. (B.3) and (B.10) were integrated with FORTRAN 
routines, which employ Romberg integration and are based on algorithms suggested by Press et 
al. (1986). For accurate integration with an infinite limit, the variable transformation x = 1/i/ was 
used to map infinity into zero. Consequently, for integration over the range of zero to infinity, we 
have used the relation 

J^'/(v)dv = |J/(v)dv-j'Jp/(^)dx . (S.14) 

In Figs. B.I -B.4, we show the calculated spectral absorption profiles at pressures of 1 , 3, 6, 
and 12 atm. The spectral profiles are calculated using Eq. (B.3) with (1) infinite spectral resolution 
(i.e., Ay* = 0) and (2) the triangular slit function. 



189 



Table B.4 Values of K and A (as functions of pressure) for three transitions assuming Nt = 8 x 
10i5cm-3. The broadening parameter is calculated using data of Rea et al. (1986, 1989) 
and the equilibrium distribution of species in a lean (equivalence ratio = 0.8, dilution 
ratio = 3.1) C2H6/O2/N2 flame at 1800 K. 



Line 


K 


a/P 
(atm-1) 




( 


A 
;cmi) 








1 atm 


3 




6 


12 atm 


Pi(2) 
Qi(6) 
Qi(13) 


0.6916 

1.538 

0.3836 


0.236 
0.201 
0.171 


0.149 
0.274 
0.087 


0.159 
0.310 
0.090 




0.165 
0.337 
0.093 


0.170 
0.360 
0.094 



-0 -Av'>T> Av' 

g(T)=r(T) = (Av' + T)/(Av")' -Av'<T<0 (fi.ll)) 

- (Av'-T)/(Av*)^ 0<T<Av'. 

Here, we use a slit width (FWHM) Av* = 1 cm-i, which is approximately the value measured from 
experimental lines. For all cases, the spectral absorption for the Q, (6) and Q, (1 3) lines is simulated 
using Nj = 8.0 X 1015 cm-3. This OH number density is consistent with values measured 
experimentally, and the Qi(6) and Qi(13) lines were, in general, the strongest and weakest lines, 
respectively, used to calculate the total number density. In addition, the broadening parameter was 
calculated using T = 1 800 K and the collisional coefficients of Rea et al. (1 986, 1 989) ; the information 
for these lines and the additional Pi (2) line is summarized in Table B.4. In each case, the integrated 
absorption [A (cm-i)] evaluated from Eq. (B.10) is also shown; we note that one consequence of 
the increased collisional broadening is an increase in the integrated absorption. 

In Figs. B.5-B.8, we show eNT(Ai/c). the relative uncertainty in Nj, due to uncertainties in Ai^c 
of 10% and 20%. These curves are calculated as a function of K since experimentally one has 
control over this parameter through choice of the absorption line or through variation of the total 
flow rate of the combustible mixture. As the latter is increased (while holding constant the 
equivalence and dilution ratios), the flame temperature in the bumt-gas region will also increase 
(Ferguson and Keck, 1979; Chao and Law, 1988), resulting in a greater OH concentration. As 
expected, the relative error increases with increasing K. One surprising result, however, is that for 
constant K, the relative error at 12 atm is less than that at 6 atm. For our purposes, the important 
conclusion is that for the range of concentrations in our C2H6/O2/N2 flames at 1, 3.1, and 6.1 atm, 
the uncertainty in Nt due to the uncertainty in Aj^c is small (< 2%). 



190 



Finally, we note that one source of uncertainty in Nj which we have not included is absorption 
in the wings of the profile that cannot be resolved due to noise. At higher pressures, the influence 
of collisional broadening increases, resulting in a larger value for the broadening parameter and 
thus a broader line, with a greater fraction of the absorbed energy in the wings. Consequently, for 
a constant value of the parameter K, the uncertainty in Nj increases, because of a decrease in the 
effective signal-to-noise ratio of the profile. From calculations performed by Penner (1 959), however, 
we expect this contribution to be small for our flames. 



191 



0.4 



0.3 



<^ 0.2 



0.1 - 



• 


0,(13) 


A 

n 
II 
1 




yi\\ 


-H. , 1 . 




r"* 0.4 - 



v-v. 



Figure B.1 Spectral absorption profiles for the Qi(6) (bottom) and Qi(13) (top) lines for P =; 1 
atm, T = 1800 K, and Nj = 8 x 10^5 cm-3. The solid cun/e is the convolution of the 
true spectral absorption, which is represented by the dashed curve, and a triangular 
slit function (Aj/* = 1 cm-i). 



192 




0.6 - 



<^ 0.4 



0.2 - 



■ 


Q,(6) 


A 
l\ 
1 1 

M 




1 -fV- . 1 . F 


-»_ 1 . — 



V- V, 



Figure B.2 Spectral absorption profiles for the Qi{6) (bottom) and Qi(13) (top) lines for P =; 3 
atm, T = 1800 K, and Nj = 8 x 10^5 cm-3. The solid curve is the convolution of the 
true spectral absorption, which is represented by the dashed curve, and a triangular 
slit function (At- * = 1 cm-i). 



193 




<"* 0.2 - 




V -Vr 



Figure B.3 Spectral absorption profiles for the Qi(6) (bottom) and Qi(l3) (top) lines for P ~ 6 
atm, T = 1800 K, and Nj = 8 x 10^5 cm-3. The solidcyrye is the convolution of the 
true spectral absorption, which is represented by the dashed curve, and a triangular 
slit function (Az^* = 1 cm-1). 



194 



<^ 0.2 





< 0.4 - 



v-v. 



Figure B.4 Spectral absorption profiles for the Qi (6) (bottom) and Qi (1 3) (top) for P =; 12 atm, 
T = 1800 K, and Nj = 8 x 10^5 cm-3. The solid curve is the convolution of the true 
spectral absorption, which is represented by the dashed curve, and a triangular slit 
function (Av* = 1 cm-i). 



195 



0.10 




-0.10 



0.1 



1 

K 



10 



Figure B.5 Uncertainty in Nt for a = 0.2 (P ~ 1 atm) duetoanuncertainty in At-cof ±'IO%(solid 
curve) and ±20% (dashed curve). 



196 



0.10 



0.05 






-0.05 - 



-0.10 







0.1 



10 



K 



Figure B.6 Uncertainty in Nt for a = 0.6 (P = 3 atm) due to an uncertainty in Ai/c of ± 1 0% (solid 
curve) and ±20% (dashed curve). 



97 



0.10 



0.05 



u 



-0.05 



-0.10 









y 




y 




y 




y 




y ^ 




y^ ^ 


- 


.^ "^^^.^----'^"^ 


._ .— — ■ "^ *" 


1^^^ 


— — ^^^^^ir — ~-^ 


- 


"-\ ^"^'^^--..^^^ 




"N^ ^**"*>>.^_^^ 




\ ^ 




\ 


^ 


\ 




\ 




\ 


. 


\ 




N. 


j_ 1 1 1 — 1 — 1 — 1— i-j — 


1 1 1 1 i 1 1 1 1 






0.1 



10 



K 



Figure B.7 Uncertainty in Nj for a = 1 .2 (P =i 6 atm) due to an uncertainty in Ai/c of ± 1 0% (solid 
curve) and ±20% (dashed curve). 



198 



0.10 



0.05 - 



z 



-0.05 - 



-0.10 




0.1 



10 



K 



Figure B.8 Uncertainty in Nj for a = 2.4 (P ~ 1 2 atm) due to an uncertainty in Ai/c of ± "1 0% (solid 
curve) and ±20% (dashed curve). 



199 



Appendix C - Error Analysis of Absorption Measurements 

The uncertainties in the absorption concentration measurements reflect uncertainties from 
(1) the calculation of the integrated absorption (cm-i) from the measured profile, (2) temperature 
(3) the line broadening parameter (see Appendix B), and (4) the path-length measurement. In cases 
where multiple lines (> 10) are used to calculate the total number density, a statistical analysis is 
performed by the absorption program; the 95% confidence interval calculated by the program 
includes uncertainties from the calculated temperature and the variation in concentrations of 
individual lines. When the OH concentration is derived from scans of only the Qi (6) and the Qi2(6) 
lines, the uncertainty in the integrated absorption was estimated from the signal-to-noise ratio of 
the profile and baseline. 

The temperatures were measured subsequent to the OH absorption and fluorescence 
measurements using silica-coated thermocouples above the burner center (rather at the burner 
edge where the fluorescence measurements were taken). We note that even at high pressures, 
evidence of catalytic reactions was observed when uncoated thermocouples were used. The 
temperatures were corrected for radiative losses using an emissivity for silica of 0.22 and the Nusselt 
number correlation recommended by Bradley and Matthews (1968); this correlation, which is used 
to model convective heat transfer from hot wire anemometers and is described by Hinze (1975) 
and Kramers (1946), is given by 

^'u = 0.42 jPr^^-^ 0.57 Pr°"/?e°-^° , (C.l) 

where Pr is the Prandtl number and Re is the Reynolds number. The thermocouple is thus modelled 
as a cylinder in cross flow, with a diameter equal to that of the thermocouple bead; a computer 
program developed by Harris (1985) was used to obtain the corrected temperatures. While the 
thermocouple measurements at 3.1 atm employed a thermocouple with a diameter of -170 ^m, 
the values at 1, 6.1, and 9.1 atm employed a thermocouple with a -100 /xm diameter. To make 
these measurements, we also removed the flame stabilization screen which was fixed about 8 mm 
above the burner. The uncertainty in these temperatures is estimated to be ±50 K for all the flames. 
Forthe effective path length for absorption, we estimate the uncertainty to be ± 1 mm; typically, 
the effective path length was -24 mm. This uncertainty accounts for possible errors due to effects 
such as beam steering, laser wavelength drift (during the absorption path-length measurement), 
and the fluorescence signal-to-noise ratio. Finally, we include the uncertainty in Nj from an 
uncertainty in the collisional linewidth, A^c, of ±10% (see Appendix B). 



200 



Tabled Total absorption uncertainty (molecules/cm3) from the partial values due to 
uncertainties in (1) the integrated absorption [5Nt(A)), (2) temperature [5Nt(T)], 
when not included in the absorption calculation], (3) path length [6Nt(L^,)], and 
(4) the collislonal linewidth [SNyiAi^c)]- The total concentration and associated 
uncertainty are listed under the column labeled Nj. 



Pressure 


Position 


Nt 


6Nt(A) 


6NtCT) 


5Nt(L;m) 


6Nt(Aj^C) 


(atm) 


(mm) 






1016 cm-3 






0.98 


1.0 


1.057 
+ 0.072 


±0.055 


-- 


+0.045 


+0.014 




2.0 


0.702 
±0.061 


±0.053 


-- 


+0.029 


+0.005 




3.0 


0.526 
±0.037 


±0.028 


- 


+0.024 


+0.003 


3.1 


0.6 


0.813 
+ 0.083 


±0.074 


- 


+0.037 


+0.008 




1.0 


0.492 
±0.063 


±0.059 


-- 


+0.023 


+0.003 




1.2 


0.434 
±0.022 


±0.010 


±0.008 


+0.018 


+0.003 




1.4 


0.382 
±0.042 


±0.038 


-- 


+0.017 


+0.002 


6.1 


0.6 


0.934 
± 0.065 


±0.044 


±0.018 


+0.040 


+0.019 




1.0 


0.616 
±0.048 


±0.037 


±0.011 


+0.027 


+0,009 




1.6 


0.445 
±0.042 


±0.037 


±0.007 


+0.019 


? 0.004 



Finally, for selected OH absorption measurements, the partial uncertainties for the four 
sources listed above have been added in quadrature to obtain the total uncertainty in Nt. For the 
flames at 1, 3.1 and 6.1 atm, the uncertainties (shown in Figs. 6.9-6.1 1) are summarized in Table 
C.1. 



201 



Appendix D - Saturation of an Inhomogeneously-Broadened A2E+— X2n (0,0) Transition of 
OH 

In this appendix, we examine the saturation behavior of an A2E+.-X2n (0,0) transition of the 
hydroxyl molecule at flame temperatures as a function of pressure. We have modelled the excitation 
process with rate equations using an approach similarto the one taken by Piepmeier (1 972a, 1 972b) . 
Because JosatdV (where V is the imaged volume) is of principal interest, one need consider only 
the two laser-coupled energy levels u and /. Since the rate coefficient for excitation can vary over 
the absorption profile, the distribution of molecules among the Doppler intervals will also vary with 
frequency. One must then define nu(f) and n/(t'), the spectral population in energy levels u and /, 
respectively, where 

A'„ = f n„(v)dv (D.i) 

Jo 

and 

N, - f n,(v)dv . (D.2) 

Accompanying the variation of W/^ over the absorption profile is a deviation from the 
Maxwell-Boltzmann velocity distribution in the excited state, and thus a net population transfer 
between the Doppler intervals of level u is possible. The rate of transfer out of the Doppler interval 
of interest is simply Go, the rate coefficient of velocity-changing non-quenching collisions, times 
the population r\J^i>)6u. The rate of transfer into this Doppler interval is equal to Qd[No - niAu)di/]. 
the total rate at which velocity-changing non-quenching collisions occur with molecules outside the 
inten/al, times the probability that a collision will transfer the molecule into the interval. This 
probability is given by n ?(t/)df /N ° where n ?(j/) and .\' °, are the respective unperturbed spectral 
and unperturbed total populations of level /. The ratio of these populations (times di/) is simply the 
fraction of the total population in the inten/al dj^, which for a Maxwell-Boltzmann velocity distribution, 
is given by the normalized Gaussian function, 

n?(v) 



Nl 



C(v-Vo:Av^) (D.3) 



-^f — 1 exp{-/n2[2(v-Vo)/AvJ^> 
AvpV It J 



202 



where Ai^d (cm-i) is the Doppler width (FWHM). Thus, the net rate of transfer into the frequency 
interval »/ to i/ + di/ is 

n?(v)(A'„/N°)Q„-n„(v)Qo . {D.A) 

where the second-order differential has been dropped. The rate equation for the excited-state 
population density nj/i/) is then given by 

^^^ = Q.n?(v)A'yA'?^n,(v)U',„(v)- (0/J) 

at 

n„(v)[Q,„ + l/„,(v)+(?J . 
With the spectral population fraction, 1 - 7(1/), equal to one, population densities in levels u 
and / are related by 

n,(v) + n„(v)=n?(v) ; (.0.6) 

this equation implies that laser excitation does not change the velocity of the molecule. As in Chapter 
3, the peak fluorescence signal is of principal interest. Thus, setting Eq. (D.5) to zero and solving 
for n^j^) using Eq. (D.6) gives 

Note that in setting Eq. (D.5) to zero, we implicitly assume that each n^ reaches steady state at the 
same time. For each Doppler interval, W^,', the spectral saturation parameter, is given by a 
convolution of the spectral energy density, p^ (J/cm3-cmi), and the homogeneous absorption 
profile; i.e., 



""^ Q 



„, Q„,J^ 2n(v-v')^-nAv?/2 



where Aj^c (cm-i) is the collisional linewidth (FWHM) and B/^ (cmS-cmVJ-sec) is the Einstein 
coefficient for absorption. When the rate coefficient for excitation is independent of frequency v, 
the population uJiv) will also be independent of frequency, and Eqs. (3.4) and (D.7) will then be 

equivalent. 

One can now solve for the desired quantity, namely N^, by integrating Eq. (D.7) after 

substitution from Eq. (D.3); thus, 

" \ a + a, ' C C(v-v„;6vj,) 



203 



Comparing Eqs. (3.4) and (0.9), we observe that Qgat, the degree of saturation, is 

1 rn /r, \ (l/fn)t^pi-y^ -, 



(O.iO) 



where y = 2 v/(ln2) (y - t'o)/At'D is the nondimensional frequency. Note that when Wy' « 1, Eq. 
(D.10) reduces to 

Although the dependence on velocity-changing collisions has disappeared, the degree of saturation 
still depends on the integral of the saturation parameter times the transition Doppler profile. 

Since we are interested in the spatially-integrated degree of saturation, we have solved the 
equation 

r f) ». J-. i-<?:>''0.//Mi-(<;,''!rj]'^/^'y I 

Ja,„,dI/ = J( ^ )dV {D.\2) 

using a 2-D Romberg integration routine, which is similar to the 1-D version employed in Appendix 
B and is based on an algorithm suggested by Press et al. (1 986). We model the spatial dependence 
of the spectral energy density with the axisymmetric function (see Chapters 6 and 7) 

PvCO) 

where r is the radial position, w is the beam halfwidth, and ^^(0) is the spectral energy density at 
the laser beam center line. For the imaged volume, we consider the following two cases (see Fig. 
7.1): (1) geometry A, which yields the disk with the differential volume dV = 27rWA rdr; (2) geometry 
B, which yields the slab with the differential volume dV = WbHb dr. 

To model the spectral distribution of energy in the laser pulse of the Quanta-Ray dye laser, 
we have used a series of monochromatic modes (i.e., p^ described with a series of (5-functions) 
separated by AfLmi the relative intensity of the modes is given by a Lorentzian function, with a 
spectral FWHM Ai^l = 0.5 cm-^. Thus we have 



Po 



[2(v-v,J/AvJ^+ 1 „er« 
with 



204 



I 5(v-v,„) . (^.14) 



Here, po (-J/cm-3) is the energy density of the central mode, which is located at uu (cm-i), and i/Lm 
(cm-i) is the frequency of the m-th of 2M+1 modes. The energy density of the m-th mode is thus 
given by 



f I— ^^n 77— •&(v-v„j)riv (/;.16) 

J m 



Po 



[2(m> AVi„)/AvJ'* 1 



or 



p = ^5 -— iD.W) 

^'" [2(m-Ay,„)/Ayj'+l 

in terms of the nondimensional frequency [again using the normalization constant Ai/D/2v/(ln2)]. 
Note that this model for saturation is least accurate for small Ai^c . since the actual nonzero width 
of the modes will act to increase the degree of saturation. In addition, a dye laser has a 
homogeneously-broadened line profile; consequently, mode competition results in fewer axial 
modes than are possible (from the cavity length) being active on each laser pulse. Effects such as 
vibration prevent complete mode competition (i.e., the elimination of all but a single mode on each 
laser shot). We note that for our laser, the mode spacing determined from the cavity length is 
estimated to be 0.038 cm-i. 

From Eq. (D.8), the spectral saturation parameter is given by 



W 



" Q.,, Jo 



J ^^^'-^^-^ Av, \dV (D.18) 



[2(v'- v^J/AvJ^* 1 2n(v- v')^ + JtAvc/2 
or in nondimensional form 

^ ..^HEl.b^ri J/^^''^^-"^ a Say (D.19) 



zfinZ B,^Pja y j 1 



a 



nAv/ Q,„ „fr«\[2(m-Ay,„)/AyJ^-l [y - (y^ + ^ ' Ay,.)] *a- 



205 



where a s ■v/(ln2) At'c/Ai^D is the broadening parameter (when the contribution from natural 
broadening is negligible) and vlc = 2v/(ln2) (j^lc - yo)/At'D goes to zero when the central frequencies 
of the transition and the laser spectral profile match. We note that Eqs.(D.18) and (D.19) describe 
a series of Lorentzian-shaped modes under the envelope of the laser spectral energy distribution 
(assumed to be a Lorentzian in this case). As a function of the spectral energy density, the laser 
irradiance is given by 



/, = c- f p^dv (D.20) 

Jo 

M 
= Po'C Y. (Pm/Po) • 

Finally, the spectral saturation parameter in terms of the laser irradiance is 

1 a 



' JrAl2(m-^y,„)/&y,y^l [y - dy u* ^ ■ Ay ,„)V - a' 
where we have used the identity 

g,.- ; ^3 (^'22) 

to cast the equation in terms of the Einstein A-coefficient. 

To calculate the Doppler and collisional linewidths (see Appendix B), we use a temperature 
of 1 750 K and the Einstein A-coefficient and frequency of the Qi (8) line. In addition, we estimate 
the ratio Qc/Qoff by comparing the dephasing collision frequency with the quenching collision 
frequency. Here, we assume that collisions which quench the molecule (i.e., change its energy 
state) also dephase the molecule. The collision frequency is given by the sum of the rate coefficients 
for electronic quenching and vibrational plus rotational energy transfer. Since the rate coefficient 
for vibrational energy transfer will be small in the A2E+ (v=0) state, the net frequency for quenching 
collisions is Qe + Qf. the sum of rate coefficients for electronic quenching and rotational relaxation. 
Using the procedure described in Chapter 6, we find Qe « 0.45 x 10^ si, Qr « 3.8 x 10^ s-i, and 
Qeff « 2.9 X 109 s-1 for the burnt gas region of an atmospheric C2H6/O2/N2 flame at T = 1750 K. 



206 



In comparison, the dephasing collision frequency is fc = xcAt-c ^ 5.3 x 10^ s-i (see Appendix B). 
Thus we have Qo/Qeff = Vc - (Qe + Qr)]/Qeft « 0.25. The relevant modelling parameters are 
summarized in Table D. 1 . 

Table D.1 Modelling parameters for the 
Qi(8) line at 1750 K.a 



Il(0) 


2.6 X 10i0W/cm2 


a/P 


0.20 atm-1 


AvD 


0.235 cm-1 


yo 


32328 cm-1 


Qe/P 


0.45 X 109S-1 atm-1 


Qr/P 


3.8x109s-i atm-1 


Qeff/P 


2.9 X 109S-1 atm-1 


Qo/Qeff 


0.25 



a We use the symbol P for pressure. 

Figure D.1 shows curves describing the variation in the relative fluorescence signal (which is 
proportional to the spatially-integrated degree of saturation in the absence of depletion of the 
laser-coupled levels) for the two imaging geometries, versus the broadening parameter. We 
consider three cases for the laser spectral energy density: (1) the profile contains 41 modes with 
a separation of Aj^tm = 0038 cm-i (which is approximately the value calculated from the cavity 
length of the dye laser); (2) the profile contains 1 1 modes with Avtm = 0.152 cm-i ; (3) the profile 
contains 5 modes with Ar^Lm = 0.38 cm-i. We note that for our flames, the range a = 0.02 to 4 
corresponds approximately to a range of pressures of 0.1 to 20 atm. The spectral saturation 
parameter was calculated from Eq.{D.21) using a center-line irradiance of 1l(0) =2.6x10iow/cm2. 
In addition, a ratio of Qef(/P of 2.9 x 10^ s-iatm-i was employed to describe the variation of the 
quenching rate coefficient with pressure (using a/P = 0.20 atm-i). For these saturation curves to 
follow those shown in Chapter 7 (Fig. 7.7), the coupling efficiency between the transition and the 
laser must remain constant. However, when (1) the homogeneous linewidth is much narrower than 
the separation of the modes and (2) the frequency of Doppler-changing collisions is smaller than 
the frequency of quenching collisions, nj^v) retains much of the nonuniformity of the laser spectral 
energy distribution, and as a consequence, the coupling efficiency is poor. With increasing Ai^c. 
nj^v) retains less of the nonuniform distribution of the laser; the coupling efficiency can therefore 
increase with increasing pressure. We therefore expect that the relative fluorescence signal will 
exhibit a smaller sensitivity to pressure than would be obtained when the coupling efficiency is 



207 



constant and only Qeff changes. This is shown in Fig. D.1 for small a. However, as Ai^c increases 
further, this effect is offset by a decrease in the absorption at frequencies near vq, causing a decrease 
in the coupling efficiency with increasing pressure; consequently, the sensitivity of the fluorescence 
signal becomes larger than would be observed solely with increased quenching. In addition, we 
note that the relative saturation profile is insensitive to the specific shape of the energy density 
spectral profile (e.g., Gaussian or Lorentzian), the width of this profile, and the ratio Qo/Qeff 
(especially with larger a). 

In Fig. D.2, we compare the saturation curves (for imaging geometries A and B) calculated 
by varying (1) pressure (i.e., the broadening parameter and the quenching rate coefficient) and (2) 
the laser irradiance, while holding constant the broadening parameter and the quenching rate 
coefficient. For case (1), we have employed the model with 5 axial modes and At-Lm = 0.38 cmi ; 
in addition, we have used a/P = 0.20 atm-i, Qeti/P = 2.9 x 109 s-^atm-i and II = 2.6 x 101° W/cm2 
to simulate the saturation curve that would be obtained by exciting the Qi (8) line in our C2H6/O2/N2 
flames and varying the pressure from 1 to 20 atm. For comparative purposes, we used the model 
employing only 5 modes, since of the three models studied (see Fig. D.1), it is the least like the 
saturation curve generated by varying the laser irradiance. For case (2), we used a = 0.20, Qoff = 
2.9 X 109 s-\ and II X P = 2.6 X 10^0 W-atm/cm2 to simulate the saturation curve that would be 
obtained by varying the laser Irradiance at atmospheric pressure. The resulting curves for case (2) 
are almost identical to the ones used in Chapters 6 and 7, where we assumed the that the relative 
fluorescence signal is independent of collisional broadening (see Eq. 6.14). 

Of particular interest, given the variation in the coupling efficiency with pressure, is the 
accuracy with which one can calculate the fluorescence correction factor, fQ--which accounts for 
changes in the laser Irradiance, the quenching rate coefficient, and the coupling efficiency-from 
SfA/SfB, the ratio of the fluorescence signals from the two imaging geometries. With the Cottereau 
method (1986), which is discussed in detail in Chapter 7, one uses saturation curves derived by 
varying the laser irradiance at constant pressure to generate the quenching correction curve, SfA/SfB 
versus the relative saturation parameter (Wf"). The measurement of Sf/v/SfB under some other 
condKlon is used to calculate W^', which can then be used to calculate fo from the saturation curve 
(for either geometry A or B). in the bottom part of Fig. D.2, we show the quenching correction curves 
which result from the saturation curves shown in the top part of the figure. The solid curve represents 
the dependence of the ratio SfA/SfB on pressure, while the dashed curve represents the dependence 
of SfA/SfB on Wr'. Using Fig. D.2, we can compare the fo calculated from the two sets of curves with 



208 



the following procedure: (1) for an arbitrary value of SfA/SfB determine the corresponding pressure, 
Ps (Pd) 'rom the solid cun/e (dashed cun/e) ; (2) with Ps (Pa), determine from the solid curves (dashed 
curves) of the top graph the value of fQ (where fQ = 1/Sf) from the cun/e describing either geometry. 
For the Cottereau method to work effectively, the dashed curves should give approximately the 
same correction factor (for the same geometry) as the solid curves, which give the true dependence 
of the fluorescence signal on pressure. We have carried out this comparison for several values of 
SfA/SfB, and the results are listed in Table D.2. This comparison shows that the Cottereau method 
can yield a good estimate of fQ. even though the two sets of saturation cun/es differ significantly. 

Table D.2 Comparison of fQ calculated from the saturation functions where 
(1) pressure [f(P)] and (2) the laser irradiance [fQO] are varied 
(see Fig. D.2). The fQ shown below are the values for geometry 



SfA/SfB 


f(P) 
(solid cu 


n/e) 


f(lL) 

(dashed curve) 


e(fQ) 




P (atm) 


fQ 


P (atm) 




fQ 




0.80 


2.34 


1.50 


2.66 




1.57 


0.041 


0.70 


3.62 


1.94 


4.78 




2.05 


0.059 


0.60 


5.75 


2.63 


9.39 




2.80 


0.065 


0.50 


9.58 


3.80 


20.8 




4.05 


0.066 



» c(fQ) is the relative error in the fluorescence correction factor from using 
the constant-pressure saturation curves (and the corresponding quenching 
correction cun/e). 



209 



Geom. A 



c 

D) 

C/5 


O 

c 

CD 
O 
C/) 

<D 

k_ 

O 

_D 

LL 

Q 
> 

CD 

DC ■ 



0.1 




Key: Av^^ (cnr^) 

0.038 

0.152 

0.380 



1 I ■ ' I I ■ 




a 



Figure D. 1 Relative fluorescence signal versus the broadening parameter. The top and bottom 
graphs show the variation of the signal for geometries A and B, respectively, when 
the spectral laser profile contains (1) 41 modes (separated by 0.038 cmi), (2) 11 
modes (separated by 0.152 cm-i), and (3) 5 modes (separated by 0.38 cm-i). 



210 



03 

CO 

Q> 
O 

c 
a> 
o 

C/J 

CD 

v_ 

o 



0) 

> 
DC 



Geom. B 



Geom. A 





P (atm) 



Figure D 2 Relative fluorescence signals (top) and their ratios (bottom) for geometries A and B 
versus pressure. For the solid and dashed curves, we use a laser spectral profile 
containing 5 modes (and Ai^im = 0.38 cm-i). The solid curves were calculated by 
varying the pressure, while the dashed curves were calculated by varying the laser 
irradiance. 



21 



Appendix E - Gaussian Quadrature Formula for the Weighting Function W(x) = 1/(1 + x^) 

Listed in Table E. 1 are the abscissa (xj) and weights (Vj) of a 20-th order Gaussian quadrature 
formula for the integral (Salmon, 1986b) 



J-' 1 + x^ 



(f.l) 



where 1/(1 + x^) is the weighting function, W(x), and f(x) is some smooth function. Integration of a 
function g(x) s W(x)f(x) is then given by 



r(A-)d.v£t/,g(.v.) . 



it .2) 



For example, with the weights and abscissa listed in Table E.1 and the function g(x) = 1/((1 + x2)2], 
the error in the integral is ~4 x 1CH. A general discussion of quadrature formulas, as well as a 
routine for calculation of the weights and abscissa for Gauss-Legendre integration is given by Press 
etal. (1986). 

Table E. 1 Abscissa and weights for the 
Gaussian quadrature formula 
describing Eq. (E.I). 



Xi 


Vi 


±0.12079 


0.24345 


±0.37390 


0.26708 


±0.66524 


0.32198 


±1.03474 


0.42833 


±1.55437 


0.63422 


±2.37541 


1.06355 


±3.87244 


2.09242 


±7.20763 


5.21265 


±17.65124 


19.93440 


±92.64416 


237.50059 



212 



IVIASA 

Naltonaf Aeronautics and 
Space Admmistralion 



Report Documentation Page 



1. Report No. 

NASA CR- 1852 18 



2. Government Accession No. 



4. Title and Subtitle 

Saturated Fluorescence Measurements of the Hydroxy! Radical in 
Laminar High-Pressure Flames 



7. Author(s) 

Campbell D. Carter, Galen B. King, and Normand M. Laurendeau 



9 Performing Organization Name and Address 

Purdue University 

School of Mechanical Engineering 

West Lafayette, Indiana 47907 



12. Sponsoring Agency Name and Address 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Lewis Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 44135-3191 



3. Recipient's Catalog No. 



5. Report Date 
February 1990 



6. Performing Organization Code 



8. Performing Organization Report No. 
None 



10. Wori< Unit No. 
506-42-51 



11. Contract or Grant No. 
NAG3-351 



13. Type of Report and Period Covered 
Contractor Report 
Final 



14. Sponsoring Agency Code 



15. Supplementary Notes 

Project Manager, Valerie J. Lyons, Space Propulsion Technology Division, NASA Lewis Research Center. 



16 Abstract 



Wc have investigated theoretically and experimentally the efficacy of laser-saturated fluorescence (LSF) for OH concentration ,,,„,. 
measurements in high-pressure flames.'Using a numerical model describing the interaction of hydroxyl with nonuniform laser 
excitation, we havr studied the effect of pressure on the validity of the balanced cross-rate model and the sensUivity of the 
depopulation of the laser-coupled levels to the ratio of rate coefficients describing (1) electronic quenching to -i;^(v" > 0) and (2) 
vibrational relaxation from v' > to v' =0. At sufficiently high pressures and near-saturated conditions, the total population of the 
laser-coupled levels reaches an asymptotic value, which is insensitive to the degree of saturation. When the ratio of electronic 
quenching to vibrational relaxation is small and the rate coefficients for rotational transfer in the ground and excited electronic states 
are nearly the same, the balanced cross-rate model remains a good approximation for all pressures. When the above ratio is large, 
depopulation of the laser-coupled levels becomes significant at high pressures, and thus the balanced cross-rate model no longer 
holds. Under these conditions, however, knowledge of the depletion of the laser-coupled levels can be used to correct the model. A 
combustion facility for operation up to 20 atm was developed to allow LSF measurements of OH in high-pressure flames. Using this 
facility, we achieved partial saturation in laminar high-pressure (<12.3 atm) CjHg/Oj/Nj flames. To evaluate the limits of the 
balanced cross-rate model, we compared absorption and calibrated LSF measurements at 3.1 and 6.1 atm. The fluorescence voltages 
were calibrated with absorption measurements in an atmospheric flame and corrected for their finite sensitivity to quenching with (1) 
estimated quenching rate coefficients and (2) an in situ measurement from a technique employing two fluorescence detection 
geometries. Whilg the absorption and calibrated fluorescence measurements compare well at 3.1 atm, thelDH fluorescence values are 
-25% below the absorption measurementJX6.i atm, indicating an effe<;^ive error of -25% in the;ba^ced cross-rate model. We 
anticipate that with atmospheric-pressure fluorSscgnce calibration and a ipeasvirement or a reasonaJ>le estimate^of the quenching 
correction factor, one can measure OH concentrations within ±50% at pressures up to 10 atm.. 



17. Key Words (Suggested by Author(s)) 

Diagnostics 
Flames 
Combustion 
Laser fluorescence 



19 Security Classif. (of this report) 
Unclassified 



18. Distribution Statement 

Unclassified -Unlimited 
Subject Category 35 



20. Security Classif. (of this page) 
Unclassified 



21 . No. of pages 
221 



22 Price" 



AID 



NASA FORIM 1«26 OCT B6 



*For sale by the National Technical Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161 



