„ Ada 9X Project Report 

CO 



Ada 9X Project 

Requirements Development Plan 


rrnr 


August 1989 


w 


s & 



Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition 
Washington, D. C. 20301 


Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 


8 Q 

KJ v 


10 6 0 24 







PREFACE 


This document describes the plan for collecting, analyzing and synthesizing the 
requirements for the revision of ANSI/MIL-STD-1815A. The plan was developed by the 
Institute for Defense Analyses (IDA) under the sponsorship of the Ada Joint Program 
Office (AJPO). The IDA Program Manager is Ms. Audrey Hook (Computer and 
Software Engineering Divison, 1801 N. Beauregard Street, Alexandria, Virginia 22311- 
1772). Other IDA staff that contributed to this document are Dr. Cy Ardoin, Dr. Joe 
Linn, and Ms. Catherine McDonald. The AJPO Program Manager is Ms. Chris 
Anderson, Ada 9X Project Manager (Air Force Armament Laboratory, Eglin Air Force 
Base, Florida 32542-5434). 


i 


Ac 






I 






w 








CONTENTS 


1. INTRODUCTION. 1 

1.1 Objective of the Ada 9X Project Requirements Development Plan ... 1 

1.2 Operational Definition of a Requirement. 1 

1.3 Requirements Criteria. 1 

1.3.1 Consistency With Original Design Goals. 2 

1.3.2 Positive Impact to a Wide Segment of the Existing Ada 

Community. 3 

1.3.3 Implementability . 3 

1.3.4 Upward Compatibility. 3 

1.4 Structure of the Requirements Development Process. 3 

1.4.1 Interaction with Other Revision Process Participants. 4 

1.4.2 Visibility of the Requirements Development Process. 4 

2. APPROACH. 5 

2.1 Commentaries on Ada Language Issues. 5 

2.2 Ada 9X Project Requirements Workshop. 5 

2.3 Special Studies. 5 

2.4 Revision Requests. 6 

2.5 DoD Waiver Requests. 6 

2.6 Requirements/Justification. 6 

3. MANAGEMENT CONCEPT. 7 

3.1 Key Participants. 7 

3.2 Work Breakdown Structure and Deliverables. 8 

3.3 Management Procedures.11 

4. SCHEDULE.13 

5. REFERENCES.17 

APPENDIX A: REQUIREMENTS TEAM.18 

APPENDIX B: DISTINGUISHED REVIEWERS.19 


- v - 






























LIST OF FIGURES 


Figure 1. Active Participants in the Ada 9X Project Requirements 

Process . 9 

Figure 2. Work Breakdown Structure for Ada 9X Project Requirement Team Areas 

of Responsibility.10 

Figure 3. Schedule: Ada 9X Requirement Development Process.14 

Figure 4. Requirements Team Schedule .15 

Figure 5. Schedule for Distinguished Reviewers.16 


- vi - 

















1. INTRODUCTION 


1.1 Objective of the Ada 9X Project Requirements Development Plan 

""The overall goal of the Ada 9X Project is to revise ANSI/MIL-STD-1815A to reflect 
current essential requirements with minimum negative impact and maximum positive 
impact to the Ada community. The Ada 9X Project Plan delineates three major activities 
within the revision process: 

requirements development^ 

d>y revision of the Ada Language Reference Manual j J— 

3^ implementation demonstrations • 

This Plan is concerned with the first of these activities: Ada 9X requirements 
development. 


The purpose of the Ada 9X Project Requirements Development Plan is to provide a 
detailed and organized approach to the process by which requirements for the revision of 
ANSI/MEL-STD-1815A will be collected, analyzed, and synthesized into justifiable 
requirements for change to the language. This document is organized as follows: 


e) 

o 


Section 1 presents the objective of the Ada 9X Requirements Development 
Plan; the acceptance criteria for the Ada 9X requirements; and the structure of 
the Ada 9X requirements development process^ 

Section 2 provides an overview of the approach to the Ada 9X requirements 
development process by discussing the activities which will lead to a final set of 
requirements for the revision of ANSL/MIL-STD-1815Aj 


Section 3 provides the management structure for the Ada 9X Requirements 
Development process as it relates to th^ overall management and work 
breakdown structures of the Ada 9X Project^ 

Section 4 provides the schedule for the Ada 9X requirements development^ k f 


Section 5 provides a list of references which are referred to directly or 
indirectly in this document, f' r . p ) ^ _ 


1.2 Operational Definition of a Requirement 

A requirement is a language capability which should be present in Ada 9X so that 
applications and software tools can be more effectively implemented and maintained 
during the 1990’s. Thus, an Ada 9X requirement is a need for programming support which 
remains unsatisfied by Ada 83. 


1.3 Requirements Criteria 

Steelman is the model for the Ada 9X Requirements process. The original goals of the 
revised language remain the same; additional capability may be added provided it is 






consistent with these goals. The impact of revision on the Ada community, which was not 
a consideration during the development of Ada 83, is now a major consideration during 
the requirements development process. Accordingly, four criteria will be applied to the 
Ada 9X requirements developed for the Mapping/Revision Team’s translation to 
language changes. 

• A requirement must be consistent with the original design goals. 

• A requirement must support the er. icement of Ada for a wide segment of the 
existing Ada community. 

• A requirement must be implementable within current Ada compiler technology, 
preferably within existing compiler structures. 

• Unless there is an overriding reason, 1 a requirement must result in upward 
compatibility. 

Requirements which do not meet this criteria will be documented as study notes for 
consideration during a future revision. 

1.3.1 Consistency With Original Design Goals 

It is expected that most requirements for revision will involve either a tightening or 
loosening of the constraints involving current language mechanisms. It is also anticipated 
that many of the issues which are seen as revision requirements by the Ada community 
will involve making a tradeoff among a number of generally desirable properties, such as: 

• constrained generality 

• reliability 

• maintainability 

• efficiency 

• simplicity 

• implementability 

• machine independence (portability) 

• complete definition 

Much of the discussion involving requirements for language revision will center on these 
Steelman properties and their tradeoffs. For example, certain language constraints may 
be viewed as having too greatly compromised efficiency or portability for the sake of ease 
of maintenance; while other requirements may arise from the view that some restrictions 
result in reduced efficiency, reliability, and maintainability. In other cases, it may be 
necessary to determine what the requirement is, rather than to focus on how the language 
can be changed to emphasize a particularly desirable property. 


1. A revision requirement that does not meet the "upward capability” criteria will only be considered if it 
affects a very large portion of the Ada community and its absence in the revised standard has a serious 
negative impact on application development. 


2 






1.3.2 Positive Impact to a Wide Segment of the Existing Ada Community 

The Requirements Team will strive to attain a strategic balance between change and 
stability. Weighing the requested change against the other criteria and the needs of the 
community is difficult, but achievable. Requirements that support a large portion of the 
Ada community will obviously be weighted more heavily than those that affect very few. 

1.3.3 Implementability 

The third criteria focuses on implementability: Can this requirement be satisfied within 
the ordinary structures of the existing Ada compiler base? The following criteria which 
was applied to the original language design also applies to the selection of requirements 
for this revision: 

“No language can avoid the issue of efficiency. Languages that require over¬ 
elaborate compilers, or that lead to inefficient use of storage or execution time, 
force these inefficiencies on all machines and on all programs...Any proposed 
construct whose implementation is unclear or that requires excessive machine 
resources should be rejected.” 

Specifically, no requirements will be included for which there is no known satisfactory 
realization that is deemed to be within the framework of current Ada compiler 
technology. 

1.3.4 Upward Compatibility 

The expectation of economic benefits for using Ada is pervasive in the Ada community. 
DoD’s sponsorship of the Ada language was motivated by the belief that focusing our 
resources on supporting one language and the associated tools for use in software 
development and maintenance would help improve the overall quality of software at 
lower costs. The investments in compilers, tools, and applications are beginning to 
produce an economic return which must continue unimpeded. The cost for implementing 
a requirement for the current revision must be justified by the long-term economic benefits 
it will produce. While some changes to compilers and tools will be needed, these changes 
should enhance the usability and reliability of applications and tools which are 
implemented after these changes are made. 2 

1.4 Structure of the Requirements Development Process 

The structure of Ada 9X requirements development process is analogous to the process 
by which requirements were developed for the design of the Ada language. Ada 9X 
revision requests will be collected from the Ada community during a prescribed period 


2. A revision requirement that does not meet the “upward capability” criteria will only be considered if it 
affects a very large portion of the Ada community and its absence in the revised standard has a serious 
negative impact on application development. 


3 








[October 1988-October 1989] and will be analyzed, synthesized, and restated as 
requirements for revision by a small team of Ada practitioners, hereafter called the 
Requirements Team [see Appendix A]. 

1.4.1 Interaction with Other Revision Process Participants 

The Requirements Team will strive to resolve inconsistencies among revision requests and 
to provide a well justified set of requirements for the Ada 9X revision. There will be close 
interaction between the Requirements Team and the Distinguished Reviewers [see 
Appendix B] in an effort to build consensus on the essential properties of a requirement 
and its potential for realization as a revision to Ada 83. It is anticipated that as 
requirements are translated into language solutions by the Mapping Team and further 
evaluated by the Implementation Teams, additional trade-offs must be made among 
generally desirable properties and their costs. 

1.4.2 Visibility of the Requirements Development Process 

The revision requests or statements of requirements for revision submitted from the Ada 
community will be collected and made available to any interested party who accesses the 
Ada 9X electronic bulletin board (1-800Ada9X25). Substantive portions of the study 
notes and positions resulting from the dialogue between the Distinguished Reviewers and 
the Requirements Team will also be available as public information. When a consensus 
on the Requirements Document has been reached between the Requirements Team and 
the Distinguished Reviewers, the Requirements Document will be distributed to the 
Government Advisory Group, ISO WG9 and other interested parties for review and 
comment. It is anticipated that several revisions will be made to the Requirements 
Document based upon comments received from these participants, prior to public 
participation in the final review of the document. The Requirements Team will also 
prepare a document justifying the final requirements. 


4 





2. APPROACH 


Analyses and synthesis of information from several sources will be performed by the 
Requirements Team as a preliminary step in the requirements development process. 

2.1 Commentaries on Ada Language Issues 

* The Ada Language Issues (AIs) have been documented with commentary and resolutions 

as part of the on-going language maintenance activity of the AJPO and ISO WG9. Many 
important requirements and significant resolutions may be found in the AIs. Therefore, 
the Requirements Team will begin the process of requirements capture with an 
examination of the documents that have served as the basis for language maintenance 
since the standard was issued. 

2.2 Ada 9X Project Requirements Workshop 

Results from the Ada 9X Project Requirement Workshop in May 1989 will be carefully 
examined. Many revision requirements were developed during the Workshop in the 
following areas: 

• Trusted Systems/Verification 

• Software Engineering in the Large 

• Real-Time Embedded Systems 

• Parallel Systems 

• Information Systems 

2.3 Special Studies 

During the past six years, several Ada related issues have persisted as topics for 
discussion among professional and standardization working groups. These issues include 
language impediments for real-time applications, lack of support for distributed 
processes, lack of formal proofs for trusted/secure systems, the need for standardized 
extensions or secondary standard* for extra-lingual capabilities, and the facilitation of 
programming paradigms. Studies in these areas will be undertaken during the 
requirements development phase by various Project Teams. The findings from these 
studies will be considered by the Requirements Team as well as by the Mapping Team. 
These studies are: 

4 • Complex Issues Study 

— exceptions and optimization 

— shared variables 

— fixed point 

— implementation-dependent pragmas and attributes 

— input/output 

— reuse 

— extended character set 

— user-controlled real-time scheduling 

— distributed processing 

— math library 


5 






• Formal Static Semantics Development Study 

• Secondary/Supplementary Standards Study 

• Programming Paradigms Study 


— stream-based functional programming 

— object-oriented programming 

— hooked-framework 5 programming 


2.4 Revision Requests * 

The Ada 9X Project Office has established a procedure for revision request submission. 

The primary job of the Requirements Team will be to ensure that the true requirement (if 
any) is extracted from each revision request so that the requirements can be consolidated 
with requirements from other sources for evaluation in accordance with the revision 
criteria. 


2.5 DoD Waiver Requests 

In the US Department of Defense (DoD), Ada is required for almost all mission critical 
and information systems. However, if this requirement can not be met, the Project 
Manager can request a waiver. During the Ada 9X Project revision process, these waiver 
requests will be examined in order to uncover language-related problems. 

2.6 Requirements/Justiflcation 

The results of the studies/analysis tasks should provide the Requirements Team with a 
well founded view of the essential needs for Ada 9X revision requirements. The 
Requirements Team will apply the criteria [see section 1.3] to reduce the set of 
requirements derived through the studies/analysis tasks to produce the requirements and 
justification documents. These documents will be developed from team working papers, 
in which the requirements will be stated along with the assumptions and trade-off 
decisions made by the Requirements Team. The Distinguished Reviewers will give critical 
reviews on these working papers and assist the Requirements Team in settling disputes, 
discerning the requirements, properly justifying decisions, and correcting ill-formed 
assumptions or justifications. In all, the Distinguished Reviewers are an integral part of 
the requirements development process, providing quality control and assurance, 
completeness, and accuracy. k 


3. A hooked-framework programming style is one where the individual components executing under the 
framework each register their semantics with the framework for execution at the appropriate time A 
(virtually-) centralized dispatcher causes the semantic routines to be executed under the appropriate 
conditions, i.e. when a keystroke is entered with the mouse in the window associated with the semantic 
routine. These semantic routines are called hooks; hence, the name. 


6 






3. MANAGEMENT CONCEPT 


The Ada 9X Project Plan identified the key participants in the Ada 9X Project 
management structure and provided a work breakdown structure for the entire project. 
1 he following identifies specific activities to be performed by these participants during the 
Requirements Development Process. 

3.1 Key Participants 

• Ada 9X Project Office 

The Ada 9X Project Manager is responsible for providing technical direction to all 
Ada 9X Project participants and for planning and implementing the Ada 9X Project 
activities. 

• Requirements Team 

The Requirements Team will develop the requirements and supporting justification 
based on the approved 197 Ada commentaries, the Ada 9X Project revision requests, 
and other sources of requirements information identified in this Requirements 
Development Plan. This team will develop the Requirements/Justification 
Document(s). 

• Distinguished Reviewers 

Distinguished Reviewers are a group of Ada experts who will review and comment on 
study findings and the requirements and justification resulting from the Requirements 
Team work. This group may be augmented, as needed, by special, volunteer 
reviewers who have expertise in particular subject areas. 

• Government Advisory Group 

The Government Advisory Group is composed of representatives from various 
government organizations spanning a wide range of user interests. This Group will be 
kept informed of the requirements development process and will provide comments as 
appropriate. They will also ensure that the technical issues/concerns of their 
respective organizations are reported to the Requirements Team. 

• International Standards Organization (ISO) 

The Convenor and several members of ISO Working Group (WG) 9 [Ada Language) 
will participate in the requirements development process as Distinguished Reviewers. 
The Ada 9X Project Manager and the Convenor will coordinate the dissemination of 
information between the Requirements Team and ISO WG9. 

• Ada Community 

The Ada community will provide input to the requirements development process 
during open meetings and via revision requests. The success of this process largely 
depends on the community’s positive support for the development and refinement of 
requirements for Ada 9X. 


7 





F’-rure 1 identifies the active participants in the requirements phase of the Ada 9X 
Project as shaded boxes within the overall Ada 9X Project Management 
Approach/Key Participants chart provided in the Ada 9X Project Plan. 


3.2 Work Breakdown Structure and Deliverables 

Figure 2 is the Ada 9X Project overall Work Breakdown Structure. The following 
identifies the elements of that structure which are performed by the Requirements Team. 

• Management 1000 

— Planning 1200 

1201 Requirements Development Plan 

— Workshops 1300 

1301 Ada 9X Project Requirements Workshop 
International Requirements Workshop 

— Reviews 1400 

1401 Continuous Distinguished Reviewer interaction with the 

Requirements Team 

Public review of Requirements/Justification Document(s). 

— Public Relations 1500 

1501 Ada 9X Project Requirements Public Forum 

• Revision Process 2000 

— Requirements/Justification 2300 

2301 Special Studies 

• Analysis of Complex Issues Study 

• Formal Static Semantics Study 

• Secondary/Supplementary Standards Study 

• Programming Paradigms Study 

2302 Ada 9X Requirements Document 

2303 Ada 9X Requirements/Justification Document 


8 








Figure 1. Active Participants in the Ada 9X Project Requirements Process (shaded 
areas; 


9 





























ADA 9X PROJECT 


Management 

1000 


Revision 

Process 



- 1 - 

Standardization 

Process 
3000 


3100 

ANSI Approval 
Process 

3200 

ISO Adoption 
Process 


3300 

DoD Adoption 
Process 

I- 3400 

NIST Adoption 
Process 


Implementation 


Transition Support 

4000 5000 


4100 

Transition 

Recommendations 

4200 

Education/ 

Training 

4300 

ACVC/ACEC 

Update 

4400 

Implementer's 

Guide 

4500 

Language 

Maintenance 


5100 

Publications 
5200 

Configuration 
Management 

- 5300 
Data 

Management 

5400 
Meeting 
Support 

5500 
Admin 
Support 


Figure 2. Work Breakdown Structure for Ada 9X Project Requirement Team Areas of 
Responsibility (shaded) 


10 








3.3 Management Procedures 


The Requirements Team will be located at the Institute for Defense Analyses (IDA) in 
Falls Church, Va. The four members of the Requirements Team, selected competitively, 
will be under contract to IDA as individual Ada experts. IDA will also supply Ada 
experts who are IDA Research Staff Members to contribute to the requirements 
development process. The IDA Task Leader for the Ada 9X requirements development 
task will make daily work assignments to the team members, prepare status reports, and 
coordinate with the Ada 9X Project Manager on schedules, products, reviews, tasking, 
and IDA practices. 


11 









12 






4. SCHEDULE 


The schedule includes the preliminary analytical/study tasks which facilitate the capture 
of requirements, the production of requirements and their justification, and reviews. 
Figure 3 depicts the schedule for the Ada 9X Requirements Development Process. Figure 
4 is a schedule for Requirement Team documents. Figure 5 is a Distinguished Reviewer 
schedule for review of the Requirements Team documents. 


13 





14 





























Schedule for Distinguished Reviewers 

DR Review of Analysis of Ada Issues (AIs) 

DR Review of Analysis of Workshop Requirements 
DR Reviews of Formal Static Semantics 
DR Reviews of Secondary/Supplementary Standards 
DR Review of Analysis of DoD Waiver Requests 
DR Review of Analysis of Programming Paradigms 
DR Review of Analysis of Revision Requests 
DR Review of Analysis of Complex Study Findings 
DR Review of Draft Requirements/Justification 
DR Review of Draft Requirements/Justification 
DR Review of Draft Requirements/Justification 


Sept. 1989 

Oct. 1989 

Aug.-Dec. 1989 

Nov. 1989-Jan. 1990 

Dec. 1989 

Jan. 1990 

Feb.1990 

Mar. 1990 

Mar. 1990 

May 1990 

Jun.1990 


t 




Figure 5. Schedule for Distinguished Reviewers 


16 




5. REFERENCES 


1. Ada 9X Project Report: Requirements Workshop, May 1989. 

2. “The Ada Programming Language Reference Manual,” ANSI/MIL-STD 1815A, 
US Department of Defense, U.S. Government Printing Office, 1983. 

3. Christine M. Anderson, Ada 9X Project Plan, Office of the Under Secretary of 
Defense for Acquisition, Washington, D.C., February 1989. 

4. Frederick P. Brooks, Jr., “No Silver Bullets: Essence and Accidents of Software 
Engineering,” Computer 20:4, April 1987, pp. 10-20. 

5. John B. Goodenough, Ada 9X Revision Needs, Software Engineering Institute, 
Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, November 1988. 

6. Department of Defense Requirements for High order Computer Programming 
Languages-“STEELMAN,” June 1978. 





APPENDIX A: REQUIREMENTS TEAM 


Cy Ardoin 
Paul Baker 
Doug Dunlop 
Joe Linn 
Steve Michell 
Karl Nyberg 


Institute for Defense Analyses 
CTA, Inc. 

Intermetrics 

Institute for Defense Analyses 
Prior Data Sciences, Canada 
Grebyn Corp. 


18 









APPENDIX B: DISTINGUISHED REVIEWERS 


Jean Ichbiah 

Emeritus Member, Alsys 

Grady Booch 

Rational 

Ben Brosgol 

Alsys 

Norm Cohen 

IBM 

Robert Dewar 

New York University 

Gary Dismukes 

TELESOFT 

David Fisher 

Incremental Systems 

Anthony Gargaro 

Computer Sciences Corp. 

Mark Gerhardt 

ESL 

John Goodenough 

Software Engineering Institute 

Ernesto Guerrieri 

SofTech 

Tim Harrison 

Software Productivity Consortium 

Stephen Heilbrunner 

LABG, Germany 

Marlow Henne 

Sverdrup 

Paul Hil finger 

University of California at Berkley 

Mike Kamrad 

Unisys 

Rudolf Landwehr 

CCI, Germany 

Kit Lester 

Portsmouth Polytechnic, UK 

Randal Leavitt 

Prior Data Sciences, Canada 

Lennart Mahsson 

TeleLogic, Sweden 

Bob Mathis 

Contel 

Mike Mills 

Air Force/ASD 

Charlie Mitchell 

Digital Equipment Corporation 

Erhard Ploedercder 

Tartan 

David Pogge 

Navy/NWC 

Kent Power 

Boeing 

Olivier Roubine 

Syseca, France 

Tucker Taft 

Intermetrics 

Bill Taylor 

Ferranti, UK 

Eugen Vasilescu 

GNV 

Tom Wheeler 

Army/CECOM 


19 






