pendently for many varied analysis tasks, 
or used in conjunction with other orbit 
analysis tools. 

By basing the tools purely on first 
principles and utilizing a high degree of 
generalization, the same set of tools can 
be applied to imaging systems not in 
orbit (i.e., helicopters, high-altitude 
planes, etc.). The image projection tools 
begin with a simple description of the 
imaging system to be analyzed. This de- 
scription is based on the highest level of 
imaging parameters (system F-number, 
pixel pitch, aperture size, etc.), which 
are among the first parameters settled 
upon when contemplating a new system. 
The tools are structured this way to allow 
for early analysis of the highest level re- 
quirements and the performance of 
rather detailed trade studies to best set- 
tle upon these high-level requirements 
early on. 

Using these high-level parameters 
and the imaging geometry of the pro- 
posed system, one can geometrically 
project the imaging system onto the 
ground and determine many of the fea- 
tures of the collected imagery. These 
features include ground sample dis- 
tances, actual image size and geoloca- 
tion, image stretching and warping, etc. 
With these features calculated, there is a 
direct link between imaging system 
hardware parameters and performance 
requirements. Additionally, the same 
tools can be used to do some level of 
image processing. Existing image data 


sets can be processed and re-projected 
to simulate what they would look like 
had they been taken with an imaging 
system with different parameters. The 
functions provide a robust toolset to 
quickly answer several types of imaging 
questions that typically arise when con- 
sidering missions around framing imag- 
ing systems. 

This work was done by Benjamin M. 
Haber and Joseph J. Green of Caltech for 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. For more 
information, contact iaoffice@jpl. nasa.gov. 

This software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Daniel Broderick of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
danielb@caltech.edu. Refer to NPO-47281. 


Coded Modulation in C and 
M AT LA 11 

This software, written separately in C 
and MATLAB as stand-alone packages 
with equivalent functionality, imple- 
ments encoders and decoders for a set 
of nine error-correcting codes and mod- 
ulators and demodulators for five mod- 
ulation types. The software can be used 
as a single program to simulate the per- 
formance of such coded modulation. 

The error-correcting codes imple- 
mented are the nine accumulate repeat- 
4 jagged accumulate (AR4JA) low-den- 
sity parity-check (LDPC) codes, which 
have been approved for international 
standardization by the Consultative 
Committee for Space Data Systems, and 


which are scheduled to fly on a series of 
NASA missions in the Constellation Pro- 
gram. The software implements the en- 
coder and decoder functions, and con- 
tains compressed versions of generator 
and parity-check matrices used in these 
operations. 

The software supports the modula- 
tions of binary phase-shift keying 
(BPSK), quadrature PSK (QPSK), 8- 
PSK, 16-ary amplitude PSK (16-APSK), 
and 32-APSK. For each modulation 
type, the software modulator supports 
various bit-to-modulation-symbol map- 
pings, including the natural order, the 
Gray code, the anti-Gray code, and the 
ordering specified by the Digital Video 
Broadcast Satellite Second Generation 
standard for 16-APSK and 32-APSK. 
The software supports hard and soft 
demodulation, and when soft, it sup- 
ports both an exact log likelihood com- 
putation and an approximate log likeli- 
hood computation based on nearest 
neighbors. 

The software supports all nine AR4JA 
LDPC codes of the CCSDS standard and 
all five modulations of the DVB-S2 stan- 
dard, in any combination. 

This work was done by Jon Hamkins and 
Kenneth S. Andrews of Caltech for NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. For more information, 
contact iaoffice@jpl. nasa.gov. 

This software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Daniel Broderick of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
danielb@caltech.edu. Refer to NPO-471 71. 


18 


NASA Tech Briefs, April 201 1 


