Antiterrorist Software 


In light of the escalation of terrorism, the Department of Defense spearheaded the 
development of new antiterrorist software for all Government agencies by issuing a Broad 
Agency Announcement to solicit proposals. This Government- wide competition resulted 
in a team that includes NASA Lewis Research Center's Computer Services Division, who 
will develop the graphical user interface (GUI) and test it in their usability lab. The team 
launched a program entitled Joint Sphere of Security (JSOS), crafted a design architecture 
(see the following figure), and is testing the interface. This software system has a state-of- 
the-art, object-oriented architecture, with a main kernel composed of the Dynamic 
Information Architecture System (DIAS) developed by Argonne National Laboratory. 
DIAS will be used as the software "breadboard" for assembling the components of 
explosions, such as blast and collapse simulations. 



JSOS object-oriented architecture. 


Embedded in DIAS are C++ objects that represent state-of-the-art simulations developed 
at sundry laboratories with various areas of expertise. DIAS uses Gemstone, a middleware 
product that facilitates the use of CORBA and Java. CORBA allows distributed 
applications to talk across networks irrespective of language or operating system. Java 
applications and applets process queries and results from DIAS objects and display the 
results on the virtual interface. The Virtual Reality Modeling Language VRML2 is the 
outer software "wrapper" that allows simulations to be visualized in a full three- 
dimensional, interactive and intuitive interface. 

Designed to be used by security officials who must deal with the threat of explosions, the 



JSOS interface can currently model blasts. A prototype scenario is depicted in the 
following screen capture from JSOS: 



|Joint Sphere- of Security (JSOS) 


(GP& optionally locates scone®! 


Ct 1 ^! 


(1) Threat Category 

selected — -t- (2) Specific threat selected 


Maps or 
specific site 
.ted 


Prototype scenario. 

Menu choices lead users from categories of threats to specific threats. Users then define 
the scene by either selecting thumbnail photos that represent specific locations or by 
progressively zooming into a three-dimensional virtual world. The large database of sites 
available can be expanded to fit an agency's or center's needs after its requirements are 
analyzed. Global positioning systems (GPS's) can be used to assist in pinpointing 
locations. Once a scene is defined, the user positions a particular threat in the virtual 
environment. Because JSOS immerses users in the scene, this interface will be intuitive 
and natural for trial-and-error exercises, briefings, and presentations. 


After defining the threat scene, the user can precipitate the destructive action by selecting 
the detonate button, whereby calculations are performed and results are illustrated (see the 
following damage analysis from JSOS). 



JSOS damage analysis. 




The inner circle represents the region where death would occur, and the outer circle 
represents the region where there would be injury (e.g., due to window breakage). Audio 
prompts help users explore the scene. Currently the project is being developed to operate 
with an Internet browser to facilitate an application-on-demand paradigm (i.e., Java 
applets). 

Lewis contact: David A. Clark, (216) 433-5914, David.A.Clark@grc.nasa.gov 
Author: David A. Clark 

Headquarters program office: Army Research Laboratory 



