w 





l u 



The MICRO-BOSS Scheduling System: 
Current Status and Future Efforts 

M O ■ 

Norman M. Sadeh ** ^ 

Center for Integrated Manufacturing Decision Systems 
The Robotics Institute 
School of Computer Science 
_ i s Carnegie Mellon University 
L t (I Pittsburgh, PA 15213 - U.S.A. 


O 


/ 3 * 71 3 

C' 3 


sadeh@ri.cmu.edu 


1. INTRODUCTION 

1 Over the past few years, several approaches 
to scheduling have been proposed that attempt 
to reduce tardiness and inventory costs by 
opportunistically (i.e. dynamically) combining a 
resource-centered perspective to schedule bot- 
tleneck resources, and a job-centered perspec- 
tive to schedule non-bottleneck operations on a 
job by job basis. Rather than relying on their 
initial bottleneck analysis, these schedulers 
reexamine the problem each time a resource or 
a job has been scheduled. This enables them to 
detect the emergence of new bottlenecks during 
the construction of the schedule. This ability 
has been termed opportunistic scheduling [3]. 
Nevertheless, the opportunism in these systems 
remained limited, as they required scheduling 
large resource-subproblems or large job- 
subproblems before allowing for a change in the 
scheduling perspective (i.e. before permitting a 
revision in the current scheduling strategy). 
For this reason, we actually refer to these ap- 
proaches as macro-opportunistic techniques. 

In reality, bottlenecks do not necessarily span 
over the entire scheduling horizon. Moreover 
they tend to shift before being entirely 
scheduled. A scheduler that can only schedule 
large resource subproblems will not be able to 
take advantage of these considerations. Often it 
will overconstrain its set of alternatives before 


having worked on the subproblems that will 
most critically determine the quality of the en- 
tire schedule. This in turn will often result in 
poorer solutions. A more flexible approach 
would allow to quit scheduling a resource as 
soon as another resource is identified as being 
more constraining 1 2 . In fact, in the presence of 
multiple bottlenecks, one can imagine a tech- 
nique that constantly shifts attention from one 
bottleneck to another rather than focusing on 
the optimization of a single bottleneck at the 
expense of others. Therefore, it seems desirable 
to investigate a more flexible approach to 
scheduling, or a micro-opportunistic approach, 
in which the evolution of bottlenecks is con- 
tinuously monitored during the construction of 
the schedule, and the problem solving effort 
constantly redirected towards the most serious 
bottleneck. In its simplest form, this micro- 
opportunistic approach results in an 
operation-centered view of scheduling, in which 
each operation is considered an independent 
decision point and can be scheduled without re- 
quiring that other operations using the same 
resource Or belonging to the same job be 
scheduled at the same time. 

Section 2 describes a micro-opportunistic fac- 
tory scheduler called MICRO-BOSS 
( Micro-Bot tleneck Scheduling System). Section 
3 describes an empirical study that compares 


1 This research was supported, in part, by the Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency under contract 

#F30602-88-C-0001, and in part by grants from McDon- 
nell Aircraft Company and Digital Equipment Corpora- 
tion. 


2 [1] describes an alternative approach in which 
resources can be resequenced to adjust for resource 
schedules built further down the road. This approach has 
been very successful at minimizing makespan. Attempts 
to generalize the procedure to account for due dates seem 
to have been less successful so far [6]. 


37 



MICRO-BOSS against a macro-opportunistic 
scheduler that dynamically combines both a 
resource-centered perspective and a job- 
centered perspective. A summary is provided in 
Section 4, along with a brief discussion of cur- 
rent research efforts. 

2. A MICRO-OPPORTUNISTIC 
APPROACH 

In the micro-opportunistic approach im- 
plemented in MICRO-BOSS, each operation is 
considered an independent decision point. Any 
operation can be scheduled at any time, if 
deemed appropriate by the scheduler. There is 
no obligation to simultaneously schedule other 
operations upstream or downstream within the 
same job, nor is there any obligation to schedule 
other operations competing for the same 
resource. 

MICRO-BOSS proceeds by iteratively select- 
ing an operation to be scheduled and a reser- 
vation (i.e. start time) to be assigned to that 
operation. Every time an operation is 
scheduled, a new search state is created, where 
new constraints are added to account for the 
reservation assigned to that operation. A so- 
called consistency enforcing procedure is ap- 
plied to that state, that updates the set of 
remaining possible reservations of each un- 
scheduled operation. If an unscheduled opera- 
tion is found to have no possible reservations 
left, a deadend state has been reached: the sys- 
tem needs to backtrack (i.e. it needs to undo 
some earlier reservation assignments in order 
to be able to complete the schedule). If the 
search state does not appear to be a deadend, 
the scheduler moves on and looks for a new 
operation to schedule and a reservation to as- 
sign to that operation. 

In MICRO-BOSS, search efficiency is main- 
tained at a high level by interleaving search 
with the application of consistency enforcing 
techniques and a set of look-ahead techniques 
that help decide which operation to schedule 
next (so-called operation ordering heuristic ) and 
which reservation to assign to that operation 
(so-called reservation ordering heuristic). 

1. Consistency Enforcing (or 


Consistency Checking): Con- 

sistency enforcing techniques 
prune the search space by infer- 
ring new constraints resulting 
from earlier reservation assign- 
ments [2, 5]. 

2. Look-ahead Analysis: A two- 

step look-ahead procedure is ap- 
plied in each search state, which 
first optimizes reservation assign- 
ments within each job, and then, 
for each resource, computes con- 
tention between jobs over time. 
Resource/time intervals where job 
contention is the highest help 
identify the critical operation to 
be scheduled next (operation or- 
dering heuristic). Reservations for 
that operation are then ranked 
according to their ability to min- 
imize the costs incurred by the 
conflicting jobs (reservation order- 
ing heuristic). By constantly 
redirecting its effort towards the 
most serious conflicts, the 
scheduler is able to build 
schedules that are closer to the 
global optimum. Simultaneously, 
because the scheduling strategy is 
aimed at reducing job contention 
as fast as possible, chances of 
backtracking tend to subside 
pretty fast too. 

The so-called opportunism in MICRO-BOSS 
results from its ability to constantly revise its 
search strategy and redirect its effort towards 
the scheduling of the operation that appears to 
be the most critical in the current search state. 
This degree of opportunism differs from that 
displayed by other approaches where the 
scheduling entity is an entire resource or an en- 
tire job [3], i.e. where an entire resource or an 
entire job needs to be scheduled before the 
scheduler is allowed to revise its current 
scheduling strategy. 


38 



3. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 

MICRO-BOSS was compared against a 
variety of scheduling techniques, including 
popular combinations of priority dispatch rules 
and release policies suggested in the Operations 
Management literature [5], 

This section outlines a study comparing 
MICRO-BOSS against a macro-opportunistic 
scheduler that dynamically combined both a 
resource-centered perspective and a job- 
centered perspective, like in the OPIS schedul- 
ing system [3]. However, while OPIS relies on a 
set of repair heuristics to recover from inconsis- 
tencies ft], the macro-opportunistic scheduler of 
this study was built to use the same consistency 
enforcing techniques and the same backtrack- 
ing scheme as MICRO-BOSS 3 . The macro- 
opportunistic scheduler also used the same 
demand profiles as MICRO-BOSS. When 
average demand for the most critical 
resource/time interval was above some 
threshold level (a parameter of the system that 
was empirically adjusted), the macro- 
opportunistic scheduler focused on scheduling 
the operations requiring that resource/time in- 
terval, otherwise it used a job-centered perspec- 
tive to identify a critical job and schedule some 
or all the operations in that job. Each time a 
resource/time interval or a portion of a job was 
scheduled, new demand profiles were computed 
to decide which scheduling perspective to use 
next. Additional details on the implementation 
of the macro-opportunistic scheduler can be 
found in [5]. 

In order to compare the two schedulers, a set 
of 80 scheduling problems was randomly 
generated to cover a wide variety of scheduling 
conditions: tight/loose average due dates, 

narrow/wide due date ranges, one or two bot- 
tleneck machines. Each problem involved 20 
jobs and 5 resources for a total of 100 opera- 
tions (see [5] for further details). 


3 An alternative would have been to implement a varia- 

tion of MICRO-BOSS using the same repair heuristics as 
OPIS. Besides being quite time-consuming to implement, 
such a comparison would have been affected by the 
quality of the specific repair heuristics currently im- 
plemented in the OPIS scheduler. 



Figure 3-1: Tardiness performance of 
MICRO-BOSS and the 
macro-opportunistic scheduler 
on eight different problem sets. 



Figure 3-2: Flowtime performance of 
MICRO-BOSS and the 
macro-opportunistic scheduler 
on eight different problem sets. 

Figures 3-1, 3-2 and 3-3 summarize the 
results of the comparison between MICRO- 
BOSS and the macro-opportunistic scheduler 4 . 
The macro-opportunistic scheduler was consis- 
tently outperformed by MICRO-BOSS (under 
all eight scheduling conditions) both with 


4 The results presented in this section correspond to the 
69 experiments (out of 80) that were each solved in less 
than 1,000 search states by the macro-opportunistic 
scheduler. 


39 




Figure 3-3: In-system time performance of 
MICRO-BOSS and the 
macro-opportunistic scheduler 
on eight different problem sets. 

respect to tardiness, flowtime (i.e. work-in- 
process) and in-system time (i.e. total inventory, 
including finished-goods inventory). More 
generally, these results indicate that highly con- 
tended resource l time intervals can be very 
dynamic, and that it is critical to constantly fol- 
low their evolution in order to produce quality 
schedules. 

In most problems, MICRO-BOSS achieved a 
search efficiency of 100% (computed as the ratio 
of the number of operations to be scheduled 
over the number of search states that were 
visited), and required about 10 minutes of CPU 
time to schedule each problem. The current sys- 
tem is written in Knowledge Craft, a frame- 
based representation language built on top of 
Common Lisp, and runs on a DECstation 5000. 


4. CONCLUSIONS 

In this paper, a micro-opportunistic approach 
to factory scheduling was described that closely 
monitors the evolution of bottlenecks during the 
construction of the schedule, and continuously 
redirects search towards the bottleneck that ap- 
pears to be most critical. This approach differs 
from earlier opportunistic approaches, such as 
the one described in [3], as it does not require 
scheduling large resource subproblems or large 
job subproblems before revising the current 


scheduling strategy. This micro-opportunistic 
approach has been implemented in the context 
of the MICRO-BOSS factory scheduling system. 
A study comparing MICRO-BOSS against a 
macro-opportunistic scheduler suggests that the 
additional flexibility of the micro-opportunistic 
approach to scheduling generally yields impor- 
tant reductions in both tardiness and inventory. 

Current research efforts include: 

.Adaptation of MICRO-BOSS to 
deal with sequence-dependent 
setups cjMT-.f* 

• Development of micro- 
opportunistic reactive scheduling 
techniques that will enable the sys- 
tem to patch the schedule in the 
presence of contingencies such as 
machine breakdowns, raw 
materials arriving late, job cancela- 
tions, etc. 


APPENDIX: PROBLEM SETS 


Problem Sets 

Number 
of Bottlenecks 

Avg. 

Due Date 

Due Date 
Range 

Problem 

Set 

1 

loose 

wide 

1 

1 

loose 

narrow 

2 

1 

tight 

wide 

3 

1 

tight 

narrow 

4 

2 

loose 

wide 

5 

2 

loose 

narrow 

6 

2 

tight 

wide 

7 

2 

tight 

narrow 

• 8 


REFERENCES 


1. J. Adams, E. Balas, and B. Zawack. "The Shifting 
Bottleneck Procedure for Job Shop Scheduling". 
Management Science 34, 3 (1988), 391-401. 

2. A.K. Mackworth and E.C. Freuder. "The Complexity 
of some Polynomial Network Consistency Algorithms for 
Constraint Satisfaction Problems". Artificial Intelligence 
25 , 1 (1985), 65-74. 

3. Peng Si Ow and Stephen F. Smith. "Viewing Schedul- 
ing as an Opportunistic Problem-Solving Process". 
Annals of Operations Research 12 (1988), 85-108. 


40 




II 

y 


i 


4. P.S. Ow, S.F. Smith, and A. Thiriez. Reactive Plan 
Revision. Proceedings of the Seventh National Con- 
ference on Artificial Intelligence, 1988, pp. 77-82. 

5. Norman Sadeh. Look-ahead Techniques for Micro- 
opportunistic Job Shop Scheduling. Ph.D. Th., School of 
Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pitts- 
burgh, PA 15213, March 1991. 

6. P. Serafini, W. Ukovich, H. Kirchner, P. Giardina, and 
F. Tiozzo. Job-shop scheduling: a case study. In 
Operations Research Models in FMS, Springer, Vienna, 
1988. 


I 




41 


