lipse with the Sun at the focus; and (3) the 
arrival phase, in which the two bodies are 
the target planet and the spacecraft, 
where the tr^ectory is an arrival hyper- 
bola with the planet as the focus. 

This work was done by Brooke Anderson 
Park and Henry Wright of Langley Research 
Center. Further information is contained in a 
TSP (see page 1 ). LAR-1 7446-1 


@ Ring Image Analyzer 

Ring Image Analyzer software analyzes 
images to recognize elliptical patterns. It 
determines the ellipse parameters (axes 
ratio, centroid coordinate, tilt angle). 
The program attempts to recognize el- 
liptical fringes (e.g., Newton Rings) on a 
photograph and determine their cen- 
troid position, the short-to-long-axis 
ratio, and the angle of rotation of the 
long axis relative to the horizontal direc- 
tion on the photograph. These capabili- 
ties are important in interferometric im- 
aging and control of surfaces. In 
particular, this program has been devel- 
oped and applied for determining the 
rim shape of precision-machined optical 
whispering gallery mode resonators. 

The program relies on a unique image 
recognition algoritlim aimed at recogniz- 
ing elliptical shapes, but can be easily 
adapted to other geometric shapes. It is 


robust against non-elliptical details of the 
image and against noise. 

Interferometric analysis of precision-ma- 
chined surfaces remains an important 
technological instrument in hardware de- 
velopment and quality analysis. This soft- 
ware automates and increases the accuracy 
of this technique. The software has been 
developed for the needs of an R&TD- 
funded project and has become an impor- 
tant asset for the fiiture research proposal 
to NASA as well as other agencies. 

This work was done by Dmitry V. Strekalov of 
Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 
Further information is contained in a TSP 
( see page 1 ). This software is available for com- 
mercial licensing. Please contact Daniel Broder- 
ick of the California Institute of Technol- 
ogy at danielb@caltech.edu. Refer to 
NPO-47579. 


@ SureTrak Probability of 
Impact Display 

The SureTrak Probability of Impact Dis- 
play software was developed for use during 
rocket launch operations. The software 
displays probability of impact information 
for each ship near the hazardous area dur- 
ing the time immediately preceding the 
launch of an unguided vehicle. 

Wallops range safety officers need to be 
sure that the risk to humans is below a cer- 


tain threshold during each use of the Wal- 
lops Flight Facility Launch Range. Under 
the variable conditions that can exist at 
launch time, the decision to launch must 
be made in a timely manner to ensure a 
successful mission while not exceeding 
those risk criteria. Range safety officers 
need a tool that can give them the needed 
probability of impact information quickly, 
and in a format that is clearly understand- 
able. This application is meant to fill that 
need. 

The software is a reuse of part of soft- 
ware developed for an earlier project: 
Ship Surveillance Software System (S4). 
The S4 project was written in C++ using 
Microsoft Visual Studio 6. The data 
structures and dialog templates from it 
were copied into a new application that 
calls the implementation of the algo- 
rithms from S4 and displays the results 
as needed. In the S4 software, the list of 
ships in the area was received from one 
local radar interface and from operators 
who entered the ship information man- 
ually. The SureTrak Probability of Im- 
pact Display application receives ship 
data from two local radars as well as the 
SureTrak system, eliminating the need 
for manual data entry. 

This work was done by John Elliott of God- 
dard Space Flight Center. Further information 
is contained in a TSP (see page 1). GSC- 
16064-1 


NASA Tech Briefs, January 2012 


19 


