The cylindrical/conical shell enclos- 
ing the cavity is machined from copper, 
which is chosen for its high thermal 
conductivity. In use, the shell is ori- 
ented vertically, open end facing up, 
and inserted in a Dewar flask filled with 
isopropyl alcohol/ dry-ice slush. A 
flange at the open end of the shell is 
supported by a thermally insulating 
ring on the lip of the Dewar flask. The 
slush cools the shell (and thus the 
blackbody cavity) to the desired tem- 
perature. Typically, the slush starts at a 


temperature of about 194 K. The slush 
is stirred and warmed by bubbling dry 
air or nitrogen through it, thereby 
gradually increasing the temperature 
through the aforementioned calibra- 
tion range during an interval of several 
hours. The temperature of the slush is 
monitored by use of a precise thermo- 
couple probe. A comparison with an in- 
dependently calibrated commercial ra- 
diometer with a thermocouple 
demonstrated less than a 1 K difference 
between a thermocouple in the slush 


and the radiometer’s output. The flow 
of dry air also acts as a purge to prevent 
airborne water vapor from frosting the 
conical and cylindrical cavity surfaces. 

This work was done by Dane Howell, 
Robert Ryan, Jim Ryan, Dane Howell, Doug 
Henderson, and Latry Clayton of Stennis 
Space Center. 

Inquiries concerning rights for the commer- 
cial use of this invention should be addressed 
to the Intellectual Property Manager, Stennis 
Space Center, (228) 688-1929. Refer to SSC- 
00193. 


® KML Super Overlay to WMS Translator 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


This translator is a server-based appli- 
cation that automatically generates KML 
super overlay configuration files re- 
quired by Google Earth for map data ac- 
cess via the Open Geospatial Consor- 
tium WMS (Web Map Service) standard. 
The translator uses a set of URL param- 
eters that mirror the WMS parameters as 
much as possible, and it also can gener- 
ate a super overlay subdivision of any 
given area that is only loaded when 
needed, enabling very large areas of cov- 
erage at very high resolutions. It can 


make almost any dataset available as a 
WMS service visible and usable in any 
KML application, without the need to 
reformat the data. 

With the proper configuration, very 
large datasets that exist in WMS can be- 
come layers in a KML-enabled client. 
For example, Google Earth natively uses 
KML for data access and is both popular 
and available. This KML to WMS transla- 
tor makes Google Earth act as a WMS 
client and can be used to make NASA re- 
mote sensing data more accessible, thus 


enabling exploration, collaboration, 
and education efforts. Simulated or 
modeled data available in WMS can be- 
come available in KML. This tool can be 
used for remote imagery of other plan- 
ets, the Moon, and Earth. 

This program was written by Lucian Pie- 
sea of Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Lab- 
oratory. 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-44684. ' 


® High-Performance Tiled WMS and KML Web Server 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


This software is an Apache 2.0 module 
implementing a high-performance map 
server to support interactive map viewers 
and virtual planet client software. It can 
be used in applications that require ac- 
cess to very-high-resolution geolocated 
images, such as GIS, virtual planet appli- 
cations, and flight simulators. It serves 
Web Map Service (WMS) requests that 
comply with a given request grid from 
an existing tile dataset. It also generates 


the KML super-overlay configuration 
files required to access the WMS image 
tiles. This server can sustain extremely 
high request rates with very short re- 
quest latencies in both WMS and KML 
protocols. It does not require significant 
computer resources and can operate 
from read-only media. 

This server makes it possible to sup- 
port very demanding interactive or im- 
mersive applications that require geo- 


graphically located data. It has direct ap- 
plications for making NASA data such as 
remote sensing and modeled or simu- 
lated data available to applications like 
WorldWind or Google Earth. 

This program was written by Lucian Plesea 
of Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO- 44685.' 


® Modeling of Radiative Transfer in Protostellar Disks 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


This program implements a spectral 
line, radiative transfer tool for interpret- 
ing Spitzer Space Telescope observa- 
tions by matching them with models of 


protostellar disks for improved under- 
standing of planet and star formation. 
The Spitzer Space Telescope detects gas- 
phase molecules in the infrared spectra 


of protostellar disks, with spectral lines 
carrying information on the chemical 
composition of the material from which 
planets form. Input to the software in- 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2007 


39 


eludes chemical models developed at 
JPL. The products are synthetic images 
and spectra for comparison with Spitzer 
measurements. 

Radiative transfer in a protostellar 
disk is primarily affected by absorption 
and emission processes in the dust and 
in molecular gases such as H 2 , CO, and 
HCO. The magnitude of the optical ab- 
sorption and emission is determined by 
the population of the electronic, vibra- 
tional, and rotational energy levels. The 
population of the molecular level is in 
turn determined by the intensity of the 


radiation field. Therefore, the intensity 
of the radiation field and the popula- 
tion of the molecular levels are inter-de- 
pendent quantities. 

To meet the computational chal- 
lenges of solving for the coupled radia- 
tion field and electronic level popula- 
tions in disks having wide ranges of 
optical depths and spatial scales, the 
tool runs in parallel on the JPL Dell 
Cluster supercomputer with C++ and 
Fortran compiler with a Message Pass- 
ing Interface. Because this software has 
been developed on a distributed com- 


puting platform, the modeling of sys- 
tems previously beyond the reach of 
available computational resources 
is possible. 

This program was written by Paul Von 
Allmen and Neal Turner of Caltech for 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Further 
information is contained in a TSP (see 
page 1). 

The software used in this innovation is 
available for commercial licensing. Please 
contact Karina Edmonds of the California 
Institute of Technology at (626) 395-2322. 
Refer to NPO-44467. 


® Composite Pulse Tube 


Axial leakage of heat is reduced. 


Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas 


A modification of the design of the 
pulse tube in a pulse-tube cryocooler re- 
duces axial thermal conductance while 
preserving radial thermal conductance. 
It is desirable to minimize axial thermal 
conductance in the pulse-tube wall to 
minimize leakage of heat between the 
warm and cold ends of the pulse tube. At 
the same time, it is desirable to maxi- 
mize radial thermal conductance at the 
cold end of the pulse tube to ensure ad- 
equate thermal contact between (1) a 
heat exchanger in the form of a stack of 
copper screens inside the pulse tube at 
the cold end and (2) the remainder of 
the cold tip, which is the object to which 
the heat load is applied and from which 
heat must be removed. The modified de- 
sign yields a low-heat-leak pulse tube 
that can be easily integrated with a cold 
tip. 

A typical pulse tube of prior design is 
either a thin-walled metal tube or a 
metal tube with a nonmetallic lining. It 


is desirable that the outer surface of a 
pulse tube be cylindrical (in contradis- 
tinction to tapered) to simplify the de- 
sign of a regenerator that is also part of 
the cryocooler. Under some conditions, 
it is desirable to taper the inner surface 
of the pulse tube to reduce acoustic 
streaming. The combination of a cylin- 
drical outer surface and a tapered inner 
surface can lead to unacceptably large 
axial conduction if the pulse tube is 
made entirely of metal. Making the 
pulse-tube wall of a nonmetallic, low- 
thermal-conductivity material would not 
solve the problem because the wall 
would not afford the needed thermal 
contact for the stack of screens in the 
cold end. 

The modified design calls for fabri- 
cating the pulse tube in two parts: a 
longer, nonmetallic part that is tapered 
on the inside and cylindrical on the 
outside and a shorter, metallic part that 
is cylindrical on both the inside and the 


outside. The nonmetallic part can be 
made from G-10 fiberglass-reinforced 
epoxy or other low-thermal-conductiv- 
ity, cryogenically compatible material. 
The metallic part must have high ther- 
mal conductivity in the cryogenic tem- 
perature range and would typically be 
made of pure copper to satisfy this re- 
quirement. The metallic part is bonded 
to the nonmetallic part with epoxy. 
Copper screens are inserted in the 
metallic part to form the cold-end heat 
exchanger, then the assembled pulse 
tube is inserted in the cold tip. 

This work was done by Jerry L. Martin 
and Jason H. Cloyd of Mesoscopic Devices, 
LLC for Johnson Space Center. For further in- 
formation, contact: 

Jerry L. Martin 
Mesoscopic Devices, LLC 
510 Compton Street, Suite 106 
Broomfield, CO 80020 
Phone No.: (303) 466-6968 
Refer to MSC-23522 


@ Photometric Calibration of Consumer Video Cameras 

In imaging of point sources, dynamic ranges can be extended beyond saturation levels. 

Marshall Space Flight Center, Alabama 


Equipment and techniques have been 
developed to implement a method of 
photometric calibration of consumer 
video cameras for imaging of objects that 
are sufficiently narrow or sufficiently dis- 
tant to be optically equivalent to point or 
line sources. Heretofore, it has been diffi- 
cult to calibrate consumer video cameras, 


especially in cases of image saturation, be- 
cause they exhibit nonlinear responses 
with dynamic ranges much smaller than 
those of scientific-grade video cameras. 
The present method not only takes this 
difficulty in stride but also makes it possi- 
ble to extend effective dynamic ranges to 
several powers of ten beyond saturation 


levels. The method will likely be primarily 
useful in astronomical photometry. 
There are also potential commercial ap- 
plications in medical and industrial imag- 
ing of point or line sources in the pres- 
ence of saturation. 

This development was prompted by 
the need to measure brightnesses of de- 


40 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2007 


