m Software 


^ Numerical Modeling of 
Nanoelectronic Devices 

Nanoelectronic Modeling 3-D 
(NEMO 3-D) is a computer program for 
numerical modeling of the electronic 
structure properties of a semiconductor 
device that is embodied in a crystal con- 
taining as many as 16 million atoms in 
an arbitrary configuration and that has 
overall dimensions of the order of tens 
of nanometers. The underlying mathe- 
matical model represents the quantum- 
mechanical behavior of the device re- 
solved to the atomistic level of 
granularity. The system of electrons in 
the device is represented by a sparse 
Hamiltonian matrix that contains hun- 
dreds of millions of terms. NEMO 3-D 
solves the matrix equation on a Beowulf- 
class cluster computer, by use of a paral- 
lel-processing matrix-vector multiplica- 
tion algorithm coupled to a Lanczos 
and/or Rayleigh-Ritz algorithm that 
solves for eigenvalues. In a recent up- 
date of NEMO 3-D, a new strain treat- 
ment, parameterized for bulk material 
properties of GaAs and InAs, was devel- 
oped for two tight-binding submodels. 
The utility of the NEMO 3-D was 
demonstrated in an atomistic analysis of 
the effects of disorder in alloys and, in 
particular, in bulk In x Gai_ x As and in 
Ino. 6 Gao. 4 As quantum dots. 

This program was written by Gerhard 
Klimeck, Fabiano Oyafuso, R. Chris Bowen, 
and Timothy Boykin of Caltech for NASA’s 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Further infor- 
mation is contained in a TSP (see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Don Hart of the Cal- 
ifornia Institute of Technology at (818) 393- 
3425. Refer to NPO-30520. 


Organizing Diverse, 
Distributed Project 
Information 

SemanticOrganizer is a software ap- 
plication designed to organize and in- 
tegrate information generated within a 
distributed organization or as part of a 
project that involves multiple, geo- 
graphically dispersed collaborators. 
SemanticOrganizer incorporates the 
capabilities of database storage, docu- 
ment sharing, hypermedia navigation, 
and semantic-interlinking into a system 
that can be customized to satisfy the 


specific information-management 
needs of different user communities. 
The program provides a centralized 
repository of information that is both 
secure and accessible to project collab- 
orators via the World Wide Web. Se- 
manticOrganizer’s repository can be 
used to collect diverse information (in- 
cluding forms, documents, notes, data, 
spreadsheets, images, and sounds) 
from computers at collaborators’ work 
sites. The program organizes the infor- 
mation using a unique network-struc- 
tured conceptual framework, wherein 
each node represents a data record that 
contains not only the original informa- 
tion but also metadata (in effect, stan- 
dardized data that characterize the infor- 
mation). Links among nodes express 
semantic relationships among the data 
records. The program features a Web 
interface through which users enter, 
interlink, and/or search for informa- 
tion in the repository. By use of this 
repository, the collaborators have im- 
mediate access to the most recent pro- 
ject information, as well as to archived 
information. A key advantage to Se- 
manticOrganizer is its ability to inter- 
link information together in a natural 
fashion using customized terminology 
and concepts that are familiar to a user 
community. 

Software development activities were di- 
rected by Richard M. Keller of Ames Re- 
search Center. For further information, ac- 
cess http://sciencedesk.arc.nasa.gov and 
http:// io. arc. nasa.gov. 

Inquiries concerning rights for the com- 
mercial use of this invention should be 
addressed to the Patent Counsel, Ames Re- 
search Center, (650) 604-5104. Refer to 
ARC-15070-1. 


Eigensolver for a Sparse, 
Large Hermitian Matrix 

A parallel-processing computer pro- 
gram finds a few eigenvalues in a sparse 
Hermitian matrix that contains as many 
as 100 million diagonal elements. This 
program finds the eigenvalues faster, 
using less memory, than do other, com- 
parable eigensolver programs. This pro- 
gram implements a Lanczos algorithm 
in the American National Standards In- 
stitute/International Organization for 
Standardization (ANSI/ISO) C comput- 
ing language, using the Message Passing 


Interface (MPI) standard to comple- 
ment an eigensolver in PARPACK. 
[PARPACK (Parallel Arnoldi Pack age) is 
an extension, to parallel-processing 
computer architectures, of ARPACK 
(Arnoldi Pack age), which is a collection 
of Fortran 77 subroutines that solve 
large-scale eigenvalue problems.] The 
eigensolver runs on Beowulf clusters of 
computers at the Jet Propulsion Labora- 
tory (JPL). The package is open-source 
software and is distributed under the 
terms of the GNU Lesser General Public 
License (LGPL) on the Internet through 
the Open Channel Foundation at 
http:/ / www.openchannelsoftware.com/. 

This program was written by E. Robert 
Tisdale, Fabiano Oyafuso, Gerhard Klimeck, 
and R. Chris Brown of Caltech for NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. Further informa- 
tion is contained in a TSP (seepage 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Don Hart of the Cal- 
ifornia Institute of Technology at (818) 393- 
3425. Refer to NPO-30834. 


@ Modified Polar-Format 
Software for Processing 
SAR Data 

HMPF is a computer program that 
implements a modified polar-format al- 
gorithm for processing data from space- 
borne synthetic-aperture radar (SAR) 
systems. Unlike prior polar-format pro- 
cessing algorithms, this algorithm is 
based on the assumption that the radar 
signal wavefronts are spherical rather 
than planar. The algorithm provides for 
resampling of SAR pulse data from slant 
range to radial distance from the center 
of a reference sphere that is nominally 
the local Earth surface. Then, invoking 
the projection-slice theorem, the resam- 
pled pulse data are Fourier-transformed 
over radial distance, arranged in the 
wavenumber domain according to the 
acquisition geometry, resampled to a 
Cartesian grid, and inverse-Fourier- 
transformed. The result of this process 
is the focused SAR image. HMPF, and 
perhaps other programs that imple- 
ment variants of the algorithm, may give 
better accuracy than do prior algo- 
rithms for processing strip-map SAR 
data from high altitudes and may give 
better phase preservation relative to 
prior polar-format algorithms for pro- 
cessing spotlight-mode SAR data. 


NASA Tech Briefs, November 2003 


15 


