Tlje Software Toolw6rks 

Walt cBilofsky? Prop. 



14478 GIORIETTA DRIVE TELEPHONE 

SHERMAN OAKS, CALIFORNIA 91423 ' '2131 986-4S85 

C/80 

Version 2.0 
February 1982 
Walt Bilofsky 

Table of Contents 

1 . INTRODUCTION 2 

2. FOR THE NEW C PROGRAMMER 3 

3 . FOR THE EXPERIENCED C USER 4 

4. THE C/80 DISTRIBUTION DISK 4 

5. AN EXAMPLE 6 

6. RUNNNING THE COMPILER 6 

7 . C/80 LANGUAGE SUMMARY 8 

7.1. Variables 10 

7.2. Data Types 11 

7.3. Pointers 11 

7.4. Structures 11 

7.5. Storage Classes 12 

7.6. Constants 13 

7.7. Operators and Expressions 13 

7.8. Statements 14 

7.9. Conclusion 15 

8. IMPLEMENTATION AND MACHINE DEPENDENCIES 15 

9 . RUNTIME AND I/O LIBRARY 18 

9.1. Files and Devices 18 

9.2. Commands 18 

9.3. I/O Redirection 19 

9.4. Interrupting a Program 20 

9.5. I/O Library Routines 20 

9.6. Formatted Output 22 

9.7. Random Access File I/O 23 

9.8. Program Chaining 24 

10 . USING C/80 WITH MACRO-80 24 

11. MULTIPLE ASSEMBLIES 25 

12. RUNTIME TRACE AND EXECUTION PROFILE 26 

13 . THE AS ASSEMBLER 27 

14 . UPPER CASE SOURCE FILES 28 

15. TRICKS AND INTERNALS 29 

16. COMPILER ERROR MESSAGES 30 

INDEX 34 



Copyright (c) 1981, 1982 Walter Bilofsky. Sale of this 
software conveys a license for its use on a single 
computer owned or operated by the purchaser. Copying this 
software or documentation by any means whatsoever for any 
other purpose is expressly prohibited. 



1. INTRODUCTION C/80 2.0 - 2 - 



1. INTRODUCTION 

C/80 is a compiler for the C programming language, running 
under the CP/M and HDOS operating systems. It requires a minimum of 
48K of memory. The compiler produces an assembly language text file 
which is turned into an executable object program by an absolute 
assembler which is included (except on HDOS, where ASM is used). 
Optionally, C/80 can produce output for Microsoft's Macro-80 
relocatable assembler. 

The reference manual for C/80 is The C Programming Language 
by Brian Kernighan and Dennis Ritchie. Section 2 tells where you 
can obtain this book. 

Purchasers of inexpensive C compilers have come to expect 
that they will lack many important language features, or will have 
non-standard variations which make C programs less portable. C/80 
Version 2.0 is one of the better compilers in this respect. It 
supports all of the language features described in The C Programming 
Language , with the following exceptions: 

o float, double, and long data types 

o typedef 

o Arguments to #define macros 

o Bit fields 

o #line 

o Declarations within nested blocks 

C/80 Version 2.0 does support structures, statics, initialization, 
casts, compile time evaluation of constant expressions — in short, 
all other C language features. A few language features have 
restrictions on their use; see Section 8 for a complete list of the 
exceptions and implementation dependencies. 

This C implementation also provides the following features: 

o Runtime command arguments including I/O redirection. 

o Conventional C I/O library 

o Random access file I/O 

o Dynamic storage allocation 

o Runtime execution profile facility 

o Selectable Macro-80 compatibility 

o In-line assembly language 

o Incudes absolute assembler (CP/M only) 

The objective of Ron Cain's small-C implementation was to 
make a subset of the C language available to the computer hobbyist 
at minimal cost. We have continued in that spirit by keeping the 
price of C/80 as low as possible. However, we have dedicated a 
considerable amount of work and compiler expertise to developing 
C/80, which now presents both the beginner and the serious 
programmer with a genuinely useful tool for program development. 
Many products from The Software Toolworks are written in C/80, 
including TEXT, LISP/80, UVMAC , ED-A-SKETCH, and C/80 itself. 



1. INTRODUCTION C/8 2.0 - 3 - 



Acknowledgements : 

Ron Cain's contribution in providing a simple, public domain 
compiler for a minimal C subset is well known and widely 
appreciated. Jim Gillogly wrote and maintained printf. The initial 
version of seek and HDOS exec were contributed by Al Bolduc. CP/M 
exec was written by Robert Wesson. 

Note: This document describes C/80 implementations for 
both CP/M and HDOS. Where program names, devices, etc., 
differ for the two systems, the CP/M names will be used, 
with the HDOS equivalent in brackets, [like this]. 



2. FOR THE NEW C PROGRAMMER 

A summary and brief description of the C/80 language appears 
below (Section 7). For a detailed introduction to C, the beginner 
should obtain The C Programming Language , by Brian Kernighan and 
Dennis Ritchie (Prentice-Hall, 1978). This book defines the C 
language, and contains many useful programs as examples. It is sold 
in many computer stores and college and technical bookstores, or you 
may purchase it by mail from either of the following: 

Lifeboat Associates 
1651 Third Avenue 
New York, NY 10028 

(212) 860-0300; phone orders $50 minimum. 
Price: $14.00 + $3.93 shipping (UPS Blue in US) 
MC, VISA, AE accepted. C.O.D: add $5.00. 

Prentice-Hall 
200 Old Tappan Road 
Old Tappan, NJ 07 675 
(201) 767-5067 

Note: In reading The C Programming Language , it is 
important to keep in mind at least the major features of C 
which are not supported by C/80. Section 8 below lists 
the differences between C/80 and the language described in 
the book. 



3. THE EXPERIENCED C USER C/80 2.0 - 4 - 



3. FOR THE EXPERIENCED C USER 

Users who know C will find C/80 quite familiar and easy to 
use. It supports data types char and int, and full C pointers, 
arrays and structures. All C control statements are supported, all 
operators, and most preprocessor functions. The preprocessor allows 
in-line assembly language code. 

C/80 programs use the conventional command line 

(main(argc,argv) ) . The runtime library provides many of the 
capabilities of the standard C I/O library file handling routines, 
and implements I/O redirection in the command line. 

There are a few differences between C/80 and full C, notably 
the absence of long and float. The one difference which may cause 
hard to detect problems in converting full C programs is that 
functions may not be called with a different number of arguments 
than specified in the function definition. 

C/80 program source files are normally prepared using the 
full upper and lower case ASCII character set. Users with upper 
case only terminals should refer to Section 14. 



4. THE C/80 DISTRIBUTION DISK 

The C/80 Distribution Disk contains the following files. A 
few of the files are not included on the Osborne 1 due to lack of 
disk space. 

C.COM or CABS The C/8 compiler. 

CLIBRARY.ASM The C/80 I/O library. This file is automatically 

included in all C/80 program assemblies. It must 
reside on A: [SYO: on HDOS] at assembly time. 

CLIBRARY.REL A relocatable version of the library, for use with 

Microsoft's Link-80 

SEEK.C Routines for random access file I/O (not for CP/M 

1. 4 and earlier) . 

EXEC. ASM [HDOS: EXEC.C]. Routine to chain to another .COM 

[.ABS] program. (Not included on Osborne.) 

CPROF.ASM The runtime execution profile library. This file is 

automatically included in assemblies of C/80 
programs compiled with the -p switch (see Section 
12). It must reside on A: [SYO: on HDOS] when such 
programs are assembled. (Not included on Osborne; 
generate from CPROF.C.) 



4. THE DISTRIBUTION DISK 



C/80 2.0 



- 5 - 



CPROF.C 



Source file for CPROF.ASM. Provided to 



allow 



CTRACE.ASM 



PRINTF.C 



PRINTF.H 

HELLO. C 
TAB.C 

CMP.C 
TREE . C 
UCASE.C 

AS.COM 



PATCHES.DOC 



alteration of runtime profile to print in other 

formats, accumulate different data, etc. Osborne 

users must generate CPROF.ASM by compiling this 
file. 

An alternate runtime execution profile library. 
Instead of printing a runtime profile, CTRACE traces 
each routine call and return. See Section 12. 



The C80 formatted output routines 
May be incorporated into a program 
printf.c", which should appear before 
printf . 



see Section 9) . 

using finclude 

any use of 



A header file for defining printf in source files 
where the entire printf.c source file must not be 
included. 

A sample C/80 program; the first program in The C 
Programming Language . 

A sample C/80 program which copies a file, replacing 
blanks by tabs wherever this might result in a 
savings of space. (Not included on Osborne.) 

A sample C/80 program which compares two files. 

A sample C/80 program showing the use of structures. 

A sample upper case C/80 source file. UCASE 
translates C/80 source files prepared in lower case 
into upper case format. (Not included on Osborne.) 

(CP/M only.) An absolute 8080 assembler which 
assembles C/80 output files. This assembler is 
essentially equivalent to the ASM assembler under 
HDOS . Section 13 gives a brief description of how 
to use AS. 

The default values and patch locations for the sizes 
of various compiler tables. See Section 6. 



5. AN EXAMPLE C/80 2.0 - 6 - 



5. AN EXAMPLE 

This section describes how to assemble and run a C/80 

program. The example shown is for the CP/M operating system. 

[Under HDOS, the procedure is identical, except that HDOS uses the 

">" prompt instead of ,, A>" , and the Heath assembler ASM is used, 

with the command "asm hello=hello" . ] 

First a source file, called HELLO. C, must be prepared. This 
can be done using any text editor. The program on the source file 
should look like this: 

# include "printf .c" 
main() { 

printf ("Hello, worldi\n H ); 

Files PRINTF. C and CLIBRARY.ASM should be copied to A: 
[SYO: on HDOS]. Then HELLO can be compiled and run by the following 
steps. Characters which the computer types are underlined in this 
example? the other characters are typed by the user. 

A> c hello 

C/80 Compiler 2.0 (2/3/82) 

A> as hello 

8080 AS 2^2 (7/7/81) 

A> hello 
Hello, world! 
A> 



6. RUNNNING THE COMPILER 

The simplest way to compile a C/80 program is to give the 
command 

c filename 

This takes the source file FILENAME. C and produces an assembly file 
FILENAME. ASM. Of course, any file name can be used instead of 
filename. 

In order to create an assembly file with a different name or 
on a different device, the command looks like 



6. RUNNING THE COMPILER C/8 2.0 - 7 - 

c d:outf ile.mac=b:inf ile 

[c dkl:outf ile.mac=syl:inf ile on HDOS] 

If no extension is specified, the defaults are .ASM for the output 
file and .C for the input. 

The C command may include "switches" to select compiler 
options. The switches consist of a -, a letter (upper and lower 
case are synonymous) , and sometimes a numeric value (represented 
below by N) . 

Example: To compile file FOO.C, producing file B:FOO.ASM, including 
the source text as comments in the assembly file, and allocating 
space for 400 symbols (300 global and 100 local), use the command 

c -t -s400 b:foo=foo 

The default values for the switchable parameters are listed 
on file PATCHES.DOC on the C/80 distribution disk, and may be 
patched by the user to select different defaults. The switches are: 

-t Include the source program text as comments in the 
assembly language file. 

-m Generate Macro-80 assembler output. See Section 10. 

-p Generate a runtime profile for the program being 
compiled. See Section 12. 

-sN Allocate N entries in the symbol table. 3/4 of the 

symbol table entries are used for globals and the 

remainder for local variables. Memory occupied by the 
symbol table is about 16 bytes per entry. 

-cN Allocates N bytes for the string constant table. This 
table stores all string constants in the program. 

-dN Allocates N bytes for the #define table. The -define 
table stores all #define macro names and strings. 

-wN Allocates N slots for the switch/case table. This table 
determines the maximum number of cases in a switch 
statement or in nested switch statements. 

-rN Allocates N bytes for the structure table. This table 
stores the information from structure declarations. 

-IN Begin generating internal labels at number N (default 
0). This provides a method of compiling several C 
source files into separate assembly files which may then 
be assembled together. See Section 11. 

-g Do not reserve storage for globals. This is equivalent 
to preceding each global declaration with the extern 
keyword. This may be useful in multiple file 
compilations; see Section 11. 



6. RUNNING THE COMPILER C/80 2.0 



- 8 - 



-f Normally, the compiler tries not to duplicate strings 
which can be overlapped. In particular, two identical 
string constants will point to the same location. This 
may cause problems in .a program which alters the 
contents of a string constant or an initialized 
character pointer. (Initialized character arrays are 
not affected.) The -f switch turns off the string 
overlap feature, and insures that each string is stored 
separately. 

-z C generally initializes all static and global storage to 
zeros. Since this can create a very large intermediate 
assembly language file, C/80 only zeros arrays shorter 
than 256 bytes. The -z switch causes all statics and 
globals to be initialized to zero, regardless of size. 

After compiling the source program, use AS [ASM on HDOS] to 
assemble the assembly language file into an executable program. 
Note that all C programs will include the C runtime library file, 
CLIBRARY.ASM, which must reside on A: [SYO: on HDOS]. 

If more than the minimum necessary memory is available, the 
C/80 compiler may be patched to change the default values to larger, 
more convenient ones. The locations in C.COM [CABS on HDOS] which 
contain the default values are shown in file PATCHES.DOC on the C/80 
distribution disk. The program may be patched on CP/M by using DDT 
and the SAVE command, and on HDOS by using the PATCH program. 



7. C/80 LANGUAGE SUMMARY 

This section contains a language summary in tabular form, 
followed by a concise explanation of the major C language features. 
Its aim is to convey the basics of C/80 to a programmer with some 
feel for computer languages. It is not intended to replace The C 
Programming Language as an exhaustive reference. 

(1) Data Types: 

Types: char, int 

long (in C/80, same as int) 
Declarations: 

char c, *pc, ac [ ] , ac2[n], **x[m][n] 

int i, *pi, ai [] , aci [n] ; 

extern char/int ... 

static char/int . . . 

auto char/int . . . 

register char/int ... 

initialization: 

char/int v = constant; 
char/int a[] = {c,c,...}; 
Structure Declarations: See "Structures" below. 



7. C/8 LANGUAGE SUMMARY C/8 2.0 - 9 - 



(2) Primaries: 

constant: 

decimal number 

octal number beginning with 

hex number beginning with Ox or OX 

character constant 'c' 

string "abc" 
variable 

address [expression] 
function (argl, ... ,argn) (n >= 0) 
structure. element 
ptr_to_structure->element 

(3) Expressions: 

Unary operators: 

minus 

* contents of 
& address of 

++ increment (pre- or postfix) 
decrement (pre- or postfix) 

! logical not 
bitwise not 

(type) type is any type (e.g., char*); 

forces type of following expression 

sizeof nr . bytes in type or expression 

Binary operators: 

* / arithmetic operators 
% modulo 

+ - arithmetic operators 

>> << right, left shift 

< <= less than, less than or equal 

> >= greater than, greater than or equal 

-= != equal, not equal (0 or 1 valued) 

& | ~ bitwise and, or, xor 

&& | | logical and, or 

? : if-then-else expression 

= assignment operator 

+= -= arithmetic assignment operators 

*= /= 

&= 1 = 






comma (expression sequencing) 



7. C/80 LANGUAGE SUMMARY C/80 2.0 - 10 - 



(4) Statements 

expression; 

if (expression) statement; 

if (expression) statement; else statement; 

for (expression; expression; expression) statement 

while (expression) statement; 

do statement while (expression); 

switch (expression) { 

case: statement; ... 
default: statement ; } 
de ea k / 
continue; 
return; 

return expression; 
goto label; 
. label: statement; 
{ statement; ...; statement; { 
; (null statement) 

(5) Function Definitions (functions are fully recursive) 

f name (argl, . . . ,argn) 

int/char argi,*argj f ... ; 
{ statements; } 

(6) Preprocessor Functions 

/* comments */ 

#define name string Replace name by string 

throughout text 
#undef name Erase definition 

tinclude "filename" Inserts filename at that 

or #include <filename> point. 
#ifdef name Generate following code 

if name is #defined or 
#ifndef name not #defined, or if 

#if expression expression nonzero, respectively. 

#else Reverse conditional generation 

#endif End conditional generation 

#asm Begin assembly language 

#endasm End assembly language 

#UPPER Convert upper to lower case 

7.1. Variables. 

Variable names consist of letters, numbers, and the 
character "_" . The first character must be a letter. Upper and 
lower case letters are allowed and are different (except globals 
when Macro-80 is used); usually lower case letters are used. 
Variable names may be any length, but any letters after the first 
seven are ignored (six for globals with Macro-80). 

Each variable has a type, a scope, and a storage class. 

The scope of a variable determines the portion of the source 
program within which the variable is known. The three possible 
scopes are local, global, and external. Local variables are those 
declared at the beginning of a function body; they are known only 
inside that function and the same names can be used in other 



7. C/80 LANGUAGE SUMMARY C/80 2.0 - 11 - 



functions. Global variables are those declared outside a function 
body; they are known in all functions from the declaration to the 
end of the file. In addition, the extern declaration may be used to 
reference variables in the C/80 library or on other files in a 
multiple file compilation. 

7.2. Data Types 

C/80 contains two basic data types: int, which is a 16 bit 
signed integer (range -32768 to 32767), and char, which is an 8 bit 
signed integer (range -128 to 127). Chars are often used to store 
characters of text. Unsigned ints are are also supported. 

Integers and characters are the basic components of the more 
complex data types: arrays , pointers , and structures . The following 
declaration declares an int, a doubly dimensioned int array, an 
array of pointers to ints, and a function returning pointers to 
ints . 

int i r array [30] [10] , *ptr[5] f *f(); 

An array is similar to a BASIC or FORTRAN array; it simply 
consists of consecutive pieces of memory each large enough to 
contain a char, int, or pointer. 

C does not contain a separate string data type; strings are 
stored as arrays of chars. By convention, a byte containing is 
used to terminate a string. 

7.3. Pointers 

The concept of pointers is essential to the C language. A 
pointer is simply an address. Thus, in C/80, pointers are unsigned 
16 bit numbers, similar to unsigned ints. They are used to step 
efficiently through arrays, where other languages might use 
subscripts and an index variable, and to pass (addresses of) large 
data structures as function arguments. An indication of how to use 
pointers is given in Section 7.7. 

7.4. Structures 

Structures are a useful way to organize data. An example of 
a structure declaration is: 

struct tree { 

char value [5] ; 

struct tree *left,*right; } 

forest [50] f *ptree; 

This declares three kinds of things: a structure type called tree, 
structure elements called value, left and right, and variables: an 
array of structures, called forest, and a pointer to objects of type 
struct tree, called ptree. Each object of type structure is like an 
array. But whereas an array contains a number of pieces of data all 



7. C/80 LANGUAGE SUMMARY C/80 2.0 - 12 - 



of the same type, a structure contains pieces of data called 
elements , which may be declared to be of different types. In the 
declaration above, objects of type struct tree are declared to 
contain a 5-long character array, and- two pointers to things of type 
struct tree. 

In a structure declaration you can omit the variables, the 
structure name, or (once the structure type has been declared) the { 
• • . j • 



or 



A structure element can be referred to by the operators -> 

forest [i] .value 
ptree->left 

Such constructs can be treated just the same as variables. Use . to 
refer to fields of variables which are structures, and -> to refer 
to fields of things which point to structures. 

Structures and their use are a complex topic and can only be 
touched on here. The C Programming Language contains much 
discussion and many examples which will be helpful. 

7.5. Storage Classes 

Storage classes determine how a variable is stored in 
memory. The storage classes in C/80 are: 

static 
auto 
register 
extern 

Statics are simply memory locations. Auto variables are stored on 
the pushdown stack. Statics declared within a function are 
preserved between calls of that function, whereas autos are not. 
When a function is called recursively, a new auto is created local 
to that call of the function; statics are not. Globals are always 
static. Local variables default to auto but may be declared static. 
(C/80 actually uses static storage for local 16 bit variables and 
saves the values so that this is transparent to the user but more 
efficient than using the stack. The explicit auto declaration may 
be used to override this and force the variables to be located on 
the stack.) 

Register variables are stored efficiently, but are otherwise 
the same as autos. Externs are statics which are declared in 
another source module. 



7. C/8 LANGUAGE SUMMARY C/8 2.0 - 13 - 



7.6. Constants. 



A decimal constant consists of a string of decimal digits. 
A constant beginning with '0' (e.g., 0177) is interpreted as an 
octal number. A constant beginning with 'Ox' or 'OX 1 is a hex 
constant. 

C/80 computes constant expressions at compile time. That 
means that wherever an integer constant is required (such as the 
dimension in an array declaration) , you can use an expression 
containing only constants. 

C/80 also contains string and character constants. 
Characters are any printing character, or 

\t for tab 

\n for newline (end of line) 

\r for carriage return 

\b for backspace 

\f for form feed 

\\ for \ 

V for ' 

V for " 

\123 for the octal value 123 
(or any other value) 

A single character constant is written 'c 1 . A string 
constant is written "ccc...". A string constant is stored as a 0- 
terminated array of chars. Useful things to do with string 
constants include assigning them to char pointers, and passing them 
as arguments to functions. 

7.7. Operators and Expressions. 

The operators in C are shown in the table at the beginning 

of Section 7. They appear in the approximate order in which they 

are performed during expression evaluation; e.g., / is performed 
before + is performed before &. 

Certain operators are peculiar to C. The unary operator * 
takes a pointer and yields the contents of the location it points 
to. The operator & takes an object, which must have an address, and 
yields a pointer to that address. Thus, for any expression A which 
has an address, the value of *&A is the same as A. 

The operators ++ and — can appear either before or after a 
variable. They cause the variable to be incremented (++) or 
decremented ( — ) by 1. The value of the expression is the variable 
either before (V++) or after (++V) the operation. For example, if p 
is a pointer to char, then *p++ increments p, but applies the * 
operation to the value of p++, which is the value of p before being 
incremented. This leads to the following sort of code, which is 
common in C : 

p = "Any old string\n B ; 
while (*p) putchar (*p++) ; 



7. C/80 LANGUAGE SUMMARY C/80 2.0 - 14 - 



which outputs the string by calling putchar() with each character in 
it, until the byte terminating the string is encountered. 

Note that when a pointer is incremented or decremented, its 
value changes not by 1 but by 1 object. Thus incrementing a pointer 
to an int moves it to point to the next following int; its actual 
value increases by 2. A pointer to a structure is incremented by 
the size of the structure, in bytes. 

Truth values in C are either zero (false) or nonzero (true). 
Truth-valued operators («, >, &&, etc.) return 1 for true. A 
useful expression in C is 

expr ? tvalue : fvalue 

whose value is tvalue if expr is nonzero, and fvalue if expr is 
zero. 

7.8. Statements. 

The table at the beginning of Section 7 lists the statements 
in C. Anywhere that C allows a single statement, it will also 
accept a compound statement of the form 

{ statement; statement; ...; } 

The iterative statements in C all have simple equivalent 
definitions: 

for (el; e2; e3) statement; 

means el; L: if (e2) { statement; e3; goto L; } 
while (e) statement; 

means L: if (e) { statement; goto L; } 
do statement; while (e) ; 

means L: statement; if (e) goto L; 
switch (e) { case cl: si; ... case en: sn; default: s; } 

means if (e == cl) si; 

• 

if (e == en) sn; 
s; 

The switch statement is not exactly equivalent to what is 
shown, however. The expression e is actually evaluated only once. 
The case values cl,...,cn must be constants. And the default case 
may be eliminated, in which case no case is executed if the value e 
is different from the values cl,...,cn. 

The statement break jumps out of the smallest for, while, or 
switch containing it. The statement continue begins the next 



7. C/8 LANGUAGE SUMMARY C/8 2.0 - 15 - 

iteration of the smallest for or while containing it. 

7.9. Conclusion. 

This short a summary can not begin to present all the 
details of the C language. In order to learn more, you can look at 
the sample C programs provided on the C/80 distribution disk and 
read The C Programming Language . 

8. IMPLEMENTATION AND MACHINE DEPENDENCIES 

The reference manual for C/80 is The C Programming Language 
(see Section 2). In using that book, it must be kept in mind that 
some features of C and the runtime library are not present in C/80, 
or differ from the description in the book. Those omissions and 
differences are listed here. First the unimplemented features and 
major restrictions are listed, followed by a detailed listing of all 
differences. Section numbers refer to the C Reference Manual in 
Appendix A of The C Programming Language . 

Unimplemented Features 

Float, double, entry and typedef keywords (2.3) 
Long and float constants (2.4) and arithmetic 
Typedef (8.1, 8.8) 
Bit fields (8.5) 
#line (12.4) 

Major Restricted Features 

Function calls (7.1) must have the same number of 
arguments as the called function definition. 

Blocks (9.2): declarations are allowed only at start 
of a function. 

#define (12.1): arguments are not allowed. 

Complete Difference List 
2 Lexical conventions 

Blanks in the middle of multiple character operators (e.g., 
=*) are not allowed. 

2.2 Names 

The first seven characters of a name are significant. If 
Macro-80 is used, global symbols are restricted to 6 characters, and 
upper and lower case are the same in globals. 



8. IMPLEMENTATION C/80 2.0 - 16 - 



2.3 Keywords 

Float, double, entry and typedef keywords are not 
recognized. 

2.4 Constants 

Long and floating constants are not implemented. 
2.6 Hardware characteristics 

Char is 8 bits. Int, short and long are 16 bits. 
7.1 Primary expressions. 

Function calls must have the same number of arguments as the 
called function definition. 

7.13 Conditional operator. 

In a?b:c the type of the result is that of b if b is a 
pointer, and the type of c otherwise. (See also Sect. 15 below.) 

8.1 Storage class specifiers 

Register variables must be at most 16 bits long. They are 
stored in static memory for fast access, and are saved on function 
entry and exit. C/80 allows any number of register variables, and 
the & operator may be applied to them, but such code may not be 
portable. 

Auto variables are stored on the stack. Local variables 
default to register if they are . 16 bits long, but the auto 
declaration can override this. Other local variables, and all 
arguments, default to auto, but the register declaration can be used 
to override this (except for variables longer than 16 bits) . All 
this is transparent to the user. 

The scope of an extern declaration is the remainder of the 
source file, even if the declaration is within a function 
definition. 

Typedef is not recognized. 

8.5 Structure and union declarations 

Bit fields are not implemented. 

8.6 Initialization 

Only static and global variables may be initialized. Only 
objects smaller than 256 bytes are defaulted to 0; the -z compiler 
switch removes this restriction. (See also Sect. 15 below.) 

Type declarations can not be nested. About the only 
restriction this imposes is that sizeof a type name may not be used 
in a dimension in a declaration. 



8. IMPLEMENTATION C/80 2.0 - 17 - 

8.8 Typedef 

Typedef is not implemented. 

9.2 Compound statement, or block 

Declarations are allowed only at the beginning of a function 
body. 

12 Compiler control lines 

In-line assembly language is supported by the #asm and 
#endasm directives. 

12.1 Token replacement 

#Define is not applied recursively, and arguments to macros 
are not allowed. 

12.4 Line control 

#line is not implemented. 

15 Constant expressions 

?: and & are not allowed in constant expressions, except 
that & may be the first character in an initializer. 

17 Anachronisms 

All forms listed are recognized, except that initializers 
which lack an = and start with (name... will not compile. 

Printf and fprintf: 

These functions (and sprintf) cope with a variable number of 
arguments through use of a #define kludge which redefines printf. 
This requires that either #include "printf. c" or #include "printf. h" 
be placed before the first use of printf. Otherwise, the C/80 1.6 
printf and format must be used: see Section 9.6. 

I/O and Runtime Library: 

Many of the basic library functions and treatments of files 
described in the manual are supported, although the format is not 
always identical. Getchar, putchar, getc, putc, fopen, f close, 
seek, ftell and exec are provided. EOF has the value -1; NULL is 
0. The older Version 6 convention of fin and fout is followed 
instead of stdin, stdout and stderr. I/O redirection is provided. 
The I/O and runtime library is described more fully in the next 
section. 



9. RUNTIME AND I/O LIBRARY C/80 2.0 - 18 - 



9. RUNTIME AND I/O LIBRARY 

C/80 is supplied with a runtime library, which provides 
convenient access to files and other devices in a manner generally 
consistent with accepted C conventions. 

9.1. Files and Devices; 

NOTE: The following information applies only to use of 
C/80 on the CP/M operating system, and should be ignored 
by users of HDOS. 

Under CP/M, the C/80 library recognizes the 
logical device driver names CON; , RPR; , PUN; and LST; as 
legal file names. 

In doing I/O to CON;, C/80 normally uses line at a 

time mode. This is true whether CON; has been accessed 

explicitly by opening file "CON;", or as the default 

device for getchar and putchar. If you need to use 
character at a time console I/O, declare 

extern char Cmode; 

and set Cmode to zero. (It is initially set to 1; other 
values produce undefined results.) 

When reading from CON;, in addition to the control 
characters which are interpreted by CP/M (see the 
description of functions 1 and 10 in the CP/M 2 . 2 
Interface Guide) , C/80 interprets ctrl-B as an interrupt. 
Moreover, when doing I/O to any of the four logical 
devices, C/80 maps CR into *\n' on input and f \n* into CR- 
LF on output. Calling fopen to open the device in binary 
mode has no effect on this (although it does for file 
I/O); the only way to avoid these mappings is not to go 
through the C/80 library. 

[Under HDOS, any legal file or device name may be used 
whenever a file name is called for. Examples of legal names are 
FOO, SY1;FILE.DAT, or LP;.] 

Upper and lower case letters are legal and synonymous in 
file names. On CP/M, the user is responsible for insuring that 
characters which confuse the CCP, such as '.' and ';', are not used. 

9.2. Commands; 



C/80 programs begin execution by calling the routine main, 
which the user must provide. Main should start off with the 
declaration 

main(argc,argv) 
char *argv [] ; 



9. RUNTIME AND I/O LIBRARY C/80 2.0 - 19 - 



When main is called, argc will be the number of elements in 
argv, and argv will be an array of pointers to the strings which 
appear on the command line (except for argv[0], which may not 
contain anything useful.) Argv [argc] is always -1. For example, if 
a C/80 program named progl is run with the command 

progl a b foodie 

then argc is 4, and argv contains pointers to the strings "PROG1" 
(or nonsense), "A", "B" and "FOODLE" (e.g., argv[3] is "FOODLE"). 
An argument containing spaces and/or tabs may be enclosed in either 
single or double quotes. 

Due to limitations in both the HDOS and CP/M systems, lower 
case letters in the argument line are passed to main as the upper 
case equivalent. 

9.3. I/O Redirection; 

Many C programs do input and output a character at a time, 
taking input from the standard input using the routine getchar, and 
writing to the standard output using the routines putchar, or 
printf. The standard input and standard output are both initially 
the terminal. However, files or other devices can also be used as 
the standard input and/or output. 

This is implemented by two global extern ints, fin and fout. 
These variables define the standard input and output, respectively. 
They are usually set to before main is called, and I/O is done to 
and from the terminal. However, a program may open a file for 
reading or writing, and set fin or fout to the file's channel 
number. This will cause subsequent I/O to be done to the file 
rather than to the terminal. A device may be used instead of a 
file. 

Normally, an output file must be closed explicitly by a 
program before exiting. However, the I/O library always closes fout 
when a program is terminated (including abnormal termination by 
ctrl-C under HDOS and ctrl-B under CP/M) . 

Fin and fout may also be redefined in the command line when 
the program is run. For example, the command 

progl a b <b:infile >lst: 

will run progl with arguments "A" and "B" . Getchar () will read 
characters from file "BrlNFILE" , and putchar () will write characters 
to the printer. The > and < arguments are not included in argc or 
argv, and may appear anywhere in the argument list. [The equivalent 
HDOS command would be 

progl a b <syl:infile >lp: ] 

Since the C/80 compiler is itself a C/80 program, I/O 
redirection may be used to redirect to a file the error messages 
usually output to the terminal. 



9. RUNTIME AND I/O LIBRARY C/80 2.0 - 20 - 



9.4. Interrupting a Program: 

C/80 programs may be interrupted by ctrl-B or ctrl-C [ctrl-C 
only on HDOS] , which causes the program to terminate immediately and 
exit. The standard output is closed (except by ctrl-C on CP/M) , but 
all other open output files are lost. 

NOTE (applies to CP/M users only) ; Under CP/M, a ctrl-C 
may not always be noticed when it is typed. The C/8 
library will check for a ctrl-C whenever a disk read or 
write is performed, but if a program does not access disk 
it must take special steps in order to be interruptable. 

The HDOS operating system provides a way for the 
user to trap and handle interrupts caused by ctrl-A, ctrl- 
B and ctrl-C. C/80 provides a similar, but weaker, 
capability under CP/M. When the C/80 console input 
routine detects a ctrl-B, a call is executed to the 
location contained in CtlB. That location initially 
contains exit(), and thus ctrl-B usually aborts a running 
program, just as ctrl-C does. 

Instead of exiting, your program may choose to 
handle ctrl-B interrupts itself. To do so, declare CtlB 
to be an extern int, and set it to a subroutine to be 
executed when ctrl-B is typed. If that subroutine returns 
when done, program execution will continue. 

Since CP/M does not usually detect a typed 
character, even ctrl-C, until the program attempts to read 
from the keyboard, C/80 programs will often not respond 
immediately to a ctrl-B or ctrl-C. The C/80 library does 
check for these characters whenever a disk read or write 
is performed. You can make your program check more often 
by calling CtlCk() whenever a check is desired. 

One side effect of CtlCk() is to read any typed 
character that may be waiting at the console. If the 
character is not a ctrl-B or ctrl-C, it will be echoed and 
will be placed in the input line buffer for the next call 
to getchar(). So calling CtlCk() provides a limited 
typeahead capability. However, editing characters like 
ctrl-U and DEL do not operate on characters read in this 
manner. Also note that once the buffer has been filled 
(about 130 characters) , any further typed characters will 
be echoed but discarded without warning, until the buffer 
has been completely emptied. 

9.5. I/O Library Routinest 

The following standard I/O library routines are included in 
C/80 and may be called from any C/80 program: 

getchar() - returns a character from the standard input 
(usually the terminal). -1 is returned for end of file 
(ctrl-D under HDOS? ctrl-Z under CP/M). 



9. RUNTIME AND I/O LIBRARY C/80 2.0 - 21 - 



putchar(c) - writes the character c on the standard output 
(usually the terminal), and returns c. 

fopen ( f name , mode) - opens the named file and returns the 
channel number of the file. Fname is a string constant, 
or pointer to or array of characters containing the file 
name. The name may be any legal file or device, like 
SYlrFOO.TXT, or TT : (under HDOS ; CP/M equivalents are 
B:FOO.TXT and CON:). Mode may be "r", "w" or "u" for 
read, write or update mode. (Update mode is treated the 
same as write mode but the file is not deleted before 
opening. [On HDOS, it is opened in update mode.] Mode may 
also be "rb", "wb" or "ub" if the file is to be treated as 
a binary file (see getc). If the file can not be opened, 
fopen returns 0. A file or device which is written on 
must be closed explicitly, or the entire file will be lost 
(except for file fout) . 

At most 6 files may be open at any one time. I/O 
buffers are allocated for three files. If more than three 
files are opened, fopen will call alloc to allocate a 
buffer of 256 bytes for each additional file. If there is 
not enough memory available, the open may fail. 

[HDOS: The fopen channel number is not necessarily 
the same as system's channel.] 

getc(chan) - returns the next character from the file or device 
open for reading on channel chan. Returns -1 to signify 
end of file. If the file was opened in binary mode, getc 
will read every byte in the file. Files opened in normal 
mode are treated as ASCII files. Under CP/M, ctrl-Z is 
interpreted as end of file, and newlines, which are a CR- 
LF pair in the file, are read in as the single character 
'\n'. [Under HDOS, the only special treatment is that 
bytes are ignored.] 

putc(cchan) - writes the character c on the file or device 
opened for writing or update on channel chan. In ASCII 
files, the conversions listed under getc are performed in 
reverse. 

fclose(chan) - closes the file or device opened on channel 
chan. If a file opened for writing is not closed before 
the program terminates, the last block of the file may be 
lost. Once a channel has been closed, another file may be 
opened without exceeding the open file limit (see fopen). 

read (chan, addr,n) - reads up to n bytes from channel chan into 
memory starting at address (pointer) addr. N must be a 
multiple of 256. Getc reads one character at a time; read 
provides an alternative method for reading many characters 
at once. Read returns the number of bytes read, which may 
be less than n if the end of file was encountered. Read 
returns if an error occurred. Read does not perform any 
character conversion regardless of whether the file was 
opened in binary mode. Read and getc should not both be 



9. RUNTIME AND I/O LIBRARY C/80 2.0 - 22 - 



used on the same channel. 

write (chan,addr,n) - writes n bytes from address addr to the 
file open on channel chan. N must be a multiple of 256. 
Write provides an alternative to putc for outputting many 
characters at a time. Write returns if an error 
occurred, and the number of bytes written otherwise. 
Write and putc should not both be used on the same 
channel . 

exit() - terminates the program and returns to command level. 
Does not close any open files except the standard output. 
Returning from main has the same effect as exit(). 

alloc (n) - allocates a block of n bytes of memory, returning 
the address of the first byte, or -1 if that much memory 
is not available. There is no way to release memory once 
it is allocated. The alloc area grows upward from the end 
of the user program, and the stack grows downward from 
high memory. Although alloc will always leave about 500 
bytes for stack expansion, it is still possible for the 
stack to grow into alloc memory (or static storage or 
program memory, for that matter), with undefined results. 
Note that fopen may call alloc to allocate I/O buffers. 

9.6. Formatted Output 

Formatted output is provided by printf, fprintf and sprintf , 
which are on file printf. c and may be included in a compilation by 
placing the command #include "printf. c" before the first reference 
to printf. If printf is included in any other way (e.g., by XTEXT 
PRINTF. ASM or by linking printf. rel using Link-80) , the header file 
printf. h must be included instead. 

These routines provide functions similar to the routines 
described in The C Programming Language. 

printf (stg f vl, ... r vn) - prints the values vl through vn (n >= 
0) on the standard output (usually the terminal) , using 
stg as the format specification. The characters in stg 
are printed on the standard output, except for conversions 
of the form %C or %nC , where n is an optional field width 
and C is a conversion letter. Each conversion takes the 
next value from the argument list and prints it according 
to the conversion letter. The conversion letters allowed 
are: 

%d (decimal number output, signed) 

%o (octal, unsigned) 

%c (single character) 

%s (string) 

%x (hexadecimal) 

fprintf (chan, stg) - like printf, but output goes to the file 
opened on channel chan rather than to the standard output. 



9. RUNTIME AND I/O LIBRARY C/80 2.0 - 23 - 



sprintf (addr f stg) - like printf, but output goes into the 
character array beginning at memory location addr. 

For example, the program fragment 

printf ("i = %d, s = %s\n" , 27 ,"Hi therel"); 
would print out the line 

i = 27, s = Hi therel 

Older versions of C/80 used two routines, printf and format, 
to perform formatted I/O. If programs using this form of output are 
to be compiled under this version of C/80, the #include "printf. c" 
must be placed after all references to printf, and printf. h must not 
be used. 

9.7. Random Access File I/O: 

The file SEEK.C on your C/80 distribution disk contains 
routines affording random access file I/O capability. This file can 
be included in your C/80 program by the statement 

# include "seek.c" 

(Note: CP/M 1.4 and earlier CP/M releases do not support random file 
I/O, and these routines will not work on those versions of CP/M.) 

SEEK.C contains the following library routines: 

seek (chan, off set, type) - moves to a specified position in the 
file which is open on channel chan. The next getc or putc 
call will read or write starting at the new location. The 
value offset, which may be positive or negative, specifies 
the number of bytes that the read/write pointer is to be 
placed from: 

type » 0: the beginning of the file. 

type = 1: the current read/write location. 

type = 2: the end of the file. 

For example, seek (chan, 0,2) will position the read/write 
pointer at the end of the file. If type = 3, 4 or 5, the 
pointer is moved offset records (256 bytes) instead. Seek 
returns a value of -1 if an error occurs, for success. 

f tell (chan) - returns the current read/write pointer for the 
file open on channel chan. This pointer is the number of 
bytes before the current position in the file. If the 
current position is greater than 65535, the value returned 
will be the offset mod 256; i.e., the byte position in the 
current record. 



9. RUNTIME AND I/O LIBRARY C/80 2.0 - 24 - 



ftellr(chan) - returns the current read/write pointer for the 
file open on channel chan, divided by 256. 

Using seek, it is possible to- alter or append to an existing 
file by opening it in update mode. It may be possible to both read 
and write to a file, as long as a seek intervenes, but this has not 
been tested thoroughly. It is safer to close the file and reopen it 
in the other mode. 

9.8. Program Chaining 

The file EXEC. ASM [HDDS: EXEC.Cj contains a routine which 
allows execution of another program from within a C/80 program. 

exec (prog, args) - chain to another program. Prog is a string 
containing the name of a program. Args is a string 
containing any arguments, separated by blanks, just as on 
the command line. Exec will execute the named program 
with the arguments given, just as if it had been invoked 
from the command line. Unless an error occurs, control 
never returns from exec. All open files must be 
explicitly closed before calling exec, or strange things 
may happen. 



10. USING C/80 WITH MACRO-80 

C/80 can optionally generate assembly code for input to the 
Microsoft Macro-80 relocatable assembler. This allows you to 
develop a C/80 program in several modules, generating .REL files 
which can be linked using the Link-80 linking loader. You can 
create .REL modules for C/80 library routines such as PRINTF and 
SEEK, to speed up their inclusion in your programs. A library 
manager such as LIB-80 (CP/M versions) can be used to create a 
library of your commonly used subroutines which can be accessed 
using Link-80. 

To generate a .MAC file, invoke C/80 using the -m switch: 
c -m [other args . . . ] 

You can also patch the Macro-80 compatibility flag so that this mode 

is the default; the -m switch will then generate .ASM files. The 

patch location is given in file PATCHES.DOC on your C/80 
distribution disk. 

Macro-80 files generated by C/80 must be assembled by M80 to 
create a .REL file. REL files are then linked by L80 to create a 
.COM file [HDOS: .ABS file]. IMPORTANT; When linking C/80 .REL 
files, the file CLIBRARY.REL must be linked in and it must be the 
last file linked. 



10. C/80 WITH MACRO-80 C/80 2.0 - 25 - 



Using Macro-80 imposes a few additional restrictions on 
source programs. In global variables and function names, only the 
first six characters are significant (as opposed to 7 in .ASM 
files). Also, upper and lower case are considered identical by 
Macro-80. Global arrays and variables must appear in only one 
source module, and must be declared extern by any other module that 
references them, being careful to distinguish between arrays and 
pointers. Functions are implicitly extern and need not be declared. 



11. MULTIPLE ASSEMBLIES 

To reduce space and time taken by compilations, it is often 
useful to compile a large program in several pieces. This may be 
done by splitting the program into several C source files, using the 
extern declaration to reference globals which are declared in 
another source file. For example, if the declaration int i[5]; 
appears at the top (global) level in one source file, the 
declaration extern int i[5]; in a second source file will allow 
programs in the second file to refer to the array i defined in the 
first file. Simply saying int i[5] in both files will cause i to be 
doubly defined at assembly or load time. Exception: functions 
defined in one source file may be called from another source file in 
the same assembly or load without any special declaration. 

There are two ways to generate a single object module from 
multiple compilations. One way is to use Macro-80 and Link-80 from 
Microsoft, as described in the previous section. The other is to 
use the AS assembler provided with C/80 [HDOS: use Heath's ASM] to 
assemble one module from several .ASM. files. 

An example will illustrate how to do this. Suppose there 
are three C source files: MAIN.C, SUB1.C, and SUB2.C. First you 
must insert into MAIN.C statements which will cause the assembly 
language files for SUB1 and SUB2 to be included in the assembly. 
The following statements should be put into MAIN.C somewhere at top 
level (i.e., not inside a subroutine): 

#asm 

XTEXT SUB1.ASM 

XTEXT SUB 2. ASM 
#endasm 

The XTEXT command will cause these lines to be included in the 
assembly language file MAIN. ASM. 

Next, compile MAIN.C to create an output file called 
MAIN. ASM. This file contains compiler-generated labels, which 
usually look like .a, .b, and so on. 

Then compile SUBl.C to produce an output file named 
SUB1.ASM. If nothing is done to prevent it, the compiler will use 
the same labels .a, .b, etc., in SUBl.ASM, and there will be a 
conflict when the two files are assembled together. To prevent 



11. MULTIPLE ASSEMBLIES C/80 2.0 - 26 - 



this, SUB1.C should be compiled with a command like "C -L1000", 
which will start the labels 1000 down in the sequence. (The largest 
permissible value for the -L switch is 32767). The -L switch also 
suppresses the generation of instructions in SUB1.ASM to include the 
C I/O library, since MAIN. ASM already has those instructions. 

Similarly, compile SUB2.C, say by "C -L2000" , to produce 
SUB2.ASM. If disk space is a problem, these compilations may all be 
performed on different disks, and the .ASM files copied to another 
disk for assembly. The library file CLIBRARY.ASM must reside on A: 
[SYO: on HDOS] during assembly. 

To assemble the program, run AS [ASM on HDOS] and give the 
command MAIN=MAIN. All the files will be assembled to produce 
MAIN.COM [MAIN.ABS on HDOS] which can then be run. 



12. RUNTIME TRACE AND EXECUTION PROFILE 

Most programs which take very long to run spend most of 
their execution time executing a relatively small amount of code. 
C/80 contains a runtime execution profile feature to help identify 
where a program is spending its time, so the critical routines can 
be made more efficient. 



as in 



To use this feature, compile the program with the -p switch, 



c -p progname 

If you are using AS or ASM, make sure the file CPROF.ASM, 
from the C/80 distribution disk, is on A: [SYO: on HDOS] when the 
program is assembled. (CPROF.ASM is not on the Osborne distribution 
disk, due to space restrictions. You will have to generate it from 
CPROF.C by the command 

c -L32600 cprof ) 

If you are using Macro-80, compile and assemble CPROF.C to 
produce CPROF. REL, and link it in when you load. 

Now run the program. When the program finishes running and 
exits normally, a listing will be produced on the standard output 
device showing, for each subroutine, the number of times it was 
called and the total time (in units of two ticks of the computer 
clock) spent inside the subroutine. 

Similarly, a runtime trace of the program execution can be 
produced by copying file CTRACE.ASM from the distribution disk onto 
A: [SYO: on HDOS] as file CPROF.ASM, and compiling as above. 

Note (applies to CP/M users only) ; C/80 can only provide 
execution times if your system has a 16-bit clock at some 
address in memory. The Heath/Zenith systems have a clock 



12. TRACE AND PROFILE C/80 2.0 - 27 - 



at memory location OB hex. To use the profile feature on 
systems with no clock, or with a clock at another 
location, you must regenerate file CPROF.ASM as follows: 

Edit file CPROF.C. Locate the line which begins with 
#define TICCNT. If your system has a clock, replace the 
expression following TICCNT with the address of the clock 
word in memory. If there is no clock, comment out the 
entire line. Then recompile CPROF by the command 

c -L32600 cprof 



13. THE AS ASSEMBLER (CP/M Versions Only) 

CP/M versions of C/80 come with AS.COM, an absolute 8080 
assembler. AS is essentially the same as the ASM assembler under 
Heath HDOS . This section gives a brief description of AS, to help 
you write assembly language code to be included in C/80 programs. 

To assemble a program, type a command of the form 

as comf ile,listf ile=inf ile 

where comfile is the name of the absolute file to be produced, 
listfile is the file on which to write an assembly listing, and 
infile is the assembler source file. If no extensions are 
specified, they default to .COM, .LST and .ASM respectively. 
Listfile can be a C/80 device, such as LST:; if that device does not 
respond to tabs, it is more useful to list to CON: and use ctrl-P to 
obtain a hard copy. The command 



is short for 



as filename 



as f ilename=f ilename 



AS takes Intel 808 mnemonics, upper case only. Identifiers 
are up to 7 characters from the set A-Z, a-z, 0-9, ., _ and $. 
Upper and lower case letters are distinguished in identifiers. A 
label may be followed by one or more colons, which are ignored. 

Constants can be one or two characters enclosed in single 
quotes, or a string of digits, possibly with a suffix or Q for 
octal, H for hex, or B for binary. Default is decimal. 

The symbols * and $ represent the address of the current 
instruction. 

Arithmetic expressions in an address field are evaluated 
strictly left to right. The operators are + , -, *, /, & (bitwise 
and), and < (left shift). Parentheses are not allowed. 



13. THE AS ASSEMBLER C/80 2.0 - 28 - 



The following pseudo-ops are identical to the ones in the 
CP/M ASM assembler: ORG, EQU , DB , DW, DS . 

The pseudo-op "XTEXT filename" is the AS equivalent of the 
C/80 "include" preprocessor directive. It includes the named file 
at that point in the assembly. If no disk is specified, it assumes 
the disk on which the current source file resides. 

The pseudo-ops "LON ccc" and "LOF ccc" control listing. 
"ccc" is a string of characters: L turns listing on (LON) or off 
(LOF), C controls listing of lines from XTEXT files (default off), 
and G lists all bytes generated by an instruction (default: list 
just the first five). 



14. UPPER CASE SOURCE FILES 

Since the C/80 language depends heavily on the full ASCII 
character set and on lower case keywords, a facility is provided to 
allow C/80 source files to be prepared on upper case only terminals. 
Upper case source files should contain the preprocessor command 

# UPPER 

as the first line in the file. This causes the compiler to 
interpret the remainder of the file in upper case mode. In this 
mode, the compiler translates each upper case letter to the 
corresponding lower case letter. Upper case letters, and the 
special characters not available in the upper case ASCII subset, are 
typed as follows: 

The characters: are interpreted as: 

\( 
\) 
\i 
\- 

A . • . z a • • • z 

"A ... ~Z A ... Z 

In upper case mode, when the character " appears before a 
non-alphabetic character, it is ignored. Note that * may be 
displayed on some terminals and printers as an up arrow, and on 
others as a caret or "hat". 

The #UPPBR command affects only the file in which it appear, 
and does not have any effect on an #include file. If an #include 
file is prepared in upper case mode, it must contain its own #UPPER 
command. (Thus, PRINTF.C, which is not in upper case mode, may be 
included in a file which is in upper case mode.) 

The file UCASE.C, which is included in the C/80 
distribution, is an example of an uppper case mode source file. 



15. TRICKS AND INTERNALS C/80 2.0 - 29 



15. TRICKS AND INTERNALS 

Global arrays occupy space in, the .COM [or .ABS] file. To 
reduce the size of these files, it is best to allocate large arrays 
at run time. This can be done by making them local to a function, 
or by using alloc (). 

Internal assembly language routines invoked by C function 
calls have access to all registers and need not restore their 
values. 

If you want to fetch the value of a variable using in-line 
assembly language code, put a statement consisting only of the 
variable just before the #asm directive. C/80 will leave the 
variable value in HL. 

The C function call linkage is to push the arguments, as 16- 
bit quantities, on the stack, and call the subroutine. It is the 
responsibility of the calling program to pop the arguments off the 
stack on return. Note that standard C pushes its arguments in 
reverse order; this means a C/80 routine may not usefully be called 
with a different number of arguments than it expects. 

The compiler generates code using a primary register (HL) , a 

secondary register (DE) , and the stack. Most operations are 

performed by calling library subroutines, with the first operand 

being HL and the second operand either DE or the top of the stack 

(which is usually popped). 

In order to produce code which is both space and time 
efficient, variables should be declared static whenever possible, 
and int in preference to char. Declaring a function argument to be 
register will save space if the argument is used five or more times 
in the body of the function. 

When compiling using several source modules, it is handy to 
define global variables using an included header file. But these 
variables must be defined only in one module, and declared extern in 
all the others. This can be accomplished through the following 
programming trick: 

In the header file, declare all the variables as follows: 

#ifndef EXTERN 

#define EXTERN extern 

ftendif 

EXTERN int i, j, ... 

Then, in the one file in which the variables are to be defined, 
place 

# define EXTERN 
tinclude "header-file" 

At runtime, the library allocates three I/O buffers directly 
below the operating system area, and then builds the stack downward 



15. TRICKS AND INTERNALS C/80 2.0 - 30 - 



starting below the buffers. 

Note (applies to HDOS users only) : Under HDOS, device 
drivers may load below the overlay area when the device is 
opened and closed. If a device driver spills over the 76 8 
byte buffer area and into the stack, problems may occur. 
Since HDOS provides no satisfactory method for determining 
potential driver memory requirements, the runtime library 
can not anticipate this problem automatically. 

The problem will rarely arise, since most systems 
have at most a single LP: or AT: device (in addition to 
TT: and SY: , which are always loaded), and no single 
driver is large enough at present to cause trouble. If 
multiple device drivers are to be loaded it may be 
necessary to leave additional room for the drivers. To do 
this, increase the number 10 in the LXI B,10 instruction 
in CLIBRARY.ASM (around line 40), adding the number of 
bytes necessary (1000 per extra device driver should be 
generous) . 



16. COMPILER ERROR MESSAG ES 

When a C/80 program contains a detectable error, the 
compiler will produce an error message, giving the source file name 
and line number, and a description of what the compiler thinks the 
error is. The source line is listed, with an arrow pointing to the 
location of the error in the line. (The line is shown the way it 
looks after all #defines have been expanded.) 

These messages aren't always as helpful as one would like, 
however. For instance, the compiler may be looking for a different 
statement type than the one you thought you wrote. So the message 
may not describe the error. Sometimes, the compiler detects the 
error far away from the place where it actually occurred. For 
example, leaving off a '}' deep inside a function will cause the 
next to last '}' in the function definition to terminate it, at 
which point the compiler will probably spew out dozens of error 
messages as it tries to parse executable statements as declarations. 
To find such an error, you may have to inspect many lines of code. 

In addition, once an error has been detected, the compiler 
is not always able to recover and continue parsing the remainder of 
the program. So a single error will sometimes result in a large 
number of error messages. Often, this is the result of C/80 trying 
to parse statements as declarations or declarations as statements. 
When you can't understand what some of these messages are 
complaining about, you should fix the first error detected, and any 
others you can easily locate, and then recompile to find any 
remaining ones. 

Limitations on error detection and analysis are almost 
unavoidable in compilers, especially when trying to cram a powerful 



16. ERROR MESSAGES C/80 2.0 - 31 - 



language into the limited space of a microcomputer. This section 
can help by describing C/80's error messages and what might cause 
them to occur. 

bad label: Labels must follow the rules for identifier names. 

bad type: C/8 expected to see a type: short, long, char, int, 
unsigned, struct or union. 

can't subscript: You can only subscript a pointer or an array. 
(Did you declare it?) 

can't initialize union: Like it says. 

can't find file: Did you specify the file and extension correctly? 
Did you leave off the device? Also, when available memory 
is almost exhausted, the compiler may be unable to 
allocate the buffer space to open an #include file. 

can't compute size: Maybe the arrays in the expression have been 
declared incorrectly. 

construct not permitted: C/8 does not allow nested type 
declarations. For example, sizeof an abstract type can 
not be used as a dimension in a declaration. 

dimension missing: The only time an array dimension can be omitted 

(or 0) is when declaring a function argument, or when the 

dimension is determined by the size of an initializer. 

Furthermore, only the last dimension of an array can ever 

be omitted. 

extra ; (ignored): This looks like a function declaration, except 
function declarations are £(...) { ...} and you put a ; 
after the ). So the compiler took it out. 

ifdefs nested too deep: Maximum nesting of #ifdef , tifndef and #if 
is 5 . 

illegal struct reference: Either a . preceded by something that 
isn't a structure, or a . or -> followed by something that 
isn't a structure element. Remember that . is used 
following things that are structures, and -> following 
things that point to structures. 

illegal function call: The identifier or expression is not of type 
function. 

illegal expression - need lvalue: Some operations (& and 
assignment, for example) require an lvalue, which is an 
object with a memory address. This isn't one. (Things 
that aren't lvalues include constants and expressions.) 

illegal symbol name: The compiler wanted an identifier here. 

improper argument: This argument is too large; probably a structure 



16. ERROR MESSAGES C/80 2.0 - 32 - 



or union. Try using a pointer to it instead. 

internal compiler error: The compiler encountered an error in code 
generation. This may indicate a compiler bug; please 
report it to The Software Toolworks. You may be able to 
proceed by simplifying or rearranging the expression. 

invalid expression: The compiler is looking for an expression, but 
this does not look like one. 

line too long: Line longer than 100 characters. This error can be 
caused when #define expansions make a line longer. 

macro table full: Recompile using the -d switch to increase the 
size of the #define table; see Section 6. 

misplaced case: case not inside a switch statement. 

? missing: (where ? is some punctuation character): C/80 expected 
to find that character and didn't. It inserted it and 
continued, so if you really did leave that character out 
at that spot, the compilation proceeded correctly. 

must be a constant: The compiler looked for a constant or constant 
expression, but didn't find it. Remember that ?: is not 
legal in a C/80 constant expression. 

nested too deep: # include files can be nested no more than three 
deep (a main file and two included ones). 

no active whiles: A break or continue statement was not inside any 
for, while or switch statement. 

not a label: This construct needs an identifier which is a label. 
You have used something which is either not an identifier 
or something besides a label (like a char or int) . 

not a declared variable: The compiler wants an lvalue here. (See 
"illegal expression - need lvalue" above.) Usually this 
error means you have forgotten to declare an identifier; 
all identifiers in C must be declared before use. 

not a function: This identifier or expression is followed by a '(', 
so it looks like a function call. But it's not of type 
function. 

not an address: In an initializer, you applied & to something that 
does not have an address. 

not a pointer: You applied *to something that is not a pointer. 
(Maybe you applied it implicitly, like in a subscript 
operation. ) 

operands and/or operator incompatible: This usually means you have 
performed an illegal arithmetic operation on a pointer. 
The only legal ones are pointer plus integer, and pointer 
minus either an integer, or another pointer that points to 



16. ERROR MESSAGES C/80 2.0 - 33 - 



something of the same size. If the expression looks 
legal, try rearranging the order of the operands. If you 
know what you are doing but C won't let you (like 
computing pointer & mask), 'use the (int) cast to fake the 
compiler out. 

output file error: Usually means the disk is full. You won't see 
this for long, because the compiler will start dumping the 
assembly language output to the terminal. 

previously defined: This identifier has been defined before. 

string space exhausted: Recompile using the -c flag to increase the 
size of the string table (see Section 6). 

struct table overflow: Recompile using the -r flag to increase the 
size of the structure table (see Section 6). 

symbol table overflow: Recompile using the -s flag to increase the 
number of symbol table slots allocated (see Section 6). 

syntax error: The compiler was trying to find a declaration (at the 
top level) but couldn't. 

too complex: In an initializer, this expression was too 
complicated, or was not a constant. 

too complicated: A type declaration had more than 7 levels of 
indirection (*, [] or () ) . 

too large for register: Register declarations may only be applied 
to chars, ints and pointers. 

too many active whiles: Well, congratulations. There's only one 
table in this compiler that isn't expandable, and you have 
overflowed it by nesting 20 whiles, fors and/or switches. 
Simplify your program. 

too many cases: Recompile using the -w switch to expand the switch 
case table. 

too many structs: At most 239 different struct types may be 
declared . 

type mismatch: You tried to initialize an identifier with a value 
of the wrong type. 

undefined struct name: This struct type has not been declared. 

usage error: Indicates a violation of some C usage rule, like 
passing a struct as a function argument. 

warning: • =»? op assumed: You are using the old style assignment 
operator (like =&) , and failed to leave a space between 
the operator and the following operand. The compiler 
assumes you mean =& , but wants you to make sure. 



INDEX 



C/80 2.0 



- 34 - 



INDEX 



acknowledgements 3 

alloc 22 

anachronisms 17 

argc 18 

argv 18 

AS assembler 5,27 

#asm 17 

assembler 27 

assembly linkages 29 

assembly language 17 

auto 12,16 

binary file 21 

blanks 15 

blocks 17 

break 14 

buffers, I/O 21,29 

C manual 3 

case 14 

chaining 24 

channels 21 

character I/O 20 

character constants 13 

compiler switches 7 

compiler, how to run 6 

compou nd s ta tement 17 

conditionals 16 

console I/O 18 

constant expression 13,17 

constants 13 ,16 

continue 14 

cprof .c 5 

CtlCk 20 

ctrl-B 20 

ctrl-C 20 

data types 8,11 

declarations 11, 17 

decrement operators 13 

#def ine 17 

device names 18 

distribution disk 4 

do 14 



efficiency 29 

end of line mappings 18,21 

#endasm 17 

EOF 17 

error messages 30 

exec 24 

exit 20,22 

expression, constant 17 

expressions 9, 13 

extern 11 , 12 , 16 

false 14 

f close 21 

file mode 21 

file names 18 

file, binary 21 

files, limit on open 21 

fin 19 

f open 21 

for 14 

formatted output 22 

f out 19 

fprintf 17,22 

f tell 23 

f tellr 23 

getc 21 

getchar 19,20 

global 11 

HDOS 3 

hexadecimal constants 13 

hints 29 

identifiers 15 

identifiers, restrictions on24 

increment operators 13 

initialization 8 , 17 

in-line assembly language. .. 17 

internals 29 

interrupting program 20 

I/O 17 

I/O, random file 23 

I/O, console 18 

I/O redirection 19 

I/O buffers 21,29 

Kernighan and Ritchie 3 



INDEX 



C/80 2.0 



- 35 - 



language restrictions 15 

lexical conventions 15 

library, runtime 4,18 

limit on open files 21 

#line 17 

Link-80 24 

local H 

logical device names 18 

machine requirements 2 

Macro-80 7,24 

main 18 

manu al , C 3 

memory, allocating 22 

multiple source f iles . 24 ,25 ,29 

names, restrictions on 24 

names 10,15 

NULL 17 

octal constants 13 

operators 9, 13 

output, formatted 22 

patches 5,7,8 

pointers 11 

preprocessor commands 10 

printf 17 ,2 2 

pr i ntf . c 5 

printf .h 5 

profile, runtime 7,26 

program chaining 24 

putc 21 

putchar 19 ,21 

random file I/O 23 

read 21 

register 12 , 16 

relocatable code 24 

restrictions on language. ... 15 

restrictions on names 24 

runtime library 18 

runtime profile 7,26 

scope of variables 11 

seek 23 

seek.c 4 

sprintf 17,23 



standard input 19 

standard output 19 

statement types 10 

statement, compound 17 

statements 14 

static 12 

stder r 17 

stdin 17 

s tdou t 17 

storage classes 11,12,16 

string constants 13 

strings 11 

structures 11 

switch I 4 

switches, compiler 7 

trace 26 

tricks 29 

truth values 14 

typedef 17 

unimplemented features 15 

upper case source 28 

#UPPER 28 

variables 10 

variables, scope of 11 

while 14 

wr ite 22 

zeros, initialization to 8 



