Steady-State Cycle Deck Launcher 
Developed for Numerical Propulsion 
System Simulation 

One of the objectives of NASA's High Performance Computing and Communications 
Program's (HPCCP) Numerical Propulsion System Simulation (NPSS) is to reduce the 
time and cost of generating aerothermal numerical representations of engines, called 
customer decks. These customer decks, which are delivered to airframe companies by 
various U.S. engine companies, numerically characterize an engine's performance as 
defined by the particular U.S. airframe manufacturer. Until recently, all numerical models 
were provided with a Fortran-compatible interface in compliance with the Society of 
Automotive Engineers (SAE) document AS681F, and data communication was performed 
via a standard, labeled common structure in compliance with AS 68 IF. Recently, the SAE 
committee began to develop a new standard: AS681G. AS681G addresses multiple 
language requirements for customer decks along with alternative data communication 
techniques. 


Airframer* 

customer 

deck 



NASA coo riinating new 
c us to me r dec k sta nda rds 
to s impl rfy dec k ge ne ratio n 


ERftJ, Bt»4 Need*.. 


Steady-State Cycle Deck (SSCD) provides a mechanism to incorporate various customer 

decks. 

Along with the SAE committee, the NPSS Steady-State Cycle Deck project team 
developed a standard Application Program Interface (API) supported by a graphical user 
interface. This work will result in Aerospace Recommended Practice 4868 (ARP4868). 
The Steady-State Cycle Deck work was validated against the Energy Efficient Engine 
customer deck, which is publicly available. The Energy Efficient Engine wrapper was used 
not only to validate ARP4868 but also to demonstrate how to wrap an existing customer 
deck. The graphical user interface for the Steady-State Cycle Deck facilitates the use of 
the new standard and makes it easier to design and analyze a customer deck. This software 
was developed following I. Jacobson's Object-Oriented Design methodology and is 
implemented in C++. 



The AS681G standard will establish a common generic interface for U.S. engine 
companies and airframe manufacturers. This will lead to more accurate cycle models, 
quicker model generation, and faster validation leading to specifications. The standard will 
facilitate cooperative work between industry and NASA. The NPSS Steady-State Cycle 
Deck team released a batch version of the Steady-State Cycle Deck in March 1996. 
Version 1.1 was released in June 1996. 

During fiscal 1997, NPSS accepted enhancements and modifications to the Steady-State 
Cycle Deck launcher. Consistent with NPSS' commercialization plan, these modifications 
will be done by a third party that can provide long-term software support. 

Lewis contacts: Donald E. Van Drei, (216)433-9089, dvandrei@grc.nasa.gov; and 

Gregory J. Follen, (216) 433-5193, gfollen@grc.nasa.gov 

Author: Donald E. Van Drei 

Headquarters program office: OA (HPCCO) 



