m Software 


Quadratic Programming for 
Allocating Control Effort 

A computer program calculates an opti- 
mal allocation of control effort in a system 
that includes redundant control actuators. 
The program implements an iterative (but 
otherwise single-stage) algorithm of the 
quadratic-programming type. In general, 
in the quadratic-programming problem, 
one seeks the values of a set of variables 
that minimize a quadratic cost function, 
subject to a set of linear equality and in- 
equality constraints. In this program, the 
cost function combines contr ol effort (typ- 
ically quantified in terms of energy or fuel 
consumed) and control residuals (differ- 
ences between commanded and sensed 
values of variables to be controlled). In 
comparison with prior control-allocation 
software, this program offers approxi- 
mately equal accuracy but much greater 
computational efficiency. In addition, this 
program offers flexibility, robustness to ac- 
tuation failures, and a capability for selec- 
tive enforcement of control requirements. 
The computational efficiency of this pro- 
gram makes it suitable for such complex, 
real-time applications as controlling re- 
dundant aircraft actuators or redundant 
spacecraft thrusters. The program is writ- 
ten in the C language for execution in a 
UNIX operating system. 

This program was written by Gurkirpal 
Singh of Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory. Further information is con- 
tained in a TSP (see page 1 ). 

This software used in this innovation is 
available for commercial licensing. Please con- 
tact Karina Edmonds of the California Insti- 
tute of Technology at (818) 393-2827. Refer to 
NPO-40592. 


Range Process Simulation 
Tool 

Range Process Simulation Tool 
(RPST) is a computer program that as- 
sists managers in rapidly predicting and 
quantitatively assessing the operational 
effects of proposed technological addi- 
tions to, and/or upgrades of, complex 
facilities and engineering systems such 
as the Eastern Test Range. Originally de- 
signed for application to space trans- 
portation systems, RPST is also suitable 
for assessing effects of proposed changes 
in industrial facilities and large organiza- 
tions. RPST follows a model-based ap- 


proach that includes finite-capacity 
schedule analysis and discrete-event 
process simulation. A component-based, 
scalable, open architecture makes RPST 
easily and rapidly tailorable for diverse 
applications. Specific RPST functions 
include: (1) definition of analysis objec- 
tives and performance metrics; (2) selec- 
tion of process templates from a process- 
template library; (3) configuration of 
process models for detailed simulation 
and schedule analysis; (4) design of op- 
erations-analysis experiments; (5) sched- 
ule and simulation-based process analy- 
sis; and (6) optimization of performance 
by use of genetic algorithms and simu- 
lated annealing. The main benefits af- 
forded by RPST are provision of infor- 
mation that can be used to reduce costs 
of operation and maintenance, and the 
capability for affordable, accurate, and 
reliable prediction and exploration of 
the consequences of many alternative 
proposed decisions. 

This program was written by Dave Phillips, 
William Haas, and Tim Barth of Kennedy 
Space Center, and Perakath Benjamin, 
Michael Graul, and Olga Bagatourova of 
Knowledge Based Systems. 

In accordance with Public Law 96-517, 
the contractor has elected to retain title to this 
inven tion. Inquiries concerning rights for its 
commercial use should be addressed to: 
Perakath Benjamin 
Knowledge Based Systems 
4710 St. Andrews Drive 
College Station, TX 77845 
Phone: (979) 260-5279 
E-mail: Pbenjamin @kbsi. com 
Refer to KSC-1251 1, volume and number 
of this NASA Tech Briefs issue, and the 
page number. 


Simulator of Space Commu- 
nication Networks 

Multimission Advanced Communi- 
cations Hybrid Environment for Test and 
Evaluation (MACHETE) is a suite of soft- 
ware tools that simulates the behaviors of 
communication networks to be used in 
space exploration, and predict the per- 
formance of established and emerging 
space communication protocols and 
services. MACHETE consists of four gen- 
eral software systems: (1) a system for 
kinematic modeling of planetary and 
spacecraft motions; (2) a system for char- 
acterizing the engineering impact on the 


bandwidth and reliability of deep-space 
and in-situ communication links; (3) a 
system for generating traffic loads and 
modeling of protocol behaviors and state 
machines; and (4) a system of user-inter- 
face for performance metric visualiza- 
tions. The kinematic-modeling system 
makes it possible to characterize space 
link connectivity effects, including occul- 
tations and signal losses arising from dy- 
namic slant-range changes and antenna 
radiation patterns. The link-engineering 
system also accounts for antenna radia- 
tion patterns and other phenomena, in- 
cluding modulations, data rates, coding, 
noise, and multipath fading. The proto- 
col system utilizes information from the 
kinematic-modeling and link-engineer- 
ing systems to simulate operational sce- 
narios of space missions and evaluate 
overall network performance. In addi- 
tion, a Communications Effect Server 
(CES) interface for MACHETE has been 
developed to facilitate hybrid simulation 
of space communication networks with 
actual flight/ ground software/hardware 
embedded in the overall system. 

This work was done by Loren Clare, Esther 
Jennings, Jay Gao, John Segui, and Winston 
Kwong of Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propul- 
sion Laboratory. Further information is 
contained in a TSP (seepage 1 ). 

This software used in this innovation, is 
available for commercial licensing. Please 
contact Karina Edmonds of the California 
Institute of Technology at (818) 393-2827. 
Refer to NPO-41373. 


H Computing Q-D Relation- 
ships for Storage 
of Rocket Fuels 

The Quantity Distance Measurement 
Tool is a CIS BASEP computer program 
that aids safety engineers by calculating 
quantity-distance (Q-D) relationships 
for vessels that contain explosive chemi- 
cals used in testing rocket engines. (Q-D 
relationships are standard relationships 
between specified quantities of specified 
explosive materials and minimum dis- 
tances by which they must be separated 
from persons, objects, and other explo- 
sives to obtain specified types and de- 
grees of protection.) The program uses 
customized geographic-information-sys- 
tem (CIS) software and calculates Q-D 
relationships in accordance with NASA’s 
Safety Standard For Explosives, Propel- 


NASA Tech Briefs, August 2005 


13 


