NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL 
MONTEREY, CALIFORNIA 


AD-A283 670 




THESIS 



AN ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC RETENTIOpJ 
MODELS FOR EXCESS STOCK IN A STOCHASTIC 
DEMAND ENVIRONMENT 

by 

Donald C Miller 
March 1994 

Thesis Advisor: Thomas P. Moore 


Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 




pnc ao!.'a:n- wsvt.; 




c\^%4_27194 

I mil 

III 



94 8 25 015 










REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 


Form Approved OMR No. (!7()4 


1‘uhlic reponing burden for thi.s collection of informstion is estimated to average I hour per response, utcluding the time fur reviewing iiistructiun. 
searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of infomtalion, .Send coiiuiienl.s 
regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information. Including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington 
Headquarters Services. Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Higliway, Suite 1204, Arlington. VA 22202-4502, and 
to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188) Washington DC 20.503. 


1. AGENCY USE ONLY/Lctrvc fe/tiitij 


REPORT DATE 
MARCH 1994 


REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

>ia.ster’.s The.sis 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

AN ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC RETENTION MODELS FOR 
EXCESS STOCK IN A STOCHASTIC DEMAND ENVIRONMENT 


6. AUTHOR(S) Miller, Donald C. 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 
Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey CA 93943-5000 


9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 


FUNDING NUMBERS 


8. PERFORMING 
ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 


10. SPONS(7RING/MONITORING 
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 


12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 
A 


11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES The views expressed in this thesis are those of the author and do not 
reflect the official policy or position of the Department of Defense or the U.S. Government. 


12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public relea.se; distribution is unlimited. 


13. ABSTRACT (maximum 200 words) 

Retention policy fur U.S. Navy wholesale inventories in long supply has been in a state of flux and under Congressional 
scrutiny since 198.5. This thesis analyzes and compares the U.S. Navy’s current economic retention process to four 
mathematical Economic Retention Decision Models designed to assist in making retention determinations with respect to 
excess inventories. The motivation for this research was based on several factors, the two primary factors were; the Navy 
does not currently use a classical economic retention decision model when making retention/disposal decisions for 
"essential " material, and U.S. Navy inventories in long supply were estimated to be as high as 3.4 billioii dollars in Marcli 
1993. A Pascal based simulation was developed to compare the Navy's retention process and the mall latical models. 
The comparison was based on performance with respect to the Measures Of Effectiveness (MOE) of Touii Cost and 
Average Customer Wait Time. The simulation was designed to emulate the portions of the Navy's consumable item 
inventory management system (UICP) applicable to the demand process for a Navy managed consumable item. The goal of 
research was to determine how effective the Navy's retention process was as compared with economic retention decision 
models for both a steady state and a declining demand environment. In general, results showed that at least one 
mathematical model performed better than the Navy's process for all demand scenarios that were simulated and that the 
idea! model varies between demand scenarios and changes in decision maker's emphasis on the MOEs. 


14. SUBJECT TERMS 15. 

Excess inventory, retention levels. Economic Retention Decision NUMBER OF 

Models, stochastic demand, declining demand, total cost and PAGES 196 


average customer wait 
simulation. 

time performance measures, inventory 

16. 

PRICE CODE 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

SECURITY 

SECURITY CLASSIFI- 

SECURITY 

LIMITATION OF 

CLASSIFICATION OF 

CATION OF THIS 

CLASSIFICATION OF 

ABSTRACT 

REPORT 

PAGE 

ABSTRACT 

UL 

Unclassified 

Unclassified 

Unclassified 




standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) 






































Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 


An Analysis of Economic Retention Models 
for Excess Stock 

in a Stochastic Demand Environment 


by 

Donald C. Miller 

Lieutenant Commander, United States Navy 
B.S., California State University, Long Beach, June 1980 

Submitted in partial fulfillment 
of the requirements for the degree of 

MASTER OF SCIENCE IN OPERATIONS RESEARCH 

from the 


Author: 


Approved by; 


NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL 
MARCH 1994 



Thomas P. Moore, Thesis Advisor 



Department of Operations Research 


11 




ABSTRACT 


Retention policy for U.S. Navy wholesale inventories in long 
supply has been in a state of flux and under Congressional scrutiny 
since 1985. This thesis analyzes and compares the U.S. Navy's 
current economic retention process to four mathematical Economic 
Retention Decision Models designed to assist in making retention 
determinations with respect to excess inventories. The motivation 
for this research was based on several factors, the two primary 
factors were; the Navy does not currently use a classical economic 
retention decision model when making retention/disposal decisions 
for "essential" material, and U.S. Navy inventories in long supply 
were estimated to be as high as 3.4 billion dollars in March 1993. 
A Pascal based simulation was developed to compare the Navy's 
retention process and the laathematical models. The comparison was 
based on performance with respect to the Measures Of Effectiveness 
(MOE) of Total Cost and Average Customer Wait Time. The simulation 
was designed to emulate the portions of the Navy’s consumable itfem 
inventoiry management system (UICP) applicable to the demand process 
for a Navy managed consumable item. The goal of this research was 
to determine how effective the Navy's retention process was as 
compared with economic retention decision models for both a steady 
state and a declining demand environment. In general, results 
showed that at least one mathematical model performed better than 
the Na\'y‘s process for all demand scenarios that were simulated and 
that the ideal model varies between demand scenarios and changes^ in 
decision maker's emphasis on the MOEs, 

iii 




THESIS OlSCIiAIMER 


The reader is cautioned that computer programs developed in 
this research may not have been exercised for all cases of 
interest. While every effort has been made, within the time 
available, to ensure that the programs are free of 
computational and logic errors, they cannot be considered 
validated. Any application of these programs without 
additional verification is at the risk of the user. 



iv 







TABLE OF CONTENTS 


I. BACKGROUND. 1 

A. INTRODUCTION . 1 

B. U. S. NAVY ECONOMIC RETENTION POLICY. 4 

C. ORGANIZATION OF RESEARCH . 7 

II. ECONOMIC RETENTION DECISION MODELS . 9 

A. LITERATURE REVIEW . 9 

1. Heyvaert and Hurt. 10 

2. Rothkopf and Fromovitz. 11 

3. Hart. 11 

4. Simpson. 12 

5. Mohon and Garg. 14 

6. Tersine and Toelle. 15 

7. Silver and Peterson. 22 

8. Rosenfield. 25 

B. SUMMARY. 26 

III. RESEARCH APPROACH AND ANALYTICAL METHOD . 28 

A. OVERVIEW. 28 

B. DEMAND SCENARIOS . 29 

C. ANALYSIS SCENARIOS . 31 

1. Total Cost Analysis. 31 


V 


























2. Constant Demand Analysis . 33 

3. Declining Demand Analysis . 33 

D. PERFORMANCE COMPARISONS . 34 

1. Paired Difference t-Test . 37 

2. Multi-Attribute Decision Making (MADM) . . 38 

IV. SIMULATION. 42 

A. SIMULATION STRUCTURE . 42 

1. Demand Observation Generation. 4-2 

2. Forecasting and Inventory Levels Setting . 46 

a. Forecasting. 46 

b. Levels Computation . 47 

3. Supply/Demand Review (.SDR) . 47 

a. Material Disposals . 48 

b. Material Receipt . 49 

c. Material Issue. 49 

d. Material Order. 50 

B. SIMULATION SET-UP . 51 

1. System Parameters. 51 

2. Random Number Seeds. 52 

3. Number of Replications. 53 

4. Initial Conditions Warm-up Period for 

Declining Demand Analysis . 53 

V. SIMULATION RESULTS . 56 

A. OVERVIEW. 56 

vi 





























B. TOTAL COST AI-IALYSIS 


56 


C. CONSTANT DEMAIJD ANALYSIS. 59 

D. DECLINING DEMAND Ai'JALYSIS. S5 

VI. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS. 72 

A. OVERVIEW. 72 

B. RESULTS. 73 

VII. OVERVIEW, CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS .... 79 

A. OVERVIEW. 79 

B. CONCLUSION. 80 

C. RECOMMENDATIONS. 83 

APPENDIX A. CONSTANT DEMAND ANALYSIS RESULTS . 84 

APPENDIX B. DECLINING DEMAND ANALYSIS RESULTS .... 86 

APPENDIX C. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS RESULTS . 92 

APPENDIX D. SIMULATION CODE.108 

APPENDIX E. GRAPHS.169 

LIST OF REFERENCES.179 

INITIAL DISTRIBUTION LIST.182 

vii 




















EXECOTIVE SUMMARY 


OVERVIEW : Retention and disposal policy for U. S. Navy 
wholesale inventories in long supply has bc.en in a state of 
flux and under congressional scrutiny since 1985. Comments 
from che Chief of the Supply Corps on 19 July 1993 indicated 
that one of the preeminent issues regarding .? future of the 
Supply Corps was inventory reduction. e stated that 
inventory reduction is "a congressionally mandated process and 
a fiscal necessity .... we must continue to aggressively 
pursue inventory reductions in an intelligent manner", and 
that it "demands our immediate and continuous attention, 

An \mportant aspect of inventory reduction is the 
retention/disposal process for excess material. This thesis 
evaluated the effectiveness of the Navy's UICP economic 
retention model. The evaluation was performed by comparing 
several mathematical economic retention models with the Navy's 
existing retention model. 

There were three primary factors that motivated this 
thesis. First, the Navy Inventory Control Points (ICP) are 
not confident that eight years worth of forecasted annual 
demand is an appropriate inventory- retention level. Second, 
with continued budget reductions and reductions in the size of 

‘Naval Supply Systems Command, Subject: Naval Supply 
Corps FLASH from the Chief, No. 7-93, 19 July 1993. 


viii 




the Fleet, excess inventories will continue to be a financial 
and administrative burden. For example, as of March 1993 the 
Navy held $1.9 billion in Economic Retention stock' and $1.5 
billion in potential excess inventory for IH, 3H and 7 COG- 
material. Finally, DOD Regulation 4140.1-R recommends that 
better analysis supporting retention decisions be done through 
the use of economic retention decision models. The Navy does 
not currently use a classical economic retention decision 
model when making retention and disposal decisions for 
“essential" material. 

ANALY.5IS : An analysis of the models was performed for a 
variety of demand scenarios in both steady state and declining 
demand situations. The analysis was designed with two 
objectives in mind. The first objective was to determine 
which model(s) were most effective in a demand environment 
similar to the Navy's stochastic demand environment. The 
second objective was to evaluate how the Navy's retention 
process performed with respect to the mathematical models. 

A discrete event Monte Carlo simulation of the Navy's UICP 
demand process and the mathematical retention models was 
developed to evaluate the performance of the models. The 

'Economic Retention Stock (ERS) is that material which is 
more economical to hold for future requirements as opposed to 
disposing and reprocuring in the future. 

^Cognizant symbols (COG) are two character alpha-numeric 
codes which identify and designate cognizant invento^ 
managers who exercise supply management over a specific 
category of material. 


IX 









simulation was developed by the author and LT Glenn 
Robillard^ and was designed to emulate the portions of the 
Navy's Uniform Inventory Control Program (UICP) applicable to 
this research. The simulation represents the demand process 
of a hypothetical Navy managed consumable item. The 
evaluation of the models* performance was based on the 
measures of effectiveness (MOE' of total cost (TO over a 
specified period of simulation time and average customer wait 
time (ACWT) per requisition for all requisitions which occur 
over a specified period of simulation time. 

The mathematical models chosen for this research were 
based on their applicability to the Navy's excess inventory 
problem and the simulation. The mathematical models chosen 
were Simpson's "Economic Retention Period Formula", Tersine 
and Toelle's simple “Net Benefit" model and present value “Net 
Benefit" model, and the simple "Net Benefit" model modified to 
account for the potential for stockouts associated with Navy 
managed items. 

The analysis and performance comparisons of the models 
were based on MOEs calculated from output data from the 
simulation for six basic demand scenarios. The demand 
scenarios were based on varying combinations of unit price, 
mean quarterly demand and variance of mean quarterly demand. 


‘LT Robillard is a U.S. Navy Supply Officer and 
graduate student at the Naval Postgraduate School studying 
Operations Research. 


X 









For each demand scenario four retention scenarios were 
analyzed using the simulation. The four retention scenario 
analyses follow. A Total Cost Analysis was performed to 
determine what the true optimal amount of inventory to hold 
was for a given quantity of initial excess inventory. A 
Constant Demand Analysis was performed to compare the various 
models to the theoretically optimal retention quantity that 
was determined during the Total Cost Analysis. A Declining 
Demand Analysis was performed to compare the models under 
three scenarios of declining mean demand patterns. Finally, 
Sensitivity Analysis was performed for four comhinations of 
demand scenarios and declining mean demand patterns. The 
parameters evaluated in the Sensitivity Analysis were 
inventory holding cost rate, obsolescence rate, administrative 
order cost rate and salvage rate. 

CONCLUSION : The findings of this research showed that none 
of the models analyzed consistently yielded the lowest total 
cost and ACWT for all of the demand and retention scenarios 
examined. As a group, the "net benefit" models performed the 
best and generally performed better than the UICP retention 
model. Additionally, for most demand scenarios in both the 
Constant and Declining Demand Analysis, the decision on which 
model to chose could typically be determined by the MOE of 
total cost alone. This was due to the fact that the 
difference between the various models' ACWTs for each demand 
scenario, was generally insignificant. In summary, the above 


XI 









findings indicate that for Navy managed items the "optimal 


retention quantity differs significantly from item to 
based on variations in mean quarterly deraand and 
price. 


item 

unit 


xii 





1 . 


BACKGROUND 


A. INTRODUCTION 

Retention and disposal policy for U. S. Navy wholesale 
inventories in long supply has been in a state of flux and 
under congressional scrutiny since 1985. Comments from the 
Chief of the Supply Corps on 19 July 1993 indicated that one 
of the preeminent issues regarding the future of the Supply 
Corps was Inventory Management/Reduction. He stated that 
inventory reduction is "a congressionally mandated process and 
a fiscal necessity .... we must continue to aggressively 
pursue inventory reductions in an intelligent manner," and 
that it "demands our immediate and continuous attention" [Ref. 
1 ] . 

A key aspect of inventory reduction is the process used to 
identify two types of inventories: Economic Retention Stock 
(ERS) and potential excess inventory. ERS (sometimes referred 
to as Economic Retention Requirement (ERR)) is the portion of 
the inventory above current requirements which is determined 
to be more economical to retain for future use as opposed to 
disposing and reprocuring in the future. The sum of current 
requirements and ERS is called the Retention Level (RL) when 
it is defined in terms of years worth of annual demand and is 
called Retention Quantity (RQ) when it is defined in terms of 


1 










the number of units. For this thesis the retention limit will 
generally be expressed in terms of years worth of annual 
demand and referred to as the RL. Potential excess inventory 
is that portion of material on-hand and on order beyond the 
RL. 

In 1985 the DOD adopted a policy to retain all units of 
any item having application to a weapons system in active use 
by any of the U. S. military services [Ref. 2]. This disposal 
moratorium was established as a result of inconsistencies the 
GAO identified in U. S. Air Force economic retention policy. 
In effect, the moratorium eliminated the need for any economic 
retention models. Motivated by new GAO findings in 1988 and 
1990 regarding the growth of DOD secondary inventories [Refs. 
3 Sc 4], in 1990 the DOD lifted the disposal moratorium [Ref. 
2]. NAVSUP Instruction 4500.13 [Ref. 5] was subsequently 
issued to provide policy on retention of wholesale Ma^y 
material. The retention limit was set at 20 years worth of 
forecasted annual demand for items that have been stocked in 
the supply system for more than seven years and coded as 
“essential" material. Here "essential” material is defined as 
an item whose failure would result in the loss or severe 
degradation of primary mission capability. As a result of the 
shrinking DOD budgets and continued congressional concern over 
large DOD secondary inventories the retention level tur 
wholesale Navy r.iaterial was further reduced in August 1992 to 
eight years worth of forecasted annual demand [Ref. 6]. 


2 











This thesis contains an analysis and comparison of the 
U. S. Navy's current economic retention process to four 
mathematical/optimization models (Economic Retention Decision 
Models) designed to assist in making retention/disposal 
determinations with respect to excess inventories. The 
motivation for this research was based on three factors. 
First, the Navy Inventory Control Points (ICP) are not 
confident that eight years worth of forecasted annual demand 
is an appropriate RL. Second, with the ongoing budget 
reductions and reductions in the size of the Fleet, excess 
inventories will continue to be a financial and administrative 
burden. For example, as of March 1993 the Navy held $1.9 
biJlion in ERS and $1,5 billion in potential excess inventory 
for IH, 3H and 7 COG‘ material. Finally, DOD Regulation 
4140.1-R [Ref. 7:p. 4.5] recommends that better analysis 
supporting retention decisions be done through the use of 
economic retention decision models. The Navy does not 
currently use a classical economic retention decision model 
when making retention/disposal decisions for "essential" 
material. 

A simulation was developed in the Pascal programming 
language to compare the Navi-'s retention process and the 
mathematical models. The comparison is based on performance 

‘Cognizant symbols (COG) are two character alpha¬ 
numeric codes which identify and designate cognizant 
inventory managers who exercise supply management over a 
specific category of material. 


3 







with respect to the measures of effectiveness (MOE) of total 
cost (TO and average customer wait time (ACWT) . The 
simulation was co-developed by the author and LT Glenn 
Robillard, and was designed to emulate the portions of the 
Navy's Uniform Inventory Control Program (UICP) applicable to 
this research. The simulation represents the demand process 
of a hypothetical Navy managed consumable item. The period of 
time over which demand is simulated and the characteristics of 
the item are specified by the user during the initialization 
of the simulation. Measures of effectiveness to be used in 
the performance comparison will be calculated froni the actual 
cost and customer wait time data generated by the simulation. 
The UICP retention process and the various retention decision 
models will be tested in a variety of simulation scenarios. 
The scenarios are based on combinations of: 

- unit price 

- mean quarterly demand 

- variance of quarterly demand 

- patterns of declining mean quarterly demand 

- levels of excess inventory 

- inventory holding cost rate 

- obsolescence rate 

- administrative order cost rate 

- salvage rate 

The goal of this thesis is to determine how effective the 
Navy's retention logic is as compared with the four economic 
retention decision models. 


4 








B. U. S. NAVY ECONOMIC RETENTION POLICY 

As discussed in the introduction to this chapter, the 
Navy's Economic Retention policy has been in a state of flux 
for approximately nine years. The current RL for "essential" 
materials (i.e.. Item Mission Essentiality Codes (IMEC) 3, 4, 
and 5) is set at eight years worth of annual forecasted 
demand, with ERS constrained to a minimum retention quantity 
of five units. All material that has been stocked in the 
supply system for less than seven years is not subject to a 
retention limit. This material is retained until the seven 
year waiting period has passed before being subject to 
retention review. 

Retention and disposal requirements are reviewed by the 
ICP semi-annually in conjunction with the execution of the 
March and September inventory Stratification, UICP application 
B20. Stratification is the process of matching current 
inventory to requirements and categorizing inventory based on 
the type of requirement. DOD Regulation 4140.1-R [Ref. 7:p. 
4.3] defines the Stratification categories as Authorized 
Acquisition Objective (AAO), Economic Retention Stock (ERS), 
Contingency Retention Stock (CRS), and Potential Reutilization 
Stock (PRS). The Authorized Acquisition Objective is a 
combination of the peace-time requirements for U.S. Forces 
through the end of the second fiscal year following the 
current date and the approved stockage requirements for grant- 
aid and military assistance programs. Economic Retention 


5 




stock is inventory held beyond the Authorized Acquisition 
Objective which is determined to be more economical to hold 
for future requirements as opposed to disposing and 
reprocuring in the future. Contingency Retention Stock is 
inventory held for known or potential requirements not covered 
by Authorized Acquisition Objective, such as initial 
outfitting, mobilization and Foreign Military Sales (FMS). 
Potential Reutilization Stock (also known as Potential Excess 
(PE)) is all inventory beyond the sum of the Authorized 
Acquisition Objective, Economic Retention Stock and 
Contingency Retention Stock. 

The ICPs will make the final retention/disposal decisions 
on material categorized as Potential Reutilization Stock. 
When a disposal release order is issued by the ICP, the depot 
holding the Potential Reutilization Stock will transfer the 
material to Def nse Reutilization Marketing Office (DRMO) for 
salvage or reuse. For this research all Potential 
Reutilization Stock is assumed to be sent immediately to DRMO 
for disposal. 

The calculation of Economic Retention Stock (ERS) 
performed during the UICP Stratification application is 
summarized as follows (Ref. 6,8): 

ERS = Max { [JiL-Dl~D2-D3-M) ,5} ^ ^ 


6 






Where: 


RL = eight years worth of forecasted annual demand. 

D1 = forecasted demand, remainder of current year. 

D2 = annual forecasted demand, appropriation year. 

D3 = annual forecasted demand, budget year. 

M = reorder Objective, which equals the sum of 

safety stock, leadtime demand, and an economic 
order quantity (EOQ). 

The calculation for Economic Retention Stock (Equation 
1.1) is based on recurring demand and does not take into 
account the portions of the Authorized Acquisition Objective 
which are considered non-recurring demand, such as Preplanned 
Program Requirements (PPR), Prepositioned War Reserves (PWR), 
Other War Reserves (OWR) and outstanding backorders (Due-out) . 
In addition, Equation 1.1 constrains the Economic Retention 
Stock to a minimum of five units, to ensure a minimal buffer 
or safety stock is maintained for "essential" material. The 
actual amount of inventory held is equal to the sum of 
Authorized Acquisition Objective, Economic Retention Stock and 
Contingency Retention Stock (where Authorized Acquisition 
Objective plus Economic Retention Stock equals the System 
Retention Level). By placing the five unit minimum constraint 
on Economic Retention Stock, the System Retention Level is 
also constrained to a minimum of five units. For this thesis 
Planned Program Requirements, Prepositioned War Resen'-es, 
Other War Reserves and Contingency Retention Stock were 
assumed to be zero. 

Because the key to the amount of inventoiy categorized as 
Economic Retention Stock and Potential Reutilization Stock is 


7 



the RL, this research will focus on alternative methods of 
calculating a RL through the use of Economic Retention 
Decision Models. 

C. ORGANIZATION OP RESEARCH 

The remainder of this thesis v;ill be devoted to the 
discussion of mathematical economic retention models, the 
development of the analytical approach and simulation, and the 
presentation of the simulation results and conclusions. 
Chapter II reviews various mathematical models and discusses 
selection of the models chosen for the research. Chapter III 
develops the analytical approach to be used in comparing the 
UICP retention process to the mathematical models chosen in 
Chapter II. Chapter IV provides a description of the 
simulation, to include a discussion of the major procedures 
and algorithms used. Chapters V and VI present the simulation 
results. Finally, conclusions and recommendations are 
presented in Chapter VII. 


8 




II. ECONOMIC RETENTION DECISION MODELS 


A. LITERATURE REVIEW 

Excess inventories are an acMinistracive and economic 
burden which consume valuable warehouse spcce deplete working 
capital and help to reduce inventory accuracy. In general, 
there are two causes for excess inventory. First, the demand 
rate may be overestimated due to a forecasting error, a change 
in technology or a change in operating tempo. Second, the 
Navy may obtain more units than they intend in a given 
replenishment action. This can happen as a result of errors 
in procurement document quantities or because the supplier 
delivers more units then the Navy requested. 

Mathematica] models designed to represent the excess 
inventory proble.n are known as Economic Retention Decision 
Models. The objective of an Economic Retention Decision Model 
is to reduce the administrative and economic burden of 
carrying excess inventory through disposal of surplus stock. 
The approach to determining how much excess inventory to carry 
and how much should be disposed of varies from model to model. 
The basic idea behind most Economic Retention Decision Models 
is to determine the trade-off between the cost to dispose of 
material and the cost to hold material. What differs between 
models is how to define the cost to dispose of material and 


9 




the cost to hold material. While considerable literature 
exists on determining inventory retention levels, few 
researchers have directly addressed the Navy's excess 
inventory problem. 

1. Heyvaerc and Hurt 

Heyvaert and Hurt developed one of the first models 
that treated the situation in which mean demand is declining, 
which is one of the causes of excess inventory [Ref. 9]. The 
model was designed to provide a simple, fast and accurate 
method for determining optimal stocking levels for slow-moving 
items. A unique objective function based on material storage 
costs and the cost of non-satisfaction of a demand was 
derived, with the optimal inventory levels (available level) 
being determined by minimizing the total cost function (W): 

2.1 

w ‘ al + pp 


a = V (s-d/2)pa + V (s^/2d)Pa 

cPo 


2.2 


P = X 


Where; 

a = long run mean stock level, assuming variations in 
demand are linear. 

I = total cost to store one unit during a 
replenishment period (t). 


10 




p = expected number of shortages during a 
replenishment period (t). 

P = total cost resulting from non-satisfaction of a 
demand requirement. 

s = current inventory on hand and on order (available 
level). 

d = demand during a replenishment period (t). 

pd = probability that an issue of size d will have to 
be made, assum.es d has a poisson distribution 
with mean = |i, 0.1 <|i< 10.0. 

Although this model does not treat the problem of 
excess stock generated from reduced demand rate, the concept 
of determining optimality based on cost and customer 
satisfaction helped motivate the use of total cost and ACWT as 
the MOEs to be used in the performance comparison phase of 
this research. 

2. Rothkopf and Fromovltz 

The Rothkopf and Fromovitz model for a save-discard 
decision involves a bulk commodity that comes in a rented 
container [Ref. 10]. Although this model is too specific to 
adapt to the Navy problem, it is one of the few models which 
deals with the stochastic nature of demand. It also applies 
the concept of discounting future costs. 

3. Hart 

Hart designed a procedure to calculate a procurement 
schedule and retention quantity for a selected inventory item 
[Ref. 11]. The procedure minimizes the sum of discounted 
relevant costs which vary in amount or in timing with changes 
in the retention quantity. Relevant costs include the cost of 


11 





holding the retained quantity, cost of not scrapping the 
retained quantity, cost of delaying the write-off of the 
retained quantity (write-off occurs when the material is 
either sold or scrapped), cost of procured quantities, and 
cost of holding the procured quantities. The minimum cost 
retention quantity is determined using a sequential search 
procedure based on the "Golden Section" method. For each 
retention quantity considered, a procurement schedule is 
determined heuristically according to a set of rules based on 
Economic Order Quantities and Economic "Bridging" Quantities. 
While Hart's model provides an interesting approach to the 
excess inventory problem, the level of effort required to 
incorporate his model into the Navy's UICP levels software 
application was beyond the scope of this research. 

4. Sliqpson 

Simpson's "formula" is one of the most frequently 
cited works in recent literature dealing with the excess 
inventory problem [Ref. 12] . The formula provides a clear and 
easy-to-use procedure which was originally developed for 
possible implementation by the Navy. 

The formula compares the cost of storing material, 
considering the chance that it may become obsolete and the 
cost of repurchasing the material in the future when needed, 
if present surpluses are sold by disposal action today. An 
economic retention period formula was derived which equals the 


12 





cost (per dollar value of material) of retaining X years of 
stock (Cj) less the cost (per dollar value of material) of 
disposing of X years of stock (0^) . In the derivation of the 
formula it was assumed that future demand was known and 
constant, all general price levels and rates were also 
constant. The derivation is a follows: 


Cj. = l-{l-p)*+z{ (1-p) (l+i)*+{l-p)*(l+i)*‘^+. . . . + (l-p)*{l+i)) 

2 .4 


Ca = l-Z?{l+i)' 


2,5 


Where: 

Ct = cost of retaining X years of stock. 

Cd = cost of disposing of X years of stock. 

D = fraction of present unit price of material which 
will be realized in disposal sales (i.e. 15 cents 
on the dollar, D = .15). 

p = fraction of material which will become obsolete in 
any one year. 

r = annual storage cost rate per dollar of material. 

i = annual interest rate. 

X = Retention Level (RL). 

Equation 2.4 (Cj) represents the obsolescence cost and 
storage cost incurred from holding material for X years. The 
obsolescence cost term (l-d-p)*) calculates the dollar value 
of loss due to obsolescence (per dollar of material) 
compounded over X years. The storage cost represents the 
cumulative cost of holding inventory X years, where che dollar 


13 





value of inventory is reduced by p each year due to 
obsolescence, and includes the cost (compounded annually) of 
lost interest revenue from money used for storage costs. 

Equation 2,5 (C^) represents the cost (per dollar of 
material) of furnishing a given quantity of an item at time tx 
given material was disposed of at time t^. The cost of 
disposal is reduced by the return from disposal sales, which 
is increased in value at the compound interest rate until tx. 

The va,..ue for X, the optimal number of years stoclc to 
be retained (RL) is obtained by equating C^. to and solving 
for X. Simpson gives the following such solution: 


log 
X = _ 

rz?(i+x))+r(i-p) (i+i) 1 

i +p+r(l-p) (i+i) 1 

log 

\ll£] 

l+ij 



5. Mohon and Garg 

The Mohon and Garg model expanded on Simpson's 
economic retention period formula by considering the case in 
which shelf life* is probabilistic [Ref. 13]. They also 
derived the specific case in which shelf life is exponentially 
distributed. While the Mohon and Garg model may offer some 


^Mohan and Garg assume shelf life is a function of 
obsolescence and deterioration. The Navy uses a combination 
of shelf life codes to account for deterioration of material 
and an obsolescence factor included in the system (UICP) 
holding cost rate. 


14 







improvements over Simpson's basic formula, it would be 
difficult to apply their model in the Navy's UICP. 
Determining the appropriate probability distributions for 
obsolescence and deterioration rates to use with the expanded 
model would be a complex task. Because of this, a retention 
model which has robust performance with respect to 
obsolescence rate might be more appropriate for the Navy. 

6. Terslne and Toelle 

Tersine and Toelle developed two "net benefit" models 
of differing complexity for determining inventory retention 
levels [Ref. 14]. The models indicate how much im^entory 
should be held (economic time supply or RL) and how much 
should be disposed of at a specific salvage price for a given 
item. In the derivation of both "net benefit" models it was 
assumed that future demand was known and constant, all general 
price levels and rates were also constant, and no stockouts 
were permitted. 

The first or simple net benefit (NB) model calculates 
the economic time supply of material to hold that maximizes 
net benefit (cost savings) resulting from the sale of excess 
stock. The femulation of the NB equation and the economic 
time supply (to) is as follows: 


15 



2.7 


Net Benefit = Salvaffe Revenue + Holding Cost Savings 
-Repurchase Cost - Reorder Coat 

Salvage Revenue - grP, » P^^M-tR) » P^-P^t 2.8 

Holding Cost Savings * (M-q) ^PF 2.9 

2P 2P 

„ M^PF_ RPFt^ _ MQPF^ QPFt 
2R 2 2R 2 


Repurchase Coat 

“ pq 

- PM-PRt 

2.10 

Reorder Coat 

. ES 

. CM CRt 

2.11 

0 

0 0 



Where: 


q 

t 

to 

C 

F 

M 

P 

P. 

Q 

R 


= M - tR - amount of excess inventory that is 
disposed of, in units. 

= time supply, in years worth of inventory 
retained. 

= economic time supply in years worth of inventory 
retained (RL). 

= ordering cost per order. 

= annual holding cost fraction. 

= available stock in units. 

= unit cost of the item. 

= unit salvage value of the item. 

= economic order size in units. 

= annual demand in units. 


The resulting net benefit formulation is as follows: 


fit) = - 


RPFt^ 


*(pR-p^*SEE. +] t+^^EE- + PJH-PM- 

\ *^2 Oj 2R 2R Q 


2.12 


16 



Note that f(t) describes a parabola and therefore has a single 
maximum. By taking the first derivative of f{t) with respect 
to t and setting it equal to zero, the economic time supply 
(to) equals: 

_ Q 2.13 

° PF 2P 

Since the second derivative of f{t) is negative, tp is located 
at the maximum point. 

The second model, a present value net benefit (NB-NPV) 
model, compensates for the fact that investments occur at 
different points in time by discounting them to their present 
value. Under continuous compounding, the present value of a 
future purchase of an item with a current price (P) at time t 
is Pe*''-'*’', where i is the annual inflation rate and k is the 
discount rate. For this thesis inflation was assumed to be 
zero and the discount rate was set to seven percent. 

The formulation of the objective function of the net 
present value version of the net benefit model is as follows: 


f(t) = 


2k 


PFQ ^ PO*C 
2{i-k) eW-«o/*-i 


2k 


PFQ ^ PO*C 

2[l-k) 




2.14 


17 






Although Equation 2.14 cannot be solved directly for t, 
Newton's method can be used iteratively to obtain a solution. 
Where: 


tji+i “ tjj 




2.15 


For this thesis the to obtained from the NB model was 
divided by two and then used as an initial estimate for the 
NB-NPV model to. The NB model to was divided by two to ensure 
that the initial approximation to the NB-NPV model to was 
sufficiently close to the optimal solution so that Newton's 
method would converge upon a solution. This choice of initial 
starting solution was particularly important for the demand 
scenarios with low unit price, because the RLs for the NB-NPV 
model were expected to be significantly less than the 
respective RLs for the NB model. Successive values for t were 
calculated until lt„.i“tnl < 0.01. When this stopping 
condition was satisfied, the final to for the NB-NPV model was 
set equal to t„^i. 

Although the Navy UICP assiimes that demand is 
stochastic and allows for stockouts. Tersine and Toelle's "net 
benefit" models are well suited for application in the Navy's 
UICP. In an effort to account for the potential for stockouts 
due to the stochastic nature of demand typically associated 
with a Navy managed item, a modified "net benefit" (NB-MOD) 
model was developed. 


18 






Disposal of some quantity of excess inventory will 
cause the inventory position (IP) to reach the reorder point 
(RO) prior to the time it would have reached the RO without 
the disposal of the excess inventory. Therefore, with 
disposal the inventory system will experience one or more 
additional reorder cycles, depending on the quantity disposed. 
Because of the stochastic nature of demand, every additional 
reorder cycle exposes the inventory system to an increase in 
the number of possible stockouts. In the modification of the 
NB model, for every additional reorder cycle that occurs due 
to disposal, the net benefit from disposal is reduced by the 
expected additional shortage costs. The modified formulation 
(NB-MOD) is; 


Net Benefit (MOD) = Salvage Revenue ^ Holding Coat Savings 

- Repurchase Cost - Reorder Coat 

- Shortage Cost 


2.16 

The new term, shortage cost, is a linear function of 
the number of additional reorders (N) that are made due to the 
disposal of q units worth of stock. We must first calculate 


N: 


M_ (M-q) 

.r - ^ R - N-tR 2.17 

0 0 
R 


19 





Where: 


N 

M/R 

(M-q) /R 
Q/R 

E[x>RO] 

RO 

A 

X 


number of additional reorders required due 
to the original disposal of q units, 
mean time supply of material without 
disposal. 

mean time supply of material with disposal, 
mean time between reorders, 
expected number of shortages in a reorder 
cycle. 

reorder point, 
shortage cost per unit. 
actual demand during a procurement 
leadtime. 


Now we may obtain the shortage cost: 


Shortage Cost = m{E[3t>RO]) 


2.18 


The expected number of shortages (E[x>RO]) in a 
reoroar cycle, assuming that X is normally distributed with 
mean, and variance, is given by [Ref. 15]; 


Elx>RO] 


(jl-JZO) xP 



2.19 


Where: 

P ^z> = Probability of a stockout. 


20 


f ■ standard normal distribution function 

evaluated at -BOzlt 

a 


RO — RL) + OZ« 

Z = standard normal distribution value which 

satisfies the UICP "probability of a stockout"' 
expression for a given values of R, L, ^i, a", F, 
P, A, and E. 

4 = mean leadtime demand^. 

= variance of leadtime demand^ 

L = procurement leadtime demand in years. 


Because the term E[x>RO] in Equation 2.20 is not a function of 
t, the expected number of shortages in a reorder cycle is 
treated as a constant. 

Collecting these terms together, the objective 
function of the modified net benefit model is: 


/(t) 


2 \ ^2 0} 2R 2R 


2.20 


'The UICP levels application calculates the probability 
of stockout using the following expression; FP/(FP+AE), where 
F is the annual holding cost fraction, P is the unit cost of 
an item, A is the shortage cost per unit and E is the military 
essentiality. 


^In UICP this parameter is PPV. 
’In UICP this parameter is B019A. 


21 






Next we must determine if Equation 2.20 is a parabola. 
Note that Equation 2.20 can be expressed in the form at-+bt+c 
and thus is a parabola [Ref. 16,p.39]. By grouping terms 
appropriately we obtain the constants a, b, and c: 


. = - (JgPF) 2.21 

2 

b = PR-PJR+^^^ — -^A{Eix>RO\) 2.22 

2 0 0 

c * j!^^-I^^+p^-PM-^-J^A{Ei3e>RO]) 2.23 

21 ? 21 ? 0 0 

By taking the first derivative of f (t) (Equation 2.20) 
with respect to t, setting it equal to zero and solving for t, 
the modified economic time supply (to) is obtained; 


C - 0 ^ C*A{ElJORO] ) 

" PF 2R OPF 


2.24 


Since the second derivative of f(t) is negative, to is located 
at the maximum point. 

7. Silver and Peterson 

Silver and Peterson developed a ru)e for the disposal 
of excess inventory which, while derived using a different 
approach from that of Tersine and Toelle, yields the same 
numerical refjults [Ref. 17:Chcip. 9]. In a manner similar to 


22 







Simpson's approach, Silver and Peterson focused on the cost of 
no disposal (Cup) versus the cost of disposal (Cp) . Then, 
assuming an EOQ strategy with deterministic demand, Silver and 
Peterson formulated an objective function of Cnp - Cp , where: 

P _ X^vx 

Cd = vr+~ (^^23vx+r>v) 


2.25 

2.26 


Where: 



cost of no disposal, 
cost of disposal. 

amount of excess inventory to dispose in units, 
on hand inventory in units. 
expected annual demand in units, 
unit price. 

salvage value per unit, 
holding cost rate $/$/yr. 
administrative order cost per order. 


The last term in Cp represents the inventory holding cost, the 
administrative ordering cost and the repurchase cost of the 
stock disposed (W) incurred after the stock retained is 
exhausted (which occurs at time (l-W)/D and continues until 
time I/D). The inventory holding cost and the administrative 
ordering cost are calculated assuming an EOQ strategy. The 
repurchase cost of the stock disposed (W) is calculated 
assuming the repurchase unit cost equals the unit cost at the 
time of disposal. 

By taking the first derivative of the objective 


23 








function (Cnd - Cp) with respect to W and setting it equal to 
zero we obtain Silver and Peterson's "decision rule for 
disposal," an expression for W, which maximizes Cnp - C,:,. 


V = I-EO0~ 


■D(v-g) 

vr 


2.27 


Although Silver and Peterson used a different approach 
in the formulation of their model than Tersine and Toelle, it 
can be show that Silver and Peterson's "decision rule for 
disposal" and Tersine and Toelle‘s simple "net benefit" model 
yield the same results. Using Silver and Peterson's notation 
it can be shown that Tersine and Toelle's economic time supply 
(to) multiplied by annual demand (D) equals Silver and 
Peterson's equation for the amount of inventory to retain (I- 
W), as follows: 




D{v-g) ^ DA ^EOQ 
vz vtEOQ 2 



vz V 2VT 
= + BOO = 


QED 


24 







Because the two derivations result in the same 
economic retentic'. decision, only the notation from one 
derivation was used in the thesis. Tersine and Toelle's 
notation and approach was chosen, primarily because of the 
extensive background provided on the excess inventory problem 
and the thorough development of the derivation of their model. 

8. Rosenfleld 

Rosenfield developed a model for the optimal number of 
items to retain for slow moving or obsolete inventories under 
conditions of stochastic demand and perishability (shelf-life) 
[Ref. 18]. This model is one of the few that addresses the 
probabilistic nature of demand for the general excess 
inventory problem. Rosenfield's basic model assumes that 
episodes of demand can be represented by a renewal process. 
This allows for a variable number of units demanded per 
episode. The model determines the correct number of units to 
retain. In the model a unit is worth disposing of if its 
immediate salvage value (it's present resale value) exceeds 
it's expected discounted sales value (from a future sale if 
the unit is held in inventory) minus the expected holding 
costs to be incurred (until the time of sale). 

Because Rosenfield's final expression for the number 
of units to retain contains the moment generating function for 
the distribution of time between demand episodes, the model 
becomes complex when the distribution of demand episodes is 


25 






not a Poisson distribution. Although this model may have 
application to the Navy's excess inventory problem, the level 
of effort required to incorporate Rosenfield's model into the 
Navy's UICP levels software application was beyond the scope 
of this research. 

B. SUMMARY 

The mathematical models chosen for this research were 
based on their applicability to the Navy's excess inventory 
problem, the UICP model, and the simulation. The models 
chosen were; 

- Simpson's "economic retention period formula" (TRAD). 

- Tersine and Toelle's simple "net benefit" model (NB) 

- Tersine and Toelle's present value "net benefit" model 
(NB-NPV). 

- The modified "net benefit" (NB-MOD), a version of the 
simple "net benefit" model. 

These models, together with the Navy's UICP current retention 
logic, will be referred to as the "models" throughout the 
remainder of the thesis. 

Although the UICP model was developed under the assumption 
that demand is stochastic, all the mathematical models listed 
above were developed under the assumption that demand was 
deterministic (with the exception of NB-MOD). The decision to 
use primarily deterministic models was based on two factors. 
First, as Simpson (Ref. 12] discussed, the effect the 
deterministic assumption has on a Retention Level (RL) is not 


26 







significant. Secondly, the difficulty of incorporating into 
the UICP model and into the simulation the stochastic models 
reviewed does not justify the small improvement in accuracy 
which, according to Simpson, we would experience. Because a 
true stochastic economic retention model was not used in this 
research, a Total Cost Analysis (see Chapter III.C.l) was 
conducted to develop a baseline, with respect to cost, to 
evaluate how the deterministic models actually perform in a 
stochastic environment. 


27 




Ill. ASSEAKCH APPROACH AND ANALYTICAL M3STH0D 


A. OVERVIEW 

The analysis that was done for this thesis made use of a 
simulation that was written in Pascal. The simulation was 
developed to represent the Navy's UICP model as well as the 
mathematical models that were analyzed in this research. A 
complete discussion of the simulation program is contained in 
Chapter IV. 

The analysis and performance comparisons of the models 
were based on MOEs calculated from simulated data for six 
basic demand scenarios. For each demand scenario four 
retention scenarios were analyzed using the simulation. A 
Total Cost Analysis was performed to determine the optimal 
amount of inventory (from just the cost standpoint) to hold 
for a given quantity of initial excess inventory, A Constant 
Demand Analysis was performed to compare the various models to 
the theoretically optimal retention level that was determined 
during the Total Cost Analysis. The same input parameter 
values were used in the Constant Demand Analysis as in the 
Total Cost Analysis. A Declining Demand Analysis was 
performed to compare the models in three scenarios (patterns) 
of declining mean demand. Finally, Sensitivity Analysis was 
performed on various combinations of derriaad scenario, pattern 


28 








of declining mean demand, and the parameters of administrative 
reorder cost rate, salvage rate, inventory holding cost rate, 
and obsolescence rate. (A complete discussion of the 
Sensitivity Analysis is contained in Chapter VI.) 

Table 1 provides a summary of retention scenarios, cross 
referenced by demand scenario and mean quarterly demand 
pattern. Each entry in the table represents a set of 
simulations and will be referred to as a simulation setting. 
The meanings of the demand scenario acronyms can be found in 
Table 2. A summary of the 16 specific settings to be 
considered in the Sensitivity Analysis is provided in Chapter 
VI, Table 9. 

In the performance comparison phase of the research the 
models were ranked based on the MOEs of total cost and ACWT. 
The comparisons were done by demand scenario for the results 
from the analysis scenarios of Constant Demand Analysis, 
Declining Demand Analysis, and Sensitivity Analysis. Multi- 
Attribute Decision Making techniques and hypothesis tests 
based on a paired difference t-test were used to compare the 
performance of the models. 

fi. DEMAND SCXUIARIOS 

Items managed by the Navy are assigned a Navy Mark Code 
based on unit price and mean quarterly demand. The Mark Code 
indicates the probability distribution for leadtime demand and 
the inventory level setting method to be used in the UICP 


29 







model [Ref. 19:p. 3-9]. Six hypothetical items based on the 
Mark Code designation criteria were selected for use 
throughout the research. The hypothetical items, called 
demand sctmarios, were chosen so that the effect of varying 
level setting computation methods, unit price and mean 
quarterly demand on economic retention decisions could be 
analyzed. The demand scenarios described in Table 2 are a 
function of tne probability distribution of demand episodes. 


TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF SIMULATION SETTINGS 


DEMAND 

SCENARIO 

HDHVHP 

HDHVLP 

HDLVHP 

HDLVLP 

LDHP 

LDLP 

DEMAND 

PATTERN 







CONSTANT 

TCA 

TCA 

TCA 

TCA 

TCA 

TCA 

MEAN 

DEMAND 

CDA 

CDA 

Ci3A 

CDA 

C£UI 

CDA 

DECLINING 


WM 





MEAN 
DEMAND 
"STEP" 

DDA 

m 

DDA 

DDA 


DDA 

DECLINING 

DDA 




DJQA 


MEAN 

DEMAND 

“CONVEX" 

8A(16j 

DDA 

DDA 

DDA 

SA(ie) 

DDA 

DECLINING 

DDA 




DDA 


MEAN 

DEMAND 

SA(IS) 

B 

DDA 

DDA 

SA(1€) 

B 

“CONCAVE" 


BB 




■IB 


Legend; TCA = Total Cost Analysis, CDA = Constant Demand 
Analysis, DDA = Declining Demand Analysis, SA = 
Sensitivity Analysis (16 simulation settings for 
each demand scenario and demand pattern combi¬ 
nation) . 















































mean quarterly demand (high and low), variance of quarterly 
demand (high and low), and unit price (high and low). Demand 
variance for the demand scenarios with a normal distribution 
are classified as high (with a standard deviation to mean 
ratio of 1.25) and low (with a standard deviation to mean 
ratio of 0.30) [Ref. 20]. 


TABLE 2. DEMAND SCENARIOS 


NAVY 

MARK 

CODE 

PROBABILITY 

DISTRIBUTION 

MEAN 

QUARTERLY 

DEMAND 

DEMAND 

VARIANCE 

UNIT 
PRICE($) 

ACRONYM 

4 

Noxanal 

Bight 

20 

Bight 625 

Bight 1500 

BDBVBP 

4 

Normal 

Bight 

20 

Low: 36 

Bight 1500 

BDLVBP 

2 

Normal 

Bight 

20 

Bight 625 

low: 20 

BDBVLP 

2 

Normal 

Bight 

20 

howt 36 

LOWt 20 

BDLVLP 

3 

Poiaaon 


m 

N/A 

Bight 1500 

LDHP 

1 

Poiaaon 


Wk 

N/A 

LOWt 20 

LDLP 


C. ANALYSIS SCENARIOS 

1. Total Cost Analysis 

This analysis was performed to compute a total cost 
for 100 quarters of demand activity for a given demand 
scenario based on V- 'ollowing set of assumptions. Assume at 
time zero the inventory is in an excess position and an 
immediate retention/disposal decision is made. Next, assume 
that this is followed by 100 quarters of demand activity with 
a stationary quarterly mean demand. The initial on-hand 















































inventory selected for demand scenarios with high unit price 
was equal to 20 years of average annual demand. For demand 
scenarios with low unit price, the initial inventory was equal 
to 25 years of average annual demand. A total cost was 
calculated for various retention levels beginning with a level 
equal to 0.5 years of annual demand and continuing, in 
increasing increments of 0.5 years annual demand. Retention 
levels were not increased beyond the inventory on hand at time 
zero. Based on an initial inventory of 20 years worth of 
annual demand for the demand scenarios with high unit price, 
40 total cost’ data points (retention levels) were calculated. 
These data points were used to construct total cost curves for 
the demand scenarios with high unit price. Based on an 
initial inventory of 25 years worth of annual demand for the 
demand scenarios with low unit price, 50 total cost data 
points (retention levels) were calculated. These data points 
were used to construct total costs curves for the demand 
scenarios with low unit price. 

Each total cost data point is discounted to current 
year dollars and is equal to the sum of material cost, 
administrative ordering cost, inventory holding cost, shortage 
cost and salvage revenue which accrue over a simulation period 
(See Equations 3.1 and 3.2). The total cost data points for 


'The total cost figure used for each data point is the 
average total cost over all replications of the respective 
simulation. 


32 




each demand scenario were then plotted to form a total cost 
curve (See Appendix E, Graphs 13 through 24) . The goal of the 
Total Cost Analysis was to determine if a minimum total cost 
associated with a single retention level existed in a 
stochastic demand environment in the same way as shown by 
Tersine for the deterministic case [Ref. 14]. The minimum of 
each total cost curve was used to obtain the optimal retention 
level for each demand scenario. These optimal retention 
levels were used as a benchmark for comparing the performance 
of the models in the Constant Demand Analysis phase. 

2, Constant Demand Analysis 

This analysis was designed to compare the performance 
of the models to the performance of the optimal retention 
level determined in the Total Cost Analysis. The comparison 
was done for all combinations of the demand scenarios and the 
models under the same simulation settings that were used in 
the Total Cost Analysis. The goal of this analysis was to 
determine, for each demand scenario, how the models performed 
in the Navy's stochastic demand environment with respect to 
the optimal retention level. 

3. Declining Demand Analyslo 

This analysis was designed to compare the models under 
a scenario involving declining mean quarterly demand. Three 
patterns of declining demand where developed for this 
analysis. The declining demand patterns represent possible 


33 





effects the reduction in Naval Forces and budget might have on 
demand for Navy managed items. In Appendix E, Graphs 1 
through 6 depict the six patterns of declining demand that 
were used. Demand activity for these scenarios begins with a 
pattern of 30 quarters of stationary mean quarterly demand. 
This allows the simulation model to reach steady state as 
discussed in Chapter IV. This was followed by 20 quarters 
with declining mean quarterly demand and finished with 16 
quarters of constant mean quarterly demand. The 16 quarter 
period was included to allow the determination of the long 
term effect that a specific retention policy might have on 
performance. Over the period of the decline of the mean 
quarterly demand, for demand scenarios with a high mean 
demand, the demand decreased from a mean of 20 units per 
quarter to a mean of 2 units per quarter. The mean quarterly 
demand for demand scenarios with low demand decreased from a 
mean of 2.0 units per quarter to a mean of 0.2 units per 
quarter. The comparison of model performance was done for 
all combinations of the demand scenarios, models, and decline 
patterns. 

D. PEFJPORMANCB COMPARISONS 

The concept behind the performance comparisons is to 
provide Navy inventory modelers with some quantitative data 
that will help them select the most suitable model to use in 
a given situation. The use of total cost and ACWT as the MOEs 


34 








was motivated by two factors. The first was Heyvaert and 
Hart’s use of cost and customer satisfaction in the 
development of their model [Ref. 9], which in essence asserts 
that when evaluating a model total cost is not the only 
evaluation criteria to consider. Modelers should also 
consider how a model satisfies customer requirements. The 
second was the fact that total cost and ACWT are generally of 
primary concern to the managers at the Navy's inventory 
control points when they make inventory policy decisions. 

The total cost MOE (Equations 3.1 & 3.2) is based on the 
Navy's UICP model total cost objective function [Ref. 19:p. 3- 
A-4] . Total cost is discounted to current year dollars and is 
equal to the sum of material cost, administrative ordering 
cost, inventory holding cost, shortage cost and salvage 
revenue which accrue over a simulation period. Costs were 
discounted because of the length of time (simulation period.) 
over which the analysis was performed. Additionally, costs 
were discounted to evaluate the effect, over time, the models' 
varying disposal decisions had on total cost. 



3.2 


35 





Where: 


TC(D) = total discounted cost for one replication of 
a simulation given D units disposed during 
the simulation period. 

F = discount factor. 

Qk = number of units ordered during quarter k. 

P = unit price. 

A = administrative order cost. 

Cy = number of orders placed during quarter k. 

Ej = inventory on hand at the end of week j. 

H = holding cost fraction ($/unit-yr). 

Tk = time Weighted Units Short (TWUS) for quarter 
k, see Equation 3.4. 

S = shortage cost ($/unit“yr). 

Dk = number of units disposed of during quarter k. 
R = salvage rate (a fraction of P). 
i = discount rate, 

q = number of quarters simulated, 

j = summation index for 13 weeks of a quarter, 

k = summation index for the number of quarters 

simulated. 


The ACWT measures the mean time required, in days, for the 
wholesale supply system to meet customer demands. ACWT for 
one replication of a simulation equals the time weighted units 
short (TWUS) divided by the total demand (D) over the 
simulation period (Equations 3.3 & 3.4). The simulation ACWT 
was equal to the average of all replication ACWTs. 


ACWT 


TWUS 

D 


3.3 


TWUS = g xARj] 


3.4 


36 







Where: 

n = number of backorders (in units) for 
measurement period. 

RDi = receipt date of the i'"’backorder. 

BODi = date the i*"'’ backorder occurred. 

ARj = amount of i'"’backorder (in units) filled on 

RDi. 

The actual performance comparisons were done using two 
methods. One method is the paired difference t-test and the 
other method is Multi-Attribute Decision Making (MADM). 

1. Paired Difference t-Test: 

Hypothesis tests based on a paired difference u-uest 
statistic [Ref. 21;p. 572] were conducted on the results of 
the Constant Demand Analysis, Declining Demand Analysis, and 
Sensitivity Analysis simulations to determine which model(s) 
performed better than all others in each MOE category. Given 
that model "X" had the best result for a specific MOE, the 
null hypothesis was that the corresponding result, for every 
other model was equal. The alternative hypothesis was that 
the corresponding result, for every other model was not equal 
to the result for model "X." 

The paired difference t-test was used because there 
was dependence between the MOE results of the models for each 
setting simulated. The dependence was attributed to the fact 
that for each replication of a simulation, the randomly 
generated demand streams were identical for all the models 
within a setting. Further discussion of the relationship 
between random number generation and the dependency of results 


37 





is contained in Chapter IV. 

2. Multi-Attribute Decision Making (MkDM) 

In order to compare the models performance, the 
decision analysis technique known as Multi-Attribute Decision 
Making (MADM), a subset of the decision making processes known 
as Multi Criteria Decision Making (MCDM), was used. There are 
four characteristics which make this performance comparison a 
Multi-Criteria Decision Making problem [Ref. 22,p. 2]. First, 
there are multiple attributes (MOEs of total cost and average 
customer wait time). Second, there is conflict among the 
MOEs, i.e. the higher the TC (which is bad) the lower the ACWT 
(which is good). Third, the MOEs have different units of 
measure (TC is per simulation period and ACWT is in terms of 
days per requisition) . Fourth, the selection of the best 
model is to be made based on each model' s level of achievement 
in the MOEs of TC and ACWT [Ref. 22,p. 3] . The primary 
feature which makes the model selection decision a MADM 
process is that there are a limited number of predetermined 
alternatives [Ref. 22,p. 3], In this case the alternatives 
are the retention models being analyzed. By using the MADM 
technique a final decision (model selection) can be made. 

The Simple Additive Weighting Method, one of the best 
known and widely used methods of MADM, was the method used for 
this thesis [Ref. 22,p. 99-103]. To determine a preferred 
model, a decision matrix must be constructed that includes the 


38 





MOE values for each model. Because the Simple Additive 
Weighting Method requires a comparable scale for all elements 
in the decision matrix, a comparable scale matrix is obtained 
using Equation 3.7 to convert the MOE values to comparable 
units. In addition to the comparable scale decision matrix, 
a set of importance weights are assigned to the MOEs, = 
(twt) • It should be noted that is normalized to sum to 
one. The weights should reflect the decision makers marginal 
worth assessment for each MOE. A total score (weighted 
average) for each model (Aj) and the most preferred model (A*) 
can be determined as follows: 


A* = max {A^|Vi = 1, 







3.5 

3.6 

3.7 


Where: 

m = the number of models being analyzed, 
i = the i’^*’ model of the m models, 
j = the MOEs of TC (j=l) and ACWT (j=2). 

Wj = the importance weight for the MOE. 

Tjj = the comparable scale value for the j"'’ MOE of 
the i'"*’ model. 

Xij = the MOE value for the i*^*' model. 

Although MOE results (Xi^) are transformed onto a 
comparable scale (ri^) by Equation 3.7, the decision makers 


39 




perspective regarding a difference of 0.2 between two model's 
Ty, for the attribute of ACWT may not have the same 
significance as a difference of 0.2 between the same model's 
rii for the attribute of TC. For example, if the ACWT Xi, is 
1.0 day in Model 1 and 0.8 days in Model 2 and the TC Xii is 
$80,000.00 in Model 1 and $100,000.00 in Model 2, a decision 
maker would probably consider the change in the TC Xi,s to be 
more significant. But if TC and ACWT are weighted equally 
Model 1 and Model 2 would have the same Aj. The key to making 
effective use of MADM techniques is selecting proper MOE 
weights. Weights should be chosen to reflect the relative 
significance of trade-offs between TC and ACWT. 

Because the selection of MOE weights is somewhat 
subjective and could vary between decision makers, three sets 
of weights were used when comparing the performance of the 
models (see Table 3). The use of three sets of weights will 
show the sensitivity of model selection to MOE weights. The 
sensitivity of model selection to changes in MOE weighting 
should also identify models which perform better with respect 
to total cost or ACWT. 


TABLE 3. MADM MOB V7BZGHT SETS 


SET 

TC 

ACWT 

1 

0.75 

0.25 

2 

0.50 

o 

• 

Ul 

o 

3 


0.75 II 


40 







Due to the subjective nature of MOE weight selection 
and the difficulty of determining the relative significance of 
trade-offs between ACWT and TC between various models, the 
MADM results should not be considered a solution to the 
problem. For this thesis the results were used to help 
develop criteria for selecting a model based on demand 
scenario and the decision maker's emphasis on the MOEs of TC 
and ACWT. 


41 











ZV. SIMULATION 


A. SIMULATION STRUCTURE 

A discrete event Monte-Carlo simulation was used to obtain 
statistical estimates of the values of the measures of 
effectiveness used in the thesis. The events of the 
simulation occurred on a quarterly basis and were defined by 
the activities associated with the UICP demand process. 

The main routine of the simulation was representative of 
the actions which occur in the Navy's UICP model given the 
quarterly generated demand observations. Execution of these 
actions is controlled by two "for" loops. The outer "for" 
loop controlled the number of replications of the simulation 
to be run. The inner "for" loop performed the functions of a 
simulation clock and timing routine, where each increment of 
the inner "for" loop represented one quarter. The major 
procedures which are called in the timing routine are: Demand 
Observation Generation, Demand Forecasting, Invertory Level 
Setting (Levels), and Supply/Demand Review (SDR). complete 
copy of the simulation is included in Appendix D e Pascal 
code can be obtained from Navy Ships Parts Control 'enter. 
Code 046, Mechanicsburg, PA 17055-0788). 


42 





1. Denumd Observation Generation 


Demand observations for the number of quarters 
simulated, for each replication of a simulation, are generated 
using an appropriately transformed pseudo-random number 
generator. The resulting demand stream is a function of the 
probability distribution that is selected (Normal or Poisson), 
the mean quarterly demand, and the variance of demand. The 
probability distribution, mean quarterly demand, and variance 
of demand are specified during initialization of the 
simulation. The method for generating a unique demand stream 
for each replication of a simulation is discussed later in 
this section. 

The algorithm for generating demand observations with 
a Poisson (A,) distribution was based on the relationship 
between the Poisson (X) and Exponential (1/X) distributions 

(Ref. 23 jp. 503] ; 

1. Let a = e'^, b = 1, and i = 0. 

2. Generate Ui^i ~ U(0,1) and replace b by bUui* 

If b < a, return X = i. 

Otherwise, go to step 3. 

3. Replace i by i + 1 and go baclc to step 2. 

The algorithm returns X, when the (-log(Ui)) is less than 

•X (equivalently, when nj=i (Ui) < e’*-) . Because the -log(U,)'s 
are exponential, they can be interpreted as the interarrival 
times of a Poisson process having rate 1. Therefore, X = X(X) 
is a Poisson random variate equal to the number of events that 


43 




have occurred by time X. 

The algorithm for generating demand observations with 
a Normal distribution was based on the "polar method" 

[Ref. 23:p. 491]: 

1. Generate Ui and U. as IID U(0,1), 
let Vi = 2Ui - 1 for V, and 

and let W = V,^ + 

2. If W > 1, go back to step 1. 

Otherwise, let Y = [ (-21n(W))/W] 

Xi = V.Y and X 2 = Vj/. 

Then X] and X 2 are IID N(0,1) random variates. 

The Uniform (U(0,1)) random number generator used in 

the Poisson and Normal random variate algorithms is a prime 
modulus multiplicative linear congruential generator Z[i) = 
(630360016 * Z[i-1]) (mod 2147483647), based on Marse & 

Robert's portable FORTRAN random number generator UNIRAN [Ref. 
23:p. 447]. The simulation has the capability to produce 
20,000 unique seeds for the random number generator based on 
the NXSEED function, also from Marse & Roberts [Ref. 23 :p. 
456] . Using the NXSEED function, a unique demand streams for 
each replication of a simulation is generated by reseeding the 
random number generator with a new seed prior to generating 
the next replication demand stream. A further discussion of 
seed selection and unique demand stream generation is 
contained in Section IV.B.2. 

Because the internal execution of the Supply/Demand 
Review procedure is on a weekly basis, each quarterly random 


44 




demand observation is subdivided into a 13 week demand stream 
as follows: 

1. For i = 1 to 13, the demand observation for 
week(i) = 0. 

2. For i = 1 to current quarter's demand observation 

a. Generate a random uniform integer(X) from 1 to 
13. 

b. increment the demand observation for week(X) 
by one. 

This routine randomly disperses one quarters worth of demand 
throughout the 13 weeks of a quarter. 

An option at simulation initialization is to include 
one to five trend, periods and/or one to five step changes in 
mean quarterly demand {D[t], where t equals a specific 
quarter). The trend function follows an exponential growth 
pattern of the form [Ref. 24]: 


D[t\ = Mo * (1+A*t(0)®) 


4.1 


Where: 

Mo = initial Trend Mean, the mean quarterly demand 
at the beginning quarter of a trend period. 

A = trend coefficient. 

t(0) = at the beginning of each trend period this 

variable is reset to one and incremented by one 
at each quarter during a trend period. 

B = trend power function. 


The number of trend periods, the quarters in which a trend 
starts and stops, and the parameters A and B for each trend 


45 






period are specified during initialization of the simulation. 
The step function applies a step multiplier (any non-negative 
number) to D[t-1] to determine D[t] [Ref. 24]. The number of 
steps, the quarter in which the step occurs (D[t]) and the 
step multiplier are specified during initialization of the 
simulation. 

2. Forecasting and inventory Levels Setting 

This part of the simulation was written to emulate, as 
closely as possible, the forecasting and cyclic levels 
application (DOl) of the UICP model. 

a. Forecaatlag 

NAVSUP Publication 553 [Ref- 19:Chap. 3] contains 
general background information on the forecasting application 
in the DOl application. Single exponential smoothing or a 
moving average is used to forecast mean quarterly demand, 
depending on the results of step and trend tests. Single 
exponential smoothing or a power rule is used to forecast Mean 
absolute deviation of demand (MAD), depending on the results 
of step and trend tests. A smoothing constant of 0.01 was 
used for exponential smoothing in the simulation. 

Prior to actual computation of the next quarterly 
demand forecast, the most recent quarterly demand observation 
is examined by two processes: "step" filtering [Ref. 19:Chap. 
3]; and the Kendall trend detection test [Ref. 25]. These 
tests are used to determine if there has been a change in mean 


46 





quarterly demand that is significant enough to warrant 
discarding most of the historical demand data and to recompute 
the forecast using only recent data. When the process is "out 
of filter" or a trend is detected a four quarter moving 
average is used to compute the next forecasted mean quarterly 
demand. The MAD is then forecasted using a power rule [Ref. 
26] . 

t>. Levels Coj^putatlon 

NAVSUP Publication 553 [Ref. 19:Chap. 3] contains 
a description of the Levels computation application in the 
DO]. The purpose of this part of the software is to compute, 
for a given Navy managed item, the economic order quantity and 
reorder point for the next quarter. The UICP calculations for 
inventory levels were developed within the guidelines of DOD 
Instruction 4140.39. Note that these guidelines follow an 
approach used by Hadley and Whitin [Ref. 27]. The optimal 
inventory levels are determined by minimizing an average 
annual variable cost equation composed of ordering, holding, 
and shortage costs. The level setting calculations in the 
simulation are based on FMSO Level Setting Model Functional 
Description PD82 [Ref. 28] which was written by the Navy Fleet 
Material Support Office. Executable code obtained from the 
Navy Ships Parts Control Center (Code 046) was used in the 
simulation to perform the actual level setting calculations. 


47 




3. Supply/Demand Review (SDR) 

The SDR routine of the simulation was coded to 
replicate the UICP model when processing material receipts, 
issues, and orders. In addition, a material disposal function 
was incorporated in the routine- The disposal function occurs 
bi-annually in conjunction with inventory stratification and 
executes economic retention decisions. The events in the 
SDR routine are driven by the output from the Demand 
Observation Generation, Forecasting, and Levels routines for 
the respective quarter. The SDR routine is called once a week 
during each quarter and the events occur in the following 
sequence: material disposal (this disposal routine is used 
only during the first week of the first and third quarters of 
each year), receiving, issuing, and ordering. In addition, 
the SDR routine calculates and records data for TWUS, ACWT, 
and total cost. 

a. Material Diapoaala 

A semi-annual inventory stratification was 
performed to determine the "retention level" and to calculate 
the amount of "potential excess." The economic retention 
model specified during initialization of the simulation is 
used to perform these calculations. The models available in 
the simulation are: 

- UICP 

- Optimal 

- Traditional (TRAD) 

- Net Benefit (NB) 


48 






- Net Benefit-Mod (NB-MOD} 

- Net Benefit-NPV (NB-NPV) 

For simulation purposes all "potential excess" is 
disposed of immediately and revenue from disposal is 
determined by multiplying the unit price of the item by the 
quantity disposed and the salvage rate (salvage rate is 
specified by the user during initialization of the 
simulation). Total cost for the simulation period is reduced 
by the discounted revenue recognized from disposal. 

b. Haterlal Receipt 

Outstanding reorders are maintained in a "priority 
heap" [Ref. 29:p. 149] in order of scheduled receipt date. If 
an outstanding reorder i^ due in the current week, the reorder 
is removed from the outstanding reorder heap. The receipt 
quantity is applied to the outstanding backorders heap. 
Backorders are ren.oved from the heap and filled until all the 
backorders were filled or the receipt quantity is exhausted. 
If all backorders are filled, the remaining receipt quantity 
is added to the current on-hand inventory. 

c. Materiel leaue 

If a demand is generated in the Demand Observation 
Generation routine tor the curreiit week and the current on- 
hand inventory is sufficient to meet the requirement, then 
material is issued and the on-hand inventory is decreased by 
the amount of the demand. When the requirement is greater 
than current on hand inventory, a backorder is created for the 


49 





amount of the requirement in excess of current on-hand 
inventory. The backorder is inserted into the outstanding 
backorder heap, a FIFO priority heap [Ref. 29:p. 149], based 
on the date at which the backorder occurred. 

d. Material Order 

At the end of each week the inventory position 
(IP) is examined to determine if a reorder is necessary [Ref. 
19:p. 3.24/25].‘ If IP is less than or equal to the reorder 
point (RO) then a reorder is placed. An RO is calculated for 
each quarter in the Levels routine prior to making the weekly 
calls to the SDR routine. The reorder quantity (ROQ) equals: 


ROO = BOO*RO+BO-OH-OS a o 

Where: 

IP = OH + OS - BO 

EOQ = economic order quantity for current quarter, 
based on output from the Levels routine. 

RO = reorder point. 

BO = total backorders outstanding at the end of the 
current week. 

OH = total on hand inventory at the end of the 
current week. 

OS = total quantity of material on order at the end 
of the current week. 

A random procurement leadtime is generated at the 
time of reorder and a receipt date equal to the current date 
plus this generated procurement leadtime is assigned tc the 


‘SDR is currently run somewhat less frequently and less 
regularly than once a week at the Navy Inventory Control 
Points. 


50 









reorder. The reorder is then inserted into the outstanding 
reorder heap. The random procurement leadtime is based on a 
normal distribution with mean of eight quarters and variance 
of 64 quarters. The actual procurement leadtime used is 
constrained to a maximum of 14 quarters and a minimum of two 
quarters. 

B. SIMULATION SBT-UP 

1. System Parameters 

The UICP model system parameters and their default 
settings are displayed in Table 4. The default values are the 
same as those used in the UICP, Computation and Research 
Evaluation System (CARES-D56) [Ref. 30]Although any of 
these parameters may be changed during initialization of the 
simulation, the default CARES values were used for Total Cost 
Analysis, Constant Demand Analysis, and Declining Demand 
Analysis simulations. The capability to change these default 
values was used in the Sensitivity Analysis simulations. 

TABLE 4. SYSTEM PARAMETERS 

Probability Break Point; 0 

Min Risk(Prob of a stockout): 0.10 

Max Risk{Prob of a stockout): 0.35 

Shelf Life Code: o 

Order Cost Rate: 400.00:$/order 

Obsolescence Rate; 0.12:$/unit-yr 

Unit Price: 1500.oo:$/unit 


‘CARES is an application designed to provide ICP 
management with a tool to analyze and evaluate alternative 
inventory management policies prior to their implementation in 
UICP. 


51 




Time Preference Rate: 
Salvage Rate: 

Storage Rate: 
Procurement LeadTime: 
Shortage Cost: 
Military Essential: 
Requisition Size: 


0.07:%/yr 
0.02:%/unit price 
0.01:$/unit-yr 
8. 00:qtrs 
1000.00:$/unit-yr 
0.50 

1:unit/reguisition 


2. Random Number seeds 

As discussed in Chapter IV.A.1 there is an array of 
2 0,000 seeds available to seed the random number generator for 
each replication of a simulation. During the initialization 
of the simulation any series of seeds in the array equal to 
the number of replications can be chosen. For example, in a 
100 replication simulation, the series of seeds from 1 to 100, 
900 to 999 or 10001 to 10100 can be specified, as long as the 
starting seed position in the array is less than or equal to 
20,000 minus the number of replications for the simulation. 
The purpose of this feature is to allow for generation of 
dependent or independent output samples from two or more 
simulations. The importance of this feature is that it 
affects the type of statistical test which may be performed 
when comparing the output from two or more simulations. 

For this thesis, dependent output samples were created 
for all simulations run within each setting. This was 
accomplished by specifying the same series of seeds for demand 
stream generation for each simulation in a setting. Using 
dependent demand streams for performance comparisons allows 
for the comparison of the models in a .similar demand 


52 











environment. However, the analysis must be done using a 
statistical test for dependent samples such as the paired 
difference t-test. If independent samples are desired, each 
simulation would have to be run using a unique series of 
seeds. 

3. Number of Replications 

In order to obtain reasonable precision in the 
confidence intervals for the estimates of ACWT and total cost, 
the absolute error method [Ref. 23 :p. 536] was used to 

determine the total number of replications to run. By using 
Lhe absolute error method with a simulation run consisting of 
400 replications, absolute errors were obtained of no more 
than 20% of the true mean ACWT and no more than 7.5% of the 
true mean total cost with a probability of 0.95. Based on 
these results, 500 replications were used in all simulations. 
This yielded an absolute error of no more than 15% for the 
true mean ACWT and no more than 5% for the true mean Total 
Cost with a probability of 0.95. Although the error for ACWT 
may appear rather high, the error, when measured in days, was 
typically less than two days. 

4. Initial Conditions wazm-up Period for Declining Demand 

Analysis 

Inherent in the simulation of a stochastic process is 
the initial transient or the start-up problem. The difficulty 


53 






is in determining the warm-up period for a modeJ.. The warm-up 
period covers the time it takes for the means of the random 
variables being measured in a simulation to converge to their 
steady state values. 

We employed the "graphical procedure" that is due to 
Welch [Ref. 23:p.544] to identify when the simulation 
approached steady state. The Welch procedure is applied to 
each demand scenario. The Welch graphs (Appendix E, Graphs 7 
- 12) were generated from data that was obtained from a 100 
replication, 80 quarter simulation. The steady state random 
variable shown in the graphs is the investment (measured in 
units) in a given quarter, averaged over all replications. 
Investment in this case is the number of units on-hand plus 
the number of units in outstanding orders at the end of a 
quarter. Investment was chosen because it most accurately 
reflects the balance between material issuing and ordering and 
when the inventory system has reached equilibrium or steady 
state. Based on Graphs 7 - 12 in Appendix E, it was 
determined that the simulated model reaches steady state with 
respect to investment by quarter 30 at the latest for all 
demand scenarios. 

The amount of time the random variable's mean remains 
in a transient state is affected by the initial conditions of 
the simulation. In an effort to reduce the warm-up period, 
the following logic was used to determine the initial on hand 
quantity, and to schedule receipt dates and quantities for 


54 






reorders outstanding at the start of the simulation. The 
initial quantity of on hand inventory is set equal to EOQ 
divided by 2 plus safety stock [Ref, 17:p. 275] . Safety stock 
is set equal to the reorder point minus Che forecasted 
leadtime demand [Ref. 19:Chap. 3]. The number of reorders 
outstanding at the start of the simulation is set equal to the 
expected number of reorders outstanding at any instant of time 
for the deterministic setting- This number equals the 
procurement leadtime divided by a reorder interval (using a 
0.5 rounding rule), where a reorder interval equals the EOQ 
divided by the forecasted quarterly demand [Ref 31:p. 93]. 
For all simulations the EOQ, reorder point, and forecast for 
quarter one is used to calculate these initial conditions. 
The receipt dates of the reorders outstanding are uniformly 
distributed from simulation time zero to simulation time zero 
plus one procurement leadtime, and the quantity of each 
reorder outstanding was set equal to the EOQ for quarter one. 


55 




V. SIMUliATION RESUliTS 


A. OVERVIEW 

This chapter will discuss the simulation results from the 
Total Cost, Constant Demand and Declining Demand Analysis. 
Total cost curves generated from the Total Cost Analysis are 
presented in Appendix E, Graphs 13-24. The simulation results 
and MADM analysis from the Constant Demand Analysis and the 
Declining Demand Analysis are presented in Appendices A and B, 
respectively. The remainder of this chapter will discuss the 
general results of each Analysis based on the gcals of the 
Analysis. In addition, specific observations which deserve 
further analysis will be examined. 

B. TOTAL COST ANALYSIS 

The goal of this particular analysis was to determine if 
a minimum Total Cost (TO associated with a single retention 
level ( symbolized by to or RL ) existed in a stochastic 
demand environment as Tersine showed for the deterministic 
case [Ref. 14]. Assuming a minimum TC exists, an optimal 
retention level (to) for each demand scenario in the Total 
Cost Analysis setting was determined that minimizes the 
respective TC. 

The results of the Total Cost Analysis simulations show 
that the TC curve for each demand scenario simulated is a 


56 














parabola (Appendix E, Graphs 13 to 24). While the high unit 
price demand scenario TC curves had an easily identifiable 
minimum point, the low unit price demand scenario TC curves 
tended to be flat in the vicinity of the minimum. This 
indicates that for the low unit price settings there may be a 
range of retention levels that yield statistically equivalent 
minimum total costs. In addition, finding the best to for the 
low unit price settings may involve other MOEs such as ACWT. 

Although all the total cost curves for the demand 
scenarios simulated are parabolas, an interesting 
characteristic in the TC curve for the LDLP demand scenario 
can be observed (Appendix E, Graphs 18 and 24). There is a 
"step" in the TC curve and specifically in the Total Order 
Cost curve at a retention level of approximately 3.5 years 
annual demand. The initial inventory position (IP) at time 
zero after disposal of excess inventory, for a retention level 
less than 3.5 years, was below the time zero reorder point 
(RO) (the RO is depicted by the vertical line in Graphs 18 
and 24) . This caused an additional reorder to be placed 
during the simulation period for all retention levels less 
than 3.5 years. The "step" down in the total order cost curve 
occurred after the retention level exceeded 3.5 years because 
an additional reorder was not placed at time zero. The 
magnitude of the "step" down was due to the high 
administrative order cost ($850/order) in relation to the low 
unit price ($20/unit) and low mean quarterly demand (2 units/qtr) . 


57 







Since the TC curves were parabolas, the next step in the 
Total Cost Analysis was to determine the respective optimal 
retention level (to) that minimized TC for each demand 
scenario in the Total Cost Analysis settings. For this 
analysis the optimal retention level was defined as the 
arithmetic mean of the retention levels which resulted in the 
minimum total cost for each of the 50 0 replications of the 
respective demand scenario simulation. The optimal inventory 
level to, was calculated as follows: 


a 



Where: 

i = index for a replication of a simulation, 
n = total number of replications of a simulation, 
tj = retention level which resulted in the minimum TC 
for a specific replication of a simulation. 

The to values are presented in Table 5 under Alternative A. 

The to values represent years worth of demand at the 

forecasted annual demand rate. 

In order to test the sensitivity of to to different 

initial inventory amounts, the simulations for the Total Cost 

Analysis settings were rerun with an initial inventory of 75 

years worth of annual demand. The results of these 

simulations are shown in Table 5 under Alternative B. The 

results presented in Table 5 indicate that to is very robust 

with respect to initial inventory. 


58 






TABLE 5. 


TOTAL COST ANALYSIS OPTIMAL RETENTION LEVELS 





A L T B R N 

A T I V E 

Demand 

Stream 

A 

B 


to 

C.I. 

to 

C.I. 

HDHVHP 

6.7 

±0.35 

6.8 

±0.62 

HDLVHP 

5.6 

±0.12 

5.5 

±0.23 

HDHVLP 

10.6 

±0.61 

10.1 

±1.10 

HDLVLP 

8.4 

±0.25 

8.3 

±0.48 

LDHP 

6.4 

±0.25 

6.3 

±0.50 

LDLP 

16.3 

±0.44 

15.8 

±0.88 


(C.I. is'^’^sTTonTT^ence^ntervaronT^ 


To suitimarize, the initial results indicate that a to 
exists for each demand scenario simulated, and the value of to 
varies considerably with respect to unit price, mean quarterly 
demand and variance of demand. The following correlation 
between to and unit price, mean quarterly demand and variance 
of demand in a stochastic environment can be developed. As 
unit price increases tg decreases, as mean quarterly demand 
increases tg decreases, and as variance of demand increases to 
increases. 

C. CONSTANT DEMAND ANALYSIS 

The goal of this analysis was to observe the performance 
of the various proposed models under the same conditions used 
in the Total Cost Analysis. We hoped to draw some conclusions 
about the performance of these models in a stochastic 
environment by comparing the performance of the models to the 
















































appropriate optimal retention levels (to) obtained from the 
Total Cost Analysis. 

Simulation and performance comparison results are 
presented in Appendix A. ACWT and TC values that appear in 
bold print in Appendix A indicate these values are 
statistically equal to or less than the respective optimal 
value, based on the paired difference t-tests conducted in the 
performance comparison. 

Table 6 summarizes the results of the performance 
comparison. The table is designed to be a decision tool to 
assist in determining which models might be appropriate for a 
specific demand scenario with respect to the relative weight 
that management places on the MOEs of TC and ACWT. Entries in 
Table 6 indicate which models were the best performers for a 
specific combination of demand scenario and MOE weighting. 

TABLB 6. CONSTANT DEMAND ANALYSIS SUMMARY RESULTS 

AND DECISION TABLE 



Legend; 1 = TRAD, 2 = NB. 3 = NB-MOD, 4 = NB-NPV, 5 = UICP 


60 















































While no single model's RL consistently matched the 
optimal retention level, the NB-MOD model performed the best 
across all demand scenarios. Additionally, there was 
typically at least one model's RL which matched the optimal 
for each demand scenario. 

The RL for the TRAD model remained constant for all demand 
scenarios because mean quarterly demand, unit price, and 
demand variance are not parameters in the calculation of the 
TRAD model's RL. The RLs for the "net benefit" models as a 
group behaved the same as the optimal with respect to changes 
in mean quarterly demand and unit price as discussed in the 
Total Cost Analysis results. Changes in demand variance had 
little effect on the RLs of the "net benefit" models, most 
likely because demand was assumed to be deterministic in the 
derivation of the basic net benefit equation. 

The following general observations can be made from the 
performance comparison results. Based solely on TC, there was 
usually one model which obtained the true optimal solution. 
The only exception was for the HDLVHP demand scenario in which 
no model had a TC which was statistically equal to the true 
optimal solution. This can most likely be explained by the 
fact that the total cost curve for the HDLVHP demand scenario 
(Appendix E, Graph 14) has the most distinct minimum point on 
its curve as compared to the other demand scenario total cost 
curves. This argument is also supported by the fact that the 
confidence interval about the optimal retention level for the 


61 





HDLVHP demand scenario is the smaller than the confidence 
intervals of the other demand scenario optimal retention 
levels (Chapter V, Table 5). 

When taking into account ACWT and TC there were generally 
several models which performed as well as or better than the 
optimal, with the NB-MOD model being the most consistent top 
performer. The TRAD model consistently had a higher RL and 
was the best performer with respect to ACWT for all demand 
scenarios except HDLVLP and LDLP. For the latter two demand 
scenarios the difference between all the models' respective 
ACWTs' was insignificant. 

It is interesting to note that under the HDHVLP and LDLP 
demand scenarios the TRAD and NB-NPV models had lower average 
total costs than the respective optimal solution. The lower 
TC for the two models could be expected due to the fact that 
both the HDHVLP and the LDLP TC curves (Appendix E, Graphs 15 
and 18) from the Total Cost Analysis were flat in the vicinity 
of the minimum TC point on the curve. After further analysis 
it was determined that the calculated optimal retention level 
for the HDHVLP and the LDLP demand scenarios may vary 
depending on how optimality was defined in the Total Cost 
Analysis. In light of the HDHVLP and LDLP results an 
alternative definition of the optimal retention quantity was 
developed. 

In the Total Cost Analysis the optimal retention level, to 
for each demand scenario in Chapter V Table 5 (Alternate A) 


62 




was defined as the arithmetic mean of the retention levels 
which resulted in the minimum total cost for each of the 500 
replications of the respective demand scenario simulation. 
The revised optimal retention level (t*) was defined as the 
retention level associated with the arithmetic mean of the 
minimum total costs of all the replications of the respective 
demand scenario simulation. The revised optimal retention 
level t* was calculated as follows: 





5.2 


t* = azgadn Tl 
t e T ' 


5.3 


Where: 

Cc = the average TC for a specific retention level 
across all replications of a simulation. 

Cti = the TC for a specific retention level and a 
specific replication of a simulation, 
t = a specific retention level simulated. 

T = the set of all retention levels simulated (0.0, 
0.5,1.0,1.5, .,m) 

m = initial on hand inventory prior to disposal, 
i = index for a replication of a simulation, 
n = total number of replications of a simulation. 


Table 7 presents the to and t* values for all demand 
streams. The values for t* tended to be greater for the HDHVLP 
and LDLP demand scenario, and were also closer to the 
respective retention levels obtained from the TRAD and NB-h.'V 


63 




models than to Lne respective values for t^. For the HDHVLP 
demand scenario this quantity was 13 years and for the LDLP 
demand scenario this quantity was 17 years. It should be noted 
that the differences between the respective t* for the 
remaining demand scenarios and the optimal to were not 
statistically significant. 


TABLE 7. OPTIMAL RETENTION LEVELS CALCULATION ANALYSIS 


Demand 

scream 

ALTERNATIVE 

to 

t* 

to 

C.I. 

t* 

C.I. 

HDHVHP 

6.7 

± 0.35 

7.0 

± 2.0 

HDLVHP 

5.6 

±0.12 

5.5 

± 0.5 

HDHVLP 

10.6 

± 0.61 

13.0 

± 3.0 

HDLVLP 

8.4 

± 0.25 

8.5 

± 1.5 

LDHP 

6.4 

± 0.25 

6.5 

± 1.0 

LDLP 

16.3 

± 0.44 

17.0 

± 1.0 


C.I. is a 95% conlidence interval) 


The difference between to and t* for the HDHVLP and LDLP 
demand scenarios can be attributed to backorders which 
occurred when the Total Cost Analysis optimal quantity, tg, 
was retained and which did not occur when the t* quantity was 
retained. The backorders occurred in approximately 10% to 15% 
of the replications of the Constant Demand Analysis 
simulations due to large spikes in observed demand between 


















































quarters 30 and 55. However, the extra stock held when t* was 
retained was sufficient to satisfy this increased demand. 
Because the two demand scenarios were low unit price 
($20/unit) scenarios, the high shortage cost ($1500/unit year 
of shortage) tended to dominate TC. Therefore when these 
backorders occurred, the TC for the to retention level 
increased by 120% to 150% and was significantly higher than 
the TC for the t* retention level. This tended to force the 
simulation average minimum TC out to t*. 

It should be noted that for 85% to 90% of the Constant 
Demand Analysis simulation replications the to retention level 
resulted in the minimum TC. Additionally, over an entire 
simulation the average total costs for the HDHVLP and LDLP 
demand scenarios and the TRAD and NB-NPV models, respectively, 
were statistically equal to the respective average optimal 
total cost based on the to retention level. 

In summary, it is difficult to conclude whether to or t* 
better defines the optimal retention quantity for the HDHVLP 
and LDLP demand scenarios. Although there is a significant 
difference between t' and t* for the HDHVLP and LDLP demand 
scenarios, the average total costs which result from the two 
retention levels are statistically equivalent. 

D. DECLINING DEMAND ANALYSIS 

The goal of this analysis was to compare the models in a 
scenario that involved declining mean quarterly demand. For 


65 




this analysis, simulation and performance comparison results 
are presented in Appendix B. ACWT and TC values that appear 
in bold print in Appendix B indicate the values which were the 
best performers from among the five models. When more than 
one value is in bold print this indicates that the values were 
statistically equivalent based on the paired difference t- 
tests. 

The values for TC and ACWT shown in Appendix B were 
accumulated over quarters 30 through 66 in the respective 
Declining Demand i^uialysis simulations. Data for TC and ACWT 
was originally collected for the full 66 quarters of each 
Declining Demand Analysis simulation. The results using the 
full 66 quarters of data were significantly affected by the TC 
and ACWT data collected during quarters 1 through 29 when mean 
quarterly demand was constant. In general, the results 
showed that the performance of all of the models was 
statistically equal when the full 66 quarters of data were 
used. Therefore, in order to get a more accurate picture of 
the effect each model's RL had on the its TC and ACWT during 
the declining demand period, data for the performance 
comparison was collected for quarters 30 through 66 only. 

Table 8 summarizes the results of the performance 
comparison. The table is designed to be a decision tool to 
assist in determining which models might be appropriate for a 
specific demand scenario with respect to the relative weight 
management places on the MOEs of TC and ACWT. Entries in 


66 








Table 8 indicates which models were the best performers for a 
specific combination of demand scenario, pattern of declining 
demand and MOE weighting. 


TABZiB 8. DBCLINING DBMAMD ANMiYSIS SUMMARY RESULTS 

AND DBCXSIOM TABLE 


I 


CBNARl 

^ - 1 


^JlOB 

WEIGHT 

ING 

Mean 

Demand 

Demand 

Variance 

Unit 

Price 

Decline 

Pattern 

Total 

Cost 

Mostly 

TC 

Equal 

TC/ACWT 

Mostly 

ACWT 

ACWT 

High 

High 

High 

Step 

4 

2,4 

2,4 

2-5 

1,5 




Convex 

4 

n 

n 

2,5 

■B 




Concave 

4 

2,4 

2-4 

3,4 

BB 



Low 

Step 

2-4 

3 

3 

3 

3 




Convex 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 




Concave 

WBM 

3 

3 

3 

3 


Low 

High 

Step 


4 

4 

4 

tSM 




Convex 

4 

4 

4 

4 





Concave 

4 

4 

4 

4 

■B 



Low 

Step 

5 

5 

5 

5 

■B 




Convex 

m 

1,4 

1,4 

1,4 

1-5 




Concave 

s 

5 

5 

5 

1-3,5 

Low 


High 

^HHI 

2-4 

1,3 

1,3 

1,3 

Bli 



Convex 

2,4 

2,3 

1-3 

1,3 

1 



Concave 

2,4 

2,3 

1-3 

1,3 

1 


Low 

Step 

n 

2-4 

2-4 

2-4 

Bl 



Convex 


2-4 

2-4 

1-4 

■B 



Concave 


4 

4 

1-5 

■B 


Legend; 1 TRAD, 2 = NB, 3 = NB-MOD, 4 = NB-NPV, 5 = UICP 


The following general observations can be made from the 
results of the performance comparison. No one model dominated 


67 






















































































across all demand scenarios based on TC alone. For the 
"mostly TC" and "mostly ACWT" categories of management 
emphasis, the NB-MOD and the N3-NPV models were consistently 
top performers regardless of demand scenario and pattern of 
declining demand. For the "only TC" category of management 
emphasis, the NB-NPV model was consistently a top performer 
regardless of demand scenario and decline pattern. Similar to 
the correlation seen in the Total Cost Analysis between the 
changes in the RL and changes in demand, the RLs for the "net 
benefit" models increased as demand decreased during the 
simulation's period of declining mean quarterly demand. The 
increases were most apparent for the low unit price scenarios. 
Because the RLs for the "Net Benefit" models were changing 
throughout the Declining Demand Analysis simulations, the 
retention levels shown in the Declining Demand Analysis 
results (Appendix B) represent the average RL over quarters 30 
through 66. Graphical illustrations of the change in the RLs 
for all of the demand scenarios and patterns of declining 
demand are shown in Appendix E, Graphs 25 to 42. 

There are several noticeable effects on the RL 
calculations made during periods of declining demand, using 
the "net benefit" models. The effects can be attributed to 
the demand forecasting method used in UICP and the use of the 
forecasted demand in the RL calculations. First, there is a 
lag between the time the declining demand period starts and 
the time the RL reacts to the changing demand. This lag is 


68 








directly correlated to the lag between the time the actual 
demand changes and the time the forecasted demand reflects 
this change. 

Second, the step-ups in RLs for the demand scenarios with 
high quarterly mean demand (Graphs 28 to 33 and 37 to 42) 
occurred when a “trend" (declining demand) was detected by the 
UICP demand forecasting application. When a "trend" is 
detected, dem.and forecasting switches from simple exponential 
smoothing to a four quarter moving average. This change in 
forecasting method caused the forecasted demand, reorder 
quantity (EOQ) and reorder point to drop rapidly, which in 
turn resulted in the step increases in the RLs. The step is 
more prominent in the demand scenarios with a convex pattern 
of declining demand. This is due to the fact that the 
decrease in demand was more rapid for the convex pattern of 
declining demand and the final forecasted quarterly demand was 
approximately one unit per quarter less than the concave and 
step patterns of declining demand. 

Third, the steps down in the RLs for the demand scenarios 
with low mean quarterly demand and high unit price (Graphs 25 
to 27) occurred when actual demand approached zero at the end 
of the declining demand period and the forecasted demand had 
not yet stabilized. For some simulation replications, several 
quarters of zero demand, in sequence, were observed when 
actual mean quarterly demand was close to zero after the 
period of declining demand. For these replications and 


69 





quarters this caused the forecasted demand and the RLs co go 
to zero. Therefore, the simulation average RLs for those 
quarters were lower than the average RLs for the remaining 
quarters. When the demand forecast stabilized about the final 
mean quarterly demand, the RLs also stabilized. 

Finally, the RLs for the NB-MOD model in the demand 
scenarios with high mean quarterly demand and high unit price 
did not increase as expected when demand decreased (Graphs 28 
to 33). This can be attributed to the decrease in expected 
number of shortages as demand decreased. The NB-MOD model RL 
(Equation 2.24) is a function of the NB model RL (Equation 
2.13) plus a term added to account for potential shortages 
As seen in Graphs 28 through 33 the NB model RLs were 
increasing as demand decreased. Because the NB-MOD model RLs 
are decreasing in these same scenarios, this indicates that 
the increase in the RLs due to the decrease in demand was more 
than offset by the reduction in the RLs due to the decrease in 
expected number of shortages. 

A specific observation which warrants further discussion 
is the effect that the five unit minimum Retention Quantity 
(RQ) constraint (used in the UICP retention logic) has on the 
results of simulations involving low mean quarterly demand. 
The Declining Demand Analysis .simulations were originally run 
with only the UICP model constrained to a minimum RQ of five 
units. As a result, when forecasted annual demand approached 
zero at the end of the declining mean quarterly demand period. 


7C 







the UICP RQ remained fixed at five units while the 
unconstrained RQs for all of the mathematical models 
approached zero. In essence, without the constraint the 
mathematical models' RQ stayed at zero regardless of how large 
the respective RLs were. Additionally, while the UICP RQ 
remained a five units, the RL grew substantially. Based on 
preliminary results it became apparent that the five unit 
minimum retention quantity gave the UICP a significant 
advantage over the other models with regard to total cost and 
average customer wait time. The five unit minimum retention 
quantity was then applied to all the models and the Declining 
Demand Analysis simulations were rerun to determine what 
effect this constraint would have. We found that this minimum 
retention quantity improved the performance in both the TC and 
ACWT MOEs for all of the models and these results were used to 
make the final performance comparison presented in Appendix B 
and Table 8. 


71 







VI. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS 


A. OVERVIEW 

The sensitivity analysis was designed to determine how 
changes in selected parameter values affect the retention 
levels of the respective models. The parameters used in this 
analysis were chosen because it is extremely difficult to 
accurately estimate the parameter values from available 
historical costs. The estimates for these rates could be 
somewhat inaccurate because the historical costs associated 
with a given parameter are either not available or not easily 
allocated to the individual items. Therefore, it is important 
to determine how each model reacts to changes in these rates. 
The goal of the sensitivity analysis is to identify which 
model's RL calculations are robust with respect to changes in 
the various parameter values. This information should aid 
decision makers in the selection of an appropriate model based 
on the level of uncertainty in the value of a specific 
parameter. In addition to the robustness of the RL's of the 
models based on changes in a given parameter, we will also 
look at the robustness of the model's performance, with 
respect to TC and ACWT for four specific scenarios from the 
Declining Demand Analysis. 

The sensitivity analysis was conducted for two demand 


72 


scenarios (HDHVHP and LDHP) and two declining demand patterns 
from the Declining Demand Analysis (convex and concave). For 
each combination of demand scenario and declining demand 
pattern, four parameters were analyzed. For each parameter 
four values (including the UICP (CARES) default rates used in 
the Declining Demand Analysis) were used. Table 9 summarizes 
the 16 simulation settings which resulted from combinations of 
demand scenario, declining demand pattern and parameter 
values. For a specific setting all other parameters and 
simulation characteristics were identical to those used in the 
Declining Demand Analysis for the respective demand scenario 
and declining demand pattern. 

TABLE 9. 16 SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS SIMULATION SETTINGS 


OBSOLESCENCE 

RATE 


0.06 

$/DNXT-YR 


SALVAGE 

RATE 


0.01 

%/miT COST 


HOLDING COST 
RATE 


0 . 01 * 

$/UNIT~YIt 


ORDER COST 
RATE 


200 

$/ORDER 


0 . 09 

$/OlfIT-YR 


0 . 02 * 

%/mriT COST 


0.03 

$/UNIT-YE 


400 

$/ORDBR 


0 . 12 * 

$/XmiT-YR 


0.05 

%/mtIT COST 


0.05 

$/UNIT-YE 


800 * 

$/OEDEE 


0.15 
$/UNIT-YE 


0.15 

fk/ONIT COST 


^'Benote^uT^?pT^ARE?^^^eTauTt^?aTu^ 


0.07 
$/UNIT-YE 


1200 

$/OEDBE 


B. RESULTS 

Simulation and performance comparison results are 
presented in Appendix C. The ACWT and total cost in bold 


73 























print indicate the value which is the best performer in its 
respective MOE categoiry. When more than one value is in bold 
print this indicates that the values were statistically 
equivalent based on the paired difference t-test. Table 10 
and Table 11 summarize the effects the varying rates had on 
each model's RL for the HDHVHP demand scenario and the LDHP 
demand scenario, respectively. 

In general, based on the results displayed in Tables 10 
and 11 the following observations can be made with regards to 
the sensitivity of the RL's of the models to changes in a 
given parameter. All models were robust with respect to 
changes in order cost rate and the three "net benefit" models 
were robust with respect to changes in the holding cost rate. 
The TRAD model was sensitive to changes in holding cost rate 
and all models showed sensitivity to changes in obsolescence 
rate. The type of demand scenario had little effect on the 
RL's for all of the models. 

Observations regarding the sensitivity of the models due 
to changes in a given parameter value are summarized in Table 
12. The observations in Table 12 indicate the effect of 
changes in a given parameter value for a specific demand 
scenario and pattern of declining demand on the performance of 
the various models. For each parameter, the respective UICP 
(CARES) default parameter value was used as the comparison 
baseline. The following types of observations were made. 
Observation type 0 means no significant change occurred in a 


74 




TABLE 10. RANGE OF AVERAGE RL 


HDHVHP SCENARIO 









































































































TABLE 11 


RANQB OF AVERAGE RL - LDHP SCENARIO 


I Rate 

liii 1 1 

Decline 

Rate 

TRAD 

m 

MOD 

NPV 

UICP 

Holding 

Cost 

Convex 

Low 

13.9 

5.9 

B 

5.4 

9.0 

High 

a 

4.9 

B 

B 

9.0 

Concave 

Low 

13.9 



5.9 

9.0 

High 

n 

5.0 

5.7 

B 

9.0 

Order 

Cost 

convex 

Low 

13.9 

5.4 

B 

5.0 

9.0 

High 

13.9 

m 

6.9 

5.6 

9.0 

Concave 

Low 

13.9 

m 

B 

5.4 

9.0 

High 

13.9 

EB 

7.5 


9.0 

Obsolete 

Convex 

Low 

19. e 

9.0 

9.9 

B 

9.0 

High 

12.3 

n 


B 

m 

Concave 

Low 

19.6 

9.7 

B 

a 

9.0 

High 

12.3 

5.6 

B 

5.2 

9.0 

Salvage 

Convex 

Low 

14.7 

5.9 

B 

5.5 

9.0 

High 

9.5 

5.2 

B 

B 

9.0 

Concave 

Low 

14.7 

m 

B 

B 

9.0 

High 

9.5 

5.7 

B 

5.1 

9.0 


76 























































































































model's performance. Observation type 1 occurred when a 
model's performance improved for parameter values greater than 
the respective UICP (CARES) default parameter value. 
Observation type 2 occurred when a model's performance 
improved for parameter values less than the respective UICP 
(CARES) default parameter value. Observation type 3 occurred 
when a model's performance declined for parameter values 
greater than the respective UICP (CARES) default parameter 
value. Observation type 4 occurred when a model's performance 
declined for parameter values less than the respective UICP 
(CARES) default parameter value. 

Based on the results displayed in Table 12 the following 
general observations with regards to the sensitivity can be 
made. The performance of the NB and NB-MOD models was robust 
with respect to changes in all parameter values for all 
scenarios. The performance of the UICP model was sensitive to 
changes in all parameters values, except salvage rate, for all 
LDHP scenarios. The performance of the TRAD model tended to 
improve with both increases and decreases in the obsolescence 
rate and salvage rate parameter values for all HDHVHP 
scenarios. The NB-NPV model's performance tended to decJ.ine 
for salvage rate parameter values greater than the UICP 
(CARES) default value in both the LDHP and HDHVHP scenarios. 


77 





TABLE 12. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS PERFORMANCE OBSERVATIONS 


Rate 

Decline 


TRAD 

NB 

MOD 

IHH 

BSiri 

Holding 

Convex 

LDHP 

0 

0 

3 

0 

1 

Cost 


HDHVHP 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 


Concave 

LDHP 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 



HDHVHP 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

Order 

Convex 

LDHP 

0 

0 

C 

0 

3 

Cost 


HDHVHP 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 


Concave 

LDHP 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 



HDHVHP 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

Obsolete 

Convex 

LDHP 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 



HDHVHP 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 


Concave 

LDHP 

0 

0 

4 

0 

4 



HDHVHP 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

Salvage 

Convex 

LDHP 

0 

0 

0 

3 

0 



HDHVHP 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 


Concave 

LDHP 

0 

0 

0 

3 

0 



HDHVHP 

J _ 

0 

0 

3 

. 1 . 


The sensitivity analysis can be summarized as follows. 
Although the RL for the TRAD model displayed the most 
sensitivity to changes in the parameter values analyzed, it 
had little effect on the performance of the TRAD model as 
compared to all other models analyzed. The UICP model 
performance displayed the most sensitivity to changes in the 
parameter values analyzed. 


78 






























































VII. OVERVIjSW, CONCXiCTSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 


A. OVERVIEW 

This thesis evaluated the effectiveness of the Navy's UICP 
economic retention model. The evaluation was performed by 
comparing several mathematical economic retention models with 
the Naw's retention model. There were two primary factors 
that motivated this thesis. First, the Navy does not 
currently apply economic retencion theory when making 
retention decisions for the majority of the material managed 
by the Navy. Second, the excess inventory problem will 
continue to grow as the Navy's budget and fleet are further 
reduced. 

An analysis of the models was performed for a variety of 
demand scenarios in both steady state and declining demand 
situations. The analysis was designed with two goals in mind. 
The first goal was to determine which model (s) were most 
effective in a demand environment similar to the Na-yy's 
stochastic demand environment. The second goal was to 
evaluate how the Navy's retention process performed with 
respect to the mathematical models, 

A simulation of the Navy's UICP demand process and the 
mathematical retention models was developed. The evaluation 


79 




of the various models was based on the measures of 
effectiveness (MOE) of total cost (TO over a specified period 
of simulation time and average customer wait time (ACWT) per 
requisition for all requisitions generated over a specified 
period of simulation time. The research also examined model 
sensitivity to changes in various parameters common to the 
models. The parameters were chosen for the analysis because 
UICP uses estimates of the true rates and these estimates 
could vary considerably from the true rates. Results of the 
sensitivity analysis helped to determine the practicality of 
applying the models in the UICP environment. 

B. CONCLUSION 

The findings of this research showed that, of the models 
analyzed, there was not one economic retention model or 
retention quantity which yielded the lowest total cost and 
ACWT for all of the demand and retention scenarios analyzed. 
There were two factors which contribute to this. First, the 
optimal retention level varied significantly with demand 
scenario and management weighting of the MOEs of TC and ACWT. 
Second, all the models analyzed did Txot account for the 
stochastic nature of demand for Navy managed items. But, 
based on the results of all analysis, the "net benefit" 
models, as a group, performed the best and generally performed 
better than the UICP retention model. Additionally, for most 
demand scenarios in both the Constant and Declining Demand 


80 






Analysis, the decision on which model to chose could typically 
be determined by total cost alone. This was due to the fact 
that the difference in the models' ACWTs (measured in days) 
for each demand scenario, were generally small. 

The results of the Total Cost Analysis showed that there 
was a unique "optimal" retention level for a given demand 
scenario in a stochastic demand environment. It also showed 
that the "optimal" retention level varies significantly with 
changes in unit price, mean quarterly demand and variance of 
mean quarterly demand. 

The Constant Demand Analysis compared the models to the 
"optimal" retention level determined in the Total Cost 
Analysis. In general, when considering both TC and ACWT the 
mathematical models performed well in the Navy's stochastic 
demand environment with respect to the performance obtained 
from the "optimal" retention level. Additionally, there was 
typically at least one model which performed as well as the 
"optimal" retention level with respect to TC alone. The NB 
and NB-MOD models consistently outperformed the UICP model 
when management emphasis was placed on total cost or mostly on 
total cost. 

The results of the Declining Demand Analysis indicated 
that the "net benefit" models, as a group, were the best 
performers over all scenarios and typically outperformed the 
UICP retention model. The average retention quantities of the 
best performers in the Declining Demand Analysis varied with 


81 








changes in the unit price, mean quarterly demand and the 
variance of mean quarterly demand in a pattern similar to that 
observed in the Total Cost Analysis for the "optimal" 
retention level. The declining demand pattern had little 
effect on overall model performance. 

The performance of the TRAD model dominated the 
performance of the other models across all analysis scenarios 
with respect to ACWT. But the performance of the NB, NB-MOD 
and UICP models was competitive with respect to ACWT in most 
of the Declining Demand Analysis scenarios. It is important 
to note that while there was generally a significant variation 
in ACWT in terms of percentage difference, in most cases the 
difference in terms of days was typically small. This 
observation applies to both the Constant and Declining Demand 
Analysis. 

The results from the sensitivity analysis showed that the 
performance of the “net benefit* models, as a group, was 
robust with respect to changes in all the parameters analyzed. 
The UICP model performance showed the most sensitivity to 
parameter changes, especially with respect to the low demand 
scenarios. Although the RL for the TRAD model displayed the 
most sensitivity to changes in the parameter values analyzed, 
it had little effect on the performance of the TRAD model as 
compared to all other models analyzed. 


82 



C. RECOMMENDATIONS 


There are three areas related to this research which merit 
further study. First, because all of the models' actual 
retention quantities are dependent upon the demand forecasting 
method, the effectiveness of a model is limited by the 
accuracy of the demand forecast. It would be interesting to 
see how performance would change if demand forecasts were 
adjusted for known changes in future demand (i.e. declining 
demand due to decommissioning of ships). Second, further 
modifications to the NB-MOD model could be made to improve the 
treatment of the stochastic nature of demand. Modifications 
could include changes in the holding cost savings and 
repurchase cost terms. The goal would be to develop a model 
which performed effectively across all demand scenarios. 
Third, the simulation developed for this thesis could be 
modified to include the Navy's repairable item demand process 
in the Forecasting, Levels and Supply/Demand Review procedures 
of the main program. 


83 




APPENDIX A. CONSTANT DEMAND ANALYSIS RESULTS 


HDHVHP 



OPTIMAL 

TRAD 

NB 

NB-MOD 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

26.65 

15.82 

27.03 

25.91 

28.30 

24.57 

TOTAL COST 

1958776.92 

2414434.20 

1975859.01 

1960427.91 


1976036.07 

YRS RL 


13.88 

5.20 

7.02 

4.80 

8.00 

MADM % ACWT / % TC 

25/75 

0.90 

0.86 

0.89 

0.90 

0.88 

0.90 

75/25 

0.70 

0.95 

0.69 

0.71 

0.67 

0.73 

50/50 

0.80 

0.91 

0.79 

0.80 

0.77 

0.82 


HDHVLP 



OPTIMAL 

TRAD 

NB 

NB-MOD 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

4.49 

3.48 

6.50 

4.98 

6,83 

6.49 

TOTAL COST 

46801.69 

45729.89 

53279.98 

48005.34 

54968.84 

52995.40 

YRS RL 

10.56 

13.88 

7.42 

9.55 

6.77 

8.00 

MADM % ACWT/% TC 

25/75 

0.93 

1.00 

0.78 

0.89 

0.75 

0.78 

75/25 

0.83 

1.00 

0.62 

0.76 

0.59 

0.62 

50/50 

0.88 

1.00 

0.70 

0.83 

0.67 

0.70 


HDLVHP 



OPTIMAL 

TRAD 

NB 

NB-MOD 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

10.55 

5.87 

11.06 

9.92 

10.94 

9.49 

TOTAL COST 

1553346.41 

2245292.78 

1555618.75 

1577861.26 

1560130.79 

1620726.40 

YRS RL 

5.56 

13.88 

5.20 

7.00 

4.80 

8.00 

MADM % ACWT/% TC 


0.89 

0.77 

0.88 

0.89 

0.88 

0.87 

75/25 

0.67 

0.92 

0.65 

0.69 

0.65 

0.70 

50/50 

0.78 

0.85 

0.76 

0.79 

0.77 

0.79 


HDLVLP 



OPTIMAL 

TRAD 

NB 

NB-MOD 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

0.98 

0.67 

1.12 

0.96 

1.23 

1.08 

TOTAL COST 

31781.21 

35668.89 

32172.09 

31934.70 

32681.24 

31950.82 

YRS RL 

8.35 

13.88 

7.42 

9.55 

6.77 

6.00 

MADM % ACWT/% TC 

25/75 

0.92 

0.92 

0.89 

0.92 

0.87 

0.90 

75/25 

0.76 

0.97 

0.70 

0.77 

0.65 

0.71 

50/50 

0.84 

0.95 

0.79 

0.85 

0.76 

0.81 


LDHP 



OPTIMAL 

TRAD 

NB 


NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

12.76 

7.60 

12.59 

12.75 

12.rJ 

12.30 

TOTAL COST 

185406.95 

239742.40 

185804.54 

185257.77 

186368.40 

188184.15 

YRS RL 

6.44 

13.88 

5.85 

6.64 

5.46 

8.00 

MADM % ACWT/% TC 

25/75 

0.90 

0.83 

0.90 

0.90 

0.89 

0.89 

75/25 

0.70 

0.94 

0.70 

0.70 

0.70 

0.71 

50/50 

0.80 

0.89 

0.80 

0.80 

0.80 

0.30 


LDLP 



OPTIMAL 

TRAD 

NB 

NB-MOD 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 


0.72 

1.01 

0.20 


0.61 

1.67 

TOTAL COST 

5812.02 

5966.92 

6383.07 

6685.97 

5789.77 

7321.19 

YRS RL 

16.30 

13.88 

23.36 

26.09 

16.77 

8.00 

MADM % ACWT/% TC 


25775 ~ir 0.741 0.731 0.901 0.771 060 














































































































































































































































































Constant Demand Analysis Results 


Model Ranking by MADM Results 



1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

HDHVHP 







25% ACWT / 75% TC 

UICP^ 

NB-MOD* 

OPTIMAL* 

NB 

NB'NPV 

TRAD 

75% ACWT / 25% TC 


UlCP 

NB-MOD 

OPTIMAL 

NB 

NB-NPV 

50% ACWT / 50% TC 


UlCP 

NB-MOD 

OPTIMAL 

NB 

NB-NPV 


HDLVHP 


25% ACWT / 75% TC 

OPTIMAL* 

NB-MOD* 


NB-NPV 

UlCP 

TRAD 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

TRAD 

UlCP 

NB-MOD 

OPTIMAL 

NB-NPV 

NB 

50% ACWT / 50% TC 

TRAD 

UlCP 

NB-MOD 

OPTIMAL 

NB-NPV 

NB 


HDHVLP 


25% ACWT / 75% TC 

TRAD 

OPTIMAL 

NB-MOD 

UlCP 

NB 

NB-NPV 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

TRAD 

OPTIMAL 

NB-MOD 

UlCP 

NB 

NB-NPV 

50% ACWT / 50% TC 

TRAD 

OPTIMAL 

NB-MOD 

UlCP 

NB 

NB-NPV 


HDLVLP 


25% ACWT / 75% TC 



OPTIMAL* 

UlCP 

NB 

NB-NPV 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

TRAD 

NB-MOD 

OPTIMAL 

UlCP 

NB 

NB-NPV 

50% ACWT / 50% TC 

TRAD 

NB-MOD 

OPTIMAL 

UlCP 

NB 

NB-NPV 


LDHP 


25% ACWT/75% TC 


NB* 

OPTIMAL* 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

TRAD 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

TRAD 

UlCP 

NB 

NB-MOD 

OPTIMAL 

NB-NPV 

50% ACWT / 50% TC 

TRAD 


NB 

NB-MOD 

OPTIMAL 

NB-NPV 


LDLP 


25% ACWT / 75% TC 

NB-MOD 

NB-NPV 

OPTIMAL 

TRAD 

NB 

UlCP 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

NB-MOD 

NB 

NB-NPV 

Esuxa 

TRAD 

UlCP 

50% ACWT/50% TC 

NB-MOD 

NB 

NB-NPV 

OPTIMAL 

TRAD 

UlCP 


Note: * indicates models have same rank and are both ranked as 1. 


85 





























































































































APPENDIX B. DECLINING DEMAND ANALYSIS RESULTS 


Declining Demand Analysis Results: HDHVHP 


[STEP DECREASES 
















TRAD 



Model Ranking by MADM Results 



Note; * indicates models have same rank and are both ranked as 1. 


86 








































































































































































Declining Demand Analysis Results: HDLVHP 


STEP DECREASES 


ACWT 


TOTAL COST 
AVGYRS RL 


MADM 


25% ACWT/75% TO 


75% ACWT/25% TO 


50% ACWT/50% TC 


TRAD 

NB 

NB-MOD 

NB-NPV 

0.90 

0.91 

0.90 

0.93 

130780.13 

123760.33 

125759.57 

123173.10 

13.88 

5.38 

6.76 

4.97 


UlCP 


0.90 


127932.56 


8.00 


0.96 

0.99 

0.98 

0.99 

0.97 

0.99 

0.99 

0.99 

0.98 

0.99 

0.97 

0.99 

0.99 

0.98 

0.98 


CONVEX DECREASES 

TRAD 

NB 

NB-MOD 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

5.87 

5.90 

5.88 

5.91 

5.90 

TOTAL COST 


229769.03 

230653.34 

229408.75 

232066,44 

AVGYRS RL 

I 13.881 

5.53 

7.13 

5.11 

8,00 

IMADM 

25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.98 

1,00 

1.00 

1,00 

0.99 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.99 

1.00 

1.00 

0.99 

0.99 


CONCAVE DECREASES 

TRAD 

NB 

NB-MOD 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

2.18 

2.19 

2.18 

2.19 

2.18 

TOTAL COST 

151099.09 

131884.03 

134241.48 

130891.24 

138017.24 

AVGYRS RL 

13.88 

5,43 

6.79 

5,03 

8.00 


MADM 


25% ACWT/75% TC 


75% ACWT/25% TC 


50%ACW7/50%TC 



Model Ranking by MADM Re sults 


STEP DECREASES 


25% ACWT/75% TC 


75% ACWT/25%TC 


50% ACWT/50% TC 


NB>MOD* 


IHSOaHI 

IlMAIsliai 


NB-MOD 


NB-NPV 


UlCP I TRAD 


TRAD* 


CONVEX DECREASES 


25% ACWT/75% TC 

1 NB-NPV* 1 NB* 1 

NB-MOD* 

UlCP 

TRAD 

75% ACWT/25% TC 


NB-NPV* 

UlCP 

TRAD 

50% ACWT/50% TC 

■■iTni'iii-yiMif 

NB-NPV* 

UlCP 

TRAD 


CONCAVE DECREASES 


25% ACWT/75% TC 


75% ACWT/25% TC 


50% ACWT / 50% TC 


NB-NPV 


NB-NPV 


NB-MOD 

UlCP 

TRAD 

NB-MOD 

UlCP 

TRAD 

NB-MOD 

UlCP 

TRAD 


Note: * indicates models have satiie rank and are both ranked as 1. 


87 





































































































































































Declining Demand Analysis Results; 


HDHVLP 


STEP DECREASES 

TRAD 

NB 

NB-MOD 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

6.21 

4.38 

3.65 

4.83 

7.92 

TOTAL COST 

8097.71 

7117.98 

7079.50 

7222.02 

8469.34 

AVGYRS RL 

13.88 

11.03 

13.40 

8.96 

C.OO 

MADM 

25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.80 

0.95 

1.00 

0.92 

0.74 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.66 

0.87 

1.00 

0.81 

0.55 

50% ACWT / 50% TC 

0.73 

0.91 

1.00 

0.87 

0.65 


CONVEX DECREASES 

TRAD 

NB 

NB-MOD 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

10.32 

10.08 

8.82 

11.39 

13.44 

TOTAL COST 

13226.76 

13230.84 

12577.99 

13778.04 

14835.81 

AVGYRS RL 

13.88 

18.49 

21.27 

10,89 

8.00 

MADM 

25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.93 

0.93 

1.00 

0.88 

0.80 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.88 

0.89 

1.00 

0.81 

0.70 

50% ACWT/50% TC 

0.90 

0.91 

1.00 

0.84 

0.75 


CONCAVE DECREASES 

TRAD 

ACWT 

7.41 

TOTAL COST 

8544.36 

AVGYRS RL 

13.88 

IMADM 

25% ACWT/75%TC 

0.82 

75% ACWT/25%TC 

0.69 

50% ACWT/50%TC 

0.76 


5.42 


7751.21 


12.44 


NB-MOD 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

4.60 

6.87 

8.57 

7604.45 

8126.42 

8747.14 

14.89 

9.62 

8.00 



Model Ranking by MADM Results 


STEP DECREASES 


25% ACWT / 75% TC NB-MOD 


75% ACWT ! 25% TC NB-MOD 


50% ACWT / 50% TC NB-MOD 


NB-NPV 

TRAD 

UlCP 

NB-NPV 

TRAD 

UlCP 

NB-NPV 

TRAD 

UlCP 


CONVEX DECREASES 


25% ACWT/75% TC 

NB-MOD 

75% ACWT / 25% TC 

NB-MOD 

50% ACWT / 50% TC 

NB-MOD 


TRAD 


TRAD 




NB-NPV 

UlCP 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 


UlCP 


CONCAVE DECREASES 


25% ACWT / 75% TC NB-MOD 


75% ACWT / 25% TC NB-MOD 


50% ACWT / 50% TC I NB-MOD 


NB-NPV 

TRAD 

UlCP 

NB-NPV 

TRAD 

UlCP 

NB-NPV 

TRAD 

UlCP 


Note; * indicates models have same rank and are both ranked as 1. 





















































































































































































Declining Demand Analysis Results; HDLVLP 


STEP DECREASES 


ACWT 


TOTAL COST 


AVGYRS Rl 


MADM _ 

25% ACWT / 75% TC 


75% ACWT / 25% TC 


50% ACWT / 50% TC 


TRAD 


0.06 


3374.65 


13.88 


3530.82 


10.95 


NB'MOD 


3626.05 


13.^0 


NB-NPV 


0.11 


3307.52 


UlCP 


0.06 


2966.10 


0.97 

0.96 

0.95 

0.63 

1.00 

0.94 1 

0.92 

0.91 

0.72 

1.00 


CONVEX DECREASES 

TRAD 

NB 

NB-MOD 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

0.47 

0.46 

0 . 46 \ 

0.46 

0.48 

TOTAL COST 

5199.29 

5602.32 

5669 70 

5206.96 

5419.07 

AVGYRS RL 

13.88 

23.78 

26.62] 

12.50 

8.00 

MADM 


25% ACWT/75% TC 


75% ACWT/25% TC 


50% ACWT/50% TC 



0.95 

0.94 

1.00 

0.98 

0.98 

1.00 

0.96 

0.96 

1.00 



CONCAVE DECREASES 


ACWT 


TOTAL COST 


AVGYRS RL 


MAOM 


25% ACWT/75% TC 


75% ACWT/25%TC 


50% ACWT/50% TC 


Model Ranking by MADM Results 


TRAD I NB NB-MOD 


0.13 0.13 


3375.91 3810.11 3918.66 


13.881 12.95 15,16 


1.06 


3676.27 


10.10 


UlCP 


0.13 


3078.21 


8.00 




Note: * indicates models have same rank and are both ranked as 1. 


89 


































































































































































Declining Demand Analysis Results: 


LDHP 


STEP DECREASES 

TRAD 

NB 

NB-MOD 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

3.56 

5.45 

4.21 

5.82 

4.94 

TOTAL COST 

24154.56 

23329.26 

23337.50 

23360.18 

23509.81 

AVGYRS RL 

13.88 

6.21 

7.15 

5.76 

8.00 

MADM I 

25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.97 

0.91 

0.96 

0.90 

0.92 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.99 

0.74 

0.88 

0.71 

0.79 

50% ACWT/50% TC 

0.98 

0.83 

0.92 

0.81 

0.86 


CONVEX DECREASES 

TRAD ! 

NB 

NB-MOD 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

12 . 54 ^ 

1 13.92 

13.31 

14.21 

13.79 

TOTAL COST 



34587.07 

34404.45 

34623.23 

AVGYRS RL 

\ 13.861 

1 5.80 

6.54 

5.39 

8.00 

MADM 

25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.98 

0.97 

0.98 

0.97 

0.97 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.99 

0.93 

0.96 

0.91 

0.93 

50% ACWT/50% TC 

0.98 

0.95 

0.97 

0.94 

0.95 


CONCAVE DECREASES 


ACWT 


TOTAL COST 


TRAD 


4.65 




NB-MOD 


23241.33 23400.07 


6.38 


23180.42 


Model Ranking by MADM Results 


UlCP 


5.76 


23542.96 


AVGYRS RL i 

1 13.881 

1 6.291 

7 20 

5.83 

8.00 

MADM 

25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.94 

0.94 

0.96 

0.93 

0.94 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.98 

0.82 

0.89 

0.80 

0.35 

50% ACWT/50% TC 

0.96 

0.88 

0.92 

0.86 

0.90 



Note; * indicates models have same rank and are both ranked as 1. 


90 



























































































































































































Declining Demand Analysis Results: 


LDLP 


STEP DECREASES 


ACWT 


TOTAL COST 


AVGYRS RL 


MADM 


25% AC'AT / 75% TC 


75% ACWT / 25% TC 


50% ACWT / 50% TC 


TRAD 


2.43 


1185.21 


13.88 


NB 


1.51 


1079.81 


57.08 


NB-MOD 


1.51 


1079.81 


61.15 


NB-NPV 


1.51 


1074.83 


24.30 


UlCP 


3.33 

1593,66 


8,00 



CONVEX DECREASES 

TRAD 

ACWT 

2.49 

TOTAL COST 

1472.60 

AVGYRS RL 

13.88 


25% ACWT/75%TC 

0.93 

75% ACWT / 25% TC 

0.81 

50% ACWT / 50% TC 

0.87 


B 


1.88 


1458.72 


47.11 



NB-MOD 


1.88 


1458.73 


50.43 


NB-NPV 


1.88 


1447.05 


20.92 


0.99 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 


UlCP 


3.15 


1634.17 


8.00 



CONCAVE DECREASES 

TRAD 

ACWT 

1.50 

TOTAL COST 

1054.90 

AVGYRS RL 

13.88 

MADM 

25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.84 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

062 

50% ACWT/50% TC 

0.73 


NB-MOD 


0 . 77 \ 0.77 


■013.75 1013.75 


62.30 66.42 



NB-NPV 


0.77 


997.99 


2 


UlCP 


1.55 


1329.69 


8.00 


1.00 

0,69 

1.00 

0.56 

1.00 

0.62 


Model Ranking by MADM Re sults 



Note; * indicates models have same rank and are both ranked as 1. 












































































































































































APPENDIX C. SENSATIVrrV ANALYSIS RESULTS 


SansativRy Analysis; HIGH DEMAND /CONVEX /STORAGE RATE 
RATE = ,01 {DafauK salting tor DDA) 


NB-MOD 


23.69 


33S326.17 


7.08 


NB-NPV 


26.45 


339267.91 


5.02 


UlCP 


24.55 


340333.27 


8.00 



Mo4sl RanWng by MADM RasuHs _ 

i 1 I _2_ 

Rato ■ 0.01 (Dalault sotting for DDA) 


25%ACWT/7S%TC NB* UlCP* 


75% AC WT / 25% TO TRAD I UlCP 


S0*AACWT/S0%TC I UlCP* I TRAD 




NB-MOD 







75%ACVVT/25%TC 


50%ACWT/50%TC 






Rato s 0.05 


75% ACWT / 25% TO UlCP* 


UlCP* 










75% ACWT/25% TO 


50% ACWT/50% TC 





NB-NPV 




Nota: * indicotos modals hova ttia soma rank and ars both rsnkod as 1. 


















































































































































































































SM$ativit>- Analysis: HIGH DEMAND/CONVEX/ORDER COST RATE 


RATE =200 



TRAD 


NB^HIOO 

NB-NPV 

UCP 

ACWT 

24.01 

26.35 

25.71 

27.12 

24.55 

1 1 

34775121 

331050. rs 

336425.45 

331557.50 

338450.71 


13.88 

527 

6.91 

4.88 

8.00 


25% ACWT / 75% TC 

0.97 

0.98 

0.97 

0.97 

0.98 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.99 

0.93 

0.95 

0.91 

0.98 


0.98 

0.95 

0.96 

0.94 

0.98 


RATE =400 



TRAD 

NB 

NB4MOO 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

24.01 

25.04 

25.74 

27.03 

24.55 

TOTAL COST 



337065.42 




r Twi 

1^ 

6.97 

1 _4^ 

1 8.001 


25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.97 

0.98 

0.97 

0.97 

0.98 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.99 

0.94 

0.95 

0.92 

0.98 

50% ACWT/50% TC 

0.98 

0.96 

0.96 

0.941 

0.98 


RATE B 800 (Detault salting for DDA) 



TRAD 

NB 

NB-MOO 

Mill 

UtCP 

ACWT 

24.01 

25.77 

2560 

1 26.451 

24.55 

TOTAL COST 

349545.12 




:uj 


13.88 

1_5^ 

1 _L08J 

1 ^ 

1 8.001 


1 25%ACWT/7S%TC 1 

0.97 

0.98 

0.97 

0.98 

0.98 


0.99 

0.95 

0.95 

0.93 

0.98 


0.98 

0.96 

0.96 

0.95 

0.98 


RATE s 1200 



■■■cna 

NB 

1 RSBoffT NB44PV 

UlCP 

lACWT 1 

24.01 

25.89 

1 25501 

1 26.33 

24M 

U 1 11—■ 

350511.08 

335322.15 



341346.96 

lAVG YRS RL I 

13.881 

5.52 

-rnj 

L . 5.0^ 

8.00 



0.97 

0.98 

0.97 

0.98 

0.98 


0.99 

0.94 

0.95 

0.93 

0.98 


0.98 

0.96 

0.96 

0.96 

0.98 


Model RanKing by MADM Results 

I ~1 ~ i~ 2 I 3 1 4 I 5 I 

Rate = 200 _ 


25% ACWT/75% TC 

UlCP* 

NB* 


NB-NPV 

TRAD 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

TRAD 



NB 

NB-NPV 

50% ACWT/50% TC 

UlCP* 



NB 

NB-NPV 


Rale = 400 


25% ACWT/75% TC 

NB* 

UlCP* 

1 "NB-MbO"' 1 

NB-NPV 

TRAD 

75% ACWT/25% tc 

TRAD 

UlCP 


NB 

NB-NPV 

50% ACWT/50% TC 

UlCP* 

^SaB= 

i NB 1 




Rate a 800 fPefault Mttitwi for PDA) 


25% ACWT/75% TC 

NB* 

UlCP* 

Mil'tiUM 

1 NB-MOD 

TRAD 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

TRAD 

UlCP 

NB 

■:it::*:*b 

NB-NPV 

50% ACWT/50% TC 

UlCP* 

TRAD* 

NB 

mii-a.K-m 

NB-NPV 


Rate B 1200 


25% ACWT/75% TC 

NB* 

mcp* 

1 NB4<PV* 1 


TRAD 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

TRAD 

UlCP 


1_ NB_._. 1 

NB-NPV 

50% ACWT/50% TC 

UlCP* 

TRAD* 

1 NB 1 

■a^*:*M 

NB-NPV 


Note: * indicates models have the same rank and are both ranked as 1. 


93 





























































































































































































































































SensalK/ity Analysis: HIGH DEMAND /CONVEX /OBSOLESENCE BATE 


RATE = .06 



TRAD 

NB 


NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

14.97 

18.46 

17.17 

19.85 

17.99 

TOTAL COST 

321842.45 

312977.96 

314537.71 


313143.04 

AVG YRS RL 

18.56 

7.64 

9.36 

6.79 

8.00 

MADM 


0.98 

0.95 

0.96 

0.94 

0.96 

/S'XACv'' /25%TC 

0.98 

0.86 

0.90 

0.82 

0.87 


0.99 

0.90 

0.93 

0.88 

0.91 


RATE = .09 




NB 

NB4MO0 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

! 20.091 

21.68 

2226 

23.13 

21.51 

TOTAL COST 



326513.97 

•'X '• 



1 15.891 

1_ ^ 

8.06 

1_LZiJ 

1 8.001 

IMADM 1 

1 25% ACWT/75%TC | 

1_^ 

_ 0.981 

0.97 

0.97 

0.98 



0.94 

0.92 

0.90 

0.95 

1 50%ACWr/50%TC 

1 0.981 

096 

0.9^ 

0.93 

0.96 


RATE = .12 (Dalautt sotting uaed in DDA} 




NB 

■LliZAiUl 

NB-NPV 

mcp 

lACWT 1 

24.01 

25.77 

25.69 

26.45 

24.55 

ii 1/ n ti— 

349545.12 


338326.17~ 

33326751 

34033327 

lAVG YRS RL 1 

13.881 

1 5.431 

70S 

5.02 

8.00 

IMADM 1 

1 25%ACWT/75%TC 

0.97 

0.98 

0.97 

0.98 

0.98 


0.99 

0.9S 

0.95 

0.93 

0.98 

1 50%ACWr/50%TC 

0.98 

0.96 

0.96 

0.95 

098 


RATE = .15 




NB 


NB-NPV 

UlCP 

lACWT 1 

1 29.05\ 

30.72 

29.68 

31.41 

2652 

rrn nr j— 


349330.60 

35444286 

1 n 



1 12.301 

4.761 

6.30 

1 *.441 

1 8.001 


1 25%ACWr/75%TC 1 

0.96 

0.98 

0.87 

0.97 

0.97 

EKfaaimaBa 

0.99 

0.93 

0.95 

0.92 

0.98 

! S0%ACWT/50%TC 1 

0.97 

0.96 

0.96 

0.95 

098 


Model RanKing by MAD M Resute _ 

I 1 12 1 3 1 4 IS I 


Rate s 0.06 


UlCP 

'IHd 

SI 

UCP 

'BHd 

MCP 


iim\ 


NB-NPV 


NB-NPV 


NRMPV 




Rate s 0.18 


1 25% ACWT/75% TC 

NB* 


NB-MOO* 

NBNPV 

TRAD 


TRAD 

MCP 

NB-MOD 

NB 

NB-NPV 

1 50%ACWT/50%TC 

MCP 

TRAD 


NB 

NB-NPV 


Note: * indicates models have the same rank and are both rankad as 1. 












































































































































































































































SensMivity Analysis HIGH DEMAND/ CONVEX/ SALVAGE RATE 


RATE s .01 



TRAD 

NB 

NB-MOO 

NB-NPV 

UCP 

ACWT 

23.92 

25.ea 

25.63 

2t ^7 

24.55 



333013.67 


33225- -7 

339281.04 

AVG YRS RL 

14.68 

5.48 

7.13 


8.00 

MADM 

25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.96 

0.98 

0.97 

0.98 

0.98 

75% ACWT / 25% TC 


0.95 

0.95 

0.93 

0.98 



0.9C 

096 

0.95 

0.98 

RATE s .02 

(Delauil sening lor DDA} 





TRAD 

NB 

NB-MOi> 

NB44PV 

INCP 

ACWT 

24.01 

'25.771 

25.59 

26.45 

24.55 

TOTAL COST 

349545.12 




34033327 


13.88 

5.43 


5.02 

8.00 


25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.97 

0.98 

0.97 

0.98 

0.98 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.99 

0.95 

0.95 

0.93 

0.98 


0.98 

0.96 


0.95 

0.98 


RATE s .05 


HHIilHHHHi 


-NBl 

NB-MOO 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

24L35 

26.1TI 

25.39 

26.80 

2455 

TOTAL COST 

350113.42 


341118.12 

336456.03 

343489.97 

AVG YRS RL 

12.05 

1 _5^ 

6.93 

4.84 

8.00 



0.97 

0.98 

0.98 

0.98 

0.98 


0.99 

0.95 

0.97 

0.93 

0.99 


0.98 

0.97 

0.97 

0.95 

0.99 


RATE:.15 



TRAD 

NB 

■wrrr-vn 

■TT’^'n 

UCP 

ACWT 

24.41 

2728 

1 28.051 

1 28.681 

24.55 


354825.77 



miLLjAU 

354012.31 

t V/ra'i 

8.49 

1_4791 

1 _643J 

1_428! 

8.00 



0.99 

0.97 

0.98 

0.96 

0.99 

ti-iif.’avtiFj-glia 

1.00 

0.92 

0.95 

0.89 

0.99 

1 50%ACWT/50%TC I 

0.99 

0.95 

0.96 

0.92 

0.99 


Mocal Ranking by MAD M Rasuks ___ 

1112 13 __L _4 . _ 5 I 

Rates 0.01_ 


25% ACWT/75% TC 

NB* 

UCP* 

NB-NPV* 

NB-MOO 

TRAD 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

TRAD 

UCP 

NB 

NB-MOD 

NB-NPV 

50% ACWT/50% TC 

UCP* 

TRAD* 

NB 

NB4IIOO 


Rate s 0.02 (Default setting for DDA) 

25% ACWT/75% TC 

NB* 

UCP* 


1 

Cl 

• 

i 

TRAD 

75% ACWT/25% TC 


UCP 

NB 

NB-MOO 

NB-NPV 

50% ACWT/50% TC 

UCP* 

TRAD* 

NB 

NB-MOO 

Ml 


Rate B 0.05 


25% ACWT/75% TC 

UCP* 

NB= 



TRAD 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

TRAD* 

UCP* 

1 NB-MOO 1 

NB 

NB-NPV 

50% ACWT/50% TC 

UCP 

TRAD 


NB 

NB-NPV 


Rate s 0.18 


25% ACWT/75% TC 

UCP* 

TRAD* 


NB 

NB-NPV 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

TRAD 

UCP 


NB 

NB-NPV 

50% ACWT/50% TC 

TRAD* 

UCP* 

1 NB-MOO 

NB 

NB-NPV 


Nola: * indicales models have the same rank and are boch ranked as 1. 


95 














































































































































































































































Senrativity Ananlysis: HIGH DEMAND/ CONCAVE/ STORAGE RATE 


RATE*. 01 (DolaultsatHfiofr DOA} 




NB 

mm I 1 1 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

12.28 

14,72 

14.04 

15.05 

13.03 

TOTAL COST 

231634.28 


213789.73 

207017.16 

217823.08 

AVQYRS RL 

13.88 

1 5.381 

6.87 

4.98 

8.00 

Imadm I 

25% ACWT / 75% TC 

0.92 

0.95 

0.94 

0.95 

0.95 

7E%ACWT/2S%TC 

0.67 

0.87 

0.60 

0.86 

0.94 

50% ACWT / 50% TC 

0.65 

0.61 

0.92 

0.91 

0.95 


RATE s .03 




NB 


NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

_ 

16.44 

15.47 

16.96 

14.25 

TOTAL COST 


216923.50 

222797.49 

214075.46 

230106.07 

AVGYRi RL 

i_?1U 

4.92 

6.34 

4.58 

8.00 

IMADM 1 

25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.63 

0.951 

0.94 

0.95 

0.94 

75% ACWT/25% TC 1 

0.98 

0.86 

0.89 

0.84 

0.94 


0.96 

0.60 

0.92 

0.90 

0.94 



Model RanMng by MADM Roeults 


Rat* ■ 0.01 (Default aatting tor DDA) 




76^4 AC WT/25% TO 


50% ACWT/50%TC 


M'rri-y 



Rata B 0.D3 


25% ACWT / 75% TC I NB4IPV‘ 


75%ACWT/25%TC 


50%ACWT/50%TC I TRAD 






Rata a 0.07 



1 NB I 

NB-NPV 

1 NB-MOD 1 

UlCP 

TRAD 

1 75% ACWT/25% TC 1 

nai 

NB-MOO 


NB 

NB-NPV 



NB-MOO 

SnSS 

TRAD 



Note: ' indicates models have the same rank and are both ranked as 1 . 


es 






























































































































































































































Sansativity Analysis: HIGH DEMAND/ CONCAVE/ ORDER COST RATE 


RATE =200 



TRAD 

NB 

NB-MOO 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

12.20 

15.55 

14.98 

16.04 

13.02 

TOTAL COST 




mi'AAm 


riVTcini 

1 13.88 

1 ■ .. -5.2-7J 

1_IZij 

1_ iiij 

1 8.001 


25%ACWT/75% fC 

0.92 

0.94 

0.93 

0.94 

0.95 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.97 

0.84 

0.86 

0.82 

0.94 


0.95 

0.89 

0.80 

0.88 

0.95 


RATE a 400 



TRAD 

NB 

NB-BIOO 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

12.20 

14.90 

14.85 

15.92 

13.03 

TOTAL COST 

231114.77 

mm^m 

213235.53 


217199.76 


13.88 

5.31 

6.80 

4.92 

8.00 

MADM 

25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.02 

0.95 

0.93 

0.94 

0.95 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.07 

0.87 

0.86 

0.83 

0.04 


0.95 

0.91 

0.90 

0.69 

0.95 

RATE a 800 

(Dafault aatting (or DDA) 





TRAD 

NB 



UlCP 

ACWT 

12M 

14.72 

14.04 

15.05 

13.03 


231834.28 


213780.73 

207017.10 

217823.0U 

AVQYRS RL 

13.88 

5.38 

6.87 

4.08 

8.00 

MADM 


0.02 

0.95 

0.94 

0.95 

0.95 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.97 

0.87 

0.90 

0.66 

0.94 

50% ACWT/50% TC 

0.05 

0.91 

0.92 

0.01 

0.95 

RATE a 1200 


TRAD 

NB 



UlCP 

ACWf 

12J0 

1524 

ISM 

1401 

1303 



209184.58 

214424.41 


218307.87 


13.88 

5.44 

6.03 

5.03 

8.00 



0.92 

0.05 

0.95 

0.06 

0.96 




0.91 

0.87 

0.94 

H'iaTiMiYmilrUfEJ 

0.95 

0.90 

0.93 

0.91 

0.95 


Modal Rankins bv MADM RaauKa 

1 i [ 

2 

J_3_ 

{ 4 

1 5 I 


Rata a 200 


25% ACWT/75% TC 

UlCP 

NB 

1 NB-NPV 1 

NB-WOO 

TRAD 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

tRa6 

UlCP 


NB 

NB-NPV 


».T1M 



NB 

NB-NPV 




Rata a 800 (Default aattlna lor ODA 














■nT:TT7M 

iHEQUB 





■KmnzM 



Nota' * Indicaiaa mocMs have the aaino rank and ara both rankad as 1. 


























































































































































































































Sens Hivity Analysis: HIQH DEMAND/ CONCAVE/ OBSOLESENCE RATE 


RATE s .06 



TRAD 

NB 

NB4HOD 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

7.31 

10.43 

9.87 

11.97 

10.48 

TOTAL CbST 

198434.68 

183703.71 

186146.11 

182330.17 

184760.54 

AVGYRS RL 

18.56 

757 

9.12 

6.75 

8.00 

IMADM 1 

25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.94 

0.92 

0.92 

0.90 

0.91 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.98 

0.77 

0.80 

0.71 

0.77 


0.96 

0.85 

o!56 

0.81 

0.84 


RATE s .09 




NB 

mm 1 n 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

10.01 

12.71 

12.70 

13.78 

12.01 

TOTAL COST 

214393.52 

196187.70 

199550.80 

194470.71 

«g»HTIBl 


15.89 

6.29 

7.84 

5.72 

1 8.001 

IMADM 1 

25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.93 

0.94 

0.93 

0.93 

0.93 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.98 

0.84 

0.83 

0.79 

0.87 


0.95 

0.89 

0.88 

0.8$ 

0.90 

RATE B .12 

(DetauH salting for DDA) 


TRAD 

NB| 

MM "1 


UlCP 

ACWT 

12.20 

14.721 

14.04 

1 15.05 

13.03 

TOTAL COST 



213789.73 

mESuHEsn 


AVGYRS RL 

1 13.88 

1 6^ 

6.87 

1 4.98 

1 8.001 


!K^!VTS[?iWI5^iSl 

0.92 

0.95 

0.94 

0.95 

0.95 


0.97 

0.87 

0.90 

0.88 

0.94 


0.95 

0.91 

0.92 

0.91 

0.95 


RATE > .IS 




RB- 

■■■rTFf’Ti'n 

1 r r 1 

UlCP 

lACWT 1 

1021 

17.83 

1_ iZ:^ 

1826 

10.29 

ir.TAivvrsTnHH 

248709.14 

220141.05 

■FrflQXa 

210010.84 

235916.93 


12.30 

4.71 

1_tnj 

4.41 

8.00 

IMADM 1 


0.91 

0.96 

0.94 

0.96 

0.93 

tS2ESjS^^^lj£3 

0.97 

0l9 

0.90 

o3f 

0.93 


0.94 

0.92 

0.92 

0.92 

0.93 


Model RanWng by MAD M ResuRs 

1112 13 14 1 ~S 1 


Rale s 0.06 


I fci ummi 11 wmm i ■! 



Rate ■ 0.00 


2S%ACWT/75%TC 


■tncBn 






Rate a 0.12 (Deleull aattlng tor DDA 




75% AC 



Rat# a 0.16 


1 

1 


NB* 1 


■riFi 


imrn 


mcp 1 

■iKgraiB 

NB 






NB 



Note: 'iTM^aa models have the same rank and are both ranked aal. 


06 





















































































































































































































SsnsativHy Analysis; HIGH DEMAND/ CONCAVE/ SALVAGE RATE 


RATE a .01 



TRAD 


13L22\ 14.65 


207664.40 


14.68 5.43 




NB-MOD 


14.0$ 


, ■ .1. iH.i I' 


NB-NPV UlCP 


14.08 1$.03 


217132.09 


5.04 8.00 


0.92 

0.95 

0.94 

0.95 

0.95 

0.97 

0.87 

0.90 

0.86 

0.94 

0.94 

0.91 

0.92 

0.91 

0.94 




Modal RonKIng by MAD M RatuBt 


Rata a 0X11 




■ il I' I iliil ii IM’II I 
EZfMaiEgiiai 


UlCP 


Noia: * Indicatat modate hava tha aama rank and aia both rankad a» 1. 


M 








































































































































































































































S«ntaljvity Analysis: LOW DEMAND/CONVEX iSTOflAGE RATE 


RATE s .01 (DafauN seRing for DDA) 



TRAD 

NB 

NB^yiOD 

mmw III 

UICP 

ACWT 

13.84 

13.92 

13.31 

1_IMU 

13.79 

TOTAL COST 

35582.07 

M TTI 

3458707 

\ 1 

34623.23 

AVG YRS RL 

13.88 

1_ 

6.54 

1 5.391 

8.00 

IMADM 1 

25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.98 

0.97 

0.98 

0.97 

0.97 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.99 

0.93 

0.96 

0.91 

0.93 


0.98 

0.95 

1 0.97 

0.94 

0.95 


RATE 3.03 



TRAD 

NB 

NB-MOD 

NB-NPV 1 

UICP 

ACWT 

13.36 

15.65 

14.16 

16571 

14.63 

TOTAL COST 

36236.12 

38830.08 

33689.28 

33868.61 

35896.61 


0.81 

5.32 

6.02 

499 

8.00 


25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.99 

0.96 

0.98 

0.95 

0.97 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

1.00 

0.89 

0.90 

0.87 

0.93 


0.99 

0.93 

0.971 

0.91 

0.95 


RATE ■ .OS 




NB 


HI III 

UICP 

lACWT 1 

1 16361 

1807 

16.43 

16.78 

15.34 



36470.11 

3663220 

36497.75 

36990.70 


1 7.871 

4.93 

5.58 

4.65 

8.00 

IMADM 1 


0.99 

0.96 

0.96 

0.95 

0.99 


1.00 

0.69 

0.95 

0.86 

1.00 

■.v,rfrT«ivi f<« 

0.99 

0.92 

0.96 

0.91 

0.99 



iiTTJil 



1754 


37666.09 


6.65 



19.05 


3741 


4.59 


NB-NPV 


19.62 


37300. 


4.36 


231 


UICP 


16.45 


38098.63 




50%ACWT/ 


Modal RanNng by MADM RtauRa 

cum. 

Rata a 0.01 (Dataull aattina (or DDA 







Rata a 0.05 




1 Oicp 1 

1 TR35B— 


1 ^ ] 

1 NB-NPV 1 


— 




■ziiriiMi 


1 UICP 1 

■■[uLIfSH 


1 NB 1 



Nota; * Indicataa tnodala hava tha aame rank and ara both rankad aa 1. 


100 

























































































































































































































Sensativity Analysis: LOW DEMAND /CONVEX/ORDER C03T 


RATE E 200 



TRAD 

NB 



UlCP 

ACWT 

12.S4 

14.10 

13.72 

14.37 

13.79 

1 1 1 1 !■ 1 1 — 

34904.16 

■■ 1 1 II 

33001.15 

33701Z0 

33914.60 


13.88 

5.36 

6.11 

5.03 

8.00 



0.07 

0.07 

0.07 

0.07 

0.97 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.00 

0.02 

0.03 

0.00 

0.03 


0.08 

0.04 

do? 

0.04 

0.95 


RATES 400 


NB-MOD 


laM 






NB44PV 


14.30 


UlCP 


13.70 


34132.71 


S.OO 




CEE5] 


76% ACWT / 


50%ACWT/50%TC 






AVO YRS RL 




75% ACWT/25%TC 


50%ACWT/50%TC 


EnTTi] 


1Z54 


35047.10 


13.8B 



Modal Ranking by MADM RasuHi 

1 _ 1 


13. 


35004.75 


S.00 


Rate s 200 



Rata a 1200 




amTTS’Tam 




•i'j.v:-* Hi! 

mkiiiijm 

KIT, mi* 

MK1 

■wninaM 

Kr;-!:T2K 


■kiUjn 


IKlMl 

MlLlildJHi 

■TITn^ip 


Noia: * Indicaiaa modala hava tha aama rank and are both ranked aa 1. 


101 

























































































































































































































Sensativity Analysis: LOW DEMAND /CONVEX /OBSOLESENCE RATE 


RATE = .06 



TRAD 

NB 


NB-NPV 


ACWT 

7.32 

8.29 

L _8J0J 

8.77 



32578.42 



31834.59, 

31757.es 


18.56 

1 8.00 

1 8.851 

7.131 

8.0 J 


25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.98 

0.97 

0.97 

0.06 

0.96 

75% ACWT/25%TC 

0.99 

0.91 

0.93 

0.88 

o.8t; 

K5!KW7jIE5»Ri 

0.99 

0.94 

0.95 

0.92 



RATE s .09 



TRAD 

NB 

NB-MOD 

NB.NPV 

UlCr' 

ACWT 

9.64 

11.29 

10.48 

11.64 

10 84 

TOTAL COST 

34027.66 

33172.34 

33374.83 

33099.09 

33185.38 

tsssmiommm 

15.89 

6.71 

7.51 

6.13 

3.00 

IMADM 1 

25% ACV/T/75%TC 

0.98 

0.96 

0.97 

0.96 

0.97 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.99 

089 

0.94 

0.87 

0.92 


0.99 

0.93 

0.96 

Soil 

0.94 


RATE ■ .12 (DafauR sMlng (or DD/^ 



TRAD 

1 

wm 1 1 

NB44PV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

12.84 

1 13.921 

13.31 

14.21 

13.79 

TOTAL COST 

35582.07 

M II 1 

34687.07 

wm ■\ '1 

3462323 

AVQ YRS RL 

13.88 

1 _ SMI 

6.54 

1 _5^ 

8.00 


1 25% ACWT/75% TC 1 

0.98 

0.97 

0.981 

1 097 

0.97 


0.99 

0.03 

0.96 

091 

0.93 


0.98 

1 0.05 

0.97 

0.94 

0.65 


RATE B.15 



AVQ YRS RL 


MADRA 




Modal Ranking by MAD M RaauRt 


37325.24 

t\yt ri 

r .36235.35 

38082.41^ 

12.30 

L 5.121 

5.79 

4.82 


0.97 

0.97 

0.98 

096 

09? 

091 

0.94 

SiTi 

0.98 

0.94 

0.96 

0.92 


1S.05 


3650 


6.00 


Rata « 0.06 









M^IjM 

TPinJM 


Rata « 0.15 


1 25% ACWT/75% TC 1 


■dHSi 

1 Tr35B 

1 . WB 1 






■mjM 


s 

1 




wmumm 

■riTziza 


Nota: * in^catas modalt hava tba aaino rank and ara both ranksd aa 1. 





























































































































































































































SensatIvHy Analysis: LOW DEMAND /CONVEX /SALVAGE RATE 


RATE B .01 



TRAD 

NB 

Mil 1 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

12.4a 

13.86 

13.31 

14.19 

13.79 

TOTAL COST 

35617.78 

34390.86 

34486.51 

M ^ r 1 

34514.30 


14.68 

5.84 

6.59 

5.46 

8.00 

MADM 

25% ACWT/75%TC 

0.97 

0.97 

0.98 

0.97 

0.97 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.99 

0.92 

0.95 

091 

0.93 


0.98 

0.95 

0.97 

0.94 

0.95 

RATE e .02 

{Dalauit salting for DDA} 





TRAD 

N6 

NB-MOD 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

iSm 

13.92 

13.31 

1421 

13.79 

TOTAL COST 

35582.07 

34485.15 

34587.07 

34404.45 

3462323 


13.88 

5.80 

6.54 

5.39 

8.00 


25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.98 

0.97 

0.98 

0.97 

0.97 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.99 

0.93 

0.96 

0.91 

093 


0.98 

0.95 

0.97 

0.94 

0.95 

RATE = .06 


TRAD 

NB 

NB-MOD 

NB-NPV 


ACWT 

12.66 

14.06 

13.14 

14.28 

13.79 


35626.31 

34778.78 

34928.90 

34707.40 

34950.03 

AVQ YRS RL 

12.05 

S.66 

6.40 

523 

8.00 


25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.98 

0.97 

0.99 

0.97 

0.97 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.99 

0.92 

0.97 

0.91 

0.94 


0.99 

096 

0.98 

0.C4 

0.96 

RATE . .15 

HHHBHHHHIi 




NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

1X65 

1428 

13.45 


St?! 


■^■TTTOTirn 

Tfr\ 

35884.66 

36148.96 

mm III 


8.49 

520 

5.94 

4.70 

8.00 



0.99 

0.99 

1.00 

0.96 

0.99 


0.09 

0.96 

1.00 

0.90 

0.98 


0.99 


1.00 

0.93 

0.99 

Model RanMng by MADM RatuRt 


1 

2 

3 

4 

8 


Rsla m 0.01 


1 25% ACWT/75% TC 1 


NB* 

■imii 




TRAD 

NB-MOO 

MW 



1 50%ACWT/50%TC I 

TRAD 


MTHM 

1 NB 1 

L !^B-NPV 1 


Rala a 0.0a 


1 25% ACWT/75% TC 1 

M-siaai 

MmM 

NB 

UlCP 

NB-NPV 


TRAD 

■:K£7:KJ*i 

UlCP 

NB 

NB-NPV 

1 50%ACWT/50%TC 1 

TRiO 

■TTTTTirnB 

UlCP 

NB 



Rata a 0.08 




r issB—1 

wmnEMm 

NB 






NB 



MLUM 


1 UlCP 1 

NB 

1 NB-NPV 1 


Rala > 0.15 


J •iV J (•• 

minr.yr>m 


MOQIB 

Ni 

NB-NPV“1 




M!M;M 

NB 


f 

i 

I 



MQQM 

NB 



Nola: *indieatatmo<Mshavathasama rank and a.'a both rankad at 1. 


103 





























































































































































































































Sensativity Analysis: LOW DEMAND/CONCAVE/STORAGE RATE 


RATE s .01 (Default setting for DDA) 



TRAD 

NB 

NBHMOO 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

4.95 

6.10 

5.44 

6.38 

5.76 

TOTAL COST 

25046.76 

23241.83 

23400.07 

23180.42 

23542.96 

AVG YRS RL 

13.88 

6.29 

720 

5.83 

8.00 

IMADM 1 

25% ACWT/75%TC 

0.84 

0.94 

0.961 

0.93 

0.94 

75% ACWT/25%TC 

0.98 

0.82 

0.891 

0.80 

0.85 


0.96 

0.88 

0.92! 

0.86 

0.90 


RATE B .03 



TRAD 

NB 

NB-MOO 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

5.00 

727 

6.27 

7.69 

6.44 

TOTAL COST 

25356.29 

24232.05 

24460.34 

24205.94 

24806.99 

r:\vcvi 

9.81 

5.78 

6.63 

5.40 

8.00 


25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.97 

0.95 

0.98 

0.94 

0.96 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.99 

086 

0.95 

0.82 

0.93 


0.98 

0.90 

0.96 

0.88 

0.95 


RATE s .05 



TRAD 

NB 

tm 1 1 


UlCP 

ACWT 

6.88 

8.16 

7.40 

1 

6.80 

TOTAL COST 

am\ 1 1 

1 t 

25314.93 


25761.12 


ZJ3 

1 5.351 

6.15 

sioi^ 

8.00 


1 25% ACWT / 75% TC I 

0.98 

0.95 

0.96 

0.94 

0.98 


0.99 

0.85 

0.91 

0.83 

0.99 

50% ACWT / 50% TC 1 

0.98 

0.90 

0.93 

0.88 

0.99 


RATE B.07 



Model Ranking by MAOM Results 

I 1 I 2 I 3 1 4 ~ 1 ' ~S~ I 


Rale s 0,01 (Defttult eetting for PDA) 


25% ACWT/75% TC 

NB-MOO 

TRAD 

UlCP 

NB 

NB-NPV 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

Ifl^Ab 

NB-MOO 

UlCP 

NB 



TRAD 


UlCP 

NB 



Rate a 0.03 


25% ACWT/75%TC 


TRAD 

UlCP 


NB-NPV 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

TRAD 


UlCP 

NB 

NB-NPV 

50% ACWT / 50% TC 

TRAD 

NB-MOD 

UlCP 




Rate « 0.05 


25% ACWT/75% TC 

UICP‘ 

■KTTTTM 


NB 


75% ACWT/25% TC 

UlCP* 

■irrrTTM 


NB 



UlCP 

TRAD 


NB 



Rate a 0.15 



UlCP 



NB 


75% ACWT/25% TC 

UlCP 

TRAD 

NB-MOO 

NB 


50% AC Wt/5b%tC 

UlCP 

TraB 

NB-MOO 

NB 



Note: * indicates tnodela fiave the same rank and are both ranked as 1. 


104 





























































































































































































































SensatMty Analysis; LOW DEMAND /CONCAVE /ORDER COST 


RATE s 200 



TRAD 

NB 

NB-MOD 

Mb-^pv 

UlCP 

ACWT 

4.85 

6.67 

5.67 

6.80 

5.76 


2461492 

22700.28 

22893.73 

■i"'l III 

23015.72 


13.88 


6.62 

5.35 

8.00 

MADM 

25%ACW i / 75% TO 

0.04 

0.92 

0.9S 

0.92 

0.94 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.98 

0.77 

0.66 

0.76 

0.85 


0.96 

olf 

0.91 

0.84 

0.90 


RATES 400 




_ _ . nbi 

NB-MOD 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

lACWT 1 

4.65 


5.42 

6.68 

5.76 


24747.79 



iMF?r7nm 

23177.95 


13.88 

1 5.88: 

6801 

1 5.501 

8.00 


25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.94 

0.931 

0.96 

0.92 

0.94 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.98 

o.wl 

0.89 

0.77 

0.85 


0.96 

0.8-7! 

0.93 

0.85 

0.90 


RATE s 800 (OateuR sMIng for DOA) 



RATE a 1200 I 


Modal RanMng by MAD M Rasults _ 

1 1 1 ~2 1 3 j—-----p-- - 


Rata s 200 



! 

■■ 

1 

1 TflAO 1 

UlCP 

NB 

NB-NPV 

1 75% ACWT/25% TC 1 

1 TRAD 1 


UlCP 

Rfc 

NB4(PV 


■kuLUHl 


mcp 

NB 

NB-NPV 




Rata a 1200 



1 NB-MOD 1 

r wb 1 

■kuLL!JHi 

1 UlCP 1 



■EiiEai 

Kl-I.'.isai 

NB 






NB 

■EIHiaH 

1 NB-NPV 1 


Nola; * indioaiss modab here same rank and are both rrinliod as 1. 


105 




























































































































































































































Sansativity Analysis; LOW DEMAND /CONCAVE /OBSOLESENCE RATE 


RATE s .06 



TRAD 

NB 

NB-MOO 

n r II1 

UICP 

ACWT 

2.54 

3.39 

3.45 

3.47 

3.53 

TOTAL COST 

21881.18 

20559.13 


20418.57 

20569.38 


18.56 

8.67 

9,75 

7.71 

8.00 

MADM 

25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.95 

0.93 

0.92 

0.93 

0.92 


0.98 

0.81 

0.80 

0.80 

0,79 


0.97 

0.87 

0.86 

0.87 

0.86 


RATE «.09 




NB 

NB-MOD 

NB-NPV 

UICP 

ACWT 

3.41 

427 

4.08 

4.62 

4.11 

TOTAL COST 

23337.77 

21852.72 

22156.85 

21778.48 

21990.64 


1 15.89 

728 

8.27 

6 63 

8.00 

IMADM 1 


0.95 

0.95 

0.95 

0.93 

0.95 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.98 

0.65 

0.87 

0.80 

0.87 

50%ACWT/50%tC 

0.97 

0.90 

0.91 

0.87 

0,91 


RATE s .12 (Oatault setting for DOA} 



TRAD 

NB 


NB-NPV 

UICP 

ACWT 

4.65 

6.10 

5.44 

6.38 

5.76 


25046.76 


23400.07 

23180.42 


lAVG YRS RL 

13.88 

1 

720 

5.83 

1 8.001 


25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.94 

0.94 

0.96 

0.93 

0.94 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.98 

0.82 

0.89 

0.80 

0.85 

S0%4CWT/~S0%tC 

0.96 

0.68 

0.92 

0.86 

0.90 



Model RanKing by MAD M Results 


Rata a 0,06 




75%ACWT/2S%TC 





UICP 


NB-MOD 


NB-MOD 




Rata a 0.09 


25%ACWT/75%TC 


TRAD 


50%ACWT/50%TC trad 


Rats L 0.12 {Default setting for DOA 


25%ACWT/75%TC NB-MOO 


TRAD 


50% ACWT/50%TC 



Rate r 0.15 


‘ 25%ACWT/75%TC 


WCP* 

1 N8 ! 

TRAD 

■TTITQV 

75% ACWT/25% tC 

1 TRAD 1 

lilcp 


NB 

■rTTTTUM 



WCP* 

1 NB4WOD 

NB 



NoIk * Indicalas modala have the same rank and are both ranked as 1. 



































































































































































































































Sensativity Analysis: LOW DEMAND /CONCAVE /SALVAQE RATE 


RATE = .Ot 



TRAD 

NB 

NB-MOD 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

4.53 

6.08 

5.44 

6.29 

S..’6 


25140.99 

231U.11 

23314.59 

wm \ 1 

23445.31 

lAVQ YRS RL 

1468 

6.34 

755 

1 5.891 

8.00 


25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.94 

0.94 

0.96 

0.93 

0.94 

76% ACWT/25% TC 

0.98 

0.82 

0.891 

0.60 

0.85 


0.96 

0.88 

0.921 

0.87 

0.89 


RATE = .02 (DatauH setting for DDA} 



TRAD 

— la 

M 1 1 

NB-NPV 

UlCP 

ACWT 

4.65 

mmKm 

5.44 

6.38 

5.76 

TOTAL COST 

25046.76 

33241.53 

23W.07 

23150.42 

23542.96 


13.88 

659 

750 

5.83 

8.00 


25% ACWT/75% TC 

0.94 

0.94 

0.96 

0.93 

0.94 

75% ACWT/25% TC 

0.98 

0.82 

0.89 

0.80 

0.85 

”50%ACWT/50%TC 

0.96 

0.88 

0.92 

0.86 

0.90 


RATE B .05 


NB-MOO 


5.$a 


NB-NPV 


6.31 


3349125 \ 


5.66 


UlCP 


5.76 


23835.93 


8.00 



ACWT 

554 

_^ 

5.45 

1. _ 6.941 

TOTAL COST 

24901.78 

KmHE] 

24663.53' 



j THS HL 

DM 


\m 

_ 


Modal RanWng by MADM Results 

I . 1 


176 


24812.47 


8.00 






Note: * indicalas models have the same rank end are both ranked as 1. 


107 






































































































































































































































APPENDIX D. SIMULATION CODE 


This appendix contains the following pascal code for the 
simulation; 


NAME _ TYPE OF CODE _ PA9B t 


- UICP_Simulator 

main program 

109. 

- toolbox 

unit 

144. 

- unirand 

unit 

148. 

- PDUnit 

unit 

153. 

- PQueue. 

unit 

165. 


108 





program UlCP_Sliiiulator (iz^nic, ouput) 


(SH c;4000.0.0) Ui'*) ($C4.) 

usp« <i 08 , crt. toolbox, unirand. PCXJnit. pqu«u8: 

'Tuaz't^iAt'iAyBAriay (1..IQ0] of 
w»«klyAi'i'ay-ai'i ay {1..1JOO] of 
i»i:^iiAy»v»riay |l..750) of r^al; 
qti'lntAriay^AMay |1..1001 of inc«g«t ; 
changaR»alAM 7 - array of tpal; 

chAngpIntAriv ■ array (1..5) of ineeg«i; 
pd62 fieldastiingllS]: 
desci iptTyf>^*>tr}ny(40] ; 

const COEPPl-138b; 

POWEfil«0.74«: 

COEPF2>3.B69; 

P0ra2*l.J78; 

MAXPLT-14.0: 

MIMPLT-2.0; 

ERROR.! .OCiQOQoOQOOOOOOE-OOlO; 

YRSERR-B; 

HINERR.&; 

vai wklyOb««rvtw«>«klyArr4y; 

obs«rv, frost, mad. BOOArry. ROLmvolArry.ERJUrt'y, 

SSADOOO.SSAIW.SGSMA.MAnDKdArry.varQiriArry. invrstQti'.qtrSMAiquarttrArray; 

st^pIndAriV. trndlftdArry .mACo<i»ArrV{qtrIntArray; 

obsoi vrype. d 1 At rTyps, out putlyp#. somdtyps, wkDat aTypm, qt rDat aTypa, 

PDOa t aTVP^ * rmpSt a t Typ*, BRFTypa, ana 1 1 ndType: char ; 

numbarRap, i, numbaiOfRaps.numbarOfOtrs.numbarOfWki.markCoda, init Inv. siaCount: intagar 
■aanPamand. varOamand; raal; 

nolnt, ttandOn. StapOn. nmbi Staps. itmbrTrands.'IWS.oidak'Count: intagar; 

s. aaad 1 nctax, numQt r: i n t aga r ; 

curx'Svad: longint; 

input fila.Output fila:taxt; 

noRaa1.fixERR;iaa1; 

5t nngval :pd82f iald; 
stop: boo laan; 

startstap, startrnd. ai>dtmd; changalntArry; 

stapmult, trandcoaff, tran^>owar: changaRaalArry; 

hourl.minutal.sacondl.hdSacl.hDur2.ainuta2.sacond2,b<t8ac2:word; 

out Fi1aNama:at ring; 

osHaap.BoHaap:Fri o r 1 1 yOuauaTypa; 

ADDfiO, ADO. 9U. 1 nvast ! r»a 1 ; 

8imA£4)80. simACD, simSMA, aiminvast, simQi'datCount: raal r 


109 





ciADt)BO. Cl ADD, e i 5HA . ct Ir.vt-et . eiOi <S*^iCount: r#*l ; 
cl Di aposAt s. cidi a^-osa iCount. cifndOH, eiEncJOS: i»a 1 ; 
v«rA£}OdO,varAI>D. varSHA ,v*rlnv«Ht. v*rOrct»rcount: r*al ; 
vat[iis.-po3al S, vaj Di spotAiCoant, VArEnJOK.VArErnlOSt imI ; 
di ^posv^lCount .d: sPiasA i s,^•nrJC^.^fvdOS: in?eg^i; 

SitiDssposalC j.\r* , sislii sposals, siaEikUMI, sivErKiSS: t*ait 
t'unt^esct ipt:irtTVpt*: 

f otCosr . hoi^ffC. ojct^iTC. *hortTC. saI vTT^s a1 ; 

tote . 8t Any, hoIdTCAj ry, orrl^tTCAi ry .shortTCAt ry. aalvTRAnytiTUAit^iAi i ay 

• twTotCost, ciMKoicfre. si«fOi-<l«t'TC. amShorlTC, vTA: r^al: 

vaiTotCost, VArHol*+rc. vatvarShortTC. VAiSalvTTi: i<>aI : 

Cl Tot Cost , c jHoldTC . ciOi deiTC. ciSnoitTC.ejSdivTR; l♦^dl ; 
pi OC«dui« Front SCI♦^n: 

b^ain 

cl iscr; 

na' 11»1 n; 
wiiteln; 

It r i t V1 n 
wi 11 ^ 1 n; 

VI it«In; 


vrit^ln 1‘ ..... 

wiitaln (' • UICP LEVELS FOUECASTINC •*) 

wtit*in (' • SIMULATOR *•» 

viiteln (• * FOR COHSl*ABL£S •*) 

VI it^ln {' • *•) 

writ*ln (• • G. C. ftobt I Und LT.SC **) 

vrit*ln * 0. C. HUUi LCDR.SC **) 

vt]C«ln (• * 

vjitsln {' • 

vi'it«ln (• •••»*4*ti*t****tt«**tt*****it.*t#».j 


D»Uy(lSO0); <Poi 1500 
clrocr; 

end; 

procedure runtype <var distrTVpe^outputType^wRDAtAtype.qtrOateType, 

POOateTyp*. repSt«.tType.EIUnype««n«l]n(nvpe:ctuir; 
var nuttberOfQtr8,nuiib«r0fWks.nunberOfReps,Medindext integer 
vai- ■eeixC H e iu Kl, vrOeaand:reel; 
var nuiiYreOH,nuBYreBRJt:reel; 
vev inputrUe,outputfile: text; 
var (reet.Mdi quarterArray; 
vai BeiKU;8ee<MrryTVpe; 
var outnleWaieeielring; 
ver tninDeecript ideecx'iptTVpe); 

vai' doite; boolean; 

i .ivucStart: integer; 
deMndlnPile: etnng: 

begin 


110 




















vtlt^ln !* THIS SCREOJ WILL ALLOW SELECTION OF RUN TYPE OPTIONS 5 ; 

'1on<^:«FALSE: 

wi 

wiit^lnr 

VI th* of i #-pl i c.»t ions tfiotn 1 to "ISC) to b# tun ; ’ }; 

nuBb«rOfR«pb: *C«t_Int (1.7S0): 

tri 1 1 ^ 1 n; 

wMt^CEnt^i Run [Tscription: * j ; 

r^orlin 11 unTJ^sct ipt i: 

writeln: 

wi jtelntobfl»*i VAt ions will be genexAted bssed cn youi selection of disti ibut ior.‘I; 
MX'iteln( ' (Poisson oi Normal) And see4 selection.'!; 
wx i t e I n r 

wziteln I'RAndosi Nutfbei Genetacoi Seed Selection: *1; 

M'iteln; 

wiiteln f* 1 - Default array ' uni'Tje see d for each t eplicat ion') ; 
wiitelr. {' 2 - Select seeds ■ mas nusU^et of leplications 10 100*); 

m i t e 1 n; 

write I'Choice: •); 

seedt ype:« readkey ; 
writein Iseedtype); 
wr 11 eIn; 

cate seedtype of 
'I': begin 

denej»TRl/E; 

■axJtart :a20001*namberC'fReps; 

wiiteCBntei RarKkMs Seed Start Index ( I CO ' .maxStart :2,' 1: ’}; 
seedlndex:* Cet.lnteget U.»axStart): 
er»i; 

*2': begin 

done:-TRUE; 

if numberOfReps • 100 then numberOfRepe:>100; 
for 1 tx 1 to nM*k>frOfRept do begin 

wiite {'Bntei Seed value for replicetion ',i,* t *); 
seeded I :>Get_Long]nt( 1.22474Bi64«); 
wiiteln; 
end; Ifor) 

end 

end 

unt X1 donexTRUC; 
cl rscr; 

writeln I' ♦••• RW SELBCTION OPTIOWS COWril*;*!) ••♦*»); 

writein; wtiteln; 

wxtte I'Eittei the number of simulation guarters; * ); 

numberOfQtre:*Cet.Integer I!,100}; 

ntw^iOfWks: T. 13 ‘HiMbeiOrOtrs; 

writein; 

donetapALSE; 

lepeat 


111 












tiTtittf'in of D»«ti jt»«t ion: *>; 

wijteln f* 1 - Nonwl*); 
wiit«‘ln {' ‘ Poi*»on*): 

writ^ f'Chojc^; *): 

•iiaXt'Typ*: «r»*rlli#y; 

iriiiti'TVp*'); 

vt'iC^in; 

case diatjTVp** of 

' i ’ : b«^ln 

don»: •7HUE; 

<*Enr«> TUAjt^kiy Man dmand: *]; 
m«anI)ienMnd: srfet.R^al l 0. 0001. Q^49«><».0j ; 

W1 

writ* (*Ent*t vaiianc«: M; 

V4t-£k«*and: -G€t_R«« ( <0.000 1.999999.0) ; 

writ^In 

»r>d: 

*2': b«g:n 

done:*TRUE; 

wx'it« {’Bnt*r < 7 UArteily «*an 4»»ar>d; 

(0.0001.999999.0): 

V4t D««4nd: -ManDrmAnd; 

9nfi 

end 

until <kme*TtlUE; 
f rcet {1) tHMenDMMind; 

Md{l];i^oerFl *«ypjP0lir£RlMn(frcstnn}: 

done:-FALSE; 

clrscr; 

writeln (* f(l94 SSLBCTION OPTlOKS COWTINtTED *••••); 

wtiteln: 

tepeet 

wt'iteln (*lnitial inventory end Outatendin^ Reoi-dera Selection: '); 
writeln; 

wiiteln (* 0 - defevlt; Initial Inv ■ EOQ * Sefety atoefc*): 

writeln (' 1 * User epecified Initial Inv. No Outatandm^ Reordera') 

writeln; 

write ('Choice: *); 
ana U ncnype: • readkey; 
writeln (anal incfType): 
writeln; 

caee anallndType of 
'O'; donei-TRUE; 

‘1 *; begin 

writel'Entei initial inventoty in yeare of annual deeand i 
niJMYrsON:-Cet_Real (0.0.1000.9); 
done:-TRUE; 
end; 


112 








«rwi; |C4»«) 
unt J i done^TltJE; 

.FALSE; 

cU SCI ; 

•ion#: .FALSE: 

CU'SCl .' 

wiit*ln r •••* RUW selection options COKTIMUEl* •**•*» 

^it#ln (‘Tyi^ of Economic R^t^ntton Selection: *): 

wi j t e 1 n ; 

Vt'iCeln 0 - No economic retention oKxiel u«ed*); 

wMtein (• 1 - Nav>- UICp-b20*); 

write In (' 2 - Net benefit Ho<lep): 

wi iteln i* 3 - Modifjerl Net Benefit 

wiiteln r 4 - NPV Nee Benefit Nortel'); 

wriceln 5 - Tradition Retention HodelM; 

writeln <» - Fixed Retention Requitewent (in years]*); 

wt iteln: 

write rChoice; *); 

EfUtrype; * 1 eadkey; 
writeln [ERRType); 
wx' 11 c 1 n; 
case EflfnVpe of 

•O'..'S' 5 donereTRUE; 

‘h'; begin 

tn itef* Enter retention reqiuireaent in years : '); 
nygiYreBflRi-Cet.Rea] (0.0,1000.0); 
done; >Tfll/E; 
end; 

•nd; (caae) 
until doneeTRUE; 
done:eFALSE; 
ciraci; 

wiiteln {• ***• RON SELBCTION OPTIONS CONTINOEC ••••*) 

wxiteln; wi’iteln; 

lepeat 

wt tteln: 

wiiteln (‘Send OutpHit to: *); 

%ifriteln: 

writeln (‘ 1 - Screen']; 
wiiteln (' 2 - File'}; 
writeln; 

writ* ('Chcice: *); 
ootputType:« readkey ; 
writeln (outputType): 
ease outputType of 
‘1 *: begin 

done: vIHUE; 

aexign(output file.'cun*); 


113 













• ;' : in 

done; »T?iUE; 

I #p>«'rtr 

w) 

wi (*Ent»r P.ith ^rvi *); 

r««dln (outFi ; 

vrit^ln; 

wt-it*ln {'Path And ent#r«d: * ,outFi leKMA]; 

wi- 1 1 e 1 n ; 

wi Ite f*ls This collect? {Y Ol N; : ”} : 
urt’.i Ge^_Aji55wei'; 

Assign (Cut{vjt f 1 1'^. out Fi ivN<wA); 

<»nd; 

«rtd: 

until don<^«TTlUE; 
wfcliAt ATyp»; ■ ’ 0' ; 
wi iceln; 

write! * Include Weekly SOIl D^ta? {Y or N): *); 

If Cet^jUiswer then wkHatAType:"' 1'; 

<H i DAtdTVPeJ»’O'; 
writeln: 

wtite!' Include OuArterly 2>Dft Data? (Y or N): ‘}; 
if Get^Anewer then < 7 trDAtAType:-M*; 

Pl»DdtAlVpe:-'0*; 
write In; 

wi i te I' Include 0“>srt^iiy deewnd. (orecest and PD92/9ft IwitA? (V or N): •); 
if cet.Answei then FOOataTyr**1 *.* 

r«pStAtType:«*0*; 
wtileln; 

writej‘Include Replication Statistics? (Y or N): *}; 
if Cetj^SMer then repStatTypei*’1 *; 
end: 

procedure RunAgain (vai output!i le:text;var runDeeenpt:desci iptType; 
vai outputType.ERinvpetchar: 

ver stopiboolean; 

vai nusYrsBlR: leal; 

rai outPi leNAM: string) ; 

Vdi demandlnFile: string; 

donel:boo lean; 
begin 

stop; -FALSE; 
clrsct; 

wiitelo !‘ RE-llUW SlIRAJiTlON OFTIOtiS SCREEN •••*'); 

wi i t e 1 n; 

wi iteln!'Re-iunning the siaulation will aaintain the saw run-type parawtets. but wi 1 
writeln(*ailow the uset to change the destination (output) file and vaiy NIIN'}; 
wi itelnf' and aodel parawtets. ’); 


114 







wi 

w7jr^ci»o yfj'i wish t*"' i^-run *:h«» ion? lY o» N-: ''. • 

if G»t_Answ»i th«f: fc>#^in 
wt i?^in- 

wi 11 ♦ i ’ ChAftg^ Run [‘e^script Jon? fY o» K1 ; ■); 
if :^t_Answ*i th«»n i»gin 
W] 1 1 r i n ^ 

wi rEnt^r Run £>*‘»CMrt t on: M; 

r«a<lln fiunDesci ipt); 

#nd; 

wi iteln: 

'ion^I:-FAL5E; 

wi It# ('ChAtig^ Economic R#t#ntion (Y oi K) : *}; 

jf r»#t_Ar!5wei th#n b#^in 
wi'iv#in; 

W 2 it< In; 

<ion#l:.PAUSE; 


•ait* n; 
r»p*ae 

w-.-it#ln l*Typ# of Econowtc R#t#ntioR Model SeUction: M 
writeln; 

writ«ln <* C • Ho «cono«ic retention «od#i us«d'}; 

wrjteln (• I - Mavy UlCP-WO*); 

wi'iteln {' 2 - Net Benefit Model*): 

viiteln (' J * Modified Net Benefit Model'); 

wiiteln (• i ■ NFV Net Benefit Model): 

wiiteln (* 5 - Tiadition Retention Model*); 

vriteln e • Fixed Retention Requiieiient fin year*)*) 

writeln: 

write (’Choice: 

OtHType: • reedAey; 
wrtteln fIMTVpe); 
writeln; 
cose EfUlType cf 

•0 -. . - S* J do«el;-TRUE? 


: begin 

write(*Enter retention requiievent in years : 
nuiiYrsEfUts-Get^Real f 0.0.1000.0) ; 
doneli-TKOE; 
end; 


end; (case) 
until donel*TRt7C; 
clrscr; 

writeln !* RUN SEUCTJOK OPTIONS CONTINUED ••••') 

wt'iteln; writeln; 


end; (if) 

if outputType>’2‘ then begin 
writeln; 

writei*Chanoe Output File? (Y oi N); ’); 
if Get.An^rfet then begin 
lepeat 


115 













W1 itfin; 

Wilt# f'tnti't Output P.\th An'1 'l; 

(OutPt : 

WM t «* 1 n ; 

('pAth Ft if Hiiaw *nt*r4^: * .cucFt 1 tflaiiig} ; 

wx 

wftt^ i'Is this collect* iY oi Wi: 'i; 
until ; 

•isSign (output f 1 1^. our Fi : 

♦nd; 

end; 

end else 

stop: “TRUE; 

end: 
cli sci ; 
end; 


function GetHarkCode (t ,ol4tark: integer; frcst. unitPiicetreeU :integei 

begin 

tf t*l then begin 

it frcst ' 0.2S then geCKerkrCode:*0; 
if (frcsr •• 0.251 and (ficst • 2.01 then begin 
if (unitPrice •* JOO.OO) then begin 
getMarkCo<ie: «J .- 
end else begin 
gecMarkCode:ol; 
end; 
end; 

if frctt 2.0 then begin 

if 4witPrice*lrctt) •« bOO.O then begin 
getHarkCode: ■4; 
end else begin 
getNarkCode: >>2 
end: 
end; 

end else begin 

getHarkCode: ■Ql<Mark; 
if oliMark • 0 then begin 

if frcSt >- O.S then begin 

if (imitPrice »* JOO.QO) then begin 
getlMrkCo4e:-J; 
end else begin 

getMarkCode:*]; 

end; 

end; 

if frcet **3 then begin 

tf <unit Pt ice* fleet) '■ bOO.O then begin 
get Mai kCodeiat: 
end ei«e begin 


116 






^rvi; 

;f tI1'- Cl ioirfititiKaJ^ b»9in 

it fic*t --j th^n brf^in 

if ! uni t Ti icf^* f» cst ; •* th^n b^in 

tcCoi^: *4: 

ervl b*9in 

kC<y^; ■* 

•»n'J; 

tnn if linitPric^ •« 200 th*n tsegir. 

g«tK<)rkCo<^: ■ 1; 

♦rv'^ »!»*• if unitPric^ »* <00 th*n b»gin 
g^tHal kCi>ie: •! ; 

er»^; 

if ftcst •• Cl.25 tfv«n g^tlCti kCc^i-O; 

if 2) tolrMdzkaO th^n b^in 

if ftcst 1.0 then begin 

if jiinitPiie^ •« 300.00) then fc^in 
getMarkCtyie: > J; 
ervi «1«<^ begin 
getMdritCo4e:*l; 
end; 

end else if (uni •; Pri ce* f rest) »• 800.OC then begin 
g«tll«rkCc>4e:*4; 

end else i* timitfh ice*frcsCl • * 400,00 then begin 
getMai kCocle i •Z : 

♦ndi 

If ftcst «« 0.2S (hen gettlarkCode:*0; 
end; 

end 

end; 


piocedure Ini t lej iseArreys tver ob«erv. BC^Arry* tiOLeve). SSAftCOO, S3ADO, 

SSSM. OXAr 1 y: ( erAr r^y; 

ver steplndf^iry. (mdlndArry.ai^^deArry; qtslntArrsy 
nuaberOfe ’ -.aiaibet-OfWLs.nuaberAepiititegei ; 

■e^JeaswQ; re« I; 
vsr teklyObeerviweeklyAxrey; 
vei aeenCadArry.verCMArryi^TusrtetArrey; 
v« totCostArry.holdTTIArry.9r<ierTCArry. 
shoitTCArry. MlvTftAriY* investOti. 
tltrSHAiquarterArreyl; 

vet t;integet; 

begin 

fui i:>i tp ftu nbe ivfgtrs <kt begin 
pbservft |: eO.O; 


117 






ly [t ’ ; -T'.' 
v<ii ly 2 c .: * - . O: 

Ei^ 1 J y (t i : - . 0-; 

;? i : -.-. 

SSADOeOJti:-0.0; 

SrSAW! {• 1 : - D . 0 ; 

SSa»(t] ;»0.0: 

•t^ZndArry (t}: *0; 
ti nrlltrl^i ry 111: -0: 

»feCo<l^A» ry [I ] : - O; 
if r.uael»»R<pr ” • th^fj t^^in 
t ctCostAitv!* 1:.0; 
h a»-^TCA j 2-y ( ? i : « - . 0; 

01 TCAi ly [ *; rpC.C-; 
shoi tTCA: ly It):*0.Q; 

Wl vnukjry ! t ) ;»0.0: 
»JiAiry{t] «0.0: 
inv»#tOtrft):»0; 
qtrSWIt} :*0; 

•n4: (if) 

end,- 

foi t:>l to (nuaberOfttke) do begin 
wAlyObi^rv It f: aO. 0; 


ewi.- 


piocedure U^kdOtMterv (v^r observ, frc«t «iud:<|uArterA*-ray: 

V4r wtly0b««ivtMeei(iy4i'r«y; 

v«i ■»An{M)Arry,V4r{]mlArry:<|U4trterArr«y; 

ob«e rVTVP* < 1 ^ t ' 

Mbeidf Ot r•. MabetO Mm . reptluM, viaCotmk $ I Dt ever; 
v«r tref*dlnd,atepIod.nHibt'St«ps. fia in T » » n d>;integer; 
■eenfVwend, yerDrpend; reel; 

T«i iinputfileztevt; 
v«r aee<*f:«ee<MrryTVPe; 

V4r iterteter. stertind. endtrnd: cHengeIntArry: 

V4i »:epBuIt. ttef>dc<>ef f, tterK^^owr: ahengeReelAi ry) 


y4r 5S:chat-; 

:. t, Ain. obeerviceek;integer; 

reni^om. currlfeenCM, initTrefKMe«n. coelfVer. <|trObeerv;re« 1 ; 
desAMlZnf 1 le: etring: 

begin 

if (repHuB ■ 1] erid IsiBCount ■ 1} then begin 
foi .. to S do begin 

step! 1 ):mO; #t*rtradiI ] :*0: endtmdU}'-0; 

St erabul? f i ]; •(> 9. t rettdccef f (:! trery^iMwei iij :■&. v; 

enri; 


118 





ncwbrTi - C; 

*-rv^: < j f > 

•Tvji -st+rtntJ^OAfvl; 

<*<^*SfV-4i : a^qtt ^v^if^raATVI} 

i<.i t:*: tc >nuno#>>Of^t 1 s, -io t^^in 

f '^*Ci': and ! 1 » 1* ' »l»Couftt •'»} th*f! t>»«gir. 

S5:•■Y•: 
wi 1 1 ♦ 1 n ; 

«iit«{'t>c you wish tc v^r^- ^ati 'WsmjH rst* ov^t tio^? (T ot ' '}: 

• f Si»r_Ansv#j th*n 

• r frT'I nri: »&; 
t t »fv1lT>'t: *0; 
c1rscf; 
mitsln: 

W7 1 1 e i n (• • • • )W>an DraanH Vai i ant s • ♦ • ’) ; 

writelft: 

viitsln f'You havs th*^ option to uaty ftsan tat» ovsi tina. It th^ notmal*] 

ifiitsln (*disti ibat ion was saiact«<l, variapca wiil also change to aamtairt youi'). 
wrttsin {’ortginai variant to aaan ratio. Yc A«y choosa batwaan stay- chA}«9a‘); 
wtitaln l*or traod or any cop^inatiofi of tha arants. If aora than ofia avant is'): 
wTitaln ,'*ci>osan to occur at tha aa*a tisa. st«p ctiani^s will ocCui fust.'): 
wiualn <‘A aasiamt of 5 KC'jrancas of aach awant is aliowad.'}; 
writaln; 

SS;*‘Y‘; 

writs ('Oo you still wish to vary isran 4< s uu v3 rata ovai tif»a? (Y oi N) ; 
if Cat.>njiw»r than ba^in 

SS:«*N'; 
cl» sc»: 

wriCaloC Star Chanj^s Scraan 

writaln; 

writa <'Do you wish to Hava stop incroasas or drcraasas? lY or H): *>: 
if ^t_Answar than stcplhd:*!; 

If stspIndBl than bagin 

writaln; 

writ#i'Intar tha nusibar of staps ehan^as liasira^i 4 ms ^]: *); 

nabi Staps: «Cat^Snta 9 ar 41.51; 

writaln; 

writalni'Tha stop function is of tha fors: tfsanltl • A * Waanit-'n • *); 
wTitaitil' You aust spactfy tha vaiua of *A* for aach stap.'); 
sir:•!; 

(oj 3:«1 to nshiStaps do bagin 
witoln; 
writaln (‘Stap 
writaln; 

writs (‘Stap quartar: *1: 

startst^l i ]: •Cat.Inta^arfmn.nMhparOfOtrs); 
writaln; 

writs ('Stap iAi; i; 

stapMilt 1 1 i: «Cat_Aaol *9. OOCOt, ^^vo.Ol * 


119 












Bin : - St • *t ♦f 11 ! ; 

♦fvl; 

*»[>'!; 

writ*}nj’ Scr^n **•*): 

wt itc-in; 

M}t«> wicfi to h*v# iV or 

tf Ot.Ans^r th^fi trofy1!ryi:«t; 
if treiv11n>:i«l thon 
wi if*ln: 

wi 1 ' ‘ *?>♦ f.\aikb*^i o* t j-^rv^ p<*i 1 c-1* 'Baji 5i : 

najbi “ 1 <*rv4s; »v1#r „ Iftt : 1.5 : j 
m itf-ln: 

wt “?>>•■ function i« of foim;*',; 

mitoinf* HeATitt} - ImtTitrpJWnn • ■ 1 • A • tio; »*B'*.- 

wi 11 *lni ’whes* t ifr) i« i*»rc to *1* dit tM b«^inning of <oAcn 1 1 oii-i p«>t i >i‘ - ; 
writ«ln(*And InitTr o f w t te AH in th^ H^n «t tho bogirmino of the trend^ reticxl.*) 
wrttoln (* Per^BcCer* A and & iMiBt tie «peci f led for e«ch tr^tid per lod, ' < .* 

■in:«U 

for a:«l to na^rtrenda <k> beyin 
writeln; 
i^iteln (*Trend 
•friteln; 

write rStort <|iiart«r: *): 

start rivil i): »Get_Integer min,nuaberOfOtrsl; 

«n iteln.- 

write 4 *End iguerter; M; 

en4tr»d( i!: aCet.Internetartrndl i I .nuB^r^f^ rs}; 

WTstelo; 

write f'Trend coefficent (A): 

t rendmf f (111 •Cet-fteA n-9999.«. «9 ; 

wrrteln; 

write (*Trend power |S)t •): 

ttecK^MWerl i J :»Ot.fteal < -tt99.6.9999. Q) ; 

writela; 

■I n; aendt md( 1 i« i ; 

end; I for I 

end; iif trendal) 

end; U( 99tAns) 

end; Ilf getaiiB} 

«fid else if t > 0 thee begin 
If SS»*y' then begin 

ae«nQbdArrv UI: "f anPwmd ; 

if dietrTy pw * 1 * then begin 
vaiibidArry i t): •warOtMnd; 
end else begin 

varlMArry ft ] -. ><rtirr9lean£9id; 
end; 

end e|»e begin 

if steplad ■ I then begin 


120 









far }:•! tc ndiferSt»r** 


if • » •%ArtI} thA-n <r«irHAAnDB**!:»*f i»I •currH^ATiti^i. 

aM; 

}f » I th#n bvgin 

fot i;*( f'^ b^in 

;f t • sTAttiivili; trv^n initTt*rfriP(^An:«cruriM»AnI»^r 

If IT -•> st«itrrvl|iM *t*1 it •> #4«^rn4{i?l th«fi 0»gin 
t-'Mrr8l»A>aO»fc<!>;«initTr< ft< >if an* 1 f {11 * 

f♦Ky' 1X J • in it -ntartttvf 1 1 • ♦ 1}) i 1; 

if c%irrlt»*.inbi - C'.o th^n cut•o.r-; 

♦IV?; 

♦rvf; 

♦TV?; 

p^AnCviAt lYM h 
if di»tiTirPf»'I* then begin 

vei fMflKi ty 11 ] : lc<»«f fV<>i'*cut : 

end elee btgin 

VAiEi^iArry (t): -cui rHenntiM; 


♦TV?; 

if di«crTyp*«'1' then bvgir. 
z Andrsor*: a^tNorvAl; 

qt rt3b*erv: •rowdfftejACBd^rry (C ] * (randrM>r»*«i7rt {«ArC«Rttrr>' 11}) > f; 
if qtrObeerv « fi.Q then qtrOfceei^?•0.ft; 
for !!•] to re«Md<<)tz^bMrv) do begin 
obseryf#eek:«Get(,?ni fonint ilij; 
vfc4yOtMM»s-v( It ■* (I *li*«b*ervWeeiif :• 

wk lyobeenr 111 • 1) * 1 i*«b«e»VMeelc)«!: 

end; 

#nH (Ifi 

♦lee If diStrTyrm*’2’ then begin 

dt rCbnerw«aCet Pe I seen < neeitflMib^rry 11}): 
for 12*1 to rouodfqtrOboerv) do begin 
obeervMeeft:«GetUni foraint Uif; 
vklyObeervf (t -1) *1 J*obeervii»ek| :• 

Mfcly O b e inr!<t-l>*lJ* o beer ¥ We « fc|*l? 

•nd; 

end; {w} 9 *) 
obee rv 1 1 ):-qc rt)b#e rv; 
end: lelse.if) 
end; (fori 
clrecr; 
end: 


piocedwre Pereceet (v«r oboexe. (rest, find;quarterJlrrey; 


const Al.AUk-ft.1: 


ear ^eglMitrry. trndlodftrry.abCodeArrv: qtrSntArray; 
BiiaberOf0trs<rec4bin: integer; ttaitPrice;r*an; 













W^i , '.rwi s>i». s-WT'ieSt-'ttk^v. at'ifto.vT^A.': : 

.HM-rifvt. st^Irwi. tt^tvIU^.. 

trwim, T. i. j. w, s. 


wi •Running R#rl »c*»t ic-r. • '.r#fMA); 

■ ly N ;:-guru’ll k'rr-V ;. . fl'?r ;■ I; .ur i-P i ; 

it I r,".: - ; -itwr; I r,-i; ■ . .- 

;■-! •■-. r: njiMi vlt't: £ 'k: t^ir. 'ctrCAsli 

I: *FAL5E; 
tian^IiKl: «0; 

S«»p3iv!: ■0; 

if I l■tCo^Itylt-ll ■ 0! 01 l«ltC<l/l»Atr/it-l! . II oi (•kCMlfAnvlt-IJ .J)l <lwn 1 iwfkfcink:-TStlE 

if iMOtttAAd t>»an b«gtn 

: ■STtPftitaffil • f rc*t (t - 1 1: 

»nH *1 m> toa^ifii 

upr*i imfrcft [t-1 J*1.2S‘**d{t-l) *STEPB(»«Ii2; 
loM*! i •(rest (t -11 - 1 .2S*«Md|c - 11 *SrcP80(JK>2: 
rnd: 

it i lovO^Mivi Axv*. (ooa^ivlt't! • S)) «i 

Mofca^j-v If - 11 . urrvt k anrl -U .• !oM#r}k «b*-n begin 

gf'l rvt: *0 r 
'ieMfi ! nd:« 0; 

fre»t It I :<AtnM*ot»*rv|t-il.(i-ALnM)*frc«t It-IJ; 
udlt I i-ALTHA* latwlolwi-vit-ll-frcit It •])) l^lI•**i(t-l!! 
end else begin 

if t(ob«erv|t«i} . un’^rl «nd or 

nob*erTlt-lJ » lomrri «or| i^omoIikUIH the« begin 

If r >4 tben tegtn 

f rear {r 1 1 - ioO«erv{t • 4)♦gbeerv1 1 > J|♦ o beerr1 1 '2l«ob>>erv(t-l)) / 4 ; 
end elee if ( • 4 then begin 

ft car Jtl :-<o6eervtt-il*«b«erv(c-2i*obeerrU'in/i<* 

end else if t • J then begin 

f I csr It): • (obterv 11 -2) •obeei-v 11 -111 /2: 

end; 

if trestle} « O.d then 

ele* ^(tJ:-OOBrPl*e9(POMIt'*in(frcetUM}: 

stefilnd:«2 ,* 
x^^lndiaO; 

end else began 

If Mebserv|r>l{ . end (uipind.on then begin 

irp2nd:>I; 

f rest It J : •ftest It- 11; 

Nd{t}: *«sd|t - 2 ] ; 
end else begin 


122 







it ( *i 1 ■ icwvi Anrt {4cnmifvi«o^ : th#-n bs^jin 

r'JowIrviliil; 

ffit ft 1 : .fr^-st It -1 ]: 

BA i {11 : •»dfi 11 -1 j ; 

♦rvi; 

♦fvl; 

ATvi.- 

«id; 

i! (t -4} .wi {*tipf'IrKl«Ol th^n b^gin {Coivhjct ll»na.%il T*x*^ T#st J 

3un:«C.0: 

i t * }f bf^i n 

ioi \ i u\ So ?-l 'V/ b*»g 1 n 
sob: ■£aB*ob3<‘) V {1} : 

*nd: 

41 - i) ; 

siiB: >0.0; 

f o I i; > 1 t c t - ] fio br-g i n 

Su*:*sun*B7r (obMrvj i) -SAapl«W*&n); 

♦nd: 

SAfl^lBStdlhevtvftqi t Uus/ It -2)) ; 
er>d b#^jn 

foi to t-i do b#gin 

•8aB*obc«'i'v11}; 

#nd; 

ftiMp 4 an:« SUB/8; 

SUM!> 0 .Q; 

for i;>t«8 to t-I do b«g)n 

••■MR: *8ua««qr (ob««rv( |) >MwpI««l«>An}; 

•nd; 

»«Mpl*StdDBv: «*rprt («gff/ 7 ) ; 

«nd; 

It MaplvdoAn • O.C th*n k«gin 

■tdD»vToll»«n :••«««) 1 dDBv / •Mmti 
end else begin 

stdDevToHeAn: 0 

end; 

Ben<trest; sfAlse: 

if liiMPTletleen -« J.O! «nd (stcPevTolfaen «» 1.7S} then begin 
kendTest: ^true; 

if stdEievTotteen > 1.0 then begin 
tAbie;<i: 
end else begin 
table:«2; 
end; 
end: 

if ((sasfvlellean ^ 1.0) and isaspIeMeen < 3.0)) and 
{stdDevToMean *> 1.75) then begin 
kendTest; •% ciie: 

if •tdDevToMran ' 1.25 then begin 
Tabie;<J: 
end else begin 


123 




^n-i; 

if ( i u.Ub) v«r>^ (ATvi 

{3trtli»yToH*^7i •■ 2.00) tfi^n b^in 
k*f‘n''fT#st: *\ I ue; 

> 2 ; 

if k#rKiT*'at*tiiif- th»n b#flin (Cojviuct K^Tviall S*Te*t fot 

W:>8; 

\f i»apqr>leH«An >* i.O' '3daf^)#l|«Ark • *i.O) th«^n b«yin 

ij I• O.jO} then W:fb; 
end; 

if -M ^,0} .ind {Sda^'lHfeAn > 20.0) then be<;)n 

if istdfievTcMe.’in * O.^.M then W;» 0 ; 
if (St SIievToHean ' 0.2W) then W:*4; 
end; 

if i8am>l#MeA.i » 2C.0) then begin 
If (stdl^vToMean * 0.S3) then 
if (stdDevToMeAn * 0.26) then W:«4; 
end; 

if W . ft-1) then div 2) *2; 

S;-0; 

fot to (t-.'*' do be^jn {Compute Ketrd.01 S-Stfttjafic) 

for 5 :»(i*l} to It-l) do begin 

If obfletv(i) • obeeivfj] then S:"S«]; 
if oba«t-v(i) * ob«etv(j) then S:o9-l; 
enH; 

end; ifo») 

if table m 2 then begin 
if W « 4 then begirt 

t rendl^: *4: t reivffin: • - 4; 
end; 

If W • e then begin 

t rendUb:J t rendDn:■-9; 
end; 

1 f W « 9 then begin 

tiendOp:«lJ; trendfin:«-)J; 

end: 

end e<ee begin 

if W > 4 then begin 

t*eni^JbJ-b; tiendDh:-*h; 
end; 

if W • b then begin 

trendUpsaii; trendpn;--U; 
end; 

if tif ■ If then begin 

t rendt^:« lO; t sendbti;* - }e; 

end; 

end; (ifj 
tiendlrwi:»0; 


124 







if 

$ 

trandUp than 

irandlrvi:* 

If 

s 

- fc trandCm than 

irandlndj ■ 

1 f 

tiarvijnil ■] than 

bag in 


AUS:« U.0: 

foI 1 : ■ it -4] to ‘ t - 11 rio b«^ i n 

9u# : MSU81-* [ 1 I; 

• fri; 

fi'c»~ 11 ] : ■9UB/4: 

if fi-CStfti ■ (j.O th«n ^d(t};»0.0 
#1 s» BUkd{t 1 :*COEFri ‘frxp { POWER 1 Mn I f I cat (t) ] J ; 
ervi; (ifl 
♦fi'i; (ifl 
♦ncS; {if} 

akCodeAiry it ):-^’etKarkCo6f {t ,»kCo<i#Arry it • 11, f rcat It) .i nitPrica); 
st*pljviAi 111 : •»tef>Irrf; 
tm-ilndAl tv! t! -* “treryilnrS; 

«r>d; { fo 2 } 

••fyi; 

pioc*dur* Lo^L^vvl* lv*» fi rst, ob##rv, fiOtfArry, frOLev«lAtry. 

SSACK)BO, SSAIH). fiSSMAzquditsrArrsy; 
v«r akCodvAttsy:QtrIntArisy: 
vsr nuBbsrOfOtrt:int«9«r; 
prMrkPt: int« 9 «r; »#4nD»«iAr»d:i«A): 

PDOat aTyp#:char); 

VkU A02J8,BRLOC.aoUA.BC19A,B42J>:,B02JD.B07J.M,PFV,ddl$,B031,MU)CUz ra*i: 


FTMSstrl: at ring {24 ]; 

P082*t»2. PD*a*tiJ. PO02jtr4, POSSstrS, K)82aerft. K«2str7. 

PO02stiil: ftrirgiaSS); 


PDitftrl: 
PD8«stt2. 
P08<>atri: 
PM4st r«: 


atring{24i; 

PMbatri. PDBbatr4. PD8«atr5, PM4atrt>, K)94atr7, 

atring(3SSi; 

atringlbOl; 


inf 1 iip,out f i }• rtaxt; 
LTVar;r»al; 
t: 


bi^in 

foi t:-} to nijpfcivrofOtra do bagin 

gOtoXYd.JI; 
wtita{'Quartar I ',t); 
assign (infila,*pdB3in.fi1 * 1; 
rasat (infile); 

raadiin(ila,ft>«28trl, Ptr82stz2. PD02atr2. PD«2str«. PMastri, PWastrti. 

PD82str7, PC82atr8}; 
closa dnfila); 

B02iD: >f rest It ) : fcur>»nt guartarly foracast} 


125 









AD23&: 

i f t •< t fi^n b«9in 

A02iB: - {ol^s<-i V 11 - 4 j «ob«#t-v 11 - J } vobs«-iv f t - 2 f ♦obsei v 11 - I} j / 4 ; 

‘‘n'-i ©Is^ if t a 4 then begin 

A02i6'. ■ (obseivft • i{«^ob«e]'v f? - 2 ] ^obseiv (t • 1 ] >. i; 
enH if t • i then begin 

ACi2J&:*iobse)v(t-2i«ob*ei''yft~in/2; 

efjfi; 

If A02JB •« 0.0 then A023B;*1.0; 

sti-Te^: -cofv iPD82»tr2.4fe, IS) ; BO UA:-St li ngToRe.il fStiTefir) : 
BC2JC;*B0UA*60;jD; 

PPV:-B02jC.- 

delete |PDa2str2.1.IS): 

insert (NuHToSt i ing (A02 3BJ . Ki82sti2, J) ; 

•^iete (rtt«2sti2, 121. IS); 

inseiT iHmrt ring (602JL*} . Pf)«'2st»2.1211; 

rleUte (Pr)829t»2. lot). IS); 

insert fNuafToString (B02JC}. PDff28tt2. lOt); 

'ielete f PDB2st rS, <»i, 15) ; 

insert (MuaToStriftg(PPV).pDe29t rS.J; 

M;-«kCodeArryttl j (Current mJtik cocie) 

rleUte (PDi2*tr4,24 1,151; 
insert iNusToStnng (H) .PDB2str4.24n ; 
if (MkCo^rryIt 1 • 2) or (■kCodeAi-ryJtl-41 then begin 
LTVar:.l,57*aoiU; 

E019A5 -B0UA‘ (sqi lpiadlt ] )*1.571*(»qi (frcsl (t 1)) ‘tTVai ; 
end else begin 

if abslB02iC)« EJUtOft then B022C:s0.0: 
if B02iC>0.& then begin 
8019A!«f>.0 
end else begin 

BO 19A; »COEFP2 • exp I PCWBt2 M n (B023C n 

end; 

end: 

delete (PD02str2.7«. IS); 

inrert fNiaiToStringlMlOA) . PDf2sti2.76) ; 

If akCodeArryftI ■ 0 then begin 

end else begin 

if ptbBikPt - 0 then begin 
BRU>C:-5; 

end else begin 

if B02iC • pibBrkPt then begin 
BRUlC:-4; 
end else begin 
BBUXi-S: 
end; 
eikd; 
end; 

delete (PDa2st i 2. U. IS) : 

insert (IMfToSti ing(BBLDC) , PMf2sti2. le); 


126 





Assign lout f 1 i*.. 'pe:it2in. f 11 * ); 

(outfile); 

wri t*ln lout f 1 < PD82st ri . P065sti2, Pf)a2«ti\), PT>82*tr4. Pli82*tf5, PT!B2»tiB. 

P£)82sti7. f»082«tr8); 
cios# (out f t; 

Sw^H^V^ctor*; 

«x«c !'d:\uicp\P(lM2IUtO.«Xv‘.'d: NUICT rvlB2in. f U pdB 2 ou;,(il * t; 

SWdfiV^toa *; 

if DoxErroi " - u th«n b# 9 in 
WS 1 1»1 n : 

?nun'1l220j : 

(JOOj ; 

MoSound; 

wikivin I'Dos error l‘, OosEiroi}; 

HitToCont; 

end; 

i inf 1 2«, *^82out. f 1 1 '}: 
reset (infileh 

r**dlinfile,n}82strl. rD82stk2. PDfi2stiJ. f>082stt4. K>S2s(iS. PD82strs. 

PDe28tr7, PDeistrei: 
close linfile); 

st rTei^: «cof>y iP082st r7 . . IS) ; aStr ingTeBeel lStrTesf>}; 

ROLevelArrylt] 

»t iTeiT': -«coFV<f'W<2*cr7.224. 1$}; B021: -StringTofteal jStrTeap) ; 

COCArryIt]:>&021; 

StrTeap:«copy(PD82str7.121,IS); BRLOCU:•StringToReeltStt^eMp): 
af PDCieteT^pe • *1* then begin 
InitK««rUe; 

SMpVectors: 

•xec rd:\Uicp\IPPOttiUl4.es**.M:Vuicf> pd8«in.fi] pdBeout.fii ' ); 
SktfepVectors; 

if Ooetrro) * * 9 then begin 
wi itein; 

Souf>dl220) ; 
deUy UOO); 

No Sound: 

writein {‘Dos error •*. DosCrror); 

HitToCont? 

end; 

essign (infile.'pdfoout.fal*); 
reset <infsle); 

resd(infilr.(*OB«i«trl. POi<»str2. POBOstrJ, PMbstr4. n>8bstr5, PDibsti^. 

PD86str7, P094str8. POBOstr9); 
close (infile); 

strT««p:*copy (P&tOstrB. loo . IS}: SSADCOOft 1 :«Str»ngToReal (StrTes|?); 
ttrTeapiecopy (POStstrB, 181. IS); SSADOIt} i-^tringToResl (Sti .'esg^) ; 
strTesr:*copy (PD8estr8,l9e,iS}; SSSHAlt} :-StringToResi (St rTeeir): 
end; 
end; 
end; 


127 








pi occ^ui'f Co«r«t*mF IvAi ly, EO0**‘»^‘. frc®t .I4*d. £fti(Arty:<^ai At i-^y; 

vAi •KCOfVAj rytTt I IfttAi r^y: 

vAi qt 1 , C4ICu) ) . s?>o&a} s , 'ii er*^*AlCou«nC .'jt rDie^M: 

ERRTyp^;chAi ; 

unitF^ .hcl<ifi«c,short.s^iyAAte, 

PLT. obsol AAt4- . iiscKAt^. nixiVt .ki ] Ess^nt: tA>«l} : 

v,ii tfl I .V]. EliR ,TZA)o,f4ufwy: isaI : 

pSt .2. LTtJ, LTVai . ?igMLTt>.2, piobShort .SXpShoi t; rsAi: 

fDblPi i»sOfT. fPri«sOfT,Tn.TnI .1 . A. P. F, ft.Q,C. Ps.M, i a; r-p.il.* 

b#gin 

cA»s EARTyT* of 

*0*: bA^in {no HispobaI) 

ERR:.OHCux1; 

£ftAAi'k'y I<It I ] ;«EftftAx ry (<Ttx ! * 0: 
sryl; ( caes C) 

‘(uicp) 

W1 I ; * 4 * fic«t(.itr}? 

Wl:. rftSEAft * WM; 

l! WI . MIKEAR then EAft:-W2 

«1*« atftc-MlNEAR; 

CARArrYldtr] :-eiUkArry(qcr) « irftSEkA; 
snd; (cass 1} 

*2': begin (net ben) 

if (frcEtjfjtr) «• OJ and (EOQArry(qtt) • *0) then begin 
TZeroi* ((uAitPi ice > (unitPr ice * eAlyRAte) • 

(ordei'CcAt / EOOJU-cy |<|ti'))} / iunitHice * holdPrac)) 

(GOOAilytqtiI / <8 * (rcctiqtr])); 

CllR:«TZeic * 4 * frcit{qtl); 

IRMrrylqtrl :«IUtArrylqtrJ « ^ro: 

end (If) 

else begin 

OUtfl; 

ERMrry Iqtr): •ERRArrylqtrl * 0; 
end; {eteei 
end; ica*e 2) 

*3': begin (piod nb) 

pStcckOut! ■ (holdFrac'xinitPrice) / 

((hoi dFrac * uni t Price) ♦ (shortcost *mi I Cesent}}; 

Z: -2lnv (pSt^hCkOwt) ; 

LTlii-fiCEt Jqtl I*PLT; 

if (MkCodeArry (qtr) ■ 2) oi (•bCodeAj ly (qt r | >4) then begin 
LTV*i:-J.57*PLT; 

•ig>»LTD;«eqrt (PbTMeqr{»ad(qtr]) *1.57)«lEj:p (frcEt {qtr))) 
‘LTV«r) ; 
end else begin 

if «bs(LTD}<EfUIOR then LTO:«0.0; 
if LTtwv.v then begin 
S 19 MLTD: *0.0 


128 









1 1 s* n 

• -sqrr * 1 n i LTD’ ) ' 

♦fKl; 

rnd; 

Mf2:-2Mf IZ) r 
prob^oi t soutMoi-Vk^i (Z ): 

♦xpShoi t: * (LTtJ - ftOL^v^lAriy ['ttt I >‘E»obShort ♦ •tgauLTD*rwifZ; 

If (ficstjqtti • ■ 0) And (EO 0 Arryi< 7 tr] • -0) th^n bvQin 
TZfri ot - (unit Pi ic*** I! - sal vftAt»; • / (unit Pi ic«*h 0 idf i ac) ♦ 
aWi lyl^tl 1 / (2*4*frc#t (< 7 ti n • 
i 01 d*'i Cose «shoi tCost • sxp 5 hoi t) i 
< LO^’Ai ly 1 i ‘uni tPi iCA*hoidFi acJ : 

ERA; *T 2 Aro* 4 * f l cst i ) ; 

ERPA 11 y I rjt I I: ■ CJUIA > ly {rjt i i • T 2 a i o; 

♦nd j I f ) 

* I Se begt r 

ERP:-1; 

eRllArs~y{qti ] :>EfUUlrry{citr| • 0; 
end; (else) 
end; (case J) 

*4‘: begin 

iiainfRate; k: •discflate; P:aunitPrtce; F:«h©ldPrAc; 

0;»EO0Arry {^trl} Rj- 4*f rest Irrtt); C:-orderCost; drUa;«'»0000; 

Ps:»unitPrice‘salvRater N: *4*f rest Iqtr) *nimTi sOH; 

if (frcstlqtr) • • 0) and (©ogArryJqti ) • . 0 ) then be^in 
t : -1 (unitPfice - (urltPiice • salvRatei ♦ 

{or«ier<:oat / eOQArivlati j)) / lunitPrice * holdfiacU ♦ 
(BOORrrylqtr) / (S • fiest iqtr))); 

Tn:*t: 

diBisyj-leKpt) li-k) *C)/li) - U ; 
fOblPriMOfT:•l; 

srfiile Klelta > 0 . 01 ) «od (diaap «.• 0) and iTti > DtWM) 
and (abslfDblPripeOfTl > EMfOR) do begin 

fPi l«eOfT:.{(P*P*R)/|2'k)•|p*F*t*R)/2)‘expl-k^t)* 

(SP*F*01/2*lP*OMi-k)*CMi-k))/ 
lexp( ((t-k)*0)/R)-l))*e«rMi-k)*t) 
-Ps»R-(P*F*R)/(2*k); 

fDbiPrine0fT;-P*r*«» ((k‘t-n/2) ‘eifpi-kn) * 

HP*F*0Mi-k))/2*(P'0**qrti-k)^**qT!i-k) 1/ 

(eicp( ((i-k) •0)/R)-l)) • ei^(li-k) *t); 

■hil: -Tn-f PrineOfT/fDb! PrineOfT; 
delta:^«bs(Thl-rn); 

T^-.eTnl; 

duMiy:«(exp( ({i - k) *0) /It) - 1); 
end; (while) 

i f 7n 1 • Ciiiiun t ben beg i n 
CRR i •Tn 1 * 4 * (1 cst f qt r}; 


129 








£«W»riy :»ERim,r»y{Ttr| * Tnl; 

{if) 

«1 I n 

WUtA< IV (Qt»1 : •ER^Ai iyIT* * J * 

<PT?d r I # J ! 

errt {J f) 
b*gin 

EWIArry Iqtr j t ■OiRAi rvtTtrl ♦ 0; 
frnd; {♦!»») 

{c^««> 4) 

•S’: fc-p^i n {ti Ad) 

T2»i o: - In I < talvKale* {riiscftat^+obsolRattf') ♦stoiHate^* il -obfiolRjt#) • 
f l+di»cRa?^ j 1 / fdiscRat**ob;^3lfiitt«-»st6i Ra'.e* 

(1 -ob^olRjt * I 1-^di «cRat#» )) / In: J 2 -obtfclR4t4>) / 

(i«di*cR4t*>); 
flW:-T2»i o*4*frc*t {qtrl; 

2W*Ai ryjqti i;-aiflAriy !<ftr) ♦ TZfto: 
end: <C4»« SI 

'ti’ : begin {fixed) 

£M: «nuayrs£ft]k*4* frc«t (gti ]; 

ERRArry (qtr I: aEUlArry {qtfl « nuaTriEMt: 
end; {ceee 4) 
end; (all caees) 
if CRR • MINSRR then &RR:«£RR 
vise CRR:«MIHEAA; 
if OHCuri ' ERR Chen begin 

dis|>oM]Count :»dicf>c»eICounc • 1; 
dicPos4ls:«disPosals ♦ (OHCurr • tound(EitR)}; 

<7ttOi«i>ose:«OHCuii • round(ERR}: 

OHCui r$«round(CRR) : 
end; (if I 
end; (ro«puteCRJI) 


procedure SGRIvar OSHeap.BGHeeptPriQrityOueucType: 
v«i wklyObseiv:weeklyArray; 

vai ECCArry ,ROLevelArrY, obsenre. frcet, CRRArry :<|uarCerAr««y; 
var nuaibeiOfOt rs. init Inv.orderCount: integer; 
var disPoeal».di«posalCount:integer^ 

^anOwand, rat i^PLTmtMU \jnitPrice,ordeiCo*t .hoidFrac: real; 

shortCoet, salvRat*, PLT.obeolflace,di»cRace:keal; 

var nuokYrcIM.nuaVreOHireal; 

kiJRssentireal; 

var mUS.endOH.endOS: integer; 

var ACC80.A0P.SHA. IfTvfat:real; 

wkDat aType > <|t rDat alVpe. outputType. SRRType. anal Indtype; chai: 
var totCoet.ho!dTC,ordei-TC. ahortTC. »aivTR;real; 
vai tot Cost Any . holdTCArry. ordes'TCArry. ShortTCAriy, 
salvTRArry. investgtr.<!|trSHA;< 4 uarterArray) .* 


130 





Vrti lyBC .wfclyCr:i: Ay ♦cci-i; 

44Bt BO. . a . wc iy{«<iMn>i. . tnit Oi^i fi, a Ait OS: a nte^et ; 

vk.-Tv t . s! ft) zeB>0.qt I t)i sfx^s^ .nutit>erOS.^y; int«^r; 

X -«n'inc')'a. 1 Ar»dPLT.wk Sy Jnv<*-st .r^i Invest.) efl nvest .»♦<>)'ielTiiw; leal; 
f i^l, f lftg2;booWAn; 

^Fi I ) .c^dTTot. OSToc .OSCut i .BOTot .BOCui t ,OHcui t .OHFiev. IPcuri , iPFt cv: int ftg^) : 
CulftBO, cuvflO.cunMC. ciaSR .<iiri^r IntiMVdl: I: 

St ftj t Int. IntLength: r^ftl; 


begin 

S«t S***i 1 iv ( nuao^j Ref} i; 

OSCUMi-C; 

OUTot : -OSCul t ; 

1 nif Inv; It* ourvi {nL»Yj sOM* 1 »cat 11} *44; 

Imr lAi 1 zepr )or t ty^eue lOSHeAp); Inx t iftl i z«Pi )oi ityQueue (BOfl^Ap); 
if AnAlIorTrype « '0' tr>en begin 

inxtlnvi-roundlEOQArryiD * ROLeveUrry (1) - (rest |l) «PLT): 
nitf^rOS; -round ( PVT/ ICOORrry (t) / f reftt il H ): 

)f nitfiberOS < • 0 th»n bftgin 

for )•** 1 to niaborOS do bogm 
wklyOS.gty:■round{BOQArry{I M : 

if (PI.T > ii-1) * <BO0ArtY(U/trc«tn)M > 0 th#n b#gin 

day:-round! PLT - (i-U * iBOORrry 11J/f roftt f 1))) • U ♦ 1? 
vk 1 yOS. We*k:-cUy; 

Inftei tPr tcirit/0u«ue{O$Heap<wkiyOS); 

OSTot;- OJJTot ♦ iidclyOS.^y; 

OSCurr:* OSCwir * vklyOS-Cty; 
end; (if) 
ond; I for) 
end; fif) 

end; Uf enelind} 

if (cjtrOateType • *«*) or (vkPAt«^pe • *1*) then begin 
writelnloutput fI lei; 

vriteln(output file.*S0A Oftt« Initiel OH Inv:* *.in)Clnv.* Initial On Order:* 

vt X tel n (output file,*-- — --- — --......---- 

end; 

OHCurr:-inilInv; 

OHf-i ev: -OHCurr; 

BCCuiI:-H; 
lepInveetiB Q.O; 

BOrtll:* 0; 

TWUS:- 0; 

AODBO:- 0; 

ADO:- 0: 

crUeftO: *0.0; 

CubHC:«0.0; 
cuiiSfi:-0.0: 
dMdfOt ;a0; 

Sitt - t»; 

BC/tot i -0; 


•.OScurr) 


131 









ICount: mC; 

If^ui I ; ■OttCurr*OECur*; 
IPPrfV:•IPCuri; 


foi Cft t : « I to n(.»b»iOfOti s fio c»gin 
jf wfclWttdTyr^ • 1* th^r b#gin 

vt it«ln f 1 1^} i 

%n loutjvi*. f: i**.’W. W fttC ^G< BC OS 0« IP OROCWT OST BcrtCC "TVIJ 

Tt I I nv«»st ; ■ C.O; 
qrrCn sposv:aO; 

**kiy Invest : » 0.0; 

i( (An«»nnrfTyp« ■ '!*) aivI |<7ti ■ 1) th^n 

Cc^ut«EM (KOLrv*lArry. fiOOArry, f rot .K*d. QtMrry ,mlrC>:I^ATry ,qt r, 

OHCuri. di 8p«Mis,4i^>o&alCount .qtrOiapos*, EARTyp*-. 
un 1 1 Pr . or<l«i'Co8t . hcldFr«c. sItortCost, 8AlvA«t*, PLT, 

obcoiRate.di»cRAt*.nupYi8EilA.»i l£4lftMt): 

if IAn<t 11 ndTv'pf ■ *1’) and (qti «• )) thpn ERRAi>y{/^I t :«0; 

if iK>d 2) > 01 and (anal Ind^Vp*^ • ' 0*1 than 

CosputaERR (ROLavalArry, EOOAi 17 ^ frcst .Had. CRRAiiY.akCodaAiiv. Qt). 

OHTurt .d]«poaa 4 a.di8po«4lCount.^r{>i«r> 08 a,RRAlypa, 
un 1 1 Pi 1 ca, ordaiCoat, hoIdfrac. ahortCoat. aaWRata, PLT. 

0^*01 Rata.di •cRata.niaKVrs&LRiCssant); 
if Mlqtr*!) mod 2) ^ • 0) and (anallndlype » '0*) than 

ERRArry lqtr{ laBRRArryfqti >1}; 

foi wii:« 1 to IJ do bagin 

*i\ lyPa«4/»d;itrounidlwkiyOb*€rv(data)): 

dmrfTot;. «tedTot ♦ %rltlyD*maf>d; 

ra^aipt:«0; 

amtRs<v:*0; 

amtOOraC; 

wklyBO.Qty.-0; 

iirA I y BC. Haak: «da t a; 

wklyOS.(Ky:aO; 

flag! 2 .FALSE; riag2:«PALSE; 


if not i&f>tyPriority0ua\ia(OSHaap}) than bagin (racaiva) 

rapaat 

if CurrHaaklOSHaap) ■ data than bagin 
astRacvrsCxtiaOtCty (OSHaap); 
vaoaipt; vamtkacv; 

OSCuti:> OSCuri - aatRacv; 

idiiia lamtRacv • OJ and not <ltev7tyPriorityguaua(BQHaap)} do bagin 
if CurrOtylBOHaap) <> amtRacv than bagiin 
amt HO: *currOt y I BOHaap) ; 

amtRacV:* amtRacv « mitHO; 

BOCurr:* BOCurr - MtBO; 

BOTili:- BOFili « ^tBO: 

THt^:- tlAJS {amtBo'Idata - CstractHaak(BOHaap) M: 


132 






e \ pi 

TAyn i .OtyAy' I; . Jty - A(»tR**rv 
WtJS:- TW£ «. (fc»<r¥ * i # - aCAi*-At-. Hp^^pArt Ay 11 ; .WA^fc- ■ : 
BOCwzi;* &)C«jrr • ^aBtfl^cvr 
BOFill:* BCFlll • ABtA^CV; 

ABtfttpCV:* Cl; 
tfftri; < » f ) 

•wi; jwhiltl 
OHKtrvz-OHCuir: 

OHCurrtaOHTurr * jMitK^cv; 

»Rd; 

jf CartyPi ioi ity^uAu^iOSHvAp} tr»n THUt 

el*p if currt*»AinOSH^Ap) • • /4j»te th^n f lAgi;-TP'Jt; 
until flA^l oi fl<tg2: 

(if 

if wkiylMUkTKl - 0 tK#n b»gin {isau^i 

If wfciyOfMnrf - OHCurt then b»9in 
wklySO.Otyi* «AlyD»MAri - OHCurr; 

OHCurr:* 0 : 

In»ArtFrtorttyCw<^fBOH««p.«^lySO] ; 

SOTot:>&aTot -» wklyfiC.Oty; 
dOCurr:*BOCiirr « tPkly&O.Oty; 

«r>d i\{\ 

*1»# OHCurr:» OHCurr - wfclyDrwuyt; 

♦fKf; (if I sau* 1 

lPPl #V: aJPCuil : ion^l f 

( if wi>u tSiMi 1 {for •iiiAttorly SC*) 

iPCuri ;- OHCurr ♦ OSCuri • BOCurr: 
if iPCurr «• ftOL»volArry(qtr) thon b««sn 

tfktyOS.Oty;«rouDd<ROL*T*lXiTy{qtr) ♦ BOCAxryKitrl) * BOCurr * 
lOMCuri- ♦ OSCurr); 
rvKkiora: «CetNorm«l; 

r*ndptT.->«bo<PLT« (r«o(k>ora*r«t iPPLT5nMU*n.T}); 
if randPLT . IVULPLT then begin 
rondPLT: -MfUPLT; 

♦r»d el*e if randPLt * MIKFLT then begin 

rondPLTi-hlKPLT 

erxi; 

wfclyOS.«eok:<<tot« « riMinddAndPLT*U) * 1: 

Ineei tf»r)orityQufMe(06He«p,wkly06) ; 

OSTot;- OSTtot ♦ wklyOS.Oty; 

C^urr:- GSCurr ♦ wklyOS.Oty; 
orderCount:- orderCount * }; 

•nd; fit) 

( end:) {for i^uorterly SCft) 

If ieU>At«Type a M* then begin 

««r Item (outfit f 1 le.qtr: J,d«te:9. receipt wfclyDeMAd:*, BOCurr:*. 

OSCur 1: *. OHCMrI-:», I KTur r: *. orderCoont: e.OSTot! *. BOTot: e. WJS:») 
if (ootputType ■ '1*) end Uvk nod 13) • 0) then begin 


133 





H; tTcCcnt ; 

ir» tt* 1 f. 5 output { 1 ; 


♦ ai; M f I 


♦ryi: 


<t^S* 

! s i I^Eh.'- • •r;3^P^ i<5» j’ ; frC.-fft'-Ap '■ : 

%\Z*OZ-.nSi.t*ir% ioi 

lU,'tC* ^ : j.' »0 g- CTV: * .curffVty: j . 

• SJ: 0£ C WMk: ‘ : J • OS C OTT: '. 

cui icty ' 03 H#*P») ; i . * Si; • . nieOS) : 
wi t ? ^In < outrsit f: lei; i 

receipt :-C: 
e: -•iAt ♦* 1: 

wklySnve*t;« «Hllylnv«st . OSCuJi - 
cvjftBO:«ei#ec. •* {tw*t*TW3/521 •»hottCos? ? ‘exi'. --ii scilAte/S2*-^t ♦); \ 
cuBAO:-cufl«0 * i(80Cuxr/S2)*ft»>eitCoftti*#zpi*«li»clt*te/S2*<lAtei; 

Ci04iC:><ru«MC ♦ lOlfeCurr* lholdfrAC*untt$>TiCe>'S 2 t *expr-'1iscftate/52*'iftrei • 

if «*klyOS.C^y - 0 ttten 

cuadt0:acu«ft0 ♦ (unit^riC«*feAlyOS.Ory • ofierCost} •expi-<«is«f)ate/S2‘riAtei; 
end: | for Mek} 

<^rlnvest:- triciyZnve«t/li; 

investor (qtr] :-iAvestOtr {<|trl*qcrlnve»t: 

replnvest:> replrTV««t « qti Invent; 

cuASft:*ci»^ ♦ (ufl)tPr ice*4Mi vR4te*<?trDi«pose*ei^(>dieclt*te* /4n; 

totCostAirv(qti) j«totCo*tArtvJ<7t» 1 ♦ curtO*<rurtO*c»**»C-enaR5R; 

holdTCArrvl'jt 1 1J •holdfTCArry I<ytrl ♦ cunMC: 
ortIrrTCArry r); ■^I'fWi'TCArry (qtri • cumAO; 
shertTCAtryiOtr} ;-»horttCArrY{lti} ♦ cuhSO: 
mIvTR/i O'lqti I :»m«lvTflA«iY(<ftt i « c\»Sii: 
if BOFUl ‘ - 0 tf»en AM»0: •?* tTWlS/BOTi 11) ; 
if ^Kffot • • 0 then begin 
ADO:*7* iTmJS/<0erffot}; 

Sl|A:«i • BOTOt/MTot; 

<ItrSi«if^rri :-^ra«i<itr| ♦S»; 
end; (if) 

if qtrOatoType • 'i' then begin 

if !rjti-l) oi M|*?tr-n 29 ) « 0)th«n begin 

writelnloutrvt f 2 (e); 

W 1 Itelnioutputdle.-grit WBJ 0« IP OS BO ADOBO ADO SMA I«VEST DiSP 
end; 

if irjit - 1 ) arri iwADataType * ' I' J nj»d not M iqtr-U hod 20 * Q) 
then begin 

wi itei»(output file); 

eixteIn(o«trvtfile.*OT» DHP ON IP 06 BO ADOSO AXS> SMA Ikf/tST DI$P 


end; 

if qttDateType > *1* then 

wr Iteln (output f ile.cjt r: i. obeerv (cftr) :e:9.0HCurr: k, IPCurr: e. 
O^UD :^.BdCurr:k,ACOeO:7;2.ADO:f:2.SI|A:‘t;2,qti3r7veet :^:2, 


EMM : 


EM' 


134 




TtiDis^s-it.OR/ttViTt* ; 

; * Aft'i f'tt»r»-»? ^Tyx^ • ' 1 

n -T : I n 5 ■ ' '■ •■nti • \ ■ •'vi i'O e '- rn*r i'»^ir 

M .f ToCofit • 

wl It^in ' f i ]♦'>: 

9-TrA: Of? 

*tiA; < fot Ttr» 

irrv«st:* i#f>Inv»st/nuBt»iOfO«i 9; 

♦iv4C*t; »Of^u r r ; 

#n^3S:*03Cuii: 

t cvCost; — fTTK’- - -~-ir-H^ — rr^*- : 

hc-HTC; .ciaeifC.- 
Ot'V»TC:«ci9l*0; 
sItortTC: viTiiadO; 

oCuaSA ; 
gotcXYf 1 .IJI; 

«rvrl: (•rlr) 

prec^^r* (prbBrkft .•r««5tn4vz: in(99*r; 

Ml vR^t* ,nuAYr«OH, fAt i^PLTSTUK). A^A/^)«Mnd. vArDMAAd: i 

v«r outputfi 19:t«rt; 

outputTyp*.«li Ot rTVr*. EAir?yp«,4nAl ]ntftVr*:cl^r; 
outf il«W9Ae:stt ir^; ninZ>9script:<i9ftcriptT>‘pw; 

nBbt^«p9,nabrTt-«nd4: int«g«r; 
stopHult. tioryiCo-ef f , t roiyi T owoi ;cfv4ng«li9aXAriv> 
•t4iit;^«p«st#{Ti'rKl.9ftcrrr»d:ciuu^lTitArt'y>; 

VJil t:)nt09«t7 

•rrilMd.dist rtl9«d..»ncilDs«<l;string(7]; 
infalo.'toxt; 

Tmj: . Hoftt h, tk*y, P*yo f w o fc i Morti; 

C02« : •tringlll: 

AQ2JB.&0l0.BOlLA.»fi30.eO2}C.B02JD.8«SS.BO57.B95l.Bfl«l.BO7i.C00ac.D«3Se. 
ltSL0P.SCR.TD.TSDfl5,VQl$R.VC22.Vi0LA,VI92.yi0i4.V29^: lool; 

PD«2strI: 8tilf»gl24): 

P£)92stt2, PMSstrJ, PM2str4. mSotrS. PCf2«ti<i. fV92^tif. 

PM29tiS: ft i'in9i25S ]; 



boQia 

di stiOftfxi: ■' 

if distriyp* • ‘2* thofi diitrOMd:«’^i»»on'; 
ert-U*ed;«* 0!C^ *; 

CASO EftJtTVpo of 

'0‘: orrVMd:** NM»9\* 

*2': orstte^d:»‘Hot Bm*: 

•3*1 #rrt>**d:.* Hod m': 

‘40 orrOMd:^* HPV »*: 


135 






Fi* Ifr*: 

- * I>fr f rtU i t ’ ; 

Cf«<» AnAllrKfTyr* of 

*1'; Arirt i U«rij »’ Us^j ipc *; 

«>nri; 

if '^utpytTyr^ ■ ‘** th#T» b*^>r! 

in 1 In / output f i 1#.' **• • . out f i i , • ••♦•V; 

Crft [i.it# ; .Month.DAy. ; 

krt i t^In (output f 1 I*-. * . Mont h . ’ - ' .Lwy . * - * .T#i»J • ; 

VT 1t*ln < output f k}el; 

wTitolntoutputflie. ' Model: UlCP - WILSON EOO M; 
vr itelnfoutput filei : 

in }teln4 output file.' Desor ipt t on.- ‘ . lunDeecripc ); 
wi iteinfoutput file); 

wt 1 telni outp*jt f i le, * tfiitiel eiaulatior eettinge *}: 

VI itelnt output file); 

«r> 1 telRfoutput f t ie, * Nusbet of quurterff to siaulAte: ‘ . nuptbetOfOt t s: S >: 

«n iteln.ioutput fi le, ‘ Muabet of iep 1 1 c^tt lons of eisulAtion to run: ‘ .nui*^rOfReps:%); 

«n iteinicutput (lie. ’ ftendoa nuabei ^eneretoi seed type: * , jee>dtype} ; 

if seedfTyre “ *i’ then 

vritelnioutputfile.* tl.\nd« ntdibet feed stert index: ’ .seedindex:^); 

writeln loutput fi le, * Econosic Detention Model: *, et rUMd); 

If PlDTy7?e • *t* tfien 

writelftioutputf 1 le,' Kusber years econoaiic retention uead: ’ .Ai4iyrsQUt;a:2); 

vritelnloutpmtfiie. * Initial Irrrentory Type: *. AnalUeed); 

if Anellndrype • *1* then 

writeinloutputf lie,' Kuabei years initial inventory: ‘ .nuiiTrsOH:a:2); 

eritelnloutput f ile, * TVpe of denand distribution: *. distrUsed): 

vriteln (output fl te. * Mean Dena^H: '.BeanDeufyl: o: 4 ); 

wt iteln(output f I le^ * Var Oenand: *.yar[>emand:e:2): 

wi iteln (output f I le. ‘ Wigi^ier of steps: ’ .nablStepSiS); 

if nstrrStepe then begin 

foi i:«l to nphrStepe do begin 

VIitelnloutputf 1 le.‘ Step: •.i;2,* Step Qtr: *.startStepl»J:5,’ Mult; ’.stepMuit[i1:s:J); 

end: 

end; f 1 f} 

vriteln(outputfi le, ‘ KiMher of trends: *.nsiPsTiends: 5) : 

if rwabiTrends >{1 then begin 

for i:«l to nabrTrends do begin 

vritelnioutputf lie. ’ Trend: *. i :2, * Start gtr: * ,siarTradI i) ' Stop ©tr: * .endfind! 1 1:4. 

* Coeff: • . tieodCoef f 1 1 1 :S; 3. * P ouvr: * .trend?cvei (13:^: 3}; 

end; 

end; (if) 

VIitelnioutputf 1 le]; 
if outputType ■ *1* then begin 
H 1 1 ToCoftt; 
olreoi; 
end; 


136 









♦In* C'jtpiu: ♦ 1 i* . ' iniriA} 

A*sifirn ! ;nf j !<►. . f 1 1') ; 

; jnf 11 e) ; 

I () nf 1 1«. K)>62st r 1 . ('C>C2str2, 

PDS2fitt7. Pn«2<trt); 

finfilf): 

C02«:«COrvfK)«2«Ci 1 ,S.n : 

»t rT*f«r*: -copy t Pl»»2*t i J, , 151 ; 
8t2T€«p; *cory i Pl>82»tri. , 15} r 

iT^«r: -copy < WTSis^i2. 121.15 5: 
St iT^ssp: -o<ir'y ‘ PWiist j 2. 181.15;: 
St I'T^wp: -cop^-fPriKist} 2.211.15); 
8t -copy (P!tV2£t 1 2,22t. 15) ; 

St tTiNirv: *c«py f PM2st i J. 1»15); 

St “Copy i t*V929t ri. J1.151 ; 

strTe*4^:«copy (PD82«tj-J.7t), ’,$) ; 

»copf i K>V2str j. 121,15); 
tt>T««t>:«eopy (Pra2«tr5.31,15): 
st|-T4iT‘:«cop»y(PlJ«2*tr5.191.15): 
St iTMip:-copy I PM2 r5.211.1 5}; 
St t-r^: -copy (PP€2str5.22t. 15) ; 
St rT««^: «copy t K>82st r5.241.15); 
St rTvsip: -copy (Ki82strt. It. 15): 
sttT#^:*COpy lP08i*trt. lOt. 15) ; 
$tz'r#ar:«cof«y |pti82strt. 121.151; 
strT#*p;«copy (Pt>82»trt. lit. 15); 
St rT<r#rs •copy I K>82*trt, itt. IS i; 


p.vr.tsii*t^i s^?t»ns»s 

(*D82sti3. POa2srr<. t>t}42str5. 


^1 lAi>Stt iSttT«^:; 

&02C : -St z trijr ^oKi^Al iStzTMpl ; 

PJ P; ■ 5t I . I (St i Tm^ i: 

BOSS : -St 11 n^oRral tSt • : 

B0S7 : -St ri ogToR^Al tStrT#^a^>; 
&0S8:-StringTofl»al t 

&0«1:-StizngToBeal(StiTsap): 

&Q7) : -StrzntfToReAl (5trT»*T‘) ; 
COC§Ct«St) logToR^Ai tst i-T^mp ); 
D02SC:»Strtr.gToR**l (StrT««f»; 
IISLOt):*Strir^^oft#a) (StrTrapl: 
SCR: «5tr ingToReal (StrTMp); 
TD:-StriftgT«A«4l (StrTrf^); 

TS0RS:».Strir»ffToR4aHStrT^srl • 
VOlSltx-StringToRcsl (3trT«^l; 
V022;*«St I (StrT««p>; 

Vl(HA;fcStringToR«ai JStrTe^): 
V]02:«Strin0ToR#aliStrToap); 
V10i4:-Str»ngT*R»4l (StrT»^) : 
V24S:-Strir^oR«al (StrT's'ari; 


PT>8istt 


b. 


M'ltaln 

1 o\it put f i 1 a 1; 





srntaln 

(output fi ia.' 

IRrob Braak : 

‘.PrbBrkPtii. * 

Kin Riak 

,V022:8:2); 

wt it^ln 

(output file.' 

Stwlf Ltfa ; 

’.ca28.• 

Kax Hiak 

.yi02:B;2}; 

writaln 

(output fi la,* 

Ra^ Siza 

•.»073:B:0, • 

Ord Coat ; •. 

vo}SR:t:2): 

VI italn 

(output fUa.' 

Unit Plica : 

',M55:B:2, 

NSLQD 

.l|SLOP:8:2); 

wi italn 

(output f1 la,* 

Salv Rat* t 

'.aalvRata:8:2. 

* Pi'oc Math 

: *,D02Se;8:0}; 

Id it«ln 

loutputfila,' 

Procur LT : 


Sfiort aga 

,V10i4:8:2); 

w) 11 a 1 n 

(output fila.' 

Csaantial 

•.C00tC:B:2. 

R/O Low 

,B020:8:2); 

wi'italn 

(outputfila,* 

HCg Sat-Up : 

'.B05B:B:2. 

R/OConati; ’ 

.V2'»5;B:2); 

nitaln 

(outputfila.' 

Obaol Rota : 

•.B057j8;2, 

Stoz Rata : 

. SCR: 8 :2) : 

wTitaln 

(output f1 la.* 

Uisc Rata 

•.B0BI:B:2. 

Ttaa Praf s 

,V10lA:8t2} ; 

wi'steln 

(outputfila,* 

Ti*a SMS : 

*.TSDBS:0:2. 

Today UT 

,TD:8:0); 

wz'italn 

(outputfila,' 

Init Yr* OH: 

*.nuftYraOH:B:2. 

PLT STC/^BU 

*.ratlOPLTSTCMU:8 : 01 : 

Wi ilvlii 







if outpatTyp* - *1’ th»n btgin 
HitToCont : 
cUtci ; 


and; 

•nd; {pt'inth«4d»t) 


procadura OtsplayPfXkitpuC {vat obaai-v. frcst. ud. BOOArry. ROLavalArry. 


137 
















SSADDfiO. SSAOT. SSSKA tfjuai t«iA» ray; 
vai st*plnrUrtv> trndlmlAM-y ,fckCoji#Ai i-y ;-Tt i IntAi s .sy 
nu»l»iOf0t rs. init )nv. rerNuaii inttf^er: 
output Typ^:Cfiai); 


Vill t ; ; 

b^^in 

«n 1 1 >ln <output f I l<p) ; 

w: j n {output f i 'Riepl ic».t ion Nutiibei ’ , y^pMu^) ; 

ta’r 5 t^in (output f.’ i*) ; 

wr 2 telnfoutput f x , 'PDai/tie tw»t a* ) ; 

wr:t»ln (output (ii#, *_____ 

fo» t!-l to nuab^iOfOtrs do bwgm 

H“l) Of (((t-1) »3d 20; ■ 0}thvn begin 
if (outputTyrpe**!*) And »t-il then HitToCont; 
wiitelnfoutputfiie); 

«U»ln (oul:,.utfil,.-0TIl OBS P*CST HU: 0 R/0 ADOBO ADC SHA M* STTR') 

end: 

wi it^ln iout»Hitf 1 le, r : 2 ,ob«eivIt[ :fc; 0 .f lest Ul : 8 : 2 ,«*dltl : 8 : 2 . 

EOOAi I'y [ 11 2 a: 0, ROLsve ‘ Ai ry (f J : o r 0. 

SSAa»Ott!!8:2,SSAODltI;»:2.SSSJtAttl:A:2..1tCort»A.ry(U:J. 

»t«( !ndAri-y|t 1! J. tmdlnelAi ty (11 1 J): 

snd; 

wjlteln (outputfile); 

If outputType- *1' then HitToCont; 
end; 


procedure tiisplsyftepStats lv«t ADOfiO, AOO. SHA. Invest. totCo*t:real.- 

vAt oi^eiCount AdisPossls.disposalCount .endOH.endOSc integer: 
outputTypeichat 


begin 

if nuHberRep • 1 then begin 
wi iteln(outputf lie); 

wiiteln (output file.******■******•*»*•••••••••••••••••••«**•)•«••••••• 

writelnloutputfile.'Replication Final scatistice'); 

wi'it.lnlogtpucril., ■ Nus AOOBO ADO SKA Orl. Inv.it IndOH EndOS 
end; Uf) 


..*.*.) 

TotDsp TotCost*); 


«iteln(outputfUe,nu»berRepM.A«JBO:?:2,AOO;S:2,SMA:b:2.otd*rCount:6,Inv 

endON:ti,endOSss,dtsposalCount: 6,disposals: 7. tot cost: M;. 
if nunberRep « nunbetS^fReps then 
trriceln(outputfi 
if outputtype -M* then begin 
delay(1500); 
clrscx: 
end; 
end; 


procedure lioStatsoar currHean.currVar.saapleReal:real: 
var s^splf'Int:integer; 


138 








conf i nt: 1 ^•.^ 1 : 

nuBkb^) ) ; 

v\<i cli^VAi : ; 

n 

if > -Q'^QO.o vhen 

^i8«‘ sanpl#: •' 

o ] : acui rtfeAH; 

vldV.U : itcui I Vx^l .* 

• I nuat>«’iR»p< >i then cui iNe-.^n: •SABipie 

-Ise cuiiMertn:* • t i nunbei Rer - 1 ) • oi'^teAni ♦fiA|if>l^‘:/a«i*t>ei Ser¬ 
if riuM>eiRep* «2 then cuirVaria 0.0 

else curtV.t);s i ( (nu^>*rRep-2) *ol4V.kk ) * t (nuinbeiRef-1} *S^ i oirWeAn})- 
lnii»berRer*f^ (cunMean) \ *£0R / inuabei Rer-1 j; 

if nuKbeiRer- ■ 0 then conflnt:^ ‘ iK>RT<cum Vat/n»,>i<Kt>ei Rep) 

else confInt:>0.0; 
end,- fdostats) 


piocedute DisplaySiKStacs iv^t •iiiRICi0O,si«AOO.fli«aM,st»Invest .siaTotCost, 

sinOrcVerCnunt .si»DispoaAls.si»()lspo&AiCount, 
0 iMEn4OH, siiftEndOS.CiAODdO ciAtlD.ciSMA.ctlnvesC . 
c iTotco«t, c 1 Ot'deiCouftt. ci Ui spoMl s. 
e idi spos^ t Count, Cl EndOH, Cl CndOS :!-«««I; 
outputType:Cher: 

hourl .ainutel .eeccndl ,hdSecl.houi'3,atnute2, 

•econdS, hdSec2 :word); 

vet upAPC^.u(:ADO.u|r*£aM.uptnveeC .upOrderCount, upDiaposels. U(^isp 08 elCOunt, 
l^tRPCiBO. iWUXi. laSHArlwlnveet«luOt'deiCount. twDiS|>o>als. lidiiaposalCount. 
iwSndOH. IwSTKlos.upCiKkM^upCnclosxrael; 


begin 

( urACDBO:«Bi»A0(»CUeiADC«O; 1«A£I080: »sikADOBO-ciAOO0O; 
upADCii-siaAOp^ciADC); 1«ADD:-stfeADD-ciAtC; 
upaiA:*siBSMh*ciSlfA; lw5MA:.si*SMA'ciStM; 
upErKK>H;*SiaE(KlOH«ciEndOH; lw£ndON:*8iaEj>iOH-c)ElidOH; 
upEndPS: •8iaEndOS«ciEndOS; )wbic|Q$:aSiaCndOS*-ciEndOS; 
i 4 ?lnv* 8 t:*smlnve8t*cilnv«a*; Iwinvest:s8tBlnve8t>ciInvest; 
upCrderCount: esipCrcierCount+ciOrdeiCount; 

IwOi derCcimt: «siaOrderCount -ciOrrSerCount ; 

upO i spo sa i 8: a 9 i nD 1 spo s A18 e c i d i spo Sd 18; 

lwDispo»als:«8inPisrosel8->ci0ispc»als; 

upOispordl count i-siBiCUtposdlCounteciDisposdlCouftt; 

IwCusposalCount lasiadtvposdlCbunt 'clPisposdlCount; 

if IWtDOfiO * 0.0 then lwRDCe0;-0.O; 

if ImADCi - 0.0 then IvADOiaO.O; 

i: IwSHA • 0.0 then lwSMA:-0.0; 

if iwlnvest u.u then ivlnvest :*u. V; 

if IworderCpunt « 0.0 then IwOrdercounttaO.O; 


139 









if iw{>i cr»os<*l s • u.O Chen Iw!)i5fypsal5r*0.0; 
if lwfUsrto&>«lCounC • i). 0 then iwOi spcc^^ICount: *0.0: 
If iwEn-lOH • O.f! then lwErv*:4<; *0.0; 

:f iwEn'-iOl- 'j . • then i wEn^rfOi": » 0 . fi; J 


to zteln/output fiiel: 

■*o iteln i oatpwt fije,‘***********‘**' 
wi tie In (output f i le. 'Smulat ion rma' 
wxitein(outputfzI«Final Heani and 
wi itelnloutputf lie, ’ 
to itelPloutputf lie, ' MX^BO 
wi it^lnJoutputfile, ' ADC) 
wi It eln (output f i le, ' SWA 
wi 11 e 1 n f output file. ' OftliEACOUtrT 
wi itelntoutputfile,' INVEST 
WI I te] n (output f 1 ie . ‘ EKDIftG CH 
wiI teln(outputf1le,' EMLINC 
wi iteitWoutputf lie, * DISPOSAL COOMT 
writelntoutputfile,* DISPOSALS 
witelnioutputfile, ‘ TOTAL COST 
writeln(output file,••»•*••••**•••*♦< 
WI'It el n (output file) ; 

WI itelnioutputflie,‘Si* Start Tiae 
WMtelnlcutput f 1 le, *Si« End Tiae 
if outputTVpe m’f then HitToCont; 
*rvi: Idi splaysL*«t 4 t) 


Stat 1 aticfi*}: 

Confidence Interval 

H*An CIM; 

* .9i*ADOBO;i2:2,ciAm>: 12:2) : 

‘ , siazATiCi: 12 :L .ciAIXi: 12:2); 

',siaSKA: 12:2,ciSHA:12:2); 

•.aisOrderCount;12:2.ciOideiCount;12:2); 

*.siAlnVest;12:2,Cl Invest;12;2); 

‘. si*£n<iOH: 12:2,ci£ndOH: l2:2); 

‘,Si«EftdOS:12:2.ciEndOS:12:2); 

',aiaDispoealCount:12:2.ciDispcaalCount;12:2); 
*, aiisOiaposala: 12:2,ciDiaposalB: J2:2); 

‘, aiorTotCoPt: 12:2,ciTotCoat: 12:2); 


* .houi'l, *: * ,*inutel. ‘,aecondl, * t ’,hdSecll ; 
*. hour2, *: ‘ ,*ifiute2. * : *. secoiriS, *: * . hfiSec2) ; 


piocedure DispleyCtrAriy*<totCostAiiy.holdTCAriy.orderTCArry.ERRAro . 

•hortTCArry, MlvT1lArrY:quarterArray; 
nuAberOfOt ta: integer); 

VAfl <itr: integer; 
begin 

isriteln(output file,... 

isritelntoutpvtf ilel; 

wi itelnioutput f i le. * Quarter cuHRilattve coats and years EM for grapfiing’); 
wri tel n I output file); 

wxitelnioutputfile, ' QTR TCTAL HOU) ORDEA SHOItT SALVAGE £RK‘): 

for qti' :« 1 to nuttbei-OfOtrs do 

wri teln (output (i le .qfti :4. totCostAiryIqtr): 12:2.hol<fTCAriy fqti ]: 12:2. 

otderTCAilyfqtr): 12:2.shortTCAi iyIqtt ] :13;2. 
aalvTRArry {rrti'l: I2:2.EMArryIqtr): 10:2); 

wTiteln (output file] ; 

writelnlQutputfile,' Quarter $MA and Inveat for steady state graphing*}; 

WI 1 teln(output fi le) 

writeln(outputfile, ' OTR SNA Invest*); 

for qtr :■ 1 to nuatwi-OfOtrs do 

wi iteln (output!i le,qtr:4 .dt rSHA (qtr|: 12:2, itivestCtrfqtr): 12:2) ; 
end; (diN>layqt ran ay) 


begin (*aini 
tertcolor !14 ? ; 
atop; bFALSE; 


140 











5 lIBCOUAl : sCI ; 


riji i • 




nc. I nr : -0 ; 

t andS^^dAi iy •* 

Front*ct#frn; 

Runtypfr {rlisti-Tyr^. ogtfXJtType. wWLkitdTVT'^.'Ttt Dat aTVt^. PWiat^Typ* . 

t«pStatTyp».ER}rTyr^,«nal ln«^Typ«.n(«b#i-ofot r*.n(tf^rOfW1i».nia£wiOf Iter's, 
S4^1fv:Wx. VAi [Mbuvi. nu»yi sCW. niaYrsdUt. f 11«. outj^ut f i i<», 

f test .BiKt,s4>^s.cutFiI#NaM,runDvftcMpT 1; 

t 

rwi it# Jogtp-jt f j 1^} ; 

5 iPiCount : as isKTount * \ ; 


(VtTisie ( houi j .einut«'I . ««cor>Hl, I); 
fo] nu«Lb«ifi^ :m I to nuAb^fOrR^pfi do b<^tn 
i f s^f^nvr** ■ ‘ 1 * t hen begin 
If nudbeiRep * 1 then begin 

for s:- I to eeedlfvlex do currSeedt-CetNext£eed(c«jitSeed) ; 

$etSeed(currSeed); 
end {if J 
else begin 

Quieted: aOetMext Seed icurrseed); 

SetSeed(curiSeed): 
end; <elae! 
end (if) 

else SetSeed|seecU|numbe|-Rep| 1 ; 

In It ;«1 1 seAn ays <observ, BOOArry .RCUevelAriy. SSA£^)BO, SSAOP.SSSVCA. CfUtArty, 
stepIndAriy. trndlodArry.ttkCodtArry.nusiberOfOtrs, 
nv»be 1-0 fWks. nuaberRep. Me anDeisand. 
vklyObeerv^sMeentsadArry. varDadArty, totCoetArry. 
holdTCArry, orderTCAriy. (ihortTCArry. MlvTRArry, 
inveetQtr.qtrSMA)j 

LoedObsatv (obeerv. frest .aad.wklyObserv.aeonEbidArry.varhMVid'y. 

obtervType,disti^9VP^<nwberOf(^ rB,nuaberOfwlis.n«berRep, 

• iaCount, 1 1 endOn, st epC^, nabrStepe. nabi-TienrU, 
aeanlieaand, varUraand, t nput t i le, seeds. star t step r 

■tartmd. endti'nd. stefrault, trendcoeff. t )en<4>ower) i 
if HMaberRep • 1 then begin 

if siaCountal then lnttPM2File (prbBrkFt.nuaYrstHJl.salvRate, 

nivYrsOH, rat ioPLTSmfiJ, storRat e, 
iHC»*o)Rate,d««cRate. inf Rate, ai lEasent); 
PD02&dit (prbBrkft .unitPrice, PLT.orderCost.holdFrac. 

•hortCost. M) vRate. nuaTrsOM, rat ioPLTSTCWJ, nuaYrsElUt. 
StorRate.obsoiRate.discRate.infRate.ailSaeent) ; 


if nuabek'Ref>»l then Pi intHeader (prbBrkFt.eeedlndFS.satvRate.nuaYi sOH. 

rati oPLTSlTMU. aeahPcaand. vai Deaand. 
output file, outpxitiype. di st iType. 

CRATVpe* anal Indtype.outFi lefidae. i unDesci ipt, 
nabrSt ep-s, nablTi en>i». st et:Mw 11, 

11 endCoef f, t re ndP oaer. st art Step. 


141 












F'-'i (obs^iv, f t cfit . St ly. 11 ly. 

ly, nu»D^|Of0t i ujijt i*-#* : 

1 f ifrrst. liA'i. otiS^JV. E<CvAi ly. SOL,*v#iAi ly, 5SAt^.>BC-. SC^KL'.V . 

KACo>t1»Arry, nuait>«rO{C'tts. prbetic(>t. ii»iAnI)*»<knri. f^JiutdlVT^)' 

i! PWiatdTyp®*‘ 1 * th^n DisplAyPPOutput «obs*rv. treat, i^. EOCAiiy. 

ROU^^lArry. SSAfiCeo. £^i£i. 

S2SIIA. *t#rlry1Arry. trjvlIiylAi ly . 

KKCockt'AiI'v.nuAt^tOt^t 1 s. init !riv. 
nuOibfriR^fr .C‘utr“i''yVT*»» ; 

3i*. tOSH-iir . wK lyOfca^i v. gogAi *y. ROL^v^lAi ty f-bs*iv. f r cs*". 

ElRRAi XV. nuBit^l Of Ut I £ . init inv . -i-t y***Ccunt .Hj sPo«.»iS,.-lj «pc5.xlCount. 

t At ioPl,T5TT#flJ. unit fi ic^.oi'iejCost .hcldFi ai: . shettCost. 

IvRAt#. PLT. obsolR^t«. «<^RAte. nuaYrsERR, nt^Yi vOH.ni 1 Essvnt .IVUS. . ^rvl^^r, 

KW.SHA, Invfitft ,wliI»atATyT'#.‘Ttl OAtsTyp^.oulfxjtTyr^. ERRTyr*. An^il iTvflVr^*. t otCost . 
hoi'STC,or<i»i-TC, »hd» tTC^ mIvTR , EotCo*tAny .hoidTCAi ty. 
or^rTCArry.ahortTCArry.MlvTRArrV' inv^Rtott .qtrSMA); 
it r^pStAtTfp* • ‘i‘ than DisplayRopStats lACOeo.ADO. SMA, Invasr .totCost. 

criiarCount .^iisPosais, 
diapooalCotmt .erviOH, 
erySOS,outr<>tTypa); 

if nuBt>arR#p « 2 than begin 

• laAMidO:-0.0; «laAOtJ: «C. 0; slOiSMA r *0.0; siptftveat; *0. C; 
ainOirl«rCou.nt: »C.O: bibDibpo«s1s:«0.0; 0 iaDi«poa««lCount;*0.U; 
siaEnr^: * 0 . 0 ; sisCniiOa: *0.0; st«TotCo»t :»0.U; siiiHoI^fTt:: *0 .Dr 
siB0|ri»|-TC ; *0.0; siAShoi tTC: *6.0; aia^ivTR: *0.0; 
eiKl; (in 

boStats(BiHA00K>.varA0C«0.ADl>B0.noInt,eiADt}80,nunbarR«r) > 
DoSt.it«(0i»AK}.yArA£)O,AlXi.noInt .ciAfX^.nuHbtrRep): 

DoSt «t • (• xmSHf .. varSKA. SHA, noint. e i S»Ui . nxvberRep); 

09StAt8lsi«(nv»tt .y«r2itrest ■ lRire«C .rnilnt ,eiIntrant .n\«iberllep): 
boStat# fsiaOrdvrCount ,y«rQr4arCount.n^aal.OrrlerCowit .eiOrlerCbunt, 
nuabaiRep ): 

t>»Stacs I •iMDi«re*al8.varDiapo«ai«< noReal .Oiapeaalv.caDi •poaa) s, nyttberRer )} 

QoStatB (eisEnrlOH. varCndOM.noReal .endOH.ci KivlOK .nvaabeiRep); 
OoStatf(sittC)ispo«alCount. varOiBposalCbunt, nolteal .<ii«po8alCount. 
c)Pi0pc«alCounC ,nxi»b»rRer>; 

DoStatBlsiaendOS. varEndOS.noR«al ,endOS.ciCnc|Q5.nuBberR»r}; 
boStata IsiaTotCovt«vai-TotCovt, tot Cost, noint ,ciTotCo*t .nuaberRop}: 

DoStat* (•iaHolctrC. VarHolcffC.holciTC.noInt .ciHoi<R*C,nuab»rRep}; 

Dost at* l8ia0rcl»rTC.v«Y0rd»rTC.orderTC.noint ,c]Or<fterTC>nuiiberRfpl; 

Dost at 0 (eiaShortTC. varShoi'tTC. shortTC. nolnt ,ci5hoi tTC>nuabei'R«r); 

Dost atsIsiaSalvTR, varSalvT1l,salvTR,noInt .ciSalvTR.nMaberRvr): 
end; (fori 

foi i:« 1 to nitfiberOfOtrs ^ begin 
qtrSMAt 1 ] iBqti SHAIi) /nuPberOfReps; 
investOtr I i):«investgt rl 1 1 /n^AberOfReps; 
end; (for| 

Cat Tins (hour2,BiRJte2, seconds, hdSec2 > : 

DisplaySiaStats(si^^r060.oiaADn,siSLSHA. sialnvest .si^oiCost. siaOrderCount. 


142 









• «, SiftDi«pd*4!Count .siK£i>ciOH,staEf>'lOS, 

ciADC‘,c;SM, c) Inv#sc .CiTotCost .ciOr<i^rCount ,ciDi sros^la, 
Count . ciEtkIDH .ciEfytCS.OiirpuTTyr^.houi i. 

Bi nut^l . s^con'li, h<'lG«‘el, hour i.*i nut. s«»cor>i2 .h45»cl‘- ; 
for ntAC^ti :« 1 to nuo^rofC'tis rlo &»gtn 

tot Cost Arty (nua&t i i! * tot Cost Arry | nua^ t) /nura^rOf 
hol*1TCArry jnuaOts 1 :*hoi<rrCArry|ni*0trJ/nt*ibfri'OfR«^»; 
or^^iTCAi lYinuaOtr] t-oi'iorTCArtYIntact}/hrMbriOfftops: 
fhortTCAt ty InuaCtt 2 ]: ashortTCArrYlniaCtr | /nuBb«rOfS«f>«; 
ftaivTAAny inuaQt I ] :«»^]vTRAriy(nuBOt t ] /nuiibvrOf Aeps; 

ERKAi lYfnuaCti l :»EMAi ry {nuaOti l/nuabei’OfReps; 
end: <for) 

Di spi AyOt.rAi ty* i t otCoftt Ariv ■ ho IrtTCArry. or<lerTCArry, CftRAriy', 

*hortTCAriy ,b.»IvT?<Ai 2y.n4^>ei-OfCrtrBl : 
close (output filei: 

RuhAs^in (outfit f i le, runltesci ipt, out put Type. ERAType.stop. 
nvdtYi bear. out*'i leN^^ael ; 

until Btop; 
textcoloi (IS) ; 

end. <aain proaran triCP-Sisnilator) 


143 







Unit TOOXiBOZ 


*Thi? Un} r ptovi-Ws toflbo* cf us«-fu; furict i uns functions And * 

•pioz^dui^c foi rlAt.i infHJt. • 

... 1 


Cs^S CRT; 

tyf^ r^H2f 2^ld«st i ir>s [ 1S}: 

VAi stfTMT': ! n'id: 

function C«t_Ajisw*i':bocl»An: 
pioc^dui# HUToContj 

function (low. h 1 nte^^r }: integer: 

function Get_Re4l{low.high:real}:ieal; 
function HuaToStrirvg (vor value:re^l) :pdB2fi»ld; 
function StringTofleal (var S:pd82f ieldl :r«al; 
function Get^tonglnt (low.high: lor>gint}: longint: 

lopleAentaCion 


function Get.Answvr: (Return* a Boolean recult for a yes/nc 'Tueryl 

vai Chat_ln:Cha}; 

Correct: Boolean; 

begin 

Correct:«Fale«; 
lerwat 

Chai_]n: uReatKey: 
wi 1 te (Chai_in); 
case Chai_In of 
'Y*.'y'ibegin 

writeln {*ea*); 

Get .Answer: sTltie; 

Correct:«Tiue 

eiyl; 

•N*, *n* :begtn 

writeln 1 ‘o'); 

Get .Answer:^Fa1 te; 

Correct:■True 

end; 

else begin 


144 












Sound(iiOi; 
di^lAy 1 JOO^ ; 

NvSound: 

wlU^ln i*»' Un*i»cc>gni?*£»i* •••»; 

f'Ztitrt Y oi K.'): 
wiifptn yo«i An»w«-j : 

#nd 

until -.‘cr j *-ct ; 

♦'Hd? i) 

r'*c.c»'dut« HitTcCont; 

iif.ij du«By;cn*s» ; 

b4>g i n 

wi 

'nit* I* Hit Any k*y t<s continue 

dumy: «t«Adk»y; 

*nd: 


(G*ts An int*0#t input b#t«*»on low And hiQh, pio«^« until on» ia r*c*}v«<1) 
fonct von cot.lntAgAi (low,high:intog*!):integer; 

VAi nu»t>«tStt ing: AtringMOl; 

«ltoi. nuiftb^iV aIu#: intAgAt; 


twgin 

I 

toAdlft (nui^vrString); 

vaI {'nunboiStt ing. niMboiValu^, «i t'Oi ); 
if Aiioi • • 0 thAn pAgin 
writvln; 

$oun4(230); 
d»iAy (JOO): 

NoSound; 

wiitv invAlid nunbor. *nt#t An intAg<»r: *l 

♦nd rltr if {nvab*rV<iu»< Iwl Ol (n<aib>iV4lu»diigh| tl»n b* 9 in 
wt itvln: 

Sound(22D}; 
drlAy (iOO); 

NoSound; 

wtitAln {••*• InvAltd Kang* - vaIu* nuvt b» a pOAitivo intogoi'}; 
wilt* i'bAtwA^n '.low,* And '.high.* Bntor huBbor; '); 

♦rror:-l; 

ond; 

until ArrotaO; 

Cot.lntog#! : -nimhrrViluf. 


145 






^ni; {fu/irt ioni 

fr;«T£ iWi lon0int inf'ut Iryw high. until on# i« i#c#jv#-d} 

functjon G#t _I-*^n9I Rt { I c?*. h igh : long int > ; long i nt; 

vai nuE^>et St ling: stringflO}: 

♦ i roi ; int#g#i; 
nuAtei'Valu#: longmt: 

I Jt 

re^dlr. inu!W>#i St»: ng; r 
v.il (nuxt^i St t'l rvg , nuab#i Vtfl u«*, 
if ♦tior ' ‘ C th^n b#g;n 
wi 

Sound 12201 ; 
d#lay fJOO); 

No Sound; 

«mt« (•*** Invalid nu«b#r, ant^i an intvgvr: M 
^r>d «ls# if (nuife^rValu«-> low) or (nu<ib»rValu*>h>gh) then begin 
writeln: 

Sound(220); 
delay (300): 

HoSound; 

wi'iteln f'*** Invalid ftange - value Must be a positive integei'): 
write (‘between ’.low,* and '.high.' Enter nuoiber: *): 
eri oi : • 1; 
end; 

ui>til eiioi'eO: 

Cet.Long 1 nt 1 «nuaberVa 1 ue.‘ 
eno; (function) 


(Gets a real value between low and high. proNtTte until one is received) 
function Cet^Real (low.high:real):real; 

var Nu:«bei‘_Stting:atring: 

Error:integer; 

Huist'f'l _Vjt [ue; leal; 

begin 

lepeat 

readln (NUBb«r_string); 

vai IMuBber.String. lhj»berevalue. Error); 
if Elroi •> > 0 then begin 
Sound(220); 
delay (300); 

HoSound; 

writeln (‘**You eust enter a valid real nuaber** ‘); 
ervi else if INuaberevalue* low) oi (Nuaber.Value'high) then begin 
writeln; 


146 









SCrurv^ ( iiO 1 ; 

Helay .SQf--. ■ 

- valu«> »u«t btr 
*.lo«:ti:l,* A/vi ’.highrft::.' 

error:•!; 

until £rrok* 0 ; 

<V^_Rea!: »Ww*t>er_Value; 

f-inction HuBTuStttrvg {vai value: i^^l} :pi82f»^Id; 

const digits ■ Itt; 

dectRais • 8: 

vai I;integer; 

3 : stringtlt|; 
begin 

sti {valu«:<ljgitsicfceCiRalc,S} ; 
foi 1 :■! ta 4 o 
jf Sill - • • then S{Us‘*0‘ 

el»e if S[i] ■ *.* then delete (S.i.l); 
NuBToSti-ing;> S 
er>d; 

function StiingToReal ivar S:pdfr2f leld) :ieal; 

var Rl. fl2: reel; 

S]:«tring(7 |; 

S2s«tring(f]; 
errorl, errer2:integer; 


begin 

SI;«copy{S.1.7}; 

S 2 :«copy(S.e.i); 
valiSl.B1,«i20111 ; 
val <S2.R2 .ei ioi2) : 

St IingToReal:«Ri*]n2/1000000CO] ; 
en-d; 


Bud. {imlc Toolbox} 


i Iee < vaiue' 
Enter nuRbe; 


147 











tmlt imlrazid; 

tntn fAc«> 

*<‘♦*4^rrvTyp♦ * Array i!..lO0O! of lor»gtnt: 

VAi SAr-'is, r/; •♦♦^riyType; 

ptTCf^u:^* f or»gin* ;; 

function longint: 

function G«tMikXtSa^ < last S >*di longmt); lon^int ; 

function Hando^Sni fore: real; 

proc^dura ranctei^cdArry (var ••^tttrry j •♦♦dArryTyp^l j 

function C«^t ^ 1 «son < v«r •oanOound: r#4l}: int« 9 «r: 

function G«tNor^l: f 44l; 

funct ion OtOo«i*t ric{p; veil) : int^g«i: 

f unct ;crr. in {p<. 4««;; •; ' • inio^ier: 

funct ion forwlnt Ihiyh: int« 9 «r}: intogvr; 

function Zlrrv tp:r«4l) iroal; 

function ZMf (2:r«aM :r«d!; 

function ucHoraal |Z: roaU :rvai; 

at ion 

vai a:Jongint; 

proc«duro S#tSo«d longint); 

b«9in 

a:w«*vd 

ond.* {pi oc«dui o) 

function lonsfint; 


148 










r.#* r 

f pt ) 


function ftarviov^in 1 f Oi'M: t; 


ccmsr lon 9 int«> 2 '^«i; 

&2Ett:lonoint««S53«: 

ho^lui- 

Ku I T 1 : 1 of>Qi nt »i 4 i ll' : 

Mul 12 t lofvgi nt ■2ti; 4 i: 

VAi Hi II.Ht J!.LowII. low,Zi: 1 vtiQint ; 


tiegin 

Zl:-4; 

Hil5:»Zi div a2ei«: 

L«^id:-(Zi - Hi 15 * P2E1%J * Hultl.- 
LowlSi-Low^rti <iiy &2E16: 

HiJl:.KilS * Hultl « UiwlS: 

Ovflow:-HiJl div aZCll; 

Z i:«(((Lowpi'ij - LowlS * B2C1%) - Modlus) • 

(H»Ji - Oviiow • BZeiS) * B2EU! . Ovflow; 
if Zt • 0 tH«»n Zi:a Zt * llodluS; 

Ki15t- Zi 4iy B2CU; 

Uwpni;^ iZi - Nils * BSeU) * Mult2; 

iMtlS:•hMprti <liv B2SU; 

HiJl;- KllS • Iftittz « LotrSS; 

Ovftcw:- HiJl dtv &2B1$; 

Zi:-n<U»^rtl - LowiS * B2£!k] • Hodlu*) « 

(HiJl - Ovflow • B2E15) « BZCUl « Qvflow; 
if Zl - 0 thM Zi:« 2i ♦ Hodlut; 

RandiMiUni fom:« (2 • (Zi djv 25*) ♦ 1> / U7772U.0; 

etiH; 


fu7»ction G«tH«XtS#«<i tUttSved: longint): longint; 

CO'iCt M:4Xt«lldrd«2U74aJM7,0; 

4:4«t#<vlyd-7lS.O; 

b: 4xt 19 S ■. 0; 

c: *st i 3tS. tt; 

V4I' Zi»st«>fid*d; 

b«gin 

if i4*tS««d»0 th»fi b*gin 

Z:-I97i2727l2.0; 

G#tN»xtS#«d: around{Z}; 


149 








*r»fi 


/ n-. 

i: ■ ! Z-} ouivf <' 2 - 0.5 • *H: 
2:* I 6*2 M; 

Z: • il'Tovfy^'Z- 0.5) J *11; 
K; 

2: - ( Z-i ouyrii 2-'J. 5 . J 'll; 
C2*t N*2Ct : • t Co/V^ ! Z) ; 


ftincti&n : r»a i) ? int»o»t : 

VAi alp^A,b«tA. UI:i-*A2r 

1; int^^r; 

b*9in 

a: « I . 0 : 
i:--I; 

I 

i: -1 • 1 ; 

alplMi:« »Kpt-a»Ant»p>r>d); 

Ut: afiamiaalUni fen; 
b»ta: tWta'Ul; 
u/]t t i b»ta4 alpha: 

C«t Po 1 f sen: • I 
♦tvi; 

function CetNoinal mal: 

vat 0I,O2.Vl.V2.¥.Y:r*a!r 

bc^ln 

tvpvat 

U1: ■> iiwIiTHni fon: 

02: «Rando(ri3ni f Ora; 

Vl:-2»0i-l; V3s-2*U2-1; 

W:^arjrfVJ>*»7t(V2); 
unC 1 1 W • « 1.0; 

Y:-»ryrt M-2MnlW) ) /¥} ; 

Gotflonal i-Vl *Y.' 

«rtd; 

function G«tG#caotricip:real):int* 90 >; 

vai 0:r«ai: 

1 : intogoi'; 


bvglti 

l:«9; 


150 



*J:-R.*n'io«Uni fov*; 

wh: not • « p; ric. b#^jn 

i:-1•! ; 

Li: ■Rinf'lossUni foi-K: 

♦rrt; 

ic:»i : 

ervi; 

iojict ign <^tNegBin ipj *jnt^^r) : i nt^^r; 

•-,<1 X. :; int^igej : 

begin 
X: »0: 

fot i;«l to £ begin 

X: •X»GetCeoaer t *C({^); 

♦fvi; 

CetHrgBtn:*!.' 

end; 

funct ion OtOni for»lnt (high; integer) : integer; 

begin 

Cetlini forwlnt ? -i ourvii (high - 1) ‘RAndOfcUn; foi-a) *1; 
etyi: 

fancticn ZInv (pJr*dl);real; 

v«i t:r««l; 

begin 

IInv;-t- I (2.Sl$Slt*<}.eo2eSJ*t«O.OlOJ29*9qT It)}/ 

I l»!.4J2t«t«*t*0. It )*0.00l J08«efcpJ3*ln(t>}) I 

end; 

timction 2W( (Z: real) : real ; 

■begin 

2pdf;»0.39«R*eKp|-(»qrlZ)/2)); 
end; <zpdf) 

function utNonal fZ: real} ireal; 

type eonetantAi-i-y* at ray (0..J) of teal; 

vai P«ubJ,gsubJ:con*tantAriY; 

smaPeubJ. suBQsubJ.RlX.et fX.X: t eal; 

):integer; 


begin 

PBufcJ(01:e242.997H523C53175j 


151 





PseobJ I u : -21 ■ 97q:;t)16]B2<>4I s;>; 

Hsub.M21 : ■«>.'»'=♦«)JSS,- 
p3ub.J [i 1 : «-0.0JSt0'»«*}J701«15jB5; 

CijiubJ ifll;*‘215.05By7SBt>'*«hIi; 
psuhJl I ):»*»!. U4‘iO54045I4(»0i: 

C>SUtAJ(2J : *1S. 0H27'i■7^3041)7787; 

C^SutkJii) ; tl .OOOOOOOOOOOOO.- 
suMPsu&Jt aO. Q; 

SUsOsubJ:aO.0; 

X; »Z/»qi't ( 2 ); 

if X - Q.O th4pn X:-O.OQ0001; 
iJ >: ■ 0.0 th*-n x:«.Ab8(X); 
f<il j:- 0 tc J do b# 4 )n 

9UiBPsuk>J:-su»PsubJ ♦ PsutxJlj) • «*pl • IniX)) ; 
suffOsubOs-suitOsubJ ♦ OsubJ[jl • ♦xpn2* j) * InJX) ) ; 
»nd; ffor^ 

R< X: -su>iP5ubJysui<>sabJ; 
eifX:-X‘RlX; 

if 2 *■ 0 th^n utKoiUMl:-] - Ul*^lfX)/2) 

»ls» utNora^l:« I U«rfX)/2; 
eno. 

end. {Unit Onlrund) 





unit PDUnlt 


Intie* f.^c# 

tj»«s dos, crt, tooJbox: 

unit F*r ic», PLT, oid^iCost . heidPt .-c . »hoi tCost: r*«»l ; 
nitfiYi IvRvit*". na»Y» sOH, i At >cpLTi?Tt*<U ; i>Ai ; 

stc}RAt«,oD£olRAt<‘.discRAt<', }nfRAt«.Bi tEss^nt :|»a}; 

pioceduie InitPfiSiFi !«• (vaj pi bBl kPt : ; 

vai nuaVt'sEfU). salvRaCe> nusYrsOH. i-,9t ioPLTS!TT44U, stci Rat e. 
obsolRat« ,discRat», infRat»,lPk) lEsMnt: r<-al /; 

pioc«dui'« PDS2fidit(var prb0rkpt: )nt«g«r; 

vai unitPric«.PLT«ord*rCott,hol<iFr«c, 
shortCost.MIvRat #.nu»Vr«OH, 
ratioPLTSTCMU.ntfliYrseRR,RtorBat^.obeolRat^, 
discRat^, infRat«,aii l£s«^nt :rMl) ; 


pioc^nuie InitPDBbf 1 !•; 

at ton 

piocpduip InitPDt2FiU (var prMrkPt 

var nuMYrsDlR.MlvRata. nyaiYrsOH. ratioPLTSTPND.Rtotftate. 
obasolRata.diacRatP. intR«t«,iiiJ£*e«nt:r»al); 

var Afr,AL.B067A,B0«7C,C02t,DBLKPO3]C,D!7SN,BfUtX.rQ24.tlCX}l.liMtLI,PVPI.IIl].BO. 
ni?POC.iOObA.YOO«B.eOQlND,PVUi : cAar; 

D:20, P[UL£ft : stlirtg 121; 

Aa2J8.BRUiC.60lO,B0UA.80l2F.E3l9A.^2C.B02JC.BO2JD,BQ23F,BO2JH,K.B0S5. 
BnS5A,8057.B05«.B05BA,B0tol .e0‘T0.e07i.B09J.B280,C00BC,DOPTC.PTC.D02&E. 
F009.HOD.HOH1 ,H0142.H014J.HOU4.M014S.HQ14«,Ht)I47.HOI4B,H0144.H01410. 
HaHiKKO|412,HO141J,H01414,H0|41&.HO14U,H01417.HO]41B,MDl4j9,HPl420, 
lLR.l|fECY.M.MOgOAD,MSLOA£},tlSbOO,»lRPlPAT,OSQ.PDO.PPV,OOH,RFIDftT,RlYAYABY, 
RSV.ftt,SCR,S5OM.TD,TSDRS,V0]SR.V0U.VO22.V0J5».VO41}t,VO42A,V04JR,V{;44, 
Vi0lA.Vl02,V10J4.Vi0i,Y295.LiLT.LtLY.PCRJ.OiB.928,RIWAST,SEIt,Ytlll,»IO0AP, 
APSR.ARCl,K)0.BBU:i.BRLDa,&flLO.BRPLO.6A0.B014A,BQ19,BQ19B.BO21.BO2U, 
8AR.|«OflpO,<7K;i,POC.PI>vaNDO,PZO,RCI.RU:i.RPU:i.ROCl.VPSA : rral; 


Pl>82sttl: «tling(24); 

PCi82set2, Pt>B2atU, PD82str4. PD82str5. P082sttt>. pD82st|7. 
Pti82strB: seiing[2SS|; 


outfi let 


353 









f jnj t 1 1 z.^t ion v.»iu^3) 
AA':-'N‘ : AL:-'W : Br'«7A! 


; COShrm’u*; liRLI:*’N'; IsCjIC:- 


1)120:- '06 ' ; Ill25H: i 
PVPlR1I:.‘N 
EO0IKri;-*N‘; FVJI;, 

AQ2jB:- l.D; 

&RUx::-S.O; 

B0l0;«0.0: 

BClLA:«b.O; 

B012f;«O.D; 

BOr»A;.20.0.- 
B02!>:*1.0: 

Bci .0; 

BC2iC:*B01U*B02J:i 
&02iF;«0.0: B02JH-.0.0; aC:B'J.O; 

B055:00.00; (unit piic^) 

B0SSA:»0.0: 

BOS7:.o. 12; obsoiflAt^: >B0S7: 
B058:.bQO.O; 

. 0 ; 

BOlOj-O.O; 

B07J;,i.0j 

BO^jtaO.O; B2tl0:»0.< 

CC(38C;a0.5; 

DOPTc:-o.o;iyrcj-c.e 
n025E:.0.0; 


E«RIs-*N'’; F024:«‘ •; MpDIr-* *; KARLi?-‘¥'; 
ftOr.’N*; YRlPOCr* * *; Y00toA:«*M'; YOC6B;**W; 
FILLER;-' 

(tycCMk t«<lfuisiCion 

(basic leor^r l^vel distribution cocisi 

(contiaCt pr<xJ 

(contiacl pioc tis^} 

(non c!«d flioup proc variance) 

(syst^pi ieotQ<!>r lev^l low liBit 'Ity) 

(gross sys •Vnand srvi of ti»ai 

(gioss sys during ti»^j 


(obsolsscence rats) 
(■Mnufac Mt-up costs) 

(discount rats) 

(si^ctsd units psi isquisition) 

(avsrags its* ssssntiality) 


iprocuriNiSftt Mthod) 

F00<»:-0.0; H&D:-0.C; HOU1:«0.0; KOM2:>Q.O; H014i:«0.0; N0144i«0.0; 
K014S:-0.0; H014«t-O.0; H0M7:-O.0.* H014«f:-O.O,- H0149:-0.0; H01410i-D.0; 
HOUlli-O.O; H01412i*«.0; NOI41Jt-0.0; N014Ut-0.0; )f0142S;-0.0; lf014I4:«0.0; 
H0}4]7:a0.0; HOMieiaO.O; KOUl^taO.O; K0142Q:-0.e: JHeCYt-O.O; 


nOOOADs-b.O; 
l(SL4Ali:-^9.a; 
MSLOD:.20.0; 
NRFIDRTi-O.0; 
OSQ:>0.0; 

PD0:>i.0; 

PPV;-Bg2Jn*B011A; 

ODH.'.O.C; 


(Mrk cods) 

(Bas ordsr ^y attrition qtrs dsaand) 
(Ml nvmbsr safety level <|trs attrition) 
(piai niodier Of safety level qitrs denand) 


(non-paraaetric order stat qtrs) 
(past <ttrB dsaand) 

(proc problea var (Bsan)} 
(quarters dsBand histoiy) 
RFIDRTr^O.O; HIYAYABY:«0.G; 

ASV;*o.O; (requisition sire vartance) 

RTl.O.O; 

dCR:-0.01; storAate:-BCR; 

SSOH:«0.0; 

TLi:-ojooi. 0; (today's date) 

TSDfiS;-0.0ll; (tiMs between SDft's in qtis) 

VClSRi-SSS.Ou; (Mil cods i and 2 otxirr costs) 

VOU;.SSO.OO; 


(storage cost rate) 


154 






VOS*: .0.1 ,• 

VO 3 « 0.0 ; 

V041R:«8i0.O0r 
V 042 R:- 1920 . 00 ; 
V04JR:.17*^0.00; 
V044:«tl00<' 
V 10 JA:-C. 
V2D2;*Ci. 

VJ0j<:»j{5. 
V:08:*0. i : 
v:"^ 5 : * i . 0 • 


flow vaI'j# Annual ori^i co**:} 

fki ocui'»ent oi-rliti cost} 

{A/iv#rtiM>i p)ocui«*#rit costs} 

(itax unpriced oi'Wr cost} 

discRace;»VJOlA; IprocutsM^nt int«r#st rats) 

(»Ax risk} 

00 : (shortage cost) 

tiftp picf»ionc«* i.vt#') 
const 1 amt* 

L1LT;-C>.0: LlLYr-O.C; PCPii-O.O; O18t«0.0; Oie;«0.0; ftWA5T:-0.0; St^s-U.O.- 

yW(:«C.0; 

WlOOW-i: ■ J . 0; (sin oirier Tty attrition 'itrs ci^suind) 


AP3R:-D.O: ARCI:*0.0 
BAPU>:>0.0: M0:»0.0 
B021A;«0.0; £RR:>0.0 


800:.0.0; BftLCl:>0.0; Bf<LICU:«0.0: dAU):«P.O: 
B014A:-0.0; B019f0.0; 60t4B:a0.0; B021:«0.0: 
HOHDO:-O.D; OGC1:>C.O: POC:«0.0; PPVBNDO:*0.0; 


P^O:-U.O; RCl:-0.0; BLCI;»0.0; RPLCI;-0.0; ROCIj-0.0; VPSRj-O.Oj 


plbBt KPt :*0; 
8dlvRdt«;B0-02; 

tatloPLTSTDHU:*0.S: 

infRate:aO.0; 
si 1Essent;aCOOBC? 


pH828trl:*i AAC« Kl* B0«7A-«> fi067G« Cd28« ORLU DOi}C« Dl20« DU5N« ERRI«- P024« 
HGOU KARtU PVPU RII* ROt YR7POC+ Y004A* YOOoB* EOOIMD* PVUlt 
rtLU£R; 


Pli828n2$« HwToSti'ing(A02Ja)^ NuaToStringlBRUX:}^ riMMTOStringlBOJO)* 
NuBiToStting{B0UA}« }lusroString(B0!2r)« NusYToStrmg^BOl^A)* 
MarroStnnglBa^O)* Hkii^oString(B02iC)* Nt^T^ring(B02JD}« 
NuaToSti tng(BC2Jf')« NiisToStriiKt * NuxToStringlBO^ 

}4uffiTciStrtng <B055) ♦ NiasToSt l ing TfOSiA) • }H«»T<»fJtnngiB057,W 
HuciToSt) ing(B0S8}-» KurToSt r tng (BOSSA); 
i: •. NumToStringiBOt J} • ving(B070 m )4«ToStringfB07i} • 

Fhs3ToStijng(B07JM WisToString{B290)•* iVusToString(COOK:)♦ 
Nus'rofltlinjjDOPTt,'* NuoiTvStvinglOTC)* Nu»T»Strino<f.025E)* 
MuisToSti .\ng(f009) ♦ N«i4iToi;tring JrfcjO) ♦ Kii[tTo3tri|ig(K3141)* 
Huai7oSt 1 trigiHO) 42) • NvsToStving<Nii}UJ)> Nu«To&tring'K0144} * 
NuaiToStringiHOMS) * ingIH0U4); 

K)82str4j« »usToSt»i;Tg(H(7i47j- NunToSt t ing <H0149} t Nui»7'c^trtr)g<HOl4«)« 

Nu«To3tiing(H014S0)-» NuuTo^'t: ing (HOI 41 U-v HuS^c4;tiing(Hai4 22}«- 
HuiiTvStiing(H0141J|* HumToSt ji ing (HOM14J ♦ HusTToSti ing}HyM J5) ♦ 
NuBtToSrMnufMQMlt*}^- NusTo^t 11 ng iK0]41T).». NuffToStt tng(HOU 1«) * 
NuaiToSt t ingih0i419} 4 ^Bl■ToStl ing |K0;420U HuvToSt 11 ng(ILR) 4 
1 1 ng (IMBCY) • HuaToSt r mg iM}; 

rjy^strS:- t^ifcrroStiingfMD4XiArJ|4 NuiToStunglKSLOAUl- NupToStt ingiHSUH-*) ♦ 
HujiToSt 1 ing(NRP]DRT) * HusToStt ing (QS(/i * NusiToSt ringiPOQ) * 
Nu»TQ$ciing(PPV}» NuStToSt i i ng! OC2H) 4 NuaToStrtng(RPIDRT} • 
Nu*ToStnng(RIYAYABY)+ NuaToStvingOlSV)* Ny»ToStiif>g(FT)4 


155 





Nujpforiti :ngf:'CP-i* i ;ng ♦ NupToSt i ing fTIil • 

KoaTofiti ingiTSWli?)* Nu«To5t i ingtVOlSfti ; 

Prigist I !i: ’■ Nu»Tc>St I jr»g (VO 16} 4 Nu^ToSti irjg< V022) ♦ Nu»To5tr»ngfVIJ ♦ 

NuaToot I 1 ng (V041R) ♦ HuBiToStrt ng (V042R}'» NmsToSt ring vVfl4 Jftl • 
NuvToStrin9;V044] 4 NuaToStk ing(VlCIA)« KvarTo^Ct ing iV102) « 
NuBiToStr 1 r>g [VI0i4) * NuBToStringfVlOg}* Nu«Todtt irig(V2<>5| * 

MuaiTo^t ring I LILT) » NuitToSt ring f LILY) -* MuatToString iPCRJ) 4 
NuxToSt ring (OIB) * HupToSt t (0261; 

Pt>H2sti7:B NuaTOat 2 1 ng <'kf9U;7T} 4 NunToSt ring (SCR) > fluinToStringtYDRl • 

tliiaToSt 1 irig |)#)0CAC1} 4 NuinTCati irvgfAPSft)* NuvToSt ring fARCI) * 

Nujp.Tc.St 1 2 ny I4 NuaToSt i ing f BRLCI5 • NoaToSt j 1 ng (BRLICUl « 

NupiToSti mg iBRUO) ♦ NuaToSti ingiBRPLOJ* NuaTeSti mg iBfcji • 

NunToSti 1 ng rboi 4A) ♦ NuaToSt i ing(60 ♦ MuaToStt inglBOi^^B/'f- 
NuaTo.'it ri ng (B021’l « NuaTo.'^t i mg (B021A) ; 
pL)g23trg:» NuaToSt r mg (ERR) 4 NuaToSt ring (HONDO) • NuaToSt ring (OCCl) * 
NuaToString [POC}4 NuaToString (PPVBNEXu) * NuacToSti mglRZO}* 

NuaToSt 1 ing (RCI} 4 NuaToSt ring (RLCl)« NuaToSti ing(RPLCI)« 

NuaToString (RgCl) * NitfsToSt ring (VPSR); 
assign loutfi1».*pdB2in.fl1*); 
rwi-itfr (outfile); 

wi Iteln (out f I U. PD628trl. PD828tr2. PDe 2 strJ. PDB2>tr4, PD82ctrS. PD82strb. 

PD82sti7. P082sttB}( 
clos» (out fi]#); 


ptocedurp PD82Cdit(v4r prbGrkPe t integer.* 

var un 11 Pm c«. PLT, or«i#rCost. holdfrsc, 

shortCost, salvR«Ce< nvonYrsOH. r«tioPLT$TtlHU, 
nuaYriERR, BtorR 4 t«mbsolft«t»,d)scR«te« infRat*. 
ailBsaenttraai); 

var C028 : stringni; 

A02i&,BOUA>B020«B02JC.B02JD.605S,BOST.BOS8,B06l,607J.C008C,D02&E. 
KSLOO.SCR.TT3.TSMS,V0lSR.V022.V10lA.Vl02,VlOJ4.V29S; »»ali 

PDB2strli sti'ing {24 ]; 

PD82stl2. PD82strJ, PDB2str4. PD82«tr5. PDtl2«tr6, POB2str7. 
P082str8: ■tring[25S]; 

BditChoic^ichar: 

done:boo14An; 

inf 1 1*,out fi1«;t«at; 


b*gi n 

default vaxiablvs froa file to adit) 
assign (infi1*.‘pd82in.fi1'); 
r**?*? i inf I le) ; 

r*a4(infil».PI>a2strK P£)82Btr2, PD82strJ, PD82str4. PDB2sti^. PD82»tr«. 


156 









K)829C|7, PI)82*ttgi; 
clos^ ! in{l1*1 : 
co^a: »cor>y i POaist 11 , S, i); 


St lT»ar:*cur¥IPtl«i3t t 2. «a, 15l ; B0 UA;.Hi irigToRMi ISIi-Tmt. 

,-t iT«*f : rp[m;.-ti2 .5 1 . ISj; B02u;.sti in^okf.tl iStiTetT-- 

St lT*»r';"<tory ipuaistii. 121.151: B02JD:.Stl ltiaToR*.il 
St iT*»r.;.copy Ipt)a2xt i2.161,151; B0S5;-&t I ir jTofIs.sl IStiT*^) 

£t iTe»r: scopy fp[182stl 2.211 . 151 : B057 ; sStungToRsAi fStrTwr’l 
sti'T™p:.copylPliS2*ti2.226,15) : BOSBt.EtrinaTcR**! 

St iTstir: -copy (PM2st 1 J .1,151; BOSl ; .EtMnaTsli<.sl !£t i T*»pl 
5t iT»»r: •clT'y IP[l82atr j ,31.15); BOti : -St r inaToRssl IStrTMpI 
£t;T*mr;.eopy (P[l82sti 3,18, 15) ; C008C;-St i inoToRfsi IStrT*»r) 

stiT€*r;.copylPIi82sti3. 121 . 15) ; D025E:-St 1 InoTofifsl (St iTtBpl 
EtlTe^ copy IPD82stl 5.31 , 15) ; KSSOO:-St t l naToRM 1 tEtlT»«^l) 
stlT«r;.cor»y IPU823tr5,181.15): SCfi:.Sti inaTtiR**) (Stt^siT') ' 
3tiT»^;-copy ip[182sti5.211 .15); Til:-St i ingToR*.»l (SttTMip); 
3tiT*«r:-copy(P0623tr5,228,15) ; TSDRSt-StrinyToR**! (StlT^s^'): 
stlT»l(';.copylPDB2str5.2«l,I5) ; V015R:.StrinaToRMl (StlT*^) ; 
etlT»«p:.oopy IPD82*tr6, U, 151 ; V022 ; -St I InoToBssl IStlT*^) ; 

»tiT»^:*cofvy(PDt2atr6, 108.15); VlOlAi.St i inaToRasl (SttTMpl; 
»tiT*«p: -copy lPt>82»tr8.121,15): V102!.StringToR«l IStiToi^l ; 
»trT«p;.copy(PDB2»tr6.Ut.l5) ; V1034 •-St ringToRoallSt rT«^); 
at iTMp;.copy (Pll82»ti 8, 168.15) : V255:.Stl ingToBMl (StrTotBsl; 
unitPlic*!.8055; ar4*rCo<t;-V015R; •PortCosts•V10J4; 
hoMFlAC:- B0'..l * VIOIA ♦ SCR; Bl 1 Essent:-CC08C; 

PLTi. BOllA; 


tlono: -FALSE; 

I 

cl 1 ac:; 


wi 11 «1 n 


* 

••• THIS SCREEN ALUWS EDITING 

OP DE( 

ULT NUN INPUT PARAMeTERS 

vtie»ln; 
















writ*ln 


A. 

Prob Br««k ? 

*. S»i bBrkPt: 6, 

H. 

Hin Risk 

*.V022;B:2]; 

writ«ln 


B. 

Sh«lf Life : 

\C02#,* 

N- 

tux Risk t 

•.V|02;8;2)j 

*n'it*ln 


c. 

Reqn Sice ; 

•,B07J;«;0. • 

0. 

Ord Cost : 

,V015R:8:2): 

1 1 e 1 n 


D. 

Unit Price : 

',MS5:8t2. 

P. 

NSLQD I 


aniteln 


E. 

Sdly. Rate : 

* tSalvRate:8:2. 


0- P«oc Moth : • .U025E;8:I3); 

writeln 


F. 

Prccur LT i 

’.B0UA:8:2. 

A. 

Shoitage 

•.V»0J4;8:2); 

m itvln 


G. 

Essenttal : 

*,C008C:8;2. 

S. 

R/O Lov ; 

',8020:8:2}; 

w)ic^ln 


H. 

Mtg Set'Up ; 

*-B0S8:8;2. 

T. 

R/0 Constr: 

*,V295:8:2}; 

wt Iteln 


I . 

Obsol Rate : 

•.B057;8:2. 

U. 

Stor Rate : 

•.SCR;8:2); 

wii teln 


J. 

Disc Kate 

'.B9bl:8:2, 

V. 

Tl»e Pief : 

*.V101A;8:2); 



K. 

Tise SDRS 

•.TSORS:B:2. 

H. 

Today OT i 

•.Tn:8.-0); 

wiitvin 


L. 

Irtit Yre ON; 

■.nu«YrsOH:8:2-' 

%. 

PLT STD/MU 

',ratioPLTSTl]HU:9:2) 

writ*In 


¥. 

Him Trs ERA: 

* 4nvMYrBBRA:8:2. 

Z 

Inflation 

Rate: *,infRate:S:j); 

viiteln; 









( ‘ 


Hit EMTEA to 

accept current vaiuas 

M; 


wi’ 



01 letter of 

field to change: 

•): 




^itChoic*: -upcase !iTdrfkey; ; 
%n-it»ln(»ditChoic»l; 


157 











/iB*- c-f 


'A' : cw^in 

wi itf-in; 

wjit* •■’Ent«‘i Pi ob.ibi 1 mv Point: * - ; 

PrbBt kPt: n'.iO) ; 

i»fvi: 

•B' : b^in 

wi it*ln; 

wiite^ K£nt»r npvt 5h^lf co^: M; 

l♦Aaln (CC28); 

fPD82sti ! .S,U; 
insevt (C028.Pr!82*tri.5J ; 
pnd; 

'C' : b^in 

wi j t <c i n ; 

wrir<>ln (‘** InfoivAtion Only • Hod^l i<i6suff>«s siz^ cf one*-. 

HitToCont ; 

*r»d; 

‘tv : M^in 

•rrit#ln: 

writ« PEjit*r n«w Unit Pi tee: *); 

BOSSt«0«t_Re«I(0.0.999999.0); 
dvUte (PO«2«Cr2 J81. IS); 
insert iMuaToStrin^(BOSS)«PD82str2.IBl); 
uftitPi ice:-B0SS: 

•nd; 

'£' : begin 

wr11 ein: 

wilt* ('£ntet new $4iVi«ge Ante, freer ion of unit cost: *); 
«elvRate:-C«t_R»sl(0.0,t.0); 
end; 

■F‘ : begin 

•a iceln: 

wiice (^Knter new Procurement i,«edtipe Poreeaet: 

BOUA:>Cet_Real (0.0,40.0); 

B023C:-BOIIA*B02JD; 

delete (PD«2str2,4«.IS)i 

insert (NumToString(BOl lA).Pli82etr2,44|; 

delete <PD82str2.JOb.15): 

insert <HUiiToString(BC2iC) .PD82etr2.10b); 

PLT:-B0] lA; 

•i>d; 

'G* .' begin 

WTlteln: 

wiite (‘Intel new Aveiege Ite* Iseentiality: *); 

C0O8C:*Get,.Re4l (0. 0. 999994.q) ; 

■ 1 lEssent: •C008C: 
delete (PP42sti J , 7ft, 15) 
inset t (NuitTcSti ing(C008C) .PD82stk i,7b] ; 
end: 

'H' : begin 


158 











«• u ♦ 1 n ; 

wiitfr f'Entej n«»w Hanuf<iceut-#j S^t-up CoflC: ‘1; 

SOSe: .G^C _Ri?rtl ; 

(PDWist il‘. 22b . IS} ; 

insert (NuBToStt ir>g(B058). PIt82str2.22«): 

^nd: 

' I' : b^gin 

0bsol»9C«nc« RAt^: *): 

B057i.G*t_R#4l {0.0.*»<»99‘»9.0); 
obsol R<at«: aBOST ; 

(RD82scx2,2U.IS); 

insert <MuBTeSti‘xngJBOS?) . PD8isiir2.21 i) : 
end; 

' sJ * ; begin 

in i t e 1 n: 

vmte (‘Entet neiK tUscoont R<!ite: 

BObl: «Get_Re^l IQ . 0,. Oj; 
delete (P082sciJ.1.IS); 
insert {NujsToStMng(BOtol) , n)82strJ. 1) ; 
end; 

*K* : loegin 

writeln: 

write (‘Enter new Ti»e Bet««een SCTfls: *); 
rSDItS:«Cet.Real(0.0.999«99.0); 
delete (Ki«2iti5,22b. iS); 
insert (NusiToSti'ing(TSDRS) . PD82stiS,22e): 
end; 

‘L* : begin 

wiiteln; 

wiite (‘Entei nuabet of yeau depend ot initial inventoiy 
nuaVi «OH; -Get^Real (0.0,200.0): 
end; 

‘N'l begin 

writelo; 

write ('Enter new Miniausi fliekt *); 

V022.»Cet_Real(0.0.1 0); 
delete (POBSstro.le.IS); 
insert (NuiiToString(V022) . P062Btrs. lb); 
end; 

*N' : begin 

vriteln; 

write ('Enter new Naxieupi Risk: *) .' 

VI02; .Ot.Real (0. 0,1.0) ; 
delete (P082str6,121.IS); 
insert tNuaToString(V102).PD82stre.121); 
end; 

'O' : begin 

writeln; 

write ('Enter new Hsrk 2/lt Order Cost: *>; 
V0lSR:«C«t_Reali0.0.999999.0); 


159 






: •VolSR; 

fPO02»tr5.241,i5j; 

in«*) t (NustToSt 11 tVOlSR) . PT'd^sti-S , 241); 

♦nH; 

P' ! t»9in 

wi:c» I’Entv^i n«« Numb«^i of Safety L.»v«‘; £>«iiind 

fPDtt2str5. jl .15); 

1 hs**rt iNuwToS^»i ng fllSU>D5 . PD82stt 5. -M ; 

0 ‘ I n 

wi 11 ^ i n .- 

wjitfr {‘Entei nrw Piocuie»^nt He-thod: •).- 
I>025E:*G#t_R««l lO. 0 . 0) ; 

d»letfr (PDe2«ciJ. 121.15); 
insert (MusToSer ing (D025E). PD82«ti J. 12U ; 

*nii; 

R’ ! b«gin 

wt 11»1 n; 

wiite (‘Ent#! n«w Ptocure9«nc Shortage Cost: 

V10J4:-C»t_Roal(0.0.999949.0); 

ShottCost:*V10J4: 

I Pr)82st rtt. n«. 15}: 

inset t [NuaToStt)ng(Vi 034).PD62sCrb.}3t); 

•nd; 

S* : Oegin 

wt iteln; 

writ# {'Enter n«w R»orti#r Lsvsl Low Liait Qtyr *); 

B020{*Get_Re«l(0.0,999999.0); 
delete tPD«2stt2.91,IS); 
insert lHuBiTostring(B020) ,Pttl2stt3,91); 
end; 

T* : begin 

wi'iteln; 

wjite ('Enter new Reoirler Level Constraint Rate: *); 

V295:■Cet^Real(0.0,999999.0); 

delete (PD82strb, Uo. 15); 
insert (NunTostring(V39S),PDB2str4. 109); 
end; 

U* : begin 

wr it e1n; 

write ('Entet new Storage Cost Rate: '); 

SCIl:*Cet_ReaI (0.0 99999.0) ; 
storRate:«5CR; 
delete lp[>82st i-5,18l, IS) ; 
insert (NwsToSt t ing (SCR). Pti«2str5. IBl} ; 
end; 

V‘ ; begin 

writeln: 

write (‘Entet new Tise Preference Rate: *); 


160 










VlulAi-Ot.R^Al j C. 0, : 

4iscRjC#: bV:O lA: 

■ielet» I PD 82 ar rt>. I Ct. IS) : 

( (NuatToSt t ing fVl OlA), PD82£t) b. )0t) : 

♦fvi: 

‘W* : be^in 

w 11«1 n; 

writ# (*Ent»r TodJiy*'# D#t# *}; 

Tt3;*G#l.RMl r0.0.«»^«*»<4.0) ; 
iFDW2#tiS .aU . IS); 

j ns#I t {NuSiToSti ing <T[)] . PD825ti-5.211); 

#nH: 

' X ‘ ; b#g 1 r. 

wt it-eln; 

wtiC# (*£nt#i PLT sigmii to au ZAtio: *); 
vm I oPUTSTDHU: *G#t _«## 1 {0.0,10.0); 

#nrt; 

'T* : begin 

writ«ln; 

writ# {‘Enter nuabei of years of econoaic retention: ’}; 
nuaYrseM: -Cet_Rea H 0.0 . nunYrsOH). 
end; 

•2' ; begin 

writeln: 

writ# i‘Enter current inflation rate: 
infHates-Cet^Reai(0.0.I.0); 
end; 

chrin): done;-Tflue 

end; 

until done-T^UE; 
holdPr«c:«e0S7 « VIOIA « SCR; 
assign (outf}le.‘pdl3in.f11 ‘; 
rewi'ite (outfile); 

w>ireln(outfile.P082strl. PU82stt2. POe2strJ, Pt>lf2str4. t>C>82str5, Pp«2sti0. 

PDKstrT. PD«2strSl; 
close (outfile); 
cli'scr; 
end; 


procedure InitKl84Pi le; 

infile. out tile:text; 


PD«2tti-l: «tring(24); 

K>82Btr2. PDe2stiJ, PU82sti4. PD82sttS. PD82stie. ni82sti7. 
P082sti'8: 8tringl2SS); 


PDI^ttrl: sti103(241; 

PD888tr2. PDttstrJ. PD86str4, KStstrS, KM^stre. POiestrl, 


161 










St I 


. i-i-J i «>' J : 


-OOJ .COCH^tst I inj I'i} : 

CCpl: 1B, LACriH.CiiOlT: , JOO IT; . RPR IN. OKtKAY r ,-hAt : 

r};j^ : rt I If>g {51 ; 

r irvg I'i;; fKI iHi 


t»L IJ A. ea 7 j . FKLTOfT. F»<L'r EXP. tHLYC^C.. PMLmM. fMLY Syrv'^'MJ. fULT^YSRC. 
ntlYOPArr.FieLrPLT. ncirRpRr.RV. J-Ul-iftTAT.FKLiffiy^II.fiivPI'R:. . FroFTR) 

F.'v'PPRA - F:>CPP1»5 i . P::*>PPPc . FSC'PPR"’ . - FL^'rFFl-. . F-'^PPRl 1 . 

FlvPF'P U . p:\iprpl i. r.\ppftu. Pii^-PPRIS. FrivPPRJ*: . FfvPfP }~ . P::OPPR J« - F-'VPPRi 

F;v?rfi;M-. FSgppp:!. FS-^PPR;;. FivjFf'R-j. f:'OPP«; 4. F::jPPli2S.Fi;C‘PPR-:c . 

F50PPR2f . FSOPWiti. rsoPPRi'i. PrJOPPRiO. F-'-OPPR n . FiiC^PWfJi.nrj, Hft2KU*3TH. 

KEAf»JC?^Zft.bOblB.B01’»A.B01^8.B01'K:.BQ2i .BSlt^.BOi lA.OPAi:r.PLTPPN,&Oi2f . PPV. 
PPVO.fiALtKrJ.FOO<»,BCUE.R?V.r^PPRl,SOPPR2.£(?P«lJ.SOPPf»4,SC>PPRS.50rPfib. 
50PPB7 . SOPPRi . SOPP* *». SOPPft 10. SOP Wf H SOPPR U. SOPPPIJ . SOPPft H . W»1S . 

OOPPR i «. SQPPH I ^. SOPPR I •. SOPPAI. sgppit 20 . SOPPR 21 . SOPPA*2. SOPi^2J. S0PPR24 . 

SOPPR25. SQPPli2t .S0PPA27. S0PPA28. SOPW2«.SOPPAJO.SOPPPJI. SOPP* J2 
SySBO.SYSRCR . A02 JB .TliPR . TSOAS. BCS5 . F007 . ZOBS. EXFCCFRS. eXPOEPRSA, 

CXPOEFSIA. PEXPliEPRS. FEXPDLFSM. PROJACCao. PROOADDVH&L. VRBL. 

PROJSSA£?bBO. PRCkJSSADC. PAOJSSSHA, R&SHATRNL}, ROSHPTrP. VLSUY:: .VRBLKR^R. 

VR B LKA SO. U« 1TS HRTP, UN 1TS SHirTR j I ♦ a I ; 


>is« (in<> U, 'pi92out ■ f i! M ; 

r*i^t (in(iU); 

r«4d(iftfil#,Pr42«trI. PD82scr2. POtt2atrJ. IH)«2*tr4. Pt}«2«tr5. PM2str«, 
P0«2stt?, 
clo»« (! 

COOJs-'lH*; 

COO IB;-' '; 

OAGTIdJ-'f ; 

L>040U:«'OOOOOOOCO' ; (HI INI 

COOITlJ-* •: 

COOIT*:-' ■: 

COOIN:-' •; 

RPRIN:«'H'; 

OHENAy:-‘H^ 

FIOLEB:-* 

•t|-T9«p:>c<^|pD82st t2.4b, IS) ; SOI IA:«St t (StiTMp); 

st t-^Mip: acopy lPD82st IJ. Jl. IS}.' BOY J: -st i ingToR^Af I St rT««pI • 
FKLTCKr:ad.9;PHLYeXP:-0.0;nCLYCRS:«0.0;PllLTlt«:-0.0;niLTSYSOIU>:*0.0; 
FKLYSYSRO:«Ci.O;PlfLYOPAST:«O.0;n(LYPLT: -0. d:PKLrRP9{SRV:*0.C: PHLYltTAT;*0.0: 
FNLYROSlZi-O.O; FSOPPAl :«0.0; FSOPPR2:.0.9;PSOPPRJ:>0.0:PSDPP«4:aO. 0; 
F^PPR^:-0.0:rsOPPRb:>C.0;FSOPP1I7:«C.Q;FS0PPRV:*0.0;PS0PPll4:.l».0; 
FSOPPR10:>Q.0^FSOPPRn :>0.0:FSOPP«I2:«0.0;FSCPPA1J:-0.0;PSOPPR14-«O.G; 
FSOPPIIlS:-0.0:FSOPPRU;>0.0;rSOPPRl?:*0.0;FSCPPPl8:-0.0;FSDPPRlR^«0.0; 
FSOPPR201-0.0; FSOPPR2} : -0.0: FSOPPfl22: • 0.0; PSOPPA2 j: • 0.0; FSOPPR24 ; «0. 0; 


162 
















r.'C-praiS ; .r .0 : F^.PPt,: -P . t-; FSJPPfi^' : .-I . 0; Fr^.-pPRi(■: -C . ": FSiPPS:'.; . . . ' ; 

FK PPfi L'; F&SPP* J 1:. u. C,; F^OPPR j; :.C..0 ;FT<O:.C-..t 

*trT»Br: •corvimsistti.lll . 151 ; B01JIi!.StrirvTo(l»<l (EttTM^l : 

KRZJJLfKTH; ■ u - 0;K£AI*j»aR; • C . 0; BOt IB: -0. 0 : 

sriTnf: .cc.^^y IPt'B-stli.'’!;. 15 ■ . BO 1 P*; .Sr I 1 ftjToRMl IStl'r»«^>i : 

Ek'-i 'a®; .0 . O.'&Ol Or 

pt iTMr;.c!ir'y lPt!«2sf r7.i2e , 15): B021: .5? rir>aTo»»al rEti^T^r': 
stiT«r;.cory i rti»2»t I 7 . :i»o. IS) ; liVToRMi lStlT»«pl; 

B<i:i*:.0.P;OP*ST:.P.0;PLTPP*:.Ci.0:B012F:.0.O: 

3'iT»«r:*<‘{T‘>'lPO»2«tl5.»l, 151 ; PPV;.StnrbjTo»*al i3tiT»^'l : 

PP.’O ; 

Et I T«r: ”=<iry ' pub; sr t r . 1: : . ; 5 : BSLDrU: .Sr 1 i n 3 ToB»i 1 iSt jTMf’;: 

: »U . 0; fttJliE: -c;. 0 r 
RSV:«C.G; 

:JCPPS 1 ; ■ 0 . Q : S0PPR2: - 0.0 ; 

SOPP*J ; .0.0; S0PPfi4 ; .0.0; S0PPB5 : .0.0; SOPPBP : .e - 0: S0PPB7; .0. 0; S0PPB6 : .0. p; 
SCPPBBi-O.OiSOPPlilOl.O.O.-SOPMIlr.O.OiSOPHIIli.O.a.SOPPSIJi.O.O/ 
SOPPS14:.0.0:SOPPBl5:.Q.O:^^PBl«:-0.0;SOPPItl7;.0.(l;SOPPBlB:-0.6,- 
S3PPJ!i5;.0.0;SOPPR2'J:.0:i;SOPPR21.-.0.0!SOPf«22:-0.0;SOPPS2J;.0.II: 
SOPP1l24:,0.0,SOPPt!2Sj.o.O; SOPP1l2t;.C.O.-3SlPP»27;.<l.O;SOPP1l2S:.a.Ci; 

SC>PP»25; .0.0:SOPPBJO: .0.6; SOPPS J1:.0.0;S0PPI1 J2:.0.0; 

3F3BO: .0.0; SYStlCB i .0.0 ; 

St iT«^: .eorvIPCMIJst r2.1.15): A02JBi.SCringro«aal IStrTr^l 

St iTmt: -copy (POi2st rS .220.15); TIIPP;-St riniFTalloal ISttTnrI; 

St iTMp: .copy (PIMi2»t 15.220.15); TSOBS; .St r mtrTsRool ISt rTei^Jl ; 
strT«^:.copir'IPO«2»tl2.U1.15): BOSSi.StringToilosI (StrToiv); 
r007:.c.l3;ZOBS;.0.0i 

KIWEPRS1.0.0: EXPMrRSII:.0.0: taPOEFSOB:.0.0; PKPOentS: .0. 0: FEXPOEFSCfi: .0. 0: 
FllOJA[I()SO;.0.0;PK<UA[XIVRBl.;>«.0;F«OJaaV]tBI,:.0-0,-PKaJSSUXIBO:.0.0; 

PROJSSAOP: .0.0: l>«OJSSSm; .0.0; ROSHimD; .0.«; BOSISrmi; •«. 0 ; VUHJTS; • 0 . 0 ; 
V1lBU«SR;.0.0:VRBUO!S0!-0.0;lWlTS»l!m>:.0.0;OSITSSIBiTR:.0.0; 

IcrpBt* PMo input filpj 

PlH(o*ttl:.C00J. COOIB. LASTIN. 004oD« COOITI* C00IT2. COOIW< RPBIM. ONEHiY. 
rilXER; 

P080>tl2;.NuilToStl 1119 IB011A).No«roSt ring)B07J} .>k^T 9 Strin 3 <nU.TCMT) . 

>4u«ToSt ring (niLYBXPI •liUiiToString (ntLYCkS) .NufFTsSt ring iPIfLYIMI). 

IfcniToS 1 11 ng I niLYSYSOftC) iHuBToSt ring! FKLYSYSttO). 

HuoToSt r I ng I nG.yoPAST) oHi^TinSt r ■ ng I nB.TPLT)« 

NuUToStnnglPHL.'r .|IV)..HuuroString(niLntTAT). 

NiBToSt r 1 ng I niLYIIV J11) oNu^'oS t r i ng I rSOPPR I). 

NwVoSt 11 ng i Fsgppiu) .NuMToSt r I ng I rsOPPRi I .NwToSt r I ng I F^PPB4) ; 
PDBostI J : .HuBTsSt ring)FSOPPR51 .HuBTsString IFSOPPRO) .Ni^oStringI FSgPP*7) , 

(h«Tosti iRg(rsppp)it).ifciBToStriiig<fSOPP*7|»ltuBTnString(rsOPPI<I(i) . 
NtBtroSti ingirsOPPRll) <NuBToStringlPsgpPRI2). 

MuBPoEti ing|FSOPI>BU).H>BFroStriiiglFS(JPF1lt4). 

KuaTost r ing I FsgppR 15) *l4uaToSt r 1 ng I rsgppR I Bi. 

H>»ToSt 1 1 ng (PaDPPS 17) .iWuBToSt 1 i ng IPSOPPBI ■). 

HuBToSt r 1 ng I rSgPP* 101 iNuBToSt r 11 « I rSOPPM01« 

HuBTo3tring(F50PPIl21) : 


163 








1 i: I :n3 rcjppfti; 4s<*rT-.^** inj. fs;tpr;: J; • 

UiiSiTc ?*; inj '. FCwf'f’RH' •Mu»Tc^? ting' fCCPWSii • * 

KwTor^rr :r>s. rSCF‘F*Rwt: *Ki^?crti ir>g -'r5CPPf»2''- 
t i nj I FI>CPPP2 b • i jr^' FSvPFP--^* • 

I ;rv-j • F-»Pf'F: jC . i irvjf F2vPP«i I»♦ 

KuBToSt I )r>g I Fl^PPP J*. '■ i t r»g (PWOi • 

Hu8tTo2t t ir>gtB02J(}. ^N^cStringfKPZMLNCTHv* 

U^oCZt irvg{J4£AM4Dr2^fti*N<^oSt2 ir»gi&0t>l&< lAg(»01<i>A/ ; 

PD^^sOS; •Nu«ToSt 1 ing tl^I ^UMu^c^St r ing (B&21) * 

KtjvToSt rin9(Sdl^V*MMBTo27'trir>gfB021A) •Nu«tTAStrin0^OPA?T' « 

Hu»To3? t : r >5 f PLTPPP» •WuatTo?* 11 t>3f6C12F5 *NuaToirtt vf>g ipr.‘; • 

MuflT-;';!’I ; r>j • ppvo• •NubT■'.'*» i >21 *N'jsfTcSt i ing - roC * » 

MviaTcS? i ir»gIB- 12 t'l *NjrTc5»:» 103 *K'jBiT- 3 jt t ing iCCPPfi i *. - 

N*i«Toi>t I 1 f»g i 3 CPP*i 2 ) ♦KusToStringtSOPPP *).' 

1 t; «HupToj't I in-ji S^PPfi4 ] ♦Hii*Tor:» 1 1 ng < SOPPftS 1 •NuaToSl 11 ng (SpPPUft * * 
NubTcj? 1 ing ) ♦HuaToSt t»nglSOPPP^i •Nu«T*St i *ng (SOPFH**} • 

HuaTo:^r i iT*g(S^PPfi 1 < 1 1 »HuBToJtt tng» >*M'^Tc>StrtSCPP1^12) • 
NusToSt I J ) ^NvmToString (S&PPK14) ^MvasToSt r 1 ng < S^PPR 1S) * 

NuaToSt 1 ing(SOPPRl«l 4(&»7oString(S^PPR)7)»4H»rTaStrtn9{SCPPBIB) * 
MuBTc2crin9lS0PP«t4}4H^oSt»)r«g{^P»20i; 

PDIe«117: *j^toSt r Iftg{S^P«21) •N'JoToSt t ing {SOPPft22 W 

M'^oString(£OPPfi2a) •iaMroStrif>gi9^m24}*Mia«Todtrtng(S^PPP2S) « 
»fcjiiTo£t r t ng (S^PI>R2ft WSiuaffoSt r 1 ng (SCPM2?) ♦l^uo^oSt r 1 ng (SOM2 B W 
i4uKToStringiSC^PPft2^) tHMiToscringtdpPPAjoi^KitfToStringiSCPP^H) * 
HraffoSt r i ryj 130PP» 32 ^ *Nu«ToSt 11 ng 1SYSBO1 ♦>fc*ToSt ri f*g iSVSSCft) 4 
K^oStrinalAOiJB) ♦MuitT<kString<TRP«)4l*yirt‘0StrtnB!T5t)llSJ; 

PD^est: i>. •HukToSt I ing (BOSS) •NuarTc^Sti ing (P907) 4 

JAjiiToSt 11 ng ( Z09S 1 ^HusToSt n ng (UPOEfAS) *>AaToSt r iT>g 1 EXPoePASR I « 

IAjbT^SC r 1 ng < CXPOCPSUd ) ring! PCXPOCPKS)« 

NiaFToSC r: ng < FEXPOcrsiA ] »fluirTo^t I ing I PftcdAJPCiK^ 

NuttToSt r 1 ng (PBa7AC«rV£BL) *tty^9SX r ing t PKOJSHAVBBL)« 
l«iBT»StringiPBaiSSADC80} ♦ffc^ro^MnglPftOJSSAO?)♦ 
llurt'aSC r lag (rftOJSSaMI ^MiiarTtoSt r ingf i09iniK)> ♦ 
riuaT»Scring(lt0SKItrnil-4N^o$t rt nglVLBOys); 

PO«4at i*»:-lluaTo5(ringiVRBLKRSB}«HgiiToSct-ing|VllfiLKR50)* 

rtuaToSt ring (WITSKRTP) 4 NubTo^ r<ngIWirsSHBTB); 

Bsstgn (out f i 'pciiain. ( 1 1 ‘ 1; 

i (put ( 1 1»1; 

wi itvinloutfUv. PCiB^strl. K)9b«tt2. POBtstiJ. Pt)i«str^. PD8«itx>, 

PDB4str7, PGB«atrl. PO«6«ti9): 
clot^ Iputfllc); 
mnd; 


End. {unit pdunlt} 


164 












unit PQueue 




intfj i.ic*- 

const KWCPgUEUESIZE-JCO; 

t>T^ ri.^tAftecoid - record 

<?ty: ; 

end; 

KeApAriA/Typ«-«>t 2 ray 11. .H^F'CdttfEi'jIZEl of cUtai«cord: 

Fi ioi jtythJeueType - record 
heiip5i2e; integei ; 
heApAiI ay:HeapA2 ta/Type 
end; 

(iiust b# called befcze the priority queue is first used) 

(also resets the priority queue sc it is e«f>ty) 

procedure lnitiali 2 ePi'iority 0 u^ue (var pCueue:PriorityQueueType}; 

lerroi if called tehen it already has MAXP0UEUESI2C elements) 

piocedure Inset tFt lot ityOueue (var r«Oueue; FriorityOueueType: dat A;«iatareco>d} 

Returns the eies»ent with the largest value) 

{errot if no elesMuts in the priority queue) 
function CuiiWeek (rCueue:PrtotityQueueType):integer; 
function CuiiOty (pOueoe;FriorityOueueiype)sinteger; 

lre»oves and returns the eleaent with the largest velwe) 
terror if no *l*»Mts in the priority cfueue) 
function tatractC^y fvar pOueue: Priori tyQueueType): integer; 
function SxtractWeek fear pOueueiPriorityQueue'IVpe) tinteger; 

function E^tyPriontyOueue (pOueue: Prion ty^eueType) sboolean; 

function SizePrioMty^ueue (pCNeueiprionty^eueType): integer; 

inplesientat ion 

{eiioj If the binary trees that are children of the index do not satisfy the 
heap picperty) 

procedure Heapify (var pOueue;PriorityQueueType; i:integer); 

vai left, right, smI lest i integer; 
t#^?vat ;<iataRecoiTl: 

begin 

with fCueUe do begin 


165 






1♦f t:* 1 ; 
j ight :w<2M )-»l; 
sm.H 1 I : »i; 

if •» rh*‘n ts*.jin 

If {hf^^pAi'i v^y ■ h^ApAri Ay 11 i th^n b^yin 

&m.«l l«st! > i«>ft 

«nd 

«nd; 

if (right-ahedpSi:•) th#n begin 

if . h»«ipAt My I right) .HeeK ' heapAri-Ayfra^nest) .WeeH] then begin 
smd1 lest :*1 ight 

end 

end; 

if smallest • u then begin 
teBspVar;-heapAri ay [ i I ; 
heapAi ray ( 1 1 ivheapAi i ay (sma 1 test); 
heaf^ri ay | seal lest {: ■teiqrtVar; 

Heapiiy (pc^ieue, naallesti 

end 

end fwith) 
end; (procedure) 


(tenoves and retuine the elesient with the largest value) 

(eiror if no elements in Che priority ^tieue) 

function Heap£x*raGtWeek (var pOueue:PiioiityOu^^eType):integer; 

begin 

with pOueue do begin 

Heap^CtactWeekt•heapArray (11 .Week; 
heapArray(1]:wheapArray(heapSite); 
heaps!ze:>heapSile-1; 

Heapify (pQueue.l) 
end (With) 
end; (procedure) 

(lemoves and returne Che element with the largest value) 

(error if no elements in the prioi vty >7ueue) 

function H»a,)£xtlactOty (vai pOoeue:Priority^eueTv'pe): tntegex'; 

begin 

With pOueue do begin 

HcapLxtlactgty:•heapAiray(I|.^ty; 
hea|:Ai ray [ 1} ;»heapAt ray (heapSi ze); 
tieapSi7e:«heap$lie-l; 

Heapify (pOueueJ) 
end (Wien) 
en..i; (,.rncedure| 


(errot if called when it already has HAXPOUUiSSlZE element*} 


166 







{■•Ie- H-i-rt-rJns^it <v*i p^eue; f»i loi ityOu»u»Tyr»r ; 


v-.-ti indfrx. pAien‘; integer? 

'ione: boolean ; 

begin 

w;cn pC>ueue ^ begin 

done: ■ f.4i 

heApSire:-heapsize*1; 

; n' lf X ; -he^ipSlZe; 
p«^i en? :« Index ‘iiv .i: 
if r:‘.tient-i- then begin 
donei-TRUE 

end else if (heapAri'^^y (patent 1 .Week - data.Week; then begin 
done:-TRUE 

end; 

while (index • 1) and (not done) do begin 
hearAiray | index 1 i -heargiri ay (parent (; 
index: -p.tient; 
parent:-index div 2 : 
it paienteO then begin 
donej-TnUE 

end elee if i heapAn ay (pai ent ] . Week •* data.Week) then begin 
done: #TRye 

end 

end; (while) 
heapArray(indexl:edata 

end (with) 

end; (pvoaeduie) 


procedure Init iaUzePrioriCyOueue (vai pOueueiPi iorityOue«*Tyr*e) r 

vai index:integei; 

begin 

p^ueue.heaps 1 ze:-0 
end; (procedure) 


procedure IneeitPriorityOueue (var pGueue;PitoritygueueType; data:dat«Recoid); 

begin 

Heaplnaert (pCueue, data) 
end; (procedujel 


function CuriWeek (pOueue:PrictityOueueT^T^)iinteget; 


begin 

Cut i-Week t «rOti*ue. heapArt ay [ 11. Week; 


167 











(function) 

fund ion C'JitCty t ; Pi i oi 2 1 yCu^ut-Tyf^ •: int 

fc>fry I li 

'-U11 Otyj he-i^pAi»ay (IJ .^ty .* 

♦n-'l; ! t unct i on j 

f ur-- 1 1 on Ext 1 ^^c^ vt y (fOu^uf*: Pi 101 1 1 yC’M^u«^'IVf>^ , : i nt^^1 .- 
r.-*?-3 s n 

E«t r»^ctOty: - H^^apExt r<^ct Oty (pOu<«u^) 

{function) 

funct ion Ext rrtctw««^ tv«ii ptfu^u^ipi iorityOu*u#TVT>t»): int»g«i .- 
b^ih 

Ext i'ActW^#k: ■H*arExti,^cti<^ek (pOu^u^) 

^•nri; f function) 

timction Eoptyfi iontyOu»u» (pOu«u»i Pi joi ityOu«u»TvT>») ;b«>l»in, 

bitflin 

EoiptyPt iOM tyOu^u* : •pOu*u*>. htapSia^.c 
♦nd; ifunction) 

function Siz»Pi 101 tty(?u#u* (fV«»u*:PriarityOu*u#Typ*) i »nt*grr; 
bvgin 

*?1 ivPr ioi 1 1 yOueu*; «pQu(*ue, h^apS) <«• 

•nd; (function) 

ond. (unit PQueue) 


168 




APPENDIX E. GRAPHS 


-demand 


0 5 10 1$ 20 

Qjartar 


Declining Demand Pattern 
Graph # 1 


Declining Demand Pattern 
Grpah # 3 


oncave Dedi 

High MeanDemnd 


* „Lx 



till 


0 

5 

10 

15 

20 



Quarter 




Declining Demand Pattern 
Graph # 5 


Step Dedine 

Low Mean Demand 


-demand 


0 5 10 15 

Quartar 


Declining Demand Pattern 
Graph # 2 


Convex Dedine 

Low Mean Demand 


0 

5 

10 15 

20 



Quarter 



Declining Demand Pattern 
Graph # 4 


_oncave Dedir 

Low Mean Demand 


0 S 10 15 20 

Quarter 


Declining Demand Pattern 
Graph # 6 
































hvesiment 






































- 



TCA 

/ 


3000 

- 



hOHy/HP 

/ 

c 

A 

2500 

* 



^ Total Cost 1 

/ 

^ «» 

• 



j 


O 


.\ 



JT 


K 

2000 

V 






Itll 1 

i 11 > 1 i 1 i_Li_i LI 11 LI tJ-t 11 i 111 i 11 1 



0 

s 

10 15 20 25 

30 35 1 



hit hv held in half y rs annual dermnd I 


Total Cost Curve Graph # 13 


3500 


1 

- 



TCA 


3000 

.. 






. 



HDLVHP 


c 2500 

- 



^TotaiCost f 

X 

•A S 

- 





5 2000 

- 











1500 




■- 



mil 

i i 1 1 II m 1 1 1 1 1 1 111 i 11 111 111111111:11 II 


0 

3 

10 15 20 25 

30 35 1 


Int tn held n half yrs amual demand 1 


Total Cost Curve Graph # 14 


« 

■o 

c 


o 

£ 

H 


200 

•\ 


TCA 


150 

- \ 





-\ 


HDWLP 


100 

v 

1 •» Total Cotl 1 

50 

\ 

--- 

0 


ililllllllUlilllUIIIIIIIHIIIIIIIIIlllll 


S 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
ht tw in half yr» anmal demand 


Total Cost Curve Graph # 15 



0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 

Total Cost Curve Graph # 16 



NOTE: The veritcal line in each graph indicates the reorder point 


171 



















TCA Cost Breakout Graph # 19 


TCA Cost Breakout Graph # 20 



TCA Cost Breakout Graph # 21 


TCA Cost Breakout Graph # 22 



TCA Cost Breakout Graph #23 


TCA Cost Breakout Graph # 24 


NOTE: The veritcal line in each graph indicates the reorder point 


172 








































30 35 40 45 SO 55 60 65 

Si mulation Quarter 

I -B-NB -0-NB-MOD -^NB-NPV 


Retention Levels Graph #25 



Retention Levels Graph # 26 



Retention Levels Graph # 27 


















































8 




































30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 

S tm ulatipn Q u ■ rtt r_ 


Retention Levels Graph # 36 































Retention Levels Graph # 38 



























































list of rsfbrbmces 

1. Naval Supply Systems Command, Subject: Naval Supply Corps 
FLASH from the Chief, No. 7-93, 19 July 1993. 

2. Deputy Secretary of Defense, Memorandum to Secretaries of 
the Military Departments, Subject: Retention and Disposal 
of DOD Assets, 13 June 1990. 

3. U. S. General Accounting Office, National Security and 
International Affairs Division, GAO/NSIAD-88~189BR, 
Defense Inventory Growth in Secondaiy Items, USGAO, 

July 1988. 

4. u. S. General Accounting Office, National Security and 
International Affairs Division, GAO/NSIAD-90-111, 

Growth in Ship and Submarine Parts, USGAO, March 1990. 

5. U.S. Department of the Navy, Supply Systems Command, 
NAVSUP Instruction 4500.13, Retention and Reutilization of 
Material Assets, January 1990. 

6. Interview between Mr. J. Zammer, Naval Supply Systems 
Command code 4111, Washington, D.C., and the author, 19 
May 1993. 

7. U.S. Department of Defense, DOD Regulation 4140.1-R, DOD 
Material Management Regulation, January 1993. 

8. Interview between Ms. J. McFadden, Navy Ship's Parts 
Control Center code 0421, Mechanicsburg, PA, and the 
author, 27 May 1993. 

9. Hayvaert, A., and Hurt, A., •Inventory Management of Slow- 
Moving Parts," Operations Research, v. 4, pp. 572-580, 
October 1956. 

10. Rothkopf, M., and Fromovitz,S., "Models for a Save-Discard 
Decision," Operations Research, v. 16, pp. 1186-1193, 
November-December 1968. 

11. Hart, A., "Determination of Excess Stock Quantities," 
Management Science, v. 19, pp. 1444-1451, August 1973. 

12. Sinpson, J., "A Formula for Decisions on Retention or 
Disposal of Excess Stock," Naval Research Logistics 
Quarterly, v. 2, pp. 145-155, September 1955. 


179 










13. Mohan, C., and Garg, R., ''Decision on Retention of Excess 
Stock, " Operations Research, v. 9, pp 496-499, Ju..y-August 
1961. 

14. Tersine, R.J., and Tuelle, R.A., "Optimal Stock Levels for 
Excess Inventory Items, " Journal of Operations Management, 
V. 4, 3 May 1984. 

15. Moore, T.P., "Derivation of a Simplified Expression for 
E[x > RO], Lecture Notes from course OA3501, Inventory 
Management, Naval Postgraduate School, November 1992. 

16. Finney, R., and Thomas, G,, Calculus, Addison-Wesley 
Publishing Company, 1990. 

17. Silver, E., and Peterson, R., Decision Systems for 
Inventory Management and Production Planning, 2d ed., John 
Wiley & Sons, 1985. 

18. Rosenfield, D., "Disposal of Excess Inventory," Operations 
Research, v. 37, pp. 404-409, May-June 1989. 

19. U.S. Department of the Navy, Supply Systems Command, 
NAVSUP Publication 553, Inventory Management, January 

1991. 

20. Interview between Mr. J. Boyarski. Navy Ship's Parts 
Control Center code 0421, Mechanicsburg, PA, and the 
author, 26-29 May 1993. 

21. Mendenhall, W., Wackerly, D., and Scheaffer, R., 
Mathematical Statistics with Applications, 4th ed., 
PWS-Kent Publishing Company, 1990. 

22. Ching-Lai Hwang and Kwangsun Yoon, "Multiple Attribute 
Decision Making - Methods & Applications," Lecture Notes 
in Economics and Mathematical Systems, v, 186, Fall 1980. 

23. Law, A., and Kelton, W., Simulation Modeling and Analysis, 
2d ed., McGraw-Hill,Inc., 1991. 

24. Navy Ship's Parts Control Center OA Report, Demand 
Forecasting Simulator, by Bunker, T., CDR, USN, 1987. 

25. Navy Ship's Parts Control Center OA Report, A Rank 
Correlation Approach for Trend Detection of Military Spare 
Parts Demand Data, by Bessinger, B, and Boyarski, J,, 

1992. 

26. Navy Ship's Parts Control Center ALRAND Working Memo 357, 
Power Rule, 30 May 1980. 


180 




27. Hadley, and Whitin, Analysis of Inventory Systems, 

Chap. 4, Prentice-Hall, 1963. 

28. Fleet Material Support Office PD82, Level Setting Model 
Functional Description, McNertney, R., and Reynolds, K,, 
1 April 1993. 

29. Cornien, T., Leiserson, C., and Rivest, R., Introduction to 
Algorithms, 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill Book company, 1991. 

30. Interview between Ms. K. Reynolds, Navy Ship's Parts 
Control Center code 046, Mechanicsburg, PA, and the 
author, 17 May 1993. 

31. Tersine, R., Principles of Inventory and Materials 
Management, 3rd ed., North-Holland, 1988. 


181 




1 . 


IMlTlAXi DIST.^IBUTION LIST 


NO. Copies 
2 


Defense Technical Information Center 
Cameron Station 

Alexandria, Virginia 22304-6145 


2. Library, Code 052 2 

Naval Postgraduate School 

Monterey, California 93943-5002 

3. Defense Logistics Studies Information Exchange 1 

United States \rny Logistics Management Center 

Fort Lee, Virginia 23801-6043 

4. Thomas P. Moore, Code SM/Mr 1 

Department of Systems Management 

Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, California 93943-5103 

5. Professor Alan W. McMasters, Code SM/Mg 1 

Department of Systems Management 

Nava] Postgraduate School 
Monterey, California 93943-5103 

6. CDR Eduardo DeGuia, Code 4111 1 

Naval Supply Systems Command 

Washington, D.C. 20376-5000 

7. Mr. Michael Pouy 1 

HQ-Defense Logistics Agency [ATTN: MMSB] 

Cameron Station 

Alexandria, Virginia 22304-6100 

8. Mr. Here Engleman, Code 046 1 


Navy Ships Parts Control Center 
5450 Carlisle Pike 
P.O. Box 2020 

Mechanicsburg, Pennsylvania 17055-0788 

9. Mr. Tom Lanagan 1 

Headquarters, DLA 
ATTN: DORO-Supply Analysis 
c/o: Defense General Supply Center 
Richmond, Virginia 25297-5082 


182 




1 


10. Mr. Alan Kaplan 

Army Material Systems Analysis A.ctivity 
800 Custom House 
Second and Chestnut Street 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19106 

11. COL Leon M Miller, USA, Ret 1 

1837 Tularosa Rd. 

Lompoc, California 

12. LCDR Kevin Maher, Code 041 1 

Navy Ships Parts Control Center 

5450 Carlisle Pike 
P.O. Box 2020 

Mechanicsburg, Pennsylvania 17055-0788 


183 





