uses COTS (commercial off-the-shelf) 
software where possible. 

This program was written by Francisco Del- 
gado o/Johnson Space Center. For further 
infor mation, contact the Johnson Technology 
Transfer Office at (281 ) 483-3809. 
MSC-23490 


& Software for Engineering 
Simulations of a Spacecraft 

Spacecraft Engineering Simulation II 
(SES II) is a C-language computer pro- 
gram for simulating diverse aspects of op- 
eration of a spacecraft characterized by ei- 
ther three or six degrees of freedom. A 
functional model in SES can include a tra- 
jectory flight plan; a submodel of a flight 
computer running navigational and 
flight-control software; and submodels of 
the environment, the dynamics of the 
spacecraft, and sensor inputs and outputs. 
SES II features a modular, object-oriented 
programming style. SES II supports event- 
based simulations, which, in turn, create 
an easily adaptable simulation environ- 
ment in which many different types of tra- 
jectories can be simulated by use of the 
same software. The simulation output 
consists largely of flight data. SES II can 
be used to perform optimization and 
Monte Carlo dispersion simulations. It 
can also be used to perform simulations 
for multiple spacecraft. In addition to its 
generic simulation capabilities, SES offers 
special capabilities for space-shutde simu- 
lations: for this purpose, it incorporates 
submodels of the space-shuttle dynamics 
and a C-language version of the guidance, 
navigation, and control components of 
the space-shuttle flight software. 

This program was written by Kirk Shire- 
man and Gene McSwain o/Johnson Space 
Center, and Bernell McCormick and 
Panayiotis Fardelos of the Boeing Co. For fur- 
ther information, contact the Johnson Tech- 
nology Transfer ■ Office at (281 ) 483-3809. 
MSG-23537 


® Lab VIEW Interface for PCI- 
SpaceWire Interface Card 

This software provides a LabView inter- 
face to the NT drivers for the PCI- 
SpaceWire card, which is a peripheral com- 
ponent interface (PCI) bus interface that 
conforms to the IEEE-1355/ 
SpaceWire standard. As SpaceWire grows 
in popularity, the ability to use SpaceWire 
links within LabVIEW will be important to 
electronic ground support equipment ven- 
dors. In addition, there is a need for a high- 
level LabVIEW interface to the low-level de- 
vice-driver software supplied with the card. 


The LabVIEW virtual instrument (VI) pro- 
vides graphical interfaces to support all (1) 
SpaceWire link functions, including mes- 
sage handling and routing; (2) monitoring 
as a passive “tap” using specialized hard- 
ware; and (3) low-level access to satellite 
mission-control subsystem functions. The 
software is supplied in a zip file that con- 
tains LabVIEW VI files, which provide vari- 
ous functions of the PCI-SpaceWire card, as 
well as higher-link-level functions. The Vis 
are suitably named according to die match- 
ing function names in the driver manual. A 
number of test programs also are provided 
to exercise various functions. 

This work was done by James Lux, Frank 
Loya, and Alex Bachmann of Caltech far 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Fur- 
ther information is contained in a TSP (see 
page 1). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at (818) 
393-2827. Refer to NPO-35207. 


© Path Following With 
Slip Compensation for a 
Mars Rover 

A software system for autonomous op- 
eration of a Mars rover is composed of 
several key algorithms that enable the 
rover to accurately follow a designated 
path, compensate for slippage of its 
wheels on terrain, and reach intended 
goals. The techniques implemented by 
the algorithms are visual odometry, full 
vehicle kinematics, a Kalman filter, and 
path following with slip compensation. 
The visual-odometry algorithm tracks 
distinctive scene features in stereo im- 
agery to estimate rover motion between 
successively acquired stereo image pairs, 
by use of a maximum-likelihood motion- 
estimation algorithm. The full-vehicle 
kinematics algorithm estimates motion, 
with a no-slip assumption, from meas- 
ured wheel rates, steering angles, and 
angles of rockers and bogies in the rover 
suspension system. The Kalman filter 
merges data from an inertial measure- 
ment unit (IMU) and the visual-odome- 
try algorithm. The merged estimate is 
then compared to the kinematic esti- 
mate to determine whether and how 
much slippage has occurred. The kine- 
matic estimate is used to complement 
the Kalman-filter estimate if no statisti- 
cally significant slippage has occurred. If 
slippage has occurred, then a slip vector 
is calculated by subtracting the current 
Kalman filter estimate from the kine- 
matic estimate. This slip vector is then 
used, in conjunction with the inverse 


kinematics, to determine the wheel ve- 
locities and steering angles needed to 
compensate for slip and follow the de- 
sired path. 

This work was done by Daniel Helmick, 
Yang Cheng, Daniel Clouse, Larry Matthies, 
and Stergios Roumeliotis of Caltech for 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Fur- 
ther information is contained in a TSP (see 
page 1). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at (818) 
393-2827. Refer to NPO-40703. 


International Space Station 
Electric Power System Per- 
formance Code — SPACE 

The System Power Analysis for Capabil- 
ity Evaluation (SPACE) software analyzes 
and predicts the minute-by-minute state of 
the International Space Station (ISS) elec- 
trical power system (EPS) for upcoming 
missions as well as EPS power generation 
capacity as a function of ISS configuration 
and orbital conditions. In order to com- 
plete the Certification of Flight Readiness 
(CoFR) process — in which the mission is 
certified for flight — each ISS System must 
thoroughly assess every proposed mission 
to verify that the system will support the 
planned mission operations; SPACE is the 
sole tool used to conduct these assess- 
ments for the power system capability. 
SPACE is an integrated power system 
model that incorporates a variety of mod- 
ules tied together with integration rou- 
tines and graphical output. The modules 
include orbit mechanics, solar array point- 
ing/shadowing/thermal and electrical, 
battery performance, and power manage- 
ment and distribution performance. 
These modules are tightly integrated 
within a flexible architecture featuring 
data-file-driven configurations, source- or 
load-driven operation, and event script- 
ing. SPACE also predicts the amount of 
power available for a given system configu- 
ration, spacecraft orientation, solar-array- 
pointing conditions, orbit, and the like. In 
the source-driven mode, the model must 
assure that energy balance is achieved, 
meaning diat energy removed from the 
batteries must be restored (or balanced) 
each and every orbit. This entails an opti- 
mization scheme to ensure that energy 
balance is maintained widtout violating 
any other constraints. In the load-driven 
mode, SPACE determines whether a given 
distributed, time-varying electrical load 
profile can be supported by the power sys- 
tem and will determine whether the sys- 
tem stays in energy balance. Load-driven 


16 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2005 


