I- 

'« 

AD-A285 873 

11 

CONTRACT NO.: DAMD17-91 -C-1096 

TITLE: Vasopressin Receptor Signaling and Cycling of Water Channels in Renal 

Epithelia 



(D 


ANNUAL REPORT 


PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Dr. Abdul J. Mia 


PI ADDRESS: 


CO-PI ADDRESS: 


Division of Science and Mathematics 
Jarvis Christian College 
Hawkins, Texas 75765 



CO-PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Dr. Thomas Yorio 


ELECTE 
NOV 01 1994 


T ' 


''ii. 




Department of Pharmacology 

University of North Texas Health Science Center 

Fort Worth, Texas 76107 


REPORT DATE: 

TYPE OF REPORT: 

PREPARED FOR: 


August 31,1994 


annual REPORT QUALITiT lUSPI^CTED a 


Commander 

U.S. Army Medical Research and 
Materiel Command 
Fort Detrick 

Frederick, Maryland 21702-5012 


DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT; Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 


The views, opinions and/or findings contained in this report are those of the author(s) and should 
not be construed as an official Department of the Army position, policy or decision unless so 


designated by other documentation. 

9411 1 015 


94-33833 

■lillilli 









REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 



' - i iSO ivSTlTLE 


3 REPORT TYPE ANO DATES COVERED 

Annual 08/01/93 - 07/31/94 


S. FUNDING NUMBERS 


Vasopressin Receptor Signaling and Cycling of 
Water Channels in Renal Epithelia 


■5 4L*"CR,; 

Dr. 

A.J. Mia 


Dr. 

T. Yorio 


= :-vFCRV NG CRGAS :i* ON SAMe(S) AND ADOfl£SS(ES) 

Jarvis Christian College 
Highway 80, Hawkins, Texas 75765 


DAMD17-91-C-1096 

0601102A 

3M161102B515 515/CA 
DA 335934 


8. PERFORMING ORGANiZ-i ON 
REPOR’’ NUMBER 


9 SPONSORING MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Commander 

U.S. Army Medical Research and 

Materiel Command 

Fort Detrick 

Frederick, Maryland 21702-5012 

10. SPONSORING MONITORING 

AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 

11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

ANNUAL REPORT TITLE; Role Of PKC During Apical 1 
Remodeling in Mezerein Stimulated Toad Urinary 1 

'lembrane Surface 
Bladder 

12a. distribution AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution 
unlimited 

12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 


13, abstract iOO^ords) 

Water reabsorption and urinary volume regulation are important processes in maintaining normal 
physiological function and vasopressin (ADH) regulates water reabsorption by the kidney in response 
to changes in plasma volume as may occur during dehydration . This process is particularly important 
to soldiers who are subject to excess heat and fluid deprivation in arid environments. We have been 
examining the mechanisms whereby ADH enhances water permeability in renal epithelia so we may find 
measures to enhance the kidney's responsiveness to ADH. Such regimens would maintain the water 
reabsorptive capacity of soldiers facing harsh conditions. Our obsen/ations suggest that an integral 
component of the water reabsorptive process by ADH is the cycling of water channels from the cytosol 
to the apical membrane. This cycling process involves exo- and endocytosis mechanisms. We have 
begun to examine membrane remodeling during hormone washout and a return to basal unstimulated 
conditions as a means to assess water channel cycling. In particular we were concerned with 
determining the role of protein kinase C (PKC) in this process and role of calcium mobilization. 



14 SUBJECT TERMS 

Transepithelial water flow; Vasopressin; Protein 
Kinase C; Endocytosis; Membrane retrieval; Filter 
sunoorts for cultured cells; Cultured kidney ^lls 


17 SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 18 SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF REPORT OF THIS PAGE OF ABSTRACT 

Unclassified Unclassified Unclassified 


15. NUMBER OF PAGES 


H PRICE CODE 


20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 
Unclassified 

































I 


FORFf^ORD 


Opinions, intarpretatlons, conclusions and recommendations are 
those of the author and are not necessarily endorsed by the US 
Army. 

y Where copyrighted material is quoted, permission has been 
obtained to use such material. 

_ Where material from documents designated for limited 

strlbution is quoted, permission has been obtained to use the 
material. 

V Citations of commercial organizations and trade names in 
this report do not constitute an official Department of Army 
endorsement or approval of the products or services of these 
organizations. 

y In conducting research using animals, the investigator(s) 
adhered to the "Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory 
Animals," prepared by the Committee on Care and Use of Laboratory 
Aniaials of the Institute of Laboratory Resources, National 
Research Council (NIB Publication No. 8C-23, Revised 1985) . 

M/A For the protection of huma n subjects, the investigator(s) 
adhered to policies of applicable Federal Law 45 CFR 48. 

M/ft In conducting research utilizing recombinant ONA technology, 
the investigator (s) adhered to current guidelines promulgated by 
the National Institutes of Health. 

m/a Xn the conduct of research utilizing recombinant DNA, the 
investigator(s) adhered to the NIH Guidelines for Research 
Involving Recombinant DNA Molecules. 

N/A Xn the conduct of research Involving hazardous organisms, 
the investigator(s) adhered to the CDC>NIH Guide for Biosafety in 
Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories. 

Accesion For 

NTIS CRA&I 
DTIC TAB 
Unannounced 
Justification 


I 




By. 

Distribution/ 












% 


Role of PKC Ehinng Apical Membrane Surface Remodeling In Mezerein Stimulated 
Toad Urinary Bladder 

ABSTRACT 

Vasopressin (ADH) promotes rapid osmotic water transfer in renal and toad 
urinary bladder epithelia by insertion of water channels into the apical plasma 
membrane. Water channels are then internalized through a complex process of 
endocytosis following down regulation or by withdrawal of hormone. Previously we 
reported on the role of endocyto v ical membrane remodeling during retrieval 
of water channels following ADH wi urawal. The present study examined the effect 
of mezerein (MZ), an activator of protein kinase C (PKC), on the nature of apical 
membrane remodeling by endocytosis as compared tc that produced by ADH. This 
study further evaluated the role of vasopressin V, receptor cascade in water channel 
recycling. Toad urinary bladder sacs were suspended at the en d of glass tubes and 
subjected to an osmotic gradient. These sacs were then stimulated for 10 min to 
promote exocytosis coincident with enhanced water flow by adding MZ to the 
mucosal cavities. MZ was then removed by fresh buffer rinses, and the sacs were 
allowed to undergo endocytosis and apical membrane remodeling for 5, 10, 20, 30 
and 60 min. At each specified time interval and at pre-buffer rinses, bladder sacs were 
fixed and processed for SEM, TEM, immunogold labeling and freeze fracture studies. 
Control tissues, during pre- or post-buffer rinses, showed little or no apparent apical 
membrane surface changes indicative of endocytosis. In contrast MZ stimulated 
tissues, during time-dependent retrieval periods, exhibited sequences of apical 
membrane internalization and subsequent apical membrane remodeling reminiscent 
of those observed for ADH challenged tissues. Although surface invaginations by 
endocytosis were induced in MZ stimulated tissues, their development was slower 


4 








% 


than in ADH treated tissues. However, MZ stimulated tissues showed faster 
membrane recovery than the ADH stimulated tissues. Therefore, the incidence of 
endocytosis in MZ and ADH stimulated tissues reverses with time of retrieval. 
Counts of proposed endocytosis at 5 and 10 min into retrieval periods showed 
apparent increases in the number of endocytosed granular cells with over 31% and 
45% in ADH stimulated tissues compared to no more than 3.50% of unstimulated 
control and 8% of MZ stimulated cells during the same corresponding time periods. 
This trend was reversed at 20 min post washout with almost 35% of the granular cells 
in MZ stimulated tissues with evidence of endocytosis, whereas less than 18% of 
cells in ADH challenged tissues had similar appearances. MZ stimulated tissues 
showed faster recovery with less than 24% and 10% at 30 and 60 min r'^^rieval 
periods compared to over 27% and 23% in ADH challenged tissues during the 
corresponding retrieval periods. These results indicated that MZ, mimicking ADH 
actions, could induce surface membrane endocytosis, probably through the activation 
of PKC. Ultrathin sections, freeze fracture replicas and immunogold labeling of PKC 
isozyme I (y) in toad urinary bladder indicated possible presence of putative water 
channels associated with coated vesicles. In aadition, PKC III (a) was detected in 
particulate forms in ADH and MZ responsive A6 amphibian cultured kidney cells 
using immunofluorescent and FITC labeling techniques. Evidence for vasopressin 
mediated intracellular calcium mobilization came from video imaging observations. 
Intracellular calcium was monitored and measured in ADH responsive LLC-PK, 
cultured porcine kidney distal convulated tubule cells, using Fura2-AM fluorescent 
dye. Vasopressin increased intracellular calciiun partly through activation of oxytocin 
receptors. It is not clear if this effect functions to co-activate PKC isoforms (in 
conjunction with diacylglycerol) in enhancing transepithelial water flow. 


5 










6 










INTRODUCTION 


Eukaryotic cells often recycle intracellular membranes along with various 
resident proteins by processes of exo- and endocytosis to regulate a variety of cell 
functions (Wolfe, 1993). The process of exocytosis is essentially involved in the 
export of membranes and proteins from the cytosol to the apical mebrane surface for 
fusion, whereas endocytosis is likely to recover all or portions of these cellular 
components in a reverse process into the cytosol. Endocytosis is thus an important 
cellular restoration process (Pearse and Crowther, 1987; Farquhar, 1985; Schmid, 
1992) for cells to return to the normal state. The cycling of water channels in renal 
epithelia and in amphibian urinary bladder model membranes is thought to involve 
similar processes of exo- and endocytosis. Vasopressin (ADH) through V, and Vj 
receptors induce exocytosis and enhances transepithelial water flow in concert with 
the appearance at the apical membrane surface of putative water channels. This apical 
membrane remodeling is accompanied by hormone activation of protein kinase A 
(PKA) and protein kinase C (PKC), in concert with propagation of apical microvilli 
from the normal phase of microridges (Mills and Malick, 1978; Spinelli et al., 1975; 
Mia et al., 1983,1987 and others). The relationship between the ADH V, receptor and 
increased osmotic water flow is still not understood. Activation of the V, receptor 
results in an increase in intracellular calcium and activation of PKC. Mezerein (MZ), 
an activator of PKC, added to the mucosal surface of toad urinary bladders increased 
water flow similar to that observed with ADH (Yorio and Satumtira, 1989). This 
water flow response by MZ was also found to be correlated with the conversion of 
the normal phase of microridges into numerous microvilli over the apical membrane 
surface as seen by scanning electron microscopic (SEM) studies, indicating the ability 
of MZ to induce microvilli in a manner similar to what was observed following 


7 








stimulation of bladder tissues with ADH (Mia et al., 1989). This was also found to 
be accompanied by the activation of several PKC isozymes by MZ, as determined by 
immunoantibody and protein A-gold labeling techniques (Mia et al., 1991, 1992). 
Collectively, these observations suggested that the ADH V, receptor cascade, 
including PKC activation, could play an integral role in the insertion of water 
channels into the apical membrane by exocytosis (Mia et al., 1991). 

The process of endocytosis in amphibian urinary bladder tissues has been 
described (Muller and Kachadorian, 1984; Masur et al., 1984, 1985; Harris et al., 
1986; Coleman et al., 1987 and others) with demonstration of relative distribution of 
tubular vesicles (aggrephores, water channels) within the cytoplasm. However, little 
is known about the changes in surface topography, associated with induced 
endocytosis, under conditions that promote water channel retrieval following removal 
of ADH or MZ (Brown et al., 1990; Coleman et al., 1987; Mia et al., 1993a, 1993b, 
1993c, 1994a). The toad urinary bladder serves as a powerful membrane model for 
ion and water transport processes because of its structural and functional similarities 
to the renal cortical collecting tubule (Bentley, 1958; DiBona, 1981 and others). 
Recently, we demonstrated that the apical membrane restoration process was initiated 
following withdrawal of ADH during normal washout (Mia et al., 1993a, 
1993b, 1993c, 1994a). We also demonstrated that the membrane retrieval process 
continued till the apical membrane was restored to the pre-hormone unstimulated 
state. Therefore, similar studies were carried out to include the effect of MZ in the 
membrane restoration process during endocytosis following removal of MZ in an 
attempt to understand the role of PKC in membrane retsoration (Mia et al., 1993c). 
We conducted time-course experimental studies, using the techniques of scanning 
and transmission electron microscopy (SEM, TEM) to correlate the changes in apical 


8 




membrane surface conformation by endocytosis during 5, 10, 20, 30 and 60 min 
retrieval periods following withdrawal of MZ. 

In addition, PKC isozymes, upon activation, translocate from the cytosol to the 
particulate membrane for outward transport to the apical membrane surface as 
reported in oligodendrocytes (Asotra and Macklin, 1993) and MDBK renal cells 
(Simboli-campbell et al.. 1993) respectively, using FITC immunofluorescent antibody 
labeling techniques. Previously, we reported localization of PKC isozyme subtypes 
I (y), II (p) and III (a) in toad urinary bladders stimulated with ADH and MZ for 30 
min and 60 min using the sensitive techniques of immunoantibody labeling and 
protein A-gold probes (Mia et al., 1991, 1992). We discovered the presence of gold 
particles in association with diffused cytoplasmic bodies, microvilli and in the apical 
membrane surface. Little is known about the role of PKC following stimulation of 
bladder sacs with hormone or PKC activators. Here, we report the localization of 
PKC isozyme I (y) following stimulation of bladder tissues with MZ for 15 min using 
immunoantibody and protein A-gold labeling to correlate these results with the freeze 
fracture deep etching preparations. In addition, the presence of PKC isozyme a was 
detected in particulate forms in A6 amphibian kidney cultured cells using 
immunofluorescent antibody labeling and fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) 
following stimulation with ADH and MZ for 15 min. Collectively, these results and 
previous studies in our laboratory suggested that the effects of ADH on the activation 
of PKC appeared to involve vasopressin V, receptor activation. It is well established 
that stimulation of this receptor results in the breakdown of membrane 
polyphosphoinositides into inositol phosphates and diacylglycerol (Yorio and 
Satumtira, 1989). The inositol phosphate (IP 3 ) mobilizes intracellular calcium which 
then serves as second messenger function in activating enzymes essential in the 


9 










regulation of transepithelial water transport. The diacylglycerol activates PKC. In the 
current experiments we utilized video image analysis to ascertain the effects of 
vasopressin (ADH) on intracellular free calcium concentrations. In particular we 
attempted to determine the receptor responsible for the increase in calcium 
concentration mediated by ADH. In these studies, we used the fluorescent dye Fura- 
2AM to measure free intracellular calcium (Yorio et al., 1992) in LLC-PK, porcine 
kidney cortical cells, as these cells are known to be responsive to ADH and have been 
in use in various studies of membrane transport. This dye permeates the cell in its 
ester form. Once in the cell, esterases convert the dye to Fura-2 which is free to 
interact with calcium. The dye fluorescence is proportional to the free calcium in the 
cell. A ratio fluorescence technique using a dual excitation computer controlled video 
imaging allows monitoring of intracellular free calcium in real time. 

METHODS 

Tropical toads, Bufo marinus, purchased from Carolina Biological Supply 
Company, Burlington, NC, were maintained in an aquatic environment with free 
access to water and were fed live crickets biweekly. 

Experimental Protocol : 

Intact urinary bladder sacs, surgically excised from doubly pithed toads, were 
placed in aerated Ringer's solution ( Mia et al., 1983, 1987). The composition of 
Ringer's solution was as follows (in millimoles per liter): NaCl, 111; KCI, 3.35; 
CaCl 2 , 2.7; MgCl 2 , 0.5; NaHC 03 ,4.0 and glucose, 5.0, with pH adjusted at 8.0. An 
osmotic gradient was instituted by diluting the mucosal solution to 1/10 of the 
Ringer's solution, and the solution was aerated continuously throughout the 


10 








experimental procedures. 


11 





Toad hemibladder sacs, as placed in aerated isotonic Ringer's solution, were 
then suspend at the ends of glass tubes as shown in Figure 1, for experimental use 
with an osmotic gradient established between the mucosal and serosal sides of the 
toad bladder sac. The sacs were then stimulated individually by adding MZ to the 
mucosal cavity for 10 or 15 rnin. Following stimulation, the sacs were emptied, rinsed 
quickly with fresh buffer and then allowed to proceed for 5, 10, 20, 30 and 60 for 
induction of membrane internalization by endocytosis following similar procedues 
used for ADH stimulated tissues. This was noted as the retrieval period. The sacs 
were then emptied and fixed at each interval by plunging into 2% glutaraldehyde in 
PIPES buffer (0.02M). This fixative was then replaced with fresh solution of 
glutaraldehyde and allowed fixation for 1 hr at room temperature. A postfixation was 
carried out using 1% osmiun tetroxide for 1 hr prior to dehydration. For SEM 
preparation, bladder sacs were placed in glass vials and processed through exchanges 
of graded acetone and liquified Peldri II for critical point drying. During final 
exchange, Peldri II was allowed to penetrate thoroughly into the tissues prior to 
solidify in closed vials by allowing the temperature to drop below 23°C. The 
solidified Peldri II was allowed to sublimate in a running fume hood for critical point 
drying. The dried specimens were mounted on clean aluminum stubs using silver 
paint. This preparation was gold coated in argon environment in a sputter coater prior 
to surface viewing in the SEM. 

Immuno-Gold Cytochemistry : 


Paired toad urinary bladder tissues were exposed to either drugs or vehicle 
during experimental procedures prior to fixation in 2% glutaraldehyde in PIPES 






buffer for 1 hr. These tissues received no postfixation with osmium tetroxide but 
rinses in PIPES buffer. Each tissue sample was minced into small pieces with a new 
razor blade prior to dehydration through exchanges of ethanol and L.R. White to cast 
into individual blocks in pure L.R. White resin using gelatin capsules. Polymerization 
was carried out in a vacuum oven in closed casules for 15 hr at bO'^C. Tissue blocks 
were trimmed and sliced with a diamond knife for collecting on bare nickel grids. For 
indirect immunogold labeling of PKC isozymes y, each grid was floated on a drop of 
0.1% BSA made in isotonic Ringer's solution containing a monoclonal antibody of 
PKC isozyme y IgG, in rabbit (1/25 dilution) for 2 hr at room temperature in a moist 
chamber.The grids were then exposed to protein A-gold probes (lOnm with dilution 
at 1/25) for 2 hr at room temperature in a moist chamber for binding with anti-PKC 
isozyme. These grids received buffer rinses between treatments. Air dried grids were 
stained with saturated uranyl acetate in 70% ethanol and lead citrate and subjected 
to TEM observations. To determine the degree of non-specific binding with protein 
A-gold particles, the control grids were exposed to 0.1% BSA (no PKC antibody) or 
to a mixture of PKC I enzyme and PKC I antibody before exposing to protein A-gold 
particles. Control grids showing the presence of only few gold particles were rated 
to be relatively free of non-specific binding with gold probes. 

Cell Culture : 

The A6 amphibian kidney cultured cells have been found to be useful in 
vasopressin regulated polarized membrane flow studies (Verry et al., 1993). These 
cells, derived from the kidney cortical tissues of Xenopus laevis, were cultured on 
glass cover slips, which were placed in sterile plastic petri-dishes according to 
procedures described previously (Candia et al., 1993). A medium of NCTC-135 with 


13 











L-Glutamine, without Sodium Bicarbonate and with a 0.1 ml penicillin streptomycin 
additive was used per every 100 ml of medium to prevent contaimination. This 
mixture was deemed as cell medium and was used to nourish the cells. These cells 
were grown for 5-7 days in an incubator at 28°C prior to use for experimental 
purpose. Cells forming a confluent monolayer on glass cover slips, were removed and 
rinsed in normal Ringer's solution for use. LLC-PK, cells, derived from porcine 
kidney cortex were similarly grown in tissue culture media. All culture media 
contained 20 ug/ml gentamycin, 10 Units/ml penicillin and 10 ug/ml streptomycin. 
Culture cells, washed and suspended in Ca^", Mg^^-free media, and then transferred 
to falcon flasks, Anocell or ICN filter supports, or petri dishes containing microscope 
glass cover slips, as required. Cells were grown in tissue culture incubator in 5% 
C02/air in humidified environment at 37°C. These kidney cells were grown in sterile 
culture in GIBCO NCTC 109 culture media. With changes with fresh culture media 
three times a week, and following confluency in 2-3 days, cells were used for 
detection of intracellular calcium using video imaging analysis and Fura2-AM. 
Immunofluorecent Microscopy Using FITC: 

For immunofluorescent antibody labeling, A6 amphibian kindney cultured 
cells were grown as a monolayer on glass cover slips placed in sterile plastic petri- 
dishes. These cells were allowed to grow for 5-7 days to confluency prior to 
experimental intervention. The glass cover slips were then removed from the media, 
and rinsed in normal Ringer's soltion for use. Control and experimental tissues were 
exposed to 0.002% DMSO, ADH lOOmU/ml or MZ lO"^ M respectively for 15 min. 
They were then fixed without buffer rinses in 3% formaldehyde in PBS for 30 min, 
rinsed in PBS buffer, air dried and stored in the refngerator. Air dried tissues were 
rinsed in buffer and then rendered permeable in cold methanol for 10 min (Yorio et 


14 







al., 1985). The permeablized cells were rinsed in PBS buffer, and then exposed to 
PKC antibody isozyme III (a) at 1/15 dilution for 1 to 2 hrs in a moist chamber at 
room temperature. Tissues received a thorough wash in the same buffer and treated 
with antibody IgG conjugated with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC; 1/16 dilution) 
for 2 hrs in the dark at room temperature. Cells were washed in PBS buffer and 
deionized water to mount on medium containing 9:1 glycerol and PBS buffer. Control 
cells received treatment only with 0.1% BSA and FITC. The preparations were 
examined in a Nikon Optiphot fluorescent microscope equipped with a narrow 
epifluorescent barrier filter. Photomicrographs were recorded on Kodak Tri-X film 
with film speed of ASA 400 and developed in a solution of Microdol-X developer. 

Freeze Fracture Replica Preparations : 

Freeze fracture studies were carried out using the whole toad urinary 
hemibladders which were set up as "sacs”, and aerated continuously in isotonic 
Ringer's solution. The mucosal side of the bladder was filed with 1/10 concentration 
of Ringer’s solution while the serosal side was bathed in isotonic Ringer's solution, 
thus establishing an osmotic gradient. Hormone or drug was added to the serosal side 
for experimental tissues and vehicle was added to controls. At various time intervals, 
the tissues were fixed by placing them in 2% glutaraldehyde in PIPES buffer. 
Fixation was allowed to proceed for 1 hr, then washed in PIPES buffer and 
cyroprotected with 30% glycerol in PIPES buffer. Pieces of tissues were placed on 
standard copper holders and plunged into liquid freon cooled to -190" C in a liquid 
nitrogen bath. Freeze fracture deep etching was performed in a Balzers 400T 
apparatus at -100"C with a knife pre-cooled with liquid nitrogen. The fractured 
surface was shadowed with evaporated platinum at an angle of 35", and then coated 
with carbon at a 90" angle. The replicas were removed from the freeze fracture 


15 









apparatus and coated with 1% collodin in amyl acetate while still frozen. The collodin 
was allowed to dry and the tissues in the replicas were digested in 5.25% Na 
hypochloride. Washed replicas were then placed on bare copper grids for examination 
in the TEM. 

Determination of IntracellulaiLCalcium : 

Free intracellular calcium was measured in ADH responsive LLC-PK, porcine 
kidney cultured cells, grown on glass cover slips using a dynamic video imaging 
system and fluorescent dye Fura2-AM. This dye upon exposure to cultured cells 
permeats into the cells and allows measurement of calcium. The epithelial cultured 
cells were allowed to incubate in Fura2-AM dye for 30 min for dye to penetrate, and 
then washed several times to remove extracellular medium. This preparation was then 
placed in a temperature controlled holder in place on the stage of a Nikon fluorescent 
microscope interfaced with video camera monitor and computer. The images as 
scanned for free calcium were recorded by computer software, and then free calcium 
values were calculated and determined using a ratio fluorescent technique. 

Drugs: 

8-Arginine vasopressin (ADH) and mezerein (MZ) were purchased from Sigma 
Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO. The concentration of ADH used in the experimental 
protocol was 100 mU/ml and was added to the serosal side of the bladder sac. The 
concentration of MZ used in the experiments was 10*^ M and was added to the 
mucosal side of the bladder. The MZ was dissolved in a stock solution of DMSO to 
a concentration of 0.05 M. The concentration of DMSO added was 0.002%. 


16 








RESULTS 


SEM Studies : 

We have used the technique of SEM to study membrane recycling in toad 
urinary bladders under a variety of experimental conditions, including following 
removal of ADH actions by a series of fresh buffer rinses (Mia et al., 1993a, 1993b, 
1994). The current study was undertaken to evaluate the pattern of membrane 
retrieval by endocytosis following the addition and removal of MZ i jrinary 
bladder tissues, as a means to assess the role of PKC in this process. Figures 2 and 3 
are presented to illustrate the control and MZ stimulated toad bladder tissues. Control 
tissues during pre- or post-buffer rinses, regardless of the length of time, showed little 
or no visible signs of membrane internalization by endocytosis. Many scanning 
electron micrographs of control tissues representing each stage of retrieval at 5,10, 
20, 30 and 60 min were made to observe the relative distribution of endocytosis. 
Figures 4 and 5 represent two low power SEM images of control tissues at 20 and 60 
min post washout periods, showing such microstructure disposition of the apical 
membrane surfaces, essentially dominated by the presence of a phase of microridges, 
and showing little or no signs of endocytosis. This phase of membrane profile was 
altered when MZ challenged bladder sacs were allowed to recover for 5 min 
following removal of MZ. A comparative morphometric analysis of endocytosis as 
induced by withdrawal of MZ was made at various retrieval time periods to correlate 
the relative distributions of endocytosis in MZ, ADH and control tissues. These 
results are presented in a graph (Fig. 6). These studies revealed no more than 3.50% 
of control granular cells showing signs of membrane invagination indicative of 
endocytosis (Mia et al, 1994). Figure 7 unveils the membrane profile at 5 min 
retrieval period with the first signs of endocytosis in the form of slight inpockettings 


17 









of the apical plasma membranes of the granular cells. At this time of retrieval, no 
more than 5% of granular cells showed membrane invagination, whereas ADH- 
stimulated tissues during corresponding retrieval period, showed over 31% of 
granular cells with endocytosis as represented in the graph (Fig. 6). Membrane 
retrieval by endocytosis appeared to progress with increased retrieval time, and 
therefore at 10 min retrieval period following MZ stimulation, the number of granular 
cells showing membrane retrieval was slightly over 7% in contrast to 46% of cells 
involved in endocytosis in ADH-stimulated tissues. Figure 8 is presented to unveil 
the membrane surface with distribution pattern of endocytosis at 10 min retrieval 
following withdrawal of MZ from the mucosal surface of the toad bladder. At this 
time some granular cells also showed a loss in the membrane microstructures 
(arrows), leaving a flattened membrane surface with no microridges and microvilli. 
This may represent a membrane transition state in granular cells undergoing 
invagination by endocytosis. Bladder sacs with 20 min into retrieval continued to 
show membrane transition, and showed a dramatic change in the number of cells 
involved in endocytosis. At 20 min retrieval period, close to 35% of granular cells 
showed endocytic involvement in MZ stimulated tissues as shown in the graph (Fig. 
6) compared to 17.21% involved cells in ADH-stimulated tissues. In addition, few 
granular cells showed some degree of membrane restoration as shown in Figure 9 
(arrows) by gradual narrowing of the surface openings. An enhanced view of the 
microstructure is presented in Figure 10 showing the gradual return of the membrane 
surface of the endocytosed pit with a gradual reconstruction of the flattened 
membrane surface into microridges. 

The apical membrane retrieval in MZ stimulated bladder tissues is progressive 
like that seen with ADH-stimulated tissues. Figure 11 represents a global view of the 


18 








toad bladder sac containing a reduced number of invaginations at 30 min retrieval 
periods following withdrawal of MZ from the bladder sac. At this retrieval time, a 
number of cells showed recovery while other cells continued to exibit slight surface 
invagination (Fig. 12), similar to 5 min retrieval following ADH removal, indicating 
that MZ treated cells undergo slow membrane remodeling. The membrane restoration 
can best be seen in enhanced SEM images as presented in figures 13 and 14 with 
membranes showing gradual return to a normal stage containing microridges from 
transitional phase lacking both microvilli and microridges. At this time of retrieval, 
following buffer rinses of MZ stimulated tissues, showed over 21% of cells with 
signs of endocytosis versus 27% in ADH-stimulated cells as shown in the graph (Fig. 
6). At 60 min retrieval, both MZ- and ADH-stimulated tissues showed almost a 
complete restoration of the apical membranes in the granular cells (Figs, 15. 16) 
respectively, now showing the membrane surfaces like unstimulated control tissues 
(Figs. 2, 4). At 60 min retrieval period, only 9.47% of MZ stimulated cells showed 
signs of endocytosis in contrast to 23.12% involved cells in ADH-stimulated tissues. 
Experiments were also designed to test the hypothesis that continued permeability to 
water was dependent, in part, on the osmotic gradient for water flow. Bladders were 
set up as sacs as in Figure 1, and ADH was added after an initial baseline waterflow 
measurement. ADH was then removed from both bladder sacs, and the sacs were 
allowed to retrieve for a period of 2 hr while water flow was measured continuously. 
It was found that the experimental sac, with maintenance of osmotic gradient by 
periodically replacing fluid inside by fi^sh diluted buffer, did not maintain the water 
flow. On the contrary, the water flow returned to baseline faster than if the gradient 
was dissipated through ion and water flow changes (Fig. 17). In addition, there was 
little or no obserable difference in membrane restoration in tissues which received 


19 







periodic adjustment of osmotic gradient from that which received no osmotic gradient 
adjustment during 60 min retrieval period. At 60 min, the percent of endocytosed 
cells in MZ-stimulated tissues was 9.47% as compared to 23.12% for ADH- 
stimulated tissues shown in the graph (Fig. 6). 

Amphibian epithelia contain a ADH V, receptor coupled to phosphinositide 
metabolism and ADH stimulates release of inositol trisphosphate (Yorio et al. 1985; 
Yorio and Satumtira, 1989). In addition, PKC isozymes, upon activation translocate 
to particulate membrane fractions for outward transport to the apical membrane as 
reported in oligodendrocytes and in renal tissues respectively (Asotra and Macklin, 
1993; Simboli-Campbell et al., 1993). We also discovered the presence of several 
PKC isozymes in association with diffused cytoplasmic bodies and in the apical 
membrane in toad urinary bladder tissues stimulated with ADH and MZ for 30 and 
60 min (Mia et al., 1991,1992), suggesting a role of PKC in osmotic water transport, 
perhaps in the involvement of cycling of water channels. Here, we report the 
localization of PKC isozyme y following stimulation of bladder tissues with MZ for 
15 min using immunoantibody and protein A-gold lebeling techniques. Figure 18 
represents a control tissue exposed to monoclonal anti-PKC isozyme I antibody (y) 
and protein A-gold (lOnm) particles in which localization of few gold particles are 
viewed randomly distributed in the cytosol. To determine specific labeling, tissues 
treated with ADH for 15 min, exposed to a mixture of PKC enzyme I and anti-PKC 
I antibody, and protein A-gold particles to see that gold labeling was not greater than 
in control tissues primary antibody was omitted. Figure 19 represents such a treated 
tissue that was stimulated with ADH. There is a general lack of the presence of gold 
particles in this tissue, similar to that observed for control tissues which were exposed 
only to BSA with omission of primary antibody. Tissues challenged with MZ lO"^ M 


20 








for 15 min showed localization of gold particles in association with anti-PKC I (y) 
predominantly surrounding the coated vesicles as shown in Figure 20 (arrow). It is 
uncertain whether the coated vesicles were released from the apical membreine during 
membrane restoration process. However, evidence indicates that this may be the case 
as several coated vesicles laced with gold particles appear to have migrated from the 
apical membrane into the cytosol as shown in Figures 21 (arrows). Coated vesicles 
encountered in TEM ultrathin sections and freeze fracture preparations are presented 
in Figures 22 and 23. These coated vesicles are distinctly different than the caveolae 
which are released from the membrane surfaces of the microfilament-rich cells 
present in toad urinary bladder sacs (Fig,24) and reported by Smart et al., (1993) in 
another type of tissue. 

We also detected the presence of PKC isozyme III (a) in A6 amphibian kidney 
cultured cells grovm as a monolayer on glass cover slips. Figure 25 represents a phase 
contract micrograph showing A6 cells on a glass cover slip. These cells received 
exposure to 0.002% DMSO for 15 min and served as control. Control cells, following 
fixation in 3% formaldehyde and then permeabilization in cold methanol, were 
exposed to 0.1% BSA and fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC). These control cells 
showed the presence of diffused fluorescence with no detection of particulate 
structures (Fig. 26) Tissues exposed to ADH for 15 min, and then labeled with 
monoclonal anti-PKC isozyme III (a) and FITC, showed the presence of this isozyme 
in particulate forms (Fig. 27) indicating activation of PKC by ADH-stimulated 
bladder tissues. Similar treatment with MZ for 15 min also resulted in the detection 
of particulate structures (Fig. 28) as those seen with ADH-stimulated tissues. These 
results suggest a possible role of PKC in ADH actions, possibly as part of the overall 
water transport process. 


21 







Studies in our laboratory have suggested that the effects of ADH on the 
activation of PKC appear to involve ADH V, receptor activation. It has been well 
established that stimulation of this receptor results in the breakdown of membrane 
polyphosphoinositides into inositol phosphates and diacylglycerol. The inositol 
phosphate (IP 3 ) mobilizes intracellular calcium which then serves as a second 
messenger function in activating enzymes essential in the regulation of transepithelial 
water transport. The diacylglycerol activates PKC. In the current experiments we 
utilized video image analysis to ascertain the effects of ADH on intracelluar calcium 
concentrations. We used the fluorescent dye Fura-2AM to measure free calcium using 
LLC-PK, cells grown in tissue culture. An SEM image (Fig. 29) depicts the surface 
profile of LLC-PK, cells as containing a scattered distribution of microridges with no 
apparent cellular tight junctions. As can be seen in Figure 30,10 *M AVP increased 
intracellular calcium in LLC-PKi cells. These cells are derived from the porcine 
kidney distal convoluted tubule, a known site for vasopressin action. Figures 31 and 
32 compare the response of ADH to oxytocin, another peptide that has known 
antidiuretic effects in some kidney models. Oxytocin which also contracts smooth 
muscles by increasing intracellular calcium acts on oxytocin receptors since the 
increase in calcium by oxytocin appeared to be blocked by an oxytocin peptide 
antagonist (Fig. 33). Surprisingly, the effects of ADH on intracellular calcium were 
blocked by the oxytocin antagonist, suggesting that the increase in intracellular 
calcium by ADH may be mediated through an oxytocin receptor (Fig. 34). This is 
demonstrated quite readily in Figure 35, where ADH effects before and after the 
oxytocin antagonist are presented. The antagonist completely abolished the actions 
of ADH on calcium mobilization. Additional experiments are planned to test the 
actions of ADH and oxytocin in the presence of a vasopressin antagonist (V,), to 


22 








determine if the receptor in the porcine kidney does not differentiate between these 
two peptides, oxytocin and vasopressin. Therefore we are still uncertain of the 
receptor that is coupled to the calcium signaling process in the kidney. Such answers 
await further experimentation. 


DISCUSSION 

Amphibian urinary bladder epithelia represent a remarkable cellular structure, 
and perhaps unique renal membrane model for experimental studies of water and ion 
transport dynamics (Gronowicz et al., 1980; Wade et al., 1981; Hays, 1983; Harris 
et al., 1986); Mia et al., 1983, 1994a and others). These and other studies indicated 
that the two plasma membranes (apical and basal) of toad urinary bladder like many 
other transport epithelia (Simmons 1992), which respond to ADH, readily undergo 
membrane transitions as a process to recycle water channels through exo- and 
endocytosis. We found the use of toad bladders indespensible in the investigation of 
membrane retrieval by endocytosis (Mia et al., 1993a, 1993b, 1993c, 1994a). The 
process of endocytosis in toad urinary bladder occurs following down regulation or 
withdrawal of hormone actions and when water flow dissipates with recovery of 
apical membrane water channels back into the cytosol. However, many key questions 
regarding the mechanism of water channel retrieval process by endocytosis remain 
unanswered. There has been numerous studies using the elegant techniques of SEM 
in elucidating the membrane surface dynamics involving exocytosis (Davis et al, 
1974; Spinelli et al., 1975; Mills and Malick, 1978; Mia et al., 1983 and others). 
Observations of the apical membrane transition from microridges to microvilli in 
response to ADH challenge coincident with enhance osmotic water flow has been 
well documented. Therefore, the application of the technique of SEM in water 
transport studies is not new. What is new is the way we can manipulate the toad 


23 











urinary bladders to undergo endocytosis under controlled experimental conditions, 
and the ability to visualize the altered apical membrane surfaces at any time point by 
SEM (Mia et al., 1993a, 1994a). We can also induce apical membrane internalization 
by inducing endocytosis deliberately using various interval time periods following 
withdrawal of ADH or MZ. It is also anticipated that this in vivo toad urinary bladder 
membrane model of endocytosis could be utilized in isolating intact endocytosed 
coated pits, and perhaps water channels, for determination of their physical and 
chemical nature as well as their functional activity. Our observations of the apical 
surface changes associated with the process of endocytosis as induced by MZ 
appeared to be reminiscent of the ADH-stimulated tissues, suggesting that MZ can 
mimic the actions of ADH in the induction of surface changes indicative of 
endocytosis (Mia et al., 1994a, 1994b). 

A good deal of literature is available on the chemistry, formation and dynamics 
of coated vesicles in tissues other than in amphibian urinary bladders (Hirokawa and 
Heuser, 1981; Brodsky, 1985; Pearse andCrowther, 1987; Heuser and Keen, 1988; 
Schmid, 1992). The presence of coated vesicles although reported in renal epithelia 
of Brattleboro rats following application of ADH, have not been described for other 
renal epithelia, like toad urinary bladders remained (Brown, 1988). Recently, we 
reported the presence of coated vesicles in ultrathin sections of ADH-stimulated toad 
urinary bladder tissue (Mia et al., 1994a). Their presence was substantiated in this 
tissue using the freeze fracture deep etching replica techniqueas shown in Figure 23. 
The coated vesicles as seen in the toad urinary bladders appear in circular arrays 
surrounding a central membrane vacuole, and look diffrent than those reported in 
other tissues. We examined numerous ultrathin sections in the TEM to detect the 
trilamellar knobbed bristles beneath the apical plasma membrane of the endocytosed 
bladder tissues as evidence of their origin, but found no evidence of their presence. 


24 







Therefore, it is not known how these coated vesicles were originated in the toad 
blader tissues. In addition, we discovered the presence of several cytosolic putative 
coated vesicles, laced with gold particles in tissue treated with MZ for 15 min using 
PKC isozyme I (y) antibody and protein A-gold particles. These vesicles show a 
distribution pattern in the cytoplasm suggestive of a process of migration from the 
apical membrane into the cytosol (Fig. 21). These observations suggest that these 
vesicles may have their origins at the apical membrane, likely in concert with the 
process of endocytosis during reverse membrane flow. 

In our current series of studies of toad urinary bladder epithelia, we reported 
that priming of toad bladder tissues with ADH was prerequisite to enhancing the 
induction of endocytosis following withdrawal of hormone (Mia et al., 1993a, 1993b, 
1994a). These results and previous studies on the process of MZ induced exocytosis 
(Mia et al., 1989) led us to undertake investigation on the phenomenon of endocytosis 
by tissue challenges with MZ, a non-phorbol activator of PKC, to correlate the role 
of the ADH V, receptor cascade in endocytosis during the retrieval process. PKC, a 
ubiquitous protein kinase, was found to be implicated in the regulation of diverse 
cellular functions in a variety of animal tissues (Yoshida et al., 1988). Amphibian 
epeithelial tissue is known to contain ADH V, receptors coupled to phosphoinositide 
metabolism (Ausiello et al., 1987; Schlondorff and Satriano, 1985; Yorio et al., 
1983). In addition, our recent experimental studies involving the actions of MZ on 
water transport processes (Yorio and Satumtira, 1989), and conformational changes 
in toad bladder epithelia (Mia et al., 1989), provided evidence for a role for PKC in 
ADH actions possibly in regulating water flow across the toad urinary bladder 
epithelia. We also reported localization of several PKC isozymes I (y), 11 (p) and III 
(a) singularly, in distinct cytosolic diffused bodies, and at the apical membrane 
interface of toad urinary bladder granular cells, using specific PKC monoclonal 


25 









antibodies and protein A-gold particles in ultrathin sections (Mia et al., 1991, 1992). 
There are reports that PKC isozymes when activated translocate to intracellular 
cytoskeletal fractions in cardiac myocytes (Mochly-Rosen et al., 1990), 
oligodendrocytes (Asotra and Macklin, 1993) and in MDBK renal cells (Simboli- 
Capmbell et al., 1993). The present report includes localization PKC isozyme I (y) in 
association of coated vesicles in MZ challenged toad urinary blader epithelia, using 
immunogold antibody labeling techniques, and PKC isozyme III (a) in A6 amphibian 
kidney cultured cells using immunoabtibody and FITC labeling techniques. These 
results suggest that various PKC isozymes may be involved in cycling of the putative 
water channels by exocytosis and coated vesicles by endocytosis following 
stimulation with ADH. 


26 









REFERENCES 


Asotra, K. and Macklin, W.B. 1993. Use of affinity-purified protein G-purified 
antibodies to study protein Kinase C isozyme expression in oligodendrocytes. Focus, 
15:94-98. 

Ausiello, D. A., Skorecki, K. L., Verkman, A. S. and Bonventre, J. V. 1987. 
Vasopressin signaling in kidney cells. Kidney Int., 31, 521-529. 

Bentley , P. J. 1958. The effects on neurohypophyseal extracts on water transfer 
across the wall of the isolated urinary bladder of the toad, Bufo marinus. J. Endocrin., 
17, 201-209. 

Brodsky, F. M. 1985. Clthrin structure characterized with monoclonal antibodies. J. 
Cell Biol., 101, 2055-2062. 

Brown , D. 1989. Vesicle recycling and cell-specific function in kidney epithelial 
cells. Annu. Rev. Physiol., 51,771-784. 

Brown, D., Verkman, A., Skorecki, K. and Ausiello, D. 1990. The cellular action of 
antidiuretic hormone. Meth. in Enzymology, 191, 551-571. 

Candia, O., Mia, A. J. and Yorio, T. 1993. Influence of filter supports on transport 
characteristics of cultured A6 kidney cells. Am. J. Physiol., 265 (Cell Physiol. 34), 
C1479-C1488. 

Coleman , R. A., Harris, H. W. Jr. and Wade, J. B. 1987. Visualization of 
endocytosed markers in freeze-fracture studies of toad urinary bladder. J. Histochem. 
Cytochem., 35,1405-1414. 

Davis, W. L., Goodman, D. B. P., Martin, J. H., Mathews, J. L. and Rasmussen, H. 
1974. Vasopressin-induced changes in the toad urinary bladder epithelial surface. J. 
Cell Biol., 61, 544-547. 


27 











DiBona, D. R. 1981. Vasopressin action of the conformational state of the granular 
cell in the amphibian urinary bladder. In Epithelial Ion and Water Transport. J. 
Cardiovasc. Phar., 8, 523-528. 

Gronowicz, G., Masur, S. K. and Holtzman, E. 1980. Qualtitative analysis of 
exocytosis and endocytosis in the hydro-osmotic response of toad urinary bladder. 
J. Membr. Biol., 52,221-235. 

Harris, H. W. Jr., Wade, J. B. and Handler, J. S. 1986. Transepithelial water flow 
regulates apical membrane retrieval in antidiuretic hormone-stimulated toad urinary 
bladder. J. Clin. Invest., 78, 703-712. 

Hays, R. M. 1983. Alternation of luminal membrane structure by antidiuretic 
hormone. Am. J. Physiol., 245, C289-C296. 

Heuser, J. F. and Keen, J. H. 1988. Deep-etch visualization of proteins involved in 
clathrin assembly. J. Cell Biol., 107, 877-886. 

Hirokawa, N. and Heuser, J. E. 1981. Quick freeze, deep-etch visualization of the 
cytoskeleton beneath surface differentiations of intestinal epithelial cells. J. Cell 
Biol., 91,399-409. 

Masur, S. K., Cooper, S. and Rubin, M. S. 1984. Effect of an osmotic gradient on 
antidiuretic hormone-induced endocytosis and hydro-osmosis in the toad urinary 
bladder. Am. Physiol. Soc., 84, F370-F379. 

Masur, S. K., Sapirstein, V. and Rivero, D. 1985. Phorbol myristate acetate induces 
endocytosis as well as exocytosis and hydrosmosis in toad urinary bladder. Biochem. 
Biophys. Acta., 821,286-296. 

Mia, A.J., Tarapoom, N., Carnes, J. and Yorio, T. 1983. Alternation in surface 
substructure of frog urinary bladder by calcium ionophore, verapamil and antidiuretic 
hormone. Tissue& Cell, 15, 737-748. 

Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X., Torres, L. Herman, C. and Yorio, T. 1987. Morphometric 


28 








analysis of epithelial cells of frog urinary bladder. I. Effect of antidiuretic hormone, 
calcium ionophore (A23187) and PGE2. Tissue & Cell, 19,437-450. 

Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. 1989. Alterations in surface substructure and 
degranulation of subapical cytoplasmic granules by mezerein (MZ) in toad urinary 
bladder epithelia. Proc. EMSA, 916-917.. 

Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. 1991. Role of PKC isozymes in water 
transport in toad urinary bladder. EMSA, 49:302-303. 

Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X. Thompson, P.D. and Yorio, T. 1992. Role of PKC isozyme 
III (a) in water transport in amphibian urinary bladder. EMSA, 50:796-797. 

Mia, A. J., Oakford, L. X., Hayes, S. C., Davidson, A. D. and Yorio, T. 1993a. 
Membrane dynamics during endocytosis in toad urinary bladders as visualized by 
SEM. Scanning, 15 Suppl III, 110-111. 

Mia, A. J. and Yorio, T. 1993b. Retrieval of water channels in toad urinary bladders 
following withdrawal of vasopressin and mezerein. Annu. Rep. U. S. Army Med. Res. 
Dev. Command, Fort Detrick, Federick, MD. 

Mia, A. J., Davidson, A. D., Oakford, L. X. and Yorio, T. 1993c. SEM studies of 
membrzine endocytosis in toad urinary bladders foilwing withdrawal of mezerein. 
Proc. Microscopy Soc. Am., 51 .*474-475. 

Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. 1994a. Surface membrane remodeling 
following removal of vasopressin in toad urinary bladder. Tissue & Cell, 26:189-201. 
Mia, A.J., Davidson, A. D., Robinson, C., Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. 1994b. SEM 
studies of comparative membrane remodeling by endocytosis in toad urinary bladders 
following withdrawal of ADH and MZ. MSA, 52:350-351. 

Mills, J. W. and Malick, L. E. 1978. Mucosal surface morphology of the toad urinary 
bladder. J. Cell Biol., 77, 598-610. 


29 








Mochly-Rosen, D., Hendrich, C. J., Cheever, L., Khaner, H. and Simpson, P.C. 1990. 
A protein kinase C isozyme is translocated to cytoskeletal element on activation. Cell 
Regul., 1,693-706. 

Muller, J. and Kachadorian, W. A. 1984. Aggregate-carrying membranes during ADH 
stimulation and washout in toad bladder. Am. J. Physiol., 247, C90-C98. 

Pearse, B. M. F. and Crowther, R. A. 1987. Structure and assembly of coated vesicles. 
Annu. Rev. Biophys. Chem., 16, 49-68. 

Schlondorff, D. and Satriano, J. A. 1985. Interactions of vasopressin, cAMP, and 
prostaglandins in toad urinary bladder. Am. J. Physiol., 248, F454-F458. 

Schmid, S. L. 1992. The mechanism of receptor-mediated endocytosis. More 
questions than answers. BioEssays, 14, 589-595. 

Simboli-Campbell, M., Gagnon, A. M., Welsh, J. E. and Franks, D. J. 1993. Analysis 
of PKC in renal cells. Focus, 15,12-15. 

Simmons, C. 1992. The development of cellular polarity in transport epithelia. 
Seminars Perionatol., 16,78-89. 

Smart, E.J., Ying, Y.S., Kamen, B.A. and Anderson, R,G.W. 1993. Protein Kinase C 
activators prevent receptor-mediated topocytosis by inhibiting internalization of 
caveloae. Mol. Biol. Cell., 4:435a. 

Spinelli, F., Grosso, A. and de Sousa, R. C. 1975. The hydrosmotic effect of 
vasopressin: a scanning electron microscope study. J. Membr. Biol., 23,139-156. 
Verry, F., Digicaylioglu, M. and Bollinger, U. 1993. Polarized membrane movements 
in A6 kidney cells are regulated by aldosterone and vasopressin/vasotocin. J. Membr. 
Biol. 133,213-226. 

Wade, J. B., Stetson, D. L. and Lewis, J. A. 1981. ADH action: evidence for a 
membrane shuttle mechanism. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 322, 106-117. 

Wolfe, S. L. 1993. Molecular and Cellular Biology, Wadsworth Publ. Co. Belmont, 


30 









CA 94002. 


Yorio, T., Royce, R., Mattem, J,, Oakford, L. X. and Mia, A. J. 1985. Inhibition of 
hydro-osmotic response to vasopressin and hypertonicity by phenothiazines and W7 
calmodulin antagonists. Gen. Pharmac., 164, 347-353. 

Yorio, T. and Satumtira, N. 1989. Contribution of vasopressin VI receptor to its 
hydro-osmotic response. Biol. Cell., 66, 7-12. 

Yorio, T.,Verstappen, A. and Cammarata, P. 1992. Histamine-induced calcium 
mobilization in cultured bovine lens epithelial cells. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 33,903. 
Yoshida, Y., Huang, F. L., Nakabayashi, H. and Huang, K. 1988. Tissue distribution 
and developmental expression of prorein kinase C isozymes. J. Biol. Chem., 263, 
9668-9673. 


31 








KEY TO FIGURES 

Figure 1. Diagrammatic presentation of the experimental set up of a toad urinary 
bladder sac for the purpose of measuring transepithelial water flow. 

Figure 2. SEM of a control toad urinary bladder sac, retained in Ringer's solution for 
10 min showing no evidence of endocj^osis in the apical membrane surface. X3,000. 
Figure 3. SEM of a toad urinary bladder challenged with MZ lO'^M for 10 min 
showing no sign of endocytosis. X3,000. 

Figure 4. SEM of a control toad urinary bladder retained under an osmotic gradient 
for 20 min showing no evidence of endocytosis. X3,000. 

Figure 5. SEM of a control bladder sac retained under an osmotic gradient for 60 min 
showing little or no evidence of endocytosis. X700. 

Figure 6. Graph represents the percentage of granular cells with endocytosis at S, 10, 
20,30 and 60 min retrieval periods following withdrawal of ADH and MZ compared 
to control tissues. 

Figure 7. SEM of a urinary blader sac stimulated for 10 min with MZ and then 
retrieved for 5 min showing signs of endocytosis in the form of membrane 
invagination. X3,000. 

Figure 8. Bladder tissue stimulated for 10 min with MZ and then retrieved for 10 min 
showing the presence of increased number of endocytosis. X3,000. 

Figure 9. SEM of toad urinary bladder sac stimulated for 10 min with MZ and then 
retrieved for 20 min showing endocytosis as well as membrane restoration. X3,000. 
Figure 10. Enhanced view of the toad bladder sac e;qx)sed to MZ for 10 min and then 
retrieved for 20 min showing the detail surface structure during gradual recovery of 
an endocytosed pit. X8,000. 

Figure 11. A global view of the toad urinary bladder sac at 30 min retrieval following 
withdrawal of MZ showing few granular cells undergoing apical membrane 


32 



restoration. XI,260. 

Figure 12. An enhanced view of the toad urinary bladder sac at 30 min retrieval 
following removal of MZ from the sac interior showing granular cells at various 
s^es of membrane restoration process. X2,500. 

Figure 13. MZ exposed bladder tissue for 10 min and then retieved for 30 min 
showing the gradual restoration of the endocytosed granular cells. 3,600. 

Figure 14. An endocytosed granular cell presented at higher magnification to show 
the detail microstructures during membrane restoration at 30 min retrieval following 
withdrawal of MZ X7,200. 

Figure 15. A global SEM view of the toad urinary bladder sac showing almost 
complete restoration of the granular cells at 60 min retrieval following withdrawal of 
MZ. XI,000. 

Figure 16. A comparative global SEM view of the toad urinary bladder sac showing 
almost complete restoration of the apical membranes at 60 min retrieval following 
withdrawal of ADH while maintaining an osmotic gradient. XI,000. 

Figure 17. Shows the water flow response of bladder sac with intermittent adjustment 
of the osmotic gradient vesus non-adjustment of osmotic gradient following hormone 
washout. 

Figure 18. Control tissue exposed to anti-PKC I (y) antibody and protein A-gold 
(lOnm) particles showing few gold particles scattered over the cytoplasm. X67,000. 
Figure 19. Tissue stimulated with ADH 100 mU/ml for 15 min and then labeled with 
PKCI enzyme and mixed with anti-PKC I, and protein A-gold probes to serve as an 
additional control. Presence of few gold particles indicates little or no specific 
binding with PKC isozyme I. X67,000. 

Figure 20. Toad urinary bladder tissue stimulated with MZ for 15 min and then 
labeled with anti-PKC isozyme 1 antibody and protein A-gold particles. Gold 


33 









particles appear localized predominantly in association with coated vesicles 
indicating association of PKC isozyme I with coated vesicles (arrow). X33,750. 
Figure 21. Toad urinary bladder tissue stimulated with MZ for 15 min and then 
labeled with anti-PKC isozyme I antibody and protein A-goId probes. Gold particles, 
associated likely with several coated vesicles (arrows), indicating the association of 
PKC isozyme I with coated vesicles and appear to show a pattern of migration from 
the apical membrane to the cytosol. X33,500. 

Figure 22. Ultrathin section viewed in the TEM of coated vesicles (arrow) in the 
cytoplasm of a granular cell in toad urinary bladder following stimulation with ADH. 
X50,000. 

Figure 23. Freeze fracture replica of an ADH-stimulated toad urinary bladder shows 
the presence of coated vesicles (arrow). XI 12,000. 

Figure 24. Freeze fracture replica of toad urinary bladder tissue stimulated with ADH 
shows the presence of protocytosed caveolae (arrows) in a microfilament-rich cell. 
X67,000. 

Figure 25. Phase contrast micrograph of A6 cells grown in monolayer on glass cover 
slip. X280. 

Figure 26. Control A6 cells showing diffused fluorescence with no particulate 
formation upon exposure to FITC. X280. 

Figure 27. A6 cells treated with 100 mU/ml ADH for 15 min, and then exposed to 
PKC III (a) antibody and fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) showing the presence of 
PKC isozyme III in particulate structures. X280. 

Figure 28. A6 cells treated with MZIO'^ M for 15 min, exposed to PKC III antibody 
and then to FITC showing PKC isozyme III in particulate structures as seen in ADH 
treated tissues. X700. 

Figure 29. SEM of LLC-PK, cells showing scattered distribution of microridges over 


34 







the apical membrane. X3,500. 

Figure 30. Intracellular calcium mobilization in LLC-PK, cells following dose 
additions of ADH and oxytocin. 

Figures 3 land 32. Compares the calcium response of ADH to oxytocin. 

Figure 33 and 34. Show the blocking of calcium by oxytocin. 

Figure 34. The effect of the anti-oxytocin antagonist on the calcium effects of ADH 
and oxytocin. 

Figure 35. Shows AVP (ADH) calcium effects before and after the anti-oxytocin 
antagonist. 


OTHER MILESTONES 

Full-length papers published and accepted: 

a. Candia, O., Mia, A.J. and Yorio, T. 1993. Influence of filter supports on 
transport characteristics of cultured A6 cells. Am. J. Physiol. 265 (Cell Physiol 
34):C1479-C1488. 

b. Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. 1993. Surface membrane remodeling 
following removal of vasopressin in toad urinary bladder. Tissue & Cell, 
26:189-201. 

c. Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. Protein Kinase C isoforms and 
vasopressin mediated water flow in toad urinary bladder. (In preparation). 

Abstracts published and submitted: 

a. Mia, A.J., Gunter, S., Johnson, S., Franklin, J., Tuck, T., Gardner, D. and 
Yorio, T. 1993. Immunofluorescent detection of PKC alpha in A6 amphibian 
kidney cells. Mol. Biol. Cell. 4:3489a. 

b. Mia, A.J., Robinson, C., Bolden, A., Davidson, A.D., Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, 
T. 1993. Membrane remodeling by endocytosis in toad urinary bladders under 


35 









sustained osmotic gradient. Mol. Biol. Cell. 4:4309. 

c. Robinson, C., Mia, A.J. and Yorio, T. 1993. Rate of water flow and membrane 
restoration during endocytosis in toad urinary bladders stimulated by 
vasopressin (ADH). NIGMS Minority Programs Symposium 1993:194. 

d. Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X., Davidson, A.D. and Yorio, T. 1994. Apical 
membrane restoration in toad urinary bladders during retrieval following 
protein kinase C activation. FASEB J. 8:A350. 

e. Yorio, T and Mia, A.J. 1994 Protein Kinase C activity and vasopressin (ADH) 
action in toad urinary bladders. FASEB J. 8:A350. 

f. Mia, A.J., Davidson, A.D., Robinson, C., Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. 1994. 
SEM studies of comparative membrane remodeling of endocytosis in toad 
urinary bladders following withdrawal of ADH and MZ. MSA 350-351. 

g. Mia, A.J., Oakford, L.X. and Yorio, T. 1994. Possible association of PKC with 
coated vesicles in ADH-stimulated toad urinary bladders. J. Cell Biol. 1994. 

h. Yorio, T., Baxter, N. and Mia, A.J. 1994.Vasopressin increase in intracellular 
calcium in culture renal epithelia may be mediated through oxytocin receptor. 
J. Cell Biol. 1994. 


OTHER ACTIVITIES 

Alvin Finkley, a chemistry major and Haile Yancy, a chemistry/biology major, 
supported by this grant for their career enrichment, graduated from Jarvis Christian 
College in May 1994. Haile Yancy has been accepted to enter into graduate school 
to pursue studies in biomedicine in Howard University, Washington, D.C. starting the 
fall semester 1994. He received full financial support from the University to 
undertake his graduate studies. Alvin Finkley plans to enter into the Graduate School 
of Biomedical Sciences at University of North Texas Health Science Center at Fort 


36 









Worth in January 1995. During the current year, three African-American 
undergraduate students, Julia Franklin, Sharia Hood and Crystal Woods received 
training in biomedical research and career enrichment involving animal tissue culture, 
immunofluorescent, bright field, scanning and transmission electron microscopy 
techniques. In addition, Kristi Henderson and Chasity Robinson, who received 
training under this research project, have been involved in further research at 
University of North Texas Health Science Center at Fort Worth under an MBRS 
project and at The University of Indiana, Bloomington, under a Howard Hughes 
Medical Research Grant, respectively. 

Students continue to receive training using computer technology to develop 
their expertise in computer use in research and academic instruction. 

Attendance at the Experimental Biology meeting - April, 1994. 

Drs. Thomas Yorio and A.J. Mia attended the Experimental Biology Meeting 
at Anaheim along with two undergraduate students: Alvin Finkley and Haile Yancy. 
Alvin Finkley and Haile Yancy attended the meeting as guests of MARC/FASEB. 

Attendance at the MSA Meeting - August, 1994 

Drs. A.J. Mia and John F. Johnson and five undergraduate students which 
include: Julia Franklin, Annette Bolden, Susan Johnson, Crystal Woods and Tony 
Freeman attended the Annual MSA Meeting in New Orleans, LA., in which Drs. Mia, 
Yorio, Oakford and student Chasity Robinson presented a paper. 


37 









wire hook for weighing of 
water loss using analytical balance 



Fifiurc 1. Illustrates the experimental set up of the toad urinary bladder sac as used. 













Represents the Percentage of Endocytosed Cells Stimulated by ADH and M2 



Time in Minutes 













































rinse and maintain 
gradient oi experiment 






































O fTi 


































