


* 
^ \ 






SAND— 92-1 820C 
EE93 000754 



IAF-92-0568 

SYSTEM MODEL DEVELOPMENT FOR 

NUCLEAR THERMAL PROPULSION 



C ■ O ****** M v 

3 t, * - = •» E -a * 
5 



NASA Lewis Research Center -tfllllll 



James T. Walton = s », g - ? g - 1 g - 

| Sis 

Nelson A. Hannan iif1rJf*i*2 

Argonne National Laboratory « J | J | J | s * 



as 



"S : a *•£ 5* 



v — 



»<=-■ 3-3E 

Se—O'SO""" - 



Ken R. Perkins u 

Brookhaven National Laboratory | &ifjjs£ s i* 

H ? s; § a > s i c ■§ £ 

John J. Buksa | ;f»j!i|3fi 

Los Alamos National Laboratory I J £ J * s f i •* I 

Brian A. Woney s =' i 1 1 1 *J f t 



V «i ° 

Oak Ridge National Laboratory P" s8 ^ : ^ 



a 5 «j = >> S ■ 



Dean Dobranich l 2 "-!!^.':' 3 ^ 

Sandia National Laboratories SjU-li^ii 



IS <S S 1 I § I g S S 



43rd CONGRESS OF THE 
INTERNATIONAL ASTRONAUTICAL FEDERATION 

August 28-September 5, 1992/Washington, DC IIACTCl) 






SYSTEM MODEL DEVELOPMENT FOR NUCLEAR THERMAL PROPULSION 

James T. Walton 

NASA Lewis Research Center 

Cleveland, Ohio USA 



Nelson A. Hannan 
Argonne National Laboratory 
Argonne, Illinois USA 



Ken R. Perkins 
Brookhaven National Laboratory 
Upton, New York USA 



John J. Buksa 
Los Alamos National Laboratories 
Los Alamos, New Mexico USA 



Brian A. Worley 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
Oak Ridge, Tennessee USA 



Dean Dobranich 
Sandia National Laboratories 
Albuquerque, New Mexico USA 



ABSTRACT 



A critical enabling technology in the evolutionary 
development of nuclear thermal propulsion (NTP) is 
the ability to predict the system performance under 
a variety of operating conditions. This is crucial for 
mission analysis and for control subsystem testing 
as well as for the modeling of various failure 
modes. Performance must be accurately predicted 
during steady-state and transient operation, 
including startup, shutdown and post operation 
cooling. The development and application of 
verified and validated system models has the 
potential to reduce the design, testing, cost and 
time required for the technology to reach flight- 
ready status. 

Since October 1991, the U.S. Department of 
Energy (DOE), Department of Defense (DOD) and 
NASA have initiated critical technology 
development efforts for NTP systems to be used on 
Space Exploration Initiative (SEI) missions to the 
Moon and Mars. This paper presents the strategy 
and progress of an interagency NASA/DOE/DOD 
team for NTP system modeling, it is the intent of 
the interagency team to develop several levels of 
computer programs to simulate various NTP 
systems. The firs: level will provide rapid, 
parameterized calculations of overall system 
performance. Succeeding computer programs will 
provide analysis of each component in sufficient 
detail to guide the design teams and experimental 
efforts. The computer programs will allow 
simulation of the entire system to allow prediction 
of the integrated performance. An interagency 



team was formed for this task to use the best 
capabilities available and to assure appropriate peer 
review. 

The vision and strategy of the interagency team for 
developing NTP system models will be discussed in 
this paper. A review of the progress on the Level 
1 interagency model is also presented. 



BACKGROUND 

During the summer of 1989, President Bush 
presented a National vision focused on returning 
man to the Moon and then travelling on to Mars. 
This was the commencement of NASA's Space 
Exploration Initiative (SEI). Since that time, a 
variety of studies and commissions have reasserted 
the desirability of an NTP system for interplanetary 
propulsion to fulfill the Space Exploration Inrt" Jtive 
(ref. 1, 2, 3). In addition to reducing the gross 
launch mass by up to 50 percent and decreasing 
launch costs, in comparison to chemical systems, 
nuclear thermal propulsion offers enhanced 
astronaut safety by lowering the inter-galactic 
cosmic radiation dose to the crew through reduced 
mission transit time. 

Nuclear thermal propulsion sy ami operate by 
using propellatt to cool a nuclear reactor core, 
yielding a high-temperature gas for expansion 
through a nozzle. The reactor core replaces the 
combustion process of bipropellant chemical 



Thic pap«r i« d«c!ar«d a work of th« U.S. Gov«mmeM and it 
not suoject to copyright protection in th« Urn tod Statu. 



propulsion systems as the source of heat. Because 
only e single propellant such as hydrogen with its 
low molecular weight, is required for NTP, the 
system can achieve more than twice the thrust 
efficiency of chemical propulsion. A schematic of 
a generic NTP system is shown in Figure 1 . 

The current NTP concept definition and technology 
development efforts are founded on a strong 
historical data base. Beginning in the mid-1 950's, 
the United States government and private industry 
have sponsored research and development 
activities aimed at producing nuclear rockets, 
ramjets, and turbojet* (r*f 4, 5. 6) through an 
investment ofnearfyll OB (1992). The pinnacle of 
this legacy was the reactor and engine tests of the 
NERVA program which culminated in 1973 with a 
"flight-ready* design. Because the NTP system 
integrates a nuclear reactor with chemical rocket 
technology. NASA and DOE have been working 
cooperatively on its concept definition and 
technology development. 

The concept definition and systems engineering 
activities involve the development of an NTP 
configuration which meets astronaut safety, SEI 
mission requirements, and NTP stage requirements. 
The primary variable in the system configuration is 
the nuclear reactor fuel form for which; candidate 
forms include prismatic, particle, and wire 
(Figure 2). The technology development activities 
involve the investigation of (1) high-temperature, 
long-life (hours) fuels, (2) low mass, high- 
performance nozzles, (3) high-efficiency, low mass 
turbopumps, and (4) reliable, autonomous system 
controls and health management systems. 

A critical task in these activities is developing the 
ability to predict system performance under a 
variety of operating conditions. The capacity to 
model system performance is required for concept 
definition activities to evaluate each configuration 
on a common basis. This capability also aids the 
technology development activities by providing a 
means to evaluate the benefits to the system from 
component improvements and by providing a 
diagnostic tool for understanding experiments. 
Moreover, the ability to predict the system 
performance is critical for mission analysis and for 
control subsystem testing, as well as for the 
modeling of various failure modes. Performance 
must be accurately predicted during steady-state 
and transient operation, including startup, 
shutdown and post operatior cooling. System 
models will access component models for the 
reactor, nozzle, turbopumps, and lines with a 



propellant properties model. The development and 
application of verified and validated system models 
has the potential to reduce the testing, cost and 
time required for new advanced NTP systems to 
regain flight-ready status. 

An integrated NASA-DOE team was formed in late 
1991 to develop and implement a strategy for 
modeling NTP systems that conform to the 
schedule for concept definition and technology 
development activities. An interagency team was 
formed to integrate the best capabilities available 
and to assure appropriate peer review. The team 
members include personnel from the following DOE 
laboratories: Argonne National Laboratory (AND, 
Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL), Idaho 
National Engineering Laboratory (INED, Los Alamos 
National Laboratory (LAND, Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory (ORNL), and Sandia National 
Laboratories (SND; and personnel from the NASA 
Lewis Research Center (LeRCi and the Marshall 
Space Right Center (MSFC). The team also 
includes personnel from the DOD Phillips 
Laboratory to facilitate the interchange of 
technology developed under the NASA SEI NTP 
program and the DOD Soace Nuclear Thermal 
Propulsion (SNTP) program. 

The interagency NTP system modeling team 
convened four times between December 1991 and 
August 1992 at LeRC, SNL, BNL and MSFC, 
respectively. The purpose of these meetings was 
to develop an overall modeling vision and to 
implement near-term strategies for its realization. 
It is the intent of the interagency team to develop 
several level* of computer programs to simulate 
NTP system performance based on various fuel 
forms. The first level will provide rapid, 
parameterized calculations of overall system 
performance. Succeeding computer programs will 
provide analysis of each component in sufficient 
detail to guide the design teams and experimental 
efforts. Note, these system models are not 
intended to replace requisite individual component 
analysis of the reactor, turbopu np or nozzle. The 
following sections outline the vision and the near- 
term strategies developed by the interagency NTP 
system modeling team. 



INTERAGENCY TEAM MISSION 

The purpose of the interagency modeling team is to 
integrate state-of-the-art computational resources 
and techniques, with the current knowledge base, 
to produce simulations of NTP system 



performance. The end products will provide users 
with a variety of validated and/or verified system 
models to assist in designing and to reduce the 
testing, cost, and time to reach a flight ready 
status. This vision can be best achieved by a 
NASA/DOE/DOD team which can use the unique 
capabilities of each team member and assure joint 
*opport for the resulting models. 



TEAM OBJECTIVE 



The Level 1 model is comparable in the level of 
detail to the Nuclear Engine System Simulation 
Program, NESS, (ref. 7) developed under NASA 
contract NAS3-25809. Program NESS is an NTP 
system design tool that combines a NERVA- 
derivative reactor model, ENABLER, developed by 
Westinghouse Electric Corporation with the 
Expanded Liquid Engine Simulation Program, ELES, 
developed by Aerojet Genera! Corporation. NESS 
determines a system configuration given its 
performance. 



A computer model of NTP systems is required for 
several reasons. First, a parametric NTP model can 
to predict system performance for several engine 
configurations on j consistent basis. In other 
words, a common tool is required to compare the 
configurations on level grounds; performance 
numbers for each configuration exist from a variety 
of sources. Second, a parametric NTP model is 
required to generate configuration performance 
data for input into mission analysis codes. Third, 
a parametric model is required to provide state- 
point input conditions to the system component 
designers and analysts. Fourth, an NTP system 
model is needed to evaluate the effect on 
performance of system design perturbations (i.e., 
sensitivity studies). Fifth, an advanced model can 
evaluate ' the performance of a given system 
through startup and shutdown transients. Sixth, a 
detailed transient model of the experimental engine 
is required for linkage to the facility model to 
determine engine-facility interactions. Last, an 
advanced NTP model can be connected to a control 
system in order to exercise the control system prior 
to its integration with hardware. To realize the 
vision and meet the needs defined above, the 
objective of the interagency team will be to develop 
five distinct computer programs, each varying in 
the level of detail and capability, to simulate NTP 
system performance. 

Level 1 Model 

The Level 1 model is en/isioned to be a relatively 
simple parametric system model. The primary 
focus of this program will be to analyze the 
performance of a variety of configurations, 
including NERVA-derivative, particle-bed, and 
CERMET reactor-based NTP systems. This program 
is expected to analyze steady-state performance 
and to require a run time on the order of minutes. 
The secondary focus of this program will be system 
design. The target user market for this program 
includes mission analysis groups, component 
modeling groups, and concept evaluation teams. 



Level 2 Model 

The Level 2 model is envisioned to be a near-term, 
detailed, transient system analysis program. It may 
use an existing base architecture program and will 
be capable of modeling system startup and 
shutdown as well as system feedbacks and 
oscillations. Since this level of analysis will involve 
multidimensional reactor neutronic solutions, this 
program will be used once reactor designs are 
reasonably fixed. The program should be capable 
of handling control drum rotations, turbopump 
assembly (TPA) startup, stress analysis, decay 
heating, and detailed nozzle heat transfer analysis 
accounting for neutron/gamma heating. It is 
anticipated that this program will not have 
neutronic criticality and power density analysis 
integrated into the base architecture although 
reactor dynamics will be included. The target user 
market for this program includes component 
modeling groups and concept evaluation teams. 
The Level 2 model will also be used parametrically 
by the interagency team to identify modeling 
requirements for the Level 3 model. 

Level 3 Model 

The Level 3 model is envisioned to be a far-term, 
detailed, transient system analysis program. This 
integrated performance analysis program will be 
based on state-of-the-art nv thodoJogy at the time 
of the base architecture program development. 
The component models must be verified by older 
component models and/or validated by component 
experimental data. This program will provide 
information similar to that of the Level 2 model, 't 
is anticipated that this program will have neutronic 
criticality and power density analysis integrated 
into the base architecture or will provide a means 
for easy information transfer through coupling. The 
target user market for this program includes 
component modeling groups and concept 
evaluation teams. This model will include two- 
phase and multi-dimensional flow capability. The 



model wrii also include shock-capturing numerics to 
allow simulation of severe accident conditions. 

Level 4 Model 

The Level 4 model is envisioned to be a modified 
version of the Level 3 program tuned to model the 
experimental or flight engine. The target user 
market for this program includes component 
modeling groups, control system developers, and 
engine performance analysts. The Level 4 model Is 
a 1 990's version of the Nuclear Engine Transient 
Analysis Program, NETAP, (ref. 8, 9) of the 
NERVA project from the view point that this 
program was tailored for a specific configuration. 
The NETAP Program is a finite-difference, explicit- 
solution, digital computer program that calculates 
the material temperature and the propellent 
temperature and pressure distributions as e 
function of time throughout the NERVA engine 
system. 

Level 5 Model 

The Level 5 model is envisioned to be a real-time, 
transient simulation model of the experimental or 
flight engine. The target user market for this 
program includes engine operator training groups 
and flight engine performance review teams. This 
model is similar to the Common Analog Model 
CAM, (ref 10, 11) of the NERVA project. 
The CAM was developed to describe the dynamic 
behavior of the NERVA 400E engine configuration 
by using correlations and curvefits of actual 
component physics. 

The performance of the interagency team will be 
measured first by its ability to provide the models 
to the users at the appropriate time according to 
the schedule of concept definition and technology 
development activities. The current schedule is 
shown in Figure 3. Second, the team performance 
will also be measured according to the accuracy 
and reliability of each model's output. This 
performance measure relies on the availability of 
experimental data for bench marking and on 
sufficient peer review of the models' algorithms; 
the standards for each model, explicit in each 
models' software design requirements document, 
have yet to be defined. Third, the team 
performance will be measured according to the 
useability of each model; in other words, the 
degree of user friendliness and the length of run 
time. These are subjective performance measures 
which require feedback from the users. 



STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT & IMPLEMENTATION 

The strategy for deve'oping each system model is 
similar and is divided Into subtasks as shown in 
Table 1 . The strategy begins with the identification 
of the users needs fr / compiling the Software 
Design Requirements Document and with the 
identification of the program structure. Subsequent 
tasks merely reflect the means to assemble the 
structure and meet the requirements; therefore, 
the subsequent tasks evolve from the selected 
program structure. 

To date, activities have focused on the Level 1 
system model. The following sections outline 
those activities and the near-term milestones. 

Level 1 Strategy 

Task 1.- The first component of the Level 1 
strategy was the development of a software design 
requirements document. This document was 
developed by the interagency team with input from 
several users. Table 2 presents the overall program 
requirements. This task was completed in March 
1992, although the requirements docurner.i will 
evolve over time. 

Task 2,* To meet the requirements, the overall 
program structure shown in Figure 4 was identified 
in March 1992. To best satisfy the requirements, 
the team decided to use a general, finite-element 
fluid system analysis program as the base 
computational engine. The input file to such a 
program contains all tne configuration-specific 
information. Therefore, because the input file will 
be lengthy, an input preprocessor will be created to 
interface with the user. The preprocessor will 
prompt the user for information, such as reactor 
type and system thrust level, and it will generate 
the appropriate input file, specifying dimensions, 
material properties, and reactor power profiles. 
The preprocesso r will access material property and 
reactor physics data bases to retrieve appropriate 
data for inclusion in the input file. 

The one-dimensional, finite-element system analysis 
program incorporates the ability to model pump. 
turbine, and nozzle performance in such a way as 
to provide true integrated performance. In addition, 
the program includes a propellent thermodynamic 
and transport properties model This overall 
approach was used so that the component models 
could he developed separate from the common 
conn tional engine. With this approach, the 
overa.i effort can be distributed and a change to 



one model will not impact the development of 
another. 

Task 3. - Next, the Level 1 strategy called for the 
evaluation and selection of a base computational 
engine. After a review of the available programs in 
light of the Level 1 requirements, the team 
identified only one program with the potential to be 
the base computational engine: the SAFSIM 
program (ref. 12). This program is currently 
slated to be used within the Level 1 system model. 

Any one-dimensional, finite-element program must 
rely on correlations for friction factors and heat 
transfer coefficients to predict pressure drop and 
wall temperatures through a fluid control volume. 
One of the key constituents to be modeled is the 
fuel element. To assist the interagency team in the 
evaluation of the various heat transfer coefficient 
and friction factor correlations, a computer program 
was developed to compare the correlations for 
hydrogen flow through a tube with internal heat 
generation. The program, ELM (ref. 13), has 
been used to compare the available correlations on 
a consistent basis and to compare temperature 
distributions with the previous nuclear rocket fuel 
element experimental data. 

Task 4. - The purpose of the fourth strategic 
element was to develop a reactor physics data base 
to be linked with the preprocessor. The inputs to 
the data base from the program includes the 
following: (1) reactor type, (2) power level and 
hydrogen flow rate, (3) operating history, and (4) 
internal shield thickness. The output from the data 
base to the program falls in two categories, internal 
and external reactor physics. The internal output 
consists of axial and radial heating rates for the fuel 
elements, support elements, moderator, reflector, 
and internal shield, along with the effective neutron 
multi 'ication factor (k CFF ). The external output 
consi^s of radiation dose rates at a variety of 
locations that may include the following: (1 ) nozzle 
wall, (2) turbopump, 13) external shield, (4) tank, 
and (5) habitation module. 

A method for modeling the reactor physics of the 
three reactor configurations was agreed upon. 
First, the cross-section data base to be used for all 
analyses will be ENDF/B-V with the ORNL graphite 
modifications. Second, the NJOY Program (ref. 
14) will be used to access ENDF/B-V when 
cross-section data is required at different 
temperatures. Third, the MCNP Program (ref. 
15), Version 4.2, will be used to analyze the 
three geometries and to provide the necessary 



output. Note, at the present time, MCNP contains 
a cross-section data base from ENDF/B-V which 
was generated at 300 K. Because the 
temperatures in the reactors will vary from 1 00 to 
3000 K, it will be necessary to extract additional 
cross-section data in the near future. This Monte 
Carlo method transport analysis will be supported 
with calculations from diffusion theory and 
discrete-ordinate transport codes. 

The first entries to the reactor physics data base 
will be steady-state internal physic? data for each 
reactor configuration at three power levels using 
the 300 K cross sections. 

Task 5. - The fifth task of the Level 1 model 
strategy was to develop pump, turbine, and nozzle, 
performance models. These models will interface 
with the base finite-element program as will the 
propellant properties model. For Level 1 , pump and 
turbine performance will be modeled using 
characteristic maps. The characteristic maps 
(Figure 5) will be provided by experimental data tor 
existing turbopumps and by TPA performance 
codes for modified hardware. Nozzle performance 
will be modeled by tables of specific impulse 
generated by the Two Dimensional Kinetics 
Program, TDK, (ref. 1 6) using the boundary layer 
correction scheme. The specific impulse tables will 
be generate^ for various chamber pressures and 
temperatures, area ratios, and wall cooling levels. 

As mentioned in the previous paragraph, a 
standardized propellant properties model is required 
to interface with the base computational engine. 
The propellant of choice for SEI missions is 
hydrogen. Nominally, hydrogen is a mixture of 
orthohydrogen and parahydrogen, which differ by 
the direction of the nuclear spin of the atoms 
within the molecule. The mixture compositions 
vary from 100 percent parahydrogen near liquid 
temperature to 25 percent near room temperature 
and above; without a catalyst, the rate of 
conversion from parahydrogen to orthohydrogen at 
a temperature variation is on the order of days. 

As a propellant for NTP systems, hydrogen is 
exposed to significant radiation fields. Experiments 
conducted during reactor tests in 1968 indicated 
that intense radiation fields hasten the conversion 
from parahydrogen to orthohydrogen (ref. 17). 
Because the properties of parahydrogen and 
orthohydrogen are significantly different between 
56 and 390 K, the extent of conversion within the 
nozzle and ref'ector would be important to their 
thermal design tnd nuclear analysis. The historical 



data indicate that in the range of power levels of 
interest, the orthohydrogen content is below 15 
percent; therefore, it would be a reasonable 
assumption to approximate the propellant as 100 
percent parahydrogen. 

A computer program for the interagency modeling 
effort was recently developed to provide selected 
parahydrogen thermal and transport properties 
which match the National Bureau of Standards 
parahydrogen data (ref. 1 8). The program, 
NBS*-pH, (ref. 19), was created by 
computerizing the required NBS parahydrogen data 
(density, thermal conductivity, viscosity, Prandtl 
number, entropy, enthalpy, specific heats, and 
speed of sound) and by using table lookups with 
linear interpolation to cover a wide range of 
pressures (0,01 to 16 MPa) and temperatures (20° 
to 10000°K). 

Task 6.- When the preliminary versions of the 
component models are available, they will be 
integrated with the preprocessor and the base 
computational engine. The development of the 
baseline input files for each configuration is critical 
to the preprocessor development. 

Task 7.- Following the system model integration 
will be a checkout and validation phase. During 
this phase, the model will be verified by the NETAP 
program and validated against NRX-A4/EST and 
XE-1 experimental data (ref. 20, 21). Model 
inaccuracies and weaknesses will be identified and 
documented. 

Task 8. * To provide for the widest dissemination 
and utilization, the Level 1 model will be fully 
documented after it is checked and validated. A 
detailed users manual will include the model 
methodology, governing equations and 
implementation, numerical methods, logic flow 
diagrams, and subroutine descriptions. Included in 
the manual will be sample input and output listings 
for each reactor configuration 

Task 9. - To reduce the learning curve for the Level 
1 model, a graphical user interface will be 
developed. This interface will provide a window- 
oriented environment in which the user can design 
the NTP configuration, create the input file, run the 
program, and view the output. Because of the 
nature of the graphical interfaces, it is likely that 
this will be machine-specific coding. 



FUTURE DIRECTION 

The accurate prediction of transient performance is 
critical to system design and testing, as well as to 
mission design and analysis. The system must 
start up and shut down in a controllable manner 
without extreme pressure and temperature 
gradients or oscillations. Moreover, once 
shutdown, low propellant flow rates will be used to 
remove fission-product-decay heat affecting the 
mission specific impulse. After Level 1 , all 
subsequent models will have transient analysis 
capability. The Level 2 model will use existing 
models whereas the Level 3 model is anticipated to 
leverage current and new code development 
efforts. 

Once reactor configurations are more clearly 
defined and the team's focus shifts to higher level 
models, a number of reactor physics codes and 
methodologies will be employed to assure a robust 
analysis. Monte Carlo methods will be used in 
conjunction with diffusion theory and discrete- 
ordinate transport codes. More detailed axial and 
radial power distributions and reactivity margins 
will be calculated as a function of operating history 
(burnup) and control drum position. Significant 
effort will be spent in determining all reactivity 
feedback coefficients for use in transient analyses. 
The problem of deep penetration of radiation 
associated with modeling complete spacecraft 
radiation fields (including reactor and non-reactor 
sources) is a very challenging problem. Use of a 
coupled Monte Carlo /discrete-ordinate 
methodology, as opposed to only separate 
methods, may be an optima! approach. 

The interagency team has begun preliminary 
planning for the Level 3 model. Because this 
generic model is envisioned as a state-of-the-art, 
multidimensional, transient system analysis model 
the long lead time necessitates early planning. It is 
expected that this model will be applied to 
reasonably fixed-system configurations and will 
leverage new computational technology 
(Fortran/90, Object Oriented Programming, Parallel 
Processing) to achieve run times on the order of a 
few hours for a startup or shutdown analysis case. 
Several configuration options have been identified 
for the Level 3 model: the first is to link an 
existing Monte Carlo reactor code with a transient 
fluid mechanics (F-M) code, such that the steady- 
state reactor code is called stepwise with time by 
the fluid mechanics code; a second is to develop 
a transient three-dimensional reactor dynamics 
code and interfacing it with a transient fluid 



mechanics code; the third, and most difficult, 
option is to develop a coupled reactor physics and 
fluid mechanics code. The team concluded that, 
prior to proceeding with a particular option, 
experience with the Level 2 model and existing 
one-dimensional transient models shootd be gained 
and that experimental validation of existing 
neutronics models should be completed for these 
fuel forms. 



CONCLUDING REMARKS 

An interagency NASA/DOE/DOD effort was 
initiated to develop several models for predicting 
the performance of nuclear thermal propulsion 
systems. These models are being developed to 
support the evaluation of conceptual designs and to 
provide a diagnostic tool for understanding system 
tests. Once verified and validated, these system 
models will aid in regaining the flight-ready status 



of nuclear thermal propulsion vehicles faster, 
cheaper, better and more safely by verifying design 
configurations and minimizing full-scale ground 
tests. 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

The authors would like to acknowledge the 
contributions of other participants of the 
interagency nuclear thermal propulsion system 
modeling team who have gone beyond the call of 
duty to provide technical insight and to cultivate 
management support for this activity. Additional 
team members, who deserve recognition, include: 
Mr. Warren Madsen (INEL), Mr. Tony Zuppero 
(INEL1, Mr. Bill Rider (LAND, Mr. RT. Perry (LAND, 
Mr. Felix Difilippo <ORNL), Ms. Margaret Proctor 
(LeRC), Mr. Terry Hardy (LeRC), Mr. Harold Gerrish 
(MSFCJ, and Mr. Ken Hampsten (PL). 









TARGET DATE 




STRATEGY 


LEVEL 1 


LEVEL 2 


LEVEL 3 


LEVEL 4 


LEVEL 5 


Compile Software Design 
Requirements Document 


03/92 


09/92 


10/92 


06/96 


06/96 


Identify Program Structure 


03/92 


09/92 


11/92 


n/a 


08/96 


Select Base Architecture 


07/92 


10/92 


n/a 


n/a 


09/96 


Develop Reactor Physics Model 


08/92 


12/92 


01/95 


n/a 


10/98 2 


Develop Reactor F-M Model 


n/a 


n/a 


01/95 


n/a 


10/98 2 



Develop Turbopump Assembly 
& Nozzle Performance Model 

Integrate Component Models 



08/92 



12/92 



01/95 



n/a 



10/98 2 



with Preprocessor 


09/92 


01/93 


06/95 


n/a 


12/98 


Verify & Validate Model 


09/92 


04/93 


09/95 


07/97 1 


12/98 


Document System Model 


12/92 


06/93 


12/95 


12/98 


04/99 


Develop & Integrate User 
Graphical Interface 


04/93 


04/93 


01/96 


n/a 


04/99 


1 calibrate with experimental data 


3 simplified correlations 









Table 1 - Nuclear Thermal Propulsion System Modeling Strategy 

7 



Programming Language: 
Computer System: 
Operating System: 
Operating Mode: 
Nominal Runtime: 
Propellant Properties: 
Minimum Solution Type: 
Verification: 
Validation: 
Documentation: 



Dissemination: 



Fortran/77 (no extensions) 

Machine independent 

Operating system independent 

User-interactive/user-friendly 

3 min. for single pt. solution on a 80386-25 

Para-hydrogen (NBS Monograph 168, 1981) 

Steady-state performance analysis 

Verify operation against more detailed models 

Validate with experimental data 

Detailed User's Manual including methodology, flow 

diagrams, subroutine descriptions, and sample test case 

input and output 

Available for release through the National 

Energy Software Center and COSMIC 



Table 2 - Level 1 Model Requirements 



TANK 



X 



PUMP 



COOLANT 



TURBINE 
CI 



TANK 

LPSESSURlZAflON, 



i 



NOZZLE 
TUBES 



REFLECTOR 



PERiPHCRAL 

SHiac 



TURBINl 
BYPASS 



CENTRAL 
SHIELD 



SUPPORT 
PLATE 



CORE 



NOZZLE 



J 



1 



PUMP 



I BEARIN 
1 COO LANT 



XI 



STRUCTURE, 
SYSTEM 



TURBINE 



X 



Figure 1 . - Generic nuclear thermal propulsion system. 

8 



PRISMATIC 



PARTICLE 



WIRE 



1 



I 1 i 





§••••••1 



i 




Figure 2. - Leading fuel forms. 



FACILITIES 



FAST TRACK 

CONCEPT DEVELOPMENT 



LEVEL 1-2 

MODC DEVELOPMENT 



LEVEL 3 

MODEL DEVELOPMENT 



LEVEL 4 

MODEL DEVELOPMENT 



LEVEL 5 

MODEL DEVELOPMENT 



92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 



PUELEIIMCNT 

TlfTfrkOUTY 



Fuuimui 
mrrtcum 



E^SSSSSSS^^SSSSS^ 



SS5 




TtrnHo 

COMPLJTIO 



01 



SSSS5S 



\\\\^\Vs^\V\\V\\< 



pul- inmi 

TIC MO 
COMP.CTID 

3T 



^ V/V4 

(OMPtXILO 



O«RATI0*AL 



N\<\^\Wv^^ 



v/v» 

OOtUMEKT4TK»N 
< OMPUTTtB 



Of&fUnOKAL 



1 



02 



v/va 

OOCUMtN rATIOfc 
COMPU TKD 



£ 



I 



X\\ \\ \\i 



Figure 3. - Model development schedule. 









— H 








PREPROCESSOR 






MATERIAL PROPERTIES 
DATA BASE 










REACTOR PHYSICS 
DATA BASE 
















1 










V 




PUMP 

PERFORMANCE MODa 






COMPUTATIONAL 
ENGINE 






TURBINE 
PERFORMANCE MODEL 


NOZZLE 
PERFORMANCE MODEL 






PROPELLANT 
PROPERTIES MODEL 























Figure 4. - Level 1 Mode! Structure, 



I 



, 


Pump Pressure Drop Map 


- 


sr** 


. 


.^"^"^ 




1 A 1 . 1 . _L ... _I __^_ 1 ^ 



W/W 



Pump Efficiency Map 




mtn 





T 


urbine Flow P&ram%\w Map 


e 


/^ o°° 


1 




f 


% 

£ 










1 1 . 1 I 1 



PRESSURE RATIO 



Turbine Efficiency Map 




U/Cc 



Figure 5 - Pump & Tut bine Performance Maps. 

10 



REFERENCES 

1. Report of the 90-Day Study on Human Exploration of the Moon and Mars. NASA TM-1C?999, 1989. 

2. America's Space Exploration Initiative: America at the Threshold. The Report of the Stafford 
Committee to the President of the United States, May 1991 . 

3. Report of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.5 3oace Program. GPO, Washington D.C., 
1990. 

4. Walton, James T.: An Overview of Tested and Aralyzed NTP Concepts. NASA TM-1 05252, 
September 1991. 

5. Thornton, G.; and Rcthstein, A J.: Comprehensive Technical Report of the General Electric Hirect-Air- 
Cycle Aircraft Nuclear Propulsion Program. General Electric Report APEX- 901, June 1962. 

6. Anon.: Nuclear Rocket Program Terminal Report. Argonne National Laboratory, ANL-7236, June 
1966. 

7 Pelaccio, D. G.; and Scheil Christine M.: Nuclear Thermal Propulsion Engine System Design Analysis 
Code Development. Presented at the 9th Symposium on Space Nuclear Power Sysxams, January 1992. 

8 Anon.: N.E.T.A.P. (Nuclear Engine Transient Analysis Program) Program E31201. Aerojet Nuclear 
Systems Company, TID/SNA-957, February 1971. 

9 Anon.: Nuclear Engine Transient Analysis Program. Aerojet General Corporation Report RN-DR-0068, 
October 1965. 

10. Miller, J.: Common Analog Model Derivation (Power Range). Aerojet General Corporation Report 
100-72-6 (T1D-26044), May 1972. 

1 1. Dry den, R.M.: NERVA Startup Common Analog Model * Equation Derivations. Aerojet General 
Corporation Report 100-72-2, June 1972. 

**2. Dobranich, Dean: SAFSIM A Computer Program For Engineering Simulation of Space Reactor 
System Performance Presentee to the ANS Meeting for Nuclear Technology for Space Exploration, 
\ugust 16-19, 1992. 

13. Walton, J.T.: Program ELM. LEW -15423, available through COSMIC, University of Athens, Athens, 
Georgia, (404) 542-3265, 1991. 

14. MacFarland, R.E.; and Muir, D.W.: NJOV Nuclear Data Processing System. LA-9303-M, 1985. 

15. Briesmeister, J.F.: MCNP - A General Monte Carlo Code For Neutron and Photon Transport. LA- 
7396-M, September 1986. 

16. Nickerson, G.R.; Berker, D.R.; Coats, D.E.; and Dunn, S.S.: Improvenents tj the Two-Dimensional 
Rocket Nozzle Performance Computer Program. Presented at the Ninth Symposium for Space Nuclear 
Power, January 1991. 

17. Robinson, C.P.; Bartlit, JR.; Stokes, R.W.; Conant, J.W.; and Edeskuty, F.J.: Conversion of Para to 
Orthohydrogen in Nuclear Rocket Radiation Fields. Progress in Refrigeration Science fr Technology, 
Proceedings of the XIII International Congress of Refrigeration, Vol. 1, pp. 577-b80, 1973. 

18. McCarty, R.D.; Hord, J.; and Rodar, H.M.: Selected Properties of Hydrogen (Engineering Design 
Data). U.S. Department of Commerce, National Bureau o? Standards, Monograph 168, February 198V 

19. Walton, J, T.: NBS Parahydrogen Properties Data Base Program (NBS-pH2). Available through 
COSMIC as LEW-1550F, 1992. 

20. Anon.: NRX/EST Reactor Test Analysis Report. WANL-TNR-216, 1966. 

21. Anon.: XE-Prime Engine Final Repor AGC RN-S-0510, 1970. 

11 



