CRN5EXP - EXPERT SYSTEM FOR STATISTICAL QUALITY CONTROL 


Mariana Hentea, Senior Consultant 

Interactive Business Systems, Oak Brook, Illinois 


ABSTRACT. The purpose of the Expert System CRN 5EXP is to 
help the user to check the quality of the coils at two very 
important mills: Hot Rolling and Cold Rolling in a steel plant. 
The system interprets the statistical quality control charts, 
diagnoses and predicts the quality of the steel. Measurements of 
process control variables are recorded in database (ADABAS) and 
sample statistics such as the mean and the range are computed 
and plotted on a control chart. The chart is analyzed through 
patterns using CLIPS and forward chaining technique to reach a 
conclusion about the causes of defects and to take management 
measures for the improvement of the quality control techniques. 

The Expert System combines the certainty factors associated 
with the process control variables to predict the quality of the 
steel. The paper presents the approach to extract data from 
database, the reason to combine certainty factors, the 
architecture and the use of the Expert System. However, the 
interpretation of control charts patterns requires the human 
expert's knowledge and lends to Expert Systems rules. 

The conclusions reached with this system help the management 
and the quality engineers to eliminate the special causes of the 
process control variable variations and to correct about 85% of 
the problems from these mills. 


EXPERT SYSTEM OVERVIEW 

The purpose of the Expert System CRN5EXP is to help the 
user to track the quality of the coils at two very important 
mills: hot rolling (HSM) and cold rolling ( CRN 5 ) . The user 
needs this system to find out why the coils at CRN 5 had gauge 
variation and what is the predicted quality of the coils produced 
at HSM. 

Hot Rolling is an upstream process and Cold Rolling is a 
downstream process. The quality of the coils is measured 
primarily ' by gauge, every coil produced at CRN 5 should have the 
gauge ordered by customer. If a coil doesn't have the 
dimensions required by the customer then it is rejected. At CRN 5 , 
the gauge variation is a function of the mill set-up, such as: 
work rolls, diameters, tons of coils rolled between roll changes, 
frequency of roll changes, maintenance, hardness of work roll 
surface, roll forces, tension, speed, motor power. At HSM, the 
gauge variation is a function of the finishing and coiling 
temperatures . 

The implemented software is a complex of NATURAL programs 
which search database files (ADABAS) for the coils which have 
gauge variations. The program contains routines which calculate 
the control charts using statistical method FORD. Control charts 



give a good indication of whether any problems are likely to be 
correctable locally or will require a management action. The 
database files (ADABAS), on mainframe IBM, store process control 
variables specific to each process: hot rolling and cold rolling. 

The coils which are not in statistical control for the gauge 
at cold rolling and hot rolling are downloaded from database 
files to PC files (ASCII) which are the input data for the Expert 
System. The present Expert System contains rules to check the 
variables specific to each mill. The user may select the coils 
produced during a period of time by entering the starting and 
ending dates. 


SYSTEM FUNCTIONS: 

CHECK THE COILS AT CRN 5 
CHECK THE COILS AT HSM 

The user from cold mill is interested to find the causes of 
the gauge variations for the coils. The knowledge about mill 
set-up and actual process control variables help the management 
to eliminate special causes of gauge variations and to correct 
about 85% of process control problems. 

The Expert System reads the data from the input file, checks 
the values of the varibles and provides a detailed report of the 
running mill. At CRN 5 , the process control variables, such as: 
tons of coils rolled between roll changes, work roll numbers, 
diameters, surface, frequency of roll changes, roll forces, 
tension, speed, and motor power are compared with the computer 
predicted values. The Expert System analyzes the data and issues 
conclusions regarding these variables. The present System is 
able to reach more than twenty conclusions. At HSM, the software 
checks the coiling and finishing temperature values. 

The Expert System implements two functions: checks the coils 
produced at CRN 5 and the coils at HSM. If the user selects the 
option to check the coils produced at CRN5, the Expert System 
analyzes the process control variables recorded at CRN 5 . If the 
actual variables are within the standards allowed for this mill, 
then the Expert System checks the variables recorded at HSM. If 
the actual variables, finishing and coiling temperatures, are 
within the standards allowed for the HSM, then the Expert System 
advices the user to search process control variables from another 
mill (pickle), which may had caused the gauge variations (not 
implemented yet). If the actual variables from CRN5 are not 
within the standards, then the Expert System issues different 
conclusions and advices managerial actions. If the actual 
variables from CRN5 are within the standards, then the Expert 
System checks the actual variables recorded at HSM. If the actual 
temperatures are not within the standards, then the Expert System 
indicates the quality of the produced coil at HSM. At user 
request, the Expert System provides an explanation facility which 
gives a detailed report about the values of actual temperatures 
and the way they influenced the quality of the produced coil. 
The finishing and coiling temperatures influence the quality of 


174 



the coil which is stated as normal, soft or hard. If the user 
selects the option to check the coils produced at HSM , then the 
Expert System checks the variables recorded at HSM and predicts 
the quality of the coil. The Expert System helps the user from 
CRN 5 to determine the quality of the incomming coils and based on 
that to compute the values for the model which are the standards 
for CRN 5 . The Expert System is used in both mills to improve the 
quality of the produced coils. 


EXPERT SYSTEM KNOWLEDGE 

The present system implements the knowledge in rules based 
on the information acquired from the experts (metallurgist, 
chemist, quality and process control engineers). The metallurgist 
and quality engineers consider that the values of roll forces, 
tension, speed, and motor power are determined by the the coil 
hardness. If the roll forces are high, above the predicted 
values, then it is an indication that incomming coil is hard. 
If the roll forces are low, below the predicted values, then it 
is an indication that the incomming coil is soft. 

The program checks first all the variables specific to CRN 5 . 
If all the variables are in statistical control, then the program 
checks the variables from the upstream process. The program 
implements rules to set-up the certainty factors for different 
temperature ranges, based on the specialist's experience. For 
example, if the finishing temperature is below or above AIMS 
temperature (standard value based on the grade of the steel) more 
than 30 degrees Fahrenheit, then the coil is not certainly 
normal: it is hard or soft with a certainty factor. The system 
displays to the user the term "probability". If the finishing 
temperature is above the AIMS, then the coil is considered soft. 
If the finishing temperature is below of the AIMS temperature, 
then the coil is considered hard. 

If the coiling temperature is not within the upper and lower 
limits (standard values based on the grade of the steel) then the 
coil is not certainly normal. If the coiling temperature is 
above the upper limit than the coil is soft. If the coiling 
temperature is below the lower limit then the coil is considered 
hard. Even though the temperatures are within limits, the 
certainty factor that a coil is normal is reduced by the 
certainty factors of each temperature value. The certainty 
factors are combined using MYCIN formulas or expert's experience 
in some cases. It depends of the type of effect each temperature 
has on the quality of the hot rolled coil. The coiling is a 
variable measured before finishing temperatures, so its variation 
causes variations to the finishing temperatures. 

Checking the coils at HSM may conclude that the temperatures 
were normal. The analysis of the coils with gauge variation prove 
that there are all kinds of causes for that: process control 
variables outside of the ranges allowed in the mill, maintenance 
problems, wrong computer model. 


175 



USE OF THE SYSTEM 


The Expert System implements two functions displayed on the main 
menu. The user can select one option and the program loads the 
facts in memory. The input data is read from the ASCII files ( 
the variables specific to CRN5 and HSM are stored in separate 
files). The user may check a coil produced at CRN5 or at HSM. 
The Expert System implements also an explanation facility, the 
user can check why the hardness of the coil is normal, hard, or 
soft. The user is informed about the values of certainty factors 
for the coiling and finishing temperature which influence the 
certainty factor for the hardness of the rolled coil at HSM. By 
knowing the hardness of the coil expressed in certainty factor, 
the process control engineers can take managerial actions to 
improve the mill set-up. 

EXPERT SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 

The system contains eighty rules. The facts for option one 
are loaded from the file containing the process control variables 
specific to CRN5. The facts for option two are loaded from the 
file containing the process control variables specific to HSM. 

The system reaches more than twenty conclusions regarding 
the quality of the coil and the mill set-up. 

The explanation facility uses a text file to store all the 
knowledge which supports a conclusion for every option. The 
certainty factors were used to combine facts about coiling and 
finishing temperatures to predict the quality of the coil 
(normal, hard, or soft). 


EXPERT SYSTEM FOR STATISTICAL QUALITY CONTROL 

The present Expert System interprets the statistical quality 
control charts to monitor, diagnose, and predict the possible 
quality of the coil. 

In many companies, it is a frustrating struggle to train and 
educate the personnel on the proper use of control charts. 
Therefore, it is reasonable to provide a uniform interpretation 
of the control charts and to establish a state of control during 
manufacturing process. The Expert System significantly improves 
the quality control techniques. 


REFERENCES 

Hayes-Roth, F., D. A. Waterman and D. B. Lenat (1983). Building 
Expert Systems. Addison-Wesley , Redding. 

Giarratano, J. C. and G. Riley (1989). Expert Systems : 
principles and programming. PWS-Kent, Boston. 


176 



