©Model Checker for Java Programs 

Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California 


Java Pathfinder (JPF) is a verification 
and testing environment for Java that inte- 
grates model checking, program analysis, 
and testing. JPF consists of a custom-made 
Java Virtual Machine (JVM) that inter- 
prets bytecode, combined with a search 
interface to allow the complete behavior 
of a Java program to be analyzed, includ- 
ing interleavings of concurrent programs. 
JPF is implemented in Java, and its archi- 
tecture is highly modular to support rapid 
prototyping of new features. 

JPF is an explicit-state model checker, 
because it enumerates all visited states 
and, therefore, suffers from the state-ex- 
plosion problem inherent in analyzing 
large programs. It is suited to analyzing 


programs less than lOkLOC, but has 
been successfully applied to finding er- 
rors in concurrent programs up to 
lOOkLOC. When an error is found, a 
trace from the initial state to the error is 
produced to guide the debugging. 

JPF works at the bytecode level, mean- 
ing that all of Java can be model-checked. 
By default, the software checks for all run- 
time errors (uncaught exceptions) , asser- 
tions violations (supports Java’s assert), 
and deadlocks. JPF uses garbage collec- 
tion and symmetry reductions of the 
heap during model checking to reduce 
state-explosion, as well as dynamic partial- 
order reductions to lower the number of 
interleavings analyzed. 


JPF is capable of symbolic execution of 
Java programs, including symbolic execu- 
tion of complex data such as linked lists 
and tr ees. JPF is extensible as it allows for 
the creation of listeners that can subscribe 
to events during searches. The creation of 
dedicated code to be executed in place of 
regular classes is supported and allows 
users to easily handle native calls and to 
improve the efficiency of the analysis. 

This work was done by Willem Visser of Re- 
search Institute for Advanced Computer Science 
for Ames Research Center. For further informa- 
tion, access http://ti.arc.nasa.gov/ase/ 
jpf/index.html or contact the Ames Technology 
Partnerships Division at (650) 604-2954. 
Refer to ARCrl5 388-1. 


70 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2007 


