Nn-n5^L 



N^^aR)--nv,jd||)^3S~/ 



NASA-TM-105397 19920008327 



. . * \j 



OPY 



•SFP I 4 IS^j 



LArJGLEY RESEARCH CEfJTER 

LIBRARY fJASA 
HA.MPTON, VIRGIfJIA 



A Service of: 




National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration 

Scientific and Technical 
Information Office 



NASA Technical Ubrary 

3 1176 01422 6576 

NASA Technical Memorandum 105397 






^ 



;1 



Experiments and Analysis Concerning the 
Use of External Burning to Reduce 
Aerospace Vehicle Transonic Drag 



Charles J. Treftiy 
Lewns Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 






17:^' 



unci ..^ 



January 1992 



IVI/NSA 



EXPERIMENTS AND ANALYSIS CONCERNING THE USE OF EXTERNAL 

BURNING TO REDUCE AEROSPACE VEHICLE TRANSONIC DRAG 

Charles J. Trefny 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

Lewis Research Center 

Cleveland. Ohio 44135 



ABSTRACT 

The external combustion of hydrogen to reduce transonic drag has been 
investigated. A control volume analysis is developed and indicates that 
the specific impulse performance of external burning is competitive with 
other forms of airbreathing propulsion and depends on the fuel-air 
ratio, freestream Mach number, and the severity of the base drag. A 
method is presented for sizing fuel injectors for a desired fuel -air 
ratio in the unconfined stream. 

A two-dimensional Euler analysis is also presented which indicates that 
the total axial force generated by external burning depends on the total 
amount of energy input and is independent of the transverse and 
streamwise distribution of heat addition. Good agreement between the 
Euler and control volume analysis is demonstrated. Features of the 
inviscid external burning flowfield are discussed. Most notably, a 
strong compression forms at the sonic line within the burning stream 
which may induce separation of the plume and prevent realization of the 
full performance potential. 



An experimental program was conducted In a Mach 1.26 free- jet to 
demonstrate drag reduction on a simple expansion ramp geometry, and 
verify hydrogen-air stability limits at external burning conditions. 
Stable combustion appears feasible to Nach numbers of between 1.4 and 2 
depending on the vehicle flight trajectory. Drag reduction Is 
demonstrated on the expansion ramp at Mach 1.26, however force levels 
showed little dependence on fuel pressure or altitude In contrast to 
control volume analysis predictions. Various facility Interference 
mechanisms and scaling Issues were studied and are discussed. 



11 



ACKN0HLED6EMENTS 

The author gratefully acknowledges the work of the engineers and 
technicians at the Propulsion Systems Lab at Lewis Research Center. 
Their dedication carried the experimental program through many trials 
and tribulations to a successful conclusion. 

Also acknowledged is the encouragement and guidance of Dr. John Anderson 
throughout the time I spent at the University of Maryland as well as the 
past four years at Lewis. 

Numerous technical discussions with Dr. Fred Billig at the Applied 
Physics Lab were Invaluable in the planning and execution of the 
program. I will always be grateful for having had the opportunity to 
work with Dr. Billig. 

Thanks are also due to my supervisors at NASA Lewis for their technical 
and administrative support. In particular, to Mr. Robert Coltrin and 
Mr. Bernard Blaha for providing me sufficient lattitude to complete this 
study. 



in 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

SSSllsn. Page 

List of Tables vli'1 

List of Figures Ix 

List of Symbols xvl I 

Chapter I - Introduction 1 

Single-stage to Orbit Airbreathing Nozzle Operation 2 

Application of External Burning 3 

Previous Work In External Burning 5 

Objectives of Current Work 13 . 

Chapter II - Control Volume Analysis 15 ' 

Background 15 

Development 20 

Three-Dimensional Relief Approximation 27 

Equations For a Perfect Gas 30 

Equations At Zero Drag 30 

Performance Parameter Definitions 31 i 

Results 33 

Fuel Injection Considerations 37 

Jet Penetration Model and Equivalence Ratio 37 

Approximation 

Fuel Injection Design Example 40 

Performance at Constant Fuel Conditions 42 

Control Volume Analysis Summary 45 | 

Chapter III - Euler Analysis 46 

Background 45 

Development 48 

Euler Equations In Conservation Form 48 

Method of Solution 50 

Artificial Damping 51 ■ | 

Assignment of Heat Addition Distribution 52 

Boundary Conditions 54 

Results 55 

Effect of Heat Addition Distribution 55 

Effect of Artificial Damping 60 



'*•— i^! — ^w*ffTKmRHf mm 



PRECEDIIMG PAGE BLAf^K NOT FILMED 



Effect of Grid Refinement 
Effect of Freestream Mach Number 

Euler Analysis Summary 

Chapter IV - Experimental Program 

Background 

Hydrogen-Air Flameholding Previous Work 

Facility Description 

Spraybar Test Apparatus and Procedure 
Equivalence Ratio Estimate 
Fuel Injector Sizing 
Instrumentation 
Ignition System 
Test Procedure 

Results 

Spraybar Base Pressure Measurements 
Flame Stability 
Effect of Elevated Temperature 
Scaling of Small -Scale Test Results 

Expansion Ramp Test Apparatus and Procedure 
Fuel Injector Sizing 
Flameholder Sizing 
Test Procedure 

Expansion Ramp Test Results 
Baseline Performance 
Comparison to Control Volume Analysis 
Facility Interaction Studies 
Effect of Exhaust Collector Modification 
Effect of Plume Boundary Simulator 
Effect of Free-Jet Boundary 
Alternate Flame-Holder and Fuel Injector 

Configurations 
Results with Heated Freestream 
Effect of Upper Sidewalls 
Expansion Ramp Flameholding 
Expansion Ramp Peformance Assessment 



61 
62 

63 

65 

65 

67 

74 

76 
77 
78 
80 
81 
82 

83 
83 
84 
86 
87 

92 
94 
95 
96 

97 
97 
102 
106 
108 
109 
113 
118 

124 
125 
126 
127 



Chapter V - Summary and Conclusions 

Appendix A - Hydrogen-Air Equilibrium Scheme 
Appendix B - Euler Analysis Test Cases 
Appendix C - Water-Cooled Total Temperature Probe 

Data Reduction 



130 

135 
142 
153 



VI 



Appendix D - Expansion Ramp Fuel Injector and Flameholders 158 

Configurations 



References 



163 



vii 



LIST OF TABLES 

3-1 Summary of Euler Analysis Runs 168 

4-1 Summary of Expansion Ramp Configurations 169 

4-2 Perfect Gas Equivalence Ratios 170 



vm 



LIST OF FIGURES 



1-1 Artist's conception of a $ingle-$tage-to-orbit vehicle. 171 

1-2 Single expansion ramp nozzle design and operation. 172 

a) On-design at high speed. 

b) Over-expanded at transonic conditions. 

1-3 Cowl flap deflection to prevent internal over-expansion. 173 

1-4 External burning concept applied to single expansion 173 
ramp nozzle. 

2-1 Control volume nomenclature. 174 

2-2 Results at zero drag along a Q(,-1000 psfa trajectory. 175 

a) Ratio of Inflow stream height to base height. 

b) Fuel flow per unit base area. 

c) Normalized specific Impulse. 

2-3 Trajectory of 1/2% fuel volume concentration from correlation 177 
of reference 50 for various fuel pressure ratios. 

2-4 Fuel schedule required to maintain zero thrust at 177 

stoichiometric conditions with a fixed orifice geometry; 
Qo-1000 psfa, d/w-. 005824, S/d*-9.485, C^-.9, T^-SIS'^R. 

2-5 Results at constant fuel conditions for a fixed orifice 178 
geometry; Qq-IOOO psfa, d /w-. 005824, S/d -9.485, C^-.9, 
T^"518 R. 

a) Ratio of inflow stream height to base height. 

b) Equivalence ratio. 

c) Thrust coefficient for various expansion assumptions; 
yb/L-3.732. w/yb-2.5. 

d) Specific impulse. 

3-1 Euler analysis schematic. 180 

3-2 80 by 40 grid. 18i 

3-3 Case 1 heat addition distribution and streamlines. 181 

3-4 Case 2 heat addition distribution, Gaussian In axial 182 
direction, constant In transverse. 

a) Heat addition contours and streamlines. 

b) Gaussian axial distribution function. 



IX 



3-5 Case 3 heat addition distribution, Gaussian In axial 183 
direction, parabolic In transverse. 

a) Heat addition contours and streamlines. 

b) Parabolic transverse distribution function. 

3-6 Euler results for case 1 heat addition; Mo-1.4. 184 

a) Mach number contours (.05 contour Intervals). 

b) Wall Nach number distribution.. 

c) Wall pressure distribution.. 

3-7 Euler results for case 2 heat addition; Mo-1.4. 185 

a) Mach number contours (.05 contour Intervals). 

b) Wall Mach number distribution. 

c) Wall pressure distribution. 

3-8 Euler results for case 3 heat addition; Mo-1.4. 186 

a) Mach number contours (.05 contour Intervals). 

b) Wall Mach number distribution. 

c) Wall pressure distribution. 

3-9 Velocity profiles at ramp trailing edge. 187 

3-10 Effect of artificial damping on Euler results. Mach number 188 
contours (.05 contour Intervals); Mo-1.4, 80 x 40 grid, 
case 2 heat addition. 

a) C.-.0125. 

b) C^-.025. 

c) Cj-.05. 

3-11 Effect of grid refinement on Euler results. Mach number 189 
contours (.05 contour intervals); Mo-1.4, Ch-.025, 
case 2 heat addition. 

a) 50 X 25 grid. 

b) 80 X 40 grid. 

c) 100 X 50 grid. 

3-12 Effect of grid density on wall pressure distributions. 190 

3-13 Mach number contours at various freestream Mach numbers 191 
(.05 contour Increment); 80 x 40 grid, C^.025, case 2 
heat addition. 

a) Mo-1.2. 

b) Mo-1.6. 

c) Mo-2.0. 

d) Ho-2.4. 

3-14 Wall Mach number distributions at various freestream Mach 193 
numbers; 80 x 40 grid, Cj-.025, case 2 heat addition. 

3-15 Wall pressure distributions at various freestream Mach 193 
numbers; 80 x 40 grid, Cd-.025, case 2 heat addition. 



3-16 Comparison of Euler and control volume analysis thrust 194 
coefficient predictions. 

4-1 Combination spraybar-flameholder concept 195 

4-2 Flame stability for a pre-mlxed, subsonic hydrogen-air 196 
stream (reproduced from reference 57). 

4-3 Flame stability along flight trajectories for a 1" dia. disk. 196 

4-4 Non pre-mlxed, and supersonic stability limits from 197 
reference 59 In terms of Dezubay parameter. 

4-5 Propulsion Systems Lab Cell 4 after hypersonic edifications 198 
(reproduced from reference 60). 

4-6 Spraybar mounted In free-jet with spark ignltor and water- 199 
cooled probe In extended positions. 

4-7 Details of piloted spraybar. 200 

4-8 Piloted spraybar operating envelopes at Mach 1.26* 201 

4-9 Field of view for optical Instrumentation and location of 202 
translating water-cooled total temperature probe. 

4-10 Schlleren Images at various free-jet exit pressure ratios; 203 
Pq (free-jet exit pressure) held constant at 8 psia. 
aj Over-expanded, Po/p.*-8. 

b) On design, Pq/p.-I-O. 

c) Under-expanded, P(/p«'>1.2. 

4-11 Effect of free-jet exit pressure ratio on spraybar base 205 
pressure; p^ (free-jet exit pressure) held constant at 
8 psia. 

4-12 Spraybar base pressure with external burning. 205 

4-13 Flame stability for piloted spraybar. 206 

4-14 Plume characteristics at nominal temperature and pressure; 207 
T. o-540*'R, Po«6 psia, Re-4.9xl0Vft. 
a)' Infra-red Image; P|-250 psia, yp-1.0"»^ -.GS. 

b) Infra-red Image; p^-350 psia, yp«1.2",<> -.75. 

c) Total temperature profiles. 

4-15 Plume characteristics at Increased temperature and pressure; 209 
T. o-960^Ri Po«12 psia, Re«4.9xl0Vft. 
a)' Infra-red Image; p^«250 psia, yp"*72",^p^,«.58. 

b) Infra-red Image; p^»350 psia, yp-.85*,<>p^».69. 

c) Total temperature profiles. 

XI 



4-16 Relation of expansion ramp models to vehicle base. 211 

4-17 Expansion ramp model details. 212 

4-18 Expansion ramp mounted In free-Jet. 213 

4-19 Flame stability envelopes for 26 Injector model; 214 

4 < Po < 12 ps1a,'50 < p, < 375 psia. 

4-20 Fuel-off static pressure distributions; configuration 1. 215 

a) Po-12 psia 

b) Po-8 psia 

c) P(,-4 psia 

4-21 Effect of fuel mass addition on center! Ine static pressure 217 
distributions; configuration 1. 
a) P5-I2 psia 

c) Po-4 psia 

4-22 Effect of external burning on center! Ine static pressure 220 
distributions; configuration 1. 

a) Po-12 psia 

b) Po-8 psia 

c) Po-4 psia 

4-23 Schlleren Images of externa! burning (configuration 10). 223 

a) Fuel -off. 

b) Low equivalence ratio; Pf-250 psia, Po-12 psia 
(^p -.56, yp-.25"). 

c) High equivalence ratio; p«-375 psia, Pn-4 psia 
(<Jp,s-1.24, yp-.51-). *^' *^ 

4-24 Total temperature profiles; configuration 1. 226 

a) P(,-12 psia 

b) Po-8 psia 

c) Po-4 psia 

4-25 Infra-red Images of external burning plume; configuration 1. 229 

a) Low equivalence ratio; Pf«200 psia, Po-12 psia 
(^ -.51, yp-.22"). 

b) Medium equivalence ratio; Pf-250 psia, Po-8 psia 
(^ -.70, y -.30"). 

c)1ligh equivalence ratio; p.-375 psia, Po-4 psia 
(^p„-1.24, yp-.51"). 

4-26 Average plume temperature correlation. 230 

a) Equivalence fatio based on penetration times spacing 
method with x/d -30. 

b) Equivalence ratio and inflow stream height based on 
correlation of average measured plume temperature. 



XII 



4-27 Thrust coefficient; configuration 1. 232 

a) Equivalence ratio based on penetration times spacing 
method with x/d -30. 

b) Equivalence ratio and inflow stream height based on 
correlation of average measured plume temperature. 

4-28 Facility Interactions suspected of causing low performance. 234 

4-29 PSL-4 Facility exhaust collector layout. 234 

4-30 Effect of altitude on exhaust collector pressure 235 

distributions during external burning; Pf-375 psia. 

4-31 Effect of auxiliary air flow on exhaust collector pressure 235 
distributions; Po-4 psia, fuel off. 

4-32 Effect of exhaust collector modification on thrust 236 
coefficient; configuration 1. 

4-33 Plume boundary simulator Installation; configuration 2. 237 

4-34 Gaussian axial heat addition distribution function. 238 

4-35 2-D Euler grids used to validate use of plume boundary 239 
simulator. 

a) Solid wall boundary, 100 x 50 nodes. 

b) Freestream boundary, 100 x 70 nodes. 

4-36 Comparison of streamlines, total heat added corresponds to 240 
^ -.45, yJyt'.ZO. 

a) Solid wall boundary. 

b) Freestream boundary. 

4-37 Comparison of Hach number contours (.05 contour increment), 241' 
total heat added corresponds to (>^„„-.45, yft/yK-.20. 

a) Solid wall boundary. " ^^ 

b) Freestream boundary. 

4-38 Comparison of wall pressure distributions, total heat added 242 
corresponds to ^corr"-*5, yo/yb--20. 

4-39 Effect of plume boundary simulator on centerline pressure 243 
distributions. 

a) Fuel off; Po-8 psia. 

b) p,-250 psia, Po-12 psia W^„-.30). 

c) p,-375 psia, Po-8 psia {^^„:67). 

d) p,-375 psia, Po-4 psia (^„„-1.36). 

4-40 Total temperature profiles with plume boundary simulator 245 
installed; configuration 2. 



X111 



4-41 Effect of plume boundary simulator on thrust coefficient. 246 

4-42 Grid used to evaluate effects of free-jet boundary 247 
(100 X 80 nodes). 

4-43 Fuel -off Euler results with free-jet boundary. 248 

a) Mach number contours (.05 contour Increment) 

b) Wall pressure distribution. 

4-44 Effect of free-jet boundary on calculated external burning 249 
thrust coefficient. 

4-45 Comparison of Nach number contours at low heat addition 250 
corresponding to ^^^^^-.25, yf/y^'.ZO. 

a) Flight boundary. 

b) Free-Jet boundary. 

4-46 Comparison of Hach number contours at medium heat addition 251 
corresponding to ^eorr'-^^, yf/y^'.ZO. 

a) Flight boundary. 

b) Free-Jet boundary. 

4-47 Comparison of Mach number contours at high heat addition 252 
corresponding to ^^^.^-l.SS, yo/yb-.20. 

a) Flight boundary. 

b) Free-jet boundary. 

4-48 Results for 56 injector model; configuration 3. 253 

a) Center! ine pressure distributions. 

b) Total temperature profiles 

4-49 26 injector model with upstream injection and 255 

flameholding; configuration 7. 

4-50 Results with upstream injection and flameholding; 256 

configuration 7. 

a) Centerline pressure distributions. 

b) Total temperature profiles. 

4-51 26 injector model with leading edge extension Installed 258 
(flameholder not Installed). 

4-52 Effect of leading edge extension and upstream Injection 259 
(configurations 2 and 8) 

a) Comparison of centerline pressure distributions with 
fuel off; Po«8 psia. 

b) Comparison of centerline pressure distributions with 
external burning; p^«375 psia, P(,»8 psia (^^^^-.GS). 

c) Comparison of total temperature profiles; 
p^-375 psia, Po-8 psia (^^„^^-.65). 



XIV 



4-53 1/4" Serrated flameholder; configuration 10. 261 

4-54 Results with 1/4" serrated flameholder; configuration 10. 262 

a) Centerline pressure distributions. 

b) Total temperature profiles. 

4-55 Thrust coefficient comparison for alternate configurations. 264 

4-56 Results for configuration 10 with heated freestream; 265 
T, o-960'R, . 

a) Centerline pressure distributions. 

b) Total temperature profiles. 

c) Thrust coefficient. 

4-57 Upper sidewall installation (baseline flameholder shown). 268 

4-58 Effect of upper sidewalls on configuration 10 performance. 269 

a) Comparison of centerline pressure distributions with 
fuel off; pp-8 psia. 

b) Comparison of centerline pressure distributions with 
external burning; p,-375 psia, Po-4 psia (^,^,,-1.33). 

c) Comparison of total temperature profiles; 
p,-375 psia, Po-4 psia (^„,,-1.33). 

d) Comparison of thrust coefficients. 

4-59 Expansion ramp flameholding, all flameholder configurations. 272 

4-60 Demonstrated performance for configuration 10. 273 

a) Thrust coefficient. 

b) Specific impulse. 



XV 



LIST OF SYMBOLS 

a speed of sound 

A cross-sectional or projected area 

Cp pressure coefficient 

C^ thrust coefficient (force / QqA^) 

Cy , orifice flow coefficient 

Cx,Cy,Cj coefficients In artificial damping scheme 

Cjo 2-D Courant number 

d orifice diameter 

dx incremental distance in x-direction 

dy Incremental distance in y-direction 

ds area Increment vector 

D disk diameter In flameholding correlation 

e internal energy per unit mass 

Ejpt total energy per unit mass ( p(e+V2/2) ) 

F^.Fj fuel injection constants 

g^ proportionality factor (32.17 ft-lb-/lb,-sec^ in english 
system) 

h enthalpy per unit mass 

H effective height of flaroeholder 

H2 hydrogen fuel 

I^ specific Impulse (force per unit fuel flow) (lb,-sec/lbj 

^•p.tot specific Impulse based on total force (lb,-sec/lbj 

J jacobian of transformation 

L length of expansion ramp In x-direction 

i length of computational plane in x-direction 



XVI 



LHV lower heating value (taken to be 52000 BTU/lb, for Hj) 

H Mach number 

^ nass flowrate 

P pressure 

P, test cell or ambient pressure 

Q dynamic pressure 

q heat added per unit nass of air 

(> heat added per unit volume per unit time 

R specific gas constant 

Re Reynold's number 

S distance between fuel Injection orifice centerllnes 

t time 

T temperature 

u x-component of velocity 

V y-component of velocity 

V velocity vector 
V».o. blow-off velocity 
w width 

X distance In streamwise or x-dlrectlon 

y height or distance in transverse or y-dlrectlon 

grssK 

Ayso three-dimensional stream surface deflection 

Ax grid spacing In x direction 

Ay grid spacing in y direction 



XV1 1 



Ay time step 

P nass per unit volume 

r Ignition delay time 

i x-coordlnate In computational plane 

17 y-coordlnate In computational plane 

9 shock wave angle 

i equivalence ratio (fraction of stoichiometric fuel-air 
ratio) 

/x Hach angle 

7 ratio of specific heats 

subscripts 

a air, or ambient 

b base 

corr based on data correlation 

eb effective back pressure 

f fuel 

N-S downstream of a normal shock 

p jet penetration 

pxs based on penetration times spacing 

s streamline 

t stagnation 

w wall surface 

X x-component, or derlvltive with respect to x 

y y-component, or derlvltive with respect to y 

2 station 2, outflow 

station 0, freestream or inflow 

xviii 



superscripts 

* sonic, or non-dimensional quantity 
fuel off 

iniscenaneous 
<> Indicates dimensional quantity 



XIX 



CHAPTER I - INTRODUCTION 



Interest In "transatmospheric" or "aerospace" vehicles has been revived In 
the United States following almost two decades of relative Inactivity. 
Evolutionary advances In "scramjet" propulsion, aaterlals, and computer 
modeling, along with current political support have set the stage for an 
aggressive program (the National Aerospace-Plane, or NASP) to develop a 
revolutionary aircraft capable of flying Into orbit following take-off 
from a conventional runway. Ready access to space, and y^ry high speed 
earth transportation are two of the obvious benefits of this technology. 
The single stage to orbit (SSTO) concept 1$ wery attractive due to Its 
operational simplicity, flexibility and Its potential for reducing the 
cost of putting payload Into orbit. The technical challenges facing the 
aerospace community are numerous, many of them related to the airbreathing 
propulsion system required to achieve orbit In a single stage. Liquid 
hydrogen fuel is widely accepted as the fuel of choice for hypersonic 
airbreathing propulsion due to It's high heat capacity for engine and 
airframe cooling, and a heat of combustion more than twice that of 
hydrocarbon fuels. One drawback of hydrogen is Its low molecular weight 
which results In a large cryogenic volume that must be highly Integrated 
with the airframe and propulsion system. An artist's conception of an 
SSTO vehicle appears in figure 1-1 which illustrates the highly integrated 
nature of the design. The entire aft end of the vehicle acts as a single 
expansion ramp nozzle, providing a very high area ratio which is exploited 
at the high nozzle pressure ratios associated with high Mach number and 



altitude. This large aft-facing area becomes a great liability however at 
transonic and low supersonic speeds where low alrbreathing engine pressure 
ratios result In a highly overexpanded nozzle. Since the nozzle exit area 
Is largely fixed at the vehicle cross-sectional area, the amount of 
variable geometry that can be employed Is a small fraction of that 
required to keep the nozzle "on-deslgn" over this speed range. 



Sinole-Staoe to Orbi t Alrbreathino No77le Qperatinn 

A qualitative discussion of nozzle design and operation follows which 
Illustrates overexpanded operation and the application of external burning 
to an SSTO nozzle geometry. At hypersonic speeds, with the engine 
operating as a supersonic combustion ramjet or "scramjet", the combustor 
exit (nozzle inlet) Mach number Is supersonic and one could envision a 
minimum length shock-free design with expansion to freestream ambient 
pressure at a given design point. The resulting hypothetical design and 
associated flowfield appear schematically In figure l-2a. Note that the 
cowl and shear layer of the single expansion ramp nozzle can be thought of 
as the symmetry plane of a syrametrlctwo-dimenslonal nozzle. The nozzle 
Is perfectly expanded and the limiting characteristic In the exhaust flow 
emanating from the trailing edge of the cowl Intersects the expansion 
surface at the trailing edge. At this point, the nozzle Is performing 
optimally, and the freestream Mach number has little effect on nozzle 
performance. In figure l-2b, the nozzle pressure ratio and freestream 
Mach number have been reduced to a point representative of a transonic 



3 
flight condition where the engine operates as a ramjet with a choked 
throat. The portion of the nozzle enclosed by the cowl (referred to as 
the Internal nozzle) has a significant area ratio and at low nozzle 
pressure ratios is Itself overexpanded to less than freestream pressure. 
Upon leaving the Internal nozzle, the exhaust stream adjusts to the local 
base pressure through the familiar "shock diamond" wave structure. The 
local base pressure to which the exhaust flow eventually equalizes, is 
lower than freestream due to the fact that the exhaust stream "fills" only 
a small part of the large nozzle exit area. Nozzle drag results from 
overexpansion in the internal nozzle, and the exhaust stream's subsequent 
inability to fully recompress to freestream pressure due to the low 
overall vehicle base pressure. The transonic nozzle drag problem can thus 
be thought of as similar to any other base drag problem, being complicated 
by the fact that the effective base pressure will be a function of the 
exhaust stream's ability to fill the base. 



Application of External Burning 

The nozzle pictured in fig .1-2 is a high Hach number, minimum length 
design employing a sharp expansion at the nozzle throat, with a resulting 
geometric area ratio in the Internal nozzle. In the preceding discussion, 
no attempt was made to vary the geometry over the range of operating 
conditions, although one could envision deflecting the trailing edge of 
the cowl upwards as shown in figure 1-3 to prevent internal overexpansion 
of the exhaust flow. Freestream pressure may be maintained in the 



Internal nozzle, but would be offset by boattall drag on the deflected 
flap. With respect to the reduced pressure on the deflected cowl 
boattall, the Internal nozzle Is underexpanded, so the propulsive stream 
expands to the local base pressure through a wave structure. Ultimately, 
the propulsive stream expands to nearly the same cross -sectional area as 
before with the cowl undeflected, so that the overall base pressure In 
this region Is unchanged. The ^wl flap deflection co jicgpt can prevent 
I nternal overexp ans lon and^ also reduce the strength of the exter nal wave 
structure, but results In no significant net drag reduction. 



The deflected cowl does however transfer the low pressure region which 
existed on the Inner expansion surface to the external flap, which makes 
the use of external burning an attractive possibility. Shown conceptually 
In figure 1-4, hydrogen would be Injected upstream of the deflected cowl 
and burn adjacent to the nozzle, pressurizing the entire base region 
thereby eliminating cowl flap drag and the external overexpanslon of the 
exhaust flow. 

The effect of external burning on a nozzle of this type at first seems to 
be complicated by detailed interactions between the freestream, the 
external burning plume, and the exhaust flow. The strategy adopted herein 
Is to consider the deflected flap and exhaust shear layer together as a 
surface upon which external burning acts. Obviously, any pressurlzatlon 
of the shear layer by external burning does not act directly on a vehicle 
surface, but must be transmitted through the exhaust stream. This Is seen 
as a second-order effect though, with regard to the main objective of the 



5 

present work which Is to Investigate the feasibility of using hydrogen 
external burning to reduce transonic drag. If the concept is workable in 
the proceeding simplified sense* extension to the actual lirbreathing 
propulsion system seems straightforward. 



Previous Work In Exte rnal Burning 

A review of the literature reveals that work related to this area falls 

roughly into two categories, "base burning" and "external burning". 

Although both use external, or unconfined combustion to increase pressure 

on a surface, important differences exist in the mechanics of the 

processes, and the analysis methods used. Base burning is characterized 

by direct fuel injection and combustion in the wake of a blunt based 

aerodynamic body (such as a projectile) to reduce drag. The recirculating 

base flow acts as the flameholder, with fuel injection and combustion 

modifying the base flow pattern in such a manner as to increase the base 

pressure. The fuel mass addition itself can often account for a 

significant part of the total drag reduction. The analysis of base 

burning must include the complex viscous effects which dominate the base 

flow phenomena and as a result, integral theories have been widely used. 

The majority of work in base flow phenomena including base injection and 

burning is summarized by Murthy, et al.' which includes a bibliography with 

over 350 references. In contrast to base burning where the surface to be 

pressurized acts as a flameholder, the present application tends more 

toward external burning in which heat is released in the inviscid portion 



of the flowfleld adjacent to the surface on which the pressure Is to be 
Increased. This process has been proposed to reduce drag, provide control 
forces and even provide primary propulsion. By It's vei^^deflnltl^on, 
external bu rning Is prima rily an Invlscl jLphenomena. and a number of 
theoretical approaches to solving flows with heat addition have been used 
such as the diabatic method of characteristics, linearized flow with heat 
addition, and the "planar heater" where heat addition is confined to a 
thin, constant area region. These techniques have been summarized by 
B1111g^ who published an unclassified, unlimited review of theoretical and 
experimental external burning work done from 1945 to 1964. Highlights of 
experimental work done during this period and subsequently are given In 
the following paragraphs. 

In 1955, Davis^ et. al., at Texaco Experiment Inc. tested hydrogen external 
burning on a small flat plate model with various fuel injection and 
flameholder configurations including oxygen piloting. The experiments 
were conducted in a Mach 1.7, 1.62" diameter free- jet at nominally 
standard temperature and pressure. Encouraging results were obtained, but 
due to the large flameholders required to stabilize the hydrogen flame 
(with respect to the tiny models), no conclusions on performance were 
drawn . 

A series of external combustion tests at the NACA Lewis Flight Propulsion 
Laboratory (now The NASA Lewis Research Center) was also initiated in 
1955. Fletcher^, et. al. demonstrated stable combustion of aluminum 
borohydride in a small (3.84" by 10") supersonic wind tunnel at sub- 



7 

ambient pressure and temperature without the use of a flameholder from 
Mach 1.5 to 4. The pyrophoric liquid fuel was Injected from the 3.84" 
wide tunnel ceiling. The effect of combustion on the tunnel ceiling 
static pressure distribution was reported in reference 5 as "significant" 
which prompted subsequent tests of various aerodynamic shapes Including 
flat plates, a body of revolution, and a two-dimensional supersonic wing 
in a 1' by r Mach 2.46 tunnel*''. These tests demonstrated levels of 
performance commensurate with theoretical predictions with combustion 
having doubled the L/D of the wing model, and nearly eliminating base drag 
on the body of revolution, but results were said to be subject to 
"undetermined wind tunnel effects" which were thought to be wave 
reflections from the tunnel walls. In order to assess these interference 
effects, the flat plate model tests were repeated in the 10' by 10' 
supersonic tunnel at Lewis by Dorsch* et. al. Results indicated that 
significant interference occurred only on a long (25" chord) flat plate 
model, and much of the data taken during the small tunnel tests was free 
of interference. 

Billig^'" conducted numerous experiments at Mach 5 on flat plate and wedge 
models using pyrophoric aluminum-alKyl fuels Including work In support of 
an external burning ramjet program". Stable combustion was attained 
without flameholders at Mach 5, but performance In terms of lift and 
thrust was somewhat lower than predicted. A composite plot In reference 
2 which shows results of many tests. Indicates that external burning 
performance is generally lower than that predicted by a constant pressure 
analysis. Billig concludes that the process is reaction-rate limited and 



8 



that lengths on the order of feet rather than Inches would be required for 
complete combustion. 

The work of Townend and Reld^^, reported In 1964 was not Included In 
filing's review and was clearly a base burning test, but is relevent to 
the present study since hydrogen fuel was used successfully to alleviate 
base drag on an axlsymnetrlc cone-cylinder nodel at a relatively low Mach 
number. The 1" diameter model was mounted In the center of a 5.5" square 
test section. Test conditions were Mach 2.14, at a static pressure of 2 
atmospheres, and ambient total temperature. Two methods of fuel injection 
were tried, direct bleeding Into the base, and peripheral Injection 
through a slot upstream of the base. Hydrogen combustion in the wake 
Increased the base pressure to slightly higher than ambient pressure In 
either case. The similarity In results of both Injection methods 
suggested that fuel Issuing from the peripheral slot simply burned In the 
wake In the same manner as fuel which was bled Into the wake directly. 30 
and 22.5 degree cone-cylinder afterbodies were tested and resulted In 
little difference from the blunt base results. The objective of this work 
was to study the effects of stable combustion In the wake or base burning, 
the peripheral Injection being used only to enhance mixing. This 
configuration however bears a close resemblance to an external burning 
scheme suggested by Strahle" four years later in which fuel would be 
Injected transversely and burn in the invlscid stream adjacent to the wake 
supposedly yielding much higher performance. 

In 1968, Strahle noted that previous base burning results were "somewhat 



9 

disappointing" being limited to base pressures less than or equal to 
freestream static pressure. He proposed using external burning outside 
but adjacent to the viscous wake to pressurize the dividing streamline and 
thereby the base surface by communication through the elliptic 
recirculation zone. In effect, the wake was to ict as an afterbody 
pressurized by external burning. He reasons that the pressure rise due to 
external burning is not constrained to freestream pressure, and that 
higher performance than that of base burning alone would be possible. He 
evaluated this concept analytically using an integral analysis for the 
recirculating wake flow, and a composite approach for the external burning 
heat addition region which combinined 2-D planar linear theory and one- 
dimensional flow. The conclusion drawn from the analysis was that indeed, 
there is no limit to the base pressure rise and the rise is monatonic in 
combustion zone strength. Boundary layer separation upstream of the base, 
and the breakdown of supersonic flow in the heat addition region were 
mentioned as two possible limiting factors. The latter concern was 
addressed in 1970 by Strahle in reference 14, He performs a more detailed 
analysis of the transonic external burning process on a flat plate using 
2-D velocity potential formulation. The conclusion is that a positive 
pressure coefficient can be maintained on the surface even after the 
transition to subsonic flow. If the outer, supersonic flow breaks down 
however, as may be the case if a transonic flow Is turned through too 
great an angle, he concludes that useful force generation cannot be 
realized. Strahle's application of external burning to wake 
pressurization served as the basis for several subsequent external burning 
studies. 



10 



In the early 1970' s, Fuhs" at the Naval Postgraduate School extended 
Strahle's analysis to axl symmetric, annular heat addition geometries and 
proposed a number of applications for external burning. One was that of 
transonic drag reduction on an axi symmetric plug nozzle. He proposed the 
addition of heat on the cowl boattail surface to reduce the Mach number, 
ultimately resulting in subsonic flow downstream of the cowl trailing 
edge. Drag reduction on the boattail Is secondary to a "wave trapping" 
effect where waves reflected from the plug surface are now reflected back 
as compressions from the subsonic boundary. Large gains in thrust at very 
modest fuel consumption are demonstrated by an initial analysis. 

A group of graduate students led by Fuhs"'^' performed projectile drag 
reduction experiments based on Strahle's concept in a Mach 2 free- jet. A 
projectile base was mounted concentrically in the free- jet, and the nozzle 
exit was contoured to generate compression waves which simulated external 
burning. The location and strength of the simulated heat release was 
varied using different nozzle geometries, to arrive at an optimum 
configuration. Compression waves focused on the wake did produce the 
expected increase in base pressure, but the practicality of forcing 
combustion to occur at the desired location and with the desired intensity 
was not addressed. 

Strahle, Hubbartt and Neale"*^ performed a series of experiments in a 6" 
diameter, Mach 3 tunnel with a concentrically mounted 2.25* diameter 
model. Following Fuhs, tests were run with simulated external burning in 
which detailed wake measurements were made. Base bleed and hydrogen base 



11 

burning with simulated external compression was then studied followed by 
an attempt at hydrogen external burning using subsonic, radial fuel 
Injection Just upstream of the base. It was found that this external 
burning configuration performed very similarly to base burning where the 
fuel was bled axlally Into the wake. It was concluded that extra Jet 
penetration of the fuel was needed, and the orifices were re-drilled to 
provide supersonic Injection. The extra jet penetration however, rendered 
stable combustion Impossible. The projectile base recirculation zone 
which had been acting as the flameholder was no longer entraining fuel and 
supporting a pilot flame. The Nach 3, 35000 ft. test conditions were 
simply too severe to expect flameholding by the fuel jet only. The strong 
disturbance created by the supersonic Injection also caused significant 
Interference within the tunnel. These results exemplify the practical 
difficulty associated with obtaining "true" external burning In the 
Invlscid stream with non-pyrophoric fuels such as hydrogen. 

Schadow^*"" performed a parallel series of experiments combining base and 
external burning In the late 1970's on both two-dimensional and 
axisymmetric base geometries at Mach 2, sea level conditions using fuel- 
rlch solid rocket exhaust as fuel. Schadow's tests were run in a free- 
Jet, and were not susceptible to tunnel choking and wall Interference 
effects. In fact, Strahle In reference 25 notes that waves reflected from 
Schadows free- jet boundary would lead to conservative results. Schadow 
achieved base pressures greater than freestream (base thrust) with 
combined base and external burning, but as in Strahle's tests, external 
burning alone did not perform to expectations. 



12 



In 1976, Cavalleri^ reports on an external burning rocket concept in which 
Strahle's wake pressurization scheme Is used to provide propulsion. Tests 
were run at Mach 2 and 2.5 over a range of altitudes with an 8" diameter 
base in a 37" diameter test section, which is of significantly larger 
scale than previous tests. Fuel -rich solid rocket exhaust was injected 
radially upstream of the base. No base Injection or base burning was used 
in conjunction with the external burning, yet enough thrust to cruise a 
low drag shape at Mach 2 was obtained. Relatively cool base temperatures 
measured during the tests indicated that the heat addition was truly in 
the form of external burning and not base burning of fuel entrained into 
the wake. Measurements made downstream of the model indicated that a 
subsonic plume caused by external combustion persisted for 14 radii 
downstream of the model base. This led to concerns that wave reflections 
and high pressure in the facility diffuser may have fed forward to 
1 nf 1 uence base pressure . D1 rector^ analyzes the data further and 
concludes that the results were not affected by facility interference. 

The bulk of past experimental external burning studies have been conducted 
using pyrophoric fuels with no additional flameholding required. Previous 
hydrogen external burning studies include Baker's early work which 
required large flameholders with respect to the tiny model scale, and 
Strahle's work at Mach 3 with no flameholders in which successful external 
burning was not achieved. To date, external burning in the inviscid 
flowfield has been approached only with pyrophoric fuels in Cavalleri's 
external burning rocket experiment. It seems that true external burning 



13 

In the sense meant by Strahle In 1968 will always be elusive, especially 
with a non-pyrophoric fuel such as hydrogen since an undisturbed, Invlscid 
supersonic flow by definition has not been disrupted by the fueling 
process, and contains no flameholding sites. The present study is 
Intended to extend the hydrogen external burning knowledge base to 
transonic conditions, representative of a single stage to orbit 
alrbreathing vehicle trajectory. Some features peculiar to this situation 
are the need for a flameholder, and the subsonic condition of the plume 
following external combustion which must be carefully considered In both 
analysis and experiments. 



Ob.iectives of Current Work 

In the current concept, a flameholder is used to sustain a piloting region 
near the wall surface, from which combustion can propagate into a fueled 
stream of somewhat larger proportion. One objective of the present study 
is thus to characterize the flameholding requirements for hydrogen and air 
at the transonic, sub-atmospheric pressure conditions of current Interest, 
and to define the flight envelope where external burning is feasible. 

Given that the hydrogen-air combustion process can be stabilized over an 
appropriate range of flight conditions, another objective is to evaluate 
the performance of external burning on the simplified expansion ramp 
geometry described earlier at transonic conditions. 



14 



To satisfy these objectives, an analytical and experimental study was 
undertaken. The control volume analysis described in chapter II was 
performed to estimate the performance potential of hydrogen external 
burning at the conditions of Interest. The control volume analysis was 
also used to size fuel Injection orifices for the experimental program. 
Results obtained were encouraging and the experimental program described 
in chapter IV was Initiated to characterize the flameholding requirements, 
and demonstrate drag reduction on the -simpJJ fled expansion ramp geometry, 
while providing data for comparison to the control volume results. In 
chapter III, an Euler analysis is performed which verifies the control 
volume results in two-dimensions, and provides further insight into the 
external burning flowfield and supersonic-subsonic transition. The Euler 
analysis also proved useful in interpreting the experimental results. 



15 
CHAPTER II • CONTROL VOLUME ANALYSIS 



Background 

The analysis of external burning In a transonic flow can be a formidable 
task, depending upon the level of detail required. Features of the 
flowfleld Include combustion of an unbounded stream of fuel and air, and 
the Interaction of this stream with the unburned freestream and thrust 
surface. The details of fuel Injection, flaroeholding, mixing and reaction 
kinetics could also be considered. To lay the groundwork for more 
sophisticated multi-dimensional analysis and experimental programs It Is 
useful. If not critical to perform a simple parametric study that Includes 
only the most dominant physical phenomena. The control volume analysis 
described In this section Is a means to this end. It Is Intended to 
reveal the Important parameters In the external burning process and assess 
the practicality of the concept as a drag reduction device. Based on the 
conservation equations. It provides insights Into overall performance 
sensitivities while avoiding complex fuel Injection, mixing and combustion 
modeling. 

Before developing the control volume equations, a brief overview of 
analysis methods used by previous authors Is given to provide a rationale 
for choosing the control volume method. Past analytical approaches to 
external burning can be divided into roughly three categories: 



16 



1) Two dimensional linearized, or exact inethods which are mentioned 
here for completeness, but in general do not apply to the transonic 
problem where heat addition causes a transition to subsonic flow. 

Pinkel'' et. al. developed a graphical approach for obtaining diabatic 
method of characteristics solutions. This technique was then applied to 
a supersonic wing under which heat was added to increase the lift/drag 
ratio'^. The method never seemed to catch on however due to it's tedious 
nature. 

Tsien and Beilock" developed equations for the perturbations caused by a 
line heat source in a compressible flow. These linear theory results 
could be superimposed and were used widely by other authors. Schetz'**'' 
for example used these results to model external burning adjacent to a 
turbulent wake as a 'flame sheet". A similar method was also used by Fuhs 
in reference 15 for a number of different external burning examples. 

2) One dimensional methods which employ equations derivable from 
Shapiro's'* Influence coefficients. They are generally put in finite 
difference form and solved by marching downstream while 
incrementally adding heat. While the equations are valid for 
subsonic flow, a singularity In the equations exists at Hach one, 
making the supersonic-subsonic transition difficult numerically. A 
subsonic outflow would also require multiple iterations in a 
downstream marching approach. 



17 
Vaughan" studied the control force generated on a flat plate by jet 
Interaction and subsequent external burning of hydrogen. He limited the 
heat release to avoid sonic conditions In the burned stream since if the 
burned stream chokes, he concludes that upstream conditions nust change 
and the assumptions used In deriving the nodel are violated. 

Callens'" et. al. used the one-dlnenslonal equations to determine external 
burning propulsion performance for a high Mach upper stage. He further 
assumes a constant pressure In the burned stream which allowed a closed 
form integration of the equations (making his method similar to a control 
volume approach). He states that a limit on the amount of heat that can 
realistically be added is that the flow remain supersonic. Further 
reasoning behind this restriction was not given. 

3) Control volume methods which Ignore the detailed interactions 
within the heat addition zone, generally requiring Information only 
at the control surfaces. No difficulty arises mathematically with 
subsonic flow, but assumptions regarding the outflow conditions must 
be made carefully, since any subsonic region Is elliptic In nature. 
The control surfaces generally Include inflow and outflow boundaries 
joined by two lateral control surfaces through which no flow passes. 
One of the lateral boundaries Is the surface to be pressurized, 
either a solid surface or wake, the other Is the boundary between 
heated and unheated flow. All Injection, mixing, and combustion 
occurs within the control volume. Often, the entire control volume 
Is assumed to be at constant pressure eliminating pressure-area 



18 



terms which can be difficult to evaluate. 

Marino'' used a constant pressure control volume approach to calculate the 
side force specific Impulse of external burning on a flat plate for 
control purposes. The minimum Nach number considered was two, and since 
the fuel considered had a heating value of 18000 btu/lb, a subsonic exit 
condition would probably not occur, and was not discussed. 

Harvey"'*^ et. al. used an annular control volume formulation for external 
burning adjacent to wake flow. In this study, the shape of the control 
volume was based on shadowgraphs of an external burning experiment and an 
approximate method of characteristics technique for axisymmetric flow was 
used to calculate the pressure on the outer control surface based on It's 
angle with respect to the freestream. 

In reference 2, Billig presents a two-dimensional constant pressure 
control volume approach applicable to high Mach external burning 
propulsion. He presents experimental data which support the constant 
pressure assumption. Shock-expansion theory was used to determine the 
control volume pressure based on the angle of the outer control surface. 

Another method used by many authors and summarized In reference 2, is the 
constant-area approach or planar heat addition model. An Infinitely fast 
heat release rate Is assumed such that the heat release takes place In an 
Infinitely thin region and therefore at constant area. One-dimensional 
relations then apply across the thin control volume bounding the heater. 



19 

Normal or oblique heater planes can be treated in combination with normal 
and oblique shocks to build up the flowfield. 

Transonic freestream conditions combined with the high heat of combustion 
of hydrogen will result in subsonic flow. For this reason, the control 
volume method was chosen as being the most applicable for the present 
study. Another more subtle advantage 1$ that the outflow pressure In the 
elliptic region can be specified, where this would generally be impossible 
in a one-dimensional marching technique, without some type of Iterative 
procedure. The present formulation differs from that of previous authors 
in that a constant pressure assumption is not made. The present analysis 
allows for the outflow pressure to equal the freestream static pressure, 
yet does not prohibit pressure excursions within the control volume which 
yield a net thrust or drag. This seems to be an important consideration 
since by it's elliptic nature, the subsonic plume extending past the 
outflow plane is influenced by the pressure downstream which quickly 
returns to freestream behind the vehicle. 

In the development to follow, only the axial or thrust force will be 
considered. A beneficial normal force, proportional to the axial force is 
also generated which counteracts the high pressure forward of the vehicle 
center of gravity on the forebody (or Inlet compression surface). The 
benefit of this normal force (which may be a number of times larger than 
the axial force) cannot be characterized as easily, but it has the 
synergistic effect of reducing drag by reducing the vehicle wing loading, 
and required pitching moment trim. The determination of the normal force 



20 



is an obvious extension to the control volume analysis once the nozzle 
chordal angle Is specified, and it must be considered in vehicle closure 
studies, when comparing external burning to other propulsion augmentation 
options. 



A simple planar expansion ramp geometry is used to model the vehicle base. 
With some imagination, this can be thought of as a simplified 
representation of the vehicle afterbody and nozzle system where the nozzle 
cowl flap and the main engine exhaust flow outer shear layer comprise a 
solid surface upon which external burning acts. The angle of this control 
surface and its' projected base area would be functions of the vehicle 
afterbody and nozzle geometry as well as the main engine nozzle pressure 
ratio. Implicit in this thinking is that the engine exhaust stream 
transmits the local pressure on the shear layer directly to the' vehicle 
afterbody. 

An important initial step in any control volume analysis is the prudent 
choice of problem boundaries. Good choices include surfaces through which 
mass does not pass and surfaces through which mass passes at right angles. 
All boundaries in the subsequent development fall into one of these 
categories. Figure 2-1 depicts the control volume nomenclature used. At 
station zero a uniform stream of air flows into the control volume at 
freestream conditions. The stream is fueled by injecting gaseous hydrogen 



21 
normal to the freestream through a row of sonic orifices. This 
specification of the Injection method is not essential to obtain Initial 
results, but is included so that fuel •omentum nay be taken into account. 
Conditions at the outflow plane or station two are also taken as uniform 
with velocity parallel to the freestream. The expansion ramp or vehicle 
base on which the change in force will be evaluated comprises the upper 
control surface. Completing the control volume is the streamline bounding 
the external burning plume, emanating from a point at station zero above 
which all of the fuel Is confined. Integral forms of the continuity, 
momentum and energy equations can now be applied to the control volume and 
with some additional assumptions will result in a system of four equations 
which can be solved for a choice of four dependent variables. 

The applicable form of the Integral momentum equation for steady flow with 
no body or viscous forces is as follows: 

j (pV'ds) V * fp ds ' [2-1] 

Equation 2-1 is split into x and y components, and the integrals are 
evaluated for each control surface. Beginning with the x component, the 
Inflow and outflow surfaces are easily evaluated with the assumption of 
uniform, parallel flow, and yield the following terms: 

inflow: -A.Uo - Poyo [2-2] 



22 



outflow: (Jh^*ibf) u^ * P^y^ 12-3] 

At the upper boundary or wall surface, only a pressure integral exists and 
is written in terms of the axial thrust coefficient defined as follows: 



C - - JSU [2-4] 



The minus sign preceeding this equation is required so that wall pressures 
above freestream static pressure result in positive thrust (note that the 
area increment vector ds points out of the control volume). Using this 
definition, terms of the x-component of the momentum equation for the wall 
surface become: 

wall surface: 'C^OoVt ' Poyt [2-5] 

On the bounding streamline or lower control surface, there is no momentum 
flux and linear theory is used to evaluate the pressure integral. Simply 
stated, the local pressure coefficient on the streamline is assumed to be 
a function of the local deflection angle. Assuming small angles the 
linear theory relation is as follows: 



23 



C, . - Is:^ -_i^ [2-6] 



"• ^0 ^i^ 



The minus sign is required so that deflections away from the vehicle axis 
result in positive values of Cp. It Is further assumed that the streamline 
returns to the freestream direction at station 2 so that the outflow and 
inflow pressures are equal. Under these assumptions, the x-component of 
the pressure integral on the streamline becomes: 



/ 




12-7] 



The second term in the Integrand cannot be evaluated unless the variation 
of dy/dx along the streamline is known. This term, which is the pressure 
increment above freestream times ah area Increment Involves the slope 
squared and always acts to reduce the thrust coefficient. Since linear 
theory already restricts the analysis to small deflection angles, it could 
be neglected which would be tantamount to assuming that freestream 
pressure acts on the streamline control surface. A more conservative 
approach is to account for the term at least approximately by assuming a 
streamline shape. In practice, the shape would depend on the axial heat 
addition distribution which is beyond the scope of this simple analysis. 
The assumption used herein Is that the slope is constant and equals the 
total change in elevation of the streamline divided by the ramp length L. 



24 



The first term In equation 2-7 Involves the Integral of the slope and Is 
evaluated exactly as freestream pressure times the change In elevation 
along the streamline. The resulting terms of the x-momentum equation on 
the streamline are as follows: 






Summing the terms In 2-2, 2-3, 2-5, and 2-8, the final x-momentum equation 
becomes : 



[m-m-v%^ms '-'' 



The second term Is the streamline linear theory approximation and Is 
negligible for low deflection angles and thrust coefficients. Note that 
this is where the effect of the ramp angle appears. From this equation it 
can be seen that for thrust coefficients near zero (base drag eliminated) 
the inflow and outflow velocities are nearly equal, only differing by a 
factor Involving the fuel-air ratio. The outflow temperature following 
hydrogen-air combustion can be almost an order of magnitude greater than 
the Inflow, resulting in a factor of three Increase in the speed of sound. 
The outflow will therefore be subsonic for the range of freestream Hach 
numbers of Interest here. 



25 
Evaluating the y-component of tnomentum on all control surfaces results in 
equation 2-10: 



(AV) , « - (PA) t' j P^ *■ f P^dx [2-10] 



Here it has been assumed that the fuel is injected normal to the 
freestream. The integrals are evaluated in a manner analagous to those of 
the x-momentum equation with the additional assumption that the wall 
surface is straight (dy/dx is constant). The final form of the y-momentum 
equation is as follows where d* is the diameter of the choked orifices, and 
S is the spacing between orifices: 



fell Mt^] - - 1 --Mnf}j] 



[2-11] 



The second term represents the fuel momentum and acts to reduce thrust. 
In spite of it's complexity, this term Is negligible compared to the 
Inflow momentum and can be Ignored. 

The continuity equation can be written simply as a statement of mass 
conservation in the control volume: 



26 



A. * ifjf - jhj [2-12] 

Applying the equation of state for a thermally perfect gas it the Inflow 
and outflow stations, and recalling that the Inflow and outflow pressures 
are equal, results in a relation for the overall control volume area 
ratio: 






To close the system of equations, information about the thermodynamic 
state of the outflow is needed. This is provided by the energy equation: 

fpV'ds + fp (e+-y ) V-ds « [2-14] 

Only the inflow and outflow planes, and the normal fuel Injection need to 
be considered here since the dot product of velocity and area Is zero 
everywhere else. Equation 2-15 is the energy balance used. 

This equation is evaluated by assuming that combustion at a given fuel-air 



\ 



27 
ratio Is complete at station 2 and that the combustion products are In 
equilibrium at freestream static pressure. Ten species are considered In 
this calculation which Is outlined In appendix A. The outflow gas 
constant needed In the continuity equation is a by-product of the 
equilibrium energy balance. 

Equations 2-9,- 2-11, 2-13, and 2-15 are four equations which can be used 
to solve for four unknowns. In general, the control volume Inflow 
conditions are specified, as well as the Inflow stream height and fuel-air 
ratio. The conservation equations can then be used to determine the 
control volume area ratio y^^y^, velocity ratio Uj/Uj, temperature ratio 
Tj/To and finally, the thrust coefficient C^. Some variations of this 
basic equation set will now be described. 



Three-Dimensional Relief Approximation 

A non-zero thrust coefficient Implies pressures different from freestream 
within the control volume which would give rise to a transverse flow. To 
account for this three-dimensional relieving effect which would tend to 
lower the magnitude of the thrust coefficient, some additional modeling Is 
introduced which allows for changes In the control volume width from 
station to station 2. The main assumption here is that all three 
"sides* (stream surfaces) of the control volume deflect equally. The 
change in the formulation arises in the x and y-momentum equations where 
the streamline slope is reduced since the cross-sectional area of the 



28 



control volume at station 2 is now accommodated by equal deflections of 
all three stream surfaces. Similar to the two-dimensional form (2-7), the 
x-component of the pressure integral on the stream surfaces is: 



0.-/ 





(f) 



Po - 20o-^ I --^ * w2^]dx [2-16] 



The dA/dx term is the total cross-sectional area change, and dy/dx is now 
the three-dimensional slope of all three stream surfaces. As in the two- 
dimensional case, this slope is assumed to be constant and equal to the 
total deflection divided by the base length. The final Hhree- 
dimensional" form of the x-momentum equation becomes: 



-#:lK'K)-l-#(-f:H)) '^ 



17] 



The three dimensional stream surface deflection is a function of the 
control volume area ratio k^/^, the Inflow stream height y^/y^^, the base 
aspect ratio w/y^, and the ramp angle L/y^. Evaluation of this term is 
purely geometric and is reduced to the quadratic equation below. 



29 



'■<Al"f:-ife)l 
=•(^■•(#-51 



[2-18] 



It should be noted that some small pressure-area terms have been neglected 
in this three-dimensional model since the control volume no longer 
conforms exactly to the edges of the ramp surface. Since linear theory 
already restricts angles to small values, inclusion of these small 
"wedges" is unneccessary. 

The three-dimensional y-momentum equation is similar to the two- 
dimensional form (equation 2-11) except that the 3-D streamline deflection 
is now used: 






The continuity and energy equations are unchanged, with y^/yo interpreted 
as the cross-sectional area change of the control volume from inflow to 
outflow. 



30 



Equations for a Perfect Gas 

The energy equation can be greatly simplified by neglecting the addition 
of fuel altogether and assuming that energy Is simply added to a perfect 
gas air stream. The resulting equation (2-20) will be useful in a 
subsequent section when comparing results from a two-dimensional perfect 
gas Euler analysis. 



^ - (Y.-1)W§ 
■*o 



(uo/^c) (y 



^■0B] '-' 



The energy added per unit mass of air flowing Into the control volume (q) 
Is assumed equal to the product of fuel-air ratio and the lower heating 
value of the fuel. Corresponding simplifications to the continuity and 
momentum equations are readily made by assuming a fuel mass flow of zero 
and that the outflow and inflow gas constants are identical. If the two- 
dimensional forms of the x and y momentum equations are used (2-9 and 2- 
11), and the second term in equation 2-11 Is neglected, the equation set 
can be manipulated Into a quadratic In Uj/Ug. 



Equations At Zero Drag 

At zero drag, three-dimensional effects are negligible, so the two- 
dimensional equations are used. Further, the term involving the slope 



31 
squared In the x-momentum equation (2-7) can be neglected. The fuel 
nomentum term In the y-momentum equation Is Ignored so that answers are 
not specific to the normal Injection case. Now, setting the thrust 
coefficient to zero results In the following forms of the x-momentum, and 
y-momentum equations. 



"2 



"" (^-^'l 



[2-21] 



y** (yz .A 12-22] 



(S-'l 



The continuity and energy equations are unchanged at zero drag, 



Performance Parameter Definitions 

A figure of merit for external burning Is needed so that It's performance 
can be compared to that of other forms of propulsion. An obvious choice 
would be the specific Impulse based on the force generated by external 
burning: 



7- „ AXIAL FORCE INCREAS E 

^Bp -^^ [2-23] 



32 



In terms of the external burning parameters used In the preceeding 
development, this equation becomes: 



j„ « w " ^1 Ub,-Bec/2b ) 

(Mj!ll\Iic\ ^-"^^ ^^^^-'^-^ [2-24] 



Where C° Is the ramp surface force coefficient without external burning 
and Is defined exactly as the thrust coefficient was In equation 2-4. 
Another definition, which does not involve the fuel off thrust coefficient 
Is obtained by assuming that the pressure on the wall with no external 
burning Is zero. The resulting "total specific Impulse" can be written as 
f ol 1 ows : 






This definition results In high Impulse values, since it Is based on the 
total force Instead of the external burning force Increment, but can be 
computed without knowledge of the drag coefficient. The total specific 
Impulse Is the sum of the external burning impulse given by equation 2-24 
and an Impulse attributed to the pressure on the ramp without external 
burning. It cannot be directly compared to the specific Impulse of other 
propulsion systems, but is useful for examining trends. 



33 
At zero thrust coefficient, a •normalized" specific Impulse 1$ obtained 
from equation 2-24. 



This equation illustrates the fact that external burning performance is 
directly proportional to the severity of the base drag problem. 



Results 

The zero-drag form of the equations will be examined first to determine 
the fuel flow and inflow stream height required to eliminate base drag. 
If either of these parameters appear to be unreasonably high, the utility 
of the concept would be in question. The zero drag y-momentum equation 
(eq. 2-22) states that the Inflow stream height depends only on the 
control volume area ratio. Since this stream must be fueled by a fuel 
injection system in any practical application, a low value is desirable 
which translates into a high value for the control volume area ratio. As 
shown by equation 2-13, the area ratio Is mainly a function of the fuel - 
air ratio chosen since at zero drag, the Inflow and outflow velocity ratio 
Is nearly one. Both the temperature and gas constant ratios increase with 
Increasing fuel -air ratio until the maximum equilibrium temperature Is 
reached at a fuel -air equivalence ratio slightly greater than one. 



34 



Further Increases In the equivalence ratio result In iiuch lesser Increases 
In area ratio as the now decreasing equilibrium temperature compensates 
for the gas constant and aass addition effects. The equilibrium 
temperature ratio 1$ affected to a lesser extent by altitude, as the 
temperature ratio increases with decreasing Inflow temperature, the 
effect of pressure on the equilibrium calculation is negligible at the 
altitudes considered for transonic flight. 

The variation of required Inflow stream height at zero drag with fuel 
equivalence ratio Is shown In figure 2-2a over a range of transonic flight 
Mach numbers on a 1000 psfa dynamic pressure trajectory. Note that since 
the linear theory terms were Ignored In the zero drag equations they can 
be evaluated below Hach one. The benefit of increasing equivalence ratio 
is reduced for equivalence ratios greater than one. The curves flatten 
out at Mach 1.8 as the vehicle climbs into the tropopause and the inflow 
temperature becomes constant. This is the only effect of trajectory on 
the inflow stream height; different trajectories would simply cause this 
flattening to begin at a different Nach number. For a stoichiometric, or 
fuel rich system, the required stream height is about six to ten percent 
of the base height over the. entire Mach number range. 

The Inflow stream height and freestream conditions fix the air flowrate 
into the control volume, so specifying the fuel-air ratio determines the 
fuel flowrate required. Figure 2-2b shows the required fuel flows at zero 
drag corresponding to the conditions of figure 2-2a. For equivalence 
ratios less than one, the increase In fuel flow with fuel -air ratio is 



35 
compensated by the reduction In Inflow stream height. Thus the curves for 
equivalence ratios from .5 to 1.0 are nearly coincident. On the fuel-rich 
side however, the fuel flow does Increase with equivalence ratio since the 
reduction In inflow stream height Is relatively small. Unlike the Inflow 
stream height, the fuel flowrate Is a strong function of altitude being 
roughly proportional to the freestream dynamic pressure. Along the 1000 
lb/ft* trajectory, the required hydrogen flowrate ranges from about .05 to 
.2 lb/sec per ft^ of base area for stoichiometric or fuel lean equivalence 
ratios. 

So far, the desire for low Inflow stream height requires the highest 
equivalence ratio possible, tempered by consideration of the fuel flow 
which Increases sharply for equivalence ratios greater than one. The 
penalty for high fuel flow Is shown In figure 2-2c using the "normalized" 
specific impulse given by equation 2-26. The impulse values decrease with 
increasing equivalence ratio, but there is relatively little loss in 
performance for equivalence ratios up to one. Performance degrades 
quickly however with further Increases in equivalence ratio. The specific- 
impulse is nearly invariant with trajectory, since the fuel flow Increases 
proportionately with freestream dynamic pressure, and the ratio of these 
two appears In equation 2-26; I.e. for a given drag coeficient, the drag 
force and fuel flow are proportional to dynamic pressure. The increase in 
specific Impulse with Nach number is due to the normalization used and 
would only occur if the drag coefficient were constant over the Nach 
number range. To determine the actual I^ due to external burning, the 
base drag of the vehicle without external burning must be known. The 



36 



determination of a base drag coefficient is a complex problem even for 

simple projectile shapes, depending on nany different parameters such as 

Reynold's number, Mach number, approach boundary layer thickness and 

boattail angle. The situation herein is further complicated by the nain 

engine exhaust which has already been simplified. Reference 1 contains a 

vast number of correlations and nodels from which an overall flavor of the 

base drag problem can be obtained. To pick a single drag coefficient 

applicable over the range of flight conditions would be a gross 

oversimplification, however for the present discussion, a value of order - 

.25 puts a lower bound on the specific impulse, reducing the normalized 

values by a factor of four. Even at this conservative level of base drag, 

the I^ at stoichiometric conditions ranges from 1000 to 4000 seconds which 

exceeds that of a rocket (400 sec) and is competetive with a turbojet 

installation. Added benefits of an external burning system are its light 

weight and relative simplicity. 

The results at zero drag indicate that the external burning system should 
be designed to operate at or near stoichiometric conditions. A fuel -lean 
approach results in slightly lower fuel flows, and higher performance, but 
would Involve distributing less fuel over a larger cross-sectional area. 
From the practical standpoints of fuel injection and flame stability to be 
discussed In a subsequent section, equiva.lence ratios near one are 
preferred. 



\ 



37 
Fuel In.lectioh Considerations 

Given the required fuel flowrate and Inflow air stream height, the fuel 
Injection scheme can be examined In mre detail. A transverse row of 
sonic orifices Injecting gaseous hydrogen fuel normal to the freestream 
will be considered. More imaginitive ways of fueling the stream such as 
spraybars, vortex mixing, etc. could be considered, but wall Injection can 
be modeled in a relatively straightforward manner and provides a good 
point of departure for more elaborate schemes. Upon injection from a 
sonic orifice normal to the freestream, the fuel jet interacts with the 
oncoming freestream air and is bent downstream in a relatively well- 
understood inviscid process known as "jet penetration"*^*". The 
"trajectory" of the fuel jet depends largely on the momentum of the two 
streams. If the freestream momentum is high compared to that of the jet, 
the fuel is quickly directed downstream and may only penetrate a few 
orifice diameters into the freestream. This inviscid interaction which 
results in most of the penetration occurs within about 20 orifice 
diameters downstream of injection, after which the viscous mixing process 
transports the fuel further into the freestream at a much slower rate. 



Jet Penetration Model and Equivalence Ratio Approximation 

For round, underexpanded, sonic orifices the jet penetration depends on a 
number of parameters including the orifice diameter, fuel and freestream 
conditions, and distance downstream of the orifice at which the 



38 



penetration Is measured. The jet penetration was found to be almost 
Invariant with gas molecular weight and total temperature in reference 48. 
Povinelli et.al." presents a correlation of experimental data which is 
useful for the present application, giving an equation that describes the 
outer boundary of the injectant defined as a 1/2% concentration by volume. 
Four correlating parameters were used, namely the jet penetration in 
orifice diameters y^/d*, the distance downstream of the orifice centerline 
x/d*, the orifice exit.Mach number, and the jet total pressure divided by 
the "effective back pressure". The effective back pressure Idea was 
introduced by Orth, et.al.*^ as a way of extending results for Injection 
Into a quiescent medium to injection into a supersonic cross-flow. The 
effective back pressure is taken to be 2/3 of the stagnation pressure 
behind a normal shock at the freestream Mach number. For sonic orifices 
the correlation equation reduces to equation 2-27 which will be used 
herein to describe jet penetration. 



P^ - (2/3) Pt.1,.^ 



[2-27] 



The fuel -air equivalence ratio and the control volume Inflow stream height 
are two key parameters which will now be related to the jet penetration. 
The amounts of fuel and air Involved in the external burning process must 
be known to arrive at an equivalence ratio. The fuel flowrate through a 
choked orifice of diameter d* is described by equation 2-28: 



39 
ift^= .1403 C^^JE|:! 12-28] 

The total fuel flowrate Is then determined by the number of orifices In 
the row. Estimating the amount of air Involved In the unconflned stream 
Is not as straightforward and nust be approximated. The central 
assumption used herein Is that the inflow stream height y^ is equal to the 
jet penetration y^. The air flow is then taken as that which flows at 
freestream conditions through the inflow plane. Thus each orifice fuels 
a cross-section of the inflow air which is y^ high and S wide where S is 
the spacing between the orifices. This airflow is given by equation 2-29. 






A. = .532-^1^1 y_S [2-29] 



yf^o 



Combining equations 2-28 and 2-29, the fue1-air equivalence ratio based on 
"penetration times spacing" becomes: 






*_„ - 5.213 C^ X «^.v/ v .s:^ i2_jo jg-SO] 



40 



The penetration times spacing equivalence ratio 1$ obviously of a global 
nature and Is most rational if the orifice spacing and the jet penetration 
are of nearly the same uagnitude*. A parameter which gives a degree of 
freedom to this calculation is the distance downstream (x/d*) at which the 
penetration is taken In equation 2-27. The 1/2% concentration 
■trajectory" given by equation 2-27 1$ plotted in figure 2-3, for various 
values of the jet pressure ratio. For x/d* values greater than about 20. 
the calculated equivalence ratio will not be a strong function of x/d* due 
to It's .281 exponent. A value of 30 is used in most subsequent 
calculations. 

The design problem is then one of finding a combination of orifice 
diameter, spacing, and fuel conditions, which results in the desired 
equivalence ratio and inflow stream height (jet penetration) at the given 
flight condition. 



Fuel Inje ction Desion Example 

Equation 2-30 can be rearranged into equation 2-31 where a dimensionless 
grouping of fuel injection parameters F, is written as a function of 
freestream conditions and the desired fuel -air equivalence ratio. 



In reference 43, the concentration profiles downstream of the 
orifice are shown to develop into a "kidney shape" of total width roughly 
equal to the height. 



41 



teP' , -"#"^r"* 



n ■ 'r-li: ■ .■'".„../ , U-311 



[!(#) (« M 



Replacing the Jet penetration y^ with the Inflow stream height y^ In 
equation 2-27 results in a second dlmenslonless group Fj which also relates 
fuel Injection parameters to freestream conditions and the desired inflow 
stream height. 



F^ - 



Kite)-"' ■ -M'^n-^-r ■-> 



Now, if a design flight condition and equivalence ratio is chosen, the 
required inflow stream height from the zero-drag equations (figure 2-2) is 
known and the fuel pressure, temperature, and orifice geometry can be 
traded using equations 2-31, and 2-32. For the following example, the 
Hach 1.4, 1000 psfa dynamic pressure (26700 ft. altitude) flight condition 
was chosen. An equivalence ratio of one Is used since as discussed 
previously, this provides a good compromise between specific Impulse 
performance and operability In terms of fuel Injection and flame 
stability. This design point results In values for F^ and Fj of .4588 and 
.0239 respectively. Specifying a fuel pressure of 300 psia, results in an 
orifice diameter of .005824 base heights from equation 2-32. The orifice 
spacing ratio S/d* can now be obtained from equation 2-31 by specifying a 
fuel temperature and flow coefficient. Using a fuel temperature of 518 



42 



degrees Rankine and a flow coefficient of 0.9, the spacing ratio is 9.485. 
At the Mach 1.4, 26700 ft. flight condition, this orifice design will 
natch the jet penetration and fuel flow such that the Inflow stream height 
and equivalence ratio are the required values for zero drag. Similarly, 
the specific Impulse performance at this condition will be the zero drag 
value given in figure 2-2c (8679 times C^"). To match the zero drag fuel 
flow and jet penetration over the entire trajectory requires a unique 
schedule of fuel temperature and pressure. For the example design given, 
this schedule appears In figure 2-4. It Is unlikely that this variation 
of fuel conditions would exist at any one point In the fuel system, where 
the external burning fuel could be extracted. To follow the variation 
shown in pressure and temperature would burden the relatively simple 
external burning sytem with auxiliary pumps, heat exchangers, etc. making 
it much less attractive. 



Performance at Constant Fuel Conditions 

Fortunately, the penalty for off-design operation Is not substantial as 
can be seen In figure 2-5 where the example orifice pattern Is operated at 
the design fuel conditions (300 psia, 518 degrees Rankine) over the entire 
trajectory. Now, the resulting equivalence ratio and stream height will 
not necessarily result in zero thrust coefficient and the general form of 
the control volume equations must be used. In figure 2-5a, the inflow 
stream height which is simply the jet penetration at constant fuel 
conditions is plotted. The zero drag, stoichiometric design result is 



43 
also shown for comparison and obviously Intersects the other curve at the 
Mach 1.4 design point. The jet penetration varies only about 10% over the 
entire envelope, as expected since the Jet •omentum Is constant and the 
freestream Momentum Is nearly so on a constant dynamic pressure 
trajectory. This results In the continuously Increasing equivalence ratio 
shown in figure 2-5b since the fuel flow Is constant, and the airflow 
decreases along the trajectory. 

With the equivalence ratio and Inflow stream height known, the control 
volume equations are solved for the non-zero thrust coefficient. First 
however, the tangent of the base angle y^L must be specified, and If the 
three-dimensional expansion assumption Is used, the aspect ratio w/y^ Is 
also needed. The thrust coefficient obtained by assuming a three- 
dimensional expansion and equilibrium chemistry Is plotted in figure 2-5c 
along with thrust coefficients for a 2-d expansion, and a perfect gas 2-d 
expansion. To give the plot a sense of scale, It may be noted that the 
drag coefficient for a 15 degree Prandtl -Meyer expansion Is -.630 at Mach 
1.1 and -.145 at Mach 2.6. This represents the worst case for the ramp 
without burning. In reality, three-dimensional effects and boundary layer 
separation would tend to make these values closer to zero. With respect 
to the Prandtl -Meyer expansion values, the thrust coefficient with 
external burning does not vary significantly from zero, which Is the 
reason that the 2-d and 3-d curves are nearly coincident. The perfect gas 
assumption results In high temperatures and high area ratios causing 
slightly higher thrust. This is compensated for somewhat by neglecting 
the fuel mass addition which is included In the real gas calculation. 



44 



From the standpoint of thrust » the consequences of simply using constant 
fuel conditions are negligible for a system designed at an intermediate 
flight condition along the trajectory. 

From figure 2-5b, using constant fuel conditions results in Increasing 
equivalence ratio. For constant thrust, this translates into a 
continuously decreasing specific impulse as shown in figure 2-5d. The 
specific impulse as defined by equation 2-24 is plotted for the 3-d thrust 
coefficient of figure 2-5c assuming a Prandtl -Meyer expansion for the fuel 
off thrust. The zero thrust curve is also shown for comparison. The I 
is greater than the zero drag value for negative thrust coefficients and 
less than the zero drag value for positive thrust coefficients. For 
example, at Mach 1.2 the zero drag I^ is 3757 seconds; compared to an I^ 
of 4373 seconds at a thrust coefficient of -.017 for the constant fuel 
conditions case. At Mach 2.0, The zero drag impulse is 2755, as compared 
to 1992 at a thrust coefficient of .014. The result of not adhering to a 
design point fuel schedule is thus slightly less thrust at a higher 
impulse or slightly more thrust at a reduced impulse. These I„ numbers 
are greater than what would be obtained in actual practice since the fuel 
off thrust coefficient would be somewhat higher. However even at half 
these impulse values the external burning system is competetive with 
turbojets given its light weight, simplicity, and the synergistic effect 
of the normal component of force which is not included in the performance 
assessment. 



45 
Control Volume Analysis Sumjtrv 

Application of the conservation equations to a control volume representing 
the external burning process results in a system of equations which 
characterizes performance and operablllty. A subset of these equations In 
which the thrust coefficient Is set to zero provides a zero drag fuel 
Injection orifice sizing criterion. Results Indicate that a 
sto 1 chjometr 1 c design strate g>L_proy1d(gs a good compromise , . between 
performance and op^abijlty. An Inflow stream height on the order of 10*1 
of the base height and a fuel flow of .1 to .2 pounds per second per \ 
square foot of base projected area are required to zero the thrust J 
coefficient alona_a_lBDiLpsfa_dyiLamlc_pces$ure_trajectory. This results 
In specific Impulse performance competetlve with other forms of 
alrbreathing propulsion. A single row of sonic orifices was sized to 
match the fuel flow and jet penetration for zero drag at a single flight 
condition. Using constant fuel pressure and temperature, the resulting 
orifice design worked_accep_tably— oveiLjthtLjBntire Mach number^range 
Indicating that modul ation of fuel ^ canditlons Ijunnecessarv. These 
encouraging Initial results warranted further analysis and experiment 
which is the subject of the following chapters. 



46 



CHAPTER III - EULER ANALYSIS 



Background 

The control volume analysis ensures conservation of nass, Mmentum and 
energy under the stated assumptions, but Is a "black box" approach. 
Internal details of the complex flowfleld need not be considered to 
evaluate the force Imparted to the wall surface. An Interesting 
Implication of the control volume analysis Is that the wall force does not 
depend on the axial distribution of heat addition, but only on the total 
energy added. Another feature of the flowfleld Is the small change In 
velocity of the external burning stream from Inflow to outflow for near- 
zero thrust coefficients (see equation 2-9). The plume Is driven to a 
subsonic condition by an increase In the speed of sound and not by 
deceleration. The transonic freestreara Is In general deflected by the 
plume, unless the stream expansion caused by heat addition exactly matches 
the wall geometry*. Deflection of the outer, transonic stream causes 
axial pressure gradients which are balanced by the subsonic plume and give 
rise to an Interaction between the hyperbolic outer stream and the 
elliptic plume. 



In reference 52, Broadbent presents an Interesting Inverse method 
for determining the heat addition distribution required for a desired wall 
pressure distribution and streamline pattern in an Invlscid two- 
dimensional flow. The method Is restricted to supersonic flow in which 
the shape of the streamlines can be estimated readily, and so has limited 
application to the present case. 



47 

The desire to better understand the features and Interactions of the 

Inviscid external burning flowfield and to verify In two-dimensions the 

control volume results, led to the development of an Euler analysis which 

Is the topic of this section, the Euler analysis also proved useful in 

evaluating the experimental results of chapter IV where the additional 

Interaction of the free-Jet boundary was examined. The Euler equations 

were chosen due to their relative simplicity and as the next step in 

complexity from the control volume analysis. A representative heat 

addition distribution is imposed on the flowfield through the energy 

equation and the equations are solved using a time-marching technique. 

Assuming the distribution of energy addition a priori may at first seem to 

be an oversimplification, but the alternative Is a viscous model of the 

complex mixing and chemical processes which are themselves subject to 

assumptions on turbulence and chemical reaction rates. A much finer grid 

and orders of magnitude greater run times are other obvious drawbacks to 

a Navier-Stokes approach. Using the Euler approach, the heat addition is 

based on available information such' as jet penetration and fuel flow and 

can be varied parametrically. Features of the flowfield and analysis are 

depicted schematically in figure 3-1. The geometry studied parallels that 

of the control volume analysis, being a straight ramp adjacent to which 

heat Is added so as to counteract the expansion and reduce the drag force. 

The heat addition region In general drives the supersonic inflow to a 

subsonic condition resulting In a mixed supersonic-subsonic outflow. The 

upper lateral boundary downstream of the ramp is treated in two different 

ways, as a solid wall parallel to the freestream, and with a second Inflow 

which simulates the flow over the upper surface of the vehicle, generating 



48 



a slip line between It and the external burning plume. In comparisons of 
the two methods to be presented in chapter 4, the plume was quickly 
deflected by the freestream inflow and the slip line and wall were nearly 
coincident, resulting in negligible differences in the ramp pressure 
distributions and drag force. The lower lateral boundary is treated as 
either a free boundary through which waves nay pass, or a free- Jet 
boundary which deflects, reflecting waves of the opposite family back into 
the flowfleld. The heat addition zone Is bounded by the wall and a 
streamline emanating from a specified point at the Inflow In the lateral 
direction, and axlally, by specified upstream and downstream locations x, 
and Xj. 



Develonment 
Euler Eouations In Conservation Form 

The equations of motion for an Invlscid, non-conducting gas without body 
forces were taken from reference 53. For the present case, the term 
representing the energy addition must be retained In the differential 
energy equation. The resulting equation set In conservation form and the 
non-dimensional Izatlon used is as follows: 



fM^f-^ 



49 
13-1) 



P 

pu 
pv 



«- 



pu 

pu^+P 

puv 



^- 



pv 







puv 
pv«+P 


ff- 






(B,^t*P) v] 




id 



Po 



e*" 



p*. 



Po<"o/^e) 



(UoV^c) 



^:' 



Po<"o/^c) 






Ufl 



(>•• 



^ 2 



V'mJL 



Po("o/^c) 



Following reference 53, a general grid transformation is applied and the 
equations are put back into conservation form. The resulting equation set 
in transformed coordinates contains the Jacobian and metrics of the 
transformation. 



et 8{ di] 



[3-2] 



J 









C- -iff 

u 



50 



The U, E, F, and Q vectors are as defined In equations 3-1. These 
equations are then solved on the transformed, uniform, rectangular grid. 
Algebraic grid generation was used with stretching functions taken from 
reference 53, used in both the x and y directions. 



Method of Solution 

The transformed equations were solved in finite-difference form using 
HacCormack's explicit, time-marching, predictor-corrector technique as 
presented in reference 53. A forward predictor, backward corrector 
differencing scheme was used for internal points, with appropriate 
switching at boundaries where an initial solution is needed to apply the 
boundary conditions. The flowfield was initialized to the inflow 
conditions and then marched in time using a time step determined by the 2- 
D Courant number: 






The flowfield was surveyed at each Iteration to determine the maximum 
allowable time step based on a constant Courant number. For many of the 
flowfields with heat addition and large density gradients a Courant number 
of 1/4 was needed to stabilize the solution. To determine convergence, 
the absolute value of the change in each of the U vector members (obtained 



51 
in the corrector step) was summed over the entire flowfield at each time 
step. These four values which represent the degree to which each of the 
four conservation equations are satisfied generally decreased by several 
orders of nagnitude, approaching steady-state values which were grid and 
problem dependent. 



Artificial Damping 

Damping was required to stabilize the solution in the vicinity of shock 
waves as well as near the boundary between heated and unheated regions. 
Common artificial viscosity models based on velocity gradient are 
sufficient for adiabatic flow, but for the present case, large gradients 
in density can occur across the heat addition boundary in the absence of 
a velocity gradient, rendering the artificial viscosity models 
ineffective. The method used was a variation on that of Rusanov as 
presented in reference 54. Terms involving spatial derivatives of the U 
vector members are added to the members of the E and F vectors in all four 
equations. This corresponds to adding an artificial viscosity, as well as 
a mass diffusion, and thermal conductivity. The dissipation terms modify 
the transformed E and F vectors in equations 3-2 as follows: 






[3-4] 



52 



where C^ and Cy are damping coefficients given by: 

Cj, ■ Ca(\u\*a)Ax 
Cy' C^(\v\*a)Ay 



C3-5] 



and C^ is an adjustable damping coefficient. This damping scheme was 
successful in smoothing oscillations near shocks as well as across heat 
addition boundaries. C^ values from .01 to .1 were used with the optimum 
value being problem dependent. 



Assignmen t of Heat Addition Distribution 

In defining the heat addition distribution, it is assumed that the inflow 
stream height and equivalence ratio are known. This determines the total 
heat added which is then distributed over the heat addition zone. The 
heat addition 2one is bounded laterally by the wall, and the streamline 
which emanates from a point defined by the height of the external burning 
stream at the inflow. The total energy input per unit time is obtained 
from the air flow and fuel-air ratio and is given by equation 3-6. 



53 
Where LHV Is the lower heating value of hydrogen and Is taken to be 52000 
BTU/lb,. This total energy input roust equal the Integral of the assumed 
distribution of heat addition per unit volume over the heat addition zone. 
After writing the air flow in terms of freestream conditions and the 
Inflow stream height y^, this equality witten In non-dimensional form 
becomes : 



1*4 ("o/^c) J UoAj'JJ J (p^\ ^iJ °\ii [3-7] 



The heat addition zone is defined by the beginning and end points of the 
expansion surface, and the upper and Tower lateral boundaries. The upper 
boundary is the wall, and the lower boundary is taken as the streamline 
starting at the inflow stream height y^ which changes as the solution^ 
marches in time. This equation is satisfied at each time step by tracking \ 
the bounding streamline and numerically integrating the heat addition I 
distribution. A coefficient which pre-multi plies the distribution 
function is then adjusted such that equation 3-7 is satisfied at all times 
as the solution converges and the bounding streamline moves. Note that 
the left hand side of the equality Is equal to the heat addition term In 
equation 2-20 which facilitates comparison between the Euler and control 
volume results. 



54 



Boundary Conditions 

The Inflow Is assigned uniform freestream conditions, and the entire 
flowfield Is Initialized to these conditions. At the outflow boundary, a 
zero axial gradient 1$ specified by overwriting the solution at the 
outflow plane with that from the last interior column for both supersonic 
and subsonic regions. 

The wall boundary Is treated using a method suggested In reference 55 
which Is applicable for both supersonic and subsonic flow. First, the 
solution at the wall Is obtained using backward differences. The velocity 
vector so obtained Is not In general tangent to the wall, I.e. a finite 
normal velocity exists. This normal velocity Is computed and a finite 
unsteady compression or expansion wave of the proper magnitude Is 
Introduced at each wall grid point such that the Induced velocity of the 
wave Is equal to and cancels the normal velocity. The condttlons 
downstream of the wave then correspond to the corrected state variables at 
the wall. 

The lower lateral boundary is treated using the method of characteristics 
extrapolation of reference 54 for supersonic points, and a simple 
extrapolation from the adjacent Interior point if subsonic flow exists 
downstream of strong shocks passing through the boundary. For the free- 
jet boundary model, extra grid Is added below the free-jet with a separate 
Inflow at the same static pressure, a specified total temperature, and a 
low subsonic Mach number. The free- jet slip line Is thus "captured" as 



55 
the solution develops in time. At the lower computational boundary, the 
velocity components are extrapolated from the adjacent Interior points, 
and the static pressure and total temperature are set to the Inflow 
values. 



fi£SUll£ 

Features of a 2-D inviscid external burning flowfield with three different 
distributions of heat addition imposed on it will be examined first and 
compared to control volume analysis results. Next, the effects of grid 
refinement and artificial damping on the solutions are examined. Finally, 
the 2-D inviscid and control volume results are compared over a range of 
Mach numbers. 



Prior to computing the relatively complex external burning flowfields, a 
number of test cases were run to verify that the program would properly 
solve a wedge-compression, a Prandtl -Heyer expansion, and a constant area 
heat-addition (Rayleigh) flow. These test cases are presented in appendix 
B. 



Effect of Heat Addition Distribution 



A 15" expansion at Mach 1.4 was chosen so that results may be directly 



56 



compared to the control volume analysis of section 2. In a11 three cases 

to be presented In this section, the 80 by 40 grid shown In figure 3-2 was 

used with a damping coefficient of .025. The grid density was biased 

toward the leading edge of the expansion to resolve the relatively small 

Inflow stream height, and the complex Interactions in this region. The 

total heat addition Is commensurate with that of the Mach 1.4 example fuel 

injector design given figure 2-7, i.e. an equivalence ratio of 1.00, and 

Inflow stream height (yf/yt) of .0865 are used In equation 3-7 to determine 

the total heat added. The heat addition zone was bounded by the beginning 

and end points of the expansion ramp In the axial direction, and by the 

wall and streamline In the transverse direction. The same total energy 

addition was distributed In three different ways within these boundaries. 

The first distribution Is simply a constant over the entire area as shown 

In figure 3-3. The streamlines of the converged solution appear In the 

figure and Indicate a delay In the expansion of the external burning plume 

which results in significant deflections in the freestream. The second 

distribution employed a Gaussian function in the axial direction to more 

closely approximate what may be expected in a real mixing and combustion 

situation. This distribution is depicted in figure 3-4a and causes an 

Initial compression in contrast to the constant heat addition case. The 

functional form used, shown in figure 3-4b Is maximum at the leading edge 

of the expansion, and decays to zero at the trailing edge. The third 

distribution shown In figure 3-5a is a variation on the second, where the 

Gaussian axial distribution is retained, and a parabolic variation In the 

transverse direction is added. The maximum Is placed at the midpoint 

between the wall and bounding streamline. At the wall and bounding 



57 
streamline, half the maximum value Is Imposed. The resulting streamline 
pattern Is very similar to that of the second case. 

Nach number contours for the three cases are shown In figures 3-6 through 
3-8 along with the corresponding wall Nach number and pressure coefficient 
distributions. For case 1 (the constant distribution) the freestream 
Initially expands to a higher Mach number and then recompresses through an 
oblique shock. Following an Initial expansion to Mach 1.7, a quasi- 
Rayleigh flow region (constant area heat addition) appears In the heated 
stream up to an axial station of about .2, at which point the wall Mach 
number Is rapidly reduced to a subsonic value of about .4 through what 
appears to be an extension of the freestream shock. An Interesting 
Interaction thus results where the shock pressure Jump Imposed on the 
freestream boundary of the heated region accompanies an abrupt transition 
to subsonic flow and a stream area increase In the plume, which In turn 
determines the strength of the freestream shock. The pressure coefficient 
distribution reflects the same phenomena, an initial expansion, a region 
of gradually Increasing pressure, and a rapid recompression. Following 
the recompression, the now subsonic plume transmits the pressure impressed 
on it by the deflecting supersonic stream directly to the wall. At the 
outflow plane, the freestream flow is again parallel to the inflow, and 
very near the inflow pressure. 

The 2-D perfect gas form of the control volume analysis described in 
chapter II gives a thrust coefficient value (as defined in equation 2-4) 
of .032, while integration of the 2-D Euler wall pressure distribution 



58 



yields a force coefficient of .028. The force incren»ent due to external 
burning is the appropriate parameter to compare, and for the 2-D inviscid 
case, a Prandtl -Heyer expansion 1$ used as the baseline. A 15* expansion 
at Hach 1.4 results In a force coefficient of -.388. The force Increment 
due to heat addition as predicted by the control volume analysis is thus 
.420 as compared to the 2-D Euler value of .416 which Is about IX lower. 
A summary of all 2-D Euler runs to be discussed In this section appears In 
table 3-1. 

The Hach number contours for the case 2 heat addition distribution 
(Gaussian in the axial direction) are shown In figure 3-7a. In contrast 
to case 1, more heat Is added at the corner and the heated stream is 
Immediately driven to a .6 Mach number. The freestream is Initially 
compressed through a shock which again coincides with the location of the 
supersonic-subsonic transition In the heated stream. The wall pressure 
then follows that Impressed on the plume by the freestream which gradually 
expands and recompresses, exiting at the Inflow pressure. Despite 
substantial differences in the flowfields and pressure distributions 
between this case and case 1, Integration of the wall pressures gives the 
same thrust coefficient of .028. 

The flowfield generated by the third heat addition distribution appears In 
figure 3-8. The parabolic transverse heat addition distribution obviously 
causes transverse Hach number gradients In the plume resulting In a 
curvature of the sonic line. The freestream flow is essentially Identical 
to that of case 2. The character of the wall Mach number distribution Is 



59 
also similar, becoming subsonic at about the same location, but with an 
Increase In the overall level. The wall pressure distribution is barely 
discernable from that of case 2 and results In a thrust coefficient of 
.030 which Is Identical to cases 1 and 2 for all practical purposes. 

The thrust coefficient is thus independent of the nanner In which heat Is 
distributed for the cases examined herein, and Hatches the value given by 
the control volume analysis. Good agreement with the control volume 
analysis Is to be expected however, since both methods satisfy the same 
set of conservation equations. As long as the 2-D Euler flowfleld does 
not severely violate any of the control volume assumptions such as linear 
theory on the bounding streamline, and parallel, uniform inflow and 
outflow, the results should be comparable. As discussed In the 
development of the control volume x-momentum equation (2-8), a variation 
In the axial distribution of heat would change the shape of the bounding 
streamline and the associated pressure-area Integral term. Since this 
term was relatively Insignificant, the streamline shape was approximated 
by a straight line, which eliminated all dependence on axial distribution 
from the control volume results. As evidenced by the 2-D Euler results, 
the shape of the bounding streamline is affected by changes In the heat 
addition distributions, but Is of little consequence In terms of the 
thrust coefficient. 

Other parameters which can be compared on a less exact basis are the 
control volume area ratio and outflow velocity. The control volume area 
ratio given by equation 2-13 Is 13.2. From the streamlines In figures 3-3 



60 



through 3-5 It Is apparent that the heated stream In the Euler solutions 
expands by about this amount. Equation 2-9 Indicates that the outflow 
velocity win be higher than inflow for positive thrust coefficients. For 
this particular case, an outflow to Inflow velocity ratio of 1.19 Is 
given. Velocity profiles for the Euler solutions at the ramp trailing 
edge station are plotted in figure 3-9 for all three heat addition 
distributions along with a line representing the control volume value and 
exit plane stream height. The profiles are not uniform, but do exhibit 
velocities higher than the Inflow velocity with a mean value near 1.19. 

The 2-D Euler results compare well both qualitatively and quantitatively 
to the control volume analysis despite non-uniform outflow, and non-linear 
shock waves on the plume boundary. The Independence of thrust coefficient 
to changes In heat addition distribution Is primarily an Invlscid 
phenomena. The sharp recompressions seen as the heated stream transitions 
to subsonic flow may Induce boundary layer separation, which would prevent 
high pressure on the wall surface. The Interaction between the heated and 
unheated streams which caused the sharp recompression In all three cases 
may be a limiting factor in actual practice. 



Effect of Artificial Damping 

Artlflcal damping was required to stabilize the solutions, and a question 
naturally arises as to the effect of the added damping terms which are 
related to viscous effects on the converged solutions. Only in very few 



61 
cases would a solution converge without a non-zero damping coefficient as 
defined above in equation 3-5. The results of the previous section were 
all run with a C^ value of .025. The case 2 heat addition above was chosen 
as the baseline, and the solution was repeated on an Identical grid with 
the damping coefficient halved, then doubled. The solution would not 
converge with zero damping. Nach number contours for the three cases are 
shown In figure 3-10. The roost obvious effects are an increase In the 
thickness of the plume boundary as damping Is Increased, and an increase 
in pre-shock oscillations at reduced damping. The wall pressure and Mach 
number distributions showed little effect of changes In damping. The 
thrust coefficients were also very similar being .034, and .029 for the 
minimum and maximum damping cases respectively. Overall, damping 
coefficients of this magnitude have only a superficial effect on the 
thrust coefficient. 



Effect of Grid Refinement 

All of the proceeding results were run on the 80 by 40 grid shown in 
figure 3-2. Increasing the grid density results in longer run times per 
time step, and requires more time steps to converge. It Is of Interest 
therefore to determine the minimum adequate grid density. In the 
transverse direction, there must be a sufficient number of nodes near the 
wall to resolve the heat addition distribution and bounding streamline for 
the heated stream, which for the previous cases is only .087 base heights 
wide at the Inflow plane. Also, the thickness of the plume boundary is a 



62 



number of grid spaclngs wide depending on the amount of damping used. 

This boundary will appear to be artificially thick on sparse grids 

although this does not seem to affect the thrust coefficient considerably. 

In the axial direction, sufficient grid Is required near the beginning of 

the expansion to resolve steep gradients caused by the wall angle and heat 

addition. The effect of grid density on the computed flowfield is seen in 

figure 3-11 where Mach number contours are plotted for 50 by 25, 80 by 40, 

(figure 3-2) and 100 by 50 grids. The damping coefficient of .025, and 

the grid distribution seen in figure 3-2 were held fixed. The shock wave 

in the freestream, and the plume boundary both appear to get thinner as 

grid density increases since they are spread over a fixed number of nodes. 

Wall pressure distributions shown in figure 3-12 show some differences at 

the expansion corner. The 50 by 25 grid does not resolve the initial 

expansion as well as the others, and this is reflected in the slightly 

higher thrust coefficient value seen in table 3-1. Also note that the 100 

by 50 grid yields a .414 change in thrust coefficient which is 1.4% lower 

than the control volume value. The 80 by 40 grid gives a .416 change in 

thrust coefficient which is comparable to the fine grid result and is 

considered adequate for this class of problems. 



Effect of Freestream Hach Number 

Euler results at selected points along a 1000 psfa trajectory were run 
with the 80 by 40 grid, .025 damping coefficient, and case 2 heat addition 
distribution. The total heat added is commensurate with the results in 



63 
figure 2-7 for the example fuel Injector geometry at constant fuel 
conditions. Figure 3-13 includes Nach number contours at four different 
freestream Mach numbers along the trajectory. The increase in the number 
of contour lines as Nach number Increases is caused by the contour 
Increment being held constant at .05. The most prominent effects of 
increasing freestream Mach number are the steepening of wave angles, and 
the coalescence of waves at the trailing edge of the ramp as the plume is 
turned back to the axial direction. Wall Nach number and pressure 
distributions appear in figures 3-14 and 3-15 and show that at Nach 2.4, 
the plume is actually slightly supersonic just upstream of the corner and 
a weak shock wave forms. A sharp reduction in Nach number occurs near the 
leading edge of the expansion in all cases, which is coincident with the 
recompression seen in the pressure distributions. The peak pressure moves 
downstream slightly as freestream Nach number Increases consistent with 
the sonic point in the plume. In figure 3-16, the thrust coefficient is 
plotted versus freestream Nach number along with the control volume 
results of figure 2-5c. The two methods of analysis agree well over the 
entire range, demonstrating the validity of the control volume approach 
which completely disregards the complex flowfield details brought out by 
the Euler analysis. 



Euler Analysis Summary 

The 2-D Euler equations with an external heat addition term retained in 
the energy equation were used to model drag reduction by external burning 



64 



on an expansion surface. The equations with artificial damping terms 
added, were solved using HacCorroack's time-marching, finite difference 
technique. Three different spatial distributions of a constant total heat 
addition were Imposed on a Mach 1.4 freestream flowfleld. The thrust on 
the expansion surface determined by numerical integration of the wall 
pressure distribution was Independent of the heat addition distribution 
and agreed well with the value given by the control volume analysis. Grid 
refinement and reduced artificial damping had the expected effect of 
reducing the thickness of the plume boundary and shock waves, but had 
little effect on the thrust coefficient. A sharp pressure rise in the 
heated stream at the sonic line was noted for all three distributions of 
heat addition. This is caused by an interaction of the elliptic region of 
the plume with the supersonic freestream and may be a limiting factor in 
external burning performance since viscous effects may cause the plume to 
separate from the wall surface before the maximum inviscid pressure is 
reached. Control volume results showed excellent agreement with the Euler 
analysis over the range of freestream Mach numbers from 1.2 to 2.4, which 
substantiates some of the simplifying assumptions used in the control 
volume analysis such as linear theory on the bounding streamline, and 
uniform outflow. 



65 
CHAPTER IV - EXPERIHENTAL PROGRAM 



Background 

The performance potential demonstrated by the control volume and Euler 
analysis warranted a series of preliminary proof of concept experiments 
that are the subject of this chapter. One of the objectives of the 
experimental program was to prove that the external burning of hydrogen 
would reduce drag on a simple expansion ramp at transonic flight 
conditions and to provide data for comparison to control volume analysis 
results. The external burning concept originally envisioned by the author 
employed the combination spraybar-flameholder pictured In figure 4-1. 
Recall the control volume analysis result from chapter II that the 
specific impulse performance was greatest at low equivalence ratio, and 
high Inflow stream height. Use of a spraybar to fuel the inflow Instead 
of relying solely on jet penetration Kirould provide for Independent control 
of the Inflow stream height without reliance on jet penetration from the 
wall, making a lower equivalence ratio, higher performance system more 
feasible. This arrangement would also provide a more uniform fuel 
distribution and a flameholding point out in the stream. The spraybar 
would be deployed transonically, and inject 2/3 of the total fuel normal 
to the freestream in both directions. The remainder of the fuel would be 
injected from the wall. 

An important precursor to an external burning test however is stable 



66 



combustion. Further, combustion must be Initiated at the proper location, 
and must be complete within an appropriate length. Heat release far 
behind the aircraft or test article would be of little value, in the 
reduction of drag. Hydrogen is not widely used as a heating or aviation 
fuel and does not have as substantial a flame stability database as 
hydrocarbon fuels. The low pressure and temperature, and high velocity 
conditions existing in the region where external burning is to be employed 
led to flame stability concerns. Another objective of the experimental 
program was thus to study the combustion characteristics of hydrogen and 
air in the external burning environment. 

The experiments were conducted in a 12" diameter, Mach 1.26 free- jet over 
a range of freestream pressures and temperatures. This particular Mach 
number was chosen due to the availability of the free- jet nozzle. The 
preliminary nature of this test program did not warrant fabrication of new 
nozzles. A complete description of the test facility appears . in a 
subsequent section. Given the 12" exit diameter in which to work, an 
approximately 1/50 scale expansion ramp model representing the entire aft- 
end of a single-stage-to-orbit vehicle was constructed complete with the 
spraybar. This model was to provide results for comparison to the control 
volume predictions. Preceeding tests of this model, a 1/5 scale section 
of the spraybar only was tested to obtain the flame stability information. 

The 1/50 scale expansion ramp model was plagued by problems with silver- 
soldered joints used to fabricate the tiny spraybar as the gaseous 
hydrogen fuel did not provide sufficient cooling. The model also caused 



67 
unsatisfactory operation of the free- jet due to high blockage. In 
hindsight, the low equivalence ratio spraybar design philosophy was not 
practical at least for the small scale Models tested. Flame stability 
considerations also tended toward a stoichiometric design for which jet 
penetration from the wall is adequate. Given this and other practical 
problems associated with the spraybar concept such as cooling, drag, and 
actuation, it was abandoned in favor of a wall Injection scheme. Re- 
designed expansion ramp models were subsequently fabricated and tested 
successfully. The spraybar geometry used in the flame stability tests was 
related to the abandoned concept, however it was sufficiently generic that 
the data obtained was used to verify and extend existing stability 
correlations to the sub-atmospheric, non pre-mixed, transonic conditions 
of present interest. 



Hvdroqen-Air Flameholdino Previous Worlc 

Flame stability, although not the primary focus of the present work, is 
crucial to the successful application of external burning. The intent of 
the following discussion is to review the flameholding process and define 
the envelope of flight conditions within which external combustion is 
feasible using the available data and correlations of previous workers. 
This provides the rationale for the preliminary flame stability tests in 
the present work. 

Flame stability is important in a wide variety of applications as 



68 



evidenced by a review of the flameholding literature which reveals a 
bewildering array of publications covering a wide variety of applications 
from heating systems to aircraft propulsion. Since the main Interest of 
the present work Is the practical application of this technology to the 
external burning problem, the discussion which follows focuses on 
appropriate empirical results in lieu of the complex details of 
flameholding physics. The objective is to understand the important 
parameters in the combustion stability limits of an unmixed hydrogen-air 
system at transonic altitude conditions. 

A simple observation made in 1955 by Zukoski and Marble^ provides a basis 
for the study of the flame stability afforded by a bluff-body or 
flameholder which generates a recirculating region of hot combustion 
products in its wake: 

"If V is the free stream velocity and L the length of the 
recirculation zone, then the ratio L/V is a measure of the time 
which the fresh gas spends in the neighborhood of the hot combustion 
products. In fact, the critical time t required for Ignition of the 
free stream Is given by 

^ " Vv;,.o. [4-1] 



where Vg ,, is the measured blowoff velocity.' 



69 
Experimental data is presented for a stoichiometric mixture of gasoline 
vapor and a number of different flameholder shapes which supports 
Zukoski's conclusion that the ignition delay time t is independent of 
gross fluid dynamic features and depends on the speed at which the 
chemical reactions takes place. 

"The similarity parameter describing the stabilization phenomenon 1$ 
thus Vt/L and in particular the blowoff condition is described by 
the value 



"fl.O. 



- 1 [4-2] 



The chemical and fluid dynamic effects are separated into t and L 
respectively. The usual dependence of blowoff velocity on the 
flameholder size follows immediately from the behavior of L and 
hence is determined by the fluid dynamics." 

The bulk of all data correlations and more sophisticated analytical models 
are rooted in this simple explanation of the flameholding process. 
Restricting attention to hydrogen and air, the first comprehensive 
experimental results found by this author was the work of Dezuba/^ In 
1954. Dezubay's experiment consisted of a 1.32" diameter glass tube in 
which disk flameholders of various diameters were concentrically strut- 
mounted. A pre-mixed stream of air and gaseous hydrogen flowed through 



70 



the glass tube with flame Initiated in the wake of the disks. Tests were 
carried out at static pressures of 2 to 6 psia and ambient total 
temperature giving a range of subsonic velocities. At a desired test 
condition, the fuel air ratio was varied to establish both lean and rich 
stability limits. The stability map so obtained is reproduced In figure 
4-2 where the fuel -air ratio at blowout is correlated with velocity, 
pressure and disk diameter. The ratio of velocity to diameter which 
appears is consistent with Zukoski's argument except for the .74 exponent 
on the disk diameter which Dezubay justifies on a theoretical basis. 
Dezubay's parameter also contains the static pressure which is of interest 
in relating these results to altitude conditions. As a flight vehicle 
climbs and accelerates through the transonic flight regime, the conditions 
for flameholding become more severe due to Increasing velocity and 
decreasing pressure. In figure 4-3, lines of constant Vo/Po'*^ which is the 
Dezubay correlating parameter for a 1" diameter disk are superimposed on 
a trajectory map to give a first indication of the operability of external 
burning. From figure 4-3 a value of 800 is the most severe condition at 
which flameholding is possible for slightly fuel-rich conditions. For the 
high altitude 500 psfa trajectory, this limit is reached at about Mach 
1.4, and at about Mach 2 for the low altitude 2000 psfa trajectory shown. 
Obviously these limits are extended by use of a larger flameholder, but a 
pressure limit of 2 psia (45000 ft.) should also be recognized below which 
combustion may not be feasible no matter what size flameholder is used. 
No experimental information on hydrogen-air combustion at pressures less 
than 2 psia was found except for some high altitude ramjet combustor data 
at 1.7 psia" but wery low velocity compared to the present situation. 



71 
The preceeding extrapolation of Oezubay's results to the present problem 
Is tenuous for a number of reasons. First, the correlation data were a11 
subsonic and the extension to supersonic flow Is not obvious. Secondly, 
the fuel and air w111 not be pre-mlxed at a carefully controlled ratio. 
The hydrogen will be Injected Into the air at some distance upstream of 
the flameholder. Finally, the flameholder used in practice will probably 
be two-dimensional and of nuch larger scale requiring a correlation 
between the recirculation zone lengths of circular and two-dimensional 
shapes. 

The work of Winterfeld^' provides some information on the Issues of 
supersonic velocity and non pre-roixed flow. Winterfeld's test apparatus 
consisted of rotationally symmetric flameholders mounted concentrically in 
a Laval nozzle with the flameholder base coincident with the nozzle exit. 
Initial tests were in a pre-mlxed hydrogen-air stream with a cylindrical 
flameholder of 6 mm diameter mounted concentrically in a nozzle of 
variable area ratio from 1.0 to 1.7 giving a range of flow velocities from 
subsonic to supersonic. Since all tests with this apparatus were, 
conducted at atmospheric pressure and with a constant flameholder 
diameter, results were presented in terms of the flow velocity and the 
"air ratio" which is the inverse of fuel-air equivalence ratio. The 
stability limit determined by Winterfeld is easily put in terms of 
Dezubay's stability parameter and appears with Dezubay's limit in figure 
4-4. Winterfeld's pre-mlxed result shows stability to lower fuel-air 
ratios than that of Dezubay, and to a flow velocity of 1770 feet per 
second. The maximum flow velocity and rich limits were not obtained due 



72 



to facility limitations. Oezubay's results were apparently unknown to 
Hinterfeld at the time and so the reasons for this discrepancy are not 
discussed. The obvious differences between the two experiments are the 
higher static pressure and supersonic flow used by Winterfeld, and 
differences in the flameholder geometry and mounting arrangement. The 
disks represent a larger effective blockage than a cylinder of equal 
diameter. Also, the cylindrical flameholder base was coincident with the 
nozzle exit while the disks were completely enclosed. Despite these 
differences, Hinterfeld's results provide confidence to apply Dezubay's 
correlation at supersonic speed. 

Another series of experiments reported by Winterfeld in reference 59 
examined the flameholding characteristics of hydrogen diffusion flames. 
The apparatus used for these experiments was similar to that discussed 
previously, only somewhat larger with all of the fuel injected by the 
flameholder itself. Flameholder diameters of 10, 20 and 30 mm were tested 
at a Mach number of roughly 2.1 in a Laval nozzle of 115 mm exit diameter 
(the different diameter flameholders resulted in a slight Mach number 
variation). Again, all tests were conducted at ambient total temperature, 
and roughly 1 atmosphere pressure. Hydrogen fuel was introduced near the 
base through an annular slot. Injection angles of 90° (perpendicular to 
the freestream), 45°, and 0° (parallel to the freestream injected directly 
into the base region) were investigated. The recirculation zone gasses 
were sampled with and without flame to infer the fuel-air ratio at 
flameout. The ratio of measured recirculation zone length to freestream 
velocity and the air ratio were used as correlating parameters. 



73 
Winterfeld reports that at the lean limit, the L/d of the recirculation 
zone for the cylindrical flaroeholder is 2 for both parallel and normal 
fuel injection. This allows the results to be cast once again in terms of 
the Oezubay parameter and included in figure 4-4. The lean stability 
limit for the diffusion flame is nearly coincident with Dezubay's pre- 
mixed data. 

Winterfeld's results, for pre-mixed and diffusion flames help to reinforce 
the extrapolation of Dezubay's correlation to the present conditions of 
figure 4-3. However, no hydrogen-air experimental data could be found to 
relate the characteristics of two-dimensional flameholders to the 
axi symmetric shapes discussed above. Some insight can be gained however 
by recalling the argument of Zukoski and Marble that the important 
parameter is the length of the recirculation zone, and that this is 
determined by the fluid dynamics. In reference 56 Zukoski and Marble 
provide data for a circular cylinder mounted transverse to the flow. The 
measured wake lengths correlated with the square root of the cylinder 
diameter for diameters from .19" to 1" and approach flow velocities from 
100 to 650 feet per second. For approach flow velocities in excess of 
about 300 feet per second, the value of L/D^^ was constant at 6.5. The 
curious square root dependence was attributed to boundary layer separation 
upstream of the diametral plane which is Reynolds number dependent, and 
blockage in the 4" high passage across which the cylinders were mounted. 
Another series of tests were run on an axisymmetric cone-cylinder and a 
two-dimensional wedge-plate of thickness equal to the cone-cylinder 
diameter. These results showed little Reynolds number dependence and 



74 



indicated that wake length was proportional to cylinder dian»eter or plate 
thickness, and that the measured L/0 of 2.3 was the same for both the 
axi symmetric cone-cylinder and the transversely mounted plate. These 
results suggest that a two-dimensional flameholder will have stability 
characteristics similar to a disk of diameter equal to the two-dimensional 
flameholder's height. 

All of the work discussed in the preceding paragraphs gives confidence 
that hydrogen-air flame stability will not preclude the successful 
application of external burning to the transonic drag problem. No one 
experiment however is directly applicable to the current situation of a 
two-dimensional, non pre-mixed, supersonic flow at sub-atmospheric 
pressure. It is for this reason that preliminary flame stability tests 
were conducted in the present test program. 



FaciHtv Description 

The experimental program was conducted in cell 4 of the Propulsion Systems 
Laboratory {PSL-4) at the NASA Lewis Research Center. PSL-4 is 25 foot 
diameter cylindrical altitude chamber used for full-scale direct-connect 
turbine engine testing. Large continuous flow compressors and exhausters, 
located in a separate central air equipment building adjacent to PSL, 
supply high pressure air and altitude exhaust capability to the facility 
making it ideal for operation of a free-jet. The high pressure air or 



75 
"combustion air" system which normally supplies air to the turbine engine 
test article has recently been modified" to provide even higher pressure 
and temperature conditions representative of a Mach 5 compressor face 
condition. This was accomplished by augmenting the original heat- 
exchanger type air heater with a hydrogen-air burner and oxygen make-up. 
Downstream of the burner, a 4 foot diameter, approximately 8 foot long 
water-cooled flow conditioning duct is used to reduce distortion upstream 
of the test article. The free-jet used for the present tests was bolted 
to the end flange of the flow conditioning duct. Figure 4-5, taken from 
reference 60 is a cut-away drawing showing the hypersonic modifications. 
The free-jet was installed in place of the "hot pipe" which was an initial 
facility calibration test article. Safety considerations dictated that 
approximately 75 pounds per second of secondary air be admitted into the 
altitude chamber at the forward bulkhead for the purpose of test cell 
cooling and dilution of unburned hydrogen. All freejet and secondary air 
was exhausted from the test cell through a 55" diameter duct, concentric 
with the free- jet near the aft end of the chamber. 

The desired transonic test conditions did not require operation of the 
hydrogen-air heater, although all of the free- jet air did pass through 
burners which placed an upper limit on the air flow of about 100 pounds 
per second. The original heat-exchanger was used during the present tests 
to elevate the free-jet air total temperature from nominally 540° R to 
about 1000° R during selected runs. The free- jet used was an existing 12" 
exit diameter, Mach 1.26, conical nozzle previously calibrated in the NASA 
Langley Mach 4 engine test facilit/\ It was instrumented with three 



76 



Static pressure taps equally spaced clrcumferentially at both the throat 
and exit. During normal operation, the free-jet supply pressure was set 
so that the average free- jet exit static pressure matched that of the 
altitude chamber. Although altitude chamber pressure and free- jet supply 
pressure were controlled separately, It was possible to naintain the 
matched condition at the free- jet exit to within .05 psia. The free- jet 
installation was capable of providing a range of test conditions from 4 to 
12 psia. 

Hydrogen fuel was supplied by high pressure tube trailers located outside 
the building. Fuel pressure at the free- jet was controllable from 50 to 
400 psia, at a nominal temperature of 520'*R. A fuel -rich hydrogen-air 
preburner was used during initial tests to preheat the fuel to 1500'*R at 
equivalence ratios of approximately 13. Operational problems with this 
system precluded it's use for the most of the test program. 



Soravbar Test Apparatus and Procedure 

The test articles were a 5/8" diameter section of spraybar-flameholder 
which spanned the entire 12" free- jet exit. Figure 4-6 is a photograph of 
one of the spraybar models mounted horizontally across the free- jet exit. 
The 5/8" diameter corresponded to approximately 1/5 scale based on 
preliminary sizing calculations for a fuel -lean spraybar injection system. 
Figure 4-7 is a three-view drawing showing details of the spraybar. The 
cylindrical leading edge and flat trailing edge cross-section was 



77 
maintained over the entire 12" but only the center 6" was drilled with 
fuel injection orifices. The original mechanical design was based on a 
5/8" diameter stainless steel pipe to which stainless steel fairings were 
brazed at the diametral plane extending downstream to form the desired 
base geometry. This method of construction proved to be unsuitable with 
the combination of heating and thermal expansion quickly causing failure 
of the brazed joints. The models were subsequently redesigned, being 
machined from a solid block of stainless steel to the cross-section shown 
in figure 4-7 with the two 90" elbows welded on. 



Equivalence Ratio EstimatP 

In. reducing the flameholding data, a key parameter is the fuel-air 
equivalence ratio. For situations where known quantities of fuel and air 
are pre-mixed far upstream of the flameholder, this parameter is easily 
calculated. For non pre-mixed or diffusion flames, gas sampling of the 
wake can be used to infer the fuel -air ratio at flameout as was done in 
reference 59. For the present case, gas sampling equipment was not 
available so a different approach was taken. From the control volume 
analysis, the parameters of importance in external burning are the Inflow 
air stream height, and the overall equivalence ratio in the external 
burning stream. To size fuel injection orifices a method of estimating 
equivalence ratio based on fuel jet penetration was described in chapter 
2. The same method will be used here with the understanding that it is 
more an estimate of the overall amount of fuel and air Involved in the 



78 



external burning process, than a measure of the actual fuel -air ratio In 
the wake of the flameholder. It should therefore be thought of as a 
correlating parameter for the flame stability results, and not a Measured 
quantity. 

The "penetration times spacing" method previously described will be 
outlined here for convenience. The fuel flow Is simply determined for the 
choked Injector at a given fuel pressure, temperature and flow 
coefficient. For the spraybar with pilots, the appropriate amount of 
pilot fuel Is Included. The air flow Involved Is estimated based on 
freestream conditions and a flow area defined by the Jet penetration times 
the orifice spacing. The jet penetration Is determined by a correlation 
which gives the height above the Injection plane where the hydrogen 
concentration Is 1/2% by volume in terms of the fuel pressure, freestream 
conditions and the distance downstream of the orifice. The distance 
downstream of the orifice at which to calculate the jet penetration is 
somewhat subjective, but again does not diminish the methods usefulness as 
a correlating technique. 



Fuel In.iector Sizing 

A total of 6, .10" diameter main orifices Injected fuel normal to the 
freestream in both directions. Note the offset between the three upper 
and three lower orifices in figure 4-7. The orifice size and spacing were 
designed to give fuel -air equivalence ratios In the fuel -lean range based 



79 

on the penetration times spacing estimate. The spraybar pictured In 

figure 4-7 had 15, .020" diameter pilot orifices which injected 

approximately 10% of the fuel directly Into the wake. A spraybar without 

these pilot orifices was also tested. Given a range of freestreara 

pressures from 4 to 12 psia, and fuel pressures from 50 to 400 psia, 

operating envelopes can be constructed In terms of the estimated 

equivalence ratio and the Dezubay stability parameter. These operating 

envelopes are pictured In figure 4-8 for different values of x/d* which is 

a free parameter In the jet penetration correlation, and free- jet total 

temperatures of 540° and 960* Ranklne. Ambient temperature fuel, and an 

orifice flow coefficient of .8 was assumed In all cases. Within a given 

envelope, Increasing fuel pressure Increases the equivalence ratio along 

a vertical line. Increasing altitude (reducing static pressure), 

Increases the value of the Dezubay stability parameter. The effect of 

increasing the assumed x/d* is to increase the value of jet penetration 

used to define the air flow in the equivalence ratio estimate (see 

equation 2-27). This Increase in air flow at constant fuel flow reduces 

the equivalence ratio proportionately. Fortunately, the jet penetration 

depends on x/d* to approximately the 1/4 power, so that a large variation 

in the assumed x/d* has relatively little effect on the estimated 

equivalence ratio. This is demonstrated in figure 4-8 where x/d* is 

increased by a factor of 4, and the maximum equivalence ratio is reduced 

by 47%. For the spraybar with no pilot injectors, the calculated 

equivalence ratios are reduced*by 10%. 



C-^ 



80 



Instrumentation 

To define flame stability limits, only the freestream and fuel conditions 
need be known, along with some way of determining when the barely visible 
hydrogen-air flame extinguishes. The freejet nozzle throat end exit were 
Instrumented with three static pressure taps each, equally spaced 
circumferentially. Total pressure and temperature were measured at three 
points on the large flange visible in figure 4-6 to which the freejet was 
attached. An open 1/16" stainless steel tube was strapped to the spraybar 
base to measure base pressure. 

An infra-red video camera, mounted inside the altitude chamber had been 
used previously to monitor the surface temperatures of turbojet engine 
components. For the present investigation, the camera was mounted so as 
to look through the external burning plume. The field of view obtained 
with the wide angle lens used is depicted in figure 4-9. The 2.0 to 5.6 
micron indium-antimonide detector in the camera provided a good image of 
the 2.6 micron water vapor emission in the external burning plume. This 
was the primary method used to determine flame-out. 

A schlieren system was set up Inside the altitude chamber in close 
proximity to the free- jet providing the 6" by 12" field of veiw also shown 
in figure 4-9. Vibration, test cell cooling air flow, and altitude 
conditions resulted In a rather severe environment for the sensitive 
schlieren optics and xenon light source. In spite of numerous 
difficulties, useful information was obtained from the system during much 



81 
of the test program. 

A water-cooled probe was used to obtain total temperature profiles 18" 
downstream of the free-jet exit. The probe had a single 1r1d1um-40% 
rhodium vs. Iridium thermocouple of bare wire In crossflow construction. 
An electric screw- type actuator provided 10" of travel allowing 
measurement from 8 Inches below the free-Jet axis to 2" above as shown In 
figure 4-9. The data reduction scheme for this measurement Is Included as 
appendix c. 

A color video camera with remote pan, tilt, and zoom provided a good 
overall view of the experiment looking upstream from above the free- jet. 



Ignition System 

Ignition was accomplished during initial tests by strapping a ceramic 
insulated electrode to the flat base of the flameholder. This electrode 
was connected to a 10,000 volt continuous transformer arcing directly to 
the spraybar. The Insulated electrode often burned away following 
ignition prompting the Installation of a translating spark plug 
arrangement. Both ignition systems are visible in Figure 4-6. The long 
vertical tube is the translating Ignltor shown In the extended position. 
The tube Itself acted as the ground electrode, and contained the high 
voltage electrode which arced against It at the tube end. Following 
ignition the tube was withdrawn completely out of the free-jet flow by a 



82 



pneumatic cylinder. The .060" spark gap was positioned approximately 1/8' 
downstream of the spraybar base at the elevation of the upper surface. 



Test Procedure 

The test cell pressure was set first to the desired level, then free-jet 

supply pressure was increased to the calculated value of stagnation 

pressure for an isentropic Mach 1.26 flow. The stagnation pressure was 

then adjusted slightly so as to match the measured average free- jet exit 

static pressure to the test cell pressure. With the free- jet on-design, 

the fuel-rich hydrogen-air preburner was ignited producing fuel conditions 

of approximately 1500" Rankine and 350 psia. Model ignition was then 

attempted with the spark Ignitor. Following ignition the air supply to 

the fuel preburner was shut off and the fuel temperature quickly dropped 

to ambient. Ignition of the model in this manner was only possible at a 

free- jet exit static pressure of 10 psia or greater, and even then was not 

assured. Tactics such as varying the preburner air supply pressure thus 

varying the unburned fuel fraction and temperature, and cycling the 

Ignitor actuator to change the spark location were often used to achieve 

Ignition. A catastrophic failure In the preburner fuel -air valving system 

during the spraybar tests prevented Its use for the rest of the program. 

Without hot fuel, an alternate method of ignition was adopted in which the 

free-jet stagnation pressure was reduced until the free-jet exit Mach 

number based on the exit static pressures was about 0.8. Ignition of 

ambient temperature fuel at the subsonic Mach number was much more 



83 
consistent and was used for the remainder of the program. 

Following ignition of the spraybar, the free- jet supply and test cell 
pressure were adjusted simultaneously to the desired altitude condition 
with fuel pressure at or near the maximum available. This corresponds to 
moving along the maximum fuel pressure line on the operating maps of 
figure 4-8. As stated earlier, the free- jet supply and test cell 
pressures were controlled independently by separate personnel . During the 
altitude change process the free-jet did stray off-design, sometimes 
causing Instabilities and flame-out. In general, once the desired 
altitude condition was set with the free-jet on-design, fuel pressure was 
reduced slowly, reducing the equivalence ratio at a constant value of the 
Dezubay parameter until flame-out occurred. 



Results 

Spravbar Base Pressure Measurements 

During Initial runs with the spraybar installed in the free-jet, a 
terminal shock appeared in the schlieren image downstream of the spraybar. 
This was not unexpected at the Mach 1.26 freestream condition, however the 
shock position did change as the free- jet strayed off-design, prompting 
Interest in the sensitivity of the spraybar base pressure to the free- jet 
exit pressure ratio, since pressure affects flame stability. Figure 4-10 
shows schlieren images of the free-jet operating slightly overexpanded. 



84 



on -design, and slightly underexpanded. The temlnal shock Is seen clearly 
on either side of the spraybar wake. The schlieren knife edge was 
oriented horizontally resulting in the apparent lack of sywnetry from top 
to bottom. In figure 4-11, the effect of shock Movement on the spraybar 
base pressure is shown. The base pressure Is three- tenths of the free- jet 
exit pressure and is Insensitive to shock Movement for on-design and 
underexpanded conditions. The base pressure rises sharply however as the 
free-jet becomes overexpanded and the shock moves upstream. As a result, 
a rather tight tolerance was put on the acceptable operating condition for 
the free-jet. Except for cases where the free-jet was deliberately 
operated off-design, and during altitude changes, all of the spraybar and 
expansion ramp tests were run at free- jet exit pressure ratios of between 
.99 and 1.01. The back pressure for the terminal shock then is the same 
as the free- jet exit pressure, and this was deemed to be roost 
representative of a flight condition. 

The effect of combustion on the base pressure is shown in figure 4-12. 
External burning increases the pressure ratio to about .7 regardless of 
altitude or fuel pressure. Although not the purpose of the spraybar 
tests, this represents a significant reduction in the drag of the spraybar 
or any other two-dimensional step flameholder which may be employed. 



Flame Stability 



Conditions at which the flame extinguished appear in figure 4-13 for the 



85 
piloted spraybar, In terms of the penetration times spacing equivalence 
ratio and the Dezubay stability parameter. An x/d* of ten was used to 
calculate the equivalence ratio, and the corresponding operating envelope 
is also shown. No flame-outs occurred at 12 psia at the Minimum fuel 
pressure. Filled symbols denote flame-outs that occurred at high fuel 
pressure during an altitude change. Since the free-Jet design condition 
could not be maintained during this operation, these points are somewhat 
anamalous but are Included for completeness. The flame-out points fall In 
a band somewhat outside the Dezubay pre-mlxed stability boundary. This Is 
not unexpected since as discussed earlier the penetration times spacing 
equivalence ratio may not accurately represent the local fuel -air ratio In 
the base which controls flame stability. 

Even without detailed knowledge of the local equivalence ratio, this 
result provides confidence in the Dezubay correlation for external burning 
conditions. A non pre-mixed, two-dimensional system can be expected to 
work at altitude to values of the Dezubay parameter in excess of 800 at 
stoichiometric or slightly fuel-rich conditions. For a fuel-lean system, 
operation would be limited to lower values of the Dezubay parameter. In 
the design of a flight system, the extra stability margin afforded by 
stoichiometric operation must be weighed against the performance benefit 
of fuel-lean operation shown by the control volume analysis. For small- 
scale drag reduction experiments where the flameholder dimension is 
disproportionately large to begin with, a stoichiometric system is 
desirable. 



86 



The spraybar without pilot orifices was tested in the same manner with 
ignition at subsonic speed and ambient temperature fuel. Despite repeated 
attempts, flame-out always occurred near Mach one as the free- jet supply 
pressure was increased toward the supersonic design value. 



Effect of Elevated Fr ee- Jet Temperature 

A flame-out that occurred at elevated freestream temperature at 6 psia is 
also shown on figure 4-13. For static pressures of 8 psia and greater the 
flame was stable down to the minimum fuel pressure with no flame-outs. 
Curiously, repeated attempts to set a 4 psia condition at maximum fuel 
pressure resulted in flame-out. The 4 psia condition at 960° R represents 
the lowest Reynolds number tested being about 2.7 million per foot as well 
as the lowest free- jet mass flow. Control of the free- jet during altitude 
changes near these minimum flow conditions was difficult. Off-design 
excursions and reduced fuel -air mixing rates probably both contributed to 
these high fuel pressure flame-outs. Note that the operating envelope 
shown in figure 4-13 applies only to the 540'*R points; refer to figure 4-8 
for the 960''R envelope.. 

The Dezubay parameter contains no explicit temperature dependence, so one 
would not expect it to correlate data with varying temperature. The 
effect of higher temperature is to increase the rate at which the chemical 
reactions take place thereby reducing the ignition delay time. Based on 
the arguments presented earlier this translates into a higher freestream 



87 
velocity at flame-out for the same size flameholder. Thus, the stability 
limit at elevated temperature should occur at greater values of the 
Dezubay parameter. Since the total temperature In flight during an 
acceleration through the transonic regime will increase with Increasing 
velocity, a limit based on data at ambient total temperature is 
conservative. The Dezubay parameter is therefore still considered 
acceptable for the external burning situation. 



Scaling of Small -Scale Test Results 

In anticipation of the smaller scale drag reduction experiments which were 
conducted following the spraybar flame stability tests, an attempt was 
made to determine whether or not sub-scale experimental results would be 
adversely affected by the finite rate at which hydrogen and air react. 
Knowledge of "chemical kinetics" as it affects ignition and reaction delay 
is important in assessing any small-scale external burning test result 
since these characteristic times depend on fuel type, fuel -air ratio, 
pressure and temperature but do not vary with model scale. A one 
millisecond ignition delay at the freestream velocity will correspond to 
a greater fraction of the model length at small-scale than at full-scale. 
This could lead to unreal istically poor performance and flame stability 
problems at the model scale. For the present case of non pre-mixed 
hydrogen and air streams, the rate of fuel -air mixing also plays an 
important role in the combustion process and is properly modeled by 
matching the Reynolds number. If the delay caused by the reaction 



88 



kinetics is insignificant compared to that resulting from fuel-air mixing, 
the process is said to be "mixing limited". For a mixing limited 
situation, sub-scale results would be similar to full-scale at the same 
Reynolds number. A common practice in combustor testing is to use full 
scale hardware (at least in the axial direction) thus making scaling or 
correction for chemical kinetics effects unnecessary. Full scale testing 
of the entire aft end of a flight vehicle is Impractical however, 
especially in the 12" diameter free-jet available. In the Interest of 
determining whether or not the spraybar tests were mixing limited, infra- 
red images of the plume at elevated free- jet temperature and pressure can 
be compared to images at the same Reynolds number, but reduced temperature 
and pressure. The fuel-air mixing process should be similar for the two 
conditions, so a difference in the plume characteristics can be attributed 
to non-equilibrium reaction effects. If the images show comparable axial 
distributions of hot water vapor, the process can be considered mixing 
limited as long as the difference in freestream pressure and temperature 
was sufficient to appreciably alter the reaction rates. 

A free-jet exit static pressure of 12 psia at a total temperature of 960*11 
results in a unit Reynolds number of 4.9 million per foot. The sane 
Reynolds number occurs at a static pressure of 6 psia and total 
temperature of 540° R. To confirm that the difference in reaction rates 
between the two test conditions is adequate to alter the plume if the 
process is not mixing limited, reference is made to the work of Bahn" who 
studied the effects of pressure, temperature and fuel -air ratio on 
hydrogen-air kinetics. Bahn's analytical approach involved 25 reactions 



\ 



89 
and was used to compute Ignition delay and time to complete reaction. The 
Ignition delay was defined as the time to maximization of HOj which was 
found to play an important role in the Ignition process. The time to 
complete reaction was defined arbitrarily as the time it takes for the 
reaction to proceed to a temperature of 2200^. The lack of a strict 
definition Is of little consequence however since the complete reaction • 
occurs almost Instantaneously following Ignition. The calculations were 
carried out at constant pressure for given Initial temperatures and fuel- 
alr ratios. 

For the present purpose of estimating the difference In reaction time • 
between two test conditions, the pressures are relatively well defined as 
6 and 12 psia, but the appropriate Initial temperature and fuel -air ratio 
are not. Fortunately, the effect of fuel-air ratio was found to be small 
for equivalence ratios from 1/4 to 4. If the free-jet total temperature i 
is assumed for the initial mixture temperature, an unreal istically long 
ignition delay would be predicted. In fact the lowest initial temperature 
reported by Bahn was 650^K (1170°R) for which the computed ignition delay- 
is over eight minutes. The appropriate initial temperature must obviously 
be nearer that of the flameholder recirculation zone since ignition and ^ 
reaction did occur just downstream of the spraybar. Using an average 
free-jet velocity and a distance of one foot gives a time increment of 
about .8 mi 1 1 i second for whi ch an appropr i ate i ni ti al temperature 
according to Bahn's charts would be about 1000^. E 

In the pressure and temperature regime of present interest, the effect of 



90 



pressure is not clear. A "double reversal" occurs near one atmosphere 
where Increasing pressure causes a sharp rise in the ignition delay time. 
At higher or lower pressure the usual trend of reduced ignition delay with 
increased pressure applies. The doubling of freestream pressure from 6 to 
12 psia therefore cannot be relied on to reduce the ignition delay. The 
effect of temperature however exhibits no such reversal, and a 100"K 
increase in initial temperature, results in roughly an order of magnitude 
reduction in ignition delay time. The reaction length should be 
significantly shorter then at the elevated free-jet temperature. If the 
combustion process is not mixing limited, i.e. if the reaction length is 
significant compared to the distance required for mixing, combustion will 
appear further upstream. 

Before examining the infra-red images, a brief explanation of the 
calibration method will be given. The infra-red signal generated by 
hydrogen-air combustion products in the 2 to 5.6 micron detector range is 
largely due to hot water vapor which emits at a wavelength of 2.6 microns. 
The amplitude of the signal depends on the molar density, temperature, and 
emmittance of the water vapor as well as the path length or thickness of 
the plume. The infra-red imaging system which consisted of the video 
camera and a processor records and displays temperature contours over the 
entire field of view based on a single eraittance input by the user. This 
is an adequate approach for mapping the surface temperature of a gray body 
but is not suitable for measuring gas temperatures. The emmittance of the 
plume at 2.6 microns varies with temperature so a single representative 
emmitance which would properly convert the radiation signal into 



91 
temperature does not exist. The approach taken was to record the Images 
with the emmlttance set to one, then calibrate the temperatures using 
total temperature data from the water-cooled probe. Measured temperature 
profiles were compared to temperatures reported by the camera at the same 
locations. The minimum and maximum temperatures reported by the camera 
were assigned the measured minimum and maximum temperatures resulting In 
a linear mapping between camera temperature and actual gas temperature. 
This mapping was then applied throughout the entire field of view. This 
approximate approach implies a one to one correspondence between the 
radiation signal and gas temperature which may not be strictly valid, but 
is adequate for the present purpose of making a qualitative comparison. 

Calibrated infra-red images of the plume at the nominal free-jet total 
temperature of 540** R appear in figure 4-14 for two different fuel 
pressures. The total temperature profiles used to calibrate the Images 
are shown in figure 4-14c. The Infra-red images are somewhat coarse, 
consisting of a 256 by 60 array, and exhibit a horizontal feature which is 
a characteristic of the imaging system and not of the plume. Combustion 
is more vigorous at 350 psia as evidenced by the Images as well as the 
temperature profiles. The 250 psia condition Is near the stability limit. 
Some asymmetry from top to bottom Is noted and the reason for this is not 
known. Most Importantly though, a delay in the onset of combustion Is 
seen at both fuel pressures. Infra-red Images at the same Reynolds 
number, but at the elevated- free- jet temperature and pressure are 
presented in figure 4-15 along with the temperature profiles used for the 
calibration. Again, combustion is more vigorous at the higher fuel 



92 



pressure, although neither case is near the stability limit, and again a 
slight asymmetry is apparent. The most prominent difference between the 
hot and cold cases is the reduced distance from the spraybar to the onset 
of combustion for the hot case. In making a qualitative comparison of the 
hot and cold Images, the unavoidable slight differences In estimated 
equivalence ratio and Jet penetration should be noted. The jet 
penetration being of somewhat more significance since the ignition delay 
is relatively insensitive to equivalence ratio. 

The overall impression given by the infra-red images and temperature 
profiles is that the increased freestream pressure and temperature did 
cause a reduction in the ignition delay distance at the same Reynolds 
number. The spraybar combustion process at this Reynolds number then is 
not mixing limited, being affected to a degree by a change in the reaction 
kinetics. This result implies that model scale would have an affect on 
the performance of external burning. Sub-scale test results however would 
be conservative, since flameholding would be more difficult, and any heat 
release occuring downstream of the test article probably serves no useful 
purpose. Although detailed small-scale experimental results may not 
directly apply to a larger scale flight vehicle, successful application of 
the external burning concept at small-scale leads to a high confidence in 
full-scale success. 



Expansion Ramp Tests Apparatus and Procedure 



93 
The objectives of the expansion ramp tests were to verify drag reduction, 
and provide data for comparison to analysis results. Figure 4-16 serves 
to illustrate that although the expansion ramp tests were preliminary and 
generic In nature, the model geometry used 1$ related to the aft end of a 
representative vehicle. The upstream flat surface from which fuel was 
injected represents the engine cowl. The downstream surface which is 
deflected 12° represents the deflected cowl and exhaust shear layer. The 
12° turn generates a Prandtl -Meyer expansion and corresponding low pressure 
which external burning Is to eliminate. 

A 3-v1ew drawing of one of the expansion ramp models appears in figure 4- 
17. Two models were constructed, identical except for the spacing and 
diameter of the fuel injection orifices. Each model was machined from a 
single slab of 3/4" thick stainless steel. The expansion surface 
downstream of the 12" corner was flame-sprayed with a zirconium-oxide 
coating which provided the only thermal protection other than the 
freestream air which Impinged on the unfueled side of the ramp. The 
models were Instrumented with two rows static pressure taps, 18 on 
center! ine, and 12 off-centerline as well as two static pressures on the 
3/4" high base. A row of 5 thermocouples were Imbedded in the expansion 
surface to monitor surface temperature. The "baseline" flameholder shown 
is a 1/8" high by 1/4" wide piece of stainless steel bar stock mounted 
such that the trailing edge was coincident with the 12° corner. The 
expansion ramp models were installed in the free-jet in much the same way 
as the spraybars. A photograph of the expansion ramp installation appears 
in figure 4-18. The sidewalls extending beneath the model were installed 



94 



to prevent the higher pressure air under the expansion ramp from spilling 
around and affecting the external burning process. Gaseous hydrogen fuel 
was supplied through the right (looking upstream) 90** elbow visible in the 
photo. 

The infra-red camera, Schlieren system, and water-cooled total temperature 
probe as depicted in figure 4-9 were also used during the expansion ramp 
tests. 



Fuel Injector Sizing 

The fuel injectors on the two models were sized for zero drag using the 
design procedure outlined in chapter II (see equations 2-30 and 2-31). An 
x/d* of 10 was used in the jet penetration correlation. The fuel -lean 
design had 8, .044" diameter orifices for zero drag at an equivalence 
ratio of 1/2. The other model was designed for zero drag at 
stoichiometric conditions with 26, .025" diameter orifices. All orifices 
were equally spaced and drilled normal to the surface 1/2" upstream of the 
12° expansion corner. Total temperature profiles just downstream of the 
model trailing edge obtained in Initial tests of the 26 injector model, 
suggested that the equivalence ratios actually obtained were somewhat 
lower than predicted and that an x/d* of 30 in the jet penetration 
correlation would be more appropriate. This lowers the estimated 
equivalence ratios by about 26%. An x/d* of 30 is thus implicit in any 
subsequent mention of estimated equivalence ratio for the expansion ramps. 



95 
No results are reported for the low equivalence ratio, 8 Injector model as 
it was unsuccessful in sustaining combustion in the Mach 1.26 flow. It 
was subsequently redrilled with 56, .018" diameter injectors for zero drag 
at stoichiometric conditions using an x/d* of 30. This design exhibited 
good flame stability. 



Flameholder Sizing 

During the initial design of the expansion ramp models, it was unknown 
exactly what size flameholder would be appropriate. Given the relatively 
small model scale, a disproportionately large flameholder with respect to 
the fueled stream height would be required to remain within the Dezubay 
pre-mixed stability limit for all test conditions. During initial tests 
of the 26 injector configuration, an attempt was made to stabilize 
combustion without a flameholder, using only the disturbance created by 
the fuel injection process. While stable combustion was maintained, the 
flameholding site as evidenced by the infra-red video monitor was 
coincident with a boundary layer separation halfway down the ramp surface 
and had little effect on the ramp surface pressures. The need for a 
flameholder to initiate combustion further upstream was apparent, and the 
1/8" height of the "basfeline" flameholder was determined to be the minimum 
conceivable in the following manner. Figure 4-19 depicts operating 
envelopes for the 26 injector design in terms of the Dezubay parameter and 
estimated equivalence ratio for 1/8" and 1/4" high steps. The dimension 
used in the Dezubay parameter is twice the step height due to symmetry; a 



96 



step actually represents one-half of a spraybar type flameholder. The 
1/4" step falls within the stability limit over much of the altitude range 
at high fuel pressure, but is disproportionately large. The minimum value 
of the Dezubay parameter for the 1/8" step is lower than 800, but outside 
the stability loop due to the low estimated equivalence ratio. The 
equivalence ratio is a global value though, and it was thought that the 
mixture in the flameholding region would vary enough that stoichiometric 
regions would exist. Also, the disturbance due to fuel injection should 
afford additional stability. Finally, the stability limit shown is 
obviously not exact, being only a guideline based on limited data at these 
conditions. It was thus decided to begin with a 1/8" step as the baseline 
flameholder. 



Test Procedure 

The fuel pre-heater was not used during the expansion ramp tests. Fuel 
temperature as measured near both 90" elbows was nominally 520° R. Unless 
otherwise noted, all tests were run at a free- jet total temperature of 
540'*R. As with the spraybar tests, ignition was accomplished using the 
translating spark ignitor at a subsonic free-jet condition. The .060" 
spark gap was positioned approximately 1/16" downstream of the trailing 
edge of the flameholder, with the ground electrode 1/16" off of the model 
surface with the ignitor fully extended. The inability of the spark to 
ignite the model at the Mach 1.26 condition is considered a result of 
incorrect spark positioning. Adjusting the spark position involved a 



97 
relatively lengthy facility shutdown and hydrogen purge procedure and so 
an optimum position which may have made supersonic Ignition possible was 
not pursued. Following Ignition, the free-jet supply pressure was 
increased to the design value and the altitude condition was set in the 
same manner as in the spraybar tests. Once on condition, data was 
generally taken at various fuel pressures from maximum to flame-out, with 
fuel off, and with fuel on at the maximum fuel pressure but not burning. 



Expansion Ramp Test Results 

The baseline configuration consists of the 26, .025" diameter fuel 
injection geometry with the 1/8" high by 1/4" wide flameholder. Results 
for this configuration will be presented in detail first, with comparisons 
to the control volume analysis. This is followed by results of model and 
test cell modifications done to study facility interference, and reconcile 
the experimental data with the control volume analysis. Next, the effect 
on performance of a number of perturbations on the baseline fuel injection 
and flameholding geometry is given. Finally, flame stability data for all 
of the model configurations is presented. A summary of expansion ramp 
configurations tested is given In table 4-1, and details of the various 
flameholders are contained in appendix D. 



Baseline Performance 



98 



The aerodynamics of the expansion ramp with fuel off is somewhat iwre 
complex than was originally desired. Figure 4-20 shows centerline and 
off-centerline pressure distributions over the range of ambient pressures 
tested. A dotted line representing a 12® Prandtl -Meyer expansion Is also 
shown for reference. At the leading edge, a pressure coefficient of -.3 
exists, followed by a rapid compression. The expansion at the leading 
edge is attributed to an upwash caused by a detached bow shock. The model 
leading edge was sharp with the upper surface parallel to the freestream, 
but the lower surface was at a 14* angle. The 5" required for an attached 
shock at Mach 1.26 was impractical given the length available. Since the 
bow shock at Mach 1.26 is nearly isentropic, the flow is again supersonic 
following expansion around the knife edge. Another bow shock caused by 
the flameholder then causes the compression to a pressure coefficient of 
roughly .25. The expansion around the flameholder base and 12" turn is 
evident at model station 3. The centerline pressure distributions show an 
initial overexpansion followed by a recompression to a region of constant 
pressure at roughly the Prandtl -Meyer value. At model station 6, a "hump" 
in the distributions is seen with pressure rising to greater than ambient, 
then reducing to near the sub-ambient base pressure at the trailing edge. 
This is characteristic of a shock-boundary layer interaction which is not 
unexpected at transonic conditions. The magnitude of the hump however is 
influenced by wave reflections from the free-jet boundary. This will be 
discussed in a subsequent section on facility interactions. The off- 
centerline distributions do not exhibit the region of constant pressure at 
model station 6, and only rise to ambient pressure at about model station 
10, but are in general similar to the centerline distributions which 



99 
indicates little potential for transverse flow on the ramp surface. Both 
centerline and off-centerline distributions with fuel off show little 
variation with altitude. 

The result of simply Injecting fuel with no subsequent combustion on the 
centerline pressure distributions is shown in figure 4-21 where the fuel 
off and fuel on distributions are plotted together. The effects are most 
pronounced at 4 psia where the jet penetration and estimated equivalence 
ratio are maximum, and Reynolds number is minimum. The influence of fuel 
injection is felt upstream, all the way to the leading edge for the 4 and 
8 psia conditions. Downstream of the expansion, the effects are slight at 
8 and 12 psia, but at the 4 psia condition, the pressure force on the ramp 
is clearly reduced by fuel injection. 

Following the subsonic ignition procedure, combustion was sustained at 
Hach 1.26 to a minimum estimated equivalence ratio of 0.5. A visual 
observation of the flame indicated that it was attached at the 1/8" high 
flameholder. Pressure distributions during external burning at various 
fuel pressures and altitudes appear in figure 4-22. External burning 
eliminates the overexpansion at model station 3, and results in a 
relatively constant pressure along the entire ramp length. The base 
pressure measured on the 3/4" model trailing edge more closely matches the 
ramp surface pressures with combustion. The effects of fuel pressure and 
altitude are almost negligible despite large changes in the jet 
penetration and estimated equivalence ratio. The flat nature of the 
pressure distributions and the fact that the base pressure is not 



100 



significantly different are indications of the elliptic nature of the flow 
on the ramp. Unfortunately, it is difficult to distinguish between a 
separated flow, and an attached flow driven subsonic by combustion as both 
may result in the observed pressure distributions. The 2-D Euler results 
of chapter III indicated that a sharp pressure gradient may accompany the 
transition to subsonic flow within the plume, which substantiates the 
separation argument, but without detailed off-surface measurements, it is 
difficult to distinguish between the two. 



The 35mm camera system used to take still Schlieren photos was unavailable 
during runs with the baseline configuration, but was installed for 
subsequent tests with other model configurations. Features of the 
Schlieren images changed little however for all configurations tested as 
evidenced by a video monitor in the control room. Typical Schlieren 
images with fuel off, and with external burning appear in figure 4-23. 
The profile of the model upper surface is clearly visible to a point near 
the trailing edge. The sharp leading edge of the model is at the 
intersection of the upper surface with the sidewall profile but is 
obscured by the 5/8" diameter elbows used for support and fuel supply. 
The bow shock standing off of these tubes is evident in all of the images, 
and is nearly coincident with the fuel injection and flameholding 
disturbances. The fuel off Image shows much more shock structure, and a 
separation point roughly halfway down the ramp surface. With external 
burning, the most prominent feature is the density gradient at the plume 
boundary. Much less structure is evident in the freestream apparently as 



101 
a result of reduced turning as the plume fills the void left by the model. 
Within the plume, the absence of any structure indicates subsonic flow, 
but from these Images alone it is impossible to distinguish between an 
attached flow driven subsonic by combustion and a separated flow. 

Total temperature profiles obtained 4" downstream of the expansion ramp 
trailing edge and 1" off the centerline are shown In figure 4-24. The 
effect of increasing fuel pressure and altitude is clearly seen as both 
the temperature and vertical extent of the plume increase. Fuel pressure 
and altitude increases result in higher jet penetration and estimated 
equivalence ratio. Temperatures approaching hydrogen-air stoichiometric 
are seen at the highest altitude, 4 psia condition. The marked variation 
in plume characteristics is in sharp contrast to the pressure 
distributions of figure 4-22 which showed little or no variation with fuel 
pressure or altitude. The profiles exhibit a definite peak near the free- 
jet centerline at the boundary between the external burning plume and the 
freestream. The lower boundary of the plume Is less definite, extending 
below the elevation of the model base. No Inference can be drawn, 
regarding the state of the boundary layer from these profiles. 

Infra-red images corresponding to three of the temperature profiles of 
figure 4-24 appear In figure 4-25. The images were calibrated using the 
same procedure outlined previously for the spraybar tests. The same 
temperature scale was used for all three of the images so a direct 
comparison can be made. Hot model surfaces appear as saturated regions 
since the calibration used Is only valid In the plume. Dramatic increases 



102 



In the size and intensity of the external burning plume are apparent as 
the estimated equivalence ratio increases. At the highest equivalence 
ratio, a cooler region near the ramp surface is visible, and a delay in 
the onset of combustion is apparent with the maximum temperature occurring 
near the trailing edge of the model. 



Comparison to Control Volume Analysis 

The control volume equations presented in chapter II predict the axial 
thrust coefficient given the model geometry, freestream conditions, and 
the inflow stream height and equivalence ratio. Since it is more 
practical to specify as input the fuel conditions and fuel injector 
geometry, the inflow stream height and equivalence ratio were estimated 
using the jet penetration and the penetration times spacing method. In 
attempting to match an experimental result, it is of interest to insure 
that the inflow stream height and equivalence ratio estimates are not 
seriously in error. To this end, the total temperature profiles measured 
approximately 4" downstream of the model trailing edge are taken to 
represent the outflow temperature, and are compared to the equilibrium 
temperature at the estimated equivalence ratio used in the control volume 
analysis. The penetration times spacing method yields this equation for 
the equivalence ratio: 



103 



•^ - 5 . 213 C, ^ '■'' ^ '"'■' I ^^'1' t«.3] 



One of the assumptions In the control volume analysis is that the inflow 

and outflow conditions are uniform. To obtain a representative value of 

total temperature from the measured profiles, all temperatures within 20% 

of the peak were averaged. These average plume temperatures for the 

baseline and all of the other configurations tested at ambient free- jet 

total temperature are plotted in figure 4-26a versus the estimated 

equivalence ratio obtained from equation 4-3 using an x/d* value of 30. 

These data encompass all of the different flameholder geometries, and two 

different spacing ratios (the 26 and 56 injector models) as well as 

various other variations including upper sidewalls, fairings, etc. A 

degree of correlation is provided by equation 4-3 but the data seems to 

stratify into two separate groups representing the two different orifice 

spacing ratios, and falls below the equilibrium curve for low equivalence 

ratios. Since the control volume analysis uses the equilibrium curve, 

this would result in an optimistic performance prediction. The 

penetration times spacing method, which seems to provide the appropriate 

functional form, can be revised to provide a better degree of correlation 

based on the present data. First, the exponent on spacing ratio is 

changed to 1/2 to collapse the data Into a single curve. A better fit 

with the equilibrium values results from changing the fuel pressure 



104 



dependence from an exponent of .517 to 1.0, and adjusting the constant 
from 5.304 to .336. The x/d* term is also lumped into the constant and the 
revised equation for estimating equivalence ratio is as follows: 






*,,„ « .129 C, V^t>»/v-c^. / _v^wo j^.4j 



The average plume temperatures are replotted using the new estimate in 
figure 4-26b. Equation 4-4 gives a good estimate of the "effective" 
equivalence ratio based on the experimental outflow temperatures. It 
reflects any reduction in combustion efficiency caused by incomplete 
mixing and ignition delay. Since these factors may depend on scale and 
model geometry, the validity of equation 4-4 outside the range of 
parameters in the present experiment cannot be guaranteed. It is now 
simply a correlation with it's functional form suggested by physical 
reasoning, and exponents adjusted intuitively to match the present data. 
The equivalence ratio so defined will be referred to as the correlated 
equivalence ratio in all subsequent discussion. 

Given the correlated equivalence ratio, and measured fuel flow, the 
corresponding amount of air Involved can be determined, which is in 
general different than that given by the penetration times spacing method. 
Assuming that the inflow stream height is still equal to the jet 
penetration, the inflow conditions could be adjusted so as to give the 



105 
proper massflow. This would lead to an Iterative process though, since an 
adjustment In the Inflow conditions would affect the jet penetration. 
Alternatively, freestream conditions can be assumed for the Inflow, and a 
stream height consistent with the airflow can be calculated Independent of 
the jet penetration correlation. Taking this approach, the effective 
height of the air stream Is given by the following: 



yi.s,,^zJ^:iyM£lL 14.5] 



Note that the Inflow stream height calculated In this manner Is only a 
function of the orifice geometry, and the freestream Mach number, and Is 
Independent of fuel and freestream conditions. The equivalence ratio and 
Inflow stream height given by equations 4-4 and 4-5 can now be used In the 
control volume analysis as better approximations than those given by the 
original penetration times spacing method. 

The experimental thrust coefficient was determined based on area-averaging 
the static pressure distributions. Separate thrust values were computed 
based on the centerline and off-centerllne rows, then the two values were 
averaged using a 2/3 weighting on the centerline value, and 1/3 on the 
outboard. This somewhat arbitrary weighting between the centerline and 
outboard rows Is of little consequence since the pressure distributions 
are so similar. The predicted and measured drag coefficients are compared 
in figure 4-27. Equilibrium hydrogen-air combustion and three-dimensional 
expansion assumptions were used In the control volume analysis. In figure 



106 



4-27a, the penetration times spacing method was used with an x/d* of 30 to 

estimate the equivalence ratio for both the experimental data and the 

control volume results, thus the inflow stream height used in the control 

volume estimate equals the jet penetration. As stated earlier, the model 

was originally designed for zero thrust at stoichiometric conditions. The 

control volume prediction curve passes through zero thrust at an 

equivalence ratio different than one because an x/d* value of 10 was used 

originally in the design, and also the experimentally determined orifice 

flow coefficient of .83 is now taken into account. The equivalence ratio 

and inflow stream height based on the data correlation is used in figure 

4-27b and results in a broader range of equivalence ratios, with the 

predicted zero drag point at an even lower equivalence ratio. The 

measured thrust coefficient shows little variation with equivalence ratio 

and is below the control volume prediction regardless of the method used. 

The performance of external burning in terms of a drag reduction per unit 
fuel flow is difficult to assess since as stated above, the fuel off 
results are susceptible to interference from the free-jet boundary above 
the model. To provide some sense of scale however it should be noted that 
the thrust coefficient resulting from a 12" Prandtl -Meyer expansion is -.4. 
The actual fuel off thrust coefficient would be closer to zero however due 
to the beneficial effects of boundary layer separation and three- 
dimensional effects. 



Facility Interaction Studies 



107 
The disparity between measured thrust coefficients and the control volume 
prediction may at first seem completely attributable to boundary layer 
separation. However, characteristics peculiar to the external burning 
flowfield must be considered before this conclusion can be drawn. The 
control volume analysis (equation 2-9) indicates that the plume velocity 
is weakly proportional to the thrust coefficient. For the slightly 
negative thrust coefficients obtained experimentally therefore, the plume 
velocity should be nearly equal to freestream. In contrast to a classical 
wake flow which reaccelerates to the freestream velocity due to large 
transverse velocity gradients, the subsonic external burning plume may 
persist for a considerably longer distance downstream of the model in the 
absence of velocity shear. The only mechanism tending to increase the 
plume Hach number Is the reduction in sound speed caused by heat transfer 
across the plume boundaries. Pressure distributions on the ramp are thus 
susceptible to upstream communication of disturbances which may occur well 
downstream of the model such as in the facility exhaust collector. This 
and other possible sources of facility interference which were studied are 
depicted schematically in figure 4-28. 

In close proximity to the model, is a sub-ambient pressure region at the 
3/4" high model base (see figure 4-22). The blunt base and the airflow 
which is channeled beneath the ramp by the sidewalls does not exactly 
represent the generic external burning outflow conditions considered thus 
far, i.e. a simple turn back to the freestream direction. The fact that 
the pressures on the ramp during burning were nearly equal to this base 
pressure gives rise to a concern that the model base region may have 



108 



influenced the results. 

The free-jet boundary also provides a possible source of Interference, 
since disturbances generated by the model would be reflected back and 
Impinge on the plume as waves of the opposite family. This would tend to 
have an equalizing effect on thrust, since a compression wave generating 
high pressure on the ramp would be reflected back as an expansion, tending 
to depressurize the plume. 



Effect of Exhaust Collector Modification 

Any experiment Involving combustion within the PSL-4 test cell requires an 
amount of cooling and dilution airflow consistent with safety guidelines. 
This auxiliary air is admitted Into the test cell at the forward bulkhead 
and flows around the flow conditioning duct and free- jet at about 80 fps 
keeping the test cell walls and electronic equipment cool as well as 
providing enough dilution so that if the hydrogen fuel is not burned in 
the experiment, the mixture which flows out of the test cell is still 
inert. The free-jet air and auxiliary air exit through an exhaust 
collector at the rear of the cell which is simply a round duct 55" in 
diameter. The leading edge of the exhaust collector was located 51" 
downstream of the model trailing edge, and did not have any type of 
bellmouth contour. The relationship of the exhaust collector and model Is 
depicted in figure 4-29. Since the leading edge of the duct was 
relatively sharp, the possibility existed of a sharp-lip separation and 



109 

vena-contracta which would cause a low pressure region through which the 

external burning plume would flow. The exhaust collector was subsequently 

Instrumented with a row of 11 static pressure taps shown in figure 4-29. 

Pressure distributions at ambient pressures of 12, 8, and 4 psia are shown 

in figure 4-30 for the 75 pps of auxiliary airnominally used. The 4 psia 

condition where the velocity is highest at the inlet due to the constant 

auxiliary air mass flow, shows a definite sharp-lip separation and low 

pressure throughout the duct. The possibility of this low pressure 

feeding forward to the model prompted a re-installation of the exhaust 

collector such that the leading edge was 105" downstream of the model. 

Following this, a study of the effect of auxiliary air flowrate on the 

duct pressure distribution was done at the 4 psia test cell condition. 

The results of this study appear in figure 4-31 and indicate that by 

reducing the auxiliary air flow to 40 pps, the separation and low pressure 

Is eliminated. It was concluded that 40 pps of auxiliary air was still 

within safety limits and all subsequent testing was done at this flowrate. 

The effect of reducing the auxiliary air flowrate and moving the exhaust 

collector entrance downstream on external burning performance Is shown in 

figure 4-32 to be negligible however. It can be concluded therefore that 

the low pressure region located about 5 feet downstream of the model did 

not feed forward through the subsonic plume and reduce performance. 



Effect of Plume Boundary Simulator 



The trailing edge of the model does not exactly represent the intended 



110 



geometry depicted in figure 4-16. The external burning plume should turn 
back to the flight direction immediately downstream of the vehicle. The 
finite model base height, and air flow beneath the nodel combine to create 
an area of low pressure in the base region as evidenced by the pressure 
distributions in figures 4-20 through 4-22. To provide a definite 
boundary for the external burning plume, thereby more closely modeling the 

. Intended situation, a flat plate was installed downstream of the model, 
parallel to the freestream. The 12" square 'plume boundary simulator" 
installed behind the model is shown in figure 4-33. It was constructed in 
the same manner as the expansion ramp models using a 3/4" thick slab of 
stainless steel, with a zirconium-oxide coating on the upper surface. The 
plate had a row of 11 static pressure taps on the centerline spaced at 1" 
intervals, and a transverse row of 5 taps at the midpoint. The outboard 
leading edges of the plate were machined to a 10° knife edge to reduce 
blockage. The total temperature probe actuator was moved 1" off 
centerline and a 3/4" diameter hole was drilled in the plate, to allow the 
water-cooled total temperature probe to pass through. A test was run with 
the hole plugged to insure that the centerline pressure measurements were 

not affected by the hole. 

The Euler analysis described in section 3 was used to demonstrate the 
equivalence between a solid boundary parallel to the freestream, and the 
actual situation where freestream flow deflects the plume. The Euler 
analysis assumes a perfect gas, so heat addition based on the fuel heating 
value and fuel-air ratio would tend to result in too much heat being 
added. So that a more representative heat addition was used in modeling 



Ill 

the experiment, 2-D perfect gas, and 2-D real gas control volume 
calculations were compared over the range of equivalence ratios tested to 
determine the equivalence ratios to be used in the perfect gas 
calculations which result in the real gas thrust coefficient values. 
These reduced equivalence ratios appear in table 4-3 along with the 
corresponding experimental conditions. The heat addition distribution 
used was Gaussian in the axial direction and constant in the transverse 
direction, as this gave pressure distributions having characteristics 
similar to the experiment. The Gaussian distribution used was slightly 
different than that used in section 3 and is depicted in figure 4-34. 
Although additional numerical experimentation could have been undertaken 
to more closely match experimental pressure distributions, this was not 
the objective of the Euler analysis. The purpose of these calculations 
was simply to validate the use of a plume boundary simulator. 

The 12° expansion ramp profile was modeled with both types of downstream 
plume boundaries. A 100 by 50 grid shown in figure 4-35a was used for the 
solid boundary case. To model the freestream inflow boundary, 20 points 
were added in the transverse direction as shown in figure 4-35b. The heat 
addition corresponding to a correlated equivalence ratio of .452 was used 
for this comparison (see table 4-2). Streamlines and heat addition 
contours for both cases appear in figure 4-36. The momentum of the 
subsonic plume is small compared to that of the freestream, due to the 
large reduction in density at about constant velocity. The plume is 
therefore quickly turned back to the axial direction by the upper 
freestream flow as evidenced in figure 4-36b where deflection of this 



112 



auxiliary freestream Is negligible. Mach number contours for both cases 
which appear In figure 4-37 are very similar as well, with the only 
difference being the large transverse gradient between the upper 
freestream and the plume. The expansion surface pressure distributions 
compared in figure 4-38 are nearly coincident over the entire ramp surface 
and result in a negligible difference In thrust coefficient. The solid 
wall is thus a valid representation of the true lateral plume boundary, at 
least for the 2-D inviscid case. The equivalence of these two boundaries 
may not be as clear if the plume is separated, since the solid boundary 
hinders reverse flow into the separated region. Despite this, the plume 
boundary simulator provides a known boundary and a better experimental 
simulation of the Intended external burning geometry than the basic 
expansion ramp model. 



Centerline pressure distributions with and without the plume boundary 
simulator are shown in figure 4-39a with fuel off along with the 2-D 
shock-expansion theory result for reference. Upstream of 8" the 
distributions are similar. Downstream of this point the baseline 
distribution falls off to the low base pressure while the distribution 
with the plume boundary simulator peaks at the 12" corner. The pressure 
then quickly decays to a zero pressure coefficient. There was little 
effect of ambient pressure on the fuel off distributions, the 8 psia cases 
shown are representative of all altitudes. The transverse row of static 
pressure taps on the plume boundary simulator at the 20" station showed no 
transverse variation in pressure at all conditions and so are not 



113 
presented. The plume boundary simulator thus eliminates the troublesome 
region of low pressure immediately downstream of the expansion ramp and 
provides a definite lateral boundary for the plume. A comparison of 
centerline pressure distributions with external burning appears in figures 
4-39b through 4-39d for high, low, and intermediate correlated equivalence 
ratios. Pressures upstream of the expansion are comparable, but a 
definite increase in expansion ramp pressure is induced by the plume 
boundary simulator at all equivalence ratios. The pressure is still 
independent of equivalence ratio however, and does not rise above ambient 
to a level consistent with control volume predictions. 

Total temperature profiles appearing in figure 4-40 at the same three 
conditions show comparable levels of temperature but a more syimetric 
shape than those of the baseline configuration in figure 4-24. An 
increase in thrust coefficient is seen in figure 4-41 over the entire 
range of equivalence ratios tested. Even less variation with equivalence 
ratio is evident with the plume boundary simulator installed. The test 
arrangement is now considered free of interference from flow beneath the. 
model and a low base pressure region. Thrust coefficients remain below 
predicted values however and do not exhibit the expected variation with 
equivalence ratio. 



Effect of Free-Jet Boundary 



The model size was obviously large with respect to the free-jet exit. 



1 



114 



Ideally, the model would have been sized to fit completely within the 
conical area formed by Mach lines emanating from the nozzle lip, commonly 
referred to as the "test rhombus" of the free-jet. In external burning 
tests where an accurate thrust measurement is to be made, it would be 
advisable to size the installation even more conservatively, Including a 
sizable portion of the subsonic plume within the test rhombus since 
disturbances impinging on the subsonic plume near the model trailing edge 
may feed forward. In the present tests, the free- jet size was determined 
by availability of the existing Mach 1.26 nozzle. Also, facility air flow 
capability would have precluded use of an appreciably larger free-jet. 
Considerations in sizing the expansion ramp models included ease of 
machining the small fuel injection orfices, as well as instrumentation, 
flame stability, and scaling. The models could not be made small enough 
to fit within the test rhombus, however it was decided that this situation 
was acceptable due to the preliminary nature of the experiments. To 
increase confidence in the data obtained, the magnitude of the free-jet 
boundary effect on thrust was estimated using the Euler analysis. 
Solutions in which a "flight" boundary condition was imposed on the lower 
computational boundary, (as in figures 4-37) were compared to cases where 
a free-jet boundary was used. The free-jet boundary was captured in the 
solution by extending the lower boundary of the grid shown in figure 4-35a 
beyond the 6" free-jet exit radius and imposing a low speed inflow to this 
region. The static pressure and total temperature match that of the free- 
jet. The solution would not converge if a zero velocity was imposed, so 
a .3 Hach number inflow was used. This is still a good representation of 
the actual case since the velocity adjacent to the nozzle was not zero due 



115 
to the auxiliary air flow and ejector pumping of the free- jet. The 100 by 
80 grid used, pictured in figure 4-42 had the same grid density in the 
heat addition region as the 100 by 50 grid so that differences in thrust 
were not artificially induced by grid refinement effects. A .025 damping 
coefficient was used in all cases. 

A case with no heat addition was run first to simulate the fuel off 
situation for which the experimental pressure distributions showed a 
curious recompression to above ambient pressure. Shock-expansion theory 
can be used in lieu of Euler analysis for the flight boundary case since 
the flowfield is made up of simple regions. The thrust coefficient so 
obtained is equal to the pressure coefficient following a 12° Prandtl -Meyer 
turn which is -.4. Hach number contours and the wall pressure 
distribution for the free-jet case appear in figure 4-43. The centered 
expansion turns the free-jet boundary toward the wall, and is reflected 
back as a strong shock, resulting in a -.2 thrust coefficient. This shock 
is evident in the fuel off schlieren image of figure 4-23 along with a 
large separated zone. Although viscous and three-dimensional effects 
would alter the flowfield somewhat, the 2-D inviscid result suggests that 
the high ramp pressure with fuel off is induced by the free-jet boundary. 

The effect of the free-jet boundary on the inviscid external burning 
flowfield is summarized in figure 4-44 where the thrust coefficient for 
both flight and free-jet boundaries are plotted versus equivalence ratio 
along with control volume analysis results. The heat addition schedule of 
table 4-2 was used in the Euler calculations, so as expected the 2-D real 



116 



gas control volume curve lies near that of the Euler "flight boundary" 
analysis. The 3-D real gas control volume result is also shown to depict 
the magnitude of three-dimensional effects which are small for thrust 
coefficients near zero. The free-jet boundary cases always remain nearer 
to zero than the corresponding flight boundary cases. For cases where the 
flight thrust coefficient is less than zero, the free-jet boundary causes 
an increase in thrust. Conversely, the free-jet boundary tends to reduce 
thrust coefficients greater than zero. The curves cross at approximately 
zero thrust so the effect of the free- jet boundary is always to reduce the 
absolute value of non-zero thrust coefficients, and the magnitude of the 
effect is proportional to the thrust level. This is an intuitive result 
since for zero thrust coefficient the streamline deflection and hence 
reflected disturbances are minimal. The reflected wave interactions are 
seen in figures 4-45 through 4-47 where Mach number contours for flight 
and free-jet cases are compared at three equivalence ratios. The minimum 
equivalence ratio case in figure 4-45 has a flight thrust coefficient of - 
.075 with an expansion propagating into the freestream. In the free-jet 
case, this expansion turns the free- jet boundary Inward slightly and is 
reflected back as a compression which impinges on the subsonic plume. The 
interaction between the plume and free-jet boundary continues downstream 
resulting in a net increase in thrust. At the higher equivalence ratios, 
an initial compression is generated by burning, and the resulting 
reflected expansion wave reduces the thrust. In the maximum equivalence 
ratio case of figure 4-47, a pocket of subsonic flow appears downstream of 
the strong shock generated by burning. The resulting reflected expansion 
and subsequent interaction reduce the thrust coefficient from .223 to 



117 
.078. The rather pronounced effects shown above apply to a two- 
dimensional flowfield. In the present experiment, three-dimensionality 
will reduce the magnitude of this effect somewhat but not alter its 
nature. 

The free-jet boundary reduces the sensitivity of ramp forces to 
equivalence ratio but does not prevent thrust coefficients greater than 
zero. Therefore, while the free-jet boundary Interaction may contribute 
to the Insensltivity of experimental results to equivalence ratio. It Is 
not the sole cause of persistent sub-zero thrust coefficients. The most 
serious effect noted Is the wave Interaction with fuel off which causes 
artificially high force levels, making an assessment of the force 
Increment due to external burning In the experiment difficult. 

The experimental arrangement Including the plume boundary simulator is 
thus considered to be free of serious facility interactions during 
external burning runs since the thrust coefficents are near zero and free- 
jet boundary interactions are minimal. The discrepancy between the 
predicted and measured thrust coefficient Is not completely attributable 
to any of the postulated facility Interference effects. Another 
explanation for lower than predicted performance Is that following initial 
expansion at the flameholder and 12" turn, the pressure rise due to 
combustion separates the boundary layer, precluding the recompression seen 
in the Euler analysis at the sonic point. In an attempt to determine 
whether or not the plume was Indeed separated, a crude pi tot tube was 
attached to the water-cooled temperature probe. The small platinum tube 



118 



did not survive the extreme environment though, and provided no useful 
data. Time limitations made construction of a more sophisticated probe 
Impossible. 

Subsequent efforts were focused on initiating combustion further upstream 
to reduce the initial expansion at the flameholder and 12" corner. To this 
end, a number of different fuel injection and flameholding configurations 
were tested. Results of these tests are presented in the following 
sections. 



Alternat e Fuel Injection and Flameholdino Configurations 

In the subsequent discussion of alternate configurations, the plume 
boundary simulator is always present. The "baseline" configuration to 
which comparisons will be made is now configuration 2 which includes the 
plume boundary simulator. Performance of this configuration was shown in 
figures 4-39 through 4-41. 

The second expansion ramp model had a row of 56, .018" diameter fuel 
injectors designed for zero drag at stoichoimetric conditions based on the 
control volume method with an x/d* of 30 used in equation 4-3 for the jet 
penetration. The design actually called for 58 evenly spaced Injectors, 
but the two outboard holes locations were very close to the edge of the 
model and were not drilled. Except for the new fuel injection pattern, 
this model was identical to the first. With the smaller orifices, the 



119 
distance from the Injection plane to the trailing edge of the flatneholder 
was 27.8 diameters as compared to 20 for the baseline configuration. Ramp 
center! Ine pressure distributions for this configuration appear In figure 
4-48a with fuel off, and with external burning at low, Intermediate and 
high equivalence ratios. Although the plume boundary simulator was 
installed for this as well as all subsequent configurations, the plots 
terminate at the trailing edge of the ramp in order to accentuate the 
flameholder and Initial expansion region. Pressure on the plume boundary 
simulator Itself quickly decayed to freestream static for all conditions 
and configurations. As expected, the fuel off distribution is identical 
to that of the baseline configuration with the plume boundary simulator 
installed (figure 4-39a) since the ramp and flameholder geometries are 
identical. The effect of the plume boundary simulator is obvious with 
fuel off, causing a slight pressurization at the trailing edge. With 
burning, the 56 injector configuration does not generate an appreciably 
higher thrust than the baseline, in spite of the increased length 
available for mixing upstream of the flameholder. Total temperature 
profiles corresponding to the three external burning pressure 
distributions appear in figure 4-48b. Compared to the baseline profiles 
of figure 4-40, the 56 Injector configuration profiles are slightly more 
symmetric in shape. Note that the equivalence ratios are different for 
the 56 Injector model, so a direct comparison of temperature level should 
not be made. 

The next variation tried was to move both the fuel injection and 
flameholding upstream 1/2". This was accomplished by welding closed the 



120 



existing 26 orifices on the baseline model, and re-drilling the identical 
26 hole pattern, 1/2" upstream. The original, 1/8" by 1/4" rectangular 
cross-section baseline flameholder could not be mounted 1/2" upstream due 
to interference of the attachment screws with the hydrogen plenum just 
beneath the surface. An alternate flameholder was constructed which used 
smaller screws located further upstream, and provided the desired 1/8" 
high step, 1/2" upstream of the 12® expansion. A photograph of this 
configuration appears in figure 4-49. The new flameholder was constructed 
of a 1/16" thick stainless steel plate, 3/8" wide with it's trailing edge 
bent up to 1/8" above the model surface. It should be noted that this 
geometry probably results in different recirculation zone length than the 
square baseline flameholder cross-section. Centerline pressure 
distributions for this configuration are shown in figure 4-50a. A more 
severe compression is apparent at the leading edge since the fuel 
injection plane is now 1/2" further upstream at 2". With fuel off, the 
overexpansion at the corner is less severe than with the baseline 
flameholder. During external burning however, the overexpansion is 
slightly more severe, but quickly recompresses to freestream pressure, 
resulting in slightly higher thrust than the baseline. Thrust 
coefficients for all of the alternate configurations are compared in a 
subsequent figure (4-55). A low equivalence ratio case was not obtained 
since flame stability for this configuration was not as good as the 
baseline, where the trailing edge of the flameholder was coincident with 
the 12° expansion. 

The persistence of sub-ambient pressure at the model knee during burning. 



. i 



121 
and the meager increase in thrust level indicates that heat release is not 
being initiated at the flameholder, but further downstream nearer the 12® 
turn similar to the baseline case. The reduced flame stability of this 
configuration suggests that the recirculation zone length generated by the 
1/8" high flameholder alone is probably only marginally sufficient to 
initiate ignition, without a lengthening caused by the 12' expansion. The 
flameholder and initial portion of the 12* corner provide a larger 
effective flameholding region than the 1/8" high step itself. Total 
temperature profiles for this configuration, shown in figure 4-50b are 
somewhat flatter than those of the baseline configuration, exhibiting 
higher temperatures nearer the wall. 

The effect of simply moving the fuel injection plane and flameholder 
upstream 1/2" thus has little effect on performance since the initiation 
of heat release was probably not moved forward with respect to the 
expansion. Before proceeding with a more sophisticated flameholder 
scheme, an attempt was made to alleviate the expansion at the sharp model 
leading edge caused by the detached shock, thereby reducing uncertainty in 
the local conditions in the fuel injection and flameholding region. To 
accomplish this, a 1" extension pictured in figure 4-51 was added to the 
leading edge of the 26 injector model (the model is shown without a 
flameholder). The 5° sharp leading edge on this extension was to allow an 
attached wave on the lower surface, resulting in clean Mach 1.26 flow on 
the upper surface. The extension extends I" into the free- jet, and was 
instrumented with two static pressure taps on the centerline. The 
extension into the free-jet is inconsequential given that the 1.26 exit 



122 



plane Mach number exists further than 1" Into the free- jet on the free- jet 
axis. 

The effect of this extension on the center! Ine pressure distributions 
downstream of the flameholder is seen to be almost negligible In figure 4- 
52a where a direct comparison with the baseline configuration Is made with 
fuel off. The expansion near station (the baseline model leading edge) 
Is reduced somewhat, but apparently the model blockage still causes a 
detached wave and resultant upwash. Limited external burning data at 8 
psia static pressure was taken with this configuration and the baseline 
flameholder. Since the leading edge extension has little effect, this 
data may be compared to baseline configuration data In figure 4-52b and c 
to show the effect of moving the Injection plane forward from 20 to 40 
orifice diameters upstream of the 12" corner. As was the case with the 56 
injector model at 27.8 orifice diameters, negligible differences In 
performance are noted. 



The final configuration to be presented is pictured in figure 4-53, and 
consisted of a 1/4" high "serrated" flameholder mounted In the upstream 
position with It's trailing edge 1/2" upstream of the 12" expansion. This 
flameholder was intended to promote fuel -air mixing, and create a longer 
recirculation zone. To accomodate a longer recirculation zone, The 1/16" 
thick plate seen in the photograph was added to the model, extending 3/4" 
downstream of the 12° corner, to provide more distance between the 
flameholder and expansion In which to Initiate Ignition and heat release. 



123 
The distance from the Injection plane to the trailing edge of the plate is 
70 orifice diameters. This configuration departs slightly from the 
previous in that the extension plate covers the 12** expansion and forms a 
short blunt base. Centerline pressure distributions for this 
configuration appear in figure 4-54a. With fuel off, a low base pressure 
In the region covered by the extension plate Is apparent followed by the 
recompression to slightly greater than freestream pressure. Combustion 
Increases the pressure in the separated region beneath the plate to 
slightly less than ambient, and this pressure persists to the end of the 
ramp. Again, it seems that heat release was initiated not at the serrated 
flameholder, but in the recirculation region formed by the extension 
plate. Total temperature profiles for this configuration appear in figure 
4-54b and are similar in shape to those of the baseline configuration. 
Again, the indication is that the flame was held in the recirculation 
region downstream of the plate and not upstream at the serrated 
flameholder. A number of other different combinations of the 
flameholders, extensions, etc. discussed above were tried, but none 
resulted in higher performance, and some exhibited very poor flame 
stability. 

Thrust coefficients for all four of the variations discussed above along 
with the baseline are shown in figure 4-55. Only the 26 orifice upstream 
Injection with the upstream 1/8" flameholder seems to show a discernable 
improvement in ramp surface force, but all are still below the control 
volume predictions. Only a slight difference in predicted performance is 
evident between the 26 and 56 Injector configurations. This is to be 



124 



expected, since the Inflow stream height ratios {yf/y^) given by equation 
4-5 are similar (.197 and .182 for the 26 and 56 Injector inodels 
respecively), and for a given equivalence ratio, this is the only 
parameter in the control volume analysis which would affect thrust. THe 
56 injector model does however operate over a wider range of equivalence 
ratios. The final configuration discussed (26 upstream injectors, 1/4" 
serrated flameholder) was subsequently run at elevated freestream 
temperature, and also with upper sidewalls. Although neither of these two 
variations resulted in an Increase in thrust they are included for 
completeness. 



Results with Heated Freestream 

Increasing the freestream total temperature has a number of effects. The 
most desirable is the increase in hydrogen-air reaction rate which may 
allow ignition and heat release to occur further upstream. This reduction 
in ignition delay comes at the expense of a lower Reynold's number, and a 
higher freestream velocity, but these effects are small compared to the 
exponential dependence of ignition delay on temperature (see the section 
on scaling of small-scale test results and reference 62). Figure 4-56a 
presents centerline pressure distributions at a free-jet total temperature 
of 960°R with fuel off, and with external burning at low, intermediate, and 
high equivalence ratios. The distributions are nearly identical to the 
corresponding results at 540" in figure 4-54, which are at somewhat lower 
equivalence ratios. Total temperature profiles appear in figure 4-56b and 



125 
exhibit a higher maximum temperature as expected, but are similar In shape 
to the cold results. Figure 4-56c shows the negligible effect of the 
heated freestream on thrust coefficient. The control volume results show 
a marked effect however since at increased freestream temperature, the 
temperature ratio and thus the stream area ratio are reduced. 



Effect of Upper Sidewalls 

The control volume analysis, which has provided the Impetus for attempting 
to Improve performance, has been done with a three-dimensional expansion 
approximation. Even so, the possibility existed that lateral spillage was 
preventing higher thrust coefficients. Thusfar, in all of the 
configurations tested, the external burning plume has been confined on 
only one surface. To approximate a more two-dimensional flow, upper 
sidewalls pictured in figure 4-57 were used which extended 2" above the 
ramp at the leading edge. The upper surf ace of the sidewalls was parallel 
to the freestream, and the leading edges were ground to a 10° knife edge.. 
In the photograph, the original baseline configuration appears without the 
plume boundary simulator. The effect of these sidewalls with fuel off, as 
shown In figure 4-58a Is to prevent lateral inflow to the low pressure 
regions, resulting in lower pressure over more of the ramp surface. The 
fuel-off recompression, which as discussed previously Is strengthened by 
free- jet boundary interference, occurs further downstream. With external 
burning at the maximum equivalence ratio (figure 4-58b), the effect of the 
sidewalls Is very slight, resulting in a small Increase in pressure. The 



126 



effect Is seen upstream to near the leading edge as the sidewalls contain 
the injection disturbance. A comparison of total temperature profiles 
with and without the upper sidewalls appears in figure 4-58c. The upper 
sidewalls prevent transverse inflow of cooler air, resulting in a slightly 
fuller profile near the wall. The effect of upper sidewalls on thrust 
coefficient is negligible as shown in figure 4-58d. 



Expansion Ramp Flameholdina 

Flame stability data was taken during the expansion ramp tests in the same 
manner as in the spraybar tests described previously. Combustion was 
stabilized at a given altitude condition, which results in a specific 
value of the Dezubay parameter, then fuel pressure was reduced, lowering 
the equivalence ratio until a flame-out occured. Points at which flame- 
outs occurred are plotted in figure 4-59 along with the Dezubay pre-mixed 
stability limit. The data appear to fall well outside the pre-mixed limit 
in contrast to the spraybar results. The characteristic dimension used to 
calculate the Dezubay parameter is subject to interpretation however, 
given the more complex geometry of the expansion ramp flameholding region. 
For figure 4-59, twice the overall geometric height of aft-facing 
flameholder area (denoted by H in appendix D) was used in the Dezubay 
parameter. Recall from the discussion on flameholder sizing that a step 
is equivalent to one-half of an unconfined two-dimensional flameholder. 
There is no inherent reason that the expansion ramp flameholders should 



127 
allow stable combustion at more severe conditions than the pre-wixed 
limit. This is another indication that the 12* corner downstream of the 
flameholders caused a lengthening of the recirculation region. The longer 
recirculation zone corresponds to a larger effective flameholder height, 
which would reduce the Dezubay parameter to more reasonable values near 
the pre-mlxed limit. The preceeding argument is consistent with the 
premise that combustion was not initiated near the flameholders, but 
further downstream allowing some Initial overexpansion to occur. 



Expansio n Ramp Performance Assessment 

The control volume analysis of chapter II indicated that the performance 
of external burning had the potential to be competitive with other forms 
of airbreathing propulsion. The specific Impulse measured experimentally 
will now be compared to that predicted. The specific Impulse in terms of 
the change In axial force per unit fuel flow is difficult to assess 
however, because of the aforementioned free- jet boundary interference with 
fuel off. The free- jet boundary causes the thrust coefficient with fuel 
off to be too high, which reduces the change in thrust coefficient due to 
external burning. Nonetheless, the thrust coefficient and specific 
impulse as defined by equation 2-24 are shown in figure 4-60 for 
configuration 10. Configuration 10 is representative of all others since 
the results showed little dependence on geometry. In figure 4-60a, The 
thrust coefficient is plotted vs. the correlated equivalence ratio to show 
the change in axial force used to compute the specific impulse. The 



128 



thrust coefficient predicted by the control volume analysis is also shown 
for comparison. Two different fuel off force values will be considered. 
First, as labelled in the figure, is the actual fuel off thrust 
coefficient of -.097 obtained experimentally in the same manner as the 
burning values, by pressure-area summation. This value is known to be 
affected by interference from the free- jet boundary, and is too high. The 
other value to be considered is that of a Prandtl -Meyer expansion about 
the 12° turn at Mach 1.26 which is -.4. This value is too low since in 
actuality, transverse flow and boundary layer separation would tend to 
relieve this low pressure. The "deltas" between these two fuel off values 
and the thrust during external burning (which is considered to be less 
affected by free- jet boundary interference) , represent the extremes 
between which the proper answer lies. In figure 4-60b, the specific 
impulse corresponding to these two extremes is shown along with the 
control volume prediction which is based on the control volume thrust 
coefficient values and the Prandtl -Meyer expansion. The experimental 
impulse based on the Prandtl -Meyer expansion falls short of the control 
volume prediction because of the lower than predicted thrust coefficients. 
The impulse computed in this manner which represents the upper limit, 
peaks at about 4000. The other curve based on the measured fuel off 
thrust shows much lower performance. This curve is the actual 
experimentally determined impulse with no allowance for the free-jet 
boundary interference, and represents the lower limit, peaking at 400 sec. 
No means were available to determine the proper fuel off drag coefficient. 
Even at the experimentally demonstrated lower limit of 400 seconds though, 
the simple external burning system exhibits performance competitive with 



129 
rocket propulsion. Other factors which must also be considered when 
comparing external burning to other propulsion augmentation options, are 
it's light weight and simplicity, as well as the beneficial normal or lift 
force which would reduce wing loading and vehicle trim drag. 



130 



CHAPTER V - SUHNARY AND CONCLUSIONS 



This work represents the first comprehensive study of the application of 
hydrogen external burning to transonic drag reduction. A control volume 
technique and a two-dimensional Euler analysis were developed specifically 
for the transonic conditions of interest. The Euler analysis revealed an 
interaction between the burned and unburned streams which is peculiar to 
the transonic inflow conditions. Experiments conducted in a Mach 1.26 
free-jet advanced the understanding of transonic external burning in two 
areas. First, the operational envelope of the concept was characterized 
by extending the validity of an existing flame stability correlation to 
non pre-mixed, transonic altitude conditions. Secondly, drag reduction 
experiments on simple expansion ramp models provided external burning data 
which was relatively free of facility interference. 

An initial assessment of the performance potential of external burning was 
made using the control volume approach. The analysis indicates that 
transonic drag can be eliminated for a hydrogen fuel expenditure of .1 to 
.2 pounds per second per square foot of aft-facing base area on a 1000 
psfa trajectory. This fuel must be distributed, preferrably in 
stoichiometric proportions in an air stream of height equal to roughly 10% 
of the base height. The jet penetration afforded by normal, sonic 
injection from the wall is sufficient to accomplish this, and an injector 
size and spacing rationale was developed. Specific impulse performance 
competitive with conventional airbreathing propulsion systems such as 



131 
turbo jets is indicated. The ratio of control volume outflow to inflow 
velocity was shown to be nearly one at zero thrust (drag eliminated), and 
was weakly proportional to thrust coefficient for non-zero thrust. The 
Increase in sound speed caused by combustion thus drives the external 
burning plume subsonic for all transonic conditions of interest. 

The control volume study was supplemented by the two-dimensional Euler 
analysis. Energy representative of hydrogen-air combustion was added in 
various distributions, demonstrating that although wall pressure 
distributions varied considerably, the thrust force generated was 
Independent of the heat addition distribution and depended only on the 
total heat added. Good agreement between the control volume and Euler 
analysis was obtained. An interesting feature of the external burning 
flowfield revealed by the Euler analysis, was a sharp compression in the 
plume at the sonic line caused by the interaction of the subsonic, 
elliptic region with the unheated still supersonic outer flow. This 
compression, which may separate the. plume boundary layer is viewed as a 
possible limiting factor in external burning performance. 

Hydrogen-air flame stability was studied experimentally in a Mach 1.26 
free- jet using a combination spraybar-flameholder to determine the 
operational flight envelope of external burning. An existing combustion 
stability correlating parameter developed for a pre-mixed, subsonic 
hydrogen-air stream adequately correlated the non pre-mixed, supersonic 
data. The maximum Mach number and altitude to which stable combustion can 
be maintained depends on many variables including the flameholder size. 



132 



and vehicle trajectory, but it can be concluded that combustion stability 
will not prevent the successful application of external burning to 
transonic drag reduction. Operation to Mach 2 on a 1000 psfa trajectory 
appears feasible. 

Infra-red Images of combustion during spraybar tests with differing 
freestream temperature and pressure, but comparable Reynold's number 
indicate that the combustion process is not completely mixing limited, and 
is influenced by the finite-rate reaction process. This result makes 
scaling of small-scale test results tenuous, but it is reasoned that 
results at reduced scale are conservative. 

External burning expansion ramp tests were run in the same free-jet 
facility to demonstrate drag reduction and provide data for comparison to 
the analysis results. The expansion ramp models were related 
geometrically to a single-stage-to-orbit vehicle base. Initial results 
demonstrated a reduction in drag due to external burning, raising the ramp 
thrust coefficient to nearly zero, but not to the level predicted by the 
control volume analysis. The experimental thrust coefficient also showed 
very little sensitivity to the estimated equivalence ratio in contrast to 
the control volume results. Ramp pressure distributions showed an initial 
overexpansion to somewhat less than freestream pressure, followed by a 
flat distribution to the trailing edge. The desparity between measured 
and predicted performance prompted an investigation into various facility 
interference issues related to the subsonic external burning plume. No 
interference mechanism was identified as being of sufficient magnitude to 



133 
account for the discrepancy. With fuel off however, wave reflections from 
the free-jet boundary above the model result in an artificially high 
thrust coefficient. This makes an assessment of the actual performance of 
external burning in terms of the change in axial force due to burning 
difficult. 

Euler results in two dimensions indicate that the performance predicted by 
the control volume analysis is accompanied by a sharp recompression in the 
heated stream at the sonic line. The lower than expected, and constant 
nature of the thrust coefficient obtained experimentally is attributed to 
this effect. It is surmised that the initial overexpansion to less than 
freestream pressure was followed by boundary layer separation, precluding 
a strong recompression and limiting performance to the level repeatedly 
demonstrated. 



Further experiments in which flameholding and fuel injection schemes were 
varied in an attempt to reduce initial overexpansion by initiating 
combustion further upstream resulted in no significant improvement in 
performance. It is concluded that combustion could not be initiated in 
close proximity to the relatively small flameholders used because the 
recirculation zone of the flameholders alone was of insufficient length. 
A lengthening of the recirculation zone caused by the the 12^ expansion is 
what allowed stable combustion, but also resulted In the initial 
overexpansion. The use of larger flameholders was not explored as the 
height of the ones used was already a significant fraction of the fueled 



134 



Stream height. A further increase would lead to inconsistency with the 
full scale system where the flameholder height necessary would be a 
smaller fraction of the fueled stream height. 

The specific impulse in terms of the change in axial force per unit fuel 
flow actually demonstrated in the experiment was computed despite the fact 
that the fuel off thrust coefficient was known to be too high due to free- 
jet boundary interference. As a result the impulse values obtained are 
conservative, and peaked at 400 sec which is competitive with a chemical 
rocket. The impulse was also computed assuming a Prandtl -Meyer expansion 
around the 12° corner with fuel off, resulting in a peak value of 4000 sec 
which represents an upper limit.. 

Larger scale tests would alleviate many of the flameholding issues, and 
should allow somewhat higher performance, since combustion could be 
initiated at the flameholding site and not downstream following an initial 
overexpansion. However a factor which may limit the performance of 
external burning in transonic flow is boundary layer separation due to the 
compression at the sonic line observed in the Euler analysis. 



135 
APPENDIX A - HYDROGEN-AIR EQUILIBRIUH CALCULATION 



In the control volume analysis of chapter II, the gas at the outflow 
station is assumed to be the products of hydrogen-air combustion in 
equilibrium. The calculation procedure used to determine the composition 
and adiabatic flame temperature is outlined below. 

The hydrogen air system considered is described by equation A-1. The 
combustion products are assumed to consist of ten species. 

«j + -i (O2 + rig^2 + zAr) - S J3^ [A-1] 



i 


soecies 


1 


"2 


2 


O2 


3 


4 


4 


H,0 


5 


H 


6 





7 


N 


8 


OH 


9 


NO 


10 


Ar 



^ is the fuel -air equivalence ratio (the fuel -air ratio normalized by the 

stoichiometric fuel -air ratio). The coefficients z and r are determined 

by the composition of air which for the present study is assumed to be the 

following: 

78.12% N, 

20.95% 0, 

0.93% Ar 



136 



This results in z-0. 044391, and r-3.7289. At a given temperature and 
pressure, ten equations are needed to solve for the ten unknown species 
concentrations. Four equations result from atomic conservation. Written 
In terms of species partial pressures, they are: 

no 2Po^ ♦ Ph,o *Po*Pno*Poh ^ ^ 



no _ 2Po, * Ph,o * Po* Pho* Poh i 



n 



K 



2Pjgi * Pn'*' Pm 



[A-3] 



£at , Pai ^ _z_ 

^K 2Pf^ * Pn* Pm 2r 



[A-4] 



P = Spj [A-5] 

i-i 



Six additional equations are obtained using equilibrium constants for the 
following six dissociation reactions: 

Ph^ - 2Ph [A-6] 

Po^ " 2Po [A-7] 

Piii - 2p„ [A-8] 

Ph,o - 2p„ * Po [A-91 



137 
Poh^Pm* Po [A- 10) 

^Ptfo * Po,* Pk, [A-11] 

Equilibrium constants which are functions of temperature relate the 
partial pressures of reactants and products at equilibrium for these 
reactions, and furnish the remaining six equations needed to close the ten 
species calculation: 



^p. 


Ph\ 


^ 


Pi 


^p. 


Pi 


K = 


Phjo 


^P« 


Ph Po 


^- 


PoH 

PoPh 


K B 


Pm' 


^ 


Po,P«, 



[A-12] 



[A-13) 



[A-14] 



[A-15] 



[A-16] 



[A-17] 



138 



The equilibrium constants are detemined using the method given by 
Prothero\ who provides sixth-order curvefits for entropy (S) and enthalpy 
(H). The free energy of a single chemical species Is given by: 

F^' Hi- TSi IA-18] 

The free energy of reaction for each of the dissociation reactions given 
by equations A-6 through A-11 is then: 

AF, « ix^F, [A-19] 

Where the x/s are the coefficients of the dissociation reactions and are 
negative for reactants and positive for products. Finally, the 
equilibrium constant for a given reaction is given by: 



RT 



In K^ = —^ [A-20] 



Equations A-2 through A-5 and A-12 through A-17 are ten non-linear 
equations in ten unknowns, the solution of which is not trivial. The 
method used is briefly outlined below. 

An equation involving only the partial pressure of Hj and 0^ is obtained 
in the following manner. First, equation A-5 is subtracted from A-3. The 



139 
resulting equation is written in terms of the partial pressures of Hj, Oj, 
and N2 using the equilibrium constant relations and equation A-4. 



Equation A-2 is written in terms of the Hj, Oj, and Nj partial pressures 
in a similar manner, and then solved for the square root of the nitrogen 
partial pressure. 



2* ;— ^ 0--2*)'!p, , (2-2*)'^. _ , '*""' 



These two equations are then combined into a single relation involving 
only the Hj and 0^ partial pressures. An initial guess is made for the Hj 
partial pressure which results in two values for the 0^ partial pressure 
from equation A-21. One of these values results in negative partial 
pressures upon back-substitution and is discarded. The sum of the partial 
pressures is then checked against the specified total pressure and a new 
value for the Hg partial pressure is determined based on the error. The 
Iteration continues until equation A-5 is satisfied to within a given 
tolerance. 



140 



The preceeding method determines the equilibrium composition given the 
temperature and pressure of the combustion products, and the fuel -air 
ratio of the reactants. This routine Is nested within the adiabatic flame 
temperature procedure which balances the enthalpy of the equilibrium 
products with the known enthalpy of the reactants by Iterating the 
temperature of the products. 

To validate the preceeding methodology, results were checked against those 
of Wear^ et. al. for hydrogen gas fuel and dry air. Figure A-1 is a sample 
comparison of the adiabatic flame temperature computed using the present 
method with Wear's results for a reactant temperature of 300" K, and a 
pressure of one atmosphere. Good agreement was obtained over the entire 
range of pressures and fuel -air ratios of interest for the external 
burning problem. 



141 



References 



1. Prothero, A., 'Computing with Thermochemical Data," Combustion and 
Flame . Vol. 13, No. 4, 1969. 

2. Hear, J.D., Jones, R.E., McBrlde, B.J., and Beyerle, R.A., 'Combustion 
Gas Properties III - Hydrogen Gas Fuel and Dry Air,' NASA TP 2477, June, 
1985. 



3,000 
2,500 
2.000 






UJ 

3 

LL 

o 

m 

< 

< 



1,500 

1,000 

500 















PRESENTT 

METHOD 
O 

REF.2 






/ 


'-^-s 


^-«^ 


) 






/ 












J 


/ 












4 





























0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 
FUEL-AIR RATIO 



Figure A-1. Comparison of calculated adiabatic flame temperatures with 
results of reference 2. 



142 



APPENDIX B - EULER ANALYSIS TEST CASES 

The following 2-D Euler test cases were run to verify that the program 
would properly solve simple compressible flows prior to applying the 
analysis to the more complex problem of external burning. All of the test 
cases were run on 21 x 11 grids with uniform grid spacing. A 2-D Courant 
number of 1/4 was used throughout. The absolute value of the change in 
each of the U vector members (determined by the corrector step in the 
MacCormack solver) was summed over the entire grid at each time step to 
determine convergence. 

10° Compression 

Figure B-1 depicts the 10° compression test case along with the exact 
solution. The grid used appears in figure B-2. Mach number contours at 
three levels of artificial damping are presented in figure B-3. The case 
with no damping (C^-O) exhibits strong pre-shock oscillations. As 
expected, these oscillations are reduced by increased damping. Wall 
pressure distributions for all three damping values appear in figure B-4 
and are nearly coincident, all approaching the exact value. 

10° Expansion 

The 10° expansion test case and exact solution are outlined in figure B-5, 
and the grid used is shown in figure B-6. Mach number contours appearing 
In figure B-7 show only slight variation with damping. The effect of 
damping on the wall pressure distributions is almost negligible as shown 
in figure B-8. The downstream wall pressure is very close to but slightly 



143 
under the exact value, 

Ravlglgh flpw 

The constant*area heat addition or Rayleigh flow test case Is depicted in 
figure B-9 along with the exact solution. A heat added per unit nass 
(normalized by the square of freestream velocity) of .328 reduces the Mach 
2.4 Inflow to Nach 1.2. The grid, and the region of heat addition used 
are shown in figure B-10. The heat was added uniformly over the shaded 
region. Mach number contours for this case exhibited no transverse 
gradients whatsoever, and so give no more information than the wall Hach 
number distributions shown in figure B-11. The exit Hach number is 
slightly under the exact value. This is consistent with the small errors 
In total temperature and pressure at the outflow seen in figures B-12 and 
13. 

Agreement with exact solutions for all three types of problems is adequate 
for the intended use of the analysis, which is to examine the features of 
the external burning flowfield, and overall performance trends. A damping 
coefficient of .025 is sufficient to damp non-physical oscillations, and ' 
does not adversely affect the accuracy of the solution. 



144 



M^=1.5 




P2 /Pi =1.656 
Cp2=.417 
M2=1.11 



Figure B-1. 10* Compression test case 




Figure B-2. Compression test case grid; 21 x 11 nodes. 



145 




a) Cj-O, 




b) Cd-.025. 

Figure B-3. 10** Compression test case results at various levels of 
damping. Mach number contours (.05 contour increments). 



146 




0.6 r 



c) Cj».05. 
Figure B-3. Concluded 




NON-DIMENSIONAL DISTANCE 



Figure B-4. Wall pressure distributions for 10° compression test case at 
various levels of damping. 



147 



M,=1.2 \ V ^,3gg. 



-6^.=56.4*^ \ 



\ N 



'1 



\ \ 



P2/Pi=.605 
Cp2=..392 
M2=1.56 



Figure B-5. 10'* Expansion test case 




Figure B-6. Expansion test case grid; 21 x 11 nodes. 



148 




a) Crf-0. 




b) C^.025. 

Figure B-7. 10" Expansion test case results at various levels of damping. 
Mach number contours (.02 contour increments). 



149 




c) Cj-.05. 
Figure B-7. Concluded 



(1 



0.2 r 



-.0 



o 
u 

en 
en 
tu 




EXACT SOLimON 



NDN->DIHENSIONAL DISTANCE 



Figure B-8. Wall pressure distributions for 10*" expansion test case at 
various levels of damping. 



150 






M^ =2.4 



/ 



q/K/gc)=-328 



M2=1.2 

Tt2/Tt, = 1.351 

P2/Pi=3.01 

Cp2=.497 



Figure B-9. Rayleigh flow test case; q/(UoVgc)"-328. 







TT- 


-.V 


': ■.'' 


'"*-■ ■ 


'^X' 


>.....: , 


■■■*,^ ■ 


■**.- 


■..^ 






■:-r 


■•■t^ 


•^''•; 


"T** 


■'^.'^ 


















































.-: 














' 








































































.> ■• 


•-^ 


















. . 
























































^■• 


:. . 




































•'•w 


'■■■ 


, - -: .'■ 




•: . 






•■4 














•■ ■ 












.•:^'*' 


■ K' 


;- .. 


# 


;:^ 


-.: 


..:;'. 






























'"':X 


^:= 


:.:«. 


-■ .^J*. 


.^^ 


.i-i:>: 


->5-^^ 


,-^ 


■ ->* 


.-■- 




'. -i 


^^- 


,.. 


■4. - ' 







Figure B-10. Rayleigh flow test case grid and heat addition region; 21 x 
11 nodes. 



151 



EXACT SOUnK)N 




NDN-OIHENSIONAL DISTANCE 



Figure B-11. Mach number distributions for Rayleigh flow test case at 
various levels of artificial damping. 




KIDN-OIHENSIONAL DISTANCE 



Figure B-12. Total temperature distributions for Rayleigh flow test case 
at various levels of artificial damping. 



152 



0.6 r 




NON-DIMENSIONAL DISTANCE 



Figure B-13. Pressure distributions for Rayleigh flow test case at 
various levels of artificial damping. 



153 
APPENDIX C - WATER-COOLED TOTAL TEMPERATURE PROBE DATA REDUCTION 



The water-cooled total temperature probe used was based on an existing 
"bare wire In crossflow" deslgnV To withstand expected temperatures 
greater than 4000** Ranklne, an 1r1d1um-40X rhodium vs. iridium thermocouple 
pair was used. The cost of these precious aetals made It necessary to 
splice the wires with copper wire a short distance away from the sensor 
within the water Jacket. This splice creates a variable temperature 
reference Junction which must be independently measured. The temperature 
of this reference Junction was measured with a standard Type T" (copper- 
constantan) thermocouple. Figure C-1 depicts schematically the 
thermocouple circuit. Tables of voltage (electromotive force or emf) from 
the wire manufacturer were based on a 0"C reference Junction, and so the 
following procedure was required to infer the Indicated gas total 
temperature from the measured emf. The emf measured is the emf induced at 
the Ir40%Rh vs. Ir pair minus the emf induced at the reference Junction 
due to the copper splice: 

e^^«« " Gittf^^ - smfr^^ [C-l] 

Adding and subtracting the emf for a 0° reference Junction results in the 
following equation: 

e^^«..« = (einfr^ - emfooc) - (em^r,^ " emfooc) IC-2] 
The last term in equation C-2 represents the emf generated by an Ir40XRh 



154 



VS. Ir pair with a 0*C reference, so the tables can be entered at the 
measured reference temperature to obtain this value. This emf is then 
added to that measured to obtain the emf based on a 0°C reference: 

This then is the emf used to obtain the indicated gas temperature from the 
tables. The indicated temperature must then be corrected for conduction, 
recovery, and radiation losses. The bare-wire in crossflow design 
afforded a wire length to diameter ratio of approximately 15 which makes 
a conduction correction unnecessary. 



Recovery correction 

The recovery correction is a function of Mach number, and compensates for 
the fact that the entire thermocouple junction is not immersed in the 
total temperature of the flow. The recovery correction used is a function 
of Mach number and pressure and was taken directly from reference 1. The 
correction is small, being a maximum of about 3% for subsonic Nach 
numbers. The effect of pressure on this factor is negligible for the 
bare-wire in crossflow design. The Mach number at the probe was not 
measured, and so was estimated in the following manner, using the fact 
that the external burning process occurs at nearly constant velocity. 

The gas composition at the probe was inferred by assuming that the 
indicated probe temperature was equal to the adiabatic flame temperature 



155 
of a fuel -lean hydrogen-air mixture at one atmosphere. The composition of 
these combustion products along with the Indicated temperature was used to 
compute a sound speed. The ratio of freestream velocity to this sound 
speed was then used as the estimated Nach number at the probe. For low 
probe temperatures where the estimated probe Mach number was supersonic, 
the recovery correction curve was extrapolated. 

The proceeding methodology accounts for the variation of recovery 
correction with Mach number only approximately, but is sufficient given 
the magnitude of the correction, and the preliminary nature of the 
experiments. 



Radiation correction 

The radiation correction used is that presented by Glawe^ et. al. For 
unshielded probes, the equation used reduces to the following: 

jf / 7» \3.82 



Where AT^^ correction in deg. K 

^rmi radiation correction coefficient 

H stream Mach number 

p stream static pressure in atmospheres 

Pq reference pressure of 1 atmosphere 

Tf probe indicated temperature in deg. K 

1q reference temperature (555°K) 

The stream Mach number computed for the recovery correction was used, and 



156 



the pressure was taken as the free- jet exit pressure. An experimentally 
determined relation for K^^ In terms of wire diameter is given for 
unshielded probes, and yields a value of 2 for the .032" dia. wire used. 
This value of K^^ resulted in corrected temperatures which were in excess 
of that theoretically possible for hydrogen and air. The K^^ relation was 
based on data which for a number of reasons may not be strictly applicable 
to the present situation. First, it was obtained In natural gas 
combustion products at a maximum temperature of 2550'R. Also, type "K" 
thermocouples were used which would have a different emmittance than the 
Iridium-Rhodium wire. For these reasons. It was deemed appropriate to 
adjust the value of K,^ to .4 such that the theoretical maximum 
equilibrium temperature for hydrogen and air at one atmosphere would not 
be exceeded. 

The maximum radiation corrections resulting were only 6% of the corrected 
temperature, so again the approximations used would not lead to large 
error in the final measurement. Obviously, more accurate measurements 
could have been obtained by calibrating the probe at the conditions of 
Interest, but the nature of the test objectives did not warrant this extra 
effort. 



157 



References 

1. Glawe, G.E., Simmons, F.S., and Stickney, T.M., "Radiation and 
Recovery Corrections and Time Constants of Several Chrome! -Alumel 
THermocouple Probes in H1gh-Temperature» High-Velocity Gas Streams," NACA 
TN 3766, Oct. 1956. 

2. Glawe, G.E., Holanda, R., and Krause, L.N., "Radiation and Recovery 
Corrections and Time Constants of Several Sizes of Shielded and Unshielded 
Thermocouple Probes for Measuring Gas Temperature," NASA TP 1099, Jan. 
1978. 



BARE-WIRE IN 

CROSSFLOW 

SENSOR 

ATTi 




VARIABLE 

TEMPERATURE 

REFERENCE 

JUNCTION 

ATT^ 



TYPET 
THERMOCOUPLE 



Figure C-1. Schematic of IrAOXRh vs. Ir thermocouple with variable 
temperature reference junction. 



158 



APPENDIX D - EXPANSION RANP FUEL INJECTOR AND FLANEHOLDER CONFIGURATIONS 



159 



t 




x-o 



FUEL INJECTION 

26. .025" DIA (CONFIGURATIONS 1 AND 2) 

56. .016* DIA (CONFIOURATK3N 3) 

pc-2.y) 



125" (H) 



Figure D-1. Configurations 1,2 and 3 (flameholder "A"). 



f 

x«o 




FUEL INJECTION 

56. .018* DIA. 

P(-2.y) 



.222'(H) 



Figure D-2. Configuration 4 (flameholder "B"). 



160 



f 



x-o 




FUELINJECTJON 
56..0iroiA. 



Mr am 



Figure D-3. Configuration 5 (flameholder "C"). 



f 



x-o 




PUB-WJECnON 

56,.0irOIA. 

(X-251 



472- (H) 



Figure D-4. Configuration 6 (flameholder "D"). 



161 



f 



x-o 



UPSTREAM 

FUEL INJECTION 

26..025'DIA. 

(X-Z<r) 



125* (H) 




Figure D-5. Configuration 7 (flameholder "E"). 



1.00* 



LEAOINQEOGE 

EXTENSION 
(5* KNIFE EDGE) 



f 

X-O 



1.0P 



-^ -*-^' 



UPSTREAM 

FUELINJECTKJN 

26..02S'DIA. 

(X-aoo 



_1 




.125' (H) 



Figure D-6. Configuration 8 (flameholder "A"). 



162 



IOC 



LEAOINQEOGE 

DCTENSJON 
(5°»miFEEDGE) 



f 



X-0 



UPSTREAM 

FUEL INJECTION 

26,.02S'O(A. 

(X«2.(n 



•25' (H) 




Figure D-7. Configuration 9 (flameholder "F"). 



i.oo- 




LEA0INQEIX3E 

EXTENSION 
(5* KNIFE EDGE) 



f 

X-O 



UPSTREAM 

FUEL INJECTION 

26,.Q2S*OIA. 

(X-iO^ 



Figure D-8. Configurations 10 and 11 (Flameholder "G"). 



163 
REFERENCES 



1. Aerodynamics of Base Combustion, ed. S. N. B. Murthy, et a1., NIT 
Press, Cambridge, 1976, pp. 143-210. 

2. Binig, F.S., "External Burning In Supersonic Streams," APL TG- 
912, Hay 1967, (JHU-APL). 

3. Davis, T., Forney, H.B., Smith E. H., Tyson, T. L., and Wolf, R. 
L., "Two Dimensional External Combustion Airfoil," Experiment, 
Inc., TM-704, July 26, 1955. 

4. Fletcher, E.A., Dorsch, R.6., and Gerstein, M., "Combustion of 
Aluminum Borohydrlde in a Supersonic Wind Tunnel," NACA RM 
E55D07a, 1955. 

5. Dorsch, R.G., Serafini, J.S., and Fletcher, E.A., "A Preliminary 
Investigation of Static-Pressure Changes Associated With 
Combustion of Aluminum Borohydrlde in a Supersonic Hind Tunnel," 
NACA RM E55F07, 1955. 

6. Dorsch, R.G., Serafini, O.S., and Fletcher, E.A., "Exploratory 
Investigation of Aerodynamic Effects of External Combustion of 
Aluminum Borohydrlde in Airstream Adjacent to Flat Plate in Mach 
2.46 Tunnel," NACA RM E57E16, 1957. 

7. Serafini, John S., Dorsch, Robert G., and Fletcher, Edward A., 
"Exploratory Investigation of Static and Base-Pressure Increases 
Resulting from Combustion of Aluminum Borohydrlde Adjacent to Body 
of Revolution in Supersonic Wind Tunnel," NACA RM E57E15, 1957. 

8. Dorsch, R.G., Serafini, J.S., Fletcher, E.A., and Pinkel, I. I., 
"Experimental Investigation of Aerodynamic Effects of External 
Combustion in Airstream Below Two-Dimensional Supersonic Wing at 
Mach 2.5 and 3.0," NASA Memo 1-11-59E. 

9. Dorsch, R.G., Harrison, A., and Dryer, M., "Investigation of 
Aerodynamic Effects of External Combustion Below Flat Plate Model 
in 10-by 10-foot Wind Tunnel at Hach 2.4," NASA TN D-282, April, 
1960. 

10. Billig, F.S. "A Study of Combustion in Supersonic Streams," 
Bumblebee Series Report No. 321, The Johns Hopkins University, 
Applied Physics Lab, July 1964. 

11. Dugger, G.L., Deklau, B., Billig, F.S., and Matthews, S.E., 
"Summary Report on External Ramjet Program," JHU/APL, TG-419, 
Oct., 1961. 

12. Townend, L.H., and Reid, J., "Some Effects of Stable Combustion in 



164 



Wakes Fonned In a Supersonic Stream," In Supersonic Flows. 
Chemical Processes, and Radiative Transfer. Edited by D. B. 01 fe 
and V. Zakkay, Pergamon Press, New York, 1964. 

13. Strahle, W.C, •Theoretical Consideration of Combustion Effects on 
Base Pressure in Supersonic Flight,' Twelfth Symposium 
(International) on Combustion. July 14-20, 1968 pp. 1163-1173, The 
Combustion Institute, 1969. 

14. Strahle, H.C., "Some Outer Limits in the Theory of Transonic Flow 
with External Burning," Combustion Science and Technology, Vol. 1, 
1970, pp. 357-363. ^j* * 

15. Fuhs, A.E., "Quasi Area Rule for Heat Addition in Transonic and 
Supersonic Flight Regimes," Naval Postgraduate School, Technical 
Report AFAPL-TR-72-10, Aug. 1972. 

16. Smithey, W., "Projectile Thrust-Drag Optimization With External 
Burning," Ph.D. Thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey. CA. 
AD-784764, June 1974. 

17. Caswell, G.J., "Base Drag Reduction by External Burning In the 
Invlscid Stream," M.S. Thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, Montrey, 
CA, Sept. 1973. ' 

18. Naber, M. E., "Investigation of External Burning Assisted 
Projectile-Reduction of Base Drag of Supersonic Projectile by 
Increasing Base Pressure," M. S. Thesis, Naval Postgraduate 
School, Monterey, California, September 1973. 

19. Smithey, W., Naber. M., Caswell. G., and Fuhs, A.E., "External 
Burning Assisted Projectile - Theory and Experiment," 9th Joint 
Propulsion Conference, Las Vegas, Nev., Nov. 5-7, 1973, AIAA Paper 
73-1193. 

20. Neal, D.H., Hubbartt, J.E., Strahle, W.C, and Wilson, W.W., "^ 
"Effects of External Compression on an axisymmetric Turbulent Near 

Wake," AIAA Journal, Vol. 16, No. 9, September, 1978, pp. 940-947. 

21. Neal, D.H., Hubbartt, J.E.. Strahle, W.C, and Wilson, W.W., 
"Experiments and Analysis Related to External Burning for 
Propulsion," Air Force Office of Scientific Research, Wash., D.C, 
AFSOR-TR-77-0602, March, 1977. 

22. Strahle, W.C, Hubbartt, J.E., Neale, D.H., and Huval, D.J., 
"Experiments Related to External Burning for Propulsion," Air 
Force Office of Scientific Research, Wash., D.C, AFOSR-77-1291, 
Oct, 1977. 

23. Neal, D.H., Hubbartt, J.E., and Strahle, W.C, "Mach 3 Hydrogen 
External/Base Burning," 18th Aerospace Sciences Mtg., Pasadena, 
CA., Jan. 14-16, 1980, AIAA Paper 80-0280. 



165 

24. Strahle, U.C, Hubbartt, J.E., and Hal trick, R., "Base Burning 
Performance at Mach 3," AIAA Paper 81-1469, 17th Joint Propulsion 
Conference, Colorado Springs, CO., 1981. 

25. Hubbartt, J.E., Strahle, W.C., "External/Base Burning for Base 
Drag Reduction at Mach 3,* AIAA Journal, Vol. 19, p. 1502-1504, 
Nov. 1981. 

26. Schadow, K.C., and Chleze, D.J., *Exper1aiental Study on Base Drag 
Reduction With Combined Lateral and Axial Injection, AIAA Journal, 
Vol. 16, No. 10, October, 1978, pp. 1084-1089. 

27. Schadow, K.C., "Base Drag Reduction By External Burning," 
Combustion and Detonation Processes; Annual International Mtg., 
10th, Karlsruhe, U. Germany, June 27-29, 1979, Proceedings, pp. 
243-260. 

28. Schadow, K.C., "Experimental Investigation of Combined External 
Burning/Base Burning," AIAA, SAE, ASHE 16th Joint Propulsion 
Conference, Hardford, CT, 1980, AIAA Paper 80-1257. 

29. Cavallerl, R.J., "Experimental Evaluation of the External Burning 
Rocket Concept," 12th Joint Propulsion Conference, Palo Alto, CA., 
July 26-29, 1976, AIAA Paper 76-641. 

30. Director, M. N., "Evaluation of an External Burning Experiment," 
13th Joint Propulsion Conference, Orlando, Fl., July 11-13, 1977, 
AIAA Paper No. 77-926. 

31. Pinkel, 1. 1., and Seraflnl, J. S., "Graphical Method for Obtaining 
Flow Field in Two-Dimensional Supersonic Stream to Which Heat is 
Added," NACA Technical Note 2206, Nov., 1950. 

32. Pinkel, 1. 1., Serafini, J. S., and Gregg, J. L., "Pressure 
Distribution and Aerodynamic Coefficients Associated with Heat 
addition to Supersonic Air Stream Adjacent to Two-Dimensional 
Supersonic Wing," NACA RH E51K26, 1952. 

33. Tsien, H.S., and Beilock, N., "Heat Source In a Uniform Flow," 
Journal of Aeronautical Science, Dec. 1949, p. 756. 

34. Schetz, J. A., Favin, S., and Billig, F.S., "Analytical Comparison 
of the Performance of Different Base-Burning Modes," AIAA Journal, 
Vol. 14, Sept., 1976, pp. 1337-1338. 

35. Schetz, J. A., Billig, F.S., Favin, S., "Approximate Analysis of 
Base Drag Reduction by Base and/or External Burning for 
Axisymmetric, Supersonic Bodies," AIAA Paper 80-1258, 16th Joint 
Propulsion Conf., Hartford, Conneticut, 1980. 

36. Shapiro, A.H. The Dynamics and Thermodynamics of Compressible 
Fluid Flow . The Ronald Press Co., New York, 1953. 



166 



37. Vaughan, J.C, "A Two-Dimenslonal Study of The Jet Interaction and 
Downstream External Burning Resulting From a Gaseous Sidejet 
Expanding Into a Supersonic Stream," Ph.D. Thesis, Purdue Univ., 
West Lafayette, Ind. 1972. 

38. Callens, E.E., Miller, J.T., and Potter, J.L., "An Investigation 
of an Upper Stage Rocket Plane With External Burning Thrust 
Augmentation," ARO Inc., Arnold Air Force Station, Tenn., ARO-VKF- 
TR-72-94 AEDC-TR-72-181. 

39. Marino, A., "Theoretical Performance with External Burning on 
Surface," General Applied Science Labs, Inc., Westbury, New York, 
Feb. 1965, GASL TR-506. 

40. Harvey, D.W., and Catton, I., "A Model of External Burning 
Propulsion," 17th Aerospace Sciences Mtg., New Orleans, LA., Jan 
15-17, 1979, AIAA Paper 79-0358. 

41. Harvey, D.W., Davis, J.C, "External Burning Propulsion Analysis," 
17th Joint Propulsion Conference, July 27-29, Colorado Springs. 
CO, AIAA Paper 81-1477. 

42. Adamson T.C., Jr., and Nicholls, J. A., "On the Structure of Jets 
From Highly Underexpanded Nozzles Into Still Air," Journal of the 
Aero/Space Sciences, Jan. 1959, pp. 16-24. 

43. Zukoski, E.E., and Spaid, F.W., "Secondary Injection of Gases into 
a Supersonic Flow," AIAA Journal, Vol. 2, No. 10, Oct. 1964, pp. 
1689-1695. ^*^ 

44. Crist, S., Sherman, P.M., and Glass, D.R., "Study of the Highly 
Underexpanded Sonic Jet," AIAA Journal, Vol. 4, No. 1, Jan. 1966, 
pp. 68-71. 

45. Schetz, J. A., and Billig, F.S., "Penetration of Gaseous Jets 
Injected into a Supersonic Stream," J. Spacecraft, Vol. 3, No. 11, 
Nov. 1966, pp. 1658-1665. 

46. Schetz, J. A., Hawkins, P.F., and Lehman, H., "Structure of Highly 
Underexpanded Transverse Jets in a Supersonic Stream," AIAA 
Journal, Vol. 5, No. 5, May 1967, 882-884. 

47. Orth, R.C., Schetz, J.A., and Billig, F.S., "The Interaction and 
Penetration of Gaseous Jets in Supersonic Flow, NASA CR-1386. 
1969. 

48. Chrans, L.J., and Collins, D.J., "Stagnation Temperature and 
Molecular Weight Effects in Jet Interaction," AIAA Journal, Vol, 
8, No. 2, Feb. 1970, pp. 287-293. 

49. Hersch, M., Povinelli, L.A., and Povinelli, F.P., "Optical Study 
of Sonic and Supersonic Jet Penetration From A Flat Plate Into A 



167 
Mach 2 Alrstream, NASA IN D-5717, Har. 1970. 

50. Povlnelli, F.P., and Povinelli, L.A., •Correlation of Secondary 
Sonic and Supersonic Gaseous Jet Penetration Into Supersonic 
Crossflows," NASA TN D-6370, June 1971. 

51. Bllllg, F. S., Orth, R. C, and Lasky, N., "A Unified Analysis of 
Gaseous Jet Penetration," AIAA Journal, Vol. 9 No. 6, June 1971, 
pp. 1048-1058. 

52. Broadbent, E.G., "Flows With Heat Addition and Associated Pressure 
Fields," Fluid Dynamic Transactions, Vol.6, Pt.I, 1972. 

53. Anderson, D.A., Tannehlll, J.C. and Pletcher, R.H., Computational 
Fluid Mechanics and Heat Transfer . HcGraw-HIll, New York, 1984. 

54. Roache, P.J., Computational Fluid Mechanics . Hermosa Publishers, 
Albuquerque, N.N., 1982. 

55. Anderson, J.D. Jr., Hypersonic and High Temperature Gas Dynamics. 
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1989. 

56. Zukoski, E.E, and Marble, F.E., "Experiments Concerning the 
Mechanism of Flame Blowoff From Bluff Bodies," Proceedings of the 
Gas Dynamics Symposium on Aerothermochemistry, Northwestern 
University, Evanston, II, August, 1955. 

57. Dezubay, E. A., "A Study of Flame Stability Based on Reaction Rate 
Theory," A.S.M.E. Paper 54-SA-27, May 5, 1954. 

58. Jonash, E.R., Smith, A.L., and Hiavin, V.F., "Low-Pressure 
Performance of a Tubular Combustor with Gaseous Hydrogen," NACA RH 
E54L30a, May 9, 1955. 

59. Winterfeld, 6., "On the Stabilization of Hydrogen Diffusion Flames, 
by Flame-Holders in Supersonic Flow at Low Stagnation 
Temperatures," Combustion in Advanced Gas Turbine Systems . 
Proceedings of an International Propulsion Symposium held at the 
College of Aeronautics, Cranfleld, April 1967. 

60. Haas, J.E., Chamberlin, R., and Dicus, J.E., "New Hypersonic 
Facility Capability at NASA Lewis Research Center," AIAA Paper 89- 
2534, 25th Joint Propulsion Conference, Monterey, CA, July, 1989. 

61. Andrews, E.A. Jr., "A Subsonic to Mach 5.5 Subscale Engine Test 
Facility," AIAA-87-2052, 23rd Joint Propulsion Conference, San 
Diego, CA, June, 1987. 

62. Bahn G.S., "Calculations on the Autoignltion of Mixtures of 
Hydrogen and Air," NASA CR 112067, April 1972. 



168 



CASE 



HEAT \. 

addition 
distribution 
Nq axial/transverse grid 



1 1.4 

2 

3 

4 
2 
5 

6 
2 
7 

8 1.2 
2 1.4 

9 1.6 

10 2.0 

11 2.4 



const/const 
gauss/const 

GAUSS/PARBL 
GAUSS/CONST 



DELTA CONTROL 
DAMPING THRUST THRUST VOLUME 
COEFF COEFF COEFF RESULT 



80 X 40 .025 



50 X 25 .025 
80 X 40 
100 X 50 

80 X 40 " 



.028 
.028 
.030 



.008 
.028 
.031 
.027 
.025 



AC, 

.416 
.416 
.418 



.0125 .034 .422 
.025 .028 .416 
.05 .029 .417 



.036 .424 
.028 .416 
.026 .414 



.519 
.416 
.342 
.244 
,189 



AC 



T.or 



.420 



.537 
.420 
.349 
.257 
.201 



Table 3-1. Summary of Euler Analysis Runs. 



169 



NUNBER ORIFICE INJECTION PLUHE LEADING 



CONFIG 
NO 


OF 
ORIFICES 


DIA 
(IN) 


PLANE STA 
(IN) 


FLANE 
HOLDER 


BOUNDARY 
SIN 


EDGE 
EHENSION 


UPPEI 
SIDE: 


1 


26 


.025 


2.5 


A 


NO 


NO 


NO 


2 


26 


.025 


2.5 


A 


YES 


NO 


NO 


3 


56 


.018 


2.5 


A 


YES 


NO 


NO 


4 


56 


.018 


2.5 


B 


YES 


NO 


NO 


5 


56 


.018 


2.5 


C 


YES 


NO 


NO 


6 


56 


.018 


2.5 


D 


YES 


NO 


NO 


7 


26 


.025 


2.0 


E 


YES 


NO 


NO 


8 


26 


.025 


2.0 


A 


YES 


YES 


NO 


9 


26 


.025 


2.0 


F 


YES 


YES 


NO 


10 


26 


.025 


2.0 


G 


YES 


YES 


NO 


11 


26 


.025 


2.0 


G 


YES 


YES 


YES 



Table 4-1. Expansion ramp configuration summary. 



170 



CORR 

EQUIV 

RATIO, 


REDUCED 

EQUIV 

RATIO, 


NORM 
HEAT 
ADDED, 


INFLOW 
STREAM 
HEIGHT, 


1 

\ 

1 


CONTROL 
VOLUME 
nfRUST 
COEFF. 


EULER 

THRUST 

COEFF, 

TT,Eul«r 


^corr 


^Eultr 


Qtot 


Vyt 


(3-D) 


(2-D) 


(FLIGHT) (FREEJET) 


^ 











NA 


NA 


-.401 


-.195 


.248 


.230 


5.42 


.197 


-.055 


-.070 


-.075 


-.034 


.452 


.400 


9.42 


.197 


.023 


.033 


.035 


.004 


.662 


.560 


13.19 


.197 


.071 


.101 


.111 


.033 


.941 


.740 


17.43 


.197 


.110 


.164 


.190 


.063 


1.379 


.840. 


19.78 


.197 


.127 


.192 


.223 


.078 



Table 4-2. Results of freejet and flight boundary Euler calculations with 
comparison to control volume results. 



171 





Figure 1-1. Artists conception of a single-stage-to-orbit vehicle. 



172 



NOZZLE 

EXPANSION 

SURFACE 




UMITING 
CHARACTERISTIC 



P = Po 



Mo >> 1 

P = Po 



COWL 

TRAILING 

EDGE 



SHEAR LAYER 



a) On-design at high speed. 



NOZZLE 

EXPANSION 

SURFACE 




SHEAR LAYER 



COWL 

TRAIUNG 

EDGE 



b) Over-expanded at transonic conditions. 



Figure 1-2. Single expansion ramp nozzle design and operation. 



173 



NOZZLE 

EXPANSION 

SURFACE 




P = Po 



// P<Po -^^^ 

//. -^-^ 



P<Po 



SHEAR LAYER 



Mo>1 
P = Po 



DEFLECTED 
COWL 



Figure 1-3. Cowl flap deflection to prevent internal over-expansion. 



NOZZLE 

EXPANSION 

SURFACE 



SHEAR LAYER 




COMBUSTION 
BOUNDARY 



Figure 1-4. External burning concept applied to single expansion ramp 

nozzle. 



174 



(VWIDE) 




1 



staO 



8ta.2 



Figure 2-1. Control volume nomenclature. 



175 



>* 



>? 



2 

UJ 

X 

IS 

I 



0.2 



0.16 



0.12 



0.08 



n. 



\ 


V 








PHI=a50 
PHI=0.75 
PHI=1.00 
PHI=2j00 


s 


X 


>^^ 




- 




V 


•> 







» 






'-.."^ 


— 




> m . 




.5 


1 


1. 


5 


2 2.5 3 





FREESTREAM MACH NUMBER, Mq 



a) Ratio of Inflow stream height to base height. 



s" 

cc 

< 

CD 



0.4 



z 

D 

cr 

UJ 
Ql 

Q 



UJ 

D 
U. 



.-. 0.3 

CM 
O 

£ 0.2 



< 



0.1 



% 
% 
% 










PHI=0^ 
PHI=0.75 
PHI=1.00 
PHI=2.00 


1 


% 

% 


• 








^ 


K 




•*^ 

^^•. 








-J 


^»5fte 


**" 


K ■ 





0.5 



1 



1.5 2 2.5 3 

FREESTREAM MACH NUMBER, M^ 

b) Fuel flow per unit base area. 
Figure 2-2. Results at zero drag along a Qq-IOOO psfa trajectory. 



176 



UJ 

D 

13 

U. (D 
CO 

n5 

^ & 

IT 
O 



(xlO^) 




1 1.5 2 2.5 3 

FREESTREAM MACH NUMBER, Mn 



c) Normalized specific impulse. 
Figure 2-2. Concluded. 



C-3 



177 



25 



^ 20 



Z 



10 















Pf/Pt 


«40 




^^ 


/ 




20 




-^ 


^ 






5 





'-^^ 










1 


2 


30 


40 50 



DISTANCE FROM ORIFICE AXIS, x/d 

Figure 2-3. Trajectory of 1/2% fuel volume concentration from 
correlation of reference 50 for various fuel pressure ratios. 



1,200 



CO 

I 


1,000 


OlT 




UJ 


800 


d 




D 








2 


600 


oc 




a. 




gj 




UJ 

P 


400 



n 




200 



5 1 1.5 2 Z5 3 

FREESTREAM MACH NUMBER. Mq 



Figure 2-4. Fuel schedule required to maintain zero thrust at 
stoichiometric conditions with a fixed orifice geometry; Qn-1000 psfa, 
d/w-. 005824, S/d -9.485, C^-.9, T,-518"R. 



178 



s 

m 

X 

s 

i 




0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 

FREESTREAM MACH NUMBER, Mq 

a) Ratio of Inflow stream height to base height. 




O 

i 

UJ 

o 

z 
111 

i 

D 
O 
UJ 



1.5 2 2.5 3 

FREESTREAM MACH NUMBER, Mj, 

b) Equivalence ratio. 

Figure 2-5. Results at constant fuel conditions for a fixed orifice 
geometry; Q(,=1000 psfa, d/w-. 005824, S/d*-9.485, C^-.9, V518''R. 



179 



O 



UJ 

o 

lU 
LL 
U. 
UJ 

o 
o 

D 
DC 




-0. 



^.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 

FREESTREAM MACH NUMBER, Mq 



c) Thrust coefficient for various expansion assumptions; yb/L»3.732, 
w/yb-2.5. 



'^ 


6 


It 


(XI 0^) 


(D 




•P 


5 






£ 




a 

w 


4 


tiT 




U) 




^ 




u 


3 


Q. 




S 




o 


2 


O 




LU 




Q. 


^ 


CO 


I 




.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 

FREESTREAM MACH NUMBER, Mq 

d) Specific impulse. 
Figure 2-5. concluded. 



180 



FREE 
BOUNDARY 



OPTIONAL 
SUPERSONIC 
INFLOW ' 



SUPERSONIC 
INFLOW 




STREAMUNE 



OPTIONAL 

WALL 
BOUNDARY 



MIXED 
SUPERSONIC- 
SUBSONIC 
OUTFLOW 



FREE. OR FREE-JET BOUNDARY 



Figure 3-1. Euler analysis schematic. 



181 




Figure 3-2. 80 x 40 grid. 




Figure 3-3. Case 1 heat addition distribution and streamlines. 



182 




a) Heat addition contours and streamlines. 




NDN-DIMENSIONAL DISTANCE 



b) Gaussian axial heat addition distribution function: 

Figure 3-4. Case 2 heat addition distribution, Gaussian in axial 
direction, constant in transverse. 



183 




a) Heat addition contours and streamlines. 



LU 

o 



CO 

o 
o 

CO 
LU 

O .1 

o 




NORMALIZED Q 



b) Parabolic transverse distribution function. 

Figure 3-5. Case 3 heat addition distribution, Gaussian in axial 
direction, parabolic in transverse. 



184 



SHADED REGIONS 
DENOTE SUBSONIC FLOW 




a) Mach number contours (.05 contour Intervals). 



2.0 r 




O.'f r 



NDN-DIMENSIDNAL DISTANCE 
b) Wall Mach number distribution. 




{ 

NDN-DIMENSIONAL DISTANCE 

c) Wall pressure distribution. 

Figure 3-6. Euler results for case 1 heat addition; Mo-1.4 



185 



SHADED REGIONS 
DENOTE SUBSONIC FLOW 




a) Mach number contours (.05 contour Intervals). 



2.0 r 







0.«*- r 



0.2 - 



LU 

o 0.0 



LU 
Of 

a 



-.'h 



NDN-DIMENSIDNAL DISTANCE 
b) Wa11 Hach number distribution. 




i 



NON-DIMENSIONAL DISTANCE 
c) Wa11 pressure distribution. 
Figure 3-7. Euler results for case 2 heat addition; Mo-1.4 



186 



SHADED REGIONS 
DENOTE SUBSONIC FLOW 




a) Mach number contours (.05 contour Intervals). 




D.H- r 



NDN-DIMENSIDNAL DISTANCE 
b) Wall Mach number distribution. 




NDN-DIMENSIDNAL DISTANCE 

c) Wall pressure distribution. 

Figure 3-8. Euler results for case 3 heat addition; Mo-1.4 



187 



.«h 



I— 
en 

o 

o 

en 



• 3 



• 2 



O .1 
I 



CASES 




CONTROL VOLUME 
RESULT 



'%.6 d75 170 T71 rhf rifc 
VELOCITY RATIDp V/Vo 



Figure 3-9. Velocity profiles at ramp trailing edge, 



188 



SHADED REGIONS 
DENOTE SUBSONIC FLOW 




\ 



a) Cd-.0125. 



SHADED REGIONS 
DENOTE SUBSONIC FLOW 




b) Cd-.025. 



SHADED REGIONS 
DENOTE SUBSONIC FLOW 




c) Cj-.05. 

Figure 3-10. Effect of artificial damping on Euler results. Mach 
number contours (.05 contour increment); Mo-1.4, 80 x 40 grid, case 2 
heat addition. 



189 



SHADED REGIONS 
DENOTE SUBSONIC FLOW 




a) 50 X 25 grid. 



SHADED REGIONS 
DENOTE SUBSONIC FLOW 




b) 80 X 40 grid. 



SHADED REGIONS 
DENOTE SUBSONIC FLOW 




c) 100 X 50 grid. 

Figure 3-11. Effect of grid refinement on Euler results. Mach number 
contours (.05 contour increment); Ng-l.A, C^.025, case 2 heat addition. 



190 



o.'^ I- 




NDN-DIMENSIONAL DISTANCE 



Figure 3-12. Effect of grid density on wall pressure distributions. 



191 



SHADED REGIONS 
DENOTE SUBSONIC FLOW 




a) Mo-1.2. 



SHADED REGIONS 
DENOTE SUBSONIC FLOW 




b) Mo-1.6 

Figure 3-13. Mach number contours at various freestream Mach numbers 
(.05 contour increment); 80 x 40 grid, C^.025, case 2 heat addition. 



192 



SHADED REGIONS 
DENOTE SUBSONIC FLOW 




C) Mo-2.0. 



SHADED REGIONS 
DENOTE SUBSONIC FLOW 




d) Mo-2.4. 
Figure 3-13. Concluded. 



193 



Mo-2.4 
Mo.2.0 




NDN-DIMENSIONAL DISTANCE 



Figure 3-14. Wall Mach number distributions at various freestream Mach 
numbers; 80 x 40 grid, C^«.025, case 2 heat addition. 



O.**- r 



Mo«1.2 




KION-DIMENSIDNAL DISTANCE 



Figure 3-15. Wall pressure distributions at various freestream Mach 
numbers; 80 x 40 grid, C^-.OZS, case 2 heat addition. 



194 



o 

I-" 

z 

UJ 

o 

U- 
U- 

LLl 

O 

O 

I- 

co 
cc 




-0.6 



-0.8 



0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 

FREESTREAM MACH NUMBER, Mq 



CONTROL 
VOLUME 

EULER 



Figure 3-16. Comparison of Euler and control volume analysis thrust 
coefficient predictions. 



195 




SPRAYBAFV 
FLAMEHOLDER 



NOZZLE 

EXPANSION 

SURFACE 



MAIN ENGINE 
EXHAUST DUCTS 



DEFLECTED COWL 



WALL INJECTION 



Figure 4-1. Combination spraybar-flameholder concept. 



196 



.09 
JOS 

X>7 

o 

m 

^ 04 

<A .03 

»J02 

JOI 



•^.^* 



^ 



• .500 DU^MCrCR OtSK 
•«250 OIAMCTCR 0I5K 

• «I25 OlAMCTCn DISK 



II 
*- STOICHIOMETRIC RATIO 
I I 



I 



^ 



-^ 



>»^ 






%»^ 



V* 






f- 



100 200 500 400 500 COO 700 600 »00 1000 
V„ V»VCtOCITr(FT/SCC) 






Pp*PRCSSURC AT DISK (PSIA) 
O'OISKOIAMCTCR (IN) 



Figure 4-2. Flame stability for. a pre-mixed, subsonic hydrogen-air 
stream (reproduced from reference 57). 



80 



60 






B 40 

5 

* 20 



%. 



STfi 
PAW 


BIUTY 
METER. 


1500 




500 
1000 


500 


1000 




***-*<^ 

^^^W^ 


2000 




> 




'*%#^ 

x*"^*' 


'« 


/^ 


y 


>C 







FREESTREAM 

DYNAMIC 

PRESSURE. 

Qo(psfa) 



1 1.5 2 2.5 

FREESTREAM MACH NUMBER, Mq 



Figure 4-3. Flame stability along flight trajectories for a 1" dia. 
disk. 



197 



o 

z 

LU 

i 

o 

UJ 



1.5 



0.5 



00 







\ 






STABLE 


> 


I 




^^^^ 


^ ^ 4 




^ 




""X 


SONIC POINT 
FORREF.59 
PRE-MIXED 



REF. 57 
PRE»MIX 

REF. 59 
PRE-MDC 

REF. 59 
DIFFUSION 



400 



600 



800 1 ,000 



DEZUBAY PARAMETER, 
^^^ (ft/sec, psia, In) 



Pp-Df 



Figure 4-4. Non pre-mixed, and supersonic stability limits from 
reference 59 in terms of Dezubay parameter. 



198 



PSL-4 HYPERSONIC MODIFICATION 



COMBUSTION AIR PIPING 



FLOW CONDITIONERS— 1 



HOT PIPE 




BYPASS VALVE 



MAKEUP 0XY6EN 



Hi AIR HEATER 



DIRECT CONNECT RESEARCH RIG 



Figure 4-5. Propulsion Systems Lab Cell 4 after hypersonic 
modifications (reproduced from reference 60). 



199 



O.Rjn'jVAf 
BUCK AND WHITE 'fhC 



nUrOGRAPH 




Figure 4-6. Spraybar mounted In free-jet with spark ignitor and water- 
cooled probe in extended positions. 



200 



t, 



. 100" DIA 

MAIN FUEL 

INJECTORS 

(6) 



C 



.020" DIA 
PILOT 
ORIFICES 
(15) 



15.0 



I .667" 
TYP 



7.5' 



• .4 17" 



• • • 



12.0' 



K .333" 



J) 



.531" DIA 



ID 




.625" -* 



SECT A- A 



Figure 4-7. Details of piloted spraybar. 



201 



o 

i 

LU 
O 

z 

UJ 

i 

D 

O 
LU 




INCREASING 

ALTrrupg 



400 600 800 

DEZUBAY PARAMETER, 

Vq ^ 

p.63 p.74 (ft/sec, psia, in) 



1,000 



Figure 4-8. Piloted spraybar operating envelopes at Mach 1.26. 



202 



FREE-JET 

NOZZLE 

EXTT 




SCHUEREN FIELD OF VIEW 
(12" X6^ 

_ / 



SPRAYBAR 



X-rO" 



WATER-COOLED 

TOTAL TEMPERATURE 

PROBE TRAVEL 

(-8'<Y<+2^ 



INFRA-RED RELD OF VIEW 
(24' X I?) 



/ 



1 



I 
X=18' 



ti^ncLJ;?; ^l^^"^ °^''i^I? r°r °P*^"1 instrumentation and location of 
translating water-cooled total temperature probe. 



ORIGINAL PAGE 
BLACK AND WHITE PHOTOGRAPH 



203 




a) Over- expanded, P(/p^-.8. 




b) On design, Po/p,-1.0. 

Figure 4-10. Schlieren images at various free-jet exit pressure ratios; 
Po (free-jet exit pressure) held constant at 8 psia. 



204 



-ACKM., WHITE VHOrOa«AP„ 




c) Under-expanded, pyp,=1.2. 
Figure 4-10. Concluded. 



205 




'0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 

FREE-JET EXfT PRESSURE RATIO, p^^/p^ 

Figure 4-11. Effect of free- jet exit pressure on spraybar base 
pressure; Pj, (free-jet exit pressure) held constant at 8 psia. 

1.0 



•Sr 0.8 
a 



O 

i 

LU 

€C 

LU 
QC 
Q. 

LU 
CO 



0.6 



0.4 



0.2 




■FREESTREAM' 



PRESSURE, 
(psla) 



O 
D 



V 



12 
10 

8 
6 
4 
I 



100 



200 



300 



400 



FUEL PRESSURE. p„^ (psia) 
Figure 4-12. Spraybar base pressure with external burning. 



206 



O 

i 

UJ 
O 

z 

y 
i 

O 

UJ 

o 



2.0 



1.5 



1.0 



0.5 



FREESTREAM 

TOTAL 

TEMPERATURE, 

\o 
(psia) 

O 5*0 
D 960 



RLLED SYMBOLS REPRESENT 
FLAME-OLTTOURINQ 
AL7TTU0E CHANGE 




OEZUBAY 

PRE-MOCED 

STABILmr 

LMT 



UJ 



0.0 




200 



SPRAYBAR OPERATING 
ENVELOPE (K/d -10) 



400 



600 



800 



1000 



DEZUBAY PARAMETER. 



-s;r74 (n/sec, psIa, in.) 
•^0 



Figure 4-13. Flame stability for piloted spraybar. 



207 



ORfQ.'lVAl PAGE 
SLACK AND WHITE PHOTOGRAPh 




a) Infra-red image; p^=250 psia, y_-1.0", <t)^^-.63 



pxs 




.75. 



b) Infra-red image; p^=350 psia, yp-1.2", ^p^^- 

igure 4-14. Plume characteristics at nominal temperature and pressure; 
t o=540*R, Po=6 psia, Re=4.9xl0Vft. 



208 



FUEL ESTIMATED FUEL JET 

PRESSURE. EQUIVALENCE PENETRATION 

P, RATIO. y„ 

(psia) 0r, 
O 357 
D 248 



.75 
.63 



'P 
(In.) 

1.20 

1.00 




1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 
TOTAL TEMPERATURE, T^ (deg. R) 



c) Total temperature profiles. 
Figure 4-14. Concluded. 



209 



;t-.;<.;, :•■:. ,< . 



BLACK A^4D Vv'hilE PHOTOGRAPH 




a) Infra-red image; p^=250 psia, y -.72", ^px8"-58 




b) Infra-red image; p^«350 psia, y «.85", ^pxs--69- 



Figure 4-15. Plume characteristics at increased temperature and 
pressure; T^ o-960®R, P(,«12 psia, Re=4.9xloVft. 



210 



FUEL ESTIMATED FUEL JET 

PRESSURE. EQUIVALENCE PENETRATION. 

P, RATIO. yp 

(psia) Opa (In.) 

O 3*9 SS .85 

D 249 .58 .72 




^^0OO 2000 3000 4000 
TOTAL TEMPERATURE, T^ (deg. R) 



5000 



c) Total temperature profiles. 
Figure 4-15. Concluded. 



211 




FOREBODY 

COMPRESSION 

SURFACE 



EXPANSION 

RAMP 

MODEL 



DEFLECTED 
COWL 



EXHAUST 

SHEAR 

LAYER 




12° EXPANSION 



Figure 4-16. Relation of expansion ramp models to vehicle base. 



212 



• STATIC PRESSURE TAP 
■ SURFACE THERMOCOUPLE 






• 


8 


1 

' 8 

9i 




• 


1 


1 V 


1 











..25 



njj 



14.5 



SEE DETAIL *A' 



.125 



DETAIL 'A* • FLAMEHOLDER 
6e,.018'DlA— ^ 



2e..02rDiA 



DETAIL "B* - FUEL INJECTOR 
CONFIGURATIONS 



Figure 4-17. Expansion ramp model details, 



213 



BLACK AND VVHiTE PHOTOGRAPH 




Figure 4-18. Expansion ramp mounted in free-jet. 



214 



1 



o 



LU 
O 

z 

LU 

-J 

o 

LU 

Q 
LU 



CO 
LU 



2.00 




400 



600 



800 



1,000 



DEZUBAY PARAMETER, 
61° . 7 4 (ft/sec, psia, in) 



Figure 4-19. Flame stability envelopes for 26 injector model; 
4 < Po < 12 psia, 50 < p^ < 375 psia. 



215 



0.6 



a 
O 


0.4 


1" 


0.2 


Q 




J. 


-.0 






3 




U 


-.2 


UJ 








^ 




js 


-.4 


u 




r 




Q. 


-.6 



-.8 



. 






o 


1 1 

CENTERUNE 










D 


OFF^JENTTERUNE 
1 






r 


:2:€ 


^^s-, 








^ 


^ 


^^^ 


^*^ 


■^ 






^ 


f 






c 










\ 

ODAILin 


12" 












EXPANSION 

1 1 



2 4 6 8 10 12 14 
DISTANCE FROM LEADING EDGE, X (in.) 

a) Po>12 psia. 





0.6 


Q. 

o 


0.4 


lU 


0.2 


o 




[J; 


-.0 


III 




o 




o 


-.2 


UJ 




cc 




D 






-.4 


UJ 




cc 




Q. 


-.6 



-.8 




2 4 6 8 101 2 14 

DISTANCE FROM LEADING EDGE, x (in.) 



b) Pg-S psia. 
Figure 4-20. Fuel -off static pressure distributions; configuration 1. 



216 



a 
O 



UJ 

O 

u. 
u. 

LU 

o 
o 

UJ 

a: 

•& 

UJ 

cc 

0. 



0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
-.0 
-.2 
-.4 
-.6 
-.8 









O CENTTERUNE 


s 






[ 


2 OFF 


:■CEN■|b^ 


UJNE 


-J 






r 


-55 


:Q^« 




? 




r 


n 


— ■'*-' 


-*-^ 


"^ 


3 




-^ 


/ 






6 










\ 

DOAMn 


12« 

Tl ftiCVC 


r« 










EXPi 


TL-McYc 
^NSION 





2 4 6 8 10 12 14 
DISTANCE FROM LEADING EDGE, x (in.) 



c) Po-4 psia. 
Figure 4-20. Concluded. 



217 



FUEL ESTIMATED FUEL JET 

PRESSURE. EQUIVALENCE PENETRATION. 

P, RATIO. Yp 

(psia) Opn (In.) 

O 

D 373 .69 JO 



O 



UJ 

o 

u. 
u. 
UJ 

O 
O 

UJ 
QC 

(O 
CO 
Ul 
QC 
Q. 



0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
-.0 
-.2 
-.4 
-.6 
-.8 





































c 


^R=i 


=rL- 






11 


c 


f 




^^ 


'^ 






te^ 


f 






i 










\ 

DDAKin' 


12' 

n.-MEYEf 

kNSION 


1 










rrWMLi 
EXP/ 





2 4 6 8 10 12 14 
DISTANCE FROM LEADING EDGE, x (in.) 



a) Pq-12 psia. 

Figure 4-21 • Effect of fuel mass addition on centerline static pressure 
distributions; configuration 1. 



218 



FUEL ESTIMATED FUEL JET 

PRESSURE. EQUIVALENCE PENETRATK)N. 
P, RATIO. Yp 

(psia) <t>pa' (In.) 

O 

D 375 .86 .36 




4 6 8 10 12 

DISTANCE FROM LEADING EDGE, x (In.) 



b) Po-8 psia. 
Figure 4-21. Continued. 



219 



FUEL ESTIMATED FUEL JET 

PRESSURE. EQUIVALENCE PENETRATION. 
P. RATJO. y„ 

0« 



o 

D 



f 

(psia) 




375 





154 



'P 

(In.) 

^1 



a 
O 

UJ 

g 
u. 

LU 

o 
o 

LLt 
CC 

LU 
CC 
0. 




DISTANCE FROM LEADING EDGE, x (in.) 



c) Po"4 psia. 
Figure 4-21. Concluded. 



220 



FUEL EST1N«ATE0 FUEL JET 

PRESSURE, EQUIVALENCE PENETRATION, 

(psia) 

O 

□ 374 
251 
^ 202 



RATIO, 


Vp 


^p» 


On.) 








.70 


.30 


.56 


.25 


.51 


S2 



o 



UJ 

o 

u. 
u. 

UJ 

O 
U 
UJ 

cr 

UJ 

cr 

Q. 



0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
-.0 
-.2 
-.4 
-.6 
-.8 



















\ 












h 




c 


-o-c 


T^.n 






\m 


^ 


#^ 


^^ 


^ 


N 




vS 


^o<: 


/ 






e 




y 






\ 

DDAKJn 


12» 


■o 




° 






EXP- 


1 L*McTc 

ANSION 





2 4 6 8 10 12 

DISTANCE FROM LEADING EDGE, x (In.) 



14 



a) Po-12 psia. 

Figure 4-22. Effect of external burning on centerline static pressure 
distributions; configuration 1. 



221 



0.6 



a 
O 


0.4 


UJ 


0.2 


o 




u. 


-.0 


UJ 




O 




o 


-.2 


UJ 




cc 




D 




ES 


-.4 


UJ 




oc 




CL 


-.6 



FUEL ESTIMATED FUEL JET 

PRESSUFE. EQUrVALENCE PENETRATON. 





(psla) 


RATIO. 


On.) 


o 

D 



373 



.84 



.36 





251 


.70 


.30 


^ 


201 


.61 


Zt 



-.8 



i3 














& 














jh 






n 


X)-C 


"^ - 




u 


W 


^ 


u 


^^ 




ri 


5 


\^ 


KX 


/ 






i 




f 






\ 

DQAKJn 


12" 

TL-MEYB 
\NSION 


R , 




6 






rrWNU 

EXP) 





2 4 6 B 10 12 

DISTANCE FROM LEADING EDGE, x (in.) 



14 



b) Po'S psla. 
Figure 4-22. Continued. 



222 



O 
D 





FUEL ESTIMATED FUEL JET 

PRESSURE. EQUIVALENCE PENETRATION. 

P, RATIO. y„ 

(psia) Opa 



374 1^4 

250 1.02 



'P 
On.) 



^1 
.42 



a 
O 



LU 
O 
U. 

u. 

LU 

O 

o 

UJ 

cr 

3 



f8 - 



III 
DC 

a. 




DISTANCE FROM LEADING EDGE, x (in.) 



c) Po-4 psia. 
Figure 4-22. Concluded. 



223 



SUCK Afi'wHnt^y •..,...,. 




a) Fuel -off. 
Figure 4-23. Schlieren images of external burning (configuration 10) 



224 



ORfGf.NAL PAGE 
BLACK AND VmjE photograPW 




b) Low equivalence ratio; p^=250 psia, Po=12 psia (0pxs=.56, yp-.25") 

Figure 4-23. Continued. 



225 



BLACK AKD VvHilE PHOTOGRAPH 




c) High equivalence ratio; p^=375 psia, Po-4 psia (0p,,-1.24, yp-.5r). 

Figure 4-23. Concluded. 



226 



FUEL ESTIMATED FUEL JET 

PRESSURE. EQUIVALENCE PENETRATION. 



D 





p. 

(psia) 


RATIO. 
<t> 


yp 

(In.) 


374 


.70 


.30 


251 


.56 


.25 


202 


.51 


.22 




PROJECTED 

BASE 

HEIGHT 



1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 
TOTAL TEMPERATURE, T^ (deg. R) 



a) Po=12 psia. 
Figure 4-24. Total temperature profiles; configuration 1 



227 



FUEL ESTIMATED FUEL JET 

PRESSURE. EQUIVALENCE PENETRATION. 





p, 


RATIO. 


Vp 




(psia) 


OpK, 


On.) 


D 


373 


.64 


.36 





251 


.70 


.30 


Zi 


201 


.61 


.27 




1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 
TOTAL TEMPERATURE. T^ (deg. R) 



b) Po=8 psia. 
Figure 4-24. Continued. 



228 



FUEL ESTIMATED FUEL JET 

PRESSURE, EQUIVALENCE PENETRATION 







P. 

(psia) 


RATIO. 


(in.) 


374 


1.24 


.51 


250 


1.02 


.42 




1 000 2000 3000 4000 5000 
TOTAL TEMPERATURE. T^ (deg. R) 



c) Po=4 psia. 
Figure 4-24. Concluded. 



f"\ I r-^ : 



BLACK AND WHITE rriOTOGRAHH 



229 




a) Low equivalence ratio; Pf-200 psia, Po"12 psia (^p^8-.51, y -.22") 




b) Medium equivalence ratio; p^.250 psia, Po-8 psia (^p^^'-^O, yp-.30"). 




c) High equivalence ratio, p^=375 psia, Po=4 psia (^p^3-1.24, yp-.5r). 
Figure 4-25. Infra-red images of external burning; configuration 1. 



230 



FUEL INJECTION CONFIGURATION 

O 26 INJ. (1.2) 

D 56 INJ. (3.4.5.6) 

26 INJ. UPSTREAM (7,8,9.10.1 1) 



^ 5000 r 



0) 



^ 4000 - 



r 



m 

LU 
Q. 




0.8 1.2 1.6 2.0 

ESTIMATED EQUIVALENCE RATIO, 0, 



pxs 



*/H*^'?n^^^^^"'^^ ""^^^^ ^^^^^ °" penetration times spacing method with 
Figure 4-26. Average plume temperature correlation. 



231 



FUEL INJECTION CONFIGURATION 

O 26INJ.(1.2) 

D 56 INJ. (3.4,5.6) 

(} 26 INJ. UPSTREAM (7.8.9.10.1 1) 



£" 


5000 


1 




^ 


4000 


? 

►^ 


3000 


* 
a. 

S 




|y 


2000 


IIJ 


1000 



Hg-AIR EQUIUBRIUM 




AT ONE ATMOSPHERE 



0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 2.0 
CORRELATED EQUIVALENCE RATIO, O^ott 



b) Equivalence ratio and Inflow stream height based on correlation of 
average measured plume temperature. 



Figure 4-26. Concluded. 



232 



O 



UJ 
O 

11. 
LL 
LU 
O 
O 

D 



0.2 



0.1 



-.0 



-.1 



-.2 



-.3 - 



FREESTREAM 
PRESSURE. 

(psia) 

O 12 
D 8 

4 



-.4, 




0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 
ESTIMATED EQUIVALENCE RATIO, (|), 



pxs 



a) ^Equivalence ratio based on penetration times spacing method with 
x/d-30. 



Figure 4-27. Thrust coefficient; configuration 1, 



233 



0.2 



0.1 



O 



fe -.0 

UJ 

o 



UJ 

o 
o 



-.1 



-.2 



-.3 - 



FREESTREAM 
PRESSURE. 

Po 
(psia) 

O 12 
D 8 

4 



-.4, 



3-D.P 

CONTR( 

PREI 


lEALGAS 

DLVOLUM 

DICTION 
\ 


1 

E 










V 


^ 








/' 




-TT 


^ 




— 


oo°- 


° 




V— 






- PI IPI ^ 


iCC TUDI le 


T 








BASED O*^ DDAwn 


>1 

ITL 








MEYER 


EXPANSIC 


IN 


\ 



0.2 0.4 0.6 O.B 1.0 1.2 1.4 
CORRELATED EQUIVALENCE RATIO, (t>^„ 



b) Equivalence ratio and Inflow stream height based on correlation of 
average measured plume temperature. 



Figure 4-27. Concluded. 



234 



FREE-JET BOUNDARY 
INTERACTIONS 



COMPRESSION 



REFLECTED 
EXPANSION 
WAVE 




LOW BASE PRESSURE 

BEHIND RAMP 



Figure 4-28. Facility interactions suspected of causing low 

performance. 



EXHAUST 
FREE-JET COLLECTOR 
(55- DIA.) 



J 



MODEL 



SUBSONIC 
PLUME 




/ 



PRESSURE 

TAPS 

(INSIDE DUCT) 

/ 



111 NMIJI IJI 1^, ,,_p^,p 



• • • • 



• • 



Si- 



Figure 4-29. PSL-4 Facility exhaust collector layout. 



235 



o. 
O 



O 
K 

& 

8 

LU 
QC 

UJ 

cc 

0. 



0.05 
0.00 
-.05 
-.10 
-.15 
-.20 



CXX>| 

D-D-CK 





20 



1 



- -A-o-^M) ^ 



40 



60 



80 



FREESTREAM 
PRESSURE, 

Po 
(psia) 



o 

D 





12 

8 
4 



100 



DISTANCE FROM EXHAUST 
DUCT ENTRANCE, x On.) 



Figure 4-30. Effect of altitude on exhaust collector pressure 
distributions during external burning; p,«375 psia. 



0.05 



Q. 

u 



. 0.00 

UJ 
O 

E -.05 



UJ 

O 
O 
UJ 

oc 

3 

oc 

0. 



-.10 



-.15 



-.20 




AUXILIARY 
AIR FLOW. 



m 



'aux 



(Pps) 

O 
D 





40 
75 



100 



DISTANCE FROM EXHAUST 
DUCT ENTRANCE, x (In.) 



Figure 4-31. Effect of auxiliary air flow on exhaust collector pressure 
distributions; Po-4 psia, fuel-off. 



236 



O BASEUNE CONFIGURATION 

D MODIFIED EXHAUST COLiECTOR. AUX AIR REDUCED 



O 



UJ 

g 
u. 

UJ 

o 
u 

to 



0.2 



0.1 



fe" -.0 



-.1 



-.2 



-.3 



-.4, 



3-D. REAL GAS 

CONTROL VOLUME 

PREDICTION 










\ 








> 


y 










/ 




_/?\ 






^=tC 


^pO 


j^ " 


=*ti 








— ct ici .r\ 


re TLJDI IC 










rUtL*Orr i nnw^ 
RAJ^pn 0><J DO A kin 


m . 








MEYER 


^1^ 1 ( V~M^W 

EXPANSIC 


IN 


A 



0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 

CORRELATED EQUIVALENCE RATIO, ^, 



"con 



Figure 4-32. Effect of exhaust collector modification on thrust 
coefficient; configuration 1. 



237 



ORIGINAL PAGE 
BLACK AND WHITE PHOTOGRAPH 




Figure 4-33. Plume boundary simulator installation; configuration 2. 



238 



Q 
LU 



O 



NON-DIMENISIDNIAL DISTANCE 



Figure 4-34. Gaussian axial heat addition distribution function. 



239 



^ 


p 

1" 

si' 

is: 

==: 
1=1 

::: 

mm* 
mmt 
aai 
■ai 


= i, 


-ti 




':'l~ 


~r* 




ii 


VY\ i 


iiiiil 


r- 

ii 


n 


il'llUU 


;■" 1 




^^^ 


Iii 

;::::::::ss 

ISiaaaaaaaa 


Iii" 


till 


s s = s = = 


^£ 


= J 


;=;===!== 


> • s 


^—3 


---£ 


-i==^: 


it 

!l 

;r:i 
;s:: 
;s: 
IS! 


= 

'*S 

!«• 

laa 
laa 
lat 

kaa 


'^ 


IZZZ 




'-- 


T" 


ZZIZIZI 


rfrrl: 


^r 


=? 




^.— . i. 




Illlllllli 


-■l.-;;>; ;.i 


--T = 


l|i 
::: 

aai 


Hi 
Iii 

Hi 

a«i 
aai 
aai 
aai 
aai 
■■1 
aai 




::: 


rr = 
:== 
:== 

IS! 
!■« 
»•■ 
••« 
laa 
■ aa 
laa 
laa 
(■a 
laa 


=1 
=1 

M 

aa 

aa 
aa 
BB 

aa 
H 

■a 


■■••••a 
■aaaaaa 

■aaaaaa 
aaaaaaa 
laaBBBB 

aaaaaaa 


====== 

■aaaaa 

••■■•• 
aaavaa 
aaaaaa 
aaaaBa 
aaBaaa 
Mtaaa 


■* 


z 

t 


s= ii£££E 

== ====== 

==J===== 

H EiHir 

•••■■■■•• 

■■■■»«•■•■ 

aaaaaaaaa 
■aBBBBaBB 

aaaaaaaaa 

!!!!!!!!!< 




1 




If 


III! 


I 

nil 

•aaa 
aaaa 


^XKxxxsss: 

==========: 


Itlli III 

"»:::::: 


aaaaaaaaaai 
■aaaaaaaaa 


■■■■■■■■■■■I 


:::: 


SSSaSpaiSiiiHIBllltmnilllllllllUIIHIIUIIIMIIIIIHIIIIIUIIIIMIIIH 

iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiMHiBiiiiiiiiiniiiiimtiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiniiiiitniiiii 




TTTMIlilll! 




!!!"! 


Uii'JM'fl 


JH-iiHMMMMMIiMlllllHlilllMnMUIMIIlMMI'l) 



a) Solid wall boundary, 100 x 50 nodes. 




b) Freestream boundary, 100 x 70 nodes. 

Figure 4-35. 2-D Euler grids used to validate use of plume boundary 
simulator. 



240 




a) Solid wa11 boundary. 




b) Freestream boundary. 

Figure 4-36. Comparison of streamlines, total heat added corresponds to 
^corr--45, yo/yb--20- 



241 



SHADED REGIONS 
DENOTE SUBSONIC FLOW 




a) Solid wall boundary. 



SHADED REGIONS 
DENOTE SUBSONIC FLOW 




b) Freestream boundary. 

Figure 4-37. Comparison of Mach number contours (.05 contour 
increment). Total heat added corresponds to ^corr"'*^. yo/yb"'20. 



242 






lij 

u 

en 
en 

UJ 
Of 
Q. 



0.2 



O.D 



-.2 



-.'^ 



FREESTREAM 
PLUME BOUNDARY 
Ct=.034 




PLUME BOUNDARY 

SIMULATOR 

INSTALLED 

Ox =.035 



NDN-DIMENSIDNAL DISTANCE 



Figure 4-38. Comparison of wall pressure distributions, total heat 
added corresponds to ^^^^^-.45, yf/y^'.ZO. 



243 



D. 

u 

LU 

o 

g 

8 

UJ 

oc 

D 



0. 



0.6 
0.4 
0.2 



T I 1 — n \ r 

O BASEUNECONRGURATION 

D BASEUNE CONFIGURATION WTTH PLUME 
BOUNDARY SIMULATOR INSTALLED 




4 8 12 16 20 24 28 
DISTANCE FROM LEADING EDGE, x (In.) 

a) Fuel off; p^-S psia. 



0.6 



& 0-^ 



i I I 1 1 

O BASEUNE CONFIGURATION 

D BASEUNE CONFIGURATION WITH PLUME — 
BOUNDARY SIMULATOR INSTALLED 




12 16 20 24 
DISTANCE FROM LEADING EDGE, x (In.) 

b) p,-250 psia, p^-lZ psia (^^„,^-.30). 

Figure 4-39. Effect of plume boundary simulator on centerline pressure 
distributions. 



244 



a 
O 

u 



o 
o 

UJ 



Q. 



0.6 
0.4 
0.2 



18 -■ 



1 n 1 I I — 

O BASEUNE C0NFIQI;RAT)0N 

D BASEUNECONFlGURAT)ON WITH PLUME 
BOUNDARY SIMULATOR iNSTALL£D 




4 8 12 16 20 24 28 
DISTANCE FROM LEADING EDGE, x (In.) 

c) p,-375 psia, P(,-8 psia (^„,,-.67). 



O BASEUNECONFKSURATION 

D BASEUNE CONFIGURATION WITH PLUME 
BOUNDARY SIMULATOR INSTALLED 




12 16 

DISTANCE FROM LEADING EDGE, x (in.) 

d) p,-375 psia, Po-4 psia {i^^„^'l .36) . 
Figure 4-39. Concluded. 



245 



FUEL FREESTREAM CORRELATED 
PRESSURE. PRESSURE. EQUIVALENCE 





P| 


Po 


RATIO. 




(psia) 


(psia) 


CUr 


D 


250 


12 


.30 





375 


8 


.67 


Zi 


375 


4 


1.36 



UJ 

z 



UJ 

o 

CD 

< 



-2 



12 

UJ 

X 



g -4 



-6 




5^ 



v\\\\r\ 



wwwww 



1000 2000 3000 4000 
TOTAL TEMPERATURE, Tj (deg. R) 



5000 



Figure 4-40. Total temperature profiles with plume boundary simulator 
installed; configuration 2. 



246 



O 



O BASEUNECONPIGURATK>N 

D BASEUNE CONFIGURATION Wrm PLUME 
BOUNDARY SIMULATOR INSTALLED 



&" - 



UJ 

o 

u. 
u. 

UJ 

O 
o 

to 

D 




0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 
CORRELATED EQUIVALENCE RATIO, 4>. 



''corr 



Figure 4-41. Effect of plume boundary simulator on thrust coefficient. 



247 




t I 






1 1 1 1 1 II I II i I 1 1 1 1 1 1 II 1 1 1 1 1 II I 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 III 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 i 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 



Figure 4-42. Grid used to evaluate effects of free-jet boundary (100 x 
80 nodes). 



248 




a) Mach number contours (.05 contour increment). 



a 
o 



O.B 



Ch 



o -.0 

CJ 



UJ 
Q. 



-.8 



FREE-JET BOUNDARY 
Cj =-.195 




FUGHT BOUNDARY 



Cj B-.401 



NON-DIMENSIONAL DISTANCE 



b) Wall pressure distribution. 
Figure 4-43. Fuel -off Euler results with free-jet boundary. 



249 



0.3 



o 

LLl 

g 
I 0.1 

I ° 



-0. 



// 



EULER (FUGKT) 



EULER (FREE-JET) 



CONTROL VOL (2-D) 



CONTROL VOL (3-D) 



0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 

EQUIVALENCE RATIO. O 



Figure 4-44. Effect of free- jet boundary on calculated external burning 
thrust coefficient. 



250 



SHADED REGIONS 
DENOTE SUBSONIC FLOW 



mummmmmmmsim 




a) Flight boundary. 



SHADED REGIONS 
DENOTE SUBSONIC FLOW 




b) Free- jet boundary. 

Figure 4-45. Comparison of Mach number contours at low heat addition 
corresponding to ^corr"-25, yo/yb-.20. 



251 



SHADED REGIONS 
DENOTE SUBSONIC FLOW 




a) Flight boundary. 



SHADED REGIONS 
DENOTE SUBSONIC FLOW 




b) Free -jet boundary. 

Figure 4-46. Comparison of Mach number contours at low heat addition 
corresponding to iJcorr"-^^' y(/yb"-20- 



252 



SHADED REGIONS 
DENOTE SUBSONIC FLOW 




a) Flight boundary. 



SHADED REGIONS 
DENOTE SUBSONIC FLOW 




b) Free- jet boundary. 

Figure 4-47. Comparison of Hach number contours at high heat addition 
corresponding to ^^„,,-1.38, yo/y^^'.ZO. 



253 



Q. 

o 



m 
O 

u. 
u. 
UJ 

O 
O 
m 

D 



UJ 
CC 
CL 



0.6 



0.4 



0.2 



-.0 



-.2 



a - 



,4 
.6 



-.8 



FUEL FREESTREAM CORRELATED 
PRESSURE. PRESSURE. EQUIVALENCE 





P, 


Po 


RATIO. 




(psia) 


(psia) 


(ken 


o 





8 





D 


250 


8 


.57 





250 


4 


1.15 


A 


875 


4 


1.72 































r 


^^ 


-Qii 


^ 




\w 


l^ 


f 


-^ 


-fr-O 




\ 


HOC 


/ 










V 






. DDAKin 


TL-MEYB 
\NSION 


Q 




° 






EXP; 





2 4 6 8 10 12 14 

DISTANCE FROM LEADING EDGE, x (in.) 



a) Centerllne pressure distributions. 
Figure 4-48. Results for 56 injector model; configuration 3. 



254 



UJ 



FUEL FREESTREAM CORRELATED 
PRESSURE. PRESSURE. EQUIVALENCE 





(psta) 


(psia) 


RATK 


D 


250 


8 


.57 





375 


4 


1.15 


^ 


375 


4 


1.72 



u 



-2 




CD 

< 

O -4 
Gj 

X 



-6 



\V\V\\\\\^v\\\\\\^ 



1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 
TOTAL TEMPERATURE, T, (deg. R) 



b) Total temperature profiles. 
Figure 4-48. Concluded. 



255 



ORfG.iWAL PAGF 
BLACK AND WHITE PHOTOGRAPH 




Figure 4-49. 26 injector model with upstream injection and 
flameholding; configuration 7. 



256 



FUEL FREES7REAM CORRELATED 
PRESSURE. PRESSURE. EQUIVALENCE 





p, 


Po 


RATIO. 




(psia) 


(psia) 


^VOfT 


o 





8 





D 


375 


8 


.66 





375 


4 


1.32 



0.6 



o. 
O 


0.4 


Hi 


0.2 


o 




Ll. 
U. 


-.0 


m 




O 




O 


-.2 


lU 




DC 




D 






-.4 


III 




CC 




Q. 


-.6 



-.8 




2 4 6 8 10 12 14 

DISTANCE FROM LEADING EDGE, x (in.) 



a) Centerline pressure distributions. 

Figure 4-50. Results with upstream injection and flameholding; 

configuration 7 



257 



FUEL FREESTREAM CORRELATED 

PRESSURE. PRESSURE, EQUIVALENCE 

P^ Pq ratio, 

(PSia) (psia) Ctorr 



375 
375 



8 

4 



.66 
1.32 






UJ 

o 

UJ 

m 

< 



g -4 

UJ 




\V\V\\^\\\\\\\\\\\ 



-6 



1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 
TOTAL TEMPERATURE, T^ (deg. R) 



b) Total temperature profiles. 
Figure 4-50. Concluded. 



258 



BLACK Am WHITE PnaiQGRAPh 




Figure 4-51. 26 injector model with leading edge extension installed 
(flameholder not installed). 



259 




-2 2 4 6 8 101214 
DISTANCE FROM LEADING EDGE, x (in.) 

a) Comparison of centerline pressure distributions with fuel off: d„-8 
psia. *^° 

0.6 




DISTANCE FROM LEADING EDGE, x (in.) 

b) Comparison of centerline pressure distributions with external 
burning; p^»375 psia, p^-S psia (^^^,^=.65). 

Figure 4-52. Effect of leading edge extension and upstream injection 
(configurations 2 and 8). 



260 



LU 

2 



UJ 

o 

UJ 

> 
o 
m 

< 



-2 



\V\\\?\\\\N 



52 
m 

X 



g -4 



-6 




\\\\\\N 



O LEADING EDGE EXTENSION 
D BASEUNE LEADING EDGE 



1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 
TOTAL TEMPERATURE, T^ (deg. R) 



c) Comparison of total temperature profiles; p.=375 psia, Pn=8 psia 



Figure 4-52. Concluded. 



261 



SLACK AND WHITE PHOTOGRAPH 




Figure 4-53. 1/4" serrated flameholder; configuration 10. 



262 



FUEL FREESTREAM CORRELATED 
PRESSURE. PRESSURE. EQUIVALENCE 





P, 


Po 


RATIO, 




(psia) 


(psia) 


^tOfT 


o 





8 





D 


250 


12 


.29 





375 


8 


.64 


A 


375 


4 


1.30 




-2 2 4 6 8 1012 
DISTANCE FROM LEADING EDGE, x (in.) 



a) Centerline pressure distributions. 
Figure 4-54. Results with 1/4" serrated flameholder; configuration 10. 



263 



FUEL FREESTREAM CORRELATED 
PRESSURE. PRESSURE. EQUIVALENCE 





P, 


Po 


RATIO, 




(psia) 


(psia) 


^vorr 


D 


250 


12 


:2B 





375 


8 


.64 


A 


375 


4 


1.30 



HI 

z 



UJ 

o 

CD 

< 



-2 




g -4 
m 

X 



-6 



\\\\\\\\\\V\\\ 



\Y 



1000 2000 3000 4000 
TOTAL TEMPERATURE, T^ (deg. R) 



5000 



b) Total temperature profiles. 
Figure 4-54. Concluded. 



264 



O 



LLJ 

g 

u. 
u. 
tu 

o 
o 

D 
DC 



o 

D 




CONFIGURATION - SEE TABLE 4-2 
(ALL WITH PLUME BOUNDARY SIMULATOR) 

26 INJECTORS 
BASEUNE FLAMEHOLDER 

56 INJECTORS 
BASEUNE FLAMEHOLDER 

26 INJECTORS UPSTREAM 
UPSTREAM FLAMEHOLDER 



A 8 



V 10 



26 INJECTORS UPSTREAM 

BASEUNE FLAMEHOLDER 

LEADING EDGE EXTENSION 

26 INJECTORS UPSTREAM 

1/4' SERRATED FLAMEHOLDER 

LEADING EDGE EXTENSION 




0.3 0.6 0.9 1.2 1.5 1.8 
CORRELATED EQUIVALENCE RATIO, <^. 



•^corr 



Figure 4-55. Thrust coefficient comparison for alternate 
configurations. 



265 



FUEL 


FREESTREAM 


CORRELATED 


PRESSURE. 


PRESSURE. 


EQUIVALENCE 


P, 


Po 


RATIO, 


(psia) 


(psia) 


Cfcoff 


O 


8 





D 250 


12 


.37 


375 


e 


.84 


A 375 


4 


1.64 




10 12 
DISTANCE FROM LEADING EDGE, x (in.) 



a) Centerline pressure distributions. 

Figure 4-56. Results for configuration 10 with heated freestream; 

Tt 0=960 R. 



266 






LU 
O 

LU 

> 

o 

m 

< 



FUEL FREESTREAM CORRELATED 
PRESSURE. PRESSURE. EQUIVALENCE 





P. 


Po 


RATIO. 




(psia) 


(psia) 


Cfcorr 


D 


250 


12 


.37 





375 


8 


.84 


A 


375 


4 


1.64 



-2 




v^:w 



LU 



O -4 



-6 



1 



T^^W 



1000 2000 3000 4000 
TOTAL TEMPERATURE, T^ (deg. R) 



5000 



b) Total temperature profiles. 
Figure 4-56. Continued. 



267 



0.2 



0.1 



O 



fe" -.0 



UJ 

o 

u. 

UJ 

O 
O 

D 
CO 



-.1 



-.2 



-.3 




I- FUEL-OFF THRUST 
BASED ON PRANDTL- 
MEYER EXPANSION 



-.4 



FREESTREAM 
TOTAL 
TEMPERATURE. 
\o (degR) 

O 540 
D 960 



\ 



0.0 0.3 0.6 0.9 . 1 .2 1 .5 
CORRELATED EQUIVALENCE RATIO, 0, 



1.8 



corr 



c) Thrust coefficient. 
Figure 4-56. Concluded. 



268 



ORfGSMAL PAGc 
BLACK AND WHITE PHOiOGI^Arn 




s 



Figure 4-57. Upper sidewall installation (baseline flameholder shown) 



269 




DISTANCE FROM LEADING EDGE, x (In.) 

a) Comparison of center! ine pressure distributions with fuel off; p^-S 
psia. 



d 0.4 




DISTANCE FROM LEADING EDGE, x (In.) 

b) Comparison of center! ine pressure distributions with externa! 
burning; p^-375 psia, Pq-4 psia (^^0^^-1.33). 

Figure 4-58. Effect of upper s1dewa!!s on configuration 10 performance. 



270 



uJ 



11) 
o 

m 

< 



CD 
ED 

X 



-2 



-4 



-6 




v^^\\vw:\w\x\ 



O NOSIDEWALLS 

D UPPER SIDEWALLS" 



1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 
TOTAL TEMPERATURE, T^ (deg. R) 



\ 



c) Comparison of total temperature profiles; p^-375 psia, Po-4 psia 
Wcorr"l-33)- 

Figure 4-58. Continued. 



271 



O NO SIOEWALLS (CONFIGURATION 10} 
D UPPER SIDEWALLS .(CONFIGURATION 1 1) 



O 

UJ 

g 

u. 
u. 
m 
O 
U 

D 



0.2 



0.1 



-.0 



-.1 



-.2 



-.3 - 



-.4, 




0.2 0.4 0.6 O.B 1.0 1.2 1.4 
CORRELATED EQUIVALENCE RATIO, ^. 



''CtXT 



d) Comparison of thrust coefficients. 
Figure 4-58. Concluded. 



272 



O 

D 



A 
V 

U 



CONPIGURATX>N • SEE TABLE 4-2 
1.Z3.8. FLAMEHOLOER*A* 
♦ -B- 

5 -C 

6 ■O- 

7 -P 
9 f 

10. 11 iQ. 




400 



BOO 



1200 



1600 



DEZUBAY PARAMETER, 
-^-74 (n/sec, psia, In.) 



Figure 4-59. Expansion ramp flameholding, all f 1 amehol der 
configurations. 



273 



0.2 



0.1 



U 



^ -.0 



UJ 

y 

u. 

UJ 

o 
o 

D 
CC 



-.1 - 



-.2 - 



-.3 - 



-.4, 



S-D, REAL GAS 

CONTTROL VOLUME 

PREDICTION 



'^.-(Z^OOO — o- 



MEASURED FUEL-OFF 
THRUST 



l-T 



FUEL-OFF THRUST 
6ASEDONPRANDTL- 
MEYER EXPANSION 



_L 



J_ 



lA 



B 



\y IV 



0.2 0.4 0.6 O.B 1.0 1.2 1.4 
CORRELATED EQUIVALENCE RATIO, 4>corr 



a) Thrust coefficient. 
Figure 4-60. Demonstrated performance for configuration 10. 



c-V 



274 



O top BASED ON MEASURED FUEL-OFF THRUST 
D top BASED ON PRANDTL-MEYER EXPANSION 



E 
Si 

1 

CO 



& 



LU 
Q. 



g 

O 
LJ 
Q. 
CO 



5000 



4000 



3000 



2000 



1000 - 



A MEASURED THRUST, MEASURED DRAO 

B MEASURED THRUST. PRANDTL-MEYER ORAQ 

C PREDICTED THRUST. PRANDTL-MEYER ORAO 




<^^-<SKXX>-Z.(C>_ 



o 



0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 
CORRELATED EQUIVALENCE RATIO, (J)^ 



ncorr 



b) Specific Impulse. 
Figure 4-60. Concluded. 



REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 


Form Approved 
0MB No. 0704-0188 


^r^^^ftS^r^^iuS^^SM vS^^^m^S^S^m^ Srco««:tion d \SSmM6on, Send comments reoarding this burden estimate or «y other aspect ot this 
S2SS Sw^SSST^^tSS^ Wwhington Headquarters SenriMS, Directorate tor information Operations and Reports. 1215 Jefferson 
SK^^^I!ST2(^ the Offii. e* MariS-ment and Budget PaperworV R«luction Prt^ci (070W188). Washington. DC 20503. 


1. AQEHCY USB OHDt {Leave i)/ank) 


2. REPORT DATE 

January 1992 


3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

Technical Memorandum 


A TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Experiments and Analysis Concerning the Use of External Burning to 
Reduce Aerospace Vehicle Transonic Drag 


5. FUNDING NUMBERS 

WU-763-01-21 


«. AUTHOR(S) 

ChariesJ.Trefhy 


7. renFORMINQ ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS{ES) 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Lewis Research Center 
aevcland,Ohio 44135-3191 


8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 

E-6789 


9. SPONSORING/MONTTORtNG AGENCY NAMES(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Washington, D.C 20546-0001 


10. SPONSORING/MONrTORING 
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 

NASA TM- 105397 


11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

Report was submitted as a dissertation in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree Doctor of Philosophy 
to the University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20742 in 1991. Responsible person, Charles J. Trefhy, 
(216)433-2162. 


12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Unclassified -Unlimited 
Subject Category 07 


12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 


13. ABSTRACT (Mexfmum 200 words) 

The external combustion of hydrogen to reduce transonic drag has been investigated. A control volume analysis 
is developed and indicates that the specific impulse performance of external burning is competitive with other 
forms of airbreathing propulsion and depends on the fiiel-air ratio, freestream Mach number, and the severity of 
the base drag. A method is presented for sizing fiiel injectors for a desired fuel-air ratio in the unconfined stream. 
A two-dimensional Euler analysis is also presented which indicates that the total axial force generated by external 
burning depends on the total amount of energy input and is independent of the transverse and streamwise 
distribution of heat addition. Good agreement between the Euler and control volume analysis is demonstrated. 
Features of the inviscid external burning flowfield are discussed. Most notably, a strong compression forms at the 
sonic line within the burning stream which may induce separation of the plume and prevent realization of the full 
performance potential. An experimental program was conducted in a Mach 1.26 free-jet to demonstrate drag 
reduction on a simple expansion ramp geometry, and verify hydrogen-air stability limits at external burning 
conditions. Stable combusuon appears feasible to Mach numbers of between 1.4 and 2 depending on the vehicle 
flight trajectory. Drag reduction is demonstrated on the expansion ramp at Mach 1.26, however force levels 
showed little dependence on fiiel pressure or altitude in contrast to control volume analysis predictions. Various 
facility interference mechanisms and scaling issues were studied and are discussed. 


14. SUBJECT TERMS 

External burning; Transonic drag reduction 


15. NUMBER OF PAGES 
294 


16. PRICE CODE 

A13 


17. SECURfTY CLASSIFICATION 
OF REPORT 

Unclassified 


18. SECURPFY CLASSIFICATION 
OF THIS PAGE 

Unclassified 


19. SECURfFY CLASSIFICATION 
OF ABSTRACT 

Unclassified 


20. UMPFATION OF ABSTRACT 



NSN 7540-01-280-5500 



Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) 
Pr*tcrtt>*d by ANSI Std. Z3&-18 
208-102 



NASA Technical Librai 



3 1176 01422 6576 



DO NOT REMOVE SLIP FROM MATERIAL 

Delete your name from this slip when returning material 



to the library. 



NAME 




XAT^anJA^ 



NASA Langley (Rev. Dec. 1991) 



DATE 



q-^^ 



MS 



3S1 



RIAD N-75 



