

N95- 19642 


ADDING INTELLIGENT SERVICES TO AN OBJECT ORIENTED SYSTEM. 


Bret R. Robideaux and Dr. Theodore A. Metzler 


LB&M Associates, Inc. 

211 SW A Ave. 

Lawton, OK 73505-4051 

(405) 355-1471 

robidb@lbm.com metzlert@lbm.com 


5/7-C / 
34*77 
f - A o 


Abstract 

As today's software becomes increasingly complex, the need grows for intelligence of 
one sort or another to become part of the application- often an intelligence that does not 
readily fit the paradigm of one's software development. 

. ? e J! ar lT y developing software, but at this time, the most promising 

the Object Onented (OO) method. This method involves an analysis to abstract the 
problem mto separate 'Objects' that are unique in the data that describe them and the 
behavior that they exhibit, and eventually to convert this analysis into computer code 
using a programming language that was designed (or retrofitted) for OO implementa- 

This paper discusses the creation of three different applications that are analyzed 
designed and programmed using the Shlaer/Mellor method of OO development and 
++ as the programming language. All three, however, require the use of an expert sys- 
tem to provide an intelligence that C++ (or any other 'traditional' language) is not 
directly smted to supply. The flexibility of CLIPS permitted us to make modifications to 
it that allow seamless mtegration with any of our applications that require an expert sys- 


We illustrate this integration with the following applications: 

1. An After Action Review (AAR) station that assists a reviewer in watching a 
simulated tank battle and developing an AAR to critique the performance 
of the participants in the battle. 

2. An embedded training system and over-the-shoulder coach for howitzer 
crewmen. 

3. A system to identify various chemical compounds from their infrared 
absorption spectra. 

Keywords - Object Oriented, CLIPS 


PAG 




. IN i hi* i jUIxAlL Y 


Pi * i0#WWs PAGE blank NOT FILMED 


143 


INTRODUCTION 

The goal of the project was to develop a company methodology of software develop- 
ment. The requirement was to take Object Oriented Analysis (done using the Shlaer-Mel- 
lor method) and efficiently convert it to C++ code. The result was a flexible system that 
supports reusability, portability and extensibility. The heart of this system is a software 
engine that provides the functionality the Shlaer/Mellor Method (Ref. 2 & 3) allows the 
analyst to assume is available. This includes message passing (inter-process communica- 
tion), state machines and timers. CUPS provides an excellent example of one facet of the 
engine. Its portability is well-known, and its extensibility allowed us to embed 
appropriate portions of our engine into it. We could then modify its behavior to make it 
pretend it was a natural object or domain of objects. This allowed us to add expert sys- 
tem services to any piece of software developed using our method (and on any platform 
to which we have ported the engine). 

OBJECT ORIENTED METHODS 

The principal concept in an OO Method is the object. Many methods include the con- 
cept of logically combining groups of objects. The logic behind determining which 
objects belong to which grouping is as varied as the names used to identify the concept. 
For example, Booch (Ref. 4) uses categories and Rumbaugh (Ref. 5) uses aggregates. 
Shlaer/Mellor uses domains (Ref. 3). Objects are grouped into Domains by their func- 
tional relationships; that is, their behavior accomplishes complementary tasks. 

Fig 1 shows that the operating system is its own domain. It is possible the operating 
has very little to do with being OO, but it is useful to model it as part of the system. 
Another significant domain to note is the Software Architecture Domain. This is the soft- 
ware engine that provides the assumptions made in analysis. The arrows denote e 
dependence of the domain at the beginning of the arrow upon the domain at the end o 
the arrow. If the model is built properly, a change in any domain will only affect the 
domains immediately above it. Notice there are no arrows from the mam application 
(Railroad Operation Domain) to the Operating System Domain. This means a change m 
operating systems (platforms) should not require any changes in the main application. 
However, changes will be required in the domains of Trend Recording, User Interface, 
Software Architecture and Network. The extent of those changes is dependent on the 
nature of the changes in the operating system. But this does stop the cascade ef e o a 
minor change in the operating system from forcing a complete overhaul of the entire sys- 
tem. 

While CLIPS could be considered an object, the definition of domains makes it seems 
more appropriate to call it a domain. 

THE SOFTWARE ENGINE 

The portion of the software engine that is pertinent to CLIPS is the message passing. 
The event structure that is passed is designed to model closely the Shlaer/Mellor even . 


144 



We have implemented five (5) kinds of events: 

1. Standard Events: events passed to an instance of an object to transition the 
state model 

2. Class Events: events dealing with more than one instance of an object 

3. Remote Procedure Calls (RPCs): An object may provide functions that other 

o jects can call. One object makes an RPC to another passing some parameters 
in, having some calculations performed and receiving a response 

4. Accesses: An object may not have direct access to data belonging to another 
object. The data other objects need must be requested via an accessor. 

5. Return Events: the event that carries the result of an RPC or Access event 


145 



The event most commonly received by CLIPS is the Class Event CLIPS is not a tme 
obied -aerefore it has no true instances, and Standard Events are not sent to it. CLIPS is 
more likely to make an RPC than to provide one. It is possible that an object may ne 
Tow about a certain fact in the fact base, so receiving an Access is possible. Should 
RPCor Access it will receive a Return Event. RPCs and Accesses are con- 
Seredpriority events so the Return Event could be handled as part of the function that 

makes the call. 

The events themselves have all of the attributes of a Shlaer/Mellor event, plus a few to 
facilitate functionality. The C++ prototype for the function Sendjdesg is. 

void Send_Mesg (char* Destination, 

EventTypes Type, 
unsigned long EventNumber, 
char* Data, 

unsigned int DataLength = 0, 
void* InstancelD = 0, 
unsigned long Priority = 0); 

Amig^C^^^ 

to be rewritten. 

The Unix version of the Inter-Process Communication (IPC) part of the engme was 
. . KTA c a'c mmole Sockets Library. Since all versions of the engme, regardless 

*e" *e system missing a beat. In the worst case, the system will not crash unre- 
coverably. 

MODIFICATIONS TO CLIPS 

Since the software engine is written in C++, at least some part of the CLIPS source 
code must be converted to C++. The most obvious choice is main.c, but this m ^ ai ^ s ^ 
uVerFunctions code must be moved elsewhere since they must remain written in C. 

moved them to sysdep.c. 

Thp inDut loop has been moved to main.c because all input will come in over the IPC 
as ™lid CLIPS instructions. The stdin input in CommandLoop has been removed, an 


146 


the function is no longer a loop. The base function added to CLIPS is: 

(RETURN event_number destination data) 

This function takes its three parameters and adds them to a linked list of structures 
(see Fig. 2). When CommandLoop has completed its pass and returns control to main.c, 
it checks the linked list and performs the IPC requests the CLIPS code made (see Fig. 3). 
RETURN handles the easiest of the possible event types that can be sent out: Class 
Events. To handle Standard Events, some way of managing the instance handles of the 
destination(s) needs to be implemented. To handle Accesses and RPCs some method of 
handling the Return events needs to be implemented. The easiest way is to write a man- 
ager program. Use RETURN to send messages to the Manager. The event number and 
possibly part of the data can be used to instruct the Manager on what needs to be done. 


RETURN () ~ 

{ 

extract parameters from call 


main () 

{ 

init CLIPS 

allocate a new element for the list 


begin loop 

fill in the structure 


Get Message 

add structure to the list 


set command string 

} 


call CommandLoop 



check output list 



if there are elements in the structure 
make the appropriate send messages 



end loop 

} 


Figure. 2: Pseudocode for function RETURN Figure 3: Pseudocode for main 0 


Sending instructions and information into CLIPS requires a translator to takes Shlaer / 
Mellor events and convert them to CLIPS valid instructions. In Shlaer /Mellor terms this 
construct is called a Bridge. 

With these changes CLIPS can pretend it is a natural part of our system. 

EXAMPLES 

This system has been successfully used with three different projects. An After Action 
Review Station for reviewing a simulated tank battle, an Embedded Training System to 
aid howitzer crewmen in the performance of their job and a chemical classifier based on 
a chemical's infrared absorbtion spectra. 


147 




The After Action Review (AAR) station is called the Automated Training Analysis 
Feedback System or ATAFS. See Figure 4 for its domain chart. Its job is to watch a simu- 
lated tank battle on a network and aid the reviewer in developing an AAR in a timely 
manner It does so by feeding information about the locations and activities of the vehi- 
cles and other pertinent data about the exercise to the expert system. The expert system 
watches the situation and marks certain events in the exercise as potentially important. 
ATAFS will then use this information to automatically generate a skeleton AAR and pro- 
vide tools for the reviewer to customize the AAR to highlight the events that rea y were 



148 










In an early version of the system, ATAFS was given the location of a Iine-of-departure, 
a phase-line and an objective. During the simulated exercise of four vehicles moving to 
the objective, CLIPS was fed the current location of each vehicle. CLIPS updated each 
vehicle's position in its fact base and compared the new location with the previous loca- 
tion in relation to each of the control markings. When it found a vehicle on the opposite 
side of a control mark than it previously was, it RETURNe d an appropriate event to 
ATAFS. Upon being notified that a potentially interesting event had just occurred, 
ATAFS is left to do what ever needs to be done. CLIPS continues to watch for other 
events it is programmed to deem interesting. 



Fig 5: ET Domain Chart 


149 






Embedded Training (ET) is a coaching and training system for howitzer crewmen. 
See Figure 5 for its domain chart. It provides everything from full courseware to simple 
reminders/checklists. It also provides a scenario facility that emulates real world situa- 
tions and includes an expert system that watches the trainee attempt to perform the 
required tasks. During the scenario the expert system monitors the trainee s activities 

and compares them to the activities that the scenario requires. 

It adjusts the user's score according to his actions and uses his current score to predict 
whether the user will need help on a particular task. All of the user's actions on the ter- 
minal are passed along to CLIPS, which interprets them and determines what theheis 
currently doing and attempting to do. Having determined what the user is doing, CLIPS 
uses its RETURN in conjunction with a manager program to access data contained in 
various objects. This data is used by CUPS to determine what level of help, if any, to 
issue the user. The decision is then RETURN ed to ET which supplies the specified help. 

The chemical analysis system (Ref. 6) designed by Dr. Metzler and chemist Dr. Gore 
takes the infrared (IR) spectrum of a chemical compound and attempts to classify it 
using a trained neural net. In the course of their study, they determined the neural net 
performed significantly better when some sort of pre-processor was able to narrow 
down the identification of the compound. CLIPS was one of the methods selected. The 
IR spectrum was broken down into 52 bins. The value of each of these bins was 
abstracted into values of strong, medium and weak. Initially three rules were built: one 
to identify ethers, one for esters and one for aldehydes (Figure 6). 


(defrule ester 
(bin 15 is strong) 

(or (bin 24 is strong) 

(or (bin 25 is strong) 

(bin 26 is strong)) 

(and (or (bin 22 is strong) 

(bin 23 is strong) 

(bin 24 is strong)) 

(or (bin 25 is strong) 

(bin 26 is strong) 

(bin 27 is strong))) 

(and (bin 28 is medium) 

(or (bin 22 is strong) 

(bin 23 is strong) 

(bin 24 is strong)))) 

(RETURN 1 "IR_Classifier" "compound is an ester")) 


Figure 6. Example of a Chemical Rule 


150 



The results of this pre-processing were RETURNed to the neural net which then was 
able to choose a module specific to the chosen functional group. Later, the output from 
another pre-processor (a nearest neighbor classifier) was also input into CLIPS and rules 
were added to resolve differences between CLIPS' initial choice and the nearest-neigh- 
bor's choice. 

CONCLUSIONS 

CLIPS proved to be a very useful tool when used in this way. In ET and ATAFS, the 
Expert System Domain could easily be expanded to use a hybrid system similar to that 
of the Chemical Analysis problem, or use multiple copies of CUPS operating indepen- 
dently or coordinating their efforts using some kind of Blackboard. In many applica- 
tions, intelligence is not the main concern. User interface concerns in both ET and ATAFS 
were more important than the intelligence. ET has the added burden of operating in con- * 
juction with a black box system (software written by a partner company). ATAFS' big- 
gest concern was capturing every packet off of the network where the exercise was 
occurring and storing them in an easily accessible manner. The flexibility of C++ is better 
able to handle these tasks than CLIPS, but not nearly as well suited for representing an 
expert coaching and grading a trainee howitzer crewman or reviewing a tank battle. 
While recognizing individual chemical compounds would be tedious task for CLIPS 
(and the programmer), recognizing the functional group the compound belongs to and 
passing the information along to a trained neural net is almost trivial. 

Expert systems like CLIPS have both strengths and weaknesses, as do virtually all 
other methods of developing software. Object Oriented is becoming the most popular 
way to develop software, but it still has its shortfalls. Neural nets are gaining in popular- 
ity as the way to do Artificial Intelligence, especially in the media, but they too have their 
limits. By mixing different methods and technologies, modifying and using existing soft- 
ware to interact with each other, software can be pushed to solving greater and greater 
problems. 


151 



REFERENCES 


1. . Gary Riley, et al, CLIPS Reference Manual Version 5.1 of CLIPS, Volume IE Utilities 
and Interfaces Guide, Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center (September 10, 1991). 

2. Sally Shlaer and Stephen Mellor, Object-Oriented Systems Analysis, Modeling the 
World in Data . (P T R Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1988). 

3. Sally Shlaer and Stephen Mellor, Object Lifecycles. Modeling the World in States . 
(Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1992). 

t» 

4. Grady Booch, Object Oriented Design with Applications . (The Benjamin/ Cummings 
Publishing Company, Inc., Redwood City, California, 1991). 

5. James Rumbaugh, et al, Object-Oriented Modeling and Design . (Prentice-Hall, Inc., 
, Englewood Cliffs, 1991). 

6. T.A. Mefzler and R.H. Gore, Application of Hybrid Al to Identification of Chemical 
Compounds, Proceedings of TECOM Conference on Al and the Environment, Aberdeen 
Maryland, September 13-16, 1994 



