N95- 19750 


USING CLIPS IN THE DOMAIN OF KNOWLEDGE-BASED 
MASSIVELY PARALLEL PROGRAMMING 


Jiri J. Dvorak 

Section of Research and Development 
Swiss Scientific Computing Center CSCS 
Via Cantonale, CH-6928 Manno, Switzerland 
Email: dvorakflcscs.ch 


Abstract 

The Program Development Environment PDE is a tool for massively parallel pro- 
gramming of distributed-memory architectures. Adopting a knowledge-based ap- 
proach, the PDE eliminates the complexity introduced by parallel hardware with 
distributed memory and offers complete transparency in respect of parallelism ex- 
ploitation. The knowledge-based part of the PDE is realized in CLIPS. Its principal 
task is to find an efficient parallel realization of the application specified by the 
user in a comfortable, abstract, domain-oriented formalism. A large collection of 
fine-grain parallel algorithmic skeletons, represented as COOL objects in a tree hi- 
erarchy, contains the algorithmic knowledge. A hybrid knowledge base with rule 
modules and procedural parts, encoding expertise about application domain, paral- 
lel programming, software engineering, and parallel hardware, enables a high degree 
of automation in the software development process. 

In this paper, important aspects of the implementation of the PDE using CLIPS 
and COOL are shown, including the embedding of CLIPS with C+- 1— based parts of 
the PDE. The appropriateness of the chosen approach and of the CLIPS language 
for knowledge-based software engineering are discussed. 


1 INTRODUCTION 

Massive parallelism is expected to provide the next substantial increase in computing 
power needed for current and future scientific applications. Whereas there exists a variety 
of hardware platforms offering massive parallelism, a comfortable programming environ- 
ment making programming of distributed-memory architectures as easy as programming 
single address space systems is still missing. The programmer of parallel hardware is 
typically confronted with aspects not found on conventional architectures, such as data 
decomposition, data and load distribution, data communication, process coordination, 
varying data access delays, and processor topology. Approaches to a simplification of 
parallel programming that have been used previously, in particular for shared-memory 
architectures, are transformational and compile-time parallelization [P0I88, ZC90]. How- 
ever, such code-level parallelization is extremely difficult for distributed architectures. 
Additionally, only a limited, fine-grain part of the opportunities for parallel execution 
within the program can be detected, and the results are dependent on the programming 
style of the programmer. The detection of conceptual, coarse-grain parallelism found in 


220 



many applications from natural sciences and engineering is in general too complicated for 
current parallelization techniques. 

Our Program Development Environment PDE [Dvo93, DDR94] is a tool for programming 
massively parallel computer systems with distributed memory. Its primary goal is to 
handle all complexity introduced by the parallel hardware in a user-transparent way. 
To break the current limitations in code parallelization, we approach parallel program 
development with knowledge-based techniques and with user support starting at an earlier 
phase in program development, at the specification and design phase. 

In this paper we focus on the expert system part of the PDE realized in the CLIPS [GR94] 
language. At first, a short overview of the PDE is given. The representation and use of 
knowledge is the topic of section 3. This is followed by sections showing aspects of external 
interfaces, problem representation, and embedding with C++. The important role of 
an object-oriented approach will be elaborated in these parts. A discussion of results, 
the appropriateness of the CLIPS language, and the current state of the development 
concludes the paper. 


2 OVERVIEW OF THE PDE 


The basic methodology of programming with the PDE consists of three steps [DR92]: 

1. Problem specification using a domain-specific, high-level formalism 

2. Interactive refinement and completion of the specification (if needed) 

3. User-transparent generation of compilable program code 

According to this three-step approach to the programming process, the program develop- 
ment environment consists of the three functional components shown in Fig. 1. In a typical 


Programming Assistant PA 



Parallel hardware 


Figure 1: The conceptual structure of the PDE 


221 


session, the programmer gives an initial specification of the problem under consideration 
using a programming assistant interface. Currently, we have an interface SMPAI covering 
the domain of stencil-based applications on n-dimensional grids. Other interfaces are in 
preparation. The initial problem specification is decomposed into the purely computa- 
tional features and the features relevant for the parallel structure. The first are passed 
directly to the Program Synthesizer PS, the latter go to the Programming Assistant PA. 
Then, in interaction with the user, the PA extracts and completes the information needed 
to determine an appropriate parallel framework. The PA is the central, largely Al-based 
component of the PDE, relying on various kinds of expert knowledge. The program syn- 
thesizer expands the parallel framework into compilable, hardware specific, parallel C++ 
or C programs. 


3 REPRESENTATION OF ALGORITHMIC KNOWLEDGE 

The PDE embodies a skeleton-oriented approach [Col89] to knowledge-based software 
engineering. A large collection of hierarchically organized fine-grain skeletons forms the 
algorithmic knowledge. The hierarchy spans from a general, abstract skeleton at the root 
to highly problem-specific, optimized skeletons at the leaf-level. Skeleton nodes in the 
tree represent a number of different entities. First, every non-leaf skeleton is a decision 
point for the rule-based descent. The descendants are specializations of the actual node 
in one particular aspect, the discrimination criterion of the skeleton. Every skeleton node 
contains information about the discrimination criterion and value that leads to its selection 
among the descendants of its parent node. The discrimination criteria represent concepts 
from parallel programming, application domain, and characteristics the supported parallel 
hardware architectures. Second, a skeleton node holds information about requirements 
other than the discrimination criterion that have to be checked before a descent is done. 
Third, skeleton nodes have slots for other kind of information that is not checked during 
descent but that may be helpful for the user or for subsequent steps. Finally, the skeleton 
nodes have attached methods or message handlers that are able to dynamically generate 
the parallel framework for the problem to be solved with the chosen skeleton. 

Based on these different roles, the question arises whether the skeleton knowledge base 
should be built using instance or class objects. To access information in slots, a skeleton 
node should be an instance of a suitable class. However, to attach specialized methods or 
message-handlers at any node, skeletons have to be represented using classes. Also, the 
specialization type of the hierarchy suggests the use of a class hierarchy for the skeleton 
tree. We have solved the conflict by using both a class and an instance as the represen- 
tation of a single skeleton node. A simplified example skeleton class is: 

(defclass skel-32 (is-a init-bnd-mixin skel-5) 

(pattern-match reactive) 

(slot discrimination-crit (default problem-type) (create-accessor read)) 
(slot discrimination-value (default INIT_BND_VAL_PROBLEM) 

(create-accessor read)) 

(multislot constraints (create-accessor read-write)) 

(multislot required (default (create! gridinstances.requirement) ) 

(create-accessor read))) 

The required slot holds instances of the requirements mentioned above. Constraints are 


222 



an additional concept used for describing restrictions in application scope. 

All instances of the skeleton nodes are generated automatically with a simple function: 

(deffunction create-instances (?rootclass) 

(progn$ (?node (class-subclasses ?rootclass inherit)) 

(make-instance ?node of ?node))) 

The two basic operations on the skeleton tree are the finding of the optimal skeleton, i.e., 
the descent in the tree, and the generation of the computational framework based on a 
selected node. 

3.1 Rule-based skeleton tree descent 

The descent in the skeleton tree is driven by rules. Based on the discrimination criterion of 
the current node, rules match on particular characteristics of the application specification 
and try to derive a value for the criterion. If a descendant node with the derived criterion 
value exists, it will get the candidate for the descent. The following example rule tries to 
find a descendant matching the grid coloring property of the specification: 

(defrule DESC: : coloring- 1 
?obj <- (object (name [descent_object] ) 

(curr_skel ?skel)) 

?inst <- (object (discrimination-crit coloring) 

(discrimination-value ?c)) 

(test (member$ (class ?inst) (class-subclasses (class ?skel)))) 

?res <- (object (nr_of .colors ?c)) 

?app <- (object (is-a PAapp.class) 

(results ?res)) 

=> 

(send ?obj put-next.skel ?inst) 

(send ?obj put-decision.ok t)) 

The pattern matching relies heavily on object patterns. The whole expert system is 
programmed practically without the use of facts. The rule first matches a descent object, 
then a skeleton which is a descendant of the current skeleton and finally the nr _of .colors 
slot of the problem specification. Note that the particular ordering of object patterns is 
induced by some peculiarities of the CLIPS 6.0 pattern matching procedure. In order to 
handle references to objects in other modules, it is advisable to use instance addresses 
instead of instance names. CLIPS does not match objects from imported modules when 
they are refered to by a name property and the module name is not explicitly given. On 
the other hand, CLIPS has no instance-address property for object patterns and the form 
?obj <- (object . . .) does not allow ?obj to be a bound variable. So, the ordering 
of patterns is restricted in such a way that first an object gets matched and then it is 
verified whether it is the desired one. The consequence is probably some loss in pattern 
matching efficiency. 

Although our initial problem domain is sufficiently restricted and well-defined to allow a 
complete, automatic descent in most cases, there is a collection of user interaction tools, 
called the Intelligent Skeleton Programming Environment ISPE, ready to handle the case 


223 



when the descent stops before reaching a sufficiently elaborated skeleton. With the ISPE, 
the user can add missing information, select a descendant node manually, or even step 
through the tree guided by the expert system. For such a functionality, the ISPE needs 
a high integration with the expert system. The rules for the descent are divided into 
various modules, separating search for descendants, verification and actual descent in 
different rule modules. The object of class descent-class used in the rule above serves 
to keep track of the current state of descent and to coordinate between the rule modules. 

3.2 Generating output from the skeleton tree 

After successful selection of a skeleton node for the application under consideration, the 
parallel framework can be generated. This is done by calling message-handlers attached 
to all skeletons. An example parallel framework for a simple stencil problem is: 

init(Grid) ; 

FOR (iter = 0; iter < nr_of .iterations ; iter++) DO 
FOR (color = 0; color < 3; color++) DO 
INTERACTION 

fill.buf (Grid, w.obuf , west, color); 

Exchange (e.ibuf , east, w.obuf , west); 
scatter.buf (Grid, e.ibuf, east, color); 


END; 

CALCULATION 

update (Grid, color); 

END; 

ENDFOR; 

ENDFOR; 
f inish(Grid) ; 

The building blocks of this formalism [BG94] are communication and computation pro- 
cedure calls, grouped by sequencing or iteration statements. 

Object-oriented concepts are realized for optimizing the representational efficiency in the 
skeleton tree. First, inheritance insures that information stored in the slots of the skeleton 
nodes is passed down the tree. If from a certain point on it does not apply any more, it 
can be overriden. Second, new behaviour is introduced with mixin classes. As it can be 
seen in the skel-32 node shown earlier, each node has both a mixin class and the parent 
class in its superclass list. In this way, it is possible to define a particular feature only 
once, but to add it at various points in the tree. Finally, instead of having methods that 
for each skeleton individually generate the complete parallel framework, an incremental 
method combination approach has been chosen. Every method first calls the same method 
of its parent node and then makes its own additions. The message-handler below shows 
this basic structure: 

(defmessage-handler stencil-MS-mixin generate-MS 0 
(bind ?inst (call-next -handler)) 

(send ?inst put-global_vars 
(create$ .... ) ) ) 


224 



Message-handlers instead of methods have to be used for this kind of incremental struc- 
ture, as methods in CLIPS do not have dynamic precedence computation, whereas message- 
handlers do. Using methods, the sequence of skeleton and method definitions in the source 
file would be dominant for the precedence instead of the class hierarchy at runtime. 


4 INTERFACES AND PROBLEM REPRESENTATIONS 

The expert system of the PDE has basically three interfaces to the outside. It receives 
input from the problem specification tools, generates the parallel framework as output for 
the program synthesizer component, and it has an interface for user interaction. 


4.1 Input 

In order to omit a parser written in CLIPS, the formalism for the problem specification 
was chosen to be directly readable into CLIPS. A natural way to achieve this consists 
in using instance-generating constructs. We have two types of constructs in the input 
formalism, for example: 

(make-instance global_spec of global_spec_class 
(grid_const 1.0) 

(dimension 2) 

(problem.type BND.VAL.PROBLEM) ) 

(stencil_spec (assign_op (grid_var f (coord 00)) 

(function_call median 

(grid_var f (coord -1 0)) 

(grid_var f (coord 00)) 

(grid.var f (coord 1 0))))) 

In the first statement above, where global properties of the application are defined, the 
make-instance is part of the formalism. Obviously, reading such a construct from a file 
with the CLIPS batch command generates an instance of the respective class and initial- 
izes the slots. In the second case, where the stencil is defined, the instance-generating abil- 
ity is not directly visible. However, for every keyword such as stencil_spec , assign.op 
or grid-var, there are functions creating instances of respective classes, e.g.: 

(def function grid_var (?name ?coord) 

(bind ?inst (make-instance (gensym*) of grid.var)) 

(send ?inst put-var_name ?name) 

(send ?inst put-coord ?coord)) 

The reasons to not use make-instance in all cases are that some constructs can have 
multiple entities of the same name, e.g., a stencil can have multiple assignment operations, 
and additional processing that is needed by some constructs. 

The lack of nested lists in CLIPS was considered as a disadvantage at the beginning, 
in particular regarding the close relation between CLIPS and Lisp/CLOS. However, a 
recursive list construct can be easily defined with COOL objects and instance-generation 


225 



functions similar to the one above. Certainly, this is not appropriate if runtime efficiency 
is critical. In the course of the PDE development, the lack of lists proved to have a 
positive effect on style and readability. For example, instead of using just the list (-1 
1 2) for a 3-D coordinate, using the construct (coord -1 1 2) creates an instance of 
a specialized class for coordinate tuples. Such an instance can be easier handled than a 
list and appropriate methods or message-handlers can be defined. The whole problem 
representation after reading the specification input is present in a number of nested, 
interconnected instances of respective classes. 


4.2 Output 

The result of the generation of the parallel framework is a problem representation by means 
of a number of instances, much in the sense of the input representation shown above. The 
writing of an output file as shown in section 3.2 is done with message-handlers attached 
to each of the relevant problem representation classes, e.g., a for-loop is written by: 

(def message-handler for_loop_class write-out (?stream) 

(printout ?stream " FOR (" ?self : varname " = " ?self:from 

ii; ii ?self : varname " < " ?self:till 
»; ii ?self : varname "++) DO " t) 

(prognS (?el ?self:subs) 

(send ?el write-out Tstream)) 

(printout ?stream " ENDFOR;" t)) 


5 EMBEDDING WITH C++ 

The global structure of the PDE consists of components written in C-t— among them the 
main program and the graphical user interface, and an embedded CLIPS expert system 
for knowledge representation and reasoning. Additionally, two parsers use the Lex/Yacc 
utilities. Whereas some components, such as the parsers, are integrated only by means of 
intermediate files for input and output, the expert system is highly integrated with the 
based ISPE and the graphical user interface. The CLIPS dialog itself is visible to 
the user through a CLIPS base window. Figure 2 shows both the CLIPS dialog window 
and a browser window for graphically browsing the skeleton tree. 


5.1 Data integration 

Both CLIPS and C++ offer objects for the representation of data. It is therefore a 
straightforward decision to use the object mechanism for the data integration between 
an expert system written in CLIPS and programs written in C++. The concept for the 
CLIPS-C++ integration relies on the decisions to represent common data on the CLIPS 
side using COOL objects and to provide wrapper classes on the C++ side for a transparent 
access to COOL objects. A class hierarchy has been built in C++ to represent CLIPS 
types, including classes and instances. Access to COOL classes is needed for example in 
the skeleton tree browser, where descendants of a node are only found by inspecting the 
subclasses list of the node. 


226 


fife: r '"PftSSJIftlro5 



CL I PS > CPA) 
descending 
descending 
descending 
descending 
comm-dl recti ons 
comm-dl recti ons 


skeleton-type data-parallel 
skel eton-type stencil 
coloring 2 
decomp-dlm 2 
(south) 

(west) 


comm-dl recti ons : (north) 
comm-dl recti ons : (east) 
n-s-symmetry : yes 
e-w-symmetry : yes 
descending : stencil -dim 2 
descending ; symmetric stencil 
descending : max communication links 
CLIPS> (output_text) 

Slave definition; 

1 oop : do till max 

sync comm : north_south color 
sync comm : east_west color 0 
perform computation, color 0 
sync comm ; north_south color 
sync comm : east_west color 1 
perform computation, color 1 
t 

PPilslii 



Figure 2: The CLIPS window and the skeleton tree browser 

The C++ wrapper classes consist of an abstract class clips.type with subclasses for the 
CLIPS data types integer, float, symbol, string, multifield, and for COOL classes and 
instances. The class coolframe used to represent COOL instances is shown below; 

class coolframe : public clips_type { 
char* f ramename ; 
public : 

coolframe (char* name); 

clips _type* get_slot (char* slotname) ; 

int put_s lot (char* slotname, clips.type* value); 

char* class_of(); >; 

The creation of a C++ frontend to a COOL instance is performed by just instantiating 
the above class, giving the constructor the name of the COOL instance. Accesses to 
slots have to be done by using the get_slot and put.slot member functions that refer to 
functions in the CLIPS external interface [NAS93]. The class coolframe is a generic class, 
usable for any COOL instance, no matter what collection of slots the COOL instance has. 
A more sophisticated approach with separate members for all slots would be somewhat 
more convenient, as the distinction between accessing a C++ object and accessing a 
COOL object through the C++ wrapper would be completely blurred. However, defining 
classes on the fly, based on the structure of the COOL instances, is not possible in C++. 
The chosen system with general-purpose wrapper classes is already convenient for use 
in C++. Operators and functions in C++ can be overloaded to handle CLIPS data 
transparently. For example, the basic mathematical operations can be overloaded to 
combine C++ numbers with CLIPS numbers in one expression. 

Care has to be taken to not introduce inconsistencies between the data stored in CLIPS 
and the C++ wrappers. To this end, the C++ interface to CLIPS does not cache any 


227 



information, and before performing any access through the CLIPS external interface it is 
verified whether the COOL object to be accessed still exists. 


5.2 Functional integration 

The goal with functional integration is to achieve fine-grain control over the reasoning 
in the expert system from C++-based components whenever needed. For example, it is 
sometimes desirable to check whether one single descent from the current skeleton node is 
possible. Or, the user may prefer to step manually through the tree, getting support from 
the expert system. The detailed control needed for such tasks has been achieved with a 
partitioning of the rules into a number of rule modules. Then, the C++ component can 
set the focus to just the rule system desired and start the reasoning. 

Two basic means to interact from the CH — t- components to the CLIPS expert system 
exist in the PDE. First, a C++ program can call any of the C functions from the CLIPS 
external interface. This happens without user visibility in the CLIPS dialog window, and a 
return value can be obtained from the call. Second, thanks to the graphical user interface 
written in C++, the C++ program can directly write to the dialog window in such a 
way that CLIPS thinks it received input at the command line. Using this alternative, no 
return value can be passed back to the C++ component, but the interaction is visible to 
the user in the window. It is thus most suited to starting the reasoning or other functions 
that produce output or a trace in the dialog window. 


6 CONCLUSIONS 

The realization of the parallel program development environment PDE has successfully 
achieved the primary goal of making parallel programming as simple as sequential pro- 
gramming within the initial problem domain of stencil-based applications. Moreover, 
thanks to programming environment support spanning from the design level up to au- 
tomated code generation and thanks to the reuse of important software components, 
parallel programming with the PDE can be considered substantially simpler and more 
reliable than sequential programming in a common procedural language. Apart from 
the high-level, domain-oriented approach to programming, the PDE offers to the user 
efficiency preserving portability of software across platforms, reuse of critical software 
components, and a flexible and comfortable interface. 

With a focus on the parts realized using CLIPS, various aspects of the implementation 
of our knowledge-based parallel program development tool PDE have been shown in this 
paper. CLIPS in its current version 6.0 [NAS93] proved to have some critical properties 
making it particularly well-suited for the use within the PDE. Of highest importance 
are probably the object-oriented capabilities of CLIPS, enabling flexible interfaces to 
the outside, appropriate representations of knowledge and intermediate problem states, 
and, together with the CLIPS external interface, a convenient embedding with the C++ 
components of the PDE. CLIPS is well suited for a rapid prototyping approach to system 
development, in particular due to the flexibility that the object-oriented mechanism can 
offer. The PDE development is currently in the fourth prototype. Apart from the first 
throw-away prototype done in CLOS [BDG + 88], each prototype reuses large parts of the 
previous one, adding completely new components or new functionality. 


228 



The problems with the CLIPS language encountered during the PDE development relate 
in part to the resemblance of CLIPS to CLOS. Examples are the lack of the lists in the 
sense of Lisp, the static precedence determination for methods, or the inability to pass 
methods or functions as first-class objects. But alternatives offering similar functionality 
have been found in all cases. Apart from such CLOS-like items, a suggestion for improve- 
ment of the CLIPS language based on our experience is to focus more on object patterns 
in rules than on facts or templates. An useful extension of the CLIPS external interface, 
based on the popularity of the C++ programming language, would be the definition and 
documentation of a C++ frontend for COOL objects. 


REFERENCES 

[BDG + 88] D.G. Bobrow, L.G. DeMichiel, R.P. Gabriel, S.E. Keene, G. Kiczales, and D.A. 

Moon. Common Lisp Object System Specification. X3J13 Document 88-002R, 
1988. 

[BG94] H. Burkhart and S. Gutzwiller. Steps towards reusability and portability in 
parallel programming. In K.M. Decker and R.M. Rehmann, editors, Program- 
ming Environments for Massively Parallel Distributed Systems, pages 147 - 
157. Birkhauser Verlag, Basel, 1994. 

[Col89] M. Cole. Algorithmic Skeletons: Structured Management of Parallel Compu- 
tation. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA., 1989. 

[DDR94] K.M. Decker, J.J. Dvorak, and R.M. Rehmann. A knowledge-based scientific 
parallel programming environment. In K.M. Decker and R.M. Rehmann, ed- 
itors, Programming Environments for Massively Parallel Distributed Systems, 
pages 127 - 138. Birkhauser Verlag, Basel, 1994. 

[DR92] K.M. Decker and R.M. Rehmann. Simple and efficient programming of parallel 
distributed systems for computational scientists. Technical Report IAM-92- 
019, IAM, University of Berne, 1992. 

[Dvo93] J. Dvorak. An Al-based approach to massively parallel programming. Tech- 
nical Report CSCS-TR-93-04, Swiss Scientific Computing Center CSCS, CH- 
6928 Manno, Switzerland, 1993. 

[GR94] J. Giarratano and G. Riley. Expert Systems: Principles and Programming. 
PWS Publishing, Boston, MA., 2nd. edition, 1994. 

fNAS93| NASA Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center. CLIPS Reference Manual, 6.0 edi- 
tion, 1993. 

[Pol88] C.D. Polychronopoulos. Parallel Programming and Compilers. Kluwer Aca- 
demic Publishers, Boston, 1988. 

[ZC90] H. Zima and B. Chapman. Supercompilers for parallel and vector computers. 
Addison- Wesley, Workingham, 1990. 


229 



