N94- 33667 


DIAGNOSING ANOMALIES OF SPACECRAFT FOR SPACE MAINTENANCE 

AND SERVICING 

Michael Lauriente, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Code 420, Greenbelt, MD 20771 

Mark Rolincik, University Research Foundation, Greenbelt, MD 20771 

Harry C. Koons and David Gomey, The Aerospace Corporation, 

P.O.Box 92957,LosAngeles,CA90009 


ABSTRACT 

Very often servicing of satellites is necessary to replace components which are responsible for anomalous 
behavior of satellite operations due to adverse interactions with the natural space environment. A major 
difficulty with this diagnosis is that those responsible for diagnosing these anomalies do not have the 
tools to assess the role of the space environment causing the anomaly. To address this issue, we have 
under development a new rule-based, expert system for diagnosing spacecraft anomalies. The knowledge 
base consists of over two-hundred (200) rules and provides links to historical and environmental 
databases. Environmental causes considered are bulk charging, single event upsets (SEU), surface 
charging, and total radiation dose. The system's driver translates forward chaining rules into a backward 
chaining sequence, prompting the user for information pertinent to the causes considered. When the user 
selects the novice mode, the system automatically gives detailed explanations and descriptions of terms 
and reasoning as the session progresses, in a sense teaching the user. As such it is an effective tutoring 
tool. The. use of heuristics frees the user from searching through large amounts of irrelevant information 
and allows the user to input partial information (varying degrees of confidence in an answer) or 
'unknown' to any question. The system is available on-line and uses C Language Integrated Production 
System (CLIPS), an expert shell developed by the NASA Johnson Space Center AI Laboratory in 
Houston. 

INTRODUCTION 

What is proposed is a system for diagnosing spacecraft anomalies which will provide an intelligence for 
servicing of satellites. The analysis of components responsible for anomalous behavior of satellites due 
to adverse interactions with the natural space environment is a very complex process. It is important to be 
able to make an accurate assessment in a timely and accurate manner when the problem becomes serious 
enough to requiring servicing. This approach that is being proposed is to take advantage of the new tools 
that have been developed to analyze, display, and interpret large data sets. Significant progress has been 
made to the extent that some are even suggesting that these powerful tools may even lead to schemes to 
predict flares and geomagnetic activity. An international workshop on artificial intelligence applications 
on solar-terrestrial physics to be held at Lund, Sweden, September 22-24, 1993, sponsored by NOAA, 
NASA/GSFC, Lund Observatory and the Swedish Science Research Institute has made such a 

suggestion.^ Although prediction may be an optimistic long term goal for scientists, the engineers 
responsible for design and building the hardware would be satisfied if early warning schemes were 
available. Vampola, as Guest Editor for a collection of papers on solar effects on space systems found a 
consensus that the solar output of radiation, solar wind, and energetic particles depends on the solar 

magnetic cycled This fits in with viewpoint that radiation belt models should be based on years of 
magnetic activity maximum and minimum instead of sun spot maximum and minimum. 3 NOAA’s 
National Geophysical Data Center, (NGDC), has responsibility for collecting, archiving, analyzing, and 

disseminating solar-terrestrial data and information. 4 NGDC makes a deliberate effort to apply these data 


641 


resources to the problem of spacecraft interaction with space environment. 

Historical records that have been started fairly recently by NOAA, indicate that the anomalous behavior of 
spacecraft occurs when the elements of the upper atmosphere become unstable. Trends alone do not 
provide the answers to the anomaly, but they help focus on the problem. On-board instruments will 
improve the ability to forecast or provide early warning of events leading to the environments responsible 

for some of the anomalies.^ Design errors and quality control problems, workmanship, and wear can 
also lead to anomalies but these are in a category that engineers understand and can cope with. 

The expert system that is under development will help those who have a need to diagnose the anomaly 
with the scientific and engineering expertise to assess the interaction that is taking place by the 
environment. As result of the heightened interest in spacecraft anomalies, no doubt due to the high 
geomagnetic activity that has been observed for solar cycle 22, the 1990 ALA A Sciences meeting included 
a special session at which seven papers related to spacecraft anomalies were presented. Since then these 
papers were updated and recently accepted for publication as a special collection on environmentally 

induced spacecraft anomalies .5 It is anticipated that these coordinated activities to update the knowledge 
base of the system will lead to a useful engineering tool for space maintenance. 


DESCRIPTION 

The tool that is being proposed is a rule-based online expert system for diagnosing inflight spacecraft 
anomalies system. It has features that provide an effective method for saving knowledge, allow sifting 
through large amounts of data, and home in on significant information. Most importantly, it uses 
heuristics in addition to algorithms which allow approximate reasoning and inference, and the ability to 
attack problems not rigidly defined. A microcomputer-based version that has essentially the same features 
is also under development by The Aerospace Corporation as a research system to accomplish the same 

results.^ 

The modularity of the expert system allows for easy updates and modifications. It not only provides 
scientists with needed risk analysis and confidence not found in the usual programs, but the window 
implementation makes it a more effective tool. The system currently runs on an IBM RISC 6000 at 
Goddard space Flight Center (GSFC). The inference engine used is NASA’s C Language Integrated 
Production System (CLIPS)7>8 CLIPS is not only compatible with both C and Fortran languages, but it 
has features which include the ability to compile the rules and save them in a binary image file, thus 
allowing faster execution than a typical rule interpretive system. This feature qualifies CLIPS to be used 
as an expert shell, i.e., an environment where the rules can reside and be accessed.The architecture of the 
system is shown in Figure 1 . 

Besides the interactive knowledgebase, the system also provides access and display of information from 
the databases. As shown in Figure 1, the system has four databases, but more can be added as needed. 
This is the fact base for the collection of informative sources related to the topic of interest. 

The attributes database is an ASCII file for launch and orbital information on satellites. Figure 2 shows 
the launch and orbital information in the Attributes database. While anomalies can occur in almost any 
orbit, it is possible to anticipate environmentally induced anomalies based on orbits. Vampola has 

summarized these probable causes for classes of orbits in his tutorial paper on spacecraft anomalies.^ 
These probable causes are also covered by rules and facts on the Knowledge Base. 

Some examples of the nature of the anomaly database are given in Figures 3-6. The anomaly database, an 
ASCH file provided by the NGDC, contains information on about 300 historical anomalies. Figure 3 is a 


642 

a-sT 



listing of the types of problems considered for anomalous behavior. Figure 4 lists the satellites that are in 
the database. Some of the names are coded to hide the identity of the actual spacecraft. The seasonal 
distribution of TDRSS anomalies shown in Figure 5 was plotted from data in the Spacecraft Anomaly 
Database using IDL™ graphics. This file was provided by NGDC. The TDRSS- 1 anomalies show no 
distinct seasonal variation in anomaly occurrence. This distribution has a very good probability of being 

random. 4 Figure 6 is a plot of the TDRSS weekly SEU count for all observed SEUs. Since some of the 
SEUs are unobserved, the rate shown is considered a minimum. The spikes in August, September and 
October are due to solar flares. This experience led to changes to hardened devices for the following 

TDRSS spacecraft whence the problem ceased. The exception was TDRSS, which was lost with 
Challenger. Part of the problem of TDRSS- 1 was an innocent desire to take advantage of advance 
technology. It was not realized at the time that as technology advances towards faster and lower power 

devices on a chip, the sensitivity to SEUs increases. ^ 

The environment database is an ASCII text file of the historical record of the geophysical parameter 
known as Kp, the planetary magnetic index, used to estimate the severity of magnetic storms within the 
Earth’s magnetosphere. The solar flare database is an ASCII data file on the date and time-of-occurrence 
of X-class solar x-rays These files are accessed by a C-language interface between the expert system and 
the ASCII file. 

KNOWLEDGE BASE 

The knowledge base consists of over two-hundred (200) rules and provides links to historical and 
environmental databases. Unlike its algorithmic predecessors, it can be flexible in the way it attacks 
complex problems. It more closely simulates the methods of human experts who use a combination of 
known empirically derived formulae, hunches based on degrees of certainty and experience, and even 
judicious “fudging when specific data is lacking. The system output was verified by referring to 
historical case studies and historical data. 

The architecture of the system was designed to emulate the way the user normally looks at data to 
diagnose anomalies. The expert system not only consolidates expertise in a uniform, objective, and 
logical way, but it also offers "smart" ways of accessing various databases which are transparent to the 
user. Then by applying various rules in its knowledge base, the system is queried, as appropriate, to 
arrive at a conclusion. 

The current development of the system is able to attribute the causes of satellite anomalies to one of 
several possible categories, including surface charging, bulk charging, single event upsets (SEU), and 
total radiation dose. ("Unknown" is also a possible and plausible conclusion, depending on the quantity 
of of data available. The architecture is such that other causes could be added if a satisfactory rule base 
were developed. The rule base includes the expert system rules that will be "fired under control of the 
inference engine. The rules are entered in a defined "if-then" format. The user interface links to 
databases which include past environmental data, satellite data and previous known anomalies. 
Information regarding satellite design, specifications and orbital history need to be assimilated with 
previous anomalies data and environmental conditions, while addressing the specific circumstances of 
individual users. 

LEARNING TOOL 

One of the most beneficial aspects of the system is its use as a learning tool for diagnosing spacecraft 
anomalies. A user is initially given a choice between either ‘novice’ or ‘expert’ mode for the current 
session. If the user selects the novice mode the system automatically gives detailed explanations and 
descriptions of terms and reasoning as the session progresses, in a sense teaching the user about the topic 


643 


or topics. The expert mode, on the other hand, simply executes the session without giving these extra 
explanations, unless the user specifically requests them. 

The user is also given the option of selecting which causes are to be considered.This selection 
determines a knowledge base sub-group, so that only rules in this specific environmental area are 
considered. In this way the user can learn what variables, information and data affect, and are important 
to, that cause. In addition to this, in the features described next, the user is actually able to access the 
relevant rules him/herself and other variables and facts which were determined by using these rules. 


FUTURE WORK 

The graphical outputs of the Anomaly Database were used as illustrations merely to make the point that 
these fact resources are readily accessed. They lend to the tool an advantage for analyzing and interpreting 
large data sets. The development of the engine or driver is considered adequate for the task. The fact base 
and knowledge base on the other hand need to be expanded. The correlation of cause and effects of solar 
terrestrial effects is a young science. Enough evidence has been collected by NOAA’s NGDC that these 
environmental effects need to be considered serious. Workshops and special publications that update our 
knowledge on these environmental interactions should be used as resources for the knowledge base. New 
frames are also needed. Orbital debris has been recognized as a threat and algorithms exist that are easily 
accomodated by the expert system. Ionic scintillation related to noisy telemetry links and commanding 

errors are also candidates to be considered. that should be used. ^ We are improving our EnviroNET 
network with the addition of an IBM Rise 6000. Once there, not only will the speed of the Expert System 
be increased, but with the use of X Windows the system will also be enhanced. The PC system is able to 
access the Spacecraft Anmomaly Manager (SAM) software which was developed by the National 
Geophysical Data Center. The SAM program provides a full range of functions for managing, displaying 
and analyzing data. The on-line system does not have this type of data management as yet but it is 
something to consider. The Spacecraft Attributes Database does not presently contain information on 
electrical parts which is certainly an area that needs pursuing. It is noted that no GSFC scientific satellites 
are listed in Figure 2. This omission also should be rectified. The last issue is that of updating Kp values. 
Recent data can be received from satellite broadcasts by the Space Environment Center, Boulder, CO. 

CONCLUSION: 

A useful tool for diagnosing anomalies of spacecraft for space maintenance and servicing has been 
described. This tool combines the algorithmic capabilities of mathematical programs and diagnostic 
models with expert heuristic knowledge, and uses confidence factors in variables and rules to calculate 
results with degrees of human confidence associated with them. Since the causes of environmentally 
induced spacecraft anomalies depend not only on algorithms, but also on environmental conditions, rules 
and information can rarely be known with 100% certainty. Based on present experiences, the role for the 
expert system is for either quasi-real time, or post analysis. There is a need to greatly improve the 
knowledge base and rules in view of the correlation observations that are emerging out of NOAA’s 
NDGC. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We are indebted to the staff of NASA’s Johnson Space Center’s AI Laboratory for their cooperation in the 
use of CLIPS. The technical discussions with Dan Wilkinson at NOAA and Al Vampola were very 
helpful. The development of the graphs from the fact datbase were by Rick Durand, of the EnviroNET 
staff. 


644 



REFERENCES 

1. STEP International, Vol. 3, No. 1, Jan., 1993 1993. 

2. Vampola, A. L., Guest Editor, Solar Cycle Effects on Space Systems,” J. Spacecraft, Vol. 26, No. 6, 
Nov.-Dee., 1989. 

3. Allen, Koe, private communication, May, 1989. 

4. Wilkinson, Daniel C., “Trends In Spacecraft Anomalies”, Spacecraft Charging Technology 
Conference, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA, Oct 31-Nov. 3, 1989. 

5. Lauriente, Michael, and Gaudet, John, Guest Editors, “Environmentally Induced Spacecraft 
Anomalies,” J. Spacecraft, in press. 

6 Koons, H. C., and Gomey, D. J., “Spacecraft Environmental Anomalies Expert System: A Status 
Report,” Aerospace Report # ATR-88 (9562)- 1, The Aerospace Corporation, El Segundo, CA., 1 Dec. 

1988. 

7. Giarratano, J. C. (1989, May). “Artificial Intelligence Section,” CUPS User’s Guide, Version 4.3 of 
CUPS, Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center. 

8. Rolinick, Marc; Lauriente, Michael; Koons, Harry, C.; Gomey, David; “An On-Line Expert System 
For Diagnosing Environmentally Induced Spacecraft Anomalies Using Clips,” NASA Conference 
Publication 3187, SOAR ‘92, Vol.l. 

9. Vampola, A. L., “ Environmentally-Induced Spacecraft Anomaly Analysis,” J. Spacecraft, in press. 

10. Wilkinson, Daniel C., TDRS-1 Single Event Upsets And The Effect Of The Space Environment,” 
IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, Vol. 38, No. 6, Dec., 1991. 

111. Robinson, P.; Lee, W.: Aguero, R.; and Gabriel, S., “Anomalies Due To Single Event Upsets,” J. 
Spacecraft, in press. 

12. Koons, H. C., and Gomey, D. J., “Spacecraft Environmental Anomalies Expert System,”, in press. 


645 


Real Time Data 



Figure 1 . Expert System Architecture. 


646 












NAME 


INCL APOGEE PERIGEE LONG LAUNCH DATE 


OSCAR.32 90.3 1185 1017 -1 9-16-87 

OSCAR.31 90.3 1183 1018 -1 9-16-87 

DMSP 0.0 0 0 -1 6-20-87 

GOESJ7 0.1 37796 35783 277 2-26-87 

FLTSCOMJ7 4.3 35875 35703 -1 12-05-86 

PLOAR.BEAR 89.6 1015 960 -1 11-14-86 

NOAA_10 98.7 826 808 -1 9-17-86 

GSTAR_2 0.1 35800 35775 255 3-28-86 

SATCOM_Kl 0.0 35794 35781 279 1-12-86 

SATCOMJC2 0.0 35801 35774 279 11-28-85 

NAVSTAR_11 63.4 20474 19887 -1 10-09-85 

ASC_1 0.1 35791 35782 81 8-27-85 

OSCAR_30 89.8 1260 1000 -1 8-03-85 

OSCAR_24 89.8 1259 1001 -1 8-03-85 

TELSTAR_3D 0.0 35804 35770 284 6-19-85 

GSTAR_1 0.0 35779 35778 257 5-08-85 

LEASAT_3 1.4 35809 35768 178 4-13-85 

SCATHA 4.9 42577 28205 -1 1-30-79 


Figure 2. Launch and orbital information on satellites contained in the database. 


647 



SPACECRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL ANOMALIES 


Select all of the types of problems that are 
associated with this anomaly. 


Yes 


<> 

PHANTOM COMMAND 

<> 

LOGIC UPSET 

<> 

ELECTRICAL 

<> 

MECHANICAL 

<> 

■sensor 1 

<> 

SOFTWARE 

<> 

MEMORY 

<> 

THERMAL 

<> 

PART FAILURE 

<> 

TELEMETRY ERROR 

<> 

SYSTEM FAILURE 

<> 

MISSION FAILURE 

<> 

OTHER 


Figure 3. Description of types of problems considered in anomaly database. 





Select the name of the satellite that has experienced the anomaly. 


OSCAR 32 TELSTARJD 

0SCAR~31 GSTARl" 

DMSP ” LEASAT 3 

GOES 7 SCATHA" 

FLTSATCOM 7 UNKNOWN 

POLAR_BEAR 
-> NOAA 10 
GSTAR 2 
SATCOM K1 
SATCOM” K2 
NAVSTAR 11 
ASC 1 
OSCARJO 
OSCAR 24 


Figure 4. Names of satellites that are in the anomaly database. 


649 



SEUs/Week 


Weekly Distribution of TDRS — 1 SEUs 



1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 

Year 


Figure 5. Graph made from data in seasonal distribution of TDRSS anomalies. 
The distribution is considered random. 

(Source NGDC) 


650 




Anomaly Count 


TDRS— 1 Anomalies from Apr 1983 — Sept 1987 



Jon Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 

Month 


Figure 6. Graph made from data in anomaly database of anomalies on TDRS-1 
weekly count for all observed SEU’s. The rate shown is a minimum. 
The spikes in August, September and October are due to flares. 
(Source NGDC) 


651 



