Consumer/Home/Recreation 



Personalized Learning Software 


tudents, educators, as well as parents or guard- 
ians can find a software assist from products 
designed by Analysis and Simulation, Inc, 
(AnSim) of Buffalo, New York 

AnSim s IEPLANNER ,M and TPLAN™ 5 products are 
interactive computer-based systems. They can be run 
either independently or together as one complete 
system. Utilized as an Individual Education Plan tool, a 
user oflEPLANNER and TPLAN can define a goals 
list, while identifying a host of student demands in 
motor skills, social skills, life skills, social issues, even 
legal and leisure needs in the users area* This computer- 
ized, expert tutor and advisor allows assessment of the 
status of the student and the degree to which his/her 
needs are being met. 

These software tools made use of CLIPS 
{C Language Integrated Production System), a NASA- 
developed expert system shell which originated at 
Johnson Space Center. NASA offers a means of reducing 
automation costs through a special type of spi noflf 


service operated by the Computer Software Manage- 
ment and Information Center (COSMIC®). COSMIC 
supplies to American businesses, like AnSim, at relatively 
low cost, government-developed computer programs 
that have secondary utility* 

As a company goal, AnSim has focused on the 
formation of software technology applications for both 
contractual and commercial products utilizing capabili- 
ties in graphical user interfaces (GUIs), expert systems, 
and simulation. Paul Patti, president of AnSim says the 
company is exploring new ways to achieve more effective 
access to the vast and ever increasing amount of infor- 
mation available electronically. Strides by AnSim in 
computer software have been aided by Johnson Space 
Center Phase 11 Small Business Innovation Research 
(SBIR) funding and NASA work performed in expert 
systems. 

Patti notes that wide area networks, such as the 
Internet, or just on large local system disks, vast 
quantities of data can he found. But how best can a 



AtiStm President Paul Patti watches as Jeffrey Meade demonstrates 
the graphical user interfaces capabilities of the company’s software, 
AnSim developed the systems using CUPS, a NASA-developed 
expert systems shell. 


84 


Commercial BeneITts — Spinoffs 






Consumer/Home/Recreation 



Social workers like AL 
Daniela Mariano use 
AttSim s IEPLANNER to 

assess and identify students 1 
needs in order to develop 
individualized plans. The 
company is extending its 
work through a NASA Small 
Business Innovation 
Research contract on a 
World Wide Web 3D 
browser * 


person sort through huge collections of material then 
seek and rank information only of relevance thar satisfies 
a distinctive need? Thar task can be likened to locating 
the proverbial “needle in the haystack*” 

NASA SBIR funding has supported An Si ms 
Human Memory Extension (HME trch ) technology. 

software uses spreading activation models of 
human memory processes applied to context-sensitive 
information associations to characterize, rank, retrieve, 
and recharacterize information* The HME 1 ^ system 
automatically and transparently builds and updates a 
persistent Memory Extension (ME) database of accessed 
documents* Document rides and other context summa- 
ries are parsed, meaning that grammatical form and 
function, a word or words in a sentence, are maintained 
by the HME Icch s global database, 

A user of this indexed meta- database can then 
retrieve ranked fists of documents via a key word or 


term, A relevance feedback stage in the software permits 
the user to quickly zero in on pertinent documents, 

A NASA Phase 1 SBIR has extended AnSims work 
in the area of creating a World Wide Weh 3D browser* 
This effort will develop a software prototype of a 3D 
interactive information visualization system. The 
software will integrate the ME technology for doing 
information ranking with a 3D Windows-based interac- 
tive graphic user interface for doing information 
visualization* 


IEPLANNER and TPLAN are trademarks of Analysis and 
Simulation, Inc, 

® COSMIC is a registered trademark of rhe National Aeronautics and 
Space Ad m i n ist rario 1 1 . 


Commercial Benefits— Spinoffs 





