
World Reaction lo Virtual Space 

Commercial Benefits — Spinoffs 



NASA-funded 
OpenWorlds™ 
technology is being 
used for graphics 
support in virtual 
worlds on the Internet. 


W hile it may be a small world after all, it 
can be a virtual one as well. 

DRaW Computing Associates, Inc., of 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, developed a virtual reality 
software package to support NASA’s work on the 
International Space Station. Through a Small 
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project 
managed by the Marshall Space Flight Center, the 

company developed 
software that creates 


complex virtual reality 
simulations of the 


Space Station’s 


numerous compo- 
nents. While the first 
elements of the Space 
Station are already 
circling Earth, 
astronaut assembly 
crews face the 
daunting task of 
putting together the 
entire facility in orbit 


over many years to 
come. DRaW’s 


powerful software, 
called OpenWorlds™, 
is facilitating the 
training of future 
assembly teams. 

OpenWorlds’™ 
scripting, hardware, 
and graphical user 
interface (GUI) front- 
end permitted Marshall engineers to “be there 
without being there,” enabling them to fashion the 
complex habitats, solar arrays, and other central 
elements in virtual space. 

OpenWorlds™ is an open platform for 3-D 
graphics and virtual reality modeling language 
(VRML) 2.0 integration. With it, there is the ability 
to have realistic, interactive, moving worlds. It 
provides the advanced features of VRML 2.0 without 
all the effort. The OpenWorlds™ C++ library 
provides VRML 2.0 support for any application and 
any graphics server. In addition, sample source code 
demonstrates implementations of VRML 2.0 
browsers on various graphics layers, including 
OpenGL®. Sample code showing the implementation 
of the build-in nodes is part of OpenWorlds™, as 



OpenWorlds™ is being used for integration of live 
video and 3-D graphics in next-generation television 
research. 

well as a GUI-based scene graphic viewer. With 
OpenWorlds™, applications can be made to support 
Java™ scripting and virtual reality hardware devices. 

According to Dr. Paul Diefenbach, president of 
DRaW, “OpenWorlds™ is an open library accessible 
by all, open to platforms, open to scripting lan- 
guages, open to change.” VRML is viewed by many 
as a web-based language for graphics scene descrip- 
tion, with additional scripting capabilities through- 
out. Dr. Diefenbach and his associates viewed 
VRML differently. Not only is it a powerful tool for 
graphics exchange, but ultimately, it is an extensible 
scripting language that also handles graphics scenes. 
VRML’s promise lies in being a medium of exchange 
for all graphics and simulation systems, Dr. 
Diefenbach says. 

DRaW was incorporated in 1991 and has 
specialized in 3-D graphics development and 
consulting, with an emphasis on human factors 
simulation. DRaW has worked closely with the 
University of Pennsylvania’s Center for Human 
Modeling and Simulation, the developer of the 
leading human factors simulation software, Jack®, 
which is commercially available as Transom™ Jack® 
from Transom Technologies, Inc. 

As a result of NASA SBIR contract awards, 
OpenWorlds™ has led to the creation of Human 
OpenWorlds™ (HOW™). Originally an add-on 
module to Transom™ Jack®, HOW™ provides the 
power of VRML scripting and transforms human 
modeling packages into true, interactive, immersive 
simulation systems by permitting the creation of 
reactive worlds. Where human factors packages offer 
control of the human figure, HOW™ provides a 
realistic virtual world in which the figure can 
interact. With HOW™, “objects can have behav- 
iors,” Dr. Diefenbach says. ♦♦♦ 


OpenWorlds™ is a trademark of DRaW Computing Associates, Inc. 

OpenGL® is a registered trademark of Silicon Graphics, Inc. 

Java™ is a trademark of Sun Microsystems, Inc. 

Transom™ Jack® is a registered trademark of Transom Technologies, Inc. 

Human OpenWorlds™ (HOW™) is a trademark of DRaW Computing Associates, Inc. 


72 Computer Technology 



