ciency has been found or normal net- 
work saturation has been attained. Net- 
Stress was written for execution in the 
VxWorks real-time operating system, but 
could easily be ported to other operat- 
ing systems. 

This program was written by Kurt Leucht 
and Guy Bedette of Kennedy Space 
Center. For further information, contact the 
Kennedy Innovative Partnerships Office at 
(321) 861-7158. 

K8C-12589 


Framework for Flexible 
Security in Group 
Communications 

The Antigone software system defines 
a framework for the flexible definition 
and implementation of security policies 
in group communication systems. 
Antigone does not dictate the available 
security policies, but provides high-level 
mechanisms for implementing them. A 
central element of the Antigone archi- 
tecture is a suite of such mechanisms 
comprising micro-protocols that provide 
the basic services needed by secure 
groups. Policies are implemented 
through the composition and configura- 
tion of these mechanisms. Mechanisms 
are composed in different ways to ad- 
dress new requirements and environ- 
mental constraints. The Antigone frame- 
work provides an easy-to-use application 
programming interface (API), from 
which secure group application pro- 
grams can be built. Written entirely in 
the C++ programming language, the sys- 
tem consists of over 18,000 lines of 
source code and has been ported to sev- 
eral versions of Linux, FreeBSD, and 


SunOS. Information for accessing re- 
cent versions of the source code and re- 
lated documentation is available at 
http://antigone.eecs.umich.edu. 

This program was written by Patrick Mc- 
Daniel and Atul Prakash of the University of 
Michigan for Kennedy Space Center. 

In accordance with Public Law 96-517, 
the contractor has elected to retain title to this 
invention. Inquiries concerning rights for its 
commercial use should be addressed to: 
Electrical Engineering and 
Computer Sciences Department 
University of Michigan 
3115 EECS 
1301 Beal Ave. 

Ann Arbor, MI 48109 
Refer to KSC-12207, volume and number 
of this NASA Tech Briefs issue, and the 
page number. 


fh Software for Collaborative 
Use of Large Interactive 
Displays 

The MERBoard Collaborative Work- 
space, which is currently being deployed 
to support the Mars Exploration Rover 
(MER) Missions, is the first instantiation 
of a new computing architecture de- 
signed to support collaborative and 
group computing using computing de- 
vices situated in NASA mission opera- 
tions rooms. It is a software system for 
generation of large-screen interactive 
displays by multiple users. The architec- 
ture provides a platform and applica- 
tions programming interface (API) for 
the development of collaborative appli- 
cations for NASA mission operations. 
The standard deployment configuration 
provides an integrated whiteboard, Web 


browser, remote viewing and control for 
collaboration over distance, and per- 
sonal and group storage spaces that pro- 
vide ubiquitous access and sharing of 
data. Customization for specific domains 
is provided through plug-ins. For the 
MER mission, plug-ins include a flow- 
charting tool for strategic rover opera- 
tions and mission planning, 3D visualiza- 
tion of the Martian terrain, a data 
navigator to navigate the mission data- 
base, and situational awareness tools. 
The MERBoard software is designed to 
run on large plasma displays with touch- 
screen overlays, thus providing an im- 
mersive and interactive environment for 
teams to view, annotate, and share data. 
The MERBoard overcomes the obstacles 
to communication, retention, and col- 
laborative modification of information 
in diverse forms that can include text, 
data (including images) from scientific 
instruments, handwritten notes, hand 
drawings, and computer graphics. The 
MERBoard provides a unifying interface 
for the integration of heterogeneous ap- 
plications, and provides those applica- 
tions with a consistent model for saving 
and retrieving data. All applications may 
be viewed and controlled from any loca- 
tion that has a MERBoard. A personal 
client provides integration of a user’s 
personal computing environment with 
the MERBoard environment. 

This program was written by Jay Trimble, 
Thodore Shab, Roxana Wales, Alonso Vera, 
Irene Tollinger, Michael McCurdy, and 
Dmitriy Lyubimov at Ames Research Cen- 
ter. For further information, contact the 
Ames Technology Partnerships Division at 
(650) 604-2954. 

ARC-14951-1 


16 


NASA Tech Briefs. June 2006 


