NASA Grant NAG 2-123* 

PILOT INTERACTION WITH AUTOMATED AIRBORNE DECISION MAKING SYSTEMS 


Semiannual Progress Report 
March 1984 - August 1984 


William B. Rouse, Principal Investigator 
John M. Hammer 
Nancy M. Morris 
Annette E. Knaeuper 
Edward N. Brown 
Charles M, Lewis 

Wan C. Yoon 

(NASA -CR- 1770 02 ) PILOT INTER ACTION WITH N86-2S5C8 

AUTOMATED AIREORNE DECISION BAKING SYSTEMS 
Semiannual Progress Report, Mar..- Aug. 1984 
(Gfeorgia Inst, of Tech.) 45 p CSCL- 05H Unclas 

G3/54 43298 

Center for Man-Machine Systems Research 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
Atlanta, Georgia 30332 


r* 


& 

The NASA Technical Officer for this grant is Everett Palmer, NASA Ames 
Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035. 



INTRODUCTION 


Increased requirements for safety and efficiency as well as increased 
availability of reliable and inexpensive computer technology have resulted 
in a trend of more and more computers being employed in flight management. 
However, this trend by no means indicates that human operators will 
disappear from aircraft cockpits. Instead, it means that the roles of the 
pilot, copilot, and flight engineer will evolve to include increased 
responsibilities for monitoring and supervising the various computer-based 
systems employed in the aircraft. 

While this assessment of the future roles of the members of the flight 
crew is fairly easy to accept, it is certainly not straightforward to decide 
how various flight tasks should be allocated among humans and computers. 
Further, it is not clear how humans and computers should communicate 
regarding the process by which their tasks are performed and the products 
that result. This report discusses progress of a research program whose 
overall objectives include providing at least partial answers to some of the 
questions surrounding these issues. 

The following two sections discuss two project areas which are 
currently being pursued in this program of research: 1) the intelligent 

cockpit and 2) studies of human problem solving. The first area involves an 
investigation of the use of advanced software engineering methods (e.g., 
from artificial intelligence) to aid aircraft crews in procedure selection 
and execution. The second area is focused on human problem solving in 
dynamic environments, particularly in terms of identification of rule- based 
models and alternative approaches to training and aiding. Both of these 
efforts are producing results that are planned to be tested further in the 
Center's evolving full-scope flight simulation facility. Progress on 

developing this facility is discussed in the section on the intelligent 
cockpit. 



THE INTELLIGENT COCKPIT 


Design goals for the intelligent aid are in the following section. 
A review of progress in developing the DC8 flight simulator is in the 
second section. 

GOALS FOR ANALYSIS OF DATA IN THE INTELLIGENT COCKPIT PROGRAM 
The Problem 

The data are a large, rich state vector of the aircraft. The 
intelligent aid is to monitor this data to watch for pilot checklist 
error and unsafe conditions either present or future. 

The current approach to monitoring has been to divide the flight 
into phases according to rules that examine the data past and present. 

It is possible to be more specific about a phase than about the whole 

r~ 

flight. Thus, it is possible to apply pre-programmed checks as 
appropriate to that phase. While this approach has merits, there are 
design limits to what can be preprogrammed. In other words, this 
approach works only for the situations the designer anticipates. In 
particular, this approach can be made to look quite good in a controlled 
experiment where the intelligent aid has been programmed to aid on those 
situations the pilot will encounter. Our approach to demonstrating 
intelligent aid concepts is to build something that at face value will 
handle a wide variety of situations. If, due to complexity, a complete 
aid cannot be constructed, we would prefer an in-depth aid for a 
particular problem (e.g., electrical malfunctions). We reject an aid 
that is able to catch a few problems of all kinds but which appears 
inadequate for complete coverage. 



External Goals 


The external goals are the visible product that an observer or pilot 
would see when the program is running. The following are planned. 

1. The program will drive two displays. The first will be the 
experimenter - system designer display. It will be used for 
program debugging, etc. The second will be a display for the 
pilot. It will be created even if there is no pilot to observe 
it (e.g., off line simulator data). This generality will allow 
the aid to be incorporated into the DC8 flight simulator without 
substantial reworking. It will also allow subjective pilot 
evaluation before being placed in the simulator. 

2. The pilot’s display will feature the following. Procedures will 
automatically be selected for display by the aid . When the aid 
detects an error, the procedure display will be changed, perhaps 
by highlighting. 

3. The display will alert the pilot to aircraft operation outside 
the normal regime at the present time and in the future. 

Internal Goals 

The internal goals describe how the program is organized. Some of 
these supplement the external goals; some are not apparent from that 
vantage point. 

1. The program will understand the procedure in terms of a model of 
the aircraft. This model will be used to predict the future 
states of the aircraft. The program will understand the effect 
of procedural errors, not just know how to detect them as was 
the case in the earlier version of the program. 



2. To the maximum extent possible, the program will generally apply 
to all commercial transport aircraft* This will facilitate 
changing from NASA's B727 to our DC8. 

3. Existing scripts will be enhanced and will represent more than a 
procedure checklist. The script will be active whenever the 
aircraft is in the appropriate state. While the aircraft is in 
the script, constraints on safe flight will be constantly 
monitored. 

4. The program's goal will be to avoid aborting the flight plan. 

This goal is made up of a number of subgoals which are by 

aircraft subsystem. For example, to avoid aborting the flight 

plan, the following failures must be avoided 

propulsion failure 
aerodynamic failures 
hyd r aul ic failures 
etc . 

Each of these areas can in turn be broken down into finer 
problems 

propulsion failure 

over stress engines 
engine ice up 
engine stall 
engine oil pressure 

engine explosion and airframe/ airfoil damage 
etc . 

To be systematic, it would be important to enumerate as many 
forms of failures as possible. Organizing them by subsystems 
would tend to keep the designer from missing a failure mode . 

To restrict the aid program to a manageable size, it may be 
necessary to aid only a subset of the potential failures (e.g., 
only electrical problems). This would, however, demonstrate the 



approach's generality, and it would be clear how to generalize 
to the entire aircraft. 

5. The program will be coded as a rule- based system in LISP. As we 
have stated before, the problem of intelligent aiding is 
principally a symbolic problem. In addition, the debugging 
tools for LISP are far superior to those of other languages. 
Also, there is a practical advantage to the use of LISP. If the 
simulator code or the intelligent aid should end up consuming 
too much of the VAX's capability, it should be possible to move 
the LISP aid code to a LISP machine. This should be 
considerably cheaper than other VAX. 

6. The program must make some predictions about the aircraft's 
future. This is necessary to check for safe, future states. 
Representing and manipulating the passage of time is a 
recognized problem in artificial intelligence. Hopefully, some 
contribution can be made to this area. 

Conclusion 

The proposed new aid will have an improved understanding of the 
aircraft and consequently the ability to alert the pilot to present and 
future dangers. The aid will also be useable on both the B727 and the 
DC8. 

SIMULATOR DEVELOPMENT 
Simulator Hardware 

Most of the switches and controls (overhead panels and flight 
controls) have wires connected that go outside the cockpit and are 
waiting to be connected to the A/D converter. A few engine controls and 



the elevator controls must have sensors designed and installed before 
being wired. 

All of the CRT displays have been mounted in the flight deck. A 
cowling must be added to enclose one of the CRT's forward of the 
pedestal. Both this cowling and a force feel system for the control yoke 
are being designed and built in the GTRI shop. The custom keyboards have 
been designed and are currently being fabricated. A force feel system 
for the pedals is installed and undergoing final adjustment. 

Simulation Software 

The simulation software currently supports high fidelity engines, 
flight dynamics, radio navigation and an autopilot. Hydraulic, 
electrical, and fuel systems are not being simulated in any but the most 
elementary ways in this version of the simulator. The remaining work on 
the simulation software is to integrate it with the display software and 
to modify the takeoff routines to use flight dynamics. Some minor 
modifications (coefficient changes and term changes) are being made to 
the flight dynamics to make it perform as a commercial transport. 

Display Software 

There are three displays to be produced for in the simulator: the 

flight instruments, the engine status, and the navigation/autopilot/ 
communication display. The engine status display is being programmed 
now; it is fairly simple. The navigation/ autopilot/communication display 
specifications have been worked out and will be programmed after the 
engine display is completed. 

The flight instrument display is by far the most complicated 
display. The original plans were to use an Apple II to drive the color 



displays. It appears this will not work because the Apple is not fast 
enough. The following simple analysis shows how this was determined. 

The ADI must be updated frequently; at a minimum, updating this display 
requires drawing of 11 or 12 lines. Timing estimates show the Apple 
(using Pascal) can erase an old line and draw a new line in .02 + 

.0002* pixels seconds. Thus, the ADI graphics can be redrawn about once 
every .250 seconds. In practice, the Apple II will be much slower than 
this, since it would have to make computations, receive VAX input, and 
display all of the flight instruments, not just the ADI. Thus, a 4 Hz 
ADI bandwidth is quite optimistic with regard to Apple II capabilities, 
but it is insufficient with respect to the pilot 1 s needs. It is our 
understanding that a 6 to 8 Hz bandwidth is necessary for realistic 
control . 

While it may well be possible to write an assembly language program 
to make the Apple perform as desired, it would be expensive from a labor 
standpoint. Consequently, alternative graphics devices are being 
investigated. Currently, the specifications for this graphics device are 
that it have a high speed, parallel interface to the VAX and a display 
list. The parallel interface is necessary to update the display quickly. 
A display list is necessary so that all the dynamic elements on the 
screen can be changed in real-time. 

It has also become apparent that seven more terminal ports will be 
necessary to drive the simulator displays. Three of these ports will be 
for output, three for input, and at least one will be needed by the 
experimenter to control the simulation. We would prefer to add more 
ports rather than take away from those we already have. Fortunately, 
ports cost only $200 each in groups of sixteen. 



HUMAN PROBLEM SOLVING 


As noted in the Introduction, research in this area is focusing on: 
1) identification of rule-based models and, 2) alternative approaches to 
training and aiding- Both of these efforts are oriented toward human 
problem solving in dynamic environments including aviation and process 
control . 

Mike Lewis, in conjunction with his Ph-D- thesis, is pursuing 
identification of rule-based models. The goal is to lessen the usual 
substantial subjectivity in the formulation of rule-based models by 
developing and testing algorithmic approaches. In this report, Mike 
discusses his use of such approaches for analysis of the CDTI data of Ev 
Palmer and his colleagues. 

During the past three years, a portion of the efforts in problem 
solving have been focused on process control. Using a simulation called 
PLANT, Nancy Morris investigated the effects of types of knowledge on 
human performance. Annette Knaeuper developed a rule-based model of 
human problem solving in PLANT. In comparing the behavior of this model 
with that of humans, Annette found that humans often did not follow their 
instructions, namely, PLANT operating procedures. This led to the idea 
of using the rule-based model for online aiding and training of 
operators. Annette and Nancy performed an initial empirical evaluation 
of this concept, the results of which are discussed in this report. 



IDENTIFICATION OF RULE-BASED MODELS 


Charles M. Lewis 


INTRODUCTION 

Researchers investigating pilots using cockpit displays of traffic 
information (CDTI) (Palmer et al. , 1980 and Smith et al., 1982) have found 
choice of control action to depend upon individual differences as well as 
encounter or display characteristics. In the development of the CCTI it is 
important that both generalized strategies shared by all pilots and 
idiosyncratic choices of the few be understood. As the CDTI will likely be 
used in conjunction with a collision avoidance system (CAS) it is important 
to gauge the influence of the display on pilot maneuvers so that advisories 
can be formed which are both consonant with pilot strategy and avoid 
conflicts among strategies. Hie radar assisted collisions discussed by 
Curry (1972) demonstrate the danger of introducing such technology without 
consideration of operator strategies. 

While established policy capturing methods exist for examining the 
influence of variables on decisions, they fail to elucidate what the 
influenced policy actually was. The present work employs pattern 
generalization techniques to identify a production system of rules 
capturing the consistencies in observed behavior. A production rule 
consists of two parts, a set of conditions and an action. If the 
conditions are satisfied the rule's action is performed. If conditions are 
expressed using propositional logic, descriptions are restricted to 
attributes (global properties of an object) . Measurements commonly used in 
science such as height, weight, or velocity are of this type. In such 
cases the conditional part of the rule defines a region of the attribute 
space within which the rule is true (responses are of the type specified in 
the action part of the rule) . This representation proves convenient for 
visualizing set theoretic relations among rules. 

While this x formulation of pattern generalization is similar in 
approach to discriminant analysis there are some important distinctions: 



Page 2 


1. A rule describes an enclosed region of the event space rather than 
a partition dividing the space into two parts. 

2. More than one rule may be needed to describe a response if regions 
in which it occurs are separated. 

3. Rules may vary both in generality (size of region) and selectivity 
(accuracy of discrimination) . 

This report describes an application of pattern generalization to 
identification of pilot strategies. 

CDTI DATA 

Data from an experiment by Palmer (1983) investigating the effects of 
information quality and intruder characteristics in the use of a cockpit 
display of traffic information instrument has been reanalyzed using pattern 
generalization techniques. 

In this experiment Sixteen pilots "flew" sixteen programmed encounters 
under three display conditions. Pilots were instructed to maintain a 
steady course, using the autopilot unless they received a threat advisory. 
In response to the threat they were to maneuver to maintain a horizontal 
separation of greater than 1.5 nm and a vertical separation in excess of 
500 ft. They were advised that an appropriate strategy was to maneuver so 
that the intruder would pass further away but in the same orientation at 
the point of closest approach. 

In the least informative condition the display portrayed the relative 
positions of the cwnship and the intruder along with tags showing their 
altitudes. The predictive display provided ground referenced predictors 
shewing predicted positions of the cwnship and intruder as well as a tag 
showing the intruders projected altitude at time of closest approach. In 
the third condition noise was introduced into the predictive display 

EXPLANATORY VARIABLES 

In this analysis encounter variables, describing the physical 
relationship between the intruder and cwnship which the pilot is instructed 
to control, were differentiated from experimental variables. Five 
encounter variables were used. Four describe the relative positions of the 
aircraft at their point of closest approach as projected at time of alarm. 
The fifth measure, intruder vertical velocity, remains constant throughout 



Page 3 


the encounter. 

hpass-horizontal passing position= behind, intercept, or infront. 

hsep-projected horizontal separations very near (0-.24nm) , near(.24-lnm) , 

or far ( > lnm) . 

vcross-vertically crossing trajectories= no, yes. 

vsep-proj ected vertical separations very near (0-140* ) , near (140-3 50') , 

or far( > 350'). 

weloc- intruder vertical velocity= zero or non-zero. 

Of the sixteen programmed encounters, encounters 7 and 8 which 
introduce crossing angle between the aircraft as a variable were excluded. 
Encounters 11-16 which involve abrupt changes in intruder course or 
introduction of intruder in near proximity to ownship, invalidating 
projections made at time of alarm, remain unanalyzed as in Palmer's (1983) 
report. 

IVo non-encounter variables were considered, display type and pilot. 
Display type in conjunction with the encounter variables describes the 
stimuli under which a decision is made. Inclusion of pilot identification 
in the generalization introduces individual differences. 

RESPONSE VARIABLE 

Pilots' responses were represented in terms of maneuvers toward or 
away from the intruder along a dominant axis. The dominant axis was 
determined by ccmparing the horizontal and vertical magnitudes of a 
maneuver to the respective tolerances which the pilots had been instructed 
to maintain. Five response classes result: no action, vertical-tcward, 

vertical-away, horizontal-tcward, and horizontal-away. 

PERFORMANCE MEASURES 

Nonpar ametric measures of association tau-b, the ratio of between 
groups sum of squares to total sum of squares, and PRE, the reduction in 
error relative to assigning the modal response to all cases, provide 
measures of rule performance which consider both coverage and 
discrimination. Tau-b provides a nonparametric analog to a squared 
correlation with values under .1 indicating a relatively weak association 



Page 4 


(corresponding to r < .30) and those over .5 a relatively strong one 
(corresponding to r > .70) . Using tau, single rules are evaluated by 
comparing the distribution of response classes within the rule with that of 
the remainder of the cases. This provides a measure (barring 
intersections) of described variance contributed by that rule to its rule 
set. Rule set performance may be evaluated relative to the situations in 
which it applies or to the entire range of examples. When restricted to 
applicable regions, tau may be interpreted as a measure of the extent to 
which the rule set describes identified consistencies. When evaluated 
relative to the entire space, an additional "response category" formed by 
uncovered observations is required. In this case tau may be considered a 
measure of rule set performance relative to arbitrarily chosen examples. 

Pq ALGORITHM 

A pattern generalization program, INDUCE 3 (Hoff, et al. 1983), was 
obtained for use in rule identification. In this analysis only the VL1 
(Aq) subprogram which identifies rules in propositional logic was employed. 

The Aq algorithm generates a set of putative rules which match a 
particular positive example and exclude all negative examples. The rule 
which matches the most additional positive examples is retained. At each 
iteration sucessfully matched examples are removed frcm consideration. The 
process terminates when all non contradictory positive examples have been 
matched. Although previously matched examples cannot contribute to the 
retention of rules, they became "blanks" in the space, which being neutral, 
may become part of subsequent generalizations. The resulting rules may 
overlap substantially. If "rectangular rules" were identified for figure 
1, three rules would be found: Rule-1=(2,3,4,5) , Rule-2=(2,3,4,6,7,8) , 
Rule-3=(1,3,7) . As Rule-1 substantially describes this space with little 
non redundant contribution from rules 2 or 3, a parsimonious description 
may allow the smaller regions, 1,6,7, and 8 to go undescribed. Under other 
circumstances collapsing across an explanatory variable to produce a more 
general rule making occasional errors may be the choice dictated by 
parsimony. 



Page 5 


EFFECTS OF NON-ENCOUNTER VARIABLES 

The complete set of rules generalized using the Aq algorithm provides 
an upper bound on the consistency with which the responses can be 
associated with the explanatory variables employed. The contribution of a 
variable may be examined by canparing performances between rule sets 
generalized with and without that variable. While modest improvement will 
be obtained from an additional variable based on an increase in degrees of 
freedom, major improvements in description will mirror the "influence" of 
that variable on pilot decisions. An index to the relative contribution of 
an explanatory variable may be found by rank ordering rules by performance. 
The relative performance for same sized sets of rules can then be compared 
for rule sets of varying sizes. 

A generalization based on encounter variables alone produced 230 
correct matches with 154 errors resulting in tau-b=.18. If individual 
differences among pilots are considered as well, correct matches rise to 
324 with 60 errors and tau-b=.61. Less improvement is found in the 
generalization based on encounter variables and display types: correct 
matches=254, errors=130, tau-b=.27. If display type and individual 
differences are entered into the generalization simultaneously only one 
error occurs yielding a tau-b of .99. 


VARIABLES 


NO. 

Rules 

Hits 

FAs 

Tau-b 

PRE 

ENOOUNTER 



20 

230 

154 

• 

M 

OO 

.38 

ENCOUNTER + 

DISPLAY 


42 

254 

130 

.27 

00 

• 

ENOOUNTER + 

PILOT 


85 

324 

60 

.61 

.76 

ENCOUNTER + 

PILOT + 

DISPLAY 

114 

383 

1 

.99 

.99 


Considering performance as a function of the number of rules reveals 
the same ordering of effects as found for the complete rule sets. The 
steeper slope of the generalization including individual differences and 
display type indicates the importance of their interaction in describing 
control strategy. Individual differences appear the stronger of the 
factors, halving the number of errors found in a generalization based on 



Page 6 


encounter variables alone. Pilots appear to develop individualized 
strategies which are influenced in similar ways by the type of display 
being used. Individual differences in the adaptation of control strategy 
to display, however, appear necessary to account for pilot behavior in 
detail. 

IDENTIFICATION OF STRATEGIES 

Examining the effects of non-encounter variables by comparing the 
performance of complete rule sets relies on the Aq algorithm^ capability 
of finding a set of rules embodying whatever consistencies are present in 
the data. In this usage, ability to jdirase noncontradictory rules is more 
crucial than their generality. When used to identify strategies, however, 
the generality and performance of particular rules or families of rules 
becomes of primary importance. 

General strategies tend to be somewhat broader than absolute 
noncontradiction requires. Particular pilots, displays, and encounters 
often demonstrate slight variations on more basic strategies. In 
extracting strategies from a rule set it is necessary to consider a number 
of explicit trade-offs: 

1. Discrimination- The strategy should make few false matches 

2. Generality- The strategy should apply to many of the examples 

3. Uniqueness- Multiple identified strategies should not match the 
same examples 

4. Coverage- Selected strategies should cover a substantial portion 
of the examples 

5. Parsimony- Only a small number of strategies should be identified 

In spatial terms these criteria call for partitioning a large part of 
the attribute space (coverage) into a small number (parsimony) of large 
(generality) , homogeneous (discrimination) , non- intersecting (uniqueness) 
regions. These goals are often conflicting. As the size of regions (and 
concomitantly coverage of the rule set) increases, so does the likelihood 
of matching negative examples or intersecting neighboring regions. 
Identification of strategies requires selection of a subset of 
representative rules which "best" meet these criteria. 



Page 7 


While the appropriate quantification of these criteria is not apparent 
it is not necessary for a rough identification of major strategies. 
Selection of a subset of rules from major regions of homogeneity requires 
only that the analyst simultaneously consider rule performance and region. 
Once selected, the performance of the reduced rule set can be evaluated and 
its usefulness as an abstraction of major consistencies in the observations 
appraised. Other possible selections do not invalidate this choice but 
merely vary the fineness of detail in exchanging generality for 
discrimination or parsimony for coverage. The resulting rule sets provide 
production system models of the observed behaviors. Conditions under which 
consistent responding failed to occur can be identified as well. 

HJLE TREES 

Since rules may be refinements of one another or otherwise share 
observations it is necessary to consider rule sets in a way making their 
redundancy explicit. This is facilitated by representing rules in trees in 
which successors are subsets of their predecessors. Rules below a selected 
rule then describe subregions of that rule while the rule, itself, 
demarcates a subregion of the rules above it. Rules which are not subsets 
of any other rule form roots. 

Well developed tree structures are typical of major strategies. Roots 
are found in generalizations collapsed across non-encounter variables while 
more specific generalizations provide refinements and variations on this 
basic theme attributable to particular pilots, displays, and encounters. 
Solitary roots by contrast tend to delimit smaller, less populous regions 
of the attribute space. 

Rules from all generalizations, with tau > .01-. 02 to exclude those 
covering only two or three events, were assembled into rule sets for each 
control action. Trees were then generated for each response type. A rule 
was considered a subset if: 

1. proper subset- its conditions were a subset of its predecessor's 

2. phenotypic subset- all events covered were also covered by its 
predecessor 



Page 8 


3. intersecting subset- 90% of events covered were also covered by 
its predecessor 

While representing rules within trees clusters those most closely 
associated, even roots may share substantial numbers of observations in 
common. In selecting rules depicting general strategies it is also 
necessary to consider the uniqueness of these rules which are not quite so 
closely related. This overlap can be conveniently expressed in an 
intersection matrix whose entries are the number of common observations for 
the rules appearing in its indices. Although less complete in its 
depiction than the rule tree which represents relations directly in the 
attribute space, the intersection matrix provides a convenient means for 
representing more isolated regions. In identifying major strategies the 
analyst may use the structural information provided by rule trees along 
with the more complete picture of intersections supplied by the matrix to 
choose rules from among branches, between trees, and among roots. This 
task will generally prove less formidable than it sounds since a major 
strategy will usually spawn a tree with a good representative (s) near its 
root while isolated roots typically have low coverage and may be 
disregarded. 

RESULTS 

A set of 9 rules were selected frcm the generalizations based on rule 
trees and intersection matrices. The selected rule set covers 44% of the 
sampled event space with 143 correct matches and 24 errors yielding PRE=.77 
and tau=.61. When performance is considered relative to the entire event 
space these figures become: correct matches=213 error s=171 with ERE=.32 
and tau=.27. 

Two rules describe conditions for taking no action, three for turning 
vertically away, and four for turning horizontally toward. Turning 
vertically toward the intruder occurred very rarely (12 out of 384 
encounters) and so was not modeled. The horizontal away response 
accounting for 70 of the 384 encounters also was not represented. Although 
73% of these occurrences are successfully described fcy a set of 29 
horizontal-away rules with only 21 errors, these rules have uniformally 
small coverage and low overlap. Over half of the horizontal-away rules 
were restricted to groups of five or f&/er pilots indicating the 
idiosyncratic (or coincidental) nature of this response choice. The 



Page 9 


overall inconsistency in the choice of this response is revealed in the 
rule trees for horizontal-away where 27 of 29 rules stand alone if a 90% 
inclusion criterion is applied. To consider pilot strategy it is necessary 
to examine the rules, themselves, in greater detail. This will be done for 
each response class. 

NO ACTION 
Rule No. 1 

[Pilot=7,8,9,10,ll,12,13,14,15,16] & [Horizontal passing position=intercepting or in front] 

& [Projected horizontal separation=far] 

correct matches=22, error s=7, PRE^.09, tau-b=.07 

Rule No. 2 

[Pilot=3,4,7,8,ll,14,15,16] & [Projected horizontal separation=far] & 

[Vertical crossover=true] 

correct matches=18, errors=6, PRE=.07, tau-b=.05 

RULE SET SUMMARY FOR NO-ACTION 

correct matches=35, errors=ll, PRE=.14, tau-b=.ll 

The essential condition for eliciting no response appears to be a 
large projected horizontal separation. Thirty of the 36 rules found for 
no-response were refinements of this condition, [Projected horizontal 
separation=far] . Standing alone this condition produces 43 correct matches 
with 52 errors. The two rules selected miss 8 of these matches but result 
in 41 fewer errors. 

Both individual differences and other aspects of the encounters appear 
responsible for the increase in selectivity. In the first rule, encounters 
in which the intruder would pass behind are excluded. This finding is 
consistent with (O'Connor et.al., 1980) and findings in relation to the 
horizontal- toward response in this study, that pilots tend to maneuver in a 
way to cause intruders to pass in front. Individual differences have an 
equally clear influence. Pilots 7, 8, 11, 14, 15, and 16 appear in both of the 
selected rules. If [Projected horizontal separation=far] is constrained to 
this group of pilots, correct matches are reduced by only 44% while errors 
decline by 79%. If the selected rules were restricted to these pilots, 
selectivity again improves with correct matches declining from 35 to 22 and 
errors from 11 to 5. 



Page 10 


While pilots made no response on only 48 out of the 384 encounters, 
patterns are found for this choice. A relatively small group (6-8) of 
pilots account for almost all occasions on which a constant course was 
maintained. This choice was made appropriately for large horizontal 
separations but failed to occur when the major separation was vertical or 
the intruder was oriented to pass behind. 

VERTICAL MAY 
Rule No. 3 

[Pilot=2, 6,7, 8,10,11,12,15] & [Projected vertical separation=near] & 

[Vertical velocity=zero] 

correct matches=43, errors=3, tau-b=.09 

Rule No. 4 

[Pilot=6,7,ll,13,16] & [Projected horizontal separation=nearl & 

[Projected vertical separation=very near or near] & 

[Vertical velocity=zero] 

correct matches=27, errors=l, tau-b=.06 

Rule No. 5 

[Display=no predictor] & [Vertical velocity=zero] 
correct matches=27, error s=5, tau-b=.05 

RULE SET SUMMARY FOR VERTICAL-MAY 
correct matches=62, errors=7, tau-b=.12 

Rules for the vertical away response are contained within the portion 
of the space in which the intruder is approaching at a constant altitude. 
Seventy-six of 134 encounters responded to with a vertical-away response 
were of this type. While 34 additional encounters are covered by 13 more 
rules in which this condition is not explicitly expressed, their 
observations fall largely within the constant altitude region. The failure 
to find strong rules covering the 54 encounters in which the intruder 
changed altitude indicates an inconsistent usage of the vertical-away 
response under these conditions. Rules 3 and 4 contain proximity 
conditions and apply to all displays. In rule 5 both proximity and 
individual differences are dropped. In the absence of predicted separation 
pilots chose a vertical away response when confronted with an intruder at 
constant velocity regardless of the actual threat. Examination of these 



Page 11 


rules indicates that, for these encounters, projected proximity information 
influenced the decision to respond but not the response chosen. Pilots' 
choice of the vertical-away response appears limited to the constant 
altitude intruder although a strategy of increasing vertical separation 
would apply to vertically moving intruders as well. The presenoe of 
predicted altitudes does not appear to influence this decision. While the 
vertical-away response was the modal response in this study its association 
with a clearly discriminable form of separation information rather than 
projected separations provided by the predictor displays may indicate sane 
difficulties in the use of this information to guide control actions. 

HORIZONTAL TOWARD 

Rule No. 6 

[Pilot=7,ll,12,14] & [Display=no predictor or predictor] & 

[Projected horizontal separation=very near or near] & 

[Vertical crossover=no] & [Vertical velocity=not zero] 
correct matches=14, errors=0, ERE=.06, tau-b=.03 

Rule No. 7 

[Pilot=6,ll,12,14] & [Projected horizontal separation=near] & 

[Projected vertical separation=far] & [Vertical velocity=not zero] 
correct matches=9, error s=0, PRE>=.04, tau-b=.02 

Rule No. 8 

[Pilot=4,5,ll,12,15] & [Projected horizontal separation=very near] & 

[Vertical velocity=not zero] 

correct matches=19, error s=6, PRE>=.07, tau-b=.03 
Rule No. 9 

[Pilot NE 5,6,10] & [Display=no predictor] & [Passing position=intercept or in front] 
& [Projected horizontal separation=near] & [Vertical velocity=not zero] 
correct matches=15, errors=0, ERE=.06, tau-b=.04 

PULE SET SUMMARY FOR HORIZONTAL-TOWARD 
correct matches=46, errors=6, ER&=.18, tau-b=.10 

Rules for the horizontal-tcward response are contained within the 
complementary "changing intruder altitude" portion of the event space. 

This factor rather than proximity or relative orientation appears crucial 
in the choice between horizontal and vertical responding. While the 



Page 12 


vertical-away response was chosen consistently throughout the constant 
altitude region, the choice of the horizontal-toward response is less 
monolithic. As noted in the discussion of "no-response", this choice 
occurs almost exclusively (98%) in this region. Similarly 83% of the 
vertical-tcward, 43% of the vertical-away, and 93% of the horizontal-away 
responses occur in encounters in which the intruder is changing altitude. 

Rules 6, 7, and 8 are refinements based on individual differences of a 
strategy of turning toward intruders who are laterally close and changing 
altitudes: 

[Projected horizontal separation=very near or near] & 

[Vertical velocity=not zero] 

correct matches=85, error s=107, PRE=.12, tau-b=.05 

The poor performance of the rule expressed in this general way indicates 
this strategy is followed by only a small group of pilots. The improved 
selectivity of rules 6 and 7 is attributable primarily to pilots 11, 12, 
and 14. The general rule restricted to these pilots: 

[Pilot=li;i2,14] & [Projected horizontal separation=very near or near] 

& [Vertical velocity=not zero] 

correct matches=28, errors=8, FRB=.08, tau-b=.04 

accounts for 75% of the encounters covered by rules 6 and 7 and represents 
a major improvement in selectivity over its unrestricted form. Rule 8, 
another refinement of the general strategy which restricts the rule to 
intruders at the closest proximity, is followed by a larger group of 
pilots. None of these rules shares as many as 60% of its observations with 
the rule embodying the recommended strategy for a horizontal-toward 
response: 

1. There is a threat 

2. Maneuvering horizontally toward the intruder will maintain the 
aircrafts' relative horizontal positions and increase horizontal 
separation at point of closest approach. 

[Passing position=intercept or in front] & 

& [Projected horizontal separation=very near or near] 
correct matches=65, errors=79, PRE=.02, tau-b=.03 

Rule 9, by contrast, is a refinement of the recommended strategy fitting 
most pilots using the display without a predictor. 



Page 13 


DISCUSSION 

Within the range of encounters examined, the vertical movement of the 
intruder appears the most crucial factor in determining the pilot's 
dominant response. Under conditions in which the intruder approached at a 
constant altitude pilots under all displays, with few individual 
differences, and with little regard to the degree of threat, maneuvered 
vertically away. This strategy follows the principle of least effort in 
limiting the decision to a single dimension (vertical velocity) and 
producing a response which increases separation at point of closest 
approach under all conditions. While ensuring success at the pilots' 
primary task of avoidance, this strategy may run counter to the secondary 
task of maintaining course in the face of nonthreatening encounters. This 
shor teeming is highlighted by noting that of 48 occasions on which the 
pilot did not maneuver only one occurred under these conditions. 

When the intruder was changing altitude the vertical response 
dimension was largely ignored accounting for the dominant response on only 
24% of such occasions. As in previous studies (Palmer et al. 1981, Ellis 
and Palmer 1982, Smith et al. 1982,1984) horizontal- toward were preferred 
to horizontal-away responses. Palmer et al. 1981 have attributed this 
tendency to the pilots' desire to maintain visual contact with the intruder 
while Ellis and Palmer (1982) have suggested they desire, instead, to 
minimize the time to resolution of the conflict by passing behind the 
intruder. Regardless of the motivation, this effect is found consistently 
in CDTI studies and should be considered in assessing the usefulness of 
such displays. Smith et al. shed additional light on this preference, 
finding that encounters rated as less threatening showed a stronger 
turning-teward tendency. Rules identified for the horizontal- toward 
response support this view shewing a general preference for the 
horizontal- toward response while using predictor displays which allowed a 
clear view of conflict resolution but limiting the response to the more 
conservative recommended strategy when the display lacked predictors. 

As found in earlier studies (Smith et al., Palmer et al., Ellis and 
Palmer) large individual differences were noted among pilot's strategies. 
The most nearly universal decision was the choice of the vertical-away 
maneuver under conditions in which it unambiguously increased separation. 



Page 14 


The rules identified suggest that vertical information may not be 
presented in the most useful manner. None of the nine selected rules 
contain any reference to this relation although it contributes as much to 
achieved separation and collision avoidance as the horizontal dimension. 
This neglect is further reflected in the pilots' overall preference for 
horizontal maneuvers. Smith et al. have suggested the preference for 
horizontal responses may be due to FAA regulations, comfort, safety or fuel 
conservation but the absence of vertical information from decision rules 
suggest the bias may more likely be due to the superior display of 
horizontal traffic information. 

The finding that pilots using predictive CDTI displays were more 
likely to proceed with conflict resolution by turning toward the intruder 
than following the recommended strategy reinforces concerns aired by Palmer 
et al. (1981) , Lester and Quan (1983) and others that CDTI in some 
instances may actually make collisions more likely. Pilots, themselves, 
are not immune to this fear. The October 28, 1984 New York Times observes 
that, "The Airline Pilots Association has been especially insistent that 
the devices must ultimately be able to recommend a horizontal right turn or 
left turn maneuver in addition to a vertical maneuver." Earlier analysis of 
this data (Palmer 1983) indicates that the noiseless predictor display led 
to fewer positive CAS advisories and smaller maneuver magnitudes while the 
predictorless display resulted in smaller achieved separations and less 
frequent agreement with the recommended strategy. The present 
investigation suggests that the superiority in performance on the predictor 
displays results from improvements in execution rather than fundamental 
shifts in strategy. For one group of pilots, in fact, consistent violation 
of the recommended strategy was linked with the use of the noiseless 
predictor display. While the most widely employed strategy observed was 
the vertical away response to a constant altitude intruder, vertical 
responses were generally avoided under other conditions. Since projected 
altitudes at closest point of approach provide information unavailable from 
rapidly updating data tags, the failure to find a related consistency in 
pilots' responses suggests some difficulty in abstracting or using this 
more detailed altitude information as it is presented. 



Page 15 


REFERENCES 

1. Curry, R.E. Will the ATSD precipitate display-assisted 

collisions? in H.G. Weiss and R.W. Bush (eds.) , 2he Role pf. an 
Airborne Traffic Situation Display in an Evolving ATC Environment 
(PB-215-714) . Cambridge, Ma: MIT, 1972. 

2. Ellis, s.R. and Palmer, e.a. lEhpeat per ce ptio n while viewing 

single conflicts on & cockpit .display of traffic information 

(Report No. 81341) . moffett Field, Ca. : NASA-Ames Research 

Center, 1982. 

3. Hoff, William A., Michalski, Ryszard S., Stepp, Robert E. "INDUCE 

3: a program for learning structural descriptions from examples", 

in draft form. Department of Computer Science, University of 
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1983. 

4. Lester, P.T. and Quan, E.E. "The cockpit display of traffic 

information and the threat alert and collision avoidance system 
integration: a review", £rocs.Qdings Of the Second S ymposium pn 
Aviation Psychology , Columbus, Ohio: Aviation Psychology 

Laboratory, Ohio State University, 1983. 

5. O'Connor, S. , Jago, S. , Baty, D. and Palmer, E. Jhe effect pf 

viewing time, time tc encounter, end practice on perception of 
aircraft separation on a cockpit dis p la y pf traffic information 
(Report No. 81173) . Moffett Field, Ca. : NASA-Ames Research 

Center, 1980. 

6. Palmer, Everett "Conflict resolution maneuvers during near miss 

encounters with cockpit traffic displays" . Proceedings pf the Human 
Factors Society-27th Annual Meeting . Santa Monica, Ca.: Human 

Factors Society ,757-761, 1983. 

7. Palmer, E.A. , Jago, S.J., Baty, D.L. , and O'Conner, S. Perception 
of horizontal aircraft separation. on a cockpit display of 
traffic information. Human Factors . 605-620, 22, 1980. 

8. Palmer, E., Jago, S. , and DuBord, M. "Horizontal conflict 

maneuvers with a cockpit display of traffic information", 
Proceedings pf ±he Sev e nte e n th Annual Conference pn Manual 
Control . Los Angeles, Ca. : UCLA, 1981. 


Page 16 


9. Smith, J.D. , Ellis, S.R. , and Lee, E. Avoidanoe maneuvers 
selected while viewing cockpit traffic displays (NASA TM-84269) . 
Moffett Field, Ca. 1982. 


10. Smith, J.D. , Ellis, S.R. , and Lee, C.E. "Perceived threat and 
avoidance maneuvers in response to cockpit traffic displays", 
Ruman Factors ,33-48, 26, 1984. 



1 


3 


7 


4 


8 


Figure 1 





5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 105 110 115 

N of Rules 
Figure 2 

E - encounter 
D - display 
P - pj 



A MODEL-BASED APPROACH FOR ONLINE AIDING 
AND TRAINING IN PROCESS CONTROL 


Annette Knaeuper 

Center for Man-Machine Systems Research 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
Atlanta, Georgia 30332 

and 

Nancy M. Morris 
Search Technology, Inc. 
Norcross, Georgia 30092 


ABSTRACT 

This research addressed the feasibility of adapting an 
existing rule-based system as an online "coach" for controlling 
PLANT, a simulation of a generic process plant. KARL, a 
rule-based model capable of controlling PLANT, was adapted to 
provided three types of information to subjects: 1) situation 
assessment (i.e., which operational procedure, if any, was 
applicable for a given situation); 2) guidance in following 
procedures (i.e., feedback whenever subjects' actions were 
inconsistent with available procedures); 3) performance feedback 
(based upon changes in the system's stability). Subjects 
received this information online while controlling PLANT. 
Compared to subjects in an earlier experiment who controlled 
PLANT without the benefit of the coach, these subjects maintained 
a generally more stable system, scored higher on a 
paper-and-pencil test of system knowledge, and were more 
successful in diagnosing an unfamiliar failure of the PLANT 
safety system. Careful analysis of these results in light of 
previous research with PLANT indicated that the reasons for these 
differences were not as straightforward as they might appear. 
This experiment is viewed as illustrating potential benefits and 
subtleties of using a rule-based model as an online coach. 



PAGE 2 


INTRODUCTION 

As systems increase in complexity, the question of how 
persons should be trained to operate them becomes more important. 
The amount of training required for someone to become proficient 
at controlling a complex system may be quite extensive, and it is 
necessary to consider a number of issues when developing such a 
training program. These issues include the content and format of 
instructional material and the structure of the program. Because 
of inherent human limitations, it may also be necessary to 
consider provision of some kind of performance aid, in addition 
to appropriate training. 

Many reports are available which directly or indirectly 
address issues relevant to training (Morris & Rouse, 1984b). 
Some are directed at obtaining an understanding of how people 
solve problems, either in the laboratory or in contact with an 
actual system. Others investigate the effects of various 
training approaches upon performance. Often there is a 
discussion of the human's "mental model" of the system being 
controlled (Rouse 6 Morris, 1984)* 

One study in particular served as a basis for the present 
research. Morris investigated the effects of different types of 
instruction upon subjects' ability to control PLANT, a 
computer-based simulation of a generic fluid production process 



PAGE 3 


(Morris, 1983; Morris & Rouse, 1984a). The PLANT operator's 
task is to supervise the flow of fluid through a series of tanks 
interconnected by valves so as to maximize production. This may 
be done by opening and/ or closing valves and adjusting input and 
output, via commands entered at the terminal keyboard. A number 
of failures may occur in PLANT, so there are several diagnostic 
and repair commands available as well. 

The primary comparison in Morris' research was between two 
different types of instruction: 1) operational procedures, and 
2) a description of dynamic principles and functional 
relationships in PLANT. Four groups of subjects were compared, 
distinguished on the basis of the combination of written 
instructional materials they received (i.e., principles, 
procedures, neither principles nor procedures, or both principles 
and procedures). Instruction was found to have no effect upon 
subjects' achievement of the overall goal of production, in that 
there were no differences between groups with respect to this 
measure. However, those groups receiving procedures were found 
to control the PLANT in a more stable manner, even though all 
groups had been told to maintain stability. 

An interesting aspect of this research was an investigation 
of subjects' ability to deal with two unfamiliar failures: a 
tank rupture, and failure of the PLANT safety system. (The 
failures were unfamiliar in that, although subjects knew they 



PAGE 4 


could occur, they had not experienced them before.) Almost all 
subjects repaired the tank rupture; however, only half of the 
subjects in each group successfully diagnosed the safety system 
failure. This was surprising, because subjects with an 
understanding of the functioning of the system (as described in 
the principles) should have been better able to make that 
diagnosis . 

As a result of these findings, it was suggested that one of 
the reasons a knowledge of principles failed to help many 
subjects deal with the unfamiliar failure was that those people 
did not realize that they were in an unusual situation, and thus 
did not realize that they should use their knowledge. In other 
words, they failed to make an accurate assessment of the 
situation. This notion was indirectly supported by the fact that 
those persons who did repair the unfamiliar safety system failure 
also maintained a more stable system in general; since the 
effect of the safety system failure was to make the PLANT appear 
more unstable, maintaining a stable system may have enabled 
subjects to detect the presence of an unusual situation more 
readily . 

Some useful insights into subjects’ behavior were gained by 
comparing their performance to that of KARL (Knowledgeable 
Application of Rule-based Logic), a model capable of controlling 
PLANT (Knaeuper, 1983 ; Knaeuper & Rouse, 1984 )* KARL is a 



PAGE 5 


rule-based model patterned after a general model of human problem 
solving proposed by Rouse (1983), which suggests that problem 
solving is accomplished in three stages: 1) recognition and 
classification, 2) planning, and 3) execution and monitoring. 
These three stages essentially define KARL's structure. When 
controlling PLANT, KARL accesses a knowledge base consisting 
basically of information contained in written information 
available to subjects (i.e., operational heuristics and 
procedures, and information about dynamic principles and 
functional relationships). 

When the performance of subjects and KARL was compared, it 
was noted that KARL consistently achieved higher production and 
maintained a more stable system than did subjects. It was also 
interesting to examine differences in the courses of action 
chosen by subjects and KARL in solving problems in PLANT. 
Basically, two rather systematic differences were found. First, 
the levels of system input and output chosen by subjects were not 
as high as those chosen by KARL (and suggested by procedures); 
subjects were more conservative in this respect. Second, KARL 
adjusted input and output much more frequently than did subjects; 
this reflected heuristics within KARL which were directed at 
maximizing production, which were not a part of operational 
procedures . 


Considering some of the apparent difficulties experienced by 



PAGE 6 


subjects in making an accurate situation assessment and following 
procedures, and the benefits derived from using KARL as an 
off-line analysis tool, an idea emerged. Why not make it 
possible for KARL to analyze subjects' actions online and provide 
advice, thus functioning as an online "coach 11 ? It seemed that 
such an approach could prove to be useful for both training and 
aiding. * 


DESCRIPTION OF THE COACH 

In light of the factors noted above, the decision was made 

to provide subjects with three types of information. In the 
context of PLANT, this information was displayed on the terminal 

near the area where normal operating messages were displayed. 
The first type of information was related to situation 
assessment . Specifically, a message informing the subject which 
procedure was currently applicable was shown (e.g., "Procedure 
5"). If no procedure applied, the following message was 
displayed: "No procedure applicable; Normal tuning". 

Subjects also received guidance in following procedures . 
KARL monitored subjects' actions, and provided feedback if a 
given action was inconsistent with the applicable procedure. For 

* Of course, one could view this approach as simply a 
special case of "expert systems". This issue is discussed later 
in this paper. 



PAGE 7 


example, the following message might appear: "Your action 
(cva,e)* is inconsistent with Procedure 5. Keep all valves open 
until the system is stable again. Type 1 y 1 for change." As may 
be ascertained from the last portion of the message, subjects had 
the option of overriding KARL or changing their actions to be 
consistent with KARL's recommendations. 

The third type of information supplied by KARL was 
performance feedback , or information about the degree to which 
subjects' actions were succeeding in remedying problems in the 
system. This information was supplied because of the length of 
time required for the consequences of actions to become manifest. 
These messages were based upon changes in PLANT stability over a 
period of 10 time units, and consisted of the following: 
"Instability extreme", "Instability excessive", or "Instability 
improving" . 

The process of enabling KARL to supply such messages was 
relatively straightforward. However, when an attempt was made to 
control PLANT with KARL as an assistant, a number of problems 
became apparent. For example, KARL's advice as to what actions 
should be taken was not always consistent with procedures. This 
could be attributed to the nature of KARL's approach to PLANT. 


* 


cva,e = close the valve between tanks a and e 



PAGE 8 


Although the information in the procedures was contained in 
KARL's knowledge base, KARL also employed several heuristics when 
controlling PLANT, which occasionally preempted the action 
recommended in procedures. 

Another problem was related to KARL's situation assessment. 
During the course of PLANT operation, situations would 
occasionally arise which were "borderline" conditions with 
respect to the applicability of various procedures. KARL's 
decisions as to which procedure applied were based upon fixed 
values of state variables. In borderline situations, normal 
fluctuations of these state variables caused KARL to change the 
situation assessment message rather frequently (e.g., every other 
time unit). 

A third source of difficulty was KARL's "persistence" in 
reporting actions which were inconsistent with procedures. The 
PLANT operator was given the option of overriding KARL and 
implementing an action against KARL's recommendations. However, 
the consequence of thus failing to conform was to receive another 
message. KARL did not know how to concede; in short, KARL was a 
nag. 


These problems were remedied in two general ways. First, it 
was necessary to inhibit the display of all messages which were 
not procedure-oriented. Second, thresholds for prompts were 



PAGE 9 


incorporated. For example, if a subject failed to comply with 
one of KARL's suggestions, KARL did not make the same suggestion 
again for five time units. As another example, "hysteresis" was 
introduced into the situation assessment thresholds to avoid the 
aforementioned problem of borderline conditions. 

An experiment was conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of 
KARL as an assistant. Two general issues were of interest: 
1 ) the feasibility of adapting a rule-based system (which was not 
originally designed as an aid) to support human problem solving, 
and 2) the effects of an online coach upon humans' performance. 

METHOD 

Sub.j ects 

Junior and senior undergraduates at Georgia Institute of 
Technology served as paid volunteer subjects. All eight of them 
were majors in industrial and systems engineering, and had 
completed courses in physics, dynamics, calculus, and 
differential equations. 

Experimental Procedure 

The experimental procedure in this experiment was almost 
identical to that used in the research described earlier (Morris, 
1983; Morris & Rouse, 1984a). Training provided to subjects in 
this experiment was equal to the group receiving instruction in 



PAGE 10 


both principles and procedures in the earlier experiment, with 
the exception that aiding was available. 

Subjects served in a total of 13 sessions each, with the 
average length of each session being approximately 60 to 75 
minutes. Generally, training was accomplished during the first 
eight sessions, in which subjects read instructional materials 
and practiced controlling PLANT. A discussion of principles 
governing PLANT was provided during session 3, and operational 
procedures were made available for the first time in session 5. 
KARL was used as an online coach during sessions 5-8, and 
supplied the three types of aiding information described earlier. 

Sessions 9-13 were considered experimental sessions, in that 
no further instruction was provided by the experimenter, and no 
questions from subjects were answered. As with the earlier 
experiment, unfamiliar situations (i.e., a tank rupture and a 
safety system failure) were introduced in sessions 10 and 12, 
which were counterbalanced across subjects. The coach did not 
provide guidance in following procedures during sessions 9-12; 
subjects received only information related to situation 
assessment and overall performance feedback. No information from 
the coach was available during session 13* At the end of session 
13, subjects completed a paper-and-pencil test of knowledge about 
PLANT and the coach, based upon material contained in the written 
instructions . 



PAGE 11 


RESULTS 


In order to assess the effects of aiding, the performance of 
subjects in this experiment was compared via analysis of variance 
to performance of the group receiving both principles and 
procedures in the earlier PLANT research. (In the following 
presentation, these groups are referred to as the aided and 
unaided group, respectively.) Thus, performance measures were 
used as dependent variables in two-way analyses with one 
between-subj ects factor (aiding) and one within-subj ects factor 
( session) . 

As with the earlier research, the experimental manipulation 
had no significant effect upon total production achieved, 
although the mean for the aided group was slightly higher (344*6 
vs. 320.2 units of production per time unit). There was also no 
significant effect of aiding on the number of automatic valve 
trips experienced (an indication of PLANT stability). However, 
as with total production, the mean for the aided group was 
slightly better (i.e., lower) (0.497 vs. 0.605 trips per time 
unit ) . 

Aiding also failed to have a significant effect upon another 
measure of PLANT stability: variance of fluid levels in the 
system. Once again, the trend was in the expected direction, in 
that the mean for the aided group was lower (12.44 vs. 15.27). 



PAGE 12 


Two performance measures were significantly affected by 
aiding. Aided subjects kept a higher percentage of valves open 
(92% vs. 87%, £ < .04), and generally maintained a higher level 
of input into the system ( 1 1 6 . 8 vs. 106.9 units per time unit, 
£ < .04) • The practical significance of these results is 
presented later. 

Assessing subjects' performance during unfamiliar 
situations, there was no effect of aiding upon subjects' repair 
of the tank rupture (15 of the 16 subjects did so). However, it 
was found that seven out of eight subjects in the aided group 
repaired the unfamiliar failure of the PLANT safety system, 
whereas only three of the eight unaided subjects found that 
failure. This difference in proportions was found to be 
statistically significant (£ < .04)* 

Differences in scores on the test of PLANT knowledge were 
examined. Although overall scores did not differ significantly, 
it was found that the aided group scored significantly higher on 
the section of the test related to dynamic principles (83% vs. 
69%, £ < .05). 

Finally, the actions selected by subjects were compared to 
actions which would have been selected by KARL in the same 
situation. This comparison was similar to that reported for the 
earlier experiment (Knaeuper, 1983; Knaeuper & Rouse, 1984)* 



PAGE 13 


There was no significant difference in the degree to which 
actions chosen by aided and unaided subjects agreed with those 
selected by KARL. 


DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 

As noted in the introduction, this research was prompted by 
two issues: 1) the feasibility of adapting a rule-based model as 
an online coach, and 2) the effects of such asistance upon 
subjects' ability to control PLANT. With regard to the second 
issue, none of the statistically significant effects the coach 
had upon subjects' performance were related to primary 
performance measures. Although mean performance for the aided 
group was better with all measures, the only significant effects 
of aiding were upon the secondary performance measures of number 
of open valves and level of system input. These measures 
indicate that subjects did what they were told to do. Although 
all subjects (in this research and in the earlier experiment) 
were instructed to keep all valves open and maintain a relatively 
high level of input and output, apparently the coach's presence 
caused them to follow these instructions more closely. 

Whereas it is fairly easy to provide an explanation for 
subjects' following instructions more closely, explaining why 
more subjects in the aided group were able to diagnose the safety 
system failure is not as straightforward. Three possibilities 
are suggested by the data. First, since failure of the safety 



PAGE 14 


system resulted in automatic closing of valves at random, the 
ability to maintain more valves open in general may have assisted 
subjects in detecting the presence of an unusual situation. Once 
detected, it should have been easy to determine that the cause of 
the unusual situation was failure of the safety system, since 
only two unusual failures were possible. 

Judging from the available evidence, however, it is 
difficult to imagine that this is a sufficient account of what 
happened. A look at the performance of all subjects supplied 
with procedures in the earlier experiment conducted by Morris 
(i.e., those with procedures only, and those with both procedures 
and principles) reveals that there was no difference in the 
number of valves kept open by persons who repaired the safety 
system and those who did not (89% vs. 88%). Additionally, a 
subsequent examination of logs kept by the unaided group during 
the time the safety system had failed indicated that at least six 
of the eight people felt that something was wrong; yet, only 
three of these successfully diagnosed the failure, and the others 
attributed the problem to deficiencies in their control actions. 

Another possible explanation may be found in the fact that 
the aided group scored significantly higher on the test of 
information related to dynamic principles. Perhaps an increased 
knowledge of the functioning of the system enabled the aided 
group to diagnose the unfamiliar failure. This explanation also 



PAGE 15 


seems inadequate. There was no difference in the test scores of 


unaided subjects 

who repaired 

the 

safety 

system and 

those 

who 

did 

not (69.3 % vs. 

69.2%) . 







The third 

explanation 

for 

aided 

subj ects ' 

success 

in 

diagnosing the 

failure of 

the 

safety 

system is 

that 

somehow 


providing them with the coach made the difference. During the 
session in which the safety system failed, two types of aiding 
messages were provided: situation assessment and performance 
feedback. The situation assessment consisted of informing 
subjects which procedure, if any, applied. There were no 
messages such as "unfamiliar situation". Performance feedback 
was related to changes in the stability of the system. When the 
safety system failed, it is possible that subjects received 
conflicting messages, such as "No procedure applicable" and 
"Instability extreme". Apparent conflict such as this may have 
served as a cue that something was wrong, and could have 
suggested to subjects that the problems in the system were not 
the result of poor control actions. 

These ideas about the role of the coach in the unfamiliar 
situation are purely conjecture at this point. It seems likely 
that a combination of all of these factors (i.e., increased 
system stability, knowledge of the functioning of the system, and 
assistance in situation assessment) contributed to subjects' 
success. An understanding of factors affecting the human's 



PAGE 16 


ability to deal with an unfamiliar event could have important 
theoretical and practical implications, and further investigation 
of this issue is warranted. 

Finally, another question arises with regard to the results 
of this research: Why did aided subjects score higher on the 
test of dynamic principles? Since the primary difference in the 
way the two groups were treated was the presence or absence of 
the online coach, it would appear that this was the reason for 
the difference in the test scores. This is counterintuitive, 
however, because the focus of the aiding was on following 
procedures, and not on understanding the functioning of the 
system. Therefore, interpretation of this result must be delayed 
until the research can be replicated, using a larger number of 
subjects and controlling for potential differences in abilities. 

Considering the feasibility of adapting a rule-based model 
as an online coach, this research has served to emphasize the 
complexities and subtleties of model-based online aiding and 
training. As noted by other researchers (Clancey & Lestinger, 
1982; Jackson & Lefrere, 1984), answering the questions of what 
advice and feedback to provide, as well as when they should be 
provided, is far from straightforward. This point is 
particularly supported by the results reported here where 
subjects benefited along several dimensions by having an online 
coach, but did not become more like the coach in the process 



PAGE 17 


(i.e., there was no increase in agreement between the subjects' 
and model's choices of actions). Thus, the results of being 
coached can be more than, or at least other than, simply gaining 
the coach's expertise. This has profound implications for the 
current view of "expert systems" as a panacea for training and 
aiding . 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


This research was partially supported by the Office of Naval 
Research under Work Unit 154-491 (Contract N0001 4-82-K-0487 ) , and 
partially supported by the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration under Ames Grant NAG 2-123. 

REFERENCES 


Clansey, W. J., 6 Letsinger, R. NEOMYCIN : Reconfiguring a 

rule-based expert system for application to teaching (Tech. 
Rept. STAN-CS-82-908) . Palo Alto, CAl Stanford 

University, 1982. 

Jackson, P., 6 Lefrere, P. On the application of rule-based 

techniques to the design of advice-giving systems. 

International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 1984, 20, 

BT -86. “ 

Knaeuper, A. A rule-based model of h uman problem solving 

behavior in dynamic environments (Tech. Rept. 83-3). 
Atlanta , TUT: uenter “Tor Man-Machine Systems Research, 

Georgia Institute of Technology, August 1983* 

Knaeuper, A., & Rouse, W. B. A rule-based model of human 

problem-solving behavior in dynamic environments. IEEE 
Transactions on Systems , Man, and Cybernetics , 1984, in 

press. 

Morris, N. M. Human problem solving in process control (Tech. 
Rept. 83-2 ) . Atlanta , GA: Center for Man-Machine Systems 

Research, Georgia Institute of Technology, August 1983. 


PAGE 18 


Morris, N. M., 6 Rouse, W. B. The effects of type of knowledge 
upon human problem solving in a process control task. IEEE 
Transactions on Systems , Man, and Cybernetics , 1984, in 
press . (a ) 

Morris, N. M. , & Rouse, W. B. Review and evaluation of 

empirical research in troubleshooting . Norcross, GA: 
Search Technology, August 1 984* CET5 ~~ 

Rouse, W. B., 6 Morris, N. M. On looking into the black box: 
Prospects and limits in the search for mental models . 
Norcross , GA: Search Technology, July 1984. 



