
Software 


Software for Use With 
Optoelectronic 
Measuring Tool 

A computer program has been written 
to facilitate and accelerate the process of 
measurement by use of the apparatus de- 
scribed in “Optoelectronic Tool Adds 
Scale Marks to Photographic Images” 
(KSC-12201), NASA Tech Briefs , Vol. 27, 
No. 1 (January 2003), page 6a. To reca- 
pitulate: The tool contains four laser 
diodes that generate parallel beams of 
light spaced apart at a known distance. 
The beams of light are used to project 
bright spots that serve as scale marks that 
become incorporated into photographic 
images (including film and electronic 
images). The sizes of objects depicted in 
the images can readily be measured by 
reference to the scale marks. 

The computer program is applicable 
to a scene that contains the laser spots 
and that has been imaged in a square 
pixel format that can be imported into a 
graphical user interface (GUI) generated 
by the program. It is assumed that the 
laser spots and the distance (s) to be mea- 
sured all lie in the same plane and that 
the plane is perpendicular to the line of 
sight of the camera used to record the 
image. The user marks the locations of 
the laser spots in the image, and the pro- 
gram calculates the distance (If) between 
them in pixels as simply the square root 
of the sum of squares of the horizontal 
and vertical pixel distances between 
them. Similarly, the user marks any two 
points, the distance between which is to 
be measured, and the program calculates 
the distance (P s ) between them in pixels, 
in the same manner in which it calculates 
the pixel distance between the laser 
spots. Then the program calculates the 
real distance (To) between the two points 
by Tq = LsP 0 /P s , where is the known 
real distance between the laser spots. 

The original version of the program, 
written in Fortran, offered limited per- 
formance: it could accept only bit-map 
(BMP) image data files and was some- 
what awkward to use. The current ver- 
sion, written in C++, performs better, in 
part because it utilizes capabilities af- 
forded by the Windows operating sys- 
tem. In addition to BMP files, the pro- 
gram can now read and save image files 
in the Joint Photographic Experts 
Group (JPEG or JPG) and Graphic 
Image File (GIF) formats. Some of the 


other features of the current version of 
the software are the following: 

• The GUI has been made less complex 
and is easier to use than it was in the 
original version. 

• The total number of laser-spot marks 
that the user can place in the image is 
not limited to four. Moreover, the marks 
need not be limited in application to the 
laser spots: they can be applied to any 
linear set of evenly spaced reference 
marks (for example, a row of evenly 
spaced screw heads) as long as the dis- 
tance between the marks is known. 

• A given pair of measurement points 
and a rectangular measurement zone 
bounded by two points at diagonally 
opposite corners is established by 
stretching the straight diagonal line 
between them in a conventional point- 
and-click “rubber band” mouse opera- 
tion. The GUI displays the horizontal, 
vertical, and diagonal dimensions of 
the measurement zone as the mouse is 
dragged to stretch the diagonal. 

• By means of a “Set Actual Distance” 
command, the user can prescribe or 
update the distance along the diagonal 
of a measurement zone. The updated 
actual diagonal horizontal, vertical, 
and diagonal distance values are im- 
mediately displayed in the image. In 
addition, a status bar provides an op- 
tion to display the actual distance be- 
tween laser spots. 

• Context-sensitive help displays com- 
prising text, images, and hypertext 
links to related pages are available for 
each command and GUI button. 
There is also a help page describing 
the procedure for using the program. 

This program was written by Kim C. 
Ballard of Kennedy Space Center. 
Further information is contained in a TSP 
( see page 1 ). 

This invention is owned by NASA, and a 
patent application has been filed. Inquiries 
concerning nonexclusive or exclusive license 
for its commercial development should be ad- 
dressed to the Technology Programs and Com- 
mercialization Office, Kennedy Space Center, 
(321 ) 867-8130. Refer to KSC-12505. 


Coordinating Shared 
Activities 

Shared Activity Coordination (ShAC) 
is a computer program for planning and 
scheduling the activities of an au- 
tonomous team of interacting spacecraft 


and exploratory robots. ShAC could also 
be adapted to such terrestrial uses as 
helping multiple factory managers work 
toward competing goals while sharing 
such common resources as floor space, 
raw materials, and transports. ShAC iter- 
atively invokes the Continuous Activity 
Scheduling Planning Execution and Re- 
planning (CASPER) program to replan 
and propagate changes to other plan- 
ning programs in an effort to resolve 
conflicts. A domain-expert specifies 
which activities and parameters thereof 
are shared and reports the expected 
conditions and effects of these activities 
on the environment. By specifying these 
conditions and effects differently for 
each planning program, the domain-ex- 
pert subprogram defines roles that each 
spacecraft plays in a coordinated activity. 
The domain-expert subprogram also 
specifies which planning program has 
scheduling control over each shared ac- 
tivity. ShAC enables sharing of informa- 
tion, consensus over the scheduling of 
collaborative activities, and distributed 
conflict resolution. As the other plan- 
ning programs incorporate new goals 
and alter their schedules in the chang- 
ing environment, ShAC continually co- 
ordinates to respond to unexpected 
events. 

This program was written by Bradley 
Clement of Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propul- 
sion Laboratory. Further information is 
contained in a TSP (see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Don Hart of the Cal- 
ifornia Institute of Technology at (818) 393- 
3423. Refer to NPO-30614. 


Software Reduces 
Radio-Interference Effects 
in Radar Data 

A computer program suppresses the 
effects of narrow-band radio-frequency 
interference (RFI) on the data collected 
by a wide-band radar system. The need 
for this program arises because some ad- 
vanced wide-band synthetic-aperture 
radar systems utilize frequency bands 
that include frequencies used by other 
radio services. In this program, the RFI 
environment is represented by an au- 
toregressive process, the frequency band 
of which is narrow relative to that of the 
radar. Most of the RFI signals, both nar- 
row- and wide-band, are estimated in 
one pass of a least-mean-square (LMS) 


NASA Tech Briefs, October 2004 


15 


