Software Configuration Management Technology Report 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/REPORT.HTML 



Software Technology Support Center 


Software Configuration Management 
Technology Report 

September 1994 19970515 051 


This technical report was prepared by the: 

Software Technology Support Center WBT1g80TICIit A 

tar 

Ogden ALC/TISE _ DbrniboticD UnJfenited 


Hill AFB, UT 84056 

The ideas and findings in this report should not be construed as an official Air Force position. It is 
published in the interest of scientific and technical information exchange. 

This document is available through the STSC. To obtain a copy, please contact the Software Technology 
Support Center, Attn: Customer Service, Ogden ALC/TISE, Hill AFB, UT 84056; 801-777-7703 or 
DSN 458-7703, FAX 801-777-8069. 

Preface 

Software Configuration Management (SCM) is the backbone of the software development process, and 
when implemented correctly, helps ensure software quality and process improvement. Use of this report 
should be the first step in transferring effective SCM principles, processes, and products into practical 
use. 

This report defines the basic principles of SCM and identifies their value in improving software quality. 
SCM adoption issues are discussed, and guidance is provided for the development of a long-term SCM 
solution. This report emphasizes the need for organizations to plan for the SCM implementation, to 
develop a detailed SCM plan, and to define the SCM process before implementing an automated SCM 
system. Information about SCM products in the marketplace is also included. Finally, future directions 
of the SCM domain are identified. 

Audience 

The target audience consists of software engineers and technical managers responsible for ensuring the 
successful adoption of SCM in their organization. 

Scope DTIC QUALrry INSPECTED 4 

This report addresses SCM issues that concern Air Force agencies developing embedded software by 
presenting an overview of SCM technology and by providing references for those who wish to study the 
subject in more detail. A detailed SCM tutorial is beyond the scope of this document. Information 
presented concentrates on SCM technology for software engineers responsible for developing and 
maintaining medium to large-scale software systems. Other DoD organizations should find the majority 


1 of21 


5/13/97 7:00 AM 


Software Configuration Management Technology Report 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/REPORT.HTML 


of the information useftil as well. 

Acknowledgments 

at the Softw^e Engineering Institute (L) at cZegtSon 

reports and briefings provided the majority of information for this report. A s^Sl note of aTOredation 
0 Susan Dart, foimerly of the SEI, who provided insight into the problems organizaSs face^Xn 
tft solution. In addition, the Software Configuration Management Team wishes to 

Te^^ology Rep^^^^^ contributed to the development of the SCM 


Table of Contents 


Preface. 

AUDIENCE.... 

SCOPE... 


Acknowledgments. ^ 

Software Configuration Management Technology’Domain’Tutorial 1^1 

Purpose and Overview.. . . . . j. i 

Basic Concepts. .. ^ 

Configuration Identification. . t ^ 

Configuration Change Control. . . t , 

Configuration Status Accounting. .'!!.'.’!!!].o 7 

Configuration Audit..q i 

Establishing a Software Baseline Library. q l 

Software Configuration Management Tools. . i’a 7 

UNIX Utilities.;..^ 

SCM Tool Features. .. ^ 

Version Control... ^ 

Configuration Support. . .t q } 

Process Support..i ^ 

Change Control. .. ^ 

Team Support. !!!!!! . . ^ ' 

Library/Repository. .*!!!!!!.'! . t ^ 

Security/Protection.. It 1 

Reporting/Query. .. 

Tool Integration..^ ’ 

Build Support. . 

Release Management. !!!!!!!!.' .1*0 

Customization Support. . 

Graphical ^ User Interfaces.!.1 q i ' 

Concepts in Software Configuration Management Tools. . iq 1 ’ i 

Evaluation of SCM Tools. .' 

SCM Technology Listing. .*!.*!!!!!!.*! . 9? 1 * 

Product Sheets.. . 

Product Critiques.i .*!!!!!!!!!!! !. 99 ^ ' 

Software Configuration Management Standards .99 

References and Recommended Reading. t' 

Glossary... . . • 

state of the Software Configuration Management Domain .95 9 

Current Trends. . 

Future Directions of the SCM Domain]!.'!!.o’ 

SCM and Ada. .. 

Applications... ^ 

Software Configuration Management'Adoption! !.9^ I' 

Phase 1: Preparation and Planning. !!!!!!!!!!!. 33 3 


22 1 . 
22 1 . 
23 1 . 
23 2 


. 2.4 
. 2.5 
. 3 

. 3.1 

. 3.2 

. 3 . 2.1 

. 3 . 2.2 

. 3 . 2.3 

. 3 . 2.4 

. 3 . 2.5 

. 3 . 2.6 

. 3 . 2.7 

. 3 . 2.8 

. 3 . 2.9 

. 3 . 2.10 

. 3 . 2.11 

. 3 . 2.12 

. 3 . 2.13 


2 of 21 


5/13/97 7:00 AM 













































Software Configuration Management Technology Report 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/REPORT.HTML 


Phase 2 : Process Definition. i -i 

Phase 3 : Tool Evaluation..^ i ’ a 

Phase 4: Pilot Project Implementation. . o-r -o’l'c 

Phase 5 : Roll-out to Other Project. .^ « 

Phase 6: Process Improvement.. H 

Case Studies.] [ ].^ 

LIST OF APPENDICES 

APPENDIX A CMM and STARS 
Project Overview A -1 


APPENDIX B - Products List B -1 

APPENDIX C - Product Sheets C -1 

APPENDIX D - User Critiques D-1 

APPENDIX E - List of Standards E-1 

APPENDIX F - References and Recommended Readinq 

APPENDIX G - Glossary G -1 

APPENDIX H - Acronyms H -1 

APPENDIX I - STSC Overview I-l 


LIST OF FIGURES 

• FIGURE 1.2- Software Configuration Management 3 

• - Software Configuration Identification Hierarchy 4 

• FIGURE 1.2.2 - Generic Change Process 7 

• FIGURE 1.3.1 - Check-out/Check-in Model 11 

1 Software Configuration Management Technology Domain Tutorial 
1.1 Purpose and Overview 

M^^Sement is the discipline for managing the evolution of computer program 
dunng all stages of development and maintenance. SCM spans all areas of the softwar^e ^ 
lifecycle. Adopting SCM m ^ organization is complex, since both managerial and technical issues must 
be addressed. Adopting SCM technology is the most difficult kind of adoption due to the compleSw 
the SCM solution and the number of people involved. It impacts all data and processes. The purpose of 
this report is to provide current information on SCM principles, methods, and technologies. ^ ^ 

Iifterest in SCM has increased dramatically in the last two years. This interest can be largely attributed to 
SEI s (Jpabihty Maturity Model (CMM), which identifies SCM as a Level 2 Key Process Area (see 
Appendix A for a brief description of the CMM). The CMM is requiring that the Air Force address SCM 
issues in their software development organizations. Software Configur JirMaLgemem 
important part at every level of process maturity. ^ ^ 

There is a wealth of information available on SCM. This information includes the following: 

Technical reports produced by SEI's Software Engineering Environments Team 

Reports developed by the Software Technology for Adaptable, Reliable Systems (STARS) program 

Recently published SCM books and articles 

IEEE software standards 

Government standards. 

detailed study 


3 of 21 


5/13/97 7:00 AM 









Software Configuration Management Technology Report 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cra/REPORT.HTML 


Tutorial outlining the basic SCM concepts 

Current SCM practices 

Features found in SCM tools 

SCM adoption issues 

Future directions of the SCM domain 

SCM products and related information. 

1.2 Basic Concepts 

Software Configuration Management is a discipline for managing the evolution of computer products, 
both during the initial stages of development and all stages of maintenance. A more detailed definition is 
found in the CMM and is listed below. 

"Software Configuration Management involves identifying the configuration of the software (i.e., 
selected software work products and their descriptions) at given points in time, systematically 
controlling changes to the configuration, and maintaining the integrity and traceability of the 
configuration throughout the software lifecycle. The work products placed under software configuration 
management include the software products that are delivered to the customer (e.g., the software 
requirements document and the code) and the items that are identified with or required to create these 
software products (e.g., compiler)" [Paulk 93]. 

SCM provides visibility into the status of the evolving software product. Software developers, testers, 
project managers. Quality Assurance (QA) personnel, and the customer benefit from SCM information. 
SCM answers the following: Who, What, When, and Why. 

Who made the changes? 

What changes were made to the software? 

When were the changes made? 

Why were the changes made? 

SCM is divided into the following functional areas: Identification, Change Control, Status Accounting, 
and Audit, (see Figure 1.2). 

Figure 1.2 Software Configuration Management 

1.2.1 Configuration Identification 

Identification involves identifying the structure of the software system, uniquely identifying individual 
components, and making them accessible in some form. The goal of Identification is to have the ability 
to identify the components of a system throughout its lifecycle and provide traceability between the 
software and related software products. Identification answers the following: What is the configuration 
of my system? What version of the file is this? and What are the components of the system? 

Identification Activities: 

Selecting items to be placed under SCM control 

Developing the software hierarchy 


4 of 21 


5/13/97 7:00 AM 





Software Configuration Management Technology Report 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/REPORT.HTML 


Creating an identification scheme that reflects the software hierarchy 
Uniquely identifying the various revisions of the software product 
Defining relationships and interfaces between the various software products. 


Figure 1.2.1 presents a typical breakdown of software into its distinct parts and presents a numberine 
scheme uniquely identifying each component. ° 


Figure 1 . 2.1 Software Configuration Identification Hierarchy 


Although the key component to be managed is the source code, related documentation and data should 
be identified and placed under SCM control. It is important to store and track all environment 
information and support tools used throughout the software lifecycle to ensure that the software can be 
reproduced. The following are examples of items typically put under SCM control: 


• Support Software (software required to build and maintain the software throughout its lifecycle) such 


System Build Files 
Compilers 
Operating System 
Link/Loaders 
Procedure Languages 
Shell Scripts 

• Object Code 

• CASE Elements 

• Documentation 
Requirements 
Specifications 
Design 

Interface Control 
User 

• Software Development Folders 

• Libraries 

• Project Plans 

• Test Plans/Procedures 

• Test Data 


5 of 21 


5/13/97 7:00 AM 



Software Configuration Management Technology Report 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/REPORT.HTML 


• SCM Plans/Procedures 

• Problem/Enhancement Reports 

• Hardware Platform Information 

• SCM Reports 

• Third-party Tools. 

1.2.2 Configuration Change Control 

Configuration Change Control involves controlling the release and changes to software products 
throughout the software lifecycle. The goal of Change Control is to establish mechanisms that will help 
ensure the production of quality software. A generic change process is identified in Figure 1.2.2. 

Change Control answers the following: What is controlled? How the changes to the products are 
controlled? and Who controls the changes? 

Change Control Activities: 

Defining the change process 

Establishing change control policies and procedures 

Maintaining baselines 

Processing changes 

Developing change report forms 

Controlling release of the product. 

Figure 1.2.2 Generic Change Process 

The baseline is a key concept of SCM. A baseline is "a specification or product that has been formally 
reviewed and agreed upon, that thereafter serves as the basis for further development, and that can be 
changed only through formal change procedures" [IEEE 90]. When an item is baselined, it becomes 
frozen - the item can only be changed by creating a new version. DoD-STD-2167A, the AF standard for 
embedded software development, defines the different types of baselines, identifies items included in the 
baseline, and specifies when baselines are created. In addition, several informal baselines are usually 
established during the software development process. The number and type of baselines depend on 
which life cyle model the project is implementing. Lifecycle models, such as the spiral, incremental 
development, and rapid prototyping, require more flexibility in the establishment of baselines. For a 
detailed explanation of lifecycle models, see Wicked Problems, Righteous Solutions by Peter DeGrace 
and Leslie Houlet Stahl. 

1.2.3 Configuration Status Accounting 

Configuration Status Accounting involves the recording and reporting of the change process. The goal of 
status accounting is to maintain a status record of all items in a baseline, thus providing the traceabiltiy 
of all changes to the baseline throughout the software lifecycle. Status Accounting answers the 
following: What changes have been made to the system? and How many files were affected by this 
problem report? 

Status Accounting Activities: 


6 of 21 


5/13/97 7:00 AM 





Software Configuration Management Technology Report 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/REPORT.HTML 


Determining type of logs and reports required 
Tracking the status of SCM items 
Tracking the status of changes to the system 
Generating status reports 
Recording and reporting the activities of SCM. 

1.2.4 Configuration Audit 

Configuration Audit verifies that the software product is built according to the requirements, standards, 
or contractual agreement. Test reports and documentation are used to verify that the software meets the 
stated requirements. The goal of Configuration Audit is to verify that all software products have been 
produced, correctly identified and described, and that all change requests have been resolved. Informal 
audits are conducted at key phases of the software lifecycle. There are two types of formal audits that are 
conducted before the software is delivered to the customer: Functional Configuration Audit (FCA) and 
Physical Configuration Audit (PCA). FCA verifies that the software actually satisfies the software 
requirements stated in the System Requirements Specification and the Interface Requirements 
Specification. PCA determines whether or not the design and reference documents represent the 
software that was built. Configuration audit answers the following: Does the system satisfy the 
requirements? and Are all changes incorporated in this version? 

Configuration Audit Activities: 

Defining audit schedule and procedures 

Performing audits on the established baselines 

Generating audit reports. 

1.2.5 Establishing a Software Baseline Library 

In support of the above activities, a software baseline library is established. The library is the heart of the 
SCM system. It serves as the repository for the work products created during the software lifecycle. 
Changes to baselines, and the release of software products, are systematically controlled via the change 
control and configuration auditing functions. 

The Software Library: 

Supports multiple control levels of SCM 

Provides for the storage and retrieval of configuration items/units 

Provides for the sharing and transfer of configuration items/units between control levels within the 
library 

Provides for the storage and recovery of archive versions of configuration items/units 
Helps to ensure correct creation of products from the software baseline library 
Provides storage, update, and retrieval of SCM records 
Supports production of SCM reports 

Provides for the maintenance of the library structure [Olson 93]. 


7 of 21 


5/13/97 7:00 AM 


Software Configuration Management Technology Report 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/REPORT.HTML 


In the past, libraries have been composed of documentation on hard copy and software on 
machine-readable media. Today, with the advances in information technology and the Computer-Aided 
Acquisition and Logistic Support (CALS) standard that requires contractors to use automated processing 
and electronic submittal techniques, organizations are moving towards maintaining all information on 
machine-readable media. Additional information on SCM basic concepts can be found in Software 
Configuration Management by Ron Berlack and Implementing Configuration Management Hardware, 
Software, and Firmware by Fletcher Buckley. 

1.3 Software Configuration Management Tools 

This section describes UNIX SCM utilities and details features found in state-of-the-art SCM tools. 

1.3.1 UNIX Utilities 

Many state-of-the-art SCM tools have their roots in the development of the UNIX utilities Source Code 
Control System (SCCS), Revision Control System (RCS), and Make. SCCS and RCS provide version 
control and baseline management. SCCS is distributed with most AT&T versions of UNIX, and RCS is 
available via the Internet. They were both designed to control source code, but can be used to store other 
data. SCCS and RCS serve as the repository in the commonly implemented Check-out/Check-in SCM 
model (see Figure 1.3.1). The basic concept of the Check-out/Check-in model is as follows; 

To modify an item the developer: 

1. Checks the item out from the repository (Check-out) 

2. Incorporates the changes 

3. Checks the item back into the repository (Check-in). 

Figure 1.3.1 

When an item is checked out, it is locked to prevent developers from simultaneously making changes to 
the same item. SCCS and RCS utilize variations of the delta storage scheme to save disk space. Delta 
storage involves storing only the changes between each version. SCCS implements the forward delta 
scheme that involves storing the initial baseline and the differences between each baseline. RCS uses 
reverse delta storage that involves storing the latest version along with the differences between each 
previous baseline. Reverse delta storage provides a more efficient retrieval of the latest version because 
the latest version is maintained. 

The UNIX utility. Make, was developed to automate the build process. Building of a large software 
system can be a tedious and error-prone process. Special care must be taken to assure that the correct 
version of each module is included in the build. Make builds an executable image from source and object 
code and stores the dependencies between modules and the rules to build the system. It identifies 
changed modules and dependencies and rebuilds only those modules. 

1.3.2 SCM Tool Features 

Many companies are expanding the functionality of their tools to meet the requirements of today's 
software development organizations. Several companies sell their products as a series of building blocks. 
For example, the base product handles version control and process control, while the problem reporting 
function may be purchased separately. 

State-of-the-art SCM tools may have all or combinations of the following features: 

Version Control 


8 of 21 


5/13/97 7:00 AM 



Software Configuration Management Technology Report 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/REPORT.HTML 


Configuration Support 
Process Support 
Change Control 
Team Support 
Library/Repository Support 
Security/Protection 
Reporting/ Query 
Tool Integration 
Build Support 
Release Management 
Customization Support 
Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs) 

1.3.2.1 Version Control 

Version Control is a basic requirement for an SCM tool. It ensures repeatability - the ability to reproduce 
any version of the software at any given time. Version Control involves controlling the different versions 
of software, uniquely identifying versions and configurations, and providing version change history to 
ensure traceability. Several tools incorporate advanced version schemes that support parallel 
development activities. 

1.3.2.2 Configuration Support 

A configuration is a collection of components that fulfill a particular purpose. Tools provide 
mechanisms that enable the user to correctly identify and model the software system as well as track 
relationships between items in the configuration. To establish traceability between components, tools 
allow users to establish links between components (e.g., link requirements to source code and test cases). 
Several tools support impact analysis by scanning for dependencies between items. Managing the 
complexity of the dependency between items is an important aspect of SCM. 

1.3.2.3 Process Support 

A process details how the various members of the organization (i.e., developer, tester, manager, QA 
personnel) use the system throughout the software lifecycle. Process controls ensure that the proper steps 
are executed in Ae correct order by the authorized person. Several tools include a predefined lifecycle 
model and provide mechanisms to ensure the proper steps are completed at each stage of the lifecycle. 
For example, a tool may specify a five-phase development process: analysis, design, development, test, 
and final release. Tools commonly implement process controls by allowing the user to define Triggers. 
Triggers execute user-defined scripts prior to, or in response to, certain events, (e.g., when a component 
is checked out from the repository, an E-mail message is sent to notify other team members). Some tools 
allow users to define roles and responsibilities. More flexible tools provide lifecycle models and control 
mechanisms that can be tailored to meet each organization's special needs. Several tools have methods 
that allow the user to bypass process steps to perform emergency maintenance. 

1.3.2.4 Change Control 


9 of 21 


5/13/97 7:00 AM 


Software Configuration Management Technology Report 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/REPORT.HTML 


Change control involves controlling the changes to the software throughout the software lifecycle. A 
change reporting system manages change reports and provides traceability between the change request 
and the items that are being changed. Several 

vendors have incorporated change reporting features in their products. Others have provided interfaces 
with third party change reporting systems. Information collected from change reports facilitates the 
collection of metrics. Several tools provide standard change forms and allow the user to customize the 
form to meet the project's requirements. Advanced tools provide an on-line display of the change form. 

1.3.2.5 Team Support 

Team Support involves: 

Controlling interactions between the various team members 
Providing programmers with an isolated workspace 
Supporting parallel development 
Supporting programmers who work at distributed sites. 

An example of controlling interactions between members of a team would be the automatic sending of 
an E-mail message that notifies team members of modifications to a particular module. 

Providing an isolated workspace involves mechanisms that allow programmers to work without 
interfering with other members of the programming team. 

Parallel development generally involves multiple programmers working on the same module or set of 
modules. For example, one programmer is fixing a bug in a module while another programmer is 
working on enhancing that module for the next release. Until recently, parallel development was done on 
a limited basis. Now, beeause software is developed at diverse sites on a variety of software and 
hardware platforms and is targeted for different machines, parallel development is becoming standard 
practice for many organizations. Tools that support parallel development must also provide improved 
mechanisms that will: 

Control access to the repository 

Notify team members of the changes taking place 

Identify the differences between versions 

Merge versions. 

Distributed development involves support for transferring of data over networks and synchronizing 
changes to the software system made at different locations. 

1.3.2.6 Library/Repository 

The library or repository captures SCM information and stores versions of items. Several tools store data 
in a proprietary database, others build functionality on top of commercial databases such as Oracle, 
Sybase, and Ingress. Several SCM tools also allow the user to select from several databases. Tools 
provide mechanisms that create an audit trail of all SCM activities and database transactions. 

1.3.2.7 Security/Protection 

To provide repository security, tools enforce a variety of access sehemes. Some rely on the operating 
system while others provide mechanisms independent of the operating system. Most tools allow the user 


10 of 21 


5/13/97 7:00 AM 



Software Configuration Management Technology Report 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/REPORT.HTML 


to define varying levels of access for each project. Mechanisms are also implemented to provide 
protection from accidental or intentional data corruption and loss. Several tools provide backup, archive, 
and restore capabilities. 

1.3.2.8 Reporting/Query 

Most tools have the capability to generate standard reports and allow the user to develop customized 
reports. Typical SCM reports include: 

Dependency Report - identifies relationships between items 

Impact Report - identifies all components affected by a change 

Build Report - identifies all items that went into the build 

Change Status Report - identifies status of all changes 

Difference Report - identifies differences between versions of items 

History Report - summarizes the historical development of the product 

Access Control Report - lists access privileges for all users 

Conflict Detection Report - identifies conflicts created by parallel development. 

Standard Query Language (SQL), or proprietary database query languages, are used to obtain database 
information. The query capability supports configuration audits and the collection of metrics. Typical 
queries answer questions such as: What access rights do the testers have? How many items are 
complete? What problems are fixed in this release? and What is the status of version 2.1? 

1.3.2.9 Tool Integration 

SCM tools may provide interfaces with documentation tools, compilers, software engineering 
environments, version control tools, defect/change tracking tools, build facilities, and CASE tools. One 
goal of an integrated environment is to establish traceability between all items that comprise a system. 
With the introduction of CASE, the traceability problem is complicated because there is an increased 
number of items that need to be traced. Many CASE tools prohibit SCM tools from accessing or 
controlling data. Several distinct approaches have been developed in an attempt to solve this problem. 
"These approaches include: 

Buy an Integrated Project Support Environment (IPSE) such as one based on the international standard, 
the Portable Common Tool Environment (PCTE) 

Buy a tool coalition set from CASE tool vendors where the vendors do all the source-code level 
integration 

Buy a meta-tool that enables customers to rapidly develop their own highly customized set of tools" 
[Dart 92]. 

Currently, most integration with SCM tools is performed by CASE tool vendors. Additional tool 
integration information can be found in Issues and Techniques of CASE Integration with Configuration 
Management by Kurt W. Wallnau. 

In addition to integration with CASE tools, SCM tools may provide filters that load existing data from 
sees or other version control tools to the host repository. Several tools are integrated with Ada 
compilers. 


11 of 21 


5/13/97 7:00 AM 





Software Configuration Management Technology Report 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/REPORT.HTML 


1.3.2.10 Build Support 

Software systems are comprised of many different items. Building these systems can be a long and 
complicated process. SCM tools need to track each item and information about each item that comprise 
the build. Several tools implement their own build facility while others interface with Make. Other tools 
have implemented smart building techniques that recompile only those items that have changed or have 
been affected by the changes. Advanced tools provide support for the following types of builds: 

Cross development builds - building on a remote or different target machine 

Parallel builds - running multiple build processes on one machine at the same time 

Distributed builds - running multiple builds on different machines at the same time. 

1.3.2.11 Release Management 

Files that are generated during the final build of a system are generally placed on tape or other media and 
delivered to the customer. Tools track release information identifying who, what, when, and where. 

1.3.2.12 Customization Support 

Recent advancement in SCM technology supports the customization of SCM tools. Customization can 
be done by the user or vendor by a variety of methods. Several tools provide a special language that 
allows the user to perform customization. Tools allow for the customization of user interfaces, reports, 
lifecycle models, user roles, security and access controls, identifying information, and file attributes as 
well as the process. 

1.3.2.13 Graphical User Interfaces 

State-of-the-art tools provide GUIs that have the capability to display the version history of the system, 
allow visual merging, and display on-line reports and forms. Older tools are currently being redesigned 
to support GUIs. 

1.4 Concepts in Software Configuration Management Tools 

SEI has conducted extensive research in SCM technology. While evaluating SCM tools in the 
marketplace, they discovered, as did others who have evaluated SCM tools, that there is no consistent 
SCM terminology. Different vendors call the same function by different names. Also, the functionality 
provided by SCM systems was not consistent, making the comparison and evaluation of SCM tools 
difficult. SEI has identified 15 concepts that enable people to discuss automated SCM support. These 
concepts, listed below, are explained in detail in Concepts in Configuration Management Systems by 
Susan Dart. 

Repository 

Distributed Component 
Context Management 
Contract 
Change Request 
Lifecycle Model 
Change Set 


12 of 21 


5/13/97 7:00 AM 



Software Configuration Management Technology Report 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/REPORT.HTML 


System Modeling 

<< 

Subsystem 
Object Pool 
Attribution 

Consistency Maintenance 
Workspace 
Transparent View 
Transaction. 

SEI also identified four SCM models that incorporate various combinations of the above concepts. The 
four models can be characterized as follows: "The Check-out/Check-in model offers version 
management of individual system components. The composition model focuses on improving the 
construction of system configurations through selection of alternative versions. The long transaction 
model emphasizes the evolution of systems as a series of configuration versions and the coordination of 
concuirent team activity. The change set model promotes a view of configuration management focused 
on logical changes" [Feiler 91]. The reader is encouraged to read Feiler's Configuration Management 
Models In Commercial Environments to develop a better understanding of the internal mechanisms of 
SCM tools. 

1.5 Evaluation of SCM Tools 

Before beginning an evaluation of SCM tools, the reader is encouraged to read SEI's A Guide to 
Classification and Assessment of Software Engineering Tools. This report provides a list of questions 
that one should consider when examining CM tools. The questions are grouped into the following areas: 

Ease of use - addresses features that make the tool easy to use (i.e., Can the user interface be tailored?) 

Power - addresses for instance, how one command can cause a major effect (i.e., globally replacing 
"Hal" with "Val") 

Robustness - addresses factors such as reliability, performance of the tool under failure conditions, and 
the consistency of tool operations (i.e., What happens to the tool when the network crashes?) 

Functionality - addresses what the tool is designed to do and the methods implemented to accomplish 
the tasks (i.e., implementation of the Checkin/Checkout model) 

Ease of insertion - addresses the ease in which the tool can be incorporated into the project environment 
(i.e.. Is installing the tool simple and straightforward?) 

Quality of commercial support - addresses cost of maintenance agreements, types of training and vendor 
track record. The SCM product sheets, located in Appendix B, contain helpful vendor information. 

In addition, an important issue that should be considered when evaluating SCM tools is scalability. 
Scalability should be addressed for each feature of the tool (i.e., How many components can the tool 
track? What is the largest number that can be used when identifying the software hierarchy? What is the 
largest number of users? How many stages can be specified in the lifecycle model?) 

1.6 SCM Technology Listing 

A list of SCM tools, sorted by product name, is contained in Appendix B. 


13 of 21 


5/13/97 7:00 AM 


Software Configuration Management Technology Report 


http://www.stsc.hiIl.af.mil/cm/REPORT.HTML 


1.7 Product Sheets 

Appendix C contains product sheets for various SCM tools. The information contained in these sheets 
has been provided by the corresponding vendor in response to a questionnaire distributed by the STSC 
SCM Team. This information is more comprehensive than that provided in the tools list and contains 
specific details about the tool including: recommended configuration, pricing, vendor history, and tool 
description. 

1.8 Product Critiques 

Appendix D contains critiques of selected SCM tools provided by experienced users of the tools, whose 
names were provided by the vendors. These critiques include information about the operational 
environment, application, and notable strengths and weaknesses of the tool. 

1.9 Software Configuration Management Standards 

The Air Force has been a leader in recognizing the benefits of Configuration Management. The 
development of ballistic missiles and jet aircraft are examples of large, complex programs that require 
Configuration Management. The first standard, AFSCM 375-1, was issued in 1962 in response to 
control and communication problems encountered during the design of a jet aircraft. Additional 
Configuration Management standards were produced by industry and government agencies. The 
concepts in these early standards addressed hardware Configuration Management issues only. Both 
hardware and software standards have continually evolved over the years. 

Presently, the major AF standard addressing SCM is MIL-STD-973, Configuration Management. 
MIL-STD-973 was written for both hardware and software Configuration Management, and addresses 
the four functions of Configuration Management as well as planning and data requirements. 
MIL-STD-973 consolidates configuration mangement requirements which were previously scattered 
throughout several Configuration Management documents. In addition, MIL-HDBK-61, Configuration 
Management, was developed to provide guidance for implementing and tailoring MIL-STD-973. 

The IEEE Computer Society has been active in the development of SCM standards. They have produced 
excellent SCM standards including IEEE-STD-1042, Guide to Software Configuration Management and 
IEEE-STD-828, Software and Configuration Plans. Appendix E contains a list of SCM standards. A 
more detailed discussion on emergence of configuration management standards and the history of SCM 
is found in Software Configuration Management by H. Ronald Berlack. 

1.10 References and Recommended Readings 

Appendix F includes references to texts and recommended readings that may provide insight to SCM 
theory, technology, and evaluation information. 

1.11 Glossary 

Appendix G provides a glossary to aid the reader in defining terms common to the SCM domain and 
used in this report. 

(This page intentionally left blank)2 State of the Software Configuration Management Domain 
2.1 Current Trends 

Many organizations are struggling with SCM problems. As software becomes more complex and 
programming teams increase in size, organizations typically encounter the following SCM problems: 

The latest version of source code cannot be found 


14 of 21 


5/13/97 7:00 AM 


Software Configuration Management Technology Report 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/REPORT.HTML 


Bugs that were fixed in a previous software version reappear again 

No one knows which modules comprise the software system delivered to the customer 

System builds take too long 

Programmers are working on the wrong version of the code 
The wrong version of the code was tested 

There is no traceability between the software requirements, documentation, and code. 

Organizations have recognized the need for automated SCM support and have taken different 
approaches to solve their SCM problems. Many organizations have developed their own SCM tools, but 
soon discovered that the maintenance of the tools was as costly and difficult as the software they were 
designed to support. Other organizations use basic version control utilities along with manual 
procedures, but found the tools and procedures did not scale up to meet the needs of current software 
projects. Still others have purchased SCM tools and found that the tools alone did not solve all their 
SCM problems. Automated SCM solutions exist, but solving an organization's SCM problems requires 
addressing both technical and managerial issues. These issues are discussed in Section 3.1. 

SCM tools have capabilities to coordinate the effort between teams of software developers working on 
distributed, heterogeneous platforms, supporting a combination of programming languages. SCM tools 
have emerged into total change management systems that manage all software work products throughout 
the software lifecycle. 

SCM tools are continually evolving to satisfy the requirements of users. The demand for SCM 
technology is increasing. It is estimated that the revenues from SCM tools have grown by 50 percent in 
1993 [Ingram, Burrows, Wesley 93]. Industry trends that have increased the demand for SCM tools 
include: 

The migration from mainframes to workstations and PCs 

Scale and complexity of applications 

Maintenance of legacy software systems 

Distributed development 

Parallel development 

Support for software reuse 

Support for process. 

2.2 Future Directions of the SCM Domain 

The future involves addressing other Software Engineering issues to help solve SCM problems. For 
example, the complexity of many SCM problems will be reduced as we learn more about software 
architectures. As advancements in software architectures are made, software systems will become more 
adaptable to change. Programmers will have the ability to easily make changes without severely 
impacting the software system. 

Research conducted by Susan Dart identified five main SCM challenges to be addressed in the future. 
They include: 

Technological - this involves expanding SCM tool functionality and addressing tool integration issues 


15 of 21 


5/13/97 7:00 AM 




Software Configuration Management Technology Report 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/REPORT.HTML 


Process-oriented - this involves developing a better understanding of SCM processes and providing 
more process automation 

Managerial - this involves management providing better support for SCM adoption 

Political - this involves government requiring contractors to provide SCM facilities in order to get a 
contract 

Standardization - this involves addressing software engineering environment and SCM standards [92 
Dart]. 

SEI is beginning to address these issues through the development of a SCM service model. For further 
details see The Past, Present & Future of Configuration Management, by Susan Dart. 

2.3 SCM and Ada 

The Ada Language was designed for the type of projects that require extra attention when considering 
configuration management requirements. These projects are typically large, normally consist of a team 
of many programmers, and are frequently supported in a wide variety of configurations. As with any 
language, issues such as multiple platforms, distributed development, and concurrent development must 
be considered when developing a software configuration management approach. In addition, some 
features unique to the Ada programming language require special consideration in the planning and 
execution of a software configuration management environment. Three such features are the Ada with 
clause, the Ada program library, and Ada's stringent compilation requirements. The following 
paragraphs will discuss these features and examine their impact on software configuration management. 

An Ada system is typically divided into a number of Computer Software Configuration Items (CSCIs). 
Each CSCI may be composed of one or more Ada units. The number of units that make up a CSCI is 
driven by the logical decomposition of the system. Typical Ada units are the package and the main 
procedure. An Ada package consists of a specification and a body, which are tracked as two separate 
files. The specification is the interface to the package and identifies any information accessible to a user 
of the package (visible). The body contains the implementation details of the package (not visible to 
user). An Ada with dependency indicates that a particular unit requires the resources of the named 
package, such as procedures or data definitions, and provides access to them. The software engineering 
concept of information hiding requires access to these resources be accomplished through the package 
interface, the specification. Thus, if changes are made to a package's body, the effects of the changes are 
isolated to that package. If changes are made to the specification (interface) of the package, the effects of 
the change will spread to all the other program units that with (depend on) that unit. For this reason, 
changes made to a package specification should be coordinated with the Software Configuration Control 
Board. Changes to the body are isolated from the rest of the system, maintaining form-fit-fimction. 

Due to the extensive number of units which may with a particular package, and the resulting complexity 
of the compilation order created by the hierarchy of dependencies and Ada's stringent compilation 
requirements, it is imperative that emphasis be placed on software configuration management when 
using Ada. Changing one unit may proliferate throughout the entire system during recompilation if steps 
are not taken to minimize the impact. Smart recompilation is one method to minimize the impact created 
by the Ada with clause with respect to configuration management. Smart recompilation only compiles 
the units that are strictly necessary. Recompilation of a unit is not required for upward compatible 
changes, changes which do not affect a dependent unit, or the addition of or changes to the comments of 
a unit. Smart recompilation minimizes the impact of the Ada with clause with respect to software 
configuration management since if recompilation is not required then it is probably not appropriate for a 
program library to be preserved as a version. Minor changes for which a new version is not necessary 
should, however, be tracked and incorporated into a new version at a later date when an update is 
required. 

The second attribute of Ada which impacts SCM is the structure of an Ada library. Two goals of the Ada 


16 of 21 


5/13/97 7:00 AM 





Software Configuration Management Technology Report 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/REPORT.HTML 


programming language are the concepts of modularity and reusability. Multiple access for system 
components, both internal to that system and externally by other systems, to Ada source code and 
libraries are provided to accommodate these goals. Multiple access to system components requires 
special consideration with regard to SCM since it is possible that simultaneous changes to a compilation 
unit may occur, or a change to a compilation unit in one library hierarchy may not be seen by a sharing 
library. 

It is possible to minimize the impacts that the two features of Ada, the with clause and the Ada library 
structure, have on SCM by ensuring certain activities are carried out. As a minimum, a CM environment 
for Ada must ensure: 

Version Control [Whitgift 91] 

- The program library exists as a set of identified versions. Due to the stringent compilation 
requirements of Ada, not every compilation of an Ada unit should create a new version of the library. 
The software manager should determine when a program library should be saved as a version based on 
the amount of rework required to dependent units. 

- The derivation of each version of the library is recorded. When a new version of an Ada library is 
necessary, the derivation (compilation script) of each version must be recorded to provide for 
repeatability. 

Access Control 

- Mutually exclusive access must be provided to Ada program units. Due to the high degree of access to 
Ada units allowed in the Ada library structure, write access to individual Ada units must be controlled 
by some type of check-out/check-in mechanism to prevent multiple simultaneous changes [Buckley, 92]. 
For example, files in the system library could be made read only to everyone except the software 
manager or a designated representative. 

- Access to Ada Program Libraries must be controlled. Multiple level Ada program libraries should be 
created with a parent program library that has limited access and contains a stable version of the system 
being developed. Programmers can set up one or more program sublibraries where code may be 
modified, debugged, and tested in the context of the stable versions in the parent library. After the 
compilation units have been successfully changed, they can be moved to the parent library by someone 
with access authority such as the software manager. 

Since it is not practical to discuss all of the details of the Ada programming language or all of the 
ramifications its use has on developing a configuration management approach in this document, it is 
recommended that the reader refer to the referenced literature for more detailed guidance. 

3 Applications 

3.1 Software Configuration Management Adoption 

Software Configuration Management Adoption consists of all the steps involved in introducing a SCM 
tool into an organization, and ensuring that it is routinely used on all projects. SCM adoption is a 
complex process. It affects all levels of the organization; therefore, an in-depth evaluation of the 
organization is required to determine how the processes and people will be affected. SCM concepts are 
not difficult to understand, but are difficult to apply. The successful adoption of SCM technology 
becomes more of a cultural issue than a technical one. 

Many organizations thought purchasing a SCM tool would solve their problems, but soon discovered 
that there was no "silver b^ullet" SCM tool. A tool alone will not solve an organization's SCM problems. 
Results of a study conducted by the Gartner Group determined that the cost of the software tool 
represents only 10 percent of the total cost of implementing a solution. Lost productivity accounts for 50 
percent and the remaining 40 percent of the solution is derived from the cost of manpower [Softool 92]. 


17 of 21 


5/13/97 7:00 AM 




Software Configuration Management Technology Report 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/REPORT.HTML 


Choosing the right tool to satisfy an organization's SCM requirements will in itself fail if other issues are 
not addressed. To ensure an effective SCM solution, an organization must address the complexities that 
it faces when implementing a change. "These complexities include: 

Technical - these issues relate to how the tool operates, how it will be installed to maximize performance 
and how it will be customized; e.g., how the tool will be installed over the company's network in the 
client-server architecture given the different platforms and how can it be used to suit the parallel 
development activities of the various teams. 

Managerial - these issues relate to the necessary planning, monitoring, setting of priorities, making of 
schedules, and resource management; e.g., who will be allocated to fulfill the adoption activities, how 
will the product schedules be affected, and which will cut over to the tool first? 

Process related - these issues relate to the way the company does its business; e.g., what is the current 
flow throughout the company and how do the developers, testers, QA personnel, build managers, 
document writers, etc. work together to ensure this flow? 

Organizational - these issues relate to the infrastructure in the company; e.g., how will the tool affect the 
responsibilities of each department and their intercommunication? 

Cultural - these issues relate to the way people operate and achieve their goals; e.g., what kind of culture 
exists at the company and what is the best way to invoke change in that culture? 

Political - these issues relate to "who is stepping on whose toes"; e.g., how will the organizational 
boundaries change, who will be responsible for what, and how will people be rewarded based on making 
the change? 

People-related - these issues relate to people's comfort level; e.g., how will resistance be managed and 
will anybody lose their job because of this tool? 

Risk-related - these issues relate to unknown information and tricky problems; e.g., how will the effect 
of making concurrent changes, such as to a new operating system to new hardware, as well as 
reengineering the legacy code, impact the new SCM system?" [Dart 94] 

The greatest barrier to overcome when introducing SCM into an organization, is to change how people 
view SCM. People generally react negatively toward SCM. Many software developers perceive the tool 
as intrusive and have little understanding of the long-term effects of not following SCM procedures. In 
many organizations, SCM has a low status, and SCM personnel are not trained or qualified to perform 
SCM duties. The person in charge of SCM needs a broad understanding of software engineering 
principles and the cultural aspects of the organization. Training becomes an important aspect of ensuring 
that SCM principles are adopted by the organization. 

The SCM adoption effort must be treated as a project with realistic goals and a defined schedule. SCM 
adoption is generally carried out in the phases listed below. Key activities may be carried out during 
several phases of the implementation. At all phases, it is important to reinforce management's 
commitment to the adoption effort and to provide training. The phases are as follows: 

Phase 1: Preparation and Planning 

Phase 2: Process Definition 

Phase 3: Tool Evaluation 

Phase 4: Pilot Project Implementation 

Phase 5: Roll-out to Other Projects 


18 of 21 


5/13/97 7:00 AM 



Software Configuration Management Technology Report 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/REPORT.HTML 


Phase 6: Process Improvement Phase 

3.1.1 Phase 1: Preparation and Planning 

This is the stage most organizations fail to perform, thereby resulting in the unsuccessful adoption of 
SCM. The purpose of this phase is to plan for the adoption activities. An SCM Adoption Plan is created 
and members of the SCM adoption team are selected. Typical Adoption Plan information details the 
benefits of SCM, outlines schedule and resources required, establishes roles of the adoption team, and 
contains all the procedures and policies involved in the adoption. 

Next, the requirements are defined and prioritized. Developing a clear understanding of the 
organizations strategic goals is required to evaluate the SCM requirements. The evaluation of SCM 
requirements should not be conducted in a vacuum. All members of the organization who will be 
affected by SCM must be surveyed to identify their SCM requirements and to determine their roles in 
the SCM process. Careful attention must be paid to the training requirements of all people affected by 
the SCM tool. 

In addition, all levels of management must be aware of the benefits of SCM. Many times this involves 
showing financial and scheduling benefits (i.e., increase in programmer productivity by automating 
SCM tasks). With the mandate for organizations to reach Level 3 Process Maturity, it is becoming easier 
to accomplish this task. 

Next, an inventory of present hardware and software platforms is conducted and future hardware and 
software platforms identified. 

The development of an SCM plan is also initiated during this phase. The plan identifies the following: 

SCM activities over the software lifecycle 

SCM organization 

SCM responsibilities and authority 

Resources needed to perform SCM functions 

Interfaces to other organizations 

SCM roles, policies, and procedures 

The change control process 

Level of SCM control 

Library requirements and activities 

Members of the Configuration Control Board. 

The following is a list of technical reports and standards that provide assistance with activities of the 
Preparation and Plarming Phase: 

IEEE STD-1042-1987, Guide to Software Configuration Management 

This guide provides detailed information on issues to consider when planning and implementing SCM. 

IEEE STD-828-1990, Standard for Software Configuration Management Plans 

This standard provides guidance in identifying which SCM activities are to be done, how they are to be 


19 of 21 


5/13/97 7:00 AM 


Software Configuration Management Technology Report 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/REPORT.HTML 


done, who is responsible for doing specific activities, and what resources are required. The standard has 
several examples of SCM Plans that can be tailored to meet the requirements of most organizations. 

SEI's Analysis of a Software Maintenance System: A Case Study 

This case study presents an analysis of an organization's SCM process and provides a mapping of the 
organization's practices to the goals of the SCM. 

3.1.2 Phase 2: Process Definition 

A defined software change process is pertinent to the successful implementation of SCM. Without a 
defined process, the organization will make little progress in the adoption. A variety of methods exist for 
defining the process. STSC's Software Process Technologies Method and Tool Report summarizes 
process methodologies and provides a reference for a detailed study of process methodologies. 

Additional information on process can be obtained from SEI, IEEE, and the STARS project. 

3.1.3 Phase 3: Tool Evaluation 

This phase consists of matching the organization's requirements to SCM tools. Information found in this 
report, along with the references, provides a starting point for those responsible for selecting an SCM 
tool. It may take as long as six months to completely understand the functionality of an SCM tool. 

3.1.4 Phase 4: Pilot Project Implementation 

The purpose of this phase is to determine how well the SCM tool satisfies the organization's 
requirements. A pilot project allows testing of the tool's functionality on a real project with real data. In 
addition, the pilot allows for the prototyping of processes/procedures and provides feedback on how the 
users respond to the tool. 

3.1.5 Phase 5: Roll-out to Other Projects 

This phase involves incrementally migrating the tool into other projects. Training and dealing with 
resistance to change are key activities of this phase. This stage is complete when the SCM is routinely 
used on all projects. 

3.1.6 Phase 6: Process Improvement 

This phase involves evaluating current processes and procedures to determine which areas need to be 
improved. 

More details on SCM adoption can be found in Adopting An Automated Configuration Management 
Solution by Susan Dart. 

4 Case Studies 

Case Studies are an important source of information for the software professional. They provide valuable 
information that details the lessons learned by other organizations. The Case Studies listed below 
describe how two organizations implemented SCM. 

• Analysis of a Software Maintenance System: A Case Study by Howard M. Slomer and Alan M. 

Christie 

Reference: SEI Technical Report CMU/SEI-92-TR-31. 

Description: This report describes how software maintenance is performed within a project supported by 
the U.S. Department of Defense. The software environment, which is supported and maintained by the 
project, is designed to process large amounts of textual information and to retrieve information from 


20 of 21 


5/13/97 7:00 AM 



Software Configuration Management Technology Report 


http://www.stsc.hiIl.af.mil/cm/REPORT.HTML 


d^similar remote systems. It provides a set of UNIX tools that includes: a high-performance distributed 
e itor, a database, a forms generator package, a mail system, application programs, and standard user 
interlace. The project supports a mail system, application programs, and standard user interface The 
project also supports a large collection of library modules (about 1,000) that are used both internally and 
by other software development organizations. The project maintenance system is now quite mature 
supporting approximately 350,000 lines of code and having processed to date approximately 2 000* 
of^e report contrasts the configuration management practices of the project with those 


•Managing Ada Using Rational's Configuration ManagementA/ersion Control and IBM's Software 
Configuration Management Library Manager by Deborah J. Blair 

Reference: ACM 0-89791-529-1/92/0011-0241.50. 

Description: This paper describes one solution for managing Ada software across multiple machines. 

I he soliftion was used on the World Wide Military Command and Control System (WWMCCS) World 
Wide Information System Common User Contract (WWISCUC or WIS) project. A description of the 
process IS presented. The report details how Rational's CM functionality together with 
IBM s Software Configuration Manager Library (SCML) satisfied the projects CM requirements 


Russell K. Port 

Copyright © 1995 [Software Technology Support Center], All rights reserved. 
Revised: March 24,1997. 


21 of21 


5/13/97 7:00 AM 



APPENDIX A 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_a.htiiil 


APPENDIX A 

CMM and STARS Project Overview 

Capability Maturity Model 
(CMM) 


The Capability Maturity Model for software provides software organizations with guidance on how to qain control of 
their processes for developing and maintaining software and how to evolve toward a culture of softwlre 
engineering and managernent excellence. The CMM was designed to guide software organizations in selectinq 
^ determining current process matur^ and identifying the few iSues S ® 

critical to software quality and process improvement. By focusing on a limited set of activities and workinq 

^chieve them, an organiz^ion can steadily improve its organization-wide software process to 
enable continuous and lasting gains in software process capability. ^ 


1 of 4 


5/13/97 7:13 AM 



APPENDIX A 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_a.html 


Level 

Characteristic 

Improvement Focus 

5 

Optimizing 

Continuous 

Improvement 

Still human-intensive process 

Maintain organization at 

optimizing level 

4 

Managed 

Measured 

process 

(quantitative 
basis for 

improvement) 

Defect prevention 

Technology innovation 

Process change management 

3 

Defined 

Process 
defined and 

institutionalized 

(qualitative 
basis for 

improvement) 

Process measurement 

Process analysis 

Quantitative quality plans 

2 

Repeatable 

Process still 

dependent on 

individuals 

(intuitive) 

Organization process focus 

Organization process definition 

Peer reviews 

Training program 

Intergroup coordination 

Software product engineering 

Integrated software management 

1 

Initial 

Crisis-driven 

(ad hoc/chaotic) 

Software project planning 

Software project tracking 

Software subcontract 
management 

Software quality 
assurance 

Software configuration 
management 

Requirements 

management 


The figure above describes the five levels of the CMM, the characteristics at each level, and the key process areas for each 
level (i.e,, improvement focus areas). 

For further information regarding the CMM and its associated products, including training on the CMM and how to perform 
software process assessments and software capability evaluations, contact: 

SEI Customer Relations 

Software Engineering Institute 


2 of 4 


5/13/97 7:13 AM 





APPENDIX A 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_a.html 


Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh PA 15213-3890 
(412) 268-5800 

internet: customer-relations@sei.cmu.edu 


SEI technical reports, such as the "Key Practices of the Capability Maturity Model, Version 1.1," is directly 
available from the Defense Technical Information Center (DTIC), the National Technical Information Service 
(NTIS), and Research Access Inc. (RAI). These documents can be obtained by contacting: 

RAI: Research Access Inc. 

3400 Forbes Avenue 

Suite 302 

Pittsburgh PA 15213 
Telephone: (800) 685-6510 
FAX: (412) 682-6530 

NTIS: National Technical Information Service 
U.S. Department of Commerce 
Springfield VA 22161-2103 
Telephone: (703) 487-4600 
DTIC: Defense Technical Information Center 
ATTN: FDRA Cameron Station 
Alexandria VA 22304-6145 
Telephone: (703) 274-7633 

SEI technical reports are also available via Internet. To use anonymous ftp from a Unix system on Internet, enter 
the following: 

ftp ftp.sei.cmu.edu 

login: anonymous 

password: <your user id or any string> 

cd pub/cmm 

get READ.ME 

get <files> 

quit 

Note: The SEI ftp machine address is ftD://1 28.237.2. 1 79/ 

The file READ.ME contains information on what files are available. Other SEI publications are available in a similar 
manner. 

The SEI WEB server, which will provide information on configuration management, will soon be available from SEI. 


3of4 


5/13/97 7:13 AM 


APPENDIX A „ 

http://www.stsc.hill.af.inil/cm/apx_a.htnil 

The Universal Resource Locator (URL) for the CM material is: http://www.sei.cmu.edu/tech/cmHomePage.html. 




APPENDIX B 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_b.html 


1 of 9 


APPENDIX B 
Products List 


Product Name 

Platform 

Operating System 

Vendor 

ADC 

APOLLO, 
APPLE, VAX, 
HP, SUN, PC 

DOMAIN, 

A/UX, VMS, 
HPUX, SunOS, 
UNIX 

-—- 

Software Maint & 

Develop Sys, Inc. 

508-369-7398 

Adele 

SUN, HP 

SunOS, 

ULTRIX, UNIX 

Verilog, Inc. 

714-252-9096 

AGE 

SUN, HP 

SunOS, 

ULTRIX, UNIX 

Verilog, Inc. 

714-252-9096 

Analyzer 

AS/400 

OS/400 

Aldon Computer Group 

800-825-5858 

Application 

Development 

Workbench 

IBM 

OS/2 

Knowledge Ware, Inc. 

206-646-4850 

ARPUS/transCASE 

APOLLO 

DOMAIN 

Enabling Technologies 
Group, Inc. 

603-882-6400 

Automated 

Systems 

Information 

Management 

IBM Mainframe 

MVS 

Information Retrieval 
Companies, Inc. 

800-IRC-7763 

Bachman/ 

Production DBA 

PC 

OS/2 

Bachman Information 
Systems, Inc. 

617-273-9003 

Bachman/ 

Analyst 

PC 

OS/2 

Bachman Information 
Systems, Inc. 

617-273-9003 

CA-Librarian 

IBM Mainframe 

MVS/370, 
MVS/XA, 
MVS/ESA, VM 

Computer Associates 

IntT, Inc. 

703-709-4767 


5/13/97 7:13 AM 




APPENDIX B 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_b.html 


CA-NETMAN 

IBM Mainframe, 

VAX 

MVS, 

VSE, VMS 

Computer Associates 

Int’l, Inc. 

703-709-4767 

CA-PANAPT 

IBM Mainframe 

MVS/SP, 

MVS/XA, 

MVS/ESA 

Computer Associates 

Int’l, Inc. 

703-709-4767 

CA-PAN/LCM 

PC, HP, SUN 

OS/2, HPUX, 

WINDOWS, 

SunOS 

Computer Associates 

Int’l, Inc. 

703-709-4767 

CA-PAN/MERGE 

IBM Mainframe 

MVS 

Computer Associates 

Int’l, Inc. 

703-709-4767 

CaseMate 

CSC 7000/RTU, 
AT&T 

UNIX 

Concurrent Computer 

Corp. 

800-631-2154 


Product Name 

Platform 

Operating 

System 

Vendor 

CaseWare/CM 

HP, SUN, RS6000, DEC, DG 
Aviion 

HPUX, 

SunOS, AIX, 

ULTRIX, 

DGUX 

Case Ware, Inc. 

714-453-2200 

CaseWare/PT 

HP, SUN, RS6000, DEC, DG 
Aviion 

HPUX, 

SunOS, AIX, 

ULTRIX, 

DGUX 

CaseWare, Inc. 

714-453-2200 

Cat II 

HP, SUN, DEC, RS6000 

HPUX, 

SunOS, 

ULTRIX, 

AIX 

Robbins-Gioia, 

Inc. 

703-548-7006 

CCC/Harvest 

IBM, VAX, PC 

MVS, VMS, 

MS-DOS, 

UNIX 

Softool Corp. 

703-847-6757 

CCC/Manager 

PC 

MS-DOS, 

OS/2, 

WINDOWS 

Softool Corp. 

703-847-6757 


2 of 9 


5/13/97 7:13 AM 







APPENDIX B 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_b.html 


CDD/ 

REPOSITORY 

VAX, DECstation 

VMS, 

ULTRIX 

Digital 

Equipment Corp. 

800-344-4825; 

603-884-5111 

Change Action 

IBM Mainframe 

MVS-GSA, 

MVS-XA 

Action Software 
International 

905-470-7113 

CHANGEMAN 

IBM, PC 

MVS, OS/2, 

WINDOWS 

Optima Software 

916-646-3800 

Change 

Manager for 

DB2 

IBM 

Mainframe 

MVS 

BMC Software, Inc. 

800-841-2031 

ChangeVision 
for Softbench 

SUN, HP 

SunOS, HPUX 

Hewlett-Packard Company 

800-637-7740 

ClearCase 

HP, SUN, 

SGI 

HPUX, 

SOLARIS, 

SunOS, IRIX 

Atria Software, Inc. 

508-650-1193 

CMS 

AS/400 

OS/400 

Aldon Computer Group 

800-825-5858 

CMS/MMS (see 
VAX DEC 

MMS) 

VAX 

VMS 

Digital Equipment Corp. 

800-344-4825; 603-884-5111 

CM Vis ion 

HP, SUN, 
VAX 

HPUX, 

SunOS, VMS, 
UNIX 

EXPERTWARE, Inc. 

510-867-0315 

CMVC 

RS6000, 

SUN, HP 

AIX, SunOS, 
HPUX 

IBM Corp. 

213-621-5605 

Comparex 

PC, 

IBM 

Mainframe 

MS-DOS, 

MVS, VSE 

Sterling Software Sys Software 
Group 

818-718-8877 

CONTROL 

SERVER: 

TANDEM 

CLIENT: PC 

SERVER: 

GUARDIAN 

CLIENT: 

WINDOWS 

Network Concepts, Inc. 

201-285-0202 


3 of 9 


5/13/97 7:13 AM 



APPENDIX B 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.niil/cm/apx_b.html 





BrownStone Solutions, Inc. 

Data Dictionary 

IBM 

MVS 

Solution 

212-370-7160 


Product Name 

Platform 

Operating System 

Vendor 

DDTs 

SUN, RS6000, 
HP, DEC, PC 

SunOS, 

SOLARIS, AIX, 
HPUX, ULTRIX 

QualTrak Corp. 

408-748-9500 

DEC FUSE 

VAX, 

DECstation, 

SUN 

VMS, ULTRIX, 
SunOS 

Digital Equipment Corp. 

800-344-4825; 603-884-5111 

Delta 

PC 

WINDOWS 

Microsoft 

800-421-8006, ext 1436 

DMS Pro 

PC 

MS-DOS, OS/2 

Van der Roest Group, Inc. 

714-542-2201 

DOSSIER 

PROVE 

IBM 

VSE, VM 

SystemWare Laboratories, 

Inc. 

503-297-3567 

Endevor 

IBM 

Mainframe, PC 

MVS, MS-DOS, 

OS/2, 

WINDOWS 

Legent Corp. 

800-726-1637 

Envy/Developer 

SUN, HP, 

PC, RS6000 

OS/2, SunOS, 
MS-DOS, AIX, 
HPUX 

Object Technology IntT, Inc. 

613-820-1200 

Foundation 

IBM 

Mainframe, PC, 
DECstation, HP 

CICS, OS/2, 

Ultrix, 

HPUX 

Andersen Consulting 

Marketing Oprtns 

800-458-8851 

Harmonizer 

Plus 

AS/400 

OS/400 

Aldon Computer Group 

800-825-5858 

Historian Plus 

HP, VAX, 
RS6000, 

SUN, SGI 

HPUX, VMS, 

AIX, SunOS, 

IRIX 

OpCode, Inc. 

512-346-7090 


4 of 9 


5/13/97 7:13 AM 





APPENDIX B 


http;//www.stsc.hill,af.mil/cin/apx_b.html 


Information 

Asset 

Management 

SUN, HP, 

DEC, RS6000, 
SGI 

SunOS, 

SOLARIS, 

HPUX, ULTRIX, 
UNIX 

Atherton Technology 

510-494-8411 ■ 

lEF 

SUN, HP, 
RS6000, IBM 
Mainframe 

SOLARIS, 

HPUX, AIX, 

MVS 

Texas Instruments, Inc. 

913-451-4511 

Info/Master 

VAX 

VMS 

Systems Center, Inc. 

703-264-8018 

ISPW 

IBM 

Mainframe 

MVS/XA, 

MVS/ESA 

BenchMark Technologies, 

Ltd. 

403-269-7499 

Keys 

PC, 

IBM 

Mainframe 

MVS, VSE, 

CICS, 

MS-DOS 

Software Engineering of 
America 

516-328-7000 

Logiscope 

SUN, HP, 
DECstation, 

VAX 

SunOS, HPUX, 

ULTRIX, VMS 

Verilog, Inc. 

714-252-9096 

Maestro II 

IBM 

Mainframe, 

VAX, RS6000, 
HP 

MVS, VMS, 

AIX, 

AIX, ULTRIX 

Softlab, Inc. 

404-668-8811 


Product Name 

Platform 

Operating System 

Vendor 

MAKE 

VAX, IBM, PC 

MVS, 

MS-DOS, 

VMS 

TauMetric Corp. 

800-874-8501 ;619-697-7607 

Merge/IT 

IBM, VAX, 

HP, 

SUN 

MVS, VMS, 

ULTRIX, 

UNIX 

Softool Corp. 

703-847-6757 

Method 

Manager 

PC, IBM 

MVS, VM 

Manager Software Products, 

Inc. 

617-863-5800 


5 of 9 


5/13/97 7:13 AM 



APPENDIX B 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_b.html 


MKS RCS 

PC 

MS-DOS, OS/2, 

WINDOWS, 

UNIX 

Mortice Kern Systems, Inc. 

800-265-4369 

Net/Master 

IBM 

VM 

Systems Center, Inc. 

703-264-8018 

Object CM 

SUN, HP, 
RS6000 

SunOS, HP/UX, 
AIX 

Alsys, Inc. 

619-457-2700 

OpusMake 

PC 

MS-DOS, OS/2, 
UNIX 

OPUS Software, Inc. 

415-664-7901 

PCMS 

VAX, SUN, 

HP 

VMS, SunOS, 
HPUX 

SQL Software, Inc. 

703-760-7895 

PNMS 

IBM 

Mainframe, 

HP, SUN, PC, 
RS6000 

MVS, VM, 
HPUX, SunOS, 
MS-DOS, AIX 

Peregrine Systems, Inc. 

619-431-2400 

PVCS 

IBM, HP, 

SUN, VAX 

MS-DOS, OS/2, 

VMS, SunOS, 
UNIX 

Intersolv, Inc. 

800-547-7827 

Rational Rose 

RS6000, SUN, 
PC 

AIX, SunOS, 
Windows 

Rational 

800-767-3237 

Resolve/IT 

IBM 

Mainframe 

MVS 

Softool Corp. 

703-847-6757 

RTM 

SUN, RS6000, 
HP, VAX 

SunOS, 

SOLARIS, 

AIX, HPUX, 
VMS 

Marconi Systems Technology 

703-263-1260 

Reuse 

Management 

SUN, HP, 

DEC, RS6000, 
SGI 

SunOS, 

SOLARIS, 

HPUX, 

ULTRIX, 

UNIX 

Atherton Technology 

510-494-8411 

Sablime 

AT&T, BULL, 
VAX, 

HP, SUN 

UNIX 

AT&T Software Solutions 

800-462-8146 


6 of 9 


5/13/97 7:14 AM 



APPENDIX B 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_b.html 


SBCS 

AT&T, BULL, 

HP, SUN 

ULTRIX, 

UNIX 

AT&T Bell Laboratories 

800-462-8146 

SCLM 

IBM, SUN, HP 

SunOS, MVS, 

IBM Corp. 


UNIX 

800-333-6705 

SCONS/3000 

HP 3000 

RTE-A, 

MPE-V, 

MPE-XL 

Corporate Computer Systems 

908-946-3800 


Product Name 

Platform 

Operating System 

Vendor 

SMARTsystem 

SUN, RS6000, 
HP 

SunOS, AIX, 
HPUX 

PROCASE Corp. 

408-433-9500 

Softboard 

VAX 

ULTRIX, VMS, 
UNIX 

Atherton Technology 

510-494-8411 

Software Backplane 

VAX, RS6000, 
SUN, 

DECstation 

VMS, AIX, 
SunOS, 

ULTRIX 

Atherton Technology 

510-494-8411 

Sourcebank 

IBM 

Mainframe 

VM/SP, 

VM/XA, 

VM/ESA 

BlueLine Software, 

Inc. 

800-826-0313 

SourceCode Manager 

SUN, AT&T, 

HP, 

RS6000 

SunOS, UNIX, 
HPUX, AIX 

The Software 

Foundry, Inc, 

201-635-5528 

Source Manager 

PC, SUN 

MS-DOS, 

UNIX 

TransWare 

Enterprises, Inc. 

408-227-7700 

Source Recovery 

IBM 

MVS, VM, 

VSE 

The Source Recovery 
Co., Inc. 

404-785-9801 


7 of 9 


5/13/97 7:14 AM 







APPENDIX B 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_b.htnil 


SourceTools 

VAX, PC, IBM 

MVS, 

MS-DOS, 

VMS 

TauMetric Corp. 

800-874-8501; 

619-697-7607 

SPARCworks/TeamWare 

SOLARIS, 

SUN 

SunOS, 

SOLARIS 

SunPro 

800-873-7869 

SuperCase CMS 

VAX 

VMS, ULTRIX, 
UNIX 

Advance Technology 
International 

212-947-0086 

Synchrony 

PC, SUN 

MVS, 

MS-DOS, 

OS/2 

Telepartner 

International 

800-935-3270; 

203-674-2640 

TeamMake 

HP, SUN 

SunOS 

TeamOne Systems, 

Inc. 

800-442-6650 

TeamNet 

HP, SUN 

SunOS, HPUX 

TeamOne Systems, 

Inc. 

800-442-6650 

Team View 

HP, SUN 

SunOS, HPUX 

TeamOne Systems, 

Inc. 

800-442-6650 

Telon 

VAX, SUN, 

IBM, PC 

MVS, VSE, 

VM, OS/2 

Computer Associates 
IntT, Inc. 

703-709-4767 

TLIB 


MS-DOS, OS/2 

Burton Systems 

Software 

PC 

WINDOWS 

919-233-8128 

VadsPro 

SUN, 

DECstation, 

RS6000 

SunOS, 

ULTRIX, AIX 

Verdix Corp. 

703-318-5800 

VAX DEC CMS 

VAX 

VMS 

Digital Equipment 

Corp. 

800-344-4825; 

603-884-5111 


8 of 9 


5/13/97 7:14 AM 

























ADC 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_l .html#A 1 


• ADC 


APPENDIX C 
Product Sheets 


ADC 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Software 
Maintenance & 

Development 



Systems, Inc. 

Version Number: 9.0 


In Business Since: 1981 

Date of Last Release: Mar 93 


Address: 200 Baker Avenue 

Date of First Release: 1983 


Suite 300 

Frequency of Updates: 1-2 times/yr. 


Concord, MA 01742 

Number Sold:2,500 + 


Marketing Contact: Bob 

Sanzo 



Phone Number:508-369-7398 



Fax Number:508-369-8272 



E-mail 

Address:adc@smds.com 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support:508-369-7398 

Single User Price:See below 


Fax - 508-369-8272 E-mail - 
adc@smds.com 

Site License:Negotiable 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:Base price of 


Consulting Support:Yes 

$19,500/8 users 


Customization: Y es 

GSA Price :N/A 


By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price: 17%/year 


By User:Yes 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

386/486 SCO Unix, DOS (client); DEC Alpha OSF/1 and VMS; DEC 
RISC OSF/1; DEC VAX VMS; HP 9000/400, 700, 800 series HPUX; 
IBM RS6000 AIX; MIPS BSD; Motorola 88000 SVR3; Pyramid S 
series; Sequent DYNIX; Silicon Graphics IRIX; Sun SPARC SunOS, 
Solaris; Unisys U6000 3x/6x, 7x/8x SvR4. 







1 of 2 


5/13/97 7:14 AM 




ADC 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_l .html#A 1 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

ADC with the X/Motif GUI requires about 15 MB of disk storage for the 
system executables. Each Model 209 database requires 0.5 MB prior to 
loading of your software. A rule of thumb for database size is that a 
product will require 1.5 to 2 times its size on the file system after 2-3 
years of active development. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

ADC is fully integrated with HP's SoftBench (specialized level), and 
with QualTrack's DDTs problem tracking system. ADC's scripting 
language can be linked with C. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Aide-de-Camp uses a database and change set technology to capture 
changes to your files. ADS includes Model 209, a pre-defined 
configuration process, and a command language that can modify this 
model or be used to define your own process. The files stored in the 
database can be text or binary files. A change set can store the changes 
made to many files (not just a single file deltaX as well as information 
about the change, when, and why; source code dependencies, and 
attributes (tags or labels). The change set is a logical change that 
corresponds with a bug fix or product enhancement. A version in ADC is 
a collection of changes sets. Changes sets make it easy to create parallel 
development paths, to move a change from one path to another, and to 
merge code from two distinct versions. ADC does not have to apply 
deltas in sequence to arrive at a specific version of a file; the change sets 
applied in a given version determine the view of the file. Only users 
defined in the database have access to that database, and further 
restrictions are possible. ADC provides an optional Ada source code 
scanner. Model 209 can be extended to provide 2167A support. 




2 of 2 


5/13/97 7:14 AM 




ALDON ANALYZER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_2.html#Al 


• ALDON ANALYZER 

. ALDON HARMONIZER PLUS 

• ALDON/CMS CHANGE MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE 


ALDON ANALYZER 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Aldon Computer 
Group 




Version Number: 2.0D 


In Business Since: 1980 

Last Released: Apr 1992 


Address: 401 15th Street 

First Released: Jun 1989 


Oakland, CA 94612 

Freq. of Updates: 4-releases 


Marketing Contact: Ruth 
Stephens 

Number Sold: 60 in 1993 


Phone 

Number:800-825-5858 



Fax Number:510-839-2894 



E-mail Address :N/A 

Pricing: 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Single User Price:$3,800 to $5,700 


Customer 

Support:800-825-5858 

Site License:Negotiable 



Multicopy Price :Negotiable 


Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:N/A 


Customization:No 

Maint. Price: 15 percent of 


By Vendor:No 

list price. 


By User:No 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBM AS/400 - IBM OS/400. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 

User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

All Models IBM AS/400. 

V2R2 Operating System. 

15 MB Disk Storage. 







1 of4 


5/13/97 7:14 AM 



ALDON ANALYZER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/ctn/apxc_2.html#Al 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

ADM. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Aldon Analyzer is a quality assurance and testing tool. Analyzer 
identifies which lines of code have been executed during testing, and 
which lines were missed. Analyzer ensures the users that their programs 
are comprehensively tested before moving them to production. 
Aldon/CMS and Harmonizer Plus are complementary products. 




ALDON HARMONIZER PLUS 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Aldon Computer 
Group 




Version Number: 2.2 


In Business Since: 1980 

Last Released: Jan 1994 


Address: 401 15th Street 

First Released: Jun 1990 


Oakland, CA 94612 

Freq. of Updates: Annually 


Marketing Contact: Ruth 
Stephens 

Number Sold: 290 in 1993 


Phone 

Number:800-825-5858 



Fax Number:510-839-2894 



E-mail Address:N/A 

Pricing: 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Single User Price:$4,500-$7,500 


Customer 

Support:800-825-5858 

Site License:Negotiable. 



Multicopy Price:Site discount. 


Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:N/A 


Customization:No 

Maint. Price: 15 percent of 


By Vendor:No 

list price. 


By User:No 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBM AS/400 - IBM OS/400. 




2 of 4 


5/13/97 7:14 AM 







ALDON ANALYZER 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cin/apxc_2.html#Al 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 

User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

All Models IBM AS/400. 

V2R2 Operating System. 

25 MB Disk Storage. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Pathfinder. 

Abstract Probe. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Harmonizer Plus is a source compare and integration tool that identifies 
differences in source code that has been changed, added, or deleted, 
whenever a program is moved from the test library into production. 
Harmonizer Plus also verifies accuracy of output produced as a result of 
changes made to programs. Harmonizer Plus saves 60 to 80 percent of 
the time you spend merging customized versions of upgrades. 
Aldoii/CMS and Analyzer are complementary products. 




ALDON/CMS CHANGE MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Aldon Computer 
Group 




Version Number: 4.1D 


In Business Since: 1980 

Last Released: Jan 1994 


Address: 401 15th Street 

First Released: Mar 1991 


Oakland, CA 94612 

Freq. of Updates: Annually 


Marketing Contaet: Ruth 
Stephens 

Number Sold: 250 in 1993 


Phone 

Number:800-825-5858 



Fax Number:510-839-2894 



E-mail Address:N/A 

Pricing: 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Single User Price:$5,d00-$15,000 


Customer 

Support:800-825-5858 


3 of 4 


5/13/97 7:14 AM 



ALDON ANALYZER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_2.htnil#Al 


Site License:Negotiable || || 

Multicopy Price:Site discount || ||Training Provided:Yes 

1 II Consulting Support:Yes 

GSAPrice:N/A || ||Customization:No 

Maint. Price: 15 percent of || ||By Vendor:No 

list price. || |jByUser:No 

_^UL 


Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBM AS/400 - IBM OS/400. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 

User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

All Models IBM as/400. 

V2R2 Operating System. 

100 MB Disk Storage and user files. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

COGNOS - Powerhouse. 

LANSA. 

ASSET and Synon - future release. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Aldon/CMS Change Management System is an integrated system 
providing management control of the entire software development and 
maintenance process, including project tracking, object distribution, 
help desk information, and text data manager. The key feature is parallel 
development with emergency checkout available. Harmonizer Plus and 
Analyzer are add-on programming tools. 




4 of 4 


5/13/97 7:14 AM 



ALDON ANALYZER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_2.html#A2 


• ALDON ANALYZER 

• ALDON HARMONIZER PLUS 

• ALDON/CMS CHANGE MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE 

AT.DON ANAf.YZF.R 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Aldon Computer 
Group 




Version Number: 2.0D 


In Business Since: 1980 

Last Released: Apr 1992 


Address: 401 15th Street 

First Released: Jun 1989 


Oakland, CA 94612 

Freq. of Updates: 4-releases 


Marketing Contact: Ruth 
Stephens 

Number Sold: 60 in 1993 


Phone 

Number:800-825-5858 



Fax Number:510-839-2894 



E-mail Address:N/A 

Pricing: 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Single User Price:$3,8()0 to $5,700 


Customer 

Support:800-825-5858 

Site License:Negotiable 



Multicopy Price:Negotiable 


Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:N/A 


Customization:No 

Maint. Price: 15 percent of 


By Vendor:No 

list price. 


By User:No 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBM AS/400 - IBM OS/400. 




Minimum/Recommended Conflguration: (RAM size, Disk size, 

User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

All Models IBM AS/400. 

V2R2 Operating System. 

15 MB Disk Storage. 







1 of4 


5/13/97 7:14 AM 






ALDON ANALYZER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.tnil/cm/apxc_2.html#A2 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

ADM. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Aldon Analyzer is a quality assurance and testing tool. Analyzer 
identifies which lines of code have been executed during testing, and 
which lines were missed. Analyzer ensures the users that their programs 
are comprehensively tested before moving them to production. 
Aldon/CMS and Harmonizer Plus are complementary products. 




ALDON HARMONIZER PLUS 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Aldon Computer 
Group 




Version Number: 2.2 


In Business Since: 1980 

Last Released: Jan 1994 


Address: 401 15th Street 

First Released: Jun 1990 


Oakland, CA 94612 

Freq. of Updates: Annually 


Marketing Contact: Ruth 
Stephens 

Number Sold: 290 in 1993 


Phone 

Number:800-825-5858 



Fax Number:510-839-2894 



E-mail Address :N/A 

Pricing: 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Single User Price:$4,500-$7,500 


Customer 

Support:800-825-5858 

Site License:Negotiable. 



Multicopy Price:Site discount. 


Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:N/A 


Customization:No 

Maint. Price: 15 percent of 


By Vendor:No 

list price. 


By User:No 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBM AS/400 - IBM OS/400. 




2 of 4 


5/13/97 7:14 AM 




ALDON ANALYZER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_2.htinl#A2 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 

User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

All Models IBM AS/400. 

V2R2 Operating System. 

25 MB Disk Storage. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Pathfinder. 

Abstract Probe. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Harmonizer Plus is a source compare and integration tool that identifies 
differences in source code that has been changed, added, or deleted, 
whenever a program is moved from the test library into production. 
Harmonizer Plus also verifies accuracy of output produced as a result of 
changes made to programs. Harmonizer Plus saves 60 to 80 percent of 
the time you spend merging customized versions of upgrades. 
Aldori/CMS and Analyzer are complementary products. 




ALDON/CMS CHANGE MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Aldon Computer 
Group 




Version Number: 4. ID 


In Business Since: 1980 

Last Released: Jan 1994 


Address: 401 15th Street 

First Released: Mar 1991 


Oakland, CA 94612 

Freq. of Updates: Annually 


Marketing Contact: Ruth 
Stephens 

Number Sold: 250 in 1993 


Phone 

Number:800-825-5858 



Fax Number:510-839-2894 



E-mail Address:N/A 

Pricing: 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Single User F’rice:$5,000-$ 15,000 


Customer 

Support:800-825-5858 


3of4 


5/13/97 7:14 AM 








ALDON ANALYZER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_2.html#A2 


Site LicenserNegotiable || || 

Multicopy Price:Site discount || [Training Provided:Yes 

II II Consulting Support:Yes 

GSAPrice:N/A || ||Custoniization:No 

Maint. Price: 15 percent of |j iBy Vendor:No 

list pnce. 11 [By User:No 

II II 

PIatforin(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBM AS/400 - IBM OS/400. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 

User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

All Models IBM as/400. 

V2R2 Operating System. 

100 MB Disk Storage and user files. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

COGNOS - Powerhouse. 

LANSA. 

ASSET and Synon - future release. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Aldon/CMS Change Management System is an integrated system 
providing management control of the entire software development and 
maintenance process, including project tracking, object distribution, 
help desk information, and text data manager. The key feature is parallel 
development with emergency checkout available. Harmonizer Plus and 
Analyzer are add-on programming tools. 




4 of 4 


5/13/97 7:14 AM 




ALDON ANALYZER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cin/apxc_2.html#A3 


• ALDON ANALYZER 

• ALDON HARMONIZER PLUS 

• ALDON/CMS CHANGE MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE 

AT.DON ANAT.YZF.R 


Product information: 


Vendor: Aldon Computer 
Group 




Version Number: 2.0D 


In Business Since: 1980 

Last Released: Apr 1992 


Address: 401 15th Street 

First Released: Jun 1989 


Oakland, CA 94612 

Freq. of Updates: 4-releases 


Marketing Contact: Ruth 
Stephens 

Number Sold: 60 in 1993 


Phone 

Number:800-825-5858 



Fax Number:510-839-2894 



E-mail Address :N/A 

Pricing; 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Single User Price:$3,800 to $5,700 


Customer 

Support:800-825-5858 

Site License:Negotiable 



Multicopy Price:Negotiable 


Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:N/A 


Customization:No 

Maint. Price: 15 percent of 


By Vendor:No 

list price. 


By User:No 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBM AS/400 - IBM OS/400. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

All Models IBM AS/400. 

V2R2 Operating System. 

15 MB Disk Storage. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 




1 of 4 


5/13/97 7:15 AM 





ALDON ANALYZER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_2.html#A3 


tools, etc.) 

ADM. 







Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Aldon Analyzer is a quality assurance and testing tool. Analyzer 
identifies which lines of code have been executed during testing, and 
which lines were missed. Analyzer ensures the users that their programs 
are comprehensively tested before moving them to production. 
Aldon/CMS and Harmonizer Plus are complementary products. 




ALDON HARMONIZER PLUS 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Aldon Computer 
Group 




Version Number: 2.2 


In Business Since: 1980 

Last Released: Jan 1994 


Address: 401 15th Street 

First Released: Jun 1990 


Oakland, CA 94612 

Freq. of Updates: Annually 


Marketing Contact: Ruth 
Stephens 

Number Sold: 290 in 1993 


Phone 

Number:800-825-5858 



Fax Numbers 10-839-2894 



E-mail Address :N/A 

Pricing: 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Single User Price:$4,500-$7,500 


Customer 

Support:800-825-5858 

Site License:Negotiable. 



Multicopy Price:Site discount. 


Training Provided: Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:N/A 


Customization:No 

Maint. Price: 15 percent of 


By Vendor:No 

list price. 


By User:No 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBM AS/400 - IBM OS/400. 




2 of 4 


5/13/97 7:15 AM 





ALDON ANALYZER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.niil/cm/apxc_2.html#A3 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 

User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

All Models IBM AS/400. 

V2R2 Operating System. 

25 MB Disk Storage. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Pathfinder. 

Abstract Probe. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Harmonizer Plus is a source compare and integration tool that identifies 
differences in source code that has been changed, added, or deleted, 
whenever a program is moved from the test library into production. 
Harmonizer Plus also verifies accuracy of output produced as a result of 
changes made to programs. Harmonizer Plus saves 60 to 80 percent of 
the time you spend merging customized versions of upgrades. 
Aldori/CMS and Analyzer are complementary products. 




ALDON/CMS CHANGE MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Aldon Computer 
Group 




Version Number: 4.1D 


In Business Since: 1980 

Last Released: Jan 1994 


Address: 401 15th Street 

First Released: Mar 1991 


Oakland, CA 94612 

Freq. of Updates: Annually 


Marketing Contact: Ruth 
Stephens 

Number Sold: 250 in 1993 


Phone 

Number:800-825-5858 



Fax Number:510-839-2894 



E-mail Address:N/A 

Pricing: 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Single User Price:$5,000-$ 15,000 


Customer 

Support:800-825-5858 


3 of 4 


5/13/97 7:15 AM 





ALDON ANALYZER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_2.html#A3 


Site LicenseiNegotiable || | 

Multicopy Price:Site discount || ||Training Provided: Yes 

1 II Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:N/A || ||Customization:No 

Maint. Price: 15 percent of || ||By Vendor:No 

list price. II j|ByUser:No 

II II 

Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBM AS/400 - IBM OS/400. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 

User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

All Models IBM as/400. 

V2R2 Operating System. 

100 MB Disk Storage and user files. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

COGNOS - Powerhouse. 

LANSA. 

ASSET and Synon - future release. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Aldon/CMS Change Management System is an integrated system 
providing management control of the entire software development and 
maintenance process, including project tracking, object distribution, 
help desk information, and text data manager. The key feature is parallel 
development with emergency checkout available. Harmonizer Plus and 
Analyzer are add-on programming tools. 




4 of 4 


5/13/97 7:15 AM 



ARPUS/transcase 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.niil/cm/apxc_3 .html#A 1 


• ARPU S/transcase 

• BACHMAN/ANALYST 

ARPUS/transcase 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Enabling 

Technologies 



Group, Inc. 

Version Number: 1.1 


In Business Since: 1990 

Last Released: Sep 1993 


Address: Five Spruce Park 

First Released: Mar 1993 


Amherst, NH 03031 

Freq. of Updates: Once 


Marketing Contact: Robert H. 
Wilson 

Number Sold: Reference sites available upon request 


Phone Number:603-882-6400 



FaxNumber:603 673-0363 



E-mail Address: 

75736.2323(gcompuserve.com 

Pricing: 


Bulletin Board System: No 

Single User Price:Contact vendor. 


Customer Support:Yes 

Site License:Contact vendor. 



Multicopy Price: 


Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price: 


Customization: Y es 

Maint. Price:Contact vendor. 


By Vendor:Yes 



By User:Yes 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Apollo Domain/OS system running version system release 10.3.5 or 

higher. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Any Apollo supporting DSEE. 







1 of 3 


5/13/97 7:15 AM 






ARPUS/transcase 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cni/apxc_3 .html#A 1 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 

Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

TRANSCASE is a member of the ARPUS Software Product Family 
(TransCase, transScript, transSource), a set of tools and utilities that 
enhance productivity of individuals and work groups using 
workstations and personal computers. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

TRANSCASE is a tool that extracts DSEE elements, along with 
important change history, version number, and configuration 
information and exports them in SCCS format for easy import into 
many Unix case systems. 




BACHMAN/ANALYST 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Bachman 

Information 



Systems, Incorporated 

Version Number: 4.15 


In Business Since: 1983 

Last Released: Jun 1993 


Address: 8 New England 

First Released: Jan 1991 


Executive Park 

Freq. of Updates: Bi-annual 


Burlington, MA 01803 

Number Sold: 4,000 


Marketing Contact:Dave 
MacKenzie 



Phone Number:617-273-9003 



Fax Number:617-229-9904 

Pricing: 


E-mail Address:N/A 

Single User Price:$10,000 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Site License;N/A 


Customer 

Support:617-273-9003 

Multicopy Price:Volume discount. 





Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:$6,000 


Customization: Y es 

Maint. Price:$1,500 


By Vendor:No 



By User:No 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

OS/2 VI.3 or higher. 




2 of 3 


5/13/97 7:15 AM 






ARPUS/transcase 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.niil/cm/apxc_3 .html#Al 





Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Intel 80386 or 80486 based PC. 

12 MB memory. 

2 button mouse. 

115 MB hard drive. 

VGA color or monochrome monitor. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

The Bachman/Analyst is able to import information from both 
KnowledgeWare's ADW and Intersolv's Excelerator. The Analyst can 
also work with the leading repositories and data dictionaries such as 
Brownstone, Deltech, DOCaid, and Infospan. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

The Bachman/Analyst is a comprehensive, graphical, and integrated 
environment for creating enterprise models. The Bachman/Analyst 
provides a comprehensive picture of the business through an enterprise 
model that unifies and synchronizes the data, process, and logic models. 
These models can then be forward-engineered to a wide variety of 
databases and code generators. 




3 of 3 


5/13/97 7:15 AM 



ARPUS/transcase 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_3.html#A2 


• ARPUS/transcase 

• BACHMAN/ANALYST 


ARPUS/transcase 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Enabling 
Technologies 



Group, Inc. 

Version Number: 1.1 


In Business Since: 1990 

Last Released: Sep 1993 


Address: Five Spruce Park 

First Released: Mar 1993 


Amherst, NH 03031 

hreq. of Updates: Once 


Marketing Contact:Robert H. 

Wilson 

Number Sold: Reference sites available upon request 


Phone Number:603-882-6400 



Fax Number:603 673-0363 



E-mail Address: 

75736.2323@compuserve.com 

Pricing: 


Bulletin Board System: No 

Single User Price:Contact vendor. 

II Customer Support: Yes ' 

Site License:Contact vendor. 

nn - 

Multicopy Price: 

||Training Provided: Yes 


II Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price: 

*__'.t,, 1 ■ -X 

II Customization: Yes 


Maint. Price:Contact vendor. 11 IfBy Vendor:Yes 


|By UsenYes 


Platform(s)/Operating System(s): ~ ~ 

Apollo Domain/OS system running version system release 10.3.5 or 

higher. 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Any Apollo supporting DSEE. 


1 of3 


5/13/97 7:16 AM 




ARPUS/transcase 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_3.html#A2 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 

Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

TRANS CASE is a member of the ARPUS Software Product Family 
(TransCase, transScript, transSource), a set of tools and utilities that 
enhance productivity of individuals and work groups using 
workstations and personal computers. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

TRANSCASE is a tool that extracts DSEE elements, along with 
important change history, version number, and configuration 
information and exports them in SCCS format for easy import into 
many Unix case systems. 




BACHMAN/ANALYST 


Product information: 


Vendor: Bachman 

Information 



Systems, Incorporated 

Version Number: 4.15 


In Business Since: 1983 

Last Released: Jim 1993 


Address: 8 New England 

First Released: Jan 1991 


Executive Park 

Freq. of Updates: Bi-annual 


Burlington, MA 01803 

Number Sold: 4,000 


Marketing Contact:Dave 

MacKenzie 



Phone Number:617-273-9003 



Fax Number:617-229-9904 

Pricing: 


E-mail Address:N/A 

Single User Price:$10,000 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Site License:N/A 


Customer 

Support:617-273-9003 

Multicopy Price:Volume discount. 





Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:$6,000 


Customization: Y es 

Maint. Price:$ 1,500 


By Vendor:No 



By User:No 


Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

OS/2 VI.3 or higher. 




2 of 3 


5/13/97 7:16 AM 





ARPUS/transcase 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cni/apxc_3.html#A2 





Minimuin/Recominended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Intel 80386 or 80486 based PC. 

12 MB memory. 

2 button mouse. 

115 MB hard drive. 

VGA color or monochrome monitor. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

The Bachman/Analyst is able to import information from both 
KnowledgeWare's ADW and Intersolv's Excelerator. The Analyst can 
also work with the leading repositories and data dictionaries such as 
Brownstone, Deltech, DOCaid, and Infospan. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

The Bachman/Analyst is a comprehensive, graphical, and integrated 
environment for creating enterprise models. The Bachman/Analyst 
provides a comprehensive picture of the business through an enterprise 
model that unifies and synchronizes the data, process, and logic models. 
These models can then be forward-engineered to a wide variety of 
databases and code generators. 




3 of 3 


5/13/97 7:16 AM 



BACHMAN/DBA 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cin/apxc_4.html#Al 


• BACHMAN/DBA 

• BACHMAN/PRODUCTION DBA 

BACHMAN/DRA 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Bachman 

Information 



Systems, Incorporated 

Version Number: 4.15 


In Business Since: 1983 

Last Released: Jun 1993 


Address: 8 New England 

First Released: Jan 1989 


Executive Park 

Freq. of Updates: Bi-armual 


Burlington, MA 01803 

Number Sold: 1,000 


Marketing Contact:Dave 
MacKenzie 



Phone Number:617-273-9003 



Fax Number:617-229-9904 

Pricing: 


E-mail Address :N/A 

Single User Price:$ 15,000 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Site License :N/A 


Customer 

Support:617-273-9003 

Multicopy Price:Volume discount. 





Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:$9,000 


Customization:No 

Maint. Price:$2,250 


By Vendor:No 



By User:No 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

OS/2 VI.3 or higher. 






Minimum/Recommended Conflguration: (RAM size, Disk size, 

User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Intel 80386 or 80486 based PC. 

12 MB memory. 

2 button mouse. 

115 MB hard drive. 

VGA color or monochrome monitor. 




1 of 3 


5/13/97 7:16 AM 




BACHMAN/DBA 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_4.html#Al 





Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Works with BMC's Change Manager and links to a variety of RDBM's, 
i.e., DB2, SQL/Server, Oracle, RDB, AD ABASE, DB2/2, Ingres, and 

Informix. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

The Bachman/DBA tool takes information from the models developed 
in the Bachman/Analyst. The models are forward-engineered into 
relational designs where the built-in expert systems ensure a quality 
design. This is then forwarded to the appropriate database of choice. 




BACHMAN/PRODUCTION DBA 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Bachman Information 



Systems, Incorporated 

Version Number: 4.15 


In Business Since: 1983 

Last Released: 


Address: 8 New England 

First Released: 


Executive Park 

Freq. of Updates: Bi-annual 


Burlington, MA 01803 

Number Sold: 50 


Marketing Contact:Dave 
MacKenzie 



Phone Number:617-273-9003 



Fax Number:617-229-9904 

Pricing: 


E-mail Address :N/A 

Single User Price:$20,000 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Site License: 


Customer Support:617-273-9003 

Multicopy Price:Sliding scale. 





Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:$12,000 


Customization: Y es 

Maint. Price:$3,000 


By Vendor:Yes 

__ II 1 

By User:No 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

OS/2 VI.3 or higher. 







2 of 3 


5/13/97 7:16 AM 







BACHMAN/DBA 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.niil/cm/apxc_4.html#Al 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Intel 80386 or 80486 based PC. 

12 MB memory. 

2 button mouse. 

115 MB hard drive. 

VGA color or monochrome monitor. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 

Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Works in conjunction with Bachman's CASE tool, the 
Bachman/Analyst, and BMC's Change Manager, as well as IBM's 

DB2 catalog. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

The Bachman/Production DBA is a workstation-based tool that, when 
used in conjunction with BMC's Change Manager, enables you to 
manage change throughout the entire DB2 application development 

lifecycle. 




3 of 3 


5/13/97 7:16 AM 




BACHMAN/DBA 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_4.html#A2 


• BACHMAN/DBA 

• BACHMAN/PRODUCTION DBA 


BACHMAN/DR A 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Bachman 

Information 



Systems, Incorporated 

Version Number: 4.15 


In Business Since: 1983 

L^st Released: Jun 1993 


Address: 8 New England 

First Released: Jan 1989 


Executive Park 

Freq. of Updates: Bi-annual 


Burlington, MA 01803 

Number Sold: 1,000 


Marketing Contact:Dave 
MacKenzie 



Phone Number:617-273-9003 



Fax Number:617-229-9904 

Pricing: 


E-mail Address :N/A 

Single User Price:$15,000 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Site License:N/A 


Customer 

Support:617-273-9003 

Multicopy Price:Volume discount. 





Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price: $9,000 


Customization:No 

Maint. Price:$2,250 


By Vendor:No 



By User:No 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

OS/2 VI.3 or higher. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 

User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Intel 80386 or 80486 based PC. 

12 MB memory. 

2 button mouse. 

115 MB hard drive. 

VGA color or monochrome monitor. 




1 of 3 


5/13/97 7:17 AM 







BACHMAN/DBA 


http://www.stsc.hiIl.af.niil/cni/apxc_4.html#A2 





Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Works with BMC's Change Manager and links to a variety of RDBM's, 
i.e., DB2, SQL/Server, Oracle, RDB, AD ABASE, DB2/2, Ingres, and 

Informix. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

The Bachman/DBA tool takes information from the models developed 
in the Bachman/Analyst. The models are forward-engineered into 
relational designs where the built-in expert systems ensure a quality 
design. This is then forwarded to the appropriate database of choice. 




BACHMAN/PRODUCTION DBA 


Product information: 


Vendor: Bachman Information 



Systems, Incorporated 

Version Number: 4.15 


In Business Since: 1983 

Last Released: 


Address: 8 New England 

First Released: 


Executive Park 

Freq. of Updates: Bi-annual 


Burlington, MA 01803 

Number Sold: 50 


Marketing Contact:Dave 

MacKenzie 



Phone Number:617-273-9003 



Fax Number:617-229-9904 

Pricing: 


E-mail Address:N/A 

Single User Price:$20,000 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Site License: 


Customer Support:617-273-9003 

Multicopy Price:Sliding scale. 





Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:$ 12,000 


Customization: Yes 

Maint. Price:$3,000 


By Vendor:Yes 



By User:No 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

OS/2 VI.3 or higher. 







2 of 3 


5/13/97 7:17 AM 




BACHMAN/DBA 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_4.html#A2 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Intel 80386 or 80486 based PC. 

12 MB memory. 

2 button mouse. 

115 MB hard drive. 


VGA color or monochrome monitor. 


?'■.. ^ — ■ ....—.— . . .... 

1 - 1 

.1 

Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Works in conjunction with Bachman's CASE tool, the 
Bachman/Analyst, and BMC's Change Manager, as well as IBM's 

DB2 catalog. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

The Bachman/Production DBA is a workstation-based tool that, when 
used in conjunction with BMC's Change Manager, enables you to 
manage change throughout the entire DB2 application development 

lifecycle. 




3 


IK 


5/13/97 7:17 AM 























CA-LIBRARIAN 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.niil/cm/apxc_5.html#Al 


• CA-LIBRARIAN 

• CA-PAN/LCM 

CA-LIBRARTAN 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Computer 

Associates International 




Version Number: R3.9 


In Business Since: 1976 

Last Released: 


Address: 12120 Sunset Hills 
Road 

First Released: 1969 


Reston, VA 22090 

Freq. of Updates: Every 1-2 years 


Marketing Contact: Stuart 
Fleagle 

Number Sold: N/A 


Phone Number:703-709-4767 



Fax Number:703-709-4820 



E-mail Address :N/A 

Pricing: 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Single CPU Price:$l 1,000 to 


Customer 

Support:908-874-9610 

$150,000 



Site Lieense:N/A 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:$7,200-$98,000 


Consulting Support: Yes 



Customization: Yes 

GSA Price:Single CPU 


By Vendor:Yes 

price. 


By UsenYes 

Maint. Price:$2,200-$37,000 





Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

CA-Librarian runs on any IBM system/370, 30XX, 43XX, or true 
compatible processor running under a supported release of the following 
operating systems: MVS/370, MVS/XA, MVS/ESA, VM. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

DASD: Approximately 800 tracks minimum is required for 
CA-Librarian. Additional space is required as needed to accommodate 
user programs and master files. 

User Interface: Librarian can be accessed on-line via 3270 terminal or 
executed through the batch facility. 




lof3 


5/13/97 7:17 AM 



CA-LIBRARIAN 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_5.html#Al 





Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, ete.) 

CA-ACF2 CA-Topsecret 

IBM/RACF CA-ROSCOE 

CA-Vollie IBM/TSO 

CA-Datadictionary CA-7 

CA-Earl CA-Scheduler 

CA-Netman CA-PAN/LCM (PC) 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

The CA-Librarian is a complete and flexible storage and archiving 
facility. Program source statements, JCL, procedures, or any 80-byte 

record can be stored. 

The archiving facility allows members to be recreated to any prior 
version or date and time. CA-Librarian has its own compression facility 
to effectively use disk space. In addition, CA-Librarian has a comparator 
facility to compare two members and produce an update check if 
needed. CA-Librarian has a complete change management facility to 
track program changes from test through production environments. It 
allows for complete control of changes with change approval or 
rejection at any point in its process. 




CA-PAN/LCM 


2 of 3 


5/13/97 7:17 AM 



CA-LIBRARIAN 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_5.html#Al 


Product Information: 

II ||Vendor: Computer Associates intemationaijj 

IIJI 

Version Number: R3.3 

II ||In Business Since: 1976 

Last Released: 1991 

||]|Address: 12120 Sunset Hills Road 

First Released: 1989 

II IIReston, VA 22090 

Freq. of Updates: 6 Mo. - 

1 Yr.|| ||Marketing Contact: Stuart Fleagle 

Number Sold: N/A 

II ]|Phone Number:703-709-4767 

II ||FaxNumber:703-709-4820 

IIIIE-mail Address: 

II ||Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 

II ||Customer Support:708 505-6782 

Single User Price:$325 

Jill 

Site License:$48,750 - $97,500|| ||Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:$325 

II II Consulting Support: Yes 

II ||Customization:Yes 

GSA Price:$325 

II ||By Vendor:Yes 


3 of 3 


5/13/97 7:17 AM 






CA-LIBRARIAN 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_5.html#A2 


• CA-LIBRARIAN 

• CA-PAN/LCM 


CA-LTBRARTAN 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Computer 

Associates International 




Version Number: R3.9 


In Business Since: 1976 

Last Released: 


Address: 12120 Sunset Hills 
Road 

First Released: 1969 


Reston, VA 22090 

Freq. of Updates: Every 1-2 years 


Marketing Contact: Stuart 
Fleagle 

Number Sold: N/A 


Phone Number:703-709-4767 



Fax Number:703-709-4820 



E-mail Address :N/A 

Pricing: 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Single CPU Price:$l 1,000 to 


Customer 

Support:908-874-9610 

$150,000 



Site License :N/A 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:$7,200-$98,000 


Consulting Support:Yes 



Customization: Y es 

GSA Price:Single CPU 


By Vendor:Yes 

price. 


By User:Yes 

Maint. Price:$2,200-$37,000 





Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

CA-Librarian runs on any IBM system/370, 30XX, 43XX, or true 
compatible processor running under a supported release of the following 
operating systems: MVS/370, MVS/XA, MVS/ESA, VM. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

DASD: Approximately 800 tracks minimum is required for 
CA-Librarian. Additional space is required as needed to accommodate 
user programs and master files. 

User Interface: Librarian can be accessed on-line via 3270 terminal or 
executed through the batch facility. 




1 of 3 


5/13/97 7:17 AM 





CA-LIBRARIAN 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_5.html#A2 





Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

CA-ACF2 CA-Topsecret 

IBM/RACF CA-ROSCOE 

CA-Vollie IBM/TSO 

CA-Datadictionary CA-7 

CA-Earl CA-Scheduler 

CA-Netman CA-PAN/LCM (PC) 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

The CA-Librarian is a complete and flexible storage and archiving 
facility. Program source statements, JCL, procedures, or any 80-byte 

record can be stored. 

The archiving facility allows members to be recreated to any prior 
version or date and time. CA-Librarian has its own compression facility 
to effectively use disk space. In addition, CA-Librarian has a comparator 
facility to compare two members and produce an update check if 
needed. CA-Librarian has a complete change management facility to 
track program changes from test through production environments. It 
allows for complete control of changes with change approval or 
rejection at any point in its process. 




CA-PAN/LCM 


2 of 3 


5/13/97 7:17 AM 







CA-LIBRARIAN 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.niil/cni/apxc_5.htnil#A2 


Product Information: 

II I Vendor: Computer Associates Internationaljl 

1 . ^ni 1 

Version Number: R3.3 

11 In Business Since: 1976 

Last Released: 1991 

11 1 Address: 12120 Sunset Hills Road 

First Released: 1989 

II ||Reston, VA 22090 

Freq. of Updates: 6 Mo. - 

1 Yr.|| i|Marketing Contact: Stuart Fleagle | 

Number Sold: N/A 

II ||Fhone Number:703-709-4767 

1 II ||baxNumber:703-709-4820 j 

II ||E-mail Address: | 

iP||l3ulletm Board System: 

pricing: 

II ||Customer Support:708 505-6782 

Single User Price:$325 

luni 

bite License.$48,750 - $9/5 DUu|| |[1 raining Provided:Yes 

jJVlulticopy Price:$325 

r ' - 

II II Consulting Support:Yes 

II II Customization: Yes 

USA Frice:$325 

in|By Vendor:Yes 


3 of 3 


5/13/97 7; 17 AM 



CA-PAN/MERGE 


http://www.stsc.hiIl.af.mi1/cm/apxc_13.html#Al 


• CA-PAN/MERGR 

• CA-PANAPT 

CA-PAN/MF.RGF 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Computer 
Associates International 




Version Number: Rl.O 


In Business Since: 1976 

Last Released: 1990 


Address: 12120 Sunset Hills 
Road 

First Released: 1990 


Reston, VA 22090 

Freq. of Updates: Every 1-2 years 


Marketing Contact: Stuart 
Fleagle 

Number Sold: N/A 


Phone 

Number:703-709-4767 



Fax Number:703-709-4820 



E-mail Address: 

Pricing: 


Bulletin Board System: 

Single CPU Price:$4,915-$20,000 


Customer Support:708 
505-6784 

Site License:N/A 



Multicopy Price:$3,200-$13,000 

I 

Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:Single CPU 

□ 

Customization: Yes 

price. 

□ 

By Vendor: Yes 

Maint. Price:$l,200-$5,000 

n 

By User:Yes 

_O ✓ X -----:- II-j 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 


IBM Mainfrtime/MVS. 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

TSO/ISPF2.1 or higher. 


1 of4 


5/13/97 7:18 AM 




CA-PAN/MERGE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_l 3 .html#A 1 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

CA-PAN/APT 

CA-PANVALET 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CA-PAN/MERGE is a development tool that allows users to easily 
combine separate sets of program changes into one program. Concurrent 
development and maintenance of vendor software often results in separate 
sets of changes to the same programs. Manual Integration of these 
changes can be tedious, error-prone, and time consuming. 
CA-PAN/MERGE automatically identifies all change overlays, and 
conflicting changes are clearly marked. Problems can be resolved on-line 
or deferred until later. Detail reports show the changes made to each input 
file, while the summary reports provide the total number of inserted, 
deleted and moved records, and total number of conflicts. 

Integration between CA-PANVALET and CA-PAN/MERGE currently 
enables the merging of any combination of CA-PANVALET, PDS, or 
sequential files. Multiple file types can easily be compared and combined 
to detect potential conflicts, increasing programmer productivity and 
application quality and reliability. 




CA-PANAPT 


Product information: 


Vendor: Computer 
Associates International 




Version Number: R.1.3 


In Business Since: 1976 

Last Released: 1993 


Address: 12120 Sunset Hills 
Road 

First Released: 1988 


Reston, VA 22090 

Freq. of Updates: 1 to 2 years 


Marketing Contact: Stuart 
Fleagle 

Number Sold: N/A 


Phone 

Number:703-709-4767 



Fax Number:703-709-4820 



E-mail Address: 

Pricing: 


Bulletin Board System: 

Single CPU Price:$14,000-$60,000 


Customer Support:708 
505-6783 

Site License:N/A 



Multicopy Price:$9,150-$41,000 


Training Provided:Yes 


2 of 4 


5/13/97 7:18 AM 




CA-PAN/MERGE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_l 3 .html#A 1 


II ||Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price.-Same as single jj jj Customization:Yes 

CPU Price. jj ||By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price:$3,400-$15,000 || ||By User:Yes 

II 1 

Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBM Mainframes - MVS/SP 1.3.5 or higher. 

MVS/XA 2.1.3 or higher, MVS/ESA 3.1 or higher. 




Minimum/Recommended Conflguration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

TSO/ISPF2.1 or higher. 

IBM VS/COBOL 2.4 compiler run-time library or IBM COBOL II 

run-time library. 

PANAPT VSAM Control Files defined with share options (4.3). 

DASD Req: 24 CYL - 3380 space. 

Max Batch Region: 4096K. 

User Interface: TSO/ISPF. 

TSO address space: 2048K. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

DBMS environments: DB2, IMS, VSAM, Model 204, IDMS/R, 
ADABAS/NATURAL, FOCUS, 

MANTIS, ORACLE; GENER/OL, EASYTRIEVE PLUS, CSP, MARK 
IV, RAMIS, CA-PANVALET, CA-LIBRARIAN, OS/PDS, 
CA-PAN/MERGE, CA-1 TMS, 

CA-7, TSO/ISPF, IMS/DC, CICS, CA-TELON, CA-PAN/LCM 
Lifecycle Manager, 

and CA-NETMAN. 







3 of 4 


5/13/97 7:18 AM 





CA-PAN/MERGE 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_13.html#Al 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CA-PANAPT is an automated production turnover system that controls, 
moves, tracks, and provides inventory of all entities and levels of 
approval to complete each step in the turnover process. CA-PANAPT 
eliminates paperwork by supporting on-line change requests, change 
authorizations, and status information. Emergency fixes and production 
backouts are automated, reducing the possibility of accidental or 
fraudulent changes at times when quick turnarounds are mandatory. 
Contains history of the production turnover process and provides 
complete control of programs, applications, and systems being moved to 
the production environment. 


4 of 4 


5/13/97 7; 18 AM 




CA-PAN/MERGE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cni/apxc_13.html#A2 


• CA-PAN/MRRGF. 

• CA-PANAPT 


CA-PAN/MERGF. 


Product information: 


Vendor: Computer 
Associates International 




Version Number: Rl.O 


In Business Since: 1976 

Last Released: 1990 


Address: 12120 Sunset Hills 
Road 

First Released: 1990 


Reston, VA 22090 

hreq. ot Updates: Every 1-2 years 


Marketing Contact: Stuart 
Fleagle 

Number Sold: N/A 


Phone 

Number:703-709-4767 



Fax Number:703-709-4820 



E-mail Address: 

Pricing: 


Bulletin Board System: 

Single CPU Price:$4,915-$20,000 


Customer Support:708 
505-6784 

^ite License:N/A 



Multicopy Price:$3,200-$ 13,000 


Training Provided:Yes 


||Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price: Single CPU 

II Customization: Yes 

price. 

||By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price:$l,200-$5,000 

||By User:Yes 

___X --—-—- 

1 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 


IBM Mainframe/MVS. 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size. User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

TSO/ISPF 2.1 or higher. 


1 of 4 


5/13/97 7:18 AM 





CA-PAN/MERGE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_13.html#A2 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

CA-PAN/APT 

CA-PANVALET 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CA-PAN/MERGE is a development tool that allows users to easily 
combine separate sets of program changes into one program. Concurrent 
development and maintenance of vendor software often results in separate 
sets of changes to the same programs. Manual Integration of these 
changes can be tedious, error-prone, and time consuming. 
CA-PAN/MERGE automatically identifies all change overlays, and 
conflicting changes are clearly marked. Problems can be resolved on-line 
or deferred until later. Detail reports show the changes made to each input 
file, while the summary reports provide the total number of inserted, 
deleted and moved records, and total number of conflicts. 

Integration between CA-PANVALET and CA-PAN/MERGE currently 
enables the merging of any combination of CA-PANVALET, PDS, or 
sequential files. Multiple file types can easily be compared and combined 
to detect potential conflicts, increasing programmer productivity and 
application quality and reliability. 




CA-PANAPT 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Computer 
Associates International 




Version Number: R.1.3 


In Business Since: 1976 

Last Released: 1993 


Address: 12120 Sunset Hills 
Road 

First Released: 1988 


Reston, VA 22090 

Freq. of Updates: 1 to 2 years 


Marketing Contact: Stuart 
Fleagle 

Number Sold: N/A 


Phone 

Number:703-709-4767 



Fax Number:703-709-4820 



E-mail Address: 

Pricing: 


Bulletin Board System: 

Single CPU Price:$14,000-$60,000 


Customer Support:708 
505-6783 

Site License:N/A 



Multicopy Price:$9,150-$41,000 


Training Provided:Yes 


2 of 4 


5/13/97 7:18 AM 






CA-PAN/MERGE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cni/apxc_13.html#A2 


II ||Consulting Support;Yes 

GSA Price:Same as single || |jCustomization;Yes 

CPU Price. || |jBy Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price:$3,400-$15,000 || ||By User:Yes 

1 II 

Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBM Mainframes - MVS/SP 1.3.5 or higher. 

MVS/XA 2.1.3 or higher, MVS/ESA 3.1 or higher. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

TSO/ISPF2.1 or higher. 

IBM VS/COBOL 2.4 compiler run-time library or IBM COBOL II 

run-time library. 

PANAPT VSAM Control Files defined with share options (4.3). 

DASD Req: 24 CYL - 3380 space. 

Max Batch Region: 4096K. 

User Interface: TSO/ISPF. 

TSO address space: 2048K. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

DBMS environments: DB2, IMS, VSAM, Model 204, IDMS/R, 

AD ABAS/NATURAL, FOCUS, 

MANTIS, ORACLE; GENER/OL, EASYTRIEVE PLUS, CSP, MARK 
IV, RAMIS, CA-PANVALET, CA-LIBRARIAN, OS/PDS, 
CA-PAN/MERGE, CA-1 TMS, 

CA-7, TSO/ISPF, IMS/DC, CICS, CA-TELON, CA-PAN/LCM 
Lifecycle Manager, 

and CA-NETMAN. 







3of4 


5/13/97 7:18 AM 



CA-PAN/MERGE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_13.html#A2 


Description/Purpose; (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CA-PANAPT is an automated production turnover system that controls, 
moves, tracks, and provides inventory of all entities and levels of 
approval to complete each step in the turnover process. CA-PANAPT 
eliminates paperwork by supporting on-line change requests, change 
authorizations, and status information. Emergency fixes and production 
backouts are automated, reducing the possibility of accidental or 
fraudulent changes at times when quick turnarounds are mandatory. 
Contains history of the production turnover process and provides 
complete control of programs, applications, and systems being moved to 
the production environment. 


4 of 4 


5/13/97 7:18 AM 


CASEWARE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_6.html#Al 


• CASEWARE 

• CHANGE ACTION 

• CHANGE MANAGER FOR DB2 

• CHANGEMAN 

CASEWARE 


Product Information: 


Vendor: CaseWare, Inc. 




Version Number: 3.1 


In Business Since: 1986 

Date of Last Release: Aug 93 


Address: 108 Pacifica, 2nd 

Floor 

Date of First Release: Feb 90 


Irvine, CA 92718 

Frequency of Updates: Annual 


Marketing Contact: Alex 
Lobba 

Number Sold:4,000 + 


Phone Number:714-453-2200 



Fax Number:714-453-2276 



E-mail 

Address:Dave@cwi.com 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support:support@cwi.com 

Single User Price:$5,600 



Site License:N/A 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:Varies w/qty 


Consulting Support:Yes 



Customization: Y es 

GSA Price:N/A 


By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price: 15% 


By UsenYes 




PIatform(s)/Operating System(s): 

SPARC - SunOS 4.1.x DG AViion - DG-UX 5.4.2 

SPARC - Solaris 2.2,2.3 DEC RISC - Ultrix 4.3 

HP 9000/300.400 - HP-UX 8.0.x (Interface only) IBM/RS/6000 - AIX 3.2 

HP 9000/700.800 - HP-UX 8.0.x, 9.0.x 




1 of 6 


5/13/97 7:18 AM 



CASEWARE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_6.html#Al 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 

User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Sun SPARC 2/HP 9000 710 RAM: 48 MB, 25 Simultaneous Sessions 

RAM Per Session: Interface (2.3 MB), Engine (4 MB), DB Server (1 

MB) 

Disk Requirements: 30 MB (CaseWare), 70 MB (DB Space), 1.5 * 

Project Size (in MB) 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 

Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Centerline CodeCenter (4.0), ObjectCenter (2.0) 

IDE STP (4.2 D) 

Softbench (B.OO), WorkBench (A.0.2) 

FrameMaker (3. IX) 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CaseWare is a product with Verdix Ada Integration (Verdix 6.0.X), full 
build capability, host/cross- compiler support, dependency analysis, 
and Alsys Ada Word Integration (5.3, 5.4, 5.5). It is a 
client/server-based software configuration management system that 
provides complete control over development and maintenance 
activities. It can be used by software engineers, project managers, 
quality control engineers, technical writers, and other team members to 
control not only software but also related data such as documentation 
and designs. It does not require that you use a particular development 
methodology or process. Rather, it can be customized to implement, 
automate, and enforce a development process that best meets your 
unique requiremerits. Thus, it devlivers the flexibility to meet today's 
changing demands for software engineering. 




CHANGE ACTION 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Mazda Computer 
Corporation/ 



Action Software 

International 

Version Number: 4 


In Business Since: 1980 


2 of 6 


5/13/97 7:18 AM 






CASEWARE 


http://www.stsc,hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_6.html#Al 


Last Released: Oct 1993 


Address: 20 Valleywood 

Drive 

First Released: Feb 1989 


Suite 107 

Freq. of Updates: 3 per year 


Markham, Ontario, 

Number Sold: 120 


Canada L3R 6G1 



Marketing Contact: Grant 

King 



Phone Number:905-470-7113 

Pricing: 


Fax Number:905-470-6507 

Single User Price:Contact vendor. 


E-mail Address :N/A 

Site License:Contact vendor. 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. 


Customer 

Support:416-543-8500 



Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:Contact vendor. 


Customization: Y es 

Maint Price:Contact vendor. 


By Vendor:Yes 



By UsenYes 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Mainframe computers with MVS-GSA or XA. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Minimum 50 CYL for trial. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 







3 of 6 


5/13/97 7:18 AM 






CASEWARE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.tnil/cm/apxc_6.htnil#Al 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Change Action will automatically track and control changes to data sets 
on an MUS-XA or ESA mainframe computer. Change Action provides 
significant reductions in problem determination time with automatic 
reporting and scan capabilities for investigating changes. The continuous 
audit requirement for managing system changes has been satisfied. The 
Change Action Reference Tracking component is used to determine 
which members of your libraries have not been used for a long time. 
Change Action Info/Interface component is also available. 


CHANGE MANAGER FOR DB2 


Product Information: 


Vendor: BMC Software 




Version Number: 3.3.0.1 


In Business Since: 1980 

Last Released: Dec 1993 


Address: 2101 City West Blvd. 

First Released: Apr 1992 


Houston, TX 77042 

Freq. of Updates: Quarterly 



Number Sold: N/A 


Marketing Contact:Mike 

James 



Phone Number: 1-800-841-2031 



Fax Number:713-918-8000 

Pricing: 


E-mail Address:N/A 

Single User Price:CPU-based. 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Site License :TIER. 


Customer 

Support:l-800-537-1813 

Multicopy Price: 





Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:Available. 


Customization:No 

Maint. Price:Contact vendor. 


By Vendor:No 



By User:No 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

MVS/XA. 

MVS/ESA. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size. 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 




4 of 6 


5/13/97 7:18 AM 




CASEWARE 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.niil/cm/apxc_6.htnil#Al 





Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 

Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Works with Bachman case tool to update the data mode when changes 
are made outside of the case tool. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Change Manager for DB2 automatically migrates changes to DB2 
structures. Provides the ability to create versions of structures to allow 
changes to be backed out. Preserves data and dependent structures. 
Synchronizes all copies of data structures across multiple subsystems. 
Allows fallback to a previously saved structure and data version. 
Allows sychronization of data structures between CASE tools and 

DB2 subsystems. 




CHANGEMAN 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Optima Software, 

Inc. 




Version Number: 3.3.2 


In Business Since: 1988 

Date of Last Release: May 93 


Address: 2277 Fair Oaks Blvd. 
#495 

Date of First Release: Mar 88 


Sacramento, CA 95825 

Frequency of Updates: Annual 


Marketing Contact: Ms. Jamie 
Madison 

Number Sold: 170 


Phone Number:916-646-3800 

Note: Release 4.1.0 scheduled for 2nd qtr 


Fax Number:916-646-3466 

1994. 


E-mail Address: 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: Starts at 50K/CPU 


Customer Support: Serena 
International @ 

Single User Price:See above 


415-696-1800 

Site License:available 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:discounts for 


Consulting Support:Yes 

multi-site 


Customization: Y es 

GSA Price:Yes, call 


By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price: 18% 


By User:Yes 





5 of 6 


5/13/97 7:18 AM 







CASEWARE 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cni/apxc_6.html#Al 


Platforin(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBM 370, 390X, 9000 series, and plug compatibles. All releases of MVS/XA and MVS/ESA, OS/2, 
Windows, and Windows/NT support available in late 1994. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

@ 4 cylinders 3390 DASD to store the CHANGE MAN libraries. 

@ 80 cylinders of 3390 DASD to store historical data from the Master 
Control File (Package Master). 

Started Task region size of 2 meg. Program runs above the 16 meg 

XA line. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Interfaces available to DB2, IMS, and MANTIS. 

Telon, lEF, Pacbase, and APS - ability to interface with other 

products. 

Support for standard IBM compilers. 

Interfaces to documentation tools: Docu/Text, jobscan, JCLprep, 

JCLcheck. 

Other interfaces - Intertest, SAS, all security systems, job schedules, 
and IBM's INFO/MAN. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CHANGE MAN is a complete software change implementation 
management system for the entire lifecycle. Includes: library 
management, version control, configuration management, delta 
storage, source to load synchronization, load module fingerprinting, 
audit and audit trails, on-line approvals, concurrent development 
support, auto production installation (local and remote sites), and 
backout management. Special features - no proprietary formats, 
started task architecture, use existing libraries without conversion, fast 
implementation, and comprehensive reports. 




6 of 6 


5/13/97 7:18 AM 




CASEWARE http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_6.html#A2 


• CASEWARE 

• CHANGE ACTION 

• CHANGE MANAGER FOR DB2 

• CHANGEMAN 

CASEWARE 


Product Information: 


Vendor: CaseWare, Inc. 




Version Number: 3.1 


In Business Since: 1986 

Date of Last Release: Aug 93 


Address: 108 Pacifica, 2nd 

Floor 

Date of First Release: Feb 90 


Irvine, CA 92718 

Frequency of Updates: Annual 


Marketing Contact: Alex 
Lobba 

Number Sold:4,000 + 


Phone Number:714-453-2200 



Fax Number:714-453-2276 



E-mail 

Address:Dave@cwi.com 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support: support@cwi. com 

Single User Price:$5,600 



Site License:N/A 


Training Provided: Yes 

Multicopy Price:Varies w/qty 


Consulting Support:Yes 



Customization: Y es 

GSA Price:N/A 


By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price: 15% 


By User:Yes 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

SPARC - SunOS 4.1.x DG AViion - DG-UX 5.4.2 

SPARC - Solaris 2.2,2.3 DEC RISC - Ultrix 4.3 

HP 9000/300.400 - HP-UX 8.0.x (Interface only) IBM/RS/6000 - AIX 3.2 

HP 9000/700.800 - HP-UX 8.0.x, 9.0.x 




1 of 6 


5/13/97 7:19 AM 



CASEWARE 


http://www.stsc.hiIl.af.mi1/cm/apxc_6.html#A2 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 

User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Sun SPARC 2/HP 9000 710 RAM: 48 MB, 25 Simultaneous Sessions 

RAM Per Session: Interface (2.3 MB), Engine (4 MB), DB Server (1 

MB) 

Disk Requirements: 30 MB (CaseWare), 70 MB (DB Space), 1.5 * 

Project Size (in MB) 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 

Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Centerline CodeCenter (4.0), ObjectCenter (2.0) 

IDE STP (4.2 D) 

Softbench (B.OO), WorkBench (A.0.2) 

FrameMaker (3. IX) 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CaseWare is a product with Verdix Ada Integration (Verdix 6.0.X), full 
build capability, host/cross- compiler support, dependency analysis, 
and Alsys Ada Word Integration (5.3, 5.4, 5.5). It is a 
client/server-based software configuration management system that 
provides complete control over development and maintenance 
activities. It can be used by software engineers, project managers, 
quality control engineers, technical writers, and other team members to 
control not only software but also related data such as documentation 
and designs. It does not require that you use a particular development 
methodology or process. Rather, it can be customized to implement, 
automate, and enforce a development process that best meets your 
unique requirements. Thus, it devlivers the flexibility to meet today's 
changing demands for software engineering. 




CHANGE ACTION 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Mazda Computer 
Corporation/ 



Action Software 

International 

Version Number: 4 


In Business Since: 1980 


2 of 6 


5/13/97 7:19 AM 





CASEWARE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_6.html#A2 


Last Released: Oct 1993 


Address: 20 Valleywood 

Drive 

First Released: Feb 1989 


Suite 107 

Freq. ot Updates: 3 per year 

IP 

Markham, Ontario, 

Number Sold: 120 


Canada L3R 6G1 


~IP 

] 

Marketing Contact: Grant 
fCing 


IP 

Phone Number:905-470-7113 

Pricing: 

IP 

Fax Number:905-470-6507 

Single User Price:Contact vendor. 


E-mail Address :N/A 

Site License:Contact vendor. 

^p 

Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. 

IP 

( 

Customer 

5upport:416-543-8500 



framing Provided:Yes 


a 

Consulting Support:Yes 

IjSA Price:Contact vendor. 

□F 

Customization: Yes 

Maint Price: Contact vendor. 

□F 

By Vendor: Yes 


□5 

By User: Yes 

1 f 


Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Mainframe computers with MVS-GSA or XA. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Minimum 50 CYL for trial. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 







3 of 6 


5/13/97 7:19 AM 




CASEWARE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_6.html#A2 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Change Action will automatically track and control changes to data sets 
on an MUS-XA or ESA mainframe computer. Change Action provides 
significant reductions in problem determination time with automatic 
reporting and scan capabilities for investigating changes. The continuous 
audit requirement for managing system changes has been satisfied. The 
Change Action Reference Tracking component is used to determine 
which members of your libraries have not been used for a long time. 
Change Action Info/Interface component is also available. 


CHANGE MANAGER FOR DR2 


Product information: 


Vendor: BMC Software 




Version Number: 3.3.0.1 


In Business Since: 1980 

Last Released: Dec 1993 


Address: 2101 City West Blvd. 

First Released: Apr 1992 


Houston, TX 77042 

Freq. of Updates: Quarterly 



Number Sold: N/A 


Marketing Contact:Mike 

James 



Phone Number: 1-800-841-2031 



Fax Number:713-918-8000 

Pricing: 


E-mail Address:N/A 

Single User Price:CPU-based. 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Site License.TlER. 


Customer 

Support: 1-800-537-1813 

Multicopy Price: 





Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:Available. 


Customization:No 

Maint. Price:Contact vendor. 


By Vendor:No 



By User:No 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

MVS/XA. 

MVS/ESA. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 




4 of 6 


5/13/97 7:19 AM 





CASEWARE 


http://www.stsc.hill. af.mil/cm/apxc_6 .html#A2 





Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 

Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Works with Bachman case tool to update the data mode when changes 
are made outside of the case tool. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Change Manager for DB2 automatically migrates changes to DB2 
structures. Provides the ability to create versions of structures to allow 
changes to be backed out. Preserves data and dependent structures. 
Synchronizes all copies of data structures across multiple subsystems. 
Allows fallback to a previously saved structure and data version. 
Allows sychronization of data structures between CASE tools and 

DB2 subsystems. 




CHANGEMAN 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Optima Software, 

Inc. 




Version Number: 3.3.2 


In Business Since: 1988 

Date of Last Release: May 93 


Address: 2277 Fair Oaks Blvd. 
#495 

Date of First Release: Mar 88 


Sacramento, CA 95825 

Frequency of Updates: Annual 


Marketing Contact: Ms. Jamie 
Madison 

Number Sold: 170 


Phone Number:916-646-3800 

Note: Release 4.1.0 scheduled for 2nd qtr 


Fax Number:916-646-3466 

1994. 


E-mail Address: 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: Starts at 50K/CPU 


Customer Support: Serena 
International @ 

Single User Price:See above 


415-696-1800 

Site License:available 


Training P’rovided:Yes 

Multicopy Price: discounts for 


Consulting Support: Yes 

multi-site 


Customization: Yes 

GSA Price:Yes, call 


By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price: 18% 


By User:Yes 





5 of 6 


5/13/97 7:19 AM 






CASEWARE 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_6.html#A2 


Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBM 370,390X, 9000 series, and plug compatibles. All releases of MVS/XA and MVS/ESA, OS/2, 
Windows, and Windows/NT support available in late 1994. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

@ 4 cylinders 3390 DASD to store the CHANGE MAN libraries. 

@ 80 cylinders of 3390 DASD to store historical data from the Master 
Control File (Package Master). 

Started Task region size of 2 meg. Program runs above the 16 meg 

XA line. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Interfaces available to DB2, IMS, and MANTIS. 

Telon, lEF, Pacbase, and APS - ability to interface with other 

products. 

Support for standard IBM compilers. 

Interfaces to documentation tools: Docu/Text, jobscan, JCLprep, 

JCLcheck. 

Other interfaces - Intertest, SAS, all security systems, job schedules, 
and IBM's INFO/MAN. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CHANGE MAN is a complete software change implementation 
management system for the entire lifecycle. Includes: library 
management, version control, configuration management, delta 
storage, source to load synchronization, load module fingerprinting, 
audit and audit trails, on-line approvals, concurrent development 
support, auto production installation (local and remote sites), and 
backout management. Special features - no proprietary formats, 
started task architecture, use existing libraries without conversion, fast 
implementation, and comprehensive reports. 




6 of 6 


5/13/97 7:19 AM 




CASEWARE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_6.htnil#A3 


• CASEWARE 

• CHANGE ACTION 

• CHANGE MANAGER FOR DB2 

• CHANGEMAN 

CASEWARE 


Product Information: 


Vendor: CaseWare, Inc. 




Version Number: 3.1 


In Business Since: 1986 

Date of Last Release: Aug 93 


Address: 108 Pacifica, 2nd 

Floor 

Date of First Release: Feb 90 


Irvine, CA 92718 

Frequency of Updates: Annual 


Marketing Contact: Alex 
Lobba 

Number Sold:4,000 + 


Phone Number:714-453-2200 



Fax Number:714-453-2276 



E-mail 

Address:Dave@cwi.com 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support: support@c wi .com 

Single User Price:$5,600 



Site License:N/A 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:Varies w/qty 


Consulting Support:Yes 



Customization: Y es 

GSA Price :N/A 


By Vendor: Yes 

Maint. Price: 15% 


By User:Yes 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

SPARC - SunOS 4.1.x DG AViion - DG-UX 5.4.2 

SPARC - Solaris 2.2,2.3 DEC RISC - Ultrix 4.3 

HP 9000/300.400 - HP-UX 8.0.x (Interface only) IBM/RS/6000 - AIX 3.2 

HP 9000/700.800 - HP-UX 8.0.x, 9.0.x 


J 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 


Network, etc.) 

Sun SPARC 2/HP 9000 710 RAM: 48 MB, 25 Simultaneous Sessions 
RAM Per Session: Interface (2.3 MB), Engine (4 MB), DB Server (1 


1 of6 


5/13/97 7:19 AM 




CASEWARE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.miI/cm/apxc_6.html#A3 


RAM Per Session: Interface (2.3 MB), Engine (4 MB), DB Server ri 

MB) 

Disk Requirements: 30 MB (CaseWare), 70 MB (DB Space), 1.5 * 

Project Size (in MB) 


Tool Integration; (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Centerline CodeCenter (4.0), ObjectCenter (2.0) 
IDE STP (4.2 D) 

Softbench (B.OO), WorkBench (A.0.2) 
FrameMaker (3.1X) 


Description/Purpose; (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CaseWare is a product with Verdix Ada Integration (Verdix 6.0.X), full 
build capability, host/cross- compiler support, dependency analysis 
and Alsys Ada Word Integration (5.3, 5.4, 5.5). It is a 
client/server-based software configuration management system that 
provides complete control over development and maintenance 
activities. It can be used by software engineers, project managers, 
quality control engineers, technical writers, and other team members to 
control not only software but also related data such as documentation 
and designs. It does not require that you use a particular development 
methodology or process. Rather, it can be customized to implement, 
automate, md enforce a development process that best meets your 
unique requirements. Thus, it devlivers the flexibility to meet today's 
changing demands for software engineering. 


CHANGE ACTION 


Product information: 


Vendor: Mazda Computer 
Corporation/ 



Action Software 

International 

Version Number: 4 


In Business Since: 1980 

Last Released: Oct 1993 


Address: 20 Valleywood 

Drive 

First Released: Feb 1989 


Suite 107 

Freq. of Updates: 3 per year 


Markham, Ontario, 

Number Sold: 120 


Canada L3R 6G1 



Marketing Contact:Grant 

King 


2 of 6 


5/13/97 7:19 AM 





CASEWARE 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_6.html#A3 




Phone Number:905-470-7113 

Pricing: 


Fax Number:905-470-6507 

Single User Price:Contact vendor. 


E-mail Address :N/A 

Site License:Contact vendor. 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. 


Customer 

Support:416-543-8500 



Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:Contact vendor. 


Customization: Y es 

Maint Price:Contact vendor. 


By Vendor:Yes 



By User:Yes 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Mainframe computers with MVS-GSA or XA. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Minimum 50 CYL for trial. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Change Action will automatically track and control changes to data sets 
on an MUS-XA or ESA mainframe computer. Change Action provides 
significant reductions in problem determination time with automatic 
reporting and scan capabilities for investigating changes. The continuous 
audit requirement for managing system changes has been satisfied. The 
Change Action Reference Tracking component is used to determine 
which members of your libraries have not been used for a long time. 
Change Action Info/Interface component is also available. 




CHANGE MANAGER FOR DB2 


Product Information: 

iniVendor: BlMC Software 


II II 

D 

Version Number: 3.3.0.1 

II 1 In Business Since: 1980 



3 of 6 


5/13/97 7:19 AM 




CASEWARE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_6.html#A3 


Last Released: Dec 1993 

= 

Address: 2101 City West Blvd. 

First Released: Apr 1992 

Houston, TX 77042 

Freq. of Updates: Quarterly 

= 


Number Sold: N/A 

Marketing Contact:Mike 

James 



Phone Number: 1-800-841-2031 



Fax Number:713-918-8000 

Pricing: 


E-mail Address:N/A 

Single User Price:CPU-based. 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Site License:TIER. 

= 

Customer 

Support: 1-800-537-1813 

Multicopy Price: 



Training Provided:Yes 


Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:Available. 

- 

Customization:No 

Maint. Price:Contact vendor. 

By Vendor:No 

II ||ByUser:No 

_^1_ 


Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 


MVS/XA. 

MVS/ESA. 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Works with Bachman case tool to update the data mode when changes 
are made outside of the case tool. 


4 of 6 


5/13/97 7:19 AM 




CASEWARE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_6.html#A3 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Change Manager for DB2 automatically migrates changes to DB2 
structures. Provides the ability to create versions of structures to allow 
changes to be backed out. Preserves data and dependent structures. 
Synchronizes all copies of data structures across multiple subsystems. 
Allows fallback to a previously saved structure and data version. 
Allows sychronization of data structures between CASE tools and 

DB2 subsystems. 


CHANGEMAN 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Optima Software, 

Inc. 




Version Number: 3.3.2 


In Business Since: 1988 

Date of Last Release: May 93 


Address: 2277 Fair Oaks Blvd. 
#495 

Date ot First Release: Mar 88 


Sacramento, CA 95825 

Frequency of Updates: Annual 

Marketing Contact: Ms. Jamie 
Madison 

Number Sold: 170 

Phone Number:916-646-3800 

Note: Release 4.1.0 scheduled for 2nd qtr 


Fax Number:916-646-3466 

1994. ~ 


E-mail Address: 


Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: Starts at 50K/CPU 


Customer Support: Serena 
International @ 

Single User Price:See above 


415-696-1800 

^ite License:available 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price: discounts for 

II 

1 

Consulting Support:Yes 

multi-site 

Customization: Y es 

USA Price:Yes, call 

II 

Jl 

By Vendor: Yes 

Maint. Price: 18% | 

By User:Yes 


□1 


i'lattorm(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBM 370, 390X, 9000 series, and plug compatibles. All releases of MVS/XA and MVS/ESA, OS/2, 
Windows, and Windows/NT support available in late 1994. 




5 of 6 


5/13/97 7:19 AM 





CASEWARE 


http://www.stsc.hiIl.af.mi1/ctn/apxc_6.html#A3 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

@ 4 cylinders 3390 DASD to store the CHANGE MAN libraries. 

@ 80 cylinders of 3390 DASD to store historical data from the Master 
Control File (Package Master). 

Started Task region size of 2 meg. Program runs above the 16 meg 

XA line. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Interfaces available to DB2, IMS, and MANTIS. 

Telon, lEF, Pacbase, and APS - ability to interface with other 

products. 

Support for standard IBM compilers. 

Interfaces to documentation tools: Docu/Text, jobscan, JCLprep, 

JCLcheck. 

Other interfaces - Intertest, SAS, all security systems, job schedules, 
and IBM's INFO/MAN. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CHANGE MAN is a complete software change implementation 
management system for the entire lifecycle. Includes: library 
management, version control, configuration management, delta 
storage, source to load synchronization, load module fingerprinting, 
audit and audit trails, on-line approvals, concurrent development 
support, auto production installation (local and remote sites), and 
backout management. Special features - no proprietary formats, 
started task ^chitecture, use existing libraries without conversion, fast 
implementation, and comprehensive reports. 




6 of 6 


5/13/97 7:19 AM 



CASEWARE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_6.html#A4 


• CASEWARE 

• CHANGE ACTION 

• CHANGE MANAGER FOR DB2 

• CHANGEMAN 

CASEWARE 


Product Information: 


Vendor: CaseWare, Inc. 




Version Number: 3.1 


In Business Since: 1986 

Date of Last Release: Aug 93 


Address: 108 Pacifica, 2nd 

Floor 

Date of First Release: Feb 90 


Irvine, CA 92718 

Frequency of Updates: Annual 


Marketing Contact: Alex 
Lobba 

Ntunber Sold:4,000 + 


Phone Number:714-453-2200 



Fax Number:714-453-2276 



E-mail 

Address:Dave@cwi.com 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

S upport: support@c wi. com 

Single User Price:$5,600 



Site License:N/A 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:Varies w/qty 


Consulting Support:Yes 



Customization: Yes 

GSA Price:N/A 


By Vendor: Yes 

Maint. Price: 15% 


By User:Yes 




PIatform(s)/Operating System(s): 

SPARC - SunOS 4.1.x DG AViion - DG-UX 5.4.2 

SPARC - Solaris 2.2, 2.3 DEC RISC - Ultrix 4.3 

HP 9000/300.400 - HP-UX 8.0.x (Interface only) IBM/RS/6000 - AIX 3.2 

HP 9000/700.800 - HP-UX 8.0.x, 9.0.x 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 


Network, etc.) 

Sun SPARC 2/HP 9000 710 RAM: 48 MB, 25 Simultaneous Sessions 
RAM Per Session: Interface (2.3 MB), Engine (4 MB), DB Server (1 


1 of 6 


5/13/97 7:20 AM 


CASEWARE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.inil/cm/apxc_6.html#A4 


RAM Per Session: Interface (2.3 MB), Engine (4 MB), DB Server (1 

MB) 

Disk Requirements: 30 MB (CaseWare), 70 MB (DB Space), 1.5 * 

Project Size (in MB) 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Centerline CodeCenter (4.0), ObjectCenter (2.0) 
IDE STP (4.2 D) 

Softbench (B.OO), WorkBench (A.0.2) 
FrameMaker (3. IX) 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CaseWare is a product with Verdix Ada Integration (Verdix 6.0.X), full 
build capability, host/cross- compiler support, dependency analysis, 
and Alsys Ada Word Integration (5.3,5.4, 5.5). It is a 
client/server-based software configuration management system that 
provides complete control over development and maintenance 
activities. It can be used by software engineers, project managers, 
quality control engineers, technical writers, and other team members to 
control not only software but also related data such as documentation 
and designs. It does not require that you use a particular development 
methodology or process. Rather, it can be customized to implement, 
automate, and enforce a development process that best meets your 
unique requiremerits. Thus, it devlivers the flexibility to meet today's 
changing demands for software engineering. 


CHANGE ACTION 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Mazda Computer 
Corporation/ 



Action Software 

International 

Version Number: 4 


In Business Since: 1980 

Last Released: Oct 1993 


Address: 20 Valleywood 

Drive 

First Released: Feb 1989 


Suite 107 

Freq. of Updates: 3 per year 


Markham, Ontario, 

Number Sold: 120 


Canada L3R 6G1 



Marketing Contact:Grant 

King 



Phone Number:905-470-7113 


2 of 6 


5/13/97 7:20 AM 




CASEWARE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cni/apxc_6.html#A4 


Phone Number:905-470-7113 

II II 


Pricing: 


Fax Number:905-470-6507 

Single User Price:Contact vendor. 


E-mail Address :N/A 

Site License:Contact vendor. 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. 


Customer 

Support:416-543-8500 



Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:Contact vendor. 


Customization: Y es 

Maint Price:Contact vendor. 


By Vendor:Yes 



By UsenYes 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Mainframe computers with MVS-GSA or XA. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Minimum 50 CYL for trial. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Change Action will automatically track and control changes to data sets 
on an MUS-XA or ESA mainframe computer. Change Action provides 
significant reductions in problem determination time with automatic 
reporting and scan capabilities for investigating changes. The continuous 
audit requirement for managing system changes has been satisfied. The 
Change Action Reference Tracking component is used to determine 
which members of your libraries have not been used for a long time. 
Change Action Info/lnterface component is also available. 




CHANGE MANAGER FOR DB2 


Product Information: 

j| |jVendor: Software 



I 11 

D 

Version Number: 3.3.0.1 

II ||In Business Since: 1980 


Last Released: Dec 1993 

II ||Address: 2101 City West Blvd. 



3 of 6 


5/13/97 7:20 AM 








CASEWARE 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_6.html#A4 


First Released: Apr 1992 


Houston, TX 77042 

Freq. of Updates: Quarterly 



Number Sold: N/A 


Marketing Contact:Mike 

James 



Phone Number: 1-800-841-2031 



Fax Number:713-918-8000 

Pricing: 


E-mail Address:N/A 

Single User Price:CPU-based. 


Bulletin Board System: N/A 

Site License :TIER. 


Customer 

Support: 1-800-537-1813 

Multicopy Price: 





Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price: Available. 


Customization:No 

Maint. Price:Contact vendor. 


By Vendor:No 



By User:No 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

MVS/XA. 

MVS/ESA. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 

Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Works with Bachman case tool to update the data mode when changes 
are made outside of the case tool. 







4 of 6 


5/13/97 7:20 AM 





CASEWARE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_6.html#A4 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Change Manager for DB2 automatically migrates changes to DB2 
structures. Provides the ability to create versions of structures to allow 
changes to be backed out. Preserves data and dependent structures. 
Synchronizes all copies of data structures across multiple subsystems. 
Allows fallback to a previously saved structure and data version. 
Allows sychronization of data structures between CASE tools and 

DB2 subsystems. 


CHANGEMAN 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Optima Software, 

Inc. 




Version Number: 3.3.2 


In Business Since: 1988 

Date of Last Release: May 93 


Address: 2277 Fair Oaks Blvd. 
#495 

Date of First Release: Mar 88 


Sacramento, CA 95825 

Frequency of Updates: Annual 


Marketing Contact: Ms. Jamie 
Madison 

Number Sold: 170 


Phone Number:916-646-3800 

Note: Release 4.1.0 scheduled for 2nd qtr 


Fax Number:916-646-3466 

1994. 


E-mail Address: 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: Starts at 50K/CPU 


Customer Support:Serena 
International @ 

Single User Price:See above 


415-696-1800 

Site License:available 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:discounts for 


Consulting Support:Yes 

multi-site 


Customization: Y es 

GSA Price:Yes, call 


By VendonYes 

Maint. Price: 18% 


By User:Yes 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBM 370,390X, 9000 series, and plug compatibles. All releases of MVS/XA and MVS/ESA, OS/2, 
Windows, and Windows/NT support available in late 1994. 


i. 


5 of 6 


5/13/97 7:20 AM 




CASEWARE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_6.html#A4 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

@ 4 cylinders 3390 DASD to store the CHANGE MAN libraries. 

@ 80 cylinders of 3390 DASD to store historical data from the Master 
Control File (Package Master). 

Started Task region size of 2 meg. Program runs above the 16 meg 

XA line. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Interfaces available to DB2, IMS, and MANTIS. 

Telon, lEF, Pacbase, and APS - ability to interface with other 

products. 

Support for standard IBM compilers. 

Interfaces to documentation tools: DocuA'ext, jobscan, JCLprep, 

JCLcheck. 

Other interfaces - Intertest, SAS, all security systems, job schedules, 
and IBM's INFO/MAN. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CHANGE MAN is a complete software change implementation 
management system for the entire lifecycle. Includes: library 
management, version control, configuration management, delta 
storage, source to load synchronization, toad module fingerprinting, 
audit and audit trails, on-line approvals, concurrent development 
support, auto production installation (local and remote sites), and 
backout management. Special features - no proprietary formats, 
started task architecture, use existing libraries without conversion, fast 
implementation, and comprehensive reports. 




6 of 6 


5/13/97 7:20 AM 



CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.niil/cm/apxc_7.htnil#Al 


• CLEARCASE 

• CMVC 

• CMVISION rCMV') 

• COMPAREX 

• CONTROL 


CLEARCASE 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Atria Software, 

Inc. 




Version Number: 1.1.3 


In Business Since: 1990 

Date of Last Release: Jan 94 


Address: 24 Prime Park 

Way 

Date of First Release: Jun 92 


Natick, MA 01760 

Frequency of Updates: Bi-annual 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold:?,000 + 


Phone 

Number:508-650-5100 



Fax Number:508-650-l 196 



E-mail 

Address: info@atria.com 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support:508-650-5151 

Single User Price:$4,000 



Site License:Call 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:Call 


Consulting Support:Yes 



Customization: Yes 

GSA Price:Call 


By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price: 15% 


By User: Yes 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

AVAILABLE TODAY SCHEDULED PORTS 

SUN SPARC/SUNOS 4.X, SOLARIS 2.X Alpha/OSF Q2 '94 

HP 700/HPUX 9.x Alpha, NT Q3 '94 

HP800/HPUX 9.x Intel/NT Q3 '94 

SGI/IRIX 5.x 




1 of 8 


5/13/97 7:20 AM 





CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.tnil/cm/apxc_7.html#Al 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Client: 32 MB RAM, 400 MB Disk 

Server: 64 MB RAM, 1GB Disk 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Key concept is transparent use with all tools, thus not requiring 
integrations just to be able to version the objects produced by a tool. 
Integrations: Softbench Encapsulation & Tooltalk Encapsulation, 
Scopus/ProTeam Tracking, Qualtrack/DDTS Defect Tracking, 
FrameMaker, and Interleaf. Planned Integrations: Centerline, Code 
Center, and Object Center, IDE, STP, and Lucid. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Atria's ClearCase product is the premier software configuration 
management system for UNIX development environments. ClearCase is 
built for distributed, client/server networks supporting both small and 
large scale development efforts. ClearCase supports five fundamental 
capabilities for software development: Version Control, Environment 
Management, Build Management, Defect Tracking, and Process Control. 
Through a concept called "Transparency," ClearCase offers the developer 
a "work-in- place" model for software development giving them the most 
powerful SCM system available with the lowest impact on the existing 
development environment. ClearCase is language independent, "thus all 
languages" source code (including Ada) can be managed. ClearCase's 
ability to implement Policy/Process enforcement allows for 2167 A/B, 
SEI, and ISO 9000 support. 




CMVC 


Product Information: 

— 

Vendor: IBM 




Version Number: 2.1 


In Business Since: 

Date of Last Release: Jan 94 


Address: 1133 Westchester 
Ave. 

Date of First Release: Mar 92 


White Plains, NY 10604 

Frequency of Updates: Annual 


Marketing Contact: Dean 
Harrison 

Number Sold: 


Phone Number:213-621-5605 


2 of 8 


5/13/97 7:20 AM 




CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_7.html#Al 


Pricing: 


Single User Price: 


Site License: 


Multicopy Price: 


GSA Price: 


Maint. Price: 


Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 


]| ||FaxNumber:213-621-5537 


I p-mail Address: 


Bulletin Board System: 


Customer Support: 


I [[Training Provided:Yes 


II [[Consulting Support:Yes 


I I Customization: 
I ||By Vendor:Yes 


I ||By User:Yes 


□ 


RS/6000 - AIX 3.2 
HP - HP/UX 


Sun - Sun/OS 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Disk - 400 MB One of the following is required: 

RAM - 64 MB SYSBASE 
XI1 Motif INFORMIX 
TCP/IP ORACLE 
DB2/6000 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Workbench/6000 

Softbench/6000 


5/13/97 7:20 AM 




















































CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_7.html#Al 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CMVC is a software configuration management tool that provides 
application developers with configuration management and change 
control (or versioning) integrated with design and defect tracking with 
heterogeneous environments. With configurable fields, CMVC defines, 
stores, and maintains a certain set of attributes for each CMVC object. 

CMVC offers GUI enhancements for ease of use and shortens the 
learning curve and lessens development complexity with the graphical 

browser. 


CMVISION fCMVt 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Expertware 




Version Number: 1.0 


In Business Since: 

Date of Last Release: Jun 93 


Address: 12901 Alcosta 

Blvd. 

Date of First Release: 


Suite 2A, P.O. Box 1847 

Frequency of Updates: Annual 


San Ramon, CA 94583 

Number Sold: 


Marketing Contact: Peggy 
L. Siers 



Phone 

Numbers 10-867-0315 



Fax Numbers 10-867-1933 



E-mail Address: 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer Support: 

Single User Price:See below 



Site License: 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:$ 18,000 for 


Consulting Support:Yes 

3 users 


Customization: Yes 

GSA Price: 


By Vendor: Yes 

Maint. Price: 18% 


By User:No 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

SunOS, HP, DEC/Ultrix, Xenix, IBM, AIX. Most Unix base platforms. 







4 of 8 


5/13/97 7:20 AM 







CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.inil/cm/apxc_7 .html#Al 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

RAM - Minimal - 4 MB 

Recommended - 8 MB 

Disk Space - Minimal - 8 MB 

Recommended -10 MB 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CMVision is a Motif-based, graphical configuration management, program 
reporting, and electronic forms control system. The heart of CMVision is its 
tree display, a graphical hierarchy of directories and files. CMVision's 
many configuration management features are invoked on objects chosen 
from the tree. CMVision can store any file type in delta format using 
standard SCCS or RCS. CMVision includes a fully integrated problem 
reporting feature. It goes one step further in automating the paperwork 
associated with the problem reporting activity. It supports a unique form 
management system that can customize not only problem reporting forms, 
but any type of form. CMVision supports several interfaces to match the 
needs of different users, including extensive command lines, character 
mode interfaces and macro definition facilities. CMVision also provides 11 
types of version description reports, Make-build support, user-specific 
default environment specifications, parallel development, virtual views of 
directory and file structures, branch baselining, linked files, and complete 
transaction history recording and archiving. 




COMPAREX 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Sterling Software 




Version Number: 8.1.0 


In Business Since: 

Last Released: Apr 1994 


Address: 9340 Owensmouth 
Ave. 

First Released: 1981 


Chatsworth, CA 91313-2210 

Freq. of Updates: Annually 



Number Sold: 1,300 mainframe. 


Marketing Contact:John 
Misurek 


5 of 8 


5/13/97 7:20 AM 





CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hiIl.af.mi1/ctn/apxc_7.html#AI 


1 IIPhone Number:818-716-1616 

II ||FaxNumber:818-998-2171 

PricingrMVS Pricing || ||E-mail Address: 

Single User Price:$15,000 - $65,000 || ||Bulletin Board System: 

Site License:Contact vendor. || ||Customer Support: 

Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. || || 

II ||Training Provided:Yes 

I || Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:Contact vendor. || ||Customization: Yes 

Maint. Price:Contact vendor. || ||By Vendor: Yes 

1 ||By User:Yes 



Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 

User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

MVS/SP, MVS/XA, MVS/ESA, DOS/VSE, VSE/ESA, VM/CMS. 

PC-DOS, MS-DOS. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size. Disk size. 

User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

MS-DOS and PC-DOS 5.0 or greater. 

1MB hard disk space. 

2MB RAM. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 

Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Comparex interfaces with IMS, DL/I, DB2, AD ABAS, 
CA-Datacom/DB, CA-IDMS/DB, CA-Ramis, VSAM, PDS, 
CA-Panvalet, GEM, lAM, CA-Librarian, Power, CA-Roscoe, Wylbur, 

and Focus. 







6 of 8 


5/13/97 7:20 AM 




CLEARCASE 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.miI/cm/apxc_7.htmI#Al 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Comparex is a comprehensive comparison utility that compares the 
contents of any two libraries, directories, files or databases, isolates 
any changes and reports the differences. Comparex runs either as a 
batch job or with an ISPF interface under TSO. 


CONTROL 


Product information: 


Vendor: Network 
Concepts, Inc. 




Version Number: 11 


In Business Since: 1979 

Last Released: Jan 1994 


Address: 201 Littleton 

Road 

First Released: Jan 1981 


Morris Plains, NJ 07950-2932 

Freq. of Updates: 9 Months 



Number Sold: 400 


Marketing 

Contact:Richard Ward 



Phone Number: (201) 
285-0202 



Fax Number:(201) 

285-1198 

Pricing: 


E-mail Address: 

Single User Price:$9,600 


Bulletin Board System: 

Site License:Contact vendor. 


Customer 

Support:201-285-0202 

Multicopy Price‘.Contact vendor. 





Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:$9,600 


Customization:No 

Maint. Price:Contact vendor. 


By Vendor:No 


□ 

By User:No 


Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

CONTROL operates on the minimum available Tandem configurations. 
(CONTROL-CS Client requires 386 or higher PC, 4 MB RAM, Windows 
3.1, and XNS-NETBIOS or TCP/IP LAN Support and software). 







7 of 8 


5/13/97 7:20 AM 




CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.tnil/cm/apxc_7 .html#Al 


iVimimum/Kecommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Tandem Computers, Incorporated 

NONSTOP II, TXP, VLX, CYCLONE, CYCLONE/R, CLX, CLX/R. 

KlOO, K1000, K10000. 

Guardian Release C30.06-C30.09, D20. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 






Descnption/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CONTROL provides a full-spectrum software maintenance and 
management system similar to mainframe programs. It is a productivity 
tool that helps organize and monitor status of software components and 
systems during all phases of the lifecycle. CONTROL compresses 
multiple versions of source into a single file by automatically computing 
changes between successive versions; keeps an audit trail and history log 
of source modifications, when it changed, and who changed it. CONTROL 
adds a security layer that provides extra file protection and allows flexible 
authorization procedures for source updates. In addition, CONTROL 
provides a wide range of historical reports and queries; assists in the 
system-building process by direct compilation from CONTROL files to 
compilers inserting the appropriate versions of copylibs as required. 
CONTROL tracks object files and identifies the specific source file 
versions that went into each object and has an extensive on-line help 
facility, documentation, and an interactive tutorial program. 




8 of 8 


5/13/97 7:20 AM 




CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_7.html#A2 


• CLEARCASE 

• CMVC 

• CMVISION rCMV^ 

• COMPAREX 

• CONTROL 


CLEARCASE 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Atria Software, 
Inc. 




Version Number: 1.1.3 


In Business Since: 1990 

Date of Last Release: Jan 94 


Address: 24 Prime Park 

Way 

Date of First Release: Jun 92 


Natick, MA 01760 

Frequency of Updates: Bi-annual 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold:?,000 + 


Phone 

Number:508-650-5100 



Fax Number:508-650-1196 



E-mail 

Address:info@atria.com 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support:508-650-5151 

Single User Price:$4,000 



Site License:Call 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:Call 


Consulting Support:Yes 



Customization: Y es 

GSA Price:Call 


By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price: 15% 


By User:Yes 




PIatform(s)/Operating System(s): 

AVAILABLE TODAY SCHEDULED PORTS 

SUN SPARC/SUNOS 4.X, SOLARIS 2.X Alpha/OSF Q2 '94 

HP 700/HPUX 9.x Alpha,NT Q3 '94 

HP800/HPUX 9.x Intel/NT Q3 '94 

SGI/IRIX 5.x 




1 of 8 


5/13/97 7:20 AM 










CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.miI/cm/apxc_7.html#A2 


Minimum/Recommended Conflguration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Client: 32 MB RAM, 400 MB Disk 

Server: 64 MB RAM, 1GB Disk 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Key concept is transparent use with all tools, thus not requiring 
integrations just to be able to version the objects produced by a tool. 
Integrations: Softbench Encapsulation & Tooltalk Encapsulation, 
Scopus/ProTeam Tracking, Qualtrack/DDTS Defect Tracking, 
FrameMaker, and Interleaf. Planned Integrations: Centerline, Code 
Center, and Object Center, IDE, STP, and Lucid. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Atria's ClearCase product is the premier software configuration 
management system for UNIX development environments. ClearCase is 
built for distributed, client/server networks supporting both small and 
large scale development efforts. ClearCase supports five fundamental 
capabilities for software development: Version Control, Environment 
Management, Build Management, Defect Tracking, and Process Control. 
Through a concept called "Transparency," ClearCase offers the developer 
a "work-in- place" model for software development giving them the most 
powerful SCM system available with the lowest impact on the existing 
development environment. ClearCase is language independent, "thus all 
languages" source code (including Ada) can be managed. ClearCase's 
ability to implement Policy/Process enforcement allows for 2167 A/B, 
SEI, and ISO 9000 support. 




CMVC 


Product Information: 


Vendor: IBM 




Version Number: 2.1 


In Business Since: 

Date of Last Release: Jan 94 


Address: 1133 Westchester 
Ave. 

Date of First Release: Mar 92 


White Plains, NY 10604 

Frequency of Updates: Annual 


Marketing Contact: Dean 
Harrison 

Number Sold: 


Phone Number:213-621-5605 


2 of 8 


5/13/97 7:20 AM 





CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_7.html#A2 


II ||FaxNuniber:213-621-5537 

r Ij IIE-mail Address: 

1 II IIBulletin Board System: 

li'ricmg: 


II II Customer Support: 

Single User Price: 


11 11 

Site License: 


II II Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price: 


II ||Consulting Support:Yes 

II ||Customization:Yes 

Ci!SA Price: 


II ||By Vendor: Yes 

Maint. Price: 


II ||By User:Yes 

L-- ^ni- 

Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

RS/6000-AIX3.2 



HP - HP/UX 



Sun - Sun/OS 



Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Disk - 400 MB One of the following is required: 

RAM - 64 MB SYSBASE 
XI1 Motif INFORMIX 
TCP/IP ORACLE 
DB2/6000 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Workbench/6000 

Softbench/6000 


3 of 8 


5/13/97 7:20 AM 




CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_7.html#A2 


Description/Purpose; (Identify support for Ada, 2167A)-- 

CMVC is a software configuration management tool that provides 
application developers with configuration management and change 
control (or versioning) integrated with design and defect tracking with 
heterogeneous environments. With configurable fields, CMVC defines 
stores, and maintains a certain set of attributes for each CMVC object.’ 

CMVC offers GUI enhancements for ease of use and shortens the 

learning curve and lessens development complexity with the graphical 

browser. 


CMVISION fCMV^ 


I II Vendor: Expertware 


In Business Since: 

Address: 12901 Alcosta 
Blvd. 

Suite 2A, P.O. Box 1847 

San Ramon, CA 945^ 

Marketing Contact: Peggy 
L. Siers 

Phone 

Numbers 10-867-0315 
] [ II Fax Number :510-867-1933 

II ||B-mail Address: ' 


L- II ||Bulletin Board System: 

, ^ni^tomer Support: 


Single User Price: See below 

_ILT. 

inr 


t. 1 

1 

Site License: 

II IITraining Provided: Yes 

[Multicopy Price:$ 18,000 for 

1 II Consulting Support:Yes 

|3 users 

II II Customization: Yes 

GSA Price: 

1 ||By Vendor:Yes | 

Maint. Price: 18% 

II II By User:No 

----1 

1 

1 _ 

J:'lattorm(s)/Operatmg Mystem(s): 




SunOS, HP, DEC/Ultrix, Xenix, IBM, AIX. Most Unix base platforms. 







Product Information; 


Version Number: 1.0 
Date of Last Release: Jun 93 


Date of First Release: 
Frequency of Update s: Annual 
[Number Sold: 


4 of 8 


5/13/97 7:20 AM 




CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cni/apxc_7.html#A2 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

RAM - Minimal - 4 MB 

Recommended - 8 MB 

Disk Space - Minimal - 8 MB 

Recommended -10 MB 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CMVision is a Motif-based, graphical configuration management, program 
reporting, and electronic forms control system. The heart of CMVision is its 
tree display, a graphical hierarchy of directories and files. CMVision's 
many configuration management features are invoked on objects chosen 
from the tree. CMVision can store any file type in delta format using 
standard SCCS or RCS. CMVision includes a fully integrated problem 
reporting feature. It goes one step further in automating the paperwork 
associated with the problem reporting activity. It supports a unique form 
management system that can customize not only problem reporting forms, 
but any type of form. CMVision supports several interfaces to match the 
needs of different users, including extensive command lines, character 
mode interfaces and macro definition facilities. CMVision also provides 11 
types of version description reports. Make-build support, user-specific 
default environment specifications, parallel development, virtual views of 
directory and file structures, branch baselining, linked files, and complete 
transaction history recording and archiving. 




COMPAREX 


Product Information: 

—;—; 

Vendor: Sterling Software 




Version Number: 8.1.0 


In Business Since: 

Last Released: Apr 1994 


Address: 9340 Owensmouth 
Ave. 

First Released: 1981 


Chatsworth, CA 91313-2210 

Freq. of Updates: Annually 



Number Sold: 1,300 mainframe. 


Marketing Contact: John 
Misurek 


5 of 8 


5/13/97 7:20 AM 





CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_7.httnl#A2 


II ||PhoneNumber:818-716-1616 

II ||FaxNumber:818-998-2171 

PricmgrMVS Pricing |j ||E-mail Address: 

Single User Pnce:$15,000-$65,000 || ||Bulletin Board System: 

Site License:Contact vendor. || ||Customer Support: 

Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. || || 

II ||Training Provided:Yes 

II 1 Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:Contact vendor. || || Customization: Yes 

Maint. Price:Contact vendor. || ||By Vendor:Yes 

11 ||By User: Yes 



Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

MVS/SP, MVS/XA, MVS/ESA, DOS/VSE, VSE/ESA, VM/CMS. 

PC-DOS, MS-DOS. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size. Disk size. 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

MS-DOS and PC-DOS 5.0 or greater. 

1MB hard disk space. 

2MB RAM. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 

Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Comparex interfaces with IMS, DL/I, DB2, AD ABAS, 
CA-Datacom/DB, CA-IDMS/DB, CA-Ramis, VSAM, PDS, 
CA-Panvalet, GEM, I AM, CA-Librarian, Power, CA-Roscoe, Wylbur, 

and Focus. 







6 of 8 


5/13/97 7:20 AM 



CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_7.html#A2 


iDescription/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Comparex is a comprehensive comparison utility that compares the 
contents of any two libraries, directories, files or databases, isolates 
any changes and reports the differences. Comparex runs either as a 
batch job or with an ISPF interface under ISO. 



CONTROL 


Product Information: 


Version Number: 11 
Last Released: Jan 1994 

First Released: Jan 1981 
Freq. of Updates: 9 Months' 
Number Sold: 400 


Pricing: 

Single User Price:$9,600 
Site License .’Contact vendor. 

Multicopy Price: Contact vendor. 


GSA Price:$9,600 
Maint. Price: Contact vendor. 




Vendor: Network 
Concepts, Inc. 

||In Business Since: 1979 

I I Address: 201 Littleton 

Road 

Morris Plains, NJ 07950-2932 

Marketing 

Contact:Richard Ward 

Phone Number:(201) 

I _ [285-0202 

Fax Number: (201) 

_ [285-1198 

[~^|E-mail Addr ess: 

_Bulletin Board System: 

[Customer 

Support:201 -285-0202 

n r — 

] [ Training Provided:Yes 

I I Consulting Support:Yes 
II I Customization:No 

II I By Vendor:No 

I I I By User:No 


M II 

Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

CONTROL operates on the minimum available Tandem configurations. 
(CONTROL-CS Client requires 386 or higher PC, 4 MB RAM, Windows 
3.1, and XNS-NETBIOS or TCP/IP LAN Support and software). 



7 of 8 


5/13/97 7:20 AM 





CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.iniI/cm/apxc_7.html#A2 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interfaee, 

Network, etc.) 

Tandem Computers, Incorporated 

NONSTOP II, TXP, VLX, CYCLONE, CYCLONE/R, CLX, CLX/R. 

KlOO, K1000, K10000. 

Guardian Release C30.06-C30.09, D20. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CONTROL provides a full-spectrum software maintenance and 
management system similar to mainframe programs. It is a productivity 
tool that helps organize and monitor status of software components and 
systems during all phases of the lifecycle. CONTROL compresses 
multiple versions of source into a single file by automatically computing 
changes between successive versions; keeps an audit trail and history log 
of source modifications, when it changed, and who changed it. CONTROL 
adds a security layer that provides extra file protection and allows flexible 
authorization procedures for somce updates. In addition, CONTROL 
provides a wide range of historical reports and queries; assists in the 
system-building process by direct compilation from CONTROL files to 
compilers inserting the appropriate versions of copylibs as required. 
CONTROL tracks object files and identifies the specific source file 
versions that went into each object and has an extensive on-line help 
facility, documentation, and an interactive tutorial program. 




8 of 8 


5/13/97 7:20 AM 



CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_7.html#A3 


• CLEARCASE 

• CMVC 

• CMVISION rCMV^ 

• COMPAREX 

• CONTROL 


CLEARCASE 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Atria Software, 

Inc. 




Version Niunber: 1.1.3 


In Business Since: 1990 

Date of Last Release: Jan 94 


Address: 24 Prime Park 

Way 

Date of First Release: Jun 92 


Natick, MA 01760 

Frequency of Updates: Bi-annual 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold:?,000 + 


Phone 

Number:508-650-5100 



Fax Number:508-650-l 196 



E-mail 

Address: info@atria. com 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support: 5 08-650-5151 

Single User Price :$4,000 



Site License:Call 


Training Provided: Yes 

Multicopy Price:Call 


Consulting Support:Yes 



Customization: Yes 

GSA Price:Call 


By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price: 15% 


By User:Yes 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

AVAILABLE TODAY SCHEDULED PORTS 

SUN SPARC/SUNOS 4.X, SOLARIS 2.X Alpha/OSF Q2 '94 

HP 700/HPUX 9.x Alpha,NT Q3 '94 

HP800/HPUX 9.x Intel/NT Q3 '94 

SGI/IRIX 5.x 




Minimum/Recommended Conflguration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 


Network, etc.) 


1 of 8 


5/13/97 7:21 AM 






CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_7.html#A3 


Network, etc.) 

Client: 32 MB RAM, 400 MB Disk 
Server: 64 MB RAM, 1GB Disk 



Il_. 

11... 

1 ool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Key concept is transparent use with all tools, thus not requiring 
integrations just to be able to version the objects produced by a tool. 
Integrations: Softbench Encapsulation & Tooltalk Encapsulation, 
Scopus/ProTeam Tracking, Qualtrack/DDTS Defect Tracking, 
FrameMaker, and Interleaf. Planned Integrations: Centerline, Code 
Center, and Object Center, IDE, STP, and Lucid. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Atria's ClearCase product is the premier software configuration 
management system for UNIX development environments. ClearCase is 
built for distributed, client/server networks supporting both small and 
large scale development efforts. ClearCase supports five fundamental 
capabilities for software development: Version Control, Environment 
Management, Build Management, Defect Tracking, and Process Control. 
Tfuough a concept called "Transparency," ClearCase offers the developer 
a "work-in- place" model for software development giving them the most 
powerful SCM system available with the lowest impact on the existing 
development environment. ClearCase is language independent, "thus all 
languages" source code (including Ada) can be managed. ClearCase's 
ability to implement Policy/Process enforcement allows for 2167 A/B, 
SEI, and ISO 9000 support. 




CMVC 


Product Information: 


Vendor: IBM 




Version Number: 2.1 


In Business Since: 

Date of Last Release: Jan 94 


Address: 1133 Westchester 
Ave. 

Date of First Release: Mar 92 


White Plains, NY 10604 

Frequency of Updates: Annual 


Marketing Contact: Dean 
Harrison 

Number Sold: 


Phone Number:213-621-5605 



Fax Number:213-621-5537 



E-mail Address: 



Bulletin Board System: 


2 of 8 


5/13/97 7:21 AM 




CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.miI/cm/apxc_7.html#A3 


Pricing: 

II Customer Support: 

Single User Price: 

_il:. 

Site License: 

||Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price: 

||Consulting Support:Yes 


II Customization: Yes 

GSA Price: 

||By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price: 

llBy User:Yes 


Jl_ 

Platform(s)/Operatmg System(s): 

RS/6000 - AIX 3.2 

HP - HP/UX 

Sun - Sun/OS 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Disk - 400 MB One of the following is required: 

RAM - 64 MB SYSBASE 

XI1 Motif INFORMIX 

TCP/IP ORACLE 

DB2/6000 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Workbench/6000 

Softbench/6000 







3 of 8 


5/13/97 7:21 AM 






CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mll/cm/apxc_7.htmI#A3 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CMVC is a software configuration management tool that provides 
application developers with configuration management and change 
control (or versioning) integrated with design and defect tracking with 
heterogeneous environments. With configurable fields, CMVC defines, 
stores, and maintains a certain set of attributes for each CMVC object. 

CMVC offers GUI enhancements for ease of use and shortens the 
learning curve and lessens development complexity with the graphical 

browser. 


CMVISION fCMVf 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Expertware 




Version Number: 1.0 


In Business Since: 

Date of Last Release: Jun 93 


Address: 12901 Alcosta 

Blvd. 

Date of First Release: 


Suite 2A, P.O. Box 1847 

Frequency of Updates: Annual 


San Ramon, CA 94583 

Number Sold: 


Marketing Contact: Peggy 
L. Siers 



Phone 

Number:510-867-0315 



Fax Number:510-867-1933 



E-mail Address: 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer Support: 

Single User Price:See below 



Site License: 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:$ 18,000 for 


Consulting Support:Yes 

3 users 


1 Customization: Yes 

GSA Price: 


By Vendor: Yes 

Maint. Price: 18% 


By User:No 


Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

SunOS, HP, DEC/Ultrix, Xenix, IBM, AIX. Most Unix base platforms. 







4 of 8 


5/13/97 7:21 AM 



CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.miI/cm/apxc_7.html#A3 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

RAM - Minimal - 4 MB 

Recommended - 8 MB 

Disk Space - Minimal - 8 MB 

Recommended -10 MB 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CMVision is a Motif-based, graphical configuration management, program 
reporting, and electronic forms control system. The heart of CMVision is its 
tree display, a graphical hierarchy of directories and files. CMVision's 
many configuration management features are invoked on objects chosen 
from the tree. CMVision can store any file type in delta format using 
standard SCCS or RCS. CMVision includes a fully integrated problem 
reporting feature. It goes one step further in automating the paperwork 
associated with the problem reporting activity. It supports a unique form 
management system that can customize not only problem reporting forms, 
but any type of form. CMVision supports several interfaces to match the 
needs of different users, including extensive command lines, character 
mode interfaces and macro definition facilities. CMVision also provides 11 
types of version description reports. Make-build support, user-specific 
default environment specifications, parallel development, virtual views of 
directory and file structures, branch baselining, linked files, and complete 
transaction history recording and archiving. 




COMPAREX 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Sterling Software 




Version Number: 8.1.0 


In Business Since: 

Last Released: Apr 1994 


Address: 9340 Owensmouth 
Ave. 

First Released: 1981 


Chatsworth, CA 91313-2210 

Freq. of Updates: Annually 



Number Sold: 1,300 mainframe. 


Marketing Contact:John 
Misurek 


5 of 8 


5/13/97 7:21 AM 




CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_7.html#A3 


II ||PhoneNumber:818-716-1616 

f ||FaxNumber:818-998-2171 

PricmgrMVS Pricing || ||E-mail Address: 

Single User Price:$15,000-$65,000 |j ||Bulletin Board System: 

Site License:Contact vendor. || ||Customer Support: 

Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. jj jj 

II IITraining Provided:Yes 

1 Ij Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:Contact vendor. j || Customization: Yes 

Maint. Price:Contact vendor. || ||By Vendor:Yes 

II ||By User:Yes 



Minimum/Recommended Configuration; (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

MVS/SP, MVS/XA, MVS/ESA, DOS/VSE, VSE/ESA, VM/CMS. 

PC-DOS, MS-DOS. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size. Disk size. 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

MS-DOS and PC-DOS 5.0 or greater. 

1MB hard disk space. 

2MB RAM. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 

Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Comparex interfaces with IMS, DL/I, DB2, AD ABAS, 
CA-Datacom/DB, CA-IDMS/DB, CA-Ramis, VSAM, PDS, 
CA-Panvalet, GEM, I AM, CA-Librarian, Power, CA-Roscoe, Wylbur, 

and Focus. 







6 of 8 


5/13/97 7:21 AM 




CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_7.html#A3 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Comparex is a comprehensive comparison utility that compares the 
contents of any two libraries, directories, files or databases, isolates 
any changes and reports the differences. Comparex runs either as a 
batch job or with an ISPF interface under TSO. 


CONTROL 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Network 
Concepts, Inc. 




Version Number: 11 


In Business Since: 1979 

Last Released: Jan 1994 


Address: 201 Littleton 

Road 

First Released: Jan 1981 


Morris Plains, NJ 07950-2932 

Freq. of Updates: 9 Months 



Number Sold: 400 


Marketing 

Contact:Richard Ward 



Phone Number:(201) 
285-0202 



FaxNumber:(201) 

285-1198 

Pricing: 


E-mail Address: 

Single User Price:$9,600 


Bulletin Board System: 

Site License:Contact vendor. 


Customer 

Support:201 -285-0202 

Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. 





Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:$9,600 


Customization:No 

Maint. Price:Contact vendor. 


By Vendor:No 



By User:No 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

CONTROL operates on the minimum available Tandem configurations. 
(CONTROL-CS Client requires 386 or higher PC, 4 MB RAM, Windows 
3.1, and XNS-NETBIOS or TCP/IP LAN Support and software). 







7 of 8 


5/13/97 7:21 AM 





CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_7.html#A3 


Mmimum/Kecommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Tandem Computers, Incorporated 

NONSTOP II, TXP, VLX, CYCLONE, CYCLONE/R, CLX, CLXAl. 

KlOO, K1000,KI0000. 

Guardian Release C30.06-C30.09, D20. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CONTROL provides a full-spectrum software maintenance and 
management system similar to mainframe programs. It is a productivity 
tool that helps organize and monitor status of software components and 
systems during all phases of the lifecycle. CONTROL compresses 
multiple versions of source into a single file by automatically computing 
changes between successive versions; keeps an audit trail and history log 
of source modifications, when it changed, and who changed it. CONTROL 
adds a security layer that provides extra file protection and allows flexible 
authorization procedures for source updates. In addition, CONTROL 
provides a wide range of historical reports and queries; assists in the 
system-building process by direct compilation from CONTROL files to 
compilers inserting the appropriate versions of copylibs as required. 
CONTROL tracks object files and identifies the specific source file 
versions that went into each object and has an extensive on-line help 
facility, documentation, and an interactive tutorial program. 




8 of 8 


5/13/97 7:21 AM 



CLEARCASE 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_7.htnil#A4 


• CLEARCASE 

• CMVC 

• CMVISION rCMV) 

• COMPAREX 

• CONTROL 

CLEARCASE 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Atria Software, 

Inc. 




Version Number: 1.1.3 


In Business Since: 1990 

Date of Last Release: Jan 94 


Address: 24 Prime Park 

Way 

Date of First Release: Jun 92 


Natick, MA 01760 

Frequency of Updates: Bi-annual 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold:7,000 + 


Phone 

Number: 508-650-5100 



Fax Number:508-650-l 196 



E-mail 

Address: info@atria. com 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support:508-650-5151 

Single User Price:$4,600 



Site License:Call 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:Call 


Consulting Support:Yes 



Customization: Yes 

GSA Price:Call 


By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price: 15% 


By User:Yes 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

AVAILABLE TODAY SCHEDULED PORTS 

SUN SPARC/SUNOS 4.X, SOLARIS 2.X Alpha/OSF Q2 '94 

HP 700/HPUX 9.x Alpha,NT Q3 '94 

HP800/HPUX 9.x Intel/NT Q3 '94 

SGI/IRIX 5.x 




Minitnum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 


Network, etc.) 


lof8 


5/13/97 7:21 AM 




CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hilI.af.mi1/cm/apxc_7.html#A4 


Network, etc.) 


Client: 32 MB RAM, 400 MB Disk 

Server: 64 MB RAM, 1GB Disk 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Key concept is transparent use with all tools, thus not requiring 
integrations just to be able to version the objects produced by a tool. 
Integrations: Softbench Encapsulation & Tooltalk Encapsulation, 
Scopus/ProTeam Tracking, Qualtrack/DDTS Defect Tracking, 
FrameMaker, and Interleaf. Planned Integrations: Centerline, Code 
Center, and Object Center, IDE, STP, and Lucid. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Atria's ClearCase product is the premier software configuration 
management system for UNIX development environments. ClearCase is 
built for distributed, client/server networks supporting both small and 
large scale development efforts. ClearCase supports five fondamental 
capabilities for software development: Version Control, Environment 
Management, Build Management, Defect Tracking, and Process Control. 
Through a concept called "Transparency," ClearCase offers the developer 
a "work-in- place" model for software development giving them the most 
powerful SCM system available with the lowest impact on the existing 
development environment. ClearCase is language independent, "thus all 
languages" source code (including Ada) can be managed. ClearCase's 
ability to implement Policy/Process enforcement allows for 2167 A/B, 
SEI, and ISO 9000 support. 




CMVC 


Product Information: 


Vendior: IBM 




Version Number: 2.1 


In Business Since: 

Date of Last Release: Jan 94 


Address: 1133 Westchester 
Ave. 

Date of First Release: Mar 92 


White Plains, NY 10604 

Frequency of Updates: Annual 


Marketing Contact: Dean 
Harrison 

Number Sold: 


Phone Number:213-621-5605 



FaxNumber:213-621-5537 



E-mail Address: 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer Support: 


2 of 8 


5/13/97 7:21AM 



CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_7.html#A4 


Pricing: 

Customer Support: 

Single User Price: 

II II 

Site License: 

II [[Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price: 

[[ [[Consulting Support:Yes 

1 ||Customization:Yes 

(JHA Price: 

[[ [[By Vendor: Yes 

Maint. Price: 

[[ [[By User.'Yes 

1 II 


RS/6000 - AIX 3.2 
HP - HP/UX 
Sun - Sun/OS 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Disk - 400 MB One of the following is required: 

RAM - 64 MB SYSBASE 
XI1 Motif INFORMIX 
TCP/IP ORACLE 
DB2/6000 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Workbench/6000 

Softbench/6000 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CMVC is a software configuration management tool that provides 
application developers with configuration management and change 
control (or versioning) integrated with design and defect tracking with 
heterogeneous environments. With configurable fields, CMVC defines, 
stores, and maintains a certain set of attributes for each CMVC object. 

CMVC offers GUI enhancements for ease of use and shortens the 
learning curve and lessens development complexity with the graphical 

browser. 


3 of 8 


5/13/97 7:21 AM 



CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hiIl.af.mi1/cm/apxc_7.html#A4 


browser. 



CMVISION fCMV 


Product Information 



Version Number: 1.0 


Date of Last Release: Jun 93 


Date of First Release: 


Frequency of Updates: Annual 


Number Sold: 



I Pricing: 


Single User Price:See below 


Site License: 


Multicopy Price:$ 18,000 for 


3 users 


GSA Price: 


|Maint Price: 18% 


I P [Vendor: Expertware 

□ 

I In Bus iness Since: 

Address: 12901 Alcosta 
Blvd. 

II Suite 2A, P.O . Box 1847 

San Ramon, CA 94583 

Marketing Contact: Peggy 
L. Siers 

iPhone 

Nuniber:510-867-0315 
||Fax Number:510-867-1933 

E-mail Address: 

Bulletin Board System: 
Customer Support: 

Training Provided:Yes 
[ Consulting Support:Yes 
I Customization:Yes 
I By Vendor: Yes 
I [ By User:No 


Platforni(s)/Operating System(s): 

SunOS, HP, DEC/Ultrix, Xenix, IBM, AIX. Most Unix base platforms. 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

RAM - Minimal - 4 MB 
Recommended - 8 MB 
Disk Space - Minimal - 8 MB 
Recommended -10 MB 







5/13/97 7:21 AM 










































































CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/ctn/apxc_7.html#A4 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CMVision is a Motif-based, graphical configuration management, program 
reporting, and electronic forms control system. The heart of CMVision is its 
tree display, a graphical hierarchy of directories and files. CMVision's 
many configuration management features are invoked on objects chosen 
from the tree. CMVision can store any file type in delta format using 
standard SCCS or RCS. CMVision includes a fully integrated problem 
reporting feature. It goes one step further in automating the paperwork 
associated with the problem reporting activity. It supports a unique form 
management system that can customize not only problem reporting forms, 
but any type of form. CMVision supports several interfaces to match the 
needs of different users, including extensive command lines, character 
mode interfaces and macro definition facilities. CMVision also provides 11 
types of version description reports. Make-build support, user-specific 
default environment specifications, parallel development, virtual views of 
directory and file structures, branch baselining, linked files, and complete 
transaction history recording and archiving. 




COMPAREX 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Sterling Software 




Version Number: 8.1.0 


In Business Since: 

Last Released: Apr 1994 

/ 


Address: 9340 Owensmouth 
Ave. 

First Released: 1981 


Chatsworth, CA 91313-2210 

Freq. of Updates: Annually 



Number Sold: 1,300 mainframe. 


Marketing Contact:John 

Misurek 



Phone Number: 818-716-1616 



Fax Number:818-998-2171 

Pricing:MVS Pricing 


E-mail Address: 

Single User Price:$15,000 - $65,000 


Bulletin Board System: 

Site License:Contact vendor. 


Customer Support: 

Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. 





Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:Contact vendor. 


Customization: Yes 

Maint. Price:Contact vendor. 


By Vendor:Yes 



By User:Yes 


5 of 8 


5/13/97 7:21 AM 













CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hlll.af.mi1/cm/apxc_7.htinl#A4 



Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 

User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

MVS/SP, MVS/XA, MVS/ESA, DOSA7SE, VSE/ESA, VM/CMS. 

PC-DOS, MS-DOS. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size. Disk size. 

User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

MS-DOS and PC-DOS 5.0 or greater. 

1MB hard disk space. 

2MB RAM. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 

Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Comparex interfaces with IMS, DL/I, DB2, AD ABAS, 
CA-Datacom/DB, CA-IDMS/DB, CA-Ramis, VSAM, PDS, 
CA-Panvalet, GEM, lAM, CA-Librarian, Power, CA-Roscoe, Wylbur, 

and Focus. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Comparex is a comprehensive comparison utility that compares the 
contents of any two libraries, directories, files or databases, isolates 
any changes and reports the differences. Comparex runs either as a 
batch job or with an ISPF interface under TSO. 




CONTROL 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Network 
Concepts, Inc. 




Version Number: 11 


In Business Since: 1979 

Last Released: Jan 1994 


Address: 201 Littleton 

Road 

First Released: Jan 1981 


Morris Plains, NJ 07950-2932 


6 of 8 


5/13/97 7:21 AM 



CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.miI/cni/apxc_7.html#A4 


Freq. of Updates: 9 Months 



Number Sold: 400 


Marketing 

Contact:l3chard Ward 



Phone Number: (201) 
285-0202 



FaxNumber:(201) 

285-1198 

Pricing: 


E-mail Address: 

Single User Price:$9,600 


Bulletin Board System: 

Site License:Contact vendor. 


Customer 

Support:201-285-0202 

Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. 





Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support: Yes 

GSA Price:$9,600 


Customization:No 

Maint. Price:Contact vendor. 


By Vendor:No 



By User:No 




Platforin(s)/Operating System(s): 


CONTROL operates on the minimum available Tandem configurations. 
(CONTROL-CS Client requires 386 or higher PC, 4 MB RAM, Windows 
3.1, and XNS-NETBIOS or TCP/IP LAN Support and software). 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Tandem Computers, Incorporated 

NONSTOP II, TXP, VLX, CYCLONE, CYCLONE/R, CLX, CLX/R. 

KlOO, KIOOO, KIOOOO. 

Guardian Release C30.06-C30.09, D20. 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 


7 of 8 


5/13/97 7:21AM 



CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hilI.af.mi1/cm/apxc_7.html#A4 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CONTROL provides a full-spectrum software maintenance and 
management system similar to mainframe programs. It is a productivity 
tool that helps organize and monitor status of software components and 
systems during all phases of the lifecycle. CONTROL compresses 
multiple versions of source into a single file by automatically computing 
changes between successive versions; keeps an audit trail and history log 
of source modifications, when it changed, and who changed it. CONTROL 
adds a security layer that provides extra file protection and allows flexible 
authorization procedures for source updates. In addition, CONTROL 
provides a wide range of historical reports and queries; assists in the 
system-building process by direct compilation from CONTROL files to 
compilers inserting the appropriate versions of copylibs as required. 
CONTROL tracks object files and identifies the specific source file 
versions that went into each object and has an extensive on-line help 
facility, documentation, and an interactive tutorial program. 


8 of 8 


5/13/97 7:21 AM 




CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cni/apxc_7.html#A5 


• CLEARCASE 

• CMVC 

• CMVISION rCMV^ 

• COMPAREX 

• CONTROL 


CLEARCASE 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Atria Software, 

Inc. 




Version Number: 1.1.3 


In Business Since: 1990 

Date of Last Release: Jan 94 


Address: 24 Prime Park 

Way 

Date of First Release: Jun 92 


Natick, MA 01760 

Frequency of Updates: Bi-annual 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold:7,000 + 


Phone 

Number:508-650-5100 



Fax Number:508-650-l 196 



E-mail 

Address: info@atria. com 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support:508-650-5151 

Single User Price:$4,000 



Site License :Call 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:Call 


Consulting Support:Yes 



Customization: Yes 

GSA Price:Call 


By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price: 15% 


By User: Yes 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

AVAILABLE TODAY SCHEDULED PORTS 

SUN SPARC/SUNOS 4.X, SOLARIS 2.X Alpha/OSF Q2 '94 

HP 700/HPUX 9.x Alpha,NT Q3 '94 

HP800/HPUX 9.x Intel/NT Q3 '94 

SGI/IRIX 5.x 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 


Network, etc.) 


1 of 8 


5/13/97 7:22 AM 


CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cin/apxc_7.html#A5 


Network, etc.) 


Client: 32 MB RAM, 400 MB Disk 

Server: 64 MB RAM, 1GB Disk 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Key concept is transparent use with all tools, thus not requiring 
integrations just to be able to version the objects produced by a tool. 
Integrations: Softbench Encapsulation & Tooltalk Encapsulation, 
Scopus/ProTeam Tracking, Qualtrack/DDTS Defect Tracking, 
FrameMaker, and Interleaf. Planned Integrations: Centerline, Code 
Center, and Object Center, IDE, STP, and Lucid. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Atria's ClearCase product is the premier software configuration 
management system for UNIX development environments. ClearCase is 
built for distributed, client/server networks supporting both small and 
large scale development efforts. ClearCase supports five fundamental 
capabilities for software development: Version Control, Environment 
Management, Build Management, Defect Tracking, and Process Control. 
Through a concept called "Transparency," ClearCase offers the developer 
a "work-in- place" model for software development giving them the most 
powerful SCM system available with the lowest impact on the existing 
development environment. ClearCase is language independent, "thus all 
languages" source code (including Ada) can be managed. ClearCase's 
ability to implement Policy/Process enforcement allows for 2167 A/B, 
SEI, and ISO 9000 support. 




CMVC 


Product Information: 


Vendor: IBM 




Version Number: 2.1 


In Business Since: 

Date of Last Release: Jan 94 


Address: 1133 Westchester 
Ave. 

Date of First Release: Mar 92 


White Plains, NY 10604 

Frequency of Updates: Annual 


Marketing Contact: Dean 
Harrison 

Number Sold: 


Phone Number:213-621-5605 



Fax Number:213-621-5537 



E-mail Address: 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer Support: 


2 of 8 


5/13/97 7:22 AM 






CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_7.html#A5 


Pricing; __Customer Support: 


< .... . . _ __II_11___ 4 

Single User Price; || || 

Site License: 

1 IjTraining Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price: 

P ||Consulting Support:Yes 


1 ||Customization:Yes 

GSA Price: 

1 ||By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price: 

1 ||By User:Yes 


1 II 

PIatform(s)/Operating System(s): 

RS/6000 - AIX 3.2 

HP - HP/UX 

Sun - Sun/OS 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Disk - 400 MB One of the following is required: 

RAM - 64 MB SYSBASE 

XI1 Motif INFORMIX 

TCP/IP ORACLE 

DB2/6000 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Workbench/6000 

Softbench/6000 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CMVC is a software configuration management tool that provides 
application developers with configuration management and change 
control (or versioning) integrated with design and defect tracking with 
heterogeneous environments. With configurable fields, CMVC defines, 
stores, and maintains a certain set of attributes for each CMVC object. 

CMVC offers GUI enhancements for ease of use and shortens the 
learning curve and lessens development complexity with the graphical 

browser. 




3 of 8 


5/13/97 7:22 AM 




CLEARCASE 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_7.htinl#A5 


browser. 


CMVISION rCMV^ 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Expertware 




Version Number: 1.0 


In Business Since: 

Date of Last Release: Jun 93 


Address: 12901 Alcosta 
Blvd. 

Date of First Release: 


Suite 2A, P.O. Box 1847 

Frequency of Updates: Annual 


San Ramon, CA 94583 

Number Sold: 


Marketing Contact: Peggy 
L. Siers 



Phone 

Number:510-867-0315 



Fax Number:510-867-1933 



E-mail Address: 


t 

.1 

Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 

□ 

Customer Support: 

Single User Price:See below 

□ 


Site License: 

1 Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:$ 18,000 for 

||Consulting Support:Yes 

3 users 

n 

Customization:Yes 

GSA Price: 


By Vendor: Yes 

Maint. Price: 18% 

1 II 

||By User:No 


PIatform(s)/Operating Systein(s): 

SunOS, HP, DEC/Ultrix, Xenix, IBM, AIX. Most Unix base platforms. 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

RAM - Minimal - 4 MB 
Recommended - 8 MB 
Disk Space - Minimal - 8 MB 
Recommended -10 MB 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 


4 of 8 


5/13/97 7:22 AM 



CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_7.html#A5 


tools, etc.) 


pescription/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CMVision is a Motif-based, graphical configuration management, program 
reporting, and electronic forms control system. The heart of CMVision is its 
tree display, a graphical hierarchy of directories and files. CMVision's 
many configuration management features are invoked on objects chosen 
from the tree. CMVision can store any file type in delta format using 
standard SCCS or RCS. CMVision includes a fully integrated problem 
reporting feature. It goes one step further in automating the paperwork 
associated with the problem reporting activity. It supports a unique form 
management system that can customize not only problem reporting forms, 
but any type of form. CMVision supports several interfaces to match the 
needs of different users, including extensive command lines, character 
mode interfaces and macro definition facilities. CMVision also provides 11 
types of version description reports. Make-build support, user-specific 
default environment specifications, parallel development, virtual views of 
directory and file structures, branch baselining, linked files, and complete 
transaction history recording and archiving. 


COMPAREX 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Sterling Software 




Version Number: 8.1.0 


In Business Since: 

Last Released: Apr 1994 


Address: 9340 Owensmouth 
Ave. 

First Released: 1981 


Chatsworth, CA 91313-2210 

Freq. of Updates: Annually 



Number Sold: 1,300 mainframe. 


Marketing Contact:John 
Misurek 



PhoneNumber:818-716-1616 



Fax Number: 818-998-2171 

PricingiMVS Pricing 


E-mail Address: 

Single User Price:$15,000 - $65,000 


Bulletin Board System: 

Site License:Contact vendor. 


Customer Support: 

Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. 





Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price: Contact vendor. 


Customization:Yes 

Maint. Price:Contact vendor. 


By Vendor:Yes 



By User: Yes 




5 of 8 


5/13/97 7:22 AM 






CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_7.html#A5 


Minimum/Kecommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

MVS/SP, MVS/XA, MVS/ESA, DOSA^SE, VSE/ESA, VM/CMS. 

PC-DOS, MS-DOS. 






Mmimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size. Disk size. 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

MS-DOS and PC-DOS 5.0 or greater. 

1MB hard disk spaee. 

2MB RAM. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 

Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Comparex interfaces with IMS, DL/I, DB2, AD ABAS, 
CA-Datacom/DB, CA-IDMS/DB, CA-Ramis, VSAM, PDS, 
CA-Panvalet, GEM, I AM, CA-Librarian, Power, CA-Roscoe, Wylbur, 

and Focus. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Comparex is a comprehensive comparison utility that compares the 
contents of any two libraries, directories, files or databases, isolates 
any changes and reports the differences. Comparex runs either as a 
batch job or with an ISPF interface under ISO. 




CONTROL 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Network 
Concepts, Inc. 




Version Number: 11 


In Business Since: 1979 

Last Released: Jan 1994 


Address: 201 Littleton 

Road 

First Released: Jan 1981 


Morris Plains, NJ 07950-2932 

Freq. of Updates: 9 Months 




6 of 8 


5/13/97 7:22 AM 





CLEARCASE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cin/apxc_7.htmI#A5 


Number Sold: 400 


Marketing 

Contact:Richard Ward 



Phone Number:(201) 
285-0202 



Fax Number:(201) 

285-1198 

Pricing: 


E-mail Address: 

Single User Price:$9,600 


Bulletin Board System: 

Site License:Contact vendor. 


Customer 

Support:201-285-0202 

Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. 





Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support: Yes 

GSA Price:$9,600 


Customization:No 

Maint. Price:Contact vendor. 


By Vendor:No 



By User:No 



Plafform(s)/Operating System(s): 

CONTROL operates on the minimum available Tandem configurations. 
(CONTROL-CS Client requires 386 or higher PC, 4 MB RAM, Windows 
3.1, and XNS-NETBIOS or TCP/IP LAN Support and software). 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Tandem Computers, Incorporated 

NONSTOP II, TXP, VLX, CYCLONE, CYCLONE/R, CLX, CLX/R. 

KlOO, KIOOO, KIOOOO. 

Guardian Release C30.06-C30.09, D20. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 







7 of 8 


5/13/97 7:22 AM 




CLEARCASE 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_7.html#A5 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

CONTROL provides a full-spectrum software maintenance and 
management system similar to mainframe programs. It is a productivity 
tool that helps organize and monitor status of software components and 
systems during all phases of the lifecycle. CONTROL compresses 
multiple versions of source into a single file by automatically computing 
changes between successive versions; keeps an audit trail and history log 
of source modifications, when it changed, and who changed it. CONTROL 
adds a security layer that provides extra file protection and allows flexible 
authorization procedures for source updates. In addition, CONTROL 
provides a wide range of historical reports and queries; assists in the 
system-building process by direct compilation from CONTROL files to 
compilers inserting the appropriate versions of copylibs as required. 
CONTROL tracks object files and identifies the specific source file 
versions that went into each object and has an extensive on-line help 
facility, documentation, and an interactive tutorial program. 


8 of 8 


5/13/97 7:22 AM 



DDTs 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_8.html#Al 


• DDTs 

• DELTA 

• HISTORIAN PLUS 

• INFORMATION ASSET MANAGEMENT 

DDTs 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Qualtrak Corp. 



In Business Since: 1988 

Version Number: 3.1 


Address: 3160 De La Cruz Blvd 

Date of Last Release: Jan 94 


. STE 206 

Date of First Release: Dec 88 


Santa Clara CA 95054 

Frequency of Updates: Bi-annual 


Marketing Contact: Richard Lin 

Number Sold:!5,000 licenses 


Phone Number:408-748-9500 ext. 

121 



Fax Number:408-748-8468 



E-mail 

Address :support@qualtrak. com 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: $9,500 (10 licenses) 


Customer Support: 

Single User Price:See Above 


(Note: The following are included 
for a fee) 

Site License:Call 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:Call 


Consulting Support: Yes 



Customization: Yes 

GSA Price:N/A 


By Vendor: Yes 

Maint. Price:$2,850 (2 yrs.) 


By UsenYes 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Sun - Sun OS 4.1.X, Solaris 2.X 

IBM RS 6000/AX 

HP - HP-UX 8.0, 9.0 

DEC - UHRIX/OSF 

PC & Mac through X-server or Telnet 




1 of? 


5/13/97 7:22 AM 



DDTs 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_8.htnil#Al 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

RAM - 8 Meg 

Disk - 40 Meg 

UI - both XI1 Motif and TTY terminal 

(Network independent) 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

HP Softbench, Sun ToolTalk, Atria ClearCase, Answer Apriori, 
SMDS Aide-de-Camp, Intersolv PVCS, 

Legent TeamNet, and Oracle Sybase and RDBMS. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

DDTs offers defect tracking, change management, general issue 
tracking, help desk, and trouble ticket tracking. DDTs supports 
2167A conforming metrics. DDTs comes with more than twenty 
types of management reports, including defect arrival rate graphs, 
defect resolution rate graphs, bug counts by project and severity, 
bug counts by engineer and severity, bug counts by project and 
status, bug counts by engineer and status, full-page bug details, 
three-line bug summaries, and summaries sorted by requested 
fields. Also, included is a rich query facility that answers 
questions such as "What are all the bugs assigned to Jane or Bob 
that are severity one or two for projects XXX and YYY? 




DELTA 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Microsoft 
Corporation 




Version Number: 1.0 


In Business Since: 1983 

Last Released: Aug 1993 


Address: 90 Industrial Park 

Rd 

First Released: Aug 1993 


Hingham, MA 02043 

Freq. of Updates: Annually 


Marketing Contact: Ken 
Glansberg 


2 of 7 


5/13/97 7:22 AM 





DDTs 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.niil/cin/apxc_8.html#Al 


Number Sold; Unknown 


Phone Number;800-421-8006, 
Ext. 1436 



Fax Number:617-749-2018 



E-mail Address :None 

Pricing; 


Bulletin Board System: None 

Single User Price:$3i37 


Customer 

Support: 800-421 -8006 

Site License:$l,335/5 user. 



$4,998/20 user. 


Training Provided:No 

Multicopy Price:$319 


Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:N/A 


Customization: 

Maint. PriceiContact vendor. 


By Vendor: 



By User: 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Microsoft Windows 3.1 or greater. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

DOS 5.0 or greater. 5 MB hard disk space. 

Windows 3.1 or greater. VGA resolution or greater. 

4 MB RAM. Mouse or compatible pointing device. 

Networks: Novell; LAN Manager; LANtastic, Windows for 

Workgroups. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 

Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Version Control. 







3 of? 


5/13/97 7:22 AM 



DDTs 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cni/apxc_8.html#Al 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Delta by Microsoft Corporation is a version control system for 
Windows. Features include: Single command download of latest 
version from master project on network, automatic concurrent file 
access merging, ability to display versions of files side by side with 
differences identified and color coded, ability to see status of all 
project files at a glance. Manage source code for any language that 

uses ASCII files. 



HISTORIAN PLUS 


Product Information: 


Version Number: 4.3 
Date of Last Release: Sep 92 
Date of First Release: 1978 
I Frequency of Updates: As needed 
INumber Sold: 


Pricing: 

Single User Price:Call 
Site License:Call 
Multicopy Price:Call 

GSA Price: ~ 

Maint. Price:Call 

|Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 


]| I Vendor: OPCODE, Inc. 

n — 

”11 I In Business Since: 1971 

]| II Address: P.O. Box 26309 
]| I jAustin, TX 78755 

"j l I Marketing Conta ct: 

"1 1 ||Phone Number:5 12-346-7090 
'l l IjFax Numbers 12- 346-8522 
'l l I E-mail Address: 

] | ||Bulletin Board System: 

H I Customer Support: 

i n 

] | |[Training Provided: 

] | I Consulting Supp ort: 

] | II Customization: 

]| II By Vendor: 

II ||By User: 

mr — 


APOLLO AEGIS; CDC NOS, NOS/BE, NOS/VE, SCOPE 2; CDC CYBER 205 VSOS; 
CONCURRENT OS, Convex Convexos; Cray COS, CTSS, UNICOS, Data General AOSA/S 
DG/UX; DEC-VAX VMS, UNIX; DIPS OS; ELXSI EMBOS; FUJITSU FACOM OS; HARRIS 
VULCAN, VOS; HITACHI VOS; HP 9000 HP UX; IBM AIX; MVS, VM; NEC ACOS4, ACOS6 
SXOS; NORSK DATA SINTRAN; PRIME PRIMOS; SIEMENS BS2000; SILICON GRAPHICS 

IRIX; SUN SUNOS; UNIVAC EXEC 8. 


4 of? 


5/13/97 7:22 AM 





DDTs 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_8.html#Al 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Depends on the CPU. Programs are designed to be 
"environmental neutral." Three primary 

executable modules. In "early bind" configuration less than 1 
MB each. In "late bind," smaller yet. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Depends on the CPU/OS combination. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Historian Plus is a software configuration management 
system that enables storage/updates to source materials in one 
library, while tracking changes. Features include: storage of 
multiple definable versions; detailed history; rescindable 
modification(s); and identification scheme that flags 
overlapping modifications, and enhancies multiple 
programmer interaction. Operates on most systems, giving a 
consistent and known application across machine boundaries. 




INFORMATION ASSET MANAGEMENT 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Atherton 
Technology 



In Business Since: 

Version Number: 3.02 


Address: 39350 Civic 

Center Dr. 

Date of Last Release: Oct 93 


Suite 430 

Date of First Release: 1987 


Fremont, CA 94538 

Frequency of Updates: 9 months 


Marketing Contact: 
Marrion Sweeney 

Number Sold:2,000 


Phone 

Number:510-494-8411 



Fax Number:510-494-1776 



E-mail Address: 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support: 800-984-7233 


5 of 7 


5/13/97 1:22 AM 





DDTs 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_8.html#Al 


Single User Price:$7,590 || || 

Site License:Yes |P ||Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:Yes || ||Consulting Support: Yes 

II II Customization: Yes 

GSA Price:N/A || ||By Vendor: Yes 

Mamt. Price: 18%/yr. || ||By User:Yes 

11 11 

Platforin(s)/Operating System(s): 

Platforms Operatine Systems 

Sun Sparc Sun Solaris Sun OS 4.1.1 HP/UX 9.0 

HP 9000/700 IBM RS/6000 Solaris 2.2 Ultrix 4.2 

DEC Station SGI IRIS AIX 3.2 DG/UX 5.4.2 

DG Aviion IRIX 5.2 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration; (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

RAM-16MB DISK 15MB Swapfile-UNIX 40MB 

Pagefile/Pagespace: 80,000 Blocks 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Seamless encapsulation of any tool or process (written in any programming 

language) can be integrated 

without modification. Interleaf 5, Cadre Teamwork, IDE Software through 
Pictures, and HP SoftBench, 

IBM Workbench/6000, and Centerline CodeCenter are also supported. 







6 of? 


5/13/97 7:22 AM 




DDTs 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_8.html#Al 


Description/Purpose; (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Information Asset Management is designed to upgrade the quality of 
information, lAM expands the capability and improves the usefulness of 
existing information resources. Accessible from any platform across a 
network, it provides the access and control to quickly generate quality 
information for people who need it. This open Client/Server architecture 
reduces overhead costs, protects investments in existing technologies, and 
provides a foundation for the future. The system allows organization, 
manipulation, maintenance, and security of data and information assets. 
The management and control functions deliver better solutions in less time, 
for a lower cost. With the system comes: Version Mgmt, Process Mgmt, ’ 
Configuration Mgmt, Workflow Mgmt, Access Control, Historial 
information, Reuse, Context Mgmt, Merge, Security, Tool Integration, 
Audit Trails, Data Integration, Process Integration, Metrics; all based on an 

object-oriented repository. 


7 of? 


5/13/97 7:22 AM 




• DDTs 

• delta 

• historian PT.TTS 

• information asset MANAGRMFNT 


DDTs 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.miI/cin/apxc_8.html#A2 


Product lnformati(^ 

I Version Number: 3.1 
fOate of Last Release: Jan 94 
Date of First Release : Dec 88 
Frequency of Updates: Bi-ann ual 
Number Sold: 15,000 licenses 


|Pricing: $9,500 (10 licenses) 
[Single User Price:See Above 

Site License: Call 
Multicopy Price:Call 

GSA Price :N/A 

Maint. Price:$2,850 (2 yrs.) 

Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 



~[ | II vendo r; Qualtrakljo^^ 

~| | [|in Business Since: 1 988 

3 I Address: 3160 Ue La Cruz Blvd 

]Q(TlEiU6 

~| | II Santa (Jla ra CA 9505T 

1 1 |[iviark eting Contact: Richard Lin 

I [[Pbone Number:408-748-9500 ext 
121 

Y [[Fax N umber:408-748-8468 
E-mail ~ 

_ ^ Address :support@qualtrak.co m 

Y ||Bulletin Board System: 

[ | II Custom er SupportT 

[[(Note: The following are included 
for a fee) 

]L ||Training Provided:Yes 
] I Consulting Support:Yes ' 

] I Customization: Yes 
I I By Ven dor:Yes 

] ||By User:Yes ~ ~ 

ini 


Sun - Sun OS 4.1.X, Solaris 2.X 
IBM RS 6000/AX 
HP - HP-UX 8.0, 9.0 
DEC - UHRIX/OSF 
PC & Mac through X-server or Telnet 


1 of? 


5/13/97 7:22 AM 



DDTs 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_8.html#A2 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

RAM - 8 Meg 

Disk - 40 Meg 

UI - both XI1 Motif and TTY terminal 

(Network independent) 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

HP Softbench, Sun ToolTalk, Atria ClearCase, Answer Apriori, 
SMDS Aide-de-Camp, Intersolv PVCS, 

Legent TeamNet, and Oracle Sybase and RDBMS. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

DDTs offers defect tracking, change management, general issue 
tracking, help desk, and trouble ticket tracking. DDTs supports 
2167A conforming metrics. DDTs comes with more than twenty 
types of management reports, including defect arrival rate graphs, 
defect resolution rate graphs, bug counts by project and severity, 
bug counts by engineer and severity, bug counts by project and 
status, bug counts by engineer and status, full-page bug details, 
three-line bug summaries, and summaries sorted by requested 
fields. Also, included is a rich query facility that answers 
questions such as "What are all the bugs assigned to Jane or Bob 
that are severity one or two for projects XXX and YYY? 




DELTA 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Microsoft 
Corporation 




Version Number: 1.0 


In Business Since: 1983 

Last Released: Aug 1993 


Address: 90 Industrial Park 

Rd 

First Released: Aug 1993 


Hingham, MA 02043 

Freq. of Updates: Annually 


Marketing Contact: Ken 
Glansberg 


2 of 7 


5/13/97 7:22 AM 





DDTs 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_8.html#A2 


Number Sold: Unknown 

] 

] 

Phone Number:800-421-8006, 
Ext. 1436 


1 

Fax Number:617-749-2018 


1 

E-mail Address :None 

Pricing: 

] 

Bulletin Board System: None 

Single User Price:$337 

1 

Customer 

Support: 800-421 -8006 

Site License:$l,335/5 user. 



$4,998/20 user. 


Iraining Provided:No 

Multicopy Price:$319 


Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:N/A 


Customization: 

Maint. PriceiContact vendor. 


3y Vendor: 



3y User: 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Microsoft Windows 3.1 or greater. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

DOS 5.0 or greater. 5 MB hard disk space. 

Windows 3.1 or greater. VGA resolution or greater. 

4 MB RAM. Mouse or compatible pointing device. 

Networks: Novell; LAN Manager; LANtastic, Windows for 

Workgroups. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Version Control. 







3 of? 


5/13/97 7:22 AM 




DDTs 


http;//www.stsc.hil].af.niil/cm/apxc_8.html#A2 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Delta by Microsoft Corporation is a version control system for 
Windows. Features include: Single command download of latest 
version from master project on network, automatic concurrent file 
access merging, ability to display versions of files side by side with 
differences identified and color coded, ability to see status of all 
project files at a glance. Manage source code for any language that 

uses ASCII files. 


HISTORIAN PLUS 


Product Information: || || 

Vendor: OPCODE, Inc. 

1 JL 

Version Number: 4.3 || |[ 

In Business Since: 1971 

Date of Last Release: Sep 92 || |[ 

Address: P.O. Box 26309 

Date of First Release: 1978 || |[ 

Austin, TX 78755 

Frequency ofUpdates: As needed || |[ 

Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: || [[ 

Phone Number:512-346-7090 

II ||Fax Numbers 12-346-8522 

II IIE-mail Address: 

II ||Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: || jl" 

Customer Support: 

Single User Price:Call || || 

I Site License:Call || ||^ 

Training Provided: 

1 Multicopy Price:Call || |[ 

Consulting Support: 

II II Customization: 

GSA Price: | ||: 

By Vendor: 


Maint. Price :Call || ll' 

By User: 


iiJi 

1 Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 



APOLLO AEGIS; CDC NOS, NOS/BE, NOS/VE, SCOPE 2; CDC CYBER 205 VSOS; 
CONCURRENT OS, Convex Convexos; Cray COS, CTSS, UNICOS, Data General AOS/VS, 
DG/UX; DEC-VAX VMS, UNIX; DIPS OS; ELXSIEMBOS; FUJITSU FACOM OS; HARRIS 
VULCAN, VOS; HITACHI VOS; HP 9000 HP UX; IBM AIX; MVS, VM; NEC ACOS4, ACOS6, 
SXOS; NORSK DATA SINTRAN; PRIME PRIMOS; SIEMENS BS2000; SILICON GRAPHICS 

IRIX; SUN SUNOS; UNIVAC EXEC 8. 





4 of 7 


5/13/97 7:22 AM 






DDTs 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_8.html#A2 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Depends on the CPU. Programs are designed to be 
"environmental neutral." Three primary 

executable modules. In "early bind" configuration less than 1 
MB each. In "late bind," smaller yet. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Depends on the CPU/OS combination. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Historian Plus is a software configuration management 
system that enables storage/updates to source materials in one 
library, while tracking changes. Features include: storage of 
multiple definable versions; detailed history; rescindable 
modification(s); and identification scheme that flags 
overlapping modifications, and enhancies multiple 
programmer interaction. Operates on most systems, giving a 
consistent and known application across machine boundaries. 




INFORMATION ASSET MANAGEMENT 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Atherton 
Technology 



In Business Since: 

Version Number: 3.02 


Address: 39350 Civic 

Center Dr. 

Date of Last Release: Oct 93 


Suite 430 

Date of First Release: 1987 


Fremont, CA 94538 

Frequency of Updates: 9 months 


Marketing Contact: 
Marrion Sweeney 

Number Sold:2,000 


Phone 

Number:510-494-8411 



Fax Number:510-494-1776 



E-mail Address: 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support: 800-984-7233 


5 of? 


5/13/97 7:22 AM 





DDTs 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_8.html#A2 


Single User Price:$7,590 || || 

Site License:Yes |j ||Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:Yes || ||Consulting Support:Yes 

II II Customization: Yes 

GSA Price:N/A || ||By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price: 18%/yr. j| j|By User:Yes 

II II _ 

Platform(s)/Operating System(s); 

Platforms Operating Systems 

Sun Sparc Sun Solaris Sun OS 4.1.1 HP/UX 9.0 

HP 9000/700 IBM RS/6000 Solaris 2.2 Ultrix 4.2 

DEC Station SGI IRIS AIX 3.2 DG/UX 5.4.2 

DG Aviion IRIX 5.2 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

RAM-16MB DISK I5MB Swapfile-UNIX 40MB 

Pagefile/Pagespace: 80,000 Blocks 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Seamless encapsulation of any tool or process (written in any programming 

language) can be integrated 

without modification. Interleaf 5, Cadre Teamwork, IDE Software through 

Pictures, and HP SoftBench, 

IBM Workbench/6000, and Centerline CodeCenter are also supported. 







6 of? 


5/13/97 1:22 AM 





DDTs 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_8.html#A2 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Information Asset Management is designed to upgrade the quality of 
information, lAM expands the capability and improves the usefulness of 
existing information resources. Accessible from any platform across a 
network, it provides the access and control to quickly generate quality 
information for people who need it. This open Client/Server architecture 
reduces overhead costs, protects investments in existing technologies, and 
provides a foundation for the future. The system allows organization, 
manipulation, maintenance, and security of data and information assets. 
The management and control functions deliver better solutions in less time, 
for a lower cost. With the system comes: Version Mgmt, Process Mgmt, 
Configuration Mgmt, Workflow Mgmt, Access Control, Historial 
information. Reuse, Context Mgmt, Merge, Security, Tool Integration, 
Audit Trails, Data Integration, Process Integration, Metrics; all based on an 

object-oriented repository. 


7 of? 


5/13/97 7:22 AM 




DDTs 


http://www.stsc.hill,af.mil/cm/apxc_8.htinl#A3 


• DDTs 

• DELTA 

• HISTORIAN PLUS 

• INFORMATION ASSET MANAGEMENT 

DDTs 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Qualtrak Corp. 



In Business Since: 1988 

Version Number: 3.1 


Address: 3160 De La Cruz Blvd 

Date of Last Release: Jan 94 


. STE 206 

Date of First Release: Dec 88 


Santa Clara CA 95054 

Frequency of Updates: Bi-annual 


Marketing Contact: Richard Lin 

Number Sold: 15,000 licenses 


Phone Number:408-748-9500 ext. 

121 



Fax Number:408-748-8468 



E-mail 

Address:support@qualtrak.com 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: $9,500 (10 licenses) 


Customer Support: 

Single User Price:See Above 


(Note: The following are included 
for a fee) 

Site License:Call 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:Call 


Consulting Support:Yes 



Customization: Y es 

GSA Price:N/A 


By Vendor: Yes 

Maint. Price:$2,850 (2 yrs.) 


By UserYes 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Sun - Sun OS 4. LX, Solaris 2.X 

IBM RS 6000/AX 

HP - HP-UX 8.0, 9.0 

DEC - UHRIX/OSF 

PC & Mac through X-server or Telnet 


JL.. 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 


Network, etc.) 
RAM - 8 Meg 


1 of 6 


5/13/97 7:23 AM 




DDTs 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/ctn/apxc_8.html#A3 


Disk - 40 Meg 

UI - both XI1 Motif and TTY terminal 

(Network independent) 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

HP Softbench, Sun ToolTalk, Atria ClearCase, Answer Apriori, 
SMDS Aide-de-Camp, Intersolv PVCS, 

Legent TeamNet, and Oracle Sybase and RDBMS. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

DDTs offers defect tracking, change management, general issue 
tracking, help desk, and trouble ticket tracking. DDTs supports 
2167A conforming metrics. DDTs comes with more than twenty 
types of management reports, including defect arrival rate graphs, 
defect resolution rate graphs, bug counts by project and severity, 
bug counts by engineer and severity, bug counts by project and 
status, bug counts by engineer and status, full-page bug details, 
three-line bug summaries, and summaries sorted by requested 
fields. Also, included is a rich query facility that answers 
questions such as "What are all the bugs assigned to Jane or Bob 
that are severity one or two for projects XXX and YYY? 




DELTA 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Microsoft 
Corporation 




Version Number: 1.0 


In Business Since: 1983 

Last Released: Aug 1993 


Address: 90 Industrial Park 

Rd 

First Released: Aug 1993 


Hingham, MA 02043 

Freq. of Updates: Annually 


Marketing Contact: Ken 

Glansberg 

Number Sold: Unknown 


Phone Number:800-421 -8006, 
Ext. 1436 



Fax Number:617-749-2018 



E-mail Address :None 

Pricing: 


Bulletin Board System; None 


2 of 6 


5/13/97 7:23 AM 




DDTs 


http://www.stsc.hiIl.af.niil/cm/apxc_8.html#A3 


Single User Price:$337 


Customer 

Support:800-421-8006 

Site Licensers 1,335/5 user. 

□ 


$4,998/20 user. 

□ 

Training Provided:No 

Multicopy Price:$319 

□ 

□ 

Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price :N/A 

Customization: 

Maint. Price:Contact vendor. 

□ 

By Vendor: 


□ 

By User: 




Flatlorm(sj/Operatmg System(s): - ============^^ 

Microsoft Windows 3.1 or greater. 



-—- 1 

Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size. 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

DOS 5.0 or greater. 5 MB hard disk space. 

Windows 3.1 or greater. VGA resolution or greater. 

4 MB RAM. Mouse or compatible pointing device. 

Networks: Novell; LAN Manager; LANtastic, Windows for 

Workgroups. 






fool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 

Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Version Control. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Delta by Microsoft Corporation is a version control system for 
Windows. Features include: Single command download of latest 
version from master project on network, automatic concurrent file 
access merging, ability to display versions of files side by side with 
differences identified and color coded, ability to see status of all 
project files at a glance. Manage source code for any language that 

uses ASCII files. 




HISTORIAN PT. ITS 


3 of 6 


5/13/97 7:23 AM 




DDTs 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cni/apxc_8.html#A3 


Product Information: || 

][ 

Vendor: OPCODE, Inc. 

II II 

Version Number: 4.3 || 

][ 

In Business Since: 1971 

Date of Last Release: Sep 92 || 

IIAddress: P.O. Box 26309 

Date of First Release: 1978 || 

II Austin, TX 78755 

Frequency of Updates: As needed || 

][ 

Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: || 

II Phone Number:512-346-7090 

II l|FaxNumber:512-346-8522 

II IIE-mail Address: 

II ||Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: || 

I 

Customer Support: 

Single User Price:Call || || 

Site License:Call || 

||Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call || 

II Consulting Support: 

1 II Customization: 

GSA Price: || 

||By Vendor: 


Maint. Price:Call || 

1|By User: 


1 JL 

j Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 




APOLLO AEGIS; CDC NOS, NOS/BE, NOSA^E, SCOPE 2; CDC CYBER 205 VSOS; 
CONCURRENT OS, Convex Convexos; Cray COS, CTSS, UNICOS, Data General AOS/VS, 
DG/UX; DEC-VAX VMS, UNIX; DIPS OS; ELXSI EMBOS; FUJITSU FACOM OS; HARRIS 
VULCAN, VOS; HITACHI VOS; HP 9000 HP UX; IBM AIX; MVS, VM; NEC ACOS4, ACOS6, 
SXOS; NORSK DATA SINTRAN; PRIME PRIMOS; SIEMENS BS2000; SILICON GRAPHICS 

IRIX; SUN SUNOS; UNIVAC EXEC 8. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 



Network, etc.) 




Depends on the CPU. Programs are designed to be 
"environmental neutral." Three primary 




executable modules. In "early bind" configuration less than I 
MB each. In "late bind," smaller yet. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 




tools, etc.) 




Depends on the CPU/OS combination. 





4 of 6 


5/13/97 7:23 AM 





DDTs 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_8.html#A3 





Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Historian Plus is a software configuration management 
system that enables storage/updates to source materials in one 
library, while tracking changes. Features include: storage of 
multiple definable versions; detailed history; rescindable 
modification(s); and identification scheme that flags 
overlapping modifications, and enhancies multiple 
programmer interaction. Operates on most systems, giving a 
consistent and knovra application across machine boundaries. 




INFORMATION ASSET MANAGEMENT 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Atherton 
Technology 



In Business Since: 

Version Number: 3.02 


Address: 39350 Civic 

Center Dr. 

Date of Last Release: Oct 93 


Suite 430 

Date of First Release: 1987 


Fremont, CA 94538 

Frequency of Updates: 9 months 


Marketing Contact: 

Marrion Sweeney 

Number Sold:2,000 


Phone 

Number:510-494-8411 



Fax Number:510-494-1776 



E-mail Address: 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support:800-984-7233 

Single User Price:$7,590 



Site License:Yes 


Training Provided: Yes 

Multicopy Price:Yes 


Consulting Support:Yes 



Customization:Yes 

GSA Price:N/A 


By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price: 18%/yr. 


By User:Yes 





5 of 6 


5/13/97 7:23 AM 




DDTs 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_8.html#A3 


Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Platforms Ooeratine Systems 

Sun Sparc Sun Solaris Sun OS 4.1.1 HP/UX 9.0 

HP 9000/700 IBM RS/6000 Solaris 2.2 Ultrix 4.2 

DEC Station SGI IRIS AIX 3.2 DG/UX 5.4.2 

DG Aviion IRIX 5.2 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

RAM-16MB DISK 15MB Swapfile-UNIX 40MB 

Pagefile/Pagespace: 80,000 Blocks 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Seamless encapsulation of any tool or process (written in any programming 

language) can be integrated 

without modification. Interleaf 5, Cadre Teamwork, IDE Software through 
Pictures, and HP SoftBench, 

IBM Workbench/6000, and Centerline CodeCenter are also supported. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Information Asset Management is designed to upgrade the quality of 
information, lAM expands the capability and improves the usefulness of 
existing information resources. Accessible from any platform across a 
network, it provides the access and control to quickly generate quality 
information for people who need it. This open Client/Server architecture 
reduces overhead costs, protects investments in existing technologies, and 
provides a foundation for the future. The system allows organization, 
manipulation, maintenance, and security of data and information assets. 
The management and control functions deliver better solutions in less time, 
for a lower cost. With the system comes: Version Mgmt, Process Mgmt, ’ 
Configuration Mgmt, Workflow Mgmt, Access Control, Historial 
information. Reuse, Context Mgmt, Merge, Security, Tool Integration, 
Audit Trails, Data Integration, Process Integration, Metrics; all based on an 

object-oriented repository. 




6 of 6 


5/13/97 7:23 AM 




DDTs 


http://www.stsc.hllI.af.miI/cm/apxc_8.htinl#A4 


• DDTs 

• DELTA 

• HISTORIAN PLUS 

• INFORMATION ASSET MANAGEMENT 

DDTs 


Product Information: 

— 

Vendor: Qualtrak Corp. 



In Business Since: 1988 

Version Number: 3.1 


Address: 3160 De La Cruz Blvd 

Date of Last Release: Jan 94 


. STE 206 

Date of First Release: Dec 88 


Santa Clara CA 95054 

Frequency of Updates: Bi-annual 


Marketing Contact: Richard Lin 

Number Sold: 15,000 licenses 


Phone Number:408-748-9500 ext. 

121 



Fax Number:408-748-8468 



E-mail 

Address: support@qualtrak. com 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: $9,500 (10 licenses) 


Customer Support: 

Single User Price:See Above 


(Note: The following are included 
for a fee) 

Site License:Call 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price: Call 


Consulting Support:Yes 



Customization: Yes 


GSA Price:N/A ||By Vendor: Yes 

Maint. Price:$2,850 (2 yrs.) ]| ||By User:Yes 


Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Sun - Sun OS 4.1 .X, Solaris 2.X 
IBM RS 6000/AX 
HP - HP-UX 8.0,9.0 
DEC - UHRIX/OSF 
PC & Mac through X-server or Telnet 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

RAM - 8 Meg 


1 of 6 


5/13/97 7:23 AM 


DDTs 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_8.html#A4 


Disk - 40 Meg 

UI - both XI1 Motif and TTY terminal 

(Network independent) 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

HP Softbench, Sun ToolTalk, Atria ClearCase, Answer Apriori, 
SMDS Aide-de-Camp, Intersolv PVCS, 

Legent TeamNet, and Oracle Sybase and RDBMS. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

DDTs offers defect tracking, change management, general issue 
tracking, help desk, and trouble ticket tracking. DDTs supports 
2167A conforming metrics. DDTs comes with more than twenty 
types of management reports, including defect arrival rate graphs, 
defect resolution rate graphs, bug counts by project and severity, 
bug counts by engineer and severity, bug counts by project and 
status, bug counts by engineer and status, full-page bug details, 
three-line bug summaries, and summaries sorted by requested 
fields. Also, included is a rich query facility that answers 
questions such as "What are all the bugs assigned to Jane or Bob 
that are severity one or two for projects XXX and YYY? 




DELTA 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Microsoft 
Corporation 





D 

Version Number: 1.0 


In Business Since: 1983 


Last Released: Aug 1993 


Address: 90 Industrial Park 

Rd 


First Released: Aug 1993 


Hingham, MA 02043 


Freq. of Updates: Annually 


Marketing Contact: Ken 
Glansberg 


Number Sold: Unknown 


Phone Number:800-421-8006, 
Ext. 1436 




Fax Number:617-749-2018 




E-mail Address :None 


Pricing: 


Bulletin Board System: None 


Single User Price:$337 


Customer 

Support: 800-421-8006 



2 of 6 


5/13/97 7:23 AM 




DDTs 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.inil/cm/apxc_8.html#A4 


Support:800-421-8006 


Site License:$l,335/5 user. |[ ji 

$4,998/20 user. || ||Training Provided:No 

Multicopy Price.$319 | ||Consulting SupportrYes 

(iSA Price.N/A || || Customization: 

Mamt. Price:Contact vendor. |j ||By Vendor: 

1 n By User: 

^ ^ ^ni- 

Plattorm(s)/Operating System(s): 

Microsoft Windows 3.1 or greater. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

DOS 5.0 or greater. 5 MB hard disk space. 

Windows 3.1 or greater. VGA resolution or greater. 

4 MB RAM. Mouse or compatible pointing device. 

Networks: Novell; LAN Manager; LANtastic, Windows for 

Workgroups. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 

Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Version Control. 






Descnption/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Delta by Microsoft Corporation is a version control system for 
Windows. Features include: Single command download of latest 
version from master project on network, automatic concurrent file 
access merging, ability to display versions of files side by side with 
differences identified and color coded, ability to see status of all 
project files at a glance. Manage source code for any language that 

uses ASCII files. 




HISTORTAN PTJIS 


Product Information; || ||Vendor: OPCODE,"inZ 

in 


3 of 6 


5/13/97 7:23 AM 





DDTs 


http://www.stsc.hiIl.af.mi1/cm/apxc_8.html#A4 


Version Number: 4.3 || 

I 

n Business Since: 1971 

Date of Last Release: Sep 92 || 

1 Address: P.O. Box 26309 

Date of First Release: 1978 jj 

fAustin, TX 78755 


Frequency of Updates: As needed || 

II Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: || 

“ijphone Number:512-346-7090 

^1 ||FaxNumber:512-346-8522 

I 1 E-mail Address: 

II IIBulletin Board System: 

Pricing: || 

II Customer Support: 

Single User Price:Call |p 

I 



Site License :Call || 

1 Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call |[~ 

~|| Consulting Support: 

II II Customization: 

GSA Price: f 

II By Vendor: 


Maint. Price:Call \[~ 

~]|By User: 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 




APOLLO AEGIS; CDC NOS, NOS/BE, NOS/VE, SCOPE 2; CDC CYBER 205 VSOS; 
CONCURRENT OS, Convex Convexos; Cray COS, CTSS, UNICOS, Data General AOS/VS, 
DG/UX; DEC-VAX VMS, UNIX; DIPS OS; ELXSIEMBOS; FUJITSU FACOM OS; HARRIS 
VULCAN, VOS; HITACHI VOS; HP 9000 HP UX; IBM AIX; MVS, VM; NEC ACOS4, ACOS6, 
SXOS; NORSK DATA SINTRAN; PRIME PRIMOS; SIEMENS BS2000; SILICON GRAPHICS 

IRIX; SUN SUNOS; UNIVAC EXEC 8. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 



Network, etc.) 




Depends on the CPU. Programs are designed to be 
"environmental neutral." Three primary 




executable modules. In "early bind" configuration less than 1 
MB each. In "late bind," smaller yet. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 




tools, etc.) 




Depends on the CPU/OS combination. 








4 of 6 


5/13/97 7:23 AM 





DDTs 


http://www.stsc.hilI.af.mi1/cm/apxc_8.html#A4 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Historian Plus is a software configuration management 
system that enables storage/updates to source materials in one 
library, while tracking changes. Features include: storage of 
multiple definable versions; detailed history; rescindable 
modification(s); and identification scheme that flags 
overlapping modifications, and enhancies multiple 
programmer interaction. Operates on most systems, giving a 
consistent and known application across machine boundaries. 


INFORMATION ASSET MANAGEMENT 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Atherton 
Technology 



In Business Since: 

Version Number: 3.02 


Address: 39350 Civic 

Center Dr. 

Date of Last Release: Oct 93 


Suite 430 

Date of First Release: 1987 


Fremont, CA 94538 

Frequency of Updates: 9 months 


Marketing Contact: 

Marrion Sweeney 

Number Sold:2,()06 


Phone 

Number:510-494-8411 



FaxNumber:510-494-1776 



E-mail Address: 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support:800-984-7233 

Single User Price:$7,590 



Site License:Yes 


Training Provided: Yes 

Multicopy Price: Yes 


Consulting Support:Yes 



Customization: Y es 

GSA Price :N/A 


By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price: 18%/yr. 


By User:Yes 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 



Platforms Oneratins Svstems 



Sun Sparc Sun Solaris Sun OS 4.1.1 HP/UX 9.0 

HP 9000/700 IBM RS/6000 Solaris 2.2 Ultrix 4.2 

DEC Station SGI IRIS AIX 3.2 DG/UX 5.4.2 


DGAviion IRIX 5.2 




5 of 6 


5/13/97 7:23 AM 






DDTs 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.niil/cm/apxc_8.html#A4 


1 II 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

RAM-16MB DISK 15MB Swapfile-UNIX 40MB 

Pagefile/Pagespace: 80,000 Blocks 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Seamless encapsulation of any tool or process (written in any programming 

language) can be integrated 

without modification. Interleaf 5, Cadre Teamwork, IDE Software through 
Pictures, and HP SoftBench, 

IBM Workbench/6000, and Centerline CodeCenter are also supported. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Information Asset Management is designed to upgrade the quality of 
information, lAM expands the capability and improves the usefulness of 
existing information resources. Accessible from any platform across a 
network, it provides the access and control to quickly generate quality 
information for people who need it. This open Client/Server architecture 
reduces overhead costs, protects investments in existing technologies, and 
provides a foundation for the future. The system allows organization, 
manipulation, maintenance, and security of data and information assets. 
The management and control functions deliver better solutions in less time, 
for a lower cost. With the system comes: Version Mgmt, Process Mgmt, 
Configuration Mgmt, Workflow Mgmt, Access Control, Historial 
information. Reuse, Context Mgmt, Merge, Security, Tool Integration, 
Audit Trails, Data Integration, Process Integration, Metrics; all based on an 

object-oriented repository. 




6 of 6 


5/13/97 7:23 AM 




MAXTRAC 


http.7/www.stsc.hilI.af.mil/cm/apxc_9.html#Al 


• MAXTRAC 

• METHODMANAGKR 

• MKS RCS 

• OBJECT CM 

MAXTRAC 


Product Information: 

II IIVendor: BlueLine Software 

_ n - 

Version Number: 2.1.1 

II ||In Business Since: 1985 

Date of Last Release: 

II ||Address: 5775 Wayzata Blvd. 

Date of First Release: 

II II Minneapolis, MN 55416 

Frequency of Updates: 

II II Marketing Contact: Wayne Hamilton 

Number Sold: 

II ||PhoneNumber:612-542-1072 

I ||FaxNumber:612-542-9566 


- g 

E-mail Address:wayne@blueline.mn.org 

^□IZ 

II ||Bulletin Board System:612-542-8431 

rricing: 

II ||Customer Support:800-826-0313 

Single User Price:contact vendor 

_^Ul 


_ M - 

Site License:contact vendor 

II II Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:contact vendor 

II ||Consulting Support:Yes 

II II Customization: Yes 

(iSA Pricexontact vendor 

II ||By Vendor: Yes 


Maint. Price:contact vendor 

II ||By User:No 


-_ — - 

Platlorm(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBMVM 






Miniinum/Recommended Conilguration: (RAM size, 

Disk size, User Interface, 



Network, etc.) 




Client: 




Server:Disk: 16 cylinder of 3375 plus temporary work disk 
of 800 4K blocks. 







1 of 6 


5/13/97 7:24 AM 




MAXTRAC 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_9.htnil#Al 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Uses SQL database. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Provides a central tracking facility for problem reporting, 
problem resolution, system component tracking, and change 

tracking. 




METHODMANAGER 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Manager Software 
Products, Inc. 




Version Number: 2.2 


In Business Since: 1968 

Date of Last Release: Sep 93 


Address: 131 Hartwell Avenue 

Date of First Release: Nov 90 


Lexington, MA 02173 

Frequency of Updates: Annual 


Marketing Contact: Jane R. 
Circle, Sales Mgr. 

Number Sold: 1,200 


Phone Number:617-863-5800 

worldwide 


FaxNumber:6i7-861-6130 

Date of next release:Mar 94 


E-mail Address: 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support: 800-737-6748 

Single User Price:$33,750 



Site License:Not Available 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:PC prod only: 


Consulting Support:Yes 

$6,413 


Customization: Yes 

GSA Price: Above 


By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price: 15% of current 


By User:Yes 

license fee || 





Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

MVS, VM, IBM mainframe or compatible CPU. 

IBM-PC or compatible running Windows 3.1. 



2 of 6 


5/13/97 7:24 AM 





MAXTRAC 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cin/apxc_9.html#Al 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

PC products - 80386 or better workstation, 6 meg of base memory, 8 
meg of hard disk space, Windows 3.1. 

Mainframe products - IBM 370 architecture or compatible CPU. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Interfaces for: lEW/ADW, Bachman DBA, Intersolv ILR. 

Databases supported: IMS, IDMS, DB2, Oracle, Sybase, Informix, or 
other related databases if needed. 

Please contact Manager Software Products, Inc. for additional 

information. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

METHODMANAGER and managerView are an integrated set of 
Repository Serviees and Funetions to assist organizations in the 
management of metadata assets: data modeling, design and impact 
analysis for new development, or the reengineering of legaey systems. 

NOTE: Please see GSA Contract GS00K92AGS5980 and ADP 
Schedule for terms and complete pricing information. 
METHODMANAGER is only available under the Special Migration 

Pricing Plan. 




MKS RCS 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Mortice Kern Systems, 
Inc. 




Version Number: 6.1 


In Business Since: 1984 

Last Released: Nov 1993 


Address: 35 King Street North 

First Released: 1987 


Waterloo, ONTN2J2W9 

Freq. of Updates: Bi-annual 


Marketing Contact: Chuck 
Lownie 

Number Sold: 25,000 


Phone Number:519-883-4363 



FaxNumber:519-884-8861 



E-mail Address:chuck@mks.com 


3 of 6 


5/13/97 7:24 AM 






MAXTRAC 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/ctn/apxc_9.html#Al 


Pricing: || \\] 

Bulletin Board System: 

Single User Price:$349 || |[i 

Customer Support:519-884-2270 

Site License:Contact vendor. | |[ 


Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. || |p 

fraining Provided:Yes 

II 1' 

Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:N/A | jf( 

Customization: Yes 

Maint. Price:Incl. with multi- || ||i 

By Vendor:No 

user license. | ||] 

By User:Yes 

1 1 


Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

DOS Sun/OS 

Windows UnixWare 

OS/2 386 Unix 

Windows NT AIX 

SCO Unix NetWare 

1 



Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

640K and hard drive. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Doeumentation 

tools, ete.) 

No incompatibilities with any other development tools. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

MKS RCS is a complete configuration management system. It 
offers both binary and text file support, full network support, 
make/configuration builder, locking, visual differencing, 
branching, merging, production control, and project management. 




OBJECT CM 


Product Information: 


]|Vendor: Alsys, Inc. 




4 of 6 


5/13/97 7:24 AM 




MAXTRAC 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.niil/cni/apxc_9.htnil#Al 





Version Number: 1.3 


In Business Since: 1980 

Date of Last Release: Feb 94 


Address: 10251 Vista 

Sorrento Pkwy. 

Date of First Release: Feb 94 


San Diego, CA 92121 

Frequency of Updates: Bi-annual 


Marketing Contact: Bill 

Hart 

Number Sold:3 


Phone 

Number:619-457-2700 



Fax Number:619-452-1334 



E-mail 

Address:hart@alsys.com 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support:800-995-2579 

Single User Price:$3,300 



Site License: 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:$2,450 for 30 


Consulting Support:Yes 

$2,250 for 50 


Customization: Y es 

GSA Price:Call 


By Vendor: Yes 

Maint. Price:20% 


By User: Yes 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Sun Sparc SunOS 

HP9000/7xxHP/UX 

IBM/RS/6000 AIX 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

32 MB RAM, 150 MB Disk. Motif or Open Look user interface. NFS if 
distributed development is desired. 







5 of 6 


5/13/97 7:24 AM 



MAXTRAC 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.niiI/cni/apxc_9.html#Al 


lool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation ^ ’ 

tools, etc.) 

Upper CASE; Cadre TeamWork, IDE Software through Pictures 
Frameworks: Freedom Works, Entreprise II 

Databases; Emeraude PCTE 

Compilers: Alsys Ada, Verdix Ada, C, C++, Fortran 

Documentation Tools: Interleaf, FrameMaker 

User Interface Builders; TeleUse, UIMX 

Metrics/Test Tools Logiscope 



Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2I67A) 

Object CM is a highly tailorable configuration management system that 
is designed to accommodate a wide range of CM needs. In its simplest 
operational mode, it serves as a repository for versioned files and 
configurations. In its most sophisticated form, it is a complete 
development environment, with context-sensitive access to encapsulated 
tools, management of user tasks and roles, and the ability to define and 
support software development processes. Object CM's underlying PCTE 
(Portable Common Tools Environment) repository allows users to 
organize software engineering work products in a way that reflects the 
true structure of their project. Object CM includes a code production 
facility that is language independent, yet includes full support for 

dependency analysis and program builds. Also included is a 
2167A process definition, a tailorable problem tracking and change 
management system, and communication utilities to support both local 
and wide-area network development. 




6 of 6 


5/13/97 7:24 AM 




MAXTRAC 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_9.httnl#A2 


• MAXTRAC 

• METHODMANAGER 

• MKS RCS 

• OBJECT CM 

MAXTRAC 


Product Information; 

1 

1 Vendor: BlueLine Software || 


Version Number: 2.1.1 

1 

||In Business Since: 1985 

Date of Last Release: 

.... 1 

’]|Address: 5775 Wayzata Blvd. 

Date of First Release: 

1 

~||Minneapolis, MN 55416 

Frequency of Updates: 

1 

"IjMarketing Contact: Wayne Hamilton 

Number Sold: 

_ 

~|[Phone Number:612-542-1072 

1 ||FaxNumber:612-542-9566 

1 ||E-mail Address:wayne@blueline.mn.org 

11 II 

1 llBulletin Board System:612-542-8431 

Pricing: 

II 

||Customer Support:800-826-0313 

Single User Price:contact vendor || || 

Site License:contact vendor 

II 

||Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:contact vendor 

_ 

||Consulting Support:Yes 

1 I Customization: Yes 

GSA Price:contact vendor 

II 

^|By Vendor:Yes 


Maint. Price:contact vendor 

_ 

"llBy User:No 


in 

Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBMVM 







Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, 
Disk size, User Interface, 




Network, etc.) 





Client: 





Server:Disk: 16 cylinder of 3375 plus temporary work disk 
of 800 4K blocks. 







1 of 6 


5/13/97 7:24 AM 




MAXTRAC 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_9.html#A2 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Uses SQL database. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Provides a central tracking facility for problem reporting, 
problem resolution, system component tracking, and change 

tracking. 




METHODMANAGER 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Manager Software 
Products, Inc. 




Version Number: 2.2 


In Business Since: 1968 

Date of Last Release: Sep 93 


Address: 131 Hartwell Avenue 

Date of First Release: Nov 90 


Lexington, MA 02173 

Frequency of Updates: Annual 


Marketing Contact: Jane R. 
Circle, Sales Mgr. 

Number Sold: 1,200 


Phone Number:617-863-5800 

worldwide 


Fax Number:617-861-6130 

Date of next release:Mar 94 


E-mail Address: 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support:800-737-6748 

Single User Price:$33,750 



Site License:Not Available 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:PC prod only: 


Consulting Support: Yes 

$6,413 


Customization: Y es 

GSA Price: Above 


By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price: 15% of current 


By User:Yes 

license fee 






Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

MVS, VM, IBM mainframe or compatible CPU. 

IBM-PC or compatible running Windows 3.1. 


JL 


2 of 6 


5/13/97 7:24 AM 





MAXTRAC 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_9.htnil#A2 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

PC products - 80386 or better workstation, 6 meg of base memory, 8 
meg of hard disk space, Windows 3.1. 

Mainframe products - IBM 370 architecture or compatible CPU. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Interfaces for: lEW/ADW, Bachman DBA, Intersolv ILR. 

Databases supported: IMS, IDMS, DB2, Oracle, Sybase, Informix, or 
other related databases if needed. 

Please contact Manager Software Products, Inc. for additional 

information. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

METHODMANAGER and managerView are an integrated set of 
Repository Services and Functions to assist organizations in the 
management of metadata assets: data modeling, design and impact 
analysis for new development, or the reengineering of legacy systems. 

NOTE: Please see GSA Contract GS00K92AGS5980 and ADP 
Schedule for terms and complete pricing information. 
METHODMANAGER is only available under the Special Migration 

Pricing Plan. 




MKS RCS 


Product information: 


Vendor: Mortice Kern Systems, 
Inc. 




Version Number: 6.1 


In Business Since: 1984 

Last Released: Nov 1993 


Address: 35 King Street North 

First Released: 1987 


Waterloo, ONT N2J2W9 

Freq. of Updates: Bi-annual 


Marketing Contact: Chuck 
Lownie 

Number Sold: 25,000 


Phone Number:519-883-4363 



Fax Number:519-884-8861 



E-mail Address:chuck@mks.com 


3 of 6 


5/13/97 7:24 AM 








MAXTRAC 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cni/apxc_9.html#A2 


Pricing; 


[biingle User Price:$349 


I I |[^uJie tin Board System: 

II If^usiomer t)upport:519-884-2 



Maint. Price :Incl. with multi¬ 
user license. 


II |fCustom ization:Yes 
II ll^y Vendor:No 



DOS Sun/OS 
Windows UnixWare 
OS/2 386 Unix 
Windows NT AIX 
SCO Unix NetWare 


£ Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size," 


Network, etc.) 
640K and hard drive. 


Tool integr^ion: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases 
Compilers, Documentation “laoases, 

tools, etc.) 

No incompatibilities with any other development tools. 


Description/Purpose: (Identity support for Ada, 2167A) 

MKS RCS is a complete configuration management system It 
Slwc? Me support, lull LtworSpport 

^ visual differencuig 

branching, merging, production control, and project management. 


OBJECT rivr 


Product Information; 


Jl_I Vendor: Alsys, Inc. | 


4 of 6 


5/13/97 7:24 AM 



MAXTRAC 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_9.html#A2 





Version Number: 1.3 

= 

In Business Since: 1980 

Date of Last Release: Feb 94 

Address: 10251 Vista 
Sorrento Pkwy. 

Date of First Release: Feb 94 

= 

San Diego, CA 92121 

Frequency of Updates: Bi-annual 

Marketing Contact: Bill 
Hart 

Number Sold:3 


Phone 

Number:619-457-2700 



FaxNumber:619-452-1334 



E-mail 

Address:hart@alsys.com 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support:800-995-2579 

Single User Price:$3,300 



Site License: 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:$2,450 for 30 

t 

Consulting Support: Yes 

$2,250 for 50 -- 

||Customization:Yes 

GSA Price:Call 

Ipy Vendor: Yes 

Maint. Price:20% 

||By User:Yes 

Pirtl —.iX*_ _ A*.. . .1 ✓ V ---- 

- 


P latform(s)/Operatmg System (s): 


Sun Sparc SunOS 
HP9000/7XX HP/UX 
IBM/RS/6000 AIX 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

32 MB RAM, 150 MB Disk. Motif or Open Look user interface. NFS if 
distributed development is desired. 


5 of 6 


5/13/97 7:24 AM 




MAXTRAC 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_9.html#A2 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Upper CASE: Cadre TeamWork, IDE Software through Pictures 

Frameworks: Freedom Works, Entreprise II 

Databases: Emeraude PCTE 

Compilers: Alsys Ada, Verdix Ada, C, C++, Fortran 

Documentation Tools: Interleaf, FrameMaker 

User Interface Builders: TeleUse, UIMX 

Metrics/Test Tools Logiscope 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Object CM is a highly tailorable configuration management system that 
is designed to accommodate a wide range of CM needs. In its simplest 
operational mode, it serves as a repository for versioned files and 
configurations. In its most sophisticated form, it is a complete 
development environment, with context-sensitive access to encapsulated 
tools, management of user tasks and roles, and the ability to define and 
support software development processes. Object CM's underlying PCTE 
(Portable Conunon Tools Environment) repository allows users to 
organize software engineering work products in a way that reflects the 
true stracture of their project. Object CM includes a code production 
facility that is language independent, yet includes ftill support for 
Ada-specific dependency analysis and program builds. Also included is a 
2167A process definition, a tailorable problem tracking and change 
management system, and communication utilities to support both local 
and wide-area network development. 




6 of 6 


5/13/97 7:24 AM 



MAXTRAC 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_9.html#A3 


• MAXTRAC 

• METHODMANAGER 

• MKS RCS 

• OBJECT CM 

MAXTRAC 


Product Information: 

II II Vendor: BlueLine Software 

II 1 

Version Number: 2.1.1 

II ||In Business Since: 1985 

Date of Last Release: 

II ||Address: 5775 Wayzata Blvd. 

Date of First Release: 

II ||Minneapolis, MN 55416 

Frequency of Updates: 

II 1 Marketing Contact: Wayne Hamilton 

Number Sold: 

II |jphoneNumber:612-542-1072 

II ||FaxNumber:612-542-9566 

II ||E-mail Address:wayne@blueline.nin.org 

__ II 1_ 

II ||Bulletin Board System:612-542-8431 

Pricing: 

II II Customer Support:800-826-0313 

Single User Price :contact vendor || || 

Site License:contact vendor 

II ||Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:contact vendor 

II II Consulting Support:Yes 

II II Customization: Yes 

GSA Price:contact vendor 

II ||By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price:contact vendor 

II ||By User:No 


Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBM VM 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, 
Disk size, User Interfaee, 

Network, ete.) 

Client: 

Server:Disk: 16 cylinder of 3375 plus temporary work disk 
of 800 4K blocks. 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 


1 of 6 


5/13/97 7:24 AM 


MAXTRAC 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_9.htnil#A3 


Uses SQL database. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Provides a central tracking facility for problem reporting, 
problem resolution, system component tracking, and change 

tracking. 




METHODMANAGRR 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Manager Software 
Products, Inc. 




Version Number: 2.2 


In Business Since: 1968 

Date of Last Release: Sep 93 


Address: 131 Hartwell Avenue 

Date of First Release: Nov 90 


Lexington, MA 02173 

Frequency of Updates: Annual 


Marketing Contact: Jane R. 
Circle, Sales Mgr. 

Number Sold: 1,200 


Phone Number:617-863-5 800 

worldwide 


FaxNumber:617-861-6130 

Date of next release:Mar 94 


E-mail Address: 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support: 800-737-6748 

Single User Price:$33,750 



Site License :Not Available 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price :PC prod only: 


Consulting Support:Yes 

$6,413 


Customization:Yes 

GSA Price: Above 


By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price: 15% of current 


By User:Yes 

license fee 






PIatform(s)/Operating System(s): 

MVS, VM, IBM mainframe or compatible CPU. 

IBM-PC or compatible running Windows 3.1. 




2 of 6 


5/13/97 7:24 AM 





MAXTRAC 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_9.html#A3 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

PC products - 80386 or better workstation, 6 meg of base memory, 8 
meg of hard disk space, Windows 3.1. 

Mainframe products - IBM 370 architecture or compatible CPU. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Interfaces for; lEW/ADW, Bachman DBA, Intersolv ILR. 

Databases supported: IMS, IDMS, DB2, Oracle, Sybase, Informix, or 
other related databases if needed. 

Please contact Manager Software Products, Inc. for additional 

information. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

METHODMANAGER and managerView are an integrated set of 
Repository Services and Functions to assist organizations in the 
management of metadata assets; data modeling, design and impact 
analysis for new development, or the reengineering of legacy systems. 

NOTE: Please see GSA Contract GS00K92AGS5980 and ADP 
Schedule for terms and complete pricing information. 
METHODMANAGER is only available under the Special Migration 

Pricing Plan. 




MKS RCS 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Mortice Kern Systems, 
Inc. 




Version Number: 6.1 


In Business Since: 1984 

Last Released: Nov 1993 


Address; 35 King Street North 

First Released: 1987 


Waterloo, ONTN2J2W9 

Freq. of Updates: Bi-annual 


Marketing Contact: Chuck 
Lownie 

Number Sold: 25,000 


Phone Number:519-883-4363 



Fax Number:519-884-8861 



E-mail Address:chuck@mks.com 


3 of 6 


5/13/97 7:24 AM 



MAXTRAC 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_9.html#A3 


Pricing: 

Single User Price:$349 
Site License:Contact vendor. 
Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. 

GSA Price :N/A 

Maint. Price :Incl. with multi- 

user license. 

Platforra(s)/Operating System(s): 


] | ||Bulletin Board Sy stem: 

]| ||Customer Support:519-884-2270 

in ^ 

] | [[Training Provided: Ye s 
] | II Consulting Support:Yes 
] [ ||Customization:Yes 
] | II By Vendor:No 
]| ||By UsenYes 

in 


DOS Sun/OS 
Windows UnixWare 
OS/2 386 Unix 
Windows NT AIX 


SCO Unix NetWare 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

640K and hard drive. 




Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

No incompatibilities with any other development tools. 




Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

MKS RCS is a complete configuration management system. It 
offers both binary and text file support, full network support, 
make/configuration builder, locking, visual differencing, 
branching, merging, production control, and project management. 




OBJECT CM 


{Product Information: 


i ||Vendor: Alsys, Inc. 


4 of 6 


5/13/97 7:24 AM 




MAXTRAC 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_9.html#A3 





Version Number: 1.3 


In Business Since: 1980 

Date of Last Release: Feb 94 


Address: 10251 Vista 

Sorrento Pkwy. 

Date of First Release: Feb 94 


San Diego, CA 92121 

Frequency of Updates: Bi-annual 


Marketing Contact: Bill 

Hart 

Number Sold:3 


Phone 

Number:619-457-2700 



Fax Number:619-452-1334 



E-mail 

Address :hart@alsys .com 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support:800-995-2579 

Single User Price:$3,300 



Site License: 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:$2,450 for 30 


Consulting Support:Yes 

$2,250 for 50 


Customization: Yes 

GSA Price:Call 


By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price:20% 


By User:Yes 




PIatform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Sun Sparc SunOS 

HP9000/7XX HP/UX 

IBM/RS/6000 AIX 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

32 MB RAM, 150 MB Disk. Motif or Open Look user interface. NFS if 
distributed development is desired. 







5 of 6 


5/13/97 7:24 AM 




MAXTRAC 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_9.html#A3 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Upper CASE: Cadre TeamWork, IDE Software through Pictures 

Frameworks: Freedom Works, Entreprise II 

Databases: Emeraude PCTE 

Compilers: Alsys Ada, Verdix Ada, C, C++, Fortran 

Documentation Tools: Interleaf, FrameMaker 

User Interface Builders: TeleUse, UIMX 

Metrics/Test Tools Logiscope 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Object CM is a highly tailorable configuration management system that 
is designed to accommodate a wide range of CM needs. In its simplest 
operational mode, it serves as a repository for versioned files and 
configurations. In its most sophisticated form, it is a complete 
development environment, with context-sensitive access to encapsulated 
tools, management of user tasks and roles, and the ability to define and 
support software development processes. Object CM's underlying PCTE 
(Portable Common Tools Environment) repository allows users to 
organize software engineering work products in a way that reflects the 
true structure of their project. Object CM includes a code production 
facility that is language independent, yet includes full support for 
Ada-specific dependency analysis and program builds. Also included is a 
2167A process definition, a tailorable problem tracking and change 
management system, and communication utilities to support both local 
and wide-area network development. 




6 of 6 


5/13/97 7:24 AM 


MAXTRAC 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_9.html#A4 


• MAXTRAC 

• METHODMANAGER 

• MKS RCS 

. OBJECT CM 

MAXTRAC 


Product Information: 

1 

IIVendor: BlueLine Software 


Version Number: 2.1.1 

II 

||ln Business Since: 1985 

Date of Last Release: 

11 

1|Address: 5775 Wayzata Blvd. 

Date of First Release: 

11 

1| Minneapolis, MN 55416 

Frequency of Updates: 

11 

|Marketing Contact: Wayne Hamilton 

Number Sold: 

11 

ijphone Number:612-542-1072 

II ||FaxNumber:612-542-9566 

II ||E^mail Address:wayne@blueline.mn.org 

1 1 

1 ||Bulletin Board System:612-542-8431 

Pricing: 

r 

||Customer Support:800-826-0313 

Single User Price:contact vendor || || 

Site License:contact vendor 


II Training Provided: Yes 

Multicopy Price:contact vendor 

1 

~||Consulting Support:Yes 

1 II Customization: Yes 

GSA Price:contact vendor 


||By Vendor:Yes 


Maint. Price:contact vendor 

II 

']|By User:No 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBM VM 







Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, 
Disk size, User Interface, 




Network, etc.) 





Client: 





Server:Disk: 16 cylinder of 3375 plus temporary work disk 
of 800 4K blocks. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 




1 tools, etc.) 






1 of 6 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 



MAXTRAC 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_9.html#A4 


Uses SQL database. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Provides a central tracking facility for problem reporting, 
problem resolution, system component tracking, and change 

tracking. 




METHODMANAGER 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Manager Software 
Products, Inc. 




Version Number: 2.2 


In Business Since: 1968 

Date of Last Release: Sep 93 


Address: 131 Hartwell Avenue 

Date of First Release: Nov 90 


Lexington, MA 02173 

Frequency of Updates: Annual 


Marketing Contact: Jane R. 
Circle, Sales Mgr. 

Number Sold: 1,200 


Phone Number:617-863-5800 

worldwide 


Fax Number:617-861-6130 

Date of next release:Mar 94 


E-mail Address: 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support:800-737-6748 

Single User Price:$33,750 



Site License:Not Available 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:PC prod only: 


Consulting Support: Yes 

$6,413 


Customization: Y es 

GSA Price:Above 


By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price: 15% of current 


By User:Yes 

license fee 






Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

MVS, VM, IBM mainframe or compatible CPU. 

IBM-PC or compatible running Windows 3.1. 



Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 


2 of 6 


Network, etc.) 

PC products - 80386 or better workstation, 6 meg of base memory, 8 
meg of hard disk space, Windows 3.1. 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 



MAXTRAC 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cin/apxc_9.html#A4 


meg of hard disk space, Windows 3.1. 

Mainframe products - IBM 370 architecture or compatible CPU. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Interfaces for: lEW/ADW, Bachman DBA, Intersolv ILR. 

Databases supported: IMS, IDMS, DB2, Oracle, Sybase, Informix, or 
other related databases if needed. 

Please contact Manager Software Products, Inc. for additional 

information. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

METHODMANAGER and managerView are an integrated set of 
Repository Services and Functions to assist organizations in the 
management of metadata assets: data modeling, design and impact 
analysis for new development, or the reengineering of legacy systems. 

NOTE: Please see GSA Contract GS00K92AGS5980 and ADP 
Schedule for terms and complete pricing information. 
METHODMANAGER is only available under the Special Migration 

Pricing Plan. 




MKS RCS 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Mortice Kern Systems, 
Inc. 




Version Number: 6.1 


In Business Since: 1984 

Last Released: Nov 1993 


Address: 35 King Street North 

First Released: 1987 


Waterloo, ONTN2J2W9 

Freq. of Updates: Bi-annual 


Marketing Contact: Chuck 
LoAvnie 

Number Sold: 25,000 


Phone Number:519-883-4363 



Fax Number:519-884-8861 



E-mail Address:chuck@mks.com 

Pricing: 


Bulletin Board System: 

Single User Price:$349 


Customer Support:519-884-2270 

Site License:Contact vendor. 



Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. 


Training Provided:Yes 


3 of 6 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 






MAXTRAC 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_9.htnil#A4 


II ||Consulting Support:Yes 

GSAPrice:N/A || || Customization: Yes 

Maint. Price:Incl. with multi- || ||By Vendor:No 

user license. | jjBy User:Yes 

nr 

Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

DOS Sun/OS 

Windows UnixWare 

OS/2 386 Unix 

Windows NT AIX 

SCO Unix NetWare 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

640K and hard drive. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

No incompatibilities with any other development tools. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

MKS RCS is a complete configuration management system. It 
offers both binary and text file support, full network support, 
make/configuration builder, locking, visual differencing, 
branching, merging, production control, and project management. 




OBJECT CM 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Alsys, Inc. 




Version Number: 1.3 


In Business Since: 1980 

Date of Last Release: Feb 94 


Address: 10251 Vista 

Sorrento Pkwy. 

Date of First Release: Feb 94 


San Diego, CA 92121 


4 of 6 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 





MAXTRAC 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_9.htnil#A4 


Frequency of Updates: Bi-annual 


Marketing Contact: Bill 

Hart 

Number Sold:3 


Phone 

Number:619-457-2700 



Fax Number:619-452-13 34 



E-mail 

Address :hart@alsys .com 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support:800-995-2579 

Single User Price:$3,300 



Site License: 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:$2,450 for 30 


Consulting Support:Yes 

$2,250 for 50 


Customization: Yes 

GSA Price:Call 


By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price:20% 


By User: Yes 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Sun Sparc SunOS 

HP9000/7XX HP/UX 

IBM/RS/6000 AIX 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

32 MB RAM, 150 MB Disk. Motif or Open Look user interface. NFS if 
distributed development is desired. 







5 of 6 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 


MAXTRAC 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_9.html#A4 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Upper CASE: Cadre TeamWork, IDE Software through Pictures 

Frameworks: Freedom Works, Entreprise II 

Databases: Emeraude PCTE 

Compilers: Alsys Ada, Verdix Ada, C, C-H-, Fortran 

Documentation Tools: Interleaf, FrameMaker 

User Interface Builders: TeleUse, UIMX 

Metrics/Test Tools Logiscope 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Object CM is a highly tailorable configuration management system that 
is designed to accommodate a wide range of CM needs. In its simplest 
operational mode, it serves as a repository for versioned files and 
configurations. In its most sophisticated form, it is a complete 
development environment, with context-sensitive access to encapsulated 
tools, management of user tasks and roles, and the ability to define and 
support software development processes. Object CM's underlying PCTE 
(Portable Common Tools Environment) repository allows users to 
organize software engineering work products in a way that reflects the 
true structure of their project. Object CM includes a code production 
facility that is language independent, yet includes full support for 
Ada-specific dependency analysis and program builds. Also included is a 
2167A process definition, a tailorable problem tracking and change 
management system, and communication utilities to support both local 
and wide-area network development. 




6 of 6 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 



OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hni.af.mil/cm/apxc_l 0.html#A 1 


• OPUS MAKE 

• PVCS CONFIGURATION BUILDER 

• PVCS DEVELOPER’S TOOLKIT 

• PVCS PRODUCTION GATEWAY 

• PVCS REPORTER 

• PVCS VERSION MANAGER 


OPUS MAKE 


Product Information: 


Vendor: O^PUS Software, 

Inc. 




Version Number: 6.0 


In Business Since: Nov 1987 

Last Released: Mar 1993 


Address: 1032 Irvine Street 

First Released: Nov 1987 


Suite 439 

Freq. of Updates: Annually 


San Francisco, CA 94122 

Number Sold: 6,200 


Marketing Contact: 



Phone 

Number:800-248-OPUS 



Fax Number:415-664-5624 

Pricing: 


E-mail Address:72002,1245 

Single User Price: $165 DOS/OS2 


Bulletin Board System: 
415-664-5694 

$199 Unix 


Customer 

Support:415-644-7901 

Site License:Contact vendor. 


Training Provided:By special 
request. 

Multicopy Price: Discounts 


Consulting Support:Yes 

available. 


Customization: Y es* 

GSA Price: 10% discount. 


By Vendor:Yes* 

Maint. Price :$60/license 


By UsenYes* 


per year. 

• Price will vary from 
above for these services. 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Opus Make primarily runs under DOS and OS/2 operating systems. 
Unix and most Unix styled operating systems are also available. 
Microsoft NT will be available as of 1 April 1994. 







1 of 9 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 




OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#Al 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 

User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

DOS version of Opus Make needs a minimum of 170K of free RAM to 
execute and requires at least MS-DOS 3.3 or OS/2.1.3. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Opus Make is a configuration management tool, and as such, it provides 
integration with Burton Systems TLIB, One Tree Source State, and 
Intersolv PVCS. It is compiler and language independent and can 
provide project control for many different languages. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Opus Make is a programming tool that helps maintain programs, 
particularly those that are constructed from several component files. 
Make controls the entire process of building your program, whether it 
involves preprocessing files, compiling, linking, or other steps. It 
automates the process and greatly reduces the amount of time spent 
rebuilding projects by hand and greatly reduces the number of mistakes 
that can occur in rebuilding projects. Supplied with Opus Make is a tool 
called MKMF, which prepares the control file used by Make. Opus 
Make is the most powerM make utility available to developers. It 
processes makefiles very quickly and has a broad range of capabilities 
designed to quickly and reliably build and maintain your software 
projects. Several of the features found in Opus Make are: minimal 
memory usage, multiple-directory support, automatic response files, 
queued shell lines, makefile compatibility, source-code revision 
support, object library support, Borland Bcc support, extensive macro 
capabilities, regular-expression syntax, debugging support, makefile 
directives, chained inference rules, and customization by an 
initialization file. 




PVCS CONFIGURATION BUILDER 


Product Information: 

II IjVendor: Intersolv 

^ni 

Version Number: 5.1 

II ||In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 

II II Address: 1700 NW 167th Place 

Date of First Release: Apr 82 

II jj Beaverton, OR 97006 

Frequency of Updates: 1+ per year 

11 jjMarketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 

II jphone Number:800-547-7827 


2 of 9 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 






OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#Al 


Pricing: 

Single User Price:Call 
Site LicenserCall 
Multicopy Price:Call 

GSA Price :N/A ^ 

Maint. Price: Call 

Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 


||FaxNumber:503-629-0186 
] | IlF-mail Ad dress:Don_Soinpi@Beav. 
cont. Intersolv.com 

_Bulletin Board Systein:Compuserve 

IICustomer Support:800-547-7827, 
ext. 610 

j _Training Provided: 

] Consulting Support: 

] I Customization: 

I II By Vendor: 

I ^ |uyuser: 


Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, AIX/RS6000. 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

DOS 3.3 or later, 250K HD, 256K Memory. OS/2 1.3 or later, 
250K HD, 4 MB Ext. Memory. DOS Extended 3.0 or later, 250K 
HD, 1 MB Ext. Memory. Windows 3.1,25OK HD, 4 MB 

Memory. 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 


|Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Configuration Builder is a totally integrated Make utility 
that records relationships between components and re-creates the 
specific sequence of steps required to construct a software system 
reliably, completely, and accurately. Configuration Builder 
embeds "footprints" of vital information into compiled objects and 
acts conditionally on footprint information. 







PVCS DEVELOPER’S TOOT.KTT 


3 of 9 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 




OPUS MAKE 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_l 0.html#A 1 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Intersolv 




Version Number: 5.1 


In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 


Address: 1700 NW 167th Place 

Date of First Release; Apr 82 


Beaverton, OR 97006 

Frequency of Updates: 1+ per year 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 


Phone Number:800-547-7827 



Fax Number:503-629-0186 



E-mail Address:Don_Sompi@Beav. 



cont. Intersolv.com 



Bulletin Board System:Compuserve 

Pricing: 


Customer Support:800-547-7827, 
ext. 610 

Single User Price:Call 



Site License:Call 


Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call 


Consulting Support: 



Customization; 

GSA Price:N/A 


By Vendor: 

Maint. Price:Call 


By User: 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, AIX/RS6000. 




Minimum/Recommended Conflguration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

PVCS Version Manager 5.1, PVCS Configuration Builder 5.1, 
MS-DOS Version 3.3 or higher or OS/2 1.3 or higher. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 







4 of 9 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 




OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.htnil#Al 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Developer's Toolkit delivers full PVCS functionality to 
your development environment or to your existing applications in 
the form of DLLs, import libraries, and header files. The scope 
and quality of the toolkit meets IBM and other programming 
standards for Application Programming Interface implementation. 


PVCS PRODUCTION GATEWAY 


Product Information: 

||Vendor: Intersolv 




Version Number: 5.1 


In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 


Address: 1700 NW 167th Place 

Date of First Release: Apr 82 


Beaverton OR 97006 

Frequency of Updates: 1+ per year 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 


Phone Number: 800-547-7827 



FaxNumber:503-629-0186 



E-mail 

Address:Don_Sompi@Beav. 



cont. Intersolv.com 



Bulletin Board 

System:Compuserve 

Pricing: 


Customer Support:800-547-7827 
ext. 610 

Single User Price:Call 



Site License:Call 


Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call 


Consulting Support: 



Customization: 

GSA Price:N/A 


By Vendor: 

Maint. Price:Call 


By User: 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, AIX/RS6000. 




5 of 9 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 





OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_l 0.html#A 1 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

To use PVCS Production Gateway on a LAN, you must have the 
following: An IBM PS/2, PC/486, PC/386, PC/AT, or compatible; 
and an SNA (Systems Network Architecture) network. Also, one of 
the following: DOS Ver 5.0 or greater, Microsoft Windows Ver 3.1, 
and IBM Networking Services/DOS Ver 1.01 (w/fix IC05847) or 
Ver 1.1; OS/2 Presentation Manager Ver 1.3, and OS/2 Networking 
Services/2; OS/2 Presentation Manager 2.1, and OS/2 NTS Network 
Transport Services and CM/2 Communication Manager; at least 
300K of free memory under Windows or 1 MB of free extended 
memory under Presentation Manager; at least 3 MB of free disk 
space; a mouse (recommended); and PVCS Version Manager 5.1 or 

later. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Production Gateway is a transparent bidirectional link that 
synchronizes LAN development archives with MVS development 
libraries. By coordinating development libraries in host-based 
library management and code control services (Endevor, 
PANVALET, Librarian, PDS) with development objects on the 
LAN (including PVCS archives), PVCS Production Gateway allows 
MVS development and LAN-based development while enforcing 
standards and providing an audit trail on the LAN. 




PVCS REPORTER 


Product Information: 

II II Vendor: Intersolv 

_^Ul_ 

Version Number: 5.1 

1 ||In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 

1 11 Address: 1700 NW 167th Place 

Date of First Release: Apr 82 

1 IIBeaverton, OR 97006 

Frequency of Updates: 1+per year 

1 II Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 

1 jjPhone Number:800-547-7827 

II ||FaxNumber:503-629-0186 

II ||E-mail Address:Don Sompi@Beav. 

II Ijcont. Intersolv.com 

II ||Bulletin Board System:Compuserve 


6 of 9 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 






OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#Al 


Pricing: 


Customer Support: 800-547-7827, 
ext. 610 

Single User Price:CalI 



Site License:Call 


Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call 


Consulting Support: 



Customization: 

GSA Price:N/A 


By Vendor: 

Maint. Price:Call 


By User: 




l'latlorm(s)/Operating System(s): 

Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, AIX/RS6000. 

L 


---- 

Minimum/Kecommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Microsoft Windows 3.0 or later, IBM Presentation Manager 1.3 or 
later, or PVCS Version Manager 5.0 or later. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Reporter lets you quickly produce reports using an 
advanced Graphical User Interface to access project information 
managed by PVCS using pre-defined queries or you build 
yourself PVCS Reporter queries access multiple projects in 
distributed architecture's to select, merge, sort, and display exactly 

what you need. 




PVCS VERSION MANAGER 


Product Information: 

*.. 

II ||Vendor: Intersolv 

II II 

Version Number: 5.1 

II ||In Business Since: 1982 

Date ot Last Release: Dec 93 

II ||Address: 1700 NW 167th Place 

Date of First Release: Apr 82 

II ||Beaverton, OR 97006 


7 of 9 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 






OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_l 0.html#A 1 


Frequency of Updates: 1+ per year 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 


Phone Number:800-547-7827 



Fax Number:503-629-0186 



E-mail Address:Don_Sompi@Beav. 



cont. Intersolv.com 



Bulletin Board System:Compuserve 

Pricing: 


Customer Support:800-547-7827, 
ext. 610 

Single User Price:Call 



Site License:Call 


Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call 


Consulting Support: 



Customization: 

GSA Price:N/A 


By Vendor: 

Maint. Price:Call 


By User: 




Platform(s)/Operafing System(s): 

Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, and AIX/RS6000. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

DOD 3.3 or later, 250 K HD, 256K Memory. OS/2 1.3 or later, 
250K HD, 4 MB Ext. Memory. DOS Extended 3.0 or later, 250 K 
HD, 1 MB Ext. Memory. Windows 3.1,250 K HD, 4 MB 

Memory. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Version Manager oversees changes to elements that 
comprise a software system automating revision, version, build, 
promotion, and release management. Version Manager supports 
all development objects including source code, ASCII files, 
graphics, documentation, and binary files. Version Manager is a 
heterogeneous solution supporting DOS, Windows, Windows NT, 

OS/2, and UNIX. 




8 of 9 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 



OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#Al 



9 of 9 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 


OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#A2 


• OPUS MAKE 

• PVCS CONFIGURATION BUILDER 

• PVCS DEVELOPER'S TOOLKIT 

• PVCS PRODUCTION GATEWAY 

• PVCS REPORTER 

• PVCS VERSION MANAGER 


OPUS MAKE 


Product Information: 


Vendor: OPUS Software, 

Inc. 




Version Number: 6.0 


In Business Since: Nov 1987 

Last Released: Mar 1993 


Address: 1032 Irvine Street 

First Released: Nov 1987 


Suite 439 

Freq. of Updates: Annually 


San Francisco, CA 94122 

Number Sold: 6,200 


Marketing Contact: 



Phone 

Number: 800-248-OPUS 



Fax Number:415-664-5624 

Pricing: 


E-mail Address:72002,1245 

Single User Price: $165 DOS/OS2 


Bulletin Board System: 
415-664-5694 

$199 Unix 


Customer 

Support:415-644-7901 

Site License:Contact vendor. 


Training Provided:By special 
request. 

Multicopy Price: Discounts 


Consulting Support:Yes 

available. 


Customization:Yes* 

GSA Price: 10% discount. 


By Vendor:Yes* 

Maint. Price:$60/license 


By User:Yes* 


per year. 

• Price will vary from 
above for these services. 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Opus Make primarily runs under DOS and OS/2 operating systems. 
Unix and most Unix styled operating systems are also available. 
Microsoft NT will be available as of 1 April 1994. 







1 of 9 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 



OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#A2 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 

User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

DOS version of Opus Make needs a minimum of 170K of free RAM to 
execute and requires at least MS-DOS 3.3 or OS/2.1.3. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Opus Make is a configuration management tool, and as such, it provides 
integration with Burton Systems TLIB, One Tree Source State, and 
Intersolv PVCS. It is compiler and language independent and can 
provide project control for many diferent languages. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Opus Make is a programming tool that helps maintain programs, 
particularly those that are constructed from several component files. 
Make controls the entire process of building your program, whether it 
involves preprocessing files, compiling, linking, or other steps. It 
automates the process and greatly reduces the amount of time spent 
rebuilding projects by hand and greatly reduces the number of mistakes 
that can occur in rebuilding projects. Supplied with Opus Make is a tool 
called MKMF, which prepares the control file used by Make. Opus 
Make is the most powerfol make utility available to developers. It 
processes makefiles very quickly and has a broad range of capabilities 
designed to quickly and reliably build and maintain your software 
projects. Several of the features found in Opus Make are: minimal 
memory usage, multiple-directory support, automatic response files, 
queued shell lines, makefile compatibility, source-code revision 
support, object library support, Borland Bcc support, extensive macro 
capabilities, reguto-expression syntax, debugging support, makefile 
directives, chained inference rules, and customization by an 
initialization file. 




PVCS CONFIGURATION BUILDER 


Product information: 

II II Vendor: Intersolv 

II Ji_ 

Version Number: 5.1 

II ||In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 

1 11 Address: 1700 NW 167th Place 

Date of First Release: Apr 82 

II ||Beaverton, OR 97006 

Frequency of Updates: 1+ per year 

1 IjMarketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 

11 jjPhone Number:800-547-7827 


2 of 9 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 



OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#A2 



1 

"ax Number:503-629-0186 


1 

E-mail Address:Don_Sompi@Beav. 


( 

:ont. Intersolv.com 



Bulletin Board System:CompuServe 

Pricing: 

( 

( 

Customer Support:800-547-7827, 

;xt. 610 

Single User Price:Call 



Site License:Call 


framing Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call 

. ( 

Consulting Support: 



Customization: 

GSA Price:N/A 

i 

By Vendor: 

Maint. Price:Call 

.i 

By User: 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, AIX/RS6000. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

DOS 3.3 or later, 250K HD, 256K Memory. OS/2 1.3 or later, 
250K HD, 4 MB Ext. Memory. DOS Extended 3.0 or later, 250K 
HD, 1 MB Ext. Memory. Windows 3.1,25OK HD, 4 MB 

Memory. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Configuration Builder is a totally integrated Make utility 
that records relationships between components and re-creates the 
specific sequence of steps required to construct a software system 
reliably, completely, and accurately. Configuration Builder 
embeds "footprints" of vital information into compiled objects and 
acts conditionally on footprint information. 




PVCS DEVELOPER'S TOOLKIT 


3 of 9 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 




OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.tnil/cm/apxc_10.html#A2 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Intersolv 




Version Number: 5.1 


In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 


Address: 1700 NW 167th Place 

Date of First Release: Apr 82 


Beaverton, OR 97006 

Frequency of Updates: 1+ per year 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 


Phone Number:800-547-7827 



Fax Number:503-629-0186 



E-mail Address:Don_Sompi@Beav. 



cont. Intersolv.com 



Bulletin Board System:Compuserve 

Pricing: 


Customer Support:800-547-7827, 
ext. 610 

Single User Price:Call 



Site License:Call 


Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call 


Consulting Support: 


II Customization: 

GSA Price:N/A 

~||By Vendor: 

Maint. Price:Call 

“~||By User: “ 

___j X \ 

1 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): ~ 

Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, AIX/RS6000. 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

PVCS Version Manager 5.1, PVCS Configuration Builder 5.1, 
MS-DOS Version 3.3 or higher or OS/2 1.3 or higher. 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 


4 of 9 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 




OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#A2 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Developer's Toolkit delivers full PVCS functionality to 
your development environment or to your existing applications in 
the form of DLLs, import libraries, and header files. The scope 
and quality of the toolkit meets IBM and other programming 
standards for Application Programming Interface implementation. 


PVCS PRODUCTION GATEWAY 


Product Information: 

— 

Vendor: Intersolv 




Version Number: 5.1 


In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 


Address: 1700 NW 167th Place 

Date of First Release: Apr 82 

== 

Beaverton OR 97006 

Frequency of Updates: 1+per year 

Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 


Phone Number:800-547-7827 


== 

Fax Number:503-629-0186 


E-mail 

Address:Don_Sompi@Beav. 



cont. Intersolv.com 



Bulletin Board 

System:Compuserve 

Pricing: 


Customer Support:800-547-7827 
ext. 610 

Single User Price:Call 



Site License:Call 

Z 

Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price: Call 

Consulting Support: 


Customization: 

GSA Price:N/A 


By Vendor: 

Maint. Price:Call 

□ 

By User: 



Fiattorm(s)/Operating System(s): 

Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, AIX/RS6000. 


ir 


5 of 9 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 




OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#A2 


Mmimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

To use PVCS Production Gateway on a LAN, you must have the 
following: An IBM PS/2, PC/486, PC/386, PC/AT, or compatible; 
and an SNA (Systems Network Architecture) network. Also, one of 
the following: DOS Ver 5.0 or greater, Microsoft Windows Ver 3.1, 
and IBM Networking Services/DOS Ver 1.01 (w/fix IC05847) or ’ 
Ver 1.1; OS/2 Presentation Manager Ver 1.3, and OS/2 Networking 
Services/2; OS/2 Presentation Manager 2.1, and OS/2 NTS Network 
Transport Services and CM/2 Communication Manager; at least 
300K of free memory under Windows or 1 MB of free extended 
memory under Presentation Manager; at least 3 MB of free disk 
space; a mouse (recommended); and PVCS Version Manager 5.1 or 

later. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Production Gateway is a transparent bidirectional link that 
synchronizes LAN development archives with MVS development 
libraries. By coordinating development libraries in host-based 
library management and code control services (Endevor, 
PANVALET, Librarian, PDS) with development objects on the 
LAN (including PVCS archives), PVCS Production Gateway allows 
MVS development and LAN-based development while enforcing 
standards and providing an audit trail on the LAN. 




PVCS REPORTF.R 


Product Information: 

1 ||Vendor: Intersolv 


1 version JNumber: ^.1 

II ||In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 

II || Address: 1700 NW 167th Place 

Date ot First Release: Apr 82 

II ||Beaverton, OR 97006 

Frequency of Updates: 1+ per year 

II ||Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 

11 iPhone Number:800-547-7827 

11 ||FaxNumber:503-629-0186 

II ||E-mail Address:Don Sompi@Beav. 

1 II ||cont. Intersolv.com 

r 11—1 ^ " 


I |[Bulletin Board System:Compuserve 


6 of 9 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 





OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#A2 


Pricing: 


Customer Support: 800-547-7827, 
ext. 610 

Single User Price:Call 



Site License:Call 


Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call 


Consulting Support: 



Customization: 

GSA Price:N/A 


By Vendor: 

Maint. Price:Call 


By User: 


□[ 


riattorm(s)/Operating System(s): 

Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, AIX/RS6000. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interfaee, 

Network, etc.) 

Microsoft Windows 3.0 or later, IBM Presentation Manager 1.3 or 
later, or PVCS Version Manager 5.0 or later. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Reporter lets you quickly produce reports using an 
advanced Graphical User Interface to access project information 
managed by PVCS using pre-defined queries or you build 
yourself. PVCS Reporter queries access multiple projects in 
distributed architecture's to select, merge, sort, and display exactly 

what you need. 




PVCS VERSION MANAGER 


Product Information: 

P ||Vendor: Intersolv 


□r- 

Version Number: 5.1 

||In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 

1 1 Address: 1700 NW 167th Place 

Date of First Release: Apr 82 

P llBeaverton, OR 97006 


7 of 9 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 







OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#A2 


f requency of Updates: 1+ per year 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 


Phone Number:800-547-7827 



Fax Number:503-629-0186 



E-mail Address:Don_Sompi@Beav. 



cont. Intersolv.com 



Bulletin Board System:CompuServe 

Pricing: 


Customer Support:800-547-7827, 
ext. 610 

Single User Price:Call 



Site License:Call 


Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call 

= 

Consulting Support: 


Customization: 

GSA Price:N/A 


By Vendor: 

Maint. Price:Call 

= 

By User: 




Platforin(s)/Operating System(s): 


Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, and AIX/RS6000. 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

DOD 3.3 or later, 250 K HD, 256K Memory. OS/2 1.3 or later, 
250K HD, 4 MB Ext. Memory. DOS Extended 3.0 or later, 250 K 
HD, 1 MB Ext. Memory. Windows 3.1, 250 K HD, 4 MB 

Memory. 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Version Manager oversees changes to elements that 
comprise a software system automating revision, version, build, 
promotion, and release management. Version Manager supports 
all development objects including source code, ASCII files, 
graphics, documentation, and binary files. Version Manager is a 
heterogeneous solution supporting DOS, Windows, Windows NT, 

OS/2, and UNIX. 


8 of 9 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 



OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#A2 



9 of 9 


5/13/97 7:25 AM 



OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cin/apxc_10.html#A3 


• OPUS MAKE 

• PVCS CONFIGURATION BUTLDF.R 

• PVCS DEVELOPER’S TOOLKIT 

• PVCS PRODUCTION GATEWAY 

• PVCS REPORTER 

• PVCS VERSION MANAGER 


OPUS MAKE 


Product Information: 


Vendor: OPUS Software, 
Inc. 


Version Number: 6.0 
Last Released: Mar 1993 
First Released: Nov 1987 
|Freq. of Updates: Annually 
Number Sold: 6,200 



Pricing: 

Single User Price: $165 DOS/OS2 

$199 Unix ^ 

Site License:Contact vendor. 

Multicopy Price: Discounts 
available. 

GSA Price: 10% discount. 
iMaint. Price:$60/license 


In Business Since: Nov 1987 
Address: 1032 Irvine Street 
Suite 439 

San Francisco, CA 94122 

Marketing Contact: 

Phone 

Number:800-248-OPUS 

Fax Number:415-664-5624 

E-mail Address:72002,1245 

Bulletin Board System: 
415-664-5694 

Customer 

Support:415-644-7901 

Training Provided:By special 
request. 

Consulting Support:Yes 
Customization: Yes* 

By Vendor:Yes* 

By User:Yes* 



Price will vary from 
above for these services. 


Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Opus Make primarily runs under DOS and OS/2 operating systems. 
Unix and most Unix styled operating systems are also available. 
Microsoft NT will be available as of 1 April 1994. 




Minimum/Recommended Conftguration: (RAM size, Disk size. 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 



1 of 8 


5/13/97 7:26 AM 



OPUS MAKE 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_10.html#A3 


DOS version of Opus Make needs a minimum of 170K of free RAM to 
execute and requires at least MS-DOS 3.3 or OS/2.1.3. 







Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Opus Make is a configuration management tool, and as such, it provides 
integration with Burton Systems TLIB, One Tree Source State, and 
Intersolv PVCS. It is compiler and language independent and can 
provide project control for many different languages. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Opus Make is a programming tool that helps maintain programs, 
particularly those that are constructed from several component files. 
Make controls the entire process of building your program, whether it 
involves preprocessing files, compiling, linking, or other steps. It 
automates the process and greatly reduces the amount of time spent 
rebuilding projects by hand and greatly reduces the number of mistakes 
that can occur in rebuilding projects. Supplied with Opus Make is a tool 
called MKMF, which prepares the control file used by Make. Opus 
Make is the most powerful make utility available to developers. It 
processes makefiles very quickly and has a broad range of capabilities 
designed to quickly and reliably build and maintain your software 
projects. Several of the features found in Opus Make are; minimal 
memory usage, multiple-directory support, automatic response files, 
queued shell lines, makefile compatibility, source-code revision 
support, object library support, Borland Bcc support, extensive macro 
capabilities, regular-expression syntax, debugging support, makefile 
directives, chained inference rules, and customization by an 
initialization file. 




PVCS CONFIGURATION BUILDER 


Product Information: 

1 1 Vendor: Intersolv 


Version Number; 5.1 

II ||In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release; Dec 93 

II II Address: 1700 NW 167th Place 

Date of First Release; Apr 82 

|[ iBeaverton, OR 97006 

Frequency of Updates; 1+ per year 

j[ ||Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold; 

II ||phoneNumber:800-547-7827 

11 ||Fax Number;503-629-0186 

1 ||E-mail Address;Don_Sompi@Beav. 

II ||cont. Intersolv.com 

II ||Bulletin Board System;Compuserve 


2 of 8 


5/13/97 7:26 AM 




OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.niil/cm/apxc_10.html#A3 


Pricing: 


Customer Support:800-547-7827, 
ext. 610 

Single User PriceiCall 



Site License:Call 


Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call 


Consulting Support: 



Customization: 

GSA Price :N/A 


By Vendor: 

Maint. Price:Call 


By User: 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, AIX/RS6000. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

DOS 3.3 or later, 250K HD, 256K Memory. OS/2 1.3 or later, 
250K HD, 4 MB Ext. Memory. DOS Extended 3.0 or later, 250K 
HD, 1 MB Ext. Memory. Windows 3.1,250K HD, 4 MB 

Memory. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Configuration Builder is a totally integrated Make utility 
that records relationships between components and re-creates the 
specific sequence of steps required to construct a software system 
reliably, completely, and accurately. Configuration Builder 
embeds "footprints" of vital information into compiled objects and 
acts conditionally on footprint information. 




PVCS DEVELOPER'S TOOLKIT 


Product Information: 

[[Vendor: Intersolv 


11 

Version Number: 5.1 

1 [[In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 

1 [[Address: 1700 NW 167th Place 


3 of 8 


5/13/97 7:26 AM 







OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.inil/cm/apxc_10.html#A3 


Date of First Release: Apr 82 


Beaverton, OR 97006 

Frequency of Updates: 1+ per year 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 


Phone Number:800-547-7827 



Fax Number:503-629-0186 



E-mail Address:Don_Sompi@Beav. 



cont. Intersolv.com 



Bulletin Board System:Compuserve 

Pricing: 


Customer Support:800-547-7827, 
ext. 610 

Single User Price:Call 



Site License:Call 


Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call 


Consulting Support: 



Customization: 

GSA Price:N/A 


By Vendor: 

Maint. Price:Call 


By User: 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, AIX/RS6000. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

PVCS Version Manager 5.1, PVCS Configuration Builder 5.1, 
MS-DOS Version 3.3 or higher or OS/2 1.3 or higher. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Developer's Toolkit delivers full PVCS functionality to 
your development environment or to your existing applications in 
the form of DLLs, import libraries, and header files. The scope 
and quality of the toolkit meets IBM and other programming 
standards for Application Programming Interface implementation. 




PVCS PRODUCTION GATEWAY 


4 of 8 


5/13/97 7:26 AM 




OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hilI.af.mi1/cm/apxc_I0.html#A3 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Intersolv 




Version Number: 5.1 


In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 


Address: 1700 NW 167th Place 

Date of First Release: Apr 82 


Beaverton OR 97006 

Frequency of Updates: 1+ per year 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 


Phone Number:800-547-7827 



Fax Number:503-629-0186 



E-mail 

Address:Don_Sompi@Beav. 



cont. Intersolv.com 



Bulletin Board 

System:Compuserve 

Pricing: 


Customer Support:800-547-7827 
ext. 610 

Single User Price:Call 



Site License:Call 


Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call 


Consulting Support: 



Customization: 

GSA Price:N/A 


By Vendor: 

Maint. Price :Call 


By User: 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, AIX/RS6000. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

To use PVCS Production Gateway on a LAN, you must have the 
following: An IBM PS/2, PC/486, PC/386, PC/AT, or compatible; 
and an SNA (Systems Network Architecture) network. Also, one of 
the following: DOS Ver 5.0 or greater, Microsoft Windows Ver 3.1, 
and IBM Networking Services/DOS Ver 1.01 (w/fix IC05847) or 
Ver 1.1; OS/2 Presentation Manager Ver 1.3, and OS/2 Networking 
Services/2; OS/2 Presentation Manager 2.1, and OS/2 NTS Network 
Transport Services and CM/2 Communication Manager; at least 
300K of free memory under Windows or 1 MB of free extended 
memory under Presentation Manager; at least 3 MB of free disk 
space; a mouse (recommended); and PVCS Version Manager 5.1 or 

later. 







5 of 8 


5/13/97 7:26 AM 




OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#A3 


Pool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Production Gateway is a transparent bidirectional link that 
synchronizes LAN development archives with MVS development 
libOTies. By coordinating development libraries in host-based 
library management and code control services (Endevor, 

T Librarian, PDS) with development objects on the 

archives), PVCS Production Gateway allows 
MVS development and LAN-based development while enforcing 
standards and providing an audit trail on the LAN. 




PVCS RRPORTFR 


Product Information: 

11 Vendor: Intersolv 


in 

Version Number: 5.1 

1 ||In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 

1 11 Address: 1700 NW 167th Place 

Date of First Release: Apr 82 

1 Beaverton, OR 97006 1 

[Frequency of Updates: 1 + per year 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 


Phone Number:800-547-7827 



Fax Number:503-629-0186 



E-mail AddressiDon Sompi@Beav. 



cont. Intersolv.com 



Bulletin Board System:CompuServe 

Pricing: 


Customer Support:800-547-7827 



ext. 610 

Single User Price:Call 



1 Site License:Call | 


Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price: Call | 

□ 

Consulting Support: 


□ 

Customization: 

GSA Price:N/A 

□1 

By Vendor: 

Maint. Price:Call —| 

□1 

By User: 


□I 


Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 



Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, AIX/RS6000. 

___ II 


6 of 8 


5/13/97 7:26 AM 





OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#A3 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Microsoft Windows 3.0 or later, IBM Presentation Manager 1.3 or 
later, or PVCS Version Manager 5.0 or later. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Reporter lets you quickly produce reports using an 
advanced Graphical User Interface to access project information 
managed by PVCS using pre-defmed queries or you build 
yourself. PVCS Reporter queries access multiple projects in 
distributed architecture's to select, merge, sort, and display exactly 

what you need. 




PVCS VERSION MANAGER 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Intersolv 




Version Number: 5.1 


In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 


Address: 1700NW 167th Place 

Date of First Release: Apr 82 


Beaverton, OR 97006 

Frequency of Updates: 1+ per year 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 


Phone Number:800-547-7827 



Fax Number:503-629-0186 



E-mail Address:Don_Sompi@Beav. 



cont. Intersolv.com 



Bulletin Board System:CompuServe 

Pricing: 


Customer Support:800-547-7827, 
ext. 610 

Single User Price:Call 



Site License:Call 


Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call 


Consulting Support: 



Customization: 

GSA Price:N/A 


By Vendor: 


7 of 8 


5/13/97 7:26 AM 






OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#A3 


Maint. PricerCall 

II By User: 


Ul 

Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, and AIX/RS6000. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

DOD 3.3 or later, 250 K HD, 256K Memory. OS/2 1.3 or later, 
250K HD, 4 MB Ext. Memory. DOS Extended 3.0 or later, 250 K 
HD, 1 MB Ext Memory. Windows 3.1,250 K HD, 4 MB 

Memory. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Version Manager oversees changes to elements that 
comprise a software system automating revision, version, build, 
promotion, and release management. Version Manager supports 
all development objects including source code, ASCII files, 
graphics, documentation, and binary files. Version Manager is a 
heterogeneous solution supporting DOS, Windows, Windows NT, 

OS/2, and UNIX. 




8 of 8 


5/13/97 7:26 AM 







OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#A4 


• OPUS MAKE 

• PVCS CONFIGURATION BUILDER 

• PVCS DEVELOPER'S TOOLKIT 

• PVCS PRODUCTION GATEWAY 

• PVCS REPORTER 

• PVCS VERSION MANAGER 


OPUS MAKE 


Product Information: 


Vendor: OPUS Software, 

Inc. 




Version Number: 6.0 


In Business Since: Nov 1987 

Last Released: Mar 1993 


Address: 1032 Irvine Street 

First Released: Nov 1987 


Suite 439 

Freq. of Updates: Annually 


San Francisco, CA 94122 

Number Sold: 6,200 


Marketing Contact: 



Phone 

Number: 800-248-OPUS 



Fax Number:415-664-5624 

Pricing: 


E-mail Address:72002,1245 

Single User Price: $165 DOS/OS2 


Bulletin Board System: 
415-664-5694 

$199 Unix 


Customer 

Support:415-644-7901 

Site License:Contact vendor. 


Training Provided:By special 
request. 

Multicopy Price: Discounts 


Consulting Support:Yes 

available. 


Customization: Y es* 

GSA Price: 10% discount. 


By Vendor:Yes* 

Maint. Price:$60/license 


By User: Yes* 



per year. 


• Price will vary from 
above for these services. 


Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Opus Make primarily runs under DOS and OS/2 operating systems. 
Unix and most Unix styled operating systems are also available. 
Microsoft NT will be available as of 1 April 1994. 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 


1 of 8 


5/13/97 7:26 AM 




OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cni/apxc_10.html#A4 


DOS version of Opus Make needs a minimum of 170K of free RAM to 
execute and requires at least MS-DOS 3.3 or OS/2.1.3. 






1 ool integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Opus Make is a configuration management tool, and as such, it provides 
integration with Burton Systems TLIB, One Tree Source State, and 
Intersolv PVCS. It is compiler and language independent and can 
provide project control for many different languages. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Opus Make is a programming tool that helps maintain programs, 
particularly those that are constructed from several component files. 
Make controls the entire process of building your program, whether it 
involves preprocessing files, compiling, linking, or other steps. It 
automates the process and greatly reduces the amount of time spent 
rebuilding projects by hand and greatly reduces the number of mistakes 
that can occur in rebuilding projects. Supplied with Opus Make is a tool 
called MKMF, which prepares the control file used by Make. Opus 
Make is the most powerful make utility available to developers. It 
processes makefiles very quickly and has a broad range of capabilities 
designed to quickly and reliably build and maintain your software 
projects. Several of the features found in Opus Make are: minimal 
memory usage, multiple-directory support, automatic response files, 
queued shell lines, makefile compatibility, source-code revision 
support, object library support, Borland Bcc support, extensive macro 
capabilities, regular-expression syntax, debugging support, makefile 
directives, chained inference rules, and customization by an 
initialization file. 




PVCS CONFIGURATION BUILDER 


Product Information: 

II [[Vendor: Intersolv 

_1 II 

Version Number: 5.1 

II ||In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 

11 IjAddress: 1700 NW 167th Place 

Date of First Release: Apr 82 

II ||Beaverton, OR 97006 

Frequency of Updates: 1+ per year 

II [[Marketing Contact: 

[Number Sold: 

II 11 Phone Number:800-547-7827 

II ||FaxNumber:503-629-0186 

II ||E-mail Address:Don Sompi@Beav. 

II ||cont. Intersolv.com 

1 ~ -- II-^ ' ... J 


]| [[Bulletin Board System:Compuserve 


2 of 8 


5/13/97 7:26 AM 





OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#A4 


Pricing: 


Customer Support:800-547-7827, 

5xt. 610 

Single User Price:Call 



Site LicensetCall 


fraining Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call 

1 

Consulting Support: 


1 

Customization: 

GSAPrice:N/A 

1 

3y Vendor: 

Maint. Price:Call 

1 

3y User: 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, AIX/RS6000. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

DOS 3.3 or later, 250K HD, 256K Memory. OS/2 1.3 or later, 
250K HD, 4 MB Ext. Memory. DOS Extended 3.0 or later, 250K 
HD, 1 MB Ext. Memory. Windows 3.1,250K HD, 4 MB 

Memory. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Configuration Builder is a totally integrated Make utility 
that records relationships between components and re-creates the 
specific sequence of steps required to construct a software system 
reliably, completely, and accurately. Configuration Builder 
embeds "footprints" of vital information into compiled objects and 
acts conditionally on footprint information. 




PVCS DEVELOPER'S TOOLKIT 


Product Information: 

□ 

Vendor: Intersolv 


□ 


Version Number: 5.1 

||In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 

II Address: 1700 NW 167th Place 


3 of 8 


5/13/97 7:26 AM 





OPUS MAKE 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cni/apxc_10.html#A4 


Date of First Release: Apr 82 


Beaverton, OR 97006 

Frequency of Updates: 1+per year 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 


Phone Number:800-547-7827 



Fax Number:503-629-0186 



E-mail Address:Don_Sompi@Beav. 



cont. Intersolv.com 



Bulletin Board System:Compuserve 

Pricing; 


Customer Support:800-547-7827, 
ext. 610 

Single User Price:Call 



Site License :Call 


Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call 


Consulting Support: 



Customization: 

GSA Price:N/A 


By Vendor: 

Maint. Price:Call 


By User: 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sim, Solaris, Interactive, AIX/RS6000. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

PVCS Version Manager 5.1, PVCS Configuration Builder 5.1, 
MS-DOS Version 3.3 or higher or OS/2 1.3 or higher. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Developer's Toolkit delivers full PVCS functionality to 
your development environment or to your existing applications in 
the form of DLLs, import libraries, and header files. The scope 
and quality of the toolkit meets IBM and other programming 
standards for Application Programming Interface implementation. 




PVCS PRODUCTION GATEWAY 


4 of 8 


5/13/97 1-26 AM 



OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.htniI#A4 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Intersolv 




Version Number: 5.1 

□ 

In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 

□ 

Address: 1700NW 167th Place 

Date of First Release: Apr 82 

□ 

Beaverton OR 97006 

Frequency of Updates: 1+ per year 

□ 

Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 

□ 

Phone Number:800-547-7827 


□ 

Fax Number:503-629-0186 


□ 

E-mail 

Address:Don_Sompi@Beav. 


□ 

cont. Intersolv.com 


□ 

Bulletin Board 

System: CompuServe 

Pricing: 

□ 

Customer Support:800-547-7827 
ext. 610 

Single User Price:Call 

□ 


Site License:Call 

□1 

Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call 

□1 

Consulting Support: 


□1 

Customization: 

GSA Price :N/A 

□1 

By Vendor: 

Maint. Price: Call 

□1 

By User: 

It*i _ / \ j ^ j ^ N .. 

□1 



P latform(s)/Operating Systein(s): 


Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, AIX/RS6000. 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

To use PVCS Production Gateway on a LAN, you must have the 
following: An IBM PS/2, PC/486, PC/386, PC/AT, or compatible; 
and an SNA (Systems Network Architecture) network. Also, one of 
the following: DOS Ver 5.0 or greater, Microsoft Windows Ver 3.1, 
and IBM Networking Services/DOS Ver 1.01 (w/fix IC05847) or 
Ver 1.1; OS/2 Presentation Manager Ver 1.3, and OS/2 Networking 
Services/2; OS/2 Presentation Manager 2.1, and OS/2 NTS Network 
Transport Services and CM/2 Communication Manager; at least 
300K of free memory under Windows or 1 MB of free extended 
memory under Presentation Manager; at least 3 MB of free disk 
space; a mouse (recommended); and PVCS Version Manager 5.1 or 

later. 


5 of 8 


5/13/97 7:26 AM 




OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hilI.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#A4 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 






Descnption/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Production Gateway is a transparent bidirectional link that 
syiichronizes LAN development archives with MVS development 
libraries. By coordinating development libraries in host-based 
library management and code control services (Endevor, 
PANVALET, Librarian, PDS) with development objects on the 
LAN (including PVCS archives), PVCS Production Gateway allows 
MVS development and LAN-based development while enforcing 
standards and providing an audit trail on the LAN. 




PVCS REPORTER 


Product Information: 

P II Vendor: Intersolv 

r 

r 


Version Number: 5.1 


In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 


Address: 1700NW 167th Place 

Date of First Release: Apr 82 


Beaverton, OR 97006 

Frequency of Updates: 1+ per year 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 


Phone Number: 800-547-7827 



Fax Number:503-629-0186 



E-mail Address:Don_Sompi@Beav. 



cont. Intersolv.com 



Bulletin Board System:Compuserve 

Pricing: 


Customer Support:800-547-7827, 
ext. 610 

Single User Price:Call 

n[— ——^—. 

Site License:Call 

||Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call 

IIConsulting Support: 


II Customization: 

GSA Price :N/A 

II By Vendor: 

Maint. Price:Call 

■n(By User: ^ 

___'fx X 

□ 

— ■ ■ - , 


Platform(s)/Operating System(s): !========================^^ 

Windows, DOS, WindowsNT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, AIX/RS6000. 


6 of 8 


5/13/97 7:26 AM 





OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#A4 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Microsoft Windows 3.0 or later, IBM Presentation Manager 1.3 or 
later, or PVCS Version Manager 5.0 or later. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Reporter lets you quickly produce reports using an 
advanced Graphical User Interface to access project information 
managed by PVCS using pre-defined queries or you build 
yourself PVCS Reporter queries access multiple projects in 
distributed architecture's to select, merge, sort, and display exactly 

what you need. 




PVCS VERSION MANAGER 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Intersolv 




Version Number: 5.1 


in Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 


Address: 1700 NW 167th Place 

Date of First Release: Apr 82 


Beaverton, OR 97006 

Frequency of Updates: 1+ per year 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 


Phone Number:800-547-7827 



Fax Number:503-629-0186 



E-mail Address:Don_Sompi@Beav. 



cont. Intersolv.com 



Bulletin Board System:Compuserve 

Pricing: 


Customer Support:800-547-7827, 
ext. 610 

Single User Price:Call 



Site License:Call 


Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call 


Consulting Support: 



Customization: 

GSA Price:N/A 


By Vendor: 


7 of 8 


5/13/97 7:26 AM 




OPUS MAKE 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_10.html#A4 


Maint. Price:Call 

II By User: 


UL. 

Platform(s)/Operating System(s); 

Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, and AIX/RS6000. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

DOD 3.3 or later, 250 K HD, 256K Memory. OS/2 1.3 or later, 
250K HD, 4 MB Ext. Memory. DOS Extended 3.0 or later, 250 K 
HD, 1 MB Ext. Memory. Windows 3.1,250 K HD, 4 MB 

Memory. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 






bescription/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Version Manager oversees changes to elements that 
comprise a software system automating revision, version, build, 
promotion, and release management. Version Manager supports 
all development objects including source code, ASCII files, 
graphics, documentation, and binary files. Version Manager is a 
heterogeneous solution supporting DOS, Windows, Windows NT, 

OS/2, and UNIX. 




8 of 8 


5/13/97 7:26 AM 



OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.miI/cm/apxc_10.html#A5 


• OPUS MAKE 

• PVCS CONFIGURATION RTJTT.DF.R 

• PVCS DEVELOPER'S TOOT.KTT 

• PVCS PRODUCTION GATEWAY 

• PVCS REPORTER 

• PVCS VERSION MANAGER 


OPUS MAKE 


Product Information: 


Vendor: OPUS Software, 

Inc. 




Version Number: 6.0 


In Business Since: Nov 1987 

Last Released: Mar 1993 


Address: 1032 Irvine Street 

First Released: Nov 1987 


Suite 439 

Freq. of Updates: Annually 


San Francisco, CA 94122 

Number Sold: 6,200 


Marketing Contact: 



Phone 

Number:800-248-OPUS 



Fax Number:415-664-5624 

Pricing: 


E-mail Address:72002,1245 

Single User Price: $165 DOS/OS2 


Bulletin Board System: 
415-664-5694 

$199 Unix 


Customer 

Support:415-644-7901 

Site License:Contact vendor. 


Training Provided:By special 
request. 

Multicopy Price: Discounts 


Consulting Support: Yes 

available. 


Customization: Yes* 

GSA Price: 10% discount. 

||By Vendor:Yes* 

Maint. Price:$60/license 

||By User:Yes* 


1 

per year. 

1 

• Price will vary from 
above for these services. 


_ 


Platlorm(s)/Operating System(s): 

Opus Make primarily runs under DOS and OS/2 operating systems. 
Unix and most Unix styled operating systems are also available. 
Microsoft NT will be available as of 1 April 1994. 







Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 


Network, etc.) 


of 8 


5/13/97 7:26 AM 



OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#A5 


DOS version of Opus Make needs a minimum of 170K of free RAM to 
execute and requires at least MS-DOS 3.3 or OS/2.1.3. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Opus Make is a configuration management tool, and as such, it provides 
integration with Burton Systems TLIB, One Tree Source State, and 
Intersolv PVCS. It is compiler and language independent and can 
provide project control for many diferent languages. 






Description/Purpose; (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Opus Make is a programming tool that helps maintain programs, 
particularly those that are constructed from several component files. 
Make controls the entire process of building your program, whether it 
involves preprocessing files, compiling, liiiking, or other steps. It 
automates the process and greatly reduces the amount of time spent 
rebuilding projects by hand and greatly reduces the number of mistakes 
that can occur in rebuilding projects. Supplied with Opus Make is a tool 
called MKMF, which prepares the control file used by Make. Opus 
Make is the most powerftil make utility available to developers. It 
processes makefiles very quickly and has a broad range of capabilities 
designed to quickly and reliably build and maintain your software 
projects. Several of the features found in Opus Make are: minimal 
memory usage, multiple-directory support, automatic response files, 
queued shell lines, makefile compatibility, source-code revision 
support, object library support, Borland Bcc support, extensive macro 
capabilities, regular-expression syntax, debugging support, makefile 
directives, chained inference rules, and customization by an 
initialization file. 




PVCS CONFIGURATION BUILDER 


Product Information: 

II IIVendor: Intersolv 

II I 

Version Number: 5.1 

II ||In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 

1 II Address: 1700 NW 167th Place 

Date of First Release: Apr 82 

1 1 Beaverton, OR 97006 

Frequency of Updates: 1+ per year 

II II Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 

1 ||Phone Number:800-547-7827 

II ||FaxNumber:503-629-0186 

II ||E-mail Address:Don_Sompi@Beav. 

1 ||cont. Intersolv.com 

II ||Bulletin Board System:Compuserve 


2 of 8 


5/13/97 7:26 AM 





OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hiI].af.inil/cm/apxc_10.html#A5 


Pricing: 


Customer Support:800-547-7827, 
ext. 610 

Single User Price:Call 

□ 


Site License:Call 

Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call 


Consulting Support: 


Customization: 

GSA Price:N/A ^ ~~ 

□ 

By Vendor: 

Maint. Price: Call 

--- 


By User: 

!....■ ....____ _^Lll 

1 

rianormfsj/uperating System(s): ---—- 

Windows, DOS, Windows NT. OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, A1X/RS6000. 

L 


]r~"—"—^ 

Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

DOS 3.3 or later, 250K HD, 256K Memory. OS/2 1.3 or later 
250K HD, 4 MB Ext. Memory. DOS Extended 3.0 or later, 25dK 
HD, 1 MB Ext. Memory. Windows 3.1, 25OK HD, 4 MB 

Memory. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Configuration Builder is a totally integrated Make utility 
that records relationships between components and re-creates the 
specific sequence of steps required to construct a software system 
reliably, completely, and accurately. Configuration Builder 
embeds "footprints" of vital information into compiled objects and 
acts conditionally on footprint information. 




PVCS DEVELOPER'S TOOT.KfT 


1 Product Information: 

Vendor: Intersolv [ 

inr 

1 version JNumber: 5.1 

II ||In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 

Date nf Anv Ql 

II || Address: 1700 NW 167th Place 

11-ir 


uateotnrst Release: Apr 82 "'Beaverton, OR 97006 


3 of 8 


5/13/97 7:26 AM 




OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hiIl.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.htinl#A5 


[Date of Fir st Release: Apr 82 
[Frequency of Updates: 1+ per year 
[Number Sold: 


Pricing: 

Single User Price:C ali 
Site License:Call 
Multicopy Price:Call 

GSA Price :N/A 
Maint. Price:Call 

PIatform(s)/Operating System(s): 


_ [_[ [Beavert on, OR 97006 

~| | Marketing Contact: 

IjPhone Number:800-547-7827 

~| | ||Fax Number:503-629-0 186 

_E-mail Address:Don_Sompi@Beav. 

_cont. Intersolv.com 

_ Bulletin B oard System .'CompuServe 

I IjCustomer Support:800-547-7827 
ext. 610 

i ni 

] | [I'l'raining P rovided: i 

] P~| Consulting Support: 

]| I Customization: 

][~] By Vendor: 

II ||By User:- 

in I 


Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, AIX/RS6000. 


|Minimum/Reconimended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

PVCS Version Manager 5.1, PVCS Configuration Builder 5.1 
MS-DOS Version 3.3 or higher or OS/2 1.3 or higher. 


j'l ool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Developer's Toolkit delivers full PVCS functionality to 
your development environment or to your existing applications in 
I the form of DLLs, import libraries, and header files. The scope 
I and quality of the toolkit meets IBM and other programming 
standards for Application Programming Interface implementation. 


PVCS PRODUCTION OATFWAV 





4 of 8 


5/13/97 7:26 AM 



OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.htmI#A5 


rroduct inlormafton: , | 

1- ^ in 

Version Number: 5.1 , _ 

\— _ in Business Since; 1982 I 

|JJciLc ui Lcliit Kelease: Dec 95 

c 

|Address: 17UUNW 167th Place 

Date ot First Release; Apr 82 

c 

Beaverton OR 97006 

oi updates: 1+ per year 

fZ 

z 

Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: =========== 

Phone Number:800-547-7827 


c 

fax Number:503-629-0186 



E-mail 

Address;Don Sompi@Beav. 



cont. Intersolv.com 



Bulletin Board 

System:Compuserve 

Pricing: ’^==============^^ 

= 

Customer Support:800-547-7827 
ext. 610 

Single User Price:Call 


Site License:Call 


Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call 

□ 

Consulting Support: 


□ 

Customization: 

CiSA Price;N/A 


By Vendor: | 

paim. price:uall -ini^User: | 


riaiiorm^sj/uperatmg System(s): 

Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solai 

is. Interactive, 

- 

AIX/RS6000. 

Minimum^ecommended Contiguration: (RAM size, Disk size. 
User Interface, ’ 

Network, etc.) 

To use PVp Production Gateway on a LAN, you must have the 
following: M IBM PS/2, PC/486, PC/386, PC/AT, or compatible; 
and an SNA (Sy^ems Network Architecture) network. Also, one of 
the following: DOS Ver 5.0 or greater, Microsoft Windows Ver 3 1 
and IBM Networking Services/DOS Ver 1.01 (w/fix IC05847) or ’ 
Ver 1.1; OS/2 Presentation Manager Ver 1.3, and OS/2 Networking 
Services/2; OS/2 Presentation Manager 2.1, and OS/2 NTS Network 
Services and CM/2 Communication Manager; at least 
300K of free memory under Windows or 1 MB of free extended 
memory under Presentation Manager; at least 3 MB of free disk 
space; a mouse (recommended); and PVCS Version Manager 5.1 or 

later. 




5 of 8 


5/13/97 7:26 AM 




OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#A5 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 






Descnption/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Production Gateway is a transparent bidirectional link that 
synchronizes LAN development archives with MVS development 
libraries. By coordinating development libraries in host-based 
library management and code control services (Endevor, 
PANVALET, Librarian, PDS) with development objects on the 
LAN (including PVCS archives), PVCS Production Gateway allows 
MVS development and LAN-based development while enforcing 
standards and providing an audit trail on the LAN. 




PVCS REPORTER 


Product Information: 

1 [[Vendor: Intersolv 


IC 

F=====================================^^ 

Version Number: 5.1 

□ 

In Business Since: 1982 

Date ot Last Release: Dec 93 

[ [[Address: 1700NW 167th Place 

|Date of First Release: Apr 82 

r 

Beaverton, OR 97006 

[Frequency of Updates: 1+ per year 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 


Phone Number:800-547-7827 



Fax Number:503-629-0186 

- 


E-mail Address :Don_Sompi@Beav. 



cont. Intersolv.com 



Bulletin Board System:CompuServe 

Pricing: 


Customer Support:800-547-7827, 
ext. 610 

Single User Price:Call 



Site License:Call 

[[Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call 

[[Consulting Support: 


□ 

□1 

Customization: 

GSA Price:N/A =——=——== 

By Vendor: 

Maint. Price:Call j 

||By User: -- 


□ —— 

rianorm(sj/uperatmg System(s): 

Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, AIX/RS6000. 


1^- 


6 of 8 


5/13/97 7:26 AM 





OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#A5 


Mmimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Microsoft Windows 3.0 or later, IBM Presentation Manager 1.3 or 
later, or PVCS Version Manager 5.0 or later. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Reporter lets you quickly produce reports using an 
advanced Graphical User Interface to access project information 
managed by PVCS using pre-defined queries or you build 
yourself. PVCS Reporter queries access multiple projects in 
distributed architecture's to select, merge, sort, and display exactly 

what you need. 




PVCS VERSION MANAGER 


Product Information: 

: - 

Vendor: Intersolv 




Version Number: 5.1 

== 

In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 

Address: 1700NW 167th Place 

Date of First Release: Apr 82 


Beaverton, OR 97006 

Frequency of Updates: 1+ per year 

= 

Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 

Phone Number: 800-547-7827 


Fax Number:503-629-0186 



E-mail Address :Don_Sompi@Beav. 



cont. Intersolv.com 



Bulletin Board System:Compuserve 

Pricing: 


Customer Support:800-547-7827, 
ext. 610 

Single User Price:Call 



Site License:Call 


Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price: Call 

= 

Consulting Support: 


Customization: 

GSA Price:N/A || ||By Vendor: 


7 of 8 


5/13/97 7:26 AM 





OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hiIl.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#A5 


Maint. Price:Call || ||By User: 

lUI 

Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, and AIX/RS6000. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

DOD 3.3 or later, 250 K HD, 256K Memory. OS/2 1.3 or later, 
250K HD, 4 MB Ext. Memory. DOS Extended 3.0 or later, 250 K 
HD, 1 MB Ext. Memory. Windows 3.1,250 K HD, 4 MB 

Memory. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Version Manager oversees changes to elements that 
comprise a software system automating revision, version, build, 
promotion, and release management. Version Manager supports 
all development objects including source code, ASCII files, 
graphics, documentation, and binary files. Version Manager is a 
heterogeneous solution supporting DOS, Windows, Windows NT, 

OS/2, and UNIX. 




8 of 8 


5/13/97 7:26 AM 



OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hilI.af.miI/cm/apxc_10.html#A6 


• OPUS MAKE 

• PVCS CONFIGURATION RTJTT.DF.R 

• PVCS DEVELOPER'S TOOT.KTT 

• PVCS PRODUCTION GATEWAY 

• PVCS REPORTER 

• PVCS VERSION MANAGRT^ 

OPUS MAKF 


Product Information: 


Vendor: OPUS Software, 

Inc. 




Version Number: 6.0 

In Business Since: Nov 1987 

East Released: Mar 1993 


Address: 1032 Irvine Street 

First Released: Nov 1987 

Suite 439 

Freq. of Updates: Annually 


San Francisco, CA 94122 

Number Sold: 6,200 


Marketing Contact: 



Phone 

Number:800-248-OPUS 



Fax Number:415-664-5624 

Pricing: 


E-mail Address:72002,1245 

Single User Price: $165 DOS/OS2 


Bulletin Board System: 
415-664-5694 

$199 Unix 


Customer 

Support:415-644-7901 

Site License:Contact vendor. 


Training Provided:By special 
request. 

Multicopy Price: Discounts 

□ 

Consulting Support:Yes 

available. 

II Customization: Y es * 

GSA Price: 10% discount. 

_ 

||By Vendor:Yes* 


Maint. Price:$60/license ~ ~|| llBy User:Yes* 


per year. 

• Price will vary from 
above for these services. 

___ L 


rlatiorm(s)/Operating System(s): 

opus Make primarily runs under DOS and OS/2 operating systems. 
Unix and most Unix styled operating systems are also available. 
Microsoft NT will be available as of 1 April 1994. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size. 

User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 




1 of8 


5/13/97 7:27 AM 



OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#A6 


DOS version of Opus Make needs a minimum of 170K of free RAM to 
execute and requires at least MS-DOS 3.3 or OS/2.1.3. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Opus Make is a configuration management tool, and as such, it provides 
integration with Burton Systems TUB, One Tree Source State, and 
Intersolv PVCS. It is compiler and language independent and can 
provide project control for many different languages. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Opus Make is a programming tool that helps maintain programs, 
particularly those that are constructed from several component files. 
Make controls the entire process of building your program, whether it 
involves preprocessing files, compiling, linking, or other steps. It 
automates the process and greatly reduces the amount of time spent 
rebuilding projects by hand and greatly reduces the number of mistakes 
that can occur in rebuilding projects. Supplied with Opus Make is a tool 
called MKMF, which prepares the control file used by Make. Opus 
Make is the most powerfol make utility available to developers. It 
processes makefiles very quickly and has a broad range of capabilities 
designed to quickly and reliably build and maintain your software 
projects. Several of the features found in Opus Make are: minimal 
memory usage, multiple-directory support, automatic response files, 
queued shell lines, makefile compatibility, source-code revision 
support, object library support, Borland Bcc support, extensive macro 
capabilities, regular-expression syntax, debugging support, makefile 
directives, chained inference rules, and customization by an 
initialization file. 




PVCS CONFIGURATION BUILDER 


Product Information: 

1 fVendor: Intersolv 

II JL 

Version Number: 5.1 

II ||In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 

11 11 Address: 1700 NW 167th Place 

Date of First Release: Apr 82 

II ||Beaverton, OR 97006 

Frequency of Updates: 1+ per year 

II ||Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 

11 jjPhone Number:800-547-7827 

II ||FaxNumber:503-629-0186 

IP ||E-mail Address:Don Sompi@Beav. 

II ||cont. Intersolv.com 

II j|Bulletin Board System:Compuserve 


2 of 8 


5/13/97 7:27 AM 



OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.htnil#A6 


Pricing: 


Customer Support:800-547-7827, 
ext. 610 

Single User Price:Call 



Site License:Call 


Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call 


Consulting Support: 



Customization: 

GSA Price:N/A 


By Vendor: 

Maint. Price:Call 


By User: 




Platforni(s)/Operating Systeni(s): 

Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, AIX/RS6000. 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

DOS 3.3 or later, 250K HD, 256K Memory. OS/2 1.3 or later, 
250K HD, 4 MB Ext. Memory. DOS Extended 3.0 or later, 250K 
HD, 1 MB Ext. Memory. Windows 3.1,25OK HD, 4 MB 

Memory. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Configuration Builder is a totally integrated Make utility 
that records relationships between components and re-creates the 
specific sequence of steps required to construct a software system 
reliably, completely, and accurately. Configuration Builder 
embeds "footprints" of vital information into compiled objects and 
acts conditionally on footprint information. 




PVCS DEVELOPER'S TOOT.KTT 


Product Information: 

II ||Vendor: Intersolv 

__ ini - 

Version Number: 5.1 

II ||In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 

II II Address: 1700 NW 167th Place 

"Date of First Release: Apr 82 

"Beaverton, OR 97006 ‘ 


3 of 8 


5/13/97 1-21 AM 




OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.html#A6 


[Date of First R elease: Apr 82 
Frequency of Updates: 1+per year 
INumber Sold: 


Pricing: 

Single User Price:Call 
Site License:Call 
Multicopy Price:Call 

|GSA Price:N/A " 

Maint. Price:Call 

Platform(s)/Operating System (s): 


_| |Beaverton , OR 97006 

~| | Marketi ng Contact: 

_ Phone Num ber:800-547-7827 

_ Fax Number :503-629-0186 

~| | ||H-mail Ad dress:Don_Sompi@Beav. 

cont. Intersolv.com ~ 

_ Bulletin Board Systeni:C ompuserve 

IjCustomer Support:800-547-7827, 
ext. 610 

in i 

~| | ll'lraining Provide 'd: 

~| | [| Consulting Supp ort: 

~] | [ Customization: 

]| I By Vendor: 

]| ||By User: ---- 

in I 



Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, AIX/RS6000. 


iMinimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

PVCS Version Manager 5.1, PVCS Configuration Builder 5.1, 
MS-DOS Version 3.3 or higher or OS/2 1.3 or higher. 


I Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Developer's Toolkit delivers full PVCS functionality to 
your development environment or to your existing applications in 
the form of DLLs, import libraries, and header files. The scope 
and quality of the toolkit meets IBM and other programming 
standards for Application Programming Interface implementation. 


PVCS PRODUCTION GATFWAV 




5/13/97 7:27 AM 


OPUS MAKE 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_10.htnil#A6 


Product Information: 

c 

Vendor: Intersolv 


c 


Version Number: 5.1 

c 

In Business Since: 1982 

Date ot Last Release: Dec 93 


Address: 1700 NW 167th Place 

Date of First Release: Apr 82 

n 

Beaverton OR 97006 

Frequency ot Updates: 1+ per year 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 


Phone Number: 800-547-7827 



Fax Number:503-629-0186 



E-mail 

Address: Don_S ompi@B eav. 



cont. Intersolv.com 



Bulletin Board 
System:Compuserve 

Pricing: 


Customer Support:800-547-7827 
ext. 610 

Single User Price:Call 



|Site License:Call 


Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price: Call 

II Consulting Support: 


II Customization: 

|GSA Price:N/A 

||By Vendor: 

[Maint. Price:Call 

||By User: 

_ __ o _A _ ^ — L 

□L 


Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 


Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, AIX/RS6000. 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size. Disk size. 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

To use PVCS Production Gateway on a LAN, you must have the 
following: An IBM PS/2, PC/486, PC/386, PC/AT, or compatible; 
and an SNA (Systems Network Architecture) network. Also, one of 
the following: DOS Ver 5.0 or greater, Microsoft Windows Ver 3.1, 
and IBM Networking Services/DOS Ver 1.01 (w/fix IC05847) or ’ 
Ver 1.1; OS/2 Presentation Manager Ver 1.3, and OS/2 Networking 
Services/2; OS/2 Presentation Manager 2.1, and OS/2 NTS Network 
Transport Services and CM/2 Communication Manager; at least 
300K of free memory under Windows or 1 MB of free extended 
memory under Presentation Manager; at least 3 MB of free disk 
space; a mouse (recommended); and PVCS Version Manager 5.1 or 

later. 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 


5 of 8 


5/13/97 1:21 AM 



OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hiIl.af.mi1/cni/apxc_10.html#A6 


Compilers, Documentation 


tools, etc.) 



1 

1 

Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Production Gateway is a transparent bidirectional link that 
synchronizes LAN development archives with MVS development 
libraries. By coordinating development libraries in host-based 
library management and code control services (Endevor, 
PANVALET, Librarian, PDS) with development objects on the 
LAN (including PVCS archives), PVCS Production Gateway allows 
MVS development and LAN-based development while enforcing 
standards and providing an audit trail on the LAN. 




PVCS REPORTER 


Product Information: || “IfVendor: Intersolv ' 


OL 

Version Number: 5.1 

1C 

In Business Since: 1982 

Date of Last Release: Dec 93 

Address: 1700NW 167th Place 

Date of First Release: Apr 82 


Beaverton, OR 97006 

Frequency of Updates: 1+ per year 


Marketing Contact: 

|Number Sold: 

— 

Phone Number:800-547-7827 

1 

Fax Number:503-629-0186 



E-mail Address :Don_Sompi@Beav. 



cont. Intersolv.com 


= 

Bulletin Board SystemiCompuserve 

Pricing: 

Customer Support:800-547-7827, 
ext. 610 

Single User Price:Call 

□ 


Site License:Call 

Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call 

□ 

Consulting Support: 


□ 

Customization: 

GSA Price :N/A 

□ 

By Vendor: 

Maint. Price:Call 

□ 

By User: 


□ 


J"iatlorm(s)/Uperating System(s): 

Windows, DOS, WindowsNT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, AIX/RS6000. 


— 


6 of 8 


5/13/97 7:27 AM 




OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.niiI/cm/apxc_10.html#A6 


Mmimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size. Disk 
size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Microsoft Windows 3.0 or later, IBM Presentation Manager 1 3 or 
later, or PVCS Version Manager 5.0 or later. 



1 ool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 



Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Reporter lets you quickly produce reports using an 
advanced Graphical User Interface to access project information 
managed by PVCS using pre-defmed queries or you build 
yourself. PVCS Reporter queries access multiple projects in 
distributed architecture's to select, merge, sort, and display exactly 

what you need. 




PVCS VERSION MANACFR 


Product Information: 

IP || Vendor: Intersolv 


in 

Version Number: 5.1 

II ||In Business Since: 1982 

Uate of Last Release: Dec 93 

1 IjAddress: 1700 NW 167th Place 

[Date of First Release: Apr 82 

1 II Beaverton, OR 97006 

1 Frequency of Updates: 1 + per year 

1 II Marketing Contact: I 

Number Sold: 


Phone Number: 800-547-7827 



Fax Number:503-629-0186 



L-mail Address:Don Sompi@Beav. 



cont. Intersolv.com 



Bulletin Boarci System .’CompuServe 

Fricing: 


Customer Support:800-547-7827 
ext. 610 

Single User Price:Call 



Site License:Call j 


Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:Call 


Consulting Support: 


Z 

Customization: 

CjSA Price:N/A | 

□ 

By Vendor: 


7 of 8 


5/13/97 7:27 AM 




OPUS MAKE 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_10.htmI#A6 


Maint. Price:Call 



II I By User: 

a 


Windows, DOS, Windows NT, OS/2, HP-UX, SCO, Sun, Solaris, Interactive, and AIX/RS6000. 


Minimum^ecommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk 
size, User Interface, ’ 

Network, etc.) 

OS/2 1.3 or later, 

r Ext. Memory. DOS Extended 3.0 or later, 250 K 

HD, 1 MB Ext. Memory. Windows 3.1,250 K HD, 4 MB 

Memory. 

' 


II 

1 ool Integration: (CASE tools, P'rameworks, Databases, ' 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Change Management Software to Design and Analyze. 

1 


Liescription/Furpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

PVCS Version Manager oversees changes to elements that 
comprise a softw^e system automating revision, version, build 
promotion and release management. Version Manager supports 
all development objects including source code, ASCII files 
graphics, documentation, and binary files. Version Manager is a 
heterogeneous solution supporting DOS, Windows, Windows NT 

OS/2, and UNIX. 




8 of 8 


5/13/97 7:27 AM 



REUSE MANAGEMENT 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_l l.html#Al 


• REUSE MANAGEMFNT 

• RTM 

• SABLIMF. 

• scoNS/3non 


REUSE MANAGFMFNT 


Eroduct Information: 


Vendor: Atherton 
Technology 

Version Number: 1.0 

= 

In Business Since: 

Date of Last Release: Feb 94 


Address: 39350 Civic 

Center Dr. 

Date of First Release: Feb 94 


Suite 430 Fremont, CA 

94538 

Frequency of Updates: 9 months 


Marketing Contact: 

Marrion Sweeney 

Number Sold:50 =================================== 


Phone 

Number:510-494-8411 



Fax Number:510-494-1776 



E-mail Address: 


t 

Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 

_ _ 

Customer 

Support:800-984-7233 

Single User Price:$4,990 

Hi 

Site License:Yes ---- 

||Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price: Yes 

II Consulting Support:Yes 

1 

II Customization: Yes 

(iSA Price:N/A 

||By VendonYes 

Maint. Price: 18% 

||By UsenYes I 

----- 1 II _ 


1 of? 


5/13/97 7:27 AM 





REUSE MANAGEMENT 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cni/apxc_l 1 .html#A 1 


Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Platforais Operatina Systems 

Sun Sparc Sun OS 4.11 

Sun Solaris Solaris 2.2 

IBM RS/6000 AIX 3.2 

SGI IRIS IRIX 5.2 

HP 9000/700 series HP/UX 9.0 

DEC Station Ultrix 4.2 

DGAviion DG/UX 5.4.2 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

RAM -16 MB DISK 15 MB 

Pagefile/Pagespace: 80,000 Blocks 

Swapfile-UNIX40MB 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Special customization can be provided. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Reuse Management System is a powerful distributed object framework 
that provides an "Automated Library" for reusable software components, 
which may include: Requirements, Source Code, User Documentation, 
Test Plans and Results, Data Generated by Any Tool, or Code written in 
any Language. The System enables developer's to identify and reuse 
high-quality, error-free components, which may be customized for future 
projects rather than spending expensive, limited resources to build each 
new application from scratch. Software Development efforts will deliver 
better solutions in less time, for a lower cost, while avoiding duplication 

of effort. 

Ada, 2167A: 2167A types are supplied. 




2 of? 


5/13/97 T21 AM 




REUSE MANAGEMENT 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_l 1 .html#A 1 


RTM 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Marconi Systems 

Tech. 




Version Number: 2.2 


In Business Since: 1984 

Last Released: Jan 1994 

— 

Address: 4115 Pleasant Valley 

Rd 

First Released: 1986 

Suite 100 

Freq. of Updates: 6 months 

Chantilly, VA 22021 

Number Sold: 2,000 


Marketing Contact:Paul 

Raymond 


= 

Phone Number:703-263-1260 


Fax Number:703-263-1533 

Pricing: 

= 

E-mail 

Address: sales@mstus.com 

Single User Price:Contact vendor. 

Bulletin Board System: 

Site License :Contact vendor. 


Customer Support:703-263-1260 

Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. 


Training Provided: Yes 


II Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:Contact vendor. 

II Customization: Y es 

Maint. Price: 

||By VendonYes 


||By User:Yes 


II 

Plattorm(s)/Operating System(s): 

SUN SUN/OS 4.1.3 

SUN SOLARIS 2.2 

IBM RS/6000 AIX 3.2.5 

HP 9000/700 HPUX 9.0.1 

VAX VMS 5.2 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Varies according to platform. Contact vendor. 







3 of? 


5/13/97 1-21 AM 







REUSE MANAGEMENT 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_l 1 .html#Al 


lool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Teamwork FrameMaker 

Software through Pictures Microsoft Word 

RDD-100 WordPerfect 

Interleaf 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

RTM is a fully configurable system for tracing requirements to any 
information across a full project lifecycle. Integrations with Cadre's 
Teamwork and IDE's Software through Pictures provide direct access 
to RTM menus for automated data capture and consistency checking. 
Requirements documents may be rebuilt in Interleaf, Framemaker, 
WordPerfect and Word formats for quality reporting. 

Within RTM, user defined objects allow any type of data to be stored 
in the RTM database providing traceability to other objects such as 
code modules, test specifications, and documentation. RTM is 
X-Windows/Motif-based and uses Oracle as its underlying database. 
RTM is language and process independent. 




SABLIME 


Product Information: 

II ||Vendor: AT&T Bell Laboratories || 

-___ lUi_ 

Version Number: 3.1 

II II In Business Since: 

Date of Last Release: Jun 93 

II IIAddress: 600 Mountain Ave. 

Date of First Release: Apr 87 

11 IIMurray Hill, NJ 07974 

Frequency of Updates: 12-15 months 

II ||Markefing Contact: Ed Cartier 

Number Sold:50 (approx.) 

II ||PhoneNumber:908-580-5719 

II ||FaxNumber:908-580-6355 

II ||E-mail Address:attmail:ecartier 

II ||Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 

II ||Customer Support:508-582-7118 

Single User Price:$5,000 

1 II 

Site License :Negotiable 

II II Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:sliding scale 

II II Consulting Support: 

$5,000 - $200 

II II Customization: 

GSA Price: 

II II By Vendor: 

Maint. Price:!5% 

II ||By User: 


4 of? 


5/13/97 7:27 AM 





REUSE MANAGEMENT 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_l 1 .html#A 1 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): ’ 

AT&T 3B2-400 and 6386, Bull DPX2, HP 9000/3xxx-7xx NCR 3345 StarServf^r F anH c q,.„c 
^ nn/I Motorola 68030, VAX 1 l/7xx, AT&T 3E-1000 knd 7020, VAX SxxO^HP' 

9000/8XX, Pyramid 9825, AT&T StarServer FT, Tandems, AT&T 7040 and 7080, Amdahls’ and 

IBMs. 

1 ___ 



----- 

lYiinimum/Kecommended Configuration: (RAM size, 

Disk size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Any standard Unix configuration from a workstation on up. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Sablime operates with any compiler and editor using 
standard ASCII text to generate source code. Sablime is 
compatible with AT&T Documentator's Workbench (DWB) 
and FrameMaker. Release 4.0 of Sablime (Q3 1994) will be 
able to manage binary output from data bases, compilers, and 

4 GL systems. 






Descnption/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Sablime tracks change requests and changes to source files as 
a result of implementing those change requests. It collects 
in-process metrics, supports the assignment and distribution 
of work, is a source for quality data, and supports project 
communications. 




SCONS/300n 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Corporate 

Computer Systems 




Version Number: 1.5 

== 

In Business Since: 

Last Released: Oct 1993 

Address: 33 West Main Street 

First Released: Oct 1987 


Holmdel, NJ 07733 

Freq. of Updates: 


Marketing Contact: Joan 
Dillon 

Number Sold: 300 

z 

Phone Number:908-946-3800 


5 of? 


5/13/97 7:27 AM 





REUSE MANAGEMENT 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_l 1 .html#Al 



1 

Fax Number:908-946-7167 


1 

i-mail Address: 

Pricing: 

~] 

Bulletin Board System: 

Single CPU Price:$3,000 

( 

< 

Customer 

3upport:908-946-3800 

Site License :Contact vendor. 



Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. 


Training Provided: Contact 
I'endor. 


( 

Consulting Support:Contact 
i^endor. 

GSA Price;No 

( 

Customization:Yes 

Maint. Price:$450/year 

~ ] 

By Vendor:No 


i 

By User:Yes 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

HP-1000 - RTE-A 

HP-300-MPE-V 

HP-300-MPE-XL 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

User interface - Standard HP terminal or equivalent. 

Disk space required - approximately 7,000 sectors (including MAKE 

and GRGP utilities). 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

• Listing and compiling may be done on a single file, file subset, 
or all-files basis. 

• User exit programs can be written to perform a variety of 
user-defined operations. 

• MAKE and GREP. 







6 of 7 


5/13/97 1:21 AM 





REUSE MANAGEMENT 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_l 1 .html#A 1 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

SCONS/3000 (Source CONtrol System) is a fourth generation change 
control system designed to manage all file change problems. 
Regardless of your programming environment, SCONS/3 000 lets you 
control your project's development without hindering its progress. 

The system organizes and maintains all revisions of any type of file, 
and at the same time controls user access and modifications. 
SCONS/3000 conserves valuable disk space by storing only the 
difference between old and new files. 


7 of? 


5/13/97 7:27 AM 



REUSE MANAGEMENT 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.niil/cm/apxc_l 1 .html#A3 


• REUSE MANAGEMENT 

• RTM 

• SABLIME 

• SCONS/30Q0 

REUSE MANAGEMENT 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Atherton 
Technology 




Version Number: 1.0 


In Business Since: 

Date of Last Release; Feb 94 


Address: 39350 Civic 

Center Dr. 

Date of First Release: Feb 94 


Suite 430 Fremont, CA 

94538 

Frequency of Updates: 9 months 


Marketing Contact: 

Marrion Sweeney 

Number Sold:50 


Phone 

Number:510-494-8411 



Fax Number:510-494-1776 



E-mail Address: 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support: 800-984-7233 

Single User Price :$4,990 



Site License; Yes 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:Yes 


Consulting Support:Yes 



Customization: Yes 

GSA Price:N/A 


By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price: 18% 


By User: Yes 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Platforms Oneratine Systems 

Sun Sparc Sun OS 4.11 

Sun Solaris Solaris 2.2 

IBM RS/6000 AIX 3.2 

SGI IRIS IRIX 5.2 

HP 9000/700 series HP/UX 9.0 

DEC Station Ultrix 4.2 

DG Aviion DG/UX 5.4.2 


1 of 6 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 



REUSE MANAGEMENT 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_l 1 .html#A3 


I 


Mmimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size. User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

RAM -16 MB DISK 15 MB 

Pagefile/Pagespace: 80,000 Blocks 

Swapfile-UNIX 40MB 


]:= — 

1 ool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Special customization can be provided. 



Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Reuse Management System is a powerful distributed object framework 
that provides an "Automated Library" for reusable software components 
which may include: Requirements, Source Code, User Documentation ’ 
Test Plans and Results, Data Generated by Any Tool, or Code written in 
any Language. The System enables developer's to identify and reuse 
high-quality, error-free components, which may be customized for future 
projects rather than spending expensive, limited resources to build each 
new application from scratch. Software Development efforts will deliver 
better solutions in less time, for a lower cost, while avoiding duplication 

of effort. 

Ada, 2167A: 2167A types are supplied. 




RTM 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Marconi Systems 

Tech. 


= 


Version Number; 2.2 

In Business Since; 1984 

Last Released: Jan 1994 

Address: 4115 Pleasant Valley 

First Released: 1986 


Suite 100 

breq. of Updates: 6 months 


Chantilly, VA 22021 

Number Sold: 2,000 


Marketing Contact:Paul 
Raymond 


||Phone Number:703-263-1260 


2 of 6 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 




REUSE MANAGEMENT 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.inil/cm/apxc_l 1 .html#A3 



"IP 

Fax Number:703-263-1533 

Pricing: 

~n 

i 

E-mail 

\ddress: sales@mstus.com 

Single User Price:Contact vendor. 

~lp 

bulletin Board System: 

Site License:Contact vendor. 

“][< 

Customer Support:703-263-1260 

Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. 


fraining Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price: Contact vendor. 

~ ( 

Customization: Y es 

Maint. Price: 


3y Vendor:Yes 



3y User:Yes 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

SUN SUN/OS 4.1.3 

SUN SOLARIS 2.2 

IBM RS/6000 AIX 3.2.5 

HP 9000/700 HPUX 9.0.1 

VAX VMS 5.2 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Varies according to platform. Contact vendor. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Teamwork FrameMaker 

Software through Pictures Microsoft Word 

RDD-100 WordPerfect 

Interleaf 







3 of 6 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 



REUSE MANAGEMENT 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.niil/cm/apxc_l 1 .html#A3 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

RTM is a fully configurable system for tracing requirements to any 
information across a full project lifecycle. Integrations with Cadre's 
Teamwork and IDE's Software through Pictures provide direct access 
to RTM menus for automated data capture and consistency checking. 
Requirements documents may be rebuilt in Interleaf, Framemaker, 
WordPerfect and Word formats for quality reporting. 

Within RTM, user defined objects allow any type of data to be stored 
in the RTM database providing traceability to other objects such as 
code modules, test specifications, and documentation. RTM is 
X-Windows/Motif-based and uses Oracle as its underlying database. 
RTM is language and process independent. 


SABLIME 


Product Information: 

lUI 

Vendor: AT&T Bell Laboratories 

II Ji_ 

Version Number: 3.1 


In Business Since: 

Date of Last Release: Jun 93 

_^Ul 

Address: 600 Mountain Ave. 

Date of First Release: Apr 87 

|n|Murray Hill, NJ 07974 

Frequency of Updates: 12-15 months 


Marketing Contact: Ed Cartier 

Number Sold:50 (approx.) 

_^Ul 

Phone Number:908-580-5719 

II ||FaxNumber:908-580-6355 

1 ||E-mail Address:attmail:ecartier 

II II Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer Support:508-582-7118 

Single User Price:$5,000 || || 

Site License :Negotiable 

^ni 

Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:sliding scale 

.. 1 1 

Consulting Support: 

$5,000 - $200 

_^Ul 

Customization: 


GSA Price: 

II ||By Vendor: 


Maint. Price:!5% 

_^Ul 

By User: 


II II 

1 Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 




AT&T 3B2-400 and 6386, Bull DPX2, HP 9000/3xxx-7xx, NCR 3345, StarServer E and S, Suns. 
AT&T 3B2 500-800, Motorola 68030, VAX 1 l/7xx, AT&T 3E-1000 and 7020, VAX 8xx0, HP 
9000/8XX, Pyramid 9825, AT&T StarServer FT, Tandems, AT&T 7040 and 7080, Amdahls, and 

IBMs. 





4 of 6 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 






REUSE MANAGEMENT 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_l 1 .html#A3 


Minimum/Recommended Conflguration: (RAM size, 

Disk size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Any standard Unix configuration from a workstation on up. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Sablime operates with any compiler and editor using 
standard ASCII text to generate source code. Sablime is 
compatible with AT&T Documentator's Workbench (DWB) 
and FrameMaker. Release 4.0 of Sablime (Q3 1994) will be 
able to manage binary output from data bases, compilers, and 

4 GL systems. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Sablime tracks change requests and changes to source files as 
a result of implementing those change requests. It collects 
in-process metrics, supports the assignment and distribution 
of work, is a source for quality data, and supports project 
communications. 




SCONS/3000 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Corporate 

Computer Systems 




Version Number: 1.5 


In Business Since: 

Last Released: Oct 1993 


Address: 33 West Main Street 

First Released: Oct 1987 


Holmdel, NJ 07733 

Freq. of Updates: 


Marketing Contact: Joan 
Dillon 

Number Sold: 300 


Phone Number:908-946-3800 



Fax Number:908-946-7167 



E-mail Address: 

Pricing: 


Bulletin Board System: 

Single CPU Price:$3,000 


Customer 

Support:908-946-3800 

Site License:Contact vendor. 



Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. 


Training Provided:Contact 
vendor. 


5 of 6 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 







REUSE MANAGEMENT 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_l 1 .html#A3 



( 

l^onsulting Support: Contact 
/endor. 

GSA Price:No 

1 

3ustomization:Yes 

Maint. Price:$4507year 

“1 

3y Vendor:No 


“1 

3y User:Yes 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

HP-1000 - RTE-A 

HP-300-MPE-V 

HP-300-MPE-XL 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

User interface - Standard HP terminal or equivalent. 

Disk space required - approximately 7,000 sectors (including MAKE 

and GRGP utilities). 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

• Listing and compiling may be done on a single file, file subset, 
or all-files basis. 

• User exit programs can be written to perform a variety of 
user-defined operations. 

• MAKE and GREP. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

SCONS/3000 (Source CONtrol System) is a fourth generation change 
control system designed to manage all file change problems. 
Regardless of your programming environment, SCONS/3000 lets you 
control your project's development without hindering its progress. 

The system organizes and maintains all revisions of any type of file, 
and at the same time controls user access and modifications. 
SCONS/3000 conserves valuable disk space by storing only the 
difference between old and new files. 




6 of 6 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 



REUSE MANAGEMENT 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.tnil/cm/apxc_l 1 .htmI#A4 


• REUSE MANAGEMENT 

• RTM 

• SABLIME 

• SCONS/30Q0 

REUSE MANAGEMENT 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Atherton 
Technology 




Version Number: 1.0 


In Business Since: 

bate of Last Release: Feb 94 


Address: 39350 Civic 

Center Dr. 

Date of First Release: Feb 94 


Suite 430 Fremont, CA 

94538 

Frequency of Updates: 9 months 


Marketing Contact: 

Marrion Sweeney 

Number Sold:50 


Phone 

Number:510-494-8411 



Fax Number:510-494-1776 



E-mail Address: 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support:800-984-7233 

Single User Price:$4,990 



Site License:Yes 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:Yes 


Consulting Support:Yes 



Customization: Y es 

GSA Price:N/A 


By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price: 18% 


By User:Yes 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

Platforms Oneratins Systems 

Sun Sparc Sun OS 4.11 

Sun Solaris Solaris 2.2 

IBM RS/6000 AIX 3.2 

SGI IRIS IRIX 5.2 

HP 9000/700 series HP/UX 9.0 

DEC Station Ultrix 4.2 

DGAviionDG/UX 5.4.2 


1 of 6 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 



REUSE MANAGEMENT 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cni/apxc_l 1 .html#A4 


■ 


1 

Minimum/Recommended Configuration; (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

RAM - 16 MB DISK 15 MB 

Pagefile/Pagespace: 80,000 Blocks 

Swapfile-UNIX 40MB 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Special customization can be provided. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Reuse Management System is a powerful distributed object framework 
that provides an "Automated Library" for reusable software components, 
which may include: Requirements, Source Code, User Documentation, 
Test Plans and Results, Data Generated by Any Tool, or Code written in 
any Language. The System enables developer's to identify and reuse 
high-quality, error-free components, which may be customized for future 
projects rather than spending expensive, limited resources to build each 
new application from scratch. Software Development efforts will deliver 
better solutions in less time, for a lower cost, while avoiding duplication 

of effort. 

Ada, 2167A: 2167A types are supplied. 




RTM 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Marconi Systems 

Tech. 




Version Number: 2.2 


In Business Since: 1984 

Last Released: Jan 1994 


Address: 4115 Pleasant Valley 

Rd 

First Released: 1986 


Suite 100 

Freq. of Updates: 6 months 


Chantilly, VA 22021 

Number Sold: 2,000 


Marketing Contact:Paul 

Raymond 



Phone Number:703-263-1260 



Fax Number:703-263-1533 


2 of 6 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 











REUSE MANAGEMENT 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_l 1 .html#A4 


Fax Number:703-263-l 533 

ji II 


• ...! 

Pricing: 


1 ....... 1 

E-mail 

Address: sales@mstus.com 

Single User Price:Contact vendor. 


Bulletin Board System: 

Site LicenserContact vendor. 


Customer Support:703-263-1260 

Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. 


Training Provided:Yes 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:Contact vendor. 


Customization: Y es 

Maint. Price: 


By Vendor:Yes 



By User:Yes 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

SUN SUN/OS 4.1.3 

SUN SOLARIS 2.2 

IBM RS/6000 AIX 3.2.5 

HP 9000/700 HPUX 9.0.1 

VAX VMS 5.2 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Varies according to platform. Contact vendor. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Teamwork FrameMaker 

Software through Pictures Microsoft Word 

RDD-100 WordPerfect 

Interleaf 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

RTM is a fully configurable system for tracing requirements to any 
information across a full project lifecycle. Integrations with Cadre's 
Teamwork and IDE's Software through Pictures provide direct access 
to RTM menus for automated data capture and consistency checking. 




3 of 6 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 




REUSE MANAGEMENT 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_l 1 .html#A4 


to RTM menus for automated data capture and consistency checking. 
Requirements documents may be rebuilt in Interleaf, Framemaker, 
WordPerfect and Word formats for quality reporting. 

Within RTM, user defined objects allow any type of data to be stored 
in the RTM database providing traceability to other objects such as 
code modules, test specifications, and documentation. RTM is 
X-Windows/Motif-based and uses Oracle as its underlying database. 
RTM is language and process independent. 


' -.—. —. . —---—-- II_ I 

SABLIME 

^ .. . 

Product Information: 

II ||Vendor: AT&T Bell Laboratories 

.. . nr - 

Version Number; 3.1 

1 ||In Business Since: 

Date of Last Release: Jun 93 

II ||Address; 600 Mountain Ave. 

Date of First Release: Apr 87 

II ||Murray Hill, NJ 07974 

Frequency of Updates: 12-15 months 

II ||Marketing Contact: Ed Cartier 

Number Sold:50 (approx.) 

11 jjPhoneNumber:908-580-5719 

II ||FaxNumber:908-580-6355 

1 ||E-mail Address:attmail:ecartier 

II ||Bulletin Board System: 

[Pricing: 

II |Customer Support:508-582-7118 

Single User Price :$5,000 

II II 

Site License:Negotiable 

II ||Training Provided: 

Multicopy Price:sliding scale 

II II Consulting Support: 

O 

o 

o 

t 

to 

o 

o 

1 1 Customization: 

GSA Price: 

II ||By Vendor: 

Maint. Price: 15% 

II ||By User: 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 


AT&T 3B2-400 and 6386, Bull DPX2, HP 9000/3xxx-7xx, NCR 3345, StarServer E and S, Suns. 
AT&T 3B2 500-800, Motorola 68030, VAX 1 l/7xx, AT&T 3E-1000 and 7020, VAX 8xx0, HP 
9000/8XX, Pyramid 9825, AT&T StarServer FT, Tandems, AT&T 7040 and 7080, Amdahls, and 

IBMs. 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, 
Disk size, User Interfaee, 

Network, ete.) 

Any standard Unix configuration from a workstation on up. 


4 of 6 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 





REUSE MANAGEMENT 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_l 1 .html#A4 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Sablime operates with any compiler and editor using 
standard ASCII text to generate source code. Sablime is 
compatible with AT&T Documentator's Workbench (DWB) 
and FrameMaker. Release 4.0 of Sablime (Q3 1994) will be 
able to manage binary output from data bases, compilers, and 

4 GL systems. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Sablime tracks change requests and changes to source files as 
a result of implementing those change requests. It collects 
in-process metrics, supports the assignment and distribution 
of work, is a source for quality data, and supports project 
commimications. 




SCONS/3000 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Corporate 

Computer Systems 




Version Number: 1.5 


In Business Since: 

Last Released: Oct 1993 


Address: 33 West Main Street 

First Released: Oct 1987 


Holmdel, NJ 07733 

Freq. of Updates: 


Marketing Contact: Joan 
Dillon 

Number Sold: 300 


Phone Number:908-946-3800 



Fax Number:908-946-7167 



E-mail Address: 

Pricing: 


Bulletin Board System: 

Single CPU Price:$3,000 


Customer 

Support:908-946-3800 

Site License:Contact vendor. 



Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. 


Training Provided:Contact 
vendor. 



Consulting Support:Contact 
vendor. 

GSA Price:No 


Customization: Y es 

Maint. Price:$450/year || ||By Vendor:No 

1 ||ByUser:Yes 

_^Ul_ 


5 of 6 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 





REUSE MANAGEMENT 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_l 1 .html#A4 


PIatforin(s)/Operating System(s): 

HP-1000 - RTE-A 

HP-300-MPE-V 

HP-300-MPE-XL 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

User interface - Standard HP terminal or equivalent. 

Disk space required - approximately 7,000 sectors (including MAKE 

and GRGP utilities). 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

• Listing and compiling may be done on a single file, file subset, 
or all-files basis. 

• User exit programs can be written to perform a variety of 
user-defined operations. 

• MAKE and GREP. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

SCONS/3000 (Source CONtrol System) is a fourth generation change 
control system designed to manage all file change problems. 
Regardless of your programming environment, SCONS/3000 lets you 
control your project's development without hindering its progress. 

The system organizes and maintains all revisions of any type of file, 
and at the same time controls user access and modifications. 
SCONS/3000 conserves valuable disk space by storing only the 
difference between old and new files. 




6 of 6 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 



SOURCE MANAGER 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_12.html#Al 


• SOURCE MANAGER 

• SOURCEBANK 

• TLIB 

• VERSION MERGER 

• VERSIONS 1.1 


SOURCE MANAGER 


Product Information: 


Vendor: TransWare 
Enterprises, Inc. 




Version Number: 2.11 


In Business Since: 1988 

Last Released: Jan 1994 


Address: 5450 Thomwood 
Drive 

First Released: Sep 1991 


Suite M 

Freq. of Updates: Aimually 


San Jose, CA 95123-1222 

Number Sold: N/A 


Marketing Contact: Virginia 
Jones 



Phone Number:408-227-7700 

Pricing: 


Fax Number:408-227-7757 

Single User Price:$169 DOS 


E-mail Address: 

$349 Unix 


Bulletin Board System: 

Site License:$349 DOS 


Customer 

Support:408-227-7700 

$699 Unix 



Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. 


Training Provided:No 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:N/A 


Customization: Y es 



By Vendor: Yes 

Maint. Price:N/A 


By User:No 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

MS-DOS, UnixWare, Interactive Unix, Solaris X86, AIX. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interfaee, 

Network, ete.) 

DOS - 640K RAM. 

All platforms: Disk Space - < 500K. 







1 of? 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 





SOURCE MANAGER 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_l 2.html#A 1 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Source_Manager may be used to control text files of any format, 
including program source files (all compilers) and database command 
files. Unix and DOS files are easily imported and exported between 

platforms. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Source_Manager is a software revision and version control program that 
organizes and protects source code. Source_Manager maintains a 
comprehensive Program Library file that contains your original source 
code, all code revisions, date/time stamps, notes, user stamps, 
passwords, and more. Two modes of operation are featured: 1) Revision 
Control, allowing revision of individual source lines; 2) Version Control, 
allowing easy check-out and check-in of complete source modules. 
Revision histories are maintained in compatible form with CDC's 
UPDATE utility program. 

Source_Manager allows you to develop and test new revisions to your 
program easily without making a permanent change to your controlled 

software. 




SOURCEBANK 


Product Information: 

1 j|Vendor: BlueLine Software 

n 

Version Number: 5.2 

1 ||In Business Since: 1985 

Date of Last Release: 

11 llAddress: 5775 Wayzata Blvd. 

Date of First Release: 

1 ||Miimeapolis, MN 55416 

Frequency of Updates: 

II IjMarketing Contact: Wayne Hamilton 

Number Sold: 

II |jPhoneNumber:612-542-1072 

1 ||FaxNumber:612-542-9566 

II ||E-mail Address:wayne@blueline.mn.org 

lUI. 

1 ||Bulletin Board System:612-542-8431 

Pricing: 

1 ||Customer Support:800-826-0313 

Single User Price:contact vendor || || 

Site License:contact vendor 

1 ||Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:contact vendor 

1 1 Consulting Support:Yes 

j II II Customization: Yes 

GSA Price:contact vendor 

1 ||By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price:contact vendor 

1 ||By User:No 


2 of? 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 





SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_12.html#Al 


II II 


Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBM VM 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, 

Disk size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Client: 

Server: Disk: 40 cylinders of 3380; 5-16 MB of memory 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Provides centralized access and control of files, including 
source, object, and data members. Complete version control 
and security are implemented through either a full-screen 
user interface or command syntax. 




TUB 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Burton Systems 
Software 




Version Number: 5.6.1 


In Business Since: 1984 

Last Released: 


Address: 5104 Western Blvd. 

First Released: 


Raleigh, NC 27606 

Freq. of Updates: 



Number Sold: 


Marketing Contact: 



Phone Number:919-233-8128 



Fax Number:919-233-0716 

Pricing: 


E-mail Address :N/A 

Single User Price:$139 (DOS) 


Bulletin Board System: 
919-233-0106 

Site License:$ 195 (OS/2) 


Customer Support:James 
Holman/ 

Multicopy Price:Volume discount. 


Dave Burton 


3 of? 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 







SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_12.httnl#Al 


1 ||Training Provided:No 

1 II Consulting Support: Yes 

GS A Price:Contact vendor. || || Customization: Yes 

Maint. Price:Contact vendor. || ||By Vendor:Yes 

1 ||ByUser:No 

__ ^1 _ 

Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

DOS, OS/2 Windows, Windows NT. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Needs approximately 500K conventional memory free. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Opus Make; Multi Edit, can be used by most makes and editors. Also, 
macros exist for Slick Edit, Code Wright, and Sage Editor. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

TLIB is a version control and configuration management tool. Would 
have no trouble managing Ada source code. TLIB allows easy migration 
of changes from one level to another. For example, you can migrate 
improvements from a "standard" level to each of several "customized" 
levels. Or, you can migrate bug fixes from the old release into the new 
release. Or, if you have modified a purchased source code library, when 
you get new releases from the vendor you can migrate their changes into 
your ovm version, without losing your modifications. 




VERSION MERGER 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Princeton Softech, 
Inc. 




Version Number: 3.1 


In Business Since: 1989 

Date of Last Release: Jan 93 


Address: 1060 State Road 

Date of First Release: Sep 90 


Princeton, NJ 08540 


4 of? 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 





SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hilI.af.mi1/cm/apxc_12.html#Al 


Frequency of Updates: Annual 


Marketing Contact: Mario 

M. de Guzman 

Number Sold:226 - U.S. 


Phone Number:609-497-0205 

12 - Int'l 


Fax Number:609-497-0302 



E-mail Address: 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 15K - 21K based on CPU size 


Customer 

Support:800-457-7060 

Single User Price:N/A 



Site License:$23,500 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price :N/A 


Consulting Support:Yes 



Customization :No 

GSA Price: 


By Vendor:No 

Maint. Price: 15% 


By User:No 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

MVS-based. Runs under either TSO/ISPF or CA-Roscoe. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Disk Requirements: - or = 75 tracks of 3380 DASD to install product 
plus size of input files that need reconciliation. 

Memory Requirements: - or = $200K for the on-line dialog. When 
editing a file, the file is brought into memory, storage needs vary 
depending on the size of the programs. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Version Merger interfaces with many change control systems, e.g., 
Endevor, ChangeMan, CCF, Panapt. Millenium transparency. Library 
systems integration, e.g.. Panvalet, Librarian. Language independent. 







5 of? 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 





SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_12.htnil#Al 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Version Merger is a programmer's productivity tool that automates the 
integration of multiple versions of the same application or program. 
Assists quality assurance people and programmers in identifying changes 
made to an application or program and retrofitting previous changes to 
new enhancements. Version Merger automates the reconciliation process 
and cuts implementation time by 50%. Version Merger is particularly 
useful for upgrading purchased applications that have been customized to 
satisfy a company's specific requirements. 


VERSIONS 1.1 


Product Information: Versions 1.1 


Vendor: StarBase 

Corporation 




Version Number: 1.1 


In Business Since: 

Date of Last Release: May 94 


Address: 18872 MacArthur 

Blvd. 

Date of First Release: Sep 93 


Suite 400, Irvine CA, 92715 

Frequency of Updates: As developed 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 1,600+ 


Phone Number:714-442-4400 



FaxNumber:714-253-6712 



E-mail Address:CompuServe 
73531,137 






Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support:714-442-4460 

Single User Price:$279 



Site License:See below * 


Training Provided:Yes, for fee 

Multicopy Price:See below * 


Consulting Support:Yes, for fee 



Customization:No 

GSA Price :N/A 


By Vendor:No 

Maint. Price :N/A 


By User:No 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

• Multicopy price information: 1-4 units $279, 5-9 units $250,10-19 units $235,20-49 units $225, 
and 50+ units - call. 

Windows, Windows for Workgroups, Windows NT 


11 


6 of? 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 





SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_l 2.html#A 1 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

An IBM or 100% compatible computer with an 80386 or higher 
processor. 4 MB available RAM, 

2 MB available hard disk space. VGA or higher resolution monitor. A 
mouse or compatible pointing 

device. MS-DOS version 5.0 or higher, and Microsoft Windows 
Version 3.1 or higher, Windows for 

Workgroups 3.11, or Windows NT 3.1. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

N/A 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

VERSIONS provides a fast, easy-to-use solution to your version 
control needs. Designed to make version control as simple as possible, 
VERSIONS has it all; easy-to-use project metaphor, automated 
"smart" suggestions for file check-in/check-out, automatic 
project-based scheduled file check-in, long-term file locking, quick 
versioning of files - even Windows' binaries, diffing and delta 
versioning for ASCII files, hassle-free reports, and use of DOS 
command-line for batch ops. Fully network 

compatible. Runs under Windows, Windows for Workgroups, and 

Windows NT. 




7 of? 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 



SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af. tnil/cm/apxc_12.html#A2 


• SOURCE MANAGER 

• SOURCEBANK 

• TLIB 

• VERSION MERGER 

• VERSIONS 1.1 


SOURCE MANAGER 


Product Information: 


Vendor: TransWare 
Enterprises, Inc. 




Version Number: 2.11 


In Business Since: 1988 

Last Released: Jan 1994 


Address: 5450 Thomwood 
Drive 

First Released: Sep 1991 


Suite M 

Freq. of Updates: Annually 


San Jose, CA 95123-1222 

Number Sold: N/A 


Marketing Contact:Virginia 

Jones 



Phone Number:408-227-7700 

Pricing: 


Fax Number:408-227-7757 

Single User Price:$169 DOS 


E-mail Address: 

$349 Unix 


Bulletin Board System: 

Site License:$349 DOS 


Customer 

Support:408-227-7700 

$699 Unix 



Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. 


Training Provided:No 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:N/A 


Customization: Y es 



By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price:N/A 


By User:No 


Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

MS-DOS, UnixWare, Interactive Unix, Solaris X86, AIX. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

DOS-640KRAM. 

All platforms: Disk Space - < 500K. 







1 of? 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 






SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hilI.af.mi1/cm/apxc_12.httnl#A2 


1001 Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Source_Manager may be used to control text files of any format, 
including program source files (all compilers) and database comm^d 
files. Unix and DOS files are easily imported and exported between 

platforms. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Source_Manager is a software revision and version control program that 
organizes and protects source code. Source_Manager maintains a 
comprehensive Program Library file that contains your original source 
code, all code revisions, date/time stamps, notes, user stamps, 
passwords, and more. Two modes of operation are featured: 1) Revision 
Control, allowing revision of individual source lines; 2) Version Control, 
allowing easy check-out and check-in of complete source modules. 
Revision histories are maintained in compatible form with CDC's 
UPDATE utility program. 

Source_Manager allows you to develop and test new revisions to your 
program easily without making a permanent change to your controlled 

software. 




SOURCEBANK 


Product Information: 

II II Vendor: BlueLine Software 

_ 

Version Number: 5.2 

II ||In Business Since: 1985 

Date of Last Release: 

1 ||Address: 5775 Wayzata Blvd. 

Date ot First Release: 

II ||Minneapolis, MN 55416 

Frequency of Updates: 

_ II ||Marketing Contact: Wayne Hamilton 

Number Sold: 

II II Phone Number:612-542-1072 

1 |FaxNumber:612-542-9566 

II ||E-mail Address:wayne@blueline.mn.org 

^nr° —“—'—"—'— 

II ||Bulletin Board System:612-542-8431 

Pricing: 

II ||Customer Support:800-826-0313 

1 Single User Priceicontact vendor || || 

Site License:contact vendor 

II ||Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:contact vendor 

II ||Consulting Support:Yes 

1 II Customization: Yes 

CrSA Price:contact vendor 

II ||By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price:contact vendor 

II ||By User:No 


2 of? 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 





SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_12.html#A2 


^nr 


Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBMVM 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, 

Disk size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Client: 

Server: Disk: 40 cylinders of 3380; 5-16 MB of memory 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Provides centralized access and control of files, including 
source, object, and data members. Complete version control 
and security are implemented through either a full-screen 
user interface or command syntax. 




TUB 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Burton Systems 
Software 




Version Number: 5.0.1 


In Business Since: 1984 

Last Released: 


Address: 5104 Western Blvd. 

First Released: 


Raleigh, NC 27606 

Freq. of Updates: 



Number Sold: 


Marketing Contact: 



Phone Number:919-233-8128 



FaxNumber:919-233-0716 

Pricing: 


E-mail Address :N/A 

Single User Price:$139 (DOS) 


Bulletin Board System: 
919-233-0106 

Site License:$195 (OS/2) 


Customer Support:James 
Holman/ 

Multicopy Price:Volume discount. || | 

Dave Burton 


3 of? 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 






SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cni/apxc_12.html#A2 


II ||Training Provided:No 

II II Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:Contact vendor. |j |jCustomization:Yes 

Maint. Price:Contact vendor. || ||By Vendor:Yes 

II llBy User:No 

II 

PIatforra(s)/Operating System(s): 

DOS, OS/2 Windows, Windows NT. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Needs approximately 500K conventional memory free. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Opus Make; Multi Edit, can be used by most makes and editors. Also, 
macros exist for Slick Edit, Code Wright, and Sage Editor. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

TLIB is a version control and configuration management tool. Would 
have no trouble managing Ada source code. TLIB allows easy migration 
of changes from one level to another. For example, you can migrate 
improvements from a "standard" level to each of several "customized" 
levels. Or, you can migrate bug fixes from the old release into the new 
release. Or, if you have modified a purchased source code library, when 
you get new releases from the vendor you can migrate their changes into 
your own version, without losing your modifications. 




VERSION MERGER 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Princeton Softech, 
Inc. 




Version Number: 3.1 


In Business Since: 1989 

Date of Last Release: Jan 93 


Address: 1060 State Road 

Date of First Release: Sep 90 


Princeton, NJ 08540 


4 of? 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 





SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hilI.af.miI/cm/apxc_12.html#A2 


Frequency of Updates: Annual 


Marketing Contact: Mario 

M. de Guzman 

Number Sold:226 - U.S. 


Phone Number:609-497-0205 

12 - Int'l 


Fax Number;609-497-0302 



E-mail Address: 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 15K - 21K based on CPU size 


Customer 

Support:800-457-7060 

^single User Price:N/A 



Site License:$23,500 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price :N/A 


Consulting Support:Yes 



Customization:No 

GSA Price: 


By Vendor:No 

Maint. Price: 15% 


By User:No 





Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 


MVS-based. Runs under either TSO/ISPF or CA-Roscoe. 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Disk Requirements: - or = 75 tracks of 3380 DASD to install product 
plus size of input files that need reconciliation. 

Meniory Requirements: - or = $200K for the on-line dialog. When 
editing a file, the file is brought into memory, storage needs vary 
depending on the size of the programs. 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Version Merger interfaces with many change control systems, e.g., 
Endevor, ChangeMan, CCF, Panapt. Millenium transparency. Library 
systems integration, e.g.. Panvalet, Librarian. Language independent. 


5 of? 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 




SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.miI/cm/apxc_12.html#A2 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Version Merger is a programmer's productivity tool that automates the 
integration of multiple versions of the same application or program. 
Assists quality assurance people and programmers in identifying changes 
made to an application or program and retrofitting previous changes to 
new enhancements. Version Merger automates the reconciliation process 
and cuts implementation time by 50%. Version Merger is particularly 
useful for upgrading purchased applications that have been customized to 
satisfy a company's specific requirements. 


VERSIONS 1.1 


Product Information: Versions 1.1 


Vendor: StarBase 

Corporation 




Version Number: 1.1 


In Business Since: 

Date of Last Release: May 94 


Address: 18872 MacArthur 

Blvd. 

Date of First Release: Sep 93 


Suite 400, Irvine CA, 92715 

Frequency of Updates: As developed 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 1,600+ 


Phone Number:714-442-4400 



FaxNumber:714-253-6712 



E-mail Address:CompuServe 
73531,137 






Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support:714-442-4460 

Single User Price:$279 



Site License:See below * 


Training Provided:Yes, for fee 

Multicopy Price:See below * 


Consulting Support:Yes, for fee 



Customization:No 

GSA Price :N/A 


By Vendor:No 

Maint. Price :N/A 


By User:No 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

• Multicopy price information: 1-4 units $279, 5-9 units $250,10-19 units $235, 20-49 units $225, 
and 50+ units - call. 

Windows, Windows for Workgroups, Windows NT 


II 


6 of? 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 





SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.inil/cin/apxc_12.html#A2 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

An IBM or 100% compatible computer with an 80386 or higher 
processor. 4 MB available RAM, 

2 MB available hard disk space. VGA or higher resolution monitor. A 
mouse or compatible pointing 

device. MS-DOS version 5.0 or higher, and Microsoft Windows 
Version 3.1 or higher, Windows for 

Workgroups 3.11, or Windows NT 3.1. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

N/A 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

VERSIONS provides a fast, easy-to-use solution to your version 
control needs. Designed to make version control as simple as possible, 
VERSIONS has it all; easy-to-use project metaphor, automated 
"smart" suggestions for file check-in/check-out, automatic 
project-based scheduled file check-in, long-term file locking, quick 
versioning of files - even Windows' binaries, diffing and delta 
versioning for ASCII files, hassle-free reports, and use of DOS 
command-line for batch ops. Fully network 

compatible. Runs under Windows, Windows for Workgroups, and 

Windows NT. 




7 of? 


5/13/97 7:28 AM 





SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_12.html#A3 


• SOURCE MANAGER 

• SOURCEBANK 

• TLIB 

• VERSION MERGER 
. VERSIONS 1.1 


SOURCE MANAGER 


Product Information: 


Vendor: TransWare 
Enterprises, Inc. 




Version Number: 2.11 


In Business Since: 1988 

Last Released: Jan 1994 


Address: 5450 Thomwood 
Drive 

First Released: Sep 1991 


Suite M 

Freq. of Updates: Annually 


San Jose, CA 95123-1222 

Number Sold: N/A 


Marketing Contact: Virginia 
Jones 



Phone Number:408-227-7700 

Pricing: 


Fax Number:408-227-7757 

Single User Price:$169 DOS 


E-mail Address: 

$349 Unix 


Bulletin Board System: 

Site License:$349 DOS 


Customer 

Support:408-227-7700 

$699 Unix 



Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. 


Training Provided:No 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:N/A 


Customization: Y es 



By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price:N/A 


By User:No 


PIatform(s)/Operating System(s): 

MS-DOS, UnixWare, Interactive Unix, Solaris X86, AIX. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

DOS - 640K RAM. 

All platforms: Disk Space - < 500K. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 




lof? 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 




SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hilI.af.mi1/cm/apxc_12.html#A3 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Source_Manager may be used to control text files of any format, 
including program source files (all compilers) and database command 
files. Unix and DOS files are easily imported and exported between 

platforms. 


. 

. 

1 

Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Source_Manager is a software revision and version control program that 
organizes and protects source code. Source Manager maintains a 
comprehensive Program Library file that contains your original source 
code, all code revisions, date/time stamps, notes, user stamps, 
passwords, and more. Two modes of operation are featured: 1) Revision 
Control, allowing revision of individual source lines; 2) Version Control, 
allowing easy check-out and check-in of complete source modules. 
Revision histories are maintained in compatible form with CDC's 
UPDATE utility program. 

Source_Manager allows you to develop and test new revisions to your 
program easily without making a permanent change to your controlled 

software. 




SOURCEBANK 


Product Information: 

II IIVendor: BlueLine Software 

__ ^Ul_ 

Version Number: 5.2 

II ||In Business Since: 1985 

Date of Last Release: 

1 ||Address: 5775 Wayzata Blvd. 

Date of First Release: 

II IIMinneapolis, MN 55416 

Frequency of Updates: 

II ||Marketing Contact: Wayne Hamilton 

Number Sold: 

II ||PhoneNumber:612-542-1072 

II ||FaxNumber:612-542-9566 

II ||E-mail Address: wayne@blueline.mn.org 

ttz 

II ||Bulletin Board System:612-542-8431 

Fricing: 

II II Customer Support:800-826-0313 

Single User Price:contact vendor 

1 JL 

Site License:contact vendor 

II ||Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:contact vendor 

II ||Consulting Support:Yes 

1 II Customization: Yes 

(iSA Price:contact vendor 

II ||By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price:contact vendor 

1 II By User:No 

____ 


2 of? 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 



SOURCE MANAGER 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_12.html#A3 


PIatform(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBMVM 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, 

Disk size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Client: 

Server: Disk: 40 cylinders of 3380; 5-16 MB of memory 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Provides centralized access and control of files, including 
source, object, and data members. Complete version control 
and security are implemented through either a full-screen 
user interface or command syntax. 




TUB 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Burton Systems 
Software 




Version Number: 5.0.1 


In Business Since: 1984 

Last Released: 


Address: 5104 Western Blvd. 

First Released: 


Raleigh, NC 27606 

Freq. of Updates: 



Number Sold: 


Marketing Contact: 



Phone Number:919-233-8128 



Fax Number:919-233-0716 

Pricing: 


E-mail Address :N/A 

Single User Price:$139 (DOS) 


Bulletin Board System: 
919-233-0106 

Site License:$195 (OS/2) 


Customer Support:James 
Holman/ 

Multicopy Price:Volume discount. 


Dave Burton 



Training Provided:No 


3 of? 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 





SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.niil/cin/apxc_12.htmI#A3 



II Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:Contact vendor. 

[ II Customization:Yes 

Maint. Price:Contact vendor. 

II By Vendor: Yes 


||By User:No 



PIatform(s)/Operating System(s): 

DOS, OS/2 Windows, Windows NT. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration; (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Needs approximately 500K conventional memory free. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Opus Make; Multi Edit, can be used by most makes and editors. Also, 
macros exist for Slick Edit, Code Wright, and Sage Editor. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

TLIB is a version control and configuration management tool. Would 
have no trouble managing Ada source code. TLIB allows easy migration 
of changes from one level to another. For example, you can migrate 
improvements from a "standard" level to each of several "customized" 
levels. Or, you can migrate bug fixes from the old release into the new 
release. Or, if you have modified a purchased source code library, when 
you get new releases from the vendor you can migrate their changes into 
your own version, without losing your modifications. 




VERSION MERGER 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Princeton Softech, 
Inc. 




Version Number: 3.1 


In Business Since: 1989 

Date of Last Release: Jan 93 


Address: 1060 State Road 

Date of First Release: Sep 90 


Princeton, NJ 08540 

Frequency of Updates: Aimual 


Marketing Contact: Mario 

M. de Guzman 


4 of? 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 



SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.miI/cm/apxc_12.html#A3 


Number Sold:226 - U.S. 


Phone Number:609-497-0205 

12 - Int'l 


Fax Number:609-497-0302 



E-mail Address: 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 15K - 21K based on CPU size 


Customer 

Support:800-457-7060 

Single User Price:N/A 



Site License;$23,500 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price :N/A 


Consulting Support:Yes 



Customization:No 

GSA Price; 


By Vendor:No 

Maint. Price: 15% 


By User:No 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

MVS-based. Runs under either TSO/ISPF or CA-Roscoe. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Disk Requirements: - or = 75 tracks of 3380 DASD to install product 
plus size of input files that need reconciliation. 

Memory Requirements: - or = $200K for the on-line dialog. When 
editing a file, the file is brought into memory, storage needs vary 
depending on the size of the programs. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Version Merger interfaces with many change control systems, e.g., 
Endevor, ChangeMan, CCF, Panapt. Millenium transparency. Library 
systems integration, e.g.. Panvalet, Librarian. Language independent. 







5 of 7 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 



SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.miI/cni/apxc_12.html#A3 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Version Merger is a programmer's productivity tool that automates the 
integration of multiple versions of the same application or program. 
Assists quality assurance people and programmers in identifying changes 
made to an application or program and retrofitting previous changes to 
new enhancements. Version Merger automates the reconciliation process 
and cuts implementation time by 50%. Version Merger is particularly 
useful for upgrading purchased applications that have been customized to 
satisfy a company's specific requirements. 


VERSIONS 1.1 


Product Information: Versions 1.1 


Vendor: StarBase 

Corporation 




Version Number: 1.1 


In Business Since: 

Date of Last Release: May 94 


Address: 18872 MacArthur 

Blvd. 

Date of First Release: Sep 93 


Suite 400, Irvine CA, 92715 

Frequency of Updates: As developed 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 1,600+ 


Phone Number:? 14-442-4400 



Fax Number:714-253-6712 



E-mail Address:CompuServe 
73531,137 






Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support:714-442-4460 

Single User Price:$279 



Site License: See below * 


Training Provided:Yes, for fee 

Multicopy Price:See below * 


Consulting Support:Yes, for fee 



Customization:N o 

GSAPrice:N/A 


By Vendor:No 

Maint. Price :N/A 


By User:No 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

• Multicopy price information: 1-4 units $279, 5-9 units $250,10-19 units $235, 20-49 units $225, 
and 50+ units - call. 

Windows, Windows for Workgroups, Windows NT 

11 


6 of? 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 





SOURCE MANAGER 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cni/apxc_12.html#A3 


Minimum/Kecommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

An IBM or 100% compatible computer with an 80386 or higher 
processor. 4 MB available RAM, 

2 MB available hard disk space. VGA or higher resolution monitor. A 
mouse or compatible pointing 

device. MS-DOS version 5.0 or higher, and Microsoft Windows 
Version 3.1 or higher, Windows for 

Workgroups 3.11, or Windows NT 3.1. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

N/A 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

VERSIONS provides a fast, easy-to-use solution to your version 
control needs. Designed to make version control as simple as possible, 
VERSIONS has it all; easy-to-use project metaphor, automated 
"smart" suggestions for file check-in/check-out, automatic 
project-based scheduled file check-in, long-term file locking, quick 
versioning of files - even Windows' binaries, diffing and delta 
versioning for ASCII files, hassle-free reports, and use of DOS 
command-line for batch ops. Fully network 

compatible. Runs under Windows, Windows for Workgroups and 

Windows NT. 




7 of? 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 




SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_12.htnil#A4 


• SOURCE MANAGER 

• SOURCEBANK 
. TLIB 

• VERSION MERGER 

• VERSIONS 1.1 


SOURCE MANAGER 


Product Information: 


Vendor: TransWare 
Enterprises, Inc. 




Version Number: 2.11 


In Business Since: 1988 

Last Released: Jan 1994 


Address: 5450 Thomwood 
Drive 

First Released: Sep 1991 


Suite M 

Freq. of Updates: Annually 


San Jose, CA 95123-1222 

Number Sold: N/A 


Marketing Contact: Virginia 
Jones 



Phone Number:408-227-7700 

Pricing: 


Fax Number:408-227-7757 

Single User Price:$169 DOS 


E-mail Address: 

$349 Unix 


Bulletin Board System: 

Site License:$349 DOS 


Customer 

Support:408-227-7700 

$699 Unix 



Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. 


Training Provided:No 

- 


Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price:N/A 


Customization: Yes 



By Vendor:Yes 

Maint. Price:N/A 


By User:No 


1 

Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

MS-DOS, UnixWare, Interactive Unix, Solaris X86, AIX. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, ete.) 

DOS - 640K RAM. 

All platforms: Disk Space - < 500K. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 




1 of? 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 

















SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.nijl/cm/apxc_12.html#A4 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Source_Manager may be used to control text files of any format, 
including program source files (all compilers) and database command 
files. Unix and DOS files are easily imported and exported between 

platforms. 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Source_Manager is a software revision and version control program that 
organizes and protects source code. Source_Manager maintains a 
comprehensive Program Library file that contains your original source 
code, all code revisions, date/time stamps, notes, user stamps, 
passwords, and more. Two modes of operation are featured; 1) Revision 
Control, allowing revision of individual source lines; 2) Version Control, 
allowing easy check-out and check-in of complete source modules. 
Revision histories are maintained in compatible form with CDC's 
UPDATE utility program. 

Source_Manager allows you to develop and test new revisions to your 
program easily without making a permanent change to your controlled 

software. 


SOURCEBANK 


Product Information: 

II ||Vendor: BlueLine Software 


Version Number: 5.2 

II ||In Business Since: 1985 

Date of Last Release: 

II ||Address: 5775 Wayzata Blvd. 

Date of First Release: 

IP ||Minneapolis, MN 55416 

Frequency of Updates: 

II 1 Marketing Contact: Wayne Hamilton 

Number Sold: 

II ||PhoneNumber:612-542-1072 

II ||Fax Number:612-542-9566 

II ||E-mail Address:wayne@blueline.mn.org 

____ 

II ||Bulletin Board System:612-542-8431 

Pricing: 

1 II Customer Support:800-826-0313 

Single User Price:contact vendor || || 

Site License;contact vendor 

II ||Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:contact vendor 

II II Consulting Support:Yes 

II II Customization: Yes 

GSA Price:contact vendor 

II ||By Vendor;Yes 

Maint. Price:contact vendor 

II ||By User:No 

^ni 


2 of? 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 





SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_12.html#A4 


Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBM VM 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, 

Disk size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Client: 

Server: Disk: 40 cylinders of 3380; 5-16 MB of memory 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Provides centralized access and control of files, including 
source, object, and data members. Complete version control 
and security are implemented through either a full-screen 
user interface or command syntax. 




TUB 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Burton Systems 
Software 




Version Number: 5.0.1 


In Business Since: 1984 

Last Released: 


Address: 5104 Western Blvd. 

First Released: 


Raleigh, NC 27606 

Freq. of Updates: 



Number Sold: 


Marketing Contact: 



Phone Number:919-233-8128 



Fax Number:919-233-0716 

Pricing: 


E-mail Address :N/A 

Single User Price:$139 (DOS) 


Bulletin Board System: 
919-233-0106 

Site License:$195 (6S/2) 


Customer Support:James 
Holman/ 

Multicopy Price:Volume discount. 


Dave Burton 



Training Provided:No 


3 of? 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 




SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_12.html#A4 


II II Consulting Support: Yes 

GSA Price:Contact vendor. j| || Customization: Yes 

Maint. Price:Contact vendor. j[ ||By Vendor: Yes 

1 ||By User:No 

II 

Platforin(s)/Operating System(s): 

DOS, OS/2 Windows, Windows NT. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Needs approximately 500K conventional memory free. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Opus Make; Multi Edit, can be used by most makes and editors. Also, 
macros exist for Slick Edit, Code Wright, and Sage Editor. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

TLIB is a version control and configuration management tool. Would 
have no trouble managing Ada source code. TLIB allows easy migration 
of changes from one level to another. For example, you can migrate 
improvements from a "standard" level to each of several "customized" 
levels. Or, you can migrate bug fixes from the old release into the new 
release. Or, if you have modified a purchased source code library, when 
you get new releases from the vendor you can migrate their changes into 
your ovra version, without losing your modifications. 




VERSION MERGER 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Princeton Softech, 
Inc. 




Version Number: 3.1 


In Business Since: 1989 

Date of Last Release: Jan 93 


Address: 1060 State Road 

Date of First Release: Sep 90 


Princeton, NJ 08540 

Frequency of Updates: Annual 


Marketing Contact: Mario 

M. de Guzman 


4 of 7 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 





SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_12.html#A4 


Number Sold:226 - U.S. -- 

ZI! 

^hone Number:609-497-0205 

12 - Int'l —1 


"ax Number:609-497-0302 



i-mail Address: 


ZB 

Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 15K - 21K based on CPU size | 

~u 

c 

t.- 

Customer 

Support: 800-457-7060 

Single User Price:N/A | 



Site License:$23,500 j 

1 Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price :N/A | 

1 Consulting Support:Yes 

I 

I Customization:No 

^SA Price: 

II By Vendor:No | 

MamLPrice:lS% || ||Bv UseriNo 

ir 

1 

Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

MVS-based. Runs under either TSO/ISPF or CA-Roscoe. 


—---- 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Disk Requirements: - or = 75 tracks of 3380 DASD to install product 
plus size of input files that need reconciliation. 

Memory Requirements: - or = $200K for the on-line dialog. When 
editing a file, the file is brought into memory, storage needs vary 
depending on the size of the programs. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc,) 

Version Merger interfaces with many change control systems, e.g., 
Endevor, ChangeMan, CCF, Panapt. Millenium transparency. Library 
systems integration, e.g.. Panvalet, Librarian. Language independent. 







5 of? 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 




SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hiIl.af.mi1/cm/apxc_12.html#A4 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Version Merger is a programmer's productivity tool that automates the 
integration of multiple versions of the same application or program. 
Assists quality assurance people and programmers in identifying changes 
made to an application or program and retrofitting previous changes to 
new enhancements. Version Merger automates the reconciliation process 
and cuts implementation time by 50%. Version Merger is particularly 
useful for upgrading purchased applications that have been customized to 
satisfy a company's specific requirements. 


VERSIONS 1.1 


Product Information: Versions 1.1 


Vendor: StarBase 

Corporation 




Version Number: 1.1 


In Business Since: 

Date of Last Release: May 94 


Address: 18872 MacArthur 

Blvd. 

Date of First Release: Sep 93 


Suite 400, Irvine CA, 92715 

Frequency of Updates: As developed 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 1,600+ 


Phone Number:714-442-4400 



Fax Number:? 14-253-6712 



E-mail Address:CompuServe 
73531,137 






Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support:714-442-4460 

Single User Price:$279 



Site License:See below * 


Training Provided:Yes, for fee 

Multicopy Price:See below * 


Consulting Support:Yes, for fee 



Customization :N o 

GSAPrice:N/A 


By Vendor:No 

Maint. Price:N/A 


By User:No 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

• Multicopy price information: 1-4 units $279,5-9 units $250,10-19 units $235,20-49 units $225, 
and 50+ units - call. 

Windows, Windows for Workgroups, Windows NT 


1^^ 


6 of 7 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 









SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_12.html#A4 


Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

An IBM or 100% compatible computer with an 80386 or higher 
processor. 4 MB available RAM, 

2 MB available hard disk space. VGA or higher resolution monitor. A 
mouse or compatible pointing 

device. MS-DOS version 5.0 or higher, and Microsoft Windows 
Version 3.1 or higher, Windows for 

Workgroups 3.11, or Windows NT 3.1. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

N/A 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

VERSIONS provides a fast, easy-to-use solution to your version 
control needs. Designed to make version control as simple as possible, 
VERSIONS has it all; easy-to-use project metaphor, automated 
"smart" suggestions for file check-in/check-out, automatic 
project-based scheduled file check-in, long-term file locking, quick 
versioning of files - even Windows' binaries, diffmg and delta 
versioning for ASCII files, hassle-free reports, and use of DOS 
command-line for batch ops. Fully network 

compatible. Runs under Windows, Windows for Workgroups, and 

Windows NT. 




7 of? 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 




SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_12.html#A5 


• SOURCE MANAGER 

• SOURCEBANK 

• TLIB 

• VERSION MERGER 

• VERSIONS 1.1 


SOURCE MANAGER 


Product Information: 


Vendor: TransWare 
Enterprises, Inc. 




Version Number: 2.11 


In Business Since: 1988 

Last Released: Jan 1994 


Address: 5450 Thomwood 
Drive 

First Released: Sep 1991 


Suite M 

Freq. of Updates: Annually 


San Jose, CA 95123-1222 

Number Sold: N/A 


Marketing Contact:Virginia 
Jones 



Phone Number:408-227-7700 

Pricing: 


Fax Number:408-227-7757 

Single User Price:$169 DOS 


E-mail Address: 

$349 Unix 


Bulletin Board System: 

Site License:$349 DOS 


Customer 

Support:408-227-7700 

$699 Unix 



Multicopy Price:Contact vendor. 


Training Provided:No 



Consulting Support:Yes 

GSA Price :N/A 


Customization: Y es 



By Vendor: Yes 

Maint. Price:N/A 


By User:No 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

MS-DOS, UnixWare, Interactive Unix, Solaris X86, AIX. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, ete.) 

DOS - 640K RAM. 

All platforms: Disk Space - < 500K. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 




1 of? 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 




SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_12.html#A5 


Tool Integration: (CASE tools, Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Source_Manager may be used to control text files of any format, 
including program source files (all compilers) and database command 
files. Unix and DOS files are easily imported and exported between 

platforms. 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Source_Manager is a software revision and version control program that 
organizes and protects source code. Source Manager maintains a 
comprehensive Program Library file that contains your original source 
code, all code revisions, date/time stamps, notes, user stamps, 
passwords, and more. Two modes of operation are featured: 1) Revision 
Control, allowing revision of individual source lines; 2) Version Control, 
allowing easy check-out and check-in of complete source modules. 
Revision histories are maintained in compatible form with CDC's 
UPDATE utility program. 

Source_Manager allows you to develop and test new revisions to your 
program easily without making a permanent change to your controlled 

software. 


SOURCEBANK 


Product Information: 

II IIVendor: BlueLine Software 


Version Number: 5.2 

II ||In Business Since: 1985 

Date of Last Release: 

I IjAddress: 5775 Wayzata Blvd. 

Date of First Release: 

1 IIMinneapolis, MN 55416 

Frequency of Updates: 

1 ||Marketing Contact: Wayne Hamilton 

Number Sold: 

II ||PhoneNumber:612-542-1072 

II ||FaxNumber:612-542-9566 

II ||E-mail Address:wayne@blueline.nm.org 

II II 

1 ||Bulletin Board System:612-542-8431 

Pricing: 

II ||Customer Support:800-826-0313 

Single User Price:contact vendor || || 

Site License:contact vendor 

II IjTraining Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price:contact vendor 

11 ||Consulting Support:Yes 

11 1 Customization: Yes 

GSA Price:contact vendor 

1 II By Vendor: Yes 

Maint. Price:contact vendor 

1 llBy User:No 



2 of? 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 





SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_12.htmI#A5 


Platforiii(s)/Operating System(s): 

IBMVM 




Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, 

Disk size, User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Client: 

Server: Disk: 40 cylinders of 3380; 5-16 MB of memory 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Provides centralized access and control of files, including 
source, object, and data members. Complete version control 
and security are implemented through either a full-screen 
user interface or command syntax. 




TUB 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Burton Systems 
Software 





D 

Version Number: 5.0.1 


In Business Since: 1984 


Last Released: 


Address: 5104 Western Blvd. 


First Released: 


Raleigh, NC 27606 


Freq. of Updates: 




Number Sold: 


Marketing Contact: 




Phone Number:919-233-8128 




FaxNumber:919-233-0716 


Pricing: 


E-mail Address :N/A 


Single User Price:$139 (DOS) 


Bulletin Board System: 
919-233-0106 


Site License:$195 (OS/2) 


Customer Support:James 
Holman/ 


Multicopy Price:Volume discount. 


Dave Burton 




Training Provided:No 




Consulting Support:Yes 



3 of? 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 





SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.tnil/cm/apxc_12.html#A5 


II Consulting Support:Yes 


GS A Price:Contact vendor. |j jj Customization: Yes 

Maint. Price:Contact vendor. | ||By Vendor:Yes 

1 ||By User:No 

_^1_ 

Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

DOS, OS/2 Windows, Windows NT. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Needs approximately 500K conventional memory free. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Opus Make; Multi Edit, can be used by most makes and editors. Also, 
macros exist for Slick Edit, Code Wright, and Sage Editor. 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

TLIB is a version control and configuration management tool. Would 
have no trouble managing Ada source code. TLIB allows easy migration 
of changes from one level to another. For example, you can migrate 
improvements from a "standard" level to each of several "customized" 
levels. Or, you can migrate bug fixes from the old release into the new 
release. Or, if you have modified a purchased source code library, when 
you get new releases from the vendor you can migrate their changes into 
your own version, without losing your modifications. 




VERSION MERGER 


Product Information: 


Vendor: Princeton Softech, 
Inc. 




Version Number: 3.1 


In Business Since: 1989 

Date of Last Release: Jan 93 


Address: 1060 State Road 

Date of First Release: Sep 90 


Princeton, NJ 08540 

Frequency of Updates: Annual 


Marketing Contact: Mario 

M. de Guzman 

Number Sold:226 - U.S. 


Phone Number:609-497-0205 


4 of 7 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 




SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_12.html#A5 


12 - Int'l 


Fax Number:609-497-0302 



E-mail Address: 



Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 15K - 21K based on CPU size 


Customer 

Support:800-457-7060 

Single User Price :N/A 



Site License:$23,500 


Training Provided:Yes 

Multicopy Price :N/A 


Consulting Support:Yes 



Customization:No 

GSA Price: 


By Vendor:No 

Maint. Price: 15% 


By User:No 



Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

MVS-based. Runs under either TSO/ISPF or CA-Roscoe. 






Minimum/Recommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, User 
Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

Disk Requirements: - or = 75 tracks of 3380 DASD to install product 
plus size of input files that need reconciliation. 

Meinory Requirements: - or = $200K for the on-line dialog. When 
editing a file, the file is brought into memory, storage needs vary 
depending on the size of the programs. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, Compilers, 
Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

Version Merger interfaces with many change control systems, e.g., 
Endevor, ChangeMan, CCF, Panapt. Millenium transparency. Library 
systems integration, e.g.. Panvalet, Librarian. Language independent. 







5 of 7 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 





SOURCE MANAGER 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apxc_I2.html#A5 


Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

Version Merger is a programmer's productivity tool that automates the 
integration of multiple versions of the same application or program. 
Assists quality assurance people and programmers in identifying changes 
made to an application or program and retrofitting previous changes to 
new enhancements. Version Merger automates the reconciliation process 
and cuts implementation time by 50%. Version Merger is particularly 
useful for upgrading purchased applications that have been customized to 
satisfy a company's specific requirements. 


VERSIONS 1.1 


Product Information; Versions 1.1 


Vendor: StarBase 

Corporation 




Version Number: 1.1 


In Business Since: 

Date of Last Release: May 94 


Address: 18872 MacArthur 

Blvd. 

Date of First Release: Sep 93 


Suite 400, Irvine CA, 92715 

Frequency of Updates: As developed 


Marketing Contact: 

Number Sold: 1,600+ 


Phone Number:714-442-4400 



Fax Number:714-253-6712 



E-mail Address:CompuServe 
73531,137 






Bulletin Board System: 

Pricing: 


Customer 

Support:714-442-4460 

Single User Price:$279 



Site License:See below * 


Training Provided:Yes, for fee 

Multicopy Price:See below * 


Consulting Support: Yes, for fee 



Customization:No 

GSA Price:N/A 


By Vendor:No 

Maint. Price :N/A 


By User:No 




Platform(s)/Operating System(s): 

• Multicopy price information: 1-4 units $279, 5-9 units $250,10-19 units $235, 20-49 units $225, 
and 50+ units - call. 

Windows, Windows for Workgroups, Windows NT 


JL 


6 of? 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 






SOURCE MANAGER 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mi1/cm/apxc_12.html#A5 


Mmimum/Kecommended Configuration: (RAM size, Disk size, 
User Interface, 

Network, etc.) 

An IBM or 100% compatible computer with an 80386 or higher 
processor. 4 MB available RAM, 

2 MB available hard disk space. VGA or higher resolution monitor. A 
mouse or compatible pointing 

device. MS-DOS version 5.0 or higher, and Microsoft Windows 
Version 3.1 or higher, Windows for 

Workgroups 3.11, or Windows NT 3.1. 






Tool Integration: (CASE tools. Frameworks, Databases, 
Compilers, Documentation 

tools, etc.) 

N/A 






Description/Purpose: (Identify support for Ada, 2167A) 

VERSIONS provides a fast, easy-to-use solution to your version 
control needs. Designed to make version control as simple as possible, 
VERSIONS has it all; easy-to-use project metaphor, automated 
"smart" suggestions for file check-in/check-out, automatic 
project-based scheduled file check-in, long-term file locking, quick 
versioning of files - even Windows' binaries, diffing and delta 
versioning for ASCII files, hassle-free reports, and use of DOS 
command-line for batch ops. Fully network 

compatible. Runs under Windows, Windows for Workgroups, and 

Windows NT. 




7 of? 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 



http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_d.htnil 


http://www.stsc.hill.af mil/cm/apx_d.html 


APPENDIX D 


User Critiques 

PRODUCT CRITIQUE 


Product Name: ChangeMan Version Number: 3.3.2 

Vendor Name; Serena Inti. Hardware Platform: IBM 

Special Operating Environment: Operating System: MVS 



Reviewer's Name: David MarksPosition/Title:Administrator/Project Leader 

Company/Organization:NWNLOffice/Group; 

Address:! 11 Washington Ave.Reviewer's Duties:lnstall, Implement 

Mols, MN 55402Project Description:Install and implement ChangeMan product 

Phone:612-342-3085Fax;612-342-3058Email:SYSM 


Years of software experience:60verall impression of this product:Good 

Years of experience with product: 

Last time product was used:In use 

Keep name and company confidential? NoQuality of Vendor Support: Fair 

Will you use this product on your next project? 

Do you prefer another product? 


Notable Strengths of this Product: 

Simple, relatively straight forward, easily customized. 


Notable Weaknesses of this Product: 

Seems to be too mainframe oriented; does not address multiple platform applications; performance 

could be better; support could be better. 


Advice for Potential Users or Buyers of this Product: 


Vendor Comments: 

None 

critique 

j Product Name: ChangeMan Version Number: 3.3.2 


1 of 6 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 




http;//www.stsc.hill.af.niil/cm/apx_d.html 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_d.html 


Vendor Name; Serena Inti. Hardware Platform: IBM 3090 Amdahl 5995 | 

[Special Operating Environment:Operating System;MVS/ESA 


[Reviewer's Name:Gail KinneyPosition/Title: Information Sys Analyst 

[Company/Organization:Duke Power Co.Office/Group:Info Technology Svcs 

Address;P.O. Box 1008, CS05AReviewer's Duties:Corporate Application 

Charlotte, NC 28201-lOOSSupport, ChangeMan Administrator 

[Phone:704-382-9442Fax:704-382-9785Email:PROFS,cc:MAIL 

[Project Description:Change implementation manager, public utility environment. 


Years of software experience: 140verall impression of this product: 

Years of experience with product:4 

Last time product was used:In use 

[Keep name and company Quality of Vendor Support:Good 

confidential? No 

Will you use this product on your next | 

Project? YesDo you prefer another product? No [j | 

n 

Notable Strengths of this Product: 

• ChangeMan provides a lot of flexibility to allow each shop to tailor it to specific needs without 
a lot of work. 

• It is easy to implement and can be phased in, no mass conversion is necessary. 

• It handles remote site installations and DB2 components very well. 


Notable Weaknesses of this Product: 

• Documentation has been less than adequate up to now. Release 4.1.0, due out later this year, 
promises to significantly improve documentation. 

• Instability of new releases has also tended to be a problem; however, more customers are now 
getting involved in beta testing. 


Advice for Potential Users or Buyers of this Product: 

• Can't think of any real dangers. 

• ChangeMan is a complex product and you have to work with it a while to really appreciate all 
the things it can do. 

• Glad to have chosen it over the other available products. 

• Both the Optima and Serena people are great to work with. They listen to the needs of their 
customers. 

—. T 


2 of 6 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 



http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_d.html 


http://www.stsc.hill.af mil/cm/apx_d.html 



Product Name: ChangeMan Version Number: 3.3.2 

Vendor Name: Serena Inti. Hardware Platform: Amdahl 5995 
Special Operating Environment: Operating System: MVS/ESA 4.1 


Reviewer's Name: Confidential Position/Title: Mgr, Tech Services 
Company/Organization: ConfidentialOffice/Group:Information Services 
Address:Confidential Reviewer's Duties:Mainframe Software 
Phone: ConfidentialFax: Email: 

j___ 

Project Description: 


Years of software experience:240verall impression of this product:Excellent 

Years of experience with product:3 

Last time product was used:In use 

Keep name and company Quality of Vendor Support:Good 

confidential? Yes 

Will you use this product on your next 
Project? YesDo you prefer another product? No 


Notable Strengths of this Product: 

• Flexible. ChangeMan permits the shop to mold change control rather than forcing rigid 
procedures. 

• Allows all changes to be done by one 'user id' rather than having all 'user ids' updating files. 


Notable Weaknesses of this Product: 

• Documentation, but it is being rewritten. 


Advice for Potential Users or Buyers of this Product: 

• Optima and Serena are both very receptive to suggestions and are easy to work with. 


Vendor Comments: 

None. 


3 of 6 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 





http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_d.html 


http://www.stsc.hill.af mil/cm/apx_d.html 


critique 


Product Name; ChangeMan Version Number; 3.3.2 


Vendor Name: Serena Inti. Hardware Platform: Amdahl 5890 


Special Operating Environment: Operating System: MVS/ESA 




Reviewer's Name: Sonia Coe Position/Title: Systems Tech Analyst 


Company/Organization: North American Van Lines Office/Group: 


Address: 5001 U.S. Hwy 30 W.Reviewer's Duties:ChangeMan, Training, 


Fort Wayne, IN 46818Development Ctr Support 


Phone:219-429-1929Fax:219-429-1762Email: 


Project Description:All change management functions including interfacing with PAC (SAG nroductl 
QUICK-REF (Chicago Soft), and APS (Intersolv). v P u. 




Years of software experience: IVOverall impression of this product:Good 


Years of experience with product:4 to 5 

] 

Last time product was used:In use 

] 

Keep name and company Quality of Vendor Support:Good 

] 

confidential? No 


V/ilI you use this product on your next 


Project? YesDo you prefer another product? No 

= 


Notable Strengths of this Product; 

• Adaptable to your environment through skeleton and panel changes. 


Notable Weaknesses of this Product; 

• Need additional interfaces with other vendors and better testing before releases. 

• Documentation should also be improved. 


Advice for Potential Users or Buyers of this Product; 

• Product has good potential for your own work. We are currently tying in several ways to 
software AG products and hope to do more in the future. 


Vendor Comments; 

None. 


critique 


4 of 6 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 





http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_d.html 


http://www.stsc.hill.af mil/cm/apx_d.html 


Product Name: Information Asset Mgt Version Number: 3.0.2 
Vendor Name: Atherton Technology Hardware Platform: SUN 
Special Operating Environment: Operating System: SUN OS 4.1.3 

Reviewer's Name: Gregory V. Braun Position/Title: Program Mgr 

Company/Organization: Loral Corporation Office/Group: Software Productivity Lab 

Address:3200 Zanker RoadReviewer's Duties:Manage development funding San Jose CAissues 

Phone:408-473-7978Fax: 408-473-713 lEmail:gvb@spl2spl.loral.com 

Project Description:Development of Loral Corporate Computer Aided Software Environment 

(CORCASE). 

Years of software experience :160verall impression of this product:Excellent 
Years of experience with product:4 ~~ 

Last time product was used:On-going ~~ 

Keep name and company Quality of Vendor Support:Excellent 
confidential? No 

Will you use this product on your next 

Project? YesDo you prefer another product? No ~~ ini 

Notable Strengths of this Product: ~~ 

Object-oriented CMS. 

Extensible/Refinable. 


Notable Weaknesses of this Produet: 

Lack of Adhoc Query Language. 

Advice for Potential Users or Buyers of this Product: 

Take advantage of available training and on-site support. 

Vendor Comments: ~~~ 

None. 

critique 


5 of 6 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 




http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_d.html 


http://www.stsc.hill.af mil/cm/apx_d.html 


Product Name: Version Merger Version Number: 

Vendor Name: Princeton Softech Hardware Platform: 3390 

Special Operating Environment: Operating System: MVS 


Reviewer's Name: ConfidentialPosition/Title:Systems Prog Specialist 

Company/Organization:ConfidentialOffice/Group: 

Address:ConfidentialReviewer's Duties:Install/Maintain Software 

Phone: ConfidentialF ax:Email: 

Project Description: 


Years of software experience:20Overall impression of this product:Excellent 

Years of experience with product:4 

Last time product was used:Dec 93 

Keep name and company Quality of Vendor Support:Excellent 

confidential? Yes 

Will you use this product on your next 

Project? YesDo you prefer another product? No 


Notable Strengths of this Product: 

• Reduces time to identify changes/differences of software components. 

• Easy to use. 

• User friendly. 

• Time and money saver for impact analysis, code documentation, coordination of software 
changes, and implementation of software changes. 

• Easy to produce and read reports. 

• Interaction with other software management tools such as Endevor, Librarian, Pan Valet, etc. 


Notable Weaknesses of this Product: 

N/A 


Advice for Potential Users or Buyers of this Product: 

• Installs easily. 

• Tutorials are simple and easy to follow. 

• Product is a must for application software and system software management. 


Vendor Comments: 

None. 


6 of 6 


5/13/97 7:29 AM 





http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_e.html 


http://www.stsc.hill.af mil/cm/apx_e.html 


APPENDIX E 
List of Standards 

SOFTWARE CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT STANDARDS 
U.S. Department of Defense Publications 

Publications available from: 

Commander 

Naval Publications and Forms Center 
Code 3013 
5801 Tabor Avenue 
Philadelphia, PA 19120 

DOD-STD-2167A, Defense System Software Development 
DOD-STD-2168, Defense System Software Quality Program 
DOD 5010.19, Configuration Management 

Military Handbooks 

MIL-HDBK-61, Configuration Management 
MIL-HDBK-287, Defense System Software Development 

Military Standards 

MIL-STD-499A, Engineering Management 

MIL-STD-881, Work Breakdown Structures for Defense Material Items 
MIL-STD-973, Configuration Management (See Note) 

Note: MIL-STD-973 is a consolidation of several CM standards. They include: 
MIL-STD-480, Engineering Change Proposals (ECP) 

MIL-STD-481, Engineering Change Proposals - short form 
MIL-STD-482, Status Accounting (Data Elements, Only) 

MIL-STD-483, (USAF), Configuration Management 
MIL-STD-1456, Configuration Management Plans 

MIL-STD-1521, Reviews & Audits (Audits only. Reviews are in MIL-STD-499B) 
MIL-STD-2167A, Defense Software Development (CM related requirements) 


lof3 


5/13/97 7:30 AM 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_e.html 


http://www.stsc.hill.af mil/cm/apx_e.html 


IEEE Standards 

Standards available from: 

IEEE Service Center 
445 Hoes Lane 
Piscatatvay, NJ 08855-1331 
1-800-678-IEEE 

IEEE Std 610.12-1990, Glossary of Software Engineering Terminology 
IEEE Std 828-1990, Standardfor Software Configuration Management Plans 
IEEE Std 1028-1988, Standard for Software Reviews and Audits 
IEEE Std 1042-1986, Guide for Software Configuration Management 
IEEE Std 1063-1987, Standardfor User Documentation 
IEEE Std 1074-1991, Standard for Developing Software Life Cycle Processes 
Electronic Industry Association (EIA) Publications 
Publications available from; 

Electronic Industry Association 
2001 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20006 
202-257-4985 

CMB4-1 A, Configuration Management Definitions for Digital Computer Programs 

CMB4-2, Configuration Identification for Digital Computer Programs 

CMB4-4, Configuration Change Control for Digital Computer Programs 

CMB5-A, Configuration Management Requirements for Subcontractors/Vendors 

CMB6-1B, Configuration and Data Management References 

CMB6-2, Configuration and Data Management In-House Training Plan 

CMB6-3, Configuration Identification 

CMB6-4, Configuration Change Control 

CMB6-5, Textbook for Configuration Status Accounting 

CMB6-6, Textbook for Audits and Reviews 

CMB6-9, Configuration and Data Management Training Course 


2 of 3 


5/13/97 7:30 AM 



http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_e.htinl 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_e.html 


CMB6-10 Education in Configuration and Data Management 
CMB7-1, Electronic Interchange of Configuration Management Data 

CMB7-2, Guideline for Transitioning Configuration Management to an Automated Environment 

CMB7-3, CALS/Configuration Management Statement of Work 

International Standards Organization (ISO) Standards 

ISO/IEC JTC1/SC7/WG8/P.7.23, Software Configuration Management 

ISO/IEC TC176/SC2/WG14/N21, Configuration Management Conference 


3 of 3 


5/13/97 7:30 AM 



http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_f.html 


http://www.stsc.hill.afmil/cm/apx_fhtml 


APPENDIX F 

References and Recommended Reading 
References and Recommend Reading 
[ANSI/IEEE 87] 

ANSI/IEEE Std 1042-1987, American National Standard IEEE, Guide to Software Configuration 
Management, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc., New York, NY, 1988. 

[Ayer, Patrinostro 92] 

Ayer, Steve J., and Frank S. Patrinostro, Software Configuration Management: Identification, 
Accounting, Control, and Management, McGraw-Hill software engineering series, McGraw-Hill, Inc., 
1992. 

[Babich 86] 

Babich, Wayne A., Software Configuration Management: Coordination for Team Productivity, 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc., 1986. 

[Berlack 92] 

Berlack, Ronald H., Software Configuration Management, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1992. 

[Buckley 92] 

Buckley, Fletcher J., Implementation Configuration Management: Hardware, Software, and Firmware, 
IEEE Press, 1993. 

[Conner 82] 

Conner, Daryl R., and Robert W. Patterson, "Building Commitment to Organizational Change," 
Training and Development Journal, Vol. 36, Number 4, April, 1982, pp. 18-30. 

[Dart 90] 

Dart, Susan A., "Issues in Configuration Management Adoption," Proceedings of Conference on 
Caseware, Software Engineering Institute Overview, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA. 

[Dart 92] 

Dart, Susan A., "State-of-the-Art in Environment Support for Configuration Management," ICSE14 
Tutorial, Australia, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, May 1992. 

[Dart 92] 

Dart, Susan A., The Past, Present, and Future of Configuration Management, Technical Report 
CMU/SEI-92-TR-8, ESC-TR-92-8, Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, July 
1992. 

[Dart 94] 

Dart, Susan A., Adopting An Automated Configuration Management Solution, Proceedings of Software 
Teclmology Conference, April 1994. 


1 of 3 


5/13/97 7:30 AM 



http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_f.html 


http://www.stsc.hill.af mil/cm/apx_f.html 


[DeGrace, Stahl 90] 

DeGrace, Peter, and Leslie Hulet Stahl. "Wicked Problems, Righteous Solutions," A Catalogue of 
Modern Software Engineering Paradigms, Yourdon Press, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1990. 

[Feiler 91] 

Feiler, Peter H., Configuration Management Models in Commercial Environments, Technical Report 
CMU/SEI-91-TR-7, ESD-9-TR-7, Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, March 
1991. 

[Feiler, Downey 90] 

Feiler, Peter H., and Grace Downey, Transaction-Oriented Configuration Management: A Case Study, 
Technical Report CMU/SEI-90-TR-23, ESD-90-TR224 Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie 
Mellon University, November 1990. 

[Firth, et al. 87] 

Firth, Robert, et al., A Guide to the Classification and Assessment of Software Engineering Tools, 
Technical Report CMU/SEI-87-TR-10, ESD-TR-87-111, Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie 
Mellon University, August 1987. 

[Forte 90] 

Forte, Gene, "Configuration Management Survey," CASE Outlook 90(2), 1990. 

[Fowler 88] 

Fowler, Pricilla and Stan Przybylinski. "Transferring Software Engineering Tool Technology," IEEE 
Computer Society Press, Washington D.C., 1988. 

[Humphrey 90] 

Humphrey, Watts S., Managing the Software Process, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, August 
1990. 

[IEEE 90] 

IEEE Std 828-1990, IEEE Standardfor Software Configuration Management Plans, 1990. 

[Ingram, Burrows, Wesley 93] 

Ingram, Pat, Clive Burrows, and Ian Wesley, Configuration Management Tools: a Detailed Evaluation. 
Ovum Limited, 1993. 

[Olson, Timothy, et al. 93] 

Olson, Timothy G., et al., A Software Process Framework for the SEI Capability Maturity Model: 
Repeatable Level, Technical Report CMU/SEI-93-SR-7, Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie 
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, 1993. 

[Rader, Morris, Brown 93] 

Rader, Jock, Ed J. Morris, and Alan W. Brown, An Investigation into the State-of-the-Practice of CASE 
Tool Integration, Technical Report CMU/SEI-93, Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon 


2 of 3 


5/13/97 7:30 AM 



http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_f.html 


http://www.stsc.hill.af mil/cm/apx_fhtml 


University, 1993. 

[Slomer, Christie 92] 

Slomer, Howard M., and Alan M. Christie, Analysis of a Software Maintenance System: A Case Study, 
Technical Report CMU/SEI-92-TR-31, ESC-TR-92-031, Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie 
Mellon University, November 1992. 

[Smith, et al. 93] 

Smith, Dennis, et al.. Software Engineering Environment Evaluation Issues, Technical Report 
CMU/SEI-93, Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, March 1993. 

[Softool 92] 

Softool Corporation, Successful Software Strategies Seminar Series: Improving Your Configuration 
Management Implementation Strategy, Washington, D.C., 1992. 

[Wallnau 92] 

Wallnau, Kurt C., Issues and Techniques of CASE Integration with Configuration Management, 
Technical Report CMU/SEI-92-TR-5, ESD-TR-92-5, Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon 
University, March 1992. 

[Whitgift91] 


3 of 3 


5/13/97 7:30 AM 



http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_g.html 


http://www.stsc.hill.af mil/cm/apx_g.html 


APPENDIX G 
Glossary 


Glossary 

Architecture - The organizational structure of a system or component [IEEE 90]. 

Audit - An independent examination of a work product or set of work products to assess 

compliance with specifications, standards, contractual agreements, or other criteria [IEEE 90]. 

Baseline - A specification or product that has been formally reviewed and agreed upon, that thereafter 
serves as the basis for further development, and that can be changed only through formal change control 
procedures [IEEE 90], 

Complexity - The degree to which a system or component has a design or implementation that is 
difficult to understand and verify [IEEE 90]. 

Computer-Aided Software Engineering (CASE) - The use of computers to aid in the software 
engineering process. May include the application of software tools to software design, requirements 
tracing, code production, testing, document generation, and other software engineering activities [IEEE 
90]. 

Configuration - The functional and physical characteristics of hardware or software as set forth in 
technical documentation or achieved in a product [IEEE 90]. 

Configuration Control - An element of configuration management, consisting of the evaluation, 
coordination, approval or disapproval, and implementation of changes to configuration items after 
formal establishment of their configuration identification [IEEE 90]. 

Configuration Control Board (CCB) - A group of people responsible for evaluation and approving or 
disapproving proposed changes to configuration items, and for ensuring 

implementation of approved changes [IEEE 90]. 

Configuration Identification - An element of configuration management, consisting of selecting the 
configuration items for a system and recording their functional and physical characteristics in technical 
documentation [IEEE 90]. 

Configuration Item (Cl) - An aggregation of hardware, software, or both, that is designated for 
configuration management and treated as a single entity in the configuration management process [IEEE 
90]. 

Configuration Item Development Record - A document used in configuration management, describing 
the development status of a configuration item based on the results of configuration audits and design 
reviews [IEEE 90]. 

Configuration Management (CM) - A discipline applying technical and administrative direction and 
surveillance to: identify and document the functional and physical characteristics of a configuration 
item, control changes to those characteristics, record and report change processing and implementation 
status, and verify compliance with specified requirements [IEEE 90]. 

Configuration Status Accounting - An element of configuration management, consisting of the 


1 of 2 


5/13/97 7:30 AM 


http;//www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_g.html 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_g.html 


recording and reporting of information needed to manage a configuration effectively. This information 
includes a listing of the approved configuration identification, the status of proposed changes to the 
configuration, and the implementation status of approved changes [IEEE 90]. 

Functional Configuration Audit - An audit conducted to verify that the development of a configuration 
item has been completed satisfactorily, that the item has achieved the performance and functional 
characteristics specified in the functional or allocated configuration identification, and that its 
operational and support documents are complete and satisfactory [IEEE 90]. 

Hierarchy - A structure in which components are ranked into levels of subordination; each component 
has zero, one, or more subordinates; and no component has more than one superordinate component 
[IEEE 90]. 

Interface - A hardware or software component that connects two or more other components for the 
purpose of passing i nf ormation from one to the other [IEEE 90]. 

Module - A program unit that is discrete and identifiable with respect to compiling, combining with 
other units, and loading; for example, the input to, or output from, an assembler, compiler, linkage 
editor, or executive routine [IEEE 90]. 

Physical Configuration Audit (PCA) - An audit conducted to verify that a configuration item, as built, 
conforms to the technical documentation that defines it [IEEE 90]. 

Product Configuration Identification - The current approved or conditionally approved technical 
documentation defining a configuration item during the production, operation, maintenance, and logistic 
support phases of its lifecycle. It prescribes all necessary physical or form, fit, and function 
characteristics of a configuration item, the selected functional characteristics designated for production 
acceptance testing, and the production acceptance tests [IEEE 90]. 

Quality Assurance (QA) - A planned and systematic pattern of all actions necessary to provide 
adequate confidence that an item or product conforms to established technical requirements [IEEE 90]. 

Software Engineering Environment - The hardware, software, and firmware used to perform a 
software engineering effort. Typical elements include computer equipment, compilers, assemblers, 
operating systems, debuggers, simulators, emulators, test tools, documentation tools, and database 
management systems [IEEE 90]. 

Software Library - A controlled collection of software and related documentation designed to aid in 
software development, use, or maintenance. Types include master library, production library, software 
development library, software repository, and system library [IEEE 90]. 

Software Lifecycle - The period of time that begins when a software product is conceived and ends 
when the software is no longer available for use. The software lifecycle typically includes a concept 
phase, requirements phase, design phase, implementation phase, test phase, installation and checkout 
phase, operation and maintenance phase, and sometimes, retirement phase 


2 of 2 


5/13/97 7:30 AM 



http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_h.html 


http://www,stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_h.html 


APPENDIX H 
Acronyms 


Acronyms 
AF - Air Force 

AFSCM - Air Force Systems Command Manual 

ASCII - American Standard Code for Information Interchange 

ASSET - Asset Source for Software Engineering Technology 

CALS - Computer-Aided Acquisition and Logistic Support 

CASE - Computer-Aided Software (or Systems) Engineering 

CSCI - Computer Software Configuration Item 

CM - Configuration Management 

CMM - Capability Maturity Model 

CMU - Carnegie Mellon University 

DARPA - Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 

DoD - Department of Defense 

ECS - Electronic Customer Services 

EIA - Electronic Industry Association 

ESIP - Embedded Computer Resources Support Improvement Program 

FCA - Functional Configuration Audit 

GUI - Graphical User Interface 

HCM - Hardware Configuration Management 

IEEE - Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 

IPSE - Integrated Project Support Environment 

ISO - International Standards Organization 

LAN - Local Area Network 

MIS - Management Information System 

NASA - National Aeronautics and Space Administration 


1 oil 


5/13/97 7:30 AM 





http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_h.html 


http://www.stsc.hill.af mil/cm/apx_h.html 


PC - Personal Computer 

PCA - Physical Configuration Audit 

PCTE - Portable Common Tool Environment 

QA - Quality Assurance 

RCS - Revision Control System 

sees - Source Code Control System 

SCML - Software Configuration Manager Library (IBM) 

SCM - Software Configuration Management 
SEI - Software Engineering Institute 
SQA - Software Quality Assurance 
SQL - Software Query Language 

STARS - Software Technology for Adaptable, Reliable Systems 
STC - Software Technology Conference 
STD - Standard 

STSC - Software Technology Support Center 

WWISCUC - World Wide Information System Common User Contract 
WWMCCS - World Wide Military Command and Control System 


2 of 2 


5/13/97 7:30 AM 


http://w\vw.stsc.hin.af.mil/cm/apx_i.html 


http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_i.html 


APPENDIX I 
STSC Overview 

1.1 The Software Technology Support Center 

The mission of the Software Technology Support Center (STSC) is to transition technologies and 
exchange information to help DOD Software Development and Support Activities continuously improve 
their software quality and life cycle productivity. 

A planned approach is necessary for successftil transition. In general, transitioning effective practices, 
processes, and technologies consists of a series of activities or events that occur between the time a 
person encounters a new idea and the daily use of that idea. Conner and Patterson's Adoption Curve 
[Conner 82], shown in Figure 1-1, illustrates these activities. 

After encountering a new process or technology, potential customers of that technology increase their 
awareness of its usage, maturity, and application. If the process or technology is promising, then 
customers try to better understand its strengths, weaknesses, costs, and applications. These first activities 
in the Adoption Curve take a significant amount of time. 

Next, the customer evaluates and compares the processes and technologies that show the most promise. 
To reduce the risk, customers usually try new processes or technologies on a limited scale through beta 
tests, case studies, or pilot projects. A customer then adopts processes or technologies that prove 
effective. Finally, refined processes and technologies become essential parts of an organization's daily 
process (institutionalization). 



Figure 1-1. Adoption Curve 

Word processors are essential in most organization's daily operations. Yet, thirty years ago they did not 
exist. The institutionalization of word processors in many organizations followed a series of events 

similar to those identified in the Adoption Curve. 

The STSC is researching and collecting information about technologies that will reduce the time and 
resources it takes to become aware, imderstand, evaluate, test, try, and adopt effective practices, 
processes, and technologies. The STSC has developed the following objectives to accomplish its 
mission: 

• 

o Technology Evaluation Identify, validate, classify, and evaluate effective processes and 
technologies. 

o Information Exchange Facilitate the exchange of better software business practices, processes, 
and technologies within the DOD. 

o Insertion Projects Analyze and improve processes, adopt new methodologies as needed, 
evaluate and select effective tools, receive appropriate levels of training, and perform pilot 
projects to try out and confirm the technology insertion efforts, 
o STSC Associates Develop STSC Associates who can infuse effective process and technology 
improvements through the use of STSC products, services, and processes. 

1.2 STSC Technology Transition Approach 

This section describes the STSC's approach to meeting the objectives identified in the previous 
section. 


1 of 3 


5/13/97 7:30 AM 





http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_i.html 


http://www.stsc.hill.af mil/cm/apx_l.html 


1.2.1 Technology Evaluation 

The first technology transition objective involves identifying, validating, and classifying 
processes, methods, and technologies that can potentially improve the quality or productivity 
of software development and maintenance. Many organizations are so focused on deadlines 
and customer needs that they lack the resources and time to thoroughly investigate options for 
improvement, leaving them vulnerable to marketing hype. The STSC has developed the 
infrastructure to provide information on all types of applicable technologies. Product critiques, 
which are essentially brief evaluations from experienced technology users, are collected. 
Quantitative evaluations, which are detailed, comparable, and objective, are performed on the 
most promising tools, methods, or processes. 

1.2.2 Information Exchange 

This technology transition objective involves exposing potential customers to available 
technologies and, conversely, customer requirements to technology developers. Referring to 
the Adoption Curve, this objective focuses on contact, awareness, and understanding. STSC 
products that accomplish this objective include CrossTalk (a monthly technology report), the 
annual Software Technology Conference, specific technology reports, and electronic customer 
services. 

1.2.2.1 CrossTalk 

Over 14,000 software professionals receive CrossTalk monthly. This publication provides a 
forum for the exchange of ideas. Articles cover leading edge, state-of-the-art, and 
state-of-the-practice processes and technologies in software engineering. 

1.2.2.2 Software Technology Conference 

The annual Software Technology Conference is held each April in Salt Lake City, Utah. This 
conference brings together over 2,000 software professionals from government, industry, and 
academia to share technology solutions and exchange ideas and information. 

1.2.2.3 Technology Reports 

STSC technology reports provide detailed information on specific software engineering 
technologies. The current list of reports include: 

SYMBOL 183 \f "Symbol" \s 10 \h Process Technologies Methods and Tool Report 

SYMBOL 183 \f "Symbol" \s 10 \h Test Preparation, Execution, and Evaluation 

SYMBOL 183 \f "Symbol" \s 10 \h Documentation 

SYMBOL 183 \f "Symbol" \s 10 \h Project Management 

SYMBOL 183 \f "Symbol" \s 10 \h Software Cost Estimation 

SYMBOL 183 \f "Symbol" \s 10 \h Requirements Analysis and Design 

SYMBOL 183 \f "Symbol" \s 10 \h Reengineering 

SYMBOL 183 \f "Symbol" \s 10 \h Source Code Static Analysis 

SYMBOL 183 \f "Symbol" \s 10 \h Software Engineering Environments 


2 of 3 


5/13/97 7:30 AM 



ht1p://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/cm/apx_i.html 


http://www.stsc.hilLaf.mil/cm/apx_i.html 


SYMBOL 183 \f "Symbol" \s 10 \h Software Management Guide 

These reports provide awareness and understanding of each topic in preparation for evaluation 
and selection of corresponding technologies. 

1.2.2.4 Electronic Customer Services 

Along with the services mentioned above, the STSC also provides customers with electronic 
access to information via Electronic Customer Services (ECS). ECS includes a bulletin board 
system which is available to obtain additional information, leave messages, add information, 
and confer electronically. In addition, a computerized database of practice, process, and 
technology information is coming on-line. ECS can be accessed via the INTERNET at address 
137.241.33.1 or stscbbs.al .mil or by calling 801-774-6509 with modem at 2400 or 9600 baud, 
8 bit word, 1 stop bit, and no parity. 

1.2.3 Technology Insertion Projects 

STSC technology insertion projects are customer oriented projects that evaluate, select, and 
pilot the use of new processes, methods, and technologies for a specific customer. These 
projects can include process definition, process improvement, methodology insertion, tool 
insertion, and development of a technology road map. Referring to the Adoption Curve, Figure 
1-1, an insertion project helps cement understanding of a process or technology, tailors an 
evaluation of the process or technology for the customer, and pilots the use of that process or 
technology with appropriate levels of training. Customers move closer to adoption of the 
process or technology through hands-on experience. It is important to try out technology 
improvements in a pilot project to confirm that the technology is appropriate for the 
organization and that the organization is ready and able to adopt the new technology. 

1.2.4 STSC Associates 

Fowler and Przybylinski [Fowler 88] propose that transitioning new technologies from a 
developer to a consumer requires an advocate to push the technology and a receptor to pull the 
technology into an organization. This concept is illustrated in Figure 1-2. 

Effective change comes from within the organization. The STSC Associates objective is to 
develop technology receptors within individual Air Force SDSAs. These receptors, STSC 
Associates, are trained in the use of the STSC's information, products, and services to enhance 
their organization's ability to incorporate advanced practices, processes, and technologies. 



Figure 1-2. Transitioning Technology 

Referring to the Adoption Curve in Figure 1-1, STSC Associates complete the trek to 
institutionalization. Associates coming from within the organization should be politically 
zistute and aware of internal organizational requirements. They have the highest probability of 
influencing the adoption and daily use of effective business practices, processes, and 

technologies. 

1.3 Embedded Computer Resources Support Improvement Program (ESIP) 

The STSC operates out of the Ogden Air Logistics Center at Hill Air Force Base, Utah, xmder 
the direction and guidance of the ESIP Steering Group. An Air Force program, the ESIP has 
the goals of reducing the software backlog and increasing software quality and productivity. 

Its mission is to provide an infrastructure to assist in the transitioning of technology to support 
all categories of embedded computer systems throughout the acquisition cycle and improve the 
readiness of Air Force weapon systems. ESIP is directed by an Air Force program 


3 of 3 


5/13/97 7:31 AM 



