as affine invariant parameter space 
(AIPS), the technique can be applied to 
many image-processing and computer-vi- 
sion problems, including image registra- 
tion, template matching, and object 
tracking from image sequence. 

The AIPS is formed by the parameters 
in an affine combination of a set of fea- 
ture points in the image plane. In cases 
where the entire image can be assumed 
to have undergone a single affine trans- 
formation, the new AIPS match metric 
and matching framework becomes very 
effective (compared with the state-of- 
the-art methods at the time of this re- 
porting) . No knowledge about scaling or 
any other transformation parameters 
need to be known a priori to apply the 
AIPS framework. 

An automated suite of software tools 
has been created to provide accurate 
image segmentation (for data cleaning) 
and high-quality 2D image and 3D sur- 
face registration (for fusing multi-resolu- 
tion terrain, image, and map data). 
These tools are capable of supporting ex- 
isting GIS toolkits already in the market- 
place, and will also be usable in a stand- 
alone fashion. The toolkit applies novel 
algorithmic approaches for image seg- 
mentation, feature extraction, and regis- 
tration of 2D imagery and 3D surface 
data, which supports first-pass, batched, 
fully automatic feature extraction (for 
segmentation), and registration. 

A hierarchical and adaptive approach 
is taken for achieving automatic feature 
extraction, segmentation, and registra- 
tion. Surface registration is the process of 
aligning two (or more) data sets to a com- 
mon coordinate system, during which the 
transformation between their different 
coordinate systems is determined. 

Also developed here are a novel, volu- 
metric surface modeling and compres- 
sion technique that provide both quality- 
guaranteed mesh surface 

approximations and compaction of the 
model sizes by efficiently coding the 
geometry and connectivity/ topology 
components of the generated models. 
The highly efficient triangular mesh 
compression compacts the connectivity 
information at the rate of 1.5-4 bits per 


vertex (on average for triangle meshes) , 
while reducing the 3D geometry by 
40-50 percent. 

Finally, taking into consideration the 
characteristics of 3D terrain data, and 
using the innovative, regularized binary 
decomposition mesh modeling, a multi- 
stage, pattern-drive modeling, and com- 
pression technique has been developed 
to provide an effective framework for 
compressing digital elevation model 
(DEM) surfaces, high-resolution aerial 
imagery, and other types of NASA data. 

This work was done by Jacob Yadegar, Hai 
Wei, Joseph Yadegar, Nilanjan Ray, and Sak- 
ina Zabuawala of UtopiaCompression Corp. 
for Stennis Space Center. 

Inquiries concerning rights for its commer- 
cial use should be addressed to: 

Utopia Compression 
11150 W. Olympic Blvd Suite 1020 
Los Angeles, CA 90064-1822 
Telephone No. (310) 473-1500 
E-mail: jacob@utopiacompresion. com 
Refer to SSC-00304/5/6/7, volume and 
number of this NASA Tech Briefs issue, and 
the page number. 


Image Calibration 

Calibrate_lmage calibrates images ob- 
tained from focal plane arrays so that 
the output image more accurately repre- 
sents the observed scene. The function 
takes as input a degraded image along 
with a flat field image and a dark frame 
image produced by the focal plane array 
and outputs a corrected image. The 
three most prominent sources of image 
degradation are corrected for: dark cur- 
rent accumulation, gain non-uniformity 
across the focal plane array, and hot 
and/or dead pixels in the array. In the 
corrected output image the dark current 
is subtracted, the gain variation is equal- 
ized, and values for hot and dead pixels 
are estimated, using bicubic interpola- 
tion techniques. 

This work was done by Christopher S. Peay 
and David M. Palacios of Caltech for NASA’s 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory. For more informa- 
tion, contact iaoffice@jpl.nasa.gov. 

The software used in this innovation is 
available for commercial licensing. Please con- 


tact Daniel Broderick of the California Insti- 
tute of Technology at danielb@caltech.edu. 
Refer to NPO-4 7191. 


@1 Rapid ISS Power 
Availability Simulator 

The ISS (International Space Sta- 
tion) Power Resource Officers (PROs) 
needed a tool to automate the calcula- 
tion of thousands of ISS power avail- 
ability simulations used to generate 
power constraint matrices. Each matrix 
contains 864 cells, and each cell repre- 
sents a single power simulation that 
must be run. The tools available to the 
flight controllers were very operator in- 
tensive and not conducive to rapidly 
running the thousands of simulations 
necessary to generate the power con- 
straint data. 

SOLAR is a Java-based tool that 
leverages commercial-off-the-shelf soft- 
ware (Satellite Toolkit) and an existing 
in-house ISS EPS model (SPEED) to 
rapidly perform thousands of power 
availability simulations. SOLAR has a 
very modular architecture and consists 
of a series of plug-ins that are loosely 
coupled. The modular architecture of 
the software allows for the easy re- 
placement of the ISS power system 
model simulator, re-use of the Satellite 
Toolkit integration code, and separa- 
tion of the user interface from the 
core logic. 

Satellite Toolkit (STK) is used to gen- 
erate ISS eclipse and insulation times, 
solar beta angle, position of the solar ar- 
rays over time, and the amount of shad- 
owing on the solar arrays, which is then 
provided to SPEED to calculate power 
generation forecasts. 

The power planning turn-around 
time is reduced from three months to 
two weeks (83-percent decrease) using 
SOLAR, and the amount of PRO power 
planning support effort is reduced by an 
estimated 30 percent. 

This ivork was done by Nicholas Downing 
of United Space Alliance for Johnson Space 
Center. For further information, contact the 
fSC Innovation Partnerships Office at (281 ) 
483-3809. MSC-24623-1 


12 


NASA Tech Briefs, May 201 1 


