AD-A224 224 


fiFK FILF 


COPY 


Copy ^ ‘ 


4 ^ 


of 36 copies 



IDA PAPER P-2162 


Ada SOFTWARE ENGINEERING EDUCATION 
AND TRAINING REQUIREMENTS WITHIN THE U.S. ARMt 


Catherine W. McDonald 
Teresa L. Anderson 


December 1988 


Prepared for 
Ada Joint Program Office 

OTIC 

ELECTE 
JUL181990| I 



90 07 16 23*?^ IDAL 06 No. HQ88-033857 








Approval! lor pobllc relaisa, unlimitaii distribution. Unclanilloil. 













Fonn Approved 
0MB No. 0704-0188 


REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 


Public reporting burden for this coUecdcn of information is eatimated to average 1 hour per remorse, including the time fc 
gadMring and iwint*irimg the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection oif information. Send comments 
coUection of information, unhiding auggeadons for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquartare Services, Directorai 
Davis ffighway. Suite 1204, Arlington. VA 22202-4302. and to the of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduc 

tr reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources. 
Tgarding this burden t9dmAt£ or any other aspect of this 

B for Information Operations end Reports, 1213 Jefferson 
ion Project (0704-0188), WMhington. DC 20503. 

1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank) 

2. REPORT DATE 

December 1988 

3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

Final 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Ada Software Engineering Education and Training Requirements Within 
the U.S. Army 

5. FUNDING NUMBERS 

MDA903 84 C 0031 

T-D5-306 

6. AUTHOR(S) 

Catherine W. McDonald, Teresa L. Anderson 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Institute for Defense Analyses (IDA) 

1801 N. Beauregard Street 

Alexandria. VA 22311-1772 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT 
NUMBER 

IDA Paper P-2162 

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO) 

Room 3E114, The Pentagon 

Washington. D.C. 20301-3081 

10. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY 
REPORT NUMBER 

n. SL-PW-EMENTARY NOTES 

12a. DISTRIBUnON/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release, unlimited distribution. 

12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 

2A 

J3. ABSTRACT (Maximuni 200 words) 

IDA Paper P-2162, Ada Software Engineering Education and Training Requirements Within the U.S. Army, 
provides the results of a study that examined the Ada software engineering education and training needs of the 
U.S. Army. This study began with an in-depth look at the structure of the Army to identify all job classifications 
that may have an impact on the hardware and/or software life cycle. The next step was to identify the type of 
education and or training necessary for these job categories and where Army personnel may obtain the required 
level of training. The final step was to identify any deficiencies in the area of Ada software engineering 
education and training within the U.S. Army and make the appropriate recommendations to the Ada Joint 
Program Office (AJPO). 

14. SUBJECT TERMS 

Ada Programming Language; Software Engineering; Ada Education and Training; 
U.S. Army. 

15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

152 

16. PRICE CODE 

17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 19. SECURITY CLASSIHCATION 

OF REPORT OFTUISPAGE OF ABSTRACT 

Unclassified Unclassified Unclassified 

20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 

SAR 


NSN 75404)1-280-5500 


S<andard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) 
Prescribed by ANSI Sid. Z39-18 
298-102 





























IDA PAPER P-2162 


Ada SOFTWARE ENGINEERING EDUCATION 
AND TRAINING REQUIREMENTS WITHIN THE U. S. ARMY 


Catherine W. McDonald 
Teresa L. Anderson 


December 1988 



Accession ?or 


NTIS GRAil 
DTIC TAB 
Unannounced 
Justiflcotloa. 


? 

□ 


By- 


Dlstrlbutlon/ 


Availability Codes 
Avail and/or ' 
Special 


Dlot 


Sd 



INSTITUTE FOR DEFENSE ANALYSES 
Contract MDA W3 C (X)3I 
;TuskT-D5-306 


THIS DOCUMEarr CONTAINED 
BLANK PAGES THAT HAVE 
BEEN DELETED 



UNCLASSIFIED 


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 


Backp-pund 

Ada education and training is an important factor in ensuring that the Department of 
Defense's (DoD) language of choice is used to its fullest potential. The responsibility of 
monitoring the Ada program, which includes education and training, falls to the Ada Joint 
Program Office (AJPO). The AJPO tasked the Institute for Defense Analyses (EDA) to 
ide- afy the Ada Vacation and training needs of the Army, keeping in mind that to use Ada 
effectively one must also use good software engineering techniques. This report 
communicates the results of that tasking. 

Finding s 

Officers, enlisted personnel and civilians in the Army have several options available 
to them for obtaining Ada education or training. Courses are available through the Army, 
the other Services and the DoD. Over 175 academic institutions offer Ada and software 
engineering courses and there are numerous workshops, symposia, courses, etc. available 
through the private sector. 

There are approximately 35,000 enlisted personnel assigned to positions that may 
require the soldier to use Ada. Training for these ^signments is obtained at the Army's 
Computer Science School. Both the Advanced Individual Training (AFT) course and the 
Advanced Non-Commissioned Officer Course (ANCOC) include Ada in the program and a 
stand-alone Ada programming course is being developed The AFT course is taught every 
week with an average class size of 18, depending upon the number of new recruits. The 
ANCO course is offered 4 to 5 times a year with the class size ranging from 17 to 34 per 
session. 

There are approximately 11,600 officers, assigned to one of five functional areas, 
that need Ada training. The five functional areas are Comptroller, Operations 
Research/Systems Analysis, Research and Development, Systems Automation, and 
Contracting and Industrial Management. Within the Army, the officer may attend the 
Computer Science School, the Army Materiel Command (AMC) Software Engineering 
Intern Program, or the Army Management Engineering College (AMEC), all of which offer 
Ada training. Army officers may also attend courses at the Air Force Institute of 
Technology (AFFF), Keesler Air Force Base, or the Defense Systems Management College 
(DSMC). All three facilities offer Ada courses at least once a year. Class sizes at these 
facilities range from 12 to 35, depending on the availability of hands-on experie’ire. 

Most of the Army's software development and maintenance, othe; than Mission 
Critical Computer Systems (MCCS), will be done by Army civilians. There are 
approximately 12,175 civilians ranging from Computer Specialist to Computer Scientist 
that need Ada training. The engineers receive Ada training if they go through the AMC 
Intern Program, the Professional Development Center (PDC), or *he AMEC. The Intern 
Program is a two-year program that offers several Ada and software engineering courses. 
The courses at PDC and AMEC run anywhere from one to 14 weeks with an average class 
size of 24. Civilians may also attend courses at Keesler, AFTT and DSMC. 


V 

UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 


Recommendations 

The Army offers its new personnel numerous opportunities to obtain Ada education 
and training. Education and training received prior to the first assignment and early in 
one's career generally includes an inb^uctory Ada course and software engineering. As a 
person's career progresses, it may be necessary to take additional Ada courses offered by 
the Army, other Services, or the DoD. However, the availability of Ada training for senior 
personnel in all three areas (enlisted, officer, and civilian) is lacking. Most of the senior 
managers attended the basic training courses prior to the inclusion of Ada in the curriculum. 
They now need to be introduced to Ada at the appropriate level. 

Specific recommendations from this study include: 

1. Approve the request by the Computer Science School to develop at 
stand-alone Ada course to meet the needs of the Senior NCOs who 
have already completed their course work but have not been 
introduced to Ada. 

2. Incorporate Ada into the curriculum at facilities attended by senior 
officers (i.e., the Army War College and the Command and General 
Staff College). 

3. Open Ada courses restricted to specific personnel (enlisted, officer 
or civilian) or to specific commands (i.e.. Information Systems 
Command or Army Materiel Command) to all Army personnel. 


I 


vi 

UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The authors would like to acknowledge the assistance of the numerous members of 
the U.S. Army who provided valuable background information for this study. Although it 
is impossible to thank everyone, the authors would like to especially thank CPT Chris 
Demery, U.S. Army Computer Science School, and Mr. Dennis Turner, U.S. Army 
Communications-Electronics Command, for their assistance in verifying Appendix D. Mr. 
Turner was also helpful in providing an expanded list of projects for Appendix B. Mr. 
Mark Oestmann, of the School for Engineering and Logistics, Red River Army Depot and 
Mr. Bruce Gray, U.S. Army Communications-Electronics Command, Ada Technology 
Branch, contributed substantial details regarding the Software Engineering intern program. 
Mr. Bob Beat provided information on the Army Management Engineering College and 
Mr. John Hovell was most helpful in explaining the role of the Professional Development 
Center. 


The authors also appreciate the insights on education and training given by 
members of the Ada Software Engineering Education and Training Team, specifically Capt 
Will Bralick, USAF and Ms. Wanda Barber, Software Development Center, Ft. Lee. They 
would also like to express their appreciation to Mr. A1 Miller of Logicon, who provided 
valuable insight into the potential problems and difficulties such as were encountered while 
doing a similar study for the Navy. 


vii 

UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Page 

PREFACE XV 

1.0 INTRODUCTION 1 

1.1 Background 1 

1.1 Scope 1 

2.0 ARMY PERSONNEL POSITIONS 3 

2.1 Introduction 3 

2.2 Enlisted Personnel 3 

2.3 Officer Corps 4 

2.4 Civilian Personnel 6 

3.0 ADA SOFTWARE ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND TRAINING 

NEEDED 9 

3.1 Enlisted Personnel 9 

3.2 Officers 9 

3.3 Civilian Personnel 10 

4.0 OPPORTUNITIES FOR ADA EDUCATION AND TRAINING 11 

4.1 Introduction 11 

4.2 Army Programs 11 

4.2.1 AMC Software Engineering Intern Program 11 

4.2.2 Professional Development Center 12 

4.2.3 Software Development Center, Ft Lee 13 

4.2.4 Computer Science School 13 

4.2.5 U.S. Military Academy 15 

4.2.6 Senior Service Schools 15 

4.2.7 Army Management Engineering College 16 

4.3 Department of Defense Schools 17 

4.3.1 Department of Defense Computer Institute 17 

4.3.2 Defense Systems Management College 17 

4.4 Other Services 18 

4.5 Courses at Academic Institutions 18 

4.6 Commercial Courses 18 

5.0 SUMMARY TABLES 21 

6.0 FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 27 

6.1 Finding 27 

6.2 Recommendations 30 


ix 

UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
(continued) 

Page 

7.0 GLOSSARY 31 

8.0 REFERENCES 33 

9.0 BIBLIOGRAPHY 37 

APPENDIX A: ADA TRAINING COURSES FOR THE ARMY A-1 

APPENDIX B: U.S. ARMY ADA PROJECTS B-1 

APPENDIX C: UNIVERSITIES TEACHING ADA C-1 

APPENDIX D: U.S. ARMY PERSONNEL STRUCTURE D-1 


X 

UNCLASSIFIED 





-ti. OJ to 


I 


UNCLASSIFIED 


LIST OF FIGURES 

Figure Page 

1 Enlisted Personnel with Computer-Related Positions 3 

Officers in Computer-Related Functional Areas 5 

Total Army Personnel Distribution 6 

Civilian Personnel in Computer-Related Positions 7 


XI 

UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


LIST OF TABLES 

Table Page 

I Summary of Training for Army Enlisted Personnel 22 

II Summary of Training for Army Officers 23 

III Summary of Training for Army Civilians 25 


xiii 

UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 


PREFACE 

The purpose of IDA Paper P'2162, Ada Software Engineering Education and 
Training Requirements Within the U S. Army, is to communicate the results of a study 
conducted by the Computer and Software Engineering Division (CSED) of the Institute for 
Defense Analyses (IDA) for the Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO). The study identifies 
who within the Army needs Ada software engineering education or training, the level 
needed, and where this education or training might be obtained. This document was 
prepared in response to subtask 4(e) of Task Order T-D5-296, Amendment No. 4, 
"Technical support in evaluating the Ada education and training programs within the 
Army." Because of time and financial limitations, no attempt was made to evaluate Ada 
courseware within the Army or their instructors. It is project^ that P-2162 will be used to 
assist in evaluating training needs within the Army and provide guidance during the 
development of future Army Ada programs. 

The document was reviewed on 28 November 1988 by the members of the CSED 
Peer review; Ms. Audrey A. Hook, Dr. John F. Kramer, Dr. Reginald Meeson, Ms. 
Katydean Price, Dr. John Salasin and Dr. Robert Winner. 


XV 

UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 


1.0 INTRODUCTION 

This paper provides the results of a study that examined the Ada software 
engineering Vacation and training needs of the U.S. Army. The Army contracts out a 
majority of its software development and maintenance for mission critical computer 
systems (MCCS). Army personnel in computer-related positions are concerned with 
administrative systems or microcomputer applications (enlisted personnel), serve as 
contract monitors (officers), or develop and maintain administrative or command and 
control systems (civ^ans). 

1.1 Background 

In 1976, Department of Defense (DoD) Instruction 5000.31 added Ada to the 
"Interim List of DoD Approved Higher Order Programming Languages." [DOD 76] On 
31 July 1986, the Under Secretary of the Army issued a memorandum stating that "Ada is 
the standard" (for the Army) and that "exceptions will be extremely difficult to obtain." 
[AMB 86] Then, in the spring of 1987, the DoD issued two new directives that mandated 
the use of Ada throughout the Services and DoD. DoD Directive 3405.1 requires the use of 
Ada in all applications and DoD Directive 3405.2 establishes the policy of using Ada in 
weapon systems. [DOD 87b, DOD 87a] Since that time, several projects have been 
developed within the Army using Ada. Appendix B contains a list of Army projects that 
have used or are using Ada. Over half of these projects have been contracted out by the 
Army. In fact, most Army software development and maintenance for MCCS are done by 
contractors. However, there are positions in the Army related to software development and 
maintenance, and these personnel need to be identified and, where appropriate, trained in 
Ada. 


The Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO), as part of its charter, is responsible for 
coordinating Ada education and training activities.[DOD 80] In keeping with its charter, 
the AJPO has been investigating the various Ada education and training activities available 
within the Services and DoD. Through the identification of already existing Ada education 
and training, the AJPO can encourage the exchange of these resources within the Services 
and DoD. This type of information is now available through the AJPO's Information 
Clearinghouse, the AJPO's on-line bulletin board, the Catalogue of Resources for 
Education in Ada and Software Engineering (CREASE) and the Ada Software Engineering 
Education and Training (ASEET) Team (sponsored by the AJPO). This study provides the 
AJPO with an analysis of the Army's requirements for Ada and the availability of education 
and training to meet these needs. 

1.2 Scope 

This study began with an in-depth look at the structure of the Army to identify all 
Job classifications that may have some impact on the hardware and/or software life cycle. 
The next step was to identify the type of Ada software engineering education and/or 
training necessary for these job categories and v'here Army personnel may obtain the 
required level of training. The last step was to identify any deficiencies in the area of Ada 
software engineering education and training within the U.S. Army and make the 
appropriate recommendations to the AJPO. 


1 

UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 


Section 2.0 discusses the Army personnel structure for those positions involved in 
the software development life cycle. Section 3.0 suggests the level of Ada software 
engineering education and training, if any, that is necessary for each job category discussed 
in Section 2.0. In Section 4.0 the reader will find a list of training opportunities available 
to Army personnel. Some of the training is specific to the Army while other training is 
available through the other Services or I>oD agencies. Section 5.0 provides three tables 
that summarize the data provided in Sections 2.0,3.0, and 4.0. Section 6.0 summarizes the 
study and provides recommendations for meeting the Ada software engineering education 
and training requirements of the Army. A glossary is provided in Section 7.0, Section 8.0 
lists the references used during this study and the bibliography is located in Section 9.0. 

Four appendices are provided to assist the reader. Appendix A includes detailed 
information on the courseware presented in Section 4.0. Appendix B provides information 
on those Army projects known to the authors that have used or are presently using Ada. 
Appendix C is a copy of the ASEET Team database on universities teaching Ada and 
software engineering with Ada. Appendix D provides a detailed discussion of the various 
Army computer-related personnel positions. This last appendix was prepared to help the 
authors better understand the structure of the Army. 


2 

UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 


2.0 ARMY PERSONNEL POSITIONS 

2.1 Introduction 

All three types of personnel in the Army (enlisted, officers, and civilians), may be 
assigned to positions involved in the software development life cycle. The enlisted soldiers 
and officers arc concerned primarily with the use and application of functioning large scale 
embedded computer systems. The civilians provide a majority of the technic^ support in 
the Research and Development (R & D) Centers. (See Appendix D for a more detailed 
description of the Army personnel structure.) There are three enlisted fields, three Signal 
Corps (SC) officer speci^ty areas, five additional officer functional areas, and six civilian 
specialties which may have a need for some sort of Ada training, although not every 
employee in each specialty would require Ada training. Each of these specialties is 
summarized below. 

2.2 Enlisted Personnel 

There is only one Career Management Field (CMF) for enlisted personnel in the 
computer field. The Automatic Data Processing (ADP) CMF is given the Military 
Occupational Specialty (MOS) code of 74 and includes the three positions discussed below. 
Figure 1 provides a breakdown of the 3500 enlisted personnel assigned within MOS 74 
during FY 87. 


Programmer/ 
Analyst (74F) 



Senior NCO 
(74Z) 


Computer 
Operator (74D) 


Figure 1. Enlisted Personnel with Computer-Related Positions^ 

The first position is the Computer/Machine Operator field (74D). The primary 
duties of the 74D at the junior level incorporate computer operation, maintenance, 
administration, and computer input/output control. At the higher levels of experience, the 
duties become more supervisory in nature and include inspection and evaluation tasks. 


*Data provided by SGM Whit, US Army Total Army Personnel Agency (TAPA). 


3 

UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 


The Programmer/Analyst field (74F) is in the same area of expertise as 74D, but is 
more applications oriented. The junior levels are involved with developing charts, 
diagrams and instructions; preparing reports, flow charts and block diagrams; and having 
some program review responsibilities. At the more senior levels, duties involve more 
supervision and management tasks, and may also include systems operation, evaluation, 
and administration. 

These two fields merge together at the E8 (Master Sergeant) level, and become the 
Data Processing Non-Commissioned Officer (NCO) (74Z) field. Because of this, both 
74D and 74F soldiers receive additional training in their non-specialty area to assist them in 
supemsing Operators and Programmers. Duties are mostly in the management and 
administration areas, including supervising the preparation of reports and studies, 
scheduling system operating and down time, serving as liaison with related functions, and 
conducting periodic inspections of programming methods and security procedures. [ARM 


2.3 Officer Corps 

Officers in computer-related positions can be found in one of three specialty areas in 
^e SC branch of the Army or in one of five functional areas (FAs). Of the fifteen branches 
in the Army, the SC is the only branch which has computer-related areas of concentration 
(AOC), as well as the five functional areas. The other branches only focus on the 
computer-related functional areas: Comptroller, Gyrations Research/Systems Analysis, 
Research and Development, Systems Automation, and Contracting and Industrial 
Management. The intensity of computer use or knowledge needed varies greatly among aU 
these functional areas, and thus, the level of training will also be varied. A brief 
description of each of these positions is given below. (See Appendix D for more details.) 

The SC is responsible for the Army's command, control, and communications 
systems, including hardware, software and related equipment. The systems are designed 
and built primarily by contract, and then used extensively within the SC. The first AOC is 
the Communications-Electronics (C-E) Automation area (25B), where the main duties 
focus on automated systems in networks which support tactical operations. The specific 
emphasis of 25B is on distributed database systems, teleprocessing systems and data 
coi^unications systems supporting battlefield systems. On the other hand, the usage and 
maintenance of SC resources is the main emphasis of the C-E Operations (25C) area. 
These officere are involved in the installation, operation, and maintenance of automation 
and communications systems. Their principal duties include planning, coordinating and 
supervising the training, operadon, supply, maintenance and resource allocation within a 
Signal unit or facility. Every Signal Corps officer is trained initially as an Operations 
Officer. The third AOC is C-E Engineering (25D). This position's responsibilities include 
test and evaluation of hardware and software both for developmental and non- 
developmental programs, and the direct application of electrical, electronic and automation 
theories and principles to the design, test, acceptance, and installation of computer based 
communications systems. [DAP 86] 

Figure 2 shows a breakdown of personnel assigned to the five functional areas with 
no distinction made between branches. In FY 87, there was a total of 11,6(X) officers 
assigned to those five FA's. 


4 

UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 



Contracting/ 
Industrial 
Management 
(FA 


Systems 
Automation 
(FA 53) 


Research and 
Development 
(FA 51) 


Comptroller 
(FA 45) 


OR/SA (FA 49) 


Figure 2. Officers in Computer-Related Functional Areas^ 

The first functional area is the Comptroller (FA45). The officer assigned to this 
area serves as resource manager for programming and planning. The officer is tasked with 
monitoring costs versus performance targets, as well as preparing recommendations for 
program budgets. 

The second functional area is Operations Research/Systems Analysis (OR/SA) 
(FA49). This discipline focuses on the application of analytic methods to solve complex 
strategic and tactical problems. Many analyses require an in-depth knowledge of 
mathematics, economics, statistics and the use of computer simulation to properly test and 
document the system's reactions, and recommend mt^ifications if needed. The systems 
can be operational or managerial, small and simple, or large and complex. For this reason, 
the ability to accurately model and analyze these systems is crucial for the FA49 officer. 

The next functional area is Research and Development (FAS 1). Members of FAS 1 
participate in the development of materiel and systems from concept through validation and 
deployment, in addition to providing support for operational tests and subsequent 
evaluations at system milestones. These officers also serve as management liaisons to 
coordinate system design with requirements and funding. Finally, the FA51 officer is 
tasked with determining future Army needs and cost effective ways to fulfill these needs. 

A fourth functional area is Systems Automation (FA53). These officers manage 
software development, software and hardware integration, automated systems, and related 
support services. A combination of computer science, systems engineering, and 
information management enables the Systems Automation officer to serve as the integrator 
of military functions, scientific technology and management tools to solve Army 


^ Data provided by Maj Lake (FA 45), Maj Harris (FA 49), Capt Casiner (FA 51 and 97), and Maj Moore 
(FA 53), TAPA. 


5 

UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


automation problems. This field is the most computer science intensive and is often paired 
with the C-E Automation specialty. 

The final functional area is Contracting and Industrial Management (FA97). 
Members of this FA actively participate in the procurement of advanced systems to meet the 
Army's needs through civilian and government contracts. From contract formulation and 
negotiation to administration and maintenance, the FA97 officer is involved with aU aspects 
of the contracting process. This position is particularly intensive in the contract preparation 
and monitoring area.[DAP 86] 

2.4 Civilian Personnel 

As indicated earlier and shown in Figure 3, a majority of the Army personnel 
assigned to computer-related positions are civilians. Although it appears that Army officers 
run a close second, it should be understood that most officers serve in managerial type 
positions. As managers, these officers are not usually tasked with hands-on development 
or maintenance work. Almost all of the civilians are directly involved in hardware or 
software development and/or maintenance. 



Figure 3. Total Army Personnel Distribution^ 


^Data obtained from "DoD Selected Manpower Statistics Fiscal Year 1987." 

6 

UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 


There were a total of 14,013 civil service employees in FY 87, serving in the six 
specialty areas which are directly related to the computer field. Figure 4 gives the 
distnbution of these positions. The position of Software Engineer for civilians was not in 
place during 87, and therefore was not included. 


Computer 


Electrical 

Engineers 

(GS-850) 


Electronic 

Engineers 

(GS-855) 



Science Operators 
(GS-332) 


Computer 

Specialists 

(GS-334) 


Figure 4. Civilian Personnel in Computer-Related Positions'^ 


Two of these specialty areas do not require college degrees, but do require some 
related experience. The others all require a minimum of a bachelor's degree, and often 
advanced degrees are needed for promotion. 

The Computer Operator series (General Schedule (GS)-332) encompasses the 
operation or supervision of the controls for digital computer systems. Although a computer 
science degree is not required, the operator must be able to read, interpret, and respond to 
system messages and other information relayed through the main control console.[OPM 
84] 


The Computer Specialist scries (GS-334), which also does not require a degree, is 
closely aligned with the professional series. The specialist serves in one of six 
subspecialties: Computer Systems Analyst, Computer Programmer, Computer 
Programmer Analyst, Computer Systems Programmer, Computer Equipment Analyst, or 
Computer Specialist. As a designer, analyst, and programmer, the GS-334 is involved in 
implementing problem-solving systems. Personnel in this series also maintain current 
knowledge of computer equipment and peripherals, as well as any specialized activities 
associated with the development and design of data processing systems. [OPM 80] 


Data provided by Lori Cummings, TAPA, Civilian Classification Division. 

7 

UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 


The Electrical/Electronics Engineering series (GS-850/855) are actually two 
separate series, but their duties are similar enough that they are often grouped together. 
Both job areas deal with electrical phenomena and the principles, techniques, and practices 
of electrical and electronics engineering. A great many electrical engineers are currently 
serving in software design jobs or other positions requiring advanced programming 
skills.[OPM 71] 

The Computer Engineering series (GS-854), the newest field of the group, was 
created in January 1988 to meet a growing DoD need for computer engineering 
professionals. The series combines principles and applications from mathematics, 
computer science, and electrical/electronics engineering in positions which concentrate on 
computer hardware and software, system architecture and integration. A majority of the 
work is concentrated in the research and development area.[OPM 88a] 

The Computer Science series (GS-1550) is specifically geared toward positions 
involving computer science methods and techniques in the solution of complex problems 
through the use of digital computers. In order to successfully compete, each professional 
should have an understanding of mathematics and statistics, as well as information 
systems, computer architecture, and structured programming concepts. Like the GS-854, a 
majority of these positions are in the research and development area. [0PM 88b] 


8 

UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


3.0 ADA SOFTWARE ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND TRAINING 
NEEDED 

This section provides an evaluation of the Army positions summarized in Section 
2.0 with respect to the type of Ada software engineering education and training required for 
personnel in these positions. Where applicable, recommendations are made concerning the 
extent of education or training needed. The education and training sites referenced in this 
section are summarized in Section 4.0. 

3.1 Enlisted Personnel 

Three enlisted personnel positions have been discussed that are associated with 
computers and the related technology: Computer/Machine Operator, Programmer/Analyst 
and Data Processing NCO. As a Computer Machine Operator, a soldier does not require 
any Ada training. The operator's only concern is to run and maintain the hardware. 
However, if the operator is promoted to Data Processing NCO, further training will be 
necessary. The NCO acts as supervisor to both the Operators and Programmers. To fulfill 
the supervisory duties, the Data Processing NCO must have an understanding of the Ada 
language and corresponding software engineering concepts. This could be obtained 
through an introductory course such as "Fundamentals of Ada Programming/Software 
Engineering" provided by Keesler Air Force Base (AFB). The Programmer/Analyst is 
concerned with writing, analyzing, editing and testing computer programs and applications. 
Since Ada is the DoD language of choice and is not restricted to embedded systems, these 
programmers should be encouraged to use Ada in their projects. Training would include 
how to write Ada programs using good software engineering techniques and an 
introduction to the Ada ftogramming Support Environment (APSE). This training will 
better prepare the programmer for promotion to Data Processing NCO. 

3.2 Officers 

In the SC there are three speciality areas related to computer technology; C-E 
Automation, C-E Operations and C-E Engineering Officers. All three positions are 
concerned with the maintenance of command, control and communications systems at a 
supervisory level. The C-E Operations Officer’s duties are hardware-related and therefore, 
this position requires no Ada software engineering education or training. The Automation 
Officer and Engineering Officer must have an undergraduate degree in electrical/electronics 
engineering, computer science or another technical discipline. Both officers, as 
supervisors in the design and development of automated software systems, may be 
involved in the practical application of automation theory in the design, implementation and 
integration of software for telecommunications and teleprocessing systems. In this 
capacity, the officer must, when using Ada, have a good working knowledge of the 
language. With the background required, these officers should be familiar with the 
concepts related to high order languages, but need to be tramed in using Ada software 
engineering techniques. 

Five functional areas were discussed in Section 2.0; Comptroller, Operations 
Research/Systems Analysis, Research and Development, Systems Automation .and 
Contracting and Industrial Management The Comptroller should have some understanding 
of the language and its benefits when conducting cost and economic analyses related to 
software. The Comptroller must also understand software engineering concepts and how 
these concepts may impact performance analyses (i.e., a lot of time will be spent up front 
doing analysis and design prior to actual coding; this does not mean a project is behind 


9 

UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 


schedule or not cost-effective). This training could be in the form of a 4-8 hour tutorial or 
part of an entry level training course. 

The Operations Research/Systems Analysis, System Automation, and Research and 
Development fields may be involved in the development, implementation and maintenance 
of software systems. All three fields require a bachelor's degree in a technical discipline 
and encourage officers to obtain an advanced degree. The Systems Automation Officer is 
also required to have either a major or minor in computer science. Based on these 
educational requirements, officers assigned to the development of software systems should 
have a good background in either computer science or software engineering. The officer's 
education then needs to be supplemented with some degree of Ada training. This training 
should include both the syntax and semantics of the language. Emphasis should be placed 
on using good software engineering techniques to develop programs and tools that improve 
productivity, with special attention given to developing skills necessary to evaluate and 
select tools for inclusion in an APSE. 

The Contracting and Industrial Management Officer may have to monitor a contract 
dealing with the development and maintenance of software for the Army. If the software 
is to be done in Ada, this officer must understand and recognize the basic concepts of Ada. 
Like the Comptroller, the Contracting Officer must have some understanding of software 
engineering. TTiis type of training could be included as part of the advanced courses offered 
to Contracting and Industrial Management Officers at the Army Logistics Management 
Center (ALMC) or the Defense Systems Management College ODSMC). 

3.3 Civilian Personnel 

Civilian positions within the Army that would require some type of Ada training are 
the computer specialist, computer engineer and computer scientist. A civilian in the 
Electrical/Electronics Engineering series does not need to be trained in Ada unless he/she is 
assigned to a software design job or a position that requires advanced programming skills. 
In these cases, the civilian would need to understand both the Ada language and related 
software engineering concepts. The computer specialist is not required to have a college 
degree and may need to be trained in the syntax and semantics of the language, along with 
how to use software engineering concepts when developing a program or system. The 
computer engineer and computer scientist have at least a bachelor’s degree and should be 
familiar with software engineering concepts and at least one high order language. Training 
should include both an introductory and advanced Ada course. As Ada is introduced into 
more university curriculum and service-related schools, the need for separate Army- 
sponsored Ada training will decrease. 


1 


« 


10 

UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 


4.0 OPPORTUNITIES FOR ADA EDUCATION AND TRAINING 

4.1 Introduction 

Within the Army, several institutions exist for the purpose of providing additional 
miUtary specific training. Although these schools are primarily for Army personnel, both 
active duty and civilians, classes may be opened to other Services and DoD personnel upon 
request Likewise, the other Services and the DoD operate training schools which are open 
to toe Army. Finally, conunercial courses taught by software companies and courses 
available through academic institutions are also options for receiving additional education 
and training. 

4.2 Army Programs 

The Army's training program consists of two categories: training received prior to 
toe first assignment and training received at various points during the career. The first 
group includes toe civilian software engineering intern program sponsored jointly by the 
ALMC School for Engineering and Logistics at Red River Army Depot, Texarkana, TX 
and toe Ada Technology Branch of the Communications-Electronics Command (CECOM), 
located at Ft. Monmouth, NJ. The Professional Development Center (PE>C) in Falls 
Church, VA provides training support for toe members of the Informations Systems 
Command (ISC). This category also includes toe Signal Corps’ Computer Science (CS) 
School at Ft Gordon, GA which provides initial training for aU enlisted members in the 74 
field. For cadets at toe U.S. Milid^ Academy (USMA) at West Point, NY, courses in Ada 
and software engineering are part of the curriculum for computer science majors. 

The second category includes the Systems Automation course at the CS School for 
FA53 officers, as well as a shorter Branch Automation (4H) skill course for officers. The 
CS School also runs a combination operations/programming course for senior enlisted 
personnel who are going into Data Processing NCO (74Z) positions. Officers who attend 
the Command and General Staff College (CGSC) at Ft. Leavenworth, KS, or the Army 
War College (AWC) at Carlisle Barracks, PA, are given a choice of several optional 
courses as part of the curriculum. The optional computer course selection at both schools 
r^gcs from microcomputer fundamentals to structured programming. For mid-career 
civilians, the Army Management Engineering College ( AMEC) at Rock Island Arsenal, EL, 
provides four courses for those employees needing additional programming skills. 

4.2.1 AMC Software Engineering Intern Program 

The Intern program for new civilian software engineers was created two years ago 
by the Army Materiel Command (AMC) to meet a growing need for college graduates with 
software engineering knowledge and experience. The program is two years in length; the 
first year is spent at Red River and the second at Ft. Monmouth. 

Each member of toe program is a recent college graduate with a degree in either 
electrical or computer engineering or a related engineering field. They are then hired by the 
Army as either a GS-5 or GS-7 depending on their college grades. Before entering the 
program they are assigned to one of nine Software Development Centers (SDC), which 
then pays for their training. In return, they are committed to that center after completion of 
the training. The 52-week course at Red River covers DoD structure and procedures, 
Army policies, and all aspects of software engineering theory, systems engineering, and 
software development and testing for MCCS. [POI 88a] After finishing the instructional 


I 


11 

UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


portion of the course, the AMC interns are sent to the Ada Technology Branch at CECOM. 
(ISC interns usually report directly to their SDC after the first year.) Here they receive 
extensive hands-on training working on actual Army programs. At the same time, the 
interns attend Monmouth College as graduate students in Software Engineering. Their 
projects at CECOM transfer to the college as their thesis work, and they complete their 
master’s degree by the end of the second year of the intern program. During this time, they 
are also promoted to the next grade. 

Once the interns have completed their training, they return to one of the AMC 
software development centers as software engineers and developers. After one year, the 
graduates are promoted non-competitively to the next grade, usually either GS-11 or GS- 
12. After that, they continue to work on various projects for the remainder of their career, 
following a normal GS progression of responsibility.[GRA 88] 

Graduates from Red River are committed to work for the Army for one year; 
graduates from Monmouth College have a three-year commitment. After that they are free 
to leave the Army. To date, 21 software engineers have completed the program, 32 interns 
are in their second year, and approximately 50 new interns will start at Red River early in 
1989. [OES 88] 

4.2.2 Professional Development Center 

The PDC is the primary training center for ISC civilian personnel assigned to the 
Washington, D.C. area. The Center's mission is to provide fundamental and advanced 
computer trying to civilian employees throughout ISC. The role is seen both as advisory 
and instructional in nature. The PDC provides guidance to other subcommands on training 
as well as providing the facilities and instructors for the courses themselves. 

The PDC has two classrooms with enough personal computers (PCs) for each 
member of a class to have their own workstation, as well as lecture rooms for seminars and 
discussions. The center once served as the training base for several ADP intern classes, 
providing the lab work for the first six months of training. These new computer specialists 
received training in microcomputer basics, data processing and programming 
fundamentals, mainframe systems and the COBOL language. The program was recently 
redefined to include an introductory Ada course as part of the curriculum. The advanced 
COBOL training was removed and taught instead as a stand-alone course. The plan was to 
teach only Ada once the need for COBOL no longer existed. 

At one time, t he PD C had evolved a position entitled Technical Training Program 
Management Officer (TTPMO), which was responsible for coordinating the training done 
at PDC. The hope was that the position would expand to include identifying the training 
needs by individual program throughout ISC, locating possible training within the 
command, and ensuring that training needs were met once training was completed. 
However, because the position was not an official one, when the original TTPMO left for 
another assignment, he was never replaced. 

Despite the excellent facilities available at the PDC, the staff has been cut several 
times in the last few years. Each time an Ada programming course has been developed at 
the PDC, the instructor gets transferred before the course materializes. For each new 
instructor, the development must begin again. This situation has made continuity between 
instructors next to impossible. Currently, a staff of four, (three full-time and one part- 
time), must develop and present all the courseware. Often, instructors from AMEC will 


12 

UNCLASSIFIED 


UNCLASSIFIED 


teach both the "Ada Programming" and the "Software Engineering with Ada" courses at the 
PDC in order to take advantage of the excellent facilities. At the same time, the PDC 
instructors are allowed to attend these courses as preparation for teaching the courses 
themselves. 

The PDC is currently in a re-evaluation phase. The six-month training program for 
ADP interns no longer exists. In its place are individual courses that can be taken 
according to the need of the student, resulting in the need for more instructors who can 
provide individualized assistance. Thus, they are petitioning for additi onal manpower in 
order to continue to provide quality training and an official TTPMO who will be 
responsible for coordinating training throughout ISC. [HOV 88] Whether they receive 
these additional resources will have a great deal of impact on their continued service to the 
members of ISC. 

4.2.3 Software Development Center, Ft. Lee 

The major programimng language being used throughout ISC is COBOL; however, 
ISC is in the process of switching to Ada. While training their COBOL programmers in 
Ada, most of whom are civilians, ISC discovered that COBOL programmers are slower in 
grasping Ada concepts because of their COBOL mind set. They also found that by 
exposing these programmers to Ada in a relaxed, in-house, self-paced environment prior :o 
attending a rigorous vendor's course, the programmers progressed at a faster rate than thev 
would without the additional exposure. Thus, the ISC SDC at Ft. Lee, VA, developed a 
short course which uses a self-paced Computer Aided Instruction program combined with 
two basic Ada concepts courses, to provide this extra practice. One on-site instructor is 
available to assist the students, and a vendor course is used to complete the training. 
Because of the additional up-front training, the vendor course has been modified, and now 
concentrates on advanced topics, rather than only basics. Since the COBOL to Ada 
transition is taking place throughout ISC, the PDC is also developing a similar set of pre¬ 
training courses to be used in the Washington, D.C. area. [WIL 88] 

4.2.4 Computer Science School 

The Computer Science School recently relocated its entire facility from Ft. 
Benjamin Harrison, IN to Ft. Gordon, GA in order to better share and utilize both the 
instructors and the equipment of the Signal Corps School, already at Ft. Gordon. Five 
separate courses are coordinated by the CS school in the area of systems automation, each 
with a different audience. These courses are offered from one to four times a year, 
depending on the class length, and average 80-90 students per class. The courses are the 
Systems Automation Course (SAC) (for officers in FA53), the Branch Automation Officer 
Course j^AOC) (for skill 4K), Advanced Individual Training (AIT) for 74F programmers, 
the Basic NCO Course (BNCOC) for 74F programmers, and the Advanced NCO Course 
(ANCOC) for 74Z Data Processing NCOs. 

The SAC is a combination training course for the software engineering, hardware 
engineering, and automation management specialty areas. The purpose of the course is to 
provide new FA53 officers with the appropriate background necessary to serve as 
automation officers. The course covers personal computer applications, software design 
and development, the Ada programming language, software engineering principles, 
hardware design and selection, operating systems, telecommunications, systems 
integration, networking, and the management of these processes. Thus, the course 
requires a solid computer background due to the speed with which the material is covered. 
Since the limit for a temporary duty assignment (TDY) is 20 weeks, the course is currently 

13 

UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 


19 weeks and 4 days in length. This one-day difference is justified by the cost savings of 
only paying for a TDY, rather than a permanent change of station move. A plan is being 
developed which would extend the course to 23 weeks, broken into subject modules. This 
would allow an officer to attend only the modules needed, instead of the whole course, 
while remaining on TDY status, thus saving additional money and time. The module 
system would also allow the officer to receive graduate credit through the Florida Institute 
of Technology upon completion of the entire course. [DEM 88] 

The BAOC is for officers who need basic computing skills and knowledge in order 
to perform their job duties. However, computer progranuning or applications are not the 
primary focus of that job. The course is two weeks long and is designed for familiari¬ 
zation, not expertise. The applications covered include MS-DOS®, Lotus® 1-2-3®, 
MultiMate®, and dBase Successful completion of this course qualifies an officer 

to later take the SAC if needed. However, the background provided in the shorter course 
may not be as much as is needed for the officer to complete the SAC in good standing. 
Currently, the primary attendees at the BAOC are members of the Adjutant General Corps. 
[DEP 88] 

An ATT course is given to all new soldiers upon entry into their chosen career field. 
The AIT for 74F programmers consists of over 400 hours of training covering problem 
solving, structured programming in COBOL, basic operating systems, and an introduction 
to microcomputer applications. Plans are currently being made to begin teaching Ada as 
well as COBOL, as a precursor to phasing out COBOL. Eventually, only Ada will be 
taught as the major programming language. [POL 88] 

After promotion to E-5, the soldier attends the Basic NCO Course (BNCOC) for 
74F programmers, which focuses on basic management tools and advanced programming 
techniques. Like the AIT course, the BNCOC is still taught in COBOL, but is being 
phased into Ada. Since the new 74Fs, who are receiving the Ada training currently 
through the AIT course, will not be attending the BNCOC for a few years, the relative 
shortage of advanced training is not yet critical. The Army recognizes that as more and 
more 74Fs receive Ada exposure from the beginning of their enlistment, the need for 
advanced Ada in the BNCOC will also increase. In the long run, the CS School plans to 
teach Ada as the sole language during the BNCOC. [POL 88]. 

The final course taught at the CS School is the ANCOC for the Senior NCOs in the 
Data Processing field. Since the NCOs have, up until this time, concentrated within their 
own specialty area, they need exposure to the other data processing specialty in order to 
effectively supervise both areas. Thus, for the operators, the course consists of two weeks 
of COBOL programming to expose the NCOs to structured programming. The depth of 
the course is just enough to allow the career operators to supervise the junior programmers. 
On the other hand, the programmers receive two weeks of Ada fundamentals, including 
hands-on exercises. Both operators and programmers receive one week of microcomputer 
training, which covers the same basic applications as the BAOC. Like the comparable 
officer training, this applications training is designed only for exposure, not for expertise. 
PEP 88] 


^MS-DOS is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation; Lotus and 1-2-3 are registered trademarks of 
Lotus Development Corporation; MultiMate is a registered tra iemark of MultiMate International 
Corporation; and dBase ni+ is a trademark of Ashton-Tate Corporation. 


14 

UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 


The Computer Science School is currently developing a new stand-alone Ada 
programming course to be taught in addition to the other four courses. The proposed 
course would be three weeks in length and is intended for personnel who will miss Ada 
training in other areas because of their training cycle. In other words, if a current 74Z 
NCO has already taken the ANCOC without the new section on Ada, the stand-alone 
course would allow him to be exposed to Ada without having to take a more expensive 
commercial course. The proposal has received strong support from the general staff at the 
school and approval by the Training and Doctrine Command is pending. [ENG 88] 

4.2.5 U.S. Military Academy 

The USMA at West Point, NY teaches Ada to all its computer science majors, as 
well as any engineering, math or science majors who wish to take an Ada course. This 
course is part of a first year curricula and is designed to teach software engineering 
principles using Ada as the tool. In addition to the technical majors, the humanities and 
public affairs majors (about half of the cadets) must take a sequence of courses in the math, 
science, or engineering area. Usually, around 15% of these cadets choose to take the Ada 
course as part of that sequence. 

All computer science majors are required to purchase PCs with two floppy disk 
drives, for use in completing class assignments. However, most of the available Ada 
compilers require more memory than is feasible on any size personal computer. The lack 
of memory means that the students must use terminals provided in a common laboratory 
area, which limits the number of students with adequate access to the equipment. It is then 
difficult for the lab to upgrade its equipment because of the number of terminals and 
increased cost involved. A second software engineering course is required for CS majors 
later in the curriculum, but it is not yet taught in Ada, primarily due to the equipment 
shortage. [HAT 88] 

4.2.6 Senior Service Schools 

Officers who attend a senior service school in residence are usually permitted one 
elective course in an area of their choice. The electives are offered strictly as a supplement 
to the regular instruction and thus cannot be offered to those attending the school by 
correspondence. 

At the CGSC, attended by only 40% of all eligible senior Captains and Majors, four 
30-hour courses are offered as electives: fundamentals of microcomputers, advanced 
information systems and networks (requires a master's degree), FORTRAN programming, 
and Pascal programming. These courses are taught by non-permanent members of the staff 
and occasionally by visiting faculty from nearby academic institutions. Currently, there is 
not an Ada programmer on the staff, nor is one expected in the near future, especially with 
pending budget cuts. Thus a course in Ada has not been scheduled, even though the need 
exists. [FAS 88] 

The AWC, which is open only to a select group of senior managers (LTC, COL), 
previously had a course on Computer Systems, which covered various aspects of 
computers as related to systems management, acquisitions and program monitoring. One 
section of the course discussed programming languages, including Ada, and the reasons 
why a standard DoD language was created. Although the course did not cover any syntax, 
it gave a good synopsis of the benefits and pitfalls of Ada compared to other languages. 
[AND 88] Currently, due to a restructuring of the curriculum, the Computer Systems 


15 

UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 


course is no longer taught A one-day Information Management Overview covers various 
aspects of computer use, but Ada is not covered as part of the curriculum except when 
brought up by the students during class discussions. [ROB 88] 

4.2.7 Army Management Engineering College 

There are four courses taught by AMEC, formerly known as the Army Management 
Engineering Training Activity, which expose students to both the fundamentals and the 
advanced features of Ada and software engineering. The courses include "Ada 
Programming Language," "Ada and Software Engineering Overview," "Ada Tasking," and 
"Software Engineering in Ada," and range from 1 1/2 days to 2 weeks. 

The first course, "Ada Programming Language," covers most of the major concepts 
of the language in the two weeks allotted to the course. Class time is spent in lectures or 
working with hands-on exercises. All attendees at this class must have at least one year of 
experience in a high order programming language, preferably Pascal. 

The second course, "Software Engineering in Ada," is one week in length The 
"Ada Programming Language" course or its equivalent is a prerequisite, since the course is 
designed for experienced Ada programmers who are involved in Ada system design and 
development. The emphasis is on design methodologies and techniques rather than the 
language syntax. The course culminates with a design project 

The remaining two courses, "Ada and Software Engineering Overview" and "Ada 
Tasking," provide introductions to Ada-specific topics wilbin a shorter time frame, 1 1/2 
and 3 1/2 days, respectively. The former is designed to give program managers and 
engineers the insight to decide the applicability of Ada to a particular project. The course 
will cover the basics of Ada and concentrate on the value and merit of the language 
compared to others. 

The second short course, "Ada Tasking," focuses on the use of Ada's unique 
tasking features for real-time systems. The student must have successfully completed both 
the "Ada Programming Language" and the "Software Engineering in Ada" courses, or have 
equivalent experience. This course also includes a final design project. [POI 88b] 

AMEC also offers an ADP intern program, which is designed for new or mid- 
career computer specialists (GS-334). The initial training is 14 weeks in length, which 
helps develop basic programming skills. Additional training is given in the following nine 
weeks which reflect the programmer's area of expertise. The training is currently taught in 
two tracks: COBOL (for the COBOL track) and C (for the office automation track). 
Beginning in June 89, AMEC will begin a pilot track, which will focus on UNIX©®, C, 
and Ada. 

In addition to the courses taught at AMEC, on-site training is available by request 
for large groups of students, usually 20-25 employees, at one installation. Although 
AMEC is primarily for members of the AMC, its courses are open to ISC, but the on-site 
training is not This resiriction is due mainly to manpower shortages. [BEA 88] 


® UNIX is a registered trademark of AT&T Corporation. 

16 

UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 



4.3 Department of Defense Schools 

Within the DoD, several joint service schools are operated to provide advanced 
military training. Although they are not strictly computer related, many of the project 
management and acquisition courses discuss Ada and its related issues during the course. 

4.3.1 Department of Defense Computer Institute 

The Department of Defense Computer Institute (DoDCI), located at the Washington 
Navy Yard, Washington, D.C., does not teach any courses focusing on a single 
programming language. Its focus is on Automated Information Systems (AIS) and 
Computer Security. The "Management of AIS for Senior Executives" course has an 
overview of software which includes a discussion of the advantages/disadvantages of 
various languages, software tools and methods, and various computer software 
applications. For the intermediate executives, the AIS management course covers the area 
of system design and development thoroughly. Lectures start with fundamentals and 
proceed through analysis, design, acquisition, and installation of the system. 

In addition to these two courses, DoDCI also teaches courses on AIS Acquisitions 
and AIS Concept Development and Design. The acquisitions course covers current 
acquisition policy, concept development, workload requirements, contracting, and 
maintenance. The second course covers many of the same areas. Discussions include 
project planning and control, requirements analysis, and software considerations. 
However, none of the four courses taught at DoDCI explicitly covers Ada and its 
relationship to system analysis, design, acquisition and management The basic concepts 
of Ada may be briefly covered when the audience requests it, but otherwise, it is not even 
mentioned. [NDU 88] 

4.3.2 Defense Systems Management College 

The DSMC, located at Ft Belvoir, VA, concentrates on the systems management 
life cycle, from design through installation. For those managers involved with computer 
systems, the course "Management of Software Acquisition" provides a background for 
making comparisons and accurate evaluations. This course is taught four times a year with 
an average class size of 35. A majority of the students arc DoD civilians, with the 
remainder of the students being active duty military officers. Included in the course is a 
half day block on Ada taught by a visiting lecturer from the Software Engineering Institute 
(SEI). The material discussed includes a description of the Ada support mechanisms (i.e., 
the AJPO), a general description of the language features, and an Ada design example. The 
coded example is designed to allow the students a chance to work through a piece of actual 
code, but in no way is it an attempt to teach progranuning concepts. The major portion of 
the lecture is focused on managing the transition to Ada and avoiding some common 
transitional pitfalls. The acquisition of compilers, tools, environments, training, and other 
relevant areas are also discussed in this context [OTIE 88] 

The College also hopes to offer an elective two-or three-week Ada programming 
course beginning in the spring of 1989. This course would be for non-programmers and 
would focus on common Ada terminology, basic programming, and include a cursory 
introduction to the advanced topics. The major stumbling block to such a course has been 
the lack of laboratory facilities to allow for hands-on exercises. [CAR 88] 


I 


17 

UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 


4.4 Other Services 

In addition to the joint schools open to all thiw Services, each Service operates their 
own set of schools and training facilities which are often open to the other Services. 

Currently, the Air Force has an Ada Training Team based at Keesler AFB, MS, 
which travels to various locations to give courses as well as offering courses at Keesler. 
The courses include a two-day executive overview, a nine-day fundamentals course, and a 
four-week advanced programming course. [VEG 88] 

The Air Force also offers both general and graduate level courses in software 
engineering and Ada at the Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT) in Dayton, OH. 
These courses are based in the Department of Mathematics and Computer Science and the 
only restriction is academic prerequisites. The courses include "Introduction to Software 
Engineering with Ada," "Introduction to Computer Science," "Concurrent Software 
Systems," and "Advanced Software Environments." The courses range from 10 weeks to 
15 weeks in length, and all four include hands-on experience. Previous computer 
programming experience is advised due to the content and pace of the courses. [CRE 88] 

In the Navy, a major training focus for Ada is at the Naval Postgraduate School 
(NPGS) in Monterey, CA. The NPGS has recently converted the majority of its computer 
science courses to Ada. These courses include an introductory course, a software 
engineering course and a data structures course emphasizing Ada. Each of the courses is 
taught on alternate quarters, with an average class size of 50 students. The NPGS has both 
Sun workstations and PCs available for student use in completing assignments. The 
master's program, which is 21 months (7 quarters) in length, is open to all civil service 
personnel and military officers meeting the academic prerequisites. The average student 
has between 5-10 years in the service and about 10% of the current enrollment is Army 
personnel. [YUR 88] Through prior arrangements with the Admissions Office, students 
are permitted to take individual courses without enrolling in the entire program. However, 
because of funding, priority is given to full-time students when filling classes and a single 
course student may be bumped. Repeated attendance by a single insolation at one course 
could result in a tuition charge in order to offset the additional expenses. Such a charge 
would be agreed upon by the NPGS and the installation in question. [CAL 88] 

4.5 Courses at Academic Institutions 

Currently, over 175 academic institudons offer a total of 265 courses in the Ada 
programming language, software engineering principles or both. The courses are taught 
through community colleges, undergraduate and graduate curricula, almost always for 
credit. Prices vary by school and state residency criteria may apply [CRE 88]. The 
academic courses offer a good altemadve when only one or two employees need training. 
Moreover, the larger financial base of most academic institutions allows for a greater 
variety in equipment and hands-on experience, which can be extremely valuable for the 
installation needing the training. 

4.6 Commercial Courses 

In eiddition to the courses taught by the Army and other DoD organizations, several 
commercial courses arc available at various costs. The individual courses vary in 
presentation manner, length, audience, material covered, follow-up assistance, exercises, 
and availability. The majority of the courses arc available at the vendor site, for less cost 


18 

UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 


and fewer personnel, while having the vendor come to the site needing training means 
higher cost and usually the need for a full classroom of students [CRE 86], Because of 
their cost and the time and travel involved, the use of commercial courses should be limited 
and employed only when no other alternatives are available. 


19 

UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 


5.0 SUMMARY TABLES 

This section consists of three summary tables for Army enlisted, officer, and 
civilian personnel. Each chart includes career classifications, job titles, job cc^es, the level 
of Ada training necessaty, and where within the Army or DoD this training may be 
obtained. Although training can be obtained outside of the DoD, the authors felt it would 
be more cost effective if the Army obtained all of its Ada education and training from within 
the DoD. Therefore, no attempt was made to evaluate private sector training or university 
courseware. 

The numbers used in the Training Needed column are based on a graduated 
knowledge of Ada an.'^ Software Engineering. Each level assumes that the previous level 
has been satisfied. The levels are defined as follows: 

Level 0 - No Ada Training Needed 

Level 1 - Concepts and Vocabulary 

Level 2 - Ada Literate 

Level 3 - Able to Contribute to Project 

Level 4 - Complete Understanding of Language 

The level 0 designation is given to those positions which do not require any 
knowledge of Ada for the performance of the job. These positions are often support and 
equipment related. 

A level 1 position is defined as needing the most basic understanding of Ada and 
Software Engineering. An employee at level 1 is able to understand and recognize basic 
concepts and vocabulary, without necessarily knowing how to apply them. 

At level 2, employees are required to read and understand professional literature 
covering Ada. TTiey should also be able to discuss Ada with other professionals in a 
competent manner. 

Level 3 applies to the position where a sufficient Ada background is necessary to 
substantially contribute to an ongoing project. Although the level 3 person does not have 
complete mastery of the language, he/she is able to provide analytical support to other team 
members. 

A level 4 position uses Ada as a main job function. A complete and thorough 
understanding of the language and related software engineering principles is needed. This 
person also serves as a reference point to other persons at lower levels. 

The names of the training courses correspond to those discussed in Section 3. The 
abbreviations are listed in Section 1.3. "CS School" refers to the proposed stand-alone 
Ada course at the Computer Science School, while "Keesler" refers to the courses offered 
by the Air Force's Ada Training Branch at Keesler AFB, MS. "AMC Intern” refers to the 
two-year program at Red River and Ft Monmouth. 


21 

UNCLASSIFIED 







Table I. Summary of Training for Army Enlisted Personnel 


UNCLASSIFIED 














O 



9 

C 


m 

c 

O 

2 



£ 

<0 


< 

o> 

c 

o 


2 


9 

E 

55 

U) 



3 

o 

E 

8 



3 


ni 




a. 

2 


a 



E 

o 

Q 

a. 

O) 

O 

2 

« 



o 

O 

a 

o 


O 

e 

o 

o» 

« “O 

2 u. 


<0 

(P 

e 

O jO 
3 « 
< O 


c 

>« o 
e 5 


<2 


1 

<0 

c 

liJ 


22 

UNCLASSIFIED 















Table II Summary of Training for Army Officers 


UNCLASSIFIED 



n 

-o 

< 




n 

« 






CO 







CM 



o 

Q 

o 


o 

o 

CM 

O 

n 

Oi 

CM 



CO 



CM 





1/) 

Oi 



CO 


o> 




r>. 

o 


■n 

u) 


«o 



o> 


in 

Oi 

o 













< 

< 

< 

CQ 

m‘ 

O 

CQ 

d 

Q 

Q 

Cl 

o 


»— 


UT) 

u> 

iO 

U> 

in 

m 

m 

lO 


CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 


5 

<0 

cc 


a 

e 

o 

O 


® 

GC 

(9 

*o 



< 

c 

<9 

c 

o 

C 

q 

</) 


E 

C2. 

2 

E 

3 

(9 

O 


® 

® 


w? 

(/) 

> 

o. 

>» 

® 

® 

0 

CO 

CC 

o 


c 

o 

« 

E 

o 

< 

(A 

e 

® 

ts 

>s 

CO 


(9 0 ) 

S '« 

® -a 

cc ™ 

fji ^ 
C 

O V) 

5 ® 
® t; 
^ >» 
O CO 


E 

® 

T? ro 
C C 
(TJ ro 

o)S 

fi 

°i 

o = 


T3 

C c 
(Z o 

r 6 

O Q. 


E 

o 

— ^ 
c c 

fls ?3 

O) 5 
® _ 
O 2 


o o 

cr D 


o ^ 

o £ 







c 

2 




g 

3 <9 

Q 

C 

C 

g 

fS 

(/> 

c 

o 

f 

® 

<9 C 

Q) 9 

< c 

1 

£ 

o 

3 

3 

a 

c 

'o> 

o 

c 

< 

o 

i5 

O 

Oi 

c 


UJ 

UJ 


LU 

6 

6 

6 


(A 



o 

o 

T9 

c 

O) 

vJ 


E 

w 

< 


C 

o 


o 

0. 


o 

u 


O 


23 

UNCLASSIFIED 

























Table II Summary o» Ttaming tor Army Otticers (Continued) 


UNCLASSIFIED 


E : 



0 

< ; 

® 

2 .£ : 

0 

0 

- £ 

0 

0 

£ 

0 -3 
< 2 
“ f> 

JO £ : 

8 ^ 

8 « 

0' 

<0 ; 

> ^ 

< 

< cn 
0} 0 

< « 

CO 0 

< c/) 

</) 0 


— 

— — — 


07 




C 


h~ 


•E “S ' 


u. 

u. 

2 rS ; 

< 

< 

< 

t- g. . 

ig • 


0 

4 /) 


S ; 

® 

® 

® 

® 

1 8 



V) 


« : 
0 


tn 

07 

53 

0 

< 

< 

< 

< 



oti 


CM 

0 






•O < 

S c 
® o 
CC 

O 

c 


■5 


a 

£ 

o 

o 


na u) 

2 

rr 2 

« < 

C 

o 1/7 

X £ 

m 


C 

o 

£ 

o 

3 


$ ct *9 

^ >* ^ 

O <0 


^ -s ■ ® 


o ^ 

<0 C 

® o 
Jr ^ 
< C 
O 
O 


a 

S 2 

I i 

■•Q ® 

< o 



24 

UNCLASSIFIED 















Table III. Summary o( Training (or Army Civilians 


UNCLASSIFIED 


>s 


E 



c 

c 

c 

2 *3 

® *5 

® ■5 

— 5 

— 9 

-1 

o S 

o S 

0 CO 

S CO 

S CO 

2 CO 

< O 

< O 

< 0 


K 

U. 

< 

wT 

8 

8 

I- 

LL 

< 

0 

Q 

8 

K 

LL 

< 

0 

0 

8 

K 

U. 

< 

0 

Q 

(S 

2 

0 " 

2 

0 

2 

0 

2 

0 

</> 

$ 

S 

0) 

(A 

$ 

s 

CO 

(A 

s 

2 

CO 

(A 

g 

S 

CO 


Q 


0 


Q 


Q 



■8 


o 


i/i 




a o 


cu 







U) 

10 

0 

0 

to 

iO 

O' 

O' 

fO 

fO 

CO 

<0 

CO 

CO 

CO 

m 

lA 

to 

10 

to 

to 

to 

to 

CO 

CO 

<0 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 



CD 

CO 

CO 

CO 

00 

» 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

<0 

<0 

CO 

CO 

to 

CO 

to 

CO 

CO 


(D 

0 

0 

C 5 

0 

CD 

0 

0 

0 

0 

CD 

0 

0 

0 

0 


X3 

o 


2 

<9 

i 

o 

« 

I 

6 

o 

o 


a> 

g 

E 

<9 


(/> 


3 (A 
Q. >. 
6 <0 
O C 

O < 


3 

a 

E 

o 

O 


I 

(0 


3 

a 
£ • 
o 

O - 


I 

S 6 

3 m 

§■ o> 

i 2 

O Q- 


a 

3 

cr 

UJ 


3 U) 

a >« 
E <9 
o c 
o < 


<0 

0 

« 

Q. 

</> 

3 

a 

E 

o 

O 


.52 

c 

® 

o 

CO 


o 

3 

a 


e 


o 


O 


2 

3 



Q. 


® 

E 

0 


® 

c 

0 


’ 5 ) 

c 



UJ 

0 

<0 


® 

■5 

® 

a 

3 

— 

c 

® 

0 

'w 

® 

CO 

CO 

UJ 


<9 

0 





® 

« 

2 


® 

c 

UJ 


O) 

c 

>» 


UJ 

(A 

0 


0 

(A 




® 

'c 

’> 

® 

0 

® 

c 


Q, 

O) 


3 

c 

® 

CO 

UJ 

UJ 


0 



'E 



0 



0 

2 


® 

® 

c 

UJ 


5 ) 



c 



UJ 

0 



(A 

® 

2 

'> 

® 

3 

® 

c 

Q. 

a 

'd> 

E 

3 

c 

0 

CO 

LU 

0 


3 

3 

Q. 

E 

O 

o 

>s 



Q. 3^ 
3 C 
CO UJ 




0 








® 










.tr 


® 










Q, 








<A 


0 



a> 


o> 


C 7 ) 

® 




w 

c 

tA 

y 

.E 


_C 

® 


2 

® .52 

2 

S 5 

C 

® 

® 

® 



3 

3 75 



0 

® 

3 

® 

CO 


Q. 

9-0 

o- 3 

c 


c 

a. 

c 



E 

E ® 

e ® 

^ O' 


o> 

E 

a> 



0 

0 Q. 

0 D 

2 c 

® 

c 

0 

c 



0 

0 CO 

0 tn 

LU LU 

UJ 

UJ 

C-> 

LU 


c 




0 




® 




U 



a> 




c 

<A 



w 



0 


2 


■£ 

s 

0 


.c 

u 

O) 



® 

c 



h- 

LU 

c 




0 


C 




(9 


<A 

0 




CL 






0 



25 

UNCLASSIFIED 




















UNCLASSIFIED 


6.0 FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

There are numerous Army-sponsored schools and training centers throughout the 
United States. In several cases, Ada and software engineering courses are already 
available; in others it is merely a question of incorporating Ada into an existing course or 
adding an Ada course. This can be done with minimal effort and cost 

Since a majority of MCCS are developed through contract, the most urgent Ada 
training needed is for those who will be evaluating proposals and those who will be 
monitoring/managing the large projects. These people need to have an understanding of the 
language and the software engineering concepts that should be incorporated when using 
Ada. 

6.1 Findings 

Finding : There are several skill areas within the Army that require some degree of Ada 
training: 

Enlisted 

Programmer/Analyst 
Data Processing NCO 

Officers 

C-E Automation Officer 
C-E Engineering Officer 
Comptroller 

Operations Research/Systems Analysis 
Systems Automation 
Research and Development 
Contracting and Industrial Management 

Civilian 

Computer Specialist 
Computer Engineer 
Computer Scientist 

Finding : New enlisted piersonnel in computer-related positions are introduced to Ada prior 
to their first assignment. The main concern is introducing Ada to the senior enlisted 
personnel. 

Most of the enlisted personnel in the job fields listed above are programmers in the 
applications arena. Prior to being assigned, they have attended the Computer Science 
School. If they are recent graduates, they have been exposed to the Ada language through 
the AIT or the ANCOC for CMF 74. This appears to be appropriate training for these job 
skill levels. However, it is also important to train the senior enlisted personnel who 
attended the Computer Science School prior to the introduction of Ada. The Computer 
Science School has proposed the development of a stand-alone Ada course to meet this 
need. It is strongly recommended that the Army approve the development of this course to 
meet the needs of these Senior NCOs. 


27 

UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


Finding : There are various opportunities for SC officers to receive Ada training throughout 
their career. 

Prior to their first assignment, each officer must attend the SC Officer Basic 
Course. This course, along with the Advanced Course taken after two assignments, is 
designed to familiarize the officer with Army procedures and how to lead troops. In all 
three C-E areas (Automations, Operations and Engineering), the officer will already have a 
degree in electrical/electronics engineering, computer science or a related discipline. Since 
there are numerous academic institutions &at now offer software engineering and/or Ada in 
their curriculum, there is a good possibility that new SC officers will already have some 
knowledge of the Ada language and understand software engineering concepts. Both C-E 
Automation Officers and C-E Engineering Officers must also complete course work at the 
AFIT. While assigned to AFIT, the officers may have an opportunity to take one or more 
of the Ada and software engineering courses offered through the Department of Math and 
Computer Science. 

Finding ; Since officers in the Operations Research/System Analysis, Systems Automation 
and Research and Development fields must have a good working Imowledge of the Ada 
language, additional training may be necessary. 

The Systems Automation Officer must take the Systems Automation Course at the 
Computer Science School which covers both Ada and software engineering. The proposed 
stand-alone Ada course at the Computer Science School would also be beneficial to these 
officers, especially those in R&D, who need Ada training to complement their degrees. 
The Contracting Officer may receive specialized training at DSMC, AI^, or AMEC. All 
three of these schools offer some degree of Ada training. Additional training is also 
available through various schools sponsored by other Services or the DoD. 

Finding : Ada is not taught at the Command and General Staff College or the Army War 
College. 

The CGSC and the AWC are attended by a select group of career Army officers 
who will be managing major projects. It is important that these officers be allowed to select 
a course that intri^uces them to the Army’s adopted programming language, Ada. At the 
present time, FORTRAN and Pascal are taught annually at the Command and General Staff 
College. It is recommended that an introductory Ada course also be taught once a year. 
As the use of FORTRAN and Pascal decreases within the Army, such courses can be 
combined and eventually deleted from the curriculum. At the Army War College, a one- 
day Information Management Overview covers various aspects of computer use. A short 
tutorial on Ada (approximately 2 hours) should be included in this overview. Interested 
officers could obtain additional Ada training at the Computer Science School, Keesler 
AFB, NPGS or AFIT. 

Finding: Several training opportunities are available for Army civilian personnel: AMC 
Software Engineering Intern Program, Professional Development Center and the Army 
Management Engineering College. 

The AMC intern program for new civilian software engineers appears to be an 
excellent means for educating personnel in software engineering and Ada. Unfortunately 
there are funding problems associated with this program. The AMC intern program is open 
to all Army personnel; however, it is a one-year assignment. Specific commands would 
have to pay for their personnel to be gone for one whole year, which can be very expensive 


28 

UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 


(cost of the school + loss of manpower). Since the courses have already been developed 
and the expertise is at Red River, the Army should consider allowing officers and enlisted 
personnel who need specific Ada or software engineering with Ada training to take 
individual parts of the program. Commands would only have to release personnel for 6 to 
8 weeks to take specific courses. This approach would certainly be more cost effective for 
the commands who need to train personnel in specific areas related to Ada and software 
engineering but can not afford to reduce their manpower for a full year. 

The PDC offers fundamental and advanced computer training to civilian employees 
throughout ISC. The center offers an introductory course in Ada, and the plans are to teach 
only Ada once COBOL is no longer needed. Since the six-month training program is being 
broken down into individual courses, it may be more cost effective to allow all qualified 
Army civilians or officers to attend these courses, regardless of command. 

The AMEC, located at Rock Island, offers Ada training for AMC and ISC 
personnel. In addition to four Ada-specific courses, AMEC offers a 14-week ADP intern 
program which will include Ada as of June 1989. Officers and enlisted personnel may also 
attend courses at AMEC, but only AMC personnel can receive remote site training. This 
provides Ada training opportunities in Illinois, Virginia (PDC), Texas (AMC), and Georgia 
(Computer Science School). 

Finding : Various other training schools within the other Services and DoD are available to 
Army personnel. 

The Air Force allows other Services to attend their courses at Keesler AFB and 
AFIT. Keesler personnel offer courses both on-site at Keesler and at remote sites. The 
courses offered include "Orientation to Ada Software Engineering," "Fundamentals of Ada 
Programming and Software Engineering" and "Ada Applications Programmer Course." 
AFIT offers four courses related to Ada: "Concurrent Software Systems," "Advanced 
Software Environments," "Introduction to Software Engineering with Ada," and 
"Introduction to Computer Science." The Navy, through its postgraduate school in 
California, offers several courses using Ada. These courses are open to both civilians and 
officers. 

Some DoD training is open to all the Services. One example would be the Defense 
Systems Management College at Fort Belvoir, VA, which offers a course on the 
".Management of Software Acquisition," which includes Ada. In addition, a two- or three- 
week Ada programming course is scheduled to begin in the spring of 1989 at DSMC. 
Unfortunately, the DoD Computer Institute in Washington, D.C. does not offer any 
courses in Ada. 

Finding : Two other means for obtaining Ada education and training are available to all 
Army personnel: local universities and the private sector. 

Many universities offer courses in Ada and software engineering. The CREASE, 
which is available through the National Technical Information Service, provides a list of 
universities known to offer Ada courses. The ASEET Team is developing two databases 
that include information on Ada and software engineering with Ada courses: one includes 
universities that teach Ada and software engineering and the other includes the Services and 
DoD agencies that offer Ada-related courses. The most recent version of the university 
database is included in Appendix D. 


29 

UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 


Several organizations in the private sector offer Ada training. This training is 
usually very expensive with registration fees averaging over $1,000 per person, exclusive 
of any TDY costs. Such courses are often offered on location at the requesting installation; 
however, in this case, the Army must pay all traveling expenses incurred by the 
instructor(s) as well as the registration fees. Since the Army has numerous training courses 
available to select from within the Army, other Services, and DoD or at a local university, 
this type of training is not recommended-unless very specific, one-time training is needed. 

6.2 Recommendations 

Based on the findings, the following recommendations should be made by the 
AJPO to the U.S. Army; 

1. Approve the development of the proposed stand-alone Ada course at the 
Computer Science School. 

2. Incorporate Ada into the curriculum at the Army War College and the 
Command and General Staff College. 

3. Emphasize the need for Ada training at the DoD Computer Institute. 

4. Allow personnel to take individual Ada and software engineering 
courses Red River rather than commit to a full year. 

5. Allow Army civilians and possibly officers to attend Ada courses at the 
Professional Development Center, regardless of command. 

6. Encourage Army personnel to attend other Service-sponsored or DoD- 
sponsored Ada courses as appropriate. 


30 

UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 


GLOSSARY 


ADP 

Automatic Data Processing 

AFTT 

Air Force Institute of Technology 

AFB 

Air Force Base 

AIS 

Automated Information Systems 

ATT 

Advanced Individual Training 

AJPO 

Ada Joint Program Office 

ALMC 

Army Logistics Management Center 

AMC 

Army Materiel Command 

AMEC 

Army Management Engineering College 

ANCOC 

Advanced Non-Commissioned Officer Course 

AOC 

Area of Concentration 

APSE 

Ada Programming Support Environment 

ASEET 

Ada Software Engineering Education and Training 

AWC 

Army War College 

BAOC 

Branch Automation Officer Course 

BNCOC 

Basic Non-Commissioned Officer Course 

C-E 

Communications-Elec Cronies 

CECOM 

Communications and Electronics Command 

CGSC 

Command and General Staff College 

CMF 

Career Management Field 

CREASE 

Catalogue of Resources for Education in Ada and Software 
Engineering 

CS 

Computer Science 

DoD 

Department of Defense 

DoDCl 

Department of Defense Computer Institute 

DSMC 

Defense Systems Management College 

FA 

Functional Area 

GS 

General Schedule 

ISC 

Information Systems Command 

MCCS 

Mission Critical Computer Systems 

MOS 

Military Occupational Specialty 

NPGS 

Naval Postgraduate School 

NCO 

Non-Commissioned Officer 

OR/SA 

Operations Research/Systems Analysis 

PC 

Personal Computer 

PDC 

Professional Ctevelopment Center 

R&D 

Research and Development 

SAC 

Systems Automation Course 

SC 

Signal Corps 

SDC 

Software Envelopment Center 

SEI 

Software Engineering Institute 

TDY 

Temporaiy Duty 

TTPMO 

Technical Training Program Management Officer 

USMA 

United States Military Academy 


31 

UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 


8.0 REFERENCES 


[AMB 86] Ambrose, James R., Memorandum on "Ada Programming Language," July 
31, 1986. 

[AND 88] Telephone Conversation with Jim Anderson, Col, USAF (Ret.), Teledyne 
Brown Engineering, October 4, 1988. 

[ARM 87] Army Regulation 611-201, "Enlisted Career Management Fields and Military 
Occupational Specialties," October 31,1987. 

[BEA 88] Telephone Conversation with Bob Beat, Army Management Engineering 
College, August 31, 1988. 

[CAL 88] Telephone Conversation with Mr. Calhoun, Naval Postgraduate School, 
November 15, 1988. 

[CAR 88] Telephone Conversation with LTC Caro, USA, De"“i. e Systems 
Management College, October 5, 1988. 

[CRE 88] "Catalog of Resources for Education in Ada and Software Engineering 
(CREASE), Version 5.0," April 1988. 

[CRE 86] "Catalog of Resources for Education in Ada and Software Engineering 
(CREASE), Version 4.0," May 1986. 

[DAP 86] Department of the Army Pamphlet 600-3, "Commissioned Officer 
Professional Development and Utilization," April 30, 1986. 

[DEM 88] Telephone Conversation with CPT Chris Denary, Signal Corps Computer 
Science School, September 22, 1988. 

[DEP 88] Telephone Conversation with SGT Depko, Signal Corps Computer Science 
School, September 18, 1988. 

[DOD 87a] Department of Defense, "Use of Ada in Weapon Systems," DoD Directive 
3405.2, March 30, 1987. 

[DOD 87b] Department of Defense, "Computer Programming Language Policy," DoD 
Directive 3405.1, April 2, 1987. 

[EXDD 80] Department of Defense, "Charter for the Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO)," 
December 12, 1980. 

[DOD 76] Department of Defense, "Interim List of DoD Approved Higher Order 
Programming Languages (HOL)," DoD Instruction 5000.31, November 24, 
1976. 


[ENG 88] Telephone Conversation with SGT English, Signal Corps Computer Science 
School, October 4, 1988. 


1 


33 

UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 


[FAS 88] 
[GRA 88] 
[HAT 88] 
[HOV 88] 
[NDU88] 
[OES 88] 
[O'NE 88] 
[0PM 88a] 
[0PM 88bJ 
[0PM 84] 
[OPM 80] 
[0PM 71] 
[POI 88a] 
[POI 88b] 
[POL 88] 
[ROB 88] 
[VEG 88] 


Telephone Conversation with LTC Fassett, Command and General Staff 
College, October 4, 1988. 

Telephone Conversation with Bruce Gray, U.S. Army Communications and 
Electronics Command, September 19, 1988. 

Telephone Conversation with CPT Jay Hatch, USA, U.S. Military Academy, 
October 20, 1988. 

Telephone Conversation with John Hovell, Professional Development Center, 
October 21,1988. 

National Defense University, Department of Defense Computer Institute, 
"Training Coordinators Catalog", April 1988. 

Telephone Conversation with Mark Oestmann, ALMC School for 
Engineering and Logistics, November 9,1988. 

Telephone Conversation with Don O'Neill, Software Engineering Institute, 
Octobers, 1988. 

Office of Personnel Management, "Position Classification Standard for GS- 
854, Computer Engineering Series," January 1988. 

Office of Personnel Management, "Position Classification Standard for GS- 
1550, Computer Science Series," January 1988. 

Office of Personnel Management, "Position Classification Standard for GS- 
332, Computer Operator Series," January 1984. 

Office of Personnel Management, "Position Classification Standard for GS- 
334, Computer Specialist Series," December 1980. 

Office of Personnel Management, "Position Classification Standard for GS- 
850/855, Electrical/Electronics Engineering Series," February 1971. 

"Program of Instruction for AMC Software Engineering Intern Course," 
AMC-P 690-3-16, Vol 4, Draft I, March 10, 1988. 

"Computer Technology Courses Programs of Instruction, Fiscal Year 1989," 
Army Management Engineering College, January 1988. 

Telephone Conversation with Mr. Pollard, Signal Corps Computer Science 
School, October 3, 1988. 

Telephone Conversation with CPT Robertson, U.S. Army War College, 
October 5, 1988. 

Telephone Conversation with Capt David Vega, USAF, Ada Training 
Branch, Keesler AFB, October 4, 1988. 


34 

UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 


[WIL 88] Telephone Conversation with Barbara Wilson, Software Development Center, 
Ft. Lee, November 18, 1988. 

[YUR 88] Telephone Conversation with LCDR John Yurchak, USN, Naval 
Postgraduate School, November 15,1988. 


35 

UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 


9.0 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Ada Information Clearinghouse Newsletter, "Hellfire Tactical Missile", Vol VI, No. 2, 
July 1988. 

Ada Software Engineering Education and Training Team "3rd Annual ASEET Symposium 
Proceedings," Denver, CO, June 1988. 

Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Association, "Ada Education and Training 
Study," Volume 1, July 22, 1987. 

Ausnit, Christine, Guerrieri, Ernesto, Ingwersen, Nancy and Ruegsegger, Suzanne, "U.S. 
Air Force Program Office Guide to Ada, Edition 3," SofTech, Inc. Report Number 
3451-4-010/2, December 1987. 

Carpenter, Chuck L., "Generic Target Acquisition Device" in "Proceedings of the Sixth 
National Conference on Ada Technology," March, 1988. 

Connolly, Daniel J., "An Ada Training Life Cycle Curriculum" in "Proceedings of the 
Sixth National Conference on Ada Technology," March 1988. 

Continuing Education Workshop sponsored by the Software Engineering Institute. 
Pittsburgh, PA, October 11-12, 1988. 

Department of the Army Regulation 611-101, "Commissioned Officer Classification 
System," March 1,1986. 


Department of the Army, U.S. Military Academy, "Course Notes for Software Engineering 
with Ada (EF474)", Spring 1988. 

Foreman, John and Goodenough, John, "Ada Adoption Handbook: A Program Manager's 
Guide," Software Engineering Institute Technical Report CMU/SEI-87-TR-9, May 
1987. 

Gordon, Robert and Osbum, Larry, "Army Trainer Proves Ada Works in Simulation," 
Defense Science, November 1988. 

Johnson, Albert L., "Software Engineering Education Directory," Software Engineering 
Institute Technical Report CMU/SEI-88-TR-2, January 1988. 

Iordan, Dr. Pauline R., McDonald, Catherine W,, and Schaar, Brian, "Concept Paper for 
the Development of a DoD Ada Software Engineering Education and Training 
Plan," Institute for Defense Analyses Memorandum Report M-7, November 1984. 

Kennedy, Elizabeth A., "Lessons Learned in Ada Training" in "Proceedings of the Sixth 
National Conference on Ada Technology," March 1988. 

Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Force Management and Personnel, 
"Defense Management Education and Training Catalog," June 1987. 


37 

UNCLASSIFIED 


UNCLASSIFIED 


Office of the Federal Register, "The United States Government Manual 1986/87," June 1, 
1986. 

Office of Personnel Management, "Handbook of Groups and Series of Classes," January 
1985. 

Office of Personnel Management, "Handbook 118: Qualification Standards for Positions 
Under the General Schedule," January 1985. 

Office of the Secretary of Defense, Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for 
Information Derations and Reports, "Department of Defense Selected Manpower 
Statistics, Fiscal Year 1987", August 1987. 

Rivers, Mary, Training Coordinator, Keesler AFB, MS, Telephone Conversation with 
Catherine McDonald, November 10,1988. 

Taft, Darryl K., "Last Barriers to Ada About to Fall Away," Government Computer News, 
August 1, 1988. 

Tomayko, James E., "Lessons Learned Teaching Ada in the Context of Software 
Engineering" in "Proceedings of the Sixth National Conference on Ada 
Technology," March 1988. 

Wolfe, Martin I., Ada Technology Center, Ft. Monmouth, NJ, Telephone Conversation 
with Teresa Anderson, November 8, 1988. 


38 

UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 


APPENDIX A 

ADA TRAINING COURSES FOR THE ARMY 

This appendix contains a more detailed description of the various course curricula, 
known to the authors, which are available to Army personnel. Additional courses may be 
under development or currently operational. The Army Program of Instruction (POI) was 
the primary reference, when available. In some cases, informal course outlines or 
telephone conversations form the basis of the course topics listed. These topics may 
change depending on the audience and time alloted. While every effort has been made to 
accurately reflect the course goals and objectives, the authors' interpretation may vary from 
the instuctors. 


A-1 

UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


Training Organization 


Org. Name: 
Contact: 
Address: 


AF Technical Training School, Ada Training Branch 

Mr. Pete Wilson _ 

3390 TCHTG/TTMKPA 1 


Keesler AFB 



39534-5000 


Phone: 


(601)377-31 10 


Autovon: AV 868-3110 


********************************************** 


Course Information 


Course 

Name: 

Audience: 

Lo''ation: 


Orientation to Ada Software Engineering 


Sr Exec, Mid-Up Mgrs, Proj Mgrs 


Hands-On: N 


TTC or User's Site (MTT) 


Length: |2 Days 


Prerequisites: 


None 


Topics: 


The software crisis; SE and Ada; Design Methods; 
Standards; Managing the Transition to Ada; 
SW/HW Issues; Mgmt/Training Issues; Risks and 
Benefits 


Notes or 

Special 

Concerns: 


Cost of Mobile Training Team is paid by 
requesting organization; must request space in 
annual schedule. 


A-2 

UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 


Org. Name: 
Contact: 
Address: 


Training Organization 


AF Technical Training School, Ada Training Branch 
Mr. Pete Wilson 


3390 TCHTG/TTMKPA 



Keesler AFB 

. MS 

39534-5000 


Phone: 


(601)377-31 10 


Autovon; AV 868-3110 


********************************************** 


Course Information 


Course 

Name: 

Audience: 

Location: 


Fundamentals of Ada Programming/SW Engineering 


Proj Mgr; Sys Conf Mgr; Prog; Designer Hands-On:[Y] 
TTC or User's Site (MTT) Length: 9 Days ] 


Prerequisites: 


Fundamental programming concepts knowledge; 
(Serves as Prereq for Appiication Prog Course) 


Topics: 


Fundamentals of Ada Systems; Basic Ada Types; 
Control Structures; Subprograms; Packages; 
Exceptions; Generics; Tasks; Progam Design 
using Ada; Developing SW using Ada 


Notes or 

Special 

Concerns: 


Cost of Mobiie Training Team is paid by 
requesting organization; must request space in 
annual schedule. 


A-3 

UNCLASSIFIED 


















UNCLASSIFIED 
Training Organization 


Org. Name: 
Contact: 
Address: 


Defense Systems Management College 


LTC Caro _ 

DSMC, Course Director, Mgmt SW Acq 


Ft. Belvoir 


].l^ 


22060 


Phone: 


(703) 664-5198 


Autovon: [ 


********************************************** 


Course Information 


Course 

Name: 

Audience: 

Location: 


Management of Software Acquisition 


Program Mgrs, Acquisition Mgrs 


Hands-On: 


N 


Ft. Belvoir, VA (DSMC) 


Length: 1 week 


Prerequisites: 


None 


Topics: 


Expectations; Software Engineering; Ada 
language; Transition to Ada adoption; Transition 
stages and mechanisms; Compilers; Tools and 
Environments; Risk Management (Topics for 
Ada section only) 


Notes or 

Special 

Concerns: 


Mr. Don O'Neill at the Software Engineering 
Institute teaches the module "Managing the 
Transition to Ada Adoption," a four hour block 
which is part of the "Management of Software 
Acquisition Course". He may be contacted at: 
(412) 268-7619 


A-4 

UNCLASSIFIED 



















UNCLASSIFIED 


Training Organization 


Org, Name: 
Contact: 
Address: 


AF Technical Training School, 

Ada 

Training Branch 




Mr. Pete Wilson 






3390 TCHTG/TTMKPA 


Keesler AFB 

MS 

39534-5000 


Phone: 


(601)377-31 10 


Autovon: AV 868-3110 


********************************************** 


Course Information 


Course 


Name: |Ada Application Programmer 


Audience: [Programmers; SW Engineers 


Hands-On:fYl 


Location: TTC or User's Site (MTT) 


Length: 4 Weeks 


Prerequisites: 


Knowledge of fundamental programming 
concepts: Recent experience in a high order 
language 


Topics: 


Fundamentals of Ada Systems; Scalar Types; 
Control Structures; Compposite Types: I/O; 
Subprograms: Packages; Exceptions: Private 
Types; Derived Types; Access Types: Generics: 
Tasks: Low Level Features: Designing w/Ada; SW 
Design w/Ada; Application Project 


Notes or 

Special 

Concerns: 


Cost of Mobile Training Team is paid by 
requesting organization; must request space on 
annual schedule. 


A-5 

UNCLASSIFIED 















UNCLASSIFIED 


Training Organization 


Org. Name: [Signal Corps Computer Science School 


Contact: [Capt. Mike Hunter 


Address: [SAC Coordinator, CS School 


Ft. Gordon 


GA 


Phone: 


Autovon: AV 780-3236 


*****ik**************************************** 


Course Information 


Course 


Name: [Systems Automation Course 


Audience: [info Sys Analyst; SW Eng; Config Mgr | Hands-On;[^ 


Location: Ft. Gordon, GA 


Length: 19 w, 4 d 


Prerequisites: 


BS in CS or Info Sys Eng or minor in same; 
equivalent experience: completion of 4H skill 
course 


Topics: 


Info Mgmt; Computer Security; HW/SW Operating 
Systems: Data Communications; System Design; 
Structured Programming; DBMS; Ada Systems 
Development; Life Cycle Mgmt; Acquisition 
Mgmt; Resource Mgmt 


Notes or 

Special 

Concerns: 


A-6 

UNCLASSIFIED 















UNCLASSIFIED 


Training Organization 


Org. Name: 
Contact: 
Address: 


Signal Corps Computer Science School 

Capt. Mike Hunter _ 

SAC Coordinator, CS School _ 

Ft. Gordon 1, |GA | I 


Phone: 


Autovon: |AV 780-3236 


********************************************** 


Course Information 


Course 

Name: 

Audience: 

Location: 


Branch Automation Officer Course 


Ofc or Civ needing Automation Skills Hands-On:[ y] 


Ft. Gordon, GA 


Length: |10 w, 3 d 


Prerequisites: 


Assignment to position requiring branch 
expertise first, and automation knowledge 
second. 


Topics: 


Info Mgmt: Computer Security: HW/SW Operating 
Systems: Data Communications: System Design: 
Structured Programming: DBMS: Ada Systems 
Development: Acquisition Mgmt:System Testing 


Notes or 

Special 

Concerns: 


Completion of course qualifies student tc serve 
in a position requiring automation knowledge. 
May also be used as prerequisite to Systems 
Automation Course, although this is not 
recommended. 


A-7 

UNCLASSIFIED 
















UNCLASSIFIED 


Org. Name: 
Contact: 
Address: 


Training Organization 


Software Development Center - Lee 

Barbara Wilson _ 

USAISSDCL 


Ft Lee 


].[yA] 


23801-6065 


Phone: 


804-734-4901 


Autovon: |aV 


***********************ik********************** 


Course Information 


Course 

Name: 

Audience: 

Location: 


COBOL to Ada Transition Course 


Hands-On:[Y] 


Length: 3 Weeks 


COBOL Programmers 


Ft Lee, VA 


Prerequisites: 


GS-334, COBOL programmer assigned to SDC-L; 
anticipated participation on Ada project 


Topics: 


Basic Ada concepts, emphasis on typing and 
distinctions between Ada and COBOL. Also 
covers various design methodologies used in 
software development. 


Notes or 

Special 

Concerns: 


Used to prepare ISC COBOL programmers to take 
vendor training. Includes an 8 hr self-paced CAI 
tutorial using the PLATO system, and 4 hrs of 
hands-on programming to get feel of language. 
Comparable course under development at PDC. 


A-8 

UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 


Org. Name: 
Contact: 
Address: 


Training Organization 


Army Management Engineering College 

Bob Beat _ 

AMEC 


Rock Island 



61299-7040 


Phone: 


(309)782-4041 ext 218] Autovon: rAV 793-4041 ext 218 


★ A******************************************** 


Course Information 


Course 

Name: 

Audience: 

Location: 


Ada Tasking 


Experienced Comp Prog, Comp Spec | Hands-On:[Yl 


Rock Island, IL 


Length: 3 1/2 days 


Prerequisites: 


Completion of Ada Programming Language and 
Software Engineering in Ada courses. 


Topics: 


Task specification and body; rendezvous; 
families; real-time modules; developing and 
testing real-time systems. 


Notes or 

Special 

Concerns; 


Course may be taught on site for class size of 
20-24 students. Must reserve place on annual 
schedule. 


A-9 

UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 


Org. Name: 
Contact: 
Address: 


Training Organization 


ALMC School for Engineering and Logistics 

Mark Oestmann, Dept of Eng _ 

Red River Army Depot _ 

Texarkana I . |TX | 


75507 


Phone: 


(214) 334-3335 


Autovon: AV 829-3335 


********************************************** 


Course Information 


Course 

Name: 

Audience: 

Location: 


Software Engineering Using Ada 


Engineers, Programmers 


Hands-On:fYl 


Red River Army Depot. TX ~] Length: [iSd (1Q5t^ 


Prerequisites: 


Civilians grade GS-05 to GS-07, who are 
qualified entry-level engineers in AMC, another 
Army Command, Service, or DoD 


Topics: 


Introduces the advanced programming features 
of the Ada programming language includng data 
abstraction and types, packages, generic 
program units, and input/output. 


Notes or 

Special 

Concerns: 


Course is part of two year AMC Software 
Engineering Intern Training Program. Program 
also includes four other training blocks where 
Ada is used extensively. 


I 


A-IO 

UNCLASSIFIED 

t 












UNCLASSIFIED 


Org. Name: 
Contact: 
Address: 


Training Organization 


Air Force Institute of Technology 

Capt. Will Bralick _ 

Dept of Math and Computer Science 


Wright-Patterson AFB jo-i | 


45433 


Phone: 


(513) 255-3098 


Autovon: |AV 785-3098 


*****ik*******************«******************** 


Course Information 


Course 

Name: 

Audience: 

Location: 


Concurrent Software Systems 


Programmers, Sys Analysts, Engrs | Hands-On:[ y~| 


Dayton, OH 


Length: 1 5w 


Prerequisites: 


Previous programming experience is 
recommended. 


Topics: 


Software Engineering, Design Concepts, and 
Technical Programming. Includes: real-time 
progarmming, exceptions, generics, strong 
typing, tasking, packages, abstract data types 
and problem solving. 


Notes or 

Special 

Concerns: 


Students inlude military officers and DoD 
civilian employees. Offered for graduate credit. 
Course is taught when there is sufficient 
demand. 


A-1 1 

UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 
Training Organization 


Org. Name: 
Contact: 
Address: 


Air Force Institute of Technology 


Capt. Will Braiick _ 

Dept of Math and Computer Science 


Wright-Patterson AFB | , |q-I | 


45433 


Phone: 


1(513) 255-3098 


Autovon: AV 785-3098 


********************************************** 


Course Information 


Course 

Name: 

Audience: 

Location: 


Introduction to Computer Science 


Programmers, Sys Analysts, Engrs I Hands-On:fY~] 


Dayton, OH 


Length: 10 weeks 


Prerequisites: 


No academic prerequisites. Previous 
programming experience is recommended. 


Topics: 


Exceptions, generics, strong typing, packages, 
abstract data types, and problem solving, with 
emphasis on engineering. 


Notes or 

Special 

Concerns: 


Students include military officers and DoD 
civilians. Offered for graduate credit; taught 
every semester. 


A-12 

UNCLASSIFIED 














UNCLASSIFIED 


Org. Name: 
Contact: 
Address: 


Training Organization 


Air Force Institute of Technology 
Capt. Will Bralick _ 


Dept of Math and Computer Science 


Wright-Patterson AFB | . |Q-I | 


45433 


Phone: 


(513) 255-3098 


Autovon: AV 785-3098 


********************************************** 


Course Information 


Course 

Name: 

Audience: 

Location: 


Introduction to Software Engineering with Ada 


Programmers. Sys Analysts, Engrs | Hands-On:[ y~| 


Dayton, OH 


Length: 10 weeks 


Prerequisites: 


No academic prerequisites. Previous 
programming experience is recommended. 


Topics: 


In-depth study of algorithmic problem solving, 
data structures, and software engineering. 
Covers exceptions, generics, strong typing, 
tasking, packages, abstract data types, and 
problem solving. 


Notes or 

Special 

Concerns: 


Students include military officers and DoD 
civilians. Offered for graduate credit. Course is 
taught when there is sufficient demand. 


A-13 

UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 


Training Organization 


Org. Name: 
Contact: 
Address: 


Army Management Engineering College 

Bob Beat _ 

AMEC 


Rock Island 


IK 


61299-7040 


Phone: 1(309)782-4041 ext 218| Autovon: |AV 793-4041 ext 218 




Course Information 


Course 

Name: 

Audience: 

Location: 


Ada Programming 


Comp Prog, Sys Analysts, Comp Spec Hands-On:[Y~| 


Rock Island, IL 


Length: 2 weeks 


Prerequisites: 


At least 1 year of experience in a High Order 
Language (HOL); Pascal is recommended but not 
required 


Topics: 


Subprograms, tasks, packages, types, attributes, 
objects, operators, expressions, statements, 
generics, elaboration, exceptions, I/O, 
overloading, scope, and visibility: Design 
concepts, and modular programming 


Notes or 

Special 

Concerns: 


Course may be taught on site for class size of 
20-24 students. Must reserve place on annual 
schedule. 


A-I4 

UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 


Org. Name: 
Contact: 
Address: 


Training Organization 

Army Management Engineering College 

Bob Beat _ 

AMEC 

Rock Island 1 , |lL | 


61299-7040 


Phone: 1(309)782-4041 ext 21~^ Autovon: rAV 793-4041 ext 218 


********************************************** 


Course Information 


Course 

Name: 

Audience: 

Location: 


Software Engineering in Ada 


System Developers, programmers | Hands-On;[V] 


Rock Island, IL 


Length: 1 week 


Prerequisites: 


Thorough knowledge of Ada as a Design 
Language; Completion of Ada Programming 
Course or equivalent 


Topics: 


Object oriented Design; Data flow analysis; 
Function parsing; Ada as a design language; 
Normalization of data structures; Reusability 
and packages; Testing strategies; Ada Program 
Support Environment 


Notes or 

Special 

Concerns: 


Course may be taught on site for class size of 
20-24 students. Must reserve place on annual 
schedule. 


A-15 

UNCLASSIFIED 
















UNCLASSIFIED 
Training Organization 


Org. Name: 
Contact: 
Address: 


ALMC School for Engineering and Logistics 

Mark Oestmann, Dept of Eng _ 

Red River Army Depot _ 


Phone: 


Texarkana 



75507 


(214) 334-3335 


Autovon: |AV 829-3335 


********************************************** 


Course Information 


Course 

Name: 

Audience: 

Location: 


Software Engineering Using Ada II 


Engineers, Programmers 


Hands-On:0 


Red River 


Length: |l3d (105hri| 


Prerequisites: 


Civilians grade GS-05 to GS-07, who are 
qualified entry-level engineers in AMC, another 
Army Command, Service, or DoD 


Topics: 


Completes presentation of advanced language 
features of the Ada programming language 
including record types and discriminated 
records: private types and generics: concurrency 
and tasking: and real-time considerations such 
as interrupts and pragma interface. 


Notes or 

Special 

Concerns: 


Course is part of two year AMC Software 
Engineering Intern Training Program. Program 
also includes four other training blocks where 
Ada is used extensively. 


A-16 

UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 


Training Organization 


Org. Name: |Air Force Institute of Technology 


Contact: |Capt. Will Bralick 


Address: |Dept of Math and Computer Science 


Wright-Patterson AFB | . |CH | |45433 


Phone: |(513) 255-3098 1 Autovon: |AV 785-3098 


it****it*it**1t*it**itt**1tittit*t***t******itt****t*t** 


Course Information 


Course 


Name: Advanced Software Environments 


Audience: [Programmers, Sys Analysts, Engrs | Hands-On:[Yl 


Location; Dayton, OH 


Length: 10 weeks - 


Prerequisites; 


Previous computer programming experience is 
recommended. 


Topics: 


Software Engineering, Design Concepts, 
Technical Programming, and Programming 
Support Environments. Includes real-time 
programming, tasking, packages, abstract data 
types, and problem solving. 


Notes or 

Special 

Concerns: 


Students include military officers and DoD 
civilians. Offered for graduate credit. The 
course is taught when there is sufficient 
demand. 


A-17 

UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 


Training Organization 


Org. Name: 
Contact: 
Address: 


Army Management Engineering College 

Bob Beat 


AMEC 


Rock Island 1. IlL I 61299-7040 


Phone: 


(309)782-4041 ext 21^ Autovon: |AV 793-4041 ext 218 


********************************************** 


Course Information 


Course 

Name: 

Audience: 

Location: 


Ada and Software Engineering Overview 


Prog Mgrs, Engrs, Comp Spec 


Hands-On: N 


Rock Island, IL 


Length: |1 1/2 days 


Prerequisites: 


Knowledge of software development process, 
basic computer hardware principles, and a high 
order language. 


Topics: 


Discussion of Ada language features especially 
those supporting software engineering: the 
software support environment: Intro to OOD: 
Ada programming environment: requirements for 
fully supporting Ada 


Notes or 

Special 

Concerns: 


Designed for Program Managers or Engineers who 
must decide on the applicability of Ada to their 
operational environment. Course may be taught 
on site for class size of 20-24 students. Must 
reserve place on annual schedule. 


A-18 

UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 


Training Organization 


Org, Name: |ALMC School for Engineering and Logistics 


Contact: [Mark Oestmann, Dept of Eng 


Address: [Red River Army Depot 


Texarkana 


, ITX I 175507 


Phone: 1(214) 334-3335 ~| Autovon: |AV 829-3335 


********************************************** 


Course Information 


Course 


Name: iSimulation using Ada 


Audience: [Engineers, Programmers 


Hands-On:0 


Location: Red River 


Length: |11d (90hr) 


Prerequisites: 


Civilians grade GS-05 to GS-07, who are 
qualified entry-level engineers in AMC, another 
Army Command, Service, or DoD 


Topics: 


Provides an introduction to digital simulation 
techniques and the application of the tasking 
features of the Ada progamming language as 
tools in the development and testing of 
real-time embedded computer systems 
Isoftware. 


Notes or 

Special 

Concerns: 


Course is part of two year AMC Software 
Engineering Intern Training Program. Program 
also includes four other training blocks where 
Ada is used extensively. 


A-19 

UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 


Training Organization 


Org. Name: 

ALMC School for Engineering and Logistics 



Contact: 

Mark Oestmann, Dept of Eng 



Address: 

Red River Army Depot 




Texarkana I, |TX | 75507 


Phone: 


(214) 334-3335 


Autovon: |AV 829-33^ 


****i^*****«***«**********«******************«* 


Course Information 


Course 

Name: 

Audience: 

Location: 


Advanced Microprocessors 
Engineers, Programmers 
Red River 


Hands-On: Y 


Length: 11d (90hr) 


Prerequisites: 


Civilians grade GS-05 to GS-07, who are 
qualified entry-level engineers in AMC, another 
Army Command, Service, or DoD 


Topics: 


Provides programming techniques required when 
one or more target processors is a micro. 

Special emphasis given to Ada interface with 
assembly language. Covers real-time application 
of Ada/Assembly interface techniques. 


Notes or 

Special 

Concerns: 


Course is part of two year AMC Software 
Engineering Intern Training Program. Program 
also includes four other training blocks where 
Ada is used extensively. 


A-20 

UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 


Org. Name: 
Contact: 
Address: 


Training Organization 

ALMC School for Engineering and Logistics 
Mark Oestmann, Dept of Eng _ 


Red River Army Depot 



Texarkana 

zj.m 

75507 


Phone: 


(214) 334-3335 


Autovon: |AV 829-3335 




Course Information 


Course 

Name: 

Audience: 

Location: 


Software Engineering Workshop 

Engineers, Programmers _ 

Red River 


Hands-On: Y 


Length: 14d (Il0hr] 


Prerequisites: 


Civilians grade GS-05 to GS-07, who are 
qualified entry-level engineers in AMC, another 
Army Command, Service, or DoD 


Topics: 


Consists of participation in a "large-scale" 
software development project to apply software 
engineering tools and techniques learned in 
previous courses. 


Notes or 

Special 

Concerns: 


Course is part of two year AMC Software 
Engineering Intern Training Program. Program 
also includes four other training blocks where 
Ada is used extensively. 


A-21 

UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 


APPENDIX B 

U.S. ARMY ADA PROJECTS 


This appendix includes a list of Army programs known to the authors, which are 
currently using or plan to use Ada in all or part of the system. The list was compiled from 
the current Ada Information Clearinghouse list, conversations with Ada technology 
divisions and articles in the public domain. Some active programs may have inadvertently 
been left out or the information may have changed. The authors have made every effort to 
ensure the list’s accuracy. 

Each project listed contains several pieces of information. The point of contact is 
usually either the program manager or the Army liaison to the contractor. Both civilian and 
Autovon (AV) phone numbers are given when known. A status of PL indicates a program 
in the planning phase, a DV indicates current full-scale engineering development and a C 
indicates the project is completed and operational. These status indicators, however, may 
change during the completion of this report. Several programs recently began 
development, while others are nearing completion and still others may never reach full- 
scale development due to budgetary or contractor limitations. 


B-1 

UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 


Project: 

Acronym: 

Contact: 

Phone: 

Status: 


Bradley Fighting Vehicle System 


_|, Majcom: 

Dan Nathan I 


AMCCOM 


AV 880-3585 


|DV I Location: 


Piccatinny Arsenal, NJ 


Description: 


Project: 


Troop carrier, armored fighting vehicle. Target 
acquisition components and some ballistics being done 
in Ada. 


Chemical Biological Mini Mass Spectrometer 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


CB-MMS 


Majcom: 


Bob Marenelli 


A..ICCOM 


Phone: 
Status: 


AV 880-3430 



Location: 


Piccatinny Arsenal, NJ 


Description: 


Man carriable device to detect biological or chemical 
agents in environment. Monitoring device and 
miniaturized mass spectrometer being written in Ada. 
May be cancelled in favor of Mini-Detector. 


B-2 

UNCLASSIFIED 
























UNCLASSIFIED 


Project: 

Acronym: 

Contact: 

Phone: 

Status: 

Description: 


Project: 

Acronym: 

Contact: 

Phone: 
Status: 

Description : 


Chemical Biological Mini-Detector 


CB-MD 


Majcom: AMCCOM 


Bob Marenelli 


AV 880-3430 


PL 


Location: Piccatinny Arsenal, NJ 


Man carriable device to detect biological or chemical 
agents in environment. Monitoring device being 
written in Ada. May be cancelled in favor of Mini Mass 
Spectrometer. 


Digital Turret Distribution Box 


DTDB 


Majcom: AMCCOM 


Chong Liao 


313-574-6497 


DV 


Location: 


Warren, Ml 


[Control of logic and switching functions in the Bradley 
Fighting Vehicle Weapon Station. 


B-3 

UNCLASSIFIED 




















UNCLASSIFIED 



Proiect: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Howitzer Improvement Program Auto Fire Control 
System 


HIP AFCS 
Dan Nathan 

AV 880-3585 


Majcom: lAMCCOM 


Phone: |AV 880-3585 _ 

Status: |DV | Location: iPicatinny Arsenal, NJ 

Description: Program will correct current shortcomings in four 

primary areas; responsiveness, survivability, terminal 
effects and random acesss memory. One of the 
principle components of this effort is development and 
fielding of the AFCS. Includes operator console, 
hydraulic support, and maneuver control components. 


Project: 


|M-60A3 Modified Fire Control System 


Acronym: IMFCS 

Contact: iDoo J. Lee / Dan Nathan 


Majcom: [AMCCOM 


Phone: 


AV 880-6069 / AV 880-3585 


Status: |dv | Location: jPicatinny Arsennal, NJ 

Description: The M21 Balistic Computer System of the M-60A3 tank 
fire control system is being converted from an analog 
to a digital device. This program will be used to 
provide Ada code for the upgraded M21 ballistic 
Computer System. Includes ballistic and siting 
correction modules. 


B-4 

UNCLASSIFIED 






















UNCLASSIFIED 



Project: Nuclear Biological Chemical Reconnaissance 

System 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Phone: 


Majcom: lAMCCOM 



Status: lev I Location: iPiccatinny Arsenal, NJ 

Description: [Lightweight armored vehicle to detect nuclear, 
biological or chemical agents in environment. 
Monitoring device being written in Ada. 


Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact; 


Phone; 


Search and Destroy Armor 


SADARM 



Majcom; [AMCCOM 



Status; |dv | Location: [Piccatinny Arsenal, NJ 


Description: Ammunition with sensor to improve accuracy. 


B-5 

UNCLASSIFIED 




















UNCLASSIFIED 


Project: 

Apronym: 

Contact: 

Phone: 

Status: 


Airborne Target Handover System/Avionics 
Integration _ 


ATHS/AI 


Majcom: lAVSCQM 


Robert Kanyok/John Berry 


AV 693-3653/AV 693-1929 


IDV I Location: |st. Louis, MO 


Description; 


Project: 


The Multiplex Remote Terminal Unit uses Ada for all 
functions. The Control Display Unit is a modification 
of an earlier program and uses PL/M 


Apache Multi-Stage Improvement Program 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Apache MSIP 


Majcom: 


Robert Kanyok/Julius Romano 


AVSCOM 


Phone: 

Status: 


AV 693-3653/AV 693-1971 



Location: 


St. Louis, MO 


Description: 


All new software or hardware will be requied to use 
Ada. Currently in Demonstration/Validation phase. 

RFP is being prepared. Contract is scheduled for March 
1989. 


B-6 

UNCLASSIFIED 





















UNCLASSIFIED 



Cockpit Emergency Procedures Trainer 


^ ^ Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Phone: |AV 693-3653 _ 

Status: |DV | Location: |St. Louis, 

Description: Original contractor defaulted, so under new contractor. 

All software will be written in Ada. Will be part of 
training program for the UH-60A Black Hawk 
Helicopter. 



Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Phone: 


Command Instrumentation System Trainer 


CIST 



Majcom: lAVSCOM 



Status: |dV | Location: |St. Louis, MO 


Description: The entire software package will be written in Ada, 
with the exception of a small portion dealing with I/O. 
Used as part of the UH-60A Black Hawk Helicopter 
training program. 


B-7 

UNCLASSIFIED 





















UNCLASSIFIED 



^ ^ I Project 


Acronym 

Contact 


Generic Aircraft Maintenance Management 
System 



GAMMS 


Majcom: lAVSCOM 


Fredrick H. Reed 


314-263-3653/AV 693-3653 


Status: I PL I Locati< 


St. Louis, MO 


Description: |Real-time data acquisition system. Ada will be 
required is project is developed. Current funding 
problems have resulted in no development plans at this 
time. 


Project: 


Integrated Inertial Navigation System 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Phone: 


Majcom: lAVSCOM 



Status: |DV | Location: |Ft. Monmouth, NJ 

Description: Airborne inertial navigation unit which provides 
navigational information to pilot in aircraft. 
Rewriting in Ada from Fortran; may also retest. 


B-8 

UNCLASSIFIED 


























UNCLASSIFIED 



[Light Helicopter Experimental Family 



Majcom: jAVSCOM 


Robin Sova 


Project; 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Phone: 

Status: |DV I Location: jSt. Louis 

Description: [The RFP requires the use of Ada for all software used 
in the aircraft. This includes flight control, 
navigation, communication, engine controls, controls 
and displays, fire control, etc. 


314-263-3653/ AV 693-3653 



Project: 


[Microwave Landing System 


Majcom: [AVSCOM 



Acronym: 

Contact: 


Phone: [AV 992-0032 _ 

Status: |dv | Location: [Ft. Monmouth, NJ 

Description: [Currently, the Air Force is the lead service for the 
MLS, and the Army has not yet provided funding. The 
ground equipment is all in Ada, while a commercial 
design was used for the avionics (programmed in 
Pascal under waiver). Also contact Allen Geberson, AV 
478-5502 (USAF, Ground Equipment) or Lt. Chris 
Caldwell, AV 478-8915 (USAF, Avionics 


B-9 

UNCLASSIFIED 


















Project 


Acronym 

Contact 


Miniature Global Positioning System 



MGPS (MGU 


Majcom: lAVSCOM 


Jorge Rivera/Paul Olsen 


Status: 


AV 995-3532/3912 


Location: iFt. Monmouth, NJ 


Description: Currently in the planning stages. If developed through 
a competitive or sole-source mode, will use Ada. 
However, if NDI or CFE, the language will be whatever 
is currently used. 


Project: 


OV-1 Aircraft Survivability Equipment Remote 
Terminal Unit 


Majcom: lAVSCOM 


Acronym: |ASE RTU 

Contact: Don Murdoch 


Phone: |201-544-4324 /AV 992-4324 

Status: I PL | Location: |Ft. Monmouth, NJ 




B-10 

UNCLASSIFIED 





























UNCLASSIFIED 



pV-1 Aircraft Survivability Equipment Training 



Majcom: lAVSCOM 


^ ® Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Phone: . . _ _ _ _ 

Status: |PL | Location: |Ft Monmouth, NJ 

Description: This system will add to system hardware as a 

real-time trainer/simulator. Majority of system will 
be developed in Ada. 



Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Phone: 



John Mund 


314-263-3653/AV 693-3653 


Status: IDV | Location: |St. Louis, MO 


Description: |The Map Display Generator uses a 1750A procesor 
performing chart memory management, SIBAN, bit 
interface handling, map control and perspective field 
computing. The entire software package is written in 
Ada, except those areas that are time critical, 
hardware dependent or deal with I/O. Assembly 
language will be used in these cases. 


B-11 

UNCLASSIFIED 
























UNCLASSIFIED 



Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Phone: 


[Special Operating Aircraft Remote Terminal Unit 


SOARTU 



Status: |DV j Locatio 


Description: The RTU supports MH47E and MH60K aircraft in 

initalization, I/O management and signal conditioning. 

It also has built-in testing capabilities. The entire 
software package is written in Ada, except those areas 
that are time critical, hardware dependent or deal 
with I/O. Assembly language will be used in these 


leases. 


Project: 


T-800 Engine Monitor 


Acronym: 

Contact: 

Phone; 

Status: 


Majeom: [AVSCOM 



Location: 


Description: The T-800 Engine Monitor will be selected with the 
T-800 Engine. The proposals for the T-800 are being 
evaluated. Ada is required, but the extent of usage 
will not be known until the contract is awarded. 


B-12 

UNCLASSIFIED 





















UNCLASSIFIED 


2 3 

Project: 


Acronym: 


Contact: 


Phone: 


Status: 


Description: 1 

1, 

r 

t 

C 


TACMS-lnertial Guidance Unit 


Majcom: lAVSCOM 


TACMS IGU 


William Gilbert 


AV 746-8311 



Location: |Redstone Arsenal, AL 



UH-60 Multi-Stage Improvement Program 



UH-60M 


Jim Maguire 


AV 885-4315 


Majcom: [AVSCOM 


St. Louis, MO 


It is unknown if Ada will be used until the Avionics 
subcontractor is selected. 


B-13 

UNCLASSIFIED 



































Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Phone: 


lUH-eOA Black Hawk Composite Trainer 



Majcom: lAVSCOM 



Status: |c | Location 


Description: Trainer's computer system control actual aircraft 

systems, as well as simulation of other non-installed 
systems. System was integrated at Ft. Rucker, AL and 
is currently in use full-time. Additional contact: 
Robert Gordon, Program Manager for the Trainer, 
Validity Corp. 


Project: 


INoncommunications Jammer 2000 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Phone: 


Majcom: lAVSCOM 



Status: |dv | Location: |Ft Monmouth, NJ 

Description: [Operational program exists to develop, fabricate, and 
demonstrate a radar jammer capable of protecting 
against current and future threat radiators. Being 
non-vehicle specific, the project has applicability to 
all services. Ada will be both the design language and 
the operational language. 


B-14 

UNCLASSIFIED 


















UNCLASSIFIED 


Project; 


Acronym: 

Contact: |AI Kerecman 

Phone: |201-544-2957 

Status: |PL | Location 

Description: Software shall be developed or designed in Ada for the 
X.25 protocol. All X.25 required functions at the 
Datalink (frame) and Network (packet) level will be 
designed in Ada using the selected Ada-based design 
language. 


Project: 



Acronym: 

Contact: 


Phone: [AV 992-1296 _ 

Status: |dv | Location: iFt. Monmouth, NJ 

Description: I Being developed in Ada, in-house. 


UNCLASSIFIED 






















UNCLASSIFIED 


2 9 


3 0 


Project: 

Acronym: 

Contact: 

Phone: 

Status: 

Description: 


Aavanced Field Artillery Tactical Data Systems 


AFATDS 


Majcom: CBDQM 


Chris Barnett 


405-351-2621 


|DV I Location: |Ft Sill, OK 


AFATDS will be the automated command and control 
system which is intended to serve as both a 
subordinate system and objective control element of 
the fire support functional system. It will replace 
TACFIRE. 


Project: 

Acronym: 
Contact: 

Phone: 

Status: 

Description: 


Advanced Quicklook Elint TDOA 


Majcom: CECOM 


Genap Dada 


AV 992-1296 


DV 


Location: 


Ft. Monmouth, NJ 


B-16 

UNCLASSIFIED 

f 






























UNCLASSIFIED 



B-17 

UNCLASSIFIED 




















UNCLASSIFIED 



Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Phone: 


Army Test Program Set Support Environment 


ATSE 



Majcom: ICECOM 



Status: |DV I Location: |Ft Monmouth, NJ 

Description: To provide an interactive, automated environment for 
Test Program Set (TPS) development and management 


Project: 


Acronym: 
Contact: 


Phone: 



Status: |dV | Location: iFt. Monmouth, NJ 


Description: Communication system providing decentralized CEOI 

functions for single and frequency hopping information. 
Not currently using Ada, but future improvements will 
given adequate funding. 


B-18 

UNCLASSIFIED 





















UNCLASSIFIED 


Project: 

Acronym: 

Contact: 

Phone: 

Status: 

Description: 

Project: 

Acronym: 

Contact: 

Phone: 

Status: 

Description: 



I PL I Location: Ft. Monmouth, NJ _ 

Scheduled to be done in Ada. Contractor disputing time 
feasibility, increasing time and cost factors. 



|dV I Location: [Ft. Monmouth, NJ 

Intelligence system which aids in jamming 
communication lines and preventing identification of 
signal origination. 


B-19 

UNCLASSIFIED 






















UNCLASSIFIED 


7 


Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 

Phone: 

Status: 



Description: 


8 


Project: 


Firefinder II addresses specific shortcomings of the 
current Firefinder radar acquisition systems used by 
Army and Marine units. Currently receiving ATIP 
money to investigate advantages of Ada in the Tacfire 
portion of system. Funding for eventual recode is still 
questionable. 


Forward Entry Device 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


FED 


Majcom: 


Milt Smith 


CECOM 


Phone: 

Status: 


405-351-2554 


DV 


Location: Ft Sill, OK 


Description: 


Software division is providing support to contractor 
developing code in Ada. Following all 2167A 
guidelines. Will interact with the AFATDS program. 
Uses standard ACS hardware. 


B-20 

UNCLASSIFIED 
















UNCLASSIFIED 


Project: 

Acronym: 

Contact: 

Phone: 

Status: 

Description: 


Project: 

Acronym; 

Contact: 

Phone: 

Status: 

Description: 



Location: |Ft Sill, OK 


Simulates target acquisition for use in testing other 
sensor devices and systems. All code is written in 
Ada. Occassionally modified for different test beds. 


Intermediate Forward Test Equipment 


IFTE 


Majcom: CECCM 


R. Burchacki 


201-532-3362 


|DV I Location: |Ft Monmouth, NJ 


System software to include the Run time System 
Software, on ATLAS compiler, simulation software, 
and maintenance, self-test, diagnostic software. 


B-21 

UNCLASSIFIED 




















UNCLASSIFIED 


4 1 


Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 

Phone: 

Status: 


Joint Surveillance, Target Acquisition, 
Reconasaince System-DGSM _ 


JSTARS-DGSM 


Majcom: 


Genap Dada 


CECOM 


AV 992-1296 



Location: 


Ft. Monmouth, NJ 


Description: 


\ 2 


Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Ada is required as part of the contract award. 


Maneuver Control System Program 


MCS _ 

Salvatore LaForgia 


Majcom: 


CECOM 


Phone: 

Status: 


201-684-7647 


IDV I 


Location: 


Ft Monmouth, NJ 


Description 


Army Command and Control System which uses 
transportable computers & tactical communication 
systems to send, process, & display combat data to 
support commanders & staffs at corps & subordinate 
echelons. Provides current info & decision aids in text 
& graphics to support timely reports. 


t 


B-22 

UNCLASSIFIED 


I 






















UNCLASSIFIED 



^ Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Mobile Automated Field Instrumentation System 


MAFIS 
Hubert Bahr 


Majcom: 



Phone: 


817-288-9308 


Status: |DV | Location: iFtHood, TX 


Description: Allows for real time monitoring of two sided 

mechanized combat where weapon engagements are 
simulated. Only the Command and Control Subsystem 
of MAFIS is being written in Ada. 


Project 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Phone: 


Status: |DV | Location: |Ft. Monmouth, NJ 

Description: Ada is primary development language, except where 
faster processing requires the use of assembly 
language. 



B-23 

UNCLASSIFIED 



















UNCLASSIFIED 



Multiple Launch Rocket System Fire Direction 
System Ada Conversion 



MLRS FDS 


Majcom: ICECOM 


Gene Crostle 


AV 639-6950 


Ft. Sill, OK 


Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Phone: 


Original system written in assembly type language on 
now obsolete hardware. Recode will use standard ACS 
hardware. System consists of fire control system 
which communicates with fire direction system at the 
Platton, Company, and Battalion levels. 


Net Control Station - JTIDS 



NCS-J 


Majcom: jCECOM 



Status: |dv I Location: jFt. Monmouth, NJ 


Description: Manned control station, performs secure network 

communication assignments. Will also be used by the 
Air Force. Entire system is in Ada. 


B-24 

UNCLASSIFIED 



























UNCLASSIFIED 


Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Phone: 


Net Planning Program 



Majcom: ICBXM 



Status: PL Location: |Ft. Monmouth, NJ 

Description: Communications Security key management system; 

under contract negotiation currently. Will use Ada for 
all development 



Majcom: ICECCM 


Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact; 


Phone: [aV 992-7940 _ 

Status: |C | Location: I Ft Monmouth, NJ 

Description: RN software provides automated functions on a 

distributed basis for the RN HF radio communication 
system 




-25 

UNCLASSIFIED 





















UNCLASSIFIED 



® Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Phone: 


Remote Relay/AEB Repeater 



Majcom: ICBXM 



Status: |DV | Location: |Ft. Monmouth, NJ 


Description: Being developed in Ada, in-house. Communications link 
system. 


Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Phone: 



Status: |DV | Location: |Ft. Monmouth, NJ 

Description: [Automated tactical record traffic monitor; receives 
and transmits messages. Will also be used by the Air 
Force. 


B-26 

UNCLASSIFIED 


















UNCLASSIFIED 


5 1 


Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 

Phone: 

Status: 


Single Subscriber Terminal (AN/UGC-144) 


SST 


Majcom: ICECOM 


Jim Wagner 


AV 992-5848 


|DV I Location: I Ft. Monmouth, NJ 


Description 


5 2 


Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 

Phone: 

Status: 


Description 


Single channel satellite terminal used for classified 
communications. Will allow real-user to prepare 
messages at PC-iike keyboard for use with JINTACS 
(interoperability network). Entirely in Ada. 


Tactical Communications Jammer-A Bluejay 


TACJAM-A 


Majcom: CECOM 


Genap Dada 


AV 992-1296 


[d7 


Location: iR. Monmouth, NJ 


Mobile Forward Area Jamming capability to support 
Division and Corps combat operations. Use of Ada stil 
in question because of time constraints and lack of 
compilers for faster signal processors. 


B-27 

UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 


Project: 

Acronym: 

Contact: 

Phone: 

Status: 

Description 


Project: 

Acronym: 

Contact: 

Phone: 

Status: 

Description 


US Army Europe Tactical Command System 


UTACCS 


Majcom: 


Frank Nissen 


CECOM 


201-532-2970 


|dv I Location: 


Ft Monmouth, NJ 


System supports operation of the Army's Echelons 
Above Corps in message composition, routing and 
storage. System supports communications through 
Army Tactical Data System and on LANS. 


Vehicle Magnetic Signature Duplicator 


VEMASID 


Majcom: CECOM 


Stephan Schaedel 


703-664-5787 


PL 


Location: Ft Belvoir, VA 


The VEMASID program is an electric countermeasure 
system designed to assist in neutralizing magnetic 
landmines. Monitors system status, performs built-in 
tests, and relays messages to operator. Converts 
assembly code to Ada. 


B-28 

UNCLASSIFIED 

















UNCLASSIFIED 


Project; 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Army Worldwide Military Command and Control 
Systems (WWMCCS) Information System 


AWIS _ 

ILTC Dick Delanev 


Majcom: ISC 


Phone: 


968-1266 


Status: iDV | Location: 


Description: Will provide complete command and control system 

Army wide. Modules include; mobilization, movement 
management, operations, engineering, intelligence, 
communication, and command level information 
management. Entering detailed design phase early in 
1989. 


Project: 


Combat Service Support Control System 


Acronym: ICSSCS 

Contact: ISrenda Blew/Roy Matson 


Majcom: |ISC 


Phone: 


AV 687-4839/ AV 992-8201 


Status: |DV | Location: |Ft Lee. VA/Ft. Monmouth, NJ 

Description: One of five nodes of overall command and control 
system. Tracks personnel, supplies, other support 
areas. 


B-29 

UNCLASSIFIED 















UNCLASSIFIED 


Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Phone: 


Department of the Army Information Network 


DAIN 


LTC Bailev 


703-355-7229/7230 



Status: |DV | Location: |Ft. Belvoir, VA 

Description: (dain is an information network to support decision, 
administrative and operating needs for HQ DA and 
selected FOAs. Will provide full-range of 
communications, processing and storage services 
including: data, text, image, voice and graphics. The 
use of Ada will be based on evaluations made during 
the definition and design phase. 



B-30 

UNCLASSIFIED 


I 
















UNCLASSIFIED 



C Q 

Project: Reserve Component Automation System 


Acronym: 

Contact: 

Phone: 

Status: 


Description: [Personnel, Pay, Mobilization, Training, Unit Admin 
System for the Army National Guard. Since system 
was mandated by Congress, Ada not specified. 

However, expected to be factor in prime selection. RFP 
has not yet been released. 



Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Phone: 


Standard Army Retail Supply System - Master 
Control Program 


SARSS-MCP 


Majcom: |ISC 



Status: |DV | Location: [Ft Lee, VA 


Description: Master control system done in Ada; controls execution 
of two major comonents on Corps level computer. Will 
be operatorless system. Performing test, analysis and 
control. 


B-31 

UNCLASSIFIED 
















UNCLASSIFIED 


6 1 


Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Standard Financial System Redesign 


STANFINS-R 
Charles Petefish 


Majcom: 


ISC 


Phone: 

Status: 

Description: 


6 2 

Project: 

Standard Installation Division Personnel System 
Version 3.0 






Acronym: 

SIDPERS-3 Majcom: ISC 





Contact: 

LTC Ron Reed 


AV 699-3143 


PL I Location: [Ft Ben-Harrison, Tn 


STANFINS-R is a redesign of a general accounting 
module, including cost accounting, cost accounting 
standards, and budget execution functions. 


Phone: 

Status: 

Description: 


703-325-6950 


PL 


Location; 


Alexandria, VA 


The SIDPERS-3 is a total army field personnel support 
system performing field strength mgmt and accounting 
from individual to entire DA. Present system is in 
three sections. Guard, Reserve and Active. SIDPERS-3 
will combine sections. 


B-32 

UNCLASSIFIED 

J 























UNCLASSIFIED 



Project: Total Army Authorization Document-Redesign 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Phone: 



TAAD-R 


Majcom: |ISC 



Status: I PL | Location: |Ft. Belvoir, VA 

Description: [1/5 of system will be in Ada 


Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Phone: 



FMPS 


Capt John Comer 


205-876-4905 


Majcom: IMICOM 


Status: |DV | Location: iRedstone Arsenal, AL 

Description: |Processes data to control the FMPS functions which 
include autotracking a target, ranging or designation 
with the laser, and reponding to manual sightline 
control commands from the gound. 





















UNCLASSIFIED 



Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 

Phone: 

Status: 


Forward Area Air Defense Non-Line-Of-Sight 
System 



FAAD-NLOS 


Majcom: IMICOM 



Location: iRedstone Arsenal, AL 


Description: Currently under contract evaluation 


Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Phone: 



Fonward Area Defense Command, Control and 
Intelligence System 



FADC2I _ 


Col Taylor/ Dana Willbanqs 


1205-895-3441/3780 


Majcom: IMICOM 


Status: |DV | Location: IRedstone Arsenal, AL 


Description: |Low to Medium altitude system to provide data on air 
targets to ground crews manning gun stations. 
Currently in preliminary design phase, using Ada PDL. 
Will be done completely in Ada. 


B-34 

UNCLASSIFIED 











































UNCLASSIFIED 


Project: 


Acronym: 

Contact: 


Radio Frequency Interferometer 


RFI _ 

James Mullins 


Majcom: 


MICOM 


Phone: 

Status: 

Description: 


Project: 

Acronym: 

Contact: 


lAV 746-1426 
|dv I Location: 


Redstone Arsenal, AL 


Robotized Wire Harness Assembly System 


RWHAS _ 

Mike Anderson 


Majcom: 


MICOM 


Phone: 

Status: 

Description: 


I205-876-9954 
|c I Location: 


Redstone Arsenal, AL 


Ada SA/V in RWHAS is a batch program called the Data 
Generator(DG). It provides a link between a CAD wire 
harness program & the CAM RWHAS by automatically 
producing data used by robots to manufacture a wire 
harness. It uses multiple file I/O to get wire 
connector, tooling info. Fully Flexible Manufacturing 
System. 


B-36 

UNCLASSIFIED 


t 




















UNCLASSIFIED 


APPENDIX C 

UNIVERSITIES TEACHING ADA 


This appendix inciudes a list of 195 universities that the authors know are teaching 
software engineering and/or Ada. References for this information include Version 5.0 of 
the CREASE and the Software Engineering Institute's (SEI) Software Engineering 
Education Directory, January 1988. This database is constantly changing and updates may 
be obtained from the Ada Software Engineering Education and Training (ASSET) Team. 


C-1 

UNCLASSIFIED 






Universities Teaching Ada 


UNCLASSIFIED 




U) 


£ 
3 

a 

^ ° 

o 


c <x> 

X 

o o 
C/) CD 

,&|Q 
'q £ 0. 


o> •§ 
.£ < 

I « 

i s. 

w <0 

O 

Q. S 

C 0} 

B g 

I I 

« < 


a. 


CO 

I 


« 2 

.. </) 

o 




3 

o 
E Q.^ 

O 9 
O Q 


I* 

a 

o 

c 

(0 

> 

*a 

< 


£ 

O) 

c 


<D 

5 

(0 

> 

< 

£ 


^ I s 

O 2 00 


? 

(0 

(A 

§,? 
§ E 
? E 
<c 2 
-* §* 

« £ 
> 

.5 (0 
« ■© 
5 

2 « 
< 


£ 

(Q 

£ 

O) 

c 


00 


« oo 

it® 

m O C 
2 0® 
^ o 
O ® 

^ o 

(/) o S 


*0 

c 

(0 «. 
c 

® o 

I ^ 

® £ 
V 0) 

s > 

(J 4> 

s.° 

CO qj 

•5 I 

E I 

O o 
u. (/) 


<B < 

® g> 
o - 

(S 3 
w. 

CO C 
> O) 
£ ‘Si 
* 4> 
O 




a 

E 

o 

O 


! 


«5 

w 

s 

1,1 

9 

O 

c 

o ® 

£ tf) 


lo « 
o e 
> 


O) 

c 

E 

E 

<0 

o 


< a 


5 

< 

? 

<Q 

o> 

c 

E 

E 

<0 





o 

r»- 

CO 





CM 

CO 

o> 

in 

«?> 

00 

iO 

CD 


O) 

(?) 

rsv 


CO 

o 

o 


a> 

m 

00 


oQ V !5 
^ £ w 

2|l 

a E « 
9 O if 
QUO 


= "D 

§ 

E w 
E CO 

w! (/) 

0> 9 

2 CO 

S “ S. 

3 ® 2 * 

c 5 ™ 

c o 2> 
I O c ^ 
O JS 


S 

£> 

w 

9 


< 

CL 

oO ^ 

5 2 


5 § 


C 

9 

Sc 

w ® 

£ E 

I- 

E a 
o ® 
o o 


£ 

O) 

3 

o 

w 

s 

<5 

o 

CO 


8 

c 

® 

r) 

CO c a 

w ® < 
® ^ 

3 r- O 
a J 5 CD 
E a ^ 

o ® o 

o Q a. 


o 

2 ® 
^ *0 
CO < 


i_ 


o 

c 

«_ ® 
O o 
- CO 
c 

p £ 

as g- 
Q. E 
® o 
Q O 


® 

I 

® "o 
•a m 

J. ca 


(A 

E ® 

II 

< 3 


E 

£ C 

?! s, 

1=1 

m u 


CO n 

o E c 

> 3 E 

S « .t 

3 < m 


c 

« 3 

® X 

1^ 

3 < 


>. 

.tS ® 
2 6 
® ® 
> ^ 
c ® 
3 < 


•SC® 

2 9 E 
9^9 
> 3 

c o J2 

3 CO < 


(A 

® ® 
> 

c 2 
3 < 


9 _ 

® JC 
> <A 

c JS 

3 < 


CO .r 

S 5 

o > 
c c 
< 3 


9 

Q. (/} 

9 ® 
<A > 

5 C 

< 3 


• ii o 

0) ^ E 

m O ™ 

2 g a 


C.2 

UNCLASSIFIED 






































































UNCLASSIFIED 







































































































































UniVL;rsiliKS Teaching Ada 


UNCLASSIFIED 


C 

CO 

O) 

UJ 


CD 

$ 

< 


■g, 


2*1 
d CD 


E 

CJ) 

0 ) 


h 

M 




! CO 
1*0 


! 0) 

i 

<0 
I «0 

\l 

I CD 


a 

£ 

o ® 

o O o 
a £ § 

® J2 G 

Q 2 (/) 


< 

C3) 

c 

(/5 


o 

c 

o 

U1 S O 

I 8. o 

i. 1 ^ 

>•^0 0 

(/) O (/) 


® o 

O < 
<0 < 
^ Q 

® a. 
! S. 3 

lO lU 


o 

c 

«- (D 

o o 

— CO 

ll 

<0 O. 

a E 

d) o 
Q O 




a 

E 

<3 


Q. $ 

a o 


> 

C «- 

3 O 

o ® 9* 

in > ® 

^ < o 




<o 


O) 


o 

13 C 

!?■ E -o 

1 i ^ ” 

10 0 3 


o cn oD 


CO 


<x> 

p ^ 

o ^ 

CL O) 


I O) tT 

ii5 g] 

la? 
E cNj 


9 


O) >. 
2 CO 
0. 

^ p 

§1 
> ™ 
■o 5 

< DC 
^ oil 


E 

E 

Q 

05 

< T3 

^ ® 
O O 

c 


i < 


i c 
1-g. 
lUJ 


c 

o 

CO 


o> 

c 

UJ 


® .2 

•S c 

< Ui 


£ 

I’i 

E O) 
E .£ 
5 ® 

O) ® 

O C 

£ g> 
E o 


■il 

^ CM < 


U) u> 

S .E 

9 S> 
(S 0) 
C C 

Ui 5> 
c c 
UJ LU 

9 9 
(0 ra 

II 

"o o 
CO CO 
cIl 


i-S 
1 ^ 
< 


! o 

9 


« =0 
E £ 

52 

O ^ 


O Q O 


J 
E ° 

5 ? 
^ I 

£ tS 

nj 

5 '^1 


4> 


T5 ^ 
C 

ns ^ d> 

O CT ™ 

.O' rtj 5 
(A 3 c: 
© O' o 

Q E 

<v 


-S ^ 

3 © 


■B - 
Jo .2 

I s 

I o 


"D 3 

© E 


© 
O' 

E 5 


S Q cb 

flO o O 


_® _ 

■o © ^ 
[O .9 ^ 

£ 3 '© 

^ c © 

-o o .2 

E © c 
UJ < D 


IP 

111 


o oi 
o 

« o 


« p o 

I 51 
^ I « 

u- ^ H 


co - 
© 

II 

■2 c 

u. 3 


.© 

® © 
© o> 
CL © 

^ O 
CO O 


c 

© 

O 

o © 
“O 

> 'w 

c o 

3 u. 


© 

? 1 

ll 


o,.| 
O 3 
to © 

w 5 

< W 


l<^ 


U) 


«o 


c-s 

UNCLASSIFIED 












































































































































































































UNCLASSIFIED 



f 


C-9 

UNCLASSIFIED 


9 6 Saginaw Software Design and Science 357 University Michigan 48710 Katherine Kerr 

University Development 2250 Pierce Road Center 













































































UNCLASSIFIED 



C-10 

UNCLASSIFIED 


I 


































































110 Montclair State 1-Programming Languages Dept of Upper Montclaii New Jersey 07043 Carl Bredlau 201-693-4263 

College 2-Programming Langauges Math/Computer 

Design Science 


UNCLASSIFIED 



f 


C-ll 

UNCLASSIFIED 














































































UNCLASSIFIED 









































UNCLASSIFIED 



Carnegie Mellor Soltwafe Engineering Deparlment of PiMsburgh Pennsylvania 15213 Dr. Nico Habermann 412-268-2592 

Computer Science 




















































UNCLASSIFIED 



C-14 

UNCLASSIFIED 


r 

















































UNCLASSIFIED 



I 


C-15 

UNCLASSIFIED 


































































1 


UNCLASSIFIED 



C-16 

UNCLASSIFIED 















































UNCLASSIFIED 


o 

O 

o 

<o 

CM 

o 

CM 

CM 


CO 

V 


00 

00 

h* 

lO 

CM 

m 


CO 



o> 


o 

o 

o 

tn 

(O 

CO 

*« 

2 

c 

o 

r 

ca 



I 


-c 

<Q 

QC 

o 

c 

<0 

^(55 

3 ^ 



•= CO 

O 

CD 

< o 


CO 

CO 

o 

«A 


o 

CM 


Oi 

a 

CO 

Oi 

<3* 

CM 


Mr 



CM 


CO 


r***. 

CO 

in 

o> 

CO 

CO 

GO 

CM 

o> 

CO 


CO 




•M- 

•M* 

o 

O 

O 

CO 

CO 

CO 


n 

2 

CQ 1 

a 

.2 

’c 

c 

c 

c 

c 

*5) 

O) 

’5) 

C7) 

O) 

w 

w 

•i: 1 

w 

w. 

> 

> 

> i 

> 

> 





® 





*5 





(0 





® 


c 




X 

o 

JO 

if 

Q 

ffl 

Q. 

o 

O 


»«• 

1 £ 



1 ® 

<0 

<Q 

o 

o 

If 

u. 

\t 

!Z 

z 

o 


5 o •§ «) 

5 -5 i I 

2 « 
I.? ■o o 

« 1 5 


o > 

^ ® o 

350 

& I S 

O O cvj 


m .£ 

I sl 

5 8.ui 

els 

Q O 


J|„ 

Q. o .2 
® — o 
Q ■£ CO 


V O 

« 5 g 

"9 E I 

? '2 ^ 
LU £ CO 


C CT W 0> 
O C C 

5 E E 
-o E!: E 

o 2 .2 2 
•s CT 5 o> 


<?-sI s 

>- < CM Q-lco a. 


Hampton 

University 

Norfolk State 
University 

Old Dominion 
University 

University of 
Virginia 

Eastern 

Washington 

University 

Goruaga 

University 

Alderson 

Braddice 

College 

9 

s 

® 

JC 

o 

9 

CO 

Marshall 

University 

West Virginia 
College of 
Graduate 
Studies 

West Virginia 
Institute of 
Technology 

00 

CO 

00 

00 

10 

00 

<0 

00 

00 

00 

00 

a» 

00 

O 1 

at ' 

A 

CM 

o> 


C-17 

UNCLASSIFIED 

















UNCLASSIFIED 


APPENDIX D 

U.S. ARMY PERSONNEL STRUCTURE 
1.0 INTRODUCTION 

The personnel structure of the U.S. Army is best understood by making a 
generalization: there are essentially two armies, both managed through the Department of 
the Army (DA). The first army consists of all the active duty officers and enlisted 
personnel whose primary job is to defend the United States, either directly or in a support 
role. The active duty army is broken down further into locations, such as the 5th Army, 
Washington and the 8th Army, Korea. Within these smaller armies, each soldier is 
assigned to one of 15 branches, which include both combat branches, such as Infantry, 
Armor, and Artillery, and support branches such as the Signal Corps, Adjutant General 
Corps, and the Medical Corps. The second army consists primarily of civilian personnel 
who are responsible for managing and developing the tools and means by which the first 
army operates. 

2.0 ENLISTED PERSONNEL STRUCTURE 

Entrance into a certain enlisted field in the Army is determined by personal requests. 
Army needs, and scores on a military aptitude test. This exam evaluates the applicant's 
ability in a variety of areas including electronic and mechanical reasoning, verbal ability, 
and perceptual speed. Based on these scores, a soldier may be rated as technical or non¬ 
technical and is matched to job fields within that classification. The soldier then attends 
basic milita^ training, as well as any specialized school or Advanced Individual Training 
(AIT) required by the career field. Upon completion of technical training, the soldier 
begins to serve in that career field. 

The primary job identification for enlisted personnel is known as a Military 
Occupational Specialty (MOS) code. This code identifies the Career Management Field 
(CMF) of the soldier, as well as the specific job duties within that field. Each field is given 
a distinct two digit number. Based on the soldier’s specialized training, this number is 
followed by an alphabetic character which determines the actual job b^eing performed. 
Together this three character alpha-numeric code is known as the MOS. (See Figure D-1) 

In order to further identify skill levels within a given MOS, the code for a particular 
job position includes two more digits after the MOS code. Initially, the soldier is 
designated a trainee, until sufficient exjjerience in the career field has been achieved. At 
this point, the soldier will be given the basic code for his field, with the level designation of 
10, which is the most basic level. Through successive assignments and additional 
schooling, enough experience is gained to progress to level 20. The tasks here become 
more complex, and require additional knowledge in the field. Upon designation as a level 
30, the duties become more supervisory in nature. Likewise, at level 40, the 
responsibilities involve supervision as well as developing plans, and making training 
recommendations. Most career fields culminate at level 50, as a senior non-commissioned 
officer (NCO). 


D-1 


UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


Position Requirements Codes (Enlisted Personnel) 


2 Characters 
(Numeric) 

1 Character 
(Alpha) 

2 Characters 
(Numeric) 

Area of primary 
skill or area of 
expertise that 
is required to 
perform main 
duties of this 
position 

Special skills 
or areas of 
expertise 
within main 
position 
specialty 

Skill level that 
is required to 
perform main 
duties of this 
position 

Career Management 
Field (2 Characters) 

Job Designator 
(1 Character) 

Military Occupational Specialty 
(3 Characters) 

Experience Level 
(2 Characters) 

Position Code (5 Characters) 


Figure D-1 


Some career fields allow for substitution into other related career fields, based on 
similar training requirements and experience. Substitutions are determined within each 
field. In addition to the opportunity to serve in a secondary career field, the soldier may 
also be selected to attend additional military or civilian training to preofl’’'* him for additional 
responsibilities. 

2,1 Automatic Data Processing (CMF 74) 

All enlisted personnel in computer reiated an n the automatic data 

processing (ADP) field. The ADP field (CMF 74) provides support for systems analysis, 
programming, computer and auxiliary equipment operation and coding data for use with 
punched cards, magnetic tapes and disks. These personnel are used in data processing 
units as well as elements of personnel, finance, communications, supply, and similar 
organizations. 

After initial training, ADP personnel proceed to one of two areas of specialty: 
Computer/Machine Operator (74D) or Programmer/Analyst (74F). Duties of the operator 
include: performing system initialization and administration procedures, correcting 
equipment stoppages, maintaining magnetic media library, mounting and unmounting tapes 
and disks, and other maintenance activities as needed. The programmer/analyst prepares, 
analyzes, edits and tests computer programs. The 74F also conducts data system studies 
involving investigation, evaluation and development of data processing systems for a 
specific subject area. 

After sufficient experience, the NCO may be selected to attend the Senior NCO 
Academy, in preparation for receiving more responsibility. Upon satisfactoiy completion, 
the enlisted person is moved to a supervisory position. The duties remain fairly consistent, 
but include more inspection, security, evaluation, and review tasks. Both ADP areas lead 
to the senior position of Data Processing NCO (74Z). Responsibilities at this level include 


D-2 


UNCLASSIFIED 














UNCLASSIFIED 


supervising systems analysis, programming, machine operations, security of automated 
data systems, and related activities. Duties ^so include determining personnel, equipment, 
and supply requirements, establishing and providing instruction in procedures and 
standards, and serving as liaison for activities support or supporting data processing 
systems activities. 

3.0 OFFICER CORPS STRUCTURE 

When an officer receives a commission in the Army, it is specified in which of the 
15 branches he/she will serve, with each branch having a specific, ^stinct combat mission. 
This becomes the primary area of specialty for that officer, and is designated with a two 
digit code. Within each branch are specialized areas of concentration (AOC), similar to the 
MOS code given to an enlisted member. The three character code is Imown as the officer's 
primary specialty, and will be the main training area. (See Figure D-2) 


Position Requirement Codes (Officer Corps) 


2 Characters 
(Numeric) 

1 Character 
(Alpha) 

2 Characters 
(Numeric) 

2 Characters 
(Alpha-Numeric) 

2 Characters 

(Alpha/Alpha- 

Numerici 

Branch/FA of 
primary skill 
or area of 
expertise that 
is required to 
perform main 
duties of this 
position 

Special skills 
or areas of 
expertise 
within main 
position 
specialty 

Branch/FA of 
secondary 
skill or area of 
expertise that 
is required to 
perform main 
duties of this 
position 

Skill Code 

Language 
skill or a 
second skill 
requirement 

Area of Concentration 
(3 Characters) 

Enter 00 if not 
required 

Optional Designations 

Position Code (5 Characters) 



Figure D-2 


Dependent on its mission, a branch may or may not have associated fields of 
specialization called functional areas (FA). The functional area code is two digits, and is 
used both to identify an officer’s training, and to specify a position's requirements. 
Functional areas may also have AOCs themselves, as well as skills. (See Figure D-3) To 
refine requirements and training even further, some AOCs may have associated skills. 
These are indicated by a two character code, a digit followed by a letter. Some skills are 
applicable to more than one area of concentration, so their use is not limited to a distinct 
area. 


D-3 

UNCLASSIFIED 















UNCLASSIFIED 


Branch 


Officer Designation Code Structure 

-► Area of — 
Concentration 


►Functional 
Area 


Figure I>-3 


•Skills 





Note: To read this chart, start at the left, and follow the arrows to the right side. When the line branches, 
either path can be taken. The areas below the main line indicate a part of the structure which is not 
required, but may be used for more detail if needed. 

After commissioning, an officer's first assignment will be to the Officer Basic 
Course (OBC), oriented toward the specific branch. This course trains the officer in 
general milita;ty areas such as leadership, military justice, weapons and tactics, as well as 
general training for their specific branch. The purpose of this course is to prepare the 
officer for his first assignment as a troop commander. After OBC, the officer may attend 
additional training prior to receiving the first branch assignment, where he/she will get 
experience both in the branch area and in leading troops. 


After one or two field assignments, most officers return to their branch school and 
attend the Officer Advanced Course (OAC). The course provides preparation for 
assignments at command and staff levels, with emphasis on planning and decision making. 
Prior to the tenth year of service, all officers are ^so required to complete the Combined 
Arms and Services Staff School (CAS3). 


Once an officer has served at least two assignments in the primary branch and has 
attended the OAC, the officer may apply to become branch qualified. This designation 
certifies that the officer has the experience and training necessary to serve as a company 
grade officer within that branch. Usually a combination of troop leadership and technical 
expertise is the minimum prerequisite for qualification. Individual areas of concentration 
may also require completion of advance training courses or a graduate degree program in 
order to be qualified. 

During this time, the officer may also serve in a branch independent assignment. 
These assignments include serving as a Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC) or U.S. 
Military Academy (USMA) instructor, a recruiter, or as an inspector general. These 
positions are designated "branch immaterial" because they require general Army knowledge 
and are not related to any one branch or functional area. 

At the seven year point, each officer must spc'^ify what career path he would prefer 
to follow: single track or dual track. The single track option permits the officer to remain 
in his branch and specialize in at least two areas of concentration within that branch. 
Similarities between each branch’s AOCs may result in suggested pairings of specialization 
and training. Those officers who choose to dual track will receive training in a functional 
area related to their branch. Each branch has the option of designating acceptable area of 
concentration and functional area pairings that meet the branches' needs and mission. In 
some cases, an officer may be allowed to single track into a different branch or the chosen 
functional area. From then on, he will receive repetitive assignments in that branch or 
functional area. Some branches though, have restrictions on officers leaving their primary 
branch to single track into another branch. Restrictions depend on the branch and Army 
needs. 


D-4 

UNCLASSIFIED 


t 



UNCLASSIFIED 


Computer related positions within the Army are concentrated primarily in the Signal 
Corps (SC), which has the responsibility for reliable information systems and 
teleconununications. In addition, both the Adjutant General (AG) Corps, which is 
responsible for accurate administrative and personnel records and the Corps of Engineers 
(CE), which is responsible for military and civil engineering tasks, allow officers to gain 
additional training in computer related functional areas. A more detailed description of each 
of these three branches and their related functional areas follows. Because of the nature of 
the specific jobs within the Signal Corps, a description is also given of each area of 
concentration. Related functional area details are given after the AG and CE descriptions. 


3.1 Signal Corps 

The Signal Corps provides rapid and reliable information systems in support of 
Army combat forces during both peace and war. This includes planning, design, 
engineering, acquisition, installation, operation, supply, maintenance and ev^uation of 
automation, communications, and visual information systems at all levels within the 
Department of the Army and the Department of Defense. 

Entrance to the SC is open to all disciplines, and requires no particular background, 
although some assignments may require engineering, or physical science knowledge. Once 
commissioned into the SC, all new Signal Officers attend the Signal Officer Basic Course 
(SOBC) at Fort Gordon, GA, where each officer is designated as a Communications- 
Electronics Operations Officer (25C). 

After two assignments, but before specialization, most officers then attend the 
Signal Officer Advanced Course (SOAC), also at Ft. Gordon. After 4-6 years of 
experience, additional training or education in another area of concentration may be 
conducted when specialization is needed, depending on the career goals of each officer and 
the needs of the Army. This other area of concentration may then become an officer's 
primary sp^ialty, and may or may not involve learning another skill. The officer may also 
opt to receive training in a functional area related to his work in the SC. The computer 
related functional areas most often recommended for the SC Officer include Operations 
Research/Systems Analysis, Research and Development, Systems Automation, and 
Contracting and Industrial Management 

From this point on, the officer's assignments will be in one of the six areas of 
concentration, as ctescribcd below or a related functional area within the SC for which he is 
^ned. Leaving the SC to move to another branch is extremely difficult and allowed only 
in special cases. Any cross training is done within the SC, typically through functional 
area training, and is highly encouraged. 

The classification of 25A, General Signal Officer, is given to those positions in the 
Signal Corps not directly related to one of the other five Areas of Concentration. It is 
normally used to classify positions requiring general signal knowledge, but is not used to 
classify an officer's skills. Such positions include: serving as an aide-de-camp. Professor 
Of Assistant Professor of Military Science, Commander of a Signal Training Unit and 
others. 


D-5 

UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 


Classification as a Communications - Electronics (C-E) Automation Officer (25B) 
requires an undergraduate degree in math, physics, computer science, engineering or a 
related discipline. Designation as such is given upon completion of the Teleprocessing 
Operations Officer Course (TOOC) conducted at the Air Force Institute of Technology 
(AFIT), Wright-Patterson Air Force Base (AFB), OH. 25B duties include: managing or 
supervising specific autontated systems or nodes in a data or communication network; 
providing technical guidance to commanders and staff concerning a given network; and 
operation and maintenance of distributed data base systems, teleprocessing systems and 
data communications supporting battlefield automated systems. The officer may also be 
involved in the practical application of automation theory in the design, implementation, 
and successful integration of hardware and software for telecommunications and 
teleprocessing. This AOC is often paired with the Systems Automation field (FA 53). 

The C-E Operations (25C) designation is given to all new officers upon entering the 
SC. Standard training consists of the Signal Officer Basic Course, followed by Signal 
Officer Advanced Course, and any additional assignment oriented training (AOT) as 
required. As an Operations Officer responsibilities include: commanding Signal units 
engaged in the instilation, operation and maintenance of automation and communication 
systems; planning, coordinating and supervising the training, administration, operation, 
supply, maintenance, transportation, security and allocation of the resources of Signal units 
and facilities; and advising commanders and staff regarding capabilities, limitations and 
employment of available Signal assets. The majority of Signal Officers will have an 
additional area of concentration besides this one. 

Classification as a C-E Engineering Officer (25D) requires a background in 
electrical/electronics engineering or a related discipline. The designation is given after 
completion of the C-E Engineering Course conducted at AFIT. This area of concentration 
is often paired with Research and Development (FA 51), and graduate work is encouraged 
in electrical/electronics or communications engineering. 25D duties involve: planning and 
supervising the design, development, installation, modification, test and acceptance of 
automation and communication-electronics equipment; developing standards for equipment 
performance, and hardware and software test and evaluation; and using the direct 
application of electrical, electronic and automation theory and principles in the design, test 
and acceptance, and installation of hardware and software for Signal systems. 

The fifth area of concentration is Information Systems and Networking (25E), 
which requires experience in C-E Operations, and completion of the SOAC. Additionally, 
a strong math and analytical background is recommended. Designation as a 25E is given 
either upon completion of the Information Systems Staff Officer Course (ISSOC) at 
Keesler AFB, MS, through equivalent graduate work, or through Training with Industry 
(TWI) in telecommunications or information systems management. Jobs in this area are 
comprised of: planning and managing the integration and interconnection of diverse types 
of automation and communication systems into local area and long haul information 
networks; determining overall architecture requirements to support battlefield users, 
exercising network control and conducting network analysis; developing network standards 
for performance and interconnectivity requirements; and the practical application of systems 
engineering principles to plan, design and install tactical and non-tactical information 
networks. 

The C-E Materiel Management (25F) area requires experience in C-E Operations 
and completion of the SOAC. An undergraduate degree in business is desirable but not 
required. Officers must complete either the Army Logistics Management Course (LMC) or 

D-6 


UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 


the Army Maintenance Management Course (MMC), both conducted at the US Army 
Logistics Management Center (ALMC), Fort Lee, VA, or qualify either through graduate 
work or TWI in logistics or material acquisition management. Officers in this field will; 
command or serve as a staff officer or manager in a unit engaged in the supply, 
maintenance, and life cycle management of information systems materiel; implement 
organization maintenance procedures, standards and quality control techniques; conduct 
reviews and develop plans for overhaul or replacement of information systems, facilities 
and equipment; and plan and direct all logistic^ matters concerning the acquisition, fielding 
and sustainment of information systems materiel. 

3.2 Adjutant General Corps 

The Adjutant General Corps' primary responsibility is for the Army's 
administrative functions. The officers in this branch formulate policies and manage the 
Army's personnel and administrative systems. This includes planning, developing and 
directing personnel systems which support the personnel life cycle, from enlistment 
through retirement, as well as providing support for administrative management activities 
and services, especially the application of techniques such as word processing. There are 
no entry restrictions for the AG Corps. 

Upon commissioning into the AG Corps, each new officer attends the Adjutant 
General Officer Basic Course (AGOBC), where he is prepared for an initial assignment in a 
personnel and/or administrative management position. After two assignments stressing 
various aspects of the personnel and administrative field, the officer will attend the 
Advanced Course (AGOAC). At this time, provided an AG branch assignment has been 
completed successfully, the officer is considered branch qualified. 

After branch qualification, an officer may choose to single track in the AG branch, 
or may choose additional training in a related functional area. The key functional areas for 
AG officers include Comptroller, Operation Research/Systems Analysis, and Systems 
Automation. Civilian and military schooling may be combined to give each officer 
opportunity to become fully qualified in their Functional Area. In addition, many AG 
officers receive the 4H skill designation. Branch Automation Officer. This skill focuses on 
personal computer applications and automation techniques. 

From now on, the officer’s assignments will be either in his branch, functional 
area, or branch immaterial areas. Additional military or civilian training may be included 
when necessary to perform job duties. 


3.3 Corps of Engineers 

The Army's Corps of Engineers has both combat support and combat service 
support roles. Officers are responsible for training and leading troops in combat along with 
construction engineering operations, facilities maintenance, and civil works programs. The 
support role may include facilities and housing support at military installations, mapping, 
charting, geodesy and geographic responsibilities as part of the Department of Defense 
(DoD) mapping team, and special tasks such as exporting engineering technology to 
friendly nations. A college background in engineering or physical science is required for 
admission to the Corps of Engineers, but may be waived for equivalent training or 
experience. 


D-7 


UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 


As in the Signal and Adjutant General Corps, the new Engineer Officer attends 
OBC, before being assigned as a Combat Engineer. After two assignments and selection tc 
captain, the officer will attend OAC. At this point, the officer will be given the opportunity 
to specify a functional area as an additional field of expertise. The computer related 
functional areas suggested most often include Comptroller, Operations Research/Systems 
Analysis and Research and Development Graduate or additional military study may be 
encouraged in this area, to provide ample training for related assignments. The officer will 
continue to serve in assignments requiring either AOC or FA Imowledge throughout his 
career. 

3.4 Comptroller (FA 45) 

The Army Comptroller Officer serves as a resource manager and provides advice 
and guidance concerning resources to commanders and chiefs. The primary duties include; 
developing and monitoring program plans and budgets, determining performance criteria, 
analyzing capabilities based on available funding, conducting cost and economic analysis, 
coordinating program reviews to ensure planned accomplishments are met, and 
administering internal budgetary controls. 

Designation as a Comptroller is given at the seven year point to branch qualified 
officers only. These officers must have sufficient college training or experience in resource 
management, managerial/cost accounting, business administration, operations research, 
information systems, or systems management, before serving as a comptroller. Attendance 
at Individual Entry Training Courses, such as the Resource Management Introductory 
Course, or the Planning, Programming, Budgeting and Execution Course is required. The 
specific course depends on assignment requirements and the officer's background. 

3.5 Operations Research / Systems Analysis (FA 49) 

Operations Research/Systems Analysis (OR/SA) specialists focus on the application 
of analytic methods, supported by mathematical, statistical, and economic research tools, to 
the solution of varied and complex strategic, operational and managerial Defense issues. 
Job responsibilities involve: applying objective, analytical and orderly thinking to the 
conduct of qualitative and quantitative analysis of complex military problems, formulating 
problems, designs, research and study methods and developing, applying and interpreting 
appropriate models in conducting such studies, and preparing reports and briefings 
detailing analytical findings for senior decision makers. 

The background required to request designation as an OR/SA officer includes a 
bachelor's degree in a discipline supporting advanced study in Operations Research. These 
fields include most engineering fields, mathematics, business, economics, computer 
science, physical sciences, or applied science. In order to perform well in an analytical 
capacity, an OR/SA officer must have an in-depth knowledge of Army weapon systems, 
force design, combat developments, and the operations of other armies. Therefore, before 
being assigned to this functional area, an officer must be branch qualified, have experience 
working with troops, and have or be eligible to obtain a graduate degree in Operations 
Research, Industrial Engineering, or a related area of study. The officer may also choose 
to attend the OR/SA Military Application Course I (MAC I), in addition to obtaining a less 
related graduate degree. 


D-8 

UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 


3.6 Research and Development (FA 51) 

A Research and Development officer participates in the development of materiel, 
programs, and systems from concept through product validation, including the 
development of prototype operational programs and systems. Job assignments involve: 
coordinating management decisions to ensure the proper interface between system design 
and support programs, while maintaining requirements at the lowest life cycle cost, 
initiating, participating and analyzing studies to determine future Army needs, coordinating 
and scheduling resources to test systems both under controlled and realistic operational 
conditions, and participating in all phases of the Life Cycle Systems Management Model, 
i.e., research and exploratory development, concept exploration, demonstration and 
validation, full scale development, and production and deployment. 

Participation in the research, development, testing and evaluation of Army systems 
requires a bachelor's degree in engineering, business, or physical sciences. The Research 
and Development Officer should also be fully branch qualified, and have previous field 
experience with troops. This functional area provides many opportunities to pursue 
advanced degrees as well as participate in the TWI program. 


3.7 Systems Automation (FA 53) 

Systems Automation Officers manage the development of software systems, the 
integration of software, hardware and data communications, automated systems and related 
services, and serve as staff officers and consultants. Officers command and manage 
automation support activities, advise commanders and staffs on the employment of 
automation and related technologies and systems security; serve in information management 
staff positions; supervise and perform systems analysis, design, development, testing, 
prototyping, training, and system installation; acquire and integrate system components, 
and manage systems implementation. 

Officers requesting Systems Automation as a functional area should possess an 
undergraduate or graduate degree or equivalent experience in computer science or a related 
major (math, engineering, physics, and statistics) with a minor in computer science. Study 
in information systems management, computer engineering, or a related scientific discipline 
is also acceptable. Course work should provide a solid technical background with a strong 
emphasis on structured problem solving, logic and automation technology. 

Officers in the Systems Automation functional area may serve as a Software or 
Hardware Engineering Officer, or Automation Management Officer. Each of these areas of 
concentration requires completion of the Systems Automation course at the Computer 
Science School at Fort Gordon, GA. This course covers all aspects of automation, 
including hardweire selection, networks, integrated systems, software design and 
development and management of automated systems. Once in this area, the officer is 
expected to maintain currency through membership in professional societies, self-study, or 
independent research. 


3.8 Contracting and Industrial Management (FA 97) 

The Contracting and Industrial Management Officer is responsible for bridging the 
gap between the military and civilian industry in order to facilitate the procurement process. 


D-9 

UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 


These officers must ensure that the weapon systems, supplies and services necessary to 
support and sustain Army troops are acquired within contract cost and specifications. 
Specific duties include: procurement program planning, and cost/budget forecasting; 
selection, formulation and review of contract type; evaluation of work in process reviews; 
preparing formal contracts and ensuring that all government terms, specifications and 
requirements are met; awarding, managing and terminating government contracts; 
conducting technical analysis of contractor facilities, cost proiwsals, quality assurance and 
quality control programs; and ensuring contract is on time and in proper condition. 

The Contracting and Industrial Management functional area is not aligned with any 
single branch of the Army, and is not usually awarded until an officer has been branch 
qu^fied. Many officers combine Contracting and Industrial Management training with the 
Materiel Acquisition Management (MAM) Program. The Management of Defense 
Acquisition Contracts Course (Basic) is required for all Contracting and Industrial 
Management officers, and is the generd procurement course at the ALMC . In addition, 
other courses in the areas of Production Management, Defense Cost and Price Analysis, 
Defense Specification Management Course, Logistics Executives Development Course, 
Integrated Logistics Support and Materiel Acquisition Course and Contract Law may be 
taken through ALMC, the Defense Systems Management College (DSMC) at Ft. Belvoir, 
VA, AFIT, the U.S. Army Management Engineering College (AMEC), Rock Island, H., 
and the Naval Materiel Command (NAVMAT), Washington, D.C. These courses may be 
combined with the TWI program and include certification leading to the Professional 
Designation in Contract Management. This certification can be valuable in obtaining a 
contracting officer's warrant allowing the officer to act on behalf of the government. 

4.0 RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ARMY 

A major portion of the Army's development work is done by civilian employees or 
govemmeri contractors. The civilians work primarily for one of two Major Commands 
(MACOM), which are further broken down into Major Subordinate Commands (MSC). 
The principle MACOMs are the Army Materiel Command (AMC), which is responsible for 
embedded, battlefield weapon systems, and the Information Systems Command (ISC), 
which concentrates on management information systems and business applications. 
Because of the nature of its work, AMC is further divided into MSCs which include, 
among others: Avionic Systems Command (AVSCOM), Armaments, Munitions and 
Chemical Command (AMCCOM), Missile Command (MICOM), and the Communications 
and Electronics Command (CECOM). All four of these MSCs coordinate and validate their 
work through AMC's Laboratory Command (LABCOM). On the other side, ISCs only 
MSC is the Information Systems Engineering Command (ISEC), which focuses on 
personnel, administrative, financial and logistics systems. 

Within AMC and ISC, eleven Life Cycle Software Engineering Center (LCSEC) 
locations are divided among the MSCs, with each of the LCSEC focusing on a different 
Battlefield Area. (Refer to Figure D-4) In AMC, each of the nine centers is connected with 
the command's Research and Development center, while the two ISC centeis stand alone. 
Each of the centers provides technical assistance to the individual program offices on all 
aspects of software development. In addition to this internal Department of the Army 
support, technology is also exchanged with several Office of the Secretary of Defense 
(OSD) projects or groups, such as the Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO), Software 
Technology for Advanced, Reliable Systems (STARS) and the Software Engineering 
Institute (SEI) located at Camegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh, PA. LABCOM also 


D-10 

UNCLASSIFIED 


t 








UNCLASSIFIED 





D-11 

UNCLASSIFIED 


Figure D-4 

MAJOR ARMY LIFE-CYCLE SOFTWARE ENGINEERING CENTERS 



















DARPA Department ol 

_ the Army 


UNCLASSIFIED 




t 

I 




D-12 

UNCLASSIFIED 


Diagram provided by Dirnnis Turner, US Army, CECOM 






















UNCLASSIFIED 


coordinates informally with the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) in 
furthering software engineering technology insertion. The continuity from the program 
office through the senior levels of the Department of the Army helps keep the programs 
running and is an essential component of the Army's software development structure. (See 
Figure D-5) 

In addition to the two development commands, the Army also has the Training and 
Doctrine Command (TRADOC). It is here that system requirements and standards ^e 
defined and refined. Once they are finalized, the requirements are sent to the coordinating 
development command. From that point on, TRADOC acts as middleman between the 
users and the Army development commands. Any changes to the initial system 
requirements are test^ for feasibility before being approved and added to the design. Once 
the system enters maintenance, TRADOC also monitors the requirements for upkeep. 

5.0 CIVILIAN PERSONNEL STRUCTURE 

Civilian personnel are managed through the Office of Personnel Management which 
maintains a civilian personnel office on each installation. Each office coordinates new 
hires, promotions into higher ranking jobs, and any complaints or problems between 
civilians and their military superiors or subordinates. The offices also assist civilians with 
any career plans, changes, or questions the employee may have. 

According to the General Schedule (GS) classification system, new employees are 
given a grade (GS-x) dependent upon their previous experience and formal education md 
training. GS-2 can be assigned with a little as 6 months general experience, and a High 
School diploma, while a GS-5 position requires a bachelor's degree including courses 
related to the position. Some of the lower grades (GS-2 through GS-4) may also require 
applicants to pass a written test before being appointed to theses positions. At the higher 
levels, such as GS-12 and GS-13, a PhD may be required for advanced research positions 
although some positions only require related experience. 

Promotion to the next grade is considered after a minimum of one year in the 
present grade. Candidates for promotion must have fulfilled all education and experience 
requirements for the next grade before being considered. In addition, selective qualification 
factors related to specific jobs may be used to determine eligibility for the next higher 
grade. Opportunities are also given to qualified applicants to pursue additional civilian 
education or to attend specialized military training. 

The six civilian positions most active in the computer area can be broken into two 
main areas: support and technical staff. The support positions are the Computer Operator 
and Computer Specialist series. The technical positions include the Electrical/Electronics 
Engineering, Computer Engineering, and Computer Science series. Neither support 
position requires a college degree, while all the technical jobs require at least a bachelors 
degree. Each of these series is described in detail below, including any specific jobs within 
each series that are of interest. 

The computer operator focuses on the operation of digital computer systems, and 
especially on the operation of peripheral equipment used in support of mainframe 
operations. These positions require basic knowledge of mainframe functions and the 
ability to interpret and react to system messages and errors. Depending on the location. 


D-13 

UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 


formal training systems or courses may be included as part of the job in order to prepare the 
operator for a specific computer mainfi^e. 

The computer specialist position involves managing, supervising, or performing 
system design, implementation, maintenance or modification in the use of digital computers 
to solve complex problems. Within this series, there are six subspecialties which define the 
job requirements more precisely. These six are: computer systems analyst, computer 
programmer, computer programmer analyst, computer systems programmer, computer 
equipment analyst and computer specialist 

The computer systems analyst is primarily concerned with systems design for 
computer applications. This work could include feasibility studies, development of 
program specifications or analysis of existing systems. The computer programmer 
translates instructions and system designs into machine readable programs through 
knowledge of a particular programming language. On the other hand, the computer 
programmer analyst combines many aspects of both the systems analyst and the 
programmer. The main functions of the programmer analyst are to evaluate new or 
modified applications, assist in new systems design and participate in the programming 
effort. 


The computer systems programmer is concerned with writing and maintaining 
software necessary to run the main system. Such packages include debuggers, editors, 
assemblers and compilers. Some work may also require the analysis or design of systems 
that require these major components to interactThe computer equipment analyst assists in 
the ev^uation of various peripherals or additional equipment in order to select the best 
equipment for a given function. However, this position does not involve internal design or 
repair. Instead, the focus is on the equipment's merits in meeting an organization's needs. 

The computer specialist position is used for jobs that do not fall directly under a 
single position and can combine one or more of the other positions. Thus, it requires a 
much more general knowledge of computers, their applications and equipment. Often, this 
position involves coordinating between the technical aspects of the computer work and 
administrative tasks such as budgeting and long range planning. 

All three professional engineering positions, electrical, electronics, and computer 
engineering, require the same general knowledge of engineering principles and all require 
the same practical background for selection and promotion. Each candidate must 
successfully complete a four year engineering program, including courses in statics and 
dynamics, strengths of materiis, fluid mechanics, hydraulics, electrical fields and circuits, 
nature and properties of materials, thermodynamics and other fundamental areas of 
engineering science or physics. Professional engineering certification is not required, but 
is helpful. In some research and development cases, a higher degree in engineering is 
required due to the nature of the work. In addition, all government engineers are expected 
to remain current in the advances of their field. 

The electrical engineering classification is given to those positions which emphasize 
electrical circuits, equipment and systems concerned with electrical energy as a source of 
power for motion, heating and cooling, illumination, or the production of electronic or 
magnetic fields. On the other hand, electronics engineering positions concentrate on 
electronic circuits, equipment and systems which use electro-magnetic or acoustical wave 
energy for communication, sensing, navigation and measurement. In both cases, a GS-5 


D-14 

UNCLASSIFIED 


I 



UNCLASSIFIED 


engineer begins as a trainee with controlled assignments and limited contacts outside the 
organization. As more experience is gained, the responsibilities increase to include more 
autonomy over projects and increased contact with contractors and others outside the 
organization. At each stage, less analysis work is done by the supervisor and gradually, 
the engineer becomes responsible for all aspects of a project. At senior levels, the work 
involves substantial amounts of design development and review. 

The computer engineering position is still so new that it is difficult to say exactly 
what the responsibilities entail. Some of the more general functions include research into 
advanced component technologies, software tools and methods and digital theory; analysis 
of system requirements, both hardware and software; conceptual design and validation of 
integrated systems; and specification analysis and preparation. Because of the newness of 
this series, much of the hardware related work has been done previously by electronics 
engineers. With the introduction of the computer engineering series, some of these 
positions will be reclassified. Others may remain as they are, especially in the case of large 
computer-based electronic systems where the emphasis must be individually determined. 

The final series for consideration is the computer science group. This series covers 
the application of advanced techniques in computer science as well as research and 
development work. Typical duties of the computer scientist include the following: 
development of software, computer graphics, high-speed, and integrated computer 
systems; research in artificial intelligence induing discrete speech recognition models; 
research in analysis of algorithms and abstract complexity theory and research into other 
related areas of study and development. The computer scientist is distinguished from the 
computer specialist by the former's in-depth knowledge of the theoretical foundations of 
computer science and the understanding of advanced mathematics and statistics. The 
specialist does not need this degree of knowledge for his work. 


6.0 TERMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 


ADP 

AHT 

AFB 

AG 

AGOAC 

AGOBC 

AIT 

AJPO 

ALMC 

AMC 

AMCCOM 

AMEC 

AOC 

ACT 

AVSCOM 

CAS3 

C-E 

CE 

CECOM 


Automatic Data Processing 

Air Force Institute of Technology 

Air Force Base 

Adjutant General Corps 

Adjutant General Officer Advanced Course 

Adjutant General Officer Basic Course 

Advanced Individual Training 

Ada Joint Program Office 

Army Logistics Management Center 

Army Materiel Command 

Armaments, Munitions and Chemical Command 

Army Management Engineering College 

Area of Concentration 

Assignment Oriented Training 

Avionic Systems Command 

Combined Arms and Services Staff School 

Communications-Electronics 

Corps of Engineers 

Communications and Electronics Command 


D-15 

UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 


CMF 

Career Management Field 

DA 

Department of the Army 

DARPA 

Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 

DISC4 

Director of Information Systems for Command, Control, 
Communications, and Computers 

DoD 

Department of Defense 

DSMC 

Defense Systems Management College 

FA 

Functional Area 

GS 

General Schedule 

IC 

Information Clearinghouse 

ISC 

Information Systems Command 

ISEC 

Information Systems Engineering Command 

ISSOC 

Information Systems Staff Officer Course 

LABCOM 

Laboratory Command 

LCSEC 

Life Cycle Software Engineering Center 

LMC 

Logistics Management Course 

MAC I 

Military Application Course I 

MACOM 

Major Command 

MAM 

Materiel Acquisition Management Program 

MICOM 

Missile Command 

f^MC 

Maintenance Management Course 

MOS 

Military Occupational Specialty 

MSC 

Major Subordinate Command 

NAVMAT 

Naval Materiel Command 

NCO 

Non-Commissioned Officer 

OAC 

Officer Advanced Course 

OBC 

Officer Basic Course 

ORySA 

Operations Research/Systems Analysis 

OSD 

Office of the Secretary of Defense 

RDA 

Research, Development and Acquisition 

ROTC 

Reserve Officer Training Corps 

SC 

Signal Corps 

SEI 

Software Engineering Institute 

STARS 

Software Technology for Adaptable, Reliable Systems 

SOAC 

Signal Officer Advanced Coune 

SOBC 

Signal Officer Basic Course 

TOOC 

Teleprocessing Operations Officer Course 

TRADOC 

Training and Doctrine Command 

TWI 

Training With Industry 

USMA 

United States Military Academy 


D-16 

UNCLASSIFIED 



Distribution List for IDA Paper P-2162 


NAME AND ADDRESS NUMBER OF COPIES 

Sponsor 

Dr. John P. Solomond 2 

Director 

Ada Joint Program Office 
Room 3E114 
The Pentagon 

Washington, D.C. 20301-3081 

Captain Glenn Hughes 5 

Army Deputy, Ada Joint Program Office 
Room 3E114 
The Pentagon 

Washington, DC 20301-3081 

Other 

Defense Technical Information Center 2 

Cameron Station 
Alexandria, VA 22314 

IIT Research Institute 1 

4600 Forbes Blvd., Suite 300 
Lanham, MD 20706 
Attn. Ann Eustice 


CSED Review Panel 

Dr. Dan Alpert, Director 1 

Program in Science, Technology & Society 
University of Illinois 
Room 201 

912-1/2 West Illinois Street 
Urbana, Illinois 6180' 

Dr. Thomas C. Brandt 1 

10302 Bluet Terrace 
Upper Marlboro, MD 20772 

Dr. Ruth Davis 1 

The Pymatuning Group, Inc. 

2000 N. 15th Street, Suite 707 
Arlington, VA 22201 


Distribution l.ist-1 




NAME AND ADDRESS 

number of copies 


Dr. C.E, Hutchinson, Dean 

Thayer School of Engineering 
Dartmouth College 

Hanover, NH 03755 

1 


Mr. A.J. Jordano 

Manager, Systems & Software 
Engineering Headquarters 

Federal Systems Division 

6600 Rockledge Dr. 

Bethesda, MD 20817 

1 


Dr. Ernest W. Kent 

Philips Laboratories 

345 Scarborogh Road 

Briarcliff Manor, NY 10510 

1 


Dr. John M. Palms, President 

Georgia State University 

University Plaza 

Atlanta, GA 30303 

1 


Mr. Keith Uncapher 

University of Southern California 

Olin Hall 

330A University Park 

Los Angeles, CA 90089-1454 

1 


IDA 



General W.Y. Smith, HQ 

Ms. Ruth L. Greenstein, HQ 

Mr. Philip Major, HQ 

Dr. Robert E. Roberts, HQ 

Ms. Anne Douville, CSED 

Ms. Audrey A. Hook, CSED 

Mr. Terry Mayfield, CSED 

Ms. Catherine W. McDonald, CSED 

Ms. Katydean Price, CSED 

Dr. Richard L. Wexelblat, CSED 

IDA Control & Distribution Vault 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

5 

2 

1 

3 


Distribution Li.st-2 

I 

f 



