SEMI-ANNUAL REPORT ^ ^ o^ 

FOR /^// 

NASA GRANT NAG-1-1063 



PERIOD: NOVEMBER 1, 1989 - JUNE 1, 1990 



PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: 

BARRY T.SMITH 

APPLIED SCIENCE PROGRAM 

COLLEGE OF WILLIAM AND MARY 

WILLIAMSBURG, VA 23665 



NASA TECHNICAL OFFICER: 

DR. PATRICK H. JOHNSTON 

NONDESTRUCTIVE SCIENCES BRANCH 

NASA, LANGLEY RESEARCH CENTER 

MAIL STOP 231 

HAMPTON, VA 23665 



(NA5A-CR-167377) DAMAGE AS<;ES3M£NT AND N9i-13494 

RF3TDUAL COMPRESSruM STRENGTH OF THICK 
COMPOSITt PLATcS WITH THROUGH-THE-THlCKNft SS 
REINFQRCEHtNJTS Semiannual Report, I Nov. Unci as 

I'^a? - 1 Jun. 1990 (College of William and G3/2A 0311689 



The first part of the grant period was spent in research on the 
porosity levels in pultruded samples and the volumetric imaging of three 
dimensional composites which have undergone impact. The results of the 
research has been presented at two meetings. The woven impact sample 
results where presented at the 1990 Review of Progress in QNDE, July 
15-20,1990, San Diego, CA. The pultrusion research was presented at 
Fiber-Tex 1990, Clemson, SC, Aug 14, 1990. Both of these meetings 
include published proceedings and the manuscripts submitted are included 
in this semi-annual report. 



DAMAGE ASSESSMENT AND RESIDUAL COMPRESSION STRENGTH OF THICK COMPOSITE 
PLATES WITH THROUGH-THE-THICKNESS REINFORCEMENTS 



Barry T. Smith* 

Applied Science 

College of William and Mary 

Williamsburg, VA 23185 

Gary L. Farley 

U.S. Army Aerostructures Directorate, AVSCOM 

NASA, Langley Research Center 

Hampton, VA 23665 

Janice Maiden 

Textile Technologies, Inc. 

Hatboro, PA 190-10 

Dreux Coogan 

Cadet, U.S. Military Academy 

West Point, New York 

Judith G. Moore 
A.S.& M. Corporation 
Hampton, VA 23665 



INTRODUCTION 

The design of composite structures is rarely based solely upon the 
strength and/or stiffness of the composite material. The influence of 
temperature, moisture, and damage, to name a few, must be also 
considered. Today, damage tolerance of a material significantly limits 
the allowable compression strain level used in the design of composite 
structure. A test that is frequently used to assess the damage tolerance 
of a material is the compression-after-impact strength test. 

Historically, composite materials have exhibited catastrophic brittle 
failure characteristics and little tolerance for low velocity impact 
damage representative of rock kick-up or tool drop impacts. New 
thermoset and thermoplastic matrix materials have produced "tougher" 
materials that have the potential for increasing the design ultimate 
strain by 50 percent. However, the cost of composite structures using 
these damage tolerant materials can be in excess of three times that of 
conventional metallic structures of comparable geometry. 



* Work supported in part by NASA Grant NAG-1-1063. 



Recent advances in textile technology and resin transfer molding has 
produced composite structures that have superior damage tolerance 
without significant sacrifice of in-plane mechanical properties. 
Furthermore, the structural part cost of these structures produced from 
textile technology can be less than the cost of a conventional metallic 
structure. The damage tolerance of these textile composite materials is 
achieved through inclusion of fibers through-the-thickness of the 
laminate. Little is understood about the mechanisms that control the 
damage initiation and growth in these materials with through-the- 
thickness reinforcements. To achieve eTficient designs using these 
textile materials it is paramount that a fuller understanding of the 
mechanisms that control the damage tolf-rance be developed. One necessary 
step in developing this understanding is to assess the extent of damage 
at each interface after impact and prior to destructive testing. 

Ultrasonic imaging techniques have been successfully employed on 
composite materials fabricated from tape prepreg to assess damage at 
different interfaces [1]. These techniques need to be extended to 
composite materials with through-the-thickness reinforcements. 

The objective of this study is to increase the understanding of 
damage in composite materials with through-the-thickness reinforcements. 
To achieve this objective an ultrasonic imaging technique was developed 
to produce images of the damage at each interface of damaged composite 
panels having through-the-thickness reinforcements. Five different fiber 
architectures in a common brittle matrix are evaluated. A panel 
fabricated from each of these architectures was impacted, ultrasonically 
imaged, destructively tested, and evaluated. 

TEST SPECIMENS AND PROCEDURES 

Five 9 layer [0/90/0/90/0/90/0/90/0] AS-4-3501-6 graphite-epoxy 
panels approximately 0.25 inches thick were evaluated in this study. Dry 
fiber preforms of each panel were produced, infiltrated with resin, and 
cured. Panel 1 was a control specimen without through-the-thickness 
reinforcements. Each layer of panel 1 was composed of a uniwoven fabric 
material. A uniwoven material is a woven material with approximately 95 
percent of the reinforcement fibers oriented in the warp direction (also 
referred to as the degree direction) . In these materials the warp 
fibers were a 21000 filament count (21K) yarn of AS--! graphite 
positioned 13 yarns per inch and the fill yarn was a fine denier E-glass 
yarn. The 21K graphite yarn was produced by combining 3K, 9K, and 12K 
yarns . 

Panel 2 and 3 were of similar architecture as panel 1 except panels 2 
and 3 had Kevlar and graphite fibers lock stitched through-the- 
thickness, respectively. A 1100 denier Kevlar and Toray graphite 
stitching yarn was used. Stitch row spacing was 0.25 in. in both 
horizontad and vertical directions producing a 0.25 in. by 0.25 in. 
cell. Stitch density was every 0.125 inches. A sketch of the stitch 
preform Is shown in Figure 1. 

Panels 4 and 5 were similar in appearance as panels 2 and 3 but their 
construction differed significantly. All the layers and through-the- 
thicknesg yarns of panels 4 and 5 were integrally woven in a single 
operatiori. Unlike the uniwoven material used in panel 1, 2, and 3 no 
fine denier glass fill yarn is used in panel 4 and 5 to hold the yarns 



in a layer together. In panels 4 and 5 the same through-the-thickness 
yarns (Kevlar and graphite) were used as used in panel 2 and 3, 
respectively. In panels 4 and 5 a "catcher yarn" embedded along the 
center of the preform is used in the weaving technique for incorporating 
a through-the-thickness yarn. A sketch of the preforms used for panels 4 
and 5 is presented in Figure 1 . 



After the dry fibe 
infiltration and cure 
infiltration step. Th 
achieve 1 60 percent 
preform Is placed on 
assembly is bagged, a 
oven and the resin in 
cure step, begins by 
surface dryness exist 
surface. The infiltra 
assembly is rebagged 



r preforms we 

process was 
e appropriate 
fiber volume 
top of the re 
vacuum is dr 
filtrates int 
inspecting th 
3 then a smal 
ted preform i 
and placed in 



re completed a two step resin 
performed. The first step is the resin 

amount of resin was weighed out to 
fraction and poured into a mold. The 
sin and the mold, resin, and preform 
awn, and the assembly is heated in a 

the preform. The second step, the 

e preform for surface dryness. If any 

1 quantity of resin is poured onto the 
s returned to the mold and the 

an rTiitoclave for cure. 



All panels were C-scanned to check for porosity and internal defects 
prior to machining of test specimens. (Jompression-af ter-impact (CAI) 
specimens were machined from each panel. Compression-after-impact 
specimens were 5.0 in. wide by 10.0 in. long. The CAI specimens were 
mounted in a test fixture and impacted with a 0.5 in. diameter aluminum 
ball. The test fixture simulates a simply supported condition around the 





No-crimp 3-D weave 



No-crimp stitched 



Figure 1. Preform architecture for the woven (sample 4 and 5) and the 
stitched (sample 2 and 3) panels. 



perimeter of the CAI panel. The impact: ing of the panel is performed with 
a compressed air operated gun. The speed of the ball at impact was 
approximately 550 ft/sec which produces an impact energy of 
approximately 30 ft-lbs. 

ULTRASONIC PROCEDURES 

The ultrasonic evaluation was performed in a water bath using a 5 
MHz transducer with a 0.5 inch aperture and a 2 inch focal point. The 
transducer was operated in a pulse-echo mode and was excited with a 
square wave pulser. The return signal was amplified and fed into a Time- 
Gain-Compensated (TGC) amplifier [2] . A digitizer with sampling rate of 
50 MHz and 8 bit dynamic range acquired the signal and passed it to a 
computer for later analysis. The entire ultrasonic wave was digitized to 
include the front, interior, and back surface reflections. A spatial 
sampling step of 2 mm was on the order of the 6 dB point spread for the 
transducer as determined experimentally. A typical sampling size was 8x8 
or 10x8 centimeters, depending of the size of the damage. 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 

The TGC has a 50 MHz bandwidth, a 50 dB gain, and a control 
bandwidth of 5 MHz. The TGC influence on the digitized signal is shown 
in Figure 2. The difference between the TGC on and off is quite 
dramatic. The front surface reflection is attenuated and the interior 
and back surface signals are enhanced to the input limit of the 
digitizer. This increases the effective dynamic range of the digitizer. 

The data was post-processed using fourier deconvolution and analytic 
magnitude signal processing techniques to provide volumetric views of 
the samples at any depth inside the panels. A discussion of this 
technique has been presented previously [1]. A fourier deconvolution 
increases the time and thus depth resolution by removing the system 
artifacts from the signal. The fourier deconvolution was calculated 
bydividing the fourier transform of a reference pulse {in this case the 
reflection from a brass plate) into the fourier transform of the 
received signal. The result after taking the inverse fourier transform 
and applying a suitable digital filter over the bandwidth of the 
transducer is the response of the material. Next the analytic magnitude 
[3] is calculated; it is a positive unipolar wave proportional to rate 
of arrival of energy in the detected ultrasonic wave [4] . An example of 
a signal processed waveform is shown in Figure 3. The front and back 
surface, and the 8 individual interlaminar locations are easily resolved 
for an undamaged region of a sample. Processed waveforms are assembled 
into a three dimensional array in position (x-y) and time. This array 
can be sliced in any manner. If we tako progressive slices in time, a 
movie is made in which each frame (equivalent to a digitizer channel 
time) gives a view deeper in the com(>(i.". i te . The signal sources at the 
same depth are in phase and the larger amplitude backscatter signal 
corresponds to a impact generated del n in i nation . Shown in Figure 4 are 
selected impact generated delaminations for a woven sample with Kevlar 
through-the-thickness fibers (panel 4) and a uniwoven sample (panel 1) . 
The damage of the uniwoven sample (panel 1) is almost twice that of the 
through-the-thickness reinforced sample. 



0) 

T3 

3 
■♦-• 

Q. 

E 
< 

> 

<i> 

GC 




100 200 300 400 500 600 
Channel 



■D 

B 0.5 



- 



a. 

E 
< 

CD 

> 

1 -0.51- 

DC 



r 


1 


"T~ T 


1 




- 




TGC - 


on 


- 


™J 


fMfilh 


UA,-/MAa-vAAaa. 


A^-V/V-V- 


, - 


- 








- 




1 


I 1 


, , I . 





100 200 300 400 

Channel 



500 600 



Figure 2. Waveform acquired with TGC off (top) and with TGC on. 
backscatter signal corresponds to a impact generated delaminations , 



a> 

XJ 

3 
*^ 

"E 

TO 



a> 

> 



■2 1 

GC 



Figure 3 
and back 






F- 

'- 
- 



Front Surface 




Back Surface 

7 



50 100 150 200 

Channel 



250 



300 



Result of deconvolution and analytic magnitude showing front 
surface, and 8 interfaces. 



To estimate the ace 
in construction to pan 
destructively sectione 
0.15 inch across the s 
of the delaminations r 
interface can be made, 
that measured ultrason 
interface. The agreeme 
confidence such that f 
the extent of damage a 



uracy of the technique a separate sample similar 
el 1 was impacted, ult rasonically inspected and 
d. The sections were taken at approximately every 
ample, placed under a microscope and the locations 
ecorded. A map of the delaminated region at each 

A comparison between the actual delamination and 
ically is shown in Figure 5 for the second 
nt was quite good. This agreement develops 
ewer panels will need to be sectioned to determine 
f ter impact . 



A graphite stitched panel was also sectioned. In this case the 
ultrasonic determined area was easily imaged but the classical 
photomicrograph revealed no delaminations. It was not until the section 
was soaked in dye penetrant and X-rayed that the delaminations were 
visible. The through-the-thickness reinforcements seem to have closed 
the delaminations making the classical destructive technique unreliable. 

After the CAI panels were impacted and ultrasonically imaged the 
panels were destructively tested in compression until failure. The CAI 
panels mounted in the test fixture are installed in a conventional 
hydraulic test machine and compressed until the panel fails. Panel 
strain and compression force is recorded automatically by a computer 
controlled data acquisition system. Failure load is converted to failure 
stress by dividing the failure load by the cross sectional area of the 
panel. The failure strengths of the five panels are shown in Figure 6. 
All strengths were normalized to a maximum value of 39.8 Ksi, the 
strength of panel 3 with the graphite stitched through-the-thickness 
reinforcement. The through-the-thickness reinforcements, for panel 2 
thru 5, provided almost twice the CAI strength of the panel without 
through-the-thickness reinforcement. The panel without through-the- 
thickness reinforcement exhibited a delamination induced instability 
failure as shown in Figure 7. The damage, in the form of delaminations, 



cronteti liy Mie i ri i I. 1 n 1 irri[v-ici. pr (ipaqnl.iMl .in I hi,; cnrnfir ens i vo load was 
applied. T?ie Cailure rnodo of t lie panel.T wii;li t.lie t hi ouqh-Uhe-thickness 
reinforcement v;as transverse shear failure with little visible growth of 
any delarninat i ons produced from the initial impact as depicted in Figure 
7 . 

Panel 1 







Panel 3 

Figure -1 . Impact generated delarninat ions for the Ist, 7th and 8th 
interfaces for panel 1 and panel 3. 




Figure 5. Delamination at the second interface for a sample similar in 
construction to panel 1. The line is from examination of a micrograph 
to determine the actual delamination area. 



ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALfTY 



1 .2 



0.8 - 



0.4 



12 3 4 5 

Panel 

Figure 6. Normalized compression-after-impact: strength for panel 1) no 
through the thickness reinforcements, 2) Kevlar stitched, 3) graphite 
stitched, 4) Kevlar woven, and 5) graphite woven. 





1 1 


— r 


1 








'PMM^SSMi 




ssli 


III 


































mil 




lllll 


ill 

ill 

gill 




Bl 






iiiiii 

iiii^ 


'■""■/■J"'"^"^"^ 




; .f-^i^i^^^^. 




■mmm 


W0& 




^■•»>yyyy^-v^y-<y-<\ 






mmm 


T '. ' "' 




-■11 




mm 

ill 


iil 




WSiMWf- 




< 


iiiii- 
wmmm 








































































'ImMM: 




iiii 


11 




mmm. 

rnmmmm 




: 


■:wvXy!-y-y-y. 


■ / , /-'-^ 




mrnsmi. 






::xi::¥::: 




■.•:^x:<::.fyyAy;:y.-<-. 






mmmm 




Ld 


'SsJiSiifSa 


± 


SSvisS 


wm. 


± 


mmmm 


± 


kMU 





--^i -s.',----- ...c-'^^r^^-"'"'^*^-*-'- '■-. 



■Wii will 




Figure 7. The failure modes for (top) pane] 1 witfiout througth-the- 
thickness reinforcements (delaminrit i on induced local insliability 
failure mode); (bottom) panel 7. ivitli tli i ougli- the- th i ckness 
reinforcements (transverse shear failure mode) . 



ORJQIMAL PAGE SS 
OF POOR QUAUTY 



SUMMARY 

The objective of this study was to increase the understanding of 
damage in composite materials with through-the-thickness reinforcements. 
As a first step it was necessary to develop new ultrasonic imaging 
technology to better assess internal damage of the composite. A useful 
ultrasonic imaging technique has been successfully developed to assess 
the internal damage of composite panels. The ultrasonic technique 
accurately determines the size of the internal damage. It was found that 
the ultrasonic imaging technique was better able to assess the damage in 
a composite panel with through-the-thickness reinforcements than by 
destructively sectioning the specimen and visual inspection under a 
microscope. Microscopic determination of crack location and lengths in a 
composite panel with through-the-thickness reinforcements was almost 
impossible. 

Five composite compression-after-impact panels were tested. The 
compression-after-impact strength of the panels with the through-the- 
thickness reinforcements was almost twice that of the comparable panel 
without through-the-thickness reinforcement. 



REFERENCES 

1. B.T. Smith, J.S. Heyman, A.M. Buoncristiani, Earl D. Blodgett, 
J.G. Miller, and S.M. Freeman, Cor relati on of the De ply 
with the Ult rasonic Ima gin g of Impact D amage in Graphite/Epoxv— 
CcmcOJaiLe^/ Materials Evaluation, vol. 47, No. 12, December 1989, pp 
1408-1416. 

2. NASA Tech Briefs, June 1987, p. 28. 

3 . P.M. Gamme 1 , Improved Ultrasonic De tection using Analytic Sigmal_ 
Magnitude. Ultrasonics, Vol. 19, March 1981, pp 73-76. 

4. R.C. Heyser, Il£tjexminatiQn_Q£__LDud3peaker._Signai_Arr±ifaJL_T±me5^_Paj:t_ 
UX,. Journal of the Audio Engineering Society, Vol. 19, Dec. 1971, pp 
902-905. 



