Partial Analysis of LDEF Experiment A-0114 



Final Report on Contract NAS8-36645 
for the reporting period May 20, 1985 - November 19, 1991 



(NASA-CR-193826) PARTIAL ANALYSIS 
OF LDEF EXPERIMENT *-011* Final 
Report, 20 May 1985 - 19 Nov. 1991 
(Alabama Univ.) 34 P 



N94-14025 
Unci as 
G3/25 0184990 



Dr. John C. Gregory, Principal Investigator 
Department of Chemistry 
Materials Science Building, Room 111 
The University of Alabama in Huntsville 
Huntsville, Alabama 35899 



John C. Gregory 
NAS8-36645 



During the contract period, work has concentrated on four main components. Data 
from the UAH silver pin hole camera was analyzed for determination of the mean LDEF 
satellite attitude and stability in orbit, to include pitch and yaw. Chemical testing performed 
on the AO-114 hot plate determined the form and locus of absorption of cosmogenic 
berylIium-7. Reaction rates of atomic oxygen with Kapton and other polymeric solids 
integrated over the whole LDEF orbital lifetime were analyzed- These rates were compared 
with the JSC estimated values for Space Station exposures. Metal and polymer films 



exposed on A0114 (C-9 and C-3 plates) were also analyzed. The following papers which 
report these finding have appeared or have been accepted for publication. 



1) "Observation of ?Be on the Surface of LDEF Spacecraft". Fishman, 
G.J., Harmon, B.A., Gregory, J.C., Parnell, T.A., Peters, P., 
Phillips, G.W., King, S.E., August, R.A., Ritter, J.C., Cutchin, 
J.H., Haskins, P.S., McKisson, J.E., Ely, D.W., Weisenberger, 
A.G., Piercey, R.B., and Dybler, T.: Nature, 242, 1991, pp678- 
680. 

2) "A Measurement of the Attitude Stability of the LDEF Satellite 
Using a Silver/Silver Oxide Detector", J.C. Gregory, P.N. Peters, 
Journal of Guidance. Control and Dynamics. AIAA. Vol. 15, No. 
1, Jan-Feb, 1992, pp 282-284. 

3) "Measurements of Erosion Characteristics for Metal and Polymer 
Surfaces Using Profilometry", J. C Gregory, L.C. Christl and 
P.N. Peters, Proceedings of the LDEF First Post-retrieval 
Symposium, Orlando, Florida, June, 1991, 

4) "Pinhole Cameras as Sensors for Atomic Oxygen in Orbit: 
Application to Attitude Determination of the LDEF", J.C. Gregory 
and P.N. Peters, Proceedings of the LDEF First Post-retrieval 
Symposium, Orlando, Florida, June, 1991. 



us 

b 



pi 



X 



w 



%0 



MEASUREMENTS OF EROSION CHARACTERISTICS FOR METAL AND POLYMER 

SURFACES USING PROFILOMETRY 



Ligia C. Christ! and John C Gregory 
The University of Alabama in Huntsville* 

Huntsville, Alabama 35899 
Phone: 205/895-6840, Fax: 205/895-6349 



Palmer N. Peters 
Space Science Laboratory, NASA/MSFC 

Huntsville, Alabama 35812 
Phone: 205/544-7728, Fax: 205/544-7754 



SUMMARY 



The surfaces of many materials exposed in low earth orbit are modified due to interaction 
with atomic oxygen. Chemical changes and surface roughening effects can occur which alter 
optical and other properties (ref.l). The experiment A0114 contained 128 solid surface samples, 
half of which were exposed on the front and half on the rear of LDEF. Each sample has been 
subjected to many analyses, but this paper will only describe the methods and techniques used to 
measure the changes in roughness, erosion depths and material growth using profilometry. 



INTRODUCTION 



The effect of atomic oxygen on materials is highly variable. No method of measuring the 
effects is optimum for all materials. We have developed several techniques found valuable in 
analyzing a wide range of materials, varying from minute effects on the level of atomic dimensions 
to heavily etched surfaces. One of the most effective techniques has been to utilize the 
measurement of etched steps at interfaces between exposed and unexposed, or masked, areas by 
stylus profilometry. Stylus profilometers typically measure the vertical displacement of a stylus 
(usually a fine pointed diamond) as it is scanned horizontally across the surface. Highly magnified 
vertical displacements are plotted against horizontal positions greatly exaggerating surface detail. 
This technique has the ability to measure a wide range of etch steps, fiombelow 1 nm to 1 mm. 
For measurements below 1 nm it is essential that optically flat surfaces be used and that the steps 
be measurable over very short lateral distances. As shown elsewhere (ref.2 ), to produce 
etch steps over short lateral distances requires very thin masks, preferably thin film patterns 
resistant to atomic oxygen that are strongly bonded to the substrate being exposed, or at least knife- 
edged masks essentially in contact with the surface; these types of mask avoid structures which 



* Work supported in part by a grant from UAH Research Institute and NASA grant NAGW-812 
and contract NAS8-36645, 



shadow the sample from the incident oxygen, preventing etch profiles with wide lateral 
dimensions. Lack of shadowing is particularly important on surfaces experiencing little effect, 
since even optical flats have variations or waves on their surfaces which cannot be distinguished 
from etch steps unless the steps are very sharp or patterned. One of the best patterns is a series of 
closely spaced lines for the masks, which produce a square wave pattern in the surface, providing 
multiple steps for comparison. An alternative approach for some thin films is to scratch narrow 
grooves through the thin film but without damaging the substrate. The depth of the scratches in 
both exposed and unexposed regions is then measured at a number of locations. This works well 
for materials softer than glass but hard enough to avoid excessive formation of furrows adjacent to 
the scratches. When done properly, the scribe will not scratch the substrate and will leave a flat 
bottom in the scratched area, indicating the full thickness of the film has been removed, as opposed 
to a v-shaped scratch which offers no assurance of this. Not only can etch steps be measured this 
way, but contaminant layers or increases in thicknesses in exposed areas due to oxidation or other 
causes, can be determined accurately, sometimes to a few 0.1 nm. This latter ability is valuable in 
conjunction with optical measurements on thin films where it is not known whether an increase in 
light transmission is due to a thinning of pathlength by removal of material or a change in optical 
properties. Measurement of an increase in the film thickness in the exposed areas helps to establish 
the latter. Thus, some metals have volatile oxides and are thinned while some form stable, clear 
oxides and are thickened, but are more transmissive to light Good reflectance measurements are 
also desired in conjunction with the transmission measurements to account for any contamination 
or surface changes. 



MEASUREMENTS 



A wide variety of material surfaces were exposed to the atomic oxygen fluence, UV 
\Z degradation and space contamination in the LDEF-A0114 experiment. The atomic fluence for the 

|j LDEF was 9.73 x 10 21 atom cm * 2 over its nearly six years exposure. 

m The surfaces consisted of polished bulk samples and high purity thin optical metal films 

— sputtered or evaporated onto 1 inch flat fused silica disks. Each disk had one half of its surface 
w masked, to be used as a control surface, and the other half was exposed to the environment The 

samples were mounted in an aluminium panel, as shown in Figure 1. By masking half of each 
= sample, it was possible to measure changes in roughness, erosion depths, material growth and 

ii changes in film thickness. These changes were measured, using a Taylor-Hobson Talystep 

Profilometer, model number 223-27, and a Taylor-Hobson Form Talysurf, model number 279-17. 

S The Talystep is a surface-profiline instrument designed to measure micro-thin film 

w deposits, with a height resolution of -1 A and a lateral resolution of ~1\jl The one used for our 

measurements consisted of a conical diamond tip stylus of lfxm radius, with an adjustable force of 
M 1 to 30 mgf. One mgf was used for tracing soft metals like Au, Ag and Sn films, to minimize 

^ damage to the surface. The Talystep measures the thickness of a film by moving the stylus at a 

constant rate across a groove cut in the film or across the step between the film and the substrate at 
|| the edge of the sample. To minimize thermal gradients and vibrations that affect the performance of 

s the instrument on the most sensitive scales, the Talystep is enclosed in a plexiglas box and 

mounted on a vibration isolation table that in turn is placed on a granite slab in an air conditioned 

— room (ref,3) 

** Calibration of the instrument was done using a standard provided by Taylor-Hobson. It is 

= comprised of a frame and a base on which two glass plates are mounted. For checking the lower 

S magnification ranges the left hand plate has three grooves nominally 2.5 micrometer deep with an 



\~s 



uncertainty of ± 0.05 [im. To check the highest magnification; the right-hand plate has three 
grooves nominally 0.025 ^im deep with an uncertainty of ± 0.005 ^im. 

The Talysurf instrument is similar to the Talystep but operates over larger ranges with 
lower resolution. The program supplied with this instrument is able to measure many different 
shapes. Also, the stylus loading force is much greater, with a range from 75 to 100 mgf. A 
statistical analysis package, provided with the system, calculates both the mean value and standard 
deviation of the data values obtained from a series of measurement. Corrections for the accurate 
movement of the stylus arm and the size and shape of stylus tip are made by the computer. In 
order for the computer to make these corrections, a series of constants, whose values represent the 
characteristics of the individual stylus geometry, are required. These constants can be input via the 
keyboard or determined from a calibration routine automatically. 



DISCUSSION 



Examples of applications of stylus profilometry to different materials illustrate its ability to 
measure numerous features of exposed and unexposed surfaces. Nine examples will be discussed 
here. Figure 2 illustrates the ability to measure the roughness of a typical coated surface 
(unexposed iridium) on an optical flat of moderate quality. The RMS roughness is strongly 
influenced here by the longer period wave on the surface compared to the short period roughness. 
A sharp transition is shown in Figure 3 for an iridium sample scanned from exposed to unexposed 
areas. Even though the surface has a wave associated with it, a step of -3.6 nm increase in 
thickness on the exposed area is apparent. The roughness on the exposed surface is also obviously 
increased by spikes which so far have not been satisfactorily explained. The increase in thickness 
could result from contamination or modification of the film itself. Studies are still underway to 
interpret the cause. Figure 4 represents a stylus trace on the same iridium sample from unexposed 
to exposed area. Although the roughness of the exposed area varies over the surface, the increase 
in thickness is comparable (3.5 nm and 3.6 nm), except at the knife edge boundary for Figure 4; 
although the sloped surface of the knife edge might enhance contamination effects at the boundary, 
insufficient data exists to positively identify the cause of the feature. 

The gold film also shows a similar increase in thickness on the exposed area (-3.5 nm) 
however the gold surface does not exhibit the spikes on the exposed surface that were observed on 
the iridium surface. Figure 5 shows a stylus trace across one scratch in the unexposed area. 
Figure 6 shows a stylus trace across two scratches in the exposed region. Note that the rms 
roughness includes the depth of the scratches. The actual rms roughness on exposed was -1.0 nm 
and the unexposed was - 0.7 nm for the gold sample. 

Figure 7 shows how multilayer coatings can be resolved by the scratching and profiling, in 
some cases. In this figure a silver film deposited over a carbon film was investigated. The two 
scratches gave -19.4 nm and -20.1 nm for the unexposed carbon thickness and -33.3 and -31.3 
nm for the unexposed silver thickness. The exposed portion of the silver over carbon sample 
could not be resolved into two layers, but only one. The total thickness of this exposed area 
averaged -112.2 nm compared to the total of -52 nm for the unexposed area. See Figure 8. 

Figure 9 illustrates etching of polycrystalline carbon of such magnitude that the etch depth 
exceeds the range of the Talystep used above and required the use of the Talysurf. The very rough 
nature of exposed combustible materials that erode heavily with formation of volatile products has 
been documented by SEM and other imaging techniques. The stylus profilometer provides 



accurate measurements of the spikes or plateaus that form at locations of slower etch, and provides 
an estimate of the maximum etch depth. 

Polymethylmethacrylate, PMMA, is a plastic which is readily etched by atomic oxygen, 
forming a large number of small spikes at the bottom of the etch and a large etch step, as shown in 
Figure 10, and Figure 11. Figure 10, was traced on a sample mounted on the ambient temperature 
plate and Figure 11 is for a sample mounted on a separate thermally isolated plate of semi polished 
aluminum. The purpose was to examine the etch rate as a function of temperature. The small 
increase in etch in Figure 1 1 may be due to slightly higher temperature of the hot plate sample. The 
smooth plateau at the right of the etched area in Figure 10 is due to an artefact caused by the stylus 
catching on the large etch step and dragging the sample a short distance; heavily etched samples 
need to be secured for this reason. 



CONCLUSION 



Stylus profilometry is a very effective non destructive or minimal scratching technique to 
measure roughness, erosion depth and material growth of metals, polymers and carbons exposed 
to the atomic oxygen. 

We have demostrated that these instruments (Talystep and Talysurf), used in combination 
with some of the techniques mentioned (scratching, step and transition measurements), have a 
wide range of resolutions, from ~lA to a few hundred microns. 

Examples, like iridium film, show the reliability of the instrument, giving the same 
thickness value for the transition in any direction scanned. 

Stylus profilometry, by indicating decreases, or increases, in film thicknesses enables 
interpretations of changes in optical density measurements, i.e. whether thinning of the film or an 
increase in thickness with optical property changes are responsible for optical density changes. 



REFERENCES 



1 . Peters, P.N., Gregory, J.C., and Swan, J.T., "Effects on Optical Systems from 
Interactions with Oxygen Atoms in Low Earth Orbits," Applied Optics. 25. 1290-1298 
(1986). 

2. Peters, P.N., Sisk, R. C, and Gregory, J.C., "Velocity Distributions of Oxygen Atoms 
Incident on Spacecraft Surfaces," J. Spacecraft and Rockets. 25(1). 53-58 (1988). 

3. Bennett, J. M, and Dancy, J. H., "Stylus Profiling Instrument for Measuring Statistical 
Properties of Smooth Optical Surfaces," A pplied Optics. 20» 1785-1802 (1981). 



'*&' 





9 



9i 



c 



u 



u 







m 



GO- 



^ 



^ 

^ 

*- 



y 



?■ 
> 



o 

u 



5 



> 
> 



u 

to 



E 



^ 



ST 



^ 






K3 









GRK^fvJL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 



33_ 

T 



» 



.2k 



%. 






'A 



Q 



L3 



c: -J 






S 



o 



J1 

jE 












in 
ru - 




in - 


ORKWAL FACE JS 




OF POOR QUALITY 






-< 


1 i i 


?s 



S i "i 

si - 



i- 



4 



^ 

j. 




in 



V 







CD 



U i 

J i 

X" 

o : 






en 

-2 

St 

3" 
d 



ORIGJNAL page is 
OF POOR QUALITY 



wn 



^ 5 en 

: a c5 S 



> 



Q 0> 



Si 



Oil 






S3 ! 
in-j 

m I 



te 



o 
o 



z: 






tz? 



ssbi 




CO 
CO 






in 



« T 






2 



03JC!^L pace is 
OF POOR QUALITY 






in 



£ C5 

3 C 



— J 3 * 











ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUAU7Y 



i 



<S ! 



CO 

o 

£ J 



L3 



CO ; 



CSS ! 

to - 



S3 : 



C3_ 



a 



f ts 





^">? ! 






S- 



3D 



w 



< i 



— 4 .." , 


■< 
2 


> 

ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 


r: " 










l 






— ■ 


— 


^ 




— 












— — 



V T3 — 

Z " I 



~ CI 





C? 



CO 



3 






ORICINAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 






PoiycrystaUine Carbon (C9- 



05) 



65 [im 



o urn - 




» v 




Figure 9. Surface profile of PoIycristaUine Carbon 



W 



PMMA (C9-31) 



626 f^m -u 



t i 



r 

urn -| 



L 



538 ^m 



"1^ -^ <rih 



3.531 ii 



554 urn 



Figure 10. Surface profile of Polymethylmethacrylate at ambient temperature 




PMMA (C9H-03) 



626 



urn 



um -I 




vv^v^'vvyVs 



'■w'Y ^ 



J ■ *3& hi 



gure ii. surface profl ,e f Polymethylmethacrylate at 100 C above the 
ambient temperature 




m 



PINHOLE CAiMERAS AS SENSORS 

FOR ATOMIC OXYGEN IN ORBIT; APPLICATION TO 

ATTITUDE DETERMINATION OF THE LDEF 



Palmer N. Peters 
Space Science Laboratory, NASA/MSFC 
Huntsville, Alabama 35812 
Phone: 205/544-7728, Fax: 205/544-7754 



John C. Gregory 
The University of Alabama in Huntsville* 

Huntsville, Alabama 35899 
Phone: 205/895-6028, Fax: 205/895-6349 



SUMMARY 



Images produced by pinhole cameras using film sensitive to 
atomic oxygen provide information on the ratio of spacecraft 
orbital velocity to the most probable thermal speed of oxygen 
atoms, provided the spacecraft orientation is maintained stable 
relative to the orbital direction. Alternatively, as described 
here, information on the spacecraft attitude relative to the 
orbital velocity can be obtained, provided that corrections are 
properly made for thermal spreading and a co-rotating atmosphere. 
The LDEF orientation, uncorrected for a co- rotating atmosphere, 
was determined to be yawed 3.0° + 0.4° from its nominal attitude, 
with an estimated + 0.35° oscillation in yaw. The integrated 
effect of inclined orbit and co-rotating atmosphere produces an 
apparent oscillation in the observed yaw direction, suggesting 
-hat the LDEF attitude measurement will indicate even better 
stability when corrected for a co-rotating atmosphere. The 
measured thermal spreading is consistent with major exposure 
occurring during high solar activity, which occurred late during 
the LDEF mission. 



INTRODUCTION 

A requirement to study the LDEF attitude was identified and 
a pinhole camera was developed for this purpose as part of 
Experiment A0114 (refs. 1-3). The atomic oxygen sensitive 
pinhole camera uses the fact that oxygen atoms dominate the 
atmosphere in low-Earth orbits, and formation of a nearly 



w Wor:< supported in part by a grant from UAH Research Institute 
and NASA grant NAGW-812 and contract NAS8-36645. 

O&C^t PAGE IS 
1 OF POOR QUALITY 



n 



w 



ccllimated beam of oxygen atoms passing through a pinhole in a 
satellite front surface occurs as a result of the orbital 
velocity being greater than the most probable Maxwell-Boltzmann 
speed of the oxygen atoms* Thus, the range of incidence angles 
of atoms to satellite surfaces is very limited, as shown by the 
angular distribution curves for two different temperatures in 
fig. 1 and described in greater detail elsewhere (ref. 4). The 
same maximum oxygen atom intensity was used for both temperatures 
to illustrate how the intensity spreads into the wings for higher 
temperatures^ A thin film of material (silver in this case), 
which is sensitive to atomic oxygen, then forms an image of the 
impact spot . 

The temperature of the t he rmo sphere depends upon solar 
activity; the 700 K temperature in fig. 1- is characteristic of a 
solar minimum and the 1500 K is closer to a solar maximum. LDEF 
altitude was high during the solar minimum of September 1986 
(initially deployed at 480 km in April 1984) where oxygen density 
was lower and had decayed by the time solar maximum was reached 
in June 1989 (recovery occurred at 310 km in January 1990) . Most 
of the exposure in the pinhole camera, occurred close to solar 
maximum when the altitude was lower, the oxygen density was 
greater, and the angular distribution for atom incidence was 
widest. As will be described later, a well-defined spot was 
measured en the pinhole camera's silver sensor surface. Although 
overall darkening from overexposure (scattered atoms within the 
camera) was observed, this spot has been interpreted as being 
from the direct incidence beam and was used to determine the 
orientation of the LDEF relative to the orbital velocity. 

MEASUREMENTS 



** The pinhole camera consisted of a 0.3 mm thick stainless steel 

_ hemisphere 3.25 cm (1.28 in. ) radius, polished on the concave 

H surface and coated with vacuum-evaporated silver. Silver was 

^ used because it discolors from formation of oxide (ref. 5) . The 

pinhole had a conical shape with an included angle much wider 
H than the maximum atom incidence angle and terminated as knife 

m edges at a pinhole diameter of 0.5 mm (0.020 in.). The pinhole 

was positioned at the center of the silvered hemisphere. As 
H shown in fig. 2, the exposure at any point on the hemisphere will 

B depend upon the solid angle subtended by the pinhole from that 

^ point and the point's angular displacement from the orbital 

„ direction, i.e., the atom fluence as a function of angle from the 

= velocity vector as shown in fig. 1 # For orientations within 10" 

^ of the orbital direction, the solid angle subtended by the 

pinhole is constant within 2%; the predominant effects of pinhole 
jp size and thus solid angle are to reduce the overall fluence, or 

„ exposure, and increase resolution by reducing pinhole size. 



o 



Thus, -he spot produced behind the pinhole should be centered 
with the LDEF's velocity vector and the spot's intensity should 
correspond to the distribution shown in fig. 1. Any variation in 
the attitude of the LDEF's velocity vector relative to the 
atmosphere would cause the spot to wander, producing a 
nonspherical, larger than normal, spot compared to that produced 
by thermal spreading of the beam. 

Two techniques were used to determine the spot center and 
its shape: the first technique involved measurements taken 
directly from an enlarged photograph of the hemisphere taken on- 
axis with a 120 mm format camera and a 80 mm macro lens, and the 
second technique involved digitizing a 512 x 512 pixel CCD video 
camera image of the hemisphere and processing it to obtain both 
the spot and hemisphere centers and the spot geometry. Both 
techniques gave similar results. 



DISCUSSION 



Assuming that misalignment of the pinhole camera relative to 
the LDEF frame was negligible (machined surfaces and robust 
structures offer assurance of this), an LDEF orbiting with 
nominal attitude should have produced a spot centered on the 
hemisphere and uniformly round. The actual spot, as shown in 
fig. 3, was off-center, as would be produced by 8° + 0.4° clock- 
wise yaw viewed from the space end. The spot was elliptical 
(major axis 14.8° and minor axis 14. 1°, as subtended from the 
pinhole), with the major axis in the satellite yaw direction. It 
is noted that a yaw of 8° should have narrowed the spot in the 
yaw direction, not widened it as observed; thus, an oscillation 
in atom incidence along the yaw direction is the likely cause. 
This originally led us to conclude that the LDEF oscillated in 
the yaw direction (i.e., about its long axis) , but it has been 
brought to our attention (Bourrassa, private communication, 1990) 
that a co-rotating Earth's atmosphere interacting with an in- 
clined orbit produces an oscillation in the angle of incidence of 
oxygen atoms at the surface. We have verified that the oscilla- 
tion occurs in the yaw direction, as observed, but the maximum 
range should be about +_ 1.5°, not the estimated +_ 0.35° obtained 
from the ellipticity measured on the spot. While the center of 
the spot is rather well defined and is believed to be the average 
orientation for the LDEF, oscillations, thermal spreading, and 
other influences on exposure, such as multiple scattering must be 
separated. Some considerations are: 

1. The exposure of the silver was an integrated effect 
which occurred over 5 3/4 years, over a wide range in oxygen atom 
temperature, and with an excess background from 
multiply-scattered atoms . However, most of the oxygen exposure 
was received during the last six months of the flight. 



03K^WAL PAGE I! 
OF POOR QUAUT 



2. We .have not been able to depth profile the exposed 
silver film, particularly across the spot. Although a nearly 
circular bulieye pattern suggests a profile similar to those in 
rig. 1, we have not yet devised a satisfactory technique for 
measuring optically opaque profiles. 

3. Without a depth-composition profile it is not possible 
co fit the oxygen exposure to a known temperature distribution 
and there is some uncertainty as to the exact limits of the spot 
diameter (i.e., where the spot ends and the background takes 
over) ; however, it appears that rings on the spot represent equal 
thicknesses of oxide and provide the measured ellipticity. The 
minor axis of the spot could reDresent temperatures as high as 
1500 K if assigned FWHM in fig. 1. 

4. An oscillating structure and the apparent oscillation 
caused by an inclined orbit and rotating atmosphere do not yield 
the same angular flux distribution in a pinhole camera. An 
oscillating structure sweeps rapidly through the zero displace- 
ment and pauses at the extreme angular displacement; The opposite 
is true for the rotating atmosphere effect. Thus, a mechanical 
oscillation has a larger integral effect on spot diameter for the 
same number of degrees of oscillation. We are calculating these 
profiles with atmospheric oscillations included. Further study 
is needed to accurately determine the LDEF's range of oscilla- 
tion. 

Analysis by x-ray diffraction of the black powder flaking 
from much of the camera interior confirmed that it 'was Ag 2 0. For 
reasons yet unknown, the primary exposed spot was more stable 
than the rest of the background exposed surface; this assisted 



^ 



ur invest! cat ion. 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The authors are grateful for continued assistance from David 
Carter, William Kinard, and Jim Jones of the NASA Langley 
Research Center; to Howard Foulke of the General Electric Company 
for explanations of their satellite stabilization studies; to 
William Witherow for digital image measurements; and to Charles 
Sisk for computer assistance. 



ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 



H 



REFERENCES 



Clark, 1. G. , Xinard, W. H. , Carter, D . J. , and Jones, J, 
L., Jr., Eds., "The Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) : 
Mission 1 Experiments," NASA SP-473, Scientific and 
Technical Information Branch, NASA, Washington, D.C. (1984) 

•Siegel, S. K. and Das, A,, "Passive Stabilization of the 
LDEF," Final Report on contract NASI-13440, GE Document No, 
74SD4264, November 1974, General Electric Company, 
Astrospace Division, Philadelphia, PA. 

Siegel, S. H. and Vishwanath, N. S., "Analysis of the 
Passive Stabilization of the LDEF, " GE Document No. 
78SD4218, August 1977, General Electric Company, Astrospace 
Division, Philadelphia, PA. 



Peters, P. N., Sisk, R. C, and Gregory, J. C. 
Distributions of Oxygen Atoms Incident o 
Surfaces," J. Spacecraft and Rockets , 25 (1) f 5 

Thomas, R. J. and 3aker, D. J., "Silver Film Atomic Oxygen 
Sensors," Can. J. ?hys. f =_Q., 1675 (1972). 



— Jr _. „, "Velocity 
ncident on Soacecraft 
'3-58* (1938) . 



ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 



FIGURE CAPTIONS 

Fig . l . Intensity cf oxygen atoms versus incidence angle, 
cap-theta, in degrees from the orbital ram direction for two 
equilibrium temperatures of the atoms. 

Fig. 2. Schematic cf pinhole camera with off-centered spot due 
"o yaw of the LDEF and showing thermal spreading about the spot 
center due to the effect shown in Fig, 1.* 

Fig, 3, Photograph of exposed silver hemisphere from pinhole 
camera'/ overall dark flaking area is interpreted as overexposure 
from multi-scattered atoms, and the spot, which is more stable, 
is believed to be from direct incidence. 



m 



m 



m 
m 




-3 



10 10 

CAP-THETA 



§ 






Wf 



ORBITAL I DIRECTION 




CENTER OF 

HEMISPHERE 

ON THE SURFACE 



CENTER OF SPOT 



'"'I *- 




CO 






ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 



Measurement of the Passive Attitude Control 
Performance of a Recovered Spacecraft 

J. C. Gregory and P. N. Peters 



Reprinted from 



Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics 



Volume 15, Number 1, January-February 1992, Pages 282-284 

1A1AA 

A publication of the 

American institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. !nc 

Tt ^ ;e r csoace Cente r 2"0 L Enfant Or omenade SW 



282 



J. GUIDANCE 



VOL. 15, NO. i 



PRECEWN6 PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED 



Measurement of the Passive Attitude 

Control Performance of a 

Recovered Spacecraft 

J. C. Gregory* 

University of Alabama in Huntsville, Huntsville, 

Alabama 35899 

and 

P. N. Peterst 

NASA Marshal! Space Flight Center, Huntsville, 

Alabama 35812 

Introduction 

WE report a direct measurement of the attitude-stability 
of the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) using a 
novel silver detector. The University of Alabama in Huntsville 
(UAH) experiment A-01I4, designed primarily to investigate 
reactions of atmospheric atomic oxygen with materials* sur- 
faces in orbit, 1 also carried a passive device to record the atti- 
tude of the vehicle in its orbit. The device showed that the 
LDEF maintained a very stable attitude during its flight of 
almost six years. There was a permanent stable offset of 8.0 
± 0.4 deg from nominal in the yaw plane and 1 deg in pitch. 
The LDEF was a hollow, cylindrical, 12-sided spacecraft, 9.1 
m (30 ft) long, 4.3 m (14 ft) in diameter, weighing 9,720 kg 
(21,400 lb). It was built by NASA Langley Research Center 
and was launched at an altitude of 480 km by the Space Shut- 
tle Challenger in April 1984 and retrieved by the Columbia in 
January 1990 at an altitude of 310 km. The spacecraft carried 
neither a telemetry system nor active attitude measuring and 
control systems. The facility was designed to stabilize in orbit 
in the gravity-gradient mode with its long axis parallel to the 
Earth radius. Predicted rotation about this axis was uncertain. 

Background 

A long cylindrical object in a circular orbit readily stabilizes 
about its pitch and roll axes such that its long axis (now that of 



Received Sept. 10, 1990; revision received Oct. 25, 1990; accepted 
for publication Oct. 25, 1990. Copyright © 1991 by the American In- 
stitute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc. No copyright is asserted 
in the United States under Title 17, U.S. Code. The U.S. Government 
has a royalty-free license to exercise all rights under the copyright 
claimed herein for Governmental purposes. All other rights are re- 
served by the copyright owner. 

•Professor of Chemistry and Materials Science, Department of 
Chemistry. 

+ Phy<iirisi. Mail Code ES 63, Space Science Laboratory. 



yaw) is pointing toward the Earth's center. Three-axis stabi- 
lization (including the yaw axis) may be achieved if the mo- 
ments of inertia about the pitch and roll axes differ by a 
suitable amount. When forced to rotate at orbital rate by grav- 
ity gradient torques, a spacecraft will tend to move, that is, 
rotate about its yaw axis toward the orientation of maximum 
moment of inertia. The LDEF spacecraft was stabilized in this 
way by placing weights on the front and back surfaces. In ad- 
dition, a magneto-viscous damper was used to absorb un- 
wanted angular momentum. This attitude stabilization 
allowed placement on the LDEF front surface of several ex- 
periments to study the effects of atmospheric gases (mostly 
atomic oxygen at those altitudes) on materials' surfaces. The 
effects, including erosion of carbon and polymers, corrosion 
of silver, and oxide film growth on many metals, may be de- 
pendent on incidence angle of the gas atoms at the surface. 
Thus the angular offset of the LDEF attitude in its orbit must 
be known. Predictions of the capture and attitude stability of 
the LDEF had been performed, 2 - 3 including the effects of or- 
bit eccentricity, solar pressure, aerodynamic forces, magnetic 
dipole, and the magnetically anchored rate damper. Predic- 
tions of offsets in pitch, roll, and yaw, and oscillations about 
these offsets were also made. Although residual damping tor- 
ques from the magnetic damper were not negligible after atti- 
tude stability was achieved, the predicted offsets were dom- 
inated by aerodynamic forces. These result when the center of 
mass of the spacecraft does not coincide with the center of 
pressure (assumed to be at the geometric center). Displace- 
ment of these centers along the yaw axis (local vertical) results 
in pitch offset, and displacement along the pitch axis results in 
yaw. The yaw offsets and uncertainties are much larger since 
the restoring torques are two orders of magnitude less than 
those for pitch. Predicted maximum offset angles for the final 
configuration were 1 to 2 deg in pitch and up to 30 deg in 
yaw. 3 Roll errors were small but in any event unmeasurable by 
the UAH device. 

Experimental Measurement 

The atmosphere at altitudes of several hundred kilometers 
consists predominantly of oxygen atoms produced by dissocia- 
tion of 2 molecules by solar ultraviolet photons. As a satel- 
lite moves through this thin but chemically reactive atmos- 
phere, oxygen atoms impinge on its front surface at satellite 
velocity (approximately 8 km/s), modified somewhat by the 
random thermal velocities of the atoms themselves. The sens- 
ing device uses the property of silver to adsorb oxygen atoms 
with high efficiency, being converted to silver oxide. The op- 
tical appearance, transmission, reflectivity, and electrical pro- 
perties of silver films are drastically changed during this pro- 
cess. The phenomenon has been used to measure atomic 
oxygen concentration on sounding rockets 4 and to measure 



JAN. -FEB. 1992 



ENGINEERING NOTES 



283 



the angular distribution of 5 eV (8 km/s) oxygen atoms scat- 
tered from a solid surface in low Earth orbit. 5 This is the first 
application of the technique to attitude sensing on orbital ve- 
hicles. 

The device consisted of a hemispherical stainless steel cup, 
radius 32.5 mm (1 .28 in.), coated on the inside surface with an 
evaporated Ag film 5 j*m thick. The cup, facing forward in the 
nominal orbital direction, was mounted behind a plate with a 
hole, 0.5 mm (0.020 in.) in diameter, positioned at the center 
of the hemisphere. This aperture admitted the atomic oxygen 
flux into the device during the entire 5.75 years of the flight, 
though the planned duration was only 10 months. Though the 
silver film was severely overexposed, nevertheless the impact 
zone of the orbital-velocity oxygen atoms on the film is clearly 
evident in Fig. 1. During the flight, it is estimated that 2 x 
10 19 oxygen atoms entered the device. These atoms diverged 
from the orifice with an angular distribution dependent on gas 
temperature and satellite velocity as previously described. 6 
They struck a zone on the hemisphere approximately 0.8 cm in 
diameter. This provided a dose of 4 x 10 19 atoms cm -2 to the 
Ag film in this zone, enough to heavily oxidize the film. Ox- 
ygen atoms were then diffusely reflected by the Ag 2 surface 
and again off the back of the aluminum mounting plate. Since 
the entire Ag film in the detector was heavily oxidized, as 
clearly seen in the photograph, recombination of atoms to 2 
(which does not significantly react with Ag) is not a dominant 
process. There was evidence of fresh silver revealed behind 
portions of peeled Ag 2 film. Though all portions of the film 
have received large doses of atomic oxygen, the area struck by 
the fast atoms entering the device is qualitatively different and 
produced a visible elliptical spot of more adherent oxide seen 
in Fig. 1. The dimensions of this spot are shown diagram- 
matically in Fig. 2, and its offset with respect to the center of 
the circle, which is the projection of the detector hemisphere, 
were recorded. The device was placed on the spacecraft so that 
if the attitude of LDEF had been nominal, the oxidation spot 
would have been in the center of the disk. Angular offset of 
the vehicle from nominal results in an equal angular displace- 
ment of the centroid of the spot from the center of the disk. 
The size and shape of the spot are related to both the tempera- 
ture of the orbital gas and to the stability of the vehicle about 
its mean position. Oscillation about either yaw or pitch axis 





Fig. 2 Diagrammatic representation of Fig. 
dinates referred to in Table 1. 



showing the coor- 



would cause elongation of the spot in orthogonal directions. 
The viewer sees both Figs. 1 and 2 in the same sense, looking 
backward along the velocity vector, as if looking at the inside 
of the cup through the small aperture in the front plate. The 
point (0,0) in Fig. 2 is the center of the flat projection of the 
hemispherical cup, while (p,q) is the geometric center of the 
elliptical oxide spot observed. If the orientation of LDEF had 
been perfect, (p,q) and (0,0) would have coincided. 

Measurements were made in two ways. The silver cup was 
directly viewed with a digital image analysis system using a 5 1 2 
x 512 CCD camera. The centroid of the circular image of the 
cup was found, and its separation from the centroid of the 
slightly elliptical spot was measured. In the second method, a 
photographic image of Fig. 1 (made with a Mamiya 645 
camera and 80 mm Macro lens) was directly measured. The 
combined results are shown in Table 1. Corrections for curva- 
ture were insignificant over the angular range of interest and 
were not included. 

Discussion 

Before the size and shape of the spot produced on the silver 
film in our device may be used to estimate the motions of the 
spacecraft about its center of mass, we must establish the 
broadening due to thermal motions of the gas atoms. The an- 
gular dispersion of atoms passing through an orifice in an or- 
biting plate has been calculated as a function of temperature 
by Peters et al. 6 and is shown in Table 2. The effect of temper- 
ature is shown here in the speed ratio S r , which relates the 
satellite speed to the most probable Maxwell-Boltzmann speed 
of the atoms. The width of the angular distribution of atoms 
passing through an orifice in a plate under these conditions in- 
creases markedly with temperature. Gas temperatures at orbi- 
tal attitudes vary strongly with cyclical solar activity. LDEF 
was in orbit for a full half solar cycle during which the mean 
gas temperature may have varied over the range of 700-1500 
K, corresponding to angular distributions of 10.4-15 deg. We 
believe that the minor diameter of the elliptical spot (14. 1 deg) 
is consistent with the gas temperature during the flight, and no 
evidence exists for broadening caused by significant instability 
in the spacecraft pitch plane. 

The observed ellipticity (1.05) with the major axis in the 
satellite yaw plane indicates an instability of 0.4 ±0.15 deg 



Table 1 Measured coordinates and ellipticity of the oxygen atom 
impact zone [the point (0,0) is at the center of the device] 



Fig. 1 Photograph (pian view) of the exposed attitude-measuring de- 
vice after retrieval from orbit. The impact zone of the orbital velocity 

owgen atoms is visible as an ellipse slightly off center. 



Coordinates of spot centroid (p,q) 


Major, minor 

axes of spot 

(a.b) 


10 " 3 in. deg 


deg 


-{178 ± 8. 21 ± 8) (8.0 ± 0.4, 1.1 ±0.4) 


(14.8. 14.1) 



J. GUIDANCE 



VOL. 15, NO. I 



Table 2 Calculations of the angular distribution function for 

oxygen atoms passing through an orifice in an orbital plane 

at various gas temperatures 



-■ — ■ 




Angular 




Speed 


width 


Temperature, 


ratio/ 


FWHM, b 


K 


s r 


deg 


■ 
[ 600 


9.87 


9.60 


700 


9.13 


10.36 


800 


8.54 


11.06 


900 


8.06 


11.70 


1000 


7.64 


12.32 


1100 


7.29 


12.90 


1200 


6.98 


13.44 


1300 


6.70 


13.97 


1400 


6.46 


14,48 


1600 


6.04 


15.44 


1800 


5.70 


16.32 


2000 


5.40 


17.16 



a The speed ratio of the saielliie velocity (with respect to a stationary at- 
mosphere) taken here as 7.77 knvs to the most probable speed for a Maxwell- 
Bolizmann distribution for O atoms at the given temperature. 

b FuII width at half maximum. 



(full width) in this plane over a significant portion of the orbi- 
tal exposure.* Since the detector system records all angular in- 
stabilities on top of one another, time-dependent instabilities 
cannot be resolved. The result is weighted by oxygen-atom ex- 
posure rather than just time averaged. Since the O atom densi- 
ty is exponential with decreasing altitude and the LDEF 
descended in its orbit at an increasing rate, the bulk of the ox- 
ygen exposure was accumulated during the last few months 
before capture. However, the attitude instabilities themselves 
are most likely to have been caused by aerodynamic forces. 
These were also at maximum during the latter portion of the 
flight as the satellite entered the denser regions of the atmos- 
phere. Thus, the yaw instability of ±0.2 deg may only have 
occurred late in the flight. 

Conclusions 

Evidence from the passive attitude detector on experiment 
A0I 14 showed that the LDEF spacecraft maintained a highly 



Jit has been observed 7 that the corotation of ihe atmosphere with 
the Earth itself would produce a deviation of ±1.5 deg in incidence 
angle of the atmosphere with the LDEF from surface as it crossed the 
equator. Such an effect, which we believe to be real, would be indistin- 
guishable from an oscillation in yaw. 



stable attitude during its 5.75-year night. There was a small off- 
set yaw of 8.0 ± 0,4 deg clockwise from nominal attitude as 
viewed from space. There also appeared to be an oscillation of 
±0.2 deg about this offset yaw. J The satellite was pitched 
slightly forward by about 1 deg (space end leading). Those ex- 
periments on the LDEF that depend on orientation relative to 
the forward direction, such as atomic oxygen reaction cross- 
section measurements, may need to be corrected for the angu- 
lar offset. The gravity-gradient mode of spacecraft 
stabilization has great cost benefits over those using active 
systems, particularly for long-lived missions, but uncertainty 
in yaw stability has been a concern for many applications. 
With demonstration of the high degree of stability about the 
yaw axis experienced by the LDEF, the instabilities predicted 
for passively stabilized spacecraft may be reduced. 

Acknowledgments 

The authors are grateful for continued assistance from 
David Carter, William Kinard, and Jim Jones of the NASA 
Langley Research Center over the extended lifetime of this 
project; to Howard Foulke of the General Electric Company 
for explanations of their satellite stabilization predictions; and 
to William Witherow for digital image measurement. The in- 
strument was built with a grant from the UAH Research Insti- 
tute and data analysis at UAH was supported in part by 
NAGW-812 and NAS8-36645. 

References 

'Clark. L. G., Kinard, W. H., Carter, D. J., and Jones, J. L. f Jr. 
(eds.), "The Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF): Mission 1 Ex- 
periments," Scientific and Technical Information Branch, NASA, 
NASA SP-473, Washington, DC, 1984. 

: Siegel, S. H., and Das, A., "A Passive Stabilization of the 
LDEF," General Electric Company, Final Report on contract NASl- 
13440,' GE Document No. 74SD4264, Astrospace Division, Phila- 
delphia, PA, Nov. 1974. 

3 Siegel t S. H. t and Vishwanath, N. S., "Analysis of the Passive Sta- 
bilization of the LDEF," General Electric Company, GE Document 
No 78SD4218, Astrospace Division, Philadelphia, PA, Aug. 1977. 

4 Thomas, R. J., and Baker, D. J.. "Silver Film Atomic Oxygen 
Sensors," Canadian Journal of Physics, Vol. 50, 1972, p. 1676. 

5 Gregory, J. C and Peters, P. N., "A Measurement of the Angu- 
lar Distribution of 5eV Atomic Oxygen Scattered Off a Solid Surface 
in Earth Orbit," Rarefied Gas Dynamics, edited by V. Boffi and C. 
Cercignani, Vol. 15, No. 1, 1986, p. 644-656. 

6 Peters, P. N., Sisk, R. C, and Gregory, J. C, "Velocity Distribu- 
tions of Oxygen Atoms Incident on Spacecraft Surfaces," Journal of 
Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 25, No. I, 1988, pp. 53-58. 

7 Bourrassa, R., The Boeing Company, private communication, 
June 1991. 



combined with lack of evidence of exten- 
sive spontaneous internalization of cell- 
surface dass II molecules, suggested that 
these ire newiy synthesized MHC pro- 
teins on their wiy to the surface. The 
findings implied Uut class II MHC mol- 
ecules are present from the earliest con- 
tact between antigen and the cellular pro- 
cessing machinery, and may potentially 
bind antigenic peptides as soon as they 
become available, shielding them for 
further degradation'"' L \ 

Such early rendezvous of class II MHC 
and antigen was not observed by Peters et 
al. 1 . Although agreeing that it is newly 
synthesized class II molecules rather than 
those recycled from the cell surface that 
are detected in the endocyrotic system, 
they find that class II MHC proteins in the 
endocyiotic pathway are confined primar- 
ily to structures resembling rysosomes; 
that is, much further along the pathway 
than early endosomes. According to this 
picture, endocytosed antigens must run 
nearly the full gamut of acid pH and endo- 
somal proteolysis before having the 
opportunity to bind class II molecules, 
suggesting that antigenic peptides would 
have to be hardy survivors of the endo- 
somal degradative system. In this regard, 
Peters et at. observed that it took 20-50 
minutes for a proteolytkally resistant 
endocytosed molecule to reach the lysom- 
some -like compartments containing class 
II molecules; meanwhile, the more readily 
degraded bovine serum albumin molecule 
was detected there only poorly, implying 
that proteolysis takes its toll of material 
moving in to deeper structures. 

Clearly, there are labile T-cell determi- 
nants that are not presented well from 
endocytosed antigens "or whose presenta- 
tion is markedly enhanced by inhibition of 
cellular proteolytic activity**. Whether 
this functional degradation of T-cell deter- 
minants observed in biological assays 
results from a prolonged trip towards class 
II MHC in an increasingly harsh endosom- 
al environment requires direct inform- 
ation; failure to detect molecules by elec- 
tron microscopy does not necessarily 
mean that T-cell epitopes could not be 
pulled from the digest by MHC molecules. 
Further, although the lag period of 30-60 
minutes needed for endocytosed antigen 
to become available for T<eU recogni 



Come in LDEF, your time is up 




The first satellite to be recovered br a sonce aburtfe th*l*n.rL M «f_c 

^(Il^waaretri^^ 

dim and rays. IT* experiment reported by Fbhnm* >J^£1^£^ 
may indicate the kind of surprise, a* ^fJp^ZM^J^Z^ 

270kmbeJowLDEFsorWt, ^ba«ahatf4ifeofoal y 53 0^, » Aat^au^ 
^^o^oerptam 



tion" fits neatly with the time taken by 
antigen id travel to the lysosome-like 
MHC-comaining structures, it ts not 
established that this is the rate-Hmiting 
step in antigen presentation. On the other 
hand, the observation by Peters et al. that 
intracellular class II MHC molecules have 
half-lives of hours may explain why anti- 
gen presentation can persist for hours 
after cellular protein synthesis has been 
inhibited". 

How can the findings of Guagliardi et 
al." and Peters et al.' be reconciled? 
Information is needed on how results 
656 



could be affected by use of different ceil 
lines, or ceils cultured under different con- 
ditions. The degree of resolution of 
molecules is also a consideration, but here 
one would expect that the thawed cryosec- 
tions used by Peters et al. would be more 
sensitive than the plastic-embedded mat- 
erial of Guagliardi et al. In any event, no 
technique has yet revealed where the asso- 
ciation between antigen and dass 
molecules actually occurs. Experiments 
addressing functional association — that 
is, experiments using T-cell recognition - 
will probably be required in order to 
resolve this issue. 

There are afco pressing questions on the 
related immunology. For instance, n 
there a way by which endogenously syn- 
thesized antigens (for a review see ref. 19) 
could enter a comp artment to associate 

NLJ.4 



PJ.. NM)tt. )J.. Oor*cftOt. V.. . 

H J Mm M* 6*9-676 0991). 

2. rMtfai. J.W « Banrar*. JA CUT 62. 203-306 

Pwt»m. P. -Willi 674-675 41990). 
Tomand. A. mm. MMtfi 840. 443-.ua (19991. 
r«yton. L #f * Mum 149. 39-44 (1990». 

am*. 60ottantt*n,r £•##* 707-716(1990) 
N^f*«. u, SftNon. v., *t*1. PJ., Gtutt. HJ. A 
*»0ffi. H.L. Of 68. 171 - 183 (19901. 
Grvmri. i * How*). K.E 4. %* cm* A* 1 
453- 481(1989). 

Gnfftm* G.. Bk* R 4 U#n* M /CM»c/lM 
2 703-2720(19991. 
10 Blum, j S 4 OwmiI. P Aoc. ntn. Awd Sa USA 
•S 3975 -3973 (1988) 



with dass II MHC, other dun by uptake at 
the cell surface? Are there mechanisms in 
the cuss n/antigen presentation system 
similar to those uncovered for dass I such 
as molecules which actively translocate 
peptides to compartments for MHC asso- 
ciation, or the need to form a complex 
with antigen as a prerequisite for transport 
of MHC to the cell surface? Finally, can 
the observation that protein antigens are 
presented by intact antigen-presenting 
celh faster and at much lower concentra- 
tions than expected from studies with isol- 
ated molecules* be explain by how pep- 
tide and MHC meet m spedalized 
intracellular compartments? a 

Outftesj Hacken * « The ttbt* institute. 

^^Jfg™*^ ******. few 
sytomnla 19104. USA. 



« ■ QM f l ?y.- L g -5* ***** U3-139O990V 

ta. ur*£ato*n, r. « urn*, ul i **m 141 

£ 1 SZ!!!H t ^ m, f XmmutM . 625-838 (1988). 
921-931 ,19891. ^^ 

X £UL2 * nmWn r0rt,y10 233-234(1989) 

^^SbV 4 MCC0W - * *"~ " 7 

NATURE VOL 349 21 FEBRUARY 1991 



PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED 

GSK5INAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 



0*G1NAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 



i-ntr* .^ 



■* 



\m*m+L«* *m ******* l-T> 

JL «NV%. L It ft A«t k 14* Cfepc» to* Unfe L. 





XlMHIt BtoJtar* * Oi 4« u* * i SS*, JBS- JS7 OMR 

i. P. A. Mv. * 0. * mm. li F ***** i IML »l -US ttSWB. 
UT.tiAKtuc apn to* Mrartl U UHcnt t. t u**, ia-kJ 4S6-49S 



AOIOMiDIBCNTS. Ifw* J»n* 



I JOnl 



Observation of 7 Be on the 
surface of LDEF spacecraft 

CL 1 FWiman* t B. A. Harmont, J* C. Grafocyt, 

T. A. Parn-jf*, P. Paten* 0. W. ftawapat, S. E. Kbit!, 

R. A. AufiutL J. C WHart, J. K Cider** 

P. S. lia*Mn«1, J. L McKkeoci*, D. W. By*, 

A. ft. Weae^nbergar*, It B. PUrcay" A T. Dyfatar" 

• Spac* Science Laboratory. Code E562. NASA Marshafl Space Right Center, 
Alabama 3581Z USA 

t IHversfties Space Research Association. ttatsviHa, 
AJaoama 35806, USA 

* Department of Chemistry. Uhfcersrty of Alabama in Kj*sv**, K^itsvUa, 
Alabama 35B99. USA 

i taw* Research Laboratory. Wasrangtcn DC 20375-5000. USA 
| Sachs/Freeman Associates. Washington, 0C 20375-5000. USA 
lUsversity of Rorida. Gafvsvtle. Rorida 32609, USA 

# Inetrojte for Spaca Sciance and Tachnolot>, Gainesviae. 
Honda 32609. USA 

•• Department of ***** Mfestsuppt Stat* University. Mssissippi State, 
I3976ZUSA 



THE Long Duration Expaamre FacJUty (LDEF\ aa orWtiag 
a ami ■aid satellite, wu recently returned to Earth after almost 
iU|««Jila»f«^FroairaaUo«aiTtty«e«ar«»«*t»,w«BaTefaaa4 
rigwftcaet ejaaatitJes ef the kwcoae 7 Be ea the leading edge (bat 
oaiy aa the leadlag edge) of LDEF. Although the akeomte atasee- 
pberic concentration af T Be needed to exalala this detection li 
txtnmt\y small <10~ T atom cm'\ its concentration at LDEFs 
altitude (310 km) must he several orders or magnitude higher than 
la me stratosphere below, where it is produced by ceeamlc-ray 
reactions with atmospheric ahrogea aad oxyg ea aaclei. To explain 
the presence af 7 Be oa the aarf ace of LDEF, H mast first he rapidly 
and eftcieutly transported ta hifh altitudes, and then adsorbed 
oata the tvface af the spacecraft Neither process had hcea 
expected. Ov detection nay therefore lead tn the use ef *Be as 
as cxa-ataMspberk tracer, as well as to stadias of aarf ace mterac* 
tieaeflu spaca. 

The LDEF spacecraft was launched by the spice shuttle 
ChaBenger oo 7 Apnl I9S4 into a nearly circular orbit with an 
incarnation of 2tS* aad an altitude of 4*0 km. It was retrieved 
by the space shuttle Columbia on 12 January 1990 at an altitude 
of 310 km. Because of its large mass, long space exposure and 
the wide variety of materials onboard, the LDEF provided a 
unique opportunity for induced radioactivity studies. These 
measurements are still in progress and will be reported else- 
where, 

71k LDEF spacecraft is a twelve-sided cylindrical aluminium 
structure, 9.1 m long by 4 3 m in diameter (see Fig. 1 ). It consists 
of as open grid to which were attached various experiment trays 
designed to measure the effects of long space exposure on 
spacecraft materials and components. Throughout its orbital 
lifetime, the spacecraft wu passively stabilized about all three 
axes of rotation, allowing one end of the spacecraft to point 

67$ 



always inward the Earth, and fixed leading s*d trailing odes 

with respect to the orbital motions. 

After its return to the Kennedy Space Center, gamma-ray 
spectra were obtained along each side of the spacecraft amng 
a germaasum detector amy prtmded by the Naval Research 
Laboratory. Measurement* were also made of selected I com- 
ponents from the spacecraft. The gamma-ray line at 471keV 
from the radioactive decay of 'Be was unamWguousry observed 
to emanate from the leading side of the spacecraft, ",* ho 7 B J" 
Fig. 1. The weaker signal observed from the trailing side of the 
spacecraft can be traced to the attenuated gamma-ray flux from 
the leading surfaces. 

Individual components were brought to the M * nhaU _5!^ 
Bight Center to quantify the residual radioactivity on the LDEF. 
A high-parity germanium detector inside a low-level background 
facility was used to obtain spectra of small aluminium ind steel 
samples taken from the leading and trailing sides. In Ftg> 2 *nd 
3, gamma-ray spectra of two identical aluminium plates and 
two sted trunnion end pieces taken from the leading and trailing 
sides of me spacecraft are showa. A dear 'Be signal w as see n 
on the leading side, with little or no signal above background 
on the trailing side. 

A po&shed aluminium plate, used as a thermal control s urface 
in LDEF experiment A0114 (ret 1), was subjected to several 
tests to determine the depth of penetration and the form of 
deposition of the 'Be. The surface was coated with cc4k*Son, 
stripped to remove all loose particles, then wiped firmlywith 
xylene. Less than 10% of the surface activity was removed by 
this process, indicating that the 'Be was neither associated with 
dust parades nor other soluble surface contaminants. An aad 
etch, without a stable beryllium carrier, removed several tens 
of microaaetres of the aluminium surface, and most of *** * e 
activity (the remainder was assumed to be re-deposited). This 
suggests that the 'Be ions are trapped in the metal oxide *wace 
layer, indicative of a chemical interaction with the surface. Such 
a process was previously unknown, with the exception of the 
atomic oxygen effect 1 . 

in Table 1, the measured number of 'Be atoms per unit area 
oo various spacecraft surfaces is shown. The results are corrected 
to the retrieval date of 12 January 1990 and for the offset angle 
from the leading direction. The areal density for Be oo the 
aluminium and steel is the same within the experimental uncer- 
tainty, and is apparently not a strong function of the type or 
surface condition of the metal. Tne Teflon thermal coating, 
however, which was used on many LDEF experiment trays, has 
a density of 'Be an order of magnitude lower than that foond 
on the aluminium surface. The reason for this apparent 
difference in uptake efficiency is unknown, but could be related 
to the material's covaJence-bond structure. The explanation may 
be complicated, also, by the observed erosion of the Teflon 
surface by atomic oxygen. 

The appearance of *Be on the leading surface*, as shown in 
Ftp 1-3, rales out direct production of the isotope within the 
spacecraft by the inddent radiation iux. In striking contrast to 
the mstribatsoo of 'Be, the mcreased flux of geoMgneocally 
trapped protons from the west in this type of orbir results tn 
higher spnflatjon-induccd activities on the trailing side of the 
spacecraft (see Fip 2 and 3). Such induced activity is also not 

TABLE 1 LDEF 7 Be surface conuan Utl c m 



Material 

Siartess steal trunnion face 
Polished aUTwtojrn plate Exp. A0114 
Arodzed aUnirvum experiment tray damp 
Teflon thermal cover 



(xif/ atoms cm"*) 

53 ±01 
67 ±1.0 
4.6*0.5 
03 ±0.2 



Corrected tor decay since recovery and for surface orientation reiaUwe 
to spacecraft ram direction. 

NATVUE • VOL 349 21 FEBRUARY 1991 



PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED 



ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 



; Ltir / - +c r\ ^-^r^ 



FTG. 1 Tt» actMty of 7 Be inewured from to 
twefve sides of the LDCF spacecraft at the Ken- 
nedy Space FUgnt Center, corrected to tie dote of 

retrieval. 



0, 



« 20 

2 



< 



- 


~t- ! ' 

1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 

Ttwmng 
•49* 


i 

i 

» 

r 
i 

i 
i 

t 
) 
r 


r 


- 


- 


t 


i 
i 
i 

LMtfftQ 




- 


LDCF 
SOt Mo 

2 /n> 

3 T 
4 "1 


rVovMn 




S\J^ 




"\n. 






* 


I « J 


-■t 




I X y i w^ 

i !. . T i 



to 



SUe No, (see ineet) 



confined to the surface. Although we do observe a small Be 
signal from aluminium samples taken from the trailing side of 
the spacecraft, this contribution is at a level we expect from 
reactions with the incident flux, and is about two orders of 
magnitude smaller than the surface activity of the leading side. 
This leads us to conclude that the T Bc must have accumulated 



Aluminium piata 



1,200 


a 


ipoo 


Si ikev <••*«. %) • 
Ltatiing s*d« 1 


SCO 


! 




600 






400 


r Bc47|htV . 

1 




200 


/I i 










£ 440 480 U0 500 $20 540 SCO 

o 1200 



1,000 
800 

too 

400 
200 



b 


SllkeV{e*jftn. a «a) 




Trailing side 




• 




■ 


■ 


f 


• 




. / 


L ' 



440 



460 



440 500 520 

f (keV) 



540 



560 



FIG 2 Gamma-ray spectra of aluminium plates on the feeding and trading 
sides of LD€F The isotope 'Be is identified by the strong line at 478 keV 
seen on the leading side out not on the trailing side. The strong Bne at 
511 ke V is produced by pratron-anrwrdUuon gamma rays from the spallation 
product "Na. as well as labor atory Background. Both spectra represent 484i 
counts. 

NATURE ■ VOL 349 • 21 FEBRUARY 1991 



on the spacecraft surfaces from the ambient atmosphere at 
orbital altitudes. 

The short-lived isotope 'Be was first detected in the atmos- 
phere by Arnold and Ai-Salih in 1955\ and later mapped by 
others as a function of altitude and latitude 4-4 . It is produced 
in the atmosphere by high-energy cosmic-ray interactions with 
air as are other radioisotopes such a* l4 C and 5 H. Once formed, 
7 Be ions are presumed to oxidize rapidly and attach to small 
aerosol particles, providing a downward transport mechanism 
from peak production regions of the atmosphere 9 " 14 . The 
primary removal process for 'Be, which occurs on a timescaie 
comparable to its mean lifetime (-77 days), is the washout of 
the aerosol-attached 7 Be in rain water 3 " 4 . 

At a given latitude above -20 km, the production rate of 7 Bc 
varies vertically in proportion to the oxygen* nitrogen gas 
density. Peak production per unit volume occurs in the lower 
stratosphere, at —20 km, below which the cosmic-ray dux a> 
substantially attenuated. At higher altitudes, the number of 'Be 
atoms produced per unit volume decreases rapidly, but the 
number of 'Be atoms per unit mass of air, or concentration, 
should be essentially constant. Balloon and aircraft measure- 
menu 4 * 15 are in approximate agreement with this, although few 
measurements extend much above the peak production altitudes. 

We can calculate the concentration of 'Be at 310 km from the 
data in Table 1, assuming the trapping efficiency on the metal 
surfaces is near unity. Using the LDEF orbital velocity of 
7.8 km s" 1 and the 77-day mean lifetime of 'Be, we find a density 
of 1.1 x 10"' atoms cm . or a relative concentration of 3.8 x to* 
atoms per gram of air. In the peak production region, at altitude 
20 km, previous measurements*" 4 yield a concentration of 10* 
'Be atoms per gram of air, or -6.1 atoms an"', in agreement 
with a simple calculation using the known cosmic-ray flux. Thus, 
the measured concentration of 'Be per unit mass of air at 310 km 
is three to four orders of magnitude in excess of the concentration 
at 20- 50 km. 

The concentration of 'Be in the 300-kzn range, far in excess 
of what can be produced in air at that altitude, is evidence of 
an unknown mechanism transporting 'Be from the stratosphere. 
Although the amount being transported (or removed) from the 
peak production regions is a minute fraction of the total atmos- 
pheric burden of 'Be, the observed density is contrary to assump- 
tions of conventional atmospheric transport and mixing, and in 
particular, to the assumed attachment to aerosol particles' 4 . 
Whatever the mechanism, however, the transport to orbital 
altitudes must take place on a timescaJe similar to the mean 
lifetime of 'Be. 

Systematic low-level induced radioactivity measurements of 

679 



m 



ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
OF KXM QUALITY 



%_? 



V 



1=4 






TOO 




Steal trunnion 










a • 






too 


> 






500 


Uetflna »w# 






400 


"UnBShaV 






300 


- 








200 


7 8« 511 UV 




« 




100 

A 




i^ _ 


' 




| 400 500 100 700 800 900 


ipoo 


5 

TOO 








o w 


* 






600 










500 


Trilling $id# 




■ 




400 






• 




300 




■ 




200 








■ 




too 
o 


'J 


~*ww~*__ 


L L . 






40 


500 600 700 600 900 


uooo 






f (koV) 












FC 3 Gamme-fay spectra of two starves* stee* trunnion pin-end pieces 
from the leaning and train* oVections of the spacecraft As in fig. 2. the 
7 Be isotope is seen onfy on the lead** side of 10EF. The 8354teV line from 
the spaUtion product ^Mt is observed on both sides of the spacecraft 
but ts stronger on the tralng side due to increased proton flux from the 
west Both spectra represent 12 -h counts. 



LDEF materials have not revealed other nuclides with similar 
surface segreg ation behaviour, in particular, we have not found 
the heavier ones thai would suggest a meteoritic origin 17 . 
Whereas 7 Be will decay in orbit, there are other non-radioactive 
light isotopes produced by cosmic rays with similar altitude 
distributions. Their concentrations should be much higher than 
that of 'Be, although more difficult to measure. We are currently 
attempting to detect other atmospheric cosmic-ray-produced 
isotopes on LDEF surfaces, such u 14 C and ,0 Be, using 
accelerator mass spectrometry (A. J« T. Jull, personal communi- 
cation). 

The use of satellite surfaces to sweep up rare atmospheric 
species may prove to be a new method of investigating atmos- 
pheric mixing processes at orbital altitudes. Q 



• iSA*lSSOa 



d4*wyl**L 



L O*o* Kl P«n P ft. ft W&- Tm imt Owmot bsemm to** 
CM. L m * U4 NASA. WWHftov OC 1SS4X 

2. mm. l w, Nrat U4 ikoMn hk^CW.Ak lM—^> 

Stmm km mam. A. t A Immm. X U TS (At>. M» v«k lSvSl 
1 Amis I a i U3m\ M Smm» IS*. 4S1 OJ0& 

4. SWT. a A. fl*t %* 1*4 U2S-UJ0 0J6ft 

5. Ut D- lfc*m. F. K INtnli JMM tm. *** U. JOS-SSI 0*881 

«. L*0.a*«^a ftnr*ip^ *»»«tos**tO4g/a5*i-eu 
issn 

7 *»*m N. J #•****%* T1, 2B77-2B30 11*701 

I OWwML J fMpnrt %i »*, C3-U1 OS7»V 

* StapfallHAFvbtt-Antw.lL J «M*** Am SL 3S47-36J* a*7Sl 
10 *«1 L. Og-Vy. ». L. Mtywi. HI O dr w t a T. Qmfihyi %* Ufl 4. 
U StaML IFj fatrri %* SX 30SS-3082 (1*781 
U Vtam. W A Sinc\ H I Gnp** *»IMT. SOS~S0t UfiSOL 

u. AMtMrit. a u. « « snpryi. am urt a ims-ioi* iisau 
u. sot*, i. Linewt. & i v**«\ a r«k« art, loo-iis tiaasL 

680 



NASA SF-173 (a* 



tSorr*m. mm y«*. 





mm «■ ts um-uc aim 

•I m OV *«■» Of*m HASA 



Low surface resistance in 
YBa 2 Cu 3 0, melt-processed 
thick films 

N. McN. Afford*, T. W. Barton*, M. J, Adamst, 
S, IMgtit, ft. McholsoAit AW.A. Pha%«4 

' O Advanced Materials, P0 Box U. The Heath, ftranx 

Omthn WA7 4Q£ UK 

t <g Ma rc on i P aiea c r i Great Bartow. Owimcford Essex CM2 8>*\ IX 

t <EC Hrst n a s aar ch Centre. East tana Wembley. Mddeses HAS 7PP. UK 



A LOW serf ace resfetsace, A,, la the key to secceasf el acr e l o yea t 
of rsaio-rreqaeacy aad sakrowaTe aaalicatloaa af Uga- 
teaaseratare svaercoadacton, Here we report the a*, ef YBa,Ca ,O x 
mkk Ium oa yttria-ctabQiaag aircoaia taaetraaaa at frcqaeadea 
v» ta 50GHz. Fllaaa arootaatd below the aerittctk teaiaerarare 
are ia* gralaed, aafe X, staaOar Co tola YBe^CajO,, geaerally 
am low critical carreat aeaaaty (JJ aaa esalbk Urtle preferrea* 
orieautioa of erysuHograpaac axes. Filav aroctsse* above tbe 
peritectk teaaperarare exaftlt preferree* orieautioa la large 
saacraUtic gralas, have higher J t aad far lower X,. For tbese flaw 
tbe crossover freqoeacy at walea JC, eqaala mat •( coffer is 
59GHz, a factor of rwo higber tbaa tbe beat talk aaateriaJ or 
tUcfc Uai vet reported aad aahy a factor of -4 lower tbaa btgk- 
qaatlrv tbia Hats. At tbe freaaeacks aae4 for awoH* coeaaMaica- 
tiaas (900 MHi aa4 14 GHz), tbe sapercoaaactor losses wooM 
be two orders of aufaitadc lawer tbaa tbost ef aorasal aaeuls. 
Tbe aartkalar aaraatages af tbe takk-ila» roate art tbe saeea* 
aa4 low coat of tbe process, aaa* tbe ability ta apply tbe fiian 
oa carvee 1 surfaces aaa* oa taige areas, tie largest so far beiag 
>2Nea a . 

Because the of tbe quadratic frequency dependence of X, in 
superconductors 1 , as opposed to the square-root dependence in 
normal metals, there is a great incentive to reduce R, in super- 
conductor* so that operation of devices below the cross-over 
frequency benefit from a lower A, than that of a normal metal. 
Measurements of /L so far can be divided ioto two broad groups: 
those made on bulkr or thick-film samples prepared from powder 
and those on thin films prepared by sputtering, laser ablation 
or co-evaporation. The thin films, which are usually grown 
epiuxially with the c axis normal to the plaae of the substrate* 
show losses thai are typically lower by two orders of magnitude 
relative to bulk materials 3 . It is believed that the increased losses 
in balk material arise from tbe weak links between tbe random 
array of crystallites which also reduce critical currents 3 . 

Our work was motivated by the need to provide an inexpen- 
sive, rapid and effective alternative to thin films for certain 
applications, and which can be used when thin- 61m methods 
are not possible for reasons of size or curvature. The thick-film 
process also has inherent advanuges in that polycrystalline 
substrates of large size (—300 mm square) are readily available. 
Tbe best thick films so far have been formed on silver substrates 
by eJectrophoretic deposition 4- *, and have an R, at 21 J GHz of 
18±3mO at 77 K. In that work, however, problems arose 
because of thermal mismatch with the substrate, causing spoiling 
of tbe films; also, because silver was used as the substrate, the 
maximum processing temperature could not exceed ^930 *C. 
Oar technique avoids these problems and gives extremely adher- 
ent films which have the lowest ft, for thick films yet reported. 
The substrates used were comprised of polycrystalline 3 mol% 

NATURE ■ VOL 349 • 21 FEBRUARY 1991 



Q&KSMAL PAGE JS 
OF POOR QUALITY 



