Automated Assignment of Proposals to Reviewers 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 



The Assignment Process begins with selection of an element from Set 1 and from Set 2 and follows a 
set of rules to avoid biases and other problems in proposal reviews. 


A computer program automates the 
process of selecting unbiased peer review- 
ers of research proposals submitted to 
NASA. Heretofore, such selection has 
been performed by manual searching of 
two large databases subject to a set of as- 
signment rules. One database lists pro- 
posals and proposers; the other database 
lists potential reviewers. The manual 
search takes an average of several weeks 
per proposal. In contrast, the present 
software can perform the selection in sec- 
onds. The program begins by selecting 
one entry from each database, then ap- 
plying the assignment rules to this pair of 
entries. If and only if all the assignment 
rules are satisfied, the chosen reviewer is 
assigned to the chosen proposal. The as- 
signment rules enforced by the program 
are (1) a maximum allowable number of 
proposals assigned to a single reviewer; 
(2) a maximum allowable number of re- 
viewers assigned to a single proposal; (3) 
if the proposing team includes a member 
affiliated with an industry, then the re- 
viewer must not be affiliated with any in- 


dustry; and (4) the reviewer must not be 
a member of the proposing team or affil- 
iated with the same institution as that of a 
member of the proposing team. 

This program was written Faiza Lansing 
and Anil Kantak of Caltech for NASA’s Jet 


Propulsion Laboratory. Further informa- 
tion is contained in a TSP ( see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-40902. 


1 Array-Pattern-Match Compiler for Opportunistic Data Analysis 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


A computer program has been written 
to facilitate real-time sifting of scientific 
data as they are acquired to find data pat- 
terns deemed to warrant further analysis. 
The patterns in question are of a type de- 
noted array patterns, which are specified 
by nested parenthetical expressions. 
[One example of an array pattern is 
((>3) 0 (^1)): this pattern matches a vec- 
tor of at least three elements, the first of 
which exceeds 3, the second of which is 
0, and the third of which does not equal 


1.] This program accepts a high-level de- 
scription of a static array pattern and 
compiles a highly optimal and compact 
other program to determine whether 
any given instance of any data array 
matches that pattern. The compiler im- 
plemented by this program is independ- 
ent of the target language, so that as new 
languages are used to write code that 
processes scientific data, they can easily 
be adapted to this compiler. This pro- 
gram runs on a variety of different com- 


puting platforms. It must be run in con- 
junction with any one of a number of 
Lisp compilers that are available com- 
mercially or as shareware. 

This program was written by Mark James 
of Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Lab- 
oratory. Further information is contained in 
a TSP (see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial licens- 
ing. Please contort Karina Edmonds of the Califor- 
nia Institute of Technology at (626) 395-2322. 
Refer to NPO-42096. 


Pre-Processor for Compression of Multispectral Image Data 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


A computer program that pre- 
processes multispectral image data has 
been developed to provide the Mars Ex- 
ploration Rover (MER) mission with a 
means of exploiting the additional corre- 
lation present in such data without ap- 
preciably increasing the complexity of 
compressing the data. When used in con- 


junction with ICER, a previously devel- 
oped image-data-compression program, 
this program enables improved compres- 
sion of multispectral images, compared 
to that achievable by use of ICER alone. 
As such, it is a straightforward means of 
achieving much of the gain possible 
from exploiting spectral correlation. 


This preprocessor software accommo- 
dates up to seven images that are differ- 
ent spectral bands of the same scene. 
The software performs an approximate 
discrete cosine transform (DCT) pixel- 
wise across the spectral bands. The soft- 
ware is written for speed; in particular 
the DCT operation performs only inte- 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2006 


53 


