REPORT SSD-TR-89-83 



f;2l AD-A218 179 

«r ' ^ 

» Ada Compiler Performance Test Suite and Test 

Evaluation Capability (ACPS) User’s Guide 



» 


Prepared by 
R. E. KAYFES 

Information Processing Division 
Engineering Group 
The Aerospace Corporation 
El Segundo, CA 90245-4691 


September 1988 


Prepared for 

SPACE SYSTEMS DIVISION 
AIR FORCE SYSTEMS COMMAND 
Los Angeles Air Force Base 
P.O. Box 92960 
Los Angeles, CA 90009-2960 


1 


APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE; 
DISTRIBUTION UNLIMITED 



This report was submitted by The Aerospace Corporation, El Segundo, CA 90245, under 
Contract No. F04701-88-C-0089 with Space Systems Division, P.O. Box 92960, Los 
Angeles, CA 90009-2960. It was reviewed and approved for The Aerospace Corporation by 
R. D. Hefner, Director, Software Development Department, Engineering Group. Capt. John 
Brill, SSD/ALR, was the project officer for the program. 

This report has been reviewed by the Public Affairs Office (PAS) and is releasable to the 
National Technical Information Service (NTIS). At NTIS, it will be available to the general 
public. 

This technical report has been reviewed and is approved for publication. Publication of this 
report does not constitute Air Force approval of the report's findings or conclusions. It Is 
published only for the exchange and stimulation of ideas. 


A. E. Stevens, Lt. Col., USAF M Lubofsky > ) 

SSD/ALR 


Senior Engineering Specialist 
Computer Resources Management 
and Standards Office 






REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

la. REPORT SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

Unclassified 

1b. RESTRICTIVE MARKINGS 

2a. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION AUTHORITY 

3 DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY OF REPORT 

Approved for public release; 

Distribution unlimited 

2b. DECLASSIFICATION / DOWNGRADING SCHEDULE 

4. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT NUMBER(S) 

TR-0089(4902-03)-2 

5. MONITORING ORGANIZATION REPORT NUMBER(S) 

SSD-TR-89-83 

6a. NAME OF PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
Engineering Group 

The Aerospace Corp. 

6b. OFFICE SYMBOL 
(If applicable) 

7a. NAME OF MONITORING ORGANIZATION 

Air Force Systems Command 

Space Systems Division 

6c ADDRESS (City, State, and ZIP Code) 

2350 E. El Segundo Blvd 

El Segundo, CA 90245 

7b ADDRESS (City, State, and ZIP Code) 

Los Angeles Air Force Base 

Los Angeles, CA 90009-2960 

8a. NAME OF FUNDING/SPONSORING 
ORGANIZATION 

8b OFFICE SYMBOL 
(If applicable) 

9 PROCUREMENT INSTRUMENT IDENTIFICATION NUMBER 

F04701-88-C-0089 

8c. ADDRESS (City, State, and ZIP Code) 

10 SOURCE OF FUNDING NUMBERS 


PROGRAM 
ELEMENT NO. 


PROJECT 

NO 



WORK UNIT 
ACCESSION NO 


11 TITLE (Include Security Classification) 

Ada Compiler Performance Test Suite and Test Evaluation Capability (ACPS) User's Guide 


12. PERSONAL AUTHOR(S) Kayfes 


13a. TYPE OF REPORT 


13b. TIME COVERED 
FROM TO 


14. DATE OF REPORT (Year, Month. Day) 15 PAGE COUNT 

September 1988 313 



17. 

COSATI CODES | 

FIELD 

GROUP 

SUB-GROUP 1 


18 SUBJECT TERMS (Continue on reverse if necessary and identify by block number) 


19. ABSTRACT (Continue on reverse if necessary and identify by block number) 

'The purpose of this document is to describe the set of software tests which is designed to 
assist users in evaluating the performance of run-time environments provided by Ada compilatio 
systems. The Ada computer programs, primarily designed and written at The Aerospace 
Corporation, and augmented by JOVIAL and FORTRAN benchmarks, provide tools to display the 
results of test executions and comparisons among the three languages. Output from the tests 
includes compile-time and run-time statistics, such as elapsed time, CPU time, code and data 
sizes, and virtual and physical memory usage. This document describes how to (a) install the 
test suite, (b) set up the test environment, (c) execute the tests, and (d) compare the test 
results for executions on different compilers or for those on the same compiler using 
different compilation options, s' 


20. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY OF ABSTRACT 
□ UNCLASSIFIED/UNLIMITED 0 SAME AS RPT 


22a NAME OF RESPONSIBLE INDIVIDUAL 

Lt. Col. A.E. Stevens 


OD FORM 1473, 84 mar 


ACT 121. ABSTRACT SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

as RPT Doric users I Unclassified 


22b. TELEPHONE (Include Area Code) 22c OFFICE SYMBOL 

(213) 643-2532 SSD/ALR 


83 APR edition may be used until exhausted. 
All other editions are obsolete. 






































EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 


The Ada Compiler Performance Test Suite and Test Evaluation Capability 
(ACPS) is a collection of programs designed to assist users in evaluating the 
performance of run-time environments provided by Ada compilation systems. A 
unique feature of the ACPS is that it provides an extensive set of JOVIAL and 
FORTRAN benchmarks to aid assessment of the likely performance impact of 
transitioning programs from JOVIAL or FORTRAN to Ada. The ACPS test suite 
includes programs to test both single language features (e.g., type conver¬ 
sion) and multiple language features (e.g., the Whetstone benchmark) written 
in Ada, JOVIAL, and FORTRAN. The suite also provides software to gather and 
report performance statistics in a format common to all three test languages. 

The Ada programs of the ACPS are written in standard Ada (ANSI/MIL-STD- 
1815A), were designed to be easily rehostable, and are not restricted to a 
particular machine environment. The user's guide supplied with the ACPS 
describes the steps necessary to rehost the ACPS and identifies the types of 
source code modifications that may be necessary when applying the ACPS to a 
different compiler. 

The ACPS also provides tools to display the results of test executions, 
and to automatically compare corresponding results from Ada, JOVIAL, and 
FORTRAN test executions. Tool output includes compile-time and run time 
statistics such as elapsed time, CPU time, code and data sizes, virtual and 
physical memory usage, etc., in order to facilitate complete and objective 
comparisons. 

The ACPS is available on tape in either Digital Equipment Corporation 
(DEC) VAX/VMS BACKUP format or in ANSI tape format for users wishing to rehost 
the ACPS. The user should have a working understanding of the host operating 
system and command language if the ACPS is to be installed on a system other 
than DEC VAX/VMS. 

The ACPS is primarily intended for users who are familiar with Ada and who 
wish to get detailed information on the run-time efficiency of an Ada imple¬ 
mentation for a particular application. The ACPS is not intended to be the 
only instrument for measuring the efficiency of Ada run-time environments. 
Performance issues and selection criteria for Ada run-time environments must 
be developed in accordance with the requirements of specific applications. 

The primary benefit of using the ACPS will be in its support of applications 
planning. It can be used to demonstrate which features of Ada are ineffi¬ 
ciently implemented through comparison of equivalent Ada, JOVIAL, and FORTRAN 
test program executions. This information can be used in several ways. It 
can be used as justification for avoiding certain language features or 
processing options. It can focus attention to those areas of the compiler 
that must be improved and provide a mechanism for measuring improvements or 
degradations in run-time performance as a compiler implementation evolves. 

The ACPS can also be used to assist determination as to whether existing 
JOVIAL or FORTRAN modules should be converted to Ada by showing the probable 
performance impact of straightforward translation to Ada as would likely be 
obtained through use of a language translation tool. 


1 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


This report is sponsored by Space Systems Division's Directorate for 
Computer Resources (SSD/ALR). Funding for the effort was provided by the Air 
Force Computer Resource Management Technology Program, Program Element (PE) 
64740F, Project 2526, Software Engineering Tools and Methods. 

Program Element 64740F is the Air Force engineering development program to 
develop and transfer into active use the technology, tools, and techniques 
needed to cope with the explosive growth in Air Force systems that use com¬ 
puter resources. The goals of the program are to: (a) provide for the 
transition of computer system developments from laboratories, industry, and 
academia to Air Force systems; (b) develop and apply software acquisition 
management techniques to reduce life-cycle costs; (c) provide improved soft¬ 
ware design tools; (d) address the various problems associated with computer 
security; (e) develop advanced software engineering tools, techniques, and 
systems; (f) support the implementation of high-order languages (e.g., Ada); 
(g) address human engineering for computer systems; and (h) develop and apply 
computer simulation techniques for the acquisition process. 

The Ada Compiler Performance Test Suite and Test Evaluation Capability was 
developed at The Aerospace Corporation by the following team of software 
engineers: Allen R. Adams, Kathleen M. Bruckert, Richard E. Kayfes, Michael 
J. McLaughlin, and Beverly L. Parmelee. Team members involved in development 
of each software module are noted by initials in commentary prologue in each 
module. 



3 




CONTENTS 


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY. 1 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS... 3 

1. INTRODUCTION. 1-1 

1.1 Test Suite........ 1-3 

1.2 Test Evaluation Capability. 1-7 

2. TEST CATEGORIES. 2-1 

3. TEST MEASUREMENT CONCERNS. 3-1 

3.1 Operating System Effect. 3-3 

3.2 Hardware Effect. 3-4 

4. TEST MEASUREMENT AND CODING TECHNIQUES. 4-1 

4.1 Compile-Time Measurement Techniques. 4-1 

4.2 Run-Time Measurement Techniques. 4-1 

4.3 ACPS Coding Technique Examples. 4-3 

5. ACPS EVALUATION TESTING SOFTWARE ARCHITECTURE. 5-1 

6. NAMING CONVENTIONS. 6-1 

6.1 File Name Format. 6-2 

6.2 Test Name Format. 6-3 

7. ACPS INSTALLATION AND TEST EXECUTION. 7-1 

7.1 Installation of ACPS Source Files. 7-1 

7.2 Creation of Command Procedures. 7-2 

7.3 Machine-Dependent Software Modifications. 7-3 

7.3.1 Machine-Specific Test Support Software. 7-3 

7.3.2 Language-Specific Test Support Software. 7-3 

7.3.3 ACPS Tests. 7-5 

7.3.4 ACPS Test Comparison Tool. 7-7 

7.4 Determination of Test Duration. 7-7 

7.5 Determination of Test Measurement Accuracy. 7-7 

7.6 Performance of Test Comparisons... 7-8 

8. Ada RUN-TIME ENVIRONMENT PERFORMANCE EVALUATION. 8-1 

APPENDICES: 

A. ANSI TAPE FORMAT. A-l 

B. VAX/VMS BACKUP TAPE FORMAT. B-l 


5 

































CONTENTS (Continued) 


APPENDICES (Continued): 


C. VAX/VMS SAMPLE COMMAND PROCEDURES. C-l 

C.l Installation of ACPS Source and Command Files. C-l 

C.2 Installation of Common Language Support Software. C-2 

C.3 Installation of ACPS Comparison Tools. C-2 

C.4 Determination of VAX/VMS Software Environment. C-2 

C.5 Determination of Ada Compiler-Dependent Parameters. C-3 

C.6 ACPS Command Procedure Techniques. C-4 

C.7 Determination of Test Loop Overhead Parameters. C-6 

C.8 Determination of Test Repeatability. C-6 

C.9 Compilation and Execution of ACPS Tests. C-7 

C. 10 Execution of ACPS Test Result Comparison Tool. C-8 

D. Ada TEST INTERFACE PACKAGE SPECIFICATIONS. D-l 

E. ACPS TEST COMPARISON TOOL. E-l 

E.l ACPS Compile-Time Test Result Comparator. E-l 

E.1.1 Compile-Time Test Result Input File Formats. E-l 

E.l.2 User Input... E-4 

E.l.3 CCOMP Output File Formats. E-4 

E.2 ACPS Run-Time Test Result Comparator. E-6 

E.2.1 Run-Time Test Result Input File Formats. E-6 

E.2.2 User Input. E-10 

E.2.3 CEXEC Output File Formats. E-ll 

E.2.4 Measurement of Test Repeatability. E-14 

E. 3 Test Name and File Name Order. E-15 

F. ACPS TEST DESCRIPTIONS. F-l 

G. TEST PROGRAMS AND SOURCE CODE FILES. G-l 


6 





























FIGURES 


1-1 Ada Run-Time Environment Components. 1-2 

1-2 Ada Test Suite Generation. 1-4 

I 

1-3 JOVIAL Test Suite Generation. 1-5 

1-4 FORTRAN Test Suite Generation. 1-6 

5-1 ACPS Test Evaluation Architecture. 5-3 

5-2 Compile-Time Evaluation Architecture. 5-4 

5-3 Run-Time Evaluation Architecture. 5-5 

5-4 Test Compilation Comparator Interfaces. 5-6 

5-5 Test Execution Comparator Interfaces. 5-7 


ft 


9 


7 














TABLES 


4-1 Ada Test Loop Overhead Program... 4-8 

4-2 Sample Test Iteration Count Package... 4-9 

4-3 JOVIAL Test Loop Overhead Program. 4-9 

4-4 FORTRAN Test Loop Overhead Program. 4-10 

4-5 Example IF Statement Test Overhead Package. 4-11 

4-6 Example IF Statement Test... 4-12 

4-7 Example IF Statement Test Driver....... 4-13 

6- 1 ACPS File Types. 6-5 

7- 1 Ada Type A Test Input/Output Files. 7-10 

7-2 FORTRAN Test Program Input/Output Files. 7-11 

7-3 Test Support Software File Types... 7-12 

7-4 Language-Specific Test Support Software Files. 7-13 

A-l ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Volume ACPS. A-3 

A-2 ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Volume ACPS02. A-20 

A-3 ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Volume ACPS03. A-25 

A-4 ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Volume ACPS04. A-29 

A-5 ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Volume ACPD05. A-33 

C-l ACPS VAX/VMS Command Procedure. C-10 

C-2 Command Procedure DACPS:LOGICALS.COM. C-ll 

C-3 Command Procedure DSUP:SUPPORT.COM. C-12 

C-4 Command Procedure DTOOL:TOOLS.COM. C-13 

C-5 Command Procedure DACPSiVAXVMS.COM. C-14 

C-6 Command Procedure DDEC: ADAPARM.COM. C-15 

C-7 ADAPARM Output for DEC VAX Ada. C-l 7 

C-8 Command Procedure DDEC:SETUP.COM. C-18 

C-9 Command Procedure DSUP:SYMBOLS.COM. C-19 

C-10 Command Procedure DSUP:RUN:COM. C-20 

C-ll Command Procedure DSUP: EXEC .COM. C-21 

C-12 Command Procedure DSUP:SHOW.COM. C-22 

C-13 Command Procedure DSUP:SHOW_.COM. C-23 

C-14 Command Procedure DDEC:AFIRST.COM. C-24 

C-15 AFIRST Output for DEC VAX Ada. C-26 

C-16 Command Procedure DDEC: REP EAT. COM. C-28 

C-17 Command Procedure DDEC:ABATCH.COM. C-29 

C-18 Command Procedure DDEC:ACOMP.COM. C-31 

C-19 Command Procedure DDEC:ACOM.COM. C-34 

C-20 Command Procedure DDEC:ALNK.COM. C-35 

C-21 Command Procedure DDEC:ASRC.COM. C-36 

C-22 Command Procedure DDEC:A0BJ.COM. C-37 

C-23 Command Procedure DDEC:AEXE. COM. C-38 

C-24 Command Procedure DDEC:AEXEC.COM. C-39 

C-25 Command Procedure DTOOL: CCOMP. COM. C-40 

C-26 Command Procedure DTOOL:CEXEC.COM. C-41 


8 

















































TABLES (Continued) 


D-l OURSYS Package Specification. D-3 

D-2 OURSYS Package Body Declarations. D-9 

D-3 OURSPC Package Specification. D-14 

D-4 OURTYP Package Specification. D-19 

D-5 OURDMP Package Specification. D-21 

D-6 MATHFUN Package Specification. D-21 

E-l CCOMP Interface File Specifications. E-16 

E-2 CEXEC Interface File Specifications. E-17 

E-3 DEC VAX Ada Compile-Time Test Statistic File. E-18 

E-4 ECSPO JOVIAL Compile-Time Test Statistic File. E-21 

E-5 ACPS Compilation Comparator Formatted Ada File. E-24 

E-6 ACPS Compilation Comparator Formatted JOVIAL File. E-27 

E-7 ACPS Compilation Comparator Comparison Output File. E-30 

E-8 DEC VAX Ada Run-Time Test Statistic File. E-36 

E-9 ECSPO JOVIAL Run-Time Test Statistic File...... E-37 

E-10 CEXEC Formatted VAX Ada Input File without VMS Statistics. E-38 

E-ll CEXEC Formatted ECSPO JOVIAL Input File without 

VMS Statistics. E-39 

E-12 CEXEC Comparison Output File without VMS Statistics. E-40 

E-13 CEXEC Formatted VAX Ada Input File with VMS Statistics. E-42 

E-14 CEXEC Formatted ECSPO JOVIAL Input File with VMS Statistics... E-43 

E-15 CEXEC Comparison Output File with VMS Statistics. E-44 

F-l ACPS Test Descriptions. F-2 

G-l Ada Type A Test Programs and Source Code Files. G-2 

G-2 Ada Type C Test Programs and Source Code Files. G-ll 

G-3 Ada Type E Test Programs and Source Code Files. G-19 

G-4 Ada Type S Test Programs and Source Code Files. G-27 

G-5 Ada Type T Test Programs and Source Code Files. G-36 

G-6 JOVIAL Test Programs and Source Code Files. G-45 

G-7 FORTRAN Test Programs and Source Code Files. G-53 

































1. INTRODUCTION 


The Ada Compiler Performance Test Suite and Test Evaluation Capability 
(ACPS) is a set of programs designed to assist users in evaluating the 
performance of run-time environments provided by Ada compilation systems. The 
ACPS is primarily composed of test cases designed and coded at The Aerospace 
Corporation. The ACPS has also been augmented by public domain benchmarks 
where appropriate. These tests have been modified to run in the ACPS test 
environment and annotated to identify their origin. The ACPS tests were 
designed to execute within the framework of a test evaluation system 
consisting of test coding techniques, test result reporting conventions, and 
tools for automated test result comparisons. The VAX/VMS version of the ACPS 
test evaluation system is delivered on tape in VAX/VMS BACKUP format. A 
rehostable version of the ACPS is delivered in ANSI tape format. 

The purpose of this document is to describe how to (a) install the ACPS 
test suite, (b) set up the ACPS test environment, (c) execute the tests, and 
(d) automatically compare the test results for executions on different 
compilers or for executions on the same compiler using different compilation 
options. In addition, this document provides guidance on how to make use of 
the ACPS test results in evaluation of Ada run-time environments. 

The primary objective of the ACPS test suite is to provide information 
useful to the evaluation of Ada run-time environments for real-time space 
applications. In our view, an Ada run-time environment is composed of the 
entire hardware/software configuration that permits execution of Ada-compiled 
programs. Figure 1-1 depicts the components of an Ada run-time environment. 
Each layer in the figure is implemented by features or capabilities provided 
by lower layers. The Ada run-time system implements features of Ada programs 
that cannot be or are not placed directly in the compiled program. The target 
operating system, if present, provides capabilities beyond the scope of the 
Ada language and may also be required to assist implementation of some of the 
features of Ada such as tasking and input/output. The functionality of an Ada 
run-time environment is largely dependent on the presence or absence of an 
underlying target operating system. It is highly likely, for example, that 
stand-alone Ada run-time environments for the Digital Equipment Corporation 
(DEC) VAX computer will provide significantly fewer capabilities to Ada 
programmers than Ada run-time environments for the VAX, which permits 
interface to the VMS operating system. It is, therefore, important to realize 
that the ACPS only applies to features appearing in the Ada Language Reference 
Manual (ANSI/MIL-STD-1815A-1983). It includes tests of mandatory as well as 
compiler-dependent features (not including L0W_LEVEL_I0) of Ada. It does not, 
however, include tests of special packages provided by an Ada compiler or of 
capabilities provided by a target operating system. As a result, the ACPS 
does not address many of the capabilities of an Ada run-time environment that 
may be extensively used in a real-time application and that as a result can 
have a significant impact on performance. 


1-1 










The forthcoming sections of this document describe the major components 
of the overall ACPS system and their application within the ACPS capability. 
Section 2 details the contents of ACPS, describing the seven types of ACPS 
tests and their interrelationships within the system. Section 3 discusses 
some of the test measurement concerns that were considered in development of 
the ACPS. To ensure that test results gathered and reported are accurate, 
repeatable, and well-focused, test measurement and coding techniques were 
developed and are discussed in Section 4. This section also describes sample 
test templates that illustrate the various forms of ACPS tests, and provides 
necessary data to users wishing to add more tests to the ACPS test roster. 

The common language test environment architecture is described in Section 5. 

To facilitate development of JOVIAL and FORTRAN programs from Ada programs, a 
set of naming conventions was devised and is detailed in Section 6. Section 7 
describes the actions necessary to rehost the ACPS and also discusses the 
types of machine- and compiler-dependent modifications that may be necessary 
when rehosting the ACPS or applying the system to a different compiler. 

Section 8 describes methods of using the ACPS in evaluating the performance 
impact of entire Ada run-time environments. 

The appendices are comprised of additional descriptions of key ACPS 
components and their functions. Appendices A and B describe the format and 
content of ACPS delivery tapes. Appendix C discusses methods of installing 
the DEC VAX/VMS version of the ACPS and provides lists of command procedures 
and other information useful when applying the ACPS to other compilers hosted 
on VAX/VMS. 

To facilitate rehosting of the ACPS, almost all use of machine- and 
compiler-dependent language features is isolated to the test support software 
modules. Appendix D lists the package specifications of the Ada test support 
software packages. To ease comparison of test execution results, a common 
language report format was used and tools were developed to automatically 
compare the compile-time and run-time performance of Ada, JOVIAL, and FORTRAN 
test executions. Appendix E discusses how to use the DEC VAX/VMS version of 
these tools and describes with examples the format of all tool input/output 
files. 


There are three classes of ACPS tests: (1) those unique to Ada, (2) those 
unique to both Ada and JOVIAL, and (3) those that can be represented in Ada, 
JOVIAL, and FORTRAN. To assist users in assessing the performance impact of 
transitioning JOVIAL and FORTRAN applications to Ada, Appendix F describes the 
function of each Ada test and indicates for each test whether JOVIAL and 
FORTRAN tests are provided. The tables in Appendix G contain Ada test program 
and source code file data broken down by Ada types A, C, E, S, and T. The 
latter tables G-6 and G-7 contain test program and source code data for JOVIAL 
and FORTRAN, respectively. 

1.1 TEST SUITE 


The core of the ACPS is the test suite. The test suite is a collection 
of programs each written to test a specific feature of Ada, such as the case 
statement or the record aggregate. For each test, the elapse time and memory 
usage is recorded for both the compilation and linkage stage and the execution 


1-3 








stage. Additionally, the support software can be customized to collect other 
data that is significant for the given configuration, such as the page fault 
rate or buffered input/output count. 

To ease the conversion to new configurations, the test suite software is 
divided into two groups: Test Software and Test Support Software (TSS). The 
Test Software simply consists of the individual programs that use the language 
features. This group is meant to be machine and operating system-independent. 
The TSS is divided into the Operating System Specific Test Support Software 
(OTSS) and the Language Specific Test Support Software (LTSS). Figures 1-2, 
1-3, and 1-4 show how the various groups merge to generate the test programs. 

Five versions of the Ada test suite exist. The first is the baseline 
suite. The second is compiled without constraint checking, which should make 
the code faster and smaller. The third suite includes exception handlers in 
each procedure. The fourth and fifth versions are compiled with the OPTIMIZE 
pragma set memory optimization and speed optimization, respectively. 

When taken collectively, the data for the five suites provide a thorough 
and detailed performance profile. This profile can be used to estimate the 
performance of an algorithm on a given configuration or to assist in optimizing 
a program. A small set of multi-featured benchmarks could not give this level 
of detail nor this degree of completeness. However, to allow comparison with 
published benchmark results, two public domain benchmarks, the Dhrystone and 
Whetstone tests, have been added. 

The compilation and linkage data give an indication of how heavily the 
compiler uses the configuration’s resources and the suitability of the 
compiler for software development. A compiler that produces exceptionally 
fast executable code might be too much of a burden on the system to be used 
constantly. In this case, a second compiler might be used during the earlier 
phases of development. 

Since Ada is meant to replace the other languages currently in use by 
DoD, it was decided that the ACPS should include JOVIAL and FORTRAN versions 
of the test suite. JOVIAL J73 was chosen because it was the Air Force's 
previous standard high-order language (HOL) for embedded systems. FORTRAN, in 
turn, has many mature compilers that can be used for comparison of efficiency 
and performance. 

The OTSS provides a common access path to the system data such as the 
system clock and the current memory usage. Its routines are shared between 
all of the test suites used on a particular operating system and must be 
provided in object code form before the tests can be run. Usually, the OTSS 
software will be FORTRAN or assembly language subroutines. 

The LTSS is a set of procedures and data definitions that permit the test 
software to remain machine-independent by hiding the details of OTSS, such as 
what data are being collected and how the timing is being done. In addition, 
compiler-dependent features are isolated in the LTSS. The Ada versions of the 
LTSS define the default floating point and integer data types. The majority 
of the global variables used in the tests are defined in the LTSS files. 


1-4 


















JOVIAL Compiler 


JOVIAL Compiler 


FORTRAN 

Compiler/ 

Assembler 



Figure 1-3. JOVIAL Test Suite Generation 












A 

Figure 1-4. FORTRAN Test Suite 


FORTRAN 

Compiler/ 

Assembler 



Generation 


1-7 












1.2 TEST EVALUATION CAPABILITY 


The base Ada test suite is comprised of U59 programs. Thus, it was felt 
that an automated method was needed to process the test suite and the result¬ 
ing data. The Test Evaluation Capability (TEC) is a set of procedures written 
in the operating system's job control language and FORTRAN programs written to 
handle these functions. The TEC job control language procedures, called 
scripts, are divided into those that control the compilation and linkage and 
those that execute the test programs. The two FORTRAN programs included in 
the TEC take the raw data and produce formatted data files and a formatted 
comparison file. One program compares two compilation and linkage results, 
and the other program compares execution results. 


1-8 




2. TEST CATEGORIES 


The ACPS consists of seven types of tests whose execution results are to 
be compared: 

• Ada tests 

• Ada tests with constraint checks suppressed 

• Ada tests with an exception handler in every procedure 

• Ada tests with space optimization pragmas 

• Ada tests with time optimization pragmas 

• JOVIAL J73 tests 

• FORTRAN 77 tests 

Almost all Ada tests use numeric data types that are defined in separate 
test support software packages. Two versions of these packages are supplied: 
one with numeric types defined with range constraints and one with numeric 
types defined without range constraints. All Ada tests should be executed 
with both packages. 

Each type of test is divided into four categories: single language 
feature tests, multiple language feature tests, multiple task loading tests, 
and compiler optimization tests. 

The ACPS only tests features of Ada that are described in the ANSI/MIL-STD- 
1815A reference manual (LRM) for Ada. The ACPS does not include tests of addi¬ 
tional compiler-dependent pragmas or packages that are not described in the 
LRM. (Use of the DEC VAX Ada pragma TIME_SLICE and the package MATHLIB are 
the only exceptions.) The tests are designed to measure only the performance 
of code generated by Ada compilers. They are not designed to measure the 
capacities of compilers and their associated run-time systems. 

Single language feature tests, as their name implies, exercise specific 
language features of Ada (e.g., data type conversion). If other language fea¬ 
tures are needed in order to construct a test of this type, then an additional 
test is developed to account for the overhead introduced. These tests are 
useful in determining which features of Ada are implemented inefficiently and 
consequently which features of Ada could have the greatest impact on applica¬ 
tion performance. 

Multiple language feature tests are designed to test a composite of 
language features to either perform an application-specific algorithm (e.g., 
Fourier transform) or to represent the frequency of language feature use for 
types of applications (e.g., the Whetstone and Dhrystone tests). 

Multiple task loading tests are designed to stress the task scheduling, 
input/output and memory management capabilities of Ada implementations. Three 
types of tasks are used: CPU intensive, CPU and memory intensive, and input/ 
output intensive. Task loading tests consist of a varying number of tasks of 
identical type (e.g., input/output intensive). They are differentiated by the 
type of the task and by the number of tasks executing. 


2-1 





Compiler optimization tests are designed to test well-known, machine- 
independent, code-generation optimization algorithms used in compilers (e.g., 
constant folding). Most of the tests are composed of two parts: a version 
coded to test a particular type of compiler optimization technique and a 
functionally equivalent hand-optimized version. Separate test results are 
generated for each version of the test and for the comparison of the two 
versions. 

The ACPS is composed of single language feature tests rather than multi¬ 
language or application specific tests. This bias is due to the developer's 
perception that it is very difficult to draw conclusions from performance data 
obtained from execution of any multi-language feature tests. Unless the 
execution time of each statement of an application is known, one cannot under¬ 
stand the performance results obtained, cannot recommend changes in coding 
techniques to improve performance, and cannot predict the performance of other 
applications which use similar language features. By containing a comprehen¬ 
sive set of single language feature tests, the ACPS can supply sufficient 
detailed performance data to (a) permit informed interpretation of application 
test execution results and (b) provide a basis for recommendation of remedial 
action to the compiler vendor or to the application coder in order to improve 
application performance. 


2-2 










3. TEST MEASUREMENT CONCERNS 


This section discusses the test measurement concerns that drove selection 
of the test measurement techniques described in Section U and Appendix C. 

The ACPS was designed for use in evaluating the efficiency of Ada com¬ 
pilers for ground applications as well as spaceborne applications. The ACPS 
and its support software were created on a host and target machine that used a 
general purpose operating system (DEC VAX/VMS) which supports both real-time 
and nonreal-time applications. As a result, some of the test measurement 
techniques employed were selected due only to the fact that a general purpose 
target operating system would be used. 

Test measurement concerns that were addressed in development of the ACPS 
are as follows: 

a. Source of test data . 

There are several aspects to test performance: test execution time 
(elapsed time, idle-time, run-time system overhead), memory usage 
(physical, virtual, compiled code, data, run-time system, page-fault 
rate), input/output operations (both intended and unintended) and 
size of input/output files. The only compiler-independent perfor¬ 
mance measurements that can be made directly within the Ada program¬ 
ming language are: 

Size of compiled code 
Size of data objects 

- Number of input/output statements executed 

- Number of times the test code is executed 

- Elapsed time of a test 

The other performance statistics (e.g., physical memory usage) must 
be obtained in a machine and run-time system-dependent manner. 

b. How to take measurements . 

Performance data can be obtained both from within and outside the 
executing program. Measurements taken outside the executing program 
are made before and after the program executes and include the time 
to load the program into memory as well as the time to remove the 
program from memory. For real-time applications, one is only 
concerned with the execution characteristics of a test, since program 
loading and initialization operations are performed before real-time 
processing begins. 


3-1 






There are three approaches that can be used to measure the execution 
time of test code from within the test program: 

1. Take a single measurement before and after a test executes. 

2. Enclose the test code in a loop and take measurements for each 
iteration through the loop and record the maximum, median, and 
minimum execution times. 

3. Enclose the test code in a loop and take a single measurement 
for multiple iterations through the test code. 

The first two approaches assume existence of a clock with greater 
resolution than the time to execute the test code. For general- 
purpose operating systems, the Ada clock resolution can be as high 
as 1 sec. For VAX/VMS, the operating system clock resolution is 
10 ms. Since test code execution times were expected to be as low 
as 20 ps, the third approach was used for ACPS tests. 

The second approach was used in special tests (e.g., time to wake up 
from a DELAY statement) that cannot be timed using a single measure¬ 
ment for a multiple iteration test loop. For DEC VAX/VMS, this 
approach required development of a machine-dependent routine to 
compute microsecond level elapsed times. The routine used privileged 
code and had to be installed in the operating system. 

c. How to isolate measurements to the code tested . 

It is important ensure that test measurements can be isolated to the 
test code itself. Any overhead introduced by the measurement 
process should be separately measurable and taken into account. It 
should also be possible to separate the time to load the test code 
and data into memory from the time to execute the test code. To the 
extent possible, execution of the test measurement code should not 
be affected by the test code. Conversely, the test code itself 
should not be affected by the test measurement code. Since test 
code is executed within test measurement loops, one has to make sure 
that compiler optimization techniques do not cause removal of test 
code from the test measurement loops. In addition, care should be 
taken in constructing tests so that compiler optimization logic does 
not affect the intent of the test (e.g., common subexpression 
elimination). 

d. How to determine the accuracy and repeatability of test execution 
time measurements . 

The accuracy of test elapsed time measurements is largely determined 
by the resolution of the clock used (i.e., smallest nonzero differ¬ 
ence in clock values) in relation to the duration of a test. If the 
clock resolution time is 10 ms and the test execution time is greater 
than 1 sec, then the error in the execution time measurement is less 
than +1X. There are a number of factors, however, which affect the 
repeatability of test measurements. These are primarily caused by 


3-2 





run-time system and target operating system operations which are 
discussed in Section 3.1. For a desired level of measurement accu¬ 
racy, one must be able to measure the repeatability of test measure¬ 
ments and be aware of what factors affect test measurement accuracy 
and how they can be controlled. Separate tests are contained within 
the ACPS to measure clock resolution and test measurement repeat¬ 
ability. For some machine architectures, it may be necessary to 
repeatably execute every test and only use the maximum or minimum 
test statistics for comparison. 

e. How to ensure, to the extent possible, that consistent run-time 

environments for Ada, JOVIAL, and FORTRAN implementations are used 
for fair comparison . 

Certainly, within a single machine and target operating system con¬ 
figuration, conventions can be established and measurement techniques 
employed to ensure consistent execution environments for comparison. 

A problem arises, however, whenever the underlying machines or target 
operating systems are different. For example, one may want to com¬ 
pare the performance of an Ada implementation on a VAX-11/785 using 
VMS to another Ada implementation on a VAX-8600 using VMS. It would 
be difficult to draw any conclusions about the comparison of test 
results, because it is not possible to determine to what extent the 
difference in performance is due to the effect of the Ada implemen¬ 
tation and to what extent the difference can be attributed to the 
effect of the target machine. In situations such as these, one 
could use a third implementation (e.g., FORTRAN) executing on both 
machines to provide a reference point for the comparison. 

3.1 OPERATING SYSTEM EFFECT 


As mentioned above, the underlying target operating system and Ada 
run-time system can have a significant impact on the repeatability of test 
measurements. Complex operating systems such as DEC VAX/VMS can impact a test 
measurement in numerous ways: 

a. Other user programs on a time-shared machine can interrupt test 
program executions. 

b. Special network and distributed database software products can 
interrupt test program executions either on a time scheduled basis 
for status and node polling activities or on an intermittent basis 
dependent upon activity throughout the network. 

c. Operating system processes and routines can interrupt test programs 
on a scheduled or intermittent basis for accounting, time 
management, terminal polling, physical memory allocation adjustment, 
test program priority adjustment, printing, etc. 

d. Ada run-time systems can distort test measurements through task 
scheduling activities and unexpected storage management garbage 
collections. 


3-3 







The user typically has a good deal of control over the effect of the 
operating system. The tests can be run stand-alone on a computer with no 
other user program or batch process executing. Network, distributed database, 
and system processes used for accounting and printing can be disabled. How¬ 
ever, no matter how well the ACPS user constrains the run-time environment, 
the ACPS test repeatability program must still be run to determine the poten¬ 
tial variance in test measurements. 

3.2 HARDWARE EFFECT 


The computer system hardware can affect the test measurement and test 
evaluation process in two ways: It can affect the repeatability of test 
measurements on a single machine, and it can impact the comparisons of test 
executions on different machines. 

The effect on test measurement repeatability will primarily be seen in 
input/output tests. Input/output throughput can be affected by the positioning 
and fragmentation of files on a single disk. The ACPS test languages do not 
provide mechanisms for controlling how files are stored on disks. As a result, 
the user may wish to run ACPS input/output tests several times and use the 
minimum test measurements obtained for comparison. It is also possible that 
hardware memory caches can also impact test repeatability. On DEC VAX, use of 
the high-speed memory cache is determined by physical address location. For 
DEC VAX/VMS, the virtual to physical address mapping will be different each 
time a test program is executed. For large ACPS test programs (e.g., loading 
tests), memory cache use could impact program performance and the user may 
wish to run these tests several times and use the minimum of test measurements 
made. Instruction pipelining can also impact test repeatability on computers 
for which separate memory modules can be accessed simultaneously and for which 
the user has no control over how his program is stored in physical memory. 

The computer hardware configuration has a significant impact on 
evaluations of compiler implementations on different machines even for 
machines with the same hardware architecture. Instruction set capabilities 
and execution times can vary significantly. Memory access time, cache memory 
size and access time, disk seek and throughput times can also vary tremen¬ 
dously among machines supporting the same instruction set architecture. 

Ideally, different compiler implementations should be compared through test 
executions in the same hardware/software environment. If this is not 
practical, then a third compiler (e.g., FORTRAN) should be used on both 
machines to provide a point of reference for the comparison. 


3-4 








4. TEST MEASUREMENT AND CODING TECHNIQUES 


This section discusses the techniques used to gather data that measure 
the performance and resource utilization of Ada, JOVIAL, and FORTRAN compilers 
at compile-time and of compiled ACPS tests at run-time. 

Examples of the different methods used in developing ACPS tests are 
presented and described, which should be useful to users wishing to augment 
the ACPS with tests of their own. 

4.1 COMPILE-TIME MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES 

Data at compile time can be derived from either the host operating system 
or the compiler. The ACPS compile time data processor, described in detail in 
Appendix E, assumes that all data are presented in a single file which 
consists of separate sections in the following order: compilation processing 
data, post-compilation processing or linkage edit processing data, source 
module size data, object module size data and load module size data. The 
expected formats for these sections, along with sample outputs, are also 
described in Appendix E. For the VAX/VMS version of ACPS, all data were 
gathered through use of operating system commands. Operating system commands 
were also used to display the test environment (user quotas, system activity) 
to ensure that the data gathered for comparison are accumulated in test 
environments as similar as possible. 

4.2 RUN-TIME MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES 

Data are gathered at run-time by test support procedures whose Ada, 
JOVIAL, and FORTRAN versions are functionally equivalent in the sense that 
they gather the same data and report them in exactly the same format. The 
ACPS run-time data processor assumes that all run-time data accumulated for 
processing are contained on a single file in a sorted order, as described in 
Appendix E. 

In gathering run-time test data, two problems must be addressed. The 
first problem is concerned with determining which data are available and how 
to gather them. The second problem addresses the methodology for controlling 
test execution such that the data gathered are accurate and measure only 
execution of the test code itself. 

Two types of data are gathered by ACPS tests: language-specific and 
operating system/compiler-dependent. 

Language-specific data measure the size of test code, data objects, and 
the elapsed time of a test. In Ada tests, the address attribute of labels is 
used to measure the size of test code, and the size attribute of data objects 
is used to compute their size. In a single test, up to five values can be 
output for the size of test code and data objects. Two types of elapsed time 
data are computed. For tests timed through repetitive execution of a test 
loop, the elapsed time of the test and the number of loop iterations executed 
are computed and output. For tests timed through single executions of test 


4-1 



code, multiple microsecond level measurements are made and the maximum, 
minimum, and median timings are computed and output. To collect language- 
specific data, test support procedures are used to the maximum extent 
possible. Their use in gathering test data is described in detail and 
illustrated with examples in Section 4.3. 

Operating system and compiler-dependent data are additional performance 
measures that may be provided by an Ada run-time environment through access to 
special compiler-dependent run-time procedures or to accounting procedures 
within an underlying operating system. They may include such data as actual 
time spent executing machine instructions, number of input/ output operations, 
physical memory usage, etc. The data are collected by ACPS test support 
software in a manner that is transparent to the test programs. Up to nine 
data of this type can be collected and output for processing by the ACPS 
run-time data comparison tool. 

To ensure that the test data collected at run-time are accurate and 
repeatable and only measure execution of the test code itself, various coding 
techniques were adopted both within ACPS test programs and within the test 
support software. 

The following coding techniques were employed to ensure to the maximum 
extent possible that the run-time data collected during a test apply only to 
the code being tested: 

a. All ACPS tests call test support software to start and stop tests 
and to gather and report performance data. 

b. Special tests (Table 4-1, page 4-8) were created to measure the 
overhead of the test support software and the test code loop. The 
ACPS run-time data processor uses these measurements to remove any 
overhead not associated with the code being tested. 

c. For some tests, the test overhead cannot be determined by the 
special test program in Table 4-1. For these tests, the overhead is 
determined directly in the program containing the test by using a 
special test support procedure (TCOMP). An example of this approach 
is discussed in Section 4.3. 

d. For nonmicrosecond level tests, two sets of data are gathered: one 
for the first iteration through the test loop and the second for 
subsequent test loop iterations. In this manner, the time to load 
the test code and its data into memory is isolated and removed from 
test measurements. 

e. All ACPS tests call a test support initialization procedure which 
ensures that all test support code and data are in memory before 
test execution begins. 

f. All ACPS tests call a test support procedure at the end of execution 
to output test results. This guarantees that the effect of output¬ 
ting the results from one test execution does not affect execution 
of subsequent tests. 


4-2 








g. A separate test support procedure (NOOPTM) is called within each 

test loop to ensure that test code is not removed from the loop by 
compiler optimization algorithms. The support procedure suppresses 
compiler optimization logic by referencing but not executing code 
that sets and uses all global variables used in test loops. If a 
test is designed to use local variables only, then these variables 
are by convention assigned to test support global variables within 
the test loop. 

The following coding techniques were used to ensure the accuracy and 
repeatability of timing measurements: 

a. A separate test program (ADAPARM) was created to measure the 
resolution of the Ada clock and the representation of predefined 
data types. It is discussed in more detail in Section 7 and 
Appendix C. 

b. A separate test program (AFIRST) was created for use in measuring 
the repeatability of test measurements. Its use is described in 
more detail in Section 7 and Appendix C. 

c. The test support software outputs an error message if the test 
execution time is less than a predetermined value. To achieve 99% 
accuracy in test measurements, the test execution time should be at 
least 100 times greater than the resolution of the Ada clock 

(Sec. 7.3.2.1). 

d. The test support software does not allow a test to start until the 
Ada clock changes value. For microsecond level tests, this removes 
the effect of operating system overhead for operating systems whose 
overhead occurs at the change of Ada clock values. (This is true 
for DEC Ada on VAX/VMS.) This convention also reduces the amount of 
time necessary to execute tests by maximizing the accuracy of the 
start time of a test. 

e. To enhance repeatability of test measurements, WHILE loops rather 
than FOR loops are used to ensure that the loop control code does 
not vary with the complexity of the code tested within the loop. To 
control test duration, a global variable (LITERS) is used in the 
WHILE loop condition that is also incremented by a test support 
procedure (NOOPTM) within each test loop. 

4.3 ACPS CODING TECHNIQUE EXAMPLES 

This section describes through example several coding techniques used in 
developing ACPS test programs. It also shows how Ada programs are mapped into 
equivalent JOVIAL and FORTRAN programs. 


4-3 








Table 4-1 shows a line numbered example of prototype test loops for 
multiple iteration tests and single iteration microsecond level tests. This 
example can serve as a template for development of additional ACPS tests. The 
following description of the contents of Table 4-1 is ordered by line number: 

Lines Each ACPS test file is preceded by commentary prologue that 

1-13 describes the contents of the file. 

Line 3 Lists the test names to which this file applies. 

Line 4 Gives the name of the file. 

Line 6 Lists the initials of the person(s) responsible for development 

and modification of the file and the date(s) the file was 
inserted into the ACPS or was modified. 

Lines Describe the purpose of the file. 

10-12 

Line 14 Allows use of test support procedures (TINIT, T2VALU, TSTART, 
NOOPTM, TSTOP, MSTART, MSTOP, TSTOPM, TPRINT) and test support 
global variables (LITERS) and constants (MICITR). 

Line 15 Allows use of test support procedures (DUMPT) to print the 
contents of test support global variables. 

Line 16 Allows use of loop iteration parameters (100000) externally 

defined in a package. These parameters define the duration of 
tests. They are grouped into packages according to test 
category to minimize the file editing required to change test 
durations. 

Line 18 Notice that the main program procedure name is the same as the 
last six characters of the file name. 

Line 20 Each ACPS test must call the procedure 0URSYS.TINIT to 
initialize test support software. 

Lines Contain a template for development of multiple iteration tests. 

21-28 All test code would be inserted after line 25. 

Line 21 Uses procedure 0URSYS.T2VALU to compute the size of the test 
loop as the difference in addresses of labels which surround 
the test loop. 





Line 22 


Lines 
23, 27 

Line 24 


Line 25 


Line 28 

Lines 

33-40 


Line 33 
Line 34 


Uses procedure OURSYS.TSTART to start execution of the test 
whose name is supplied as an argument. This procedure 
initializes global variables that can be used by the test 
code. If initial values different from those set by TSTART are 
to be specified, then the initialization statements should be 
inserted between lines 20 and 22 along with the following 
statement: 

set_tmp: = true; 

Define the start and end of the test loop. 


Contains the test loop control statement. The variable LITERS 
is defined in the package OURSYS, initialized by TSTART to one, 
and incremented by N00PTM within the loop. Notice that the 
loop iteration parameter is a six character name that begins 
with a "1" and has the same last five characters as the test 
name. 

Invokes procedure OURSYS.N00PTM for several purposes: 

a. To increment the loop control parameter LITERS 

b. To prevent compiler optimization logic from removing test 
code involving calculations which use or set test support 
global variables 

c. To force two sets of test results to be generated: one 
for the first iteration through the loop and the second 
for subsequent iterations through the loop 

Uses procedure OURSYS.TSTOP to stop test execution and to 
compute and save all run-time test data for subsequent printing. 

Contain a template for development of microsecond level tests. 
The test code to be timed would be inserted before line 36 and 
between the calls to OURSYS.MSTART and OURSYS.MSTOP. The calls 
to MSTART and MSTOP needn't appear immediately within the test 
loop but can appear in a procedure or task invoked from within 
the test loop. In addition, calls to MSTART and TSTART needn't 
be made from the same procedure or task. 

Invokes OURSYS.TSTART to start test execution. 

Contains the test loop control statement. The variable LITERS 
is defined in the package OURSYS, initialized by procedure 
TSTART, and incremented by procedure MSTART. The test loop 
iteration parameter MICITR is defined in OURSYS as the maximum 
number of microsecond level measurements that can be made for a 
test. 


4-5 







Line 35 Invokes OURSYS.MSTART to start a microsecond level test 
measurement. 

Line 36 Invokes OURSYS.MSTOP to compute the elapsed time of a 

microsecond level measurement and store the result in a test 
support data buffer. 

Line 38 Uses OURSYS.TSTOPM to stop a microsecond level test and compute 
and save all microsecond level run-time test data for 
subsequent printing. TSTOPM computes the maximum, median, and 
minimum value of all microsecond level measurements made during 
the test. 


Line 39 Invokes OURSYS.TPRINT to output test results previously saved 
by TSTOP and TSTOPM. Up to 50 test results can be saved for 
printing by TPRINT. If more than 50 tests are executed, then 
TSTOP and TSTOPM will call TPRINT whenever the data buffers 
become full. 


Line 40 Invokes OURDMP.DUMPT to output the contents of all global 
variables defined in package OURSYS. The global variable 
OURSYS.DEBUG controls whether printing occurs when DUMPT is 
called. By default, printing does not occur. To force 
printing, OURSYS.DEBUG can be set to boolean true in the test 
program or in default initialization in package OURSYS. 


Table 4-2 contains an example of a template for a package defining test 
iteration counts. A package of this type is developed for each test category. 
As shown at line 16, the iteration counts are defined as constants. 


Tables 4-3 and 4-4 show JOVIAL and FORTRAN versions of the Ada program in 
Table 4-1. These tables illustrate the following Ada coding conventions that 
were adopted to facilitate conversion of Ada tests to JOVIAL and FORTRAN: 

a. Only six characters are used for procedure and data object names in 
Ada. As a result, all procedure and data object names in Ada tests 
are identical to those in JOVIAL and FORTRAN. 

b. Ada, JOVIAL, and FORTRAN test names and file names only differ in 
the first character. 

c. Ada comments are suffixed with two dashes to facilitate translation 
to JOVIAL. 

d. Ada executable statements begin with at least six blanks to 
facilitate translation to FORTRAN. 

As a result of the use of Ada coding conventions for ACPS tests, much of 
the work necessary to translate Ada tests to JOVIAL and FORTRAN equivalents 
was automated with VAX/VMS edit command procedures. The examples shown in 
Tables 4-1, 4-3, and 4-4 illustrate the following Ada language feature 
mappings to JOVIAL and FORTRAN: 


4-6 







a. The use of an address attribute for a label can be implemented in 
JOVIAL with the LOC function and in FORTRAN with the ASSIGN 
statement (whose implementation is compiler-dependent). 

b. WHILE statements must be translated to DO statements in FORTRAN. 

Since a global variable is used as the loop control variable and is 
referenced by the routine NOOPTM, FORTRAN compilers must generate 
code to store into the variable for each iteration through the test 
loop. However, FORTRAN compilers may generate different loop control 
compiled code depending on the complexity of the test statements 
which can result in test measurements that are too high. 

c. WITH statements are translated to COMPOOL statements in JOVIAL and 
to VAX FORTRAN INCLUDE statements in FORTRAN. 

As discussed in Section 4.2, for some tests, the test loop overhead 
cannot be determined by the special test program shown in Table 4-1. For 
these tests, the overhead is accounted for directly in the program containing 
the test. This kind of test program is composed of three types of packages: 
a test overhead package, one or more test code packages, and a test driver 
package. Examples of these package types are shown in Tables 4-5, 4-6, 
and 4-7. 

Table 4-5 shows a package containing a single procedure that measures the 
test loop overhead for the IF statement test contained in Table 4-6. This 
procedure contains all statements (both executed and not executed) that are 
not part of the test but are necessary for its construction. It must be the 
first procedure executed in the test program. The following description of 
the features of the test overhead package shown in Table 4-5 is ordered by 
line number: 

Line 29 


Lines 32, 61 


Line 34 


Line 65 


The procedure OURSYS.TINIT is called to initialize test 
support software variables and ensure that the support 
software procedures are read into memory. 

OURSYS.TSTART and OURSYS.TSTOP are called to gather data 
from execution of the overhead test and to save the 
results for subsequent use and printing. 

The loop iteration count (105305) used in the overhead 
test should have the same value as the loop iteration 
counts used in test code packages. 

The procedure OURSYS.TSAVE must be called to identify the 
previous test executed as an overhead test so that 
run-time data can be saved for use in subsequent tests 
executed within the same Ada program to account for the 
test loop overhead. 


4-7 







Table 4-6 shows an example of a test code package in which the test loop 
overhead has been previously computed and saved through invocation of 
OURSYS.TSAVE. The test support procedure OURSYS.TCOMP is called (line 27) to 
indicate that previously saved test loop overhead data are to be subtracted 
from the next test executed. Two sets of test results are generated by the 
procedure OURSYS.TSTOP: one including test loop overhead (AF05306) followed 
by one without test loop overhead (AF55306). The test name supplied to 
OURSYS.TCOMP must contain an "S" in the third character position. 

Table 4-7 shows the test driver for tests in Table 4-5 and 4-6. The 
driver first calls the test that computes the test loop overhead and then 
calls all other tests to be executed. It finally calls OURSYS.TPRINT to 
output the run-time data for each test. 

The test program structure shown in Tables 4-5, 4-6, and 4-7 is identical 
to the one used in the ACPS to determine whether machine-independent optimiza¬ 
tion algorithms are employed by a compiler. In this situation, the performance 
of a hand optimized version of a test is executed first and is compared with 
the performance of the compiler optimized version of a test. The run-time 
data comparison is computed as a fraction [100*(hand_optimized/ 
compiler_optimized)]. To identify the comparison as fractional, a "C" must be 
used in the third character position of the test name argument to OURSYS.TCOMP 
[e.g., OURSYS.TCOMP ("A0C0508")]. 

Table 4-1. Ada Test Loop Overhead Program 


1 

2 

5 

4 

5 
4 
7 
• 
* 

10 

11 

12 

15 

14 

15 
14 
17 
It 
1 » 
20 
21 
22 
25 

24 

25 
24 
27 
20 
2 * 

50 

51 

52 
55 

54 

55 
54 
57 
50 
50 

40 

41 


Ada RmI Tiae/Run Tin Environment Tut Aerospace Corporation — 

__ 

— Tostt AAOOOOO,AAM00D0 — 

— File. AAOOOOO •— 

ue* 

REK 2/1/00 -I 

ue» 

•* Descriptioni — 

— nil This tut establishes the run time ays tea dependent statistic •— 
“ ■*** eyerhud ef the test support softwareCoursys,ourdoe). This tut — 

— mi should ho the first tut run in sny tut soauonce. — 

u• Uu 

with eursys; uo oursysi 
with owrdnpi ue ourdop; 
with aaOpOOOi ue eaOeOOO; 


procedure AAOOOOO is 

hosin 

oursys.tiniti 

Biirmyr, . 12val v( top 'oddrou, hot tu 'addrsu ) ; 
our4ys.tstart("AAOOOOO")/ 

«top» nulli 

while liters <• 100000 Isos 
eursys.neeptai 
and loop; 

«hottu>> null; 

oursys.tstop; 

ssocuto tut to do torsi no over hud in accsuin* aicruecend level — 
— ties. — 

eursys.tstart("AAH0000"); 
while liters <■ nicitr loop 
eursys.utert; 
eursys.utepj 
end loop; 
eursys.tstou; 
eursys.tprint; 
eurdap.duut; 

end; 


4-8 






M«iW»WNMe<OIIM«UIJ>IHNH 


Table 4-2. Sample Test Iteration Count Package 

-- Ada Real Time/Run Tiaa Environment Test Aareapaca Corporation ~~ 

— Tasti . 

— Filei AA0P000 " 

REK 2/1/88 ” 

— Dascriptiom — 

— kxkk this packapa dafinas tast loop iteration counts for tost “ 

— *«* overhead tests — 

with OURSYS; use OURSYS; 

packapa AA0P000 is 

100000 i constant our intoper »« 300000; 
and AA0P000; 


Table 4-3. JOVIAL Test Loop Overhead Program 


1 

2 

10 

11 


14 

15 

14 
17 

15 

19 

20 
21 
22 

23 

24 

25 

24 
27 

25 
29 
SO 

31 

32 

33 

34 

35 

34 
37 

35 

39 

40 

41 

42 


start 

■ Ada Real Tiaa/Run Tiaa Environment Tast Aerospace Corporation 

* Tasti JAOOOOO*JAMOOOO 

- Filei JA00000 

* REK 2/1/88 

■ Dascriptiom 

” This tost astablishas the run tiaa system dependant statistic 

■ overhead of the test support softwaroCoursySfourdmp). This tast 

* should bo tha first tast run in any tost soquenco. 

!coapool C'ourjov'); 

Jcompool ('jovdap*); 

!compool CjaOpOOO'); 
propraa aOOOOO; 
bapin 

tinit; 

t2valu(loc(top),loc(bottom)); 
tstartC'JA00000'); 

topi | 

while liters <» 100000; 
neopta; 

bottomi; 

tstop; 


• oxocuto tost to detorsino overhead in acci 

• time." 


inp aicrosocond loval 


tstartC'JAH0000*); 
while liters <* aicitr; 

bapin 

■start; 

■stop; 
ond*loop;* 
tstopm; 
tprint; 
duopt; 

and 

tors 


4-9 








»»WUUV)MI«lilblWUNNNNNNNNNri|MMMMMMMMMM 

HO«W'4»>Ui«biNHe«M'>J»<Vi»WNMO««'g»Ui»UNMe««M»gi|tUNM 


Table 4-4. FORTRAN Test Loop Overhead Program 


e Ada Real Tiae/Run Tiaa Environment Tost Aerospace Corporation 

c Tasti FA00000.FAM0000 

c File* FA00000 

c REX 2/1/88 

c Description* 

c This test establishes the run tiaa system dependant statistic 
c overhead of the test support software(oursys»ourdap). This test 
c should be the first test run in any test sequence. 

program aOQOOO 
include 'ourfor.cmn* 
include *fa0p000.can* 
call tinit 
assign 100 to tmpisl 
assign 200 to ta?is2 
cell t2valu(tmpisl.tapis2> 
call tstartt'FA00000') 

100 do 10 liters«l.100000 

call noopta 

10 continue 

200 continue 

call tstop 

c execute test to deteraino overhead in accessing microsecond level 
c time. 


call tstertt*FAMOOOO*) 
do 299 liters >l.aicitr 
call astart 
call mstop 

299 continue 

cell tstopa 
call tprint 
call duapt 
stop 
end 


4-10 









»»»»»»*>»»|pUWWUlMUlMU , W*»»**»»»*«UtitUWtaWMWWIHNNNNNNNNNNHMHMMMMHHM 

d^i»ui«>wNMe<o(i-4o>ui»wNi- | e«H'i«>uir>wNwo«ei'j^ui»UNMo«ei'4ff>ui»MNMo«oisoiui«uNHe«ti'J«uif>b*NM 


Table 4-5. Example IF Statement Test Overhead Package 


— Ada Raal Tioe/Run Tiae Environment Taat Aerospace Corporation — 

— Testi AF05S05 

— Filei AF05305 


ARA.REK 2/1/88 

— Descriptioni 

— kkxk This package aaasuras the tost loop overhead for testa* 

— KM KM 

— KMMM af05306 

— MKK af05307 


** run statistic II ■ size of the tost loop coda 

with oursys; usa oursys; 
with AF0P000; usa AF0P000; 
with ourdap; usa eurdap; 
package AF05305 is 

procedure F05305; 
and AF05305; 
packape body AF05305 is 
procedure F05305 is 

bopin 

-* initialize for the tost saeuence — 
oursys.tinit) 

oursys.t2valu(top*address»bottoa'addrass>; 
oursys.tsta rt("AF05S05"); 

«top» null) 

whilo liters <> 105305 loop 
oursys.noopta) 
if (tapbsa) than 
tapbal(l) i* falsa) 
tapba1(2) •* false) 
tapbal(3) »» false; 
tapbal(l) •• false; 
tapbal(5) i* false; 
tapbal(t) i» false; 
tapbal(7) •• false; 
tapbal(S) •• false; 
tapbald) i* false; 
taipbal(lO) »* false; 
tapba2(l) i* false; 
and if; 

tapbsl i* false; 
tapbs2 i* false; 
tapbs3 false; 
tapbsl •» falsa; 
tapbs5 «• falsa; 
tapbsft «« falsa; 
tapbs7 i* false; 
tapbsS »* false; 
tapbs9 i* falsa; 
tapbsa • ■ falsa; 
and loop; 

<<bettoa>> null; 

oursys.tst op; 
surdap.duapt; 

— save tost rasults for later usa as base value — 
oursys.tsave; 
return; 
and; 

and AF05305; 


4-11 





^ jx ^ ^ |^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^| ^ ^ ^ f^y ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

«OlNj»m^UMNO<OOI^^^»UfgHe««^»Ui»btNMO«Oi^»Ui^tiNMO«0«S9«UlitoiNMO<a«^Ul^OiNMO««I^Ul|k^MH 


Table 4-6. Example IF Statement Test 


— Ada Real Tima/Run Tima Environnant Test Aerospace Corporation 

— Tosti AF05306,AFS5306 

— Filot AFD5306 

ARA.REK 2/1/86 

— Descriptioni 

— xxxx This tost measures the execution time of 

— xxxx 10 if statements with the then part executed. 

— run statistic 81 « size of test loop code 


with oursys; usa eursys; 
with AFOPOOO) use AFOPOOO) 
with ourdmp; use ourdmp; 
package AF05306 is 

procadura F05306) 
and AF05306) 
package body AF05306 is 
procadura F05306 is 


begin 


oursys.tcoapf"AFS5306*); 
eursys.t2valu( top'address , bottom'eddr 
eursys.tstart("AFD5306")) 

«top» null) 

while liters <• 105306 loop 

eursys.nooptm; 
if ( tmpba2(l) ) then 
tmpbsl <« false) 

else 

tmpbal(l) i* false) 
end if) 

if ( tmpba2(2) ) then 
tmpbs2 i* false) 
also 

tmpbal(2) •* false) 
end if) 

if ( tmpba2(5) 1 then 
tmpbs3 •• false) 
also 

tmpbalCS) •* false) 
end if) 

if ( tmpba?(4) ) then 
tmpbst «■ falso) 
also 

tmpbal(t) «■ false) 
end if) 

if ( tmeba2(5) ) then 
tmpbs5 »■ false) 
else 

tmpbeKS) i* falso) 
end if) 

if ( tmpba2(6) 1 then 
tapbsi •• falso) 
also 

tapbal(6) »• false) 
and if) 

if ( tmpbe2(7) ) then 
tmpbs7 •* falao) 
else 

tmpbal(7) i* falsa) 
and if) 

if ( tmpba2«> ) then 
tmpbst false) 


)) 


4-12 





NNNNNNNNNNmmwmmhwmmm 


Table 4-6. Example IF Statement Test (Continued) 


70 

71 

72 
75 

74 

75 

76 

77 

78 
70 
80 
81 
82 
85 

84 

85 

86 

87 

88 

89 

90 

91 

92 


•Isa 

tapbal(S) i* falsa) 
•nd if) 

if ( tapba2(9> ) than 
tapbs9 i* falsa) 

slsa 

tapbal(9) »• falsa) 
and if) 

if ( tapba2(10) ) than 
tapbsa «« falsa) 

•Isa 

tapbal(lO) i* falsa) 
•nd if) 

if ( tapbsa > than 
tapba5(l) «■ true; 

•nd if) 

•nd leap) 

«bottoa>> null) 

eursys.tstop) 

ourdap.duapt) 

raturn) 

and; 

•nd AF05506) 


Table 4-7. Example IF Statement Test Driver 


Ada Real Tiaa/Run Tiaa Environaant Test Aerospace Corporation 

— Testi . 

— Films AF05508 

^ m 

ARA.REK 2/1/88 

— Dascriptioni 

— ***« This is the driver for testst 

— af05505 

— af05506 

— af05507 

with oursys; use oursys; 
with AF05505; use AF05505; 
with AF05506; use AF05506) 
with AF05507) use AF05507) 
procedure AF05508 is 

basin 

— execute the test saauenca — 

f05505; 
f05506) 

F05507) 

•ursys.tprint) 

•nd AF0550B) 


4-13 





5. ACPS EVALUATION TESTING SOFTWARE ARCHITECTURE 


The ACPS evaluation testing capability design, as depicted in Figure 5-1, 
is structured around the desire to test and evaluate several different Ada 
implementations as well as JOVIAL and FORTRAN capabilities. As such, a common 
language test and evaluation environment was designed to permit automated 
comparisons of results from Ada, JOVIAL, and FORTRAN test executions. This 
section describes the basic test and evaluation architecture and how the three 
languages fit into the overall capability. 

Each language has its own environment and restrictions which must be 
addressed in order to get a working system. Those areas which are common 
across all three languages are collected into common capabilities within the 
test and evaluation capability. Those areas which are specific to a given 
language, implementation, or host operating system are identified and isolated 
to the maximum extent possible. 

The test and evaluation capability is further divided into specific 
implementation areas of: compile and link operations, run-time evaluation 
operations, and result comparison operations. 

The compile and link operations comprise the set of steps necessary to 
compile and link the application for each of the specific test cases and the 
different languages. Some of the tests are targeted for all three languages, 
others for Ada, and one for JOVIAL or FORTRAN, and some for Ada only. 

Initially, the DEC VAX/VMS operating system was chosen, so all of the current 
procedures are for this specific implementation environment. The basic design 
requires the correct and consistent usage of compilation/linking options and 
ider. ifi- cation of specified system support files for running the test 
cases. The compile-time testing evaluation architecture is shown in Figure 
5-2. Common language command procedure conventions were established to ensure 
that compile time statistic files generated for each language are in the same 
format for presentation to the test result comparator. Example command 
procedures are discussed in detail in Appendix C for DEC VAX/VMS. Appendix E 
describes the test statistic and comparison outputs in detail. 

The run-time evaluation operations comprise the basis for the run-time 
test and evaluation capability. These operations define a common set of 
run-time operations and interfaces for use by the test programs during execu¬ 
tion. These operations have been packaged together to form what is known as 
the OURSYS interface. This interface is constructed, to the extent possible, 
for Ada, JOVIAL, and FORTRAN. It basically provides a set of procedures and 
functions for timing and measuring a test case as well as a common set of data 
definitions and other utilities. Figure 5-3 graphically depicts the ACPS run¬ 
time testing evaluation architecture. Each set of language tests is supported 
by a common test interface (OURSYS) implemented in each language and buttressed 
by an inner target operating system-specific interface implemented in assembly 
language or FORTRAN. The common test interface generates test results in a 
common language format for presentation to the test comparator. Appendix E 
contains a detailed description of the test data and comparison output formats. 


5-1 



The result comparison operations comprise the set of steps necessary to 
interpret and present the results of the test execution. Data gathered from 
the compile, link, and execution phases of the tests are brought together from 
the various language and implementation environments for comparison and 
presentation. The ACPS test comparison tool is used to present formatted test 
results and comparisons to the user. It consists of two separate programs: 
the test compilation comparator (CCOMP) and the test execution comparator 
(CEXEC). As shown in Figures 5-4 and 5-5, each tool has a similar architec¬ 
ture. The tools take as input two unformatted test result files and generate 
formatted output for each input file as well as output that compares the 
results from common tests within each input file. Appendix E describes the 
format of all comparison tool interface files in detail. 


5-2 






Figure 5-1. ACPS Test Evaluation Architecture 


5-3 







Ada TEST 
PROGRAMS 


JOVIAL TEST 
PROGRAMS 



Figure 5-2. Compile-Time Evaluation Architecture 


5-4 












5-5 

















ACPS Compilation 
Results 
A 


ACPS Compilation 
Results 
B 



Formatted ACPS 
Compilation Results 

B 


Test Compilation 
Comparisons 


Figure 5-4. Test Compilation Comparator Interfaces 


5-6 










f Formatted ACPS 
nest Execution Resultsj 

V A 


fast 


Formatted ACPS 
Execution Results | 

B 



Figure 5-5. Test Execution Comparator Interfaces 


5-7 











6. NAMING CONVENTIONS 


The primary objectives in the development of the ACPS were to ease 
conversion of Ada test programs to JOVIAL and FORTRAN and to minimize the 
effort needed to rehost the ACPS. To facilitate these objectives, three types 
of naming conventions were formulated: file name, test name, and programming 
language identifier. 

File name conventions were selected so that ACPS file names would be 
compatible with all host computer operating systems commonly used in Depart¬ 
ment of Defense (DoD) applications. The ACPS file name syntax is identical to 
that of the Control Data Corporation Cyber series of computers executing the 
NOS BE operating system. ACPS file names are restricted to seven characters 
in length. The characters may be capital letters or digits. The file name 
must begin with a letter. Since the ACPS was developed in a VAX/VMS environ¬ 
ment, each ACPS file also has a file type appropriate to the VMS file type 
conventions used by DEC VAX Ada, ECSPO JOVIAL, and DEC VAX FORTRAN compilers. 
Table 6-1 lists all ACPS file types. For almost all ACPS files, the file 
names, however, are unique and the file type field is not necessary to distin¬ 
guish ACPS files within a language or between languages. However, in certain 
situations, multiple versions of a files may be present. The versions are 
distinguished by file type. For Ada test support software, file types are 
employed to distinguish files according to their use of optimization pragmas 
(SPACE, TIME). For other files, the need for additional file types arises 
whenever a compiler used in development of an ACPS test cannot compile single 
or multiple statements within the file. This can occur for statements which 
(a) are too complicated, (b) that invoke noncompilable procedures, or (c) that 
test capabilities not supported by the compiler, but which may be provided by 
other host environments or other compilers. In these situations, the file 
type USE is used for the file that includes the noncompilable statements, and 
compiler-specific file type (e.g., JOV) is used for the file with 
noncompilable statements either deleted or transferred into comments. 

The conventions and formats for ACPS test names are identical to those for 
file names and as a result, the correspondence between test names and file 
names is predetermined by the naming conventions. The format of ACPS test 
names is similar to the format of test names used in the Ada Compiler Valida¬ 
tion Capability (ACVC) test suite. ACPS test names are divided into fields 
whose contents describe much of what must be known about a test: the language 
the test is written in; the category of the test; which language feature is 
being tested; whether the test is compiler-dependent, etc. The detailed 
formats for ACPS file names and test names are described in Sections 6.1 and 
6.2, respectively. 


6-1 




To facilitate conversion of Ada test programs to JOVIAL and FORTRAN, Ada 
identifier conventions were established. Ada identifiers in newly developed 
tests (i.e., tests not acquired from other sources) were restricted to conform 
to FORTRAN 77 syntax: containing only six or less characters; containing only 
letters and digits; and beginning with a letter. Therefore, all data object 
and procedure names in corresponding Ada, JOVIAL, and FORTRAN tests are 
identical. 

6.1 FILE NAME FORMAT 

ACPS file names are comprised of seven characters divided into five 
fields. The name description following is ordered by fields according to 
their character positions: 

Character 1: indicates the type of file as follows: 

A - an Ada source file 

C - an Ada source file with constraint checks suppressed 

E - an Ada source file with exception handlers in every procedure 

F - a FORTRAN source file 
I - an input data file 
J - a JOVIAL source file 

M - a machine language source file (not currently used) 

0 - an output data file 

S - an Ada source file with a space optimization pragma 

T - an Ada source file with a time optimization pragma 

Character 2: indicates the test category as follows: 

A - test loop overhead test 
F - language feature test 

G - general or application specific test involving multiple 
language features 

L - multi-task loading test either CPU or input/output intensive 
0 - compiler optimization test 

Character 3: dependent on test category and indicates the following: 

D - the file is involved in a test of compiler-dependent language 
features 

F - the file contains FORTRAN modules used by JOVIAL test programs 

J - the file contains a JOVIAL compool or FORTRAN common block 

definition 

M - the file contains a microsecond level language feature test 

N - the file contains a microsecond level language feature test 

involving compiler-dependent language features 
zero - has no special significance 

Character 4: dependent on test category as follows: 

zero - for test categories A, G, and 0 


6-2 








LRM Chapter - for test categories F and L. The character is in hexadecimal 

notation and indicates that the file is involved in a test that 
applies to this chapter in the Ada language standard (MIL-STD 
1815A). 

P - for all test categories. The character indicates that the file 
contains test loop iteration parameters. 

Characters 5-7: used as test number identification. The characters may be 

numeric or alphabetic. 

6.2 TEST NAME FORMAT 


ACPS test names contain seven characters divided into five fields. The 
name description that follows is ordered by fields according to their 
character positions: 


Character 1: indicates the type of test as follows: 


A - an Ada test 

C - an Ada test with constraint checks suppressed 

E - an Ada test with exception handlers in every procedure 

F - a FORTRAN test 
J - a JOVIAL test 
M - a machine language test 

S - an Ada test with space optimization pragmas 

T - an Ada test with time optimization pragmas 


Character 2: indicates the test category as follows: 


A - a test loop overhead test 
F - a language feature test 

G - a general or application specific test involving multiple 
language features 

L - a multi-task loading test that is either CPU or input/output 
intensive 

0 - a compiler optimization test 


Character 3: dependent on test category and indicates the following: 


C - an optimization comparison test 

D - a test involving compiler-dependent language features 
I - an information test. The run statistics fields contain the 
test information 

M - a microsecond level language feature test 

N - a microsecond level language feature test involving compiler- 
dependent language features 

S - a language feature test with test loop overhead statistics 
removed 

has no special significance 


zero 








Character 4: dependent on test category as follows: 


zero - 
LRM Chapter - 

Characters 5- 


for test categories A, G, and 0 

for test categories F and L. The character is in hexadecimal 
notation and indicates that the test applies to this chapter in 
the Ada language standard (MIL-STD 1815A). 

7: used as test number identification. These characters 

containing either a capital letter or a numeric digit. 

For many language features tests, character 5 indicates 
that the test applies to this section of the LRM chapter 
specified by character 4. 








Table 6-1. ACPS File Types 


File Type 

Purpose 

Ada 

Used for Ada source code modules. Each file contains either 
a main program, a package, a package specification, or a 
package body. 

CMN 

Used for FORTRAN common definition modules that are referenced 
by machine-specific INCLUDE statements in FORTRAN source code 
files. Each file corresponds to an Ada package specification. 

CPL 

Used for JOVIAL compool definition modules. Each file corres¬ 
ponds to an Ada package specification. 

DAT 

Used for ACPS test program input/output files and for files 
referenced by JOVIAL !COPY directives. 

DEC 

Used for Ada source code modules that contain the DEC VAX 
Ada-specific language pragmas VOLATILE and TIMFSLICE. 

FOR 

Used for FORTRAN source code modules. Each file is either a 
main program, BLOCK DATA program, or collection of FORTRAN 
routines. 

JOV 

Used for JOVIAL source code modules. Each file corresponds 
to an Ada main program or an Ada package body. 

SPA 

Used for Ada test support software modules that contain the 
pragma OPTIMIZE(SPACE). 

TIM 

Used for Ada test support software modules that contain the 
pragma OPTIMIZE(TIME). 

USE 

Used for Ada, JOVIAL, or FORTRAN source code modules that 
were not used on DEC VAX/VMS because either the files were 
not compilable or executable or because an equivalent VAX 
version of the file was used. The FORTRAN files with this 
type may contain common definition modules, and the JOVIAL 
files may contain compool definition modules. 

VAX 

Used for modules that test VAX-specific language features. 
These files are not placed on the ANSI tape. 

VAXSPA 

Used for test support software modules that contain VAX- 
specific language features and the pragma OPTIMIZE(SPACE). 
These files are not placed on the ANSI tape. 

VAXTIM 

Used for test support software modules that contain VAX- 
specific language features and the pragma OPTIMIZE(TIME). 

These files are not placed on the ANSI tape. 


6-5 










7. ACPS INSTALLATION AND TEST EXECUTION 


This section discusses installation and execution of the various parts 
of the test and evaluation capability. As described earlier, the testing 
process involves three basic phases: compilation, execution, and comparison. 
Each phase involves a number of different aspects about the test capability 
depending on the language(s) and environment being addressed. For the initial 
release of the test capability, the DEC VAX/VMS operating system is the 
execution environment used. 

The compilation and execution phases are controlled by command 
procedures which invoke the specific compiler(s) for the specified test cases, 
link the results together, and invoke execution of the test cases. Results 
are then processed by the comparison programs for presentation to the user. 

For DEC VAX/VMS, these command procedures and comparator programs are already 
provided. For other operating systems, the user will need to construct similar 
operations to provide the same functionality. In addition, some low-level 
operating system interface operations will have to be supplied in order to 
access operating system dependent statistics. 

The following subsections describe the tasks necessary to install, 
compile, and execute the ACPS tests and to use the test comparison programs. 

The discussion will be as general as possible and will be oriented toward 
users needing to execute the ACPS tests on operating systems other than DEC 
VAX/VMS. References will be given as appropriate to appendices for detailed 
descriptions and examples of outputs. Appendix C describes what must be done 
to use the ACPS test and evaluation capability for DEC VAX/VMS. 

7.1 INSTALLATION OF ACPS SOURCE FILES 


The ACPS source files are delivered on an ANSI formatted tape generated 
on a DEC VAX/VMS system using the COPY command. The tape format and content 
are described in detail in Appendix A. The procedures to read the tape are 
host machine dependent. The tape contains four types of files: Ada test 
files, JOVIAL test files, FORTRAN test files, and comparison tool source files. 

All ACPS test files were developed to compile and execute properly on 
the DEC VAX/VMS 4.X operating system using the DEC VAX Ada VI.4-33 compiler, 
the ECSPO JOVIAL FV-03.000 compiler hosted and targeted to VAX/VMS, and the 
DEC VAX FORTRAN V4.7-271 compiler. The language-specific test support 
software references external procedures that gather target operating system 
dependent performance statistics. These procedures as well as command 
procedures to compile and execute ACPS programs are not provided on the ANSI 
delivery tape. 

As discussed in Section 6.1, the file type USE for a source file 
indicates that the file was not used in the DEC VAX/VMS version of the ACPS 
but should be used when rehosting the ACPS. In some situations, another 
version of the file (e.g., with file type ADA) is provided on the ANSI tape. 
This version of the file was used on DEC VAX/VMS because the USE version 
wasn't compilable or executable. Tables G-l to G-7 in Appendix G list all 
test program files contained on the ANSI tape and indicate which files are 
supplied with multiple versions. 


7-1 



Subsequent subsections discuss the machine-dependent modifications that 
must be made to the supplied files and the additional software and command 
procedures that must be created to fully utilize the ACPS test and evaluation 
capability. 

7.2 CREATION OF COMMAND PROCEDURES 


Test compilation and execution command procedures are not supplied with 
the ACPS. Tables G-l to G-7 in Appendix G list the programs and supporting 
files for all ACPS test types and test languages. The file names of input/ 
output files for all ACPS tests are constructed by the language-specific test 
support procedures FINAME and FIFORM. Table 7-1 lists the file names of 
input/output files used by all type A(Ada) tests. The same file names are 
used by corresponding tests in other test types (types C, E, F, J, S, and T). 
Table 7-2 lists the FORTRAN unit numbers assigned to files in input/output 
tests. All Ada tests write test result data output to the default output 
device. All JOVIAL and FORTRAN tests write test data output to unit 6, which 
is not connected to an external file. 

ACPS test comparison programs use up to eight input/output files. 
Appendix E describes the purpose, format, and FORTRAN unit number of each 
comparison program input/output file. FORTRAN OPEN statements are only used 
to assert whether the file is formatted or not and whether it is to be read or 
written. OPEN statments are not used for terminal input/output units. 

If the ACPS test comparison programs are to be used, compilation and 
execution command procedures must be constructed so that the test result files 
generated can be processed by the comparison programs. Appendix E describes 
the content and format expected by the comparison programs for compile-time 
and run-time test result files with operating system-dependent records and 
data specific to DEC VAX/VMS. The comparison programs not only expect input 
test result files to be in a specific format; they also expect file compila¬ 
tions, program linkage edits, file size computations, and test executions to 
appear in a specific order. This ordering is defined in Section E.3. Tables 
G-l to G-7 in Appendix G show the order that programs should be compiled and 
executed. 

There are seven types of ACPS tests supplied. Separate compilation and 
execution command procedures should be created for each type of test in order 
to perform comparisons (e.g., type A versus type J, type A versus type C, 
etc.). There are two versions of each of the packages OURSYS and OURTYP: one 
with range constraints on numeric types (files OURSYSR and OURTYPR) and one 
without (files OURSYS and OURTYP); all Ada tests should be compiled and 
executed with both versions. Several of the Ada test support software files 
are supplied with the file types SPA and TIM. These files should be used for 
the S and T type Ada tests, respectively. Table 7-3 lists the file types of 
all language-specific test support software files supplied on the ANSI tape. 


7-2 








7.3 MACHINE-DEPENDENT SOFTWARE MODIFICATIONS 

This section discusses the machine- and compiler-dependent language 
features that are used in ACPS source code files and also the kinds of source 
code modifications that may need to be made when rehosting the ACPS. The ACPS 
was designed so that almost all statements using machine-dependent language 
features are placed in the test support software. If a particular feature 
used in a test support package is not supported. Tables 7-1 through 7-4, can 
be used to assist identification of the programs which must be deleted, since 
these figures list which test support packages are used by each test program. 

7.3.1 Machine-Specific Test Support Software 

Several target machine and target operating system-dependent external 
procedures are called by language-specific test support software to access 
microsecond level time and run-time environment performance data. These 
procedures are not supplied with the ACPS and must be developed. A description 
of the purpose of and arguments to these procedures is contained in Appendix D. 
All JOVIAL and FORTRAN tests assume that the function SECS (described in 
Appendix D) will be supplied to permit test support software to compute elapsed 
execution times. If the capability to access microsecond level time cannot be 
provided, then none of the microsecond level tests (i.e., tests names with M 
or N in character position three) can be executed. If additional run-time 
environment data can be supplied, then modifications are required to the 
run-time test comparator to process and output these data. 

7.3.2 Language-Specific Test Support Software 

The language-specific test support software is used by ACPS tests to 
control the gathering and reporting of test result data. Functionally 
equivalent capabilities are provided for each test language. Table 7-4 
describes all language-specific test support software files and shows the 
correspondence of files among the three test languages. Compiler- and machine- 
dependent statements are identified in the Ada test support software by 
special comment strings (—*) placed at the end of the statement. The user 
must manually identify the corresponding statements in the functionally 
equivalent JOVIAL and FORTRAN files. The modifications that may need to be 
made to the test support software are as follows: 

a. Interface to machine-specific test support software . If machine- 
specific test support software (Sec. 7.3.1) cannot be developed or 
an Ada compiler does not permit interface to them, then stubs for 
each of the requisite procedures should be developed and 
integrated into the test support software. 

b. ACPS input/output . File name dependencies are encapsulated in the 
procedure FINAME. Ada FORM parameter dependencies are handled by 
the procedure FIFORM. If a FORTRAN compiler is not available, 
then the FORTRAN routines in files SYSJOV and TMPDMP that perform 
input/output for JOVIAL test support software must be redeveloped. 
Ada test support software uses the predefined Ada generic package 
TEXT_IO for reporting test results. If this package is not 
supported, then Ada statements that output test results must be 
changed to invoke equivalent functions in another language. 


7-3 




c. Numeric data types . ACPS tests were developed on the DEC VAX 
computer which has numerous machine level integer and floating 
point data types. Section C.5 discusses the mapping between ACPS 
numeric types and Ada predefined types. (Note: The ACPS type 
OUR_D_FLOAT is only used for the DEC VAX/VMS version of the ACPS.) 
The range constraints supplied for these data types in packages 
OURSYSR and OURTYPR are based on the corresponding size of the 
underlying VAX data type (as shown in Section C.5) and may need to 
be changed. The FORTRAN version of OURTYP contains nonstandard 
FORTRAN syntax for data type specification statements. These 
statements may have to be modified for each machine-specific 
FORTRAN compiler. Some of the ACPS data types (e.g., 
OUR_SHORT_SHORT_INTEGER) may not be supported by each language 
specific compiler. This may be resolved by either changing the 
machine data type mappings, or by modifying or deleting the ACPS 
tests that use the unsupported data types. However, in order to 
obtain meaningful comparisons between ACPS test execution for 
different compilers on the same machine, the underlying machine 
data type for each ACPS data type should be the same for all 
compilers used. 

d. Representation specifications . The bit level storage allocation 
statements in package OURSPC are machine and compiler dependent 
and may need to be changed, or the associated ACPS tests may have 
to be deleted or modified. 

e. Pragma PACK . Support of the PACK pragma is compiler-dependent. 

It is used by package OURSPC. Its use may have to be deleted in 
OURSPC and the associated ACPS tests modified or deleted as well. 

f. Address arithmetic . The procedure T2VALU is used to compute the 
difference in address values of its arguments. This computation 
is compiler-dependent and may have to be deleted. Since every Ada 
test program references address attributes of labels, many files 
may need to be modified. One approach that may be used is to 
declare objects (e.g., top, bottom) in package OURSYS that have 
the same name as program labels. For a given machine, the address 
value calculation should be expressed in the same units for all 
compilers. For DEC VAX, results from address calculations are 
expressed in units of bytes. 

g. Elapsed time calculations . The accuracy of elapsed time 
calculations should be consistent across compilers. JOVIAL and 
FORTRAN test support software reference the machine-specific 
function SECS, which returns the current value of time as a 
floating point value in units of seconds. If the resolution of 
the Ada clock is worse than the resolution of values returned by 
SECS, then SECS should be used in Ada support software to access 
time. SECS will be invoked by Ada support software if the value 
OS is assigned to the variable TCLOCK in the file ADASYS. 


7-4 






h. Test loop overhead statistics . The test execution comparison 
program is intended for use in accounting for the overhead 
introduced by the test support software in controlling test 
executions. If this tool cannot be used (e.g., on machines that 
do not support FORTRAN), then variables in the test support 
software must be set to allow the test support software itself to 
account for the overhead it introduces into test executions. A 
special program in each test language (AFIRST, FFIRST, JFIRST) is 
used to measure the values to be assigned to these variables. A 
more detailed description of these variables and the test programs 
used to calculate their values is contained in Section C.7. 

i. FORTRAN global common reference . In FORTRAN test support 
software, Ada package specifications are implemented in separate 
nonexecutable source files. These source files are then 
referenced by VAX FORTRAN INCLUDE statements where necessary. 

These INCLUDE statements will need to be modified for each FORTRAN 
compiler used. 

j. Multiple FORTRAN program units per file . Several FORTRAN test 
support software files contain more than one program unit or 
subroutine. These files will need to be partitioned into separate 
files for compilers that allow only one program unit per file. 

k. Math function names . The Whetstone test exercises numerous mathe¬ 
matical functions while other tests exercise the same functions 
individually. The package MATHFUN is used to make these functions 
available for ACPS data types with the same names used in the 
Whetstone test. This package is compiler-dependent and may need 
to be modified. If the run-time environment does not support 
access to math functions, then all tests using them should be 
deleted. 

7.3.2.1 Determination of Ada Compiler Dependent Parameters . The program 
ADAPARM is used to compute the resolution of the Ada clock, the minimum delay 
interval in a DELAY statement, the size of predefined data types, and the name 
of the standard output file. Section C.5 discusses the use of this program 
and shows sample output from it for DEC VAX Ada. 

7.3.3 ACPS Tests 


Many ACPS tests involve the use of compiler-dependent features of Ada 
which may not be supported or which may require source language changes in 
order to execute. All ACPS files which are involved in tests of Ada language 
features that are known to be compiler-dependent contain the symbol D or N in 
the third character position of the file name (Sec. 6.1). Any statements in 
an Ada source file directly using compiler-dependent features that may require 
modification will be identified with a comment appearing at the end of the 
statement (—*). Location of the corresponding statements in the equivalent 
FORTRAN and JOVIAL source files must be determined manually. Tables G-l 
through G-5 in Appendix G underline all Ada test files that may require source 
code modifications to compile or execute properly. Other machine-dependent 
test files use features that may not be supported (e.g., input/output) and 


7-5 








that cannot be made to work through modification of the source code. For 
these files, to the extent possible, the use of compiler-dependent features 
has been placed in the test support software. Compiler-dependent language 
features used include the following: 

- input/output statements 

pragmas INLINE, OPTIMIZE, PACK, PRIORITY, SHARED, SUPPRESS 

- task scheduling algorithms 

use of a special pragma (TIME_SLICE for DEC VAX Ada) to force 
timed sliced scheduling of tasks of equal priority 

- use of predefined numeric data types other than integer and float 

- address and storage_size attributes 

- representation specifications 

- math function names 

- change of representation 

- nonstandard data type conversions 
unchecked storage deallocation 

All values computed in integer calculations are less than 16 bits in magnitude. 
Test iteration counts can be greater than 2**16 and may need to be modified 
for execution on 16-bit machines. 

All tasking tests that use the priority pragma assume that three 
priority levels are available and that a preemptive task scheduling algorithm 
is used by the Ada run-time system. Many tests use a DELAY statement in a 
high priority task to allow lower priority task(s) to be executed and the 
assumption is made that at the end of the delay interval the high priority 
task will preempt any lower priority tasks from executing. In addition, task 
loading tests assume that task execution can be completed within 
OURSPC.max_time seconds. If a task in a type A multi-tasking test aborts, the 
user will not be notified as to why the task aborted. The user should 
therefore execute the type E version of ali Ada tasking tests first. Since 
these tests contain exception handlers in all procedures, the user will be 
notified about the type of any error that occurs for corrective action (e.g., 
increasing the storage_size attribute for a task). 

For JOVIAL tests, FORTRAN subroutines are used for input and output 
operations. If a FORTRAN compiler is not available, then the FORTRAN 
subroutines in files SYSJOV and TMPDMP will have to be redeveloped. 





For FORTRAN tests, all executable source files use VAX FORTRAN INCLUDE 
statements to reference global common definitions. These statements will have 
to be modified for each FORTRAN compiler used. In addition, some test files 
contain more than one program unit or subroutine. These files will need to be 
divided into separate files for compilers that allow only one program unit per 
source code file. For these compilers, all local procedure tests (see 
Appendix F) can be deleted. 

7.3.4 ACPS Test Comparison Tool 

The ACPS test comparison tool consists of two programs: a compile-time 
test result comparator and a run-time test result comparator. Both programs 
are implemented in FORTRAN 77 and utilize the VAX FORTRAN INCLUDE statement to 
import global common specifications. The programs are divided into operating 
system-dependent modules and operating system-independent modules. The target 
operating system-dependent modules for VAX/VMS are included and identified in 
the source files and must be redeveloped for each new host and target operating 
system. The comparison tool consists of the following source files: CCOMP, 
CCOMPA, CCOMPV, CEXEC, CEXECA, CEXECV. The files CCOMPV and CEXECV are 
VAX/VMS-specific and are provided to ease rehosting of the comparison tool. 

7.4 DETERMINATION OF TEST DURATION 

Test durations are determined by test iteration counts which are grouped 
into files according to test category (Sec. 6.1). The iteration counts were 
set so that most type A Ada tests execute for at least 1 sec exclusive of test 
overhead using DEC VAX Ada on a VAX-11/8600. 

The duration of a test is essentially driven by the desired accuracy of 
test measurements. For a desired measurement accuracy of 99%, tests (exclusive 
of loop overhead) must be executed for a duration at least 100 times greater 
than the resolution of the clock used. In addition, this measurement accuracy 
must be achieved for every test execution. As discussed in Section 3, the 
repeatability of elapsed time measurements is impacted by the run-time system 
architecture. A separate test program, AFIRST, is used to measure the 
repeatability of test measurements. The use of AFIRST in demonstrating test 
measurement accuracy for DEC VAX/VMS is discussed in Section C.8. AFIRST 
should be executed at least 50 times so that approximately 1000 test measure¬ 
ments are made for the same test code. The variance in test measurements made 
determine the length of time required to run a test to achieve an expected 
level of test measurement accuracy. The test iteration counts can then be 
adjusted accordingly. 

7.5 DETERMINATION OF TEST MEASUREMENT ACCURACY 

Section 7.4 discusses varying the test durations of a single program 
(AFIRST) to ensure test repeatability. Although this process does account for 
inaccuracies in the clock used and for scheduled or intermittent interference 
from the run-time system or underlying operating system, it does not account 
for all factors that impact program performance for all machine architectures. 
For the DEC VAX computer, it has been seen that the amount of physical memory 


7-7 








can have a significant impact on the execution efficiency of test programs. 
Single test program execution speeds have varied by more than 30X irrespective 
of test duration for large memory configurations (e.g., 48 Mbyte). It is 
believed that this variance is due to the combined effect of instruction 
pipelining and how programs are mapped to physical memory. For some machine 
architectures, therefore, it is necessary to compute the variability of each 
test measurement made. 

As shown in Sections C.10 and E.24, the run-time test comparator tool 
can be used to determine the accuracy of test measurements by computing the 
maximum and minimum values of test execution data for each test which is 
repeatedly executed. The test should be repeatedly run until the maximum and 
minimum run data do not change. Only the maximum or minimum data for each 
test should be used for comparison. 

7.6 PERFORMANCE OF TEST COMPARISONS 

The ACPS was designed to encourage the user to perform as many test 
execution comparisons as possible. For a single Ada compiler, over 10,000 
test comparisons can be made among ACPS test programs processed by that 
compiler. To fully utilize the capabilities of the ACPS, it is imperative 
that the ACPS test comparison tools are installed and used. 

The ACPS consists of seven types of benchmark test programs as 
described in Section 2. The ACPS test evaluation capability was designed for 
comparison of sets of tests of each type. Appendix F describes each 
individual test for each test type. These test descriptions also suggest 
additional comparisons (e.g., see the description for test AFD4135) that can 
be made by the user but currently not automatically by the test execution 
comparison tool. Five sets of Ada tests are provided. Five additional sets 
of executable Ada tests should be created by compiling each Ada test program 
using two versions of the Ada packages OURSYS (files OURSYS, OURSYSR) and 
OURTYP (files OURTYP and OURTYPR). Compiler options can also be used to 
increase the number of comparisons that can be made. For example, DEC VAX Ada 
permits suppression of compiler optimization algorithms. By using this, 
option, ten additional sets of Ada tests can be generated. Also, DEC VAX 
FORTRAN not only allows suppression of optimization algorithms but also 
permits inclusion of run-time array bound checks. For DEC VAX FORTRAN, one 
could therefore easily create four different test sets from a single set of 
test programs. 

When comparing the performance of two different Ada compilers, ten 
different comparison options are available (comparison of type A, C, E, S, 
and T tests which are compiled both with and without range constraints on 
numeric data types). For a given Ada compiler, numerous comparison options 
are available to determine the effect of using range constraints on numeric 
types, of suppressing constraint checks, of using space or time optimization 
pragmas, and of using exception handlers in procedures. 

When comparing the performance of different compilers for a given set 
of tests, it is important to make sure that the machine representation of each 
numeric data type used is the same for both compilers and also that the size 


7-8 







of components of corresponding record structures is the same. ACPS language 
feature tests for Section 13.7 of the LRM (tests AF0D720 to AFDD72I) display 
the size of all numeric data types used, the size of all composite data types 
used and the size of all record data type components. These data are 
processed for comparison by the test execution comparison tool. The Ada 
program ADAPARM determines the internal representation of all numeric data 
types used in ACPS test programs, as described in Section C.5. 

The most difficult and time consuming task in generating test compari¬ 
sons is to ensure that each test executes for the necessary amount of time to 
guarantee a desired level of test measurement accuracy. In construction of 
some test programs, little concern was given as to how long each test would 
have to be executed to ensure accurate test measurements. As a result, some 
of the difference tests (e.g., AFS5406) may require exorbitant computer time 
to achieve the desired test duration. The test iteration counts supplied on 
the ACPS ANSI tape were generated as follows. First, the A type tests were 
executed using DEC VAX Ada on a VAX 8600. A software tool was then used to 
adjust the iteration counts based on the execution times obtained, with the 
constraint that no test should be required to execute for more than 30 sec. 
These iteration counts were then used for all of the other test types. 


7-9 





Table 7-1. Ada Type A Test Program Input/Output Files 


£fifi£SAH 

INPUT/OUTPUT FILES 



AFDE220 

OFDE201 

DFDE206 

0FDE211 

0FDE216 

OFDE202 

OFDE207 

0F0E212 

OFDE203 

OFDE208 

OFDE213 

OFDE204 

OFDE209 

0F0E214 

AFDE250 

XFDE231 

IFDE236 

1FDE241 

IFDE246 

XFSE232 

XFDE237 

XFDE242 

XFDE233 

XFDE238 

XF0E243 

XFDE234 

IFDE239 

XFDE244 

AFOE420 

OFDE401 

OFDE406 

OFDE411 

OFDE416 

OFDE402 

OFDE407 

0F0E412 

OFDE403 

OFDE408 

OFDE413 

OFDE404 

OFDE409 

0FDE414 

AF0E450 

XFDE431 

XFDE436 

IFDE441 

XFDE446 

XFDE432 

XFDE437 

XFDE442 

XFDE433 

XFDE438 

XFDE443 

XFDE434 

XFDE439 

XFDE444 

ALDE2C1 

OLE2001 




ALDE2C2 

OLE2001 

OLE2006 

OLE2002 

OLE2007 

OLE2003 

OLE2008 

OLE2004 

OLE2009 

ALDE2C3 

OLE2001 




ALDE2C4 

OLE2002 

OLE2006 

0LE2002 

OLE2007 

OLE2003 

OLE2008 

OLE2004 
. OLE2009 

ALDE2C5 

XLE2001 



• 

ALDE2C6 

ILE2001 

ILE2006 

XLE2002 

XLE2007 

XLE2D0S 

XLE2008 

XLE2004 

XLE2009 

ALDE2C7 

XLE2001 




AIDE2CS 

ILE2001 

ILE2006 

XLE2002 

ILE2007 

XLE2003 

XLE2008 

XLE2004 

XLE2009 

ALDE4C1 

OLE4001 




ALDE4C2 

OLE4001 

OLE4006 

OLE4002 

OLE4007 

OLE4003 

OLE4008 

OLE4004 

OLE4009 

ALDE4C3 

OLE4001 




ALDE4C4 

OLE4001 

OLE4006 

OLE4002 

OLE4007 

OLE4003 

OLE4008 

OLE4004 

OLE4009 

ALDE4C5 

ILE4001 




ALDE4C6 

XLE4001 

ILE4006 

ILE4002 

XLE4007 

XLE4003 

ILE4008 

1LE4004 

XLE4009 

ALDE4C7 

XLE4001 




ALDE4C8 

XLE4001 

XLE4006 

XLE4002 

XLE4007 

XLE4003 

XLE4008 

XLE4004 

XLE4009 


OFDE205 

OFDE20A 

0FDE215 


XFDE235 

XFDE23A 

XFDE245 


OFDE405 

OFDE40A 

OFDE415 


XFDE435 

XFDE43A 

XFDE445 


OLE2005 

OLE2010 


OLE2005 

0LE2010 


XLE2005 

XLE2010 


XLE2005 

XLE2020 


OLE4005 

OLE4010 


OLE4005 

OLE4010 


XLE4005 

XLE4020 


XLE4005 

XLE4020 


7-10 







Table 7-2. FORTRAN Test Program Input/Output Files 


PBQSB &fi 

FFDE220 

FFDE250 

FFDE420 

FFDE450 


INPUVOUTPUT FILES(FILENAME-UNIT NUMBER) 


OFDE201-11 

OFDE206-16 

0FDE211-21 

0FDE216-26 

IFDE231-11 

IFDE236-16 

IFDE241-21 

IFDE246-26 

0FDE401-11 

OFDE406-16 

OFDE411-21 

OFDE416-26 

IFDE431-11 

IFDE436-14 

IFDE441-21 

IFDE446-26 


OFDE202-12 

OFDE207-I7 

0FDE212-22 


IFDE232-12 

IFDE2S7-17 

IFDE242-22 


OFDE402-12 

OFDE407-17 

0FDE412-22 


IFDE432-12 

IFDE437-17 

3FDE442-22 


OFDE203-13 

OFDE208-18 

0FDE213-23 


IFDE233-13 

IFDE238-18 

IFDE243-23 


OFDE403-13 

OFDE408-18 

OFDE413-23 


IFDE433-13 

XFDE438-18 

XFDE443-23 


0FDE204-14 

OFDE209-19 

0FDE214-24 


IFDE234-14 

IFDE239-19 

IFDE244-24 


OFDE404-14 

OFDE409-19 

0FDE414-24 


IFDE434-14 

IFDE439-19 

IFDE444-24 


OFDE205-15 

OFDE20A-20 

0FDE215-25 


IFDE235-15 

IFDE23A-20 

IFDE245-25 


OFDE405-15 

OFDE40A-20 

0FDE415-25 


IFDE435-15 

IFDE43A-20 

IFDE445-25 


7-11 




Table 7-3. Test Support Software File Types 


File Name 


File Type 


Ada CMN CPL DAT DEC FOR JOV SPA TIM USE 


Ada Test Support Files 


ADADMP 

ADASPC 

ADASYS 

ADATYP 

MATHFUN 

OURDMP 

OURSPC 

OURSYS 

OURSYSR 

OURTYP 

OURTYPR 


X X 
X X 
X X 
X X 
X X 


JOVIAL Test Support Files 


DMPJOV 

JOVDMP 

JOVMATH 

JOVSPC 

JOVSYS 

JOVTYP 

OURJOV 

SPCJOV 

SYSJOV 

TMPDMP 

TYPJOV 


FORTRAN Test Support Files 


FORDMP 

FORSYS 

FORTYP 

OURFOR 

SYSBLK 

SYSFOR 

TYPFOR 



7-12 


X X 











Table 7-4. Language-Specific Test Support Software Files 


File 

Name 



Ada 

JOVIAL 

FORTRAN 

Description 

OURSYS 

OURJOV 

OURFOR 

SYSBLK 

Package specification for numeric types, 
test control and reporting procedures, 
and scalar global variables. 

ADASYS 

JOVSYS 

SYSJOV 

SYSFOR 

FORSYS 

Package body implementing procedures 
defined in OURSYS. 

OURSYSR 



Same as OURSYS except range constraints 
are supplied for each numeric data type. 

OURDMP 

JOVDMP 


Package specification for global variable 
dump procedures. 

ADADMP 

DMPJOV 

TMPDMP 

FORDMP 

Package body implementing procedures 
defined in OURDMP. 

OURTYP 

JOVTYP 

FORTYP 

Package specifications for special 
numeric types and global variables, and 
for procedures that set/use them. 

OURTYPR 



Same as OURTYP except range constraints 
are supplied for each numeric data type. 

ADATYP 

TYPJOV 

TYPFOR 

Package body implementing procedures 
defined in OURTYP. 

OURSPC 

JOVSPC 


Package specification for composite data 
types and global variables and procedures 
that set/use them. 

ADASPC 

SPCJOV 


Package body implementing procedures 
defined in OURSPC 

MATHFUN 

JOVMATH 


Package specifying standard names for 
math functions as referenced in the 
WHETSTONE benchmark. 


7-13 










8. Ada RUN-TIME ENVIRONMENT PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 


The purpose of the ACPS test evaluation capability is to provide a mech¬ 
anism to assist assessment of the performance impact of Ada run-time environ¬ 
ments. An extensive set of test cases is provided in Ada along with a fewer 
number of functionally equivalent JOVIAL and FORTRAN tests. Five versions of 
each Ada test are supplied to reveal the effect of constraint checking, of 
exception handlers, and of various optimization options. The majority of 
tests are designed to exercise individual features of the Ada language. A 
consistent test methodology was developed and used to ensure to the extent 
possible that performance measurements taken are complete, accurate, repeat- 
able, and isolated from irrelevant factors. A common language test support 
interface was defined which permitted development of a capability to 
automatically compare the run-time performance of different compilers across 
the three test languages. 

Performance evaluations of Ada run-time environments must be made in 
accordance with the requirements of specific applications. Performance issues 
and selection criteria for Ada run-time environments are dependent not only 
upon the specific application concerns but on the general type of application. 
For example, for applications on computers with general purpose operating 
systems, the performance of Ada tasking may be of little concern. For DEC 
VAX/VMS, commonly available Ada implementations map all Ada tasks in an exe¬ 
cuting program into the same VMS process. Due to the virtual memory nature of 
VMS, this is an inherently inefficient implementation in that a single disk 
page-fault will halt all Ada tasks from executing until the fault is satisfied. 
The key performance concern will not be how efficiently tasking is implemented 
within a single VMS process but whether the Ada compiler permits use of VMS 
tasking system services. On the other hand, for Ada implementations on target 
machines such as the MIL-STD 1750A with no underlying executive or operating 
system, the implementation of Ada tasking will be of paramount concern. 

Functionality and space/time requirements of capabilities provided are 
two aspects of run-time performance. There are many compiler-dependent 
features in Ada which are tested in isolation by the ACPS. If these features 
(e.g., INLINE pragma, representation specifications) are not supported by a 
compiler, then for certain applications, that compiler can be considered on an 
a priori basis to be too inefficient to be used. The ACPS only tests features 
of Ada that are described in the LRM. Some compilers may provide additional 
pragmas and packages that could have a significant positive impact on perfor¬ 
mance for specific applications. These compiler-dependent performance 
enhancements must be considered in any performance evaluation of Ada run-time 
environments. 

The ACPS consists of black box tests designed to test language feature 
implementation rather than compiler implementation. Just as it is practically 
impossible to develop black box tests to debug compilers, it is also practi¬ 
cally impossible to develop black box benchmarks to explore all performance 
concerns for a given Ada compiler. Additional tests will need to be developed 
to investigate the performance ramifications of individual run-time system 
architectures. 






In light of the above comments, it is still our perception that the ACPS 
test evaluation capability can play an important role in Ada run-time environ¬ 
ment evaluations. The performance measures provided can give the user a good 
first cut estimate of the run-time efficiency of an Ada implementation. They 
can also furnish the user with a basis for understanding the performance 
behavior of application oriented benchmarks. Numerous comparison options are 
provided. One can automatically compare Ada implementations for the same 
machine architecture to provide quantifiable evidence to justify selection of 
a clearly superior implementation or to identify several implementations for 
detailed consideration. One can also get rough estimates of the resource 
impact of using Ada versus FORTRAN and JOVIAL for those language features for 
which functionally equivalent tests exist within the ACPS. 

In relating performance evaluation to a specific application, a user can 
select various tests from the ACPS and by varying the test duration can 
generate a composite test sequence modeling the expected frequency of language 
feature usage within the application. This composite test sequence can then 
be used with the test comparison capability to compare the performance of 
different Ada implementations. The ACPS can also be used in applications 
planning to demonstrate which features of Ada are inefficiently implemented. 
This information can then be used in several ways. It can be used as 
justification for avoiding certain language features or processing options. 

It can focus attention to those areas of the compiler that must be improved 
and provide a mechanism for measuring improvements or degradations in run-time 
performance as a compiler implementation evolves. The ACPS can also be used 
to assist determination as to whether existing JOVIAL or FORTRAN modules 
should be converted to Ada by showing the probable performance impact of 
straightforward translation to Ada as would likely be obtained through use of 
a language translation tool. 


8-2 





APPENDIX A 


ANSI TAPE FORMAT 


Four tapes are written in ANSI ASCII "a" character format as volumes ACPS, 
ACPS02, ACPS03, ACPS04, and ACPS05. The tapes are structured as a multi-file, 
multi-volume configuration. The different files represent collections of ACPS 
test programs. Each collection of similar files is grouped together on the 
tape. Tables A-l through A-5 contain a complete list of the files in the 
order they appear on each tape. The ordering of files in a row of each figure 
is from left to right. 

The tapes were written in a VAX/VMS environment at a density of 1600 bpi 
using the copy command. 

Each tape has the following format: 

14 - 18 feet of blank tape 
BOT (Beginning Of Tape) mark 
V0L1 label = ACPS 

HDR1 label 
HDR2 label 

TM (Tape Mark) - start of file 
«file 1 block described below» 

TM - end of file 
EOF1 label 
E0F2 label 

TM - inter-file 

HDR1 label 
HDR2 label 
TM - end of file 
E0F1 label 
E0F2 label 

TM - inter-file 
... other file blocks ... 

TM - inter-file 

HDR1 label 
HDR2 label 
TM 

«file n blocks described below» 

TM 

E0F1 label 
E0F2 label 

TM - end of tape 1 
TM - end of tape 2 
Scratch Tape 
EOT (End Of Tape) mark 


A-l 





The HDR1 label is a file description block providing file identifier 
information and creation dates. 

The HDR2 label is a record description block describing the record format 
of the specific file. 

The file blocks are at most 1024 characters in length. Each record within 
a file block represents a line of text. The first four characters of each 
record indicate the length of the record. This length includes the four- 
character length count. For example, a blank line would be represented as 
"0004" and a line containing the characters "ADA" would be represented as 
"0007ADA." 

The files on the tapes are organized as follows: 

Ada test files on volumes ACPS, ACPS02, APCS03, and ACPS04 

FORTRAN test files on volumes ACPS04 and ACPS05 

JOVIAL test files on volume ACPS05 

Test comparison tool files on volume ACPS05 


A-2 









Table A-l ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Voluae ACPS 


AA00000.ADA 
AF03501.ADA 
AF03511.ADA 
AF03519.ADA 
AF03604.ADA 
AF03610.ADA 
AF03616.ADA 
AF03631.ADA 
AF03637.ADA 
AF03644.ADA 
AF03650.ADA 
AF03800.ADA 
AF04120.ADA 
AF04126.ADA 
AF04132.ADA 
AF0413K.ADA 
AF04512.ADA 
AF04518.ADA 
AF0451E.ADA 
AF0451V.ADA 
AF04521.ADA 
AF04532.ADA 
AF04538.ADA 
AF04541.ADA 
AF04555.ADA 
AF04550.ADA 
AF04602.ADA 
AF0460J.ADA 
AF05204.ADA 
AF0520A.ADA 
AF05210.ADA 
AF0521H.ADA 
AF05300.ADA 
AF05306.ADA 
AF05403.ADA 
AF05501.ADA 
AF05507.ADA 
AF0550D.ADA 
AF06011.ADA 
AF06018.ADA 
AF06026.ADA 
AF06032.ADA 
AF06047.ADA 
AF06053.ADA 
AF06065.ADA 
AF06071.ADA 
AF06077.ADA 
AF06109.ADA 
AF06115.ADA 
AF06132.ADA 
AF06138.ADA 
AF06145.ADA 
AF06152.ADA 
AF06158.ADA 
AF06165.ADA 
AF06172.ADA 
AF06178.ADA 
AF06185.ADA 
AF06191.ADA 
AF06197.ADA 
AF0619D.ADA 
AF0619J.ADA 
AF0619P.ADA 
AF06425.ADA 
AF0642B.ADA 
AF06809.ADA 
AF0680F.ADA 


AA0P000.ADA 
AF03502.ADA 
AF03512.ADA 
AF03550.ADA 
AF03605.ADA 
AF03611.ADA 
AF03617.ADA 
AF03632.ADA 
AF03638.ADA 
AF03645.ADA 
AF037 00.ADA 
AF03801.ADA 
AF04121.ADA 
AF04127.ADA 
AF04133.ADA 
AF04310.ADA 
AF04513.ADA 
AF04519.ADA 
AF0451F.ADA 
AF0451H.ADA 
AF04522.ADA 
AF04533.ADA 
AF04539.ADA 
AF04550.ADA 
AF04556.ADA 
AF04560.ADA 
AF0460E.ADA 
AF0460H.ADA 
AF05205.ADA 
AF0520B.ADA 
AF05211.ADA 
AF0521I.ADA 
AF05301.ADA 
AF05307.ADA 
AF05404.ADA 
AF05502.ADA 
AF05508.ADA 
AF0550E.ADA 
AF06013.ADA 
AF06019.ADA 
AF06027.ADA 
AF06033.ADA 
AF06048.ADA 
AF06060.ADA 
AF06066.ADA 
AF06072.ADA 
AF06078.ADA 
AF06110.ADA 
AF06116.ADA 
AF06133.ADA 
AF06139.ADA 
AF06146.ADA 
AF06153.ADA 
AF06159.ADA 
AF06166.ADA 
AF06173.ADA 
AF06179.ADA 
AF06186.ADA 
AF06192.ADA 
AF06198.ADA 
AF0619E.ADA 
AF0619K.ADA 
AF0619Q.ADA 
AF06426.ADA 
AF06802.ADA 
AF0680A.ADA 
AF06810.ADA 


ADADMP.ADA 
AF03503.ADA 
AF03513.ADA 
AF03600.ADA 
AF03606.ADA 
AF03612.ADA 
AF03618.ADA 
AF03633.ADA 
AF03639.ADA 
AF03646.ADA 
AF03701.ADA 
AF03802.ADA 
AF04122.ADA 
AF04129.ADA 
AF0413D.ADA 
AF04311.ADA 
AF04514.ADA 
AF0451A.ADA 
AF0451G.ADA 
AF0451X.ADA 
AF04527.ADA 
AF04534.ADA 
AF0453A.ADA 
AF04551.ADA 
AF04557.ADA 
AF04562.ADA 
AF0460F.ADA 
AF05200.ADA 
AF05206.ADA 
AF0520M.ADA 
AF05212.ADA 
AF0521J.ADA 
AF05302.ADA 
AF05308.ADA 
AF05405.ADA 
AF05503.ADA 
AF05509.ADA 
AF0550F.ADA 
AF06014.ADA 
AF06022.ADA 
AF06028.ADA 
AF06043.ADA 
AF06049.ADA 
AF06061.ADA 
AF06067.ADA 
AF06073.ADA 
AF06079.ADA 
AF06111.ADA 
AF06117.ADA 
AF06134.ADA 
AF06140.ADA 
AF06147.ADA 
AF06154.ADA 
AF06160.ADA 
AF06167.ADA 
AF06174.ADA 
AF06180.ADA 
AF06187.ADA 
AF06193.ADA 
AF06199.ADA 
AF0619F.ADA 
AF0619L.ADA 
AF0619R.ADA 
AF06427.ADA 
AF06803.ADA 
AF0680B.ADA 
AF06811.ADA 


ADAPARM.ADA 
AF03504.ADA 
AF03514.ADA 
AF03601.ADA 
AF03607.ADA 
AF03613.ADA 
AF03619.ADA 
AF03634.ADA 
AF03641.ADA 
AF03647.ADA 
AF03702.ADA 
AF03803.ADA 
AF04123.ADA 
AF0412B.ADA 
AF0413H.ADA 
AF04312.ADA 
AF04515.ADA 
AF0451B.ADA 
AF0451H.ADA 
AF0451Y.ADA 
AF04529.ADA 
AF04535.ADA 
AF0453B.ADA 
AF04552.ADA 
AF04558.ADA 
AF04563.ADA 
AF0460G.ADA 
AF05201.ADA 
AF05207.ADA 
AF05200.ADA 
AF05213.ADA 
AF0521K.ADA 
AF05303.ADA 
AF05400.ADA 
AF05406.ADA 
AF05504.ADA 
AF0550A.ADA 
AF06001.ADA 
AF06015.ADA 
AF06023.ADA 
AF06029.ADA 
AF06044.ADA 
AF06050.ADA 
AF06062.ADA 
AF06068.ADA 
AF06074.ADA 
AF06100.ADA 
AF06112.ADA 
AF06118.ADA 
AF06135.ADA 
AF06142.ADA 
AF06148.ADA 
AF06155.ADA 
AF06162.ADA 
AF06168'. ADA 
AF06175.ADA 
AF06182.ADA 
AF06188.ADA 
AF06194.ADA 
AF0619A.ADA 
AF0619G.ADA 
AF0619M.ADA 
AF06422.ADA 
AF06428.ADA 
AF06806.ADA 
AF0680C.ADA 
AF06814.ADA 


ADASPC.ADA 
AF03509.ADA 
AF03517.ADA 
AF03602.ADA 
AF03608.ADA 
AF03614.ADA 
AF03620.ADA 
AF03635.ADA 
AF03642.ADA 
AF03648.ADA 
AF03703.ADA 
AF03804.ADA 
AF04124.ADA 
AF04130.ADA 
AF0413I.ADA 
AF04510.ADA 
AF04516.ADA 
AF0451C.ADA 
AF0451I.ADA 
AF0451Z.ADA 
AF04530.ADA 
AF04536.ADA 
AF0453C.ADA 
AF04553.ADA 
AF04559.ADA 
AF04600.ADA 
AF0460H.ADA 
AF05202.ADA 
AF05208.ADA 
AF0520R.ADA 
AF05214.ADA 
AF0521L.ADA 
AF05304.ADA 
AF05401.ADA 
AF05407.ADA 
AF05505.ADA 
AF0550B.ADA 
AF06009.ADA 
AF06016.ADA 
AF06024.ADA 
AF06030.ADA 
AF06045.ADA 
AF06051.ADA 
AF06063.ADA 
AF06069.ADA 
AF06075.ADA 
AF06101.ADA 
AF06113.ADA 
AF06119.ADA 
AF06136.ADA 
AF06143.ADA 
AF06149.ADA 
AF06156.ADA 
AF06163.ADA 
AF06169.ADA 
AF06176.ADA 
AF06183.ADA 
AF06189.ADA 
AF06195.ADA 
AF0619B.ADA 
AF0619H.ADA 
AF0619N.ADA 
AF06423.ADA 
AF06429.ADA 
AF06807.ADA 
AF0680D.ADA 
AF06815.ADA 


A-3 


AF03500.ADA 
AF03510.ADA 
AF03518.ADA 
AFD3603.ADA 
AF03609.ADA 
AF03615.ADA 
AF03630.ADA 
AF03636.ADA 
AF03643.ADA 
AF03649.ADA 
AF03704.ADA 
AF03805.ADA 
AFD4125.ADA 
AF04131.ADA 
AF0413J.ADA 
AF045U.ADA 
AF04517.ADA 
AF0451D.ADA 
AF0451J.ADA 
AF04520.ADA 
AF04531.ADA 
AF04537.ADA 
AF04540.ADA 
AF04554.ADA 
AF0455N.ADA 
AF04601.ADA 
AF0460I.ADA 
AF05203.ADA 
AF05209.ADA 
AF0520S.ADA 
AF05215.ADA 
AF0521N.ADA 
AF05305.ADA 
AF05402.ADA 
AF05408.ADA 
AF05506.ADA 
AF0550C.ADA 
AF06D10.ADA 
AF06017.ADA 
AF06025.ADA 
AF06031.ADA 
AF06D46.ADA 
AF06052.ADA 
AF06064.ADA 
AF06070.ADA 
AF06076.ADA 
AF06108.ADA 
AF06114.ADA 
AF06122.ADA 
AF06137.ADA 
AF06144.ADA 
AF06150.ADA 
AF06157.ADA 
AF06164.ADA 
AF06170.ADA 
AF06177.ADA 
AF06184.ADA 
AF06190.ADA 
AF06196.ADA 
AF0619C.ADA 
AF0619I.ADA 
AF06190.ADA 
AF06424.ADA 
AF0642A.ADA 
AF06808.ADA 
AF0680E.ADA 
AF06816.ADA 







Table A-l ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Voluae ACPS (continued) 


AF06817.ADA 
AF06823.ADA 
AF09503.ADA 
AF09509.ADA 
AF09605.ADA 
AF09713.ADA 
AF09902.ADA 
AF0C103.ADA 
AF0C305.ADA 
AF0D728.ADA 
AFD412C.ADA 
AFD4139.ADA 
AFD451K.ADA 
AFD451Q.ADA 
AFD4526.ADA 
AFD455G.ADA 
AFD4567.ADA 
AFD4606.ADA 
AFD460K.ADA 
AFD4802.ADA 
AFD520F.ADA 
AFD520P.ADA 
AFD521C.ADA 
AFD5210.ADA 
AFD6213.ADA 
AFD6219.ADA 
AFD6227.ADA 
AFD6233.ADA 
AFD6248.ADA 
AFD6260.ADA 
AFD6266.ADA 
AFD6272.ADA 
AFD6278.ADA 
AFD6310.ADA 
AFD6316.ADA 
AFD6333.ADA 
AFD6339.ADA 
AFD6346.ADA 
AFD6353.ADA 
AFD6359.ADA 
AFD6366.ADA 
AFD6373.ADA 
AFD6379.ADA 
AFD6386.ADA 
AFD680H.ADA 
AFD9C01.ADA 
AFDC310.ADA 
AFDD602.ADA 
AFDD609.ADA 
AFDD725.ADA 
AFDD72G.ADA 
AFDE201.ADA 
AFDE207.ADA 
AFDE213.ADA 
AFDE232.ADA 
AFDE238.ADA 
AFDE244.ADA 
AFDE403.ADA 
AFDE409.ADA 
AFDE415.ADA 
AFDE434.ADA 
AFDE43A.ADA 
AFDE446.ADA 
AFDF004.ADA 
AFM9A03.ADA 
AFMB005.ADA 
AFHB011.ADA 


AF06818.ADA 
AF06824.ADA 
AF09504.ADA 
AF09600.ADA 
AF096 06.ADA 
AF09720.ADA 
AF09903.ADA 
AF0C300.ADA 
AF0C306.ADA 
AF0D729.ADA 
AFD412D.ADA 
AFD413A.ADA 
AFD451L.ADA 
AFD451R.ADA 
AFD4528.ADA 
AFD455I.ADA 
AFD4568.ADA 
AFD4607.ADA 
AFD460L.ADA 
AFD4803.ADA 
AFD520G.ADA 
AFD520Q.ADA 
AFD521D.ADA 
AFD521P.ADA 
AFD6214.ADA 
AFD6222.ADA 
AFD6228.ADA 
AFD6243.ADA 
AFD6249.ADA 
AFD6261.ADA 
AFD6267.ADA 
AFD6273.ADA 
AFD6279.ADA 
AFD6311.ADA 
AFD6317.ADA 
AFD6334.ADA 
AFD6340.ADA 
AFD6347.ADA 
AFD6354.ADA 
AFD6360.ADA 
AFD6367.ADA 
AFD6374.ADA 
AFD6380.ADA 
AFD6387.ADA 
AFD680I.ADA 
AFD9C02.ADA 
AFDC311.ADA 
AFDD603.ADA 
AFDD610.ADA 
AFDD72A.ADA 
AFDD72H.ADA 
AFDE202.ADA 
AFDE208.ADA 
AFDE214.ADA 
AFDE233.ADA 
AFDE239.ADA 
AFDE245.ADA 
AFDE404.ADA 
AFDE40A.ADA 
AFDE416.ADA 
AFDE435.ADA 
AFDE441.ADA 
AFDE450.ADA 
AFDF005.ADA 
AFMB000.ADA 
AFMB006.ADA 
AFMB012.ADA 


AF06819.ADA 
AF06825.ADA 
AF09505.ADA 
AF09601.ADA 
AF09607.ADA 
AF09721.ADA 
AF09B01.ADA 
AF0C301.ADA 
AF0C307.ADA 
AF0D72D.ADA 
AFD4135.ADA 
AFD413B.ADA 
AFD451H.ADA 
AFD451S.ADA 
AFD452A.ADA 
AFD45SJ.ADA 
AFD4569.ADA 
AFD4608.ADA 
AFD460N.ADA 
AFD4804.ADA 
AFD520H.ADA 
AFD5218.ADA 
AFDS21E.ADA 
AFD6201.ADA 
AFD6215.ADA 
AFD6223.ADA 
AFD6229.ADA 
AFD6244.ADA 
AFD6250.ADA 
AFD6262.ADA 
AFD6268.ADA 
AFD6274.ADA 
AFD6300.ADA 
AFD6312.ADA 
AFD6318.ADA 
AFD6335.ADA 
AFD6342.ADA 
AFD6348.ADA 
AFD6355.ADA 
AFD6362.ADA 
AFD6368.ADA 
AFD637S.ADA 
AFD6382.ADA 
AFD6388.ADA 
AFD680J.ADA 
AFDC104.ADA 
AFDC313.ADA 
AFDD604.ADA 
AFDD611.ADA 
AFDD72B.ADA 
AFDD72I.ADA 
AFDE203.ADA 
AFDE209.ADA 
AFDE215.ADA 
AFDE234.ADA 
AFDE23A.ADA 
AFDE246.ADA 
AFDE405.ADA 
AFDE411.ADA 
AFDE420.ADA 
AFDE436.ADA 
AFDE442.ADA 
AFDF000.ADA 
AFIRST.ADA 
AFMB001.ADA 
AFMB007.ADA 
AFHB013.ADA 


AF06820.ADA 
AF09500.ADA 
AFQ9506.ADA 
AF09602.ADA 
AF09710.ADA 
AF09731.ADA 
AF0C100.ADA 
AF0C302.ADA 
AF0D720.ADA 
AFOPOOO.ADA 
AFD4136.ADA 
AFD413C.ADA 
AFD451N.ADA 
AFD4523.ADA 
AFD455D.ADA 
AFD455K.ADA 
AFD4603.ADA 
AFD4609.ADA 
AFD4600.ADA 
AFD520C.ADA 
AFD520I.ADA 
AFD5219.ADA 
AFD521F.ADA 
AFD6209.ADA 
AFD6216.ADA 
AFD6224.ADA 
AFD6230.ADA 
AFD6245.ADA 
AFD6251.ADA 
AFD6263.ADA 
AFD6269.ADA 
AFD6275.ADA 
AFD6301.ADA 
AFD6313.ADA 
AFD6319.ADA 
AFD6336.ADA 
AFD6343.ADA 
AFD6349.ADA 
AFD6356.ADA 
AFD6363.ADA 
AFD6369.ADA 
AFD6376.ADA 
AFD6383.ADA 
AFD6389.ADA 
AFD9000.ADA 
AFDC105.ADA 
AFDC314.ADA 
AFDD605.ADA 
AFDD722.ADA 
AFDD72C.ADA 
AFDDA01.ADA 
AFDE204 ADA 
AFDE20A.ADA 
AFDE216.ADA 
AFDE235.ADA 
AFDE241.ADA 
AFDE250.ADA 
AFDE406.ADA 
AFDE412.ADA 
AFDE431.ADA 
AFDE437.ADA 
AFDE443.ADA 
AFDF001.ADA 
AFM9A00.ADA 
AFMB002.ADA 
AFMB008.ADA 
AFMB014.ADA 


AF06821.ADA 
AF09501.ADA 
AF09507.ADA 
AF09603.ADA 
AF09711.ADA 
AF09900.ADA 
AF0C101.ADA 
AFOC303.ADA 
AF0D721.ADA 
AFD3S51.ADA 
AFD4137.ADA 
AFD413E.ADA 
AFD4510.ADA 
AFD4524.ADA 
AFD455E.ADA 
AFD455L.ADA 
AFD4604.ADA 
AFD46OA.ADA 
AFD4800.ADA 
AFD520D.ADA 
AFD520J.ADA 
AFD521A.ADA 
AFD521K.ADA 
AFD6210.ADA 
AFD6217.ADA 
AFD6225.ADA 
AFD6231.ADA 
AFD6246.ADA 
AFD6252.ADA 
AFD6264.ADA 
AFD6270.ADA 
AFD6276.ADA 
AFD6308.ADA 
AFD6314.ADA 
AFD6322.ADA 
AFD6337.ADA 
AFD6344.ADA 
AFD6350.ADA 
AFD6357.ADA 
AFD6364.ADA 
AFD6370.ADA 
AFD6377.ADA 
AFD6384.ADA 
AFD6390.ADA 
AFD9200.ADA 
AFDC106.ADA 
AFDD600.ADA 
AFDD606.ADA 
AFDD723.ADA 
AFDD72E.ADA 
AFDDA02.ADA 
AFDE205.ADA 
AFDE211.ADA 
AFDE220.ADA 
AFDE236.ADA 
AFDE242.ADA 
AFDE401.ADA 
AFDE407.ADA 
AFDE413.ADA 
AFDE432.ADA 
AFDE438.ADA 
AFDE444.ADA 
AFDF002.ADA 
AFM9A01.ADA 
AFHB003.ADA 
AFHB009.ADA 
AFHB015.ADA 


AF06822.ADA 
AF09502.ADA 
AF09508.ADA 
AF09604.ADA 
AF09712.ADA 
AF09901.ADA 
AF0C102.ADA 
AF0C304.ADA 
AF0D727.ADA 
AFD412A.ADA 
AFD4138.ADA 
AFD413G.ADA 
AFD451P.ADA 
AFD4525.ADA 
AFD455F.ADA 
AFD4566.ADA 
AFD4605.ADA 
AFD460B.ADA 
AFD4801.ADA 
AFD520E.ADA 
AFD520N.ADA 
AFD521B.ADA 
AFD521M.ADA 
AFD6211.ADA 
AFD6218.ADA 
AFD6226.ADA 
AFD6232.ADA 
AFD6247.ADA 
AFD6253.ADA 
AFD6265.ADA 
AFD6271.ADA 
AFD6277.ADA 
AFD6309.ADA 
AFD6315.ADA 
AFD6332.ADA 
AFD6338.ADA 
AFD6345.ADA 
AFD6352.ADA 
AFD6358.ADA 
AFD6365.ADA 
AFD6372.ADA 
AFD6378.ADA 
AFD6385.ADA 
AFD680G.ADA 
AFD9C00.ADA 
AFDC107.ADA 
AFDD601.ADA 
AFDD607.ADA 
AFDD724.ADA 
AFDD72F.ADA 
AFDEOOO.ADA 
AFDE206.ADA 
AFDE212.ADA 
AFDE231.ADA 
AFDE237.ADA 
AFDE243.ADA 
AFDE402.ADA 
AFDE408.ADA 
AFDE414.ADA 
AFDE433.ADA 
AFDE439.ADA 
AFDE445.ADA 
AFDF003.ADA 
AFM9A02.ADA 
AFHB004.ADA 
AFMB010.ADA 
AFMB016.ADA 









Table A-l ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Volume ACPS (continued) 


AFMB017.ADA 
AFMB023.ADA 
AFMB029.ADA 
AFMB035.ADA 
AFMB041.ADA 
AFN9302.ADA 
AFN9612.ADA 
AGD0002.ADA 
AGD0008.ADA 
AGD0039.ADA 
AGN000J.ADA 
AL09121.ADA 
ALD9212.ADA 
ALDE000.ADA 
ALDE2C6.ADA 
ALDE4C6.ADA 
AOOOl07.ADA 
A000202.ADA 
A000300.ADA 
A000314.ADA 
AD00320.ADA 
A000326.ADA 
A000332.ADA 
A000338.ADA 
A000347.ADA 
A000353.ADA 
A000359.ADA 
A000365.ADA 
A00036B.ADA 
A00036K.ADA 
A00036W.ADA 
A000390.ADA 
A000502.ADA 
A000512.ADA 
A000602.ADA 
A000702.ADA 
A000708.ADA 
A000715.ADA 
A000721.ADA 
AOD036D.ADA 
AOD036S.ADA 
AOD0371.ADA 
AOD0383.ADA 
AOD0528.ADA 
CF03502.ADA 
CF03512.ADA 
CF03550.ADA 
CF03605.ADA 
CF03611.ADA 
CF03617.ADA 
CF03632.ADA 
CF036 38.ADA 
CF03645.ADA 
CF03700.ADA 
CF03801.ADA 
CF04121.ADA 
CF04127.ADA 
CF04133.ADA 
CF04310.ADA 
CF04513.ADA 
CF04519.ADA 
CF0451F.ADA 
CF0451H.ADA 
CF04522.ADA 
CF04S33.ADA 
CF04539.ADA 
CF04550.ADA 


AFMB018.ADA 
AFHB024.ADA 
AFMB030.ADA 
AFMB036.ADA 
AFMB042.ADA 
AFN9303.ADA 
AFN9613.ADA 
AGD0003.ADA 
AGD0009.ADA 
AGD0049.ADA 
AGN000K.ADA 
AL 09131.ADA 
ALD9215.ADA 
ALDE2B1.ADA 
ALDE4B1.ADA 
A000001.ADA 
A000108.ADA 
A000203.ADA 
A000305.ADA 
A000515.ADA 
A000321.ADA 
A000327.ADA 
A000333.ADA 
A000339.ADA 
A000348.ADA 
A000354.ADA 
A000360.ADA 
A000366.ADA 
A00036F.ADA 
A00036L.ADA 
A000374.ADA 
A000391.ADA 
A000503.ADA 
A000513.ADA 
A000603.ADA 
A000703.ADA 
A000709.ADA 
A000716.ADA 
AOOPOOO.ADA 
A0D036E.ADA 
AOD036T.ADA 
AOD0372.ADA 
AOD0523.ADA 
AOD0529.ADA 
CF03503.ADA 
CF03513.ADA 
CF03600.ADA 
CF03606.ADA 
CF03612.ADA 
CF03618.ADA 
CF03633.ADA 
CF03639.ADA 
CF03646.ADA 
CF03701.ADA 
CF03802.ADA 
CF04122.ADA 
CF04129.ADA 
CF0413D.ADA 
CF04311.ADA 
CF04514.ADA 
CF0451A.ADA 
CF04S1G.ADA 
CF0451X.ADA 
CF04S27.ADA 
CF04534.ADA 
CF04S3A.ADA 
CF04551.ADA 


AFMB019.ADA 
AFMB025.ADA 
AFMB031.ADA 
AFMB037.ADA 
AFMB043.ADA 
AFN9510.ADA 
AG0D00C.ADA 
AGD0004.ADA 
AGD000D.ADA 
AGN000F.ADA 
AL09000.ADA 
ALOPOOO.ADA 
ALD9222.ADA 
ALDE2B2.ADA 
ALDE4B2.ADA 
A000002.ADA 
AOOOl09.ADA 
A000204.ADA 
A000310.ADA 
A000316.ADA 
A000322.ADA 
A000328.ADA 
A000334.ADA 
A000340.ADA 
A000349.ADA 
A000355.ADA 
A000361.ADA 
A000367.ADA 
A00036G.ADA 
A00036M.ADA 
A000375.ADA 
A000402.ADA 
A000504.ADA 
A000514.ADA 
A000604.ADA 
A000704.ADA 
A000710.ADA 
A000717.ADA 
A0D0344.ADA 
AOD0360.ADA 
A0D036X.ADA 
A0D0373.ADA 
AOD0524.ADA 
CAOOOOO.ADA 
CF03504.ADA 
CF03514.ADA 
CF03601.ADA 
CF03607.ADA 
CF03613.ADA 
CF03619.ADA 
CF03634.ADA 
CF03641.ADA 
CF03647.ADA 
CF03702.ADA 
CF03803.ADA 
CF04123.ADA 
CF0412B.ADA 
CF0413H.ADA 
CF04312.ADA 
CF04515.ADA 
CF0451B.ADA 
CF0451H.ADA 
CF0451Y.ADA 
CF04529.ADA 
CF04535.ADA 
CF0453B.ADA 
CF04552.ADA 


AFMB020.ADA 
AFMB026.ADA 
AFMB032.ADA 
AFMB038.ADA 
AFMB044.ADA 
AFN9511.ADA 
AGOPOOO.ADA 
AGD0005.ADA 
AGDOOOE.ADA 
AGNOOOG.ADA 
AL09100.ADA 
ALD9200.ADA 
ALD9223.ADA 
ALDE2C1.ADA 
ALDE4C1.ADA 
AOOOl02.ADA 
A000112.ADA 
A000207.ADA 
A000311.ADA 
A000317.ADA 
A000323.ADA 
A000329.ADA 
A000335.ADA 
A000341.ADA 
A000350.ADA 
A000356.ADA 
A000362.ADA 
A000368.ADA 
A00036H.ADA 
A00036N.ADA 
A000376.ADA 
A000403.ADA 
A000507.ADA 
A000517.ADA 
A000605.ADA 
A000705.ADA 
A000711.ADA 
A000718.ADA 
AOD0345.ADA 
AOD056P.ADA 
AOD036Y.ADA 
AOD0380.ADA 
A0D0525.ADA 
CAOPOOO.ADA 
CF03509.ADA 
CF03517.ADA 
CF03602.ADA 
CF03608.ADA 
CF03614.ADA 
CF03620.ADA 
CF03635.ADA 
CF03642.ADA 
CF03648.ADA 
CF03703.ADA 
CF03804.ADA 
CF04124.ADA 
CF04130.ADA 
CF0413I.ADA 
CF04510.ADA 
CF04516.ADA 
CF0451C.ADA 
CF0451I.ADA 
CF0451Z.ADA 
CF04530.ADA 
CF04536.ADA 
CF0453C.ADA 
CF04553.ADA 


AFMB021.ADA 
AFMB027.ADA 
AFMB033.ADA 
AFMB039.ADA 
AFN9300.ADA 
AFN9610.ADA 
AGDOOOO.ADA 
AGD0006.ADA 
AGD0019.ADA 
AGNOOOH.ADA 
AL09101.ADA 
ALD9202.ADA 
ALD9232.ADA 
ALDE2C2.ADA 
ALDE4C2.ADA 
A000103.ADA 
AOOOl15.ADA 
A000208.ADA 
A000312.ADA 
A000318.ADA 
A000324.ADA 
A000330.ADA 
A000336.ADA 
A000342.ADA 
A000351.ADA 
A000357.ADA 
A000363.ADA 
A000369.ADA 
A00036I.ADA 
A00036U.ADA 
A000377.ADA 
A000404.ADA 
A000508.ADA 
A000518.ADA 
A000606.ADA 
A000706.ADA 
A000713.ADA 
A000719.ADA 
A0D0346.ADA 
AOD036Q.ADA 
AOD036Z.ADA 
AOD0581.ADA 
A0D0526.ADA 
CF03500.ADA 
CF03510.ADA 
CF03518.ADA 
CF03603.ADA 
CF03609.ADA 
CFO3615.ADA 
CF03630.ADA 
CF03636.ADA 
CF03643.ADA 
CF03649.ADA 
CF03704.ADA 
CF03805.ADA 
CF04125.ADA 
CF04131.ADA 
CF0413J.ADA 
CF04511.ADA 
CF04517.ADA 
CF0451D.ADA 
CF0451J.ADA 
CF04520.ADA 
CF04531.ADA 
CF04537.ADA 
CF04540.ADA 
CF04554.ADA 


AFMB022.ADA 
AFMB028.ADA 
AFMB034.ADA 
AFMB040.ADA 
AFN9301.ADA 
AFN9611.ADA 
AGD0001.ADA 
AGD0007.ADA 
AGD0029.ADA 
AGNOOOI.ADA 
AL09111.ADA 
ALD9203.ADA 
ALD9233.ADA 
ALDE2C5.ADA 
ALDE4C5.ADA 
A000104.ADA 
AOOOl14.ADA 
A000209.ADA 
A000313.ADA 
A000319.ADA 
A000325.ADA 
A000331.ADA 
A000337.ADA 
A000343.ADA 
A000352.ADA 
A000358.ADA 
A000364.ADA 
A00036A.ADA 
A00036J.ADA 
A00036V.ADA 
A000378.ADA 
A000500.ADA 
A000509.ADA 
A000519.ADA 
A000607.ADA 
A000707.ADA 
A000714.ADA 
A000720.ADA 
A0D036C.ADA 
AOD036R.ADA 
AOD0370.ADA 
AOD0382.ADA 
AOD0527.ADA 
CF03501.ADA 
CF03511.ADA 
CF03519.ADA 
CF03604.ADA 
CF03610.ADA 
CF03616.ADA 
CF03631.ADA 
CF03637.ADA 
CF03644.ADA 
CF03650.ADA 
CFO3800.ADA 
CF04120.ADA 
CF04126.ADA 
CF04132.ADA 
CF0413K.ADA 
CF04512.ADA 
CF04518.ADA 
CF0451E.ADA 
CF0451V.ADA 
CF04521.ADA 
CF04532.ADA 
CF04538.ADA 
CF04541.ADA 
CF04555.ADA 




Table A-l ACPS ANSI Tap* Contents Voluas ACPS (continued) 


CF04556.ADA 
C F 04560.ADA 
CF0460E.ADA 
CF0460M.ADA 
CF05205.ADA 
CF0520B.ADA 
CF05211.ADA 
CF0521I.ADA 
CF05301.ADA 
CF05307.ADA 
CF05404.ADA 
CF05502.ADA 
CF05508.ADA 
CF0550E.ADA 
CF06013.ADA 
CF06019.ADA 
CF06027.ADA 
CF06033.ADA 
CF06048.ADA 
CF06060.ADA 
CF06066.ADA 
CF06072.ADA 
CF06078.ADA 
CF06110.ADA 
CF06116.ADA 
CF06133.ADA 
CF06139.ADA 
CF06146.ADA 
CF06153.ADA 
CF06159.ADA 
CF06166.ADA 
CF06173.ADA 
CF06179.ADA 
CF06186.ADA 
CF06192.ADA 
CF06198.ADA 
CF0619E.ADA 
CF0619IC. ADA 
CF0619Q.ADA 
CF06426.ADA 
CF06802.ADA 
CF0680A.ADA 
CF06810.ADA 
CF06818.ADA 
CF06824.ADA 
CF09504.ADA 
CF09600.ADA 
CF09606.ADA 
CF09720.ADA 
CF09903.ADA 
CF0C300.ADA 
CF0C306.ADA 
CFD412D.ADA 
CFD413A.ADA 
CFD451L.ADA 
CFD451R.ADA 
CFD4528.ADA 
CFD455I-ADA 
CFD4568.ADA 
CFD4607.ADA 
CFD460L.ADA 
CFD4803.ADA 
CFD520C.ADA 
CFD520Q.ADA 
CFD521D.ADA 
CFD521P.ADA 
CFD6214.ADA 


CF04557.ADA 
CF04562.ADA 
CF0460F.ADA 
CF05200.ADA 
CF05206.ADA 
CF0520M.ADA 
CF05212.ADA 
CF0521J.ADA 
CF05302.ADA 
CF05308.ADA 
CF05405.ADA 
CF05503.ADA 
CF05509.ADA 
CF0550F.ADA 
CF06014.ADA 
CF06022.ADA 
CF06028.ADA 
CF06043.ADA 
CF06049.ADA 
CF06061.ADA 
CF06067.ADA 
CF06073.ADA 
CF06079.ADA 
CF06111.ADA 
CF06117.ADA 
CF06134.ADA 
CF06140.ADA 
CF06147.ADA 
CF06154.ADA 
CF06160.ADA 
CF06167.ADA 
CF06174.ADA 
CF06180.ADA 
CF06187.ADA 
CF06193.ADA 
CF06199.ADA 
CF0619F.ADA 
CF0619L.ADA 
CF0619R.ADA 
CF06427.ADA 
CF06803.ADA 
CF0680B.ADA 
CF06811.ADA 
CF06819.ADA 
CF06825.ADA 
CF09505.ADA 
CF09601.ADA 
CF09607.ADA 
CF09721.ADA 
CF09B01.ADA 
CF0C301.ADA 
CF0C307.ADA 
CFD4135.ADA 
CFD413B.ADA 
CFD451M.ADA 
CFD451S.ADA 
CFD452A.ADA 
CFD455J.ADA 
CFD4569.ADA 
CFD4608.ADA 
CFD460N.ADA 
CFD4804.ADA 
CFD520H.ADA 
CFD5218.ADA 
CFD521E.ADA 
CFD6201.ADA 
CFD6215.ADA 


CF04558.ADA 
CF04563.ADA 
CF0460G.ADA 
CF05201.ADA 
CF05207.ADA 
CF05200.ADA 
CF05213.ADA 
CF0521K.ADA 
CF05303.ADA 
CF05400.ADA 
CF05406.ADA 
CF05504.ADA 
CF0550A.ADA 
CF06001.ADA 
CF06015.ADA 
CF06023.ADA 
CF06029.ADA 
CF06044.ADA 
CF06050.ADA 
CF06062.ADA 
CF06068.ADA 
CF06074.ADA 
CF06100.ADA 
CF06112.ADA 
CF06118.ADA 
CF06135.ADA 
CF06142.ADA 
CF06148.ADA 
CF06155.ADA 
CF06162.ADA 
CF06168.ADA 
CF06175.ADA 
CF06182.ADA 
CF06188.ADA 
CF06194.ADA 
CF0619A.ADA 
CF0619G.ADA 
CF0619M.ADA 
CF06422.ADA 
CF06428.ADA 
CF06806.ADA 
CF0680C.ADA 
CF06814.ADA 
CF06820.ADA 
CF09500.ADA 
CF09506.ADA 
CF09602.ADA 
CF09710.ADA 
CF09731.ADA 
CF0C100.ADA 
CFOC302.ADA 
CF0P000.ADA 
CFD4136.ADA 
CFD413C.ADA 
CFD451N.ADA 
CFD4523.ADA 
CFD4S5D.ADA 
CFD455K.ADA 
CFD4603.ADA 
CFD4609.ADA 
CFD4600.ADA 
CFD520C.ADA 
CFD520I.ADA 
CFD5219.ADA 
CFD521F.ADA 
CFD6209.ADA 
CFD6216.ADA 


CF04559.ADA 
CF04600.ADA 
CF0460H.ADA 
CF05202.ADA 
CF05208.ADA 
CF0520R.ADA 
CF05214.ADA 
CF0521L.ADA 
CF05304.ADA 
CF05401.ADA 
CF05407.ADA 
CF05505.ADA 
CF0550B.ADA 
CF06009.ADA 
CF06016.ADA 
CF06024.ADA 
CF06030.ADA 
CF06045.ADA 
CF06051.ADA 
CF06063.ADA 
CF06069.ADA 
CF06075.ADA 
CF06101.ADA 
CF06113.ADA 
CF06119.ADA 
CF06136.ADA 
CF06143.ADA 
CF06149.ADA 
CF06156.ADA 
CF06163.ADA 
CF06169.ADA 
CF06176.ADA 
CF06183.ADA 
CF06189.ADA 
CF06195.ADA 
CF0619B.ADA 
CF0619H.ADA 
CF0619N.ADA 
CF06423.ADA 
CF06429.ADA 
CF06807.ADA 
CF0680D.ADA 
CF06815.ADA 
CF06821.ADA 
CF09501.ADA 
CF09507.ADA 
CF09603.ADA 
CF09711.ADA 
CF09900.ADA 
CF0C101.ADA 
CF0C303.ADA 
CFD3551.ADA 
CFD4137.ADA 
CFD413E.ADA 
CFD4510.ADA 
CFD4524.ADA 
CFD4S5E.ADA 
CFD455L.ADA 
CFD4604.ADA 
CFD460A.ADA 
CFD4800.ADA 
CFD520D.ADA 
CFD520J.ADA 
CFD521A.ADA 
CFD521K.ADA 
CFD6210.ADA 
CFD6217.ADA 


CF0455N.ADA 
CF04601.ADA 
CF0460I.ADA 
CF05203.ADA 
CF05209.ADA 
CF0520S.ADA 
CF05215.ADA 
CF0521N.ADA 
CF0S305.ADA 
CF05402.ADA 
CF05408.ADA 
CF05506.ADA 
CF0550C.ADA 
CF06010.ADA 
CF06017.ADA 
CF06025.ADA 
CF06031.ADA 
CF06046.ADA 
CF06052.ADA 
CF06064.ADA 
CF06070.ADA 
CF06076.ADA 
CF06108.ADA 
CF06114.ADA 
CF06122.ADA 
CF06137.ADA 
CF06144.ADA 
CF06150.ADA 
CF06157.ADA 
CF06164.ADA 
CF06170.ADA 
CF06177.ADA 
CF06184.ADA 
CF06190.ADA 
CF06196.ADA 
CF0619C.ADA 
CF0619I.ADA 
CF06190.ADA 
CF06424.ADA 
CF0642A.ADA 
CF06808.ADA 
CF0680E.ADA 
CF06816.ADA 
CF06822.ADA 
CF09S02.ADA 
CF09508.ADA 
CF09604.ADA 
CF09712.ADA 
CF09901.ADA 
CFOC102.ADA 
CF0C304.ADA 
CFD412A.ADA 
CFD4138.ADA 
CFD413G.ADA 
CFD451P.ADA 
CFD4525.ADA 
CFD455F.ADA 
CFD4566.ADA 
CFD4605.ADA 
CFD460B.ADA 
CFD4801.ADA 
CFD520E.ADA 
CFD520N.ADA 
CFD521B.ADA 
CFD521M.ADA 
CFD6211.ADA 
CFD6218.ADA 


CF04550.ADA 
CF04602.ADA 
CF0460J.ADA 
CF05204.ADA 
CF0520A.ADA 
CF05210.ADA 
CF0521H.ADA 
CF05300.ADA 
CF05306.ADA 
CF05403.ADA 
CF05501.ADA 
CFO5507.ADA 
CF0550D.ADA 
CF06011.ADA 
CF06018.ADA 
CF06026.ADA 
CF06032.ADA 
CF06047.ADA 
CF06053.ADA 
CF06065.ADA 
CF06071.ADA 
CF06077.ADA 
CF06109.ADA 
CF06115.ADA 
CF06132.ADA 
CF06138.ADA 
CF06145.ADA 
CF06152.ADA 
CF06158.ADA 
CF06165.ADA 
CF06172.ADA 
CF06178.ADA 
CF06185.ADA 
CF06191.ADA 
CF06197.ADA 
CF0619D.ADA 
CF0619J.ADA 
CF0619P.ADA 
CF06425.ADA 
CF0642B.ADA 
CF06809.ADA 
CF0680F.ADA 
CF06817.ADA 
CF06823.ADA 
CF09503.ADA 
CF09509.ADA 
CF09605.ADA 
CF09713.ADA 
CF09902.ADA 
CF0C103.ADA 
CF0C305.ADA 
CFD412C.ADA 
CFD4139.ADA 
CFD451K.ADA 
CFD451Q.ADA 
CFD4S26.ADA 
CFD455G.ADA 
CFD4567.ADA 
CFD4606.ADA 
CFD460K.ADA 
CFD4802.ADA 
CFD520F.ADA 
CFD520P.ADA 
CFD521C.ADA 
CFD5210.ADA 
CFD6213.ADA 
CFD6219.ADA 








Table A-l ACPS ANSI Tap* Contents Volume ACPS (continued) 


I CFD6222.ADA 

CF06228.ADA 
CFD6243.ADA 
CFD6249.ADA 
CFD6261.ADA 
CFD6267.ADA 
CFD6273.ADA 
CFD6279.ADA 
CFD6311.ADA 
CFD6317.ADA 
CFD6334.ADA 
CFD6340.ADA 
CFD6347.ADA 
CFD6354.ADA 
CFD6360.ADA 
CFD6367.ADA 
CFD6374.ADA 
CFD6380.ADA 
CFD6387.ADA 
CFD680I.ADA 
CFD9C02.ADA 
CFDC311.ADA 
CFDD603.ADA 
CFDD610.ADA 
CFDE202.ADA 
CFDE208.ADA 
CFDE214.ADA 
CFDE233.ADA 
CFDE239.ADA 
CFDE245.ADA 
. CFDE404.ADA 

CFDE40A.ADA 
CFDE416.ADA 
CFDE435.ADA 
CFDE441.ADA 
CFDE450.ADA 
CFDF005.ADA 
CFMBD01.ADA 
CFMB011.ADA 
CFMB017.ADA 
CFMB031.ADA 
CFHB041.ADA 
CFN9302.ADA 
CFN9612.ADA 
CGD0002.ADA 
CGD0008.ADA 
CGD0039.ADA 
CGN000J.ADA 
CL09121.ADA 
CLD9212.ADA 
CLDEOOO.ADA 
CLDE2C6.ADA 
CLDE4C6.ADA 
C000107.ADA 
C000202.ADA 
C000300.ADA 
C000314.ADA 
C000320.ADA 
C000326.ADA 
C000332.ADA 
C000338.ADA 
C000347.ADA 
C0003S3.ADA 
C000359.ADA 
C000365.ADA 
C00036 B.ADA 
C00036K.ADA 


CFD6223.ADA 
CFD6229.ADA 
CFD6244.ADA 
CFD6250.ADA 
CFD6262.ADA 
CFD6268.ADA 
CFD6274.ADA 
CFD6300.ADA 
CFD6312.ADA 
CFD6318.ADA 
CFD6335.ADA 
CFD6342.ADA 
CFD6348.ADA 
CFD6355.ADA 
CFD6362.ADA 
CFD6368.ADA 
CFD6375.ADA 
CFD6382.ADA 
CFD6388.ADA 
CFD680J.ADA 
CFDC104.ADA 
CFDC313.ADA 
CFDD604.ADA 
CFDD611.ADA 
CFDE203.ADA 
CFDE209.ADA 
CFDE215.ADA 
CFDE234.ADA 
CFDE23A.ADA 
CFDE246.ADA 
CFDE405.ADA 
CFDE411.ADA 
CFDE420.ADA 
CFDE436.ADA 
CFDE442.ADA 
CFDFOOO.ADA 
CFM9A00.ADA 
CFMB002.ADA 
CFMB012.ADA 
CFMB018.ADA 
CFHB032.ADA 
CFMB042.ADA 
CFN9303.ADA 
CFN9613.ADA 
CGD0003.ADA 
CGDD009.ADA 
CGD0049.ADA 
CGNOOOK.ADA 
CL09131.ADA 
CLD9213.ADA 
CLDE2B1.ADA 
CLDE4B1.ADA 
COOOOOl.ADA 
C000108.ADA 
C000203.ADA 
C000305.ADA 
C000315.ADA 
C000321.ADA 
C000327.ADA 
C000333.ADA 
C000339.ADA 
C000348.ADA 
C000354.ADA 
C000360.ADA 
C000366.ADA 
C00036F.ADA 
C00036L.ADA 


CFD6224.ADA 
CFD6230.ADA 
CFD6245.ADA 
CFD62S1.ADA 
CFD6263.ADA 
CFD6269.ADA 
CFD6275.ADA 
CFD6301.ADA 
CFD6313.ADA 
CFD6319.ADA 
CFD6336.ADA 
CFD6343.ADA 
CFD6349.ADA 
CFD6356.ADA 
CFD6363.ADA 
CFD6369.ADA 
CFD6376.ADA 
CFD6383.ADA 
CFD6389.ADA 
CFD9000.ADA 
CFDC105.ADA 
CFDC314.ADA 
CFDD605.ADA 
CFDDA01.ADA 
CFDE204.ADA 
CFDE20A.ADA 
CFDE216.ADA 
CFDE235.ADA 
CFDE241.ADA 
CFDE250.ADA 
CFDE406.ADA 
CFDE412.ADA 
CFDE431.ADA 
CFDE437.ADA 
CFDE443.ADA 
CFDF001.ADA 
CFM9A01.ADA 
CFHB003.ADA 
CFHB013.ADA 
CFMB019.ADA 
CFMB033.ADA 
CFMB043.ADA 
CFN9510.ADA 
CGOOOOC.ADA 
CGD0004.ADA 
CGDOOOD.ADA 
CGNOOOF.ADA 
CL 09000.ADA 
CLOPOOO.ADA 
CLD9222.ADA 
CLDE2B2.ADA 
CLDE4B2.ADA 
C000002.ADA 
C000109.ADA 
C000204.ADA 
C000310.ADA 
C000316.ADA 
C000322.ADA 
C000328.ADA 
C000334.ADA 
C000340.ADA 
C000349.ADA 
C000355.ADA 
C000561.ADA 
C000367.ADA 
C00036G.ADA 
C00036H.ADA 


CFD6225.ADA 
CFD6231.ADA 
CFD6246.ADA 
CFD6252.ADA 
CFD6264.ADA 
CFD6270.ADA 
CFD6276.ADA 
CFD6308.ADA 
CFD6314.ADA 
CFD6322.ADA 
CFD6337.ADA 
CFD6344.ADA 
CFD6350.ADA 
CFD6357.ADA 
CFD6364.ADA 
CFD6370.ADA 
CFD6377.ADA 
CFD6384.ADA 
CFD6390.ADA 
CFD9200.ADA 
CFDC106.ADA 
CFDD600.ADA 
CFDD606.ADA 
CFDDA02.ADA 
CFDE20S.ADA 
CFDE211.ADA 
CFDE220.ADA 
CFDE236.ADA 
CFDE242.ADA 
CFDE401.ADA 
CFDE407.ADA 
CFDE413.ADA 
CFDE432.ADA 
CFDE438.ADA 
CFDE444.ADA 
CFDF002.ADA 
CFM9A02.ADA 
CFMB004.ADA 
CFMB014.ADA 
CFMB020.ADA 
CFMB034.ADA 
CFMB044.ADA 
CFN9511.ADA 
CGOPOOO.ADA 
CGD0005.ADA 
CGDOOOE.ADA 
CGNOOOG.ADA 
CL09100.ADA 
CLD9200.ADA 
CLD9223.ADA 
CLDE2C1.ADA 
CLDE4C1.ADA 
C000102.ADA 
C000112.ADA 
C000207.ADA 
C000311.ADA 
C000317.ADA 
C000323.ADA 
C000329.ADA 
C000335.ADA 
C000341.ADA 
C000350.ADA 
C000356.ADA 
C000362.ADA 
C000368.ADA 
C00036H.ADA 
C00036N.ADA 


CFD6226.ADA 
CFD6232.ADA 
CFD6247.ADA 
CFD6253.ADA 
CFD6265.ADA 
CFD6271.ADA 
CFD6277.ADA 
CFD6309.ADA 
CFD6315.ADA 
CFD6332.ADA 
CFD6338.ADA 
CFD6345.ADA 
CFD6352.ADA 
CFD6358.ADA 
CFD6365.ADA 
CFD6372.ADA 
CFD6378.ADA 
CFD6385.ADA 
CFD680G.ADA 
CFD9C00.ADA 
CFDC107.ADA 
CFDD601.ADA 
CFDD607.ADA 
CFDEOOO.ADA 
CFDE206.ADA 
CFDE212.ADA 
CFDE231.ADA 
CFDE237.ADA 
CFDE243.ADA 
CFDE402.ADA 
CFDE408.ADA 
CFDE414.ADA 
CFDE433.ADA 
CFDE439.ADA 
CFDE445.ADA 
CFDF003.ADA 
CFM9A03.ADA 
CFMB005.ADA 
CFMB015.ADA 
CFMB029.ADA 
CFMB035.ADA 
CFN9300.ADA 
CFN9610.ADA 
CGDOOOO.ADA 
CGD00D6.ADA 
CGD0019.ADA 
CGNOOOH.ADA 
CL09101.ADA 
CLD9202.ADA 
CLD9232.ADA 
CLDE2C2.ADA 
CLDE4C2.ADA 
C000103.ADA 
C000113.ADA 
C000208.ADA 
C000312.ADA 
C000318.ADA 
C000324.ADA 
C000330.ADA 
C000336.ADA 
C000342.ADA 
C000351.ADA 
C000357.ADA 
C000365.ADA 
C000369.ADA 
COO036I.ADA 
C00036U.ADA 


A-7 


CFD6227.ADA 
CFD6233.ADA 
CFD6248.ADA 
CFD6260.ADA 
CFD6266.ADA 
CFD6272.ADA 
CFD6278.ADA 
CFD6310.ADA 
CFD6316.ADA 
CFD6333.ADA 
CFD6339.ADA 
CFD6346.ADA 
CFD6353.ADA 
CFD6359.ADA 
CFD6366.ADA 
CFD6373.ADA 
CFD6379.ADA 
CFD6386.ADA 
CFD680H.ADA 
CFD9C01.ADA 
CFDC310.ADA 
CFDD602.ADA 
CFDD609.ADA 
CFDE201.ADA 
CFDE207.ADA 
CFDE213.ADA 
CFDE232.ADA 
CFDE238.ADA 
CFDE244.ADA 
CFDE403.ADA 
CFDE409.ADA 
CFDE415.ADA 
CFDE434.ADA 
CFDE43A.ADA 
CFDE446.ADA 
CFDF004.ADA 
CFMBOOO.ADA 
CFMB010.ADA 
CFMB016.ADA 
CFMB030.ADA 
CFMB036.ADA 
CFN9301.ADA 
CFN9611.ADA 
CGD0001.ADA 
CGD0007.ADA 
CGD0029.ADA 
CGNOOOI.ADA 
CL09111.ADA 
CLD9203.ADA 
CLD9233.ADA 
CLDE2C5.ADA 
CLDE4C5.ADA 
C000104.ADA 
C000114.ADA 
C000209.ADA 
C000313.ADA 
C000319.ADA 
C000325.ADA 
C000331.ADA 
C000337.ADA 
C000343.ADA 
C000352.ADA 
C000358.ADA 
C000364.ADA 
C00036A.ADA 
C00036J.ADA 
C00036V.ADA 








Table A-l ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Volume ACPS (continued) 


C00036H.ADA C000374.ADA C000375.ADA 
C000390.ADA C000391.ADA C000402.ADA 
C000502.ADA C000503.ADA C000504.ADA 
C000512.ADA C000513.ADA C000514.ADA 
C000602.ADA C000603.ADA C000604.ADA 
C000702.ADA C000703.ADA C000704.ADA 
C000708.ADA C000709.ADA C000710.ADA 
C000715.ADA C000716.ADA C000717.ADA 
C000721.ADA COOPOOO.ADA C0D0344.ADA 
COD036D.ADA COD036E.ADA COD036O.ADA 
COD036S.ADA COD036T.ADA COD036X.ADA 
COD0371.ADA COD0372.ADA COD0373.ADA 
COD0383.ADA C0D0523.ADA COD0524.ADA 
C0D0528.ADA COD0529.ADA EA00000.ADA 
EF03502.ADA EF03503.ADA EF03504.ADA 
EF03512.ADA EF03513.ADA EF03514.ADA 
EF03550.ADA EF03600.ADA EF03601.ADA 
EF03605.ADA EF03606.ADA EF03607.ADA 
EF03611.ADA EF03612.ADA EF03613.ADA 
EF03617.ADA EF03618.ADA EF03619.ADA 
EF03632.ADA EF03633.ADA EF03634.ADA 
EF03638.ADA EF03639.ADA EF03641.ADA 
EF03645.ADA EF03646.ADA EF03647.ADA 
EF03700.ADA EF03701.ADA EF03702.ADA 
EF03801.ADA EF03802.ADA EF03803.ADA 
EF04121.ADA EF04122.ADA EF04123.ADA 
EF04127.ADA EF04129.ADA EF0412B.ADA 
EF04133.ADA EF0413D.ADA EF0413H.ADA 
EF04310.ADA EF04311.ADA EF04312.ADA 
EF04513.ADA EF04514.ADA EF04515.ADA 
EF04519.ADA EF0451A.ADA EF0451B.ADA 
EF0451F.ADA EF0451G.ADA EF0451H.ADA 
EF0451M.ADA EF0451X.ADA EF0451Y.ADA 
EF04522.ADA EF04527.ADA EF04529.ADA 
EF04533.ADA EF04534.ADA EF04535.ADA 
EF04539.ADA EF0453A.ADA EF0453B.ADA 
EF04550.ADA EF04551.ADA EF04552.ADA 
EF045S6.ADA EF04557.ADA EF04558.ADA 
EF04560.ADA EF04562.ADA EF04563.ADA 
EF0460E.ADA EF0460F.ADA EF0460G.ADA 
EF0460M.ADA EF05200.ADA EF05201.ADA 
EF05205.ADA EF05206.ADA EF05207.ADA 
EF0520B.ADA EF0520M.ADA EF052D0.ADA 
EF05211.ADA EF05212.ADA EF05213.ADA 
EF0521I.ADA EF0521J.ADA EFQ521K.ADA 
EF05301.ADA EF05302.ADA EF05303.ADA 
EF05307.ADA EF05308.ADA EF05400.ADA 
EF05404.ADA EF05405.ADA EF05406.ADA 
EF05502.ADA EF05503.ADA EF05504.ADA 
EF05508.ADA EF05509.ADA EF0S50A.ADA 
EF0550E.ADA EF0550F.ADA EF06001.ADA 
EF06013.ADA EF06014.ADA EF06015.ADA 
EF06019.ADA EF06022.ADA EF06023.ADA 
EF06027.ADA EF06028.ADA EF06029.ADA 
EF06033.ADA EF06043.ADA EF06044.ADA 
EF06048.ADA EF06049.ADA EF06050.ADA 
EF06060.ADA EF06061.ADA EF06062.ADA 
EF06066.ADA EF06067.ADA EF06068.ADA 
EF06072.ADA EF06073.ADA EF06074.ADA 
EF06078.ADA EF06079.ADA EF06100.ADA 
EF06110.ADA EF06111.ADA EF06112.ADA 
EF06116.ADA EF06117.ADA EF06118.ADA 
EF06133.ADA EF06134.ADA EF06135.ADA 
EF06139.ADA EF06140.ADA EF06142.ADA 
EF06146.ADA EF06147.ADA EF06148.ADA 
EF06153.ADA EF06154.ADA EF06155.ADA 
EF061S9.ADA EF06160.ADA EF06162.ADA 


C000376.ADA C000377.ADA C000378.ADA 
C000403.ADA C000404.ADA C000500.ADA 
C000507.ADA C000508.ADA C000509.ADA 
C000517.ADA C000518.ADA C000519.ADA 
C00060S.ADA C000606.ADA C000607.ADA 
C000705.ADA C000706.ADA CD00707.ADA 
C000711.ADA C000713.ADA C000714.ADA 
C000718.ADA C000719.ADA C000720.ADA 
COD0345.ADA COD0346.ADA COD036C.ADA 
C0D036P.ADA C0D036Q.ADA C0D036R.ADA 
COD036Y.ADA C0D036Z.ADA C0D0370.ADA 
COD0380.ADA COD0381.ADA COD0382.ADA 
COD0525.ADA C0D0526.ADA COD0527.ADA 
EA0P000.ADA EF03500.ADA EF03501.ADA 
EF03509.ADA EF03510.ADA EF03511.ADA 
EF03517.ADA EF03518.ADA EF03519.ADA 
EF03602.ADA EF03603.ADA EF03604.ADA 
EF03608.ADA EF03609.ADA EF03610.ADA 
EF03614.ADA EF03615.ADA EF03616.ADA 
EF03620.ADA EF03630.ADA EF03631.ADA 
EF0363S.ADA EF03636.ADA EF03637.ADA 
EF03642.ADA EF03643.ADA EF03644.ADA 
EF03648.ADA EF03649.ADA EF03650.ADA 
EF03703.ADA EF03704.ADA EF03800.ADA 
EF03804.ADA EF03805.ADA EF04120.ADA 
EF04124.ADA EF04125.ADA EF04126.ADA 
EF04130.ADA EF04131.ADA EF04132.ADA 
EF04131.ADA EF0413J.ADA EF0413K.ADA 
EF04510.ADA EF04511.ADA EF04512.ADA 
EFD4516.ADA EF04517.ADA EF04518.ADA 
EF0451C.ADA EF0451D.ADA EF0451E.ADA 
EF0451I.ADA EF0451J.ADA EF0451V.ADA 
EF0451Z.ADA EF04520.ADA EF04521.ADA 
EF04530.ADA EF04531.ADA EF04532.ADA 
EF04536.ADA EF04537.ADA EF04538.ADA 
EF0453C.ADA EF04540.ADA EF04541.ADA 
EF04553.ADA EF04554.ADA EF04555.ADA 
EF04559.ADA EF0455N.ADA EFD4550.ADA 
EF0460D.ADA EF04601.ADA EF04602.ADA 
EF0460H.ADA EF0460I.ADA EF0460J.ADA 
EF05202.ADA EF05203.ADA EF05204.ADA 
EF05208.ADA EF05209.ADA EF0520A.ADA 
EF0520R.ADA EF0520S.ADA EF05210.ADA 
EF05214.ADA EF05215.ADA EF0521H.ADA 
EF0521L.ADA EF0S21N.ADA EF05300.ADA 
EF05304.ADA EF05305.ADA EF05306.ADA 
EF05401.ADA EF05402.ADA EF05403.ADA 
EF05407.ADA EF05408.ADA EF05501.ADA 
EF05505.ADA EF05506.ADA EF05507.ADA 
EF0550B.ADA EF0550C.ADA EFD550D.ADA 
EFD6009.ADA EF06010.ADA EF06011.ADA 
EF06016.ADA EF06017.ADA EF06018.ADA 
EF06024.ADA EF06025.ADA EF06026.ADA 
EF06030.ADA EF06031.ADA EF06032.ADA 
EF06045.ADA EF06046.ADA EF06047.ADA 
EF06051.ADA EF06052.ADA EF06053.ADA 
EF06063.ADA EF06064.ADA EF06065.ADA 
EF06069.ADA EF06070.ADA EF06071.ADA 
EF06075.ADA EF06076.ADA EF06077.ADA 
EF06101.ADA EFD610B.ADA EF06109.ADA 
EF06113.ADA EF06114.ADA EF06115.ADA 
EF06119.ADA EF06122.ADA EF06132.ADA 
EF06136.ADA EF06137.ADA EF06138.ADA 
EF06143.ADA EF06144.ADA EF06145.ADA 
EF06149.ADA EF06150.ADA EF06152.ADA 
EF06156.ADA EF06157.ADA EF06158.ADA 
EF06163.ADA EF06164.ADA EF06165.ADA 




Table A-l ACPS ANSI Tap* Contents Volume ACPS (continued) 


EF06166.ADA 
EF06175.ADA 
EF06179.ADA 
EF06186.ADA 
EF06192.ADA 
EF06198.ADA 
EF0619E.ADA 
EF0619K.ADA 
EF0619Q.ADA 
EF06426.ADA 
EF06802.ADA 
EF0680A.ADA 
EF06810.ADA 
EF06818.ADA 
EF06824.ADA 
EF09504.ADA 
EF09600.ADA 
EF09606.ADA 
EF09720.ADA 
EF09903.ADA 
EF0C300.ADA 
EF0C306.ADA 
EFD412D.ADA 
EFD413A.ADA 
EFD451L.ADA 
EFD451R.ADA 
EFD4528.ADA 
EFD455I.ADA 
EFD4568.ADA 
EFD4607.ADA 
EFD460L.ADA 
EFD520F.ADA 
EFD520P.ADA 
EFD521C.ADA 
EFD5210.ADA 
EFD6213.ADA 
EFD6219.ADA 
EFD6227.ADA 
EFD6233.ADA 
EFD6248.ADA 
EFD6260.ADA 
EFD6266.ADA 
EFD6272.ADA 
EFD6278.ADA 
EFD6310.ADA 
EFD6316.ADA 
EFD6333.ADA 
EFD6339.ADA 
EFD6346.ADA 
EFD6353.ADA 
EFD6359.ADA 
EFD6366.ADA 
EFD6373.ADA 
EFD6379.ADA 
EFD6386.ADA 
EFD680H.ADA 
EFD9C01.ADA 
EFDC310.ADA 
EFDD602.ADA 
EFDD609.ADA 
EFDE201.ADA 
EFDE207.ADA 
EFDE213.ADA 
EFDE232.ADA 
EFDE238.ADA 
EFDE244.ADA 
EFDE403.ADA 


EF06167.ADA 
EF06174.ADA 
EF06180.ADA 
EF06187.ADA 
EF06193.ADA 
EF06199.ADA 
EF0619F.ADA 
EF0619L.ADA 
EF0619R.ADA 
EF06427.ADA 
EF06803.ADA 
EF0680B.ADA 
EF06811.ADA 
EF06819.ADA 
EF06825.ADA 
EF09505.ADA 
EF09601.ADA 
EF09607.ADA 
EF09721.ADA 
EF09B01.ADA 
EF0C301.ADA 
EF0C307.ADA 
EFD4135.ADA 
EFD413B.ADA 
EFD451M.ADA 
EFD451S.ADA 
EFD452A.ADA 
EFD455J.ADA 
EFD4569.ADA 
EFD4608.ADA 
EFD460N.ADA 
EFD520G.ADA 
EFD520Q.ADA 
EFD521D.ADA 
EFD521P.ADA 
EFD6214.ADA 
EFD6222.ADA 
EFD6228.ADA 
EFD6243.ADA 
EFD6249.ADA 
EFD6261.ADA 
EFD6267.ADA 
EFD6273.ADA 
EFD6279.ADA 
EFD6311.ADA 
EFD6317.ADA 
EFD6334.ADA 
EFD6340.ADA 
EFD6347.ADA 
EFD6354.ADA 
EFD6360.ADA 
EFD6367.ADA 
EFD6374.ADA 
EFD6380.ADA 
EFD6387.ADA 
EFD680I.ADA 
EFD9C02.ADA 
EFDC311.ADA 
EFDD603.ADA 
EFDD610.ADA 
EFDE202.ADA 
EFDE208.ADA 
EFDE214.ADA 
EFDE233.ADA 
EFDE239.ADA 
EFDE245.ADA 
EFDE404.ADA 


EF06168.ADA 
EF06175.ADA 
EF06182.ADA 
EF06188.ADA 
EF06194.ADA 
EF0619A.ADA 
EF0619G.ADA 
EF0619M.ADA 
EF06422.ADA 
EF06428.ADA 
EF06806.ADA 
EF0680C.ADA 
EF06814.ADA 
EF06820.ADA 
EFD9500.ADA 
EF09506.ADA 
EF09602.ADA 
EF09710.ADA 
EF09731.ADA 
EF0C100.ADA 
EF0C302.ADA 
EF0P000.ADA 
EFD4136.ADA 
EFD413C.ADA 
EFD451N.ADA 
EFD4523.ADA 
EFD455D.ADA 
EFD455K.ADA 
EFD4603.ADA 
EFD4609.ADA 
EFD4600.ADA 
EFD520H.ADA 
EF05218.ADA 
EFD521E.ADA 
EFD6201.ADA 
EFD6215.ADA 
EFD6223.ADA 
EFD6229.ADA 
EFD6244.ADA 
EFD6250.ADA 
EFD6262.ADA 
EFD6268.ADA 
EFD6274.ADA 
EFD6300.ADA 
EFD6312.ADA 
EFD6318.ADA 
EFD6335.ADA 
EFD6342.ADA 
EFD6348.ADA 
EFD6355.ADA 
EFD6362.ADA 
EFD6368.ADA 
EFD6375.ADA 
EFD6382.ADA 
EFD6388.ADA 
EFD680J.ADA 
EFDC104.ADA 
EFDC313.ADA 
EFDD604.ADA 
EFDD611.ADA 
EFDE203.ADA 
EFDE209.ADA 
EFDE215.ADA 
EFDE234.ADA 
EFDE23A.ADA 
EFDE246.ADA 
EFDE405.ADA 


EF06169.ADA 
EF06176.ADA 
EF06183.ADA 
EF06189.ADA 
EF06195.ADA 
EF0619B.ADA 
EF0619H.ADA 
EF0619N.ADA 
EF06423.ADA 
EF06429.ADA 
EF06807.ADA 
EF0680D.ADA 
EF06815.ADA 
EF06821.ADA 
EF09501.ADA 
EF09507.ADA 
EF09603.ADA 
EF09711.ADA 
EF09900.ADA 
EF0C101.ADA 
EF0C303.ADA 
EFD3551.ADA 
EFD4137.ADA 
EFD413E.ADA 
EFD4510.ADA 
EFD4524.ADA 
EFD4S5E.ADA 
EFD455L.ADA 
EFD4604.ADA 
EFD460A.ADA 
EFD520C.ADA 
EFD520I.ADA 
EFD5219.ADA 
EFD521F.ADA 
EFD62D9.ADA 
EFD6216.ADA 
EFD6224.ADA 
EFD6230.ADA 
EFD6245.ADA 
EFD6251.ADA 
EFD6263.ADA 
EFD6269.ADA 
EFD6275.ADA 
EFD6301.ADA 
EFD6313.ADA 
EFD6319.ADA 
EFD6336.ADA 
EFD6343.ADA 
EFD6349.ADA 
EFD6356.ADA 
EFD6363.ADA 
EFD6369.ADA 
EFD6376.ADA 
EFD6383.ADA 
EFD6389.ADA 
EFD9000.ADA 
EFDC105.ADA 
EFDC314.ADA 
EFDD6D5.ADA 
EFDDA01.ADA 
EFDE204.ADA 
EFDE20A.ADA 
EFDE216.ADA 
EFDE235.ADA 
EFDE241.ADA 
EFDE250.ADA 
EFDE406.ADA 


EF06170.ADA 
EF06177.ADA 
EF06184.ADA 
EF06190.ADA 
EF06196.ADA 
EF0619C.ADA 
EF0619I.ADA 
EF06190.ADA 
EF06424.ADA 
EF0642A.ADA 
EF06808.ADA 
EF0680E.ADA 
EF06816.ADA 
EF06822.ADA 
EF09502.ADA 
EF09508.ADA 
EF09604.ADA 
EF09712.ADA 
EF09901.ADA 
EF0C102.ADA 
EF0C304.ADA 
EFD412A.ADA 
EFD4138.ADA 
EFD413G.ADA 
EFD451P.ADA 
EFD4525.ADA 
EFD455F.ADA 
EFD4566.ADA 
EFD4605.ADA 
EFD460B.ADA 
EFD520D.ADA 
EFD520J.ADA 
EFD521A.ADA 
EFD521K.ADA 
EFD6210.ADA 
EFD6217.ADA 
EFD6225.ADA 
EFD6231.ADA 
EFD6246.ADA 
EFD6252.ADA 
EFD6264.ADA 
EFD6270.ADA 
EFD6276.ADA 
EFD6308.ADA 
EFD6314.ADA 
EFD6322.ADA 
EFD6337.ADA 
EFD6344.ADA 
EFD6350.ADA 
EFD6357.ADA 
EFD6364.ADA 
EFD6370.ADA 
EFD6377.ADA 
EFD6384.ADA 
EFD6390.ADA 
EFD9200.ADA 
EFDC106.ADA 
EFDD600.ADA 
EFDD606.ADA 
EFDDA02.ADA 
EFDE205.ADA 
EFDE211.ADA 
EFDE220.ADA 
EFDE236.ADA 
EFDE242.ADA 
EFDE401.ADA 
EFDE407.ADA 


EF06172.ADA 
EF06178.ADA 
EF06185.ADA 
EF06191.ADA 
EF06197.ADA 
EF0619D.ADA 
EF0619J.ADA 
EF0619P.ADA 
EF06425.ADA 
EF0642B.ADA 
EF06809.ADA 
EF0680F.ADA 
EF06817.ADA 
EF06823.ADA 
EF09503.ADA 
EF09509.ADA 
EF09605.ADA 
EF09713.ADA 
EF09902.ADA 
EF0C103.ADA 
EF0C305.ADA 
EFD412C.ADA 
EFD4139.ADA 
EFD451K.ADA 
EFD451Q.ADA 
EFD4526.ADA 
EFD455G.ADA 
EFD4567.ADA 
EFD4606.ADA 
EFD460K.ADA 
EFD520E.ADA 
EFD520N.ADA 
EFD521B.ADA 
EFD521M.ADA 
EFD6211.ADA 
EFD6218.ADA 
EFD6226.ADA 
EFD6232.ADA 
EFD6247.ADA 
EFD6253.ADA 
EFD6265.ADA 
EFD6271.ADA 
EFD6277.ADA 
EFD6309.ADA 
EFD6315.ADA 
EFD6332.ADA 
EFD6338.ADA 
EFD6345.ADA 
EFD6352.ADA 
EFD6358.ADA 
EFD6365.ADA 
EFD6372.ADA 
EFD6378.ADA 
EFD6385.ADA 
EFD680G.ADA 
EFD9C00.ADA 
EFDC107.ADA 
EFDD601.ADA 
EFDD607.ADA 
EFDE000.ADA 
EFDE206.ADA 
EFDE212.ADA 
EFDE231.ADA 
EFDE237.ADA 
EFDE243.ADA 
EFDE402.ADA 
EFDE408.ADA 


A-9 







Table A-l ACPS ANSI Tap* Contents Voluao ACPS (continued) 


EFDE409.ADA 
EFDE415.ADA 
EFDE434.ADA 
EFDE43A.ADA 
EFDE446.ADA 
EFDF004.ADA 
EFN9300.ADA 
EFN9610.ADA 
EGD0000.ADA 
EGD0006.ADA 
EGD0019.ADA 
EGN000H.ADA 
EL09101.ADA 
ELD9202.ADA 
ELD9232.ADA 
ELDE2C2.ADA 
ELDE4C2.ADA 
E000103.ADA 
E000113.ADA 
EO00Z08.ADA 
E000312.ADA 
E000318.ADA 
E000324.ADA 
E000330.ADA 
E000336.ADA 
E000342.ADA 
E000351.ADA 
E000357.ADA 
E000363.ADA 
E000369.ADA 
E00036I.ADA 
E00036U.ADA 
E000377.ADA 
E000404.ADA 
E000508.ADA 
E000518.ADA 
E000606.ADA 
E0007 06.ADA 
E000713.ADA 
E000719.ADA 
EOD0346.ADA 
EOD036Q.ADA 
EOD036Z.ADA 
EOD0381.ADA 
EOD0526.ADA 
OURSYSR.ADA 
SF03503.ADA 
SF03513.ADA 
SF03600.ADA 
SF03606.ADA 
SF03612.ADA 
SF03618.ADA 
SF03633.ADA 
SF03639.ADA 
SF03646.ADA 
SF03701.ADA 
SF03802.ADA 
SF04122.ADA 
SF04129.ADA 
SF0413D.ADA 
SF04311.ADA 
SF04514.ADA 
SF0451A.ADA 
SF0451G.ADA 
SF0451X.ADA 
SF04527.ADA 
SF04534.ADA 


EFDE40A.ADA 
EFDE416.ADA 
EFDE435.ADA 
EFDE441.ADA 
EFDE450.ADA 
EFDF005.ADA 
EFN9301.ADA 
EFN9611.ADA 
EGD0001.ADA 
EGD0007.ADA 
EGD0029.ADA 
EGN000I.ADA 
EL09111.ADA 
ELD9203.ADA 
ELD9233.ADA 
ELDE2C5.ADA 
ELDE4C5.ADA 
E000104.ADA 
E000114.ADA 
E000209.ADA 
E000313.ADA 
E000319.ADA 
E000325.ADA 
E000331.ADA 
E000337.ADA 
E000343.ADA 
E000352.ADA 
E000358.ADA 
E000364.ADA 
E00036A.ADA 
E00036J.ADA 
E00036V.ADA 
E000378.ADA 
E000500.ADA 
E000509.ADA 
E000519.ADA 
E000607.ADA 
E000707.ADA 
E000714.ADA 
E000720.ADA 
EOD036C.ADA 
EOD036R.ADA 
EOD0370.ADA 
EOD0382.ADA 
EOD0527.ADA 
SA00000.ADA 
SF03504.ADA 
SF03514.ADA 
SF03601.ADA 
SF03607.ADA 
SF03613.ADA 
SF03619.ADA 
SF03634.ADA 
SF03641. ADA. 
SF03647.ADA 
SF03702.ADA 
SF03803.ADA 
SF04123.ADA 
SF0412B.ADA 
SF0413H.ADA 
SF04312.ADA 
SF04515.ADA 
SF0451B.ADA 
SF0451H.ADA 
SF0451Y.ADA 
SF04529.ADA 
SF04535.ADA 


EFDE411.ADA 
EFDE420.ADA 
EFDE436.ADA 
EFDE442.ADA 
EFDF000.ADA 
EFH9A00.ADA 
EFN9302.ADA 
EFN9612.ADA 
EGD0002.ADA 
EGD0008.ADA 
EGD0039.ADA 
EGN000J.ADA 
EL09121.ADA 
ELD9212.ADA 
ELDE000.ADA 
ELDE2C6.ADA 
ELDE4C6.ADA 
E000107.ADA 
E000202.ADA 
E000300.ADA 
E000314.ADA 
E000320.ADA 
E000326.ADA 
E000332.ADA 
E000338.ADA 
E000347.ADA 
E000353.ADA 
E000359.ADA 
E000365.ADA 
E00036B.ADA 
E00036K.ADA 
E00036N.ADA 
E000390.ADA 
E000502.ADA 
E000512.ADA 
E000602.ADA 
E000702.ADA 
E000708.ADA 
E000715.ADA 
E000721.ADA 
EOD036D.ADA 
EOD036S.ADA 
EOD0371.ADA 
EOD0383.ADA 
E0D0528.ADA 
SA0P000.ADA 
SF03509.ADA 
SF03517.ADA 
SF03602.ADA 
SF03608.ADA 
SFO3614.ADA 
SF03620.ADA 
SF03635.ADA 
SF03642.ADA 
SF03648.ADA 
SF03703.ADA 
SF03804.ADA 
SF04124.ADA 
SF04130.ADA 
SF0413I.ADA 
SF04510.ADA 
SF04516.ADA 
SF0451C.ADA 
SF0451I.ADA 
SF0451Z.ADA 
SF04530.ADA 
SF04S36.ADA 


EFDE412.ADA 
EFDE431.ADA 
EFDE437.ADA 
EFDE443.ADA 
EFDF001.ADA 
EFM9A01.ADA 
EFN9303.ADA 
EFN9613.ADA 
EGD0003.ADA 
EGD0009.ADA 
EGD0049.ADA 
EGNOOOK.ADA 
EL09131.ADA 
ELD9213.ADA 
ELDE2B1.ADA 
ELDE4B1.ADA 
E000001.ADA 
E000108.ADA 
E000203.ADA 
E000305.ADA 
E000315.ADA 
E000321.ADA 
E000327.ADA 
E000333.ADA 
E000339.ADA 
E000348.ADA 
£000354.ADA 
E000360.ADA 
E000366.ADA 
E00036F.ADA 
E00036L.ADA 
E000374.ADA 
E000391.ADA 
E000503.ADA 
E000513.ADA 
E000603.ADA 
E000703.ADA 
E000709.ADA 
E000716.ADA 
EOOPOOO.ADA 
EOD036E.ADA 
EOD036T.ADA 
EDD0372.ADA 
E0D0523.ADA 
EOD0529.ADA 
SF03500.ADA 
SF03510.ADA 
SF03518.ADA 
SF03603.ADA 
SF03609.ADA 
SF03615.ADA 
SF03630.ADA 
SF03636.ADA 
SF03643.ADA 
SF03649.ADA 
5F03704.ADA 
SF03805.ADA 
SF04125.ADA 
SF04131.ADA 
SF0413J.ADA 
SF04511.ADA 
SF04517.ADA 
SF0451D.ADA 
SF0451J.ADA 
SF04520.ADA 
SF04531.ADA 
SF04537.ADA 


EFDE413.ADA 
EFDE432.ADA 
EFDE438.ADA 
EFDE444.ADA 
EFDF002.ADA 
EFM9A02.ADA 
EFN9S10.ADA 
EG0000C.ADA 
EGD0004.ADA 
EGD000D.ADA 
EGN000F.ADA 
EL09000.ADA 
ELOPOOO.ADA 
ELD9222.ADA 
ELDE2B2.ADA 
ELDE4B2.ADA 
E000002.ADA 
E000109.ADA 
E000204.ADA 
E000310.ADA 
E000316.ADA 
E000322.ADA 
E000328.ADA 
E000334.ADA 
E000340.ADA 
E000349.ADA 
E000355.ADA 
E000361.ADA 
E000367.ADA 
E00036G.ADA 
E00036M.ADA 
E000375.ADA 
E000402.ADA 
E000504.ADA 
E000514.ADA 
E000604.ADA 
E000704.ADA 
E000710.ADA 
E000717.ADA 
EOD0344.ADA 
EOD0360.ADA 
E0D036X.ADA 
EOD0373.ADA 
EOD0524.ADA 
OURDMP.ADA 
SF03501.ADA 
SF03511.ADA 
SF03519.ADA 
SF03604.ADA 
SFO3610.ADA 
SF03616.ADA 
SF03631.ADA 
SF03637.ADA 
SF03644.ADA 
SF03650.ADA 
SF03800.ADA 
SF04120.ADA 
SF04126.ADA 
SF04132.ADA 
SF0413K.ADA 
SF04512.ADA 
SF04518.ADA 
SF0451E.ADA 
SF0451V.ADA 
SF04521.ADA 
SF04532.ADA 
SF04538.ADA 


EFDE414.ADA 
EFDE433.ADA 
EFDE439.ADA 
EFDE445.ADA 
EFDF003.ADA 
EFM9A03.ADA 
EFN9511.ADA 
EG0P000.ADA 
EGD0005.ADA 
EGD000E.ADA 
EGNOOOG.ADA 
EL09100.ADA 
ELD9200.ADA 
ELD9223.ADA 
ELDE2C1.ADA 
ELDE4C1.ADA 
E000102.ADA 
E000112.ADA 
E000207.ADA 
E000311.ADA 
E000317.ADA 
E000323.ADA 
E000329.ADA 
E000335.ADA 
E000341.ADA 
E000350.ADA 
E000356.ADA 
E000362.ADA 
E000368.ADA 
E00036H.ADA 
E00036N.ADA 
E000376.ADA 
E000403.ADA 
E000507.ADA 
E000517.ADA 
E000605.ADA 
E000705.ADA 
E000711.ADA 
E000718.ADA 
EOD0345.ADA 
EOD036P.ADA 
EOD036Y.ADA 
EOD0380.ADA 
EOD0525.ADA 
OURSYS.ADA 
SF03502.ADA 
SF03512.ADA 
SF03550.ADA 
SF03605.ADA 
SF03611.ADA 
SF03617.ADA 
SF03632.ADA 
SF03638.ADA 
SF03645.ADA 
SF03700.ADA 
SF03801.ADA 
SF04121.ADA 
SF04127.ADA 
SF04133.ADA 
SF04310.ADA 
SF04513.ADA 
SF04519.ADA 
SF0451F.ADA 
SF0451W.ADA 
SF04522.ADA 
SF04533.ADA 
SF04539.ADA 


A-10 







Table A~1 ACPS ANSI Tap* Contents Volume ACPS (continued) 


SF0453A.ADA 
SF04551.ADA 
SF04557.ADA 
SF04562.ADA 
SF0460F.ADA 
SF05200.ADA 
SF05206.ADA 
SF0520M.ADA 
SF05212.ADA 
SF0521J.ADA 
SF05302.ADA 
SF05308.ADA 
SF05405.ADA 
SF05303.ADA 
SF05509.ADA 
SF0550F.ADA 
SF06014.ADA 
SF06022.ADA 
SF06028.ADA 
SF06043.ADA 
SF06049.ADA 
SF06061.ADA 
SF06067.ADA 
SF06073.ADA 
SF06079.ADA 
SF06111.ADA 
SF06117.ADA 
SF06134.ADA 
SF06140.ADA 
SF06147.ADA 
SF06154.ADA 
SF06160.ADA 
SF06167.ADA 
SF06174.ADA 
SF06180.ADA 
SF06187.ADA 
SF06193.ADA 
SF06199.ADA 
SF0619F.ADA 
SF0619L.ADA 
SF0619R.ADA 
SF06427.ADA 
SF06803.ADA 
SF0680B.ADA 
SF06811.ADA 
SF06819.ADA 
SF06825.ADA 
SF09505.ADA 
SF09601.ADA 
SF09607.ADA 
SF09721.ADA 
SF09B01.ADA 
SF0C301.ADA 
SF0C307.ADA 
SF0D72D.ADA 
SFD4135.ADA 
SFD413B.ADA 
SFD451M.ADA 
SFD451S.ADA 
SFD452A.ADA 
SFD455J.ADA 
SFD4569.ADA 
SFD4608.ADA 
SFD460N.ADA 
SFD4804.ADA 
SFD520H.ADA 
SFD5218.ADA 


SF0453B.ADA 
SF04552.ADA 
SF04558.ADA 
SF04563.ADA 
SF0460G.ADA 
SF05201.ADA 
SF05207.ADA 
SF05200.ADA 
SF05213.ADA 
SF0521K.ADA 
SF05303.ADA 
SF05400.ADA 
SF05406.ADA 
SF05504.ADA 
SF0550A.ADA 
SF06001.ADA 
SF06015.ADA 
SF06023.ADA 
SF06029.ADA 
SF06044.ADA 
SF06050.ADA 
SF06062.ADA 
SF06068.ADA 
SF06074.ADA 
SF06100.ADA 
SF06112.ADA 
SF06118.ADA 
SF06135.ADA 
SF06142.ADA 
SF06148.ADA 
SF06155.ADA 
SF06162.ADA 
SF06168.ADA 
SF06175.ADA 
SF06182.ADA 
SF06188.ADA 
SF06194.ADA 
SF0619A.ADA 
SF0619G.ADA 
SF0619M.ADA 
SF06422.ADA 
SF06428.ADA 
SF06806.ADA 
SF0680C.ADA 
SF06814.ADA 
SF06820.ADA 
SF09500.ADA 
SF09506.ADA 
SF09602.ADA 
SF09710.ADA 
SF09731.ADA 
SF0C100.ADA 
SF0C302.ADA 
SF0D720.ADA 
SF0P000.ADA 
SFD4136.ADA- 
SFD413C.ADA 
SFD451N.ADA 
SFD4S23.ADA 
SFD455D.ADA 
SFD455K.ADA 
SFD4603.ADA 
SFD4609.ADA 
SFD4600.ADA 
SFD520C.ADA 
SFD520I.ADA 
SFD5219.ADA 


SF0453C.ADA 
SF04553.ADA 
SF04559.ADA 
SF04600.ADA 
SF0460H.ADA 
SF05202.ADA 
SF05208.ADA 
SF0520R.ADA 
SF05214.ADA 
SF0521L.ADA 
SF05304.ADA 
SF05401.ADA 
SF05407.ADA 
SF05505.ADA 
SF0550B.ADA 
SF06009.ADA 
SF06016.ADA 
SF06024.ADA 
SF06030.ADA 
SF06045.ADA 
SF06051.ADA 
SF06063.ADA 
SF06069.ADA 
SF06075.ADA 
SF06101.ADA 
SF06113.ADA 
SF06119.ADA 
SF06136.ADA 
SF06143.ADA 
SF06149.ADA 
SF06156.ADA 
SF06163.ADA 
SF06169.ADA 
SF06176.ADA 
SF06183.ADA 
SF06189.ADA 
SF06195.ADA 
SF0619B.ADA 
SF0619H.ADA 
SF0619N.ADA 
SF06423.ADA 
SF06429.ADA 
SF06807.ADA 
SF0680D.ADA 
SF06815.ADA 
SF06821.ADA 
SF09501.ADA 
SF09507.ADA 
SF09603.ADA 
SF09711.ADA 
SF09900.ADA 
SF0C101.ADA 
SF0C303.ADA 
SF0D721.ADA 
SFD3551.ADA 
SFD4137.ADA 
SFD413E.ADA 
SFD4510.ADA 
SFD4524.ADA 
SFD45SE.ADA 
SFD455L.ADA 
SFD4604.ADA 
SFD460A.ADA 
SFD4800.ADA 
SFD520D.ADA 
SFD520J.ADA 
SFD521A.ADA 


SF04540.ADA 
SF04554.ADA 
SF0455N.ADA 
SF04601.ADA 
SF0460I.ADA 
SF05203.ADA 
SF05209.ADA 
SF0520S.ADA 
SF05215.ADA 
SF0521N.ADA 
SF05305.ADA 
SF05402.ADA 
SF05408.ADA 
SF05506.ADA 
SF0550C.ADA 
SF06010.ADA 
SF06017.ADA 
SF06025.ADA 
SF06031.ADA 
SF06046.ADA 
SF06052.ADA 
SF06064.ADA 
SF06070.ADA 
SF06 076.ADA 
SF06108.ADA 
SF06114.ADA 
SF06122.ADA 
SF06137.ADA 
SF06144.ADA 
SF06150.ADA 
SF06157.ADA 
SF06164.ADA 
SF06170.ADA 
SF06177.ADA 
SF06184.ADA 
SF06190.ADA 
SF06196.ADA 
SF0619C.ADA 
SF0619I.ADA 
SF06190.ADA 
SF06424.ADA 
SF0642A.ADA 
SF06808.ADA 
SF0680E.ADA 
SF06816.ADA 
SF06822.ADA 
SF09502.ADA 
SF09508.ADA 
SF09604.ADA 
SF09712.ADA 
SF09901.ADA 
SFOC102.ADA 
SF0C304.ADA 
SF0D727.ADA 
SFD412A.ADA 
SFD4138.ADA 
SFD413G.ADA 
SFD451P.ADA 
SFD452S.ADA 
SFD455F.ADA 
SFD4566.ADA 
SFD4605.ADA 
SFD460B.ADA 
SFD4801.ADA 
SFD520E.ADA 
SFD520N.ADA 
SFD521B.ADA 


SF04541.ADA 
SF04S55.ADA 
SF04550.ADA 
SF04602.ADA 
SF0460J.ADA 
SF05204.ADA 
SF0520A.ADA 
SF05210.ADA 
SF0521H.ADA 
SF05300.ADA 
SF05306.ADA 
SF05403.ADA 
SF05501.ADA 
SF05507.ADA 
SF0550D.ADA 
SF06011.ADA 
SF06018.ADA 
SFQ6026.ADA 
SF06032.ADA 
SF06047.ADA 
SF06053.ADA 
SF06065.ADA 
SF06071.ADA 
SF06077.ADA 
SF06109.ADA 
SF06115.ADA 
SF06132.ADA 
SF06138.ADA 
SF06145.ADA 
SF06152.ADA 
SF06158.ADA 
SF06165.ADA 
SF06172.ADA 
SF06178.ADA 
SF06185.ADA 
SF06191.ADA 
5F06197.ADA 
SF0619D.ADA 
SF0619J.ADA 
SF0619P.ADA 
SF06425.ADA 
SF0642B.ADA 
SF06809.ADA 
SF0680F.ADA 
SF06817.ADA 
SF06823.ADA 
SF09503.ADA 
SF09509.ADA 
SF09605.ADA 
SF09713.ADA 
SF09902.ADA 
SF0C103.ADA 
SFOC305.ADA 
SF0D728.ADA 
SFD412C.ADA 
SFD4139.ADA 
SFD451K.ADA 
SFD451Q.ADA 
SFD4S26.ADA 
SFD455G.ADA 
SFD4567.ADA 
SFD4606.ADA 
SFD460K.ADA 
SFD4802.ADA 
SFD520F.ADA 
SFD520P.ADA 
SFD521C.ADA 


SF045S0.ADA 
SF04556.ADA 
SF04560.ADA 
SF0460E.ADA 
SF0460M.ADA 
SF05205.ADA 
SF0520B.ADA 
SF05211.ADA 
SF0521I.ADA 
SF05301.ADA 
SF05307.ADA 
SF05404.ADA 
SF05502.ADA 
SF05508.ADA 
SF0550E.ADA 
SF06013.ADA 
SF06019.ADA 
SF06027.ADA 
SF06033.ADA 
SF06048.ADA 
SF06060.ADA 
SF06066.ADA 
SF06072.ADA 
SF06078.ADA 
SF06110.ADA 
SF06116.ADA 
SF06133.ADA 
SF06139.ADA 
SF06146.ADA 
SF06153.ADA 
SF06159.ADA 
SF06166.ADA 
SF06173.ADA 
SF06179.ADA 
SF06186.ADA 
SF06192.ADA 
SF06198.ADA 
SF0619E.ADA 
SF0619K.ADA 
SF0619Q.ADA 
SF06426.ADA 
SF06802.ADA 
SF0680A.ADA 
SF06810.ADA 
SF06818.ADA 
SF06824.ADA 
SF09504.ADA 
SF09600.ADA 
SF09606.ADA 
SF09720.ADA 
SFO9903.ADA 
SF0C300.ADA 
SF0C306.ADA 
SF0D729.ADA 
SFD412D.ADA 
SFD413A.ADA 
SFD451L.ADA 
SFD451R.ADA 
SFD4528.ADA 
SFD455I.ADA 
SFD4568.ADA 
SFD4607.ADA 
SFD460L.ADA 
SFD4803.ADA 
SFD520G.ADA 
SFD520Q.ADA 
SFD521D.ADA 


A-ll 







Table A-l ACPS ANSI Tap* Contents Volume ACPS (continued) 


SFD521E.ADA SFD521F.ADA SFD521K.ADA 
SFD6201.ADA SFD6Z09.ADA SFD6210.ADA 
SFD6215.ADA SFD6216.ADA SFD6217.ADA 
SFD6223.ADA SFD6224.ADA SFD6225.ADA 
SFD6229.ADA SFD6230.ADA SFD6231.ADA 
SFD6244.ADA SFD6245.ADA SFD6246.ADA 
SFD6Z50.ADA SFD6251.ADA SFD6252.ADA 
SFD6262.ADA SFD626S.ADA SFD6264.ADA 
SFD6268.ADA SFD6269.ADA SFD6270.ADA 
SFD6274.ADA SFD6275.ADA SFD6276.ADA 
SFD6300.ADA SFD6301.ADA SFD6308.ADA 
SFD6312.ADA SFD6313.ADA SFD6314.ADA 
SFD6318.ADA SFD6319.ADA SFD6322.ADA 
SFD6335.ADA SFD6336.ADA SFD6337.ADA 
SFD6342.ADA SFD6343.ADA SFD6544.ADA 
SFD6348.ADA SFD6349.ADA SFD6350.ADA 
SFD6355.ADA SFD6356.ADA SFD6357.ADA 
SFD6362.ADA SFD6363.ADA SFD6364.ADA 
SFD6368.ADA SFD6369.ADA SFD6370.ADA 
SFD6375.ADA SFD6376.ADA SFD6377.ADA 
SFD6382.ADA SFD6383.ADA SFD6384.ADA 
SFD6388.ADA SFD6389.ADA SFD6390.ADA 
SFD680J.ADA SFD9000.ADA SFD9200.ADA 
SFDC104.ADA SFDC105.ADA SFDC106.ADA 
SFDC313.ADA SFDC314.ADA SFDD600.ADA 
SFDD604.ADA SFDD605.ADA SFDD606.ADA 
SFDD611.ADA SFDD722.ADA SFDD723.ADA 
SFDD72D.ADA SFDD7ZC.ADA SFDD72E.ADA 
SFDD72I.ADA SFDDA01.ADA SFDDA02.ADA 
SFDE203.ADA SFDE204.ADA SFDE205.ADA 
SFDE209.ADA SFDEZOA.ADA SFDE211.ADA 
SFDE215.ADA SFDE216.ADA SFDE220.ADA 
SFDE234.ADA SFDE235.ADA SFDE236.ADA 
SFDE23A.ADA SFDEZ41.ADA SFDE242.ADA 
SFDE246.ADA SFDE250.ADA SFDE401.ADA 
SFDE405.ADA SFDE406.ADA SFDE407.ADA 
SFDE411.ADA SFDE412.ADA SFDE413.ADA 
SFDE420.ADA SFDE431.ADA SFDE432.ADA 
SFDE436.ADA SFDE437.ADA SFDE438.ADA 
SFDE442.ADA SFDE443.ADA SFDE444.ADA 
SFDF000.ADA SFDF001.ADA SFDFOOZ.ADA 
SFM9A00.ADA SFM9A01.ADA SFM9A02.ADA 
SFMB002.ADA SFMB003.ADA SFMB004.ADA 
SFMB008.ADA SFMB009.ADA SFMBOIO.ADA 
SFMB014.ADA SFMB015.ADA SFMB016.ADA 
SFMB020.ADA SFMB021.ADA SFMB022.ADA 
SFMB026.ADA SFMB027.ADA SFMB028.ADA 
SFMB032.ADA SFMB033.ADA SFMB034.ADA 
SFMB038.ADA SFMB039.ADA 5FMB040.ADA 
SFMB044.ADA SFN9300.ADA SFN9301.ADA 
SFN9511.ADA SFN9610.ADA SFN9611.ADA 
SGOPOOO.ADA SGDOOOO.ADA SGD00D1.ADA 
SGD0005.ADA SGD0006.ADA SGD0007.ADA 
SGDOOOE.ADA SGD0019.ADA SGD0029.ADA 
SGNOOOG.ADA SGNOOOH.ADA SGNOOOI.ADA 
SL09100.ADA SL09101.ADA SL09111.ADA 
SLD9200.ADA SLD9Z02.ADA SLD9203.ADA 
SLD9Z23.ADA SLD9232.ADA SLD9233.ADA 
SLDE2C1.ADA SLDE2C2.ADA SLDE2C5.ADA 
SLDE4C1.ADA SLDE4C2.ADA SLDE4C5.ADA 
S000102.ADA S000103.ADA S000104.ADA 
S000112.ADA S000113.ADA S000114.ADA 
S000207.ADA S000208.ADA S000209.ADA 
S000311.ADA S000312.ADA S000313.ADA 
S000317.ADA S000318.ADA S000319.ADA 
S000323.ADA S000324.ADA S0003Z5.ADA 
S0003Z9.ADA S000330.ADA S000331.ADA 


SFDS21H.ADA SFD5210.ADA SFD521P.ADA 
SFD6211.ADA SFD6213.ADA SFD6214.ADA 
SFD6Z18.ADA SFD6219.ADA SFD62Z2.ADA 
SFD6226.ADA SFD6227.ADA SFD6228.ADA 
SFD6232.ADA SFD6Z33.ADA SFD6Z43.ADA 
SFD6247.ADA SFD6248.ADA SFD6249.ADA 
SFD6253.ADA SFD6260.ADA SFD6261.ADA 
SFD6265.ADA SFD6266.ADA SFD6267.ADA 
SFD6271.ADA SFD6272.ADA SFD6Z73.ADA 
SFD6277.ADA SFD6278.ADA SFD6279.ADA 
SFD6309.ADA SFD6310.ADA SFD6311.ADA 
SFD6315.ADA SFD6316.ADA SFD6317.ADA 
SFD6332.ADA SFD6333.ADA SFD6334.ADA 
SFD6338.ADA SFD6339.ADA SFD6340.ADA 
SFD6345.ADA SFD6346.ADA SFD6347.ADA 
SFD6352.ADA SFD6353.ADA SFD6354.ADA 
SFD6358.ADA SFD6359.ADA SFD6360.ADA 
SFD6365.ADA SFD6366.ADA SFD6367.ADA 
SFD6372.ADA SFD6373.ADA SFD6374.ADA 
SFD6378.ADA SFD6379.ADA SFD6380.ADA 
SFD6385.ADA SFD6386.ADA SFD6387.ADA 
SFD680G.ADA SFD680H.ADA SFD680I.ADA 
SFD9C00.ADA SFD9C01.ADA SFD9C02.ADA 
SFDC107.ADA SFDC310.ADA SFDC311.ADA 
SFDD601.ADA SFDD602.ADA SFDD603.ADA 
SFDD607.ADA SFDD609.ADA SFDD610.ADA 
SFDD724.ADA SFDD7Z5.ADA SFDD72A.ADA 
SFDD72F.ADA SFDD7ZG.ADA SFDD72H.ADA 
SFDE000.ADA SFDE201.ADA SFDE202.ADA 
SFDE206.ADA SFDE207.ADA SFDEZ08.ADA 
SFDE212.ADA SFDE213.ADA SFDE214.ADA 
SFDE231.ADA SFDE232.ADA SFDE233.ADA 
SFDE237.ADA SFDE238.ADA SFDE239.ADA 
SFDE243.ADA SFDE244.ADA SFDE245.ADA 
SFDE40Z.ADA SFDE403.ADA SFDE404.ADA 
SFDE408.ADA SFDE409.ADA SFDE40A.ADA 
SFDE414.ADA SFDE415.ADA SFDE416.ADA 
SFDE433.ADA SFDE434.ADA SFDE455.ADA 
SFDE439.ADA SFDE43A.ADA SFDE441.ADA 
SFDE445.ADA 5FDE446.ADA SFDE450.ADA 
SFDF003.ADA SFDF004.ADA SFDF005.ADA 
SFH9A03.ADA SFMBQOO.ADA SFMB001.ADA 
SFMB005.ADA SFHB006.ADA SFHB007.ADA 
SFMB011.ADA SFMB012.ADA SFMB013.ADA 
SFHB017.ADA SFMB018.ADA SFMB019.ADA 
SFMB023.ADA SFMB024.ADA SFMB025.ADA 
SFMB029.ADA SFHB030.ADA SFMB031.ADA 
SFMB035.ADA SFMB036.ADA SFMB037.ADA 
SFMB041.ADA SFMB042.ADA SFHB043.ADA 
SFN9302.ADA SFN9303.ADA SFN9510.ADA 
SFN961Z.ADA SFN9613.ADA SG0000C.ADA 
SGD0002.ADA SGD0003.ADA SGD0004.ADA 
SGD0008.ADA SGD0009.ADA SGD000D.ADA 
SGD0039.ADA SGD0049.ADA SGNOOOF.ADA 
SGNOOOJ.ADA SGNOOOK.ADA SL09000.ADA 
SL091Z1.ADA SL09131.ADA SLOPOOO.ADA 
SLD9212.ADA SLD9Z13.ADA SLD9222.ADA 
SLDEOOO.ADA SLDEZB1.ADA SLDE2B2.ADA 
SLDE2C6.ADA SLDE4B1.ADA SLDE4B2.ADA 
SLDE4C6.ADA S000001.ADA S000002.ADA 

S000107.ADA S000108.ADA S000109.ADA 
S000202.ADA SO00Z03.ADA S000204.ADA 
S000300.ADA S00030S.ADA S000310.ADA 

S000314.ADA S000315.ADA S000316.ADA 

S000320.ADA S000321.ADA S0003Z2.ADA 

S000326.ADA S0003Z7.ADA S0003Z8.ADA 

5000332.ADA S000333.ADA S000334.ADA 


A-12 








Table A-l ACPS ANSI Tap* Contents Voluae ACPS (continued) 


S000335.ADA 
S000341.ADA 
5000350.ADA 
S000356.ADA 
S000362.ADA 
S000368.ADA 
S00036H.ADA 
S00036N.ADA 
S000376.ADA 
5000403.ADA 
S000507.ADA 
S000517.ADA 
S000605.ADA 
S000705.ADA 
S000711.ADA 
S000718.ADA 
S0D0345.ADA 
SOD036P.ADA 
S0D036Y.ADA 
SOD0380.ADA 
SOD0525.ADA 
TA0P000.ADA 
TF03509.ADA 
TF03517.ADA 
TF03602.ADA 
TF03608.ADA 
TF03614.ADA 
TF03620.ADA 
TF03635.ADA 
TF03642.ADA 
TF03648.ADA 
TF037 03.ADA 
TF03804.ADA 
TF04124.ADA 
TF04130.ADA 
TF0413I.ADA 
TF04510.ADA 
TF04516.ADA 
TF0451C.ADA 
TF0451I.ADA 
TF0451Z.ADA 
TF04530.ADA 
TFD4536.ADA 
TF0453C.ADA 
TF04553.ADA 
TF04559.ADA 
TF04600.ADA 
TF0460H.ADA 
TF05202.ADA 
TF05208 ADA 
TF0520R.ADA 
TF05214.ADA 
TF0521L.ADA 
TF05304.ADA 
TF05401.ADA 
TF05407.ADA 
TF05505.ADA 
TF0550B.ADA 
TF06009.ADA 
TF06016.ADA 
TF06024.ADA 
TF06030.ADA 
TF06045.ADA 
TF06051.ADA 
TF06063.ADA 
TF06D69.ADA 
TF06075.ADA 


S000336.ADA 
S000342.ADA 
S000351.ADA 
S000357.ADA 
S000363.ADA 
S000369.ADA 
S00036I.ADA 
S00036U.ADA 
S000377.ADA 
S000404.ADA 
S000508.ADA 
S000518.ADA 
5000606.ADA 
S000706.ADA 
S000713.ADA 
S000719.ADA 
S0D0346.ADA 
SOD036Q.ADA 
SOD036Z.ADA 
SOD0381.ADA 
SOD0526.ADA 
TF03500.ADA 
TF03510.ADA 
TF03518.ADA 
TF03603.ADA 
TF03609.ADA 
TF03615.ADA 
TF03630.ADA 
TF03636.ADA 
TF03643.ADA 
TF03649.ADA 
TF03704.ADA 
TF03805.ADA 
TF041Z5.ADA 
TF04131.ADA 
TF0413J.ADA 
TF04511.ADA 
TF04517.ADA 
TF0451D.ADA 
TF0451J.ADA 
TF04520.ADA 
TF04531.ADA 
TF04537.ADA 
TF04540.ADA 
TF04554.ADA 
TF0455N.ADA 
TF04601.ADA 
TF04601.ADA 
TF05203.ADA 
TF05209.ADA 
TF0520S.ADA 
TF05215.ADA 
TF0521N.ADA 
TF0530S.ADA 
TF05402.ADA 
TF05408.ADA 
TF05506.ADA 
TF0550C.ADA 
TF06010.ADA 
TF06017.ADA 
TF06025.ADA 
TF06031.ADA 
TF06046.ADA 
TF06052.ADA 
TF06064.ADA 
TF06070.ADA 
TF06076.ADA 


S000337.ADA 
S000343.ADA 
S000352.ADA 
S000358.ADA 
S000364.ADA 
S00036A.ADA 
S00036J.ADA 
S00036V.ADA 
S000378.ADA 
S000500.ADA 
S000509.ADA 
S000519.ADA 
S000607.ADA 
S000707.ADA 
S000714.ADA 
S000720.ADA 
SOD036C.ADA 
SOD036R.ADA 
SOD0370.ADA 
SOD0382.ADA 
SOD0527.ADA 
TF03501.ADA 
TF03511.ADA 
TF03519.ADA 
TF03604.ADA 
TF03610.ADA 
TF03616.ADA 
TF03631.ADA 
TF03637.ADA 
TF03644.ADA 
TF03650.ADA 
TF03800.ADA 
TF04120.ADA 
TF04126.ADA 
TF04132.ADA 
TF0413K.ADA 
TF04512.ADA 
TF04518.ADA 
TF0451E.ADA 
TF0451V.ADA 
TF04521.ADA 
TF04532.ADA 
TF04538.ADA 
TF04541.ADA 
TF04555.ADA 
TF04550.ADA 
TF04602.ADA 
TF0460J.ADA 
TF05204.ADA 
TF0520A.ADA 
TF05210.ADA 
TF0521H.ADA 
TF05300.ADA 
TF05306.ADA 
TF05403.ADA 
TF05501.ADA 
TF05507.ADA 
TF0550D.ADA 
TF06011.ADA 
TF06018.ADA 
TF06026.ADA 
TF06032.ADA 
TF06047.ADA 
TF06053.ADA 
TF06065.ADA 
TF06071.ADA 
TF06077.ADA 


S000338.ADA 
S000347.ADA 
S000353.ADA 
S000359.ADA 
S000365.ADA 
S00036B.ADA 
SOGQ36K.ADA 
S00036N.ADA 
S000390.ADA 
S000502.ADA 
S000512.ADA 
S000602.ADA 
S000702.ADA 
S000708.ADA 
S000715.ADA 
S000721.ADA 
SOD036D.ADA 
SOD036S.ADA 
S0D0371.ADA 
SOD0383.ADA 
SOD0528.ADA 
TF03502.ADA 
TF03512.ADA 
TF03550.ADA 
TF03605.ADA 
TF03611.ADA 
TF03617.ADA 
TF03632.ADA 
TF03658.ADA 
TF03645.ADA 
TF03700.ADA 
TF03S01.ADA 
TF04121.ADA 
TF04127.ADA 
TF04133.ADA 
TF04310.ADA 
TF04513.ADA 
TF04519.ADA 
TF0451F.ADA 
TF0451N.ADA 
TF04522.ADA 
TF04533.ADA 
TF04539.ADA 
TF04550.ADA 
TF04556.ADA 
TF04560.ADA 
TF0460E.ADA 
TF0460M.ADA 
TF05205.ADA 
TF0520B.ADA 
TF05211.ADA 
TF0521I.ADA 
TF05301.ADA 
TF05307.ADA 
TF05404.ADA 
TF05502.ADA 
TF05508.ADA 
TF0550E.ADA 
TF06013.ADA 
TF06019.ADA 
TF06027.ADA 
TF06033.ADA 
TF06048.ADA 
TF06060.ADA 
TF06066.ADA 
TF06072.ADA 
TF06078.ADA 


S000339.ADA 
S000348.ADA 
S000354.ADA 
S000360.ADA 
S000366.ADA 
S00036F.ADA 
S00036L.ADA 
S000374.ADA 
S000391.ADA 
S000503.ADA 
S000513.ADA 
S000603.ADA 
S000703.ADA 
S000709.ADA 
S000716.ADA 
SOOPOOO.ADA 
SOD036E.ADA 
SOD036T.ADA 
S0D0372.ADA 
SOD0523.ADA 
SOD0529.ADA 
TF03503.ADA 
TF03513.ADA 
TF03600.ADA 
TF03606.ADA 
TF03612.ADA 
TF03618.ADA 
TF03633.ADA 
TF03639.ADA 
TF03646.ADA 
TFC5701.ADA 
TF03802.ADA 
TF04122.ADA 
TF04129.ADA 
TF0413D.ADA 
TF04311.ADA 
TF04514.ADA 
TF0451A.ADA 
TF0451G.ADA 
TF0451X.ADA 
TF04527.ADA 
TF04534.ADA 
TF0453A.ADA 
TF04551.ADA 
TF04557.ADA 
TF04562.ADA 
TF0460F.ADA 
TFD5200.ADA 
TF05206.ADA 
TF0520M.ADA 
TF05212.ADA 
TF0521J.ADA 
TF05302.ADA 
TF05308.ADA 
TF05405.ADA 
TF05503.ADA 
TF0550' ADA 
TF055C' ADA 
TF06014.ADA 
TF06022.ADA 
TF06028.ADA 
TF06043.ADA 
TF06049.ADA 
TF06061.ADA 
TF06067.ADA 
TF06073.ADA 
TF06079.ADA 


S000340.ADA 
S000349.ADA 
S000355.ADA 
S000361.ADA 
S000367.ADA 
S00036G.ADA 
S00036M.ADA 
S000375.ADA 
S000402.ADA 
S000504.ADA 
S000514.ADA 
S000604.ADA 
S0007 04.ADA 
S000710.ADA 
S000717.ADA 
SOD0344.ADA 
S0D0360.ADA 
S0D036X.ADA 
SOD0373.ADA 
SOD0524.ADA 
TA00000.ADA 
TF03504.ADA 
TF03514.ADA 
TF03601.ADA 
TF03607.ADA 
TF03613.ADA 
TF03619.ADA 
TF03634.ADA 
TF03641.ADA 
TF03647.ADA 
TF03702.ADA 
TF03803.ADA 
TF04123.ADA 
TF0412B.ADA 
TF0413H.ADA 
TF04312.ADA 
TF04515.ADA 
TF0451B.ADA 
TF0451H.ADA 
TF0451Y.ADA 
TF04529.ADA 
TF04535.ADA 
TF0453B.ADA 
TF04552.ADA 
TF04558.ADA 
TF04563.ADA 
TF0460G.ADA 
TF05201.ADA 
TF05207.ADA 
TFD5200.ADA 
TF05213.ADA 
TF0521K.ADA 
TF05303.ADA 
TF05400.ADA 
TF05406.ADA 
TF05504.ADA 
TF0550A.ADA 
TF06001.ADA 
TF06015.ADA 
TF06025.ADA 
TF06029.ADA 
TF06044.ADA 
TF06050.ADA 
TF06062.ADA 
TF06068.ADA 
TF06074.ADA 
TF06100.ADA 


A-13 






Table A-l ACPS ANSI Tap* Contents Volume ACPS (continued) 


TF06101.ADA 
TF06113.ADA 
TF06119.ADA 
TF06136.ADA 
TF06143.ADA 
TF06149.ADA 
TF06156.ADA 
TF06163.ADA 
TF06169.ADA 
TF06176.ADA 
TF06183.ADA 
TF06189.ADA 
TF06195.ADA 
TF0619B.ADA 
TF0619H.ADA 
TF0619N.ADA 
TF06423.ADA 
TF06429.ADA 
TF06807.ADA 
TF0680D.ADA 
TF06815.ADA 
TF06821.ADA 
TF09501.ADA 
TF09507.ADA 
TF09603.ADA 
TF09711.ADA 
TF09900.ADA 
TF0C101.ADA 
TF0C303.ADA 
TF0D721.ADA 
TFD3551.ADA 
TFD4137.ADA 
TFD413E.ADA 
TFD4510.ADA 
TFD4524.ADA 
TFD455E.ADA 
TFD455L.ADA 
TFD4604.ADA 
TFD460A.ADA 
TFD4800.ADA 
TFD520D.ADA 
TFD520J.ADA 
TFD521A.ADA 
TFD521K.ADA 
TFD6210.ADA 
TFD6217.ADA 
TFD6225.ADA 
TFD6231.ADA 
TFD6246.ADA 
TFD6252.ADA 
TFD6264.ADA 
TFD6270.ADA 
TFD6276.ADA 
TFD6308.ADA 
TFD6314.ADA 
TFD6322.ADA 
TFD6337.ADA 
TFD6344.ADA 
TFD6350.ADA 
TFD6357.ADA 
TFD6364.ADA 
TFD6370.ADA 
TFD6377.ADA 
TFD6384. ADA 
TFD6390.ADA 
TFD9200.ADA 
TFDC106.ADA 


TFQ6108.ADA 
TF06114.ADA 
TF06122.ADA 
TF06137.ADA 
TF06144.ADA 
TF06150.ADA 
TF06157.ADA 
TF06164.ADA 
TF06170.ADA 
TF06177.ADA 
TF06184.ADA 
TF06190.ADA 
TF06196.ADA 
TF0619C.ADA 
TF0619I.ADA 
TF0619D.ADA 
TF06424.ADA 
TF0642A.ADA 
TF06808.ADA 
TF0680E.ADA 
TF06816.ADA 
TF06822.ADA 
TF09502.ADA 
TF09508.ADA 
TF09604.ADA 
TF09712.ADA 
TF09901.ADA 
TF0C102.ADA 
TF0C304.ADA 
TF0D727.ADA 
TFD412A.ADA 
TFD4138.ADA 
TFD413C.ADA 
TFD451P.ADA 
TFD4525.ADA 
TFD455F.ADA 
TFD4566.ADA 
TFD4605.ADA 
TFD460B.ADA 
TFD4801.ADA 
TFD520E.ADA 
TFD520N.ADA 
TFD521B.ADA 
TFD521M.ADA 
TFD6211.ADA 
TFD6218.ADA 
TFD6226.ADA 
TFD6232.ADA 
TFD6247.ADA 
TFD6253.ADA 
TFD6265.ADA 
TFD6271.ADA 
TFD6277.ADA 
TFD6309.ADA 
TFD6315.ADA 
TFD6332.ADA 
TFD6338.ADA 
TFD6345.ADA 
TFD6352.ADA 
TFD6358.ADA 
TFD6365.ADA 
TFD6372.ADA 
TFD6378.ADA 
TFD6385.ADA 
TFD680G.ADA 
TFD9C00.ADA 
TFDC107.ADA 


TF06109.ADA 
TFD6115.ADA 
TF06132.ADA 
TF06138.ADA 
TF0614S.ADA 
TF06152.ADA 
TF06158.ADA 
TF06165.ADA 
TF06172.ADA 
TF06178.ADA 
TF06185.ADA 
TF06191.ADA 
TF06197.ADA 
TF0619D.ADA 
TF0619J.ADA 
TF0619P.ADA 
TF06425.ADA 
TF0642B.ADA 
TF06809.ADA 
TF0680F.ADA 
TF06817.ADA 
TF06823.ADA 
TF09S03.ADA 
TF09509.ADA 
TF09605.ADA 
TF09713.ADA 
TF09902.ADA 
TF0C103.ADA 
TF0C305.ADA 
TF0D728.ADA 
TFD412C.ADA 
TFD4139.ADA 
TFD451K.ADA 
TFD4519.ADA 
TFD4526.ADA 
TFD455G.ADA 
TFD4567.ADA 
TFD4606.ADA 
TFD460K.ADA 
TFD4802.ADA 
TFDS20F.ADA 
TFD520P.ADA 
TFD521C.ADA 
TFD5210.ADA 
TFD6213.ADA 
TFD6219.ADA 
TFD6227.ADA 
TFD6233.ADA 
TFD6248.ADA 
TFD6260.ADA 
TFD6266.ADA 
TFD6272.ADA 
TFD6278.ADA 
TFD6310.ADA 
TFD6316.ADA 
TFD6333.ADA 
TFD8339.ADA 
TFD6346.ADA 
TFD6353.ADA 
TFD6359.ADA 
TFD6366.ADA 
TFD6373.ADA 
TFD6379.ADA 
TFD6386.ADA 
TFD680H.ADA 
TFD9C01.ADA 
TFDC310.ADA 


TF06110.ADA 
TF06116.ADA 
TF06133.ADA 
TF06139.ADA 
TF06146.ADA 
TF06153.ADA 
TF06159.ADA 
TF06166.ADA 
TF06173.ADA 
TF06179.ADA 
TF06186.ADA 
TF06192.ADA 
TF06198.ADA 
TF0619E.ADA 
TF0619K.ADA 
TF0619Q.ADA 
TF06426.ADA 
TF06802.ADA 
TF0680A.ADA 
TF06810.ADA 
TF06818.ADA 
TF06824.ADA 
TF09504.ADA 
TF09600.ADA 
TF09606.ADA 
TF09720.ADA 
TF09903.ADA 
TFOCSOO.ADA 
TF0C306.ADA 
TF0D729.ADA 
TFD412D.ADA 
TFD413A.ADA 
TFD451L.ADA 
TFD451R.ADA 
TFD4528.ADA 
TFD455I.ADA 
TFD4568.ADA 
TFD4607.ADA 
TFD460L.ADA 
TFD4803.ADA 
TFD520G.ADA 
TFD520Q.ADA 
TFD521D.ADA 
TFD521P.ADA 
TFD6214.ADA 
TFD6222.ADA 
TFD6228.ADA 
TFD6243.ADA 
TFD6249.ADA 
TFD6261.ADA 
TFD6267.ADA 
TFD6273.ADA 
TFD6279.ADA 
TFD6311.ADA 
TFD6317.ADA 
TFD6334.ADA 
TFD6340.ADA 
TFD6347.ADA 
TFD63S4.ADA 
TFD6360.ADA 
TFD6367.ADA 
TFD6374.ADA 
TFD6380.ADA 
TFD6387.ADA 
TFD680I.ADA 
TFD9C02.ADA 
TFDC311.ADA 


TF06111.ADA 
TF06117.ADA 
TF06134.ADA 
TF06140.ADA 
TF06147.ADA 
TF06154.ADA 
TF06160.ADA 
TF06167.ADA 
TF06174.ADA 
TF06180.ADA 
TF06187.ADA 
TF06193.ADA 
TF06199.ADA 
TF0619F.ADA 
TF0619L.ADA 
TF0619R.ADA 
TF06427.ADA 
TF06803.ADA 
TF0680B.ADA 
TF06811.ADA 
TF06819.ADA 
TF06825.ADA 
TF09505.ADA 
TF09601.ADA 
TF09607.ADA 
TF09721.ADA 
TF09B01.ADA 
TF0C301.ADA 
TF0C307.ADA 
TF0D72D.ADA 
TFD4135.ADA 
TFD413B.ADA 
TFD451M.ADA 
TFD451S.ADA 
TFD452A.ADA 
TFD455J.ADA 
TFD4569.ADA 
TFD4608.ADA 
TFD460N.ADA 
TFD4804.ADA 
TFD520H.ADA 
TFD5218.ADA 
TFD521E.ADA 
TFD6201.ADA 
TFD6215.ADA 
TFD6223.ADA 
TFD6229.ADA 
TFD6244.ADA 
TFD6250.ADA 
TFD6262.ADA 
TFD6268.ADA 
TFD6274.ADA 
TFD6300.ADA 
TFD6312.ADA 
TFD6318.ADA 
TFD8335.ADA 
TFD6342.ADA 
TFD6348.ADA 
TFD8355.ADA 
TFD6362.ADA 
TFD6368.ADA 
TFD6375.ADA 
TFD6382.ADA 
TFD6388.ADA 
TFD680J.ADA 
TFDC104.ADA 
TFDC313.ADA 


TF06112.ADA 
TF06118.ADA 
TF06135.ADA 
TF06142.ADA 
TF06148.ADA 
TF06155.ADA 
TF06162.ADA 
TF06168.ADA 
TF06175.ADA 
TF06182.ADA 
TF06188.ADA 
TF06194.ADA 
TF0619A.ADA 
TF0619G.ADA 
TF0619M.ADA 
TF06422.ADA 
TF06428.ADA 
TF06806.ADA 
TF0680C.ADA 
TF06814.ADA 
TF06820.ADA 
TF09500.ADA 
TF09506.ADA 
TF09602.ADA 
TF09710.ADA 
TF09731.ADA 
TF0C100.ADA 
TF0C302.ADA 
TF0D720.ADA 
TFOPOOO.ADA 
TFD4136.ADA 
TFD413C.ADA 
TFD451N.ADA 
TFD4523.ADA 
TFD455D.ADA 
TFD455K.ADA 
TFD4603.ADA 
TFD4609.ADA 
TFD4600.ADA 
TFD520C.ADA 
TFD520I.ADA 
TFD5219.ADA 
TFD521F.ADA 
TFD6209.ADA 
TFD6216.ADA 
TFD6224.ADA 
TFD6230.ADA 
TFD6245.ADA 
TFD6251.ADA 
TFD6263.ADA 
TFD6269.ADA 
TFD6275.ADA 
TFD6301.ADA 
TFD6313.ADA 
TFD6319.ADA 
TFD6336.ADA 
TFD6343.ADA 
TFD6349.ADA 
TFD6356.ADA 
TFD6363.ADA 
TFD6369.ADA 
TFD6376.ADA 
TFD6383.ADA 
TFD8389.ADA 
TFD9000.ADA 
TFDC105.ADA 
TFDC314.ADA 


A-14 







Tabla A-l ACPS ANSI Tap* Contant* Voluaa ACPS (eontinuad) 


TFDD600.ADA 
TFDD606.ADA 
TFDD723.ADA 
TFDD72E.ADA 
TFDDA02. ADA 
TFDE205.ADA 
TFDE21I.ADA 
TFDE220.ADA 
TFDE256.ADA 
TFDE242.ADA 
TFDE401.ADA 
TFDE407.ADA 
TFDE413.ADA 
TFDE432.ADA 
TFDE438.ADA 
TFDE444.ADA 
TFDF002.ADA 
TFM9A02.ADA 
TFMB004.ADA 
TFMB010.ADA 
TFMB016.ADA 
TFMB022.ADA 
TFMB028.ADA 
TFMB034.ADA 
TFMB040.ADA 
TFN9301.ADA 
TFN96I1.ADA 
TGD0001.ADA 
TGD0007.ADA 
TGD0029.ADA 
TGNOOOI.ADA 
TL 09111.ADA 
TLD9Z03.ADA 
TLD9233.ADA 
TLDE2C5.ADA 
TLDE4C5.ADA 
TDOJ104.ADA 
T000114.ADA 
T000209.ADA 
T000313.ADA 
T000319.ADA 
7000325.ADA 
T000331.ADA 
T000337.ADA 
T000343.ADA 
TC30352.ADA 
T000358.ADA 
T000364.ADA 
T00036A.ADA 
T00036J.ADA 
T00036V.ADA 
T000378.ADA 
T000500.ADA 
T000509.ADA 
T000519.ADA 
T0006 07.ADA 
T000707.ADA 
T000714.ADA 
T000720.ADA 
TOD036C.ADA 
TOD036R.ADA 
TOD0370.ADA 
TOD0382.ADA 
TOD0527.ADA 
ALD9224.DEC 
ALDE4C3.DEC 
CLD9224.DEC 


TFDD601.ADA 
TFDD607.ADA 
TFDD724.ADA 
TFDD72F.ADA 
TFDEOOO.ADA 
TFDE206. ADA 
TFDE212.ADA 
TFDE231.ADA 
TFDE237.ADA 
TFDE243.ADA 
TFDE402.ADA 
TFDE408.ADA 
TFDE414.ADA 
TFDE433.ADA 
TFDE439.ADA 
TFDE445.ADA 
TFDF003.ADA 
TFM9A03.ADA 
TFMB005.ADA 
TFMB011.ADA 
TFMB017.ADA 
TFMB023.ADA 
TFNB029.ADA 
TFMB035.ADA 
TFMB041.ADA 
TFN9302.ADA 
TFN9612.ADA 
TGD0002.ADA 
TGD0008.ADA 
TGD0039.ADA 
TGNOOOJ.ADA 
TL09121.ADA 
TLD9212.ADA 
TLDEOOO.ADA 
TLDE2C6.ADA 
TLDE4C6.ADA 
T000107.ADA 
T000202.ADA 
T000300.ADA 
T000314.ADA 
T000320.ADA 
T000326.ADA 
T000332.ADA 
T000338.ADA 
T000347.ADA 
T000353.ADA 
T000359.ADA 
T000365.ADA 
T00036B.ADA 
T00036K.ADA 
T00036W.ADA 
T000390.ADA 
T000502.ADA 
T000512.ADA 
T000602.ADA 
T000702.ADA 
T000708.ADA 
T000715.ADA 
T000721.ADA 
TOD036D.ADA 
TOD036S.ADA 
TOD0371.ADA 
TOD03B3.ADA 
TOD0528.ADA 
ALD9Z34.DEC 
ALDE4C4.DEC 
CLD9234.DEC 


TFDD602.ADA 
TFDD609.ADA 
TFDD725.ADA 
TFDD72G.ADA 
TFDE201.ADA 
TFDE207.ADA 
TFDE213.ADA 
TFDE232.ADA 
TFDE238.ADA 
TFDE244.ADA 
TFDE403.ADA 
TFDE409.ADA 
TFDE415.ADA 
TFDE434.ADA 
TFDE43A.ADA 
TFDE446.ADA 
TFDF004.ADA 
TFMBOOO.ADA 
TFMB006.ADA 
TFMB012.AJA 
TFMB018.ADA 
TFMB024.ADA 
TFMB030.ADA 
TFHB036.ADA 
TFMB042.ADA 
TFN9303.ADA 
TFN9613.ADA 
TGD0003.ADA 
TGD0009.ADA 
TGD0049.ADA 
TGNOOOK.ADA 
TL09131.ADA 
TLD9213.ADA 
TLDE2B1.ADA 
TLDE4B1.ADA 
T000001.ADA 
T000108.ADA 
T000203.ADA 
T000305.ADA 
T000315.ADA 
T000321.ADA 
T000327.ADA 
T000333.ADA 
T000359.ADA 
T000348.ADA 
T000354.ADA 
T000360.ADA 
T000366.ADA 
T00036F.AD' 
T00036L.ADA 
T000374.ADA 
T000391.ADA 
T000503.ADA 
T000513.ADA 
T000603.ADA 
T000703.ADA 
T000709.ADA 
T000716.ADA 
TOOPOOO.ADA 
T0D036E.ADA 
TOD036T.ADA 
TOD0372.ADA 
T0D0523.ADA 
T0D0529.ADA 
ALDE2C3.DEC 
ALDE4C7.DEC 
CLDE2C3.DEC 


TFDD603.ADA 
TFDD610.ADA 
TFDD72A.ADA 
TFDD72H.ADA 
TFDE202.ADA 
TFDE208.ADA 
TFDE214.ADA 
TFDE233.ADA 
TFDE239.ADA 
TFDE245.ADA 
TFDE404.ADA 
TFDE40A.ADA 
TFDE416.ADA 
TFDE435.ADA 
TFDE441.ADA 
TFDE450.ADA 
TFDF005.ADA 
TFMB001.ADA 
TFMB007.ADA 
TFMB013.ADA 
TFMB019.ADA 
TFMB025.ADA 
TFMB031.ADA 
TFMB037.ADA 
TFMB043.ADA 
TFN9510.ADA 
TGOOOOC.ADA 
TGD0004.ADA 
TGDOOOD.ADA 
TGNOOOF.ADA 
TL09000.ADA 
TLOPOOO.ADA 
TLD92Z2.ADA 
TLDE2B2.ADA 
TLDE4B2.ADA 
T000002.ADA 
T000109.ADA 
T000204.ADA 
T000310.ADA 
T000316.ADA 
T000322.ADA 
T000328.ADA 
T000334.ADA 
T000540.ADA 
T000349.ADA 
T000355.ADA 
T000361.ADA 
T000367.ADA 
T00056G.ADA 
T00036M.ADA 
T000375.ADA 
T000402.ADA 
T000504.ADA 
T000514.ADA 
T000604.ADA 
T000704.ADA 
T000710.ADA 
T000717.ADA 
TOD0344.ADA 
TOD0360.ADA 
TOD036X.ADA 
TOD037 3.ADA 
T0D0524.ADA 
MATHFUN.DEC 
ALDE2C4.DEC 
ALDE4C8.DEC 
CLDE2C4.DEC 


TFDD604.ADA 
TFDD611.ADA 
TFDD72B.ADA 
TFDD72I.ADA 
TFDE203.ADA 
TFDE209.ADA 
TFDE215.ADA 
TFDE234.ADA 
TFDE23A.ADA 
TFDE246.ADA 
TFDE405.ADA 
TFDE411.ADA 
TFDE420.ADA 
TFDE436.ADA 
TFDE442.ADA 
TFDFOOO.ADA 
TFM9A00.ADA 
TFMBQ02.ADA 
TFMB008.ADA 
TFMB014.ADA 
TFMB020.ADA 
TFMB026.ADA 
TFMB032.ADA 
TFMB038.ADA 
TFMB044.ADA 
TFN9511.ADA 
TGOPOOO.ADA 
TGD0005.ADA 
TGDOOOE.ADA 
TGNOOOG.ADA 
TL09100.ADA 
TLD9200.ADA 
TLD9223.ADA 
TLDE2C1.ADA 
TLDE4C1 .ADA 
T000102.ADA 
T000112.ADA 
T000207.ADA 
T000311.ADA 
T000317.ADA 
T000323.ADA 
T000329.ADA 
T000335.ADA 
T000341.ADA 
T000350.ADA 
T000356.ADA 
T000362.ADA 
T000368.ADA 
T00036H.ADA 
T00036N.ADA 
T000376.ADA 
T000403.ADA 
T000507.ADA 
T000517.ADA 
T000605.ADA 
T000705.ADA 
T000711.ADA 
T000718.ADA 
TOD0345.ADA 
TOD036P.ADA 
T0D036Y.ADA 
TOD0380.ADA 
TOD0525.ADA 
ALD9204.DEC 
ALDE2C7.DEC 
CLD9204.DEC 
CLDE2C7.DEC 


TFDD605.ADA 
TFDD722.ADA 
TFDD72C.ADA 
TFDDA01.ADA 
TFDE204.ADA 
TFDE20A.ADA 
TFDE216.ADA 
TFDE235.ADA 
TFDE241.ADA 
TFDE250.ADA 
TFDE406.ADA 
TFDE412.ADA 
TFDE431.ADA 
TFDE437.ADA 
TFDE443.ADA 
TFDF001.ADA 
TFM9A01.ADA 
TFMB003.ADA 
TFMB009.ADA 
TFMB015.ADA 
TFMB021.ADA 
TFMB027.ADA 
TFMB033.ADA 
TFMB039.ADA 
TFN9300.ADA 
TFN9610.ADA 
TGDOOOO.ADA 
TGD0006.ADA 
TGD0019.ADA 
TGNOOOH.ADA 
TL09101.ADA 
TLD9202.ADA 
TLD9232.ADA 
TLDE2C2.ADA 
TLDE4C2.ADA 
T000103.ADA 
T000113.ADA 
T000208.ADA 
T000312.ADA 
T000318.ADA 
T000324.ADA 
T000330.ADA 
T000356.ADA 
T000342.ADA 
T000351.ADA 
T000357.ADA 
T000363.ADA 
T000569.ADA 
T00036I.ADA 
T00036U.ADA 
T000377.ADA 
T000404.ADA 
T000508.ADA 
T000518.ADA 
T000606.ADA 
T000706.ADA 
T000713.ADA 
T000719.ADA 
TOD0346.ADA 
TOD036Q.ADA 
TOD036Z.ADA 
TOD0381.ADA 
TOD0526.ADA 
ALD9214.DEC 
ALDE2C8.DEC 
CLD9214.DEC 
CLDE2C8.DEC 


A-15 




Table A-2 ACPS ANSI Tap* Content* Volua* ACPS (continued) 


CIDE4C3.DEC 
ELD9224.DEC 
EIDE4C3.DEC 
SLD9224.DEC 
SIDE4C3.DEC 
TID9224.DEC 
TLDE4C3.DEC 
EGD0059.DEC 
CFD9C04.DEC 
TFD9C04.DEC 
OURSPC.TIM 
ADATYP.USE 
CFD4128.USE 
EFD451U.USE 
SFD4128.USE 
TFD451U.USE 
FA0P000.CMN 
FOOPOOO.CMN 
FF03503.FOR 
FF03603.FOR 
FF04120.FOR 
FF04126.FOR 
FF04513.FOR 
FF04519.FOR 
FF0451F.FOR 
FF0451H.FOR 
FF04522.FOR 
FF04534.FOR 
FF0453A.FOR 
FF04553.FOR 
FF04559.FOR 
FF04602.FOR 
FF05204.FOR 
FF0520A.FOR 
FF05215.FOR 
FF05301.FOR 
FF05307.FOR 
FF05404.FOR 
FF05502.FOR 
FF05508.FOR 
FF0550E.FOR 
FF06013.FOR 
FF06019.FOR 
FF06027.FOR 
FF06033.FOR 
FF06048.FOR 
FF06060.FOR 
FF06066.FOR 
FF06072.FOR 
FF06078.FOR 
FF06110.FOR 
FF06116.FOR 
FF06133.FOR 
FF06I39.FOR 
FF06146.FOR 
FF06153.FOR 
FF06159.FOR 
FF06166.FOR 
FF06173.FOR 
FF06179.FOR 
FF06186.FOR 
FF06803.FOR 
FF06819.FOR 
FF0D728.FOR 
FFD451P.FOR 
FFD4525.FOR 
FFD455I.FOR 


CLDE4C4.DEC 
ELD9234.DEC 
ELDE4C4.DEC 
SLD9234.DEC 
SLDE4C4.DEC 
TLD9234.DEC 
TLDE4C4.DEC 
SGD0059.DEC 
EFD9C03.DEC 
OURSPC.SPA 
OURSYS.TIM 
AFD4128.USE 
CFD451U.USE 
EFDC107.USE 
SFD451U.USE 
TFD4805.USE 
FFDP000.CMN 
OURFOR.CMN 
FF03504.FOR 
FFO3605.FOR 
FF04121.FOR 
FF04127.FOR 
FF04514.FOR 
FF0451A.FOR 
FF0451G.FOR 
FF0451X.FOR 
FF04529.FOR 
FF04535.FOR 
FF04540.FOR 
FF04554.FOR 
FF04560.FOR 
FF0460I.FOR 
FF05205.FOR 
FF05210.FOR 
FF0521H.FOR 
FF05302.FOR 
FF05308.FOR 
FF05405.FOR 
FF05503.FOR 
FF05509.FOR 
FF0550F.FOR 
FF06014.FOR 
FF06022.FOR 
FF06028.FOR 
FF06043.FOR 
FF06049.FOR 
FF06061.FOR 
FF06D67.FOR 
FF06073.FOR 
FF06079.FOR 
FF06111.FOR 
FF06117.FOR 
FF06134.FOR 
FF06140.FOR 
FF06147.FOR 
FF06154.F0R 
FF06160.FOR 
FF06167.FOR 
FF06174.FOR 
FF06180.FOR 
FF06187.FOR 
FF06806.FOR 
FFO6820.FOR 
FFD451K.FOR 
FFD4510.FOR 
FFD4526.FOR 
FFD455J.FOR 


CLDE4C7.DEC 
ELDE2C3.DEC 
ELDE4C7.DEC 
SLDE2C3.DEC 
SLDE4C7.DEC 
TLDE2C3.DEC 
TLDE4C7.DEC 
TGD0059.DEC 
EFD9C04.DEC 
OURSYS.SPA 
OURSYSR.TIM 
AFD451U.USE 
CFD4803.USE 
EFDD608.USE 
SFD4803.USE 
TFDC107.USE 
FFDE000.CMN 
SYSFOR.CMN 
FF03514.FOR 
FF03606.FOR 
FF04122.FOR 
FF04129.FOR 
FF04515.FOR 
FF0451B.FOR 
FF0451H.FOR 
FF0451Y.FOR 
FF04530.FOR 
FF04536.FOR 
FF04541.FOR 
FF04555.FOR 
FF04562.FOR 
FF05200.FOR 
FF05206.FOR 
FF05211.FOR 
FF0521I.FOR 
FF05303.FOR 
FF05400.FOR 
FF05406.FOR 
FF05504.FOR 
FF055OA.FOR 
FF06001.FOR 
FF06015.FOR 
FF06023.FOR 
FF06029.FOR 
FF06044.FOR 
FF06050.FOR 
FF06062.FOR 
FF06068.FOR 
FF06074.FOR 
FF06100.FOR 
FF06112.FOR 
FF06118.FOR 
FF06135.FOR 
FF06142.FOR 
FF06148.FOR 
FF06155.FOR 
FF06162.FOR 
FF06168.FOR 
FF06175.F0R 
FF06182.FOR 
FF06188.FOR 
FF06807.FOR 
FF06821.FOR 
FFD451L.FOR 
FFD451R.F0R 
FFD455D.F0R 
FFD455K.F0R 


CLDE4C8.DEC 
ELDE2C4.DEC 
ELDE4C8.DEC 
SLDE2C4.DEC 
SLDE4C8.DEC 
TLDE2C4.DEC 
TLDE4C8.DEC 
AFD9C03.DEC 
SFD9C03.DEC 
OURSYSR.SPA 
OURTYP.TIM 
AFD4803.USE 
CFDC107.USE 
OURSPC.USE 
SFDC107.USE 
TFDD608.USE 
FGOPOOO.CMN 
FAOOOOO.FOR 
FF03519.FOR 
FF03608.FOR 
FF04123.FOR 
FF04510.FOR 
FF04516.FOR 
FF0451C.FOR 
FF0451I.FOR 
FF0451Z.FOR 
FF04531.FOR 
FF04537.FOR 
FF04550.FOR 
FF04556.FOR 
FF04565.FOR 
FF05201.FOR 
FF05207.FOR 
FF05212.FOR 
FF05Z1J.FOR 
FF05304.FDR 
FF05401.FOR 
FF05407.FOR 
FF05505.FOR 
FF0550B.FOR 
FF06009.FOR 
FF06016.FOR 
FF06D24.FOR 
FF06030.FOR 
FF06045.FOR 
FF06051.FOR 
FF06063.FOR 
FF06069.FOR 
FF06075.FOR 
FF06101.FOR 
FF06113.FOR 
FF06119.FOR 
FF06136.FOR 
FF06143.FOR 
FF06149.F0R 
FF06156.FOR 
FF06163.FOR 
FF06169.FOR 
FF06176.FOR 
FF06183.FOR 
FF06189.FOR 
FF06816.FOR 
FF0D720.FOR 
FFD451M.FOR 
FFD451S.FOR 
FFD455E.FOR 
FFD455L.FOR 


ELD9204.DEC 
ELDE2C7.DEC 
SLD9204.DEC 
SLDE2C7.DEC 
TLD9204.DEC 
TLDE2C7.DEC 
AGD0059.DEC 
AFD9C04.DEC 
SFD9C04.DEC 
OURTYP.SPA 
OURTYPR.TIM 
AFDC107.USE 
CFDD608.USE 
OURTYP.USE 
SFDD608.USE 

FGDOOOO.CMN 
FF03500.FOR 
FF03600.FOR 
FF03609.FOR 
FF04124.FOR 
FF04511.FOR 
FF04517.FOR 
FF0451D.F0R 
FF0451J.FOR 
FF04520.FOR 
FF04532.FOR 
FF04538.FOR 
FF04551.FOR 
FF04557.FOR 
FF04600.FOR 
FF05202.FDR 
FF05208.FOR 
FF05213.FOR 
FF0521K.FOR 
FF05305.FOR 
FF05402.FOR 
FF05408.FOR 
FF05506.FOR 
FF0550C.FOR 
FF06010.FOR 
FF06017.FOR 
FF06025.FOR 
FF06031.FOR 
FF06046.FOR 
FF06052.FOR 
FF06D64.FOR 
FF06070.FOR 
FF06076.FOR 
FF06108.FOR 
FF06114.F0R 
FF06122.FOR 
FF06137.FOR 
FF06144.FOR 
FF06150.F0R 
FF06157.FOR 
FF06164.FOR 
FF0617O.FOR 
FF06177.FOR 
FF06184.FOR 
FF06190.FOR 
FF06817.FOR 
FF0D721.FOR 
FFD451N.F0R 
FFD4523.FOR 
FFD455F.F0R 
FFD4S67.F0R 


ELD9214.DEC 
ELDE2C8.DEC 
SLD9214.DEC 
SLDE2C8.DEC 
TLD9214.DEC 
TLDE2C8.DEC 
CGD0059.DEC 
CFD9C03.DEC 
TFD9C03.DEC 
OURTYPR.SPA 
ADASYS.USE 
AFDD608.USE 
EFD4128.USE 
OURTYPR.USE 
TFD4128.USE 

F000002.CMN 
FF03502.FOR 
FF03602.FOR 
FF03620.FOR 
FF04125.FOR 
FF04512.FOR 
FF04518.FOR 
FF0451E.FOR 
FF0451V.FOR 
FF04521.FOR 
FF04533.F0R 
FF04539.FOR 
FF04552.FOR 
FF04558.FOR 
FF04601.FOR 
FF05205.FOR 
FF05209.FOR 
FF05214.FOR 
FF053OO.FOR 
FFO5306.FOR 
FF05403.FOR 
FF05501.FOR 
FF05507.FOR 
FF0550D.FOR 
FF06011.FOR 
FF06018.FOR 
FF06026.FOR 
FF06032.FOR 
FF06047.FOR 
FF06053.FOR 
FF06065.FOR 
FF06071.FOR 
FF06077.FOR 
FF06109.FOR 
FF06115.FOR 
FF06132.F0R 
FF06138.FOR 
FF06145.F0R 
FF06152.F0R 
FF06158.FOR 
FF06165.FOR 
FF06172.FOR 
FF06178.FOR 
FF06185.FOR 
FF06802.FOR 
FF06818.FOR 
FF0D727.FOR 
FFD4510.F0R 
FFD4524.FOR 
FFD455G.FOR 
FFD4568.FOR 


A-16 







Table A-l ACPS ANSI Tap* Contents Volume ACPS (continued) 


FFD4569.F0R 
FFD4608.FOR 
FFD520E.FOR 
FFD5218.FOR 
FFD521E.FOR 
FFDE201.FOR 
FFDE207.FOR 
FFDE213.FOR 
FFDE232.FOR 
FFDE238.FOR 
FFDE244.F0R 
FFDE403.FOR 
FFDE409.FOR 
FFDE415.F0R 
FFDE434.FOR 
FFDE43A.FOR 
FFDE446.FOR 
FFDF004.FOR 
F000102.FOR 
F000300.FOR 
F000314.FOR 
F000320.FOR 
F000326.FOR 
F000332.FOR 
F000338.FOR 
F000347.FOR 
F000353.FOR 
F000359.FOR 
F000402.FOR 
F000504.FOR 
F000514.FOR 
F000604.FOR 
F000704.FOR 
F000710.FOR 
FO00717.FOR 
F000345.FOR 
FORSYS.FOR 
JA0P000.CPL 
JFJ3504.CPL 
JFJ3603.CPL 
JFJ3609.CPL 
JFJ3800.CPL 
JFJ4519.CPL 
JFJ451F.CPL 
JFJ4510.CPL 
JFJ5301.CPL 
JFJ5400.CPL 
JFJ5406.CPL 
JFJ5506.CPL 
JFJ6013.CPL 
JFJ6019.CPL 
JFJ6028.CPL 
JFJ6044.CPL 
JFJ6050.CPL 
JFJ6063.CPL 
JFJ6070.CPL 
JFJ6076.CPL 
JFJ6115.CPL 
JFJ6119.CPL 
JFJ6137.CPL 
JFJ6145.CPL 
JFJ6153.CPL 
JFJ6159.CPL 
JFJ6167.CPL 
JFJ6175.CPL 
JFJ6183.CPL 
JFJ6189.CPL 


FFD4603.FOR 
FFD4609.FOR 
FFD520F.FOR 
FFD5219.FOR 
FFD521F.FOR 
FFDE202.FOR 
FFDE208.FOR 
FFDE214.FOR 
FFDE233.FOR 
FFDE239.FOR 
FFDE245.FOR 
FFDE404.FOR 
FFDE40A.FOR 
FFDE416.FOR 
FFDE435.FOR 
FFDE441.FOR 
FFDE450.FOR 
FFDF005.FOR 
FOOOl03.FOR 
F000305.FOR 
F000315.FOR 
F000321.FOR 
F000327.FOR 
F000333.FOR 
F000339.FOR 
F000348.FOR 
F000354.FOR 
F000360.FOR 
F000403.FOR 
F000507.FOR 
F000517.FOR 
F000605.FOR 
F000705.FDR 
F000711.FOR 
F000718.FOR 
FOD0346.FOR 
SYSBLK.FOR 
JFOPOOO.CPL 
JFJ3513.CPL 
JFJ3604.CPL 
JFJ341O.CPL 
JFJ3801.CPL 
JFJ451A.CPL 
JFJ451G.CPL 
JFJ451V.CPL 
JFJ5302.CPL 
JFJ5401.CPL 
JFJ5407.CPL 
JFJ5507.CPL 
JFJ6014.CPL 
JFJ6023.CPL 
JFJ6029.CPL 
JFJ6045.CPL 
JFJ6051.CPL 
JFJ6064.CPL- 
JFJ6071.CPL 
JFJ6077.CPL 
JFJ6114.CPL 
JFJ6132.CPL 
JFJ6138.CPL 
JFJ6146.CPL 
JFJ6154.CPL 
JFJ6162.CPL 
JFJ6168.CPL 
JFJ6176.CPL 
JFJ6184.CPL 
JFJ6191.CPL 


FFD4604.FOR 
FFD460A.FOR 
FFD520G.FOR 
FFD521A.FOR 
FFDD722.FOR 
FFDE203.FOR 
FFDE209.FOR 
FFDE215.FOR 
FFDE234.FOR 
FFDE23A.FOR 
FFDE246.FOR 
FFDE405.FOR 
FFDE411.FOR 
FFDE420.FOR 
FFDE436.FOR 
FFDE442.FOR 
FFDF000.FOR 
FF1RST.FOR 
FOOOl04.FOR 
F000310.FOR 
F000316.FOR 
F000322.FOR 
F000328.FOR 
F000334.FOR 
F000340.FOR 
F000349.FOR 
F000355.FOR 
F000361.FOR 
F000404.FOR 
F000508.FOR 
F000518.FOR 
F000606.FOR 
F000706.FOR 
F000713.FOR 
F000719.FOR 
FOD036X.FOR 
FFD451U.U5E 
JFJ3500.CPL 
JFJ3514.CPL 
JFJ3605.CPL 
JFJ3700.CPL 
JFJ3802.CPL 
JFJ451B.CPL 
JFJ451K.CPL 
JFJ451W.CPL 
JFJ5303.CPL 
JFJ5402.CPL 
JFJ5501.CPL 
JFJ5508.CPL 
JFJ6015.CPL 
JFJ6024.CPL 
JFJ6030.CPL 
JFJ6046.CPL 
JFJ6052.CPL 
JFJ6C65.CPL 
JFJ6072.CPL 
JFJ6078.CPL 
JFJ6115.CPL 
JFJ6135.CPL 
JFJ6139.CPL 
JFJ6147.CPL 
JFJ6155.CPL 
JFJ6163.CPL 
JFJ6169.CPL 
JFJ6177.CPL 
JFJ6185.CPL 
JFJ6192.CPL 


FFD4605.FOR 
FFD460B.FOR 
FFD520H.FOR 
FFD521B.F0R 
FFDD723.FOR 
FFDE204.FOR 
FFDE20A.FOR 
FFDE216.FOR 
FFDE235.FOR 
FFDE241.FOR 
FFDE250.FOR 
FFDE406.FOR 
FFDE412.FOR 
FFDE431.FOR 
FFDE437.FOR 
FFDE443.FOR 
FFDF001.FOR 
FGD0001.FOR 
F000202.FOR 
F000311.FOR 
F000317.FOR 
F000323.FOR 
F000329.FOR 
F000335.FOR 
F000341.FOR 
F000350.FOR 
F000356.FOR 
F000362.FOR 
F000500.FOR 
F000509.FOR 
F000519.FOR 
F000607.FOR 
F000707.FOR 
F000714.FOR 
F000720.FOR 
F0D036Y.FOR 
FFD4566.USE 
JFJ3501.CPL 
JFJ3600,CPL 
JFJ3606.CPL 
JFJ3701.CPL 
JFJ3B03.CPL 
JFJ451C.CPL 
JFJ451L.CPL 
JFJ451X.CPL 
JFJ5305.CPL 
JFJ5403.CPL 
JFJ5502.CPL 
JFJ5509.CPL 
JFJ6016.CPL 
JFJ6025.CPL 
JFJ6031.CPL 
JFJ6047.CPL 
JFJ6060.CPL 
JFJ6066.CPL 
JFJ6073.CPL 
JFJ6100.CPL 
JFJ6116.CPL 
JFJ6134.CPL 
JFJ6142.CPL 
JFJ6148.CPL 
JFJ6156.CPL 
JFJ6164.CPL 
JFJ6172.CPL 
JFJ6178.CPL 
JFJ6186.CPL 
JFJ6193.CPL 


FFD4606.FOR 
FFD520C.FOR 
FFD520I.FOR 
FFD521C.FOR 
FFDD724.FOR 
FFDE205.FOR 
FFDE211.FOR 
FFDE220.FOR 
FFDE236.FOR 
FFDE242.FOR 
FFDE401.FOR 
FFDE407.FOR 
FFDE413.F0R 
FFDE432.FOR 
FFDE438.FOR 
FFDE444.FOR 
FFDF002.FOR 
FGDOOOD.FOR 
F000203.FOR 
F000312.FOR 
F000318.FOR 
F0003Z4.FOR 
F000330.FOR 
F000336.FOR 
F000342.FOR 
F000351.FOR 
F000357.FOR 
F000390.FOR 
F000502.FOR 
F000512.FOR 
F000602.FOR 
F000702.FDR 
F000708.FOR 
F000715.FOR 
F000721.FOR 
FOD036Z.FOR 
FORTYP.USE 
JFJ3502.CPL 
JFJ3601.CPL 
JFJ3607.CPL 
JFJ3702.CPL 
JFJ3804.CPL 
JFJ451D.CPL 
JFJ451M.CPL 
JFJ451Y.CPL 
JFJ5306.CPL 
JFJ5404.CPL 
JFJ5503.CPL 
JFJS50A.CPL 
JFJ6017.CPL 
JFJ6026.CPL 
JFJ6032.CPL 
JFJ6048.CPL 
JFJ6061.CPL 
JFJ6067.CPL 
JFJ6074.CPL 
JFJ6108.CPL 
JFJ6117.CPL 
JFJ6135.CPL 
JFJ6143.CPL 
JFJ6149.CPL 
JFJ6157.CPL 
JFJ6165.CPL 
JFJ6173.CPL 
JFJ6179.CPL 
JFJ6187.CPL 
JFJ6194.CPL 


FFD4607.FOR 
FFD520D.FOR 
FFD520J.FOR 
FFD521D.FOR 
FFDD725.FOR 
FFDE206.FOR 
FFDE212.FOR 
FFDE231.FOR 
FFDE237.FOR 
FFDE243.FOR 
FFDE402.FOR 
FFDE408.FOR 
FFDE414.FOR 
FFDE433.FOR 
FFDE439.FOR 
FFDE445.F0R 
FFDF003.FOR 
FGDOOOE.FOR 
F000204.FOR 
F000313.FOR 
F000319.FOR 
F000325.FOR 
F000331.FOR 
F000337.FOR 
F000343.FOR 
F000352.FOR 
F000358.FOR 
F000391.FOR 
F000503.FOR 
F000513.FOR 
F000603.FOR 
F000703.FOR 
F000709.FOR 
F000716.FOR 
F0D0344.FOR 
FORDMP.FOR 
TYPFOR.USE 
JFJ3503.CPL 
JFJ3602.CPL 
JFJ3608.CPL 
JFJ3703.CPL 
JFJ4518.CPL 
JFJ451E.CPL 
JFJ451P.CPL 
JFJ5300.CPL 
JFJ5307.CPL 
JFJ5405.CPL 
JFJ5504.CPL 
JFJ550B.CPL 
JFJ6018.CPL 
JFJ6027.CPL 
JFJ6043.CPL 
JFJ6049.CPL 
JFJ6062.CPL 
JFJ6068.CPL 
JFJ6075.CPL 
JFJ6112.CPL 
JFJ6118.CPL 
JFJ6136.CPL 
JFJ6144.CPL 
JFJ6152.CPL 
JFJ6158.CPL 
JFJ6166.CPL 
JFJ6174.CPL 
JFJ6182.CPL 
JFJ6188.CPL 
JFJ6195.CPL 


A-17 







Table A-l ACPS ANSI Tap* Contents Volume ACPS (continued) 


JFJ6196.CPI 
JFJ619D.CPL 
JFJ619K.CPL 
JFJ619Q.CPL 
JFJ6218.CPL 
JFJ6227.CPL 
JFJ6243.CPL 
JFJ6249.CPL 
JFJ6808.CPL 
JFJ6810.CPL 
JFJ6824.CPL 
JGJ000D.CPL 
JOJOl02.CPL 
JOJ0314.CPL 
J0J0329.CPL 
J0J0338.CPL 
JOJ0347.CPL 
JOJ0364.CPL 
JOJ036P.CPL 
J0J036Y.CPL 
JOJ0507.CPL 
J0J0523.CPL 
JOJ0706.CPL 
JOVDMP.CPL 
JF03501.JOV 
JF03519.JOV 
JF03604.JOV 
JF03610.JOV 
JF0S704.JOV 
JF03805.JOV 
JF04125.JOV 
JF04131.JOV 
JF0413J.JOV 
JF04511.J0V 
JF04517.JOV 
JF0451D.JOV 
JF0451W.JOV 
JF04522.JOV 
JF04S33.JOV 
JF04539.JOV 
JF04550.JOV 
JF04556.JOV 
JF04560.JOV 
JF0460E.JOV 
JF0460M.JOV 
JF05205.JOV 
JF0520B.JOV 
JF05211.JOV 
JF0521I.JOV 
JF05301.JOV 
JF05307.JOV 
JF05404.JOV 
JF05502.JOV 
JF05508.JOV 
JF0550E.JOV 
JF06013.JOV 
JF06019.JOV 
JF06027.JOV 
JF06033.JOV 
JF06048.JOV 
JF06060.JOV 
JF06066.JOV 
JF06072.JOV 
JF06078.JOV 
JF06110.JOV 
JF06116.JOV 
JF06133.JOV 


JFJ6197.CPL 
JFJ619E.CPL 
JFJ619L.CPL 
JFJ6213.CPL 
JFJ6219.CPL 
JFJ6228.CPL 
JFJ6244.CPL 
JFJ6250.CPL 
JFJ680A.CPL 
JFJ6814.CPL 
JC0P000.CPL 
JGN000F.CPL 
JOJ0103.CPL 
JOJ0315.CPL 
JOJ0330.CPL 
JOJ0339.CPL 
JOJ0348.CPL 
JOJ036I.CPL 
JOJ036R.CPL 
J0J0390.CPL 
JOJ0508.CPL 
JOJ0524.CPL 
JOJ0707.CPL 
JOVSPC.CPL 
JF03502.JOV 
JF03550.JOV 
JF03605.JOV 
JF03620.JOV 
JF03800.JOV 
JF04120.JOV 
JF04126.JOV 
JF04132.JOV 
JF0413K.JOV 
JF04512.JOV 
JF04518.JOV 
JF0451E.JOV 
JF0451X.JOV 
JF04527.JOV 
JF04534.JOV 
JF0453A.JOV 
JF04551.JOV 
JF04557.JOV 
JF04562.10V 
JF0460F.-OV 
JF05200.JOV 
JF05206.JOV 
JF0520M.JOV 
JF05212.JOV 
JF0521J.JOV 
JF05302.JOV 
JF05308.JOV 
JF05405.JOV 
JF05503.JOV 
JF05509. JOV* 
JF0550F.JOV 
JF06014.JOV 
JF06022.JOV 
JF06028.JOV 
JF06043.JOV 
JF06049.JOV 
JF06061.JOV 
JF06067.JOV 
JF06073.JOV 
JF06079.JOV 
JF06111.J0V 
JF06117.JOV 
JF06134.JOV 


JFJ6198.CPL 
JFJ619F.CPL 
JFJ619M.CPL 
JFJ6214.CPL 
JFJ6223.CPL 
JFJ6229.CPL 
JFJ6245.CPL 
JFJ6251.CPL 
JFJ680C.CPL 
JFJ6816.CPL 
JGD0000.CPL 
JGNOOOG.CPL 
JOJ0202.CPL 
JOJ0323.CPL 
JOJ0332.CPL 
JOJ0341.CPL 
JOJ0349.CPL 
J0J036J.CPL 
JOJ036S.CPL 
JOJ0402.CPL 
J0J0512.CPL 
JOJD602.CPL 
JOJ0709.CPL 
OURJOV.CPL 
JF03503.JOV 
JF03600.JOV 
JF03606.JOV 
JF03700.JOV 
JF03801.JOV 
JF04121.JOV 
JF04127.JOV 
JF04133.JOV 
JF04310.JOV 
JF04513.JOV 
JF04519.JOV 
JF04S1F.JOV 
JF0451Y.JOV 
JF04529.JOV 
JF04535.JOV 
JF0453B.JOV 
JF04S52.JOV 
JF04558.JOV 
JF04565.JOV 
JF0460G.JOV 
JF05201.JOV 
JF05207.JOV 
JF05200.JOV 
JF05213.JOV 
JF0521K.JOV 
JF05303.JOV 
JF05400.JOV 
JF05406.JOV 
JF05504.JOV 
JF0550A.JOV 
JF06001.JOV 
JF08015.JOV 
JF06023.JOV 
JF06029.JOV 
JF06044.JOV 
JF06050.JOV 
JF06062.JOV 
JF06068.JOV 
JF06074.JOV 
JF06100.JOV 
JF06112.JOV 
JF08118.JOV 
JF06135.JOV 


JFJ619A.CPL 
JFJ619G.CPL 
JFJ619N.CPL 
JFJ6215.CPL 
JFJ6224.CPL 
JFJ6230.CPL 
JFJ6246.CPL 
JFJ6252.CPL 
JFJ680E.CPL 
JFJ6818.CPL 
JGD0004.CPL 
JGN000H.CPL 
JOJ0203.CPL 
JOJ0324.CPL 
JOJ0333.CPL 
JOJ0342.CPL 
JOJ0351.CPL 
JOJ036L.CPL 
JOJ036U.CPL 
JOJ0403.CPL 
JOJ0513.CPL 
JDJ0603.CPL 
JOJ0710.CPL 
DMPJOV.JOV 
JF03504.JOV 
JF03601.JOV 
JF03607.JOV 
JF03701.JOV 
JF03802.JOV 
JF04122.JOV 
JF04129.JOV 
JF0413D.JOV 
JF04311.JOV 
JF04514.JOV 
JF0451A.JOV 
JF0451G.JOV 
JF0451Z.JOV 
JF04530.JOV 
JF04536.JOV 
JF0453C.JOV 
JF04553.JOV 
JF04559.JOV 
JF04600.JOV 
JF0460H.JOV 
JF05202.JOV 
JF05208.JOV 
JF0520R.JOV 
JF05214.JOV 
JF0521L.JOV 
JF05304.JOV 
JF05401.JOV 
JF05407.JOV 
JF05505.JOV 
JF0550B.JOV 
JF06009.JOV 
JF06016.JOV 
JF06024.JOV 
JF06030.JOV 
JF06045.JOV 
JF08051.JOV 
JF06063.JOV 
JF06069.JOV 
JF06075.JOV 
JF06101.JOV 
JF06113.JOV 
JF06119.JOV 
JF06136.JOV 


JFJ619B.CPL 
JFJ619H.CPL 
JFJ6190.CPL 
JFJ6216.CPL 
JFJ6225.CPL 
JFJ6231.CPL 
JFJ6247.CPL 
JFJ6802.CPL 
JFJ680G.CPL 
JFJ6820.CPL 
JGD0005.CPL 
J000002.CPL 
JOJ0311.CPL 
JOJ0326.CPL 
JOJ0335.CPL 
JOJ0344.CPL 
J0J0352.CPL 
J0J036M.CPL 
JOJ036V.CPL 
JOJ0502.CPL 
JOJ0517.CPL 
J0J0702.CPL 
J0J0719.CPL 
JA00000.JOV 
JF03513.JOV 
JF03602.JOV 
JF03608.JOV 
JF03702.JOV 
JF03803.JOV 
JF04123.JOV 
JF0412B.JOV 
JF0413H.JOV 
JF04312.JOV 
JF04515.JOV 
JF0451B.JOV 
JF0451J.J0V 
JF04520.JOV 
JF04531.JOV 
JF04537.JOV 
JF04540.JOV 
JF04554.JOV 
JF0455N.JOV 
JF04601.JOV 
JF0460I.JOV 
JF05203.JOV 
JF05209.JOV 
JF0520S.JOV 
JF05215.JOV 
JF0521N.JOV 
JF05305.JOV 
JF05402.JOV 
JF05408.JOV 
JF05506.JOV 
JF0550C.JOV 
JF06010.JOV 
JF06017.J0V 
JF06025.JOV 
JF06031.JOV 
JF06046.JOV 
JF06052.JOV 
JF06064.J0V 
JF06070.JOV 
JF06076.JOV 
JF06108.JOV 
JF06114.JOV 
JF06122.JOV 
JF06137.J0V 


JFJ619C.CPL 
JFJ619J.CPL 
JFJ619P.CPL 
JFJ6217.CPL 
JFJ6226.CPL 
JFJ6232-CPL 
JFJ6248.CPL 
JFJ6806.CPL 
JFJ680I.CPL 
JFJ6822.CPL 
JGD0006.CPL 
JOOPOOO.CPL 
JOJ0312.CPL 
J0J0327.CPL 
J0J0336.CPL 
JOJ0345.CPL 
JOJ0363.CPL 
JOJ0360.CPL 
J0J036X.CPL 
JOJ0503.CPL 
J0J0518.CPL 
JOJ0703.CPL 
J0J0720.CPL 
JF03500.JOV 
JF03514.JOV 
JF03603.JOV 
JF03609.JOV 
JF03703.JOV 
JF03804.JOV 
JF04124.JOV 
JF04130.JOV 
JF0413I.JOV 
JF04510.JOV 
JF04516.JOV 
JF0451C.JOV 
JF0451V.JOV 
JF04521.JOV 
JF04532.JOV 
JF04538.JOV 
JF04541.JOV 
JF04555.JOV 
JF04550.JOV 
JF04602.JOV 
JF0460J.JOV 
JF05204.JOV 
JF0520A.JOV 
JF05210.JOV 
JF0521H.JOV 
JF05300.JOV 
JF05306.JOV 
JF05403.JOV 
JF05501.JOV 
JF05507.JOV 
JF0550D.JOV 
JF06011.JOV 
JF06018.JOV 
JF06026.JOV 
JF06032.JOV 
JF06047.JOV 
JF06053.JOV 
JF06065.JOV 
JF06071.JOV 
JF06077.JOV 
JF06109.JOV 
JF06115.JOV 
JF06132.JOV 
JF06138.JOV 


A-18 






Table A-l ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Volume ACPS (continued) 


JF06139.JOV 
JF06146.JOV 
JF06153.JOV 
JF06159.JOV 
JF06166.J0V 
JF06173.JOV 
JF06179.JOV 
JF06186.JOV 
JF06192.JOV 
JF06198.JOV 
JF0619E.JOV 
JF0619K.JOV 
JF0619Q.JOV 
JF06808.JOV 
JF0680E.JOV 
JF06816.JOV 
JF06822.JOV 
JF0D727.JOV 
JFD412A.JOV 
JFD413S.JOV 
JFD413G.JOV 
JFD4523.JOV 
JFD455J.JOV 
JFD4606.JOV 
JFD520C.JOV 
JFD520Q.JOV 
JFD521M.JOV 
JFD6211.JOV 
JFD6218.J0V 
JFD6226.JOV 
JFD6232.JOV 
JFD6247.JOV 
JFD6253.JOV 
JFDD601.JOV 
JFDD607.JOV 
JFDD723.JOV 
JFDD72G.J0V 
JFDFOOl.JOV 
JG0000C.JOV 
JGDOOOE.JOV 
J000104.JOV 
J000310.JOV 
JO00316.JOV 
J000328.JOV 
J000334.JOV 
J000340.JOV 
J000349.JOV 
J000364.JOV 
JO0036M.JOV 
J000391.JOV 
J000503.JOV 
J000513.JOV 
J000603.JOV 
J000703.JOV 
J000709.JOV 
JO00716.JOV 
J000344.JOV 
J00036R.JOV 
J000523.JOV 
JF04311.USE 
JFD451N.USE 
JFD4526.USE 
JFD4568.USE 
JFD460C.USE 
JFD521C.USE 
JFD6262.USE 
JFD6268.USE 


JF06140.JOV 
JF06147.JOV 
JF06154.JOV 
JF06160.JOV 
JF06167.JOV 
JF06174.JOV 
JF06180.JOV 
JF06187.JOV 
JF06193.JOV 
JF06199.JOV 
JF0619F.JOV 
JF0619L.JOV 
JF0619R.JOV 
JF06809.JOV 
JF0680F.JOV 
JF06817.JOV 
JF06823.JOV 
JF0D728.JOV 
JFD412C.JOV 
JFD4139.JOV 
JFD451K.JOV 
JFD4524.JOV 
JFD4566.JOV 
JFD4607.JOV 
JFD520D.JOV 
JFD5218.JOV 
JFD5210.JOV 
JFD6213.JOV 
JFD6219.JOV 
JFD6227.JOV 
JFD6233.JOV 
JFD6248.JOV 
JFD680G.JOV 
JFDD602.JOV 
JFDD608.JOV 
JFDD72A.JOV 
JFDD72H.JOV 
JFDF002.JOV 
JGD0001.JOV 
JGNOOOI.JOV 
J000202.JOV 
J000311.JOV 
J000323.JOV 
J000329.JOV 
J000335.JOV 
J000341.JOV 
J000350.JOV 
J000365.JOV 
J00036N.JOV 
J000402.JOV 
J000504.JOV 
J000514.JOV 
J000604.JOV 
J000704.JOV 
J000710.JOV 
J000717.JOV 
J000345.JOV 
J0D036S.JOV 
JOD0524.JOV 
JF0451H.USE 
JFD4510.USE 
JFD4528.USE 
JFD4569.USE 
JFD460D.USE 
JFD521D.USE 
JFD6263.USE 
JFD6269.USE 


JF06142.JOV 
JF06148.JOV 
JF06155.JOV 
JF06162.JOV 
JF06168.JOV 
JF06175.JOV 
JF06182.JOV 
JF06188.JOV 
JF06194.JOV 
JF0619A.JOV 
JF0619G.JOV 
JF0619M.JOV 
JF06802.JOV 
JF0680A.JOV 
JF06810.JOV 
JF06818.JOV 
JF06824.JOV 
JF0D729.JOV 
JFD412D.J0V 
JFD413A.JOV 
JFD451L.JOV 
JFD452A.JOV 
JFD4567.JOV 
JFD460K.JOV 
JFD520E.JOV 
JFD5219.JOV 
JFD521P.JOV 
JF06214.J0V 
JFD6222.JOV 
JFD6228.JOV 
JFD6243.JOV 
JFD6249.JOV 
JFD680H.JOV 
JFDD603.JOV 
JFDD609.JOV 
JFDD72B.JOV 
JFDD72I.JOV 
JFDF003.JOV 
JGD0007.JOV 
JGN000J.JOV 
J000203.JOV 
J000312.JOV 
J000324.JOV 
J000330.JOV 
J000336.JOV 
J000342.JOV 
JO00351.JOV 
J00036I.JOV 
J00036U.JOV 
J000403.JOV 
J000507.JOV 
JO00517.J0V 
J000605.JOV 
J000705.JOV 
J000711.JOV 
J000718.JOV 
J000346.JOV 
JOD036T.JOV 
JOD0525.JOV 
JF0451I.USE 
JFD451R.USE 
JFD455F.USE 
JFD4608.USE 
JFD520G.USE 
JFD521E.USE 
JFD6264.USE 
JFD6270.USE 


JF06143.JOV 
JF06149.JOV 
JF061S6.JOV 
JF06163.JOV 
JF06169.JOV 
JF06176.JOV 
JF06183.JOV 
JF06189.JOV 
JF06195.JOV 
JF0619B.JOV 
JF0619H.JOV 
JF0619N.JOV 
JF06803.JOV 
JF0680B.JOV 
JF06811.JOV 
JF06819.JOV 
JF06825.JOV 
JF0D72D.JOV 
JFD4135.JOV 
JFD413B.JOV 
JFD451M.JOV 
JFD455D.JOV 
JFD4603.JOV 
JFD460L.JOV 
JFD520F.JOV 
JFD521A.JOV 
JFD6201.JOV 
JFD6215.JOV 
JFD6223.JOV 
JFD6229.JOV 
JFD6244.JOV 
JFD6250.JOV 
JFD680I.JOV 
JFDD604.JOV 
JFDD610.JOV 
JFDD72C.JOV 
JFDDA01.JOV 
JFDF004.JOV 
JG00008.JOV 
JGNOOOK.JOV 
J000204.JOV 
J000313.JOV 
J000325.JOV 
JOO0331.JOV 
J000337.JOV 
J000343.JOV 
J000352.JOV 
J00036J.JOV 
J00036V.JOV 
J000404.JOV 
J000508.JOV 
J000518.JOV 
J000606.JOV 
J000706.JOV 
J000713.JOV 
J000719.JOV 
J000360.JOV 
J00036X.JOV 
JOVSYS.JOV 
JF0451J.USE 
JFD451S.USE 
JFD455G.USE 
JFD4609.USE 
JFD520H.USE 
JFD521F.USE 
JFD6265.USE 
JFD6271.USE 


JF06144.JOV 
JF06150.JOV 
JF06157.JOV 
JF06164.JOV 
JF06170.JOV 
JF06177.JOV 
JF06184.JOV 
JF06190.JOV 
JF06196.JOV 
JF0619C.JOV 
JF0619I.JOV 
JF06190.JOV 
JF06806.JOV 
JF0680C.JOV 
JF06814.JOV 
JF06820.JOV 
JF0D720.JOV 
JFD3551.JOV 
JFD4136.JOV 
JFD413C.JOV 
JFD451P.JOV 
JFD455E.JOV 
JFD4604.JOV 
JFD460N.JOV 
JFD520N.JOV 
JFD521B.JOV 
JFD6209.JOV 
JFD6216.JOV 
JFD6224.JOV 
JFD623D.JOV 
JFD6245.J0V 
JFD6251.JOV 
JFD680J.JOV 
JFDD605.JOV 
JFDD611.JOV 
JFDD72E.JOV 
JFDDA02.JOV 
JFDF005.JOV 
JGD0009.JOV 
J000102.JOV 
J000300.JOV 
J000514.JOV 
J000326.JOV 
J000332.JOV 
J000338.JOV 
J000347.JOV 
J000353.JOV 
J00036K.JOV 
J00036W.JOV 
J000500.JOV 
J000509.JOV 
J000519.JOV 
J000607.JOV 
J000707.JOV 
J000714.JOV 
J000720.JOV 
JOD036P.JOV 
JOD036Y.JOV 
SPCJOV.JOV 
JF0619A.USE 
JFD451U.USE 
JFD455K.USE 
JFD460A.USE 
JFD520I.USE 
JF06260.USE 
JFD6266.USE 
JFD6272.USE 


JF06145.JOV 
JF06152.JOV 
JF06158.JOV 
JF06165.JOV 
JF06172.JOV 
JF06178.JOV 
JF06185.JOV 
JF06191.JOV 
JF06197.JOV 
JF0619D.JOV 
JF0619J.JOV 
JF0619P.JOV 
JF06807.JOV 
JF0680D.JOV 
JF06815.JOV 
JF06821.JOV 
JF0D721.JOV 
JFD4128.JOV 
JFD4137.JOV 
JFD413E.JOV 
JFD451Q.JOV 
JFD455I.J0V 
JFD4605.JOV 
JFD4600.JOV 
JFD520P.JOV 
JFD521K.JOV 
JFD6210.JOV 
JFD6217.J0V 
JFD6225.JOV 
JFD6231.JOV 
JFD6246.JOV 
JFD6252.J0V 
JFDD600.JOV 
JFDD606.JOV 
JFDD722.JOV 
JFDD72F.JOV 
JFDFOQO.JOV 
JFIRST.JOV 
JGDOOOD.JOV 
J000103.JOV 
J000305.JOV 
J000315.JOV 
J000327.JOV 
J000333.JOV 
J000339.JOV 
J000348.JOV 
J000363.JOV 
J00036L.JOV 
J000390.JOV 
J000502.JOV 
J000512.JOV 
J000602.JOV 
J000702.JOV 
J000708.JOV 
J000715.JOV 
J000721.JOV 
JOD036Q.JOV 
J0D036Z.JOV 
JF03701.USE 
JF06822.USE 
JFD4525.USE 
JFD455L.USE 
JFD460B.USE 
JFD520J.USE 
JFD6261.USE 
JFD6267.USE 
JFD6273.USE 


A-19 








Table A-l ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Volume ACPS (concluded) 


JFD6274.USE 
JFDD602.USE 
JFJ451H.USE 
JFJ6260.USE 
JFJ6Z66.USE 
JFJ6273.USE 
JGD0008.USE 
J000321.USE 
JOVTYP.USE 
JOVMATH.DAT 
CCOMPA.CMN 


JFD6275.USE 
JFDD603.USE 
JFJ451I.USE 
JFJ6261.USE 
JFJ6267.USE 
JFJ6274.USE 
JGN000J.USE 
J000322.USE 
TYPJOV.USE 

CCOMPV.CMN 


JFD6276.USE 
JFDD610.USE 
JFJ451N.USE 
JFJ6262.USE 
JFJ6268.USE 
JFJ6275.USE 
J000317.USE 
JOJ0317.USE 
JGF0001.FOR 

CEXECA.CMN 


JFD6277.USE 
JFDD611.USE 
JFJ4510.USE 
JFJ6263.USE 
JFJ6Z70.USE 
JFJ6276.USE 
J000318.USE 
JOJ0318.USE 
JGFOOOE.FOR 

CEXECV.CMN 


JFD6278.USE 
JFDD724.USE 
JFJ451R.USE 
JFJ6264.USE 
JFJ6271.USE 
JFJ6277.USE 
J000319.USE 
JOJ0320.USE 
SYSJOV.FOR 

CCOMP.FOR 


JFD6279.USE 
JFDD725.USE 
JFJ451S.USE 
JFJ6265.USE 
JFJ6272 .USE 
JFJ6278.USE 
J000320.USE 
JOJ0321.USE 
TMPDMP.FOR 

CEXEC.FOR 


A-20 











Table A-2. ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Volume ACPS02 


CF06178.ADA 
CF06185.ADA 
CF06191.ADA 
CF06197.ADA 
CF0619D.ADA 
CF0619J.ADA 
CF0619P.ADA 
CF06425.ADA 
CF0642B.ADA 
CF06809.ADA 
CF0680F.ADA 
CF06817.ADA 
CF06823.ADA 
CF09503.ADA 
CF09509.ADA 
CF09605.ADA 
CF09713.ADA 
CF09902.ADA 
CF0C103.ADA 
CF0C3P5.ADA 
C” v'C.ADA 
Ch^il39.ADA 
CFD451K.ADA 
CFD451Q.ADA 
CFD4526.ADA 
CFD455G.ADA 
CFD4567.ADA 
CFD4606.ADA 
CFD460K.ADA 
CFD4802.ADA 
CFD520F.ADA 
CFD520P.ADA 
CFD521C.ADA 
CFD5210.ADA 
CFD6213.ADA 
CFD6219.ADA 
CFD6227.ADA 
CFD6233.ADA 
CFD6248.ADA 
CFD6260.ADA 
CFD6266.ADA 
CFD6272.ADA 
CFD6278.ADA 
CFD6310.ADA 
CFD6316.ADA 
CFD6333.ADA 
CFD6339.ADA 
CFD6346.ADA 
CFD6353.ADA 
CFD6359.ADA 
CFD6366.ADA 
CFD637S.ADA 
CFD6379.ADA 
CFD6386.ADA 
CFD680H.ADA 
CFD9C01.ADA 
CFDC310.ADA 
CFDD602.ADA 
CFDD609.ADA 
CFDE201.ADA 
CrDE207.ADA 
CFDE213.ADA 
CFDE232.ADA 
CFDE238.ADA 
CFDE244.ADA 
CFDE403.ADA 
CFDE409.ADA 
CFDE415.ADA 
CFDE434.ADA 


CF06179.ADA 
CF06186.ADA 
CF06192.ADA 
CF06198.ADA 
CF0619E.ADA 
CF0619K.ADA 
CF0619Q.ADA 
CF06426.ADA 
CF06802.ADA 
CF0680A.ADA 
CF0681D.ADA 
CF06818.ADA 
CF06824.ADA 
CF09504.ADA 
CF09600.ADA 
CF09606.ADA 
CF09720.ADA 
CF09903.ADA 
CF0C300.ADA 
CF0C306.ADA 
CFD412D.ADA 
CFD413A.ADA 
CFD451L.ADA 
CFD451R.ADA 
CFD4528.ADA 
CFD455I.ADA 
CFD4568.ADA 
CFD4607.ADA 
CFD4601.ADA 
CFD4803.ADA 
CFD520G.ADA 
CFD5209.ADA 
CFD521D.ADA 
CFD521P.ADA 
CFD6214.ADA 
CFD6222.ADA 
CFD6228.ADA 
CFD6243.ADA 
CFD6249.ADA 
CFD6261.ADA 
CFD6267.ADA 
CFD6273.ADA 
CFD6279.ADA 
CFD6311.ADA 
CFD6317.ADA 
CFD6334.ADA 
CFD6340.ADA 
CFD6347.ADA 
CFD6354.ADA 
CFD6360.ADA 
CFD6367.ADA 
CFD6374.ADA 
CFD6380.ADA 
CFD6387.ADA 
CFD680I.ADA 
CFD9C02.ADA 
CFDC311.ADA 
CFDD603.ADA 
CFDD610.ADA 
CFDE202.ADA 
CFDE208.ADA 
CFDE214.ADA 
CFDE233.ADA 
CFDE239.ADA 
CFDE245.ADA 
CFDE404.ADA 
CFDE40A.ADA 
CFDE416.ADA 
CFDE435.ADA 


CF06180.ADA 
CF06187.ADA 
CF06193.ADA 
CF06199.ADA 
CF0619F.ADA 
CF0619L.ADA 
CF0619R.ADA 
CF06427.ADA 
CF06803.ADA 
CF0680B.ADA 
CF06811.ADA 
CF06819.ADA 
CF06825.ADA 
CFD9505.ADA 
CF09601.ADA 
CF096 07.ADA 
CF09721.ADA 
CF09B01.ADA 
CFOC301.ADA 
CF0C307.ADA 
CFD4135.ADA 
CFD413B.ADA 
CFD451M.ADA 
CFD451S.ADA 
CFD452A.ADA 
CFD455J.ADA 
CFD4569.ADA 
CFD4608.ADA 
CFD460N.ADA 
CFD4804.ADA 
CFDS20H.ADA 
CFD5218.ADA 
CFD521E.ADA 
CFD6201.ADA 
CFD6215.ADA 
CFD6223.ADA 
CFD6229.ADA 
CFD6244.ADA 
CFD6250.ADA 
CFD6262 .ADA 
CFD6268.ADA 
CFD6274.ADA 
CFD6300.ADA 
CFD6312.ADA 
CFD6318.ADA 
CFD6335.ADA 
CFD6342.ADA 
CFD6348.ADA 
CFD6355.ADA 
CFD6362.ADA 
CFD6368.ADA 
CFD6375.ADA 
CFD6382.ADA 
CFD6388.ADA 
CFD680J.ADA 
CFDC104.ADA 
CFDC313.ADA 
CFDD604.ADA 
CFDD611.ADA 
CFDE203.ADA 
CFDE209.ADA 
CFDE215.ADA 
CFDE234.ADA 
CFDE23A.ADA 
CFDE246.ADA 
CFDE405.ADA 
CFDE411.ADA 
CFDE420.ADA 
CFDE436.ADA 


CF06182.ADA 
CF06188.ADA 
CF06194.ADA 
CF0619A.ADA 
CF0619G.ADA 
CF0619M.ADA 
CF06422.ADA 
CF06428.ADA 
CF06806.ADA 
CF0680C.ADA 
CF06814.ADA 
CF06820.ADA 
CF09500.ADA 
CF09506.ADA 
CF09602.ADA 
CF09710.ADA 
CF09731.ADA 
CFOCIOO. ADA 
CF0C302.ADA 
CFOPOOO.ADA 
CFD4136.ADA 
CFD413C.ADA 
CFD451N.ADA 
CFD4523.ADA 
CFD455D.ADA 
CFD455K.ADA 
CFD4603.ADA 
CFD4609.ADA 
CFD4600.ADA 
CFD520C.ADA 
CFD520I.ADA 
CFD5219.ADA 
CFD521F.ADA 
CFD6209.ADA 
CFD6216.ADA 
CFD6224.ADA 
CFD6230.ADA 
CFD6245.ADA 
CFD6251.ADA 
CFD6263.ADA 
CFD6269.ADA 
CFD6275.ADA 
CFD6301.ADA 
CFD6313.ADA 
CFD6319.ADA 
CFD6336.ADA 
CFD6343.ADA 
CFD6349.ADA 
CFD63S6.ADA 
CFD6363.ADA 
CFD6369.ADA 
CFD6376.ADA 
CFD6383.ADA 
CFD6389.ADA 
CFD9000.ADA 
CFDC10S.ADA 
CFDC314.ADA 
CFDD605.ADA 
CFDDA01.ADA 
CFDE204.ADA 
CFDE20A.ADA 
CFDE216.ADA 
CFDE235.ADA 
CFDE241.ADA 
CFDE2S0.ADA 
CFDE406.ADA 
CFDE412.ADA 
CFDE431.ADA 
CFDE437.ADA 


CF06183.ADA 
CF06189.ADA 
CF06195.ADA 
CF0619B.ADA 
CF0619H.ADA 
CF0619N.ADA 
CF06423.ADA 
CF06429.ADA 
CF06807.ADA 
CF0680D.ADA 
CF06815.ADA 
CF06821.ADA 
CF09501.ADA 
CF09507.ADA 
CF09603.ADA 
CF09711.ADA 
CF09900.ADA 
CF0C101.ADA 
CF0C303.ADA 
CFD3551.ADA 
CFD4137.ADA 
CFD413E.ADA 
CFD4510.ADA 
CFD4524.ADA 
CFD455E.ADA 
CFD455L.ADA 
CFD4604.ADA 
CFD460A.ADA 
CFD4800.ADA 
CFD520D.ADA 
CFD520J.ADA 
CFD521A.ADA 
CFD521K.ADA 
CFD6210.ADA 
CFD6217.ADA 
CFD6225.ADA 
CFD6231.ADA 
CFD6246.ADA 
CFD6252.ADA 
CFD6264.ADA 
CFD6270.ADA 
CFD6276.ADA 
CFD6308.ADA 
CFD6314.ADA 
CFD6322.ADA 
CFD6337.ADA 
CFD6344.ADA 
CFD6350.ADA 
CFD6357.ADA 
CFD6364.ADA 
CFD6370.ADA 
CFD6377.ADA 
CFD6384.ADA 
CFD6390.ADA 
CFD9200.ADA 
CFDC106.ADA 
CFDD600.ADA 
CFDD606.ADA 
CFDDA02.ADA 
CFDE205.ADA 
CFDE211.*DA 
CFDE220.ADA 
CFDE236.ADA 
CFDE242.ADA 
CFDE401.ADA 
CFDE407.ADA 
CFDE413.ADA 
CFDE432.ADA 
CFDE438.ADA 


CF06184.ADA 
CF06190.ADA 
CF06196.ADA 
CF0619C.ADA 
CF0619I.ADA 
CF06190.ADA 
CF06424.ADA 
CF0642A.ADA 
CF06808.ADA 
CF0680E.ADA 
CF06816.ADA 
CF06822.ADA 
CF09S02.ADA 
CF09508.ADA 
CF09604.ADA 
CF09712.ADA 
CF09901.ADA 
CF0C102.ADA 
CF0C304.ADA 
CFD412A.ADA 
CFD4138.ADA 
CFD413G.ADA 
CFD451P.ADA 
CFD4525.ADA 
CFD455F.ADA 
CFD4566.ADA 
CFD4605.ADA 
CFD460B.ADA 
CFD4801.ADA 
CFD520E.ADA 
CFD520N.ADA 
CFD521B.ADA 
CFD521M.ADA 
CFD6211.ADA 
CFD6218.ADA 
CFD6226.ADA 
CFD6232.ADA 
CFD6247.ADA 
CFD6253.ADA 
CFD6265.ADA 
CFD6271.ADA 
CFD6277.ADA 
CFD6309.ADA 
CFD6315.ADA 
CFD6332.ADA 
CFD6358.ADA 
CFD6345.ADA 
CFD6352.ADA 
CFD6358.ADA 
CFD6365.ADA 
CFD6372.ADA 
CFD6378.ADA 
CFD6385.ADA 
CFD680G.ADA 
CFD9C00.ADA 
CFDC107.ADA 
CFDD601.ADA 
CFDD607.ADA 
CFDEOOO.ADA 
CFDE206.ADA 
CFDE212.ADA 
CFDE231.ADA 
CFDE237.ADA 
CFDE243.ADA 
CFDE402.ADA 
CFDE408.ADA 
CFDE414.ADA 
CFDE433.ADA 
CFDE439.ADA 


A-21 




Table A-2. ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Volume ACPS02 (Continued) 


CFDE43A.ADA CFDE441.ADA 
CFDE446.ADA CFDE450.ADA 
CFDF004.ADA CFDF005.ADA 
CFMB000.ADA CFMB001.ADA 
CFMB010.ADA CFMB011.ADA 
CFMB016.ADA CFMB017.ADA 
CFMB030.ADA CFMB031.ADA 
CFMB036.ADA CFMB041.ADA 
CFN9301.ADA CFN9302.ADA 
CFN9611.ADA CFN9612.ADA 
CGDOOOl .ADA CGD0002.ADA 
CGD0007.ADA CGD0008.ADA 
CGD0029.ADA CGD0039.ADA 
CGN000I.ADA CGNOOOJ.ADA 
CL09111.ADA CL09121.ADA 
CLD9203.ADA CLD9212.ADA 
CLD9233.ADA CLDEOOO.ADA 
CLDE2C5.ADA CLDE2C6.ADA 
CLDE4C5.ADA CLDE4C6.ADA 
COO0104.ADA C000107.ADA 
C000114.ADA C000202.ADA 
C000209.ADA C000300.ADA 
C000313.ADA C000314.ADA 
C000319.ADA C000320.ADA 
C000325.ADA C000326.ADA 
C000331.ADA C000332.ADA 
C000337.ADA C000338.ADA 
C000343.ADA C000347.ADA 
C000352.ADA C000353.ADA 
C000358.ADA C000359.ADA 
C000364.ADA C000365.ADA 
C00036A.ADA C00036B.ADA 
C00036J.ADA C00036K.ADA 
C00036V.ADA C00036H.ADA 
C000378.ADA C000390.ADA 
C000500.ADA C000502.ADA 
C000509.ADA C000512.ADA 
COOD519.ADA C000602.ADA 
C000607.ADA C000702.ADA 
C000707.ADA C000708.ADA 
C000714.ADA C000715.ADA 
C000720.ADA C000721.ADA 
COD036C.ADA COD036D.ADA 
COD036R.ADA COD036S.ADA 
COD0370.ADA C0D0371.ADA 
C0D0382.ADA COD0383.ADA 
COD0527.ADA COD0528.ADA 
EF03301.ADA EF03502.ADA 
EFD3511.ADA EF03512.ADA 
EF03519.ADA EF03550.ADA 
EF03604.ADA EF03605.ADA 
EF03610.ADA EF03611.ADA 
EF03616.ADA EF03617.ADA 
EF03631.ADA EF03632.ADA 
EF03637.ADA EF03638.ADA 
EF03644.ADA EF03645.ADA 
EF03650.ADA EF03700.ADA 
EF03800.ADA EF03801.ADA 
EF04120.ADA EF04121.ADA 
EF04126.ADA EF04127.ADA 
EF04132.ADA EF04133.ADA 
Er0413K.ADA EF04310.ADA 
EF04512.ADA EF04S13.ADA 
EF04518.ADA EF04S19.ADA 
EF0451E.ADA EF0451F.ADA 
EF0451V.ADA EF0451H.ADA 
EF04521.ADA EFD4522.ADA 
EF04532.ADA EF04533.ADA 
EF04538.ADA EF04539.ADA 
EF04541.ADA EF04550.ADA 


CFDE442.ADA CFDE443.ADA 
CFDF000.ADA CFDF001.ADA 
CFM9A00.ADA CFM9A01.ADA 
CFMB002.ADA CFMB003.ADA 
CFMB012.ADA CFMB013.ADA 
CFHB018.ADA CFMB019.ADA 
CFMB032.ADA CFMB033.ADA 
CFMB042.ADA CFMB043.ADA 
CFN9303.ADA CFN9510.ADA 
CFN9613.ADA CG0000C.ADA 
CGD0003.ADA CGD0004.ADA 
CGD0009.ADA CGDOOOD.ADA 
CGD0049.ADA CGNOOOF.ADA 
CGNOOOK.ADA CL09000.ADA 
CL09131.ADA CLOPOOO.ADA 
CLD9213.ADA CLD9222.ADA 
CLDE2B1.ADA CLDE2B2.ADA 
CLDE4B1.ADA CLDE4B2.ADA 
C000001.ADA C000002.ADA 
C000108.ADA C000109.ADA 
C000203.ADA C000204.ADA 
C000305.ADA C000310.ADA 
C000315.ADA C000316.ADA 
C000321.ADA C000322.ADA 
C000327.ADA C000328.ADA 
C000333.ADA C000334.ADA 
C000339.ADA C000340.ADA 
C000348.ADA C000349.ADA 
C000354.ADA C000355.ADA 
C000360.ADA C000361.ADA 
C000366.uDA C000367.ADA 
C00036F.ADA C0D036G.ADA 
C00036L.ADA C00036M.ADA 
C000374.ADA C000375.ADA 
C000391.ADA C000402.ADA 
C000503.ADA C000504.ADA 
C000513.ADA C000514.ADA 
C000603.ADA C000604.ADA 
C000703.ADA C000704.ADA 
C000709.ADA C000710.ADA 
C000716.ADA C000717.ADA 
COOPOOO.ADA C0DD344.ADA 
C0D936E.ADA CDD0360.ADA 
COD036T.ADA C0D036X.ADA 
COD0372.ADA COD0373.ADA 
COD0523.ADA COD0524.ADA 
C0D0529.ADA EAOOOOO.ADA 
EF03503.ADA EF03504.ADA 
EF03513.ADA EF03514.ADA 
EF03600.ADA EF03601.ADA 
EF03606.ADA EF03607.ADA 
EF03612.ADA EF03813.ADA 
EF03618.ADA EF03619.ADA 
EF03633.ADA EF03634.ADA 
EF03639.ADA EF03641.ADA 
EF03646.ADA EF03647.ADA 
EF03701.ADA EF03702.ADA 
EF03802.ADA EF03803.ADA 
EF04122.ADA EF04123.ADA 
EF04129.ADA EF0412B.ADA 
EF0413D.ADA EF0413H.ADA 
EFD4311.ADA EF04312.ADA 
EF04514.ADA EF04515.ADA 
EF0451A.ADA EF0451B.ADA 
EF0451G.ADA EF04S1H.ADA 
EF04S1X.ADA EF0451Y.ADA 
EF04527.ADA EF04529.ADA 
EF04534.ADA EF04535.ADA 
EF0453A.ADA EF0453B.ADA 
EF04551.ADA EF04552.ADA 


CFDE444.ADA CFDE445.ADA 
CFDF002.ADA CFDF003.ADA 
CFM9A02.ADA CFM9A03.ADA 
CFHB004.ADA CFHB005.ADA 
CFMB014.ADA CFHB015.ADA 
CFHB020.ADA CFMB029.ADA 
CFHB034.ADA CFMB035.ADA 
CFHB044.ADA CFN9300.ADA 
CFN9511.ADA CFN9610.ADA 
CGOPOOO.ADA CGDOOOO.ADA 
CGD0005.ADA CGD0006.ADA 
CGDOOOE.ADA CGD0019.ADA 
CGNOOOG.ADA CGNOOOH.ADA 
CL09100.ADA CL09101.ADA 
CLD9200.ADA CLD9202.ADA 
CLD9223.ADA CLD9232.ADA 
CLDE2C1.ADA CLDE2C2.ADA 
CLDE4C1.ADA CLDE4C2.ADA 
C000102.ADA C000103.ADA 
C000112.ADA C000113.ADA 
C000207.ADA C000208.ADA 
C000311.ADA C000312.ADA 
C000317.ADA C000318.ADA 
C000323.ADA C000324.ADA 
C000329.ADA C000330.ADA 
C000335.ADA C000336.ADA 
C000341.ADA C000342.ADA 
C000350.ADA C000351.ADA 
C000356.ADA C000357.ADA 
C000362.ADA C000363.ADA 
C000368.ADA C000369.ADA 
C00036H.ADA C00036I.ADA 
C00036N.ADA C00036U.ADA 
C000376.ADA C000377.ADA 
C000403.ADA C000404.ADA 
C000507.ADA C000508.ADA 
C000517.ADA C000518.ADA 
C000605.ADA C000606.ADA 
C000705.ADA C000706.ADA 
C000711.ADA C000713.ADA 
C000718.ADA C000719.ADA 
COD0345.ADA COD0346.ADA 
C0D036P.ADA COD036Q.ADA 
C0D036Y.ADA COD036Z.ADA 
COD0380.ADA COD0381.ADA 
COD0525.ADA COD0526.ADA 
EAOPOOO.ADA EF03500.ADA 
EF05509.ADA EF03510.ADA 
EF03517.ADA EF03518.ADA 
EF03602.ADA EF03603.ADA 
EF03608.ADA EF03609.ADA 
EF03614.ADA EF03615.ADA 
EF03620.ADA EF03630.ADA 
EF03635.ADA EF03636.ADA 
EF03642.ADA EF03643.ADA 
EF03648.ADA EF09649.ADA 
EF03703.ADA EF037C4.ADA 
EF03804.ADA EF03805.ADA 
EF04124.ADA EF04125.ADA 
EF04130.ADA EF04131.ADA 
EF0413I.ADA EF0413J.ADA 
EF04510.ADA EF04S11.ADA 
EF04516.ADA EF04517.ADA 
EF0451C.ADA EF0451D.ADA 
EFD451I.ADA EF0451J.ADA 
EF0451Z.ADA EF04520.ADA 
EFD4530.ADA EF04531.ADA 
EF04536.ADA EF04537.ADA 
EF04S3C.ADA EF04540.ADA 
EF04553.ADA EF04554.ADA 


A-22 






Table A-2. ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Volume ACPS02 (Continued) 


EF04555.ADA EF04556.ADA 
EF04550.ADA EF04560.ADA 
EF04602.ADA EF0460E.ADA 
EF0460J.ADA EF0460M.ADA 
EF05204.ADA EF05205.ADA 
EF0520A.ADA EF0520B.ADA 
EF05210.ADA EF05211.ADA 
EF0521H.ADA EF0521I.ADA 
EF05300.ADA EF05301.ADA 
EF05306.ADA EF05307.ADA 
EF05403.ADA EF05404.ADA 
EF05501.ADA EF05502.ADA 
EF05507.ADA EF05508.ADA 
EF0550D.ADA EF0S50E.ADA 
EF06011.ADA EF06013.ADA 
EF06018.ADA EF06019.ADA 
EF06026.ADA EF06027.ADA 
EF06032.ADA EF06033.ADA 
EF06047.ADA EF06048.ADA 
EF060S3.ADA EF06060.ADA 
EF06065.ADA EF06066.ADA 
EF06071.ADA EF06072.ADA 
EF06077.ADA EFD6078.ADA 
EF06109.ADA EF06110.ADA 
EF06115.ADA EF06116.ADA 
EF06132.ADA EF06133.ADA 
EF06138.ADA EF06139.ADA 
EF06145.ADA EF06146.ADA 
EFD6152.ADA EF06153.ADA 
EF06158.ADA EF06159.ADA 
EF06165.ADA EF06166.ADA 
EF06172.ADA EF06173.ADA 
EF06178.ADA EF06179.ADA 
EF06185.ADA EF06186.ADA 
EF06191.ADA EF06192.ADA 
EF06197.ADA EF06198.ADA 
EF0619D.ADA EF0619E.ADA 
EF0619J.ADA EF0619K.ADA 
EF0619P.ADA EF0619Q.ADA 
EF06425.ADA EF06426.ADA 
EF0642B.ADA EF06802.ADA 
EF06809.ADA EF0680A.ADA 
EF0680F.ADA EF06810.ADA 
EF06817.ADA EF06818.ADA 
EF06823.ADA EF06824.ADA 
EF09503.ADA EF09504.ADA 
EF09509.ADA EF09600.ADA 
EF09605.ADA EF09606.ADA 
EF09713.ADA EF09720.ADA 
EF09902.ADA EF09903.ADA 
EF0C103.ADA EF0C300.ADA 
EF0C305.ADA EF0C306.ADA 
EFD412C.ADA EFD412D.ADA 
EFD4139.ADA EFD413A.ADA 
EFD451K.ADA EFD451L.ADA 
EFD451Q.ADA EFD451R.ADA 
EFD4526.ADA EFD4528.ADA 
EFD455G.ADA EFD455I.ADA 
EFD4567.ADA EFD4568.ADA 
EFD4606.ADA EFD4607.ADA 
EFD460K.ADA EFD460L.ADA 
EFD520E.ADA EFD520F.ADA 
EFD520N.ADA EFD320P.ADA 
EFD521B.ADA EFD521C.ADA 
EFD521M.ADA EFD5210.ADA 
EFD6211.ADA EFD6213.ADA 
EFD6218.ADA EFD6219.ADA 
EFD6226.ADA EFD6227.ADA 
EFD6232.ADA EFD6233.ADA 
EFD6247.ADA EFD6248.ADA 


EF04557.ADA EF04S58.ADA 
EF04562.ADA EF04563.ADA 
EF0460F.ADA EF0460G.ADA 
EF05200.ADA EF05201.ADA 
EF05206.ADA EF05207.ADA 
EF0520M.ADA EF05200.ADA 
EF05212.ADA EF05213.ADA 
EF0521J.ADA EF0521K.ADA 
EF05302.ADA EF05303.ADA 
EF05308.ADA EF05400.ADA 
EF0S405.ADA EF05406.ADA 
EF05503.ADA EF05504.ADA 
EF05S09.ADA EF0550A.ADA 
EF0550F.ADA EF06001.ADA 
EF06014.ADA EF06015.ADA 
EFD6022.ADA EF06023.ADA 
EF06028.ADA EF06029.ADA 
EF06043.ADA EF06044.ADA 
EF06049.ADA EF06050.ADA 
EF06061.ADA EF06062.ADA 
EF06067.ADA EF06068.ADA 
EF06073.ADA EF06074.ADA 
EF06D79.ADA EF06100.ADA 
EF06111.ADA EF06112.ADA 
EF06117.ADA EF06118.ADA 
EF06134.ADA EF06135.ADA 
EF06140.ADA EF06142.ADA 
EF06147.ADA EF06148.ADA 
EF06154.ADA EF06155.ADA 
EF06160.ADA EFD6162.ADA 
EF06167.ADA EF0616S.ADA 
EF06174.ADA EF06175.ADA 
EF06180.ADA EF06182.ADA 
EF06187.ADA EF06188.ADA 
EF06193.ADA EF06194.ADA 
EF06199.ADA EF0619A.ADA 
EF0619F.ADA EF0619G.ADA 
EF0619L.ADA EF0619M.ADA 
EF0619R.ADA EF06422.ADA 
EF06427.ADA EF06428.ADA 
EF06803.ADA EF06806.ADA 
EF0680B.ADA EF0680C.ADA 
EF06811.ADA EF06814.ADA 
EF06819.ADA EF06820.ADA 
EF06825.ADA EF09500.ADA 
EF09505.ADA EF09506.ADA 
EF09601.ADA EF09602.ADA 
EF09607.ADA EF09710.ADA 
EF09721.ADA EF09731.ADA 
EF09B01.ADA EF0C100.ADA 
EF0C301.ADA EF0C302.ADA 
EFOCS07.ADA EF0P000.ADA 
EFD4135.ADA EFD4136.ADA 
EFD413B.ADA EFD413C.ADA 
EFD451H.ADA EFD451N.ADA 
EFD451S.ADA EFD4S23.ADA 
EFD452A.ADA EFD455D.ADA 
EFD455J.ADA EFD4BSK.ADA 
EFD4S69.ADA EFD4603.ADA 
EFD4608.ADA EFD4609.ADA 
EFD460N.ADA EFD4600.ADA 
EFD520G.ADA EFD520H.ADA 
EFDS20Q.ADA EFD5218.ADA 
EFD521D.ADA EFD521E.ADA 
EFD521P.ADA EFD6201.ADA 
EFD6214.ADA EFD8215.ADA 
EFD6222.ADA EFD6223.ADA 
EFD6228.ADA EFD6229.ADA 
EFD6243.ADA EFD8244.ADA 
EFD6249. ADA EFM250.ADA 


EF04559.ADA EF0455N.ADA 
EF04600.ADA EF04601.ADA 
EF0460H.ADA EF0460I.ADA 
EF05202.ADA EF05203.ADA 
EF0S208.ADA EF05209.ADA 
EF0520R.ADA EF0520S.ADA 
EF05214.ADA EF05215.ADA 
EF0S21L.ADA EF0521N.ADA 
EF05304.ADA EF05305.ADA 
EF05401.ADA EF05402.ADA 
EF05407.ADA EF05408.ADA 
EF0S505.ADA EF05506.ADA 
EF0550B.ADA EF0550C.ADA 
EF06009.ADA EF06010.ADA 
EF06016.ADA EF06017.ADA 
EF06024.ADA EF06025.ADA 
EF06030.ADA EF06031.ADA 
EF06045.ADA EF06046.ADA 
EF06051.ADA EF06052.ADA 
EF06063.ADA EF06064.ADA 
EF06069.ADA EF06070.ADA 
EF06075.ADA EF06076.ADA 
EF06101.ADA EF06108.ADA 
EF06113.ADA EF06114.ADA 
EF06119.ADA EF06122.ADA 
EF06136.ADA EF06137.ADA 
EF06143-ADA EF06144.ADA 
EF06149.ADA EF06150.ADA 
EF06156.ADA EF06157.ADA 
EF06163.ADA EF06164.ADA 
EF06169.ADA EF06170.ADA 
EF06176.ADA EF06177.ADA 
EF06183.ADA EF06184.ADA 
EF06189.ADA EF06190.ADA 
EF06193.ADA EF06196.ADA 
EF0619B.ADA EF0619C.ADA 
EF0619H.ADA EF0619I.ADA 
EF0619N.ADA EF06190.ADA 
EF06423.ADA EF06424.ADA 
EF06429.ADA EF0642A.ADA 
EF06807.ADA EF06808.ADA 
EF0680D.ADA EF0680E.ADA 
EF06815.ADA EF06816.ADA 
EF06821.ADA EF06822.ADA 
EF09S01.ADA EF09502.ADA 
EF09507.ADA EF09508.ADA 
EF09603.ADA EF09604.ADA 
EF09711.ADA EF09712.ADA 
EF09900.ADA EF09901.ADA 
EFOC101.ADA EF0C102.ADA 
EF0C303.ADA EF0C304.ADA 
EFD3551.ADA EFD412A.ADA 
EFD4137.ADA EFD4138.ADA 
EFD413E.ADA EFD413G.ADA 
EFD4510.ADA EFD451P.ADA 
EFD4524.ADA EFD4525.ADA 
EFD455E.ADA EFD4SSF.ADA 
EFD455L.ADA EFD4566.ADA 
EFD4604.ADA EFD4605.ADA 
EFD460A.ADA EFD460B.ADA 
EFD520C.ADA EFD520D.ADA 
EFD520I.ALA EFD320J.ADA 
EFD3219.ADA EFDS21A.ADA 
EFD321F.ADA EFDS21K.ADA 
EFD6209.ADA EFD6210.ADA 
EFD6218.ADA EFD4217.ADA 
EFD4224.ADA EFD6223.ADA 
EFD8230.ADA EFD6231.ADA 
EFD824S.ADA EFD4244.ADA 
EFD6251.ADA EFD6252.ADA 


A-23 






Table A-2. ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Volume ACPS02 (Continued) 


EF04555.ADA 
EF04550.ADA 
EF04602.ADA 
EF0460J.ADA 
EF05204.ADA 
EF0520A.ADA 
EF05210.ADA 
EF0521H.ADA 
EF05300.ADA 
EF05306.ADA 
EF05403.ADA 
EF05501.ADA 
EF05507.ADA 
EF0550D.ADA 
EF06011.ADA 
EF06018.ADA 
EF06026.ADA 
EF06032.ADA 
EF06047.ADA 
EF06053.ADA 
EF06065.ADA 
EF06071.ADA 
EF06077.ADA 
EF06109.ADA 
EF06115.ADA 
EF06132.ADA 
EF06138.ADA 
EF06145.ADA 
EF06152.ADA 
EF06158.ADA 
EF06165.ADA 
EF06172.ADA 
EF06178.ADA 
EF06185.ADA 
EF06191.ADA 
EF06197.ADA 
EF0619D.ADA 
EF0619J.ADA 
EF0619P.ADA 
EF06425.ADA 
EF0642B.ADA 
EF06809.ADA 
EF0680F.ADA 
EF06817.ADA 
EF06823.ADA 
EF09503.ADA 
EF09509.ADA 
EF09605.ADA 
EF09713.ADA 
EF09902.ADA 
EF0C103.ADA 
EF0C303.ADA 
EFD412C.ADA 
EFD4139.ADA 
EFD451K.ADA 
EFD451Q.ADA 
EFD4526.ADA 
EFD455G.ADA 
EFD4567.ADA 
EFD4606.ADA 
EFD460K.ADA 
EFD520E.ADA 
EFD520N.ADA 
EFD521B.ADA 
EFD521M.ADA 
EFD6211.ADA 
EFD62I8.ADA 
EFD6226.ADA 
EFD6232.ADA 
EFD6247.ADA 


EF04556.ADA 
EF04560.ADA 
EF0460E.ADA 
EF0460M.ADA 
EF05205.ADA 
EF0520B.ADA 
EF05211.ADA 
EF0521I.ADA 
EF05301.ADA 
EF05307.ADA 
EF05404.ADA 
EF05502.ADA 
EF05508.ADA 
EF0550E.ADA 
EF06013.ADA 
EF06019.ADA 
EF06027.ADA 
EF06033.ADA 
EF06048.ADA 
EF06060.ADA 
EF06O66.ADA 
EF06072.ADA 
EF06078.ADA 
EF06110.ADA 
EF06116.ADA 
EF06133.ADA 
EF06139.ADA 
EF06146.ADA 
EF06153.ADA 
EF06159.ADA 
EF06166.ADA 
EF06173.ADA 
EF06179.ADA 
EF06186.ADA 
EF06192.ADA 
EF06198.ADA 
EF0619E.ADA 
EF0619K.ADA 
EF0619Q.ADA 
EF06426.ADA 
EF06602.ADA 
EF0680A.ADA 
EF06810.ADA 
EF06818.ADA 
EF06824.ADA 
EF09504.ADA 
EF09600.ADA 
EF09606.ADA 
EF09720.ADA 
EF09903.ADA 
EF0C300.ADA 
EF0C306.ADA 
EFD412D.ADA 
EFD413A.ADA 
EFD451L.ADA 
EFD451R.ADA 
EFD4528.ADA 
EFD455I.ADA 
EFD4568.ADA 
EFD4607.ADA 
EFD460L.ADA 
EFD520F.ADA 
EFD520P.ADA 
EFD521C.ADA 
EFD5210.ADA 
EFD6213.ADA 
EFD6219.ADA 
EFD6227.ADA 
EFD6233.ADA 
EFD6248.ADA 


EF04557.ADA 
EF04562.ADA 
EF0460F.ADA 
EF05200.ADA 
EF05206.ADA 
EF0520M.ADA 
EF05212.ADA 
EF0521J.ADA 
EF05302.ADA 
EF05308.ADA 
EF05405.ADA 
EF05503.ADA 
EF05509.ADA 
EF0550F.ADA 
EF06014.ADA 
EF06 022.ADA 
EF06028.ADA 
EF06043.ADA 
EF06 049.ADA 
EF06061.ADA 
EF06067.ADA 
EF06073.ADA 
EF06079.ADA 
EF06111.ADA 
EF06117.ADA 
EF06134.ADA 
EF06140.ADA 
EF06147.ADA 
EF06154.ADA 
EF06160.ADA 
EF06167.ADA 
EF06174.ADA 
EF06180.ADA 
EF06187.ADA 
EF06193.ADA 
EF06199.ADA 
EF0619F.ADA 
EF0619L.ADA 
EF0619R.ADA 
EF06427.ADA 
EF06803.ADA 
EF0680B.ADA 
EF06811.ADA 
EF06819.ADA 
EF06825.ADA 
EF09505.ADA 
EF09601.ADA 
EF09607.ADA 
EF09721.ADA 
EF09B01.ADA 
EF0C301.ADA 
EF0C307.ADA 
EFD4135.ADA 
EFD413B.ADA 
EFD451M.ADA 
EFD451S.ADA 
EFD452A.ADA 
EFD455J.ADA 
EFD4569.ADA 
EFD460B.ADA 
EFD460N.ADA 
EFD520G.ADA 
EFD520Q.ADA 
EFD521D.ADA 
EFD521P.ADA 
EFD6214.ADA 
EFD6222.ADA 
EFD6228.ADA 
EFD6243.ADA 
EFD6249.ADA 


EF04558.ADA 
EF04563.ADA 
EF0460G.ADA 
EF05201.ADA 
EF05207.ADA 
EF05200.ADA 
EF05213.ADA 
EF0521K.ADA 
EF05303.ADA 
EF05400.ADA 
EF05406.ADA 
EF0S504.ADA 
EF0550A.ADA 
EF06001.ADA 
EF06015.ADA 
EF06023.ADA 
EF06029.ADA 
EF06044.ADA 
EF06050.ADA 
EF06062.ADA 
EF06068.ADA 
EF06074.ADA 
EF06100.ADA 
EF06112.ADA 
EF06118.ADA 
EF06135.ADA 
EF06142.ADA 
EF06148.ADA 
EF06155.ADA 
EF06162.ADA 
EF06168.ADA 
EF06175.ADA 
EF06182.ADA 
EF06188.ADA 
EF06194.ADA 
EF0619A.ADA 
EF0619G.ADA 
EF0619M.ADA 
EF06422.ADA 
EF06428.ADA 
EF06806.ADA 
EF0680C.ADA 
EF06814.ADA 
EF06820.ADA 
EF09500.ADA 
EF09506.ADA 
EF09602.ADA 
EF09710.ADA 
EF09731.ADA 
EF0C100.ADA 
EF0C302.ADA 
EFOPDOO.ADA 
EFD4136.ADA 
EFD413C.ADA 
EFD451N.ADA 
EFD4523.ADA 
EFD455D.ADA 
EFD455K.ADA 
EFD4603.ADA 
EFD4609.ADA 
EFD4600.ADA 
EFD520H.ADA 
EFD5218.ADA 
EFD521E.ADA 
EFD6201.ADA 
EFD6215.ADA 
EFD6223.ADA 
EFD6229.ADA 
EFD6244.ADA 
ETD6250.ADA 


EF04559.ADA 
EF04600.ADA 
EF0460H.ADA 
EF05202.ADA 
EF05208.ADA 
EF0520R.ADA 
EF05214.ADA 
EF0521L.ADA 
EF05304.ADA 
EF05401.ADA 
EF05407.ADA 
EF05505.ADA 
EF0550B.ADA 
EF06009.ADA 
EF06016.ADA 
EF06024.ADA 
EF06030.ADA 
EF06045.ADA 
EF06051.ADA 
EF06063.ADA 
EF06069.ADA 
EF06075.ADA 
EF06101.ADA 
EF06113.ADA 
EF06119.ADA 
EF06136.ADA 
EF06143.ADA 
EF06149.ADA 
EF06156.ADA 
EF04163.ADA 
EF06169.ADA 
EF06176.ADA 
EF06183.ADA 
EF06189.ADA 
EF06195.ADA 
EF0619B.ADA 
EF0619H.ADA 
EF0619N.ADA 
EF06423.ADA 
EF06429.ADA 
EF06807.ADA 
EF068QD.ADA 
EF06815.ADA 
EF06821.ADA 
EF09501.ADA 
EF09507.ADA 
EF09603.ADA 
EF09711.ADA 
EF09900.ADA 
EF0C101.ADA 
EF0C303.ADA 
EFD3551.ADA 
EFD4137.ADA 
EFD413E.ADA 
EFD4510.ADA 
EFD4524.ADA 
EFD435E.ADA 
EFD455L.ADA 
EFD4604.ADA 
EFD460A.ADA 
EFD520C.ADA 
EFDS20I.AmA 
EFD5219.ADA 
EFD521F.ADA 
EFD6209.ADA 
EFD6216.ADA 
EFD4224.ADA 
EFD6230.ADA 
EFD6245.ADA 
EFD4251.ADA 


EF0455N.ADA 
EF04601.ADA 
EF0460I.ADA 
EF05203.ADA 
EF05209.ADA 
EF0520S.ADA 
EF05215.ADA 
EF0521N.ADA 
EF05305.ADA 
EF05402.ADA 
EF05408.ADA 
EF05506.ADA 
EF0550C.ADA 
EF06010.ADA 
EF06017.ADA 
EF06025.ADA 
EF06031.ADA 
EF06046.ADA 
EF06052.ADA 
EF06064.ADA 
EF06070.ADA 
EF06076.ADA 
EF06108.ADA 
EF06114.ADA 
EF06122.ADA 
EF06137.ADA 
EF06144.ADA 
EF06150.ADA 
EF06157.ADA 
EF06164.ADA 
EF06170.ADA 
EF06177.ADA 
EF06184.ADA 
EF06190.ADA 
EF06196.ADA 
EF0619C.ADA 
EF0619I.ADA 
EF06190.ADA 
EF06424.ADA 
EF0642A.ADA 
EF06808.ADA 
EF0680E.ADA 
EF06816.ADA 
EF06822.ADA 
EF09502.ADA 
EF09508.ADA 
EF09604.ADA 
EF09712.ADA 
EF09901.ADA 
EFOC102.ADA 
EF0C304.ADA 
EFD412A.ADA 
EFD4138.ADA 
EFD413G.ADA 
Er&451P.ADA 
EFD4525.ADA 
EFD455F.ADA 
EFD4566.ADA 
EFD4605.ADA 
EFD460B.ADA 
EFD520D.ADA 
EFD520J.ADA 
EFD521A.ADA 
EFD521K.ADA 
EFD6210.ADA 
EFD6217.ADA 
EFD6225.ADA 
EFD6231.ADA 
EFD6246.ADA 
EFD6252.ADA 


A-24 






Table A-2. ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Volume ACPS02 (Concluded) 


EFD6253.ADA 
EFD6265.ADA 
EFD6271.ADA 
EFD6277.ADA 
EFD6309.ADA 
EFD6315.ADA 
EFD6332.ADA 
EFD6338.ADA 
EFD6345.ADA 
EFD6352.ADA 
EFD6358.ADA 
EFD6365.ADA 
EFD6372.ADA 
EFD6378.ADA 
EFD6385.ADA 
EFD680G.ADA 
EFD9C00.ADA 
EFDC107.ADA 
EFDD601.ADA 
EFDD607.ADA 


EFD6260.ADA 
EFD6266 . ADA 
EFD6272.ADA 
EFD6278.ADA 
EFD6310.ADA 
EFD6316.ADA 
EFD6333.ADA 
EFD6339.ADA 
EFD6346.ADA 
EFD6353.ADA 
EFD6359.ADA 
EFD6366.ADA 
EFD6373.ADA 
EFD6379.ADA 
EFD6386.ADA 
EFD680H.ADA 
EFD9C01.ADA 
EFDC310.ADA 
EFDD602.ADA 


EFD6261.ADA 
EFD6267.ADA 
EFD6273.ADA 
EFD6279.ADA 
EFD6311.ADA 
EFD6317.ADA 
EFD6334.ADA 
EFD6340.ADA 
EFD6347.ADA 
EFD6354.ADA 
EFD6360.ADA 
EFD6367.ADA 
EFD6374.ADA 
EFD6380.ADA 
EFD6387.ADA 
EFD680I.ADA 
EFD9C02.ADA 
EFDC311.ADA 
EFDD6D3.ADA 


EFD6262.ADA 
EFD6268.ADA 
EFD6274.ADA 
EFD6300.ADA 
EFD6312.ADA 
EFD6318.ADA 
EFD6335.ADA 
EFD6342.ADA 
EFD6348.ADA 
EFD6355.ADA 
EFD6362.ADA 
EFD6368.ADA 
EFD6375.ADA 
EFD6382.ADA 
EFD6388.ADA 
EFD680J.ADA 
EFDC104.ADA 
EFDC313.ADA 
EFDD604.ADA 


EFD6263.ADA 
EFD6269.ADA 
EFD6275.ADA 
EFD6301.ADA 
EFD6313.ADA 
EFD6319.ADA 
EFD6336.ADA 
EFD6343.ADA 
EFD6349.ADA 
EFD6356.ADA 
EFD6363.ADA 
EFD6369.ADA 
EFD6376.ADA 
EFD63S3.ADA 
EFD6389.ADA 
EFD9000.ADA 
EFDC105.ADA 
EFDC314.ADA 
EFDD605.ADA 


Total of 1369 files 


EFD6264. ADA 
EFD6270.ADA 
EFD6276.ADA 
EFD6308.ADA 
EFD6314.ADA 
EFD6322.ADA 
EFD6337.ADA 
EFD6344.ADA 
EFD6350.ADA 
EFD6357.ADA 
EFD6364.ADA 
EFD6370.ADA 
EFD6377.ADA 
EFD6384.ADA 
EFD6390.ADA 
EFD9200.ADA 
EFDC106.ADA 
EFDD600.ADA 
EFDD606.ADA 


A-25 







Figure A-3. ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Volume ACPS03 


EFDD609.ADA 
EFDE201.ADA 
EFDE207.ADA 
EFDE213.ADA 
EFDE232.ADA 
EFDE258.ADA 
EFDE244.ADA 
EFDE403.ADA 
EFDE409.ADA 
EFDE415.ADA 
EFDE434.ADA 
EFDE43A.ADA 
EFDE446.ADA 
EFDF004.ADA 
EFN9300.ADA 
EFN9610.ADA 
EGD0000.ADA 
EGD0006.ADA 
EGD0019.ADA 
EGNOOOH.ADA 
EL09101.ADA 
ELD9202.ADA 
ELD9232.ADA 
ELDE2C2.ADA 
ELDE4C2.ADA 
E000103.ADA 
E000113.ADA 
E000208.ADA 
E000312.ADA 
E000318.ADA 
E000324.ADA 
E000330.ADA 
E000336.ADA 
E000342.ADA 
E000351.ADA 
E000357.ADA 
E00036 3.ADA 
E000369.ADA 
E00036I.ADA 
E00036U.ADA 
E000377.ADA 
E000404.ADA 
E000508.ADA 
£000518.ADA 
E000606.ADA 
E000706.ADA 
E000713.ADA 
E000719.ADA 
EOD0346.ADA 
EOD036Q.ADA 
EOD036Z.ADA 
EOD0381.ADA 
EOD0526.ADA 
OURSYSR.ADA 
SF03503.ADA 
SF03513.ADA 
SF03600.ADA 
SFD3606.ADA 
SF03612.ADA 
SF03618.ADA 
SF03633.ADA 
SF03639.ADA 
SF03646.ADA 
SF03701.ADA 
SF03802.ADA 
SF04122.ADA 
SF04129.ADA 
SF0413D.ADA 
SF04311.ADA 


EFDD610.ADA 
EFDE202.ADA 
EFDE208.ADA 
EFDE214.ADA 
EFDE233.ADA 
EFDE239.ADA 
EFDE245.ADA 
EFDE404.ADA 
EFDE40A.ADA 
EFDE416.ADA 
EFDE435.ADA 
EFDE441.ADA 
EFDE450.ADA 
EFDF005.ADA 
EFN9301.ADA 
EFN9611.ADA 
EGD0001.ADA 
EGD0007.ADA 
EGD0029.ADA 
EGN0001.ADA 
EL09111.ADA 
ELD9203.ADA 
ELD9233.ADA 
ELDE2C5.ADA 
ELDE4C5.ADA 
E000104.ADA 
E000114.ADA 
E000209.ADA 
E000313.ADA 
E000319.ADA 
E000325.ADA 
E000331.ADA 
E000337.ADA 
E000343.ADA 
E000352.ADA 
E000358.ADA 
E000364.ADA 
E00036A.ADA 
E00036J.ADA 
E00036V.ADA 
E000378.ADA 
E000500.ADA 
E000509.ADA 
E000519.ADA 
E000607.ADA 
E000707.ADA 
E000714.ADA 
E000720.ADA 
EOD036C.ADA 
EOD036R.ADA 
EOD0370.ADA 
EOD0382.ADA 
EOD0527.ADA 
SAOOOOO.ADA 
SF03504.ADA 
SF03514.ADA 
SF03601.ADA 
SF03607.ADA 
SF03613.ADA 
SF03619.ADA 
SF03634.ADA 
SF03641.ADA 
SF03647.ADA 
SF03702.ADA 
SF03803.ADA 
SF04123.ADA 
SF04128.ADA 
SF0413H.ADA 
SF04312.ADA 


EFDD611.ADA 
EFDE203.ADA 
EFDE209.ADA 
EFDE215.ADA 
EFDE234.ADA 
EFDE23A.ADA 
EFDE246.ADA 
EFDE405.ADA 
EFDE411.ADA 
EFDE420.ADA 
EFDE436.ADA 
EFDE442.ADA 
EFDFOOO.ADA 
EFM9A00.ADA 
EFN9302.ADA 
EFN9612.ADA 
EGD0002.ADA 
EGD0008.ADA 
EGD0039.ADA 
EGNOOOJ.ADA 
EL09121.ADA 
ELD9212.ADA 
EIDEOOO.ADA 
ELDE2C6.ADA 
ELDE4C6.ADA 
E000107.ADA 
E000202.ADA 
E000300.ADA 
E000314.ADA 
E000320.ADA 
E000326.ADA 
E000332.ADA 
E000338.ADA 
E000347.ADA 
E0003S3.ADA 
E0003S9.ADA 
E000365.ADA 
E00036B.ADA 
E00036K.ADA 
E00036H.ADA 
E000390.ADA 
E000502.ADA 
E000512.ADA 
E000602.ADA 
E000702.ADA 
E000708.ADA 
E000715.ADA 
E000721.ADA 
E0D036D.ADA 
EOD036S.ADA 
EOD0371.ADA 
EOD0383.ADA 
EODOS28.ADA 
SAOPOOO.ADA 
SF03509.ADA 
SF03517.ADA 
SF03602.ADA 
SF03608.ADA 
SF03614.ADA 
SF03620.ADA 
SF03635.ADA 
SF03642.ADA 
SF03648.ADA 
SF03703.ADA 
SF03804.ADA 
SF04124.ADA 
SF04130.ADA 
SF04131.ADA 
SF04510.ADA 


EFDDA01.ADA 
EFDE204.ADA 
EFDE20A.ADA 
EFDE216.ADA 
EFDE235.ADA 
EFDE241.ADA 
EFDE250.ADA 
EFDE406.ADA 
EFDE412.ADA 
EFDE431.ADA 
EFDE437.ADA 
EFDE443.ADA 
EFDF001.ADA 
EFM9A01.ADA 
EFN9303.ADA 
EFN9613.ADA 
EGD0003.ADA 
EGD0009.ADA 
EGD0049.ADA 
EGNOOOK.ADA 
EL09131.ADA 
ELD9213.ADA 
ELDE2B1.ADA 
ELDE4B1.ADA 
E000001.ADA 
E000108.ADA 
E000203.ADA 
E000305.ADA 
E000315.ADA 
E000321.ADA 
E000327.ADA 
E000333.ADA 
E000339.ADA 
E000348.ADA 
E000354.ADA 
E000360.ADA 
E000366.ADA 
E00036F.ADA 
E00036L.ADA 
E000374.ADA 
E000391.ADA 
E000503.ADA 
E000513.ADA 
E000603.ADA 
E000703.ADA 
E000709.ADA 
E000716.ADA 
EOOPOOO.ADA 
EOD036E.ADA 
E0D036T.ADA 
EOD0372.ADA 
EOD0523.ADA 
EOD0529.ADA 
SF03500.ADA 
SF03510.ADA 
SF03518.ADA 
SF03603.ADA 
SF03609.ADA 
SF03615.ADA 
SF03630.ADA 
SF03636.ADA 
SF03643.ADA 
SF03649.ADA 
SF03704.ADA 
SF03805.ADA 
SF04125.ADA 
SF04131.ADA 
SF0413J.ADA 
SF04511.ADA 


EFDDA02.ADA 
EFDE205.ADA 
EFDE211.ADA 
EFDE220.ADA 
EFDE236.ADA 
EFDE242.ADA 
EFDE401.ADA 
EFDE407.ADA 
EFDE413.ADA 
EFDE432.ADA 
EFDE438.ADA 
EFDE444.ADA 
EFDF002.ADA 
EFM9A02.ADA 
EFN9510.ADA 
EGOOOOC.ADA 
EGD0004.ADA 
EGDOOOD.ADA 
EGNOOOF.ADA 
EL09000.ADA 
ELOPOOO.ADA 
ELD9222.ADA 
ELDE2B2.ADA 
ELDE4B2.ADA 
E000002.ADA 
E000109.ADA 
E000204.ADA 
E000310.ADA 
E000316.ADA 
E000322.ADA 
EOO0328.ADA 
E000334.ADA 
E000340.ADA 
E000349.ADA 
E000355.ADA 
E000361.ADA 
E000367.ADA 
E00036G.ADA 
E00036M.ADA 
E000375.ADA 
E000402.ADA 
E000504.ADA 
E000514.ADA 
E000604.ADA 
E000704.ADA 
E000710.ADA 
E000717.ADA 
EOD0344.ADA 
EOD0360.ADA 
EOD036X.ADA 
EOD0373.ADA 
EOD0524.ADA 
OURDMP.ADA 
SF03501.ADA 
SF03511.ADA 
SF03519.ADA 
SF03604.ADA 
SF03610.ADA 
SF03616.ADA 
SF03631.ADA 
SF03637.AwA 
SF03644.ADA 
SF03650.ADA 
SF03800.ADA 
SF04120.ADA 
SF04126.ADA 
SF04132.ADA 
SF0413K.ADA 
SF04512.ADA 


EFDEOOO.ADA 
EFDE206.ADA 
EFDE212.ADA 
EFDE231.ADA 
EFDE237.ADA 
EFDE243.ADA 
EFDE402.ADA 
EFDE408.ADA 
EFDE414.ADA 
EFDE433.ADA 
EFDE439.ADA 
EFDE445.ADA 
EFDF003.ADA 
EFM9A03.ADA 
EFN9511.ADA 
EGOPOOO.ADA 
EGD0005.ADA 
EGDOOOE.ADA 
EGNOOOG.ADA 
EL09100.ADA 
ELD9200.ADA 
ELD9223.ADA 
ELDE2C1.ADA 
ELDE4C1.ADA 
E000102.ADA 
E000112.ADA 
E000207.ADA 
E000311.ADA 
E000317.ADA 
E000323.ADA 
E000329.ADA 
E000335.ADA 
E000341.ADA 
E000350.ADA 
E000356.ADA 
E000362.ADA 
E000368.ADA 
E00036H.ADA 
E00036N.ADA 
E000376.ADA 
E000403.ADA 
E000507.ADA 
E000517.ADA 
E000605.ADA 
E000705.ADA 
E000711.ADA 
E000718.ADA 
EOD0345.ADA 
EOD056P.ADA 
EOD036Y.ADA 
EOD0380.ADA 
EOD0525.ADA 
OURSYS.ADA 
SF03502.ADA 
SF03512.ADA 
SF03550.ADA 
SF03605.ADA 
SF03611.ADA 
SF03617.ADA 
SF03632.ADA 
SF03638.ADA 
SF03645.ADA 
SF03700.ADA 
SF03801.ADA 
SF04121 ADA 
SF04127.ADA 
SF04133.ADA 
SF04310.ADA 
SF04513.ADA 


A-26 






Figure A-3. ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Volume ACPS03 (Continued) 


SF04514.ADA 
SF0451A.ADA 
SF0451G.ADA 
SF0451X.ADA 
SF04527.ADA 
SF04534.ADA 
SF0453A.ADA 
SF04551.ADA 
SF04557.ADA 
SF04562.ADA 
SFQ460F.ADA 
SF05200.ADA 
SF05206.ADA 
SF0520M.ADA 
SF05212.ADA 
SF0521J.ADA 
SF05302.ADA 
SF05308.ADA 
SF05405.ADA 
SF05503.ADA 
SF05509.ADA 
SF0550F.ADA 
SF06014.ADA 
SF06022.ADA 
SF06028.ADA 
SF06043.ADA 
SF06049.ADA 
SF06061.ADA 
SF06067.ADA 
SF06073.ADA 
SF06079.ADA 
SF06111.ADA 
SF06117.ADA 
SF06134.ADA 
5F06140.ADA 
5F06147.ADA 
SF06154.ADA 
SF0616 0.ADA 
SF06167.ADA 
SF06174.ADA 
SF06180.ADA 
SF06187.ADA 
SF06193.ADA 
SF06199.ADA 
SF0619F.ADA 
SF0619L.ADA 
SF0619R.ADA 
SF06427.ADA 
SF06803.ADA 
SF0680B.ADA 
SF06811.ADA 
SF06819.ADA 
SF06825.ADA 
SF09505.ADA 
SF09601.ADA 
SF09607.ADA 
SF09721.ADA 
SF09B01.ADA 
SF0C301.ADA 
SF0C307.ADA 
SF0D72D.ADA 
Sr'D4135 .ADA 
SFD413B.ADA 
SFD451M.ADA 
SFD451S.ADA 
SFD452A.ADA 
SFD455J.ADA 
SFD4569.ADA 
SFD4608.ADA 
SFD460N.ADA 


SF04515.ADA 
SF0451B.ADA 
SF0451H.ADA 
SF0451Y.ADA 
SF04529.ADA 
SF04535.ADA 
SF0453B.ADA 
SF04552.ADA 
SF04558.ADA 
SF04S63.ADA 
SF0460G.ADA 
SF05201.ADA 
SF05207.ADA 
SF05200.ADA 
SF05213.ADA 
SF0521K.ADA 
SF05303.ADA 
SF05400.ADA 
SF05406.ADA 
SF05504.ADA 
SF0550A.ADA 
SF06001.ADA 
SF06015.ADA 
SF06023.ADA 
SF06029.ADA 
SF06044.ADA 
SF06050.ADA 
SF06062.ADA 
SF06068.ADA 
SF06074.ADA 
SF06100.ADA 
SF06112.ADA 
SF06118.ADA 
SF06135.ADA 
SF06142.ADA 
SF06148.ADA 
SF06155.ADA 
SF06162.ADA 
SF06168.ADA 
SF06175.ADA 
SF06182.ADA 
SF06188.ADA 
SF0619i.ADA 
SF0619A.ADA 
SF0619G.ADA 
SF0619H.ADA 
SF06422.ADA 
SF06428.ADA 
SF06806.ADA 
SF0680C.ADA 
SF06814.ADA 
SF06820.ADA 
SF09500.ADA 
SF09506.ADA 
SF09602.ADA 
SF09710.ADA 
SF09731.ADA 
SF0C100.ADA 
SF0C302.ADA 
SFOPTO.ADA 
SFr 00.ADA 
SFwl36 .ADA 
SFD413C.ADA 
SFD451N.ADA 
SFD4523.ADA 
SFD455D.ADA 
SFD455K.ADA 
SFD4603.ADA 
SFD4609.ADA 
SFD4600.ADA 


SF04516.ADA 
SF0451C.ADA 
SF0451I.ADA 
SF0451Z.ADA 
SF04530.ADA 
SF04536.ADA 
SF0453C.ADA 
SF04553.ADA 
SF04559.ADA 
SF04600.ADA 
SF0460H.ADA 
SF05202.ADA 
SF05208.ADA 
SF0520R.ADA 
SF05214.ADA 
SF0521L.ADA 
SF05304.ADA 
SF05401.ADA 
SF05407.ADA 
SF05505.ADA 
SF0550B.ADA 
SF06009.ADA 
SF06016.ADA 
SF06024.ADA 
SF06030.ADA 
SF06045.ADA 
SF06051.ADA 
SF06063.ADA 
SF06069.ADA 
SF06075.ADA 
SF06101.ADA 
SF06113.ADA 
SF06119.ADA 
SF06136.ADA 
SF06143.ADA 
SF06149.ADA 
SF06156.ADA 
SF06163.ADA 
SF06169.ADA 
SF06176.ADA 
SF06183.ADA 
SF06189.ADA 
SF06195.ADA 
SF0619B.ADA 
SF0619H.ADA 
SF0619N.ADA 
SF06423.ADA 
SF06429.ADA 
SF06807.ADA 
SF0680D.ADA 
SF06815.ADA 
SF06821.ADA 
SF09501.ADA 
SF09507.ADA 
SF09603.ADA 
SF09711.ADA 
SF09900.ADA 
SF0C101.ADA 
SFOC303.ADA 
SF0D721.ADA 
SFD3551.ADA 
SFD4137.ADA 
SFD413E.ADA 
SFD4510.ADA 
SFD4524.ADA 
SFD455E.ADA 
SFD455L.ADA 
SFD46D4.ADA 
SFD460A.ADA 
SFD4800.ADA 


SF04517.ADA 
SF0451D.ADA 
SF0451J.ADA 
SF04520.ADA 
SF04531.ADA 
SF04537.ADA 
SF04540.ADA 
SF04554.ADA 
SF0455N.ADA 
SF04601.ADA 
SF0460I.ADA 
SF05203.ADA 
SF05209.ADA 
SF0520S.ADA 
SF05215.ADA 
SF0521N.ADA 
SF05305.ADA 
SF05402.ADA 
SF05408.ADA 
SF05506.ADA 
SF0550C.ADA 
SF06010.ADA 
SF06017.ADA 
SF06025.ADA 
SF06031.ADA 
SF06046.ADA 
SF06052.ADA 
SF06064.ADA 
SF06070.ADA 
SF06076.ADA 
SF06108.ADA 
SF06114.ADA 
SF06122.ADA 
SF061S7.ADA 
SF06144.ADA 
SF06150.ADA 
SF06157.ADA 
SF06164.ADA 
SF06170.ADA 
SF06177.ADA 
SF06184.ADA 
SF06190.ADA 
SF06196.ADA 
SF0619C.ADA 
SF0619I.ADA 
SF06190.ADA 
SF06424.ADA 
SF0642A.ADA 
SF06808.ADA 
SF0680E.ADA 
SF06816.ADA 
SF06822.ADA 
SF09502.ADA 
SF09508.ADA 
SF09604.ADA 
SF09712.ADA 
SF09901.ADA 
SF0C102.ADA 
SFOC304.ADA 
SF0D727.ADA 
SFD412A.ADA 
SFD4138.ADA 
SFD413G.ADA 
SFD451P.ADA 
SFD4525.ADA 
SFD455F.ADA 
SFD4566.ADA 
SFD4605.ADA 
SFD460B.ADA 
SFD4S01.ADA 


SF04518.ADA 
SF0451E.ADA 
SF0451V.ADA 
SF04521.ADA 
SF04532.ADA 
SF04538.ADA 
SF04541.ADA 
SF04555.ADA 
SF04550.ADA 
SF04602.ADA 
SF0460J.ADA 
SF05204.ADA 
SF0520A.ADA 
SF05210.ADA 
SF0521H.ADA 
SF05300.ADA 
SF05306.ADA 
SF05403.ADA 
SF05501.ADA 
SF05507.ADA 
SF0550D.ADA 
SF06011.ADA 
SF06018.ADA 
SF06026.ADA 
SF06032.ADA 
SF06047.ADA 
SF06053.ADA 
SF06065.ADA 
SF06071.ADA 
SF06077.ADA 
SF06109.ADA 
SF06115.ADA 
SF06132.ADA 
SF06138.ADA 
SF06145.ADA 
SF06152.ADA 
SF06158.ADA 
SF06165.ADA 
SF06172.ADA 
SF06178.ADA 
SF06185.ADA 
SF06191.ADA 
SF06197.ADA 
SF0619D.ADA 
SF0619J.ADA 
SF0619P.ADA 
SF06425.ADA 
SF0642B.ADA 
SF06809.ADA 
SF0680F.ADA 
SF06817.ADA 
SF06823.ADA 
SF09503.ADA 
SF09509.ADA 
SF09605.ADA 
SF09713.ADA 
SF09902.ADA 
SF0C103.ADA 
SF0C305.ADA 
SF0D728.ADA 
SFD412C.ADA 
SFD4139.ADA 
SFD451K.ADA 
SFD451Q.ADA 
SFD4526.ADA 
SFD455G.ADA 
SFD4567.ADA 
SFD4606.ADA 
SFD460K.ADA 
SFD4802.ADA 


SF04519.ADA 
SF0451F.ADA 
SF0451W.ADA 
SF04522.ADA 
SF04533.ADA 
SF04539.ADA 
SF04550.ADA 
SF04556.ADA 
SF04560.ADA 
SF0460E.ADA 
SF0460M.ADA 
SF05205.ADA 
SF0520B.ADA 
SF05211.ADA 
SF0521I.ADA 
SF05301.ADA 
SF05307.ADA 
SF05404.ADA 
SF05502.ADA 
SF05508.ADA 
SF0550E.ADA 
SF06013.ADA 
SF06019.ADA 
SF06027.ADA 
SF06033.ADA 
SF06048.ADA 
SF06060.ADA 
SF06066.ADA 
SF06072.ADA 
SF06078.ADA 
SF06110.ADA 
SF06116.ADA 
SF06133.ADA 
SF06139.ADA 
SF06146.ADA 
SF06153.ADA 
SF06159.ADA 
SF06166.ADA 
SF06173.ADA 
SF06179.ADA 
SF06186.ADA 
SF06192.ADA 
SF06198.ADA 
SF0619E.ADA 
SF0619K.ADA 
SF0619Q.ADA 
SF06426.ADA 
SF06802.ADA 
SF0680A.ADA 
SF06810.ADA 
SF06818.ADA 
SF06824.ADA 
SF09504.ADA 
SF09600.ADA 
SF09606.ADA 
5F09720.ADA 
SF09903.ADA 
SFOC300.ADA 
SF0C306.ADA 
SF0D729.ADA 
SFD412D.ADA 
SFD413A.ADA 
SFD451L.ADA 
SFD451R.ADA 
SFD4528.ADA 
SFD4551.ADA 
SFD4568.ADA 
SFD4607.ADA 
SFD460L.ADA 
SFD4803.ADA 


A-27 






Figure A-3. ACFS ANSI Tape Contents Volume ACPS03 (Continued) 


SFD4804.ADA 
SFD520H.ADA 
SFD5218.ADA 
SFD521E.ADA 
SFD6201.ADA 
SFD6215.ADA 
SFD6223.ADA 
SFD6229.ADA 
SFD6244.ADA 
SFD6250.ADA 
SFD6262.ADA 
SFD6268.ADA 
SFD6274.ADA 
SFD6300.ADA 
SFD6312.ADA 
SFD6318.ADA 
SFD6335.ADA 
SFD6342.ADA 
SFD6348.ADA 
SFD63S5.ADA 
SFD6362.ADA 
SFD6368.ADA 
SFD6375.ADA 
SFD6382.ADA 
SFD6388.ADA 
SFD680J.ADA 
SFDC104.ADA 
SFDC313.ADA 
SFDD604.ADA 
5FDD611.ADA 
SFDD72B.ADA 
SFDD72I.ADA 
SFDE203.ADA 
SFDE209.ADA 
SFDE215.ADA 
SFDE234.ADA 
SFDE23A.ADA 
SFDE246.ADA 
SFDE405.ADA 
SFDE411.ADA 
SFDE420.ADA 
SFDE436.ADA 
SFDE442.ADA 
SFDF000.ADA 
SFM9A00.ADA 
SFMB002.ADA 
SFMB008.ADA 
SFMB014.ADA 
SFMB020.ADA 
SFMB026.ADA 
SFHB032.ADA 
SFMB038.ADA 
SFMB044.ADA 
SFN9511.ADA 
SG0P000.ADA 
SGD0005.ADA 
SGDOOOE.ADA 
SGNOOOG.ADA 
SL 09100.ADA 
SLD9200.ADA 
Si.D9223.ADA 
SlDE 2C1.ADA 
SLDE4C1.ADA 
S000102.ADA 
SOOOl12.ADA 
S000207.ADA 
S000311.ADA 
S000317.ADA 
S000323.ADA 
S000329.ADA 


SFD520C.ADA 
SFD520I.ADA 
SFD5219.ADA 
SFD521F.ADA 
SFD6209.4DA 
SFD6216.ADA 
SFD6224.ADA 
SFD6230.ADA 
SFD6245.ADA 
SFD6251.ADA 
SFD6263.ADA 
SFD6269.ADA 
SFD6275.ADA 
SFD6301.ADA 
SFD6313.ADA 
SFD6319.ADA 
SFD6336.ADA 
SFD6343.ADA 
SFD6349.ADA 
SFD6356.ADA 
SFD6363.ADA 
SFD6369.ADA 
SFD6376.ADA 
SFD6383.ADA 
SFD6389.ADA 
SFD9000.ADA 
SFDC105.ADA 
SFDC314.ADA 
SFDD605.ADA 
SFDD722.ADA 
SFDD72C.ADA 
SFDDAOl.ADA 
SFDE204.ADA 
SFDE20A.ADA 
SFDE216.ADA 
SFDE235.ADA 
SFDE241.ADA 
SFDE250.ADA 
SFDE406.ADA 
SFDE412.ADA 
SFDE431.ADA 
SFDE437.ADA 
SFDE443.ADA 
SFDFOOl.ADA 
SFM9A01.ADA 
SFMB003.ADA 
SFMB009.ADA 
SFMB015.ADA 
SFMB021.ADA 
SFMB027.ADA 
SFHBD33.ADA 
SFHB039.ADA 
SFN9300.ADA 
SFN9610.ADA 
SGD0000.ADA 
SGD0006.ADA 
SGD0019.ADA 
SGN000H.ADA 
SL09101.ADA 
SLD9202.ADA 
SID9232.ADA 
SLDE2C2.ADA 
SLDE4C2.ADA 
SOOOl03.ADA 
S000113.ADA 
S00020B.ADA 
S000312.ADA 
S000318.ADA 
S000324.ADA 
S000330.ADA 


SFD520D.ADA 
SFD520J.ADA 
SFD521A.ADA 
SFD521K.ADA 
SFD6210.ADA 
SFD6217.ADA 
5FD6225.ADA 
SFD6231.ADA 
SFD6246.ADA 
SFD6252.ADA 
SFD6264.ADA 
SFD6270.ADA 
SFD6276.ADA 
SFD6308.ADA 
SFD6314.ADA 
SFD6322.ADA 
SFD6337.ADA 
SFD6344.ADA 
SFD6350.ADA 
SFD6357.ADA 
SFD6364.ADA 
SFD6370.ADA 
SFD6377.ADA 
SFD6384.ADA 
SFD6390.ADA 
SFD9200.ADA 
SFDC106.ADA 
SFDD600.ADA 
SFDD606.ADA 
SFDD723.ADA 
SFDD72E.ADA 
SFDDA02.ADA 
SFDE205.ADA 
SFDE211.ADA 
SFDE220.ADA 
SFDE236.ADA 
SFDE242.ADA 
SFDE401.ADA 
SFDE407.ADA 
SFDE413.ADA 
SFDE432.ADA 
SFDE438.ADA 
SFDE444.ADA 
SFDF002.ADA 
SFM9A02.ADA 
SFMB004.ADA 
SFHB010.ADA 
SFMB016.ADA 
SFMB022.ADA 
SFHB028.ADA 
SFMB034.ADA 
SFHB040.ADA 
SFN9301.ADA 
SFN96U .ADA 
SGD0001.ADA 
SGD0007.ADA 
SGD0029.ADA 
SGN000I.ADA 
SL 09111.ADA 
SiD9203.ADA 
SLD9233.ADA 
SLDE2C5.ADA 
SLDE4C5.ADA 
S000104.ADA 
S000114.ADA 
5000209.ADA 
S000313.ADA 
S000319.ADA 
S000325.ADA 
S000331.ADA 


SFD520E.ADA 
SFD520N.ADA 
SFD521B.ADA 
SFD521M.ADA 
SFD6211.ADA 
SFD6218.ADA 
SFD6226.ADA 
SFD6232.ADA 
SFD6247.ADA 
SFD6253.ADA 
SFD6265.ADA 
SFD6271.ADA 
SFD6277.ADA 
SFD6309.ADA 
SFD6315.ADA 
SFD6332.ADA 
SFD6338.ADA 
SFD6345.ADA 
SFD6352.ADA 
SFD6358.ADA 
SFD6365.ADA 
SFD6372.ADA 
SFD6378.ADA 
SFD6385.ADA 
SFD680G.ADA 
SFD9C00.ADA 
SFDC107.ADA 
SFDD601.ADA 
SFDD607.ADA 
SFDD724.ADA 
SFDD72F.ADA 
SFDEOOO.ADA 
SFDE206.ADA 
SFDE212.ADA 
SFDE231.ADA 
SFDE237.ADA 
SFDE243.ADA 
SFDE402.ADA 
SFDE408.ADA 
SFDE414.ADA 
SFDE433.ADA 
SFDE439.ADA 
SFDE445.ADA 
SFDF003.ADA 
SFM9A03.ADA 
SFMB005.ADA 
SFHB011.ADA 
SFHB017.ADA 
SFMB023.ADA 
SFMB029.ADA 
SFMB035.ADA 
SFMB041.ADA 
SFN9302.ADA 
SFM9612.ADA 
SGD0002.ADA 
SGD0008.ADA 
SGD0039.ADA 
SGNOOOJ.ADA 
SL09121.ADA 
SLD9212.ADA 
SLDEOOO.ADA 
SLDE2C6.ADA 
SLDE4C6.ADA 
S000107.ADA 
S000202.ADA 
S000300.ADA 
S000314.ADA 
S000320.ADA 
S000326.ADA 
S000332.ADA 


SFD520F.ADA 
SFD520P.ADA 
SFD521C.ADA 
SFD5210.ADA 
SFD6213.ADA 
SFD6219.ADA 
SFD6227.ADA 
SFD6233.ADA 
SFD6248.ADA 
SFD6260.ADA 
SFD6266.ADA 
SFD6272.ADA 
SFD6278.ADA 
SFD6310.ADA 
SFD6316.ADA 
SFD6333.ADA 
SFD6339.ADA 
SFD6346.ADA 
SFD63S3.ADA 
SFD6359.ADA 
SFD6366.ADA 
SFD6373.ADA 
SFD6379.ADA 
SFD6386.ADA 
SFD680H.ADA 
SFD9C01.ADA 
SFDC310.ADA 
SFDD602.ADA 
SFDD609.ADA 
SFDD725.ADA 
SFDD72G.ADA 
SFDE201.ADA 
SFDE207.ADA 
SFDE213.ADA 
SFDE232.ADA 
SFDE238.ADA 
SFDE244.ADA 
SFDE403.ADA 
SFDE409.ADA 
SFDE415.ADA 
SFDE434.ADA 
SFDE43A.ADA 
SFDE446.ADA 
SFDF004.ADA 
SFMBOOO.ADA 
5FMB006.ADA 
SFMB012.ADA 
5FMB018.ADA 
SFMB024.ADA 
SFMB030.ADA 
SFMB036.ADA 
SFMB042.ADA 
SFN9303.ADA 
SFN9613.ADA 
SGD0003.ADA 
SGD0009.ADA 
SGD0049.ADA 
SGNOOOK.ADA 
SL09131.ADA 
SLD9213.ADA 
SLDE2B1.ADA 
SLDE4B1.ADA 
S000001.ADA 
S000108.ADA 
S000203.ADA 
S00030S.ADA 
S000315.ADA 
S000321.ADA 
SOOQ327.ADA 
S000333.ADA 


SFD520G.ADA 
SFD520Q.ADA 
SFD521D.ADA 
SFD521P.ADA 
SFD6214.ADA 
SFD6222.ADA 
SFD6228.ADA 
SFD6243.ADA 
SFD6249.ADA 
SFD6261.ADA 
SFD6267.ADA 
SFD6273.ADA 
SFD6279.ADA 
SFD6311.ADA 
SFD6317.ADA 
SFD6334.ADA 
SFD6340.ADA 
SFD6347.ADA 
SFD6354.ADA 
SFD6360.ADA 
SFD6367.ADA 
SFD6374.ADA 
SFD6380.ADA 
SFD6387.ADA 
SFD680I.ADA 
SFD9C02.ADA 
SFDC311.ADA 
SFDD603.ADA 
SFDD610.ADA 
SFDD72A.ADA 
SFDD72H.ADA 
SFDE202.ADA 
SFDE208.ADA 
SFDE214.ADA 
SFDE233.ADA 
SFDE239.ADA 
SFDE245.ADA 
SFDE404.ADA 
SFDE40A.ADA 
SFDE416.ADA 
SFDE435.ADA 
SFDE441.ADA 
SFDE450.ADA 
SFDF005.ADA 
SFMB001.ADA 
SFMB007.ADA 
SFMB013.ADA 
SFHB019.ADA 
SFMB025.ADA 
SFMB031.ADA 
SFMB037.ADA 
SFMB043.ADA 
SFN9510.ADA 
SGOOOOC.ADA 
SGD0004.ADA 
SGDOOOD.ADA 
SGNOOOF.ADA 
SL09000.ADA 
SLOPOOO.ADA 
SLD9222.ADA 
SLDE2B2.ADA 
SLDE4B2.ADA 
S000002.ADA 
S000109.ADA 
S000204.ADA 
S000310.ADA 
S000316.ADA 
S000322.ADA 
S000328.ADA 
S000334.ADA 


A-28 







Figure A-3. ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Volume ACPS03 (Concluded) 


( 


S000335.ADA 
S000341.ADA 
S00035C.ADA 
5000356.ADA 
S000362.ADA 
S000368.ADA 
S00036H.ADA 
S00036N.ADA 
5000376.ADA 
S000403.ADA 
S000507.ADA 
S000517.ADA 
S000605.ADA 
S000705.ADA 
S00071I.ADA 
S000718.ADA 
S0D0345.ADA 
SOD036P.ADA 
SOD036Y.ADA 
SOD0380.ADA 
SOD0525.ADA 
TA0P000.ADA 
TF03509.ADA 
TF03517.ADA 


S000336.ADA 
5000342.ADA 
S000351.ADA 
S000357.ADA 
S000363.ADA 
5000369.ADA 
S00036I.ADA 
S00036U.ADA 
S000377.ADA 
5000404.ADA 
S000508.ADA 
S000518.ADA 
S000606.ADA 
S000706.ADA 
S000713.ADA 
S000719.ADA 
SOD0346.ADA 
50D036Q.ADA 
SOD036Z.ADA 
SOD0381.ADA 
SOD0526.ADA 
TF03500.ADA 
TF03510.ADA 
TF03518.ADA 


S000337.ADA 
S000343.ADA 
S000352.ADA 
S000358.ADA 
S000364.ADA 
S00036A.ADA 
S00036J.ADA 
500036V.ADA 
S000378.ADA 
S000500.ADA 
S000509.ADA 
SOD0519.ADA 
S000607.ADA 
S000707.ADA 
5000714.ADA 
S000720.ADA 
SOD036C.ADA 
SOD036R.ADA 
S0D0370.ADA 
SOD0382.ADA 
SOD0527.ADA 
TF03501.ADA 
TF03511.ADA 
TF03519.ADA 


5000338.ADA 
S000347.ADA 
S000353.ADA 
S000359.ADA 
S000365.ADA 
S00036B.ADA 
S00036K.ADA 
S00036H.ADA 
S000390.ADA 
S000502.ADA 
S000512.ADA 
5000602.ADA 
5000702.ADA 
S000708.ADA 
5000715.ADA 
S000721.ADA 
S0D036D.ADA 
SOD036S.ADA 
SOD0371.ADA 
S0D0383.ADA 
S0D0528.ADA 
TF03502.ADA 
TF03512.ADA 
TF03550.ADA 


S000339.ADA 
S000348.ADA 
S000354.ADA 
S000360.ADA 
S000366.ADA 
S00036F.ADA 
S00036L.ADA 
S000374.ADA 
5000391.ADA 
S000503.ADA 
S000513.ADA 
S000603.ADA 
S000703.ADA 
S000709.ADA 
5000716.ADA 
SOOPOOO.ADA 
S0D036E.ADA 
S0D036T.ADA 
SOD0372.ADA 
S0D0523.ADA 
SOD0529.ADA 
TF03503.ADA 
TF03513.ADA 


5000340.ADA 
S000349.ADA 
S000355.ADA 
SD00361.ADA 
S000367.ADA 
S00036G.ADA 
S00036M.ADA 
S000375.ADA 
5000402.ADA 
S000504.ADA 
5000514.ADA 
5000604.ADA 
S000704.ADA 
S000710.ADA 
S000717.ADA 
50D0344.ADA 
50D0360.ADA 
50D036X.ADA 
SOD0373.ADA 
SOD0524.ADA 
TA00000.ADA 
TF03504.ADA 
TF03514.ADA 


Total of 1396 files 


A-29 









Figure A-4. ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Volume ACPS04 


TF03600.ADA TF03601.ADA 
TF03606.ADA TF03607.ADA 
TF03612.ADA TF03613.ADA 
TF03618.ADA TF03619.ADA 
TF03633.ADA TF03634.ADA 
TF03639.ADA TF03641.ADA 
TF03646.ADA TF03647.ADA 
TF03701.ADA TF03702.ADA 
TF03802.ADA TF03803.ADA 
TF04122.ADA TF04123.ADA 
TF04129.ADA TF0412B.ADA 
TF0413D.ADA TF0413H.ADA 
TF04311.ADA TF04312.ADA 
TF04514.ADA TF04515.ADA 
TF0451A.ADA TF0451B.ADA 
TF0451G.ADA TF0451H.ADA 
TF0451X.ADA TF0451Y.ADA 
TF04527.ADA TF04529.ADA 
TF04534.ADA TF04535.ADA 
TF0453A.ADA TF0453B.ADA 
TF04551.ADA TF04552.ADA 
TF04557.ADA TF0455S.ADA 
TF04562.ADA TF04563.ADA 
TF0460F.ADA TF0460G.ADA 
TF05200.ADA TF05201.ADA 
TF05206.ADA TF05207.ADA 
TF0520M.ADA TF05200.ADA 
TF05212.ADA TF05213.ADA 
TF0521J.ADA TF0521K.ADA 
TF05302.ADA TF05303.ADA 
TF05308.ADA TF05400.ADA 
TF05405.ADA TF05406.ADA 
TF05503.ADA TF05504.ADA 
TF05509.ADA TF0550A.ADA 
TF0550F.ADA TF06001.ADA 
TF06014.ADA TF06015.ADA 
TF06022-ADA TF06023.ADA 
TF06028.ADA TF06029.ADA 
TF06043.ADA TF06044.ADA 
TF06049.ADA TF06050.ADA 
TF06061.ADA TF06062.ADA 
TF06067.ADA TF06068.ADA 
TF06073.ADA TF06074.ADA 
TF06079.ADA TF06100.ADA 
TF06111.ADA TF06112.ADA 
TF06117.ADA TF06118.ADA 
TF06134.ADA TF06135.ADA 
TF06140.ADA TF06142.ADA 
TF06147.ADA TF06148.ADA 
TF06154.ADA TF06155.ADA 
TF06160.ADA TF06162.ADA 
TF06167.ADA TF06168.ADA 
TF06174.ADA TF06175-ADA 
TF0618D.ADA TF06182.ADA 
TF06187.ADA TF06188.ADA 
TF06193.ADA TF06194.ADA 
TF06199.ADA TF0619A.ADA 
TF0619F.ADA TF0619G.ADA 
TF0619L.ADA TF0619M.ADA 
TF0619R.ADA TF06422.ADA 
T r06427.ADA TF06428.ADA 
TF06803.ADA TF06806.ADA 
TF0680B.ADA TF0680C.ADA 
TF06811.ADA TF06814.ADA 
TF06819.ADA TF06820.ADA 
TF06825.ADA TF09500.ADA 
TF09505.ADA TF09506.ADA 
TF09601.ADA TF09602.ADA 
TF09607.ADA TF09710.ADA 


TF03602.ADA TF03603.ADA 
TF03608.ADA TF03609.ADA 
TF03614.ADA TF03615.ADA 
TF03620.ADA TF03630.ADA 
TF03635.ADA TF03636.ADA 
TF03642.ADA TF03643.ADA 
TF03648.ADA TF03649.ADA 
TF03703.ADA TF03704.ADA 
TF03804.ADA TF03805.ADA 
TF04124.ADA TF04125.ADA 
TF04130.ADA TF04131.ADA 
TF0413I.ADA TF0413J.ADA 
TF04510.ADA TF04511.ADA 
TF04516.ADA TF04517.ADA 
TF0451C.ADA TF0451D.ADA 
TF0451I.ADA TF0451J.ADA 
TF0451Z.ADA TF04S20.ADA 
TF04530.ADA TF04531.ADA 
TF04536.ADA TF04S37.ADA 
TF0453C.ADA TF04540.ADA 
TF04S53.ADA TF04554.ADA 
TF04559.ADA TF0455N.ADA 
TF04600.ADA TF04601.ADA 
TF0460H.ADA TF0460I.ADA 
TF05202.ADA TF0S203.ADA 
TF05208.ADA TF05209.ADA 
TF0520R.ADA TF0520S.ADA 
TF05214.ADA TF05215.ADA 
TF0521L.ADA TF0521N.ADA 
TF05304.ADA TF05305.ADA 
TF05401.ADA TF05402.ADA 
TF05407.ADA TF054D8.ADA 
TF0S505.ADA TF05506.ADA 
TF0550B.ADA TF055CC.ADA 
TF06009.ADA TF06010.ADA 
TF06016.ADA TF06017.ADA 
TF06024.ADA TF06D25.ADA 
TF06 030.ADA TF06031.ADA 
TF06045.ADA TF06046.ADA 
TF06 051.ADA TF06 052.ADA 
TF06063.ADA TF06064.ADA 
TF06 069.ADA TF06070.ADA 
TF06075.ADA TF06076.ADA 
TF06101.ADA TF06108.ADA 
TF06113.ADA TF06114.ADA 
TF06119.ADA TF06122.ADA 
TF06136.ADA TF06137.ADA 
TF06143.ADA TF06144.ADA 
TF06149.ADA TF06150.ADA 
TF06156.ADA TF06157.ADA 
TF06163.ADA TF06164.ADA 
TF06169.ADA TF06170.ADA 
TF06176.ADA TF06177.ADA 
TF06183.ADA TF06184.ADA 
TF06189.ADA TF06190.ADA 
TF06195.ADA TF06196.ADA 
TF0619B.ADA TF0619C.ADA 
TF0619H.ADA TF0619X.ADA 
TF0619N.ADA TF06190.ADA 
TF06423.ADA TF06424.ADA 
TF06429.ADA TF0642A.ADA 
TF06807.ADA TF0680B.ADA 
TF0680D.ADA TF0680E.ADA 
TF06815.ADA TF06816.ADA 
TF06821.ADA TF06822.ADA 
TF09501.ADA TF09502.ADA 
TF09507.ADA TF09508.ADA 
TF09603.ADA TF09604.ADA 
TF09711.ADA TF09712.ADA 


TF03604.ADA TF03605.ADA 
TF03610.ADA TF03611.ADA 
TF03616.ADA TF03617.ADA 
TF03631.ADA TF03632.ADA 
TF03637.ADA TF03638.ADA 
TF03644.ADA TF03645.ADA 
TF03650.ADA TF03700.ADA 
TF03800.ADA TF03801.ADA 
TF04120.ADA TF04121.ADA 
TF04126.ADA TF04127.ADA 
TF04132.ADA TF04133.ADA 
TF0413K.ADA TF04310.ADA 
TF04512.ADA TF04513.ADA 
TF04518.ADA TF04519.ADA 
TF0451E.ADA TF0451F.ADA 
TF0451V.ADA TF0451H.ADA 
TF04521.ADA TF04522.ADA 
TF04532.ADA TF04533.ADA 
TF04538.ADA TF04539.ADA 
TF04541.ADA TF04550.ADA 
TF04555.ADA TF04556.ADA 
TF04550.ADA TF04560.ADA 
TF04602.ADA TF0460E.ADA 
TF0460J.ADA TF0460H.ADA 
TF05204.ADA TF05205.ADA 
TF0520A.ADA TF0520B.ADA 
TF05210.ADA TF05211.ADA 
TF0521H.ADA TF0521I.ADA 
TF05300.ADA TF05301.ADA 
TF05306.ADA TF05307.ADA 
TF05403.ADA TF05404.ADA 
TF05501.ADA TF05502.ADA 
TF05507.ADA TF05508.ADA 
TF0550D.ADA TF0550E.ADA 
TF06011.ADA TF06013.ADA 
TF06018.ADA TF06019.ADA 
TF06026.ADA TF06027.ADA 
TF06032.ADA TF06033.ADA 
TF06047.ADA TF06048.ADA 
TF06053.ADA TF06060.ADA 
TF06065.ADA TF06066.ADA 
TF06071.ADA TF06072.ADA 
TF06077.ADA TF06078.ADA 
TF06109.ADA TF06110.ADA 
TF06115.ADA TF06116.ADA 
TF06132.ADA TF06133.ADA 
TF06138.ADA TF06139.ADA 
TF06145.ADA TF06146.ADA 
TF06152.ADA TF06153.ADA 
TF06158.ADA TF06159.ADA 
TF06165.ADA TF06166.ADA 
TF06172.ADA TF06173.ADA 
TF06178.ADA TF06179.ADA 
TF06185.ADA TF06186.ADA 
TF06191.ADA TF06192.ADA 
TF04197.ADA TF06198.ADA 
TF0619D.ADA TF0619E.ADA 
TF0619J.ADA TF0619K.ADA 
TF0619P.ADA TF06190.ADA 
TF06425.ADA TF06426.ADA 
TF0642B.ADA TF06802.ADA 
TF06809.ADA TF0680A.ADA 
TF0680F.ADA TF06810.ADA 
TF06617.ADA TF06818.ADA 
TF06823.ADA TF06824.ADA 
TF09503.ADA T. r 0950A ADA 
TF09509.ADA TF09600.ADA 
TF09605.ADA TF09606.ADA 
TF09713.ADA TF09720.ADA 







Figure A-4. ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Volume ACPS04 (Continued) 


TF09721.ADA 
TF09B01.ADA 
TF0C301.ADA 
TF0C307.ADA 
TF0D72D.ADA 
TFD4135.ADA 
TFD413B.ADA 
TFD451M.ADA 
TFD451S.ADA 
TFD452A.ADA 
TFD455J.ADA 
TFD4569.ADA 
TFD4608.ADA 
TFD460N.ADA 
TFD4804.ADA 
TFD520H.ADA 
TFD5218.ADA 
TFD521E.ADA 
TFD6201.ADA 
TFD6215.ADA 
TFD6223.ADA 
TFD6229.ADA 
TFD6244.ADA 
TFD6250.ADA 
TFD6262.ADA 
TFD6268.ADA 
TFD6274.ADA 
TFD6300.ADA 
TFD6312.ADA 
TFD6318.ADA 
TFD6335.ADA 
TFD6342.ADA 
TFD6348.ADA 
TFD6355.ADA 
TFD6362.ADA 
TFD6368.ADA 
TFD6375.ADA 
TFD6382.ADA 
TFD6388.ADA 
TFD680J.ADA 
TFDC104.ADA 
TFDC313.ADA 
TFDD604.ADA 
TFDD611.ADA 
TFDD72B.ADA 
TFDD72I.ADA 
TFDE203.ADA 
TFDE209.ADA 
TFDE215.ADA 
TFDE234.ADA 
TFDE23A.ADA 
TFDE246.ADA 
TFDE405.ADA 
TFDE411.ADA 
TFDE420.ADA 
TFDE436.ADA 
TFDE442.ADA 
TFDF000.ADA 
TFM9AD0.ADA 
TFMB002.ADA 
TFMBD08.ADA 
TrMB014.ADA 
TFMB020.ADA 
TFMB026.ADA 
TFHB032.ADA 
TFHB038.ADA 
TFMB044.ADA 
TFN9511.ADA 
TC0P000.ADA 
TGD0005.ADA 


TF09731.ADA 
TF0C100.ADA 
TF0C302.ADA 
TF0D720.ADA 
TF0P000.ADA 
TFD4136.ADA 
TFD413C.ADA 
TFD451N.ADA 
TFD4523.ADA 
TFD455D.ADA 
TFD455K.ADA 
TFD4603.ADA 
TFD4609.ADA 
TFD4600.ADA 
TFDS20C.ADA 
TFD520I.ADA 
TFD5219.ADA 
TFD521F.ADA 
TFD6209.ADA 
TFD6216.ADA 
TFD6224.ADA 
TFD6230.ADA 
TFD6245.ADA 
TFD6251.ADA 
TFD6263.ADA 
TFD6269.ADA 
TFD6275.ADA 
TFD6301.ADA 
TFD6313.ADA 
TFD6319.ADA 
TFD6336.ADA 
TFD6343.ADA 
TFD6349.ADA 
TFD6356.ADA 
TFD6363.ADA 
TFD6369.ADA 
TFD6376.ADA 
TFD6383.ADA 
TFD6389.ADA 
TFD9000.ADA 
TFDC105.ADA 
TFDC314.ADA 
TFDD605.ADA 
TFDD722.ADA 
TFDD72C.ADA 
TFDDA01.ADA 
TFDE204.ADA 
TFDE20A.ADA 
TFDE216.ADA 
TFDE235.ADA 
TFDE241.ADA 
TFDE250.ADA 
TFDE406.ADA 
TFDE412.ADA 
TFDE431.ADA 
TFDE437.ADA 
TFDE443.ADA 
TFDFOOl.ADA 
TFH9A01.ADA 
TFHB003.ADA 
TFHB0D9.ADA 
TFMB015.ADA 
TFMB021.ADA 
TFMB027.ADA 
TFMB033.ADA 
TFHB039.ADA 
TFN9300.ADA 
TFN9610.ADA 
TCD0000.ADA 
TGD0006.ADA 


TF09900.ADA 
TF0C101.ADA 
TFOC303.ADA 
TF0D721.ADA 
TFD3551.ADA 
TFD4137.ADA 
TFD413E.ADA 
TFD4510.ADA 
TFD4524.ADA 
TFD455E.ADA 
TFD455L.ADA 
TFD4604.ADA 
TFD460A.ADA 
TFD4800.ADA 
TFD520D.ADA 
TFD520J.ADA 
TFD521A.ADA 
TFD521K.ADA 
TFD6210.ADA 
TFD6217.ADA 
TFD6225.ADA 
TFD6232.ADA 
TFD6246.ADA 
TFD6252.ADA 
TFD6264.ADA 
TFD6270.ADA 
TFD6276.ADA 
TFD6308.ADA 
TFD6314.ADA 
TFD6322.ADA 
TFD6337.ADA 
TFD6344.ADA 
TFD6350.ADA 
TFD6357.ADA 
TFD6364.ADA 
TFD6370.ADA 
TFD6377.ADA 
TFD6384.ADA 
TFD6390.ADA 
TFD9200.ADA 
TFDC106.ADA 
TFDD600.ADA 
TFDD606.ADA 
TFDD723.ADA 
TFDD72E.ADA 
TFDDA02.ADA 
TFDE205.ADA 
TFDE211.ADA 
TFDE220.ADA 
TFDE236.ADA 
TFDE242.ADA 
TFDE401.ADA 
TFDE407.ADA 
TFDE413.ADA 
TFDE432.ADA 
TFDE438.ADA 
TFDE444.ADA 
TFDF002.ADA 
TFM9A02.ADA 
TFMB004.ADA 
TFHB010.ADA 
TFMB016.ADA 
TFMB022.ADA 
TFMB028.ADA 
TFMBD34.ADA 
TFMB040.ADA 
TFN9301.ADA 
TFN961I.ADA 
TCD000I.ADA 
TGD0007.ADA 


TF09901.ADA 
TF0CI02.ADA 
TF0C304.ADA 
TF0D727.ADA 
TFD412A.ADA 
TFD4138.ADA 
TFD413G.ADA 
TFD4S1P.ADA 
TFD4525.ADA 
TFD455F.ADA 
TFD4566.ADA 
TFD4605.ADA 
TFD460B.ADA 
TFD4801.ADA 
TFD520E.ADA 
TFD520N.ADA 
TFD521B.ADA 
TFD521M.ADA 
TFD6211.ADA 
TFD6218.ADA 
TFD6226.ADA 
TFD6232.ADA 
TFD6247.ADA 
TFD6253.ADA 
TFD6265.ADA 
TFD6271.ADA 
TFD6277.ADA 
TFD6309.ADA 
TFD6315.ADA 
TFD6332.ADA 
TFD6338.ADA 
TFD6343.ADA 
TFD6352.ADA 
TFD6358.ADA 
TFD6385.ADA 
TFD6372.ADA 
TFD6378.ADA 
TFD6385.ADA 
TFD680G.ADA 
TFD9C00.ADA 
TFDC107.ADA 
TFDD601.ADA 
TFDD607.ADA 
TFDD724.ADA 
TFDD72F.ADA 
TFDEOOO.ADA 
TFDE206.ADA 
TFDE212.ADA 
TFDE231.ADA 
TFDE237.ADA 
TFDE243.ADA 
TFDE402.ADA 
TFDE408.ADA 
TFDE414.ADA 
TFDE433.ADA 
TFDE439.ADA 
TFDE445.ADA 
TFDF003.ADA 
TFM9A03.ADA 
TFHBOOS.ADA 
TFMB011.ADA 
TFMB017.ADA 
TFNB025.ADA 
TFMB029.ADA 
TFHB035.ADA 
TFMB041.ADA 
TFN9302.ADA 
TFH9612.ADA 
TGD0002.ADA 
TGD0008.ADA 


TF09902.ADA 
TF0C103.ADA 
TF0C305.ADA 
TF0D728.ADA 
TFD412C.ADA 
TFD4139.ADA 
TFD451K.ADA 
TFD451Q.ADA 
TFD4526.ADA 
TFD455G.ADA 
TFD4567.ADA 
TFD4606.ADA 
TFD460K.ADA 
TFD4802.ADA 
TFD520F.ADA 
TFD520P.ADA 
TFD521C.ADA 
TFD5210.ADA 
TFD6213.ADA 
TFD6219.ADA 
TFD6227.ADA 
TFD6233.ADA 
TFD6248.ADA 
TFD6260.ADA 
TFD6266.ADA 
TFD6272.ADA 
TFD6278.ADA 
TFD6310.ADA 
TFD6316.ADA 
TFD6333.ADA 
TFD6339.ADA 
TFD6346.ADA 
TFD6353.ADA 
TFD6359.ADA 
TFD6366.ADA 
TFD6373.ADA 
TFD6379.ADA 
TFD6386.ADA 
TFD680H.ADA 
TFD9C01.ADA 
TFDC310.ADA 
TFDD602.ADA 
TFDD609.ADA 
TFDD725.ADA 
TFDD72G.ADA 
TFDE201.ADA 
TFDE207.ADA 
TFDE213.ADA 
TFDE232.ADA 
TFDE238.ADA 
TFDE244.ADA 
TFDE403.ADA 
TFDE409.ADA 
TFDE4 j.ADA 
TFDE434.ADA 
TFDE43A.ADA 
TFDE446.ADA 
TFDF004.ADA 
TFHB000.ADA 
TFMB006.ADA 
TFMB012.ADA 
TFMB018.ADA 
TFMB024.ADA 
TFHB030.ADA 
TFMB036.ADA 
TFMB042.ADA 
TFN9303.ADA 
TFN9613.ADA 
TGD0003.ADA 
TGD0009.ADA 


TF09903.ADA 
TF0C300.ADA 
TF0C306.ADA 
TF0D729.ADA 
TFD412D.ADA 
TFD413A.ADA 
TFD451L.ADA 
TFD451R.ADA 
TFD4528.ADA 
TFD455I.ADA 
TFD4568.ADA 
TFD4607.ADA 
TFD460L.ADA 
TFD4803.ADA 
TFD520G.ADA 
TFD520Q.ADA 
TFD521D.ADA 
TFD521P.ADA 
TFD6214.ADA 
TFD6222.ADA 
TFD6228.ADA 
TFD6243.ADA 
TFD6249.ADA 
TFD6261.ADA 
TFD6267.ADA 
TFD6273.ADA 
TFD6279.ADA 
TFD6311.ADA 
TFD6317.ADA 
TFD6334.ADA 
TFD6340.ADA 
TFD6347.ADA 
TFD6354.ADA 
TFD6360.ADA 
TFD6367.ADA 
TF06374.ADA 
TFD6380.ADA 
TFD6387.ADA 
TFD680I.ADA 
TFD9C02.ADA 
TFDC311.ADA 
TFDD603.ADA 
TFDD6I0.ADA 
TFDD72A.ADA 
TFDD72M.ADA 
TFDE202.ADA 
TFDE208.ADA 
TFDE214.ADA 
TFDE233.ADA 
TFDE239.ADA 
TFDE245.ADA 
TFDE404.ADA 
TFDE40A.ADA 
TFDE416.ADA 
TFDE435.ADA 
TFDE441.ADA 
TFDE45D.ADA 
TFDF005.ADA 
TFHBOOl.ADA 
TFMB007.ADA 
TFHB013.ADA 
TFMB019.ADA 
TFHB025.ADA 
TFMB031.ADA 
TFHB037.ADA 
TFMB043.ADA 
TFN9510.ADA 
TGOOOOC.ADA 
TGD0004.ADA 
TGD000D.ADA 


A-31 






Figure A-4. ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Volume ACPS04 (Continued) 


TGD000E.ADA 
TGN000G.ADA 
TL09100.ADA 
TLD9200.ADA 
TLD9223.ADA 
TLDE2C1.ADA 
TLDE4C1.ADA 
T000102.ADA 
T000112.ADA 
T000207.ADA 
T000311.ADA 
TOOD317.ADA 
T000323.ADA 
T000329.ADA 
T00033S.ADA 
T000341.ADA 
T000330.ADA 
T000356.ADA 
T000362.ADA 
T000368.ADA 
T00036H.ADA 
T00036N.ADA 
T000376.ADA 
T000403.ADA 
T000507.ADA 
T000517.ADA 
T000605.ADA 
T0007 05.ADA 
T000711.ADA 
T000718.ADA 
TOD0345.ADA 
TOD036P.ADA 
T0D036Y.ADA 
TOD0380.ADA 
T0D0525.ADA 
ALD9204.DEC 
ALDE2C7.DEC 
CLD9204.DEC 
CLDE2C7.DEC 
ELD9204.DEC 
ELDE2C7.DEC 
SLD9204.DEC 
SLDE2C7.DEC 
TID9204.DEC 
TLDE2C7.DEC 
AGD0059.DEC 
AFD9C04.DEC 
SFD9C04.DEC 
OURTYP.SPA 
OURTYPR.TIM 
AFDC107.USE 
CFDD608.USE 
OURTYP.USE 
SFDD608.USE 
FAOPOOO.CMN 
FOOPOOO.CMN 
FF03503.F0R 
FF03603.FOR 
FF04120.FOR 
FF04126.FOR 
FF04513.FOR 
FF04519.FOR 
FF0451F.FOR 
FF0451W.FOR 
FF04522.FOR 
FF04534.FOR 
FF0453A.FOR 
FF04553.FOR 
FF04559.FOR 
FF04602.FOR 


TGD0019.ADA 
TGN000H.ADA 
TL09101.ADA 
TLD9202.ADA 
TLD9232.ADA 
TLDE2C2.ADA 
TLDE4C2.ADA 
T000103.ADA 
T00D113.ADA 
T000208.ADA 
T000312.ADA 
T000318.ADA 
T000324.ADA 
T000330.ADA 
T000336.ADA 
T000342.ADA 
T000351.ADA 
T000357.ADA 
T000363.ADA 
T000369.ADA 
T00036I.ADA 
T00036U.ADA 
T000377.ADA 
T000404.ADA 
T000508.ADA 
T000518.ADA 
T000606.ADA 
T000706.ADA 
T000713.ADA 
T000719.ADA 
TOD0346.ADA 
TOD036Q.ADA 
TOD036Z.ADA 
TOD0381.ADA 
TOD0526.ADA 
ALD9214.DEC 
ALDE2C8.DEC 
CLD9214.DEC 
CLDE2C8.DEC 
ELD9214.DEC 
ELDE2C8.DEC 
SLD9214.DEC 
SLDE2C8.DEC 
TLD9214.DEC 
TLDE2C8.DEC 
CGD0059.DEC 
CFD9C03.DEC 
TFD9CQ3.DEC 
OURTYPR.SPA 
ADASYS.USE 
AFDD608.USE 
EFD4128.USE 
OURTYPR.USE 
TFD4128.USE 
FF0P000.CMN 
OURFOR.CMN 
FF03504.FOR 
FF03605.FOR 
FF04121.FOR 
FF04127.FOR 
FF04514.FOR 
FF0451A.FOR 
FF0451G.FOR 
FF0451X.FOR 
FF04529.FOR 
FF04535.FOR 
FF04540.FOR 
FF04554.FOR 
Ff04560.FOR 
FF0460I.FOR 


TGD0029.ADA 
TGN000I.ADA 
TL09111.ADA 
TLD9203.ADA 
TLD9233.ADA 
TLDE2C5.ADA 
TLDE4C5.ADA 
T000104.ADA 
T000114.ADA 
T000209.ADA 
T000313.ADA 
T000319.ADA 
T000325.ADA 
T000331.ADA 
T000337.ADA 
T000343.ADA 
T000352.ADA 
T000358.ADA 
T000364.ADA 
T00036A.ADA 
T00036J.ADA 
T00036V.ADA 
T000378.ADA 
T000500.ADA 
T000509.ADA 
T000519.ADA 
T000607.ADA 
T000707.ADA 
T000714.ADA 
T000720.ADA 
TOD036C.ADA 
TOD036R.ADA 
TOD0370.ADA 
TOD0382.ADA 
TOD0527.ADA 
ALD9224.DEC 
ALDE4C3.DEC 
CLD9224.DEC 
CLDE4C3.DEC 
ELD9224.DEC 
ELDE4C3.DEC 
SLD9224.DEC 
SLDE4C3.DEC 
TLD9224.DEC 
TLDE4C3.DEC 
EGD0059.DEC 
CFD9C04.DEC 
TFD9C04.DEC 
OURSPC.TIM 
ADATYP.USE 
CFD4128.USE 
EFD451U.USE 
SFD4128.USE 
TFD451U.USE 
FFDEOOO.CHN 
SYSFOR.CMN 
FFC3514.FOR 
FF03606.FOR 
FF04122.FOR 
FF04129.FOR 
FF04515.FOR 
FF0451B.FOR 
FF0451M.FOR 
FF0451Y.FOR 
FF04530.FOR 
FF04536.FOR 
FF04541.FOR 
FF04555.FOR 
FF04562.FOR 
FF05200.FOR 


TGD0039.ADA 
TGN000J.ADA 
TL09121.ADA 
TLD9212.ADA 
TLDE000.ADA 
TLDE2C6.ADA 
TLDE4C6.ADA 
T000107.ADA 
T000202.ADA 
T000300.ADA 
T000314.ADA 
T000320.ADA 
T000326.ADA 
T00C332.ADA 
T000338.ADA 
T000347.ADA 
T000353.ADA 
T000359.ADA 
T000365.ADA 
T00036B.ADA 
T00036K.ADA 
T00036W.ADA 
T000390.ADA 
T000502.ADA 
T000512.ADA 
T000602.ADA 
T000702.ADA 
T000708.ADA 
T000715.ADA 
T000721.ADA 
TOD036D.ADA 
TOD036S.ADA 
TOD0371.ADA 
T0D0383.ADA 
TOD0528.ADA 
ALD9234.DEC 
ALDE4C4.DEC 
CLD9234.DEC 
CLDE4C4.DEC 
ELD9234.DEC 
ELDE4C4.DEC 
SLD9234.DEC 
SLDE4C4.DEC 
TLD9234.DEC 
TLDE4C4.DEC 
SGD0059.DEC 
EFD9C05.DEC 
OURSPC.SPA 
OURSYS.TIM 
AFD4128.USE 
CFD451U.USE 
EFDC107.USE 
SFD451U.USE 
TFD4803.USE 
FGOPOOO.CMN 
FA00000.FOR 
FF03519.FOR 
FF03608.FOR 
FF04123.FOR 
FF04510.FOR 
FF04516.FOR 
FF0451C.FOR 
FF0451I.FOR 
FF0451Z.FOR 
FF04531.FOR 
FF04537.FOR 
FF04550.FOR 
FF04556.FOR 
FF04563.FOR 
FF05Z01.FOR 


TGD0049.ADA 
TGNOOOK.ADA 
TL09131.ADA 
TLD9213.ADA 
TLDE2B1.ADA 
TLDE4B1.ADA 
T000001.ADA 
T000108.ADA 
T000203.ADA 
T000305.ADA 
T000315.ADA 
T000321.ADA 
T000327.ADA 
T000333.ADA 
T000339.ADA 
T000348.ADA 
T000354.ADA 
T000360.ADA 
T000366.ADA 
T00036F.ADA 
T00036L.ADA 
T000374.ADA 
T000391.ADA 
T000503.ADA 
T000513.ADA 
T000603.ADA 
T000703.ADA 
T000709.ADA 
T000716.ADA 
TOOPOOO.ADA 
TOD036E.ADA 
TOD036T.ADA 
TOD0372.ADA 
TDD0523.ADA 
T0D0529.ADA 
ALDE2C3.DEC 
ALDE4C7.DEC 
CLDE2C5.DEC 
CLDE4C7.DEC 
ELDE2C3.DEC 
ELDE4C7.DEC 
SLDE2C3.DEC 
SLDE4C7.DEC 
TLDE2C5.DEC 
TLDE4C7.DEC 
TGD0059.DEC 
EFD9C04.DEC 
OURSYS.SPA 
OURSYSR.TIM 
AFD451U.USE 
CFD4803.USE 
EFDD608.USE 
SFD4803.USE 
TFDC107.USE 
FGDOOOO.CMN 
FF03500.FOR 
FF03600.FOR 
FF03609.FOR 
FF04124.FOR 
FF04511.FOR 
FF04517.FOR 
FF0451D.FwR 
FF0451J.FOR 
FF04520.FOR 
FF04532.FOR 
FF04538.FOR 
FF04551.FOR 
FF04557.FOR 
FF04600.FOR 
FF05202.FOR 


TGNOOOF.ADA 
TL09000.ADA 
TL0P000.ADA 
TLD9222.ADA 
TLDE2B2.ADA 
TLDE4B2.ADA 
T000002.ADA 
T000109.ADA 
T000204.ADA 
T000310.ADA 
TOOD316.ADA 
T000322.ADA 
T000328.ADA 
T000334.ADA 
T000340.ADA 
T000349.ADA 
T000355.ADA 
T000361.ADA 
TOOU367.ADA 
T00036G.ADA 
T00036M.ADA 
T000375.ADA 
T000402.ADA 
T0005D4.ADA 
T000514.ADA 
T000604.ADA 
T000704.ADA 
T000710.ADA 
T000717.ADA 
TOD0344.ADA 
T0D036D.ADA 
TOD036X.ADA 
TOD0373.ADA 
TOD0524.ADA 
MATHFUN.DEC 
ACDE2C4.DEC 
ALDE4C8.DEC 
CLDE2C4.DEC 
CLDE4C8.DE 
ELDE2C4.DEC 
ELDE4C. .DEC 
SLDE2C4.DEC 
SLDE4C8.DEC 
TLDE2C4.DEC 
TLDE4C8.DEC 
AFD9C03.DEC 
SFD9C03.DEC 
OURSYSR.SPA 
OURTYP.TIM 
AFD4803.USE 
CFDC107.USE 
OURSPC.USE 
SFDC107.USE 
TFDD608.USE 
F000002.CMN 
FFC3502.FOR 
FF03602.FOR 
FF03620.FOR 
FF04125.FOR 
FF04512.FOR 
FF04518.FOR 
FF0451E.FOR 
FF0451V.FOR 
FF04521.FOR 
FF04533.FOR 
FF04559.FOR 
FF04552.FOR 
FF04558.FOR 
FF04601.FOR 
FF05203.FOR 


A-32 




Figure A-4. ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Volume ACPS04 (Concluded) 



I 


FF05204.FOR 
FF0520A.FOR 
FF05215.FOR 
FF05301.FOR 
FF05307.FOR 
FF05404.FOR 
FF05502.FOR 
FF05508.FOR 
FF0550E.FOR 
FF06013.FOR 
FF06019.FOR 
FF06027.FOR 
FF06033.FOR 
FF06048.FOR 
FF06060.F0R 
FF06066 .FOR 
FF06072.FOR 
FF06078.FOR 
FF06110.FOR 
FF06116.FOR 
FF06133.FOR 
FF06139.FOR 
FF06146.FOR 
FF06153.FOR 
FF06159.FOR 


FF05205.FOR 
FF05210.FOR 
FF0521H.FOR 
FF05S02.FOR 
FF05308.FOR 
FF05405.FOR 
FF05503.FOR 
FF05509.FOR 
FF0550F.FOR 
FF06014.FOR 
FF060Z2.FOR 
FF06028.FOR 
FF06043.FOR 
FF06049.FOR 
FF06061.FOR 
FF06087.FOR 
FF06073.FOR 
FF06079.FOR 
FF06111.FOR 
FF06117.FOR 
FF96134.FOR 
FF06140.FOR 
FF06147.FOR 
FF06154.F0R 
FF06160.FOR 


FF05206.FOR 
FF05211.FOR 
FF0521I.FOR 
FF05303.FOR 
FF05400.FOR 
FF05406.FOR 
FF05504.FOR 
FFOSSOA.FOR 
FF06001.FOR 
FF04015.FOR 
FF06023.FOR 
FF06029.FOR 
FF06044.FOR 
FF06050.FOR 
FF06062.FOR 
FF06068.FOR 
FF06074.FOR 
FF06100.FOR 
FF06112.FOR 
FF06118.FOR 
FF061S5.F0R 
FF06142.FOR 
FF06148.FOR 
FF06155.FOR 
FF06162.FOR 


FF05207.FOR 
FF0S212.FOR 
FF0521J.FOR 
FF05304.FOR 
FF05401.FOR 
FF05407.FOR 
FF05S05.FOR 
FF0550B.FOR 
FF06009.FOR 
FF06016.FOR 
FF06024.FOR 
FF06030.FOR 
FF06045.FOR 
FF06051.FOR 
FF06063.FOR 
FF06069.FOR 
FF0607S.FOR 
FF06101.FOR 
FF06113.FOR 
FF06119.FOR 
FF06136.FOR 
FF06143.FOR 
FF06149.FOR 
FF06156.FOR 
FF06163.FOR 


FF05208.FOR 
FF05213.FOR 
FF0521K.F0R 
FF0SS05.FOR 
FF05402.FOR 
FF05408.FOR 
FF05506.FOR 
FF0550C.FOR 
FF06010.FOR 
FF06017.FOR 
FF06025.FOR 
FF06031.FOR 
FF06046.FOR 
FF06052.F0R 
FF06064.FOR 
FF06070.F0R 
FF06076.FOR 
FF06108.FOR 
FF06114.FOR 
FF06122.FOR 
FF06137.FOR 
FF06144.F0R 
FF06150.FOR 
FF06157.FOR 
FF06164.FOR 


FF05209.FOR 
FF05214.FOR 
FF05300.FOR 
FF05306.FOR 
FF05403.FOR 
FF05501.FOR 
FF05507.FOR 
FF0550D.FOR 
FF06011.FOR 
FF06018.FOR 
FF06026.FOR 
FF06032.FOR 
FF06047.FOR 
FF06053.FOR 
FF06065.FOR 
FF06071.FOR 
FF06077.FOR 
FF06109.FOR 
FF06115.F0R 
FF06132.FOR 
FF06138.FOR 
FF06145.FOR 
FF06152.FOR 
FF06158.FOR 
FF06165.FOR 


Total of 1404 filos 


A-33 







Table A-5. ACFS ANSI Tape Contents Volume APCSOS 


FF06166.FOR 
FF06173.FOR 
FF06179.FOR 
FF06186.FOR 
FFD6803.FOR 
FF06819.FOR 
FF0D728.FOR 
FFD451P.FOR 
FFD4525.FOR 
FFD455I.FOR 
FFD4569.FOR 
FFD4608.FOR 
FFD520E.FOR 
FFD5218.FDR 
FFD521E.F0R 
FFDE201.FOR 
FFDE207.FOR 
FFDE213.FOR 
FFDE23Z.F0R 
FFDE238.FOR 
FFDE244.FOR 
FFDE403.FOR 
FFDE409.FOR 
FFDE415.FOR 
FFDE434.FOR 
FFDE43A.FOR 
FFDE446.FOR 
FFDF004.FOR 
F000102.FOR 
F000300.FOR 
F000314.FOR 
F000320.FOR 
F000326.FOR 
F000332.FOR 
F000338.FOR 
F000347.FOR 
F000353.FOR 
F000359.FOR 
F000402.FOR 
F000504.FOR 
F000514.FOR 
F000604.FOR 
F000704.FOR 
F000710.FOR 
F000717.FOR 
FOD0345.FOR 
FORSYS.FOR 
JA0P000.CPL 
JFJ3504.CPL 
JFJ3603.CPL 
JFJ3609.CPL 
JFJ3800.CPL 
JFJ4519.CPL 
JFJ451F.CPL 
JFJ4510.CPL 
JFJ5301.CPL 
JFJ5400.CPL 
JFJ5406.CPL 
JFJ5506.CPL 
JFJ6013.CPL 
JFJ6019.CPL 
JFJ6028.CPL 
JFJ6044.CPL 
JFJ6050.CPL 
JFJ6063.CPL 
JFJ607 0.CPL 
JFJ6076.CPI 
JFJ6113.CPL 
JFJ6119.CPL 


FF06167.FOR 
FF06174.FOR 
FF06180.FOR 
FF06187.FOR 
FFD6S06.FOR 
FF06820.FOR 
FFD451K.FOR 
FFD451Q.FOR 
FFD4526.FOR 
FFD455J.FOR 
FFD4603.FOR 
FFD4609.FOR 
FFD520F.FOR 
FFD5219.FOR 
FFD521F.FOR 
FFDE202.FOR 
FFDE208.FOR 
FFDE214.FOR 
FFDE233.FOR 
FFDE239.FOR 
FFDE245.FOR 
FFDE404.FOR 
FFDE40A.FOR 
FFDE416.FOR 
FFDE435.FOR 
FFDE441.FOR 
FFDE450.FOR 
FFDF0O5.FOR 
F000103.FOR 
F000305.FOR 
F000315.F0R 
F000321.FOR 
F000327.FOR 
F000333.FOR 
F000339.FOR 
F000348.FOR 
F000354.FOR 
F000360.FOR 
F000403.FOR 
F000507.FOR 
F000517.FOR 
F000605.FOR 
F000705.FOR 
FOG3711.FOR 
F000718.FOR 
FOD0346.FOR 
SYSBLK.FOR 
JFOPOOO.CPL 
JFJ3513.CPL 
JFJ3604.CPL 
JFJ3610.CPL 
JFJ3801.CPL 
JFJ451A.CPL 
JFJ451G.CPL 
JFJ451V.CPL 
JFJ5302.CPL 
JFJ5401.CPL 
JFJ5407.CPL 
JFJ5507.CPL 
JFJ6014.CPL 
JFJ6023.CPL 
JFJ6029.CPL 
JFJ6045.CPL 
JFJ6051.CPL 
JFJ6064.CPL 
JFJ6071.CPL 
JFJ6077.CPL 
JFJ6114.CPL 
JFJ6132.CPL 


FF06168.FOR 
FF06175.FOR 
FF06182.F0R 
FF06188.FOR 
FF06807.FOR 
FF06821.FOR 
FFD451L.FOR 
FFD451R.FOR 
FFD455D.FOR 
FFD455K.FOR 
FFD4604.FOR 
FFD460A.FOR 
FFD520C.FOR 
FFD521A.F0R 
FFDD722.FOR 
FFDE203.FOR 
FFDE209.FOR 
FFDE215.FOR 
FFDE234.FOR 
FFDE23A.FOR 
FFDE246.FOR 
FFDE40S.FOR 
FFDE411.FOR 
FFDE420.FOR 
FFDE436.FOR 
FFDE442.FOR 
FFDF000.FOR 
FFIRST.FOR 
F000104.FOR 
F000310.FOR 
F000316.FOR 
F000322.FOR 
F000328.FOR 
F000334.FOR 
F000340.FOR 
F000349.FOR 
F000355.FOR 
F000361.FOR 
F000404,FOR 
F000508.FOR 
F000518.FOR 
F000606.FOR 
F000706.FOR 
F000713.FOR 
F000719.FOR 
FOD036X.FOR 
FFD451U.USE 
JFJ3500.CPL 
JFJ3514.CPL 
JFJ3605.CPL 
JFJ3700.CPL 
JFJ3802.CPL 
JFJ451B.CPL 
JFJ451K.CPL 
JFJ451H.CPL 
JFJ5303.CPL 
JFJ5402.CPL 
JFJ5501.CPL 
JFJ5508.CPL 
JFJ6015.CPI 
JFJ6024.CPL 
JFJ603D.CPL 
JFJ6046.CPL 
JFJ6052.CPL 
JFJ6065.CPL 
JFJ6072.CPL 
JFJ6078.CPL 
JFJ6115.CPL 
JFJ6133.CPL 


FF06169.FOR 
FF06176.FOR 
FF06183.FOR 
FF06189.FOR 
FF06816.FOR 
FF0D720.FOR 
FFD451M.FOR 
FFD451S.FOR 
FFD455E.FOR 
FFD455L.FOR 
FFD4605.FOR 
FFD460B.FOR 
FFD520H.FOR 
FFD5218.FOR 
FFDD723.FOR 
FFDE204.FOR 
FFDE20A.FOR 
FFDE216.FOR 
FFDE235.FOR 
FFDE241.FOR 
FFDE250.FOR 
FFDE406.FOR 
FFDE412.FOR 
FFDE431.FOR 
FFDE437.FOR 
FF0E443.F0R 
FFDF001.FOR 
FGD0001.FOR 
FO002D2.FOR 
F000311.FOR 
F000317.FOR 
F000323.FOR 
F000329.FOR 
F000335.FOR 
F000341.FOR 
F000350.FOR 
F000356.FOR 
F00036Z.FOR 
F000500.FOR 
F000509.FOR 
F000519.FOR 
F000607.FOR 
F000707.FOR 
F000714.FOR 
F000720.FOR 
F0D036Y.FOR 
FFD4566.USE 
JFJ3501.CPL 
JFJ3600.CPL 
JFJ3606.CPL 
JFJ3701.CPL 
JFJ3803.CPL 
JFJ451C.CPL 
JFJ451L.CPL 
JFJ451X.CPL 
JFJ5305.CPL 
JFJ5403.CPL 
JFJ5502.CPL 
JFJ5509.CPL 
JFJ6016.CPL 
JFJ6025.CPL 
JFJ6031.CPL 
JFJ6047.CPL 
JFJ6060.CPL 
JFJ6066.CPL 
JFJ6073.CPL 
JFJ6100.CPL 
JFJ6U6.CPL 
JFJ6134.CPL 


FF06170.FOR 
FF06177.FOR 
FF06184.FOR 
FF06190.FOR 
FF06817.FOR 
FF0D721.FOR 
FFD451N.F0R 
FFD4523.FOR 
FFD455F.F0R 
FFD4567.F0R 
FFD4606.FOR 
FFD520C.FOR 
FFD520I.FOR 
FFD521C.F0R 
FFDD724.FOR 
FFDE205.FOR 
FFDE211.FOR 
FFDE220.F0R 
FFDE236.FOR 
FFDE242.F0R 
FFDE401.FOR 
FFDE407.FOR 
FFDE413.F0R 
FFDE432.F0R 
FFDE438.FOR 
FFDE444.FOR 
FFDF002.FOR 
FGDOOOD.FOR 
F000203.FOR 
F000312.FOR 
F000318.FOR 
F000324.FOR 
F000330.FOR 
F000336.FOR 
F000342.FOR 
F000351.FOR 
F000357.FDR 
F000390.FOR 
F000502.FOR 
F000512.FOR 
F000602.FOR 
F000702.FOR 
F000708.FOR 
FOOD715.FOR 
F000721.FOR 
FOD036Z.FOR 
FORTYP.USE 
JFJ3502.CPL 
JFJ3601.CPL 
JFJ5607.CPL 
JFJ3702.CPL 
JFJ3804.CPL 
JFJ451D.CPL 
JFJ451M.CPL 
JFJ451Y.CPL 
JFJ5306.CPL 
JFJ5404.CPL 
JFJ5S03.CPL 
JFJ550A.CPL 
JFJ6017.CPL 
JFJ6026 .Ci'L 
JFJ6032.CPL 
JFJ6048.CPL 
JFJ6061.CPL 
JFJ6067.CPL 
JFJ6074.CPL 
JFJ6108.CPL 
JFJ6117.CPL 
JFJ6135.CPL 


FF06172.FOR 
FF06178.FOR 
FF06185.FOR 
FF06802.FOR 
FF06818.FOR 
FF0D727.FOR 
FFD4510.FOR 
FFD4524.FOR 
FFD455G.FOR 
FFD4568.FOR 
FFD4607.FOR 
FFD520D.FOR 
FFD520J.FOR 
FFD521D.FOR 
FFDD725.FOR 
FFDE206.FOR 
FFDE212.FOR 
FFDE231.FOR 
FFDE237.FOR 
FFDE243.F0R 
FFDE402.FOR 
FFDE408.FOR 
FFDE414.F0R 
FFDE433.FOR 
FFDE439.FOR 
FFDE445.FOR 
FFDF003.FOR 
FGDOOOE.FOR 
F000204.FOR 
F000313.FOR 
F000319.FOR 
F000325.FOR 
F000331.FOR 
F000337.FOR 
F000343.FOR 
F000352.FOR 
F000358.FOR 
F000391.FOR 
F000503.FOR 
F000513.FOR 
F000603.FOR 
F000703.FOR 
F000709.FOR 
F000716.FOR 
F0D0344.FOR 
FORDMP.FOR 
TYPFOR.USE 
JFJ3503.CPL 
JFJS602.CPL 
JFJ3608.CPL 
JFJ3703.CPL 
JFJ4518.CPL 
JFJ451E.CPL 
JFJ451P.CPL 
JFJ5300.CPL 
JFJS307.CPL 
JFJ5405.CPL 
JFJ5504.CPL 
JFJ5508.CPL 
JFJ6018.CPL 
JFJ6027.CPL 
JFJ6043.CPL 
JFJ6049.CPL 
JFJ6062.CPL 
JFJ6068.CPL 
JFJ6075.CPL 
JFJ6112.CPL 
JFJ6118.CPL 
JFJ6136.CPL 


A-3A 







Table A-5. ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Volume APCSOS (Continued) 


JFJ6137.CPL JFJ6138.CPL 
JFJ6145.CPL JFJ6146.CPL 
JFJ6153.CPL JFJ6154.CPL 
JFJ6159.CPL JFJ6162.CPL 
JFJ6167.CPL JFJ6168.CPL 
JFJ6175.CPL JFJ6176.CPL 
JFJ6183.CPL JFJ6184.CPL 
JFJ6189.CPL JFJ6191.CPL 
JFJ6196.CPL JFJ6197.CPL 
JFJ619D.CPL JFJ619E.CPL 
JFJ619K.CPL JFJ619L.CPL 
JFJ619Q.CPL JFJ6213.CPL 
JFJ6218.CPL JFJ6219.CPL 
JFJ6227.CPL JFJ6228.CPL 
JFJ6243.CPL JFJ6244.CPL 
JFJ6249.CPL JFJ6250.CPL 
JFJ6808.CPL JFJ680A.CPL 
JFJ6810.CPL JFJ6814.CPL 
JFJ6824.CPL JG0P000.CPL 
JGJOOOD.CPL JGNOOOF.CPL 
JOJ0102.CPL JOJ0103.CPL 
JOJ0314.CPL J0JD315.CPL 
JOJ0329.CPL JOJ0330.CPL 
JOJ0338.CPL JOJ0339.CPL 
JOJ0347.CPL JOJ0348.CPI 
JOJ0364 .CPL J0J036I.CPL 
JOJ036P.CPL JOJ036R.CPL 
JOJ036Y.CPL JOJ0390.CPL 
JOJ0507.CPL JOJ0508.CPL 
J0J0523.CPL J0J0524.CPL 

J0J0706.CPL JOJ0707.CPL 
JOVDMP.CPL JOVSPC.CPL 
JF03501.JOV JF03502.JOV 
JF03519.JOV JF03550.JOV 
JF03604.JOV JF03605.JOV 
JF03610.JOV JF03620.JOV 
JF03704.JOV JF03800.JOV 
JF03805.JOV JF04120.JOV 
JF04125.JOV JF04126.JOV 
JF04131.JOV JF04132.JOV 
JF0413J.JOV JF0413K.JOV 
JF04511.JOV JF04512.JOV 
JF04517.JOV JF04518.JOV 
JF0451D.JOV JF0451E.JOV 
JF0451H.JOV JF0451X.JOV 
JF04522.JOV JF04527.JOV 
JF04533.JOV JF04534.JOV 
JF04539.JOV JF0453A.JOV 
JF04550.JOV JF04551.JOV 
JF04556.JOV JF04557.JOV 
JF04560.JOV JF04562.JOV 
JF0460E.JOV JF0460F.JOV 
JF0460M.JOV JF05200.JOV 
JF05205.JOV JF05206.JOV 
JF0520B.JOV JF0520M.JOV 
JF05211.JOV JF05212.JOV 
JF0521I.JOV JF0521J.JOV 
JF05301.JOV JF05S02.JOV 
JF05307.JOV JF05308.JOV 
JF05404.JOV JF05405.JOV 
JP05502.JOV JF0S503.JOV 
Jr05508.JOV JF05509.JOV 
JF0550E.JOV JF0550F.JOV 
JF06013.JOV JF06014.JOV 
JF06019.JOV JF06022.JOV 
JF06027.JOV JF06028.JOV 

JF06033.JOV JF06043.JOV 
JF06048.JDV JF06049.JOV 
JF06060.JOV JF06061.JOV 
JF06066.JOV JF06067.JOV 


JFJ6139.CPL JFJ6142.CPL 
JFJ6147.CPL JFJ6148.CPL 
JFJ6155.CPL JFJ6156.CPL 
JFJ6163.CPL JFJ6164.CPL 
JFJ6169.CPL JFJ6172.CPL 
JFJ6177.CPL JFJ6178.CPL 
JFJ6185.CPL JFJ6186.CPL 
JFJ6192.CPL JFJ6193.CPL 
JFJ6198.CPL JFJ619A.CPL 
JFJ619F.CPL JFJ619G.CPL 
JFJ619M.CPL JFJ619N.CPL 
JFJ6214.CPL JFJ6215.CPL 
JFJ6223.CPL JFJ6224.CPL 
JFJ6229.CPL JFJ6230.CPL 
JFJ6245.CPL JFJ6246.CPL 
JFJ6251.CPL JFJ6252.CPL 
JFJ680C.CPL JFJ680E.CPL 
JFJ6816.CPL JFJ6818.CPL 
JGDOOOO.CPL JGD0004.CPL 
JGNOOOG.CPL JGNOOOH.CPL 
JOJ0202.CPL JDJ0203.CPL 
JOJ0323.CPL JOJ0324.CPL 
JOJ0332.CPL JOJ0333.CPL 
JOJ0341.CPL JOJ0342.CPL 
J0J0349.CPL JOJ0351.CPL 

JOJ036J.CPL JOJ036L.CPL 
J0J036S.CPL J0J036U.CPL 
JOJ0402.CPL J0J04D3.CPL 
JOJ0512.CPL JOJ0513.CPL 
J0J0602.CPL JOJ0603.CPL 
JOJ0709.CPL JOJ0710.CPL 
OURJOV.CPL DMPJOV.JOV 
JF03503.JOV JF03504.JOV 
JF03600.JOV JF03601.JOV 
JF03606.JOV JF03607.JOV 
JF03700.JOV JF03701.JOV 
JF03801.JOV JF03802.JOV 
JF04121.JOV JF04122.JOV 
JF04127.JOV JF04129.JOV 
JF04133.JOV JF0413D.JOV 
JF04310.JOV JF04311.J0V 
JF04513.JOV JF04514.JOV 
JF04519.JOV JF0451A.JOV 
JF0451F.JOV JF0451G.JOV 
JF0451Y.JOV JF0451Z.JOV 
JF04529.JOV JF04530.JOV 
JF04535.JOV JF04536.JOV 
JF0453B.JOV JF0453C.JOV 
JF04552.JOV JF04553.JOV 
JF04558.JOV JF04559.JOV 
JF04563.JOV JF04600.JOV 
JF0460G.JOV JF0460H.JOV 
JF05201.JOV JF05202.JOV 

JF05207.JOV JF05208.JOV 
JF05200.JOV JF0520R.JOV 
JF05213.JOV JF05214.JOV 
JF0521K.JOV JF0521L.J0V 
JF05303.JOV JF05304.JOV 
JF05400.JOV JF05401.JOV 
JF05406.JOV JF05407.JOV 
JF05504.JOV JF05505.JOV 
JF0550A.JOV JF05S0B.JOV 
JF06001.JOV JF06009.JOV 

JF06015.JOV JF06016.JOV 
JF06023.JOV JF06024.JOV 
JF06029.JOV JF08030.JOV 
JF06044.JOV JF06045.JOV 
JF06050.JOV JF06O51.JOV 
JF06062.JOV JF06083.JOV 
JF06068.JOV JF06069.JOV 


JFJ6143.CPL JFJ6144.CPL 
JFJ6149.CPL JFJ6152.CPL 
JFJ6157.CPL JFJ6158.CPL 
JFJ6165.CPL JFJ8166.CPL 
JFJ6173.CPL JFJ6174.CPL 
JFJ8279.CPL JFJ8182.CPL 
JFJ6187.CPL JFJ6188.CPL 
JFJ6194.CPL JFJ6195.CPL 
JFJ619B.CPL JFJ619C.CPL 
JFJ619H.CPL JFJ619J.CPL 
JFJ6190.CPL JFJ^19P.CPL 
JFJ6216.CPL JFJ6217.CPL 
JFJ6225.CPL JFJ6226.CPL 
JFJ6231.CPL JFJ6232.CPL 
JFJ6247.CPL JFJ6248.CPL 
JFJ6802.CPL JFJ6806.CPL 
JFJ680G.CPL JFJ680I.CPL 
JFJ6820.CPL JFJ6822.CPL 
JGD0005.CPL JGD0006.CPL 
J000002.CPL JOOPOOO.CPL 
J0J0311.CPL JOJ0312.CPL 
J0J0326.CPL JOJ0327.CPL 
J0J0335.CPL J0J0336.CPL 

J0J0344.CPL J0J0345.CPL 
J0J0352.CPL J0J0363.CPL 

J0J036M.CPL JOJ0360.CPL 
JOJ036V.CPL J0J036X.CPL 
JOJ0502.CPL JOJ0503.CPL 
JOJ0517.CPL JOJ0518.CPL 
JOJ0702.CPL JOJ07 03.CPL 
J0J0719.CPL JOJ0720.CPL 
JAOOOOO.JOV JF03500.JOV 
JF03513.JOV JF03514.JOV 
JF03602.JOV JF03603.JOV 
JF03608.JOV JF05609.JOV 
JF03702.JOV JF83703.JOV 
JF03803.JOV JF03804.JOV 
JF04123.JOV JF04124.JOV 
JF0412B.JOV JF04130.JOV 
JF0413H.JOV JF0413I.JOV 
JF04312.JOV JF04510.JOV 
JF04515.JOV JF04516.JOV 
JF0451B.JOV JF0451C.JOV 
JF0451J.JOV JF0451V.JOV 
JF04520.JOV JF04521.J0V 
JF04531.JOV JF04532.JOV 
JF04537.JOV JF04538.JOV 
JF04540.JOV JF04541.JOV 
JF04554.JOV JF04555.JOV 
JF0455N.JOV JF04550.JOV 
JF04601.JOV JF04602.JOV 
JF0460I.JOV JF0460J.JOV 
JF05203.JOV JF05204.JOV 
JF05209.JOV JF0520A.JOV 
JF0520S.JOV JF05210.JOV 
JF05215.JOV JF0521H.JOV 
JF0521N.JOV JF05300.JOV 
JF05305.JOV JF05306.JOV 
JF05402.JOV JF05403.JOV 
JF05408.JOV JF05501.JOV 
JF05506.JOV JF05507.JOV,> 
JF0550C.-OV JF0550D.JOV 

JF06010.JOV JF06011.JOV 
JF06017.JOV JF06018.JOV 
JF06025.JOV JF06026.JOV 
JF06031.JOV JF06032.JOV 
JF06046.JOV JF06047.JOV 
JF06052.JOV JF06053.JOV 
JF06064.JOV JF06065.JOV 
JF06070.JOV JF06071.JOV 


A-3* 







Table A-5. ACPS ANSI Tape Contents Volume APCSOS (Continued) 


JF06072.JOV 
JF06078.JOV 
JF06110.JOV 
JF06116.JOV 
JF06133.JOV 
JF06139.JOV 
JF06146.JOV 
JF06153.JOV 
JF06159.JOV 
JF06166.JOV 
JF06173.JOV 
JF06179.JOV 
JF06186.JOV 
JF06192.JOV 
JF06198.JOV 
JF0619E.JOV 
JF0619K.JOV 
JF0619Q.JOV 
JF06808.JOV 
JF0680E.JOV 
JF06816.JOV 
JF06822.JOV 
JF0D727.JOV 
JFD412A.JOV 
JFD4138.JOV 
JFD413G.JOV 
JFD4523.JOV 
JFD455J.JOV 
JFD4606.JOV 
JFD520C.JOV 
JFD520Q.JOV 
JFD521M.JOV 
JFD6211.JOV 
JFD6218.JOV 
JFD6226.JOV 
JFD6232.JOV 
JFD6247.J0V 
JFD6253.JOV 
JFDD601.JOV 
JFDD607.JOV 
JFDD723.JOV 
JF0D72G.JOV 
JFDF001.JOV 
JG0000C.JOV 
JGD000E.JOV 
J000104.JDV 
J009310.JOV 
J000316.JOV 
J000328.JOV 
J000334.JOV 
J000340.JOV 
J000349.JOV 
J000364.JOV 
JO0036M.JOV 
J000391.JOV 
J000503.JOV 
J000513.JOV 
J000603.JOV 
J000703.JOV 
J000709.JOV 
JD00716.JOV 
J000344.JOV 
JOD036R.JOV 
JOD0523.JOV 
JF04311.USE 
JFD451N.USE 
JFD4526.USE 
JFD4568.USE 
JFD460C.USE 
JFD521C.USE 


JF06073.JOV 
JF06079.JOV 
JF06111.JOV 
JF06117.JOV 
JF06134.JOV 
JF06140.JOV 
JF06147.JOV 
JF06154.JOV 
JF06160.JOV 
JF06167.JOV 
JF06174.JOV 
JF06180.JOV 
JF06187.JOV 
JF06193.JOV 
JF06199.JOV 
JF0619F.JOV 
JF0619L.JOV 
JF0619R.JOV 
JF06809.JOV 
JF0680F.JOV 
JF06817.JOV 
JF06823.JOV 
JF0D728.JOV 
JFD412C.JOV 
JFD4139.JOV 
JFD451K.JOV 
JFD4524.JOV 
JFD4566.JOV 
JFD4607.JOV 
JFD520D.JOV 
JFD5218.JOV 
JFD5210.JOV 
JFD6213.JOV 
JFD6219.JOV 
JFD6227.JOV 
JFD6233.JOV 
JFD6248.JOV 
JFD680G.JOV 
JFDD602.JOV 
JFDD608.JOV 
JFDD72A.JOV 
JFDD72H.JOV 
JFDF002.JOV 
JGD0001.JOV 
JGN000I.JOV 
J000202.JOV 
J000311.JOV 
J000323.JOV 
J000329.JOV 
JO0033S.JOV 
J000341.JOV 
J000350.JOV 
J000365.JOV 
J00036N.JOV 
J000402.JOV 
J000504.JOV 
J000514.JOV 
J000604.JOV 
J000704.JOV 
J000710.JOV 
J000717.JOV 
JOD0345.JOV 
JOD036S.JOV 
JOD0524.JOV 
JF0451H.USE 
JFD4510.USE 
JFD4528.USE 
JFD4569.USE 
JFD460D.USE 
JFD521D.USE 


JF06074.JOV 
JF06100.JOV 
JF06112.JOV 
JF06118.JOV 
JFD6135.JOV 
JF06142.JOV 
JF06148.JOV 
JF06155.JOV 
JF06162.JOV 
JF06168.JOV 
JF06175.JOV 
JF06182.JOV 
JF06188.JOV 
JF06194.JOV 
JF0619A.J0V 
JF0619G.JOV 
JF0619M.JOV 
JF06802.JOV 
JF0680A.JOV 
JF06810.JOV 
JF06818.JOV 
JF06824.JOV 
JF0D729.JOV 
JFD412D.JOV 
JF0413A.JOV 
JFD451L.JOV 
JF0452A.JOV 
JFD4567.JOV 
JFD460K.JOV 
JFD520E.JOV 
JFDS219.JOV 
JFD521P.JOV 
JFD6214.JOV 
JFD6222.JOV 
JFD6228.JOV 
JFD6243.JOV 
JFD6249.JOV 
JFD680H.JOV 
JFDD603.JOV 
JFDD609.JOV 
JFDD72B.JOV 
JFDD72I.J0V 
JFDF003.JOV 
JGD0007.JOV 
JGN000J.JOV 
J000203.JOV 
J000312.JOV 
J000324.JOV 
J000330.JOV 
J000336.JOV 
J000342.JOV 
J000351.JOV 
J00036I.JOV 
J00036U.JOV 
J000403.JOV 
J000507.JOV 
J000517.JOV 
J000605.JOV 
J000705.JOV 
J000711.JOV 
J000718.JOV 
JOD0346.JOV 
JOD036T.JOV 
JOD0525.JOV 
JF0451I.USE 
JFD451R.USE 
JFD455F.USE 
JFD4608.USE 
JFD520G.USE 
JF0521E.USE 


JF06075.JOV 
JF06101.JOV 
JF06113.JOV 
JF06119.JOV 
JF06136.JOV 
JF06143.JOV 
JF06149.JOV 
JF06156.JOV 
JF06163.JOV 
JF06169.JOV 
JF06176.JOV 
JF06183.JOV 
JF06189.JOV 
JF06195.JOV 
JF0619B.JOV 
JF0619H.JOV 
JF0619N.JOV 
JF06803.JOV 
JF0680B.JOV 
JF06811.JOV 
JF06819.JOV 
JF06825.JOV 
JF0D72D.JOV 
JFD4135.JOV 
JFD413B.JOV 
JFD451M.JOV 
JFD455D.JOV 
JFD4603.JOV 
JFD460L.JOV 
JFD520F.JOV 
JFD521A.JOV 
JFD6201.JOV 
JFD6215.JOV 
JFD6223.JOV 
JFD6229.JOV 
JFD6244.JOV 
JFD6250.JOV 
JFD680I.JOV 
JFDD604.JOV 
JFDD610.JOV 
JFDD72C.JOV 
JFDOAOl.JOV 
JFDF004.JOV 
JGD0008.JOV 
JGN000K.JOV 
J000204.JOV 
J000313.JOV 
J000325.JOV 
J000331.JOV 
J000337.JOV 
J000343.JOV 
J000352.JOV 
J00036J.JOV 
JO0036V.JOV 
J000404.JOV 
J000508.JOV 
J000518.JOV 
J000606.JOV 
J000706.JOV 
J000713.JOV 
J000719.JOV 
J000360.JOV 
J00036X.JOV 
JOVSYS.JOV 
JF0451J.USE 
JFD451S.USE 
JFD455G.USE 
JFD4609.USE 
JFD520H.USE 
JF0521F.USE 


JF06076.JOV 
JF06108.JOV 
JF06114.JOV 
JF06122.JOV 
JF06137.JOV 
JF06144.JOV 
JF06150.JOV 
JF061S7.JOV 
JF06164.JOV 
JF06170.JOV 
JF06177.JOV 
JF06184.JOV 
JF06190.JOV 
JF06196.JOV 
JF0619C.JOV 
JF0619I.JOV 
JF06190.JOV 
JF06806.JOV 
JF0680C.JOV 
JF06814.JOV 
JF06820.JOV 
JF0D720.JOV 
JFD35S1.JOV 
JFD4136.JOV 
JFD413C.JOV 
JFD451P.JOV 
JFD455E.JOV 
JFD4604.JOV 
JFD460N.JOV 
JFD520N.JOV 
JFD521B.JOV 
JFD6209.JOV 
JFD6216.JOV 
JFD6224.JOV 
JF06230.JOV 
JFD6245.JOV 
JFD6251.JOV 
JFD680J.JOV 
JFDD605.JOV 
JFDD611.JOV 
JFDD72E.JOV 
JFDDA02.JOV 
JFDF005.JOV 
JGD0009.JOV 
J000102.JOV 
J000300.JOV 
J000314.JOV 
JOJ0526.JOV 
J000332.JOV 
J000338.JOV 
J000347.JOV 
J000353.JOV 
J00036K.JOV 
J00036H.JOV 
J000500.JOV 
J000509.JOV 
J000519.JOV 
J000607.JOV 
J000707.JOV 
J000714.JOV 
J000720.JOV 
J00036P.JdV 
J0D036Y.JOV 
SPCJOV.JOV 
JF0619A.USE 
JFD451U.USE 
JFD4S5K.USE 
JF0460A.USE 
JFDS20I.USE 
JFD6260.USE 


JF06077.JOV 
JF06109.JOV 
JF06115.JOV 
JF06132.JOV 
JF06138.JOV 
JF06145.JOV 
JF06152.JOV 
JF06158.JOV 
JF06165.JOV 
JF06172.JOV 
JF06178.JOV 
JF06185.JOV 
JF06191.JOV 
JF06197.JOV 
JF0619D.JOV 
JF0619J.JOV 
JF0619P.JOV 
JF06807.JOV 
JF0680D.JOV 
JF06815.JOV 
JF06821.JOV 
JF0D721.JOV 
JFD4128.JOV 
JFD4137.JOV 
JFD413E.JOV 
JFD451Q.JOV 
JFD455I.J0V 
JFD4605.JOV 
JFD4600.JOV 
JFD520P.JOV 
JFD521K.JOV 
JFD6210.JOV 
JFD6217.JOV 
JFD6225.JOV 
JFD6231.JOV 
JFD6246.JOV 
JFD6232.JOV 
JFDD600.JOV 
JFDD606.JOV 
JFDD722.JOV 
JFDD72F.JOV 
JFDFOOO.JOV 
JFIRST.JOV 
JGD000D.JOV 
J000103.JOV 
J000305.JOV 
J000315.JOV 
J000327.JOV 
J000333.JOV 
J000339.JOV 
J000348.JOV 
J000363.JOV 
J00036L.JOV 
J000390.JOV 
J000502.JOV 
J000512.JOV 
J000602.JOV 
J000702.JOV 
J000708.JOV 
J000715.JOV 
JOG0721.JOV 
JOD036Q.JOV 
JOD036Z.JOV 
JF03701.USE 
JF06822.USE 
JFD4525.USE 
JFD4S5L.USE 
JFD460B.USE 
JFDS20J.USE 
JFD6261.USE 


A-36 







Table A-5. ACTS ANSI Tape Contents Volume APCSOS (Concluded) 


JFD6262.USE 
JFD6268.USE 
JFD6274.USE 
JFDD602.USE 
JFJ451H.USE 
JFJ6260.USE 
JFJ6266.USE 
JFJ6273.USE 
JGD0008.USE 
JD00321.USE 
JOVTYP.USE 
JOVMATH.DAT 
CEXEC.FOR 


JFD6263.USE 
JFD6269.USE 
JFD6275.USE 
JFDD603.USE 
JFJ451I.USE 
JFJ6261.USE 
JFJ6267.USE 
JFJ6274.USE 
JGN000J.USE 
J000322.USE 
TYPJOV.USE 
CCOMPA.CNN 


JFD6264.USE 
JFD6270.USE 
JFD6276.USE 
JFDD610.USE 
JFJ451N.USE 
JFJ6262.USE 
JFJ6268.USE 
JFJ6275.USE 
J000317.USE 
JOJ0317.USE 
JGF0001.FOR 
CCONPV.CNN 


JFD6265.USE 
JFD6271.USE 
JFD6277.USE 
JFDD611.USE 
JFJ4510.USE 
JFJ6263.USE 
JFJ6270.USE 
JFJ6276.USE 
J009318.USE 
JOJ0318.USE 
JGF000E.FOR 
CEXECA.CNN 


JFD6266.USE 
JFD6272.USE 
JFD6278.USE 
JFDD724.USE 
JFJ451R.USE 
JFJ6264.USE 
JFJ6271.USE 
JFJ6277.USE 
J000319.USE 
JOJ0320.USE 
SYSJOV.FOR 
CEXECV.CNN 


Total of 1327 filos 


JFD6267.USE 
JFD6273.USE 
JFD6279.USE 
JFDD725.USE 
JFJ451S.USE 
JFJ6265.USE 
JFJ6272.USE 
JFJ6278.USE 
J000320.USE 
JOJ0321.USE 
TMPDMP.FOR 
CCONP.FOR 


A-37 







APPENDIX B 


DEC VAX/VMS BACKUP TAPE FORMAT 


This appendix describes the delivery tape format and directory file 
organization for the DEC VAX/VMS version of the ACPS. 

One tape is written in DEC VAX/VMS BACKUP format as volume ACPS, save set 
ACPS.BCK. Refer to the DEC VAX/VMS Backup Utility Reference Manual for 
details on BACKUP formatted tapes. The tape is structured as a multi-file, 
multi-directory, single-volume configuration. The different files represent 
collections of ACPS test programs and command procedures. Each collection of 
similar files is grouped together in specific directories on the tape. The 
organization of the files on this tape according to directory is as follows: 


[acps] 

Top-level ACPS directory containing command 
procedures to establish a common language test 
environment and to display the VAX/VMS software 
environment. 

[acps.results] 

Contains output files from ACPS compilations and 
test executions and from ACPS test comparison tool 
executions. 

[acps.support] 

Contains common language test support software and 
command procedures. 

[acps.tools] 

Contains ACPS test comparison tool program source 
and command procedures files. 

[acps.ada] 

Top-level directory for Ada tests. 

[acps.ada.dec] 

Contains Ada test files and coimnand procedures for 
use with the DEC VAX Ada compiler. 

[acps.ada.dec.lib], 
[acps.ada.dec.1ib.sub] 

Reserved for program library files generated by VAX 
Ada compilations of Ada tests. 

[acps.fortran] 

Contains FORTRAN test files and command procedures 
for use with the DEC VAX FORTRAN compiler. 

[acps.jovial] 

Contains JOVIAL test files and command procedures 
for use with the ECSPO JOVIAL compiler hosted and 
targeted to VAX/VMS. 

[acps.jovial.com.user] 

Contains a command procedure to define logical names 
and global symbols for execution of the ECSPO JOVIAL 
compiler as described in Appendix A of the EMAD ITS 
JOVIAL J73 Compiler User's Guide. 


B-l 





APPENDIX C 


VAX/VMS SAMPLE COMMAND PROCEDURES 


This appendix describes use of a set of VAX/VMS 4.X command procedures 
that are provided on the ACPS BACKUP formatted delivery tape to perform the 
tasks necessary to compile/execute ACPS tests and to use the ACPS test 
comparison tools. Listings are provided for each command procedure discussed. 
The test compilation and execution command procedures shown are for DEC VAX 
Ada and were used to generate the output examples discussed in Appendix E. 
Table C-l lists the file names (using ACPS logical name conventions) and 
purpose of all VAX/VMS command procedures provided with the ACPS. 

This appendix assumes familiarity with the VAX/VMS command language 
(DCL). The information presented should be useful to those desiring to either 
rehost the ACPS or to use it for an Ada compiler other than DEC VAX Ada. 

C.l INSTALLATION OF ACPS SOURCE AND COMMAND FILES 

For VAX/VMS users, the ACPS delivery tape is written in BACKUP utility 
format and contains the single save set ACPS.BCK. 

To install the tape the user should type the following: 

$MOUNT/FOREIGN MTAO: 

$BACKUP/LOG MTAO:ACPS.BCK MYDISK:[MYDIRECTORY...]* 
where: 

MTAO is the tape drive on which the ACPS tape is mounted. 

MYDISK is a user disk. 

MYDIRECTORY is a VMS directory to contain the ACPS. 

The directory [MYDIRECTORY.ACPS] will be created as the top-level ACPS 
directory. The following global symbol definition must be placed in the 
user’s LOGIN.COM file: 

$acps:==@MYDISK:[MYDIRECTORY.ACPS]LOGICALS MYDISK MYDIRECTORY 

All ACPS batch command procedures use the symbol ACPS to establish an 
initial test environment state common to all ACPS test languages. Its use 
causes invocation of the ACPS command procedure LOGICALS.COM which defines all 
ACPS logical names and test environment global symbols, and sets the default 
directory to the top-level ACPS directory. Table C-2 contains a listing of 
LOGICALS.COM. Subsequent sections in this appendix will refer to the logical 
names defined in this command procedure. 


C-l 




C.2 INSTALLATION OF COMMON LANGUAGE SUPPORT SOFTWARE 


A separate directory in ACPS is reserved for common language test support 
software which is used to gather VMS run-time performance statistics and to 
access microsecond level time. To install this software the user should type 
the following: 

$ ACPS 

$ SET DEF DSUP 
$ 0SUPPORT 

Table C-3 contains a listing of DSUP:SUPPORT.COM. 

To execute ACPS microsecond level tests, the MACRO routine contained in 
file DSUP:USSDISP.MAR must be installed as a user written system service in 
the VMS directory SYS$SHARE as file USS.OLB. A template for developing user 
written system services is contained in file USSDISP.MAR in the VMS directory 
SYS$EXAMPLES. If the user is unable to create the necessary system service, 
then the following must be done in order to execute any of the ACPS tests: 

a. Remove the call to USER_GET_ICR in file DSUP:GETICR.MAR and 
reexecute DSUP:SUPPORT. 

b. Remove references to SYS$SHARE:USS.OLB in the following command 
procedures: DDEC:SETUP.COM, DFOR:SETUP.COM and DJOV:SETUP.COM. 

C.3 INSTALLATION OF ACPS TEST COMPARISON TOOLS 

To install the ACPS test comparison tools, the following should be typed: 

% ACPS 

i SET DEF DTOOL 
i 0TOOLS 

Table C-4 contains a listing of DTOOL:TOOLS.COM. 

C.4 DETERMINATION OF VAX/VMS SOFTWARE ENVIRONMENT 

In order to draw conclusions about the results of execution of ACPS tests 
for a given compiler, one must know the VAX/VMS software environment under 
which the tests are executed. Table C-5 shows a listing of the command 
procedure DACPS:VAXVMS which is used to display all relevant information about 
the VMS software environment. 


C-2 







C.5 DETERMINATION OF ADA COMPILER-DEPENDENT PARAMETERS 


The Ada run-time command procedures and Ada tests supplied with the ACPS 
are dependent upon several compiler-specific parameters. The values chosen for 
these parameters are specific to the DEC VAX Ada compiler. The program that 
displays these parameters is contained in file DDEC:ADAPARM.ADA and is exe¬ 
cuted by the command procedure DDEC:ADAPARM.COM which is shown in Table C-6. 
Table C-7 shows the output from ADAPARM for DEC VAX Ada. The Ada test support 
packages OURSYS.ADA, ADASYS.ADA, OURTYP.ADA, OURSYSR.ADA and OURTYPR.ADA make 
the following assumptions: 

a. The resolution of the Ada clock (i.e., the Ada clock cycle or 
smallest nonzero difference in Ada clock values) is not worse than 
10 ms. 

In order to minimize test execution times, it is desirable to keep 
the clock granularity as low as possible. If it is greater than 
10 ms, then the variable TCLOCK in package ADASYS.ADA should be 
initialized to the value "OS". 

b. Run-time statistics are written to the standard output file in Ada 
which is assumed to be SYS$0UTPUT. 

If this assumption is invalid, then either the approach used in 
recording run statistics within the ACPS Ada command procedures 
provided must be changed or all PUT and NEWJLINE statements in the 
packages ADASYS.ADA and ADADMP.ADA must be changed to output to file 
SYS$0UTPUT. 


c. ACPS numeric data types defined in packages OURSYS.ADA, OURSYSR.ADA, 
OURTYP.ADA, and OURTYPR.ADA are mapped to VAX data types as follows: 


ACPS Type 


VAX Ada Type 


VAX Type-Size 


OUR_INTEGER 
0UR_FL0AT 
OUR_P0SITIVE 
0UR_SH0RT_INTEGER 
0UR_SH0RT_SH0RT_INTEGER 
0UR_L0NG_FL0AT 
0URL0NG L0NG_FL0AT 
OUR D FLOAT 


INTEGER 

FLOAT 

POSITIVE 

SH0RT_INTEGER 

SH0RT_SH0RT_INTEGER 

LONG-FLOAT 

LONG L0NG_FL0AT 

D FLOAT 


Longword-32 bits 
F_Float-32 bits 
Longword-32 bits 
Word-16 bits 
Byte-8 bits 
G_float-64 bits 
H_float-128 bits 
D float-64 bits 


If the Ada compiler mapping between predefined ADA numeric types and 
VAX data types is not as shown in the above table, then the corre¬ 
sponding ACPS type statements in packages OURSYS.ADA, OURSYSR.ADA, 
OURTYP.ADA, and OURTYPR.ADA must be modified to ensure the correct 
VAX data type representation for each ACPS numeric type. 


C-3 







d. The minimum time used in a DELAY statement to force invocation of a 
lower priority task is assumed to be ten milliseconds. This value 
establishes the minimum time that will be used in DELAY statements 
by ACPS tests. Its value is contained in the named constant 
minimum_delay_interval defined in package OURSYS. 

C.6 ACPS COMMAND PROCEDURE TECHNIQUES 

This section discusses command procedure techniques common to all ACPS 
test languages and compilers. The discussion refers to the command procedure 
shown in Table C-6 which compiles and executes the Ada program ADAPARM using 
DEC VAX Ada compiler. 

a. Creation of compiler-specific test environments . ACPS compilation 

and execution command procedures are assumed to be executed in batch 
mode. To create an initial compiler-independent test environment, 
the first command (shown on line 46 of Fig. C-6) uses the symbol 
"ACPS" to invoke the command procedure DACPS:LOGICALS.COM which does 
the following: 

1. It defines logical names for each ACPS directory. 

2. It defines global symbols (e.g., USEDEC) which are used to 
establish compiler-specific test environments. 

3. It sets the batch output buffer update interval to one day to 
ensure that VMS batch output buffer flushes do not impact test 
measurements. 

4. It sets the default directory to DACPS. 

To create a compiler-specific test environment, the next command 
(shown on line 47 of Table C-17) uses the symbol USEDEC to invoke 
the command procedure DDEClSETUP.COM which completes establishment 
of the test environment for DEC VAX Ada compiler. As shown in 
Table C-8. DDECrSETUP.COM does the following: 

1. It defines global symbols used by all ACPS compilation and 
execution command procedures by executing the procedure 
DSUPrSYMBOLS.COM shown in Table C-9. 

2. It defines symbols which are used in ACPS compilation command 
procedures to specify compiler options and common language test 
support software object modules. 

3. It sets the current directory to the one containing the command 
procedures and test cases for a specific compiler. 


C-4 







b. Creation of compile-t ime test environment . A common language test 
environment is created to begin each ACPS compile-time test. All 
extraneous files are deleted (as shown in lines 38-42 of Table C-6). 
The working set parameters are set to the specific values shown in 
line 59 of Table C-6 and are also displayed in the compile-time test 
statistic file. The system activity before and after the test is 
also displayed to verify that the compilations are made in a stand¬ 
alone environment and are not impacted by other VMS processes. 

c. Creation of run-time test environment . A common language test 
environment is created for each ACPS run-time test. The working set 
parameters are set to the specific values shown in line 57 of 
Table C-6 and are also output to the run-time statistic file. The 
parameters as shown are used for all single task tests to ensure 
that VAX automatic working set adjustment logic does not affect test 
measurement repeatability by interrupting test executions. The 
system activity before and after the tests is displayed to ensure 
that test measurements are not affected by other VMS processes or 
system users. 

d. Recording of run-time test statistics . All ACPS run-time command 
procedures assume that run-time statistics from test executions are 
written to the file with logical name SYS$OUTPUT. 

To ensure that an output operation from one test execution does not 
impact (due to output completion or file extension) another test, a 
separate command procedure is used to execute each test and to 
append the results to a single permanent file. As shown in lines 68 
and 69 of Table C-6, the logical name RESULTS is assigned to the 
permanent file that will contain the performance statistics from all 
test executions. The symbol OUR_RUN (defined by DSUP:SYMBOLS) is 
used to invoke the command procedure DSUP:RUN which executes a test 
and appends the results to the file with logical name RESULTS. 

Table C-10 contains a listing of DSUP:RUN.COM. As shown at line 32 
of Table C-10, DSUP:RUN uses the command procedure DSUP:EXEC, shown 
in Table C-ll, to execute the test program and directs the output to 
a temporary file. It then uses the APPEND command to append the 
temporary file to the file RESULTS and finally deletes the temporary 
file. 

To ensure that completion of output from a DCL SHOW command does not 
impact a test execution, a separate command procedure, DSUP:SHOW, is 
used to execute each show command and append the output to the file 
with logical name RESULTS. Table C-12 contains a listing of 
DSUP:SHOW.COM. As shown at line 26, DSUP:SHOW uses the command 
procedure SHOW_, shown in Table C-13, to execute the SHOW command 
and directs the output to a temporary file. The APPEND command is 
then used to add the temporary file to the end of the file RESULTS. 
The temporary file is then deleted. 


C-5 





C.7 DETERMINATION OF TEST LOOP OVERHEAD PARAMETERS 


The ACPS test comparison tool is used to account for test loop overhead 
in ACPS tests. For host machines that do not support execution of the tool 
(i.e., host computers not supporting FORTRAN 77), a special test program in 
each ACPS test language is used to compute the test overhead. These overhead 
measurements can then be used to set variables in the test support software so 
that test loop overhead (except for operating system statistics) can be 
accounted for directly in each test execution. Table C-14 shows the command 
procedure which executes the program AFIRST which is the Ada version of the 
overhead test. Table C-15 contains output from execution of AFIRST. The 
output contains 20 executions (ADAFRST) of nonmicrosecond level tests and 
10 executions of microsecond level tests(TOVR). The format of the output is 
described in Appendix E. Based on data from Table C-15, the following initial 
values would be given to variables in DDEC:ADASYS.ADA: 

a. For microsecond level tests, the test loop overhead time is 

contained in variable TOVR. It would be initialized to 213. 

b. For nonmicrosecond level tests: 

1. LOOPN contains the number of test loop iterations. It would be 
set to 99998. 

2. LOOPTM contains the measured elapsed time for LOOPN iterations 
through the test loop. It is set to the median of values 
measured which would be 3.299988. 

3. LOOPZ contains the size in bytes of the test loop compiled 
code. The preset value for DEC VAX Ada is 0 since the compiler 
does not support the address attribute for labels. 

C.8 DETERMINATION OF TEST REPEATABILITY 

As a result of the coding and command procedure conventions adopted in 
the VAX/VMS ACPS, the elapsed time and CPU time measurements made at run-time 
can be made accurate to within +10 ms. To achieve a test measurement accuracy 
of 99%, one needs only to ensure that each test (exclusive of test overhead) 
executes for at least 1 sec. 

The special command procedure DDEC:REPEAT, shown in Table C-16, is used 
in the ACPS to verify measurement accuracy by repeatedly executing the test 
loop overhead program AFIRST so that 1000 test measurements are made. The 
run-time test statistic file is then manually inspected to determine the 
variance in test measurements. If the minimum and maximum measurements differ 
by more than 20 ms, then to achieve a test measurement accuracy of 99%, the 
ACPS test durations must be increased accordingly [e.g., for a 40 ms variance, 
test6 must be executed (exclusive of test loop overhead) for at least 3 sec]. 


C-6 




Typically, these large test measurement variances are caused by scheduled 
events within VMS (e.g., VAX cluster and DECNET polling activities or periodic 
processing by the system process ERRFMT). They can be eliminated by restric¬ 
tion of the VMS software environment. Table C-15 shows an example of a test 
measurement (3.349976) which was impacted by VMS batch processing logic that 
flushes batch output buffers at 1 min intervals even if they are empty. ACPS 
command procedures were subsequently modified to set this interval to one day. 

For VAX computers with either large memory configurations (greater than 
16 Mbytes) or which have memory modules that have different access times, test 
measurements cannot be made to be repeatable through varying test durations. 
Test measurement variances greater than 30% have been obtained in such config¬ 
urations. These variances are due to the effect of instruction pipelining in 
which multiple memory accesses may be made simultaneously. The efficiency of 
memory access for these configurations is dependent upon where programs are 
located in physical memory. Since the user has no control over how his or her 
program is loaded into physical memory, any tests run in these configurations 
are not repeatable and the user must measure the variance of execution time 
for all tests executed as discussed in Section C.10. 

C.9 COMPILATION AND EXECUTION OF ACPS TESTS 


Several command procedures are used to compile and execute ACPS tests. 

As shown in Table C-l, for each common language test (not including type C, E, 
S, or T tests) functionally equivalent command procedures of similar form are 
used for each ACPS test language. The batch procedure to compile and execute 
tests for DEC VAX Ada compiler is shown in Table C-l7. It invokes two command 
procedures: DDEC:ACOMP to compile ACPS tests and DDEC:AEXEC to execute ACPS 
tests. Compile-time statistics are written to the file DRESULT:AC0MP.DAT and 
run-time statistics are written to the file DRESULT:AEXEC.DAT. 

Table C-18 shows a shortened version of the command procedure DDEC:ACOMP 
which was used to compile selected ACPS VAX Ada tests for demonstration of 
ACPS compile-time output which is described in Appendix E. The command 
procedure is divided into five sections: compilation of tests (lines 44-83), 
creation of executable modules (lines 86-92), determination of source file 
size (lines 96-114), determination of object module size (lines 117-134), and 
determination of executable module size (lines 137-144). The command procedure 
generates start and end records (e.g., lines 44 and 86) on the output 
statistic file for use by the ACPS comparison tool to identify where each of 
these test output sections begins and ends. The symbol < is used to indicate 
the start of a test record or test section. ACOMP uses the command procedure 
DDEC:AC0M to compile and generate test output records for single compilation 
units. As shown in Table C-19, ACOM first uses the symbol PMSG to write a 
test identification record and then uses the DCL SHOW STATUS command (invoked 
by symbol SHW defined by DSUP:SYMBOLS) to measure system resource use before 
and after the compilation. ACOMP uses the command procedure DDEC:ALNK, shown 
in Table C-20, to form executable modules for single Ada programs and to 
generate tes- records showing the resources consumed. ALNK generates test 
identification and performance statistic records in the same way as ACOM 
does. ACOMP uses the following command procedures to calculate and display 


C-7 








the size of VAX Ada test files: DDEC:ASRC, shown in Table C-21, for source 
files; DDEC:AOBJ, shown in Table C-22, for object files; and DDEC.’AEXE, shown 
in Table C-23, for executable files. These command procedures set global 
symbols (source_size, object_size, executable_size) that are used by ACOMP for 
output of the total size of each type of Ada file. 

Table C-24 shows a shortened version of the command procedure DDEC:AEXEC 
which was used to execute selected ACPS tests compiled by VAX Ada for demon¬ 
stration of ACPS run-time statistic output which is described in Appendix E. 
The DCL SHOW STATUS command is used to measure the execution and program 
loading time of the test loop overhead test (aaOOOOO) and of the entire test 
suite. 

The ACPS test comparison tool assumes that test records within compile¬ 
time and run-time test statistic files appear in a specific sorted order which 
is described in Appendix E Section E.3. All test compilation and execution 
command procedures provided with the VAX/VMS version of the ACPS comply with 
this ordering. 

C.10 EXECUTION OF ACPS TEST RESULT COMPARISON TO OL 

The ACPS test result comparison tool consists of two separate programs: 
one to compare compile-time test results and one to compare run-time execution 
results. 

The command procedures DTOOL:CCOMP is used to interactively execute the 
ACPS compile-time test result comparator. Table C-25 contains a listing of 
DTOOL:CCOMP which describes how to invoke the command procedure, the logical 
names created, and the filename and filetype conventions used. To compare 
compile-time test results generated through execution of ACPS command pro¬ 
cedures provided for ECSPO JOVIAL and VAX Ada, one would type the following: 

$ 0DTOOL:CCOMP DRESULT:ACOMP DRESULT:JCOMP DRESULT:COMPILE_A_J 

The comparator tool prompts the user for information to control the 
comparison. This input is described in Appendix E. At the end of execution 
the following files would be created: 

DRESULT:C0MPILE_A_J.U09 - Output comparing VAX Ada and ECSPO JOVIAL 

compile-time test statistic files. 

DRESULT:COMPILE_A_J.U10 - Formatted output for VAX Ada compile-time test 

statistic input file. 

DRESULT:COMPILE_A_J.U11 - Formatted output for ESPO JOVIAL compile-time 

test statistic input file. 


C-8 






The command procedure DTOOL:CEXEC is used to interactively execute the 
ACPS run-time test result comparator. The comparator tool prompts the user 
for information to control processing. This input is described in Appendix E. 
The listing for DTOOL:CEXEC is contained in Table C-26. It describes how the 
command procedure is invoked, which logical names it uses, and the filename 
and filetype conventions employed. To compare run-time test results from 
execution of ACPS command procedures for ECSPO JOVIAL and VAX Ada, one would 
enter the following command: 

$ @DTOOL:CEXEC DRESULTrAEXEC DRESULT:JEXEC DRESULT:RUN_A_J 

At the end of execution, CEXEC would generate the following files: 

DRESULT:RUN_A_J.U09 - Output comparing VAX Ada and ECSPO JOVIAL run-time 

test statistic files. 

DRESULT:RUN_A_J.U10 - Formatted output for VAX Ada run-time test statistic 

input file. 

DRESULT:RUN_A_J.U11 - Formatted output for ECSPO JOVIAL run-time test 

statistic input file. 

To measure test repeatability, the execution comparator tool can be used 
to calculate the maximum and minimum execution statistics for each test. The 
tool can optionally compare results of successive executions of ACPS test 
execution command procedures and generate maximum or minimum test statistic 
files (see lines 42-45 in Table C-26). These test statistic files can be 
continually updated by comparison with subsequent test executions until the 
maximum and minimum statistic values for every test do not change. The 
resultant maximum or minimum test statistic files could then be used for 
comparison to corresponding maximum or minimum test result files for other 
test types. 


C-9 



Table C-l. ACPS VAX/VMS Command Procedures 


HU MKS 


Descriotion 

VAX Ada 

ECSPO JOVIAL 

VAX PORTRAN 

01 splay VAX/VWS Software Environment 

DACPStVAXVRS 

• 

• 

Define Logical Mows and Environment SjwPols 

DACPS:LOCICALS 

• 

• 

Install Ccmwn Language Support Software 

DSUP:SUPPOAT 

• 

• 

Install ACPS last Caparison loots 

07001:TOOLS 

• 

• 

Setup Language last Environment 

ODEC:SETUP 

WOV:SHUP 

*0*:SfTUP 

Define Cotnon Language tanand Synpois 

DSUP:STWOLS 

• 

• 

Eaecute Progron and Aacord last Aesutts 

0SUP:RUN 

• 

• 

iiecute Program 

BSUP:EIEC 

• 

• 

Eiecute Show tanand and Record Results 

8SUP:SM0M • 

• 

• 

Eaacuta Show Coeimnd 

Display Ada tapiler Dependent Parameters 

0SUP:SM0H 

OOEC'.ADAPARA 

• 

• 

Cooptle/Eaecute lest loop Overfeed Test 

- canon language tests 

- Ada type C tests 

• Ada type E tests 

- Ada type S tests 

- Ada type I tests 

Determine Rim Time Neasuroaent Repeatability 

ROEClAHRST 
BKC:CHRST 
■KClEHRST 
DDEC:SHItST 
00£C:TF IRSt 

DOEC-.REPEAT 

0JCV:MRST 

■FOR:fflRS7 

Coaptle/Esecute ACPS tests 

- conmon language tests 

DOECtARATCH 

OJOV:JRATCN 

RFOR:FRATCM 

- Ada type C tests 

- Ada type E tests 

- Ada type S tests 

- Ada type T tests 

8KC:CRAICM 

ODIC'.EBATCM 

D0EC:SRA7CM 

COEC:TRATCH 



Compile ACPS tests 

- camon language tests 

• Ada type C tests 

• Ada type E tests 

- Ada type S tests 

- Ada type T tests 

DDEC:ACOHP 

00CC:CC0AP 

DOCClECOMP 

DKCrSCOMP 

tOEC:TCOMP 

DJOV:JCOHP 

BFOR-.fCOte’ 

taptle Individual ACPS Hies 

BOCClACOA 

tXN-.Xtm 

Of OR :f COP 

lint ACPS Programs 

00tC:AU* 

DJ0V:JUK 

«F0R:FUK 

Determine Sin of ACPS Source Hies 

S0EC:ASRC 

DJ0V:JSRC 

BF0R:FSRC 

Determine Site of ACPS Object Hits 

B0CC:A0RJ 

DJOV:JORJ 

■FOR-.FORJ 

Determine Slse of ACPS taecutable Hies 

DOtC.Am 

RJ0V:Jttt 

RF0R:FEU 

Eaecute ACPS lasts 

• conmon language tests 

- Ada type C tests 

- Ada type E tests 

• Ada type S tests 

- Ada type 1 tests 

KKC:AEIEC 

DOtCrCEXEC 

nc.iinc 

aotc:uuc 

DOEC:tEKtC 

U0V:XttC 


Enecute ACPS tap!! at ion Comorater 

DTOOUCCOHP 

• 

9 

Eaecute ACPS Test Eaecutlon Separator 

01001:CtXIC 

• 

9 




for Oil languages 


C-10 





HMMirin<oNHa>OHN(O«in'«M«»OHNM < r4n«N«0>op4Nio«in<«N«9>eHN)Otfin«NM»aHNi')<r 


Table C-2. Command Procedure DACPSiLOGICALS.COM 


Ada Real Time/Run Tine Environment Tost Aerospace Corporation 

Tests . 

Files LOG2CALS.COM 

REK 2/1/88 

Descriptions 

This command procedure is used to define logical names for 

ACPS Ada/FORTRAN/JOVIAL test directories and is invoked as followss 

dlogicals pi p2 

whores 

pi - is the device containing the ACPS test suite 
(e.g. sys$disk) 

p2 ~ is the name of the ACPS test suite top level 
directory (e.g. user.acps) 

At the end of execution the default directory is set to the top 
level directory of the ACPS test suite and the batch output 
rate is set to 1 day. 


assign logical directory names 


; 

assign 

'Pi* 

s [ * p2'1 

daeps 

assign 

'Pi* 

sl'pZ'.ada] 

da da 

assign 

'Pi* 

s['P2*.fortranl 

dfor 

assign 

'Pi* 

s(*p2*.jovial 1 

djov 

assign 

’Pi* 

s['p2*.tools! 

dtool 

assign 

•pl* 

t(*p2*.support! 

dsup 

assign 

•pl* 

>I*p2'.data! 

data 

assign 

'Pi* 

i(* p 2*.ada.telesoftl 

dtela 

assign 

*pl* 

«l*p2*.ada.dec! 

ddec 

assign 

•Pl’ 

•(*p2*.ada.alsl 

dais 

assign 

» 

•pl* 

• I *p2*.results! 

dresult 


define symbols to set up compiler specific test environments 

use_aKls 8dalsssetup.com 

use_fKortran ■«« 8dforssetup.com 
use_d*ec «** 8ddecisetup.com 

use.jxovial »■* 8djovssetup.com 
use_tKelesoft »»* 8dtelessetup.com 

set default directory to top level acps directory and set batch 
output rate to 1 day 

set def daeps 

set output_rate*l-0<0<0 


C-U 














NNNNwhmmmmmhmh 

(KM->o«0>'J9>UiX>biNMO«H>l»U<«UNM 


Table C-3 Command Procedure DSUPiSUPPORT.COM 


! Ada Raal Tine/Run Tiae Environment Tast Aerospace Corporation 

I Tests . 

! Files SUPPORT.COM 
! REK 2/1/88 

! Descriptions 

j xxxx compile/assemble Ada/FORTRAN/JOVIAL test support software 
! xxxx create object aodule library file SUPPORT.0L8 to contain the 
! KKXK test support software object Modules. 

! assumed logical naaess 

! dsup - directory containing test support software 

for/cheeksbounds gettim 
for/check-bounds gstats 
macro geticr 

» 

library/object/create support.olb gettia,gstats.geticr 


C-12 








NNNNNhmhhhhhhhh 


Table C-4 Command Procedure DTOOLiTOOLS.COM 


Ada Real Time/Run Time Environment Test Aerospace Corporation 

Test: . 

File: T00LS.C0M 

REK 2/1/88 

Description) 

kxkk compile/link Ada/F0RTRAN/J0VIAL compilation,execution result 
xxxx comperison tools 

kxkk The current directory is changed to dtool and left there on exit 
assumed logical names: 

dtool - directory containing comparison tool source, 

object,executable files and execution procedures 

set def dtool 
for/check«bounds ccomp 
for/check*bounds cexec 
link ccomp 
link cexec 


C-13 










WMWWWNNNIMNNNNNnmmhmhhmhwm 

!'WNHO'0M'IO>uiX'lfiNMO<OOI^O>UiX>wNMa4OI'4O>UUtUNH 


Table C-5 Command Procadura DACPSiVAXVMS.COM 


fj Ada Real Tima/Run Tiaa Environment Taat Aerospace Corporation *! 

I! £ f 

*! Test. 1; 

•! File. VAXVMS.COM 

REX 2/1/58 Ji 

I! 1 ; 

I! Description. 

I * e. 

This command procedure displays VAX/VMS system and process parameters 

J; which define the software environment under which ACPS tests are 

II compiled and executed. 

f; parameters are set and displayed separately by each 

|j ACPS compilation and execution command procedure. 

w » 

|| display system processes 

> show system 

t'. 

>'• display process/quotas 

!! 

> show process/quotas 

t! 

|j display RMS multi-block and multi-buffer defaults for FORTRAN 1/0 
' show rms default 

[ f 

|! display system parameters 

1 run systsystem<sysgen 

ihow/all 

ihow/special 

ixit 


C-14 














S>»»»«*»ftUigiUlUlUIUlUlUIUlUI^««»«l>»|t»»MWWWWWWWWWNNNNNNNNNNMHHHHMMMMH 

->JO^uix^ci«Ni^e«e('4»>ui«>b4N>->e<eM>i»>vii»wis>Me<ooi' < >49«uix«U)NH<e<«M'>i»ui««uN»^e<ae*>i»>ui»o«N^o«e»'4»>ui«>o«rM»^ 


Table C-6 Command Procedure DDECiADAPARN.COM 


Ada Real Time/Run Time Environment Test Aerospace Corporation 

T est < . 

File> ADAPARM.COM 

REK 2/1/88 

Description! 

xxxx batch procedure to compile/link/execute Ada ACPS test ADAPARM 
xxxx output will be written to data set dresultiadaparm.dat 


! assumptions! 

! assumed logical namesi 

! deeps - top level directory of ACPS test suite 

l dresult - directory that contains ACPS test result output 

l dsup - directory containing common language support 

! software and command procedures 

! assumed symbol values! 

! acps - executes command procedure daepsilogicsIs 

! to define logical names*global symbols and 

! set the default directory to daepsi 

! aopt - Ada compiler execution options 

! asys - list of object modules common to all tests 

! our_run - invokes dsupirun.com which executes the 

! program in the parameter field and appends 

! the test results to the file with logical 

! name results. 

! use_dec - invokes a command procedure that defines 

! global symbols used to compile and execute 

! test programs and sets the current 

! directory to the one containing 

! the Ada ACPS test programs 

! assumed program library directory! t.libl 

! other assumptions! 

! - support routines have been compiled*assembled 

! set up DEC Ada test environment 

acps 
use_dec 
show system 

delete extraneous files- 

del [.liblK.KjK 

acs create library I.libl 

acs set library [.lib) 


-— compile/link test programs —— 

set work /quota*4096/extent*8152/adjust 
show work 
Dacom adaparm 

acs link/nomap/coimaand s adapara.tmp adaparm 

Sadaparm.tmp 

dal adaparm.tap;X 

--- run adaparm ——- 

set work /noadjust/quota*850/extent*850 
show work 


C-15 























Table C-< CoMMnd Procedure DOECtADAPARM.COM (concluded) 


AS $ assign dresultiadapara.dat rasults 

69 6 copy drosultioapty.dat results' 

70 # our_run adapara 

71 6 show system 


C-16 


I 







Table C-7 ADAPARM Output for DEC VAX Ada 


minimun delay tiae interval * 1 •OOOOOE-02 
ada clock granularity(seconds) 8 9■222252 

ada clock granularity(seconds) 8 2‘252252 

ada clock pranularity(seconds) 8 ®*®22252 

ada clock granularitylseeonds) 8 2‘222252 

ada clock pranularity(saeonds) 8 2*222252 

ada clock pranularity(seconds) 8 2*222252 

ada clock pranularity(seconds) 8 2‘®22252 

ada clock granularityCseeonds) 8 2‘222252 

ada clock granularity(seeonds) 8 2‘222252 

ada clock granularity(seconds) 8 0.009949 

duration'small 8 6.10352E-05 
system.tick 8 1.00000E-02 
system.fin*_d*lta 8 9.31323E-10 
system, mi n_int 8 -2147483648 
system.max_int 8 2147483647 
system.max_digits 8 33 

system.max_mantissa 8 31 

stand*rd_input file nam* 8 5YS6INPUTi >.! 
standsrd_output file name*SYS90UTPUT «.I 
integer'size 8 32 

integer*first*-2147483648 
integer*lest 8 2147483647 
short_integer*size 8 16 

short_integer*first 8 "32768 

short_integer»last* 32767 

*hort_short_int*p*r'siz* 8 8 

short_short_integer'first* -128 

short T short_int*ger*last* 127 

positave’size 8 31 

positive'first 8 1 

positive*last 8 2147483647 
float'siz* 8 32 

float'digits 8 6 

float*emax 8 *4 

long float'siz* 8 64 

long_float'digits 8 .15 

long_float*eaax 8 204 

lon g long float'size 8 125 

long_long_float'digit* 8 33 

long long_float'*max 8 444 


C-17 


HHHHHHHHHHNNNNNNNNNN«««rt««KlKtK|IO»tftftftf 


Table C-8 Command Procedure DDECsSETUP.COM 


Ada Real Time/Run Time Environment Test Aerospace Corporation 

Tests . 

Files SETUP.COM 

REK 2/1/88 

Descriptions 


xxxx defines DEC Ada compile/link global symbols end sets the default 
kxkx directory to ddec. It slso defines global symbols to invoke comiaand 
xxxx procedures in directory dsup. 

assumed logical namess 

ddec - points to directory containing DEC Ada ACPS tests 

dsup - points to directory containing test support 

object modules 

systshare - directory containing a user written system 
service to access microsecond level time 

command procedures usedi 

dsup>symbols - defines global symbols our_run,our_show to invoke 
command procedures in directory dsup> 

define DCL symbols used in Ada/JOVIAL/FORTRAN command procedures 

Ddsupisymbols 

define compile/link symbols 

copt «** aopt "/nowarn/nolist/nocheck" 

nopt «** aopt i«* "/nowarn/nolist" 

sopt aopt i«* "/nowarn/nolist/optimize*space* 

topt «■» aopt i* 1 ”/nowarn/nolist/optimiza s time" 

anoopt i** aopt i*« "/nowarn/nolist/noopt" 

alist i*« aopt ««* "/nowarn/list" 

aopt I s * /nowarn/nolist 

asys i« dsup(support.olb/library>sys#share■uss.olb/library 
set the default directory for DEC Ada 
sd ddec 

assign tul5554.acps.ada.dec.results! drasult 


C-18 















O<OW'-^9'Ul.r>Mrs)»*O>0W'>49MI'*MN»oO<0ei*’4OsUI'*t*NM 


Table C-9 Command Procadura DSUPsSYMBOLS.COM 


Ada Real Time/Run Tima Environment Test Aerospace Corporation 

Test i . 

Files SYMBOLS.COM 

REK 2/1/88 

Descriptions 


Defines symbols which invoke language independent command procedures 
and which abreviate commonly used VAX DCL commands. These symbols 
are used in ACPS compile/execute command procedures. 

This procedure is invoked by each language's setup.com command procedure 
which is used to set up compiler specific compile-time/ 
run-time test environments 


assumptions! 

assumed logical namess 

dsup - directory for Ada/JOVIAL/FORTRAN common support 
routines/command procedures 

our_r*un "Ddsuptrun" 

our_s*how i** w 3dsup■show" 

sd i*= set default 

shw «»* show status 

pmsg »■« write systoutput 


C-19 













UMtUMWNNNNNNNNNNHMHMHHHHKH 

»WNMe«MM»UiX'b)NHe«OI->4»Ui«MNHeiOei>4»Ult>blNM 


Table C-10 Command Procedure DSUPiRUN.COM 


Ada Real Time/Run Time Environment Test Aerospace Corporation 

Test < . 

Filet. RUN.COM 

REK 2/1/88 

Description t 

xxxx This command procedure is used to execute Ada/JOVIAL/FORTRAN 
kkkk main programs and append the test results to the file with 
kkkk logical names resultst . It uses the command procedure 
kkkk dsuptexec.com to do the actual execution. RUN is invoked as 
kkkk followsi 

Drun pi 

where *pl* is the Ada/JOVIAL/FORTRAN program to be executed 


assumptions! 

assumed logical namest 

results - file to contain test result output 
dsup - directory for Ada/JOVIAL/FORTRAN common support 
routines/command procedures 


execute the program and direct the results to a temporary file 

Odsupiexec/output* dsup■temp.dat * pi' 
append dsupttemp.dat resultst 
del dsupttemp.dat ;k 


C-20 













Table C-ll Command Procedure DSUPsEXEC.COM 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 
17 


Ada Real Time/Run Time Environment Test Aerospace Corporation 

Tests . 

Files EXEC.COM 

REK 2/1/88 

Descriptions 

xxxx This command procedure is common to Ada/FDRTRAN/JOVIAL tests 
xKKK and is used to execute main programs. It is invoked as follows: 

Oexac 'pi' 

this procedure executes program *pl* 
run *pl* 


C-21 










Oi‘W0tU:nMN»*O<eM>jmin.m(4NMO«O»'JOvUl*trtN:'* 


Table C-12 Command Procedure DSUP>SHOH.COM 


Ada Real Time/Run Time Environment Test Aerospace Corporation 

Test: . 

Pile: SHOH.COM 

REK 2/1/88 

Description: 


This procedure executes a specified show command and appends its ou 


put 


to the file with the logical name results: . It is invoked as follows: 


Dshow 'pi* 


whore 'pi' is the show command to be executed 


assumptions: 


assumed logical names: 

results - file to contain test result output 
dsup - directory for Ada/JOVIAL/FORTRAN common support 
routines/command procedures 


adsup < show_/output * dsup:temp.dat 'pi' 
append dsup:temp.dat results: 
del dsup:temp.datj* 


C-22 













Table C-1S Command Procedure DSUP« SHON_.COM 


Ada Real Tima/Run Tima Environment Teat Aerospace Corporation ♦! 

▼ • 

Tests . !! 

Files SH0H_.C0M I; 

REK 2/1/S8 JI 

$ > 

Descriptions 

This procedure executes a specified show command and is invoked as followss 
Dshow. 'pi* 

where 'pi' is the show command to bo executed 
show *pl' 


C-25 







e>» o> O* »»>» U« m m Ul Ul (#• Ul U« Ul M ****** xt M M (* I* O' <*(* M C« r» NIV) N N N N N N N M ** fr* •->»* M 

'iO>UI»UNMO«e'M0<ui*WNWO««''a'Ui*wNHO«DI , <'9'UI*UiNHO«OI'>l»UII'^NMo«M>i»>UiIiMNHe«M<4»Ui*WNM 


Table C-14 Command Procedure DDECiAFIRST.COM 


Ada Real Tiae/Rurt Tine Environment Test Aerospace Corporation 

Test < . 

File> AFIRST.COM 

REX 2/1/88 

Description! 

xxxx batch procedure to compile/link/execute Ada ACPS test AFIRST 
xxx* output of AFIRST will be written to file dresultiafirst.dat 


! assumptionst 

! assumed logical namest 

! daeps - top level directory of ACPS test suite 

! dresult - directory that contains ACPS test result output 

! dsup - directory for Ada/JOVIAL/FORTRAN common support 

! routines/command procedures 

! assumed symbol values■ 

! acps - executes command procedure daepstlogicals 

! to define logical names*global symbols and 

! set the default directory to daepst 

! aopt - Ada compiler execution options 

! asys - list of object modules common to all tests 

! our_run - invokes dsuptrun.com which executes the 

• program in the parameter field and appends 

! the test results to the file with logical 

! name results. 

! our_show - invokes dsuptshow.com which executes the 

! show command in the parameter field and 

! appends the show command output to the file 

! with the logical name results. 

! use_dec - invokes a command procedure that defines 

! global symbols used to compile and execute 

! test programs and sets the current 

! directory to the one containing 

! the Ada ACPS test programs 

! assumed program library directory! [.lib! 

! other assumptionst 

! - dsup support routines have been compiled.assembled 

! set up DEC Ada test environment 

acps 
use_dec 
show system 

delete extraneous files- 

del (.liblx.X;K 

acs create library l.lib] 

mem set library I.lib! 

! ————— compile test support routines- 

ade'aopt oursys 

ada'aopt ourspc.doc ! for non VAX Ada use ourspc.use 
ade'aopt ourdmp 
ada'aopt ourtyp.vax 

ada'aopt adasys.doc ! for non VAX Ada usa adasys.use 
ada'aopt adaspc 
ada'aopt adadmp 


C-2A 



















Tabla C-14 Command Proeadura DDECtAFIRST.COM (concludad) 


I 68 $ ada'aopt adatyp.vax 

69 6 ada'aopt mathfun.dac !for non VAX Ada ~ radavalop 

70 #! 

71 6!-compilo/link tast programs- 

72 $! 

73 6 3acom afirst 

74 6 3aInk afirst 

75 6! 

76 6!-run afirst- 

77 6! 

78 6 copy drasultiampty.dat drasultiafirst.dat 

79 $ assign drasulttafirst.dat results 

80 6 sat work /noadjust/quota=850/axtant = 850 

81 6 our_show work 

82 ♦ our~run afirst 

83 $ show systam 


C-25 













Tabl* C-15 AFIRST Output for DEC VAX Ada 


<adafrst 

0.000000 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

2 

-1 

1 






<adafrat 

1.939941 

149999 

194 

0 

0 

0 

5 

<adafrst 

0.000000 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

2 

-1 

2 






<adafrat 

1.929993 

149999 

191 

0 

0 

0 

5 

<adafret 

0.000000 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

2 

-1 

3 






<adafrst 

1.939941 

149999 

192 

0 

0 

0 

5 

<adafrst 

0.000000 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

2 

-1 

4 






<adafrat 

1.939941 

149999 

194 

0 

0 

0 

5 

<adafrat 

0.000000 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

2 

-1 

5 






<adafrat 

1.939941 

149999 

194 

0 

0 

0 

5 

<adafrat 

0.000000 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

2 

-1 

6 






<adafrat 

1.939941 

149999 

194 

0 

0 

0 

5 

<adafrat 

0.000000 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

2 

-1 

7 






<adafrat 

1.929993 

149999 

193 

0 

0 

0 

5 

<adafrat 

0.000000 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

2 

-1 

8 






<adafrat 

1.939941 

149999 

193 

0 

0 

0 

5 

<adafrat 

0.000000 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

2 

-1 

9 






<adafrat 

1.939941 

149999 

193 

0 

0 

0 

5 

<adafrat 

0.000000 

1 

0 

0 

0 


5 

2 

-1 

10 






<adafrat 

1.939941 

149999 

193 

0 

0 

0 

5 

<adafrat 

0.000000 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

2 

-1 

11 






<adaf rat 

1.939941 

149999 

194 

0 

0 

0 

5 

<adafrat 

0.000000 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

2 

-1 

12 






<adafrat 

1.939941 

149999 

193 

0 

0 

0 

5 

<adafrat 

0.000000 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

2 

-1 

13 






<adaf rat 

1.939941 

149999 

194 

0 

0 

0 

5 

<adafrat 

0.000000 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

2 

-1 

14 






<adafrat 

1.929993 

149999 

193 

0 

0 

0 

5 

<adafrat 

0.000000 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

2 

-1 

IS 






<adafrat 

1.939941 

149999 

194 

0 

0 

0 

5 

<adafrat 

0.000000 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

2 

-1 

16 






<adafrat 

1.929993 

149999 

193 

0 

0 

0 

5 

<adafrat 

0.000000 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

2 

-1 

17 






<adafrat 

1.939941 

149999 

194 

0 

0 

0 

5 


C-26 








Tabla C-1S AFIRST Output for DEC VAX Ada (concluded) 


<adafrat 

2 

0.000000 

-1 

1 

18 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

<adafrat 

1.939941 

149999 

193 

0 

0 

0 

5 

<adafrat 

2 

0.000000 

-1 

1 

19 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

<adafrat 

1.9.994k 

149999 

194 

0 

0 

0 

5 

<adafrst 

2 

0.000000 

-1 

1 

20 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

<adafrat 

1.949951 

149999 

194 

0 

0 

0 

5 

<tovr 

2 

0.000109 

136 

0 

119 

50 

45 

0 

0 

5 

<tovr 

2 

0.000107 

146 

0 

115 

50 

44 

0 

0 

5 

<tovr 

2 

0.000107 

135 

0 

123 

50 

45 

0 

0 

5 

<tovr 

2 

0.000106 

134 

0 

116 

50 

45 

0 

0 

5 

<tovr 

2 

0.000107 

144 

0 

122 

50 

44 

0 

0 

5 

<tovr 

2 

0.000108 

145 

0 

123 

50 

45 

0 

0 

5 

<tovr 

2 

0.000108 

134 

0 

115 

50 

45 

0 

0 

5 

<tovr 

2 

0.000109 

150 

0 

119 

50 

44 

0 

0 

5 

<tovr 

2 

0.000107 

138 

0 

115 

50 

46 

0 

0 

5 

<tovr 

2 

0.000110 

144 

0 

125 

50 

45 

0 

0 

5 


C-27 








t>*»«»»*>t>UlUlUIUlUlUIUtUlUIV»»«>«»x>«»»»UMWUUWWUWWNNNNNNNNNNHHMMHMMHMl-) 

’sia>iji»v«iv)*>^e<oM>i»ui»UiN»»e<ow>i9>ui»MN^O'OOt>J9>ui<«o«N»- < e<oo>'«i9vui^o«is)H>e«o»'40>ui»(MN»- > e«W'>4««ui»(MfM*-> 


Table C-16 Command Procedure DDECiREPEAT.COM 


Ada Real Time/Run Tiae Environment Tost Aerospace Corporation ♦! 

♦ * 

Tost i . ♦! 

File. REPEAT.COM i! 

♦! 

REK 2/1/88 t! 

Description! A! 

♦ ! 

This command procedure is used to execute AF1RST 50 timas 

The output will be placed on DRESULTiREPEAT.DAT and should be inspected 

to see how the execution time varies for each AFIRST execution 

in order to determine how long each ACPS tost should be executed 


assumptions! 

assumed logical namesi 

daeps - top level directory of ACPS tost suite 
ddec - diractory containing DEC Ada ACPS tests 
dresult - diractory that contains ACPS tost result output 
dsup ~ directory containing common language support 
software and command procedures 

assumed symbol valuesi 

acps - axocutas command procedure daepstlogicals 

to define logical names#global symbols and 
set the default directory to daepsi 
our_run * invokes dsupirun.com which executes the 

progrem in the peremeter field and appends 
the test results to the file with logical 
name results. 

our_show - invokes dsupishow.com which executes the 
show command in the parameter field and 
appends the show command output to the file 
with the logical name results, 
use.dec - invokes a command procedure that defines 

global symbols used to compile and execute 
test programs and sets the current 
directory to the one containing 
the Ada ACPS test programs 

other assumptions! 

- AFIRST has been compiled/linked 

get to appropriate directory 

acps 
use_dec 
show system 

ensure that the output is written to REPEAT.DAT 

copy dresultiempty.dat dresultirepeet.dat 
assign dresultirepeat.dat results 

set the working set size appropriately 

set work /noadjust/euota*850/liait s 850 
our_show work 

execute AFIRST 50 times 

count 1 0 
loopi 


C-28 



















Table C-16 Command Procadura DDECiREPEAT.COM (concluded) 


68 

69 

70 

71 

72 


our_run AFIRST 

count * count ♦ 1 

if(count .It. 50) then goto loop 

show system 









*4N*)>nflior»«o9>o*4fiiiO'nft<or»«oo>0'HN»o^m'ot^*o»or4(Mio>?in«t>«Mo > >OF4N»a'rm'eN«oo>QH(M 

HHHHHHHHHHNNNNNNNNNN^nmonio«innKi«««<ftftf««««ininin 


Table C-17 Comund Procedure DDECiABATCH.COM 


Ada Real Tiae/Run Tiae Environaent Test Aerospace Corporation 

Tast> . 

Filei ABATCH.COM 

REK 2/1/88 

Description! 

xxxx batch procedure to compile/link/execute Ada ACPS test suite 
xxxx compilation result output will be on file dresult:acomp.dat 
xkxk axecution result output will be on file dresultiaexec.dat 


assumptions: 

assumed logical names: 

daeps - top level directory of ACPS test suite 
dresult - directory that contains ACPS test result output 

assumed symbol values: 

acps * executes command procedure deeps:logicals 

to define logical names.global symbols and 
set the default directory to daeps: 

use_dec - invokes a command procedure that defines 

global symbols used to compile and execute 
test programs and sets the current 
directory to the one containing 
the Ada ACPS test programs 

other assumptions: 

- dsup support routines have been compiled.assembled 


set up DEC Ada test environment 

acps 
use_dec 
show system 

-— coapila/link test programs — 

Dacoap/output^dresult:acoap.dat 

--- execute test programs —- 

copy dresult:eapty.dat drasultlaexec.dat 
assign dresultiaexec.dat results 
Daexec 
show system 


C-30 


















»»»»»»»»UUiUlWUIVUlU)UlW«0»»»l>Mk»«WWUWUWWWMWNNNNNNNNNNMHHHMHHMMM 

<UO>U),PMN**O<OO*''IO'.U'.mMN*<o<0»'We>U'*«*N»-«O<OM'>Je'Ul.Pl*N»-*O<0M'U»UtX«trtN»~O«M'U»>UI*t«Nfr«O«W'Ue>Ui*O«rOI-' 


Table C-18 Command Procadura DDECiACOHP.COM 


Ada Raal Tima/Run Tima Environment Tast Aarospaca Corporation 

Tost> . 

File: ACOMP.COM 

REX 2/1/88 

Dascriptiom 


**** eompila/link ADA tast programs 
assumad logical names> 

dsup - ADA/JOVIAL/ADA common support routines 
assumed symbol values) 

aopt - ADA compiler options 

asys ~ list of object modules common to all tests 
pmsg - outputs parameter on systoutput 

shw - show status 

command procedures used) 

acorn - compiles program/peckage modules and 
generates show status records 
sink - links Ada programs and generates show status 
records 

asrc - calculates/prints/sums source module sizes 
aobj - calculates/prints/sums object module sizes 
aexa - calculates/prints/sums load module sizes 

assumad program library directory) 

I.lib! 


! set work set limits 

set work /quotas40<>6/axtents8152/adjust 
show work 

i-«...-delete extraneous files —-- 

del I.lib.. 

acs create library [.lib] 
acs set library [.lib] 
purge *.* 

del K.obj;X'*.exe;* 

» _____ ___ _ 

Piling "<start compiles" 

! compile ADA tast programs and support routines 
pmsg "<system" 
shw 

ada'aopt oursys 

ada'aopt ourspc.dec ! for non VAX Ada use ourspc.use 
ada'aopt ourdmp 
ada'aopt ourtyp.vax 

ada'aopt adasys.doc ! for non VAX Ada use adasys.use 
ada'aopt adaspc 
ada'aopt adadm p 
ada'aopt adatyp.vax 

ada'aopt mathfun.dec !for non VAX Ada - redevelop 
shw 

acs create sublibrary/parent*[.lib! [.lib.sub] 

9acom AAOPOOO 
9acom AA00000 
9acom AAOPOOO 
9acom AA00000 
9acom AFOPOOO 
9acom AF05305 
9acom AF05306 
9acom AF0S307 
9acom AF05308 


C-31 















Table C-18 Command Procedure DDECiACOMP.COM (continued) 


AS 

69 

70 

71 

72 

73 

74 

75 

76 

77 

78 

79 

80 
81 
82 

83 

84 

85 

86 

87 

88 

89 

90 

91 

92 

93 

94 

95 

96 

97 

98 

99 
100 
101 
102 

103 

104 

105 


108 

109 

110 
111 
112 

113 

114 

115 

116 

117 

118 

119 

120 
121 
122 

123 

124 

125 

126 

127 

128 

129 

130 

131 

132 

133 

134 


dacom AGOPOOO 
pmsg "<6000008" 
sHw 

ada'aopt AC00003 
ada'aopt AG00004 
ada'aopt AG00005 
ada'aopt AG00006 
ada'aopt AG00007 
ada’aopt AG00008 
shw 

3acom AGM0008 
dacom AOOPOOO 
dacom A000505 
Sacom A000506 
3aInk AF05308 
pmsg "<end compiles" 

t___ 

! link programs 
pmsg "<start links" 
acs set library (.lib! 

3aInk AA00000 
3aInk AG00008 
3aInk AGM0008 
3aInk A000506 
pmsg "<end links" 

i_____ 

! aourca fila storage 
source_size ** 0 
pmsg "<start source size" 

dasrc "system" oursys>ourdmp>ourtyp.adasys.adadmp.adatyp.mathfun,ourspc.adasp 
3asrc "" AA0P000 
dasrc "" AAOOOOO 

3asrc "system" oursys,ourdmp»adasys»adadmp 

3asrc "" AA0PD00 

3asrc "" AAOOOOO 

3asrc •" AF0P000 

3asrc •" AF05305 

3asrc "" AF05306 

Sasrc "" AF05307 

3asrc "" AF05308 

3asrc ”” AGOPOOO 

3asrc AG00008 AG0000S,AG00004,AG00005,AG00006,AG00007,AG00008 

3asrc "" AGM0008 

3asrc "" AOOPOOO 

dasrc ”” A000505 

3asrc "" A000506 

pmsg "<end source size * "sourco_size'” 

»____ — ____ 

! object file storage 
object_size ** 0 
pmsg "<start object size" 
assign t.libl objlib 

3aobj "system” oursys*ourdmp»ourtyp>adasys,adadmp»adatyPrmathfun'Ourspc»adasp 

3aobj "" AAOPOOO 

3aobj "" AAOOOOO 

3aobj "" AF0P000 

3aobj "" AF05305 

3aobj "" AF05306 

3aobj "" AF05307 

3aobj ”" AF0S308 

3aobj "" AGOPOOO 

daobj AG00008 AG00003,AG00004,AG00005.AG00006,AG00007,AG00008 

3aobj "" AGM0008 

3aobj "” AOOPOOO 

daobj "" A000505 

3aobj "" A000506 

pmsg "<and object size • ''object.size'" 


C-32 










Table C-18 Command Procedure DDECiACOMP.COM (concluded) 


135 8!- 

136 6! load module file storage 

137 8 executable_size == 0 

138 6 pmsg "<start executable size" 

159 9 Saexe AA00000 

190 $ Saexe AF05308 

191 6 Saexe AG00008 

192 $ Saexe AGM0008 

193 8 Saexe A000506 

199 $ pmsg "<end executable size » "executable size'" 

195 6 deassign objlib "" 

196 -- 







■HHnrtnrtrtriHHNNNNNNNNNN^««Kl 


Table C-19. Command Procedure DDEC:ACOM.COM 




Ada Real Time/Run Time Environment Test Aerospace Corporation 

Test> . 

File* ACOM.COM 

REK 2/1/88 

Description! 

This command procedure compiles DEC Ada ACPS tests 
It is invoked by the DEC Ada ACPS compile/link command procedure 
with a single parameter that identifies the file to be compiled 
It assumes that the source file is contained in e file with 1 of 
3 different file types which ere searched in the following orderi 
.ada*.vaxi.dec 

It outputs status records to sysfoutput that show the cpu/io impact 
of the compilation 

if ftsearchCpl ♦ *.ada") .nes. ■" then goto eont_2 

if ffsearchtpl ♦ ".vox") .nes. ■" then goto cont_l 

if f$search(pl ♦ ".dec") .nes. ■" then goto eont_0 

goto exit 


8cont_0i file_name * pi ♦ ".dec" 

8 goto cont_3 

8cont_li file_name * pi ♦ ".vex* 

8 goto cont_3 

8cont_2i file_name * pi ♦ ".ada* 

8cont_3« 

8 PMSG "<»'P1»" 


8 SHW 

8 ADA'AOPT • filename 
8 SHW 


8 exitt 




C-34 









Table C-20 Command Procadura DDEC:ALNK.COM 


1 8! Ada Real Tima/Run Tima Environmant Tast Aarospaca Corporation 

2 8! 

3 8! Tast. . 

A 8! File. ALNK.COM 

5 8! 

6 $! REK 2/1/88 

7 8! 

8 8! Description. 

9 8! 

10 8! This command procedure links DEC Ada ACPS tests 

11 8! It is invoked by the DEC Ada ACPS compile/link command procedure 

12 8! with a single parameter that identifies the main program name 

13 8! It outputs status records to sys$output that show the epu/io impact 

14 8! of the link 

15 8! 

16 8 PMSG •<* , P1•" 

17 8 SHW 

18 8 ACS L1NK/NOMAP/COMMAND 5 ’ PI •.TMP 'PI* *ASYS 

19 8 D'Pl'.TMP 

20 8 SHW 

21 8 DEL 'P.’.TMP;* 


C-35 








»»»U)UU)UIUlUlUIWWlUll>«»»»«>*«««Wti«MWblWWtilUWNNNNMNNNIMNMWHHMHHMMM 

N^e««'J»UI»WNMe4«^9'UI»MNwe«M'4»>Ui»UIN>- l O«M^»Ul^WNHa<i|M>l»Ui«WNHO>eM><«>UI^WNH 


Tabic C-21 Command Procedure DDECiASRC.COM 


Ada Real Time/Run Time Environment Test Aerospace Corporation 

Test) . 

File: ASRC.COM 

REK 2/1/88 

Description) 


! This command procedure is used by the DEC Ada ACPS compile/link 

! command procedeure and is invoked as follows) 

« 

! Dasrc pi p2 

; 

! The command procedure determines the size of source files for 
! filenames specified in argument pZ and outputs a message to 
! systoutput as follows) 

! <pl siz 

! where siz is the size of the source files 

! for filenames in parameter p2 

! If pi is null.then the last filename in p2 

! is used for pi. 

! The procedure also adds the size of the source files to the global 
! symbol source.size. 

total.size * 0 
loop) ” 

comma location * f$locate("." , p2> 
file.Tength » ftlengthC p2 ) 

if comma.location .eq. file_length then goto last.file 
file name * ftextraett 0 , comma_location , p2 ) 
if ftsearcM file.name * ".ada") .nes. "" then goto lpop.2 

if f$search(file.name ♦ ".vax") .nes. •" then goto loop.l 

if f$search(file_name ♦ ".dec") .nes. "" then goto loop.O 

goto loop 

loop.Ot file_name * file_name ♦ ".dec" 
goto loop.3 

loop.l> file.name * file.name ♦ ".vox" 
goto loop.3 

loop_2) file.name * file.name + ".ada" 
loop_3« 

total size * total.size ♦ f#file_attributes( file.name . "oof" ) 
p2 * f#extract( comma.location ♦ 1 , fdengthC p2 ) , p2 ) 
goto loop 
last.filei 

file.name * p2 

if f?saarch(file.name ♦ ".ada") .nes. •" then goto last.2 

if ftsearch(file.name ♦ ".vax") .nes. "" then goto last.l 

if ftsearch(file.name ♦ ".dec") .nes. ”" then goto last.O 

goto exit 

last.O) file.na'me * file.name ♦ ".dec" 
goto last.3 

last.li file.name * file.name ♦ *.vax" 
goto last_3 

last.2i file.name « file.name ♦ ".ada" 
last_3 > 

total.size * total.size ♦ ftfile.attributasC file.name > "aof" ) 
if pi .aqs. "" then pi * p2 

exit > 

write sysloutput *<**pl* ••total.size** 
souree.size *« source.size ♦ total.size 


C-36 















»»»»»WUIUlUIUlUIUIUIUlUl»»*»»«M»«»Mb<UWUUlWlilWWNNNNNMNNNNMHHHMWHMMM 


Tabic C-22 Command Procedure ODECiAOBJ.COM 


Ada Real Tima/Run Time Environment Test Aerospace Corporation 

Testt . 

File: AOBJ.COM 

REK 2/1/88 

Description: 


! This command procedure is used by the DEC Ada ACPS compile/link 
! command procedure and is invoked as follows: 

i 

! Saobj pi p2 
1 

! The command procedure determines the size of object files for 
! filenames specified in argument p2 and outputs a message to 
! sysfoutput as follows: 

! <pl siz 

! where siz is the size of the object files 

! for filenames in parameter p2. 

! If pi is null,then the last filename in p2 

! is used for pi. 

! The procedure also adds the size of the obaect files to the global 
! symbol object_size. 

! assumed logical names: 

! objlib - points to the directory containing the object 

! modules for the input filename 

f 

total_size = 0 

loop: 

comma location * f$locate(",* > p2) 
file.Tength * ftlengtht p2 ) 

if comma ..location .eq. file.length then goto last_file 
temp_name * f$extract( 0 , comma_location , p2 ) 
under * *" 

cont_l: file name * "objlib:" ♦ temp_name ♦ under ♦ ".obj" 
if f«search(file_name) .eqs. ■" then goto cont_2 
total ..size * total_size * f$file_attributes( file name , "eof" ) 
file name * "objlib:" ♦ temp name ♦ under ♦ ".adc" 
total_size * total_size ♦ f$file_attributes( file name , "eof" ) 
file name * "objlib:" ♦ temp name ♦ under ♦ ".ecu" 
total_size * total size ♦ f$?ile_attributes( file_name , "eof" ) 
cont_2: if( under .eqs. *_■) then goto eont_J 
under * "_* 
goto cont 1 

cont_S: p2 c f$extract( comma_location ♦ 1 , ftlangthC p2 ) , p2 ) 
goto loop 
lest_file: 

under * "* 

cont_A: file name * "objlib:* ♦ p2 ♦ under ♦ *.obj* 

if f?search(file_name) .eqs. "" then goto cont 5 

total_size * total size * ftfile_attributes( file_name , "eof" > 

file name * "objlib:" ♦ p2 ♦ under ♦ ".acu" 

totaT_size « total size ♦ ftfile_attributes( file.nsme . "eof" ) 
file name * "objlib:* ♦ p2 ,♦ under ♦ ".adc" 

totaT.siza * total size ♦ flfile.attributest file_name , "eof" ) 
cont_5: ifC under .oqs. then goto eont_8 

under «*• 
goto eont_4 

cont_6: if pi .oqs. then pi * p2 

write systoutput *<"pl' ''total^size** 
objoct_size «* object_size ♦ total.size 


C-37 











Tabic C-23 Command Procedure DDECtAEXE.COM 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 
21 
22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 


Ada Real Tima/Run Tima Environment Test Aerospace Corporation 

Testi . 

Filet AEXE.COM 

REK 2/1/88 

Description! 


This command procedure is used by the DEC Ada ACPS compile/link 
command procedure and is invokad as follows! 

daexe pi 

The command procedure determines the size of the load module file 
for the file specified in argument pi and outputs a message to 
sysFoutput as follows: 

<pl siz 

where siz is the size of the load files 
for the filename in parameter pi 

The procedure also adds the size of the load files to the global 
symbol executable_size. 

file name * ***pl'" ♦ ".axe" 

total_size ** f$file attributes! file name , "eof" ) 
write systoutput "< ,T pl* *'total_size T " 
executable.size ** executable_size ♦ total_size 


C-38 












* * * * * * M t* <rt t* I* b« (M t* t* t* N N N IS) N N N N N IS) fr* fr* fr* fr* t->»»i-> 

V»WN^e«M'4MM>WNwe«M>J»'Ul^WNHe<<IM > 4»UlMi*NMO««-<4»UiikWNI rf 


Table C-24 Command Procadura DDECiAEXEC.COM 


Ada Real Time/Run Time Environment Test Aerospace Corporation 

Test: . 

File: AEXEC.COM 

REK 2/1/88 

Description: 


this command procedura axecutas DEC Ada varsions of ACPS test programs 
assumed logical names: 

data - points to diractory containing tast input data 
filas 

dsup - directory containing common language support 
software and command procedures 

assumed symbol values: 

our.run - invokes dsup:run.com which executes the 

program in the parameter field and appends 
the test results to the file with logical 
name results. 

our_show - invokes dsup:show.com which executes the 
show command in the parameter field and 
appends the show command output to the file 
with the logical name results. 

set work/limit=850/quota s 850/noadjust 
our_show work 

use show status to time aaOOOOO and all tast program loading time 

our_show status 
our_run AAOOOOO 
our.show status 
our_show status 
our_run af05508 
our_run agOOOOS 
our_run agmOOOS 
our_run ao00506 
our_show status 
set work/adjust 
our_show status 
set work/adjust 


C-39 













HHHHHHHHHHNNNNNNNNNN»iiO)>)Ktrt^iini«)»itftf«<f««««tr(rinininiAinininiAiniA«««««« 


Table C-25. Command Procedure DTOOL:CCOMP.COM 


Ada Real Tima/Run Tima Environment Test Aarospaca Corporation c 

Tasti . c 

File* CCOMP.COM c 

REK 2/1/88 c 

c 

Description: c 

c 

This file contains the command procedure to execute the ACPS 
compilation comparison program CCOMP and is invoked as follows: 

Dccomp pi p2 p3 pA 

where 

pl - gives the filename of the compilation result file 
assigned to logical unit 7 

p2 - gives the filename of the compilation result file 
assigned to logical unit 8 

p3 - gives the filename of CCOMP outputs on logical units 
9.10.11 

p4 - gives the filename of command input. If absent.then 
command input is read from the terminal 

The following shows logical name assignments and complete file 
names for all input/output files to CC0MP> 

name type filename description 


ferOO5 input 'pA'.dat User command input 

for006 output systoutput Terminal output for prompts and error 

messages 

for007 input 'pl'.dat Unformatted ACPS compilation result file 

forOOS input *p2'.dat Unformatted ACPS compilation result file 

for009 output *p3'.u09 ACPS compilation comparison file 

forOlO output *p3'.ul0 Unit 7 formatted with headings and with 

VMS status records processed 

forOll output 'pS'.ull Unit 8 formatted with headings and with 

VMS status records processed 

assumptions: 

assumed logical names: 

dtool - directory containing ACPS compilation/test result 
comparison tools 

if pA .nes. *" then assign 'pA'.dat ferO05 

if p4 .eqs. *" then assign systcommand for005 

assign 'pl'.dat for007 

assign *p2'.dat forOOS 

assign *p3'.u09 for009 

assign 'pS'.ulO forOlO 

assign *p3'.ull forOll 

assign systoutput for006 

run dtooliccomp 

doassign for005 

deassign for006 

deassign for007 

doassign forOOS 

deassign for009 

doassign forOlO 

doassign forOll 


C-A0 










X') »»»*»»»»*»UiUIVIUIUI«)IU)IDU)UI*I>I«*«*»«#«WIHU(iIIHWUWWWNNNNNNNNNNMmmhmmmhmm 

MO «M'>J»U1»WNMO««l'i»>Ui^WNMO<0»'J9>Ul»WNMO«0ivl9<UIX>^NMO«0iMe'UiX>WNMo««l<4»Ui»UNMe«M>l9>UI»UNM 


Table C-26. Command Procedure DTOOL:CEXEC.COM 


Ada Real Time/Run Tine Environment Test Aerospace Corporation 

Test< . 

Filei CEXEC.COM 

REK 2/1/88 


Description> c 

c 

This file contains the command procedure to execute the- ACPS 
test result comparison program CEXEC and is invoiced as follows* 

Sccomp pi p2 pS p4 

where 

pl - gives the filename of the test result file to be 
assigned to logical unit 7 

p2 - gives the filename of the test result file to bo 
assigned to logical unit 8 

p3 - gives the filename of CEXEC outputs on logical units 
9,10,11.12 

p4 - gives the filename of command input. If absent,then 
command input is read from the terminal 

The following shows logical name assignments and complete file 
names for all input/output files to CEXECi 


e i 

E 1 

2! 

type 

filename 

for005 

input 

*P<*.dat 

forOOB 

output 

systoutput 

for007 

input 

*pl'.dot 

forOOB 

input 

*p2'. dat 

for009 

output 

•p3'.u09 

forOlO 

output 

■pS'.ulO 

forOll 

output 

•pJ’.ull 

for012 

output 

*p3*.ul2 


description 


User command input 

Terminal output for prompts and error 
Mtssaots 

Unformatted ACPS test result file 
Unformatted ACPS test result file 
ACPS test result comparison file 
Unit 7 formatted with headings and with 
test overhead values subtracted 
Unit 8 formatted with headings and with 
test overhead values subtracted 
Optionally generated file that contains 
the minimum or maximum run statistics 
for corresponding test results output on 
units forOlO,forOll 


assumptiensi 

assumed logical names■ 

dtool “ directory containing ACPS compilation/tast result 
comparison tools 

if p4 .nos. •" then assign 'pA'.dat for005 

if pA .eqs. *" then assign systcomoand for005 

assign *pl'.dat for007 

assign 'p2'.dat forOOB 

assign *p3*.u09 for009 

assign 'pS'.ulO forOlO 

assign *p3'.ull forOll 

assign *p3'.ul2 for012 

assign systoutput for006 

run dtooltcexec 

deassign for005 

deassign for006 

deassign for007 

deassign forOOB 

deassign for009 

deassign forOlO 


deassign forOll 
deassign for012 


C-41 













APPENDIX D 


Ada TEST INTERFACE PACKAGE SPECIFICATIONS 


This appendix lists the Ada package specifications for the common language 
test support software. It also lists the Ada specifications for non-Ada 
procedures that access target operating system-dependent performance 
statistics. All compiler-dependent statements (i.e., those suffixed with the 
string —*) are specific to the DEC VAX Ada compiler and may have to be 
changed for other Ada compilers. 

Tables D-l and D-2 list the specifications for the package OURSYS which 
defines test support procedures, data types, and global variables for use by 
all Ada tests. Table D-3 lists the specification for the package OURSPC which 
defines numerous composite data types and global variables that are used by 
many ACPS tests. Test descriptions in Appendix F refer to these types by name 
using capital letters (e.g., RECORDS and RECORD_POINTER). Table D-4 lists the 
specification for the package OURTYP which defines compiler- and machine- 
dependent numeric data types and global variables declared with these types. 
Test descriptions in Appendix F refer to these types by name if the test uses 
any of the types or global variables declared in OURTYP. The package 
specification for test support software procedures that dump global variables 
contained in packages OURSYS and OURSPC is shown in Table D-5. The package 
MATHFUN, shown in Table D-6, is used by tests to access compiler-dependent 
mathematics function libraries. Rename statements are used to standardize 
names of mathematics routines to those used in the Whetstone test. 

The package body of OURSYS implements the test support procedures defined 
in the package specification shown in Table D-l. To provide the ability to 
read time to the microsecond level and to access additional performance 
statistics, procedures within the body of OURSYS reference operating system- 
dependent procedures to perform these tasks. The Ada specification for these 
procedures is shown in Table D-2 which lists the declarative part of the 
package body for OURSYS. As shown in the interface pragma statements 
contained in lines 281 to 283 of Table D-2, these procedures are: GETTIM, 
GSTATS, INITIM, ISTATS, and SECS. For the VAX/VMS version of ACPS, these 
procedures are provided in the directory [acps.support] as FORTRAN and MACRO 
subroutines. As can be seen in Appendix A, these routines are not supplied on 
the ACPS delivery tape in ANSI format. New versions of these routines must be 
implemented for each new target operating system. 

The following provides further clarifications on the function of these 
external procedures: 

a. Microsecond level time is assumed to be a floating point number 
expressed in units of seconds to microsecond level accuracy. 

b. The value returned by the external function SECS is assumed to be in 
floating point format in units of seconds. 


D-l 







c. The operating system statistic array set by procedure 6STATS is 
assumed to contain OURSYS.NCPUST (i.e., 9) elements. The first 
OURSYS.NTOSUB (i.e., 4) elements are assumed to increase and the 
difference of the values from the start to the end of a test will be 
output on the test result file. For the remaining elements in the 
array, the value at the end of test execution is output to the test 
result file. 


D-2 






O' »»»»»»«UiUIUIUIUiUiUIUIUlUl««««»«X<»«^WMUWbiWWUWMNNNNNNNNN f\> •-•«-' •-•»-> mmhmhh 

^i»>ui»c>«N^e«M>iO'Ui^MNt->e<O0(X9>ui»o«rg*->a«0*'4O'u«xvMN^e'OW^4O'ui»o<NMe«WviO'Vx^o«N»- > e«e*'4Ov«ii»o«rs>»-> 


Table D-l OURSYS Package Specification 


— Ada Raal time/Run tiao Environaant Test Aarospaca Corporation — 

— Tost< . 

— Filai OURSYS 

REK,MJM,KMB 2/1/88 


— Descriptiont 

— xxxx This package defines the language independent 

— xxxx test statistic interface routines used by all ACPS tests. 

— xxxx OURSYS defines various numeric datatypes(e.g our_integer) to 
-- xxxx ensure that for each test the size of datatypes manipulated 

— xxxx is compiler independent for a single machine (e.g. VAX). Global 

— xxxx variables of various datatypes are defined for use by each test 

— xxxx program. 

— KKKXKKKXKKXXXKXKXKXKXKKKKKKKXKKKXXKXKXXXXXXXXXXKXXXXKXXXXXXXXXXKXK - 

— xxxx Notei In the Ada version of OURSYS(Statements followed by - 

-- xxxx are implementation dependent and may need to be changed - 

— xxxx for each compiler and for each machine. 

— xxxx Changes may also be required to the corresponding 

~ xxxx statements in the JOVIAL and FORTRAN versions of OURSYS.- 

— KKKKKXKXKKKKXXXKXKXXXXXXXKXXXXXXKXXXXXXXXXXKKXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXK - 


with system; use system; 
with calendar; use calendar; 
with text.io; usa text_io; 
with unchecked_conversion; 
package oursys is 


- KXXXKKXXKKXXXXXXKXXXXKXXXXXXXXXKXKXXXKKXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX — 

— data typas (machine word length integer# float) used in tests — 
- XKXXXXXXXXXXXKKXKKXKKKXXKKXKKKXKKKXKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKXXKK — 


subtype our.string is string; —x 

type our_fixed is delta 0.125 range 0.0 .. 1024.0; 


subtype our_integer is integer ;—X 
subtype our_positive is positive ;—* 
subtype our_natural is natural ;— X 
subtype our_float is float t—x 


type one_to_3 is integer range 1..3; 


— file management definitions — 


subtype file_name 
subtype file_form 
subtype fin fo 
subtype test_id 
subtype test_ext 


is our_string(l..11) 
is our_string(l..80) 
is our_string(1..8) 
is our_string(l..7) 
is our_string(l..3) 


;—* 

X 

x 

x 

;—x 


- KKKKKXKXXKKKKKKKKKKXXKHKXKXKXXKXKKKKKKKXKXXKKKKKKKXKXKK 

— unchecked conversions 

— KKKXXKXXKXKXXKKXXXXXKXKKXXXXXKKKKKKKXKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKK 


function address_to_integer is new 

unchecked_conversion(a ddress,our_integer); — X 


— XKKXKXHKKKKKXHXXKXXXKXKXXKXKXKKKKMKKKKKKKKXXKKKKKKKXKKK — 

— generic 1/0 instantiations»one per base type — 

— KXHKKXKKKKXKKXKXKXKKXXXKHKKKXKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKXKK ~ 


D-3 







Tabic D-l QURSYS Package Specification (continued) 


68 

69 

70 

71 

72 

73 
76 

75 

76 

77 

78 

79 

80 
81 
82 
83 
86 

85 

86 

87 

88 

89 

90 

91 

92 

93 
96 

95 

96 

97 

98 

99 
100 
101 
102 
103 
106 

105 

106 

107 

108 

109 

110 
111 
112 
113 
116 

115 

116 

117 

118 

119 

120 
121 
122 
123 
126 

125 

126 

127 

128 

129 

130 

131 

132 

133 
136 


package ourfixed_io 
package ourfloat_io 
package ourinteger.io 


is mw fixed_io (our fixed); 
is new float_i© (our_float); 
is new intager.io (our_integer); 


use ourfixed_io; 
use ourfloat_io; 
use ourinteger_io; 


— XKKXXXKXXXKXXXXXXXXXXXXXKKXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXKXXXXX — 

global test timing interface procedures — 

- XXXXXKXXXXXXXXXXKXXKXXXXXXXKKXKXXXXXKXKKKXKXXKXKKXXKKXK - 

— finame (testid, fname) - constructs a — 

— implementation dependent — 

file name — 

-- fiform (finfo, fform) ~ constructs a ~ 

implementation dependent — 

— file form — 


— mstart 

— mstop 


— nooptm 


— tcomp 


- start a microsecond level test iteration — 

- stop a microsecond level test iteration — 
end record the elapsed time — 

- used to prevent optimization of test code — 
within test loops. Also causes output of test 
statistics after first test iteration — 

- cause comparison of the next test execution — 
to the saved test execution — 


— tfail (errcod) 

— tinit 


— tprint 


- outputs a test failure error message with — 
error code errcod — 

- intialize test environment — 

call istats tp initialize non-ada routines — 
determine overhead of normal test loop 
determine overhead of microsecond level test - 
loop — 

- print test results stored by tstop and tstopm 


— tsave 


save test statistics for later comparison — 


-- tstart (td) 
td 


start a test using ada time (if possible) 
test identification (7 characters) 


— tstopm 


retrieve 8 store test statistics at end of — 
microsecond tests. — 


tstop 


retrieve 8 store test statistics at and of ~ 
a test — 


tlvalu (val) 


store val into print buffers 


— t2valu (tvlf tv2) - stores test values tvl. tv2 into test print — 

— buffers for output with test results — 


procedure finame (testid « in tsst.id; 

fname » out our_string 

); 


procedure fiform (finfo 
fform 


in fin_fo; 
out our_string 






Table 8*1 OURSYS Package Specification (continued) 


135 >; 

136 

137 procedure mstart; 

138 

139 procedure mstop; 

140 

141 procedure nooptm; 

142 

143 procedure tcomp (tastn i test id); 

144 

145 procedure tsava; 

146 

147 procedure tfail (errcod t in our integer); 

148 

149 procedure tinit; 

150 

151 procedure tprint; 

152 

153 procedure tstart (td « in test_id); 

154 

155 procedure tstopm; 

156 

157 procedure tstop; 

158 

159 procedure tlvalu (val • in our integer); 

160 

161 procedure t2valu (veil* val2 i in address); 

162 

163 XKXXXXXXXXXKKKXXKKKXXXXXXXKKXXXXKKXXKKKKKKKKKXXXXKKXKKK - 

164 — test iteration parameters— 

165 — KKKKXXKKXKKKKXXKXKKXKKKKXKXKKXKXKXKXXKKKKXXKXXKXXXXKKKK — 

166 

167 — aaxitr - maximum V of loop iterations in tests 

168 — micitr - maximum • of iterations in microsecond level tests — 

169 

170 eiaxitr i constant our.integer i* 150000; —X 

171 micitr i constant our.intager ** 50; 

172 

173 — kkkkxkxxkkkxkxkkxxkkxkkkkxkkkkkkkxxkkkkkkkkkkxkkkkxkkxx — 

174 — test global variables— 

175 — KXKKHKXKKKKKXKKXKKKXKKKKXKKXHXKKXKKKXKKKXKKKKXKXKKKXKKX — 

176 

177 

178 — all global variables are initialized by tinit — 

179 — global variables are reset by test start procedures — 

180 — (tstart f mstart) and are conditionally setSused by nooptm — 

181 — to prevent removal of test code from the test loops. — 

182 

183 — debug - used to control whether print is generated from routines — 

184 — in peckage ourdmp that are called by test programs to dump — 

185 — global variables for debugging purposes. — 

186 

187 type debug type is (0FF>ON); 

188 debug t debug.type «* OFF; 

189 

190 — delay.test - used to indicate in microsecond level tests whether the 

191 — Ada delay statement is being tested 

192 

193 delay.test • boolean i* falsa; 

194 

195 — max.memory - this is the maximum memory unit size used in the 

196 — memory mamagement tests. The largest amount of memory 

197 — created dynamically will be an array of 1 .. max_memory. 

198 

199 max memory » constant our.integer i* 2KX18; —X 

200 
201 


D-5 







Table 0-1 OURSYS Package Specification (continued) 


l 


202 

203 

204 

205 

206 

207 

208 

209 

210 
211 
212 

213 

214 

215 

216 

217 

218 

219 

220 
221 
222 

223 

224 

225 

226 

227 

228 

229 

230 

231 

232 

233 

234 

235 

236 


240 

241 

242 

243 

244 

245 

246 

247 

248 

249 

250 

251 

252 

253 

254 

255 

256 

257 

258 

259 

260 
261 
262 

263 

264 

265 

266 

267 

268 


— minimum_delay_interval - this is the minimum delay time supplied in 

— an Ada delay statement to force invocation 

— of a lower priority task. It is determined 

— automatically by the program ADAPARM. 

minimum_delay_interval » constant duration t* 0.01; —* 

— our_delay - the delay interval used in microsecond level tasking tests 

— (e.g. time to wake up after a delay,time to activate 

— a lower priority task after a delay). It should 
be greater than the minimum delay interval supported 

— by an Ada run time environment and >= duration'small, 

— system.tick. 

our_delay i constant duration i= 10* minimum_delay_interval; —* 

— liters - used by all test loops as the test iteration count— 

— initialized by tinit,tstart — 

— incremented by nooptm,mstart — 

liters t our_integer «= 0; 


— set_tmp - used to determine whether mstart and — 

— tstart are to reset the tmpX global variables, set.tmp is set by — 

— test programs before calling tstart to indicate that initial — 

— values are being given to the tap* variables, tstop and tstopm — 

— always reset set.tmp — 


set_tmp t boolean t* false; 


— integer variables ( all variables » 3 except tmpisO which is 0) — 

— sat/used — 


tmpisO 

tmpisl 

tmpis2 

tmpis3 

tmpis4 

tmpis5 

tmpis6 

tmpis7 

tmpisS 

tmpis9 

tmpisa 

tmpisb 

tmpisc 

tmpisd 

tmpise 

tempi 


our_integer; 

our_integer; 

our_integer; 

our_integer; 

our_integer; 

our_integer; 

our_integer; 

our_integer; 

our_integer; 

our_integer; 

our_intager; 

our_integer; 

our_integer; 

our.integer; 

our_integer; 

our_integer; 


type max.mem is array(our_integer range <>) of our_intager; 
type array_pointer is access max„mem; 

type integer_vector is array (our_integer range <>) of our_integer; 
type integer_matrix is array (our_integer range <>, 

our_integer range <>) of our_integer; 
type integer_3d is array (our.integer range <>, 

our_integer range <>, 
our_integer range <>) of our_integer; 
subtype integer_array_50 is integer_vector (1..50) ; 
subtype integer_array_3_3 is integer.matrix (1..3, 1..3) ; 
subtype integer_array_S_3 T 3 is integer_3d (1..3, 1..3, 1..3) ; 
subtype integer_array_10 is intoger_voctor (1..10) ; 
tmpial i integer_array_50; 
tmpia2 « integer_array_3_3; 
tmpia3 i integer_array_3_3_3; 










Table D-l OURSYS Package Specification (continued) 


269 

270 

271 

272 

273 
276 

275 

276 

277 

278 

279 

280 
281 
282 
283 
286 

285 

286 

287 

288 

289 

290 

291 

292 

293 
296 

295 

296 

297 

298 

299 

300 

301 

302 

303 
306 

305 

306 

307 

308 

309 

310 

311 

312 

313 
316 

315 

316 

317 

318 

319 

320 

321 

322 

323 
326 

325 

326 

327 

328 

329 

330 

331 

332 

333 
336 
335 


tmpia6>tmpia5«tmpia6 • integer_array_10; 

-Mem t array_pointer; ~ 

— arrays not defined in type statements — 

tmpaul i array ( our_integer range 1..50) of our_integer; 
tmpau2 i array ( our_integer range 1..3, our_intager range 1..3) 
of our^integer; 

tmpauS s array ( our_integer range 1..3# our_integer range 1..3» 
our_integer range 1..3) of our_integer; 

— used only — 

tmpiul i our_integer; 
tmpiu2 < our_integer; 
tmpiu3 t our_integer; 
tmpiu6 i our.integer; 
tmpiu5 i our_integer; 

— integer variables range 1..3 — 

set/used — 
tmpil « one_to_3; 
tmpi2 i one_to_3{ 
tmpi3 » one_to_3; 
tmpi6 i one_to_3s 
tmpi5 « one_to_3; 
tmpi6 t one_to_3; 
tmpi7 t one_to_3; 
tmpiS i one_to_3; 
tmpi9 i one_to_3; 
tmpia « one_to~3; 

— positive variables — 

— set/used — 
tmpnl i our_positive; 
tmpn2 » our.positive; 
tmpn3 i our_positive; 
tmpn6 « our_positive; 
tmpn5 t our_positive; 
tmpn6 i our_positive; 
tmpn7 i our_positive; 
tmpnS i our_positive; 
tmpn9 i our_positive; 
tmpna « our_positive; 

— boolean variables — 

— set/used -- 
tmpbsl i boolean; 
tmpbs2 i boolean; 
tmpbs3 i boolean; 
tmpbs6 i boolean; 
tmpbsS < boolean; 
tmpbs6 i boolean; 
tmpbs7 i boolean; 
tmpbs8 i boplean; 
tmpbs9 t boolean; 
tmpbsa > boolean; 
tmpbsb t boolean; 
tmpbsc i boolean; 
tmpbsd i boolean; 
tnpbse i boolean; 

type boolean_vector is array (our.integer range <>) of boolean; 
type boolean.aatrix ia array (our_integer range <>, 

our_integer range <>) of boolean; 
type boolean_3d is array (our_integer range <>» 

our_integer range <>, 
our_integer range <>) of boolean; 


D-7 







Table D-l OURSYS Package Spacification (concluded) 


336 

337 

338 

339 

340 

341 

342 

343 

344 

345 

346 

347 

348 

349 

350 

351 

352 

353 

354 

355 

356 

357 

358 

359 


380 

381 

382 

383 

384 

385 

386 

387 

388 

389 

390 

391 

392 

393 

394 

395 

396 

397 

398 

399 


subtypa boolaan_array_10 is boolean_vector(l..10) ; 
subtype boolean_array_3_3 is boolean_matrix(1..3. 1..3) ; 
subtype boolean_array_3_3_3 is boolean_3d(l..3. 1..3, 1..3) 
tmpbal»tmpba2>tmpba3 s boolean_array_10; 
tmpb«4 i boolean_array_3_3; 
tmpba5 > boolean_arrey~3_3_3; 


fixed point 
tfflpfsO 
tmpfsl 
tmpfs2 
tmpfs3 
tmpfs4 
tmpfs5 
tmpfs6 
tmpfs7 
tmpfsS 
tmpfs9 
tmpfsa 


variables • 

our_fixed; 

our_fixed; 

our_fixed; 

our_fixed; 

our_fixed; 

our_fixed; 

our_fixed; 

our_fixed; 

our_fixed; 

our_fixed; 

our_fixed; 


float variables — 

set/used — 


360 

tmprsO 

8 

our_flost; 

361 

tmprsl 

t 

our_float; 

362 

tmprs2 

t 

our_flost; 

363 

tmprs3 

1 

our_float; 

564 

tmprs4 

l 

our_float; 

365 

tmprs5 

S 

our_floot; 

366 

tmprs6 

t 

our_floet; 

367 

tmprs7 

s 

our_floot; 

368 

tmprsS 

t 

our_float; 

369 

tmprs9 

* 

our_flost; 

370 

tmprsa 

1 

our_float; 

371 

tmprsb 

t 

our_float; 

372 

tmprsc 

1 

our_float; 

373 

tmprsd 

l 

our_floet; 

374 

tmprsc 

1 

our_floet; 

375 

tempr 

f 

our float; 

376 

type 

float_vector 

377 

type 

float matrix 

378 




379 

type 

float_3d 


our_integer range <>) of our_floet 
is array (our__integer range <># 
our_integer range <>, 
our_integer range <>) of our_float 
subtype float_array_3_3 is float_matrix (1..3, 1..3) ; 
subtype float_array_3_3 T 3 is floet_3d (1..3. 1..3* 1..3) t 
subtype float_array 10 is float_vector Cl..10) ; 
tmprel,tmpre2,tmpraJ i float_array_10; 


topre4 
tmpra5 


f1oe t_arr a y_3_3 ; 
float_array_3_3_3; 


tempf « our_.fi xed; 


string variables — 

set/used — 
our_string(l..10) 
our_string(l..20) 
our_string(l..50) 
our_string(l..10) 
our_string(l..10) 


tmpcsl 

tmpcs2 

tmpcs3 

tmpcs4 

tmpcs5 


D-8 


and oursys; 









Table D-2. OURSYS Package Body Declarations 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 
17 
IS 

19 

20 
21 
22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

31 

32 

33 

34 

35 

36 

37 

38 

39 

40 

41 

42 

43 

44 

45 

46 

47 

48 

49 

50 

51 

52 

53 

54 

55 

56 

57 

58 

59 

60 
61 
62 

63 

64 

65 

66 

67 

68 
69 


— Ada Real Time/Run Time Environment Tast Aerospace Corporation — 

— Testi . 

— File. ADASYS 

REK*MJM*KMB 2/1/88 -- 


— Description! 

— kkxx This file contains the package body for OURSYS. It implements 

— xxxx tast statistic interface routines used by all ACPS tests. It 

— xxxx references machine dependent routines ( see pragma interface 

— xxxx statements within the package body) to access machine dependent— 
xxxx performance statistics and read time to the microsecono' level. — 

— kkkkkxkkkkhxkkxkkkkkkkkxkkkkkkxkkxxxxkxkxkxxkxkkkkxkxkkhkmkkkkxkkk — 

— xxxx Notei In the Ada version of OURSYS*statements followed by —X — 

*■ kkxx are implementation dependent and may need to ba changed — 

— xxxx for each compiler and fer each machine. 

kkxx Changes may also be required to the corresponding — 

— XXXX statements in the JOVIAL and FORTRAN versions of OURSYS.— 

— ■KKKKKKKKKKKKKKXKKXXKXXXXXXXKXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXKXXXXKXXXKKXXXXKXXXXXX — 


with ourdmp; use ourdmp; 
with eurtyp; use ourtyp; 
with ourspc; use ourspej 

package body oursys is 


— KKKXKXKKKKKKKXXKKKKKHKKXKKXKKKKXKXKXXKXXXXXKKXKKKKKKKXK — 

— data types used in the package body of oursys — 

— HKXXXXK XXXX KKXXX XXX XKKXXKXXKXKKKXKXKXKKKXKKKKKKKKKXKKKK — 


Subtype our_duration is our_floot I—X 

subtype our_micro is our.float ; — x 

subtype our_stat is integer ; — X 

subtype our_time is time; —X 

— KKKKKKXKKKKKKXXXXXKKKXXXXXKXKKKXXKKXXXKXXKXXXXKKXXKXKXX — 

— machine dependent test parameters 

— KKXKHXHKXXHKKHKKKKHKXKKKXXKKXKKXXXXXXKXKKKKKKKKKKKKXKKK — 


— ntesub - • of statistics returned by gstats that always inersese — 

— and for which the difference (end-start) will be output — 

— nepust - • of machine statistics set by gstats ~ 

— mintim - minimum test period in seconds — 

— tclock - type of clock (Ada* operating system) to be read in — 

— non-microsecond level tests. — 

— If the operating system clock is used*then the subtype — 

“ our_time should be set eppropriately(fer VAX/VMS * — 

— use our_float) and the function wcleck modified if necessary — 

nepust i constant our_integer i* 9; —* 

type mach_stats is array (our_integer range 1..nepust) of our_stat; —x 

ntesub i constant our_integer i* 4; —X 
mintim i constant our_duration •« 1.0; —x 

type cleck.type is (Ada, OS); 

tclock i constant cleck.type •* Ada; — X 


— local test timing interface variables and procedures — 


— cstore - stores comparison of previous/saved tast results — 

— fer optimization tests in which testcp(3t3> ■ C — 

— The comparison is dene by division — 


D-9 







Table D-2. OURSYS Package Body Declarations (Continued) 


— sstore 


— stotal 

— tapref 

— tapset 


— tstore 


— gettia (ta) 


~ stores eosparison of provious/savod tost results — 
for tests in which testcp(SiS) * S. —- 
The eosparison is dona by subtraction — 

- stores test results in tots arrays — 

* called by noopta to reference global variables — 

~ called by test start procedures to set all — 

set/used global variables aade visible by «ursys — 

* store test results, calls gstats to get aachine — 
dependent statistics and stotal to store results — 

~ non-Ada procedure that stores aicrosecond level — 
tiae into ta — 


gstats (stary,retcod) - non-Ada procedure which acquires non-Ada— 
run statistics and stores thea into array stary — 
retcod is a status return code. The value 1 — 
signifies success — 


— initia 


— istats 


— wclock 


- non-Ada procdura that stores an initial tiae for — 
aicrosoeond levol tests so that test durations — 
can be coaputed to aicrosecond level accuracy — 

- non-Ada procedure to initialise non-Ada run — 
statistics — 

- non-Ada function that returns tiae in seconds — 

it is used if the value OS is assigned to telock — 


- returns tiae (Ada, OS) based 


:loek — 


procedure sstore; 
procedure stotal; 
procedure tapref; 
procedure tapsat; 
procedure tstore; 

procedure gettia (ta • out our_aicro); 

proceduro gstats (stary • eut aach_stats; retcod • out our_integer); 
procedure initia; 


procedure istats; 


r.tiae; 

»ur_tiaa; 


— individual test statistic variables — 

— teste - flag if set signals that the next test is to be coopered — 

— with a saved test — 

— testep - naaa of test that coapares results of two previous tests — 

— testna - naaa of test — 


— initok - sat if tiaa relatad routines have been executed once — 


D-10 












Table D-2. OURSYS Package Body Declarations (Continued) 


140 

141 — niters - counter for nusbor of loop iterations executed in s tost — 

142 

143 — niterl - contains nitors for the previous tost — 

144 

145 — nitor2 - contains nitors for the saved tost — 

146 

147 — ones ~ indicates whether test code has bean executed at least once 

148 

149 — ntstat - • of possible entries in tstatv — 

150 

151 -- tststi • index to last entry stored into tstatv — 

152 

153 — tstatv - print buffer for test values inserted by t2valu8tlvalu — 

154 

155 — tstatl - contains tstati for the previous test — 

156 

157 — tstat2 - contains tstati for the saved test — 

158 

159 — tstata - contains tstatv values for the previous test — 

160 

161 — tstatb - contains tstatv values for the saved test — 

162 

163 — strtis - tiso at start of test — 

164 

165 — endtis - tiaa at and of tost — 

166 

167 — strsic - aicrosecond level tine at start of test — 

168 

169 — endmic - aicrosecond level tiaa at and of tost — 

170 

171 — alapta - elapsed tiae of test in saconds — 

172 

173 — alaptl - elapsed tiae for the previous tost — 

174 

175 -- elapt2 - elapsed tine for the saved test — 

176 

177 — aiebuf - buffer to hold aicrosecond elapsed tiaes for a test — 

178 

179 — aicind - index to last entry stored into aiebuf — 

180 

181 — loopn - • of iterations in loop tiaed by loopn — 

182 

183 — loopsz 

184 

185 — looptm 

186 

187 — tovr 

188 

189 

190 — ststat 

191 

192 — estat 

193 

194 ~ estatl 

195 

196 — estat 2 


197 

198 

199 

initok 

t 

booloan i* falsa; 

200 

once 

• 

boolean *■ falsa; 

201 

teste 

I 

boolaan; 

202 

203 

tastep 

t 

test.id; 

204 

tastna 

t 

test_id; 

205 

206 

aicind 

1 

our.intagar »» 0 

207 

nitors 

1 

our.integar •• 0; 

208 

niterl 

1 

our_integer »* 0; 

209 

niter2 

t 

our_integer i« 0; 


- size of test loop overhead codo(bytes) — 

- elapsed tiae overhead of test loop for loopn itorotions — 

- elapsed tiae overhead in calling gottia for aicrosecond -- 
level tests — 

-aachine dependent statistics at start of test — 

- aachine dependent statistics at end of tost — 

- aachine test statistics of the previous test — 

- aachine test statistics ef tha savad tost — 


D-l 1 








Table D-2. OURSYS Package Body Declarations (Continued) 


210 tstati • our„.inteper i*-0; 

211 tstati i ©ur_integer; 

212 tstat2 i our integer} 

213 

214 ntstat i constant our_integer «« 5; 

215 tstatv i array (our_intepar range 1..ntstat) of our_integer; 

216 tstata « array (our_intager range 1..ntstat) of our_integer; 

217 tstatb i array (our_integar range 1..ntstat) of our„integer; 

218 

219 strtia i our_ti»e; 

220 andtia < eur tine; 

221 

222 strnic i our_aicro; 

223 andmic i our nicro; 

224 

225 elaptn « our_duration; 

226 alaptl « our_duration; 

227 alapt2 t our duration; 

228 

229 loopn > our_integer t* 0; -- preset deternined by AFIRST — 

230 loopsz i our_integer i* 0; — preset deternined by AFIRST — 

231 loopta « our_duration »* 1.665000; *• preset deternined by AFIRST — 

232 tovr i our duration i* 0.000000; preset deternined by AFIRST — 

233 

234 type tvactor is array (our_integer range l..nicitr) of our_duration; 

235 nicbuf i tvactor; 

236 

237 ststat > Mch_stets; 

238 ostat i aach.stats; 

239 astatl • aach.stets; 

240 ostat2 i nech.stats; 

241 

242 — accunulation tost statistic variables — 

243 

244 — ntot - • of tost results saved before printing — 

245 — used as a dinension linit in tot* arrays — 

246 

247 — totind - index of last entry in tot« arrays — 

248 

249 — totelp - contains elaptn for all tests run — 

250 

251 — totitr - contains niters for all tests run — 

252 

253 — totaac - contains ostat for all tests run ~ 

254 

255 — totnn - contains tostnn for all tests run — 

256 

257 — totrun - contains tstatv for all tests run — 

258 

259 -- totsti - contains tstati for all tests run — 

260 

261 ntot • constant our integer t«75; 

262 

263 totind ■ our integer i* 0; 

264 

265 totelp i array (our_integer range l..ntot) of our_duration; 

266 totitr i array (our_intager range l..ntot) of our_integer; 

267 totaac • array (our integer range 1..ncpust«our_integer range l..ntot) 

268 of ourstet; 

269 totnn i array Tour.integer range l..ntot) of tost id; 

270 totrun » array (our_inteper range 1..ntstat»our_integer range l..ntot) 

271 of our integer; 

272 totsti i array ?our_integer range l..ntot) of our^inteper; 

273 

274 — variables that are shared between tasks in nicrosecond level tasking tests 

275 — this occurs in tests where astop is called in a different task than 

276 — tinit'tstart'tstopa and tprint 

277 

278 pragaa sharad(nicind); —* 

?79 pragaa shared(strnic); —■ 

D-12 









Table D-2. OURSYS Package Body Declarations (Continued) 


280 

281 pragma interface (FORTRAN* gottia); —* 

282 pragma interface (FORTRAN* estate); —a 

283 pragma interface (FORTRAN* ini tin); —a 

284 pragma interface (FORTRAN* istats); —* 

285 pragma interface (FORTRAN* secs); --a 

286 

287 

288 — aaaaa oursys procedures fellow in alphabetical order aaaaa 

289 

290 

291 — aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa — 


D-13 







»»»»»»»>»UIUigiUlUUIUIUlUIUI««»«»«»»*»WUWWUWWWMWNNNNNNNNNNMWHHHMMMHM 


Table 0-3 OURSPC Package Specification 


— Ada Raal time/Run tiaa Environment Ta*t Aarospaea Corporation 


Testi . 

Filei OURSPC 


REK 

— Description) 


2 / 1/88 


— xxxx This package defines datatypes and objects used in tests for 

— xxxx access/enumeration/record types.representation specifications 
-- xxxx unchecked programming.sharad variables and tasking faatures. 

— xxxx It also defines procedures which set/reference the objects 

— xxxx defined — 

- XXKKXXXXXXXKXKXXXXXKKXXXXXXXXKXXKXXHXXKKKKXXKKXXKXKKKKKXXKKXKKKXKX 

—- xxxx Note> In the Ada varsion of OURSPC.statements followed by —x 

— xxxx are implementation dependent and may need to be changed 

— xxxx for each compiler and for aaeh target machine. 

— xxxx Changes may also be required to the corresponding 

— xxxx statements in the JOVIAL and FORTRAN versions of OURSPC 

— KXKKKKKKXKKKKXKKKKKKKKKKKKKXKKKXKKKKKKKKKKXXKXKKXKKKKKKKKKKKKXKKKK 


with system; 

with unchecked_convarsion; 
with calendar; use calendar; 
with oursys; use oursys; 
package ourspc is 


— XXKKKXKKKKXKKKXKKXKXXXXKXXKKKXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXKXKXXX — 

— data types used in tests — 

— xkxkkkkxkxxxkkxkkkxkxkkkkkxkkxxkxkxkxkxxkxxkkkkkkxxkkkk — 


type packed_boolean is new boolean; 

type packed_bool_array is new boolean_vactor Cl. .10); 

type months is (Jan.Fab.Her,Apr,May,Jun. 

Jul,Aug,Sep,Oct,Nov,Dec); 
type rep_months is new months; 

type five_bit_integer is range 0..31; 
type packed_months is new months; 


type records is 
record 

comp_il « five_bit_integer; 
comp_i2 i five_bit_integer; 
comp_bl i packed_boolean; 
comp_b2 i packed_boolean; 
comp_e > packed_aonths; 
and record; 

type packed_records is new records; 
type rep_records is new records; 


type variant records!discr > months i* Jun) is 


record 

case discr is 
when jan *> 
first 

when mar *> 
second 
when others 
comp_i1 
comp_i2 
comp_bl 
comp_b2 
comp_e 
end case; 


• our_integer; 

i our_float; 

*> 

> five_bit_integer; 
i fiva_bit_integer; 

• packed_boolean; 
i packed_boolaan; 
i packed_months; 


D-14 












Table D-3 OURSPC Package Specification (continued) 

4 

68 

and record; 

\ 

69 

type packed_variant is new variant_records; 


70 


- 

71 

typo reeords_array is array(our.integer range 1..10) of records; 


72 

type paeked_records_array is array(our_integer range 1..10) 


73 

of packad.records; 


74 

type rep_records_array is array(our_integer range 1..10) of rep.records; 


75 


- 

76 

type Enumeration is (Ident.l. 


77 

Ident_2, 


78 

Ident_3, 


79 

Ident_4, 


80 

ldent_5); 


81 



82 

subtype One.To.Fifty is our.integar range 1 .. 50; 


83 



84 

type String.10 is array(our_integer range 1..10) of character; 


85 

type String_20 is array(our_integer range 1..20) of character; 


86 

type String_30 is arraytour.integer range 1..30) of character; 


87 



88 

type Record.Type; 


89 



90 

type Record.Pointer is access Record_Type; 


91 



92 

type Record.Type is 


93 

record 


94 

Pointer.Comp i Record_Pointer; 


95 

Enum Comp t Enumeration; 


96 

Int^Comp i Ona_To_Fifty; 


97 

Stnng_Comp i String_30; 


98 

ond record; 


99 


m 

100 

- KXXXXXXXKXXKXXXXXXXXXXXXKXKKXXXXXXXKKKXKKKXXKKKXKKKKKXXKKXKKKKXXKKKXXX - 


101 

— representation specifications for declared types(placed before object — 

! 

1 

102 

— declarations) — 

1 

103 



104 

pragma pack(packed_bool array); — * 

* 

105 

for packad.boolean use (0.1); —* 


106 

for packed.boolean'size use 1; — * 


107 



108 

for rap months use (1.2.4.8.16.52.64.128. 


109 

256.512.1024.2048); —X 


110 

for rep.months'size use 12; —* 


111 



112 

pragma pack(packed_records); — * 


113 

pragma pack(packed_variant) ; —* 


114 

pragma pack(String_10); —* 


115 

pragma pack(String_20); —* 


116 

pragma pack(String_30); — * 


117 



118 

for five_bit_integer'size use 5; —* 


119 

for packed_months , size use 4; —* 


120 



121 

— define rap-records to be sixteen bits in size — 


122 

— align rep-records on a 16 bit boundary — 


123 

for rep_records use 


124 

record at mod (16 / system.storage_unit); —X 


125 

comp.il at 0 range 0..4; — * 


126 

comp_i2 at 0 range 5..9; — * 


127 

comp.bl at 0 range 10..10; — * 


128 

comp_b2 at 0 range 11..11; — * 


129 

comp.e at 0 range 12..15; — * 


130 

ond record; 

t 

131 



152 

pragma pack(packed_records_array); — * 


133 

for rap.records.array'size use 10 > 16; — * 

m 

i 

134 




D-15 








Tabic D~3 OURSPC Package Specification (continued) 


135 

136 

137 

138 

139 

140 

141 

142 

143 

144 
1 ' 5 

146 

147 

148 

149 

150 

151 

152 

153 

154 

155 

156 

157 

158 

159 

160 
161 
162 

163 

164 

165 

166 

167 

168 

169 

170 

171 

172 

173 

174 

175 

176 

177 

178 

179 

180 
181 
182 

183 

184 

185 

186 

187 

188 

189 

190 

191 

192 

193 

194 

195 

196 

197 

198 

199 

200 
201 


XXKXKXXKXXXKXKXXXXKXXXKXXKKKXXKKXXXKXXKXXXKKXKKKKXXKXXX — 

unchecked conversions -- 

KXXXXXXXXXXXXKXXXKHKXKKKXKKKKXKKKKXXKKXKKKKKKKXKKKKXXKK — 

function float_to_integer is new unchecked^conversion( 

our_float,our integer); —* 
function records_to_integer is new unchecked. r conversion( 

~ ~ rep_records#our_integer); — X 

KXXXXXXXXXXKKKKXKKKKXKXXXXXXXXXKXKXXKXXKXXXXXXXXXKXKKKK — 

test constants ~ 

KXXXKXXXXKKKXXXKKXKXXKKXXXKXXXXKXXXXXXXKKXXKXKXXKKXXXKX — 


aggregate constants used in array*record tests and to initialize — 
array*record variables — 


string_30_con i constant String_30 i* "123456789012345678901234567890" 


record_type_con 


i constant record_type »* (null*Ident_l,50, 

string_3D_eon); 

> constant records t« (l»l*false*true*Jan); 

< constant records i* (2*2*false*false*Feb); 
i constant records «« (3,3,true,false,Her); 
t constant packed_records i* (2*2*false,false*Feb); 
i constant packed.records i* (l*l*false,true,Jan); 
i constant packad_records «* (3*3*true,false*Har); 

• constant rep_records i* (3,3,true,false,Her); 
t constant rep_racords »* (2,2,false,false*Feb); 

_ _ t constant rep_records i* (l*l,false,true,Jan); 

variant_con_l « constant varient_reeords »» (Jun*l*l*false*true*Jan); 
variant_con_2 t constant variant_records «• (Jun,2*2*false,false.Feb); 


records_eon_l 

records_con_2 

racords_con_3 

pack_records_con_l 

pack_records_con_2 

pack_records_con 3 

rep_records_con_l 

rep_records_con_2 

rep_records_con_3 


pack_variant_eon_l 

pack_variant_con_2 

bool_array_con_l 
bool_array_con 2 
pack_bool_con_l 
pack_bool_con_2 


constant packed_variant i* (Jun*2*2*false* 

false*Feb); 

constant packed.variant •* (Jun,1,1 * false. 


constant boolean_array_10 
constant boolean array_10 


True,Jan); 

* (1..10 *> true); 
(1..10 => false); 


constant packed_JEool_array i* (1..10 *> true); 
constant packed_bool_array »* (1..10 *> false); 


max_time - delay tiae used in MASTER task timed entry calls. It 

contains the maximum time that a task test should take 
in seconds. 

max_time > constant duration »* 60.0; —* 


time_slice_interval - the forced time slice interval used in tasking 

tests. It should be consistent across Ada 
run-time environments for each target machine 
(for the VAX * .Olsecs) 

time_slice_interval ■ constant duration i* 0.01; —« 

driver_priority - priority of driver tasks in tasking tests — 

master_priority - priority of master tesks in tasking tests — 

slave_priority - priority of slave or master created tasks in 

tasking tests — 


driver_priority « constant our_integer «* 3; —* 
master_priority « constant our_integer i* 2; —* 
slave.priority i constant our_integer i* 1; —* 


KKXHKXXXKXKXXXXKXKKXXKKXKKKXKKKKXXXXXKHKKKHKKKXKKKKXKKK — 
procedure definitions used by oursys — 

XKXXXKKXXXXKKKKKXXXKHXXXXXXXXXXKXXXKXXXKKKKKKKKXXKKXKKK - 

speset - sets all ourspc.shrX shared global variables to oursys.tmpK 
equivalents and also sets ourspc.tmpx variables. 


D-16 








I 


1 


Table D-3 OURSPC Package Specification 

(continued) 

\ 

202 

— speraf -v references all ourspc.shrX,tapX global variables i 

< 

203 




204 

procedure speset; 


• 

205 




206 

procadura speraf; 



207 




208 




209 

— XXKXXKXXKKXKXKXXKXXXXXKXXXKKXXXXXXXKXXXXXKKXXXXXKXXXXXX — 1 

- 

210 

— global variable definitions — 

1 


211 

— KKKKXXKXXXKXXXXXXKXXKXKXKKXXXXXKKXKKXXXKKXKXXXKKXXKKKKK — fl 


212 




213 

— non-shared record structure variables 



214 




215 

tmperO , taper1 , tmper2» tmper3 , taper4 , taper5 , 



216 

tmper6 , tmper7 >tmperS , tnper9,tapera 

rep_aonths; 


217 

tmpesO , tapesl , tapes2 >tapes3 , tapes4 > tapes5 , 



218 

tapes6,tapes7 >tapesS >tapes9,tapesa 

months; 


219 

tapppO , tapppl,tappp2.tappp3 * tappp4,tappp5 , 



220 

tappp6 >tappp7.tapppS,tappp9,tapppa 

record_pointer; j 


221 

tapprO #tappr1>tappr2,tapprS > tappr4 > tappr5 , 



222 

tappr6,tappr7 , tapprS,tappr9,tappra 

record_type; 


223 

taprcO,taprcl , taprc2,tnprc3 , taprc4»taprc5 > 



224 

taprc6 > tmprc7>taprcS , taprc9,tmprea 

records; 


225 

tmprpO , taprpl , taprp2> taprp3,taprp4 , taprp5> 



226 

taprp6 >taprp7 > taprpS,taprp9 , taprpa 

packed records; 


227 

taprrO,taprrl>taprr2,tmprr3,taprr4 > taprr5» 



228 

taprr6 #taprr7,taprrS , taprr9,taprra 

rep_records; 


229 

tapvsO >tapvsl , tapvs2#tapvs3,tapvs4 >tapvs5, 



230 

tapvs6 , tapvs7,tapvsS,tapvs9,tapvsa 

variant_records; 


231 

tmpvpO , tapvpl , tapvp2 , tapvp3 , tapvp4,tapvp5> 



232 

tapvp6,tapvp7 , tapvpB# tapvp9,tapvpa 

packed variant; 


233 



** 

234 

— non-shared arrays — 



235 




236 

tmpcpl,tapcp4,tapcpS « String_10; 


1 

237 

tmpcp2 i String_20; 



238 

tapcp3 » String_30; 


. 

239 




240 

tapras t records array; 



241 

taprap i packed_records_array; 



242 

tmprar i rep records.array; 



243 




244 

tapbpl,tmpbp2,tapbpS i packed_bool_array; 



245 

— - 



246 

— shared integer veriables ( all variables * 3 except shrisO which is 0) — R 


247 

— set/used — 



248 




249 

— task test work counter — 



250 

total_work i our integer; 



251 

pragma sharedCtotal work); —X 



252 

shrisO < eur_integer; 



253 

shrisl i our_integer; 



254 

shris2 t our_integer; 



255 

shris3 i our_integer; 



256 

shris4 i our integer; 



257 

shris5 « our_integer; 



258 

shris6 « our_integer; 



259 

shris7 i our_integer; 



260 

shrisS i our_integer; 



261 

shris9 i our_integer; 



26 2 

shrisa < our_integer; 



263 

shrisb t our_integer; 



264 

shrisc • our_integer; 


r 

265 

shrisd ■ our_integer; 



266 

shrise < our_integer; 



267 

pragma shared(shrisO); —X 


* 

268 

pragma sharedtshrisl); —X 




D-17 









Table D-5 0UR5PC Package Specification 


269 

270 

271 

272 

273 

274 

275 

276 

277 

278 

279 

280 
281 
282 

283 

284 

285 

286 

287 

288 

289 

290 


pragma shared(shris2); —X 

pragma shared(shris3); —* 
pragma shared(shris4); —X 
pragma shared!shrisS); —X 

pragma shared!shris6); —* 

pragma shared(shris7); — X 

pragma shared(shrisS); — X 

pragma shared!shris9); --X 
pragma shared(shrisa); — X 
pragma shared(shrisb); --X 

pragma shared(shrisc); --X 
pragma shared(shrisd); — X 

pragma shared(shrise); —x 


— variables of type time and duration — 

time_0,time_l,time_2,time_3 , time_4 , time_5 
time_6 > time_7 , time_8 , time_9 * time_a 
duretion_0,duration_l, duratior>_2, duration, 
duration_4,duration_5,duration_6,duration_7 
duration_8,duration_9,duration_a 
end ourspc; 


(concluded) 


i time; 

> time; 

: duration; 

> duration; 
t duration; 


D-18 








»»»»»»»»VHVUlUIUlUIUUIU)UlO*«»|t»»«»*UWWWblWWUUOlNNNNNNNNNNHNMMHWHHMM 

■sj(Mn*WNMe«MS*ui»wNMo«M^»ui»MNHe««>t0'Uif>MNHe<0MM»ui»wNHe«ei'je>ui«wNHe«e»'>4»ui»wNH 


Table D-4 OURTYP Package Specification 


— Ada Real Tiae/Run Tine Environaent last Aerospace Corporation — 

— Test) . 

— Filei OURTYP 

ARA.REK 2/1/88 

— Description* 

— xxxx This package declares compiler specific non-standard integer — 

— kxxx and floating point data types . It 

— xkkx also declares global variablas with these datatypes that are — 

— xkkx used by relevant benchmark programs. 

with system; use system; 
with oursys; use oursys; 
package ourtyp is 


subtype,, our_short_integer is short_integer ; —X 
subtypeour_short short_integer is short short_integer ;—x 
subtype our_long_float is long_float ;—* 
subtype our lone Iona float is long_long_flost ;—* 


— typset - initialize the non-32 bit standard variables — 

— typref - reference the non-32 bit standard variables — 

procedure typset; 
procedure typref; 


tsiO * our_short_integer; 
tsil « our_short_integer; 
tsi2 * our_short_integer; 
tsi3 « our_short_integer; 
tsi4 * our_short_integer; 
tsi5 * our_short_integer; 
tsi6 * our_short_integer; 
tsi7 * our_short_integer; 
tsi8 * our_short_integar; 
tsi9 * our_short_integer; 
tsia • our_short^integer; 

type s_int_ary_10 is arroytour^integer range 1..10) 
of our_short integer; 

type s_int_ary_l0_10 is arrayTour_integar range 1..10, 

our_integer range 1..10) of our_short_integer; 
pragma pack(s_int_ary_10); — X 
pragma pack(s_int_ery_10_l0); —* 
tsial.tsia2>tsia3 * sint_ary_10; 
tsia4 » s_int_ary_10_10; 

tssiO * our_short_short_integer; 
tssil * our_short_short_integer; 
tssi 2 * our_,short_shert_integer; 

tssi3 * our_short_short_integer; 

tssi 4 « our_short_short_integer; 

tssiS * our_short_ahort_integer; 
tssi 4 « our_short_short_integer; 

tssi7 * our_short_short_integer; 
tssiS • our_short_short_integer; 
tssi9 * our_short_short_intager; 

tssia « our_short_.short_integer; 

type a_s int_ary_10 is arrayCour_integer range 1..10) 
of our short_short_integer; 

type s_s_int_ary_l0_10 Is arrayCour integer range 1..10, 

our_integer range 1..10) of our_short_short_integer 


D-19 








Table D-4 OURTYP Package Specification (concluded) 


68 

69 

70 

71 

72 

73 

74 

75 

76 

77 

78 

79 

80 
81 
82 

83 

84 

85 

86 

87 

88 

89 

90 

91 

92 

93 

94 

95 

96 

97 

98 

99 
100 
101 
102 

103 

104 

105 

106 

107 

108 

109 

110 


pragma pack(s_s_int_ary_10 10); —* 
pragma pack(s_s_int_ary_l0); —X 
tssial,tssia2>tssla3 > s s_int_ary_10; 
tssia4 « s_s_int_ary_10_T0; 


tlfO 
tlfl 
tlf2 
tlf 3 
tlf 4 
tlf 5 
tlf6 
tlf7 
tlf8 
tlf9 
tlfa 


our_long_float; 
our_long_float; 
our_long_f1oa t; 
our_long_float; 


our_long_float; 
our_long_float; 
t our_long_float; 

« our_long_float; 

« our_long_float; 
i our_long_float; 
t our_long_float; 
type l_flt_ary_10 is array(our_integer range 1..10) 
of our_long_float; 

type l_flt_ary_10_10 is array(our_integer range 1..10> 

our integer range 1..10) of our long_float; 
tlfel,tlfa2»tlfa3 i T flt_ary_10; 
tlfa4 . l_flt_ary_10_T0; 


tllfO 
tllfl 
tllf2 
tllf3 
tllf4 
tllf5 
tllf6 
tllf7 
tllf8 
tllf9 
tllfa 
type 1_ 

type I_ 

tllfal , 
tllfa4 


our_long_long_f1oa t; 
our_long_long_f1oa t; 
our_long_long_float; 
our_long_long_float; 
our_long_long_f1oat; 
our_long_long_float; 
our_long_long_float; 
our_long_long_float; 
our_long_long_float; 
our_long_long_float; 
our_long_long_float; 
l_flt_ary_10 is array(our_integar range 1..10) 
of our^long„long.floet; 

I..flt_ary_2C_10 is arroy(our intogor rangm 1..J0, 

our_integer range T..10) of our long.long float; 
tllfa2.tllfa3 . 1 1 flt_ary 10; 

« l_l_f 1t_a ry_l0_T0; 


end ourtyp; 


D~20 








HNn«n«N«»oHNn«m«NHQ>eHNnirtn«NM»eHNMirin 

HHHHHHHHHHNNNNNNNNNN«mnnM«l 


Tabl* D-5 OURDMP Package Specification 


— Ada Real Time/Run Time Environment Test 

— Test> . 

— File. OURDMP 

REK 2/1/88 


Aerospace Corporation - 


Description! 


— xxxx This package defines procedures used by test programs to -- 

— XXXX dump the contents of various global variables defined by OURSYS 

— KKKK If global variable DEBUG is OFF, then no print is generated — 


with OURSYS; use OURSYS; 
with OURSPC; use OURSPC; 
package OURDMP is 


•• dumpb(num,al,a2#aS»e4,a5) - print a record of its boolean arguments 
— - nun specifies the number of arguments to print 


— dumpi(num,al,a2,aS,a4,a5,a6,a7,a8,a9,al0) - 

— - print a record of its integer arguments — 

— - num specifies the number of arguments to print 

— dumpr(num,al,a2,a3,a4,a5) - print a record of its real arguments — 

— - num specifies the number of arguments to print 

— dumpt - print global test variables tapX — 

procedure dumpbCnum i in our_integar;al,a2»e3#a4»a5 i in boolean); 
procedure dumpi(num,al,a2ia3,a4,a5,a6»a7,a8,a9,al0 i in our.integer) 
procedure dumpr(num t in our.integer;al,a2»aS,a4,a5 « in our_floet); 
procedure dumpt; 
end OURDMP; 


D-2 











Table 0-6 MATHFUN Package Specification 


— Ada Real Time/Run Tine Environaent Tast Aerospace Corporation -- 

— Tests . 

-- Files MATHFUN 

REK 2/1/88 

— Descriptions 

— xx** This file makes standard math functions used by the HHETSTONE 

— **** benchmark available to test programs. This is done by 

— xxxx instantiation of generic program libraries with the type 

— xxxx our_floet. The names of any library routines which are different 

— xxxx from those used in the HHETSTONE benchmark Csin,cos.arcten,sort, 

— xxxx axp>ln) should be renamed 

with math_lib; 

WITH OURSYS; USE OURSYS; 

PACKAGE MATHFUN IS 

package ourfloat_lib is new math_lib(our_float); —X 
use ourfloat_lib; 

function arctantx s our_float) return our_float renames atan; —* 
function ln(x s our float) return our_float renames log; —X 
END MATHFUN; 


D-22 








APPENDIX E 


ACPS TEST COMPARISON TOOL 


The ACPS test comparison tool automatically compares ACPS compile-time 
and run-time test statistic files and generates formatted outputs of the input 
files and of the comparison results. The tool consists of two programs which 
compare compile-time and run-time test results. The programs were developed 
using a VAX/VMS host and were designed to process ACPS test result output 
specific to VAX/VMS. Appendix C describes the VAX/VMS command procedures used 
to execute the tool. The programs are written in FORTRAN 77 and use the VAX 
FORTRAN INCLUDE statement for reference to FORTRAN common block definitions. 

The input/output files are read/written with FORTRAN formatted read/write 
statements. The target operating system dependencies are separated into 
separate common block include files and subroutines. The input/output logical 
unit assignments for the tools are shown in Tables E-l and E-2. 

This appendix describes the format and target operating system depend¬ 
encies of all comparison tool input and output files. It also describes the 
required order in which test records must appear within the input test 
statistic files. The discussion is illustrated with sample input and output 
files generated from execution of the VAX/VMS version of the ACPS using 
command procedures described in Appendix C. 

E.l ACPS COMPILE-TIME TEST RESULT COMPARATOR (CCOMP) 

E.1.1 Compile-Time Test Result Input File Formats 

CCOMP takes as input two files containing compile-time generated test 
records augmented by compiler and linker diagnostic and informational messages. 
Table E-3 shows output generated using DEC VAX Ada compiler and Table E-4 
shows output generated using the ECSPO JOVIAL compiler. The output contains 
two types of records that are processed by the comparison tool: 

a. operating system-independent test records which begin with the 
symbol < in column 1 

b. operating system-dependent statistic records for VAX/VMS, which 
are generated by the DCL SHOW STATUS command 

The output is divided into the following five sections: compilation 
test records, linkage edit test records, source module size test records, 
object module size test records, and executable module test records. These 
sections are formatted as follows: 


E-l 







a. Compilation Te st Record Section Format 

The compilation test record section contains records in the 
following order: 

<start compiles 
<FILE-NAME 

DCL SHOW STATUS RECORD 1 
DCL SHOW STATUS RECORD 2 
o 
o 
o 

<FILE-NAME 

DCL SHOW STATUS RECORD 1 
DCL SHOW STATUS RECORD 2 
<end compiles 

where: 

FILE-NAME - is either the name "system" or an ACPS file name 
whose syntax is described in Section 6.1. The 
name "system" is used to represent the compilation 
of the language-specific test support software. 


Linkage Edit Test Record Section Format 


The linkage edit test record section format consists of records in 
the following order: 


<start links 
<FILE-NAME 

DCL SHOW STATUS RECORD 1 
DCL SHOW STATUS RECORD 2 
o 
o 
o 

<FILE-NAME 

DCL SHOW STATUS RECORD 1 
DCL SHOW STATUS RECORD 2 
<end links 


where: 

FILE-NAME - is an ACPS filename whose syntax is described in 
Section 6.1. 


E-2 






Source Module Size T est R ecord Section Format 

The source module size test record section contains records in the 
following order: 

<start source size 
<FILE-NAME # 
o 
o 

<FILE-NAME it 

<end source size = Itit 

where: 

FILE-NAME - is either the name "system" or an ACPS filename 
whose syntax is in Section 6.1. The name 
"system" is used for all source files in the 
language-specific test support software. 

it - is the source module size. For VAX/VMS, it is 
expressed in 512 byte disk blocks. 

itit - is the total size of source modules. For 

VAX/VMS, it is expressed in 512 byte blocks. 

Object Module Size Test Record Section Format 

The object module size test record section contains records in the 
following order: 

<start object size 
<FILE-NAME it 
o 
o 

<FILE-NAME it 

<end object size = itit 

where: 

FILE-NAME - is either the name "system" or an ACPS filename 
whose syntax is in Section 6.1. The name 
"system" is used for all object files in the 
language-specific test support software. 

it - is the object module size. For VAX/VMS, it is 
expressed in 512 byte disk blocks 

itit - is the total size of object modules for VAX/VMS, 
it is expressed in 512 byte blocks. 


E-3 





e. Executable Modu l e Siz e Test Record Section Format 

The executable module size test record section contains records in 
the following order: 

<start executable size 
<FILE-NAME 1 # 
o 
o 

<FILE-NAME N # 

<end executable size = IHt 

where: 

FILE-NAME - is an ACPS filename whose syntax is section in 
Section 6.1. 


It - is the executable module size. For VAX/VMS, it 
is expressed in 512 byte disk blocks 

## - is the total size of executable modules. For 
VAX/VMS, it is expressed in 512 byte blocks. 

E.1.2 User Input 

CCOMP interacts with the user by requesting user responses to the 
following questions: 

a. What title should be placed on the comparison output listings? 

b. Which host operating system was used to generate the input files? 
The tool currently only supports output generated by VAX/VMS. 

E.1.3 CCOMP Output File Formats 

CCOMP generates two types of output files: one containing formatted 
versions of the input files and one containing the results of the comparison 
of the input files. The formats of these files are as follows: 

a. Formatted Input File Format 

Figures E-3 and E-4 contain formatted output files generated by 
CCOMP from the VAX Ada and ECSPO JOVIAL compilation statistics shown in 
Figures E-l and E-2. As can be seen from these figures, the CCOMP 
outputs for different test languages have the same content and format. 
The outputs are divided into five sections: compilation statistics, 
linkage edit statistics, source module size statistics, object module 
size statistics, and executable or load module size statistics. The 
heading for each output shows the logical unit number (e.g., UNIT 8 in 
Figure E-3) of the input file from which the output is derived. 








The compilation and linkage edit outputs have identical formats. 

The outputs are in tabular form. The separate entry "totals" is used 
to contain the summation by column of the values of all other entries 
in the table. These outputs are operating system-dependent since they 
contain statistics generated by the DCL SHOW STATUS command. The 
meanings of the output headings are as follows: 

FILE(S) - the name of a single file or group of files. The name 
"system" corresponds to the files associated with the 
language-specific test support software 

WALL-CLOCK - the elapsed time expressed in units of seconds 

CPU-TIME - the VMS CPU time statistics expressed in units of seconds 

BUFIO - the number of VMS buffered input/output operations 

DIRIO - the number of VMS direct input/output operations 

PAGE-FAULTS - the VMS working set page fault statistic 

The source, object, and executable module size statistics section 
have identical format and contain data which is operating system- 
independent (albeit obtained from operating system-dependent commands). 
The file sizes are expressed in units of 512 byte disk blocks. 

b. Comparison Result File Format 

The comparison result file contains output that compares the 
compile-time statistics from the two input files supplied to CCOMP. 

Table E-7 shows an example comparison output file for the input files 
shown in Tables E-3 and E-4. The output comparison results are pre¬ 
sented in fractional form as a ratio of the test statistic from input 
logical unit 8 divided by the corresponding test statistic from input 
logical unit 7. The file names appearing on the output are the same as 
those appearing on logical unit 8. Test statistics that appear on one 
input file but not on the other are not compared and do not affect the 
comparison output. The output is divided into six sections: the user/ 
tool dialogue, the compilation comparison, the linkage edit comparisons, 
the source module size comparison, the object module size comparison, 
and the load or executable module size comparison. 

The first page of Table E-7 shows the dialogue between the user 
and CCOMP. User responses follow the record containing the prompt 
character < while CCOMP requests precede the prompt record. 

The comparison output sections are in the same format as the cor¬ 
responding sections in the formatted input file outputs described above, 
the only difference being that the tabular data contains fractional com¬ 
parisons between corresponding input file statistics. For example, in 
the compilation comparison output, the total compile time was 5% less 
in Ada than in JOVIAL even though the number of page faults generated 
was 1.8 times greater in Ada than in JOVIAL. 


E-5 




ACPS RUN-TIME RESULT COMPARATOR (CEXEC) 


E.2.1 Run-Time Test Result Input File Formats 

CEXEC takes as input two files containing run-time generated test 
records optionally augmented by target operating system-dependent records that 
measure the program loading time as well as the program execution time. 

Tables E-8 and E-9 show sample output generated by run-time execution of ACPS 
tests compiled by the VAX Ada compiler and the ECSPO JOVIAL compiler, respec¬ 
tively. As can be seen from these outputs, the run-time statistic files 
generated by different ACPS test languages have identical formats. The 
run-time output file contains two types of records that are processed by CEXEC 

a. Optional target operating system-dependent rec o rds . These are 
optionally processed based on user response to questions posed by 
CEXEC. Their intent is to permit measurement of the program loading 
time of the test overhead programs and of the entire test suite. 

Three records are generated by the ACPS VAX/VMS run time execution 
command procedure using the DCL SHOW STATUS command. The records 
appear immediately before and after the overhead test record and also 
after the last test record as shown in Table E-8. 

b. Test support-software test records . These are generated by the 
language-specific test support software and may contain operating 
system-dependent statistic fields. They begin with the symbol < 
preceded by either one or two blanks (dependent upon how Ada compilers 
generate output to the standard output file. For both FORTRAN and 
JOVIAL, the < symbol is preceded by a single blank). 

Each test record contains two logical records. The first logical 
record contains the test name, the elapsed time, and operating system 
dependent records as follows: 

Column Contents 

2 < 

3-9 Test name (described in Section 6.2). 

10-19 Elapsed time expressed in units of seconds to microsecond 
level accuracy. 

20-29 Number of test iterations (an integer). The field is zero 
for microsecond level tests. 


E-6 







30-119 Nine target operating system-dependent statistics expressed 

as integers. For VAX/VMS, the statistics appear in the 

following order: 

1. CPU time expressed in units of 10 ms 

2. number of page faults 

3. number of buffered input/output operations 

4. number of direct input/output operations 

5. number of open files 

6. PO virtual address space used expressed in bytes 

7. PI virtual address space used expressed in bytes 

8. process page count 

9. global page count 

The second logical record contains data dependent on the type of 
the test. The record contains up to six 10-column fields. The first 
field always specifies the number of data fields that follow. For 
nonmicrosecond level tests (e.g., AA00000), the first data field always 
contains the size of the compiled test code in bytes. Subsequent data 
fields contain test-specific statistics that are only defined in the 
test source code prologue. If a data field contains a -1, CEXEC 
ignores the field since the statistic represented involves a language 
feature that is not supported by the corresponding compiler (e.g., VAX 
Ada run-time tests do not include the size of the compiled test code, 
since the VAX Ada compiler does not support the address attribute for 
labels). For microsecond level tests (e.g., AAM0000), the data records 
correspond to the maximum and median elapsed time measurements made and 
are expressed in units of microseconds. 

There are five types of test records: informational tests, 
microsecond level tests, self-measured overhead tests; optimization 
comparison tests, single iteration tests, and multiple iteration 
tests. Tables E-8 and E-9 contain examples of each type of test record. 

The informational test records are identified by name (i.e., I in 
character position three) and contain informational rather than 
execution performance statistics. The data in these records is used to 
describe the size of data objects and data types, and the distribution 
of work in task loading tests. The data is entirely contained in the 
second logical record. Records of this type are not compared by CEXEC 
but are written to the corresponding formatted output file. 

The microsecond level tests are identified by test name (i.e., M 
or N in character position three) and contain zero in the test 
iteration field. 

The self-measured overhead test records are identified by name 
(i.e., S in character position three) and are records in which the test 
overhead has been subtracted from every statistic in the first and 
second logical records. The test record appearing immediately before 
the self-measured test record corresponds to the same test with the 
test overhead included in the statistics. 


E-7 







The optimization comparison test record is also identified by name 
(i.e., C in character position three) and corresponds to the comparison 
of hand-optimized tests to compiler-optimized tests. All statistics 
are fractional and are computed as a ratio of 100 times the compiler- 
optimized test statistics divided by the corresponding hand-optimized 
test statistics. Values of 100 correspond to statistics that are the 
same (see the record for A0C0508 in Figure E-6 which compares A000508 
to A000507). 

The single iteration test record has a one in the test iteration 
field of the first logical record (columns 20-29). It corresponds to 
execution of the first iteration through the test loop. The multiple 
iteration test record is used for the remaining iterations of the test 
loop. For this type of test record, the second logical record is blank 
and contains no data fields. All code and data object sizes for the 
multiple iteration tests appear in the second logical record of the 
corresponding single-iteration test, (e.g., see test JA00000 in 
Table E-9. 

As shown in Table E-8, the run-time statistic files input to CEXEC also 
contain diagnostic and informational messages generated by the test support 
software. These messages are preceded by four asterisks (*) and are output by 
the test support procedure tfail. The messages that can be generated are as 
follows: 

**** Elapsed time in above test is too short (< 100 times clock 

granularity). 

This message occurs if test durations are not long enough to 
ensure that the error in elapsed time measurements is less 
than 1%. 

For corrective action, the user can increase the 
corresponding test iteration count. 

**** Test <test-name> fails - incorrect value computed. 

This message occurs in self-monitoring tests that compare 
computed values against expected values. 

For corrective action, the user should examine the test 
source and compiled code to determine the cause of the error. 

**** Test <test-name> fails - incorrect path taken. 

This message occurs in self-monitoring tests when a test 
statement is unexpectedly executed. 

For corrective action, the user should examine the test 
source and compiled code to determine the cause of the error. 


E-8 






**** 


Test <test-name> fails - error in reading operating 
system statistics. 


**** 


**** 


**** 


**** 


This message occurs in VAX/VMS test support software whenever 
the system service SYS$GETJPI returns an error condition. 

This message should not be generated and signals that a fatal 
error has occured in the test support software. 

Test <test-name> fails - comparison tests are improperly 
used. 

For corrective action, the user should make sure that the 
test name conforms to the test naming conventions described 
in Section 6 and that the test support software was also used 
properly. Optimization comparison tests are discussed in 
Section 4.3. 

Test <test-name> fails - difference tests should have the 
same number of iterations as the loop overhead test. 

This message occurs when test names or self-measuring 
overhead tests are improperly used. 

For corrective action, the user should make sure the test 
name follows the test naming convention described in 
Section 6 and that the test coding conventions described in 
Section 4 are followed. 

Test <test-name> fails - pragma priority is not supported 
with enough distinct priority levels. 

This message occurs in tasking tests that require three 
different task priority levels to work properly. 

No corrective action can be taken. 

Test <test-name> fails - task test does not complete 
within ourspc.max_time seconds. 

This message is generated in task loading test drivers which 
assume that the test can complete within a specified time 
(60 sec for DEC VAX). 

For corrective action increase ourspc.max_time. If this does 
not correct the problem, then the run-time environment 
probably does not support preemptive task scheduling and no 
further corrective action is recommended. 


E-9 




kkkk 


Test <test-name> fails - change of representation between 
objects does not preserve the values. 


This message is generated in self-monitoring tests which 
check the results of operations which change representation 
between record objects. 

For corrective action, the user should examine the source and 
compiled code to determine the cause of the error. 


**** Test <test-name> fails - unchecked conversion incorrectly 

converted a floating point value (3.0) to an integer 
value (3). 

For corrective action, examine the source and compiled code 
to determine the cause of the error. 

constraint error 

numeric error 

program error 

storage-error 

tasking-error 

nonpredefined exception 

The above messages are generated in Ada type E tests that 
fail as stated in the message. 

For corrective action, the user should examine the test 
source code for the cause of the error. 



Test 

<test-name> 

fails 

**** 

Test 

<test-name> 

fails 

**** 

Test 

<test-name> 

fails 

**** 

Test 

<test-name> 

fails 

**** 

Test 

<test-name> 

fails 

**** 

Test 

<test-name> 

fails 


All of the above messages are ignored by CEXEC. 


E.2.2 User Input 


CEXEC is an interactive program that requests information from the user 
to direct processing of the input files and to affect how the output files are 
generated. CEXEC requests user responses to supply the following information: 

a. Whether or not to generate a maximum or minimum test result file. 


b. Whether or not to process operating system status records. These 
records should not be processed in executions involving maximum or 
mininum test result files. 

c. Whether or not to process operating system-dependent statistics in 
test records. 


E-10 










d. Which target operating system was used. This request is only made 
if operating system-dependent data are to be processed. 

Currently, CEXEC only supports the VMS operating system. 

e. Whether or not to subtract the operating statistics obtained from 
the test overhead record from corresponding statistics in 
subsequent tests. 

f. The title to be placed on all output files generated by CEXEC. 

g. The minimum test execution time. CEXEC generates an error message 
in the formatted output file for multiple iteration tests if the 
test execution time exclusive of test loop overhead is less than 
the minimum time specified by the user. 

The first page of Tables E-12 and E-15 show sample dialogues between 
the user and CEXEC. The CEXEC prompt record contains a single < symbol. 

CEXEC requests for information immediately precede the prompt record while 
user responses follow the prompt record. 

E.2.3 CEXEC Output File Formats 

CEXEC generates two types of output files: one containing formatted versions 
of the input files and one containing the results of the input file 
comparisons. There are two formats for each type of output: one with and one 
without target operating system dependent information. The formats of these 
two types of output files are as follows: 

a. Formatted input file format . Tables E-10 and E-ll show formatted 
input files generated by CEXEC from the VAX Ada and ECSPO JOVIAL input 
files shown in Tables E-8 and E-9. The outputs shown contain only 
operating system-independent statistics and are generated by compiler- 
independent source code within the language-specific test support 
software. As can be seen from these tables, E-10 and E-ll, the format 
and content of these outputs are the same for each test language. The 
listing heading shows the test language associated with the output and 
the logical unit numbers [e.g., unit (8) in Table E-10] of the input 
file from which the output is derived. The output is presented in 
tabular form with one entry per test record. An "elapsed time too 
short" error message can appear in the output whenever the elapsed time 
in the immediately preceding multiple iteration test is less than a 
user specified minimum value. The meanings of the column headings are 
as follows: 


E-ll 







TEST-ID - Contains the name of the test whose syntax is 

described in Section 6.2. 

WALL-TIME - Contains the elapsed test execution time in 

seconds. The effect of the test loop overhead 
(tests AA00000, AAM0000) has been removed from all 
tests except the optimization comparison (e.g., 
AOC0508) and self-measuring overhead (e.g., 
AFS5307) tests. 

ITERATIONS - Contains the number of test loop iterations 

executed. 

RUN STATISTICS - Contains five entries corresponding to the data 

fields appearing in the second logical record of 
each test input record. An entry containing 0* 
indicates that the data field does not apply to 
this test. The effect of the test loop overhead 
has been removed for microsecond level tests 
(e.g., AGM0008) and for single-iteration tests. 

Tables E-13 and E-14 show formatted input files generated by CEXEC 
that also contain VAX/VMS operating system statistics. Each output 
test record contains two logical records: the first record contains 
nonoperating dependent data and the second record contains operating 
system-specific data. The effect of the test loop overhead is 
optionally subtracted from the operating system-dependent statistics. 
The meanings of the column headings for VAX/VMS statistics are as 
follows: 

CPUTIM - the VMS CPU time statistic expressed in units of 10 ms 

PAGEFLT - the number of working set page faults 

BUFIO - the number of buffered input/output operations 

DIRIO - the number of direct input/output operations 

FILCNT - the number of open input/output files 

POSPACE - the amount of PO virtual address space used 

P1SPACE - the amount of PI virtual address space used 

PPGCNT - the process page count 

GPGCNT - the global page count 


E-12 



b. Comparison result file format . The comparison result file 
contains output that compares the run-time statistics contained on the 
two input files (e.g.. Tables E-8 and E-9) read by CEXEC. Test 
statistics that appear on one input file but not on another are not 
compared and do not affect the comparison output. The output 
comparison results are presented in fractional form as the ratios of 
the test statistics from input on logical unit 8 divided by test 
statistics from input on logical unit 7. The effect of the number of 
iterations is taken into account in both the elapsed time and CPU time 
(if present) statistics. The test names appearing on the outputs are 
the same as those contained on logical unit 8. 

Table E-15 shows a comparison output file that does not contain 
target operating system-specific data. The first page shows the 
tool/user dialogue which causes suppression of processing of operating 
system-dependent records and fields. The meanings of the output 
headings are the same as for the formatted input file output shown in 
Table E-10 and described previously. Test comparison totals, which 
appear at the end of the output, present accumulated comparisons of all 
but the test overhead tests and the optimization comparison tests. The 
meanings of the entries appearing in the test total output are as 
follows: 

micro - microsecond level test totals 

1 iter - single-iteration test totals 

>1 iter - multiple-iteration test totals (not including 

self-measuring overhead tests) 

diff. - self-measuring overhead test totals 

Table E-15 shows a comparison output file that contains VMS status 
record and VMS statistic field comparisons. The first page of the 
output shows the dialogue between the tool and user that selected the 
form of output. The rest of the output is divided into three sections: 
benchmark test comparisons, SHOW STATUS statistics, and SHOW STATUS 
comparisons. 

The benchmark test comparison section contains the individual test 
comparisons. The meanings of the output headings are the same as for 
the formatted input file output shown in Table E-13 and described 
above. The results are expressed as the ratio of the processed 
statistics from input logical unit 8 divided by the corresponding 
processed statistics from input logical unit 7. The values of the 
processed statistics used are contained in the formatted input file 
outputs shown in Tables E-13 and E-1A. Test comparison totals appear 
at the end of the output. The entries have the same meaning as those 
in Table E-12 which were previously described. 


E-13 





The VMS SHOW STATUS statistics section displays the result of 
processing the VMS SHOW STATUS records that are inserted into the 
run-time data file to measure both the program loading and test 
execution time of the overhead test and of the entire test suite. The 
meanings of the output headings are as follows: 

I/O-UNIT - input logical unit containing the data 

NUMBER - specifies the pair of status records processed as 

follows: 

a. corresponds to the first pair which measure the 
execution and program loading time of the 
overhead test 

b. corresponds to the second pair which measure the 
execution and program loading time of all other 
tests executed 

WALL-CLOCK - elapsed time in seconds 

CPU-TIME - VMS CPU time statistic in seconds 

BUFIO - number of buffered input/output operations 

DIRIO - number of direct input/output operations 

PAGE-FAULTS - number of working set page faults 

The VMS SHOW STATUS comparison section compares the results 
contained in the SHOW STATUS statistics section for corresponding 
statistic records contained on input logical units 8 and 7. The 
comparison results are expressed as the ratios of the test statistics 
from logical unit 8 divided by the corresponding test statistics on 
logical unit 7. The meanings of the output column headings are the 
same as those in the SHOW STATUS statistics section previously 
described. 

E.2.4 Measurement of Test Repeatability 

For target machines for which the run-time environment cannot be 
constrained to permit repeatable measurements of test execution times, CEXEC 
can be used to measure the repeatability or variance of test statistics for 
all ACPS tests. By responding with maximum or minimum to the first CEXEC 
prompt which is shown in Table E-15, the user can cause CEXEC to generate a 
file (on unit 12) containing the maximum or minimum test statistics from 
corresponding tests in the two test result input files. The user should keep 
a set of maximum and minimum test result files for each type of ACPS test 
execution set. Each time a new set of test results is generated, CEXEC can 
then be used to update the corresponding maximum and minimum result files. 

This process should be repeated until all maximum and minimum values do not 


E-14 





change. The maximum and minimum result files can then be compared by CEXEC to 
determine the test variance. Only corresponding maximum or minimum result 
files of different test types should be compared. 


E.3 TEST NAME AND FILE NAME ORDER 

In order to compare corresponding test records in test statistic input 
files, each ACPS comparison program) assumes that test records (i.e., those 
records prefixed by the symbol <) appear in a sorted order as follows: 

a. For test and program names, the order is determined by sorting 
logic applied to character fields in the following sequence: 


Character Position 

2 

4 

5 

6 
7 
3 


Sorting Order 
A,F,G,L,0 

0,1,...,9,A,B,C,D,E,F 
0,1,...,9,A,B,... ,Z 
0,1,...,9,A,B,...,2 
0,1,...,9,A,B,...,Z 
0,D,I,M,N,S,C 


Program names appear on linkage edit test records in 
compile-time statistic files and test names appear on test 
records in run-time statistic files. 


b. For file names, the sorting logic is applied to character fields 
in the following order: 

Character Position Sorting Order 


2 

4 

5 

6 
7 
3 


A,F,G,L,0 

P,0,1,...,9,A,B,C,D,E,F 
0,1,...,9,A,B,...,Z 
0,1,...,9,A,B,...,Z 
0,1«...,9,A,B,...,Z 
J,D,F,M,N 


File names appear in compilation and file site test records in 
compile-time statistic files. 


E-15 





Table E-l. CCOMP Interface File Specifications 


FORTRAN 



Input/Output Unit 

Type 

Description 

5 

Input 

User terminal input 

6 

Outout 

Terminal output for prompts and error messages 

7 

Input 

Unformatted compile-time test result input file 

8 

Input 

Unformatted compile-time test result input file 

9 

Output 

Test result comparison output file 

10 

Output 

Formatted output file for input from unit 7 

11 

Output 

Formatted output file for input from unit 8 


E-16 













Table E-2. CEXEC Interface File Specifications 


FORTRAN 



Input/Output Unit 

Type 

Description 

5 

Input 

User terminal input 

6 

Output 

Terminal output for prompts and error messages 

7 

Input 

Unformatted run-time test result input file 

8 

Input 

Unformatted run-time test result input file 

9 

Output 

Test result comparison output file 

10 

Output 

Formatted output file for input from unit 7 

11 

Output 

Formatted output file for input from unit 8 

12 

Output 

Optionally generated file that contains the 
minimum or maximum test statistics for corre¬ 
sponding test results input from units 7 and 8 


E-17 













Table E-3. DEC VAX Ada Compile-time Test Statistic File 


tt*rfcing l*t /Unit* ISO IIM /!>!«(• t»N 

AytH*rin^ M(»< UM 4ulh*find UUnU ||M 

<*UM uapiUi 




tUlut an 

17-MC-XO* 0*;f4:$4.14 

llwiM C*U I 

0 00:00:10.IS 

tut*. I/O 1 

It. 

Cur. an. i 

is. 

tW" til.. 1 

ttilwt an 

l?-fttC-l«0ft 0*;I*:SS.4S 

llwul tow I 

0 00:01:44.01 

tu«f. I/O 1 

Ml 

Car. *ft. I 

ist 

0b.. til*, i 

<040*000 









>U(wt cat 

17-MC-140* 0*11*ill.44 

(IsbmB cm i 

0 00(01:44.41 

tut 4. 1/0 I 

S04 

Car. w«. i 

Mt 

Man til., i 

It*tu* m* 

17-ICC-140* 04:14:41.47 

ll»<M CBU I 

0 00i01tSS.il 

tuff. I/O 1 

4M 

Car. a». i 

>M 

Man til.. ■ 

<1100000 









It*tuft an 


■ Iimw cm i 


tut I. S/O l 

4*4 

Car. ai. i 

SBC 

Mm* fits, i 

X4t.C-«-|N0DUCl. M> wcilltm amm 

MIM .itt t SitrailiM 






It*tuft an 


(l«ut cm i 

• MitliM.41 

out. S/0 i 

*44 

Cur. ai. t 

SM 

tms tilt, i 

u'orooo 









lt*tu* a* 

IB-MC-I4B4 Militll.n 

iumm cm i 


tut4. I/O i 

4n 

Cur. w«. i 

SM 

Mm til., t 

It*tu* an 

ll-tfC-lat* MilliU.II 

ciMBrf cm i 

• MiftiM.14 

Out*. S/0 I 

tit 

Car. a*, a 

Itt 

Man tils. I 

<470*101 









It*tuft an 

11-BCC-1B4* MitliH.U 

ilwW cm i 

• NiHiM.M 

tutt. S/0 I 

t!4 

far. ai. a 

SBC 

tBan film ■ 

Xat.Cm-lMISl.es. am uvilatix m« 

1.IM .illi t Site 

mliti 






It*tu* an 

U*MC-I«4 B.ltllSI.44 

iibhi cm i 

• ttittilS.t* 

tuft. S/0 i 

to. 

far. ai. a 

SM 

Man film ■ 

ufDim 









11* tu* an 

D-MC-IW MilMl.H 

iiwut cm t 

• Mittilt.N 

tuff. 1/0 i 

BBS 

Cur. a*. « 

SM 

Wm film i 

X4B4Cm>tNBSI4CS. U> wpiUlitn SMB 

lata< with t 






It* tu* an 

17*0CC*14O4 Oft >17:17.70 

iiimm cm t 

0 00:011>4.04 

tutt. S/O i 

444 

Cur. w«. i 

SM 

turn film ■ 

«orolio? 









It*tu« an 

17-MC-140* 04:17:10.0$ 

cimu cm t 

0 00illit4.fi 

tuff. S/O i 

4Tt 

Cur. a*. • 

14C 

Man film i 

X4B4C>«>|M>tl4CS. Mi aaa»ilatian aam 

lataO with 1 Oiaanaatia* 






It*tuft an 

P-MC-1W Mitlttk.at 

iiwm cm i 

• MittiSl.ta 

tutt. S/0 I 

MS 

Cur. «. i 

SM 

Man film i 

<1701100 









It*tuft an 

IT'HC-IW t4itTit4.4T 

iiihw cm i 

• MittiSS.41 

tutt. 1/0 t 

MB 

far. «•*. i 

SM 

Man fila. i 

It*tu* an 

l!-BU-lMa UiMiU.W 

llama* cm 1 

• Mitt ill.BO 

tutt. I/O t 

TBS 

far. w. i 

Stt 

Man iila. t 

<1600000 









11* tu* an 

IT-BfC'lM. 

UtnM cm i 

• MlBtiST.n 

tutt. S/O ■ 

TB1 

Cur. as. 1 

SM 

Man fila. i 

It*tu« an 

P-MC-IU. UiMiU.M 

IIM cm i 

• Mlttl41.lt 

tuff. S/O i 

414 

Cur. an. i 

SM 

Man lilm t 

<0600000 









It*tu* an 

II-UC-IUI 

IIM cm i 

• Mittitl.tS 

tuff. S/0 1 

tu 

Cur. a. » 

SM 

Man film ■ 

It*tu* an 

P-MC-IMI B4ltBil4.44 

iiwut cm i 

• Mitlitt.41 

tutt. S/O ■ 

Stl. 

tar. aa. t 

SM 

Man film i 

ftOCnOOOi 









It*tuft an 

1VHC-IIU t4lfBll4.4t 

C1bb«U cm i 

« Willitt.lt 

tuff. I/O > 

strt 

Car. aa. f 

Stt 

Man fila. 1 

It*tu« an 

P-HC-1MI Mlltill.lt 

■UnM cm i 

• Mi tlitS. 14 

tuff. S/O 1 

USB 

Cur. •*«. t 

SM 

Man fila. i 

<0000000 









It*tuft an 

B*:tB:tS.M 

limit cm i 

• Mitsits.sr 

tutt. I/O I 

SIM 

Car. an. i 

IM 

Man fila. i 

It*tu« an 

ir-HC-IMI Mlltlll.M 

IImiM cm i 

• MitliIB.lt 

tuff. I/O ■ 

1141 

far. a. I 

1M 

Man Ilia, l 

<000010$ 









It*tuft an 

It-NC-ltM MltBlSI.il 

limit cm 1 

• MitSiM.4t 

tuff. S/O i 

IMS 

Caw. aa. a 

SM 

Man film ■ 

X!0«C-«*lNe0!0e$. OO* ««^il*4t*n aaap 

ItM Mill < tiap 

mliti 






It*tu« an 

17*0fC*14Oft Oft;>4:17.44 

UwMt cm • 

• MitSi4S.lt 

tuff. I/O • 

stst 

Cur. «. i 

SM 

Man fila. t 

<0000104 









It*tu* an 

17*0tC*14O4 Oft:>4i$l.17 

UmM cm t 

t M itS 141.4. 

tuff. S/O • 

IMS 

far. aa. i 

SM 

Man fila. i 

X40IC-K-IH00UCS. am nailllw mb 

1*4*4 with > 4iioa»tit» 






It*tuft an 

|l-B(C-|4t« 4. : 10:01.#. 

limit cm 1 

0 00:01:41.41 

Butt. I/O i 

SMB 

far. «u- t 

SM 

Man film : 


«•"< IMPlltl 
<»Uf( lif*l 


E-18 










Table E-3. DEC VAX Ada Compile-time Test Statistic File (Continued) 


suit* 17.DtC-)*** 0*10:01.I< (1«H^ m i • Mi»}i««.ft4 luff. I/O i 1291 (ur. m. i IN 

'TaCVI-Ci_Ll«*INC. Ifwefctnt tha VIM/VW llia»r 

*IH» •*.«»»«OS. Mmiaft »n M*»l« 4*00000 fita OUUUC: (Ulftfft* .41 ON. AW .OfC (4400000 OOJt I 

Statue en 17>0IC-I«0* 04:10:10.41 C4U i 0 00:01:11.24 Ouff. I/O t 1144 Ur. we. t 800 

04700100 

Statue •" l?-0CC-l«0* 04:10:11.00 tiwiW C*V i 0 00:01:11.M Ouff. I/O ( 1100 Ur. m. : fOO 

*4C2*t*Cl.t >•*!**• |nve*if^ th» VAX/vets Unfcar 

*lH* •*•«■*« 6* v tuniUtisn Mfniegi in aeOjI* 4701107 file 0W0UC rlUHIU .414N. 40*. 0CC 14701107. OOJil 

*t y** •*•**’* *2. t*a*iiAf»r» KAmiiifi in aaOul* 4700104 fiJa 0U012C:IU1880*.414N.404.0(C (4700104.00J»1 

*11** •*-••»** OS. c— rilafna —fwingt h m4uI« 4700100 file 0U0UCiIU10004.414N.404.0CC 14700100.OOJil 

Statue on 17-0lC-l«O* 04:10:14.00 Klapaed C*U i 0 00:01:01.41 Ouff. 1/0 t 1411 Ur. ere. i 100 

44000000 

Statue *n 1?-OfC-1*0* 04^0:14.01 lleeaed COW » 0 00:01:81.04 Ouff. I/O i |4tf Cur. we. « ISO 

14CS*I*CI.UW(|NC. Irw^iag tNa VAK/VW 

Statue on 17-0(C-1*4» 04:10:80.81 | lapsed COU t 0 00:01:88.01 Cuff. I/O « 1404 U*. ese. t 180 

440*70000 

Statue m* I7-0fC-l<04 04:10.80.74 llapaed C*U i 0 00:01:88.77 Ouff. I/O i 8400 Ce*. ue. i 800 

*4CS-I-Cl.ll**l»C. tha VAX/vm li*4er 

Statue en S7-0CC-14O* 04:11:17.10 U ta t N C*U i 0 00:01:87.11 tuff. I/O i U40 Cur. e». t 180 

44000804 

Statue en |7-0(C*1404 04:11:11.41 llapaed C*V « 0 00:01:87.00 Ouff. I/O i 8881 Cue. wa. « 800 

14CI-I*CI.'JI41NC, lawfKai^ ihm V4XSVW li«4tf 

*1 I** *N .4* os. laailafun Mminyt in uedule 4000801 file 0U0LlCtlU18884.4i4N.404.0CC H000108.00J»1 

*11**-*-••** 4S. CNOiltfi** «4*n»npe in aedule 4000804 file OUOLlC:IU11884.414N.404.OCC 14000804.00J»1 

Statue «n 17-0CC-I94* 04:11:14.41 llapaed C*V ( 0 00:01:89.49 Ouff. 2/0 i 8411 Cue. an. r 180 Open files » 

send links 
«4taet eeuree tin 

tiyitee 104 
4440OQ00 2 
44*00000 4 
4470*000 20 
44701108 4 
<4708104 7 
44708107 7 
<4708100 8 
<4004000 2 
<4000000 17 
<49*0000 2 
<400*000 4 
<4000808 0 
<4000804 4 

tend teurce sir# • 218 
<eta*t efcyeet me 
eayeta* 840 
<4404000 7 
<4400000 10 
<4704000 42 
<4708108 17 
<4708104 20 
<4708107 20 
<4708100 8 
<4604000 7 
<4600000 122 
<46*70000 0 
<4004000 IS 


E-19 


!!!!!! ? T f 









Table E- 


. DEC VAX Ada Compile-time Test Statistic File (Concluded) 


<4000505 26 
<4000506 11 
<end object size * 699 
<*tart executable size 
<4400000 59 
<4F05508 64 
<4G00008 68 
<4GM0008 67 
<4000506 64 

<end executable size * 522 


E-20 






Table E-4. ECSPO JOVIAL Compile-time Test Statistic File 


/!>*•«• I*e /Ouotpr IIM /I.<*>.<• ||M 
m)iM OutMor M I MO kitafiiW (iKnt* (MO 

«4y4to« — 

Otolut on 17-MC-I404 tltotod CPU I • M,M,04.47 Ouft. 1/0 t 144 Ur. op. i 

lita Mu«> CtwHn hteAi« 


nciNtMi:ijo*m.(Mie.noit.».Mija«tti.Mii coaotior 

PUOllC:(UlSlt4 4I04.JOVI4L MUtJOV.C'L 104 l*rtc Maputo 

PU01IC:IU11S4» OtOH.JOrMilMJOv.OOJll Ofcjoct Output 

PUnilC,IUllSt4.4i4N.J0viai MJ0V.C4»,tl tip Output 

(OP Opurco Llw . 141 Jovm ttetpwtl. 

HO HIMCtt. 

(ppiltlnr ti<a> CPU TIM • 0i00t01.il tlOPSCO TIM ■ OOtOOtll.lO 
Til# Vipfi 


11 - 7 ( 0-1404 11 : 10:11 
I 4 -KC-I 404 14 : 11:10 
17 -MC -1404 04 :It:It 

17 -PfC- 14 P 4 04 , 14,17 


twtipi Ooto/Tioo 


HKPPOfOUtt:I JOvtti.C0Hric.100lS.lv.OM UOV14l.lM,l CPMtlar low 11-710-1404 11,10:11 

PUOUC tlUlflM. 414M. JOVIti iJOVSri. JOviltl 
PUOllC: IUlllt* .01 »H. J0V111 MJOJOv .CM111 
PU0llC:IUltlt4.4l4„.JOVIti IJOVOHP.CHPill 
PUOIIC:IU1S14*.414N.JOVI4L IJOVSTS.OOJtl 
004 hum linn 410 JMIl lltlmlt. 

1 MSS 46 CS: I H 4 PHIHC 

CutiUlim T«hp: CPU TIM 4 0,00,40.07 ICtPStO TIM o 00,00,41.04 

• tlo t u n tnotio, Otlt/TiH 



14 -MC-I 40 11 : 11,10 
1 T-IEC -1404 04 , 14:17 
lt-KC -1004 11 , 01:10 
17 - 0 CC -1404 04 , 17 itl 


1 M Opon 4 ilot : 


MStPOOIOUtl: I jovlti. ctpirie.Toots. TV.TKIUOVIOL.(MU Cooiltr la 
PUOllC:IUISSS 4 . 4 L 4 N.JOV 14 llJOVOMP.CPl,t l«r« Mtull 

PU 0 llC:lumt 4.41 tN JOVIti MUOJOV.CHPltl Cm Hi liput 

PUOlIC:ll/lHt 4 .tl 4 v.JOv|tllJOVOMP.OOJ,l flkjoct Output 

PUOHC,IUIH 14 . 4 L 4 H.JOVlaH J OVO,H.CMP ||4 Ctptll Output 

00 S p>»r «4 llw,. 41 J 0 VI 4 L Stotaaantp. 

HO MSS 4 CIS. 


C««,l>tix Tiao: CPU TIM a 0 , 00 , 04 .SS ItOPttO TIM 4 00 , 00 , 00 .U 

• tlo U aapa 


ll-rto-1004 tl, to, IS 

tt- 0 (C -1004 10 : 01,11 
IT-OtC -1404 04 , 14,17 
17 - 0 CC -1404 04 : 17,11 
17 -O 0 C- 14 O 4 04 , 17,11 


Croatian Oata/Tiaa 


HKOP 040 U 4 I.IJOV 14 L.CVH 1 C.TOOLS.TV.(KtUDVIOt.(Mil CPMilor 
PUtllC:IUlStS* 4 l 4 M.JDV| 4 ll 0 MPJ»v.J 0 v ,4 hint Mulp 

PUOLlC:tUltlt 4 . 4 l 4 M.JOV|tl nUOJOV.CMllI ti ow l |«HUt 

PUOltC,IUttlS 4 . 4 l 4 N. JOVIti UOvomp.cmPiIp Cl ottl Input 

PUOLlC:lumt 4 . 4 L 4 N.JOvl 4 l IpMP JOV .00 J, | 00 >PCt Output 

00 Oputpp tlMPt. tl JOVIOL Stataaantr. 

HO MSS 461 S. 


11 - 710-1404 11 ,( 0:11 
lt-KC -1004 10 , 01:04 
17 -KC-I 004 04 , 14,17 
17 -KC-I 004 04 , 17,11 
17 -MC -1404 04 , 17,47 


Cmwilpttw, Trap: CPU TIM v 0 : 00 : 00.01 ( 14 PS 10 TIM • 00 , 00 : 11.*0 


IUIm «n 
CJA0*900 

pvMC-lti* 


(laptop CPU , 0 00,01,IS.41 

Outf. 1/0 > 000 

Ctr. «, i 

190 


film 

SlalM ow 
fftlo 

P-Kt-lHk 

9*tl?t94.ft? 

(laptop CPU , 0 00,01,11.00 

tuff. I/O , 447 

Craotio, Oato/Tiao 

Cast, m* . i 

MO 




Hscoootouoti joviol.con 7 |c. toots.rv.iat uovm.fHii 

PUOllC lumu 411„. JOVIti IJ40P000.CPL ,7 
PUOlICtUlIlM 414,1. JO-.'ttl lOUPJOV.CMPitl 
PUOIIC lUllll* 4,4,1. JOVIti Ijoorooo .OOjtl 
PUOllC :IUI14M .414M. JOVIti IJ40P000 CMP,II 



11 - 710-1404 ( 1 : 10:11 
IS-MC -1404 11:14 44 
17 -MC -1404 04 : 14:17 
I 7 -KC-I 404 04 : 10:01 
1 I-KC-I 404 04 : 10,04 



E-21 













Table E-4. ECSPO JOVIAL Compile-time Test Statistic File (Continued) 


MSCOOOtOU*S:l<JOVI*l .CVfftC. tOOll.tv.tM IJWIU.IHli tuwiiar lw|i 11-1(0-140* tlill:l) 

PUOIIDlUISllo *:*»:.JOvUl l/nonooo.CPlilo him Mila U-KC-lht 11:17.11 

PUB: It: lulliv* a: IN. JOVIII WUajOv.CMBitl C«w»l Iwul 11-OtC-l*** *0:l»:lt 

PllUICtUIMV. »:*»« JOv»»l Ijoofooo.onjil Ob)*ct Output ll-OIC-l*** OP: tl ;*0 

Ol»llC:IUK»Vi.M*h JOvUt JJOOnooO.CNPt* t ipu l Output ll-MC-140* *0:11:00 

h hua** tma. to JOviai Ittlpunli. 


MO MSIUIS. 

(Milalix tana: CPU Tiatt • 0:00:00.11 IllPStO TIM • 00:00:00.0* 


Stale#* «n 

cjooom 

ll-OCC-IMa Oo:tl:Ot.OO 

DapaaU CPU i 0 00:01:1*.00 

Outt. 1/0 « 10*0 

hr. m. i 

ISO 

Oppn 

tilpa 

States* «n 
film 

ll-MC-l*** 04:11:01.11 

Hap.aU CPU : 0 00:01:0*.Tl 

Maapa 

Outt. I/O : 1*00 

CrppttPt hta/Tiu 

hr. m. i 

MO 

0^ 

til*. 


Mscomiou*0:ijovin.coHric.Tooii.tv.tnuovm.tMti topiiw lappa u-rto-i*** ntf0:» 

PUOiIDluillto.aian. joviu IJOOOMI.JOvtll lamtlMuli ll-MC-l*** lTillilt 

PUBlIC:IUltSS*.*l*’J.JOU|*l MPUOv.CMPatl (apal laput )<4[C-lMi 0*:la:tt 

PUOIICHUIISS*. at ON. jovlai UOOPOOO.CWlO ta aaal Input ll-MC-140* 0*:tl:*0 

PU*tlC:tUIttlo.«I*M. JOViai iJOvOHP.CMil* tppnl Input H-OtC-14*. 00:11:11 

PUBIIC:1UIS114.*1*M. JOVlai UO00S0S.0O.Jll Ohjaat Output H-OtC-140* 00:0:00 

Ot Spunpp tin*.. «? JOviai ttatpppnta. 


« MISOOtl: 0 INTOPnOTION 

Copilatip: tana: CPU TIM * 0:00:10.00 UOPStO TIM * 00:00:10.00 


States* ms 
tJDOOtl* 


00:11:00.0* 

HapaaU CPU 1 0 *0:01:01.14 

outt. i/e i ton 

hr. m. i 

10* 


tilpa : 

Stries* ms 
film 

11-OtC-iaoa 

0*:tl:0*.tl 

llapaaU CPU t 0 00:01:*!.01 
Map 

Outt. I/O 1 MI* 

Cnpptian Optp/1 iau 

tm. mm. • 

MO 

*-* 

tilpa : 


MSCOOOOOU01:tJOVIOl.CONr|C.TOOiS.IV.IMUOvm.tMil Caavilpr laapa ll-rto-lapo tl: 10:11 

PUPllC:IUl Silo.*l*N.JOVlai UOOOSO*. JOv 1 1* Saurpa NaOul* 11-OfC-l*** 11:11:00 

*U*LKilUlSSlo.*l*M.jovlai KSMJOv.CMPitl Caaaal lrput 1!-*«C-140* 0400:11 

0U0L1C:lUlllla.0I0H.JOvlOl I JOOaoOO. C*P t* la pill Input 11-OtC-lOO* 00:11:00 

PUOlIC:IUI»llo.4io><.JOv|*iljouoa».CM*ilo tupul lawut ll-MC-140* 00:11:11 

*U*llC:IUUSSo.*l*N. JOvlai UOOOMo.OOJil Ohjaat Output l!-*tc-l*** PO:tI :00 

10 luur*. lima oo JOvilt Otataapnta. 

0 Milan S: 4 |MfOOatalltPa 

tPPilataa" Tana: CPU TIM a 0 : 00 : 00.00 UOPStO TIM • 00:00:10.M 

otatua an ll-MC-140* Oa:tt:ll.tO tlapaaP CPU ■ 0 00:01:10.11 Outt. I/O a 0100 Cur. no. ■ 100 (pon tilpa : 

«#nU aavilti 
aatant laaOa 
W400000 

Otatua on 11-MC-I*** 04:11:11.00 IlaptaP C«U ■ 0 00:01:01 01 Outt. I/O I 1110 Cun. aaa. I 100 (pan til.. ■ 

Statu. H-MC-140* 04:11:10.00 ClapaaU CPU ■ 0 00:01:10.01 Outt. I/O t 1104 Can-, up. > 100 Op*, til*. : 

out01100 

Statu, ara H-0tC-l*Sa 00 tt tl.lt ClapaaU CPU I 0 00:00:00.00 Outt. I/O ■ 1101 Cun. up. ■ 100 Opp» til*. : 

Statu* ll-MC-l*** 04:11:10.00 tiap . aU CPU : 0 00:04:00.01 Outt. I/O a 1100 Caan. aaa. : ISO Spun tain. : 

OJOOOOOO 

Statu. «• l!*0tc-l«0* 00:11:10.10 llapaaU CPU ■ 0 00:00:01.10 Outt. I/O ■ tt*t Cur. up. : 100 tpan til*. : 

Otatu. n> ll-MC-140* 0 o:tl:o 0 .u ClapaaU CPU : 0 00:00:10.11 Outt. I/O i (lot Cur.ua. a ISO Span «, la. : 

4JMW000 

otatu. on lT-MC-t«04 00:11:00.11 Dap.aU CPU : 0 00:00:10.11 Outt. I/O : tut Cur.ua. : 100 Opantil*. : 

Statu, an ll-MC-l*** 0*.tt:*«.*l ClapaaU CPU : 0 00:04:10.11 Outt. I/O t toll Can-, ua. : 110 (pan f,l*. : 

a/oooio* 

Stalin pn IT-Dfc-I**. potto* *1 t lau.aU CPU : 0 00:04:11.10 Outt. I/O: toll Cur. u*. : loo Onant.la. : 

statu, an J!-0IC-l«O* Pott: 10.11 Dap.aU CPU : 0 00:04:10.11 Outt. I/O: till Cur.ua. : 110 Span tala. : 

tp U I in*. 


E-22 















Table E-< 


. ECSPO JOVIAL Compile-tine Test Statistic File (Concluded) 


<start source sisa 
<system 104 
<JA0P000 2 
OAOOOOO 3 
<JF0P000 21 
OF05305 7 
OF05306 9 
<JF05307 9 
OFDS308 3 
<JG0P000 2 
<JG00006 43 
OGM0008 2 
<JOOPOOO 4 
0000505 8 
0000506 4 

<end source size * 221 

Otari object size 

<systam 52 

OAOPOOO 3 

OAOOOOO 2 

OFOPOOO 23 

OF05305 5 

OF05306 6 

OF05307 4 

OF05308 1 

OGOPOOO 3 

OGOOOOS 20 

OGM0008 1 

OOOPOOO 4 

0000505 5 

0000506 2 

<end object size * 133 
<start executable size 
OAOOOOO 29 
OF05308 31 
0600008 32 
OGMOOOB 32 
0000506 31 

<end executable size * 155 


E-23 





Table £-5. ACPS Compilation Comparator Formatted Ada File 


COMPILATION - SHOH STATUS STATISTICS!UNIT 8) 


FILES! S) 

HALL-CLOCK 

CPU-TIME 

BUFIO 

DIRIO 

PAGE-FAULTS 

system 

121.27 

99.31 

153 

238 

13661 

AAOPOOO 

7.31 

3.59 

36 

49 

1982 

AAOOOOO 

9.37 

4.74 

45 

60 

2281 

AFOPOOO 

12.15 

8.11 

37 

58 

2521 

AF05305 

16.08 

8.11 

75 

113 

3175 

AF05306 

16.05 

8.85 

73 

100 

3215 

AFQ5307 

16.37 

8.95 

73 

104 

3305 

AF05308 

8.80 

4.18 

46 

60 

2168 

A60P000 

7.73 

3.80 

37 

53 

2574 

AG00008 

62.84 

38.96 

240 

335 

15671 

AGM0008 

8.64 

4.42 

42 

59 

2277 

AOOPOOO 

8.26 

4.15 

37 

63 

2440 

A000505 

20.85 

14.10 

73 

109 

3636 

A000506 

9.62 

5.47 

46 

62 

2306 

totals 

325.34 

216.74 

1013 

1463 

61212 


LINKAGE EDIT 

- SHOW STATUS STATISTICS!UNIT 

8) 

FILES!S) 

HALL-CLOCK 

CPU-TIME 

BUFIO 

DIRIO PAGE-I 

FAULTS 

AAOOOOO 

17.62 

1.70 

53 

49 

489 

AF05308 

18.50 

2.03 

71 

58 

484 

AG00008 

18.72 

2.03 

59 

49 

701 

AGM0008 

16.31 

1.94 

60 

51 

493 

A000506 

17.49 

1.81 

59 

49 

499 

totals 

90.64 

9.51 

302 

256 

2666 


E-26 




i 


Table E-5. ACPS Compilation Comparator Formatted 


Ada File (Continued) 



SOURCE MODULE- FILE SI2E STATISTICS(UNIT 81 
FILE!SI SIZE(BLOCKS I 


system 104 
AA0P000 2 
AAOOOOO 4 
AFOPOOO 20 
AF0S305 A 
AF0S306 7 
AF05307 7 
AF05308 3 
AGOPOOO 2 
AC00008 37 
AGM0008 2 
AOOPOOO 4 
A000505 8 
A000506 4 
totals 215 


OBJECT MOOULE' FILE SI2E STATISTICSlUNIT B) 

FILElS ) SIZE(BLOCKS) 


system 368 
AAOPOOO 7 
AAOOOOO 10 
AFOPOOO 62 
AF05305 17 
AF05306 20 
AF05307 20 
AF05308 B 
AGOPOOO 7 
AG00008 122 
AGM0008 B 
AOOPOOO 13 
A00050S 26 
A000506 11 
totals 694 


£-25 



Table E-5. ACPS Compilation Comparator Formatted Ada File (Concluded) 


LOAD 

FILE(S) 


AAOOOOO 

AF05308 

A600008 

AGM0008 

A000506 

-totals 


MODULE - FILE SIZE STATISTICSI UNIT 
SIZE(BLOCKS) 


59 

64 

68 

67 

64 

322 


8 ) 


E-26 




Table E-6. ACPS Compilation Comparator Formatted JOVIAL File 


COMPILATION - SHOW STATUS STATISTICS!UNIT 71 


FILES!S ) 

WALL-CLOCK 

CPU-TIME 

BUFIO 

DIRIO PAGE 

-FAULTS 

system 

89.76 

68.98 

319 

302 

6410 

JAOPOOO 

9.65 

5.07 

73 

56 

1064 

JAOOOOO 

10.47 

6.05 

78 

57 

1323 

JFOPOOO 

21.81 

17.00 

73 

62 

1093 

JF05305 

21.28 

12.68 

149 

105 

2472 

JF05306 

22.69 

13.99 

150 

109 

3071 

JF05307 

22.87 

13.80 

149 

106 

2537 

JF05308 

9.80 

5.67 

82 

51 

1386 

JGOPOOO 

9.35 

5.17 

73 

54 

1120 

JG00008 

75.97 

48.44 

470 

328 

8218 

JGMOOOB 

10.23 

5.78 

82 

50 

1326 

JOOPOOO 

10.43 

6.10 

73 

52 

1293 

J000505 

15.72 

11.08 

77 

55 

1436 

J000506 

11.97 

7.40 

77 

51 

1212 

totals 

342.00 

227.21 

1925 

1438 

33961 

LINKAGE EDIT 

- SHOW STATUS STATISTICS!UNIT 7) 


FILES! S) 

WALL-CLOCK 

CPU-TIME 

BUFIO 

DIRIO 

PAG*-FAULTS 

JAOOOOO 

9.35 

4.40 

79 

140 

696 

JF05308 

9.42 

5.01 

95 

137 

742 

JG00008 

9.24 

4.97 

90 

137 

747 

JGMOOOB 

9.24 

4.84 

90 

137 

722 

J000506 

8.62 

4.44 

74 

127 

828 

totals 

45.87 

23.66 

428 

678 

5735 


E-27 




Table E-6. ACPS Compilation Comparator Formatted JOVIAL File (Continued) 


SOURCE MODULE- FILE SIZE STATISTICS! UNIT 7) 


FILE IS) 

SIZE!! 

system 

104 

JAOPOOO 

2 

JA00000 

S 

JFOPOOO 

21 

JF05305 

7 

JF05306 

9 

JF05307 

9 

JF0S308 

3 

JCOPOOO 

2 

JG00008 

43 

JCM0008 

2 

JOOPOOO 

4 

JOOOSD5 

8 

J000506 

4 

totals 

221 


OBJECT MODULE- FILE SIZE STATISTICS!UNIT 7) 


FILECSI 

SIZE II 

system 

52 

JAOPOOO 

3 

JAOOOOO 

2 

JFOPOOO 

23 

JF05305 

5 

JF05306 

6 

JF05307 

4 

JF05308 

1 

JGOPOOO 

3 

JG00008 

20 

JGM0008 

1 

JOOPOOO 

4 

JO00S05 

5 

J000506 

2 

totals 

133 


E-28 




Table £-6. ACPS Compilation Comparator Formatted JOVIAL File (Concluded) 


LOAD MODULE - FILE SI2E STATISTICS!UNIT 
FILE IS ) SIZEI BLOCKS) 


JAOOOOO 29 
JF05308 31 
JG00008 32 
JGMOOOS 32 
J000506 31 
iotaIs 155 


7) 


E-29 





Table 


E-7. ACPS Compilation Comparator Comparison Output File 


The Aerospace Corporation 


input test identification!< 55 characters): 
> 

VAX Ada vs ECSPO JOVIAL!opt on) 
which operating system!vms»...)? 

> 

vms 


E-30 







Table E- 

( 


. ACPS Compilation Comparator Comparison Output File (Continued) 


VAX Ada vs 2CSPO JOVIAL! apt on I 


FILES! S 1 MALL-CLOCK CRU-TIHE 

OUFIO 

01 RIO PACE 

-FAULTS 

aystan 

l.SS 

l.AA 

0.40 

0.7* 

2.IS 

AAoaooo 

0.7* 

0.71 

0.4* 

0.00 

1.0* 

AAOOOOO 

o.o* 

0.70 

0.00 

1.00 

. 1.72 

AFOPOBO 

o.s* 

O.AO 

0.01 

0.A4 

2.SI 

AF05S0S 

0.7* 

0.** 

0.00 

1.00 

1.20 

AF05S0* 

0.71 

O.AS 

0.4* 

0.*2 

1.00 

AF0SS07 

0.72 

0.*5 

0.4* 

e.*e 

l.SO 

AF05S0S 

o.*o 

0.7* 

0.04 

1.10 

1.0* 

A6BPOOO 

o.as 

0.7* 

0.01 

o.*e 

2.SO 

A60000S 

o.ss 

0.00 

e.ci 

1.02 

l.*l 

aomoooo 

0.0* 

0.7* 

0.01 

1.10 

1.72 

AOOPOOO 

0.7* 

0.00 

0.01 

1.21 

1.0* 

A00050S 

l.SS 

1.27 

o.*s 

l.*0 

2.OS 

AOOOSOt 

o.ao 

0.7* 

0.00 

1.22 

l.*0 

COMPILATION totals> 






o.ss 

0.*S 

o.cs 

1.02 

1.00 


COMPILATION 

COMPARISONS!UNIT 

0 / IMIT 

71 


E-31 





Table E-7. ACPS Compilation Comparator Comparison Output File (Continued) 


VAX Ada v* ECSPO JOVJALIapt an) 


PILES) S 

1 MAIL-CLOCK CPU-TIME 

OUPIO 

OIRIO BABE 

-FAULTS 

AA00000 

l.as 

e.i* 

0.47 

e.ss 

0.70 

APOSSOS 

1.4* 

0.41 

B.7S 

0.42 

0.4S 

A60000S 

t.os 

0.41 

0.44 

0.14 

0.44 

AONOOOA 

l.as 

0.40 

0.47 

0.S7 

0.40 

4000504 

t.n 

0.41 

o.ao 

0.14 

0.40 

LINKACE 

KBIT total*: 






l.as 

0.40 

0.71 

O.SA 

0.71 


UtKASE IOIT COW ARISONS) UNIT S / UNIT 7) 


E-32 





Table E-7. ACPS Compilation Comparator Comparison Output File (Continued) 


VAX Ad* vt ECS*0 JOVIALI opt mni 


FIIEISI 

smtoLoc 

•ytimm 

l.OS 


1.00 


MI 

AT0*000 

o.*s 

ATOSSOS 

0.0* 

orosso* 

0.70 

A70SS07 

0.70 

OFOfSO* 

1.00 

060*000 

1.00 

acooooo 

0.0* 

A6NOOOO 

1.00 

A00*000 

1.00 

AOOOSOS 

1.00 

AOOOSO* 

1.00 

SOURCE MOOULE total* t 


0.07 


SOURCE MODULE HIE SIZE tor* AAXSONSI UNIT S / 


UNIT 71 


E-33 






Table E- 


. ACPS Compilation Comparator Comparison Output File (Continued) 


VAX Ad* V* ECSOO JOVIAL)apt an) 
FllCtS I SITEISLOCKS I 


lyitM 7.OS 
AAOOOOO t.SS 
AA00000 S.00 
At0*000 1.70 
AFOSSOk k.40 
AFOklO* MI 
AF0SI07 S.S] 
AFOSSOS a. 00 
A600000 t.Sl 
ACOOOOO A.10 
ACNOOOB 0.00 
AOOOOOO S.tk 
AOOOSOf k.fO 
AOOOkOA S.kO 


OOJtCT FBOULE total*1 


I.H 


E-34 







Table E-7. ACPS Compilation Comparator Comparison Output File (Concluded) 


VAX 

runs i 


AAOOOOO 
AfCSSOA 
ACOOOOi 
ACnOOOA 
AOOOSOt 


Ado M tCSOO JOVIALIapt an I 
Sin I BLOCKS I 


t.OI 

t.M 

*.l* 

t.M 







Table £-8. DEC VAX Ada Run-time Test Statistic File 


MrkiM Ml /laatfa Nt /Ouot*a «M 

/•■fanfa 

KM 








AdHMlaanl ditfthled 

tvitaranf 

turn «•« 

111 Ovffcariaa* lafanf* 

KM 



14 It Caar. 


IW 


>UI« an Ta-OtC-14%* liMstl.ia 

(lama* C*V i 

• isifitr.n 

•alff. 

I/O l 

aaa. 


utwm MNM 

1 

• 


• 

■ 

• 

1 

11 Tam 

1T411 

tr» 


•ft 

S *1 













Mimii i.iimm 

H 

Mt 


• 

• 

• 

1 

I1N4I 

1T411 

ITT 


m 

liMHN l.tMtll 

• 

M 


• 

• 

• 

• 

SIMM 

NMH 

trr 


m 

t til 

tl« 












tlaly. an h-KC-IHt aa:l»itl.|T 

llaaaai C4V 1 

• 1llTl4l.lt 

•tiff. 

1/0 I 

HI tar. 

aaa. i 

•M 


MflDU I.MWOO 

1 

• 


• 

• 

■ 

I 

iM«n 

MMtl 

tTT 



1 -1 













urHMi l.»»mm 

Ml 

SM 


• 

• 

• 

I 

iwm 

NM11 

tTT 



(WHIM l.tNtM 

1 

• 


• 

• 

• 

I 

ItHN 

MMtl 

«TT 



1 *1 













uihim i.n**ao 

MM* 

in 


• 

• 

• 

1 

HIM 

MMtl 

«»T 


•ft 

umiN l.irami 

MMe 

im 


• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 


• 

1 -I 













d»NW l.aeooot 

1 

• 


• 

• 

• 

• 

HIM 

MMtl 

tTT 


•ft 

1 -1 










■trr 



amilT mimu 

Ml 

m 


• 

• 

• 

• 

HUM 

MMtl 


fl 

aruiir 

Mma 

IN 


• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 


• 

l -1 

1— Mill 1.10110 

1 

• 


• 

• 

• 

• 

•Mil 

inti 

HI 


•ft 

■Him i.tin 

MM 

Ml 


HI 

• 

• 

I 

Mma 

MMtl 

Ml 


W 

niin i.Niiu 

• 

M 


U 

• 

• 

I 

MITM 

MMtl 

1U 


III 

I HIT 

1(11 









•4T 



<1HT 1.*00000 

1 

• 


• 

• 

• 

• 

•1441 

MMtl 


•ft 

1 '1 













«mir o.«i*mi 

•ma 

•1 


• 

• 

• 

• 

HU 

MMtl 

»4T 


•ft 

ww 11—W f mm in aim teal ia tea alarl 

M 11 liaaa ala* nwlarlhl 

•1411 

MMtl 

•4T 



uomM •aimie 

1 

• 


• 

• 

• 

• 


•ft 

i -i 













awmi i.nn** 

am 

in 


• 

• 

• 

I 

•1441 

MMtl 

I4T 


•ft 

aecNN 

• 

•n 


11 

11 

11 

IN 

11 

IN 

IN 


IW 














Itotea an |4HKC>I404 teiiaill 

it 

MU m < 

• iiiatii.li 

•aft. 

I/O 1 

1144 Car 

aaa. a 

•M 



UlM : 


film I 


film i 


E-36 






Table £-9. ECSFO JOVIAL Run-time Test Statistic File 


tat /trail* CM AmU* MO ^<<*n<i (MS 
Mjwtt«*nl 4i**Hl m4 lultw'ini Oat** tOM OvttrairaO Intrat* tOM 


tllllA On h-HC-l«*t 0*:t*:0». 17 
IMNMi 0.000000 1 0 

I tl 

000*000 1. *10000 ***** 101 


otnoooo 0.000001 0 to 

t MO tl* 

JMil 0*0* — tIOMINOTtM* COM IS 
0*oIv* on t*-MC-l*0* 0*:t*:lt.t0 

ofoiioi o.oooooo 1 o 

1 is* 

orossos t.sroooo ***** ts? 

orosio* o.oooooo I o 

1 too 

orosio* s.oroooo ***** sot 


tlra«W cov * 

o 


lira*** COU a 
0 


00:10:11 


lilOil 


orosio* o.oooooo 

MHO 


OS 

• 


• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

0 

0 

l *i 













•••• *l*nW <M in 

•Oran tnl 

i* 

Ora •trail* 100 

lira* 

oM ( 

pwralraltyt 

0 






orosio? o.oooooo 

1 


• 

• 


• 

s 

imto 

0010*? 

tro 

0* 

1 M 













orosio? t.oooooo 

ooooo 


to* 

• 


• 

• 

s 

ttosto 

MUST 

tro 

00 

orssio? o.to**** 

0»**0 


to 

• 


• 

• 

• 

■ 

0 

• 

0 

1 *0 













•*>«• tlma* * in* in 


t* 

tra akratlr 100 

lira* 

•Irak raw*ilrallyl 






jdvioi fto* •• TioniMOTim coot 

IS 


0 









IJdMM •*•00000 

i 


• 

0 


• 

• 

1 

UlOTt 

MIM7 

trt 

so 

CJQOO— o.oooooo 

(too 


OS 

0 


• 

• 

s 

lliort 

•NM7 

trt 

BO 

•*•* *l*n*r lira in l>».. 

<• 

tra .trail« 100 


t 

1 

milrait?! 






joviot sto* — t(*ni*uiiM coot 

IS 


0 








CJONOOOO 0.0000*0 

• 


10 

0 


0 

0 

s 

UlOTt 

oosoo? 

ISO 

BT 

V I1H 

0*1 












JOVMl ST0» — ft OMIMOVW C00( 

IS 


0 









CJOOOSO? 0.000000 

1 


0 

0 


0 

0 

s 

imto 

NM7 

t«* 

*1 

1 01 













OOOOSO? 0.4*0000 

*«0 


00 

• 


• 

0 

s 

imto 

MSN? 

to* 

*1 

••»« >|w**i * in 

■Oran trat 

it 

«M 100 

lira* 

•M | 

pWMvUri ty 1 

• 






CJOOOOOO •*•00000 

1 


• 

0 


0 

s 

imto 

MSM7 

t** 

*1 

1 tos 













CJDOOSOO t.TOOOOO 

oooo 


tro 

0 


• 

• 

s 

imto 

MIM7 

•00 

01 

CJOCHM 

• 


Ml 

100 

100 

100 100 

100 

IM 

100 

100 

t IW 













J0V1AI fto* — IfOMIiMTtON coot 

IS 


0 










|0*0 •*:•*: 

u. 

M 

IlsttM COU i 

0 00:10:11.1* kill. 

I/O 1 

S*tO Cra. 

M. « 

•so 


Ouff. 

1 

1/0 1 
ll«t«* 

111* Cra. 

oosoo? 

ra. t 

ts* 

•SO 

01 

flora 

filsi t 

1 

u«m 

oosoo? 

ts» 

or 



s 

not** 

oosoo? 

ts* 

OT 



Oirlf. 

1 

1/0 t 
ItOltt 

im Cra. 

oosoo? 

n. * 

tro 

•so 

00 

— 

fiUt 1 

s 

imto 

oosoo? 

tro 

•0 



s 

imto 

oosoo? 

tro 

00 



s 

imto 

oosoo? 

tro 

00 




til** I 


E-37 







Table E-10. CEXEC Formatted VAX Ada Input File without VMS Statistics 


VAX Ada vs ECSPO JOVIAL!opt on,no VMS I BENCHMARK TEST RESULTS: ADA UNIT! 61 


TEST-ID 

HALL-TIME 

ITERATIONS 

RUN STATISTICS!0»«N0T 

APPLICABLE 1 



AAOOOOO 

0.000000 

1 

0« 

0» 

Os 

Os 

Os 

AAOOOOO 

3.519946 

49998 

0* 

0* 

Os 

0» 

0» 

AAMOOOO 

0.000213 

0 

263 

214 

Os 

0» 

0» 

AT05505 

0.000000 

1 

0» 

0* 

0» 

0» 

0» 

AF05505 

1.070055 

74498 

0» 

0« 

0« 

0» 

0» 

AF05306 

0.000000 

1 

0« 

0« 

0« 

0» 

0* 

AF05306 

3.250047 

74998 

0* 

0« 

0« 

0* 

0» 

AFS5306 

2.174493 

74998 

0» 

0* 

0» 

0* 

0« 

AF05307 

0.000000 

1 

0« 

0> 

0» 

0» 

0» 

AF05307 

3.330003 

74498 

0» 

0» 

Os 

Os 

0» 

AFS5307 

2.259444 

74998 

0* 

0» 

0» 

0» 

Os 

AG00006 

0.000000 

1 

0» 

0« 

Os 

0» 

0" 

AG00008 

1.376889 

1248 

o» 

Os 

Os 

0» 

Os 

AGMOOOB 

0.000498 

0 

3264 

1017 

0* 

Os 

Os 

A000507 

0.000000 

1 

0» 

0» 

0* 

Os 

Os 

A000507 

0.108006 

9498 

0» 

Os 

Os 

0» 

0» 

•••• olapsad tim 
A000508 0.000000 

in above test 
1 

is too short 
0» 

Os 

0« 

0» 

Os 

A000508 

3.428014 

4448 

0» 

0" 

0» 

0» 

0* 

AOC0S08 

6.546476 

0 

Os 

0* 

0» 

Os 

0» 


E-38 








Table E-ll. CEXEC Formatted ECSPO JOVIAL Input File without VMS Statistics 


VAX Ada vs ECSPO JOVIAL (opt on,no VMS) BENCHMARK TEST RESULTS: JOVIAL UNIT! 7) 

TEST-ID NALL-TIME ITERATIONS RUN STATISTICS!0**NOT APPLICABLE) 


JAOOOOO 

0.000000 


1 


22 

0« 

0» 

0« 

Os 

JAOOOOO 

1.930000 


99998 


0» 

0* 

0« 

0« 

Os 

JAMOOOO 

0.000203 


0 


216 

216 

0« 

0« 

0« 

JF05305 

0.000000 


1 


137 

0« 

0* 

0« 

Os 

JF05305 

1.122510 


76998 


0« 

0« 

0« 

0« 

0« 

JF05306 

0.000000 


1 


226 

0» 

o« 

Os 

0 « 

JF05306 

1.572510 


76996 


0« 

0* 

0« 

Os 

0« 

JFS5306 

0.650000 


76996 


91 

D« 

OS 

Os 

Os 

••«• elapsed time 

in 

** 

«A 

• 

• 

1 

is 

too short 





JF05307 

0.000000 


1 


227 

0« 

Os 

0» 

Os 

JF05307 

1.612510 


76998 


0« 

0« 

Os 

0« 

0 « 

JFS5307 

0.269699 


76998 


90 

0» 

Os 

0« 

Os 

•••• elapsed time 

in 

above test 

is 

too short 





JG00008 

0.000000 


1 


0* 

©s 

Os 

0« 

0« 

JC00008 

0.826966 


1298 


0* 

0* 

Os 

Os 

0« 

••*• elapsed time 

in above test 

is 

too short 





JCM0008 

0.000637 


0 

2176 

627 

Os 

Os 

Os 

J000507 

0.000000 


1 


59 

0« 

Os 

Os 

Os 

J000507 

0.697035 


9998 


0* 

0« 

0« 

Os 

0« 

•••• elapsed time 

in 

above test 

is 

too short 





J00050B 

0.000000 


1 


683 

Os 

Os 

Os 

Os 

J00050B 

2.587035 


9998 


0« 

0» 

0» 

Os 

Os 

JOCO5O0 

6.026986 


0 


870 

0« 

Os 

Os 

0« 


E-39 






Table E-12. CEXEC Comparison Output File without VMS Statistics 


The Aerospace Corporation 


read operating system dependent status records(yes/no)? 
> 

no 

read operating system dependent fields!yes/no)? 

> 

no 

input test title 
> 

VAX Ada vs ECSPO JOVIAL!opt on,no VMS) 
input minimum test time in secondste.g. 1.1): 

> 

1.0 


E-40 








Table E-12. CEXEC Comparison Output File without VMS Statistics 

(Continued) 


VAX Ada VI ICSAO JOVlAll *p< vn.ne VMS I llicmm T1ST COMPARISON: (MIT OIAOA I / (MIT 71 JOVIAL • 

TIST-10 NAIL-TIME MM STATISTICS! l.O* MCT APRLICAALE I 



1.00 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

AAOOOOO 

1.71 

1 . 00 a 

1.00* 

1.00 s 

1.00* 

1.00* 

AAHOOOO 

i.es 

1.21 

1.00 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

ATOSIOS 

1.00 

1.00a 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

AT0S10S 

• n 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

AT0SSO4 

1.00 

1.00a 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

ATOSIOS 

2 .or 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

ATSSSOA 

A.oa 

1.00a 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

ATOSSOT 

1.00 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

ATOSS07 

I.U 

1 . 00 a 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

ATSS10T 

7.70 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

A600000 

1.00 

1. 00 a 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

ACOOOOA 

1.A7 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

AOHOOOO 

1 .ST 

l.SO 

1.42 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

A000S07 

1.00 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

AOOOSOT 

o.tz 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

AOOOSOA 

1.00 

1.00* 

1.00a 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

AOOOSOO 

1.S1 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

AOCOSOO 

2.12 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

(ait m 

pariaon (atala: 





aicro 

1.S7 

l.SO 

1.42 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

S itsr 

1.00 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

>1 itar 

l.SZ 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

did. 

A.00 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 

1.00* 


E-<*1 







Table E-13. EXEC Formatted VAX Ada Input File with VMS Statistics 


VAX 

•So »• ICS»0 JOVUUapt 

•n 1 


OICOUM TEST RE HAT t 

IU 

UNIT 01 





TtST.JO 

W4U.-T176 

iterations 

OIM STATISTICS!0**NDT •OOllCMlt » 


06 STATISTICS 








C7VT1M 

OAetrir 

ourio 

OHIO 

mem 

OOS71CE 

PlfttACt 

OOCCKT 

6»CCMT 


0.000000 

1 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 






A*00000 




0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

117**0 

•07*11 

>77 

00 

nt««» 

***** 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 








lit 

0 

0 

0 

1 

si7**e 

•07**1 

>77 

00 

**710000 

o.eoom 

0 

>*s 

tl« 

0* 

0* 

0* 




wtirn 




to 

0 

0 

0 

1 

S17**0 

•07471 

>77 

00 

0.000000 

1 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 





WtUOl 




0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ISM 

• 

0 

1 

1.0700SS 

7***0 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 





trniH 




100 

0 

0 

0 

0 

lSl* 

• 

0 

1 

0.000000 

1 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 









0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ISM 

• 

0 

1 

1.*100*7 

7***0 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 





trtuw 




Itl 

0 

0 

0 

0 

IBM 

• 

0 

1 

>.17***I 

7***0 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 





•rosso* 




>17 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

• 

0 

e 

0.000000 

1 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 






grosser 




0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ISM 

• 

0 

1 

l.SSOOOJ 

7***0 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 









II* 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ISM 

0 

0 

1 

1. ****** 

***** 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 





•000000 




ft* 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

• 

0.000000 

1 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 










0 

• 

0 

0 

0 

700*0 

0 

** 

-11 

•000000 

1.17*00* 

17*0 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 










111 

HI 

0 

0 

0 

n**to 

0 

M 

•40 

MHNt 

0.000**0 

0 

It** 

1017 

0* 

0* 

0* 





MOO SO 7 




0 

u 

0 

0 

0 

70SM 

0 

70 

4 

0.000000 

1 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 





•000tO 7 




0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

to** 

• 

n 

-10 

0.10000* 

**** 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 









If 

0 

0 

0 

0 

00*0 

0 

to 

•10 

•••• tlmtd iimm 

in atoew* tnl 

i* iw *h*f-< 







•DOOM* 

0.000000 

1 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 










0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

to** 

0 

>0 

•10 

•ooosoo 

».**00I* 

***• 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 




•OCOtO* 




1*1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

10*0 

0 

to 

-10 

O.S***7* 

0 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 

0* 









on 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 


E-62 





Table E-14. CEXEC Formatted ECSPO JOVIAL Output File with VMS Statistics 


VAX Ad* v* 1C SAC JOVJAWapt ant IdCWUlK TIST U SUITS 

TtST-10 NALl-TIW ITtOATlONS RUN STATISTICS*•■■NOT AAAllCABlt I 

cwtim AAsmr surie 


JAOOOOO 

0.000000 

1 

tt 

0* 

0* 

Oa 





0 

0 

0 

JAOOOOO 

t.otoooo 

ooooo 

0« 

0* 

Oa 

0* 





ITS 

0 

0 

jAwoooo 

o.oootoi 

0 

CIO 

SI* 

Oa 

•a 





to 

O 

0 

jrtssos 

0.000000 

1 

tS7 

*• 

Oa 

Oa 





0 

O 

0 

jrostos 

l.tttSIO 

0*000 

0* 

*• 

0* 

Oa 





tit 

0 

0 

jrosto* 

0.000000 

t 

tto 

Oa 

0< 

Oa 





0 

0 

0 

jrosto* 

t.smio 

0*000 

0* 

*a 

Oa 

0* 





ISO 

O 

0 

jrosto* 

0.*10000 

0*000 

01 

Oa 

Oa 

Oa 





OS 

O 

O 

•••• tlattW <i« 

in tn< 

i* <H atari 




jrostOT 

0.000000 

t 

tto 

Oa 

O* 

0< 





0 

0 

0 

jrostoT 

l.«ltS10 

0*000 

0* 

Oa 

Oa 

Oa 





14t 

0 

0 

jtsssot 

O.tIMM 

0*000 

00 

0* 

0* 

Oa 





to 

0 

0 

•••• tlwd <iaa 

in |>>H 

i* ia* atari 




JOOOOOO 

0.000000 

t 

*• 

0* 

Oa 

0* 





0 

4 

0 

J000000 

o.st*«*o 

ttoo 

0« 

0* 

0* 

Oa 





St 

O 

0 

•••• alaottd f»«w 

S 

i 

c 

•00 

ia ia* atari 




jonooo* 

0.000*17 

0 

SITS 

•to 

0« 

0* 





•to 

• 

0 

J000S07 

0.000000 

1 

so 

0* 

Oa 

0* 





0 

0 

0 

J000S0T 

0.*07010 

oooo 

#• 

0* 

Oa 

Oa 





BO 

0 

0 

•••■ tlwirt li« 

in ■>»■' (m< 

ia tao atari 




JOOOSOO 

0.000000 

1 

MS 

Oa 

Oa 

Oa 





0 

0 

0 

J000S00 

I.S070SO 

00*0 

*• 

0* 

0< 

0* 





tso 

0 

0 

JOCOSOO 

A.otooo* 

0 

070 

Oa 

0« 

Oa 





•Ot 

too 

too 


: JOVIAL ILMIT Tl 

W STATISTICS 
•ZSIO flLCMT ROSSACC 

S UOtO* 

s ntm 

s uwt 

• tot* 

o tot* 

0 tot* 

0 tot* 

0 0 

o tot* 

0 tot* 

0 0 

o ttm 

o ttm 

0 tITTA 

o tot* 

0 tot* 

0 tot* 

0 tot* 

too 100 


•ISAAC! 

oaecwr 

oaecNT 

OOSOS7 

tso 

•7 

OOSM7 

tto 

*7 

OOSM7 

tso 

•7 

0 

tl 


0 

tl 


0 

tl 


0 

tt 


0 

0 


0 

11 


0 

tl 


0 

0 


0 

is 

-0 

0 

tl 

-* 

0 

-1 

•10 

0 

to 

-* 

0 

to 

-* 

0 

to 

-♦ 

0 

10 

-* 

100 

100 

100 



E-43 









Table £-15. CEXEC Comparison Output File with VMS Statistics 


read operating system dependent status record*(yes/no)? 

> 

yes 

read operating systam dependent fields!yes/no I? 

> 

yes 

subtract test routine overhead from operating system statslyes/no I? 
> 

yes 

which operating system!vms»...I? 

> 

input test title 
> 

VAX Ada vs ICSPO JOVIAL!opt on) 

input minimum test time in aeeondsle.g. 1.11: . 



Table E-15. CEXEC Comparison Output File with VMS Statistics (Continued) 

( 


VM U > «• !KW JOVlAlloot anl MtCWIAOX TTST CCWUUMi MT SIMA I / UNIT 71 JOVIAL • 

TIST-IO MIL'TINI IUN STATISTICS ! 1 . 0 *NCT AmiCASLl I VMS STATISTICS 

C 7 UTIH OACtflT OUT 10 01*10 7 tlCMT 00 S 0 AC 7 7 ISAAC ! OOOCNT ROCCMT 


AAOOOOO 

1.00 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 


00 * 


00 * 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.04 

1.00 

1.07 

1.44 

AAOOOOO 

1.71 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 


00 * 


00 * 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

7 . 4 * 

1.00 

1.07 

1.44 

AtHOOOO 

l.OS 

1.71 

1.00 

1 . 00 * 


00 * 


so * 

7 .SO 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

7.44 

1.00 

1.07 

1.44 

AfOUM 

1.00 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 

l . OO * 


00 * 


so * 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

l.SO 

1.00 

0.01 

o.so 

Arossos 

o.*s 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 


00 * 


00 * 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

l.SO 

1.00 

0.01 

0 10 

AT 0 SS 04 

1.00 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 


00 * 


00 * 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

l.SO 

1.00 

0.01 

o.so 

srosso * 

7.07 

!. 00 » 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 


00 * 


00 * 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

l.SO 

1.00 

0.01 

o.so 

AfSSIOA 

A.Ok 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 


00 * 


to * 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

A 70 SI 07 

1.00 

l . OO * 

1 . 00 * 

l . OO * 


00 * 


to * 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

l.SO 

1.00 

0.01 

o.so 

ATOS 107 

7 . 1 * 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 


00 * 


00 * 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

l.SO 

1.00 

0.01 

o.so 

A 7 SS 107 

7 . 7 * 

1 OS * 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 


00 * 


00 * 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

ACOOOOA 

1.00 

i . oo * 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 


00 * 


00 * 

1.00 

l.SO 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

4.70 

1.00 

1 . 0 * 

1.00 

ACOOOOA 

1 . A 7 

l . OO * 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 


00 * 


00 * 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

17.01 

1.00 

70.44 

1.00 

ACM 000 A 

117 

l.SO 

1 . A 1 

1 . 00 * 


to * 


00 * 

1.00 

S.Tt 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

4 . 4 S 

1.00 

1.00 


AOOOSO 7 

1.00 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 

l . OO * 


00 * 


00 * 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

7.00 

1.00 

7.00 

1.00 

A 000 S 07 

0.77 

l . OO * 

1 . 00 * 

l . OO * 


00 * 


00 * 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

7.00 

1.00 

7.00 

1.00 

AOOOSOA 

1.00 

1 . 00 * 

l . OO * 

1 . 00 * 


00 * 


00 * 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

7.00 

1.00 

7.00 

1.00 

AOOOSOA 

1.11 

i . oo * 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 


00 * 


eo > 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

7.00 

1.00 

7.00 

1.00 

AOCOSOA 

MM 

7.17 

N'iun 1*1 

1 . 00 * 

sit : 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 


00 * 


to * 

1.07 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 


| aicr * 

1 . S 7 

l.SO 

1.47 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 

1.00 

1.70 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

S . 4 S 

1.00 

1.00 

44.44 

1 l«*r 

1.00 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 

1.00 

l.SO 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

0.10 

1.00 

l.SO 

1.00 

>1 Ho * 

1 . S 7 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

17.44 

1.00 

4.44 

1.00 

* i ««. 

4.00 

1 . 00 * 

1 . 00 * 

l . OO * 

l . OO * 

1 . 00 * 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 

1.00 


E-45 






















Table E-15. CEXEC Comparison Output File with VMS Statistics (Continued) 


VAX Ada vs ECSPO JOVIAL!opt on) VMS SHOW STATUS STATISTICS 


I/O-UNIT NUMBER 

HALL-CLOCK CPU-TIME 

6UFI0 

DIRIO RACE 

-FAULTS 

7 

1 

4.01 

4.12 

57 

34 

734 

S 

1 

7.48 

S.77 

54 

34 

742 

7 

2 

23.61 

16.14 

255 

43 

2644 

S 

2 

32.35 

24.67 

143 

43 

2560 


E-46 






Table E-15. CEXEC Comparison Output 


File with VMS Statistics (Concluded) 


VAX AS* w* tCSPO JOVIAL I apt an) VIS SMOM STATUS COWAMSONSt UNIT SIAM I / WIT T( JOVIAL I 


MM(« MALL-CLOCK CW-TKC 

auras 

•zsie 

SASt-FSUITS 

1 l.M l.*0 

1 . 0 * 

l.oe 

l.M 

t l.M l.M 

i.os 

1.00 

l.M 


E-47 



APPENDIX F 


TEST DESCRIPTIONS 


This appendix describes the function of every ACPS test. These test 
descriptions are contained in Table F-l and are ordered according to the ACPS 
test name sorting conventions described in Section E.3. Many entries in the 
TEST NAME field of Table F-l are followed by a comma and an alphabetic 
character (C, I, M, or S) to indicate that an additional version of the test 
exists. These additional test names contain this character as the third 
character in the test name. For example, the test description entry AFO3501, 

S corresponds to two tests: AF03501 and AFS3501. For some tests (e.g., 
AFD520K) an asterisk is placed to the right of the test name. This signifies 
that the test is VAX specific, and the test program is not placed on the ACPS 
ANSI formatted delivery tape. The VERSIONS field of Table F-l lists any other 
versions of a test based on test type. For example, the following versions of 
test AF03500 exist within the ACPS: CF03500, EF03500, SF03500, TF03500, 
JF03500, FF03500. The test description field in Table F-l describes what is 
being measured in each test. The descriptions were derived from commentary 
prologue contained in each test file. The descriptions were condensed, and 
corrected for grammatical and descriptive errors. However, these corrections 
were not made to the corresponding test file prologues. 






Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions 


TEST NAME 
AAOOOOO.M 

AF03500 

AF03501,S 
AF03502.S 
AF03503/S 

AF03504,S 

AF03509.S 

AF03510.S 

AF03511.S 

AFD3512.S 

AF03513.S 

AF03514.S 

AF03517.S 

AF0351S.S 

AF03550 

AFD3551 

AF03600 

AF03601.S 
AF03602,S 
AF03603.S 

AF036D4,S 
AF03605.S 
AF03606.S 

AF03607,S 
AF03608.S 

AF03609.S 


versions DESCRIPTION 


C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 


establishes the run tine system dependent statistic 
overhead of support softwereCoursys.eurspc.ourtyp, 
ourdmp). The test should be the first test run in any 
test sequence. 

test loop overhead for testsi AF03501»AF03502.AF03503, 
AF03504.AF03509,AF03510, AF05311,AF05312,AF05313, 

AF05314,AF05317,AF05318. 

allocation/deallocation of 10 integer variables declared 
in a procedure. 

allocation/dealloeetion/initialization to 0 of 10 
integer variables declared in a procedure, 
allocation/deallocation/initialization to non-zero 
constants of 10 integer variables declared in a 

procedure. 

alloeation/dealloeation/initialization to global 
variables of 10 integer variables declared in a 

procedure. 

allocation/deallocation of 10 integer variables declared 
in a block stetoeent. 

allocation/deallocation/initialization to 0 of 10 
integer variables declared in a block statement, 
allocation/deallocation/initialization to non-zero 
constants of 10 integer variables declared in a block 

statement. 

allocation/deallocation/initialization to global 
variables of 10 integer variables declared in a block 
statement. 

allocation/deallocation of 10 string variables declared 
in a procedure. 

allocation/deallocation/initialization of 10 string 
variables declared in a procedure. 

allocation/deallocation of 10 string variables declared 
in a block statement. 

allocation/deallocation/initialization to a constant of 
10 string vmri»bl^M declared in a block statement, 
execution of PREDrSUCC functions for enumeretion type 
MONTHS in 10 statements of the form THPESi t* months’XC 
TMPESj); where X is PRED or SUCC. 

execution of PRED,SUCC functions for enumeration type 
REP_H0NTM5 in 10 statements of the form* TMPERi i* 
rep months*XtTMPERj )i where X is PRED or SUCC. 
tesT loop overhead for testst AF03601,AF03602,AF03603, 
AF03604,AF03605,AF03606, AF03607.AF03608,AF03609, 

AF03610, AF03611,AF03612,AF03613,AF03614,AF03615, 

AF03616, AF03617,AF03618,AF03419. 

allocation/deallocation of 10 1 dimensional(10) integer 
arrays declared in a procedure. 

allocation/deallocation/initialization to 0 of 10 1 

dimensional!10) integer arreys declared in a procedure, 
allocation/deallocation/initialization to non-zero 
constents of 10 1 dimensional(lO) integer arrays 
declared in a procedure. 

allocation/deallocation of 10 2 dimensions1(3.3) integer 
arrays declared in a procedure. 

allocation/deallocation/initialization to 0 of 10 2 

dimensional(3,3) integer arrays declared in a procedure, 
allocation/deallocation/initialization to non-zero 
constants of 10 2 dimensional(3,3) integer arrays 
declared in a procedure. 

allocation/deallocation of 10 3 dimensional(3,3,3) 

integer arrays declared in a procedure, 
allocation/deallocation/initialization to 0 of 10 3 

dimensional(3,3,3) integer arrays declared in a 
procedure. 

allocation/dealloeetion/initialization to non-zero 


F-2 





Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


TEST.,.NAME 

AF03610.S 

AF03611,S 
AF03612,S 

AF03613.S 

AF03614# S 
AF03615.S 

AF03616,S 

AF03617,S 
AF03618.S 

AF03619»S 

AF03630 

AF03631.S 

AF03632.S 

AF03633.S 

AF03634,S 

AF03635.S 

AF03636,S 

AF03637,S 

AF03638.S 

AF03639,S 

AF03641»S 

AF03642.S 


VERSIONS 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/.T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 


DESCRIPTION 

eonstanta ef 10 3 dimensional(3»3*3) integer arrays 

declared in a procedure. 

allocation/deallocation ef 10 3 dimensional(3.3,3) 

integer arrays declared in a procedure. The variables 
are not referenced and should net be allocated (compare 
to AF03607). 

allocation/deallocation ef 10 1 dimensional(10) integer 
arrays declared in a block statement. 

allocation/deallocation/initialization to 0 ef 10 1 

dimensional(10) integer arrays declared in a block 
statement. 

allocation/deallocation/initializatien to non-zero 
constants ef 10 1 dimensional(lO) integer arrays 
declared in a block statement. 

alloeation/daallocation ef 10 2 dimensional(3,3) integer 
arrays declared in a block statement. 

allocation/deallocation/initialization to 0 of 10 2 

dimensional(3»3) integer arrays declared in a block 
statement. 

allocation/daallocation/initialization to non-zero 
constants ef 10 2 dimansional(3»3) integer arrays 
declared in a block statement. 

allocation/deallocation ef 10 3 dimensional(3»3»3) 

integer arrays declared in a block statement, 
mllocatien/deallocation/initialization to 0 of 10 3 

dimensional(3>3>3) integer arrays declared in a block 

statement. 

allocation/deallocation/initialization to non-zero 
constants ef. 10 3 dimensional(3,3.3) integer arrays 
declared in a block statement. 

test loop overhead for testst AF03631.AF03632.AF03633, 
AF03634,AF0363S,AF05636, AF03637,AF03638,AF03639, 

AFD3641,AF03642,AF03643,AF03644/AF03645.AF03646, 

AF03647,AF03648,AF03649. 

allocation/deallocation of 10 dynamically sized 1 

dimensional(10) integer arrays declared in a procedure, 
allocation/deallocation/initialization to 0 of 10 
dynamically sized 1 dimensional(10) integer arrays 
declared in a procedure. 

allocation/daalloeatien/initialization to non-zero 
constants ef 10 dynamically sized 1 dimensional(10) 
integer arrays declared in a procedure, 
alloeation/daallocation ef 10 dynamically sized 2 

dimensional(3'3) integer arrays declared in a procedure, 
allocatien/deallocation/initializatien to 0 ef 10 
dynamically sized 2 dimensienal(3>3) integer srrays 
declared in a procedure. 

allocation/deallocation/initialization to non-zero 
censtents ef 10 dynamically sized 2 dimensional(3»3) 
integer arrays declared in a procedure, 
allocation/deallocation ef 10 dynamically sized 3 
dimensional(3,3,3) integer arrays declared in a 
procedure. 

allecatien/deallecatien/initializatien to 0 ef 10 
dynamically sized 3 dimensional(3>3>3) integer arrays 
declared in a procedure. 

allocation/deallocation/initialization to non-zero 
constants ef 10 dynamically sized 3 dimensional(3»3»3) 
integer arrays declared in a procedure, 
allocation/deallocation ef 10 dynamically sized 1 
dimensional(lO) integer srrays declared in a block 
statement. 

allocation/deallocation/initialization to 0 ef 10 
dynamically sized 1 dimensional(10) integer arrays 
declared in a block statement. 


F-3 





Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


I£§T .HAflE 

AF03643,S 

AF03644,S 

AF03645.S 

AFD3646/S 

AF03647.S 

AF03648.S 

AF03649.S 

AF03700 

AF03701.S 

AF03702* S 

AF03703.S 

AF03800 
AF03801,S 

AF03802,S 

AF03803,S 

AF03804,S 

AF04120 

AF04121 

AF04122 

AF04123 


versions PESCRIPTIPN 


C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T/J 
C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 


C/E/S/T/J 


C/E/S/T/J/F 
C/E/S/T/J/F 
C/E/S/T/J/F 
C/E/S/T/J/F 


allocation/deallocation/initialization to non-zero 
constants of 10 dynamically sized 1 dimensional(10) 

integer arrays declared in a block statement, 
allocation/deallocation of 10 dynamically sized 2 

dimensional(5*3) integer arrays declared in a block 
statement. 

allocation/deallocation/initialization to 0 of 10 
dynamically sized 2 dimensional(3,3) integer arrays 
declared in a block statement. 

alloeation/deallocation/initialization to non-zero 
constants of 10 dynamically sized 2 dimensional(3,3) 

integer arrays declared in a block statement, 
allocation/deallocation of 10 dynamically sized 3 

dimensional(3«3>3) integer arrays declared in a block 
statement. 

allocation/daallocation/initialization to 0 of 10 
dynamically sized 3 dimensional(3,3,3) integer arrays 
declared in a block statement. 

allocation/deallocation/initialization to non-zero 
constants of 10 dynamically sized 3 dimensional(3,3,3) 
integer arrays declared in a block statement, 
test loop overhead for testsi af03701»AF03702»AF03703. 
allocation/deallocation of 10 1 dimensional(10) arrays 

with discriminated raeord components(type 
VARIANT_REC0RDS) declared in a procedure. A variable is 
used as the record discriminant. 

allocation/deallocation of 10 1 dimensional(lO) arrays 

with discriminated reeord components(type 
VARIANT_RECORDS) declared in a procedure. A constant is 
used as the record discriminant. 

allocation/deallocation/intialization to a record 
aggregate of 10 1 dimensional(10) arrays with 

discriminated raeord components(type VARIANT_RECORDS) 
declared in a procedure. A constant is used as the 
record discriminant. 

test loop overhead for testsi AF03801,AF03B02,AF03803, 
AF03804. 

allocation/deallocation of 10 1 dimensional(10) arrays 

with record access components declared in a procedure. 
The access type(RECORD_P0INTER) is globally defined in 
package ourspe. 

allocation/deallocation/initialization to a raeord 
aggregate of 10 1 dimensional(10) arrays with record 

access components declared in a procedure. The access 
type(REC0RD_P01NTER> is globally defined in package 
ourspe. 

allocation/deallocation of 10 1 dimensional(10) arrays 

Kith record access components declared in a procedure. 
The access type used is declared within the procedure 
and the test includes the time to create/remove the 
collection of access objects associated with the access 
type. 

allocation/deallocation/initialization to a record 
aggregate of 10 1 dimensional(lO) arrays with record 

access components declared in a procedure. The access 
type used is declared within the procedure and the test 
includes the tine to create/remove the collection of 
access objects associated with the access type. 

3 assignment statements using integer array slices with 
constant slice ranges. 

3 assignment statements using integer array slices with 
sealar variable slice ranges. Compare to AF04120. 

3 assignment statements using character string slices 
with constant slice ranges. 

3 assignment statements using character string slices 





Table F-l ACPS Test Daseriptions (continued) 


TEST NAME 

AF04124 

AF04125 

AF04126 

AF04127 

AFD4128 

AF04129 

AFD412A 

AF0412B 

AFD412C 

AFD412D 

AF041S0 

AF041S1 

-AF04132 

AF0413S 

AFD4135 

AFD4136 

AFD4137 

AFD4138 

AFD4139 

AFD413A 

AFD413B 

AFD413C 


VERSIONS 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 


DESCRIPTION 

with scalar variable slice ranges. Cospare to AF04122. 

3 assignsant stataaants of constant aggregates to 

integer array slices with constant slice ranges. 

3 assignsent statements of constant aggregates to 

integer array slices with variable slice ranges. 
Cospare to AF04124. 

3 assignsent statements of constant aggregates to slices 
of string variables with constant slice indices. 

3 assignment statements of constent aggregates to slices 
of string variables using variable slice and aggregate 
named association ranges. Compare to AF04126. 

3 assignment statements of constant aggregates to slices 
of pecked string veriables using non-constent slice and 
aggregata named association ranges. Compare to AF04127. 

3 assignment statements using boolean array slices with 
constent slice ranges. 

3 assignment statements using slices of packed boolean 
arrays with constant slice ranges. Compare to AF04129. 

3 assignment stetements using record array slices with 
constant slice ranges. 

-3 assignment statements using packed reeordttype 

PACKED.RECORDS) array slices with constant slice 
ranges. Compare to AF0412B. 

3 assignment statements using packed reeordttype 

REP.RECORDS) array slices with constant slice ranges. 
Compare to AF0412B* AFD412C. 

references to integer components of records (type 

RECORDS) in 10 statements of the forms THPRCi.COMP.il 
•« TMPRCj.C0MP.ilj. 

references to integer components of records (type 

RECORDS) in 10 statements of the forms TMPRCi.COMP.I2 
i* TMPRCj.C0MP.12j. 

references to boolean components of records (type 

RECORDS) in 20 statements of the forms TMPRCi.C0MP.B1 
«* TMPRCj.COMP.Blj. 

references to enumeration components of records (type 
RECORDS) in 10 statements of the forms TMPRCi.COMP.E ** 
TMPRCj.COMP.Ej. 

references to integer components of packod records (type 
PACKED.RECORDS) in 10 stetements of the forms 

TMPRPi.COMP.il »* TMPRPj.C0MP.I1j. Compare to AF04130. 
references to integer components of packed records (type 
PACKED.RECORDS) in 10 statements of the forms 

TMPRPi.C0MP.I2 s« TMPRPj.C0MP.12;. Compare to AF04131. 
references to boolean components of packed records (type 
PACKED.RECORDS) in 10 statements of the forms 

TMPRPi.C0MP.B1 s* TMPRPj.COMP.Blj. Compare to AF04132. 
references to enumeration components of packed records! 
type PACKED.RECORDS) in 10 statements of the forms 
TMPRPi.COMP.E .« TMPRPj.COMP.Ej. Compere to AF04133. 
references to integer components of records packed by 

rep.specs, (type REP.RECORDStbits 0..4) in 10 

statements of the forms TMPRRi.C0MP.il i* 
TMPRRj.C0MP.ilj. Compare to AFD4135. 

references to integer components of records packed by 

rap.specs, (type REP.RECORDStbits 5..9) in 10 

statements of the forms TMPRRi.COMP 12 t* 

TMPRRj.C0MP.12j. Compare to AFD4138. 

references to boolean components of records packed by 

rep.specs, (type REP.RECORDStbit 10) in 10 statements 
of the forms TMPRRi.COMP.Bl ■« TMPRRj.C0MP.B1J. Compare 
to AFD4137. 

references to onumeration components of records packed 
by rep.specs, (type REP.RECORDStbits 12..15) in 10 
statements of the forms TMPRRi.COMP.E i* 


F-5 




Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


IKIJMHE versions description 


THPRRj.COHP.E;. Coepare to AFD4138. 

AF041SD C/E/S/T/J references to inteeor components of unconstrained record 

variants (type VARIANT RECORDS) in 10 steteeents of the 
fora. THPVSi.COMP I1 i« THPVSj.COHP II;. 

AFD413E C/E/S/T/J references to integer components of packed unconstrained 

record variants (type PACKED.VARIANT) in 10 statements 
of the forai THPVPi.C0HP.il •* THPVPj.C0HP.I1;. Compere 
to AF0413D. 

AFD413G C/E/S/T/J references to packed string components of records (type 

RECORD.TYPE) in 10 statements of the formi 

THPPRi.String.Comp «» THPPRj.Strina_Comp;. 

AF0413H C/E/S/T/J references to access type components of record access 

objects (type RECORD.POINTER) in 10 statements of the 

formi THPPPi.Pointer.Comp i* THPPPj.Pointer.Comp;. 

AF0413I C/E/S/T/J references to inteaor components of records (type 

RECORD.TYPE) in 10 statements of the forms 

THPPRi.Int.Comp i* THPPRj.Int.Comp;. 

AF0413J C/E/S/T/J references to integer components of record access 

objects (type RECORD.POINTER) in 10 statements of the 

forms THPPPi.Znt_Coap «« THPPPj.Int.Comp;. Compare to 
AF0413I. 

AF0413K C/E/S/T/J references to integer components of record access 

objects (type RECORD POINTER) in 10 statements of the 

forms THPPPi.Pointer.Comp.Int.Comp s* 

THPPPj.Pointer.Coap.lnt.Comp;. Compare to AF0413J* 
AF0413I. 

AF04310 C/E/S/T/J 10 statements assigning a record aggregate to a record 

veriable (type RECORDS). 

AF04311 C/E/S/T/J 10 stetements assigning a record aggregate to an 

unconstrained variant record variable(type 
VARIANT RECORDS). 

AF04312 C/E/S/T/J 10 statements assigning a record aggregate to a record 

access variable using the mualifiar .alKtype 
REC0RD.P0INTER). 

AF04510 C/E/S/T/J/F 9 logical AMDs all true in one IF statement. 

AF04511 C/E/S/T/J/F 9 logical ANDs all false in one IF statement. It is 

permissable if an olapsed time too short error message 
is generated for this test. 

AF04512 C/E/S/T/J/F 9 logical ORs all true in one IF statement. It is 

permissable if an alapsed time too short orror message 
is generated for this tost. 

AF04513 C/E/S/T/J/F 9 logical ORs all false in one IF statement. 

AF04514 C/E/S/T/J/F 9 logical XORs all false in one IF statement. 

AF04515 C/E/S/T/J/F 1 10 olement boolean array AND assignment. 

AF04516 C/E/S/T/J/F 1 10 olement boolean array relational (equality) 

assignment. 

AF04517 C/E/S/T/J/F 1 10 element boolean array relational (>•> assignment. 

AF04518 C/E/S/T/J/F test loop overhead for tastes AF04519 AF0451a AF0451b 

AF0451C AF0451d AF0451o AF0451f AF0451g AF0451h 

AF0451i. The overhead includes all logical operations 


AF04519.S 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

and statements that 
used to construct it. 
10 relational * in 

are 

one 

not 

IF 

part of the tost but 

statement (all true) 

only 

with 

AF0451A.S 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

10 relational * 

in 

ana 

IF 

statement 

(all 

true) 

with 

AF0451B.S 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

float operands. 

10 relational /* 

in 

one 

IF 

statement 

(all 

true) 

with 

AF0451C.S 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

integer operands. 
10 relational < 

in 

one 

IF 

statement 

(all 

true) 

with 

AF0451D.S 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

integer operands. 
10 relational <* 

in 

one 

IF 

statement 

(all 

true) 

with 

AF0451E.S 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

integer operands. 
10 relational > 

in 

one 

IF 

statement 

(all 

true) 

with 

AF0451F.S 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

integer operands. 
10 relational >* 

in 

one 

IF statement 

(all 

true) 

with 









Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


TEST name versions description 

integer operands. 

AF0451G,S C/E/S/T/J/F 10 logical negations in one IF stataaant (all true) with 

boolean operands. 

AF0451H*S C/E/S/T/F 10 aeabership in tests in one IF stataaant-(all true) 

with integer operands. 

AF0451I«S C/E/S/T/F 10 aeabership not in tests in one IF stataaent (all true) 

with integer operands. 

AFD451K C/E/S/T/J/F test loop overhead for tests> AFD4511 AFD451M AFD451N 

AFD4510 AFD451P AFD451Q AFD451R AFD451S AFD451T. The 
overhead includes all logical operations and statements 
that are not part of the test but only used to 
construct it. 

AFD451L»S C/E/S/T/J/F 10 relational * in one IF stateaent (all true) with 

short_short_integer operands. 

AFD451M,S C/E/S/T/J/F 10 relational * in one IF stateaent (all true) with 

short_integer operands. 

AFD451N,S C/E/S/T/F 10 relational * in one IF stateaent (all true) with 

long_float operands. 

AFD4510»S C/E/S/T/F 10 relational * in one IF stateaent (all true) with 

long_long float operands. 

AFD451P.S C/E/S/T/J/F 10 relational < in one IF stataaent (all true) with 

short_short integer operands. 

AFD451Q,S C/E/S/T/J/F 10 relational < in ona IF stateaent (all true) with 

short_integer operands. 

AFD451R*S C/E/S/T/F 10 relational < in ona IF stataaant (all true) with 

long_float operands. 

AFD451S'S C/E/S/T/F 10 relational < in ona IF stataaant (all true) with 

long_longfloat operands. 

AFD451T*S* C/E/S/T/J/F 10 relational « in one IF stateaent (all true) with 

d_float operands. 

AF0451V C/E/S/T/J/F test loop overhead for tests> AF0451H AF0451X AF0451Y. 

The overhead includes all logical operations and 
stateaants that are not part of the test but only used 
to construct it. 


AF0451W,S 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

10 relational /* 
integer operands. 

in 

ona 

IF 

stateaent 

(all 

r\ 

m 

M 

£ 

with 

AF0451X.S 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

10 relational /* 
float operands. 

in 

one 

IF 

stateaent 

(all 

false) 

with 

AF0451Y.5 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

10 relational < 

in 

ona 

IF stateaent 

(all 

false) 

with 


integer operands. 

AF04520 C/E/S/T/J/F 10 eloaent integer array * test in one IF statement 

True). Includes oxocution of the if ♦ the then part( 

tapisl i* 100). 

AF04521 C/E/S/T/J/F 10 eleaent integer array >* test in one IF ststement( 

True). Includes execution of the if ♦ the then part( 

tapisl i* 100). 

AF04522 C/E/S/T/J/F 10 olaaent integer array * test in one IF statementt 

False). Includes execution of the if ♦ the else part( 
tapis2 i* 100). 

AFD4523 C/E/S/T/J/F 10 eleaent - short_short_integer array « test in one IF 

stateaent (true). Includes execution of the if ♦ the 
then part(tapisl »* 100). Coapare to AFD451L. 

AFD4524 C/E/S/T/J/F 10 .eleaent short_integer array * test in one IF 

stateaent (true). Includes execution of the if ♦ the 
then part(tapisl «« 100). Coapare to AFD451M. 

AFD4525 C/E/S/T/F 10 olaaent long_float array • test in one IF statementt 

true). Includes execution of the if ♦ the then part( 
tapisl •* 100). Coapare to AFD451N. 

AFD4526 C/E/S/T/F 10 olaaent long_long_float array * test in one IF 

stateaent (true). Includes execution of the if ♦ the 
than part(tapisl •* 100). Coapare to AFD4510. 

AF04S27 C/E/S/T/J 10 eleaent boolean array * test in one IF statement 

true). Includes execution of the if ♦ the then part( 
tapisl i* 100). 

AFD452S C/E/S/T 10 olaaent packed boolean array * test in one IF 


F-7 




Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


TEST NAME VERSIONS PESCRIPUPN 

statement (true). Includes execution of the if ♦ the 
then part(tepisl i* 100). Coepare to'AF04527. 

AF04529 C/E/S/T/J/F 10 character string * test in one IF statement (true). 

Includes execution of the if ♦ the then part(tmpisl »* 

100 ). 

AFD452A C/E/S/T/J 10 character pecked string * test in one IF statement 

true), includes execution of the if ♦ the then part( 
tmpisl t* 100). Compere to AFD4529. 

AF04530 C/E/S/T/J/F 1 assignment statement assigning an expression with 9 

integer additions of sealer variables to a scalar 
variable. 

AF04531 C/E/S/T/J/F 1 assignment statement assigning an expression with 9 

integer subtractions of scalar variables from a scalar 
variable. 

AF04532 C/E/S/T/J/F 1 assignment statement assigning an expression with 9 

float additions of scalar variables to a scalar 
variable. 

AF04533 C/E/S/T/J/F 1 assignment statement assigning an expression with 9 

float subtractions of scalar variables from a scalar 
variable. 

AF04534 C/E/S/T/J/F 1 assignment statement assigning an expression with 9 

constant character catenations to a string variable. 

AF04535 C/E/S/T/J/F 1 assignment statement assigning an expression with 9 

constant catenations of strings of length 3 to a string 
variable. 

AF04536 C/E/S/T/J/F 1 assignment statement assigning an expression with 9 

integer array element catenations to an array slice. 

AF04537 C/E/S/T/J/F 10 integer increments by 1. Ten assignment statements 

using scalar variable operands were used to construct 
the test. 

AF04538 C/E/S/T/J/F 10 intogar increments by 10. Tan assignment statements 

using scalar variable operands wars used to construct 
the test. 

AF04539 C/E/S/T/J/F 10 integer decrements by 1. Tan assignment statements 

using scalar variable operands wera used to construct 
the tost. 

AF0453A C/E/S/T/J/F 10 integer decrements by 10. Ton assignment statements 

using scalar variable operands wore used to construct 
the tost. 

AF0453B C/E/S/T/J 1 assignment statement assigning an expression with 9 

fixad point additions of scalar variables to a scalar 
variable. 

AF0453C C/E/S/T/J 1 assignment statement assigning an expression with 9 

fixed point subtractions of scalar variables from a 
scalar variable. 

AF04540 C/E/S/T/J/F 10 assignment statements assigning a negated integer 

scalar variable to a scalar variable. 

AF04541 C/E/S/T/J/F 10 assignment statements assigning a negated float 

scalar variable to a scalar variable. 

AF04550 C/E/S/T/J/F 3 assignment statements of the form x «« x nod y where x, 

- y and z are scalar variables and x is 0. 

AF04551 C/E/S/T/J/F 3 assignment statements of the form x »* y mod z where x> 

y and-z ara positive scalar variables. 

AF04552 C/E/S/T/J/F 3 assignment statements of the fern x«* y nod z where x» 

y and z are scalar variables and only z is negative. 

AF04553 C/E/S/T/J/F 3 assignment statements of the form x«» y rem z where x» 

y and z are scalar variables and y is zero. 

AF045S4 C/E/S/T/J/F 3 assignment statements of the form x i« y rem z where x. 

y and z are scalar variables and are >0. 

AF045S5 C/E/S/T/J/F 3 assignment statements of the fern x y rem z where x> 

y and z are scalar variables and only z is negative. 

AF04556 C/E/S/T/J/F 1 assignment statement assigning an expression with 7 

integer multiplies of scalar variables to a scalar 
variable. 

AF04557 C/E/S/T/J/F 1 assignment statement assigning an expression with 7 


F-« 









Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


TEST NAME 

AF04558 

AF04559 

AFD455D 

AFD455E 

AFD455F 

AFD455G 

AFD455H* 

AFD455I 

AFD455J 

AFD455K 

AFD455L 

AFD455HK 

AF0455N 

AF04550 

AF04560 

AF04562 

AF04563 

AFD4566 

AFD4567 

AFD4568 

AFD4569 

AFD456AK 

AF04600 

AF04601 

AF04602 

AFD4603 

AFD4604 

AFD4605 

AFD4606 

AFD4607 


mm 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F - 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 


DESCRIPTION 

integer divides of scalar variables to a scalar 
variable. 

1 assignment statement assigning an expression with 7 
float multiplies of scalar variables to a scalar 
variable. 

1 assignment statement assigning an expression with 7 
float divides of scalar variables to a scalar variable. 

3 short short.integer multiplies in 1 assignment 
statement using scalar variable operands. 

7 short.integer multiplies in 1 assignment statement 
using scalar variable operends. 

7 long.float multiplies in 1 assignment statement using 
scalar variable operands. 

7 long_long_float multiplies in 1 assignment statement 
using scalar variable operands. 

7 d_floot multiplies in 1 assignment statement using 
scalar variable operands. 

3 short_short_integer divides in 1 assignment stetement 
using scalar variable operands. 

7 short.integer divides in 1 assignment statement using 
scalar variable operands. 

7 long_float multiplies in 1 assignment statement using 
scalar variable operands. 

7 long_long_float divides in 1 assignment statement 
using scalar variable operands. 

7 d.float divides in 1 assignment statement using scelar 
variable operands. 

1 assignment stetement assigning an expression with 7 
fixed point multiplies of scalar variables to a scalar 
variable. 

1 assignment statement assigning an expression with 7 
fixed point divides of mealmr variablam to a scalar 
variable. 

6 assignment statements of the form x t* abs(y) where x 
and y are scalar variables. 

1 assignment statement assigning an expression with 2 
integer exponentiations of scalar variables to a scalar 
variable. 

1 assignment statement assigning an expression with 2 
float exponentiations of scalar variables to a scalar 
variable. 

3 short.short integer exponentiations. Three assignment 
statements with scalar operands wars used to construct 
the test. 

3 short integer exponentiations. Three assignment 
statements with scalar operpnds were used to construct 
the test. 

3 long_float exponentiations. Three assignment 
statements with scalar operands wars used to construct 
the test. 

3 long_long.flost exponentiations. Three assignment 
statements with scalar operands were used to construct 
the test. 

3 d_float exponentiations. Three assignment statements 
with mcalar operands were used to construct the test. 

10 type conversions (integer to float). 

10 type conversions (float to integer). 

10 type conversions of an integer muantity to one with a 
smaller range(integer to one to 3). 

10 type converaions (short.snort.integer to 
short.integer). 

10 type conversions (short.short.integer to integer). 

10 type conversions (short.integer to integer). 

10 type conversions (integer to short.integer). 

10 type conversions (integer to short.short.integer). 


F-9 






Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


IESJ HAWE 

AFD4608 

AFD4609 

AFD460A 

AFD460B 

AFD460C* 

AFD460D* 

AF0460E 

AF0460F 

AF0460G 

AF0460H 

AF0460I 

AF0460J 


AFD460K 


AFD460L 


AF0460M 


AFD460N 


AFD4600 


AFD4800 


AFD4801»S 


AFD4802,S 


AFD4803.S 


AF05200 

AF05201 

AF05202 

AF0520S 

AF05204 

AF05205 

AF05206 

AF05207 

AF05208 


versions description 


C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J 


C/E/S/T/J 


C/E/S/T/J 


C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 


C/E/S/T/J 

C/S/T 

C/S/T 


C/S/T 

C/S/T 

C/E/S/T/J/F 
C/E/S/T/J/F 
C/E/S/T/J/F 
C/E/S/T/J/F 
C/E/S/T/J/F 
C/E/S/T/J/F 
C/E/S/T/J/F 
C/E/S/T/J/F 
C/E/S/T/J/F 


10 type conversions (float to long_fleat). 
l0 type conversions (float to long..long_float). 

10 type conversions (Ion a Iona..float to long_float). 

10 type conversions (long_long float to float). 

10 type conversions (long_float to d.float). 

10 type conversions (d^float to long float). 

10 type conversions (fixed point to float). 

10 type conversions (float to fixed point).. 

10 type conversions (integer to fixed point). 

10 type conversions (fixed point to integer). 

10 type conversions (integer to positive). 

10 type conversions (five_bit_integer to integer). The 
five_bit_integer is, contained in a coaponent(comp_il) 
of a racord(type RECORDS). 

10 type conversions (five_bit_integer to integer). The 
five_bit integer is contained in a component(comp il) 
of a packed recerd(type PACKED.RECORDS). Coapare to 
AF0460J. 

10 type conversions (five_bit_integer to integer). The 
five_bit_integer is contained in a component(coap.il) 
of a packed raeord(type REP_RECORDS). Coapare to 
AF0460J. 

10 type conversions (integer to five_bit_integer). The 
five_bit_integer object is contained in a coaponent( 

coapil) of a record!type RECORDS). 

10 type conversions (integer to five..bit_integer). The 
five bit integer object is contained in a component( 

comp_il) of a packed reeord(type PACKED_REC0RDS). 
Coapare to AF0460N. 

10 type conversions (integer to five_bit_integer). The 
five.bit_integer object is contained in a component( 

comp il) of a packed raeord(type REP_RECORDS). Coapare 
to A?0460M. 

test loop overhead for testsi AFD4801.AFD4802.AFD4803. 
The overhead includes all stateaents that are not part 
of the test but only used to construct it. 

100 stateaents dynamically allocating/initializing a 
record object!type RECORDS) and assigning the access 
value for it to an access variable whose type is 
locally defined The storage_size attribute for the 

access type is determined by the caapilor and placed in 
run statistic 12. 

test AFD4801 plus 100 stateaents te use unchecked 
storage deallocation te raclaia previously allocated 
storage. Coapare to AFD4801. 

saae test as AFD4802 except the storage size attribute 
of the access type used is set by the test program to 
an implementation dependent value. 

l0 integer assignments. The tost assigns a scalar 

variable to a scalar variable. 

10 integer assignments. A scalar constant is assigned 
to a scalar variable. 

10 float assignments. The test assigns a scalar 
variable to a scalar variable. 

10 float assignments. A scalar constant is assigned to 
a scalar variable. 

10 boolean assignments. The test assigns a scalar 

variable to a scalar variable. 

10 boolean assignments. A scalar constant is assigned 
te a scalar variable. 

10 relational * assignments using scalar integer 

operands with the result being true. 

10 relational * assignments using scalar integer 

eperands with the result being false. 

10 assignments statements ef the farm x i* not y where x» 


F-10 










Table F-l ACPS Tact Descriptions (continued) 


IKT WAflE 

AF05209 

AF0520A 

AF0520B 

AFD520C 

AFD520D 

AFD520E 

AFD520F 

AFD520G 

AFD520H 

AFD5201 

AFD520J 

AFD520K* 

AFD520LK 

AF0520H 

AFD520N 

AF05200 

AFD520P 

AFD520Q 

AF0520R 

AF0520S 

AF05210 

AF05211 

AF05212 

AF05215 

AF05214 

AF05215 

AFD5218 

AFD5219 


VERSIONS 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 


DESCRIPTION 

y are scalar variables. 

10 logical AND assignaent stateaents using scalar 
boolean operands. 

10 logical OR assignaent stateaents using scalar beolean 
operands. 

10 fixed point assignaents. The test assigns a scalar 
variable to a sealer variable. 

10 short_short_integer assignaents. The test assigns a 
scalar variable to a scalar variable. 

10 short_short_integer assignments. The test assigns a 
scalar constant to a scalar variable. 

10 short integer assignaents. The test assigns a scalar 
variable to another sceler verieble. 

10 short integer assignaents. The test assigns a scalar 
constant to a acalar variable. 

10 long_float assignaents. The test assigns a scalar 
variable to a scalar variable. 

10 long_float assignaents. The test assigns a scalar 
constant to a scalar variable. 

10 long_longfloat assignaents. The test assigns a 
scalar variable to a acalar variable. 

long_long float assignaents. The test assigns a scalar 
constant to a scalar variable. 

10 d float assignaents. The test assigns a scalar 
variable to a scalar variable. 

10 d.float assignments. The test assigns a scalar 
constant to a scalar variable. 

10 enumeration assignments. The test assigns a scalar 
variable to a acalar variable. 

10 enumeration assignments. The test assigns a scalar 
variable to a scalar variable. The variables are of 
type REP.N0NTHS. Compare to AF0520M. 

10 record assignments. The test assigns a record object 
to a record object. 

10 racord assignments. The test assigns a packed record 
object to a pecked record object. The record objects 
are of typo PACRED.RECORDS. Compare to AF05200. 

10 record assignments. The test assigns a packed record 
object to a packed record object. The record objects 
are of typo REP.RECORDS. Compare to AF05200.AFD520P. 

10 record access variable assignments of the form: 

TMPPPi i* THPPPjj. 

10 record access variable assignaents of the form: 

TMPPPi.All «« TMPPPj.AlL;. 

10 integer array assignments with the subscript a 

variable. A constant is assigned to an array olement. 

10 integer array assignments with the subscript e 

constant. A constant is assigned to an array element. 

10 float array assignments with the subscript a 
variable. A scalar variable is assigned to an array 

elament. 

10 float array assignments with the subscript a 
constant. A scalar variable is assigned to an array 

element. 

10 boolean array assignments with the subscript e 
variable. A scalar variable is assigned to an array 

element. 

10 boolean array assignments with the subscript a 
constant. A scalar variable is assigned to an array 

element. 

10 short_short_integer array assignments with the 

subscript a scalar variable. A scalar variable is 
assigned to an array element. 

10 short_short_integer array assignments with the 

subscript a seetar constant. A scalar variable is 


F-ll 





IE5L-MABE 

AFD521A 

AFD521B 

AFD521C 

AFD521D 

AF0521E 

AFD521F 

AF0521H 

AF0521I 

AF0521J 

AF0521K 

AFD521K 

AF0521L 

AFD521M 

AF0521N 

AFD5210 

AF0521P 

AF05S00 

AF05301,S 

AF05302.S 

AF05303.S 

AF05305 

AF05306.S 
AF05307 #S 
AF05400 

AF05401»S 


Table F~1 ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


versions 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S'T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T J/F 
C/E/Vf/J/F 
C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 


DESCRIPTION 

assionad to an array alaaant. 

10 short_integer array assignaants with the subscript a 
scalar variable. A scalar variable is assigned to an 

array alaaant. 

10 shert.intager array assignaants with the subscript a 
scalar constant. A scalar variable is sssignad to an 

array alaaant. 

10 long_float array assignaants with tha subscript a 
scalar variable. A scalar variable is assigned to an 

array alaaant. 

10 long_float array assignaants with tha subscript a 
scalar constant. A scalar variable is sssignad to an 

array alaaant. 

10 long_long_float array assignaants with tha subscript 
a scalar variable. A scalar variable is assigned to an 
array alaaant. 

10 long_long.float array assignaants with tha subscript 
a scalar constant. A scalar variable is assigned to an 
array alaaant. 

5 2-diaensional integer array assignaants with tha 

subscript a variable. A scalar variable is assigned to 
sn array aleiaent. 

5 3-dimensional integer array assignaants with tha 

subscript a variable. A scalar variable is assigned to 
an array alaaant. 

10 integer array assignaants with tha subscript a 
variable typed with the range tha saae as tha 
diaensions (coapare to AF05210). A constant is assigned 
to an array alaaant. 

5 2-diaansional integer array assignaants with tha 

subscript variables typed with ranges the saaa as the 
diaension (coapare to AF0521H). A constant is assigned 
to an array alaaant. 

10 packed boolean array assignaants with tha subscript a 
variable. Coapare to AF05214. 

10 character array assignaants with tha subscript a 
variable(TMPCSHTHPISi) «« TNPCS4(j);). 

10 packed character array assignaants with the subscript 
a variable(TMPCP2(TMP2Si) »■ TMPCP4(j)/). Coapare to 

AF0521L. 

10 record array assignaents with tha subscript a 
variable(THPRAS(TMPISi) •« THPRCjj). 

10 packed reeord(type PACKED RECORDS) array assignments 
with tha subscript a variableTTMPRAP(TNPlSi) TMPRPj;) 
. Coapare to AF0S21N. 

10 packed rocord(type REP RECORDS) array assignaants 
with the subscript a variabTe(THPRAR(THPISi) «* THPRRj;) 
. Coapare to AFD5210. 

test loop overhead for testsi AF05301 AF05302 AF05303. 
The overhead includes sll stataaents that are not part 
af tha test but only used to construct it. 

10 IF stataaents with no else part. The if condition 
fails. 

10 nested IF stataaents. Tha if condition fails. 

1 IF and 9 ELS2F stataaents. The if condition fails, 
test loop overhead for testsi AF05306 AF05307. Tha 

overhead includes all stataaents that are not part of 
the test but only used to construct it. 

10 IF stataaents with the then part executed. 

10 IF stataaents with the else part executed, 
test loop overhead for testsi AF05401 AF0S402 AF05403 
AF05404 AF05405 AF05406 AF05407. The overhead includes 

stataaents that are net part sf tha test but only used 
to construct it. 

1 case stataaant with 10 alternatives in increasing 


F-12 





Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continuod) 


mi NAflE 

AF05402.S 

AF05403.S 

AF05404.S 

AF05405.S 

AF05406.S 

AF05407.S 
AF05501 

AF05502.S 

AF05503.S 

AF05504.S 

AF05506 

AF05507.S 
AF05508.S 
AF05509 f S 
AF0550A.S 

AF0550B.S 

AF0550D 

AF0550E 

AF0550F 

AF06001 

AF06009 

AF06010 

AF06011 

AF06013 

AF06014,S 

AF06015.S 

AF06016.S 


VERSIONS 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 


PE5CRIPTIQN 

sequential numerical order. The lost alternative is 

executed. 

1 case stateaent with 10 alternatives in decreasing 
sequential nuaerical order. The last alternative is 

executed. 

1 case stateaent with 10 alternatives in increasing 

sequential nuaarical order. The (others) alternative 

is executed. 

1 case stateaent with 10 alternatives increasing by 2 
The last alternative is executed. 

1 case stateaent with 10 alternatives with large 

non-contiguous ranges. The last alternative is 

executed. 

1 case stateaent with 10 alternatives with large 

non-contiguous ranges. The (ethers) alternative is 

executed. 

1 case stateaent with 10 alternatives with large 

contiguous ranges. The last alternative is executed, 
test loop overhead for tests* AF05502 AF05503 AF05504 
AF05505 AF05506 AF05507 AF05508 AF05509 AF0550a 

AF0550b. The overhead includes all stateaents that are 
not part of the loop control stateaent. 

10 0-iteration FOR leopsdoop control *> for i in 

1.. tapisO). 

10 0-iteration FOR loops in reverse order( loop control 
•>for i in reverse 1..tapisO). 

10 0-iteration while leopsdoop control*> while tapisx 
<* tapisO). 

test loop overhead for tests* AF05507 AF05S08 AF05509 
AF05S0A AF0550B. The overhead includes all stateaents 
that are not part of tha loop control stateaent. 

10 1-iteration FOR leopsdoop control *> for i in 

1.. tapisl). 

10 1-iteration FOR loops in reverse orderdoop control 
*> for i in reverse 1..tapisl). 

5 2-level 1-iteration nested FOR leopsdoop control *> 
for i in 1..tapisl). 

5 2-level 1-iteratien nested FOR loops with loop control 
variable referenced but not useddeop control *> for i 
in 1..tapisl). 

1 10 level nested loop with 1 iteration per loop, 
references to a 1-diaensional array within a FOR loop 
using the loop iterative as array index(tapial(i) 
i*tapial(i+l)). 

references te e 2-diaensional (3.3) array within a 

2- level nested FOR leop using the loop iteratives as 
array indices (tapia2(i«J)*>tapie2(j.i)). 

references te e 3-diaensional (3.3.3) array within a 

3- level nested FOR leop using the loop iteretives as 

array indices (tapia3(i»i.fc)*«tapia3(k.i.i>). 
invocation of a local procadure with no argunents. 
invocation of a local procedure with 1 scalar integer 

input arguaent. 

invocation of a local procedure with 1 scalar integer 

output arguaent. 

invocation of a local procedure with 1 scalar integer 

input/output arguaent. 

loop overhead for subsequent tests fer local procedure 
calls with IP scalar integer argunents. which are tests 
AF06014 AF06015 AF06016. 

invocation of a local procedure with 10 scalar integer 
input argunents. 

invocation of a local procedure with IP scalar integer 
output argunents. 

invocation of a local procedure with 10 scalar integer 


F-13 





Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


TEST NAME VERSIONS DESCRIPTION 

input/output arguments. 

AF06017 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in a loeal procedure to 10 scalar integer 

input arguments with references to the arguments in 10 
statements of the form THPISi «* ARCi. 

AF06018 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in a local procedure to 10 scalar integer 

output arguments with references to the arguments in 10 
statements of the form ARGi i* THPISi. 

AF06019 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in a local procedure to 10 scalar integer 

input/output arguments with references to the arguments 
in 10 statements of the form ARGi i* ARGi. 

AF06023 C/E/S/T/J/F loop overhead for subsequent tests for local procedure 

calls to procedures declared with 10 constrained 

1-dimensional integer array arguments* which are tests 
AF06024 AF06025 AF06026 AF06027 AF06028 AF06029 AF06030 

AF06031 AF06032 . The overhead includes all statements( 

including the invocation of a 0 argument local 
procedure) that are not part of the test but only used 
to construct it. 

AF06024*S C/E/S/T/J/F invocation of a local procedure with 10 constrained 

1-dimensional integer array input arguments. 

AF06025*S C/E/S/T/J/F invocation of a local procedure with 10 constrained 

1-dimensional integer array output arguments. 

AF06028«S C/E/S/T/J/F invocation of a loeal procedure with 10 constrained 

1- dimensional integer array input/output arguments. 

AF06027*S C/E/S/T/J/F invocation of a local procedure with 10 constrained 

2- dimensional integer array input arguments. 

AF06028.S C/E/S/T/J/F invocation of a local procedure with 10 constrained 

2-dimensional integer array output arguments. 

AF06029*S C/E/S/T/J/F invocation of a local procedure with 10 constrained 

2- dimensional integer array input/output arguments. 

AF06030.S C/E/S/T/J/F invocation of a loeal procedure with 10 constrained 

3- dimensional integer array input arguments. 

AF06031*S C/E/S/T/J/F invocation of a local procedure with 10 constrained 

3-dimensional integer array output arguments. 

AF06032*S C/E/S/T/J/F invocation of a local procedure with 10 constrained 

3-dimensional integer array input/output arguments. 
AFQ6043 C/E/S/T/J/F loop overhead for subsequent tests for local procedure 

calls declared with 10 unconstrained integer array 
arguments* which are tests AF06044 AF06045 AF06046 

AF06047 AF06048 AF06049 AF06050 AF06051 AF06052 . The 

overhead includes all statements (including the 
invocation of a 0 argument local procedure) that are 
not part of the test but only used to construct it. 
AF06044*S C/E/S/T/J/F invocation of a local procedure with 10 constrained 

1-dimensional integer array input arguments. 

AF06045*S C/E/S/T/J/F invocation of a local procedure with 10 constrained 

1-dimensional integer array output arguments. 

AF06046.S C/E/S/T/J/F invocation of a local procedure with 10 constrained 

1- dimensional integer array input/output arguments. 

AF06047.S C/E/S/T/J/F invocation of a local procedure with 10 constrained 

2- dimensional integer array input arguments. 

AFQ6048*S C/E/S/T/J/F invocation of a local procedure with 10 constrained 

2-dimensional integer array output arguments. 

AF06049.S C/E/S/T/J/F invocation of a local procedure with 10 constrained 

2- dimensional integer array input/eutput arguments. 

AF04050.S C/E/S/T/J/F invocation of a local procedure with 10 constrained 

3- dimensional integer array input arguments. 

AF06051*S C/E/S/T/J/F invocation of a local procedure with 10 constrained 

3-dimensional integer array eutput argumenta. 

AF06052.S C/E/S/T/J/F invocation of a local procedure with 10 constrained 

3-dimensional integer array input/output arguments. 
AF06060 C/E/S/T/J/F treference in a local procedure declared with 10 

constrained 1-dimensional integer array input arguments 
to an argument in 10 statements of the form THPISi «* 

0 run statistic 02 * size of return statement code 


F-14 












Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


IEST NAME VERSIONS description 

ARG(THPISj). 

AF06061 C/E/S/T/J/F (r«f*r«nei in • local procedure declared with 10 

constrained 1-dimensional integer array output 

arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 
ARG(TMPISi) »■ constant (compare to AF05210). 

AF06062 C/E/S/T/J/F •reference in a local procedure declared with 10 

constrained 1-damonsional integer array input/output 

arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 

ARG(TMPISi) i* ARG(TMPISj). 

AF06063 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in s local procedure declared with 10 

constrained 2-dimensional integer array input arguments 

to an argument in 10 statements of the form TMPISi i* 

ARG(TMPISj,TMPISj). 

AF06064 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in a local procedure declared with 10 

constrained 2-dimensional integer array output 

arguments to an argument in 5 statements of the form 

ARG(TMPISi,TMPISi) •> constant (compare to AF0521H). 

AF06065 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in a local procedure declared with 10 

constrained 2-diaansional integer array input/output 

arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 
ARGCTMPISi.TMPISi) •* ARGCTMPISj.TMPISj). 

AF06066 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in a local procedure declared with 10 

constrained 3-dimensional integer array input arguments 

to an argument in 10 statements of the fora TMPISi «* 

ARG(TMPISi,TMPISj.TMPISj). 

AF06067 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in a local procedure declared with 10 

constrained 3-dimensional integer array output 

arguments to an argument in 5 statements of the form 

ARGCTMPISi.TMPISi,TMPISi) i* constant (compare to 
AF0521I). 

AF0606S C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in' a local procedure declared with 10 

constrained 3-diaensional integer array input/output 

arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 
ARG(TMPISi.TMPISi,TMPISi) .* ARG(TMPISi,TMPISj,TMPISj). 

AF06070 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in a local procedure declared with 10 

unconstrained 1-dimensional integer array input 

arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 

TMPISi •> ARGCTMPISj). 

AF06071 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in a local procedure declared with 10 

unconstrained 1-dimensienal integer array output 

arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 

ARG(TMPISi) to constant (compare to AF05210). 

AF06072 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in a local procedure declared with 10 

unconstrained 1-dimensional integer array input/output 

arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 

ARG(TMPISi) »« ARGCTMPISj). 

AF06073 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in a local procedure declared with 10 

unconstrained 2-dime national integer array input 

arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 
TMPISi •« ARGCTMPISj,TMPISj). 

AF06074 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in a local procedure declared with 10 

unconstrained 2-dimensional integer array output 

arguments to an argument in 5 statements of the form 
ARG(TMPISi,TMPISi) »■ constant (compare to AF0521H). 

AF06075 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in a local procedure declared with 10 

unconstrained 2-dimamaional integer array input/output 

arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 
ARG(TMPISi.TMPISi) «• ARGCTMPISj.TMPISj). 

AF06076 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in a local procedure declared with 10 

unconstrained 3-dimensional integer array input 

arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 
TMPISi t* ARGC TMPISj,TMPISj.TMPISj). 

AF06077 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in a local procedure declared with 10 

unconstrained Jndisansional integer array output 

P run statistic <2 * size of return statement code 





Table F-l ACPS Tast Descriptions (continued) 


TEST name versions description 

arguments to an argument in 5 statements of the form 
ARG(TMPISi*TMPISi*TMPISi) »« constant (compare to 

AF0521I). 

AF06078 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in a loeal procedure declared with 10 

unconstrained 3-dimensional integer array input/output 
arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 
ARG(TMPISi,TMPISi,TMPISi) .« ARG(TMPISj *TMPISi,TMPISi). 

AF06101 C/E/S/T/J/F external procedure call with 0 arguments. . 

AF06109 C/E/S/T/J/F external procedure call with 1 scalar integer input 

argument. 

AF06110 C/E/S/T/J/F external procedure call with 1 scalar integer output 

argument. 

AF06111 C/E/S/T/J/F external procedure call with 1 scalar integer 

input/output argument. 

AF06113 C/E/S/T/J/F loop overhead for subsequent tests for external 

procedure calls of procedures declared with 10 scalar 
integer arguments* which are tests AF06114 AF06115 

AF06116 The overhead includes all statements! 
including the invocation of a 0 argument external 
procedure) that are not part of the test but only used 
to construct it. 

AF06114.S C/E/S/T/J/F call of an external procedure with 10 integer input 

arguments. 

AF06115*S C/E/S/T/J/F call of an external procedure with 10 integer output 

' arguments. 

AF06116.S C/E/S/T/J/F cell of an external procedure with 10 integer 

input/output arguments. 

AF06117 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in an external procedure to 10 scalar integer 

input arguments with references to the arguments in 10 
statements of the form TMPISi »« ARGi. 

AF06118 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in an axternal procedure to 10 scalar integer 

output arguments with references to the arguments in 10 
statements of the form ARGi >* TMPISi. 

AF06119 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in an external procedure to 10 scalar integer 

input/output arguments with references to tMe arguments 
in 10 statements of the form ARGi i* ARGi. 

AF06133 C/E/S/T/J/F loop overhead for subsequent tests for axternal 

procedure calls of procedures declared with 10 
constrained 1-dimensional integer array arguments* 
which are tests AF06134 AF06135 AF06136 . The overhead 
includes all statements (including the invocation of a 
0 argument external procedure) that are not pert of the 
test but only used to construct it. 

AF06134*S C/E/S/T/J/F call of an external procedure with 10 constrained 

1-dimensional integer array input arguments. 

AF06135«S C/E/S/T/J/F call of an external procedure with 10 constrained 

1-dimensional integer array output arguments. 

AF06136*S C/E/S/T/J/F call of an external procedure with 10 constrained 

1-dimensional integer array input/output arguments. 

AF06137 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in an external procedure declared with 10 

constrained 1-dimensional integer array input arguments 
to an argument in 10 statements of the form TMPISi i* 
ARG(TMPISi). 

AF06138 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in an external procedure declared with 10 

constrained 1-diaensienal integer array output 
arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 
ARG(TMPlSi) •• constant (compare to AF05210). 

AF06139 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in an axternal procedure declared with 10 

constrained 1-dimensional integer array input/output 
arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 

ARG(TMPISi) «■ ARG(TMPlSj). 

AF06143 C/E/S/T/J/F loop overhead for subsequent tests for external 

procedure calls ef procedures declared with 10 
constrained 2-dimensional array arguments* which ere 

P run statistic P2 * size of return statement code 






Table F-l ACPS Test Daseriptiens (continued) 


TEST name versiphs description 

tests AF06144 AF06145 AF06146 . The overhead includes 

all statements (including tha invocation of a 0 
argument external procedure) that ara not part of the 
test but only used to construct it. 

AF06144.S C/E/S/T/J/F call of an external procedure with 10 constrained 

2-dimensional integer array input arguments. 

AF06145.S C/E/S/T/J/F call of an external procedure with 10 constrained 

2-dimensional integer array output arguments. 

AF06146.S C/E/S/T/J/F call of an external procedure with 10 constrained 

2- dimensional integer array input/output arguments. 

AF06147 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in an external procedure declared with 10 

constrained 2-dimensional integer array input arguments 

to an argument in 10 statements of the form THPISi «* 

ARGCTHPISi.THPISi). 

AF06148 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in an external procedure declared with 10 

constrained 2-diaansional integer array output 

arguments to an argument in 5 statements of the form 
ARGCTHPISi.THPISi) «* constant (compare to AF0521H). 

AF06149 C/E/S/T/J/F Preferanea in an gxternal procedure declared with 10 

constrained 2-diaensional integer array input/output 

arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 

ARGCTMPXSi.THPISi) .« ARGCTHPISi.THPISi). 

AF06155 C/E/S/T/J/F loop overhead far subsequent tests for external 

procedure calls of procedures declared with 10 
constrained 3-dimensional integer array arguments, 

which are tests AF06154 AF06155 AF06156 . The overhead 
includes all statements (including the invocation of a 
0 argument external procedure) that are not part of the 
test but only used to construct it. 

AF06154.S C/E/S/T/J/F call of an external procedure with 10 constrained 

3- dimansional integer array input arguments. 

AF06155.S C/E/S/T/J/F call of an external procedure with 10 constrained 

3-dimensional integer array output arguments. 

AF06156.S C/E/S/T/J/F call of an external procedure with 10 constrained 

3-dimansional integer array input/output arguments. 

AF06157 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in an external procedure with 10 constrained 

3-dimensional integer array input arguments to an 
argument in 10 statements of the fora THPISi i B ARG( 
THPISi.THPISj.THPISi). 

AF06158 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in an external procedure with 10 constrained 

3-dimensional integer array output arguments to an 
argument in 5 statements of the form ARGCTHPISi.THPISi» 
THPISi) i* constant (compare to AF0521I). 

AF06159 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in an external procedure with 10 constreined 

3-dimensional integer array input/output arguments to 
an argument in 10 stetements of the fora ARGCTHPISi. 
THPISi.THPISi) i> ARGCTHPISi.THPISi.THPISi). 

AF06163 C/E/S/T/J/F loop overhead for subsequent tests for external 

procedure calls of procedures declared with 10 
unconstrained 1-dimensional integer array arguments, 
which are tests AF06164 AF06165 AF06166 . The overhead 
includes all statements (including the invocation of a 

0 argument external procedure) that ara not part of the 
test but only used to construct it. 

AF06164.S C/E/S/T/J/F call of an external procedure with 10 constrained 

1-dimensional integer array input arguments. 

AF06165.S C/E/S/T/J/F call of an oxternal procedure with 10 constrained 

1-dimensional integer array output arguments. 

AF06166.S C/E/S/T/J/F call of an external procedure with 10 constreined 

1-dimensional integer array input/output arguments. 

AF06167 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in an external procedure declared with 10 

unconstrained 1-dimensional integer array input 
arguments to sn argument in 10 statements of the form 
THPISi ARGCTHPISi). 

P run statistic 02 * size of return statement code 


F-17 








Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


IB 5L JMHE VERSIONS PESCRIP-TION 

AF06168 C/E/S/T/J/F freference in an external procedure declared with 10 

unconstrained 1-dimensional integer array output 

arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 
ARG(THPlSi) i* constant (compare to AF05210). 

AF06169 C/E/S/T/J/F Preference in an external procedure declared with 10 

unconstrained 1-dimensional integer array input/output 

arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 
ARG(THPISi) •* ARG(THPISj). 

AF06173 C/E/S/T/J/F loop overhead for subsequent tests for external 

proeidure calls of procedures declared with 10 
unconstrained 2-dimensional integer array arguments* 

which are tests AF06174 AF06175 AF06176 . The overhead 
includes all statements (including the invocation of a 
0 argument external procedure) that are not part of the 
test but only used to construct it. 

AF06174*S C/E/S/T/J/F call of an external procedure with 10 constrained 

2-dimensional integer array input arguments. 

AF06175*S C/E/S/T/J/F call of an external procedure with 10 constrained 

2-dimensional integer array output arguments. 

AF06176*S C/E/S/T/J/F call of an external procedure with 10 constrained 

2- dimensional integer array input/output arguments. 

AF06177 C/E/S/T/J/F freference in an axternal procedure declared with 10 

unconstrained 2-dimensional integer array input 

arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the fora 

THPISi i« ARG(THPISj,THPISj>. 

AF06178 C/E/S/T/J/F freference in an axtarnal procedure declared with 10 

unconstrained 2-dimensional integer array output 

arguments to an argument in 5 statements of the form 
ARG(THPISi#THPlSi) »« constant (compare to AF0521H). 

AF06179 C/E/S/T/J/F freference in an axternal proeedura declared with 10 

unconstrained 2-dimansional integer array input/output 

arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 
ARG(THPISi.THPlSi) .■ ARG(THPISi.THPISj). 

AF06183 0/£/S/T/J/F loop overhead for subsequent tests for external 

procedure calls of procedures declared with 10 
unconstrained 3-dimensional integer array arguments* 

which are tests AF06184 AF06185 AF06186 . The overhead 
includes all statements (including the invocation of a 
0 argument axternal procedure) that are not part of the 
test but only used to construct it. 

AF06184*S C/E/S/T/J/F call of an axternal procedure with 10 constrained 

3- dimensional integer array input arguments. 

AF06185*S C/E/S/T/J/F call of an external procedure with 10 constrained 

3-dimensienal integer array output arguments. 

AF06186.S C/E/S/T/J/F call ef an external procedure with 10 constrained 

3-dimensional integer array input/output arguments. 

AF06187 C/E/S/T/J/F freference in an axternal proeedura declared with 10 

unconstrained 3-dimensienal integer array input 

arguments to an argument in 10 statements ef the form 
THPISi .« ARG(THPI5j *THPISj*THPISi). 

AF06188 C/E/S/T/J/F freference in an axternal procedure declared with 10 

unconstrained 3-dimensional integer array output 

arguments to an argument in 5 statements of the form 
ARG(THPISi *THPISi *THP1Si) •• constant (compare to 

AF0521I). 

AF06189 C/E/S/T/J/F freference in an axternal procedure declared with 10 

unconstrained 5-dimensional integer array input/output 

arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 
ARG(THPlSi,THPI5i*THPISi) »« ARG(THPlSj.THPlSj,THPISj). 

AF06192 C/E/5/T/J loop overhead for subsequent tests for axternal 

proeadure calls of procedures declared with 10 
enumeration arguments* which are tests AF06195 AF06194 
AF06195. The overhead includes all atatements( 

including the invocation ef a 0 argument external 

f run statistic 82 * sixa ef return statement cede 


F-18 





Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


IEST NAME 

AF06195,S 

AF06194,S 

AF06195,S 

AF06196 

AF06197 

AF06198 

AF0619B 


AF0619C,S 
AF0619D,S 
AF0619E,S 
AF0619F 

AF0619G 

AF0619H 

AF0619K 


AF0619L »S 
AF0619M.S 
AF0619N.S 
AF06190 

AF0619P 

AF06190 

AFD6201 

AFD6209 


VERSIONS 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 


C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 


C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 


PEscmmjm 

procedure) that ere not part of the test but only used 
to construct it. 

cell of an external procedure with 10 enuaeration input 
arguments. 

call of an external procedure with 10 enuaeration output 
arguments. 

call of an external procedure with 10 enuaeration 
input/output erguaents. 

reference in an external procedure to 10 enumeration 

input arguments with references to the aguments in 10 
statements of the fora THPESi «* ARGi. 

reference in an external procedure to 10 enumeration 

output arguments with references to the arguments in 10 
statements of the form ARGi i* THPESi. 

reference in an external procedure to 10 enumeration 

input/output arguments with references to the arguments 
in 10 statements of the fora ARGi i* ARGj. 
loop overhead for subsequent tests for external 
procedure calls of procedures declared with 10 
unconstrained variant record arguments* which ere tests 
AF0619C AF0619D AF0619E. The overhead includes all 

statements (including the invocation of a 0 argument 
external procedure) that are not part of the test but 
only used to construct it. 

call of an external procedure with 10 unconstrained 

variant record input arguments. 

call of an external procedure with 10 unconstrained 

variant record output arguments. 

call of an external procedure with 10 unconstrained 

variant record input/eutput arguments. 

reference in an external procedure to 10 unconstrained 
variant reeord input arguments with references to the 
arguments in 10 statements of the form THPVSi i* ARGi. 
reference in an external procedure to 10 unconstrained 
variant reeord output arguments with references to the 
arguments in 10 statements of the form ARGi »* THPVSi. 
reference in an external procedure to 10 unconstrained 
variant record input/output arguments with references 
to the arguments in 10 statements of the fora ARGi • * 
ARGj. 

loop overhead for subsequent tests for external 
procedure calls of procedures declared with 10 record 
access arguments(type RECORDPOINTER ), which are tests 
AF0619L AF0619M AF0619N. The overhead includes all 

statements (including the invocation of a 0 argument 
external procedure) that are not part of the test but 
only used to construct it. 

call of an external procedure with 10 record access 

input arguments. 

call of an external procedure with 10 record access 

output arguments. 

cell of an external procedure with 10 record access 

input/output arguments. 

reference in an external procedure to 10 record access 
input arguments with references to the arguments in 10 
statements of the fora THPPPi i« ARGi. 

reference in an external procedure to 10 record access 
eutput arguments with references to the arguments in 10 
statements of the fora ARGi «* THPPPi. 

reference in an external procedure to 10 record access 

input/output arguments with references to the arguments 

in 10 statements of the form ARGi • * ARGj. 

call of a local pragma inline procedure with no 

arguments. 

call ef a local pragma inline procedure with 1 integer 


F-19 




Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


TEST name versions DESCRIPTION 

input argument. 

AFD6210 C/E/S/T/J call of a local pragma inline procedure with 1 integer 

output argument. 

AFD6211 C/E/S/T/J call of a local pragma inline procedure with 1 integer 

input/output argument. 

AFD6213 C/E/S/T/J loop overhead for subsequent tests for pragma inline 

procedure calls ef procedures declared with 10 scalar 
integer arguments* which are tests AFD6214 AFD6215 
AFD6216 The overhead includes all statementsC 
including the invocation of a 0 argument local pragma 
inline procedure) that are not part of the test but 
only used to construct it. 

AFD6214,S C/E/S/T/J call of a local pragma inline procedure with 10 integer 

input arguments. 

AFD6215*S C/E/S/T/J call of a local pragma inline procedure with 10 integer 

output arguments. 

AFD6216*S C/E/S/T/J call of a local pragma inline procedure with 10 integer 

input/output arguments. 

AFD6217 C/E/S/T/J treferenca in a local pragma inline procedure to 10 

integer input arguments with references to the 
arguments in 10 statements of the form THPISi i* ARGi. 

AFD6218 C/E/S/T/J •reference in a local pragma inline procedure to 10 

integer output arguments with references to the 
arguments in 10 statements of the form ARGi • * THPISi. 

AFD6219 C/E/S/T/J Preference in a local pragma inline procedure to 10 

integer input/output arguments with references to the 
arguments in 10 statements of the form ARGi i* ARGi. 

AFD6223 C/E/S/T/J loop overhead for subsequent tests for local pragma 

inline procedure calls of procedures declared with 10 
constrained integer array arguments* which are tests 
AFD6224 AFD6225 AFD6226 AFD6227 AFD6228 AFD6229 AFD6230 

AFD6231 AFD6232 . The overhead includes all statementsC 

including the invocation of a 0 argument local pragma 
inline procedure) that are not part of the test but 
only used to construct it. 

AFD6224.S C/E/S/T/J invocation of a local pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 1-dimensional integer array input arguments. 

AFD6225.S C/E/S/T/J invocation of a local pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 1-dimensional integer array output 

arguments. 

AFD6226*S C/E/S/T/J invocation of a local pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 1-diaensional integer array input/output 

arguments. 

AFD6227*S C/E/S/T/J invocation ef a local pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 2-dimensional integer array input arguments. 

AFD6228.S C/E/S/T/J invocation ef a local pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 2-dimensional integer array output 

arguments. 

AFD6229*S C/E/S/T/J invocation ef a local pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 2-dimensional integer array input/output 

arguments. 

AFD6230.S C/E/S/T/J - invocation ef a local pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 3-dimensional integer array input arguments. 

AFD6231«S C/E/S/T/J invocation of a local pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 3-diaensional integer array output 

arguments. 

AFD6232»S C/E/S/T/J invocation of a local pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 3-diaensional integer array input/output 

arguments. 

AFD6243 C/E/S/T/J loop overhead for subsequent tests for local pragma 

inline procedure cells of procedures declorod with 10 
unconstreined integer array arguments* which sre tests 
AFD6244 AFD6245 AFD6246 AFW247 AFD6248 AFD6249 AFD6250 

AFD6251 AFD6252 . The overhead includes all statements( 

8 run statistic 82 * size of return statement code 


F-20 


I 










Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


test name VERSIP.MS BESCRIEIlflN 

including the invocation of a 0 argument local pragma 
inline procedure) that are not part of the test but 
only used to construct it. 

AFD6244»S C/E/S/T/J invocation of a local pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 1-diaensional integer array input arguments. 

AFD6245.S C/E/S/T/J invocation of a local pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 1-dimensional integer array output 

arguments. 

AFD6246,S C/E/S/T/J invocation of a local pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 1-dimensional intagar array input/output 

arguments. 

AFD6247»S C/E/S/T/J invocation of a local pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 2-dimensional integer array input arguments. 

AFD6248»S C/E/S/T/J invocation of a local pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 2-dimensional integer array output 

arguments. 

AFD6249.S C/E/S/T/J invocation of a local pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 2-dimensional integer array input/output 

arguments. 

AFD6250.S C/E/S/T/J invocation of a local pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained S-dimansional integer array input arguments. 

AFD6251»S C/E/S/T/J invocation of a local pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 3-dimensional integer array output 

arguments. 

AFD6252*S C/E/S/T/J invocati n of a local pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 3-dimensional integer array input/output 

arguments. 

AFD6260 C/E/S/T Preference in a local pragma inline procedure declared 

with 10 constrained 1-dimensional integer array input 
arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 
THPISi »* ARG(THPXSi). 

AFD6261 C/E/S/T Preference in a local pragma inline procedure declared 

with 10 constrained 1-dimensional integer array output 
arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 
ARG(THPISi) i* constant (compare to AF05210). 

AFD6262 C/E/S/T Preference in a local pragma inline procedure declared 

with 10 constrained 1-dimensional integer array 
input/output arguments to an argument in 10 statements 
ov the form ARG(THPISi) «« ARG(THPISj). 

AFD6263 C/E/S/T Preference in a local pragma inline procedure declared 

with 10 constrained 2-dimensional integer array input 
arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 
THPISi «« ARGCTHPISj *THPISj). 

AFD6264 C/E/S/T Preference in a local pragma inline procedure declared 

with 10 constrained 2-dimensional integer array output 
arguments to an argument in 5 statements of the form 
ARGCTHPISi,THPISi) •* constant (compare to AF0S21H). 

AFD6265 C/E/S/T Preference in a local pragma inline procedure declared 

with 10 constrained 2-dimensional integer array 
input/output arguments to an argument in 10 statements 
of the form ARG(THPISi.THPISi) •« ARGCTHPISj.THPISj). 

AFD6266 C/E/S/T Preference in a local pragma inline procedure declared 

with 10 constrained 3-dimensional integer array input 
'arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 
THPISi •* ARGCTHPISj,THPISj,THPISj). 

AFD6267 C/E/S/T Preference in a local pragma inline procedure declared 

with 10 constrained 3-dimensional integer array output 
arguments to an argument in 5 statements of the form 
ARG(THPISi»THPXSi»THPISi) • * constant (compare to 
AF0521I). 

AFD6268 C/E/S/T Preference in a local pragma inline procedure declared 

with 10 constrained 3-dimensional integer array 
input/output arguments to an argument in 10 statements 
of the form ARG(THPISi,THPISi.THPISi) •> ARG(THPISj» 

P run statistic 82 * size of roturn statement code 


F-21 






Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continuad) 


I1S3-HAHE VESSIflHS 

AFD6270 C/E/S/T 

AFD6271 C/E/S/T 

AFD6272 C/E/S/T 

AFD6273 C/E/S/T 

AFD6274 C/E/S/T 

AFD6275 C/E/S/T 

AFD6276 C/E/S/T 

AFD6277 C/E/S/T 

AFD6278 C/E/S/T 

AFD6301 C/E/S/T 

AFD6309 C/E/S/T 

AFD6310 C/E/S/T 

AFD6311 C/E/S/T 

AFD6313 C/E/S/T 


AFD6310.S C/E/S/T 
AFD8315.S C/E/S/T 
AFD6316,S C/E/S/T 
AFD6317 C/E/S/T 

AFD6318 C/E/S/T 


DESCRIPTION 
THPISj,TMPISi>. 

Oreferonce in a leeal pragma inlina procedure declared 
with 10 unconstrained 1-dimensional integer array input 
argunants to an arguaant in 10 stataaants of tha form 
TMPISi i* ARG(TMPISj). 

Orafaranea in a local pragma inlina precadura daclarad 
with 10 uneenstrainad 1-dimensional intagar array 
output arguments to an argumant in 10 statements of tha 
form ARG(TMPlSi) »« constant (compare to AF05210). 

Orafaranea in a local pragma inlina procedure daclarad 
with 10 unconstrained 1-dimensional intagar array 
input/output arguments to an argument in 10 statements 
ef tha form ARG(THPISi) • « ARG(TMPISj). 

Orafaranea in a local pragma inlina procedure declared 
with 10 unconstrained 2-diaensienal integer array input 
arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 
TMPISi <> ARGCTMPISj.TMPISi). 

Oreferanea in a local pragma inline procedure declared 
with 10 unconstrained 2-dimensional integer array 
output arguments to an argument in 5 statements of the 
form ARGCTMPISi,TMPISi) •« constant (compara to AF0521H) 

Oreferanea in a local pragma inline procedure declared 
with 10 unconstrained 2-dimensional integer array 
input/output arguments to an argument in 10 statements 
ef the fora ARGCTMPISi,TMPISi> •> ARGtTNPISi.TMPISi). 

Oreferanea in a local pragma inline procedure declared 
with 10 unconstrained 3-diaensional integer array input 
arguments to an argument in 10 statements of the form 
TMPISi .* ARGCTMPISi,TMPISi,TMPISi). 

Oreferance in a local pragma inline procedure declared 
with 10 unconstrained 3-dimensional integer array 
output arguments to an argumant in 5 statements of the 
form ARGCTMPISi»TMPISirTHPISi> •* constant (compare to 

AF0521I). 

Oraforonce in a local pragma inlina procedure declared 
with 10 unconstrained 3-dimensional integer array 
input/output arguments to an argument in 10 statements 
of the form ARGtTMPISi.TMPISi.TMPISi) •> ARGCTMPISi, 
TMPISi'TMPISj). 

invocation ef an external pragaia inline procedure with 0 
arguments. 

invocation of an external pragma inlina procedure with 1 
scalar integer input argument. 

invocation ef an external pragaia inlina procedure with 1 
scalar integer output argument. 

invocation of an external pragma inlina procedure with 1 
scalar integer input/output argumant. 

test loop overhead for external pragma inline procedure 
calls of procaduras declared with 10 scalar integer 
arguments, which are tests AFD6319 AFD6315 AFD6316 . 

The overhead includes all statements (including the 
invocation of a 0 argument external pragma inline 
procedure) that are not part of the test but only used 
to construct it. 

invocation of an external pragaia inlina procedure with 
10 scalar integer input argunants. 

invocation of an external pragma inlina procedure with 
10 scalar intagar output arguments. 

invocation of an external pragaia inlina procedure with 
10 scalar intagar input/output arguments. 

Orafaranea in an external pragma inlina procedure to 10 
scalar intagar input arguments with rafarances to the 
arguments in 10 statements of tha form TMPISi • * ARGi. 

Orafaranea in an external pragma inlina procedure to 10 


0 run statistic 02 * size of raturn statement coda 


• i 


F-22 











Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


JEST- HAWE 

AFD6319 

AFD6333 

AFD6334.S 

AFD6335.S 

AFD6336.S 

AFD6337 

AFD6338 

AFD6339 

AFD6343 

AFD6344.S 

AFD6345.S 

AFD6346.S 

AFD6347 

AFD6348 

AFD6349 

AFD6353 


VERSIONS 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 


BESCMPTIPH 

scalar integer output arguments with rafarances to the 
arguments in 10 statements of the form ARGi »* TMPISi. 
Preference in an external pragma inline procedure to 10 
scalar integer input/output arguments with references 
to the arguments in 10 statements of the fora ARGi i* 
ARGi. 

loop overhead for subsequent tests for external pragma 
inline procedure calls of procedures declared with 10 
constrained 1-diaensional integer array arguments, 
which are tests AFD6334 AFD6335 AFD6336 . The overhead 
includes all statements (including the invocation of a 
0 argument external pragma inline procedure) that are 
not part of the test but only used to construct it. 
call of an external pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 1-dimensional integer array input arguments, 
call of an external pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 1-dimensional integer array output 
arguments. 

call of an external pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 1-dimensional integer array input/output 

arguments. 

Preference in an external pragma inline procedure 

declared with 10 constrained 1-dimensional integer 
array input arguments to an argument in 10 statements 
of the form TMPISi >> ARG(TMPISj). 

Preference in an external pragma inline procedure 

declared with II constrained 1-dimensional integer 
array output arguments to an argument in 10 statements 
of the form ARG(TMPISi) i* constant (compare to AF05210) 
Preference in an external pragma inline procedure 
declared with 10 constrained 1-dimensional integer 
array input/output arguments to an argument in 10 
statements of the fora ARG(TMPISi) ARG(TMPISj). 
loop overhead for subsequent tests for external pragma 
inline procedure calls of procedures declared with 10 
constrained 2-dimensional integer array arguments, 
which are tests AFD6344 AFD6345 AFD6346 . The overhead 
includes all statamants (including the invocation of a 
0 argument external pragma inline procedure) that are 
not part of the test but only used to construct it. 
call of an external pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 2-dimensional intagor array input arguments, 
call of an axternal pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 2-diaensional integer array output 
arguments. 

call of an external pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 2-diaensional integer array input/output 
arguments. 

Preference in an axternal pragma inline procedure with 10 
constrained 2-dimensional integer array input arguments 
to an argument in 10 statements of the form TMPISi •* 
ARG(TMPXSj.TMPlSj). 

Preference in an axternal pragma inline procedure 
declared with 10 constrained 2-diaensional integer 

array output arguments to an argument in 5 statements 
of the fora ARG(TMPXSi.TMPISi) •• constant (compare to 
AF0521H). 

Preferenca in an extarnal pragma inline procedure 
declared with 10 constrained 2-dimensional integer 

array input/output arguments to an argument in 10 
statements of the form ARG(TMPISi.TMPISi) • * ARG(TMPISj, 
TMPISj). 

loop overhead for subsequent tests for axternal pragma 
inline procedure calls of procedures declared with 10 


P run statistic 02 * size of return statement code 


F-23 



Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


TEST NAflE 

AFD6354.S 

AFD6355*S 

AFD6356.S 

AFD6357 

AFD6358 

AFD6359 

AFD6363 

AFD6364* S 
AFD6365.S 

AFD6366.S 

AFD6367 

AFD6368 

AFD6369 

AFD6373 

AFW 374,S 
AFD6375*S 


versions 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 


DESCRIPTION 

constrained 3-dimensional integer array arguments* 
which ara teats AFD6354 AFD6355 AFD6356 . The overhead 
includes all stataaants (including the invocation of a 
0 arguaant external pragma inline procedure) that ara 
not part of the test but only used to construct it. 
call of an external pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 3-dimensional integer array input arguments, 
call of an axtarnal pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 3-dimensional integer array output 
arguments. 

call of an axtarnal pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 3-dimensional integer array input/output 
arguments. 

Preference in an axtarnal pragma inline procedure 
declared with 10 constrained 3-dimansional integer 

array input arguments to an argument in 10 statements 
of the form THPISi »* ARG(THPISi,THPISi,THPISj>. 

Preference in an axtarnal pragma inline procedure 
declared with 10 constrained 3-dimensional integer 

array output arguments to an argument in 5 statements 
of the form ARG(THPlSi*THPISi*THPISi) »• constant 
compare to AF0521I). 

Praferanea in an axtarnal pragma inline procedure 
dmelmrmd with 10 constrained 3-dimensional integer 

array input/output arguments to an argument in 10 
statements of the fora ARG(THPISi*THPISi,THPISi) »« ARG( 
THPISi.THPISi,THPISi). 

loop ovarhoad for subsequent tests for external pragma 
inline procedure calls of procedures declared with 10 
unconstrained 1-dimensional integer array arguments* 
which arc tests AFD6364 AFD6365 AFD6366 . The overhead 
includes all statamants (including the invocation of a 
0 argument external pragma inline procedure) that ara 
not part of the tost but only used to construct it. 
call of an external pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 1-dimensional integer array input arguments, 
call of an external pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 1-dimensional integer array output 
arguments. 

call of an external pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 1-dioonsional integer array input/output 
arguments. 

Profaranca in an axtarnal pragma inline procedure 

declared with 10 unconstrained 1-dimensional integer 

array input arguments to an argument in 10 statamants 
of the form THPISi «• ARG(THPISi). 

Preference in an external pragma inline procedure 

declared with 10 unconstroined 1-dimensional integer 

array output arguments to an argument in 10 statements 
of the form ARG(THPISi) • « constant (compare to AF05210) 

Profaranca in an external pragma inline procedure 

declared with 10 unconstrained 1-dimensional integer 

array input/output arguments to an argument in 10 

statements of the fora ARG(THPISi) •* ARG(THPISi). 
loop overhead for subsequent tests for external pragma 
inline procedure calls of procedures declared with 10 
unconstroined 2-disansional integer array arguments* 
which are tests AFD6374 AFD6375 AFD6376 . The overhead 
includes all statements (including the invocation of a 

0 argument extornal pragma inline procedure) that are 
not part of the test but only used to construct it. 
call of an external pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 2-dimensional integer array input arguments, 
call of an oxtarnal pragma inline procedure with 10 


P run statistic 12 » sire of return statement code 


F-24 










Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


test NAME VERSIONS 

AFD6376.S C/E/S/T 

AFD6377 C/E/S/T 

AFD6378 C/E/S/T 

AFD6379 C/E/S/T 

AFD6383 C/E/S/T 

AFD6384.S C/E/S/T 

AFD6385.S C/E/S/T 

AFD6386.S C/E/S/T 

AFD6387 C/E/S/T 

AFD6388 C/E/S/T 

AFD6389 C/E/S/T 

AF06423 C/E/S/T 

AF06424.S C/E/S/T 

AF06425.S C/E/S/T 

AF06426,S C/E/S/T 

8 run statistic 82 


DESCRIPTION 

constrained 2-diaensional integer array output 
arguments. 

call of an asternal pragma inlina procedure with 10 
constrained 2-dimensional integer array input/output 
arguments. 

Preference in an external pragma inline procedure 
declared with 10 unconstrained 2-dimensional integer 

array input arguments to an argument in 10 statements 
of the form TMPISi t* ARG(TMPISj,TMPISi). 

Preference in an external pragma inline procedure 
declared with 10 unconstrained 2-dimensional integer 

array output arguments to an argument in 5 statements 
of the fora ARG(TMP2Si,TMPISi) »» constant (compare to 
AF0S21H). 

Preference in An external pragma inline procedure 
declared with 10 unconstrained 2-dimensional integer 

array input/output arguments to an argument in 10 

statements of the form ARGCTMPISi,TMPISi) •* ARGtTMPISi, 
TMPISi). 

loop overhead for subsequent tests for external pragma 
inline procedure calls of procedures with 10 
unconstrained 3-dimensional integer array arguments, 
which sre tests AFD6384 AFD6385 AFD6386 . The overhead 
includes all statements (including the invocation of a 
0 argument external pragma inline procedure) that are 
not part of the test but only used to construct it. 
call of an external pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 3-dimensional integer array input arguments, 
call of an external pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 3-dimensional integer array output 
arguments. 

call of an external pragma inline procedure with 10 

constrained 3-dimensional integer array input/output 
arguments. 

Preference in an external pragma inline procedure 
declared with 10 unconstrained 3-dimensional integer 

array input arguments to an argument in 10 statements 
of the form TMPISi •* ARG(TMPISi.TMPISi,TMPISi). 

Preference in an external pragma inline procedure 
declared with 10 unconstrained 3-dimensional integer 

array output arguments to an argument in 5 statements 
of the form ARG(TMPlSi.TMPISi.TMPISi) •> constant! 
compare to AF05212). 

Preference in an external pragma inline procedure 
declared with 10 unconstrained 3-dimensional integer 

array input/output arguments to an argument in 10 
statements of the form ARGCTMPISi,TMPISi.TMPISi) «« ARG( 
TMPISi,TMPISi,TMPISi). 

loop overhead for subsequent tests for external 
procedure calls with 10 arguments with default 
parameter values. The tests are AF04424,AF06425,AF0642P, 
AF06427, AF06428,AF06429.AF0642A. The overhead includes 

all statements (including the invocation of a 0 
argument external procedure) that are not part of the 

test but only used to construct it. 

call of an external procedure declared with 10 integer 
input arguments with default values. The procedure is 
cslled with 10 actual arguments. Compare to AF06114. 
call of an external procedure declared with 10 integer 
input arguments with default values. The procedure is 
called with 0 actual arguments. Compare to AF06114, 
AF06424. 

call of an external procedure declared with 10 
constrained 1-dimensional integer array input arguments 

* size of return statement code 


F-25 




Table F-l ACPS Test Daaeriptions (eontinuad) 


usumL 

AF06427,S 

AF06428,S 

AF06429.S 

AFD642A 

AF06802 

AF06806 

AF06808 

AF0680A 

AF0680C 


AF0680E 


AFD680G 


AFD680I 


AF06810 

AF06814 

AF06816 

AF06818 

AF06820 

AF06822 


versions 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 


C/E/S/T/J/F 
C/E/S/T/J/F 
C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 


C/E/S/T/J 


C/E/S/T/J 


C/E/S/T/J 


C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J 


PESCBIfilflN 

with dafault valuaa. Tha procedure it callad with 10 

actual arguments. Coapara to AF06154. 

call of an external procedure daclarad with 10 

constrained 1-dimensional integer array input arguments 

with default values. The procedure is called with 0 

actual arguments. Coapara to AF06134»AF06426. 

call of an external procedure declared with 10 record 

input arguments with default values. The procedure is 

called with 10 actual arguments. 

call ef an external procedure declared with 10 record 

input arguments with default values. The procedure is 
called with 0 actual arguments. Compare to AF06428. 
rafarance in an external procedure to 10 integer input 
arguments with references to tha arguments in 10 
statements ef tha fora TNPISi i* ARGi. The arguments 
ara declared with default values. The procedure is 
called with 0 arguments. Compare to AF06117. 
global scalar integer variable reference free within a 
called procaduraCcompara to AF05200). 

local scalar integer variable reference free within a 
called precadurateempara to AF06802). 

local record access variable reference from within a 
called procedure in 10 statements of the form ARGi i* 
ARGi. Tho access variable type is globally declared! 
REC0RD.P0INTER). Compare to AF0520R. 

local record access variable rafarance from within a 

called pracodure in 10 statements of tho form LOCi.all 
i> LOCi.all The access variable type is globally 
doclaredtREC0RD.P01NTER). Compare to AF0520S. 
local record access variable reference from within a 

called procedure in 10 statements ef the form LOCi •* 
LOCi Tha access type used is locally declared. The 
storage_size attribute for tho access type is 
determined by the compiler and placed in run statistic 
•2. Compare to AF06808. 

local record access variable rafarance from within a 

called procedure in 10 statements ef the form LOCi.all 
i* LOCi.all . The access type used is locally declared. 
The storage size attribute for the access type is 
determined by the compiler and placed in run statistic 
• 2 . 

local record access variable reference from within a 
called procedure in 10 statements ef the form LOCi •* 
LOCi The access type used is locally declared. The 
storage_siza attribute for the access type is set by 
the test program and placed in run statistic 82. 
Compare to AF0680C. 

local record access variable rafarance from within a 
called procedure in 10 statements ef the form LOCi.all 
i* LOCi.all . The access type used is locally declared. 
The storage size attribute for the access type is set 
by the test program and placed in run statistic 82. 
Compare to AF0680E. 

local scalar integer variable reference - 1 procedure 
level up (compare to AF06806). 

local scalar integer variable rafarance - 2 procedure 
levels up (compare to AF06806). 

local 1-dimensional array element references(compare to 
AF05210). 

local 2-dimensional array element references(compare to 
AF0521N). 

local 3-dimensional array element references(compare to 
AF0S211). 

local unconstrained variant record raforanee from within 
a called procedure in 10 statements of tho form 


F-26 






Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


TEST NAME 

AF06824 

AFN9301 

AFN9302 

AFN9303 

AF09501 

AF09502 

AF09503 

AF09504 

AF09505 

AF09506 

AF09507 

AF09508 

AF09509 

AFN9511 

AF09601 

AF09602 

AF09603 

AF09604 

AF09605 

AF09&06 

AF09607 
AFN9611 
AFN9612 


VERSIONS 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 


DESCRIPTION 

LOCi.COMP.I1 * LOCj.COMP_Xl. Compere to AF0413D. 
local constrained variant record reforonco free within a 
a called procedure in 10 steteeents of the fore 
L0Ci.C0MP.il > L0Cj.C0MP.il. Compere to AF06S22. 
declaration/activation of a single low priority task 
within a block statement. Control is not transferred to 
the low priority task. 

declaration/activation of a single high priority task 
within a block statement. Control is transferred to the 
high priority task. 

declaration/activation of 10 low priority tasks within a 
a block statement. Control is not transferred to the 
low priority taskCcompere to AFN9301). 

rendezvous with a 0-argument task antry. Run statistic 
•2 * storage.size attribute of the called task, 
rendezvous with a 0-argument task antry that is the last( 
5th) accept alternative in a select statement(compare 
to AF09501). Run statistic 02 * storage.size attribute 
of the called task. 

rendezvous with a task antry with 10 integer scalar 
input arguments. Run statistic 02 * storage.size 

attribute of the callod task. 

rendezvous with a task antry with 10 integer scalar 
output argumenta. Run statistic 02 ■ storage.size 

attribute of the called task. 

rendezvous with a task antry with 10 1-dimensional 
integer array output arguments. Run statistic 02 * 

storage.size attribute of the called task, 
reference in a task accept statement to 10 integer 
scalar input arguments with references to the arguments 
in 10 statements of the form TNPISi •• ARGi(compare to 
AFD6117). 

reference in a task accept statement with 10 
1-dimansional integer array output arguments to an 
argument in 10 statements of the form ARG(TMPlSi) i* 
constant. Compare to AF06168. 

local scalar integer variable reference from within a 
taak accept statement(cemparo to AF06806). 
global scalar integer variable reference from within a 
task accept statement(compare to AF06S02.AF09508). 
muaue an antry call to a suspended task.suspend the 
caller and transfer control to a lower priority task, 
reforancas to the clock function in 10 assignment 
statements of the form time.i i« clock. 

references to the seconds function in 10 assignment 

statements ef the formi DURATION.! «* second*!TIME.i). 
rafarances to the split procedure in 5 statements of the 
formi split(TlME_i.TNPISi.TMPISj.TMPISk.DURATION.i). 
references to the time.of function in 10 assignment 

statements of the formi TlN£.i i* time.of(THPISi.TMPISj. 
TMPISk.DURATZ0N.1). 

10 assignment statements that add values of type 
duration to those of typo time(TIME_i •* TIME.i ♦ 

DURATION.!). 

10 assignment statements involving subtraction of values 
of type time!DURATION.i i* TIME i - TIME.0). 

10 boolean assignments involving values of type time in 
statements of the following formi TMPBSi • * TIME.i < 
TIME.!. 

10 conversions of type duration to type float in 10 
statements of the formi TMPRSi i* our.float(DURATIONi). 
wake up from a delay statement with no other tasks 
executing (tost time * time.awaken - time.delay^expires) 
wake up from a delay statement with 5 low priority tasks 
executing in an intarlaavad fashion through us* of 


F-27 




IESI .MABE 

AFN9613 

AF09710 

AF09712 

AF09720 

AF09721 

AF09731 

AF09901 

AF09902 

AF09903 

AFM9A01 

AFH9A02 

AFM9A03 

AF09B01 

AFD9C00 

AFD9C01 

AFD9C02.I 

AFD9C03.I 

AFD9C04.I 


Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


m .sim 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 


DESCRIPTION 

delay stataaants (test_tiae * tiae_eweken - 
tiae_delay_expires). 

transfar control to a low priority task not in a wait 
stata after execution of a delay stataaent in a high 
priority task. Tha test tiao includes the tiae to 
execute the delay stataaent. 

execution of a selactiva wait stataaent with 4 select 
alternatives (accept stataaants) and an else part. The 
else part is executed. Run statistic 92 * storege_size 
attribute ef the test task. 

execution ef a selactiva wait stataaent with 4 select 
alternatives (accept stataaants) and an else part. Each 
accept stataaent is guarded with a test of the count 
attribute ef an entry queue. The else part is executed. 
Run statistic 92 * storage_size attribute of the test 

task. 

conditional entry call.call iaaediately taken. Coapare 
to AF09501. Run statistic 92 * storage size attribute 
of the called task. 

conditional entry call.also part(null) taken. Run 
statistic 92 * storage_siza attribute ef the called 

task. 

tiaed entry call.call iaaediately taken. Coapare to 
AF09501.AF09720. Run statistic 92 * storage_size 

attribute of tha called task. 

raferancas to tha callable attribute of tasks in 10 
assignaent stataaants of tha forat TMPISi i* tasks(i) 
'callable. 

refarencos to tha tarainated attribute of tasks in 10 
assignaent stataaants ef the forai THPBSi • » tasks(i) 
'tarainated. 

references to the count attribute ef task entries in 10 
assignaent stateaents of the forai THPBSi i* 
entry_i*count. 

1 abort stataaent issued froa within a block stataaent 
aborting a single task created within the block. The 
task is waiting at an accept stataaent. 

1 abort stataaent issued froa within a block stataaent 
aborting 10 tasks created within the block. The tasks 
ara waiting at accept stateaents. Coapare to AFH9A01. 
execution of 1 abort stataaent frea within a block and 
exit froa the block. The abort stataaent aborts 10 
tasks waiting at accept stataaants. Caspars to AFH9A02. 
shared global scalar integer variable reference froa 
within a task accept statoaent(coapare to AF09509). 
execution ef a work-load froa a aain prograa with no 
subordinate tasks and without a priority pragma, 
execution of a work-load by a single subordinate task. 
Coapare to AFD9C00 to seo the affect ef task scheduling 
overhead, (run statistic 91 » storage.size attribute of 
the subordinate task type). 

execution ef a work-load by 5 subordinate tasks. Compare 
te AFD9C00.AFD9C01 to see the effect of task scheduling 
overhead!run statistics 1-5 in AFI9C02 contain the task 
iteration counts in the order the tasks ware created), 
execution of a work-load by 5 subordinate tasks with a 
forced time-slice intervel(VAX*.01secs). Compare to 
AFD9C02 to soo the affect of forced time-slicing (run 
statistics 1-5 in AFI9CQ5 contain the task iteration 
counts in tho ordor the tasks were created), 
execution ef a work-load by 20 subordinate tasks with a 
forced tiae-slice interval(VAX*.Olsecs). Coapare to 
AFD9C03 to see the effect ef task-scheduling overhead.! 
run statistics 1-4 in AFX9C04 contain tho total.maximum, 
ainiaua and aadian task iteration counts). 


F-2S 








Table F-l ACPS Tast Daseriptions (continuad) 


IEST NAflE VERSIONS PESCRIPUPH 


AFHB001 

C/S/T 

AFMB003 

C/S/T 

AFNB005 

C/S/T 

AFHB007 

S/T 

AFHB009 

S/T 

AFHB012 

C/S/T 

AFMB016 

C/S/T 

AFMB020 

C/S/T 

AFMBQ24 

S/T 

AFMB028 

S/T 

AFMB032 

t/S/T 

AFHB036 

C/S/T 

AFNB040 

S/T 

AFMB044 

C/S/T 

AF0C300 

C/E/S/T 

AF0C301.C 

C/E/S/T 

AF0C302 

C/E/S/T 


AF0C303 

C/E/S/T 

AF0C3O4.C 

C/E/S/T 


raise/deliver a uaar dafinad axcaption and tast for it 
with tha axcaption choica othars. 

raisa/dalivar a wsar dafinad axcaption and tast for 5 
pradofinad axcaptions and than for tha usar dafinad 
axcaption (compare to AFMB001). 

raisa/dalivar a nuaaric arror pra-dafinad axcaptionC 
divida by zeroi tapisli*tmpis2/tmpis0). 

raisa/dalivar a nuaaric range constraint arror axcaption 
(tapili*tapisO). 

raisa/dalivar an indax ranga constraint arror axcaptionC 
tapialttmpisO) i* 0). 

raisa/dalivar a usar dafinad axcaption which is 
autoaatieally propagated 1 procadura laval upwardC 
propagation time s AFMB012-AFMB001>. 

raisa/dalivar a usar dafinad axcaption which is 
autoaaiically propagated 2 procadura lavals upwardC 
propagation time*AFMB01B-AFMB001>. 

raisa/dalivar a usar dafinad axcaption. Usa raise 

statements to propagate tha axcaption to a handler 2 
procadura lavals upwardCcoopers to AFMB016). 
detect/deliver a nuaaric arror axcaptionCdivida by 0) 
which is automatically propagated 2 procadura lavals 
upward Cpropagation tiae*AFHBD24-AFMB005. Compare to 
AFMB016). 

dotact/daliver a numeric arror axeeptionCdivide by 0). 
Usa raise statements to propagate tha axcaption to a 
handler 2 procadura lavals upwardCcompare to AFHB024). 
raisa/dalivar a usar defined axcaption which is 

automatically propagated 2 procadura lavals upwardC 
propagation time*AFHB032-AFHB001). Each procadura has 
10 scalar output argumentsCcompara to AFHB016). 
raisa/dalivar a usar dafinad exception. Usa raise 

statements to prppapata tha axcaption to a handler 2 
procadura lavals upward. Each procadura has 10 scalar 
output argumentsCcompara to AFHB020. AFMB032). 
datoct/dalivar a numeric arror axeeptionCdivide by 0) 
which is automatically propagated 2 procedure levels 
upward (propagation tima*AFMB040-AFHB005). Each 
procedure has 10 scalar output srgumontsCcompare to 
AFHB024, AFMB032). 

datoct/dalivar a numeric error axcaptionCdivida by 0). 
Use raise statements to propagate tha exception to a 

handler 2 procedure lavals upward. Each procadura has 
10 scalar output argumentsCcompara to AFMB028* AFMB040). 
non-generic version of tost AF0C301 with which its 
compared (AFCC301 » AF0C301/AF0C30D). 
tests execution of a procadura derived from 
instantiation of a generic package containing a 
procedure whose compiled code should bo tha same for 
each instantiation (only instantiate for unconstrained 
floating point vectors). 

same tast as AF0C301*except tha generic package is 
instantiated with 5 different numeric typesCinteger, 
float.boolean). All three instantiations are 
rafarancad. Only the floating point procadura is timed. 
Compare to AF0C301 to sea if memory requirements are 
greater (i.e. are separate copies of tha generic 
procedure generated for each instantiation?), 
non-generic version of test AFBC304 with which its 
compared (AFCC304 > AF0C304/AF0C303). 

tests execution of a function derived from instantiation 
ef a generic package containing vector functions(*»-»*. 
/) whose compiled coda should be different for each 
instantiation (only instantiate for unconstrained 
floating point vectors). Only the ♦ function is 


F-29 




TEST NAME 
AFOCSOS 

AF0CS06 

AF0C307 

AFDC310 
AFDC311*C 

AFDC313 

AFDC314*C 


AFDD600 

AFDD601 

AFDD402 

AFDD603 

AFDD604 

AFDD605 

AFDD606 

AFDD*07 
AFDD608 
AFDD609 
AFDD610 

AFDD*11 

AF0D720 


Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


VERSIONS 

C/E/S/T 


C/E/S/T 


C/E/S/T 


C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 


C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 


C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

S/T/J/F 


DESCRIPTION 

referenced or executed. 

sane test as AF0C304* except all functions in the 

instantiated package are referenced but only the ♦ 
function is timed. Compere to AFOC504 to see if the 
nenory requirements are greater in this testCi.e. are 
unreferenced instantiated functions included in the 
load module). 

same test as AF0C305* except the generic package is 

instantiated for 2 datatypes (integer*floating point). 
Only the floating point instantiation is referenced or 
timed. Compare memory requirements to AF0C305(i.e. are 
unreferenced instantiations included in the load module) 
same test as AF0C306* except all package instantiations 
ara refarenced. Compare to AF0C306*AF0C305(notei 
execution time and memory requirements mil differ 
depending on whether or not a new copy of a function is 
generated for each instantiation). 

non-generic version of test AFDC311 with which its 
compared (AFCC311 > AFDC311/AFDC310). 

tests execution of an inline procedure derived from 
instantiation of a generic package containing an inline 
procedure whose compiled code should be the same for 
each instantiation (only instantiate for unconstrained 
floating point vectors). Compare to AF0C301. 
non-generic version of test AFDC314 with which its 
compared (AFCC314 > AFDC314/AFDC313). 

tests execution of an inline function derived from 
instantiation of a generic package containing inline 
vector functions!**-*!*/) whose compiled code should be 
different for each instantiation (only instantiate for 
unconstrained floating point vactors). Only the * 
function is referenced or executed. Compare to AF0C304. 

3 statements changing representation of unpacked boolean 
arrays (1..10) to packed boolean arrays. 

3 statements changing representation of packed boolean 
arrays (1..10) to unpacked boolean arrays. 

10 statements changing representation from objects of 
enumeration type REP_MONTHS to values of type MONTHS. 

10 statements changing representation from objects of 
enumeration type MONTHS to values of type REP MONTHS. 

10 statements changing representation of packed records! 
type PACK.RECORDS) to unpacked records(type RECORDS). 

10 statements changing representation of unpacked 

records!type RECORDS) to packed records(type 
PACKJtECORDS). 

10' statements changing representation of unpacked 

records(type RECORDS) to packed records(type 
REP.REC0RDS). 

10 statements changing representation of packed records! 
type REP.REC0RDS) to unpacked reeords(type RECORDS). 

10 statements changing representation of packed records! 
type REPJtECORDS) to packed records(type PACK RECORDS). 

10 statements changing representation of packed records! 
type PACK.REC0RDS) to packed recerds!type REPJtECORDS). 

10 statements changing representation of unpacked record 
variants!type VARIANT RECORDS) to pecked variant 
records (type PACKED_V*RIANT). 

10 statements changing representation of packed record 
variants!type PACKEDVARIANT) to unpacked record 
variants (type VARIANT RECORDS). 

displays in run statistic fields the sice of objects 
used in tests and defined in package OURSYS. Run 
statistic 01 ■ bit sica of objects of type integer. Run 

statistic 02 « bit size of objects which ere 

l-dimensional(lO) integer arreys. Run statistic 03 * 


F-30 






IE5IHAHE 


AF0D721 


AF00722 


AFDD723 


AFDD724 


AFDD725 


AFDD726K 


AF0D727 


AF0D728 


AF00729 


Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


VERSIONS 


S/T/J/F 


S/T/J/F 


S/T/J/F 


S/T/F 


S/T/F 


S/T/J/F 


S/T/J/F 


S/T/J/F 


S/T/J 


DESCRIPTION 

bit size of objects which are 2-diaensional(3»3) 
integer arrays. Run statistic 84 * bit size of objects 
which are 3-diaensional(3*3*3) integer arrays. Run 
statistic 85 « bit size of objects of type positive, 
displeys in run statistic fields the size of objects 
used in tests and defined in package OURSYS. Run 

statistic 81 ■ bit size of objects of type float. Run 

statistic 82 * bit size of objects which are 

1- ’diaensionaldQ) float arrays. Run statistic 83 * bit 

size of objects which are 2-diaensional(3*3) float 

arrays. Run statistic 84 * bit size of objects which 

are 3-diaansional(3»3*3) float arrays. 

displays in run statistic fields the size of objects 

used in tests and defined in package OURTYP. Run 

statistic 81 * bit size of objects of type 

short.integar. Run statistic 82 * bit size of objects 

which are 1-diaensionaldO) short integer arrays. Run 
statistic 83 * bit size of objects which are 

2- diaensionaldQ»10) short^integer arrays. 

displays in run statistic fields the size of objects 

used in tests and defined in package OURTYP. Run 

statistic 81 * bit size of objects of type 

short short^intager. Run statistic 82 * bit size of 

objects which are 1 "-dimensional (10) short_short integer 
arrays. Run statistic 83 * bit size of objects which 

are 2**diaansional( 10>10) short short_integer arrays, 
displays in run statistic fields the size of objects 

used in tests and defined in package OURTYP. Run 

statistic 81 * bit size of objects of type long_fioat. 

Run statistic 82 * bit size of objects which are 

1- diaensional(lO) long_float arrays. Run statistic 83 * 
bit size ef abjects which ara 2-diaansional(10,10) 
long float arrays. 

displays in run statistic fields the size of objects 

used in tests and defined in package OURTYP. Run 

statistic 81 ■ bit size ef objects of type 

long long_.float. Run statistic 82 * bit size of objects 
which are 1-diaensionaldO) long long_floot arrays. Run 
statistic 83 ■ bit size ef objects which are 

2- diaensienald0*10) long lono float arrays. 

displays in run statistic fields the size of objects 

used in tests and defined in package OURTYP. Run 

statistic 81 ■ bit size ef objects of type d float. Run 

statistic 82 * bit size of objects which are 

l-diaensionaldO) d float arrays. Run statistic 83 * 
bit size ef abjects which are 2'disensionalClO*10) 
d float arrays. 

displays in run statistic fields the size of objects 

used in tests and defined in package OURSYS. Run 

statistic 81 * bit size ef objects of type boolean. Run 

statistic 82 e bit size of objects which are 

1-diaensionald..10) boolean arrays. Run statistic 83 * 
bit size af objecta which are 2>diaensional(3*3) 
boolean arrays. Run statistic 84 * bit size of objects 
which are 3-dieensional(S*3»3) boolean arrays, 
displays in run statistic fields the size of objects 

used in tests and defined in packages OURSYS*0URSPC. 
Run statistic 81 1 bit size of objects which are 10 

character strings. Run statistic 82 * bit size of 

objects which are 20 character strings. Run stetistic 
83 * bit size of objects which are 30 character 

strings. Run statistic 84 ■ bit size ef abjects of type 
MONTHS. 

displays in run statistic fields the size of objects 

used in tests and defined in package OURSPC. Run 


F-31 






TEST HAME 


AFDD72A 


AFDD72B 


AFDD72C 


AF0D72D 


AFDD72E 


AF0D72F 


Table F-l ACPS Tut Descriptions (continued) 


VERSIONS 


S/T/J 


S/T/J 


S/T/J 


S/T/J 


S/T/J 


S/T/J 


DESCRIPTION 

statistic 91 * bit size of objects which are rocords of 

typo RECORDS. Run statistic 12 * bit size of objects 

which are 1-dimensional arrays whoso coapononts are of 
typo RECORDS. Run statistic IS * bit size of objocts 

which are unconstrained variants of the discriminated 
record type VARIANT RECORDS. Run statistic §4 * bit 

size of objocts which are records of typo RECORD.TYPE. 
Run statistic IS * bit size of objocts which aro access 
variables of typo RECORD.POINTER. 

displays in run statistic fields the size of objocts 
used in tests and defined in paekaso OURSPC. Run 
statistic 91 « bit size of objects which are packed 

records of type PACKED_RECORDS. Compare to run 
statistic tl in AF0D729. Run statistic >2 * bit size of 
objects which are 1-dimensional arrays whose components 
are of type PACKED.RECORDS. Compare to run statistic 12 
in AF0D729. Run statistic 93 ■ bit size of objects 

which ara unconstrained variants of the discriminated 
record type PACKED-VARIANT. Compere to run statistic IS 
in AF0D729. Run statistic 94 « bit size of objects 

which are packed 30 character strings. Compare to run 
statistic 93 in AF0D72S. Run statistic 95 « bit size of 
objects which are packed l-dimensional(l..10) boolean 
arrays. Compare to run statistic 92 in AF0D727. 
displays in run statistic fialds the size of objects 
used, in tests and defined in package OURSPC. Run 

statistic 91 * bit size of objocts which are packed 

records of type REPRECORDS. Compare to run statistic 
91 in AF0D72A,AF0D727. Run statistic 92 • bit size of 
objects which are 1-dimensional arrays whose components 
are of type REP.RECORDS. Compare to run statistic 92 in 
AF0D72A,AF0D729. Run statistic 93 * bit size of objects 
of type REP.HONTHS. Compare to run statistic 94 in 
AF0D728. 

displays in run statistic fields the size of objects 
used in tests and defined in package OURSPC. Run 

statistic 91 « bit size of Pointer Comp component of 

objects of type RECORD.TYPE. Run statistic 92 * bit 
size of Enu* Comp component of objects of type 
RECORD.TYPE. Run statistic 93 * bit size of Int Comp 

component of objects of type RECORD TYPE. Run statistic 
94 ■ bit size of String SO component of objects of type 

RECORD.TYPE. Run statistic 95 • Storage'size attribute 
for access type RECORD POINTER. 

displays in run statistic fialds the size of components 
of record objects of type RECORDS used in tests and 
defined in package OURSPC. Run statistic 91 * bit size 
of comp.il component. Run stotistic 92 * bit size of 
eemp_i2 component. Run statistic 93 * bit size of 

comp.bl component. Run statistic 94 « bit size of 

comp.b2 component. Run statistic 95 * bit size of 

comp a component. 

* displays in run statistic fields the size of components 
of record objocts of type PACKED RECORDS used in tests 
and defined in package OURSPC. Run statistic 91 * bit 
size of comp.il component. Run statistic 92 * bit size 
of comp.i2 component. Run statistic 93 ■ bit size of 
comp.bl componant. Run statistic 94 • bit size of 

comp_b2 component. Run statistic 95 « bit size of 

eompe component. Compare to corresponding statistics 
in AR0D72D. 

displays in run statistic fields the size of components 
of rocord objocts of type REP.RECORDS used in tests end 
d^finnd in package OURSPC. Run statistic 91 » bit size 
of comp.il component. Run statistic 92 • bit size of 


F-32 




Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


IEST..NAME 

AFDD72G 

AFDD72H 

AFDD72I 

AFDDA01 

AFDDA02 

AFDE201 

AFDE202 

AFDE203 

AFDE204 

AFDE205 

AFDE206 


msum 


S/T/J 


S/T/J 


S/T/J 


C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 


DESCRIPTION 

comp_i2 coeponent. Run statistic IS * bit size of 

comp.bl coeponent. Run statistic 94 * bit size of 

comp_>2 coeponent. Run statistic 95 * bit size of 

coep e coeponent. Coepare to corresponding statistics 
in AF0D72D,AFDD72E. 

displays in run statistic fields the size of coeponents 
of record objects of type VARIANT RECORDS used in tests 
and defined in package OURSPC. Run stetistic 91 « bit 
size of coap_il coeponent. Run statistic 92 * bit size 
of coep_i2 coeponent. Run stetistic tS * bit size of 

coep_bl coeponent. Run statistic 94 * bit size of 

coep_b2 coeponent. Run statistic 15 ■ bit size of 

coep e coeponent. 

displays in run statistic fields the size of coeponents 
of record objects of type PACKED VARIANT used in tests 
and defined in package OURSPC. Run statistic 91 * bit 
size of coep.il coeponent. Run stetistic 92 * bit size 
of coep.i2 coeponent. Run statistic 93 * bit size of 

coep.bl coeponent. Run statistic 94 » bit size of 

coep_b2 coeponent. Run statistic 95 * bit size of 

coep e coeponent. Coepare to corresponding statistics 
in AFDD72G. 

displays in run statistic fields the size of objects 
used in tests and defined in package OURSYS*OURSPC. Run 
statistic 91 * bit size of objects which are packed 10 

character strings. Run statistic 92 * bit size of 

objects which are packed 20 character strings. Run 
statistic 93 ■ bit size of objects which are pecked 30 

character strings. Run statistic 94 « bit size of 

objects of type REP.HONTHS Compare to corresponding 
statistics in AF0D728. 

10 unchecked conversions of floating point operands to 
integer in 10 statements of the formt TNPISi »* 
floet_to_integer(THPRSi). 

10 unchecked conversions of record objects of type 
REP RECORDS to integer in 10 statements of the form> 
TMPlSi «■ reeords.to integerCTMPRRi>. 

1968 sequentiel file writes using an operand that is a 
scalar character variable. Output to the file is 1968 
characters(including carriage control) per iteration 
which fills a DEC VT100 terminal screen (by default 24 
x 80). 

1968 sequential file writes using an operand that is a 1 
element character array. Output to the file is 1968 
characters(including carriage control) per iteration 
which fills a DEC VT100 terminal screen (by default 24 
x 80). 

240 sequential file writes using an operand that is an 8 
element array with character components. Output to the 
file is 1968 charaeters(including carriage control) per 
iteration which fills a DEC VT100 terminal screen (by 
default 24 x 80). 

24 sequential file writes using an operand that is an 82 
element array of characters with embedded carriage 
control. Output to the file is 1968 characterst 

including carriage control) per iteration which fills a 
DEC VT100 terminal screen (by default 24 x 80). 

1 sequential file write using an operand that is a 1968 
element array with character components. Output to the 
file is 1968 cheracters(including carriage control) per 
iteration which fills a DEC VT100 terminal screen (by 
default 24 x 80). 

8040 sequential file writes using an operand that is a 
scalar character variable. Output to the file is 8040 
characters per iteration which fills a standard page of 


F-S3 


Table F-l ACPS Taat Descriptions (continued) 


TEST NAME 
AFDE207 

AFDE208 

AFDE209 

AFDE20A 

AFDE211 

AFDE212 

AFDE213 

AFDE214 

AFDE215 

AFDE216 

AFDE231 

AFDE232 

AFDE233 

AFDE234 

AFDE235 

AFDE236 


versions 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 


HESCRIpilPN 

coaputer paper (by default 60 x 132). 

8040 sequential file writes using an oparand that is a 1 
alaaent character array. Output to the file is 0040 
characters per iteration which fills a standard page of 
coaputar paper (by default 60 x 132). 

960 sequential fila writas using an operand that is an 8 
alaaant array with charactar components. Output to the 
file is 7800 characters per iteration!including 

carriage control) which fills a standard page of 
coaputer paper (by default 60 x 132). 

60 sequantial file writes using an oparand that is an 82 
alaaent array of characters with embedded carriage 
control. Output to the file is 8040 characters per 
iteration whieh fills a standard page of coaputer paper 
(by default 60 x 132). 

1 sequential file write using an oparand that is a 8040 
alaaent array with charactar components. Output to the 
file is 8040 characters per iteration which fills a 

standard page of coaputer paper (by default 60 x 132). 

1 sequantial file write using an operand that is a 512 
alaaent array with integer components. The output to 
the fila consists of 512 integers per iteration. 

512 saquential fila writas using an operand that is a 
scalar intagar variable. Output to the file consists of 
512 integers per iteration. 

1 sequential file write using an operand that is a 512 
alaaent array with floating point components. The 
output to the file consists of 512 floating point 
numbers per iteration. 

512 sequential fila writas using an operand that is a 
floating point scalar variable. Output to the file 
consists of 512 floating point numbers per iteration. 

1 saquential fila write using an operand that is a 512 
alaaent array with character components. The output to 
the file consists of 512 characters per iteration. 

512 sequential file writas using an operand that is a 
scalar character variable. Output to the fila consists 
of 512 characters per iteration. 

1968 sequential fila raads using an operand that is a 
scalar character variable. Input to the file is 1968 
characters!including carriage control) per iteration 
which fills a DEC VT100 tarainal screen (by default 24 
x 80). 

1968 sequential file raads using an operand that is a 1 
alaaent character array. Input from the file is 1968 
characters(including carriage control) per iteration 
which fills a DEC VT100 tarainal scraen (by default 24 
x SO). 

240 sequential fila raads using an operand that is an 8 
alaaent array with character components. Input from 

the fila is 1968 charactars(including carriage control) 
per iteration which fills a DEC VT100 tarainal screen! 
by default 24 x 80). 

24 sequantial fila raads using an operand that is an 82 
alaaant array of characters with embedded carriage 
control. Input to the file is 1968 characterst 
including carriage control) per iteration which fills a 
DEC VT100 terminal scraen (by default 24 x 80). 

1 sequential file read using an operand that is a 1968 
alaaent array with character components. Input from 

the file is 1968 characters(including carriage control) 
per iteration which fills a DEC VT100 tarainal screen! 
by-default 24 x 80). 

•040 sequential fila raads using an operand that is a 
scalar character variable. Input to tho file is 8040 



F-S4 


I 










Table F-l ACPS Tast Descriptions (continued) 


IEST NAME 
AFDE237 

AFDE238 

AFDE239 

AFDE23A 

AFDE241 

AFDE242 

AFDE243 

AFDE244 

AFDE245 

AFDE246 

AFDE401 

AFDE402 

AFDE403 

AFDE404 

AFDE405 

AFDE406 


iE&sums 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 


DESCRIPTION 

characters par iteration which fills a standard page of 
computer paper (by default 60 x 132). 

8040 sequential file reads using an operand that is a 1 
element character array. Input from the file is 8040 
characters par iteration which fills a standard page of 
computer paper (by default 60 x 132). 

960 sequential file.reads using an operand that is an 8 
element array with character components-. Input from 

the file is 7800 characters par iteration(including 
carriage control) which fills a standard page of 
computer paper (by default 60 x 132). 

60 sequential file reads using an operand that is an 82 
element array of characters with embedded carriage 
control. Input to the file is 8040 characters par 
iteration which fills a standard page of computer paper 
(by default 60 x 132). 

1 sequential file read using an operand that is a 8040 
element array with character components. Input from 

the file is 8040 characters par iteration which fills a 
standard page of computer paper (by default 60 x 132). 

1 sequential file read using an operand that is a 512 
element array with integer components. Input from the 
file is a block of integers par iteration. 

512 sequential file reads using an operand that is a 
scalar integer variable. Input from the file consists 
of 512 integers per iteration. 

1 sequential file read using an operand that is a 512 
element array with floating point components. Input 
from the file consists of 512 floating point numbers 
per iteration. 

512 sequential file reads using an operand that is a 
floating point scalar variable. Input from the file 
consists of 512 floating point numbers per iteration. 

1 sequential file read using an operand that is a 512 
element array with character components. Input from 
the file consists of 512 characters per iteration. 

512 sequential file reads using an operand that is a 
scalar character variable. Input from the file consists 
of 512 characters par iteration. 

1968 direct file writes using an operand that is a 

scalar character variable. Output to the file is 1968 
characters(including carriage control) per iteration 
which fills a DEC VT100 terminal screen (by default 24 
x 80). 

1968 direct file writes using an operand that is a 1 

element character array. Output to the file is 1968 
characters(including carriage control) per iteration 
which fills a DEC VT100 terminal screen (by default 24 
x 80). 

240 direct file writes using an operand that is an 8 
element array with character components. Output to the 
file is 1968 charactersdneluding carriage control) per 
iteration which fills a DEC VT100 terminal screen (by 
default 24 x 80). 

24 direct fils writes using an operand that is an 82 
element array of characters with embedded carriage 
control. Output to the file is 1966 charactersC 
including carriage control) per iteration which fills a 
DEC VT100 terminal screen (by default 24 x 80). 

1 direct file write using an operand that is a 1968 
element array with character components. Output to the 
file is 1968 charaeters(including carriage control) per 
iteration which fills a DEC VT100 terminal screen (by 
default 24 x 80). 

8040 direct fila writes using on operand that is a 


F-35 






Table F~1 ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


TEST NAME 

AFDE407 

AFDE408 

AFDE409 

AFDE40A 

AFDE411 

AFDE412 

AFDE413 

AFDE414 

AFDE415 

AFDE416 

AFDE4S1 

AFDE4S2 

AFDE433 

AFDE4S4 

AFDE435 


VERSIONS 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 


PEScRip.iim 

scalar character variable. Output to the file is 8040 
characters per iteration which fills a standard page of 
conputar paper (by default <0 x 132). 

8040 diract file writes using an oparand that is a 1 
elesent character array. Output to the file is 8040 
characters per iteration which fills a standard page of 
conputar paper (by default 80 x 132). 

980 direct file writes using an oparand that is an 8 
elenant array with character coaponents. Output to the 
file is 7800 characters per iteration(including 

carriage control) which fills a standard page of 
conputar paper (by default 80 x 132). 

80 direct file writes using an operand that is an 82 
alenent array of charactars with enbedded carriage 
control. Output to the file is 8040 characters per 

iteration which fills a standard page of conputar paper 

(by default 80 x 132). 

1 direct file write using an operand that is a 8040 

elenant array with character coaponents. Output to the 
file is 8040 characters per iteration which fills a 

standard page of conputar paper (by default 80 x 132). 

1 diract file write using an operand that is a 512 

elenant array with integer coaponents. The output to 
the file consists of 512 integers per iteration. 

512 diract file writes using an operand that is a scalar 
integer variable. Output to the file consists of 512 
integers per iteration. 

1 direct file write using an operand that is a 512 

alenent array with floating point coaponents. The 
output to the file consists of 512 floating point 
nunbers per iteration. 

512 direct file writes using an operand that is a 
floating point scalar variable. Output to the file 
consists of 512 floating point nunbers per iteration. 

1 direct file write using an operand that is a 512 

alenent array with character conponents. The output to 
the file consists of 512 characters par iteration. 

512 direct file writes using an operand that is a scalar 
character variable. Output to the file consists of 512 
characters per iteration. 

1968 diract file roads using an operand that is a scalar 
character variable. Input to the file is 1968 
characters(including carriage control) per iteration 
which fills a DEC VT100 terainal screen (by default 24 
x 80). 

1968 diract fila roads using an operand that is a 1 
alenent character array. Input fron the file is 1968 
charaeters(including carriage control) per iteration 
which fills a DEC VT100 terainal screen (by default 24 
x 80). 

240 direct file reads using an operand that is an 8 
elenant array with character coaponents. Input from 

the file is 1968 characters(including carriage control) 
per iteration which fills a DEC VT100 terainal screent 
by default 24 x 80). 

24 diract file roads using an operand that is an 82 
alenent array of characters with embedded carriage 
control. Input to the file is 1968 characters( 

including carriage control) per iteration which fills a 
DEC VT100 terainal scraen (by default 24 x 80). 

1 direct file read using an oparand that is a 1968 
alenent array with charactar components. Input from 

the file is 1968 characters(including carriage control) 
per iteration which fills a DEC VT100 terainal screen( 
by default 24 x 80). 


F-36 








Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


IK! NAHE 
AFDE436 

AFDE437 

AFDE438 

AFDE439 

AFDE43A 

AFDE441 

AF0E442 

AF0E443 

AF0E444 

AF0E445 

AFDE446 

AFDF000 

AFOFOOl 

AFDF002 

AFDF003 

AFDF004 

AFDF005 

AGD0001 

AGD0003 

AGD0009 


VERSIONS DESCRIPTION 


C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/5/T 


C/E/S/T/J 


•040 direct file reads using an operand that is a scalar 
character variable. Input to the file is S040 
characters per iteration which fills a standard page of 
coaputer paper (by default <0 x 132). 

•040 direct file reads using an eperand that is a 1 
aleaent character array. Input froa the file is 8040 
characters per iteration which fills a standard page of 
coaputer paper (by default 80 x 132). 

960 direct file reads using an eperand that is an 8 
alaaent array with character coaponents. Input froa 

the file is 7800 characters per iteration(including 
carriage control) which fills a standard page of 
coaputer paper (by default 60 x 132). 

60 direct file reads using an operand that is an 82 
aleaent array of characters with aabedded carriage 
control. Input to the file is 8040 characters per 
iteration which fills a standard page of coaputer paper 
(by default 60 x 132). 

1 direct file read using an operand that is a 8040 
aleaent array with character coaponents. Input froa 

the file is (040 characters per iteration which fills a 
standard page of coaputer paper (by default 60 x 132). 

1 direct file read using an eperand that is a 512 

aleaent array with integer coaponents. Input froa the 
file is a block of integers per iteration. 

512 direct file reads using an operand that is a scalar 
integer variable. Input froa the file consists of 512 
integers per iteration. 

1 direct file read using an operand that is a 512 

aleaent array with floating point coaponents. Input 
froa the file consists of 512 floating point numbers 
per iteration. 

512 direct file reads using an operand that is a 
floating point scalar variable. Input froa the file 
consists of 512 floating point nuabers per iteration. 

1 direct file read uming an eperand that is a 512 

element array with character coaponents. Input from 
the file consists of 512 characters per iteration. 

512 direct file reads using an operand that is a scalar 
character variable. Input from the file consists of 
512 characters per iteration. 

2 assignment statements of the fora x i* sin(y) where x* 
y are scalar variables. 

2 assignment statements of the fora x •* atan(y) where x» 
y are scalar variables. 

2 assignment statements of the fora x «* ces(y) where x> 
y are scalar variablas. 

2 assignment statements of the fora x «* sqrt(y) where x* 
y are scalar variables. 

2 assignment statements of the fora x »■ exp(y) where x> 
y are scalar variables. 

2 assignment statements of the fora x »* ln(y) where x,y 
are scalar variablas. 

the Mhetstone test as defined in the paper A Synthetic 
•enchaark published in the Coaputer Journal*Feb 1976 
by Curnow and Michaann. Input/Output statements are not 
axecutod. 

the Mhetstone test as defined in the paper A Synthetic 
•enchaark published in the Coaputer Journal*Feb 1976 

by Curnow and Michaann. The test uses predefined types 
integer and float for numeric types(coapere to AGD0001 
which uses eur_integer and eur.float). Input/Output 
statements are not executed. 

the Dhrystone test as defined in the paper DHRYSTONE> A 
Synthetic Benchmark published in the CACM*Oct 1984 by 







Table F-l ACPS Tast Descriptions (continued) 


IESI MAflE 

AC0000C 

A6DOOOE 

AGN000K 

AGD0039.I 

AGD0099.I 

AGD0059.I 


AL09101 

AL09111 

AL091Z1 

AL09131 

ALD9202 

ALD9203.I 

ALD9209,1 


icssim 

C/E/S/T/J 
C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 


C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 


C/E/S/T 


DESCRIPTION 

R.Wicker. Run statistic Cl « size in bits ef objects of 
type Record_Typa(default discriainant). 

ackermann's function as modified froa the AdaTac Ada 
Fair tast suite. 

the Whetstone tast as dafinad in the paper A Synthetic 
Benchaark published in the Coaputer Journal,Feb 1976 
by Curnow and Wichaann. Input/Output stataaents are not 
axecuted. external procedures are used • rather than 
local procaduras. Coapere to AGD0001. 

the Dhrystona tost as defined in the paper DHRYSTONEi A 
Synthetic lenchaark published in the CACH»0ct 1989 by 
R.Wicker. Tha tast aakas aultiple aierosecond level 
aoasuraaonts of tha Dhrystona tast without 
initialization. 

execution of the Dhrystona tast by 10 subordinate tasks. 
Run statistic 01 « storage_size sttribute of the 

subordinate task typo. Coapare to AGD0009 to see the 

affect of multi-tasking . Run statistics 1*4 in AGI0039 
contain tha total»maximum*minimum*median task iteration 
counts. 

axaeution of the Dhrystona tast by 100 subordinate 
tasks. Run statistic 01 « storapesize attribute of the 
subordinate task type. Coapare to AGD0009 to see the 

affoet ef multi-tasking . Run statistics 1-9 in AGI0099 

co.ntain tha total»aaxiaum*minimua*aedian task iteration 
counts. 

axaeution of the Dhrystona test by 100 subordinate tasks 
with forced time-slicing(VAX*.01 secs.). Compare to 
AGD0099 to sea tha affect of forced tiae-slicing. 
Coapare to AGD0009 to see the affect of aulti-tasking . 
Run statistic 01 * storage_size attribute of the 

subordinate task type. Run statistics 1-9 in AGI0099 

contain the total»maxioua*ainiaua,median task iteration 
counts. 

execution of a workload to randomly access a 128 element 
integer array with no subordinate tasks and without a 
priority pragma. 

axaeution ef a workload to randomly access a 12800 
element integer array with no subordinate tasks and 
without a priority pragma. 

execution ef a workload to randomly access a 69000 
element integer array with no subordinate tasks and 
without a priority pragma. Compare to tast A109101. 
axaeution of a workload to randomly access o 128000 
alamant integer array with no subordinate tasks and 
without a priority pragma. Compare to tast AL09101. 
axaeution ef a workload to randomly access a 128 element 
integer array by 1 subordinate task. Compare to test 
AL09101 to see tha affect of task scheduling. Run 
statistic tl ■ storage.siza attribute of the 
subordinate task type. 

execution of a workload to randomly access a 128 element 
integer array by 10 subordinate tasks. Compare to 

A109101*ALD9202 to saa the effect ef multi-tasking. Run 
statistic 01 * storege.size attribute of tha 

subordinate task type. Run statistics 1-9 of ALI9203 
contain the total*aaxiaum*minimum*median task iteration 
counts. 

axaeution ef a workload to randomly access s 128 element 
integer array by 10 subordinate tasks with forced 

time-slicing. Coapare to ALD9203 to see the affect of 
forcad time-slicing. Run statistic 01 * storage_size 

attribute of tha subordinato task typo. Run statistics 
1-9 ef ALI9209 contain the total*maximum*minimum*median 
task iteration counts. 


F-38 






Table F-l ACPS Tact Descriptions (continuad) 


JEST NftflE 
ALD9212 

ALD9213*I 

ALD9214*I 

ALD9222 

ALD9223.I 

ALD9224*I 

ALD9232 

ALD9233.I 

ALD9234*X 

ALDE2C1 

ALDE2C2.I 


VERSIONS DESCRIPTION 


C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 


execution of • workload to randomly accasa a 12800 
alamant integer array by 1 subordinata task. Compara to 
tast AL09111 to saa tha affaet of task scheduling. Run 
statistic 81 * storage.size attributa ef tha 

subordinata task typa. 

axaeutien of a workload to randomly access a 12800 

alamant integer array by 10 subordinata tasks. Compara 
to AL09111.ALD9212 to saa tha effect ef multi-tasking. 
Run statistic 81 ■ storage size attributa of the 

subordinata task type. Run statistics 1-4 of ALI9213 
contain tha total*naxinum*nininua*nedian task iteration 
counts. 

execution of a workload to randomly access a 12800 

alamant integer array by 10 subordinata tasks with 
forced time-slicing. Compara to ALD9213 to saa tha 
effect of foread time-slicing. Run statistic 81 * 

storage_size attributa ef tha subordinata task typa. 
Run statistics 1-4 ef ALI9214 contain tha total*maximum, 
minimum*median task iteration counts. 

execution of a workload to randomly access a 84000 

alamant intagar array by 1 subordinata task. Compara to 
tast AL09121 to saa the affaet of task scheduling. Run 
statistic 81 » storage_siza attributa of the 

subordinata task type. 

execution of a workload to randomly access a 84000 

alamant intagar array by 10 subordinate tasks. Compare 
to AL09121.ALD9222 to saa tha affect of multi-tasking. 
Run statistic 81 * storaga_size attribute of the 

subordinate task type. Run statistics 1-4 of ALI9223 
contain tha total*maxinun*minimum*median task iteration 
counts. 

execution of a workload to randomly access a 84000 

element intagar array by 10 subordinata tasks with 
forced time-slicing. Compara to ALD9223 to saa tha 
effect of forced time-slicing. Run statistic 81 * 

storage_siza attributa of tha subordinate task type. 
Run statistics 1-4 of ALI9224 contain tha total*maximum* 
minimum,median task iteration counts. 

execution of a workload to randomly access a 128000 

alamant integer array by 1 subordinata task. Compare to 
test AL09131 to see tha affaet of task scheduling. Run 
statistic 81 * storeg«_size attribute of tha 

subordinata task typa. 

execution of a ' workload to randomly access a 128000 

alamant intagar array by 10 subordinate tasks. Compara 
to AL09131*ALD9232 to saa tha affect of multi-tasking. 
Run statistic 81 * storage_sizo attribute of tha 

subordinata taak type. Run statistics 1-4 of ALI9233 
contain tha total *maxinun*minimum*median task iteration 
counts. 

execution of a workload to randomly access a 128000 

alamant intagar array by 10 subordinata tasks with 
foread tine-slicing. Compara to ALD9233 to see tha 
affect of forced tine-slicing. Run statistic 81 1 

■torage_siza attributa ef tha subordinata task type. 
Run statistics 1-4 of ALI9234 contain tha total*maximum* 
ninimum*nedian task iteration counts. 

execution of a work-load by 1 subordinata task. The work 
load outputs 1988 characters to a sequential file of 
character type, (run statistic 81 * storage_size 

attributa of the subordinata task type), 
execution of a work-load by 10 subordinata tasks. 
Compare to ALDE2C1 to saa tha affect of taak scheduling 
overhead. Tha work load outputs 1988 characters to a 
sequential file of character typa. Run statistics 1-4 


F-39 





Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


iest.hahe 

ALDE2C3 

ALDE2C4,I 

ALDE2C5 

ALDE2C6,X 

ALDE2C7 

ALDEZCS,I 

ALDE4C1 

ALDE4C2.I 

ALDE4C3 

ALDE4C4.I 


YE85.IPN5 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 


DESCRIPTION 

in AL1E2C2 contain the total, naxinun, nininun, and 
■edian task iteration counts, (run statistic 91 * 

storage_size sttribute of the subordinate task type), 
execution of a work-load by 1 subordinate task with a 
forced tiseslice interval (VAX*.01 secs). Conpare to 
ALDE2C1 to saa the affect of forced tine-slicing. The 
work load outputs 2968 characters to a sequential file 
of character type, (run statistic 91 .* storage.size 
attribute of the subordinate task typo), 
execution of a work-load by 10 subordinate tasks with a 
forced tise-slica interval (VAX .01 secs). Conpare to 
ALDE2C2 to see the effect of forced tine-slicing. The 
work load outputs 1968 characters to a sequential file 
of character type. Run statistics 1-4 in ALIE2C4 
contain the total,naxinun, nininun, and nedian task 
iteration counts, (run statistic 91 * storage_size 

attribute of the subordinate task type), 
execution of a work-load by 1 subordinate task. The work 
load inputs 1968 characters fron a sequential file of 
character type, (run statistic 91 * storage_size 

attribute of the subordinate task type), 
execution of a work-load by 10 subordinate tasks. 
Conpare to ALDE2C5 to see the effect of task scheduling 
overhead. The work load inputs 1968 characters fron a 
sequential file of character type. Run statistics 1-4 
in ALIE2C6 contain the total,naxinun, nininun, and 
nedian task iteration counts, (run statistic 91 * 

storage_size attribute of the subordinate task type), 
execution of a work-load by 1 subordinate task with a 
forced tineslice interval (VAX*.01 secs). Conpare to 
ALDE2CS to sea tho affect of forced tine-slicing. The 
work load inputs 1968 characters fron a sequential file 
of character type, (run statistic 91 * storege_siza 
attribute of the subordinate task type), 
execution of a work-load by 10 subordinate tasks with a 
forced tine-slice interval (VAX .01 secs). Conpere to 
ALDE2C6 to see the effect of forced tine-slicing. The 
work load inputs 1968 characters fron a sequential file 
of character type. Run statistics 1-4 in ALIE2C8 
contain tho total,naxinun, nininun, and nedian task 
iteration counts, (run statistic 91 ■ storage_siza 

attribute of the subordinate task type), 
execution of a work-load by 1 subordinate task, to 
ALDE4C1 to soo the affect of task scheduling overhead. 
The work load outputs 1968 characters to a diroct file 
of character type, (run statistic 91 * storage_size 

attribute of the subordinate task type), 
execution of a work-load by 10 subordinata tasks. 
Conpare to ALDE4C1 to soo the affect of task scheduling 
overhead. Tho work load outputs 1968 characters to a 
diroct file of character typo. Run statistics 1-4 in 
ALIE4C2 contain tho total,naxinun, nininun, and nedian 
task iteration counts, (run statistic 91 * storage.size 
attribute of the subordinate task type), 
execution of a work-load by 1 subordinate task with a 
forced tineslice interval (VAX*.01 secs). Conpare to 
ALDE4C1 to soo tho affect of forced tine-slicing. The 
work load outputs 1968 characters to a diroct file of 
character typo, (run statistic 91 * storage_size 

attribute of the subordinate task type), 
execution of a work-load by 10 subordinata tasks with a 
forced tine-slica interval (VAX .01 secs). Conpare to 
ALDE4C2 to see the affect of forced tine-slicing. The 
work load outputs 1968 characters to a direct file of 
character type. Run statistics 1-4 in AL1E4C4 contain 


F-40 







Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


iest NAME 

ALDE4C5 

ALDE4C4,! 


ALDE4C7 


ALDE4C8,X 


AOOOIOZ 

A00010S»C 

A000107 

A000108.C 

A000112 

A000113.C 

A000202 

AD00203.C 

A000207 
A000208 >C 

A000300 

A000305 

A000310 

A000311 

AO00312.C 

A000314 

A000315,C 


VERSIONS 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 


C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 


C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 


C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 


C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 


C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 


description 

the totel,aexiaua, ainiaua, and aedian task iteration 
counts, (run statistic 81 * storage_size attribute of 

the subordinate task typa). 

execution of a work-load by 1 subordinate task. The work 
load inputs 1948 characters froa a direct file of 
character type, (run statistic 81 * storage_size 

attribute of the subordinate task type), 
execution of a work-load by 10 subordinate tasks. 
Coapara to ALDE4C5 to sea the effect of task scheduling 
overhead. The work load inputs 1948 characters froa a 
direct file of character type. Run statistics 1-4 in 
ALXE4C4 contain the total»aexiaua, ainiaua, and aedian 
task iteration counts, (run statistic 01 * storege_size 
attribute of the subordinate task type), 
execution of a work-load by 1 subordinate task with a 
forced tiaeslice interval (VAX>.01 secs). Coapare to 
ALDE4C5 to see the effect ef forced tiae-slicing. The 
work load inputs 1948 characters froa a direct file of 
character type, (run statistic 81 * storage_size 

attribute of the subordinate task type), 
execution of a work-load by 10 subordinato tasks with a 
forced tiae-slica interval (VAX .01 secs). Coapare to 
ALDE4C4 to see the effect ef forced tiae-slicing. The 
work load inputs 1948 characters froa a direct file of 
character type. Run statistics 1-4 in ALIE4C8 contain 
the total.aaxiaua. ainiaua, and aedian task iteration 
counts, (run statistic 81 * storage_size attribute of 

the subordinate task type), 
hand-eptiaized version ef tost A000103. 

tests constant folding optiaization logic for constant 
scalar and character expressions within assignaent 
stateaents. 

hand-eptiaized version ef tost A000108. 

tests constant folding/propagation optiaization logic 
for constont aggregate expressions within/between 
assignaent stateaents. 
hand-eptiaized version of test A000113. 

tests constant folding optiaization logic for constant 
pradafinad attribute expressions within assignaent 
stateaents. 

hand-eptiaized version of test A000203. 

tests constant propagation optiaization logic for scalar 
and charactor constant expressions within and between 
assignaent and central structure stateaents by 
providing opportunities for roaeval of stateaents at 
coapile-tiae. 

hand-eptiaized version of test A000208. 
tests constant propagation optiaization logic for 
aggregate constont oxprossiens within and between 
assignaent and control structure svateaents by 
providing opportunities for roaeval of stateaents at 
coapile-tiae. 

tests coaaon array address exprsssion optiaization logic 
for 1-diaonsional integer arrays. 

tests coaaon array address expression optiaization logic 
for 2 diaonsional integer arrays. 

tests coaaon array address expression optiaization logic 

for S diaonsional integer arrays. 

hand-optiaizod version of tost A008312. 

tests coaaon subexpression optiaization logic 

within/between assignaent stateaents for arithaetic 

expressions with intoger scalar operands. 

hand-optiaizod version of tost A000315. 

tests coaaon subexpression optiaization logic 

within/between assignaent stotaaonts for arithaetic 


F-41 





Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


lESI-MAHE 


A000317 

A000318.C 


A000320 
A000321rC 


A000323 

A000324.C 


A000326 

A000327.C 


A000329 

A000330.C 


A000332 

A000333.C 


A000335 
A000336»C 


A000338 

A000339.C 


A000341 

A000342.C 


AOD0344 

AOD0345.C 


A000348 

A000349.C 


A000351 

A000352/C 


A000354 

A000355.C 


versions 


C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 


C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 


C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 


C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 


C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 


C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 


C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 


C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 


C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 


C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 


C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 


C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 


C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 


DESCRIPTION 

expressions with 1-diaansional inteper array eleaant 

operands. 

hand-optiaized version of test A000318. 
tests coamon subexpression optiaization logic 
within/between assignaent steteaents for arithmetic 
expressions with 2-dimensional integer array element 

operands. 

hand-optimized version of test A000321. 
tests coamon subexpression optimization logic 

within/between assignment statements for arithmetic 
expressions with 3-diaansional integer array element 

operands. 

hand-optiaized version of test A000324. 

tests coamon subexpression optiaization logic within and 
between assignaent and control statements for 
arithmetic expressions with integer scalar operands, 
hand-optiaized version of test A000327. 

tests coamon subexpression optiaization logic across 

short-circuit operators in IF stateaants for arithmetic 
expressions involving integer scalar operands, 
hand-optiaized version of test A000330. 

tests coamon subexpression optiaization logic for coamon 

1- diaensionel array element references within a FOR 
loop with the loop iteration parameter used as index, 
hand-optiaized version of test A000333. 

tests common subexpression optiaization logic for common 

2- dimensional array eleaant references within a 2-level 
nested FOR loop with the loop iteration parameters used 
as indices. 

hand-optiaized version of test A000336. 

tests common subexpression optiaization logic for common 

3- diaensional array element references within a 3-level 
nested FOR loop with the loop iteration parameters used 
as array indices. 

hand-optiaized version of test A000339. 

tests common subexpression optiaization logic within end 
between assignaent and control statements for 
relational and logical operators with integer scalar 
operands. 

hend-optiaized version of tost ADO0342. 

tests coamon subexpression optiaization logic 

within/betwoen assignment steteaents for expressions 

using the aed.rea and abs operators. 

hand-optimized version of tost A0D0345. 

tests coamon subexpression optimization logic 

within/betwoen assignaent statements for expressions 

using the math functions sin»cos>tan. 

hand-optiaized version of test A000349. 

tests common subexpression optimization logic between 

assignaent steteaents end across a cell to an external 
procedure. The expressions involve local variables that 
are not referenced by nor passed as arguments to the 
called procedure. 

hand-optiaized version of test A000352. 

tests common subexpression optiaization logic between 

assignment steteaents and across a cell to an external 
procedure. The expressions involve global variables 
that are not referenced by nor passed as arguments to 
the called procedure. 

the test requires range checks for ell indices of array 
element references. It is compared to tost A0003S5. 
tests array index range check optiaization logic by 
assigning constants (within separate paths of an IF 
statement) to variables used in subsequent array 
references. No array index range checks ere necessary. 


F-42 







Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


IEST HAUL 


A000357 

A000358.C 


A000360 
A000361*C 


A000363 


A000364,C 


AD00366 
A000367 »C 


A000369 

A00038A.C 


AOD036C 

A0DD36D.C 


A00036F 

A00036G.C 


A00036I 

A00036J.C 


A00036L 

A00036M.C 


A0D036O 

AOD036P.C 


AOD036R 

AOD036S.C 


VERS1BK5 

C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 


C/E/S/T/F 

C/E/S/T/F 


C/E/S/T/J 


C/E/S/T/J 


C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 


C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 


C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 


C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 


C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 


C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 


C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 


C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 


DESCRIPTION 

If optimized,AOC0355 should bo < 1. 

the test requires rang* checks for all indices of array 
element references. Zt is coopered to test A000358. 
tests array index range check optimization logic by 

assigning positive valued variablestwithin an IF 
statement) to variables used in subsequent array 
references. Only lower bound array index range cheeks 
are necessary. Zf optimized*AOC0358 should be < 1. 
the test requires range checks for all indices of array 
element references. Zt is compared to test A000361. 
tests array index range check optimization logic by 

assigning (from within an ZF statement) variables typed 
with ranges to variables typed without ranges which are 
used in subsequent array references. No array index 
range checks are necessary. Zf optimized»A0C0361 should 
be < 1. 

hand-optimized version of test A000364. Tests AOC0364, 
A0C0367 *AOC036A,A0C036D*A0C036G* AOC036J,AOC036M, 
ADC036P,AOC036S.AOC036V,AOC036Y all have the same 
structure and say ba compared to one another to see 
whether the type of the operand used in the tests 
affects optimization. 

tests common subexpression optimization logic within and 
between assignment and control statements for 
relational and logical operators with enumeration 
scalar operands. 

hand-optimized version of tost A000367. 

tests common subexpression optimization logic within and 
between assignment and control statements for 

relational and logical eperators with integer - array 
slice operands. 

hand-optimized version of tost A00036A. 

tests common subexpression optimization logic within and 
between assignment and control statements for 

relational and logical eperators with boolean - array 
slice operands. 

hand-optimized version of test AOD036D. 

tests common subexpression optimization logic within and 
between assignment and control statements for 

relational and logical operators with packed boolean - 
array slice operands, 
hand-optimized version of tost A00036G. 

tests common subexpression optimization logic within and 
between assignment and control statements for 

relational and logical eperators with record object 
operands(type RECORDS), 
hand-optimized version of tost A00036J. 

tests common subexpression optimization logic within and 
between assignment and control statements for 

relational and logical operators with operands that are 
access type components of rocord oecoss objectsftype 
RECORD.POINTER). 

hand-optimized version of tost A00036M. 

tests common subexprassion optimization logic within and 
between assignment and control statements for 

relational and logical operators with operands that are 
integer components of record objects(type RECORDS), 
hand-optimized version of test A0D036P. 

tests common subexpression optimization logic within and 
between assignment and control stotoments for 

relational and logical operators with operands that are 
integer components of record ebjectsCtype 

PACKEDJtECORDS). 

hand-optimized version of test AODOS4S. 

tests common subexpression optimization logic within and 


F-43 





Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


TEST. MAHE VERSIONS description 

between assignment and control stateaents for 
relational and logical operators with operands that are 
integer coaponents of record objectsttype REP_RECORDS). 

AOOOS6U C/E/S/T/J hand-optiaized version of test A00036V. 

A00036V.C C/E/S/T/J tests coaaon subexpression optiaization logic within and 

betwean assignaent and control stateaents for 
relational and logical operators with operands that are 
string coaponents of record access obiects(type 
RECORD_TYPE>. 

A0D036X C/E/S/T/J/F hand-optiaized version of test AOD036Y. 

AOD036Y.C C/E/S/T/J/F tests coiaaon subexpression optiaization logic within and 

between assignaent and control stateaents for 
relational and logical operators with short_integer 
scalar operands. 

AOD0370 C/E/S/T non-sharad global variable version of test ADD0371. 

A0D0371.C C/E/S/T tests coaaon subexpression optiaization logic 

within/between assignaent stateaents for arithmetic 
expressions with integer scalar operands. The test is 
executed within an Ada task and the variables in the 
expressions are declared as shared variables. AOC0371 
coapares optiaization logic for non-sharad variables to 
that for shared variables. 

A000375 C/E/S/T hand-optiaized version of test A000376. 

A000376.C C/E/S/T tests coaaon subexpression optiaization logic for 

arithaetic expressions with integer scalar operands 
across a call to a task entry. The variables in the 

expressions are not referenced by the rendezvous. The 
test is executed within an Ada task and the variebles 
in the expressions are declared as global variables. 

AOD0380 C/E/S/T hand-optiaizaed version of test A0D0381. 

AOD0381.C C/E/S/T tests coaaon subexpression optiaization logic for 

arithmetic expressions with integer scalar operands 
across a call to a task entry. The variables in the 

expressions are net referenced by the rendezvous. The 
test is executed within an Ada task and the variebles 
in the expressions are declared as shared variables. 
Compare AOC0381 to A0C0376. 

A000391 C/E/S/T/J/F tests optiaization logic to recognize coaaon argument 

lists in external procedure calls and to eliminate any 
redundant code/data. The test contains 5 procedure 
calls with identical argument lists consisting of 10 
1-diaensional integer array input/output arguments. The 
extent of optiaization is bast determined through 
examination of the compiled code. 

A000402 C/E/S/T/J/F hand-optiaized version of test A000403. 

A000403«C C/E/S/T/J/F tests code notion space optiaizetien logic to conserve 

space by moving code coaaon to all paths in IF 

stateaents. 

A000500 C/E/S/T/J/F tests dead assignment optimization logic by providing 

opportunities to eliminate assignaent statements to 

local variables whose values are only used within the 
assignment stateaents. All stateaents in the test loop 
can be removed. 

A000502 C/E/S/T/J/F* hand-optiaized version of test A000503. 

A000503.C C/E/S/T/J/F tests dead gssignaent optiaization logic by providing 

opportunities to eliainate assignaent stateaents to 

global variables that are not used but always set in a 
local procedure called within the test loop. 

A000507 C/E/S/T/J/F hand-optiaized version of test A000508. 

A000508.C C/E/S/T/J/F tests dead assignaent optiaization logic by providing 

opportunities to eliainate assignaent stateaents to 

global variables that are not used but always set as 
output parameters to s local procedure called within 
the test loop. 

A000512 C/E/S/T/J/F hand-optiaized version of tost A00051S. 


F-44 






Table F-l ACPS Test Descriptions (continued) 


T£ST NAME 
A000513,C 

A000517 

A000518,C 


A0D0523 

AOD0524,C 


AOD0527 

AOD0528,C 


A000602 

A000603,C 


A000605 

A000606 

A000607 

A000702 

A000703.C 

A000705 

A000706 

A000707,C 

A000709 

A000710.C 

A000713 

A000714 


A000715 


A000716 


A000717 


A000718 


A000719 

A000720.C 


VERSIONS DESCRIPTION 


C/E/S/T/J/F 


C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 


C/E/S/T/J 

C/E/S/T/J 


C/E/S/T 

C/E/S/T 


C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 

C/E/S/T/J/F 


tests dead assignment optimization logic by providing 

opportunities to eliminate redundant assignment 

statements within a sequential sat ef assignment and 

control structure statements. 

hand-optimized version of test A000518. 

tests dead assignment optimization logic by providing 

opportunities to eliminate redundant assignment 

statements within a sequential set of * assignment 

statements. 

hand-optimized version of test AOD0524. 

tests dead aasignment optimization logic by providing 

opportunities to eliminate assignment statements to 

global variables that are not used but always set in a 

local pragma inline procedure called within the test 

loop. 

hand-optimized version of test AOD0528. 

tests dead assignment optimization logic by providing 
opportunities to eliminate assignment statements to 

global variables that are not used but always set in an 
external pragma inline procedure called within the test 
loop. 

hand-optimized version of test A00060S. 

tests algebraic identity recognition optimization logic 
by providing opportunities to simplify arithmetic and 
relational expressions within assignment statements, 
tests target dependent operator strength reduction 
optimization logic for integer expressions within 
assignment stateaentstsee test code for run statistic 
description). 

tests target dependent operator strength reduction logic 
for oultiplication/division by powers of 2(e.g. 4,8,..). 
tests target dependent operator strength reduction logic 
for exponentiation by constant mxponents(e.g. 2,3,4,8). 
hand-optimized version of test A000703. 

tests optimization logic to remove loop invariant codeC 
expression,assignment statement,control statement) from 
for loops. 

tests optimization logic to remove loop invariant array 

index calculations from FOR loo;*. 

hand-optimized version of test A000707. 

tests optimization logic to remove loop invariant 

expressions involving array references from FOR loops. 

hand-optimized version of tost A000710. 

tests loop fusion optimization logic by providing an 

opportunity to combine 2 loops into 1. 

tests target machine dependent optimization logic to use 

block move instructions to implement FOR loops that 

transfer data between 1-dimensional arrays. 

tests target machine dependent optimization logic to use 

bloek move instructions to implement FOR loops that 

transfer data between 2-dimensional arrays. 

tests target machine dependent optimization logic to use 

block move instructions to implement FOR loops that 

transfer data between 5-dimensional arrays. 

tests target machine dependent optimization logic to use 

block move instructions to implement FOR loops that 

initialize 1-dimensional arrays to a constant. 

testa target machine dependent optimization logic to use 

bloek move instructions to implement FOR loops that 

initialize 2-dimensional arrays to a constant. 

tests target machine dependent optimization logic to use 

block move instructions to implement FOR loops that 

initalize 3-dimansional arrays to a constant. 

hand-optimized version ef test A000720. 

tests time eptimiztion logic to unroll a 3-iteration FOR 

loop. 


F-45 



APPENDIX G 

TEST PROGRAMS AND SOURCE CODE FILES 


G-l 





Table G-l Ada Type A Test Programs and Source Coda Files 


PROGRAM SUPPORT FILESC*. - TEST SUPPORT SOFTW ARE PACKAGES USED) 


AA00000 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AAOPOOO 


AF03S02 

AF03S03 

AF03519 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AF03500 

AF03501 

AF03504 

AF03509 

AF03510 

AF03511 

AF03512 

AF03513 


AF03514 

AF03517 

AF03518 

AFOPOOO 



AF0S550 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AFD3551 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 

AF03602 

AF03603 

AF03620 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AF03600 

AF03601 


AF03604 

AF03605 

AF03606 

AF03607 

AF03608 

AF03609 


AF03610 

AF03611 

AF03612 

AF03615 

AF03614 

AF03615 


AF03616 

AF03617 

AF03618 

AF03619 

AFOPOOO 

AF03633 

AF03650 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF03630 

AF03631 

AF03632 


AF03634 

AF03635 

AF03636 

AF03637 

AF03638 

AF03639 


AF03641 

AF03642 

AF03645 

AF03644 

AF03645 

AF03646 


AF03647 

AF03648 

AF03649 

AFOPOOO 

AF0S701 

AF03702 

AF03704 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AF03700 


AF03703 

AF0P000 



AF0S801 


AF03805 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF03800 

AF03802 


AF03803 

AF03804 

AFOPOOO 




AF04120 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AF0P000 




AF04121 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04122 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04123 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AFD4124 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04125 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04126 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04127 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AFD4128* 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AF04129 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AFD412A 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AF0412B 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AFD412C 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AFD412D 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AF04130 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AF04131 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AF04132 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AF04133 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AFD4135 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AFD4136 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AFD4137 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AF04138 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AFD4139 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AFD413A 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AFD413B 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AFD413C 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AF0413D 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AFD413E 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AFD413G 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AF0413H 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AF04131 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AF0413J 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AF0413K 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AF04310 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AF04311 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AF04312 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AF04510 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04S11 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04512 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04513 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04514 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF0451S 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04516 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04517 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 

AF04S19 


AF0451B 

AF0451J 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF04518 

AF0451A 

AF0451C 

AF0451D 

AF04S1E 

AF0451F 

AF0451G 

AF0451H 


AF0451I 

AF0P000 





8 Source 

file auaaliad with USE 

file type only 




C-2 







Table G~1 Ada Type A Test Progress and Source Code Files (continued) 


PROGRAM 



AFD451U9 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPH 

AFOPOOO 

AFD451K 

AFD451L 


AFD451M 

AFD451N 

AFD4510 

AFD451P 

AFD451Q 

AFD451R 


AFD451S 






AF0451Z 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AF0451V 

AF0451H 

AF0451X 

AF0451Y 


AF0P000 






AFD4520 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04521 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04522 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



• 

A* 04523 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 



AFD4524 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

AFOPOOO 



AFD4525 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 



AFD4526 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 



AF04527 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AFD4528 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AF04S29 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AFD452A 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AF04530 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04531 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04532 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04533 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04534 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04535 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04536 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04537 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04538 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04539 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF0453A 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF0453B 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF0453C 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04540 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04541 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04550 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04551 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04552 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04553 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04554 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04555 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04556 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04557 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04558 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04559 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AFD455D 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 



AFD455E 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 



AFD455F 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 



AFD455G 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 



AFD455I 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 



AFD455J 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 



AFD455K 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 



AFD455L 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 



AF0455N 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04550 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04560 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04562 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04563 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AFD4566 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 



AFD4567 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 



AFD4568 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 



AFD4569 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 



AF04600 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AFOPOOO 




AF04601 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF04602 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AFOPOOO 




AFD4603 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 



AFD4604 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 



AFD46G5 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 



AFD4606 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 




• Source file supplied with USE file type only 





Tabl* 0-1 Ada Typa A Ta*t Programs and Sourco Coda Films (continued) 


program 

AFD4607 

AFD4608 

AFD4609 

AFD460A 

AFD460B 

AF0460E 

AF0460F 

AFQ460G 

AF0460H 

AF0460I 

AF0460J 

AFD460K 

AFD460L 

AF0460M 

AFD460N 

AFD4600 

AFD4804 

AF05200 

AF05201 

AF05202 

AF05203 

AF05204 

AF05205 

AF05206 

AF05207 

AF05208 

AF0S209 

AF0520A 

AF0520B 

AFD520C 

AFD520D 

AFD520E 

AFD520F 

AFD520G 

AFD520H 

AFD520I 

AFD520J 

AF0520M 

AFD520N 

AF05200 

AFD520P 

AFD520Q 

AF0520R 

AF0520S 

AF05210 

AF05211 

AF05212 

AF05213 

AF05214 

AF05215 

AFD5218 

AFD5219 

AFD521A 

AFD521B 

AFD521C 

AFD521D 

AFD521E 

AFD521F 

AF0521M 

AF0521I 

AF0521J 

AF0521K 

AFD521K 

M Multiple 


SU P.E fl RI -FILES(» - TEST SUPPORT SOFT W ARE PACKAGES USED) 


OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 



OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 



OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 



OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 



OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPODO 




OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSPCK 

AFD4802 

OURSYSK 

AFD4803** 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 

AFD4800 

AFD4801 

OURSYSK 

Qurdmpk 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

AFOPOOO 



OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

AFOPOOO 



OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




versions of source file suppliedCUSE and ADA file types) 







Tabla 6-1 Ada Typa A Tast Programs and Sourca Coda Films (continuad) 


program 


JJTTTTB 

T&mmm 

wnumm 



AF0521L 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AFD521M 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AFOPOOO 



AF0521N 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AFOPOOO 



AFD5210 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 



AFD521P 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AFOPOOO 



AF05304 

OURSYSK 

AF0P000 

OURDMPK 

AF0S300 

AF05301 

AF05302 

AF05303 

AF05308 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AF05305 

AF05306 

AF05307 

AfOPOOO 

AF05408 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AF05400 

AF05401 

AF05402 

AF05403 

AF05505 

AF05404 

AF05405 

AF05406 

AF05407 

AFOPOOO 


OURSYSK 

AFOPOOO 

OURDMPX 

AF05501 

AF05S02 

AF05503 

AF05504 


AF0550C 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AF05506 

AF05507 

AF05508 

AF05509 


AF0550A 

AF0550B 

AFOPOOO 



AF0550D 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF0550E 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AFOPOOO 




AF0550F 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AFOPOOO 




AF06001 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF06009 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AF06010 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AFOPOOO 




AF06011 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AFOPOOO 




AF06022 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AF06013 

AF06014 

AF0601S 

AF06016 

AF06033 

AF06017 

AF06018 

AF06019 

AFOPOOO 



OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AF06023 

AF06024 

AF06025 

AF06026 


AF06027 

AFOPOOO 

OURSYSK 

AF06028 

AF06029 

AF06030 

AF06031 

AF06032 

AF06053 

OURDMPX 

AF06043 

AF06044 

AF06045 

AF06046 


AF06047 

AFOPOOO 

OURSYSK 

AF06048 

AF06049 

AF06050 

AF06051 

AF06052 

AF06069 

OURDMPX 

AF06060 

AF06061 

AF06062 

AF06063 

AF06079 

AF06064 

AF06065 

AF06066 

AF06067 

AF06068 

AFOPOOO 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AF06070 

AF06071 

AF06072 

AF06073 

AF06101 

AF06074 

AF06075 

AF06076 

AF06077 

AF06078 

AFOPOOO 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AF061C0 

AFOPOOO 



AF06109 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AF06108 

AFOPOOO 



AF06110 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AF06108 

AFOPOOO 



AF06111 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AF06108 

AFOPOOO 



AF06122 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AF06112 

AF06113 

AF06114 

AF06115 


AF06116 

AF06117 

AF06118 

AF06119 

AFOPOOO 


AF06140 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AF06132 

AF06133 

AF06134 

AF06135 


AF06136 

AF06137 

AF06138 

AF06139 

AFOPOOO 


AF06150 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AF06142 

AF06143 

AF06144 

AF06145 


AF06146 

AF06147 

AF06148 

AF06149 

AFOPOOO 


AF06160 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AF06152 

AF06153 

AFQ6154 

AF06155 


AF06156 

AF06157 

AF06158 

AF06159 

AFOPOOO 


AF06170 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AF06162 

AF06163 

AF06164 

AF06165 


AF06166 

AF06167 

AF06168 

AF06169 

AFOPOOO 


AF06180 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AF08172 

AF06173 

AF06174 

AF06175 


AF06176 

AF06177 

AF06178 

AF06179 

AFOPOOO 


AF06190 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AF06182 

AF06183 

AF06184 

AF06185 


AF06186 

AF06187 

AF06188 

AF06189 

AFOPOOO 


AF06199 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AF06191 

AF06192 

AF06193 


AF06194 

AF06195 

AF06196 

AF06197 

AF06198 

AFOPOOO 

AF0619I 

OURSPCK. 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AF0619A 

AF0619B 

AF0619C 


AF0619D 

AF0619E 

AF0619F 

AF0619G 

AF0619H 

AFOPOOO 

AF0619R 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AF0619J 

AF0619K 

AF0619L 


AF0619M 

AF0619N 

AFD6190 

AF0619P 

AF0619Q 

AFOPOOO 

AFD6201 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AFOPOOO 



AFD6209 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 




AFD6210 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AFOPOOO 




AFD6211 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AFOPOOO 




AFD6222 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AFOPOOO 

AFD6213 

AFD6214 

AFD6215 


AFD6216 

AFD6217 

AFD6218 

AFD6219 



AFD6233 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AFOPOOO 

AFD6223 

AFD6224 

AFD6225 


AFD6226 

AFD6227 

AFD6228 

AFD6229 

AFD6230 

AFD6231 





Table 6-1 Ada Typa A Test Programs and Source Coda Files (continued) 


E&flgMfl SUPPORT FJLEStX - TEST .SUPPORT SOFTWARE PACKAGES USED) 




AFD6232 






AFD6253 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF0P000 

AFD6243 

AFD6244 

AFD6245 



AFM246 

AFD6247 

AFD6248 

AFD6249 

AFD625Q 

AFD6251 



AFD62S2 






AFD6269 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF0P000 

AFD6260 

AFD6261 

AFD6262 



AFD6263 

AFD6264 

AFD6265 

AFD6266 

AFD6267 

AFD6268 

AFD6279 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF0P000 

AFD6270 

AFD6271 

AFD6272 



AFD6273 

AFD6274 

AFD6275 

AFD6276 

AFD6277 

AFD6278 

AFD6301 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF0P000 

AFD6300 



AFD6309 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 

AFD6308 



AFD6310 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF0P000 

AFD6308 



AFD6311 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 

AFD6308 



AF06322 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 

AFD6312 

AFD6313 

AFD6314 



AFD6315 

AFD6316 

AFD6317 

AFD6318 

AFD6319 


AFD6340 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 

AFD6332 

AFD6333 

AFD6334 



AFD6335 

AFD6336 

AFD6337 

AFD6338 

AFD6339 


AFD6350 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 

AFD6342 

AFD6343 

AFD6344 



AFD6345 

AFD6346 

AFD6347 

AFD6348 

AFD6349 


AFD6360 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 

AFD6352 

AFD6353 

AFD6354 



AFD6355 

AFD6356 

AFD6357 

AFD6358 

AFD6359 


AFD6S70 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 

AFD6362 

AFD6363 

AFD6364 



AFD6365 

AFD6366 

AFD6367 

AFD6368 

AFD6369 


AFD6380 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 

AFD6372 

AFD6373 

AFD6374 



AFD6375 

AFD6376 

AFD6377 

AFD6378 

AFD6379 


AFD6390 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 

AFD6382 

AFD6383 

AFD6384 



AFD6385 

AFD6386 

AFD6387 

AFD6388 

AFD6389 


AF0642B 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF06422 

AF06423 

AF06424 



AF06425 

AF06426 

AF06427 

AF06428 

AF06429 

AF0642A 



AF0P000 






AF06803 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF06802 

AFOPOOO 



AF06807 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF06806 

AFOPOOO 



AF06809 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF06808 

AFOPOOO 


AF0680B 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF0680A 

AFOPOOO 

- 

AF0680D 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF0680C 

AFOPOOO 


AF0680F 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF0680E 

AFOPOOO 


AFD680H 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 

AFD6806 


AFD680J 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AFOPOOO 

Xkb 680 l 


AF06811 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF06810 

AFOPOOO 



AF06815 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF06814 

AFOPOOO 



AF06817 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF06816 

AFOPOOO 



AF06819 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF06818 

AFOPOOO 



AF06821 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF06820 

AFOPOOO 



AF06823 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF06822 

AFOPOOO 


AFD6825 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF06824 

AFOPOOO 


A 

FN9301 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

AFM93PP 




T 

[H9 02 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 





T 

[N?! 05 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 





Jf 

F09501 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF09500 

AFOPOOO 


AF09502 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF09500 

AFOPOOO 


AF09503 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF09500 

AFOPOOO 


AF09504 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF09500 

AFOPOOO 


AF09505 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF09500 

AFOPOOO 


AF09506 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF09500 

AFOPOOO 


AF09507 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF09500 

AFOPOOO 


AF09508 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF09500 

AFOPOOO 


AF09509 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

AF09500 

AFOPOOO 



AFN9511 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

afnjsio 

AF09600 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

AFOPOOO 

AF09601 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

AFOPOOO 

AF09602 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

AFOPOOO 

AF09603 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

AFOPOOO 

AF09604 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

AFOPOOO 

AF09605 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

AFOPOOO 

AF09606 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

AFOPOOO 

AF09607 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

AFOPOOO 


G-6 






Table G-l Ada Type A Test Programs and Source Coda Files (continued) 



AFN9611 

AFN9612 

AFN961S 

AF09711 

AF09713 

AF09720 

AF09721 

AF097S1 

AF09901 

AF09902 

AF09903 

AFM9A01 

AFM9A02 

AFM9A03 

AF09B01 

AFD9C00 



AFMB003 

AFMB005 

AFHB007 

AFMB009 


OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 


OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

AF09710 

AF09712 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

AF09900 

AF09900 

AF09900 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

AFMB000 

AFMB002 

AFMB004 

AFHB006 

AFMB008 



AF0P000 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

AF0P000 

AF0PD00 

AF0P000 

AFM9A00 

AFM9A00 

AFM9A00 

OURDMPK 

AF0P000 

AF0P000 

AF0P000 

AF0P000 

AF0P000 


AF09500 

AF09500 

AF09500 


AF09500 

AFD9000 

AFD9000 

AFD9000 

AFD9000 

AFD9000 


AFOPOOO 

AFOPOOO 

AFOPOOO 


AFOPOOO 



AFMB012 

OURSYSK 

AFMB010 

AFMB011 




AFMB016 

OURSYSK 

AFMB013 

AFMB014 

AFMB015 



AFMB020 

OURSYSK 

AFMB017 

AFMB018 

AFMB019 



AFMB024 

OURSYSK 

AFMB021 

AFMB022 

AFMB023 



AFMB028 

OURSYSK 

AFMB025 

AFMB026 

AFMB027 



AFMB032 

OURSYSK 

AFMB013 

AFMB014 

AFMB015 



AFMB036 

OURSYSK 

AFMB033 

AFMB034 

AFMB035 



AFMB040 

OURSYSK 

AFMB037 

AFHB038 

AFMB039 



AFMB044 

OURSYSK 

AFMB041 

AFMB042 

AFMB043 



AF0C301 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AF0C100 

AFOClOl 

AF0C300 

AFOPOOO 

AF0C302 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AF0C100 

AF0C101 

AFOC300 

AFOPOOO 

AF0C304 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AF0C102 

AF0C103 

AF0C303 

AFOPOOO 

AF0C305 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AF0C102 

AFOPOOO 



AF0C306 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AF0C102 

AFOPOOO . 



AF0C307 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AF0C102 

AFOPOOO 



AFDC311 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AFOPOOO 

AFDC104 

AFDC105 

AFDC310 

AFDC314 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AFOPOOO 

AFDC106 

AFDC10799 

AFDC313 

AFDD600 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AFOPOOO 



AFDD601 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AFOPOOO 




AFDD602 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AFOPOOO 




AFDD603 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AFOPOOO 




AFDD604 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AFOPOOO 




AFDD605 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AFOPOOO 




AFDD606 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AFOPOOO 




AFDD607 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AFOPOOO 




AFDD6089 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AFOPOOO 




AFDD609 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AFOPOOO 




AFDD610 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AFOPOOO 




AFDD611 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AFOPOOO 




AF0D720 

OURSYSK 






AF0D721 

OURSYSK 






AFDD722 

OURSYSK 

OURTYPK 





AFDD723 

OURSYSK 

OURTYPK 





AFDD724 

OURSYSK 

OURTYPK 





AFDD725 

OURSYSK 

OURTYPK 





AF0D727 

OURSYSK 






AF0D728 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 





AF0D729 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 






99 Multiple versions of source file suppliedCUSE and ADA file types) 
99 Source file supplied with DEC file type only 
9 Source file supplied with USE file type only 


C-7 





Table G-l Ada Type A Tast Program* and Source Coda Files (continued) 


program 







AFDD72A 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 





AFDD72B 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 





AFDD72C 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 





AF0D72D 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 





AFDD72E 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 





AFDD72F 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 





AFDD726 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 





AFDD72H 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 




• 

AFDD72I 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 





AFDDA01 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AF0P000 




AFDDA02 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AFOPOOO 




AFDE220 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AFOPOOO 

AFDE000 

AFDE201 

AFDE202 


AFDE203 

AFDE204 

AFDE205 

AFDE206 

AFDE207 

AFDE208 


AFDE209 

AFDE20A 

AFDE211 

AFDE212 

AFDE213 

AFDE214 


AFDE215 

AFDE216 





AFDE250 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AFOPOOO 

AFDE000 

AFDE231 

AFDE232 


AFDE233 

AFDE234 

AFDE235 

AFDE236 

AFDE237 

AFDE238 


AFDE239 

AFDE23A 

AFDE241 

AFDE242 

AFDE243 

AFDE244 


AFDE245 

AFDE246 





AFDE420 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AFOPOOO 

AFDE000 

AFDE401 

AFDE402 


AFDE403 

AFDE404 

AFDE405 

AFDE406 

AFDE407 

AFDE408 


AFDE409 

AFDE40A 

AFDE411 

AFDE412 

AFDE413 

AFDE414 


AFDE415 

AFDE416 





AFDE450 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AFOPOOO 

AFDE000 

AFDE431 

AFDE432 


AFDE433 

AFDE434 

AFDE435 

AFDE436 

AFDE437 

AFDE438 


AFDE439 

AFDE43A 

AFDE441 

AFDE442 

AFDE443 

AFDE444 


AFDE445 

AFDE446 





AFDF000 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

MATHFUNK 

AFOPOOO 



AFDF001 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

MATHFUNK 

AFOPOOO 



AFDF002 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

MATHFUNK 

AFOPOOO 



AFDF003 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

MATHFUNK 

AFOPOOO 



AFDF004 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

MATHFUNK 

AFOPOOO 



AFDF005 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

MATHFUNK 

AFOPOOO 



AGD0001 

OURSYSK 

MATHFUNK 

AGOPOOO 

AGDOOOO 



ACPPPP? 

AGD0009 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

AG0P000 

AGOPOOO 

mm 

AGD0005 

AGD0006 

AGD0007 


AGD0008 






AG0000C 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AGOPOOO 




AEMMI 

Agnoook 

OURSYSK 

MATHFUNK 

AGOPOOO 

AGDOOOO 

mm 


OURSYSK 

Wl 

AGN000G 

AGN000H 

AGN000J 


OURSPCK 

AGOPOOO 


AGD0005 

AGD0006 

AGD0007 

AGD0008 

AGD0019 

PTO'I'T'Fi 




OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AGOPOOO 

W.TtM'IT'r 

AGD0005 

AGD0006 

AGD0007 

AGD0008 

AGD0019 




A0DQQ59M 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AGOPOOO 

l.w#T'r 

AGD0005 

AGD0006 

AGD0007 

AGD0008 

AGD0019 

•.’M'll'W; 



AL09101 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AL09000 

AL09100 

ALOPOOO 


AL09111 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AL09000 

AL09100 

ALOPOOO 


AL09121 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AL09000 

AL09100 

ALOPOOO 


AL 09131 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AL09000 

AL09100 

ALOPOOO 


II III 1 M 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AL09000 

AL09100 

ALOPOOO 

TlilFTT 


OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AL09000 

AL09100 

ALOPOOO 

Tl'TM'I' 

'TI'IW'LII 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AL09000 

AL09100 

ALOPOOO 

.Tl'O-W 


OURSPCK’ 

OURSYSK 

AL09000 

AL09100 

ALOPOOO 


’.n'lWTl/:. 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AL09000 

AL09100 

ALOPOOO 

Tl'IM'I' 

K-lWtul 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AL09000 

AL09100 

ALOPOOO 


'xmiwmM 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AL09000 

AL09100 

ALOPOOO 

Ml'l-Wl' 


OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AL09000 

AL09100 

ALOPOOO 

'.Yl'IWF 

.uwiiri 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AL09000 

AL09100 

ALOPOOO 

'.Tl-IM-F 


OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AL09000 

AL09100 

ALOPOOO 



OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

A109000 

AL09100 

ALOPOOO 

’Tl'IWT' 


OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AL09000 

AL09100 

ALOPOOO 



OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

AL0P000 

ALDE000 

tm 



OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

ALOPOOO 

ALDE000 



•• Source file supplied with DEC file type only 










Table 6-1 Ada Type A Teat Programs and Source Code Files (continued) 


PROGRAM 



TlflCW 


b: 

A0001Q4 

A000109 

A000114 

A000204 

A000209 

A000300 

A000305 

A000310 

A000315 

A000316 

A000319 

A000322 

A000325 

A000328 

A000331 

A000334 

A000337 

A000340 

A000343 

AOD0346 

A000350 

A000353 

A000356 

A000359 

A000362 

A000365 

A000368 

A00036B 

A0D036E 

A00036H 

A00036K 

A00036N 

A0DQ36Q 

AOD036T 

A00036H 

AOD036Z 

AOD0373 

A000378 

AOD0383 


A000391 

A000404 

A000500 

A000504 

A000509 

A000514 

A000519 

AOD0525 


SUPPORT FILES!* 


IESI. SUPPORT. 


SOFTWARE PAC KAGES USED) 


OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURSPCK 

AOD0372 

OURSYSK 

AOOPOOO 

OURSPCK 

AOD0381 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 


OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPX 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURSYSK 

A0D0382 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

AOOPOOO 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 


ALOPOOO 

AL0P000 

ALOPOOO 

ALOPOOO 

ALOPOOO 

ALOPOOO 

ALOPOOO 

ALOPOOO 

ALOPOOO 

ALOPOOO 

ALOPOOO 

ALOPOOO 

ALOPOOO 

ALOPOOO 

A000002 

A000001 

AOOOOOl 

A000202 

AOOOOOl 


AO00311 

A000314 

A000317 

A000320 

A000323 

A000326 

A000329 

A000332 

A000335 

A000338 

A000341 

HATHFUNK 

A000347 

A000347 

A000354 

A0003S7 

A000360 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

OURDMPK 

A000374 

OURDMPX 

A000590 

A000402 

A000502 

A000507 

A000512 

A000517 

AOOPOOO 


ALDE000 

ALDE000 

ALDE000 

ALDE000 

ALDEOOO 

ALDE000 

ALDEOOO 

ALDEOOO 

ALDEOOO 

ALDEOOO 

ALDEOOO 

ALDEOOO 

ALDEOOO 

ALDEOOO 

A000102 

A000107 

A000112 

A000203 

A000207 


A000312 

A000315 

A000318 

A000321 

A000324 

A000327 

A000330 

A000333 

A000336 

A000339 

A000342 

AOOPOOO 

A000348 

A000351 

A000355 

AD00358 

A000361 

A000363 

A000366 

A000369 

AOOPOOO 

A00036F 

A00036Z 

A00036L 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

A00036U 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

A000375 

A000374 

AOOPOOO 

A000403 

A000503 

A000508 

A000513 

A000518 

AOD0523 


ALDEZll 


.T1W* 

*IY 
CO 
ill 
ill 
CO 
tl 

11'ICO 
d 
llilCIT 




A000103 

A000108 

A000113 

AOOPOOO 

A00020B 


AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

AOD0344 

A000349 

A0003S2 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

A000364 

A000367 

A00036A 

AOD036C 

A00036G 

A00036J 

A00036M 

AOD036O 

AOD036R 

A00036V 

AOD036X 

AOD0370 

A000376 

AOOPOOO 


AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

AOD0524 


•• Source file supplied with DEC file type only 


G-9 


AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 


AOD034S 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 


AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

AOD036D 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

AOOPOOO 

AOD036P 

AOD036S 

AOOPOOO 

AOD036Y 

AOD0371 

A000377 

AOD0380 




Table 6*1 Ada Type A Tast Program* and Sourea Coda Filas (coneludad) 


PROGRAM 


AOD0529 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AOOPOOO 

AOD0526 

AOD0527 AOD0528 

A000604 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

A000602 

A000603 

AOOPOOO 

A000605 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AOOPOOO 



A000606 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AOOPOOO 



A000607 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AOOPOOO 



A000704 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

A000702 

A000703 

AOOPOOO 

A000705 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AOOPOOO 



A000708 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

A000706 

A000707 

AOOPOOO 

A000711 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

A000709 

A000710 

AOOPOOO 

A00071S 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AOOPOOO 



A000714 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AOOPOOO 



A000715 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AOOPOOO 



A000716 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AOOPOOO 



A000717 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AOOPOOO 



A000718 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

AOOPOOO 



A000721 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

A000719 

A000720 

AOOPOOO 


G-10 





Table G-2 Ada Typa C Test Programs and Source Code Files 
PROGRAM SUPPORT FILEStK - TEST SUPPORT SOFTWARE PACKAOES_USEPl 


CA00000 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CA0P000 



CF03519 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CF03500 

CF03501 

CF03502 


CF03504 

CF03509 

CF03510 

CF03511 

CF03512 


CF03514 

CF03517 

CF03S18 

CFOPOOO 


CF03550 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CFD3551 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF03620 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CF03600 

CF03601 

CF03602 


CF03604 

CF03605 

CF03606 

CF03607 

CF03608 


CF03610 

CF03611 

CF03612 

CF03613 

CF03614 


CF03616 

CF03617 

CF03618 

CF03619 

CFOPOOO 

CF03650 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CF03630 

CF03631 

CF03632 


CF03634 

CF03635 

CF03636 

CFO3637 

CF03638 


CF03641 

CF03642 

CF05643 

CF03644 

CF03645 


CF03647 

CF03648 

CF03649 

CFOPOOO 


CF03704 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CF03700 

CF03701 


CF03705 

CFOPOOO 




CF03805 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CF03800 

CF03801 


CF03803 

CF03804 

CFOPOOO 



CF04120 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 



CF04121 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 



CF04122 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 



CF04123 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 



CF04124 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 



CF04125 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 



CF04126 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 



CF04127 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 



CFD41288 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF04129 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 



CFD412A 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF0412B 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CFD412C 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CFD412D 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF04130 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF04131 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF04132 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF04133 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CFD4135 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CFD4136 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CFD4137 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF04138 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CFD4139 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CFD413A 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CFD413B 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CFD413C 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF0413D 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CFD413E 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CFD413G 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF0413H 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF0413I 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF0413J 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF0413K 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF04310 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF04311 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF04312 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF04S10 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 



CF04511 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 



CF04512 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 



CF04513 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 



CF04S14 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 



CF04515 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 



CF04516 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 



CF04517 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 



CF0451J 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CF04518 

CF04519 

CF0451A 


CF0451C 

CF0451D 

CF0451E 

CF0451F 

CF0451C 


CF04S1I 

CFOPOOO 




8 Source 

file supplied with USE 

file type 

only 



CF03503 

CF03513 


CF05603 

CF03609 

CF03615 

CF03633 

CF03639 

CF03646 

CF03702 

CF03802 


CF0451B 

CF04S1H 


G-ll 







Table 0-2 Ada Type C Tast Program and Seurea Coda Filas (continued) 


PROGRAM 



CFD451U* 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 

CFD451K 

CFD451L 


CFD451N 

CFD451N 

CFD4510 

CFD451P 

CFD4519 

CFD451R 

CF0451Z 

CFDhMS 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CF0451V 

CF0451H 

CF0451X 

CF0451Y 


CFOPOOO 






CF04520 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CFD4521 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04522 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 



* 

CFD4523 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 



CFD4524 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 



CFD4525 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 



CFD4526 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 



CF04527 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CFD4528 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 



CF04529 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CFD452A 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 



CF04530 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF045S1 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04532 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF0453S 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04534 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04535 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 

* 



t'04536 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04537 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04S38 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04539 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF0453A 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04S3B 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF0453C 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04540 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04541 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04550 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04551 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04552 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04553 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04554 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04555 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04556 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04557 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04558 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04559 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CFD4550 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 



CF0455E 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 



CFD455F 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 



CFD455G 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 



CFD4S51 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 



CFD455J 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 



CF0455K 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 



CFD45SL 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 



CF0455H 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04550 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04580 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04582 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04S63 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CFD4566 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 



CFD4587 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 



CFD4568 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 



CFD4589 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 



CF04600 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CFO4801 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF04802 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CFD4803 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 



CFD4804 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 



CFD4805 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 



CFD4806 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 




• Souree file supplied with USE file type only 


C-12 






Table 6-2 Ada Typa C Tast Programs and Source Code Files (continued) 


PROGRAM 


CFD4607 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 

CFD460S 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 

CFD4609 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 

CFD460A 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 

CFD460B 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 

CF0460E 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CF0P000 


CF0460F 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF0P000 


CF0460G 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

* 

CF0460H 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF0P000 


CF0460I 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 


CF0460J 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CFD460K 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CFD460L 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 

CF0460M 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CFD460N 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CFD4600 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CFD4804 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO CFD4800 CFD4801 

CF05200 

CFD4802 

OURSYSK 

CFD4803*# 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 


CF05201 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF05202 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 


CF05203 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 


CF05204 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 


CF05205 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF05206 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 


CF05207 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF05208 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF05209 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF0520A 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF0520B 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF0520C 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 

CF0520D 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 

CFD520E 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 

CFD520F 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 

CFD520G 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 

CFD520H 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 

CFD520I 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 

CFD520J 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 

CF0520M 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 

CFD520N 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 

CF05200 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CFD520P 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CFD520Q 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CF0520R 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 

CF0520S 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 

CF05210 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF05211 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF05212 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF05213 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF05214 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 


CF05215 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CFD5218 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 

CFD5219 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 

CFD521A 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 

CFD521B 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 

CFD521C 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 

CFD521D 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 

CFD521E 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 

CFD521F 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

CFOPOOO 

CF0521H 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF0521I 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF0521J 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CF0521K 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 


CFD521K 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 

M Multiple 

versions 

ef source file suppliedCUSE and ADA file types) 


G-13 






Table 6-2 Ada Type C Test PregraM and Source Cede Files (continued) 


PROGRAM 

SUPPORTS 

1LESCK - TE 



CF0521L 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 



CFD521M 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 



CF0521N 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 



CFD5210 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 



CFD521P 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 



CF05304 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF05300 

CF05301 

CF05302 

CF05303 


CFOPOOO 






CF05508 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CF05305 

CFQ5S06 

CF05307 

CFOPOOO 

CF0540S 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF05400 

CF05401 

CF05402 

CF05403 


CF05404 

CF05405 

CF05406 

CF05407 

CFOPOOO 


CF05505 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CF05501 

CF05502 

CF05S0S 

CF05504 


CFOPOOO 






CF0550C 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CF05506 

CF0SS07 

CF05508 

CF05509 


CFDS50A 

CF0550B 

CFOPOOO 




CF0550D 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF0550E 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF0550F 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF06001 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF06009 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CFOSOIO 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 




CF06011 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CF06QZ2 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF06013 

CF06014 

CF06015 

CF06016 


CF06017 

CF06018 

CF06019 

CFOPOOO 



CF0605S 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CF06023 

CF06024 

CF06025 

CF0S026 


CF06027 

CF0S028 

CF06029 

CF06O3O 

CF06031 

CF06032 

CF06053 

CrurQuu 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFQ6045 

CF06044 

CF06045 

CF0S046 


CF06047 

CFOS048 

CF0S049 

CF06050 

CF06051 

CFOS 052 


CFOPOOO 






CF06069 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFC60S0 

CF0S061 

CF06062 

CF0S063 


CF0&064 

CF0S065 

CF0S066 

CFO*0*7 

CF06068 

CFOPOOO 

CF06079 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CF06070 

CF06071 

CF06072 

CF06073 


CF06074 

CF06075 

CF06076 

CF06077 

CF06078 

CFOPOOO 

CF06101 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CF06100 

CFOPOOO 



CF06109 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CF06108 

CFOPOOO 



CF0611B 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CF06108 

CFOPOOO 



CF06111 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOS102 

CFOPOOO 



CF06122 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CF06112 

CFQ6113 

CF06114 

CF0S115 


CF06116 

CF0S117 

CFC6118 

CF0S119 

CFOPOOO 


CF06140 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFDS132 

CF0S133 

CF06134 

CFOS155 


CF06136 

CF06137 

CFDS138 

CF0S139 

CFOPOOO 


CF06150 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFDS142 

CF0S145 

CF0S144 

CF06145 


CF06146 

CF06147 

CF04148 

CF06149 

CFOPOOO 


CF06160 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOS152 

CF061S3 

CF0S154 

CF06155 


CF06156 

CF06157 

CFO*158 

CF06159 

CFOPOOO 


CF06170 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF0S1S2 

CF0616S 

CF0S1S4 

CFOSIS 5 


CF0616S 

CF0SIS7 

CF061S8 

CF061S9 

CFOPOOO 


CF06180 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CF06172 

CF0S173 

CF0S174 

CF0S175 


CF06176 

CF06177 

CF0S178 

CF0S179 

CFOPOOO 


CF06190 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFO*182 

CF06185 

CF0S184 

CF0S185 


CF0618S 

CF06187 

CF0S188 

CF06189 

CFOPOOO 


CF06199 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CF06191 

CFO*192 

CF0S193 


CF06194 

CF0S195 

CF06196 

CF06197 

CFOS 198 

CFOPOOO 

CFDS19I 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF0S19A 

CF0619B 

CF0S19C 


CF0619D 

CF0S19E 

CF0S19F 

CF0S19G 

CF0S19H 

CFOPOOO 

CF0619R 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFQ619J 

CF0S19K 

CF0619L 


CF0629M 

CF0S19N 

CF06190 

CF0619P 

CFQ619Q 

CFOPOOO 

CFD6201 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CFDSZ09 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CFD6210 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

CFOPOOO 




CFD6211 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 




CFD6222 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CFDS213 

CFDS214 

CFD6215 


CFD621S 

CFDS217 

CFD6218 

CFDS219 



CFD6233 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CFDS223 

CFDS224 

CFDS225 


CFD622S 

CFD622? 

CFD6228 

CFD6229 

CFDS230 

CFD6231 


G-14 



Table G-2 Ada Type C Test Programs and Source Code Files (continued) 


PBPSRftfl SUPPORT FILESCX - TEST SUPPORT SOFTHARF PACKAGES USED) 
CFD6232 


CF0625S 

OURSYSK 

OURSNPK 

CFOPDOO 

CFD6243 

CFD6244 

CFD6245 


CFD6246 

CFD6252 

CFD6247 

CFD6248 

CFD6249 

CFD6250 

CFD6251 

CFD6269 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CFD6260 

CFD6261 

CFD6262 


CFD6263 

CFD6264 

CFD6265 

CFD6266 

CFD6267 

CFD6268 

CFD6279 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CFD6270 

CFDA271 

CFD6272 


CFD6273 

CFD6274 

CFD6275 

CFD6276 

CFD6277 

CFD6278 

CFD6301 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CFD6300 



CFD6309 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CFD6308 



CFD6310 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CFD6308 



CFD6311 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CFD6308 



CFD6322 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CFD6312 

CFD6313 

CFD6314 


CFD6315 

CFD6316 

CFD6317 

CFDA318 

CFD6319 


CFD6340 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CFD6352 

CFD6333 

CFD6334 


CFD6335 

CFD6S36 

CFD6337 

CFD63S8 

CFD6539 


CFD6350 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CFD6342 

CFD6343 

CFD6344 


CFD6S45 

CFD6346 

CFD6S47 

CFD6348 

CFD6349 


CFD6360 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CFDA352 

CFD6353 

CFD63S4 


CFD6355 

CFD6356 

CFD6357 

CFD6358 

CFD6359 


CFD6370 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CFD6362 

CFD6565 

CFD6364 


CFD6365 

CFD6S66 

CFD6367 

CFD6368 

CFD6369 


CFD6380 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CFDA372 

CFD6373 

CFD6374 


CFD8375 

CFD6376 

CFDA377 

CFD6378 

CFD6379 


CFD6390 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CFD6382 

CFD6383 

CFD6384 


CFD6385 

CFD6386 

CFD6S87 

CFD6388 

CFD6369 


CF0642B 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF06422 

CF06423 

CF06424 


CFOA425 
CFOPOOO 

CF06426 

CF06427 

CFOA428 

CF06429 

CF0642A 

CF06803 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF06802 

CFOPOOO 



CF06807 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF06806 

CFOPOOO 



CF06809 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF06808 

CFOPOOO 


CF0680B 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF0680A 

CFOPOOO 


CF0680D 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF0680C 

CFOPOOO 


CF0680F 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF0680E 

CFOPOOO 


CFD680H 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 

CFD680G 


CFD680J 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CFOPOOO 



CF06811 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF06810 

CFOPOOO 



CF06815 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF06814 

CFOPOOO 



CF06817 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF06616 

CFOPOOO 



CF06819 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF06818 

CFOPOOO 



CF06821 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF06820 

CFOPOOO 



CF06823 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF06822 

CFOPOOO 


CF06825 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF06824 

CFOPOOO 


CFH9301 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 





' -N9302 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 





t-N93Q3 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 





CF0950I 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 


CF09500 

CFOPOOO 


CF09502 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF09500 

CFOPOOO 


CF09503 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF09500 

CFOPOOO 


CF09504 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF09500 

CFOPOOO 


CF0950S 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF09500 

CFOPOOO 


CF09506 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF09500 

CFOPOOO 


CF09507 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF09500 

CFOPOOO 


CF09508 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF09500 

CFOPOOO 


CF095Q9 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

CF09500 

CFOPOOO 



OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

m 




CF09601 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

CFOPOOO 




CF09602 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

CFOPOOO 




CF09603 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

CFOPOOO 




CF09604 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

CFOPOOO 




CF09605 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

CFOPOOO 




CF09606 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

CFOPOOO 




CF09607 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

CFOPOOO 





G-1 5 


Table 6-2 Ada Typa C last Programs and Sourca Coda Filas (eontinuad) 


PROGRAM 

CFN9611 

CFN9612 

CFN9613 

CF09711 

CF09713 

CF09720 

CF09721 

CF09731 

CF09901 

CF09902 

CF09903 

CFM9A01 

CFM9A02 

CFH9A03 

CF09B01 

CFD9C00 


«« 
• « 

CFMB003 

CFMB005 

CFMB012 

CFMB016 

CFMB02S 

CFHB032 

CFHB036 

CFMB044 

CF0C301 

CF0C302 

CF0C304 

CF0C305 

CF0C306 

CF0C307 

CFDC311 

CFDC314 

CFDD600 

CFDD601 

CFDD602 

CFDD603 

CFDD604 

CFDD605 

CFDD606 

CFDD607 

CFDD608* 

CFDD609 

CFDD610 

CFDD611 

CFDDA01 

CFDDA02 

CFDE220 


CFDE250 


CFDE420 




OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSYSK CF09710 

OURSYSK CF09712 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSYSK CF09900 

OURSYSK CF09900 

OURSYSK CF09900 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSYSK CFMB000 

OURSYSK CFMB002 

OURSYSK CFMB004 

OURSYSK CFHB01O 

OURSYSK CFMB013 

OURSYSK CFMB017 

OURSYSK CFHB013 

OURSYSK CFMB033 

OURSYSK CFMB041 

OURSYSK OURDMPK 

OURSYSK OURDMPK 

OURSYSK OURDMPK 

OURSYSK OURDMPK 

OURSYSK OURDMPK 

OURSYSK OURDMPK 

OURSYSK OURDMPK 

OURSYSK OURDMPK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSPCK OURSYSK 

OURSYSK OURDMPK 

CFDE203 CFDE204 

CFDE209 CFDE20A 

CFDE215 CFDE216 

OURSYSK OURDMPK 

CFDE233 CFDE234 

CFDE239 CFDE23A 

CFDE245 CFDE244 

OURSYSK OURDMPK 

CFDE403 CFDE404 

CFDE409 CFDE40A 

CFDE415 CFDE416 



CF0P000 

OURDMPK CF09500 

OURDMPK CF09500 

OURDMPK CF09500 

CF0P000 

CF0P000 

CF0P000 

CFM9AD0 

CFM9A00 

CFM9A00 

OURDMPK CF09500 

CF0P000 CFD9000 

CF0P000 CFD9000 

CF0P00D CFD9000 

CF0P000 CFD9000 

CF0P000 CFD9000 


CFMB011 

CFMB014 CFMBD15 

CFMB018 CFMB019 

CFMB014 CFMB015 

CFMB034 CFMB035 

CFMB042 CFMB043 

CF0C100 CF0C101 

CF0C100 CF0C101 

CF0C102 CF0C103 

CF0C102 CF0PD00 

CF0C102 CFOPOOO 

CF0C102 CFOPOOO 

CFOPOOO CFDC104 

CFOPOOO CFDC106 

CFOPOOO 

CFOPOOO 

CFOPOOO 

CFOPOOO 

CFOPOOO 

CFOPOOO 

CFOPOOO 

CFOPOOO 

CFOPOOO 

CFOPOOO 

CFOPOOO 

CFOPOOO 

CFOPOOO 

CFOPOOO 

CFOPOOO CFDEOOO 

CFDE205 CFDE206 

CFDE211 CFDE212 

CFOPOOO CFDEOOO 

CFDE235 CFDE238 

CFDE241 CFDEZ42 

CFOPOOO CFDEOOO 

CFDE405 CFDE406 

CFDE411 CFDE412 


CFOPOOO 

CFOPOOO 

CFOPOOO 


CFOPOOO 



CF0C300 CFOPOOO 
CF0C300 CFOPOOO 
CF0C303 CFOPOOO 


CFDC105 CFDC310 
CFDC107 0 CFDC313 


CFDE201 CFDE202 
CFDE207 CFDE208 
CFDE213 CFDE214 

CFDE231 CFDE232 
CFDE237 CFDE238 
CFDE243 CFDE244 

CFDE401 CFDE402 
CFDE407 CFDE408 
CFDE413 CFDE414 


M Multiple varaiona of aourea fila auppliadCUSE and ADA fila typaa) 
•• Sourca fila auppliad with DEC fila typa only 
• Sourca fila auppliad with USE fila typa only 


G-16 



Table G-2 Ada Typa C Tast Programs and Source Coda Filas (continued) 


PROGRAM 

CFDE450 


CFDF000 

CFDF001 

CFDF002 

CFDF003 

CFDF004 

CFDF005 

CGD0001 


Hd'Tri'l. 


CGD0009 

CG0000C 


SUPPORT FILFSt* - TEST SUPPORT SOFTHARF PACKAGES M S W. 


5GN000K 

££M13 

CGD0049 

cfimia** 

CL09101 

CL09111 

CL09121 

CL09131 

p.. 


i{j9p 9 «« 


:L DE4C4 f f 




ft > UT 


5o6oT04 
C000109 
C000114 
C000204 
C000209 
C000300 
C000505 
C000310 
C000313 


*•» 


OURSYS* 

CFDE4S5 

CFDE439 

CFDE445 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

CGD0008 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSPC* 

CGD0007 

OURSPC* 

CGD0007 

OURSPC* 

CGD0007 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC* 

OURSPC*’ 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 


OURDMP* 

CF0P000 

CFDE000 

CFDE431 

CFDE432 

CFDE434 

CFDE435 

CFDE436 

CFDE437 

CFDE438 

CFDE43A 

CFDE441 

CFDE442 

CFDE443 

CFDE444 

CFDE446 





OURDMP* 

MATHFUN* 

CF0P000 



OURDMP* 

MATHFUN* 

CF0P000 



OURDMP* 

MATHFUN* 

CF0P000 



OURDMP* 

MATHFUN* 

CF0P000 


* 

OURDMP* 

MATHFUN* 

CFOPOOO 



OURDMP* 

MATHFUN* 

CF0P000 




MATHFUN* 

CG0P000 

CGOPOOO 

DURDMP* 

MATHFUN* 

CONOOOF 

OURSYS* 

CGD0008 

OURSYS* 

CGD0008 

OURSYS* 

CGD0008 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

OURDMP* 

OURDMP* 

OURDMP* 

OURDMP* 

COOPOOO 

COOPOOO 

COOPOOO 

OURDMP* 


CGOPOOO 


mm 

CGOPOOO 

CGOPOOO 

CGN000G 

CGOPOOO 

CGD0019 

CGOPOOO 

CGD0019 

CGOPOOO 

CGD0019 

CL09000 

CL09000 

CL09000 

CL09000 

CL09000 

CL09000 

CL09000 

CL09000 

CL09000 

CL09000 

CL09000 

CL09000 

CL09000 

CL09000 

CL 09000 

CL09000 

CL0P000 

CL0P000 

CLOPOOO 

CL0P000 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

C000002 

C000001 

COOOOOl 

C00020? 

COOOOOl 


C000311 


CGD0000 
CGD0005 CGD0006 


CGDOOOO 

CGNOOOK 

CGD0004 



iOO 
CL09100 
CL09100 
CL09100 
CL09100 
CL09100 
CL09100 
CL09100 
CL09100 
CL09100 
CL09100 
CL09100 
CL09100 
CL09100 
CL 09100 
CL0910D 
CLDEOOO 
CLDE000 
CLDEOOO 
CLDEOOO 
CLDEOOO 
CLDEOOO 
CLDEOOO 
CLDEOOO 
CLDEOOO 
CLDEOOO 
CLDEOOO 
CLDEOOO 
CLDEOOO 
CLDEOOO 
CLDEOOO 
CLDEOOO 
COO0102 
C000107 
C000112 
C000203 
C000207 


C000312 


;gnoooi 

CGD0005 

CGD0005 

CGD0005 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 

CLOPOOO 



C000108 

C000113 

COOPOOO 

C000208 


COOPOOO 


CGD0007 

CGN000J 

CGD0006 

CGD0006 

CGD0006 


CLD92P0 


mm 


piM 


SM 

FihTviftft 


L192P0 


L P92 iP 


CLD92P0 

l hA O ft rt 


£JLM2M 

^ i hntnn 


Mi 

CiPiiip 


CLD920D 


COOPOOO 

COOPOOO 

COOPOOO 

COOPOOO 


•• Source file supplied with DEC file typa only 


G-17 











Table 6-2 Ada Type C Tast Programs and Source Code Files (concluded) 


PROGRAM 



C000316 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

C000314 

C000315 

COOPOOO 


C000319 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

C000317 

C000318 

COOPOOO 


C000322 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

C000320 

C000321 

COOPOOO 


C000325 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

C000323 

C000324 

COOPOOO 


C000328 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

C000326 

C000327 

COOPOOO 


C000331 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

C000329 

C000330 

COOPOOO 


C000334 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

C000332 

C000333 

COOPOOO 


C000337 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

C000335 

C000336 

COOPOOO 

• 

CQ00340 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

C000338 

C000339 

COOPOOO 


C000343 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

C000341 

COQ0342 

COOPOOO 


COD0346 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

MATHFUNX 

COOPOOO 

COD0344 

COD0345 

C000350 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

C000347 

C000348 

C000349 

COOPOOO 

C000353 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

C000347 

C000351 

COQ0352 

COOPOOO 

C000356 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

C000354 

C000355 

COOPOOO 


C000359 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

C000357 

C000358 

COOPOOO 


C000362 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

C000360 

CQ00361 

COOPOOO 


C000365 

OURSPC* 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

C000363 

C000364 

COOPOOO 

C000368 

OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

C000366 

C000367 

COOPOOO 

C00036B 

OURSPC* 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

C000369 

C00036A 

COOPOOO 

C0D036E 

OURSPC* 

OURSfSX 

OURDMPX 

COOPOOO 

C0D036C 

COD036D 

C00036H 

OURSPC* 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

C00036F 

C00036G 

COOPOOO 

C00036K 

OURSPC* 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

C00036I 

C00036J 

COOPOOO 

C00036N 

OURSPC* 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

C00036L 

C00036M 

COOPOOO 

COD036Q 

OURSPC* 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

COOPOOO 

C0D0360 

C0D036P 

COD036T 

OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

COOPOOO 

C0D036R 

COD036S 

C00036W 

OURSPC* 

OURSYSX 

OURDMP* 

C00036U 

C00036V 

COOPOOO 

CQD036Z 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

COOPOOO 

COD036X 

COD036Y 

C0D0373 

OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

COOPOOO 

COD0370 

COD0371 


COD0372 






C000378 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

C000374 

C000375 

C000376 

C000377 


COOPOOO 






C0D0383 

OURSPC* 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

C0D0374 

COOPOOO 

CODD380 


COD0381 

COD0382 





C000391 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

C000390 

COOPOOO 



C000404 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

C000402 

C000403 

COOPOOO 


C000500 

OURSYS* 

COOPOOO 





C000504 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

C000502 

C000503 

COOPOOO 


C000509 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

C000507 

C000508 

COOPOOO 


C000514 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

C000512 

C000513 

COOPOOO 


C000519 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

C000517 

C000518 

COOPOOO 


COD0525 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

COOPOOO 

COD0523 

COD0524 


COD0529 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

COOPOOO 

COD0526 

C0D0527 

COD0528 

C000604 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

C000602 

C000603 

COOPOOO 


C000605 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

COOPOOO 




C0006D6 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

COOPOOO 




C000607 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

COOPOOO 




C000704 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

C000702 

CD00703 

COOPOOO 


C000705 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

COOPOOO 




C000708 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

C000706 

CD00707 

COOPOOO 


C000711 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

C000709 

C000710 

COOPOOO 


C000713 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

COOPOOO 




C000714 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

COOPOOO 




C000715 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

COOPOOO 




C000716 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

COOPOOO 




C000717 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

COOPOOO 




C000718 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

COOPOOO 




C000721 

OURSYS* 

OURDMPX 

C000719 

C000720 

COOPOOO 



G-18 



Table 7-3 Ada Type E Tast Programs and Source Code Files 


PRO fi RAH SUPPORT FILES(X - TEST SUPPORT SOFTWARE PACKAGES USED) 


EAOOOOO 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF03519 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 


EF03504 

EF03509 


EF03514 

' EF03517 

EF03550 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

EF03551 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

EF03620 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 


EF03604 

EF03605 


EF03610 

EF03611 


EF03616 

EF03617 

EF03650 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 


EF03634 

EF03635 


EF03641 

EF03642 


EF03647 

EF03648 

EF03704 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 


EF03703 

EF0P000 

EF03805 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 


EF03B03 

EF03804 

EF04120 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF04121 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF04122 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF04123 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF04124 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF04125 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF04126 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF04127 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFD4128* 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

EF04129 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF0412A 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

EF0412B 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

EFD412C 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

EFD412D 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

EF04130 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

EF04131 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

EF04132 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

EF04133 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

EFD4135 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

EFD4136 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

EFD4137 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

EFD413B 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

EFD4139 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

EF0413A 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

EFD413B 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

EFD413C 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

EF0413D 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

EFD413E 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

EF0413G 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

EF0413H 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

EF0413I 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

EF0413J 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

EF0413K 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

EF04310 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

EF04311 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

EF04312 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

EF04510 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF04511 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF04512 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF04513 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF04514 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF04515 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF04516 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF04517 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF0451J 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 


EF0451C 

EF0451D 


EF04511 

EF0P000 


♦ Source file supplied with USE 


EAOPOOO 

EF03500 

EF03S01 

EF03502 

EF03510 

EF03511 

EF03512 

EF03S18 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


EF03600 

EF03601 

EF03602 

EF03606 

EF03607 

EF03608 

EF03612 

EF03613 

EF03614 

EF03618 

EF03619 

EFOPOOO 

EF03630 

EF03631 

EF03632 

EF03636 

EF03637 

EF03638 

EF03643 

EF03644 

EF03645 

EF03649 

EFOPOOO 

OURDMPX 

EF03700 

EF03701 

OURDMPX 

EF03800 

EF03801 

EF0P000 

EF0P000 

EF0P000 

EF0P000 

EFOPOOO 

EF0P000 

EFOPOOO 

EFOPOOO 

EFOPOOO 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 

EFOPOOO 

OURDMPX 

—0P00D 


OURDMPX 

rOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


EFOPOOO 

EFOPOOO 

EFOPOOO 

EFOPOOO 

EFOPOOO 

EFOPOOO 

EFOPOOO 

EFOPOOO 

EF04518 

EF04519 

EF0451A 

EF0451E 

EF0451F 

EF0451G 

file type 

only 



EF03503 

EF03513 


EF03603 

EF03609 

EF03615 

EF03633 

EF03639 

EF03646 

EF03702 

EF03802 


EF0451B 

EF0451H 


G-19 


Table 7*3 Ada Type E Teat Programs and Source Code Files (continued) 


PBflfi&Afl 

EFD451U* 


EF0451Z 

EF0452G 

EF04521 

EF04522 

EFD4523 

EFD4524 

EFD4525 

EFD4526 

EF04527 

EFD4528 

EF04529 

EFD452A 

EF04530 

EF04531 

EF04532 

EF04533 

EF04534 

EF04535 

EF04536 

EF04537 

EF04538 

EF04539 

EF0453A 

EF0453B 

EF0453C 

EF04540 

EF04541 

EF04550 

EF04551 

EF04552 

EF04553 

EF04554 

EFQ455S 

EF04556 

EF045S7 

EF04558 

EF04559 

EFD455D 

EFD4SSE 

EFD455F 

EFD455G 

EFD455I 

EFD455J 

EFD455K 

EFD455L 

EF0455N 

EF04550 

EF04560 

EF04562 

EF04563 

EFD4566 

EFD4567 

EFD4568 

EFD4569 

EF04600 

EF04601 

EF04602 

EFD4603 

EFD4604 

EFD4605 

EFD4606 

8 Source 


ftiPPOPT FTI FS(K ~ TEST SUPPORT S OFTWARE PACKAGES U5EB2 


OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 

EFD451K 

EFD451H 

EFD451N 

EFD4510 

EFD451P 

EFD451Q 

EFD451S 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF0451V 

EF0451H 

EF0451X 

EF0P000 





OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF0P000 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF0P000 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFDP000 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX . 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 


OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 



EFD451L 

EFD451R 

EF0451Y 


file supplied with USE file type only 


G-20 



Table 7-3 Ada Type E Test Programs and Source Code Files (continued) 


PROGRAM SUPPORT FILFSfX - TEST S UPPORT SOFTHARF PACKASES U5EE2 


EFD4607 

EFD4608 

EFD4609 

EFD460A 

EFD460B 

EF0460E 

EF0460F 

EF0460G 

EF0460H 

EF0460I 

EF0460J 

EFD460K 

EFD460L 

EF0460M 

EFD460N 

EFD4600 

EF05200 

EF05201 

EF05202 

EF05203 

EF05204 

EF05205 

EF05206 

EF05207 

EF05208 

EF05209 

EF0520A 

EF0520B 

EFD520C 

EFD520D 

EFD520E 

EFD520F 

EFD520G 

EFD520H 

EFD520I 

EFD520J 

EF0520M 

EFD520N 

EF05200 

EFD520P 

EFD520Q 

EF0520R 

EF0520S 

EF05210 

EF05211 

EF05212 

EF05213 

EF05214 

EF05215 

EFD5218 

EFD5219 

EFD521A 

EFD521B 

EFD521C 

EFD521D 

EFD521E 

EFD521F 

EF0521H 

EF05211 

EF0521J 

EF0521K 

EFD521K 

EF0521L 

EFD521M 

EF0521N 


OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCx 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCx 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCx 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCx 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCx 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCx 

OURSPCX 


OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 


OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 

OURTYPX 

EFOPOOO 

EFOPOOO 


EFOPOOO 


EFOPOOO 


EFOPOOO 


EFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 

EFOPOOO 


EFOPOOO 


EFOPOOO 


EFOPOOO 


EFOPOOO 


EFOPOOO 


EFOPOOO 


EFOPOOO 


EFOPOOO 


EFOPOOO 


EFOPOOO 


EFOPOOO 


OURTYP* 

EFOPOOO 

OURTYP* 

EFOPOOO 

OURTYP* 

EFOPOOO 

OUPTYP* 

EFOPOOO 

OUKTYP* 

EFOPOOO 

OURTYP* 

EFOPOOO 

OURTYP* 

EFOPOOO 

OURTYP* 

EFOPOOO 

OURDMP* 

EFOPOOO 

OURDMP* 

EFOPOOO 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 

OURDMP* 

EFOPOOO 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 

OURDMP* 

EFOPOOO 

EFOPOOO 


EFOPOOO 


EFOPOOO 


EFOPOOO 


EFOPOOO 



EF0P000 

OURTYPX EFDP000 

OURTYPX EF0P000 

OURTYPX EF0P000 

OURTYPX EFOPOOO 

OURTYPX EFOPOOO 

OURTYPX EFOPOOO 

OURTYPX EFOPOOO 

OURTYP* EFOPOOO 

EFOPOOO 
EFOPOOO 
EFOPOOO 
EFOPOOO 

OURDMPX EFOPOOO 

OURDMPX EFOPOOO 

OURDMPX EFOPOOO 

OURDMPX EFOPOOO 


G-21 








Table 7-3 Ada Type E Test Propram* and Source Code Files (continued) 


PROGRAM SUPPORT .FILES(» - TEST SUPPORT SOFTWA RE PACKAGES USED) 


EFD5210 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



EFD521P 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 



EF05304 

OURSYSX 

EF0P000 

OURDMPX 

EF05300 

EF0S301 

EF05302 

EF05303 

EF05308 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF05305 

EF05306 

EF05307 

EFOPOOO 

EF05408 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF05400 

EF05401 

EF05402 

EF05403 


EF05404 

EF0S405 

EF05406 

EF05407 

EFOPOOO 


EF05505 

OURSYSX 

EF0P000 

OURDMPX 

EF05S01 

EF05502 

EF05503 

EF05504 

EF0550C 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF05506 

EF05507 

EF05508 

EF05509 


EF0550A 

EF0550B 

EFOPOOO 




EF0550D 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 




EF0550E 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 




EF0550F 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 




EF06001 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 




EF06009 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 




EF06010 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 




EF06011 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 




EF06022 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF06013 

EF06014 

EF06015 

EF06016 


EF06017 

EF06018 

EF06019 

EFOPOOO 



EF06033 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF06023 

EF06024 

EF06025 

EF06026 


EF06027 

EFOPOOO 

EF06028 

EF06029 

EF06030 

EF06031 

EF06032 

EF06053 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF06043 

EF06044 

EF06045 

EF06046 


EF06047 

EFOPOOO 

EF06048 

EF06049 

EF06050 

EF06051 

EF06052 

EF06069 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF06060 

EF06061 

EF06062 

EF06063 


EF06064 

EF06065 

EFD6066 

EF06067 

EF06068 

EFOPOOO 

EF06079 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF06070 

EF06071 

EFD6072 

EF06073 


EF06074 

EF06075 

EF06076 

EF06077 

EF06078 

EFOPOOO 

EF06101 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF06100 

EFOPOOO 



EF06109 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF06108 

EFOPOOO 



EF06110 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF06108 

EFOPOOO 



EF06111 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF06108 

EFOPOOO 



EF06122 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF06112 

EF06113 

EF06124 

EF06115 


EF06116 

EF06117 

EF06118 

EF06119 

EFOPOOO 


EF06140 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF06132 

EF06133 

EF08134 

EF06135 


EF06136 

EF06137 

EF06138 

EF06139 

EFOPOOO 


EF06150 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF06142 

EF06143 

EF06144 

EF06145 


EF06146 

EF06147 

EF06148 

EF06149 

EFOPOOO 


EF06160 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF06152 

EF06153 

EF06154 

EF06155 


EF06156 

EF06157 

EF06158 

EF06159 

EFOPOOO 


EF06170 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF06162 

EF06163 

EF04164 

EF06165 


EF06166 

EF06167 

EF06168 

EF06169 

EFOPOOO 


EF06180 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF06172 

EF06173 

EF06174 

EF06175 


EF06176 

EF06177 

EF06178 

EF06179 

EFOPOOO 


EF06190 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF06182 

EF06183 

EF06184 

EF06185 


EF06186 

EF06187 

EF06188 

EF06189 

EFOPOOO 


EF06199 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF06191 

EF06192 

EF06193 


EF06194 

EF06195 

EF06196 

EF06197 

EF06198 

EFOPOOO 

EF0619I 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF0619A 

EF0619B 

EF0619C 


EF0619D 

EF0619E 

EF0619F 

EF0619G 

EF0619H 

EFOPOOO 

EF0619R 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EF0619J 

EF0619K 

EF0619L 


EF0619M 

EF0619N 

EF06190 

EF0619P 

EF0619Q 

EFOPOOO 

EFD6201 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 




EFD6209 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 




EFD6210 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 




EFD6211 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 




EFD6222 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 

EFD6213 

EFD6214 

EFD6215 


EFD6216 

EFD6217 

EFD6218 

EFD6219 



EFD6233 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 

EFD6223 

EFD6224 

EFD6225 


EFD6226 

EFD6232 

EFD6227 

EFD6228 

EFD6229 

EFD4230 

EFD6231 

EF06253 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 

EFD6243 

EFD6244 

EFD8245 


EFD6246 

EFD6247 

EFD6248 

EFD6249 

EFD4250 

EFD6251 


G-22 






Table 7-3 Ada Typa E Tast Programs and Sourca Code Filas (continued) 


PROGRAM 




EFD6252 






EFD6269 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EFOPOOO 

EFD6260 

EFD6261 

EFD6262 


EFD6263 

EF06264 

EFD6265 

EFD6266 

EFD6267 

EFD6268 

EFD6279 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EFOPOOO 

EFD6270 

EFD6271 

EFD6272 


EFD6273 

EFD6274 

EFD6275 

EFD6276 

EFD6277 

EFD6278 

EFD6301 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EFOPOOO 

EFD6300 



EFD6309 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EFOPOOO 

EFD6308 



EFD6310 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EFOPOOO 

EFD6308 


’ 

EFD6311 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EFOPOOO 

EFD6308 



EFD6322 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EFOPOOO 

EFD6312 

EFD6313 

EFD6314 


EFD6315 

EFD6316 

EFD6317 

EFD6318 

EFD6S19 


EFD6340 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EFOPOOO 

EFD6332 

EFD6333 

EFD6334 


EFD6335 

EFD6336 

EFD6337 

EFD6338 

EFD6339 


EFD6350 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EFOPOOO 

EFD6342 

EFD6343 

EFD6344 


EFD6345 

EFD6346 

EFD6347 

EFD6348 

EFD6349 


EFD6360 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EFOPOOO 

EFD6352 

EFD6353 

EFD6354 


EFD6555 

EFD6356 

EFD6357 

EFD6358 

EFD6359 


EFD6370 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EFOPOOO 

EFD6362 

EFD6363 

EFD6364 


EFD6365 

EFD6366 

EFD6367 

EFD6368 

EFD6369 


EFD6380 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EFOPOOO 

EFD6372 

EFD6373 

EFD6374 


EFD6375 

EFD6376 

EFD6377 

EFD6378 

EFD6379 


EFD6390 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EFOPOOO 

EFD6382 

EFD6383 

EFD6384 


EFD6385 

EFD6386 

EFD6387 

EFD6388 

EFD6389 


EF0642B 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EF06422 

EF06423 

EF06424 


EF06425 

EF06426 

EF06427 

EF06428 

EF06429 

EF0642A 


EF0P000 






EF06803 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EF06802 

EFOPOOO 



EF06807 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EF06806 

EFOPOOO 



EF06809 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EF06808 

EFOPOOO 


EF0680B 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EF0680A 

EFOPOOO 


EF0680D 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EF0680C 

EFOPOOO 


EF0680F 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EF0680E 

EFOPOOO 


EFD680H 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EFOPOOO 

EFD680G 


EFD680J 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EFOPOOO 



EF06811 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EF06810 

EFOPOOO 



EF06815 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EF06814 

EFOPOOO 



EF06817 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EF06816 

EFOPOOO 



EF06819 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EF06818 

EFOPOOO 



EF06821 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EF06820 

EFOPOOO 



EF06823 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EF06822 

EFOPOOO 


EF06825 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EF06824 

EFOPOOO 


EFN9301 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 





EFN9302 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

|fn?{op 




EFN9303 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

|FN$300 




EF09501 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EF09500 

EFOPOOO 


EF09502 

OURSPCK 

OURSYS" 

OURDMPK 

EF09500 

EFOPOOO 


EF09503 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EF09500 

EFOPOOO 


EF09504 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EF09500 

EFOPOOO 


EF09505 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EF09500 

EFOPOOO 


EF09506 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EF09500 

EFOPOOO 


EF09507 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EF09500 

EFOPOOO 


EF09508 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EF09500 

EFOPOOO 


EF09509 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EF09500 

EFOPOOO 



EFN9511 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFN9510 

EF09600 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

Ifopooo 

EF09601 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 

EF09602 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 

EF09603 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 

EF09604 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 

EF09605 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 

EF09606 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 

EF09607 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 

EFN9&11 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 


EFN9612 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFN9610 

EFN9613 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

efmoaTo 


G-23 



Table 7-3 Ada Type E Test Programs and Source Coda Files (continued) 


MOO*AM SUPPORT FILES(X - TEST S UPPORT SOFTHA RF PACKAGES USED) 


EF09711 

OURSYSK 

EF09710 

EF0P000 





EF09713 

OURSYSK 

EF09712 

EFOPOOO 





EF09720 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

EF09500 

EFOPOOO 


EF09721 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

EF09500 

EFOPOOO 


EF09731 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

EF09500 

EFOPOOO 


EF09901 

OURSYSK 

EF09900 

EFOPOOO 





EF09902 

OURSYSK 

EF09900 

EFOPOOO 





EF09903 

OURSYSK 

EF09900 

EFOPOOO 




- 

EFM9A01 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFM9A00 





EFM9A02 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFM9A00 





EFM9A03 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

EFM9A00 





EF09B01 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

EF09500 

EFOPOOO 


EFD9C00 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 

EFD9000 




: 

FD9C01 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 

EFD9000 

r 

FD9200 


h 

: D9C02 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 

EFD9000 


• D9200 


P 

a 

-D9C03** 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 

EFD9000 

h 

: D9200 


P 

-D9C04«« 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 

EFD9000 


■D9200 


1“ 

F0C301 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

EF0C100 

EF0C101 


F0C300 

EFOPOOO 

EF0C302 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

EF0C100 

EF0C101 

EF0C300 

EFOPOOO 

EF0C304 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

EF0C102 

EF0C103 

EF0C303 

EFOPOOO 

EF0C305 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

EF0C102 

EFOPOOO 




EF0C306 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

EF0C102 

EFOPOOO 




EF0C307 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

EF0C102 

EFOPOOO 




EFDC311 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 

EFDC104 

EFDC105 

EFDC310 

EFDC314 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 

EFDC106 

EFDClOZtt 

EFDC313 

EFDD600 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 





EFDD601 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 





EFDD602 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 





EFDD603 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 





EFDD604 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 





EFDD605 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 





EFDD606 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 





EFDD607 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 





EFDD608F 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 





EFDD609 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 





EFDD610 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 





EFDD611 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 





EFDDA01 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 





EFDDA02 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EFOPOOO 





EFDE220 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 

EFDE000 

EFDE201 

EFDE202 



EFDE203 

EFDE204 

EFDE205 

EFDE206 

EFDE207 

EFDE208 



EFDE209 

EFDE20A 

EFDE211 

EFDE212 

EFDE213 

EFDE214 



EFDE215 

EFDE216 






EFDE250 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 

EFDE000 

EFDE231 

EFDE232 



EFDE233 

EFDE234 

EFDE235 

EFDE236 

EFDE237 

EFDE238 



EFDE239 

EFDE23A 

EFDE241 

EFDE242 

EFDE243 

EFDE244 



EFDE245 

EFDE246 






EFDE420 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 

EFDE000 

EFDE401 

EFDE402 



EFDE403 

EFDE404 

EFDE405 

EFDE406 

EFDE407 

EFDE408 



EFDE409 

EFDE40A 

EFDE411 

EFDE412 

EFDE413 

EFDE414 



EFDE415 

EFDE416 






EFDE450 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

EFOPOOO 

EFDE000 

EFDE431 

EFDE432 



EFDE433 

EFDE434 

EFDE435 

EFDE436 

EFDE437 

EFDE43B 



EFDE439 

EFDE43A 

EFDE441 

EFDE442 

EFDE443 

EFDE444 



EFDE445 

EFDE446 



EFDFQOO 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

MATHFUNK 

EFOPOOO 

EFDF001 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

MATHFUNK 

EFOPOOO 

EFDF002 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

MATHFUNK 

EFOPOOO 

EFDF003 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

MATHFUNK 

EFOPOOO 

EFDF004 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

MATHFUNK 

EFOPOOO 

EFDFOOS 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

MATHFUNK 

EFOPOOO 

EGpQOOl 

OURSYSK 

MATHFUNK 

EGOPOOO 

EGD0000 


OURSYSK 

EOOPOOO 

£!W 



ft Multiple versions of sourea file suppliedtUSE and ADA file types) 
•• Source file supplied with DEC file typo only 
f Source file supplied with USE file type only 


Z-2L 









Table 7-3 Ada Type E Test Programs and Source Coda Files (continued) 


program 


i 11 i 4--1 M-il J d •] 

wmimw 



ECD0009 

OURSYSX 

EG0P000 

EGD0004 

EGD0005 

EGD0006 

EGD0007 


EGD0008 






EG0000C 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

EGOPOOO 




■EGD000E 

OURSYSX 

HATHFUNK 

EGOPOOO 

EGDOOOO 

EGDOOOD 


EGN000K 

OURSYSX 

EGNpOOF 

EGN000G 

EGN000H 

EGNOOOI 

EGN000J 

EGD0039 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EGOPOOO 

M 1 Mill 

EGD0005 

EGD0006 


EGD0007 

EG00008 

EGD0019 

l»4o.iw: 



EGD0049 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

EGOPOOO 

iiS 4t)'TiTTrT' 

EGD0005 

EGD0006 


EGD0007 

EGD0008 

EGD0019 




EGD0059H 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

EGOPOOO 


EGD0005 

EGD0006 


EGD0007 

EGD0008 

EGD0019 




EL09101 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EL09000 

EL091S8 

ELOPOOO 


EL OH 1 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EL09000 

EL09100 

ELOPOOO 


EL09121 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

EL09000 

EL09100 

ELOPOOO 


EL09131 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

EL09000 

EL09100 

ELOPOOO 



OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EL09000 

EL09100 

ELOPOOO 



OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

EL09000 

EL09100 

ELOPOOO 

41‘IH'I' 

41>lW>iTTl 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

EL 09000 

EL09100 

ELOPOOO 

41-lW'T 


OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EL09000 

EL09100 

ELOPOOO 

41'tH'T 


OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EL09000 

EL09100 

ELOPOOO 

41 

4»aw«pi 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EL09000 

EL09100 

ELOPOOO 

4iwr 

4 1 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EL09000 

EL09100 

ELOPOOO 

41 'IW'T' 

41'TF»|PP 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EL09000 

EL09100 

ELOPOOO 

4ia»F 


OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EL09000 

EL09100 

ELOPOOO 

41-1«-I' 


OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EL09000 

EL09100 

ELOPOOO 

41'1M'I> 


OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EL09000 

EL 09100 

ELOPOOO 

41'IM'I' 

41I>*llHn 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EL09000 

EL09100 

ELOPOOO 

41'1'W'I' 


OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

ELOPOOO 

ELDE000 



■i%‘) TWiH 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

EL0P000 

ELDE000 

Wm 41 >1 



OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

ELOPOOO 

ELDE000 



4V>]4’M3t 1 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

ELOPOOO 

ELDE000 




OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

ELOPOOO 

ELDE000 




OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

ELOPPOO 

ELDE000 



41']4'44iT5 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

ELOPOOO 

ELDEOOO 

IBil M 1 M' '' 


ilO+W-fi $fl 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

ELOPOOO 

ELDE000 

itM di n 


41Ti»1*Sl 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

ELOPOOO 

ELDEOOO 

3i^H4i ^ 


4 %»] 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

ELOPOOO 

ELDEOOO 



4iac»fTl 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

ELOPOOO 

ELDEOOO 

ii YIHSk 


41*Jd*LQ m 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

ELOPOOO 

ELDEOOO 



41'J4:-T^m'.;r 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

ELOPOOO 

ELDEOOO 



4 *>]«•{ 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

ELOPOOO 

ELDEOOO 

41 i] il y^mSS. 


4ia«*tirH 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

ELOPOOO 

ELDEOOO 

!IM~4i ii 


141'JilHLlSll 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

ELOPOOO 

ELDEOOO 

ISBl 41 >1 aTi 


E000104 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

E000002 

E000102 

is&JB 4^»T«T'1f 

EOOPOOO 

E000109 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

EOOOOOl 

E000107 

E000108 

EOOPOOO 

E000114 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

E000001 

E000112 

E000113 

EOOPOOO 

E000204 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

E000202 

E000203 

EOOPOOO 


E000209 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

EOOOOOl 

E000207 

E000208 

EOOPOOO 

E000300 

OURSYSK 

EOOPOOO 





E000305 

OURSYSK 

EOOPOOO 





E000310 

OURSYSK 

EOOPOOO 





E000313 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

E000311 

E000312 

EOOPOOO 


E000316 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

E000314 

E000315 

EOOPOOO 


E000319 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

E000317 

E000318 

EOOPOOO 


E000322 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

E000320 

E000321 

EOOPOOO 


E000325 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

E000323 

E000324 

EOOPOOO 


E000328 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

E000326 

E000327 

EOOPOOO 


E000331 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

E000329 

E000330 

EOOPOOO 


E000334 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

E000332 

E000333 

EOOPOOO 


E000337 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

E000335 

E000336 

EOOPOOO 


E000340 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

E000338 

E000339 

EOOPOOO 


E000343 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E000341 

E000342 

EOOPOOO 


E0DQ346 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

HATHFUNK 

EOOPOOO 

E0D0344 

E0D0345 

E000350 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E000347 

E000348 

E000349 

EOOPOOO 


tl Source file supplied with DEC file type only 


c-:*> 




















Tabla 7-3 Ada Typa E Tast Programs and Seurea Coda F&las (eencludad) 


PROGRAM SUPPORT FILESU - TEST SUPPORT SOFT WARE PACKAGES USED) 


E000353 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E000347 

E000351 • 

E000352 

EOOPOOO 

E000356 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E000354 

E000355 

EOOPOOO 


E000359 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E000357 

E0003S8 

EOOPOOO 


E000362 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E000360 

E000361 

EOOPOOO 


E000565 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E000363 

E000364 

EOOPOOO 

E000368 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E000366 

E000367 

EOOPOOO 

E00036B 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E000369 

E00036A 

EOOPOOO 

E00036E 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EOOPOOO 

E0D036C 

EOD036D 

E00036H 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E00036F 

E00036G 

EOOPOOO 

E00036K 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E00036X 

E00036J 

EOOPOOO 

E00036N 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E00036L 

E00036M 

EOOPOOO 

E0D036Q 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EOOPOOO 

EOD0360 

EOD036P 

E00036T 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EOOPOOO 

EOD036R 

EOD036S 

E00036H 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E00036U 

E00036V 

EOOPOOO 

EOD036Z 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

EOOPOOO 

EOD036X 

E0D036Y 

E0D0373 

OURSPCK 

EOD0372 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EOOPOOO 

EOD0370 

E0D0371 

E000378 

OURDMPK 

E000374 

E000375 

E000376 

E000377 

EOD0383 

EOOPOOO 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E000374 

EOOPOOO 

EOD0380 

E000391 

EOD0381 

EOD0382 



OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E000390 

EOOPOOO 



E000404 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E000402 

E000403 

EOOPOOO 


E000500 

OURSYSK 

EOOPOOO 



E000504 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E000502 

E000503 

EOOPOOO 


E000509 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E000507 

E000508 

EOOPOOO 


E000514 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E000512 

E000513 

EOOPOOO 


E000519 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E000517 

E000518 

EOOPOOO 


EOD0525 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EOOPOOO 

E0D0523 

E0D0524 


E0D0529 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EOOPOOO 

EOD0526 

EOD0527 

EOD0528 

E000604 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E000602 

E000603 

EOOPOOO 

E000605 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EOOPOOO 


E000606 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EOOPOOO 




E000607 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EOOPOOO 




E000704 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E000702 

E000703 

EOOPOOO 


E000705 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EOOPOOO 



E000708 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E000706 

EDO0707 

EOOPOOO 


E000711 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E000709 

E000710 

EOOPOOO 


E000713 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EOOPOOO 


E000714 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EOOPOOO 




E000715 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EOOPOOO 




E000716 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EOOPOOO 




E000717 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EOOPOOO 




EO00718 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

EOOPOOO 




E000721 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

E000719 

E000720 

EOOPOOO 



G -26 


I 









Table G-4. Ada Type S Test Programs and Source Code Files 


PRPgRAM SUPPORT FILEStK - TEST SUPPORT SOFTWARE PACKAGES USED) 


SA00000 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

SAOPOOO 




SF0S519 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF03500 

SF03501 

SF03502 

SF03503 


SF03504 

SF03509 

SF03S10 

SF03511 

SF03512 

SF03513 


SF03514 

SF03517 

SF03518 

SFOPOOO 



SF03550 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD3551 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SF03620 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF03600 

SF03601 

SF03602 

SF03603 


SF03604 

SF03605 

SF03606 

SF03607 

SF03608 

Sf03609 


SF03610 

SF03611 

SF03612 

SF03613 

SF03614 

SF03615 

SF03650 

SF03616 

SF03617 

SF03618 

SF03619 

SFOPOOO 


OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF03630 

SFQ3631 

SF03632 

SF03633 


SF03634 

SF03635 

SF03636 

SF03637 

SF03638 

SF03639 


SF03641 

SF03642 

SF03643 

SF03644 

SF03645 

SF03646 

SF03704 

SF03647 

SF03648 

SF03649 

SFOPOOO 


OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF03700 

SF03701 

SF03702 


SF03703 

SFOPOOO 




SF03805 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF03800 

SF03801 

SF03802 


SF03803 

SF03804 

SFOPOOO 


SF04120 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 




SF04121 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 




SF04122 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 




SF04123 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 




SF04124 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 




SF04125 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 




SF04126 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04127 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 




SFD4128F 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SF04129 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD412A 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 



SF0412B 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD412C 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD412D 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SF04130 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SF04131 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SF04132 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SF04133 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD4135 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD4136 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD4137 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD4138 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



5FD4139 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD413A 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD413B 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD413C 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 



SF0413D 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD413E 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD413G 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 



SF0413H 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SF0413I 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 



SF0413J 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SF0413K 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SF04310 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SF04311 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SF04312 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SF04510 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04511 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04512 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04513 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04514 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04515 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04516 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 




SF04517 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF0451J 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF04518 

SF04519 

SF0451A 

SF0451B 


SF0451C 

SF0451D 

SF0451E 

SF0451F 

SF0451G 

SF0451M 


SF04511 

SFOPOOO 



8 Source 

file supplied with USE 

file type enly 




G-27 






Table G—4. Ada Type S Test Programs and Source Code Files (Continued) 


PROGRAM 



SFD451U* 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

SFOPOOO 

SFD451K 

SFD451L 


SFD451M 

SFD451S 

SFD451N 

SFD4510 

SFD451P 

SFD451Q 

SFD451R 

SF0451Z 

OURSYSX 

SF0P000 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SF0451V 

SF0451H 

SF0451X 

SF0451Y 

SF04520 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SFD4521 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SF0P000 




SF04522 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



• 

SFD4523 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD4524 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD4525 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD4526 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

SFOPOOO 



SF04527 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD4528 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SF04529 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD452A 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SF04530 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SF04531 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04532 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04533 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04534 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04535 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04536 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04537 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04538 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04539 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF0453A 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF0453B 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF0453C 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04540 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04541 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




Sf04550 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04551 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 


* 


SF04S52 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04553 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04554 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04555 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04556 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04557 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04558 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04559 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SFD455D 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD455E 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD455F 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD455G 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD4551 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD455J 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD455K 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD455L 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

SFOPOOO 



SF0455N 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SF04550 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04560 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04562 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04563 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SFD4566 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD4567 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFL4568 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD4569 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

SFOPOOO 



SF04600 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04601 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF04602 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SFD4603 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD4604 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD4605 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD4606 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

SFOPOOO 




♦ Source file supplied with USE file type only 


G-28 





Table G-4. Ada Type S Test Programs and Source Code Files (Continued) 


UMiH SUPPORT_FI1ES(K - TEST SUPPORT SOFTHA RE PACKAGES USED) 


SFD4607 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD4608 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD4609 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD460A 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD460B 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

SFOPOOO 



SF0460E 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF0P000 



SF0460F 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF0P000 




SF0460G 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



- 

SF0460H 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF0P000 




SF0460I 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF0460J 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD460K 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD460L 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 



5F0460M 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD460N 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD4600 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD4804 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 

SFD4800 

SFD4B01 

SF05200 

SFD4802 

OURSYSK 

S£J24££ltt 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 


SF05201 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF05202 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 




SF05203 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF05204 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF05205 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF05206 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF05207 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF05208 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 




SF05209 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF0520A 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF0520B 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SFD520C 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD520D 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD520E 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD520F 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD520G 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD520H 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD5201 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD520J 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

SFOPOOO 



SF0520M 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD520N 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SF05200 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD520P 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD520Q 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SF0520R 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 



SF0520S 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SF05210 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF05211 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF05212 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 




SF05213 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF05214 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF05215 

OURSYSX . 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SFD5218 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD5219 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD521A 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFDS21B 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD521C 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD521D 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFDS21E 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD521F 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPK 

SFOPOOO 



SF0521H 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF05211 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF0521J 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 




SF0521K 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SFD521K 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




M Multiple versions of source file supplied(USE end ADA file types) 




Table G-4. Ada Type S Test Programs and Source Code Files (Continued) 


PROGRAM SUPPORT FILE SCX - TEST SUPPORT SOFTWARE PACKAGES USED) 


SF0521L 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD521M 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 



SF0521N 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 



SFD5210 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 



SFD521P 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 



SF05304 

OURSYSK 

SF0P000 

OURDMPX 

SF05300 

SF05301 

SF05302 

SF05303 

SF05308 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF05305 

SF05306 

SF05307 

SFOPOOO 

SF05408 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF05400 

SF05401 

SF05402 

SF05403 


SF05404 

SF05405 

SF05406 

SF05407 

SFOPOOO 


SF05505 

OURSYSK 

SF0P000 

OURDMPX 

SF05501 

SF05502 

SF05503 

SF05504 

SF0550C 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF05506 

SF05507 

SF05508 

SF05509 


SF0550A 

SF0550B 

SFOPOOO 




SF0550D 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF0550E 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF0550F 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF06001 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF06009 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 




SF06010 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 




SF06011 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SF06022 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF06013 

SF06014 

SF06015 

SF06016 


SF06017 

SF06018 

SF06019 

SFOPOOO 



SF06033 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF06023 

SF06024 

SF06025 

SF06026 


SF06027 

SF0P000 

SF06028 

SF06929 

SF06030 

SF06031 

SF06032 

SF06053 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF06043 

SF06044 

SF06045 

SF06046 


SF06047 

SFOPOOO 

SF06048 

SF06049 

SF06050 

SF06051 

SF06052 

SF06063 

SF06069 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF06060 

SF06061 

SF06062 


SF06064 

SF06065 

SF06066 

SF06067 

SF06068 

SFOPOOO 

SF06079 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF06070 

SF06071 

SF06072 

SF06073 


SF06074 

SF06075 

SF06076 

SF06077 

SF06078 

SFOPOOO 

SF06101 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF06100 

SFOPOOO 



SF06109 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF06108 

SFOPOOO 



SF06110 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF06108 

SFOPOOO 



SF06111 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF06108 

SFOPOOO 



SF06122 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF06112 

SF06113 

SF06114 

SF06115 


SF06116 

SF06117 

SF06118 

SF06119 

SFOPOOO 


SF06140 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF06132 

SF06133 

SF06134 

SF06135 


SF06136 

SF06137 

SF06138 

SF06139 

SFOPOOO 


SF06150 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF06142 

SF06143 

SF06144 

SF06145 


SF08146 

SF06147 

SF06148 

SF06149 

SFOPOOO 


SF06160 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF06152 

SF06153 

SF06154 

SF06155 


SF06156 

SF06157 

SF06158 

SF06159 

SFOPOOO 


SF06170 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF06162 

SF06163 

SF06164 

SF06165 


SF06166 

SF06167 

SF06168 

SF06169 

SFOPOOO 


SF06180 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF06172 

SF06173 

SF0617s 

SF06175 


SF06176 

SF06177 

SF06178 

SF06179 

SFOPOOO 


SF06190 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF06182 

SF06183 

SF06184 

SF06185 


SF06186 

SF06187 

SF06188 

SF06189 

SFOPOOO 


SF06199 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF06191 

SF06192 

SF06193 


SF06194 

SF06195 

SF06196 

SF08197 

SF04198 

SFOPOOO 

SF0619I 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF0619A 

SF0619B 

SF0619C 


SF0619D 

SF0619E 

SF0619F 

SF0619G 

SF0619H 

SFOPOOO 

SF0619R 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF0619J 

SF0619K 

SF0619L 


SF0619M 

SF0619N 

SF0619Q 

SF0619P 

SF0A19Q 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6201 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 




SFD6209 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SFD6210 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SFD6211 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 




SFD6222 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6213 

SFD6214 

SFD8215 


SFD6216 

SFD6217 

SFD6218 

SFD6219 



SFD6233 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6223 

SFD6224 

SFD6225 


SFD6226 

SFD6227 

SFD6228 

SFD6229 

SFD6230 

SFD6231 


C-30 








Table G-4. Ada Type S Test Programs and Source Code Files (Continued) 


PROGRAM SUPPORT FILES(X - TEST SUPPORT SOFTWA RE PACKAGES USED) 
SFD6232 


SFD6253 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF0P000 

SFD6243 

SFD6244 

SFD6245 


SFD6246 

SFD6252 

SFD6247 

SFD6248 

SFD6249 

SFD6250 

SFD6251 

SFD6269 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF0P000 

SFD6260 

SFD6261 

SFD6262 


SFD6263 

SFD6264 

SFD6265 

SFD6266 

SFD6267 

SFD6268 

SFD6279 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF0P000 

SFD6270 

SFD6271 

SFD6272 


SF06273 

SFD6274 

SFD6275 

SFD6276 

SFD6277 

SFD6278 

5FD6301 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6300 



SFD6309 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF0P000 

SFD6308 



SFD6310 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6308 



SFD6311 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6508 



SFD6322 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6312 

SFD6313 

SFD6314 


SFD6315 

SFD6516 

SFD6317 

SFD6318 

SFD6319 


SFD6340 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6332 

SFD6333 

SFD6334 


SFD6335 

SFD6336 

SFD6337 

SFD6338 

SFD6339 


SFD6350 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6342 

SFD6343 

SFD6344 


SFD6345 

SFD6346 

SFD6347 

SFD6348 

SFD6349 


SFD6360 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 

SFW352 

SFD6353 

SFD6354 


SFD6555 

SFD6356 

SFD6357 

SFD6358 

SFD6359 


SFD6370 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6362 

SFD6363 

SFD6364 


SFD6565 

SFD6366 

SFD6367 

SFD6368 

SFD6369 


SFD6380 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6372 

SFD6373 

SFD6S74 


SFD6375 

SFD6376 

SFD6377 

SFD6378 

SFD6379 


SFD6390 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6382 

SFD6383 

SFD6384 


SFD6385 

SFD6386 

SFD6387 

SFD6338 

SFD6389 


SF0642B 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF064Z2 

SF06423 

SF06424 


SF06425 

SF0P000 

SF06426 

SF06427 

SF06428 

SF06429 

SF0642A 

SF06803 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF06802 

SFOPOOO 



SF06807 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF06806 

SFOPOOO 



SF06809 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF06808 

SFOPOOO 


SF0680B 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPH 

SFO680A 

SFOPOOO 


SF0680D 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF0680C 

SFOPOOO 


SF0680F 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF0680E 

SFOPOOO 


SFD680H 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 

HHff 


SFD680J 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SFOPOOO 


SF06811 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF06810 

SFOPOOO 


SF06815 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF06814 

SFOPOOO 



SF06817 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPH 

SF06816 

SFOPOOO 



SF06819 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF06818 

SFOPOOO 



SF06821 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF06820 

SFOPOOO 



SF06823 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF06822 

SFOPOOO 


SF06825 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF06824 

SFOPOOO 


SFN9301 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SFN9500 




SFN9302 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SFN9300 




5FN9303 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SFN9300 




Sr09501 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF09500 

SFOPOOO 


SF09502 

OURSPCK 

CURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF09500 

SFOPOOO 


SF09503 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF09500 

SFOPOOO 


SFG9504 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF09500 

SFOPOOO 


SF09S05 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF09500 

SFOPOOO 


SF09506 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPH 

SF09500 

SFOPOOO 


SF09507 

OURSPCK 

0URSY3X 

OURDMPX 

SF09500 

SFOPOOO 


SF09508 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF09500 

SFOPOOO 


SF09509 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

SF09500 

SFOPOOO 


sfn?5ii 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SFN9510 




SF09600 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SFOPOOO 




SF09601 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SFOPOOO 




SF09602 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SFOPOOO 




SF09603 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SFOPOOO 




SF09604 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SFOPOOO 




SF09605 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SFOPOOO 


* 


SF09606 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SFOPOOO 




SF09607 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SFOPOOO 





G-31 





Table G-4. Ada Type S Test Programs and Source Code Files (Continued) 
PROGRAM SUPPORT FILES tK - TEST SUPPORT SOFTHARF PACMSES USEB2 


SFN9611 

SFN9612 

SFN9615 

5F09711 

SF0971S 

SF09720 

SF09721 

SF09731 

SF09901 

SF09902* 

SF09903 

SFM9A01 

SFM9A02 

SFM9A03 

SF09B01 

SFD9C00 

fgp y g pi 


J9 .&P2 




FD9C04 M 
►FMB001 
SFMB003 
SFMB005 
SFMB007 
SFMB009 
SFMB012 
SFMB016 
SFMB020 
SFMB024 
SFMB028 
SFMB032 
SFMB036 
SFMB040 
SFMB044 
SF0C301 
SF0C302 
SF0C304 
SF0C305 
SF0C306 
SF0C307 
SFDC311 
SFDC314 
SFDD600 
SFDD601 
SFDD602 
SFDD603 
SFDD604 
SFDD605 
5FDD6 06 
SFDD607 
SFDD608* 
SFDD609 
SFDD610 
SFDD611 
SF0D720 
SF0D721 
SFDD722 
SFDD723 
SF0D724 
SFDD725 
SF0D727 
SF0D728 
SF0D729 


OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCR 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 


OURSYSK 
OURSYSK 
OURSYSK 
SF09710 
SF09712 
OURSYSK 
OURSYSK 
OURSYSK 
SF09900 
SF09900 
SF09900 
OURSYSK 
OURSYSK 
OURSYSK 
OURSYSK 
OURSYSK 
OURSYSK 
OURSYSK 
OURSYSK 
OURSYSK 
SFMB000 
SFMB002 
SFMB004 
SFMB006 
SFMB008 
SFMB010 
SFMB013 
SFMB017 
SFMB021 
SFMB025 
SFMB013 
5FMB033 
SFMB037 
SFMB041 
OURDMPK 
OURDMPK 
OURDMPK 
OURDMPK 
OURDMPK 
OURDMPK 
OURDMPK 
OURDMPK 
OURSYSK 
OURSYSK 
OURSYSK 
OURSYSK 
OURSYSK 
OURSYSK 
OURSYSK 
OURSYSK 
- OURSYSK 
OURSYSK 
OURSYSK 
OURSYSK 


OURTYPK 

OURTYPK 

OURTYPK 

OURTYPK 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 


;N961D 

4MM 


SF0P000 

OURDMPK 

SF09500 

SFOPOOO 

OURDMPK 

SF09500 

SFOPOOO 

OURDMPK 

SF09500 

SFOPOOO 

SF0P000 

SFOPOOO 

SF0P000 

SFM9AOO 

SFM9AOO 

SFM9AOO 

OURDMPK 

SF09500 

SFOPOOO 

SFOPOOO 

SFOPOOO 

SFD9000 

SFD9000 


FD9200 

SFOPOOO 

SFD9000 

T 

■b9200 

SFOPOOO 

SFD9000 


-P9200 

SFOPOOO 

SFD9000 

s 



SFMB011 



SFMB014 

SFMB015 


SFMB018 

SFMB019 


SFMB022 

SFMB023 


SFMB026 

SFMB027 


SFMB014 

SFMB015 


5FMB034 

SFMB035 


SFMB038 

SFMB039 


SFMB042 

SFMB043 

SF0C300 

SF0C100 

SF0C101 

SF0C100 

SF0C101 

SF0C300 

SF0C102 

SF0C103 

SF0C303 

SF0C102 

SFOPOOO 


SF0C102 

SFOPOOO 


SF0C102 

SFOPOOO 

SFDC105 

SFOPOOO 

SFDC104 

SFOPOOO 

SFOPOOO 

SFOPOOO 

SFOPOOO 

SFOPOOO 

SFOPOOO 

SFOPOOO 

SFOPOOO 

SFOPOOO 

SFOPOOO 

SFOPOOO 

SFOPOOO 

SFOPOOO 

SFDC106 

SFDCIQTti 


SF0P000 

SF0P000 

SF0P000 


SFDC310 


♦9 Multiple versions of source file suppliodCUSE and ADA file typos) 
it Source file supplied with DEC file type only 
• Source file supplied with USE file type only 


C-32 




Table G-4. Ada Type S Test Programs and Source Code Files (Continued) 


PROGRAM 




SFD6232 






SFD6253 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6243 

SFD6244 

SFD6245 


SFD6246 

SFD6252 

SFD6247 

SFD6248 

SFD6249 

SFD6250 

SFD6251 

SFD6269 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6260 

SFD6261 

SFD6262 


SFD6263 

SFD6264 

SFD6265 

SFD6266 

SFD6267 

SFD626S 

SFD6279 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6270 

SFD6271 

SFD6272 


SFD6273 

SFD6274 

SFD6275 

SFD6276 

SFD6277 

SFD6278 

SFD6301 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6300 



SFD6309 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6308 



SFD6310 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6308 



SFD6311 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6308 



SFD6322 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6312 

SFD6313 

SFD6314 


SFD6315 

SFD6316 

SFD6317 

SFD6318 

SFD6319 


SFD6340 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6332 

SFD6333 

SFD6334 


SFD6335 

SFD6336 

SFD6337 

SFD6338 

SFD6339 


SFD6350 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6342 

SFD6343 

SFD6344 


SFD6345 

SFD6346 

SFD6547 

SFD6348 

SFD6349 


SFD6360 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6352 

SFD6353 

SFD6354 


SFD6355 

SFD6356 

SFD6357 

SFD6358 

SFD6359 


SFD6370 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 

SFD8362 

SFD6363 

SFD6364 


SFD6365 

SFD6366 

SFD6367 

SFD6368 

SFD6369 


SFD6380 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6372 

SFD6373 

SFD6374 


SFD6375 

SFD6376 

SFD6377 

SFD6378 

SFD6379 


SFD6390 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 

SFD6382 

SFD6383 

SFD6384 


SFD6385 

SFD6386 

SFD6387 

SFD6388 

SFD6389 


SF0642B 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF06422 

SF06423 

SF06424 


SF06425 

SF0P000 

SF06426 

SFQ6427 

SF06428 

SF06429 

SF0642A 

SF06803 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF06802 

SFOPOOO 



SF06807 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF06806 

SFOPOOO 



SF06S09 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF06808 

SFOPOOO 


SF0680B 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF0680A 

SFOPOOO 


SF0680D 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF0680C 

SFOPOOO 


SF0680F 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF0680E 

SFOPOOO 


SFD680H 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 

H 


SFD680J 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SFOPOOO 


SF06811 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF06810 

SFOPOOO 


SF06815 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF06814 

SFOPOOO 



SF06817 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF06816 

SFOPOOO 



SF06819 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF06818 

SFOPOOO 



SF06821 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF06820 

SFOPOOO 



SF06823 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF06822 

SFOPOOO 


SF06825 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF06824 

SFOPOOO 


SFN9301 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SFN930D 




SFN9$02 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

5fn?$oo 




SFN93C3 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SrN9300 




SF09501 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF09500 

SFOPOOO 


SF09502 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF09500 

SFOPOOO 


SF09503 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF09500 

SFOPOOO 


SF09504 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF09500 

SFOPOOO 


SF09505 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF09500 

SFOPOOO 


SF09506 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF09500 

SFOPOOO 


SF09507 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF09500 

SFOPOOO 


SF09508 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF09500 

SFOPOOO 


SF09509 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF09500 

SFOPOOO 


SFN9511 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

5E N 2f19 




5F0960D 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SFOPOOO 




SF09601 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SFOPOOO 




SF09602 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SFOPOOO 




SF09603 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SFOPOOO 




SF09604 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SFOPOOO 




SF09605 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SFOPOOO 


* 


SF09606 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SFOPOOO 




SF09607 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SFOPOOO 





G-31 





Table G-4. Ada Type S Test Programs and Source Code Files (Continued) 


PROGRAM 






SFDD72A 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 





SFDD72B 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 





SFDS72C 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 





SF0D72D 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 





SFDD72E 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 





SFDD72F 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 





SFDD72G 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 





SFDD72H 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 




• 

SFDD72I 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 





SFDDA01 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SF0P000 




SFDDA02 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SF0P000 




SFDE22D 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF0P000 

SFDE000 

SFDE201 

SFDE202 


SFDE203 

SFDE204 

SFDE205 

SFDE206 

SFDE207 

SFDE208 


SFDE209 

SFDE20A 

SFDE211 

SFDE212 

SFDE213 

SFDE214 


SFDE215 

SFDE216 





SFDE250 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF0P000 

SFDE000 

SFDE231 

SFDE252 


SFDE233 

SFDE234 

SFDE235 

SFDE236 

SFDE237 

SFDE238 


SFDE239 

SFDE23A 

SFDE241 

SFDE242 

SFDE243 

SFDE244 


SFDE245 

SFDE246 





SFDE420 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF0P000 

SFDE000 

SFDE401 

SFDE402 


SFDE403 

SFDE404 

SFDE405 

SFDE406 

SFDE407 

SFDE408 


SFDE409 

SFDE40A 

SFDE411 

SFDE412 

SFDE413 

SFDE414 


SFDE415 

SFDE416 





SFDE450 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SF0P000 

SFDEOOD 

SFDE431 

SFDE432 


SFDE43S 

5FDE434 

SFDE435 

SFDE436 

SFDE437 

SFDE438 


SFDE439 

SFDE43A 

SFDE441 

SFDE442 

SFDE443 

SFDE444 


SFDE445 

SFDE446 





SFDF000 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

MATHFUNK 

SF0P000 



SFDF001 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

MATHFUNK 

SF0P000 



SFDF002 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

MATHFUNK 

SF0P000 



SFDF003 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

MATHFUNK 

SF0P000 



SFDF004 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

MATHFUNK 

SFOPOOO 



SFDF005 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

MATHFUNK 

SFOPOOO 



5SPPPP1 

OURSYSK 

MATHFUNK 

SGOPOOO 

SGD0000 



SGD0003 

5GD0009 

OURSYSK 

OURSYSK 

SG0P000 

SGOPOOO 

ISPPPP2 

SGD0004 

SGD0005 

SGD0006 

SGD0007 


SGD0008 






SGOODGC 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

SGOPOOO 




SfiPP-PftE 

SGN000K 

OURSYSK 

MATHFUNK 

SGOPOOO 

SGD0000 

SCmOD 

Sgnoooi 


OURSYSK 

SPHPPPf 

OURSYSK 

SGN000G 

SGNOOOH 

SGN000J 

SGDD039 

OURSPCK 

SGOPOOO 


SGD0005 

SGD0006 

SGD0007 

SGD0008 

SGD0019 

B-WiFIW- 



MM 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SGOPOOO 

B-w-i-i-rr 

SGD0005 

SGD0006 

SGD0007 

SGD0008 

SGD0019 




SGD005988 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SGOPOOO 


SGD0005 

SGD0006 

SGD0007 

SGD0008 

SGD0019 

■-frH'I'W'. 



S109101 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SL09000 

SL09100 

SLOPOOO 


SL09111 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SL09000 

S109100 

SLOPOOO 


5109121 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SL09000 

SL09100 

SLOPOOO 


SL09131 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SL09000 

SL09100 

SLOPOOO 


-i 1 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SL09000 

SL09100 

SLOPOOO 



OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SL09000 

SL09100 

SLOPOOO 

TIIWI' 


OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SL09000 

SL09100 

SLOPOOO 

'H'l'W'I' 


OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SL09000 

SL09100 

SLOPOOO 

-Tl'TWE 


OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SL09000 

SL09100 

SLOPOOO 


■H'l'Wlfl ■ 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SL09000 

SL09100 

SLOPOOO 

41-TMT' 

-t 9•pW’jJBH 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SL09000 

SL09100 

SLOPOOO 

'Tl'TW'I 1 


OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SL 09000 

SL09100 

SLOPOOO 

-H'iM'I' 

-51 iiWiiT M 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SL09000 

SL09100 

SLOPOOO 

■Jl'IWF 


OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SL09000 

SL09100 

SLOPOOO 

-Tl-IH-I? 

-51'IW|P 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

St 09000. 

SL09100 

SLOPOOO 

-H'lWT' 


OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SL09000 

SL09100 

SLOPOOO 


ko 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SLOPOOO 

SLDE000 

IHSRN 



OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

SL0P000 

SLDE000 



II Sourea file supplied with DEC file type only 


G-33 






Table G-4. Ada Type S Test Programs and Source Code Files (Continued) 


rag ,rah 








• OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

SL0P000 

SLDE000 



-11 

f OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

SL0P000 

SLDE000 

■ ■] xj j flil 



OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

SLOPOOO 

SLDE000 

mm* i rr 


- 11 < 1 «*fl 

OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

SL0P000 

SLDE000 

ilKll il Jri 



t OURSPC* 

OURSYSX 

SLOPOOO 

SLDE000 



-11 ■]*«.] 

« OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

SLOPOOO 

SLDE000 

0 i'i 


-H'lCWl 

OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

SLOPOOO 

SLDEOOO 

i >] xi 



OURSPC* 

OURSYSX 

SLOPOOO 

SLDE000 


• 

-iiraarai 

« OURSPC* 

OURSYSX 

SLOPOOO 

SLDEOOO 

i rr ii .1 


- 11']«*1 

t OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

SLOPOOO 

SLDEOOO 

n ii 


-ii-iiw-i 

OURSPC* 

OURSYSX 

SLOPOOO 

SLDEOOO 



-Il'lCWI 

OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

SLOPOOO 

SLDEOOO 

1 >1 


-11'1-CIHrj 

« OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

SLOPOOO 

SLDEOOO 



- 11 '] -CM] 

• OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

SLOPOOO 

SLDEOOO 



S000104 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S000002 

S000102 

S000103 

SOOPOOO 

S000109 

OURSYSX 

OURDMP* 

SOOOOOl 

S000107 

S000108 

SOOPOOO 

SOOOU4 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

SQ00001 

S000112 

S000113 

SOOPOOO 

S000204 

OURSYSX 

OURDMP* 

5000202 

S000203 

SOOPOOO 

S000209 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

SOOOOOl 

S000207 

S000208 

SOOPOOO 

S0003CQ 

S000305 

S000310 

S000313 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

SOOPOOO 

SOOPOOO 

SOOPOOO 

OURDMP* 

S000311 

S000312 

SOOPOOO 

S000316 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S000314 

S00031S 

SOOPOOO 


S000319 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S000317 

S000318 

SOOPOOO 


S000322 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S000320 

S000321 

SOOPOOO 


S000325 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S000323 

S000324 

SOOPOOO 


S00032S 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

SQ00326 

S000327 

SOOPOOO 


S000331 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

SQ00329 

S000330 

SOOPOOO 


S000334 

OURSYSX 

OURDMP* 

S000332 

S000333 

SOOPOOO 


S000337 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S000335 

S000336 

SOOPOOO 


S000340 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S000338 

S000339 

SOOPOOO 


S000343 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S000341 

S000342 

SOOPOOO 


SOD0346 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

MATHFUN* 

SOOPOOO 

SOD0344 

SOD0345 

S000350 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S000347 

S000348 

S000349 

SOOPOOO 

S000353 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S000347 

S000351 

S000352 

SOOPOOO 

S000356 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S000354 

S0003S5 

SOOPOOO 

S000359 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S000357 

S000358 

SOOPOOO 


S000362 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S000360 

S000361 

SOOPOOO 


S000365 

OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S000363 

S000364 

SOOPOOO 

S000368 

OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S000366 

S000367 

SOOPOOO 

S00036B 

OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S000369 

S00036A 

SOOPOOO 

SOD036E 

OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

SOOPOOO 

S0D036C 

SODOS6D 

S00036H 

OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S00036F 

S00036G 

SOOPOOO 

S00036K 

OURSPC* 

OURSYSX 

OURDMP* 

S00036I 

800056J 

SOOPOOO 

S00036N 

OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S00036L 

S00036M 

SOOPOOO 

SOD036Q 

OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

SOOPOOO 

SOD0360 

SOD036P 

S0D036T 

OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

SOOPOOO 

SOD036R 

S0D036S 

S00036M 

OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S00036U 

SO*036V 

SOOPOOO 

SOD036Z 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

OURTYP* 

SOOPOOO 

S0D036X 

SOD036Y 

SOD0373 

OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

SOOPOOO 

S0D0370 

SOD0371 

S000378 

SOD0372 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S000374 

S000375 

S000376 

S000377 

SOD0383 

SOOPOOO 

OURSPC* 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S000374 

SOOPOOO 

SOD0380 

S000391 

S000404 

SOD0381 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

SOD0382 

OURDMP* 

OURDMP* 

S000390 

S000402 

SOOPOOO 

S000403 

SOOPOOO 

S000500 

S000504 

OURSYS* 

OURSYS* 

SOOPOOO 

OURDMP* 

S000502 

S000503 

SOOPOOO 


5000S09 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S000507 

S000508 

SOOPOOO 


S000514 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S000512 

S000513 

SOOPOOO 


S000519 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

S000517 

S000518 

SOOPOOO 


SODOS25 

OURSYS* 

OURDMP* 

SOOPOOO 

SOD0523 

SOD0524 



•t Source file supplied with DEC file type only 


G-34 
















Table G-4. Ada Type S Test Programs and Source Code Files (Concluded) 

i 


PROGRAM SUPPORT FILESCK - TEST SUPPORT SOFTWARE PACKAGES USED) 


SOD0529 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

S000604 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

S000605 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

S000606 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

S000607 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

S000704 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

5000705 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

S000708 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

S000711 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

5000713 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

S000714 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

S000715 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

S000716 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

S000717 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

S000718 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

S000721 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 


strurm 

SOD0526 

SOD0527 

SOD0528 

S000602 

S00060S 

SOOPOOO 


SOOPOOO 

SOOPOOO 

SOOPOOO 

S000702 

S00070S 

SOOPOOO 


SOOPOOO 

S000706 

S000707 

SOOPOOO 


S000709 

S000710 

SOOPOOO 


SOOPOOO 

SOOPOOO 

SOOPOOO 

SOOPOOO 

SOOPOOO 

SOOPOOO 

S000719 

S000720 

SOOPOOO 



G-35 


Tabic G-5 Ada Type T test Programs and Source Coda Files 


PROGRAM SUPPORT FIL ES(X - TEST SUPPORT SOFTW ARE PACKAGES USED) 


TA00000 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TA0P000 




TF0SS19 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TF03500 

TF03501 

TF03502 

TF03503 


TF03504 

TF03509 

TF03510 

TF03511 

TF03512 

TF03513 


TF03514 

TF03517 

TF03518 

TFOPOOO 



TF0S550 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD3551 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF03620 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TF03600 

TF03601 

TF03602 

TF03603 


TF03604 

TF03605 

TF03606 

TF03607 

TF03608 

TF03609 


TF03610 

TF03611 

TF03612 

TF03613 

TF03614 

TF03615 

TF03650 

TF03616 

TF03617 

TF03618 

TF03619 

TFOPOOO 


OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TF03630 

TF03631 

TF03632 

7*03633 


TF03634 

TF03635 

TF05636 

TF03637 

TF03638 

TF03639 


TF03641 

TF03642 

TF03643 

TF03644 

TF03645 

TF03646 


TF03647 

TF03648 

TF03649 

TFOPOOO 



TF03704 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TF03700 

TF03701 

TF03702 


TF03703 

TF0P000 




TF03805 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TF03800 

TF03801 

TF03802 


TF03803 

TF03804 

TF0P000 



TF04120 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TF0P000 




TF04121 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TF0P000 




TF04122 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TF0P000 




TF04123 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TF0P000 




TF04124 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF04125 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF04126 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF04127 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TFD4128* 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF04129 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TFD412A 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF0412B 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD412C 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD412D 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF04130 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF04131 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF04132 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF04133 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD4135 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD4136 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD4137 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD4138 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD41S9 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD413A 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD413B 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD413C 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF0413D 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD413E 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD413G 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF0413M 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF04131 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF0413J 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF0413K 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF04310 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF04311 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF04312 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF04S10 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF04511 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF04512 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF04513 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF04514 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF04515 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF04516 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF04517 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF0451J 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TF04518 

TF04519 

TF0451A 

TF0451B 


TF0451C 

TF0451D 

TF0451E 

TF0451F 

TF0451G 

TF0451H 


TF04511 

TF0P000 





9 Source 

file supplied with USE 

file type only 




G-36 









Tabls 

G-5 Ada Typa 

T tast Program* and Seurca Coda Filas (centinuad) 

program 




TFD451U* 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO TFD451K TFD451L 


TFD451M 

TFD451S 

TFD451N 

TFD4510 

TFD451P TFD451Q TFD451R 

TF0451Z 

OURSYSX 

TF0P000 

OURDMPK 

TF0451V 

TF0451M TF0451X TF0451Y 

TF04520 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

TF0P000 


TF04521 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

TF0P000 


TF04522 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TF0P080 

. 

TFD4523 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 

TFD4524 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 

TFD4525 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 

TFD4526 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 

TF04527 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


TFD4528 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 

TF04529 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


TFD452A 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

TFOPOOO 

TF04530 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


TF04531 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


TF04532 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


TF04533 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


TF04534 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

TFOPOOO 


TF04535 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


TF04536 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

TFOPOOO 


TF04537 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


TF04538 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


TF04539 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


TF0453A 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


TF0453B 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


TF0453C 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


TF04540 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

TFOPOOO 


TF04541 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

TFOPOOO 


TF04550 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

TFOPOOO 


TF04551 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


TF04552 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

TFOPOOO 


TF04553 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

TFOPOOO 


TF04554 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


TF04555 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

TFOPOOO 


TF04556 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


TF04557 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

TFOPOOO 


TF04558 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


TF04559 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


TFD455D 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 

TFD455E 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 

TFD455F 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 

TFD455G 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 

TFD455I 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 

TFD455J 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 

TFD455K 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 

TFD455L 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 

TF045SN 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


TF04550 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


TF04560 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

TFOPOOO 


TF04S62 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


TF04563 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

TFOPOOO 


TFD4566 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 

TFD4567 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 

TFD4568 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 

TFD4569 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 

TF04600 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

TFOPOOO 


TF04601 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


TF04602 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

TFOPOOO 


TFD4603 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 

TFD4604 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO . 

TFD4605 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 

TFD4606 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 


• Sourca fila supplied with USE fils typa only 


C-37 







Tabl* G-5 Ada Type T test Programs and Source Code Files (continued) 


PROGRAM SUPPORT FILEStX - TEST S UPPORT S0FTHA RF PACKAGES USED) 


TFD4607 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD4608 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD4609 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD460A 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD460B 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF0460E 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF0460F 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TF0P00D 




TF0460G 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



' 

TF0460H 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF0460I 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF0460J 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD460K 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD460L 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF0460M 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD460N 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD4600 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD4804 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 

TFD4800 

TFD4801 

TF05200 

TFD4802 

OURSYSX 


TFOPOOO 




TF05201 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF05202 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF05203 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF05204 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF05205 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF05206 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF05207 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF05208 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF05209 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF0520A 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF0520B 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TFD520C 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD520D 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD520E 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD520F 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD520G 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD520H 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD520I 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD520J 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF0520M 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD520N 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF05200 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD520P 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFDS20Q 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF0520R 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF0520S 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF05210 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF05211 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF05212 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF05213 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF05214 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF05215 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TFD5218 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD5219 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD521A 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD521B 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD521C 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD521D 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD521E 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 



TFD521F 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPX 

TFOPOOO 



TF0521H 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF05211 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF0521J 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TF0521K 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




TFD521K 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 




it Multiple versions of source file suppliedCUSE and ADA file types) 


G-38 





Table G-5 Ada Type T test Programs and Source Code Files (continued) 


SUPPORT FILESCX - TE ST SUPPORT SOFTWARE PACKAGES 


TF0521L 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

TFD521M 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

TF0521H 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

TFD5210 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

TFD521P 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

TF05304 

OURSYSK 

TFOPOOO 

OURDMPX 

TF05308 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TF05408 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 

TF05505 

TF05404 

TF05405 

OURSYSK 

TFOPOOO 

OUROMPK 

TF0550C 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 

TF0550D 

TF0550A 

TF0550B 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 

TF0550E 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 

TF0550F 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 

TF06001 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 

TF06009 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 

TF06010 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 

TF06011 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TF06022 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TF06033 

TF06017 

TF06018 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 


TF06027 

TFOPOOO 

TF06028 

TF06053 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 


TF06047 

TFOPOOO 

TF06048 

TF06069 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 

TF06079 

TF06064 

TF0606S 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 

TF06101 

TF06074 

TF06075 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 

TF06109 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 

TF06110 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 

TF06111 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 

TF06122 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 

TF06140 

TF06116 

TF06117 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 

TF06150 

TF06136 

TF06157 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 

TF06160 

TF06146 

TF06147 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 


TF06156 

TF06157 

TF08170 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 


TF06166 

TF06167 

TF06180 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 


TF06176 

TF06177 

TF06190 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 

TF06199 

TF06186 

TF06187 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 


TF06194 

TF06195 

TF0619I 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 


TF0619D 

TF0619E 

TF0619R 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 


TF0619M 

TF0619N 

TFD6201 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 

TFD6209 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 

TFD6210 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 

TFD6211 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 

TFD6222 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 


TFD6216 

TFD6217 

TFD6233 

OURSYSK 

OUROMPK 


TFD6226 

TFD6227 


OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


OUROMPK 

TFOPOOO 


OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 


TF05300 

TF05301 

TF05302 

TF05305 

TF05306 

TF05307 

TF05400 

TF05401 

TF05402 

TF05406 

TF05407 

TFOPOOO 

TF05501 

TF05502 

TF0S503 

TF05506 

TF05507 

TF05508 

TFOPOOO 



TFOPOOO 



TFOPOOO 



TFOPOOO 



TFOPOOO 



TFOPOOO 



TFOPOOO 



TFOPOOO 



TF06013 

TF06014 

TF06015 

TF06019 

TFOPOOO 


TF06023 

TF06024 

TF06025 

TF06029 

TF06D30 

TF06031 

TF06043 

TF06044 

TF06045 

TF06049 

TF06D50 

TF06051 

TF06060 

TF06061 

TF06062 

TF06066 

TF06067 

TF06068 

TF06070 

TF06071 

TF06072 

TF06076 

TF04077 

TF06078 

TF06100 

TFOPOOO 


TF06108 

TFOPOOO 


TF06108 

TFOPOOO 


TF06108 

TFOPOOO 


TF06112 

TF06113 

TF06114 

TF06118 

TF06119 

TFOPOOO 

TF06132 

TF06133 

TF06134 

TF06138 

TF06139 

TFOPOOO 

TF06142 

TF06143 

TF06144 

TF06148 

TF06149 

TFOPOOO 

TF06152 

TF06153 

TF06154 

TF06158 

TF06159 

TFOPOOO 

TF06162 

TF06163 

TF06164 

TF06168 

TF06169 

TFOPOOO 

TF06172 

TF06173 

TF06174 

TF06178 

TF06179 

TFOPOOO 

TF06182 

TF06183 

TF06184 

TF06188 

TF06189 

TFOPOOO 

OURDMPX 

TF06191 

TF06192 

TF06196 

TF06197 

TF06198 

OUROMPK 

TF0619A 

TF0619B 

TF0819F 

TF0619C 

TF0619H 

OUROMPK 

TF0619J 

TF0619K 

TF06190 

TF0619P 

TF0619Q 

TFOPOOO 



TFOPOOO 



TFOPOOO 



TFOPOOO 



TFOPOOO 

TFD8213 

TF06214 

TFD6218 

TFD6219 


TFOPOOO 

TFD6223 

TF08224 

TFD6228 

TFD6229 

TFD6230 

G-39 




TF05303 

TF0P000 

TF05403 

TF05504 

TF05509 


TF06016 

TF06026 

TF06032 

TF06046 

TF06052 

TF06063 

TF0P000 

TF06073 

TF0P000 


TF06115 

TF06135 

TF06145 

TF06155 

TF06165 

TF06175 

TF06185 

TF06193 

TF0P000 

TF0619C 

TFOPOOO 

TF0619L 

TFOPOOO 


TFD6215 

TFD6225 

TFD6231 



Table 6-5 Ada Type T teat Programs and Source Coda Files (continued) 


msm 

TFD6253 


TFD6269 

TFD6279 

TFD6301 

TFD6309 

TFD6310 

TFD6311 

TFD6322 

TFD6340 

TFD6350 

TFD6360 

TFD6370 

TFD6380 

TFD6390 

TF0642B 


TF06803 

TF06807 

TF06809 

TF0680B 

TF0680D 

TF0680F 

TFD680H 

TFD680J 

TF06811 

TF06815 

TF06817 

TF06819 

TF06821 

TF06823 

TF06825 

i f N3 iU 

FN Sifil 

if 

TF09502 
TF09503 
TF09504 
TF09505 
TF09506 
TF09507 
TF09508 
TF09509 
<9511 
J96 00 
TF09801 
TF09602 
TF09603 
TF09604 
TF09605 
TF09606 
TF09607 


SUPPORT FILES(K 


TEST-SUPPORT SOFTWARE PACKAGES U5EH 


TFD6232 

OURSYSX 

TFD6246 

TFD6252 

OURSYSX 

TFD6263 

OURSYSX 

TFD6273 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

TFD6315 

OURSYSX 

TFD6335 

OURSYSX 

TFD6345 

OURSYSX 

TFD8355 

OURSYSX 

TFD6365 

OURSYSX 

TFD6375 

OURSYSX 

TF06385 

OURSPCX 

TF06425 

TF0P000 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 


OURDMPK 

TFD6247 

OURDMPK 

TFD6264 

OURDMPK 

TFD6274 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

TFD6316 

OURDMPK 

TFD6336 

OURDMPK 

TFD6346 

OURDMPK 

TFD6356 

OURDMPK 

TFD6366 

OURDMPK 

TFD6376 

OURDMPK 

TFD6386 

OURSYSX 

TF06426 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 


TFOPOOO 

TFD6248 


TFOPOOO 

TFD6265 

TFOPOOO 

TFD6275 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFD8317 

TFOPOOO 

TFD6337 

TFOPOOO 

TFM347 

TFOPOOO 

TFD6357 

TFOPOOO 

TFD6367 

TFOPOOO 

TFD6377 

TFOPOOO 

TFD6387 

OURDMPK 

TF06427 


TF06802 

TF06806 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

TF06810 

TF06814 

TF06816 

TF06818 

TF06820 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

TFM9300 

IpSM 

ouSdm^x 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

OURDMPK 

fflHH 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 


TFD6243 

TFD6249 

TFD6260 

TFD6266 

TFD6270 

TFD6276 

TFD6300 

TFD6308 

TFD6308 

TFD6308 

TFD6312 

TFD6318 

TFD6352 

TFD6338 

TFD634Z 

TFD6348 

TFD6352 

TFD6358 

TFD6362 

TFD6368 

TFD8372 

TFD6378 

TFD6382 

TFD6388 

TF06422 

TF06428 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TF06808 

TF0680A 

TF0680C 

TF0680E 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TF068Z2 

TF06824 


TF09500 

TF09500 

TF09500 

TF09500 

TF09500 

TF09500 

TF09500 

TF09500 

TF09500 


TFD6244 

TFD6250 

TFD6261 

TFD6267 

TFD6271 

TFD6277 


TFD6313 

TFD6319 

TFD6333 

TFD6339 

TFD6343 

TFD6349 

TFD6353 

TFD8359 

TFD6363 

TFD6369 

TFD6373 

TFD6379 

TFD6383 

TFD6389 

TF06423 

TF06429 


TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFD680G 


iiiim 


TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 


TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 


TFD6245 

TFD6251 

TFD6262 

TFD6268 

TFD6272 

TFD6278 

TFD6314 

TFD6334 

TFD4344 

TFD6354 

TFD6364 

TFD8374 

TFD6384 

TF06424 

TF0642A 


G-40 



Table G-5 Ada Type T test Programs and Source Code Files (continued) 


PROGRAM SUPPORT FILESOt - TEST SUPPORT SOFTWARE PACKAGES USED) 


TFN9611 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 






TFN9612 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

TFN9610 





TFN9613 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

TFN9610 





TF09711 

OURSYSX 

TF09710 

TFOPOOO 





TF09713 

OURSYSX 

TF09712 

TF0P000 





TF09720 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

TF09500 

TFOPOOO 


TF09721 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

TF09500 

TFOPOOO 


TF09731 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TF09500 

TFOPOOO 


TF09901 

OURSYSX 

TF09900 

TF0P000 





TF09902 

OURSYSX 

TF09900 

TF0P000 





TF09903 

OURSYSX 

TF09900 

TF0P000 





TFM9A01 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

TFM9A00 





TFM9A02 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

TFM9A00 





TFM9A03 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

TFM9A00 





TF09B01 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

TF09500 

TFOPOOO 


TFD9C00 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

TF0P000 

TFD9000 




TFD9C01 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

TF0P000 

TFD9000 

* 

FD9200 


TFD9C02 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

TF0P000 

TFD9000 

1 

: D9200 


TFD9C03«« 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

TFOPOOO 

TFD9000 

1 

*09200 


TFD9C04M 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

TFOPOOO 

TFD9000 

t 

■D9200 


TFMB001 

OURSYSX 

TFMB000 





TFMB003 

OURSYSX 

TFMB002 






TFMB005 

OURSYSX 

TFMB004 






TFMB007 

OURSYSX 

TFMB006 






TFMB009 

OURSYSX 

TFMB008 






TFMB012 

OURSYSX 

TFMB010 

TFMB011 





TFMB016 

OURSYSX 

TFMB013 

TFMB014 

TFMB015 




TFMB020 

OURSYSX 

TFMB017 

TFMBD18 

TFMB019 




TFMB024 

OURSYSX 

TFMB021 

TFMB022 

TFMB023 




TFMB028 

OURSYSX 

TFMB025 

TFMB026 

TFMB027 




TFMB032 

OURSYSX 

TFMB013 

TFMB014 

TFMB015 




TFMB036 

OURSYSX 

TFMB033 

TFMB034 

TFMB035 




TFMB040 

OURSYSX 

TFMB037 

TFMBD38 

TFMB039 




TFMB044 

OURSYSX 

TFMB041 

TFMB042 

TFMB043 




TF0C301 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

TF0C100 

TFOClOl 

TF0C300 

TFOPOOO 

TF0C302 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TF0C100 

TF0C101 

TF0C300 

TFOPOOO 

TF0C304 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPK 

TF0C102 

TF0C103 

TF0C303 

TFOPOOO 

TF0C305 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TF0C102 

TFOPOOO 




TF0C306 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TF0C102 

TFOPOOO 




TF0C307 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TF0C102 

TFOPOOO 




TFDC311 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 

TFDC104 

TFDC105 

TFDC310 

TFDC314 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFOPOOO 

TFDC106 

TFDC107tt 

TFDC313 

TFDD600 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

TFOPOOO 





TFDD601 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

TFOPOOO 





TFDD602 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

TFOPOOO 





TFDD603 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

TFOPOOO 





TFDD604 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 

TFOPOOO 





TFDD605 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

TFOPOOO 





TFDD606 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

TFOPOOO 





TFDD607 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

TFOPOOO 





TFDD608* 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

TFOPOOO 





TFDD609 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

TFOPOOO 





TFDD610 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

TFOPOOO 





TFDD611 

OURSPCX . 

OURSYSX 

TFOPOOO 





TF0D720 

OURSYSX 







TF0D721 

OURSYSX 







TFDD722 

OURSYSX 

OURTYPK 






TFDD723 

OURSYSX 

OURTYPX 






TFDD724 

OURSYSX 

OURTYPK 






TFDD725 

OURSYSX 

OURTYrx 






TF0D727 

OURSYSX 







TF0D728 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 






TF0D729 

OURSPCX 

OURSYSX 







At Multiple versions of source file suppliedCUSE and ADA file types) 
•• Source file supplied with DEC file type only 
t Source file supplied with USE file type only 


G-U 




Table 6-5 Ada Type T test Program* and Source Code Files (continued) 


program 

TFDD72A 

TFDD72B 

TFDD72C 

TF0D72D 

TFDD72E 

TFDD72F 

TFDD72G 

TFDD72H 

TFDD72I 

TFDDA01 

TF0DA02 

TFDE220 


TF0E250 


TFDE420 


TFDE450 


TFDF000 

TFDF001 

TFDF002 

TFDF003 

TFDF0D4 

TFDF005 


TGD0009 

TG0000C 

TGD000E 

TGNOOOK 

I« 

TCD0049 

TGD0059 H 

TL09101 

TL09111 

TL09121 

TL09131 


iflW* 
if 10*41? 

I MOW 
afl*ff** 
Ml 0**2 
ifio*w 

EffO**d 


OURSPCX 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCK 

ourstsx 

TFDE20S 

TFDE209 

TFDE215 

OURSYSX 

TFDE23S 

TFDE239 

TFDE245 

OURSYSX 

TFDE403 

TFDE409 

TFDE415 

OURSYSX 

TFDE43S 

TFDE439 

TFDE445 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

TGD0008 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSPCX 

TGD0007 

OURSPCX 

TGD0007 

OURSPCX 

TGD0007 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCK 

OURSPCX 

OURSPCX 


OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

TFDE204 

TFDE20A 

TFDE216 

OURDMPX 

TFDE234 

TFDE23A 

TFDE246 

OURDMPX 

TFDE404 

TFDE40A 

TFDE416 

OURDMPX 

TFDE434 

TFDE43A 

TFDE446 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

OURDMPX 

MATHFUNK 

TG0P000 

TG0P000 

OURDMPX 

MATHFUNK 


OURSYSX 

TGD0008 

OURSYSX 

TGD0008 

OURSYSX 

TGD0008 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 

OURSYSX 


TF0P000 

TFOPOOO 

TF0P000 

TFDE20S 

TFDE211 

TFOPOOO 

TFDE235 

TFDE241 

TFOPOOO 

TFDE405 

TFDE411 

TFOPOOO 

TFDE435 

TFDE441 

MATHFUNK 

MATHFUNK 

MATHFUNK 

MATHFUNK 

MATHFUNK 

MATHFUNK 

TG0P000 


TG0P000 

TGOPOOO 

TGN000G 

TGOPOOO 

TGD0019 

TGOPOOO 

TGD0019 

TGOPOOO 

TGD0019 

TL09000 

TL09000 

TL09000 

TL09000 

TL09000 

TL09000 

TL09000 

TL09000 

T109000 

TL09000 

TL09000 

TL09000 

TL09000 

TL09000 

TL09000 

TL09000 

TLOPOOO 

TLOPOOO 


TFDECOO 

TFDE206 

TFDE212 

TFDE000 

TFDE236 

TFDE242 

TFDE000 

TFDE406 

TFDE412 

TFDE000 

TFDE436 

TFDE442 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TFOPOOO 

TGD0000 

TGD0005 


TGD0000 

TGNOOOH 


i WITT'C 
iW'i'iw: 
iW'T'IT't 
iraoi**; 

iff 


09 
TL09100 
TL09100 
TL09100 
TL09100 
TL09100 
TL09100 
TL09100 
TL09100 
TL09100 
TL09100 
TL09100 
TL09100 
TL09100 
TL09100 
TL09100 
TLDEOOO 
TLDEOOO 


TFDE201 

TFDE207 

TFDE2J3 

TFDE231 

TFDE237 

TFDE243 

TFDE401 

TFDE407 

TFDE413 

TFDE431 

TFDE437 

TFDE443 


TFDE202 

TFDE208 

TFDE214 

TFDE232 

TFDE238 

TFDE244 

TFDE402 

TFDE408 

TFDE414 

TFDE432 

TFDE438 

TFDE444 


TGD0006 

TGD0007 

MW 

TGNOOOJ 

TGD0005 

TGD0006 

TGD0005 

TGD0006 

TGD0005 

TGD0006 

TLOPOOO 


TLOPOOO 


TLOPOOO 


TLOPOOO 


TLOPOOO 


TLOPOOO 

I > r 

TLOPOOO 


TLOPOOO 

■ifi'N'i'i 

TLOPOOO 

IntJ'i 

TLOPOOO 

■noron 

TLOPOOO 

Biiw: 

TLOPOOO 

■fio**E 

TLOPOOO 

»«o**r: 

TLOPOOO 

Bnw: 

TLOPOOO 

» 110 ** 1 : 

TLOPOOO 

■ilim 

TLDE211 

Ti nfJii 



•• Source file supplied with DEC file type only 


G-42 












Tabla G~5 Ada Typa T tast Programs and Sourca Coda Filas (eontinuad) 


PROGRAM 


THiitn 





OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

TL0P000 

TLDE000 



i #9 11 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

TL0P000 

TLDEOOO 




OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

TL0P000 

TLDEOOO 

Bit! irl T-flU 


|||i] 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

TL0P000 

TLDEOOO 

Si^STio+4-hBll 


1IV 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

TL0P000 

TLDEOOO 

111] 



OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

TL0P000 

TLDEOOO 

wm. 11»] * A ■Y'Um 



OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

TL0P000 

TLDEOOO 

fl>] i'i iiHiti 


i 1 I'lifimii 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

TL0P000 

TLDEOOO 

fiiHif«']£V»fli 

• 


OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

TL0P000 

TLDEOOO 



lIR'l^M-T I n 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

TL0P000 

TLDEOOO 

mm Kil<]^l iflUi 


iiitfiTifps 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

T10P000 

TLDEOOO 

IUHSi 1 1'] ii 


iIR'ld'f'S"- 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

TL0P000 

TLDEOOO 

11 •] il 


ifR'JX.'T'fr/1 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

TL0P000 

TLDEOOO 




OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

TLOPOOO 

TLDEOOO 

UK fill iT 


T000104 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

T000002 

T000102 

T000103 

TOOPOOO 

T000109 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

T000001 

T000107 

T000108 

TOOPOOO 

T000114 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

TOOOOOl 

T000112 

1000113 

TOOPOOO 

T000204 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

T000202 

T000203 

TOOPOOO 


T000209 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TOOOOOl 

T000207 

T000208 

TOOPOOO 

T000300 

OURSYSK 

TOOPOOO 





T000305 

OURSYSK 

TOOPOOO 





T000310 

OURSYSK 

TOOPOOO 





T000313 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

T000311 

T000312 

TOOPOOO 


T000316 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

T000314 

T000315 

TOOPOOO 


T000319 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

T000317 

T000318 

TOOPOOO 


T000322 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TOOOS2D 

T000321 

TOOPOOO 


T000325 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

T00032S 

T000324 

TOOPOOO 


TQ00328 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

T000326 

T000327 

TOOPOOO 


T000331 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

T000329 

T000330 

TOOPOOO 


T000334 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

T0003S2 

T000333 

TOOPOOO 


T000337 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

T000335 

T000336 

TOOPOOO 


T000340 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

T000338 

T000339 

TOOPOOO 


T000343 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

T000341 

T000342 

TOOPOOO 


TOD0346 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

MATHFUNK 

TOOPOOO 

TOD0344 

TOD0345 

T000350 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

T000347 

T000348 

T000349 

TOOPOOO 

T000353 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

T000347 

T000351 

T000352 

TOOPOOO 

T000356 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

T000354 

T000355 

TOOPOOO 


T000359 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

T000357 

T000358 

TOOPOOO 


T000362 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

T000360 

T000361 

TOOPOOO 


T000365 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

T000363 

T000364 

TOOPOOO 

T000368 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

T000366 

T000367 

TOOPOOO 

TO8036$ 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

T000369 

T00036A 

TOOPOOO 

TOD036E 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

TOOPOOO 

T0D036C 

TOD036D 

T00036H 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

T00036F 

T00036G 

TOOPOOO 

T00036K 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

T000361 

T00036J 

TOOPOOO 

T00036N 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

T00036L 

T00036M 

TOOPOOO 

T0DD36Q 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

TOOPOOO 

TOD0360 

TOD036P 

TOD036T 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

TOOPOOO 

TOD036R 

T0D036S 

T00036W 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSX 

OURDMPX 

T00036U 

T00036V 

TOOPOOO 

TOD036Z 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

OURTYPK 

TOOPOOO 

TOD036X 

TOD036Y 

TOD0373 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

TOOPOOO 

TOD0370 

TOD0371 


TOD0372 






T000378 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

T000374 

T000375 

T000576 

T000377 


TOOPOOO 






TOD0383 

OURSPCK 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

T000374 

TOOPOOO 

TOD0380 


TOD0381 

T0DD382 





T000391 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

T000390 

TOOPOOO 



T000404 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

T000402 

T000403 

TOOPOOO 


T000500 

OURSYSK 

TOOPOOO 





T000504 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

T000502 

T000503 

TOOPOOO 


T000509 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

T000507 

T000508 

TOOPOOO 


T000514 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

T000512 

T000513 

TOOPOOO 


T000519 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

T000517 

T000518 

TOOPOOO 


TOD0525 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

TOOPOOO 

TOD0523 

TOD0524 



•• Sourca fila auppliad with DEC filo typa only 


G-43 
















Table G-5 Ada Type T teat Programs and Source Code Files (concluded) 


PROGRAM SUPPORT FILESCK - TEST SUPPORT SOFTWARE PACKAGES U SEPi 


TOD0529 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TOOPOOO 

TOD0526 

TODOS27 

TOD0528 

T000604 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

T000602 

T00060S 

TOOPOOO 


T000605 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TOOPOOO 




T000606 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TOOPOOO 




T000607 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

TOOPOOO 




T000704 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

T000702 

T00070S 

TOOPOOO 


T000705 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

TOOPOOO 




T000708 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

T000706 

T000707 

TOOPOOO 

* 

TO00711 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

T000709 

T000710 

TOOPOOO 


T000713 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

TOOPOOO 




T000714 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TOOPOOO 




T000715 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

TOOPOOO 




T000716 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

TOOPOOO 




T000717 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

TOOPOOO 




T000718 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPK 

TOOPOOO 




T000721 

OURSYSK 

OURDMPX 

T000719 

T000720 

TOOPOOO 



G-44 





Table G-6 JOVIAL Test Program and Source Code Files 


PROGRAM 



JA00000 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JAOPODOX 




JF03519 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JF03500 

JF03501 

JF03502 

JF03503 


JF03504 

JF03513 

JF03514 

JFOPOOOX 

JFJ3500K 

JFJ3501X 


JFJ3502K 

JFJ3503X 

JFJ3504X 

JFJ3513K 

JFJ3514X 


JF0S550 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JFD3551 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPXx 

JFOPOOOX 



JF03620 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JF03600 

JF03601 

JF03602 

JF03603 


JF03604 

JF03605 

JFQS606 

JF03607 

JF03608 

JF03609 


JF03610 

JFQP000* 

JFJ3600X 

JFJ3601X 

JFJ3602X 

JFJ3603X 


JFJ3604X 

JFJ3605X 

JFJ3606X 

JFJ3607K 

JFJ3608X 

JFJ3609X 


JFJ3610X 






JF03704 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JF03700 

JF03701M 

JF03702 


JF03703 

JF0P000X 

JFJ3700X 

JFJ3701X 

JFJ3702X 

JFJ3703X 

JF03805 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JF03800 

JF03801 

JF03802 


JF03803 

JF03804 

JF0P000X 

JFJ3800X 

JFJ3801K 

JFJ3802X 


JFJ3803X 

JFJ3804X 





JF04120 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JF0P000X 




JF04121 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04122 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JF0P000X 




JF04123 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04124 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04125 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04126 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04127 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JFD4128 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JF04129 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JFD412A 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JF0412B 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JFD412C 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JFD412D 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



Jf04130 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JF04131 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JF04132 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JF04133 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JFD4135 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JFD4136 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JFD4137 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JFD4138 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JFD4139 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JFD413A 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JFD413B 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JFD413C 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JF0413D 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JFD413E 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JFD413G 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JF0413H 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JF0413I 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JF0413J 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JF0413K 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JF04310 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JF0431198 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JF04312 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JF04510 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04511 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04S12 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04513 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04514 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04515 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04S16 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04517 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF0451J** 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JF04518 

JF04519 

JF0451A 

JF0451B 


JF0451C 

JF0451D 

JF0451E 

JF0451F 

JF0451G 

JF0451H* 


♦ Source file supplied with USE file type only 

ft Multiple versions of source file suppliedtUSE and JOV/CPL fila types) 


G-45 








Table G-6 JOVIAL Tast Programs and Source Coda Files (continued) 


PROGRAM SUPPORT FILEStx - FILES NAMED IN CQM Pnm AND COPY DIRECTIVES) 



JF0451I* 

JF0P000X 

JFJ4518X 

JFJ4519X 

JFJ451AX 

JFJ451BX 


JFJ451C* 

JFJ451DX 

JFJ451EX 

JFJ451FX 

JFJ451GX 

JFJ451HFX 


JFJ451IM 






JFD451U* 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVTYPX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFD451K 

JFD451L 


JFD451M 

JFD451N* 

JFD4510* 

JFD451P 

JFD451Q 

JFD451R* 


JFD451S8 

JFJ451RK 

JFJ451LX 

JFJ451MX 

JFJ4S1N8K 

JFJ4510FX 


JFJ451PX 

JFJ451QX 

JFJ451R8X 

JFJ451S9K 

JFJ451TX 


JF0451Z 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JF0451V 

JF0451W 

JF04S1X 

JF0451Y 


JFOPOOOK 

JFJ451VX 

JFJ451WX 

JFJ451XK 

JFJ451YX 


JF04520 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOK 




JF04521 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOK 




JF04522 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JFD4523 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVTYPX 

JFOPOOOX 



JFD4524 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVTYPX 

JFOPOOOX 



JFD4525* 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVTYPX 

JFOPOOOX 



JFD4526* 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVTYPX 

JFOPOOOK 



JF04527 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOK 




JFD4528F 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCX 

JFOPOOOK 



JF04S29 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JFD452A 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCX 

JFOPOOOX 



JF04530 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04531 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04532 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04533 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04534 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04535 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04536 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04537 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04538 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04539 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF0453A 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF0453B 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF0453C 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04540 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04541 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04550 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04551 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04552 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04553 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04554 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04555 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOK 




JF04556 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04S57 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04558 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04559 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JFD4S5D 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVTYPX 

JFOPOOOX 



JFD455E 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVTYPX 

JFOPOOOK 



JFD455F8 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVTYPX 

JFOPOOOX 



JFD455G8 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVTYPX 

JFOPOOOK 



JFD455I 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVTYPX 

JFOPOOOK 



JFD4S5J 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVTYPX 

JFOPOOOX 



JFD455K* 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVTYPX 

JFOPOOOK 



JFD4S5L8 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVTYPX 

JFOPOOOK 



JF0455M 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04550 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04560 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04562 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JF04563 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOX 




JFD4566 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVTYPX 

JFOPOOOK 



JFD4567 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVTYPX 

JFOPOOOK 



JFD4568* 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVTYPX 

JFOPOOOX 



JFD4569I 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVTYPX 

JFOPOOOK 



JF04600 

OURJOVX 

JOVDMPX 

JFOPOOOK 





t Source file supplied with USE file type only 


G-46 


i 




Table 6-6 JOVIAL Test Programs and Source Coda Files (continued) 


EBflgRAH SUPPORT FILE SCX - FILES NAMED 


JF04601 OURJOVX 
JF04602 OURJOVX 
JFD4603 OURJOVX 
JFD4604 OURJOVX 
JFD4605 OURJOVX 
JFD4606 OURJOVX 
JFD4607 OURJOVX 
JFD4608* OURJOVX 
JFD4609* OURJOVX 
JFD460A9 OURJOVX 
JFD460B* OURJOVX 
JFD460C9 OURJOVX 
JFD460D* OURJOVX 
JF0460E OURJOVX 
JF0460F OURJOVX 
JF0460G OURJOVX 
JF0460H OURJOVX 
JF0460I OURJOVX 
JF0460J OURJOVX 
JFD460K OURJOVX 
JFD460L OURJOVX 
JF0460M OURJOVX 
JF0460N OURJOVX 
JFD4600 OURJOVX 
JF05200 OURJOVX 
JF05201 OURJOVX 
JF05202 OURJOVX 
JF05203 OURJOVX 
JF05204 OURJOVX 
JF05205 OURJOVX 
JF05206 OURJOVX 
JF05207 OURJOVX 
JF05208 OURJOVX 
JF05209 OURJOVX 
JF0520A OURJOVX 
JF0520B OURJOVX 
JFD520C OURJOVX 
JFD520D OURJOVX 
JFD520E OURJOVX 
JFD520F OURJOVX 
JFD520G* OURJOVX 
JFD520H* OURJOVX 
JFD520I# OURJOVX 
JFD520J* OURJOVX 
JF0520M OURJOVX 
JFD520N OURJOVX 
JF05200 OURJOVX 
JFD520P OURJOVX 
JFD5209 OURJOVX 
JF0520R OURJOVX 
JF0520S OURJOVX 
Jr05210 OURJOVX 
JF05211 OURJOVX 
JF05212 OURJOVX 
JF05213 OURJOVX 
JF05214 OURJOVX 
JF05215 OURJOVX 
JFD5218 OURJOVX 
JFD5219 OURJOVX 
JFD521A OURJOVX 
JFD521B OURJOVX 
JFD521C# OURJOVX 
JFD521D* OURJOVX 


JOVDMPX JF0P000X 

JOVDMPX JF0P000K 

JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 

JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 

JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 

JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 

JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 

JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 

JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 

JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 

JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 

JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 

JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 

JOVDMPX JF0P000K 

JOVDMPX JF0P000X 

JOVDMPX JFOPOOOX 

JOVDMPX JFOPOOOX 

JOVDMPX JFOPOOOX 

JOVDMPX JOVSPCX 

JOVDMPX JOVSPCX 

JOVDMPX JOVSPCX 

JOVDMPX JOVSPCX 

JOVDMPX JOVSPCX 

JOVDMPX JOVSPCX 

JOVDMPX JFOPOOOX 

JOVDMPX JFOPOOOX 

JOVDMPX JFOPOOOX 

JOVDMPX JFOPOOOX 

JOVDMPX JFOPOOOX 

JOVDMPX JFOPOOOX 

JOVDMPX JFOPOOOX 

JOVDMPX JFOPOOOX 

JOVDMPX JFOPOOOX 

JOVDMPX JFOPOOOX 

JOVDMPX JFOPOOOX 

JOVDMPX JFOPOOOX 

JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 

JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 

JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 

JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 

JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 

JOVDMPX . JOVTYPX 
JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 

JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 

JOVDMPX JOVSPCX 

JOVDMPX JOVSPCX 

JOVDMPX JOVSPCX 

JOVDMPX JOVSPCX 

JOVDMPX JOVSPCX 

JOVDMPX JOVSPCX 

JOVDMPX JOVSPCX 

JOVDMPX JFOPOOOX 

JOVDMPX JFOPOOOX 

JOVDMPX JFOPOOOX 

JOVDMPX JFOPOOOX 

JOVDMPX JFOPOOOX 

JOVDMPX JFOPOOOX 

JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 

JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 

JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 

JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 

JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 

JOVDMPX JOVTYPX 


0 Source file supplied with USE file type 


IN COMPOOL AMD COPY DIRECTIVES) 


JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 


JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 


JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 


JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

only 


G-47 








Table 6-6 JOVIAL Test Programs and Source Code Files (continued) 


PROGRAM 


jfW X'V # fP'TMj JTjH ilne sj p] * ) A 1"j * j Jl 'm 1 *1ill 

JFD521E* 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JOVTYPK 

JFOPOOOX 



JFD521F9 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JOVTYPK 

JFOPOOOK 



JF0521H 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JF0P000K 




JF0521I 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JF0P000K 




JF0521J 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JF0P000K 




JF0521K 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JFOPOOOK 




JFD521K 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOK 



JF0521L 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOK 


* 

JF0521M 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOK 



JF0521N 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOK 



JFD5210 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOK 



JFD521P 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 



JF05304 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JF05300 

JF05301 

JF05302 

JF05303 


JFOPOOOX 

JFJ5300K 

JFJ5301K 

JFJ5302X 

JFJ5303K 


JF05308 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JF05305 

JF05306 

JF05307 

' JFOPOOO* 


JFJ5305X 

JFJ5306R 

JFJ5307K 




JF05408 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JF05400 

JF05401 

JF05402 

JF05403 


JF054O4 

JF05405 

JF05406 

JF05407 

JFOPOOOK 

JFJ5400* 


JFJ5401K 

JFJ5402K 

JFJ5403K 

JFJ5404K 

JFJ5405K 

JFJ5406K 


JFJ5407X 






JF05505 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JF05501 

JF05S02 

JF05503 

JF05504 


JFOPO0OK 

JFJ55D1K 

JFJ5502X 

JFJS503K 

JFJ5S04K 


JF0550C 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JF05506 

JF05507 

JF05508 

JF05509 


JF055OA 

JF0550B 

JFOPOOOK 

JFJ5506X 

JFJ5507K 

JFJ5508K 


JFJ5509K 

JFJ550AK 

JFJ550BK 




JF0550D 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK . 

JFOPOOOK 




JF0550E 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JFOPOOOK 




JF0550F 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JFOPOOOK 




JF06001 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JFOPOOOK 




JF06009 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JFOPOOOK 




JF06010 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JFOPOOOK 




JF 06011 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JFOPOOOK 




JF06022 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JF06013 

JF06014 

JF06015 

JF06016 


JF06017 

JF06018 

JF06D19 

JFOPOOOX 

JFJ6013X 

JFJ6014X 


JFJ601SK 

JFJ6016K 

JFJ6017K 

JFJ6018K 

JFJ6019K 


JF060SS 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JF06023 

JF06024 

JF06025 

JF06DZ6 


JF06027 

JF06028 

JF06029 

JF06030 

JF06031 

JF0603Z 


JF0P000K 

JFJ6023K 

JFJ6024X 

JFJ6025X 

JFJ6026K 

JFJ6027K 


JFJ602SK 

JFJ6029K 

JFJ6030K 

JFJ6031K 

JFJ6032K 


JF06055 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JF06043 

JF06044 

JF06045 

JF06046 


JF06047 

JF06048 

JF06049 

JF06050 

JF06051 

JF06052 


JFOPOOO* 

JFJ6043K 

JFJ6044K 

JFJ6045X 

JFJ6046K 

JFJ6047X 


JFJ6048K 

JFJ6049K 

JFJ6050X 

JFJ6051X 

JFJ6052K 


JF06069 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JF06060 

JF06061 

JF06062 

JF06063 


JF06064 

JF06065 

JF06066 

JF06067 

JF06068 

JFOPOOOK 


JFJ6060K 

JFJ6061K 

JFJ6062K 

JFJ606SK 

JFJ6064K 

JFJ6065K 


JFJ6066K 

JFJ6067K 

JFJ6068K 




JF06079 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JF06070 

JF06071 

JFO6072 

JF06073 


JF06074 

JF06075 

JF06076 

JF06077 

JF06078 

JFOPOOOK 


JFJ6070K 

JFJ6071K 

JFJ6072K 

JFJ6073K 

JFJ6074K 

JFJ6075K 


JFJ6076K 

JFJ6077K 

JFJ6078K 




JF06101 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JF06100 

JFOPOOOK 

JFJ6100X 


JF06109 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JF06108 

JFOPOOOK 

JFJ6108K 


JF06110 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JF06108 

JFOPOOOK 

JFJ6108K 


JF06111 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JF06108 

JFOPOOOK 

JFJ6108H 


JF06122 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JF06112 

JF06113 

JF06114 

JF06115 


JF06116 

JF06117 

JF06118 

JF06119 

JFOPOOOK 

JFJ6112K 


JFJ6113K 

JFJ6114K 

JFJ6115K 

JFJ6116K 

JFJ6117K 

3FJ6118K 

JF06140 

JFJ6119* 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JF06132 

JF06133 

JF061S4 

JF06135 


JF06136 

JF06137 

JF06138 

JF06139 

JFOPOOOK 

JPJ6132^ 


JFJ6133K 

JFJ6134K 

JFJ6135K 

JFJ6136H 

JFJ6137K 

JFJ6138K 


JFJ6139X 


* Source file supplied with USE file type enly 


G-48 





Tabl* 0-6 JOVIAL Tost ProBram* and Sourco Coda Filos (continuad) 

SUPPORT FILESCX - FILES NAMED IN CO HPOOL AND COPY DIRECTIVES) 


PROGRAM 

JF06150 


JF06160 


JF06170 


JF06180 


JF06190 


JF06199 


JF0619I 


JF0619R 


JFD6201 

JFD6209 

JFD6210 

JFD6211 

JFD6222 


JFD6233 


JFD6253 


JFD62690 


JFD62798 


JF06803 

JF06807 

JF06809 

JF0680B 

JF0680D 

JF0680F 

JFD680H 


OURJOVX 

JF06146 

JFJ6143X 

JFJ6149X 

OURJOVX 

JF06156 

JFJ6153X 

JFJ6159X 

OURJOVX 

JF06166 

JFJ6163X 

JFJ6169X 

OURJOVX 

JF06176 

JFJ6173X 

JFJ6179X 

OURJOVX 

JF06186 

JFJ6183K 

JFJ6189X 

OURJOVX 

JF06194 

JFJ6191X 

JFJ6197X 

OURJOVX 

JF06190 

JFJ619AX 

JFJ619GX 

OURJOVX 

JF0619M 

JFJ619JK 

JFJ619PX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

JFD6216 

JFJ6215K 

OURJOVX 

JFD6226 

JFD6232 

JFJ6228K 

OURJOVX 

JFD6246 

JFD6252 

JFJ6248X 

OURJOVX 

JFD6263# 

JFJ6260IX 

JFJ62660X 

OURJOVX 

JFD62730 

JFJ62700X 

JFJ62760X 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 


JOVDMPX 

JF06147 

JFJ6144X 

JOVDMPX 

JF06157 

JFJ6154X 

JOVDMPX 

JF06167 

JFJ6164X 

JOVDMPX 

JF06177 

JFJ6174X 

JOVDMPX 

JF06187 

JFJ6184X 

JOVDMPX 

JF06195 

JFJ6192X 

JFJ6198X 

JOVDMPX 

JF0619E 

JFJ619BX 

JFJ619HX 

JOVDMPX 

JF0619N 

JFJ619KX 

JFJ619QX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVDMPX 

JFD6217 

JFJ6216X 

JOVDMPX 

JFD6227 

JFJ6223X 

JFJ6229K 

JOVDMPX 

JFD6247 

JFJ6243X 

JFJ6249X 

JOVDMPX 

JFD6264I 

JFJ62610X 

JFJ62676K 

JOVDMPX 

JFD62740 

JFJ6271M 

JFJ62778X 

JOVDMPX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVDMPX 


JF06142 

JF06148 

JFJ6145X 

JF06152 

JF06158 

JFJ6155X 

JF06162 

JF06168 

JFJ6165X 

JF06172 

JF06178 

JFJ6175X 

JF06182 

JF06188 

JFJ6185X 

JOVSPCX 

JF06196 

JFJ6193X 

JOVSPCX 

JF0619F 

JFJ619CX 

JOVSPCX 

JF06190 

JFJ619LK 

JFOPODOK 

JFOPOOOK 

JFOPDDOX 

JFOPODOK 

JFOPOOOK 

JFD6218 

JFJ6217X 

JFOPOOOK 

JFD6228 

JFJ6224X 

JFJ6230K 

JFOPOOOK 

JFD6248 

JFJ6244X 

JFJ6250X 

JFOPOOOK 

JFD62650 

JFJ6262BK 

JFJ6268BK 

JFOPOOOK 

JFD62750 

JFJ62728X 

JFJ6278BK 

JF06802 

JF06806 

JOVSPCX 

JOVSPCX 

JOVSPCX 

JOVSPCX 

JOVSPCX 


JF06I43 

JF06149 

JFJ6146K 

JF06153 

JF06159 

JFJ6156X 

JF06163 

JF06169 

JFJ6166X 

JF06173 

JF06179 

JFJ6176K 

JF06183 

JF06189 

JFJ6186X 

JF06191 

JF06197 

JFJ6194X 

JF0619A00 

JF0619C 

JFJ619DK 

JF0619J 

JF0619P 

JFJ619MX 


JFD6213 

JFD6219 

JFJ6218K 

JFD6223 

JFD6229 

JFJ6225X 

JFJ6231K 

JFD6243 

JFD6249 

JFJ6245X 

JFJ6251K 

JFD62608 

JFD62660 

JFJ62638K 

JFD62700 

JFD62760 

JFJ62738X 

JFOPOOOK 

JFOPOOOK 

JF06808 

JF0680A 

JF0680C 

JF0680E 

JFOPOOOK 


JF06144 

JFOPOOOK 

JFJ6147K 

JF06154 

JFOPOOOK 

JFJ6157X 

JF06164 

JFOPOOOK 

JFJ6167K 

JF06174 

JFOPOOOK 

JFJ6177X 

JF06184 

JFOPOOOK 

JFJ6187X 

JF06192 

JF06198 

JFJ6I95K 

JF0619B 

JF0619H 

JFJ619EK 

JF0619K 

JF0619Q 

JFJ619NX 


JFD6214 

JFJ6213K 

JFJ6219X 

JFD6224 

JFD6230 

JFJ6226K 

JFJ6232K 

JFD6244 

JFD6250 

JFJ6246K 

JFJ6252X 

JFD62610 

JFD62670 

JFJ6264BK 

JFD62718 
JFD62770 
JFJ62740X 

JFJ6802X 

JFJ6806K 

JFOPOOOK 

JFOPOOOK 

JFOPOOOK 

JFOPOOOK 

JFD680G 


JF06145 

JFJ6142X 

JFJ6148X 

JF06155 

JFJ6152X 

JFJ6158X 

JF06165 

JFJ6162X 

JFJ6168X 

JF06175 

JFJ6172X 

JFJ6178X 

JF06185 

JFJ6182K 

JFJ6188X 

JF06193 

JFOPOOOK 

JFJ6196X 

JF0619C 

JFOPOOOK 

JFJ619FX 

JF0619L 

JFOPOOOK 

JFJ6190K 


JFD6215 

JFJ6214K 

JFD6225 

JFD6231 

JFJ6227K 

JFD6245 

JFD6251 

JFJ6247X 

JFD62620 

JFD6268* 

JFJ6265FK 

JFD62728 

JFD62780 

JFJ6275CK 


JFJ6808K 

JFJ680AK 

JFJ680CK 

JFJ680EK 

JFJ680GK 


8 Sourco fila supplied with USE filo typo only 

Of Multipla vorsions of sourco filo ouppliodCUSE and JOV/CPL filo typos) 







Table G-6 JOVIAL Test Programs and Source Code Files (continued) 


PROGRAM 

JFD680J 

JF06811 

JF06815 

JF06817 

JF06819 

JF06821 

JF06823 

JF06825 

JFDD600 

JFDD601 

JFDD602M 

JFDD6039* •• 

JFDD604 

JFDD605 

JFDD606 

JFOD607 

JFDD608 

JFOD609 

JFDD610M 

JFDD611M 

JF0D720 

JF0D721 

JFDD722 

JFDD723 

JFDD7249 

JFDD7259 

JF0D727 

JF0D728 

JF0D729 

JFDD72A 

JFDD72B 

JFDD72C 

JF0D72D 

JFDD72E 

JFDD72F 

JFDD72G 

JFDD72H 

JFDD72I 

JFDDA01 

JFDDA02 

JFDFOOO 

JFDF001 

JFDF002 

JFDF003 

JFDF004 

JFDF005 

JGD0001 

JG00009 

JG0000C 

JGD000E 

JGNOOOK 

J000104 

J000204 

J000300 

J000305 

J000310 

J000313 


OURJOVA 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

JGD0008M 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

JONOOOJM 

OURJOVX 

JOJ0102X 

OURJOVX 

JOJ0203X 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

OURJOVX 

J0J0312X 


JOVDMPx 

JOVDMPx 

JOVDMPX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVSPCK 

JOVSPCX 

JOVSPCK 

JOVSPCX 

JOVSPCX 

JOVSPCX 

JOVSPCX 

JOVSPCX 

JOVSPCX 

JOVSPCX 

JOVSPCK 

JOVSPCX 


JOVTYPK 

JOVTYPX 

JOVTYPK 

JOVTYPX 

JOVSPCK 

JOVSPCX 

JOVSPCX 

JOVSPCX 

JOVSPCX 

JOVSPCX 

JOVSPCX 

JOVSPCK 

JOVSPCX 

JOVSPCK 

JOVSPCX 


JOVSPCK 

JF06810 

JF06814 

JF06816 

JF06818 

JF06820 

JOVSPCX 

JOVSPCK 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 


JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JF06822M 

JF06824 


JFD6801 

JFJ6810K 

JFJ6814K 

JFJ6816K 

JFJ6818X 

JFJ6820X 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 


JFJ680IX 


JFJ6822X 

JFJ6824X 


jovspcx 

JOVSPCX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVDMPX 

JOVMATHX 

JGOPOOOK 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JOVMATHX 

JOVMATHX 

JOVMATHX 

JOVMATHX 

JOVMATHX 

JOVMATHX 

JGOPOOOK 

JGD0004X 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JFOPOOOX 

JGDOOOOX 

JGD0005K 

JGF0001 

JGD0006K 

JGD0007 

JOVDMPX 

JGOPOOOK 

JGOPOOOK 

JGDOOOOX 

JGDOOOD 

JGFOOOE 

JGJOOODK 

JGOPOOOK 

JGNOOOFK 

JGNOOOGX 

JGNOOOHX 

JGNOOOI 

JOVDMPX 

J000002X 

J000102 

J000103 

JOOPOOOK 

JOJ0103X 

JOVDMPX 

J000202 

J000203 

•joopoook 

JOJ0202K 

JOOPOOOK 

JOOPOOOK 

JOOPOOOK 

JOVDMPX 

J000311 

J000312 

JOOPOOOK 

JOJ0311X 


* Source file supplied with USE file type enlv 

•• Multiple versions of source file suppUedCUSE end JOV/CPL fil 


e types) 




Table C-6 JOVIAL Test Programs and Sourca Coda Filas (continued) 


SUPPORT FILESC* - FILES NAMED IN C0H P00L AND COPY DIRECTIVES) 


PROGRAM 

JO00316 

J000319* 

JO003228 

J000325 

J000328 

J000331 

J000334 

J000337 

J000340 

J000343 

J000346 

J000350 

J000353 

J000365 

J00036K 

J00036N 

JODQ36Q 

JOD036T 

J00036H 

JOD036Z 

J000391 

J000404 

J000500 

J000504 

J000509 

J000514 

J000519 

J000525 

J000604 

J000605 

J000606 

J000607 

J000704 

J000705 

J000708 


OURJOV* 

JOJ0315* 

OURJOV* 

JOJ03188* 

OURJOV* 

JOJ03218* 

OURJOV* 

JOJ0324* 

OURJOV* 

JOJ0327* 

OURJOV* 

JOJ0330* 

OURJOV* 

JOJ0333* 

OURJOV* 

JOJ0336* 

OURJOV* 

J0J0339* 

OURJOV* 

JOJ0342* 

OURJOV* 

JOJ0345* 

OURJOV* 

J0J0347* 

OURJOV* 

JOJ0347* 

OURJOV* 

J0J0363* 

OURJOV* 

JOJ036I* 

OURJOV* 

JOJ036L* 

OURJOV* 

JOJ0360* 

OURJOV* 

JOJ038R* 

OURJOV* 

JOJ034UK 

OURJOV* 

JOJ036X* 

OURJOV* 

OURJOV* 

J0J0403* 

OURJOV* 

OURJOV* 

JOJ0503* 

OURJOV* 

JOJ0508* 

OURJOV* 

J0J0513* 

OURJOV* 

JOJ0518* 

OURJOV* 

JQJ0524X 

OURJOV* 

JOJ0603* 

OURJOV* 

OURJOV* 

OURJOV* 

OURJOV* 

JOJ0703* 

OURJOV* 

OURJOV* 


JOVDMP* 

JOVDMP* 

JOVDMP* 

JOVDMP* 

JOVDMP* 

JOVDMP* 

JOVDMP* 

JOVDMP* 

JOVDMP* 

JOVDMP* 

JOVDMP* 

JOVDMP* 

JOJ0348* 

JOVDMP* 

JOJ03S1* 

JOVDMP* 

JOJ0364* 

JOVDMP* 

J0J036J* 

JOVDMP* 

JOJ036M* 

JOVDMP* 

J0J036P* 

JOVDMP* 

JOJ036S* 

JOVDMP* 

JOJ036V* 

JOVDMP* 

J0J036YK 

JOVDMP* 

JOVDMP* 

JOOPOOOX 

JOVDMP* 

JOVDMP* 

JOVDMP* 

JOVDMP* 

JOVDMP* 

JOVDMP* 

JOVDMP* 

JOVDMP* 

JOVDMP* 

JOVDMP* 

JOVDMP* 

JOVDMP* 


JOOOS14 

JO00317* 

J0003208 

JO00323 

J000326 

J000329 

J000332 

J000335 

J000338 

JOOOS41 

JOOPOOQ* 

J000347 

JOJ0349* 

J000347 

JOJ0352* 

JOVSPC* 

JOVSPCK 

JOVSPC* 

JOVSPCK 

JOVSPCK 

JOVSPCK 

JOVTYP* 

J000390 

J000402 

J000502 

J000507 

J000512 

J000517 

JOOPOOO* 

J000602 

JOOPOOO* 

JOOPOOO* 

JOOPOOO* 

J000702 

JOOPOOO* 

J000706 


J00031S 

J000318* 

J000321* 

J000324 

J000327 

J000330 

J000333 

J000336 

J000339 

J000342 

JOD0344 

J000348 

J000351 

J000363 

J00036I 

J00036L 

JOOPOOO* 

JOOPOOO* 

J00036U 

JOOPOOOX 

JOOPOOO* 

J000403 

J000505 

J000508 

J000513 

J000518 

JOD0523 

J000603 

J000703 

J000707 


JOOPOOOX 

JOOPOOO* 

JOOPOOO* 

JOOPOOO* 

JOOPOOO* 

JOOPOOOX 

JOOPOOO* 

JOOPOOO* 

JOOPOOO* 

JOOPOOO* 

JOD0345 

J000349 

J000352 

J000364 

J00036J 

J00036M 

JOD0360 

JOD036R 

J00036V 

J0D036X 

JOJ0390* 

JOOPOOO* 

JOOPOOO* 

JOOPOOO* 

JOOPOOO* 

JOOPOOO* 

JOD0524 

JOOPOOO* 

JOOPOOO* 

JOOPOOO* 


JOJ0314* 

JOJ0317$* 

JOJ0320** 

JOJ0323* 

JOJ0326* 

JOJ0329* 

JOJ0332* 

JOJ0335* 

JOJ0338* 

JOJ0341* 

J0J0344* 

JOOPOOOX 

JOOPOOO* 

JOOPOOO* 

JOOPOOO* 

JOOPOOO* 

JOD036P 

JOD036S 

JOOPOOO* 

JOD036Y 

JOJ0402* 

JOJ0502* 

J0J0507* 

J0J0512* 

J0J0517* 

J0J0523* 

JOJ0602* 

JOJ0702* 

J0J0706* 


9 Sourca file supplied with USE file type only 


C—51 











Table 6-6 JOVIAL Test Programs and Sourca Coda Filas (concluded) 


PROGRAM 

SUPPORT ^ILES(X - FILES MAMED IN COMPOOL 

AND COPY DIRECTIVE'S) 


JOJ0707K 




JOOPOOOK 

JOJ0709K 

J000711 

OURJOVK 

JOJO710X 

JOVDMPK 

J000709 

J000710 



J00071S 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPX 

JOOPOOOX 




J000714 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JOOPOOOK 




J000715 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JOOPOOOX 




J000716 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPX 

JOOPOOOK 




J000717 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPK 

JOOPOOOK 



* 

J000718 

OURJOVK 

JOVDMPX 

JOOPOOOK 


JOOPOOOK 

JOJ0719X 

J000721 

OURJOVK 

JOJO720K 

JOVDMPX 

JO00719 

J000720 






G-52 



Table G-7. FORTRAN Test Programs and Source Code Files 


PROGRAM 





FA00000 

OURFORX 

FAOPOOOx 





FF03519 

OURFORX 

FF03500 

FF03502 

FF03503 

FF03504 

FF03514 


FF0P000X 






FF03620 

OURFORX 

FF03600 

FF03602 

FF03603 

FF03605 

FF03606 


FF03608 

FF03609 

FFOPOOOX 




FF04120 

OURFORX 

FF0P000X 





FF04121 

OURFORX 

FF0P000X 





FF04122 

OURFORX 

FF0P000X 





FF04123 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOx 





FF04124 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04125 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04126 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOx 





FF04127 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOx 





FF04129 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04510 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04511 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04512 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04513 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04514 

OURFORX 

. FFOPOOOx 





FF04515 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04516 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOx 





FF04517 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF0451J 

OURFORX 

FF04518 

FF04519 

FF0451A 

FF0451B 

FF0451C 


FF0451D 

FF0451E 

FF0451F 

FF0451G 

FF0451H 

FF0451I 


FF0P000X 






FFD451US 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOX 

FFD451K 

FFD451L 

FFD451M 


FFD451N 

FFD4510 

FFD451P 

FFD451Q 

FFD451R 

FFD451S 

FF0451Z 

OURFORX 

FF0451V 

FF0451M 

FF0451X 

FF0451Y 

FFOPOOOX 

FF04520 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04521 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04522 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FFD4523 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOX 




FFD4524 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOX 




FFD4525 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOx 




FFD4526 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOX 




FF04529 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04530 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04531 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOx 





FF04S32 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04533 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOx 





FF04534 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04535 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOx 





FF04536 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOx 





FF04537 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04538 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04539 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF0453A 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04540 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOx 





FF04541 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04550 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04551 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOx 





FF04552 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOx 





FF04553 

OURFORX 

' FFOPOOOX 





FF04554 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04555 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04556 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04557 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04558 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FF04559 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FFD455D 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOX 




FFD455E 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOX 




FFD455F 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOX 




FFD455G 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOx 




FFD455I 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOX 





♦ Source file supplied with USE file type only 


G-53 






Table 6-7. FORTRAN Test Programs and Source Code Files (Continued) 


ERflfiBAM- 

SVPEORT 

FILESCX - FILES NAMED IN INCLUDE STATEMENTS! 

FFD455J 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD455K 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD4551 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FF04560 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF04562 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF04563 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FFD45668 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD4567 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD4568 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD4569 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FF04600 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF04601 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF04602 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FFD4603 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD4604 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD4605 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD4606 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD4607 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FF04608 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD4609 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD460A 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD460B 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FF0460I 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF05200 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF05201 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF05202 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF05203 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF05204 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF05205 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF05206 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF05207 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF05208 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF05209 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF0520A 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FFD520C 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD520D 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD520E 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD520F 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD520G 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD520H 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD520I 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD520J 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FF05210 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF05211 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF05212 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF05213 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF05214 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF05215 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FFD5218 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD5219 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD521A 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD521B 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD521C 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD521D 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD521E 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FFD521F 

OURFORX 

FORTYPX 

FFOPOOOK 



FF0521H 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF0521I 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF0521J 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF0521K 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOK 




FF0S304 

OURFORX 

FF05300 

FF05301 

FF05302 

FF05303 

FF05308 

OURFORX 

FF05305 

FF05306 

FF05307 

FFOPOOOK 

FF05408 

OURFORX 

FF05400 

FF05401 

FF05402 

FF05403 


♦ Source file supplied with USE file type only 


FFOPOOOK 

FF05404 


G-54 







Table G-7. .FORTRAN Test Programs and Source Code Files (Continued) 


SUPPORT FILESQt - FILES NAMED IN IN CLUDE STATEMENTS) 


PROGRAM 

FF05405 

FF05505 

FF0550C 

FF0550D 

FF0550E 

FF0550F 

FF06001 

FF06009 

FF06010 

FF06011 

FF06022 

FF06033 

FF06053 

FF06069 

FF06079 

FF06101 

FF06109 

FF06110 

FF06111 

FF06122 

FF06140 

FF06150 

FF06160 

FF06170 

FF06180 

FF06190 

FF06803 

FF06807 

FF06817 

FF06819 

FF06821 

FF0D720 

FF0D721 

FFDD722 

FFDD723 

FFDD724 

FFDD725 

FF0D727 

FF0D728 

FFDE220 


FFDE250 


FFDE420 


FF05406 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

FF0550B 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

FF06018 

OURFORX 

FF06028 

OURFORX 

FF06048 

OURFORX 

FF06065 

OURFORX 

FF06075 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

FF06117 

OURFORX 

FF06137 

OURFORX 

FF06147 

OURFORX 

FF06157 

OURFORX 

FF06167 

OURFORX 

FF06177 

OURFORX 

FF06187 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

OURFORX 

FFDE204 

FFDE20A 

FFDE216 

OURFORX 

FFDE234 

FFDE23A 

FFDE246 

OURFORX 

FFDE404 


FF05407 

FF05S01 

FF05506 

FFOPOOOX 

FF0P000X 

FFOPOOOX 

FFOPOOOX 

FFOPOOOX 

FFOPOOOX 

FFOPOOOX 

FFOPOOOX 

FF06013 

FF06019 

FF06023 

FF06029 

FF06043 

FF06049 

FF06060 

FF06066 

FF06070 

FF06076 

FF06100 

FF06108 

FF06108 

FF06108 

FF06U2 

FF06118 

FF06132 

FF06138 

FF06142 

FF06148 

FF06152 

FF06158 

FF06162 

FF06168 

FF06172 

FF06178 

FF06182 

FF06188 

FF06802 

FF06806 

FF06816 

FF06818 

FF06820 


FORTYPX 

FORTYPX 

FORTYPX 

FORTYPX 


FFOPOOOX 

FFDE205 

FFDE211 

FFOPOOOX 

FFDE235 

FFDE241 

FFOPOOOX 

FFDE405 


FFOPOOOX 

FF05502 

FF05507 


FF06014 

FFOPOOOX 

FF06024 

FF06030 

FF06044 

FF06050 

FF06061 

FF06067 

FF06071 

FF06077 

FFOPOOOX 

FFOPOOOX 

FFOPOOOX 

FFOPOOOX 

FF06113 

FF06119 

FF06133 

FF06139 

FF06143 

FF06149 

FF06153 

FF06159 

FF06163 

FF06169 

FF06173 

FF06179 

FF06183 

FF06189 

FFOPOOOX 

FFOPOOOX 

FFOPOOOX 

FFOPOOOX 

FFOPOOOX 


FFDE000X 

FFDE206 

FFDE212 

FFDEOOOX 

FFDE236 

FFDE242 

FFDEOOOX 

FFDE406 


FF05503 

FF05508 


FF06015 

FF06025 

FF06031 

FF06045 

FF06051 

FF06062 

FF06068 

FF06072 

FF06078 


FF06114 

FFOPOOOX 

FF06134 

FFOPOOOX 

FF06144 

FFOPOOOX 

FF06154 

FFOPOOOX 

FF06164 

FFOPOOOX 

FF06174 

FFOPOOOX 

FF06184 

FFOPOOOX 


FFDE201 

FFDE207 

FFDE213 

FFDE231 

FFDE237 

FFDE243 

FFDE401 

FFDE407 


FF05504 

FF05509 


FF06016 

FF06026 

FF06032 

FF06046 

FF06052 

FF06063 

FFOPOOOX 

FF06073 

FFOPOOOX 


FF06115 

FF06135 

FF06145 

FF06155 

FF06165 

FF06175 

FF06185 


FFDE202 

FFDE208 

FFDE214 

FFDE232 

FFDE238 

FFDE244 

FFDE402 

FFDE408 


FFOPOOOX 

FF0550A 


FF06017 

FF06027 

FFOPOOOX 

FF06047 

FFOPOOOX 

FF06064 

FF06074 


FF06116 

FF06136 

FF06146 

FF06156 

FF06166 

FF06176 

FF06186 


FFDE203 

FFDE209 

FFDE215 

FFDE233 

FFDE239 

FFDE245 

FFDE403 

FFDE409 


G-55 




Table G-7. FORTRAN Test Programs and Source Code Files (Concluded) 


PROGRAM 

Minn 





FFDE40A 

FFDE416 

FFDE411 

FFPE412 

FFDE413 

FFDE414 

FFDE415 

FFDE450 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 

FFDE000X 

FFDE431 

FFDE432 

FFDE433 


FFDE434 

FFDE435 

FFDE436 

FFDE437 

FFDE438 

FFDE439 


FFDE43A 

FFDE446 

FFDE441 

FFDE442 

FFDE443 

FFDE444 

FFDE445 

FFDF000 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FFDF001 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FFDF002 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FFDF003 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FFDF004 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FFDF005 

OURFORX 

FFOPOOOX 





FGD0001 

OURFORX 

FG0P000X 

FGD0000X 




FGOOOOE 

OURFORX 

FG0P000* 

FGD0000X 

FGOOOOD 



F000104 

OURFORX 

F000002X 

F000102 

F000103 

FOOPOOOX 


F000204 

OURFORX 

F000202 

F000203 

FOOPOOOX 



F000300 

OURFORX 

FOOPOOOX 





F000305 

OURFORX 

FOOPOOOK 





F000310 

OURFORX 

FOOPOOOX 





F000313 

OURFORX 

F000311 

F000312 

FOOPOOOK 



F000316 

OURFORX 

F000314 

F000315 

FOOPOOOX 



F000319 

OURFORX 

F000317 

F000318 

FOOPOOOK 



F000322 

OURFORX 

F000320 

F000321 

FOOPOOOX 



F000325 

OURFORX 

F000323 

FO00324 

FOOPOOOX 



F000328 

OURFORX 

F000326 

F000327 

FOOPOOOX 



F000331 

OURFORX 

F000329 

F000330 

FOOPOOOX 



FO00334 

OURFORX 

F000332 

F000333 

FOOPOOOX 



F000337 

OURFORX 

F000335 

F000336 

FOOPOOOX 



F000340 

OURFORX 

F000338 

F000339 

FOOPOOOX 



F000343 

OURFORX 

F000341 

F000342 

FOOPOOOX 



FOD0346 

OURFORX 

FOOPOOOK 

F0D0344 

FOD0345 



F000350 

OURFORX 

F000347 

F000348 

F000349 

FOOPOOOX 


F000353 

OURFORX 

F000347 

F000351 

F000352 

FOOPOOOX 


F000356 

OURFORX 

F000354 

F000355 

FOOPOOOX 



F000359 

OURFORX 

F000357 

F000358 

FOOPOOOX 



F000362 

OURFORX 

F000360 

F000361 

FOOPOOOK 



FOD036Z 

OURFORX 






F000391 

OURFORX 

F000390 

FOOPOOOX 




F000404 

OURFORX 

F000402 

F000403 

FOOPOOOX 



F000500 

OURFORX 

FOOPOOOX 





F000504 

OURFORX 

F000502 

F000503 

FOOPOOOK 



F000509 

OURFORX 

F000507 

F000508 

FOOPOOOX 



F000514 

OURFORX 

F000512 

F000513 

FOOPOOOX 



F000519 

OURFORX 

F000517 

F000518 

FOOPOOOX 



F000604 

OURFORX 

F000602 

F000603 

FOOPOOOX 



F000605 

OURFORX 

FOOPOOOX 





F000606 

OURFORX 

FOOPOOOX 





F000607 

OURFORX 

FOOPOOOX 





F000704 

OURFORX 

F000702 

F000703 

FOOPOOOK 



F000705 

OURFORX 

FOOPOOOX 





F000708 

OURFORX 

F000706 

F000707 

FOOPOOOX 



F000711 

OURFORX 

F000709 

F000710 

FOOPOOOX 



F000713 

OURFORX 

FOOPOOOX 





F000714 

OURFORX 

FOOPOOOK 





F000715 

OURFORX 

FOOPOOOK 





F000716 

OURFORX 

FOOPOOOK 





F000717 

OURFORX 

FOOPOOOX 





F000718 

OURFORX 

FOOPOOOX 





F000721 

OURFORX 

F000719 

F000720 

FOOPOOOX 




C-56 









Table G-8 Ada Typa A Tast Program Input/Output Files 


prookam 

INPUT/OUTPUT FILES 




AFDE220 

OFDE201 

OFDE206 

0FDE211 

0FDE216 

OFDE202 

DFDE207 

0FDE212 

OFDE203 

OFDE208 

0FDE213 

OFDE204 

OFDE209 

0FDE214 

OFDE20S 

OFDE20A 

0FDE215 

AF0E250 

IFDE231 

1FDE236 

IFDE241 

IFDE246 

IFDE232 

IFDE237 

1FDE242 

IFDE233 

IFDE238 

ZFDE243 

IF0E234 

IFDE239 

IFDE244 

IFDE235 

XFDE23A 

XFDE245 

AFDE420 

0FDE401 

OFDE406 

0FDE411 

OFDE416 

OFDE402 

OFDE407 

OFOE412 

OFDE403 

OFDE408 

0FDE413 

0F0E404 

OFDE409 

0FDE414 

OFDE405 

OFDE40A 

OFDE415 

AFDE450 

IFDE431 

IFOE436 

ZFDE441 

IFDE446 

1FDE432 

1FDE437 

IF0E442 

IFDE433 

IFDE438 

IFDE443 

XFDE434 

IFDE439 

IFDE444 

IFDE435 

IF0E43A 

XFDE445 

ALDE2C1 

OLE2001 





ALDE2C2 

OLE2001 

OLE2006 

OLE2002 

OLE2007 

OLE2003 

OLE2008 

OLE2004 

OLE2009 

OLE2005 

OLE2010 

ALDE2C3 

OLE2001 





ALDE2C4 

OLE2001 

OLE2006 

OLE2002 

OLE2007 

OLE2003 

OLE2008 

OLE2004 

OLE2009 

OLE2005 

OLE2010 

ALDE2C5 

ILE2001 





ALDE2C6 

ILE2001 

ILE2006 

ILE20P2 

ILE2007 

ILE2003 

ZLE2008 

ILE2004 

ILE2009 

ILE2005 

XLE2010 

ALDE2C7 

ILE2001 





ALDE2C8 

ILE2001 

ILE2006 

ILE2002 

ILE2007 

ILE2003 

XLE2008 

ZLE2004 

XLE2009 

XLE2005 

ILE2010 

ALDE4C1 

OLE4001 





ALDE4C2 

OLE4001 

OLE4006 

OLE4002 

OLE4007 

OLE4003 

OLE4008 

0LE4004 

OLE4009 

OLE4005 

OLE4010 

ALDE4C3 

OLE4001 





ALDE4C4 

OLE4001 

OLE4006 

OLE4002 

OLE4007 

OLE4003 

OLE4008 

OLE4004 

OLE4009 

OLE4005 

OLE4010 

ALDE4C5 

ILE4001 





ALDE4C6 

1LE4001 

ILE4006 

ILE4002 

1LE4007 

XLE4003 

XLE4008 

XLE4004 

XLE4009 

XLE4005 

ILE4010 

ALDE4C7 

ILE4001 





ALDE4C8 

1LE4001 

ILE4006 

ILE4002 

ILE4007 

XLE4005 

XLE4008 

ILE4004 

XLE4009 

XLE4005 

XLE4010 


G-57 





