NASA-CR-203753 

Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 263, 86 1-867 ( 1 993) 

Hydrodynamics of relativistic fireballs 

Tsvi Piran, 1 ' 2 Amotz Shemi 3 and Ramesh Narayan 1 

'Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA 

-Racah Institute for Physics, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel 

1 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel 

Accepted 1 993 February 3. Received 1 993 January 29; in original form 1 993 January 4 



O 



/6^57 



ABSTRACT 

Many models of y-ray bursts involve a fireball, which is an optically thick concentra- 
tion of radiation energy with a high ratio of energy density to rest mass. We examine 
analytically and numerically the evolution of a relativistic fireball. We show that, after 
an early rearrangement phase, most of the matter and energy in the fireball is concen- 
trated within a narrow shell. The shell propagates at nearly the speed of light, with a 
frozen radial profile, and according to a simple set of scaling laws. The spectrum of 
the escaping radiation is harder at early times and softer later on. Depending on the 
initial energy-to-mass ratio, the final outcome of a fireball is either photons with 
roughly the initial temperature or ultrarelativistic baryons. In the latter case, the 
energy could be converted back to y-rays via interaction with surrounding material. 

Key words: hydrodynamics - relativity - gamma-rays: bursts. 



1 INTRODUCTION 

The sudden release of a large quantity of gamma-ray photons 
into a compact region can lead to an opaque photon-lepton 
fireball' through the production of electron-positron pairs. 
The term "fireball' refers here to an opaque radiation plasma 
whose initial energy is significantly greater than its rest mass. 
The formation and the evolution of fireballs are of interest in 
astrophysics (Cavallo & Recs 1978), especially for the 
understanding of gamma-ray bursts at cosmological 
distances (Goodman 1986; Paczyriski 1986, 1990; Shemi & 
Piran 1990; Meszaros & Rees 1992, 1993; Narayan, 
Paczyriski & Piran 1992) or in the halo of the Galaxy (Piran 
& Shemi 1993). 

In this paper we investigate the hydrodynamics of fireballs. 
We begin by summarizing in this section several qualitative 
results concerning this problem that are already known. 
Because of the opacity due to pairs, the radiation in a fireball 
cannot initially escape. Instead, the fireball expands and 
cools rapidly until the temperature drops below the pair- 
production threshold and the plasma becomes transparent. 
In addition to radiation and e + e" pairs, astrophysical fire- 
balls may also include some baryonic matter, which may be 
injected with the original radiation or may be present in an 
atmosphere surrounding the initial explosion. The electrons 
associated with this matter increase the opacity, delaying the 
escape of radiation. More importantly, the baryons are 
accelerated with the rest of the fireball and convert part of 
the radiation energy into bulk kinetic energy. 



As the fireball evolves, two important transitions take 
place. One transition corresponds to the change from opti- 
cally thick to optically thin conditions. As long as the total 
opacity (pairs + matter) is large, the plasma expands adiabati- 
cally as a perfect fluid (Goodman 1986). However, once r 
drops below 1 , the photons and baryons decouple from each 
other and continue their evolution independently and with- 
out interaction. The second transition corresponds to the 
switch from radiation-dominated to matter-dominated 
conditions, i.e. from r\ > 1 to // < 1, where r\ is the ratio of the 
radiation energy E to the rest energy M:r\ = E/Mc 2 (Cavallo 
& Rees 1978; Shemi & Piran 1990). In the early radiation- 
dominated stages, where rj>\, the fluid accelerates in the 
process of expansion, reaching relativistic velocities and 
large Lorentz factors. The kinetic energy also increases 
proportionately. Later, however, when t]<\, the fireball 
becomes matter-dominated and the kinetic energy is com- 
parable to the total initial energy. The fluid therefore coasts 
with a constant radial speed. The overall outcome of the evo- 
lution of a fireball then depends critically on the value of t] 
when t reaches unity. If t] > 1 when r = 1 , most of the energy 
comes out as high-energy radiation, whereas if tj < 1 at this 
stage most of the energy has already been converted into the 
kinetic energy of the baryons. 

The opacity itself has a contribution from electron- 
positron pairs as well as from electrons associated with the 
baryons. Initially, when the local temperature T is large, the 
opacity is dominated by e + e~ pairs (Goodman 1986). 
However, this opacity, r , decreases exponentially with 



862 T. Piran, A. Shemi and R. Narayan 



decreasing temperature, and falls to unity when 7 = 7 p = 2() 
keV. The matter opacity, z h , on the other hand decreases 
only as R~ 2 , where R is the radius of the fireball. If, at the 
point where r = 1, r b is still > 1, then the final transition to 
r = 1 is delayed and occurs at a cooler temperature. 

The initial ratio of radiation energy to mass, ?/,, determines 
in what order the above transitions take place. Shemi & 
Piran ( 1990) identified four regimes: 

(i) i 7i >j, pllir = (3a*E i a7-«/4ji,H*c 4 * i ) 1 ' 2 (where £, and R t 
are the initial energy and radius). In this regime, the effect of 
the baryons is negligible and the evolution is of a pure 
photon-lepton fireball. When the temperature reaches T p , 
the pair opacity r p drops to 1 and r b « 1 . At this point the 
fireball is radiation-dominated {rj> 1 ), and so most of the 
energy escapes as radiation. 

(") '? P a,r> »?i> t] h = (3o T EJ87tm v c 2 Rt) l l\ Here, in the 
late stages, the opacity is dominated by free electrons 
asociated with the baryons. The comoving temperature 
therefore decreases far below 7 p before r reaches unity. 
However, the fireball continues to be radiation-dominated, 
as in the previous case, and most of the energy still escapes as 
radiation. 

(iii) ^ b >»7i>l. The fireball becomes matter-dominated 
before it becomes optically thin. Most of the initial energy is 
therefore converted into the bulk kinetic energy of the 
baryons, with a final Lorentz factor y f = rj t + 1 . 

(iv) ?/, < 1. This is the Newtonian regime. The rest energy 
exceeds the radiation energy and the expansion never 
becomes relativistic. 

The above summary describes the qualitative features of a 
roughly homogeneous expanding fireball. In this paper we 
investigate some aspects of the evolution of an inhomogene- 
ous fireball with a non-uniform radial profile. We show in 
Section 2 that, after an initial rearrangement phase, the 
evolution is well described by an asymptotic large-/ solution. 
The radial profile of the fireball remains frozen over most of 
this phase, and each streamline follows simple scaling laws as 
a function of radius. In Section 3 we solve numerically the 
adiabatic expansion of a spherical fireball and compare the 
results with the asymptotic solution. We show that the agree- 
ment with the theoretical solution is good. Finally, in Section 
4 we summarize the results and discuss their implications. 



2 SCALING LAWS AND ASYMPTOTIC 
SOLUTIONS 

We consider a spherical fireball with an arbitrary radial 
distribution of radiation and matter. We discuss here the 
early phase of evolution, during which the energy and matter 
densities of the exterior are negligible compared with the 
internal energy and matter densities of the fireball so that 
effectively we may consider the fireball to be expanding into 
a vacuum. In the later stages of the expansion, the matter 
density in the exterior may be significant and a shock may 
form. This phase has been discussed by Blandford & McKee 
( 1 976, 1 977 ) and Meszaros & Rees ( 1992, 1993). 

The unique feature of a fireball is that initially it is an 
optically thick system in which the radiation energy domin- 
ates the rest mass density. The optical depth is generally due 
to yy^e*e~ and to Compton scattering. Under these condi- 
tions there is strong coupling among the photons, and the 



radiation therefore behaves like a fluid. Furthermore, if 
baryons are present they will also be strongly coupled to the 
radiation fluid, and the radiation and matter at each radius 
will behave like a single fluid, moving with the same velocity. 
Since the radiation pressure dominates, the pressure p and 
the energy density e are related by p = e/3. Under these 
conditions, we can rewrite the standard relativistic conserva- 
tion equations of baryon number and energy momentum 
(Weinberg 1973) as 

^-(ny) + -~ 2 --(r 2 nu) = 0, (1) 

at r dr 



~(e> l4 y) + \l(r 2 e^u) 
at r or 



= 0, 



dt 



n+~e\ yu 



1 a 

r or 



n + - e\ u~ 

3 



]_ae 
3 9r' 



where y = u', u = u ' = -Jy 2 - 1, and we use units in which c = 1 
and the mass of the particles m=l. The mass density, n, the 
total energy density, e (which includes contributions from the 
radiation as well as from the relativistic electron-positron 
pairs at temperatures at which the latter are present), and the 
pressure, p, are measured in the local frame of the fluid, but r 
and t are in the observer's frame. 

If one changes the variables from r, t to r, s = t - r, equa- 
tions ( 1 )-(3) then become 



I A 
r" dr 

IJL 
r" dr 

13 
r~ dr 



{r'nu) 



ds \y+ uj ' 



/ 3/4 



ds 



r | n + - e I u 



y+ u 



(4) 

(5) 



a 

"3s 




de de 

aTov 



where the derivative d/dr now refers to constant s, i.e. is 
calculated along a characteristic moving outwards at the 
speed of light. After a short acceleration phase, we expect 
that the motion of a fluid shell will become highly relativistic 
( y 3> 1 ). If wc restrict our attention to the evolution of the 
fireball from this point on, we may treat y~ x as a small 
parameter and set y~u, which is good to order o{y~ x ). 
Under a wide range of conditions (which we discuss below), 
the quantities on the right-hand side of equations (4)-(6) are 
then significantly smaller than those on the left. We therefore 
set the terms on the right to zero, and obtain the following 
conservation laws for each fluid shell: 



r~ny = constant. 



> 1/4 y = constant, 



" + t ( '| y= constant. 



Two regimes of behaviour are then immediately apparent. 
In the radiation-dominated phase (e» n), we have 



y«r, 



«« r 



e<xr~ 



T iths ~ constant. 



(8) 



obs - Y e "" i- s the temperature of the radiation as seen 



,1/4 , 



where T t 

by an observer at infinity. [Strictly, the radiation temperature 
depends on e n the energy density of the photon field alone; 
for T«m e c 2 , e r =e, but for T> m e c 2 , e contains an addi- 
tional contribution from the electron-positron pairs (see 
Shemi & Piran 1990); we neglect this complication for 
simplicity]. The scalings of n and e given in (8) correspond to 
those of a fluid expanding uniformly in the comoving frame. 
Indeed, all four scalings in equation (8) were derived for a 
homogeneous radiation-dominated fireball by Shemi & 
Piran (1990; see also Goodman 1986) by noting the analogy 
with an expanding universe. What we have shown here is that 
the same relations are valid for each individual radial shell in 
the fireball, even in the more general inhomogeneous case. In 
fact, these scaling laws also apply to Paczyriski's (1986) 
solution for a steady-state relativistic wind. When we neglect 
the right-hand sides of equations (4)-(6), the problem 
becomes effectively only r-dependent. 

Although the fluid is approximately homogeneous in its 
own frame, because of Lorentz contraction it appears as a 
narrow shell in the observer's frame, with a radial width 
given by Ar~ rjy~ constant ~ R- r where R, is the initial 
radius of the fireball. We can now go back to equations 
(4)-(6) and set djds~ yjr. We then find that the terms we 
neglected on the right-hand sides of these equations are 
smaller than the terms on the left by a factor of - 1/y. The 
conservation laws (7) and the scalings (8) are therefore valid 
so long as the radiation-dominated fireball expands ultra- 
relativistically with large y. The only possible exception is in 
the very outermost layers of the fireball, where the pressure 
gradient may be extremely steep and d/ds may be 3> yjr. 
Ignoring this minor deviation, we interpret equation (7) and 
the constancy of the radial width Ar in the observer's frame 
to mean that the fireball behaves like a pulse of energy with a 
frozen radial profile, accelerating outwards at almost the 
speed of light. 

In the alternate matter-dominated regime (e<SOz), we 
obtain from equation (7) the following different set of 
scalings: 



y -* constant, 



n<*r~ 



e<*r 



-S/3 



r^oer-^. (9) 



The modified scalings of n and e arise because the fireball 
now moves with a constant radial width in the comoving 
frame. (The steeper fall-off of e with r is a result of the work 
done by the radiation through tangential expansion.) More- 
over, since f«/i, the radiation has no important dynamical 
effect on the motion and produces no significant radial 
acceleration, y therefore remains constant on streamlines, 
and the fluid coasts with a constant asymptotic radial 
velocity. Of course, since each shell moves with a velocity 
that is slightly less than c and that is different from one shell 
to the next, the frozen-pulse approximation on which 
equation (7) is based must ultimately break down at some 
large radius. We consider this question below, but first 
continue with our investigation of the approximate relations 
in equation (7). 

A scaling solution that is valid in both the radiation- 
dominated and matter-dominated regimes, as well as in the 
transition zone between, can be obtained by combining the 
conserved quantities in equation (7) appropriately. Let t Q be 
the time and r n be the radius at which a fluid shell in the fire- 
ball first becomes ultrarelativistic, with y&few. We label the 



Hydrodynamics of relativistic fireballs 863 

various properties of the shell at this time with the subscript 
0, e.g. y , n , e , and define t) = e/n, t) a = e /n Q . Defining the 
auxiliary quantity D, where 



1 



. Ya ) 3y„ 



D y 4t) lt y 4r/ a 
we find that 






D 3 ' 



_£o_ 

D 4 



D 



uo) 



in) 



These are parametric relations which give the r, n, e and rj of 
each fluid shell at any time in terms of the y of the shell at 
that time. The relation for r in terms of y is a cubic equation. 
This can in principle be inverted to yield y(r), and thereby n 
and e, and r) may also be expressed in terms of r. 

The parametric solution ( 1 1 ) describes both the radiation- 
dominated and matter-dominated phases of the fireball 
within the frozen-pulse approximation. For y^rj () y , the 
first term in equation (10) dominates and we find D<x r ,y<*r, 
recovering the radiation-dominated scalings of equation (8). 
This regime extends out to a radius of r~ t] r . At larger 
radii, the first and last terms in (10) become comparable and 
y tends to its asymptotic value of y f = (4^„/3+ l)yo- This is 
the matter-dominated regime. (The transition occurs when 
4e/3 = H, which happens when y=y s /2.) In this regime, 
Doc r W* t leading to the scalings in equation (9). 

Ultimately, all the energy in the fireball is concentrated in 
the kinetic energy of the matter, and this determines the 
value of y f . Interestingly, if we write y f in terms of the initial 
parameters of the fireball at time t = 0, we find y s = rj, + 1 , 
whereas when we write it in terms of t] , y we have the 
additional factor of 4/3 as written above. Both formulae 
represent energy conservation, but the component T" of the 
energy momentum tensor behaves differently in the two cases. 
At time 1 = 0, the fluid is at rest and the radiation energy 
density is merely e, whereas at t = t the fluid 
is already moving highly relativistically and there is an addi- 
tional contribution to the energy from the moving pressure, 
T"=yle + (l/3)ule~(4/3)yZe. 

Let us now return to a consideration of very late times in 
the matter-dominated phase, at which the frozen-pulse 
approximation begins to break down. We have already seen 
that in this phase the radiation density e is much smaller than 
the matter density n, and also that y tends to a constant value 
y, for each shell. We may therefore neglect the term 
— (l/3)(8e/8r) in equation (3) and treat y and u in equations 
(l)-(3) as constants. We then find that the flow moves strictly 
along the characteristic, fi f t- r= constant, so that each fluid 
shell coasts at a constant radial speed, /J f = w f /y f . Let us label 
the baryonic shells in the fireball by a Lagrangian coordinate 
R, moving with a fixed Lorentz factor y^R), and let / c and r c 
represent the time and radius at which the coasting phase 
begins, which correspond essentially to the point at which the 
fluid makes the transition from being radiation-dominated to 
matter-dominated. We then find that 



r(t,R)-rJR) 



Jy 2 (R)~ 

YiW 



U-tAR) 



2y;(R) 



\t-Ur . 



(12) 



864 T. Piran, A. Shemi and R. Narayan 



The separation between two neighbouring shells separated 
by a Lagrangian distance AR varies during the coasting 
phase as 



d(dr/dR) 



dt 



AR = 



1 dy t 



Ys 



RfdR 



AR. 



:i3) 



Thus the width of the pulse at time t is 

AM-Ar c + Ay f (f-/ c )/yj>«K i + (/-/J/7 f 2 . 

where Ar c ~ R x is the width of the fireball when it begins 
coasting, y, is the mean y f in the pulse, and Ay f ~y f is the 
spread of y i across the pulse. From this result, we see that 
there are two separate regimes in the fireball evolution even 
within the matter-dominated coasting phase. As long as 
t — t c <y}R v we have a frozen-coasting phase in which Ar is 
approximately constant and the frozen-pulse approximation 
is valid. In this regime, the scalings in equation (9) are satis- 
fied. However, when t — t c >y}R K , the fireball switches to an 
expanding-coasting phase, where Ar«r-/ C and the pulse 
width grows linearly with time. In this regime the scaling of n 
reverts to n<*r~ 3 , and, if the radiation is still coupled to the 
matter, e<* r~ 4 . 

Independently of the above considerations, at some point 
during the expansion the fireball will become optically thin 
and the radiation will decouple. From this stage on, the radia- 
tion and the baryons no longer move with the same velocity 
and the radiation pressure vanishes, leading to a breakdown 
of equations (2) and (3). The radiation will now coast with a 
speed exactly equal to c and with a constant radial width. 
The radiation energy density will clearly scale as e« r~ 2 . The 
baryon shells, on the other hand, will coast with their own 
individual velocities. If the fireball is already in the matter- 
dominated coasting phase, there will be no change in the 
propagation of the baryons. If, however, the fireball is in the 
radiation-dominated phase when it becomes optically thin, 
then the baryons will continue to be dragged by the photons 
until the mean path for Compton scattering of an electron by 
the photons is larger than the size of the fireball. Since this 
mean free path is smaller by a factor of (« e /'i y )" J than the 
mean free path for the scattering of a photon by an electron, 
an additional expansion by a factor of (« y /n l .) l ■' ,, is required 
for the baryons to decouple from the radiation (Meszaros, 
Laguna & Rees 1993). Once this has happened the baryons 
switch to a coasting phase. 

The final outcome of the fireball depends on the stage at 
which the fireball becomes optically thin. If this happens 
during the radiation-dominated era, then most of the initial 
energy will escape as photons, typically with the same 
temperature as the initial temperature (Goodman 1986). If, 
on the other hand, the fireball is in the matter-dominated era, 
then most of the energy will have been converted into the 
kinetic energy of the baryons and only a negligible fraction 
will be carried by the photons. However, in this case it is still 
possible to recover the energy in the form of radiation if the 
escaping baryons interact with the surrounding matter 
(Meszaros & Rees 1992, 1993; Blandford & McKee 1977). 



3 NUMERICAL RESULTS 

We have developed a spherically symmetric relativistic code 
that follows the evolution of a mass-loaded fireball from an 



initial configuration at rest, via the acceleration phase, into 
the asymptotic frozen-pulse regime (Shemi 1993; Shemi & 
Piran, in preparation). The code is Eulerian and employs a 
second-order conserved scheme (Bowers & Wilson 1991) 
which is modified to take into account the extreme relativis- 
tic Lorentz factors encountered in this problem. Our scheme 
is quite different from the one used by Vitello & Salvati 
(1976), who studied a similar problem. The code has passed 
several standard tests, including the Richardson test, i.e. the 
results converge satisfactorily as the grid size is decreased. 
The initial profiles for the cases that we present here are 



e(r,t = 0) = - 



R* + r*)' 



n(r, 0) 



e(r,0) 
V, 



y(r,0)=l, 



(14) 



where we choose R { , the initial width of the fireball, to be 
unity. The initial radiation density e is in arbitrary units, and 
we assume a constant ratio tj l of energy to mass. The energy 
density falls off sufficiently rapidly with radius in the initial 
profile that the external density is negligible compared to the 
interior density. We cannot, however, set the exterior density 
exactly to zero, since this leads to numerical problems. We 
have explored different initial conditions, and find different 
pulse shapes, but the overall qualitative behaviour is 
generally similar to the results described below. 

Fig. 1 (a) shows a sequence of profiles in the observer's frame 
of the energy density, ye, and the mass density, yn, for a simula- 
tion with t) t = 50. Three phases of evolution are apparent, 
namely an initial acceleration/rearrangement phase, a short 
radiation-dominated phase, and a final matter-dominated 
phase. Conservation of energy requires that, asymptotically, the 
average Lorentz factor of the expanding fluid should be 
y, = rj t = 1 ■ We compute y at each stage by means of 



y = 



T" r dr 



J[jT"r T drj r -{jT"r 2 drf 
| /"V dr 



J\f(T" +T')rdr\\\{T"-T")r 2 dr) 

where the second expression is preferable for numerical 
accuracy. The average Lorentz factor in this simulation does 
approach the expected asymptotic value, but it does not 
quite reach it because we did not let the computation 
continue for a long enough time. 

Early in the evolution, the pulse rearranges itself during a 
brief acceleration phase. Although with our choice of initial 
data the ratio between the energy and mass densities, rj, 
initially has a constant value throughout the fireball (equation 
14), it changes during this phase and no longer remains 
constant within the pulse. Generally, rj ends up being smaller 
in the inner parts of the fireball and larger on the outside. 
This can be seen in Fig. 2, which shows n, e and y at a fixed 
moment in time after the end of the early phase of rearrange- 
ment. After this phase, the shape of the pulse is frozen and 
the fireball evolves through a radiation-dominated phase to a 
matter-dominated state. The transition from radiation- 
dominated to matter-dominated can be clearly seen in Fig. 
1(a), where the matter density is initially lower than the 



Hydrodynamics of relativistic fireballs 865 




(b) 



200 



I I I | I I I I | I I I I | 



.(.'•>.' 



t 






-•'*:■. ~~- v ,"-'. ■'-;■'- 


.-■' 


H 


3 


siuii 


-USS&i^v- 


-v.-* 


BO 










O 










►J 










•o 










§ 




- 






^^ 




- 






s 












;> 








M 










200 



Figure 1. (a) The energy density ey (solid lines) and the mass density ny (dotted lines) in the observer's frame for a numerical simulation in 
which the initial energy-to-mass ratio ^ = 50. (b) The Lorentz factor y (solid lines) and the observed temperature r„„, = yT= ye 1 ' 4 (dotted 



energy- 
lines). The temperature scale is arbitrary. 



60 



40 — 



20 — 











. _ 


- 






/ 7 

/ ..._ <- 









n 

->.--■' 




'''■=■ 


- 








~ 


- 








— 


— 




<> e 




- 


-^^ — ~^^~-> 




.. ■'■ ' 






- 


"" 


' 1 1 1 1 


i i i i 1 i i i i 1 


i i i 1 ir*»**- 


- 



2.5x10 



2x10 



1.5x10 



— 10 



5x10 



151 



152 



153 



154 



155 



156 



Figure 2. Calculated (solid lines) and extrapolated (dotted lines) n, e and y profiles at I = 1 53.7 (the end of the computation). The extrapolation 
is from t= 14 (shortly after the end of the rearrangement phase) using equations (10)-(1 1). The agreement is best in the trailing edge of the 
pulse in the interior of the fireball, and is less satisfactory in the leading edge. This is a result of the combined effects of the steep pressure 
gradient and the loss of numerical accuracy at lower densities. 



energy density but becomes larger by the end of the compu- 
tation. 

The profile of the Lorentz factor y at various times in the 
pulse is shown in Fig. 1(b). We see that y varies significantly 
across the pulse. Whereas the mean y, cannot exceed the 
asymptotic value of *7,+ 1, the maximum Lorentz factor 



within the pulse is larger than this and in fact increases 
throughout the evolution. This happens because the outer- 
most layers of the fireball keep accelerating, as can be seen in 
Fig. 2. The Lorentz factor therefore peaks ahead of the 
energy density in a low-density region, and a small fraction of 
the material is accelerated to these high-y values. The peak 



866 T. Piran, A. Shemi and R. Narayan 



in y leads to the highest observed temperature being 
obtained from the front of the fireball and to lower tempera- 
tures being obtained from the interior (Fig. lb). 

In Fig. 2 we compare the calculated pulse at t= 153.7 to a 
pulse extrapolated, using equations (10) and (11), from 
t=\A. The agreement is very good considering that the 
energy and matter densities have decreased by 4 and 3 
orders of magnitude, respectively, while the maximal Lorentz 
factor has increased by a factor of 6 between these two 
moments. The agreement is excellent in the inner region of 
the pulse, but is less satisfactory on the outside. This is partly 
due to the continuing acceleration of the outer regions, in 
which the pressure gradient is steepest, and partly because of 
decreased numerical accuracy in the regions in which the 
density is very low. 

Fig. 1(b) shows profiles of T oblt , the temperature that 
would be observed at infinity if the radiation could escape. 
At early times, there is a drop in T obs due to the broadening 
of the pulse as a result of internal rearrangement. During the 
subsequent radiation-dominated phase, T«. y ~ ' (equation 8), 
and the observed temperature 7 llhs of each shell remains 
constant. The overall spectrum of a fireball that becomes 
optically thin during this phase is a blending of thermal 
spectra with different temperatures and different blueshifts, 
and will be slightly broader than a single-temperature 
thermal spectrum (see Goodman 1986). The spectrum does 
not change during the radiation-dominated phase, apart from 
a minor effect due to the addition of a harder component 
from the acceleration of the outermost layers of the fireball. 
When a given shell enters the matter-dominated phase, 7„ b , 
begins to decrease, since T continues to decrease but there is 
no longer a compensating increase in y (equation 9). The 
result is a softer spectrum than that observed during the 
radiation-dominated phase. The spectrum emitted depends 
now on the moment at which each shell becomes optically 
thin. Since different shells become optically thin at different 
values of y, we expect the spectrum to be broader than that 
emitted during the radiation-dominated phase. 

The evolution of the relativistic radiation fireball that we 
have described here and in Section 2 is remarkably different 
from that of a Newtonian fireball with r] K <SC 1 . Fig. 3 shows 
the energy density and the mass density for a pulse with 
^1 = 0.001. None of the features described earlier appear. 
Relativistic velocities are never reached and the shape of the 
pulse is not frozen. We observe instead an expanding, almost 
homogeneous sphere, rather than an expanding shell of 
matter and radiation, and the expansion velocity of most of 



the fireball is roughly the Newtonian velocity Jit], = 0.045. A 
negligible fraction of the matter on the surface is accelerated 
to higher speeds. Interestingly, the Newtonian fireball bears a 
strong qualitative resemblance to the relativistic fireball in 
the local frame. The differences between the two cases arise 
mainly because of the transformation to the observer's 
frame. In the Newtonian case, there is no difference between 
the observer's frame and the matter local frame, but in the 
relativistic case Lorentz contraction leads to a drastic change 
in the appearance of the fireball. In the former case the fire- 
ball therefore appears to fill the entire sphere of radius r, 
whereas in the latter case the observer sees a narrow pulse 
whose width remains of the same order as the original width, 
leading to a time-scale of ~ RJc. 



4 CONCLUSIONS 

We have shown in this paper that fireballs with large initial 
ratios r) l of radiation energy to rest mass energy show certain 
common global features during their expansion and evolu- 
tion. After a short initial acceleration phase, the fluid reaches 
relativistic velocities, and the energy and mass become 
concentrated in a radial pulse whose shape remains frozen in 
the subsequent expansion. The motion is then described by 
an asymptotic solution (equations 10 and 1 1; see Section 2), 
which gives, for each individual shell, scaling laws similar to 
those of a homogeneous sphere. 

The expanding fireball has two basic phases: a radiation- 
dominated phase and a matter-dominated phase. Initially, 
during the radiation-dominated phase, the fluid accelerates 
with y«- r for each Lagrangian shell. The fireball is roughly 
homogeneous in its local rest frame but, due to the Lorentz 
contraction, its width in the observer's frame is Ar= R„ the 
initial size of the fireball. When the mean Lorentz factor of 
the fireball becomes y ~ ( tj t + 1 )/2, a transition takes place to 
the matter-dominated phase. Ultimately, all the energy 
becomes concentrated in the kinetic energy of the matter, 
and the matter coasts asymptotically with a final Lorentz 
factor of y, « ( ^ + 1 ). The matter-dominated phase is itself 
further divided into two subphases. At first, there is a frozen- 
coasting phase, in which the fireball expands as a shell of 
fixed radial width in its own local frame, with a width 
~y f R t ~ ifj/fj. Because of Lorentz contraction, the pulse 



2 r^. 



Ik 



~i I I I r i i i I i i i i | i i i r 




Figure 3. The energy density e (solid lines) and the mass density n 
(dotted lines) for a Newtonian or non-relativistic fireball with 
rj, = 0.00 1 . Note thai, while the final time is the same as in Fig. 1 , the 
pulse has propagated a much shorter distance. There is no hint of a 
shell structure or a frozen-pulse shape here, in contrast to the relati- 
vistic case shown in Fig. 1 . 



Hydrodynamics of relativistic fireballs 867 



appears to an observer to have a width of Ar~ R { . Eventu- 
ally, the spread in y f as a function of radius within the fireball 
results in a spreading of the pulse and the fireball enters the 
coasting-expanding phase. In this final phase, Ar a R^t/y,, 
and the observed pulse width increases linearly with time. 

The fireball can become optically thin in any of the above 
phases. Once this has happened the system ceases to behave 
like a fluid, and the radiation moves as a pulse with a 
constant width, while the baryons enter a coasting phase like 
the one described above. If the fireball becomes optically 
thin during the radiation-dominated phase, there will be a 
short photon-dragging phase, in which the baryons will 
continue to be accelerated by the radiation field until the 
mean free path for an electron is larger than the size of the 
fireball. The free-coasting phase for the baryons will begin 
from this point onwards. 

We have verified many of these theoretical results by 
means of numerical simulations of spherically symmetric 
relativistic fireballs (Section 3). In particular, we confirm that 
the asymptotic solution with a frozen-pulse shape is repro- 
duced to a good approximation. This is a very useful result, 
since it implies that in future it will not be necessary to carry 
out numerical simulations to very late times. As soon as the 
Lorentz factor of the expanding fluid reaches a moderately 
large value, say y~ 10, we can use the theoretical results to 
extrapolate the pulse. This will provide a huge saving in 
computation time, particularly in cases where »?,» 1 and the 
asymptotic y is very large. 

An important aspect of fireball evolution that can be 
studied only by numerical simulations is the early stages of 
rearrangement. During this phase, the fireball is still only 
mildly relativistic, and it internally modifies the profiles of 
the energy and matter densities. From a number of simula- 
tions with different initial conditions, we find that the ratio of 
energy density to matter density, t], usually ends up with a 
lower value in the interior of the fireball than on the outside. 
The Lorentz factor y also invariably increases from the 
inside out. These modified profiles enter the frozen-pulse 
phase and then do not change any further. Consequently, it 
appears to be a generic feature that any radiation that 
escapes from the fireball will be hot on the outside and 
cooler on the inside. In other words, the observed radiation 
pulse will tend always to have a spectral profile that shows a 
characteristic hard-to-soft transition as a function of time. 
This effect will be enhanced if the early radiation from the 
outside is emitted in the radiation-dominated phase and the 
later radiation from the interior is released from matter- 
dominated layers. The hard-to-soft signature will be even 
stronger in this case. Even if the radiation is not obtained 



directly from the fireball, but through shock reradiation as 
the fireball interacts with external matter, this feature should 
still be present. 

The discussion in this paper has been restricted to general 
issues related to the evolution of relativistic fireballs, and we 
have focused on the phase in which the fireball expands 
effectively into a vacuum. The most immediate application of 
these results is to cosmological and Galactic halo models of 
gamma-ray bursts. Although these models differ in their 
explanations of the origin of the gamma-rays, all of them 
involve a stage in which the initially injected energy goes 
through a fireball phase. The scaling laws that we have 
written down for the matter and energy densities, the 
temperature and the Lorentz factor y will therefore be 
relevant. Also, the hard-to-soft spectral evolution described 
above should be observed in each sub-burst, and possibly 
across the whole burst as well. In fact, this prediction is 
probably valid regardless of the way in which the final 
observed radiation is produced, whether it be through direct 
emission from the fireball when it becomes optically thin 
(Goodman 1986; Paczyriski 1986; Shemi & Piran 1990) or 
through shock re-emission (Meszaros & Rees 1992, 1993). 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This work was supported by NASA grant NAG 5-1904 to 
Harvard University and by a BSF grant to the Hebrew 
University. 



REFERENCES 

Blandford R. D., McKee C. F., 1 976. Phys. Fluids, 19,11 30 

Blandford R. D„ McKee C. F, 1 977, MNRAS, 1 80, 343 

Bowers R. L., Wilson J. R., 1991, Numerical Modeling in Applied 

Physics and Astrophysics. Jones and Bartlett, Boston 
Cavallo G., Rees M. J., 1 978, MNRAS, 183,359 
Goodman J., 1 986, ApJ, 308, L47 
Meszaros P., Rees M. J., 1 992, MNRAS, 258, 4 1 p 
Meszaros P., Rees M. J., 1 993, ApJ, 405, 278 
Meszaros P., Laguna P., Rees M. J., 1 993, ApJ, in press 
Narayan R„ Paczyriski B., Piran T., 1 992, ApJ, 395, L83 
Paczyriski B., 1986, ApJ, 308, L5 1 
Paczyriski B., 1990, ApJ, 363, 218 
Piran T, Shemi T, 1993, ApJ, 403, L67 
Shemi A., 1 993, PhD thesis. Tel Aviv University 
Shemi A., Piran T., 1 990, ApJ, 365, L55 
Vitello P., Salvati M., 1 976, Phys. Fluids, 1 9, 1 523 
Weinberg S., 1 973, Gravitation and Cosmology. Wiley, New York 



