A Field Guide to Alto-Land 

or 

Exploring the Ethernet with Mouse and Keyboard 

by ROY LEVIN 

REVISED APRIL 1979 



XEROX 



PALO ALTO RESEARCH CENTER 

3333 Coyote Hill Road / Palo Alto / California 94304 



© Xerox Corporation 1979 



Raison d'Etre 

Are you a programmer? Are you sick of manuals that tell you how to use a software system 
without telling you why it behaves as it does? Are you frustrated because you don't know the 
unstated assumptions behind the interesting discussions you hear around you? Have you ever 
wanted to browse through the source code or the documentation for a program, but couldn't figure 
out where to find it? If the answer to some of these questions is "yes", read on! These and other 
useful (and occasionally entertaining) tidbits shall be made known unto you. 

You will doubtless read many documents while you are at Xerox. A common convention observed in many manuals and 
memos is that fine points or items of complex technical content peripheral to the main discussion appear in small type, 
like this paragraph. You will soon discover that you cannot resist reading this fine print and that, despite its diminutive 
stature, it draws your eyes like a magnet. This document has such passages as well, just so that you can begin to enjoy 
ferreting out the diamonds in the mountain of coal. 

There is a great deal of useful information available on-line at Xerox in the form of documents and 
source program listings. Reading them is often very helpful, but finding them can be a nuisance. 
Throughout this document, references to on-line material are indicated by {n}, where n is a citation 
number in the bibliography at the end of this document. Standard citations to the open literature 
appear as [n]. 

Reading a document from front to back can be mighty boring. This document is organized so that 
(supposedly) you can browse through and read the parts that look interesting. This means that the 
usual bottom-up approach to documentation (define your terms before you use them) has been 
abandoned. Instead, all the relevant terms, acronyms, and the like have been collected in a glossary 
at the end. Some information is contained only in the glossary, so you may want to scan through it 
later. It is assumed that you have a basic knowledge of computer science, and a modicum of common sense. Don't 
expect to find terms like "computer" and "network" in the glossary. 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 2 

Alto-Land 

Behind that inviting screen there lurks a wealth of fascinating history, folklore, and (occasionally) 
documented wisdom. However, even the great storytellers of old occasionally forgot that their 
attentive audiences included travelers from other lands who were ignorant of the local customs and 
traditions. So it was with the Alto gurus. What follows is a transcription of the oral history of the 
Alto culture acquired by a relatively recent settler in these parts. It makes no claim to 
completeness, balance, or fairness. (A separate document exhibiting these qualities may be found 
on {20}.) 

A Rosa by Any Other Name ... 

Before exploring Alto-land, you should know something about the names of the creatures you will 
find there. The prevailing philosophy about naming systems in PARC, ASD, and SDD is perhaps 
somewhat different from the trend elsewhere. While we have our share of alphabet soup (e.g., 
PARC, FTP, MAXC, IFS), we are trying to avoid making it any worse. Names for hardware and 
software systems are taken from the Sunset Western Garden Book [14]. individual Altos also have names 
which frequently, but not necessarily, come from the same source. These names are chosen by individuals and 
registered with Art Axelrod. As this convention about names does not meet with universal approval, it 
seems inappropriate to offer a justification of the underlying philosophy without offering equal time 
to the opposition. You will doubtless provoke a far more interesting discussion if you advance your 
own views on naming to almost anyone wandering in the corridors. Accordingly, we abandon the 
topic here and move on to more concrete matters. 

The Alto hardware 

The first thing an immigrant notices about the Alto is that there are a lot of them. It seems that 
every office has one. In fact, there are order of 1000 Altos in existence, though only some of these 
are at PARC. The genus comprises two species, imaginatively named Alto I and Alto II, and there 
are several sub-species as well. All members of the genus have at least a display, a keyboard, a 
mouse with 3 keys, and a processor/disk cabinet. You can normally spot an Alto II by its larger 
keyboard with extra buttons on each side. You can even spot an Alto II blindfolded - the "feel" of its 
keyboard is unmistakable. In fact, at a major demonstration attended by many important Xerox people, Alto IPs were 
used because of their flexibility, but Alto I keyboards were attached to them. Alot IPs are getting cleverer, however; the 
newer models come with keyboards that "feel" more like Alto I's, but cost a lot less. 

The innards of the Alto are revealed in gory detail in a very complete manual {1}. Facts, figures, 
specifications, and programming information (at the machine level) are all there. What isn't there is 
a bit of the philosophy underlying the machine design and organization. In particular... 

1) There isn't much special-purpose hardware in the Alto. Most of the nifty stuff you can 
read about in the hardware manual is in fact implemented by microcode. This gives us 
considerable flexibility in the way we design software interfaces for experimental devices 

and Specialized instruction sets. In fact, Mesa and Smalltalk are implemented almost entirely with 
"special" microcode. 

2) The display is rather different from a number of other common displays. Instead of 
containing a character or vector generator, the display hardware interprets individual bits. 
One bit in memory shows up as one dot on the screen. Since the screen is 606 by 808 
points, a quick calculation shows that a full-screen display requires nearly half the standard 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 3 

Alto memory. For a machine with only 64K of memory, that seems a big price to pay. 
The theory is that in exchange for the space we get enormous freedom to experiment with 
various strange ways of manipulating the screen. 

So much for philosophy - how does it work out in practice? Well, excessive flexibility breeds chaos, 
so a number of things have been standardized. All Altos contain a ROM that defines the "normal 
emulator" (i.e., the standard instruction set) and the standard i/o device interfaces (e.g., display, 
disk, ethernet, and so-called "junk i/o" - the keyboard and mouse). The instruction set is derived 
from the Data General Nova, though the i/o structure is rather different and several specialized 
instructions exist to support various display manipulations. If you have a spare hour or so, read about 
BITBLT in {1}. Then try to imagine writing the microcode to implement it Since the microcode for these 
standard facilities is blown into a ROM, suggestions for improvements/extensions are treated with 
considerable skepticism, particularly since there are 500 or so Altos around. Microcode hackers will 
find the additional IK control RAM available on all Altos a reasonably comfortable sandbox in 
which to play. If you are both a microcode hacker and a concrete pourer, you can also use a second IK ROM on an 
Alto II. 

The display has enormous potential, and there are a number of programs around that exploit it in 
interesting ways. We also feel compelled to note that at least an equal number of programs still 
treat the display as a glass teletype. Home-made cookies require more effort, but they taste a lot 
better than the store-bought variety. Fortunately, more and more people are getting into home 
cooking. 

The mouse has two obvious properties - it rolls and it clicks. Inside the Alto hardware, the mouse 
position and the display cursor position are completely unrelated, but most software arranges for the 
cursor to "track" the mouse's movements. The three mouse buttons are named red, yellow, and 
blue, even though physically they are nearly always black. This choice was made because not all 
mice have their buttons arranged in the same way. On some (older) mice, the buttons are thin, 
horizantal bars; the top one is red, the bottom one is blue. On most mice, however, the buttons are 
wide, vertical bars, with red at the left and blue at the right. Some people insist on naming the buttons red, 
yellow, and green - perhaps as kids they had strange paintboxes, or were fixated on traffic lights. 

A somewhat unusual property of the Alto is that the keyboard and mouse buttons are unencoded; 
that is, there is a bit for each key that indicates, whether the keys is up or down. Many programs 
distinguish between holding a mouse button down and clicking it down and up. Fewer programs 
play such tricks with the keyboard, although combinations of keys that would jam a conventional 
typewriter are quite meaningful to some programs, e.g., the NetExec. Fortunately, there is standard 
software that enables you to treat the keyboard in the usual way if you want to. 

With a personal computer, you are programmer, system hacker, and console operator all rolled into 
one. If you don't like the state your program has reached, you can always press the boot button 
and start over - an option you rarely have on larger, shared machines. However, the Alto differs 
from many small computers in that it lacks those time-honored, nitty-gritty debugging facilities - 
the console lights and switches. If things are so screwed up inside that you can't get some sort of 
(software) debugger running, there isn't much you can do as console operator. This tends to down- 
play the operator role and emphasizes the system hacker role. ("Let's see, if I hit shift-Swat, that will write 
the core image on Swatee, and if I then bootload the debugger...") It also makes certain kinds of bugs, e.g., 
those that smash crucial memory locations in low-core, very difficult to find. 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 4 

Small Fish in a Big Pond- the Network 

Two's company, three's a network. You can do a lot with an Alto, but at best it's still a classy 
minicomputer. With hundreds of them out there we should be able in theory to do all sorts of 
wonderful things. In practice, we actually do some of them. You should read the paper by 
Metcalfe and Boggs describing the Ethernet [2] for a good introduction to the communication 
network that connects our Altos together. In essence, a collection of Altos within reasonable 
proximity is hooked together by an Ethernet. Ethernets are connected to each other by Gateways, 
which for most purposes allow us to ignore the topology of the resulting network. However, 
occasionally it's nice to know where things really are, and that's when a map {3} is helpful. For 
programs (which are notoriously poor map readers), the Gateways also provide an information service {15}. 

We all know how uncommunicative computers can be when left to their own devices, and Altos are 
no different. That's why we invent careful protocols for them to use in talking to each other. Most 
of the protocols now in use on the Ethernet are called PUP-based (Rare Universal Packets) {16}. 
Built on top of the Pup protocol are quite a number of others, some of which you can read about 
in {4,5,6,7}. You will probably hear some of the following protocol names being tossed about in 
conversation: 

0) EEFTP - a grand-daddy of file transfer protocols (Experimental Ether FTP). No longer 
in active use. 

1) EFTP - stands variously for Early FTP, Ears FTP, Experimental FTP, Ether FTP, Easy 
FTP. A venerable protocol now mostly used to transfer files to printing servers. The Alto 
program EmPress uses it for this purpose. 

2) FTP - refers to the File Transfer Protocol, as well as the Alto program that implements 
it and provides an interactive user interface. If you come from the Arpanet world, don't 
confuse this FTP with the one out there - ours is Pup-based and incompatible. On MAXC, 
where both the Pup and Arpa FTP protocols come in handy, the name FTP refers to the 
Arpa one and PupFTP (obviously) refers to the Ethernet one. 

3) BSP - the Byte Stream Protocol. Built on top of Pup, this protocol is used by 
conversants who want to view the network as a full-duplex stream of 8-bit bytes. BSP is 
used to implement FTP and Chat. 

4) MTP - the Mail Transfer Protocol. Used by Laurel (the Alto-based message system) to 
ship messages to and from mailbox servers. 

There are quite a few other protocols in use as well. The wisdom here is: if you have some nifty 
multi-machine communication to do, look around - someone may well have done your protocol 
work for you. There also are a number of communications wizards about who can keep you from 
falling into various traps. 

Question: Why have a network? Answer: Because it's nice to be able to pawn off some of the 
dog work on other machines, leaving your Alto free to do the interesting stuff. That's why we have 
a number of machines generically called servers. Normally, server Altos have special purpose, 
expensive hardware attached to them (e.g., large-capacity disks, printers), and their sole purpose in 
life is to make that hardware available to more than one person/Alto. We tend to identify servers 
by function, so we talk about printing servers, file servers, name lookup servers, mailbox servers, 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 5 

and so on. Many of the protocols for use of the Ethernet were developed precisely so that personal 
Altos could communicate effectively with server Altos. 

Printer servers and file servers get the biggest workout. There is considerable history and folklore 
surrounding printing and printing servers - you will find some of it in later sections of this 
document One doesn't tend to hear much about file servers, except when they are down; nevertheless, 
they are essential to our computational well-being. Because Alto disks are rather small (another 
topic we'll come back to later), we rely heavily on file servers to store libraries of Alto packages, 
subsystems, and documentation. In Palo Alto, our primary file servers are Maxcl and two IFS servers, Ivy and 
iris. A file server also acts as the natural common repository for the "truth version" of a system 
being constructed by a number of individuals. Once you begin to write programs (and run out of local 
disk space), you will soon discover the importance of these facilities in our daily computing. 

Alto software 

The first high-level programming language used on the Alto was BCPL, and an overwhelming 
majority of Alto cycles is still consumed by BCPL programs. Other languages exist however: 
Smalltalk [18] (an integrated, interactive, object-oriented programming system), Mesa [19] (a 
strongly-typed, PASCAL-like implementation language), Poplar (a simple interactive, text-oriented 
language), a version of LISP, and others. Mesa and Smalltalk are the most widely used. 

There is a reasonable amount of introductory documentation for systems you commonly need (e.g., 
Bravo, FTP, the Alto Executive) in [13]. This is by far the most useful single reference for the Alto 
environment. Since the entire document can't be reprinted when any subsystem changes, however, 
you can expect the information there to be somewhat out of date at any one time, if you suspect you 
need the latest documentation for some program X, you might try [Maxc]<AltoDocs>X.press (or X-news.press). 

The early development of the Alto programming environment was influenced considerably by existing software for the 
Nova. We still see this influence in a few places, e.g., certain file-name extensions. However, the desire to communicate 
with other Altos and with Maxc has had a stronger effect on software written in recent years, and the importance of the 
Nova is now mostly historical. 

The Alto Operating System 

BCPL programs typically run on top of the Alto Operating System, which is itself written in BCPL. 
Like most OSs, this one provides a number of basic facilities, not all of which are needed by any 
one program. Because the small memory of the Alto is precious, a technique called "Junta" exists 
which permits BCPL programs to get rid of unneeded portions of the OS during their execution. 
"Counter-Junta" brings them back. You can read about the layers of the OS in {8}. 

Mesa programs do not use the Alto OS at all, mostly because Mesa and BCPL have rather different 
philosophies about the run-time world in which they exist. It is also a considerable nuisance for 
Mesa and BCPL programs to communicate, since their underlying instruction sets are completely 
different. So, most of the important OS facilities (e.g., the file system) have been (re-)implemented 
directly in Mesa. Mesa's memory management strategies replace the revolutionary tactics of "Junta" 
and "Counter-junta" with the (relative) anarchy of segment swapping. 

There is a program called the Executive which runs on top of the OS and provides a command 
interpreter with a number of natural facilities, such as "tell me what files are on this disk", "run this 
program", "execute this command file", "go away". System maintained will tell you that the Executive is 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 6 

"just another program - if you don't like it, you can write one yourself. That's true - you could also write a Mesa 
compiler yourself, but ... . In all fairness, however, the Executive is one of a number of programs that have reached the 
state where maintenance consists of aggravating details. Consequently, requests for feature enhancement are not likely to 
fall upon receptive ears. Perhaps the most useful features of the Executive are file name completion 
(ESC) and *-expansion, particularly in conjuction with subsystem invocation. You should also read 
about control-X and control-U in the Executive section of {10}. 

No matter what program you are running, there are times when you want to say "get me out of this 
mess and back to somewhere more comfortable!" Unless things are really messed up, you have two 
choices, both of which require you to know where the Swat key is. (This invaluable key is 
unlabelled, and is in different places on Alto I's and IPs. On Alto I keyboards, it is at the extreme 
lower right, next to the shift key; on Alto IPs, it is at the extreme upper right, separated somewhat 
from the main keyboard area.) By hitting shift-Swat, you can normally get back to the Executive. 
To get back to where you were, use the Executive command "Resume". Control-Shift-Swat will normally get 
you into Swat (the BCPL debugger). What you do there is your own business (see {10}). Control- 
Swat will get you to the Mesa debugger if you are in a Mesa program, and there is a Mesa debugger on your disk, and 
it is installed, and your core image isn't too badly screwed up. If you are just trying to abort whatever program you 
are running, you probably don't want to be in the debugger anyway. And just to keep you on your toes, only the left- 
hand Shift key works here! If these last-ditch facilities don't seem to work, things are very confused, 
and you will have to boot your Alto, using the little white button that is not only unlabelled, but 
hidden behind the keyboard. 

The Network Executive 

There are several facilities available over the Ethernet that do not require a disk. You can boot any 
one of these programs into your Alto by pressing down a strange collection of keys simultaneously 
and hitting the boot button, but there is an easier way. If you hold down the BS and ' (single 
quote) keys and hit the boot button, you get the NetExec, a simple executive to which you can type 
the name of the program you want to boot into your machine. Typing "?" will tell you what is 
available. The most frequently used facilities are the Scavenger, Chat, CopyDisk, and FTP. You 
can also get a variety of diagnostic programs, the most popular being DMT. 

The Alto file system 

Most general-purpose computer systems have some sort of file system, and no two of them are 
exactiy alike. Programmers tend to assimilate the assumptions of their local file system so 
completely that they forget that other systems do things differently. As a result, they sometimes get 
burned when they start programming under a different system. Let's consider some of the implicit 
assumptions behind the Alto file system organization. 

AltO disks are self-contained. Exception: there exist Altos with two disk drives that can be configured to spread 
the file system across both disks. Forget about this case for now. Each one has a single directory in which the 
visible names of the files are Stored. Fine point: multiple directories are permitted, but most software can't 
handle them. Names consist of a file name proper, optionally followed by a period and an extension. 
Actually, file names are terminated by a "." and may contain any number of embedded "."s. Dividing the name into 
two parts with a single "." is purely a convention, though a widely-observed one. Certain conventional extensions 
exist, e.g., ".mesa" for Mesa source programs. All of this is probably familiar to you from other 
systems. 

Wrinkle #1: The Alto file system supports version numbers that are essentially the same 
as those of TENEX [9], but almost no one uses them. If you are thinking about using 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 7 

version numbers, don't. There are some lurking bugs in the Alto OS related to version- 
numbered files. In addition, many Alto programs don't support version numbers (notably 
those written in Mesa, for low-level implementation reasons). Unfortunately, you don't 
find out which ones they are until it is too late. 

Wrinkle #2: Because multiple versions are impractical, writing a "new version" of a file 
really means writing on top of the old one. Nearly everyone who isn't accustomed to this 
(particularly PDP-10 hackers) gets burned by it at least once. (However, there is an 
important exception: Bravo and Markup maintain explicit backup files even when 
version numbers are disabled.) 

Wrinkle #3: Alto files consist of pages. Each page carries with it the number of 
significant bytes it contains. Thus, in principle, a file need not be a sequence of full pages followed by 
a single partially full page. In fact, however, strange things will happen if you manage to construct a file in 
which any page (except possibly the last one) is not full. Fortunately, it is hard to do so. 

Wrinkle #4: In the directory, all file names have a terminating ".". Within the layers of 
software that access the directory, some define interfaces that expect the terminating 
period, others supply it automatically. Not all subsystems mask these internal differences 
effectively; thus, various programs have different ideas about what " Arbitrary FileName" 
and "Arbitrary FileName." mean. Ah, the wonders of information hiding and abstract specifications... 

Wrinkle #5: Alto files always have a page at the front called a leader page, which holds 
various interesting and useful data about the file (e.g., when it was last written). For 
obscure reasons, the Alto file system prefers that the last page of the file contain less than 
512 bytes of data. This means that a logically empty file actually takes two pages, one for 
the leader and one containing significant bytes of data. 

Wrinkle #6: The Alto disk architecture permits a representation for files that drastically 
reduces the possibility of a hardware or software error destroying the disk's contents. The 
basic idea is that you must tell the disk not only the address of the sector you want to 
read/write, but also what you think that sector holds. This is implemented by dividing 
every sector into 3 parts: a header, a label, and a data field. Each field may be 
independently read, written, or compared with memory during a single pass over the 
sector. The Alto file system stuffs a unique identification of the disk block (consisting of 
a file serial number and the page number of the file) into the label field. Now, when the 
software goes to write a sector, it typically asks the hardware to compare the header and 
label fields against data in memory, and to abort the writing of the data field if the 
compare fails. This makes it pretty difficult, though not impossible, to write in the wrong 
place. The label field also contains links (disk addresses) to the predecessor and successor blocks of the 
file. It happens that if the compare logic of the disk microcode sees a particular pattern in a memory word, 
it omits the comparison on that word and instead overwrites the pattern with the data from the 
corresponding disk word. Thus, by cleverly arranging the memory "image" of a label field to be compared, 
the software can get the safety check on the block identification AND obtain the disk addresses of the 
neighboring blocks in the same operation. Cute, huh? More information about the disk system 
and how the software exploits it may be found in {1} and the "Disks and BFS" section of 
{8}. 

You should also know about the Scavenger, a program that rebuilds the file structure (but not the file 
content) of an Alto disk. Despite the checks and balances of the file system, occasionally things get 
smashed or lost. When they do, running the Scavenger is the best first attempt to recover them. 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 8 

The Scavenger is available from the NetExec, so even if your disk is so messed up that you can't 
boot it, help is available. You can read more about the Scavenger and what it can do in {10} and 
[13]. 

Big Fish in a Small Pond - the Alio disk 

Lots of smart people have spent lots of man-years producing lots of nifty software for the Alto. 
Programs to manipulate directories, programs to format documents, programs to make pictures and 
illustrations, programs to transfer files, disks, and messages around, programs to help you write 
programs, programs to ... oops, you just ran out of disk space. 

We all know that you can't have your cake and eat it too. With a small disk, you can't even have 
it, most of the time. Most people are amazed to learn that an Alto disk will hold over 4800 pages - 
they rarely see one with more than a few hundred available. You will quickly discover that many 
programmers spend a significant fraction of their day switching disk packs or running FTP. Some 
do both. There's no real cure for this disease, but by being aware of what is costly in space, you 
can make the pain less acute. Let's see where the space goes by "building a disk" from scratch, so 
to speak. 

Naturally, there are a few things that you just can't live without. You must have an Operating 
System, an Executive, and a number of files that go along with them. You also need the basic file 
system machinery (the directory and the disk descriptor so you can allocate disk space). You also should 
have Swatee and probably Swat, though the latter isn't really essential. There are also a number of 
small files that the OS and the Executive expect to find around - don't try to get rid of them, they 
will just come right back. Even so, a disk with just the OS, Executive, Swatee, Swat, and friends 
still has about 3900 pages free. 

Next come the facilities you nearly always want - FTP and Bravo. FTP can always be obtained 
from the NetExec, but that takes a while and you use it frequently, so most people keep it around 
on the disk. It consumes about 180 pages. For wizards and hackers, there is a version of FTP hiding inside 
SYS.BOOT, and one can put together a small kludge that transfers control to it This way you can have FTP without 
giving up the full 180 pages it normally needs. Bravo is a good deal larger, weighing in at about 650 pages 
by the time you count all its related files and a font or two. Still, if you want to edit, you've pretty 
much got to have it. With FTP and Bravo, your disk is now down to around 3000 free pages. 

At this point, things begin to diverge, depending on your plans for the disk. As an example, let's 
consider a Non-Programmer's Disk. This is a disk designed mostly for producing memos and 
documents and contains lots of files appropriate for these tasks. When you get it, it has about 1600 
free pages - a comfortable amount, but quite a drop from 3000. Where did those pages go? Well, 
first there are the forms - files containing templates for things you commonly produce, like memos, 
letters, etc. The standard bunch only consumes about 40 pages - cheap. Then come the fonts ... 
and disk space starts to disappear. Screen fonts (so that Bravo can display things) occupy about 100 
pages, and you should probably retain the standard bunch (on a Non-Programmer's disk, at least). 

Even though Ears is effectively dead, many Non-Programmer disks still have a collection of .EP fonts. These are used 
only to format documents for Ears, and by deleting them you recover 450 pages. The real Space hogs are 
subsystems you rarely use. Chat takes 130 pages, and unless you spend a great deal of time talking 
to Maxc (in which case you probably don't care about Alto disk space), you might as well get it 
from the NetExec when you need it. Markup and PressEdit occupy another 210 pages, Draw takes 
150 more. Unless you use these facilities regularly, you are wasting 300 pages. DDS requires 275 
pages, and you rarely need its generality; you'll probably prefer to use Neptune or just get by with 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 9 

the Standard Executive file System commands. There is also an Executive command "FileStat" that will tell 
you how big files are. Finally, a Non-Programmer's disk also has BravoBug and some sample 
documents and illustrations, which together occupy about 100 pages. They are pure fat - you 
almost never use them, and can retrieve them from appropriate servers when necessary. 

Perhaps this tirade on disk space seems superfluous - after all, a Non-Programmer's disk does have 
over 1600 free pages even with all this junk. True, but other disks are rarely so empty. Things get 
particularly tight on Mesa disks, so it is useful to know just what can be deleted and what can't. 
The preceding discussion gives you an introduction, but Mesa programmers have been known to go 
out much further on the limb in their quest for breathing space (e.g., deleting Swat, SYS.ERRORS, and 
related files that are only needed when the Alto is trying to tell you about a weird error condition). The moral is: 
know what's on your disk and why it's there. Delete *$, Scratch*, and * .scratch occasionally - it's 
amazing what you find lying around. 

In summary, then, we can categorize some commonly encountered files as follows: Files on the same 
line generally assume or require that their brothers and sisters exist. 

Essential files: 

Sys.boot SysDir DiskDescriptor Sysfontal Swatee 
Executive.run Com.cm Rem.cm User.cm 

Highly desirable: 
Sys.errors Swat 

FTP.run FTP.log , ' ' ' 

Bravo.run Bravo.error Bravo.messages (and various scratch files) 

Useful: 

Empress.run Fonts.widths 
Neptune.run or DDS.run DDS.vmem 
Laurel.image RunMesa.run (and various .dl files) 
various .al font files 

Hook, Line, and Sinker 

How do you reel in those big fish we've just been talking about? With FTP. After Bravo, FTP is 
probably the most heavily used Alto subsystem, so it is well worth your while to learn something 
about its facilities. However, the documentation in [13] is sufficiently old that you should read the 
relevant section of {10} instead. We'll touch on the high points here. 

Full-blown FTP (there are half-blown versions) operates three windows on the Alto display, of 
which two are interesting. The so-called "user" window is where you conduct your file transactions 
with another machine, often (but not necessarily) a file server. The "Telnet" window provides you 
with a stripped-down version of Chat, and is handy when you want to do something that just isn't 
covered by the file transfer protocol. Most of the time, however, the user window is all you ever 
look at (or through). There are commands to establish and destroy connections, to retrieve, store, 
delete, and rename files, and to interrogate directory contents . and storage resources. 

Much of the flexibility of FTP is derived from its command line processor, which, in conjunction 
with the Executive's file name completion and *-expansion, provides considerable flexibility and 
power. With flexibility comes the ability to screw yourself with ease, so FTP implements a few 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 10 

checks that prevent you from doing stupid things, at least without confirmation. You should read 
about the /N and /U switches remembering that, unless you can afford to maintain multiple 
versions, once you write on an Alto file, it's gone. 

Editing and Producing Documents 

In the outside world, document production systems are usually de-coupled from text editors. One 
normally takes the text one wants to include in a document, wraps it in mysterious commands 
understood by a document processor, feeds it to that processor, and puzzles over the resulting 
jumble of characters on the page. In short, one programs in the document processor's language 
using conventional programming tools - an editor, a compiler, and sometimes even a debugger. 
Programmers tend to think this is neat; after all, one can do anything with a sufficiently powerful 
programming language. (Remember, Turing machines supply a sufficiently powerful programming language too.) 
However, document processors of this sort frequently define bizarre and semantically complex 
languages, and one soon discovers that all of the time goes into the edit/compile/debug cycle, not 
careful prose composition. 

Bravo is a modest step away from the programming paradigm for document production. A single 
program provides the usual editing functions and a reasonable collection of formatting tools. You 
can't program it as you would a document "compiler", but you can get very tolerable results in far 
less time. The secret is in the philosophy: what you see on the screen is what you get on paper. 
You use the editing and formatting commands to produce on the screen the page layout you want. 
Then, you tell Bravo to ship it to a printer server and presto! You have a hardcopy version of what 
you saw on the screen. Sounds simple, right? 

Of course, it isn't quite that easy in practice. There are dozens of subtle points having to do with 
fonts, margins, tabs, headings, and on and on. Bravo is a success because most of these issues are 
resolved more or less by fiat - someone has prepared a collection of configuration parameters (in 
user.cm) and a set of forms (on a Non-Programmer's disk and the MAXC <Forms> directory) that accommodate 
99% of the document production you have to do. Most of the configuration options aren't even 
documented, so it is hard to get enough rope to hang yourself, if you feel suicidal, there are always 
wizards about who can answer your every question about Bravo esoterica. The net effect is that you spend much 
more time composing and much less time compiling. 

No one believes Bravo is the ideal solution; indeed, it has a lot of shortcomings that become 
evident as you begin to push on it. Nevertheless, it is a sufficiently large step forward that you will 
wonder how you tolerated the old way of doing things. (If this isn't obvious to you after reading 
[12] and [13], wait until you've used it for a few weeks.) You will also find that the availability of 
multiple fonts, paragraphing, automatic indentation, and other formatting facilities inside the text 
editor leads you to make prettier programs as well. It just isn't that much more work to create and 
maintain attractive source text, and a simple set of formatting conventions can be a more potent 
program documentation aid than comments (see [11] for some examples). There are some operational 
annoyances with using Bravo formatting, however. The only program which can interpret Bravo formatting information 
and produce corresponding hardcopy is Bravo itself, and it can only do so on one file at a time and rather slowly. 
Empress is much faster, but can only handle pre-formatted Press files or simple text (e.g., a sequence of ASCII 
characters). There is a Hardcopy subsystem that takes a list of files and feeds them one-by-one to Bravo for hardcopying 
(it uses a Bravo macro [13] to eliminate manual intervention), but this is a kludge at best Therefore, some people feel 
that Bravo formatting is just too much trouble and instead do it "by hand". They are a small minority. 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land U 

When Bravo crashes 

Like all text editors, Bravo breaks once in a while. There is nothing quite like the sinking feeling 
you get when a large number of your precious keystrokes gurgle away down the drain. When they 
do, you probably have an instinctive response (conditioned by previous editors you have used) to 
run the editor again to find out what state your file is in. Resist this impulse at all costs - it is the 
worst thing you can do. 

Bravo has a "replay" mechanism, meaning that it records all of its actions in a file and is capable of 
replaying an editing session (yes, even one involving multiple files) from the beginning. However, 
all replay information is thrown away when Bravo initializes unless you tell it that you wish to 
replay the immediately preceding session. If Bravo crashes on you, by diving into Swat or 
displaying "bootlights", your best bet is to re-boot your Alto, use FTP to obtain BravoBug (unless, 
of course, you already have it), refresh your memory about how replays work [13], then run 
BravoBug. Bravo/r is not an acceptable substitute, despite a popular rumor to that effect! More 
details are available in [13]. The essential notion is that you must not run Bravo in the usual way, 
or you will forfeit your opportunity to do a replay. 

Square Pegs in Rhombic Holes - Alto Mesa 

For years BCPL was the only implementation language for the Alto. Naturally, a nice cozy 
environment for BCPL programs (and programmers) gradually developed, and the cognoscenti could 
guess how subsystems would behave in unusual cases because they knew that the programs operated 
in this environment Then, along came Mesa and the end of innocence. Mesa programs either 
have to mimic the behavior of the BCPL environment in situations where they supply overlapping 
function, or risk being branded "incompatible". 

Okay, so that's a bit melodramatic. Nevertheless, Mesa is faced with the problem of adapting to an 
environment that it finds less than ideal. As subsystems coded in Mesa begin to emerge, subtle 
incompatibilities appear (e.g., Mesa's inability, at present, to support version-numbered files). 
Mesa's more modern approach to memory management (implicit segment swapping instead of 
explicit overlays) has the disadvantage of consuming considerably more disk space, largely because it 
has become much easier to ignore the constraints imposed by the Alto's small primary memory. 

Mesa is nevertheless the programming language for successors to the Alto. These machines have an 
architecture designed to support Mesa comfortably, and BCPL will quickly fade away when these 
machines arrive on the scene. Mesa today may be likened to a size 12 foot in a size 11 shoe. 

Smalltalk 

[This section was contributed by John Shoch.] 

Smalltalk is both a programming language and a programming environment, developed by the 
Learning Research Group with lots of help from other folks in CSL and SSL. The system has 
always been intended to serve as both a powerful language for use by experienced programmers and 
an easy language to be learned by children; some of the work of LRG has been aimed at testing 
out these systems with kids. 

As a programming language, Smalltalk is an "object-oriented" system which provides a uniform 
epistemology: 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 12 

* Every "object" is an "instance" of some "class". 

* The class definition describes the behavior of all its instances. 

* Objects communicate by sending messages. 

(Geneologists will recognize major parts of Simula and Lisp in our bloodline, combined with traces 
of many other languages.) 

But Smalltalk is more than just a language design -- it is a highly interactive, integrated system 
which tries to merge together many functions that are often viewed as separate subsystems: writing 
programs, editing text, drawing, real time animation, generation of music, and more. This view 
meshes well with the notion of a small, single-user personal computer (the "Dynabook"), and work 
continues to develop a truly portable Smalltalk machine. 

There have been many different releases of Smalltalk, but there have been two principal designs: 

1) Smalltalk 72, a fully interpreted version developed for the Alto, and used in some of 
the original work with kids. 

2) Smalltalk 76, a newer version incorporating the design of a virtual Smalltalk machine, a 
microcoded version of this on the Alto, a compiler to produce byte codes executed by 
the virtual machine, and an object-oriented virtual memory (called OOZE) upon which 
the whole thing sits. 

For more information, take a look at [22] and [23]. The "Smalltalk 72 Manual" is now both out of print and 
out of date, but did provide lots of interesting examples and discussion; try to borrow a copy from someone. 

No Computer Scientist is an Island- the Laurel message system 

We rely very heavily on an electronic mail system. Since people spend much of the day at their 
Altos, notices posted on a central bulletin board are not likely to be seen rapidly. Accordingly, 
most announcements are broadcast (to expansive distribution lists) using our electronic mail system. 
If you don't check your messages once a day or so, you will soon find yourself out-of-touch (and 
Saddled with a mailbox full of Obsolete junk mail). This business of using the message system for rapid 
distribution of announcements can get out of hand One occasionally receives notices of the form: "meeting X will start 
in 2 minutes - all interested parties should attend". 

We also use the electronic mail system as a way of recording the progress of working groups and 
projects. Minutes of meetings, design documents, and related materials often pass as messages 
among group members. A file in which a copy of each such message is retained becomes a 
valuable archive of the project history and is quite painless to maintain. Many individuals keep 
archival files of their messages as well. 

In the bad old days, the only generally available facility for sending messages was a Maxc subsystem 
called SNDMSG. A separate program, MSG, was commonly used to inspect and classify incoming 
messages. Consequently, people who had no other reason to use Maxc were compelled to process 
their mail there. 

The new kid on the block is an Alto-based message system named Laurel. {17} Regular Maxc 
users still rely primarily on MSG/SNDMSG, but Alto users now have no need to Chat to Maxc 
periodically to inspect their mail boxes. They do need Maxc accounts, however, to hold their mailboxes. 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 13 

However, because Laurel stores mail locally on the Alto disk and requires a moderate amount of 
disk space (about 450 pages), most users find it necessary to dedicate a disk on which they process 
all their mail. If you like to read your mail frequently and you don't have a double-disk system, 
you find yourself switching disks a lot. 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 14 

A Printing Discussion 

You might expect that Xerox Corporation might be more than a little interested in printing. 
Indeed, we are so interested that we have created an array of printing facilities sufficient to confuse 
any new-comer. Let's try to understand the basics. 

First of all, there is an important difference between copiers and printers. A copier obtains its input 
by scanning a physical image in some way. A printer obtains its input image in digital form from 
some external source, e.g., an interface to an Alto. 

There are a lot of printing programs about: Press, Spruce, Empress. There are a lot of printers 
too: Dover, Versatec, ... To make matters worse, each of the instances of each of these printers 
has a name as well: Clover, Menlo, Palo, Daisy. As you might expect, not all programs can talk to 
all printers, but we're working on that (see axiom 2 below). Here are a few axioms that may help 
you reason logically about all this: 

1) There are no line printers around here. All of our printers are built on top of Xerox 
copier printing engines that have been lobotomized and brainwashed to understand the 
babbling of an Alto instead of an optical input scanner. 

2) Press files are the Esperanto of documentation. Most printer servers demand that 
the documents you send them be in Press file format. This means you have to convert 
whatever you have in hand (usually text) to Press format before a server will deign to 
print it. There are several ways to do this. 

3) Press files are hairy. Some printer servers don't support the full generality available 
in a Press file. Generally, however, such servers will simply ignore what they can't' figure 
out, so you can safely send them any Press file you happen to have. 

4) There is an extensive collection of standard fonts, and they are mostly 
straightforward to use. Be prepared for a few surprises if you insist on building your 
own. 

In general, if you simply want to make a memo, or a listing of a program, or a copy of a 
documentation file that someone has sent you, things are quite straightforward. Bravo's hardcopy 
command [13] will take the file you are editing, convert it to Press format (including all the 
formatting information you have supplied), and ship it directiy to any printing server you specify. 
The important server program to know about is Spruce, which understands everything Bravo can 
produce. Spruce can operate a Dover and a number of other printers, and is the server you will use 
for almost everything unless you are a graphics hacker. 

Spruce will accept Press files from any source (though it does not implement all Press features). 
Standard documents and memos are typically stored in Press format, so you can ship them directly 
to your favorite Spruce server. From an Alto, use the Empress program; from Maxc, use the 
PRESS command. 

Empress can tell the difference between a Press file and a text file, and will convert a text file to 
Press format if necessary before sending it to the printing server. If you do this a lot, you will want 
to know about various options that apply to this conversion - see {10}. in such cases, Empress uses a 
single font, which generally has a fixed pitch. This is the way we simulate a line printer. 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 



15 



Spruce servers have a collection of fonts stored locally. Press files do not contain the representation 
of the fonts they require, only their names. Naturally, if a Press file is produced using fonts that a 
Spruce server doesn't have, the server will have a hard time printing it. Spruce will attempt a 
reasonable substitution for unavailable fonts, and tell you about it on the break page of your listing. 
If you have chronic font difficulties of this sort, contact your local Spruce maintainer. 

Most frequently traveled paths through the printing maze 



inning on 


Inputfile 


Output 


Program 




format 


desired 


to use 


Maxc 


Text 


Press file/printer 


PRESS command 




Press 


Press printer 


PRESS command 


Alto 


Text 


Press file/printer 


Empress, Bravo 




Bravo 


Press file/printer 


Bravo 




Press 


Press printer 


Empress 




Draw 


Press file 


Draw 




SIL 


Press file 


SIL 



A few caveats go along with this table. First, it is typically easier to format and print large files 
from Maxc (because of disk space considerations) than from an Alto, but it often takes longer. 
Second, you should know that these various programs have a large number of options and defaults, 
and they are not always consistent. Beware of printing groups of files with ""-expansion (particularly 
*.*) unless you are certain you are doing it properly. (LIST *.* is a disaster, for more reasons than 
you might think.) For more details about printing, and before you try to do anything clever, read 
{21}. 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 16 

Beyond the Black and White Horizon ■ MAXC and the Arpanet 

Sitting at your Alto, you can easily forget about the other computing facilities that are within your 
grasp. Perhaps the most notable non-Alto on our network is MAXC, which is a home-grown 
microprogrammed processor masquerading as a PDP-10. Actually, we have two of them, Maxcl 
and Maxc2, implemented rather differently but software compatible. Both run Tenex. Both are 
connected to the Arpanet, so it is possible for you to reach out to any machine connected to the 
Arpanet, at least in principle. In practice, not many people do (and there are restrictions imposed by our 
ARPA contract as well), except to send messages to people at other Arpanet sites. Laurel understands 
Arpanet names in messages, so you don't need to use Maxc directly for mail either. 

Maxc provides three essential services. First, at present, it serves as our only mailbox server. 
Second, it acts as a file server, archive facility, and software distribution center. Third, it provides 
the only computationally feasible place to run LISP. Few programming languages other than LISP 
are exercised on Maxc. 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 17 

Looking under Rocks 

All Alto users should know about various interesting files and directories. There is no coherent 
logic to the placement of "general interest" files and directories, but Maxc is the best place to start. 
Browse through the glossary at the end of this document to get a rough idea of what's around. 

Browsing on Maxc 

The primary directories for documentation on Maxc are <AltoDocs>, <Doc>, <PrintingDocs>, 
<Mesa-Doc>. As you can see, the naming conventions aren't very consistent, so you may have to 
fumble around a bit before you find the right one. The Tenex file name completer (ESC) can take 
some of the difficulty out of remembering, as can a quick glance in the glossary at the end of this 
document. 

Just because you don't find a particular file, don't give up! Tenex has an automatic facility called 
"archiving", which moves infrequently accessed files to tape. It sometimes happens that the 
documentation you are looking for has been archived. There is a Tenex command, "Interrogate", 
that will help you locate an archived file - see [9]. 

Maxc is still the file repository "of record", though that burden is gradually being shifted to various 
IFS servers. These servers frequentiy have duplicate copies of documentation, packages, subsystems, 
and the like. This is done partly for redundancy and partly to decrease the load on Maxc when a new version of a 
popular Alto facility is released. Duplicated directories always have the same name on IFS servers, but 
are not always scrupulously maintained, and therefore may be inconsistent, incomplete, or obsolete. 
Proceed with caution. 

Browsing on IFS servers 

IFS servers don't have an archiving facility (yet), which means that you are less likely to overlook 
something interesting. IFS supplies a general sub-directory structure which the Maxc file system 
lacks, and as a result there are many more pigeonholes in which to look. For example, on Maxc 
you might look for 

<AltoDocs>MyFavoritePackage.press 

while on IFS you would probably look for 

<Packages>Doc>MyFavoritePackage.press 
<Packages>MyFavoritePackage>Documentation.press 

or perhaps some other permutation. This requires a bit of creativity and a little practice. However, 
if you use the "Chat Executive" and get in the habit of using *s in file name specifications, e.g., 

<Packages>*>*.press 

you will find all sorts of things you might not otherwise locate. 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 18 

Code Phrases 

You may occasionally hear the following incomprehensible phrases used in discussions, sometimes 
accompanied by laughter. To keep you from feeling left out, we offer the following translations: 

"Committing error 33" 

(1) Predicating one research effort on the success of another. (2) Allowing your own 
research effort to be placed on the critical path of some other project (be it a research 
effort or not). Known elsewhere as Forgie's principle. 

"You can tell the pioneers by the arrows in their backs." 

Mostly self-explanatory. Usually applied to the bold souls who attempt to use software 
systems in clever, novel, and therefore unanticipated ways ... with predictable 
consequences. 

"We're having a printing discussion" 

Refers to a protracted, low-level, time-consuming, generally pointless discussion of 
Something peripherally interesting to all. Historically, printing discussions were of far greater 
importance than they are now. You can see why when you consider that printing used to be done by 
carrying magnetic tapes from Maxc to a Nova that ran an XGP. 

Fontology 

The body of knowledge dealing with the construction and use of new fonts, it has been said 
that fontology recapitulates file-ogeny. 

"What you see is what you get." 

Used specifically in reference to the treatment of visual images by various systems, e.g., a 
Bravo screen display should be as close as possible to the hardcopy version of the same 
text. 

"Hey guys, up-level!" 

The conversation has degenerated to a discussion of nitty-gritty details. This phrase is 
often preceded or followed by: "We're having a printing discussion." 

... smashed to zero 

A quaint way of saying that some memory location acquired the value zero when it should 
had something else. "Smashed" is much preferred to "clobbered" in local argot, though in this context it 
seems about as appropriate as using a wrecking ball to stack bricks. 

"Life is hard" 

Two possible interpretations: (1) "While your suggestion may have some merit, I will 
behave as though I hadn't heard it." (2) "While your suggestion has obvious merit, 
equally obvious circumstances prevent it from being seriously considered." The charm of this 
phrase lies precisely in this subtle but important ambiguity. 

"What's a spline?" 

"You have just used a term that I've heard for a year and a half, and I feel I should 
know, but don't. My curiosity has finally overcome my guilt." Moral: don't hesitate to 
ask questions, even if they seem obvious. 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 19 

Some CSL Lore 

Here are a few bits of information specific to CSL that you should know: 

CSL has a weekly meeting on Wednesday afternoons called Dealer. The name comes from the 
concept of "dealer's choice" - the dealer sets the ground rules and topic(s) for discussion. When 
someone says he will "give a Dealer on X", he means that he will discuss X at some future weekly 
meeting, taking about 15 minutes to do so (plus whatever discussion is generated). Generally, such 
discussions are informal, and presentations of half-baked ideas are encouraged. The topic under 
discussion may be long-range, ill-formed, controversial, or all of the above. Comments from the 
audience are encouraged, indeed, provoked. More formal presentations occur at the Computing Forum on 
Thursday afternoons, which is not specifically a CSL function and is open to all Xerox employees. Dealers are also 
used for announcements which are not appropriate for distribution by electronic mail. 

Once a month, normally on the first Wednesday, Dealer is extended and becomes CSL Luncheon. 
On these occasions, we have a tasty buffet lunch amidst bean-bag splendor, and Mother Xerox picks 
up the tab. 

The CSL Archives (not to be confused with TENEX archives) are a collection of file cabinets and 
3-ring binders that provide a continuing record of CSL technical activities. The archives are our 
primary line of defense in legal matters pertaining to our projects, but they make interesting reading 
for anyone curious about the history of any particular project. You will find it most informative to 
browse the archives from time to time, just to see what's been going on in those projects you just 
haven't quite had the time to monitor. Ask someone to point you at the cubicle where the archives 
are stored. 

If you are a CSL member and need a new disk pack, see Mike Overton in the CSL lab (across from 
the Commons). 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 20 

Some SSL Lore 

Here are a few bits of information specific to SSL that you should know: 

The work of the System Science Laboratory spans a wide range of computer-related research, 
organized into several projects including: the Learning Research Group (LRG), the Office 
Research Group (ORG), LSI Area, Applied Information Processing Psychology (AIP), a Graphics 
project, and the Engineering and Software Group. 

A Lab-wide meeting is often scheduled on one afternoon each month or two, usually accompanied 
by something delicious to eat (plan ahead -- find out if a particularly extravagant pastry will be 
served, and you can skip dessert at lunch!). 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 



21 



A Glossary of Alto Terms, Subsystems, Directories, and Files 

(and acronyms, protocols, and other trivia) 



Note: For users in Palo Alto, Maxcl is the file server on which most of the directories described 
below reside. Other locations have equivalent directories on their local file servers (IFSs). 



<Alto> A directory on which standard Alto (BCPL) programs and subsystems are 

stored. Only object code files (extension .BR) and runnable files (extension 
.RUN) are stored here; source files and documentation are stored on 
<AltoSource> and <AltoDocs>, respectively. 

<AltoDocs> A directory on which documentation for Alto programs is stored. Common 

extensions are .PRESS (for files directly printable by Press or Spruce), and 
.TTY (ASCII). See <AltoSource> and <Alto> for corresponding source and 
object files. 

<AltoFonts> A directory on which screen fonts for the Alto are stored (extension .AL). 

<AltoSource> A directory on which source versions of standard Alto programs are stored. 

Corresponding object versions and documentation are stored on <Alto> and 
<AltoDocs>, respectively. 

ASD Acronym for Advanced Systems Department, a part of XBS. 

bar A generally thin, generally rectangular, generally invisible region of the screen 

in which certain generally display- related actions occur, e.g., the scroll bar, 
the line-select bar. 

BCPL A system programming language used as the basis for many Alto facilities. 

Also, the compiler for that language. 

BITBLT (prounouced "bit-blit"). A complex Alto instruction used for moving and 

possibly modifying a rectangular bitmap. The "BLT" part is an acronym for 
BLock Transfer. 

bitmap Generally refers to a representation of a graphical entity as a sequence of bits 

directly representing points. The Alto display hardware and microcode 
process what is essentially a bitmap of the image to be displayed. 

boot Short for "bootstrap", which is in turn short for "bootstrap load". Refers to 

the process of loading and starting a program on a machine whose main 
memory has undefined contents. 

boot button The small button behind an Alto keyboard used (sometimes in conjunction 

with the keyboard) to boot some program into execution. 

boot server A computer on the network that provides a retrieval service for certain stand- 

alone programs. See NetExec. 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 



22 



bootlights A screen pattern resembling a city skyline. Occurs occasionally when some 

erroneous unanticipated condition arises, e.g., getting a parity error in a 
BCPL program on a disk that doesn't have Swat. 

Bravo.run An integrated text editor and document formatting program that runs on the 

Alto. 

BravoBug.run A program used when Bravo crashes to replay the editing actions up to the 

point of the crash, and/or to report the problem to a (nominally responsible) 
person. 

Cedar A large project in CSL revolving around an experimental programming 

environment for essentially all of CSL's applications. The system is based on 
the Mesa programming language and many ideas from the InterLISP 
programming environment. 

Chat.run A subsystem that permits teletype-like, interactive access to a remote 

computer on the network. Used also to refer to a facility resembling that 
provided by this subsystem, e.g., FTP is said to have a Chat window. Chat is 
mainly used to communicate with Maxcl, Maxc2, and IFS servers. 

Clover A Dover used primarily by CSL. 

Com.cm A file used by the Alto Executive to store the current command being 

executed. See Rem.cm. 

CopyDisk.run A stand-alone program used to transfer the entire contents of a disk. May be 

used between computers or on a single computer with multiple disk drives. 

CSL Acronym for Computer Science Laboratory, a part of PARC. 

Daisy A Dover used primarily by SDD/Palo Alto. 

DDS.run Acronym for Descriptive Directory System. An Alto subsystem providing 

more sophisticated manipulation of the file system than is available with the 
Executive. See also Neptune, which is a poor man's DDS: it provides most 
of the functionality but uses less disk space and time. 

DiskDescriptor A file that contains the disk allocation information used by the Alto file 

system. 

DLISP A version of InterLISP running on Maxc that communicates with some fancy 

display manipulation facilities on the Alto. 

DMT.boot Acronym for Dynamic Memory Tester. A memory diagnostic for the Alto. 

DMT is automatically booted from the network by the Alto Executive after 
the Alto has been idle for about 20 minutes. 

Dorado A high-performance computer being designed and built by CSL and intended 

to execute Mesa, Lisp, and Smalltalk programs very rapidly. 

Dover A laser-scan printer built on the Xerox 7000 xerographic engine and 

connected to an Alto by means of a Orbit interface. Successor to EARS. 

Draw.run An Alto subsystem that permits interactive construction of pictures composed 

of lines, curves, and text 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 



23 



Dumper.boot 
DWIM 
EmPress.run 
Ethernet 



Executive.run 
file extension 



file server 

FLG 
fog index 



A file used for desperation debugging. Dumps (most of) the current core 
image to Swatee for subsequent inspection by a debugger. 

Acronym for Do What I Mean. Also, a facility intended to make LISP do 
what you mean, not what you say. 

An Alto subsystem used to convert text files to Press format and ship them 
to a Press printer server. 

The communication line connecting several Altos (or other computers with 
compatible interfaces) together. Strictly speaking, an Ethernet is a single, 
continuous piece of co-axial cable, but the term is sometimes (incorrectly) 
applied to the entire network accessible through the cooperation of Gateways. 
Every Ethernet within a (connected) network has a unique identifying 
number. 

A distinguished Alto subsystem that provides simple commands to inspect 
and manipulate the file system directory, and to initiate other subsystems. 

The portion of a file name that appears following a period (possibly null). 
By convention, a number of extensions are reserved to indicate the type of 
data in the file, though not all subsystems are consistent in their defaulting of extensions. 
Some commonly encountered extensions are: 

~ an Executive command (not really an extension) 

al Alto screen font 

bed Mesa object program module 

bcpl BCPL source program module 

boot program invokable by boot button 

br BCPL object program module 

bravo text file containing Bravo formatting information 

cm Executive command file 

dl Laurel distribution list 

dm dump file (i.e., several logical files stored as one) 

error(s) Swat error message file 

image executable (Mesa) program 

log history of certain program actions 

mail Laurel mail file 

mail-dmsTOC Laurel table-of-contents file 

run executable (BCPL) program 

mesa Mesa source program module 

press Press file 

st Smalltalk source program text 

symbols Mesa symbol table (for debugging) 

syms BCPL symbol table (for debugging) 

ts, typescript typescript file (log of interaction) 

A computer on the network that provides a file storage and retrieval service. 
MAXC and IFS are two different types of file server, though they provide 
related facilities. 

(pronounced "flug"). A switch (usually in Lisp programs) that customizes a 
program's behavior to an individual user's working habits. 

A measure of prose obscurity. Units are years of education required for 
understanding. 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 



24 



font An assortment of characters all of one size and style. 

<Fonts> A MAXC directory containing fonts used for printing (in Press files), as well 

as Fonts. widths. 

Fonts.widths A file containing character-width information for a large number of fonts. 

Used by many programs on the Alto that manipulate multiple fonts. 

<Forms> A MAXC directory containing files that are usable as templates (in Bravo) for 

various kinds of documents (e.g., memos, letters, reports). 

FTP.run Acronym for File Transfer Protocol (or Program). An Alto program that 

provides a convenient user interface to the file transfer protocol, enabling the 
transfer of files between co-operating computers on the network. 

Gateway A computer serving as a forwarding link between separate Ethernets. 

Gateways may also perform certain server functions, such as name lookup. 

IFS Acronym for Interim File System. An Alto-based file server. Several distinct 

IFS servers exist on various Ethernets, including Ivy, Iris, and Isis. 

install A term applied to the Alto Operating System and a number of subsystems 

(notably Bravo), referring to a procedure whereby certain configuration 
options are established. 

InterLISP An interactive version of Lisp with a large library of facilities and a 15-pound 

reference manual. 

Iris An IFS server in SDD/Palo Alto. 

Ivy An IFS server in PARC. 

Juniper A CSL project and system exploring issues in the design and construction of 

a distributed file system. 

Junta A technique for eliminating layers of the Alto Operating System that are not 

required by a particular subsystem. 

KBA Acronym for Knowledge-Based Assistance. Refers to an on-going project in 

CSL. 

KRL Acronym for Knowledge Representation Language. Refers to an on-going 

project in CSL. 

Lampson A unit of speech rate. 1 Lampson is defined as Butler's maximum sustained 

speed. For practical applications, the milliLampson is a more appropriate 
unit. 

Laurel.image An Alto-based, display-oriented message system. 

level i system (for i € [1..3]). A terminology for classifying (software) systems according to 

their intended user community: 

1 implementors only 

2 implementors and friendly users 

3 naive users 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 



25 



LRG 

Markup.run 

MAXC 

Menlo 
menu 

Mesa 

<Mesa> 

<MesaLib> 

name lookup 

name lookup server 
Neptune 

NetExecboot 

network address 
Orbit 

OS 

PARC 
Phogg.image 



Acronym for Learning Research Group, a part of SSL. 

An Alto subsystem for editing Press files. 

Acronym for Multi-Access Xerox Computer (pronounced "Max"). The 
generic name given to local implementations of a computer functionally 
similar to the DEC PDP-10. When used in reference to a specific machine, 
MAXC1 is usually intended. 

A Dover used primarily by SSL. 

A collection of text strings or icons on a display screen generally used to 
represent a set of possible actions. 

A PASCAL-like, strongly typed, system programming language developed by 
PARC and SDD. 

A directory on which Mesa programs (source and object) and documentation 
are stored. Additional facilities of interest to Mesa programmers may also be 
found on <MesaLib>. 

A directory on which Mesa utilities and packages (source, object and 
documentation) are stored. Standard Mesa programming facilities may be 
found on <Mesa>. 

In the context of network communications, the process of mapping a string of 
characters to a network address. Also, the protocol that defines the 
mechanism for performing such a mapping. 

A computer that implements the name lookup protocol. 

An Alto subsystem providing more sophisticated manipulation of the file 
system than is available with the Executive. See also DDS, which provides 
still more bells and whistles at the expense of time and space. 

A mini-Executive usable without a disk and obtainable directly from the 
Ethernet (from a boot server). The NetExec makes available a number of 
useful stand-alone programs, including CopyDisk, Scavenger, FTP, and a 
number of diagnostics. 

A pair of numbers <network number, host number> that uniquely identifies 
any computer on the network. 

A high performance image generator designed to merge source rasters into a 
raster output stream for a SLOT printer (e.g., Dover). So named because it 
ORs bits into buffers. 

Acronym for Operating System. Generally used to refer to the Alto 
Operating System, which is stored in the file Sys.boot. Rarely used locally to 
refer to the operating system of the same name that runs on IBM 360/370 
computers. 

Acronym for Palo Alto Research Center. 

A program that computes the fog index for a piece of prose text. 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 



26 



Pine 

plaid screen 

PLAP 
Poplar 

Press 

PressEdit.run 
printer server 

<Printing> 
<PrintingDocs> 

products 



PUP 

Rem.cm 

replay 
Scavenger.boot 

scroll 



See PLAP. 

Occurs when certain kinds of memory smashes overwrite the display bitmap 
area or control blocks. The term "salt & pepper" refers to a different pattern 
of similar origin. 

Acronym for Page Level Access Protocol. Sometimes called Pine. 

An interactive programming language system running on the Alto, an 
experimental system in the direction of programming by relatively naive 
users. Useful for text manipulation applications. 

A file format used to encode documents for printing and editing. Also, a 
printing server capable of obeying all the specifications present in a Press file. 

A subsystem that recombines Press files on a page-by-page basis. PressEdit 
can also convert an .ears file to Press format. 

A computer that provides printing services, usually for files formatted in a 
particular way. The term also refers to the specific software that converts 
such files into a representation that can be processed by a specific printer 
hardware interface. Spruce is an example of a printer server program. 

A MAXC directory containing printing and graphics programs. 

A MAXC directory containing documentation related to printing and graphics 
facilities such as Press files and fonts. 

The following is a list of the most commonly encountered Xerox product 
numbers and their distinguishing characteristics: 

typewriter-based, word-processing terminal 

display-based, word-processing terminal 

desktop copier 

3 sec/page copier, good solid black-area development 

1 sec/page copier, 2-sided copying 

1 sec/page copier, good resolution 

20 sec/page copier, color copying 

1 sec/page copier 

offset-quality, .5 sec/page copier 

offset- quality, .5 sec/page, laser-scan printer 

Acronym for PARC Universal Packet. The structure used to transmit blocks 
of information (packets) on the Ethernet. Also, one such unit of information. 

A file used by the Alto Executive to store commands to be interpreted after 
the current one has completed. See Com.cm. 

Refers to a Bravo facility that permits recovery after a crash. See BravoBug. 

A program available through the NetExec that checks for damaged file 
structures on an Alto disk and tries to repair them. 

Refers to a method of repositioning text on a display as though it were part 
of a long, continuous sheet of paper. 



800 

850 

2600 

3100 

4500 

5400 

6500 

7000 

9200 

9700 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 



27 



SDD 
SIL.run 

<Secretary> 

server 

Smalltalk 
Spruce 

SSL 

<SubSys> 

subsystem 

Swat 

Swatee 

Sys.boot 
SysDir. 
SysFont.al 
Telnet 

Tenex 

thumbing 

typescript 



Acronym for System Development Division, a part of XBS. 

Acronym for Simple ILlustrator. An illustrator program used for logic design 
and drawing in general. 

A MAXC directory containing standard distribution lists for use with Laurel 
and SNDMSG. 

A computer dedicated to performing some collection of service functions for 
the communal good (e.g., a printer server). 

An integrated programming system for the Alto developed by LRG. 

A program that recognizes certain portions of a Press file (primarily text and 
bitmaps), converts them to a form acceptable by an Orbit interface, and prints 
them. 

Acronym for System Science Laboratory, a part of PARC. 

A MAXC directory containing standard TENEX subsystems. 

A program running under a specific operating system. Normally used to 
refer to Alto programs that run under the Alto OS, but also used to refer to 
PDP-10 programs that run under TENEX. 

A debugger used primarily for BCPL programs. Also, the key used in 
conjunction with the "control" and "shift" keys to invoke the debugger. 
Used as a verb to refer to the act of striking these keys or entering the 
debugger. 

A file used by debugging programs (both Swat and the Mesa debugger) to 
hold the core image of the program being debugged. Also used as a scratch 
file by many Alto subsystems. Not to be deleted under any circumstances. 

An Alto disk file containing the executable representation of the Alto 
Operating System. 

The Alto file directory. Roughly speaking, this file contains the mapping 
from file names to starting disk locations. 

An Alto screen font used by the Executive and (generally) as a default by 
other programs. 

A PUP-based protocol used to establish full-duplex, teletype-like 
communication with a remote computer. (The term is borrowed from a 
similar protocol used on the Arpa network.) Chat speaks this protocol. 

An operating system for the DEC PDP-10 computer, which also runs on 
MAXC. 

A technique of positioning a file (usually text) to an arbitrary position, 
usually for viewing on a display. 

An Alto file used to back-up information (usually text) appearing in a region 
of the display. 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 



28 



user.cm 

window 

XBS 
XGP 



A file containing a number of logically distinct sections that each define 
certain configuration parameters (e.g., the location of a preferred printer 
server for a particular file format). Programs that interpret such parameters 
are often organized to read user.cm only at installation time (e.g., Bravo). 

A display region, usually rectangular, used to view (a portion of) an image 
that generally exceeds the bounds of the region. 

Acronym for Xerox Business Systems. 

Acronym for Xerox Graphics Printer. An obsolete, low-resolution continuous 
paper, xerographic printer. 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 29 



References 

Reference numbers in [square brackets] are for conventional, hardcopy documents. Reference 
numbers in {curly, brackets} are for on-line document files. The notation used for on-line files is: 
[FileServer]<Directory>SubDirectory>FileName.Extension . 

Each reference is followed by a brief description of what you can expect to find in the cited 
document. 

If you can't find some of the on-line files, they may have been archived. See the section on 
"Looking Under Rocks". 

{1} [Maxc]<AltoDocs>AltoHardware.press 

[2] Metcalfe, R. M. and Boggs, D. R. Ethernet: Distributed Packet Switching for Local 
Computer Networks. Communications of the ACM 19, 7 (July 1976), pp. 395-404. A 
description of the Ethernet's functional organization, with a discussion of error recovery 
strategies. 

{3} [Maxc]<AltoDocs>AltoNetwork.press. Contains a one-page picture of the entire network 
configuration. 

{4} [Maxc]<Pup>FTPspec.press. A functional specification of the file transfer protocol, 
independent of implementation in any particular language or system. 

{5} [Maxc]<Pup>EFTPspec.press. A functional specification of the "easy" file transfer protocol. 

{6} [Maxc]<Pup>Telnet.press. A functional specification of a protocol for interactive teletype- 
like communication between computers on the network. 

{7} [Maxc]<Pup>MiscServices.press. Describes a variety of simple protocols (usually a single 
exchange of packets). 

{8} [Maxc]<AltoDocs>OS.press. The programmer's reference manual for the Alto Operating 
System, including detailed information on the services provided and the interface 
requirements. 

[9] Myer, T. H. and Barnaby, J. R. TENEX Executive Language Manual for Users. Available 
from Arpa Network Information Center as NIC 16874, but in the relatively unlikely event 
that you need one, borrow one from a Tenex wizard. 

{10} [Maxc]<AltoDocs>SubSystems.press. Documentation on individual Alto subsystems, 

collected in a single file. Individual systems are documented on 

[Maxc]<AltoDocs>systemname.TTY, and these files are sometimes more recent than 
SubSystems.press. 

[11] Morris, J. H. The Elements of Mesa Style. Xerox PARC Internal Report, June 1976. 
Somewhat out of date (since Mesa has changed under it), but a readable introduction to 
some useful program structuring techniques in Mesa. 

[12] Jerome, Suzan. Bravo Course Outline. Xerox PARC Internal Report, undated. Oriented 
to non-programmers. 

[13] Alto User's Handbook. Xerox PARC Report, November 1978. An introduction to Alto 
facilities and re feren ce documentation for several commonly used subsystems, including 
Bravo, Laurel, FTP, Draw, Markup, and Neptune. 



A Field Guide to Alto-Land 30 

[14] Sunset Western Garden Book. Lane Magazine and Book Company, Menlo Park, Ca. The 
definitive document on Western gardening for non-botanists. 

{15} [Maxc]<Pup>GatewayInformation.press. Describes the protocol for obtaining packet routing 
information from the Gateways. 

{16} [Maxc]<Pup>Pup. press. A functional specification of the PUP mechanism for packet-based 
communication on the network. 

{17} [Maxc]<DMS>Laurel.press. Documentation for the Alto-based, electronic mail system. 

{18} On-line documentation for Smalltalk is (always?) in a state of flux. Consult a member of 
LRG for a current pointer. 

[19] Maybury, W. and Mitchell, J. G. Mesa Language Manual. Xerox PARC Internal Report, 
October, 1977. A cross between a tutorial and a reference manual, though much closer to 
the latter than the former. Details of the Alto implementation appear in other, on-line 
documentation - look on [Maxc]<Mesa>. 

{20} [Maxc]<AltoDocs>AltoUsersPrimer.press. A more complete (and neutral) introduction to 
Alto-land, intended at least in part for non-programmers. 

{21} [Maxc]<PrintingDocs>Printing.press. The "entry document" for printing services on Maxc 
and the Alto. 

[22] Kay, A. C. "Microelectronics and the Personal Computer". Scientific American, 
September, 1977, pp. 230-244. 

[23] Personal Dynamic Media. Xerox LRG/SSL report 76-1, 1976. 



