AD-A226 975 


















/ 





* 




A * 


V 


1'tiblislnM is SI I 'Xi < DKI. I * I l>\ ili SoIiw.im’ I rip mo mijj Iiuiimtt Iho M I is a 

ledcriillv ' iinlcii n-si m h ,m<! < lopm ml t rnici sponsor' I In ihr I.Vp mnrnt ■ l 

DHpriv i! 'il^t t milt,i i lu ( ,ii ft- Mi l '>n ! unctsitx 


Apprt,»\i‘i! nf pu 1 -lu I'lr.t.sc 


•istril'iili' 'i unlimited 


r 



Summary of SEI Accomplishments: 1Q90 


The Software Capability Evaluation (SCE) Project presented an introductory 
course on using the SCE method in selecting contractors to the Space and Naval Warfare 
System Command (SPAWAR), who will sponsor the pilot use of the SCE method in its 
acquisitions. 

The Capability Maturity Model Workshop was held in March at the SEI. Sixty-two 
people from 40 government and industry organizations attended. 

The Software Metrics Definition Working Group and the Software Metrics Ac¬ 
quisition Working Group met separately in January. Both groups are developing 
documents that specify measures of products, processes, and project characteristics that 
can be widely and consistently used. 

The Software Engineering Process Definition Project completed initial planning. 
This project supports process improvement through the maturation of the methods and 
technology associated with software engineering process definition. 

Members oi die Software Process Modeling Project delivered a model of the F-16 
software change process to Ogden Air Logistics Center. 

The Domain Analysis Project entered a feasibility study phase. Project members are 
developing and testing methods for performing domain analysis to support software reuse. 

Members of the Real-Time Embedded Systems Testbed Project completed the first ver¬ 
sion of the Hartstone benchmark, a set of timing requirements for testing a system’s 
ability to handle real-time applications. 

The SEI established working relationships with four organizations to build prototyping 
and modeling tools for real-time systems using the Durra software, which describes 
distributed applications running on heterogeneous machines. 

Two new courses were offered by Carnegie Mellon as pan of iLs new Master of Soft¬ 
ware Engineering program, a joint effort between the SEI and the CMIJ School of 
Computer Science. 

The seventh Educator Development Workshop was held in January. The 85 partici¬ 
pants addressed educational issues and received SEI curriculum modules and other mate¬ 
rials. 

The Academic Scries of the Video Dissemination Project began its sixth semester of 
production by videotaping two courses: Software Creation and Maintenance, and Soft¬ 
ware Verification and Validation. 

The Distributed Ada Real-Time Kernel (DARK) Project concluded development 
and established baseline version 3.0 of the Kernel software and documentation for 
MC68020 and VAX/VMS. 

Sixteen new Industry affiliates, one new academic affiliate, and thirteen new resi¬ 
dent affiliates joined the SEI this quarter. 

The Computer Emergency Response Team Coordination Center (CERT/CC) 

r.uiDiiMK'ii or. .inline icposimry of computer security information. 



This section provides 
a summary of 
accomplishments from 
January-March 1990 







Table of Contents 


Software Capability Evaluation. 1 Software 

Software Process Assessment.2 Engineering 

Software Process Development.3 Process 

Software Engineering Process Definition. 3 


Software Development Environments.5 Software 

Software Architecture Design Principles.5 Engineering 

Software Process Modeling.6 Methods 

Domain Analysis.7 


Real-Time Embedded Systems Testbed .9 

Real-Time Scheduling in Ada .9 

User Interface.10 

Software for Heterogeneous Machines. 11 


Software 

Systems 


Software Engineering Curriculum 13 Education 

Video Dissemination 14 

Advanced Learning Technologies . 15 


Software Architectures Engineering 
Binding of Ada and SQL 
Study and Analysis for Ada 9X . 


17 Ada & 

,o STARS 
Support 


Technology Applications 
Affiliate Relations 
Empirical Methods . . 


21 

22 

23 


Technology 

Transition 


25 CERT 

Coordination 

Center 


For More 
Information 










































Software Engineering Process 


The Software Engineering Process Program focuses on improving the process of soft¬ 
ware development. Projects within the program are assessing the actual practice of soft¬ 
ware 'Engineering in the defense community, training organizations to gain management 
control over their software development processes, supporting the use of quantitative 
methods and measures as a basis for process improvement, and developing improved 
methods for software process management. 

The Process Program has an advisory board that reviews its work and provides informal 
comments and suggestions to guide its activities. The members of this board are: 

Dr. Stephen Ficnberg / Carnegie Mellon University 
Dr. Robert Balzer/ Information Sciences Institute 
Dr Lee Ostcrwcil / University of California, Irvine 
Dr. William Curtis / MCC 
Mr. Victor Vyssotsky / Digital Equipment Corp. 

Mr. Albert Roberts / Defense Systems Management College 

Because ot their broad background and association with software work in DoD, industry, 
and academia, the hoard members provide informal, stimulating discussions of the pro¬ 
gram's activities and plans. The board typically meets with the Process Program two or 
three times a year. The fourth such meeting was held on March 8-9; participants re¬ 
viewed aspects of all Process projects. 


The Software Capability Evaluation (SCE) Project helps DoD acquisition organizations 
to evaluate the capability of contractors to competently develop and maintain software. 
The project is improving and transitioning an evaluation method for use in software- 
intensive acquisitions. 

In January 1990, project members conducted a panel at the first Armed Forces Commu¬ 
nications and Electronics Association Military /Government Computing Conference and 
Exposition. The panel, tilled “Contractor Software Capabilities Assessment and Evalu¬ 
ation Panel,” featured five speakers who discussed their experiences with the SEI soft¬ 
ware capability assessment method. In addition to the Process Program director and the 
SCE project leader, representatives from IBM, Raytheon, and Naval Air Development 
Center participated. The conference was attended by 200 participants from industry and 
government. 

The project presenter) an introductory course on using the SCE method in selecting con¬ 
tractors to the directors and program managers in Space and Naval Warfare Systems 
Command (SPAWARJ in Crvstal Citv Vireinia. As a re S uI« SPAWAR will sponsor the 
pilot use ol die SCE method in its acquisitions. ► 


Software Capability 
Evaluation 


SEI Quarterly Update 1Q90 1 






software Process 
Assessment 


► 

Project members conducted a workshop on the capability maturity model in March at the 
SEI. The objectives of the workshop were to promote a dialogue on the project’s revi¬ 
sion effort and plans, and to collect recommendations on the software engineering and 
management practices covered in the model. Sixty-two people from 40 government and 
industry organizations attended. In preparation for this workshop, registrants received a 
paper elaborating the precepts underpinning the maturity questionnaire and model, a set 
of tables itemizing the practices needed to achieve the software process capability stated 
in the model, and a report summarizing tnc unresolved change requests and the user 
comments associated with each change request. 

The Questionnaire Advisory Board (QAB) met for the first time on the day preceding 
the workshop. Composed of seven government and industry software professionals, this 
board will independently review and recommend changes to SCE products prior to their 
release. 

The project drafted a product offering, whi'h is a one-page description of the SCE 
method, its use, and training in it. A timeline for introducing the method into an organi¬ 
zation is also included 


The Software Process Assessment Project assists software otgani/ations in launching 
effective process improvement programs, characterizes and reports on the software engi¬ 
neering capabilities of defense contractors, and defines priority needs for software proc 
ess improvement in the defense community. 

Project members acted as observers for self-assessments conducted by six organizations: 
Software Productivity Consortium in Herndon. Virginia: Northrop in Los Angeles. Cali¬ 
fornia; Computer Sciences Corporation in Gaithersburg. Maryland; AIRMICS in 
Tyson’s Corner, Virginia: Aluminum Company of .America (ALCOA! in Warrick, Indi¬ 
ana: and Tinker Air Force Base in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The project frequently 
provides one or two observers experienced in assessments to attend an organization’s 
initial sell-assessment. 

Project members and Technology Transition staff conducted the fifth self-assessment 
training session at the SRI in February. Thirty-two registrants from five affiliate organi¬ 
zations attended. The training prepares software professionals to assess software devel¬ 
opment processes within their organizations. 

Two project members conducted a special self-assessment training session with 
ALCOA. The purpose ol tins special session was to understand the process implications 
of training secondary or site assessment team members. Project members also examined 
the assessment of small projects. 

Two of the four SEl-assisted assessment::,Tinned for fiscal year 1990 were completed 
during this quarter. A final assessment report and a briefing on action recommendations 
were delivered to Medtronic in Minneapolis in January. The on-site phase was com¬ 
pleted for Hughes Aircraft Company/Ground Systems Group in Fullerton, California. 
(During the on-site phase, the assessment team conducts extensive discussions with pro¬ 
ject managers and software practitioners, and briefs the senior executives on the team's 
view of the organization's most pressing software process issues.) A final assessment 
report and a briefing on action recommendations were delivered to Hughes Aircraft 
Company/Ground Systems Group in March. ^ 


2 


SEI Quarterly Update 1090 







► 

Assessment team training was completed for TRW (Systems Integration Division / West 
Coast) in Redondo Beach, California. Jet Propulsion Laboratories (IPL) submitted a 
copy of their action plan for review. 

Project members were invited to give presentations on process management at ihe fol¬ 
lowing organizations: GE Productivity Forum in Pittsburgh, Storagetck in Denver, and 
the Eight Annual National Conference on Ada Technology in Atlanta. 


The Software Process Development Project is advocating the use of measurement in the 
practice of software development and management. Toward that end, it coordinates a 
sieeri.,£ toimndtCc, two working groups and a best-practices activity, all devoted to 
encouraging organizations to use quantitative methods to improve their software process. 

The Software Metrics Definition Working Group and the Software Metrics Acquisition 
Working Group met separately for three days each in January. Both working groups arc 
developing documents that specify measures of products, processes, and project charac¬ 
teristics that can be widely and consistently used. Both groups have scheduled additional 
meetings throughout the year and plan to complete a preliminary draft of their docu¬ 
ments by January 1991. 

The Measurement Steering Committee met for two days in March. It reviewed the 
status, direction, and progress of the measurement working groups and projects. The 
committee endorsed their direction and pace. 

A correspondence group was formed: it will be the source for future openings in me 
working groups and the Measurement Steering Committee. More than 100 persons out¬ 
side the SEI are involved as volunteers in die measurement effort. 

To encourage organizations to adopt measurement, project members are collecting best 
practices and motivations, which will he published in an SEI technical report. To further 
the collection, project members visited IBM Systems Integration Division in Bethesda, 
Maryland: Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland; McDonnell Douglas 
Helicopter Co. in Mesa. Arizona; and TRW in Carson, California. Additional visits arc 
planned. 

Project members made presentations to the AFC'EA (Armed Forces Communications and 
Electronics Association) Computer Conference in Washington, D.C., the Annuai NASA 
Software Management and Assurance Conference in San Diego, and the Strategic De¬ 
fense Initiative Metrics Tools Fair in Colorado Springs. 

The project hosted representatives from the European ESPRIT MF.TKIT (Metrics Edu¬ 
cational Tixilkit) project lor two days. These representatives joined the correspondence 
group. 


Software Process 
Development 


SEI Quarterly Update 1Q90 


3 






■ •••••••••••••a The Software Engineering Process Definition Project supports process improvement 

Software Engineering through the maturation of the methods and technology associated with software engi- 

Process Definition necring process definition. The project is developing the capabilities required to support 

the definition and evolution of software processes within an organization. This project 
began as a task within the Software Process Development Project. 

This project was fully staffed this quarter. Project members met with Standard Systems 
Center (SSC) personnel at Gunter Air Force Base, and reached agreement on the pro¬ 
ject's objectives and approach. More detailed planning is currently underway. 

Candidates for the Process Definition Steering Committee (PDSC) were selected, and 
the first meeting was planned. An initial letter was sent to each candidate to request thei 
participation in the PDSC. The Committee will review and provide guidance to the pro¬ 
ject. The steering committee will be composed of leading software process researchers 
and practitioners from government, industry, and academia. 

Project members began collecting a process definition library'. It will include recently 
published materia! on process, process modeling, process definitions, process represent 
lions, process tailoring and related areas. 


4 


SEI Quarterly Update 1Q90 







Software Engineering Methods 


The primary objective of the Methods Program is to improve the practice of sottwarc 
engineering by improving individual and team productivity through the identification 
and transition to practice of emerging software technology, promoting the appropriate 
use of this technology supports the SEf effort to transform software development from 
an ad-hoc, labor-intensive activity to a technology-supported engineering discipline. 


The Software Development Environments Project is studying the problem of tool con¬ 
figuration management and is tracking the state ot environment architectures, with a 
hvus on configuration management (CM) functionality. 

To address the problem of managing tool configuration, the project analyzed paramet¬ 
erization and configuration mechanisms in commercial systems and investigated the fea¬ 
sibility of a prototype tool (hat supports the configuration management of tools in a dis¬ 
tributed workstation environment. This quarter, project members analyzed a tool version 
management technique in a commercial system, and completed an initial data model for 
the tool configuration modeling prototype. 

As part of an effort to assess advances in CM support and new CM concepts, the project 
has recognized three major usage models in recent commercial CM systems. This quar¬ 
ter the project leader presented this information as part of an all-day tutorial tilled “Soft¬ 
ware Configuration Management: Advances in Software Development Environments” at 
the 12th International Conference ori Software Engineering ((CSE Project members 
also completed experiments and a draft report on the benefits and limitations of one of 
die three usage models as realized in die Sun Network Software Environment (NSE). 

The project leader, who is chairing the 3rd International Software Configuration Man¬ 
agement Workshop to be held in June 1001 in Norway, issued a call for participation. 


To develop a fundamental understanding ol structures for the software architecture level 
of design, this project is describing basic design elements used in die description, analy¬ 
sis, and development of software systems. 

Project members attended and presented at several conferences, including the Human- 
Computer Interaction Consortium and an architecture workshop at Rcll Tabs. 

In January, a project member presented a scheme for describing and classifying archi¬ 
tectural choices in user interlace sottwarc at ihc quarterly meeting of the IEEE Stan¬ 
dards Committee P1201 in New Orleans This committee is working on standards lor 
graphical user interlace sottwarc. ► 


Software Development 
Environments 


Software Architecture 
Design Principles 


SEI Quarterly Update 1090 5 







► 

The Associatio i for Computing Machinery (ACM) published extensive excerpts from a 
workshop run by the project leader. The excerpts appeared in Communications of the 
ACM. 


An interview with the project leader on engineering history and us lessons for software 
was published in the March 1990 issue of I ECU Software. 

The project leader continued to be involved in public service activities, including attend¬ 
ing the January meeting of the Computer Science and Technology Board. 


Software Process 
Modeling 


The Software Process Modeling Project is investigating techniques for modeling the 
software development and maintenance process. 

In February, project members delivered the F-16 as-implemented PDSS process model 
to Ogden Air Logistics Center, and delivered a draft document providing an overview 
of this model. 

As part of the remaining Ogden effort, project members are developing a model of the 
post-deployment software support process detailed in the draft of MIl.-HDRK-.f47, en¬ 
titled “Mission-Critical Computer Resources Software Support”. Progress on this model 
was also reviewed at the Ogden meeting in February. Plans for continuing interactions 
during the remainder of the project were also discussed. 

In January, a special session of the 2 Vd Annual Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences, entitled "Software Engineering Practices: Models and Analysis." was 
organized and chaired by a project member. The introduction to the session, and the set 
of scholarly papers, appear in the conference proceedings. 

Project members gave a briefing on software process modeling work completed for 
NAVAIR. The presentation was for die NAVAIR TECR (Tactical Embedded Computer 
Resources) Executive Advisory Committee, consisting of the chief 1-2 software cxecu- 
tive(s) from each of S Navy labs supporting NAVAIR weapon systems (for example. 
Naval Air Development Center [NADC'I, Naval Weapons Center (NWC|, Pacific Mis¬ 
sile Test Center (PMTC), etc.). 

A technical meeting was held with the Office of Naval Technology, during which a 
briefing was given on software process modeling. 

The project hosted a technical interchange meeting with personnel from NADC. The 
NADC group is embarking on a process analysis and improvement effort for certain 
staff functions at NAVAIR in Washington. 

The SF.I was represented by a project member at the bimonthly meeting of the Joint 
Logistics Commanders (JLC) post deployment software support (PDSS) Subgroup. This 
is a group chartered by the JLC to address the special needs and concerns of software 
support. 


6 


SEI Quarterly Update tQ90 






Domain Analysis 


The Domain Analysis Project is developing and testing methods for performing domain 
analysis to support software reuse. The primary objective ot the project is to define a 
process and set of products to support the systematic discovery and exploitation of com¬ 
monality across related software systems. 

The project established three phases for domain analysis: scoping, which defines a do¬ 
main for analysis; domain modeling, which provides a description ol the problems 
within the domain; and architectural modeling, which creates the software architecturc(x) 
that implements a solution to the problems in the domain. 

During this quarter, the project entered a feasibility study phase. Project members are 
defining methods and applying them to a small test domain. 

Project members made several presentations at external events, including: “Designing 
for Reuse: Is Ada Class-Conscious .’'' at the Realities of Reuse Workshop sponsored by 
Syracuse University; "Software Reuse Technology,” a tutorial at the F.ighth Annual Na¬ 
tional Conference on Ada Technology; and a presentation at the First International 
Workshop on Advanced Computing in Seoul. Korea 


SEI Quarterly Update 1090 7 







8 


SEI Quarterly Update 1090 





Software Systems 


The goal of the Systems Program is to improve the development of real-time distributed 
systems by integrating software engineering with systems engineering and reducing the 
risk of new technology. 


The Real-Time Embedded Systems Testbed (REST) Project is collecting, classifying, 
generating, and disseminating information about software development for real-time em¬ 
bedded systems. 

Project members completed the first version of the Hartstone benchmark, a set of timing 
requirements for testing a system’s ability to handle hard real-time applications. The 
accompanying Hart stow l 'ser's Guide, Version / OfCMU/SEI-dOT'G-l) describes the 
structure and behavior of an Ada implementation of one category of Hartstone require¬ 
ments, the peruxlic harmonic iPfli test series. The Ada implementation of die PH test 
series is aimed primarily at real-time embedded processors, where the only executing 
code is the benchmark and the Ada runtime system. The objective of the PH scries is to 
provide a set ot tasks that are periodic and harmonic, these being common in real-time 
applications. Plans have been developed for distributing the Hartstone program and re¬ 
ceiving feedback from users. 

si I testing ol the IBM Real lime Communication Network (RTON) has uncovered 
low level timing anomalies internal to the RTCN. The test programs were delivered to 
IBM in Manassas, where they are currently investigating the problem. The SE1 and IBM 
are botli working on developing suitable workarounds to this problem. 

Several disUihuted processing activities are currently underway. First, project members 
are writing a concept paper on real time distributed system issues with an emphasis on 
schedulabilitv Second, the project is considering several real-time distributed demon¬ 
stration sy stems tor incorporation into its testbed. These systems include an enhanced 
version ol the avionics soltware system currently in use by the SE1 Software for Hetero¬ 
geneous Machines Project, as well as the real-time scenarios described in the paper 
"Real-Time System Scenarios,” delivered by Pal Watson (1RM, Manassas) to the. Office 
id Naval Research Third, project members are defining real-time benchmark programs 
tor testing the throughput, predictability, and schedulability of distributed networks. 

I he protect successfully tested a new connection strategy for its testbed—a strategy dial 
allows greater connectivity between workstations, hosts, and target machines. 


The Real Time Scheduling in Ada Project is demonstrating how to design and imple¬ 
ment real-time systems using analytic scheduling algorithms. 

Projec t members made a presentation to the PAVE PACE visitors from Wright 
Patterson Air home Base on the prospects for using rate monotonic theory in distributed 
applications. Ibe project is attempting to establish a formal relationship with the PAVE 
PACE Program as a vehicle for extending and transitioning real-time scheduling in Ada 
technology to distributed systems. ^ 


Real-Time Embedded 
Systems Testbed 


Real-Time Scheduling 
in Ada 


SEI Quarterly Update 1G90 9 








► 

The project completed an analysis of problems that might be encountered in standardiz¬ 
ing commercial backplanes, local area networks, and operating systems for use on 
real-time Navy systems. An important recommendation was to suggest that work on 
operating system standardization pay more attention to performance issues, namely, by 
specifying performance standards to help ensure that conforming implementations 
provide predictable and acceptable worst-case performance when used for real-time 
applications. 

NASA Space Station is considering making a commitment to using rate monotonic 
scheduling theory as the default approach for real-time work. Project members addressed 
the concerns of IBM. McDonnell Douglas, and NASA representatives about the usks of 
adopting rate monotonic theory. 

Work began on transitioning real-time scheduling in Ada technology to the Navy's 
BSY-2 Program. In March, the project held a two-dav workshop with BSY-2 engineers 
to explore the applicability of rate monotonic theory to BSY-2. This workshop was the 
tirsi of a series of planned technical interactions. 

A draft of the TutureRus-t- handbook, which discusses how to make effective use of the 
F-'utureBus+ design, was completed and sent to review. 

An article on rate monotonic scheduling and its application to Ada was accepted for 
publication by Computer Magazine. The article w ill appear in the April WO issue. 


User Interface 


The I'ser Interface Project in developing Serpent, a user interface management system. 
Serpent separates the concerns ol the user interface from those of the application, which 
allows integration ol mput/ouiput technologies without modifying the functional pot lion 
of the application. 

Four Open Software Foundation Motif widgets—the bulletin board, text, label, and push 
button were integrated into Serpent. Development also continued on an interactive edi¬ 
tor that will allow the visual specification of user interfaces. 

Three project members presented a Serpent tutorial at die Third X Window Technical 
Conference in Boston. There were more than 100 attendees, many of whom arc inter¬ 
ested in Serpent. The project leader chaired a birds-of-a-feather session on lllMSs at¬ 
tended by more than 70 people. 

A Serpent presentation was made by a former resident affiliate to die USENIX Winter 
Conference. Project members also gave Serpent presentations at ESL. TRW. Computer 
Science Coiporation, and a NASA workshop on die workstation of the future. 

There tire currently more than 75 users of Serpent divided among research, academic, 
and industrial sites. 


10 


SEI Quarterly Update 1Q90 





The Software for Heterogeneous Machines Project is developing tools and a methodol¬ 
ogy for building distributed, large-grained, concurrent applications running on heteroge¬ 
neous machine networks. The project has developed Durra, a language for describing 
distributed applications as a set of task descriptions and type declarations that prescribe 
a way to manage the resources of the network. 

Project members completed the initial port of the Durra runtime to the Nectar architec¬ 
ture developed by the CMU School of Computer Science and have successfully run a 
simple Durra application on one Nectar host Work will continue to distribute the appli¬ 
cation over multiple Nectar hosts and to allow for dynamic reconfiguration. 

Project members redesigned the C version of the Durra interface in the process of mak¬ 
ing it conform to the Ada version. Durra applications tasks can be written in C and Acta. 

Project members submitted an article on developing fault-tolerant distributed systems to 
the 1989 Ski {'et hnical Review. The article describes the fault-tolerant features of Durra. 

The project leader presented a paper on the Durra language at the 3rd IEEE Computer 
Society International Conference on Computer Languages in New Orleans. This biennial 
conference is organized by the IEEE Computer Society Technical Committee on Com¬ 
puter Languages. The project leader was appointed General Chairman for the 1992 con¬ 
ference. 

The project is working with several technology transition partners to build prototyping 
and modeling t<x>ls for real-time systems using Durra: Institute for Simulation and 
Training (Lniversitv of Central Florida). MITRE Corporation, Hughes Aircraft Corpora¬ 
tion, and GTE. 

The project leader and a member of the Technology Applications group visited NASA 
Langley, Naval Research Laboratory, University of Maryland, and NASA Goddard to 
gather information for a survey of software engineering technology for distributed avion¬ 
ics applications. 


Inertial S avis’at ion System Simulator Program: lop-Level Design 
l C M L/SEI - 89-T'R - 3 8) 


Hartstone Benchmark Vsers Guide. Version 1.(1 
(CML/SF'-OtU : G-l i 

F-'or information on how to order reports, see page 27. 


Software for 

Heterogeneous 

Machines 


00000000009200 

Software Systems 
Program Reports 

January-March 1990 


SEI Quarterly Update 1Q90 11 






12 SEI Quarterly Update 1Q90 





Education 


The primary objective of the SEI Education Program is to increase the number of highly 
qualified software engineers by rapidly improving software engineering education 
throughout the education communities of academia, government, and industry. To ac¬ 
complish this, the projects of die Education Program focus on accelerating the develop¬ 
ment of software engineering programs in academia and on enhancing opportunities for 
the continuing education of practitioners. 

The University of Arizona has become an academic affiliate. The academic affiliates are 
educational institutions who have contractually joined the SEI in cooperative efforts of 
mutual interest. These efforts include work in education, training, research, development, 
or technology transition. 

Two new courses were offered by Carnegie Mellon as part of its new Master of Soft¬ 
ware Engineering (MSE) program, a joint effort between the SE! and the CMU School 
of Computer Science. The Software Development Seminar features a scries of lectures 
by software professionals. This course encourages active participation of the students 
and lecturers. The Software Development Studio consists of a team effort by the stu¬ 
dents to complete all phases of a realistic software development project. Four students 
are enrolled in each of these courses. 


The Software Engineering Curriculum Project is developing model curricula, promoting 
the creation of both graduate and undergraduate software engineering programs in the 
academic community, and increasing the amount of software engineering content in both 
graduate and undergraduate computer science programs. The project develops curricu¬ 
lum modules, classroom support materials, and other educational materials to promote 
the teaching of software engineering. It holds a semi-annual Educator Development 
Workshop (formerly called Faculty Development Workshop) and an annual Conference 
on Software Engineering Education as two of the mechanisms for disseminating its work 
to the education community. 

The Seventh SEI Educator Development Workshop (EDW) was held in January 1990. 
The 85 attendees included representatives from more than 50 colleges and universities, 
and 7 corporations. Participants attended a half-day tutorial on software reliability meas¬ 
ures as well as formal presentations and small-group discussion sessions. They also 
received educational materials and curriculum modules on topics such as software speci¬ 
fication and requirements, design methods for real-time systems, teaching software engi¬ 
neering ethics, and teaching writing to software engineerings. (Sec the document list on 
page 15 for new releases.) 

A visiting scientist from the University of Ulster, Northern Ireland, has begun a six- 
month sabbatical at the SEI, lie is currently working on the development of a curriculum 
module on concurrent programming, which will be available in April. ► 


Software Engineering 
Curriculum 


Sti Cjea'^rty Update 1Q90 13 





► 

The 1990 SE1 Report on Undergraduate Software Engineering Education (CMU/ 
SEI-90-TR-3) was released in March. The report discusses fundamental issues of under¬ 
graduate software engineering education and provides information about topics such as 
course content and accreditation. 

The project leader gave a talk titled “The Future of Software Engineering Education” as 
part of a colloquium scries sponsored by the computer science department at the Univer¬ 
sity of Iowa. The talk was telecast to Rockwell in Cedar Rapids. 

The project leader also presented a tutorial on teaching a software engineering project 
course at the ACM SIGSCE Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education. 


Video Dissemination 


The Video Dissemination Project provides courses on modem software engineering 
methods. The project has three scries of videotaped courses: the Academic Series, which 
develops graduate courses that arc offered by universities for academic credit; the Con¬ 
tinuing Education Series, which offers noncredit courses to software practitioners in gov¬ 
ernment and industry; and the Technology Series, which provides stand-alone presenta¬ 
tions that promote awareness of emerging issues and leading-edge technologies. 

The Academic Scries began its sixth semester of production by videotaping two courses: 
Software Creation and Maintenance, and Software Verification and Validation (version 
2). Presentation of these courses began at Carnegie Mellon University in January. The 
videotaped versions will be available to participating schools for the fall 1990 semester. 

The videotaped version of Software Design is offered this term at McGill University, 
Eastern Michigan University, and University of Houston, Clear Lake. Software Verifica¬ 
tion and Validation is ottered at Mississippi State University, East Tennessee State 
University, and the University of Minnesota, Duluth. Software Project Management is 
offered at Carnegie Mellon University, Florida Atlantic University (six sites), Florida 
Institute of Technology, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology, The Wichita Slate 
University, Eastern Michigan University, and Temple University. Tutors for these 
courses attended a one-day orientation session at the SEI. 

In the Continuing Education Series, the third offering of Software Project Management 
for Tutors course was completed this quarter. Eight individuals, representing the Na¬ 
tional Security Agency, Martin Marietta, and McDonnell Douglas completed the course 
and received 5.4 continuing education units. They are now qualified to serve as learning 
facilitators-or “tutors”-for the course at their respective organizations. The tutors re¬ 
ceived guidance in tailoring the course to meet the educational requirements of their or¬ 
ganizations. 

Six instructors from the Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT) and one representative 
each from General Dynamics and the University of Scranton are spending six months at 
the SEI participating in a Course Development Workshop. The workshop participants 
arc working with SEI staff members to define the content of and develop materials for 
AFIT software engineering courses. The five graduate-level continuing education 
courses resulting from this workshop will be presented at AFIT by its own instructors. 


14 


SEI Quarterly Update 1Q90 





The Advanced J earning Technologies (ALT) Project is using hardware and software 
technologies to teach software code inspections. Interactive, technology-intensive train 
ing can be distributed economically to a broad audience and can provide an effective 
learning experience. 

The ALT project leader demonstrated ALT work as part of a panel at the Fifth Interna¬ 
tional CD-ROM Conference anti Exposition sponsored by Microsoft in February. Also 
on the panel were representatives from Apple, Ashton-Tale, and Mclamcdia, a DoD CD- 
ROM/interactive video producer. 

The first CD-ROM check disk was created. Project members arc currently integrating 
and testing 'he data on this disk with existing code. A second check disk will be made, 
based on the results of these tests. Parse tables were integrated into the talk interface. 
These pars’ tables interpret what the student of the code inspections course says and 
allows the student to take an active role in an inspection simulation. 

“Intelligent Interactive Video Simulation of a Code Inspection,” by the project leader, 
has been translate ! into Japanese and published in the journal Nikkei Artificial! nielli- 
item e. The paper originally appeared in the July 1989 issue of Communications of the 
ACM. 

T he project leader was interviewed lor an ACM article and appeared in an ACM Video 
Presentation titled “Interactive Digital Video.” The SE1 Software Engineering V ideo 
Network provided editing facilities and personnel. The video was distributed by ACM 
Press in conjunction with a special edition ol the Communications of the ACM The pro¬ 
gram teatured interviews with prominent figures in digital video/multimediadevelop¬ 
ment ami research. 


19RO SCI Report on l 'ndergradmte Software Engineering Education 
(CM17SFI-90.tr V) 

Software Specifications: A Framework 
(SF.l-CM-11.2.0) 

Software Requirements 
(SEI-CM-19.1.1) 

Software Design Methods for Real-1 ime Systems 
(SI.iI-CM-22-l.O) 

For information on how to order modules and reports, see page 27. 


0000000^00 9 0 0 0 

Education Program 
Reports 

January-March 1990 


Advanced Learning 
Technologies 


SEI Quarterly Update 1Q90 15 






16 


SEI Quarterly Update 1090 









Ada & STARS Support 


i- ware v iiL'ii'iViMiL .ippie.iGu- and para 


1 M S. [a.i;c V. ' e .lure- !.:ii rii-e • v\Fi Project provides technical guidance to 
!■■■ ’ '■ j oil ices in apply mg iiim .i: >_■. model-ha veil soli ware engineering soln- 

the problems liiai chura.ion/c .11 application tl miain. The project is working 
a 11 h the Granite .Sentrv Program Otluc on part of the replacement for the NORAD sys¬ 
tem in Cheyenne Mountain, ami with the Anns WWMCCS Information System (AWIS) 
i’rogi.im Ollice. The project is also working with the Advanced Millimeter-Wave Seeker 
AMMWSi Program Oft ice to change the Maverick air-to-ground missile seeker from 
ml fared sensing to millimeter wave radar sensing, with Ada as lhe implementation lan¬ 
guage. In each e'tort. project members are taking an active mie in the design and devel¬ 
opment ot the sy stem. 


Software Architectures 
Engineering 


Protect members tmali/ed A Model Solution for (\'t 7 randaiion and l 'alidation (CMC/ 
SH-S‘> TR -1 2>. a document on the Message Translation and Validation (MTV) model. 
Much is available lor public release. The document was sent to Granite Sentry represen¬ 
tatives and more than 50 other interested contractors and government organizations. A 
1 one analysis was performed on the M i V code to reduce the M l V typecaster obteet- 
, o.‘. siz.- on the Granite Sentry I'i.uvc I! workstations. The results were transmitted to 
( b.|.:|iS k . 


: ’i' me. t r'-.einbers .d o >.oiL\ ted and ev.im.i. d I'lnisC il metric' tnlormalion to gam insight 
me (i-i .!!.. images and disadvantages ot the modeling approach to software' develop- 
>1. m In-, la-iuih witii Gramte S> ntrv i-wealcd that the information that has been col 
i i' too high level. I'liturv dis.uvMonv will decide which metrics arc needed and can 
r ; asoa.il'K he l i illectcd. 

i’roiccl members attended the Phase I! test-readiness review to assess how Phase II is 
progressing. Project memlxrs also attended the Architecture Working Group meeting to 
provide input on modeling and to address issues and concerns regarding new message 
sets for future phases ol Granite Sentrv Finally, project members began planning for 
potential participation on Granite Sentrv in the future. 

Project members supported the S TARS AMMWS Shadow Project by reviewing the Her¬ 
cules Project final report and helping Hercules prepare a presentation for the February 
AdaJUG. W'ork has begun on the final lessons-learned report. ► 


SEI Quarterly Update 1Q90 17 






► 

Project members began working with the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 
(DARPA) to help organize and possibly participate in a new program, Domain Specific 
Architectures (DSA). DARPA has approved the program, and funding issues are being 
addressed. The first task will be to organize an exploratory workshop to determine the 
goals and objectives of the DSA Program. 

At the request of the Air Force Electronic Combat Office (AFECO) at Wright- 
Pattcrson AFB, project members organized and conducted a workshop for Electronic 
Combat Office system users and designers to assess the limitations of current environ¬ 
ments and military hardware platforms. As a result of the workshop, AFECO requested 
that the SAE Project continue working with them on an 18-month experimental model¬ 
ing effort, the Electronic Combat Digital Evaluation System. Project members are writ¬ 
ing a direct support agreement for that effort. 

The project continued work on developing model solutions to recurring problems for 
the AWIS Program. The MTV software developed for the Granite Sentry Program was 
modified to meet the requirements of the AWIS Program. A model solution for a ge¬ 
neric report generator was also developed. 

Project members analyzed design documents and Ada code from Release 1 of the mo¬ 
bilization and deployment segment, and from Release 2 of the transportation segment 
to identity potential models for reuse on AWIS. 

Project members worked with two other SE1 projects-thc User Interface Project and the 
Binding of Ada and SQL Projcct-to begin development of model solutions for a man- 
machine interface and for an application-database interface. 


Binding of Ada 
and SQL 


The Binding of Ada and SQL Project, initiated at the request of the Ada Joint Program 
Office (AJPO), has investigated the problem of binding the Ada programming language 
with the Structured Query Language (SQL) database language. The solution to this prob¬ 
lem was the specification of the SQL Ada Module Extensions (SAME), an interface that 
permits an application program written in Ada to access and manipulate data controlled 
by a database management system (DBMS) using SQL. 

The SAME-ba.ign Committee (SAME-DC), a group of experts from government, in¬ 
dustry, and academia, met in February in Irvine, California, and completed the descrip¬ 
tion of the language for describing SAME application interfaces. This language is now 
known as the SQL Ada Module Description Language (SAMcDL). An updated version 
of the SAMeDL reference manual is scheduled to be produced during the second quarter 
of 1990. The June meeting of the SAME-DC will be held in conjunction with the June 
meeting of the International Standards Organization Working Group on Ada (ISO/ 
WG9). The current plan is to present the updated manual to the Ada/SQL subgroup of 
WG9. 

Recently, the Army Tactical Command and Control System (ATCCS), a S400-million, 
three-year project, has committed to using the SAME and the SAMeDL. The organiza¬ 
tion developing SIDPERS-3, the new Army personnel system, has used the manual im¬ 
plementation of the SAME (as described in CMU/SE1-89-TR-16). Representatives from 
both ATCCS and SIDPERS-3 have joined the SAME-DC. 


18 


SEI Quarterly Update 1090 






The Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO) has decided that a revision to the Ada language 
standard is required to maintain it as a standard (ANSI/MIL-STD-1815A). This revision 
process is commonly referred to as Ada 9X. The purpose of this project, begun in Febru¬ 
ary 1989, is to identify and evaluate potential areas for revising the Ada standard based 
on the experiences of software developers and compiler implementors. This project is 
providing an organizational framework to help guide revision activities. 

Project staff advised the Ada 9X Project Office on proposals submitted for the mapping/ 
revision effort. Reports on shared variables and fixed-point types were prepared and de¬ 
livered to the project office. Work proceeded on the preparation of additional reports on 
reuse, inpul/output, optimization issues, mathematical processing, real-time, and distrib¬ 
uted systems, and on review of draft revision requirements submitted by the require¬ 
ments team. 

The project was represented at the third Distinguished Reviewer meeting at the end of 
March. Distinguished Reviewers are a group of experts appointed by the Ada 9X Project 
Office, and part of the work under the Ada 9X direct support agreement is to attend their 
meetings. 


,4 Model Solution for CM 'translation and Validation 
iCMl'/SF.I-K'l-TR-lJi 

For information on how to order reports, see page 2 7. 


Study and Analysis 
for Ada 9X 


Ada & STARS Support 
Reports 

January-March 1990 


SEI Quarterly Update 1Q90 19 








20 SEI Quarterly Update 1Q90 





Technology Transition 


The Technology Transition Program is the focal point lor SEi transition efforts. The 
program works with other SEI programs to match problems anil solutions in the DoD 
software community. 


The Technology Applications Function provides a link between DoD mission-critical 
application domains and ongoing SEI activities in technology evaluation, development, 
and transition. The goal ot iluwe activities is to assist the efforts of organizations to 
adopt and institutionalize new technology through matching the technology to an appro¬ 
priate context, fostering a climate ot acceptance for the technology, and tailoring the 
technology for pilot installations. Transition sites are principally chosen for their ability 
to influence the lunher adoption ol die technology throughout a larger community. 

In this quarter. Technology Applications stall continued to assist simulator program of- 
t ice's that are addressing the problems of acquiring and developing simulator systems by 
using structural model technology. Within the flight simulator domain, the structural 
model concept continues to be used on several programs, including the Air Force C-17 
transport program and the Navy SHOD helicopter program. The use of structural models 
is now pari oi the NASA space station activity and is being considered for wide use hv 
NASA. 

Die role i>| structural models expanded into the electronic combat simulation domain 
during this quarter. The SI 1 is planning to work with the Air Force Electronic Combat 
(> 1 ! i,c to develop an electionn. combat simulator framework. This framework will use 
the structural unxlel approach to identify key design problems and develop solution 
models lor these problems 

As a long-term initiative to institutionalize the use ot structural models, the SEI is work- 
ing with the National Sccuruy Industrial Association (NSlAt Working Group lor Simu¬ 
lators and l SAF Aeronautical Systems Dix ision.-T'raining Systems (ASD/YWi on mak¬ 
ing acquisition practices consistent with the structural model approach, 

A member o| the Technology Applications stall hosted the second meeting ol the Allied 
Standard Avionics Architecture Council (ASAAC ) Software Task Group on February 
2X-March 2 at the SEI. The group, consisting of government delegations Irom West Ger¬ 
many, I 'mted Kingdom, France, and the United Suites, met to continue work on the 
ASAAC plan for the software roadmap program. This plan is a joint effort by the lour 
governments to develop common avionics architectures and software development life 
cycles, methods, and environments among the industries in these countries. 

Technology Applications supported the Air Force Air Defense Initiative Program Office 
in conducting a review of the final concept definition proposals submitted by five 
participating contractors. Technology Applications staff reviewed the co" - ?nt of the pro¬ 
posals, identified the software engineering issues, and noted the issues ,T i were not 
addressed by the proposals. T he concept definition study was aimed at selling the 
boundaries of the problem and csuiblishing the confidence to proceed to the next step for 
the project, budding a demonstration radar. Technology Applications staff also partici¬ 
pated in the review of study results and contractors’ final study briefings. ► 


Technology 

Applications 


SEI Quarterly Update 1Q90 21 





► 

The Distributed Ada Real-Time Kernel (DARK) Project concluded development and es 
tahlished baseline version 3.0 of the Kernel software and documentation, available for 
two targets: MC68020 and VAX/VMS. The Kernel software, documentation, and other 
DARK-related information are now available for anonymous ftp to the public, and are 
also available from the $EI in tape form; 30 copies of version 3.0 have been sent out to 
new and existing DARK users in government, industry, and academia. The DARK Tran¬ 
sition Project will host a workshop on July 10-12 to discuss irchitccturc for Real-Time 
Systems." The primary goal of this workshop is to bring together users of rc ' time, em¬ 
bedded systems to share solutions to common problems, to identify future directions, and 
to discuss what can be done to improve the state of the practice. 


Affiliate Relations 


The Aff iliate Relations Function e ••‘hlishcs and maintains SET relationships with indus¬ 
try and government organizations. Aililiate Relations also negotiates and places, with 
the cooperation of the SFI Joint Program Office, government and industry resident affili¬ 
ates at the SFI. The SFI Education Program manage'' academic affiliates and visiting 
scientists from academia. 

Sixteen new industry affiliates signed information exchange agreements during this quar¬ 
ter: All Systems Inc.: American Institute for Research; Rail Systems. Engineering Div i¬ 
sion; Boeing Commercial Airplane Group; F.-Svstems, F.C'I Division; F.yring Inc.: 

1 ogicon Inc.; Mantech Services Corporation; The Matrix Group; Metalw orking Technol¬ 
ogy Inc.. Objective Interface Systems Inc.; Plessey Electronic Systems Corporation; 
Schlumherger Laboratory for Computer Science: Software Process Innovations; 

Some raft Inc.: and Systems Control Technology Inc. 

Thirteen new resident affiliates from the follow ing organizations joined the SP.I this 
quarter; seven Iron) the Air Force Institute of Technology and one each from Computer 
Sciences Corporation; Electronics Systems Division, 1 'niteu .tales Air Forc; General 
Dynamic': Gunter Air Force Base; National Security Agency: and Wright-Patterson Air 
Force Base. Four resident affiliates concluded their work .it die SEI during this quarter. 
As of March 31, I WO. twenty resident affiliates were working at the SEP six from in¬ 
dustry anil fourteen from the services and government agencies. 

Members ol Aililiate Relations conducted SEI Visitors Day on February 15. This event 
is held quarterly to accommodate the increasing requests for visits to the SEt. Tweniv 
representatives from nine companies anil two government organizations attended. The 
next two Visitors Days are scheduled for May 17, 1W0 and August 23, 1W0. Visitors 
must contact Affiliate Relations to register for Visitors Day: walk-ins are not accepted. 

In this quarter, Aililiate Relations began planning for the I WO SEI Affiliates Sympo¬ 
sium, to be held SeptemKi 11-15, 1 WO, in Pittsbi. gh. The symposium w ill highlight 
both the state of software engineering technology and the slate of software engineering 
practice. 


22 


SEI Quarterly Update 1Q90 







The Empirical Methods Function supports transition management of SEI technology 
projects by providing market research methods and materials, conducting surveys, and 
evaluating events or validating products of SEI projects. 

Empirical Methods staff reported the results of the first phase of a two-phased study of 
t'.S. software capacity to Air Force Systems Command (AFSC). The SEI is collaborat¬ 
ing with ESI) and MITRE in assessing the nation’s capacity to produce software for the 
IVI). In the first phase of the study, 106 industry and Air Force executives were asked 
to rate the relative importance of lactors that contribute to failure to meet schedules and 
budgets lor software development contracts. The executives listed these factors as the 
ten most serious: inadequate requirements specification, changes in requirements, short- 
aees ot s\ stems engineers, shortages of software managers, shortages of qualified project 
in. matters, shortages o! oft ware engineers, fixed-price contracts, inadequate communica¬ 
tion tor swciiis integration, insulin ient experience as a team, and shortages of applica¬ 
tion domain exports. Empirical Methods staff also reported on readily available data 
about demand tor Ada sottware, growth in demand for post-deployment software sup- 
port PPVS and labor supply lor software and systems development. 

Eaipiik.i! MethiMs stall conducted a telephone survey concerning the economics of Ada 
,bop':on. ' hose stirveved included senior technical and management staff of 50 compa¬ 
nies a, eking in 14 application areas. A report that summarizes the results of the survey 
•a ill c •mplcte , uirent SEI elforts io study and document MCCR industry decisions to 
adopt or net adopt Ada for use in sjvcilic application domains. The report is scheduled 
;. 'v adaf le In the summer el |odn 


Empirical Methods 


SEI Quarterly Update 1090 


23 






24 SEI Quarterly Update 1090 




CERT Coordination Center 


The Computer Emergency Response Team Coordination Center (CERT/CC) supple¬ 
ments existing mechanisms by which informally organized experts deal with and prevent 
computer emergencies. The CERT/CC at the SEI supports two different communities: 
Internet users and developers of technology that is available on the network, such as 
Unix and networking software. The CERT/CC provides a dependable 24-hour point of 
contact for security issues and allows rapid communication during emergencies. It also 
raises constituents’ awareness of security issues and assists individual organizations in 
improving the security of their systems. Finally, the CERT/CC maintains a highly secure 
repository of information for team members and cultivates close ties with researchers in 
the area of trusted systems to improve the security of existing systems. 

Since its inception in 1988, the CERT/CC has responded to a continuous stream of re¬ 
ported security incidents. These include reports of intrusions, worms, and viruses as well 
as reports of vulnerabilities and suggested fixes for problems. In handling these prob¬ 
lems, the CERT/CC issues advisories to the Internet community to warn them of prob¬ 
lems and inform them of preventive techniques. In cases where vulnerabilities exist, the 
CERT/CC works w ith software vendors and the technical community in analyzing and 
resolving the problems. 


During the l'iisi quarter of 1990, the CERT/CC worked w ith the Internet Engineering 
Task Force (IETF) to initiate a separate IETF security working area. A working group 
dealing with Internet security policy was initiated. This working group will produce rec¬ 
ommendations for network security policy and wall present those recommendations to 
the Internet Activities Board. 

CERT project members organized a second IETF working group focused on producing a 
security handbook for use by Internet-connected site and system administrators. The 
handbixik wall provide guidance on policy, administrative, and technical issues to sup¬ 
port administrators’ efforts to improve the security of their systems. 

The CERT project members also established an online repository of computer security 
information. This repository includes listings of all CERT advisories and Federal Infor¬ 
mation Processing Standards Publications from the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology. More than 300 requests for information have already been processed. 

The CERT/CC produced a draft charter and called a membership meeting of the CERT 
system, a federation of organizations working together to improve the security of their 
systems. Formalizing the relationship among the organizations will allow closer coopera¬ 
tion of group members and will also provide a mechanism for expanding group member¬ 
ship. ► 


SEI Quarterly Update 1090 25 







► 

CERT projcci members completed planning for and recently announced the Second In¬ 
vitational Workshop on Computer Security Incident Response, scheduled for June. This 
workshop will focus on new ideas and models in the area of incident handling as well as 
lessons learned. The workshop will focus on three broad sets of issues: managerial issues, 
threats and vulnerabilities, and communication issues. More than 40 speakers, each active 
in responding to and preventing computer security incidents, will present their work and 
will interact with session attendees. 


26 SEI Quarterly Update 1Q90 






For More Information 


To order an SEI publication, send a written request accompanied by a preaddressed 
mailing label to: 

Software Engineering Institute 
ATTN: Publications Requests 
Cvi*iiCL,ie Er , ’*crs:Ly 

Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890 


To be added to the Bridge mailing list, write to: 

Software Engineering Institute 
ATTN: Bridge Mailing List 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3X90 


For information on opportunities for affiliation, contact: 

Software Engineering Institute 
ATTN: Mark Coticehia 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890 
(412) 268-6138 
I nternet: mec@ sei.cmu.edu 


For further information about the SEE contact: 

Information Center 
Software Engineering Institute 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890 
(412) 268-5800 


How to Order 
SEI Publications 


How to Get the 
SEI Magazine 


How to Become 
an SEI Affiliate 


How to Get 

Additional Information 


SEI Quarterly Update 1090 27 












SEI Quarterly Update 1090 














The SKI is ;i federally funded research and 
development center sponsored by the 
Department of Defense under contract to 
(’arm-pbo Mellon 1 niversity. 




















