

N89- 1628T /_?/? 


ia Adm SrsuramaLPS Support Environment 

A1 Tyrrill 
A. David Chan 

North Amerioan Aircraft Operations 
Rockwell International 
Lakewood, California 


ABSTRACT 

This paper describes the toolset of an Ada Programming 
Support Environment (APSE) being developed at North American 
Aircraft Operations (NAAO) of Rockwell International. The 
APSE is resident on three different hosts and must support 
development for the hosts and for embedded targets. Tools 
and developed software must be freely portable between the 
hosts. 

The toolset includes the usual editors, compilers, linkers, 
debuggers, configuration managers and documentation tools. 
Generally, these are being supplied by the host computer 
vendors. Other tools, for example, pretty printer, cross 
referencer, compilation order tool and management tools have 
been obtained frcm publio-domain sources, are implemented in 
Ada and are being ported to our hosts. 

Several tools being implemented in-house are of interest, 
these include an Ada Design Language processor based on 
compilable Ada. A Standalone Test Environment Generator 
facilitates test tool construction and partially automates 
unit level testing. A Code Audi tor/ Static Analyser permits 
Ada programs to be evaluated against measures of quality. 
An Ada Comment Box Generator partially automates generation 
of header comment boxes. 


1 INTRODUCTION 

Rockwell International North American Aircraft Operations (NAAO) is 
constructing a facility for the development of Ada software. The facility will 
support an avionics integration laboratory where both simulation and embedded 
avionics software are to be developed. Ada software development will occur on 
three different hosts. 

1. A supermini widely used in the aerospace and scientific communities. 

2. Another supermini noted for high "number crunching" horsepower. This 
processor model will support the simulations and simulation development. 


3. A processor designed specifically for Ada software development, on which 
all system software has been implemented in Ada. 

Eaoh of the development hosts will interface to a user maintenance console that 
supports several of the embedded avionics processors. The maintenance console 
oan pass data between the target processor memories and the hosts and control 
execution of the targets. 

The avionics processors are connected to each other, various actual aircraft 
hardware and the simulation host by means of several hi#i speed data busses. 
Software in the avionics processors can be tested with actual hardware online 
or with hardware simulated by models in the simulation host. 

The hosts are to be networked with an Ethernet line so that software, 
associated products and development tools can be easily transported. 

Rockwell is constructing an Ada Programming Support Environment (APSE) for the 
development facility. The APSE consists of a set of tools whose objective is 
to support the production of a well-organized, structured and maintainable 
software product, in a cost effective manner. The APSE itself must be 
constructed in a cost effective manner. 

The cost requirement on the APSE dictates that available tools be used as much 
as possible. This reduces the potential level of tool integration, as tools 
implemented in isolation frcm each other generally will not share common 
interfaces. The interface that is shared by most of the tools is the Ada 
language, however, and its rigid standardization makes assembly of a toolset 
from disparate sources feasible. 

2 APSE COMPONENTS 

This section summarizes the components of the NAAO APSE and indicates the 
sources frcm which the tools will be obtained. Section 3.0, Locally Developed 
APSE Components, describes in more detail some of the components that are to be 
implemented at NAAO. 

2.1 Development Tools 

These tools support the design and coding phases of the software development 
process. They are an Ada Design Language, text and program editors, compilers 
and assemblers, a library of primitives and common packages, and link editors. 

2.1.1 M a Design Language 

The objective of the NAAO Ada Design Language (DL) is to provide a means of 
expression for both control flow and data structure and relationships. The Ada 
language itself provides an excellent means for expressing data structure, but 
some other means of describing control flow is necessary prior to actually 
committing a design to Ada code. 


B2.2-2 



Accordingly, the Ada DL uses compilable Ada to represent data structure and a 
traditional Program Design Language (PDL) to represent control flow. The PDL 
statements are embedded as oomments within the Ada specifications so that the 
entire Ada DL description is compilable* Several tools are available to 
support construction of Ada DL designs* These include a "TBD" package, the Ada 
DL preprocessor, the processor for the traditional PDL and an Ada body part 
generator. 

The Ada DL is described, along with its use in object oriented design, in more 
detail in section 3 * 1 » Ada Design Language. 

2*1.2 Editing Xoola 

Several tools support the editing of Ada DL, Ada code and documentation files. 

2. 1.2.1 Text Editors - Text editors are provided for editing of documentation 
and other non-Ada files. These were obtained with the system software on each 
of the hosts. 

2. 1.2 .2 Ada Syntax Sensitive Editors - A syntax sensitive Editor is one that 
contains the syntax equations of the target language in its database. 
Templates are expanded to their syntactic substructure. The means exists to 
traverse between templates and delete templates for optional constructs. 

Two of the three hosts have Ada syntax sensitive editors available from the 
system vendor. In one of these, initial entry of a file begins with the 
template [compilation], which by repeated expansion and replacement of 

templates with text, is converted to the desired code. The templates have the 
same names as the syntax equations from the Ada LRM. When adding to an 
existing file, it is necessary to enter the starting template e.g. 

[later_declarative_item] , [statement] manually (and one must know what they are 
called) . 

On the Ada based host, a construct is prompted by entering an initial keyword, 
e.g. "procedure 11 , "if", and requesting the editor format the file. It 
identifies the construct and expands it into its components. 

2. 1.2. 3 Source Formatter (Pretty Printer) - The source formatter reformats 

existing Ada source into a consistent form. The level of statement indentation 
is made proportional to the nesting depth. Spaces and line breaks are added to 
improve readability. Declarations and line comments are aligned where 

appropriate. The source formatter was obtained frcm a public domain source, is 
written in Ada and will be modified to improve functionality. On the Ada based 
host, the source formatter is integral with the editor. 

2.1.3 Compilers and Assemblers 

Program development will occur in different environments in the development 
facility. Native mode code will be generated for initial program testing and 
for tool implementation. Code will be generated for the simulation host on 
that host. Ada written for the simulation host must interface with existing 
FORTRAN code. Ada code will be written for the embedded processors. This code 
must interface with existing JOVIAL code. 


- B2.2-3 



2. 1.3.1 Ada Native Mnrfa Compilers - Each of the developnent hosts has a 
validated Ada ooopller available from the system vendor. Each has an 
associated library manager for creating and maintaining Ada program libraries. 

2. 1.3.2 Ida. Bn bedded Prooessor Cross Compiler - Cross compilers for the 
embedded processor are available or will be available for all our development 
hosts, although none have been validated. For two of the hosts, the system 
vendor will be supplying the cross compiler, for the other, one of several 
possible third party vendors will be seleoted. 

The different vendors products are currently being evaluated. The selected 
produot will hold a validation certificate or otherwise have been demonstrated 
to oorrectly compile those features required by the avionics software. 

2. 1.3. 3 JOVIAL Avionics Prflceasor Cross Compiler - This compiler will 
translate JOVIAL to the object code of the avionics processor. The object file 
format will be compatible with that generated by the Ada compilers for the 
avionics prooessors. It will be possible for JOVIAL to call Ada and vice versa 
without the use of Interface routines when the parameter types have analogues 
In both languages. The JOVIAL cross compiler will be obtained from the Ada 
cross compiler vendor. 

2. 1.3.4 Avionics Processor Cross Assembler - These assemblers will run on the 
hosts and generate avionics processor object code. The object file formats 
will be compatible with that generated by the Ada compilers for the avionics 
processors. The Ada cross compiler vendors each have compatble cross 
assemblers available. 

2. 1.3. 5 Simulation Host FORTRAN Compiler - The native mode FORTRAN compiler on 
the simulation host will generate object files compatible with those of that 
host's Ada compiler. Such a compiler Is available from the system vendor. 

2.1.4 Library OL Primitives and Common Packages 

The library of primitives and common packages will be a collection of commonly 
used functions in the areas of navigation, weapons delivery and math functions. 
Initially, a set of primitives will be identified for inclusion in the library 
and implemented when they are first needed. Additional primitives will be 
developed as the need for them is identified. 

Some type of "browser" utility that will enable the potential user to 
intelligently search the library is being planned. 

2.1.5 Link Editors 

The linkers in the APSE shall have the means to determine that all modules 
dependent on a module that has been recompiled have also been recompiled, or 
that otherwise the full set of object modules involved in the link edit is in a 
consistent state. 

2. 1.5.1 Host Li nk Edl tors ~ These linkers will link object files produced by 
the hosts' native mode Ada compilers to produce an image executable on the 
host. Each host system vendor has augmented its link editor to provide the 


- B2.2-4 - 



required consistency checking* 

2 . 1 . 5.2 Avionics Processor £roaa Linker - These linkers will generate 
executable avionics processor images from object files produced by the Ada 
cross compiler, the JOVIAL cross compiler and the avionics processor cross 
assembler* The avionics processor images can be executed interpretively by 
simulators on the host or downloaded to an avionics processor. 

2.2 Jesting Tools 

The Ada environments on the hosts will be integrated with the symbolic 
debuggers provided with the hosts' operating systems. Symbolic debuggers will 
be procured for the avionics processors which will support standard debugging 
operations without incurring additional overhead in the target. A tool will 
exist to create an environment in which to test Ada compilation units in a 
standalone mode. 

A data bus monitor will support the capture and display of selected bus data 
and the simulation of bus transmissions to facilitate integration testing. 

The development host will have the simulation and support tools necessary to 
execute the avionics software in an integrated mode with the actual or 
simulated aircraft hardware or in a software environment only. This includes a 
host simulator designed to exeoute flight software in native code supported by 
environment programs and I/O simulated in software. The hosts will have target 
processor simulation including input/output and interrupt simulation. 

2.2.1 Host Symbolic Debugjrers 

These tools, used for debugging native mode programs on the hosts, supports 
examination and deposit, setting of breakpoints and watchpoints, stepwise 
execution and trace, all referenced to Ada source statements or declarations. 
The debuggers are part of the host system vendors' software support packages, 
but each has been modified to support tasking and other unique features of the 
Ada language. 

2.2.2 Avionics Processor Interface and Debugger 

These tools supports downline load of executable images to the avionics 
processors, execution control of the avionics processors and transmittal of 
status information back to the hosts. Symbolic debugging is supported from the 
hosts. Symbol table information is maintained in the hosts and not downloaded 
to the avionics processors. Target debugger support is provided by all the Ada 
cross compiler vendors, but additional interfacing to support NAAO's particular 
test environment will be required. 

2.2.3 Standalone Test Environment Generator 

This tool determines the inputs, outputs and external entry points of a set of 
Ada programs under test. The tool prompts the user for inputs, executes one of 
the specified programs and displays the outputs. Pre-canned functions can be 
specified for the inputs and the program executed repeatedly with variation of 
an independent variable, such as time. Outputs can be plotted against inputs 


B2.2-5 - 


or the independent variable. 

J**™ 1 ® 10 ?® Test Environment Generator will be implemented in-houae at NAAO, 
aud la described in more detail in a subsequent section. 

2*2.4 Bata Bqa Monitor 

The bus monitor will interface with the various data busses in the avionics 
integration laboratory and perform the following functions, lhe bus monitor 
will be implemented by augmenting existing capabilities. 

Generate real time displays of selected bus data. 

Generate profiles of bus data by message type and subtype. 

Generate simulated bus data for test stimulation. 

2.2.5 Hflat Avionics Processor Simulator 

Simulators for the avionics processors will be available to support the testing 
of avionics processor images that would otherwise require the actual hardware. 
A conventional simulator will interpret executable images down to the 
instruction field level. A faster simulator in which the Ada code is compiled 
into prooedure calls on the host that duplicate the computations of the 
avionics processors without actually interpreting at the bit level is also 
being acquired. Both of these are available from the Ada cross compiler 
vendors. 

A simulator is being implemented in Ada inhouse that will be capable of 
concurrently simulating several avionics processors, with interprocessor 
communications implemented as transfers through common memory buffers. 

2.2.6 Pocuaifi.ata.tipn Support Tools 

The documentation generators will construct data dictionaries from sets of Ada 
programs. They will construct trees of calls and context references (WITH's). 

A header comment box generator will summarize that information in the program 
headers that can be extracted automatically from the program source. These 
processors will accept a list of files, or scan a link editor command file and 
process the sources for all the input modules for the linking of the executable 
image. A report formatter/word processor will be available for general 
document preparation. 

2. 2. 6.1 Ada Da ta Dictionary Generator - This tool scans a set of Ada program 
source files and records the full context of declarations, recognizing Ada 
scope and visibility rules. It generates a data dictionary with locations of 
declarations, set references and use references in a format compatible with 
required documentation. This will be implemented by augmenting public domain 
software, implemented in Ada. 

2. 2. 6. 2 Ada nalled-bv/Withed-bY Generator - This utility does a scan of a set 
of Ada source programs. For subprograms it constructs trees of calls and 
called-by references. For packages, it constructs trees of context clause 
(WITH statement) references. The generated reports are in a format compatible 
with required documentation. This tool will also be obtained by augnenting an 



existing publio domain program. 


2. 2. 6. 3 Header Comment Box Generator - This tool scans the source of an Ada 
compilation unit for that information which is required to be in the header 
comment box, such as inputs and outputs, subprograms called and called-by, 
imported data structures and routines, and other resources used. It creates a 
new header comment box or updates the existing one. This tool Is being 
implemented in-house in Ada and is described in more detail in a subsequent 
section. 


2. 2. 6. 4 Report Formatter - These utilities process a file of text with 
interspersed formatting commands. They perform word processing functions such 
as right margin alignment, indentation, assignment of heading numbers, table of 
contents generation and others. Several of these are already installed in our 
facility, from various sources. They are the most widely used support tools in 
the laboratory. 

2.2.7 C onfiguration Management Support 

These tools support the adherence to software standards and the controlled 
maintenance of source and documentation files, 

2. 2. 7.1 Code. Audi tor/ Static Analyser - The code auditor scans the source for 
an Ada compilation unit and generates a report of areas of non-conformance to 
software standards, as specified in the Ada Style Guide that was developed 
jointly by several Rockwell divisions. 

2.2. 7.2 Conf iguration Control System - The configuration control system will 
create and maintain libraries of controlled files, which can be Ada DL source, 
program source, documentation cr any other textual material. It will track 
changes by associating them with retrieval and replacement of library elements. 
It will monitor access and be able to generate a historical record of the 
accesses to each element in a library. Each host has such software available 
from the system vendor. 

3 LD£ALL1 PENELOPES AISJS SQEPDSEBJE 

The following sections describe in more detail some of the tools that are being 
implemented in-house at NAAO. Of particular interest are the following. 

1. Ada Design Language processor, that will permit embedding a traditional PI;L 
within compilable Ada speci f ica tions. 

2. Standalone Test Environment Generator, that will determine the inputs and 
outputs of a program under test, then generate input values, execute the 
program and capture and display the outputs. 

3. Code Audi tor/Static Analyser, which will permit Ada programs to be checked 
for conformity with software standards, and be evaluated against various 
measures of quality. 


B2.2-7 - 


ORIGINAL PAGE IS 
OF POOR QUALITY 



i|. Ada Header Comment Box Generator, which will automate collection of some of 
the information required to be in the header comment box of program units. 

3.1 Ada Design Language 

Traditional PBLs, like those widely used in the oomputing community over the 
past deoade are good at describing control flow, but poor at describing 
structure, hierarchy, data relationships and interfaces. 

Ada specifications are good at describing these things, but do not describe 
control flew. Use of compilable Ada to describe control flew is awkward, at 
best, because it does not permit specification of detail to be deferred. 

The idea of using compilable Ada as a design language is gaining acceptance 
because it specifies at design time what the software product will look like. 

I.e. the Ada specs are a form of "contract" for the software that is to be 

implemented. 

Traditional PDLs are coming to be regarded as a decade old technology that Is 
little more than an improvement on flowcharts. 

The NAAO Ada Design Language combines compilable Ada with Re configurable Design 
Language (RDL), a traditional PDL with an Ada-like syntax, to obtain the 
benefits of each. RDL was implemented at another Rockwell division in Ada and 

can be installed on any host with a validated Ada compiler. Aside frem the 

syntax change to make it more Ada-like, it is similar in appearance and 
capabilities to a commercially available PDL widely used in the computing 
community for over a decade. 

3.1.1 Use of the Ada. DL 

Use of this design language consists of the following steps. 

1. Description of the structure, operation and interfaces of a design using 
Ada specifications. 

2. Construction of the Ada bodies, starting with the specifications, then with 
further development. 

3 . Description of the control flow within units, using RDL statements in 
specially marked comments. 

3 . 1 . 1.1 Development of Ada Specifi cations. - The design language user first 
identifies the objeots to be implemented. These suggest the top level package 
structure of the design. Then, the actions to be performed on these objects 
are identified, these suggest the procedures and functions these packages will 
support. 

Externally visible data structures are identified, then Ada types and objects 
are defined to represent these. Parallel event streams suggest creation of 
tasks to support them. Textual comments are added to further explain the 
purpose of the constructs so defined. 


- B2.2-8 - 



3. 1.1. 2 Pavel oment of Ada Bodies - Then, using an Ada body part builder, body 
parts for the specifications are created. Pata structures not to be visible 
externally are defined within the bodies of the packages and subprograms. Use 
of the available "TBD* package permits the user to defer assigning specific 
types to Ada objeots. 

3. 1.1. 3 Dflvelomflnt OL JU2L. Descriptions - The control flow within the 
subprogram bodies is now designed and specified with RDL procedures. The RDL 
statements are enclosed in speolally marked Ada oomments to keep the entire 
design description compilable. Reference to data defined In the pure Ada part 
can be made by the RDL. Use of RDL permits the existing RDL processor to be 
used to generate data dictionaries and calling trees. 

Large designs may require several Iterations of this process before the design 
is oomplete. The completed design consists of Ada specs with embedded textual 
comments and Ada bodies with embedded RDL procedures and comments. 

3.1.2 Ada. Design Language Utilities 

Several tools and utilities are available to assist in the generation of Ada DL 
descriptions. 

3. 1.2.1 Package - This TBD package, which is public domain software, 
provides types, objects, functions and a procedure which can be referenced in a 
design when the actual type of the objeot or subprogram parameter is not known. 
TBD values for the quantities in package SXSTEM, such as maximum integer, 
smallest fixed point delta, eto. are also defined. As a design is evolved, the 
TBD quantities are replaced with the actual objects. All names in the package 
contain the substring "TBD" so they can be located with an editor search. 

3. 1.2. 2 Body Part Generator - This tool generates a body part from an Ada 
specification. It is available as a primitive on the Ada based development 
host, and also from a public domain source for any processor with a validated 
Ada compiler. 

3. 1.2. 3 Ada. £L Preprooesaor - This utility, which will t implemented 
in-house, scans the Ada Design Language descriptions and records all the type, 
objeot, subprogram and task specifications. It extracts the RDL procedures 
from the Ada bodies and generates RDL declarations for the objects declared in 
the Ada and referenced in the RDL. It formats the RDL into a form acceptable 
to the RDL processor and submits it for generation of an RDL report. 

3.1 .2.4 2BL PrD.oeaaor - The RDL processor, currently installed on two of our 
hosts, generates a formatted report from an RDL description. It also produces 
a data dictionary and calling trees for the segments (subprograms). 

3.2 standalone laat Environment Generator 

Traditionally, unit level testing is done by Implementing special purpose data 
generators and data monitors, linking everything together, running the program 
under test, then analysing the data. The next routine requires new data 
generators and monitors. 


- B2.2-9 - 



The Standalone Test Environment Generator (STEG) being developed at NAAO will 
aot as data generator and monitor for a large class of subprograms and will 
partially automate the unit test process. 

A unit to be tested includes a subprogram and its dependent units. They are 
first compiled cleanly. 

Tbe STEG will soan tbe unit under test, Identify the calling parameters, then 
determine those objects declared at a higher scope that are used but not set 
(inputs) and set but not used (outputs). It will detect those that are both 
set and used, as these could be inputs, outputs, both or neither. 

Tbe STEG will prompt the tester for tbe names of inputs and outputs not 
identified in tbe scan. It will then generate an Ada shell that supplies the 
program's inputs and captures its outputs. This will be compiled and linked 
with the program under test. Stubs will be provided for subprogram that are 
not provided. An OUT parameter from a stub is regarded as an input. 

The STEG will then prompt for the values of the identified inputs and pass them 
to the target program. It will execute the program under test, then display 
the values for tbe identified outputs. Exceptions returned from the target 
program will be identified. Facility to generate an exception from a stub will 
also be supported. 

A command language will be provided for repeatedly executing the program under 
test while varying the values for selected inputs. The command language will 
be a subset of Ada. Plotting and data reduction features are to be provided. 


3.3 


Analyser 


The purpose of this tool is to support the enforcement of software standards 
and good programming practices. It will gather statistics that may be 
indicative of the use or non-use of these standards and practices and prepare a 
report that might serve as the starting point for a code review or structured 
walkthrough. The code auditor will gather the following types of statistics. 

1 . The amount of commentary relative to the amount of code will be determined. 
Textual comments will be distinguished from delimiting comments (blank 
lines and lines of dashes, etc.). Of course, it will be unable to 
distinguish a useful comment from something like " — Mary had a little 
lamb". 

2. Measures of program complexity will be developed, such as nunber of nodes 
in a program's directed graph, then statistics will be developed from our 
experience with implementing and maintaining these programs relative to 
their measured complexity. 

It is generally regarded that overly complex program units cause 
maintenance problems. However, simpler programs mean more program units 
are necessary, and this complicates the integration process. 


B2.2-10 - 




The lumber of eubtypes and derived types defined and their frequency of 
referenoe versus the frequency of reference of the predefined types. Use 
of subtypes and derived types makes better use of the strong typing 
features of Ada. 

4. For subprograms, the mmber of parameters passed versus the direct 
referenoes to objects declared at a higher aoope (global variables). Use 
of global references Is regarded by some as producing harder to read code. 

5. Statistics on Identifier length will be gathered. Average length, 
distribution of lengths and frequency of referenoe of various lengths will 
be recorded. These statistics will be gathered for various classes of 
identifiers, e.g. scalars, record components, FOR loop indeces, subprogram 
formal parameters, eto. Use of overly short identifier names is regarded 
as a poor practice, but it is not clear that longer is always better. 

6. Use of PRAGMAS, particulary PRAGMA SUPPRESS, will be recorded and 
summarized. 

7. Placement of more than one type or object declaration on a line, or more 
than one executable statement on a line will be flagged. Code so written 
is likely to be harder to read. 

8. Types and objects declared but not referenced, objects declared at a higher 
scope than necessary and uninitialized objects will be flagged. 

9. The number of declarations and executable statements for each subprogram 
will be recorded. These values will be provided both including and 
excluding nested subprograms. The maximum nesting depth for control 
structures, subprograms and tasks will also be determined for each program 
unit. 


10. The nunber of GOTOs and Jump target labels (<<LABEL>>, not LABEL:) will be 
counted, and a measure of the "branching complexity" of a routine will be 
determined. 

11. Unlabelled blocks and loops will be flagged. Use of these labels often 
provides a valuable form of commentary. 

12. Declaration of typed constants vs. universal numbers will be flagged when 
appropriate. Use of a DELTA other than a power of 2 for fixed point types 
will be detected. U 3 e of a radix other than 2, 8, 10 or 16 will also be 
flagged. 

3.4 Header Comment Box Generator 

Software standards at NAAO specify that each compilation unit be headed by a 
comment box that contains detailed information about the unit. 

Among other things it is required that the comment box list all sets and 
references to global variables (objects declared at a higher scope), all 
subprograms and tasks called, task entries, exceptions generated (other than 
the usual Ada exceptions) and exceptions handled, and all packages, tasks and 




subprograms defined Internally. 

The header oooment box generator will detect the presence of these features and 
create the part of the header oomment box that describes them. If already 
present, the existing oomment box will be revised. 

Gathering this Information for the comment box is a tedious task which 
implementors do without enthusiasm, and thus without attention to correctness 
and detail. Frequently the information is ignored when it is needed (say, by a 
tiger team called in to fix a high-priority problem) because it is assumed to 
be inoorrecfc ana out of date. Automating its generation shoulJ greatly 
inorease its reliability and usefulness. 

4 COHCLUSIONS 

The Ada development environment described here meets most of the needs of our 
ourrent and near future development requirements. The objectives of a cost 
effective APSE implementation and a versatile development environment are 
expected to be satisfied. 


B2.2-12 - 


