AD-A224 222 


m FILE COPY ' 


Copy 16 of 34 copies 



IDA DOCUMENT D-568 


Ada COMPILER VALIDATION PROCEDURES 



Audrey A. Hook 
Stephan Heilbrunner 


January 1989 


Preparedfor 
Ada Joint Program Office 



ELECTE 
JUL 111990 



Oi^flUTip N A 

Apprwed for pubUc 

DlMtibtittop UnUnsitd' 


INSTITUTE FOR DEFENSE .ANALYSES 

1801 N. Beauregard Street, Alexandria, Virginia 22311-1772 


IDA Log No. HQ 89-034105. 










DEFINITIONS 

lOA publishes the lollowing documents to report the results of its work. 

Reports 

Reports are the most authoritative and most carefully considered products IDA publishes. 
They normally embody results of major projects which (a) have a direct bearing on 
decisions affecting major programs, (b) address Issues of significant concern to the 
Executive Branch, the Congress and/or the public, or (c) address issues that have 
significant economic implintlons. {DA Reports are reviewed by outside panels of experts 
to ensure their high quality and'ifeievance to the problems studied, and they are released 
by the President of iOA. 

Group Reports 

Group Reports record the findings and results of IDA established working groups and 
panels composed of senicr individuals addressing major issues which otherwise would be 
the subject of an IDA Report. IDA Group Reports are reviewed by the senior individuals 
responsible lor the project and others as setecied by tOA to ensure their high quality and 
relevance to the problems studied, and are released by the President of IDA. 

Papers 

Papers, also authoritative and carefully considered products of IDA, address studies that 
are narrower in scope than those covered in Reports. IDA Papers are reviewed to ensure 
that they meet the high standards expected of refereed papers in professional journals or 
formal Agency reports. 

Documents 

IOA Documents are used lor the convenience of the sponsors or the analysts (a) to record 
substantive work done In quick reaction studies, (b) to record the proceedings of 
conferences and meetings, (c) to make available preliminary and tentative results of 
analyses, (d) to record data developed in the course of an investigation, or (e) to forward 
Information that is essentially unanalyaed and unevaluated. The review of IDA Documents 
Is suited to their content and intended use. 














^4 


' i - -fe; — 


z 


t 


t 


REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

Form Approved 

0MB No. 0704-0188 

Public r^HXUng ourden ior (his coUecacn of mfonnsion is rratgif.tgii u> 1 hour pci respoxse, including the dine for reviewing instructions, seerefung existing dsts sources, 

gathering and piuntfining the dsia needed, end coi^leung end reviewing the coilecccn of infonnation.Sesid vosusentsregerdingtlu burden cshxsateot enji o&er a.'^iect <:>r thJs 
CQUeccon of infonssuon, including suggesuons for reducing this burden, to Wsshingtoci Headquarters Services, Directorate for Infonnadon Operations and Rq>orts, 1215 JcHcnscn 
Dava Highway. Suite 1204, Ahuigton, VA 22^*4302, and to the O&ce of Mant^emenl and Budget, Paperwork Reduction IVojea (07044)188), Weshbgtc^ DC 20503- 

1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank) 

2. REPORT DATE 

Jariuary 1989 

3. REPORTTYPE AND DATES COVERED 

Final 

_; _ 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Ada Compiler Validation Procedures 


6. AUTHOR(S) 

Audrey A. Hook, Stephan Heilbrunner 


?. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Institute for Defense Analyses (IDA) 

1801 N. Beauregard Street 
Alexandria, VA 22311-1772 


9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO) 

Room 3E114, The Pentagon 
Washington, D.C 20301-3081 


5. FUNDING NUMBERS 

MDA 903 84 C 0031 
T-D5-304 


8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT 
N’lMBER 

IDA Document D-568 


10. SPONSORlNG/MONnORLNG AGE>,CY 
REPORT NUMBER 


11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 


I2a. distribution/availability STATEMENT 

Approved for public release, unlimited distribution. 


!2b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 

2A 


13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) 

The Institute for Defense Analyses (IDA) Document D-568, Ada Compiler Validation Procedures, is a re\ ision 
of the Ada ValidaUon Procedures and Guidelines, version 1.1, issued by the Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO) 
in January 1987. A pnncipal objective of the revision was to update the Procedures and Guidelines to reflect 
the cunent validaUon practice and to improve the rules of procedure and management so as to reduce the 
burden of \alidation on the certification body and its customers. IDA solicited comments from the Ada 
Validation Facility (,AVF) managers on \ersion 1.1, drafted a first revision for furtlier comments, and produced 
this final version as a deliverable to the AJPO. This version reflects the current policy of tlie Department of 
Defense and other national certification systems (e.g., U.S. Department of Commerce), as well as tlie collectiv e 
operational experience of the Ada certification body. 


14. SUBJECT TERMS 

Ada Programming Language; Compilers; Validation; Ada Validation Facility 
(AVF); Ada Compiler Validation Capability (ACVC); Standards. 


n.SECURnT CLASSIFICATION 
OF REPORT 

Unclassified 


18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF THIS PAGE 

Unclassified 


19. SECURITY CLASSinCATION 
OF ABSTRACT 

Unclassified 


15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

50 


16, PRICE CODE 


20. LIMITATION OT ABSTRACT 

SAR 


NSN7540-01-280.S5(X) 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) 
Prescribed by ANSI Sid. 239-18 
) 298-102 






IDA DOCUMENT D-568 


Ada COMPILER VALIDATION PROCEDURES 


Audrey A. Hook 
Stephan Heilbrunner 


January 1989 



\DA 


INSTITUTE FOR DEFENSE ANALYSES 


Contract MDA 903 84 C 0031 
TaskT-D5-304 


UNCLASSIFIED 


PREFACE 

This IDA Document f 9 rwards to the Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO) a major revision of the 
Ada Validation Procedures and Guidelines, version 1.1 (hereafter “P&G”), issued by the AJPO 
in January 1987. 

In June 1988, the AJPO tasked IDA to revise the P&G with assistance from the AVF managers. 
A principal objective of the revision was to update the P&G to reflect current validation practice 
and to improve the rules of procedure and management so as to reduce the burden of validation 
on the certification body and its customers. A secondary objective that EDA adopted was to 
simplify the entire document so as to make it more readily comprehensible. 

EDA solicited comments from the AYFs on the P&G, drafted a first revision for further 
comment, and produced this final version as a a deliverable to the AJPO. This version reflects 
the current policy of the Department of Defense (DoD) and other national certification systems 
(e.g., U.S. Department of Commerce), as well as the collective operational experience of the 
Ada certification body. 

The following summarizes the major changes made in accordance with the revision objectives: 

• Updating practices to reflect current validation practice 

— The DoD Guidelines section has been deleted, since DoD directives [DoD 87] that 
supersede these guidelines have been issued. 

— Minor changes were made since the registration of the DoD Ada Trademark was not 
renewed and a certification mark was adopted. 

— The National Institute for Standards and Technology responsibility and authority for 
validation of compilers for all the Federal Information Processing Standards (FEPS) and 
accreditation of variation facilities has been acknowledged. 


• Reducing validation burden 


— The ACVC version’s usable (for validation) life was extended from 12 months to 18 
months (as emphasis shifts from ACVC development to maintenance), which reduces the 
frequency of validation per implementation. 

— The expiration date of a validation certificate was changed from being 12 months after 
date of issue to being 12 months after the expiration date of the ACVC used in the 
validation. 



— The automatic extension of a certificate, pending completion of one or more validation 
steps, has been eliminated: all certificates expire on the same date (see above), and there 
is some incentive to re-validate early. 

— An expired ACVC version may be used to complete a validation only if the AVF has a. 

already begun the on-site testing before the version’s expiration date. — 


□ 

□ 


■skit 


lUatr ibutlon/ 


I Availability Codes 


r 

iOtst 


Avail and/or 
Special 


V 

UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 


• Improving registration procedures 

— AVFs and Customers have been provided with a “check-list” of information and 
conditions for validation by registration. 

— The responsibilities of the certification body for registration are limited to clearly defined 
procedural and minimaly judgemental actions similar to practices of the National Institute 
for Standards and Technology. 

• Simplification 

— Preference was given to the use of terms that are defined in other standards documents 
(e.g., ISO, ANSI, IEEE). Ada-specific defined terms were defined to be as clear and 
simple as possible. 

— To improve readability, the P&G convention of capitalization of a defined terms was 
changed to the IEEE convention of highlighting terms in boldface. Care has been taken to 
ensure that no meaning of a defined term is changed by its use within the text; thus, the 
boldface can be abandonned when this document is provided in electronic form. 

— Expository discussion was minimized in favor of simple, declarative statements. 


• Other chMges 

— AVF customers have been provided the conditions for advertising their validation status if 
the AVF operating policy (e.g. national accreditation rules) does not conflict; otherwise, 
no advertising is permitted until the customer either receives a validation certificate or a 
formal notice from the AVF that the AJPO has issued the certificate. 

— A signed Declaration of Conformance must be received by the AVO before a certificate 
request will be made. 

Contributions to this revision were made by each Ada Validation Facility manager. Stephan 
Heilbrunner (lABG) and Audrey Hook (IDA) were the principle authors and editors of this 
document; the reviewers were; 

Jacqueline Sidi - AFNOR 

William Dashiell & Arnold Johnson - NIST 

Jane Pink, Jon Leigh, & Adrian Groom - NCC 

Steve Wilson, Dale Lange, & Brian Andrews - WPAFB 

Mike Hill & Phil Brashear - SofTech (in support of WPAFB) 

Dan Lehman, Robert Knapper, & Katydean Price - IDA 


VI 

UNCLASSIFIED 


9 


UNCLASSIFIED 


CONTENTS 


1. INTRODUCTION. 1 

2. GLOSSARY OF TERMS. 3 

3. ORGANIZATION AND RESPONSIBILITIES. 7 

3.1 Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO). 7 

3.2 The Ada Validation Organization (AVO) . 7 

3.3 The AC VC Maintenance Organization (AMO) . 7 

3.4 Ada Validation Facilities (AVFs). 8 

3.5 Customers. 8 

C 4. THE ADA COMPILER VALIDATION CAPABILITY. 9 

4.1 Versions. 9 

4.2 Inapplicable Tests. 9 

4.3 Test Modifications. 9 

4.4 Test Withdrawal. 9 

4.5 Customization.10 

4.6 Passing the ACVC.10 

4.7 Availability.10 

5. VALIDATION BY TESTING .11 

5.1 Step One: Validation Agreement.11 

5.2 Step Two: Prevalidation.11 

5.2.1 Customer Testing.12 

5.2.2 Submission of Results.12 

5.2.3 Test Issues.12 

5.2.4 Incomplete Prevalidations .13 

5.2.5 Successful Prevalidation.13 

5.3 Step Three: Validation Testing.13 

5.4 Step Four: Declaration of Conformance.13 

5.5 Step Five: Validation Summary Report ..13 

5.5.1 VSR Production.14 

5.5.2 VSR Availability.14 

, 5.6 Step Six: Validation Certificate ..14 

5.7 Advertising Validated Status. 14 

5.8 Certification Mark. 15 

6. VALIDATION BY REGISTRATION.17 

6.1 Result Profile.17 

6.2 Derived Implementations.17 

*■ 6.3 Registration Request. 17 

6.4 AVF Evaluation. 18 

6.5 Registration.18 

6.6 Expiration of Validated Status.19 

5.7 Challenges . 19 

I 6.8 Challenge Mark.19 

6.9 Challenge Test ..19 


VI i 

UNCLASSIFIED 
















































UNCLASSIFIED 


APPENDICES 

APPENDIX A Declaration of Conformance.A-1 

APPENDIX B Implementer Dispute Format.B-1 

APPENDIX C Validation Certificate.C-1 

APPENDIX D Certification Mark.D-1 

APPENDIX E Points of Contact. E-1 

APPENDIX F References. F-1 


vi i 1 

UNCLASSIFIED 














UNCLASSIFIED 


1. INTRODUCTION 


The United States Department of Defense (DoD) sponsored the development of the Ada 
programming language and established the Ada Joint Program OfiSce (AJPO) as part of 
an effort to support recognized principles of software en^eering for a wide range of 
applications. In view of the well known benefits of standardization, the AJPO has 
established a certification system to prevent the proliferation of dialects of the Ada 
programming language and to encourage Ada implementations which conform to the 
[ANSI 83]. The Ada certification system rules of procedme and management address the 
validation of Ada implementations by testing and by registration. This document provides 
an operational definition of a validated Ada compiler which is required by [DoD 87] and 
by the [FERMR 87] and revises the rules and definitions issued in [AJPO 87]. 

The certification body of the Ada certification system consists of the AJPO for overall 
direction, the Ada Validation Organization (AVO) and ACVC Maintenance Organization 
(AMO) for technical support, and the Ada Validation Facilities (AVFs) for performing 
validations. The Ada certification body operates in conjunction with the U.S. Department 
of Commerce which has the responsibility for establishing and maintaining a certification 
system for the Federal Information Programming Standards (FTPS). 

It is important to note the scope and intent of Ada validation. Users of an Aaa 
implementation are cautioned that the purpose of validation is to encourage confcimity of 
Ada implementations with the standard and that characteristics other than those specified 
by the standard, such as performance or suitability for a partirni.ai application, are 
outside the scope of Ada vdidation. Moreover, users are cautioned that the yardstick of 
conformity testing is the collection of test programs contained in the ACVC. Thus, 
compliance is measured only within the limitation of these tests. 

A glossary of terms used in this document is provided in Section 2. Terms defined in the 
glossary are signified in the text of the document by bold print. Appendices to this 
document provide examples of documents used in validation, current points of contact 
and references. 


1 

UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 


2. GLOSSARY OF TERMS 


Ada PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE: The language defined by reference [ANSI 83] or its 
successors. 

ACVC MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION (AMO): The part of the certification body 
that maintains the ACVC. 

ACVC USER’S GUIDE: A document that explains the teclmcal details of processing the 
test programs and evaluating their results. 

Ada COMPILER: The software and hardware, if any, which has to be added to a given 
host and target computer system to allow transformation of Ada programs into executable 
form and execution thereof. 

Ada COMPILER VALIDATION CAPABILITY (ACVC): The means for testing 
compliance of Ada implementations, consisting of the test suite, the support programs, the 
ACVC user’s guide and the template for the validation summary report. 

Ada IMPLEMENTATION: An Ada compiler with its host computer system and its target 
computer system. 

Ada JOINT PROGRAM OFFICE (AJPO): The part of the certification body which 
provides policy and guidance for the Ada certification system. 

Ada VALIDATION FACILITY (AVF): The part of the certification body which carries out 
the procedures required to establish the compliance of an Ada implementation. 

Ada VALIDATION ORGANIZATION (AVO): The part of the certification body that 
provides technical guidance for operations of the Ada certification system. 

APPLICABLE ACVC TEST: A test which is neither inapplicable nor withdrawn. 
Compare with inapplicable test program and withdrawn test program. 

BASE IMPLEMENTATION: An Ada implementation that was validated by testing (see 
Section 5). 

CERTIFICATION BODY: pSO/EEC 86] An impartial body, governmental or non¬ 
governmental, possessing the necessary competence and leliability to operate a 
cettification system, and in which the interests of all parties concerned with the 
functioning of the system are represented. 

CERTIFICATION MARK: A mark which may be used only on products directly 
associated with the Ada compiler for which the certification mark was awarded. 

CERTIFICATION SYSTEM: [ISO/EEC 86] A system having its own rules of procedure 
and management for carrying out conformity certifications. 


3 

UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


COMPLIANCE of an Ada IMPLEMENTATION: The ability of the implementation to 
pass an ACVC version. [Note: For the purposes of this document, compliance is a 
practical measure of conformity.] 

COMPUTER SYSTEM: [ISO 74 ANSI/IEEE 83] A fiihctional unit, consisting of one or 
more computers and associated software, that uses common storage for all or part of a 
program and also for all or part of the data necessary for the execution of the program; 
executes user-written or user-designated programs; performs user-designated data 
manipulation, including arithmetic operations and logic operations; and that can execute 
programs that modify themselves during execution. A computer system may be a stand¬ 
alone unit or may consist of several inter-coimected units. 

CONFORMITY: [ISO/IEC 86] Fulfillment by a product, process or service of all 
requirements specified. [Note: Also see Section 1.1.2 in the ANSI/MIL-STD-1815A] 

CONFORMITY TESTING: The process described in Section 5 of this document. 

CUSTOMER: An individual or corporate entity who enters into an agreement with an 
AVF which specifies the terms and conditions for AVF services (of any kind) to be 
performed. 

CUSTOMIZED TEST SUITE: The ACVC tests, adjusted as necessary, that must be used 
for a given Ada implementation (see Section 4.5). 

DECLARATION of CONFORMANCE: A formal statement from a customer assuring 
that conformity is realized or attainable on the Ada implementation for which validation 
status is requested, [see Appendix A for a sample format of a declaration of 
conformance.] 

DERIVED IMPLEMENTATION: An Ada implementation that was obtained from a base 
implementation which has a current validation certificate (see Section 6). 

FAIL AN ACVC VERSION: The Ada implementation fails one or more test of the 
customized test suite according to the relevant evaluation criteria. 

FUNCTIONAL UNIT: [ISO 74 ANSI/IEEE 83] An entity of hardware, software or both, 
capable of accomplishing a specified purpose. 

HOST COMPUTER SYSTEM: A computer system where Ada source programs are 
transformed into executable form. 

INAPPLICABLE TEST: A test that contains one or more test objectives found to be 
irrelevant for the given Ada implementation. 

INSTRUCTION SET: [ANSI/IEEE 83] The set of instructions of a computer, of a 
programming language, or of the programming languages in a programming system. 

OPERATING SYSTEM: [ISO 74] Software that controls the execution of programs and 
that provides services such as resource allocation, scheduling, input/output control, and 


4 

UNCLASSMED 






UNCLASSIFIED 


data management. Usually, operating systems are predominantly software, but partial or 
complete hardware implementations are possible. 

PASS AN ACVC VERSION: Each test of the customized test suite is processed according 
to the Ada programming l^guage. 

PREVALIDATION TESTING: Processing of an appropriately customized test suite by the 
customer. 

RESULT PROFILE: The result of processing the customized test suite according to given 
evaluation criteria (see Section 6). 

SOFTWARE MAINTENANCE: [ANSI/IEEE 83] Modification of a software product 
after delivery to correct faults, to improve performance, or to adapt the product to a 
changed environment (see below). 

— CORRECTIVE MAINTENANCE: Maintenance performed specifically to overcome 
existing faults. 

— PERFECTIVE MAINTENANCE: Maintenance performed to improve performance or 
maintainability. 

— ADAPTIVE MAINTENANCE: Maintenance performed to make a software product 
usable in a changed environment. 

TARGET COMPUTER SYSTEM: A computer system where the executable form of Ada 
programs are executed. 

TEST ISSUE: Any problem arising during validation (see Section 5.2.3). 

VALIDATION: The process of checking the conformity of an Ada compiler to the Ada 
programming language and of issuing a certificate for this implementation. 

VALIDATED ADA IMPLEMENTATION: An Ada implementation that has been 
validated successfully either by AVF testing (see Section 5) or by registration (see Section 
6 ). 

VALIDATED Ada COMPILER: The compiler of a validated Ada implementation. 

VALIDATION CERTIFICATE (VC): Issued by authority of the AJPO for tested Ada 
implementations which pass an ACVC version. 

VALIDATION SUMMARY REPORT: A report produced by an AVF containing results 
that are observed from testing a specific Ada implementaUon or grouping of Ada 
implementations. 

WITHDRAWN TEST : A test found to be incorrect and not used in conformity testing. A 
test may be incorrect because it has an invalid test objective, fails to meet its test 
objective, or contains erroneous or illegal use of the Ada programming language. 


5 

UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 


3. ORGANIZATION AND RESPONSmiLmES 


This section specifies the role of organizations which form the certification body and of 
customers who receive service from them. 

3.1 Ada Joint Program Oflace(AJPO) 

The AJPO establishes the policies of the certification system by: 

a. establishing the conditions for issuance, the life, and the scope of a validation 
certificate; 

b. establishing the schedule for issuing versions of the AC VC; 

c. approving each release of an ACVC version; 

d. designating members of the certification body; 

e. resolving issues that may arise during validation when these issues can not be 
resolved through the best efforts of the AVO and AVF; 

f. maintaining the official lists of validated Ada implementations; and 

g. issuing documents pertaining to validation. 

3.2 The Ada Validation Organization (AVO) 

The AVO provides the technical and administrative support required to operate the 
certification system by: 

a. advising the AJPO and AVFs concerning requirements for modification to the 
validation procedures; 

b. resolving issues that may arise during the validation process; 

c. reviewing all VSRs prepared by AVFs; 

d. recommending to the AJPO issuance of a validation certificate for Ada 
implementations validated by testing (see Section 5) and the registration of derived 
implementations (see Section 6); 

e. participating in the ACVC quality control and configuration management process; 

f. deciding on the withdrawal of test programs from the ACVC version that is being 
used for validation; and 

g. convening meetings of the members of the certification body at appropriate intervals 
to discuss the validation process and to evaluate practices. 

3.3 The ACVC Maintenance Organization (AMO) 

The AMO provides the technical and administrative support required to supply the ACVC 
for use in the operation of the certification system by: 


7 

UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 


a. producing ACVC versions according to a schedule established by the AJPO; 

b. performing quality control and configuration management according to procedures 
approved by the AJPO; 

c. distributing the ACVC version releases to AVFs and the AVO; 

d. distributing the final release of ACVC versions to the U.S. National Technical 
Information Service (NTIS), a service of the U.S. Department of Commerce, for 
further distribution to the public; and 

e. providing information to the public concerning the list of test programs withdrawn 
from the current test suite, the number of test programs in each version and release 
of the test suite, and other information that promotes a public awareness of the test 
suite and evaluation criteria. 

3.4 Ada Validation Facilities (AVFs) 

An AVF is chartered by the AJPO to conduct validation by: 

a. adhering to validation procedures approved by the AJPO; 

b. producing the VSR; 

c. forwarding unresolved test issues to the AVO for review and analysis, with final 
resolution to be provided by the AJPO, if necessary; 

d. forwarding a customer’s registration request for a derived Ada implementation to the 
AVO, with recommendations based upon knowledge of the base implementation and 
the completeness of documentation supporting the request; and 

e. striving to satisfy national accreditation criteria. 

The AJPO may issue an AVF charter to an organization that has been recognized as an 
accredited testing laboratory by the U.S. Department of Commerce, National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST). The AJPO may issue a charter to an organization 
located in a country which has a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the U.S. 
government covering the chartering of AVFs, according to the rules specified in the MoU. 
An AVF charter may remain in effect indefinitely; however, a charter can be revoked by 
the AJPO, at any time, for due cause. The AJPO may direct an impartial body to conduct 
an audit at any time or prior to issuing an AVF charter. Audits are conducted in 
accordance with procedures established by the AJPO at the time of the audit and are 
tailored to reflect the purpose of the audit. 

3.5 Customers 

Customers are serviced by the Ada certification body in matters concerning Ada 
validation. In requesting services of the Ada certification body, customers are to provide 
accurate and complete infonuation to perform validation, to register derived Ada 
implementations, or to obtain other services. 


8 

UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 


4. THE ADA COMPILER VALUATION CAPABILITY 


The ACVC is designed to demonstrate compliance of an Ada implementation with the Ada 
Programming Language. The ACVC is distributed as a collection of test programs, 
support programs which facilitate processing the tests, and-an ACVC User’s Guide that 
explains the criteria for evaluating the results. 


4.1 Versions 

Each new version of the ACVC test suite is released for a period of six months before it is 
used for validation. Dining this period, a compiler implementer or any interested party 
may submit comments to the AMO. At the end of six months, the new version of the 
ACVC is released for validation use for a period of 18 months. A version’s tests may be 
slightly changed between releases as a result of AMO modifications, but the two releases 
of any version are essentially the same. Comment on the ACVC tests should be submitted 
in the test-dispute format (see Appendix B); the AMO will evaluate comments and will 
take appropriate action after consultation with the AVO. 

4.2 Inapplicable Tests 

Each test program in the test suite has one or more test objectives described in a comment 
in the test program. Some test objectives may be irrelevant for a given Ada 
implementation. For example, the test objective “check write operations for permanent 
files” is irrelevant for an implementation on an embedded computer system which does 
not allow the creation of permanent files. Test programs containing test objectives which 
are irrelevant for a particular Ada implementation may be declared inapplicable, as a 
whole or in parts, for that implementation. As a general rule, the inapplicability of a test 
is established by analysis of the result of processing the test program. However, results 
obtained from one test program may imply the inapplicability of others which need not be 
processed. The ACVC User’s Guide contains detailed rules about implied inapplicability 
and the omission of inapplicable test programs. 

4.3 Test Modifications 

Some of the test and support programs are designed to make use of implementation 
dependent characteristics (e.g., line lengths and integer ranges). These programs must 
be adjusted to a given Ada implementation according to the rules contained in the ACVC 
User’s Guide. In addition to these anticipated test modifications, additional changes may 
be required to remove unforeseen conflicts between the test program and implementation 
dependent characteristics of the Ada implementation (e.g., the algorithm for recovering 
from syntax errors). The allowable changes for each Ada implementation are determined 
by an AVF after consultation with the AVO. 

4.4 Test Withdrawal 

In any ACVC version that is used for validation, it is possible that a test program is based 
on assumptions which need not hold true for all Ada implementations or that the test 
program does not meet its test objectives. In these cases, the AVO may issue a correction 


9 

UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFffiD 


to the evaluation criteria in the ACVC User’s Guide or the test program may be 
withdrawn from that version of the test suite. Any interested party may dispute a test 
program through an AVF by asking for a review of its evaluation criteria or for its 
withdrawal. The;fonn for submitting a test dispute is provided in Appendix B. 


4.5 Customization 

A customized test suite is produced by the AVF for each Ada implementation that is a 
candidate for validation. This customization always consists of removing withdrawn tests 
and in making required modifications to test and support programs, and may include 
removal of some inapplicable tests when detailed rules for them are provided in the ACVC 
User’s Guide. 

4.6 Passing the ACVC 

An Ada implementation passes a given ACVC version if it processes each test of the 
customized test suite in accordance with the Ada programming language, whether the test 
is applicable or inapplicable: otherwise, the Ada implementation fails the ACVC. 


4.7 Availability 

The ACVC is available to the general public from the NTIS according to U.S. 
Department of Commerce policies and rules for payment of fees and for export control. 
The ACVC is also available to a customer of an AVF from that AVF. It should be noted 
that the distribution of the ACVC is subject to export restrictions as detailed by laws of 
the U.S. and other countries. 


10 

UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 


5. VALIDATION BY TESTING 


There are six steps which must be completed by a customer and the certiScation body so 
that the customer obtains a validation certificate and a VSR. The same ACVC version 
must be used to complete the steps described in this section. The ACVC version used for 
validation testing must be the current one: there is no exception to this rule. The AVF 
must be able to begin testing the Ada implementation at the customers site before the 
current ACVC version expires or else validation with that ACVC version will not be 
allowed. Anyone who intends to obtain a validation certificate should contact an AVF, as 
soon as the intention is known, to obtain advice on the handling of the ACVC, on 
interpretation of the test evaluation criteria, and on the operational details of that AVF’s 
management practices. 

5.1 Step One: Validation Agreement 

In order to obtain services from the certification body, an interested party must become a 
customer of an AVF by reaching a formal agreement. This agreement should address the 
following topics: 

a. identification of the Ada implementation to be tested and the ACVC version to be 
used; 

b. a statement of work, including analysis of prevalidation testing, validation, and 
preparation of the VSR; 

c. the format of data to be exchanged; 

d. a schedule of events and the site of validation; 

e. financial arrangements; 

f. retention of records; 

g. AVF liability; and 

h. confidentiality of validation information. 

The schedule for events, deliverables, and payments should take into account the fact 
that certain steps in validation require interaction with other members of the certification 
body (i.e., AVO or AJPO). The AVF will put forth its best effort to keep confidential a 
customer’s intent to obtain a validation certificate and the projected schedule for 
validation. This confidentiality will not be allowed to interfere with the normal review 
procedures of validation. H the customer requests confidentiality for reasons of national 
security, the customer will provide to the AVF an official statement of the security level 
that applies to the validation, and the AVF will obtain further guidance from the AJPO. 

5.2 Step Two; Prevalidation 

The requirements of this step are discussed separately so that the customer understands 
the interaction that is required with an AVF. 


11 

UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 


5.2.1 Customer Testing 

After entering into a formal agreement, the customer provides the necessary information 
for the AVF to prepare a cii^omized test suite. The customer then processes all the tests in 
this customized test suite using the candidate Ada implementation or another Ada 
implementation which produces the same result. If the iniplementation provides for 
options in the way in which programs are processed, then the.same set of options must be 
chosen for all test programs, with the possible exception of an option controlling the 
production of information output. Any other exception constitutes a test issue which must 
be resolved with the AVF (see Section 5.2.3). Test issues should be sent to the AVF for 
analysis as soon as they are known. 

5.2.2 Submission of Results 

Upon completion of testing, the customer delivers the complete set of results in the agreed 
format to the AVF. These results are accompanied by the following information: 

a. a bst of test programs which the customer claims are inapplicable, together with an 
explanation for these claims; 

b. a list of test programs which are disputed but not withdrawn (see Section 4.4) 
together with explanations (see Appendix B for format); 

c. an annotated sample command script; 

d. the complete set of option settings used for processing the customized test suite, 
including the default settings; and 

e. complete and current documentation for implementation dependent characteristics 
as required in the VSR. 

5.2.3 Test Issues 

A test issue may be any of the following: 

a. a missing or incomplete result to a test; 

b. a result presented in an inadequate form; 

c. a disagreement between the customer and the AVF as to the interpretation of a 
result; 

d. a change in the choice of options to be used during testing; 

e. a result which makes the Ada implementation fail the ACVC according to the 
current evaluation criteria; or 

f. an implementation dependent characteristic that may effect the conformity of the 
Ada implementation. 

The material submitted by the customer is analyzed by the AVF and any test issues are 
resolved. If the AVF and the customer cannot agree on a way to resolve a test issue, the 
issue will be referred to the AVO for a resolution. It may be justified to leave a test issue 
unresolved at prevalidation. For example, it may be impossible to check the processing 
of control characters by inspecting printed results. The AVF will note these unresolved 


12 

UNCLASSIFIED 


UNCLASSfiilED 


issues and describe the results which will be expected during validation testing. It is also 
possible that the customer iriforination provided for production of the customized test suite 
(see Section 5.2.1) was insufficient so that corrections to the customized test suite must be 
made.and additional processing will be required. 

5.2.4 Incomplete Prevalidadons 

The AW and the customer may agree that, at the customer’s risk, j)arts of the customized 
test suite need not be processed. The customer must certify .that the results from a 
previous prevalidation submitted to the AW or validation results obtained by the AW are 
identical to those that would have been obtained by the customer. The normal practice is 
to submit complete prevalidatioh results. 


5.2.5 Successfiil Prevalidation 

Prevalidation testing is successful if the analysis of results and the resolution of test issues 
show that the candidate Ada implementation passes the customized test suite. 
Prevalidation is successful with caveats if the results are satisfactory except that they 
were incomplete (see Section 5.2.4) or if resolution of some test issues are deferred until 
validation testing by agreement between the AW and the customer. 


5.3 Step Three: Validation Testing 

Upon successful completion of prevalidation, with or without caveats, the AW tests the 
Ada implementation at the site and time mutually agreed by the AW and customer. The 
AW prepares a customized test suite based upon customer information and any 
information collected during the resolution of test issues. The customized test suite is 
installed and processed under AW supervision. K the AW determines that the results 
agree with those obtained from prevalidation and are satisfactory with respect to the 
caveats, the testing has been successful!: otherwise, re-testing will be required. 

5.4 Step Four: Declaration of Conformance 

At some time during the validation but not later than at validation testing, the customer 
wiU complete and sign a declaration of conformance. The declaration states that the 
organization which is responsible for the production, maintenance or distribution of the 
Ada compiler is offering a product that is in compliance with the Ada programming 
language. The declaration becomes part of the AW records and is copied into the VSR. 
A Validation Certificate will not be issued unless a signed declaration of conformity has 
been provided to the AW. 


5.5 Step Five: Validation Summary Report 

A VSR is produced for each validation testing effort. A single VSR may cover validation 
testing of several Ada implementations, provided that they all have the same result profile. 
The VSR provides the following documentation pertaining to the validation effort: 

a. identification of the customer responsible for validation of the Ada implementation; 


13 

UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


b. identification of the organization responsible for the production, maintenance, or 
distribution of the Ada implementation; 

c. identification of the Ada compiler tested and of the hosf and target computer systems 
used during testing; 

d. options provided by the Ada compiler and identity of the options used for testing; 

e. description of the AVF testing procedure with sample command scripts that were 
used to process the test suite;' 

f. the inapplicable test programs and iinplementation dependent characteristics 
exhibited by the test programs that established inapplicability; 

g. the implementation dependent characteristics pertinent to the customized test suite; 

h. description of implementation dependent characteristics as detailed by “Appendix 
F” of [Ada 83]; 

i. withdrawn test programs; and 

j. modifications to test programs with an explanation for such modifications. 

5.5.1 VSR Production 

The VSR is prepared by the AVF but includes material which is produced by the customer, 
such as the “Appendix F” required by [Ada 83]. A draft of the VSR is sent to the AVO 
for approval before or after validation testing. The final version of the VSR is signed by 
the AVF, the AVO, and the AJPO. 

5.5.2 VSR Availability 

The final version of the VSR is available to the general public from NTIS and from the 
AVF that produced it. The AVF may require payment of a fee for VSR reproduction and 
mailing costs. 

5.6 Step Six: Validation Certificate 

For each successfully tested Ada implementation, one certificate is issued by authority of 
the AJPO. An example of a certificate is provided in Appendix C. The information on 
the validation certificate describes the tested Ada implementation: the source of this 
information is the signed declaration of conformance which the AVF provides to the AVO 
after completion of testing. The customer will ensure that the information contained on 
the certificate does not infringe on the rights of third parties and may be required to 
provide a written statement of consent from any tWrd party involved. Currently, 
validation certificates will expire one year after the expiration date of the ACVC version 
used for the validation. An entry in the list of compilers validated by testing will be made 
for each certificate issued. This entry will be removed when the certificate expires. 

5.7 Advertising Validated Status 

The customer will not advertise or make public claims that the Ada implementation is 
validated until after receiving a validation certificate or after receiving formal notification 


14 

UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 


from the AVF that the AJPO has issued a validation certificate. A waiver of 
confidentiality must be signed by a customer who intends to advertise the completion of 
events that indicate progress toward completion of validation. If a waiver of 
confidentiality has been signed with the AVF, the AVF will respond to inquiries about the 
customer’s advertisements or public claims by acknowledging receipt of validation 
materials (i.e., a formal agreement, pre-validation results, or validation testing results) 
without judgement concerning the success of the validation. 

5.8 Certification Mark 

The certification mark (see Appendix D for reproduction) may only be used on products 
directly associated with validated Ada compilers, such as disks, tapes, packaging, 
advertising, reference manuals and any other associated documentation where a 
significant portion relates to a validated Ada compiler. This unique mark distinguishes 
compilers validated in accordance with the rules in this document. The certification mark 
can be reproduced in any size, color, or combination of colors. 


15 

UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 


6. VALroATION3Y REGISTRATION 


6.1 Result Profile 

Two Ada implementations which pass a given ACVC version have the same result profile 
when: 

a. they use the same customized test suite; 

b. inapplicable test programs in the customized test suite are the same for both 
implementations; 

c. inapplicable test programs are inapplicable for the same reasons; and 

d. any implementation dependent characteristics tested for by the customized test suite 
are the same for both implementations. 

6.2 Derived Implementations 

Any tested Ada implementation may serve as a base implementation when all of the 
following conditions are tme: 

a. the validation certificate for the base implementation has an expiration date at least 
three months beyond the time of derivation; 

b. the host and target computer systems of the base and derived Ada implementations 
have compatible instruction sets and operating systems; 

c. the Ada implementation proposed for registration contains an Ada compiler that was 
obtained from the Ada compiler of the base implementation by changes that are 
within the scope of accepted software maintenance practices; and 

d. Tlie result profile is the same for the base implementation and the Ada 
implementation derived from it (see Section 6.3). 

Common examples of compatible instruction sets and operating systems are two different 
computer system models in a manufacturer’s product line or the computer systems 
produced by different manufacturers that use the same fimctional units and operating 
systems. 

The changes that may be made to an Ada compiler for the purpose of derivation will be 
within the scope of software maintenance and applied to the domain of compiler 
construction. Changes must be classified as corrective, adaptive, or perfective. Examples 
of these changes are the correction of a compiler error, the adaption to an operating 
system upgrade, the addition of a floating point processor to a small target computer 
system, or the perfection of a garbage collection algorithm. 

6.3 Registration Request 

Registration of an Ada implementation can be achieved only through the AVF which 
validated the base implementation. Any interested party may initiate a registration by 


17 

UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 


sending a request to the appropriate AVF and paying a fee established by the AVF. The 
registration request must contain the following information: 

a. reference to the base implementation and its validation certificate; 

b. identifying description of the Ada implementation(s) that is being derived from the 
base implementation; 

[Note that this description must include the nomenclature of the computer 
system(s), including operating system for both host and target computer system (s), or 
run-time system for the target computer, if applicable, the Ada compiler name and 
version identifier, and identifier for any components of the host and target computer 
systems listed in the VSR for the base implementation.] 

c. a signed declaration of conformance for the derived impIementetion(s); 

d. a consent agreement from any other party having a legal interest in the Ada 
compiler; 

e. a statement as to whether the Ada implementation(s) have been tested with the 
customized test suite used in the validation of the base implementation; and 

f. a statement supported by appropriate evidence that the Ada implementation (s) may, 
in fact, be derived from the referenced base implementation. 

The statement, required by f. above, will include the classification of software 
maintenance changes (see Section 6.2) and the effect these changes have on the result 
profile; will list the differences between the computer systems of the base implementation 
and the derived implementation; and will describe the effect these differences have on the 
Ada compiler. The information provided in this statement is the rationale for the claim 
made in the declaration of conformance and for the requirement that the result profile is 
the same as for the base implementation, (see Section 6.1). 

6.4 AVF Evaluation 

The AVF will not perform testing on derived implementations. The AVF will review the 
registration request for completeness and the plausibility of information. The certification 
body may require the customer to provide written statements concerning a result profile 
from any third party involved. If the AVF and customer cannot reach an agreement on 
the registration request, the issue is referred to the AVO for a decision. 

6.5 Registration 

Registration requests which are acceptable to the AVF are forwarded to the AVO for 
registration with the AJPO as validated Ada implementations untested by an AVF. The 
customer will be notified by the AVF when the AVO requests registration. A validation 
certificate will not be issued for these derived implementations but the customer may use 
the certification mark awarded to the base implementation. The list of derived 
implementations and information prorided in the registration request will be available to 
the public from the AJPO. 


18 

UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 


6.6 Expiration of Validated Status 

A derived implementation loses its status of being validated if it is challenged successfully 
(see Section 6.7), upon expiration of the validation certificate of its base implementation, 
or when registration is revoked by the customer. 

6.7 Challenges 

Any derived implementation may be challenged by any interested party through the AVF 
which initiated its registration. The challenger will pay a challenge fee to the appropriate 
AVF and will submit a challenge request which: 

a. identifies the derived implementation being challenged; 

b. names one ACVC test from the customized test suite together with its 
implementation dependent parameters, if any; and 

c. describes in which way the implementation will fail this test. 

The AVF will send this challenge to its registration customer asking for comment. The 
challenge will be considered settled if the registration is revoked by the registration 
customer; otherwise, the challenge will be settled as outlined in Section 6.9. 

6.8 Challenge Mark 

The AVF will inform the AVO that a challenge for a given derived implementation has 
been received. The derived implementation will then be marked as “challenged” on the 
list of validated Ada compilers maintained by the AJPO. Information pertaining to the 
challenge may be requested by any interested party and received trom the AVF. It should 
be noted that a challenge mark applies only to the derived implementation which was 
named and does not indicate any judgement about the conformity of the challenged 
implementation. 

6.9 Challenge Test 

The AVF will conclude a formal agreement with the challenger which covers the AVF’s 
cost for performing a challenge test. For challenge testing, the challenged derived 
implementation will be tested against the named ACVC test. The challenger will provide 
access to the challenged derived implementation and appropriate expertise to facilitate 
the AVF test. The AVO will be informed of the test result. Depending on its result, the 
AVO will settle the challenge by either removing the challenge mark or the derived 
implementation from the list of validated Ada compilers. 


19 

UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


APPENDIX A ' 

Declaration of Conformance 


Customer: _ 

Ada Validation Facility: _ 

ACVC Version: _ 

Ada Implementation 

Ada Compiler Name:_ 

Version: _ 

Host Computer System: _^_ 

Target Computer System: _ 

Customer’s Declaration 

I, the undersigned, representing <customer> declare that <customer> has no knowledge of 
deliberate deviations from the Ada Language Standard ANSI/MIL-STD-1815A in the 
implementation(s) listed in this declaration. 


Signature 


Date 


A-1 

UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 


APPENDIX B 

Implementer Dispute Format 

[part A] 

Implementer: 

Configuration: 

ACVC Version: 

Pre-Validation Submittal Date: 


<implementer’s name> 

<host & target hardware & operating systems> 
< ACVC version#> 

<due date for in-house results> 


[Part A will be completed once by each implementer; part B will be completed for each 
dispute. It is not necessary for a pre-validation date to have been established. Part A 
information is treated as confidential.] 


B-1 

UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 




[partB] 

Reference: <test name {,test name}> 

Summary: <brief description of the dispute> 

Discussion: <detailed description of the dispute> 


[In this Discussion, arguments should be specified using test line #s and references to 
pertinent sections of the Ada standard. Commentaries (AI-xxxx), or the ACVC 
Implementer’s Guide (AIG)*. The implementer must describe the behavior of the 
implementation for the test or tests that are disputed, stating the particular test messages 
that are produced. It is sufficient for the detailed description to be limited to the 
particular segment of test code that is disputed. Relevant source code with compiler 
messages should be included. (For a group of tests that cause much the same behavior, it 
is sufficient for a detailed description to be given for one of them, with the relevant line 
numbers given for the like problems in the related tests.) 

If the argument depends upon implementation constraints of hardware or software (e.g., 
characteristics of the operating system), then these should be specified; the particular 
computer and operating system should be identified. It is especially important that 
implementations that fail to pass some test due to capacity limitations be described in 
enough detail for the AVO to assess the reasonableness of these limitations. 

Failure to fully specify the points pertinent to a dispute might result in an adverse decision 
being made, with the disputer having to further argue the case with a second submittal to 
the AVO. Yet it is possible that the Summary will suffice to adequately present a dispute. 

*(The AIG is not an official interpretation of the Ada standard but it might provide useful 
information in support of a dispute in explaining implementation choices.)] 


B-2 

UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 


APPENDIX C 

Validation Certificate 


Ada Joint Program Office 


Ada Validation Certificate <number> 


The 

<compiler name> 

was validated by testing using ACVC version <number> 

in the configuration consisting of the 

Host Computer System 
<description> 

and the 

Target Computer System 
<description> 


Ada Validation Facility: 
Date of Issue: 
Expiration Date: 
Validation Customer: 




C-1 

UNCLASSIFIED 





Certification Mark 









D-1 










UNCLASSIFIED 




APPENDIX E 
Poiiiis of Contact 


Ada Validation Facility Managers 
Mr. Bobby Evans 

Standard Languages and Environments Division 
Engineering Applications Directorate 
DCS/Communications-Computer Systems 
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base 
Ohio 45433-6503 

Ms. Jane Pink 

Mr. Adrian Groom 

The National Computing Centre, Ltd. 

Oxford Road 
Manchester 
England, M17ED 

Dr. Jacqueline Sidi 
AFNOR 

Tour Europe, cedex 7 
F-92080 Paris la Defence 
France 

Dr. William Dashiell 

National Institute of Standards and Technology 
National Computer Systems Laboratory 
Building 225, 

Room A266 

Gaithersburg, MD 20899 

Dr. Stephan Heilbrunner 
lABG, Dept SZT 
Einsteinstrasse 
D-8012 Ottobrunn 
Federal Republic of Germany 

ACVC Maintenance Organization 

Mr. Steve Wilson 

Standard Languages and Environments Division 
Engineering Applications Directorate 
DCS/Communications-Computer Systems 
W'right-Patterson Air Force Base 
Ohio 45433-6503 


E-1 

UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


Ada Joint Program Office 
William S. Ritchie 

Acting Director Ada Joint Program Office 

Deputy Director, Defense Research and Engineering (R&AT) 

Pentagon Room 3E114 (Fern St.) 

Washington, D.C. 20301-3081 
Telephone: + 202-694-0209 

Ms. Barbara Fleming 
Ada Joint Program Office 
Pentagon Room 3E114 (Fern St.) 

Washington, D.C. 20201-3081 
Telephone: + 202-694-0209 
net: bfleming@ajpo.sei.cmu.edu 

Ada Validation Organization 

Dr. John F. Kramer, Jr. 

Institute for Defense Analyses 
1801N. Beauregard St. 

Alexandria, Va. 22311 
Telephone:+703-824-5504 
net:laamer@ida.org 

Ms. Audrey A. Hook 
Institute for Defense Analyses 
1801N. Beauregard St. 

Alexandria, Va. 22311 
Telephone:+703-824-5501 
net: hook@ida,org 

Ada Information Center 

Ms. Mary Armstrong 
Ada Information Center 
HT Research Institute 
4600 Forbes Blvd. 

Lanham, Md. 207064312 
Telephone: + 703-685-1477 

ACVC and VSR Distribution 

National Technical Information Service 
U.S. Department of Commerce 
5285 Port Royal Road 
Springfield, Va. 22161 
Telephone:+703-487-4650 


E-2 

UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 


DoD Directives and Ada Policy Statements 

Ms. Jan Bodanyi 
OASDPA 

Pentagon Room 2E757 
Washington, D.C. 20301-1400 
Telephone: + 202-695-0192 

Validated Compiler Lists 

AJPO - Official Ada lists, updated monthly. 

Mary Armstrong 
Ada Information Center 
nr Research Institute 
4600 Forbes Boulevard 
Lanham, MD 20706-4312 
Telephone: + 703-685-1477 

NIST - All FIPS validated compilers, updated quarterly. 

National Institute of Standards and Technology 
National Computer and Telecommunications Laboratory 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 


E-3 

UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 


APPENDIX F 
References 


[AJPO 87] Ada Joint Program Office: Ada Compiler Validation Procedures and 
Guidelines, Version 1.1,1 January 1987 

[ANSI 83] American National Standards Institute and United States Department of 
Defense: ANSI/MIL-STD-1815A The Programming Language Ada, 1983 Note: This 
standard is identical with ISO/8652-1987 and FIPS 119, 1985. The ANSI 83 is available 
from vanous publishers and from the U. S. Government at the following addresses: 

Commanding Officer 
Naval Publications and Forms Center 
Attn: NPODS 
5801 Tabor Avenue 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19120 

Superintendent of Documents 
Government Printing Office 
Washington, D.C. 20402 

The ISO/8652-1987 (French and English versions) is available from: 

AFNOR 

Tour Europe, cedex 7 
F-92080 Paris la Defence 
France 


[ANSI/IEEE 83] American National Standards Institute and Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers, Inc., Standard 729-1983; ”ANSI/IEEE Standard Glossary of 
Software Engineering Terminology”. 

[DoD 87] Department of Defense Directives: Number 3405.1, 2 April 1987 Subject: 
Computer Programming Language Policy and Number 3405.2, 30 March 1987 Subject: 
Use of Ada in Weapon Systems. 

[FIRMR 87] General Services Administration, Federal Information Resources 
Management Regulations (FIRMR) 201.8-109, 10 July 1981, Subject: Validation of 
Compilers. 

[ISO 74] International Standards Organization: ISO 2382/1-1974 Data Processing - 
Vocabulary - Section 01: Fundamental Terms. 

[ISO/IEC 86] International Standards Organization: ISO/IEC, Guide 2, 5th edition 1986 - 
General Terms and Their Definitions Concerning Standardization and Related 
Activities. 


F-1 

UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


Distribution List for IDA Document D-568 
NAME AND ADDRESS NUMBER OF COPIES 

Sponsor 

Dr. John P. Solomond 2 

Director 

Ada Joint Program Office 
Room 3E114 
The Pentagon 

Washington, D.C. 20301-3081 
Other 

Defense Technical Information Center 
Cameron Station 
Alexandria, VA 22314 

IT Research Institute 
4600 Forbes Blvd., Suite 300 
Lanham, MD 20706 
Attn. AnnEustice 

Mr. Bobby Evans 1 

Standard Languages and Environments Division 
Engineering Applications Directorate 
DCS/Communications-Computer Systems 
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base 
Ohio 45433-6503 

Ms. Jane Pink 

The National Computing Centre, Ltd. 

Oxford Road 
Manchester 
England, M17ED 

Mr. Adrian Groom 
The National Computing Centre, Ltd. 

Oxford Road 
Manchester 
England, M17ED 

Dr. Jacqueline Sidi 
AFNOR 

Tour Europe, cedex 7 
F-92080 Paris la Defence 
France 


1 


1 


1 


2 


1 (camera-ready copy) 


Distribution List-1 
UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 


NAME AND ADDRESS NUMBER OF COPIES 

Dr. William Dashiell 1. 

National Institute of Standards and Technology 
National Computer Systems Laboratory 
Building 225, Room A266 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 

Dr. Stephan Heilbrunner 1 

lABG, Dept SZT 

Einsteinstrasse 

D-8012 Ottobrunn 

Federal Republic of Germany 

CSED Review Panel 

Dr. Dan Alpert, Director 1 

Program in Science, Technology & Society 
University of Illinois 
Room 201 

912-1/2 West Illinois Street 
Urbana, Illinois 61801 

Dr. Thomas C. Brandt 1 

10302 Bluet Terrace 
Upper Marlboro, MD 20772 

Dr. Ruth Davis 1 

The Pymatuning Group, Inc. 

2000 N. 15th Street, Suite 707 
Arlington, VA 22201 

Dr. C.E. Hutchinson, Dean 1 

Thayer School of Engineering 
Dartmouth College 
Hanover, NH 03755 

Mr. A.J. Jordano 1 

Manager, Systems & Software 

Engineering Headquarters 

Federal Systems Division 

6600 Rockledge Dr. 

Bethesda, MD 20817 

Dr. Ernest W. Kent 1 

Philips Laboratories 
345 Scarborogh Road 
Briarcliff Manor, NY 10510 


Distribution List-2 
UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 


NAME AND ADDRESS 

Dr. John M. Palms, President 
Georgia State University 
University Plaza 
Atlanta, GA 30303 

Mr. Keith Uncapher 

University of Southern California 

OlinHaU 

330a University Park 
Los Angeles, CA 90089-1454 

IDA 

General W.Y. Smith, HQ 
Mr. Philip Major, HQ 
Dr. Robert E. Roberts, HQ 
Ms. Anne Douville, CSED 
Ms. Audrey A. Hook, CSED 
Mr. Dan Lehman, CSED 
Mr. Robert Knapper, CSED 
Mr. Terry Mayfield, CSED 
Ms. Katydean Price, CSED 
Dr. Richard L. Wexelblat, CSED 
IDA Control & Distribution Vault 


NUMBER OF COPIES 
1 


1 


1 

1 

1 

1 

2 

1 

1 

1 

2 

1 

3 


Distribution List-3 
UNCLASSIFIED 







