NASA/CR- 1999-209356 



The Aviation System Analysis Capability 
Noise Impact Model 


Russell A. Ege and Jerome Brown 

Logistics Management Institute, McLean, Virginia 

Kevin Bradley and Fabio Grandi 
Wyle Laboratories, Arlington, Virginia 


July 1999 



The NASA STI Program Office ... in Profile 


Since its founding, NASA has been dedicated 
to the advancement of aeronautics and space 
science. The NASA Scientific and Technical 
Information (STI) Program Office plays a key 
part in helping NASA maintain this 
important role. 

The NASA STI Program Office is operated by 
Langley Research Center, the lead center for 
NASA’s scientific and technical information. 
The NASA STI Program Office provides 
access to the NASA STI Database, the 
largest collection of aeronautical and space 
science STI in the world. The Program Office 
is also NASA’s institutional mechanism for 
disseminating the results of its research and 
development activities. These results are 
published by NASA in the NASA STI Report 
Series, which includes the following report 
types: 

• TECHNICAL PUBLICATION. Reports of 
completed research or a major significant 
phase of research that present the results 
of NASA programs and include extensive 
data or theoretical analysis. Includes 
compilations of significant scientific and 
technical data and information deemed 

to be of continuing reference value. NASA 
counterpart or peer-reviewed formal 
professional papers, but having less 
stringent limitations on manuscript 
length and extent of graphic 
presentations. 

• TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM. 

Scientific and technical findings that are 
preliminary or of specialized interest, 
e.g., quick release reports, working 
papers, and bibliographies that contain 
minimal annotation. Does not contain 
extensive analysis. 

• CONTRACTOR REPORT. Scientific and 
technical findings by NASA-sponsored 
contractors and grantees. 


• CONFERENCE PUBLICATION. 

Collected papers from scientific and 
technical conferences, symposia, 
seminars, or other meetings sponsored or 
co-sponsored by NASA. 

• SPECIAL PUBLICATION. Scientific, 
technical, or historical information from 
NASA programs, projects, and missions, 
often concerned with subjects having 
substantial public interest. 

• TECHNICAL TRANSLATION. English- 
language translations of foreign scientific 
and technical material pertinent to 
NASA’s mission. 

Specialized services that complement the 
STI Program Office’s diverse offerings include 
creating custom thesauri, building customized 
databases, organizing and publishing 
research results . . . even providing videos. 

For more information about the NASA STI 
Program Office, see the following: 

• Access the NASA STI Program Home 
Page at http://www.sti.nasa.gov 

• Email your question via the Internet to 
help@sti.nasa.gov 

• Fax your question to the NASA STI 
Help Desk at (301) 621-0134 

• Telephone the NASA STI Help Desk at 
(301) 621-0390 

• Write to: 

NASA STI Help Desk 

NASA Center for AeroSpace Information 

7121 Standard Drive 

Hanover, MD 21076-1320 



NASA/CR- 1999-209356 



The Aviation System Analysis Capability 
Noise Impact Model 


Russell A. Ege and Jerome Brown 

Logistics Management Institute, McLean, Virginia 

Kevin Bradley and Fabio Grandi 
Wyle Laboratories, Arlington, Virginia 


National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration 

Prepared for Langley Research Center 
under Contract NAS2- 14361 


Langley Research Center 
Hampton, Virginia 23681-2199 


July 1999 



Available from: 


NASA Center for AeroSpace Information (CASI) 
7121 Standard Drive 
Hanover, MD 21076-1320 
(301) 621-0390 


National Technical Information Service (NTIS) 
5285 Port Royal Road 
Springfield, VA 22161-2171 
(703) 605-6000 



Contents 


Summary 1 

Introduction 3 

NIM Background and Purpose 3 

Anticipated Use of the Noise Model 4 

Overview of Model Capabilities and Actions 4 

Database Access 5 

Case Development 5 

Computation 8 

Results Output 8 

NIM Operation 9 

Model Components 9 

User Interfaces 9 

Databases 20 

Computational Modules 21 

Connecting the Components 22 

Sample Case 24 

Database Preparation and Data Preprocessing 25 

Calculation Steps 37 

Model Accuracy and Limitations 44 

Conclusions 45 

Bibliography 

Appendix A Flight Tracks and Noise Contours 
Appendix B Time and Distance Savings 
Appendix C Airport Profiles 
Appendix D Data Input Screens 
Appendix E Abbreviations 


iii 



Appendix F Existing Aircraft Noise Parameters 

Appendix G Aircraft Perceived Decibel Level by Thrust and Distance 

Figures 

Figure 1. Noise Impact Model Flowchart 4 

Figure 2. Existing Flight Tracks for Orlando International Airport 6 

Figure 3. Optimized Flight Tracks for Orlando International Airport 7 

Figure 4. Sample NIM Output Table 14 

Figure 5. NIM Batch Program Graphic Output 15 

Figure 6. Data Flow for the NIM 23 

Figure 7. Data Preparation For the NIM 24 

Figure A-l. Atlanta International Flight Tracks and 1993 Noise Contours A-2 

Figure A-2. Boston Logan International Airport Flight Tracks and 1993 Noise 

Contours A-3 

Figure A-3. Cincinnati-Northern Kentucky International Airport Flight Tracks and 

1993 Noise Contours A-4 

Figure A-4. Dallas/Ft. Worth International Flight Tracks and 1993 Noise Contours A-5 

Figure A-5. Detroit Metropolitan Wayne County Airport Flight Tracks and 1993 

Noise Contours A-6 

Figure A-6. Newark International Airport Flight Tracks and 1993 Noise Contours A-7 

Figure A-7. Dulles International Airport Flight Tracks and 1993 Noise Contours A-8 

Figure A-8. John F. Kennedy International Flight Tracks and 1993 Noise Contours A-9 

Figure A-9. Los Angeles International Llight Tracks and 1993 Noise Contours A-10 

Ligure A-10. La Guardia International Llight Tracks and 1993 Noise Contours A- 11 

Ligure A-ll. Orlando International Airport Flight Tracks and 1993 Noise Contours A-12 

Figure A-12. Mimieapolis-St. Paul International Airport Flight Tracks and 1993 

Noise Contours A- 13 

Figure A- 13. Chicago O’Hare International Airport Flight Tracks and 1993 Noise 

Contours A- 14 

Figure A- 14. Pittsburgh International Airport Flight Tracks and 1993 Noise Contours ... A-15 

Figure A-15. Seattle-Tacoma International Airport Flight Tracks and 1993 Noise 

Contours A- 16 


iv 



Contents 


Figure A- 16. San Francisco International Airport Flight Tracks and 1993 Noise 

Contours A- 17 

Figure D-l. NIM Home Page D-l 

Figure D-2. NIM Scenario File Locator D-2 

Figure D-3. Airport Selector D-3 

Figure D-4. Global Parameters (Part 2) D-4 

Figure D-5. Aircraft Operations Scaling D-4 

Figure D-6. Flight track Optimization D-5 

Figure D-7. Alternative Runway Utilization D-6 

Figure D-8. Global Noise Reduction D-7 

Figure D-9. Aircraft Selection (Part 1) D-8 

Figure D-10. Aircraft Selection (Part 2) D-9 

Figure D- 1 1 . Select Number of Countour Levels D-10 

Figure D-12. Set Contour Decibel Levels D-ll 

Figure D-13. User Comments D-12 

Figure D-14. Save Scenario File D-13 

Figure D-l 5. Run the Noise Impact Model D-14 

Tables 

Table 1. Data Types and Sources 5 

Table 2. Alternate Runway Use Effects 12 

Table 3. Sample OAG to INM Substitution List 26 

Table 4. Global Aircraft Parameters 37 

Table 5. Aircraft Scaling 38 

Table B-l. Time and Distance Savings for Optimized Flight Tracks at Study Airports B-l 

Table C-l. Airport Profiles C-l 

Table F-l. Aircraft Noise Parameters F-l 

Table G-l. Aircraft Decibel Level By Thrust And Distance G-l 


v 



The Aviation System Analysis Capability 
Noise Impact Model 


Summary 

The primary purpose of the ASAC Noise Impact Model (NIM) is to enable users 
to examine the impact that quieter aircraft technologies and/or operations might 
have on community noise impact and on air carrier operating efficiency at any of 
16 large- and medium-sized U.S. airports, as well as, one European airport. These 
are Atlanta (ATL), Boston (BOS), Cincinnati (CVG), Dallas-Ft. Worth (DFW), 
Detroit (DTW), Newark (EWR), Washington-Dulles (IAD), New York- Kennedy 
(JFK), Eos Angeles (FAX), New York-Fa Guardia (EGA), Orlando (MCO), 
Minneapolis (MSP), Chicago- O’ Hare (ORD), Pittsburgh (PIT), Seattle (SEA), 

San Francisco (SFO), and Zurich (ZRH). 

To use the NIM, an analyst selects an airport and case year for study, chooses a 
runway use configuration and set of flight tracks for the case, and has the option of 
reducing noise of the aircraft that operate at the airport by 0-40 decibels. A default 
atm ual- average runway use pattern is available for each airport. This is the current 
existing configuration and may incorporate preferential runway use patterns due to 
community noise restrictions. For some airports, NIM provides, as an alternative 
scenario, a more efficient runway use configuration that could be used if noise 
were not an issue. Alternate runway use patterns, capacity, and delay values are 
available for three airports: Eos Angeles International (FAX), Chicago’s O’Hare 
International (ORD), and San Francisco International (SFO). Fikewise, two sets of 
flight tracks are available for 1 1 airports: one that represents current conditions, 
including noise abatement tracks, which avoid flying over noise- sensitive areas; 
and a second set that offers more efficient routing in or out of the terminal area. 

The remaining five airports do not use noise abatement tracks, so no alternate flight 
tracks are provided for DFW, DTW, IAD, ORD, and PIT. 

NIM computes the resultant noise impact and, for some airports, reports the 
change in airfield capacity and delay associated with the efficient runway use con- 
figuration, and reports the time and distance saved from using the more efficient, 
alternate flight tracks. The relationship between runway use patterns and airport 
capacity is a new capability with this release of NIM. Previously, the capability to 
analyze flight tracks was provided through the stand-alone Flight Track Noise Im- 
pact Model (FTNIM). Both functions are now combined and use the same noise 
and impact calculation algorithms. 


1 



Noise impact is characterized in three ways: the size of the off-airport noise con- 
tour footprint, the number of people living within the various contours, and the 
number of homes located in the same contours. The change in airfield capacity is 
estimated by comparing the difference in the number of peak hourly arrivals and 
departures for the noise abatement pattern with the more efficient runway use con- 
figuration. Delay is estimated as a function of capacity and demand. Flight track 
time and distance savings are calculated by comparing the noise abatement flight 
path length to the more efficient alternate routing. 

The current version of NIM is designed for World Wide Web implementation. 
Access is through the ASAC home page (http://www.asac.lmi.org). Worldwide 
Web HTML screens are used for all input, case processing, and output. These 
NIM core input screens, are used to define the parameters for a single airport case, 
scenario file. Then the NIM on an NT Server processes the inputs, compute noise 
impacts, and displays the results in an output text table, and also graphically in a 
jpeg file. The model is designed to be simple to run; a single airport scenario may 
take from 5 minutes to an hour, depending on the complexity of the case. 

Noise calculations are performed using the core modules of the FAA’s Integrated 
Noise Model (INM) Version 4.1 1. Population and housing counts are computed 
using an algorithm that incorporates 1990 census data, modified to account for 
population growth and nonresidential areas such as the airport property and nearby 
water bodies. The geographic information system is built on Maplnfo Pro-Server, 
a commercially available mapping software package for network applications. 

We recognize that modifying runway usage patterns or relocating aircraft flight 
patterns are technically and politically sensitive issues. This model is intended as a 
simple analysis tool and does not presume to offer prescriptions for actual airfield 
operation. Some airports and airlines have suggested that operational changes may 
be possible in certain circumstances. However, existing noise mitigation programs 
at most airports cannot be modified without further technical review and open 
public involvement. The options included in NIM provide important insights into 
the relationship between noise abatement and airline efficiency to guide research, 
not public policy. 


2 



The Aviation System Analysis Capability 


Introduction 

This introduction reviews our past research into the relationship between noise 
abatement and airline efficiency is highlighted, describing the proposed uses for 
the ASAC Noise Impact Model (NIM). The second section describes, in general, 
terms how the model works. The third section provides a more thorough report of 
the program’s flow and methodology. The fourth section presents a sample case. 
Then, the final section offers conclusions. 

NIM Background and Puipose 

During 1994, the Logistics Management Institute (LMI) initiated a NASA- 
sponsored study to analyze the economic impacts of local noise restrictions on air 
carrier operations. The project goals included documenting which noise abatement 
measures have the most impact on the way airlines operate and assessing the po- 
tential economic value of quieter aircraft technologies. Results of this study are 
documented hi a LMI research report (WR 96-19) entitled “Aircraft Noise Reduc- 
tion and Air Carrier Efficiency.” 

Since that initial study, LMI, with oversight from NASA Langley Research 
Center, expanded the scope of work and began developing a noise impact model 
to be integrated into ASAC. This model is intended to help users examine the 
effects that new aircraft technology may have on the aviation industry. 

The first generation noise impact model, the Flight Track Noise Impact Model 
(FTNIM), was released in early 1997 as a stand-alone computer program. This 
model examined the combined effects of quieter aircraft and more efficient flight 
tracks at eight U.S. airports. This version is described in the NASA Contractor 
Report (201683) entitled The Flight Track Noise Impact Model. 

Work under the current task has developed a tool that NASA researchers and 
others can use to examine how runway use patterns are related to airline operating 
efficiency and community noise impact. We developed the capability to examine 
the relationship between more efficient runway usage and community noise 
impact. This concept, the Runway Use Noise Impact Model (RUNIM), has now 
been combined with FTNIM. The new merged version is called, simply, the 
ASAC NIM and will be hosted on the World Wide Web. hi addition to 
incorporating the runway use model for three airports, the scope of the FTNIM 
analysis capability has been expanded to a total of 16 large- and medium- sized 
U.S. airports and one foreign airport. 


3 



Anticipated Use of the Noise Model 


Using NIM, an analyst can ask “How could airline operating efficiency be 
improved if noise were not a problem at this airport?” To facilitate this analysis, 
NIM provides a baseline set of noise abatement procedures at 16 airports, enables 
the user to model quieter aircraft, offers alternative runway use patterns and flight 
tracks for a subset of these 16 airports, and assesses the community noise impact 
that results when the quieter airplanes use the alternate procedures. By exercising 
NIM for successive cases, analysts can determine the reduction in the magnitude 
of the noise source from one or more specific aircraft types required to hold the 
community noise impact constant, or even reduce it, while simultaneously 
improving airline operating efficiency. 

Overview of Model Capabilities and Actions 

The NIM accesses a collection of databases, gathers and processes the information 
needed to analyze a user’s case, executes two distinct computational actions, and 
documents the results along with a case history. Each of these functions — data- 
base access, case development, computation, and results output — are outlined be- 
low and are depicted in Figure 1. 

Figure 1 . Noise Impact Model Flowchart 



4 







The Aviation System Analysis Capability 


Database Access 

NIM operates on five types of data derived from the sources noted in the Table 1. 

Table 1. Data Types and Sources 


Data type 

Source 

Airport fleet mix and operations 
Airport operations analysis 

Runway use database 
Flight track database 

Aircraft performance and noise data 
Population and housing 

LMI- AS AC 
LMI 

LMI 

LMI 

FAA - Integrated Noise Model 
1990 U S. Census 


Case Development 

To develop a scenario, the user chooses one of the three case years for which 
operations data are available (1993, 2005, or 2015) and selects one of the 
following 17 airports: 

♦ The William B. Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport (ATL) 

♦ General Edward Lawrence Logan International Airport (BOS) 

♦ Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky International Aiiport (CVG) 

♦ Dallas-Fort Worth International Aiiport (DFW) 

♦ Detroit Metropolitan Wayne County Aiiport (DTW) 

♦ Newark International Airport (EWR) 

♦ Washington Dulles International Aiiport (IAD) 

♦ John F. Kennedy International Aiiport (JFK) 

♦ Los Angeles International Aiiport (LAX) 

♦ La Guardia Airport (LGA) 

♦ Orlando International Airport (MCO) 

♦ Minneapolis-St. Paul International Aiiport (MSP) 

♦ Chicago-O’Hare International Aiiport (ORD) 

♦ Greater Pittsburgh International Airport (PIT) 


5 





♦ Seattle-Tacoma International Airport (SEA) 

♦ San Francisco International Airport (SFO). 

♦ Zurich International Airport (ZRH), 

Once the airport and case year have been chosen, NIM provides the default run- 
way use configuration and flight tracks, which may include noise abatement 
procedures. For three airports (FAX, ORD, SFO), users have the option of select- 
ing a more efficient runway use configuration. For eleven airports (ATF, BOS, 
CVG, EWR, JFK, FAX, EGA, MCO, MSP, SEA, and SFO) a set of flight tracks 
have been developed excluding community noise impact as a factor. 

If the runway use configuration is improved, airfield operations become more 
efficient, potentially improving airfield capacity and reducing delay. If flight 
tracks are optimized, the existing noise abatement flight tracks are replaced with 
tracks designed for more direct routing into or out of the terminal area, with 
associated time and distance savings. The change in airfield capacity and delay, 
and the time and distance savings from each efficient flight track have been pre- 
computed. 

Figure 2. Existing Flight Tracks for Orlando International Airport 



Note: Two flight tracks execute a 270 degree turn when departing to the north. This routing 
avoids flying over the dense residential population of Orlando, immediately north of the airport. 


6 



The Aviation System Analysis Capability 


Figure 3. Optimized Flight Tracks for Orlando International Airport 



Note: In this figure, the same two departure flight tracks have been relocated to fly over 
Orlando. This saves time and fuel for the aircraft operator, but would only be acceptable to the 
community if the aircraft were quiet enough not to create adverse noise impacts. 


Figures 2 and 3 demonstrate the concept of using more efficient airfield and flight 
track operation procedures; shown are existing and optimized flight tracks for Or- 
lando International Airport. Current noise restrictions limit the use of north-flow 
runway use configurations due to the dense residential population of Orlando, im- 
mediately north of the airport. When aircraft are operating to the north, they 
must execute a time-consuming flight path to avoid over-flying the populated areas. 

The introduction of new technology aircraft, with lower noise characteristics, 
would potentially increase the use of north-flow configurations and improve 
airfield capacity. While noise is a factor in determining airfield capacity, there are 
several other important factors, including wind, weather conditions, and airspace 
management issues. The NIM database of runway use configurations has been 
developed in cooperation with airport operators to ensure that the assessment of 
alternate patterns are realistic, given all the other factors that influence airfield 
operations and capacity. 

Scrutiny of flight procedures at most airports reveals that moving flight tracks 
brings up several airspace management issues. For example, with three large air- 
ports sharing the same airspace, the New York Metropolitan Area has a very com- 
plex, high-density air traffic environment. A noise abatement flight track at 
Newark cannot simply be relocated without taking the traffic patterns at La 
Guardia and Kennedy airports into account, hi all cases, we exercised caution in 


7 





defining alternative routes to ensure that these optimized tracks are realistic in 
terms of safety, aircraft performance, and air traffic management. 

The standard noise abatement and alternate efficient flight tracks for each of the 
study airports are shown in Appendix A. The time and distance savings estimated 
for each of the optimized tracks are included in Appendix B. 

The numbers of departures for the case airport and year are displayed for four 
categories of jet-powered commercial aircraft: wide- or narrow-body and short- or 
long-haul (an equal number of arrivals are assumed), hi NIM, a long-haul flight is 
1,000 statute miles or more. Figures for each category of aircraft may be increased 
or decreased at the user’s discretion. The number of departures by all other aircraft 
(i.e., propeller, general aviation, helicopters, and military) will be displayed but 
may not be changed. 

The fleet mix for the facility and year also are displayed, and the user may reduce 
the modeled noise level for any commercial jet aircraft type by 0-40 decibels (dB). 
NIM also enables users to reduce the noise level of an entire category of aircraft 
(wide- or narrow-body) in one step and then go back and selectively modify the 
noise-reduction factors for individual aircraft types. 

Computation 

NIM exercises two computational modules as part of the analysis. First, it calls up 
the FAA’s EMM to compute the noise impact for the user’s scenario. Noise impact 
is defined with a set of selectable noise contours between 55-85 dB day-night av- 
erage sound level (DNL). DNL is the industry standard for evaluating noise im- 
pact, and it accounts for the number and type of flights as well as the fleet mix and 
flight tracks. Operations conducted between 10 p.m. and 7 a.m. are assigned a 10 
dB penalty to reflect their greater intrusiveness. The noise contours show which 
areas around the airport experience the greatest noise and the average noise level. 
The 1993 baseline DNL contours are shown for all study airports in Appendix A. 

Second, NIM exercises a geographic information system (GIS) to compare the 
noise impact areas with the residential neighborhoods and count the number of 
homes and people within the noise contours. The GIS module also subtracts the 
airport property and bodies of water from the noise contour areas computed by 
INM to give an “off-airport” area of impact, in acres. 

Results Output 

The NIM Core program reports changes in air carrier operating efficiency, in- 
cluding the change in airfield capacity, estimated delay, and the time/distance 
saved for operations on each optimized flight track along with measures of com- 
munity noise impact — the number of acres, homes, and people exposed to signifi- 
cant levels of noise from airport activities. These outputs are provided in a tabular 


8 



The Aviation System Analysis Capability 


format and can be saved along with the case parameters. The NIM Core program, 
in addition to reporting the outputs listed above, provides a graphic display of the 
selected DNL 55-85 db contours along with a map of the airport vicinity (includ- 
ing airport boundaries), hi addition, another graphical file is also generated with a 
color coded legend defining each contour, hi the SEL case or a case where a flight 
track has been modified, a third graphical file is generated. This output file shows 
the actual flight path used or modified. 

NIM Operation 

This section describes NIM components and provides a sample calculation, 
step-by-step, to explain the modeling methodology. 

Model Components 

Several distinct components are combined to provide the modeling capabilities 
available in NIM: the user interfaces, databases, and computational modules. We 
created the original user interfaces using the C++ programming language. The 
Web-based implementation may change the form of these interfaces slightly. 
However, the data being collected, transferred, and reported will remain as de- 
scribed here. 

Although much of the database content is taken from external, verified sources 
and then reformatted for use by the model, some has been developed in-house. 
The analytical program modules were written in the C programming language, hi 
addition, modules are used from two outside sources: the core noise computation 
module of the FAA’s INM and Maplnfo Pro-Server, a geographic information 
system software package. The various modules are linked through a series of sub- 
routines that process and transfer the data at each stage. 

User Interfaces 

Analysts use the internet-based NIM input screens to build and process a single 
airport case and output the results in tabular format. Users are able to download 
two output files upon model run completion. The first file is a text file with all 
output data. The second file is the airport contour map, which, is provided in the 
.jpeg format. The interfaces that the analyst will use depends somewhat upon the 
type of case being tested, hi the following section, we will look at the interfaces 
used in four possible scenarios. The scenarios are as follows: 

1 . Building a standard case. 

2. Analyzing a single noise event. 


9 



3. Adding a new aircraft. 

4. Adjusting the Flight Track On-Screen 
Interfaces Common to All Functions 

NIM Description Home Page 

Figure D-l shows the web-based input screen, which is accessible through the 
ASAC Model Wizard. This screen is the starting place for all runs of the Noise 
Impact Model. On this page, the user will find a description of the background 
and functionality of the NIM. All users must start at this page to be assigned an 
appropriate file name for the scenario that they wish to run. Also, the user must 
choose the type of case to be run; either a DNL (Day/Night average sound level) 
case or an SEL (Sound Exposure Level) case. A DNL case is the standard case 
that comprises a large number of daily operations with a specific aircraft mixture 
for a given airport. An SEL case shows the noise impact of a single aircraft using 
a single arrival or departure flight track. 

Choosing to Create or Use an Existing File 

After selecting “Continue” on the NIM home page, the user is taken to the 
Scenario File Locator page (See Figure D-2). On this page, the user has four op- 
tions; to use the default scenario, to download a previous scenario file, to build a 
new scenario file, or to upload a scenario file. Building a scenario case study is the 
more common and complex option and is discussed in the following section. 

If downloading or uploading a previous scenario file is selected, then the user will 
be taken to a web page labeled “ASAC Noise Impact Scenario File Finder”. At 
this point, the user is prompted to select a file for download from the ASAC 
server. Upon selecting a file and pressing “Continue”, the analyst is given the two 
options. One option button is “View/Edit.” Selection of this option will take the 
user to the “ASAC NIM Scenario File Editor”(described below) and allows the 
user to change details of the original scenario file. The other option is to press the 
“Continue” button and proceed directly to the “Run the Noise Impact Model” web 
page. 

Scenario 1: Building a Standard Case 
Step 1 : Selecting An Airport 

When selecting to “Build” a new scenario, the screen will change to the “ASAC 
NIM. DNL Contours. Scenario File Builder- Select Airport” screen, shown in 
Figure D-3. Scroll through the list of 17 available airports and select one for the 
current scenario. Press “Continue” and proceed to the “Select Study Year” screen. 


10 



The Aviation System Analysis Capability 


Step 2: Selecting the Study Year 

Figure D-4 illustrates the screen where the user is able to select the study year for 
the current scenario. The user selects a case year; either 1993, 2005, or 2015. This 
selection determines the census data and aircraft mixture that are used for the case 
study. When selection is complete press “Continue” and proceed to the “Edit 
Aircraft Operations Scaling Parameters” screen. 

Step 3: Editing Aircraft Operations 

The user has the option of changing the scaling of the aircraft mixture (see Figure 
D-5). Adjusting the scaling allows the user to see the noise impact of 
increased/reduced operations of a specific aircraft type. Users can adjust three 
types of aircraft with two different ranges. The choices available are widebody 
jets, narrowbody jets, and propeller aircraft. Each of these categories are broken 
down into short-haul or long-haul aircraft. As stated previously, long-haul aircraft 
are defined as aircraft with an average stage length of over 1000 miles. When 
selection is complete press “Continue” and proceed to the “Select Flight Track 
Optimization” screen. 

Step 4: Selecting Flight Track Optimization 

Users select the individual runways for which they want the flight tracks to be 
optimized (See Figure D-6). Once a runway is selected, tracks using that runway 
will be optimized. Optimized runways appear on the output report. Also, all Time 
and Distance savings associated with the optimized flight tracks are reported. If no 
optimizable flight tracks are available, then no selections are offered and the user 
is prompted to proceed to the next page. When selection is complete press 
“Continue” and proceed to the “Select Runway Utilization Type” screen. 

Step 5: Select Runway Utilization Type 

If the airport selected is one of the three airports (ORD, LAX, or SFO) that has an 
alternative runway use configuration, then the user will have the option to add this 
data to the scenario output file (see Figure D-7). If the user selects this option, 
then NIM will configure the airport case to activate a different runway utilization 
percentage. If the airport does not have optimizable runway use, then the option 
will not appear onscreen and the user will be prompted to prompted to proceed. 


11 



All results are printed on the output statement. All capacity and delay values have 
been pre-computed as follows: 

Table 2. Alternate Runway Use Effects 


Airport 

Default 
Capacity 
(Ops/Peak Hr) 

Default 

Delay 

(Min/Op) 

Alternate 
Capacity 
(Ops/Peak Hr) 

Alternate 

Delay 

(Min/Op) 

LAX 

89 

mgm 

89 


ORD 

100 


104 


SFO 

48 


48 

■BS 


When selection is complete press “Continue” and proceed to the “Edit Global 
Noise Reduction Parameters” screen. 

Step 6: Edit Global Noise Reduction Parameters 

Similar to the scaling in Step 3, global noise reductions can be affected on wide- 
body, narrowbody, or propeller aircraft (see Figure D-8). Each category has text 
box in which a decibel reduction of 0-40 decibels is entered. Before proceeding, 
apply the noise reductions by selecting “Use” on the right side of the “Global Pa- 
rameters” box. The purpose of this procedure is to allow global changes to be ap- 
plied to a an uploaded file. After entering all parameters and pressing the 
“Continue” button the user proceeds to the “Edit Aircraft Noise Reduction Pa- 
rameters” page. 

Step 7: Edit Aircraft Noise Reduction Parameters 

Figure D-9, shows the aircraft mixture for a particular airport for a given year. All 
of the global noise reductions import from the previous screen. This page allows 
the user to make noise reduction adjustments on individual aircraft . Like the 
global parameters on the previous page, noise reduction can be set between 0 and 
40 decibels. If the user does not wish to adjust the aircraft mix, then they press 
Continue and proceed to the “Select Number of Noise Level Contours” page. 

Step 8: Select number of Noise Level Contours 

Users have the option of selecting from 1 to 5 Noise Contour levels (see 
Figure D-10). The tenn contours refers to graphical indication of sound levels on 
the graphical (i.e. picture map) output file. When selection is complete press 
“Continue” and proceed to the “Edit Values for the Noise Contour Level” screen. 

Step 9: Edit Values for the Noise Contour Level 

Select the decibel values for the contour levels selected in Step 8 (see 
Figure D- 11). The decibel values must be between 55-85 decibels and in de- 
scending order (i.e. Contour l=75db, Contour 2=70db, etc.). When selection is 


12 











The Aviation System Analysis Capability 


complete press “Continue” and proceed to the “Select Whether or Not to Edit 
Flight Tracks” screen. 

Step 10: Select Whether or Not to Edit Flight Tracks 

If “Edit Flight Tracks” is chosen, the user proceeds to the “Edit Flight Tracks” 
screen. If it is not selected, then the user proceeds to Step 12. 

Step 11: Edit Flight Tracks 

All available arrival and departure flight tracks are listed here. The user selects 
which flight tracks to edit and enters the changes into the text box. When selection 
is complete press “Continue” and proceed to the “Select Whether or Not to Use 
New Aircraft” screen. 

Step 12: Selecting Use or Non-Use of New Aircraft 

This screen allows the user to add a new aircraft to the aircraft mix. This will be 
described further in the “Select New Aircraft” case description below. Selecting 
“No New Aircraft” allows the user to proceed to the “Edit Comments” screen. 

Step 13: Edit Comments 

The user can enter comments which will appeal* in the scenario output file. When 
selection is complete press “Continue” and proceed to the “Save Changes” screen. 

Step 14: Save the Scenario File and Run the NIM 

After setting all parameters, the user is given the option of naming and saving the 
scenario file. After saving the file, the user proceeds to the “Run the Noise Impact 
Model” web page. After pressing the “Run” button, the model is started and the 
user is notified by e-mail when the scenario run is complete. 

Step 15: Download the Output Files: 

The NIM DNL case outputs three files; a text file with all output data and two 
graphic file showing the noise contours around the airport. One graphical output 
file functions as a legend to the other graphic file, which shows the noise contour 
levels in color. To download the output files direct the browser to the following 
download site ftp://ftp.asac.lmi.org/pub/Models/Output. Output files may also be 
downloaded through the ASAC Model Wizard file manager. 

Figure 4 shows a typical output table with results for a notional airport (“COM”) 
in 2005 with optimized runway use configuration, optimized flight tracks on two 
of the runways, all operations levels kept at then* defaults, and the noise levels for 
narrow-body aircraft reduced by 10 dB. The graphical output file displays a pic- 
ture of the airport vicinity overlaid with the selected noise contour intervals — as 


13 



shown for Orlando International Airport (MCO) in Figure 5. The graphical files 
are in .jpeg fonnat and can be used within a wide variety of software products. 

Figure 4. Sample NIM Output Table 


| Airport Efficiency Scenario Report For 



COM 

Execution date 


01 -Oct-97 








Year 

Runways optimized 9 

Flight track optimization (by runway) 

2005 

Yes 

35L, 36 R 

| Noise reductions 




| Narrow- body aircraft 

10 dB 




| Changes i n airf i eld capacity and delay | 

| Standard 

Optimized 


Capacity(ops/hr) 

Delay (min/opn) 

Capacity(ops/hr) 

Delay (min/opn) 


36 

33 

37 

24 


|Time and distance savings per operation per track ) 

Track 

Time (sec) 

Distance (nm) 

6 

41 

5.5 

10 

39 

5.2 

| Aggregate savings per aircraft type § 

Aircraft 

Time (min/year) 

Distance (nm/year) 

Operations/year 


735 

14 

111.5 

21.6 


72F 

2.4 

18.9 

3.7 


| Noise impact statistics | 

Noise 

Population 

Housing 

Census Area 


Contour 

(people) 

(units) 

(sq. acres) 


60 DNL 

9339 

3384 

13484 


65 DNL 

1291 

458 

3662 


70 DNL 

178 

55 

491 


75 DNL 

16 

5 

21 



14 







































































The Aviation System Analysis Capability 


Figure 5. NIM Batch Program Graphic Output 



Scenario 2: Creating a Single Noise event 

Under this scenario, only one aircraft and one flight operation is used. A single 
event or SEL case is begun by selecting the “SEL Case” option on the NIM Home 
page (Figure D-l). 

Step 1 : Selecting an Airport 

When selecting to “Build” a new scenario, the screen will change to the “ASAC 
NIM. SEL Contours. Scenario File Builder- Select Airport” screen. Scroll through 
the list of 17 available airports and select one for the current scenario. Press 
“Continue” and proceed to the “Select Study Year” screen. 

Step 2: Selecting the Study Year 

This page allows the user to select the study year for the current scenario. 

The user selects a case year; either 1993, 2005, or 2015. This selection 
determines the census data and aircraft mixture that is used for the case 
study. When selection is complete press “Continue” and proceed to the 
“Select Aircraft to Use” screen. 

Step 3: Selecting the Aircraft to be used for the Single Event Study. 

At this point, the user is able to select an aircraft for the current scenario. This 
selection determines the census data and aircraft mixture that are used for the case 
study. If the user wants to create a new aircraft, then proceed forward until reaching 


15 



the “Add New Aircraft Screen.” When selection is complete press “Continue” and 
proceed to the “Edit Aircraft Noise Reduction Parameters” screen. 

Step 4 Select Aircraft Noise Reduction Parameter 

Like the global parameters in the DNL case, noise reduction can be set between 0 
and 40 decibels. When selection is complete press “Continue” and proceed to the 
“Select Number of Noise Contours” screen. 

Step 5 Select Number of Noise Contour Levels 

Users have the option of selecting from 1 to 5 Noise Contour levels (see 
Ligure D-10). The tenn contours refers to graphical indication of sound levels on 
the graphical (i.e. picture map) output file. When selection is complete press 
“Continue” and proceed to the “Edit Values for the Noise Contour Level” screen. 

Step 6: Edit Values for the Noise Contour Level 

Select the decibel values for the contour levels selected in Step 5. The decibel 
values must be between 55-85 decibels and in descending order (i.e. Contour 
l=75db, Contour 2=70db, etc.). When selection is complete press “Continue” and 
proceed to the “Select Llight Track” screen. 

Step 7 Select a Plight Track 

Select one of the arrival or departure tracks listed for the airport selected. When 
selection is complete press “Continue” and proceed to the “Edit Plight Track” 
screen. 

Step 8 Edit a Flight Track 

This screen allows the user to adjust the existing flight track chosen in Step 7. 
When selection is complete press “Continue” and proceed to the “Chose a New 
Aircraft or Not” screen. 

Step 9 Chose Whether or Not to Use a New Aircraft 

At this point, the user is presented with the option of adding a new aircraft, which 
will be described in detail in Scenario 3. 

Scenario 3: Adding a New Aircraft 

To add a new aircraft type, the NIM must collect all required INM noise and per- 
formance parameters. Please see the INM 4.1 1 user’s guide for detailed informa- 
tion on these parameters. The “ASAC NIM Add a New Aircraft” incorporates the 
parameter tables listed below. Overall, the two basic stages for creating a new air- 
craft type are described below. 


16 



The Aviation System Analysis Capability 


Stage 1: Assign Parameter Set Names: 

• New aircraft name. 

• Body type (Wide, Narrow, or Propeller) 

• Number of Annual Operations 

• Category (JCOM, JGA, JMIL, PCOM, PGA, PMIL) 

• Noise curve name, number of thrust values, and number of detection points. 

• Approach parameters name. 

• Approach profile name and number of segments. 

• Takeoff profile name and number of segments. 

Stage 2: Assign Parameter Values: 

Noise Curve Data 

Enter noise curve data into the form. The number of values for EPNL and SEL 
data = (number of thrust values) * (number of detection points). This table de- 
scribes the measured decibel level of a particular aircraft cross-referenced by a 
thrust level and the distance from the aircraft. 



Thrust 1 

Thrust 2 

Thrust 3 

Distance 1 


115.7 

121.2 

Distance 2 

108.2 

110.2 

115.8 

Distance 3 

104.3 

106.3 

111.8 

Distance 4 

100 

102 

107.5 


Aircraft Characteristics 

Enter the aircraft weight and number of engines (paid of approach parameter data) 
into the fonn. 


Weight 

Number of Engines 

10,000 

2 


17 





















Enter the approach profile performance characteristics into the form. 



1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

Distance 

Em 

10 

warn 

3 

1 

0 

0 

Altitudes 


3236 


1007 

370 

0 

0 

Speeds 

m 

160 


160 

160 

32 

0 

Thrusts 

i 

1 

i 

1 

1 

1 

1 


Enter the takeoff profile performance characteristics into the form. 



1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

Distance 

0 

1376 

4126 

6876 

6877 

9626 


15000 

Altitudes 

0 

0 

500 

1000 

1000 

1500 


1500 

Speeds 

32 

160 

160 

160 

160 

160 


160 

Thrusts 

2 

2 

2 

1 

1 

1 

1 



The following sections cover a specific case of creating a new aircraft using the 
current version of the Noise hnpact Model. When creating either a DNL or SEL 
case the user is prompted about whether or not to create a new aircraft. If a new 
aircraft is to be created, then the user is lead through a series of screen prompts. 
Creation of a new aircraft is a complex process and requires an in depth knowl- 
edge of INM 4. 1 1 inputs. 

Stepl: Edit Base Parameters for New Aircraft Screen 

There are five pieces of key information that need to provided; 

• New Aircraft Name 

• Aircraft Body Type- Widebody, Narrowbody, or Propellor. 

• Number of Operations- For a DNL case only. 

• Aircraft Stage Length 

• Desired Aircraft Noise Reduction- Must be between 0-40 decibels. 

Step 2: Choose Number of Thrusts and Distances for Noise Curve table 

This selection determines the number of Thrust Columns versus the number of 
Distance Rows in the Thrust versus Distance table described in the “Assign Pa- 
rameter Values” section above. After completing this selection and pressing the 
“Continue” button, the next screen is “Edit Values for Thrusts and Distances for 
New Aircraft” 


18 
































The Aviation System Analysis Capability 


Step 3: Editing Values for Thrusts and Distances 

This screen allows column and row headers to be assigned to the noise curve ta- 
ble. The Thrust (Column) headers should be in increments of 1 (i.e. 1,2,3,...). 
These numbers will be used as a reference which relates a given decibel level in 
the table (in tenns of distance) to the actual altitudes and distances being used for 
the case study. The Distance (Row) headers establish the distance at which a par- 
ticular decibel level is heard in relation to a particular thrust setting. 

Step 4: Creating Decibel Levels For EPNL and SEL Cases 

The thrust versus distance tables have now been created for both EPNL and SEL 
cases. The next step now is to populate those tables with decibel data. The relation 
can now be seen between a Thrust level and a particular distance. Sample data are 
provided in the “Assign Parameters” section of Scenario 3. The Thrust versus 
Distance data for existing aircraft is found in Appendix G. Appendix G is a good 
starting point for anyone creathig a new aircraft without specific knowledge of 
aircraft noise characteristics. 

Step 5: Edit New Aircraft Weight and Engines 

This screen allows adjustment to the weight of an aircraft and the number of 
engines. 

Step 6: Edit Number of Segments for Approach and Take Off. 

This screen sets the number of columns in the approach and take off parameters 
tables. Enough columns should be chosen to accommodate all changes in aircraft 
distance, altitude, speed, and thrust. 

Step 7: Edit Approach and Take Off Parameters 

Enter the distance, altitude, speed, and thrust values for each segment of the flight. 
The thrust values should relate back to the thrust values in Step 3. 

Scenario 4: Adjusting a Flight Track(s) 

Under this scenario, a user wishes to adjust the flight track(s) within a given sce- 
nario file. The user is given the choice to go to the “ASAC NIM Flight Track 
Adjustment” page after completing the “ASAC Noise Impact Model Scenario File 
Builder - Edit Values for the Noise Contour Levels”. On this page, the user has 
the capability to edit all flight tracks for a given airport. 

To select a track (s) to be modified, the user must check the box in the “Modified” 
column, which is located to the left of the flight track name and description. The 
next step is to modify the text command for the selected flight track located under 


19 



the column “Command.” The following key inputs must be used to define a flight 
track: 


1. Straight- hidicates linear flight. 

2. Right/Left- hidicates a turn to Port or Starboard. 

3. D- Must be used to indicate a turn. 

4. Degree of Turn- Direction for new heading relative to the current flight 
path. 

5. Radius of the Turn- Describes the length of the radius of the turn. 

The correct syntax for defining a flight track is as follows: 

“Straight [# miles] [Left/Right] [# Deg.] D [Radius (1.74 miles)] Straight [50 
miles]” 

So, the correct syntax for a flight proceeding straight for 5.28 miles then turning 
90 degrees and proceeding straight for 50 is as follows: 

“Straight 5.28 Left 90 D 1.74 Straight 50” 

Further examples can be found by looking directly at the “ASAC NIM Flight 
Track Adjustment” page for a particular airport. 


Databases 


The NIM integrates data drawn from a variety of sources into a comprehensive 
library providing the following information: 

The INM database, INM input files, and/or airport sources provide the following 
data: 

♦ Seventeen airports, their runways, height above sea level, and average 
temperature (these data are listed in Appendix C) 

♦ Runway utilization for 1993 operations at each airport, by aircraft category 

♦ The flight tracks used for arrivals and departures on each airport runway 

♦ Flight track utilization statistics for each aircraft type 

♦ The typical descent profiles for each aircraft type and several climb pro- 
files, depending on how heavily loaded the aircraft is with fuel (more fuel 
for longer flights) 


20 



The Aviation System Analysis Capability 


♦ Noise data for each operational profile for each aircraft type. 

The ASAC relational database provides data about the specific types of aircraft 
operating at each airport, the number of departures executed during 1993, the 
operations levels projected for 2005 and 2015, and the average stage length each 
aircraft flies at that facility. 

The following data were generated through analysis performed for this task: 

♦ Capacity and delay values for the existing preferential runway usage pat- 
terns (based upon combhied input from LMI-computed capacity delay data 
and airport/airline evaluations) 

♦ Alternate runway utilization by aircraft category for optimized scenarios, 
the associated capacity and delay values for (LAX, ORD, and SFO). 

♦ Alternate flight tracks designed to provide greater operating efficiency 
compared with existing noise-abatement flight procedures and the time 
and distance saved for' ATL, BOS, CVG, EWR, JFK, LAX, LG A, MCO, 
MSP, SEA, and SFO 

♦ A table translating the types of aircraft noted in the Official Airline Guide 
(OAG) into the equivalent types recognized by the INM. 

The U.S. Census and commercially available databases provide these data: 

♦ Population and housing densities surrounding each airport, subdivided 
geographically into census blocks 

♦ Information defining the airport boundary and nearby bodies of water 

♦ Airport property graphics. 

Computational Modules 

The two key computational modules in NIM are the FAA’s INM and the airport 
noise impact calculation module using the geographic information system Map- 
Info Pro-Server. 

INM Version 4. 11 

The industry standard for analyzing noise impacts from aircraft operations around 
airports is the FAA’s INM. This model was originally developed in the early 
1970s and has been upgraded several times since then. According to a recent FAA 
statement: 


21 



The model is used by over 700 organizations in 35 countries to study 
changes in noise impact from new or extended runways or runway con- 
figurations, new traffic demand and fleet mix, revised routings and air- 
space structures, alternative flight profiles and modifications to air 
traffic control procedures. 

Source code for the core modules of INM Version 4.1 1 (in Fortran) has been 
incorporated into NIM. To date, attempts to insert the comparable INM version 
5.0 code into NIM have failed due to the unavailability of separable software 
modules. 

Geographic Information System for Assessing Noise Impact 

This methodology starts with the INM noise contours and census data, but it uses 
a population density distributed uniformly throughout the census block rather than 
assuming all people reside at the centroid of the census block. The algorithms also 
examine the surrounding land uses to discount the airport property and nearby 
bodies of water. The resulting assessment of the number of people and homes 
impacted is much more accurate than if the contour areas were applied directly to 
the population density defined for the census blocks. 

NIM uses the network mapping software, Maplnfo Pro-Server, to integrate the 
noise level, land use, and census data into a comprehensive noise impact map that 
can be analyzed for the areas, population, and houses located within each of the 
contour bands for a given user scenario. 

Connecting the Components 

The connection and communication among the various components is accom- 
plished through a set of customized routines that we developed for NIM. The 
functions of these routines are quite varied, from data preprocessing and user-sel- 
ection translation, to geographic mapping conversions. Some of these functions 
were performed during the development of FTNIM and NIM and the results in- 
corporated into databases. Other functions are activated each time NIM operates. 

Figure 6 shows the data flow for NIM. Since the model is fully integrated into 
ASAC, users access the model through the ASAC server and make a series of 
choices, setting up the Client Case shown in the center top portion of the figure. 

At this point in the process, the Client Case exists as a set of data selections. At 
each stage, routines are required to evaluate the user’s scenario and collect the 
necessary data from the databases. Then, the required operations are performed on 
the data to prepare them for use by the next program module. Several intermediate 
data files are created and used. These actions are described more fully in the 
Sample Calculation section of this report. All data groups and data tables appear 
in Figure 6 as parallelograms, while computational program elements are shown 
in boxes. 


22 



The Aviation System Analysis Capability 


Figure 6. Data Flow for the NIM 



I Noise Web Page 





On- Airport 
Noise Exposure 
Program 
(acreage) 


23 






















Ill Figure 6, the circled letters A through F indicate points in the analysis where 
data are provided by subroutines not shown hi the figure. These actions, shown in 
Figure 7, preprocess the data for integration into the other program elements. 


Figure 7. Data Preparation For the NIM 


' EMM 
Runstrcams 
(16 Airports) J 


Database (types! 

i& categories'® 


OAG2INM CON 


/ OAG '93 
f Data and 
Forecasts (20 
airports) j 


Runstream 

Pre- 


processing 

(macro) 


/ OAG F 93 & 
Forecast Operations 
and Average Stage 
Length by Aircraft , 

Type / 


EMM Airport 
& Runway 
data 



Optimized 
Flight Track 
Utilization 
data 


Flight Track 
Utilization 
by Aircraft 
Category 


/ Airfield 
I Capacity & 
Time & 

Distance Values i 





Sample Case 

This section describes a sample calculation and the data on which the calculations 
are based. There are three subsections: the first describes the databases used to 
perform the calculations and the steps used to preprocess the data. The second 
contains the calculation steps. The third subsection discusses the accuracy of the 
model. 


24 









The Aviation System Analysis Capability 


Database Preparation and Data Preprocessing 

Four databases are used in the entire process. Each one is described below. Data 
preprocessing consists primarily of the analysis of INM runstreams (input files) 
and OAG operations data. 

INM Aircraft Types and Categories Database (4P1 1 .PRN) 

The pertinent data in this file are the INM aircraft types from the V 4. 1 1 database 
and their associated aircraft category (sample below). The two aircraft categories 
of “narrow-body” and “wide-body” have been established by the aviation industry, 


Sample INM Version 4.11 database file section: 


0-500 500-1000 1000-1500 1500-2000 2500-3500 


INM_ACID INM_NO DESCRIPTION 

CCS CATNAIVE 

NO# NO NAIVE 

NO STAGE 

Body 

BB 

LDPJMAIVE 

LDPJD 

TOP_S1 

TOP_S2 

TOP_S3 

TOP_S4 

TOP_S5 

747100 

1 B747-10QGT9DED 

CCS 

JCCM 

6 JT9DBD 

1 

W 

4EWB 

STD3D 

1 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

747200 

2 B747-200UT9D-7 


JCCM 

7 JT9DFL 

2 

W 

4EWB 

STD3D 

2 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

7471 0Q 

3 B747-1 00CN/JT9D-7CN 


JCCM 

7 JT9CFL 

2 

W 

4EWB 

STD3D 

3 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

747SP 

4 B747SP/JT9D-7 


JCCM 

7 JT9DFL 

2 

W 

4EWB 

STD3D 

4 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

74720B 

5 B747-20Q/JT9D-7Q 


JCCM 

50 JT9D7Q 

3 

W 

4EWB 

STD3D 

5 

27 

28 

29 

30 

31 

DC820 

6 DC-8-20' JT4A 

COS 

JCCM 

1 JT4A 

1 

N 

4ENB 

STD3D 

6 

34 

35 

36 

37 

38 

707 

7 B707-12OJT3C 

CCS 

JCCM 

1 JT4A 

1 

N 

4ENB 

STD3D 

7 

40 

41 

42 

43 

44 

720 

8 B72Q/JT3C 

CCS 

JCCM 

1 JT4A 

1 

N 

4ENB 

STD3D 

8 

46 

47 

48 

49 

50 

707320 

9 B707-320B'JT3D-7 

cos 

JCCM 

2 JT3D 

1 

N 

4ENB 

STD3D 

9 

51 

52 

53 

54 

55 

707120 

10 B707-120BUT3D-3 

CCS 

JCCM 

2 J13D 

1 

N 

4B4B 

STD3D 

10 

58 

59 

60 

61 

62 

720B 

11 B720B'JT3D-3 

cos 

JCCM 

2 JT3D 

1 

N 

4ENB 

STD3D 

11 

64 

65 

66 

67 

68 

DC850 

12 DC-8-50 JT3D-3B 

cos 

JCCM 

2 JT3D 

1 

N 

4ENB 

STD3D 

12 

69 

70 

71 

72 

73 

DC860 

13 DC-8-60JT3D-7 

cos 

JCCM 

2 JT3D 

1 

N 

4ENB 

STCQD 

13 

75 

76 

77 

78 

79 

DC870 

14 DC-8-70CFM56-2C-5 


JCCM 

4 CFM562 

3 

N 

4ENB 

STD3D 

14 

82 

83 

84 

85 

86 

BAE146 

15 BAE 1 46-20OAI_F502R-5 


JCCM 

5 AL502R 

3 

N 

4ENB 

STCQD 

15 

89 

90 

91 



707CN 

16 B707-320BUT3D-7CN 


JCCM 

3 JT3DQ 

2 

N 

4BMB 

STCQD 

16 

92 

93 

94 

95 

96 

DC8GN 

17 DC-8-60 JT8D-7QN 


JCCM 

3 JT3DQ 

2 

N 

4ENB 

STCQD 

17 

99 

100 

101 

102 

103 

CCNCRD 

18 CCNCCRDE/CLY593 


JCCM 

8 CLY593 

1 

N 

4ENB 

STCQD 

18 

106 

107 

108 

109 

110 

DC1010 

19 DC10-1OCF6-6D 


JCCM 

11 CF66D 

3 

W 

3EWB 

STCQD 

19 

112 

113 

114 

115 

116 


OAG Aircraft Type Substitution List (OAG2INM.CON) 

This file lists the OAG aircraft types and the comparable INM aircraft type on the 
basis of noise levels each aircraft generates (Table 3). “OAG_A_Profile” shown 
in column 3 indicates the departure climb profile used for each aircraft’s 
operations. “STD3D” is the standard default climb procedure specified for each 
aircraft type. It defines engine thrust, climb gradient, and air speed as functions of 
the distance from the start of takeoff roll. 


25 






Table 3. Sample OAG to INM Substitution List 


OAG_type 

INM_type 

OAG_A_profile 

Description 

310 

A31 0 

STD3D 

Airbus A310 (all series) 

320 

A320 

STD3D 

Airbus A320 

727 

727Q7 

STD3D 

Boeing 727 passenger jet (all series) 

72 F 

727EM2 

STD3D 

Boeing 727 freighter (200) 

733 

737300 

STD3D 

Boeing 737-300 

734 

737400 

STD3D 

Boeing 737-400 

743 

74720 B 

STD3D 

Boeing 747-300 SUD 

744 

747400 

STD3D 

Boeing 747-400 

757 

757RR 

STD3D 

Boeing 757 (all series) 

75 F 

757RR 

STD3D 

Boeing 757-200pf freighter 

763 

767300 

STD3D 

Boeing 767-300/300ER 

767 

767CF6 

STD3D 

Boeing 767 (all series) 


Census Database Files (.TAB, .MAP, .ID, .DAT, .IND) 

The NIM census database files contain three different sets of data: cartographic 
data, population data, and households data. To achieve this, three different data- 
bases have been combined and processed: 

♦ TIGER/Line census files (1990, 1992, and 1995 releases), which provided 
the cartographic data 

♦ Census summary tape file 1A (STF1A), which provided the framework for 
the population and households data 

♦ Woods & Poole Economics, Inc. 1994 regional forecast and database, 
from which the actual population and households information were ex- 
tracted. 

The TIGER/Line files database is a product of the U.S. Bureau of Census and 
consists of selected geographic and cartographic information extracted from the 
U.S. Census Bureau’s TIGER database. For this project, only the cartographic 
information was needed. These data represent the structure definition of the 
polygonal shapes that when combined make up the census areas of the different 
counties of interest. The criterion for selecting the counties was that they had to be 
located, even if only partially, within a 20-mile radius from the chosen airport. 

The degree of resolution of the resulting maps was chosen to be at the “block 
group” level since that is the maximum resolution common to all the types of 
census data that were needed. A block group is a combination of census blocks 
that is a subdivision of a census tract or Block Numbering Area (BNA). 


26 













The Aviation System Analysis Capability 


Once extracted, the selected TIGER/Line database data were refined by removing 
bodies of water and airport property from the analysis. This step was necessary in 
order to obtain a more accurate representation of the actual population and house- 
holds distribution and density after joining the population and household data with 
the cartographic data. If such refinement had not been done, the resulting map 
would have had population and households equally distributed between land and 
water, or airport property, where these happened to be included in the same block 
group, hi the context of census data, households are defined as occupied housing 
units. 

The 1990 Census STF1A is another product of the U.S. Census Bureau containing 
data about all persons and housing units in the United Sates. The data extracted 
from this database were used, however, only to calculate the coefficients neces- 
sary to derive the population and households figures for each county block group 
from the county totals. This procedure was necessary because the U.S. Census Bu- 
reau provides forecasts for only a few years into the future and the database that 
contained the required projections had only a county-level resolution. The popu- 
lation coefficients were calculated as follows: 


Coeffpop 


BGpop 

Cty TOTPOP 


where: 


Coejfpop = Population coefficient 

BGpop = Block group population figure 

Cty totpop = County total population figure 

The households coefficients also were calculated in the same maimer: 


BG HOUS 

Coejfnous — — 

C tVTOTHOUS 


where: 


Coejfnous = Households coefficient 

BGhous = Block group households figure 

CtyroTHous = County total households figure 

The coefficients were then multiplied by the county total population and house- 
holds data for the years 1993, 2005, and 2015 extracted from the Woods & Poole 
database giving resultant projected block group figures. This procedure assumes 


27 



that while the overall population may change by some percentage, the distribution 
of population and households within each county will remain unchanged. 

As previously stated, the last database used, the Woods & Poole Economics, hie. 
1994 Regional Forecast and Database, provided the projected data for the years 
1993, 2005, and 2015. Woods & Poole used the corrected census data from 1969 
to 1992 as a starting point and then developed their forecast using a four-stage 
process. 

First, the forecast for the entire United States was developed. This first projection 
was needed to provide a “control set” of data. Then, the United States was divided 
into 183 economic areas (EA) and employment and earnings projections were cal- 
culated for each of them. These forecasts then were used in the third stage as the 
principal explanatory variables used to estimate the population and households 
figures for each EA. The last stage repeated the process of the previous two stages 
to create forecasts at the county level, hi this stage, the EA figures were used as 
control values. The main strength of this forecast technique lies in the 
comprehensiveness of the county database and the integrated nature of the model. 
In fact, each change in one of the counties effects not only that county, but its 
neighboring counties as well. 

We had to extrapolate the analysis for several geographical areas, including 
Fairfax (VA), Fairfax City (VA), Falls Church (VA). Prince William County 
(VA), Manassas City (VA), and Manassas Park City (VA). These areas were 
grouped together in the Woods & Poole database, but not in the Tiger/Line or in 
the STF1A databases. As a result, to maintain a consistent data set, coefficients 
had to be calculated in order to create data sets for each single area. The calcula- 
tion of the coefficients was performed with the same technique used for the block 
group data sets. The equations used were the following: 


AreaCoejf pop 


Arecipop 

SctroTPOP 


where: 

AreaCoejf pop = Area population coefficient 

Areapop = Area population figure 

SetpoTPOP = Set of areas total population figure 


Area HOUS 

AreaCoejfnous — 

SCtTOTHOUS 


28 



The Aviation System Analysis Capability 


where: 


AreaCoeff H ous = Area households coefficient 

Area nous = Area households figure 

Setromous = Set of area’s total households figure 

The data necessary to perform these calculation were extracted from the Census 
1990 STF1A database. 

INM Noise Database (NOISE411.DAT) 

This file contains the sound exposure level (SEL) and effective perceived noise 
level (EPNL) values for slant range distances for all available V4. 1 1 aircraft types 
as extracted from the FAA’s INM database. The slant range distance is the straight 
line distance between the aircraft and the receiver grid point on the ground. 

Preprocessing OAG Operations Data 

Operational data for each study airport were provided by LMI and contained the 
number of operations by OAG aircraft type for the years 1993, 2005, and 2015. 

For 1993 departures, the data also contain the average stage length in statute 
miles. 1 

The data are then processed with an Excel macro that, with the help of the INM 
Aircraft Types and Categories database and the OAG Aircraft Type Substitution 
List, lists the operations for 1993 and forecast years and, for departures, the aver- 
age stage length by OAG aircraft type, sorted by the aircraft classes. An aircraft 
class is defined as the combination of a quantitative descriptor of the stage length 
(long- or short-haul) and the aircraft category (i.e., narrow-body, wide-body, 
other). The “long” category is one having a minimum average stage length of 
1,000 statute miles (equivalent to INM stage length 3). The Excel macro writes 
the .OPS file. 

Sample .OPS file: 


"NARROW", "LONG", 1 
"D93", 1200, 3000, 0, 0 
"WIDE", "LONG", 1 
"744", 1200, 3500, 4240, 6020 


1 Stage length is defined as the great-circle distance from the airport of origination to the air- 
port of destination. 


29 






The sample shown above is for two aircraft, a McDonnell Douglas DC9-30 and a 
Boeing 747-400. The following information for the DC9 appears in the first two 
lines; the classification as a narrow-body, long-haul aircraft; “1” for departures; 
type as a D93; average stage length of 1,200 statute miles; 3,000 annual opera- 
tions in 1993; 0 operations in 2005; and 0 operations in 2015. Similar data are 
given in the next two lines for the 747 indicating the same average stage length 
but increasing numbers of operations. 

Preprocessing INM Runstreams 

INM runstreams of typical operations for each study airport were obtained and 
analyzed through semi- automated and manual processes. The products of the pre- 
processing are up to six files for each airport. These files are described in the fol- 
lowing subsections. 

INM Airport and Runway Data 

The first three sections of each INM runstream containing the airport 
name/identifier, information on climate, and runway coordinates were extracted 
and written to the .PRO file. 

Sample .PRO file: 


"AIRPORT" , "COM" 

"ALTITUDE" , 96, "TEMPERATURE" ,23.0, "C" 
"RUNWAYS" , 1 

"RW", "36R", "18L", 50000, 23000, 50000, 35004, 359 


For notional airport “COM,” the airfield altitude is given as 96 feet above mean 
sea level and the year-round average temperature is 23.0 degrees centigrade. COM 
has just one runway, designated 36R/18L, with one end point at coordinates 
(50000, 23000) and the other end point at coordinates (50000, 35004). The actual 
runway orientation is 359 degrees. 

Runway Use Configurations 

An airport has one set of runways that can be used in several different configura- 
tions depending on weather conditions, wind, air-space management issues, air- 
craft mix, noise restrictions, etc. Each configuration defines runway use 
percentages, which potentially affect the airfield capacity. 


30 





The Aviation System Analysis Capability 


To look at preferential runway use based on noise and its effect on airport capac- 
ity, it is first useful to consider the factors that determine the capacity of an air- 
field. Aggregate airport capacity is a sophisticated concept, affected by multiple 
variables. These include the number of gates at the terminal, the overall capacity 
of the terminal, the number and length of the runways, the capacity of the taxi- 
ways, and the parking capacity. Each of these variables is usually affected by sev- 
eral additional factors. For example, the way the runways are combined so that 
some are used for arrival and others for departure under given weather conditions, 
has a significant impact on capacity. Further, the navigational aids installed, espe- 
cially for arrivals, can determine capacity when the weather is poor and instrument 
flight mles are applied. 

Noise compatibility problems, generally caused by residential areas being en- 
croached by airport noise, will cause a community noise problem. If the airport 
responds to citizen complaints by restricting the use of certain runways, capacity 
can be affected. Generally, these runway restrictions are formalized in a “prefer- 
ential runway use plan” that identifies which runways are preferred for arrivals or 
departures so that noise impacts are minimized. These restrictions may be aimed 
at nighttime operations only, or may be enforced throughout the day. Generally, 
however, noise abatement considerations are given less priority than safety and 
peak hourly capacity issues. So, even when preferential runway use schemes have 
been defined, they are generally only implemented during off-peak hours. 

For the three NIM airports for which an alternate runway use scheme is available, 
we used ASAC data for the base case capacity and delay values. We also used 
historical data obtained from airports, as well as limited assumptions based on this 
historical data and dialogue with airports relating to optimized runway use con- 
figurations. Our data included the capacity and delay values associated with typi- 
cal runway use configurations. Then, we developed alternative configurations that 
could be expected to improve the efficiency of aircraft movements, hi all cases, 
we coordinated closely with the airport staff at LAX, ORD, and SFO to be sure 
our assumptions about alternate configurations were realistic. 

First, we used the ASAC configuration-specific capacity data as a starting point. 
Then, we contacted the airports to determine percentage of time that operations at 
an airport use a particular runway configuration on an annual basis. This collected 
information is based on two operational scenarios: (1) the Current Scenario run- 
way use configurations used and (2) the Alternate Scenario runway use configura- 
tions that would be used without noise as a consideration. By comparing each 
runway use configuration to the hourly capacities figures, we derived, based on 
weighted averages, an Average Annual Hourly Capacity (AAHC) for each sce- 
nario. AAHC is a single number descriptor of overall field capacity. 

The single number AAHC was necessary because the INM recognizes runway us- 
age in a very different form than normally described by aiiport operators. INM 
accepts the assignment of aircraft operations to flight tracks and the attachment of 


31 



tracks to runways, for an annual average day. This means that information re- 
garding how runways are used in combination (the form of data normally used to 
analyze capacity) must be translated into utilization percentages for individual 
runways, hi addition, runway utilization framed in tenns of different weather con- 
ditions must be combined in a weighted average to describe operations for an an- 
nual-average day. Our engineers have analyzed airport inputs to reformat them for 
use in the INM. The capacity values, discussed in more detail below, are deter- 
mined by the airfield configuration and do not change with the number of opera- 
tions. So, the capacity remains the same for all three case years, 1993, 2005, and 
2015. 

The capacity information accounted for four weather conditions, as well as wet 
and dry conditions. Since we extracted percentages concerning time in a given 
weather condition, it was possible to apply this information accurately to any 
projected runway use configuration developed. The AAHC, derived for the air- 
port’s current operational scenario and based on real numbers, provides a valid 
reference. The percentages relating to capacity changes are based on the estimated 
time a more efficient configuration would be available. Basing available runway 
configurations on the factors discussed above, as well as historical wind condi- 
tions, we arrived at a runway configuration that would most likely be used without 
noise as an issue. By analyzing this configuration, a value suggestive of how the 
AAHC may change, was derived based on the implementation of the new configu- 
ration. 

Once we developed a rationale for expressing AAHC, each of the three airports 
was examined to determine the change in capacity that might result from a change 
in runway use patterns. Many members of the aviation community have expressed 
the belief that releasing noise concerns and changing runway usage would signifi- 
cantly improve the capacity of the target airfields. Our analysis, however, has not 
shown the degree of improvement that had been hoped. The primary reason for 
this is that when airports are experiencing peak demand, they generally relax the 
noise abatement preferential runway use rules. Consequently, relaxing the miles 
for the rest of the day will provide improvements in efficiency only on the off- 
peak operations, hi effect, the capacity of the airport is not as heavily impacted by 
noise abatement as many in the industry have expected. For this reason, the 
change in capacity reported by NIM for LAX, ORD, and SFO (shown in a previ- 
ous section) reveal improvements of zero (LAX), one percent (SFO), and 3.7 per- 
cent (ORD). 

The cost of noise abatement is determined by the delay time incurred at the airport 
as a result of preferential runway use schemes. These schemes may require longer 
taxi times to get to the preferred railway, and usually cause delay in waiting for 
the other aircraft that also must use the designated runway. Once delay values are 
known, the cost is determined by multiplying the time lost by the cost of operating 


32 



The Aviation System Analysis Capability 


ail airliner, including fuel, crew salary, and increased aircraft maintenance re- 
quirements. This will generate a dollar amount suggestive of the cost each year to 
aircraft operators of using preferential runway use programs based on noise. 

The basic airfield delay values were subject to the same limitations noted for the 
capacity values. That is, the delay related to noise abatement was difficult to dis- 
cern directly, because noise abatement restrictions are minimized during peak op- 
erating hours, histead, we focused on determining the change in time for ground 
movements. Ground movements are factored into our analysis in a general way, 
but without the level of detail that is necessary to “tease out” the specific cause 
(noise abatement) and effect (special delay) relationship that we were looking for. 
Then, our ground delay factor could be used to modify the existing airfield delay 
values that the our modeling documented. 

The methodology for determining ground delay determined likely trends. There- 
fore, it is not specific enough for use in strategic planning at any of the airports 
considered. Because significant delays occur primarily during the taxi-out phase 
of an aircraft journey, only departure operations were addressed in the analysis. 

Based on discussion with airport personnel at ORD, LAX, and SFO, we obtained 
information delineating runway usage. These were broken down into the Current 
Scenario and Alternate Scenario categories, hi addition, we collected data includ- 
ing runway use by day and hour for December 1997 for each airport. These data 
were cross-referenced with average median delay data, collected from the FA A. 
The delay data were broken down in the same format for the month of December. 
Using weighted averages, the average delay was calculated for both the Current 
and the Alternate Scenarios. The difference in the delay numbers indicated a sav- 
ings, in minutes, that would likely occur if aircraft were to fly without regard for 
noise policy. Except for LAX, this savings is one that would most likely effect all 
aircraft using the most common runway usage configurations at the airport. The 
delays at LAX, based on discussions with airside airport operations personnel, 
would be realized only by cargo operators located on the south side of the airport 
complex. 

INM Flight Track Sets 

For each modeled runway of each study airport, the flight tracks from the INM 
runstream were extracted. These are the default flight tracks. Each default track 
was studied for potential noise-abatement modifications. If the flight track could 
be improved to fly a more direct route, the revised track then was considered an 
“efficient” flight track. 


33 



The guidelines used to determine the potential for modifying a default flight track 
include the following criteria: 

♦ The INM flight track could be clearly associated with other published 
information an airport provided about its defined noise-abatement 
procedures. Most airports develop pilot instructions for flying noise- 
abatement routes. These texts can be compared with the flight track shown 
in the INM runstream. 

♦ A realistic alternate route could be identified that would be safe, practical 
in terms of equipment performance, and would not infringe on other active 
airspace. 

♦ The alternate track would provide measurable distance savings when com- 
pared with the existing noise-abatement track. 

The standard and associated efficient flight tracks were written to the .TRK file 
for each study airport, sorted by runway, hi some cases, these are tracks that al- 
ready existed in the INM file but were restricted to commuter operations, hi other 
cases, we defined new tracks based on airport staff input and analysis of other op- 
erational and procedural considerations. 

The sample file describes some of the flight tracks at COM. The first set of tracks 
shown is for operations departing from railway 36R. There are five existing 
abatement tracks called by numbers 2 through 6. The first track, number “2,” 
starts with a straight segment of 5.28 miles. Then, the track turns left 90 degrees 
through a turn radius of 1.74 miles. The final segment is straight for 50 miles, at 
which time the aircraft has left the airport’s vicinity. Note that the nonabatement 
track 2 is identical to the abatement track. For the file sample shown here, only 
track 6 differs between the abatement and nonabatement cases. The abatement 
procedure includes a him to the right of 270 degrees, while the nonabatement case 
turns 90 degrees. 


34 



The Aviation System Analysis Capability 


Sample .TRK file: 


"AIRPORT" , "COM" 
"DEPARTURES" , 1 
"36R" , 1 
"ABATEMENT" 

"2" , "STRAIGHT 5 .28 
"3" , "STRAIGHT 5.28 
"4" , "STRAIGHT 1 . 97 
"5" , "STRAIGHT 1 . 97 
"6", "STRAIGHT 1 . 97 
"NON-ABATEMENT" 
"2", "STRAIGHT 5.28 
"3", "STRAIGHT 5.28 
"4" , "STRAIGHT 1 . 97 
"5", "STRAIGHT 1 . 97 
"6", "STRAIGHT 1 . 97 
"ARRIVALS" , 1 
"36R", 1 
"ABATEMENT" 

"B" , "STRAIGHT 50" 
"NON-ABATEMENT" 

"B" , "STRAIGHT 50" 


LEFT 90 D 1.74 STRAIGHT 50" 
LEFT 20 D 1.74 STRAIGHT 50" 
RIGHT 20 D 1.74 STRAIGHT 50" 
RIGHT 60 D 1.74 STRAIGHT 50" 
RIGHT 270 D 1.74 STRAIGHT 50" 

LEFT 90 D 1.74 STRAIGHT 50" 
LEFT 20 D 1.74 STRAIGHT 50" 
RIGHT 20 D 1.74 STRAIGHT 50" 
RIGHT 60 D 1.74 STRAIGHT 50" 
LEFT 90 D 1.74 STRAIGHT 50" 


Flight Track Utilization by Aircraft Class 

Using a FORTRAN program, the operations in each INM runstream are grouped 
by class and summed within each class by flight track. The program then deter- 
mines the percentage of the associated class’ operations occurring on each flight 
track in daytime, evening (if applicable), or nighttime periods. For example, the 
program calculates, among ah long-haul wide-bodied class of aircraft operations 
at airport COM, flight track 16 is used 82.1 percent during the daytime and 
7.01 percent during the nighttime The program writes the percentages (in decimal 
format) to one .UTI file representing operations using the standard runway use 
configuration. A second .UTI file is created in which the operation numbers have 
been scaled to reflect the optimized runway use scenario. 


35 







Sample .UTI file: 


CLAS S , TRACK , DAY , EVE , NITE 

"LW" , "16", " .821"," .00000"," .0701" 


This sample file shows data for long-haul, wide-bodied aircraft (LW) on track 
number 16. The values shown indicate that 82.1 percent of the daytime LW flights 
use this track, no operations occur on it during the evening hours of 7 P.M. to 
10 P.M., and 7.01 percent of the nighttime LW operations use it from 10 P.M. to 
7 A.M. 

Airfield Capacity and Delay Values 

The change in airfield capacity is defined by the difference in the number of peak 
arrivals and departures per hour — for the standard and optimized runway use 
configurations. The delay is specified in minutes per operation for both 
configurations. For each study airport, the airfield capacity and delay values for 
the standard and alternate configurations are stored in the RUNIM.SAV file. 

Sample RUNIM .SAV file: 

The first pair of numbers is capacity measured in operations per hour and average 
delay per operation, respectively, for the standard configuration while the second 
pair of numbers is for the optimized runway use pattern. 


“COM” 


"36", "33", "37", ”24 




The first pair of numbers is capacity measured in operations per hour and average 
delay per operation, respectively, for the standard configuration while the second 
pair of numbers is for the optimized runway use pattern. 

Time and Distance Values 

The time spent and the distance traveled by aircraft that use the standard and 
efficient flight tracks are computed and written to a file. The time spent is 
computed by dividing the distance traveled in nautical miles by an average 
cruising speed. This cruising speed is specific to each airport and is computed as 
the weighted average of aircraft cruising speeds for the aircraft operating at the 
airport, with the weighting based on the number of daily departures. These data 
are kept in the .SAV file, which is specific for each airport. 


36 








The Aviation System Analysis Capability 


Sample .SAY file: 


"16", "4.8", "53 


if 


As shown in this file, flight track 16 offers a savings of 4.8 nautical miles and 
53 seconds for every operation. 

Military Operations 

If military aircraft operations exist in the INM runstreams, their runstream header 
and frequency (operations) data are extracted and written to the .HDR and .FRQ 
files, respectively. This step is performed prior to determining the Flight Track 
Utilization by Aircraft Category. The NIM will hold military operations constant 
for all user scenarios. 

Calculation Steps 

With the databases and data preprocessing having been covered, it is now appro- 
priate to describe the basic steps necessary to run a user-supplied operational sce- 
nario to compute noise-exposure, changes in airfield capacity, and time/distance 
savings data. 

Sample Scenario 

The following list defines a notional operational scenario: 

♦ Airport: COM 

♦ Case Year: 2005 

♦ Decibel Reduction by OAG type or Aircraft Category: 

Table 4. Global Aircraft Parameters 


Aircraft type 

Reduction (dB) 

Long-haul, wide-body (LW) 

0 

Long-haul, narrow-body (LN) 

3 

Short-haul, wide-body (SW) 

0 

Short-haul, narrow-body (SN) 

0 


37 





Scaling by Aircraft Category: 


Table 5. Aircraft Scaling 


Class 

Scaling 

LW 

125% 

LN 

150% 

SW 

0 

SN 

0 


♦ Optimized Runway Use Configuration 

♦ Efficient Flight Tracks by Runway: Runways 35L and 36R 
Computing Noise Exposure Data 

The main goal of this task is to determine the off-airport land acreage, number of 
dwellings, and population within the noise-exposure contours. This involves the 
creation of a runstream for the INM based on the user-supplied inputs. The INM 
then creates the noise-exposure contours that the GIS will use to determine noise 
impacts. To accomplish the main goal, seven programs are executed: Header, 
Track, Noise, Onecase, INM, PNTREAD2, and Popcount. Each of these programs 
is described in the following seven subsections. 

Header Program 

The Header program determines the INM aircraft types associated with the user’s 
case. It accomplishes this by reviewing the portion of the COM. OPS file (for the 
year 2005) and assigning the INM aircraft types via the OAG Aircraft Type Sub- 
stitution List. Along with the COM. PRO preprocessed airport/runway data and the 
user case description (case year plus options), the list of aircraft types is compiled 
and written to the COM.HDR file. The “FT.” line is an INM descriptor specifying 
that distances used in flight track descriptions are in feet. This line also could be 
specified as “NM.” to reflect distances in nautical miles. 


38 




The Aviation System Analysis Capability 


Sample COM.HDR file: 


BEGIN. 

SETUP : 

TITLE <NASA ASAC HYPOTHETICAL CASE CREATED: 12/9/96 3:18:15 
PM> 

AIRPORT <COM> 

ALTITUDE 96 TEMPERATURE 23 C 
FT. 

RUNWAYS 

RW 36R-18L 50000 23000 TO 50000 35004 HEADING= 359 
AIRCRAFT: 

TYPES 

AC 747400 CURVE=74E 
AC DC9Q9 CURVE=DC9 


Track Program 


The Track program requires two pieces of information: (1) the user- specified set 
of efficient flight tracks (standard tracks for all runways except runway 36R) and 
(2) the COM.TRK preprocessed file, which lists all standard and efficient flight 
tracks in semi-INM format for COM airport. 

The Track program copies the appropriate set of tracks for the user case from the 
COM.TRK file to the COM.TRX file. 


39 





Sample COM.TRX file: 



Noise Program 

The Noise program creates tables of sound exposure level and effective perceived 
noise level (noise curves) versus distance in the INM format for aircraft types 
associated with the aircraft class to which the user requests decibel reductions. 

It accomplishes this by first assigning INM aircraft types and classes to the OAG 
aircraft types in the COM.OPS preprocessed file (for the year 2005) via the INM 
“aircraft types and categories” database and the “OAG aircraft type substitution 
list.” 

The Noise program then copies all the noise curves from the INM noise database 
applicable to the user’s case (long-haul, narrow-bodied departures and narrow- 
bodied arrivals for our sample case), modifies them by the user’s reductions (i.e., 
3 dB), and writes the modified noise curves to the NOISE.DAT file in the INM 
format. 


40 




The Aviation System Analysis Capability 


Onecase Program 

The Onecase program has two primary functions: (1) It is the engine for comput- 
ing the number of annual average daily daytime, evening, and nighttime operations 
by INM aircraft type and stage length for the chosen runway use configuration and 
applicable flight tracks and (2) it compiles all INM operational data into an INM 
mnstream file. 

Onecase computes operations with the Flight Track Utilization by Aircraft Class 
preprocessed file (COM.UTI); the user-specified scalings by aircraft class 
(125 percent for long-haul and wide-bodied aircraft and 150 percent for long-haul 
and narrow-bodied aircraft); the INM aircraft types and categories database; the 
OAG aircraft type substitution list; and the preprocessed COM. OPS file (year 
2005 portion). A sample calculation is described below. 

With the help of the INM aircraft types and categories database and the OAG air- 
craft type substitution list, the program determines that, for the year 2005, the 
COM.OPS file contains the following annual operations: 

♦ 4,240 long-haul, wide-body departures consisting of only INM aircraft 
type 747-400, stage length 5 

♦ 624 long-haul, narrow-body departures consisting of only INM aircraft 
type DC9, stage length 3 

♦ 4,240 wide-body arrivals consisting of only INM aircraft type 747-400 

♦ 624 narrow-body arrivals consisting of only INM aircraft type DC9. 

The user- specified scalings would be applied to these annual operations (rounding 
to the nearest operations for the sake of brevity): 

♦ 4,240 x 1.25 = 5,300 long-haul, wide-body (747-400 stage length 5) de- 
partures 

♦ 624 x 1.5 = 936 long-haul, narrow-body (DC9 stage length 3) departures 

♦ 4,240 x 1.25 = 5,300 wide-body (747-400) arrivals 

♦ 624 x 1.5 = 936 narrow-body (DC9) arrivals. 


41 



Sample NOISE.DAT file: 


NOISE CURVES 

NC DC9 6 BY 10 6 BY 10 

EPNL 

THRUSTS 3000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 

200 92.6 98.4 102.7 107.2 111.8 116.8 

400 88.4 94.2 98.5 103.2 107.8 112.9 

630 85.1 90.9 95.3 100.0 104.7 109.9 

1000 81.4 87.2 91.7 96.5 101.3 106.6 

2000 75.4 81.2 85.8 90.6 95.7 101.2 

4000 68.4 74.2 79.1 84.2 89.4 95.1 

6300 63.1 68.9 74.0 79.5 85.0 91.0 

10000 57.0 62.8 68.3 74.1 80.0 86.4 

16000 49.5 55.3 61.3 67.6 74.0 81.0 

25000 40.8 46.6 53.1 60.0 67.0 74.6 

SEL 

THRUSTS 3000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 

200 88.6 93.8 98.3 103.0 107.8 113.1 

400 84.8 90.0 94.6 99.2 104.1 109.4 

630 81.9 87.1 91.7 96.5 101.4 106.8 

1000 78.8 84.0 88.7 93.5 98.5 104.0 

2000 73.8 79.0 83.7 88.6 93.6 99.1 

4000 67.4 72.9 77.7 82.6 87.8 93.4 

6300 63.0 68.2 73.1 78.1 83.3 89.0 

10000 57.6 62.8 67.8 73.0 78.2 84.1 

16000 51.2 56.4 61.6 66.9 72.4 78.4 

25000 44.2 49.4 54.8 60.3 66.1 72.4 

NC 747 5 BY 10 5 BY 10 

EPNL 

THRUSTS 8000 16000 24000 32000 40000 

200 100.9 106.6 110.3 112.6 114.6 

400 96.2 101.9 105.7 108.0 110.0 

630 92.4 98.1 102.1 104.5 106.5 

1000 87.8 93.5 97.9 100.5 102.5 

2000 79.4 85.1 90.1 93.5 95.0 

4000 71.4 77.1 83.2 86.5 88.5 

6300 65.9 71.6 77.7 81.1 83.1 

10000 59.7 65.4 71.6 75.0 77.0 

16000 52.2 57.9 64.9 68.7 70.7 

25000 43.3 49.0 57.1 61.4 63.4 

SEL 

THRUSTS 8000 16000 24000 32000 40000 

200 96.3 100.3 103.4 105.8 107.8 

400 91.8 95.8 99.1 101.4 103.4 

630 88.3 92.3 95.7 98.1 100.1 

1000 84.5 88.5 92.0 94.5 96.5 

2000 78.4 82.4 86.2 88.9 90.9 

4000 71.7 75.7 79.8 82.7 84.7 

6300 66.9 70.9 75.2 78.2 80.2 

10000 61.3 65.3 69.9 73.1 75.1 

16000 54.7 58.7 63.7 67.1 69.1 

25000 47.3 51.3 56.8 60.5 62.5 


42 






The Aviation System Analysis Capability 


The COM.UTI file specifies that, for long-haul, wide-bodied aircraft, departure 
flight track 16 is used 82.1 percent during the daytime and 7.01 percent during the 
nighttime. For the long-haul, wide-body departures, departure flight track 16 
would contain the following annual average daily operations: 

♦ (5,300 departures/year x 0.821)/(365 days/year) = 12 daytime 747-400 
stage length 5 departures per day 

♦ (5,300 departures/year x 0.0701)/(365 days/year) = 1 nighttime 747-400 
stage length 5 departures per day. 

Similar calculations would be made for the DC9 stage length 3 departures on 
flight track 16 and for all 747-400 and DC9 arrivals on their respective flight 
tracks. 

The program then combines the computed operations data with the 

♦ COM.HDR file, 

♦ COM.TRX file, 

♦ NOISE.DAT file, 

♦ COMMIL.HDR file, and 

♦ COMMIL.FRQ file. 

It generates an INM runstream file COM.INP. The COM.INP file is temporarily 
renamed FOR02.DAT for purposes of executing the INM. 

Integrated Noise Model Version 4. 1 1 

The Input, Flight, and Compute modules of the INM are executed. The primary 
outputs are the FOR03.DAT and FOR33.DAT files, which contain the noise con- 
tours in a binary format. 

PNTREAD2 Program 

The PNTREAD2 program stands for “point read.” It reads the binary format con- 
tour files generated by the INM and writes GIS noise contour files compatible 
with Map Info. 

Popcount Program 

The Popcount program uses the “point read” files and the preprocessed census 
database files to compute the off- airport land acreage, numbers of dwellings, and 
population within each noise-exposure contour. 


43 



Computing Changes in Airfield Capacity and Delay 

The savings program utilizes the database of airfield capacity and delay values to 
compute the differences in capacity and delay between the standard and more effi- 
cient runway use configurations. The results are written to the COM.SAV file. 

Computing Time/Distance Savings Data 

The Savings program uses the preprocessed data file of “time and distance values” 
for all standard and efficient flight tracks (for COM airport) and the user- specified 
set of efficient flight tracks (tracks on runway 36R only). The program computes 
the difference in time and distance between activation of the standard and efficient 
flight tracks and writes the results to the COM.SAV file, similar to the sample 
.SAV file shown previously. 

Model Accuracy and Limitations 

NIM relies on accurate input data, as do all computer models, and it makes as few 
assumptions and approximations as possible, given the intended use of the results. 
The primary usefulness of NIM is in its ability to model how changes in aircraft 
noise levels and/or flight procedures could affect flight efficiency and community 
noise impact. The assumptions and approximations noted below have been al- 
lowed because they speed processing time without diminishing, in our view the 
utility of the model for its intended purpose. 

Overall, it must be noted that the noise calculations, while using the INM, are not 
sufficiently detailed to be useful for predicting noise impact at any given airport. 
LMI, and NASA strongly discourage users from exercising NIM to assess noise 
impacts at an airport for other than research purposes. The most recent version of 
the INM (currently version 5.1) as provided by the FAA, or the most recent 
version of its military counterpart NOISEMAP, as provided by the Department of 
the Air Force — always should be used as the primary tool for assessing or 
predicting aircraft noise impacts. 

The definition of a long-haul flight as anything greater than 1 ,000 statute miles 
and the grouping of aircraft into long-haul versus short-haul categories is not as 
refined as most INM runstreams used for airport noise studies. However, the 
results of comparing one scenario to another are still valid for the level of detail 
available to most of the aviation industry and for research analysts exploring 
aircraft technologies. 

Similarly, there are considerable differences in the noise characteristics of the 
various aircraft within the categories “narrow body” or “wide -body.” New tech- 
nologies are likely to be aimed at specific aircraft rather than broad categories, so 
users may want to apply individual aircraft noise reductions. 


44 



The Aviation System Analysis Capability 


The INM itself has certain limitations due to the simplified treatment of how air- 
craft noise is generated and propagated hi air and across varied terrain. Generally, 
the model is considered accurate within approximately one dB when groups of 
aircraft are considered. The accuracy diminishes as the aircraft travels farther 
away from the airport and as there are fewer aircraft in the mix. 

Conclusions 

The NIM provides analysts with a convenient tool bringing together four basic 
functions for studying airports: 

♦ A noise modeling tool for aircraft operations 

♦ Evaluation of the change in airfield capacity and estimated delay associ- 
ated with using more efficient runway use patterns compared with stan- 
dard noise-abatement configurations 

♦ Evaluation of the time and distance savings associated with using more 
efficient flight tracks compared with existing noise- abatement flight tracks 

♦ Accurate evaluation of changes in the off-airport acreage and numbers of 
people and homes impacted by noise resulting from user-defined changes in 
runway use, flight tracks, numbers of operations, and aircraft noise levels. 


45 



Bibliography 


Bum, M., J. Carey, J. Czech, and E. R. Wingrove HI. The Flight Track Noise Im- 
pact Model. NASA Contractor Report 201683, April 1997. 

Wyle Research Report WR 96-19. Aircraft Noise Reduction and Air Carrier Effi- 
ciency — Final Progress Report. Wyle Laboratories, Arlington, V A, June 1996 


Bib-1 



Appendix A 

Flight Tracks and Noise Contours 


In this appendix, we graphically display important data for the 16 airports in- 
cluded in the AS AC NIM. 


A-l 




Scale 


Figure A-l 


Peculated Areas 
Cmlcura 


Atlanta International 
Flight Tracks and 1993 
Noise Contours 


Arriv^ Tracks 
ftafiarture Tracks 
O^rniftftd Departure- T riteka 


\m 



Flight Tracks and Noise Contours 


Figure A-2. Boston Logan International Airport Flight Tracks 
and 1993 Noise Contours 



WCk 


fm 


' /■:; , 

:''V ^ *'- v •?,- x A 

' ' ' . ,s „ • ' 

' V--' , ' - • 

• s 

g§lg§ggi 


*0* 


\ ■■ ■ 

WM 






/ * I kx I • 1 

? mmm&l ■ 
: I \V V 1 i 

- ' T- r 

,v ■' v V- v 
■ ' --v v-'.*. 


* : -cM 




Scale 


Miles 


Legend 

SC454 w*wr 

|j. rtailattsd Arsns 
Co«t«;r» 

Ritewsy 
•Vriva': Tracks 
D^p^rtLi:s;-T“s:CK8 
OplL-iiisd a--r:j re Tracks 


Figure A-2 

Boston. Logan 
International Airport. 
Flight Tracks arid 1993 
Noise Contours 


A-3 




Figure A-3. Cincinnati-Northern Kentucky International Airport Flight Tracks 

and 1993 Noise Contours 



Scale 


Miles 


Legend 

Water 

Pop-ti Ink: d At 

Colours 

Runway 

Arrival Tracks 

DCpftltUfO 

DpUrc&edL 


vo tracks I 


Figure A-3 

Ctncinnati-Northerii Kentucky 
International Airport 
Flight Tracks and 3993 
Noise Contours 

| Sow*. TlOfUi.M i-v\ I W 


A-4 



Flight Tracks and Noise Contours 







Figure A-5. Detroit Metropolitan Wayne County Airport Flight Tracks 

and 1993 Noise Contours 


Figure A-5 


Pfipsilatjetti Areas 
Csntsurs 





Flight Tracks and Noise Contours 


Figure A-6. Newark International Airport Flight Tracks and 1993 Noise Contours 







■ . . . 




/ 

£V;v ¥; 

# m : 


lllllll 




■ . ' xX 

■.'..■• ^\ -■■ ;•• x ' 

N C.C 

(0$ MS xVX%4" 


MBMM 

mMrnmmm i 


Figure A-6 


Legend 

|||£| Water 
[03 ^raLated Anssu* 

m».m i nw*» CaitOltfrS 

Rv.aws.V 

Arrival Tmcb 

I^p&iturc 

*<---<•* Optimised $s§xasta.re Tracks 


Newark International 
Flight Tracks and 1993 
Noise Contours 



A-7 





Figure A-7. Dulles International Airport Flight Tracks and 1993 Noise Contours 


] f^pulatad Areas 

- Contours. 
m Runway 

•' Arrive I Trasks. 

- Lftpwturc IVfceis* 


ulks international Airport 
Flight Tracks and 1 993 
Noise Contours 





Flight Tracks and Noise Contours 


Figure A-8. John F. Kennedy International Flight Tracks 
and 1993 Noise Contours 



wKBMm m 

1 * , • •- ' < 




l ' J^wiUs&d Ahvjk 

........... 

a aaM B RtmW&y 
— , — rt.{’nvfl? Trades 
DCJMtftai’O I'iVVrk:? 

OpiirtiLssed Dcip«rLu3 ^ Ts'g&kfc 


rcJUH^: ! l:Uivfj/k«B. j-MI 


Figure A~8 


John F. Kennedy Internationa 
Flight Tracks and 1993 
Noise Contours 






Figure A-9. Los Angeles International Flight Tracks and 1993 Noise Contours 





legend 

Wtoccr 

E§J Fapu-^-ted Arms 

<hbbb Runway 

Arrival Tr-icks- 

— ~ pepamm; Tracks 

■■■•“■■ - O^tacftiged Ucpsutu’'* Trank* 


Figure A-9 


Los Angeles Internfttional 
Flight Tracks and 1993 
Noise Contours 


i^iiura IKfl'FI! !!! f > : Wj 


Flight Tracks and Noise Contours 


Figure A-10. La Guardia International Flight Tracks and 1993 Noise Contours 



iissi 




mm* a 


m 

emm 


wMM 


Legend 



Water 

f~1 i\;p^tated Ary»» 
— Conatura 
■WWW HUcWfc&V 
— • Arrival Tr»x:k» 

...... Departure Tracks 

^.v. Optimised fteportufC: 


l-a Gu&rdia International 
Plight Tracks and 1 993 
Noise Contours 


»x>\\-e. sw ft j i i }<r 


A-l 1 




Figure A-ll. Orlando International Airport Flight Tracks 
and 1993 Noise Contours 







Water 

popuJatcd ai«r» Orlando International Airport 

cou-oMi* Flight Tracks and 1 993 

Hunway - 

Arrival Tracks NOlSC COHlOUrS 

DfcpftrtiwfciYiwkfc 

Optimised DtqxaCutre I mukif 

toiMi'i- WsSIW ift? • Ml 


A-12 


Flight Tracks and Noise Contours 


Figure A- 12. Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport Flight Tracks 

and 1993 Noise Contours 



Scale 


legend 

Figure A- 12 


k 

Is 

[ — H TVasitbsesci Areas 

Minniapolis-'St. Paul 

0 1 2 

N 


International Airport 

Miles 



Flight Tracks and 1993 


% 

Dopriftf^^ 'racks 

Noise Contours 



— — On dm i swi D vc ' LVac ks 

jw.v n-A.eft/Mor ?ai 


A-13 




Figure A-13. Chicago O’ Hare International Airport Flight Tracks 
and 1993 Noise Contours 



Scale 

k 

Legend 

Figure A~13 



| | Populated Areas 

Chicago O’Hare Internationa 

C2,~? 2.5 

Siles 

M 

AmV&i; ‘Tj'SviwJ 
... DcpSB.ftt. 4 -rC; Traced 

Might Tracks and 1993 
Noise Contours 



Flight Tracks and Noise Contours 



Figure A-14. Pittsburgh International Airport Flight Tracks 
and 1993 Noise Contours 


Legend 


Figure A-14 

Pittsburgh 
International Airport 
Flight Tracks and 1993 
Noise Contours 


C ’ ’ i Populated Area* 
****** C<?ritcurs 

4&BB fcOTft&V 

Arrivn! Tracks 

.......... fjenastfen: Track: 


j»wrr?: fUiJSBH.iw. l -Ml 





Figure A-15. Seattle-Tacoma International Airport Flight Tracks 
and 1993 Noise Contours 



Legend 

$$$& Water 

OGJ Popujc.f?4 ArsisH 

— LiODvOUr^ 

1111 urinnni i^UTTOtay 

Amval Tracks 

Arrival VracJra 
Xteasartur* Tracks 


Figure A- 1 S 

S eattle-Taemna 
international Airport 
Flight Tracks and 1 993 
Noise Contours 


Mites 


v.n-c: 



Flight Tracks and Noise Contours 





PPiSPPSilw* °wm 

^ ,if" ’ ' •*'•.' . *. •' ;1 

. '//ifc ' ■ * ' <• ■ *- ■ •„ 1 

v 

£yj g c ' ' 


■ 


Figure A-16. San Francisco International Airport Flight Tracks 
and 1993 Noise Contours 


Figure A-16 


Legend 


g$& War jxr 

l ' Arm 

vmmm C^tT^rn 
anas- ftuKWSy 

• Aiiiva! Trade? 

~~~ A/Sfiystl Track: 

Depai-Ute 6 Tracks 


San Francisco International 
Flight Tracks and 1993 
Noise Contours 





Appendix B 

Time and Distance Savings 


Table B-l . Time and Distance Savings for Optimized Flight Tracks at Study Airports 


Airport 

Runway 

Optimized flight track 

Time saved (sec.) 

Distance saved (nm) 

ATL 

26L 

Z36X 

16 

1.92 


26L 

Z5BY 

14 

1.65 


26L 

Z5YB 

31 

3.64 


26L 

Z6YB 

19 

2.19 


26L 

Z7YB 

25 

2.89 


26L 

Z8XB 

7 

0.82 


26L 

Z5BY 

14 

1.65 


27R 

Z32Y 

20 

2.39 

BOS 

04 R 

4RD1 

41 

5.3 


04 R 

4RD3 

41 

5.3 


04 R 

4RD4 

41 

5.3 


04 R 

4RD5 

41 

5.3 


09C 

09D1 

8 

1.0 


09C 

09D2 

58 

7.5 


09C 

09D4 

58 

7.5 


15R 

15D1 

66 

8.6 


15R 

15D3 

66 

8.6 


15R 

15D4 

66 

8.6 


15R 

15D5 

66 

8.6 


22L 

2LD1 

74 

9.6 


22L 

2LD2 

74 

9.6 


22L 

2LD3 

74 

9.6 


22L 

2LD4 

74 

9.6 


22L 

2LD5 

74 

9.6 


22R 

2RD1 

74 

9.6 


22 R 

2RD2 

74 

9.6 


22 R 

2RD3 

74 

9.6 


22R 

2RD4 

74 

9.6 


22 R 

2RD5 

74 

9.6 


27C 

27N1 

62 

8.1 


27C 

27N2 

62 

8.1 


B-l 










Table B-l. Time and Distance Savings for Optimized Flight Tracks at Study Airports (Cont.) 


Airport 

Runway 

Optimized flight track 

Time saved (sec.) 

Distance saved (nm) 

BOS (cont.) 

27C 

27N3 

62 

8.1 


27C 

27N4 

112 

14.6 


27C 

27N5 

112 

14.6 


27C 

27N6 

112 

14.6 


27C 

27S1 

55 

7.1 


27C 

27S2 

55 

7.1 


27C 

27S3 

55 

7.1 


27C 

27S4 

55 

7.1 


27C 

27S5 

55 

7.1 


27C 

27S6 

55 

7.1 


33L 

33 D2 

5 

0.6 


33L 

33 D3 

5 

0.6 

CVG 

18L 

DT10 

93 

12.0 


18L 

DTI 2 

93 

12.0 


18L 

DTI 5 

38 

4.9 


18L 

DTI 9 

93 

12.0 


18R 

DT21 

49 

6.3 


18R 

DT2B 

49 

6.3 


18R 

DT2M 

49 

6.3 


18R 

DT2Q 

49 

6.3 


27 

DT30 

13 

1.6 


27 

DT31 

13 

1.6 


27 

DT32 

40 

5.1 


27 

DT33 

3 

0.4 


27 

DT34 

33 

10.7 


27 

DT35 

55 

7.1 


27 

DT3C 

55 

7.1 


27 

DT3D 

13 

1.6 


27 

DT3M 

13 

1.6 


27 

DT3N 

3 

0.4 


27 

DT3P 

13 

1.6 


27 

DT3Q 

83 

10.6 


36L 

DT51 

48 

6.3 


36R 

DT41 

55 

7.1 


36R 

DT42 

55 

7.1 


36R 

DT43 

86 

11.1 


36R 

DT45 

25 

3.2 


B-2 




















Time and Distance Savings 


Table B-l. Time and Distance Savings for Optimized Flight Tracks at Study Airports (Con.t) 


Airport 

Runway 

Optimized flight track 

Time saved (sec.) 

Distance saved (nm) 

EWR 

04L 

4LD3 

12 

1.45 


04L 

4LD4 

10 

1.15 


04L 

4LD5 

44 

5.24 



4LD6 

13 

1.56 



4LD7 

12 

1.46 



4LD8 

14 

1.70 



4RD3 

12 

1.45 



4RD4 

10 

1.15 


04 R 

4RD5 

44 

5.24 


04 R 

4RD6 

13 

1.56 


04 R 

4RD7 

12 

1.46 


04 R 

4RD8 

14 

1.70 


22L 

2LD3 

16 

1.88 


22L 

2LD4 

10 

1.22 


22L 

2LD5 

5 

0.55 


22L 

2LD6 

10 

1.21 


22L 

2LD7 

5 

0.57 


22L 

2LD8 

11 

1.31 


22L 

2LDA 

6 

0.76 


22L 

2LDO 

2 

0.27 


22L 

2LDS 

6 

0.70 


22 R 

2RD3 

16 

1.88 


22 R 

2RD4 

10 

1.22 


22 R 

2RD5 

5 

0.55 


22R 

2RD6 

10 

1.21 


22 R 

2RD7 

5 

0.57 


22R 

2RD8 

11 

1.31 


22 R 

2RDA 

6 

0.76 


22R 

2RDO 

2 

0.22 


22R 

2RDS 

6 

0.70 


B-3 
















Table B-l. Time and Distance Savings for Optimized Flight Tracks at Study Airports (Cont.) 


Airport 

Runway 

Optimized flight track 

Time saved (sec.) 

Distance saved (nm) 

JFK 

31 L 

1 LD1 

17 

2.27 


31 L 

1 LD2 

17 

2.27 


31 L 

1 LD3 

21 

2.91 


31 L 

1 LD4 

7 

0.94 


31 L 

1 LD5 

21 

2.86 


31 L 

1 LD6 

30 

4.05 


31 L 

1 LDB 

13 

1.82 


31 L 

1 LDJ 

13 

1.78 


31 R 

1 RD3 

60 

8.23 


31 R 

1 RD4 

13 

1.80 


31 R 

1 RD5 

22 

3.01 

LAX 

24L 

M24L 

29 

3.03 


24L 

P24L 

114 

11.85 


24L 

V24L 

68 

7.05 


24 R 

M24R 

29 

3.03 


24 R 

P24R 

114 

11.85 


24 R 

V24R 

68 

7.05 


25L 

M25R 

45 

4.68 


25L 

P25L 

117 

12.12 


25L 

V25L 

68 

7.05 


25 R 

M25R 

45 

4.68 


25 R 

P25R 

117 

12.12 


25 R 

V25R 

68 

7.05 

LGA 

13 

13D1 

23 

2.78 


13 

13D2 

22 

2.61 


13 

13D3 

9 

1.04 


13 

13D4 

28 

3.30 


13 

13D5 

71 

8.43 


13 

13D6 

12 

1.45 


13 

13D7 

32 

22.00 


13 

13D8 

10 

1.24 


13 

13D9 

10 

1.22 


13 

13DA 

7 

0.86 


13 

13DB 

5 

0.61 


13 

13DD 

18 

2.14 


13 

13DG 

6 

0.76 


13 

13DH 

20 

2.40 


B-4 






















Time and Distance Savings 


Table B-l. Time and Distance Savings for Optimized Flight Tracks at Study Airports (Cont.) 


Airport 

Runway 

Optimized flight track 

Time saved (sec.) 

Distance saved (nm) 

MCO 

35L 

10 

39 

5.16 


36R 

6 

41 

5.47 

MSP 

29L 

TR1 6 

2 

0.26 


29L 

TR1 7 

5 

0.66 


29L 

TR18 

8 

1.05 


29L 

TR20 

7 

0.86 


29R 

TR23 

4 

0.53 


29R 

TR24 

7 

0.86 

SEA 

16L 

JA04 

22 

2.94 


16L 

JA12 

30 

4.00 


16R 

JA54 

22 

2.94 


16R 

JA62 

30 

4.00 


34L 

JA55 

95 

12.77 


34L 

JA57 

31 

4.10 


34L 

JA59 

43 

5.81 


34L 

JA61 

20 

2.64 


34L 

JA63 

20 

2.65 


34L 

JA65 

62 

8.30 


34 R 

JA05 

47 

6.30 


34 R 

JA07 

33 

4.50 


34 R 

JA09 

46 

6.21 


34 R 

JA1 1 

46 

6.25 


34 R 

JA13 

23 

3.05 


34 R 

JA15 

62 

8.30 

SFO 

28L 

A1 IN 

10 

1.24 


28 R 

A1NE 

10 

1.22 


B-5 

































Appendix C 

Airport Profiles 


Table C-l. Airport Profiles 


Name 

Data 

The William B. Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport 

Airport, "ATL" 

Altitude, 1 026, ’Temperature”, 1 6, "C" 
Runways, 4 

RW,"09R","27L", 0,0, 8700, 0,92 
RW,"09L","27R",0, 1 000, 1 1 700, 1 000,92 
RW,"08R","26L", 2740, 5295, 12650,5290,92 
RW,"08L","26R", 2076, 651 5,1 1 61 0,651 0,92 

General Edward Lawrence Logan International Airport 

Airport, "BOS" 

Altitude, 15, "Temperature”, 59. 0,"F" 
Runways, 6 

RW,"04R","22C", 0,0, 2966, 8285,35 
RW,"04C","22L",474, 1323,3440,9608,35 
RW,"04L","22R",-545,2927,2028,1 01 14,35 
RW,"09C","27C", -145, 1921 ,6589, 3534, 92 
RW,"15R","33C", -1548, 861 3, 5530, 1504, 151 
RW,"1 5C","33L", -956, 801 7,5530,801 7, 1 51 

Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky International Airport 

Airport, "CVG" 

Altitude, 890, "Temperature”, 1 2,"C" 

Runways, 3 

RW,"1 8R","36L",70,9500,0,0,180 
RW, "09", "27", -3265, 431 5,4530,4250,90 
RW,"18L","36R", 6305,7745,6230,-2265,180 

Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport 

Airport, "DFW" 

Altitude,603,"Temperature”,19,"C" 

Runways, 7 

R W " 34 ", " 1 6 ", 1 3 1 96 , - 1 285 , 1 3 1 96 , 6294 , 340 
RW,"35R","1 7L",781 5,-1 29,781 6, 1 0661 ,354 
RW,"35L","1 7R”, 6406,-1 29,6406,1 0789,354 
RW,"36R","18L", 0,0, 128, 10789, 354 
RW,"36L","18R",-1 154,128,-1 153,10661 ,354 
RW, "31 L","13R", -3588, 4366, -9609, 10789, 31 3 
R W " 31 R" "i 3 |_", 1 5374,5780,9225, 1 1 945,309 


C-l 















Table C-l. Airport Profiles (cont.) 


Name 

Data 

Detroit Metropolitan Wayne County Airport 

Airport, "DTW" 

Altitude, 639, ’Temperature”, 48. 6, "F" 
Runways, 4 

RW, "09", "27", 21 80,5380, 10880,5380,094 
RW,"03L","21 R", 0,0, 5830, 1 0490,034 
RW,"03C","21C",5280, 1940,9500,9370,034 
RW, "03R", "21 L", 5020, -2460, 101 20, 6260, 034 

Newark International Airport 

Airport, "EWR" 

Altitude, 1 8, "Temperature”, 1 3,"C" 

Runways, 6 

RW,"04R","22L", 0,0, 3996, 8398, 39 
RW, "03R", "21 L", -451, 1904, 3485, 7323, 39 
RW,"04L","22R",-1 620,1 637,2823,81 22,39 
RW,"03L","21 R",-1 301 ,2305,2634,7725,39 
RW,"1 1 ","29",-1 881 ,9081 ,4899,8553, 1 08 
RW,"1 0","28",-1 881 ,9081 ,4601 ,8577, 1 08 

Washington Dulles International Airport 

Airport, "IAD" 

Altitude, 31 3, "Temperature”, 60, "F" 
Runways, 3 

RW,"01 L","1 9R",0,0,1 40,1 1499,1 0 
RW, "01 R","19L", 6632, -5581, 6773, 5918, 10 
RW, "12", "30", -8791, 1689, 578, -1807, 120 

John F. Kennedy International Airport 

Airport, "JFK" 

Altitude, 1 3, "Temperature”, 1 3,"C" 

Runways, 7 

RW,"04L","22R", 0,0, 5805, 9755, 44 
RW,"05L","23R", 0,0, 4260, 71 58,44 
RW,"04R”,"22L",4222,1 241 ,8518,8459,44 
R W "i 3L","31 R",-1 255, 1 3035,7338,7920, 1 34 
RW,"14L","32R”, -405, 12528, 6458, 8444, 134 
RW, "13R", "31 L", -8643, 9635, 3879, 21 83, 134 
RW,"14R","32L", -6404, 8303, 1023, 3883, 134 


C-2 















Airport Profiles 


Table C-l. Airport Profiles (cont.) 


Name 

Data 

Los Angeles International Airport 

Airport, "LAX" 

Altitude, 1 26", TEMPERATURE", 1 7,"C" 
Runways, 8 

RW,"06L","24R", -3649, 5566, 4790, 661 1 ,69 
RW,"06R","24L", -4959, 4689, 4925,5971 ,69 
RW,"07L","25R",-68,708, 1 1 570,21 59,69 
RW,"07R","25L", 0,0,1 1503,1 41 6,69 
RW,"08L","26R",-68,708, 10984,2087,69 
RW,"08R","26L",0,0, 10920, 1345,69 
RW,"06C","24C", -5296, 5002, 4834, 6254, 69 
RW,"07C","25C",-34,354, 1 1 537, 1 787,69 

La Guardia Airport 

Airport, "LGA" 

Altitude,"22,”Temperature",13,"C" 
Runways, 3 

RW, "04", "22", 0,0, 3701 ,5942,45 

RW "i 3 " " 31 " 1 572,4792,751 4, 1 091 , 1 35 

RW,"1 4", "30", 1 572,4792,7365, 1 1 84, 1 35 

Orlando International Airport 

Airport, "MCO" 

Altitude, 96, "Temperature”, 23. 0,"C" 

Runways, 3 

RW,"36L","18R", 0,0,0, 12204,359 
RW,"36R","1 8L", 1 500,0, 1 500, 1 2204,359 
RW,"35L","17R", 10040,-2500,9950,7500,359 

Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport 

Airport, "MSP" 

Altitude, 841 , "Temperature”, 60, "F" 

Runways, 4 

RW, "04", "22", 0,0, 51 40,51 20,41 
RW,"1 1R”,"29L", -880, 3790, 7700, -1450,1 18 
R W "i i L","29R", 2580, 561 0,9550, 1 350, 1 1 8 
RW,"04C","22C", 0,0, 5950, 5900, 41 

Chicago O'Hare International Airport 

Airport, "ORD" 

Altitude, 668, "Temperature", 10, "C" 

Runways, 6 

RW,"04L","22R", 0,0, 4770, 5787, 41 
RW,”04R","22L", 3938, -10327,9286,-4283,43 
RW,"09L","27R",-1 209,814,6758,855,91 
RW,”09R","27L",-1 935,-461 0,8205,-4590,91 
RW,"1 4 L", "32 R", -397, 7568, 6033, -95, 141 
RW,"14R","32L", -5228, 3198, 31 29, -6759, 141 

















Table C-l. Airport Profiles (cont.) 


Name 

Data 

Greater Pittsburgh International Airport 

Airport, "PIT" 

Altitude, 18, "Temperature”, 82. 7, "F" 

Runways, 5 

RW,"10L","28R", 0,0, 10500, 0,1 00 
RW,"1 0C","28C", 8773, -4309,1 681 2,-431 1 ,1 00 
RW,"1 0", "28", 8773, -4309,1 7412,-431 1 ,1 00 
RW, "1 OR", "28L", 5622, -5503, 171 22, -5503, 100 
RW "i 4 " " 32 ", 1 2973,-1 855, 1 8758,-7526, 1 40 

Seattle-Tacoma International Airport 

Airport, "SEA" 

Altitude, 430, "Temperature", 1 1 ,"C" 
Runways, 2 

RW,"34L","1 6R", 0,0, 0,9425, 338 
RW,"34R","16L", 800, -2475, 800, 9425, 338 

San Francisco International Airport 

Airport, "SFO" 

Altitude, 1 1 /Temperature”, 1 6, "C" 

Runways, 4 

RW, "1 0L","28R", 0,0,1 1 689,-2061 ,1 00 
RW, "1 0R","28L",1 1 1 3, -1008,11552,-2849,100 
RW, "01 L","1 9R",5643, -5391,6859,1503,10 
RW, "01R","19L",6226, -6589,7771,2176,10 


C-4 












Appendix D 

Data Input Screens 


Figure D-l . NIM Home Page 



tiers System Analysis Capability 




&&&&& 




7ii 


QRS Model Server 



ASAC Model Wizard 

QRS Model Wizard 

ASAC Noise Impact Model 

QRS File Manager 


I QRS Document Server 


QRS Query Server 
QRS Report Server 
QRS Help 
ASAC Home 
Feedback 


M Si iiiAySi; M isd ddSsfe S£S ssisS 

Mf% S?j p&sM®t 
&S i'fVs'iSSx'J is : &s*ii te$>& i 


SsaSS: • sra<;K3r£ :S5SJ§?Si 


;SC5* iSS! $>% $£$&§&& *8 S’*: iJM% ?&£ 

iMi $&» HPSK! ftSrs «>3 pMl! % &1 $&sS 8& 


'T§b£* «y ftro ir&sM&i OS &&i ASAC JfasSStii ^jjaiS &1&M. OS<it iiAVffijStS SS&i. £is&s:»¥ M- i o» Op&i&SSO .SSsS SftO SSS'tx - S.0Sf:-£SMt 

*£« M KStffS &:>■& ». Mto&ab %Ht*& «*8 &* isSSfi &ftft JSfjfllif $£& .«S2 VX^-ftS Siiw tilH iWfc 3 JftJItf 


:>« £*? S*S *-sswfS-; ,*ii? SS-sw 




D-l 





Figure D-2. NIM Scenario File Locator 



latron System Analysis Capability! 


ASA C Model Wizard 


QRS Model Wizard 


QRS Model Server 


| QRS Document Server 


QRS Query Server 
QRS Report Server 
QRS Help 
ASAC Home 
Feedback 


ASAC Noise Impact Model 

DNL Contours Scenario File Locator 


Enter the location of the Scenario file and press CONTINUE 



<*' Use Default Scenario File 

Scenario 

c Find Scenario File on Server 

File 

| c Build New Scenario File 


r Upload Scenario File to Server 


D-2 





Data Input Screens 


Figure D-3. Airport Selector 



ASAC Model Wizard 


QRS Model Wizard 


2R.S File Manager 


QRS Model Server 


fatten System Analysis Capability! 


CONTINUE 


QR5 Document Server 


QRS Query Server 
QRS Report Server 
QRS Help 
ASAC Home 
Feedback 


ASAC Noise Impact Model 

DNL Contours Scenario File Builder 

Select Airport 

Select an airport to analyze and press CONTINUE 


Seleci j 
Aiiport j 

AUa-ita 'iiifillian 0 Hartsfield Intern abend Arport m 

Boston Legal In tern abend Arport ““ 

Chicggo O' Hare Intenaticnd Arport 

Cincinnati i Northern Kentucky Intemabcnd Arport 

Ddlas- Fort Worth Intenaticnd Arport 

Detroit/ Wayne County Arport 

Los Aigeles In te inabend Arport 

Mnnecpdis-St. Paul Intenaticnd Arport 

New York John F Kennedy Intemabcnd Arport 

New York La Guardia Arport J 




D-3 







ASAC Model Wizard 


QRS Model Server 




ASAC Model Wizard 


QRS Model 


QRS Model Server 


Ration System Analysis Capability! 


CONTINUE 


Figure D-4. Global Parameters (Part 2) 


Figure D-5. Aircraft Operations Scaling 


D-4 


QRS Document Server 


QRS Query Server 
QRS Report Server 
QRS Help 
ASAC Home 
Feedback 


ASAC Noise impact Model 

DML Contours Scenario File Builder 

Edit Aircraft Operations Scaling Parameters 

Edit the parameters used for scaling aircraft operations by category and press CONTINUE 


Aircraft Operations Scaling; 

Wide Body Short Haul: 

!r~ % 

Wide Body Long Haul: 

;riB% 

Narrow Body Short Haul: 

j| 

Narrow Body Long Haul: 

i — % 

Propeller Short Haul: 

rr % 

Propeller Long Haul: 

r~t % 


ASAC Noise Impact Model 
qrs Document server DNL Contours Scenario File Builder 
Select Study Year 

QRS Query Server 

QRS Report Server Select the study year to use and press CONTINUE. 

QRS Help 

ASAC Home i | C 1993 C 2005 55131 

Feedback 


Popul&tum ^ 
Year: 


1993 * 2005 SO 15 







Data Input Screens 


Figure D-6. Flight track Optimization 



ASAC Model Wizard 


lien System Analysis Capability! 


QRS Document Server 


QRS Model Server 


QRS Query Server 
QRS Report Server 
QRS Help 
ASAC Home 
Feedback 


ASAC Noise impact Model 
DNL Contours Scenario File Builder 
Select Flight T rack Optimization 


Select the flight tracks to optimize by runway arid press 

CONTINUE 


Eight Track Optimization (by runway) 

Runway 

Optimize 

28L 

C No <? Yes’ 

28R 

« No C Yes 


D-5 





Figure D-7. Alternative Runway Utilization 



jff / 

n'-TM'l f. 

ASAC Model Wizard 

QRS Model Wizard 


QRS Fife Manager 

ASAC Noise Impact Model 
DNL Contours Scenario File 

1 QRS Document Server 

QRS Model Server 

QRS Query Server 
QRS Report Server 

Builder 

QRS Help 
ASAC Home 

Select Runway Utilization Type 

Feedback 

Select standard or alternative runway utilization and 
press CONTINUE. 


Rimway Utiliza (Ion 


'• Standard c Alternative 

CONT3NUE | 


D-6 





Data Input Screens 


Figure D-8. Global Noise Reduction 



Ration System Analysis Capability! 


ASAC Model Wizard 


QRS Model Wizard 


QRS Model Server 


CONTINUE | 


Global Noise Reductions 

Wide Body: F“ dB 

** Do Not Use C Use 

Narrow Body: ipl: dB 

a Do Not Use r Use 

Propeller: Q i dB 

Do Not Use C Use 


| QRS Document Server 


QRS Query Server 
QRS Report Server 
QRS Help 
ASAC Home 
Feedback 


ASAC Noise Impact Model 

DNL Contours Scenario File Builder 

Edit Global Noise Reduction Parameters 


Edit Global Woise Reduction Values for aircraft categories and press CONTINUE 


D-7 





Figure D-9. Aircraft Selection (Part 1 ) 



llfatton System Analysis Capability! 


QR5 Document Server 


QRS Model Server 



ASAC Model Wizard 

QRS Model Wizard 

ASAC Noise Impact Model 

DNL Contours Scenario File Builder 

QRS File Manager 


Edit Aircraft Noise Reduction Parameters 


QRS Query Server 
QRS Report Server 
QRS Help 
ASAC Home 
Feedback 


SSSS* vtS&ifSS S'S’ Sr# i'&SSW tSiVii'Svi'; jiSitWSiSS'K .:*•£} fS-viiii f:«S SiS* (■ 

Aits : | !N'<*nc lit tt*s 


I s ;>v : < fsft >.¥>>; 
______ 


\mm 


D-8 










Data Input Screens 


Figure D-10. Aircraft Selection (Part 2) 



D-9 





Figure D-ll. Select Number of Countour Levels 



iation System Analysis Capability 


QRS Document Server 


DNL Contours Scenario File Builder 


QRS Model Server 




ASAC Model Wizard 

OPS Model Wizard 
QRS File Manager 

ASAC Noise impact Model 


QRS Query Server 
QRS Report Server 
QRS Help 
ASAC Home 
Feedback 


Select Number of Noise Level 
Cs^o into ij rs 


Select the number of noise level contours to use and press 

CONTINUE 


Number of Noise Level 

n 

2 < 

' 3 f 

' 4 

Contours 

r 

5 




D-10 





Data Input Screens 


Figure D-12. Set Contour Decibel Levels 



iiiiiii)))))i)iiiiiniiiiii))))))n»>»w»ni)n»miii i 


latian System Analysis Capability 


INM Sound Level 1 


INM Sound Level 2 


INM Sound Level 3 !|1 j 


INM Sound Level 4 ! jfyTj 


QRS Model Server 



ASAC Model Wizard 

QRS Modal Visard 


QRS File Manager 


| QRS Document Server 


Edit Values for Noise Contour Levels 


•SS&fS&SS j 


INM Sound Level 5 


QRS Query Server 
QRS Report Server 
QRS Help 
ASAC Home 
Feedback 




Edit the values for the noise contour levels and press CONTINUE. Noise contour values may 
range between 55-85 decibels. 




Values for INM Sound Levels 




D-l 1 






Figure D-13. User Comments 



llimi lll lllli wn 


latian System Analysis Capability 



ASAC Model Wizard 

QRS Model Wizard 

ASAC Noise Impact Model 

QRS File Manager 

| QRS Document Server 

DNL Contours Scenario File Builder 

QRS Model Server 

Edit Comments 

QRS Query Server 
QRS Report Server 
QRS Help 
ASAC Home 

Edit the comments for the scenario and press CONTINUE 

Input CorwicntJ Here j 


Feedback 


CONTINUE 


D-12 





Data Input Screens 


Figure D-14. Save Scenario File 



•— 


latian System Analysis Capability 


QRS Model Server 



ASAC Model Wizard 

QRS Model Wizard 

ASAC Noise impact Model 

QRS File Manager 


11 qrs Document server DNL Contours Scenario File Builder 
Save Changes 


QRS Query Server 
QRS Report Server 
QRS Help 
ASAC Home 
Feedback 


Enter a filename for the Scenario File that you have built and press SAVE FILE 
New File Name: :jregel9S79^ dial" 


D-13 





Figure D-15. Run the Noise Impact Model 





latian System Analysis Capability 


QRS Model Server 



ASAC Model Wizard 

QRS Model Wizard 

ASAC Noise Impact Model 

QRS File Manager 


1 QRS Document Server Run the DNL Contours Module 


Press RUN NOISE IMPACT MODEL to run the model and create the output file(s). 


• Using Airport : SFO 

* Using Population Year; 2015 

♦ Using Scenario File: HIM/rege/t egel 9579 dnl 

* Usmg Email Address |rege@imii org 


RUN NOISE IMPACT MODEL 


QRS Query Server 
QRS Report Server 
QRS Help 
ASAC Home 
Feedback 


You have completed the input to the ASAC Noise Impact Model and are ready to run it. The 
scenario file that you have selected is listed below. If it is incomplete or incorrect, use the BACK 
button of your browser and reselect the items. 


The ASAC Noise Impact Model requires 1 0 to 60 minutes to run, depending on input parameters 
and usage load. You will be notified via email at the address given. If you wish the notification to 
be emailed to a different address, make the necessary changes below. 


D-14 





Appendix E 

Abbreviations 


ASAC 

DNL 

EA 

FTNIM 

GIS 

INM 

NIM 

OAG 


= Aviation System Analysis Capability 
= day-night average sound level 
= economic areas, U.S. census 
= Flight Track Noise Impact Model 
= Geographic Information System 
= Integrated Noise Model 
= Noise Impact Model 
= Official Airline Guides 


E-l 



Appendix F 

Existing Aircraft Noise Parameters 


Table F-l. Aircraft Noise Parameters 


Aircraft 

Category 

Approach 

Noise # 

707 

JCOM 

STD3D 

1 

707120 

JCOM 

STD3D 

2 

707320 

JCOM 

STD3D 

2 

707QN 

JCOM 

STD3D 

3 

720 

JCOM 

STD3D 

1 

720 B 

JCOM 

STD3D 

2 

727100 

JCOM 

STD3D 

9 

7271 0A 

JCOM 

STD3D 

0 

727200 

JCOM 

STD3D 

9 

72720A 

JCOM 

STD3D 

0 

727D15 

JCOM 

STD3D 

9 

727D17 

JCOM 

STD3D 

10 

727EM1 

JCOM 

STD3D 

62 

727EM2 

JCOM 

STD3D 

63 

727Q15 

JCOM 

STD3D 

10 

727Q7 

JCOM 

STD3D 

10 

727Q9 

JCOM 

STD3D 

10 

737 

JCOM 

STD3D 

13 

737300 

JCOM 

STD3D 

49 

7373B2 

JCOM 

STD3D 

49 

737400 

JCOM 

STD3D 

49 

737500 

JCOM 

STD3D 

49 

737D17 

JCOM 

STD3D 

14 

737QN 

JCOM 

STD3D 

14 

747100 

JCOM 

STD3D 

6 

7471 OQ 

JCOM 

STD3D 

7 

747200 

JCOM 

STD3D 

7 

74720A 

JCOM 

STD3D 

50 

74720 B 

JCOM 

STD3D 

50 

747400 

JCOM 

STD3D 

67 

747SP 

JCOM 

STD3D 

7 

757 PW 

JCOM 

STD3D 

53 


F-l 













Table F-l . Aircraft Noise Parameters (Continued) 


Aircraft 

Category 

Approach 

Noise # 

757RR 

JCOM 

STD3D 

52 

767300 

JCOM 

STD3D 

60 

767CF6 

JCOM 

STD3D 

60 

767JT9 

JCOM 

STD3D 

60 

A300 

JCOM 

STD3D 

19 

A31 0 

JCOM 

STD3D 

19 

A320 

JCOM 

STD3D 

66 

A7D 

JMIL 

MIL3D 

48 

BAC1 1 1 

JCOM 

STD3D 

13 

BAE146 

JCOM 

STD3D 

5 

BAE300 

JCOM 

STD3D 

5 

BEC58P 

PGA 

STD3D 

42 

Cl 30 

PMIL 

MIL3D 

32 

C130E 

PMIL 

MIL3D 

31 

CIT3 

JGA 

STD3D 

30 

CL600 

JGA 

STD3D 

27 

CL601 

JGA 

STD3D 

28 

CNA441 

PCOM 

STD3D 

39 

CNA500 

JGA 

STD3D 

25 

COMJET 

JGA 

STD3D 

21 

COMSEP 

PGA 

STD3D 

43 

CONCRD 

JCOM 

STD3D 

8 

CVR580 

PCOM 

STD3D 

34 

DC1010 

JCOM 

STD3D 

11 

DC1030 

JCOM 

STD3D 

11 

DC1040 

JCOM 

STD3D 

11 

DC3 

PCOM 

STD3D 

41 

DC6 

PCOM 

STD3D 

40 

DC820 

JCOM 

STD3D 

1 

DC850 

JCOM 

STD3D 

2 

DC860 

JCOM 

STD3D 

2 

DC870 

JCOM 

STD3D 

4 

DC8QN 

JCOM 

STD3D 

3 

DC910 

JCOM 

STD3D 

13 

DC930 

JCOM 

STD3D 

13 

DC950 

JCOM 

STD3D 

14 

DC9Q7 

JCOM 

STD3D 

14 

DC9Q9 

JCOM 

STD3D 

14 


F-2 













Existing Aircraft Noise Parameters 


Table F-l . Aircraft Noise Parameters (Continued) 













Appendix G 

Aircraft Perceived Decibel Level by 
Thrust and Distance 


Table G-l . Aircraft Decibel Level By Thrust And Distance 


NOISE_NUM 

METRIC 

THRUST 

DB 

200 FT 

DB 

400 FT 

DB 

630FT 

DB 

1000 FT 

DB 

2000 FT 

DB 

4000 FT 

DB 

6300 FT 

DB 

10000FT 

DB 

16000FT 

DB 

25000FT 

1 

EPNL 

4000 

113.7 

108.2 

104.3 

100 

91.3 

79.4 

70.5 

62.3 

53.7 

44.7 

1 

EPNL 

6000 

115.7 

110.2 

106.3 

102 

93.6 

81.7 

72.8 

64.8 

56.2 

47.2 

1 

EPNL 

10000 

121.2 

115.8 

1118 

107.5 

99.3 

89.5 

82.9 

76.4 

68.2 

59.3 

1 

EPNL 

12000 

124.3 

118.9 

114.8 

110.5 

102.5 

94 

88 

81.5 

73.4 

64.8 

1 

EPNL 

15000 

130.3 

125.1 

120.9 

116.5 

108.8 

100.9 

95 

88.7 

81.1 

72.2 

1 

SEL 

4000 

110.8 

105.4 

101.2 

97 

89.6 

80.6 

74.3 

68.6 

60.9 

52.7 

1 

SEL 

6000 

112.7 

107.3 

103.3 

99 

91.8 

82.9 

76.8 

71.1 

63.6 

55.7 

1 

SEL 

10000 

117.4 

112.4 

108.7 

104.5 

97.4 

89.2 

83.3 

76.9 

69.4 

61.5 

1 

SEL 

12000 

120 

115.2 

111.6 

107.5 

100.6 

92.6 

86.6 

80.3 

72.6 

64.7 

1 

SEL 

15000 

125.5 

120.8 

117.6 

113.5 

106.9 

99.3 

93.3 

86.6 

78.7 

70.6 

2 

EPNL 

4000 

119.3 

114.3 

110.4 

105.7 

96.8 

83.9 

73.7 

64.7 

56.5 

48.4 

2 

EPNL 

6000 

121.8 

116.8 

112.9 

108.2 

99.3 

87 

76.6 

69.8 

61.3 

53.6 

2 

EPNL 

8000 

124.4 

119.3 

115.4 

110.7 

101.8 

90.9 

82.8 

75.2 

67 

59.1 

2 

EPNL 

10000 

126.6 

121.5 

117.5 

112.8 

103.9 

94.3 

88.2 

80.1 

72.3 

64.2 

2 

EPNL 

12000 

127.4 

122.3 

118.3 

113.5 

104.5 

96.4 

91.1 

84.4 

77.1 

69 

2 

EPNL 

15000 

128.2 

123.4 

119.3 

114.5 

105.6 

98.4 

92.8 

86.6 

79.7 

71.6 

2 

SEL 

4000 

112.5 

107.5 

103.6 

99 

90 

78.3 

71.2 

64.5 

57 

49.5 

2 

SEL 

6000 

114.8 

109.8 

105.9 

101.5 

92.8 

81.8 

75.2 

68.9 

61.7 

54.1 

2 

SEL 

8000 

117.1 

112 

108.2 

104 

95.9 

85.9 

79.6 

73.4 

66.1 

58.6 

2 

SEL 

10000 

119 

113.9 

110.1 

106 

98.5 

90 

83.7 

77.5 

70.1 

62.8 

2 

SEL 

12000 

120.7 

115.6 

111.9 

107.7 

100.8 

92.6 

87.1 

81 

73.9 

66.5 


G-l 














































































































































Table G-l . Aircraft Decibel Level By Thrust And Distance ( Continued ) 


NOISE_NUM 

METRIC 

THRUST 

DB 

200 FT 

DB 

400 FT 

DB 

630FT 

DB 

1000 FT 

DB 

2000 FT 

DB 

4000 FT 

DB 

6300 FT 

DB 

10000FT 

DB 

16000FT 

DB 

25000FT 

2 

SEL 

15000 

122.5 

117.4 

113.6 

109.5 

103.1 

96.4 

90.8 

85.1 

77.9 

70.4 

3 

EPNL 

3000 

112.1 

106.7 

102.5 

97.6 

88.7 

78.9 

71.8 

65.1 

57.1 

46.8 

3 

EPNL 

5000 

113.3 

108.1 

103.8 

98.7 

89.5 

80.1 

73.5 

66.9 

58.9 

48.3 

3 

EPNL 

11000 

114.4 

110.1 

106.9 

103.4 

97.7 

90.6 

85.3 

79.3 

72.7 

65.4 

3 

EPNL 

15500 

120.8 

116.8 

114 

110.8 

105.8 

100.2 

96.1 

91.4 

85.2 

78.4 

3 

SEL 

3000 

104.4 

99.4 

95.6 

91.4 

84.8 

77.8 

72.6 

66.7 

59.9 

52.7 

3 

SEL 

5000 

105.1 

100 

96.2 

91.9 

85.4 

78.4 

73.2 

67.3 

60.6 

53.7 

3 

SEL 

11000 

109.1 

105.4 

102.7 

99.8 

95 

88.9 

84.2 

78.6 

72.1 

65.2 

3 

SEL 

15500 

116.9 

113.3 

110.8 

108.1 

103.5 

98.1 

94.1 

89.4 

83.9 

77.7 

4 

EPNL 

5000 

102.9 

98 

94.2 

89.7 

82.7 

75.3 

70.1 

64.1 

56.8 

46.4 

4 

EPNL 

10000 

106.3 

101.5 

97.8 

93.6 

87 

79.9 

74.8 

68.8 

61.6 

52.2 

4 

EPNL 

15500 

111.1 

106.5 

102.9 

99.1 

93.1 

86.4 

81.3 

75.5 

68.4 

60.4 

4 





90.4 


81.9 



64.9 


■1 


4 

SEL 

10000 

101.5 

97.2 

94.2 

91 

85.9 

79.8 

75 

69.3 

62.6 

55.4 

4 

SEL 

15500 

106.5 

102.5 

99.6 

96.5 

91.6 

85.7 

81 

75.5 

68.9 

61.6 

5 

EPNL 

1600 

96.9 

92.5 

89 

84.7 

77.9 

69.5 

63.7 

56.7 

47.6 

34.5 

5 

EPNL 

5200 

106.1 

102.1 

98.9 

95.2 

88.9 

81.7 

76.6 

70.9 

64.4 

55.2 

5 

SEL 

1600 

92.9 

89 

86 

82.7 

77.3 

70.4 

65 

58.7 

51.6 

44.3 

5 

SEL 

5200 

102.3 

98.4 

95.4 

92.1 

86.8 

80.4 

75.6 

70.3 

64.4 

58.7 

6 

EPNL 

8000 

114 

108.9 

105.1 

101 

93.6 

84.2 

76.3 

69.2 

61.2 

51.2 

6 

EPNL 

14000 

120 

114.9 

111.1 

107 

99.6 

90.2 

82.3 

75.2 

67.2 

57.2 

6 

EPNL 

20000 

123.8 

118.8 

114.9 

110.5 

102.2 

92.6 

86.4 

80 

72.7 

64.4 

6 

EPNL 

28000 

125.4 

120.4 

116.5 

112 

103.4 

93.8 

88.1 

81.9 

74.8 

67.1 

6 

EPNL 

36000 

126.9 

121.9 

118 

113.5 

104.9 

95.3 

89.6 

83.4 

76.3 

68.6 

6 

SEL 

8000 

108.2 

103.5 

99.9 

96 

89.1 

80.6 

74.2 

67.6 

60.9 

53.7 

6 

SEL 

14000 

113.2 

108.5 

104.9 

101 

94.1 

85.6 

79.2 

72.6 

65.9 

58.7 

6 

SEL 

20000 

116.6 

111.8 

108.1 

104 

96.9 

89 

83.4 

77.3 

70.7 

63.4 



































































































































































































































































































































































Aircraft Perceived Decibel Level by Thrust and Distance 



Table G-l . Aircraft Decibel Level By Thrust And Distance ( Continued ) 


METRIC 

THRUST 

DB 

200 FT 

DB 

400 FT 

DB 

630FT 

DB 

1000 FT 

DB 

2000 FT 

DB 

4000 FT 

DB 

6300 FT 

DB 

10000FT 

SEL 

28000 

118.7 

113.9 

110.2 

106 

98.8 

91.2 

85.9 

80 

SEL 

36000 

120.2 

115.4 

111.7 

107.5 

100.3 

92.7 

87.4 

81.5 

EPNL 

8000 

106.9 

102.2 

98.4 

93.8 

85.4 

77.4 

71.9 

65.7 

EPNL 

16000 

112.6 

107.9 

104.1 

99.5 

91.1 

83.1 

77.6 

71.4 

EPNL 

24000 

116.3 

111.7 

108.1 

103.9 

96.1 

89.2 

83.7 

77.6 

EPNL 

32000 

118.6 

114 

110.5 

106.5 

99.5 

92.5 

87.1 

81 

EPNL 

40000 

120.6 

116 

112.5 

108.5 

101 

94.5 

89.1 

83 

SEL 

8000 

102.3 

97.8 

94.3 

90.5 

84.4 

77.7 

72.9 

67.3 

SEL 

16000 

106.3 

101.8 

98.3 

94.5 

88.4 

81.7 

76.9 

71.3 

SEL 

24000 

109.4 

105.1 

101.7 

98 

92.2 

85.8 

81.2 

75.9 

SEL 

32000 

111.8 

107.4 

104.1 

100.5 

94.9 

88.7 

84.2 

79.1 

SEL 

40000 

113.8 

109.4 

106.1 

102.5 

96.9 

90.7 

86.2 

81.1 

EPNL 

10000 

121.1 


113 



m 

89.9 

86.7 

EPNL 

20000 

133.9 

128.9 

124.9 

120.8 

114.4 

106.9 

100.9 

94.5 

EPNL 

28000 

140.5 

135.3 

131.2 

126.8 

120.3 

112.7 

106.7 

100.3 

EPNL 

32000 

142.4 

137.1 

133 

128.4 

121.8 

114.2 

108.2 

101.8 

SEL 

10000 

117.7 

113.4 

110.3 

107 

101.5 

94.8 

89.6 

83.5 

SEL 

20000 

130.3 

125.5 

122 

118.3 

112.6 

106.1 

101.1 

95.3 

SEL 

28000 

136.4 

131.3 

127.6 

123.8 

118 

111.4 

106.4 

100.6 

SEL 

32000 

138.4 

133.2 

129.4 

125.5 

119.6 

113 

108 

102.2 

EPNL 

3000 

109 

104.4 

100.7 

96.4 

89 

80.6 

75 

68.4 

EPNL 

6000 

112.3 

107.8 

104.1 

99.9 

93 

85 

79.3 

73 

EPNL 

8000 

114.9 

110.4 

106.7 

102.9 

96 

88.2 

82.6 

76.7 

EPNL 

10000 

117.7 

113.5 

110 

106.3 

100 

92.8 

87.9 

82.3 

EPNL 

12000 

121.3 

117.2 

114 

110.6 

104.8 

98.1 

93.8 

88.5 

EPNL 

14000 

125.9 

121.9 

119.1 

115 

110 

103.7 

99.3 

94.9 

SEL 

3000 

104.3 

99.2 

94.9 

90.5 

84.8 

77.6 

72.9 

67.4 


DB 

16000FT 

DB 

25000FT 

73.5 

66.2 

75 

67.7 

58.2 

49.3 

63.9 

55 

70.9 

63.1 

74.7 

67.4 

76.7 

69.4 

60.7 

53.3 

64.7 

57.3 

69.7 

62.8 

73.1 

66.5 

75.1 

68.5 



87.7 

79.5 

93.5 

85.7 

95.1 

87.4 

76.5 

68.3 

88.3 

80.3 

93.7 

85.7 

95.3 

87.4 

61 

51.4 

65.3 

56.1 

69.6 

61.3 

75.8 

68.1 

82.5 

75.5 

89.5 

83.1 

60.8 

53.8 











































































































































































































































































































































































Table G-l . Aircraft Decibel Level By Thrust And Distance ( Continued ) 


NOISE_NUM 

METRIC 

THRUST 

DB 

200 FT 

9 

SEL 

6000 

108.1 

9 

SEL 

8000 

110.8 

9 

SEL 

10000 

113.4 

9 

SEL 

12000 

117.1 

9 

SEL 

14000 

121.8 

10 

EPNL 

3000 

100.6 

10 

EPNL 

6000 

106.4 

10 

EPNL 

8000 

110.7 

10 

EPNL 

10000 

115.2 

10 

EPNL 

12000 

119.4 

10 

EPNL 

14000 

124.8 

10 

SEL 

3000 

96.6 

10 


6000 

101.8 

10 

SEL 

8000 

106.3 

10 

SEL 

10000 

111 

10 

SEL 

12000 

115.8 

10 

SEL 

14000 

121.1 

11 

EPNL 

8000 

105.5 

11 

EPNL 

14000 

110 

11 

EPNL 

20000 

112.1 

11 

EPNL 

28000 

114.1 

11 

EPNL 

36000 

116.2 

11 

SEL 

8000 

100.7 

11 

SEL 

14000 

104.4 

11 

SEL 

20000 

106.2 

11 

SEL 

28000 

109.3 

11 

SEL 

36000 

110.9 


DB 

400 FT 

DB 

630FT 

DB 

1000 FT 

DB 

2000 FT 

DB 

4000 FT 

DB 

6300 FT 

DB 

10000FT 

DB 

16000FT 

DB 

25000FT 

102.5 

98.7 

95 

89.2 

82.9 

78.1 

72.7 

66.1 

58.9 

105.9 

102.5 

98.8 

93.5 

87.7 

82.5 

77.1 

70.9 

64 

109.2 

106.3 

103.1 

97.7 

91.5 

87 

81.8 

75.5 

68.7 

113.1 

110.4 

107.5 

102.2 

96.3 

91.9 

87 

80.8 

74.1 

117.9 

115.3 

112.5 

107.4 

101.7 

97.3 

92.3 

86.5 

80.4 

96.4 

93.1 

89.4 

83.4 

76.4 

71.1 

65 

57.5 

48.8 

102.2 

98.9 

95.2 

89.2 

82.2 

76.9 

70.8 

63.3 

54.6 

106.5 

103.3 

99.7 

93.8 

87.1 

82 

76.3 

69.3 

61.1 

111.2 

108 

104.5 

98.8 

92.2 

87.5 

82.1 

75.6 

68 

115.8 

112.7 

109.3 

103.7 

97.4 

93 

88 

82 

75 

120.9 

117.9 

114.6 

109.2 

103.1 

99 

94.4 

89 

82.6 

92.8 

89.8 

86.8 

81.8 

75.4 

71 

65.6 

59.2 

52.2 

98 

95.1 

92 

87 

80.9 

76.2 


64.4 


102.6 

99.7 

96.7 

91.7 

85.7 

81.1 

75.8 

69.6 

62.8 

107.2 

104.5 

101.5 

96.6 

90.6 

86.1 

81 

74.9 

68.3 

112.1 

109.4 

106.5 

101.6 

95.8 

91.3 

86.2 

80.4 

74.1 

117.4 

114.8 

112 

107.1 

101.4 

97 

92.1 

86.4 

80.4 

100.1 

95.8 

91 

82.1 

73.7 

67.7 

61 

52.2 

43.3 

105 

100.9 

96.5 

88.5 

80.6 

75 

68.7 

60.9 

52.6 

107.2 

103.3 

99 

91.5 

83.8 

78.4 

72.3 

64.8 

56.8 

109.4 

105.6 

101.5 

94.4 

87 

81.7 

75.8 

68.8 

61.1 

111.6 

107.9 

104 

97.3 

90.1 

85 

79.3 

72.7 

65.3 

95.5 

91.7 

87.5 

81.1 

74 

68.8 

63 

56.3 

49.7 

99.5 

95.9 

92 

85.9 

79 

73.9 

68.3 

61.7 

55.2 

102.2 

98.7 

95 

89 

82.3 

77.3 

71.8 

65.4 

58.9 

104.8 

101.4 

98 

92.2 

85.6 

80.7 

75.3 

69 

62.6 

106.6 

103.3 

100 

94.3 

87.8 

83 

77.6 

71.4 

65.1 













































































































































































































































































































































































Aircraft Perceived Decibel Level by Thrust and Distance 


Table G-l . Aircraft Decibel Level By Thrust And Distance ( Continued ) 


NOISE_NUM 

METRIC 

THRUST 

DB 

200 FT 

DB 

400 FT 

12 

EPNL 

8000 

104 

98.6 

12 

EPNL 

14000 

108.6 

103.5 

12 

EPNL 

20000 

110.6 

105.7 

12 

EPNL 

28000 

113 

108.2 

12 

EPNL 

36000 

115.2 

110.6 

12 

SEL 

8000 

100.7 

95.5 

12 

SEL 

14000 

104.8 

100 

12 

SEL 

20000 

107.3 

102.6 

12 

SEL 

28000 

109.8 

105.3 

12 

SEL 

36000 

111.4 

107.1 

13 

EPNL 

3000 

107 

102.4 

13 

EPNL 

6000 

110.3 

105.8 

13 

EPNL 

8000 

112.9 

108.4 

13 

EPNL 

10000 

115.7 

111.5 

13 

EPNL 

12000 

119.3 

115.2 

13 

EPNL 

14000 

123.9 

119.9 

13 

SEL 

3000 

102.3 

97.2 

13 

SEL 

6000 

106.1 

100.5 

13 

SEL 

8000 

108.8 

103.9 

13 

SEL 

10000 

111.4 

107.2 

13 

SEL 

12000 

115.1 

111.1 

13 

SEL 

14000 

119.8 

115.9 

14 

EPNL 

3000 

98.6 

94.4 

14 

EPNL 

6000 

104.4 

100.2 

14 

EPNL 

8000 

108.7 

104.5 

14 

EPNL 

10000 

113.2 

109.2 

14 

EPNL 

12000 

117.8 

113.8 




8000 104 98.6 94.3 89.5 80.6 72.2 66.2 59.5 50.7 41.8 


20000 110.6 105.7 101.8 97.5 90 82.2 76.8 70.7 63.2 55.1 


28000 113 108.2 104.4 100.3 93.2 85.7 80.4 74.5 67.5 59.8 


36000 115.2 110.6 106.9 103 96.3 89.1 84 78.3 71.7 64.3 


8000 100.7 95.5 91.7 87.5 81.1 74 68.8 63 56.3 49.7 


14000 104.8 100 96.4 92.5 86.4 79.5 74.5 68.8 62.3 55.8 


20000 107.3 102.6 99.1 95.5 89.5 82.8 77.8 72.3 65.8 59.5 


28000 109.8 105.3 101.9 98.5 92.7 86.1 81.2 75.8 69.5 63.2 


36000 111.4 107.1 103.8 100.5 94.8 88.3 83.5 78.1 71.9 65.6 


3000 107 102.4 98.7 94.4 87 78.6 73 66.4 59 49.4 


DB 

2000 FT 

DB 

4000 FT 

80.6 

72.2 

87 

79.1 

90 

82.2 

93.2 

85.7 

96.3 

89.1 

81.1 

74 

86.4 

79.5 

89.5 

82.8 

92.7 

86.1 

94.8 

88.3 

87 

78.6 

91 

83 

94 

86.2 

98 

90.8 

102.8 

96.1 

108 

101.7 

82.8 

75.6 

87.2 

80.9 

91.5 

85.7 

95.7 

89.5 

100.2 

94.3 

105.4 

99.7 

81.4 

74.4 

87.2 

80.2 

91.8 

85.1 

96.6 

90.2 

101.7 

95.4 




10000 115.7 111.5 108 104.3 98 90.8 85.9 80.3 73.8 66.1 


12000 119.3 115.2 112 108.6 102.8 96.1 91.8 86.5 80.5 73.5 


14000 123.9 119.9 117.1 113 108 101.7 97.3 92.9 87.5 81.1 


3000 102.3 97.2 92.9 88.5 82.8 75.6 70.9 65.4 58.8 51.8 


6000 106.1 100.5 96.7 93 87.2 80.9 76.1 70.7 64.1 56.9 


8000 108.8 103.9 100.5 96.8 91.5 85.7 80.5 75.1 68.9 62 


10000 111.4 107.2 104.3 101.1 95.7 89.5 85 79.8 73.5 66.7 


14000 119.8 115.9 113.3 110.5 105.4 99.7 95.3 90.3 84.5 78.4 


6000 104.4 100.2 96.9 93.2 87.2 80.2 74.9 68.8 61.3 52.6 


DB 

16000FT 

DB 

25000FT 

50.7 

41.8 

59.3 

51 

63.2 

55.1 

67.5 

59.8 

71.7 

64.3 

56.3 

49.7 

62.3 

55.8 

65.8 

59.5 

69.5 

63.2 

71.9 

65.6 

59 

49.4 

63.3 

54.1 

67.6 

59.3 

73.8 

66.1 

80.5 

73.5 

87.5 

81.1 

58.8 

51.8 

64.1 

56.9 

68.9 

62 

73.5 

66.7 

78.8 

72.1 

84.5 

78.4 

55.5 

46.8 

61.3 

52.6 

67.3 

59.1 

73.6 

66 

80 

73 














































































































































































































































































































































































Table G-l . Aircraft Decibel Level By Thrust And Distance ( Continued ) 


DB DB DB DB DB DB DB DB DB DB 


NOISE_NUM 

METRIC 

THRUST 

200 FT 

400 FT 

630FT 

1000 FT 

2000 FT 

4000 FT 

6300 FT 

10000FT 

16000FT 

25000FT 

14 

EPNL 

14000 

122.8 

118.9 

115.9 

112.6 

107.2 

101.1 

97 

92.4 

87 

80.6 

14 

SEL 

3000 

94.6 

90.8 

87.9 

84.8 

79.8 

73.4 

69 

63.6 

57.2 

50.2 

14 

SEL 

6000 

99.8 

96 

93.1 

90 

85 

78.9 

74.2 

68.8 

62.4 

55.4 

14 

SEL 

8000 

104.3 

100.6 

97.7 

94.7 

89.7 

83.7 

79.1 

73.8 

67.6 

60.8 

14 

SEL 

10000 

109 

105.2 

102.5 

99.5 

94.6 

88.6 

84.1 

79 

72.9 

66.3 

14 

SEL 

12000 

113.8 

110.1 

107.4 

104.5 

99.6 

93.8 

89.3 

84.2 

78.4 

72.1 

14 

SEL 

14000 

119.1 

115.4 

112.8 

110 

105.1 

99.4 

95 

90.1 

84.4 

78.4 

15 

EPNL 

2000 

102.4 

97.5 

93.8 

89.8 

83.6 

76.4 

70.9 

64.4 

56.7 

45.8 

15 

EPNL 

4000 

107.4 

102.5 

98.8 

94.8 

88.6 

81.4 

75.9 

69.4 

61.7 

50.8 

15 

EPNL 

6000 

111.4 

107 

103.8 

100.4 

94.9 

88.7 

84 

78.5 

71.5 

62.6 

15 

EPNL 

8000 

116.6 

112 

108.7 

105.2 

99.5 

92.9 

88.1 

82.5 

75.4 

66.5 

15 

EPNL 

10000 

121.8 

117 

113.4 

109.5 

103.4 

96.6 

91.6 

85.8 

78.8 

69.9 

15 



■ 

94.8 


mm 

m 

m 


64.9 


■ 

15 

SEL 

4000 

103.2 

98.8 

95.7 

92.3 

86.6 

80 

74.8 

68.9 

62.1 

54.5 

15 

SEL 

6000 

110.4 

106.2 

103.2 

100 

94.7 

88.6 

84 

78.8 

72.8 

65.8 

15 

SEL 

8000 

115.5 

111.2 

108.1 

104.8 

99.2 

92.6 

87.6 

81.9 

75.5 

67.8 

15 

SEL 

10000 

120.5 

116.1 

113 

109.5 

103.7 

96.6 

91.1 

84.9 

77.9 

69.8 

16 

EPNL 

4000 

95.5 

90.8 

87.5 

84 

78.3 

71.6 

66.5 

59.9 

52.7 

41.4 

16 

EPNL 

8000 

102.1 

97.4 

94.1 

90.6 

84.9 

78.6 

73.1 

66.5 

59.3 

48 

16 

EPNL 

12000 

105.4 

101.5 

98.7 

95.5 

90.2 

83.7 

78.6 

72.8 

65.4 

57.2 

16 

EPNL 

16000 

109.9 

106 

103.5 

100 

94.7 

88.2 

83.1 

77.3 

69.9 

61.7 

16 

SEL 

4000 

91 

87 

84.4 

81.5 

76.9 

71.1 

66.4 

60.9 

54.2 

46.7 

16 

SEL 

8000 

97.5 

93.5 

90.9 

88 

83.4 

77.6 

72.9 

67.4 

60.7 

53.2 

16 

SEL 

12000 

102.2 

98.7 

96.1 

93.3 

88.5 

82.5 

77.7 

72.1 

65.6 

58.4 

16 

SEL 

16000 

106.9 

103.4 

100.8 

98 

93.2 

87.2 

82.4 

76.8 

70.3 

63.1 

17 

EPNL 

4000 

101 

96.7 

93.4 

89.6 

83.3 

75.7 

69.8 

62.9 

54.1 

41.8 

17 

EPNL 

10000 

103.8 

99.5 

96.3 

92.5 

86.2 

78.7 

73.1 

66.6 

58.2 

48 











































































































































































































































































































































































Aircraft Perceived Decibel Level by Thrust and Distance 


Table G-l . Aircraft Decibel Level By Thrust And Distance ( Continued ) 


NOISE_NUM 

METRIC 

THRUST 

17 

EPNL 

16000 

17 

SEL 

4000 

17 

SEL 

10000 

17 

SEL 

16000 

18 

EPNL 

5000 

18 

EPNL 

10000 

18 

EPNL 

20000 

18 

EPNL 

30000 

18 

SEL 

5000 

18 

SEL 

10000 

18 

SEL 

20000 

18 

SEL 

30000 

19 

EPNL 

10000 

19 

EPNL 

25000 

19 

EPNL 

40000 

19 

SEL 

10000 

19 

SEL 

25000 

19 

SEL 

40000 

20 

EPNL 

10000 

20 

EPNL 

25000 

20 

EPNL 

38000 

20 

SEL 

10000 

20 

SEL 

25000 

20 

SEL 

38000 

21 

EPNL 

30 

21 

EPNL 

60 

21 

EPNL 

100 






16000 107.6 103.3 100.1 96.4 90.2 82.8 77.5 71.6 64.7 56.3 


4000 96.6 92.8 90.1 


10000 99.5 95.7 92.9 89.9 84.7 78.4 73.6 67.5 


72 65.1 57.9 


5000 103.7 98.6 94.7 90 81.7 72.5 65.5 58.9 50.9 40.8 


10000 105.7 100.6 96.7 92 


20000 109.1 104.4 100.8 96.7 89.8 81.7 75.8 69.8 62.5 


83 77.4 70.7 63.2 


5000 97.4 92.5 88.9 85 78.8 72.1 67.2 61.7 55.2 48.2 


10000 99.4 94.5 90.9 87 80.8 74.1 69.2 63.7 57.2 50.2 


20000 102.8 98.5 95.4 92 86.4 80 75.2 69.9 63.7 


30000 106.7 102.8 100 97 91.9 85.6 80.9 75.8 69.8 63.3 


■ 


DB 

2000 FT 

DB 

4000 FT 

90.2 

82.8 

81.9 

75.5 

84.7 

78.4 

88.7 

82.6 

81.7 

72.5 

83.7 

74.5 

89.8 

81.7 

95.5 

88.1 

78.8 

72.1 

80.8 

74.1 

86.4 

80 

91.9 

85.6 

84.2 

75 

90.3 

82 

95.6 

88.2 

81.3 

74.6 

87.1 

80.6 

92 

85.8 

84.7 

75.5 

90.3 

82 

95.2 

87.8 

81.8 

75.1 

87 

80.5 

91.6 

85.3 

79.2 

71 

91.9 

84.1 

98.6 

90.3 



60 52.6 


43.3 


62.7 53.9 



40000 113 108.6 105.2 101.5 95.6 88.2 83.1 77.5 70.8 63.3 


10000 99.9 95 91.4 87.5 81.3 74.6 69.7 64.2 57.7 50.7 


25000 103.7 99.3 96.1 92.7 87.1 80.6 75.8 70.5 64.3 57.5 


40000 106.8 102.9 100.1 97.1 92 85.8 81 75.9 69.9 63.4 


10000 106.7 101.6 97.7 93 84.7 75.5 68.5 61.9 53.9 43.8 


70 62.7 53.9 


38000 112.6 108.2 104.8 101.1 95.2 87.8 82.7 77.1 70.4 62.9 


10000 100.4 95.5 91.9 88 81.8 75.1 70.2 64.7 58.2 51.2 


25000 103.6 99.2 96 92.6 87 80.5 75.7 70.4 64.2 57.4 


38000 106.4 102.5 99.7 96.7 91.6 85.3 80.6 75.5 69.5 


50 39.7 


60 111.4 107 103.2 99 91.9 84.1 78.1 71.1 62.9 53.2 


100 122 116.3 112.1 107.1 98.6 90.3 84.1 76.9 68.3 58.4 


G-7 












































































































































































































































































































































































Table G-l . Aircraft Decibel Level By Thrust And Distance ( Continued ) 


NOISE_NUM 

METRIC 

21 

SEL 

21 

SEL 

21 

SEL 

22 

EPNL 

22 

EPNL 

22 

EPNL 

22 

SEL 

22 

SEL 

22 

SEL 

23 

EPNL 

23 

EPNL 

23 

EPNL 

23 


23 

SEL 

23 

SEL 

24 

EPNL 

24 

EPNL 

24 

EPNL 

24 

EPNL 

24 

SEL 

24 

SEL 

24 

SEL 

24 

SEL 

25 

EPNL 

25 

EPNL 

25 

EPNL 

25 

EPNL 


THRUST 

DB 

200 FT 

DB 

400 FT 

DB 

630FT 

DB 

1000 FT 

DB 

2000 FT 

DB 

4000 FT 

DB 

6300 FT 

DB 

10000FT 

DB 

16000FT 

DB 

25000FT 

30 

95.8 

91.8 

88.6 

85.1 

79.2 

72.3 

67 

60.9 

54.2 

46.9 

60 

109.5 

105 

101.8 

98.3 

92.2 

84.9 

79.2 

72.3 

64.5 

55.6 

100 

119 

114 

110.3 

106.3 

99.6 

91.8 

85.6 

78.5 

70.1 

60.6 

700 

102.9 

98.1 

94.5 

90.6 

83.7 

75.5 

69.5 

62.5 

54.6 

44.6 

1800 

121.7 

116.7 

112.9 

108.7 

101.6 

93.8 

87.9 

80.9 

72.6 

63 

2600 

127.6 

121.9 

117.7 

112.8 

104.2 

96 

89.9 

82.6 

74 

64.2 

700 

100.8 

96.4 

93.3 

89.9 

84 

77 

71.5 

65.1 

57.8 

49.6 

1800 

119.3 

114.8 

111.6 

108 

101.9 

94.5 

88.6 

81.6 

73.4 

63.9 

2600 

124.7 

119.7 

116 

112 

105.3 

97.5 

91.3 

84.1 

75.7 

66.1 

1000 

98.1 

92.9 

88.9 

84.4 

76.5 

68.3 

62.1 

55 

47 

36.2 

1500 

103.6 

98.5 

94.8 

90.5 

82.9 

75.1 

69.3 

62.6 

54.7 

44.9 

2650 

114.8 

108.9 

104.3 

99 

90.9 

82.3 

75.5 

67.6 

59.4 

47.8 


93.7 

89 


81.8 

75.6 

68.9 

64.1 

58.8 


46.9 

1500 

99.3 

94.8 

91.4 

87.8 

81.8 

74.9 

69.7 

64 

57.6 

50.6 

2650 

110.5 

105 

101.1 

97.1 

90.6 

83 

77.1 

70.3 

62.5 

53.8 

850 

106.9 

101.5 

97.2 

92 

81.9 

72.4 

66.5 

60 

52.6 

41.8 

1500 

109 

103.7 

99.8 

95.5 

87 

77.4 

70.8 

63.6 

55.2 

46.1 

2500 

109.5 

104.2 

100.3 

96 

88.8 

81.4 

76 

69.9 

62.9 

53.7 

3750 

115.3 

109.9 

105.8 

101 

92.9 

85 

79.2 

72.6 

64.8 

54.1 

850 

100.7 

95.3 

91.2 

86.4 

78.7 

71.4 

66.2 

60.5 

54.4 

47.4 

1500 

102.8 

97.8 

94.1 

90 

83.4 

75.9 

70.1 

63.7 

57.2 

50 

2500 

104.2 

99.5 

96.1 

92.5 

86.7 

79.9 

74.7 

68.9 

62.3 

55.1 

3750 

111.3 

106.4 

102.8 

99 

92.6 

85.1 

79.2 

72.7 

65.4 

57.4 

300 

89.8 

84.7 

80.7 

76.3 

69.8 

62.2 

55.9 

48.2 

38.4 

19.5 

600 

91 

85.9 

81.9 

77.5 

71 

63.4 

57.1 

49.4 

39.6 

20.7 

1200 

101.4 

96.3 

92.4 

87.7 

79.9 

72.1 

66.3 

59.8 

51.7 

40.4 

1550 

102.4 

97.4 

93.6 

89.5 

83 

75.4 

69.4 

62.3 

54.2 

43.2 













































































































































































































































































































































































Aircraft Perceived Decibel Level by Thrust and Distance 


Table G-l . Aircraft Decibel Level By Thrust And Distance ( Continued ) 



NOISE_NUM 

METRIC 

THRUST 

DB 

200 FT 

DB 

400 FT 

DB 

630FT 

DB 

1000 FT 

DB 

2000 FT 

DB 

4000 FT 

DB 

6300 FT 

DB 

10000FT 

DB 

16000FT 

DB 

25000FT 

25 

SEL 

300 

85.6 

81 

77.7 

74.2 

68.5 

62.3 

57.6 

52.3 

46.2 

39.2 

25 

SEL 

600 

86.8 

82.2 

78.9 

75.4 

69.7 

63.5 

58.8 

53.5 

47.4 

40.4 

25 

SEL 

1200 

96.4 

91.7 

88.2 

84.5 

78.3 

71.4 

66.3 

60.6 

54.2 

47.1 

25 

SEL 

1550 

98 

93.6 

90.4 

87 

81.4 

74.8 

69.7 

63.9 

57.1 

49.5 

26 

EPNL 

670 

95.4 

90.4 

86.6 

82 

74 

65.7 

59.6 

52.4 

43.8 

31.5 

26 

EPNL 

1500 

107.9 

102.7 

99.2 

95.2 

88.5 

80.7 

76.1 

70.4 

63.3 

54.5 

26 

EPNL 

2100 

108.6 

105 

101.7 

98.4 

92.8 

86.2 

81.4 

75.7 

68.6 

59.7 

26 

SEL 

670 

90.2 

85.6 

82.2 

78.4 

72.3 

65.3 

60.3 

54.7 

48.4 

41.4 

26 

SEL 

1500 

104.1 

99.8 

96.8 

93.4 

87.3 

81.1 

76.6 

71.3 

64.8 

57.4 

26 

SEL 

2100 

106 

102.4 

99.7 

96.8 

91.6 

85.7 

81.2 

75.9 

69.3 

61.8 

27 

EPNL 

1900 

93.8 

88.8 

85 

80.5 

72.5 

63.3 

57.1 

49.5 

40.5 

26.7 

27 

EPNL 

5000 

103.8 

99.3 

96 

92.3 

85.5 

78.8 

73.6 

67.4 

60.4 

51.5 

27 


1900 

■ 

85.5 


78.3 

72 

■H 

59.4 

53.6 

47.4 


27 

SEL 

5000 

101.1 

96.8 

93.8 

90.5 

85 

78.6 

73.8 

68.4 

62.5 

55.6 

28 

EPNL 

2000 

94.1 

89.4 

85.9 

82 

74.9 

66.9 

60.9 

53.5 

44.5 

30.6 

28 

EPNL 

3000 

98.1 

93.2 

89.4 

85.3 

79 

69.4 

63.5 

56.3 

47.4 

34.2 

28 

EPNL 

4000 

100.8 

95.7 

92 

87.8 

80.7 

73.4 

67.8 

61.4 

53.3 

42 

28 

EPNL 

5000 

102.1 

97.2 

93.4 

89.1 

82.4 

75.2 

69.7 

63.3 

56.2 

46.1 

28 

EPNL 

6000 

104 

99.1 

95.3 

91 

84.3 

77.1 

71.6 

65.2 

58.1 

48 

28 

SEL 

2000 

90.9 

86.7 

83.3 

79.9 

74.1 

67.4 

62.4 

56.9 

50.7 

43.9 

28 

SEL 

3000 

94.3 

89.8 

86.5 

82.9 

76.9 

70 

64.8 

59.2 

52.9 

46 

28 

SEL 

4000 

96.3 

91.8 

88.5 

85 

79.1 

72.5 

67.5 

61.9 

55.6 

48.6 

28 

SEL 

5000 

97.7 

93.2 

90 

86.5 

80.8 

74.3 

69.5 

64.1 

57.9 

50.7 

28 

SEL 

6000 

99.7 

95.2 

92 

88.5 

82.8 

76.3 

71.5 

66.1 

59.9 

52.7 

29 

EPNL 

2000 

101.6 

96.7 

93 

89 

82.8 

75.6 

70.1 

63.6 

55.9 

45 

29 

EPNL 

4000 

106.6 

101.7 

98 

94 

87.8 

80.6 

75.1 

68.6 

60.9 

50 

29 

EPNL 

6000 

113.4 

109 

105.8 

102.4 

96.9 

90.7 

86 

80.5 

73.5 

64.6 














































































































































































































































































































































































Table G-l . Aircraft Decibel Level By Thrust And Distance ( Continued ) 


NOISE_NUM 

METRIC 

THRUST 

DB 

200 FT 

DB 

400 FT 

DB 

630FT 

DB 

1000 FT 

DB 

2000 FT 

DB 

4000 FT 

DB 

6300 FT 

DB 

10000FT 

DB 

16000FT 

DB 

25000FT 

29 

EPNL 

8000 

120.6 

116 

112.7 

109.2 

103.5 

96.9 

92.1 

86.5 

79.4 

70.5 

29 

EPNL 

10000 

126 

121.2 

117.6 

113.7 

107.6 

100.8 

95.8 

90 

83 

74.1 

29 

SEL 

2000 

98.4 

94 

90.9 

87.5 

81.8 

75.2 

70 

64.1 

57.3 

49.7 

29 

SEL 

4000 

102.4 

98 

94.9 

91.5 

85.8 

79.2 

74 

68.1 

61.3 

53.7 

29 

SEL 

6000 

112.5 

108.3 

105.3 

102.1 

96.8 

90.7 

86.1 

80.9 

74.9 

67.9 

29 

SEL 

8000 

119.5 

115.2 

112.1 

108.8 

103.2 

96.6 

91.6 

85.9 

79.5 

71.8 

29 

SEL 

10000 

124.7 

120.3 

117.2 

113.7 

107.9 

100.8 

95.3 

89.1 

82.1 

74 

30 

EPNL 

880 

94.2 

89.3 

85.5 

80.9 

73.4 

65.6 

59.6 

52.4 

42.6 

28.9 

30 

EPNL 

2300 

100.2 

95.8 

92.6 

89.1 

83.2 

76.1 

70.9 

64.4 

57.2 

47.8 

30 

EPNL 

3000 

107.8 

103.4 

100.1 

96.5 

90.4 

83.2 

77.4 

71.9 

64.7 

55.2 

30 

SEL 

880 

87.1 

82.9 

79.8 

76.4 

70.8 

64.3 

59.3 

53.8 

47.6 

41 

30 

SEL 

2300 

95.9 

92 

89.3 

86.3 

81.3 

75.4 

70.8 

65.1 

58.1 

50.2 

30 


3000 



96.4 

93.8 

88.8 

m 

78.3 


65.9 

58.3 

31 

EPNL 

30 

102.1 

97.5 

94.1 

90.3 

83.8 

75.9 

70 

63.7 

56.3 

45.7 

31 

EPNL 

100 

107.2 

102.9 

99.8 

96.6 

91.4 

85.7 

81.4 

76.6 

71.2 

65 

31 

SEL 

30 

98 

93.7 

90.6 

87.2 

81.4 

74.2 

68.3 

61.8 

55.5 

49.4 

31 

SEL 

100 

100.1 

95.8 

92.9 

89.8 

85 

80 

76.6 

72.9 

69 

64.4 

32 

EPNL 

28 

102.9 

98 

94.4 

90.3 

83.9 

76.6 

71 

64.7 

58 

49.1 

32 

EPNL 

100 

112.7 

108.1 

104.7 

101.3 

95.6 

89 

83.3 

77.1 

71.2 

64.3 

32 

SEL 

28 

98.7 

94.2 

91.1 

87.7 

82.1 

75.7 

70.8 

65.5 

59.7 

53.4 

32 

SEL 

100 

106.8 

102.6 

99.5 

96.3 

90.8 

84.7 

80 

74.9 

69.6 

63.9 

33 

EPNL 

30 

99 

94.1 

90.4 

86.1 

78.6 

70.1 

64.2 

57.3 

49 

37.2 

33 

EPNL 

100 

99.8 

95.5 

92.2 

88.8 

83 

76.7 

71.6 

66 

59.6 

50 

33 

SEL 

30 

95.4 

90.7 

87.4 

83.7 

77.4 

70.2 

65 

59.6 

54.3 

48.9 

33 

SEL 

100 

93.6 

89.4 

86.5 

83.4 

78.4 

73 

69.2 

65 

60.6 

55.6 

34 

EPNL 

30 

99.1 

94.5 

91.1 

87.3 

80.8 

72.9 

67 

60.7 

53.3 

42.7 

34 

EPNL 

100 

104.2 

99.9 

96.8 

93.6 

88.4 

82.7 

78.4 

73.6 

68.2 

62 













































































































































































































































































































































































Aircraft Perceived Decibel Level by Thrust and Distance 


Table G-l . Aircraft Decibel Level By Thrust And Distance ( Continued ) 



DB 

200 FT 

DB 

400 FT 

DB 

630FT 

DB 

1000 FT 

95 

90.7 

87.6 

84.2 

97.1 

92.8 

89.9 

86.8 

106.5 

101.2 

96.8 

91.5 

107.3 

102.2 

98.1 

94.5 

107.7 

103.3 

100.2 

96.8 

98.9 

93.5 

89.1 

84 

100.2 

95.4 

92 

88.4 

101.3 

97.2 

94.3 

91.4 

94.4 

90.1 

87.1 

83.9 

93.9 

89.7 

86.7 

83.5 

101.2 

97 

94.1 

91 

88 

84 

81.3 

78.5 

88.5 

84.4 

81.5 

78.5 

95.1 

91.1 

88.4 

85.5 

94 

89.6 

86.5 

82.9 

94.8 

90.6 

87.6 

84.3 

102 8 

98.4 

95.3 

92 

87.5 

83.4 

80.5 

77.5 

89 

85.1 

82.5 

79.5 

97 

92.8 

90.1 

87.3 

94.4 

90 

86.9 

83.5 

99.2 

95 

92.1 

89.1 

91.3 

87.2 

84.4 

81.6 

95.9 

92 

89.3 

86.5 

87.4 

83 

79.9 

76.5 

92.2 

88.1 

85.3 

82.3 

84.3 

80.2 

77.4 

74.6 







DB 

10000FT 

DB 

16000FT 

DB 

25000FT 

58.8 

52.5 

46.4 

69.9 

66 

61.4 

53.8 

45.7 

34.2 

69.2 

62.9 

54.6 

74.2 

67.8 

59.2 

56.5 

50.8 

44.6 

69.5 

64.5 

58.5 

72.8 

67.3 

60.6 

60.1 

54.1 

46.2 

59.6 

53.7 

46.3 

67.7 

61.8 

54.7 

61.6 

57 

51.6 

60.9 

56.8 

52 

68.4 

63.8 

58.4 

59.9 

52.9 

41 

62.5 

56.2 

45.6 

70 

63.5 

53.4 

59.1 

53.6 

47.3 

62 

57.2 

51.8 

69.5 

64.1 

57.8 

61 

54 

44.9 

69.3 

63.2 

55.4 

62.9 

57.2 

50 

68.6 

63.5 

57.4 

54 

47 

37 

62.1 

56.4 

49.1 

55.9 

50.2 

43.7 


G-ll 













































































































































































































































































































































































Table G-l . Aircraft Decibel Level By Thrust And Distance ( Continued ) 


NOISE_NUM 

METRIC 

THRUST 

DB 

200 FT 

DB 

400 FT 

DB 

630FT 

DB 

1000 FT 

DB 

2000 FT 

DB 

4000 FT 

DB 

6300 FT 

DB 

10000FT 

39 

SEL 

100 

88.5 

84.6 

82 

79.3 

75 

70.3 

66.7 

62.7 

40 

EPNL 

30 

102.6 

98.2 

95.1 

91.8 

86.2 

79.4 

74 

68 

40 

EPNL 

100 

115.9 

111.3 

108.2 

104.5 

98.8 

91.9 

86.3 

80.2 

40 

SEL 

30 

99.9 

95.7 

92.7 

89.5 

84.3 

78.3 

74 

69.6 

40 

SEL 

100 

110.5 

106 

102.9 

99.6 

94.3 

88.4 

84 

79.2 

41 

EPNL 

30 

99.6 

95.2 

92.1 

88.8 

83.2 

76.4 

71 

65 

41 

EPNL 

100 

112.9 

108.3 

105.2 

101.5 

95.8 

88.9 

83.3 

77.2 

41 

SEL 

30 

96.9 

92.7 

89.7 

86.5 

81.3 

75.3 

71 

66.6 

41 

SEL 

100 

107.5 

103 

99.9 

96.6 

91.3 

85.4 

81 

76.2 

42 

EPNL 

30 

90.3 

86 

83 

79.8 

74.1 

67.8 

63.2 

57.3 

42 

EPNL 

100 

102.4 

98.2 

95.2 

92 

86.4 

80.1 

75.4 

70.2 

42 

SEL 

30 

84.6 

80.6 


75.1 

70.5 

65.3 

61.4 

57.1 

42 

SEL 

100 




88 

83.4 


74.4 

HI 

43 

EPNL 

30 

83.8 

78.5 

74.7 

70.8 

64.3 

56.5 

49.4 

41.7 

43 

EPNL 

100 

94.2 

90 

87 

83.8 

78.2 

71.9 

67.2 

62 

43 

SEL 

30 

77 

72.9 

70.1 

67.2 

62.6 

57.6 

54 

50.2 

43 

SEL 

100 

89.9 

85.9 

83.2 

80.3 

75.7 

70.6 

66.7 

62.4 

44 

EPNL 

30 

88 

82.7 

78.9 

75 

68.5 

60.7 

53.6 

45.9 

44 

EPNL 

100 

98.9 

94.7 

91.7 

88.5 

82.9 

76.6 

71.9 

66.7 

44 

SEL 

30 

81.7 

77.6 

74.8 

71.9 

67.3 

62.3 

58.7 

54.9 

44 

SEL 

100 

94.6 

90.6 

87.9 

85 

80.4 

75.3 

71.4 

67.1 

45 

EPNL 

30 

81.5 

76.2 

72.4 

68.5 

62 

54.2 

47.1 

39.4 

45 

EPNL 

100 

91.4 

87.2 

84.2 

81 

75.4 

69.1 

64.4 

59.2 

45 

SEL 

30 

74.2 

70.1 

67.3 

64.4 

59.8 

54.8 

51.2 

47.4 

45 

SEL 

100 

87.1 

83.1 

80.4 

77.5 

72.9 

67.8 

63.9 

59.6 

46 

EPNL 

4200 

122.7 

117.5 

113.6 

109.4 

102 

94.1 

87.9 

81.1 

46 

EPNL 

9800 

134.8 

129.2 

125.2 

120.7 

113.8 

106.1 

100.3 

93.7 


DB 

16000FT 

DB 

25000FT 

57.9 

52.2 

61.6 

53.2 

74.1 

67 

64.9 

59.6 

73.7 

67.5 

58.6 

50.2 

71.1 

64 

61.9 

56.6 

70.7 

64.5 

51.9 

43.4 

64.1 

55.9 

52.2 

46.8 

■ 


30.4 


55.9 

47.7 

46 

41.4 

57.6 

52.2 

34.6 

23 

60.6 

52.4 

50.7 

46.1 

62.3 

56.9 

28.1 

16.5 

53.1 

44.9 

43.2 

38.6 

54.8 

49.4 

73.9 

65.1 

86.7 

79 








































































































































































































































































































































































Aircraft Perceived Decibel Level by Thrust and Distance 


Table G-l . Aircraft Decibel Level By Thrust And Distance ( Continued ) 


NOISE_NUM 

METRIC 

46 

EPNL 

46 

SEL 

46 

SEL 

46 

SEL 

47 

EPNL 

47 

EPNL 

47 

EPNL 

47 

SEL 

47 

SEL 

47 

SEL 

48 

EPNL 

48 

EPNL 

48 

:,i 

48 

SEL 

49 

EPNL 

49 

EPNL 

49 

EPNL 

49 

EPNL 

49 

EPNL 

49 

EPNL 

49 

SEL 

49 

SEL 

49 

SEL 

49 

SEL 

49 

SEL 

49 

SEL 

50 

EPNL 


THRUST 

DB 

200 FT 

DB 

400 FT 

DB 

630FT 

15000 

136.1 

130 

125.6 

4200 

117 

112.1 

108.6 

9800 

130.9 

125.6 

122 

15000 

132 

126.3 

122.6 

4800 

121.8 

116.7 

112.9 

9400 

137.1 

130.6 

126.4 

14500 

142.2 

135 

129.8 

4800 

117.9 

113.1 

109.7 

9400 

133.6 

127.2 

122.8 

14500 

138.2 

131 

126 

3000 

112.2 

106.8 

102.8 

12500 

131.3 

125.4 

120.7 





12500 

127.6 

121.9 

118 

3690 

100.9 

96.1 

92.5 

6180 

104.5 

99.9 

96.5 

9880 

103.9 

99.3 

95.8 

13190 

103.2 

99 

95.9 

17273 

104.5 

100.7 

98 

21180 

111.9 

108.2 

105.4 

3690 

96.2 

91.7 

88.5 

6180 

98.3 

93.9 

90.6 

9880 

97.6 

93.6 

90.7 

13190 

99.8 

95.9 

93.1 

17273 

102.8 

99.1 

96.5 

21180 

106.6 

103.3 

100.9 

8560 

106.3 

102.9 

99.8 


DB 

DB 

DB 

1000 FT 

2000 FT 

4000 FT 

121 

114 

106.2 

104.9 

98.9 

92 

118.2 

112.1 

105.1 

118.8 

112.6 

105.4 

108.7 

101.5 

93.1 

121.5 

113 

103.7 

125 

116.9 

108.7 

106 

99.9 

92.9 

118.4 

111.7 

104.3 

121.4 

115 

108.1 

98.6 

91 

82.6 

115.8 

108.2 

99.1 

94.9 

88.8 

m 

114 

107.5 

99.7 

88.3 

80.9 

72.8 

92.4 

85.3 

77.4 

91.6 

84.9 

111 

92.4 

86.9 

80.2 

95.2 

90.5 

84.2 

102.3 

96.9 

90.4 

85 

79.6 

73 

87.3 

82 

75.7 

87.6 

82.7 

76.8 

90.2 

85.4 

79.6 

93.7 

89.1 

83.4 

98.4 

94 

88.5 

96.2 

89.8 

83.9 


DB 

6300 FT 

DB 

10000FT 

DB 

16000FT 

DB 

25000FT 

100.5 

94.1 

87.2 

78.4 

86.7 

80.8 

74.1 

66.4 

99.9 

93.9 

87.1 

79.3 

100 

93.7 

86.6 

78.5 

87.1 

80.6 

73.6 

65.3 

97 

89.6 

81.2 

72.4 

102.8 

96.5 

90.2 

83.1 

87.5 

81.5 

74.7 

67 

98.4 

91.6 

83.5 

74.2 

102.9 

97.1 

90.5 

83.1 

76.6 

69.9 

62.5 

53.9 

91.6 

82.8 

72.3 

59.6 

76.9 

71.2 

64.6 

■1 

93.5 

85.7 

75.6 

62.4 

66.6 

59.5 

51.5 

43.1 

71.3 

64.2 

56.3 

48 

71.8 

65.2 

57.5 

49.4 

74.9 

68.7 

61.6 

54.2 

79.2 

73.5 

66.9 

60 

85.4 

79.6 

73.1 

66.2 

67.9 

61.9 

55 

47.8 

70.8 

65 

58.2 

51 

72.1 

66.5 

60 

53 

75 

69.5 

63.1 

56.3 

78.9 

73.7 

67.4 

60.7 

84.1 

78.9 

72.7 

66.2 

78.9 

70.6 

61.6 

51 













































































































































































































































































































































































Table G-l . Aircraft Decibel Level By Thrust And Distance ( Continued ) 


NOISE_NUM 

METRIC 

50 

EPNL 

50 

EPNL 

50 

EPNL 

50 

EPNL 

50 

EPNL 

50 

SEL 

50 

SEL 

50 

SEL 

50 

SEL 

50 

SEL 

50 

SEL 

51 

EPNL 

51 


51 

EPNL 

51 

EPNL 

51 

EPNL 

51 

EPNL 

51 

SEL 

51 

SEL 

51 

SEL 

51 

SEL 

51 

SEL 

51 

SEL 

52 

EPNL 

52 

EPNL 

52 

EPNL 

52 

EPNL 


THRUST 

DB 

200 FT 

DB 

400 FT 

DB 

630FT 

DB 

1000 FT 

DB 

2000 FT 

DB 

4000 FT 

DB 

6300 FT 

DB 

10000FT 

DB 

16000FT 

DB 

25000FT 

14000 

110.2 

106.7 

103.5 

99.7 

92.9 

86 

81.2 

73.1 

64.8 

55.4 

24370 

111.1 

108 

105 

101.6 

95 

87.9 

82.1 

75.5 

67.9 

59.8 

34850 

115.8 

112.8 

109.9 

106.5 

100 

92.4 

86.4 

80.2 

72.9 

65.4 

40240 

119.1 

116.1 

113.1 

109.6 

102.8 

95.3 

90.1 

83.9 

77.1 

70.2 

44940 

121.7 

118.6 

115.6 

112 

105.5 

99.1 

93.7 

88.5 

82.4 

76.2 

8560 

103.6 

99.5 

96.6 

93.5 

88.1 

81.7 

77 

71.6 

65.5 

58.9 

14000 

105.1 

100.9 

97.8 

94.3 

88.7 

82.3 

77.6 

72.4 

66.4 

59.9 

24370 

108.1 

103.9 

100.9 

97.5 

92.1 

86 

81.5 

76.5 

70.7 

64.4 

34850 

111.8 

107.9 

105 

101.9 

96.7 

90.5 

86.1 

80.9 

75.1 

68.8 

40240 

114.3 

110.4 

107.6 

104.5 

99.4 

93.2 

88.7 

83.5 

77.7 

71.4 

44940 

117.1 

113.2 

110.4 

107.2 

102.1 

96 

91.4 

86.3 

80.4 

74.1 

7000 

104.4 

99.5 

95.8 

91.6 

84.1 

76.3 

71.1 

65.8 

60.3 

55.1 



101.5 


93.5 



73 


62.6 

57.6 

17000 

107.1 

102.5 

99.1 

94.5 

86.9 

79.5 

75.3 

69.5 

64 

58.4 

25000 

107.4 

102.9 

99.5 

95.9 

89.2 

82.2 

77.4 

71.8 

65.9 

59.8 

33000 

107.7 

103.7 

100.7 

97.1 

91.8 

85.5 

80.7 

75.2 

69 

62.6 

41000 

111.6 

107.8 

105 

102.1 

96.9 

90.6 

85.8 

80.3 

74.1 

67.7 

7000 

98.9 

94.1 

90.8 

87.3 

81.6 

75.2 

70.4 

65 

58.6 

52 

12000 

101.7 

96.7 

93.2 

89.4 

83.3 

76.6 

71.7 

66.2 

60 

53.4 

17000 

103 

98.2 

94.8 

90.8 

84.4 

77.5 

72.7 

67.3 

61.2 

54.7 

25000 

104.2 

99.5 

95.9 

92 

85.6 

79 

74.5 

69.6 

63.9 

57.9 

33000 

105.4 

101.1 

97.9 

94.5 

89 

83.1 

78.6 

73.7 

68 

61.9 

41000 

107.4 

103.4 

100.7 

97.5 

92.6 

86.7 

82.3 

77.4 

71.7 

65.7 

5000 

98.6 

93.3 

89.1 

84.1 

77.5 

70.1 

64.3 

57.6 

50.1 

42.1 

12000 

100.2 

95.5 

91.8 

86.2 

79.7 

72.5 

67 

60.8 

53.9 

46.7 

13000 

99.8 

94.8 

91.4 

87.4 

81.3 

74.4 

68.9 

62.7 

55.6 

48.2 

18000 

103.8 

98.7 

95.3 

91.4 

85.4 

78.6 

73.3 

67.4 

60.8 

53.9 










































































































































































































































































































































































Aircraft Perceived Decibel Level by Thrust and Distance 


Table G-l . Aircraft Decibel Level By Thrust And Distance ( Continued ) 



NOISE_NUM 

METRIC 

THRUST 

DB 

200 FT 

DB 

400 FT 

DB 

630FT 

DB 

1000 FT 

DB 

2000 FT 

DB 

4000 FT 

DB 

6300 FT 

DB 

10000FT 

52 

EPNL 

30000 

108.7 

103.8 

100.5 

97 

91.4 

84.9 

79.8 

74.1 

52 

EPNL 

36000 

111.1 

106.7 

103.5 

100.4 

95.7 

89.3 

84.3 

78.6 

52 

SEL 

5000 

94.4 

89.6 

86.4 

83.1 

77.8 

71.2 

66.2 

60.4 

52 

SEL 

12000 

97 

92.2 

89 

85.6 

80.2 

73.7 

69 

63.6 

52 

SEL 

13000 

94.2 

90.4 

87.5 

84.3 

78.9 

72.6 

67.8 

62.5 

52 

SEL 

18000 

97.9 

94.1 

91.2 

87.9 

82.5 

76.3 

71.8 

66.5 

52 

SEL 

30000 

102.8 

99.3 

96.6 

93.7 

88.9 

82.9 

78.3 

73.1 

52 

SEL 

36000 

104.8 

101.8 

99.7 

97.2 

93 

87.1 

82.3 

76.9 

53 

EPNL 

5000 

99.3 

94.4 

90.9 

86.6 

79.2 

71.6 

65.9 

59.2 

53 

EPNL 

12000 

104.4 

100 

96.5 

91.8 

83.6 

74.2 

68.3 

61.9 

53 

EPNL 

13000 

102.9 

98.5 

95.6 

91.6 

84.8 

76.4 

70.1 

63.7 

53 

EPNL 

24000 

109.4 

104.8 

101.8 

97.8 

90.8 

82.1 

76.2 

70.6 

53 

m 

30000 

110.8 

106.1 

103 

■1 

93.2 

84.8 

79.2 


53 

EPNL 

36000 

111.5 

106.6 

103.6 

101.2 

95.9 

88 

83 

76.7 

53 

SEL 

5000 

95.1 

90.8 

87.7 

84.3 

78.7 

72 

66.8 

61.1 

53 

SEL 

12000 

99.6 

95 

91.7 

88.1 

82.1 

75.2 

69.9 

63.9 

53 

SEL 

13000 

97.4 

93.3 

90.2 

86.8 

80.9 

73.9 

68.6 

62.5 

53 

SEL 

24000 

101.5 

97.2 

94 

90.4 

84.7 

77.9 

73.2 

68.2 

53 

SEL 

30000 

103.3 

99.6 

96.7 

93.6 

88.3 

81.9 

77.1 

71.9 

53 

SEL 

36000 

105.5 

102.5 

100.2 

97.7 

93.3 

87.3 

82.3 

76.5 

54 

EPNL 

4000 

94.8 

90.5 

87.3 

83.6 

77.8 

69.7 

63.7 

57.4 

54 

EPNL 

6000 

97.5 

93.4 

90 

86.6 

81 

72.8 

67 

61.1 

54 

EPNL 

7000 

100.4 

95.8 

92.6 

89.3 

84 

75.6 

70.4 

64.8 

54 

EPNL 

10000 

103.5 

99.5 

96.5 

93.2 

88 

81 

76 

70.1 

54 

EPNL 

13000 

106.3 

102.5 

99.8 

96.5 

91.5 

84.9 

79.9 

74.2 

54 

EPNL 

19000 

113.1 

109.3 

106.4 

103.1 

98.2 

91 

85.8 

80.4 

54 

SEL 

4000 

90.5 

87 

84.5 

81.7 

77 

71 

66.3 

60.9 


DB 

16000FT 

DB 

25000FT 

67.6 

60.9 

72.1 

65.3 

54.1 

47.4 

57.4 

50.9 

56.5 

50.1 

60.7 

54.5 

67.2 

61 

70.7 

64.3 

51.8 

44 

55.6 

49.5 

56.6 

49.5 

64.7 

59.4 



70.4 

64 

54.7 

48.2 

57.2 

50.4 

55.8 

48.8 

62.7 

57 

66 

59.9 

69.7 

62.6 

48.7 

36.4 

53 

42.2 

57.8 

48.8 

63.3 

54.6 

67.4 

59.2 

73.6 

65.5 

54.5 

47.4 










































































































































































































































































































































































Table G-l . Aircraft Decibel Level By Thrust And Distance ( Continued ) 


NOISE_NUM 

METRIC 

THRUST 

DB 

200 FT 

DB 

400 FT 

DB 

630FT 

DB 

1000 FT 

DB 

2000 FT 

DB 

4000 FT 

DB 

6300 FT 

DB 

10000FT 

DB 

16000FT 

DB 

25000FT 

54 

SEL 

6000 

93.7 

89.6 

87.3 

84.5 

79.8 

73.9 

69 

63.8 

57.3 

50 

54 

SEL 

7000 

95.6 

92 

89.5 

86.6 

82.3 

76.4 

71.9 

66.7 

60.4 

53.5 

54 

SEL 

10000 

100.5 

97 

94.4 

91.7 

86.8 

81 

76.4 

70.8 

64.7 

57.8 

54 

SEL 

13000 

104.4 

100.8 

98.1 

95.5 

90.5 

84.5 

79.8 

74.5 

68.1 

61.1 

54 

SEL 

19000 

110.5 

106.8 

104.1 

101.5 

96.7 

90.7 

85.9 

80.4 

74 

67 

55 

EPNL 

2600 

107.8 

103.2 

99.5 

95.1 

88.7 

80.1 

73.8 

68.1 

61.4 

53.4 

55 

EPNL 

2800 

111.1 

106.2 

102.4 

97.9 

91.1 

83.3 

76.6 

70.7 

63.8 

56.1 

55 

EPNL 

3200 

110 

105.5 

102.1 

98.1 

91.6 

84.4 

79.3 

73.6 

66.9 

59.4 

55 

EPNL 

3400 

110.9 

106.6 

103.4 

99.7 

93.9 

87.2 

82.4 

76.9 

70.6 

63.4 

55 

EPNL 

3600 

112.1 

108.2 

105.2 

101.9 

96.5 

90.4 

85.9 

80.8 

74.6 

67.6 

55 

EPNL 

3900 

114.5 

111.2 

108.7 

105.9 

101 

96.2 

92.1 

87.3 

79 

74.4 

55 

SEL 

2600 

101.9 

97.5 

94.4 

91 

85.6 

79.6 

74.7 

69.3 

62.8 

56.4 

55 



104.3 

99.6 


m 


81 


70.8 

64.6 


55 

SEL 

3200 

104.5 

100.2 

97.4 

94.2 

89 

83 

78.5 

73.4 

67.5 

61.1 

55 

SEL 

3400 

106 

102 

99.3 

96.3 

91.4 

85.6 

81.2 

76.1 

70.3 

64.1 

55 

SEL 

3600 

107.8 

104.1 

101.5 

98.7 

94.1 

88.4 

84.2 

79.2 

73.5 

67.4 

55 

SEL 

3900 

111.2 

107.9 

105.4 

102.8 

98.6 

93.4 

89.2 

84.4 

78.8 

72.9 

56 

EPNL 

1798 

101.8 

96.5 

92.4 

88.1 

80.4 

73.4 

68.5 

63.1 

57 

50.8 

56 

EPNL 

2698 

102.6 

97.8 

93.9 

90.1 

83.5 

76.9 

71.9 

66.4 

60.2 

53.8 

56 

EPNL 

3147 

105.6 

100.5 

96.5 

92.2 

85.4 

78.6 

73.6 

68.1 

61.9 

55.5 

56 

EPNL 

3597 

106.4 

101.1 

97.1 

93.1 

86.9 

80.3 

75.3 

69.8 

63.6 

57.2 

56 

EPNL 

4496 

107.3 

102.3 

98.9 

95.6 

90.2 

83.7 

78.8 

73.2 

66.8 

60.1 

56 

EPNL 

10116 

124.5 

119.8 

116.6 

113.3 

108.1 

102.6 

98.7 

94 

88.1 

81 

56 

SEL 

1798 

96.5 

91.7 

88.2 

84.8 

78.8 

72.6 

68.1 

62.3 

55.4 

47.9 

56 

SEL 

2698 

97.4 

93.2 

90.1 

87 

81.8 

75.8 

71.3 

65.5 

58.5 

50.9 

56 

SEL 

3147 

99.9 

95.4 

92 

88.8 

83.7 

77.4 

72.9 

67.1 

60.2 

52.8 

56 

SEL 

3597 

100.5 

96.3 

92.9 

89.8 

85.1 

79 

74.5 

68.7 

61.8 

54.3 












































































































































































































































































































































































Aircraft Perceived Decibel Level by Thrust and Distance 


Table G-l . Aircraft Decibel Level By Thrust And Distance ( Continued ) 



NOISE_NUM 

METRIC 

THRUST 

DB 

200 FT 

DB 

400 FT 

DB 

630FT 

DB 

1000 FT 

DB 

2000 FT 

DB 

4000 FT 

DB 

6300 FT 

DB 

10000FT 

56 

SEL 

4496 

102.2 

98.4 

95.7 

92.6 

88.3 

82.2 

77.7 

71.9 

56 

SEL 

10116 

121.6 

117.5 

114.5 

111.4 

106.4 

101.1 

96.9 

91.8 

57 

EPNL 

1798 

100.3 

95.3 

91.5 

87.1 

80 

73 

68.1 

62.7 

57 

EPNL 

2698 

100.3 

96 

92.9 

88.9 

82.5 

76 

71 

65.6 

57 

EPNL 

3147 

104 

99.3 

95.9 

91.5 

84.3 

77.4 

72.5 

67.1 

57 

EPNL 

3597 

104.4 

100.2 

96.8 

92.3 

85.5 

78.9 

74 

68.5 

57 

EPNL 

4496 

105 

101.2 

98.4 

94.6 

88.6 

81.8 

76.9 

71.5 

57 

EPNL 

10116 

121.7 

116.4 

112.8 

109.2 

103.4 

97.4 

93.2 

88.3 

57 

SEL 

1798 

95.5 

91 

87.9 

84.5 

78.6 

72.4 

67.6 

61.4 

57 

SEL 

2698 

95.8 

92 

89.4 

86.7 

81.5 

75.3 

70.4 

64.2 

57 

SEL 

3147 

98.8 

94.6 

91.5 

88.5 

83.2 

76.7 

71.9 

65.7 

57 

SEL 

3597 

99.6 

95.6 

92.8 

89.7 

84.4 

78.2 

73.3 

67.1 

57 

SEL 

■■ 



95.2 

■a 


81.1 

76.2 

70 

57 

SEL 

10116 

118.1 

113.7 

110.5 

107.3 

102 

96.2 

91.8 

86.3 

58 

EPNL 

35 

91.8 

86.9 

83 

78.4 

71.4 

61.4 

54.8 

48.4 

58 

EPNL 

40 

95.3 

90.4 

86.5 

81.9 

74.9 

64.9 

58.3 

51.9 

58 

EPNL 

80 

93.7 

89 

85.9 

82.1 

76.1 

69.8 

64.8 

59.2 

58 

EPNL 

100 

95.9 

91.2 

88.1 

84.3 

78.4 

72 

67 

61.4 

58 

SEL 

35 

85.7 

82.3 

79.6 

76 

70.2 

63.6 

58.9 

53.5 

58 

SEL 

40 

89.2 

85.8 

83.1 

79.6 

73.7 

67.3 

62.4 

57 

58 

SEL 

80 

86.5 

82.6 

80 

77 

72 

65.8 

61.5 

56.2 

58 

SEL 

100 

88.7 

84.8 

82.2 

79.2 

74.2 

68 

63.6 

58.4 

59 

EPNL 

35 

93.8 

89.7 

86.7 

83.4 

76.8 

68.2 

62.5 

57.3 

59 

EPNL 

40 

97.5 

93.4 

90.4 

86.9 

81.2 

74.7 

70 

64.5 

59 

EPNL 

90 

90.9 

87.4 

84.9 

81.9 

77 

71.4 

67.2 

62.2 

59 

EPNL 

100 

94.5 

91.1 

88.9 

85.9 

81.3 

76.4 

72.6 

68.4 

59 

SEL 

35 

88.9 

84.4 

81.1 

77.7 

71.9 

65.8 

62.3 

58.7 


DB 

16000FT 

DB 

25000FT 

65 

57.5 

84.9 

76 

56.7 

50.6 

59.4 

53 

61.2 

55.1 

62.3 

55.9 

65.4 

59.2 

82.1 

74.7 

53.9 

45.6 

56.7 

48.5 

58.4 

50.4 

59.8 

51.7 


■1 

79 

69.5 

40.9 

33.7 

44.8 

37.9 

52.9 

46.5 

55.1 

48.7 

47.9 

42.2 

50.9 

44.7 

50.5 

44.4 

52.9 

47.3 

51.5 

46.3 

58.5 

52.3 

56.6 

50.7 

63.8 

59.1 

55.6 

52.8 














































































































































































































































































































































































Table G-l . Aircraft Decibel Level By Thrust And Distance ( Continued ) 


NOISE_NUM 

METRIC 

THRUST 

DB 

200 FT 

DB 

400 FT 

DB 

630FT 

DB 

1000 FT 

DB 

2000 FT 

DB 

4000 FT 

DB 

6300 FT 

DB 

10000FT 

DB 

16000FT 

DB 

25000FT 

59 

SEL 

40 

91.8 

87.8 

84.8 

81.5 

76.2 

70.8 

67.4 

63.7 

59.9 

56.1 

59 

SEL 

90 

84.6 

81 

78.5 

75.9 

72.3 

68.1 

65.2 

62.2 

58.8 

55.6 

59 

SEL 

100 

87 

83.5 

81.4 

79.1 

75.4 

71.5 

68.7 

65.9 

62.7 

59.6 

60 

EPNL 

7000 

104.4 

99.5 

95.8 

91.6 

84.1 

76.3 

71.1 

65.8 

60.3 

55.1 

60 

EPNL 

12000 

106.5 

101.5 

97.7 

93.5 

85.7 

78.1 

73 

67.9 

62.6 

57.6 

60 

EPNL 

17000 

107.1 

102.5 

99.1 

94.5 

86.9 

79.5 

75.3 

69.5 

64 

58.4 

60 

EPNL 

25000 

107.4 

102.9 

99.5 

95.9 

89.2 

82.2 

77.4 

71.8 

65.9 

59.8 

60 

EPNL 

33000 

107.7 

103.7 

100.7 

97.1 

91.8 

85.5 

80.7 

75.2 

69 

62.6 


60 

EPNL 

41000 

111.6 

107.8 

105 

102.1 

96.9 

90.6 

85.8 

80.3 

74.1 

67.7 

60 

SEL 

7000 

98.1 

93.9 

90.8 

87.4 

81.4 

75 

70.3 

65.7 

60.6 

55.7 

60 

SEL 

12000 

99.3 

95 

91.9 

88.5 

82.5 

76.2 

71.7 

67.2 

62.3 

57.6 

60 

SEL 

17000 

100 

95.6 

92.6 

89.3 

83.7 

77.6 

73.1 

68.5 

63.4 

58.4 

60 

mi 

25000 


■ 

93.9 




imi 

70.5 

m 

m 

60 

SEL 

33000 

103.3 

99.9 

97.3 

94.5 

89.7 

83.6 

79.2 

74.3 

69 

63.5 

60 

SEL 

41000 

106.2 

103.1 

100.8 

98.2 

93.6 

87.6 

83.1 

78.1 

72.5 

66.8 

61 

EPNL 

3690 

103.9 

99.1 

95.5 

91.3 

83.9 

75.8 

69.6 

62.5 

54.5 

46.1 

61 

EPNL 

6180 

107.5 

102.9 

99.5 

95.4 

88.3 

80.4 

74.3 

67.2 

59.3 

51 

61 

EPNL 

9880 

106.9 

102.3 

98.8 

94.6 

87.9 

80.7 

74.8 

68.2 

60.5 

52.4 

61 

EPNL 

13190 

106.2 

102 

98.9 

95.4 

89.9 

83.2 

77.9 

71.7 

64.6 

57.2 

61 

EPNL 

17273 

107.5 

103.7 

101 

98.2 

93.5 

87.2 

82.2 

76.5 

69.9 

63 

61 

EPNL 

21180 

114.9 

111.2 

108.4 

105.3 

99.9 

93.4 

88.4 

82.6 

76.1 

69.2 

61 

SEL 

3690 

99.2 

94.7 

91.5 

88 

82.6 

76 

70.9 

64.9 

58 

50.8 

61 

SEL 

6180 

101.3 

96.9 

93.6 

90.3 

85 

78.7 

73.8 

68 

61.2 

54 

61 

SEL 

9880 

100.6 

96.6 

93.7 

90.6 

85.7 

79.8 

75.1 

69.5 

63 

56 

61 

SEL 

13190 

102.8 

98.9 

96.1 

93.2 

88.4 

82.6 

78 

72.5 

66.1 

59.3 

61 

SEL 

17273 

105.8 

102.1 

99.5 

96.7 

92.1 

86.4 

81.9 

76.7 

70.4 

63.7 

61 

SEL 

21180 

109.6 

106.3 

103.9 

101.4 

97 

91.5 

87.1 

81.9 

75.7 

69.2 










































































































































































































































































































































































Aircraft Perceived Decibel Level by Thrust and Distance 


Table G-l . Aircraft Decibel Level By Thrust And Distance ( Continued ) 


NOISE_NUM METRIC 


62 EPNL 




62 EPNL 




62 EPNL 




62 SEL 














93 8 




5000 104.8 99.9 96.2 92.1 


7000 106.5 101.9 98.6 


DB 

2000 FT 

DB 

4000 FT 

DB 

6300 FT 

DB 

10000FT 

79.4 

72 

66.4 

60.3 

82 

74.6 

69 

62.9 

87.9 

80.3 

74.7 

68.4 

94.9 

87.6 

82.1 

75.9 

98.7 

91.6 

86.2 

80.4 

102.4 

95.5 

90.4 

84.7 

79.6 

72.9 

67.8 

62.1 

82.6 

75.9 

70.8 

65.1 

88.2 

81.3 

76 

69.9 

93.4 

86.5 

81.4 

75.7 

96.9 

90.4 

85.5 

80 

99.8 

93.5 

88.6 

83.2 

81.8 

74.4 

68.9 

62.5 

86 

78.9 

73.7 

67.6 

89.2 

81.6 

76 

69.7 

95.4 

88.2 

82.8 

76.9 

99.7 

93.2 

88.5 

83.3 

104 

97.6 

93.1 

88 

80.8 

74.4 

69.5 

63.9 

83.5 

77.2 

72.5 

67.1 

89 

82.1 

76.8 

70.7 

93.7 

86.9 

81.8 

76.2 

97.2 

91.1 

86.6 

81.6 

100.9 

94.9 

90.5 

85.8 

81.8 

73.1 

67.9 

62.3 

94.4 

88.5 

84.6 

80.3 

78.2 

72 

67.7 

62.9 


DB DB 




80 73.5 65.9 


88 81.9 74.5 


G-19 














































































































































































































































































































































































Table G-l . Aircraft Decibel Level By Thrust And Distance (Continued) 


NOISE_NUM 

METRIC 

THRUST 

DB 

200 FT 

DB 

400 FT 

DB 

630FT 

DB 

1000 FT 

DB 

2000 FT 

DB 

4000 FT 

DB 

6300 FT 

DB 

10000FT 

DB 

16000FT 

64 

SEL 

13489 

108 

104.3 

101.7 

98.7 

93.9 

88.2 

83.7 

78.5 

72.9 

65 

EPNL 

4496 

99.9 

95.5 

92.3 

88 

81.3 

72.3 

67.3 

61.8 

56.1 

65 

EPNL 

13488 

109.3 

105.3 

102.4 

99.2 

93.6 

88.2 

84.5 

80.5 

76.3 

65 

SEL 

4496 

93.1 

88.9 

85.8 

82.2 

76.8 

70.4 

66.4 

62.1 

57.6 

65 

SEL 

13488 

106.5 

102.9 

100.2 

97.4 

92.7 

87.3 

83.2 

78.5 

73.6 

66 

EPNL 

8992 

109.3 

103.9 

99.8 

94.7 

84.8 

72.5 

64.2 

55.8 

47.2 

66 

EPNL 

15737 

110.8 

106 

102.2 

97.7 

89.5 

79.5 

73.4 

67.3 

61 

66 

EPNL 

20233 

112.1 

107.4 

104.1 

99.7 

92.3 

83.6 

77.7 

71.8 

65.6 

66 

SEL 

8992 

104.1 

99 

95.1 

89.9 

81.5 

73.7 

67.3 

60.3 

53.1 

66 

SEL 

15737 

106.5 

101.4 

98 

93.7 

85.9 

78.3 

72.5 

66 

59.5 

66 

SEL 

20233 

107.8 

103 

99.7 

96 

88.7 

81.3 

75.5 

69 

62.5 

67 

EPNL 

8000 

105.9 

100.8 

97.2 

93.4 

87 

79.6 

73.9 

68.1 

62.2 

67 

m 

16000 

110.3 

105.6 

101.8 

97 

89 

81 

75.6 

70 

64.4 

67 

EPNL 

26000 

112.5 

108.2 

104.8 

100.8 

93.6 

86 

80.9 

74.5 

68.1 

67 

EPNL 

32000 

113.3 

109.3 

106 

102.3 

95.8 

88.4 

83.2 

76.9 

70.5 

67 

EPNL 

40000 

114.7 

110.8 

107.7 

104.3 

98.6 

91.8 

86.7 

80.7 

74.6 

67 

EPNL 

46000 

116.3 

112.4 

109.4 

106.1 

100.7 

94.6 

89.9 

84.2 

78.5 

67 

SEL 

8000 

103.6 

99.1 

95.8 

92.3 

86.6 

80.1 

75.3 

70.5 

65.6 

67 

SEL 

16000 

105.5 

100.7 

97.1 

93.3 

87.2 

80.6 

76 

71.2 

66.4 

67 

SEL 

26000 

106.3 

102 

98.6 

95 

89 

82.8 

78.5 

73.8 

69.1 

67 

SEL 

32000 

107.4 

103.3 

100.1 

96.7 

91 

84.9 

80.7 

76.1 

71.5 

67 

SEL 

40000 

109 

105.2 

102.3 

99.2 

94 

88.2 

84.1 

79.7 

75.1 

67 

SEL 

46000 

111.1 

107.4 

104.6 

101.7 

96.7 

91.3 

87.3 

82.9 

78.5 

68 

EPNL 

10020 

101.6 

97 

93 

89 

82.1 

75.5 

70.1 

64.3 

58.1 

68 

EPNL 

23190 

110.9 

106 

102.2 

98.7 

90.1 

81.7 

75.7 

69.3 

62.5 

68 

EPNL 

25940 

110.7 

104.2 

100.2 

96.2 

89.5 

81.2 

75.2 

68.4 

61.2 

68 

EPNL 

39180 

112.2 

106.7 

103.2 

99.5 

93.2 

86.2 

80.7 

74.2 

67.2 



G-20 














































































































































































































































































































































































Aircraft Perceived Decibel Level by Thrust and Distance 


Table G-l . Aircraft Decibel Level By Thrust And Distance ( Continued ) 



DB 

200 FT 

DB 

400 FT 

DB 

630FT 

DB 

1000 FT 

DB 

2000 FT 

DB 

4000 FT 

DB 

6300 FT 

DB 

10000FT 

DB 

16000FT 

DB 

25000FT 

114.7 

110.2 

107.2 

104.2 

98.7 

92.4 

88 

82 

75.2 

68.5 

117.2 

112.7 

110 

107.2 

101.8 

96.2 

91.7 

86.7 

80.2 

73.7 

99.5 

95.1 

91.4 

88.3 

82.5 

76.3 

71.9 

66.6 

61.3 

56.3 

105.1 

100.6 

97.1 

93.7 

87 

80.1 

75.1 

69.5 

64 

58.4 

103.7 

98.7 

95.4 

92.2 

87 

80.7 

76 

70.2 

64 

55.2 

106 

101.7 

98.7 

96.2 

91.2 

85.2 

80.2 

75 

68.7 

60.2 

110.2 

106.2 

103.4 

100.7 

96.2 

90.7 

86.2 

81.2 

75.2 

67.2 

113.2 

109.2 

106.4 

103.7 

98.2 

94.2 

89.7 

85.2 

79.2 

72 

105.6 

101.1 

97.1 

93.1 

85.7 

75.9 

73.1 

67.1 

61.1 

55.1 

110.6 

105.9 

101.7 

97.4 

89.4 

81 

75.5 

69 

62.6 

56.9 

111.2 

104.7 

100.4 

96.2 

89.2 

80.5 

74.3 

68.2 

60.2 

53.2 

112.2 

106.9 

103.2 

99.7 

93.2 

85.7 

80.2 

74.2 

66.2 

59.2 

114.2 

109.2 

106.5 

103.2 


91 


80.2 

73 

66.2 

116.2 

111.5 

108.3 

105.2 

99.8 

93.7 

88.4 

83.2 

76.5 

70.2 

101 

96.9 

93 

89.6 

83.6 

77.7 

73 

68.1 

63.1 

58.4 

104.3 

99.7 

96.1 

92.1 

85.8 

79.3 

74.6 

69.7 

64.6 

59.7 

103.7 

98.2 

94.7 

91.2 

85.7 

79.4 

74.7 

69.7 

63.7 

58 

106.2 

101.2 

98 

94.7 

89.7 

83.7 

79.2 

74 

68.2 

62.7 

109.2 

105 

102 

99.1 

94.2 

88.7 

84.2 

79.3 

73.2 

68.2 

111.4 

107.3 

104.2 

101.2 

96.8 

91.2 

87.2 

82 

76.2 

71.2 

106.7 

102 

98.6 

95.1 

89.3 

82.7 

77.5 

71.8 

65.2 

57.5 

112.9 

108.3 

105 

101.5 

95.8 

89 

83.5 

77.3 

70.3 

62 

124.8 

120 

116.3 

112.2 

105.9 

98.2 

91.9 

84.7 

76.4 

66.4 

103 

98.7 

95.7 

92.6 

87.5 

81.6 

77.1 

72 

66.2 

59.7 

109.9 

105.6 

102.7 

99.5 

94.3 

88.1 

83.3 

77.8 

71.5 

64.2 

121.2 

116.6 

113.4 

110.1 

104.6 

98 

92.7 

86.3 

78.2 

68.2 

104.5 

99.8 

96.4 

92.5 

86 

78.9 

73.3 

67 

59.4 

49.1 


G-21 













































































































































































































































































































































































Table G-l . Aircraft Decibel Level By Thrust And Distance ( Continued ) 


NOISE_NUM 

METRIC 

THRUST 

DB 

200 FT 

DB 

400 FT 

DB 

630FT 

DB 

1000 FT 

DB 

2000 FT 

DB 

4000 FT 

DB 

6300 FT 

DB 

10000FT 

DB 

16000FT 

DB 

25000FT 

71 

EPNL 

97 

122.9 

117.7 

113.8 

109.4 

103 

95.8 

90.4 

84.2 

77.2 

68.6 

71 

EPNL 

104 

130.4 

125.2 

121.2 

116.7 

109.3 

101.9 

96.5 

90.7 

83.9 

75.7 

71 

SEL 

87 

99.6 

95.3 

92.3 

89 

83.6 

77.1 

72.1 

66.5 

60.1 

52.8 

71 

SEL 

97 

118.7 

114.1 

110.8 

107.3 

101.6 

95 

90 

84.3 

77.6 

69.9 

71 

SEL 

104 

126.1 

121.1 

117.6 

114 

108.1 

101.3 

96.2 

90.4 

83.9 

76.2 

72 

EPNL 

83 

109.4 

105 

101.8 

98.5 

93.1 

86.6 

81.6 

75.9 

69.3 

61.5 

72 

EPNL 

86 

118.8 

114.2 

110.9 

107.1 

100.9 

94 

88.7 

82.7 

75.9 

67.7 

72 

EPNL 

91 

125.7 

120.8 

117.2 

113.1 

106.1 

99 

93.7 

87.9 

81.1 

73 

72 

SEL 

83 

106.3 

102.2 

99.3 

96.2 

91.1 

85.1 

80.5 

75.3 

69.3 

62.4 

72 

SEL 

86 

116.1 

111.8 

108.7 

105.5 

100.1 

93.6 

88.7 

83.1 

76.8 

69.4 

72 

SEL 

91 

121.9 

117.4 

114.3 

110.8 

105.2 

98.5 

93.5 

87.8 

81.3 

73.9 

73 

EPNL 

84 

106.2 

101.6 

98.4 

94.7 

88.4 

81.4 

76 

69.9 

62.8 

53.6 

73 

EPNL 

89 


123.4 

119.8 

115.7 

109.3 

102.3 


91.4 

84.6 


73 

EPNL 

93 

130.5 

125.5 

121.8 

117.6 

110.6 

103.4 

98 

92.1 

85.4 

77.3 

73 

SEL 

84 

102.5 

98.3 

95.3 

92.1 

86.8 

80.4 

75.5 

69.8 

63.4 

56.2 

73 

SEL 

89 

124.6 

120.1 

116.9 

113.6 

108.1 

101.7 

96.8 

91.2 

84.8 

77.3 

73 

SEL 

93 

126.2 

121.5 

118.2 

114.7 

109 

102.4 

97.4 

91.8 

85.3 

77.7 


G-22 










































































































































































































































REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 


Form Approved 
OMBNo. 0704-01 88 


Public burden lor this coflection of informotion is Miniitd to sversoe 1 hour Dec rosotfiee — - • > . . . 

Bflyor ing end^tflinino the del* needed, snd compleling end re*L*?^eoflecbon%^ «W"9 eoureee. 
collection of information, mctudflw suggestions for reducing this burden toWs5! ! SMttaedS»r^Sen^^I2!^rCf22^l?^^?;*^?* l * 0 'y’ ro,h * M P* ;,0<lht » 
Highway, sue. 1204 . Adington. V ZSgtS, M * non D,v * 

1. AGENCY USE ONLY (L"„ blnk) 1 2. REPORT DATE H T REPORT TYPE AND DATPS cn WB pn 


2. REPORT DATE 

July 1999 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 


The Aviation System Analysis Capability Noise Impact Model 


3. REPORT TYPE ANO DATES COVERED 

Contractor Report 

™ — S. FUNDING NUMBERS 

C NAS2- 14361 


6. AUTHOR(S) — 

Russell Ege, Jerome Brown, Kevin Bradley, and Fabio Grandi 


WU 538-16-11-01 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Logistics Management Institute 
2000 Corporate Ridge 
McLean, VA 22102-7805 


8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 

NS807S1 


S. SPONSORING / MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Langley Research Center 
Hampton, VA 23681-2199 


10. SPONSORING /MONRORING 
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 

NASA7CR- 1 999-209356 


TV. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES ' 

Langley Technical Monitor: Robert E. Yackovetsky 
Final Report 

12*. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILUY STATEMENT 

Unclassified - Unlimited 


Kevin Bradley and Fabio Grandi 
Wyle Laboratories, Arlington, Virginia 


1 12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 


Subject Category 01 


Availability: NASA CASI (301) 621-0390 
Distribution: Nonstandard 


13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) ~ “ 

To meet its objective of assisting the U.S. aviation industry with the technological challenges of the future 
NASA must identify research areas that have the greatest potential for improving the operation of the air 
transportation system. To accomplish this, NASA is building an Aviation System Analysis Capability (ASAC) 

The Noise Impact Model (NIM) has been developed as part of the ASAC. Its primary purpose is to enable 
users to examine the impact that quieter aircraft technologies and/or operations might have on community noise 
impact and air carrier operating efficiency at any of 16 large- and medium-sized U.S. airports. The analyst 
chooses an airport and case year for study, selects a runway use configuration and set of flight tracks for the 
scenario, and has the option of reducing the noise of the aircraft that operate at the airport by 3 6 or 10 
decibels. NIM computes the resultant noise impact and estimates any airline operational improvements 
Community noise impact is characterized in three ways: the size of the noise contour footprint, the number of 
people living within the contours, and the number of homes located in the same contours. Distance and time 
savings are calculated by comparing the noise abatement flight path length to a less circuitous alternate routing. 
For a more efficient runway use configuration, the increase in capacity and reduction in delay are shown. 


14. SUBJECT TERMS 


aeronautics, aviation system, NASA technology, noise impact model, aircraft noise 


17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF REPORT 

Unclassified 


18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF THIS PAGE 

Unclassified 


19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF ABSTRACT 

Unclassified 


15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

120 

16. PRICE CODE 

A06 


20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 

Unlimited 


NSN 7540-01-280-5500 


Standard Form 290 (Rev. 2-09) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18 
298-102 




