Report No. DODIG-2013-027 


November 30, 2012 



Jnspector (general 

United States 
Department of Defense 



f DoD Generally Effective at Correcting Causes 
of Antideficiency Act Violations in Military 
Personnel Accounts, But Vulnerabilities 
i Remain 




Report Documentation Page 

Form Approved 

OMB No. 0704-0188 

Public reporting burden for the collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and 
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, 
including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington 

VA 22202-4302. Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it 
does not display a currently valid OMB control number. 

1. REPORT DATE 

30 NOV 2012 2 ' REPORT TYPE 

3. DATES COVERED 

00-00-2012 to 00-00-2012 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

DoD Generally Effective at Correcting Causes of Antideficiency Act 
Violations in Military Personnel Accounts, But Vulnerabilities Remain 

5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 

5b. GRANT NUMBER 

5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 

6. AUTHOR(S) 

5d. PROJECT NUMBER 

5e. TASK NUMBER 

5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Inspector General of the Department of Defense,400 Army Navy 

Drive,Arlington,VA,22202-4704 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 

REPORT NUMBER 

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 

11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 

12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited 

13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

14. ABSTRACT 

15. SUBJECT TERMS 

16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 17. LIMITATION OF 

___ ABSTRACT 

18. NUMBER 19a. NAME OF 

OF PAGES RESPONSIBLE PERSON 

a. REPORT b. ABSTRACT c. THIS PAGE Same OS 

unclassified unclassified unclassified Report (SAR) 

50 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std Z39-18 





Additional Information 

To obtain additional copies of this report, visit the Web site of the Department of Defense 
Inspector General at http://www.dodig.mil/audit/reports or contact the Secondary Reports 
Distribution Unit at auditnet@dodig.mil . 


Suggestions for Audits 

To suggest or request audits, contact the Office of the Deputy Inspector General for 
Auditing at auditnet@dodig.mil or by mail: 

Department of Defense Office of Inspector General 
Office of the Deputy Inspector General for Auditing 
ATTN: Audit Suggestions/13F25-04 
4800 Mark Center Drive 
Alexandria, VA 22350-1500 


DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 

i ivyi 


■ - 

To report fraud, waste, mismanagement, and abuse of authority. 

pp 

Send written complaints to: Defense Hotline, The Pentagon, Washington, DC 20301-1900 

ill iU 

Phone: 800.424.9098 e-mail: hotline@dodiq.mil www.dodiq.mil/hotline 


Acronyms 

and Abbreviations 

ADA 

Antideficiency Act 

BA 

Budget Activity 

BUPERS 

Bureau of Navy Personnel 

CMA 

Centrally Managed Allotment 

DoD FMR 

DoD Financial Management Regulation 

MILPERS 

Military Personnel 

OMB 

Office of Management and Budget 

PCS 

Permanent Change of Station 

USD(C)/CFO 

Under Secretary of Defense 


(Comptrailer)/Chief Financial Officer, DoD 







INSPECTOR GENERAL 

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
4800 MARK CENTER DRIVE 
ALEXANDRIA, VIRGINIA 22350-1500 

November 30, 2012 

MEMORANDUM FOR UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (COMPTROLLER)/ 

CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER, DOD 
ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE 
(FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND COMPTROLLER) 
NAVAL INSPECTOR GENERAL 
AUDIT OR GENERAL, DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY 

SUBJECT: DoD Generally Effective at Correcting Causes of Antideficiency Act 
Violations in Military Personnel Accounts, But Vulnerabilities Remain 
(Report No. DODIG-2013-027) 

We are providing this report for review and comment. This audit was required by 
Section 8109 of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2012. The Military Departments 
were generally effective implementing and sustaining corrective actions taken in response 
to nine Antideficiency Act violations, involving the Military Personnel accounts, totaling 
$541.9 million, reported since October 1, 2002. However, controls over tracking the 
collective actions could be improved. In addition, Army and Navy Comptroller 
personnel did not annually assess the adequacy of control procedures for centrally 
managed allotments to prevent Antideficiency Act violations and justify their use. 

DoD Directive 7650.3 requires that recommendations be resolved promptly. Comments 
from the Department of the Navy were responsive, and we do not require additional 
comments. We received comments from the Under Secretary of Defense 
(Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, DoD; Department of the Army; and Department 
of the Air Force that were generally responsive. However, the comments from the Under 
Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, DoD, on Recommendation 
B. 1 .b and the comments from the Departments of the Army and Air Force on 
Recommendation A.2 were only partially responsive. We request additional comments 
on these recommendations by December 31, 2012. 

Please provide comments that conform to the requirements of DoD Directive 7650.3. If 
possible, send a portable document format (.pdf) file containing your comments to 
audfmr@dodig.mil. Copies of your comments must have the actual signature of the 
authorizing official for your organization. We are unable to accept the /Signed/ symbol 
in place of the actual signature. If you arrange to send classified comments 
electronically, you must send them over the SECRET Internet Protocol Router Network 
(SIPRNET). 

We appreciate the courtesies extended to the staff. Please direct questions to me at 
(703) 604-8938. 



pUJL_X 


v/ 




Richard B. Vasquez, CPA 
Acting Assistant Inspector General 
Financial Management and Reporting 



Report No. DODIG-2013-027 (Project No. D2012-D000FI-0118.000) 


November 30, 2012 



Results in Brief: DoD Generally Effective at 
Correcting Causes of Antideficiency Act 
Violations in Military Personnel Accounts, 
But Vulnerabilities Remain 


What We Did 

We determined whether DoD developed and 
implemented effective controls to prevent future 
Antideficiency Act (ADA) violations in the 
Military Personnel (MILPERS) accounts. This 
audit was required by Section 8109 of the 
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2012. 

What We Found 

The Military Departments were generally 
effective in implementing and sustaining 
corrective actions for the nine MILPERS ADA 
violations, totaling $541.9 million, reported 
since October 1, 2002. Specifically, the Under 
Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief 
Financial Officer, DoD (USD[C]/CFO) and the 
Military Department’s Assistant Secretaries for 
Financial Management and Comptroller 
(Comptroller) personnel provided adequate 
support to substantiate that 36 of 44 corrective 
actions were implemented and sustained. 
However, in four of the nine violations, Anny 
and Navy Comptroller personnel could not 
demonstrate that they had completed and 
sustained eight corrective actions, including 
three actions still in process. This occurred 
because DoD had not established sufficient 
controls to ensure that required corrective 
actions in MILPERS ADA violation reports 
were properly implemented, sustained, and 
documented. As a result, DoD remained 
vulnerable to future MILPERS ADA violations. 

Anny and Navy Comptroller personnel did not 
assess the adequacy of control procedures 
established for managing centrally managed 


allotments (CMAs). This occurred because 
Army personnel did not recognize this 
requirement before FY 2012, and Navy 
personnel did not understand that the MILPERS 
accounts were covered by this requirement. As 
a result, the Army and Navy had limited 
assurance that controls will prevent future 
MILPERS ADA violations and they have not 
justified the continued operation of MILPERS 
accounts as CMAs. 

What We Recommend 

The USD(C)/CFO should require the Military 
Departments to report the status of all 
unimplemented corrective actions and update 
the DoD Financial Management Regulation to 
clarify the definition of a CMA and require the 
Military Departments to provide written 
assurance of their annual review of CMAs to the 
USD(C)/CFO. 

We recommend that the Assistant Secretaries of 
the Army, Navy, and Air Force (Financial 
Management and Comptroller) establish 
procedures to document corrective actions 
taken. The Navy should also identify all its 
CMAs and begin performing and documenting 
annual reviews. 

Management Comments and 
Our Response 

Comments from the Navy were responsive. 
Comments from the USD(C)/CFO, Anny, and 
Air Force were partially responsive. We request 
additional comments. Please see the 
recommendations table on the back of this page. 


l 



Report No. DODIG-2013-027 (Project No. D2012-D000FI-0118.000) November 30, 2012 

Recommendations Table 


Management 

Recommendations 
Requiring Comment 

No Additional Comments 
Required 

Under Secretary of Defense 
(Comptroller)/Chief F inancial 
Officer 

B.l.b 

A.l, B.l.a 

Assistant Secretary of the Army 
(Financial Management and 
Comptroller) 

A.2 


Assistant Secretary of the Navy 
(Financial Management and 
Comptroller) 


A.2, B.2 

Assistant Secretary of the Air 

Force (Financial Management 
and Comptroller) 

A.2 



Please provide comments by December 31, 2012. 




Table of Contents 


Introduction 1 

Objective 1 

Background 1 

Review of Internal Controls 5 

Finding A. DoD Was Generally Effective In Implementing and 

Sustaining ADA Violation Corrective Actions 6 

General Categories for Numerous Causes of Violations 6 

Military Departments Implemented and Sustained Most Corrective Actions 7 
Reducing Vulnerability to Future ADA Violations Requires Follow-up 

and Documentation of Corrective Actions 10 

Completing Remaining Corrective Actions Should Take Priority 

Over Seeking Congressional Action 11 

Management Comments on the Finding and Our Response 11 

Recommendations, Management Comments, and Our Response 13 

Finding B. Army and Navy Did Not Complete Annual Reviews 

of the Military Personnel Accounts 15 

Required Reviews of Centrally Managed Allotments 15 

Army and Navy Did Not Comply with the Annual CMA Review Requirement 16 
DoD Financial Management Regulation Did Not Require Reporting to 

USD(C)/CFO 17 

Management Comments on the Finding and Our Response 18 

Recommendations, Management Comments, and Our Response 18 

Appendices 

A. Scope and Methodology 20 

B. Prior Coverage 21 

C. Antideficiency Act Summaries 23 

Management Comments 

Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, DoD 34 

Department of the Anny 36 

Department of the Navy 38 

Department of the Air Force 40 




Introduction 

Objective 

The audit objective was to determine whether DoD developed and implemented effective 
controls to prevent future Antideficiency Act (ADA) violations in the Military Personnel 
(MILPERS) accounts. Specifically, we detennined whether DoD implemented the 
corrective actions in prior reports and investigations concluded in the last 10 years that 
identified ADA violations of the MILPERS accounts and whether DoD maintained its 
process improvements to prevent future ADA violations. This audit was required by the 
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2012 (the Act). See Appendix A for a discussion of 
the scope and methodology and Appendix B for prior coverage related to the objectives. 

Background 

The office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, DoD 
(USD[C]/CFO) submitted proposals for FYs 2012 and 2013 to the House and Senate 
Appropriations Committees that requested the authority to extend 2 percent of each 
MILPERS appropriation for obligation for an additional year. USD(C)/CFO personnel 
stated in their proposal that this would reduce the rate of MILPERS ADA violations by 
allowing the Military Departments more flexibility for unidentified or underestimated 
requirements that occurred after a MILPERS appropriation was no longer available for 
new obligations. 

As a result of interest in this request, Section 8109 of the Act required the following: 

The Inspector General of the Department of Defense shall conduct a review of 
Antideficiency Act violations and their causes in the Department of Defense Military 
Personnel accounts. Based on the findings of the review, the Inspector General shall 
submit to the congressional defense committees a report containing the results of the 
review and recommendations for corrective actions to be implemented. 

Appropriations and Budget Authority 

An appropriation is a provision of legal authority that permits Federal agencies to incur 
obligations 1 and to make payments out of the U.S. Treasury for a specified purpose. An 
appropriation usually follows enactment of authorizing legislation by Congress and is the 
most common means of providing budget authority. Appropriations also represent 
limitations of amounts and the purpose for which agencies may obligate during the time 
period specified in the respective appropriation acts. 

Following the authorizing legislation, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) then 
apportions the funds to agencies. This means that OMB makes distributions of amounts 
available for obligation in an appropriation into amounts available for specified time 


'An obligation is a binding agreement that will result in outlays, immediately or in the future. Budgetary 
resources must be available before obligations can be incurred legally. 


1 



periods, programs, activities, or projects. An apportionment may be further subdivided 
by an agency into allotments, suballotments, allowances, and allocations. Allotments are 
subdivisions of apportionments that are made by the heads of agencies. Suballotments 
are subdivisions of allotments while allowances and allocations are subdivisions of 
suballotments. 

When Congress appropriates budget authority, it sets the period of availability for new 
obligations of the budget authority and the period normally is specified in the law 
providing the budget authority. 

• Annual budget authority refers to budget authority that is available for obligation 
for one fiscal year or less. 

• Multi-year budget authority is available for obligation for a specified period of 
time in excess of one fiscal year. 

• No-year budget authority is an appropriation which is available for obligation 
until all funds have been expended. 

Centrally Managed Allotments 

Centrally managed allotments (CMAs) are established to finance activities when 
centralized funding controls are more practical for the appropriation. Under centralized 
fund control, fund allowances, allotments, commitment records, and fiduciary 
responsibility for the funds are maintained and controlled by a single funds holder, such 
as the Director of Resource Management /Comptroller. In the event of an ADA 
violation, the Director of Resource Management /Comptroller would be held accountable 
for the ADA violation. 

By contrast, under decentralized fund control, funds are distributed to other organizations 
and these organizations then have fiduciary responsibility for the funds received. In the 
event of an ADA violation, the funds holder of the allocation, suballocation, or other 
subdivision of funds may be held accountable. 

DoD Financial Management Regulation (DoD FMR) volume 14, chapter 1, 
“Administrative Control of Funds,” January 2009, requires that the head of each DoD 
Component review its CMAs annually to determine whether its operation should be 
continued. The annual review must include an evaluation of the adequacy of control 
procedures established to prevent ADA violations. 

Military Personnel Accounts 

MILPERS accounts are annual appropriations that fund military member pay and 
allowances, recruiting and retention incentives, subsistence-in-kind (food rations), 
pennanent change of station (PCS) costs, death gratuities, unemployment compensation 
benefits, Reserve Officer Training Corps, and Cadet stipends. Most of the MILPERS 
accounts are centrally managed. 

MILPERS accounts consist of 10 separate annual appropriations. The Army and the Air 
Force each have three appropriations (Active, Reserve, and National Guard) while the 


2 



Navy and Marine Corps each have two appropriations (Active and Reserve). 
Appropriations are broken down into categories, called Budget Activities (BAs), which 
identify the purposes, projects, or types of activities financed by the appropriation. There 
are six BAs within the Active MILPERS accounts. 

• BA 1 - Pay and Allowances of Officers 

• BA 2 - Pay and Allowances of Enlisted 

• BA 3 - Pay and Allowance of Cadets 

• BA 4 - Subsistence of Enlisted Personnel 

• BA 5 - PCS 

• BA 6 - Other MILPERS Cost 

The Reserve and National Guard components of the Military Services use a single BA, 
Unit and Individual Training, to manage all of their funding. 

There is minimal discretionary spending within the MILPERS accounts. More than 
90 percent of the annual MILPERS accounts is required for pay and benefits to military 
service members, and the funds must be paid according to the number of service 
members. Some PCS costs, including the cost of storage of family household goods 
(sometimes for lengthy periods) are difficult to estimate. This creates a unique 
end-of-year budgeting and expenditure execution challenge for DoD. 

Antideficiency Act 

The ADA consists of provisions of law designed to enforce the Constitutional authority 
of Congress over funding the government. The ADA has a number of restrictions, 
including the following laws prohibiting obligations and expenditures in excess of an 
appropriation or before an appropriation is made. 

• An employee of the United States government may not authorize a payment or an 
obligation exceeding an apportionment or amount pennitted by regulation of 
administrative control of funds. (Section 1517, Title 31, United States Code) 

• An employee of the United States government may not authorize a payment or an 
obligation exceeding an amount available in an appropriation.. .before an 
appropriation is made. (Section 1341, Title 31, United States Code) 

Potential ADA violations must be investigated, in accordance with DoD FMR, 
volume 14. If an ADA violation is suspected, a preliminary review must be completed 
by the agency. Further, if the preliminary review concludes that an ADA violation likely 
occurred, a fonnal investigation must also be completed. The responsible Military 
Department must report the results of the fonnal investigation to the USD(C)/CFO, 
which then reports all the relevant facts and actions for actual ADA violations to the 
President and Congress in accordance with Section 1351, Title 31, United States Code. 


3 




Funds Control Annual Report 

DoD FMR, volume 14, chapter 1, paragraph 010211, states that each DoD Component 
must conduct an annual evaluation of its overall administrative funds control processes 
and the processing of ADA violations. 

The evaluation must include: 

• descriptions of improvements of the effectiveness of internal controls over 
appropriations and funds, 

• a status report of the number of key fund control personnel identified and trained, 

• descriptions of improvements in compliance with the ADA, and 

• the identification of lessons learned from the investigation of ADA violations and 
implementation of appropriate corrective actions to preclude the reoccurrence of 
ADA violations. 

Universe of MILPERS ADA Violations 

Over the past 10 years, there were nine closed ADA violation cases involving the 
MILPERS accounts. Table 1 lists the nine MILPERS ADA cases, valued at 
$541.9 million, reported in the last 10 years. 


Table 1. MILPERS ADA Violations 


Military 

Department 

Case 

Number 

Fiscal Year(s) 
of Violation 

Dollar Value 

Case Closed 

Navy 

03-01 

2002 

$21,800,000 

August 2005 

Anny 

04-07 

1995-1997 * 

521,790 

April 2007 

Anny 

04-12 

2004 

30,000 

April 2007 

Anny 

05-03 

2001 

25,000,743 

August 2007 

Anny 

06-09 

2005 

59,046,000 

September 2007 

Air Force 

09-03 

2005 

87,535,000 

December 2010 

Anny 

10-02 

2008 

155,000,000 

June 2012 

Navy 

10-03 

2008 

183,241,112 

March 2011 

Air Force 

10-06 

2009 

9,729,552 

February 2012 

Total 



$541,904,197 


*Although the formal case for this MILPERS ADA violation was opened in December 2002, the events 
that generated the case actually occurred in FYs 1995 through 1997. 


See Appendix C for a summary of each violation. The Army also had one potential 
MILPERS ADA violation under formal investigation. As of September 24, 2012, Army 
Comptroller personnel were preparing the formal report for Army Case 11-07. This was 
a potential ADA violation in the FY 2005 MILPERS, Anny appropriation. The 
estimated dollar value of the potential violation is $130,280,000. 

Table 2 identifies the impact of the 2 percent proposed authority for each of the Military 
Departments for the past 5 fiscal years. This authority would significantly exceed the 
financial impact for each of the ADA violations as listed in Table 1. For example, the 


4 




Air Force violation in FY 2009 was $9.7 million; however, 2 percent of the Air Force 
appropriations for FY 2009 would have been $616.6 million, which is significantly 
greater than the dollar value of the ADA violation. 

Table 2. 2 Percent of Annual MILPERS Appropriation (in millions) 


Military 

Service" 

FY 2007 

FY 2008 

FY 2009 

FY 2010 

FY 2011 

Anny 

$768.7 

$1,100.7 

$1,217.0 

$1,278.7 

$1,309.5 

Navy 

414.9 

521.5 

551.2 

572.5 ’ 

584.2 

Air Force 

479.3" 

590.8 

616.6 

648.0 

674.1 

Marine Corps 

171.8 ' 

254.1 

278.6 ~ 

284.5 ' 

292.0 

Total 

$1,834.7 

$2,467.1 

$2,663.4 

$2,783.7 

$2,859.8 


*Appropriations for each Military Service are combined in this table. Totals for the Army and Air Force 
include Active, Reserve, and National Guard appropriated amounts. Totals for Navy and Marine Corps 
include Active and Reserve appropriated amounts. 

Review of Internal Controls 

DoD Instruction 5010.40, “Managers’ Internal Control Program (MICP) Procedures,” 
July 29, 2010, requires DoD organizations to implement a comprehensive system of 
internal controls that provides reasonable assurance that programs are operating as 
intended and to evaluate the effectiveness of the controls. We identified internal control 
weaknesses in the reporting of unimplemented corrective actions for MILPERS ADA 
violations and procedures for maintaining records documenting corrective actions taken. 
In addition. Army and Navy personnel did not annually assess the adequacy of control 
procedures established for managing CMAs. We will provide a copy of the report to the 
senior official responsible for internal controls in the Department of the Army, 
Department of the Navy, and Department of the Air Force. 


5 




Finding A. DoD Was Generally Effective In 
Implementing and Sustaining ADA Violation 
Corrective Actions 

The Military Departments were generally effective in implementing and sustaining the 
corrective actions for nine MILPERS ADA violations, totaling $541.9 million, reported 
since October 1, 2002. Specifically, USD(C)/CFO and the Military Department’s 
Assistant Secretaries for Financial Management and Comptroller (Comptroller) 
personnel 2 provided adequate support to substantiate that 36 of 44 corrective actions were 
implemented and sustained. However, in four of the nine MIFPERS ADA violation 
cases, Army and Navy Comptroller personnel could not demonstrate that they had 
completed and sustained eight corrective actions, which included three corrective actions 
still in process. This occurred because USD(C)/CFO and Military Department 
Comptroller personnel had not established sufficient controls to ensure that the required 
corrective actions in the MIFPERS ADA violation reports were properly implemented, 
sustained, and documented. The absence of a method for tracking prior corrective 
actions made it difficult for the Military Department Comptroller personnel to provide 
evidence that they had taken and sustained all of the corrective actions. As a result, DoD 
remained vulnerable to future MIFPERS ADA violations. 

General Categories for Numerous Causes of Violations 

The ADA violation reports documenting the formal ADA investigations identified 
numerous causes for the nine MIFPERS ADA violations, but there were several common 
reasons for the violations. We identified three general categories of causes. As shown in 
Table 3, most ADA violations resulted from a failure to follow established procedures or 
internal control weaknesses. Inadequate cost estimating was a factor in only three of the 
nine MIFPERS ADA violations. 


2 Within the Air Force, the Assistant Secretary for Financial Management and Comptroller has control over 
the budget, cost, manpower, and financial operations functions. However, within the Army, the Assistant 
Secretary for Financial Management and Comptroller only has control over the budget, cost, and financial 
operations functions. The manpower function is controlled by the Army’s Deputy Chief of Staff, G-l. 
Similarly, within the Navy, the Assistant Secretary for Financial Management and Comptroller only has 
control over the budget, cost, and financial operations functions. The manpower function is controlled by 
the Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Manpower and Reserve Affairs). Unless otherwise noted, reference to 
the Assistant Secretaries for Financial Management and Comptroller personnel includes all MILPERS 
functions. 


6 



Table 3. Categories of MILPERS ADA Violations 


Military 

Department 

Case 

Number 

Internal 

Control 

Weakness 

Inadequate 

Cost 

Estimating 

Failure to 
Follow 
Established 
Procedures 

Navy 

03-01 

X 

x 

X 

Anny 

04-07 

X 


X 

Anny 

04-12 



X 

Anny 

05-03 



X 

Anny 

06-09 


r x 

X 

Air Force 

09-03 

P X 


X 

Anny 

10-02 

X 

X 


Navy 

10-03 

X 



Air Force 

10-06 

X 


X 


The MILPERS ADA violation reports also identified the corrective actions in response to 
the causes for the individual violations. DoD FMR, volume 14, chapter 7, 
“Antideficiency Act Report,” November 2010, requires these reports to identify the 
specific actions to be completed to prevent similar violations in the future. The 
corrective actions are to be detailed enough in order to evaluate the adequacy of the 
corrective actions required by the ADA investigation. This includes improvement of 
overall and specific policies, procedures, and processes used; newly established or 
improved internal procedures; and assurances that a similar violation would not occur in 
the future. Enclosures to ADA violation reports must show documentation of corrective 
actions taken or to be completed. 

Military Departments Implemented and Sustained Most 
Corrective Actions 

Military Departments implemented and 
sustained most of the corrective actions 
identified in the nine MILPERS ADA violation 
reports issued since October 1, 2002. Based on 
information in the ADA violation reports, 
additional documents provided to us, and our 
discussions with Military Department 
personnel, we detennined whether the 

corrective actions identified in the reports had been completed and whether there was 
evidence indicating that the corrective actions were still in place. Table 4 identifies the 
status of all corrective actions taken on the nine MILPERS ADA violations. 


Military Departments 
implemented and sustained most 
of the corrective actions 
identified in the nine MILPERS 
ADA violation reports issued 
since October 1, 2002. 


7 




Table 4. Status of MILPERS ADA Violation Corrective Actions 


Military 

Department 

Case 

Number 

Total 

Corrective 

Actions 

Corrective 

Actions 

Completed 

and 

Sustained 

Evidence of 
Corrective 
Action 

Was 

Inadequate 

Corrective 

Actions 

Still In 
Process 

Navy 

03-01 

9 

9 

0 

0 

Army 

04-07 

5 

3 

2 

0 

Army 

04-12 

1 

1 

0 

0 

Army 

05-03 

3 

2 

1 

0 

Army 

06-09 

4 

4 

0 

0 

Air Force 

09-03 

5 

5 

0 

0 

Army 

10-02 

12 

8 

2 

2 

Navy 

10-03 

4 

3 

0 

1 

Air Force 

10-06 

1 

1 

0 

0 

Total 


44 

36 

5 

3 


Although many corrective actions had been taken by Military Department personnel in 
response to the MILPERS ADA violations, evidence did not exist to substantiate that 
they had taken or sustained corrective actions related to four of the nine MILPERS ADA 
violations. 

Corrective Actions Completed and Sustained 

Military Department Comptroller personnel fully completed and sustained the corrective 
actions identified in ADA violation reports for five of the nine MILPERS ADA violation 
cases. For example, Air Force Case 09-03 had five corrective actions listed in the report. 
Air Force Comptroller personnel provided supporting documentation showing that they 
had completed and sustained all the corrective actions listed in the ADA violation report. 
To illustrate, the inexperience of the staff was one of the causes contributing to the ADA 
violation and they did not understand ADA implications of procedures used to obligate 
PCS moves. The corrective action identified required additional training for staff who 
managed the unique aspects of the MILPERS processes. Air Force Comptroller 
personnel provided descriptions of the additional required training courses, as well as 
evidence that this training had been implemented and was on going. 


8 




Some Corrective Actions Evidence Was Inadequate 

Army Comptroller personnel could not demonstrate that they properly implemented or 
sustained 5 of 20 corrective actions identified in three ADA violation reports. For 
example, the ADA violation report for Army Case 
05-03 indicated that the Anny National Guard 
Comptroller Personnel responsible for calculating 
Military Retirement Trust Fund contributions had 
not received training on how to make the 
calculations. Anny National Guard Comptroller 
personnel provided us documentation that indicated 
that training had been provided to individuals responsible for calculating contributions to 
the Military Retirement Trust Fund in 2007. However, they could not demonstrate the 
current personnel responsible for calculating contributions were trained after 2007. 

Corrective Actions Still In Process 

Three corrective actions related to two MILPERS ADA violations are still in process. 

For example, in Navy Case 10-03, one of the corrective actions was the development and 
implementation of a future system that met the requirements outlined for the Defense 
Integrated Military Human Resources System. With the cancelation of the Defense 
Integrated Military Human Resources System in February 2010, each Department was 
required to develop its own integrated personnel and military pay enterprise system 
solution. The Integrated Personnel and Pay System-Navy is intended to be the Navy’s 
integrated pay and personnel system but it is not scheduled for completion until FY 2016. 

In addition, Anny Case 10-02 identified an internal control weakness in the management 
of its Active MILPERS account. As a result, Anny personnel created a Lean Six Sigma 
project to help correct the internal control weakness by identifying a better way to record 
PCS moves. There are two on going tasks for this Lean Six Sigma project which, 
according to Anny Comptroller personnel, will not be completed until March 2014. 

Until all identified conective actions are taken, DoD remains vulnerable to future 
MILPERS ADA violations. 


Army Comptroller personnel 
could not demonstrate that 
they properly implemented or 
sustained 5 of 20 corrective 
actions identified in three ADA 
violation reports. 


9 




Reducing Vulnerability to Future ADA Violations 
Requires Follow-up and Documentation of 
Corrective Actions 

DoD had not established sufficient controls to ensure that the corrective actions identified 
in ADA violation reports were implemented, sustained, and documented. DoD FMR, 

volume 14, chapter 1, requires that each DoD 
Component annually conduct an evaluation of its 
overall administrative funds control processes. The 
evaluation must identify lessons learned for the 
investigation of ADA violations and address actions 
to implement appropriate corrective actions to 
preclude the reoccurrence of ADA violations. Each of the Military Departments prepared 
the reports for FY 2012. Although the Military Departments reported on the corrective 
actions taken in regards to new ADA violations, none of the evaluation reports identified 
the status of corrective actions in previous MILPERS ADA violation reports. The DoD 
FMR did not require them to report in subsequent reports on the status of the 
unimplemented corrective actions as a part of the evaluation. In addition, the Military 
Departments’ Comptroller personnel did not maintain or track records to prove that they 
had taken corrective actions in response to MILPERS ADA violation reports. None of 
the Military Departments had a centralized location for infonnation related to prior ADA 
investigations and there were often numerous points of contact for a single case. One 
manager who worked with ADA investigations told us that she had never been asked to 
follow up on the status of a completed investigation. By comparison, she stated that 
recommendations from audit reports were centrally monitored and tracked. 

DoD FMR, volume 14, chapter 1, also requires that each DoD Component annually 
report on its annual review that shows management’s assessment of the adequacy of 
control procedures established in each of its CMAs to prevent ADA violations and justify 
the continued use of the CMA as a fund controls approach. Only the Air Force prepared 
these annual reports. (See Finding B for more details.) 

DoD should strengthen the reporting requirements in DoD FMR, volume 14, chapter 1, 
and require the Military Departments to monitor the status of unimplemented corrective 
actions and report on the status of unimplemented corrective actions in the annual report 
evaluating funds control processes until completion to ensure that they properly 
implemented and sustained all corrective actions taken to correct ADA violations. In 
addition, the Military Departments should establish procedures to maintain records 
documenting corrective actions taken for each ADA violation. Consistent with National 
Archives and Records Administration records retention guidance, records should be 
maintained for at least 6 years and 3 months after either the date of the ADA violation 
report to the President, or the date of the last implemented corrective action for an ADA 
violation, whichever is the later date. 


None of the evaluation 
reports identified the status 
of corrective actions in 
previous MILPERS ADA 
violation reports. 


10 




Completing Remaining Corrective Actions Should Take 
Priority Over Seeking Congressional Action 

DoD officials have given much attention to managing MILPERS accounts. In addition to 
the evidence provided to support corrective actions taken on the nine MILPERS ADA 
violations, Military Department personnel informed us of other actions that had been 
taken or were planned to better manage the MILPERS accounts. For example, the 
Military Departments are developing integrated personnel and pay systems, which will be 
key to tracking and reporting MILPERS expenditures in a more timely manner and to 

3 

achieving better control over the MILPERS accounts after they are implemented. 

The last MILPERS ADA violation reported by the Anny and Navy involved their 
FY 2008 MILPERS accounts, and the last MILPERS ADA violation reported by the Air 
Force involved the FY 2009 Air National Guard account. However, as a result of the 
inconsistent oversight of the implementation and sustainment of the corrective actions 
identified in previous MILPERS ADA violations, DoD remained vulnerable to future 
ADA violations. Completion of the remaining corrective actions is needed before 
seeking additional flexibility in managing the MILPERS accounts. 

Management Comments on the Finding and 
Our Response 

Department of the Army Comments 

The Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Anny (Financial Operations) provided comments 
on the finding discussion. He stated that the Anny had only one outstanding conective 
action associated with PCS moves. He referenced a PCS Lean Six Sigma project that 
will resolve three material weaknesses for the Anny that are common across DoD. In 
addition, the Deputy Assistant Secretary provided additional comments regarding the 
corrective actions for Army Cases 05-03 and 10-02, for which we reported that we did 
not receive adequate supporting documentation. For Anny Case 05-03, he stated that the 
Army National Guard did not provide additional training because of a change to the 
process after FY 2007 in the calculations of the Military Retirement Trust Fund 
contributions. Consequently, there was no ADA risk in this area because payments are 
made at the start of each fiscal year based on the budgeted amount. For Army Case 
10-02, he stated that the Funds Control Module was no longer a material part of 
managing the MILPERS, Anny appropriation. 

The Deputy Assistant Secretary also stated that the Army strongly believes that 
automation is the key to improving controls in a meaningful way. He stated that annually 
assessing internal controls is an important management function that provides continued 


3 The Army, Navy, and Air Force are developing Enterprise Resource Planning systems to replace the 
Defense Integrated Military Human Resources System that was initiated in 1998 and discontinued in 2010. 
The replacement Enterprise Resource Planning systems are not expected to be fully deployed until 2017. 


11 



benefit; however, the challenges that MILPERS appropriation managers face 
fundamentally revolve around system shortcomings rather than people or process 
challenges. 

Our Response 

In our review of the ADA violation reports for the nine MILPERS violations, we 
considered each corrective action listed by the Investigating Officers as a separate 
corrective action. The ADA violation report for Army Case 10-02 listed two separate 
corrective actions related to the PCS Lean Six Sigma project and, as a result, we treated 
each corrective action separately. We also contacted and met with Army personnel on 
several occasions to determine the status of corrective actions for the ADA violations, but 
they did not provide the supporting documentation that we requested related to use of the 
Funds Control Module. 

For Army Case 05-03, the corrective action stated that comprehensive training was 
provided to the three individuals responsible for calculating the Military Retirement Trust 
Fund contributions, but we did not receive supporting documents to substantiate that the 
training had been conducted after FY 2007. During the audit, the Anny did not provide 
us any infonnation stating that the change in process as described in the Army comments 
eliminated the need for this training. We agree that the change in business process would 
minimize the risk of ADA violations and reduce the need for comprehensive 
training. However, the Anny did not provide supportable evidence of the process change 
or substantiate that any training had been conducted after FY 2007. The challenge of 
receiving the requested corrective action information for these two ADA violations 
supports the need for the Military Departments to establish procedures to maintain 
records documenting the conective actions for each ADA violation 
(Recommendation A. 1). The circumstances that resulted in changes in operations 
affecting MILPERS funds and internal control processes should be identified and 
assessed in annual evaluations. 

We agree that the Army’s continued progress toward automation of its financial 
processes is key to improving controls in a meaningful way and to the Army’s 
advancement toward full auditability of its financial statements. We acknowledge in the 
finding that the Military Departments are developing integrated personnel and pay 
systems, which will be key to tracking and reporting MILPERS expenditures in a more 
timely manner and to achieving better control over the MILPERS accounts after they are 
implemented. We acknowledge that there are other system challenges, that once 
overcome, will improve management of the MILPERS appropriations. 

Department of the Navy Comments 

The Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management and Comptroller) provided 
comments on the finding discussion. She stated that the Navy remained concerned about 
the risk of future ADA violations in the MILPERS accounts. The Assistant Secretary 
stated that the Navy will implement the best estimating techniques and strong internal 
controls, but these actions may not stop an ADA violation in a MILPERS account 
because of the unique nature of the account. She stated that the MILPERS accounts do 


12 



not have the same execution flexibility as other accounts, which contributes to the high 
risk of ADA violations. Further, she stated that the report should focus on these concerns 
and provide viable alternatives to Congress to reduce the risk of future MILPERS ADA 
violations. 

Our Response 

We recognize that the MILPERS appropriations do not have the same operational 
flexibility as most DoD appropriations. However, reducing the risk of future ADA 
violations in the MILPERS appropriations depends principally on implementing strong 
automated procedures and controls over establishing financial obligations as well as the 
prompt and accurate recording and reporting of execution information. More consistent 
oversight of the implementation and sustainment of the corrective actions identified in 
previous MILPERS ADA violations would reduce DoD vulnerability to future ADA 
violations. Senior DoD officials are also responsible for conducting systematic and 
meaningful evaluations of their administrative funds control processes. We considered 
the DoD proposal that requested the authority to extend 2 percent of each MILPERS 
appropriation for funds obligation for an additional year, but we did not attempt to 
identify possible alternatives to this proposal that Congress could consider to further 
reduce the risk of future MILPERS ADA violations. 

Recommendations, Management Comments, and 
Our Response 

A.l, We recommend that the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief 
Financial Officer, DoD, revise DoD Regulation 7000.14-R, “DoD Financial 
Management Regulation” (DoD FMR), volume 14, chapter 1, January 2009, to 
require the Military Departments to monitor the status of unimplemented corrective 
actions and report on the status of unimplemented corrective actions in the annual 
report evaluating funds control processes to ensure that they properly implemented 
and sustained all corrective actions taken to correct ADA violations. 

USD(C)/CFO Comments 

The Deputy Chief Financial Officer, responding on behalf of the USD(C)/CFO, agreed 
and stated that DoD FMR, volume 14, chapter 1, would be revised in the next scheduled 
update to include a requirement for the Military Departments to monitor the status of 
unimplemented corrective actions and report the status as a part of the annual review of 
funds and internal control processes. 

Our Response 

Comments from the Deputy Chief Financial Officer were responsive, and the actions met 
the intent of the recommendation. 

A.2. We recommend that the Assistant Secretaries of the Army, Navy, and Air 
Force (Financial Management and Comptroller) establish procedures to maintain 
records documenting corrective actions taken for each ADA violation for at least 


13 



6 years and 3 months subsequent to either the date of the ADA report to the 
President or the date of the last implemented corrective action for an ADA violation, 
whichever is the later date. 

Department of the Army Comments 

The Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Anny (Financial Operations), responding on 
behalf of the Assistant Secretary of the Army (Financial Management and Comptroller), 
agreed and stated that, effective immediately, the Army would begin tracking and 
sustaining corrective actions for all open formal ADA investigations that will close in 
FY 2013 and beyond. He also stated that fund holders at activities where the ADA 
violations occurred will be responsible for providing recurring status updates that will be 
reported to the office of the USD(C)/CFO. 

Our Response 

Comments from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Army (Financial Operations) were 
partially responsive. The comments did not address whether the Army would establish 
procedures to maintain records documenting corrective actions taken for each ADA 
violation. We request that the Anny provide comments on the final report by 
December 31, 2012. 

Department of the Navy Comments 

The Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management and Comptroller) agreed 
and stated that the Navy would retain records documenting actions taken for each ADA 
violation in accordance with National Archives and Records Administration records 
retention guidance. 

Our Response 

Comments from the Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management and 
Comptroller) were responsive, and the actions met the intent of the recommendation. 

Department of the Air Force Comments 

The Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Air Force Financial Operations (Financial 
Management), responding on behalf of the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Financial 
Management and Comptroller), agreed and stated that her office would track corrective 
actions for reportable ADA violations and work with the office of the USD(C)/CFO and 
the other Services to establish procedures and a standard format to report on corrective 
actions. 

Our Response 

The comments from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Air Force Financial Operations 
(Financial Management) were partially responsive. The comments did not address 
whether the Air Force would establish procedures to maintain records documenting 
corrective actions taken for each ADA violation. We request that the Air Force provide 
comments on the final report by December 31, 2012. 


14 



Finding B. Army and Navy Did Not Complete 
Annual Reviews of the Military Personnel 
Accounts 

The Army and Navy Comptroller personnel did not annually assess the adequacy of 
control procedures established for managing their CMAs to prevent ADA violations and 
justify the continued use of the CMAs. 4 Anny Comptroller personnel did not perform 
these reviews for their MILPERS accounts and other CMAs because they failed to 
recognize the requirement that had existed since at least 1995. In June 2012, Army 
personnel identified the Army’s CMAs, including their MILPERS accounts, and initiated 
action to complete a review of control procedures. Navy Comptroller personnel did not 
complete the annual review because they did not believe that the MILPERS accounts 
were covered by the DoD FMR requirement. As a result, the Anny and Navy had limited 
assurance that controls would prevent future MILPERS ADA violations. In addition, 
they have not justified the continued operation of all MILPERS accounts as CMAs. 

Required Reviews of Centrally Managed Allotments 

DoD FMR, volume 14, chapter 1, states that the head of an operating agency may 
establish CMAs, but these allotments must be established only when it is impractical to 
administer decentralized allotments under normal operating procedures. Before approval, 
a specific determination must be made that adequate controls have been established to 
avoid over-obligating or over expending the allotment. The DoD FMR requires an 
annual review that both assesses the adequacy of control procedures established in the 
CMA to prevent ADA violations as well as to justifying the continued use of the CMA as 
a funds control approach. The DoD FMR also requires that the Military Department’s 
internal audit organization evaluate the adequacy of control procedures established to 
prevent ADA violations and recommend whether or not continued use of the CMAs is 
justified. 

The Military Departments managed the MILPERS accounts for Active component 
MILPERS costs and other centrally funded types of expenses as CMAs. The Military 
Departments managed MILPERS accounts related to Reserve and National Guard 
operations more on a decentralized basis. Table 5 shows the CMA status for each of the 
10 MILPERS appropriations, according to the Military Departments. 


4 ln addition to the MILPERS accounts, the Air Force centrally managed its foreign currency accounts. The 
Army also centrally managed foreign currency accounts as well as second destination transportation 
charges. 


15 



Table 5. CMA Status of the Military Service Components 


Military Service 

Component 

CMA 

Air Force 

Active 

Yes 

Air Force 

Reserve 

No 

Air Force 

Air National Guard 

No 

Army 

Active 

Yes 

Army 

Reserve 

No 

Army 

National Guard 

Partial 1 

Navy 

Active 

No 2 

Navy 

Reserve 

No 

Marine Corps 

Active 

No 2 

Marine Corps 

Reserve 

No 


*The Army National Guard has both CMA and decentralized funding. Most 
National Guard funds are part of the CMA but a portion is distributed to the United 
States Property and Fiscal Officer (USPFO). Each State’s USPFO is the official 
with pecuniary liability for all Federal property and funding in the possession of the 

National Guard with which the USPFO is serving. 

2 

“Navy Comptroller personnel did not believe that their MILPERS accounts 
(including the Marine Corps) were CMAs. 

Army and Navy Did Not Comply with the Annual CMA 
Review Requirement 

Prior to FY 2012, the Army had not completed annual CMA reviews. The ADA 
violation report for Army Case 10-02 identified weaknesses in managing the MILPERS 
account as a CMA. Specifically, the report stated that the Office of the Deputy Chief of 
Staff, G-l, did not take steps to properly establish the MILPERS account as a CMA as 
required by regulation and did not comply with the annual requirement to prescribe and 
document an adequate system of financial and nonfinancial controls. In response to the 
findings in the ADA violation report for Anny Case 10-02, the Assistant Secretary of the 
Anny (Financial Management and Comptroller) issued a memorandum dated January 18, 
2012, requiring that the Anny comply with the annual DoD FMR requirement. As of 
October 5, 2012, Army personnel had identified all of the Anny’s CMAs, including the 
MILPERS accounts, and were preparing the CMA packages to be provided to U.S. Army 
Audit Agency for evaluation, as required by the DoD FMR. 

Navy personnel did not complete the annual reviews for the Navy and Marine Corps 
MILPERS accounts, stating that the DoD FMR requirement specifically required a 
review of a CMA, not a “centrally managed account,” as the Navy has defined its 
MILPERS account. DoD FMR, volume 14, chapter 1, states that allocations, 
suballocations, or portions of an allocation, that are not required to be divided further 
may be treated and recorded as allotments. Office of the USD(C)/CFO personnel stated 
that the intent of the DoD FMR requirement was for all the Military Departments to 
complete the annual reviews for all CMAs including MILPERS accounts. Although we 


16 




do not agree with the Navy interpretation of DoD FMR, volume 14, chapter 1, the DoD 
FMR needs clarification to better explain the applicability of the guidance to MILPERS 
accounts. 

The Air Force adequately completed the annual CM A review requirement for the periods 
we reviewed, FYs 2010 through 2012. In its review for FY 2012, the Air Force 
concluded that the justification package for the MILPERS account demonstrated clearly 
that the fund control and management procedures established to administer its CMA 
remained intact and were adequate to preclude overobligation and over expenditure of the 
CMA. Air Force Audit Agency agreed with this assessment. 

The USD(C)/CFO should revise the DoD FMR to clarify the definition of a CMA to 
ensure that each Military Department completes the annual report for all CMAs, 
including MILPERS accounts. Navy personnel should identify all of the Navy’s CMAs 
and commence performing and documenting annual reviews of its CMAs, including the 
Navy and Marine Corps MILPERS accounts. The reviews should assess the adequacy of 
control procedures established in the CMAs to prevent ADA violations and justify the 
continued use of the accounts as a funds control procedure. 

DoD Financial Management Regulation Did Not Require 
Reporting to USD(C)/CFO 

The DoD FMR requires that the head of each operating agency complete the annual 
CMA report, but does not require providing these reports to the office of the 
USD(C)/CFO. If a Military Department 
does not comply with the requirement to 
complete this report, it may have 
increased risk of future ADA violations as 
a result of weak controls within the CMA. 

The USD(C)/CFO needs assurance that 
all the Military Departments have established required controls within the MILPERS 
account CMAs and that the justification for continuing the CMA is reasonable. 

The USD(C)/CFO should establish procedures to require that Military Department 
Comptroller personnel provide his office with written assurance of the completion of the 
annual review of CMAs, including MILPERS accounts. The report should note any 
deficiencies or material issues revealed by the review and the results of its evaluation by 
the Military Department’s internal audit organization. 


The USD(C)/CFO needs assurance that 
all the Military Departments have 
established required controls within the 
MILPERS account CMAs. 


17 




Management Comments on the Finding and 
Our Response 

Department of the Army Comments 

The Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Anny (Financial Operations) provided comments 
on the finding discussion. The Deputy Assistant provided information about Army 
assessments of internal controls for the Anny MILPERS appropriations. He stated that 
appropriation managers had been monitoring internal controls in accordance with 
Section 3512, Title 31, United States Code, “Executive Agency Accounting and Other 
Financial Management Reports and Plans;” OMB Circular No. A-123, “Management’s 
Responsibility for Internal Control;” and Anny Regulation 11-2, “Managers’ Internal 
Control Program.” The Army’s annual assessment of the effectiveness of internal 
controls for both financial and non-financial operations was done as a part of the Annual 
Statement of Assurance process. 

Our Response 

We recognize that the annual assessment of the effectiveness of internal controls provides 
meaningful information about overall operational and financial controls. However, the 
Annual Statement of Assurance does not provide the more detailed and specific analysis 
of controls that would be achieved in the annual review of centrally managed allotments. 

Recommendations, Management Comments, 
and Our Response 

B.l. We recommend that the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief 
Financial Officer, DoD, revise DoD Regulation 7000.14-R, “DoD Financial 
Management Regulation” (DoD FMR), volume 14, chapter 1, to: 

a. clarify the definition of a centrally managed allotment as it relates to 
Military Personnel accounts; and 

b. establish procedures to require that each Assistant Secretary for Financial 
Management and Comptroller provides his office with written assurance of 
completion of the annual review of centrally managed allotments, including the 
Military Personnel appropriations. 

USD(C)/CFO Comments 

The Deputy Chief Financial Officer, responding on behalf of the USD(C)/CFO, agreed 
with the recommendation and stated that DoD FMR, volume 14, chapter 1, would be 
revised in the next scheduled update to clarify the definition of a centrally managed 
allotment, which includes allotments and allocations, and require the Military 
Departments to report to the Assistant Secretary of the Military Departments (Financial 
Management and Comptroller) upon completion of the review. 


18 



Our Response 

Comments from the Deputy Chief Financial Officer were partially responsive. In 
response to Recommendation B.l.b, he stated that each Assistant Secretary of a Military 
Department (Financial Management and Comptroller) should be notified when the annual 
reviews were completed. We recommended that the USD(C)/CFO be notified so that his 
office would be aware that each Military Department completed the annual review of 
centrally managed allotments. We request that the USD(C)/CFO provide comments on 
the final report describing plans for updating the DoD FMR that would require that each 
Assistant Secretary for Financial Management and Comptroller provide the office of the 
USD(C)/CFO with written assurance of completion of the annual review of centrally 
managed allotments. 

B.2. We recommend that the Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial 
Management and Comptroller) identify all of the Navy’s centrally managed 
allotments and commence performing and documenting annual reviews of its 
centrally managed allotments, including the Navy and Marine Corps Military 
Personnel accounts. 

Department of the Navy Comments 

The Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management and Comptroller) agreed 
and stated that the Navy would comply with the direction of the office of the 
USD(C)/CFO upon implementation of Recommendation B.l. 

Our Response 

Comments from the Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management and 
Comptroller) were responsive. In response to Recommendation B.l, the Deputy Chief 
Financial Officer stated that the definition of a centrally managed account will be 
clarified and that the Military Departments will be required to report the results upon 
completion of their annual review of centrally managed accounts, which includes 
allotments and allocations. Regardless of when the DoD FMR is changed, the Navy 
should begin its review of internal controls and substantiate the continued operation of 
each of its centrally managed allotments, including the MILPERS appropriations. The 
Navy actions met the intent of the recommendations. 


19 



Appendix A. Scope and Methodology 

We conducted this performance audit from March 2012 through November 2012 in 
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards 
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to 
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. 
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and 
conclusions based on our audit objectives. 

We obtained the ADA violation reports for the nine MILPERS ADA violations that the 
Military Departments reported in FYs 2003 through 2012. We reviewed the documented 
causes of each violation for completed investigations and determined whether DoD 
implemented and sustained the required corrective actions that resulted from the causes 
of the violations. We determined whether the annual reports of CMA reviews and 
evaluations of administrative funds controls processes were completed in accordance 
with DoD FMR, volume 14, chapter 1. We met with the House Committee on 
Appropriations, Subcommittee on Defense and the Senate Committee on Appropriations, 
Subcommittee on Defense to discuss our audit approach and provide a status update. We 
also held meetings with personnel from the USD(C)/CFO and the offices of the Assistant 
Secretaries of the Army, Navy, and Air Force to obtain further details about the 
corrective actions that had been taken in response to the ADA violation reports. 

Use of Computer-Processed Data 

We did not rely on computer-processed data as a basis for developing our findings, 
conclusions, or recommendations. 

Use of Technical Assistance 

We did not use technical assistance in conducting this audit. 


20 



Appendix B. Prior Coverage 

During the last 5 years, the Government Accountability Office (GAO), the Department of 
Defense Inspector General (DOD IG), U.S. Army Audit Agency, Naval Audit Agency, 
and Air Force Audit Agency have issued 16 reports discussing MILPERS accounts. 
Unrestricted GAO reports can be accessed over the Internet at http://www.gao.gov . 
Unrestricted DOD IG reports can be accessed at http://www.dodig.mil/audit/reports . 

Unrestricted Army reports can be accessed from .mil and gao.gov domains over the 
Internet at https://www.aaa.army.mil/ . 

Naval Audit Service reports are not available over the Internet. 

Air Force Audit Agency reports can be accessed from .mil domains over the Internet at 
https://afkm.wpafb.af.mil/ASPs/CoP/OpenCoP.asp?Filter=OO-AD-01-41 by those with 
Common Access Cards. 


GAO 

GAO Report No. GAO-12-406, “The Anny Faces Significant Challenges in Achieving 
Audit Readiness for Its Military Pay,” March 2012 

GAO Report No. GAO-11-950T, “Weaknesses in Controls Over the Use of Public Funds 
and Related Improper Payments,” September 22, 2011 

GAO Memo No. B-318724, “Department of the Army-The Fiscal Year 2008 Military 
Personnel, Army Appropriation and the Antideficiency Act,” June 22, 2010 

GAO Report No. GAO-08-1063, “Improvements are Needed in Antideficiency Act 
Controls and Investigations,” September 2008 

Army 

U.S. Army Audit Agency Report No. A-2012-0079-FMF, “Controls Over the 
Unemployment Compensation Program for Ex-Service members,” March 16, 2012 

U.S. Anny Audit Agency Report No. A-2010-0143-FFM, “Follow-up Audit of FY 05 
Subsistence Charges,” July 29, 2010 

U.S. Anny Audit Agency Report No. A-2010-0071-FFP, “Follow-up Audit of Controls 
Over Leave, Overtime, and Compensatory Time by Anny Commands in Hawaii,” 

May 6, 2010 

U.S. Army Audit Agency Report No. A-2009-0171-FFF, “Processes to Pay and Recoup 
Enlistment Bonuses for the U.S. Anny Reserves,” September 30, 2009 


21 






U.S. Army Audit Agency Report No. A-2009-0118-FFF, “Processes to Pay and Recoup 
Enlistment Bonuses for the Active Anny, ODCS, G-l,” May 19, 2009 

U.S. Army Audit Agency Report No. A-2008-0108-FFM, “Miscellaneous Credits for 
Reserve Component Pay,” April 29, 2008 

Navy 

Naval Audit Service Report No. 2012-0024, “Business Process Reengineering Efforts for 
Selected Department of the Navy Business System Modernizations; Personalized 
Recruiting for Immediate and Delayed Enlistment Modernization,” March 6, 2012 

Air Force 

U.S. Air Force Audit Agency Report No. F2012-0002-FD4000, “Military Personnel 
Appropriation Man-Days,” November 22, 2011 

U.S. Air Force Audit Agency Report No. F2011-0012-FD4000, “Combat Pay and Tax 
Exclusion,” August 12, 2011 

U.S. Air Force Audit Agency Report No. F2010-0011-FBI 000, “Selected Aspects of the 
Military Personnel Appropriation Centrally Managed Allotment,” September 7, 2010 

U.S. Air Force Audit Agency Report No. F2010-0010-FD4000, “Basic Allowance For 
Subsistence/Essential Station Messing Entitlements,” September 1, 2010 

U.S. Air Force Audit Agency Report No. F2010-0007-FD4000, “Military Leave 
Program,” July 1, 2010 


22 



Appendix C. Antideficiency Act Summaries 

_ Navy Case 03-01 _ 


Violation 

This violation occurred because the Marine Corps overdisbursed the MILPERS Marine 

Corps appropriation during FY 2002. The Marine Corps was authorized to mobilize up to 
7,500 reservists after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, but because of complexities 
associated with the increased workload and no accurate process for tracing the costs, the 
Marine Corps overdisbursed its MILPERS appropriation. The violation totaled $21,800,000 
and resulted in a violation of Title 31, United States Code, Section 1341(a). 

Causes 

• The September 11 event caused strain on the appropriation due to a marked increase in 
workload and complexity when the Marine Corps was ordered to mobilize a large 
number of Marine Reservists. 

• The Deputy Commandant for Manpower and Reserve Affairs staff and financial staff 
had difficulty in reaching an agreement on the number of reservists to mobilize, how 
they were to be used, and the effect on the MILPERS account. 

• The Marine Corps’ established procedures were not followed. 

• The inability to determine what data was reflected in the obligation plans and 
expenditure data contributed to the problems in reconciling the MILPERS account. 

• A pay grade matrix for the mobilized reserve strength was not provided until 

August 2002, making it impossible to verify the accuracy of the Marine Corps Total 

Force System data. 

Corrective 

Actions 

Taken and 
Sustained 

• The Marine Corps established a schedule for reconciling the Reserve Order Writing 
System. 

• Deputy Commandant for Manpower and Reserve Affairs issues daily reports on the 
number of Marines mobilized and on stop-loss. 

• The Marine Corps combined active and mobilized reservists in manpower end-strength 
and financial phasing plans. 

• Quarterly funds status briefings are prepared and presented at the three star level with 
Deputy Commandant for Programs and Resources and Deputy Commandant for 
Manpower and Reserve Affairs. The Assistant Deputy Commandant for Programs and 
Resources is briefed weekly or as required. 

• Assigned two Presidential Management Fellows and one Navy Financial Management 
Intern to the Manpower Personnel Branch. 

• The Marine Corps assigned a junior officer (major) with a financial management 
background and a strong field disbursing experience to develop and implement improved 
automated system reporting procedures. 

• The Marine Corps established a budget execution analyst position. 

• The Marine Corps developed automated reports from the Marine Corps Total Force 
System. 

• Defense Finance and Accounting Service Kansas City developed an automated interface 
between the Marine Corps Total Force System and Standard Accounting, Budgeting, and 
Reporting System. 


23 






Navy Case 03-01 (continued) 


Evidence of 
Corrective 
Action was 
Inadequate 

None 

Corrective 
Actions Still 
In Process 

None 


24 




Army Case 04-07 


Violation 

This violation occurred in FYs 1995 through 1997 in the National Guard, Army 
appropriations and totaled $521,790.86. The U.S. Virgin Islands Army National Guard 
performed numerous missions during hurricane support and relief efforts, but did not bill 
the Territory of the Virgin Islands to obtain reimbursement. The Territory fully 
reimbursed these expenditures in FY 2006; however, the reimbursement was not credited 
to the affected appropriations because the appropriations had canceled. This situation 
resulted in a violation of Title 31, United States Code, Section 1341(a). 

Cause 

The National Guard Bureau concluded there was a lack of proper documentation and 
believed the U.S. Virgin Islands Army National Guard should be held accountable for the 
misuse of Federal funds. 

Corrective 
Actions 
Taken and 
Sustained 

• The Territory of the Virgin Islands provided the reimbursement. 

• The National Guard Bureau is conducting normal inspections as scheduled by the 
appropriate directorates. 

• The National Guard Bureau made changes to the Safety Aviation Program, and a new 
Safety Aviation Officer has been assigned to ensure all flights and activities are 
conducted according to Army Regulation and Standard Operating Procedures. 

Evidence 

of 

Corrective 
Action was 
Inadequate 

• Procedures for the loan of Federal materiel are being completed in accordance with 
the Army Regulation 700-131. Army National Guard Comptroller personnel did not 
provide information to show the corrective action occurred. 

• Proper use of the armories is being monitored. Although the Army National Guard 
Comptroller personnel provided information showing personnel were trained, they 
could not show that armories were monitored. 

Corrective 

Actions 

Still In 
Process 

None 


Our assessment of the corrective action is indicated by italics. 


25 





Army Case 04-12 


Violation 

This violation occurred at the Office of the Chief, Anny Reserve, when a memorandum 
was published authorizing $5,000 for 3-year reenlistment bonuses in FY 2004. These 
bonuses were in excess of the statutory limit of $2,500 contained in Title 37, United 

States Code, Section 308(b). Twelve soldiers were approved for such bonuses totaling 
$60,000, which was $30,000 more than permitted by statute. This situation resulted in a 
violation of Title 31, United States Code, Section 1341(a)(1)(A). 

Cause 

The Office of the Chief, Army Reserve, Director, Program Analysis and Evaluation 
(PA&E), published a memorandum on December 5, 2003, authorizing $5,000 bonus 
payments for 3-year reenlistments, at the direction of Chief of Anny Reserve 
(Chief). The Chief was aware that Congress authorized the Active Component a 3-year 
reenlistment bonus for $5,000 and believed it also applied to the Reserve, but never 
requested a written legal opinion to support his interpretation. 

Corrective 
Actions 
Taken and 
Sustained 

• Twelve soldiers who were approved for the bonus had their reenlistment contracts 
revoked and no funds were disbursed exceeding the $2,500 limit. To prevent a 
reoccurrence of the violation, new procedures have been implemented to obtain legal 
opinions prior to issuing future bonus policy memorandums. 

Evidence 

of 

Corrective 
Action was 
Inadequate 

None 

Corrective 

Actions 

Still In 
Process 

None 


26 





Army Case 05-03 


Violation 

The violation occurred when personnel associated with the Army National Guard Bureau 
underestimated the required contributions to the Military Retirement Trust Fund. This 
violation, totaling $25,000,743, occurred in FY 2001. This situation resulted in a 
violation of Title 31, United States Code, Section 1341(a)(1)(A). 

Cause 

The Anny National Guard did not properly calculate Military Retirement Trust Fund 
contributions because it used monthly contributions rates from FY 2000 rather than from 
FY 2001. 

Corrective 
Actions 
Taken and 
Sustained 

• Corrected contributions to the retirement trust fund by discontinuing the previous 
practice. 

• Established formal monthly retired pay accrual standard operating procedures. 

Evidence 

of 

Corrective 
Action was 
Inadequate 

• Provided comprehensive training for calculating the contributions. Army National 
Guard Comptroller personnel provided information that the training was required as 
of2007. However, Army National Guard Comptroller personnel could not support 
that subsequent training occurred. 

Corrective 

Actions 

Still In 
Process 

None 


Our assessment of the corrective action is indicated by italics. 


27 





Army Case 06-09 


Violation 

The violation occurred because Army Reserve Command personnel failed to promptly 
record and pay valid FY 2005 Reserve Personnel, Anny obligations, totaling $59,046,000. 
This overobligation resulted in a violation of Title 31, United States Code, Section 
1341(a)(1)(A). 

Causes 

• There was an increase in Reserve Soldiers drilling, and Office of the Deputy Chief of 
Staff for Personnel expanded the window of reenlistment eligibility. Consequently, 
Anny Reserve disbursements for incentives increased from $51.9 million in FY 2004 
to $138.4 million in FY 2005, and Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Programs 
(G-8) became aware of the need to obligate funds sufficient to cover reenlistment 
bonuses. 

• One of the staff members was engaged in supporting an Army Regulation 
investigation and was unable to devote full attention to their primary job. 

• Another staff member, noticing the increasing costs, transferred as much available 
Reserve Personnel, Army funding into the areas needed because these payments were 
going to be needed earlier than the end of year for the Defense Health Care Accrual. 

• Another individual was instructed to ensure the Defense Health Care Accrual FY 2005 
obligations were raised and recorded at the appropriate levels. As a result, a voucher 
was created making it appear as if the Defense Health Care Accrual was obligated and 
paid in full even though it was not. 

Corrective 
Actions 
Taken and 
Sustained 

• The Command developed a budget execution analysis modeling system. 

• Command started processing initial and reenlistment bonus payments to soldiers 
through an automated process as of August 1, 2006. 

• In FY 2006, a new law (United States Code, Section 1116) required that Defense 

Health Care Accrual payments be made at the beginning of the current fiscal year. 

• The Comptroller; the Plans, Analysis, and Evaluation Chief; and the U.S. Anny 

Reserve Command G-8 now report to the Office Chief Anny Reserve, Director of 
Resource Management. 

Evidence 

of 

Corrective 
Action was 
Inadequate 

None 

Corrective 

Actions 

Still In 
Process 

None 


28 






Air Force Case 09-03 


Violation 

The violation occurred because the Air Force overobligated its FY 2005 MIFPERS, Air 
Force appropriation when a significant number of PCS moves were charged to FY 2006, 
while the PCS moves were commenced and completed in FY 2005. This resulted in a 
violation of Title 31, United States Code, Section 1341(a)(1)(A) of $87,535,000. 

Cause 

There was inadequate manpower and experience within the finance community to manage 
the PCS budget. 

Corrective 
Actions 
Taken and 
Sustained 

• To correct the identified overobligations, the Air Force has made the required funding 
corrections to properly record obligations. 

• The Air Force has implemented several major policy changes that clarify and tighten 
guidance regarding the recording of PCS obligations. In addition, in the final month 
of each fiscal year, Air Force Personnel Center now centralizes PCS order 
authentication and approval, effectively exerting real-time control of orders issuance. 

• The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Financial Management, Director of Budget, 
formally established and now chairs the Personnel Budget Review Committee. The 
Personnel Budget Review Committee provides senior-level oversight that had been 
absent when the overobligations occurred. 

• The Air Force has taken action to improve manning. The Air Force Comptroller and 
the Director of Budget have provided clear direction regarding focus on staffing and 
management of the MIFPERS Section. 

• The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Financial Management, Director of Budget, 
has developed a robust training syllabus for new analysts to the division. The syllabus 
includes specific training required to manage the unique aspects of the MIFPERS 
account. 

Evidence 

of 

Corrective 
Action was 
Inadequate 

None 

Corrective 

Actions 

Still In 
Process 

None 


29 







Army Case 10-02 


Violation 

This violation occurred when the Anny’s payroll, PCS claims, bonus payments, and 
subsistence adjustments paid in FY 2009 for its MILPERS, Anny appropriation exceeded 
the amount of funds available by $155,000,000. This resulted in a violation of Title 31, 
United States Code, Section 1341(a)(1)(A). 

Causes 

• Defense Finance and Accounting Service accounting reports in October 2008 revealed 
a significant increase in costs associated with PCS claims, pay-related adjustments, 
and bonus payments; however, funds in the appropriation account were already fully 
obligated. 

• The Department of Labor presented a $55.9 million quarterly invoice for 
unemployment compensation benefits paid to former Federal employees and fonner 
Service members. The Army delayed payment because there were not sufficient 
funds available. 

• The cost model did not take into consideration pay-related adjustments and bonus 
entitlements that were authorized and paid in different years. 

• There was weak management of the MILPERS, Army appropriation as a CMA. 

• The subsequent increase in fuel prices and reimbursement at full replacement value 
for damaged household goods claims could not be predicted when PCS orders were 
issued. 

Corrective 
Actions 
Taken and 
Sustained 

• Congress approved the Anny’s request to transfer $200 million into the MILPERS 
account. 

• The Anny automated the Cost of War submission. 

• The cost model was developed to forecast funding requirements based on manpower. 

• The Anny developed the Monthly MILPERS Review. 

• The Anny established a cell at the Army Human Resources Command to validate 
unemployment compensation claims provided by and reimbursed to the Department of 
Labor. 

• The Anny began issuing MILPERS funding letters that are co-signed by the Anny 
Budget Office and Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Personnel. 

• The Lean Six Sigma project for Recruiting and Retention focus was on incentive 
bonuses. 

• Anny completed the initial testing of the Other Contingency Operations Temporary 
Change of Station budget module and established a Council of Colonels Project Team 
and a General Officer Steering Committee Governance structure for PCS system 
development. 


30 







Army Case 10-02 (continued) 


Evidence 

of 

Corrective 
Action was 
Inadequate 

• Subsistence-in-Kind: 

o The Army began implementation of the Army Food Management Information 
System to enable it to record MILPERS obligations at the point of initial 
requisition. 

o The Army automated the civilian cost transfer estimate for subsistence-in-kind 
using the Oracle model. The Army did not provide information on how they 
automated the civilian cost transfer estimate. 
o The Army expanded its ability to accurately record rations used in theater on its 
accounting reports. 

• In FY 2011, the Army began utilization of the Funds Control Module. The Army did 
not provide information on this corrective action. 

Corrective 

Actions 

Still in 
Process 

• The Army established a Fean Six Sigma project for PCS to gather information on a 
process and system to record PCS obligations at the individual level prior to 
disbursement in order to comply with the DoD policy to obligate PCS orders at the 
time that they are issued. The Fean Six Sigma team is developing several Courses of 
Action for presentation to Army staff leadership. 

• The Army identified the inability to accurately report obligations for the PCS program 
as a material weakness in its Annual Statement of Assurance. PCS subject matter 
experts and pilot sites personnel will have completed software development by the end 
of FY 2012. The Army will also require U.S. Army Audit Agency to validate the 
audit results for the pilot sites and will begin training and development for additional 
sites. 


Our assessment of the corrective action is indicated by italics. 


31 




Navy Case 10-03 


Violation 

The violation occurred because the Bureau of Navy Personnel (BUPERS) overobligated 
the FY 2008 MILPERS, Navy appropriation. The BUPERS Comptroller Office was 
unable to properly exercise internal control and management oversight of the MILPERS, 
Navy account, thereby preventing it from accurately assessing the overobligations and 
requirement for additional funding for FY 2008 MILPERS, Navy account. Although 
some funding requests and mitigation strategies were executed during the fiscal year, they 
were insufficient to liquidate all obligations. This resulted in a violation of Title 31, 

United States Code, Section 1341(a)(1)(A). 

Causes 

Internal control and management oversight deficiencies prevented BUPERS financial 
managers from making a more accurate assessment of the amount of additional funding 
needed. The situation was made worse by significant information technology issues 
(numerous and complex interactions between systems), human resource issues 
(inadequate training and high turnover), and unique account characteristics (lag time for 
proper recording of obligations). BUPERS also did not have adequate estimates 
regarding the number of service members it needed to pay. 

Corrective 
Actions 
Taken and 
Sustained 

• Three transactions were verified by BUPERS and Defense Finance and Accounting 
Service Cleveland as accounting errors and corrected. An Above Threshold 
reprogramming action to correct the violation was processed in October 2010. 

• The Head, Financial Operations, Policy Branch, created the Critical Balance report, 
which provides a daily status of expenditures of the appropriation. 

• BUPERS partnered with Defense Finance and Accounting Service Cleveland for 
ongoing working group sessions to develop agreed-upon procedures internally. 

Evidence 

of 

Corrective 
Action was 
Inadequate 

None 

Corrective 

Actions 

Still In 
Process 

• When a future system is implemented that meets the requirements outlined for 

Defense Integrated Military Human Resources System, BUPERS management will be 
in a better position to effectively deal with the complexity of the MILPERS, Navy 
account. 


32 





Air Force Case 10-06 


Violation 

This violation occurred when the Air National Guard expended $9,729,552 more than was 
appropriated in FY 2009. A review of the funding documents at the Air National Guard 
Military Personnel appropriation led to an inaccurate understanding of the total amount of 
unobligated funds available in the later part of the fiscal year. This resulted in a violation 
of Title 31, United States Code, Section 1341(a)(1)(A). 

Causes 

• There was a failure in administration of the account. 

• The workday rate was not recalculated in FY 2009. 

• The checkbook was not kept in balance and up-to-date. A checkbook is an internal 
tool to ensure that funding is properly reflected in the man-day metrics and that the 
remaining man-days accurately reflect remaining appropriations. 

Corrective 
Actions 
Taken and 
Sustained 

• The violation was corrected using available (FY 2010) funds. Specifically, the 
obligations that were otherwise chargeable to the FY 2009 Air National Guard 

Military Personnel appropriation were charged to the FY 2010 Air National Guard 
Military Personnel appropriation in accordance with Section 8054 of Public 

Faw 111-118. 

• Air National Guard has ensured that the appropriation manager will perform quarterly 
adjustments to the man-day factor, based upon the number of projected man days (to 
include a reserve of funds as a buffer). 

Evidence 

of 

Corrective 
Action was 
Inadequate 

None 

Corrective 

Actions 

Still In 
Process 

None 


33 




Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial 
Officer, DoD, Comments 



COMPTROLLER 


OFFICE OF THE UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 
1 lOO DEFENSE PENTAGON 
WASHINGTON. DC 20301-1100 


NOV 1 6 2012 


MEMORANDUM FOR DEPUTY INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AUDITING, DEPARTMENT 
OF DEFENSE OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL 

SUBJECT: Comments on the Department of Defense Inspector General Draft Audit Report. 

“DoD Generally Effective at Correcting Causes of Antideficiancy Act Violations in 
Military Personnel Accounts. But Vulnerabilities Remain” 

We received the subject November 6, 2012. draft audit report and reviewed your 
recommendations to the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer. 

A response that addresses your recommendations is attached. 

We apprec iate the opportunity to re view and comment on thedraftauditreporLMystaff 

She can be reached 



Mafk E. Easton 

Deputy Chief Financial Officer 


Attachment 
As stated 



34 



DOD IG DRAFT REPORT - DATED NOVEMBER 6, 2012 
DOD IG PROJECT NO. D2012-D000FI-0118.000 

‘•DOD GENERALLY EFFECTIVE AT CORRECTING CAUSES OF ANTIDEFICIENCY 
ACT VIOLATIONS IN MILITARY PERSONNEL ACCOUNTS, BUT VULNERABILITIES 

REMAIN” 

OFFICE OF THE UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (COMPTROLLER) 
(OUSD(C)) RESPONSE TO THE DOD IG RECOMMENDATION 


RECOMMENDATION A.l : We recommend that the Under Secretary of Defense 
(Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, DoD, revise DoD Regulation 7000.14-R. “DoD Financial 
Management Regulation” (DoD FMR), volume 14, chapter 1, to require the Military 
Departments to monitor the status of unimplemented corrective actions and report on the status 
of unimplemented corrective actions in the annual report evaluating funds control processes to 
ensure that they properly implemented and sustained all corrective actions taken to correct ADA 
violations. 

OUSDtCl RESPONSE : Concur. The DoD FMR Volume 14, Chapter 1 will be revised in the 
next scheduled update to include a requirement for the Military Departments to monitor the 
status of unimplemented corrective actions and report the status as part of their annual review of 
funds and internal control processes. 

RECOMMENDATION B.l : We recommend that the Under Secretary of Defense 
(Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, DoD, revise DoD Regulation 7000.14-R, “DoD Financial 
Management Regulation” (DoD FMR), volume 14, chapter 1, to: 

a. clarify the definition of a centrally managed allotment as it relates to Military Personnel 
accounts; and 

b. establish procedures to require that each Assistant Secretary for Financial Management 
and Comptroller provides his office with written assurance of completion of the annual 
review of centrally managed allotments, including the Military Personnel appropriations. 

OUSD(C) RESPONSE : Concur. The DoD FMR Volume 14, Chapter 1 will be revised in the 
next scheduled update to: 1) clarify the definition of a centrally managed account, which 
includes allotments and allocations, and 2) include the requirement for the Military Departments 
to report to the Assistant Secretaries of the Military Departments (Financial Management and 
Comptroller) upon completion of the annual review of their centrally managed accounts. 


Attachment 


35 







Department of the Army Comments 


Final Report 
Reference 



REPLY TO 
ATTENTION OF 


OFFICE OF THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE ARMY 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND COMPTROLLER 
109 ARMY PENTAGON 
WASHINGTON DC 20310-0109 


DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY 


m 1 <2012 


MEMORANDUM THRU Auditor General, Department of the Army, 3101 Park Center Drive, 
Alexandria, Virginia 22302-1596 

FOR Inspector General, Department of Defense, Financial Management and Reporting, 4800 Mark 
Center Drive, Alexandria, Virginia 22350-1500 

SUBJECT: Draft Report, DoD Generally Effective at Correcting Causes of Antideficiency Act 
Violations in Military Personnel Accounts, but Vulnerabilities Remain (D2012-D000FI-0118.000} 

1. We appreciate the opportunity to provide comments on the subject report. We offer several 
technical comments: 

• Tables on pages 8 and 27 indicate that the Army has two corrective actions ongoing 
associated with permanent change of station (PCS) moves. In reality, these are the same 
issue. The Army has one corrective action ongoing - a PCS Lean Six Sigma project that 
will resolve three material weaknesses for the Army that are common across the DoD. The 
corrective actions will address: the inability to record an obligation when orders are issued; 
the inability to apply a reliable cost estimate to the obligation; and the inability to reconcile 
disbursements to obligations. 

• On page 9 the statement pertaining to failure to sustain training of individuals calculating 
contributions to the Military Retirement Trust Fund is inaccurate. OSD changed the 
process whereby payments are made to the trust fund five years ago. Consequently, the 
earlier training requirement was overtaken by events and did not continue after FY 2007. 
There is now no ADA risk in this area because payments are made at the start of each 
fiscal year based on the budgeted amount, which is simply an actuarial rate times the 
average budgeted strength for a given fiscal year. There is no additional Army National 
Guard training requirement required to sustain this process change. It is now simple and 
common to all Services and Components. 

• On page 12, please change “MPAs” in the footnote to “MILPERS” to reflect its wider 
applicability to the U.S. Air Force appropriations. 

3. We also wish to make the following qualitative comments that we hope can be incorporated into 
the final report. 

• This audit report should not convey the message that prior to FY 2012, Army conducted no 
assessment of internal controls for the MPA appropriation. While it is true that prior to FY 
2012, Army failed to comply with the regulatory requirements in Volume 14, Chapter 1 of 
the DoD Financial Management Regulation, appropriation managers had already been 
monitoring internal controls in accordance with 31 U.S.C. 3512, the Federal Managers' 
Financial Integrity Act, OMB Circular A-123 and Army Regulation 11 -2. Army’s annual 
assessment of the effectiveness of internal controls for both financial and non-financial 
operations ultimately flows to the SECARMY as part of the Annual Statement of Assurance. 
It was via this process that the Army identified and elevated the material weakness 
associated with PCS moves. 


Pages 8 and 30 


Revised, page 15 


36 



SUBJECT: Draft Report, DoD Generally Effective at Correcting Causes of Antideficiency Act 
Violations in Military Personnel Accounts, but Vulnerabilities Remain (D2O12-DOO0R-O118.000) 


• On page 11 the narrative provides a brief discussion on implementation of Enterprise 
Resource Planning systems across the department. Army strongly believes automation is 
the key to improving controls in a meaningful way. Annually assessing internal controls is 
an important management function that provides continued benefit; however, the 
challenges MILPERS appropriation managers face fundamentally revolve around system 
shortcomings rather than people or process challenges. This would be an important point 
to make more forcefully in the audit report. 

. During the summer of 2012 the Army changed procedures used to identify and cost transfer 
subsistence-in-kind charges associated with feeding civilians in theater by accessing a 
CENTCOM report that provides better detail on the actual number of civilians in theater. 

The use of the Funds Control Module is no longer a material part of MPA appropriation 
management as this system was used as an interface to a DLA system the Army now uses 
minimally since implementation of the Army Food Management Information System. 

4. Finally, the audit also makes the following recommendation for the Army, which we would like to 
address: 

• A.2. We recommend that the Assistant Secretaries of the Army, Navy and Air 
Force (Financial Management and Comptroller) establish procedures to maintain 
records documenting corrective actions taken for each ADA violation for at least 
6 years and 3 months subsequent to either the date of the ADA report to the 
President or the date of the last implemented corrective action for an ADA violation, 
whichever is the later date. 


• Army concurs. Effective immediately, Army will begin tracking and sustaining corrective 
actions for all open formal ADA cases that will close in FY 2013 and beyond. Fund holders 
at activities where the ADA occurred will be responsible for providing recurring status 
updates that will be reported to OSD under the aegis of the Annual Evaluation of the Army’s 
Administrative Fund Control Process and the Processing of Violations of the 
Antideficiency Act. 


5. 


My point of contact for this report is 



ho can be reached at 



Jajpes J. Watkins 
y Assistant Secretary of the Army 
(Financial Operations) 


2 


37 




Department of the Navy Comments 



THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE NAVY 
(FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND COMPTROLLER) 
1000 NAVY PENTAGON 
WASHINGTON, DC 20350-1000 


NOV 15 A112 


MEMORANDUM FOR DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE INSPECTOR GENERAL 


SUBJECT: Review of DODIG Draft Report “DoD Generally Effective at Correcting 

Causes of Antideficiency Act Violations in Military Personnel Accounts, but 
Vulnerabilities Remain” (Project No. D2012-D000FI-0118.000) 

We appreciate the opportunity to review and comment on this draft DoD-IG report. 
The accompanying attachment provides the Department of Navy response on 
recommendations A.2. and B.2. 

Although we do not have objections to the audit findings and recommendations, we 
remain concerned about the risk of future Antideficiency Act (ADA) violations associated 
with our military personnel accounts. As discussed with your staff, the Department will 
implement the best estimating techniques and strong internal controls, but these actions 
may not stop a military personnel account ADA violation from occurring because of the 
unique nature of the account. The execution agility of military personnel pay is different 
from any other account. For instance, accounts that pay civilians have flexibility to make 
fiscal tradeoffs during the execution year. These accounts have other “non-pay” related 
efforts that can be reduced to cover civilian pay costs. Military personnel accounts do not 
have the same execution flexibility which therefore contributes to the high risk ADA 
violation aspect. To ensure that the Congress fully appreciates the dynamics of military 
personnel accounts, it would be helpful if the report was to focus on the aforementioned 
concerns and provide viable alternatives that the Congress could implement to reduce the 
risk of future military personnel AD As. 



Gladys J. Commons 


Attachment: 
As stated 


38 



Final Report 
Reference 


DoDIG Draft Report “DoD Generally Effective at Correcting Causes of Antideficiency 
Act Violations in Military Personnel Accounts, But Vulnerabilities Remain” (Project No. 

D2012-D000FI-0118.000) 


The Department of the Navy (DON) requests a change to footnote 2 currently on page 6 of the 
report. The ASN(FM&C) position has control over the budget, cost, and financial operations 
but does not have control over manpower. In the DON manpower is with the Assistant 
Secretary of the Navy (Manpower and Reserve Affairs). 

With regard to the two recommendations assigned to the DON, the following applies: 

Recommendation A.2.: We recommend that the Assistant Secretaries of the Army, Navy, and 
Air Force (Financial Management and Comptroller) establish procedures to maintain records 
documenting corrective actions taken for each ADA violation for at least 6 years and 3 
months subsequent to either the date of the ADA report to the President or the date of the last 
implemented corrective action for an ADA violation, whichever is the later date. 

DON Comment: Concur. We will retain records documenting procedural actions taken for 
each ADA violation consistent with National Archives and Records Administration records 
retention guidance. 

Recommendation B.2: We recommend that the Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial 
Management and Comptroller) identify all of the Navy’s centrally managed allotments and 
commence performing and documenting reviews of its centrally managed allotments, 
including the Navy and Marine Crops Military Personnel Accounts. 

DON Comment: Concur. Upon OUSD(C)’s completion of recommendation B.l clarifying 
the definition of a centrally managed allotment and promulgation of guidance, the Department 
of the Navy will comply with the OUSD(C) direction. 


Revised, page 6 


39 



Department of the Air Force Comments 



DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE 

WASHINGTON, DC 


OFFICE OF THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY 


i 9 NOV 2012 


MEMORANDUM FOR DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE INSPECTOR GENERAL 
FROM: SAF/FMP 

SUBJECT: Management Comments on DoDIG Audit Report No. D2012-D000FI-0118.000, 

“DoD Generally Effective at Correcting Causes of Antideficiency Act Violations in 
Military Personnel Accounts, But Vulnerabilities Remain", dated November 6,2012 

This is in reply to your request for an updated status on corrective actions taken in 
response to findings and recommendations made in the subject report. 

Recommendation : A.2 We recommend that the Assistant Secretaries of the Army, Navy, 
and Air Force (Financial Management and Comptroller) establish procedures to maintain records 
documenting corrective actions taken for each AJDA violation for at least 6 years and 3 months 
subsequent to either the date of the ADA report to the President or the date of the last 
implemented corrective action for an ADA violation, whichever is the later date. 

Response: Air Force concurs with DoD/IG’s recommendation. SAF/FMP will track 
corrective actions for reportable ADA violations, as described above. SAF/FMP will work with 
OUSD(C) and the other Services to establish procedures and a standard format to report on 
corrective actions. 



Financial Operations 
(Financial Management) 

CC: 

OUSD(C) 


"Financing the Fight" 


40 

























