
NAVAL 

POSTGRADUATE 

SCHOOL 

MONTEREY, CALIFORNIA 


THESIS 


AUTONOMOUS-AGENT BASED SIMULATION OF ANTI¬ 
SUBMARINE WARFARE OPERATIONS WITH THE GOAL 
OF PROTECTING A HIGH VALUE UNIT 

by 

Fahrettin AKBORI 
March 2004 


Thesis Advisor: Christian DARKEN 

Second Reader: Curtis BLAIS 


Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 




THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 



REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 


Form^££roved^OMB^No^^0704^018^^^^ 
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time 
for reviewing instruction, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing 
and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this 
collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington headquarters Services, 
Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202- 
4302, and to the Office of Management and Bud get, Pap erwork Reduction Project (0704-0188) Washington DC 20503. 

2. REPORT DATE 
March 2004 


6. AUTHOR(S) _Fahrettin Akbori 


11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES The views expressed in this thesis are those of the author and do not reflect the official 
policy or position of the Department of Defense or the U.S. Government._ 


13. ABSTRACT (maximum 200 words) 

The Anti-Submarine Warfare screen design simulation is a program that provides a model for operations in 
anti-submarine warfare (ASW). The purpose of the program is to aid ASW commanders, allowing them to configure an 
ASW screen, including the sonar policy, convoy speed, and the number of ships, to gain insight into how these and 
other factors beyond their control, such as water conditions, impact ASW effectiveness. It is also designed to be used 
as a training tool for ASW officers. The program is implemented in Java programming language, using the Multi Agent 
System (MAS) technique. The simulation interface is a Horizontal Display Center (HDC) which is very similar to a 
MEKC200 class Frigate Combat Information Center’s (CIC) HDC. The program uses Extensible Markup Language 
(XML) files for reading data for program scenarios; parameters are initialized before each run time begins. The 
simulation also provides all the output data at the end of run time for analysis purposes. The program user’s goal, and 
the purpose of the program, is to decrease the number of successful attacks against surface vessels by changing the 
configuration parameters of the ASW screen, to reflect sonar policy, convoy speed or number of ships in the simulation. 
Cngoing use of the program can provide data needed to anticipate required operational needs in future ASW situations. 


16. PRICE CODE 


NSN 7540-01-280-5500 Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std. 239-18 


20. LIMITATION OF 
ABSTRACT 

UL 


15. NUMBER OF 
PAGES 

124 


14. SUBJECT TERMS Anti-Submarine Warfare (ASW), Anti-Submarine Warfare (ASW) 
Screen, Multi Agent Systems, Artificial Intelligence, Protection of High Value Unit (HVU), 
Combat Information Center (CIC), Naval Simulations, Combat Information Center (CIC) Watch 
Cfficer, Sonar Detection, Submarine Torpedo Attack, Decision Making, Cognitive Factors 

18. SECURITY 
CLASSIFICATION OF THIS 
PAGE 

Unclassified 


19. SECURITY 
CLASSIFICATION OF 
ABSTRACT 

Unclassified 


17. SECURITY 
CLASSIFICATION OF 
REPORT 

Unclassified 


12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 


12a. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, CA 93943-5000 

9. SPONSORING /MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND 
ADDRESS(ES) 

N/A 


5. FUNDING NUMBERS 


8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 


10. SPONSORING/MONITORING 
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE: Autonomous-Agent Based Simulation of Anti- 
Submarine Warfare Operations with the Goal of Protecting a High Value 
Unit 


3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

Master’s Thesis 


1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank) 


I 


























THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 



This thesis is done in cooperation with the MOVES Institute 
Approved for pubiic reiease; distribution is uniimited 


AUTONOMOUS-AGENT BASED SIMULATION OF ANTI-SUBMARINE 
WARFARE OPERATIONS WITH THE GOAL OF PROTECTING A HIGH 

VALUE UNIT 


Fahrettin AKBORI 

Lieutenant Junior Grade, Turkish Navy 
B.S., Turkish Naval Academy, 1998 


Submitted in partial fulfillment of the 
requirements for the degree of 


MASTER OF SCIENCE IN 

MODELING, VIRTUAL ENVIRONMENTS AND SIMULATION (MOVES) 


from the 


NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL 
March 2004 


Author: Fahrettin AKBORI 


Approved by: Christian Darken 

Thesis Advisor 

Curtis Blais 
Second Reader 


Rudolph P. Darken 

Chair, MOVES Academic Committee 



THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


IV 



ABSTRACT 


The Anti-Submarine Warfare screen design simulation is a program that 
provides a model for operations in anti-submarine warfare (ASW). The purpose 
of the program is to aid ASW commanders, allowing them to configure an ASW 
screen, including the sonar policy, convoy speed, and the number of ships, to 
gain insight into how these and other factors beyond their control, such as water 
conditions, impact ASW effectiveness. It is also designed to be used as a 
training tool for ASW officers. The program is implemented in Java programming 
language, using the Multi Agent System (MAS) technique. The simulation 
interface is a Horizontal Display Center (HDC) which is very similar to a 
MEKO200 class Frigate Combat Information Center’s (CIC) HDC. The program 
uses Extensible Markup Language (XML) files for reading data for program 
scenarios; parameters are initialized before each run time begins. The 
simulation also provides all the output data at the end of run time for analysis 
purposes. The program user’s goal, and the purpose of the program, is to 
decrease the number of successful attacks against surface vessels by changing 
the configuration parameters of the ASW screen, to reflect sonar policy, convoy 
speed or number of ships in the simulation. Ongoing use of the program can 
provide data needed to anticipate required operational needs in future ASW 
situations. 


V 



THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


VI 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


I. INTRODUCTION.1 

A. WHAT IS SIMULATION?.1 

B. WHY DO SIMULATION?.1 

C. BENEFITS OF SIMULATION IN MILITARY APPLICATIONS.2 

D. APPLICATION OF SIMULATION FOR ANTI-SUBMARINE 

WARFARE.2 

E. SUMMARY OF CHAPTERS.3 

II. ANTI-SUBMARINE WARFARE NOTION.5 

A. ANTI SUBMARINE WARFARE.5 

B. THE THREAT.5 

C. THE ENVIRONMENT.7 

1. Weather Effects.7 

2. Sound Energy and Gradients.7 

3. Sonic Equipment.11 

4. Non-Acoustic Detection.12 

a. Magnetic Anomaly Detectors (MAD) . 12 

b. Infrared (IR) . 12 

c. Turbulence . 12 

d. Electronic Support Measure (ESM) . 12 

e. Radar . 12 

D. ASW PROCESS.13 

1. Detection.13 

2. Ciassification.14 

3. Localization.14 

4. Tracking.15 

5. Kill.15 

E. OPERATIONAL CONCEPTS.15 

F. WEAPONS.16 

III. CONCEPTUAL DESIGN.19 

A. ASW SIMULATION.19 

B. THE PURPOSE OF THE MODEL.19 

C. MAS REQUIREMENTS.21 

1. Environment.22 

2. System Objects.29 

a. Rectangular Area Object .29 

b. ASW Screen Object . 29 

c. Sector Objects . 30 

d. Referee Object . 31 

e. Convoy Object . 32 

f Sonar Object . 32 

g. Submarine Battery Object . 33 

h. Manager Object . 34 

vii 












































/. Simulation Time Object . 34 

J Data Collector Object. . 34 

3. Agents.35 

a. Surface Ships . 35 

b. Submarine . 39 

4. Relationships.41 

a. Roles . 41 

b. Goals . 41 

5. Requirements.42 

6. Operations and Processes.42 

D. SUMMARY OF LAWS.43 

E. HUMAN INTERFACE.44 

IV. IMPLEMENTED MODEL.49 

A. STRATEGY FOR CONFIGURATION OF THE ASW SCREEN.49 

B. AGENTS AND OBJECT INTERACTIONS.50 

1. Agent Behaviors.50 

2. Object Behavior and Communications.52 

a. Simulation Time Object: .52 

b. Screen Object . 53 

c. Environment Manager Object . 53 

d. Track List Object . 53 

e. Submarine List Object . 54 

f. Referee Object . 54 

C. GRAPHIC USER INTERFACE.54 

1. Initializing the Simulation.54 

2. Horizontal Display Center.61 

D. MONITORING INTERACTION.64 

1. Display Panel.64 

2. Submarine Battery Display.65 

3. Event Loggers.67 

4. Contact Display.68 

V. ANALYSIS.69 

A. EXPERIMENT WITH SAMPLE CONFIGURATIONS.69 

1. Goal of Experiment.69 

2. Description of Configurations.70 

a. ASW Screen Configuration with Four Ships . 70 

b. ASW Screen Configuration with Five Ships .72 

c. ASW Screen Configuration with Six Ships (First 

Configuration) . 74 

d. Second ASW Screen Configuration with Six Ships 

(Second Configuration) . 76 

B. RESULTS.78 

1. Results for Four Ships.78 

2. Results for Five Ships.80 

3. Results for Six Ships (First Configuration).82 

viii 














































4. Results for Six Ships (Second Configuration).84 

C. DISCUSSION.86 

VI. CONCLUSIONS.91 

A. SUCCESS OF THE MODEL.91 

B. POSSIBLE APPLICATIONS OF THE MODEL.92 

1. Training.92 

2. Decision Aid.92 

C. FUTURE WORK.93 

1. Possible Improvements to the Model.93 

2. Expanding to Other Military Operations.94 

APPENDIX A EXTENSIBLE MARK-UP LANGUAGE (XML) FILES USED 

IN THE SIMULATION.95 

A. READING AND WRITING TO EXTENSIBLE MARK-UP 

LANGUAGE (XML).95 

B. TYPES OF XML FILES IN THE SIMULATION.95 

1. ASW Area File.95 

2. ASW Screen File.96 

3. ASW Zigzag Policy File.96 

4. ASW Sonar Policy File.97 

5. Ship Characteristics File.98 

APPENDIX B GENERATING RANDOM NUMBERS.101 

A. SIM KIT PACKAGE.101 

B. GENERATING RANDOM NUMBERS.101 

1. Normal Distribution.101 

2. Uniform Distribution.101 

BIBLIOGRAPHY.103 

INITIAL DISTRIBUTION LIST.105 


IX 




























THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


X 



LIST OF FIGURES 


Figure 1. Variation of Sound Velocity with Depth (After:Hill,1985, 38).9 

Figure 2. Formation of Shadow and Convergence Zone (After: Flill, 1985, 40). 10 

Figure 3. Bottom Effects and Sonar Below the Layer (After; Flill, 1985, 41). 11 

Figure 4. Active Homing Torpedo Search Pattern.17 

Figure 5. A Typical ASW Screen.20 

Figure 6. Operational Area (Not Drawn to Scale).23 

Figure 7. Locating Two Submarines in the ASW Area (Not Drawn to Scale).... 24 

Figure 8. Example of a Zigzag Pattern for the Main Force (Not Drawn to 

Scale).25 

Figure 9. Sonar Range Distributions for Medium and Long Range Sonar 

Types.27 

Figure 10. The Frontal Sector and its Vertices.31 

Figure 11. Submarine Battery Endurance Graphs.33 

Figure 12. Data Collector Object Fields.35 

Figure 13. Dividing a Sector into Four Quadrants.36 

Figure 14. Ship’s Search Pattern; Visiting Each Quadrant in a Sequence (Not 

Drawn to Scale).37 

Figure 15. Dividing a Sector into Square Grids.38 

Figure 16. Submarine Movements Before An Attack.40 

Figure 17. Input Page 1.44 

Figure 18. Input Page 2.45 

Figure 19. Input Page 3.45 

Figure 20. Input Page 4.46 

Figure 21. Output Table 1.46 

Figure 22. Output Table 2.47 

Figure 23. Number of Successful Attacks with Different Convoy Speeds.47 

Figure 24. Number of Successful Attacks with Different Medium and Long 

Sonar Range Combinations.48 

Figure 25. ASW Input Wizard Stepi.55 

Figure 26. ASW User Input Wizard Step2.56 

Figure 27. Choosing a Saved XML File for ASW Screen Configuration.56 

Figure 28. ASW Screen Edit Frame.57 

Figure 29. Preview of an ASW Screen.58 

Figure 30. ASW Input Wizard Step3.60 

Figure 31. Warning Frame, Attempting to Close ASW Input Wizard.60 

Figure 32. Horizontal Display Center.61 

Figure 33. Date and Time Frame.62 

Figure 34. Location Frame.63 

Figure 35. Contact Information Frame.63 

Figure 36. Display Panel.64 

Figure 37. Submarine Battery Display.65 

Figure 38. Event Logger for Surface Ships.67 

Figure 39. Event Logger for Submarine.68 


XI 








































Figure 40. ASW Screen Design with Four Ships.71 

Figure 41. ASW Screen Configuration for Five Ships.73 

Figure 42. ASW Screen Configuration for Six Ships.75 

Figure 43. ASW Screen Configuration for Six Ships.77 

Figure 44. Attack Distances in Each Try.79 

Figure 45. Surface Ships’ Success for the Configuration.79 

Figure 46. Submarine’s Status at End.80 

Figure 47. Attack Distances in Each Try.81 

Figure 48. Surface Ships’ Success for the Configuration.81 

Figure 49. Submarine’s Status at End.82 

Figure 50. Attack Distances in Each Try.83 

Figure 51. Surface Ships’ Success for the Configuration.83 

Figure 52. Submarine’s Status at End.84 

Figure 53. Attack Distances in Each Try.85 

Figure 54. Surface Ships’ Success for the Configuration.85 

Figure 55. Submarine’s Status at End.86 

Figure 56. ASW Area File Shown in Grid.96 

Figure 57. Screen File Shown in Grid.96 

Figure 58. Zig-zag File Shown in Grid.97 

Figure 59. Sonar Policy File Shown in Grid.98 

Figure 60. Ship Characteristics File Shown in Grid.99 


xii 
























LIST OF TABLES 


Table 1. A Sonar Policy Example.26 

Table 2. Sonar Ranges For Hull-Mounted Sonar.26 

Table 3. Probabilities of Successful Attack Based on Distance From an 

HVU.28 

Table 4. Sector Information.30 

Table 5. Submarine Battery Endurance Within Various Speeds.33 

Table 6. Battery Consumption Based on Different Speed.66 

Table 7. ASW Screen Configuration with Four Ships.70 

Table 8. Sonar Policy for Four-Ship Screen Configuration.72 

Table 9. ASW Screen Configuration with Five Ships.72 

Table 10. Sonar Policy for Five-Ship Screen Configuration.73 

Table 11. ASW Screen Configuration with Six Ships.74 

Table 12. Sonar Policy for Six-Ship Screen Configuration.76 

Table 13. ASW Screen Configuration with Six Ships.76 

Table 14. Sonar Policy for Six-Ship Screen Configuration.78 

Table 15. The Results for Four-Ship ASW Configuration.78 

Table 16. The Results for Five-Ship ASW Configuration.80 

Table 17. The Results for Six-Ship ASW Configuration.82 

Table 18. The Results for Six-Ship ASW Configuration.84 


xiii 





















THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


XIV 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


I would like to thank my advisor Professor Christian Darken and Professor 
John Miles and Mr. Curt Blais for their expert knowledge and support. Without 
their guidance and advice, I could not have completed this project. I would also 
like to thank Ms. Barbara Young for her patience in editing my thesis. Most of all, 
I am very grateful to Ms. Caitlyn Nguyen and Lieutenant Junior Grade Baris 
Egemen Ozkan for their assistance and moral support. 


XV 



THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


XVI 



I. INTRODUCTION 


A. WHAT IS SIMULATION? 

Simulation is designing a model of an actual system in the computer to 
imitate reality. By using the simulation, the user learns through doing. For 
example, a child understands the world by simulating with toys or role-playing. 
During role-play, a child will experiment with interactions between objects- 
playing with human and animal figurines or crashing toy cars together and 
observing the results of the collision. Artificial objects are constructed and the 
roles between them are analyzed to capture the complexity of reality. A 
computer simulation is a representation of role-playing in a synthetic environment 
or virtual world.'' 

Three steps are involved in a simulation: model design and model 
implementation, model execution, and model analysis. A model design is 
constructed to answer a real world problem. It is a mathematical model that 
represents a physical object and may be a declarative, functional, constraint, 
spatial or hybrid model. After construction of a model design, the next step is to 
execute the model. The model can be executed by creating a computer program 
to run the mathematical model with input parameters and deriving outputs. 
Model analysis explores the relationship between the input parameters and the 
output data. The analysis tells a story of what happened during a simulation and 
tries to answer a question. 

B. WHY DO SIMULATION? 

A simulation is used to study complex, dynamic systems. Simulation is 
essential in the following cases: 1) the model has many variables and interacting 
components, 2) the relationships between the variables are not linear, 3) the 
model has random variables, 4) the model output is a visual rendering such as a 


Fishwick, P., cited 2004: What is simulation? [Available online at 
http://www.cis.ufl.edu/~fishwick/introsim/node1.html.] 


1 



three-dimensional computer animation. 2 Simulation is used to visualize a large 
variety of non-linear systems and behavior or to replicate the actual system. 

Since a simulation has predictive capabilities the program user can make 
better decisions through optimization and control. A simulation is a 
computational laboratory experiment that provides the program user with a 
greater understanding of the sensitivities of parameters and scale-up information. 
The simulation can be used to isolate and combine phenomena.3 

C. BENEFITS OF SIMULATION IN MILITARY APPLICATIONS 

Simulation used in military operations is an efficient and cost-effective way 
of preparing and training military personnel. In the modern military environment, 
weapon systems and vehicles are increasingly expensive to operate. Realistic 
training using actual systems is more difficult due to safety and environmental 
issues.^ Simulation is a better approach to preparing an operation as well 
training military personnel. Simulations also help military commanders make 
decisions based on model combat and subsequent analysis modeling integrating 
the platforms, sensors, and weapons into a simulated environment. 

D. APPLICATION OF SIMULATION FOR ANTI-SUBMARINE WARFARE 

In this research thesis, a model design is used to simulate Anti-Submarine 
Warfare (ASW) operations incorporating High-Value Unit (HVU) protection. This 
simulation can be used to train ASW officers. They will become acquainted with 
ASW operations through computer-generated visualization. ASW commanders 
can analyze the output and configure better ASW screen designs to prepare and 
plan an operation. 


2 Fishwick, P., cited 2004: Why do simulation? [Available online at 
http://www.cis.ufl.edu/~fishwick/introsim/node2.html.] 

3 Ewing R. and R. Sharpley, cited 2004: Interactive control of large-scale simulations. 
[Available online at http://www.cise.nsf.g 0 v/cns/darema/dd_das/ew_ing/sldOIO.htm.] 

^ Wilton D. R., 2004: Demonstrating the benefits of simulation in a military environment. J. 
Battlefield Tech. ,7, 31-37 


2 



The simulation program is created in JAVA programming language using 
multi-agent system (MAS) technique. 


E. SUMMARY OF CHAPTERS 

The following chapters provide an overview of ASW operations and the 
simulation design model, execution, and analysis. Chapter II covers general 
knowledge of ASW operations. Chapter III discusses the conceptual design of 
the simulation program. Chapter IV gives a description of the agent and object 
interactions and how the user can monitor these interactions. Chapter V 
discusses analysis and the findings of a sample experiment. Chapter VI confirms 
the success of the model; suggest possible applications and expansion of the 
model, as well as possible future research. 


3 



THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


4 



II. ANTI-SUBMARINE WARFARE NOTION 


Anti-Submarine Warfare (ASW) possesses numerous peculiar concepts 
that must be well understood for understanding the proposed simulation. This 
chapter briefly surveys the ASW concept, as well as the ASW weapons, screen, 
and water conditions. This chapter is crucial to the understanding of the 
following chapters. Additional information on ASW can be found in the list of 
references at the end of this thesis. 

A. ANTI SUBMARINE WARFARE 

Anti-Submarine Warfare (ASW) is the art and science of eliminating the 
enemy submarines’ effectiveness. There can be no ASW without submarines. 
Therefore, it is important to first focus on the enemy submarines.^ 


B. THE THREAT 

Submarines are battle vessels that can dive and maintain a submerged 
position during an attack or other operations. Submarines have multiple 
operational capabilities and can be used for attacking land targets with long- 
range ballistic missiles, for damaging the enemy’s cargo ships, for intelligence 
collection or for deploying SEALS or other special teams. Additionally, 
submarines can be strategically used during warfare to damage the enemy’s 
commercial transportation lines. 

Two types of submarines are used in modern day warfare: nuclear and 
diesel-electric. Nuclear submarines make more noise than conventional diesel- 
electric submarines. Nuclear submarines are larger (length 100 to 150 m, beam 
11 to 20 m, drought 8 to 14 m) and tonnage (5,000 to 9,500 tons) and can 
operate thousands of miles away from base. They can remain submerged for 
more than six months. Their main power sources are nuclear reactors, which 
provide power allowing them to exceed 30 knots at high speed. Diesel-electric 

^ Gardner, W. Jr., 1996, Anti-Submarine Warfare, Brassey’s Inc., p 1. 


5 



submarines, also known as “small conventional submarines”, weigh 
approximately 500 to 1,500 tons and are mainly for coastal operations. Their 
small size (length 50 to 70 m, beam 5.5 to 9 m, drought 5 to 8 m) minimizes the 
acoustic target echo strength (TES) signature, which, as a result, is lower than 
that for nuclear submarines. Conventional submarines have maximum 
submerged speeds of 16 to 24 knots, very low acoustic signatures, and very 
short endurance at maximum speed. Quite often, a conventional submarine is 
unable to maintain its top speed for more than 15 to 30 minutes.® 

A diesel-electric submarine has to reach periscope/snorkeling (P/S) depth, 
which is 0 to 20 m below the surface, for snorkeling. It runs its diesel engines to 
charge its batteries, also known as snorkeling. The snort mast (snorkel), expels 
the exhaust gases and circulates fresh air. At the same time, messages can be 
relayed by coast support units. At this time, the submarine is very vulnerable, for 
the crew on a plane or a ship can see the snort mast, and the fumes can be 
detected by IR detection devices. Today’s radar has the ability to detect snorkels 
from a distance of a couple of thousand yards. Therefore, submariners snorkel 
several times a day for only short periods, and if possible only at night. 

A submarine’s primary objective is to remain undetected and can be a 
very powerful weapon if it remains undetected. In order to remain undetected, it 
must be silent and submerged at a depth that minimizes detection by the ASW 
forces. However, a submerged submarine can be detected via acoustic sensors 
in two ways. First, a listening device can hear the noises emitted by the 
submarine. The main engine, auxiliary engines, fans, pumps, propeller, or the 
transmissions from the submarine’s own sonic systems can emit noise. A 
submarine’s propeller creates cavitations, and this formation and collapse of 
bubbles causes noise. Using passive devices, noise caused by a submarine can 
be heard. Second, a device (active sonar) can be used to transmit acoustic 


® Armo, K. R., 2000, The relationship between a submarine’s maximum speed and its 
evasive capacity, M.S thesis. Naval Postgraduate School, 72 pp. 

6 



energy or waves through the water which will be reflected as they hit any object 
in their path. Returning pulses can be picked up by a receiver of active sonar.^ 


C. THE ENVIRONMENT 

1. Weather Effects 

ASW operations are sensitive to weather conditions. Turbulent waves and 
swells make detecting noise from a submarine more difficult. Precipitation and 
wind also add to background noise for the detecting sensor and mask noise from 
a submarine at the same bearing. Waves can also prevent visibility of the 
submarine mast at the same bearing. Additionally, the effectiveness of surface 
ship personnel is also lessened by bad weather conditions. 


2. Sound Energy and Gradients 

Sound does not travel in a straight line through the sea, because the sea 
is not homogenous. The velocity of sound varies with temperature, pressure, 
and salinity. These factors vary at different points and depths of the sea. With 
the change of velocity, the direction of the sound ray also changes, creating 
considerable bending effects. In general temperature is the most dominant factor 
in determining sound velocity, since temperature has a variable pattern. Salinity 
does not vary significantly and pressure increases with depth.^ 

Water temperature near the surface is usually higher than the temperature 
at any other depth. The sun’s rays heat the surface, but because of viscosity, 
cannot reach a depth of more than a few hundred feet. In the summer, surface 
temperature is at its peak; but, in winter, the highest temperature level can be 
measured at a depth of 20 to 30 feet. The temperature drops sharply with depth 
after its peak value. This rapid decline in temperature associated with depth is 
called “thermocline” or “layer.” The layer near the sea’s surface belt is called a 

^ Hill, J. R., 1985, Anti Submarine Warfare, 3'^'^ Ed. Naval Institute Press, p 39. 

® Hill, J. R., 1985, Anti Submarine Warfare, 3'^'^ Ed. Naval Institute Press, p 45. 


7 



permanent thermocline. In a classic example of a surface belt, sound can travel 
very far in a surface duct. Under the surface, sound rays bend downward. When 
the rays reach the thermocline, they bend towards the surface. At the surface, 
the rays bend back towards the water. Sound diminishes with distance as it 
encounters water molecules which absorb the sound’s energy and turn the sound 
into heat. 

In winter, water temperature is usually constant with depth, called 
“isothermal gradient.” In that situation, sound rays do not bend, but can travel 
through water and reach great depths. Hull-mounted sonar is most effective in 
conditions of isothermal gradient. After an isothermal gradient, temperature 
decreases with depth. This is the main thermocline. Sound velocity also 
decreases, and the sound rays bend downward. Sound velocity reaches its 
minimum at 4,000 feet where the temperature is constant with depth, but the 
velocity increases with pressure. In this case, a deep sound channel is formed 
between the thermocline and the next increasing sound speed layer where the 
sound rays begin to bend upward. The sound is trapped in the sound channel 
and can travel long distances (see Figure 1). 


8 




During the summer in the Mediterranean, when the surface duct is warm 
and very shallow, there is a negative gradient below the surface duct where a 
sound channel exists at 1,000 feet. Active sonar beams, from hull-mounted 


9 







sonar, can reach the sound channel where they bend upward with increasing 
pressure and gather at the surface about 30 to 60 miles from the source as 
shown in Figure 2. This is known as the convergence zone (CZ). 



Figure 2. Formation of Shadow and Convergence Zone (After: Flill, 1985, 40) 


At thermocline or layer, sound rays cannot penetrate and bend up as a 
result of reflection. A considerable percent of the sound energy turns into heat. 
Below the layer, sound rays are deflected and bend downward due to a change 
in their velocity. A shadow zone occurs below the layer, into which sonar rays 
cannot penetrate, as a result of reflection and deflection. The submarine 
positions itself in a shadow zone to prevent detection, as shown in Figure 3. The 
best approach for gaining contact with a submarine located in the shadow zone 
is to position the sonar below the layer. Flelicopter dunking sonar or depth- 
variable-towed-array sonar (DTAS) are used for this purpose. 


10 




















3. Sonic Equipment 

Active sonar for detecting sound rays needs to be reflected from the 
target. Propagation loss is relatively severe during the two-way trip. If a long 
range is needed, lower frequencies are required. The range is determined by the 
transmitted power. The more energy transmitted, the greater the reflected signal. 
The relationship between increase in power and range is not linear, but 
logarithmic. 

Passive sonar can detect noise from sea creatures, noise from other 
surface ships in a battle group, and the ship’s own propeller and engines. A 
surface ship, with towed array sonar (TAS) for passive listening, can be placed at 
a distance from other surface ships in the force to minimize mutual interference. 


11 














4. 


Non-Acoustic Detection 


a. Magnetic Anomaly Detectors (MAD) 

Since a submarine is made of ferrous metal, it causes a local 
change in the earth’s magnetic field when passing through an area. The 
magnetic effect can be detected at distances of several hundred feet by Magnetic 
Anomaly Detectors (MAD). MADs are used by planes or helicopters for detection 
purposes. 


b. Infrared (IR) 

Water is circulated through the submarine’s machinery to cool it. 
The circulated water is discharged at higher temperature. This temperature 
change can be detected by infrared (IR) devices. Additionally, a submarine’s 
snort mast also provides an infrared (IR) target. 

c. Turbulence 

Turbulence results from the displacement of water as the 
submarine moves through it, and this can be noted visually. 

d. Electronic Support Measure (ESM) 

Radar and conventional transmissions from a submarine can be 
easily detected by Electronic Support Measure (ESM) devices to obtain the 
bearing of the submarine.^ 

e. Radar 

A submarine’s snort mast and attack periscope can be detected by 
modern radars. 


9 Hill, p 43. 


12 



D. ASW PROCESS 

Advances in technology, such as satellites, allow for more effective 
tracking of submarines as they transit from the base to operational areas. A 
satellite can monitor a submarine while it navigates on the surface during its 
transit. However, after submersion, a satellite cannot detect the submarine. 
Other means of ASW operations are required to eliminate the submarine’s 
effectiveness in the sea. 

Five phases are involved in the ASW process: 

1. Detection 

2. Classification 

3. Localization 

4. Tracking 

5. Kill 


1. Detection 

Detection refers to a contact being made with an object, believed to be a 
submarine. The detection can occur through the following mediums: 
visual/radar, MAD, ESM devices or acoustic. A maritime patrol aircraft (MPA) 
can be used effectively to search an area, and patrol it for at least six hours, as 
determined by its fuel capacity. An MPA has several mechanisms for searching 
and detecting a submarine in the area. The basic means for searching is visual 
detection by the pilots who look for the body or mast of the submarine near the 
surface. A more effective way of detection is using magnetic anomaly detection 
(MAD). MAD is a short-range, out of water sensor that has wide coverage 
capability. Since MAD devices must stay relatively close to the water’s surface to 
be effective, they can only operate from low-flying aircraft. "lo An MPA can also 
deploy a passive or active sonobuoy to detect the submarine and monitor its 
acoustic field. A sonobuoy is a cylindrical device, made of levels of 
hydrophones, which can be programmed to specified depths. Sonobuoys can be 
active and/or passive, and can be used together for greatest efficiency. Bearing 
information can be obtained through directional, passive sonobuoys. Non- 

Daniel, D. C., 1986, Anti-Submarine Warfare and Superpower Strategic Stabiiity, 
University of Illinois Press, p 71. 


13 



directional passive sonobuoys provide contact indication only within their fields. 
When used in tandem sonobuoys can detect a submarine, transmit its range and 
bearing, or both, and provide contact indication information to a receiver on a 
ship or aircraft. 

Ships have different types of sonar to detect submarines. Hull-mounted 
sonar can transmit acoustic signals. Ships can also tow a cable with sonar 
arrays. The depth of the sonar can be set depending on the speed of the ship 
and the length of the cable. Sonar can be used in passive, active, or passive and 
active modes. An ASW ship can carry a helicopter installed with dipping sonar. 
One advantage of using dipping sonar is the ability to place the sonar device 
under the layer through which hull-mounted sonar cannot transmit. The 
helicopter can operate for two to five hours depending on its type. A 
disadvantage of using helicopters in the ASW operation is their susceptibility to 
weather conditions. At sea state four, a helicopter can hardly operate in the 
area. Another disadvantage is that the ship has to maintain at the same speed 
and course as the wind while the helicopter takes off and lands. 

2. Classification 

Classification is making a judgment about a contact and assessing 
whether or not that contact is a submarine. Big sea creatures, sunken ships, and 
sea bottom contours can be very deceptive, since they often resemble submarine 
silhouettes on sonar detection. The doppler effect, which states that an 
approaching target will, because of its relative movement, return an echo at 
higher frequency is used to analyze contacts. When a target recedes, the sound 
waves are stretched, and cause the sound's pitch to decrease. 

3. Localization 

Localization is a process for obtaining an accurate position for a 
submarine contact.''"i The bearing and distance can be obtained through active 

'I'l Hill, p 48. 

14 



sonar with accuracy that depends on the device’s characteristics and range. 
Some hull-mounted active sonar automatically focus on the bearing of the 
contact, instead of omni 360°. They transmit more acoustic energy through the 
sector. A submarine can detect the point at which the surface ship obtains an 
active sonar contact because transmissions from active sonar sources result in 
an immediate increase in acoustic energy signaling the ship that the submarine 
has been detected while simultaneously alerting the submarine. 

4. Tracking 

Tracking is a process of obtaining an estimation of a submarine’s past and 
future movements for a fire solution. For passive devices, such as a cross 
bearing is required. The estimated position accuracy depends on the angle 
between the passive devices and the target. 


5. Kill 

Kill is the last phase of the ASW process. To kill a submerged submarine, 
a weapon needs to be placed into the water. The weapon needs to explode at a 
distance that is lethal to its target. 

E. OPERATIONAL CONCEPTS 

One of the main operations in ASW is convoy or High Value Unit (HVU), 
protection. As an example, merchant ships need to be protected from enemy 
submarines along their transport routes. The best way to protect them is to 
group them in a convoy. The command and control ship in a battle group or the 
biggest replenishment ship can be assessed as HVU units. Losing these units 
will cause other vessels at sea to suffer severely. ASW ships form a special 
shield for protection of convoys or an HVU. Most often, three to six ships with 
hull-mounted active sonar are positioned on the perimeter of the convoy for anti¬ 
submarine defense. 


15 



A submarine with the intent of sinking the HVU in the convoy will try to 
maneuver into an attack position. During an attack, the submarine increases its 
risk of being detected, since it breaks silence. It may decide to withhold an 
attack and risk the convoys reaching its destination safely. If the submarine 
decides to use the attack periscope or active sonar to obtain an accurate bearing 
and range to the target, it is subject to detection by surface ships. 

An aircraft can support a battle group by searching the area of interest 
visually, checking for radar and visual sighting of periscopes, using its MAD, 
deploying and monitoring sonobuoys. Helicopters can use dipping devices at the 
convoy’s outer perimeter. Fixed wing aircraft or helicopters can be considered 
mobile weapon platforms. They can be used effectively in the areas outside of 
the surface ships’ torpedo ranges. These platforms can arrive at the identified 
point of contact in minutes because of their speed advantage. The time between 
detection of a submarine and attack is very important in minimizing a 
submarine’s probability of escape. A torpedo in the water launched by a surface 
vessel or aircraft, will cause the submarine to cancel an attack, since the 
submarine’s priority is its own survivability. The submarine will need to reposition 
itself for another attack or find a new fire solution. 

A friendly submarine can also be used as a detection device, but its own 
safety is compromised when it comes to the surface to obtain relayed messages 
or to transmit information regarding an enemy submarines. 


F. WEAPONS 

When a sonar contact is classified as a submarine, a torpedo is launched 
to a computed future position of the submarine. The calculation of the position 
where the torpedo enters the water and the required course and speed for the 
attack platform is called fire solution problem. A light-weight torpedo can be 
dropped from a fixed wing aircraft or helicopter, or launched from a ship. After a 
modern torpedo is launched, a self-homing operation is initiated by its own 
machinery and propeller. The torpedoes in NATO country inventories are mostly 


16 



US origin MK44 and MK46 types. These torpedo types have been in service 
since the early 1950’s. The MK44 type is an active homing torpedo with a 
maximum speed of 30 knots; the MK46 is an active/passive homing torpedo with 
a maximum speed of 45 knots. When an MK46 type torpedo is fired in passive 
mode, it will attempt to obtain a contact by acoustic energy (noise) emitted by the 
submarine’s propellers or machinery. An active sonar pulse from the submarine 
will also guide the torpedo to its target. Both torpedoes’ ranges are between 
3,000 and 8,000 yards. An Anti-Submarine Rocket (ASROC) is a rocket that is 
attached to a torpedo and can propel it 10,000 yards in the air. It is very 
important for the torpedo to be launched close enough to the target, since the 
target must be located by torpedo’s sensor. The torpedo will execute search 
patterns to maximize the probability of submarine detection (see Figure 4). It will 
continue its search pattern until it exhausts its fuel. Surface ships near the drop 
point will turn off their active sonar to avoid mutual interference. 

Other types of weapons including depth charges or mortars are used 
against submarines. A depth-charge is a bomb which explodes at a programmed 
depth and can be launched via rails installed on the deck of a surface ship. 



Figure 4. Active Homing Torpedo Search Pattern 


17 









THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


18 



III. CONCEPTUAL DESIGN 


A. ASW SIMULATION 

This chapter explains the conceptual design of the Anti-Submarine 
Warfare screen that will be used in the simulation. A conceptual design is very 
important to the process of producing a software program for evaluating a 
specific problem. This step must be accomplished before any actual program 
code implementation is done, since it helps to clarify goals in the early stage of 
the project. The conceptual design does not have to contain detail, but must 
exhibit the main characteristics of the model. However, the final product is often 
different from the conceptual design due to various factors such as resource 
constraints and feedback received. 

The initial conceptual design of the ASW Screen for simulation was 
conceived of as a final project assignment in the “Agent-Based Autonomous 
Behavior for Simulations” course. 

B. THE PURPOSE OF THE MODEL 

The purpose of the simulation model is to strategize Anti-Submarine 
Warfare (ASW) operations in order to protect a High Value Unit (HVU). In the 
simulation, the number of available surface ships with ASW capability will be 
between four and eight. The program will allow a diagram of surface ships 
protecting an HVU to be displayed on the ASW screen (see Figure 5). The 
command and control ship in a battle group, or the biggest replenishment ship, 
can also be designated as HVU unit, since losing this unit would be detrimental 
to the operation of other forces at sea. The surface ships are free to maneuver 
within their assigned sectors. The objective of the surface ships is to cover their 
sector as well as possible to prevent a submarine from attacking the HVU. The 
model will help to predict the outcomes of each maneuver by individual surface 
ships and how each ship contributes to the HVU’s defense. 


19 




Figure 5. A Typical ASW Screen 


The purpose of using the model is to provide answers to the following: 

1. How a change in the convoy’s speed will affect the outcome. 

2. If a better measurement of effectiveness (MOE) value can be obtained if more 
ships are placed in the simulation. 

3. If positioning a ship with towed array sonar (TAS) in front of the sector, and 
apart from the convoy, will be beneficial to the HVU’s protection from 
submarines. 

4. If the frontal sectors are changed: will the ASW Screen effectiveness be 
increased. 


20 















5. If the parameters of the inner or outer boundaries for any individual ship’s 
sector are changed will the model’s results are changed. 

6. If water conditions will affect the outcome of the surface ships’ effectiveness. 

The model will help the user evaluate how each individual ship’s 
maneuvering, within its sector, affects the other ships’ maneuvers. The model 
will determine situations when gaps occur between sector borders and whether 
time is sufficient for a submarine to penetrate the screen. The simulation will 
help the user explore emerging patterns during runtime. A software laboratory 
will be developed where the issues mentioned above and others can be 
investigated to gain more insight into anti-submarine defense of an HVU. 

The software will use Multi-Agent System (MAS) techniques. An agent is 
a computer system that is placed in a defined environment and acts 
autonomously within this environment.'i2 Agents have their own intelligence and 
are able to adapt to situational changes to meet their design objectives. An 
agent will sense its environment and take required actions to modify that 
environment. In a Multi-Agent System (MAS), actions of individual agents will 
affect the other agents’ decisions. Hence, it is very difficult to predict the 
outcome before running the model. MAS technique is very useful since it 
involves cognition and decision making to map out the complex patterns of 
interactions among the agents. A software laboratory using MAS techniques is 
capable of surprising even the designer. 

C. MAS REQUIREMENTS 

Every MAS involves six elements:''^ 

1. Environment 

2. Objects 

3. Agents 

4. Rules or Relationship 

5. Operations and Laws. 


Wooldridge, M., 2002, Multi Agent Systems, Wiley, p 15. 

Ferber, J., 1999, Multi-Agent Systems, Addison-Wesley Inc., pi 12. 

21 



1. Environment 

The simulation is designed to train ASW commanders to configure the 
ASW screen. The simulation operates assuming, that in the scenario, a surface 
group travels within a defined area to defend the HVU from submarines. The 
convoy is positioned to maneuver within a strait with no available alternative 
routes due to blockage by enemy sea mines. The intelligence sources will 
confirm that there are one or two enemy submarines operating in the area. 

The simulation focuses on a rectangular area of 35 x 50 nautical miles 
(NM) (see Figure 6). The convoy is programmed to bear north. The surface 
ships in the simulation are ASW capable and have hull-mounted sonar installed. 
They escort the HVU, which does not have ASW capability. Some surface ships 
are also carriers of ASW helicopters, and are required to stay within their 
assigned sectors; but are free to set their courses and speeds. The main force’s 
initial position is at the southern edge of the ASW area. 

The program’s user can choose either one or two submarines for the 
model at the beginning of the simulation. The submarines’ initial positions, 
speeds, and courses are unknown to the surface group. When a submarine is 
within a surface ship’s sonar range, detection of the submarine will be 
determined by a probability distribution. At initialization, submarine is positioned 
randomly within 2/3 of the ASW area, north of the main force’s location. The 
main purpose for positioning the submarine(s) near the center of the ASW area, 
instead of placing it near the initial position of the surface group is to allow 
sufficient time for an attack. 


22 




Figure 6. Operational Area (Not Drawn to Scale) 

If two submarines are to be positioned within an ASW area which is 
divided into two equal operational areas each known as a Submarine Action Area 
(SAA). An SAA prevents mutual interference between submarines to ensure 

23 




















their safety from friendly fire. Each submarine needs to stay within its assigned 
SAA. Figure 7 shows two submarines in their operational areas. The model 
involves only conventional diesel-electric submarines. Since the main power 
source for a submerged conventional submarine is battery units, the battery 
charge level is the most critical issue when in a submarine’s operation. Speed is 
correlated with battery level. At high speeds, a submarine consumes more 
battery power. For example, in speeds between three and four knots, a 
submarine can operate 48 hours without snorkeling. It can maneuver at speeds 
between 18 and 24 knots for 72-50 minutes. Then, its batteries need recharging. 
Flowever, when the submarine maneuvers at high speed; for example 22 knots 
for 30 minutes, its battery charge units drop 60%. 



Figure 7. Locating Two Submarines in the ASW Area (Not Drawn to Scale) 


24 


























The main force’s speed is dependent on the HVU’s speed because the 
surface ships needs to remain within their defined sectors, determined by the 
HVU’s position (see Figure 5). Furthermore, escort ships have a speed and 
maneuver ability advantage as compared to the HVU. During runtime, the 
program’s user can change the main force’s course between 0° - 45° at a time. 
The default course of the surface group is 000°. The user is also able to choose 
a zigzag pattern. The changes in a surface ship’s course, in a zigzag pattern, 
within specified intervals are shown in Figure 8. The ship maneuvers in a zigzag 
pattern to complicate the submarine’s torpedo firing calculation, making it more 
time consuming and difficult to lock onto the ship’s position. The user is able to 
enter the zigzag pattern at the beginning of the simulation. The main force’s 
(HVU) speed is between 10-14 knots. Escort ships are able to maneuver two 
knots above the HVU’s speed to their maximum speed. 


-i 


ir 


03" to right from 
main course 


. 11" to left from 

% main course 

\ 


N2' 

^ 34 ' 


15" to right from 
main course 

44" to left from 
main course 


X 21' 






08' 


22 to left from 
main course 

7" to right from 
main course 


Figure 8. Example of a Zigzag Pattern for the Main Force (Not Drawn to Scale) 


Since a conventional submarine is very quiet, the surface ship’s sonar 

personnel do not detect the submarine when using a hull-mounted sonar in 

25 



passive mode. Thus, the surface group uses sonar in active mode to detect the 
submarine. The program user may also choose a sonar policy which forces 
surface ships to turn off their sonar for specific time intervals. This kind of sonar 
policy can prevent mutual interference from hull-mounted sonar. A submarine 
can detect fewer acoustic clues while a restrictive sonar policy is in progress. 
See Table 1 for an example of a sonar policy. 


Time when sonar is ON starting at the top of 

Totai interval timewhen sonar 

ShiD Name 

the hour for each hour (min) 

is ON for each hour (min) 

rCG YILDIRIM- TCG TURGUTREIS 

10-20 

10 

TCG SALIHREIS ■ TCG KEMALREIS 

20-40 

20 

TCG MUAVENET - TCG KARADENIZ 

40-10 

30 


Table 1. A Sonar Policy Example 

There are two sonar types in the model medium and long range. An 
active sonar device range depends on its power. The more acoustic energy a 
sonar device transmits into the water, the better the range. Maximum range for 
both sonar types is determined by normal distribution. Table 2 shows minimum 
and maximum range values for both sonar types. If desired, the user can elect to 
input minimum and maximum sonar ranges for both sonar types at the beginning 
of the simulation. 


Range Intervals 


Sonar Type 

(In Yards) 

Medium Range 

Min 

Msol 

Sonar 

3,000 

7,000 

Long Range 



Sonar 

4,500 

9,800 


Table 2. Sonar Ranges For Hull-Mounted Sonar 


26 






If the user does not specify sonar ranges, the program will calculate the 
maximum sonar ranges for both types, according to normal distribution within the 
given mean and standard deviations. See Figure 9 for an example of the 
parameters and normal distribution graphs. 




Medium Sonar Range Distribution with // = 5000 Long Sonar Range Distribution with /r = 7150 

Parameters ct= 588.2356 Parameters cr=779.4117 

Figure 9. Sonar Range Distributions for Medium and Long Range Sonar Types 

In the program, the submarine operates within periscope/snorkel (P/S) 
depth of between 10 to 15 meters. The simulation provide water conditions of 
isothermal gradient, usually seen in winter, when there are no layers, and sonar 
rays can reach a depth of 250 meters. The simulation does not operate when 
there is a layer (thermocline), since the sonar rays cannot penetrate or are 
reflected from the layer. Submarines located under the layer cannot be detected 
by hull-mounted sonar. 

During the simulation, when the submarine is within the ship’s sonar 
range, it will be detected and destroyed immediately. In addition, once the 
submarine is detected, it is not able to attack. The submarine will plan a torpedo 
attack to sink the FIVU. A successful torpedo attack will be determined by a 
stochastic process. Table 3 shows the probabilities for a successful attack 
according to the range. In the model, a torpedo fired from the submarine 

targeting surface ships should not be considered a particular type. A modern 

27 








conventional submarine can have different types of torpedoes loaded in its 
torpedo tubes. Therefore, the probabilities used in the program for the success 
of an attack have been gathered from different NATO torpedo characteristics and 
abilities with ASW experts’ judgments. (Since firing a torpedo is complex-the 
sample size for tries is small-the probabilities are far from a validation.) 

For example, if a Type 209 submarine fires a torpedo at a distance of 
11,000 yards; its probability of success is 0.60. The probability of success in the 
program refers to probability of kill. The program will calculate a uniform random 
number between zero and one. If the number is less or equal to 0.60, the attack 
is considered successful. 


Distance 

From HVU 
(In Yards) 

Probability of 

A Successful 
Attack 

0-7,000 

0.95 

7,000-10,000 

0.77 

10,000-12,000 

0.60 

12,000-14,000 

0.48 

14,000-15,000 

0.24 

>15,000 

0.003 


Table 3. Probabilities of Successful Attack Based on Distance From an FIVU 

The submarine is free to attack at anytime within its Submarine Action 
Area (SAA), unless its battery level drops to a level insufficient for an attack. It 
remains submerged during the simulation. Once it comes to the surface, the 
submarine can be detected by the ship’s radar, regardless of its distance from 
the ship. The submarine has to maintain the same speed and course during the 
two minutes prior to an attack. This is the theoretical minimum time needed for 
the firing solution. 


28 




The submarine’s position is known by the battle group immediately after it 
fires a torpedo. The closest ship will move toward the submarine’s last known 
position to make contact. At the same time, the submarine will move away from 
the surface group at maximum speed to avoid precisely located by surface ships. 
In the simulation, the surface ships’ weapon ranges are greater than their sensor 
ranges. When a ship has localized and tracked a submarine, the submarine is 
destroyed immediately. 

During the simulation, the submarine uses only its passive sonar in order 
to obtain the ship’s location, and never transmits an active sonar pulse. The 
submarine’s passive sonar range is 50,000 yards (half the height of the ASW 
area. A submarine’s systems can detect a ship’s speed and course within its 
sonar range when a ship’s sonar is in active mode. If the surface ship’s sensor is 
in passive mode, or if its sonar is off, the submarine can still detect the ship 
within 6,000 yards because the submarine will be able to hear the noise caused 
by the surface ship’s machinery or propulsion. 

2. System Objects 

a. Rectangular Area Object 

The ASW area is 35 x 50 nautical miles (NM). The information 
concerning all the ships as well as the submarines, such as the position, speed, 
course, and sonar situation is stored in the rectangular area object. The program 
obtains the information concerning the ASW screen and draws the sector lines 
illustrating inner and outer bounds as shown in Figure 5. The ships will be drawn 
within their sectors and their sonar coverage will be represented by a red circle. 

b. ASW Screen Object 

The ASW screen object stores the information of the sector 
bearings and inner-outer ranges as shown in Table 4. 


29 



Sector 

Number 

Sector 
Bearings 
(In Degrees) 

Inner-Outer 
Sector Ranges 
(In Yards) 

1 

320-040 

4,000-9,500 

2 

040-150 

4,000-9,000 

3 

150-210 

4,000-8,000 

4 

210-320 

4,000-9,000 


Table 4. Sector Information 


At the start of the simulation, the user is required to input the 
number of sectors, the sector bearings, and the inner-outer ranges. The program 
warns the user if the inner sector boundaries do not add to 360° or if a sector 
begins within another sector’s bearing boundaries. In addition, the user inputs 
the name of the ships assigned to the sectors. The outer sectors are not 
required to cover 360°, but outer sectors are expected to start at least from the 
distance where the inner sector ends. 

c. Sector Objects 

Every sector has a unique identification number between one and 
the total number of ships. Beside its identification number, the sector has the 
beginning and ending bearings and beginning and ending ranges. It has a string 
value for storing the name of the ship assigned to the sector. 

The HVU is located at the center of the ASW screen. A sector is 
drawn on the computer screen using the x-y values of all vertices (see Figure 
10 ). 


30 





Figure 10. The Frontal Sector and its Vertices 

The following is an example of the calculation of the x-y values: 

The FIVU is located at point (200,500), main course is 000° 

Sector bearing values are between 320°-040°. Further range 
values are between 4,000-9,000 yards. 

One yard is represented by one pixel on the computer screen 

= 200 + X sin 320 = 174 

100 

Ay = 500 - X cos 320 = 469 

100 

The x-y values for the other three points can be computed in a 
similar manner. 

In the next example, the same values are used except than the 
main course is 030°. The calculation for point A on the computer screen: 


320 +30 = 350 

= 

200 + 

4,000 

100 

X sin 350 = 193 

040 +30 = 070 

II 

> 

500 - 

4,000 

100 

X cos 350 = 461 


d. Referee Object 

A referee object decides the detection and attack results. This 
object retrieves the surface ship’s position, its sonar status, and also the 
submarine’s position. For every time step, a calculation is computed to 
determine whether a submarine is detected within the surface ship’s sonar 
ranges. When a property change for the detection of surface ship occurs 


31 







depending on its sonar status, the referee passes along the bearing, distance, 
speed, and course of the surface ship to the submarine. The referee decides 
whether a submarine torpedo attack is successful or not according to stochastic 
processes depending on the distance from the HVU. 

e. Convoy Object 

A convoy consists of the HVU and the escorting ships. The HVU’s 
location is calculated with a given speed and time by the following equations: 

X= Xo+Vf 
y= Yo + Vt 

For example, if the HVU’s initial position is (200,500) with a course 
of 030° and speed of 14 knots, the next position after At is calculated below. In 
this example, delta time represents one time step which is 30 seconds. 

V = 14 knots =7.2 m/s => 223.6 ft/s = 7.9 yards/s 

^QQ _|_ ^ X Sin 30 X 30 _ 2Q y 
118.75 

500 =498 

204.46 

The x-y calculated here represents the new position of the HVU 
after one time step. 

f. Sonar Object 

Sonar ranges, depending on the type of sonar, are determined by 
normal distribution. Table 2 shows the minimum and maximum ranges for both 
sonar types. The initial sonar ranges are computed using the parameters input 
by the user or with the default maximum and minimum numbers (see Table 2), at 
the beginning of the simulation. After sonar ranges are determined by the 

program, they remain constant and cannot be changed during runtime. 

32 


X = 

y = 



g. Submarine Battery Object 

The submarine battery object stores information on the submarine’s 
battery charge level. For every time step, the battery charge level is updated. 
See Figure 11 and Table 5 for submarine battery endurance levels for various 
speeds. 



Maichinery 

Power 

Speed 
<(n Knots) 

Battery Life 
<ln Hours) 

1/8 

3 

48.26 

1/4 

8 

21.90 

1/2 

12 

10.03 

3/4 

17 

4.6 

7/8 

22 

1.18 


Figure 11. Submarine Battery Endurance Graphs 


Speed 
(In Knots) 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

Batteiy Life 
(In Hours) 

48.28 

46.44 

39.34 

30.65 

23.55 

21.90 

18.81 

14.60 

12.26 

10.3 

9.07 

Speed 
(In Knots) 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

Batteiy Life 
(In Hours) 

7.76 

6.97 

5.92 

4.60 

4.07 

3.2 

2.23 

1.49 

1.18 

0.83 

0.65 


Table 5. Submarine Battery Endurance Within Various Speeds 


If a submarine with 90% battery capacity level is trying to gain a 
firing position on a main force traveling at 14 knots, it needs to run at 17 knots for 
30 minutes. If running at a speed of 17 knots, the battery can last for 4.6 hours. 
At the end of 30 minutes, the submarine has used 50% more of its beginning 
battery level. The new battery level is then 40%. 


33 



















h. Manager Object 

The manager object positions the ships at the center of their 
sectors and the submarine, randomly, within its SAA at the start of the simulation. 
This object checks or zigzag patterns and triggers he HVU for a course change 
when necessary. If an interval sonar policy is in progress, the manager orders 
he ship to change its sonar status to parallel the sonar policy. 

/. Simulation Time Object 

The simulation time (SimTime) object checks the system time and 
synchronously updates elapsed time with system time. The simulation 
terminates when the main force has exited the ASW area at its north edge or ten 
minutes after a successful attack. 

J Data Collector Object 

A data collector object will retrieves the information required for 
analysis (see Figure 12 for an example of data collector fields). 


34 



Convoy's Speed 
Sonar Policy 

# Of Submarines 

# of Successful Attacks 

# of Unsuccessful Attacks 

# of Ships 

Medium Range Sonar Range 
Long Range Sonar Range 

# of Ships in the Inner Screen 

# of Ships in the Outer Screen 
Screen Information 

Simulation Total Time 

Submarine Battery Level At Attack 

Submarine Battery Level After Attack 

Submarine Batttery Level At Finish 

Submarine Survival 

Figure 12. Data Collector Object Fields 

3. Agents 

This model is suitable for a MAS laboratory. Because the actions of ships 
and submarines are affected by the environment and in turn the environment is 
shaped by the reactions or actions of the surface ships and submarines. 

a. Surface Ships 

Each of the surface ships is an agent that can freely choose and 
act autonomously. The ships can choose their speeds and courses, but they 
must stay in their assigned sectors. The ships try to cover the sector as well as 
possible, while remaining within it. Since a ship’s sensor coverage is relatively 

35 




small in relation to the sector area, it must find an appropriate search pattern for 
better coverage. If the ship is to remain at a particular area of the sector for a 
long period of time, the submarine is able to penetrate the gaps caused by 
insufficient coverage. On the other hand, the submarine needs some time to 
position itself in a good location for a torpedo attack. In addition, the submarine 
tries to gain a firing position at minimum speed. 

The ship’s movement pattern is unknown to the submarine unless 
the ship exhibits a repeated pattern. After some time, the submarine can 
comprehend the ship’s search pattern and move to the optimum position for an 
attack. 

During the simulation, the ships are able to choose their own 
preferences from a list. One of the preferences is to divide the sector into four 
quadrants and to visit each of the quadrants to a specified time limit. Figure 13 
shows how a sector can be divided into four quadrants. 



Figure 13. Dividing a Sector into Four Quadrants 

The ship chooses the quadrants randomly. The model draws a random number 
between one and four with uniform distribution. Next, the ships determine the 
number of legs and time intervals for the movement according to uniform 
distribution. The legs are between two and four and the time intervals are 
between six and ten minutes. For example, the ship moves into quadrant II and 
executes two legs with the total movement lasting nine minutes. It then heads to 
the edge of the quadrant. This is point A shown in Figure 14. Since the ASW 


36 






screen is dynamic and moves in accordance with the HVU’s course and speed, 
the ship calculates point A; where point A will be in nine minutes and bends for 
this location. 



Figure 14. Ship’s Search Pattern: Visiting Each Quadrant in a Sequence (Not Drawn 

to Scale) 

An easy way to calculate the distance a vessel moves at sea is to 
use the “Three-Minute Rule.” To compute the distance using the three-minute 
rule, one takes a unit’s speed in knots and adds two zeroes to the speed. This is 
how far the vessel travels in three minutes. For example, a vessel moving at a 
speed of 20 knots can travel 2,000 yards within three minutes. The ship moves 
666.67 yards in one minute and 6,000 yards in nine minutes at a speed of 20 
knots. If the HVU’s speed is 14 knots, then the ship moves six knots faster. The 
ship gains 1,800 yards from its initial position relative to the screen. After nine 
minutes it chooses the quadrant, number of legs, and time interval for the next 
session (see Figure14). The pattern is quite complex and is very hard for the 
submarine to comprehend. The pattern can be developed using a rule, stating 
that from top of the hour the ship visits the frontal quadrants (I or II) four times, 
then the rear quadrants (III or IV), which is determined by random distribution. 


37 





























Another preference can be a variant of the first, where there is 
cooperation between neighboring ships. The ships cover the same quadrants in 
their sectors, which may overlap into the sector areas covered by neighboring 
ships. Obviously, the ships benefit from the coverage by neighboring ships. 

A ship discards a preference in order to find a better search pattern 
for sensor coverage. The criterion for discard is the area of the ship’s sensor 
coverage during 40 minutes. If the preference cannot provide a coverage 
criterion above the threshold value, the preference is discarded. 

The ships do not have knowledge of the exact number of 
submarines in the ASW area. The program continues after the first detection. 
The simulation ends only when there are two detections. 

The ship picks the preference and calculates the speed 
requirement and course for the preference and then update the position. It 
reports the new updated positions for every time step. The sector is divided into 
square grids for sensor coverage calculation (see Figure15). 



Figure 15. Dividing a Sector into Square Grids 

Each grid stores an integer value, either one or zero, and the value 
is initialized at zero at the start of the preference. During the session, if the ship’s 
sensor covers the grid, the grid’s value is changed to one; otherwise, it remains 


38 







































as zero. After 40 minutes has elapsed, the program counts the grids valued at 
one or the grids covered by the ship’s sensor. The effectiveness function for 
coverage is: 

#grids covered 
# total grids in the sector 

If the number returned from the effectiveness function is below the 
threshold value, the existing preference is discarded and the ship chooses 
another preference. At the start of a new preference, all the grid values is 
initialized to zero again. A grid is considered covered if the grid’s center is within 
the ship’s sensor range. The ship checks the distance between its location and 
the grid’s center location. If it is less than the sensor range, the grid’s value is set 
to one. The model only checks the grids which have not yet been covered. 

b. Submarine 

The submarine’s initial position is a random location within the SAA. 
The referee object provides information on any ship within its passive sonar 
range. When a submarine has made a contact, it is able to get the bearing, 
distance, course, and speed of the target ship. Some error is expected to occur 
depending on distance. 

The submarine tries to comprehend the location of the HVU. Since 
an HVU is not an ASW force, it does not have acoustic sensors. A submarine 
cannot obtain contact with the HVU from long distances due to the fact that it 
must calculate the center of the screen and assume that to be the HVU’s 
location. The submarine takes the average of the x and y coordinates of the 
ships and moves to the west or east through the convoy location. It finds a 
rendezvous point at the relative bearing of 045 or 315, at a 10,000 yard distance 
from the center of the screen (See Figure 16). It calculates the required speed 
and course to the rendezvous point. Since the surface group can execute a 
zigzag pattern, the submarine needs to update the rendezvous point, calculation, 
required course, and speed in every simulation time step. At the rendezvous 

39 



point, the submarine checks the other ships’ distances. If the distances from the 
ships are more than 9,500 yards and the ships are not moving towards the 
submarine, it then advances towards the HVU in order to increase its probability 
of a successful attack. If the distance for ships becomes less than 9,500 yards, 
the submarine decides whether or not to cancel the attack. When such a 
decision must be considered, if the submarine is at the same course for between 
one to two minutes, a random number between zero and one in uniform 
distribution will be drawn for a decision. If the drawn number is between 0.0 and 
0.7, the submarine fires the torpedo; if not, it cancels the attack. The submarine 
can also change its course by reversing and moving away from surface ships. 
The submarine then increases its speed to 22 knots for 15 minutes or until it is 
17,000 yards away from the nearest ship. 



40 


















The referee object decides on the ships’ detection of the 
submarine. At the time of the attack, the submarine’s position is known to the 
surface group. The referee object also determines whether the torpedo attack is 
successful or not. If the attack is unsuccessful, or if the submarine does not have 
a chance to attack, it bears north at a speed of 16 knots. Then the submarine 
calculates the rendezvous point at 045° or 315°, 10,000 away from the center 
point. (The battery charge capacity must be more than 40% at attack time.) The 
submarine then moves to the rendezvous point at a speed determined 
considering the time the convoy is expected to reach a position of 225° or 135°, 
10,000 yards from the rendezvous point. Then the submarine continues with the 
same attack procedure outlined. 

The submarine attempts to attack, unceasingly, until its battery 
charge level is less than 40% or the convoy is leaving its SAA. 

4. Relationships 

a. Roles 

The ships are trying to find a good search pattern with which to 
cover their area. They can change their preferences if the criteria for coverage 
are not met. The submarine attempts to attack the HVU while maintaining its 
own survivability option. 

b. Goals 

The goal of the program is to find an optimum screen configuration 
for protecting the HVU. The configuration’s effectiveness can be measured by 
the number of the times the HVU reaches its destination safely. During the 
program’s operation surface ships find their preferences for optimum coverage 
of their sector. 

The submarine tries to attack the HVU and raise the probability of 
success by advancing towards its target, while it considers its ability to survive 


41 



counterattacks. The submarine cancels an attack if it determines that its current 
location is unsafe. At the end of the simulation, the user obtains the optimum 
design based on how many attempts to transit the region for the given convoy 
speeds and water conditions. 


5. Requirements 

The surface ships need to use sonar in active mode to detect a 
submarine. At the beginning of the simulation, the submarine position is 
unknown to the surface ships. The referee object notifies the surface ships of a 
detection. Upon detection, the submarine is destroyed immediately. After an 
attack, the submarine’s position is known to the surface ships and the referee 
object decides the success of the attack and informs both the surface ships and 
the submarine(s). The nearest surface ship approaches the submarine’s last 
known position in order to detect the submarine; however, the ship must stay 
within its sector. The program ends ten minutes after a successful attack. A final 
determination of the submarine’s status is made by the referee object during this 
ten minute period. 

6. Operations and Processes 

The program user inputs the number of ships and submarines and the 
sector information when the simulation starts. The manager object randomly 
places the submarine within the SAA. First, the model decides the sonar ranges 
with normal distribution, and then it draws the screen and places the ships at the 
center of their sectors. The manager object retrieves the zigzag pattern and 
sonar policy. The ships choose their preferences. The ships report their new 
positions to the referee object and the referee object checks for mutual detection 
by surface ships and submarine. Then, the referee object checks the surface 
ships’ sonar status. Afterwards, the sector objects update their location with the 
convoy’s speed and courses. The submarine needs to report its updated 
position to the manager for every simulation time step. The grid objects’ status 
also is updated. 


42 



The manager object checks the ships’ sonar status and triggers them to 
change their sonar status to either ON or OFF according to the chosen sonar 
policy. Similarly, the HVU will be forced to alter its course according to the 
zigzag pattern. 

When an attack occurs, the referee object determines whether it is 
successful or not and triggers the nearest ship to move to the submarine’s last 
position. When an attack occurs, the data collector object obtains the results of 
the attack as well as the submarine battery’s charge capacity. The data collector 
object also retrieves information from the objects such as the convoy’s speed, 
sonar policy, and number of submarines. 

The program terminates either when all the submarines in the simulation 
are destroyed, or when the convoy leaves the rectangular area, or ten minutes 
after a successful attack. At the end of the simulation, the statistical data is 
shown on a frame. If the program user runs the model with the same input 
parameters more than once, the system initializes the parameters automatically. 


D. SUMMARY OF LAWS 

The rules of the model include: 

• The submarine’s position is unknown to surface ships in the 
beginning. 

• The ships are free to choose their speeds in their sectors (zero to 
max speed), but they must stay within their sectors. 

• The main force will bear north. 

• When the sonar ranges are initialized, they cannot be changed 
during the runtime. 

• When there is detection, the submarine will be destroyed 
immediately. 

• The referee object will decide whether the attack is successful or 
not. 

• At the time of the attack, the submarine’s position will be known to 
the surface ships and the nearest surface ship will move as close 
as possible to this position. 


43 



• The ships choose their preferences randomly and discard the 
preferences below the required thresholds. 

• The submarine continues its attacks unless its battery charge level 
is less than 40% or until the surface group leaves its SAA. (Since a 
conventional submarine needs to come to periscope/snorkel depth 
to recharge its batteries, the batteries can not be recharged during 
the simulation.) 

• The simulation ends when all the submarines are destroyed. If 
there is a successful attack, the simulation will end ten minutes 
after that attack. 


E. HUMAN INTERFACE 

A human interface allows the user to communicate with the computer 
program. The human interface in the simulation allows the user to input the 
parameters. The following are frames showing the human interface: 


Input Page 1 

Total Number of Ships : H ^ | 

Total Number of Ships with Medium Range Sonar : | 3 ^ | 
Total Number of Ships with Long Range Sonar : h ^ I 
Convoy Speed: 


12 V 


Number of Ships on the Main Screen: H '^| 

Number of Ships on the Outer Screen : | 0 ^ | 

Number of Submarines : @ One O Two 

Assign Sonar Ranges Randomly with Normal Distribution 


YES v 


Enter Sonar Ranges Manually 


M R Sonar “1500 Yds. LR. Sonar 7750 

Yds. 


[ Continue with Next Page | 


Figure 17. Input Page 1 


44 






















Input Page 2 


jCourse (degrees) 

|Duration(at the top of the hour, in minutes) 

[040 

[00-15 

1320 

15-25 

[350 

25-45 

[ooo 

[45-00 


Sector Assignments 


[ship Name 

[Sector Number 


TCGMUAVENET 

jl 


TCG YILDIEIM 

[2 


TCGTURGUTREIS 

[3 


TCGZAFER 

[4 


Ship(s) Name for Long Range Sonar [ TCG MUAVENET v 

• 1 1 ADD 1 

1 « Back to First Pago J | Continue with Next Page » 


Figure 18. Input Page 2 


Input Page 3 

Sector Design 


# |StartBearmg 

End Bearing 

Inner Bound 

jOuter Bound 

[i~[320 

040 

[4000 

[9500 

[^[040 

150 

[4000 

9500 

[^[Iso 

210 

[4000 

[8000 

[4~[210 

320 

[4000 

[9000 

[ ; 

1- 




I Check Sectors ~| 


Outer Sector 

# 

Start Bearing [End Bearing Inner Bound 

Outer Bound 

[l 

1 1 


2 


[ 


3 


1 





ext Page » | 

[ 

Check Outer Sectors || Drawthe Screen | 


[ « Back to Second Page || Continue with b 


Figure 19. Input Page 3 


45 





























































When the program user clicks on “draw the screen” the program displays 
the ASW Screen configuration in a pop-up window (see Figures). 


Input Page 4 


Sonar Policy 


© Active All 
O Interval 
Sonar Policy 


Ship Name 

Duration 





1 



Times the Simulation to be Runned? 


250 


I SAVE and EXIT | 


Figure 20. Input Page 4 


The following output window appears showing the results from the 
simulation: 


Convoy's 

Speed 

Sonar 

Policy 

#of 

Submarines 

#of 

Successful 

Attacks 

#of 

Unsuccessful 

Attacks 

# of Ships 






1 



1 




Med.Range 
Sonar 
Range 

Lon. Range 
Sonar 
Rnage 

# of Ships on 
the Inner 
Screen 

# of Ships 
on the Outer 
Screen 

Screen Design 
Information 

Simulation Total 
Time ^ 













Submarine 
Battery 
Charge 
Capacity at 
Attack Time 

Submarine 
Battery 
Charge 
Capacity 
after Attack 
Time 

Submarine 
Battery Charge 
Capacity at End 

Submarine 

Survival 
















Figure 21. Output Table 1 
46 











































































A. 

Convoy's Speed 

10 

B. 

Convoy's Speed 

12 


Total # of Ships on the 
Screen 

4 


Total # of Ships on the 
Screen 

6 


Med. Ran. Sonar Range 

4200 


Med. Ran. Sonar Range 

4890 


Lon. Ran. Sonar Range 

5 65 0 


Lon. Ran. Sonar Range 

7070 


Successful Attacks 

85 


Successful Attacks 

65 


Figure 22. Output Table 2 


The simulation outcomes can also be shown as histograms. Examples of 
the histograms are shown in Figure 23 and Figure 24. 



Figure 23. Number of Successful Attacks with Different Convoy Speeds 


47 















Figure 24. 


Number of Successful Attacks with Different 
Medium and Long Range Sonar Range Combinations 



Number of Runs: 250 
Sonar Policy: All Active 
Convoy Speed: 10 knots. 


MSR 5.000 yds. MSR 5,000 yds. MSR 5,500 yds. 
LSR 5,500 yds. LSR 6,700 yds. LSR 7,900 yds. 


Sonar Ranges 
MSR 5,700 yds. (In Yards) 
LSR 7,500 yds. 


Number of Successful Attacks with Different Medium and Long Sonar 

Range Combinations 


48 





IV. IMPLEMENTED MODEL 


This chapter explains the simulation model and program user interface. 
The user will gain a greater understanding of how to strategize and implement an 
ASW configuration screen by interfacing with the program. The chapter will also 
describe agent and object interactions and communications and how the user 
can monitor those interactions. 

A. STRATEGY FOR CONFIGURATION OF THE ASW SCREEN 

The overall program’s effectiveness is measured by how often the HVU 
safely reaches its destination. The program user will attempt to find the optimal 
screen configuration for protecting the HVU from submarine attacks. In 
configuring an optimal ASW screen, the program user needs to consider 1) the 
measure of effectiveness (MOE) value and 2) the cost effectiveness of the 
number of ships used in the configuration. 

The Measure of Effectiveness (MOE) function is: 

# of times HVU protected safely 

MOE = - 

ft of total runs 

In the simulation, the user will be able to see the output for each ASW 
configuration and change the parameters of the program to improve the 
configuration. The most important factors to consider in configuring an ASW 
screen are the number of surface ships, the formation of the ships in the screen, 
the speed of the surface ships, and the ships’ sonar ranges. However, in many 
military operations, the commanders are limited by the number of ships, the HVU 
maximum speed capacity, and effects of water conditions in sonar ranges. The 
HVU maximum speed capacity and water conditions are factors that the 
commanders cannot manipulate. Therefore, the most important variables in 
deciding an ASW screen are the number of ships and their formation on the 
screen. The number of ships chosen for the configuration will be determined by 


49 



whether adding additional ships to the configuration will greatly increase the 
MOE. The desired MOE will be determined by the commander for the particular 
operation. 


B. AGENTS AND OBJECT INTERACTIONS 

1. Agent Behaviors 

The surface escort ships will be configured on the ASW screen around the 
HVU. The ships need to use their sonar in active mode to detect the submarine. 
The submarine’s position will be unknown to the surface group at the beginning 
of the simulation. The surface ships will bear north in the ASW area. 

The HVU’s course will be 000° unless a zigzag pattern is implemented 
(see Figure 8: An Example of Zigzag Pattern for the Main Force, on page 25). 
The escort ships will be free to alter their speed and course while they attempt 
maximum coverage within their respective sectors. The ships will choose a 
preference search pattern within their sectors and discard any preference that 
falls below the threshold value for covering its sector (see page 37 for the 
effectiveness function for coverage of a sector). If the submarine fires a torpedo, 
the submarine’s position at the time of attack will be revealed to the surface 
ships. The nearest two ships will move to the submarine’s last known position 
(DATUM) at a speed of 21 knots (maximum speed is 25 knots). They will try to 
obtain a detection and form a barrier between the submarine and the HVU. The 
DATUM will be in progress for 15 minutes. At the end of the 15 minute period, 
the surface ships will return to their sectors and move north in the formation. 

The submarine is the most important agent in the simulation. For a 
conventional submarine, battery level and speed are the most important issues. 
In the model, the submarine will make decision based on remaining battery 
percent; for example, when a submarine decides that it will not have sufficient 
remaining battery unit after the attack, it will cancel the attack and try to distance 
itself from the surface vessels. 


50 



The submarine will try to attack the HVU with the greatest probability of 
success, by advancing towards its target. However, the probability of a 
successful attack will be compromised by the submarine’s consideration of its 
survivability. The submarine can detect surface ships with active sonar at a 
distance of 50,000 yards. The submarine will calculate a rendezvous point at 
which its initial position will be perpendicular (90° or 270°) to surface ships. This 
point is the shortest distance between the submarine and the surface ships. 
Hence, the submarine will minimize the distance traveled and its battery 
consumption. When the submarine arrives at the rendezvous point, it will be 
10,000 yards away and have a bearing of 45° (east or west) relative to the HVU. 
If the submarine detects other surface ships within 7,500 yards—the maximum 
distance for the ship to detect the submarine—before it arrives at the rendezvous 
point, it has two options for attacking the HVU. The first option is for the 
submarine to attack if the following two conditions are met: 1) its distance from 
the HVU is less than or equal to the maximum torpedo range (17,000 yards) and 
2) it has remained on the same course for the last two minutes (the time required 
for torpedo firing solution). The second attack option occurs when the submarine 
has remained on the same course for one minute at a distance of 17,000 yards 
from the HVU or less. In this case, it will draw a uniform random number 
between 0.0 and 1.0. If the number is less than, or equal to 0.7, then it will 
attack. If the submarine cannot meet these conditions for a safe attack, it will 
abort. The submarine’s status will change to “escape” either after an attack or 
when it aborts. The submarine will alter its course to 180° to move away from 
the surface ships at a maximum speed of 24 knots for at least 15 minutes to 
avoid possible counterattacks. After 15 minutes, the submarine will calculate a 
new position for another attack when conditions are safe. The submarine will 
continue to attack unless 1) it has a battery level of less than or equal to 40% 
(required minimum battery level for an escape operation), or 2) the HVU has 
exited the ASW area to the north. 


51 



2. Object Behavior and Communications 

In real life, many objects are not physical, but are needed to simulate the 
relationships. A torpedo’s success cannot be known unless it has sunk a ship. 
However, It is not possible to fire a war head torpedo as part of practice. A 
torpedo might be defective, and can behave other than expected. There is no 
referee in reality but the object must be created to determine the relationships 
between the ships and the submarine. 


a. Simulation Time Object: 

The simulation time object calculates elapsed time synchronously 
with system time. 

For example, if the user inputs into the ASW wizard 13:00 as the 
initial simulation time, the simulation time will be initialized as 13:00:00:000 (first 
field is for hour, second field is for minute, third field is for second, the last field is 
for millisecond). The simulation time object will continuously obtain system time 
(11:53:25:120) and will be updated using threads. Threads allow a program to 
efficiently perform multiple tasks simultaneously and enhance performance and 
functionality. The simulation time update thread will run inside the simulation 
time object to calculate elapsed time and update it. System time will be stored as 
“oldTime”. Then the simulation time update thread will wait (sleep) for 60 
milliseconds. After the 60 millisecond lapse, the simulation update thread will 
obtain system time and store it as “newTime”. The simulation time object will be 
updated using the following equations: 

elapsed system time = newTime - oldTime 

elapsed system time = 11:53:25:180 - 11:53:25:120 = 60 milliseconds 


Drake, J. D., cited 2004, Introduction to java threads [ Avaiiabie oniine at 
http://www.javaworid.com/javaworid/jw-04-1996/jw-04-threads.htmi.] 

52 



elapsed simulation time = 


simulation elapsed 
time X system 
turn time 


elapsed simulation time = 


15 


120 

(wiiiiseconds) 


elapsed simulation time = jsOQ miiiiseconds (1 second + 800 milliseconds) 

The simulation time will be: 13: 00: 01: 800 

Briefly, when one second elapses in system time, the simulation 
time will be forwarded 15 seconds. 


b. Screen Object 

The screen object obtains information regarding the sector bearings 
and ranges from the ASW Screen XML file. It configures the ship objects and 
positions them in the center of their sectors relative to the HVU, which is located 
at the center of the ASW screen. For example, if the sector has a beginning 
bearing of 0° and an ending bearing of 60° with an inner boundary at 4,000 yards 
and outer boundary at 9,000 yards, then the ship will have a bearing of 30° at a 
distance of 6,500 yards relative to the HVU’s position. 

c. Environment Manager Object 

The environment manager object tracks the sonar status by 
obtaining the sonar policy from the XML files. It will control whether the sonar will 
be active or passive for each ship according to sonar policy in progress. 

d. Track List Object 

The track list object registers the ships’ information such as 
identification numbers; names; course; speed; location; and bearing and distance 
(relative to the guide’s ship). When other objects need to retrieve a surface 
ship’s information they can query the track list object. 


53 



e. Submarine List Object 

Similarly, the submarine list object retains the submarine’s 
information such as its identification number, name, course, speed, location, 
bearing, and distance. 

f. Referee Object 

The referee object determines the detection of the ships and 
submarines. It checks the ships’ sonar status and the distances between the 
ships and the submarine. For example, if the ship’s sonar status is active, and 
the distance is within the submarine’s passive sonar range (50,000 yards), then 
the referee object will notify the submarine that it detects a ship. The submarine 
will then obtain the ship’s location, course, and speed from the referee object. If 
the ship’s sonar status is passive, the submarine will be able to detect the ship 
within 15,000 yards (due to the propulsion and machinery noise), and it will 
obtain the ship’s location, course, and speed from the referee object. If the 
submarine attacks the HVU, the referee will determine the attack’s success. The 
referee will check the distance between the submarine and the HVU at the time 
of the attack (see Table 3: Probabilities of Successful Attack Based on Distance 
from an HVU, page 27). If a submarine fires a torpedo at a distance of 12,500 
yards from the HVU, the probability of the kill is 0.48. The referee then draws a 
random number between 0.0 and 1.0 according to uniform distribution. If the 
random number drawn is less than or equal to 0.48, the attack is considered 
successful. 

C. GRAPHIC USER INTERFACE 

1. Initializing the Simulation 

At the beginning of the program, the user will input the parameters and the 
required Extensible Markup Language (XML) files. The program user will be 
prompted by an ASW Input Wizard to input the parameters in three steps. The 

54 



user can move back and forth between the three steps by clicking on the “back” 
or “next” buttons while setting the desired parameters. In the first step, the user 
will input the simulation date and time; local time; and the course, speed, and 
location (latitude and longitude) of the guide ship in the formation (see Figure 
25). 



Figure 25. ASW Input Wizard Step1 

The user can input the date-time by either clicking on the roller or the current 
date-time icon. The default date-time is 1/11/04, 1:00 pm. The local time range 
is -12 to +12. The course range is 000° to 359.9°. The speed ranges from 12 
knots to 21 knots. The user will input the latitude and longitude for the location. 
For this simulation, the latitude ranges from 38° north to 40° north. The longitude 
ranges from 24° east to 30° east. The other ships in the formation will be 
positioned in reference to the guide ship’s location (see ASW screen design). If 
the user inputs a non-numerical value, the program will not continue to the next 
step. 

In step two, the user will choose the area, screen, zigzag pattern, ship 
characteristics, and output file names (see Figure 26). (In addition, refer to 

Appendix A for an explanation of the XML files.) 

55 

























































Figure 26. ASW User Input Wizard Step2 


In this simulation, the area file consists of four-points which are the edges 
of the rectangular ASW area. Each point has an assigned letter from A to D with 
latitude and longitude coordinates. The user can choose from saved ASW 
screen files, or can create a new file with a different set of parameters (see 
Figure 27). 



Figure 27. Choosing a Saved XML File for ASW Screen Configuration 


56 
















































































































The user can input the new set of parameters by clicking on the edit icon. 
A frame will appear and the user will be prompted to input the numerical values 
for the number of ships (four to eight), ships’ names, screen value (one to 
number of ships), start bearing (0° to 359.9°), end bearing (0° to 359.9°), start 
range (in yards), end range (in yards), and inner screen (true or false). The 
starting bearing of one sector should be greater than, or equal to, the end 
bearing of another sector (see Figure 28). The inner screen sector values should 
add up to 360°. The outer screen sector begin ranges should be greater or equal 
to the inner sector end ranges. Inner screen values are “true” when the sectors 
belong to the inner screen; otherwise, they are “false.” The same numerical 
values and constraints apply to the parameters for the helicopters. A helicopter 
can be positioned in a similar way within the sectors, as are the ships. 



Figure 28. ASW Screen Edit Frame 


57 




























































































After setting the parameters, the user must click on the “save” icon to save 
the set parameters. If the user clicks on the “close” button before saving the 
parameters, the frame will not close and the user will be warned to save the file. 
The user will choose the directory and file name to save the parameters to an 
XML file. The user can preview the ASW screen, incorporating the chosen 
parameters by clicking on the “preview” icon (see Figure 29). 



Figure 29. Preview of an ASW Screen 


58 





In step three, the user will choose a file name to save the track 
initialization file (see Figure 30). The default name is ASWTrack_001 .xml. The 
user may also click on the “assign” icon for a different file name, i.e. 
ASWTrack_Mar6_1710.xml. Then the user will click on the “create” button and 
proceed to input values for sonar ranges: medium-range sonar values (3,000 to 
7,000 yards) and long-range sonar values (4,500 to 6,800 yards). In the program 
there are two types of sonar: medium and long range sonar. The program user 
can input sonar ranges considering seasonal changes. 

For medium range sonar: 

Winter min: 3,000 yards, max 7,000 yards. 

Summer min: 2,000 yards, max 3,000 yards. 

The maximum range for an active sonar device is affected by two factors: 
1) temperature at depth (gradient), 2) sonar device capability. Gradient differs for 
the same area in different seasons. In summer, a hull-mounted active sonar is 
expected to be efficient in a very short distance, where in winter, the range could 
be twice that of summer conditions. For the program, the user decides the 
maximum and minimum sonar ranges and inputs the values at the beginning of 
the program. The program user’s personal preferences influence the choice of 
sonar ranges. A minimum range is the worst case range, and the maximum 
range is the best case range that a sonar device’s detection ability. Before an 
ASW operation the commander will retrieve these ideal ranges from a 
bathythermograph device. 

A sonar range file name will be chosen similarly to the track initialization 
file. The user will click on the “create” button to save the sonar range values. 


59 




Figure 30. ASW Input Wizard Step3 


To end the Wizard, the user will click on the “done” icon. If the user closes 
the wizard at any time during the three-step initializing of the simulation, the user 
will be warned that closing the wizard will end the program (see Figure 31). 



Figure 31. Warning Frame, Attempting to Close ASW Input Wizard 


60 








































































2. Horizontal Display Center 

The horizontal display center (HDC) is a computer-generated version of a 
MEKO200 class frigate Combat Information Center (CIC) HDC (see Figure 32). 



Figure 32. Horizontal Display Center 


61 













































































































The HDC consists of five different panels: up, left, right, center, and down 
panels. 

The up panel displays information on course, speed, and time for the 
guide ship. 

The right panel has buttons used to choose radar types and magnification. 
The magnification button magnifies the center panel by a power of two (2, 4, 8, 
16, 32, 64, 128) distance in nautical miles. 

The left panel has buttons the user can choose to display the types of 
tracks and own ship indicators, courses, and bearings (surface, underwater, air, 
and electronic warfare tracks). Simulation time turn buttons are 1 sec, 15 sec, 30 
sec, 1 min, 15 min, 30 min. 

The center panel displays the ASW area and ASW screen in a compass. 
It also displays the ships (tracks) and submarine positions. The guide ship is 
positioned at the center of the panel and the other ships are positioned in 
reference to the guide ship. 

The down panel displays buttons for determining the time, location, 
contact information, submarine and ship logs, submarine battery capacity level, 
threat, screen and datum. The time frame displays the date and time of the 
simulation (see Figure 33). The location frame displays the location of the guide 
ship, in latitude and longitude (see Figure 34). 



Figure 33. Date and Time Frame 


62 














!□ LOCATION ::: 


[T 1SI 

Ln^tltude 

Longitude 

39 17 

26 26 

30.1 N 

39.8 E 

Figure 34. 

Location Frame 



The contact information frame shows the identification number, type, 
bearing, distance, location, course, speed, and classification of the other ships in 
the formation (see Figure 35). 



Figure 35. Contact Information Frame 


The user can input the ship track identification number to set the default 
contact information or set the information manually. 

The submarine and ship logs display the submarines’ and ships’ status 
and decisions (see Appendix C). The submarine battery capacity level display 
shows the remaining battery unit and battery percent. The user can also display 
the track assessment in the center panel by clicking on the threat button. When 


63 















































the user clicks on the “screen” button, a screen with be displayed in the center 
panel according to the chosen magnification of display center. 


D. MONITORING INTERACTION 


1. Display Panel 

The display panel shows the ASW configurations of ship and submarine 
objects enclosed within an orange compass. The diameter of the compass can 
be adjusted by the magnification button. Surface ships are represented by white 
circles, which is a symbol of friendly surface track (see Figure 36). 







The submarine is represented by a red, inverted, half-diamond, which 
symbolizes an enemy, underwater track. The courses are represented by 
straight lines: blue for surface ship tracks and red for submarine. The ASW area 
is shown as a square with red sides. The DATUM is represented by a cyan “X” 
enclosed in a circle. The DATUM symbol will appear for fifteen minutes in 
simulation time only when the submarine fires a torpedo. 

2. Submarine Battery Display 

The submarine battery display has two panels (see Figure 37). 



Figure 37. Submarine Battery Display 

The first panel shows the remaining unit represented by a rectangular bar. 
The second panel displays the remaining percent, also represented by a 
rectangular bar. The remaining unit can be calculated using the battery 
consumption table (see Table 6). 


65 



























Speed 
(In Knots) 

Battery 

Consumption 

(Unit/Hour) 

0-5 

1 

6-7 

2 

8-9 

3 

10-11 

4 

12-13 

8 

14 

12 

IS 

14 

16 

15 

17 

20 

18 

25 

19 

39 

20 

40 

21 

so 

22 

60 

23 

75 

24 

90 

25 

100 


Table 6. Battery Consumption Based on Different Speed 


For example, a submarine with 64.0 battery units at the current time, at a 
speed of 21 knots, after 15 simulation time elapsed, the remaining battery unit 
can determined by the following equations: 

/ elapsed time ^ battefy consumption j 
\ (sec) (unit/hour) / 

Remaining unit = remaining unit - -;-;- 

( 60 (min) X 60 (sec) ) 

Remaining unit will be: 64.0 - ((15.0 x 50)/3,600.0) = 63.79 

In a Type-209 submarine which has a total 75 battery units, the remaining 
percent will be calculated by the fallowing equations: 

„ , . „ / remaining unit \ 

Remaining Percent = ^ - \x 100.0 

Remaining percent will be: (63.79/75.0) x 100.0 = 85.05% 


66 




3. Event Loggers 

The event loggers display text messages for each event change in a tree. 
It will register the event information regarding when and how a change occurs for 
the submarine and ships (see Figure 38). 



Figure 38. Event Logger for Surface Ships 


When an event occurs, the event loggers will register a message at the 
end of the leaf for each event category. The user can learn about event 
categories such as the status, course, speed, detection, DATUM, and sonar 
status for the surface ships by checking the event logger. The user can also 
investigate the submarine’s status, course, speed, detection, contact loss, move 
for attack, and move for survival (see Figure 39). 


67 





























Figure 39. Event Logger for Submarine 

4. Contact Display 

The contact display is a frame that shows the surface ships’ basic 
information such as identification number, type, bearing, distance, latitude, 
longitude, course, speed, and classification (see Figure 35). 


68 























V. ANALYSIS 


It is not possible to analyze the space of all simulations that can be run on 
the simulator described in this work, since there are infinitely many such 
simulations. Thus, a thorough analysis of the program is a project of itself that 
may be addressed in the future. The purpose of this chapter is to present a 
simple analysis of sample configurations. The outcomes of the simulation are 
discussed and the findings allow the user to investigate other possible 
configurations. 


A. EXPERIMENT WITH SAMPLE CONFIGURATIONS 

1. Goal of Experiment 

The experiment explored how the configuration and number of ships affect 
the Measure of Effectiveness (MOE). The simulation was run with four, five, and 
six ships and each configuration was run for ten times. The configuration with 
the number of ships that yielded the greatest MOE was chosen. The positions of 
the ships from the six ships configuration was then changed to see if a different 
configuration with the same number of ships would yield a greater MOE. The 
parameters (sonar range and convoy speed) for all configurations were identical 
for all configurations. Medium-range sonar is chosen for all configurations, since 
the majority of Turkish naval ships have medium-range sonar. To further simplify 
the configurations for ease of analysis, a zig-zag pattern was not implemented. 
The submarine began at the same position for all simulations. From this 
experiment, the program user will be able to determine how the number of ships 
in a configuration affects overall coverage of ASW screen and whether a change 
in the configuration greatly impacts the MOE value. 


69 



2. Description of Configurations 

The inputted medium sonar range was 3,000 yards (minimum) and 4,000 
yards (maximum) for all the runs. The main force speed was 14 knots. The 
ships were searching their sectors at a speed between eight to eighteen knots. 


a. 4SIV Screen Configuration with Four Ships 

In this configuration, four ships (TCG Yavuz, TCG Turgutreis, TCG 
Fatih, TCG Yildirim) were positioned on the inner sector (see Table 7 and Figure 
40). Each ship is positioned at 90° and their frontal inner sector bounds begin at 
a distance greater than the rear sector bounds. The frontal sector bounds began 
at a distance of 5,500 yards and rear sector bounds began at a distance of 4,500 
yards. 


SECTOR DESIGN 


Sector 

ID 

Ship Name 

Start 

Bearing 

End 

Bearing 

Inner Bound Outer Bound 

Inner Screen 

1 

TCG Yavuz 

000 

090 

5500 

10000 

true 

2 

TCG Turgutreis 

090 

180 

4500 

9000 

[true 

3 

'TCG Fatih 

180 

270 

4500 

9000 

true 

4 

TCG Yildinm 

270 

360 

5500 

10000 

true 


Table 7. ASW Screen Configuration with Four Ships 


70 


















Figure 40. ASW Screen Design with Four Ships 


The sonar policy allowed only two ships to have their sonar on 
active mode for a specific time (see Table 8). From the top of the hour between 
00-10, all ships are in passive mode. At 10-20 TCG Yildirim and TCG Turgutreis 
sonar were active. At 20-30 TCG Yavuz and TCG Fatih sonar were active. At 
30-40 TCG Yildirim and TCG Fatih sonar were active. Then at 40-00 TCG Yavuz 
and TCG Fatih sonar were active. This sonar policy allowed only one ship to be 
active in the frontal sectors, while one ship was active in the rear sectors. The 
sonar policy for the four ships is shown in Table 8. 


71 




Time Slices in Each Hour (In Minutes) 


00-10 

10-20 

20-30 

30-40 

40-50 

50-00 

Name of the Ship 
Using Sonar In 
Active Mode 


TCG Yildirim 
TCGTurgutreis 

TCG Yavuz 

TCG Fatih 

TCG Yildirim 
TCGTurgutreis 

TCG Yavuz 

TCG Fatih 

TCG Yavuz 

TCG Fatih 


Table 8. Sonar Policy for Four-Ship Screen Configuration 


b. ASW Screen Configuration with Five Ships 

In this configuration, five ships (TCG Yavuz, TCG Turgutreis, TCG 
Fatih, TCG Yildirim and TCG Barbaras) were positioned on the inner sectors 
(see Table 9 and Figure 41). The frontal ships were assigned to 60° with sector 
bounds beginning at 5,500 yards. Sectors two and four were positioned at 72°, 
4,500 yards from the FIVU. The ship at the rear sector was positioned at 96° with 
the sector bounds beginning at 4,500 yards from the HVU. 

SECTOR DESIGN 


Sector 

ID 

Ship Name 

Start 

Bearing 

End 

Bearing 

Inner Bound 

Outer Bound 

Inner Screen 

1 

TCG Yavuz 

000 

060 

5500 

10000 

true 

2 

TCG Turgutreis 

060 

132 

4500 

9000 

true 

3 

TCG Fatih 

132 

228 

4500 

9000 

true 

4 

TCG Yildinm 

228 

300 

4500 

9000 

true 

5 

TCG Barbaros 

300 

360 

5500 

10000 

true 


Table 9. ASW Screen Configuration with Five Ships 


72 























Figure 41. ASW Screen Configuration for Five Ships 


The sonar policy allowed one, two or three ships to be in active 
mode for ten-minute intervals (see Table 10). From the top of the hour between 
00-10 only TCG Barbaros was in active mode. From 10-20, TCG Yildirim and 
TCG Turgutreis were active. From 20-30, TCG Yavuz and TCG Fatih were 
active. From 30-40, TCG Yildirim TCG Turgutreis and TCG Barbaros were 
active. From 40-00 TCG Yavuz and TCG Fatih were active. The sonar policy for 
the five ships is shown in Table 10. 



Time Slices in Each Hour (In Minutes) 


00-10 

10-20 

20-30 

30-40 

40-50 

50-00 

Name of the Ship 
Using Sonar In 
Active Mode 

TCG Barbaros 

TCG Yildirim 
TCG Turgutreis 

TCG Yavuz 

TCG Fatih 

TCG Yildirim 
TCG Turgutreis 
TCG Barbaros 

TCG Yavuz 

TCG Fatih 

TCG Yavuz 

TCG Fatih 


Table 10. Sonar Policy for Five-Ship Screen Configuration 


73 













c. ASW Screen Configuration with Six Ships (First 
Configuration) 

In this configuration, five ships (TCG Yavuz, TCG Turgutreis, TCG 
Fatih, TCG Yildirim, and TCG Barbaras) were positioned on the inner sector and 
one ship (TCG Orucreis) was assigned to the outer sector (see Table 11 and 
Figure 42). The inner sector design was the same as the previous five-ship ASW 
Screen Configuration. The outer sector began at an angle of 315° and ended at 
45° with sector bounds at 12,000 and 16,000 yards from the FIVU. 

SECTOR DESIGN 


Sector VT 

^ Ship Name 

Start 

Bearing 

. Inner Bound 

Bearing 

Outer Bound 

Inner Screen 

1 

TCG Yavuz 

000 

060 

5500 

10000 

true 

2 

TCG Turgutreis 

o 

o 

132 

4500 

9000 

true 

3 

TCG Fatih 

132 

228 

4500 

9000 

true 

4 

TCG Yildinm 

228 

300 

4500 

9000 

true 

5 

TCG Barbaros 

300 

360 

5500 

10000 

true 

6 

TCG Orucreis 

045 

315 

12000 

16000 

false 


Table 11. ASW Screen Configuration with Six Ships 


74 















Figure 42. ASW Screen Configuration for Six Ships 


The sonar policy allowed one, two or three ships to be in active 
mode for ten minutes intervals (see Table 12). From the top of the hour between 
00-10, TCG Barbaros and TCG Fatih were in active mode. From 10-20 TCG 
Barbaros and TCG Turgutreis were active. From 20-30 TCG Orucreis, TCG 
Yildirim, and TCG Turgutreis were active. From 30-40, TCG Yavuz and TCG 
Yildirm were active. From 40-50, TCG Barbaros and TCG Yavuz were active. 
From 50-00 TCG Orucreis and TCG Fatih were active. Table 12 shows the 
sonar policy for six ships. 


75 





; 

Time Slices in Each Hour (In Minutes) 


00-10 

10-20 

20-30 

30-40 

40-50 

50-00 

Name of the Ship 
Using Sonar In 

Active Mode 

TCG Orucreis 

TCG Fatih 

TCG Barbaros 
TCG Turgutreis 

TCG Orucreis 

TCG Yildirim 

TCG Turautreis 

TCG Yavuz 

TCG Yildirim 

TCG Barbaros 

TCG Yavuz 

TCG Orucreis I 

TCG Fatih | 


Table 12. Sonar Policy for Six-Ship Screen Configuration 


d. Second ASW Screen Configuration with Six Ships 
(Second Configuration) 

The ASW Screen configuration was changed to potentially improve 
the MOE from the previous configuration (see Table-13 and Figure 43). The 
main difference was that two ships are positioned on the outer sector instead of 
one ship (TCG Barbaros and TCG Orucreis). The outer sectors began at 315° 
and ends at 45°. The sector boundaries were 11,000-15,000 yards from the 
HVU. The frontal sectors began at 75°, and the rear sectors began at 105°. The 
frontal sectors were positioned at 5,500 yards, and the rear sectors positioned at 
4,500 yards from the HVU. 


SECTOR DESIGN 


Sector 

ID 

Ship Name 

Start 

Bearing 

End 

Bearing 

Inner Bound 

Outer Bound 

Inner Screen 

1 

TCG Yavuz 

000 

075 

5500 

10000 

true 

2 

TCG Turgutreis 

075 

180 

4500 

9000 

true 

3 

TCG Fatih 

180 

285 

4500 

9000 

:true 

4 

TCG Yildinm 

|285 

360 

5500 

9000 

[true 

5 

TCG Barbaros 

315 

360 

11000 

15000 

false 

6 

TCG Orucreis 

000 

045 

11000 

15000 

:false 


Table 13. ASW Screen Configuration with Six Ships 


76 























Figure 43. ASW Screen Configuration for Six Ships 


The sonar policy allowed one, two or three ships to be in active 
mode for 10 minutes intervals (see Table 14). From the top of the hour between 
00-10, TCG Barbaros and TCG Yavuz were in active mode. From 10-20, TCG 
Orucreis and TCG Yildirim were active. From 20-30, TCG Orucreis, TCG Fatih 
and TCG Turgutreis were active. From 30-40, TCG Yavuz and TCG Yildirim 
were active. From 40-50, TCG Barbaros and TCG Yavuz were active. From 50- 
00, TCG Orucreis and TCG Yildirim were active. See Table 14 for the sonar 
policy for the six ships. 


77 





Time Slices in Each Hour (In Minutes) 


00-10 

10-20 

20-30 

30-40 

40-50 

50-00 

Name of the Ship 
Using Sonar In 

Active Mode 

TCG Barbaros 

TCG Yavuz 

TCG Orucreis 

TCG Yildirim 

TCG Orucreis ' 

TCG Fatih 

TCG Turgutreis | 

TCG Yavuz 
TCG Yildirim | 

TCG Barbaros 

TCG Yavuz 

TCG Orucreis 

TCG Yildirim 


Table 14. Sonar Policy for Six-Ship Screen Configuration 

B. RESULTS 


1. Results for Four Ships 

The submarine attacked the HVU 17 times. It was successful nine out of 
seventeen of those attempts. See Table 15 for a more detail description of the 
attacks. 



Attack 

Distances 

Submarine's 

Success 

Battery Unit 
at Attack Time 
(%) 

Siibmaiine's 
Status at End 

Run Time 
Serial 
Number 

First Try 

Second 

Try 

First Try 

Second Try 

First Try 

Second 

Try 


1 

13,717 


Successful 


74.2 


Survived 

2 

13,659 

8,672 

Unsuccessful 

Successful 

74.11 

45.33 

Survived 

3 

13,561 

8,248 

Unsuccessful 

Unsuccessful 

74.13 

46.46 

Survived 

4 

13,626 

8,319 

Unsuccessful 

Successful 

74.06 

47.52 

Survived 

5 

13,625 

8,362 

Unsuccessful 

Successful 

73.98 

46.28 

Survived 

6 

13,698 


Successful 


74.1 


Survived 

7 

13,705 

8,682 

Unsuccessful 

Successful 

73.97 

46.52 

Survived 

8 

13,527 

8,727 

Unsuccessful 

Successful 

74.19 

45.8 

Survived 

9 

13,550 


Successful 


74.1 


Survived 

10 

12,760 

8,569 

Unsuccessful 

Successful 

71.59 

44.81 

Survived 


Table 15. The Results for Four-Ship ASW Configuration 


Submarine attacked at distances between 12,760-13,717 yards with an 
average distance of 13,543 yards (see Figure 44). 


78 
















Figure 44. Attack Distances in Each Try 


The surface ship’s success rate was 47% for protecting the HVU. 
MOE was 0.1 (see Figure 45). 


Surface Ships Success 


Surface Ships' 


Success Rates 


Successful 

8 

Unsuccessful 

9 

MOE 

0.1 



Figure 45. Surface Ships’ Success for the Configuration 


The surface ships could not sink the submarine (see Figure 46). 


The 


79 






























































































Submarine Status at End 

Sunk 

0 % 


Submarine Status 

Survived 

10 

Sunk 

0 



Survived 

100 % 


Figure 46. Submarine’s Status at End 


2. Results for Five Ships 

The submarine attacked the HVU 13 times. The submarine was 
successful at attacking the HVU in three of the thirteen attempts. See Table 16 
for the details of the results of those attacks. 



Attack 

Distances 

Submarine's 

Success 

Baneiy Unit 
<it Attack Time 
(%) 

Submaiine's 
Status at End 

Run Time 
Serial 
Number 

First Try 

Second 

Try 

First Try 

Second Try 

First Try 

Second 

Try 


1 

11,265 


Successful 


71.2 


Survived 

2 

14,237 


Successful 


70.2 


Survived 

3 

14,359 

16,729 

Unsuccessful 

Unsuccessful 

69.7 

61.6 

Sunk 

4 

14,237 


Unsuccessful 


73.24 


Sunk 

5 

14,228 


Successful 


73.18 


Survived 

6 

14,016 


Unsuccessful 


73.13 


Sunk 

7 

14,220 

16,651 

Unsuccessful 

Unsuccessful 

72.06 

57.56 

Sunk 

8 

14,182 


Unsuccessful 


73.2 


Sunk 

9 

14,118 

16,517 

Unsuccessful 

Unsuccessful 

73.29 

58.72 

Sunk 

_la 

_14.527 


Unsuccessful 


_73.17 


Sunk_ 


Table 16. The Results for Five-Ship ASW Configuration 


80 







Submarine attacked at distances between 11,265-14,527 yards with an 
average distance of 13,939 yards (see Figure 47). 



Figure 47. Attack Distances in Each Try 


The surface ship’s success rate was 77% and the MOE is 0.7 (see Figure 
48). 


Surface Ships' Success 


Unsuccessful 

23 % 


Surface Ships' 
Success Rates 
Successful 
Unsuccessful 
MOE 



10 

3 

07 


Successful 
77 % 


Figure 48. Surface Ships’ Success for the Configuration 


The surface ships sank the submarine seven times (see Figure 49). 


81 









































































































Submarine Status at End 


Submarine Status 

Survived 

3 

Sunk 

7 



Figure 49. Submarine’s Status at End 


3. Results for Six Ships (First Configuration) 

The submarine attacked the HVU 14 times. It was able to successfully 
attack the HVU four out of the fourteen attempts. See Table 17 for the results of 
the attacks. 



Attack 

Distances 

Submarine's 

Success 

Battery Unit 
at Attack Time 
(%) 

Siihmaiine’s 
St<itii$ at End 

Run Time 
Serial 
Number 

First Try 

Second 

Try 

First Try 

Second Try 

First Try 

Second 

Try 


1 

12.558 

15,119 

Unsuccessful 

Unsuccessful 

60.38 

44.82 

Sunk 

2 

12,813 


Successful 


59.04 


Survived 

3 

13,059 


Successful 


60.03 


Survived 

4 

13,183 


Successful 


60.59 


Survived 

5 

12,201 


Successful 


60.49 


Survived 

6 

12,473 


Unsuccessful 


58.09 


Sunk 

7 

14,548 


Unsuccessful 


63.24 


Survived 

8 

13,158 

13,368 

Unsuccessful 

Unsuccessful 

59.26 

43.76 

Survived 

9 

14,925 

14,971 

Unsuccessful 

Unsuccessful 

63.05 

41.94 

Survived 

10 

14,348 

14,165 

Unsuccessful 

Unsuccessful 

62.96 

42.74 

Sunk 


Table 17. The Results for Six-Ship ASW Configuration 


82 






The submarine attacked at distances between 12,201-14,925 yards with 
an average distance of 13,327 yards (see Figure 50). 


Attack Distances 



First Try 

SecondTry 

Mean 

13,327 

14,406 

Median 

13,109 

14,568 

Minimum 

12,201 

13,368 

Maximum 

14,925 

15,119 


16.000 

14,000 

12,000 

"S 10,000 
(0 ’ 

> 

w 8.000 

V 

u 

e 

« 6.000 

a 

4,000 

2,000 

0 


1 5, 1 1 9 


i4.9Kyn 


12,55 5 


14,548 


12,813 


1 3,059 


13,1 8 3 


12,201 


13,1-^%3fi8 


14.3f1#.i65 


5 6 

Run Serial Number 


Figure 50. Attack Distances in Each Try 


The surface ship’s success rate was 71%. The MOE was 0.6 (see Figure 


51). 


SiirfaceShips' Success 


Unsuccessful 

29% 



Surface Ships' 

Success Rates 

Successful 

10 

Unsuccessful 

4 

MOE 

0.6 


Successful 

71% 


Figure 51. Surface Ships’ Success for the Configuration 


The surface ships sank the submarine three times (see Figure 52). 


83 


























































































Submarine Status 


Submarine Status at End Survived 7 

Sunk 3 



Figure 52. Submarine’s Status at End 


4. Results for Six Ships (Second Configuration) 

The submarine attacked the HVU 12 times. It was successful at attacking 
the HVU only two out of the 12 attempts. See Table 18 for details on the 
success rate of the attacks. 



Attack 

Distances 

Submarine's 

Success 

Bcitteiy Unit 
at Attack Time 
(%) 

Submari ne's 
Status at End 

Run Time 
Serial 
Number 

First Try 

Second 

Try 

First Try 

Second Try 

First Try 

Second 

Try 


1 

14,229 


Unsuccessful 


62.13 


Survived 

2 

10,936 


Successful 


37.08 


Survived 

3 

13,903 

16,960 

Unsuccessful 

Unsuccessful 

62.31 

45.01 

Survived 

4 

14,340 


Unsuccessful 


62.3 


Survived 

5 

13,373 

16,218 

Unsuccessful 

Unsuccessful 

58.88 

42.12 

Sunk 

6 

10,788 


Successful 


34.25 


Survived 

7 

10,202 


Unsuccessful 


33.01 


Sunk 

8 

10,128 


Unsuccessful 


30.73 


Sunk 

9 

11,219 


Unsuccessful 


36.53 


Survived 

10 

14,122 


Unsuccessful 


62.56 


Survived 


Table 18. The Results for Six-Ship ASW Configuration 


The submarine attacked at distances between 10,128-12,296 yards with 
an average distance of 12,234 yards (see Figure 53). 


84 







Figure 53. Attack Distances in Each Try 


The surface ship’s success rate was 83%. The MOE was 0.8 (see Figure 
54). 


Unsuccessful 

17% 


Surface Ships' Success 



Surface Ships' 


Success Rates 


Successful 

10 

Unsuccessful 

2 

MOE 

0.8 


Figure 54. Surface Ships’ Success for the Configuration 


The surface ships sank the submarine three times (see Figure 55). 


85 
























































































Submarine Status at End 


Submarine Status 

Survived 

7 

Sunk 

3 



Figure 55. Submarine’s Status at End 


C. DISCUSSION 

The most beneficial feature of a MAS technique is that the outcomes of 
the simulation have the capability to surprise even its designer. As previously 
mentioned, the simulation helps the program user by showing the details and 
events that the user cannot predict or understand without the aid of a 
visualization tool. The following is a brief analysis of the results of the sample 
configurations. 

The four-ship configuration was the least effective in protecting the HVU 
(MOE = 0.1). Surface ships protected the HVU only one time. The submarine 
attacked at the distances: first try at 13,543 yards, second try: 8,659 yards. The 
greatest disadvantage in this configuration was the large sectors assigned to 
each ship. As a result, the ships were slow to return to their sectors after 
searching the DATUM. Even though the submarine was unsuccessful with its 
attack, the attack forced the escort ships to leave their sectors for the DATUM 
search. The submarine was able to penetrate the screen at the sectors where 
the ships had left to search for the DATUM and fire its torpedo within the fatal 
distance of 10,000 yards. The surface ships could not sink the submarine during 
any run-time. This was due to the great distance between the attack position and 
the nearest ship’s position. When the nearest ship arrived at the DATUM, the 
submarine had already moved away. This configuration would be the worst 

86 





decision for an ASW commander, since the submarine was able to penetrate the 
configuration at a fatal distance of 10,000 yards for seven times. 

The configuration with five ships provided a MOE value with 0.7. The 
submarine attacked at two distances : first try at 13,939 yards and second try at 
16,632 yards. If the submarine failed in its first try, it also failed at its second try. 
The ship was successful in protecting the HVU by creating a barrier between the 
HVU and the submarine. The surface ships prevented the submarine from 
approaching the HVU at a close range (14,000 yards) on all attempts except for 
one. The submarine was forced to fire the second torpedo from a greater 
distance than the first torpedo attack. The submarine was destroyed seven 
times. The success rate for the surface ship was 77%. 

The configuration for the six ships was not as effective compared to the 
second configuration (MOE = 0.6). The submarine attacked at tow distances: 
first try at 13,327 yards and the second try at 14,406 yards. A user who is not 
familiar with ASW Screen Configuration might predict that increasing the number 
of ships would yield a greater MOE and attack distances. However, this proved 
not to be the case in this simulation. The disadvantage of this configuration was 
that the outer sector was so broad (90°) and quite large for a ship to cover. The 
submarine could attack at the opposite corner of the sector of the ship’s position. 
The submarine was sunk only for three times and the success for the surface 
ship was 71%. 

The second configuration with six ships (two ships were assigned to outer 
sectors) provided the highest MOE value within the four sample configurations in 
this experiment (MOE=0.8). The submarine attacked at the distances: first try at 
12,324 yards and second try at 16,589 yards. The submarine was not able to 
penetrate the ASW screen several times; therefore, it canceled these attacks 
since it sensed a very close ship but did not have sufficient time for a fire 
solution. The submarine consumed more battery every time it tried to attack and 
then cancelled since it is moving at 20 knots to assume an attack position. For 
this reason, the submarine had only one chance for an attack. The submarine’s 


87 



decision surprised the user since it risked its own safety and approached the 
HVU for an attack though it had a low battery level. The submarine fired a 
torpedo at distances of 10,000 to 11,000 yards when it came close to the HVU. 
The submarine was sunk three times and the success rate for the surface ship 
was 83%. 

The program user will decide the best configuration based on the results 
of the model. The user will consider the MOE value to determine the success 
rate of protecting an HVU. However, in configuring an ASW screen, the ASW 
Commander must also consider the distance between the submarine and the 
HVU during an attack. Therefore, the configuration that provides the second 
highest MOE value, but forces the submarine at a greater distance from the 
HVU, could be considered an alternate. To be able to test whether the MOE 
(0.7) is significantly different from the highest MOE value (0.8) or not, a null 
hypothesis should be defined, and a t test should be applied. The null 
hypothesis and alternative hypothesis is defined below. 


Ho: 

MOEo.s = 

MOE 0.7 

H,: 


MOEoj 


The significance level (a) is 0.05, the standard deviation can be 
determined by the following equation 


MOE X (1- MOE) 
n 

and t-value can be calculated from the following equation: 

^ x-y - (i^^- 


m n 

Devore, J. L., 1999, Probability and Statistics, 5th Ed. Duxbury Inc., p 366. 

88 




The t-value for this test is 1.64 and the degree of freedom can be 
determined by the following equation: 



The degree of freedom value is 17.6 and ^ 005 , 17 . 6 = ^ 74 

Since the t-value calculated is less than the t-value from table-value, there 
is not enough evidence to reject the null hypothesis described. Statistically, there 
is not significant difference between MOE value (0.8) and MOE (0.7). Because 
of the lack of significant difference, the configuration that provides the second 
highest MOE (0.7) value, because it forces the submarine at greatest distance 
from the HVU, would be chosen. In this configuration (MOE 0.7) the submarine 
does not penetrate the ASW screen. At the end of the experiment, the 
configuration for five ships yielded the best overall results for HVU protection. 
Although the MOE (0.7) was not significantly different from the best MOE value 
(0.8), it provided the greatest distance between the submarine and the HVU at 
the time of attack (13,939 yards) and in effect, the best protection. 


89 



THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


90 



VI. CONCLUSIONS 


The following description outlines the success of the model, possible 
applications in ASW operations, and discusses the need for further research. 

A. SUCCESS OF THE MODEL 

The model can be used to aid in ASW military operations for the Turkish 
and NATO Navies. This is especially true for navy operations that are restricted 
by shallow waters—characteristic of the Mediterranean and Aegean Sea—since 
the shallow depth prevents effective use of Towed Array Sonar (TAS). The 
simulation allows the user to test parameters that correlate with real life 
variables. A submarine’s maximum speed and passive sensor range, as well as 
a torpedo’s maximum range, used in the model, are characteristics of current 
submarines. Hence, the results derived from the simulations will be very similar 
to actual ASW operations. The model can be used to train ASW personnel and 
aid commanders in deciding and planning an optimal ASW screen configuration 
for ASW operations. 

The model provides military personnel with information on submarine 
movements that they would not otherwise be able to detect in actual ASW 
operations. For example, they would not know when the submarine begins 
attack procedures. In actual ASW training, the submarine commander’s decision 
to release attack information is usually delayed (approximately five minutes after 
initial submarine attack) and the submarine’s position is known by the surface 
ships only after the submarine communicates its attack via underwater 
telephone. Hence, the surface ship personnel know of an attack only after that 
communication. Following actual training, the submarine commander, surface 
ship commanders, and ASW officers may convene to analyze the outcomes of 
the training. However, they will not be able to plot all the ships’ and submarines’ 
positions for a thorough analysis. The simulation model will be a critical tool for 
improving the training and analysis of the effectiveness of an ASW operation. 


91 



The findings of the training from the simulation model can then be distributed to 
experts who can verify the accuracy of the findings and compare them to actual 
ASW operations. 


B. POSSIBLE APPLICATIONS OF THE MODEL 

1. Training 

The model can be used by ASW experts as well as someone who has 
very little knowledge of ASW operations. The model allows the program user to 
experiment with ship configurations to improve the MOE. A user can attempt to 
configure an optimal ASW screen by employing the following strategies: 

1. Changing the perimeters and boundaries of the frontal ships. 

2. Positioning one or two ships to outer sector. 

3. Changing sonar policy. 

4. Increasing the convoy speed. 

The model allows the user to obtain information on the conditions when a 
submarine decides to fire a torpedo and when it will cancel an attack. The user 
will try to force the submarine to fire the torpedo at a distance greater than 
15,000 yards. A submarine attack at a distance greater than 15,000 yards yields 
the lowest probability for a successful attack. At the same time, the user will 
consider one element of cost-effectiveness by minimizing the number of ships in 
the configuration. 


2. Decision Aid 

The model can be used as a decision aid for planning an ASW operation. 
To configure an ASW screen, the commander must first determine the sonar 
ranges for the simulation. The commander can obtain the sonar range by first 
collecting stored data from previous years about water temperatures at the time 
of the operation. The data on the water temperature and sonar range can be 
retrieved from a bathythermograph. The bathythermograph shows the water 
temperature change with a depth of up to 2,000 meters. The commander will 
then run the model to obtain the number of the ships and the ASW screen 

92 



configuration needed for the ASW operation training. If the previously input 
sonar range values differ from the actual values on the training day, the 
commander will run the model with the actual sonar range values and change the 
number of ships and screen configuration accordingly. At the end of the training, 
the model outcomes can be compared to actual ASW findings. The accuracy of 
the outcomes from the simulation can be verified by the actual data from the 
ASW operation. 

C. FUTURE WORK 

1. Possible Improvements to the Model 

The greatest deficiency in the present model is that it does not simulate 
the water layer and its effect on hull-mounted sonar. A layer can significantly 
compromise the effectiveness of hull-mounted sonar to detect a submarine under 
the layer. The active sonar used by surface ships is considerably affected by 
water conditions. The sonar devices are small and underdeveloped compared to 
the submarine’s sonar devices. In future models, water conditions can be 
simulated to show their effects on the surface ship’s sonar and its detection of 
submarines. 

In this model, the submarine targets only the HVU for an attack, but in 
reality, every surface ship in the formation is a potential target. Actually a 
submarine can penetrate the ASW screen by deciding to attack any surface ship 
in the formation. If the submarine is successful attacking a ship or a ship moves 
away from its coverage sector, the ASW screen’s effectiveness will be 
diminished by gaps in protection. The submarine can then advance towards the 
HVU for a kill. As described above, a submarine’s movement in an actual ASW 
operation is more complex than accounted for in the simulation. 


93 



2. Expanding to Other Military Operations 

The current program does not implement Marine Patrol Aircraft (MPA). 
Using sonobuoys from the MPA and a helicopter can enhance the effectiveness 
of the overall success of HVU protection from submarine attacks. 

The use of the present program can be extended to simulate other types 
of warfare such as Anti-Surface Warfare (ASUW) and Anti-Air Warfare (AAW). 
ASUW and AAW operations are more critical in the case of attacks from enemy 
planes or ships. The same logic for implementing simulations for ASW can be 
applied to ASUW and AAW. 

In the future, the program’s submarine artificial intelligence or decision 
algorithm can be further developed with advice and guidance from the submarine 
commander. The commander’s input in developing the submarine’s artificial 
intelligence and algorithm should be covered by national security to protect the 
model from being used by other countries. This will ensure the security of the 
ASW operation for the particular country using the simulation technology. 


94 



APPENDIX A EXTENSIBLE MARK-UP LANGUAGE (XML) 
FILES USED IN THE SIMULATION 


A. READING AND WRITING TO EXTENSIBLE MARK-UP LANGUAGE 

(XML) 

In the simulation Extensible Mark-up Language (XML) files were created 
to store data and initialize the parameters. Data can be stored in an XML file for 
easy access, and XML structures force the data to be stored with a restricted 
format. To be able to read and write data in XML files the JDOM package is 
used. JDOM is an open source-library, pure Java API for parsing, creating, 
manipulating, and serializing XML documents. JDOM source code and the 
instructions for installation can be obtained from JDOM.org web page."!® 

XML files used in the program are saved in the hard drive under a folder 
XMLFiles, the default file path is “C;\ASWDesign\ASWDesign\XMLFiles\”. Each 
file is saved under a different folder. For example ASWArea files are stored in 
“.. \\XMLFiles\AreaData\ ”. and similarly ASWScreen files are stored under 
“. . \\XMLFiles\ScreenData\ ” 

B. TYPES OF XML FILES IN THE SIMULATION 

1. ASWArea File 

ASW Area File has two elements : NumberofPoints and Point. A point 
Element is also has three elements: ID, Lat, Long (see Figure 56). In the 
simulation the ASW Area is 35 x 50 nautical miles (NM). 


Hunter J., cited 2004, JDOM 
http://www.jdom.org/downloads/source.html.] 


source, 


[Available online at 


95 





Tl >ML 


1 

DOC TYPE di ea:ASWAi ea 

J 


ID SYSTEM 

"ASWArea_001 did" 



srea.'ASWAi ea 






= xmlns:arad 

http: //fakbori/ASWAreaAis 




fr- Comment 

This is a file for describing an ASW Area and its points in lat log 




{!•• Comment 

Created By :Fahrettin Akbori 




0" Comment 

Created at 1 >27/04 




O llumbei OfPoints 

4 



*1 Point (4) 


OlD 

<>L.it 

<> Long 

1 A 

390000N 

0265152.5E 

2 B 

395000N 

0265152.5E 

3 C 

395000N 

0260907.5E 

4 D 

390000N 

0260907.5E 


Figure 56. ASW Area File Shown in Grid 


2. ASW Screen File 

ASW Screen File has four or more sector Elements. Each sector element 
has eight elements: ID, Name, Screen Value, Starting Bearing, Ending Bearing, 
Staring Range, and Ending Range (see Figure 57). 



OlD 

{) Hnnie 

<> s... 

<> Sta... 

{} Eii{l... 

{> Start... 

{} EiifIR... 

{) hill... 

1 

1 

Yavui 

1 

0 

90 

5500 

10000 

true 

2 

2 

TurgutReis 

2 

90 

180 

4500 

9000 

true 

J 

3 

Fatih 

3 

180 

270 

4500 

9000 

true 

4 

4 

Yildirim 

4 

270 

359 

5500 

10000 

true 

5 

5 

Barbaros 

5 

300 

359 

11000 

16000 

false 

« 

6 

OrucReis 

6 

0 

60 

11000 

16000 

false 


Figure 57. Screen File Shown in Grid 


3. ASW Zigzag Policy Fiie 

ASW Zigzag file has a date element and a pattern element. A pattern 
Element has three elements: a start time, end time, and course change from 
main course (see Figure 58). 


96 































XML 

z) DOC TYPE zigzag:zigz.i(jliifo 
^ z/gzag:zigzagliifo 

= xmlns:zfgzag 
Comment 
Comment 
(!•• Comment 
O Date 
patei n (4) 


http: //f akbori/ZigZagDatayhs 
This is a file for Zigzag File 
In this file 

Created By :Fahrettin Akbori 
Jan 11.2004 



Ost 

O end 

{) coiiise 

1 

60 

150 

040 

2 

150 

300 

015 

3 

300 

450 

350 

4 

45 

55 

000 


Figure 58. Zig-zag File Shown in Grid 


4. ASW Sonar Policy File 

ASW sonar policy file has 2 elements: Date and Ship, a Ship element can 
be as many as ships used in the simulation. Each ship element has two 
elements: ID, and Active. Each active element should have a start time and end 
time (see Figure 59). 


97 










Zl XML 


DOC7yP£sp:splnfo 



^ ^.'splllfo 


= xmlnsisp 

http: //f akbori/SonarPolicyData/hs 

Comment 

This is a file for sonarPolicy 

Comment 

In this file 

Comment 

Created By :Fahrettin Akbori 

() Date 

Jan 11,2004 


ship (4) 


OlD 


O active 


1 Yildirim 

A 

a 

ctive (2) 


Ost 

{) end 

1 10 

20 

2 30 

40 

2 Turgutreis 

▲ 

active (2) 




Ost 

O end 




1 10 

20 




2 30 

40 

3 Yavuz 

▲ 

active (2) 




Ost 

O end 




1 20 

30 




2 40 

00 

4 Fatih 


active (2) 




Ost 

O end 




1 20 

30 




2 40 

00 


Figure 59. Sonar Policy File Shown in Grid 


5. Ship Characteristics File 

Ship characteristics file has ship elements. A ship element has Name, 
Type, Flull-number, Call-sign, Sensors, Weapons and Flelicopter Elements. 
Each sensor element consists of a sonar element. A sonar element has three 
elements status, type, and maximum range fields. Each weapons element 
consists of torpedo elements. A torpedo element has two fields; type and 
quantity. Helicopter elements have two fields; tail number and status field (see 
Figure 60). 


98 













Zl XML 


▼i DOCTYPf shiprshipChars 
^ 9A/p;shipChars 


= 


http; fflakbori/ASWShipChars/hs 

(!• 

Comment 

This is a file for Ship Chars 

fr- Comment 

Created By: 

Fahrettin Akbori 












A. 

ship (4) 




{) Name 

<> Ty... 

<) Hull 

<> Cal... 

[) Sensors 

() Weapons 

<) Helo 



1 

Yavuz 

Meko 

540 

2XEA 


Sensors 

A 

Weapons 












A 

Sonai 


A 

Torpedo (2) 













{} Status 

100 



<>T...<>0... 













<> Tyi>e 

SQS56 



1 Mk46 8 













O MaxRange 

35 


_ 

2 Mk44 2 






2 

Turgutreis 

Meko 

241 

2XEB 


Sensors 


Weapons 

A 

Helo 









A 

Sonai 


A 

Torpedo (2) 


OTail 

357 










O Status 

100 



<>T...<>0... 


O Status 

Active 










<> Type 

SQS56 



1 Mk46 8 











_ 


O MaxRange 

35 


_ 

2 Mk44 2 






3 

Fatih 

Meko 

242 

2XEC 


Sensors 

A 

Weapons 












A 

Sonai 


A 

Toipedo (2) 













O Status 

100 



{>T...<)0... 













<> Tyi>e 

SQS56 



1 Mk46 8 













O MaxRange 

35 


_ 

2 Mk44 2 






4 

Yiidirim 

Meko 

243 

2XED 


Sensors 


Weapons 

A 

Helo 









A 

Sonai 


A 

Toiperlo (2) 


<>T.iil 

357 










O Status 

100 



{>T...<>0... 


O Status 

Active 










<> Type 

SQS56 



1 Mk46 8 













O MaxRange 

35 


_ 

2 Mk44 2 





Figure 60. Ship Characteristics File Shown in Grid 


99 
































THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


100 



APPENDIX B GENERATING RANDOM NUMBERS 


A. SIMKIT PACKAGE 

In this simulation, random numbers are generated by Simkit package. 
Simkit is a library for creating a Discrete Event Simulation (DES) models. The 
Simkit package is written in Java programming language, and used as a teaching 
tool for Masters' students in Operations Research and MOVES at the Naval 
Postgraduate School in the System Simulation course. Simkit is free software 
and can be obtained from the Simkit home page.''^ 


B. GENERATING RANDOM NUMBERS 

In the simulation, two types of distributions are used for drawing random 
numbers: 

1. Normal Distribution 

2. Uniform Distribution 

1. Normal Distribution 

Normal distribution is used to determine the sonar ranges for medium- and 
long-range sonar. The default maximum and minimum values for medium-range 
sonar are 3,000 to 7,000 yards. The parameters to generate a random number 
for this type of sonar are mean value: 5,000 and standard deviation: 588.23. For 
every distribution, a seed value will be generated as a function of system time. 

seed value=(system second x 1000) + system millisecond 

2. Uniform Distribution 

Uniform distribution is used to randomly position the submarine within two- 
thirds of the ASW area. It is also used to determine the submarine’s torpedo 
attack success rate. A uniform random number between 0.0 and 1.0 can be 
calculated from inputting the parameters (0.0 and 1.0) and a seed value. 

Buss A., cited 2004, Simkit home page, [available online at 
http://diana.or.nps.navv.mil/Simkit/] 


101 




THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 


102 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Armo, K. R., 2000, The relationship between a submarine’s maximum speed and 
it’s evasive capability, M.S Thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, 72 pp. 

Aydin, E., 2000, Screen dispositions of naval task forces against anti-ship 
missiles, M.S Thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, 144 pp. 

Buss, A., cited 2004, Simkit home page, [available online at 
http://diana.or.nps.navv.miI/Simkit/ .1. March 2004. 

Bond, L., Carlson, C., 2003: Harpoon4-Modern Tactical Naval Combat. Rules 
Revision 4.1, Clash of Arms Games Inc. 

Daniel, D. C., 1986, Anti-Submarine Warfare and Superpower Strategic Stability, 
University of Illinois Press, 222 pp. 

Devore, J. L., 1999, Probability and Statistics, 5th Ed. Duxbury Inc., 717 pp. 

Dickie, A., 2002 , Modeling robot swarms using agent-based simulation, M.S 
Thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, 107 pp. 

Drake, J. D., cited 2004, Introduction to java threads [ Available online at 
http://www.iavaworld.eom/iavaworld/iw-04-1996/iw-04-threads.html .1. March 
2004. 

Ewing R., and R. Sharpley, cited 2004: Interactive control of large-scale 
simulations. [Available online at 

http://www.cise.nsf.gov/cns/darema/dd das/ew inq/sIdOIO.htm .l, March 2004. 

Ferber, J., 1999, Multi-Agent Systems, Addison-Wesley Inc., 528 pp. 

Fishwick, P., cited 2004: What is simulation? [Available online at 

http://www.cis.ufl.edU/~fishwick/introsim/node1.html .1. March 2004. 

Fishwick, P., cited 2004: Why do simulation? [Available online at 

http://www.cis.ufl.edU/~fishwick/introsim/node2.html .1. March 2004. 

Forrest, R. N., 1987, Notes on search, detection and localization modeling. Naval 
Postgraduate School, 70 pp. 

Gardner, W. Jr., 1996, Anti-Submarine Warfare, 3rd Ed. Brasseys Inc, 154 pp. 

Flill, J. R., 1985, Anti-Submarine Warfare, Naval Institute Press, 110 pp. 

Flunter, J., cited 2004, JDOM source [Available online at 

http://www.id 0 m. 0 rg/d 0 wnl 0 ads/s 0 urce.html .l. March 2004. 

Kunigami, M., 1997, Optimizing ASW search for HVU protection using the FAB 
algorithm, M.S Thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, 72 pp. 

Recalde, C., 1996, A reactive target active ASW sonar search tactical decision 
aid, M.S Thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, 165 pp. 


103 








Sheffield, R., 1989, 40 Great Submarine Simulator War Adventures, Compute 
Books Inc., 248 pp. 

Whitestone, N., 1973, The Submarine, The Ultimate Weapon, Davis-Poytner Ltd, 
146 pp. 

Wilton, D. R., 2004: Demonstrating the benefits of simulation in a military 
environment. J. Battlefield Tech., 7, 31-37 


104 



INITIAL DISTRIBUTION LIST 


1. Defense Technical Information Center 

Ft. Belvoir, Virginia 

2. Dudley Knox Library 

Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, California 

3. Anadolu University Library and Documentation Department 

Eskisehir, Turkey 

4. Arastirma Merkezi Komutanligi 

Pendik, Istanbul, Turkey 

5. Bilkent University Library 

Bilkent, Ankara, Turkey 

6. Bogazici University 

The Institute of Science and Engineering, Computer Engineering 
Bebek, Istanbul, Turkey 

7. Deniz Kuvvetleri Komutanligi 

Personal Daire Baskanligi 
Bakanliklar, Ankara, Turkey 

8. Deniz Kuvvetleri Komutanligi Kutuphanesi 

Bakanliklar, Ankara, Turkey 

9. Deniz Harp Okulu Kutuphanesi 

Tuzia, Istanbul, Turkey 

10. Istanbul Technical University 

Electric and Electronic Faculty, Department of Computer Engineering 
Ayazaga, Istanbul, Turkey 

11. Istanbul Technical University 

Software Development Center 
Maslak, Istanbul, Turkey 

12. Middle East Technical University 

Department of Computer Engineering 
Ankara, Turkey 


105 



13. Military Operations Research Society (MORS) 
Alexandria, Virginia 


106 



