NASA High-Reynolds Number Circulation Control 
Research - Overview of CFD and Planned Experiments 

(Invited) 

W. E. Milholen 11*, G.S. Jones^ and CM. Cagle* 
NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA, 23681-2199 

A new capability to test active flow control concepts and propulsion simulations at high Reynolds 
numbers in the National Transonic Facility at the NASA Langley Research Center is being developed. This 
technique is focused on the use of semi-span models due to their increased model size and relative ease of 
routing high-pressure air to the model. A new dual flow-path high-pressure air delivery station has been 
designed, along with a new high performance transonic semi-span wing model. The modular wind tunnel 
model is designed for testing circulation control concepts at both transonic cruise and low-speed high-lift 
conditions. The ability of the model to test other active flow control techniques will be highlighted. In 
addition, a new higher capacity semi-span force and moment wind tunnel balance has been completed and 
calibrated to enable testing at transonic conditions. 





Nomenclature 


c 


= local airfoil chord 


Cd 


= drag coefficient 


Cl 


= lift coefficient 


c, 


= sectional lift coefficient 


c„ 


= airfoil pitching moment 


Cp 


= surface pressure coefficient 


c. 


= mUjlq^S 


h 


= blowing slot height 


M 


= local value of Mach number 


Mdd 


= drag divergent value of freestream Mach number 


M 

00 


= freestream Mach number 


m 


= mass flow, Ibm/sec 


NPR 


= nozzle pressure ratio, p^. 1 p^ 


P 


= pressure 


q^ 


= freestream dynamic pressure 


Re 


= Reynolds number based on mean aerodynamic chord 


S 


= wing reference area 


T 


= temperature 


Uj 


= total velocity at jet exit 


u,v,w 


= velocity components in the x,y,z directions 


x,y,z 


= Cartesian coordinate system 


a 


= angle-of-attack, degrees 


11 


= non-dimensional semi-span location 



subscripts 

j = j et exit location 

o = stagnation quantity 

00 = freestream quantity 

* Research Engineer, Configuration Aerodynamics Branch, MS 499, Senior Member AIAA. 

* Research Engineer, Flow Physics and Control Branch, MS 170, Senior Member AIAA. 

* Design Engineer, Aeronautics Systems Engineering Branch, MS 238. 

1 

American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. 



I. Introduction 



Active flow control continues to be a fertile research field that holds promise to enhance the aerodynamic 
performance of conventional aircraft and enable the development of unconventional vehicles. A wide variety of 
active flow control techniques are being pursued, ranging from direct boundary layer manipulation using steady or 
pulsed blowing methodologies, to indirect methods including induced plasma flows near a surfaced 
Computational Fluid Dynamic (CFD) methods are maturing to the point that they are being used as tools to improve 
and optimize flow control techniques on realistic conflgurations. The confidence in these CFD tools can be 
improved as they are systematically validated. In general, CFD validation is deflned by determining how well the 
CFD model predicts the performance and flow physics when used for its intended purposes^''. The level of CFD 
validation can be deflned by the complexity of the code and the experiment being used for validation, as described 
in Figure 1 . 



Benchmark 

Cases 



Complete 
S\steiii 



Fundamental Poworfid Lift 




2-D CC Airfoil w/ Upper and 
Lower Blowing 

GTRI/NASA LaRC - MTRBART 




Unit Problems 



Fundarnental 

Will Ssunded Jel 




Skrt Flow »■ 



..rrrTrmmTTr. 



Jet Exit Velocity Profile 
NASA LaRC -CC Lab 




3-D HybiidWin;; Btidy w/ 
USB iiugmenied w/ CC Wing 

Cal Poly/NASA ARC - NFAC 



High Reynolds Number 
3-D CC Semi-span Wing 

NASA LaRC -KTF 



Increasing Geometric And Flow Comp lex ity 
Figure 1. Four levels of CFD validation used to study circulation control. 



One active flow control technique that has experienced a resurgence in 
research is circulation control"'''^'^'*''. The circulation control method 
introduces momentum directly to the near wall region via a blowing slot, 
typically located near the trailing edge and directed over a simple short-cord 
flap as shown in Figure 2. The resulting simplified high-lift system can 
generate maximum lift values significantly higher than that of a conventional 
multi-element high-lift system. The introduced high momentum flow from the 
blowing slot is typically characterized by the non-dimensional blowing 
coefficient ( C ), and the ratio of the slot height to local wing chord (h/c), and 

the Nozzle Pressure Ratio (NPR). On an aircraft, one supply option for the 
circulation control system is engine bleed air, which was shown to be viable by 
a recent e-STOL aircraft design study'". It is worthy to note that unsteady 
circulation control methods are also being examined to reduce the bleed air 
requirements. Another advantage, which has yet to be fully addressed, is the 



DUAL RADIUS 
FLAP 




Figure 2. Circulation control 
blowing slot arrangement in the 
flap trailing edge region. 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



application of the circulation control technique during transonic cruise for either drag reduction or for simplified 
maneuvering systems. 

Several recent publications'^'''''"'''''^ have begun to highlight the developing database that can be used for CFD 
validation. As with most publically available active flow control datasets, one shortfall that still remains is the lack 
of data at realistic Reynolds numbers and data for Reynolds number effects, thereby limiting the scalability of the 
flow control techniques to flight conditions. To address this overarching need, a research project was begun to 
develop the capability to test active flow control concepts and propulsion simulations at high Reynolds numbers in 
the National Transonic Facility (NTF) at the NASA Langley Research Center. 

The new flow control and propulsion simulation capability at the NTF is focused on the use of semi-span 
models due to the relative ease of routing high-pressure air to the model, and the increased model size compared to a 
conventional sting mounted full-span model. The increased model size allows higher model fidelity, as well as 
increased internal volume for housing the flow control mechanisms and instrumentation. A new high-pressure air 
delivery station has been designed which has a "low" mass flow segment for flow control simulations, and a "high" 
mass flow segment for propulsion simulations. Two new wind tunnel models are being developed for the initial 
testing with this air station. The first is a simple model which employs two check-standard nozzles to verify the 
operational characteristics of the air station. The second model is a high-performance transonic wing that will be 
used to evaluate various circulation control concepts at both transonic cruise conditions, as well as low-speed high- 
lift conditions. Lastly, a new higher load capacity semi-span force and moment balance has been completed and 
calibrated for the transonic testing. This paper will give an overview of all three aspects needed to develop the new 
high Reynolds number flow control and propulsion simulation testing capability at the NTF. In addition, the 
modular design employed for the new transonic semi-span model will be emphasized, as it can readily be re- 
configured for testing other flow control techniques. 



II. Results and Discussion 



A. Wind Tunnel Air Station Design 



The NTF air station utilizes a dual flow air delivery system that is coupled to the NTF Sidewall Mounted 
Support System (SMSS) as depicted in Figure 3. The two independently controlled airlines pass through the center 
of the force and moment balance and couple to the model using two concentric bellows and the model interface plate 
as shown in Figure 4. The high flow line can provide 0.1-20.0 Ibm/sec and the low flow line delivers 0.1-8.0 
Ibm/sec to the model. 




Figure 3. Schematic diagram of the routing of high- 
pressure air to a semi-span mounted on the sidewall 
of the NTF for flow control and propulsion 
simulation testing. 




Figure 4. Cross sectional view of the bellows 
arrangement at the wind tunnel model 
attachment location. 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



The external high-pressure air system provides a continuous flow of clean, dry air to the SMSS. Initial 

operations of the facility will be limited to total pressure of 5 atmospheres and a total temperature of -50 F when the 
air station is being used to avoid the formation of frost in the tunnel circuit'^. The air station provides pre-heated 
high-pressure air to the model, thus low temperature control of the jet is obtained through Joule Thompson effects 
and heat transfer through conduction of the pipes that are exposed to the cold temperatures inside the facility plenum 
(-50°F<7: <120°F). 

As part of the air delivery system a fast acting model protection system was added to enable various model 
designs. Internal flow paths are often manipulated with choke plates, valves, or flow straighteners. These devices 
can create large pressure requirements that are unique to a given wind tunnel model. The isolation and vent system 
can be adjusted for maximum internal pressures that vary from 400 - 1200 psig to match the design pressure limits 
of the given wind tunnel model. In the event of a pressure spike, the model over-pressure protection system would 
automatically isolate and vent the wind tunnel model, and command a shut down and venting of the high-pressure 
air delivery system. The design requirement for the isolation and venting of the wind tunnel model was a reaction 
time of one second or less. The ventilation valves can also be used to pre-condition the air temperature of the 
system, efficiently allowing this procedure to occur while the wind tunnel is being brought onto condition. 

B. Wind Tunnel Air Station Validation 



To verify the air station test envelope, it is essential 
to size the nozzles and internal choke plates for the 
highest mass flow rate and internal pressures. An 
additional beneflt of the air station evaluation is the 
characterization of the "air on" model and air station 
interface. This model uses readily available Stratford 
calibration nozzles from the NASA inventory that have 
known thrust characteristics. The initial nozzles selected 
are based on near term jet areas associated with 
Circulation Control and Propulsion Airframe Integration. 



The maximum flow rate for either leg occurs at the 
lowest free stream Mach number and highest free stream 
static pressure as shown in figure 6. The internal model 
pressure is limited to 1200 psig and is based on the high- 
pressure limit of the air station piping system. The 
maximum mass flow rate for the high mass flow leg is 
20 Ibm/sec. With the wind tunnel pressurized to 5 ATM the NPR limit varies from 1.85 to 2.2 for jet temperatures 




Figure 5. Conceptual sketch of dual nozzle check 
standard configuration for air station performance 
validation. 



5 
o 
i 10 



1 ' . 

DESIGN LIMIT OF HIGH FLOW LEG ^ ^^J^ ^^^ 


-::- 




MACH •-'•^i 
-^0.200 jjr ^'■' 

»■ 0.400 .r'*^"' ^.♦'* 


.-"-' 

»-'' 






[^ 


♦ 0.600 y^^^ 

-^0.800 y^-* ^.♦* 


„«'*"" 


^ 


r**^ 








y- 


r- 












r 


1 1 


1 1 








1 







1000 1.200 1.400 1.600 1.800 2.000 2.200 2.400 2.600 
NPR 





DESIGN LIMIT OF HIGH FLOW LEG 




^ 


.*-"■ 


MAC 
-^0.2C 
-i-0.4C 


H 






r^ 


^ 




^-*- 
»-♦'* 


.**'" 


-♦-0.6C 
-^0.8C 






^ 




,«-''^' 


^ 


-^ 








>^ 


r" 






















• 





1.000 1.200 1.400 1.600 1.800 2.000 2.200 2.400 2.600 
NPR 



a) T „= T ■.,^=-50°F b) T „= T ., ^.=120°F 

Figure 6. Mass characteristics for high mass fiow nozzle (p o= 5 ATM, Diameter: 2.7 inches). 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 




a) p o=5 ATM, T „= T ■'j=-50°F 



b) p„=lATM, T„=T<,^.=120°F 



Figure 7. Mass flow characteristics for typical circulation control wing(h/c=0.0033, Slot Area=2.64 in ). 



that range from -50°F to 120°F. The corresponding estimated thrust is 600 Ibf. These estimates are based on a 
nozzle diameter of 2.7 inches, and are characteristic of the model scales to be tested in the NTF. 

Nominally the pressure in the plenum just prior to the jet exit establishes the NPR. It is important that the losses 
across the internal flow path that distributes the flow through the nozzle or circulation control slot is accounted for. 
Many of these devices have minimal losses, but major losses through choke plates occur. The maximum predicted 
upstream choke plate pressure described above occurs at the higher temperature and is approximated to be 1000 psig 
for a 37% open choke plate. The model safety system can be adjusted to the maximum allowable internal pressure 
of the model or 1200 psig (whichever is lower). 

The non-dimensional momentum coefficient, Cpi, is used to characterize the performance of the many of the 
active flow control methods such as circulation control. The experimental uncertainty of Cpi can be related to the 
uncertainty in the measurement of both the mass flow and the slot height. Figure 7 highlights only the sensitivity of 
accurate slot height measurements on the C pi coefficient. It should be noted that the air station is staged with two 
flow meters per leg. The anticipated accuracy of each flow meter is 1% of reading, with the low limit being 
approximately 0.01 Ibm/sec. The actual mass flow measurement accuracy will be evaluated during the initial testing 
with the check standard nozzles. 

C. Transonic Wing Design 



Figure 8 shows the planform of the new semi-span 
model. The wing has an aspect ratio of 5.0, taper ratio 
of 0.40, a leading edge sweep of 30°, and no dihedral. 
The chord length at the side of the fuselage is 25.0 
inches, resulting in a mean aerodynamic chord of 18.1 
inches. The circulation control blowing slot is located 
at the 85% chord location on the upper surface, and will 
be directed over a 15% chord simple hinged flap when 
the model is in the high-lift mode. The generic fuselage 
is comprised of elliptic cross sections with a maximum 
width of 4.0 inches. The wing is mounted in the mid- 
fuselage position to simplify the routing of the high- 
pressure air supply lines. For wind tunnel testing, the 
model will be offset from the tunnel sidewall using a 
2.0-inch non-metric standoff '^, which has a profile 
shape identical to that of the fuselage centerline. 




blowing slot 



Figure 8: Planform view of NTF circulation 
control semi-span model. 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 





Figure 9. View of surface grid for transonic cruise 
configuration. 



Figure 10: Predicted upper surface pressure 
contours (M=0.85, Cl = 0.50, Re = 30x10*). 



The wing was designed for a Mach number of 0.85, a lift 
coefficient of 0.50, at a Reynolds number based on mean 
aerodynamic chord of 30x10*. The unstructured Navier-Stokes 
flow solver USM3D'' was used in conjunction with the CDISC^" 
design code. The CDISC design method is highly efficient 
because the geometry changes are introduced in a manner that 
allows both the geometry and the simulated aerodynamic analysis 
to converge in unison. The flow was assumed to be fully 
turbulent, and a wall-function version of the Spalart-AUmaras 
turbulence model was employed. The grid had approximately 5 
million cells and was found to provide reasonably grid converged 
results. Apartial view of the cruise grid is shown in Figure 9. It 
should be noted that the design and analysis was conducted 
simulating the conflguration in "free-air", and the circulation 
control blowing slot was not included. 

The initial wing loft utilized a modem supercritical airfoil 
section, the NASA TMA-0712^\ The CDISC design method 
was used to improve the wing using several geometry and flow 
fleld constraints. The airfoil thickness to chord distribution on 
the outboard portion of the wing was decreased to 10%, while the 
original 12% thickness ratio was maintained over the inboard half 
of the wing. The flnal wing design has a weak Shockwave that is 
shown in Figure 10, where the upper surface pressure coefficient 

contours are displayed. The wing has approximately 3 of 
washout, with a linear spanwise variation. A representative 
pressure distribution is shown in Figure 11 at ti= 0.625. A state- 
of-the-art supercritical pressure distribution was achieved, with a 
weak shock wave located at approximately 75% chord. The 
wing performs well over a wide range of Mach number, which is 
highlighted in Figure 12 where the M(L/D) ratio is plotted at the 
design lift coefficient of 0.50. 



- 1 .00 r 



-0.50 ■ 



O 



0.00 - 



0.50- 



1.00- 




-n - 0.625 



0.00 



0.25 



0.50 

x/c 



0.75 



1.00 



Figure 11. Predicted chordwise pressure 
distribution (M=0.85, Cl = 0.50, Re = 30x10*). 



18.0 



16.0 



i14.0 



12.0 



10.0 



iiii*' 



0.76 0.7B 0.B0 



0.B? 

Mach 



0.B4 0.B6 O.BB 



Figure 12. Effectof Mach number on 
aerodynamic performance (Cl = 0.50, Re = 
30x10*). 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



D. Low Speed High-Lift Design 



0.50 



0.25 



4; 0.00 



-0.25 



■0.50 



The high-lift design effort focused on 
optimizing the leading edge slat position and 
the circulation control blowing slot utilizing a 
simplified fiap geometry. A preliminary 2-D 
high-lift design study was performed on the 
NASA TMA-0712 airfoil to understand the 
influence of the circulation control blowing 
parameters. Figure 13 depicts the geometry, 
which has a 15% chord flap, deflected to 60°, 
and a blowing slot height of 0.003c. A 1 0% 

chord slat, deflected downward 30 , protects 
the leading edge of the airfoil from 
separation. The detailed view of the plenum 
region shows the vertical face upon which a 
resulting mass flow is introduced by specifying the static 
and stagnation pressures, analogous to setting the NPR. 
The CFD design study was conducted using USM3D in the 
"quasi 2-D" mode (eg. one cell wide grid), requiring 
approximately 370,000 cells. The Spalart-Allmaras 
turbulence model was again used, however in the full- 
viscous mode, with the y+ value for the l" cell off the 
surface being approximately unity. 

The 2-D design study was successful in designing an 
effective slat in the presence of the actively blown trailing 
edge flap. The effect of the leading edge slat on the lift 
coefficient is shown in Figure 14, for NPR=1.60. Without 
the slat, the leading edge of the main element separates, 
yielding a maximum lift coefficient of 3.0 at zero degrees 
angle-of-attack. The slat increases the stall angle to 15°, 
with a maximum lift coefficient of approximately 5.70. It 
was noted that the flap remained attached through the 
entire angle-of-attack range, and stall occurred due to 
separation on the slat and main element. This comparison 
also indicates the performance beneflts that a leading edge 
blowing slot^^ would need to attain to effectively replace 
the slat, which will be examined in the near future. 

The high-lift system designed for the semi-span model 
is shown in Figure 15. Both the leading edge slat and the 
15% chord trailing edge flap span the entire length of the 
wing. A streamwise slice through the wing at any 
spanwise location would be similar to the 2-D geometry 
shown in Figure 13. To simplify the construction of the 
wind tunnel model, the slat was designed to be a bolt-on 
addition to the cruise wing. Thus, the slat does not 
simulate the deployment of the cruise leading edge as 
would occur on an actual aircraft. This simpliflcation 
does have an impact on the maximum obtainable lift 
coefficient. In the context of developing a versatile 
research configuration, this was however deemed an 
acceptable compromise. 




0.00 



0.25 



0.50 

x/c 



0.75 



1.00 



Figure 13. Two-dimensional high-lift circulation control airfoil 
geometry 



6.00 



O 4.00 



3.00 



2.0( 





1 1 





















laiOn 






J 


____-£ 
>—"""' 


1_ 
































if 












y 


























/ 














/ 








































/ 












/ 


r 












/ 














/ ) 


f 












"7 / 














K , , , 






1 1 1 1 






1 1 1 1 



5.0 -10.0 -5.0 0.0 



a, deg. 



5.0 10.0 15.0 20.0 



Figure 14. Effect of leading edge slat on 2-D high- 
lift circulation control airfoil (M=0.20, Re=20xl0'^. 




.^'V'l'i' 



j^, 



M^ 



-'m u 



t*.? 



Figure 15. View of surface grid for high-lift 
configuration, 60° fiap defiection. 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



The USM3D flow solver was used to conduct 
parametric studies that varied the trailing edge deflection 
angle, the blowing slot height, and the rigging of the 
leading edge slat. The full-viscous option was again 
utilized with the Spalart-Allmaras turbulence model, with 
the finest grid comprised of approximately 31 million cells, 
which was deemed adequate for the design effort. Only 
salient features of the high-lift design study will be 
presented. 

Figure 16 demonstrates the effect of the aft plenum 
nozzle pressure ratio on the lift coefficient. With no 
blowing, NPR = 1.00, the simple hinged trailing edge flap 
experiences flow separation through the entire angle-of- 
attack range. The addition of blowing attaches the flow 
over the flap and provides a significant increase in lift. 
The lift increment due to blowing at zero degrees angle of 
attack is 1.45, for NPR=1.60. A further increase in the 
blowing to NPR=1.80 provides a nearly constant lift 
increment at all angles-of-attack. For this blowing rate, it 
was noted that the exit Mach number at the blowing slot is 
nearly sonic across the span of the wing. The predicted 
near surface streamline patterns at CLmax for the NPR=1.80 
case are shown in Figure 17. The flow over the entire 
upper surface of the wing is attached, with the only 
appreciable spanwise flow occurring near the wing tip on 
the main element. This region becomes the locus of the 
wing stall as the angle-of-attack is further increased. 

£. Wind Tunnel Model Design 

The wind tunnel model has been designed to allow 
flexibility for testing not only the current circulation 
control concepts, but also adaptability to other flow control 
techniques in the future. The CFD studies presented above 
were used to supply estimated aerodynamic loads on all 
model components for the design and stress analysis. 
Figure 18 shows a view of the model mounted on the 
sidewall turntable, with the upper fuselage and upper wing 
skins removed. The model-mounting block in the center of 
the fuselage serves as the attachment to both the semi-span 
balance and the high-pressure air delivery bellows. The 
mounting block manifolds the high-pressure air into four 
independent flow paths, which are regulated by computer 
controlled ball valves mounted in the fuselage. The four 
supply lines are then routed through the wing box to 
supply four plenums in the trailing edge region. Although 
not discemable in this view, each plenum uses a stainless 
steel perforated choke plate to maintain the desired internal 
flow conditions. Although the CFD studies to date have 
not examined the spanwise variability of the blowing rate it 
is anticipated to be a useful feature of this model; for 
example, the ability to manipulate the spanwise 
distribution of lift or to provide roll control capability from 
the outboard plenum. 



4.00 
3.50 
3.00 
2.50 
2.00 
Cj"! .50 
1.00 
0.50 
0.00 





1 












r 




= 1.80 






------- NRR=1.W 






J"-\ 




















jO" 


> 


1 






A' 


1 ' 






// 




.■' 




■, 




/ 










/ 


y' 












* 












1 











-0.50 

-30.0 -20.0 -10.0 0.0 



10.0 20.0 30.0 40.0 

a (deg.) 

Figure 16. Effect of NPR on high-lift 
performance (M=0.20, Re = 20x10*). 




Figure 17. Predicted upper surface streamline 
patterns at CLmai for NPR=1.80 (M=0.20, a = 25", 
Re = 20x10*). 



ESP MODULES 

64 PORT 

(1-4) 


MOTOR 
VALVES 
(1&4) 


PRESSUR^H^^^g 

SWITCHES ^^^^^H 

(xS) * 


1 , 


HIGH PRESSURE ^, 

PLENUMS T^^iZ 
w/ CHOKE PLATES IX 

(X4) , f \ 


===r 


SLAT- / ;#!--- 





TURNTABLE 



TOPHAT 
BALANCE INTERFACE 



MOTOR 
VALVES 
(2&3) 



ESP MODULES 

B4 PORT 

(5-7) 




^ FLAP 
(0, 30, 60) 



PLENUM COVER 

w/ 4 REAL TIME 

SLOT HEIGHT GAGES 



ADA 
MODULE 



\ 



NON-METRIC STANDOFF 
w/ LABYRINTH SEALS 



Figure 18. View of wind tunnel model in low-speed 
high-lift configuration. 



8 

American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



STANDOFFS 



The semi-span model is offset from the wind tunnel sidewall using a 2.0-inch non-metric standoff that is 
mounted to the turntable plate. A nominal 0.25-inch gap is maintained between the standoff and semi-fuselage and 
a labyrinth type flow blocker'^ is used to minimize the flow between the model parts. A multi-segment fouling 
circuit is used to monitor the behavior of the gap during testing. A small gap is also provided between the back of 
the standoff and wind tunnel wall, and a spring-loaded Teflon strip is used as a scrubbing flow blocker'^. 

The design of the wing structure allows every 
component to be replaced except for the lower wing 
skin, which is integral to the wing box. In anticipation 
of testing leading edge flow control devices, the front 
spar has milled passageways for the routing of high- 
pressure air. Figure 19 shows the outboard portion of 
the wing in the high-lift mode, with the slat and 60° 
trailing edge flap installed. The plenum cover plate has 
been removed to highlight the airfoil shaped standoffs 
used to support the cover plate, and maintain the 
blowing slot height. Several non-intrusive variable 




capacitance gauges will be installed in this region to 
monitor the behavior of the slot height during testing. 



Figure 19. Detail view of wind tunnel model outboard 
wing in the low-speed high-lift configuration. 



The model will be instrumented with four rows of 
pressure taps on the wing, shown in Figure 20 for the 
cruise configuration. In the high-lift mode, the slat and 
flaps will include pressure taps at these locations, as well 
as pressure taps inside the plenum to help characterize 
the internal flow exiting the blowing slot. The fuselage 
will have a row of pressure taps near the centerline, as 
well as one radial row ahead of the wing. The model has 
approximately 250 pressure taps. Electronically 

scanned pressure modules are housed in the nose and tail 
regions of the fuselage. The performance of the four 
plenums will be documented using several pressure 
measurements. Additional instrumentation housed in 
the fuselage includes the redundant model over- 
pressurization safety switches, and the model angle-of- 
attack inclinometer. 



11 = 0.20 



11 = 0.40 



r, = 0.60 



11 = 0.60 



Figure 20. Location of pressure tap rows on cruise wing 
configuration. 



F. NTF-117S Balance 

The semi-span model test technique at the NTF has 
traditionally focused on high-Reynolds number testing 
of low-speed high-lift configurations. The NTF-114S 
balance used for this testing is not well suited for 
transonic testing due to the elevated model loads 
generated. A larger load capacity balance, the NTF- 
1 17S was fabricated in the late 1990s but not completed. 
As part of the current research program this balance was 
recently instrumented and calibrated. The new balance 
is shown in Figure 21, along with the various load 
capacities referenced to the balance moment center. 
The normal force capability of 12,000 lb is of particular 
interest for transonic testing. It is important to note that 
the physical dimensions of the new balance are identical 
to those of the NTF-114S balance, allowing either to be 
used with the new air station. 





Full Scale Design Loads': I 


Normal Force: 


12,000 lbs 


Axial Force: 


1,800 lbs 


Pitch Moment: 


90,000 in-lbs 


Roll Moment: 


669,000 in-lbs 


Yaw Moment: 


100,350 in-ibs 



'All loads are about BMC 




lalarce Moment Center (BMC) 

Figure 21. Characteristics of the NTF-117S semi-span 
balance. 



American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



The addition of the high-pressure air delivery supply lines and bellows do add more potential variables to the 
performance of the semi-span balance. Of particular interest are possible pressure tare and momentum tare 
interference effects. The engineering design analysis to date suggests that the bellows will have a minimal effect on 
the balance readings for two reasons: 1) the small size and relative stiffiiess of the bellows; and 2) the balance does 
not measure side force which is the anticipated direction of the predominate bellows forces. A second calibration of 
the NTF-117S is however currently being formulated to quantify the effects of the statically pressurized bellows on 
the balance accuracy. This calibration will be performed with the balance installed in the SMSS. To access the 
momentum tare effects, the check standard nozzle configuration discussed above will be used to examine the 
influence of the supply pressure and mass flow rate on the balance accuracy. 

III. Concluding Remarks 

The capability to test active flow control and propulsion simulations is being established in the National 
Transonic Facility at the NASA Langley Research Center, with capacity for high Reynolds number and Reynolds 
number effects testing. This testing technique is focused on the use of semi-span models due to their increased size 
and relative ease of routing high-pressure air to the model. 

A new dual flow-path high-pressure air delivery station has been designed. The low mass flow leg of the air 
station is capable of delivery up to 8 Ibm/sec of flow, while the high mass flow leg delivers up to 20 Ibm/sec. The 
high-pressure air is routed through the sidewall mounting system, and through the center of the force and moment 
balance, connecting to the semi-span model with a co-flowing bellows arrangement. The wind tunnel models are 
protected by a model over-pressurization protection system, which is based on a series of fast acting isolation and 
ventilation valves. To avoid the formation of frost in the wind tunnel circuit the testing technique is limited to a 

minimumtunnel temperature of -50 F. 

The first aerodynamic model to utilize the new air station is a high performance transonic wing model that was 
designed using state-of-the-art CFD methods. The wing will be used to examine various circulation control 
concepts at both transonic cruise, and at low-speed high-lift conditions. For the high-lift configuration, the 
circulation control blowing slot will be directed over a simple 15% chord hinged trailing edge flap, while the leading 
edge utilizes a conventional slat. The circulation control is applied via four independent plenums across the 
trailing edge of the wing, and supplied by four computer-controlled valves in the semi-fuselage. The model has 
been designed to allow testing of other active flow control techniques in the future. 

Finally, a new semi-span force and moment balance has been completed and calibrated to allow testing at 
transonic Mach numbers. The new NTF-117S balance has a maximum normal force capacity of 12,000 lb. Plans 
have been formulated to access the interference tares imparted by the bellows, which will include the evaluation of 
the static pressure tares, as well as the momentum tares. The momentum tares will be evaluated using a series of 
Stratford calibration nozzles, mounted on a new check standard dual-nozzle model. 

Acknowledgements 

The authors would like to express their sincere gratitude to a large group of NASA and contract personnel who 
have contributed to this research effort. The scope of the project has required coordination with multiple 
organizations at the NASA Langley Research Center with a significant emphasis placed on the safe operation of the 
high-pressure air delivery station. The project has been supported by the Subsonic Fixed Wing project, with special 
thanks given to Mike Rogers and Richard Wahls, for their support and latitude in the execution of this new 
capability. The first author is grateful to Richard Campbell for his assistance in the use of the CDISC design 
method. The CFD computations were performed on the Columbia supercomputer at the NAS facility at NASA 
Ames Research Center. 

The following individuals have played key roles in the design of the high-pressure air delivery station, and are 
recognized for their efforts and commitment to excellence: Bryan Haas and Mike Palmer for oversight of the air 
station design; Paul Smith for his detailed mechanical design for the SMSS modifications; Greg Gatlin for his shared 
expertise of the SMSS and semi-span model testing; Frank Beltinck and Jeremiah Berry for mechanical and 
electrical guidance inside the SMSS; Ray Rhew, Shirley Jones, and Chris Lynn for support of the NTF-1 17S balance 

10 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



calibration activities; Dr. Balakrishna and Dave Butler for their preliminary design study and transient flow analysis, 
Bill Bissett and Arbria Wright for their support and leadership; and Mike Brewer and Steve Alperin who will 
oversee the air station construction and integration phase. The authors would also like to thank Larry Lake, Garry 
Grab, and Allan Sordelett of Progressive Design Inc. for their contributions to the air station design. The support 
and interest expressed by both Cale Zeune at the Air Force Research Lab, and Rick Hooker of Lockheed Martin are 
greatly appreciated. The authors also appreciate the continued interactions with Bob Englar, and his research staff 
at the Georgia Tech Research Institute. 

References 



Gad-el-Hak, M, Pollard, A. Bonnet J (Ed), " Flow Control - Fundamentab and Practices ", Springer, M 53, 
October 1997 

2 
" Guide for Verification and Validation of Computational Fluid Dynamics Simulations ", American Institute of 

Aeronautics and Astronautics, AIAAG-077, 1998. 

3 
Roache, P.J., " Verification and Validation in Computational Science and Engineering " Hermosa Publications, 

1998 

^ Jones, G.S., Joslin, R.D., "Proceedings of the 2004 NASA/ONR Circulation Control Workshop", NASA/CP-2005- 
213509, June 2005 

Jones, G. S., Yao, C, Allan, B.G., "Experimental Investigation of a 2-D Supercritical Circulation-Control airfoil 
Using Particle Image Velocimetry", AIAA-2006-3009, June 2006. 

^ Lin., J.C, Jones, G.S, Allan, B.G., Westra, B.W., Collins, S.W., and Zeune, C. H., "Flow-Field Measurement of a 
Hybrid Wing Body Model with Blown Flaps", AIAA Paper 2008-6718, July 2008. 

7 
Jones, G.S., Viken, S.A., Washburn, A.E., Jenkins, L.N., & Cagle, CM., "An Active Flow Circulation Controlled 

Flap Concept for General Aviation AppUcations", AIAA 2002-3157, June 2002. 

Englar, R. J., G. S. Jones, B. G. Allan, and J. C. Lin, "2-D Circulation Control Airfoil Benchmark Experiments 
Intended for CFD Code VaUdation," AIAA Paper 2009-0902, January 2009. 

9 
Min, B.Y., Lee, W, Englar, R., and Sankar, L.N., "Numerical Investigation of Circulation Control Airfoils" 

Journal of Aircraft, Vol. 46, No. 4, 2009, pp. 1403 - 1410. 

'^^ Collins, S.W., Westra, B.W., Lin., J.C, Jones, G.S., and Zeune, C H., "Wind Tunnel Testing of Powered Lift, 
All- Wing STOL Model", International Powered Lift Conference, Royal Aeronautical Society, London, July 2008. 

Englar, R. J., "Two- Dimensional Transonic Wind Tunnel Tests of Three 15 -Percent -Thick Circulation Control Airfoils," 
Naval Ship R&D Center Technical Note AL-182, AD 882-075, Dec. 1970. 

^^ Jones, G.S, Lin., J.C, Allan, B.G., Milholen II, W.E., Rumsey, C.L., and Swanson, R.C, "Overview of CFD 
Validation Experiments for Circulation Control Applications at NASA", International Powered Lift Conference, 
Royal Aeronautical Society, London, July 2008. 

13 

Englar, R. J., G. S. Jones, B. G. Allan, and J. C Lin, "2-D Circulation Control Airfoil Benchmark Experiments 

Intended for CFD Code VaUdation," AIAA Paper 2009-0902, January 2009. 

11 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



14 

Swanson, R. C. and Rumsey, C. L., "Numerical Issues for Circulation Control Calculations," AIAA Paper 2006- 

3008, June 2006 

Pfingsten, K.C and Radespiel, R., "Experimental and Numerical Investigation of a Circulation Control Airfoil", 
AIAA 2009-533, January 2009 

Wetzel, D., Griffin, J., Liu, F., and Cattafesta, L., "An Experimental Study of Circulation Control on an Elliptic 
Airfoil", AIAA-2009-4280, June, 2009 

17 

Gatlin, G.M, Tomek, W.G., Payne, P.M., and Griffiths, R.C., "Recent Improvements in Semi-Span Testing at the 

National Transonic Facility (Invited)", AIAA Paper 2006-508, January 2006. 

'* Barrier, B.L., Leavitt, L.D., and Bangert, L.S., "Operating Characteristics of the Multiple Critical Venturi System and 
Secondary Calibration Nozzles Used for Weight-Flow Measurements in the Langley 16-Foot Transonic Tunnel", NASA TM 
86405, 1985. 

'' Frink, N. T., "Tetrahedral Unstructured Navier-Stokes Method for Turbulent Flows," AIAA Journal, Vol. 36, No. 
11, November 1998, pp. 1975-1982. 

20 

Campbell, Richard L, "Efficient Viscous Design of Realistic Aircraft Configurations (Invited)", AIAA Paper 98- 

2539, June 1998. 

21 

Milholen, II, W.E., and Owens, L.R., "On the Application of Contour Bumps for Transonic Drag Reduction 

(Invited)", AIAA Paper 2005-0462, January 2005. 

^^ Englar, Robert J., et al., "Experimental Development of CC airfoils and Pneumatic Powered-Lift Systems," AIAA 
2010-0345, January 2010. 

23 

Manning, B., Doussin, J.F., "Best Practices in the use of "Smart" Displacement, Gap and Hole Mapping Sensors 

for Aircraft and Aircraft Engine test and overhaul". Aerospace Texting Expo 2005, Hamburg, Germany, April 6, 

2005 



12 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 



