N87- 26698 


1986 

NASA/ASEE Summer Faculty Research Fellowship Program 

Johnson Space Center 
University of Houston 

Development of a Computer Program to Generate Typical 
Measurement Values for Various Systems on a 

Space Station 

Prepared by: Louis A. DeAcetis, Ph.D. 

Academic Rank: Professor of Physics 

Institution: Bronx Community College of the 

City University of New York 
Bronx, NY 10453 

NASA/ JSC 

Directorate: Engineering 

Division: , Tracking and Communications 

Branch: Communications Performance and 

Integration 

JSC Colleague: Oron L. Schmidt 

Date: August 15, 1986 

Contract #: NGT-44-005-803 (University of Houston) 


6-1 



Abstract 


The elements of a simulation program written in 
Ada have been developed. The program will eventually 
serve as a data generator of typical readings from 
various Space Station equipment involved with Com- 
munications and Tracking, and will simulate various 
scenarios that may arise due to equipment malfunction 
or failure, power failures, etc. 

In addition, an evaluation of the Ada language has 
been made from the viewpoint of a FORTRAN programmer 
learning Ada for the first time. Various strengths and 
difficulties associated with the learning and use of 
Ada are considered. 


6-2 


I n t roduct ion 


The planning and testing of the various data col- 
lecting and management systems on the proposed U. S. 
Space Station requires that various configurations be 
tested to determine whether performance criteria can be 
realistically met. This requires that the various sys- 
tems and their interaction with the data 
col lect ion/moni tor ing and data management systems be 
simulated. (Eventually, as actual equipment becomes 
available, it can replace its software simulation in 
the monitoring system.) In particular, readings from 
anticipated equipment involved with Tracking and Com- 
munication are to be simulated by computer programs 
which will mimic the typical performance of such equip- 
ment, and, eventually, simulate the effects of anomalis 
behavior or equipment failure. 


6-3 



It is anticipated that Ada will be used as the 
programming language for the simulation. Since there 
has been limited experience thus far with Ada* an 
evaluation of the language and its capabilities in this 
area is also of interest. The two goals of this project 
thus were: 

a) To begin the programming of a data generator 
which will simulate various equipment involved with 
Tracking and Communications on the Space Station* and 

b) To evaluate the Ada language as the language of 
choice for such a simulation. 


Resu Its and Cone 1 us i ons_ 

In order to meet the two major goals of this 
project? the principal investigator undertook to learn 
Ada, and then to apply it in programs that could serve 
as a basis for Cor at least a start on) the required 
simulation. Headway was made in defining the parameters 
to be included in the simulation, and preliminary 
programs have been written that can serve as a basis 
for further programming. 


6-4 


In terms of an evaluation of Ada, the following 
comments about Ada are reported: 

a) Ada is a language well suited for large scale 
simulation programs. In fact, it appears designed 
specifically for such applications CIt would be cumber- 
some for small programs or numerical analysis). 

b) Ada is complex and relatively difficult to 
learn Ca background in PASCAL appears to be helpful) . 
It contains much jargon, and many of the current 
references are poorly indexed, 

c) The diagnostics on the VAX (typical?) are poor 
and not very helpful. 

d) All of the bugs are apparently not worked out 
of the DEC implementation on the VAX — we discovered 
one involving the TEXT_IO package and port I/O and were 
apparently the third facility to bring this to DEC'S 
attention. 


6-5 



e) One of Ada's most powerful facilities is the 
ability to program concurrent Cor parallel) tasks that 
execute "simul taneously • “ (Outside of Ada i such concur- 
rent processing is only possible at the system level by 
"detaching" from jobs that then continue to run in the 
background. Such processes* however, are machine/system 
dependent and therefore not readily transpor table . ) 
This feature should be especially useful in programming 
simul at ions . 

The general conclusions of this project are that 
Ada is a powerful language that is well suited to 
programming simulations, but that its complexity means 
that it is not for the casual programmer . 


6-6 


References 


Booch, Grady , Software Engineering With Ada * 
Benj amin/Cummings Publishing Co,, Menlo Park, CA, 1983. 

Price, David, Introduction to Ada , Prentice Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1984. 

Reference Manual for the Ada Poraramming Languaae i 
Digital Equipment Corporation. 

Telesoft-Ada Compiler User's Manual i Version 1 . 3G , 
Telesof t , 1983. 

VAX Language-Sensitive Editor Users Guide * Digital 
Equipment Corporation, AA-FY24A-TE , July 1985. 

VAX Ada Programmer's Run-Time Reference Manual i Digital 
Equipment Corporation, AA-EF88A-TE, February 1985. 


Acknow 1 edaemen t s 

Many thanks to Eric Barnhart for his considerable 
assistance and support. My comments last year concern- 
ing Oron L. Schmidt are reaffirmed. 


6-7 


