both UNIX and Windows operating sys- 
tems. 

These programs were written by Rodrick V. 
Chima and Meng-Sing Lion of Glenn Re- 
search Center. Further information is con- 
tained in a TSP (seepage 1 ). 

Inquiries concerning rights for the commer- 
cial use of this invention should be addressed 
to NASA Glenn Research Center, Commercial 
Technology Office, Attn: Steve Fedor, Mail 
Stop 4-8, 21000 Brookpark Road, Cleveland, 
Ohio 44135. Refer to LEW-17635/88-1. 


<fh Program Facilitates CMMI 
Appraisals 

A computer program has been written 
to facilitate appraisals according to the 
methodology of Capability Maturity 
Model Integration (CMMI). [CMMI is a 
government/industry standard, main- 
tained by the Software Engineering Insti- 
tute at Carnegie Mellon University, for 
objectively assessing the engineering ca- 
pability and maturity of an organization 
(especially, an organization that produces 
software) ] . The program assists in prepa- 
ration for a CMMI appraisal by providing 
drop-down lists suggesting required arti- 
facts or evidence. It identifies process 
areas for which similar evidence is re- 
quired and includes a copy feature that 
reduces or eliminates repetitive data 
entry. It generates reports to show the en- 
tire framework for reference, the ap- 
praisal artifacts to determine readiness 
for an appraisal, and lists of interviewees 
and questions to ask them during the ap- 
praisal. During an appraisal, the program 
provides screens for entering observa- 
tions and ratings, and reviewing evidence 
provided thus far. Findings concerning 
strengths and weaknesses can be ex- 
ported for use in a report or a graphical 
presentation. The program generates a 
chart showing capability level ratings of 
the organization. A context-sensitive Win- 
dows help system enables a novice to use 
the program and learn about the CMMI 
appraisal process. 

This program was written by Wesley Sweetser of 

Goddard Space Flight Center. Further infor- 
mation is contained in a TSP (see page 1 ). 
GSC-14782-1 


Grid Visualization Tool 

The Grid Visualization Tool (GVT) is 
a computer program for displaying the 
path of a mobile robotic explorer 
(rover) on a terrain map. The GVT 
reads a map-data file in either portable 
graymap (PGM) or portable pixmap 
(PPM) format, representing a gray-scale 


or color map image, respectively. The 
GVT also accepts input from path-plan- 
ning and activity-planning software. 
From these inputs, the GVT generates a 
map overlaid with one or more rover 
path(s), waypoints, locations of targets 
to be explored, and/or target-status in- 
formation (indicating success or failure 
in exploring each target). The display 
can also indicate different types of paths 
or path segments, such as the path actu- 
ally traveled versus a planned path or 
the path traveled to the present position 
versus planned future movement along 
a path. The program provides for updat- 
ing of the display in real time to facili- 
tate visualization of progress. The size of 
the display and the map scale can be 
changed as desired by the user. The 
GVT was written in the C++ language 
using the Open Graphics Library 
(OpenGL) software. It has been com- 
piled for both Sun Solaris and Linux op- 
erating systems. 

This program was written by Caroline 
Chouinard, Forest Fisher, Tara Estlin, 
Daniel Gaines, and Steven Schaffer of Cal- 
tech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Labora- 
tory. Further information is contained in a 
TSP (see page 1). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(818) 393-2827. Refer to NPO-40303. ' 


0 Program Computes Sound 
Pressures at Rocket 
Launches 

Launch Vehicle External Sound 
Pressure is a computer program that 
predicts the ignition overpressure and 
the acoustic pressure on the surfaces 
and in the vicinity of a rocket and 
launch pad during launch. The pro- 
gram generates a graphical user inter- 
face (GUI) that gathers input data 
front the user. These data include the 
critical dimensions of the rocket and of 
any launch-pad structures that may act 
as acoustic reflectors, the size and 
shape of the exhaust duct or flame de- 
flector, and geometrical and opera- 
tional parameters of the rocket engine. 
For the ignition-overpressure calcula- 
tions, histories of the chamber pres- 
sure and mass flow rate also are re- 
quired. Once the GUI has gathered the 
input data, it feeds them to ignition- 
overpressure and launch-acoustics rou- 
tines, which are based on several ap- 
proximate mathematical models of 
distributed sources, transmission, and 
reflection of acoustic waves. The out- 


put of the program includes ignition 
overpressures and acoustic pressures at 
specified locations. 

This program was written by Gary Ogg, 
Roy Heyman, Michael White, and Karl 
Edquist of Applied Research Associates, Inc., 
for Marshall Space Flight Center. For fur- 
ther information, contact the company at 
www.ara.com. 

MFS-31568 


0 Solar-System Ephemeris 
Toolbox 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) 
generates planetary and lunar ephemeris 
data and FORTRAN routines that allow 
users to obtain state data for the Sun, the 
moon, and the planets. The JPL Solar Sys- 
tem Ephemeris Toolbox, developed at 
Kennedy Space Center, is a set of functions 
that provides the same functionality in the 
MATLAB computing environment along 
with some additional capabilities. The tool- 
box can be used interactively via a graphical 
user interface (GUI), or individual func- 
tions can be called from the MATLAB com- 
mand prompt or other MATLAB scripts 
and functions. The toolbox also includes 
utility functions to define and perform co- 
ordinate transformation (e.g., mean-of- 
date, tme-of-date, J2000) that are common 
in the use of these ephemerides. An at- 
tached README file guides the user 
through the process of constructing binary 
ephemeris files, verifying correct installa- 
tion, and using functions to extract state 
data. This process also can be performed 
using the GUI. Help from each toolbox 
function is available through MATLAB’s 
“help” function. Many of the functions in 
die toolbox are MATLAB equivalents of the 
JPL-written FORTRAN programs and sub- 
routines used for the same purposes. A 
novice can use the GUI to extract state data, 
while a more experienced user can use the 
functions directly, as needed, in his/her ap- 
plications. The toolbox has been tested 
using MATLAB Releases 13 and 14. 

This program was written by Charles F. Walker 
o/Kermedy Space Center. For further infor- 
mation, access www.openchannelsoftware.org. 
KSC-12544 


Data-Acquisition Software 
for PSP/TSP Wind-Tunnel 
Cameras 

Wing-Viewer is a computer program for 
acquisition and reduction of image data ac- 
quired by any of five different scientific- 
grade commercial electronic cameras used 
at Langley Research center to observe 
wind-mnnel models coated with pressure- 


16 


NASA Tech Briefs, October 2005 


