^iftljli PHIL MUM 



01000-83 



I " i 



NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR AERONAUT IOSt 



TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM, / ^ 



ABSTRACTS FROM THE GERliAN TECHNICAL PRES& ' 
RA TES FOR FLIGHTS ORGANIZED BY THE STATE? 



Translated from 

. "Naohriohten fflr Luftfahrer," Vol. 3, No. 3, 

"by 
Paris Office, N.A. C.'A. . 



■ . ! ■ • i<-.urned to 

- ttii -Phe Lar.&'-3J( , ■_ . „. . . 

Mci... ' eron-j-jiical 

^ April, 1931. 



7 



£ 




II 

3 1176 01439 9787 



ABSTRACT 3 FRCEI THE GERMAN TECHNICAL PRESS . 
RATES FOR FLIGHTS ORGANIZED BY THE STATE- 



. In regard to aerial transport on the order of Government 
authorities, the following tariff was drawn up by the State 
Ministry of Transport (State Department for Air and Power Trans- 
port) in collaboration with the State Finanoe Department, in 
agreement with the firms incorporated in the Association of Ger- 
man Aircraft Manufacturers by the Convention of Aerial Trans- 
port Companies. The tariff itself constitutes the regulations 
by which the firms below listed are obligated for the time being. 
Flight orders under no special agreement are to be considered 
as contracts limited by the terms stated in the tariff. 

Directions for the utilization of the airplanes in question 
will be issued by the State Finance Department, according to 
arrangement with the interested parties. 

The (Company) hereby pledges itself to furnish 

i 

airplanes - with due referenoe to the possibilities of such ma- 
chines - on the order of State and National authorities, for 
aerial transport (State flights) under the following oondltlone:- 

1. Order b issued by the Government to take precedence of 
all others; suoh orders to be delivered in writing. 

2. Airplane , pilot and crew to be provided as for ordinary 
transport purposes. If an observer be required by the party giv- 



T 3 - 
ing the order, or due to the nature of the journey, speoial oom- 
3 pensatlon xnuat be mode for suoh services. 

-3.-- The party giving the order may. utilize the full load 
capaoity; should it not be utilized, other cargo may be carried 
on board with his consent. 

4. The return flight must be paid in full to the starting 
port , even when the full load oapaoity is not used by the party 
in question. The same applies to any flights required to be 
made without any load. 

In the case of flights made without a load,- other loads may 
be carried with or without the oonsent of the party ordering the 
flight. Sixty per oent of the amount reoeived for suoh utiliza- 
tion of the airplane shall be credited to the Company in question. 

5. The party hiring the airplane may request that landings 
be made only in places oonsidered suitable by the pilot of the 
machine. 

6. Fuel must be supplied by the party hiring the airplane. 

7. Payment will be made according to the number of kilo- 
meters flown, an additional 10$ being oharged. f or a minimum dis- 
tance of 20 km. , however, on the number of kilometers covered 
in exoess of the route shown on the map. The minimum extra 
oharge for 30 km. includes the cost of the first asoent and the 
first landing; for any succeeding landings made by request of 
the passenger, an extra oharge, as for 30 km. , will be made for 
each landing and olimb, oounted together. 



- 3 - 

Deviations from the prescribed route, as toII as intermedi- 
ate landings made "by request of the passenger, will be included 
in the scale of charges made. 

The charges are as follows: 
Hail airplane, old type, with one engine, 12 Marks per kg. 



Seaplane , " n 


n 


it n 


13 


n ■ 


n 


Giant airplane n " 


n 


two engines , 


19 


n 


n 


Land transport 

airplane ,new n 


n 


ona engine, 


15 


n 


» 


Sea transport 

airplane , new n 


n 


n ii 


16 


n 


D 



8. Additional charges: 

1. Services of an observer, 1.15 Harks per km. 

2. For every landing made by special request outside 
an airdrome (that is, landings made on ground not exclusively 
reserved and duly kept as landing-plaoes for airplanes) : th9 
oharge for a flying oourse of 20 km. , according to JTo. 7, without 
additional oharge. 

3. For every night spent away from the starting port 
by the airplane in the oourse of its work, a charge for 40 km. 
without extras, will be made aooording to paragraph 7. 

4. For flights made by request over regions tihere fight- 
ing operations are going on, or nfoere other risks are run, the 
oharge made will be double the amount stated in par. 7, or as 
stated in par. 8, 1-3. 



- 4 - 

9. If an airplane should be ordered, but not utilized, a 
charge will be made for each day at the rate of 80 km. flona, ac- 
cording to par. 7, without extra tax, unless the order has been 
rescinded before 10 a. m. on the preceding day. 

10. If the Company in question should be presented through 

strikes or similar causes from executing the required flights, 

the airplane is placed at the disposal of the hiring party, isSio 

supplies his own personnel in that oase. The following charges 

are made for every day inoluded from the time of delivery to the 

time of the return of the airplane: 

1. Payment for a o curse, pf 40 km. according to par. 7, 
without extra tax. 

3. Half the amount - aooording to par. 7 - charged for 
the course flown. 

11. The company in question undertakes the storage of fuel 
for flights on Government orders in accordance with the aooommo- 
daticn available and in taking all the customary measures for 
the safety and supervision of such fuel. Beyond this, it under- 
takes no responsibility. 

The Company may not utilize the fuel otherwise than on behalf 
of the party storing it , with the exception that an amount not 
exceeding 30$ of the quantity supplied may be temporarily used by 
the Company for its own purposes; with regard to consumption of 
the fuel, an aocount must be rendered at the conclusion of each 
order. H&en the contraot lapses, any fuel left over after the 
deduotion of the amount duly consumed must be immediately returned. 



- 5 - 

12. This tariff applies only to flights that can he executed 
in Germany in the interval between half an hour before sunrise and. 
half an hour after sunset. 

13. This contract can be terminated in writing within a per- 
iod of four reeks. 

14. In case of dispute concerning the oontract, the matter 
must be brought before a court of arbitration called by the State 
Department for Air and Power Transport for decision, and the Com- 
pany in question must be represented at the hearing of the oase. 
Ordinary legal proceedings are then also available. 

LIST of the firms incorporated in the Association cf German 

Airoraft Manufacturers at the Convention of Aerial Transport 

Companies: 

1. ALBATROS COMPANY FOR AIRPLANE UNDERTAKINGS , Ltd. 
Berlin-Johannisthal Aerodrome. 

3. AUTOMOBILE AKD_AVIATION JOINT STOCK Co. , 
"' ^IPZiC-Reiterblib'k. 

3. BAVARIAN RUMPLER WORKS Joint-Stoci Co. , Augsburg. 

4. CASPAR WORKS, Ltd. , Travemunde-Priwall. 

5. GERMAN AERIAL NAVIGATION Cc . , Ltd. , Berlin, JT.*T. 7. 

6. German . AIRPLANE WORKS (in liquidation) Ltd. 

Sommerstr. 4, Berlin, N-.ff.--7. 

7. HANN0VER3CHE WAGGONFABRIS , Joint -Stock Co. , 

Hannover-Linden . 

8. KONDOR AIRPLANE WORKS, Ltd. , 

Nordhausen HARZ. 

9. SCHUETTE-LANZ Airplane Factory, 

Mannheim Rheinau. 



10. AIRPLANE AND AIRCRAFT Co . , Ltd. , 
ICleiststrasse 8, Berlin VI. 63. 

11* I»L0YD AERIAL TRANSPORT SABLATIIG , Ltd. , 
Bellevuestr. 5 a. Berlin 17. 9. 

13. AERIAL TRANSPORT COMPANY, Artur Mill Is r , 

Gross Berliner Damra 103-104, Berlin Johannesthal. 

13. ROLAND MACHINE FACTORY, Ltd. , 

Rognitsstrasse , Kaiserdauim, Berlin Charlottenburg,, 

14. RUlffLSR WORKS Oo . (in liquidation) 

Potsdacierstrasse 36, Berlin W. . 35. 

15. ZEPPELIN WORKS, Ltd., 

Staaken bei Spandau. 



The underlined firms tjere in possession of airplanes on Jan- 
uary 15, 1931. 



(Translated from " Nadir icht en fur Luftfahrer," Vol, 3, No. 4.) 






NASA Technical Library 



3 1176 01439 9787 



