VEBE. A Computer Model for Simulation of Conventional Weapons 

Effects in Urban Areas. 


Rickard Forsen 

National Defence Research Establishment, FOA, Sweden 


Abstract 

VEBE is a computer model developed by FOA for simulation of conventional weapons 
effects in urban areas. The model is still under construction but there is already an operational 
first version running. This first version has also been used in studies for the Swedish National 
Rescue Services Board (SRV). VEBE has been developed and used on a workstation but there 
is also a PC version running. 

The model will also, in a later version, simulate other types of weapons effects and different 
types of manmade peacetime disasters such as vapour cloud explosions. 

VEBE can be used in studies of damage prevention, studies of rescue activities, in education 
on different levels of the civil and military defence and in planning within both central and 
local authorities. 

In VEBE it is possible to use the total map of a small town or the map of a part of a major city 
as input. 

When the objective of the weapon attack has been chosen the computer helps the user to 
choose the appropriate type of attack and the type of weapon from a code menu. 

Both air attacks and surface combat can be handled by the model. 

The computer calculates the points of weapon impact, the penetration of the weapons into 
buildings or into the ground and the damage from blast, fragments, debris and fire. 

The output data are the number of casualties (both dead and injured persons and the casualty 
cause), the number and severity of damaged buildings and shelters, the amount and location 
of debris, the limitations of availability due to craters and debris, the damaged supply systems 
(water, heat, electricity and telephone) and finally the fires with their growth displayed as a 
function of time. 

Introduction 

Calculations of the damage to buildings and people in urban areas from conventional weapons 
have been made in Sweden for several years. The purpose has been to give a view of the 
situation after an attack, that can be used in planning of civil defence activities, studies of 
damage prevention and rescue activities, and also in education on different levels of the civil 
and military defence. The calculations have been supported by extensive theoretical and 



Report Documentation Page 


Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 


Public reporting burden for the collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and 
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, 
including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington 
VA 22202-4302. Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it 
does not display a currently valid OMB control number. 


1. REPORT DATE 

AUG 1994 


2. REPORT TYPE 


3. DATES COVERED 

00-00-1994 to 00-00-1994 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

VEBE. A Computer Model for Simulation of Conventional Weapons 
Effects in Urban Areas 

6. AUTHOR(S) 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

National Defence Research Establishment, FOA,PO Box 551,Tumba, 
5-14725 Sweden, 


5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 


5b. GRANT NUMBER 

5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 

5d. PROJECT NUMBER 


5e. TASK NUMBER 


5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 


9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 


10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 


11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 


12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited 

13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

See also ADM000767. Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth DoD Explosives Safety Seminar Held in Miami, FL 
on 16-18 August 1994. 


14. ABSTRACT 

see report 


15. SUBJECT TERMS 


16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 


a. REPORT 

unclassified 


b. ABSTRACT 

unclassified 


c. THIS PAGE 

unclassified 


17. LIMITATION OF 

18. NUMBER 

ABSTRACT 

OF PAGES 

Same as 

8 

Report (SAR) 



19a. NAME OF 
RESPONSIBLE PERSON 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std Z39-18 





experimental research concerning different phenomenas of loading from weapons and 
response from such loadings to urban areas. In the beginning the calculations were made 
manually for instance of the damage after an attack of airplanes against a railwaystation 
surrounded by dwelling houses. Calculations made manually are very timeconsuming and that 
makes it very difficult to study the effects of parametric variations. 

Some years ago work was initiated to develop a computer code - VEBE, that made it possible 
to quickly make repeated calculations with variations of for instance type of attack, type of 
weapon, target and target surroundings. 

Using a computer code often gives the operator a false belief of the accuracy of the results. It 
is very important to be aware of that a code like VEBE do not give the absolute truth and that 
the accuracy is ruled by the accuracy of the input data and the subroutines in the code. VEBE 
should therefore be used as one among other tools in decisionmaking. 

Characteristics of VEBE and how to use it 

VEBE has been developed and used on a workstation but there is also a PC version running. 
The total size of the executable files are approximately 2 MB and approximately 10 MB for 
the data files in a typical run. The programme language is ADA. 

Running VEBE starts with choosing the map of a small town or a part of a mayor city and the 
data for this area is previously stored on the hard disk. The data contains coordinates in two 
dimensions for the buildings, streets and supply of water, sewerage, heat, electricity and 
telephone. This data has previously been transformed from data, digitally available for several 
districts in Sweden. Some data has been surveyed on site and then stored into the computer. 
Such data are for instance the types of the buildings (22 types have been defined according to 
framework and materials used [1],[2]), the height and number of stories, and if there are 
basements and attics. For houses that are not for dwelling, also the use of the building is 
surveyed and stored. Data about the civil defence shelters is also read into the computer. 

After the choice of the map the simulation is started by giving information about the attack. 
First the computer asks the operator to mark the target and the direction of the attack. Then 
information of the phase of the war (if it is in early or late stage) is required as a base to the 
computers suggestion of type of the attack, which can be from the ground or from the air, and 
what type of weapons and weapon platforms there are used. For airplanes the height and 
velocity are also put in. The suggestion from the computer can be accepted or changed 
arbitrarily. The weapons are described by a number of parameters such as type, diameter, total 
weight, weight of high explosive, nose shape and fuse time delay. All this is stored in 
databases in the program and can be accepted or changed arbitrarily. 

Next step in the simulation is to position the people. To start with, it is possible to choose 
night or day-time for the attack which gives different total numbers of people in the area. It is 
now possible to place the people manually by clicking in the map for each person or to 
choose a more standardized procedure. It is for instance possible to choose placing all or parts 



of the people outdoors, indoors in the apartments, in the basements or in the shelters. 

There are two ways of doing the simulation. Either a single run can be done and it is then 
possible to study where the explosions take place, the damage from the explosions and the 
damage from the fire and smoke (Figure 1). When a single run is made it is also possible to 
choose different overlays, with information about supply systems for instance, or to zoom in 
the map. It is also possible to click on a specific building to get a plan and a crossection where 
the damage are shown in different zones (Figure 2). 

It is also possible to choose a number of runs in a row with the same situation. For each run 
the hit points are randomized according to certain rules of scatter. The result of this type of 
repeated runs will be a list of average values of results. 

Output data from VEBE 

The output data from VEBE concerns damage to buildings, ground, supply systems in the 
ground and people. 

The damage to buildings due to blast and fragments is shown with a number of damage 
zones: 

- floor collapse zone (closest to an explosion inside, where the floors have collapsed) 

- wall collapse zone (zone further out from the explosion than floor collapse zone, where the 
load bearing walls have collapsed) 

- crack zone (zone where there are cracks through load bearing walls) 

- shake zone (zone where non load bearing walls are damaged) 

- debris fall zone (zone outside buildings where the debris has fallen down) 

- debris throw zone (zone outside buildings where debris has been thrown) 

- window breaking zone (area where more than 50% of the windows are broken) 

The damages to supply systems in the ground such as water, sewerage, heat, electricity and 
telephone are also shown as are the crater dimensions. 

The damage from fire and smoke is also divided into different damage zones: 

- fire zone (where there is open fire) 

- smoke zone (smoke filled volumes) 

- cooling zones (a few different are shown with characteristic temperatures) 

The damage from fire and smoke change by time and it is possible to stop after for instance 
every 5 minutes starting from the hit of the weapons and evaluate the damage. 

The output data from the program concerning injury to people are the number of casualties. 
Both dead and injured are calculated and listed according to the cause who are: 


- blast 



- shrapnels 

- debris from the building 

- window glass fragments 

- fire 

- smoke 

Calculations in VEBE submodels 

The actual calculations in VEBE start with determining the hit points. The hit points are 
randomized in an area with size depending on the type of weapon, the distance from the 
weapon platform to the target and if the weapons come from an airplane the velocity and 
height of the airplane and also the modernity of the aerial aiming device [3,4,5]. 

Next step is to calculate the depth of penetration into the buildings or the ground [3,4,5,6]. 
The fuse may be set with one of three different time delays: 

- no time delay 

- short time delay (ignition after first penetration of floor or wall) 

- long time delay (ignition after weapon has stopped) 

After the point of explosion for each warhead has been calculated the damage to buildings is 
calculated. If the explosion is outside, above ground, the damage will depend on the blast 
wave pressure, the impulse density and loading from the shrapnels [3,4,5,7]. Damage from 
explosion inside is calculated according to rules determined by help of the computer code 
PROMIX [3,4,5,8]. The smallest unit used in the calculations are not the single rooms but 
something called framework unit, which is the volume limited by loadbearing walls. 

Damage due to explosion underground to supply, buildings and crater dimensions is ruled by 
fairly simple handbook methods [3,4,5,9]. 

A submodel describes the fire and smoke spread [3,4,5]. The fire may, besides internal spread 
inside the buildings, also spread between buildings due to heat radiation or firebrands. 

One submodel in the calculations of injuries to people concerns blast [3,4,5,10]. The numbers 
of injuring and lethal fragments at different distances are based on calculations of shell 
breakup, fragment initial velocity, trajectory, and injury criteria [3,4,5,11]. 

Casualties due to debris from the buildings including window glass fragments as well as 
casualties due to smoke and fire are connected to the damage zones and based on rather 
simple rules derived from accidents and war time experience [3,4,5]. 

Summary and future development 


VEBE is a computer model developed by FOA for simulation of conventional weapons 
effects in urban areas. 



A lot of efforts has been made to give a good picture of the damage to a built-up area with 
possibilities to zoom in and to study a single building both in plan and cross section. 


With VEBE it is simple to make parametric variations. 

VEBE has already been used in several studies of war time civil defence organization and also 
in studies of benefit with civil defence shelters. 

VEBE can be used to identify the phenomenas that are the most important in conventional 
weapon attacks in urban areas. It can thus be used as a tool to guidance of which areas of 
research are most important. 

It is very important to be aware of that a code like VEBE do not give the absolute truth by any 
means. VEBE should be used only as a tool among others. The accuracy is ruled by the 
accuracy of the input data and the subroutines in the code. 

There are plans to develop VEBE in several ways for instance to make it possible to simulate 
the effects of other types of weapons such as chemical weapons. There are also plans to make 
it possible to simulate manmade peacetime disasters such as vapour cloud explosions. 

Another use of VEBE that has been discussed is to simulate the damage from explosions in 
ammunition magazines. 



References 


1. Broberg, M. (1987). Catalogue of Residential House Types. FOA Report C 20669-2.6. (In 
Swedish.) 

2. Liljegren, T. (1994). Catalogue of all Categories of House Types in Sweden. FOA Report 
in preparation (in Swedish). 

3. Lindqvist, S., Forsen, R., Holm, G., & Hagglund, B. (1989). VEBE - A Dynamic Computer 
Model for Conventional Weapons Effects in Urban Areas. Interim Report 1988/1989. FOA 
Report C 20772-2.5(2.6,2.7). (In Swedish.) 

4. Lindqvist, S., Forsen, R., Holm, G., Hagglund, B., & Onnermark, B. (1991). VEBE - A 
Dynamic Computer Model for Conventional Weapons Effects in Urban Areas. Interim Report 
1989/1990. FOA Report C 20831-2.5(2.6,2.7). (In Swedish.) 

5. Lindqvist, S., Forsen, R., Holm, G., Hagglund, B., & Onnermark, B. (1994). VEBE - A 
Dynamic Computer Model for Conventional Weapons Effects in Urban Areas. Interim Report 
1992/1993. FOA Report C 20971-2.5(2.6,2.7). (In Swedish.) 

6. Gotherskjold, L. (1981). Investigation on Conventional Weapon Penetration and Explosion 
Point Distribution in Buildings. FOA Report C 20435-D4. (In Swedish.) 

7. Forsen, R. (1985). Airblast Loading of Wall Panels. FOA Report C 20586-D6. 

8. Forsen, R., & Jonasson., T. (1989). PROMIX - A Computer Code for Calculating Building 
Damage from Interned Explosions. FOA Report C 20766-2.3. 

9. FortHl, (1987) Swedish Fortification Manned. (In Swedish.) 

10. White, C. S., Jones, R. K., Damon, E. G., Fletcher, E. R. & Richmond, D. (1971). The 
Biodynamics of Airblast. DNA 2738T. 

11. Ahlers, (1969). Fragment Hazard Study. Minutes of the Eleventh Explosives Safety 
Seminar. 



Figure 1. A map showing a part of the Swedish town Umea, with VEBE 
simulated hit points after an aerial attack. 























Figure 2. The map from Figure 1 has been zoomed in and plan and cross 
sections for one of the buildings are displayed. The upper cross section and 
plan show the damage from blast and fragments. The lower cross section 
shows the fire and smoke spread after 30 minutes. 




































