^ 



'LffrtiO? 



PiVoT GPS Receiver 



Miriam Dvorak Wennersten, NASA, Goddard Space Flight Center, Anthony Vince Banes, Orbital Sciences 
Corporation, Gregory J. Boegner, NASA, Goddard Space Flight Center, Lamar Dougherty, Goddard Space 
Flight Center, Bernard L. Edwards, NASA. Goddard Space Flight Center, Joseph Roman, Goddard Space 

Flight Center 



BIOGRAPHY 

Miriam Dvorak Wennersten is a computer engineer at 
the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. She is 
currently leading the PiVoT 1.0 and PiVoT 1.5 
development. She has been working on embedded 
software systems her entire 12 year tenure at 
Goddard. She has numerous software programs in 
orbit on NASA satellites. She has a Bachelor of Arts 
degree in Computer Science from La Salle University 
and a Masters of Science degree in Computer Science 
from Johns Hopkins University. . 

Anthony V. (Vince) Banes, Jr. is an embedded 
systems engineer for Orbital Sciences Corporation on 
contract with NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, 
and has extensive experience in navigation systems, 
electronic warfare systems, and voice switching for 
the FAA. He has taught computer science classes for 
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University. He has a 
Bachelor of Science Degree in Mathematics from 
Baylor University, and a Master of Science Degree in 
Business from Troy State University. 

Gregory J. Boegner, Jr. is a senior electronics 
engineer at the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center 
with approximately 15 years experience 
designing analog and digital systems in the fields of 
communications, embedded control, and digital signal 
processing. He has worked for the U.S. Department 
of Defense, ASRC Aerospace Corporation, and as an 
independent consultant. He has a Bachelor of Science 
Degree in Electrical Engineering from Drexel 
University in Philadelphia. 

Lamar F. Dougherty is a Design Engineer at the 



NASA Goddard Space Flight Center with 
approximately 15 years experience designing digital 
systems, specifically in the field of microprocessors. 
He has worked for Westinghouse Electric 
Corporation, Kaman Sciences Corporation, and 
Fairchild Space and Defense Corporation. He has a 
Bachelor of Science Degree in Electrical Engineering 
from West Virginia University. 

Bernard L. Edwards is a systems engineer at the 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, and has 
extensive experience in digital communication 
systems and signal processing. Previously he was 
with the U.S. Department of Defense, holding a 
variety of technical positions from project engineer to 
department manager. He has taught courses at the 
Naval Postgraduate School and at DoD facilities 
worldwide. He has a Bachelor of Science Degree in 
Electrical Engineering, a Master of Science Degree in 
Electrical Engineering, and a Master of Science 
Degree in Computer Science all from the Johns 
Hopkins University. 

Joseph Roman is an Electronics Technician with a 
Communications background in the U.S. Navy as a 
Cryptologic Maintenance Technician. He has worked 
at Goddard Space Flight Center for nine years. He is 
very experienced with the electronics assembly of 
Attitude Control Systems and parts research and 
procurement. 

ABSTRACT 

NASA Goddard Space Flight Center has built an 
open architecture, 24 channel space flight GPS 
receiver. The CompactPCI PiVoT GPS receiver card 
is based on the Mitel/GEC Plessey Builder-2 board. 



PiVoT uses two Plessey 2021 correlators to allow 
tracking of up to 24 separate GPS SV's on unique 
channels. Its four front ends can support four 
independent antennas, making it a useful card for 
hosting GPS attitude determination algorithms. It has 
been built using space quality, radiation tolerant 
parts. The PiVoT card will track a weaker signal than 
the original Builder 2 board. It also hosts an 
improved clock oscillator. 

The PiVoT software is based on the original Plessey 
Builder 2 software ported to the Linux operating 
system. The software is POSIX complaint and can 
easily be converted to other POSIX operating 
systems. The software is open source to anyone with 
a licensing agreement with Plessey. Additional tasks 
can be added to the software to support GPS science 
experiments or attitude determination algorithms. 
The next generation PiVoT receiver will be a single 
radiation hardened CompactPCI card containing the 
microprocessor and the GPS receiver optimized for 
use above the GPS constellation. 

PiVoT was flown successfully on a balloon in July, 
2001, for its first non-simulated flight. 



INTRODUCTION 

The PiVoT is a space flight GPS receiver designed 
in-house by the Goddard Space Flight Center's 
(GSFC) Guidance, Navigation, and Control Center 
(GNCC). PiVoT is an open architecture receiver in 
both the hardware and software. The GPS card, 
based on the Mitel/GEC Plessey GPS Builder-2 card, 
is a 3U CompactPCI card with 2 correlators for a 
total of 24 channels. Four RF front-ends allow the 
system user to utilize up to four antenna inputs. 

The Guidance, Navigation, and Control Center at 
Goddard decided to build a space flight GPS receiver 
because of the lack of availability of open-source 
receivers on which to develop algorithms that could 
then be tested and used in a real space environment. 
The original PiVoT hardware and software design 
was based on the Mitel/GEC Plessey Builder-2 
development platform. 

Hardware 

The Plessey Builder-2 test set consisted of open- 
source GPS software and an ISA bus GPS hardware 
card that could be plugged into nearly any personal 
computer capable of running the MS-DOS operating 
system. The original Builder-2 card came standard 



with one correlator, one front-end (and hence, one 
antenna input), and was capable of tracking up to 12 
channels of GPS data. The GP2021 correlator has 
inputs for two front-ends, and a version of the 
Builder-2 card could be purchased with the card 
populated with both front-ends. 

The original PiVoT GPS card used the Plessey 
Builder-2 ISA card as a baseline for the design. 
Several key changes were made to the existing 
design. The bus interface was changed from ISA to 
CompactPCI. The card had two correlators instead of 
one, and four front-ends instead of two. The original 
design for the PiVoT card also had an Intel 196 
microcontroller for on-card tracking loop closure. 
The 196 was then determined to not have sufficient 
processing power to track twenty-four channels, and 
that section of the card remains unpopulated. All 
parts on the PiVoT GPS card were selected with 
radiation tolerance in mind. 

Most electronic parts used for the first generation 
PiVoT meet Military and Space grade specifications, 
however several of the parts were manufactured to 
Industrial grade specifications only. Radiation 
screened parts were chosen when available, however 
other parts were chosen based on similar parts' 
radiation performance history. For example, the GPS 
chipset, designed by Mitel/Plessey was manufactured 
with a process similar to some previously screened 
parts. Preliminary radiation screening was performed 
on the Mitel/Plessey GPS chipset with positive results 
up to 25Krads. Electronic parts for future versions of 
the PiVoT GPS Receiver are being researched and 
purchased targeting higher radiation environments. 

Today, PiVoT version 1 .0 receiver block diagram 
looks like this: 



RF Front End #1 



RF Front End #2 



RF Fronl End »3 



RF Front End #4 



10.0 MHz 
Oscillator 



PGA 
Glue Logic 



X 



CPCI 
Interface 



Status Monitor I- 



PiVoT v 1.0 receiver 

The 10.0 MHz oscillator provides the reference for 
the phase lock loop, local oscillators in each RF Front 
End and the clock for the correlator functions. This 
reference oscillator was carefully chosen to have a 
low ( 1 part per billion) root Allen variance to aid the 
GEODE software. The oscillator is radiation tolerant, 



and provides better than 1-ppm frequency accuracy 
over the full temperature range. 

The four RF Front Ends are based on Mitel/Plessey's 
GP2015 GPS Receiver Front End chip. This chip 
performs the down conversions and digital sampling 
of the civilian GPS signal at 1.57542 GHz. The 
design differs from Mitel's Builder-2 only in part 
selection, layout and routing. Higher-grade parts of 
similar or same values were chosen for environmental 
concerns and size constraints. By employing a two- 
sided layout with 12 layers, we were able to reduce 
the total area of each Front End, shorten all critical 
nets, and provide better shielding. This effort resulted 
in a 1 .2 square inch circuit for each RF Front End, 
with much better immunity to electrical noise from 
other cards in the PCI enclosure. On each side, a ring 
around each RF Front End allows for further 
shielding by soldering down a box to cover the 
circuit. This added shielding has not yet been needed. 

The Correlators (Mitel/Plessey's GP2021's) each 
handle 12 simultaneous GPS C/A code signals. They 
each receive digitized signals from two Front Ends. 
They provide the functions of tracking, despreading 
(correlating), and demodulating signals from any of 
the satellites received, through control of the 
processor in an adjacent CPCI slot. 

Three voltages, +5, +12, and -12, their currents from 
the power supply, and two temperatures, one on this 
card and one on the power supply can be monitored 
by this card. The three voltages are directly converted 
by the on board analog to digital converter. Three 
current sense resistors located on the power supply 
board provide voltage proportionate to the total 
current draw. These voltages are passed to the 
receiver card across the back plane (on unused lines) 
for conversion. The temperature sensors provide a 
voltage proportionate to temperature. These voltages, 
(the one on the power supply board is also passed 
across the back-plane) are also converted by the 
analog to digital converter in the Status Monitor 
section of this board. 

The PGA Glue Logic and CPCI Interface provide all 
the remaining functions necessary to make this board 
work and communicate to the processor on another 
card in the CPCI enclosure. This card requires +5, +/- 
12 and draws approximately 7.5W when fully 
populated. Preliminary radiation testing has shown 
that this board should survive a total dose of better 
than 25Krad. Further radiation testing will be 
performed this October. 




Power Supply 



PiVoT System 



We have put this receiver card with a processor board 
into a custom enclosure with a three-slot CPCI back 
plane plus a power supply board. This leaves one 
open slot for future options. Our power supply is 
designed to interface to a spacecraft 28-volt supply 
and provide +3.3, +5, and +/-12 to PCI specifications. 
The power supply is built with latch-up protection 
and is radiation tolerant. The processor board, built 
by EMS Technologies, utilizes a PowerPC 603, and 
is radiation hard to 25Krad. The enclosure allows for 
taller components on the bottom side of each CPCI 
card than the CPCI specification and also allows for a 
piece of aluminum to be inserted between each card 
for mechanical, thermal, and EMI/RFI concerns. This 
enclosure is very rugged, it has survived the violent 
impact at the end of a balloon mission without any 
damage to any part. When populated in the 
configuration shown, this system draws 18 watts at 28 
volts. 




PiVoT 1 .0 CompactPCI board 



Software 

The PiVoT GPS software is based on the original 
Plessey Builder-2 software. The original software 
was compiled in an MS-DOS environment and 
utilized its own internal task-switching system. The 
first port of the software by the PiVoT team was 
targeted to a StrongArm 1 10 microprocessor 
embedded system. The internal tasking system of 
Plessey was converted to the Nucleus real-time 
operating system by Accelerated Technologies, Inc. 
The closing of tracking loops was handled as a high 
priority interrupt. For the embedded system, the 
original Plessey display software also had to be 
changed to output via RS-232 to any VT100 terminal 
emulator. All keyboard command inputs also had to 
be transmitted to the system via RS-232. In a flight 
environment, the commands and telemetry would 
replace the keyboard and display transmissions on the 
RS-232. 

The StrongARM port had to be abandoned when the 
actual CompactPCI StrongArm microprocessor card 
we purchased was determined to be inadequate to the 
task of tracking 24 GPS channels. By clever linking 
of the code to run the tracking loops out of cached 
memory, the StrongARM PiVoT could track up to 6 
channels. Unfortunately, another version of a 
CompactPCI StrongARM card could not be located 
to replace the custom-built card we had, and the 
entire embedded development was shelved 
temporarily. 

In order to proceed with software development, the 
software was ported to the Linux operating system. 
Now the software could run on any ordinary personal 
computer running Linux. The software can be run 
using either the original Plessey Builder-2 ISA card 
or the new PiVoT PCI card. In order to plug a PiVoT 
CompactPCI card into a personal computer, a simple 
CompactPCI to PCI adapter can be used. Another lab 
version of the PiVoT receiver is a CompactPCI rack 
with a CompactPCI processor card plugged in as the 
motherboard, running Linux. A Pentium 133 
microprocessor has proven capable of tracking all 24 
channels on the PiVoT card. 

The Linux version of the software has the tracking 
loop software residing in the kernel as kernel 
modules. Only the kernel can access hardware with 
the Linux operating system, so the tracking loop 
modules pass the data back to user space and the 
application program via a shared memory block. 
Whenever changes are made to the tracking loops, the 



modules have to be reloaded into the kernel. 

A key feature of the PiVoT GPS receiver is the 
availability of the source code. Most GPS receivers 
are highly proprietary regarding hardware and 
software configuration. This can lead to reverse 
engineering to determine if solutions are being 
filtered, etc. if the data coming out of the receiver is 
not exactly what the user expects. The open-source 
aspect of PiVoT allows for the algorithm 
development and customization of satellite selection, 
acquisition, and tracking. 

The Linux software version of PiVoT has proven to 
be an ideal system for GPS algorithm development 
and testing. The software is self-hosted, meaning that 
changes to the software can be made and compiled on 
the same machine on which it is running. Reloading 
the software is as instantaneous as simply re-running 
the software, rather than having to download it to an 
embedded system via serial or network connections. 
These capabilities have been extensively used as 
improvements were made to the original Plessey 
software to make it suitable for an orbital 
environment. 

Some of the changes to make the original Plessey 
software work on an orbital receiver include 
removing height limits and changing Doppler bin 
widths and dwell times. For tests involving highly 
elliptical orbits, a flag was added to indicate the 
antenna direction. A satellite selection algorithm 
designed specifically for space-use has to be added. 
Also, the PiVoT receiver still needs to have a solid 
space flight cold-start mode implemented. The 
GEODE navigation filter has been added to the 
receiver software as a separate software task. 

GEODE, the GPS-Enhanced Orbit Navigation 
System, is a NASA-developed software package that 
improves the accuracy of GPS-generated three- 
dimensional position and velocity fixes. GEODE 
produces true orbit determination, not just positioning 
with GPS. In simulations using NASA satellite data, 
GEODE-filtered GPS data produced position 
accuracies to better than 20 meters and velocity 
measurements to better than 0.03 meters per second 
(both results are 1 sigma). [1] 
(http://geons.gsfc.nasa.gov) 

The PiVoT software feeds the GEODE task 
measurement data and GPS ephemeris data in real- 
time. PiVoT also must feed the GEODE 
configuration commands, and accept any telemetry 
generated by GEODE for output. The ephemeris data 



is fed to GEODE as it is received. The measurement 
data is sent to GEODE before the main estimate state 
routine of GEODE, which generates the current state 
vector, is called. Eventually, the state vector 
generated by GEODE will be the state vector that 
PiVoT outputs for position, velocity, and time to the 
spacecraft upon request. 

The existing Linux version of the PiVoT receiver has 
been tested on the GSS STR4760 simulator located at 
Goddard Space Flight Center and maintained by the 
Guidance, Navigation, and Control Center. The 
PiVoT has even tracked satellites in highly elliptical 
orbit scenarios. 

The configuration of PiVoT is flexible. The current 
box design has a spare compact-PCI 
slot which could host a number of different options, 
including, but not limited to: a 1553 card, a micro- 
gyro card, a magnetometer card, and even an ethernet 
card to support TCP/IP in space. 

Balloon Flight 

PiVoT's first flight opportunity was in July, 2001 on 
the In-FOCUS balloon flown from the NSBF, 
Palestine, TX. Previous to this mission, PiVoT had 
been operating typically as a lab receiver, using a 
industrial qualified CompacfPCI rack containing a 3U 
Pentium processor, IDE harddrive and network 
connection. The design and construction of the 
mechanical enclosure and power supply was 
conducted separately, so the only missing piece was a 
flyable microprocessor card. For this flight, an 
industrial grade Pentium 400 MHz CPU with an 
extended temperature rating was selected. The IDE 
harddrive was replaced with a 128Mbyte solid state 
FLASH IDE-style drive. 

Since Linux is not an ideal embedded operating 
system for this situation, the solution for a quick- 
turnaround was to treat the PiVoT the same way as a 
regular PC in the lab. The FLASH drive was divided 
into two partitions: the DOS boot partition and the 
Linux partition. The processor boots from the small 
(2Mbyte) DOS partition using the Syslinux boot 
utility. Then, the initialization function for Linux was 
modified so that when it has completed all other 
system initialization, it will initialize the GPS kernel 
and start the main GPS application task. In this way, 
the PiVoT receiver would begin searching for SV's 
within 30 seconds after power was applied. 

The test plan for PiVoT was to prove the current 
PiVoT hardware and software design could operate in 



near-space conditions. Since there was not enough 
time to procure a fully qualified processor, no major 
expectations were placed on the survivability of the 
CPU. The FLASH drive was an off-the-shelf item 
with no modifications made for the balloon 
environment. The receiver card and the power supply 
were designed for space flight, and were expected to 
operate normally during the entire mission. 

The PiVoT was configured to have each of the four 
RF channels connected to its own antenna. Due to 
time constraints, the PiVoT field team members were 
only allowed to install the receiver to the gondola and 
connect the power and telemetry cables to the rest of 
the balloon systems. The antennas and mounting 
brackets were installed by the balloon technicians and 
the PiVoT team was not able to fully test the 
configuration before launch. 

The PiVoT software was modified to store some of 
the mission data at regular intervals throughout the 
mission. Since the size and write-speed of the 
FLASH drive is limited, this data was stored only 
once every 15 seconds. The data record consists of 
the computed time, position, and velocity of the 
receiver, the clock oscillator offsets and drift values, 
and the signal to noise ratio for each receiver channel. 

The PiVoT software was also modified to send the 
position data once a second via an RS-232 serial port 
to the balloon's onboard GRISS flight processor. 
This data message was formatted to emulate the 
Rockwell NavCore receiver. This NavCore receiver 
had been used on previous missions and the balloon 
flight computer would need no modifications to 
accept the data. Therefore, the telemetry data IDC 
allowed for GPS position data if such data is 
available. Since the InFocus mission did not require 
the position information, the GPS data was collected 
and transmitted to the ground station, but was not 
needed for the final mission data analysis. 

The mission flew on the 6 th of July, 2001 for about 6 
hours. All the PiVoT hardware was recovered and 
returned to Goddard Space Flight Center for post 
mission analysis. Form this data the following 
conclusions were made: 

1 . The data on the FLASH drive was recovered. 

2. The receiver collected GPS data during the entire 
mission. 

3. The Pentium processor worked right up to the 
end of the mission, but subsequent tests of the 
processor have failed in the lab. 

4. The PiVoT receiver card has been fully tested in 



the lab and is still fully functional. 
5. The telemetry data was successfully sent to the 
balloon's onboard flight computer. 



PiVoT ported to PowerPC ESP603 and Nucleus 

The Pentium solution for the balloon flight was 
adequate because radiation and power were not 
limiting factors for the receiver. To transform the lab 
version of PiVoT into a true space flight receiver, a 
new CompactPCI microprocessor had to be found. 
The ESP603 Enhanced Space Processor PowerPC 
card by EMS Technologies was selected. This 
PowerPC card was designed for low earth orbit 
applications. The board uses error detection and 
correction circuitry to prevent single event upsets. 
The total power drawn by this board is approximately 
9 watts. The PiVoT software team must still port the 
software to this new board. 

The Linux solution, while ideal for the lab, cannot 
guarantee hard real-time performance. For the 
PowerPC card, PiVoT will be ported again to the 
Nucleus real-time operating system. This will 
decrease code size, and increase real-time 
performance due to lower operating system overhead. 
Targeting a specific board architecture with Nucleus 
is also significantly simpler than porting Linux. 

A final, flight version of the PiVoT GPS receiver box 
will be available by early 2002. This includes the 
flight enclosure, microprocessor, and flight GPS card. 
The total power requirement for this box will be 
approximately 18 watts. It was hoped a lower power 
processor card could be found to lower the power 
requirement. 

PiVoT 1.5 

After the initial design of the original PiVoT box 
(PiVoT 1.0), it was determined that the power 
requirement was too high for most spacecraft. Its 
source code availability makes it attractive as an 
instrument for incorporating GPS science algorithms. 
However, the power requirement would continue to 
be a drawback. This led to the concept of the PiVoT 
1.5 card, which incorporated all lessons learned from 
the PiVoT 1.0 development. 

The goals for the PiVoT 1 .5 card are: low power (<6 
watts), radiation tolerant, 24 channels of GPS data, 4 
antenna inputs, improved front-ends, 3U CompactPCI 
interface, and on-card processing. The output from 
the card will be position, velocity, and time, via either 



RS-232 or across the PCI backplane. 

This card will be a highly flexible solution for 
spacecraft desiring GPS capabilities. Because the 
navigation solution is output from the card, no 
external microprocessor card is needed. This 
CompactPCI can be plugged into any spacecraft bus 
that is utilizing the CompactPCI backplane. In this 
case, the PiVoT card would be used as a slave on the 
PCI backplane. If the spacecraft is not utilizing the 
CompactPCI backplane, the PiVoT 1 .5 card can be 
placed into the original PiVoT enclosure, modified 
for only one slot, and be delivered as a complete 
system, with navigation output via RS-232. If some 
other output is required (such as 1553), then the box 
can be modified for an additional slot and the 
appropriate interface card can be added. 



Next Generation PiVoT GPS Receiver 

GSFC is also developing the Next Generation 
(NexGen) PiVoT GPS Receiver for use in high Earth 
orbits (HEO) and geostationary orbits (GEO). Earth 
Science and Space Science researchers are 
envisioning distributed spacecraft and formation 
flying missions in HEO, and GPS is an enabling 
technology to provide the required onboard orbit 
information to coordinate the multiple spacecraft. 
Acquiring and tracking GPS signals in orbits above 
the GPS constellation, however, is much more 
challenging than using GPS in low Earth orbits 
(LEO). There are important differences in 
geometrical coverage, signal power levels, and 
vehicle dynamics. For example, there are rarely four 
or more satellites visible simultaneously at HEO and 
there are significant periods in which no signals are 
available. The GPS receiver will also have to be 
designed to survive the extremely severe radiation 
environment encountered in such orbits. The 
NexGen PiVoT will be a software based GPS 
receiver, and will not use any industry available GPS 
chipsets to do signal processing. In building this 
receiver, GNCC will have a complete understanding 
of the GPS signal in HEO and GEO orbits and how to 
best build a space qualified receiver to operate there. 
Doing as much of the signal processing in software as 
possible will provide the most flexibility and allow 
GNCC to investigate ideas that drastically deviate 
from a conventional hardware approach. 

Currently, GNCC has a non-real-time software GPS 
receiver working in MATLAB (registered trademark 
of the Math Works, Incorporated) that does signal 
acquisition, tracking, and demodulation. GNCC 



partnered with the U.S. Air Force Research 
Laboratory's Sensor Directorate at Wright-Patterson 
Air Force Base in developing this software. It 
acquires and tracks GPS signals with a carrier to 
noise ratio (C/NO) as low as 27 dB-Hz. A receiver 
that can acquire and track weak signals is critical for 
use in high altitude orbits. The acquisition algorithm 
is based on a paper by Dr. Mark Psiaki of Cornell 
University, "Block Acquisition of Weak GPS Signals 
in a Software Receiver". The algorithm averages 
signals over multiple GPS code periods and multiple 
navigation data bits to achieve weak signal 
acquisition. It uses the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) 
and inverse FFT to process one code period (1 ms) at 
a time to speed up computations. The software has 
been tested with simulated and digitized GPS signals. 
The next step is to port the software to a commercial- 
off-the-shelf Digital Signal Processor (DSP) in order 
to test the algorithms in a real-time environment. 

After the algorithms have been verified in the GNCC 
Formation Flying Testbed, they will be "ported" to 
radiation hardened components. Radiation hardened 
components and single event upset tolerant software 
are required for a receiver to work in high altitude 
orbits. A coherent RF front-end will be used to 
down-convert GPS signals from four different 
antennas to near baseband. The PGAs will do signal 
acquisition, tracking, and demodulation. The GPS 
data streams will be passed to a radiation-hardened 
microprocessor to produce usable navigation data. 
Like in the case of the existing PiVoT GPS receiver, 
NexGen PiVoT will be using the GPS Enhanced 
Orbit Determination (GEODE) software as an 
onboard navigation filter. The same microprocessor 
will also be running algorithms to determine the 
spacecraft attitude. 

Finally, NexGen PiVoT will support sparse sampling 
of GPS signals to drastically conserve power for 
those missions that can tolerate relatively large 
position and velocity errors. The receiver will be 
"awakened" from a "sleep mode" to occasionally 
sample GPS signals for short intervals. A software 
based GPS receiver easily supports this idea since it 
can process a "snapshot" of data rather than 
continuously tracking the signal as a pure hardware 
receiver would do. The sampled data can be 
processed either onboard the spacecraft or 
telemetered to the ground. Ground processed data 
can be further uploaded to the spacecraft and 
projected ahead for later use. 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Charles E. Clagett, Noble Jones, Andrew Maynard, 
Russell Carpenter, Michael Moreau 



REFERENCES 

1. http://geons.gsfc.nasa.gov 

Moreau, Michael C, "GPS Receiver Architecture for 
Autoomous Navigation in High Earth Orbits", Ph.D. 
thesis for University of Colorado, 2001. 



