January - February 2012 




TOB aatLBQBKl 

^d]Q[pE0[iDg) ^©GflDD^j D@adl(§[P@ ■SGDITOQQDCi] D©©^^ ^©MODCg) 
(§®DD(§©[p , S@ Z 7 -sRo© (Pir®fe880®[jD ®{F ^EPDcm© C@Mi[p©0(|p 




/ / 
f 1 






























Report Documentation Page 


Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 


Public reporting burden for the collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and 
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, 
including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington 
VA 22202-4302. Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it 
does not display a currently valid OMB control number. 


1. REPORT DATE 

JAN 2012 


2. REPORT TYPE 


3. DATES COVERED 

00-01-2012 to 00-02-2012 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Fires. A Joint Publication for U.S. Artillery Professionals. January 
February 2012 


5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 


5b. GRANT NUMBER 


5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 


6. AUTHOR(S) 


5d. PROJECT NUMBER 


5e. TASK NUMBER 


5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Fires,Building 652, Room 203, McNair Road,Fort Sill,OK,73503 


8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 


9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS (ES) 


10. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S ACRONYM(S) 


11. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 


12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited 


13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 


14. ABSTRACT 


15. SUBJECT TERMS 


16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 


a. REPORT 

unclassified 


b. ABSTRACT 

unclassified 


c. THIS PAGE 

unclassified 


17. LIMITATION OF 

18. NUMBER 

ABSTRACT 

OF PAGES 

Same as 

68 

Report (SAR) 



19a. NAME OF 
RESPONSIBLE PERSON 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std Z39-18 






4 

B 

B 

1 □ 
ID 

1 1 
1 B 








Success through Soldiers, leaders 

By MG David D. Halverson 

Adaptable, flexible, agile air defense professionals 

By COL Daniel Karbler 

Distinguishing the unique profession of field artillerymen 

By COL Mike Cabrey 

US Army Air Defense and Field Artillery Award Winners 

Fires change of command ceremonies 

An interview with COL Dan Pinnell, US Army Field Artillery 
2nd BCT, 1st AD brigade combat team commander 

By Shirley Dismuke 

Employment of the M982 in Afghanistan: 

US Army and Marine Corps differences 

by MG (RET) Toney Stricklin 

Meeting the fire support challenge 

By COL Gene Meredith and COL Richard M. Cabrey 

Things you must get right as a battalion commander 

By COL Steve Maranian 

Fires Author's Guide 

A chief warrant officer's advice about promotion boards 

By CW5 Manuel Vasquez 


DISCLAIMER: Fires, a professional bulletin, is 
published bimonthly by Headquarters, Department 
of the Army under the auspices of the Fires Center of Excellence (Building 652, Hamilton 
Road), Fort Sill, Okla. The views expressed are those of the authors and notthe Department 
of Defense or its elements. Fired content doesn’t necessarily reflect the U. S. Army’s position 
or supersede information in other official Army publications. Use of news items constitutes 
neither affirmation oftheiraccuracy nor product endorsements. Fires is printed by Monarch 
Litho Inc., a private firm in no way con nected with the Department of the Army. Fires assumes 
no responsibility for any unsolicited material. By Order of the Secretary of the Army: 

George W. Casey Jr., General, United States Army, Chief of Staff. 

Official: 


1/ Joyce E. Morrow 


Administrative Assistant to the 
Secretary of the Army, 1121302 


David D. Halverson 
Major General, United States Army 
Commanding General, Fort Sill, Okla. 


PURPOSE: Founded in 2007, A/resserves as a forum for the professional discussions of all 
Fires professionals, both active and Reserve Component (RC); disseminates professional 
knowledge about progress, developments and best use in campaigns; cultivates a common 
understanding of the power, limitations and application of joint Fires, both lethal and 
nonlethal; fosters joint Fires interdependency among the armed services; and promotes 
the understanding of and interoperability between the branches, both active and RC, 
all of which contribute to the good of Army, joint and combined forces, and our nation. 
REPRINTS: Fires is pleased to grant permission to reprint; please credit Fires, the 
author(s) and photographers. 

SUBSCRIPTIONS: Those not eligible for official distribution may subscribe to Fires via 
the U.S. Superintendent of Documents, P.O. Box 37154, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954 
(1-866-512-1800). 

OFFICIAL DISTRIBUTION: Free copies are sent to USA and USMC FA units: FA/ 
Fires brigade, brigade combat team (BCT), Stryker cavalry regiment (SCR), FA Marine 


2 January - February 2012 • 


Fires 






44 

46 

52 

56 

64 

67 


Modern Musicians of Mars 

The evolution of junior fire supporters 

By MAJ Elijah M. Ward (U.S. Army), CPT Fred A. Janoe (U.S. 

Army), Capt Thomas F. Hicks (Canadian Army), Capt Richard 
W. Heaser (U.S. Marine Corps) 

Fear-based leadership: 

Motivation is key 

By Gene Kamena 

Terms of engagement 

Army captains from Fort Sill, Okla., receive a 
different type of training in Norman 
By Damien Lodes 

Winners of the 2011 Fires 
Photo Contest 
Evolving Marine Artillery: 

Utilizing the Triad of Fires in the 21st Century 

By Capt. B. A. Friedman 

Combat Training Center and training unit partnership: 

Supporting and designing pre-deployment training events for a mixed field artillery 
battalion 

By MAJ Corey Landry and MAJ Jon B. Fausnaugh 

Electronic Warfare: 

The newest military career field choice 

Compiled by Shirley Dismuke from articles by: Marie Berberea (The Cannoneer), SGT Justin A Naylor 
(2nd BCT, 1st Cav Div), Adrienne Anderson (The Bayonet), and SGT Brandon Bednarek (4th BCT, 1st 
Armored Div) 

Fires Center of Excellence social media portals 



On the cover: PFC Danica Sasakura and PFC 
Dean Werner, Patriot Missile operators from 
Charlie Battery, 1st Battalion, 1st Air Defense 
Artillery Regiment, perform pre-launch checks 
on a Patriot Missile launcher as part of a field 
training exercise. (Photo by Airman 1st Class Maeson L. 
Elleman, U.S. Air Force) 


regiment and battlefield coordination detachment (BCD) headquarters; 13 per FA/Fires 
battalion/squadron; 3 per fire support element (FSE), Fires and effects cell (FEC), effects 
coordination cell (ECC) fire support cell (FSC), and separate battery or detachment; 2 per 
fire support team (FIST); and 1 per Master Gunner. Free copies to Army ADA units: 7 per 
air and missile defense command (AAMDC) and ADA brigade headquarters; 13 per ADA 
battalion; and 3 perairdefense airspace management cell (ADAM) and separate battery or 
detachment. The FAand ADA Schools’ departments, directorates and divisions each get 2 
copies. OtherArmy branch and US armed services units/organizations and US government 
agencies that work with FA or ADA personnel, equipment, doctrine, tactics, training 
organization or leadership issues may request a free copy—including, but not limited to— 
ROTCs, recruiting commands, libraries, attaches, liaison officers, state adjutants general, 
public affairs offices, military academies, laboratories, arsenals, major commands, etc. 
Contact Fires at http://sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/. 


POSTMASTER: Fires {USPS 309-010) (ISSN 1935-4096) is published bimonthly; periodical 
postage paid by Department of the Army at Lawton, OK 73501 and an additional mailing 
post office. Send address changes to Fires , PO. Box 33311, Fort Sill, OK 73503-0311. 
SUBMISSIONS: Email to the Editor, Fires , at fires.bulletin@mail.mil; mail to P.O. Box 
33311, Fort Sill, OK 73503-0311; overnight to Building 652, Room 203, McNair Road, 
Fort Sill, OK 73503; or call at DSN 639-5121/6806 or commercial (580) 442-5121/6806. 

Acting Editor-in-Chief: Shirley Dismuke 

Managing Editor: Jennifer McFadden 

Art Director: Rickey Paape, Jr. 

Assistant Editor: Paul Jiron 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/* The 21st Century Soldier 


3 
















Success through 
Soldiers, leaders 


By MG David D. Halverson 

Commanding General of the Fires Center of Excellence 


W ith 2011 behind 

us, the Fires force 
enters the new year 
better prepared 
than ever before 
for the challenges of 2020 and beyond. 
Today's Army is significantly different 
from the Army of 2001. The Fires force 
has evolved and adapted to stringent 
demands of the current fight and 
realities of reduced resources. The 
past 10 years of war have drastically 
changed our doctrine, equipment, 
organization and leader development; 
however, in the midst of all this change 
one critical asset remains steadfast: the 
Fires Soldier. 

The Soldier is the driving force behind the Army's 
transformation. This has been true for every major 
conflict in which our armed forces have been engaged. 
The innovation of our Soldiers and leaders in the field, 
coupled with years of warfighting experience, is what 
allows us to successfully wage the Global War on Terror, 
a conflict which consistently changes and challenges our 
organization. This ingenuity assisted the U.S. in defeating 
the Taliban and A1 Qaeda in Afghanistan and has led 
to great success in Iraq. We learned early during these 
conflicts that lessons learned, and tactics, techniques and 
procedures created in combat must be codified so they 
are not lost, which could cost more than just resources 
but the loss of life unnecessarily. As we end our combat 



mission in Iraq, we face yet another enduring challenge 
as we retain a focus in Afghanistan. 

Without looking past the current fight, we must 
analyze and prepare for future threats. The challenge 
and operating environment is to retain the knowledge of 
the last 10 years of conflict, which has focused primarily 
on wide area security, while maintaining our ability to 
conduct combined arms maneuver in a joint environment. 

Even the concept of the joint operation is evolving. 
'Joint' no longer just means multi-service or multi¬ 
national. Joint applies to a combined effort of all assets 
available to any commander. Part of our job as leaders 
is ensuring our Soldiers and junior officers have the 
knowledge and the confidence to apply all aspects of 
joint Fires. From multi-national and multi-service to 
multi-asset, the Fires Center of Excellence has made, and 


4 January - February 2012 • Fires 




















will continue to make, great progress in training future 
leaders to fight and win in a joint environment. 

If there is one thing we know for certain, we are moving 
toward a period of transition and uncertainty. As the 
Army and the Fires force face uncertain challenges ahead, 
we must remain focused on leader development. Training 
agile leaders will give us the edge to continue to be an 
adaptable Fires force that can confront and overcome 
future threats. We have incorporated the Joint Fires 
Observer course into the Basic Officer Leadership Course 
and the Warrant Officer Advanced Course. An article in 
this edition of the Fires Bulletin, co-authored by CPT Fred 
A. Janoe along with several other instructors, explains 
exactly how the Field Artillery School is integrating this 
critical training into established POIs. This type of creative 
thinking will keep our Fires officers and Soldiers in high 
demand for the next decade and beyond. 

We have already seen a shift in the thought process 
of some of our most-senior leaders. The first U.S. Army 
Field Artillery brigade combat team commander, COL 
Daniel A. Pinnell, acknowledges the tactical expertise 
and professionalism the Fires force brings to the fight. 
The Fires Bulletin staff recently interviewed COL Pinnell, 
and in this edition he shares his insight and experience 
on shaping our junior officers' careers and how to keep 
them on a successful path. His role is even more important 
as his brigade tests new concepts and capabilities, 
modernizing our force. 

Several articles in this issue are geared specifically 
toward preparing Soldiers for successful careers. CW5 
Manuel Vasquez shares his insight on the warrant 
officer selection board, how board members make their 
selections, and how Soldiers can better prepare their 
records to appear before the board. Professor Gene C. 
Kamena, instructor of Leadership and Ethics at the Air 
War College in Montgomery, Ala., writes about avoiding 
the pitfalls of fear-based leadership, and COL Steve 
Maranian, commander of 19th Battlefield Coordination 
Detachment, Ramstein Air Base, Germany, shares his 
experience with, "10 things you must get right as a 
battalion commander." 

As we move forward, preparing future leaders, 
the Army has realized the importance of two-way 
communication between senior leaders and the Soldiers 
we lead. 

One initiative is the Army Chief of Staff's annual 
Future Study Plan, Unified Quest. Recently, Fort Sill 
hosted the Army Profession Junior Leader Forum, a part 
of Unified Quest, designed to examine issues critical to 
current and future force development. This annual study 
integrates issues and insights into concept and capability 
development programs through seminars, workshops, 
symposia, and war games and immediately impacts 
both Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) and 





Soldiers participating in a training opportunity with the M67 Gun Laying and 
Positioning System (GLPS). The officers are participating in the Basic Officer 
Leadership Course on Fort Sill, Okla. (Photo by Rick Paape, Jr., u.s. Army) 


the Army Capabilities Integration Center. I appreciate 
all of those who participated in making this an 
exceptional forum directly impacting the Army of 2020. 

Although we do not yet know exactly what the 
Army of 2020 will look like, we do know the Fires force 
must continue to develop leaders, who are proficient 
in understanding and framing difficult and complex 
problems. Intellectual thinkers, who are able to adapt to 
an ambiguous environment and overcome future threats 
and challenges, will emerge as our future leaders. If we 
train our Soldiers, who value the ideology of defending 
the Constitution and the citizens of this great nation, in 
the ethical and expert application of lethal force, then we 
will have succeeded in developing professional Soldiers. 

The challenges that lay ahead of us are great. Our 
fortitude to overcome these challenges must be greater. 
Technology will assist us, however the key to winning 
any battle rests with our Soldiers. Take care of them; teach 
them; lead them.. .and 2020 will be just another amazing 
year for our Fires force. 

Fit to Fight - Fires Strong! 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/* The 21st Century Soldier 


5 








Adaptable, flexible, agile 
air defense professionals 

By COL Daniel Karbler 


oday's operational 
environment requires 
adaptable, flexible 
and agile leaders in an 
air defense profession 
that demands attention to detail, 
precision, technical know-how 
and the highest standards of 
execution. But, today's operational 
environment also rarely provides 
black-and-white problems with 
clearly defined solution sets. 

Today's Air Defender is responsible for the lives of U.S. 
and coalition pilots, as well as the lives of military and 
civilians on the ground. The failure of an Air Defender 
to properly execute their friendly protect function could 
result in a tragic fratricide; failure of an Air Defender to 
establish and demand the highest standards in ready- 
for-action crew drills could result in catastrophic missile 
or indirect fire impact into a defended asset. 

The U.S. Army Air Defense Artillery junior leaders face 
a myriad of challenges in accomplishing their missions. 
They must understand and follow rigid procedures for 
identification and engagements; rules of engagement 
promulgated at the highest service command levels; 
structured national and regional chains of command 
for mission accomplishment through identification 
authority, engagement authority, emission control, 
operational control, and administrative control; 
missions within the national capitol region or combatant 
command's area of responsibility. 

However, the ADA junior leader must also account 



for the many vagaries associated with their missions. 
System equipment performance anomalies require Air 
Defenders to be agile and adaptive thinkers as they apply 
professional military judgment in making decisions. 
They must remain flexible in their outlooks and actions 
as they adapt to the different cultures and procedures 
of the other services or coalition partners. 

Our learning and training concepts and Profession of 
Arms Campaign are postured to help our junior ADA 
leaders adapt to the aforementioned challenges. The 
newly instantiated air defense airspace management/ 
brigade aviation element (ADAM/BAE) course taught 
at Fort Sill, Okla., brings together U.S. Army Air 
Defenders and aviators ensuring we have seamless 
mission execution throughout the airspace. Existing 
functional training courses, such as counter-rocket, 
artillery and mortar (C-RAM), air defense artillery fire 
control officer (ADAFCO), Patriot Top Gun, and Patriot 
Master Gunner Course expose Air Defenders to the joint 
participants throughout the air and missile mission areas. 



6 January - February 2012 • Fires 




















This includes resident AD AFCO courses at Kirtland Air 
Force Base, N.M. Training of our German and Emirati 
air defense coalition partners has commenced at Fort Sill 
and will ensure better cooperation and understanding 
for our allied air defense forces. The standing-up of a 
Patriot battalion's worth of Reconfigurable Table Top 
Trainers (RT-3) in the Jared Monti Hall Joint Training 
Facility at Fort Sill will provide an unprecedented local 
and distributed-training capability, including national- 
level air and missile defense exercises. As a result of 
these training capabilities, ADA junior leaders will 
further their knowledge of strategic and operational 
issues confronting them, increase their tactical expertise, 
and better adapt to their operational environments — 
be it defending the Homeland, combatant command 
(COCOM) strategic assets, or providing air defense of 
tactical brigade combat teams. 

New learning concepts are not limited to air defense 
specific training. The Captain's Career Course's cultural 
learning program will provide air defense captains 
an opportunity to focus on the region to which they 
will be assigned. Captains being assigned to brigade 
combat teams will have their cultural training tailored 
to Afghanistan, as this is their most likely deployment 


location. Captains assigned to Forces Command 
(FORSCOM) Patriot battalions will have their cultural 
training tailored to Southwest Asia - Kuwait, Bahrain, 
Qatar, or the United Arab Emirates - and will be based 
on the regionally-aligned brigade to which they will be 
assigned. Captains assigned to a brigade outside the 
continental United States (OCONUS) will likewise have 
tailored cultural training - Korea, Japan, and Europe 
(Germany, Poland, Israel, and Turkey). In the learner¬ 
centric environment defined by the Army Learning 
Model, students will conduct research, as well as interact 
with students from their region, and then be evaluated 
on a region-based scenario requiring understanding of 
that region's culture, language, military and how they 
bear on the military mission. 

There are many more complex challenges the ADA 
junior leader of today faces. At Fort Sill, the institutional 
training base must ensure our training and learning 
concepts help our leaders. We must help them understand 
their environment, be agile, adaptive and flexible leaders 
while still adhering to stringent standards, attention-to- 
detail and precision execution in performing the U. S. 
Air Defense Artillery's mission. 


SPC Brian Deaton and PFC Edward Nedweski, power generation equipment repairers with 5th Battalion, 52nd Air Defense Artillery, perform a load bank 
test of a Patriot Launching Station generator during a week-long maintenance program. (Photo by cpt Dan Moore, u.s. Army) 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


7 
















Distinguishing the unique 
profession of field artillerymen 


By COL Mike Cabrey 



I recently returned from an International 
Artillery Symposium in Draguignan, 
France. While there, I had the opportunity 
to speak with the chiefs and directors of 
field artillery from many of our NATO 
allies. From our discussions, it was confirmed 
that field artillerymen from around the world 
continue to be proud of their contributions, 
focused on providing Fires in support of 
operations and decisive in their efforts to 
identify new and improved methods of 
training. Additionally, we all are working 
through the challenge of reduced budgets 
while continuing to provide our militaries 
with the most agile branch on the battlefield. 


As a force, we remain fully engaged; our field artillery 
units are firing more than 6,000 rounds per month in 
Operation Enduring Freedom in joint and combined 
operations. Fire support is being executed from platoon 
up through the battlefield coordination detachment 
(BCD), creating a tremendous pool of seasoned Soldiers, 
NCOs and officers. 

Our FA Soldiers and leaders today are the most 
combat tested in generations. We are taking advantage 
of our seasoned leaders by bringing them back to the 
FA School in order to enhance the quality educational 
experience of our upcoming leaders and young Soldiers. 
The experiences of the last 10 years reinforce the need to 
develop FA Soldiers who are both accomplished at the 
tactical level and competent and capable leaders at the 
operational and strategic level. At the FA School we will 
continue to provide training opportunities in a quality 
environment that expose our Soldiers and leaders to 
what they will face in the future. 


While preparing our Soldiers and leaders for the 
challenges they face in the current and future fight, we 
are also providing a context of learning that is tied to 
our past, but not limited by it. We are working within 
the outlines of TRADOC's Army Profession Campaign, 
by providing our students and field artillerymen a 
connection to our history and traditions. Through this 
connection, we hope to reinforce the values and traits 
that define and distinguish the unique profession of 
field artillerymen. 

So along those lines, I invite everyone, not just our 
field artillerymen, to check out our new "Redlegacy" 
interactive database located on the school's public facing 
webpage athttp://sill-www.army.mil/usafas/. There you 
will find biographies of great field artillerymen who 
have laid the foundation of professionalism for today's 
Redleg. This list in not all-inclusive, but provides an 
illustration of the professional achievements past and 
current Redlegs have attained. It also demonstrates the 


8 January - February 2012 • Fires 

















quality of service the field artillery branch provides 
through a variety of experiences plus the foundation of 
skills and opportunities that have allowed some of our 
own to accomplish great things - not only for the field 
artillery but for the Army and America. 

Each FA leader listed in the ''Redlegacy" interactive 
database is an exemplary role model who embodies the 
identity, character, and capabilities that each member 
should strive to attain in our chosen profession. Being 
a field artilleryman is a calling; it is more than a 
job. The branch as a whole understands we have an 
abiding commitment to provide effective, ethical, and 
honorable service to the Army and to the nation. We have 
incorporated this ideology into our entire leadership 
curriculum. 

As part of a greater effort, the TRADOC initiative to 
merge the Army Learning and Training Concepts into 
'Army Learning Concept: Educations and Training, 
2016-2028," we are also building a platform of cultural 
awareness for our students in all of our courses taught 
here at Fort Sill, Okla. We have combined quality 
educators with PhDs working with our best and brightest 
instructors with contemporary operational experience 
to provide an education which will produce the future 
strategic leaders in our Army. 

We are also working to enrich leader training and 
education by leveraging technology and training 
methodologies to replicate complexity and hybrid 
threats in the classroom. Combined arms training is 
progressing at Fort Sill through the use of technology 
to collaboratively plan and execute with our maneuver 
brethren at Fort Benning, Ga., and Fort Rucker, Ala. The 
FA School, as a part of the Fires Center of Excellence, 
is using gaming technology not only to teach students 
attending the Field Artillery Basic Officers Leader Course 
(FA BOLC-B) here the fundamentals of calling for fire, 
but to give them a glimpse of what to expect when they 
are teamed up later in their careers with maneuver 
commanders in combat. 

The FA School earlier this year conducted two 
collaborative leadership development exercises (LDXs) 
with the Maneuver Center of Excellence (MCoE) and 
Aviation Center using Virtual Battlespace 2 (VBS2). The 
school is leveraging VBS2 as one of the gaming platforms, 
working towards Live, Virtual, Constructive & Gaming 
(LVC &G) instructional integration as part of the Army 
Learning Concept: Education and Training, 2016-2028. 
The LDX teamed up students attending the Maneuver 
Captain's Career Course (MCCC) at Fort Benning, the 
Aviation Center Captain's Career Course (ACCC) at 
Fort Rucker and Fort Sill's Field Artillery Basic Officer 
Leader Course (BOLC-B) students. 

We are also working an initiative that will add Joint 
Fires Observer (JFO) academics, including the JFO online 


course, to the Basic Officers Leader Course program of 
instruction. The goal is to have every BOLC graduate 
who has a follow on assignment to a brigade combat 
team complete JFO certification as an assignment 
oriented training (AOT) course following graduation. 
This pilot JFO AOT initiative is scheduled to begin in 
January 2012 with BOLC class 7-11. Currently, the JFO 
is offered as an additional skill identifier course (L7) for 
13Fs or fire support specialists as well as for company 
fire support officers/NCOs, platoon forward observers, 
combat observation lasing teams and members of scout/ 
reconnaissance organizations. 

We will also continue to harness the benefits of training 
with our joint services and ally nations such as Canada, 
U.K., Singapore, Jordan, Germany, Korea, Japan - to 
name a few. By engaging and collaborating with other 
branches, our sister-services and our allies, we hope 
to expand the interoperability and the expeditionary 
mindset of our students and develop them into master 
integrators of Fires and effects at all echelons of command. 
So no matter in what country or area of operations our 
FA leaders and Soldiers find themselves, they will be 
able to effectively and efficiently conduct fires missions 
in conjunction with the maneuver commander. 

So in closing, we are actively working to produce 
curriculum and training opportunities across the branch 
to produce Soldiers and leaders who are: 

• Competent in their core proficiencies 

• Broad enough to operate with a global mindset and 
across the spectrum of conflict 

• Able to operate in joint, interagency, 
intergovernmental, and multinational (JIIM) 
environments, and leverage other capabilities in 
achieving their objectives 

• Culturally astute and able to use this awareness and 
understanding to achieve an intercultural edge 

• Courageous enough to see and exploit opportunities 
in the challenges and complexities of the operational 
environment 

• Grounded professionals who close-hold the Army 
values, our traditions and the warrior ethos 

Looking forward, we expect to encounter hybrid 
threats, budget limitations, and continued deployment 
cycles - to name a few challenges. But now, more than 
ever, we here at the FA School will continue to do 
what it takes to grow 21st Century leaders through the 
learning and training concepts and the Army Profession 
Campaign. 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


9 







Field Artillery Winners 

Henry A. Knox Award 

Headquarters and Headquarters Battery, 3rd Battalion, 320th 
Field Artillery Regiment, 3rd Brigade Combat Team, 101st 
Airborne Division (Air Assault), Fort Campbell, Ky. 

Alexander Hamilton Award 

B Battery, 1st Battalion, 623rd Field Artillery Regiment, 
Kentucky Army National Guard 

BG Edmund L. Gruber Award 

SFC Malcolm A. Lewis, A Battery, 3rd Battalion, 321rd Field 
Artillery Regiment, Fort Bragg, N.C. 

Winners will be featured in our March-April 2012 issue 


Air Defense Artillery Winners 

Henry A. Knox Award 

D Battery, 5th Battalion, 7th Air Defense Artillery Regiment, 
10th Air and Missile Defense Command, Kaiserslautern, 
Germany 

Alexander Hamilton Award 

Headquarters and Headquarters Battery, 2nd Battalion, 263rd 
Air Defense Artillery Regiment, South Carolina Army National 
Guard 

BG James A. Shipton Award 

CPT Will D. Andrews, 2nd Battalion, 44th Air Defense Artillery 
Regiment, 108th ADA Brigade, Fort Campbell, Ky. 



January 2012 

5th BN, 25th FA, Fort Polk, La. 

Outgoing: LTC William Chlebowski 
Incoming: LTC Matt Condry 


February 2012 

1st BN, 5th FA, Fort Riley, Kan. 

Outgoing: LTC Keith Casey 
Incoming: LTC Scott Nolan 



















An interview with COL Dan Pinnell, US 
Army Field Artillery 2nd BCT, 1 st AD 
brigade combat team commander 

By Shirley Dismuke 


"Do not follow where the path may 
lead. Go instead where there is 
no path and leave a trail." 

-Harold R. McAlindon. author of, "The Little Book of Big 
Ideas: Inspiration. Encouragement & Tips to Stimulate 

Creativity and Improve Your Life." 


S eldom in our careers do we get the 
opportunity to be'first'at something 
truly significant. In a Soldier's world, 
all ranks have been achieved by one 
person or another, all medals have 
been earned and many great tasks have been 
accomplished. Occasionally, however, leaders 
emerge from their peers and important'firsts' 
are unexpectedly achieved. 

ires Soldiers are no exception. Throughout history, 
our Soldiers have achieved many firsts. Harry S. 
Truman was the first and only U.S. Army Field Artillery 
officer to become president of the United States. GEN 
Charles Summerall (the namesake of Summerall Hall, 
Fort Sill, Okla.) was the first Redleg to serve in the 
position of chief of staff of the Army. We now add, to our 
distinguished ranks of firsts, COL Daniel A. Pinnell who 
is the first field artillery officer to be selected as a brigade 
combat team commander, a position traditionally, and 
until recently by modification table of organization and 
equipment (MTOE), filled by armor and infantry officers. 

Pinnell, a New York native, comes from a military 
family with both his father and grandfather serving as 
career naval officers. He was commissioned as a second 
lieutenant in the U.S. Army Field Artillery in 1986, 
earning a bachelor's in Political Science from Hofstra 
University, N.Y. After training at Fort Sill, Pinnell was 
assigned to the 82nd Airborne Division, Fort Bragg, 
N.C., where he served as a battalion and company fire 




sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


11 







support officer and battery executive officer in support 
of the 325th Airborne Infantry Regiment. 

It was in an assignment at Fort Bragg where Pinnell 
served under one of the most influential leaders in his 
career, CPT Paul Terkelsen. 
nfluence through leadership. "I have served under 
many great leaders, including (then Colonel now 
Chief of Staff of the Army) 

GEN Raymond Odierno, 
who have had a positive 
and lasting impact on my 
career." 

However, it was 
Terkelsen's name which 
immediately came to 
mind when asked, "Has 
there been one leader 
who has significantly 
influenced your leader¬ 
ship style and whose 
traits you have adopted 
and still use today?" 

"He taught me how to 
be totally predictable to my Soldiers in all I do, but to 
be totally unpredictable to the enemy," said Pinnell. 


He explained how Terkelson taught him to integrate 
deception into his strategic operational plan and recalled 
an exercise that still impacts him today. 

"During one particular exercise, the evaluators 
setup our battery for failure. Following the exercise as 
planned would have meant capture for the entire battery. 
Terkelson set up a completely false battery to deceive the 

opposing forces (OpFor). 
Using old telephone 
poles, old camouflage net 
systems, a recording of 
old radio transmissions, 
even a couple of Soldiers 
smoking in the middle 
of the perimeter, they 
quietly moved one gun 
at a time out of the attack 
area to a new location. 
Over a three-hour period 
starting at 2 a.m., we 
camouflaged our guns 
and had the entire battery 
moved before the OpFor 
attacked. We defeated the enemy because of deception 
and it had been totally integrated into our operation," 


It’s the way we fight. It should 
be the way we always train, and 
we must do it live-fire and close 
enough to ‘scare the hair off 
you’ at every opportunity we get. 


COL Daniel A. Pinnell, brigade commander, 2nd Brigade, 1st Armored Division, leads his Soldiers during the pass and review at the 1st Armored Division 
uncasing and change of command ceremony at Noel Field on Fort Bliss, Texas. (Photo by Danieia vestal, u.s.Army) 















Pinnell explained. He went on to share how he has used 
this tactic throughout his career and it was especially 
helpful in Operation Iraqi Freedom/Operation Enduring 
Freedom and during his time at the Joint Readiness 
Training Center, Fort Polk, La. 

reparing for new challenges. When asked how his 
field artillery training prepared him for the challenges 
as a BCT commander, Pinnell talked about his various 
assignments, specifically 82nd Airborne, 2nd Infantry 
Division, and 7th Infantry Division. 

"All three organizations required us to improve our 
technical and tactical skills through written and hands- 
on evaluations. The evaluations were regular, ruthless 
and conducted to exact standards." He also talked about 
the vital importance of live-fire exercises. Simply stated, 
simulations can go only so far to prepare Soldiers for 
comb at... live-fire takes over where simulation stops. 

With more than 14 years of fire support time, 
Pinnell was adamant about the importance of training 
in a combined arms 
environment. "It's the 
way we fight. It should be 
the way we always train, 
and we must do it live-fire 
and close enough to 'scare 
the hair off you' at every 
opportunity we get." 

As we looked through 
PinnelTs biographical 
sketch before the 
interview, the staff was 
truly impressed at the 
variety of assignments 
and experiences he had 
over the past 25 years. 

"GEN Odierno advised me to constantly broaden my 
skill set and increase my value to the Army, and I have 
followed that advice every chance I got." 

Pinnell said his psychological operations (PSYOPS) 
training and follow-on assignments were an "amazing 
contribution" to his skill set. 

"I learned a key lesson while serving as a Strategic 
PSYOP Detachment Commander in Rwanda in the mid- 
90's: to conduct patient, detailed studies of the population 
you find yourself among and are trying to influence. 
My primary mission during my time in Rwanda was 
to assist the Rwandans in reducing civilian casualties 
from mines and UXOs scattered around the country as 
a result of an ongoing civil war." 

"I learned from the PSYOP NCOs I served with the 
value of conducting a detailed analysis of the population- 
with special emphasis on understanding the web 
of formal and informal relationships which link the 
members of a society. Put simply, you must research and 
understand other's motivations in order to understand 
and then positively impact their behavior." 

"I learned first-hand that reacting to another's 
behavior without understanding the "why" behind it 


can lead to wasted effort and ineffective responses, or 
worse, mission failure. Making accurate assumptions 
about other's motivations without investigating them 
first hand is difficult within your own culture, and is 
nearly impossible - and extremely dangerous-when 
done cross-culturally." 

"My NCOs, in conjunction with our Rwandan 
partners, used a detailed understanding of the target 
audiences in the most effected districts of the country to 
craft what turned out to be a highly effective campaign 
that dramatically reduced casualties among the civilian 
population and returning refugees. I later leveraged 
this and other lessons from my PSYOP service to great 
effect in accurately assessing the motivations of my Iraqi 
counterparts, shaping my own actions for maximum 
effect, and influencing my partners and opponents to 
behave in ways that were supportive of our efforts to 
restore civil society and terminate the insurgency." 

"My language training and cross-cultural engagement 

experiences in central and 
Southern Africa also later 
helped me, along with 
LTC Steve Heidecker, 
create what became the 
extremely effective and 
successful Engagement 
University (EU) cross- 
cultural engagement and 
negotiations program at 
JRTC. EU, and practical 
experiences provided 
by role players during 
the typical JRTC rotation 
were consistently cited 
by rotational units as the 
most important and effective training experience they 
had received at the CTC. " 

Pinnell also emphasized the value of pursuing 
education outside the military education system. He 
earned his Masters in Human Resource Development 
in night school while attending Command and General 
Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, Kan., in 1998/99, and 
cited it as being particularly useful in his career. 

As part of an interpersonal communications course 
taught by an experienced Kansas City Police community 
affairs officer, he learned a critical component to 
successfully diffusing angry situations and solving an 
immediate problem, while at the same time setting good 
conditions for positive, long-term relations, was to take 
your ego out of the equation. 

"She taught us to ignore personal attacks or accusations 
delivered by others in emotional distress, and respond 
with empathy and a lot of patience while we probed 
to discover the actual underlying cause of the person's 
distress, then to work with the individual to solve that 
underlying cause. Her simple but elegant observation, 
'just because someone throws a knife at you, doesn't 
mean you have to catch it,' and the conflict resolution 



The best path is to maximize 
opportunities, in both education 
and assignments. Itwillmakeyoua 
better, well-rounded leader. We are 
here to serve the Army... selflessly. 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


13 




lessons she taught, were critical to my success later in 
dealing with very tough actors among the political and 
militia groups I interacted with during my time in Iraq," 
said Pinnell. 

These 'non-artillery' assignments broadened 
his experience and skill sets, Pinnell explained it is 
"indispensible for individuals to broaden their military 
and civilian experiences - to learn and experience as 
much as they can - and be able to give back more to the 
Army because of it." 

Pinnell believes there is no clear path to promotion 
or leadership assignments. 

"The best path is to maximize opportunities, in 
both education and assignments. It will make you 
a better, well-rounded leader. We are here to serve 
the Army... selflessly. 

Seek out opportunity 
and make the best of it. 

I tell young officers to 
always do the very best 
they can do in the job 
they are given, and not 
worry about promotions 
or assignments. If they are 
doing the absolute best 
they can, and it's meant 
to be, everything else will 
fall into place." 

"Over the years. I've 
seen the Army do an 
exceptional job of caring 
for its people, rewarding 
merit, and getting the 
right talent to the right 
place at the right time," 

Pinnell advised. 

Bill Gates once said, 

"As we look ahead 
into the next century, 
leaders will be those who 
empower others." Pinnell 
personifies this principle, 
ow to better equip 
leaders, making 
educated decisions under stressful situations. "I 
believe one of the best courses we can provide for our 
young officers headed for deployment is the Joint Fires 
Observer course. Frankly, all 13 series officers and fire 
support NCOs should be trained JFOs. I also feel the 
Army should strongly consider creating a significant 
number of Army JTACs in order to ensure we have the 
depth and quality of coverage of trained controllers 
required to meet the demands of any conflict. Army 
aviators and field artillery officers, and 13Fs are the best 
prepared populations to draw these new JTACs from. 

Rapid, accurate, and integrated ground and air Fires 
have been decisive in ensuring our victory over our 
enemies time and again over the last century. Soldiers 


should be trained and allowed to call for and directly 
control all of them without restriction" 

ducation for the future. As the first U.S. Army 
Field Artillery BCT commander, Pinnell outlined 
his opinion on how the Fires Center of Excellence 
could better educate future commanders on the 
value and use of guided munitions. "This is a problem, 
because leaders don't have the time to try and 
learn this once they deploy. Pre-command courses 
are not technical enough and move too quickly 
to cover much of this stuff." 

"The Army needs to make the investment to show 
leaders the application of these (precision) systems. 
One solution might be to bring all BCT commanders 
to a central location, such as Fort Sill, and 

give them a one or 
two day experience 
with both the Guided 
Multiple Launch 
Rocket System and 
the Excalibur," he 
stated. 

Commanders dep¬ 
end heavily on their 
fire support officers; 
however, knowing both 
the capabilities and limits 
on both precision weapon 
systems could pay huge 
benefits in time, reduced 
collateral damage, and 
ultimately, the outcome 
of the battle. 

As the commander 
of 2nd Brigade Combat 
Team, 1st Armored 
Division, Pinnell is 
responsible for the 1st 
Battalion, 6th Infantry; 1st 
Battalion, 35th Armored 
Regiment; 4th Battalion, 
27th Field Artillery 
Regiment; 47th Brigade 
Support Battalion; 1st 
Squadron, 1 st Cavalry Regiment; and 2nd Brigade Special 
Troops Battalion. 

The brigade's mission is to be the Army's user 
representative to test and evaluate new doctrinal 
concepts and equipment in a tough realistic operational 
environment. 

"We provide candid feedback to military senior leaders 
so they can make the difficult acquisition decisions for 
the Army's future," Pinnell explained. 

With the Army Profession of Arms campaign in full 
swing, the 2nd BCT has already implemented training 
and evaluation of the concept. 

"I have been asked to teach, emphasize and 
evaluate the concepts presented in Profession of Arms 


The Army needs to make the 
investment to show leaders the 
application of these (precision) 
systems. One solution might be 
to bring all BCT commanders 
to a central location, such as 
Fort Sill, and give them a one 
or two day experience with both 
the Guided Multiple Launch 
Rocket System and the Excalibur 




14 January - February 2012 • Fires 





U.S. Army Chief of Staff GEN Raymond T. Odierno, center, receives instructions from SPC Allison Ferrone and COL Dan Pinnell, commander of 2nd Brigade 
Combat Team, 1st Armored Division, on how to operate a mine resistant ambush protected (MRAP) all-terrain vehicle at a training site in White Sands 
Missile Range, N.M., Nov. 17, 2011. (Photo by SSG Teddy Wade, U.S. Army) 


white paper, and provide 
feedback to the Army on 
whether the renewed 
emphasis on the tenets 
of our profession and 
methods used to deliver 
it have had the intended 
effect" said Pinnell. 

"We've already 
conducted the 'classroom' 
instruction - 'chain 
teaches', LPDs, and 
inclusion of discussions 
on the tenets of the 
ethical performance of 
duty in everything we 
do. Now we're in the 
practical exercise phase 
of examining our actions on a given day - examining 
everyday issues that come up that challenge the ethics 
and values we say are central to the profession. 

These friction points provide opportunities to talk 
about the practical application of our values and ethics, 
and begin to reverse negative trends. " 


Pinnell is excited 
about the Army 
Profession Campaign 
and is extremely proud 
of the high quality of 
Soldiers and officers who 
will be evaluating it for the 
entire Army. 

MG David Halverson, 
commander of the Fires 
Center of Excellence and 
Fort Sill, stated, "We at 
the Fires Center of 
Excellence are proud 
of COL Pinnell, 
not only for his selection 
as the first field artillery 
BCT commander, but for the sterling example he sets 
for other Fires officers." John Quincy Adams wrote, 
"If your actions inspire others to dream more, learn 
more, do more, and become more, you are a leader." 
Pinnell is an inspiration for other Fires officers and a 
true personification of Army values. 


We at the Fires Center of Excell¬ 
ence are proud of Colonel Pinnell, 
not only for his selection as the first 
field artillery BCT commander, 
but for the sterling example he 
sets for other Fires officers. 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


15 






by MG (RET) Toney Stricklin 



O ur country has been engaged in a long and costly war for over 
a decade. At the same time, the military services have made 
major changes to remain relevant and to adapt to an enemy 
grounded in 12th century tribal culture but fully adept at 
prosecuting a 21st Century insurgency. The U.S. Army and 
Marines Corps have spearheaded our nation's efforts on 
the ground. While taking the fight to our enemies in forbidding terrain 
and circumstances, the Army has gone through significant organizational 
and training adaptations to better prepare itself for the war we fight today 
and those i 


Marines with Charlie Battery, 1st Battalion, 12th Marine Regiment, fire an M982 Excalibur round from an M777A2 howitzer during a fire support 
mission. (Photo courtesy of U.S. Marine Corps) 


















The U.S. Army Field Artillery 
branch has, unfortunately, seen 
more than its share of Army level, 
top down, directed changes, and 
while well intentioned, has created 
unintended consequences for our 
current organizations. If these 
unintended consequences are not 
corrected, and is a greater concern, 
the long term impact they will have 
on our ability to decisively defeat 
our adversaries in future wars. This 
article is intended to address one 
aspect of Army level, top down 
change so adversely affecting the 
Army in Afghanistan and contrasting 
it with how the U.S. Marine Corps 
field artillery units are thriving in 
the same environment. 

Fire support coordination 
organizational changes to field 
artillery units over the past decade 
have had unintended consequences 
for the employment of precision 
muntions in theater, especially the 
employment of the M982 Excalibur. 
The USMC has not been subjected to 
the Army's organizational changes 
and is able to employ the M982, in 
Afghanistan, at a significantly higher 
rate than the Army. In researching 
this article, I was interested in all 
aspects of why the Army was not 
employing the M982 at the same rate 
as the USMC. 

Over the six month period from 
October 2010 to April 2011, Army 
maneuver commanders have 
employed the M982 in Afghanistan 
only 11 times. Over the same period, 
USMC commanders have fired the 
M982, 149 times and heralded its 
effectiveness. Also during this time, 
USMC commanders have used the 
M982,13 times more frequently than 
Army commanders. Similar rates 
have remained consistent over recent 
months. This is a remarkable statistic 
given the weapon is equally available 
to both services and, according to 
the Marine Corps, its effectiveness 
is beyond expectation. The reason I 
have written this article is to address 
this significant difference in M982 
employment. 

Typically, the engagement of 
A1 Qaeda and Taliban forces in 
Afghanistan occurs in areas and 


locations where the potential for 
collateral damage is a certainty. 
We must minimize the unintended 
consequences of the war. The M982 
gives maneuver commanders the 
organic capability to deliver the 
precision necessary to avoid civilian 
casualties and collateral damage. 
On August 3, 2010, GEN David 
Petraeus released his guidance 
for conducting counterinsurgency 
(COIN) operations in Afghanistan. 
He said, "We can't win without 
fighting, but we also cannot kill 
or capture our way to victory. 
Moreover, if we kill civilians or 
damage their property in the course 
of our operations, we will create 
more enemies than our operations 
eliminate. That's exactly what the 
Taliban want. Don't fall into their 
trap. We must continue our efforts 
to reduce civilian casualties to an 
absolute minimum." 

The Marine Corps has 
overwhelmingly embraced the 
M982's accuracy, lethality and its 
ability to minimize collateral damage 
effects; it can engage targets close to 
friendly forces; it can engage targets 
requiring extraordinary precision; 
and it can reduce the logistics 
tail, which in the past, required 
mountains of'dumb-iron' munitions. 
The M982 is designed to be employed 
against targets where collateral 
damage must be minimized and 
the target is accurately located. The 
M982 is best used in situations with 
'troops in contact,' friendly forces 
within 100 meters of the target, and 
where collateral damage must be 
limited. With the M982, 'danger- 
close' is a technique that may be no 
longer necessary. I have read reports 
that Army units, using the M982, 
are surprised and disappointed 
the building being engaged was 
not destroyed. Other munitions are 
engineered to destroy structures 
and kill its inhabitants - the M982 
is engineered to provide a precision 
kill without destroying the structure 
or infrastructure surrounding the 
target. After much research, I believe, 
the single greatest impediment for 
why Army maneuver units do not 
employ the M982 consistently, is 


the loss of fire support coordination 
functionality at the brigade combat 
team (BCT) and division levels. This 
is manifested in the loss of the army's 
senior fire support coordinators 
(FSCOORDs) in the BCT and division 
headquarters and the elimination of 
the division fire support element. 
Although organic fire support 
officers (FSOs) remain assigned to the 
BCT and division, their experience, 
training and access to senior 
maneuver commanders is not as 
effective as were senior FSCOORDs. 
In today's organizations FSOs may 
not function as the full time fire 
support officer on a day-to-day basis. 
Army modularity force structure 
changes eliminated the brigade fire 
support element from the direct 
support artillery battalion and made 
it organic to the BCT. The Army's 
decision to inactivate its division 
and corps artilleries eliminated 
the fire support coordinator for 
divisions and corps that make up 
many joint task force organizations. 
Those colonels (formerly division 
artillery commander) and brigadier 
generals (formerly corps artillery 
commander) who served as 
the senior FSCOORDs had the 
training, experience, confidence, 
and access to the senior maneuver 
and JTF commanders that our 
current field artillery commanders 
do not. The senior FSCOORD's 
credibility had a profound impact 
on brigade, battalion, and company 
commanders' ability to employ 
and deliver indirect Fires for their 
units. Simply stated, the lack of 
senior fire support coordinators 
inhibits the tactical and operational 
understanding that U.S. Army 
maneuver commanders need to 
employ the M982 and other precision 
munitions at the appropriate time 
and circumstance. This is not an 
indictment of the U.S. Army or 
our field artillery commanders. 
Instead, it points to a significant 
gap regarding support relationships 
between senior commanders and 
multiple organizations. As the U.S. 
Army made its modularity decisions 
a few years ago, I confirmed it was 
the intent of senior Army leaders 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


17 


to review, at a later time, the 
sweeping organizational changes 
made and address any unintentional 
repercussions. Changes in fire 
support coordination structure have 
created significant ramifications 
across the Army and the BCT. All 
of the evidence I have reviewed 
suggests that today's maneuver 
commanders and the fire support 
officers serving in BCT and higher 
headquarters have significantly less 
functionality and 
expertise today 
than in similar 
organizations 10 
years ago. But fire 
support isn't the 
only inhibiting 
factor effecting 
M982 employment. 

For a combat 
capability to be 
used effectively 
and consistently, 
it must be readily 
available to the 
maneuver commander regardless 
of weather, time of day or availability 
of other assets. Another significant 
reason why Army units do not use 
the M982 more frequently is the 
infantry brigade combat team (IBCT) 
commanders do not have an organic 
weapon capable of firing it. The Army 
IBCT's have no organic LW155 mm 
howitzers in their MTO&E. Many 
IBCTs, however, have task organized 
in Afghanistan and include a LW155 
mm howitzer battery. 

Though my research indicates 
there is little or no training for the 
delivery of the M982, in the IBCT, 
prior to deployment because the 
system is not available during the 
pre-deployment training at the 
Joint Readiness Training Center, 
Fort Polk, La. The USMC however 
has the LW 155 mm howitzer as 
their direct support cannon system 
which provides a full M982 delivery 
capability. With the NLOS-LS system 
terminated by the Army and no LW 
155 mm howitzers to fire the M982 in 
the IBCT, the Army, in its IBCT, has no 
organic means to employ precision 
munitions. They have instead, relied 
heavily on close air support to deliver 


precision munitions. Composite field 
artillery battalions may be the only 
near-term solution for the Army now. 
Field artillery precision munitions 
should complement tactical air and 
attack helicopters and provide the 
maneuver commander scalable 
engagement options for a variety of 
targets. It also gives the maneuver 
commander a 100 percent organic 
capability, day or night, good or bad 
weather, 24/7 to deliver precision 


attacks at the designated time and 
place of his choosing regardless of 
support availability. 

Another significant factor effecting 
M982 employment in Afghanistan is 
air space command and control. 
Some may argue this is the most 
significant factor. The Marine Direct 
Air Support Center is responsible 
for coordinating direct air support 
missions along with the Fire Support 
Coordination Center. As a result, the 
fire support coordination measures 
associated with artillery and air 
support are much less complex than 
what the Army has to deal with. 
Marine Corps M982 missions are 
sometimes cleared at the battalion/ 
regimental combat team as opposed 
to the Army, where clearances 
must be elevated to the Air Support 
Operations Center/Coalition Air 
Operations Center or International 
Joint Command in Afghanistan. 
For Army troops in contact this 
coordination procedure is clearly 
non-responsive to the needs of the 
maneuver commander. However, 
the position of units also affects 
why USMC commanders are so 
much more likely than U.S. Army 


commanders to employ the M982 
against A1 Qaeda and the Taliban. 
In the north, the Army must contend 
with many more command layers 
than the Marine Corps, including 
NATO. In the east. Army units have 
CAS only 10 minutes away which 
creates an over reliance of that asset. 
There is no guarantee our nation's 
next fight will readily have CAS only 
10 minutes away. Organic delivery 
means mustbe available f or Army/JTF 
commanders. 
Finally,inadis- 
cussion about 
why Army 
units are hes¬ 
itant or un¬ 
willing to 
employ the 
M982, I was 
surprised to 
hear a young, 
former fire 
support officer 
saytheM982is 
so expensive 
he was hesitant to use it. This is 
an example of a training issue that 
shouldbe easy to solve. Young officers 
and NCOs need to understand, once 
the institutional Army procures a 
munition for employment in combat, 
its cost is not a factor in the 'how best 
to kill the enemy or save U.S. lives' 
decision process. The M982 does not 
cost $100,000 per round. The cost of 
the M982 1A is now $80,000 and IB 
is $40,000 - it's not as inexpensive 
as the Army would like, but it has 
not yet been procured in quantities 
that will reduce individual unit cost 
to a more desirable amount. Do our 
officers and NCOs think about the 
life cycle costs of employing precision 
munitions from the U.S. Air Force, 
Marine Corps or Navy tactical 
fighter bomber who support them? 
I don't think that enters the tactical 
or operational calculus of whether 
or not to employ air delivered 
precision munitions. So why should 
it be a factor in employing the 
M982? In the December 2009 issue 
of National Defense magazine, then 
Commandant of the Marine Corps, 
GEN James Conway stated, by the 
time security and transportation 


The M982 is best used in situations 
with 'troops in contact,' friendly forces 
within 100 meters of the target, and 
where collateral damage must be limited. 
With the M982, 'danger-close' is a 
technique that may be no longer necessary. 


18 January - February 2012 • Fires 




p 



Spc. Michael Payne, an assistant gunner with Company A, 3rd Battalion, 321st Field Artillery Regiment, 
18th Fires Brigade, 82nd Airborne Division, fires the XM982, March 8, 2011, on Forward Operating 
Base Salerno. It was the first time the unit had fired the Excalibur in the four months they had been in 
Afghanistan. (Photo by SPC Tobey White, U.S. Army) 


expenses were applied to USMC jet 
fuel destined for Afghanistan the 
actual cost of one gallon of jet fuel 
was $400. For a typical F/A18 Super 
Hornet internal fuel load that is a cost 
of over $800,000 dollars of fuel for one 
aircraft. Many argued this was not 
the actual cost of the fuel; however, 
it is doubtful this factor, regardless 
of cost, was a consideration before 
a commander employed the F/A18 
on a target. Nor should any dollar 
amount be a factor of employing the 
M982 on a target. 

I was impressed by the comments 
Marines made extolling the accuracy, 
speed, and lethality of the M982 to 
defeat the A1 Qaeda and the Taliban 
forces. "Always on target. Two 
JDAMs missed the target, called in 
Excalibur and had a 'shack/ Accurate 

to a gnat's a_. At the end of the day, 

my CO always asks, what's the status 
of my Excalibur inventory? I fired 
at max range with a cold tube and 
still had a 10 meter hit. I had eight 
bad guys in a building, Excalibur 
went through the roof and got them 
all. It has given new life to the field 
artillery. No collateral damage." 

Perhaps the most telling story came 
from Election Day in Afghanistan: 
Two forward operating bases (FOBs) 
were attacked simultaneously by 
the Taliban. "We called in Excalibur 
on one of the targets, at about 100 
meters from us and had a direct hit. 
Because of the accuracy, not only did 
the Taliban retreat from our FOB, 
but also from the other one as well." 

And finally, "we had eyes on our 
high-value target with Scan Eagle 
but couldn't get him, even with 
a gunship. He went into a small 
courtyard and we hit him with an 
Excalibur with no collateral damage 
to the surrounding buildings." 

The last and most important 
comment made by a Marine was, 
"Excalibur saves Marines' lives." 

The M982 is a very accurate and 
effective munition and there are 
some steps the U.S. Army should 
immediately undertake to make 
it more responsive to maneuver 
commanders. First, is to repair the 
functionality loss of fire support 
coordination in the Army. We need 


senior field artillery officers as fire 
support coordinators responsible 
for advising, training and mentoring 
maneuver commanders on the 
employment of Fires. Secondly, 
the Army must develop a less 
cumbersome and more responsive 
airspace coordination process. When 
the process cannot support 'troops in 
contact' it is ineffective and must be 
fixed. Thirdly, IBCTs must have an 
organic weapon to employ precision 
munitions. Equipping changes must 
make the LW155 mm howitzer 
organic to the IBCT. Finally, as units 
prepare to deploy to Afghanistan it 
is essential they train as they fight 
by firing the M982. The National 
Training Center at Fort Irwin, Calif., 
is capable of this but the JRTC does 


not allow the IBCT to fire the M982 
during training. These are five 
modest changes that if incorporated 
will enhance our BCTs effectiveness 
and save lives today and in the future. 


MG (RET) Toney Stricklin served 32 years 
as a commissioned officer and commanded 
the United States Army Field Artillery Center 
and Fort Sill from July 1999 to August 2001 
and is now chairman of a consulting firm. 
He was appointed by former Secretary of the 
Army, Pete Geren, as Civilian Aide to the 
Secretary of the Army, Oklahoma (West) from 
2008 to 2010 and Oklahoma Governor Mary 
Fallin appointed him to the Oklahoma State 
Regents for Higher Education in 2011. Stricklin 
continues to provide leadership and selfless 
service to the Lawton-Fort Sill community. 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


19 






By COL Gene Meredith and COL Richard M. Cabrey 



Soldiers from C Battery, 1st Battalion, 321st Filed Artillery Regiment fire the M777 while deployed to Forward Operating Base Wright, Afghanistan. (Photo 
courtesy of the U.S. Army) 


F rom discussions with 
recently deployed and 
redeployed leaders from the 
Army and Marine Corps, 
the topic of Excalibur, 
M982, employment has surfaced in 
numerous forums. These discussions 
highlight some of the unintended 
consequences modularity has had 
for the Army and specifically for 
the field artillery. These unintended 
consequences have not only caused 
degradation in the ability of field 
artillery to provide indirect Fires 
(Excalibur included) but have also 
caused degradation in the entire 
fire support system. The good news 


is the Army and the Fires Center 
of Excellence (FCoE) have already 
recognized the situation and have 
taken/are taking steps to mitigate 
these unintended consequences. 

The U.S. Marine Corps has done 
a great job employing the M982 
Excalibur in Afghanistan; however, 
it must be noted that the fight they 
face in the Regional Command 
South (RC-South) is very different 
from the one the Army faces in 
the Regional Command East (RC- 
East). In fact if one examined the 
total number of artillery rounds 
fired in RC-East vs. RC-South over 
the last eight months, the Army 


shot 22 times the total number of 
rounds that the Marine Corps fired. 
Therefore, direct comparison of a 
single munition does not provide 
the entire picture. Additionally, 
the Air Force has been focused on 
supporting the close air support 
(CAS) mission in Afghanistan since 
there has been no need to execute air 
interdiction and counter air missions. 
This has created a situation of 
unprecedented CAS availability for 
the maneuver commander. Although 
this has provided excellent results 
in Afghanistan, it has also had the 
2nd order effect of allowing the 
forward observer and his maneuver 


20 January - February 2012 • Fires 










commander to become extremely 
reliant on CAS for fire support. This 
is a luxury we may not have in the 
next conflict. One benefit of the CAS 
availability is the validation of the 
joint Fires observer (JFO) program 
that has been ongoing since 2006. 
After acknowledging these facts we 
must also acknowledge that over the 
course of almost 10 years of persistent 
conflict, degradations in Army fire 
support training, certifications and 
leader development have occurred. 
Modularity has had a contributing 
effect of degrading the entire fire 
support system from Army Corps 
through brigade combat team 
thus not providing the maneuver 
commander with quality of fire 
support he requires to accomplish 
his mission. The Fires Center of 
Excellence's mission has been/is 
to improve the entire fire support 
system through several venues. 

The FCOE is currently pursuing 
an initiative that will address these 
changes through a force design 
update (FDU). The FDU will 
reorganize fire support Soldiers 
and leaders into the Fires battalions, 
facilitating standardized fire 
support training across the BCT 
thus institutionalizing fire support 
training 'best practices' to ensure 
critical certifications through Table 
XII are conducted to standard, 
and to facilitate the professional 
development of fire support 
personnel. The fire support teams 
will continue to integrate with 
their maneuver companies during 
the Train/Ready phases of Army 
Force Generation but will place 
the responsibility of certification 
and training on the green tab Fires 
battalion commander, thus ensuring 
a unity of effort for training the entire 
fire support system belongs to one 
commander. The concept paper 
for reorganization has been agreed 
upon by both the Fire Center of 
Excellence and the Maneuver Center 
of Excellence (MCOE) commanders 
and is currently awaiting TRADOC 
and Headquarters Department of the 
Army approval. 

The second organizational change/ 
FDU is the composite Fires battalion 


for the infantry brigade combat 
team. This organization will consist 
of one M777A2 battery and one or 
two M119A2 batteries. The FDU 
will provide greater flexibility, 
mobility, range, and lethality to the 
IBCT commander in addition to the 
precision capability found in the 155 
mm weapon system. The composite 
battalion FDU has been approved 
by Army Capabilities Integration 
Center (ARCIC) and is currently in 
staffing at HQDA. In the interim, 
IBCT units train on M777A2 prior to 
deployment to Afghanistan and or 
have an M777A2 battalion attached 
to them in theater. The follow on 
effect of this FDU will be a renewed 
emphasis on fire support in the IBCT, 
specifically training precision Fires 
tasks for employment of a weapon 
system that was not previously 
resident in their formations. 

Along with organizational changes 
doctrine is also being addressed. 
Most importantly is the role of 
the organic field artillery battalion 
commander to the BCT and the Fires 
brigade commander to the division. 
In accordance with the new FM 3-09 
(Final Approved Draft) Chapter 
2-17: "The fire support coordinator 
is the brigade combat team's organic 
Fires battalion commander; if a Fires 
brigade is designated as the division 
force field artillery headquarters, 
the Fires brigade commander is the 
division's fire support coordinator 
and is assisted by the chief of Fires 
who then serves as the deputy 
fire support coordinator during 
the period the force field artillery 
headquarters is in effect. The fire 
support coordinator (FSCOORD) is 
the primary advisor on the planning 
for and employment of field artillery 
and fire support. The responsibilities 
and authority given to the FSCOORD 
should be fully delineated by 
the supported commander. The 
FSCOORD may be given authority 
by the commander to: 

1. Provide for consolidated and 
focused FS-specific training, 
certification, readiness, 
and oversight (personnel 
management, equipment issue, 
and training); 


2. Facilitate establishing standard 
operating procedures across the 
brigade (to save time and ensure 
a single standard); 

3. Ensure efficiently resourced 
training packages. 

Although this doctrine change 
does not return to the concept 
of a division artillery and direct 
support battalions it does clearly 
put FA commanders in charge of 
the entire fire support system. FM 
3-09 has been approved by the FCoE 
commanding general and received 
"Final Approved Draft" status 
from the Combined Arms Doctrine 
Directorate (CADD) for publishing. 

The FCOE is implementing 
changes in fire support system 
institutional training as well. The skill 
set required to call for and execute 
precision Fires missions at the 
forward observer level is complex. 
Use of equipment like the pocket 
sized forward entry device (PFED) 
and knowledge of the precision 
Fires software must be second 
nature in order to execute time 
sensitive missions in the combined 
arms maneuver/wide area security 
(CAM/WAS) environment. This 
issue maybe indirectly linked to the 
lack of formalized training while 
fire support personnel have been 
assigned to maneuver formations, 
but no direct correlation should 
be made. However, within the 
FA School and specifically in the 
NCO Academy, this education has 
received renewed emphasis. With 
the most recent Basic Officer Leader's 
Course, each student will complete 
the Joint Fires Observer Course 
(JFO) curriculum and attend a two 
week Assignment Oriented Training 
for JFO certification. Although 
designed to enhance the ability to 
direct aviation down to platoon 
level, the instruction includes 
target mensuration and collateral 
damage estimation (CDE); both 
skills required to employ precision 
munitions. Additional classes added 
to the BOLC-B POI include: 

1. Excalibur/Precision Guided 
Munitions - 6 hours 

2. Precision Strike Suite-Special 
Operations Forces/Collateral 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


21 



Damage Estimate (PSS-SOF/ 
CDE - 8 hours 

3. PFED - 8 hours 

4. PFED integration in Call For Fire 
Trainer/Live Fire 

5. PFED use during walking shoot/ 
Fire Support lane and static 
observation post operations 
during Redleg War 

The NCO Academy has also 
recently adjusted curriculum to 
improve the skill set required of our 
13F NCOs. In the Advanced Leader's 
Course (E-6) they have added40 hours 
of target mensuration and training 
on the PFED with precision software. 
The Senior Leader Course has 
expanded for 13F as well to include: 
weaponeering, target mensuration 
and joint operations targeting 
process. The Warrant Officer's 
Basic Course students receive 40 
hours of instruction on CDE and an 
additional 40 hours of instruction on 
target coordinate, mensuration, both 
tasks directly applicable to firing 
precision munitions. The Warrant 
Officer's Advanced Course students 
receive 80 hours of instruction 
in joint operational Fires and an 
additional 32 hours of instruction 
on target coordinate mensuration. 
Within the curriculum of Advanced 
Individual Training, recent program 
of instruction (POI) adjustments 
include: PFED familiarization 
training into 13F AIT POL Although 
not a skill level 10 task, familiarization 
training and hands-on opportunities 
on the observation post exposes them 
to equipment that is in their future 
fire support teams. 

Collective training is another area 
being addressed. While it is true that 
the IBCTs cannot live-fire Excalibur 
at the Joint Readiness Training 
Center, Fort Polk, La., due to range 
restrictions, we are taking steps to 
address this issue at Fort Polk and 
with the program manager for the 
M982. The issue is the Fort Polk 
training area is not large enough to 
accommodate the standard surface 
danger zone (SDZ) roughly 30x30 
Km to meet the 1:1,000,000 criteria 
from AR 385-63. Excalibur can 
currently be fired only at the National 
Training Center, Fort Irwin, and 




Twentyninepalms, Calif., because 
these are the only installations with 
maneuver areas large enough to 
account for the SDZ. The program 
manager (PM) for Excalibur is 
planning to implement a software 
change on block la-2 Excalibur round 
that could potentially shrink the SDZ 
by up to 50 percent of the current 
size. This change, if implemented, 
will allow firing of the M982 at 
other installations. Although live- 
fire training on Excalibur, and 
other indirect Fires munitions, is 
important, they can all be trained in 
the dry fire mode at any location. This 
is critical for units based outside the 
U.S. since it will never be possible to 
live fire the M982 in most OCONUS 
training locations. What JRTC and 
the other CMTCs provide is the 
opportunity to train the entire fire 
support system, and this is what 
is absolutely critical to providing 
the maneuver commander the fire 
support he requires to accomplish 
his mission. 

In order to further improve the fire 
support system, the FA commandant 
has personally attended Maneuver 
PreCommand courses to discuss the 
training and use of fire supporters in 
theBCTformations. These discussions 
also include the ability of their fire 
supporters to integrate the use of 
precision fires if properly trained 
and equipped. The commandant has 
also provided guidance to the MCOE 
Fires cell, who has in turn instituted a 
number of efforts in maneuver basic 
officer leadership course (M-BOLC) 
and the captains' career course. 
Infantry and Armor BOLC receive 
overview briefs on PSS-SOF and 
PFED and demonstrations of the 
equipment, while the maneuver CCC 
is offered an elective on precision 
Fires providing more details/aspects 
of precision Fires and includes 
hands-on training with systems. 

Although modularity may have 
had a contributing effect on the ability 
of the fire support team to provide 
indirect Fires due to unforeseen 2nd 
order effects on the field artillery, the 
FCoE has and currently is addressing 
these issues across the doctrine, 
organization, training, material. 


leadership, education, personnel, 
and facilities (DOTMLPF)domains. 
Excalibur usage is just one symptom 
of a larger issue that is currently being 
corrected. With the implementation 
of the FDUs, training, and doctrinal 
revisions outlined in this article, 
changes are being made to address 
the modularity induced unintended 
consequences. By implementing these 
changes the FCOE will provide the 
Army a highly trained, skilled, and 
adaptable fire support system that is 
prepared to support the maneuver 
commander in the combined arms 
maneuver/wide area security (CAM/ 
WAS) environment today and into 
the future. 


COL Gene Meredith has served as a field 
artillery officer for 22 years spending the 
majority of his career in Airborne units to 
include the 82nd Airborne Division, 18th Fires 
Brigade (Airborne), 173rd Airborne Brigade, 
and Special Operations Command Europe. He 
has deployed to Panama, Iraq, and multiple 
times to Afghanistan where, on his last tour, 


he commanded 1-321st Airborne Field Artillery 
Regiment providing 155 mm Fires in support 
of the 82nd Airborne Division. Meredith is 
currently assigned to the Fires Center of 
Excellence at Fort Sill, Okla. 


COL Richard “Mike” Cabrey currently serves 
as the commandant, U.S. Army Field Artillery 
School. He is also a graduate of the U.S. 
Army Ranger School, and has served in 
various field artillery positions throughout his 
career such as infantry company fire support 
officer, platoon fire direction officer, platoon 
leader, operations officer, battery commander, 
and corps fire support coordinator. Cabrey 
has also attended the Advanced Operational 
Arts Studies Fellowship (AOASF) where he 
served as a seminar leader in the School 
of Advanced Military Studies. Following the 
fellowship he served as the commander, 
Operations Group COE in the Battle Command 
Training Program. He has also served in the 
position of assistant commandant of the U.S. 
Army Field Artillery School, and previously 
commanded the 214th Fires Brigade, Fort 
Sill, Okla. 


Soldiers from C Battery, 1st Battalion, 321st Filed Artillery Regiment fire the M777 while deployed to 
Forward Operating Base Bostick, Afghanistan. (Photo courtesy of the U.S. Army) 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


23 












Things you must get right 
as a battalion commander 



By COL Steve Maranian 


LTC Mark O'Donnell, right, jumps to a Hesco barrier as he makes his way to a firing position to talk to Soldiers on Vehicle Patrol Base Badel in Konar 
province, Afghanistan. O'Donnell, commander of the 1st Battalion, 32nd Infantry Regiment, was on a routine mission to communicate face-to-face with 
junior leaders. (Photo by SSG Andrew Smith, U.S. Army) 


A n officer, who used to work for me and with whom I’ve maintained 
a mentor/mentee relationship, approached me recently and asked me 
for advice about command. He asked if I had saved any products over 
the years along the lines of ‘10 things that you must get right,’ as a 
battalion commander. Advice about being a commander is ubiquitous, 
and I certainly have multiple documents filed away as ‘keepers.’ Nonetheless, 
as I pondered my mentee’s request and as thoughts about what makes an officer 
successful in battalion command swirled around in my head, I decided to sit down 
and share with him what I thought were some nuggets of advice to add to his 
leadership arsenal. He was gracious enough to permit me to share my thoughts 
with a wider audience. 


24 January - February 2012 • Fires 







F irst, success in command at 
any level starts with the Army 
values. If you have one silver bullet 
to fire early in your tenure, spend 
it stressing upon your unit what 
matters most to their new boss, 
being a team and values-based 
organization. Grounded with Army 
values as a foundation, the sky 
is the limit. As a commander of 
commanders, battalion command 
is different than company/battery/ 
troop command. It takes 16-18 years 
to grow a battalion commander. You 
are experienced -- have been 'around 
the block' -- so most of what I have to 
say will seem obvious to you. Taken 
holistically however, the points 
below build a picture of 
what, I believe. Soldiers, 
junior-level leaders, and 
senior-level commanders 
look for from battalion 
commanders. 

C are for your 
Soldiers, and I mean 
genuinely care for them. 

As a company/battery/ 
troop commander you 
probably knew every 
Soldier, their strengths 
and weaknesses, and 
many of their families. 

At higher echelons it gets 
harder and harder to know everyone. 
This should not be a deterrent. Strive 
to get to know as many of your 
Soldiers and their families as you 
can. Write note cards, if need be, 
to remember names after meeting 
people for the first time. When 
dealing with Soldiers' and families' 
problems, take an interest and follow 
through. Troops will know instantly 
if you do not really care — and so will 
their families. 

F rom those to whom much is given, 
much is expected. It's not all about 
you. Never let personal career goals 
interfere with the unit's success, or 
the direction in which it is led. To me, 
genuine humility in a commander 
is one of the most desirable traits, 
as well as working well with peers 
and being a great teammate. Give 
both peers and subordinates credit 
where credit is due. Developing the 
Army's future leaders may be the 


most important thing we do, and the 
focus should be on leaders two levels 
down. Real success as a commander 
is the long-term success of those who 
you currently lead. 

W ords mean a lot; as a field- 
grade commander choosing 
them carefully is important. Soldiers 
will lay awake at night analyzing 
and worrying about things said to 
and about them. Praise often and 
publicly. Criticize privately, and 
whenever possible, in a mentoring 
way. I'm not saying coddle people; 
there is a time and place to raise your 
voice in a calculated manner. Never 
lose control. A commander does not 
have the luxury of having a bad day. 


At higher echelons it 
gets harder and harder 
to know everyone. This 
should not be a deterrent. 
Strive to get to know as 
many of your Soldiers and 
their families as you can. 


The organization takes its cues from 
you and adopts your personality so 
when you are not 100 percent and 
still remain positive, your unit will 
be positive as well. Your team will 
know something is wrong if you 
are behaving uncharacteristically 
unhappy or distracted. It will affect 
the unit, and performance will 
suffer. A commander has to leave 
distractions at the door and put on 
their game face. 

R eceive bad news well. Do not 

'shoot the messenger,' or no one 
will want to deliver bad news about 
which you need to know. Very few 
'bad things' require your immediate 
personal involvement, (you'll know 
which ones those are) and typically 
the first report is seldom correct or 
complete. When receiving the first 
report of something bad, and feel the 
need to give guidance, try directing: 
"Develop the situation, ask X, Y, and 


Z, check the facts as we know them 
and get back with me in an hour." 

Y ou're not the XO. Do not micro¬ 
manage, and delegate as much 
as possible until the point you are 
uncomfortable; then delegate some 
more. The key is to find the right 
frequency and intervals for spot 
checks, and touch on major points 
with the staff. Train your executive 
officer and S3 to do your job when you 
are on leave or away on temporary 
duty. It empowers them, and when 
you return, support the decisions 
they have made in your absence. 

F orgive and forget honest 
mistakes. Nobody wakes up 
and says, "I think Ill screw up at 
work today." If you truly 
want to develop troops to 
work at the next level up, 
they need the freedom 
to mess up every now 
and then. When things 
go wrong, have an after 
action review, fix them 
and then move on. 

E stablish your 
red-lines. Those 
things absolutely not 
tolerated are red lines. 
Communicate them 
clearly to leaders and 
Soldiers. These tie back 
to the Army values, but they also tie 
into those things important enough 
that only you, the commander, can 
make the decision. 

W alk the walk. Never, ever, 
ever do anything you tell 
your Soldiers not to do. Don't drink 
a single drop of alcohol and get 
behind the wheel of a car if you tell 
your folks "don't drink and drive." 
Subordinates should never be able to 
say, "he/she talks the talk but doesn't 
walk the walk". 

E ngage people in person. E-mail 
is not a method of leadership 
and should be done before/after PT, 
at lunch, and/or at the end of the 
day. When Soldiers are working, 
be where they are (this also helps 
getting to really know them). Don't 
stifle your subordinate commanders 
by hovering, but know what they 
need and what their challenges are. 
As a commander of commanders. 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


25 




your job is to ensure subordinate 
commanders have the resources they 
need to be successful in the eyes of 
your boss - their senior rater. 

e physically fit. You cannot lead 
from the front if you cannot lead 


and dance recitals. Your spouse is 
the most important person in the 
world...she/he needs to know you 
feel that way every day. I'd rather 
my tombstone say, "loving husband" 
than "Colonel." Take awesome. 


Many people would debate some of 
what I've written to you - good! Talk 
about these ideas with your leaders. 
Be yourself, and have fun. 


COL Steve Maranian, field artillery, is the 



from the front. Remind 
Soldiers the enemy is 
who chooses the time and 
place where they will have 
to display their physical 
readiness. Not being fit is 
being undisciplined. 

B e technically and 
tactically competent. 

Know, maintain, and 
properly account for 
equipment. Many skills, 
which were second nature 
to older generations of 
company grade officers, 
are becoming a lost art. 

Take the time to teach 
people by varying leader 
development sessions to cover the 
art of our profession as well as the 
science. Finally, and I saved this for 
last so it lingers in your mind... 

Y our family is your life. Your job 
is your job. As a commander, 
this is often forgotten; however, 
there will be no second chances 
to go to ball games, school plays. 


Don't stifle your subordinate 
commanders by hovering, but 
know what they need and what 
their challenges are. As a 
commander or commanders, 
your job is to ensure 
subordinate commanders 
have the resources they need 
to be successful in the eyes of 
your boss — their senior rater. 


unforgettable family vacations, and 
do not lose leave. Caring about your 
family will show, and will set a tone 
within your formation (getting back 
at the values I mentioned at the 
beginning.) 

I hope this advice gives every 
leader something to think about. 
It's not perfect, nor is it all-inclusive. 


commander of 19th Battlefield 
Coordination Detachment, 
Ramstein Air Base, Germany. 
His past commands were the 4th 
Battalion, 319th Airborne Field 
Artillery Regiment in Afghanistan 
and Bamberg, Germany, and two 
batteries, Charlie Battery, 2nd 
Battalion, 82nd Field Artillery and 
Headquarters and Headquarters 
Battery, 1st Cavalry Division 
Artillery both at Fort Hood, Texas. 
His significant staff assignments 
include executive officer to the 
Director of Training, Headquarters 
Department of the Army, assistant 
chief of staff G-3/5/7, Washington 
DC; Special assistant to the 
commanding general, USAREUR, Heidelberg, 
Germany; Deputy assistant chief of staff - 
G3, 1st Infantry Division, Tikrit, Iraq; and 
XO, 1st Infantry Division Artillery, Bamberg, 
Germany. COL Maranian holds a masters 
degree in Human Resources Development 
from Webster University, St. Louis, Mo., and 
a bachelors in Business Administration from 
Bucknell University, Lewisburg, Pa. 


COL Thomas James expresses his appreciation to the Soldiers of the 4th Brigade Combat Team, 3rd Infantry Division for their service after his final tank 
ride at Forward Operating Base Iskan. (Photo by spc Sophia Lopez, u.s. Army) 



26 January - February 2012 • Fires 









Fires 


Author's Guide 


A rticle subjects. Fires strives to be 
“forward-looking.” We’re at the dawn 
of a new Army transformation. Many 
exciting things are taking place in the field 
and air defense artillery fields of expertise. 
Article subjects should therefore be current 
and relevant. Writers may share good ideas 
and lessons learned with their fellow Soldiers, 
as exploring better ways of doing things 
remains a high emphasis with Fires. 

If an article subject is significant and 
pertains to field artillery or air defense 
artillery and its diverse activities, as a rule 
of thumb we’ll consider it appropriate for 
publication. Article subjects include (but 
aren’t limited to) technical developments, 
tactics, techniques and procedures; how-to 
pieces, practical exercises, training methods 
and historical perspectives (Army Regulation 
25-30, Paragraph 2-3, b). 

We are actively seeking lessons-leamed 
articles which will enhance understanding 
of current field and air defense artillery 
operations. The magazine’s heart is 
material dealing with doctrinal, technical 
or operational concepts. We especially 
solicit progressive, forward-thinking and 
challenging subject matter for publication. 
In addition to conceptual and doctrinal 
materials, we encourage manuscripts dealing 
with maintenance, training or operational 
techniques. 

Good ideas or lessons-leamed articles 
should have two closely related themes: one, 
what did you leam from what you did? The 
second theme is: what is most important for 
others to know, or what will you do differently 
in the future? Include only the pertinent 
information on how you did it so someone 
else can repeat what you did. Don’t include 
a blow-by-blow of your whole deployment. 
The article’s emphasis should be that your 
unit has a good idea or some lessons-leamed 
to share. 

Steps involved in submitting an article 
to Fires are outlined following. 

All articles should have the bottom line up 
front; however, to better ensure your chances 
of publication, we recommend that you read 
all the criteria contained in this article as 
well as apply the guidance contained in the 
Fires style manual at sill-www.army.mil/ 
firesbulletin/style.asp for more details. We do 
not pay for articles or illustrations other than 
providing contributors with complimentary 


copies of the magazine. 

Fires is not copyrighted. All material 
published is considered in the public domain 
unless otherwise indicated. (Occasionally 
we use copyrighted material by permission; 
this material is clearly marked with the 
appropriate legal notification.) 

If you get permission to use someone 
else’s graphic or photo, especially from 
the private sector, we need proof of that in 
writing. 

etting started. Select a relevant topic 
of interest to the U.S. Army field and air 
defense artillery community. The topic must 
professionally develop members of these 
fields. Write an outline to organize your 
work. Put the bottom line up front and write 
clear, concise introduction and conclusion 
paragraphs. Follow the writing standard 
established in Army Regulation 25-50, 
Preparing and Managing Correspondence, 
Section IV (the Army writing style), and 
Department of the Army Pamphlet 600- 
67, Effective Writing for Army Leaders, 
especially Paragraphs 3-1 and 3-2. 

The Army standard is writing you can 
understand in a single rapid reading and 
is generally free of errors in grammar, 
mechanics and usage. Also see Fires' style 
manual. Maintain the active voice as much 
as possible. Write “Congress cut the budget” 
rather than “the budget was cut by Congress.” 
(Department of the Army Pamphlet 600-67, 
Paragraph 3-2, b[l]). Write as if you were 
telling someone face-to-face about your 
subject: use conversational tone; T,’ ‘you’and 
‘we’ personal pronouns; short sentences and 
short paragraphs. Articles should be double¬ 
spaced, typed, unpublished manuscript, 
between 3,000 and 3,500 (or less), but no 
more than 5,000 words, including inline 
citations as appropriate. 

Authors should check their articles’ 
contents withunit commanders or organization 
directors or S2s/G2s to ensure the articles 
have no classified or operations security 
information in them. Clearance requirements 
are outlined in Army Regulation 360-1, 
Chapter 5, Paragraph 5-3. Headquarters 
Department of the Army/Office of the 
Secretary of Defense clearance is required 
if your article meets any of the criteria listed 
there. Article clearance is further covered in 
Paragraph 6-6, with procedures on how to 
do so outlined in Paragraph 6-9. The bottom 


line on most article clearance is discussed 
in Paragraph 6-6. While you certainly may 
ask your local Public Affairs Office’s advice, 
it is the “author’s responsibility to ensure 
security is not compromised. Information that 
appears in open sources does not constitute 
declassification. The combination of several 
open-source documents may result in a 
classified document.” 

So while the Fires staff may question 
the sensitivity of an article we receive, it 
is not our responsibility to officially clear 
articles; however if we do see something 
within an article that might cause concern, 
we reserve the right to withhold publication 
of such an article until it is thoroughly 
vetted with the proper subject matter expert 
or Army authority. But it still remains the 
author’s responsibility, as outlined in Army 
Regulation 360-1, not to compromise 
national security or U.S. Army operational 
security matters. 

We reserve the right to edit an article, so 
the Fires staff will edit all manuscripts and 
put them in the magazine’s style and format. 
The author of an article or interviewee will 
receive a courtesy copy of the edited version 
for review before publication; however, if 
the author does not get back to the Fires 
staff with any questions or concerns within 
a specified suspense date (typically five to 
seven working days) it will be assumed the 
author concurs with all edits and the article 
will run as is. 

Except in the case of Armywide 
news items, authors should not submit 
a manuscript to Fires while it is being 
considered elsewhere. A comprehensive 
biography, highlighting experience, 
education and training relevant to the 
article’s subject and credentialing the author 
as the writer of the article also is required. 
Include e-mail and mailing addresses and 
telephone, cell and fax numbers. Please 
keep this information current with Fires 
for as long as we’re considering the 
manuscript. 

hotographs and graphics. Visit sill-www. 
army.mil/firesbulletin/submissionguide. 
html for information on submitting graphics 
or photographs. 

end the article. E-mail the editor at 
firesbulletin@us.army.mil; or mail them 
to P.O. Box 33311, Fort Sill, OK 73503-0311. 




sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


27 




By CW5 Manuel Vasquez 


I t is a pleasure for me to write a message to the 131A community concerning 
my experiences in the last promotion board. Some of the remarks 
included in this note are my personal observations. I will do my best to 
highlight when I give my opinion so as not to confuse the reader. For the 
people who like to read here are some of the most important reference 
material used during the board process: Title 10, U.S.Code, section 611- 
647, Promotion Boards, Title 10, U.S. Code, section 571-583 Appointment, 
Promotion, and Involuntary Separation and Retirement for Members on 
the Warrant Officer Active-Duty List, AR 600-8-29, Officer Promotions, 
a memorandum of instruction (MOI) from the secretary of the army, and , 
any other pertinent Army regulation. 

SPC John Cunningham, Bravo Troop, 1st Squadron, 18th Cavalry, California National Guard, delivers a departing salute to CSM Harold London of the 79th Infantry Brigade Combat Team. Cunningham 
had just completed an intense Appearance Board with the top sergeants major of California, the final event in the 2011 Best Warrior Competition held at Camp San Luis Obispo, Calif., Sept. 17, 

2011. (Photo by SPC Joseph Samudio, U.S. Army) 













I was one of 12 voting members, 
seven of the members were active 
duty warrant officers, and the other 
five officers were colonels (COL). 
All 12 officers came from different 
branches with one warrant officer 
and colonel being Army aviators. 
Two of the seven were chief warrant 
officers of the branch (CWOB) 
or regimental warrant officers of 
branch (RWOB) and the aviation 
(AVN) COL was the current Warrant 
Officer Career College (WOCC) 
commander (CDR). The promotion 
board president was a brigadier 
general (BG) and chief of staff (CoS) 
of an Army command (ACOM). 
We all had an undergraduate 
degree with some having at least 
one type of graduate degree. All 
the warrant officers were of the 
rank of CW5 and graduates of the 
Warrant Officer Senior Staff Course 


(WOSSC), which is a mandatory 
requirement according to the U.S. 
Army G-l Officer Selection Board 
Policy Branch Standing Operating 
Procedures (October 2009). All the 
chief warrant officers had held the 
rank for a minimum of 2 years with 
some more than 10 years. 

One myth I want to quash has to 
do with equal opportunity and the 
promotion board. Over the years, I 
have heard rumors that promotion 
boards must contain certain races or 
specific genders and must promote 
certain groups over others. There is 
no Army regulation or U.S.C. that 
stipulates the board has to consist 
of a certain amount officers from 
various races or be of a specific 
gender. However, US Army G-l 
Officer Selection Board Policy Branch 
Standing Operating Procedures 
(October 2009) states, "Each selection 


board will have at least one minority 
officer as a voting member," and "... 
(that) some boards (might) require 
more than one minority officer as a 
voting member." The SOP further 
states that, "For boards requiring 
one minority representative, the 
minority member should be from the 
minority category having the greatest 
representation in the considered 
population," and "...at least one 
minority member should be of the 
minority category having the greatest 
representation in the considered 
population." In addition, the MOI 
never instructed the board members 
to give preferential treatment to 
members of a certain minority group 
or to women. 

The Army did a tremendous job 
in selecting members from various 
ethnic groups, races and genders for 
the Fiscal Year 2011CWO Promotion 


CSM Necati Akpinar, command sergeant major, 2nd Battalion, 25th Aviation Regiment, Task Force Diamond Head, briefs promotion board Soldiers and 
their sponsors about the day's promotion board standards prior to the TF Diamond Head's monthly board at Contingency Operating Base Speicher, near 
Tikrit, Iraq. (Photo by SSG. Mike Alberts, U.S. Army) 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


29 












Board. The board had 10 male officers 
and two female officers. There were 
six Caucasian officers, four African- 
American officers, one Asian officer, 
and one Hispanic officer and the 
board demographic lay-down 
closely matched the figures in the 
Army G1 2010 Demographic Profile 
of the Army. As a voting member, I 
can honestly say that the Army could 
do away with the photo and remove 
gender and race from the Officer 
Record Brief (ORB) because it was 
not a factor for me. My quantitative 
vote was based on the contents of the 
file. I would ask if you hear someone 
say race or gender has anything to 
do with a promotion board or the 
promotion process you immediately 
stop the erroneous information. 

According to specific U.S.C. and 
Army regulation, there are only two 
competitive categories for Army 
warrant officers. The two categories 
are aviators and technical services. 
The board must consist of at least 
five core members serving in a 
permanent grade above major or 
lieutenant colonel and from the same 
service as the selectees. The Secretary 
of the Army may appoint warrant 
officers as additional members to 
the selection board that are senior in 
grade to those under consideration. 
There must be at least one warrant 
officer originating from each of the 
competitive categories, unless there 
is an insufficient number of warrant 
officers within the competitive 
category that are qualified and senior 
in grade to all those being considered. 

A few things that are important in 
the previous passage to the reader 
is all warrant officer promotion 
boards must consist of at least 
five core members that are Army 
O-grades and there is no mandatory 
requirement for the Secretary of the 
Army to appoint warrant officers to 
the selection board. Nevertheless, 
the Secretary of the Army has 
habitually appointed warrant officers 
as additional members on warrant 
officer selection boards, so there 
must be at least an aviator and one 
technical services warrant officer 
serving on the boards. This does not 
mean that an aviator or technical 


services warrant officer holding a 
specific military occupational skill 
(MOS) are going to be members of 
every board, but it does mean that at 
least one qualified individual from 
one of the two competitive categories 
is going to be present to represent 
their cohort. Finally, no officer may 
serve on two consecutive boards if the 
second board is considering anyone 
looked at by the first board. 

The memorandum of instruction 
(MOI) is the official method for the 
Secretary of the Army to provide 
his guidance to the board. The 
MOI is a living document and it 
is constantly changing. It states 
the maximum number of warrant 
officers recommended for promotion 
and the promotion zone for warrant 
officers on the warrant officer active- 
duty list. The Secretary, through 
the MOI, orders the selection board 
to consider all warrant officers for 
promotion to the next higher grade 
either from the promotion zone 
or above the promotion zone for 
promotion. The selection board may 
not recommend a warrant officer for 
promotion unless the officer receives 
the recommendation of a majority 
of the members of the board and a 
majority of the members of the board 
finds the officer is fully qualified 
for promotion. The Secretary shall 
establish the number of warrant 
officers the selection board may 
recommend from among warrant 
officers considered from below the 
promotion zone (BZ) within each 
grade or competitive category. 
The number of warrant officers 
recommended for promotion from 
BZ does not increase the maximum 
total number of warrant officers, 
which the board is allowed to 
recommend. The number of officers 
recommended for promotion from 
BZ may not exceed 10 percent of the 
total number recommended. 

In addition, the MOI lets the 
board members know what is to 
be considered positive or negative 
information within each file. From 
memory, the MOI made it clear that 
the lack of civilian or professional 
military education and the lack of 
deployments are not discriminators 



SPC Stephanie Vargas, an operations clerk with 
the 506th Quartermaster Company out of Fort 
Lee, Va., and a Manhattan, N.Y., native, practices 
disassembling the M249 Squad Automatic Weapon 
in preparation forthe upcoming board. (PhotobySGT 

Ryan Twist, U.S. Army) 


for promotion. Additionally, it 
told the board to look favorably at 
information about officers serving 
in military transition teams (MiTT), 
embedded training teams (ETT) or 
any other type of unit that provides 
those types of functions. One area 
in which I remember the MOI was 
lacking guidance was concerning 
warrant officers recovering in warrior 
transition units (WTU). Again, I need 
to reinforce I am pulling from my 
memory and this was an issue on a 
couple of files. My personal opinion is 
these individuals had incredible files 
due to their performance and were 
most likely going to be promoted 
anyway. 

At this point, I want to move on 
to the actual promotion files. All the 
files are in a digital format, shown on 
computer screens, and are randomly 
displayed to the board members. 
There are no loose papers for the 
board members to shuffle through 
or the possibility for something 
unauthorized to enter into the 
file without being cleared by the 
appropriate authority. 


30 January - February 2012 • Fires 







All members are sitting either at a 
cubicle-type desk or at an individual 
desk. There is no talking allowed 
among members unless a recorder 
is present. There were at least three 
recorders in the room at all times: one 
was answering questions received 
from members online, working 
on administrative information, or 
preparing for the next segment of 
the board process; the other two 
were roaming the room to ensure 
the members are following the 
established rules, answering verbal 
questions, and keeping unauthorized 
personnel from 
disturbing the 
board. 

Upon opening 
a file, the first 
thing the board 
member sees is 
any retirement 
paperwork that 
might have 
been submitted 
anytime during 
the individual's 
career. A white 
sheet of paper 
is displayed with the person's full 
name, social security number, the 
date the paperwork was submitted 
and the approved retirement date. I 
noticed certain things when it came 
to retirement paperwork. The first, 
was some officers had submitted 
retirement paperwork with an 
approved release date approximately 
90 days after the board was expected 
to convene. In this scenario, my 
perception was these officers were 
challenging the board to promote 
them, and if not selected, they were 
going to retire and move on. It made 
me question their loyalty. The second 
thing I noticed was some officers, for 
one reason or another, had submitted 
retirement paperwork earlier in their 
career and decided not to follow 
through. In this second scenario, it 
made me look deeper into a person's 
file during the timeframe to find 
out what exactly had occurred to 
make them pull their paperwork. 
No matter what scenario you may 
find yourself in, ensure that when 
retirement paperwork is submitted. 


it is exactly what you want to do. 
This, at least for me, sent a definite 
message. 

The next part of the promotion file 
was in the 'Derogatory Information' 
part. The first thing that shocked 
me was the number of warrant 
officers getting into legal trouble. It 
ran the gamut from driving while 
intoxicated, adultery, as well as 
other illegal or immoral behavior. 
All of which are signs of immaturity 
within the ranks. I am far from 
perfect; however, some of the things 
I saw in the files were truly startling. 


The voting member cannot proceed 
without opening the derogatory file, 
if there is one. It does not mean I have 
to read the contents, but I must at 
least open it for the program to give 
me permission to move forward. In 
my opinion, very few officers who 
have received punishment under 
the Uniform Code of Military Justice 
do not have the ability to overcome 
the smudge in their files. I gave 
everyone the benefit of the doubt 
and read their entire file to see if 
they were remorseful by overcoming 
the indiscretion. Something you can 
take from this is that UCMJ action 
against an officer is probably a 
career terminator. Even if the officer 
attempts to improve him or herself, 
it is most likely too difficult to 
overcome in the long run. My advice 
to everyone is to think before acting. 
Don't destroy your livelihood. 

Finally the most important part of 
this entire essay concerning the board: 
the Officer Evaluation Report (OER) 
and how I used it in developing a 
word picture on a warrant officer. We 


all agree the OER is not perfect and 
may never fit perfectly in describing 
the performance of a warrant 
officer. According to FY10 statistics 
maintained by the Army Gl, warrant 
officers only make up approximately 
3 percent and commissioned officers 
account for 14 percent of the entire 
end strength of active-duty force. 
Nevertheless, this is the system used 
to articulate promotion potential to 
future promotion boards. That being 
said, remember... you are your best 
career advocate and manager. It is 
your responsibility to ensure your 
administrative 
data is correct, 
so as a board 
member, I 
only scanned 
this area. To a 
certain extent, 
OER block III 
and IV were not 
very important 
to me; however, 
block IV - c, 
'APFT/height 
and weight' 
was extremely 
important. It was not my job to 
question or verify rater or senior 
rater's entries in the block. However, 
if the block had APFT failure, no entry 
or it mentioned the rated officer did 
not meet the Army height and weight 
standard, I wanted to see a profile 
date or a comment in the rater block 
concerning the non-compliance. This 
is simple for warrant officers out in the 
field to correct. I personally have been 
injured in the past, so I understand 
if a Soldier cannot physically do an 
assigned task. However, make sure 
it is annotated correctly on your 
evaluation. Army Regulation 623-3, 
Personnel Evaluation- Evaluation 
Reporting System has the specifics 
on what must occur to rectify this 
problem. 

The part of the OER I consider 
the most important is the back 
page, block V (rater) and VII (senior 
rater). These two portions are what 
I used to develop your potential for 
promotion. Throughout the entire 
process of the board, I read every 
rater and senior rater entry for each 


lome officer! had submitted retirement 
paperwork with an approved releaie date 
approximately 90 day! after the board 
wa! expected to convene* In thi! scenario, 
my perception was these officers were 
challenging the board to promote them, and 
if not selected, they were going to retire and 
move on* It made me question their loyalty* 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


31 


individual. I read almost 4,000 files 
over a two-week period and I can 
honestly claim I gave every file the 
same level of scrutiny. Every file 
contains all OERs and DA 1059s 
Academic Evaluation Reports that 
are allowed to be shown to the board. 
It is a falsehood the board can only 
see five years worth of reports. The 
board sees it all and there is no time 
limit on how long a member can 
spend reviewing any particular file. 
The rumor of specified time limits 
has evolved through the recorders 
monitoring the times board members 
spend on files. If the recorder notices a 
particular member taking a long time 
to review files, the recorder might 


ask if the member is having issues 
with voting. On the other hand, if the 
member is moving quickly through 
the files, the recorder might engage 
the voter to ensure they are giving 
the proper attention the files deserve. 

Back to the rater and senior rater 
blocks of the OER. Because these 
two blocks hold so much weight 
for board members, it is imperative 
raters and senior raters do a better 
job of quantifying their claims. For 
example to say, "This is the best 
warrant officer I have rated in my 
entire career, which has spanned 
more than 28 years," does not do 
much. It is better for them to say, "I 
consider this warrant officer the best 


out of 25 I have rated in my entire 
career, which has spanned more than 
28 years." The difference might be 
slight, but very important because 
it does not force the board member 
to try and figure out what the raters 
or senior raters are attempting to 
impart. Another example in support 
of the point I am attempting to argue 
is, "This officer is in the top three 
of more than 15 warrant officers I 
currently senior rate." To some this 
might be an awesome write-up, 
but in reality, it does not say much 
except this particular officer cannot 
breakout of the Top three' logjam 
to be the very best officer. A board 
member might conclude this officer 


Ms. Tannie Jackson, lead human resource specialist with the 81st Regional Support Command’s boards branch, searches through some of the more than 
600 files received for the next senior enlisted promotion board. Helping her search the files is one of the directorate of human resource’s four staff members, 
MSG Maria Colon-Suarez. (Photo by Gail Anderson, U.S. Army) 



32 January - February 2012 • Fires 









is a strong center of mass performer 
- promote with peers. 

A number of raters and senior 
raters have found a way to change the 
font size or to bold particular lines in 
their write-ups. In my opinion, these 
illegal techniques did nothing to get 
the rated officer a higher vote and 
did not accomplish what the raters 
and senior raters intended. Another 
thing most senior raters did was use 
'gimmicky phrases' to describe an 
officer. One phrase I remember was 
to compare an officer to a 'rock star/ 
I recommend rated officers advise 
their senior raters not to do this unless 
you truly aspire to be in a band. 

Another area I noticed were 
warrant officers who stayed in 
one location for an extended 
amount of time. Many of us call 


this 'homesteading.' It appeared to 
me that officers who stayed at one 
post for a long time had stale OERs. 
It was almost as though evaluations 
were photocopies of previous OERs, 
even when they changed jobs within 
the same organization. If the officer 
was a steady-state performer, his 
file showed he was steady state 
for the entire time with no sign 
of improvement or any further 
development. There are tremendous 
benefits to having officers move to 
other locations to experience new 
things and overcome different sets 
of challenges. At a very minimum, 
when an officer moves it is customary 
to receive an award for past 
performance. This shows the board 
signs of improvement and growth. 

The final three areas I want to 


address have to do with the Officer 
Record Brief (ORB), the official 
photos, and being a member of a 
special mission unit (SMU). The ORB 
was my primer before I delved into 
the officer's promotion file. I know 
from experience it is very difficult to 
keep the ORB up to date, specifically 
concerning awards and assignments. 
However, I could tell the officers 
who cared about being selected for 
promotion by the accuracy of the 
ORB. 

Although I applaud members of 
SMUs, they do not get favorable 
treatment as compared to other 
officers serving in conventional 
units, unless the Secretary of the 
Army mentions it in the MOI. For 
this board, he did not. From my 
perspective, SMU rater and senior 


A U.S. Army North (ARNORTH) Soldier appears before a promotion board Feb. 25, at ARNORTH’s Headquarters and Headquarters Company building on 
Fort Sam Houston, Texas. (Photo by LTC Kim Chaney, U.S. Army) 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


33 















CSM Cedric Green, the senior enlisted Soldier for the 479th Chemical Battalion, based at Fort Tilden, 
N.Y., and CSM Thomas Colvin, the senior enlisted Soldier for 4th Battle Command Training Brigade, 
75th Battle Command Training Division, review a senior enlisted promotion packet. (Photo by sfc Mark 

Bell, U.S. Army) 


raters have the same difficulty 
quantifying their warrant officers 
as the rest of the conventional side. 

The official photo is an area 
where the lack of attention to detail 
can hurt an individual. I've already 
made the point the promotion file 
could get rid of the official photo 
and it was not important to my vote; 
however, some warrant officers 
were wearing awards in the wrong 
locations or wearing unauthorized 
awards. There were officers wearing 
insignias of aides to Presidential, Vice 
Presidential, Secretary of Defense, 
or other staff over the wrong breast 
pocket. In addition. Army regulation 
does not authorize the wearing of 
the German Marksmanship Award 
(Schuetzenschnur) by officers, but 
officers can wear one of the various 
levels (bronze, silver or gold) of the 
German Armed Forces Badge for 
Military Proficiency or any other 
Bundeswher award that German 
military officers are allowed to wear. 

Three more points on the official 
photo: (1) wearing the Army Service 
Uniform (ASU) or the Class A' green 
uniform in the official photo made no 
difference to me, (2) female officers 
need to pay specific attention to hair 
color and makeup, and both must 
be within Army standard, and (3) I 
was shocked at the sheer numbers of 
warrant officers who have outdated 
photos, many of which were still 
wearing their NCO rank. 

The most important thing to take 
away from this is everything you 
do, or do not do, comes down to the 
needs of the Army. Promotion has 
nothing to do with open slots. You 
might be an officer with the right 
schools, assignments, deployments, 
awards and still not get selected 
for promotion. Nevertheless, I can 
guarantee if you quit and stop doing 
all the right things, you will never 
get selected for promotion. To me it 
is like playing the lottery. Even when 
the odds are so great, the chances 
of winning are almost non-existent, 
people still buy tickets and have the 
same opportunity to win as everyone 
else. The individual with no ticket 
is guaranteed to never win. I know 
this euphemistic example might 


appear simplistic, but in reality, it 
can happen if you decide to quit on 
yourself and your career. 

Since 1993, CW5 Manuel Vasquez has been 
a 131A Field Artillery Targeting Technician 
and has served at every level of command 
expected from a warrant officer in his career 
field. Vasquez has performed traditional FA 
Targeting Technician functions and non- 
traditional duties at various locations from 
Germany to Afghanistan as a member of 
various military units. He has two conventional 
deployments in support of Operation Iraqi 
Freedom (OIF) and one deployment in support 
of Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF) for 
a totality equating to almost 40 months of 
deployment time. Vasquez has completed 
many Joint Courses (Joint Firepower Control 


Course, Joint Airspace Command and Control 
Course, Joint Targeting Course, etc.), Army 
specific courses (Army Operational Electronic 
Warfare Course, U.S. Army Red Team Member 
Course, etc.) and all the recommended warrant 
officer professional military education courses. 
He is currently serving in the newest U.S. 
Army Service Component Command (ASCC) 
- U.S. Army Africa Command (USARAF) 
as the command targeting officer. The U.S. 
Army has selected Vasquez for attendance 
at the Advanced Military Studies Program 
(AMSP) class 12-02, Fort Leavenworth, 
Kan. Vasquez is a graduate of the Austin 
Peay State University with a Bachelor of 
Science in Homeland Security field of study 
and presently enrolled in the Long Island 
University Homeland Security Management 
graduate program. 


34 January - February 2012 • Fires 






http://sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin 



FlMle latest ksic if Fires Ilyin 
camputcr 01 any Mher sasnt dciice. 











































The evolution of junior fire supporters 


By MAJ Elijah M. Ward (U.S. Army), CPT Fred A. Janoe (U.S. 
Army), Capt Thomas F. Hicks (Canadian Army), Capt Richard 
W. Heaser (U.S. Marine Corps) 



Soldiers participating in the Basic Officer Leadership Course gather around thier instructor during training 
On Fort Sill, Okla. (Photo by Rick Paape, Jr., U.S. Army) 


" There is still a tendency in each separate unit. ..to be a 
one-handed puncher. By that I mean that the rifleman 
wants to shoot, the tanker to charge,, the artilleryman 
to fire...That is not the way to win battles. If the band 
played a piece first with the piccolo, then with the 
brass horn, then with the clarinet, and then with the 
trumpet, there would be a hell of a lot of noise but no 
music. To get the harmony in music each instrument 
must support the others. To get harmony in battle, 
each weapon must support the other. Team play wins. 
You musicians of Mars must not wait for the band 
leader to signal you...You must each of your own 
volition see to it that you come into this concert at 
the proper place and at the proper time ..." 

-GEN George S. Patton, Jr. 








COL Arthur Kandarian, 
commander of 2nd Brigade Combat 
Team (BCT), Strike, 101st Airborne 
Division (Air Assault) quoted the 
above passage by GEN George S. 
Patton referencing Mars, the Roman 
God of War, in every after action 
review during his BCT's Walk and 
Shoot exercises in October 2009. In 
this exercise each company/troop 
of the Strike Brigade employed 
surface and air delivered Fires while 
maneuvering on targets to increase 
fire supporters and maneuver 
commander's confidence in indirect 
fire employment. In 2010, the Strike 
Brigade deployed to Afghanistan 
to Regional Command South as the 
main effort to secure the people of 
Zhari, Panjwayi and Arghandab 
districts as a part of the presidential 
directed surge of forces. From the first 
days in the summer of 2010 when 
the BCT arrived, the fire support 
community was employing mortars, 
artillery, close combat attack (CCA) 
and close air support (CAS) to defeat 
an entrenched and determined 
enemy. The success of the BCT was 
predicated in the fact that there was 
an early realization of the need for 
joint Fires capability and for precision 
Fires experts. The following article 
demonstrates how Fort Sill , Okla. 
is adjusting to meet the demands of 
units like the Strike Brigade. 

The Field Artillery Basic Officer 
Leaders Course-B (BOLC-B) at the 
U.S. Army Fires Center of Excellence 
Fort Sill, serves as the cornerstone 
for training future U.S. Army and 
Marine field artillery officers. The 
program of instruction (POI) which 
trains future fire support officers for 
infantry and armor units throughout 
the Army and Marine Corps has 
undergone several changes in the 
past 10 years. The reason for these 
changes is varied and sometimes 
inter-related but important to 
understand before they are detailed. 

The most important change is 
applying lessons learned from 
operational commanders and 
experienced fire supports gained 
after 10 years of conflict in Iraq and 
Afghanistan. The Army and Marine 
Corps Fire Support systems were 


ideal for the initial hostilities in both 
theaters when the focus was on a 
linear fight as our AirLand doctrine 
outline and as we have fought for 
more than 50 years. However, with 
the shift of operational focus to full 
spectrum operations the feedback 
from operating forces was that Fires 
needed to be precise and joint assets 
were being applied at all levels which 
increased requirements for joint Fires 
experts. 

These changes, along with a host 
of others across the Warfighting 
Functions initiated the publication of 
a new Army FM 3-0 Operations. This 
manual, produced by TRADOC in 
February 2008 and re-issued in 2011, 
elevates full spectrum operations 
to the level of the offense and the 
defense in focus in training and 
equipping Army and Marine Corps 
units. 

However, in the past 24 months 
senior-military leadership has 
recognized the fact a 10-year 
involvement in conflict has eroded 
some core competencies. So the 
combat training centers have 
undertaken the mission to ensure 
the Army is equally capable of 
conducting offense and defense, as 
well as full spectrum operations. 
Feedback from these centers, as well 
as from operational commanders 
indicates fire supporters are now 
more experienced than any time 
since 1973, but that experience 
is skewed towards conducting 
counter-insurgent operations. 
Fire supporters now struggle to 
synchronize company and battalion 
fire plans with maneuver after 10 
years of conflict focused at the squad 
and platoon level. 

The final significant stimulus for 
change is the incorporation of Army 
Learning Concept 2015. In short this 
concept focuses on ensuring our 
doctrine is able to be understood 
at all levels of the force and that 
training units incorporate a variety 
of methods with an emphasis on 
practical exercise and application to 
train the Soldiers of the 21 st Century. 

Thefiresupportportion of BOLC-B 
is prepared to ensure our leaders 
are fully trained for all elements 


of conflict due to the fact the fire 
support department never really left 
its doctrinal focus but did incorporate 
lessons learned from theater, 
specifically the leveraging of close air 
support and close combat aviation. 
The non-contiguous battlefield and 
advancements in precision guided 
munitions (PGMS) has changed the 
way of thinking of the fire support 
community from echelonment of 
Fires to support AirLand concepts 
on linear battlefields to applications 
of precise Fires to neutralize targets 
and minimize damage to host nation 
populations in non-contiguous areas 
of operation. 

In 2008-2009, the chief of the officer 
instructor group and the fire support 
instructors began leaning forward 
in ensuring our course material 
incorporated those lessons learned, 
doctrinal evolutions and ALC 2015. 
Although the foundations of fire 
support have not changed much over 
the years, new materials and methods 
of instruction are being updated at 
the Field Artillery School. 

The fire support section of the 
BOLC-B course is conducted in three 
separate blocks of instruction. 

lock 1: Learning the scales 
(fundamentals of fire support). 
Just as a musician has to learn the 
fundamentals of his instrument 
and how to produce the desired 
melody, young officers must learn 
the fundamentals of their branch 
to include its capabilities and 
characteristics. The students learn 
the field artillery structure, how 
fire support functions and how it is 
integrated with ground maneuver, 
and who is responsible for fire support 
up to and including the brigade level. 
This portion of the course has been 
updated to include the changes 
in structural organization which 
began in 2004 with the restructuring 
of the brigade combat team with 
organic Fires capability as well as the 
establishment of Fires brigades. The 
enabling learning objectives (ELOs) 
that encompass block one emphasize 
the command relationship and 
tactical missions that artillery officers 
have been doctrinally tasked to 
perform as well as elaborating on 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


37 


operations with ground maneuver 
forces at all levels. The primary 
focus is on the basic fundamentals 
of fire support. Students learn 
how Fires can and should support 
maneuver forces; which includes 
integrating fire support assets with 
lethal and non-lethal effects to 
accomplish tactical tasks. As block 
one of instruction gathers speed, 
the students are taught all fire 
support assets available in the U.S. 
arsenal and how to properly apply 
each asset in tactical scenarios. This 
instruction includes the application 
of Fires ranging from mortars, light 
to heavy field artillery assets, as well 
as a knowledgeable understanding of 
the Multiple Launch Rocket System 
(MLRS) as well as the FFigh Mobility 
Artillery Rocket System (HI VIARS) 
assets. The BOLC-B course utilizes 
multiple system trainers in addition 
to live fire practical exercises so that 
students can apply the skills they 
learn in the classroom utilizing 
virtual reality simulators. One such 
trainer is the Call for Fire Trainer 
(CFFT), which utilizes a panoramic 
tactical view of a given operation 
area. This trainer which has replaced 
the GUARDFIST familiar to earlier 
generations allows the students to 
practice the techniques of applying 
indirect fire support in an enhanced 
visual environment so the student 
is capable of understanding the 
challenges faced by their forward 
observers. 

At the end of this block students 
are capable of adjusting indirect fire 
themselves and have demonstrated 
this with graded evaluations of 
adjustments of Fires. The lieutenants 
are also cognizant of the capabilities 
of the force within which they will 
serve. 

lock 2: Practicing the song 
(planning and preparing fire 
support plans). Just as a musician 
then progresses to learning solo 
pieces and finds that practice is 
essential, in block 2 students are 
taught to take the fundamentals 
of block one and start applying 
them to the maneuver plan. In the 
second block of instruction, the focus 
evolves to the planning process for 


defensive and offensive operations 
and how to integrate fire support 
assets to achieve the maneuver 
commander's intent for any given 
operation. The students are taught 
to develop these plans as a part of 
the military decision making process 
(MDMP) of the tactical planning 
cycle. By focusing heavily on troop 
leading procedures (TLPs), the fire 
support instructors emphasize the 
planning and coordination process 
at the company level. This transition 
proves challenging for the students 
at this early stage in their overall 
understanding of the planning 
process because after four years of 
pre-commissioning training rooted 
at the platoon and squad level the 
students must begin thinking at the 
company and battalion level. The 
course is taught utilizing lectures and 
reinforced with multiple practical 
exercises on planning operations 
to support a company defense and 
offense. The culmination comes in 
two simulation exercises utilizing the 
Joint Conflict and Tactical Simulator 
(JCATS) which replaced the Janus 
exercise, and is supported by staff at 
the SFC Jared C. Monti FFall Mission 
Simulation Center Facility, the 
newest and most advanced facility 
on Fort Sill for this type of training. 
This exercise has a dual purpose. It 
requires the students to produce two 
deliberate fire plans and brief one for 
grade to a fire support or combined 
arms division instructor acting as a 
maneuver company commander. 
The second portion of the event 
designates each student a role in a 
battalion fire support element and 
they utilize the simulator to conduct 
self-learning on how well their 
battalion and company fire support 
plan is integrated with the simulated 
maneuver plan. This allows the 
students an understanding of the 
importance of timing, triggers and 
the ability to adjust planned targets to 
engage targets of opportunity. These 
plans are a good azimuth check as 
well for the instructors, as it allows 
them to gauge the student's ability 
to apply the lessons learned to this 
point in the POI much better than the 
role memorization and referencing 


required for the written exams. 

The student finishes Block 2 with 
thefirstoftwogradedJCATSexercises 
complete. There is also a written test 
to demonstrate understandings of 
concepts taught in this portion, 
lock 3: Tuning and toning 
(precision software and joint 
Fires applications). Musicians can be 
technically proficient in their craft but 
without the fine adjustments which 
come through toning the piece will 
not have allure to the listener. In the 
same way, the fire supporter must 
understand the finer points of his 
craft in order to best complement the 
maneuver plan. The third and final 
block of the fire support training 
in BOLC-B focuses on artillery 
specific employment with respect 
to precision Fires, urban Fires, and 
tactical employment of lasers, but the 
emphasis of this block of training is 
on joint Fires observer (JFO) training. 
The evolution of JFO trainings 
incorporation into the BOLC POI has 
consisted of several phases. 

The first of these changes began 
in 2010 when several blocks of 
instruction which JFO certified 
instructors had found useful in that 
course were incorporated into the 
BOLC-B Fire Support instruction. 
These classes were taught primarily 
bytheJointandCombinedlntegration 
Directorate (JACI) instructors over a 
two day period. This instruction was 
reinforced with a four hour block of 
time for each platoon to participate 
in hands-on training in the Joint 
Fires and Effects Trainer (JFETS) 
on Fort Sill where students are able 
to simulate attacks utilizing CAS 
and CCA in the simulators. Also 
added, was a four hour introduction 
to Precision Strike Suite Special 
Operations Forces (PSS-SOF) by the 
warrant officers within 1st Battalion, 
30th Field Artillery in order to aid 
students in understanding collateral 
damage estimates and precision 
effects. Fire support instructors 
concluded with a four hour 'round 
robin' exercise to further develop the 
students' skills using the CFFT on 
CAS, CCA, AC-130 CFF, advanced 
artillery calls for fire, target talk on 
skills, and naval surface fire support. 




38 January - February 2012 • Fires 


In 2011, another modification 
was added to the POL The JACI 
JFO OIC and the Fire Support 
Department in coordination with 
Joint Knowledge Online, developed 
a self paced learning block to 
complement the existing JFO classes 
taught within BOLC-B. These classes 
are congruent with the recently 
approved prerequisite course 
required by all those who desire 
to attend the resident JFO course 
on Fort Sill. These classes cover the 
same material as those classes taught 
in JFO and BOLC-B; however, by 
mirroring the approved prerequisite 
course, all BOLC students will now 
be considered to have completed the 
prerequisite requirements to attend 
the JFO course for a time period of 
one year after completing BOLC-B. 


The focus of this training is not 
necessarily in producing more JFOs 
who will only be utilized for one 
year in a fire supporter role as it is to 
develop leaders who understand the 
importance of joint Fires integration 
and maintaining currency of the JFOs 
throughout the force and fleet. 

Additionally, the PSS-SOF training 
increases from four hours to an eight 
hour block of instruction per the 
guidance of the FA commandant, 
which now includes collateral 
damage estimation (CDE), and 
weaponeering taught by instructors 
from JACI and the Basic Fire 
Support Branch. Additionally, an 
eight hour block of instruction on 
the Pocket-sized Forward Entry 
Device (PFED) has been added to the 
course in order to emphasize the first 


requirement of accurate predicted 
fire (accurate target location) by 
using Precision Fires Image (PFI). 
This training is also a direct result of 
a desire from ground commanders 
to have fire supporters capable of 
assessing targets and determining 
the residual effects munitions may 
have as employed in the operational 
environment. The student is now 
capable of understanding the ability 
that the BCT fire support cell has 
of developing targets and selecting 
munitions which achieve effects 
while minimizing collateral damage. 

At the conclusion of this final 
phase of training, the lieutenant 
understands the capabilities of 
precision guided munitions and the 
technological capability to analyze 
targets. He also has developed the 


Students, 2LT Ellery Lungmus and 2LT Chase Prasnicki participate in call-for-fire at McKenzie Hill observation point, Fort Sill, Okla., during a training 
exercise. (Photo by 2LT Nick Rinaldi, U.S. Army) 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


39 





Students in the Basic Officers Leadership Course begin building a terrain model during a training exercise. (Photo by 2 lt Nick Rinaldi, u.s.Army) 


confidence to engage targets with 
joint platforms. He has completed 
a second JCATS exercise and also 
demonstrated quick fire planning 
while conducting a dismounted fire 
support lane to test his ability to 
employ the skills from Block 2 with 
limited time and resources. 

edleg War: Conducting the 
orchestra (integrating j oint Fires 
into the maneuver plan). The Redleg 
War serves as the culminating event 
for the BOLC-B course. During this 
one week field training exercise, 
students rotate through different 
stations and systems consisting of 
the fire support lanes, combined arms 
division's maneuver lanes, skill level 
IV gun-line operations, and the fire 
direction center. Traditionally, the 
combined arms maneuver and fire 
support lanes were combined and the 
students executed a combination of 
counter insurgency operations and 
call for fire training. During the fall of 
2010, under the guidance of LTC Nick 
Mauldin, 1-30 FA, commander, the 
fire support department separated 
from the maneuver lanes and 


overhauled the fire support portion 
of the Redleg War. In the past, 
lieutenants would occupy a static 
observation point (OP) in large 
groups with one or two instructors 
and call for fire for extended periods 
of time. Under the new concept, the 
fire support department has taken 
the instructor to student ratio from 
1:20 to 1:8, providing more focused 
instruction and feedback to potential 
future FSOs. 

The fire support department 
has divided its resources into two 
focus areas. First, the new static OP 
location used primarily during hours 
of limited visibility now exposes 
the lieutenant to the STRYKER fire 
support vehicle, the Bradley fire 
support vehicle, and a dismounted 
OP. On the dismounted OP the 
student demonstrates proficiency 
with the laser locater designator 
rangefinder (LLDR) and Vector 21 
used in conjunction with PFED. 
These additional tools allow the 
students to enhance their skills and 
provide tactical mensurated target 
coordinates to the FDC, JTAC, and 


CAS platforms that are utilized 
during the Redleg War. 

The second focus of the new 
fire support concept is the tactical 
dismounted lane. The lieutenants 
are given an operations order, a fire 
support execution matrix, and a 
battalion level target list worksheet 
as part of a tactical scenario. Students 
are then given limited time to 
plan, prepare and execute a quick 
company fire plan while tactically 
moving and adjusting indirect 
Fires. During this exercise, the 
fire support instructors serve as a 
maneuver company commander, 
while the FSOs must manage their 
fire support teams (FIST), as well as 
meet the commander's guidance. 
With the addition of the PFED to 
the fire support lanes, the students 
now understand how to balance 
tactical movement, fire planning, 
and current technological assets to 
achieve first round fire for effects. 
By integrating current technology 
along with traditional doctrinal 
procedures, students learn the value 
of fire planning and executing calls 



40 January - February 2012 • Fires 




for fire on the move with precision, 
nto the concert hall (the way 
ahead for fire supporters at the 
company level). The Field Artillery 
School continues to produce the 
maestros of the modern battlefield, 
true professionals who understand 
their instruments and how to bring 
them together in harmony with a 
maneuver plan. The changes within 
BOLC-B have been made in response 
to the needs of the operating forces 
and the Fleet Marine Force to try to 
minimize the gap in the skill level 
required in combat zones and the 
skill level of those leaving the school 
house. Under the guidance of the 
former commandant of the Field 
Artillery, BG Thomas Vandal, and the 
428th FA Brigade commander COL 
John Dr ago, the Field Artillery School 
has begun to fully implement a JFO 
program as a follow on course after 
BOLC-B to certify those lieutenants 
going to a BCT. 

All these changes were 
incorporated in the course with FA 
BOLC Class 7-11 which will graduate 
Jan. 10, 2012. With class 7-11, all 
BOLC lieutenants will be required 
to complete 20 hours of JFO distance 
learning prior to the start of their fire 
support training. During their fire 
support training, BOLC students 
will receive the same 32 hours of JFO 
academic training that is taught in 
the JFO course. All lieutenants that 
are assigned to a brigade combat 
team, will then attend the JFO course 
that is taught by the FCoE after 
graduation from BOLC. This will 
allow lieutenants going to BCTs the 
opportunity to become a certified JFO 
prior to arriving at their first unit of 
assignment. 

The lieutenants trained at the Field 
Artillery School receive a plethora 
of information during the course. 
During the Fire Support portion 
of their training, updated TTPs 
combined with new technology is 
producing a better quality, more 
versatile fire supporter in 2012 and 
beyond. The BOLC-B Fire Support 
department continues to prepare 
future Army and Marine junior 
officers to be an integral component 
for U.S. Army and Marine force 


units to conduct operations in 
today's contemporary operating 
environments anywhere on the 
globe. 


Captain Thomas F. Hicks enrolled into the 
Canadian Armed Forces in 1982 as a non¬ 
commissioned officer. He served as an NCO 
for 18 years before commissioning from the 
ranks. His various duties have included, 
fire support NCO for 3 Commando (First 
Special Service Force), recon NCO with 2nd 
Regiment Royal Canadian Artillery, Parachute 
Instructor (Canadian Parachute Training 
Centre). Hicks then commissioned from the 
ranks in 2003, he assumed the duties as 
troop commander F Bty 2nd Regiment RCA. 
He deployed to Afghanistan in 2005 with 
the Afghanistan National Army mentor teams 
in Kabul, Afghanistan. He was attached to 
2nd Bn Princes Patricia’s Canadian Light 
Infantry Bn as the company FSO/JTAC and 
once again deployed to Afghanistan. Hicks 
has completed tours of duty in the Middle 
East as well as the FRY, and was then 
posted to Fort Sill, Okla., Fires Center of 
Excellence as an instructor with BOLC-B. 
Hicks completed two years as an instructor 
at Fort Sill, Okla., before being posted back 
to Canada to the Peace Support Training 
Center as a standards officer. 


Captain Richard W. Heaser enlisted in the 
U.S. Marine Corps in 1995 as a combat 
engineer serving in India Company, 3rd 
Battalion 2nd Marines, 2nd Marine Division 
and Alpha Company, 2nd Combat Engineer 
Battalion 2nd Marine Division, Camp Lejeune 
N.C. During this time he deployed with the 
Marine Expeditionary Unit -26 and served in 
Operation Joint Guard in Bosnia/Herzegovina 
and Operation Deliberate Guard in Albania/ 
Montenegro. He also served in Marine Wing 
Support Squadron 172 in Okinawa, Japan. In 
2004, he earned his Bachelor’s Degree from 
Campbell University and was commissioned. 
He completed the Basic School in Quantico, 
Va., and the Field Artillery Basic Officer 
Leadership Course at Fort Sill, in 2005. 
Heaser served as a forward observer and 
assistant executive officer in Fox Battery, 2nd 
Battalion 10th Marines, 2nd Marine Division 
in Camp Lejeune, deploying in support of 
the Unit Deployment Program to Okinawa, 
Japan. Upon returning from the deployment he 
became the assistance operations officer for 
2nd Battalion 10th Marines. Shortly thereafter 
he deployed to Iraq in support of OIF and 


became the battalion operations officer for 
the deployment. Upon returning from Iraq 
Heaser became the executive officer of Golf 
Battery 2nd Battalion 10th Marines where he 
assisted in the transition of the Battery from 
the Ml98 to the M777. Heaser is currently 
the Fire Support Branch Chief and Instructor 
at the Field Artillery Basic Officer Leadership 
Course at Fort Sill, Okla. Heaser has recently 
been selected for the Inter-service Physicians 
Assistant Program at Fort Sam Houston, 
Texas where he will transition to the Army 
and attend PA school in April of 2012. 


Captain Fred A. Janoe is a BOLC-B fire 
support instructor for 1st Battalion, 30th Field 
Artillery Regiment at Fort Sill, Okla. His 
previous assignments include platoon leader 
and battery executive officer with 2nd Battalion, 
18th Field Artillery Regiment (MLRS), Fort 
Sill, along with a 15-month deployment to 
Combined Joint Task Force-Horn of Africa. 
Upon return from the deployment, Janoe 
served as the battalion fire direction officer 
in the same battalion. He is a graduate 
of the Field Artillery Officer Basic Course, 
Joint Operational Fires and Effects Course, 
Fire Support Coordinator Course, Joint Fires 
Observer Course, and the Joint Collateral 
Damage Estimation Course. 


Major Elijah Ward has served as a fire 
support instructor with 1st Battalion, 30th 
Field Artillery Regiment since August 2011. 
Ward graduated from FAOBC in June 2002 
and served as a fire support officer for C/2- 
327th Infantry, 1st Brigade, 101st Airborne 
Division (Air Assault) at Fort Campbell, Ky., 
while assigned to 2nd Battalion, 320th Field 
Artillery and deployed to support the initial 
phases of Operation Iraqi Freedom and later 
served as the FDO for C/2-320th FAR. He 
served a second tour in MND-N with 2-320th 
FAR as the battalion adjutant in 2005-2006 
before attending FACCC in 2007 and returning 
to 2nd Brigade, 101st Airborne Division (Air 
Assault) at Fort Campbell. Ward then served 
as fire support officer for 1-502nd Infantry 
from 2007 to 2009 to include 14 months in 
West Baghdad on his third deployment to 
Iraq. In 2009, he assumed command of Bravo 
Battery, 1st Battalion, 320th Field Artillery, 
for 19 months and deployed his battery to 
Afghanistan in June 2010. Ward is a 2001 
graduate of Virginia Military Institute with a 
B.A. in History. 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


41 






Fear-based ItadcrsHp: 

Mstivatiin is key 

By Gene Kamena 


“You gain strength, courage and confidence by 
every experience in which you really stop to 
look fear in the face. You must do the thing 
you think you cannot do.” 

- Eleanor Roosevelt 


E very leader possesses a motivating spark—the energy that drives a leader forward 
and determines how the unique characteristics and traits possessed by that leader 
are actually brought to bear. When the spark of leadership is lit, by a desire for 
making things happen and for making a difference in the lives of others, regardless 
of personal cost, the outcome is usually positive for all involved. Unfortunately, 
some leaders today are motivated by fear; fear of failing, fear of making a mistake, fear 
of what others might think.. .fear of being wrong. This article is directed to those leaders 
residing in this category, with the intent of calling them out, having them examine their 
actions, and most importantly, reappraising their motivational spark. 


If you have been in, or around, the military for any 
length of time, you know the kind of leader I am writing 
about. They are overly cautious, test the environment 
before acting, are risk averse, and all too often, they are 
rewarded for not making waves. One might assume fear- 
based leadership is most prominent in junior leaders, 
and that time and maturity would remedy this deficit 
of character. My personal experience and observations 
indicate this is not the case; in fact, fear-based leaders 
are found at all levels of command and throughout the 
gamut of leadership positions in our services. 

Fear-based leaders are most effective when things are 
going well and when there is no requirement for decisive 
action. They are at their best when the environment 
is predictable and certain. The reality of our world, 
however, is no one can promise stable environments 


and certainties. The thing that keeps these leaders up 
at night is the specter of crisis, when the spotlight of 
attention places them front-and-center, demanding 
a critical decision be made without hesitation. When 
circumstances prevent the sampling of opinions and 
perceptions, when action is required and risk must be 
accepted, the fear-based leader often proves inadequate 
to the task. They usually pick the 'safe' course of action 
because the middle of the road is where fear-based 
leaders live. Sometimes the 'safe' choice works out fine, 
but there are times when it is absolutely the worst course 
of action possible. 

ow are fear-based leaders made? They are formed 
in environments that do not allow for creativity or 
mistakes; zero-defect atmospheres become the genesis 
of fear-based leaders. Once formed, these leaders often 



42 January - February 2012 • 


Fires 


thrive in the 'don't make waves' culture of the corporate military. 
Unfortunately, this species of leader affects all those around them by 
becoming a model of how to succeed. 

W hat can be done? Action is required at several levels. Our military 
services must value appropriate risk-taking; this requires more 
than just words. Risk-takers must actually be supported and rewarded. 
Addressing creativity and risk acceptance on performance reports might 
be a first step. Senior leaders are obligated to encourage subordinate 
leaders who do not 'go with the flow.' The actions of senior leaders 
speak louder than their words; therefore, how fear-based leaders are 
handled will come through loud and clear. If senior leaders call out those 
leaders who always play it safe, often to the detriment of the mission or 
progress, then the message will spread quickly—the message that it is OK, 
and actually valued, to go out on a limb from time to time. Fear-based 
leaders can do much to self-correct their own behavior. If reading this 
short article causes you to question 


your own actions, then it achieved its 
purpose. If you find yourself overly 
cautious, then ask yourself a question- 
-am I more concerned with appearing 
wrong than being wrong? A leader 
can be forgiven for being wrong 
(once in a while) if acting in the best 
interest of the mission, organization 
and others. What cannot be tolerated 
is the leader who is more concerned 
with appearances than doing what 
is required. 

At the end of the day, all leaders 
must look into the mirror and know 
they did their best. No leader can 
achieve good outcomes if motivated 
or unduly influenced by fear. When 
fear-based leaders peer into the 
looking glass, they see only half a 
person: one who plays it safe and 
risks nothing. Motivation does matter; 
in fact, it matters a lot. What type of 
leader do you see in the mirror? 

Professor Gene C. Kamena currently teaches 
Leadership and Ethics at the Air War College in 
Montgomery, Ala. He is retired from the Army 
as a Colonel of infantry. He holds a B.A. in 
History from Auburn University and a Masters 
Degree in Military Art and Science from CGSC 
at Fort Leavenworth. He graduated from the 
Army War College in 1998 and commanded 
the 2nd Brigade, 1AD. He also served as 
the chief of staff for the 1st Infantry Division, 
director of staff of U.S. Space Command and 
the deputy chief of staff for U.S. Northern 
Command, director for Iraqi Security Forces 
and formed and led an Iraqi special border 
commando brigade on the Syrian border. 
His operational deployments include; Desert 
Shield Desert Storm, Macedonia, Kosovo, and 
Iraq (OIF.) 




Captains from Fort Sill, Okla. are briefed in how to speak to reporters before they take part in mock interviews with Oklahoma University journalism 
Students. (Photo by Dwight Normile, Oklahoma University 


irQffDuQS ®ff @K)(|]ag]@[M)@DDG 

Army captains from Fort Sill, Okla., receive a different type of training in Norman 

By Damien Lodes 


On a brisk winter Friday morning, 
a squad of U.S. Soldiers headed 
nervously into unfamiliar territory. 
Dressed in camouflage utilities, the 
troops did their best to prepare for 
whatever lay ahead. When they 
finally arrived at their destination, 
they knew there was no turning back. 
On the morning of Feb. 18, 2011, 65 
captains and four majors from Fort 
Sill, Okla., invaded Gaylord Hall 
to take on a small but determined 
force of journalism professors and 
students. 

Since 2008, the Gaylord College of 
Journalism and Mass Communication 
has trained military members from 
Fort Sill on the art of speaking 
with reporters. The Army Media 
Engagement Training is part of the 
Field Artillery Captain's Career 
Course, and is held six times a year 
at the Oklahoma University through 
a contract with the U.S. Department 
of Defense and is earning accolades. 

"It's been talked about nationally 
as a model for hands-on interactive 
education in a civilian setting," said 
Gaylord College Dean, Joe Foote. 

This particular morning started 
in the Ethics and Excellence in 


Journalism Foundation Auditorium, 
where Charles Self, Institute for 
Research and Training director, 
laid out the day's battle plan for the 
Army and Marine Corps officers in 
attendance. 

After Self's introduction, Gaylord 
Visiting Professional Professor 
Mike Boettcher joined the class 
via computer video conference. 
Currently in London, Boettcher was 
on his way back to Afghanistan to 
resume his work as an embedded 
journalist with the 101st Airborne 
Division. His goal on this morning, 
however, was to give the captains 
a firsthand look and feel at what 
journalists are looking for and need 
when they are attached with military 
personnel. He also showed video 
clips of pieces he had produced to 
illustrate how the process works. 

Boettcher said he wanted to change 
the common perception among 
service members that the media were 
'out to get them'. He also explained 
to the Soldiers how the training 
exercise to follow was designed, 
bridging the gap and improving 
the working relationship between 
military personnel and journalists. 


"You're not just waging a war 
on the ground, you're waging an 
information war," he said. 

But Boettcher did emphasize one 
piece of advice before he signed off. 

"The guidance I would give is 
engagement," he said. "You engage 
that [journalist] on a personal level. 
Don't be confrontational." 

The participants were then divided 
into four groups and deployed to 
the third floor of Gaylord Hall. In 
separate rooms, the men and women 
were briefed by Gaylord faculty 
members on expectations during 
their ensuing mock interviews with 
journalism students. 

Gaylord professors Warren Vieth 
and Bob Dickey instructed one 
group. A professional journalist for 
26 years, Vieth held a unique insight, 
having covered the U. S. occupation 
of Iraq in 2003. 

"[The media training] gives the 
military a much more realistic 
perspective on how the press 
operates and why things don't 
always turn out the way they think 
they should," Vieth said. 

As Vieth and Dickey were 
conducting their brief, some shared 


44 January - February 2012 • Fires 






their personal and professional 
experiences with the media. One 
Soldier told the class about a 
journalist who overheard him 
talking with one of his friends, and 
how his comments ended up in 
a story without his knowledge or 
permission. 

A common theme during this 
interview preparation session was 
the service member should remain 
in charge of the interview, not the 
reporter, and does not have to 
divulge anything to the press. For 
some, this was a hard lesson to learn. 

"Nine times out of 10, they're 
going to ask the guy what his name 
is, and five minutes later he's told 
them his entire life story," said MAJ 
Paul Harrison, who was in charge of 
one of the groups. 

Prior to the actual interviews, the 
troops studied a scenario based on 
an actual battle in Afghanistan. The 
journalism students were provided 
only rumors from which to compose 
their interview questions. 

"It's a high-pressure, think-on- 
your-feet setting that also help 
students develop their interviewing 
skills," Vieth said. 

As the captains entered the 
rooms to conduct their one-on-one 
interviews, some of them looked as if 
they were walking into a firing squad. 
Each interview was videotaped 
and lasted five to 10 minutes. The 
students did their best to trip up the 
captains, and sometimes succeeded. 

After CPT Ray Augustine entered 
the room, OU student Emily Erichsen 
started with easy questions. 

"Do you feel you have the same 
goal as the Afghanistan military?" 
she asked. 

"Yes, we both have the same 
goal of rebuilding and stabilizing 
Afghanistan," CPT Augustine 
replied, his right foot tapping slowly 
throughout. 

The questions got tougher though. 

"Some of the soldiers deserted 
you. Can you trust them? Why did 
it take 45 minutes for the MEDEVAC 
to arrive?" 

Augustine maintained his calm 
throughout, even if some of the 
answers sounded rehearsed. 


"I've been to Afghanistan and 
Iraq, but I've never been in front of 
a camera before," said one captain. 
When asked if it would be scarier 
to look down the barrel of a gun 
or a camera he said, "A camera, 
definitely." 

After finishing his actual interview, 
the captain looked greener than the 
uniform he was wearing. 

"That was horrible," he said. The 
entire room erupted with laughter. 

After a few more captains finished 
with their interviews, they began 
to compare notes. It soon became 
clear, one of them had inadvertently 
thrown his fellow captains 'under 
the bus' when he misunderstood a 
question. 

As the others found out, antici¬ 
pation grew to watch this captain on 
tape in the afternoon review session. 

As the participants reconvened 
from lunch into the classrooms, 
their faces registered a range of 
emotions. The class started watching 
the interviews and the feedback was 
mostly positive. Many of the captains 
had good posture and bearing, while 
some were noticeably fidgety. 

As Harrison had predicted, the 
biggest mistake was giving up too 
much information before answering 
the question. But that was the point 
of the drill. 

"I think it's a huge benefit for 
them," said Harrison, who spent 
a year in Iraq between 2008 and 
2009. "This is my fourth time [at the 
OU training], and I always learn 
something new." 

Harrison also explained that the 
Soldiers and Marines are briefed at 
Fort Sill about certain informational 
limitations. 

"You're required to answer 
questions if you're asked, but 
you have to maintain operational 
security, those kinds of things, the 
basic stuff," he said. 

After a couple of embarrassing and 
somewhat robotic interviews later, 
the moment everyone was waiting 
for finally came. No one wanted to 
miss anything from the infamous 
interview. 

His eyes were the size of golf 
balls as the video began. His posture 


started to sag as the interviewer, 
Gaylord student Morgan Downing, 
asked about a comment made by the 
previous captain she had interviewed. 
With renewed confidence, he boldly 
proclaimed, "He is wrong. That 
didn't happen." His peers exploded 
with laughter, and the tape had to be 
paused as the mood settled. 

"I've told them, 'You're gonna get 
up there, and you're gonna mess up, 
and we're gonna laugh at you. But 
when you walk away from here, 
hopefully you'll have a positive 
experience from this,"' said Harrison. 

After the debrief was finished, the 
captains headed back to post, having 
completed one of the most unique 
days of their training. 

Self, a former editor at the U.S. 
Army Newspapers and reporter 
for United Press International, said 
the program, which began as 'just a 
one-shot thing,' has evolved through 
the years. 

"It's a little different than what 
we originally thought we would 
be doing," he said. "But our goals 
are still the same: to build a more 
open and transparent and cordial 
relationship between the captains 
and the journalists, so they're more 
comfortable in the situation." 

Asked for his vision of where the 
Army media training would be in 10 
years. Self paused and said wistfully, 
"If the Afghanistan war continues 
for some time, I think the Defense 
Department is going to want to 
expand this program." 

Gaylord College and Fort Sill have 
created an exemplary model for other 
installations to replicate. 


Kingfisher, Okla., native Damien Lodes, a 
sophomore broadcast meteorology major, 
served five years in the Marine Corps as 
an Air Traffic Controller. 


(Editor's note: This article was 
originally printed in July 2011 in the 
Pulse AlumniMagazinepublishedby 
the Gaylord College of Journalism 
and Mass Communication at the 
University of Oklahoma, Norman, 
Okla.) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


45 





Winners of the 2011 

First Place Combat Photo 



CPL Jefferson Norrel and PFC Bobby Orr, both 
from 3rd Platoon, A Battery, 2nd Battalion, 8th Field 
Artillery, 25th Stryker Brigade Combat Team, direct 
fire with the M777A2 howitzer at Combat Outpost 
Al Masaak, Zabul, Afghanistan, on July 9, 2011. 
Photo taken by CPT Wolf-Ekkehard Hindrichs 



Fires Photo Contest 


First Place Training Photo 



A Multiple Launch Rocket System (MLRS), from 
A Battery, 2nd Battalion, 4th Field Artillery, sends 
a rocket downrange during a live-fire training 
exercise at Fort Bliss, Texas, February 2011. 
Photo taken by 2LT Justin Nash 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


47 



Winners of the 2011 


Second Place Combat Photo 



A Soldier from 
B Battery, 3rd 
Battalion, 17th Field 
Artillery Regiment, 
fires the M777A2 
from Forward 
Operating Base Spin 
Boldak, Afghanistan, 
Aug ust 2009. 
Photo taken by 1SG 
Michael McMurdy 


Third Place Combat Photo 


Smoke billows out 
of the muzzle of the 
howitzeras members 
of 3rd Section, 2nd 
Platoon, B Battery, 
3rd Battalion, 321st 
Field Artillery, 
18th Fires Brigade 
conducta calibration 
mission at Camp 
Wright, Asadabad, 
Kunar Province, 
Nov. 9, 2010. 

Photo taken by SPC 
Joseph Gallegos 






Fires Photo Contest 

Second Place Training Photo 

SSG Shaun Umi, 
from C Battery, 1st 
Battalion, 37th Field 
Artillery Regiment, 

3rd Brigade Combat 
Team, 2nd Infantry 
Division, overseethe 
firing of the M777A2 
howitzer during 
section certification 
at Joint Base Lewis- 
McChord, Wash., 

April 1, 2011. 

Photo taken by 1LT 
Alexander Kim 


Third Place Training Photo 

Canon crew¬ 
members from 
B Battery, 1st 
Battalion, 101st 
Field Artillery, 86th 
Infantry Brigade 
Combat Team, fire 
the M119A2 howitzer 
during a live-fire 
exercise at the 
Ethan Allen Firing 
Range in Jericho, 
Vt., Aug. 27, 2011 
Photo taken by SPC 
Ryan Richards 




sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


49 




Winners of the 2011 


Combat Photo Runners Up 









Fires Photo Contest 


Training Photo Runners Up 


















Utilizing the Triad of Fires in the 21st Century 











7 hile the artillery 
/ community 
/ has a long and 
/ storied tradition 
/ stretching back 
centuries, modern combat has 
ushered in changes in the ways 
that the King of Battle is employed. 
Since 2001, U.S. Marine artillery 
has led the way in adapting to the 
requirements of modem warfare by 
employing splitbattery operations 
and experimenting with enhanced 
battery operations. However, these 
new missions have stretched the 
capabilities of the classic artillery 
structure to the point where major 
structural changes are necessary to 
operate on the modern battlefield. 
The last significant changes to the 
structure of U.S. artillery units were 
the introduction of the fire direction 
center in 1935 and the first use of 
forward observers in 1942. 

An M777 howitzer kicks rocks and dust into the air after firing during a recent mission. The Marines with 
Charlie Battery, 1st Battalion, 12th Marine Regiment, remain undaunted as they listen to the recorder 
to see if they have another mission. (Photo by CpI. Jeff Drew, U.S. Marine Corps) 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


53 








In the last decade, the artillery 
community has acquired three new 
weapon systems to replace the one 
system previously in use. Rapidly 
advancing digital communications 
technology enables a plethora of new 
possibilities for the employment of 
fire support. However, the structure 
of Marine artillery has not sufficiently 
evolved from the traditional battalion 
originally adopted by artillery units 
after the Franco-Prussian War of 
1870-1871 nor has the potential 
of digital technology been fully 
embraced. Fortunately, the last 10 
years have yielded more than enough 
data to chart a way forward for 
Marine artillery to remain a potent 
capability. While the Marine Corps 
has taken steps towards reorganizing 
the battery, a more comprehensive 
change must be made to truly 
optimize Marine artillery. In order 
to be relevant and effective on the 
modern battlefield. Marine artillery 
must reorganize around the triad 
of Fires utilizing the lessons of Iraq 
and Afghanistan and the capabilities 
of modern digital communications 
equipment. 

■—I r - 1 he last 10 years. As a community, 
U Marine artillery is a vastly 
different field than it was in 2001. 
Every artillery unit in the Marine 
Corps fielded the M198 155 mm 
towed howitzer. Planners could focus 
on the employment of artillery in large 
scale, conventional warfare against 
a near-peer competitor. Artillery 
fought as battalions or supported 
Marine expeditionary units' (MEU) 
deployments as batteries but did not 
operate as independent platoons or 
sections. Close air support (CAS) 
was a job left to the air officer and 
the only precision guided munition 
available, the M712 Copperhead 
round, was so rare that it was almost 


mythical. Today is vastly different. 
Marine artillerymen employ not one 
but three different weapon systems: 
the M777A2 155 mm lightweight 
towed howitzer, the High Mobility 
Artillery Rocket Systems (HIMARS), 
and the Expeditionary Fire Support 
System (EFSS). The requirement 
for a regiment or battalion worth of 
massed artillery fire is rare. Instead, 
the infantry needs artillery coverage 
over as wide an area as possible. 
Artillery forward observers must 
now be just as adept at CAS nine 
lines as they are at calls for fire and, 
for the foreseeable future, precision 
guided munitions will be in high 
demand or become the norm. While 
our tools and the requirements of 
modern combat have drastically 
changed, our structure, methods, and 
employment have not kept pace. This 
has led to strains as artillery units 
attempt to bend to meet modern 
requirements. Artillery now has long, 
medium, and short range capabilities 
that should grant it the flexibility 
needed to support any contingency. 
This flexibility has thus far eluded 
us because we have not sufficiently 
evolved to our environment or 
our tools. Two major changes to 
the Marine artillery community 
are drastically needed in order for 
us to be relevant and capable in 
future operations. First, we must 
restructure artillery units around 
the three weapon systems rather 
than just plugging them into the 
existing structure. Second, we must 
embrace decentralized fire direction, 
made possible by advancements in 
automated fire direction, 
"o^eorganization. In a 1999 
J\Ainformation paper entitled, 
"Comprehensive review of Marine 
Artillery" GEN E. R. Bedard, 
commanding general, II Marine 


Expeditionary Force to the 
Commander, wrote "The current 
artillery structure does not provide 
the flexibility required to support 
current or future Marine Corps 
missions." 

The above statement is as true 
today as it was at the close of the 
last century. Despite the acquisition 
of three new weapon systems, the 
structure of Marine artillery has not 
evolved one step in the intervening 
years. Marine artillery has always 
fought and trained as battalions, and 
this should not change. However, we 
are far too wedded to homogenous 
battalions (meaning, artillery 
battalions utilizing only one kind of 
weapon system.) We now have one 
active duty and one reserve battalion 
composed entirely of HIMARS 
batteries despite the fact that they will 
never be employed as such. HIMARS 
are best suited for high payoff 
targets in the deep battlespace or for 
targets that require precision guided 
munitions that other systems cannot 
reach. Thus, they are being employed 
in Iraq and Afghanistan as sections 
composed of two HIMARS systems. 
A scenario where an entire battalion 
of HIMARS systems must be massed 
is ludicrous and maintaining them in 
such units off the battlefield is equally 
ill-advised. Furthermore, since 
HIMARS systems are best employed 
as sections, it only makes sense to 
disperse these sections as widely as 
possible throughout the force. 

The artillery community has 
gone in the opposite direction with 
the EFSS. Rather than integrating 
the mortar throughout the artillery 
community, it has been relegated to 
a sole battery in each regiment. This 
only ensures that most artillerymen 
will never get the chance to work 
or train with the system unless they 


Figure 1: Flexibility is the key to relevancy across the range of military operations. 



ENGAGEMENT 


SWEET SPOT 


CRISIS RESPONSE 


A 


POWER PROTECTION 

_ 


SUSTAINED OP »RREGULAR 
WARFARES MARINE CORPS ORDER 


► 


54 January - February 2012 • Fires 













Figure 2: The proposed artillery battalion of the future offers far more flexibility to the RCT commander, including a deep battle space strike capability, while 
maintaining the ability to mass fires on a decisive point. 


are assigned to these few batteries. 
Once they are assigned to these 
batteries, they may bring with them 
no knowledge or experience with 
the system, but must be brought 
up to speed. For the EFSS system to 
reach its full potential and to be fully 
integrated with the other two legs of 
the triad of Fires, we must begin to 
build institutional knowledge and 
experience with the system. This can 
never be achieved under the current 
system. 

Since artillery will continue to 
fight and train as battalions, the ideal 
way to utilize the 'triad of Fires' is to 
integrate all three weapon systems 
into the Marine artillery battalion. 
The artillery battalion of the future 
should consist of two 6-gun M777A2 
batteries, one 8-gun EFSS battery, 
and a Headquarters and Service 
Battery that includes a HIMARS 
platoon (one 2-system section and 
its support). This heterogeneous 


battalion offers the regimental 
combat team (RCT) commander the 
complete range of capabilities that 
Marine artillery can provide and 
the artillery battalion commander 
a wide range of options to meet the 
commander's intent. During low- 
intensity, distributed operations, 
the M777A2 and EFSS batteries can 
provide wide-ranging indirect fire 
coverage while adding the long- 
range, all-weather, precision strike 
capability of HIMARS. The EFSS 
battery allows the RCT commander 
to weigh his main effort with a 
more responsive weapon system 
with a higher rate of fire. During 
conventional operations, this method 
can yield the same ability to mass 
Fires on a decisive point as the classic 
artillery battalion while giving the 
RCT commander the ability to affect 
the enemy in the deep battle space. 

This organization has additional 
benefits while not deployed. It 


would give the artillery battalion 
commander the ability to cross train 
his battalion on each weapon system. 
Currently, artillerymen will utilize 
one weapon system for a three-year 
fleet tour, serve on a B billet, and then 
return to the fleet, possibly utilizing a 
vastly different weapon system. This 
will lead to gaps of six to nine years 
or more where artillerymen do not 
train on two out of three systems. 
This is obviously unsustainable. The 
only solution is to maintain those 
skills through cross training and 
a battalion with access to all three 
systems is the ideal organization to 
accomplish that goal. Additionally, 
because of this skill cross-training, 
the EFSS battery in each battalion 
will be able to quickly transition 
to M777A2 operations if necessary 
without a long lag time. The battalion 
will also be better able to support 
task-organized MEU requirements 
since each Marine artilleryman will 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


55 






























0S44 Section 
Fire Control 
Man 


0 044 Section 
Fire Control 
Man 


0S44 Section 
Fire Control 
M an 



0802 Fire 
D I recthon 
Officer 



0B44 Fire 
Direction 
Chief 


0844 Assistant 
Fire D I recti on 
Chief 


Figure 2: The proposed Artillery battalion of the future offers far more flexibility to the RCT commander, including a deep battle space strike capability, while 
maintaining the ability to mass fires on a decisive point. 


be knowledgeable on each system, 
ecentralized fire direction. 
Bedard also wrote, "As we 
develop and field more digital 
communications systems for the 
artillery, to include Advanced 
Field Artillery Tactical Data System 
(AFATDS), the personnel structure 
and training must support its 
implementation." 

The other major change to 
artillery that must be embraced is 
decentralized fire direction. Batteries 
that have experimented with EBO or 
conducted split battery operations 
in Afghanistan have strained to 
conduct these operations with 
classic, centralized fire direction 
that the Marine Corps has utilized 
for years. While automated fire 
direction has been a reality since 
1944, this capability has never had 
an evolutionary impact on artillery 
structure or employment. This lack 
of evolution was partly due to the 
limitations of early automated fire 
direction systems, but technology 
has now advanced to the point 
where evolution is possible. The 
decentralized nature of modern 


infantry combat necessitates the 
parallel decentralization of fire 
support and thus, decentralized 
fire direction. In situations where 
counter-battery fire is a concern, 
centralized fire direction is fraught 
with liability. Decentralized fire 
direction would also greatly enhance 
Marine artillery when conducting 
operations such as a 'jumping 
barrage/ With the right software, 
an off-the-shelf iPod Touch or other 
similar technology can provide 
automated fire direction in the 
palm of your hand. The inherent 
communications capability enables 
these devices to communicate with 
each other. There is no longer a 
reason to continue concentrating 
fire direction at the battery level in 
a pair of ancient desktop computers. 
Many will find the elimination of 
battery fire direction center (FDC) 
to be uncomfortable, but it is not 
without precedence. The German 
18th Artillery Division was able to 
mass the Fires of its batteries using an 
experimental fire direction battery at 
the division level in 1943, utilizing a 
primitive electronic computer linked 


to teletype machines. Raytheon's 
Centaur Handheld Fire Direction 
System, now outdated by civilian 
technology standards, was capable of 
battery fire direction some years ago. 
Yet, we have failed to translate new 
capabilities into improved tactics, 
techniques, and procedures. With 
training, future cannon crewmen 
could compute their own firing 
data, specific to their gun, on 
handheld computers while 0844s 
provide oversight, expertise, or 
conduct manual computation as a 
backup system. The technology to 
accomplish this is not only present, 
but has been for quite some time. It is 
up to us to finally take advantage of it. 
/^^hallenges. The largest hurdle 
V_C?that implementing this plan 
would face is the new logistical 
challenges that three weapon systems 
would present to the battalion S-4. 
Additionally, the S-4 will be strained 
by the logistical requirements of the 
HIMARS platoon resident in the 
Headquarters and Service Battery. 
These challenges can be mitigated 
by shifting some of the burden 
for resupply onto the batteries 



56 January - February 2012 • Fires 






Marines with Charlie Battery, 1st Battalion, 12th Marine Regiment, fire an M982 Excalibur round from 
an M777 howitzer during a fire Support mission. (Photo by CpI. Jeff Drew, U.S. Marine Corps) 


themselves as each battery has assets 
capable of transporting ammunition. 
Another significant challenge is the 
lack of a suitable East Coast firing 
range for HIMARS live-fire training. 
Fort Bragg, N.C. is the best option 
for East Coast units, but live-fire can 
always be conducted at Twentynine 
Palms during pre-deployment 
training. Another hurdle is that, thus 
far, HIMARS have been deployed 
as a division level asset. This was 
proper for a new weapon system, 
but the time has come to fully 
integrate HIMARS where it can best 
be employed by the artillery battalion 
supporting the RCT. The RCT is more 
than capable of conducting the aerial 
de-confliction necessary to utilize 
HIMARS. To do otherwise limits its 
potential and is detrimental to our 
ability to support the infantry in both 
conventional and irregular warfare. 

Lastly, many will resist replacing 
six M777A2s with eight EFSSs in 
each artillery battalion. However, 
the ability to field two additional 
tubes, the superior rate of fire, 
and the increased blast radius 
of high angle of fire weapons 
makes up for its smaller size. The 
flexibility and responsiveness of 
EFSS is a capability that should not 
be denied to the supported unit. The 
reduced range of EFSS in comparison 
with the M777A2 will produce an 
additional but not insurmountable 
challenge to the artillery battalion 
S-3 when directing battalion 
operations. Additionally, in the 
July/August edition of The Artillery 
Journal, LTC Michael Forsyth, USA 
identified the decreasing need for 
the massing of Fires concurrent 
with the proliferation of precision 
guided munitions in both close air 
support and indirect fire support. 
The increased effectiveness of highly 
accurate firepower decreases the 
need to cover point targets with 
massive amounts of rounds. On 
the other hand, the Marine Corps 
could also consider increasing the 
amount of guns in the M777A2 
batteries to eight tubes to maintain 
the current level of firepower. Eight- 
gun batteries composed of M198 
Howitzers were used in the 1980s 


and a study conducted in 1980 of 
various artillery battalion structures 
concluded that a battalion composed 
of eight-gun batteries was the most 
effective organization. 

volution. Marine artillery is 
organized in the exact same way 
as every other artillery community 
on earth and employed in much the 
same way that Napoleon employed 
his Corps artillery. But we are not 
every other artillery community and 
we have certainly come a long way 
since the early 19th Century. The 
Marine Corps has a unique mission 
set and versatility is key when it 
comes to supporting those missions. 
Additionally, the technology we use 
to accomplish our missions is vastly 
different than it was just 10 years ago. 
We have a long history of developing 
cutting edge tactics that has been 
ignored for far too long. Future 
warfare, whether it takes the form 
of conventional combat operations 
against a near-peer competitor 
or counterinsurgency operations 
against irregular combatants, will 
require flexible fire support provided 
by multiple weapon systems 
geographically separated from each 
other. The artillery battalion as it 


is currently organized with access 
to only one weapon system and 
saddled with outdated fire direction 
methods cannot provide the flexible 
and responsive fire support that 21st 
Century warfare requires and remain 
relevant. Since the near future will be 
one of tight budgets, we are fortunate 
that most of the technology required 
to evolve artillery for the future is 
already developed and acquired. 
This article, if nothing else, is meant 
to serve as a starting point to evolve 
Marine fire support to fit the present 
and future environment. All we need 
now is the intellectual leadership to 
develop a new path and the will to 
make the required changes. 


Captain B. A. Friedman is currently serving 
as the Fires action officer, Current Operations 
Branch, Training and Education Command G-3. 
Fie has also served as a fire direction officer 
during the operational test of the Expeditionary 
Fire Support System, a Fires and effects 
advisor with an Iraqi army battalion, and the 
liaison officer of India Battery, 3rd Battalion, 
10th Marines. Fie holds a Bachelor’s Degree 
in history from Ohio State University and 
is currently working on a Master’s Degree 
in National Security and Strategic Studies 
through the United States Naval War College. 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


57 






By MAJ Corey Landry and MAJ Jon B. Fausnaugh 


I n the summer of 2010, the 
172nd Separate Infantry 
Brigade's long range 
calendar included force 
generation, training, 
and preparation for an 
Operation Enduring 
Freedom deployment in the winter 
of 2011/2012. That timeline afforded 
1st Battalion, 77th Field Artillery, 
the SIB's organic Fires battalion, 
ample time to reorganize from a 
modified table of organization and 
equipment Army-of-Excellence 
Paladin battalion to a mixed towed 
artillery battalion as part of the 172nd 
SIB's transition to an infantry brigade 
combat team. 

In the fall, however, the brigade 
received notification its deployment 
timeline had drastically changed, 
forcing the brigade and Firesbattalion 
into an accelerated timeline allowing 
only six months to task organize, 
field equipment, qualify crews and 


execute a mission rehearsal exercise 
at the Joint Multinational Readiness 
Center, Hohenfels, Germany. The 
battalion's mission in OEF was to be 
Fires'pure/makingitimperativeeach 
crew attain maximum proficiency in 
their core skills. 

Beginning withJointMultinational 
Readiness Center's (JMRC) Leader 
Training Program for 172nd BCT in 
December 2010, the Vampire observer/ 
controller-trainer (O/C-T) team 
(fire support trainers) and 1-77 FA 
opened a continuous dialogue to 
determine how the team could best 
support the battalion commander's 
training objectives and prepare the 
unit for deployment. The challenges 
facing the battalion were many. 
In short order, the battalion and 
batteries needed to task organize, 
borrow towed howitzers from 2nd 
Stryker Cavalry Regiment and 173rd 
Airborne BCT, train, and conduct 
live-fire exercise certification of 


Paladin crews on M119A2 and 
M777A2 cannons, all prior to the start 
of their mission rehearsal exersice 
(MRE). 

The transition and certification on 
new systems would consume much 
of the battalion's remaining training 
time, leaving little time to train tasks 
outside of their core competencies. 

To prepare for deployment, the 
Vampire Team and l-77FAimmediately 
began working together to maximize 
the value of the remaining training 
time. The 1-77 planned several 
weeks of systems training, section 
certification and platoon-level 
gunnery leading up to their MRE. 
The Vampires would support this 
with an independent set of eyes 
from experienced O/C-Ts, helping 
coach and train battery leadership 
through platoon certification. As 
for the MRE, the team needed 
to design a comprehensive FA 
situational training exercise lane 


58 January - February 2012 • Fires 























Left: A hook up team, from A Battery, 1st Battalion, 77th Field Artillery Regiment, secures the cargo net of ammunition to a Blackhawk helicopter during 
sling load training at the Joint Multinational Readiness Center (JMRC), Germany. (Photo courtesy of 1st bn, 77th fa) 


which would exercise and assess 
core competency skills, as well 
as additional counterinsurgency 
training not fully achieved during 
train-up. 

By maintaining constant 
communication with 1-77 FA's 
leadership, the Vampire Team 
supported and designed training for 
the battalion, which was approved 
by the command teams of the unit 
and JMRC. 

re-rotation gunnery training. 

At 1-77's request, two months 
before the battalion's JMRC rotation, 
the Vampires sent a battery O/C-T 
team (minus), 
consisting of a 
battery senior 
officer, two 13B 
senior non¬ 
commissioned 
officers , and a 
13D senior NCO, 
to assist the unit 
in executing 
platoon-level 
gunnery train¬ 
ing at the Grafen- 
woehr Training 
Area, home of the 
7th Army Joint 
Multinational 
Training Co¬ 
mmand. Because 
of the relatively close proximity of 
JMRC to United States Army Europe 
units, the O/C-T teams frequently 
work with units prior to a rotation, 
building solid relationships and 
establishing communications early. 

The battalion commander focused 
the O/C-T's observations towards 
critical areas which he wanted 
feedback and coaching, including 
6400 mil operations, fire direction 
center and section crew drills, 
high angle, direct, and sweep-and- 
zone Fires. Each platoon, having 
completed their transition to Ml 19A2 
and M777A2 over the previous 
90 days, had different levels of 
proficiency. The O/C-Ts conducted 
numerous classes at the platoon level 
to improve proficiency in crew drills. 


During the unit's combat outpost 
defense LFX, O/C-Ts instructed 
sections on tactics, techniques, and 
procedures, as well as doctrine for 
engaging targets with direct fire 
and 'Killer Junior' (direct fire with 
and adjusted trajectory and time 
fuze designed to achieve a 10 meter 
height-of-burst) from the M119A2. 
Sections adjusted crew drills to 
incorporate 10/R, which raises tube 
elevation, achieving the 10 meter 
height of burst for 'Killer Junior.' 

The unit also spent considerable 
time focusing on special missions 
they expected to execute during 


their upcoming deployment: high 
angle, sweep-and-zone, and action- 
azimuth (or out-of-traverse), with 
the latter two missions being focus 
areas for the O/C-Ts. They assisted 
gunners and section chiefs in 
improving crew drills by using 
their M137 sights as compasses, 
establishing action azimuth markers, 
issuing warning orders from the 
FDC, and establishing alternate 
aim-ing reference points to support 
6400 mil operations. Each firing unit 
worked through several versions of 
sweep-and-zone missions, varying 
the order in which sections fired 
aim points. O/C-Ts assisted the unit 
in developing standing operating 
procedures from FM 6-50, Tactics, 
Techniques and Procedures for the 


FieldArtillery Cannon Battery, firing 
the center aim point first, followed 
by the remainder of the sweep-and- 
zone. 

Fire direction centers (FDCs) at 
each firing platoon were proficient 
in computing firing data for single 
targets inside a safety box, but were 
not yet comfortable with back-up 
manual computational procedures, 
as they had only recently received 
graphic firing tables, graphical site 
tables, and tabular firing tables. 
The O/C-Ts assisted the FDCs in 
establishing manual procedures, 
including computation of site 
and extracting 
data from TFTs. 
Finally, the team 
assisted FDCs in 
developing and 
implementing 
standardized 
tracking systems 
to incorporate 
prior to their 
JMRC rotation. 

The O/C-T 
team would brief 
the battalion co¬ 
mmander and 
battery co- 
mmander daily 
on its observ¬ 
ations and 
recommendations. Based on this 
feedback, the battalion commander 
adjusted training as necessary, and 
gained insight allowing him to refine 
training tasks for the upcoming MRE 
and squad training exercise (STX). 
TX development. Following the 
platoon-gunnery exercises, the 
battalion commander and Vampire 
Team were able to focus the MRE STX 
design on observed weaknesses and 
the commander's additional training 
objectives. Having achieved section 
and platoon-level proficiency in core 
competency tasks, the commander 
decided to focus STX week during the 
MRE on platoon table XII live fire and 
additional mission-essential skills, 
including fire base operations, air 
assault rigging, M777A2 direct-fire 



The 1st Battalion, 77th 
Field Artillery Regiment 
planned several weeks of 
systems training, section 
certification and platoon-level 
gunnery leading up to their 
mission readiness exercise. 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


59 





Squad Training Exercise (STX) / Command Post Exercise (CPX) 


Unit 

Day 1 

Day 2 

Day 3 

Day 4 

Day 5 

Day 6 

Day 7 

l/A/1-77 

Field Artillery STX 
(Fire Base) 

Direct 

Fire 

AAR 

Air 

Assault 

Rigging 

Depart 
to MRE/ 
Occupy 
FOB 

2/A/1-77 

3/A/1-77 

l/B/1-77 

TLPs/ 

M777 

Cross- 

Training 

D30 

Training 

Air 

Assault 

Rigging 

Field Artillery STX 
(Fire Base) 

AAR 

2/B/1-77 

l/C/1-77 

Air 

Assault 

Rigging 

TLPs/ 

M777 

Cross- 

Training 

Field Artillery STX 
(Fire Base) 

AAR/ 

D30 

Training 

Depart 
to MRE/ 
Occupy 
FOB 

2/C/1-77 


AAR = After Action Review MRE = Mission Rehearsal Exersice FOB = Forward Operating Base 


Figure 1: Table showing the squad training exercises (STX) and command post exercise (CPX) schedules. 


and crew cross-training on howitzer 
systems. Furthermore, the battalion 
was to begin a partnering mission 
with a D30 artillery battery from the 
Afghanistan National Army, which 
required familiarization with the 
D30 system. To support this, the 
team designed a week long training 
schedule consisting of a three-day 
live-fire STX in a fire base, and 
one day of each specialty training 
objective: direct fire, sling load 
operations and D30 familiarization. 
Fire base occupation and training 
events would be conducted by 
consolidated batteries, allowing 
commanders to command, control 
and assess their platoons during 
training, as well as coordinate the 
multiple tasks required during fire 
base occupation. The final schedule 
is depicted in figure 1. 

The Vampires developed the FA 
live-fire STX as a 72-hour tactical 
mission, in support of a notional 
company air assault, and attack of 
an objective inside the impact area. 
Prior to occupation, the battery O/C-T 
issued a battalion-level operations 
order to the battery commander, 
complete with graphics, annex D 


and schedule of fires. Once each 
unit issued their order, the Vampires 
replicated the maneuver fire support 
team and fire support element 
while conducting a task force fires 
rehearsal, which was a first for many 
of the commanders. Clarifying the 
rehearsal process, from the combined 
arms rehearsal through fire support, 
FA, and finally technical rehearsals, 
greatly enabled platoons and sections 
to understand and execute the fire 
plan. The firing battery was assigned 
toa200mxl00m fire base with 6 foot 
berms, a logistics support area and an 
entry control point. Movement from 
the forward operating base to the 
fire bases was unimpeded, allowing 
the unit to focus on advanced party 
procedures and TLABSPAP [trails, 
lay, aiming point identified, bore- 
sight verified, safe, pre-fire checks 
performed, ammunition prepared, 
and position improvement]. The 
priorities of the troop to task 
throughout the STX lane stressed the 
leadership to manage personnel and 
accept risk. 

The battery was responsible for 
defending the fire base, operating 
the ECP, maintaining a platoon-size 


quick reaction force, and maintaining 
a platoon prepared to fire in support 
of the maneuver operation. The 
battery O/C-T team replicated 
the maneuver headquarters and 
coordinated the tactical scenario by 
providing reports and situational 
updates. 

The l-77FAcombatoperationlaser 
team (COLT), along with a COLT 
O/C-T, occupied an observation 
post, observed and requested Fires 
as part of the tactical scenario. 
Additionally, the battalion radar 
sections incorporated friendly and 
hostile fire tracking into the STX 
lanes by occupying radar positions 
on opposite ends of the impact area. 
The Q36 and Q37 radars provided 
secondary observers and sent digital 
counter-fire missions to the firing 
platoons with hostile fire replicated 
by fire markers in and around the 
fire base. Using embedded trainer 
mode on the radar systems, counter¬ 
fire points of origin were generated 
from inside the impact area, and 
were completely integrated with 
the tactical scenario and indirect fire 
impacting on the fire base. 

During the firing battery STX lane. 


60 January - February 2012 • Fires 






























each battery conducted all Artillery 
Table XII tasks. 

Depending on the task, targets 
were either built into the tactical 

fire support plan _ 

or sent as targets 
of opportunity 
by the COLT or 
radar section. 

Each type of 
mission was 
initially sent as 
a do not load 

mission, and - 

then executed live. The FDCs for each 
battery received maneuver reports 
from O/C-Ts; battle tracked, live fired 
using manual computations, and 
conducted technical fires rehearsals 


to prepare for a schedule of Fires 
in support of the final assault. 
Additionally, O/C-Ts assisted 
batteries in solidifying crew drills 


The battery was responsible for defending the fire 
base, operating the ECP, maintaining a platoon-size 
quick reaction force, and maintaining a platoon 
prepared to fire in support of the maneuver operation. 


and SOPs for FDC and gunline 
operations that included warning 
orders, battle tracking, fire order 
Standard Operating Procedures 
(SOPs), out-of-traverse procedures. 


fire command standards and 
terrain gun position corrections 
to streamline communication and 
increase efficiency. O/C-Ts assisted 

_ section chiefs, 

fire direction 
officers and 
platoon leaders 
in developing 
sound, yet 
flexible, fire 
order SOPs to 
facilitate rapid 
crew drills in the 
FDC and predictability on the gun 
line. These crew drill modifications 
reduced the platoons' out-of-traverse 
mission times by more two minutes 
and enabled the gunline to orient 


Soldiers from 1st Battalion, 77th Field Artillery Regiment perform Table XII tasks from the fire base in Grafenwoehr Training Area, Germany during their 
Joint Multinational Readiness Center (JMRC) Mission Readiness Exercise (MRE). (Photo courtesy of 1st bn, 77th fa) 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


61 















Soldiers from 1st Battalion, 77th Field Artillery Regiment perform Table XII tasks from the fire base in Grafenwoehr Training Area, Germany during their 
Joint Multinational Readiness Center (JMRC) Mission Readiness Exercise (MRE). (Photo courtesy of 1st bn, 77th fa) 


on an action azimuth while the FDC 
computed technical solutions. In 
addition to continuous FA operations, 
critical operational environment 
training events were distributed 
throughout the exercise. Each 
battery conducted an information 
engagement in the adjacent village 
with the elders, mullah, and police 
chief; reacted to negative villager 
sentiments and civilian casualties 
from an improvised explosive device; 
and defended their firebase from 
an aggressive attack. Leaders con¬ 
ducted an information engagement 
immediately after occupation and, 
after 24 hours of LFX operations, 
were approached by the populace 
with negative sentiments regarding 
the disruption to daily life caused by 
the artillery Fires. Subsequently, the 
villagers struck a victim-operated 


IED leaving the fire base, forcing the 
battery to deploy its QRF, execute 
the 5Cs [confirm, clear, cordon, 
check, and control], and treat 
civilian casualties (medical rules of 
engagement). Finally, O/C-Ts focused 
on developing engagement areas and 
defending their fire base. Batteries 
were able to refine and rehearse their 
defense plans, develop mass casualty 
event SOPs and observation plans for 
dead space, as well as reposition and 
harden crew-served positions. They 
also established platoon sectors and 
assigned howitzer responsibilities 
to sections with reduced manning. 
Platoons also developed aid and litter 
teams, refined casualty collection 
points, and instituted sweep and 
clear tasks as a QRF planning priority. 

Concurrent to the FASTX, each 
radar section executed STX lanes 


incorporating movement to and 
occupying a radar position, reacting 
to an IED, and unexploded ordnance, 
as well as survivability moves. 
Throughout the lanes, the battalion 
leadership was allowed to observe 
and assess training, make corrections 
and retrain as needed. Specialty 
training during STX week included 
D30 familiarization training, sling 
load training, system cross-training, 
and direct fire training for the 
M777A2 battery. D30 mentorship 
training included eight hours 
of instruction from O/C-Ts on 
occupation, emplacement, lay, crew 
drill and fire direction procedures. 
Units learned to emplace and march 
order the D30, conducted indirect 
and direct fire missions, and laid the 
platoon with the 6000 mil aiming 
circle. FDCs learned to compute 


62 January - February 2012 • Fires 



manual firing solutions for the D30 
manually and how to operate the 
Afghan Field Artillery Computer. 

In addition to each firing battery, 
the battalion master gunner and FDC 
chief, who would be supervising 
the battalion's partnering mission, 
participated throughout to gain 
proficiency. During sling load 
training, the batteries rigged and 
hooked up howitzers to German 
CH-53 Sea Stallion helicop¬ 
ters or Slovenian 
Cougar helicop¬ 
ters, training 
between 10 and 
15 hook-up teams. 

This training was 
enthusiastically 
received by the 
unit, as these 
skills are crucial 
in Afghanistan's 
operational en¬ 
vironment and not 
easily resourced for 
training. Another 
first for the battalion 
was the opportunity 
to direct fire the 
M777A2 howitzer. 

Although this 
skill had been 
previously trained 
on the M119A2, the 
ability to execute 
live, direct fire of a 
155 mm projectile 
was a confidence 
booster for the relatively new M777 
crews. 

Upon completion of STX week, the 
firing platoons were placed under 
the tactical control of the maneuver 
task forces for the duration of the 
MRE. They entered the MRE in a 
much better position to integrate with 
and support maneuver operations 
in a COIN environment. Battalion 
and battery leaders entered the 
MRE confident they had gotten the 
most training value possible from 
their limited time, and perhaps not 
perfect, their platoons were certainly 
proficient in delivering Fires. The 
flexibility of FA battalion missions 
and task organization in support 
of OEF has spawned even more 


flexible approach to exercise and 
training design. As a result, each 
MRE involves early coordination 
with the rotational unit chain of 
command and event tailoring to fully 
meet pre-deployment requirements 
and prepare units for success. 
This article represents one such 
example to maximize the training 
value for an FA battalion fielding 
and training on new equipment in 
preparation for an OEF fires mission. 


Had early communication not been 
established between the battalion 
and the O/C-T team, these events 
may not have been so successful. 
The team would have designed 
and resourced FA STX in a vacuum, 
with no previous visibility of unit 
strengths and weaknesses, and not 
as well-nested with the battalion 
commander's training objectives 
and key tasks. Fortunately, the 
mutual efforts of 1-77 FA and the 
Vampire Team resulted in a very 
productive exercise, which yielded 
great improvement at the most 
important level - the platoon. 


Major Corey Landry's first assignment was with 
2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment, Fort Polk, La., 


where he served as a fire support officer, fire 
direction officer, battery executive officer, and 
battery commander for 2nd Howitzer Battery 
(Ml98) during Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) 
I. He served as a basic fire support instructor 
for the Field Artillery Officer Basic Course and 
Basic Officer Leadership Course III at Fort Sill, 
Okla., from 2005-2006. He then commanded 
Bravo Battery, 2nd Battalion, 4th Field Artillery 
Regiment, 214th Fires Brigade, deploying to 
OIF from NOV 07 - FEB 09. He was then 
reassigned to the Joint Multinational Readiness 
Center, Hohenfels, 
Germ-any, where 
he served as 
battalion/task force 
fire support, firing 
battery, and a field 
artillery battalion 
operations observ¬ 
er/controller-trainer 
(O/C-T). He is 
currently attending 
Intermediate Level 
Education at Fort 
Leavenworth, Kan. 


Captain Jon B. 
Fausnaugh’s first 
assignment was to 
1st Battalion, 77th 
Field Artillery, Fort 
Sill, Okla., where 
he served as a 
support platoon 
leader and Multiple 
Launch Rocket 
System firing 
platoon leader. 
He later joined 1st Battalion, 11th Armored 
Cavalry Regiment, where he served as a 
fire support officer in OIF from February 
2005 through January 2006. Following the 
Field Artillery Captains Career Course, 
Fausnaugh was assigned as the brigade 
S3 for 5th Battalion, 2nd Infantry Division 
(Stryker Brigade Combat Team) during 
the first nine months of its generation. 
He went on to serve as the Brigade Assistant 
S3 until he took command of Bravo Battery, 
3rd Battalion, 17th Field Artillery Regiment 
in December 2008. Fausnaugh deployed 
with Bravo Battery to Kandahar province, 
Afghanistan from July 2009 through June 
2010. He is now stationed at the Joint 
Multinational Readiness Center, Hohenfels, 
Germany, where he serves as a battalion 
operations observer/control trainer. 


Units learned to emplace and 
march order the D30, conducted 
indirect and direct fire missions, 
and laid the platoon with the 
6000 mil aiming circle. FDCs 
learned to compute manual 
firing solutions for the D30 
manually and how to operate the 
Afghan FieldArtillery Computer. 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


63 






Electronic Warfare: 

The newest military career field choice 

Compiled by Shirley Dismuke from articles by: 

Marie Berberea (The Cannoneer), SGT Justin A Naylor (2nd BCT, 1st Cav Div), Adrienne 
Anderson (The Bayonet), and SGT Brandon Bednarek (4th BCT, 1st Armored Div) 



Students sit inside a secure classroom Jan. 21,2011, in the Electronic Warfare Specialist Course, as they learn how to integrate, coordinate, execute and 
assess electronic warfare capabilities with ground operations across the full spectrum of joint military operations. There are also courses offered for officers 
and warrant officers at Fort Sill, Okla. as the Army establishes electronic warfare as a career field. (Photo courtesy of u.s. Army) 


If you were to ask 20 people on 'Main Street, USA/ what 
the acronym EW stands for, you are likely to get about 20 
different answers. Some people would say Entertainment 
Weekly. People with a medical background might say 
the emergency ward. Environmentalist might say extinct 
in the wild. And some Soldiers might say EW stands for 
early warning. Technically, all of them are absolutely 
correct. 

The Army is working diligently to change this, at 
least for Soldiers. Electronic warfare, has been a 'buzz 
word' since GEN Peter Charelli, Army vice chief of staff. 


recognized the need for EW capability in Iraq. In 2006, 
he placed Navy electronic warfare officers with ground 
combat units to manage the complicated electromagnetic 
spectrum. 

Why has the electromagnetic spectrum become so 
important during the past five to six years? Even if 
they can't tell you what the electromagnetic spectrum 
is, just about anyone who has been deployed knows it 
has everything to do with IEDs, or improvised explosive 
devices. What the average person might not realize is. 


64 January - February 2012 • Fires 











electronic warfare has played a significant role in military 
operations since WWII, where radar and jamming 
equipment significantly contributed to the success of 
an Allied victory. 

Prior to Operation Overlord at Normandy in 1944, a 
Royal Air Force squadron 
deceived the German army 
and convinced them that a 
second fleet of Allied ships 
was approaching another 
French coastline, according 
to the historyofwar.org 
website. 

Armed with specialized 
jamming equipment, 
the squadron's planes 
mimicked the radar 
signatures of warships 
by flying 'low and slow' 
across the English Channel. 

It was a deception tactic used to make the Germans think 
the fleet was coming from a different direction. 

The website also explains how the use of RADAR 
{radio detection and ranging (yes, it was originally an 
acronym; although, it has become a commonly used 
word)} dramatically impacted the outcome of the war. 


Once the military began using radar on U.S. bombers 
and torpedo bombers, the tide began to turn in favor of 
the U.S. and our allies. The newly incorporated radar 
systems allowed U.S. planes to successfully conduct 
night missions against a powerful Japanese fleet, which 

controlled the Pacific for 
most of the war. 

Although radar was 
the first significant use 
of electronic warfare, it 
has become a cornerstone 
in today's military 
operations. Training 
the modern Soldier on 
something as intangible 
as the electromagnetic 
spectrum can be a daunting 
task, one which the Fires 
Center of Excellence 
at Fort Sill, Okla., has 

enthusiastically embraced. 

MAJ Gregory Griffin, 1st Armored Division 
Headquarters, formerly an infantry officer, attended 
the Electronic Warfare Officer's Qualification Course at 
Fort Sill, after the Army's decision to establish Electronic 
Warfare, 29-series, as a career field. 


Electronic warfare has played 
a significant role in military 
operations since WWII , where 
radar and jamming equipment 
significantly contributed to the 
success of an Allied victory. 


This cell phone was rigged as a detonator for an improvised explosive device (I ED). The detonator was recovered undamaged after having been successfully 
jammed by electronic warfare personnel using Counter Radio-Controlled IED Electronic Warfare equipment. (Photo courtesy of u.s. Army) 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • The 21st Century Soldier 


65 






"If you're listening to a radio, if you're talking on 
a cell phone, if you're using a GPS, you're tied to the 
electromagnetic spectrum," said Griffin. "It's a very 
functional part of the battlefield. Everyone uses it. 
Everyone relies on it - adversaries as well as friendlies." 

Bill Sprayberry, Northrop Grumman program 
manager, explained the electromagnetic spectrum in 
laymen terms. "Imagine a helicopter is flying along 
and suddenly an F-16 flies by doing Mach 1.2 about 100 
yards away from it. The 
helicopter is going to fall 
out of the sky because those 
two can't use the same air 
space - one is going to take 
over the other. Inside the 
electromagnetic spectrum, 
it's the same thing." 

Because two pieces of 
equipment cannot 'occupy 
the same space' within the spectrum, EW has become 
a critical tool in combating remotely controlled IEDs 
in theater; however, blocking detonation signals is just 
a small piece of what the new 29-series officers and 
Soldiers learn. There are three subdivisions of electronic 
warfare: electronic support, electronic protect, and 
electronic attack. 

Electronic support involves searching, locating 
and intercepting radiated electromagnetic energy for 
the purpose of finding immediate threat recognition, 
targeting, planning and conducting future operations. 

Electronic protect prevents personnel, facilities 
or equipment from any negative effects of the 
electromagnetic spectrum that can degrade, neutralize 
or destroy friendly combat capability. 

Electronic attack uses the electromagnetic spectrum 
to attack the enemy. Jamming is part of electronic 
attack and occurs when a stronger signal overrides 
another signal - for example, preventing a cell phone 
signal from detonating a radio-controlled improvised 
explosive device. 

Fort Benning, Ga., has incorporated electronic warfare 
into its training regimen as part of the Maneuver Center 
of Excellence Fires Cell. Although all of the EW courses 
are taught at Fort Sill, the goal of the Combined Arms 
Center's EW Proponent Office, at Fort Leavenworth, 
Kan., is to integrate teaching electronic warfare into 
military education at all levels and for all Soldiers. 

Lou West, the electronic warfare analyst and instructor 
at Fort Benning says, "My role is to ensure that Soldiers 
and the maneuver side of the house know how to properly 
utilize EW in planning and operations." West served as 
an electronic warfare officer with the Tennessee National 
Guard's 278th Armored Cavalry Regiment during 
Operation Iraqi Freedom. After the unit demobilized, 
he was hired as a contractor by FSCX, Inc., and attended 
FA29 at Fort Sill before coming to Fort Benning in March 
2011. 

West provides EW training to Soldiers and units at 


Fort Benning and the training is currently integrated 
into the Armor and Infantry Basic Officer Leader Course, 
Maneuver Captains Career Course and Maneuver Pre- 
Command Course. 

"In combat, electronic warfare is used to deny the 
enemy an advantage in the electromagnetic spectrum," 
West said. It is used "to support military operations 
involving various levels of detection, denial, deception, 
disruption, degradation, protection and destruction." 

The big question for 
future electronic warfare 
officers is how to get all 
of the systems integrated 
without unintentionally 
destroying someone else's 
capability. The course 
instructors at Fort Sill 
likened the EW integrator's 
role to that of a field 
artillery fire support coordinator who draws together 
fire, such as cannons, rockets, mortars, close air support 
and Naval gunfire. Besides focusing onhow radio waves 
flow, EW students learn how to fight as a piece of the 
puzzle. Since no battle is fought by the Army alone, the 
Soldiers learn the capabilities of the other services and 
how to use them as well. 

"It's easy to get people to walk in a formation. They 
can see each other. But to coordinate something that no 
one can see, feel, touch or taste is more difficult, so we 
try to make them respect the threat that comes with not 
properly coordinating," said Jeffery Cassidy, Electronic 
Warfare Specialist Course instructor at Fort Sill. "These 
Solders are on the staff to coordinate, integrate and 
synchronize all these systems from the Army, Navy, 
Air Force and Marines and give them to the command 
as an asset." 

The different classes at Fort Sill are synchronized so 
whether Soldiers are enlisted, officers or warrant officers, 
they will have the same capability downrange only 
working on different parts of the operation. The officer 
course focuses on strategy while the enlisted training 
focuses on tactical to operational levels; the warrant 
officers bridge the gap between the two. 

The limits of modern technology are constantly being 
tested. As that happens, the Army's electronic warfare 
program will adapt and evolve. Fort Sill is currently 
working on developing senior leader electronic warfare 
courses for the future in an effort to sustain a field that 
is vital to today's operation. 

For more information on the Army's newest military 
occupational skill, 29E, go to Armyreenlistment.com. 


Editor's Note: The information in this article is 
taken from articles written by Marie Berberea (The 
Cannoneer, Fort Sill, Okla.), SGT Justin A Naylor (2nd 
BCT, 1st Cav Div), Adrienne Anderson (The Bayonet, 
Fort Benning, Ga.), and SPC Brandon Bednarek (4th 
BCT, 1st Armored Div) 


My role is to ensure that Soldiers 
and the maneuver side of the house 
know how to properly utilize 
EW in planning and operations. 


66 January - February 2012 • Fires 






Fires Center 
of Excellence 

social media 
portals 


Commanding General's Blog: 

Facebook: 

Fires Center of Excellence US Army ADA 
School 

US Army Field Artillery School 
Fires Bulletin 
Twitter: 

Fires Center of Excellence 
US Army ADA School 

Army Field Artillery School 
YouTube: 

Fires Center of Excellence 
Flickr: 

Fort Sill Cannoneer 
US Army Field Artillery School 





http://usacacblogs.army.mil/firescenterofexcellence/ 


http://www.facebook.com/FiresCenterofExcellence 


http://www.facebook.com/AirDefenseArtillerySchool 


http://www.facebook.com/fieldartilleryredleglive 


http://www.facebook.com/FiresBulletin 


https://twitter.eom/#I/FCoE_TeamSill 
http://twitter.com/adacmdt 
https://twitter. com/#! /U SAFAS 

http://www.youtube.com/user/usarmyfirescenter 


http://www.flickr.com/photos/fortsillcannoneer/ 


http://www.flickr.com/photos/redleglive/ 




Fires 

(USPS 309-010) 

P.O. Box 33311 

Fort Sill, OK 73503-0311 



Periodicals Postage 

PAID 

Shepherdsville, KY 



Marine 2nd Lt. Allan Boehm, Field Artillery Basic Officer Leaders Course B student, wipes down the barrel of an M777A2 155 mm howitzer 
June 22 , 2011, during the Redleg War on a West range, Fort Sill, Okla. One-hundred and fifteen Soldiers, Marines and international 
students in Class No. 3-11 completed the five-day capstone exercise, using all the skills they learned in the 18.5-week course for new FA 
officers. (Photo courtesy of U.S. Army) 


PIN 102225-000 




