The 

National 




Exchange 


Volume 2 Number 1 


FORWARD 100! 


September 1983 


Here Comes Atari Logo 

by 

Shoneen Gervich 

Atari Logo is on the way! Boasting four 
turtles, floating point arithmetic, and a 
full array of list processing capabilities, 
it has the potential to become one of the 
most popular versions of Logo. Developed by 
LCSI to take advantage of the Unique 
capabilities of the Atari computers, it 
features most of the ’’usual" Logo primitives 
plus some exciting new ones which give the 
Logo juggling act a completely different 
slant. 

THUNDERING TURTLES 

A herd of four turtles is available to 
carry out both individual and collective 
commands. That is, each turtle can move 
independently or in concert with the others, 
responding to primitives such as TELL, ASI, 
EACH, and WHO. 

Moreover, these turtles actually look 
like turtles instead of the sometimes con¬ 
fusing triangles. Each has a round body with 
four legs and a tail. A turtle head points 
clearly in the direction of the heading. 

TURTLE CONTROLS 

Each turtle has three pens, each of 
which can draw in any of 128 different 
colors. Moreover, each of these colors is 
available for the background, and for the 
colors of the turtles themselves. The Atari 
palette will give your students color 
possibilities which are practically 
unlimited. 

The drawing speeds of the turtles can 
be controlled by the primitive SETSP and a 
number from 0 to 199. Thus, a turtle which 
has been told SETSP 5 will draw rather 
slowly, a feature perhaps useful with begin¬ 
ners, while one with SETSP 150 will draw 


much faster. Also, a line drawn at high 
speed will be less 6olid than one drawn 
slowly, giving an added texture capability. 

The Atari Logo turtles can change 
shape, making it possible to create animated 
sequences. Up to 15 user-defined shapes may 
be in memory at any one time. Cars, planes, 
human figures, animals, and the like can 
come to life on the screen very easily by 
rapidly changing turtles from one shape to 
another, in a manner similar to that often 
done with the TI LOGO Sprites. 

Possibly the most unique feature of 
Atari Logo is its collision detection. 
Beings called, "WHEN Demons" check to see 
when specified turtles collide or when they 
cross lines. Predetermined lists of commands 
are then carried out. For example, if Turtle 
1 Bnd Turtle 3 collide, they could change 
^hape or rebound or almost anything else 
imaginable. 

The TOOT primitive will create sounds 
which can be played through the speaker of 
the television. Frequency, duration, and 
volume may be specified for two voices, 
making it possible to compose music, create 
special effects, and the like. 

With Atari Logo, the heart-felt desire 
of almost every child to create a video game 
is now within reach. 

NUTS AND BOLTS 


Atari Logo comes in a plug-in 16K ROM 
cartridge which will fit the 400, 800, and 
1200 models and their successors. When used 
with a 48K machine, such as the 800, Atari 
Logo has about one thousand more nodes of 
memory available in the workspace than any 
of the Apple versions. 

Atari Logo comes with a reference card, 
and two books, "Introduction to Progr ammi ng 
Through Turtle Graphics" and "Atari Logo 
Reference Manual." 




From The Editor 


A disk drive is recommended, in order 
to teke full advantage of the language. 
Storage and retrieval tasks are 
straightforward. 

The cost of an Atari Logo system is 
quite low. The language, a disk drive, and 
64K computer can be put together for under 
$900. By using a tape cassette storage 
system and the 16K computer, you can drive 
the price below $400. This is about the 
lowest price you will find for a full Logo 
implementation. 

EFFECTS 

You may expect Atari Logo to have a 
significant effect on both teachers and 
students, and on the teaching of Logo. 

The wealth of options available with 
Atari Logo will stimulate those already 
familiar with other versions of the 
language, and will serve as a beckoning 
enticement to those contemplating entering 
the Logo microworlds for the first time. 

The multiple turtle capability makes 
possible new ways of thinking about solving 
problems. Turtle control becomes more 
complex, more challenging. Creativity and 
imagination become even more important. 

Atari has made Logo affordable, power¬ 
ful, and irresistible. It is up to us and 
our students to make the most of it. 

(For more information, write: Atari 
Logo, P0 Box 16525, Denver CO 80216 — Ed.) 


Shoneen Gervich teaches children's classes 
in PILOT, Logo, and (only if she has to) 
BASIC, through various community agencies in 
the South Bay area of San Francisco. 


NLX Back Issues Available 

A limited number of sets of Volume 1 of 
The National Logo Exchange newsletter are 
available, covering the period from Septem¬ 
ber 1982 through May 1983. Many beginning 
Logo teachers have found this set to be a 
helpful resource for ideas and activities, 
as well as for general Logo information. To 
order your set, send $25 to NLX Volume 1, PO 
Box 5341, Charlottesville VA 22905. 


September always has a special zing to 
it, doesn't it? There is something 
invigorating about hallways alive with young 
people once more. Facing a class full of new 
friends and new challenges is stimulating. 
And, of course, having Logo in your lesson 
plans for the coming year is exciting! 

This school year is going to be one of 
incredible growth for Logo. Thousands of 
teachers everywhere are starting to use it 
in their classrooms. More and more versions 
are being released for more and more 
computers. Several Logo books are being 
published, and more are on the way. Nearly 
every educational computing magazine now has 
a Logo section. 

This growth has excited many people: 
teachers, parents, administrators, profes¬ 
sors, software developers, publishers. And 
the children are the most excited of all! 

With you, we welcome this growth. Our 
motto FORWARD 100! was chosen to reflect 
this attitude. FORWARD is the direction of 
progress, improvement, growth. 100Z of our 
newsletter supports you, the Logo teachers. 
The exclamation mark represents the excite¬ 
ment Logo brings to learning. By working 
together and sharing Logo ideas, we ran 
multiply this growth to proportions that 
cannot be imagined. Your students are the 
direct beneficiaries of this growth! 

To all our earlier subscribers, we send 
a hearty WELCOME BACK! We appreciated 
meeting you last year, apd look forward to 
working with you again this school year. To 
our many new subscribers, we extend a 
special HELLO! We hope that this year will 
be one of healthy challenges and profes¬ 
sional growth for all of us. 

As a personal note, I'd like to add 
that, after 13 years of marriage, my wife, 
Posy, and I have been blessed with a child! 

We are pleased that our son, Kyser, will be 
able to grow up with Logo, and with Logo 
teachers such as you! 


FORWARD 100! 


-- 



