
O il drilling rigs can pose hazards to human life, 
property and the environment if they are not 
properly monitored for possible blowouts. An oil 
well blowout results from uncontrolled subsurface flows 
known as “kicks/ which are caused by oil, gas or water 
entering the wellbore and traveling up the well casing to 
the surface. 

A petroleum industry goal is developing a method for 
predicting a blowout and advising oil rig crews how to 
correct such a situation. The Drilling Engineering 
Association (DBA), a cooperative of 1 1 oil/gas service 
companies, is funding a project conducted by Tracer 
Applied Sciences. Austin, Texas for development or a Well 
Site Advisor (WSA). a PC-based expert system for Lraining 
oil rig personnel in taking well control actions. With the 
help of a NASA computer program called CLIPS. Baker 
Hughes INTEQ. Houston, Texas is developing a Unix-based 
version of the WSA for use at the rigsite. 


Originally developed by Johnson Space Center. 

CLIPS is a software shell for developing expert systems, 
ft is designed to permit research, development and deliv- 
ery of artificial intelligence on conventional computers. A 
collection of rules is set up and. as facts become known, 
these rules are applied. The versatility and power of 
CUPS has made it a valuable research tool for applica- 
tions such as INTEQ's WSA, which provides the capability 
to accurately process, predict and interpret well data in a 
real time mode. 

By means of electronic sensors, a kick is tracked as 
it moves upward in the drilling system. Using mathemati- 
cal data from the sensors and rules set up by industry 
experts as part of the DEA project, the embedded CLIPS 
portion of the WSA attempts to predict whether the kick 
has the strength to reach the surface and to diagnose the 
probable cause of the problem when actual conditions do 
not match predictions. 



The accumulated well site data 
is used by CLIPS to provide a list of 
probable causes. Then CLIPS starts a 
diagnostic session of questions and 
answers to develop more refined cal- 
culations of possible situations. The 
WSA displays the results coupled with 
the rules of logic CLIPS used to obtain 
them; a! lefl. a drill byte operator is 
reviewing the results to decide which 
scenarios best matches a current 
situation, 

CLIPS was provided to INTEQ by 
COSMIC®, NASA's Computer Software 
Management and Information Center 
(see page 1 28), Located at the 
University of Georgia (Athens). 
COSMIC routinely makes available to 
industrial and other clients govern- 
ment de ve !o p ed co m p u te r p rog ra m s 
that have secondary utility. 


"COSMIC is a registered trademark of the 
National Aeronautics anil Space Administration 


1 


70 





