Next-Generation Telemetry Workstation 



Global Positioning 
System (GPS) 
Metric Tracking 


A next-generation telemetry workstation has been developed to replace the one currently 
used to test and control Range Safety systems. Improving upon the performance of the 
original system, the new telemetry workstation uses dual-channel telemetry boards for 
better synchronization of the two uplink telemetry streams. The new workstation also 
includes an Interrange Instrumentation Group/Global Positioning System (IRIG/GPS) time code 
receiver board for independent, local time stamping of return-link data. The next-generation system 
will also record and play back return-link data for postlaunch analysis. 


The telemetry workstation software is based on C++ and was designed with the Microsoft Visual 
Studio 2005 development environment. Display screens were designed with National Instruments 
Lab VIEW professional graphics development tools. The figures show examples of typical Lab VIEW 
display screens. The C++ software sends display data to the Lab VIEW software and receives button 
control commands from the Lab VIEW software, using a Transmission Control Protocol/Internet 
Protocol (TCP/IP) communication scheme. The Lab VIEW software does not control any hardware; 
rather it functions as a slaved smart graphical user interface. 

The workstation was designed to support various ongoing NASA and Air Force projects. The 
workstation can send and receive RS-422 telemetry data at a rate of up to 10 Mb/s over two uplink 
channels and two downlink channels simultaneously. When configured in record and playback 
mode, the workstation can record or play back up to four channels simultaneously. It can work 
with clocked or unclocked data using almost any return-to-zero (RZ) or non-return-to-zero (NRZ) 
data format. The workstation implements a clock recovery algorithm for unclocked data streams. 

It performs a software data decommutation operation on the incoming telemetry streams, and the 
data is processed for display and archiving according to the requirements of the particular telemetry 
system being supported. 

The workstation can encrypt forward-link data, using triple Data Encryption Standard (DES) 
techniques, as well as encode and decode Reed Solomon error correction codes for forward- and 
return-link data and perform cyclical redundancy checks on return-link data. 


The next phase in the development is to design and conduct comprehensive test procedures for 
the telemetry workstation. The tests will verify operation of the workstation hardware and the user 
interface software. Failure modes will be simulated, and the workstations ability to detect, correct, 
and recover will be studied. Simulation software will need to be developed, and further software 
changes and enhancements will probably be necessary, based on the results of these tests. A final 
certification test will be developed and conducted to validate the workstation. 

Contacts: Emilio Valencia <J.Emilio.Valencia@nasa.gov> , NASA-KSC, (321) 861-9074; and Christopher S. Forney 
< Christopher.S.Forney@nasa.gov >, NASA-KSC, (321) 867-6672 

Participating Organization: ASRC Aerospace (Steven J. Klinko and Jesus A. Dominguez) 


64 


Range Technologies 





Telemetry workstation return-link status display. 



Telemetry workstation forward-link status display. 


KSC Technology Development and Application 2006-2007 


65 





