Reports on Work 
in Support of 
NA SA 's Tracking and 
Communication Division 


Terry Feagin 
Anthony Lekkos 

12/31/91 

N92-26 -j8 i 


Unci as 
0096747 

Cooperative Agreement NCC 9-16 
Research Activity No. AI.01 : 

Communications & Tracking Expert Systems for the Space Station 

NASA Johnson Space Center 
Engineering Directorate 
Tracking and Communications Division 


( N A S A- C R - 1 90 38 6) REPORT 6 ON WORK IN SUPPORT 
u c NASA'S TRACKING AND COMMUNICATION 
DIVISION Interim Report, 1 Oct. - 31 Pec. 

10 91 (Research Inst, for Computing and 
Information Systems) 1R p G3/32 



Research Institute for Computing and Information Systems 

University of Houston-Clear Lake 


INTERIM REPORT 




The RICIS Concept 


The University of Houston-Clear Lake established the Research Institute for 
Computing and Information Systems (RICIS) in 1986 to encourage the NASA 
Johnson Space Center (JSC) and local industry to actively support research 
in the computing and information sciences. As part of this endeavor, UHCL 
proposed a partnership with JSC to jointly define and manage an integrated 
program of research in advanced data processing technology needed for JSC’s 
main missions, including administrative, engineering and science responsi- 
bilities. JSC agreed and entered into a continuing cooperative agreement 
with UHCL beginning in May 1986, to jointly plan and execute such research 
through RICIS. Additionally, under Cooperative Agreement NCC 9-16, 
computing and educational facilities are shared by the two institutions to 
conduct the research. 


The UHCL/RICIS mission is to conduct, coordinate, and disseminate research 
and professional level education in computing and information systems to 
serve the needs of the government, industry, community and academia. 
RICIS combines resources of UHCL and its gateway affiliates to research and 
develop materials, prototypes and publications on topics of mutual interest 
to its sponsors and researchers. Within UHCL, the mission is being 
implemented through interdisciplinary involvement of faculty and students 
from each of the four schools: Business and Public Administration, Educa- 
tion, Human Sciences and Humanities, and Natural and Applied Sciences. 
RICIS also collaborates with industry in a companion program. This program 
Is focused on serving the research and advanced development needs of 
industry. 

Moreover, UHCL established relationships with other universities and re- 
search organizations, having common research interests, to provide addi- 
tional sources of expertise to conduct needed research. For example, UHCL 
has entered into a special partnership with Texas A&M University to help 
oversee RICIS research anl education programs, while other research 
organizations are involved via the “gateway" concept 

A major role of RICIS then is to find the best match of sponsors, researchers 
and research objectives to advance knowledge in the computing and informa- 
tion sciences. RICIS, working jointly with its sponsors, advises on research 
needs, recommends principals for conducting the research, provides tech- 
nical and administrative support to coordinate the research and integrates 
technical results into the goals of UHCL, NASA/JSC and industry. 


Reports on Work 
in Support of 
NA SA 's Tracking and 
Communication Division 




RICIS Preface 


This research was conducted under auspices of the Research Institute for 
Computing and Information Systems by Dr. Terry Feagin and Dr. Anthony A. 
Lekkos of the University of Houston - Clear Lake. Dr. T. F. Leibfried served as 
RICIS research coordinator. 

Funding was provided by the Tracking and Communications Division, 
Engineering Directorate, NASA/JSC through Cooperative Agreement NCC 9-16 
between the NASA Johnson Space Center and the University of Houston-Clear Lake. 
The NASA research coordinator for this activity was Oron L. Schmidt, of the 
Tracking and Communications Division, Engineering Directorate, NASA/JSC. 

The views and conclusions contained in this report are those of the authors 
and should not be interpreted as representative of the official policies, either express 
or implied, of UHCL, RICIS, NASA or the United States Government. 




Report on Work in Support of NASA's 
Tracking and Communication Division 

by T. Feagin 


This is a report on the research conducted during the period October 1, 1991 
through December 31, 1991. The research can be divided into primarily two 
areas: 

1. Generalization of the FIBS (Fault Isolation using Bit Strings) technique to 
permit fuzzy information to be used to isolate faults in the tracking and 
communications systems of the Space Station, and 

2. A study of the activity that should occur in the on-board systems in order to 
attempt to recover from failures that are external to the Space Station. 

The research on the first topic has advanced to the point where an Ada computer 
program has been written that accepts a set of sensor readings (or various levels 
of symptoms that may be present) and produces a resulting diagnosis. A level of 
confidence in this diagnosis is also provided. A presentation was made to the 
Tracking and Communication Division and the slides are attached. 

The research on the second topic is still in an early stage. At this point, we have 
studied the so-called Scenario #2, in which communication with the ground has 
been lost and all indications are that the problem is external to the Space 
Station. So far we have established that: 

a) there is a time, to, at which the loss of communications happened, 

b) there is another time, tl, at which the Space Station systems are 

able to detect the loss of communications. 



c) there is another time, t2, at which the ground knows that the Space 

Station systems should have detected the loss of 
communica tions, 

d) usually the ground knows about the loss of communications first, 

e) if there is a shuttle team on-board, they may also confirm the loss, 

f) there would be a short-term plan and a long-term plan, 

g) the long-term plan would begin after a few orbits of trying to re- 

establish communications, 

h) the short-term plan would involve trying HDR (high-data-rate) or 

LDR (low-data-rate) transmissions with various subsystems 
and antennae, 

i) the long-term plan would probably involve the LDR and the omni 

antenna, 

j) there should be a solid, low-power, receive-only mode for S-band, 

similar to what JPL does for deep space missions, 

k) the cycle of attempted operations would be preset so that both the 

ground and on-board systems would know what the other 
system was trying in order to re-establish communications. 


At this point, it appears that other scenarios (such as those that would postulate 
problems in the on-board systems) will be developed, at which time the use of 
techniques such as fuzzy FIBS would become more useful. 

Hopefully, funding for this research will eventually be found and this work can 
be continued (either by me or someone else). Thanks to everyone who supported 
this work and especially to Oron Schmidt at NASA. 



Terry Feagin, Senior Investigator 



First Element of Fuzziness — 


Consider the Fuzzy Set of 
Symptoms Observed 


approach 


new fuzzy set approach 


Symptoms 
Not Observed 


Symptoms 
Not Observed 



old crisp set 


Symptom* 
Observed J 


In classical set theory, the degree of membership 
is either 0 (is not a member) or 1 (is a member). 

In fuzzy set theory, it is possible to have fractional 
membership (between 0 and 1). 

Suppose we have a sensor reading that can range 
between 0 and 15 volts. If the reading is below 5, 
everything is okay. If the reading is above 10 volts, 
we say that the sensor reading is out-of-range. Tf the 
reading is between 5 and 10 volts, we are not sure. 

Fuzzy set theory allows us to consider directly the 
issue of whether or not we have a symptom. We 
simply assign a value between 0 and 1 for those 
readings between 5 and 10 volts. 



The Degree of a Symptom 


So, we introduce the concept of the degree d 
of a symptom. For previous example, then: 



we could use the function: 

d = 0 , for 0 < v < 5 

d = (v-5)/5, for 5 < v < 10 

d = 1 , for 10 < v < 15 

or some similar continuous function. 

d = 0 means symptom is definitely not present 

d = 1 means symptom is definitely present 




Example Fault Scenario 


Symptoms 4 and 2 are observed. So, obviously a fault 
is detected, and we begin to try to diagnose the problem. 


We obtain, therefore, the bitwise conjunction of S 4 and S 2 
and (not S^ ) and (not S 3 ) to obtain the result bitstring R: 

old strings new strings 

-o 4 -( 11011 ) ► (d4 ^ ua 4 d 4 d 4 ) 

» ld 2 d 2 d 2 i - d2 i-d,} 

~ 5 T ~ (Qiiii) ► pum, d, d, d,} 

new result ~ ^ 3 - t J 1 1 Od-j ► { d 3 d 3 d 3 l-d 3 d 3 } 
■ R - ( d 4 d 2 (l-dj) d 3 / d4d 2 djd 3 / (l-d 4 )d 2 did 3/ cp (l-d 2 )d]d 3 ) 


old result was 


R = ( 0 1 0 0 0) 


which is to be interpreted to indicate that the problem is a 
dead battery. 




The Degree of the 
Problem- Symptom Relationship 


The second element of fuzziness that we introduce 
is in the relationship between a problem (or disorder) 
and its possible resulting symptoms (or manifestations). 

For symptom i and problem k, the relationship is 
measured by the variable S ^ which will take on 
values between 0 and 1 according to the strength 
of the causal relationship between the problem and 
the symptom. If there is a very strong relationship 
(i.e., if problem k almost always causes symptom i), 
then a S ^ is assigned a value near 1. If there is a 
very weak relationship (i.e., if problem k almost 
never can be seen as a cause for symptom i), then 
a value near zero is assigned. 

If there is no known relationship, then S ^ is set to zero. 

Note: One of the difficulties posed by the fuzzy set 
approach to the fault isolation problem is obtaining 
reasonable values for the S ^ parameters. Also, 
for large systems, the storage requirements may be 
excessive (unless shortcuts are used). 



The Warm Fuzzies 


Now the question becomes how to combine the 
two fuzzy values dj (the degree to which symptom i 
is observed at some point in time) and Sik (the 
degree to which the i-th symptom can be related to 
the k-th problem) and what to do with the result. 


In order to determine the extent to which the k-th 
problem might be responsible, we form the product 

Rk= T[n-s ik -d i+ 2 s^di) 

These values are then sorted so the result is a list of 
possible single-point failures that could cause the 
observed symptoms in order of "likelihood.” 



Some sample problems and their symptoms 


For problem number 141 KP_AA_A , the symptoms are: 

14 9 KP_ALP H A_GMC_A 
172 KP_BETA_GMC_A 
145 KP_AA_HEATER_A 
152 KP_AL_ANT_ANGA 
174 KP BE ANT ANGA 


For problem number 75 KN2_BSPT , the symptoms are: 

111 KN2_HFM_BSPT2_IL 
7 9 KN2_BSPT_HFM2_OL 
78 KN2_BSPTXMDM2_IL 
76 KN2_BSPTBSPV2_OL 
82 KN2 BSPVBSPT2 IL 


For problem number 81 KN2_BSPV , the symptoms are: 

112 KN2_HFM_BSPV2_IL 

82 KN2_BSPVBSPT2_IL 

83 KN2 BSPV HFM2 OL 



■Enter number of symptoms observed: 5 

Enter symptom observed: 149 

Enter degree of presence : 1.0 

Enter symptom observed: 172 

Enter degree of presence: 1.0 

Enter symptom observed: 145 

Enter degree of presence: 1.0 

Enter symptom observed: 152 

Enter degree of presence: 1.0 

Enter symptom observed: 174 

Enter degree of presence: 1.0 

Number of symptoms observed is 5 

Diagnosis starting... 

SUSPECT1 

141 is the physical problem or cause to extent 8.1451E-01 
1 

KP AA A 


Enter number of symptoms observed: 5 

Enter symptom observed: 149 

Enter degree of presence: 0.8 

Enter symptom observed: 172 

Enter degree of presence: 0.7 

Enter symptom observed: 145 

Enter degree of presence: 0.9 

Enter symptom observed: 152 

Enter degree of presence: 0.8 

Enter symptom observed: 174 

Enter degree of presence: 0.8 

Number of symptoms observed is 5 

Diagnosis starting. . . 

SUSPECT1 

141 is the physical problem or cause to extent 3.1044E-01 
1 

KP AA A 


Enter number of symptoms observed: 4 
Enter symptom observed: 149 
Enter degree of presence: 0.7 
Enter symptom observed: 172 
Enter degree of presence: 0.6 
Enter symptom observed: 145 
Enter degree of presence: 0.9 
Enter symptom observed: 152 
Enter degree of presence: 0.8 
Number of symptoms observed is 4 

Diagnosis starting. . . 

SUSPECT1 

14] is the physical problem or cause to extent 1 . 54 4 6E-02 


KP AA A 


1 



. Enter. 'number of symptoms observed: 3 
'Enter symptom observed: 149 
Enter degree of presence: 0.99 
Enter symptom observed: 172 

Enter degree of presence: 0.99 
Enter symptom observed: 174 
Enter degree of presence: 0.99 
Number of symptoms observed is 3 

Diagnosis starting. . . 

SUSPECT1 

141 is the physical problem or cause to extent 4.1662E-02 
1 

KP_AA_A 

Enter number of symptoms observed: 1 
Enter symptom observed: 149 
Enter degree of presence: 0.999 
Number of symptoms observed is 1 

Diagnosis starting. . . 

SUSPECT1 

141 is the physical problem or cause to extent 1.1864E-04 
1 

KP AA A 


Fuzzy FIBS (version 5.8) is at your service ... 

Have you got any exciting jobs for me today ? 

DEBUG level is set to 1 

What is the desired threshold for faults ? 0.00001 
OK PIPELESS Version ..let's go... 

Enter number of symptoms observed: 8 
Enter symptom observed: 111 

Enter degree of presence: 0.9 
Enter symptom observed: 79 
Enter degree of presence: 0.9 
Enter symptom observed: 78 
Enter degree of presence: 0.9 
Enter symptom observed: 76 
Enter degree of presence: 0.9 
Enter symptom observed: 82 
Enter degree of presence: 0.99 
Enter symptom observed: 112 
Enter degree of presence: 0.9 
Enter symptom observed: 83 
Enter degree of presence: 0.99 
Enter symptom observed: 82 
Enter degree of presence: 0.99 
Number of symptoms observed is 8 

Diagnosis starting. . . 

SUSPECT 1 

75 is the physical problem or cause to extent 5.3473E-04 
81 is the physical problem or cause to extent 7.6151E-05 
2 

KN2 BSPT 
KN2 BSPV 



Report 

on 

Work in Support of NASA's 
Tracking & Communication Division 

Dr. Anthony A. Lekkos 
University of Houston, Clear Lake 


October 1 , to December 31 , 1991 




