LINKFINDER : AN EXPERT SYSTEM THAT CONSTRUCTS 
PHYLOGENIC TREES 


James Inglehart and Peter C. Nelson 

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (m/c 154) 
The University of Illinois at Chicago 

Chicago, Illinois 60680 e-mail: inglehar@uicbert.eecs.uic.edu 


Abstract. An expert system has been developed using CLIPS that automates the process of 
constructing DNA sequence-based phylogenies — trees or lineages that indicate evolutionary relation- 
ships. LinkFinder takes as input homologous DNA sequences from distinct individual organisms. It 
measures variations between the sequences, selects appropriate proportionality constants, and esti- 
mates (if possible) the time that has passed since each pair of organisms diverged from a common 
ancestor. It then designs and outputs a phylogenic map summarizing these results. 

LinkFinder can find genetic relationships between different species, and between individuals of the 
same species, including humans. It was designed to take advantage of the vast amount of sequence 
data being produced by the celebrated Genome Project, and should be of great value to evolution 
theorists who wish to utilize this data, but who have no formal training in molecular genetics. 

The mathematical basis of LinkFinder’s DNA sequence analysis is remarkably simple. Evolu- 
tionary theory holds that distinct organisms carrying a common gene inherited that gene from a 
common ancestor. Homologous genes vary from individual to individual and species to species, and 
the amount of variation is now believed to be directly proportional to the time that has passed since 
divergence from a common ancestor. The proportionality constant must be determined experimen- 
tally ; it varies considerably with the types of organisms and DNA molecules under study. Given an 
appropriate constant, and the variation between two DNA sequences, a simple linear equation gives 
the divergence time. 


INTRODUCTION 

Plants and animals have long been classified according to the similarities and differences 
in their form and structure. When the concept of evolution was first proposed, biologists 
naturally used these morphological features to establish phylogenies — evolutionary trees. 
Proposed lineages were modeled as paths (from root to leaf) through the tree, and closely 
related species were shown as parallel branches emanating from a common ancestor node. 

Constructing a tree based on morphology has always been highly subjective, more of 
an art than a science. Most classifications are based on anatomy, but microscopic species, 
such as bacteria, are more commonly distinguished by chemical analyses. Morphology is 
good for classifying evolutionary relationships at certain scales, but it indicates neither the 
large-scale structure of evolution nor the fine details. Mice are clearly much closer cousins 
to humans than bacteria, but the details of how we diverged from mice are obscure, despite 


199 



numerous anatomical similarities between mice and men. And bacteria seem so alien to 
us (despite some common features) that the details of how we diverged from them seem 
impossible to determine from morphology alone. 

Fortunately, sophisticated new methods of genetic analysis have arisen to challenge 
morphology as the prime determinant of family trees. We now understand that all life 
processes are ultimately controlled by DNA. This self-replicating molecule is found in every 
living thing, and it is the key to the structure and complexity of all life on earth. Because 
of recent technological advances, biologists and geneticists are now able to ascertain the 
atomic structure of an individual organism’s DNA molecules. Since the common ancestor 
of all life on earth is believed to have been a single, primal molecule of DNA, evolution can 
be viewed as simply the development of new forms of DNA through accidental mistakes in 
duplication. 

Because all DNA is constructed exactly the same way (only the specific base sequence 
differs from individual to individual), DNA analysis provides an objective basis for discern- 
ing evolutionary relationships. Closely related species should have closely similar DNA 
sequences. Distantly related species will have far more dissimilarities. But if all life is 
truly related (through some primal common ancestor) then even the most disparate life 
forms should share some similarities. All life shares the same chemical basis, so total DNA 
sequence divergence (to the point of zero resemblance between distantly related organisms) 
should not occur (Doolittle et al. 1986). 

Some phylogenic trees based on genetic analyses are radically different from traditional 
morphological trees, challenging our traditional views. For example, comparative studies 
of the Ursidae, or bear family, and Procyonidae, or raccoon family, indicate that the giant 
panda belongs in the bear family, whereas the red panda belongs in the raccoon family 
(O’Brien et al. 1985). Phylogenically, then, there is really no such thing as a “panda,” 
whereas bears and raccoons really exist. 

Similar results have been obtained in primate studies. Comparative analyses of the 
beta-globulin genes of humans and the great apes (the chimpanzee, gorilla, and orangutan) 
indicate that humans are more closely related to chimpanzees than chimpanzees are to the 
other great apes (Miyamoto et al. 1988). This contradicts the common notion (based on the 
morphological similarities of apes) that humans diverged from the common ancestor of the 
great apes. In fart, the semantic label “ape” has now lost its phylogenic connotation, since 
it makes more sense to lump humans and chimpanzees together than to group chimpanzees 
with the other great apes (Ueda et al. 1986). 

The most controversial result (cf. Latorre et al. 1986) has been the “Mother Eve hypoth- 
esis” of Rebecca Cann and her colleagues. Their studies of worldwide human mitochondrial 
DNA indicate that all humans alive today have a common ancestor, a woman, who lived 
in Africa roughly 200,000 yeaxs ago (Cann et al. 1987). Prior to this discovery, anthro- 
pologists generally assumed that the the most recent common human ancestor must have 
lived closer to one million yeaxs ago (Stoneking et al. 1986). 


The Genetic Code 

The genetic information in DNA is encoded within strings of nitrogenous bases. There are 


200 



four of these: adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), and thymine (T). A DNA sequence 
can be thought of as simply a long string of these four letters in some combination. 

A string of three bases codes for an amino acid ; there axe exactly twenty of these. 
Proteins are simply long strings of amino acids. Thus, for any protein, there is some 
corresponding base sequence that acts as a template for that protein ; this template is 
called a gene. Genes code for protein production, and chromosomes are simply long strings 
of genes. A genome is the entire gene set of a single organism. 

During reproduction, the genome is copied, to be passed on to future generations. 
Usually the copy is perfect, but sometimes an incorrect base is substituted. Or a gene may 
be damaged by something in its environment. If the mutation is a minor one (non-fatal) it 
will be copied and passed on to future generations. Over time, these inheritable mutations 
will lead to the development of new genotypes within a species, and ultimately to new 
species. 

Algorithmic Tree Construction 

These considerations have led to the development of phylogenic tree construction algo- 
rithms, which take as input DNA sequence data from living organisms. The input organ- 
isms are then “clustered” into larger related units on the basis of their genetic similarities. 
The more distantly related clusters are then iteratively clustered in turn, until a complete 
tree is formed. Each internal node on this tree represents a hypothetical ancestor form, a 
“missing link,” joining separate lineages. Leaf nodes represent the input organisms living 
today. The root node represents the common ancestor of all the leaves on the tree. 

Detailed family trees of certain organisms, such as pedigreed animals, are already 
known. These known trees can be used to test tree construction algorithms. Given genetic 
data from present-day forms, a good algorithm should reconstruct the known trees. Fruit 
flies axe good test cases, since they have been bred in the laboratory for decades. Some 
human genealogies extend more than 1,000 years. But no known trees go back far enough 
in time to link distinct species, such as humans and chimpanzees. 

Because known trees are so limited, tree construction algorithms axe usually tested on 
made-up data. An single ancestor DNA sequence is chosen at random, and descendent 
generations Eire iteratively created by random base substitutions (Tateno 1985). A good 
algorithm will correctly reconstruct the entire made-up tree from the DNA sequences of 
its final generation. 

In an accurate morphologically-based tree, the vertical height of lineages is made pro- 
portional to the passage of time. Divergence times axe deduced from accepted geological 
time scales by examining the fossil record. Ideally we would like trees constructed by al- 
gorithm to also show how long ago each pair of lineages diverged. But finding the correct 
time scale is difficult, and highly organism- dependent. Bacteria, for example, can mutate 
much faster than humans. Because of these difficulties, the vertical height of divergent 
lineages in trees constructed by algorithm is usually made proportional to the “genetic 
distance” between divergent pairs of organisms. This “distance” is the calculated (or es- 
timated) percentage by which the genomes of the two organisms diverge. When a tree 
is constructed from genetic data, some attempt is usually made to convert this “distance 


201 



scale” to a time scale. This conversion usually requires expert knowledge concerning the 
fossil record, the types of organisms under study, and the types of genetic data being used. 


LinkFinder 

LinkFinder automates the process of tree construction in two ways : 1) it automatically 
constructs a tree from genetic data, and 2) it converts (if possible) the distance scale of the 
initial tree to a time scale. The topology of the final tree is entirely determined by the input 
data and the tree construction algorithm. But to convert the tree from a distance scale to 
a time scale, LinkFinder requires an expert system. Our CLIPS-based system takes into 
account the specific nature of the input data in choosing a conversion, considering both 
the fossil record and known mutation rates before making a decision. 

The fossil record remains the primary source of authoritative evidence on the divergence 
times of major lineages, and LinkFinder’s knowledge base is mostly derived from the 
published literature on the fossil record. Its knowledge is thus limited to areas where 
evidence of divergence times has already been found. Since the fossil record is incomplete, 
there axe considerable gaps in the knowledge base, which hopefully will be filled in the 
future. Other techniques of estimating genetic divergence rates also exist (e.g., Nei and 
Tajima 1983, Ferris et al. 1983, and Stoneking et al. 1986), and some of these estimates 
are now being added to LinkFinder’s knowledge base. Our primary reason for developing 
LinkFinder was to take advantage of the explosion of new genetic data being produced by 
the Genome Project — the ongoing worldwide effort to map and sequence the entire human 
genome, as well as the entire genomes of several other organisms. We hope to continue 
developing LinkFinder as the Genome Project progresses, adding new information to its 
knowledge base as it becomes available. In its present form, LinkFinder is a powerful tool 
for tree estimation, but it will not be a true, general purpose tree constructor until more 
complete data is available on rates of divergence. 


HOW LINKFINDER WORKS 

LinkFinder constructs a phylogenic tree from input genetic data in two distinct stages : 

1. The topology of the tree is determined by the unweighted pair-group (UPG) method. 
At this stage, branch lengths in the tree axe proportional to the calculated percent 
difference between the clustered genotypes. 

2. A CLIPS-based expert system attempts to determine an explicit time scale for the 
tree. It considers known mutation rates and the fossil record (if any) of the organisms 
in the tree before making a decision. 


202 



Estimating Tree Topology 

There is as yet no known algorithmic method of tree construction which can reproduce 
known phylogenic trees with unfailing accuracy. Reconstructed trees are therefore phylo- 
genic estimates at best. 

The UPG method utilized by LinkFinder is the simplest well-known tree construction 
algorithm (first proposed by Sokal and Michener in 1958), but it has stood well the test 
of time. Numerous, far more complicated tree construction algorithms have since been 
proposed (e.g., Fitch and Margoliash 1967, Farris 1972, Moore et al. 1973, and Tateno et 
al. 1982) but the overall performance of the UPG method still compares favorably with 
these (Li 1981). 

Genetic data is input to LinkFinder as a two-dimensional array, with each row contain- 
ing sequence data from a single operational taxonomic unit (OTU), which can be a gene, 
an individual, a population, a species, or a taxa of higher rank (Moore et al. 1973). Each 
row also contains a unique label identifying the OTU. 

Another input file classifies each OTU according to kingdom, phylum, class, etc. This 
taxonomic information will be needed by LinkFinder’s expert system. 

Sequence data is coded either as a string of amino acids, or (more typically) as a string 
of bases. The four possible bases can be coded with the four letters A, C, G, and T, and the 
twenty possible amino acids can be coded using any convenient choice of twenty distinct 
characters. OTU labels are distinct name strings chosen to identify the OTUs under study, 
but in the examples below single letters will be used as labels for hypothetical OTUs. 

The UPG method utilized by LinkFinder makes the following assumptions about its 
OTU sequence data : 

1. Genetic sequences have been chosen to be homologous between OTUs. I.e., if the se- 
quence is a gene coding for some protein which varies from OTU to OTU, each OTU 
must have inherited that gene from some common ancestor, so that each individ- 
ual contemporary form represents divergence from the same ancestral form (Tateno 
1985). For example, the gene for hemoglobin, found in some form in all mammals, 
is homologous in mammals. 

2. Contemporary homologous OTU sequences are assumed to have diverged from the 
ancestral form because of random base (amino acid) substitutions in succeeding 
generations. (Note that changing a single base in a group of three can also change 
the amino acid that the group codes for.) These substitutions are assumed to be 
random both in the choice of base (amino acid) and with respect to position in the 
sequence. This assumption is well supported by our current understanding of genetic 
mutations (Tateno 1985). 

3. The number of base substitutions in all lineages is assumed to be linear over time, 
i.e., all lineages are assumed to evolve at the same constant rate. This simplifying 
assumption is realistic in many cases, but it is not strictly true. The actual number 
of base substitutions in an evolutionary lineage over time is believed by many ge- 
neticists to follow a Poisson distribution whose mean is the expected number of base 
substitutions in that OTU over time. This implies that the actual numbers of base 


203 



substitutions in two lineages can differ considerably due to stochastic error (Tateno 
1985). When the actual rates for different lineages are very different, tree estimation 
by the UPG method is sometimes in error. This has motivated the development 
of more complex tree construction algorithms. However, the UPG method is much 
simpler to implement, and it works well in the majority of cases (Li 1981). 

Assumptions (1) and (2) combined imply that all input genetic sequences must be exactly 
the same length, with each containing the same number of bases (amino acids). All three 
assumptions must hold for the constructed tree to be considered valid. 

Given an input array of homologous sequence data for n distinct OTUs, LinkFinder 
starts by computing the genetic distance between every pair of distinct OTUs, and loading 
these values into an nxn distance matrix. Genetic distance is simply the percent difference 
between two distinct sequences, which is calculated by direct comparison. If the pair of 
bases (amino acids) in the ith position of two sequences don’t match, a counter is bumped, 
and the final count for that pair is divided by the total number of bases (amino acids) in 
a sequence. 

The tree topology is generated from the distance matrix by the following iterative 
algorithm (from Li 1981) : 

1. Choose the smallest non-zero distance in the distance matrix. These two closest 
OTUs will now be clustered together into a single OTU. E.g., if <Iab is the shortest 
distance (as in Table 1), then A and B are the closest OTUs, and the new OTU will 
be, labeled (AB). 

2. Draw vertical lines from the chosen nodes A and B to their presumed common 
ancestor node (as in Figure 1). Make the lines proportional in length to </ab/2. 

3. Construct a new, smaller distance matrix from the old one by taking the distance 
between AB and any other OTU, say C, to be the arithmetic average of d\c and 
cfec — i-e., d(AB)c = (<*ac + cfe c)/2 (as in Table 2). 

4. Continue the process (1, 2, and 3) until all the initial OTUs are clustered into a single 
binary tree. The root node of this tree will represent the common ancestor of all the 
initial OTUs, and the height of the tree will be proportional to the genetic distance 
(percent divergence) between the hypothetical ancestor and all of its descendent leaf 
nodes. 

In the tables and figures, seven contemporary OTUs are labeled A, B, C, D, E, F, 
and G, and their initial distance matrix (Table 1) indicates that (AB) should be the first 
cluster, since the sequences of A and B differ by the smallest amount (3%). The common 
ancestor of A and B should thus differ 1.5% from each of its descendants, so the parent 
node linking A and B is placed at a height of 1.5 percentage units (Figure 1). 

The second distance matrix (Table 2) gives us (EF) as a cluster with a height of 2.5 
units (Figure 2). The third (Table 3) joins (AB) with D to produce the cluster ((AB)D) 
with an overall height of 3.75 units (Figure 3). Next we get ((EF)G), also 3.75 units high 
(Figure 4). Then (((AB)D)C), 4.38 units high (Figure 5). We now have only two clusters 
left, so our hypothetical common ancestor must lie between them. If we call this root node 


204 



Table 1. Initial distance matrix. 



A B C D E F G 

A 

0 3 8 7 10 9 13 

B 

0 9 8 11 10 14 

C 

0 9 12 11 15 

D 

0 9 8 12 

E 

0 5 9 

F 

0 6 

G 

0 


Table 2. After one iteration. 



(AB) C D E F G 

(AB) 

0 8.5 7.5 10.5 9.5 13.5 

C 

0 9 12 11 15 

D 

0 9 8 12 

E 

0 5 9 

F 

0 6 

G 

0 


Figure 1. Initial cluster: (AB). 


H 


0-1 


n 

A B 


Figure 2. Resultant cluster : (EF). 

j n r 

A B E F 


Figure 3. Resultant cluster: ((AB)D). 


H 


oJ 



A B 


D 




Table 3. After two iterations. 



(AB) C D (EF) G 

(AB) 

0 8.5 7.5 10 13.5 

C 

0 9 11.5 15 

D 

0 8.5 12 

(EF) 

0 7.5 

G 

0 


Table 4. After three iterations. 



((AB)D) C (EF) G 

((AB)D) 

C 

(EF) 

G 

0 8.75 9.25 12.75 

0 11.5 15 

0 7.5 

0 


Figure 4. Resultant cluster: ((EF)G). 







A B D E F G 
Figure 5. Resultant cluster: (((AB)D)C). 



Table 5. After four iterations. 



((AB)D) C ((EF)G) 

((AB)D) 

C 

((EF)G) 

0 8.75 11 

0 13.25 

0 


Table 6. After final iteration. 



(((AB)D)C) ((EF)G) 

(((AB)D)C) 

((EF)G) 

0 12.125 

0 


Figure 6. Resultant tree : 


X 



205 






X , then our final tree (Figure 6) can be written in line-form as (((AB)D)C)AT((EF)G). Its 
height of 6.06 units gives the average divergence of the seven present-day OTUs from their 
presumed common ancestor : about 6%. 


Estimating Divergence Times 

LinkFinder’s method of phylogenic tree estimation is a straightforward implementation of 
the UPG method. It can produce a tree for any reasonable input set of sequence data. 
However, the vertical axis of a true phylogenic tree represents time, not percent divergence. 
To produce a true phylogenic tree, LinkFinder must convert the vertical axis to units of 
time. 

Unfortunately, there is no straightforward way to do this. Divergence rates vary greatly 
for different organisms and different types of DNA. To make a reasonable conversion, Link- 
Finder must proceed on a case-by-case basis. It must consider the available experimental 
evidence on divergence rates for the specific data under study. It needs expert advice. 

It was to solve this problem that LinkFinder was equipped with a CLIPS-based expert 
system. LinkFinder’s knowledge base contains current data on divergence rates and times 
for many basic types of organisms. These data have been culled from selected books and 
papers on evolution, the fossil record, and genetics. Given the taxa under consideration, 
LinkFinder can usually make educated guesses about divergence times. 

For example, it has been estimated that prokaryotic organisms (like bacteria) diverged 
from eukaryotic organisms (like plants and animals) roughly 1.8 billion years ago. Plants 
probably diverged from animals about 1 billion years ago, and animals diverged into ver- 
tebrates and invertebrates about 500 million years ago. These facts (from Doolittle et 
al. 1986) have been entered into LinkFinder’s knowledge base, and LinkFinder can use 
them to obtain conversion factors. Given homologous gene sequences from two OTUs, 
one human, one bacterial, LinkFinder will assume that their linking ancestor existed 1.8 
billion years ago. Based on this knowledge, LinkFinder will postulate a conversion factor 
for a divergence- scaled tree containing these two OTUs. E.g., if the pair of homologous 
genes (one human, one bacterial) coded for the metabolic enzyme triosephosphate iso- 
merase (found in both bacteria and humans), LinkFinder would find a 54% divergence 
between the pair (Doolittle et al. 1986). This suggests a conversion factor of 33 million 
years per percent divergence for a tree containing these two OTUs, which is exactly what 
LinkFinder would propose. If the same tree contained other OTU pairs which were also 
present in LinkFinder’s knowledge base, then other possible conversion factors would also 
be reported, along with the specific OTUs upon which each conversion was based. If there 
is good agreement between the various calculated factors, this is strong evidence in favor 
of an overall time-scale conversion. If the various factors do not agree, then various indi- 
vidual clusters within the tree should probably be assigned their own separate time scales 
based on the recommended conversions. In its present form, LinkFinder only recommends 
possible conversions. It leaves the final decision on how to scale the overall tree to the 
user. 

LinkFinder’s knowledge base is organized according to the usual taxonomic distinctions. 
By examining the classification file for each OTU, it can quickly position each OTU within 


206 



the general biological categories in its knowledge base : prokaryote-eukaryote, plant-animal, 
vertebrate-invertebrate, fish-amphibian-reptile-mammal, etc. Once it has categorized each 
OTU, it searches for known divergence times for all OTU pairs. Each divergence time found 
is reported as a possible time-scale conversion factor for the percent divergence- scaled tree. 

LinkFinder’s knowledge base is intended to be augmented as new information becomes 
available. There are tens of millions of different species upon the earth, and divergence 
rates in general are not known for a given pair of OTUs. Even if they were, it would take 
considerable time to add so much information to LinkFinder’s knowledge base. For now, 
we have concentrated on entering divergence times of the most basic taxonomic units — 
the kingdoms, phyla, and classes. In certain taxonomic areas (notably primates/humans) 
more detailed information has been entered on individual species. Our main purpose in 
creating LinkFinder has been to develop a prototype of the automated expert phylogenic 
tree constructor of the future. The great volumes of sequence data being generated by the 
Genome Project will be valueless without the proper analytic software tools, and detailed 
phylogenic analyses of these data will be needed before we can determine with any certainty 
the actual divergence paths taken by the myriad forms of life on earth. 


REFERENCES 

Cann, R.L., Stoneking, M., and Wilson, A.C. (1987). Mitochondrial DN A and human evo- 
lution. Nature 325(1 Jan), 31-36. 

Doolittle, R.F., Feng, D.F., Johnson, M.S., and McClure, M.A. (1986). Relationships of 
human protein sequences to those of other organisms. Molecular Biology of Homo 
Sapiens : Cold Spring Harbor Symposium on Quantitative Biology 51(part 1), 447- 
455. 

Farris, J.S. (1972). Estimating phylogenetic trees from distance matrices. Am. Nat. 106, 
645-668 

Ferris, S.D., Sage, R.D., Prager, E.M., Ritte, U., and Wilson, A.C. (1983). Mitochondrial 
DNA evolution in mice. Genetics 105, 681-721. 

Fitch, W.M. and Margoliash, E. (1967). Construction of phylogenic trees. Science 155, 
279-284. 

Latorre, A., Moya, A., and Ayala, F.J. (1986). Evolution of mitochondrial DNA in Dro- 
sophilia subobscura. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S. 83, 8649-8653. 

Li, W.-H. (1981). Simple method for constructing phylogenic trees from distance matrices. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S. 78, 1085-1089. 

Miyamoto, M.M., Koop, B.F., Slightom, J.L., Goodman, M., and Tennant, M.R. (1988). 
Molecular systematics of higher primates : Genealogical relations and classification. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S. 85, 7627-7631. 


207 



Moore, G.W., Goodman, M., and Barnabas, J. (1973). An iterative approach from the 
standpoint of the additive hypothesis to the dendogram problem posed by molecular 
data sets. J. Theor. Biol. 38, 423-457. 

Nei, M. and Tajima, F. (1983). Maximum likelihood estimation of the number of nucleo- 
tide substitutions from restriction sites data. Genetics 105, 207-217. 

O’Brien, S.J., Nash, W.G., Wildt, D.E., Bush, M.E., and Benveniste, R.E. (1985). A mo- 
lecular solution to the riddle of the giant panda’s phylogeny. Nature 317(12 Sep), 
140-144. 

Sokal, R.R. and Michener, C.D. (1958). A statistical method for evaluating systematic re- 
lationships. Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 38, 1409-1438. 

Stoneking, M., Bhatia, K., and Wilson, A.C. (1986). Rate of sequence divergence estima- 
ted from restriction maps of mitochondrial DNAs from Papua New Guinea. Molec- 
ular Biology of Homo Sapiens : Cold Spring Harbor Symposium on Quantitative 
Biology 51(part 1), 433-439. 

Tateno, Y., Nei, M., and Tajima, F. (1982). Accuracy of estimated phylogenetic trees from 
molecular data. J. Mol. Evol. 18, 387-404. 

Tateno, Y. (1985). Theoretical aspects of molecular tree estimation. Population Genetics 
and Molecular Evolution (Ohta, T. and Aoki, K., ed.), 293-312, Japan Sci. Soc. 
Press, Tokyo/Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 

Ueda, S., Watanabe, Y., Hayashida, H., Miyata, T., Matsuda, F. and Honjo, T. (1986). 
Hominoid evolution based on the structures of immunoglobulin epsilon and alpha 
genes. Molecular Biology of Homo Sapiens : Cold Spring Harbor Symposium on 
Quantitative Biology 51(part 1), 429-432. 


208 



