OPKN LOOP SIMULATION 

TAM ERA L. THOMAS 

VINCENT HOUSTON, BILL LYNN 
JOHN WHITE, MONICA HUNTER 

I OSD. OEB 


743 



ABSTRACT 


M\ project is designing a (Tight control program utilizing "C" 
language. Ii eonsists of paths made up of fixed radius ares and straight 
lines. Ares w dl he defined hy a center, a radius and turn angle. 

Straight lines \\ ill he defined hy an end way point and an inbound course. 
Way points u ill he pre -defined such that the location of the end ol each leg 
accurately matches the beginning of the next leg. The simulation paths will 
closely match paths normally llown by the TSRV, but will not necessarily 
be defined identically in terms of type and number of way points. 



OPEN LOOP AIRCRAFT SIMULATION 


My project lor this summer was to write software to implement 
open loop aireralt simulations for onboard testing and troubleshooting 
purposes. I'lns program, written in C language, calculates way points for 
an inbound course using a list of given data such as pitch, roll, indicated 
airspeed, magnetic heading, latitude, longitude, etc. This data is then used 
to calculated successive points on a three dimensional coordinate plane. 

These points ultimately result to a flight path. I was also given other tasks 
working with a High-Speed Research (HSR). 

The approach used for this project was an analytical process. I had to break my 
project into component parts or constituent elements. I also learned to utilize the "C" 
computer language to complete this project. 

NASA's Hoeing 7.37 Transport Systems Research Vehicle (TSRV) 
was acquired In the Langley Research Center in 1974 to conduct research 
into advance transport aircraft technologies. TSRV has played a critical 
role m developing and gaining acceptance for numerous significant 
transport technologies, including "glass cockpits," airborne windshcar 
detection systems, data link for air traffic control communications, the 
microwave finding system, and the satellite-based global positioning 
system. 

Thoiough prcflighl testing of Transport Systems Research and 
Vehicle flight controls requires that the system be exercised through an 
approach and automatic landing. At present, there is a limited capability 
to accomplish the usage of Microwave Landing System (MLS) signals 
simulated onboard. The increasing use of Global Positioning System 
(GPS) and inevitable demise of MLS require that this capability be 
provided for GPS as well. The availability of smaller and more 
sophisticated computers provides an opportunity to improve simulation 
fide I i tv. 

The hardware equipment used is a VME chassis containing a (><X()|() 
processor card with Random Access Memory (RAM), Read Only Mcmoix 
(ROM ). RS d id sei nil port, an ARINC 429 interface card and other 
interlace cauls as required. The software equipment is pSOS real-time 
kcrnal m R< 'VI. This program will eventually be used on the 737 airplane 
during pi e I helm 

In addition to my project, I was able to work with the High-Speed 
Research Program (HSR). High-Speed Program is the cornerstone of 
NASA Aeronautics for the 1990s. It addresses the challenges of emissions 
effects on the atmosphere, airport noise and sonic boom. If solved it could 
support ami industry decision to build a supersonic transport. A 
supersonic transport flying through the atmosphere at more than twice the 
speed of sound is extremely sensitive to aerodynamic - "drag" generated by 
air friction. < >nc way to reduce drag and increase an aircraft's fuel 


745 



elliciency i'- to i educe turbulent airflow over ihe wings, leaving smooth or 
"laminar" Mow. I lie most important technology work in HSR prom am 
loetises in! i.l\ a need combustor (combustion chamber) concepts that could 
significant!) cut NOx emissions. 

The f light Deck Systems (FDS) technology area is conducting the 
lirst in a scries ol Might tests designed to develop and (light validate a 
cockpit display sy stem that will eliminate the necessity of a droop-nose 
configuration toi a High Speed Civil Transport (HSCT). the lack of a nose 
droop capability on the HSCT will require that the pilot's forward 
visibility be lunctionally replaced by an External Visibility Sysiem(XVS). 
Additionally, the XVS will enable all-weather, suitable-site operations. 

I enji >y ed working with HSR. 1 was able to attend weekly meetings 
and write work aiders for the hardware pertaining to HSR. This part of mv 
intern gave me an opportunity to interact with the employees in a business 
manner. 


746 



