Computer Programs 


Electronic Systems 


Software for Remote 
Monitoring of Space- 
Station Payloads 

Telescience Resource Kit (TReK) is a 
suite of application programs that enable 
geographically dispersed users to monitor 
scientific payloads aboard the International 
Space Station (ISS). TReK provides local 
ground support services that can simulta- 
neously receive, process, record, playback, 
and display data from multiple sources. 
TReK also provides interfaces to use the 
remote services provided by the Payload 
Operations Integration Center which man- 
ages all ISS payloads. An application pro- 
gramming interface (API) allows for payload 
users to gain access to all data processed 
by TReK and allows payload-specific tools 
and programs to be built or integrated with 
TReK. Used in conjunction with other ISS- 
provided tools, TReK provides the ability to 
integrate payloads with the operational 
ground system early in the lifecycle. This 
reduces the potential for operational prob- 
lems and provides “cradle-to-grave” end-to- 
end operations. TReK contains user guides 
and self-paced tutorials along with training 
applications to allow the user to become 
familiar with the system. 

This program was written by Michelle 
Schneider, Jeff U'ppincott, Steve Chubb, 
Jimmy Whitaker, Robert Gillis, Donna Sellers, 
Chris Sims, and James Rice of Marshall 
Space Flight Center. Further information is 
contained in a TSP [see page 1 ]. 

MFS-3 1 792 

SpaceWire Driver Software 
for Special DSPs 

A computer program provides a high- 
level C-language interface to electronics cir- 
cuitry that controls a SpaceWire interface in 
a system based on a space qualified version 
of the ADSP-21 020 digital signal processor 
(DSP). SpaceWire is a spacecraft-oriented 
standard for packet-switching data-com- 
munication networks that comprise nodes 
connected through bidirectional digital serial 
links that utilize low-voltage differential sig- 
naling (LVDS). The software is tailored to the 
SMCS-332 application-specific integrated 
circuit (ASIC) (also available as the 
TSS901E), which provides three high- 
speed (1 50 Mbps) serial point-to-point links 
compliant with the proposed Institute of 


Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) 
Standard 1 355.2 and equivalent European 
Space Agency (ESA) Standard ECSS-E- 
50-12. In the specific application of this 
software, the SpaceWire ASIC was com- 
bined with the DSP processor, memory, and 
control logic in a Multi-Chip Module DSP 
(MCM-DSP). The software is a collection of 
low-level driver routines that provide a sim- 
ple message-passing application program- 
ming interface (API) for software running on 
the DSP. Routines are provided for interrupt- 
driven access to the two styles of interface 
provided by the SMCS: (1) the “word at a 
time” conventional host interface (HOCI); 
and (2) a higher performance “dual port 
memory” style interface (COMI). 

This program was written by Douglas 
Clark, James Lux, Kouji Nishimoto, and 
Minh Lang of Caltech for NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. Further informa- 
tion is contained in a TSP [see page 1 ]. 

This software is available for commer- 
cial licensing. Please contact Don Hart of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(818) 393-3425. Refer to NPO-30389. 


Mechanics 


Solution-Adaptive 
Program for Computing 
2D/Axi Viscous Flow 

A computer program solves the Navier- 
Stokes equations governing the flow of a 
viscous, compressible fluid in an axisym- 
metric or two-dimensional (2D) setting. To 
obtain solutions more accurate than those 
generated by prior such programs that uti- 
lize regular and/or fixed computational 
meshes, this program utilizes unstructured 
(that is, irregular triangular) computational 
meshes that are automatically adapted to 
solutions. The adaptation can refine to 
regions of high change in gradient or can 
be driven by a novel residual minimiza- 
tion technique. Starting from an initial 
mesh and a corresponding data structure, 
the adaptation of the mesh is controlled by 
use of minimization functional. Other 
improvements over prior such programs 
include the following: (1) Boundary condi- 
tions are imposed weakly; that is, following 
initial specification of solution values at 
boundary nodes, these values are relaxed in 
time by means of the same formulations as 
those used for interior nodes. (2) 
Eigenvalues are limited in order to suppress 


expansion shocks. (3) An upwind fluctua- 
tion-splitting distribution scheme applied 
to inviscid flux requires fewer operations and 
produces less artificial dissipation than does 
a finite-volume scheme, leading to greater 
accuracy of solutions. 

This program was written by William A. 
Wood of Langley Research Center. 
Further information is contained in a TSP 
[seepage 1], 

LAR- 16431 


Machinery 


Software for 

Preprocessing Data From 
Rocket-Engine Tests 

Three computer programs have been 
written to preprocess digitized outputs 
of sensors during rocket-engine tests at 
Stennis Space Center (SSC). The programs 
apply exclusively to the SSC “E” test-stand 
complex and utilize the SSC file format. The 
programs are the following: 

• Engineering Units Generator (EUGEN) 
converts sensor-output-measurement 
data to engineering units. The inputs to 
EUGEN are raw binary test-data files, 
which include the voltage data, a list 
identifying the data channels, and time 
codes. EUGEN effects conversion by 
use of a file that contains calibration 
coefficients for each channel. 

• QUICKLOOK enables immediate viewing 
of a few selected channels of data, in 
contradistinction to viewing only after 
post-test processing (which can take 
30 minutes to several hours depending 
on the number of channels and other 
test parameters) of data from all chan- 
nels. QUICKLOOK converts the selected 
data into a form in which they can be plot- 
ted in engineering units by use of Winplot 
(a free graphing program written by Rick 
Paris). 

• EUPLOT provides a quick means for look- 
ing at data files generated by EUGEN 
without the necessity of relying on the PV- 
WAVE based plotting software. 

This program was written by Chiu-Fu 
Cheng of Lockheed Martin Corp. for 
Stennis Space Center. 

Inquiries concerning rights for the com- 
mercial use of this invention should be 
addressed to the Intellectual Property 
Manager, Stennis Space Center [see page 
1], Refer to SSC-001 51/53/60. 


NASA Tech Briefs, March 2003 


29 


