AD-A228 614 


Ada 

Compiler Validation 
Procedures 



Version 2.1 
August 1990 


Ada Joint Program Office 
Room 3E114 
The Pentagon 

Washington, D.C. 20301-3081 





EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 


The purpose of this executive summaiy is to provide otrly an overview of the Ada compiler 
validation process. Anyone who obtains services from the Ada certification body must 
understand the definition of terms and follow the mote specific rules provided in the body of this 
documertt. 

• Organization aivl Responsibilities 

The Ada certification body consists of the Ada Joint Program Office. (AJPO). the Ada 
Validation Organization (AVO). the ACVC Mairuenarrce Organization (AMO), and the Ada 
Validation Facilities (AVFs). The AJPO. a component of the Department of Defense, 
establishes the policies of the Ada certification system, issues validation certificates for AVF- 
tested Ada implementations and registers Ada implementations that are un-tested by an AVF. 
The AVO. the Institute for Defense Analyses, provides the technical and administrative 
support required to operate the Ada certification system. The AMO. Wright-Pattcrson Air 
Force Base, provides the technical and administrative support required to supply the Ada 
Compiler Validation Capability (ACVQ for use in the operation of the Ada certification 
system. There are five AVFs chartered by the AJPO to conduct validation (see Section 3 and 
Appendix E). The Ada certification body operates in conjunction with the U.S. Department of 
Commerce which has the responsibility for establishing and maintaining a certification system 
for the Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS). 

• The Ada Compiler Validation Capability 

The ACVC is designed to demonstrate the compliance of an Ada implementation with the 
Ada Programming Language. Each new version of the ACVC test suite is released for a 
period of six months before it is used for validatioa At the end of six months, the new 
version of the ACVC is authorized for validation use for a period of 18 moruhs. Stnne test 
programs may contain test objectives which ate irrelevant for a particular Ada implementation 
and may be declared inapplicable, in whole or in parts, for that implementatioa The ACVC 
User’s Guide, distributed with the ACTVC. contains instructions about implied inapplicability 
of test programs. Some test programs are designed to make use of implementation dependent 
characteristics and must be adjusted according to instructions given in the ACVC User’s 
Guide or must be modified by the AVF after consultation with the AVO. Tests may be 
withdrawn from the ACVC by the AVO when it is found that they are based on assumptions 
that need not hold true for all Ada implementations or that the test program does not meet its 
test objective. Any interested party may dispute a test program through an AVF (see Sections 
4.1, 4.4 and Appendix B). Ihe AVF customizes an ACVC for each Ada implementation 
which is validat^ by testing. An Ada implementation passes a given ACVC version if it 
processes each test of the customized ACVC in accordance with the Ada programming 
language, whether the test is applicable or inapplicable; otherwise, the Ada implementation 
fails the ACVC. The ACVC is available to the public from the National Technical 
Information Service (NTIS) according to Department of Commerce policies and rules for the 
payment of fees and for export control. The ACVC is also available to customers of an AVF. 

• Validation by Testing 

4 

There are six steps which must be completed by a customer and the Ada certification body so 

. i 




that the customer obtains a validation certificate and a Validation Summary Report (VSR). 
These steps are: 

1. A formal validation agreement between the customer and an AVF is required to obtain 
validation services (see Section S.l). 

2. Prevalidation which consists of customer testing, submission of results to the AVF. and 
the resolution of test issues (see Section 5.2). 

3. Validation testing performed by an AVF at a mutually agreed upon site (see Section 
5.3). 

4. A Declaration of Conformance is completed and signed by the customer not later than 
at validation testing. A validation certificate will not be issued until a Declaration of 
Cbrtformance has been completed (see Section 5.4 and Appendix A). 

5. A VSR is prepared by the AVF to document the validation by testing (see Section 5 J). 

6. A Validation Certificate is issued by authority of the AJPO for a successfully tested Ada 
implementation (see Section 5.6). 

The ACVC version used for validation by testing must be the current orte: there is no 
exception to this rule. A validation certificate will expire one year after the expiration date of 
the ACVC version used for the validation (see Section 5) 

Validation by Registration 

An Ada implementation may be derived from one which has been validated by testing (a base 
implemenution) when four conditions are true (see Section 6.2). These conditions provide an 
easy test for determining whether to proceed with a request to register an Ada implementation 
which was derived from a base implementation. A registration request must be sulxnined to 
the AVF that validated the base implementation and the request must provide the information 
required to substantiate a sign^ Declaration of Conformance for the derived Ada 
implemenution (see Section 6.3). The AVF will provide a template for a registration request 
which can then be completed by any party interested in initiating a registration. The AVF will 
review registration requests for completeness and plausibility of informatiorL A registration 
request which is accepted by the AVF and the AVO will be forwarded to the AJPO to be added 
to the public list of Ada implementations validated by registration. A derived implementation 
loses its sums of being validated if it is challenged successfully (see Section 6.7), upon 
expiration of the validation certificate of its base implementation, or when registration is 
revoked by the customer. A procedure is provided for adjudication of a claim that the derived 
implementation fails the ACVC used to validate the base implemenution (See Section 
6.7-6.9). 


ii 




CONTENTS 


1. INTRODUCTION. 1 

2. GLOSSARY OF TERMS. 3 

3. ORGANIZATION AND RESPONSIBILmES. 7 

3.1 Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO). 7 

3.2 The Ada Validation Organization (AVO). 7 

3.3 The ACVC Maintenance Organization (AMO). 7 

3.4 Ada Validation Facilities (AVFs). 8 

3J Customers. 8 


4. THE ADA COMPILER VALIDATION CAPABILITY. 9 

4.1 Versions. 9 

4.2 Inapplicable Tests. 9 

4.3 Test Modifications. 9 

4.4 Test Withdrawal.10 

4.5 Customization.10 

4.6 Passing the ACVC.10 

4.7 Availability.10 

5. VALIDATION BY TESTING.11 

5.1 Step One: Validation Agreement .11 

5.2 Step Two: Prevalidation.11 

5.2.1 Customer Testing.12 

5.2.2 Submission of Results.12 

5.2.3 Test Issues.12 

5.2.4 Incomplete Prevalidations.13 

5.2.5 Successful Prevalidation.13 

5.3 Step Three: Validation Testing.13 

5.4 Step Four. Declaration of Conformance.13 

5.5 Step Five: Validation Summary Report.13 

5.5.1 VSR Production.14 

5.5.2 VSR AvaUabUity.14 

5.6 Step Six; Validation Certificate.14 

5.7 Advertising Validated Status.14 \ , * 

5.8 Certification Mailt.15 


6. VALIDATION BY REGISTRATION 

6.1 Result Profile. 

6.2 Derived Implementations . . 

6.3 Registration Request . . . 

6.4 AVF Evaluation .... 

6J Registration. 

6.6 Expiration of Validated Status 

6.7 Challenges. 

6.8 (Challenge Mark .... 

6.9 Challenge Test. 


17 

17 

17 

17 

18 
18 
18 
19 
19 
19 


I 




^ V, j fit! ^11 iTy 


rs 


Dist 


*VH.| 0'aior 
SrfCi«l 


t'P^OO 













































1. INTRODUCTION 


The United States Dq)aitment of Defense (DoD) sponsored the development of the Ada 
programming language and established the Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO) as pan of an 
effon to su{^n recognized principles of software engineering for a wide range of ^)plications. 
In view of the well known benefits of standardization, the AJPO has established a certification 
system to prevent the proliferation of dialects of the Ada programming language and to 
encourage Ada implementations which conform to the (ANSI 83]. The Ada certification system 
rules of procedure and management address the validation of Ada implementations by testing 
and by registration. This document provides an operational definition of a validated Ada 
compiler which is required by [DoD 87] and by the [FIRMR 87]. This version [2.1] is a minor 
revision of the document issu^ by the AJPO in May 1989. Section 4, paragraphs 4.1,4 J and 4.3 
and Appendix A have been revised to clarify and simplify validation procedures; and, the points 
of contact in Appendix E have been updated. 

The certification body of the Ada certification system consists of the AJPO for overall 
direction, the Ada Validation Organization (AVO) and ACVC Mainteiuince Organization 
(AMO) for technical suppon. and the Ada Validation Facilities (AVFs) for perfonning 
validations. The Ada certification body operates in conjunction with the U.S. Depanment of 
Commerce which has the responsibility for establishing and maintaining a certification system 
for the Federal Infotmation Programming Standards (FIPS). 

It is important to note the scope and intent of Ada validation. Users of an Ada implementation 
are cautioned that the purpose of validation is to encourage conformity of Ada implementations 
with the standard and that charaaeristics other than those specified by the standard, such as 
performance or suiubility for a particular application, are outside the scope of Ada validation. 
Moreover, users are cautioned that the yardstick of conformity testing is the collection of test 
programs contained in the ACVC. Thus, compliance is measured only within the limiution of 
these tests. 

A glossary of terms used in this document is provided in Section 2. Terms defined in the glossary 
are signified in the text of the document by bold print Appendices to this documem provide 
examples of documents used in validation, current points of contact and references. 


1 






2. GLOSSARY OF TERMS 


Ada PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE: The language defined by reference [ANSI 83] or its 
successors. 

ACVC MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION (AMO): The pan of the cenification body that 
maintains the ACVC. 

ACVC USER’S GUIDE: A document that explains the technical details of processing the test 
programs and evaluating their results. 

Ada COMPILER: The software and any tteeded hardware that have to be added to a given host 
and target computer system to allow transformation of Ada programs into executable fonn and 
execution thereof. 

Ada COMPILER VALIDATION CAPABILITY (ACVC): The means for testing compliance 
of Ada implementations, consisting of the test suite, the suppon programs, the ACVC user’s 
guide and the template for the validation sununary report 

Ada IMPLEMENTATION; An Ada compiler with its host computer system and its target 
computer systent 

Ada JOINT PROGRAM OFFICE (AJPO): The part of the certification body which provides 
policy and guidance for the Ada certification system 

Ada VALIDATION FACILITY (AVF): The part of the certification body which carries out the 
procedures required to establish the compliance of an Ada implementation. 

Ada VALIDATION ORGANIZATION (AVO): The part of the certification body that provides 
technical guidance for operations of the Ada certification system 

APPLICABLE ACVC TEST: A test which is rreither inapplicable nor withdrawn. Compare 
with inapplicable test program and withdrawn test program 

BASE IMPLEMENTATION: An Ada implementation that was validated by testing (see 
Section S). 

CERTIFICATION BODY: [ISO/IEC 86] An impartial body, governmental or non- 
goverrunental, possessing the necessary competence and reliability to operate a certification 
system, and in which the interests of all parties concerned with the functioning of the system are 
represented. 

CERTIFICATION MARK: A mart which may be used only on products directly associated 
with the Ada compiler for which the certification mark was awarded. 

CERTIFICATION SYSTEM: (ISO/IEC 86] A system having its own rules of procedure and 
management for carrying out conformity certifications. 


3 





k 


COMPLIANCE of an Ada IMPLEMENTATION: The ability of the implementation to pass 
an ACVC version. (Note: Fbr the purposes of this document, compliance is a practical measure 
of conformity.] 

COMPUTER SYSTEM: [ISO 74 ANSl/lEEE 83] A functional unit, consisting of one or more 
computers and associated software, that uses common storage for all or part of a program and also 
for idl or part of the data necessary fbr the execution of the program; executes user-written or user- 
designated programs; performs user-designated data manipulation, including arithmetic 
operations and logic operations; and that can execute programs that modify themselves during 
execution. A computer system may be a stand-alone unit or may consist of several inter¬ 
connected units. 

CONFORMITY: [ISO/IEC 86] Fulfillment by a product, process or service of all requirements 
specified. [Note: Also see Section 1.1.2 in the ANSI/MIL-STD-181SA] 

CONFORMITY TESTING: The prxrcess described in Section 5 of this dociunenL 

CUSTOMER: An individual or corporate entity who enters into an agreement with an AVF 
which specifies the terms and conditions for AVF services (of any kind) to be performed. 

CUSTOMIZED TEST SUITE: The ACVC tests, adjusted as necessary, that must be used for a 
given Ada implenrentation (see Section 4S). 

DECLARATION of CONFORMANCE: A formal statement from a customer assuring that 
conformity is realized or attainable on the Ada implementation for which validation status is 
requested, [see Appendix A for a sample format of a dedaration of confomumce.] 

DERIVED IMPLEMENTATION: An Ada implementation that was obtained from a base 
implementation which has a current validation certificate (see Section 6). 

FAIL AN ACVC VERSION: The Ada implementatior. fails one or more test of the customized 
test suite according to the relevant evaluation criteria. 

FUNCTIONAL UNIT: [ISO 74 ANSI/IEEE 83] An entity of hardware, software or both, capable 
of accomplishing a specified purpose. 

HOST COMPUTER SYSTEM: A computer system where Ada source programs are 
transformed into executable form. 

INAPPLICABLE TEST: A test that contains one or more test objectives found to be irrelevant 
for the given Ada implementation. 

INSTRUCTION SET: [ANSI/EEEE 83] The set of instructions of a computer, of a programming 
language, or of the programming languages in a programming system. 

OPERATING SYSTEM: [ISO 74] Software that controls the execution of programs and that 
provides services such as resource allocation, scheduling, input/output control, and data 
management Usually, operating systems are predominantly software, but partial or complete 
hardware implementations are possible. 


4 




PASS AN ACVC VERSION: Each lesi of the customized test suite is processed according to 
the Ada programming language. 

PREVALIDATION TESTING: Processing of an appropriately customized test suite by the 
customer. 


RESULT PROFILE: The result of processing the customized test suite according to given 
evaluation criteria (see Section 6). 

SOFTWARE MAINTENANCE: [ANSI/IEEE 83] Modification of a software produa after 
delivery to correct faults, to improve performance, or to adapt the product to a changed 
environment (see below). 

— CORRECriVE MAINTENANCE: Maintenance performed specifically to overcome 
existing faults. 

— PERFECTIVE MAINTENANCE: Maintenance performed to improve performance or 
maintainability. 

— ADAPTIVE MAINTENANCE: Maintenance performed to make a software product usable 
in a changed environment 

TARGET COMPUTER SYSTEM: A computer system where the executable form of Ada 
programs are executed. 

TEST ISSUE: Any problem arising during validation (see Section 5J2.3). 

VALIDATION: The process of checking the conformity of an Ada compiler to the Ada 
programming language and of issuing a certificate for this implementation. 

VALIDATED ADA IMPLEMENTATION: An Ada implementation that has been validated 
successfully either by AVF testing (see Section 5) or by registration (see Section 6). 

VALIDATED .Ada COMPILER: The compiler of a validated Ada implementation. 

VALIDATION CERTIFICATE (VC): Issued by authority of the AJPO for tested Ada 
implementations which pass an ACVC version. 

VALIDATION SUMMARY REPORT (VSR): A report produced by an AVF containing results 
that are observed from testing a specific Ada implementation or grouping of Ada 
implementations. 

WITHDRAWN TEST : A test found to be incorrect and not used in confomdty testing. A test 
may be incorrect because it has an invalid test objective, fails to meet its test objective, or contains 
erroneous or Ulegal use of the Ada programming language. 


5 





3. ORGANIZATION AND RESPONSmiLlTIES 


This section specifies the role of organizations n^ch form the certification body and of 
customers who receive service firom them. 

3.1 Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO) 

The AJPO estab l is h es the policies of the certification system by: 

a. establishing the conditions for issuance, the life, and the scope of a validation certificate; 

b. establishing the schedule for issuing versions of the ACVC; 

c. approving each release of an ACVC version; 

d. designating members of the certification body; 

e. resolving issues that may arise during validation when these issues can rK>t be resolved 
through the best efforts of the AVO and AVF; 

f. maintaining the official lists of validated Ada implementatioits; and 

g. issuing documents pertaining to validation. 

3.2 The Ada Validation Organization (AVO) 

The AVO provides the technical and administrative support required to operate the certification 
system by: 

a. advising the AJPO and AVFs concerning requirements for modification to the validation 
procedures; 

b. resolving issues that may arise during the validation process; 

c. reviewing all Validation Summary Reports (VSRs) prepared by AVFs; 

d. reconunending to the AJPO issuance of a validation certificate for Ada implementations 
validated by testing (see Section 5) and the registration of derived implementations (see 
Section 6); 

e. participating in the ACVC quality coturol and configuration managemem process; 

f. deciding on the withdrawal of test programs from the ACVC version that is being used for 
validation; and 

g. convening meetings of the members of the certification body at appropriate irttervals to 
discuss the validation process and to evaluate practices. 

3J The ACVC Maintenance Organization (AMO) 

The AMO provides the technical and administrative support required to supply the ACVC for use 
in the operation of the certification system by: 

a. producing ACVC versions according to a schedule established by the AJPO; 


7 




b. performing quality control and configuration management according to procedures 
approved by the AJPO; 

c. distributing the ACVC version releases to AVFs and the AVO; 

d. distributing the final release of ACVC versions to the U.S. National Technical Information 
Service (NTIS), a service of the U.S. Department of Commerce, for further distribution to 
the public; and 

e. providing information to the public concerning the list of test programs withdrawn from the 
current test suite, the number of test programs in each version and release of the test suite, 
and other information that promotes a public awareness of the test suite and evaluation 
criteria. 

3.4 Ada Validation Facilities (AVFs) 

An AVF is chartered by the AJPO to conduct validation by: 

a. adhering to validation procedures improved by the AJPO: 

b. producing the VSR; 

c. forwarding uruesolved test issues to the AVO for review and analysis, with final resolution 
to be provided by the AJPO, if necessary; 

d. forwarding a customer’s registration request for a derived Ada implementation to the 
AVO, with recommendations based upon knowledge of the base implementation and the 
completeness of documentation supporting the request; and 

e. striving to satisfy national accreditaUon criteria. 

The AJPO may issue an AVF charter to an organization that has been recognized as an accredited 
testing laboratory by the U.S. Department of Commerce, National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST). The AJPO may issue a charter to an organization located in a country which 
has a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the U.S. government covering the chartering of 
AVFs. according to the niles specified in the MoU. An AVF charter may remain in effect 
indefinitely; however, a charter can be revoked by the AJPO, at any time, for due cause. The 
AJPO may direct an impartial body to conduct an audit at any time or prior to issuing an AVF 
charter. Audits are conducted in accordance with procedures established by the AJPO at the time 
of the audit and are tailored to reflect the purpose of the audit 

3.5 Customers 

Customers are serviced by the Ada certification body in matters concerning Ada validation. In 
requesting services of the Ada certification body, customers are to provide accurate and 
complete information to perform validation, to register derived Ada implementations, or to 
obtain other services. 


8 




4. THE ADA COMPILER VALIDATION CAPABILITY 


The ACVC is designed to demonstrate compliance of an Ada implementation with the Ada 
Programming Language. The ACVC is distributed as a collection of test programs, suppoit 
programs which facilitate processing the tests, and an ACVC User’s Guide dut explains the 
criteria for evaluating the r^ts. 

4.1 Versions 

Each new version of the ACVC is available to an AVF customer for a period of six months 
before it is used for validation. At the end of this initial release period, the new version of the 
ACVC will be used for validation for a period of 18 months. It is the goal of this policy to 
preclude changes during the initial release period of 6 months. If it is found that some test 
programs should be changed, they will either be withdrawn or modified processing or grading 
criteria will be provided. The list of withdrawn tests and modified processing or grading criteria 
will be issued by the AVO prior to the date that the new ACVC version is to be used for 
validation. Comments on the ACVC tests should be submitted to the AVF in the test-dispute 
format (see Appendix B): the AVO will evaluate comments and take the appropriate action. If an 
error is discovered in the ACVC support software or documentation, the AMO will distribute 
corrections as soon as the problem hu been resolved. Comments on the ACVC support software 
or documentation should be submitted to the AMO in a report format supplied as part of the 
ACVC materials. 

42 Inapplicable Tests 

Each test program in the test suite has one or more test objectives described in a comment in the 
test program. Some test objectives may be irrelevant for a given Ada implementation. For 
example, the test objective “check write operations for permanent files" is irrelevam for an 
implementation on an embedded computer system which does not allow the creation of 
permanent files. Test programs containing test objectives which are irrelevant for a particular Ada 
implementation may be declared iru^jplicable, as a whole or in parts, for that implementation. As 
a general rule, the inapplicability of a test is established by analysis of the result of processing the 
test program. However, results obtained from one test program may imply the inapplicability of 
others which need not be processed. 

42 Test Modifications 

Some of the test programs are designed to make use of implementation dependent characteristics 
(e.g. line lengths and integer ranges). These programs must be adjusted to a given Ada 
implementation according to the instructions ^ven in the ACTVC User's Guide. Other test 
programs contain intentional violations of Ada programming language rules which must be 
detected. The way in which some of these violations are grouped into test programs may conflict 
with the error recovery algorithms of a given Ada implementation. In such a case, the violations 
may be regrouped in a way which is consistent with the error recovery mechanism. This 
regrouping may be done by the AVF without consultation with the AVO. Apart from these 
anticipated test modifications, there may be a need for additional modifications in order to cope 
with unforeseen implementation characteristics so that a specific test objective can be met Any 
such change may be performed by an AVF only with the consent of the AVO. 


9 





Some of the test and suppoit programs are designed to make use of implementation dependent 
characteristics (e.g., line lengths and integer ranges). These programs must be adjusted to a given 
Ada implementation according to the rules contained in the ACVC User’s Guide. In addition to 
these anticipated test modifications, additional changes may be required to remove unforeseen 
conflicts between the test program and implementation dependent characteristics of the Ada 
implementation (e.g., the tfgorithm for recovering from syntax errors). The allowable changes 
for each Ada implementation are detennined by an AVF alter consultation with the AVO. 

Apart from the anticipated test modifications described above there may be a need for additional 
modifications in order to cope with unforeseen implementation characteristics so that a spescific 
test objective can be met Any such change may IX performed by an AVF only with the consent 
of the AVO. 

4.4 Test Withdrawal 

In any ACVC version that is used for validation, it is possible that a test program is based on 
assumptions which tteed not hold true for all Ada implementations or that the test program does 
rK)t meet its test objectives. In these cases, the AVO may issue a correction to the evaluation 
criteria in the ACVC User’s Guide or the test program may be withdrawn from that version of 
the test suite. Any interested party may dispute a test program through an AVF by asking for a 
review of its evaluation criteria or for its withdrawal. The form for submitting a test dispute is 
provided in Appendix B. 

4JS Customization 

A customized test suite is produced by the AVF for each Ada implementation that is a candidate 
for validation. This customization always consists of removing withdrawn tests and in making 
required modifications to test and suppoit programs, and may include removal of some 
inapplicable tests when detailed rules for them ate provided in the ACVC User’s Guide. 

4.6 Passing the ACVC 

An Ada implementation passes a given ACVC version if it processes each test of the 
customized test suite in accordance with the Ada programnung language, whether the test is 
applicable or inapplicable: otherwise, the Ada implementation fails the ACVC. 


4.7 Availability 

The ACVC is available to the general public from the NTIS according to U.S. Department of 
Commerce policies and rules for payment of fees and for export control. The ACVC is also 
available to a customer of an AVF from that AVF. It should be noted that the distribution of the 
ACVC is subject to export restrictions as detailed by laws of the U.S. and other countries. 


10 




5. VALffiATION BY TESTING 


There are six steps which must be completed by a customer and the certification body so that the 
customer obtains a validation certificate and a VSR. The same ACVC veision must be used to 
complete the steps described in this section. The ACVC version used for validation testing must 
be the cunent one: there is no exception to this nile. The AVF must be able to begin testing the 
Ada implementation at the customers site before the cunent ACVC version expires or else 
validation with that ACVC version will not be allowed. Anyone who intends to obtain a 
validation certificate should contact an AVF, as soon as the intention is known, to obtain advice 
on the handling of the ACVC, on interpretation of the test evaluation criteria, and on the 
operational details of that AVF’s management practices. 


5.1 Step One: Validation Agreement 

In order to obtain services from the certification body, an interested party must become a 
customer of an AVF by reaching a formal agreement This agreement should address the 
following topics: 

a. identification of the Ada implementation to be tested and the ACVC version to be used; 

b. a statement of work, including analysis of prevaiidation testing, validation, and 
preparation of the VSR; 

c. the format of data to be exchanged; 

d a schedule of events and the site of validation; 

e. financial arrangements; 

f. retention of records; 

g. AVF liability; and 

h. confidentiality of validation informaticn. 

The schedule for events, deliverables, and payments should take into account the faa that certain 
steps in validation require interaction with odier members of the certification body (i.e., AVO or 
AJPO). The AVF will put forth its best effort to keep confidential a customer’s intent to obtain a 
vali ation certificate and the projected schedule for validation. This confidentiality will not be 
allowed to interfere with the normal review procedures of validation. If the customer requests 
confidentiality for reasons of national security, the customer will provide to the AVF an official 
statemeru of the seouity level that applies to the validation, and the AVF will obtain further 
guidance from the AJPO. 


5.2 Step Two: Prevalidation 

The requirements of this step are discussed separately so that the customer understands the 
interaction that is required with an AVF. 


11 






5^.1 Customer Testing 

Alter entering into a fonnal agreement, the customer provides the necessary infonnation for the 
AVF to prepare a customized test suite or. the customer may prepare a customized test suite 
according to instnictions in the ACVC user’s guide. The customer then processes all the tests in 
this customized test suite using the candidate Ada Implementation or another Ada 
Implementation which produces the same lesulL If the implementation provides for options in 
the way programs are processed, then the same set of options must be chosen for all test programs, 
with the possible exception of an option controlling the production of information output Any 
other exception constitutes a test issue which must be resolved with the AVF (see Section 52.3). 
Test issues should be sent to the AVF for analysis as soon as they are known. 

S22 Submission of Results 

Upon completion of testing, the customer delivers the complete set of results in the agreed format 
iu the AVF. These results are accompanied by the following infonnation: 

a. a list of test programs which the customer claims are inapplicable, together with an 
explanation for these claims: 

b. a list of test programs which are disputed but not withdrawn (see Section 4.4) together with 
explanations (see Appendix B for format): 

c. an annotated sample command script: 

d. the complete set of option settings used for processing the customized test suite, including 
the default settings: and 

e. complete and current documentation for implementation dependent charaaeristics as 
required in the VSR. 


523 Test Issues 

A test issue may be any of the following; 

a. a missing or incomplete result to a test: 

b. a result presented in an inadequate form; 

c. a disagreement between the customer and the AVF as to the interpretation of a result; 

d. a change in the choice of options to be used during testing; 

e. a result which makes the Ada implementation fail the ACVC according to the current 
evaluation criteria; or 

f. an implementation dependent characteristic that may effea the conformity of the Ada 
implementation. 

The material rabmitted by the customer is analyzed by the AVF and any test issues are resolved. 
If the AVF and the customer cannot agree on a way to resolve a test issue, the issue will be 
referred to the AVO for a resolution. It may be justified to leave a test issue uruesolved at 
prevalidatioa For example, it may be impossible to check the processing of control characters by 
inspecting printed results. The AVF will note these unresolved issues and describe the results 
which will be expected during validation testing. It is also possible that the customer information 


12 








provided for production of the customized test suite (see Section 52.1) was insufficient so that 
corrections to the customized test suite must be made and additional processing will be required. 


52.4 Incomplete Prevalidations 

The AVF and the customer may agree that, at the customer’s risk, parts of the customized test 
suite need not be processed. The customer must certify that the results from a previous 
prevalidation submitted to the AVF or validation results obtained by the AVF are identical to 
those that would have been obtained by the customer. The normal practice is to submit complete 
prevalidation results. 

52.5 Successful Prevalidation 

Prevalidation testing is successful if the analysis of results and the resolution of test issues show 
that the candidate Ada implementation passes the customized test suite. Prevalidation is 
successful with caveats if the results are satisfactory except that they were incomplete (see Section 
5.2.4) or if resolution of some test issues are deferred until validation testing by agreement 
between the AVF and the customer. 


52 Step Three: Validation Testing 

Upon successful completion of prevalidation, with or without caveats, the AVF tests the Ada 
implementation at the site and time mutually agreed by the AVF and customer. The AVF 
prepares a customized test suite based upon customer information and any infonnation collected 
during the resolution of test issues. The customized test suite is install^ and processed under 
AVF supervision. If the AVF determines that the results agree with those obtained from 
prcvalidation and are satisfactory with respea to the caveats, the testing has been successful: 
otherwise, re-testing will be required. 

5.4 Step Four: Declaration of Conformance 

At some time during the validation but not later than at validation testing, the customer will 
complete and sign a declaration of conformance. The declaration states that the organization 
which is responsible for the production, maintenance or distribution of the Ada compiler is 
offering a pr^uct that is in compliance with the Ada programming language. The declaration 
becomes part of the AVF records and is copied into the VSR. A Validation Certificate will not 
be issued unless a signed declaration of confornunce has been provided to the AVF. 


52 Step Five: Validation Summary Report 

A VSR is produced for each validation testing effort A single VSR may cover validation 
testing of several Ada implementations, provided that they all have the same result profile. The 
VaR provides the following documentation pertaining to the validation effort 

a. identification of the customer responsible for validation of the Ada implementation; 

b. identification of the organization responsible for the production, maintenance, or 
distribution of the Ada compiler or Ada implementation; 

c. identification ofthe Ada implementation tested; 


13 





d. options provided by the Ada compiler and identity of the options used for testing; 

e. description of the AVF testing procedure with sample command scripts that were used to 
process the test suite; 

f. the inapplicable test programs and implementation dependent characteristics exhibited by 
the test programs that established inapplicability; 

g. the implementation dq>endent diaracteristics pertinent to the customized test suite; 

h. description of implementation dependent characteristics as detailed by “Appendix P of 
[Ada 83]; 

i. withdrawn test programs; and 

j. modifications to test programs with an explanation for such modifications. 

53.1 VSR Production 

The VSR is prepared by the AVF but includes material which is produced by the customer, such 
as the “Appendix P required by [ANSI 83]. A draft of the VSR is sent to the AVO for approval 
before or after validation testing. The final version of the VSR is signed by the AVF. the AVO, 
and the AJPO. 

53.2 VSR Availability 

_r 

The final version of the VSR is available to the general public from NTIS and ftom the A\T that 
produced it The AVF may require payment of a fee for VSR reproduction and mailing costs. 

5.6 Step Six: Validation Certificate 

For each successfully tested Ada implementation, one certificate is issued by authority of the 
AJPO. An example of a certificate is provided in Appendix C. The information on the validation 
certificate describes the tested Ada implementation; the source of this information is the signed 
declaration of conformance which the AVF provides to the AVO after completion of testing. 
The customer will ensure that the information contained on the certificate does not inftinge on the 
rights of third parties and may be required to provide a written sutement of consent from any 
third party involved. Currently, validation certificates will expire one year after the expiration 
date of the ACVC version used for the validation. An entry in the list of Ada implementations 
validated by testing will be made for each certificate issued. This entry will be removed when the 
certificate expires. 

5.7 Advertising Validated Status 

The customer will not advertise or make public claims that the Ada implementation is validated 
until after receiving a validation certificate or after receiving formal notification from the AVF 
that the AJPO has issued a validation certificate A waiver of confidentiality must be signed by 
a customer who intends to advertise the completion of events that indicate progress toward 
completion of validation. If a waiver of confidentiality has been signed with the AVF. the AVF 
will respond to inquiries about the customer’s advertisements or public claims by acknowledging 
receipt of validation materials Q.e.. a formal agreement, pre-validation results, or validation 
testing results) without judgement concermng the success of the validation. 

14 






5^ Certification Mark 


The certification mark (see Appendix D for reproduction) may only be used on products directly 
associated with validated Ada compilers, such as disks, tapes, packaging, advertising, reference 
manuals aixl any other associated documentation where a sigtiificant portion relates to a validated 
Ada compiler. This unique mark distinguishes compilers validated in accordarux with the rules 
in this document The certification mark can be reproduced in any size, color, or combination of 
colors. 



6. VALroATION BY REGISTRATION 


6.1 Result Profile 

Two Ada implementations which pass a given ACVC version have the same result profile 
when; 

a. they use the same customized test suite; 

b. inapplicable test programs in the customized test suite are the same for both 
implementations: 

c. inapplicable test programs are inapplicable for the same reasons; and 

d. any implementation dependent characteristics tested for by the customized test suite are the 
same for both implementations. 

6J, Derived Implementations 

An Ada implementation may be derived from a base implementation when all the following 
conditions are true: 

a. the validation certificate for the base implementation has an expiration date at least three 
.. mopths beyond the time of derivation; 

b. the host and target computer systems of the base and derived Ada implementations 
have compatible instruction sets and operating systems; 

c. the Ada implementation proposed for registration contains an Ada compiler that was 
obtained from the Ada compiler of the base implementation by changes that are within 
the scope of accepted software maintertance practices; and 

d. The result profile for the Ada implementation is either the same as the base 
implementation or, if there are minor differences, these differences are justified as being 
within the scope of accepted software maintenance practices (see Section 6.3). 

Common examples of compatible instruction sets and operating systems are two differeru 
computer system models in a manufacturer’s product line or the computer systems produced by 
different manufacturers that use the same functional units and operating systems. 

The changes that may be made to an Ada compiler for the purpose of derivation will be within 
the scope of software maintenance as applied to the domain of compiler construction. Changes 
must be classified as corrective, adaptive, or perfective. Examples of these changes are the 
correction of a compiler error, the adaptation to an operating system upgrade, the addition of a 
flo atin g point processor to a small target computer system, or the perfection of a garbage 
collection algorithm. 

6J Registration Request 

Registration of an Ada implementation can be achieved only through the AVF which validated 
the base implementation. Any interested party may initiate a registration by sending a request to 


17 




the appropriate AVF and paying a fee established by the AVF. The registration request must 
contain the following infonnation: 

a. reference to the base implementation and its validation certificate; 

b. identifying description of the Ada implementation(s) that is being derived from the base 
implementation; 

[Note that this description must include the nomenclature of the computer systemfs). 
including operating system for both host and target computer 6ystem(s). or nin-time 
system for the target computer, if applicable, the Ada compiler name and version 
identifier, and identifier for any components of the host and target computer systems listed 
in the VSR for the base implementation.] 

c. a signed declaration of conformance for the derived implementation(s); 

d. a consent agieemem from any other party having a legal interest in the Ada compilei, 

e. a statement as to whether the Ada implementation(s) have been tested with the customized 
test suite used in the validation of the base implementation; and 

f. a statement supported by appropriate evidence that the Ada implementation(s) may, in 
fact, be derived from the referenced base impiementation. 

The statement, required by f. above, will include the classification of software maintenance 
changes (see Section 6.2) and the effea these changes have on the result profile; will list the 
differences between the computer systems of the base implementation and the derived 
implementation; and will describe the e^ea these diHerences have on the Ada compiler. The 
information required by e. and f. above substantiate the claim made in the declaration of 
conformance. 

6.4 AVF Evaluation 

The AVF will not perform testing on derived implementations. The AVF will review the 
registration request for completeness and the plausibility of information. The certification body 
may require the customer to provide wrinen statements concerning a result profile from any third 
party involved. If the AVF and customer cannot reach an agreement on the registration request, 
the issue is referred to the AVO for a decision. 

Registration 

Registration requests which are accepuble to the AVF are forwarded to the AVO for registration 
with the AJPO as validated Ada Implementations untested by an AVF. The customer will be 
irotified by the AVF when the AVO approves registration. A validation certificate will not be 
issued for these derived Implementations but the customer may use the certification mark 
awarded to the base implementation. The list of derived implementations and information 
provided in the registration request will be available to the public from the AJPO. 

6.6 Expiration of Validated Status 

A derived implementation loses its sutus of being validated if it is chaUenged successfully (see 
Section 6.7), upon expiration of the validation certificate of its base implementation, or when 


18 




registration is revoked by the customer. 

6.7 Challenges 

Any derived implementation may be challenged by any interested party through the AVF which 
initiated its registration. The challenger will pay a chaUenge fee to the appropriate AVF and will 
submit a challenge request which: 

a. identifies the derived implementation being challenged; 

b. names one ACVC test horn the customized test suite together with its implementation 
dependent parameters, if any; and 

c. describes in which way the implementation will fail this test 

The AVF will send this challenge to its registration customer asking for comment The challenge 
will be considered settled if the registration is revoked by the registration customer: otherwise, 
the challenge will be settled as outlined in Section 6.9. 

6.8 Challenge Mark 

The AVF will inform the AVO that a challenge for a given derived implementation has been 
received. The derived implementation will then be marked as “challenged” on the list of 
derived implementations maintained by the AJPO. Information pertaining to the chaUenge may 
be requested by any interested party and received from the AVF. It should be noted that a 
chaUenge mark applies only to the derived implementation which was named and does not 
indicate any judgement about the conformity of the chaUenged implementation. 


6.9 Challenge Test 

The AVF wiU conclude a formal agreement with the chaUenger which covets the AVF’s cost for 
performing a chaUenge test. For chaUenge testing, the chaUenged derived implementation wiU 
be tested against the named ACVC test The chaUenger wiU provide access to the chaUenged 
derived implementation and appropriate expertise to facilitate the AVF test The AVO wiU be 
informed of the test result. Depending on its result, the AVO wiU settle the chaUenge by either 
removing the chaUenge mark or the derived implementation from the list of validated Ada 
compilers. 


19 




APPENDIX A 


Declaration of Conformance 


Customer: _ 

Certificate Awardee: _ 

Ada Validation Facility: _ 

ACVC Version: _ 

Ada Implementation 

Ada Compiler Name and Version: _ 

Host Computer System: _ 

Target Computer System: _ 

Declaration: 

[1/we] the undersigned, declare that [I/we] have no knowledge of deliberate deviations from the Ada 
Language Standard ANSI/MIL-STD-181SA in the implementation listed above. 


Customer Signature Date 

Company 

Tide 


Certificate Awardee Signature Date 

Company 

Title 


Note: If tire Customer and the Certificate Awardee are the same, only the customer signahire is needed. 


A-1 





APPENDIX B 


Implementer Dispute Format 


[pan A] 


Implemenier 

Configuration: 

ACVC Version: 

Pre-Validation Sutoittal Date: 


<implementer*s name> 

<host A target hardware A operating systems> 
<ACVC version#> 

<due date for in-house results> 


[Pan A will be completed once by each implementer; pan B will be completed for each dispute. 
It is not necessary for a pre-validation date to have been established. Part A information is treated 
as confidential.] 


B-1 






[partBJ 


Reference: 

Summary: 

Discussion: 


<test name {.test name}> 

<brief description of die dispute> 
<detailed description of the dispute> 


[In this Discussion, arguments should be specified using test line #s and references to pertinent 
sections of the Ada standard. Commentaries (AI-xxxx), or the ACVC Implementer’s Guide 
(AIG)*. The implementer must describe the behavior of the implementation for the test or tests 
that are disputed, stating the particular test messages that are produced. It is sufficient for the 
detailed description to be limited to the particular segment of test code that is disputed. Relevant 
source code with compiler messages should be included. (For a group of tests that cause much the 
same behavior, it is sufficient for a detailed description to be given for one of them, with the 
relevant line numbers given for the like problems in ^e related tests.) 

If the argument depends upon implementation constraints of hardware or software (e.g., 
charaaeristics of the operating system), then these should be specified; the particular computer 
and operating system should be identified. It is especially important that implementations that fail 
to pass some test due to capacity limitations be describ^ in enough detail for the AVO to assess 
the reasonableness of these limitations. 

Failure to fully specify the points pertinent m a dispute might result in an adverse decision being 
made, with the disputer having to further argue the case with a second submittal to the AVO. Yet 
it is possible that the Summary will suffice to adequately present a dispute. 

*CThe AIG is not an official inteipretation of the Ada standard but it might provide useful 
infonnation in support of a dispute in explaining implementation choices.)] 




APPENDIX C 


Validation Certificate 


Ada Joint Prograin Office 


Ada Validation Certificate <nuiDber> 


The 

<compileriuime> 

was validated by testing using ACVC version <nuinbcr> 

in the configuration consisting of the 

Host Computer System 
<description> 

and the 

Target Computer System 
<description> 


Ada Validation Facility: 
Date of Issue: 
Expiration Date: 
Validation Customer 


C-1 





APPENDIX D 


Certification Mark 




iHti raoovci coMfOiMf 
to iatUMt ltO lllUAl 

oiiUMiNioiriMi AjfO 
vatoiairicuiifHi 

litiworaocioutci 



THIS PRODUCT CONFORMS 
TO ANSI/MIL-STD-1015A AS 
DETERMINED BY THE AJPO 
UNDER ITS CURRENT 
TESTING PROCEDURES 



TIMS PnOOUCT CONFORMS 
10 ANSl/MIl-STO-tllSAAS 
OttiHMINfOir Till AJPO 
UND(H ITS CURRENT 
lisiiNGrROCEniiiifS 



THIS PRODUCT CONFORMS 
T0ANSI/MIL-STD-ini5AAS 
DCTCRMINED DY THE AJPO 
UNDER ITS CURRENT 
TESTING PROCEDURES 


D-1 







APPENDIX E 


Points of Contact 


Ada Validation Facility Managers 
Mr. Bobby Evans 

Standard Languages and Environments Division 
Engineering Applications Directorate 
DCS/Cotmnunicadons-Computer Systems 
Wright-Pattexson Air Force Base 
Ohio 45433-6503 

Ms. Jane Pink 
Mr. Michael Ryan 

The National Computing Centre, Ltd. 

Oxford Road 
Manchester 
England. Ml 7ED 

Mr. Fabrice Gamier de Labareyre 
Mr. Alphonse Philippe 
AFNOR 

Tour Europe, cedcx 7 
F-92080 Paris la Defence 
France 

Dr. William Dashiell 

National Institute of Standards and Technology 
National Computer Systems Laboratory 
Building 225, 

Room A266 

Gaithersburg, MD 20899 

Mr. Michael Tonndorf 
lABG, Dept SZT 
Einsteinstrasse 
D-8012 Onobrunn 
Federal Republic of Germany 

ACVC Maintenance Organization 

Mr. Steve Wilson 

Standard Languages and Environments Division 
Engineering Applications Directorate 
DCS/Communications-Computer Systems 
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base 
Ohio 45433-6503 


E-1 





Ada Joint Program Ojftce 

Dr. John P. Solomond 

Director Ada Joint Program Office 

Deputy Director, Defense Research and Engineering (R&AT) 

Penugon Room 3E114 (Fern Sl) 

Washington, D.C 20301-3081 
Telephone; + 202-694-0209 
net: solomond@ajpo.sei.cmu.edu 


Ada Validation Organization 

Ms. Audrey A. Hook 
Institute for Defense Analyses 
1801 N. Beauregard St 
Alexandria, Va. 22311 
Telephone: + 703-824-5501 
net: hook@ida.org 

Ada Information Center 

Ms. Susan Carlson 
Ada Information Oearinghouse 
UT Research Institute 
4600 Forhcs Blvd. 

Lanham,Md. 20706-4312 
Telephone: 703-685-1477 

ACVC and VSR Distribution 

National Technical Information Service 
U.S. Department of Commerce 
5285 Port Royal Road 
Springfield, Va. 22161 
Telephone: -»■ 703-487-4650 


E-2 









DoD Directives and Ada Policy Statements 


Ms. Jan Bodanyi 
OASDPA 

Pentagon Room 2E757 
Washington, D.C. 20301-1400 
Telephone: + 202-695-0192 

Validated Compiler Lists 

AJPO - Official Ada lists, updated monthly. 

Michele Kee 

Ada Infoimation Gearinghouse 
nr Research Institute 
4600 Fortes Boulevard 
Lanham, MD 20706-4312 
Telephone: +703-685-1477 

NIST - All FIPS validated compilers, updated quarterly. 

Natiorud Institute of Standards and Technology 
National Computer and Telecommunications Laboratory 
Gaithersburg. MD 20899 


E-3 






1 


APPENDIX F 
References 


[AJPO 87] Ada Joint Program Office: Ada Compiler Validation Procedures and Guidelines, 
Version 1.1,1 January 1987 

[ANSI 83] American National Standards brstitute and United States Department of Defense: 
ANS1/MIL-STD-181SA Reference Manual for The Ada Programming Language, 1983 Note: 
This standard is identical with ISO/8652-1987 and FIPS 119, 1985. The ANSI 83 is available 
firom various publishers and from the U. S. Govemmem at the following addresses: 

Commanding Officer 
Naval Publicadons and Forms Center 
Attn: NPODS 
5801 Tabor Avenue 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19120 

Superintendent of Documents 
Government Printing Office 
Washington, D.C. 20402 

The ISO/8652-1987 (French and English versions) is available from: 

AFNOR 

Tour Europe, cedex 7 
F-92080 Paris la Defence 
FratKe 

[ANSI/IEEE 83] American National Standards Institute and Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers, Inc., Standard 729-1983; "ANSI/IEEE Standard Glossary of Software Engineering 
Terminology". 

[DoD 87] Department of Defense Directives: Number 3405.1, 2 April 1987 Subject: Computer 
Prrgramming Language Policy and Number 34052, 30 March 1987 Subjea: Use of Ada in 
Weapon Systems. 

[FIRMR 87] GesMtal Services Admiitistratioit, Federal Iidbrmation Resources Management 
Regulations (FIRMR) 201.8-109,10 July 1981, Subject: Validation of Compilers. 

[ISO 74] International Standards Organization: ISO 2382/1-1974 Data Processing - Vocabulary • 
Section 01: Fundamental Ibims. 

[ISO/DEC 86] International Standards Organization: ISO/IEC, Guide 2, Sth edition 1986 - General 
Terms and Their Definitions Concerning Startdardization and Related Activities. 


F-1 






