Software 


@ Converting EO S Data From 
HDF-EOSto netCDF 

A C-language computer program ac- 
cepts, as input, a set of scientific data and 
metadata from an Earth Observing Sys- 
tem (EOS) satellite and converts the set 
from (1) the format in which it was cre- 
ated and delivered to (2) another format 
for processing and exchange of data on 
Earth. The first-mentioned format can 
be either HDF-EOS 2 or HDF-EOS 5 
("FI DF" signifies "FI ierarchical Data For- 
mat”). The second-mentioned format is 
netCDF ("CDF” signifies "Common Data 
Format”), which is an open-standard, 
machine-independent, self-describing 
format for scientific-data files. In the ab- 
sence of this or a similar program, in- 
compatibilities among the three file for- 
mats can cause loss of metadata upon 
conversion. 

This program preserves as many of the 
metadata as possible upon conversion. 
The program opensthe input FIDF-EOS 
2 or FI DF-EOS 5 file, queries the compo- 
nents of the file by use of the FI DF-EOS 2 
and FIDF-EOS 5 Compatibility Library 
(which is described in the immediately 
following article and provides uniform 
access to HDF-EOS 2 and HDF-EOS 5 
files), and writes the data and metadata 
components into a netCDF file following 
the Climate and Forecast (CF) metadata 
conventions. 

This program was written by Richard U li- 
man of Goddard Space Flight Center; Bob 
Bane of Global Science & Technology, Inc.; 
and Jingli Yang of Earth Resources Technol- 
ogy, Inc. Further information is contained in a 
TSP (see page 1). GSC-15007-1 


o HDF-EOS 2 and HDF-EOS 5 
Compatibility Library 

The HDF-EOS 2 and HDF-EOS 5 
Compatibility Library contains C-lan- 
guage functions that provide uniform 
access to HDF-EOS 2 and HDF-EOS 5 
files through one set of application pro- 
gramming interface (API) calls. ("HDF- 
EOS 2" and "H DF-EOS 5” are defined in 
the immediately preceding article.) 
Withoutthislibrary, di ff eren ces between 
theAPIsof HDF-EOS2and H DF-EOS 5 
would necessitate writing of different 
programsto cover H DF-EOS 2 and HDF- 
EOS 5. The API associated with this li- 
brary is denoted "he25.” 


For nearly every H DF-EOS 5 API call, 
there is a corresponding he25 API call. 
If a file in question is in the H DF-EOS 5 
format, the code reverts to the corre- 
sponding H DF-EOS 5 call; if the file is in 
the HDF-EOS 2 format, the code trans- 
lates the arguments to HDF-EOS 2 
equivalents (if necessary), calls the H DF- 
EOS 2 call, and retranslates the results 
back to H DF-EOS 5 (if necessary). 

This program was written by Richard U li- 
man of Goddard Space Flight Center; Bob 
Bane of Global Science & Technology, Inc.; 
and Jingli Yang of Earth Resources Technol- 
ogy, Inc. Further information iscontained in a 
TSP (seepage 1).G SC -15 008-1 


£ HDF-EOS Web Server 

A shell script has been written as a 
means of automatically making HDF- 
EOS-formatted data sets available via the 
World Wide Web. ("H DF-EOS” and vari- 
ants thereof are defined in the first of 
the two immediately preceding articles.) 
The shell script chains together some 
software tools developed by the Data Us- 
ability Group at Goddard Space Flight 
Center to perform the following actions: 
•Extract metadata in Object Definition 
Language (ODL) from an H DF-EOSfile, 
•Convert the metadata from ODL to 
Extensible Markup Language (XML), 
•Reformat the XML metadata into 
human-readable Hypertext Markup 
Language (HTML), 

• Publish the HTML metadata and the 
original H DF-EOS file to a Web server 
and an 0 pen-source Project for a N et- 
work Data Access Protocol (OPeN- 
DAP) server computer, and 

• Reformat the XML metadata and sub- 
mit the resulting file to the EOS Clear- 
inghouse, which is a Web-based meta- 
data clearinghouse that facilitates 
searching for, and exchange of, Earth- 
Science data. 

This program was written by Richard U li- 
man of Goddard Space Flight Center; Bob 
Bane of Global Science & Technology, Inc.; 
and Jingli Yang of Earth Resources Technol- 
ogy, Inc. Further information iscontained in a 
TSP (seepage 1). GSC-15011-1 


Q HDF-EOS 5 Validator 

A computer program partly automates 
the task of determining whether an H DF- 
EOS 5 file is valid in that it conforms to 


specifications for such characteristics as 
attribute names, dimensionality of data 
products, and ranges of legal data values. 
["HDF-EOS” and variants thereof are de- 
fined in "Converting EOS Data From 
HDF-EOS to netCDF" (GSC-15007-1), 
which is the first of several preceding arti- 
cles in this issue of NASA Tech Briefs.] Pre- 
viously, validity of a file wasdetermined in 
a tedious and error-prone process in 
which a person examined human-read- 
able dumps of data-file-format informa- 
tion. 

The present software helps a user to 
encode the specifications for an HDF- 
EOS 5 file, and then inspects the file for 
conformity with the specifications: First, 
the user writes the specifications in Ex- 
tensible Markup Language(XML) byuse 
of a document type definition (DTD) 
that is part of the program. Next, the por- 
tion of the program (denoted the valida- 
tor) that performs the inspection is exe- 
cuted, using, as inputs, the specifications 
in XML and the H DF-EOS 5 file to be val- 
idated. Finally, the user examines the out- 
put of the validator. 

This program was written by Richard U li- 
man of Goddard SpaceFlightCenter; Bob Bane 
of Global Science & Technology, Inc.; and 
Jingli Yang of Earth Resources Technology, Inc. 
Further information iscontained in a TSP (see 
pagel). GSC-15015-1 


fs XML DTD and Schemas for 
HDF-EOS 

An Extensible Markup Language(XML) 
document type definition (DTD) standard 
for the structure and contents of H DF-EOS 
files and their contents, and an equivalent 
standard in theform of schemas, have been 
developed. ("HDF-EOS” and variants 
thereof are defined in the first two of four 
related articles immediately preceding this 
one.) More specifically, this standard de- 
scribes the structure and contents of a sin- 
gle H DF-EOS 5 file based on the H DF-EOS 
model as published in Volumes 1 and 2 of 
the HDF-EOS Library Users Guide. The 
DTD and schemas are easy-to-use represen- 
tations of a complex file format, enabling 
display of data in multiple ways 

By means of HDF5 XML software 
tools from the National Center for Super- 
computing Applications, the user can 
transform HDF5 files into XML files or 
vice versa. Inasmuch as HDF-EOS 5 files 
areH DF5 files, thesamesoftwaretoolscan 


NASA Tech Briefs, December 2008 


17 


