Final Report: Modeling the Volcanic Source at Long Valiev. 

CA. Using a Genetic Algorithm Technique 


NGT5-30025 

ESS/96-0139 


A. SUMMARY. 

In this project, we attempted to model the deformation pattern due to 
the magmatic source at Long Valley caldera using a real-value coded 
genetic algorithm (GA) inversion similar to that found in Michalewicz, 
1992. 


The project has been both successful and rewarding. The genetic 
algorithm, coded in the C programming language, performs stable 
inversions over repeated trials, with varying initial and boundary 
conditions. The original model used a GA in which the geophysical 
information was coded into the fitness function through the computation of 
surface displacements for a Mogi point source in an elastic half-space. The 
program was designed to invert for a spherical magmatic source - its 
depth, horizontal location and volume - using the known surface 
deformations. It also included the capability of inverting for multiple 
sources. 

As of August, 1999, the program has been revised to model a more 
complicated source pattern, including both elliptical sources and fault 
sources. The elliptical model inverts for the horizontal location, the depth, 
and the major and minor axes of a prolate ellipsoid, as well as its volume, 
and both its orientation and dip angles. The fault model inverts for the 
fault displacement, knowing the type and location of existing fault 
structures. Again, the program can invert for both multiple sources of a 
given type as well as a mixture of the source types themselves. 

After prolonged testing of parameter ranges and inversion stability 
on synthetic data, the GA was employed to invert actual data from Long 
Valley for both spherical and elliptical sources. While the model has the 
capability of inverting GPS measurements, expansion line readings and 
simple leveling or uplift data, available data included two-color geodolite 
measurements at very high accuracy, leveling circuits at better than 
average precision and laser altimeter data with substantial coverage and 
lower accuracy. All three types were incorporated into a time-dependent 
inversion in an initial attempt to locate the sources below the dome 



throughout the early to mid-1990s. Shown on the next few pages are the 
location plans for that data and the inversion results for both a two 
spherical source model and a two ellipsoid source model using laser 
altimeter and geodolite measurements. 

The GA was modified to include options for multipoint crossover 
and windowing. These options have been tested on different inversion 
problems to determine their applicability for different fitness landscapes 
with varying standard deviations on the parameters themselves. In 
addition, a combination of research and testing has led to better 
recommendations for appropriate mutation rates. A thorough error 
analysis on the GA results for different source models also was completed 
this year. In addition, the model has been modified to include multipoint 
crossover and proportional mutation, both of which proved to be more 
efficient for searching the large parameter space associated with the 
ellipsoidal models. 

In a 1998 collaboration with other CU researchers, the genetic 
algorithm developed for this project was employed in a waveform 
inversion for the crustal structure of the western U.S., and the results were 
published in BSSA, 1999 (see below). 

Substantial work was done in the last year in understanding the 
interactions between the various ellipsoidal parameters, specifically 
volume, depth and length of semimajor axis, and their effects on the fitness 
landscape. 

Finally, in the last few months, the algorithm has been adapted to 
invert for gravity data available for the Mayon volcano in the Philippines, 
in association with several colleagues from Europe. We were successful in 
inverting for the source volume, location, mass and depth below that active 
stratovolcano, and presented our results at IUGG in England, July 1999. 


B. PERSONAL INFORMATION. 

Current address: 

Kristy F. Tiampo 
CIRES, C.B. 216 
University of Colorado 
Boulder, CO 80309-0216 

Anticipated Degree Date: Spring, 2000 



Anticipated Employment Plans: Postdoctoral work, Univ. of CO 


C. PUBLICATIONS ASSOCIATED WITH THIS RESEARCH. 

Tiampo, K.F., Hofton, M., Rundle, J.B., and Minster, J.B., 1996. Inversion 
for the volcanic source at Long Valley, Califomia,using a genetic 
algorithm technique. Eos, Transactions, AGU, v. 77, n. 46, p. 146. 

Tiampo, K.F., Rundle, J.B., Hofton, M., Minster, J.B., and Langbein, J.O., 
1997. Inversion for the volcanic source at Long Valley, California, using 
multiple data sources and a genetic algorithm technique. Eos, 

Transactions, AGU, v. 78, n. 46, p. 776. 

Tiampo, K.F., Rundle, J.B., Fernandez, J.M., and Langbein, J.O., 1998. 
Ellipsoidal vs. spherical models for magmatic intrusion sources. Annales 
Geophysicae, v. 16, pt. I, EGS, p. 191. 

Bhattacharyya, J., Sheehan, A.F., Tiampo, K., 1998. Genetic algorithm 
inversion of regional waveforms for western United States crustal 
structure. Eos, Transactions, AGU, v. 78, n. 46, p. 493. 

Bhattacharyya, J., Sheehan, A.F., Tiampo, K., Rundle, J.B. Using genetic 
algorithms to model regional waveforms for crustal structure in the 
western United States. BSSA, v. 89, no. 1, Feb. 1999. Copies enclosed. 

Tiampo, K.F., Rundle, J.B., Fernandez, J.M., and Langbein, J.O.. 

Spherical and ellipsoidal volcanic sources at Long Valley caldera, 
California, using a genetic algorithm inversion technique, Journal of 
Volcanology and Geophysical Research, in review, 1999. Reprints will be 
forwarded upon publication. 

Tiampo, K.F., Rundle, J.B., Fernandez, J.M., and Langbein, J.O. 

Inversion for multiple volcanic sources using a genetic algorithm 
technique, IUGG 99, Birmingham, Eng. land. 

Fernandez, Jose, Kristy F. Tiampo, Gerhard Jentzsch & John B. Rundle, 

On the interpretation of the microgravity and GPS measurements in Mayon 
volcano, Philippines, IUGG 99, Birmingham, England. 



Fernandez, Jose, Kristy F. Tiampo, Gerhard Jentzsch & John B. Rundle, 
Microgravity and GPS measurements in Mayon volcano, Philippines, to be 
submitted to Fall AGU, 1 999. 

Tiampo, K.F., Fernandez, J., Jentzsch, G. and Rundle, J.B., Inverting for 
the shallow source at Mayon volcano, Philippines, using microgravity and 
GPS measurements, to be submitted to JGR or Journal of Volcanology, 
1999-2000. 




Two-color EDM and leveling lines, Long Valley caldera, California 








Solution for two sphere inversion, Long Valley caldera, California, 1989-92 



119' 00 



Solution for the two ellipsoid i 


118' 45 'W 



, Long Valley Caldera 















Length of Semimajor 



1 600 h 



3000 


Q 2000 


1000 


Ot 


150 


ioo h 


50 r 


Correct depth = 2500 m A A^A 
A 


A A .^4 

a 


Correct theta = 30 degrees 


1.0000 0.9994 


Fitness 


Variation in fitness with a. volume, b. length of semimajor axis 
c. depth and d. theta. 






