NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL 
Monterey, California 




THESIS 



Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 



94-06455 

lililllllililili 



XI ii-- .. 



L/ 






Best 

Available 

Copy 







REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

Form Approved 

0MB So. 07O4-OIS8 

PuMc i«pOfting fof ttm eoNscton qI • Mtvnttcd to ovofogo 1 hOMf p*f ripcmo# tKk/drg tho tvno rwvwnng rntruotton* Moro^ing •■•ttfiQ dot* tourcM 

gtfhdfftg ond motfiMing thm daU wodid and oofvtpla()nQ and tav—wog tia eolatfion of twformaden Sand oonman^a ragardv^ tha durdan oatvnata Of any othor aspaet of ifM 
oodicmn of vitofmaion mofw^ng tuggaationa fo« raducoig tha bvrdan to WaaMington Haidqinda>i Sarvaaa OaaolOfaM fof Hormatten Opanttona and Rapods I2i5 Jaiofion 

Oawa Highway. Suda 1204 Aitaigton. VA 23202-4302. and to tha Odioa of Managamant and Sudgat Papanvoi'k Raduolion Profact (0704-0188) Waahmgion DC 20503 

nrMf?r4*nM€>\vviirnn 

1 REPORT TVSe ANb biTES eOVeAED 1 

Master’s Thesis 1 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

A Real-Time U.S. Army Tactical Telephone Network 

Management System G-f) 

S. FUNDING NUMBERS 

6. AUTHOR(S) 

Johnson, Gregory Morris 

7. PERFOflMINO ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND AODRESS<ES) 

Naval Postgraduate School 

Monterey, CA 93943-5000 

6. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 

REPORT NUMBER 

9. SPONSORING.' MONITORING AGENCV NAME(S) AND AODRESS(ES) 

10. SPONSORING/ MONITORING 

AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 

11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

The views expressed in this thesis are those of the author and do not reflect the official policy or position 
of the Department of Defense or the United States Government. 

12a. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 

12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 

13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) 

The U.S. Army is currently developing a network management system for theater-level communications 
called the Integrated System Control. One limitation of this system is the lack of a real-time telephone 
network monitoring capability. Without this capability, communication commanders will not have a rapid 
and efficient tool for identifying and diagnosing network outages. The current semi-manual network 
reporting procedures are slow and error prone. This approach implements a real-time software 
monitoring system which displays the telephone network’s status to the operator. This system allows the 
operator to locate and diagnose network outages in real-time. The result is an Ada program which receives 
line-of-sight radio shelter status messages and displays their effects on the network’s status. The telephone 
network is represented by a series of display panels. Each panel provides the user with a different level of 
network detail, i.e., the network level, nodal level, intemodal level, or line-of-sight radio shelter 
component level. The network’s objects (line-of-sight radio shelters, circuit switches, telephone 
multiplexers, and radio and cable links) are represented by individual display objects. A color scheme is 
used to indicate a display object’s status. This program is tested by simulating status messages via 
randomly reading a file. 

i4. SUBJECT TERMS 

Area Common User System, Digital Group Multiplex. Integrated System Control. 
Mobile Subscriber Equipment. Wide Area Network Management 

15. NUMBER OF PACES 

83 

16. PRICE CODE 

17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

OF REPORT OF THIS PAGE 

Unclassified Unclassified 

19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

OF ABSTRACT 

Unclassified 

20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 

Unlimited 


NSN 7540-01-280-5500 


sianaara horm (kcv. 
Preicnbed by ANSI Std. 239-18 



















Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 


A REAL-TIME US. ARMY TACTICAL TELEPHONE NETWORK 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 

by 

Gregory Morris Johnson 
Captain, United States Army 

B. S., Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, 1984 


Submitted in partial fulfillment of the 
requirements for the degree of 


MASTER OF SCIENCE IN COMPUTER SCIENCE 


from the 

NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL 


Author: 


Approved By: 


September 1993 



Dr. Ted Lewis, Chairman, 
Department of Computer Science 


ii 







ABSTRACT 


The U.S. Army is currently developing a network management system for theater- 
level communications called the Integrated System Control. One limitation of this system 
is the lack of a real-time telephone network monitoring capability. Without this capability, 
communication commanders will not have a rapid and efficient tool for identifying and 
diagnosing network outages. The current semi-manual network reporting procedures are 
slow and error prone. 

This approach implements a real-time software monitoring system which displays the 
telephone network’s status to the operator. This system allows the operator to locate and 
diagnose network outages in real-time. 

The result is an Ada program which receives line-of-sight radio shelter stanis 
messages and displays their effects on the network’s status. The telephone network is 
represented by a series of display panels. Each panel provides the user with a different level 
of network detail, i.e., the network level, nodal level, internodal level, or line-of-sight radio 
shelter component level. The network’s objects (line-of-sight radio shelters, circuit 
switches, telephone multiplexers, and radio and cable links) are represented by individual 
display objects. A color scheme is used to indicate a display object’s status. This program 
is tested by simulating status messages via randomly reading a file. 


iii 


Acc f'Si 

tor 

NTIS 

CRA&I 

Oric 

tar 

1 U: .):■ • 

1 .:(’d 





Ry 


O': t 'l. 

!i,.. / 




•'/ ('odes 


JMC/or 

SpL-Cliil 






TABLE OF CONTENTS 


l. INTRODUCTION.1 

A. THESIS MOTIVATION.1 

B. FOCUS OF THESIS.1 

C. AREA COMMON USER SYSTEM OVERVIEW.3 

1. Theater Level Communications.3 

2. Description of the Area Common User System.4 

II. NETWORK MANAGEMENT SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.8 

A. NETWORK MANAGEMENT DEHNITIONS.8 

B. MANAGEMENT SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION REQUIREMENTS.9 

C. TACTICAL TELEPHONE NETWORK MODEL.9 

D. TACTICAL TELEPHONE SYSTEM OVERVIEW.13 

E. MANAGEMENT SYSTEM REACTION REQUIREMENTS.20 

1. Background Information.20 

2. Network Reaction Requirements.21 

m. NETWORK MANAGEMENT SYSTEM DESIGN.29 

A. NETWORK MANAGEMENT SYSTEM OVERVIEW.29 

B. PANEL DESIGN SEGMENT.30 

1. Transportable Applications Environment Plus General Information ..30 

2. Network Panel Designs.31 

C. TRC-173 STATUS MESSAGE SEGMENT DESIGN.33 

1. Network Model Database Design.34 

2. TRC-173 Status Message Status Message Structure.37 

3. TRC-173 Status Message Processing Logic Design.37 

D. SYSTEM MANAGEMENT CONTROLLER SEGMENT DESIGN.37 

1. Panel Display Object Database Design.37 

2. Network Database Processor Task.40 

3. Display Object Database Processor Task.40 

4. TRC-173 Status Message Receiver Task.42 

5. Display Object Timer Task.42 

IV. MANAGEMENT SYSTEM VALIDATION TEST.43 

A. MANAGEMENT SYSTEM VALIDATION TEST PROCEDURE.43 

1. Step 1; Constructing and Evaluating TRC-173 Data Set.43 

2. Step 2: Processing The Data Sets and Collecting The Results.44 

3. Step 3: Comparing The Predicted Against Actual Results.44 

B. SUMMARY OF TEST RESULTS.44 

V. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS.46 

A. CONCLUSIONS.46 

B. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH.46 

APPENDIX A: ACRONYMS AND DEFINITIONS.48 

APPENDIX B: NETWORK LAYOUT & INTERNAL CONNECTTVITY.50 

APPENDIX C: ALGORITHMS FOR MESSAGE PROCESSING.60 


IV 













































APPENDIX D: MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FLOW DIAGRAMS.70 

REFERENCES.74 

INITIAL DISTRIBUTION LIST.76 







I. INTRODUCTION 


A. THESIS MOTIVATION 

In the early 1970’s, the U.S. Army started a program to modernize its tactical 
communications assets. The communication upgrades included a transition from analog to 
secure digital voice and data communications systems and the development of position 
location systems. Today these improvements have provided battlefield commanders with 
efficient and reliable tactical communications systems. 

However, the one major drawback to these tactical communications advancements is 
that an equally advanced communications management system was not concurrently 
developed. Today communication commanders have no single automated system to assist 
them in communications management. These commanders are reduced to having their 
staffs compile the overall system status from separate communication management 
facilities. This semi-manual overall system status procedure is slow, inefficient, and error 
prone. 

The U.S. Army is cunently developing the Integrated System Control to manage all 
tactical communications systems. The system will automate the functions of wide area 
network management, network planning and engineering, battlefield frequency 
management, communications security management, and communication asset command 
control for the three classes of communications systems. TABLE 1 contains the 
communication classes and their functions.[Ref. 1] 

The Integrated System Control wide area network management requirements do not 
address the issue of real-time tactical telephone network system monitoring. Without this 
capability, communication commanders will not have a rapid and efficient tool for 
identifying and diagnosing network outages. 

B. FOCUS OF THESIS 

The focus of this research is to design and implement an automated real-time Army 
Tactical Telephone Network Management System for a part of the communications 


1 





TABLE 1: ARMY COMMUNICATION CLASSES 


Communication Ciaia Providoi Uiar With 


Aim Combw Uur 

MtlilliM liliphOAi mm 

Ceibii Nil Ridle 

iMUfi ilnili ehiMwi cmMlMllMi 

Aibi Dill Dlilrlbitlin Syitoa 

CoBBinliilleni ter laelleil tfite lyitoai 


network, known as the Area Common User System. This is a computer program which will 
illustrate that from a central location a user can monitor a tactical telephone network. The 
user can identify the cause of a status change by transversing through display panels. 

The Army Tactical Telephone Network Management System monitors a fixed 
network consisting of line-of-sight radio shelters, circuit switches, telephone multiplexers, 
and cable and radio links. The management system updates the network’s status color 
display when a status message is received. Line-of-sight radio shelters are the only objects 
in the system that will generate status messages. 

This network management system is panel-driven and is divided into the following 
levels: network, nodal, intemodal, and line-of-sight component. Each display panel 
consists of various display objects that graphically represents the network at different levels 
of detail. 

The Ada programming language is utilized to implement the Army Tactical 
Telephone Network Management System. The Transportable Applications Environment 
Plus graphical user interface tool is used to produce the network panels.Validation testing 


2 











is used to demonstrate that the management system conforms with the system 
requirements. 

C. AREA COMMON USER SYSTEM OVERVIEW 

This section explains what the Area Common User System is, and describes its role 
in theater level communications. 

1. Theater Level Communications 

A theater is a geographical area that is outside of the Continental United States 
which has been assigned a unified or specified military commander. The geographic size 
of a theater can easily exceed 1,000,000 square km. Figure 1 depicts the portion of the 
Middle East that comprises the U.S. Central Command Theater. When U.S. military power 
is required the theater assets are geographically focused against the opposing force. The 
theater is divided into two levels: echelons corps and below and echelons above corps (see 
Figure 2). The echelons corps and below portion of the theater is where the actual combat 
operations are conducted and is composed of divisions and corps. A division is the most 
forward combat element (between the a division and corps) and consists of approximately 
15,000 troops. The area that a division can cover is approximately 4000 square km. A corps 
generally contains from three to five divisions and its command structure and support 
elements operate behind the division areas. A corps, including its divisions, can contain 
more than 80,000 troops and operates in an area of 35,000 square km. The echelons above 
corps portion of the theater is the area rearward of combat operations and provides support 
for the entire theater. Some of the operations performed at the echelons above corps level 
include engineer, supply, communications, medical, and maintenance operations. Both of 
these levels perform their activities in support of the theater commander. [Ref. 2] & [Ref. 3] 

Theater management is divided by the Army Command and Control System at the 
echelons above corps level and the Army Tactical Command and Control System at the 
echelons corps and below level. Both systems are integrated to support the five Battlefield 
Functional Areas: Maneuver Control, Air Defense, Fire Support, Intelligence, and Combat 


3 






Service Support. By having these two systems interfaced together through the three 
communication classes (Area Common User System, Combat Net Radio, and Army Data 
Distribution System), critical information can be provided throughout theater (see Figure 
3).[Ref. 2] 

2. Description of the Area Common User System 

The Area Common User System is a command and control system which is 
primarily a battlefield telephone system. Communicaiion is provided over a geographical 
area by a combination of line-of-sight radio, tactical satellite, tropospheric scatter radio and 
cable links. Tropospheric scatter radio links use the earth’s troposphere to reflect the 
transmitting radio’s waves back to a receiving radio. This process creates a radio link of 


4 





Figure 2; Theater Levels 

270 km. Line-of-sight radio links are the primary mode of establishing network 
connectivity betw -en circuit switches. When network connectivity requirements exceed 
the range of the line-of-sight radios (planning range 40 km) and the use of multiple relay 
stations are not economical, tactical satellite or tropospheric scatter links can be employed. 
In this thesis the reader only needs to know that tactical satellite and tropospheric scatter 
communication does exist in the Area Common User System. Cable links are used 
primarily to provide individual subscribers with telephone access to the tactical telephone 
network.[Ref. 4] 

5 









Figure 3: Command and Control System 
The Area Common User System is divided into two subsystems - one that 
supports echelons above corps units and one that supports echelons corps and below units. 
The Echelons Above Corps Area Common User Subsystem is supported by Digital Group 
Multiplex equipment and by the AN/TTC-39 series circuit switch while the Echelons Corps 
and Below Area Common User Subsystem is supported by Mobile Subscriber Equipment. 
The main differences between the two subsystems are the channel kbps rate, circuit routing 
strategies, mobile subscriber support, and International Consultative Committee on 
Telegraphy and Telephony (CCITT) X.25 packet switching service. Digital Group 
Multiplex equipment and the ANATC-39 series circuit switch operate at 32 kbps (but can 
also operate at 16 kbps) per channel while Mobile Subscriber Equipment operates at 16 
kbps. The AN/TTC-39 series circuit switch utilizes deterministic routing while Mobile 
Subscriber Equipment circuit switches use flood search routing. Flood search routing is a 
technique that requires a circuit switch to try all possible routes to complete a telephone 


6 











call. This routing technique ensures that the shortest communication path is utilized. 
Mobile Subscriber Equipment provides a tactical cellular telephone capability to mobile 
subscribers through the Radio Access Unit (RAU) and Mobile Subscriber Radiotelephone 
Terminal (MSRT). This cellular telephone service is not provided by the Echelons Above 
Corps Area Common User Subsystem. CCITT X.25 package switching is available through 
the Mobile Subscriber Equipment circuit switches but not by the AN/TTC-39 series circuit 
switch. In order to integrate the two subsystems selected gateway circuit switches must be 
established.[Ref. 4], [Ref. 5] & [Ref. 6] 

In the near future, echelons above corps communications will be more 
comparable to echelons corps and below communications. For example, the AN/TTC-39 
series circuit switch will be enhanced to include flood search routing [Ref. 5]. This will 
ensure that the most efficient route through the network will always be utilized. It will also 
enable direct echelons above corps switch to echelons corps and below switch trunking 
without designating gateway switches between the two levels. Other enhancements to the 
echelons above corps level will be a tactical cellular telephone capability and CCITT X.25 
packet switching [Ref. 7] & [Ref. 8]. 

The Area Common User System has two independent management facilities that 
perform most of the same functions required for the Integrated System Control. The 
Communications System Control Element is the management facility at the echelons above 
corps level and the System Control Center-2 fulfills this task at the echelons corps and 
below level. However, both of these management facilities are deficient in real-time 
network monitoring.[Ref. 9] & [Ref. 10] 


7 







II. NETWORK MANAGEMENT SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 


This chapter specifies a definition of a wide area network and network management. 
These definitions focus which network management functional area the Army Tactical 
Telephone Network Management System is associated with. Next, the management system 
implementation requirements and network model are covered. A detailed communications 
example is presented to illustrate how the equipment provides communications. This 
chapter concludes with a definition of the network management system reaction 
requirements. 

A. NETWORK MANAGEMENT DEFINITIONS 

The term wide area network refers to a communications network that supports 
subscribers in an area larger than 50 square km. Since the Area Common User System can 
support an area in excess of 1,000,000 square km it falls into this is category. 

Network management is composed of four functional areas: network operational 
control, network administration, network analysis and tuning, and network capacity 
planning.[Ref. 11] 

Network operational control is a collection of activities that assist a user in 
dynamically maintaining a network’s service levels. Some of the activities in this area are 
evaluating network events, collecting network data, processing on-line and off-line 
maintenance, and determining network problems. Operational control response time can 
range from real-time to one day.[Ref. 11] 

Network administration is the second functional area of network management. It deals 
with activities that maintain network equipment inventories, network changes, evaluation 
of network service levels, and trouble tickets. The response time for network administration 
can range from one to 40 days.[Ref. 11] 

The next functional area is network analysis and tuning. This functional area provides 
network managers with an ongoing quantitative evaluation of a network. It verifies that 
service levels are maintained, locates actual and potential bottlenecks, and provides 


g 







network trend reports. Network analysis and tuning cycles typically can take a few weeks 
to complete.[Ref. 11] 

Network capacity planning is the final functional area in network management. 
Constructing the optimal network is the goal of the network capacity planner. In order to 
determine the optimal network, the network capacity planner must perform the following 
steps: collect network data, develop network requirements, design and optimize network, 
and implement network. Network capacity planning can take six months to two years to 
complete. [Ref. 11] 

The Army Tactical Telephone Network Management System falls under the 
operational control functional area. The justification for this is that the management system 
will be evaluating event notifications, i.e., line-of-sight radio shelter status messages. 

B. MANAGEMENT SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION REQUIREMENTS 

The ultimate goal of this thesis is to present a version of the Army Tactical Telephone 
Network Management System that will operate as a module of the Integrated System 
Control. Therefore, the network management system will comply with the Integrated 
System Control’s implementation requirements. These requirements state that the system 
will be implemented in the Ada programming language and will operate on a hardware 
platform that supports the Unix Operating System and the X Window Graphical Interface 
System.[Ref I] 

C. tactical TELEPHONE NETWORK MODEL 

The program for this thesis is limited to a fixed network consisting of three nodes and 
will allow the user to view the network at four levels. These four levels are the network 
level, nodal level, internodal level, and line-of-sight radio shelter component level. The 
user can determine the display objects’ status by a color scheme. This color scheme will be 
described later in this chapter. The Echelons Above Corps Area Common User Subsystem 
equipment is used in this network model. However, this equipment is used to model the 
entire Area Common User System since all circuit switches and line-of-sight radio shelters 


9 






provide the same basic functions respectively. The differences between the different circuit 
switches and line-of-sight radio shelters are their capacity and components. The remainder 
of this section defines each level and explain the role of each display object. 

The network level is the top level of the network and is used to display the overall 
network status (see Figure 4). At this level there are three nodes. Each node represents the 
overall status of its corresponding nodal level. Each node is connected to the other adjacent 
nodes through intemodal line-of-sight radio links. Each node is identified by the format 
label Nx, where x represents a number. For example, the N1 represents node one. 
Intemodal links are identified by the format label Lyz, where y represents the link 
originator node number and z represents the link terminator node number. For example, 
L23 represents the intemodal link that originates at node two and terminates at node three. 



The nodal level is an expanded view of a particular node at the network level (see 
Figures 5-7). Each of the three nodal level’s equipment and link layout are basically the 


10 









same. At each nodal level there are six line-of-sight radio shelters (labeled TRC-173), one 
circuit switch (labeled TTC-39D), and three telephone multiplexers (labeled RMC). At 
each nodal level TRC-173s and the TTC-39Ds are identified by the label format C_x. The 
telephone multiplexers are identified by a two digit number. This equipment is interfaced 
together through a combination of cable and radio links. Cable and intranodal radio links 
are identified by the label formats Cx and Lx respectively. The intemodal links are 
identified as stated above. 



Figure 5: Node 1 Level 


The intemodal level is an isolated view of the transmission path between two circuit 
switches (see Figures 8-10). For example, intemodal link LI2 level displays only the 


II 







Figure 6: Node 2 Level 


equipment and links involved in the path between the circuit switches at N1 and N2. The 
identification and labeling of display objects are as stated above. 

The line-of-sight radio shelter component level displays the internal components of a 
specific TRC-173 (see Figure 11). A detailed listing and function of the TRC-173’s 
components is given in the next section. 

In this network model there are two types of display objects - active and passive. 
Active display objects generate a status message. TRC-173 line-ot-sight radio shelters are 
the only objects that can be active in this model. TRC-173s become active only when they 


12 








Figure 7: Node 3 Level 


generate a status message. All other objects, to include non-active TRC-173s, are passive 
and they react to a status message. 

D. TACTICAL TELEPHONE SYSTEM OVERVIEW 

This portion of the chapter provides an overview of how the actual objects in this 
model provide communications. The following topics are covered: the concept of a digital 
transmission group (DTG), telephone multiplexer service, trunking between circuit 
switches, TRC-173 line-of-sight radio shelter components; and local and long distance 
telephone calls. 


13 











Figure 9: Intemodal L23 Level 


The term digital transmission group refers to a collection of full duplex channels 
which connect two nodes. These channels can be trunks, telephone loops, or data loops. 
Digital transmission groups originate from a circuit switch and terminate either to another 
circuit switch, a telephone multiplexer device, or another type of terminating equipment. 
Digital transmission groups can be transmitted over cable or radio links. Multiple digital 
transmission groups (known as super groups) can be multiplexed together and transmitted 


14 




















over links. Super groups can be demultiplexed into separate digital transmission groups or 
super groups and then be transmitted to different destinations. In this network model all 
digital transmission grc ms have nine channels and each one operates at 32 kbps for a total 
rate of 288 kbps. Eight of these channels are available to users and one is reserved for 
common channel signaling. 

Trunks provide communication paths between different circuit switches. In almost all 
cases trunks between circuit switches are a combination of cable and radio links. Cable 
links are used to connect equipment that is separated by a short distance, i.e., 5 km or less. 
They are used to connect the following equipment: a circuit switch to line-of-sight radio 
shelters, line-of-sight radio shelters, and circuit switches in special situations. Radio links 
greatly increase the distance between circuit switches, i.e., 40 km. In this network model 
there will be eight trunks between each pair of circuit switches. 

The TRC-173 line-of-sight radio shelter is used to extend the connectivity of the 
network through radio links. In the Area Common User System, the TRC-173 is primarily 
utilized as a terminator. However, it also has the capability to function as a relay. Since the 
TRC-173 can functions in both roles, it was chosen to model all the other Area Common 
User System radio shelters. 

Since the TRC-173 line-of-sight radio shelter is the only active object in this network 
model a basic understanding of how it functions is needed. Figure 12 is used to display each 
component in the shelter .The components of the TRC-173 are Group MODEM (GM), 
Trunk Group Multiplexer (TGM), Trunk Encryption Device (TED), Radio MODEM (RM), 
and GRC-103 microwave radio unit. [Ref. 4] 

The Group MODEM (GM) is the first TRC-173 component to be discussed. The 
purpose of the Group MODEM is to provide an interface from a cable link to the TRC-173. 
The Group MODEM converts a cable link signal to a nonreturn to zero (NRZ) signal and 
a NRZ signal into either conditioned diphase, dipulse, or bipolar signal. There are four 
cable connection slots per Group MODEM and there are two Group MODEMs per 
shelter. [Ref. 4] 


16 




Figure 12: TRC-173 LOS Radio Shelter 

The next component is the Trunk Group Multiplexer which multiplexes and 
demultiplexes up to four NRZ signals from a Group MODEM. There are a total of two 
Trunk Group Multiplexers per TRC-173.[Ref. 4] 

A Trunk Encryption Device can be connected to each Trunk Group Multiplexer to 
encrypt and decrypt the signals passing through it.[Ref. 4] 

The Radio MODEM converts the NRZ signal from the Trunk Encryption Device to a 
radio binary signal and a radio binary signal into a NRZ signal. There are rhree MODEM 
slots in a Radio MODEM unit.[Ref. 4] 

The final component in the TRC-173 is the GRC-103 microwave radio unit. The radio 
unit transmits the radio binary signal from the Radio MODEM and receives a radio binary 
signal from a distant TRC-173. There are two GRC-103 microwave radio units per 
she Iter. [Ref. 4] 


17 





A Remote Multiplexer Combiner (RMC) is a device that multiplexes and 
demultiplexes up to eight full duplex telephone loops. It transmits and receives a 
multiplexed signal via a cable link.[Ref. 4] 

Figure 13 illustrates how the equipment discussed above provides telephone service. 
In this example there are four digital transmission groups. Circuit switch (CS) 1 originates 
DTGs 1, 2, and 3 and CS 2 originates only DTG 4. DTG 1 is used to provide trunking 
between CS 1 and CS 2. DTGs 3 and 4 provide local site telephone service through RMC 
1 and RMC 2 respectively. DTG 2 provides site 3 with telephone service through RMC 1 
from CS 1. 

The network connection between all sites is provided by the TRC-173 line-of-sight 
radio shelters. The TRC-173 radio shelters in this example provide either a terminator or 
relay function. There are four line-of-sight terminators in this network: LOS 1, LOS 3, LOS 
4; and LOS 5. LOS 2 functions as the only relay. LOS I’s GM 1 slots 1 and 2 transmit and 
receive signals from Cl and C2 from CS 1 (DTGs 1 and 2 respectively). Internally a path 
is created through LOS 1 from GM 1 slots 1 and 2, TGM 1, TED 1, RM slot 1, and GRC- 
103 radio unit 1. The product of the Trunk Group Multiplexer is a super group consisting 
of DTGs 1 and 2. LOS 2 is a relay to LOS 1 and LOS 3. The internal path for LOS 2 requires 
a direct connection between the two GRC-103 radio units. The internal paths in LOS 3 are 
the same as LOS 1. However, once the super group is decomposed DTG 1 via GM 1 slot 1 
is cable linked (terminated) to CS 2 and DTG 2 via GM 1 slot 2 is cable linked to LOS 4’s 
GM 1 slot 1. LOS 4 creates an internal path from GM 1 slot 1, TGM 1, TED 1, RM slot 1, 
and GRC-103 radio unit 1. LOS 5 has the same internal path as LOS 4. DTG 2 is terminated 
at RMC 3 via a cable link from LOS 5’s GM 1 slot 1. 

A local telephone call is defined as both the calling and called telephones receiving 
telephone service from the same circuit switch. In Figure 5, calls placed from sites 1 or 3 
to sites 1 or 3 and from site 2 to site 2 are considered local calls. 


18 





Figure 13: Telephone Service Example 

A long distance telephone call is defined as both the calling and called telephones 
receiving telephone service from separate circuit switches. In Figure 5, calls placed from 
sites 1 or 3 to site 2 or from site 2 to sites 1 or 3 are considered long distance telephone calls. 


19 






E. MANAGEMENT SYSTEM REACTION REQUIREMENTS 


1. Background Information 

In the Army Tactical Telephone Network Management System, display objects 
can be one of four status colors. The status color green represents that a display object is 
fully functional. The orange status color indicates that a display object is partly functional. 
The status color blue means that the display object is nonfunctional due to no fault of its 
own. This status is assigned to a display object when it is not receiving input from some 
point along the transmission path. The status color red means that the display object is 
nonfunctional due to a fault of its own.The status color ranking from lowest to highest is as 
follows; green, orange blue and red. 

There are two categories of components in any line-of-sight radio shelter: those 
components in-system and those not in-system. Components that are in-system are in the 
radio shelter’s internal path to external links. Not in-system components are those 
components that are not in a radio shelter’s internal path to external links. Figure 14 shows 
aTRC-173 with the following components in-system: GM 1 slots 1 and2, TGM l.TED 1, 
RM slot 1. and GRC-103 1. All other components in this TRC-173 are categorized as not 
in-system. 

In-system components fall into one of two classes: external or internal interface 
capable. External interface capable components interface directly with a cable or radio link. 
On the other hand, internal interface capable components do not have this capability. They 
indirectly interface with a cable or radio link. In a TRC-173 line-of-sight radio shelter, only 
Group MODEMS and GRC-103 microwave radio units can be classified as external 
interface components. All the other components can be classified as internal interface 
components (see Figure 15). 


20 






Figure 14; In-System Components Example 

2. Network Reaction Requirements 

With the above terminology defined, the various network reactions to a TRC-173 
status message can be defined. The remainder of this chapter will specify status message 
reaction at the following levels: active TRC-173 level, nodal and intemodal levels, and the 
networK level. 

a. Active TRC-173 Level Requirements 

These reaction requirements will be presented in the following groupings; 
not in-system components, internal in-system components, and external in-system 
components. 

(1) Not In-System Component Requirements. When the Area Tactical 
Telephone Network Management System receives a red TRC-173 status message for a 
green not in-system component, the system will change the appropriate TRC-173’s 
component status to red. If the component identified in the status message is a Group 


21 

















Extarnal In-Mtem CamooMnt* 



Figure 15: External and Internal Components Example 
MODEM slot or an Radio MODEM slot, the management system will check if all slots are 
red. If true, the overall Group MODEM or Radio MODEM component status is changed to 
red. If false, the overall status is changed to orange. The overall status for the TRC-173 that 
generated the status message is based on the following: Orange - if the current status is 
green or orange. Blue - if the current status is blue, or Red - if the current status is red. 

On the other hand, if the network management system receives a green 
TRC-173 status message for a red not in-system component, the system will change the 
appropriate TRC-173’s component status to green. If the component identified in the status 
message is a Group MODEM slot or a Radio MODEM slot, the management system will 
check if all slots are green. If true, the overall Group MODEM or Radio MODEM 
component status is changed to green. If false, the overall status is changed to orange. The 
overall status for the TRC-173 that generated the status message is based on the following: 
Green - if all component statuses are green and all link statuses are green. Orange - if a 
component is orange or a not in-system component is red and at least one link is green or 


22 
























orange. Blue - if all links are a combination of blue and red and no pending overall TRC- 
173 status of red, or Red - if pending overall TRC-173 status is red. 

(2) Internal In-System Component Requirements. Some of the following 
reaction requirements are similar and, in some cases, will be identical to the above section. 

When the Area Tactical Telephone Network Management System 
receives a red TRC-173 status message for a green internal in-system component, the 
system will change the appropriate TRC-173’s component status to red. If the component 
identified in the status message is an Radio MODEM slot, the system checks if all slots are 
red. If true, the overall Radio MODEM component status is changed to red. If false, the 
overall status is changed to orange. All cable and radio links that indirectly pass through 
this component will have their status changed to blue if their current status is green or 
orange. However, no link’s status will be changed if its current status is blue or red. The 
overall status for the TRC-173 that generated the status message is based on the following: 
Orange - if at least one link is green or orange or Red - if all the links have either a blue or 
red status. 

If the management system receives a green TRC-173 status message 
for a red internal in-system component, the system will change the appropriate TRC-173’s 
component status to green. If the component identified in the status message is a Radio 
MODEM slot, the system checks if all slots are green. If true, the overall Radio MODEM 
component status is changed to green. If false, the overall status is changed to orange. All 
the cable and radio links that pass through the component identified in the status message 
will have their status changed to green if the following is true: the current link status is blue 
and the blue status was produced by a previously processed red status message for this 
component. In all other cases the current link status will not be changed. The overall status 
for the identified TRC-173 will be determined by the following rules: Green - if all links 
are green. Orange - if all links are orange or a combination of green and orange. Blue - if 
all links are blue or red or a combination of blue and red and no pending overall TRC-173 
status of red, and Red - if pending overall TRC-173 status of red. 


23 









(3) External In-System Component Requirements. Once again, the 
reaction requirements that follow will resemble the previous sections. 

When the management system receives a red TRC-173 status message 
for a red external in-system component, the system will change that component’s status to 
red. If the component identified in the status message is a Group MODEM slot, the system 
checks if all slots are red. If true, the overall Group MODEM component status is changed 
to red. If false, the overall status is changed to orange. If the identified component identified 
in the status message is a Group MODEM slot, then the status of the connected cable link 
is changed to red. The radio link that is indirectly connected to the Group MODEM slot will 
receive a status based on the following: Orange - if there is at least one cable link that is 
green or orange or Blue - if all cable links that are indirectly connected to this link are blue 
or red. If the component identified in the status message is a GRC-103 radio, then the 
associated radio link status is changed to red. All the cable links that are indirectly 
connected to this GRC-103 radio will receive a blue status unless there is a pending red 
status. The overall status for the TRC-173 that generated the status message is based on the 
following: Orange - if at least one link is green or orange or Red - if all the links have either 
a blue or red status. 

If the network management system receives a green TRC-173 status 
message for a red external in-system component, the system will change that component’s 
status to green. If the component identified in the status message is a Group MODEM slot, 
the system checks if all the Group MODEM slots are green. If true, the overall Group 
MODEM component status is green. If false, the overall component status is orange. The 
cable link connected to the Group MODEM will have a status of green if the following is 
true: the current status is blue and the blue status was produced by a previously processed 
red status message for this component. In all other cases the current cable link status will 
not be changed. The radio link that is indirectly connected to the Group MODEM slot will 
receive a status based on the following: Green - if all cable links that are transmitted over 
this radio link are green. Orange - if there is at least one cable link that is transmitted over 


24 






this radio link which is green or orange. Blue - if all cable links that are transmitted over 
this radio link are any combination of blue or red, or Red - if the associated GRC-103 radio 
unit has a status of red. If the identified component in the status message is a GRC-103 
radio, then the associated radio link status is green if the following is true: the current status 
is red and there are no other pending non-green statuses. In all other cases the highest 
pending status will be assigned to the radio link’s status. The overall status for TRC-173 
that generated the status message is based on the following: Green - if all links are green. 
Orange - if at least one link has a status of green or orange. Blue - if all links are blue or red 
or a combination of blue and red and no pending overall TRC-173 status of red or Red - if 
pending overall TRC-173 status of red. 

b. Nodal and Internodal Levels Requirements 

A status message will propagate from the TRC-173 which generated it in 
two directions. These two directions are to the origination and termination points of the 
affected digital transmission group(s). The following example will illustrate message 
propagation. Figure 16 shows a nodal level consisting of a circuit switch, two TRC-173s, 
and a Remote Multiplexer Combiner. CS 1 is the originating point for DTG 1 and RMC 1 
is its terminating point. DTG 1 is transmitted from the CS 1 to the RMC 1 by Cl, LOS 1 
(GM 1 slot 1, TGM 1, TED 1, RM slot 1, and GRC-103 1), LI, LOS 2 (GRC-103 1, RM 
slot 1, TED 1, TGM 1, and GM 1 slot 1), and C2. At this point, the entire network has a 
green status. Figure 17 shows that LOS 2 generated a red status message for GRC-103 1. 
This caused LOS 2’s GRC-103 1 status to change to red, LOS 2’s overall status to change 
to red, Li’s status to change to red, and C2’s status to change to blue (per the above active 
TRC-173 requirements). This status message indicates that DTG I’s path has been 
disrupted. Therefore, the message propagates from LOS 2 to DTG I’s origination and 
termination points. The propagated status message caused the status of the CS 1, Cl, LOS 
1, and RMC 1 to transition to blue (rules for these status changes are given below). Figure 
18 shows that LOS 2 generated a green status message for GRC-103 1. This indicates that 


25 






DTG \'s path has been restored and therefore the network’s status has been returned to 
green. The above example can be modified to demonstrate a intemodal level by replacing 
the RMC 1 with CS 2 and LI with LI2. 



The requirements for nodal and intemodal passive objects affected by status 
message propagation will be presented in the following order: link objects; TRC-173 
objects; and circuit switch and Remote Multiplexer Combiner objects. The reader is 
advised that the following requirements will resemble and in some cases will be identical 
to each other. However, the slight differences between the requirements are significant and 
should be read carefully. 

(1) Link Object Status Message Propagation Requirements. The overall 
status for a link object affected by the propagate of a status message is based on the 
following: Green - if all required digital transmission groups are being transmitted over the 
link. Orange - if at least one of many digital transmission groups are being transmitted over 
the link. Blue - if the current status is not red and none of the required digital transmission 
groups are being transmitted over the link, or Red - if the current status is red. 


26 











Figure 17: Propagation Example Part b 



Figure 18: Propagation Example Part c 


27 










(2) TRC-173 Object Status Message Propagation Requirements. The 
overall status for a TRC-173 object that is affected by the propagation of a status message 
is based on the following: Green - if all the links connected to the TRC-173 are green. 
Orange - if at least one link connected to the TRC-173 is green or orange. Blue - if the 
current TRC-173 status is not red and the links connected to the TRC-173 are either all blue 
or red; or Red - if the current TRC-173 status is red. 

(3) CS and RMC Objects’ Status Message Propagation Requirements. 
The overall status for a circuit switch or Remote Multiplexer Combiner object that is 
affected by the propagation of a status message is based on the following: Green - if all the 
cable links connected to the object are green. Orange - if at least one cable link connected 
to the object is green or orange or Blue - if the cable links connected to the object are either 
blue or red. 

c. Network Level Requirements 

At the network level there are two reaction requirements. First, the network 
level nodes must receive the same status as their corresponding circuit switches. The 
second requirement is to have the network level radio links receive the same status as their 
corresponding intemodal radio links at the appropriate nodal and internodal levels. 


28 




III. NETWORK MANAGEMENT SYSTEM DESIGN 


This chapter provides an Army Tactical Telephone Network Management System 
overview. Following this, a detailed presentation of the management system design is 
given. The Army Tactical Telephone Network Management System is divided into the 
following three segments: panel, status message processing, and system management 
control. The panel segment is responsible for displaying the various network levels and 
display objects. The Transportable Applications Environment Plus Version 5.1 software 
development tool is used to design the panel segment. The status message processing 
segment is responsible for processing TRC-173 line-of-sight radio shelter status messages 
and updating the network database. The system management control segment is 
responsible for the following: initially receiving the status message, sending a received 
status message to the status message processor, and updating the panel display objects. 
Each of these segments are discussed in greater detail in this chapter. The Army Tactical 
Telephone Network Management System flow diagrams are contained in Appendix D. 

A. NETWORK MANAGEMENT SYSTEM OVERVIEW 

The Army Tactical Telephone Network Management System is a graphical panel- 
driven system. This means that the user is viewing a computer monitor displaying one of 
the four network levels discussed in Chapter II. In order to traverse to another panel, the 
user clicks a mouse on a display object’s button. This action opens another panel depicting 
increased information of the object whose button was clicked. The user clicks the EXIT 
button to return to the previous panel. This process can continue until the user is at the 
desired panel level. The user determines the network’s status by the display objects’ status 
colors. In this system, there are some display objects that blink once their status changes. 
The purpose for blinking display objects is to draw the user’s attention to a network event. 

Initially the network level panel is displayed and all display objects are green. A node 
or intemodal link display object starts to blink once a status message is received. At this 
point, the user moves the mouse to the blinking object’s button and clicks it. This will open 


29 




the corresponding object’s panel. If the button clicked was for a node the associated nodal 
level panel will be opened. At this level the user sees the status of this portion of the 
network. A blinking TRC-173 line-of-sight radio shelter represents the cause of the 
network level blinking. The user moves the mouse and clicks the blinking TRC-173’s 
button. This action, will open the TRC-173 component level panel. The blinking 
component indicates the cause of the network status change. The user returns to the 
network level panel by clicking the EXIT button at both the TRC-173 component level and 
at the node level panels. If the button clicked at the network level is an intemodal object, 
the corresponding intemodal level panel is displayed. This level will prov ide a view of the 
trunk path status between two circuit switches. The blinking TRC-173 line-of-sight radio 
shelter is the cause of the network’s status change. 

This system operates in real-time. Therefore, additional TRC-173 line-of-sight radio 
shelter status messages can change the network’s status while the user is exploring an old 
network reaction. Real-time status message generation is simulated by the management 
system reading a status message file at random intervals. The random read intervals are 
from 1 to 10 seconds. 

B. PANEL DESIGN SEGMENT 

This portion of the thesis is discussed in two sections. The first section presents 
general information about the Transportable Applications Environment Plus software 
development tool. The second section focuses on the actual design of each network level 
panel. 

1. Transportable Applications Environment Plus General Information 

Transportable Applications Environment Plus is a software development tool 
used for designing interactive graphical user interfaces. It operates on a Unix Operating 
System platform under the X Window System. This tool allows a user to design custom 
panels from the following presentation categories: data driven objects, selection, and text. 


30 





Data driven objects are display objects that can be manipulated in real-time. The network 
display objects used in the network management system are from this presentation 
category. The selection presentation category is used to provide a user with a facility to 
choose options from. Some of the presentation types in this category are push buttons (used 
in this management system), pulldown menus, and radio buttons. Text, the final 
presentation category, allows labeling of objects (used in this management system), user 
keyed-in values to be utilized by an application program, and program values to be 
displayed. Once panels are constructed Transportable Applications Environment Plus 
provides a facility to connect the panels in a desired order. Transportable Applications 
Environment Plus has the capability to generate code after panel connections are 
completed. This code generation facility can produce Ada (used in this management 
system), C, FORTRAN, or TCL (Transportable Applications Environment Plus 
programming language) code. The code that is produced is a template for full application 
development. .Application-specific code is added to the template at Transportable 
Applications Environment Plus designated points.[Ref 12] 

2. Network Panel Designs 

This section describes the following four network panel designs: network level 
panel, nodal level panel, intemodal level panel, and TRC-173 line-of-sight radio shelter 
component level panel. All of these panels display the real-time status of their network 
portion. The network management system starts with all display objects green. A TRC-173 
status message causes a network status change. Some display objects blink when their 
status is changed. This blinking continues until the user clicks the display object’s button 
or exits the panel. 

The network level panel displays the network level layout described in Chapter 
II. This panel contains the following display objects: three nodes and three intemodal links. 
A corresponding push button is assigned to each display object. When a push button is 
clicked the appropriate nodal level or intemodal level panel will be opened. To halt the 


31 





management system the user clicks the EXIT button. Both node and intemodal link display 
objects can blink. Clicking these display objects’ push buttons terminate their blinking. 

There are a total of three nodal level panels that correspond with one of the nodal 
level layouts presented in Chapter II. Each panel contains push buttons for the following 
display objects: TTC-39D circuit switch, TRC-173 line-of-sight radio shelters. Remote 
Multiplexer Combiners, and intemodal links. The only active push buttons are associated 
with the TRC-173s and intemodal links. When an active push button is clicked the 
appropriate TRC-173 component level panel or intemodal level panel will be opened. 
There is also an EXIT button that when clicked will return the user to the network level 
panel. Only TRC-173 line-of-sight radio shelter and intemodal link display objects blink. 
Clicking these display objects’ push buttons terminate their blinking. 

Similarly, there are a total of three intemodal level panels each corresponding 
with one of the intemodal level layouts presented in Chapter II. Each panel has push buttons 
for the following display objects: TRC-173 line-of-sight radio shelters and TTC-39D 
circuit switches. The only active push buttons are associated with the TRC-173 line-of- 
sight radio shelters. A clicked button will display the TRC-173 line-of-sight radio shelter 
component level panel. There is also an EXIT button that when clicked will return to the 
user to the panel that called the Intemodal Level Panel. Only TRC-173 line-of-sight radio 
shelters blink on Intemodal Level Panels. Clicking these display objects’ push buttons 
terminate their blinking. 

The TRC-173 line-of-sight radio shelter component level panel displays the 
current component status of the TRC-173 that corresponds with the button that opened this 
panel. Since the TRC-173 line-of-sight radio shelter contains two microwave radio units 
there can be two separate in-system paths supported by the shelter. A label of either 
SYSTEM 1 or SYSTEM 2 identifies which components are in a particular in-system path. 
The absence of a label indicates that a component is not in-system, (see Figure 19) All 
component display objects can blink. When the EXIT button is clicked the user will return 


32 





to the panel that called the TRC-173 component level panel. This action terminates any 
blinking component display objects. 



Figure 19: TRC-173 In-System Component Labeling 

C. TRC-173 STATUS MESSAGE SEGMENT DESIGN 

This portion of the thesis discusses the design of the TRC-173 Status Message 
Segment which is divided into three sections. The first section is the Network Model 
Database Design. This database represents the network model described in Chapter II and 
maintains the network status. The next section presents the design of the TRC-173 Status 
Message Structure. The third section provides the Status Message Processing Logic 
Design. 





















1. Network Model Database Design 

The Network Model Database is used to maintain the network connectivity, 
equipment, and status. This database is divided into three sections. The %st section defines 
each item in the network and maintains its status. The database schemas which fall into this 
sfction are: Basic Equipment, TRC-173 Components, and Item Status. The second section 
maintains the connectivity information between equipment. The database schemas which 
fall into this section are: GRC-103 Radio Unit to Radio Link Mapping, GM Slot to Cable 
Link Mapping, and Equipment Item to Cable Link Mapping. The final section maintains 
the information about which links transmit which digital transmission groups. The digital 
transmission group to Link Mapping Schema makes up this section. 

a. Item Definition and Status Maintenance Schemas 

(1) Basic Equipment Schema. The Basic Equipment Schema is used to 
define and maintain the status for the end item equipment utilized in the network. In this 
network model there are three types of end item equipment. TRC-173s, TTC-39D circuit 
switches, and Remote Multiplexer Combiners. The Unit_Id attribute is used to maintain the 
Army unit’s designation that owns the end item equipment. The Node_Id attribute is used 
to identify the node that the equipment is assigned. The Equipment_Id attribute is utilized 
to identify the end item equipment at the nodal level. The Unit_Id, Node_Id, and 
Equipment_Id make up the key attributes for this schema. The Equipment_Type attribute 
maintains the end item equipment’s type. The Status_Stack attribute is a stark data 
structure that maintains the equipment’s status. The top element in the Status_Stack 
contains the equipment’s current status. Each element in the stack has a Status and 
Message_Id attribute. Only red status values with their associated status message number 
will be stacked. When the Status_Stack is free of red status values non-red statuses can be 
stored in the top stack position. Initially the Status_Stack value is green. 

(2) TRC-173 Components Schema. The TRC-173 Components Schema 
is used to maintain the status and in-system state of the components for each TRC-173 in 


34 




the network.The Unit_Id, Node_Id, and Equipment_Id attributes have the same meaning as 
stated above. Each stand alone component (TED_1, TED_2, GRC_103_1, GRC_103_2, 
TGM_1, and TGM_2) or component slot (RM_1, RM_2, RM_3. GM_1_1, GM_1_2, 
GM_1_3, GM_1_4, GM_2_1, GM_2_2, GM_2_3, and GM_2_4) is a composite attribute 
consisting of the following attributes: Status and System_Number. The Status attribute 
contains the component’s status. Initially Status has a value of green. The System_Number 
attribute represents which internal system path the component belongs to. The 
System_Number value can be 0 (meaning not in-system), 1 (meaning in-system and 
supporting internal system path 1), or 2 (meaning In_system and supporting internal system 
path 2). Each end item component that contains component slots (RM, GM_1, and GM_2) 
is a composite attribute consisting of the Status attribute. The Status attribute contains the 
end item component’s overall status. 

(3) Item Status Schema. This schema is used to define and maintain the 
status of radio links, cable links, and digital transmission groups. The Node_Id attribute has 
the same meaning as stated above. The Item_Id attribute is used to identify the item (radio 
link, cable link, or digital transmission group) at the nodal and internodal levels. The 
Node_Id and Item_Id make up the key attributes for this schema and together identify the 
item at the network, nodal, and internodal levels. The Status_Stack attribute provides the 
same function as stated above. 

b. Connectivity Schemas 

(1) GRC-103 Radio Unit to Radio Link Mapping Schema. The GRC-103 

Radio Unit to Radio Link Mapping Schema is used to maintain which radio units are 
mapped to a particular radio link. The Unit_Id, Node_Id, and Equipment_Id attributes have 
the same meaning as stated above. The Radio_Id attribute is used to identify a specific 
TRC-173’s radio unit. The Unit_ID, Node_Id, Equipment_Id, and Radio_Id make up the 
key attributes for identifying a particular radio unit. The Radio_Link_Node_Id attribute 
identifies the node that is responsible for maintaining the radio link. The Radio_Link_ID 


35 






attribute is used to identify the link. The Radio_Link_Node_Id and Radio_link_Id 
attributes make up the key attributes for identifying a particular radio link at the network, 
nodal, and intemodal levels. 

(2) GM Slot to Cable Link Mapping Schema. This schema is used to 
maintain which GM slots are mapped to a particular cable link. The Unit_Id, Node_Id, and 
Equipment_Id attributes have the same meaning as stated above. The GM_Slot_Id attribute 
is used to identify a GM slot The UnitJD, Node_Id, Equipment_Id, and GM_Slot_Id 
attributes make up the key attributes for identifying a particular GM slot that is mapped to 
a cable link. The Cable_Link_Node_Id attribute identifies the node that is responsible for 
maintaining the cable link. The Cable_Link_ID attribute is used to identify the link. The 
Cable_Link_Node_ld and Cable_Link_Node_Id attributes make up the key attributes for 
identifying a particular cable link at the nodal and intemodal levels. 

(3) The Equipment to Cable Link Mapping Schema. The Equipment to 
Cable Link Mapping Schema is used to maintain which cable links are mapped to a 
particular TTC-39D circuit switch or Remote Multiplexer Combiner. The Unit_Id, 
Node_Id, and Equipment_Id attributes make up the key attributes for identifying the 
equipment that is mapped to a cable link at the nodal or intemodal levels. The 
Cable_Link_Node_ld and Cable_Link_Id attributes make up the key attributes for 
identifying a cable link at the nodal and intemodal levels 

c. DTG to Link Mapping Schema 

This schema is used to maintain which digital transmission groups are 
mapped to a radio or cable link. The Link_Node_Id and Lmk_Id attributes make up the key. 
This key is used to identify a particular radio or cable link at the network, nodal, or 
intemodal levels. TTie DTG_Node_Id and DTG_Id attributes make up the key attributes for 
identifying a particular digital transmission group at the network, nodal, and intemodal 
levels. 


36 






2. TRC-173 Status Message Status Message Structure 

The TRC-173 Status Message contains a TRC-173 component’s status change. 
The Unit_Id, Nodejd, and Equipmentjd attributes are used to identify a specific TRC- 
173. The Component_Id attribute identifies the component that has had its status changed. 
The Status attribute maintains the component’s new status value. The System_Number 
attribute contains the in-system state of the component. The Messagejd attribute contains 
a number used to identify the status message. Red status messages and their corresponding 
green messages will both have the same unique message number. 

3. TRC-173 Status Message Processing Logic Design 

Upon receipt of a status message, the status message processing module 
evaluates the status message’s component status and in-system state. The status message is 
then forwarded to one of the following sub-modules for further processing: Component 
Red and In-system, Component Green and In-system, Component Red and Not In-system, 
and Component Green or Not In-system (see Figure 20). The algorithms for these sub- 
modules are contained in Appendix C. 

D. SYSTEM MANAGEMENT CONTROLLER SEGMENT DESIGN 

The System Management Controller Segment is responsible for ensuring that both the 
panel and status message segments communicate properly between each other. This 
segment structure is based on the Panel Display Object Database and four Ada tasks. The 
Network Database Processor, Display Object Database Processor, TRC-173 Status 
Message Receiver, and Display Object Timer make up the four Ada tasks. 

1. Panel Display Object Database Design 

The Panel Display Object Database maps current status values from the network 
database to the appropriate panel display object. This database is implemented as an array 
with various sections representing each display panel. Each array position contains a panel 


37 





Figure 20: Message Processing Data Flow 

display object and its current status value. Figure 21 displays the structure of the database 
and the position ranges per display panel. 

The Panel Display Object Database Schema is used to maintain the mapping data 
between the network database and display objects. The Panel_Name and Item_In_Panel 


38 












attributes refers to a particular display item in a display panel. The Unit_Id, Node_Id, and 
Item_Id attributes refer to a specific element in the network database, i.e., equipment or a 
link. The System_Number attribute is used only with the TRC-173 section. Its purpose is 
to identify whether a component is in-system (SYSTEM 1 or SYSTEM 2) or not in-system. 


39 






















The Status attribute contains the same status value for a display object. Initially the Status 
value is green. The Blink attribute contains a boolean value indicating a display object’s 
blink state. Initially the Blink value is set to false (a nonblinking state). 

The TRC-173 line-of-sight radio shelter section of the database is only updated 
when a user clicks a TRC-173 button. The associated TRC-173 button’s TRC-173 
Component tuple is read into this section of the display object database. This action causes 
the appropriate TRC-173’s component status to be displayed. 

2. Network Database Processor Task 

The Network Database Processor Task is responsible for controlling all access to 
the Network Database. This task has the following two entry points; 

a. Status Message Processor Entry Point 

This entry point receives a TRC-173 Status Message and passes the message 
to the TRC-173 Status Message Processing Logic for processing. 

b. Read Specific TRC-173 Components Entry Point 

This entry point receives a request after a specific TRC-173 button has been 
clicked to read the specified tuple from the TRC-173 Components Relation. A task entry 
call is made to the Display Object Database Processor Task to update the Display Object 
Database’s TRC-173 section with the just read component information. After the tuple is 
read, all Blink attributes of the tuple are set to false. 

3. Display Object Database Processor Task 

This task is responsible for controlling all access to the Display Object Database. 
This task has the following four entry points: 

a. Update TRC-173 Section Entry Point 

This entry point receives a tuple from the TRC-173 Components Relation 
for updating the Display Object Database’s TRC-173 section. The call to this entry point 
will be made immediately after a TRC-173 button is clicked. This requires the 


40 




Transportable Applications Environment Plus code to be modified with a call statement 
that is inserted after the TRC-173 button code statement. 

b. Update General Panel Item Entry Point 

This entry point receives a status change to a general display object in the 
display database. A general display object is an object that does not blink. All display 
objects except the following do not blink: a TRC-173 identified in a status message, nodes, 
and intemodal links at the network and nodal panels. The call to this entry point is made 
after the object’s Status_Stack has been modified. This requires the TRC-173 Status 
Message Processing Logic code be modified with a call statement after the network 
object’s Status_Stack is updated. 

c. Update Panel TTC-39D Item Entry Point 

This entry point receives a status change to a TTC-39D circuit switch 
display object in the display database. A TTC-39D circuit switch status change causes three 
updates to the database. The first change is at the network panel where the corresponding 
node display object receives the TTC-39D circuit switch’s status value and its Blink 
attribute is set to true. The final two changes are at the TTC-39D circuit switch’s 
corresponding node and intemodal levels. At these two levels the appropriate TTC-39D 
circuit switch display objects will receive the status change and their Blink attribute is set 
to false. The call to this entry point is made after the object’s Status_Stack has been 
modified.This requires the TRC-173 Status Message Processing Logic code to be modified 
with a call statement to this entry point after the network object’s Status_Stack is updated. 

d. Update Panel Link Item Entry Point 

This entry point receives a status change to a link display object in the 
display database. An update to a cable or intranodal radio link display object Status 
attribute causes the associated Blink attribute to be set to false. The update to an intemodal 
radio link causes the corresponding link Status attribute at the network, nodal, and 


41 







intemodal levels to be assigned the status change. The Blink attribute at the network and 
nodal level will be set to true. However, the Blink attribute at the intemodal level is 
assigned to false. The call to this entry point is made after the object’s Status_Stack has 
been modified. This requires the TRC-173 Status Message Processing Logic code to be 
modified with a call statement to this entry point after the network object’s Status_Stack is 
updated. 

e. Display Items Entry Call Point 

This entry point accepts a signal to refresh the panel display objects with 
either their status values or to cause them to blink. The Display Object Timer Task will 
generate this signal. 

4. TRC-173 Status Message Receiver Task 

This task randomly reads the status message file. The interval between reads can 
range from one to ten seconds. Once a status message is read it is sent to the Network 
Database Processor Task_Status Message Processor Entry Point to be processed. 

5. Display Object Timer Task 

This task sends a signal to the Display Object Database Processor Task_Display 
Items Entry Point to refresh the panel’s display objects. The timing signal is generated 
every quarter of a second. 


42 




IV. MANAGEMENT SYSTEM VALIDATION TEST 


Validation testing is a procedure used to ensure that a software system functions in a 
manner that is consistent with the system requirements.[Ref. 13] This chapter discusses the 
validation test procedure that was utilized to evaluate the implemented Army Tactical 
Telephone Network Management System design and provides a summary of the test 
results. 

A. MANAGEMENT SYSTEM VALIDATION TEST PROCEDURE 

The Army Tactical Telephone Network Management System validation test consists 
of the following three steps; constructing and evaluating TRC-173 data sets; processing the 
data set and collecting the results; and comparing the predicted results against the actual 
results. The remainder of this section will expound on these steps. 

I. Step 1: Constructing and Evaluating TRC-173 Data Set 

The first stage in this step is to construct TRC-173 data sets. A data set consists 
of one or more TRC-173 status messages. These status messages must comply with the 
message structure that is explained in Chapter III. Each message is based on the network 
model contained in Chapter II and Appendix B. 

After each data set is compiled, the effect of each message on the network is 
calculated. The calculations are performed in accordance with the network management 
system reaction requirements contained in Chapter II. By using these system requirements, 
each status message will affect the network in some or all of the following categories; TRC- 
173 not in-system component, TRC 173 internal in-system component, TRC-173 external 
in-system, nodal status message propagation, intemodal status propagation, and network 
status propagation. 






2. Step 2: Processing The Data Sets and Collecting The Results 

This step requires that the management system be executed with the data sets from 
step 1. While each status message is processed the corresponding system reactions are 
recorded. 

3. Step 3: Comparing The Predicted Against Actual Results 

The predicted results from step 1 are compared against the actual results from step 
2. If the results match, then the implemented system complies with its system requirements. 

B. SUMMARY OF TEST RESULTS 

Five data sets are used to validate the Army Tactical Telephone Network 
Management System. These five data sets are placed into the following test categories: 
nodal, internodal, and network. 

The nodal test category requires that each node level be tested separately. In each 
data set, all TRC-173 line-of-sight radio shelters (except for TRC-I73s that support 
internodal links) have at least one red status message and one green status message. The 
purpose of this test category is to ensure that the individual display items at each nodal level 
reacts correctly to a TRC-173 generated status message. 

In the internodal test category, all TRC-173s that support internodal links are jointly 
tested. The data set contains at least one red and green status message for each TRC-173. 
The test objective is to determine whether the internodal display objects are reacting 
correctly to a status message. 

The network test category integrates the testing of all nodal and internodal 
categories. The data set contains at least one red and green status message for each TRC- 
173. The purpose of this test category is to demonstrate that the management system 
functions correctly with processing both nodal and internodal levels status messages. 

The results of the validation test using the three test categories are that each data test 
set’s predicted results matched their corresponding actual results. Therefore, the 


44 





implemented Army Tactical Telephone Network Management System complies with its 
system requirements. 






V. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 


A. CONCLUSIONS 

This thesis presents a design for an automated real-time panel-driven Army Tactical 
Telephone Network Management System. The design is implemented in Ada and utilizes 
the Transportable Applications Environment Plus interactive graphical user interface tool. 
The network management system monitors a fixed network and updates the network’s 
status through TRC-173 status messages. Validation testing is used to demonstrate that the 
program conforms to its system requirements. 

This management system illustrates that from a central location, communication 
commanders can receive real-time network status updates down to the line-of-sight radio 
shelter component level. This capability is not currently available to these commanders. 
Without this capability, communication commanders will not have a rapid and efficient 
tool for identifying and diagnosing network outages. 

A copy of the Army Tactical Telephone Network Management System program 
listing is available by request from the Computer Science Department, Naval Postgraduate 
School. This request can be sent by electronic mail to lundy@taurus.cs.nps.navy.mil or 
postal mail to Dr. G. M. Lundy, Code CS/Ln, Assistant Professor, Computer Science 
Department, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA 93943-5000. 

B. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH 

The Army Tactical Telephone Network Management System should be expanded to 
handle the monitoring of all equipment in the Area Common User System. This will require 
implementing status messages for each type of equipment and incorporating their network 
reaction requirements to the management system. 

The Army Tactical Telephone Network Management System utilized an array data 
structure to implement the Status_Stack attribute. This data structure is a wasteful 
utilization of memory space and is limited to supporting 35 stacked red status. In order 
improve efficiency, the stack should be implemented in a dynamic data structure. 


46 







The network database should be modified to enable the system to receive and process 
equipment operation level messages. This function could enable the tracking of equipment 
operation levels. It could also notify the user when equipment is approaching a nonoperable 
status. This function would allow the network monitor to take proactive steps to prevent 
network degradation. 

The network database is an array. The database should be implemented with a 
database management system. This will allow the user to query the database for trends at 
the network or a specified unit level, to determine equipment availability and location, and 
user specified areas of interest. 

The implemented Army Tactical Telephone Network Management System has 
limited error handling for erroneous status messages. In order for this network management 
system to be operationally utilized, it must be able to recognize erroneous status messages. 

A “logic box” must be developed that will determine the equipment status and 
transmit the status message to the Army Tactical Telephone Network Management System 
for processing. The issues of message propagation delay and message signaling method 
must be addressed. 


47 


APPENDIX A: ACRONYMS AND DEFINITIONS 


ACUS: Area Common User System- is the U.S. Army’s battlefield telephone network. 

AN/TRC-173: is one of the U.S. Army’s radio communications shelters. This type of 
shelter utilizes the line-of sight communications technique. 

AN/TTC-39: is the U.S. Army’s base series circuit switch that is used at the echelons 
above corps level. 

AN/TTC-39D: is a specific AN/TTC-39 model that uses floor search routing. 

CCi TI'; International Consultative Committee on Telegraphy and Telephony 

Corps- contains from three to five divisions and its command structure and support ele¬ 
ments operate behind the division areas. A corps, including its divisions, can contain 
more than 80,000 troops and operates in an area of 35,000 square km. 

CS: circuit switch- is a communications device that establishes a dedicated path 
between any pair or group of users attempting to communicate. 

Division- is the most forward combat element (between a division and corps) and con¬ 
sists of approximately 15,000 troops. The area that a division can ccver is approxi¬ 
mately 4000 square 1^. 

DTG: digital transmission group; refers to a collection of full duplex channel.These 
channels can be trunks, telephone loops, or data loops. 

GM: Group MODEM- converts a cable link signal to a nonreturn to zero (NRZ) signal 
and a NRZ signal into either conditioned diphase, dipulse, or bipolar signal. 

km: kilometers 

kbps: kilobits per seconds. 

LOS: line-of-sight- is a communication technique that requires the transmitted signal to 
travel in a narrow beam to the receiver. 

MSRT: Mobile Subscriber Radiotelephone Terminal: is a device that provides a mobile 
user access to the RAU. 

NRZ: nonreturn to zero- is a digital signaling technique in which the signal is a constant 
level for the duration of a bit time. 

RAU: Radio Access Unit - is part of the U.S. Army’s cellular telephone system. This 
device provides a mobile user access to the ACUS. 

RM: Radio MODEM- converts a NRZ signal from the to a radio binary signal and a 
radio binary signal into a NRZ signal. 


48 





RMC: Remote Multiplexer Combiner- is a device that multiplexes and demultiplexes 
up to eight full duplex telephone loops. 

TED: Trunk Encryption Device- can be connected to each TGM to encrypt and decrypt 
the signals passing through it 

TGM: Trunk Group Multiplexer- can multiplex and demultiplex up to four NRZ signals 
from a Group MODEM 

Theater- is a geographical area that is outside of the Continental United States which 
has been assigned a unified or specified military commander. The geographic size of a 
theater can easily exceed 1,000,000 square km. When US military power is required the 
theater assets are geographically focused against the opposing force. The theater is 
divided into two levels: echelons corps and below and echelons above corps. The eche¬ 
lons corps and below portion of the theater is where the actual combat operations are 
conducted and is composed of divisions and corps. The echelons above corps portion of 
the theater is the area rearward of combat operations and provides support for the entire 
theater. 

X.25- A standard packet switch protocol. 


49 





APPENDIX B: NETWORK LAYOUT & INTERNAL CONNECTIVITY 



Figure 22: Node 1 C_1 Internal Connectivity 


50 









Figure 24; Node 1 C_4 Internal Connectivity 


51 










Figure 25: Node 1 C_5 Internal Connectivity 



Figure 26: Node 1 C_6 Internal Connectivity 


52 
















Figure 28: Node 2 C_1 Internal Connectivity 


53 









Figure 30; Node 2 C_4 Internal Connectivity 


54 










Figure 32: Node 2 C_6 Internal Connectivity 


55 



























Figure 34: Node 3 C_1 Internal Connectivity 


56 









Figure 36: Node 3 C_4 Internal Connectivity 


57 






Figure 38: Node 3 C_6 Internal Connectivity 


58 
















APPENDIX C: ALGORITHMS FOR MESSAGE PROCESSING 


A. Red and In-system Sub-module Algorithm Steps 

1. Search for a tuple in the TRC-173 Components Relation that matches the 
Unit_Id, Node_Id, and Equipment_Id attributes in the status message. When the tuple is 
found change its component (identified in the status message) to the status indicated (in the 
status message). 

2. Check if the remaining components’ (that match the component type in 
the status message) statuses are also red. If true, search for a tuple in the Basic Equipment 
Relation that matches the Unit_Id, Node_Id, and Equipment_ld attributes in the status 
message and push a red status with the current Message_Id on the tuple’s Status_Stack 
attribute. 

3. If the component in the status message is an internal component then the 
following are executed: 

a) Find the GRC-103, in the tuple from step 1, that has the same 
System_Number as in the status message. 

b) Search for a tuple in the GRC-103 Radio Unit to Radio Link 
Relation that matches the Unitjd, Node_Id, Equipment_Id, and GRC-103 from step 3.a. 

c) Search for the tuples in the DTG to Link (radio links) Mapping 
Relation that match the Link_Node_Id and Link_Id in step 3.b). 

d) Search for the tuples in the Item (DTGs) Status Relation that match 
the Node_Id and Item_Id in step 3.c) and push a red status with the current Messagejd on 
the tuples’ Status_Stack attribute. 

e) Search for the tuples in the DTG to Link (cable links) Mapping 
Relation that match the DTG_Node_Id and DTG_Id in step 3.d). 

f) Search for the tuples in the Item (cable links) Status Relation that match the 
Node_Id and Item_Id in step 3.e). Next evaluate and assign a new status to each cable link 
tuple based on TABLE 2. 


60 




TABLE 2; CABLE OR RADIO LINK STATUS 



OHf 

Oiwrtll Cafelt LMw* 

•Wna ii 

TkM Dt TIm T« TIM IUtM.II«el 


Or 

•IM 

If Ha Rad Italaa: Paa 1 Paah RIm lUlia 

Ortngt 

Or 

Orw«« 

if Ha Rad Maiaa: Pap 1 PtMii Oruta MalM 


And 

OrMK 

If Na Rad luiaa: Pap 1 Paah OrNn Italaa 


g) Search for the tuples in the DTG to Link (radio links) Mapping 
Relation that match the DTG_Node_Id and DTG_Id in step 3.d). 

h) Search for the tuples in the Item (radio links) Status Relation that 
match the Node_ld and Item_Id in step 3.g). Next evaluate and assign a new status to each 
radio link tuple based on TABLE 2. 

4. If the component in the status message is a GRC-103 Radio Unit then the 
following are executed: 

a) Search for the tuple in the GRC-103 Radio Unit to Radio Link 
Mapping Relation that matches the Unit_Id. Node_Id, Equipment_ld, Component 
attributes in the status message. 

b) Search for the tuple in the Item (radio link) Status Relation that 
matches the Node_Id and Item. Link_Id attributed in step 4.a). Then push a red status with 
the current Message_Id on the tuple’s Status_Stack attribute. 

c) Search for the tuples in the DTG to Link (radio links) Mapping 
Relation that match the Link_Node_Id and Link_Id in step 4.b). 


61 


















d) Search for the tuples in the Item (DTGs) Status Relation that match 
the Node_Id and Item_Id in step 4.c) and push a red status with the current Message_Id on 
the tuples’ Status_Stack attribute. 

e) Search for the tuples in the Item (radio links) Status Relation that 
match the Node_Id and Item_Id in step 4.c). Next evaluate and assign a new status to each 
radio link tuple based on TABLE 2. 

f) Search for the tuples in the DTG to Link (cable links) Mapping 
Relation that match the DTG_Node_Id and DTG_Id in step 4.d). 

g) Search for the tuples in the Item (cable links) Status Relation that 
match the Node_Id and Link_Id in step 4.f). Next evaluate and assign a new status to each 
cable link tuple based on TABLE 2. 

5. If the component in the status message is a GM Slot then the following 

are executed: 

a) Search for the tuple in the GM Slot to Cable Link Mapping Relation 
that matches the Unit_Id, Node_Id, Equipment_Id, Component attributes in the status 
message. 

b) Search for the tuple in the Item (cable link) Status Relation that 
matches the Node_Id and Item_Id attributes from step 5.a). Then push a red status with the 
current Message_Id on the tuple’s Status_Stack attribute. 

c) Search for the tuples in the DTG to Link (cable links) Mapping 
Relation that match the Link_Node_Id and Link_Id attributes from step 5.b). 

d) Search for the tuples in the Item (DTGs) Status Relation that match 
the Node_Id and Item_Id attributes from step 5.c) and push a red status with the current 
Message_Id on the tuples’ Status_Stack attribute. 

e) Search for the tuples in the Item (cable links) Status Relation that 
match the Node_Id and Item_Id attributes from step 5.c). Next evaluate and assign a new 
status to each cable link tuple based on TABLE 2. 


62 



f) Search for the tuples in the DTG to Link (radio links) Mapping 
Relation that match the DTG_Node_Id and DTG_Id attributes from step 5.d). 

g) Search for the tuples in the Item (radio links) Status Relation that 
match the Node_Id and Item_Id attributes from step 5.f). Next evaluate and assign a new 
status to each radio link tuple based on TABLE 2. 

6. Search for the TRC-173 tuple in the Basic Equipment Relation that matches the 
Unit_Id, Node_Id, and Equipment_Id attributes in the status message. Next evaluate and 
assign a new status to this tuple based on TABLE 3. 

TABLE 3: TRC-173 THAT GENERATED MESSAGE STATUS 



63 













































7. Evaluate the status of each TOC-173 that is affected by the propagation 
of this status message. This is accomplished by searching the Basic Equipment Relation for 
each TOC-173 (except the one in the status message) and then determining their status by 
TABLE 4. 

8. Evaluate the status of each TTC-39D that is affected by the propagation of this 
status message. This is accomplished by searching the Basic Equipment Relation for each 
TTC_39D and then determining their status by TABLE 5. 


TABLE 4; TOC-173 THAT DID NOT GENERATE MESSAGE STATUS 



9. Evaluate the status of each RMC that is affected by the propagation of 
this status message. This is accomplished by searching the Basic Equipment Relation for 
each RMC and then determining their status by TABLE 5. 

B. Component Green and In-system Sub-module Algorithm Steps 

1. Check whether all components’ (that match the component type in the 
status message) statuses are red. If true, search for a tuple in the Basic Equipment Relation 


64 

















TABLE 5: TrC-39D OR RMC STATUS 


•Ulna U 

Opar 

Ovarall Cafela Linka' 
•talua la 

Than Oa Tha Pallaainf T» Tha Malaa.Maah 

!!•« 

M 

Mad 

Muah Mad tialaa A HaaaadaJd 

•hi* 

B 

MIga 

If Na Mad Mtalvai Map A Maah Mlaa Piataa 

Oraiia* 

B 

Oranpa 

II Na Mad Mlalaai Pap A Puah Oranpa Mlaiaa 

araan 

And 

Mraan 

If Na Nad ttalgai Pap A Paah Oiaan Mlataa 


that matches the Unit_Id, Node_Id, and Equipment_Id attributes in the status message. 
Then pop the red status with the same Message_ld as the current status message from the 
tuple’s Status_Stack attribute. If the tuple’s Status_Stack is free of red status values then 
push an orange status on the stack. 

2. Search for a tuple in the TRC-173 Components Relation that matches the 
Unit_Id, Node_Id, and Equipment_Id attributes in the status message. When the tuple is 
found change its component (identified in the status message) to status indicated (in the 
status message). 

3. If the component in the status message is an internal component then the 
following are executed; 

a) Find the GRC-103, in the tuple from step 1, that has the same 
System_Number as in the statu<5 message. 

b) Search for a tuple in the GRC-103 Radio Unit to Radio Link 
Relation that matches the Unit_id, Node_Id, Equipment_Id, and GRC-103 from step 3.a). 


65 



























c) Search for the tuples in the DTG to Link (radio links) Mapping 
Relation that match the Link_Node_Id and Link_Id attributes from step 3.b). 

d) Search for the tuples in the Item(DTGs) Status Relation that match 
the Node_Id and Item_Id attributes in step 3.c). Then pop the red status with the same 
Message_Id as the current status message from the tuple’s Status_Stack attribute. If the 
tuple’s Status_Stack is free of red status values then push a green status on the stack. 

e) Search for the tuples in the DTG to Link (cable links) Mapping 
Relation that match the Item_Node_Id and Item_Id attributes from step 3.d). 

f) Search for the tuples in the Item (cable links) Status Relation that 
match the Node_Id and Item_Id attributes from step 3.e). Next evaluate and assign a new 
status to each cable link tuple based on TABLE 2. 

g) Search for the tuples in the DTG to Link (radio links) Mapping 
Relation that match the DTG_Node_Id and DTG_Id attributes from step 3.d). 

h) Search for the tuples in the Item (radio links) Status Relation that 
match the Node_Id and Itemjd attributes from step 3.g). Next evaluate and assign a new 
status to each radio link tuple based on TABLE 2. 

4. If the component in the status message is a GRC-103 Radio Unit then the 
following are executed: 

a) Search for the tuple in the GRC-103 Radio Unit to Radio Link 
Mapping Relation that matches the Unit_Id. Node_Id, Equipment_Id, Component_ld 
attributes in the status message. 

b) Search for the tuple in the Item (radio link) Status Relation that 
matches the Node_Id and Itemjd attributes from step 4.a). Then pop the red status with the 
same Messagejd as the current status message from the tuple’s Status_Stack attribute. If 
the tuple’s Status_Stack is free of red status values then push a green status on the stack. 

c) Search for the tuples in the DTG to Link (radio links) Mapping 
Relation that match the Link_Node_Id and Link_Id attributes from step 4.b). 


66 




d) Search for the tuples in the Item (DTGs) Status Relation that match 
the Node_Id and Item_Id attributes from step 4.c). Then pop the red status with the same 
Messagejd as the current status message from the tuple’s Status_Stack attribute. If the 
tuple’s Status_Stack is free of red status values then push a green status on the stack. 

e) Search for the tuples in the Item (radio links) Status Relation that 
match the Node_Id and Item_Id attributes from step 4.c). Next evaluate and assign a new 
status to each radio link tuple based on TABLE 2. 

f) Search for the tuples in the DTG to Link (cable links) Mapping 
Relation that match the DTG_Node_Id and DTG_Id attributes from step 4.d). 

g) Search for the tuples in the Item (cable links) Status Relation that 
match the Node_Id and Item_Id attributes from step 4.f). Next evaluate and assign a new 
status to each cable link tuple based on TABLE 2. 

'i. If the component in the status message is a GM Slot then the following 

are executed: 

a) Search for the tuple in the GM Slot to Cable Link Mapping Relation 
that matches the Unit_Id, Node_Id, Equipment_Id, Component attributes in the status 
message. 

b) Search for the tuple in the Item (cable link) Status Relation that 
matches the Node_Id and Item_Id attributes in step 5.a). Then pop the red status with the 
same Message_Id as the current status message from the tuple’s Status_Stack attribute. If 
the tuple’s Status_Stack is free of red status values then push a green status on the stack. 

c) Search for the tuples in the DTG to Link (cable links) Mapping 
Relation that match the Link_Node_Id and Link_Id attributes from step 5.b). 

d) Search for the tuples in the Item (DTGs) Status (Relation that match 
the Node_Id and Item_Id attributes from step 5.c). Then pop the red status with the same 
Message_Id as the current status message from the tuples’ Status_Stack attribute. If the 
tuples’ Status_Stack is free of red status values then push a green status on the stack. 


67 






e) Search for the tuples in the Item (cable links) Status Relation that 
match the Node_Id and Item_Id attributes from step 5.c). Next evaluate and assign a new 
status to each cable link tuple based on TABLE 2. 

£) Search for the tuples in the DTG to Link (radio links) Mapping 
Relation that match the DTG_Node_Id and DTG_Id attributes from step 5.d). 

g) Search for the tuples in the Item (radio links) Status Relation that 
match the Node_Id and Item_Id in step 5.0- Next evaluate and assign a new status to each 
radio link tuple based on TABLE 2. 

6. Search for the tuple in the Basic Equipment Relation that matches the 
Unit_Id, Node_Id, and Equipment_Id attributes in the status message. Next evaluate and 
assign a new status based on TABLE 3. 

7. Evaluate the status of each TRC-173 that is affected by the propagation 
of this status message. This is accomplished by searching the Basic Equipment Relation for 
each TRC-173 (except the one in the status message) and then determining their status by 
TABLE 4. 

8. Evaluate the status of each TTC-39D that is affected by the propagation 
of this status message. This is accomplished by searching the Basic Equipment Relation for 
each TTC_39D and then determining their status by TABLE 5. 

9. Evaluate the status of each RMC that is affected by the propagation of 
this status message. This is accomplished by searching the Basic Equipment Relation for 
each RMC and then determining their status by TABLE 5. 

C. Component Red and Not In-system Sub-module Algorithm Steps 

1. Search for a tuple in the TRC-173 Components Relation that matches the 
Unit_Id, Node_Id, and Equipmentjd attributes in the status message. When the tuple is 
found change its component (identified in the status message) to the status indicated (in the 
status message). 


68 







2. Check if the remaining component’s (that match the component type in 
the status message) status are also red. If true, search for a tuple in the Basic Equipment 
Relation that matches the Unitjd, Nodejd, and Equipmentjd atmbutes in the status 
message. Then push a red status with the current Message_ld on the tuple’s Status_Stack 
attribute. 

D. Component Green and Not In-system Sub-module Algorithm Steps 

1. Check whether all components’ (that match the component type in the 
status message) statuses are red. If true, search for a tuple in the Basic Equipment Relation 
that matches the Unit_Id, Nodejd, and Equipmentjd attributes in the status message. 
Then pop the red status with the same Message Jd as the current status message from the 
tuple’s Status_Stack attribute. If the tuple’s Status_Stack is free of red status values then 
push an orange status on the stack. 

2. Search for a tuple in the TRC-173 Components Relation that matches the 
Unit_Id, Nodejd, and Equipmentjd attributes in the status message. When the tuple is 
found change its component (identified in the status message) to the status indicated (in the 
status message). 


69 






APPENDIX D: MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FLOW DIAGRAMS 


TRC-173 



Figure 40: Network Database Processor Task Flow Diagram 


70 







'•'•TRC-173 M«ssaa« Procassina Loolc 



71 


Slatua Maaao^a t-A. 




2.A. 

2.B. 

or 

2.C. 


Natworfc 

Database 


ic Flow Diagram 







Figure 42; Display Object Database Processor Task Flow Diagram 


72 





















4.TRC-173 Status Mstsag* R«c«tvar Task 


Status 

Mastogs 


Rsquast 

Rsad 


Rsquastad 

Rsad 



Display 
ttsms . 


2.E 


Figure 43: Other Flo 


73 


3. Ponal Ssgmant 



Rssst Rsqusst 

Blinking TRC-173 

Itsm Tupis 


I I 

2.F. I.B. 








REFERENCES 


[Ref. 1] 

[Ref. 2] 

[Ref. 3] 
[Ref. 4] 
[Ref. 5] 
[Ref. 6] 

[Ref. 7] 

[Ref. 8] 

[Ref. 9] 

[Ref. 10] 

[Ref. II] 


Commander, U.S. Army Signal Center and Fort Gordon, Attention; ATZH- 
CDM, Fort Gordon, Georgia 30905-5000, SUBJECT: Required Operational 
Capabilities for the Integrated System Control, UNCLASSIFIED, 5 
December 1990. 

Department of the Army, Field Manual 11-23, Signal Support 
Responsibilities: Echelons Above Corps (EAC) (Final Draft), November 
1990. 

Department of the Army, Special Text 11-30, Corps/Division Signal Unit 
Operations, 30 June 1989. 

Department of Defense, Joint and Multiservice Publication 6-05.4, Joint 
Transmission Systems, 1 July 1990. 

Department of Defense, Joint and Multiservice Publication 6-05.2, Joint 
Voice Corrununications Systems (Draft), 19 June 1992. 

GTE Mobile Subscriber Equipment Division, 400 John Quincy Adams 
Road, Taunton, Massachusetts 02780, Mobile Subscriber Equipment: 
Commander’s Brief, 1992. 

Commander, U.S. Army Signal Center and Fort Gordon, Directorate of 
Combat Developments, Fort Gordon Georgia 30905-5000, Briefing: 
Echelons Above Corps Improvement Program Communications, 
UNCLASSIFIED, 1989. 

Commander, U.S. Army Signal Center and Fort Gordon, Directorate of 
Combat Developments, Fort Gordon Georgia 30905-5000, Briefing: 
Battlefield Information Architecture Near, Mid, and Far Term, 
UNCLASSmED, 4 April 1991. 

The MITRE Corporation, 145 Wyckoff Road, Eatontown, New Jersey 
07702, Initial Investigation Into The Feasibility of Orderwire Telemetry 
Acquisition For The Communications Systems Control Element (CSCE), 
November 1990. 

GTE Mobile Subscriber Equipment Division, 400 John Quincy Adams 
Road, Taunton, Massachusetts 02780, Mobile Subscriber Equipment 
(MSE): System Control Center (SCC) Requirements Document SCC 
Operational Messages, 10 June 1992. 

Terplan, K., Communication Networks Management, Prentice-Hill, Inc., 
1987. 


74 





[Ref. 12] National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Goddard Space Flight 
Center, Transportable Applications Environment Plus User Interface 
Developer’s Guide, v.5.1, April 1991. 

[Ref. 13] Pressman, R. S., Software Engineering: A Practitioner’s Approach, 
McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1982. 


75 




INITIAL DISTRIBUTION LIST 


1. Defense Technical Information Center 2 

Cameron Station 

Alexandria, VA 22304-6145 

2. Dudley Knox Library 2 

Code 52 

Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, CA 93943-5002 

3. Dr. Ted Lewis, Chairman 1 

Computer Science Department 

Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, CA 93943-5000 

4. Dr. G. M. Lundy 1 

Code CS/Ln 

Assistant Professor, Computer Science Department 
Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, CA 93943-5000 

5. Commander, USASC&FG 1 

Attn: ATZH-CDM (Don Jones) 

Ft. Gordon, GA 30905-5075 

6. Project Manager 1 

Multi-Service Communications System 

Attn; SFAE-CM-MSC-CMS 
Ft. Monmouth, NJ 07703-5000 


7. CPT Gregory M. Johnson 3 

13122 Pavilion Lane 

Fairfax, VA 22033 

8. LCDR John A. Daley 1 

Code CS/Da 

Computer Science Department 
Nav^ Postgraduate School 
Monterey, CA 93943-5000 


76 




