Acoustic Emission Signals in Thin Plates 
Produced by Impact Damage 

William H. Prosser, Michael R. Gorman and Donald H. Humes 

Received 30 June 1998. William H. Prosser and Donald H. Humes are affiliated with 
NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA 23681-0001, and Michael R. Gorman is 
with Digital Wave Corp., Englewood, CO 801 1 1 

Journal of Acoustic Emission, Vol. 17(1-2), (June, 1999), pp. 29-36. 



Abstract 

Acoustic emission (AE) signals created by impact sources in thin aluminum and 
graphite/epoxy composite plates were analyzed. Two different impact velocity regimes 
were studied. Low-velocity (less than 0.21 km/s) impacts were created with an airgun 
firing spherical steel projectiles (4.5 mm diameter). High- velocity (1.8 to 7 km/s) impacts 
were generated with a two-stage light-gas gun firing small cylindrical nylon projectiles (1.5 
mm diameter). Both the impact velocity and impact angle were varied. The impacts did not 
penetrate the aluminum plates at either low or high velocities. For high-velocity impacts in 
composites, there were both impacts that fully penetrated the plate as well as impacts that 
did not. All impacts generated very large amplitude AE signals (1-5 V at the sensor), 
which propagated as plate (extensional and/or flexural) modes. In the low-velocity impact 
studies, the signal was dominated by a large flexural mode with only a small extensional 
mode component detected. As the impact velocity was increased within the low velocity 
regime, the overall amplitudes of both the extensional and flexural modes increased. In 
addition, a relative increase in the amplitude of high-frequency components of the flexural 
mode was also observed. Signals caused by high- velocity impacts that did not penetrate 
the plate contained both a large extensional and flexural mode component of comparable 
amplitudes. The signals also contained components of much higher frequency and were 
easily differentiated from those caused by low-velocity impacts. An interesting 



phenomenon was observed in that the large flexural mode component, seen in every other 
case, was absent from the signal when the impact particle fully penetrated through the 
composite plates. 

1. Introduction 

Damage from impact is a serious hazard to aircraft and spacecraft. During takeoff 
and landing, impact threats include runway debris and birds. Ice created on spacecraft 
from the exposure of humid air to the cold of cryogenic propellants may break off during 
launch and cause impact damage. There are also numerous in-flight sources of impact 
damage including birds, projectiles used against military aircraft, and collisions with other 
aircraft or spacecraft. For spacecraft, there is another hazard, which is the impact of 
micrometeoroids and space debris. These on-orbit collisions occur at velocities exceeding 
10 km/s, and at these velocities, even very small particles can create significant damage. 
The seriousness of the threat of this type of impact damage to spacecraft is reflected in the 
titles of two government reports; "Space Program: Space Debris is a Potential Threat to 
Space Station and Shuttle" (GAO, 1990) and "Space Station: Delays in Dealing with Space 
Debris May Reduce Safety and Increase Costs." (GAO, 1992) 

Acoustic emission (AE) monitoring has been proposed as one method for structural 
health monitoring to detect, locate, and assess impact damage. Lempriere (1987) and 
Nelson and Lempriere (1987) discussed such applications of AE for spacecraft. The 
advantages of such a monitoring system are that the number of post- flight inspections can 
be minimized or eliminated. This can lead to a tremendous cost savings while at the same 
time providing enhanced safety. For long-term orbiting space platforms such as the 
proposed Space Station, routine inspections for impact damage are particularly difficult. 
Extra-vehicular activity (EVA) is expensive and dangerous, and there are limited space- 



tested tools and techniques for damage inspection and assessment. A recent example 
demonstrating this point is the inability to find the leak in a Mir Space Station Module, 
caused by a collision with another spacecraft, even after several EVA inspections. 

In this research, AE signals from impact sources in plates were detected with broad 
band, high fidelity sensors and digitized for analysis. Impact events were studied in both 
isotropic aluminum, and anisotropic graphite/epoxy. Both materials are widely used on 
aircraft and spacecraft. Low- velocity impacts were created with a pump airgun, firing 
spherical steel projectiles at velocities less than 0.21 km/s. Varying the number of times the 
airgun was pumped made it possible to study the effect of velocity variation within the low 
velocity regime. The effect of the angle of the plate on the observed signal was also 
evaluated. High-velocity impacts were generated in these plates with a two- stage light-gas 
gun. The velocity was varied over the range of 1.8 to 7 km/s. A smaller nylon projectile 
was used. Again, the angle of impact was varied. For the composite materials, by varying 
the velocity in the high- velocity regime, impacts that fully penetrated the plate were 
produced as well as those that did not. 

For all conditions of impact studied in this research in both the aluminum and 
graphite/epoxy composite plates, the detected AE signals were of very large amplitude. At 
the relatively short distances of propagation (less than 20 cm) in this work, attenuators, 
rather than preamplifiers, were used in some cases. This was necessary to reduce the 
signal amplitudes to a sufficiently low level for digitization. All signals contained 
propagating plate mode (extensional and/or flexural) components. Although location 
results are not presented in this paper, the large amplitude signals (and thus large signal-to- 
noise ratios) made it possible to obtain excellent impact location agreement with that 
measured directly on the plate. 



For low-velocity impacts, the flexural plate mode was predominant. As the 
projectile velocity was increased within the low-velocity regime, the overall amplitude of 
the modes increased and the amplitude of higher frequency components in the flexural 
mode increased. Previous research (Gorman, 1990; Gorman and Prosser, 1991; Prosser, 
1991) showed the effect of the direction of source motion on the relative amplitudes of plate 
modes. This was the motivation for varying the angle of impact. In contrast to the 
previous studies, no clear effect of varying the trajectory on the relative amplitude of plate 
modes was observed. 

For high- velocity impacts, the extensional mode amplitude was much larger than 
for low-velocity impacts and comparable to that of the flexural mode. The signals 
contained much higher frequency content. Again, the effect of varying the impact angle 
produced no change in the relative amplitudes of the plate modes. The flexural mode was 
entirely absent in every case where full penetration of the composite plate occurred. 
Further study of this effect is warranted as this could provide a useful discriminator for the 
detection of spacecraft-hull penetration. 

In previous research, attempts were made to use acoustic detectors to characterize 
the micrometeoroid environment. Examples of this work are described by Konstantinov et 
al. (1969), Alexander et al. (1962), and Kapinsinsky (1978). Laboratory experiments 
were used to characterize the sensitivity of the devices and such acoustic detectors were 
widely flown on balloons, sounding rockets, satellites, and lunar and deep-space probes. 
However, much like AE testing of structures, the reliability of the data from these on-board 
acoustic sensors has often been questioned because extraneous noise was not identified or 
eliminated. Thus, the rates of impacts determined from acoustic signals were unrealistically 
high in comparison to other measurement systems such as capacitive discharge detectors. 



The extraneous noise signals were attributed to both electromagnetic interference and noise 
caused by thermal expansion of the spacecraft. 

Laminated composite materials offer considerable weight savings for aircraft and 
spacecraft, but are particularly susceptible to impact damage. As such, there has been 
considerable study on acoustic waves generated by impact sources (Gardiner and Pearson, 
1985; Weems et al., 1991; Takeda et al., 1981). However, these studies have focused 
primarily on impact sources of very low velocity such as dropped projectiles or weights 
dropped onto impact tups. The signals acquired in these experiments are in agreement with 
the results from the low-velocity impact testing in this study in that small amplitude 
extensional mode components followed by much larger flexural mode components can be 
identified. In addition, a number of authors including Moon (1973), Sun and Lai (1974), 
Datta et al. (1992), Karim (1991), and Mai and Lih (1992) have investigated theoretical 
approaches for predicting acoustic waves in composite laminates generated by impact 
sources. 

More recently. Nelson and Lempriere (1987) evaluated AE signals generated by 
impact sources in metallic plates for the development of AE technology for the Space 
Station. Although they successfully demonstrated the detection and location of impacts, an 
AE monitoring system was not included in later plans for the Space Station. It is believed 
that the infant state of the waveform-based technology used, combined with severely 
limited development funds, led to the curtailment. In their study, they detected and 
digitized signals with broadband sensors for low-velocity impacts created with an air gun 
and spherical projectiles. They also collected signals from a very limited number of high- 
velocity impacts, but the results were not discussed in detail. AE signals propagating as 
plate modes were also observed in both cases and considerable discussion focused on the 
ability to locate sources with these dispersive waves. However, they tested only metal 



specimens representative of space-station materials and only considered normal impact. 
They also suffered problems with their digitizing instrumentation causing high frequency 
spikes that distorted some signals. Furthermore, differences between penetrating and non- 
penetrating high- velocity impacts were not evaluated. Thus, a more extensive study was 
conducted and the results are detailed below. 

2. Low-Velocity Impact 

A pump air gun (Daisy model 880) was used to produce low-velocity impacts. 
Spherical, steel balls with a diameter of 4.5 mm were used. The velocity of the projectiles 
was not measured in these experiments. The nominal maximum muzzle velocity for this 
model gun, as obtained from the manufacturer, is 0.21 km/s when the gun is pumped to its 
full capacity of 10 pumping. At this velocity, the estimated kinetic energy (mvV2) of the 
projectile is 8.2 J. 

The target plate was 2024 aluminum sheet with a thickness of 3. 175 mm and 50.8 
cm square. For safety, the target plate with attached sensors was placed inside a chamber 
of 76-mm thick high density foam. The plate was placed on a fixture that allowed the angle 
of impact to be varied from normal to the plate (90°) down to 10° grazing incidence in 10° 
steps. 

Heavily damped, 3.5 MHz ultrasonic transducers for thickness gaging (Panametrics 
model VI 82) were used to detect the signals produced by these low-velocity impacts. 
Operated far off their resonance in the low-frequency AE range (less than 1 MHz), these 
sensors provide flat with frequency, high-fidelity, displacement response. This was 
demonstrated (Prosser, 1991) by comparison of their response against that of a calibrated 
laser interferometer. In addition, Papadakis (1980) discussed why such transducers make 
ideal high-fidelity AE sensors. This sensor has a diameter of 1.27 cm. This large aperture 



leads to problems with phase cancellation across the sensor face at higher frequencies. To 
reduce this effect, a smaller diameter sensor (Digital Wave Corp., model B1025) was used 
in the high-velocity impact studies, which were conducted later. Even though these two 
sensors have similar response curves as a function of frequency except for the aperture 
effects, exact comparisons of the low- and high- velocity impact generated AE signals are 
not made. This is particularly true for the higher-frequency extensional mode and the 
higher-frequency component of the flexural mode. However, gross differences of these 
signals, particularly of the relative amplitudes of the plate modes between low-velocity and 
high-velocity impacts are noted and will be discussed. 

For these experiments, four sensors were placed in a rectangular array around the 
anticipated impact spot. They were all located at a nominal distance of 15.2 cm from the 
impact. In repeated test firing, the impact position did not vary more than 1 .27 cm in any 
direction from the desired impact position. As the amplitudes of the AE signals produced 
by these impacts were so large, no preamplifiers were used. The output of the sensors 
were put directly into a transient recorder (LeCroy model 6810) which had a 12-bit vertical 
resolution. A sampling frequency of 2 MHz was used and 1024 points were acquired for 
each waveform. 

A typical signal captured from an impact, in which the gun had been pumped five 
times is shown in Fig. la. The extensional and flexural mode components of this signal 



10 r 



^ 5 - 



o 

(U 

-a 

3 




-5 
-10 



Flexural 

Mode 

1 




- Extensional 
Mode 



50 100 

Time (|J,sec. ) 
a) 



150 




50 100 

Time (|lsec.) 
b) 



150 



Fig. 1 AE signals produced by low- velocity impact on aluminum plate with: a) air gun 
pumped 5 times, and b) air gun pumped 2 times. 

are identified in this figure. The extensional mode propagates with a faster velocity and 
suffers little dispersion, while the flexural mode travels more slowly with dispersion such 
that higher frequencies arrive earlier in the signal. The peak amplitude of the signal is quite 
large, and again, this is without any amplification. The flexural mode is dominant and the 
extensional mode is barely observable in comparison. This is as expected since the impact 
produces a large out-of -plane source motion and thus generates a large bending moment. 
For these impacts, the projectile did not penetrate the plate but did produce a significant 
crater. The crater diameter was approximately the same diameter as the spherical projectile. 



A signal from an impact, in which the gun was only pumped twice is shown in Fig. 
lb. The velocity (and energy) of the projectile for this case is smaller, which leads to a 
smaller peak amplitude. Again, the flexural mode is dominant with very little extensional 
mode signal present. Not only is the amplitude different for the signals from different 
impact velocities, but the frequency content changes as well. As can be seen in the time 



domain signals of Fig. 1, and even more clearly in their frequency response curves in Fig. 
2, the high-frequency content increased in the signal from the higher- velocity impact. 



250 ,- 




100 200 300 
Frequency (kHz) 

a) 



400 



250 ,- 




100 200 300 
Frequency (kHz) 

b) 



400 



Fig. 2 Magnitude of FFT of AE signals in Fig. 1 produced by low-velocity impact on 
aluminum plate with: a) air gun pumped 5 times, and b) air gun pumped twice. 



No effect of impact-angle variation on the relative amplitudes of the two plate 
modes was observed. As mentioned previously, earlier research (Gorman, 1990; Gorman 
and Prosser, 1991; Prosser, 1991) had demonstrated a strong relationship between the 
directionality of the source motion and the relative amplitudes of plate modes. In this 
previous work, the simulated AE sources (pencil-lead breaks) were all applied at the mid- 
plane of the plate as the source angle was varied. Impact sources, however, occur on, or 
near the surface of the plate. This off-mid-plane source always creates a large bending 
moment, and thus large flexural mode. The variation in the angle of impact produced 
frequency content and overall amplitude (of both modes) changes similar to those produced 
by varying the velocity. This is because the normal component of the impact velocity 
changes, as the angle is varied. These effects, as well as signal dispersion effects due to 
slight variation in the propagation distance from shot to shot, all contributed to further mask 
any possible effect on relative amplitudes of plate modes that might have been caused by 



impact angle variations. Further study is needed to determine the feasibility of impact 
trajectory assessment through AE signal analysis. 

3. High-Velocity Impact 

A two- stage light-gas gun was used for high-velocity impact experiments. These 
high- velocity impacts cause damage, which more closely simulates that caused by 
hypervelocity impacts of micrometeoroids and space debris on spacecraft.. The first stage 
of this gun consisted of a Swift 5.59-mm caliber rifle, which fires a nylon piston. The 
barrel for this first stage is pressurized with hydrogen prior to the shot. As the 5.59-mm 
diameter nylon piston is fired down the barrel in the first stage, it further compresses the 
hydrogen until the high pressure ruptures a polymer membrane at the muzzle end of the 
first stage. The piston is caught in a large steel capture block prior to reaching the end of 
the first stage. The pressurized hydrogen then propels a much smaller projectile down an 
evacuated chamber at velocities, for this gun, up to 7 km/s. More details about the 
operation of such guns are given by Crozier and Hume (1957) and more recently by 
Schneider and Stilp (1990). 

The velocity is controlled by a number of factors including the projectile size and 
weight, the amount of powder charge in the first stage, and the original pressure of the 
hydrogen gas in this stage. For these experiments, the impact projectiles were nylon 
cylinders with diameter of 1.5 mm and length of 1.25 mm. The velocity was measured 
with an optical system. Using mirrors, the path of a He-Ne laser beam was manipulated so 
that it passed twice through the intended path of the projectile at known, fixed distances 
between passes. The laser beam then impinged on a photo-detector. As the impact 
projectile traveled down the chamber, each time it passed through the laser beam, it 
temporarily blocked the light from arriving at the photo-detector. The photo-dector output 



signal could then be used to determine the time required for the particle to travel the distance 
between the two beam paths. This time, with the known distance, was then used to 
determine the velocity of the projectile, which in our experiments ranged from 1.8 to 7 
km/s. Over this velocity range, the calculated kinetic energy of the projectile ranges from 
4.1 J to 61.7 J. Thus, even though the velocities are much higher than those used in the 
low- velocity study, the energy of the projectile is of the same order of magnitude. 

Both aluminum and graphite/epoxy composite plates were impacted at high 
velocities. The 2024 aluminum plates had the same nominal thickness and lateral 
dimensions as those used for low- velocity experiments. Two different graphite/epoxy 
composites were used. The first was 8 plies of IM7/8552, which had a nominal thickness 
of 1.27 mm. The lateral dimensions of these plates varied but was 25.4 x 25.4 cm or 
larger. The second was 24 plies of IM7/977-2 with a nominal thickness of 3.56 mm. The 
lateral dimensions of these plates were 35.6 x 35.6 cm. Both laminates were quasi- 
isotropic lay-ups, the first being [0, 45, 90, -45]s and the second being [0, 45, 90, -45]3s. 
For the composites, only impact normal to the plate was studied, while for the aluminum, 
the impact angle was varied again from normal (90°) down to 10° in 10° steps. 

As mentioned previously, different sensors (Digital Wave Corp. model B1025) 
were used for the high-velocity experiments. These were similar to those used in the low- 
velocity impact study in that they are highly damped ultrasonic sensors operating far off 
resonance to provide a flat frequency response. However, they have a smaller diameter, 
which minimizes aperture effects thus providing better fidelity at the higher frequencies in 
the extensional mode and the early portion of the flexural mode. Again, four sensors were 
used in an array around the impact site. However, in this case, they were not equidistant 
from the impact site. For the aluminum plates, the nominal sensor positions were as 
shown in Fig. 3. For the composite plates, similar sensor spacing was maintained, but 



because the lateral dimensions of the plate were different, the positions relative to the plate 
edges were different. Also, as illustrated in this figure, there was slightly larger variability 
of the impact site from shot to shot. 



508 




508 



Fig. 3 Illustration of sensor positions for high- velocity impact in aluminum plate. 
Dimensions in mm. 



A different signal recording system (Digital Wave Corp. model 4012 Fracture Wave 
Detector) was used for these experiments. It also had 12-bit vertical resolution, but the 
sampling frequency was 10 MHz. The signal was bandpass filtered from 20 kHz to 1.5 
MHz. Because the input range of this digitizer was limited to +0.5 V, an attenuating 
preamplifier (Digital Wave Corp. model 2040 G/A) was used to provide 20-dB attenuation. 
For the signals presented in this paper, the amplitudes have been multiplied by 10 to correct 
for this attenuation and provide the voltage output from the sensor. This allows direct 
comparison of these signals against those recorded from the low-velocity impact study. 
However, the differences in type of sensors and filtering must be considered when making 
such comparisons. Thus, only significant differences in wave shape and modal content 
will be discussed between these two impact conditions. 



Figure 4a shows the signal produced in an aluminum plate from a high- velocity 
impact. The velocity of the impact particle was 4.2 km/s and the aluminum plate was not 
penetrated. In fact, for the range of velocities tested, no projectiles penetrated the 
aluminum plates. The propagation distance to the sensor was 14.7 cm. Because of the 
significant high-frequency components in this signal, it is more difficult to clearly identify 
the extensional and flexural mode components. A 500 kHz low -pass filter was applied 
with the results shown in Fig. 4b. Here the plate mode components are more readily 
identified. In comparing these signals to the low-velocity impact signals in Fig. 1, it is 
noted that the shift in arrival times of these signals, and others to be presented later, are due 
to differences in trigger timing. Two significant differences are readily apparent when 
comparing signals caused by high- velocity impact to those caused by low-velocity impact. 
The first, which was clearly demonstrated by the need to use a low-pass filter to identify 
the modes, is that there is much higher frequency content in signals produced by high- 
velocity impact. It is suspected, although not verified by signal analysis, that higher order 
Lamb modes may be present in this high-frequency signal. This higher frequency content 
is not unexpected due to the source mechanism at much higher velocity. An increase in 
high-frequency content was also observed even for the slight velocity increase in low- 
velocity impact (cf. Fig. 2). 



Extensional 
Mode 



Flexural 
Mode 




o 

(U 

-a 

3 



< 



3 ,- 

2 

1 



-1 

-2 




50 100 

Time (fisec. ) 

a) 



150 



50 100 

Time (fisec.) 

b) 



150 



Fig. 4 a) AE signal produced by high velocity impact on aluminum plate; b) same signal 
as a) except after filtering with 500-kHz low-pass filter. 

The second significant difference between the low- and high-velocity impact signals 
is the much larger extensional mode component for high-velocity impacts. It has an even 
larger amplitude than the flexural mode for this signal. A qualitative explanation for this 
difference can be offered based on an examination of the type of deformation produced by 
impacts at these different velocities. As discussed previously, low-velocity impact 
produces a crater, which is of similar diameter to the projectile diameter. For high-velocity 
impact, however, the diameter of the crater is several times larger than the diameter of the 
projectile. Thus, there is significant in-plane deformation as the crater expands in the high- 
velocity impact event. It seems likely that this in-plane deformation from crater expansion 
accounts for the large extensional plate mode component in high-velocity impact signals. 



Again, no clear difference in the relative amplitude of the plate-mode components 
was detected as a function of the angle of impact. As the angle was decreased from normal 
impact, overall decreases in signal amplitude were observed as the normal component of 
the velocity decreased. However, the larger variations in the actual impact spot relative to 



the sensor positions made it difficult to investigate this effect. The apparent amplitudes of 
the modes change with propagation distance, especially for the flexural mode because of its 
high dispersion. Further, more controlled tests, in which either the propagation distance 
varied less, or amplitude changes due to propagation distance variations are compensated, 
are required. This will allow a better determination of whether information about impact 
trajectory is also contained in AE signals. 

For high-velocity impacts in composite plates, the impact projectile fully penetrated 
the plate in most cases, except when the projectile was at the low end of the velocity 
spectrum (less than 2 km/s). Figure 5 shows the signal from an impact event, in which the 
projectile did not penetrate the composite plate. The velocity for this impact was 1.8 km/s. 
The plate in this experiment was the 8-ply IM7/8552 material. The distance of propagation 
was only 7.2 cm in a direction at a small angle (approximately 1.5°) from the 0°-fiber 
direction in this quasi-isotropic material. Again, similar to the signal from high-velocity 
impact in aluminum, there are large amplitude extensional and flexural mode components. 
However, the very high-frequency components that were present in Fig. 4a, are missing. 
This is most likely due to the much higher attenuation at higher frequencies that is typical of 
composites. 

A different result was obtained when the composite plate was penetrated. Figure 6a 
shows a signal for such a case in the 8-ply material where the projectile velocity was 6.6 
km/s. The propagation distance was 14.1 cm in a direction of 51.4° with respect to the 0°- 
fiber direction. For this signal, the flexural mode component is not present. The signal is 
composed only of the extensional mode and its reflections from the plate edges. A similar 
result is shown in Fig. 6b for the 24-ply laminate. The velocity in this case was 5.2 km/s. 
The propagation distance was 13.0 cm along a 54.3° propagation direction. 



2p 

1.5 - 

I 1 - 
o 

■> 0.5 - 

I -1- 
^-1.5- 









50 100 150 
Time (|J,sec.) 



200 



Fig. 5 AE signal produced by non-penetrating high- velocity impact on 8-ply graphite/epoxy 
composite plate. 



o 

(U 

-a 

3 



< 



3 p 

2 - 

1 - 



-1 - 

-2 - 




50 100 150 
Time (fisec. ) 

a) 



200 



3 ,- 




11 




50 100 150 
Time (|J,sec.) 
b) 



200 



Fig. 6 AE signals produced by penetrating impact in composite plates; a) 8-ply laminate, 
and b) 24 ply laminate. 



4. Summary 



In this study, AE signals generated by impact were detected with broadband, high 
fidelity sensors. A wide variety of impact conditions were studied including both low- and 
high-velocity impact, and varied impact trajectory in metal and composite targets. In the 
composite plates at high velocities, both penetrating and non-penetrating impacts were 
examined. In all cases, the AE signals had very large amplitudes and propagated as plate 
modes. 

AE signals from low- and high-velocity impacts were easily differentiated from 
their frequency content and modal analysis. Low-velocity impacts produced signals with 
little extensional mode and large flexural mode components. For variations in velocity over 
the low-velocity regime, effects on both the amplitude and frequency content of the AE 
signals were observed. High-velocity, non-penetrating impacts also produced AE signals 
with large flexural modes. However, these signals had large extensional mode components 
of comparable amplitude to the flexural mode. The large extensional modes may be due to 
the in-plane crater deformation caused by impacts at these velocities. When high- velocity 
impacts fully penetrated the composite plates, the flexural mode was absent from the AE 
signal. Variations in the impact trajectory had no discernible effect on the modal content of 
the AE signals at either high or low velocities. The only signal variation was a change in 
overall amplitude, which was attributed to simple changes in the normal velocity 
component as a function of impact angle. 

These results demonstrate the feasibility for using AE to not only detect and locate 
impact events on aircraft and spacecraft, but also provide information about the nature of 
the damage. The very large signal amplitudes for the impacts studied indicate that relatively 
large sensor spacing might be used for practical, economical, implementation. This, of 
course, depends on a number of factors such as the minimum allowable undetected impact 
damage, and the structural complexity of the region to be monitored, which can 



significantly affect the propagation of AE waves. The observed variation in signal 
characteristics with impact parameters such as velocity suggests that quantitative 
information about the impact parameters could be obtained. Such information could be 
used to remotely assess damage, which is of particular importance for long-term orbiting 
spacecraft. Likewise, the ability to differentiate penetrating and non-penetrating impact 
events would be critical for assessing damage in spacecraft, particularly on pressurized 
components such as habitat modules and tanks. 

However, further study will be necessary to develop and implement a full-scale AE 
impact-monitoring system for a given application. A wider range of impact velocities, 
projectile size and materials, and propagation distances, which are representative of those 
expected for the particular application should be tested. Also, realistic specimen geometry 
again representative of the aircraft or spacecraft to be monitored should be studied. This 
will allow the effects of wave propagation such as reflections or attenuation through 
complex geometry to be evaluated. Such effects can be significant and are often ignored 
when attempting to extend laboratory AE results to monitor real structures. And finally, as 
with any AE application, considerable attention needs to be paid to evaluating and 
eliminating potential noise sources. The development of accurate models to predict AE 
signals from impact sources will also be of tremendous benefit. Such simulations could 
help minimize the high expense required for experimentally testing a wide variety of impact 
conditions, and can be used to help understand and interpret results from actual events. 

References 

W. M. Alexander, W. W. McCracken, L. Secretan, and O. E. Berg (1962), "Review of 
Direct Measurements of Interplanetary Dust from Satellites and Probes," NASA TN D- 
1669, pp. 39-60. 

W. D. Crozier, and W. Hume (1957), "High Velocity Light Gas Gun," J. Appl. Phys., 
28, 892-894. 



S. K. Datta, T. H. Ju, R. L. Bratton, and A. H. Shah (1992), "Transient Response of a 
Laminated Composite Plate, " Review of Progress in Quantitative Nondestructive 
Evaluation, 11, 145-151. 

GAO (1990), "Space Program: Space Debris is a Potential Threat to Space Station and 
Shuttle," GAO Report* GAO/IMTEC-90- 18. 

GAO (1992), "Space Station: Delays in Dealing with Space Debris May Reduce Safety and 
Increase Costs," GAO Report # GAO/IMTEC-92-15. 

D. S. Gardiner and L. H. Pearson (1985), "Acoustic-Emission Monitoring of Composite 
Damage Occurring Under Static and Impact Loading," Experimental Techniques, 9, 22-28. 

M. R. Gorman (1990), "Plate Wave Acoustic Emission," J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 90(1), 
358-364. 

M. R. Gorman and W. H. Prosser (1991), "AE Source Orientation by Plate Wave 
Analysis," Journal of Acoustic Emission, 9(4), 283-288. 

I. Kapinsinsky (1978), "On the Reliability of the Acoustic Method of Micrometeoroid 
Detection," Bulletin of the Astronomical Institutes of Czechoslovakia, 29(6), 326-330. 

M. R. Karim (1991), "Impact Response of a Unidirectional Composite Laminate," JSME 
International Journal, 34(4), 496-504. 

B. P. Konstantinov, M. M. Bredov, E. P. Mazets, V. N. Panov, R. L. Aptekar, S. V. 
Golenetskii, Y. G. Guryan, and V. N. Il'inskii, (1969), "Micrometeors in 
Circumterrestrial Space Observed by Kosmos-163," Translated from Kosmicheskie 
Issledovaniya, 7(6), 817-821. 

B. M. Lempriere (1989), "Nondestructive Evaluation of Composite Structures in Space," 
Boeing Report #D180-3 1598-1. 

A. K. Mai and S. S. Lih (1992), "Wave Field Produced in a Composite Laminate by a 
Concentrated Surface Force," Review of Progress in Quantitative Nondestructive 
Evaluation, 11, 137-144. 

F. C. Moon (1973), "Wave Surfaces Due to Impact on Anisotropic Plates," Journal of 
Composite Materials, 7, 62-79. 

J. M. Nelson and B. M. Lempriere (1987), "Space Station Integrated Wall Design and 
Penetration Damage Control," Final Report for NASA Contract NAS8-36426. 

E. P. Papadakis (1980), "Broadband Flaw Detection Transducers: Application to Acoustic 
Emission Pulse Shape and Spectrum Recording Based on Pulse Echo Response Spectrum 
Corrected for Beam Spreading," Acoustica, 46, 293-298. 

W. H. Prosser (1991), "The Propagation Characteristics of the Plate Modes of Acoustic 
Emission Waves in Thin Aluminum Plates and Thin Graphite/Epoxy Composite Plates and 
Tubes," NASA Technical Memorandum 104187. 

E. Schneider and A. Stilp (1990), "Acceleration of Particles in Light Gas Guns for 
Micrometeoroid/Space Debris Simulation," Proceedings of the International Symposium on 
Environmental Testing for Space Programs - Test Facilities and Methods, Sponsored by 



ESA, Guyenne, T. and Hunt, J., editors, Noordwijk, Netherlands, June 22-29, pp. 385- 
388. 

C. T. Sun and R. Y. S. Lai (1974), "Exact and Approximate Analyses of Transient Wave 
Propagation in an Anisotropic Plate," AIAA Journal, 12(10), 1415-1417. 

N. Takeda, R. L. Sierakowski, and L. E. Malvern (1981), "Wave Propagation 
Experiments on Ballistically Impacted Composite Laminates," Journal of Composite 
Materials, 15, 157-174. 

D. Weems, H. T. Hahn, E. Granlund, and I. G. Kim (1991), "Impact Detection in 
Composite Skin Panels Using Piezoelectric Sensors," American Helicopter Society 47th 
Annual Forum Proceedings, 1, 643-652. 



