their own plots with minimal effort, and 
can gain access to all of the features of the 
case management system. Users can also 
define their own models (including gravi- 
tational and non-gravitational force mod- 
els) , types of measurement, and optimiz- 
ers, using software hooks that are made 
available in the scripting layer of the tool. 
This enables users to extend the function- 
ality of MONTE without restriction. 


MONTE provides maneuver opti- 
mization as well as re-optimization ca- 
pability that includes support for partic- 
ular constraints, such as cones and 
directions. The software has integrated 
support to help satisfy planetary quar- 
antine requirements. 

This work was done by Richard F. Sunseri, 
Hsi-ChengWu, Robert A. Hanna, Michael P. 
Mossey, Courtney B. Duncan, Scott E. Evans, 


James R. Evans, Theodore R. Drain, Michelle 
M. Guevara, Tomas J. Martin Mur, and 
Ahlam A. Attiyah of Caltech for NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. 

This software is available for commer- 
cial licensing. Please contact Karina Ed- 
monds of the California Institute of Tech- 
nology at (626) 395-2322. Refer to 
NPO-46083. 


Extensible Infrastructure for Browsing and Searching 
Abstracted Spacecraft Data 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


A computer program has been devel- 
oped to provide a common interface 
for all space mission data, and allows 
different types of data to be displayed 
in the same context. This software pro- 
vides an infrastructure for representing 
any type of mission data. Existing soft- 
ware requires that each type of mission 
data be treated separately. The new pro- 
gram’s representations provide identify- 
ing information, and provide a means 


of opening the data for further inspec- 
tion. This is useful for searching and 
browsing large quantities of data across 
multiple databases. 

The software is written in Java as part 
of the MSLICE program, and can be run 
on any Windows, Mac OS, or Linux com- 
puter. The software may be adapted to 
other mission operation software. 

This work was done by Michael N. Wal- 
lick, Thomas M. Crockett, Joseph C. Joswig, 


Recaredo J. Torres, Jeffrey S. Norris, Jason 
M. Fox, Mark W. Powell, David S. 
Mittman, Lucy Abramyan, Khawaja S. 
Shams, and Michael B. Vaughn of Caltech 
and Guy Pyrzak and Melissa Ludowise of 
Ames Research Center for NASA’s Jet Propul- 
sion Laboratory. 

This software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-46397. ' 


Lossless Compression of Data Into Fixed-Length Packets 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


A computer program effects lossless 
compression of data samples from a one- 
dimensional source into fixed-length 
data packets. The software makes use of 
adaptive prediction: it exploits the data 
structure in such a way as to increase the 
efficiency of compression beyond that 
otherwise achievable. 

Adaptive linear filtering is used to pre- 
dict each sample value based on past sam- 
ple values. The difference between pre- 
dicted and actual sample values is encoded 
using a Golomb code. The particular 
Golomb code used is selected using a 


method described in “Simpler Adaptive Se- 
lection of Golomb Power-of-Two Codes” 
(NPO-41336), NASA Tech Briefs, Vol. 31, 
No. 11 (November 2007), page 71. As 
noted therein, the method is somewhat 
suboptimal (suboptimality <1/2 bit per 
sample) but offers the advantage that it in- 
volves significantly less computation than 
does a prior method of adaptive selection 
of optimum codes through “brute force” 
application of all code options to every 
block of samples. Hence, the computer 
program is relatively simple and produces 
packets relatively rapidly. 


The method and, hence, the program 
are robust to loss of packets: All parame- 
ters needed to decompress a packet are 
encoded in the packet. Therefore, the 
loss of one or more packets does not di- 
minish the ability to reconstruct samples 
in remaining packets. 

This work was done by Aaron B. Kiely and 
Matthew A. Klimesh of Caltech for NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. 

This software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-45942. ' 


Video-Game-Like Engine for Depicting Spacecraft Trajectories 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


GoView is a video-game-like software en- 
gine, written in the C and C++ computing 
languages, that enables real-time, three-di- 
mensional (3D) -appearing visual repre- 
sentation of spacecraft and trajectories (1) 


from any perspective; (2) at any spatial 
scale from spacecraft to Solar-system di- 
mensions; (3) in user-selectable time 
scales; (4) in the past, present, and/ or fu- 
ture; (5) with varying speeds; and (6) for- 


ward or backward in time. GoView con- 
structs an interactive 3D world by use of 
spacecraft-mission data from pre-existing 
engineering software tools. GoView can 
also be used to produce distributable ap- 


54 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2009 


plication programs for depicting NASA or- 
bital missions on personal computers run- 
ning the Windows XP, Mac OsX, and 
Linux operating systems. 

GoView enables seamless rendering of 
Cartesian coordinate spaces with pro- 
grammable graphics hardware, whereas 
prior programs for depicting spacecraft 
trajectories variously require non-Carte- 
sian coordinates and/ or are not compat- 
ible with programmable hardware. 
GoView incorporates an algorithm for 


nonlinear interpolation between arbi- 
trary reference frames, whereas the 
prior programs are restricted to special 
classes of inertial and non-inertial refer- 
ence frames. Finally, whereas the prior 
programs present complex user inter- 
faces requiring hours of training, the 
GoView interface provides guidance, en- 
abling use without any training. 

This work was done by Paul R. Upchurch of 
Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 

In accordance with Public Law 96-517, 


the contractor has elected to retain title to this 
invention. Inquiries concerning rights for its 
commercial use should be addressed to: 
Innovative Technology Assets Management 

JPL 

Mail Stop 202-233 
4800 Oak Grove Drive 
Pasadena, CA 91109-8099 
E-mail: iaoffice@jpl.nasa.gov 
Refer ■ to NPO-452 74, volume and number 
of this NASA Tech Briefs issue, and the 
page number. 


Alert Notification System Router 

Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland 


The Alert Notification System Router 
(ANSR) software provides satellite oper- 
ators with notifications of key events 
through pagers, cell phones, and e-mail. 
Written in Java, this application is specif- 
ically designed to meet the mission-crit- 
ical standards for mission operations 
while operating on a variety of hardware 
environments. 

ANSR is a software component that 
runs inside the Mission Operations Cen- 
ter (MOC). It connects to the mission’s 
message bus using the GMSEC [God- 


dard Space Flight Center (GSFC) Mis- 
sion Services Evolution Center 
(GMSEC)] standard. Other compo- 
nents, such as automation and monitor- 
ing components, can use ANSR to send 
directives to notify users or groups. The 
ANSR system, in addition to notifying 
users, can check for message acknowl- 
edgements from a user and escalate the 
notification to another user if there is no 
acknowledgement. 

When a firewall prevents ANSR from 
accessing the Internet directly, proxies 


can be run on the other side of the wall. 
These proxies can be configured to ac- 
cess the Internet, notify users, and poll 
for their responses. Multiple ANSRs can 
be run in parallel, providing a seamless 
failover capability in the event that one 
ANSR system becomes incapacitated. 

This work was done by Joseph Gurganus of 
Goddard Space Flight Center and Everett 
Cary, Robert Antonucci, and Peter Hitchener 
of Emergent Space Technologies, Inc. Further 
information is contained in a TSP (see page 
1). GSC-15592-1 


Lossless Compression of Classification-Map Data 

This algorithm performs better than do general-purpose image-data compression algorithms. 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 



This False-Color Image and Classification Map were derived from image data acquired by an airborne 
visible/infrared imaging spectrometer (AVIRIS) over Moffett Field, California. The classification map is 
typical of images meant to be processed by use of the present algorithm. 


A lossless image-data-compression al- 
gorithm intended specifically for appli- 
cation to classification-map data is based 
on prediction, context modeling, and 
entropy coding. The algorithm was for- 
mulated, in consideration of the differ- 
ences between classification maps and 
ordinary images of natural scenes, so as 
to be capable of compressing classifica- 
tion-map data more effectively than do 
general-purpose image-data-compres- 
sion algorithms. 

Classification maps are typically gener- 
ated from remote-sensing images ac- 
quired by instruments aboard aircraft (see 
figure) and spacecraft. A classification 
map is a synthetic image that summarizes 
information derived from one or more 
original remote-sensing image (s) of a 
scene. The value assigned to each pixel in 
such a map is the index of a class that rep- 
resents some type of content deduced 
from the original image data — for exam- 


ple, a type of vegetation, a mineral, or a 
body of water — at the corresponding lo- 
cation in the scene. When classification 
maps are generated onboard the aircraft 


or spacecraft, it is desirable to compress 
the classification-map data in order to re- 
duce the volume of data that must be 
Uansmitted to a ground station. 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2009 


55 




