


25 5 8 


THE APPLICATION OF INTEGRATED KNOWLEDGE-BASED 
SYSTEMS FOR THE BIOMEDICAL RISK ASSESSMENT 
INTELLIGENT NETWORK (BRAIN) 


Karin C* Loftin, Krug Life Sciences* Inc*, 1290 Hercules, Suite 120, Houston, Texas, 77058* 
Bebe Ly* NASA, Johnson Space Center, Mail Code PT41, Houston, Texas, 77058 
Laurie Webster, NASA, Johnson Space Center, Mall Code ER221, Houston, Texas, 77058 
James Verlander, Krug Life Sciences, Inc*, 1290 Hercules, Suite 120, Houston, Texas, 77058 
Gerald IL Taylor, NASA, Johnson Space Center, Mail Code SD5, Houston, Texas, 77058 
Gary Riley, NASA, Johnson Space Center, Mall Code PT41, Houston, Texas, 77058 
Chris Culbert, NASA, Johnson Space Center, Mail Code PT41, Houston, Texas, 77058 
Tina Holden, Lockheed Engineering and Sciences, Corp*, Houston, Texas, 77058 
Marianne Rudisill, NASA, Johnson Space Center, Mail Code SP34, Houston, Texas, 77058 


ABSTRACT 

One of NASA's goals for long duration space flight is to maintain acceptable levels of crew health, safety, and 
performance* One way of meeting this goal is through the Biomedical Risk Assessment Intelligent Network 
(BRAIN), an integrated network of both human and computer elements. BRAIN will function as an advisor to flight 
surgeons by assessing the risk of in-flight biomedical problems and recommending appropriate countermeasures. 

This paper -describes the joint effort among various NASA elements to develop BRAIN and an Infectious Disease 
Risk Assessment (XDRA) prototype. The implementation of this effort addresses the technological aspects of: (1) 
knowledge acquisition, (2) integration of IDRA components, (3) use of expert systems to automate the biomedical 
prediction process, (4) development of a user-friendly interface, and (5) integration of the IDRA prototype and 
Exercise Countermeasures Intelligent System (ExerCISys). Because the C Language, CLIPS (the C Language 
Integrated Production System), and the X-Window System were portable and easily integrated, they were chosen as 
the tools for the initial IDRA prototype. The feasibility was tested by developing an IDRA prototype that predicts 
the individual risk of influenza. The application of knowledge-based systems to risk assessment is of great market 
value to the medical technology industry. 


INTRODUCTION 

One of NASA'S primary goals for space flight is to maintain acceptable levels of health, safety, and performance of 
the crew. To achieve this goal, medical teams have monitored the health of the crew pre-flight, in flight, and post 
flight throughout the history of manned space programs. During the Skylab missions, in-flight biomedical data 
were used as a basis for making decisions about the flight duration of successive Skylab missions (21). The medical 
team had to plan very carefully for a quick turn-around time of sample processing and data analysis between 
missions. The Skylab Medical Management Group met daily to review the status of the crew. Without computer 
assistance this activity was very man-hour intensive and undoubtedly increased the cost of the operations. 

For extended tours of duty on Space Station Freedom and Lunar/Mars stations, a greater effort will be required to 
assure nominal crew operations. To achieve this, NASA will monitor crew physiological, psychological, and task 
performance and administer appropriate countermeasures (17,22,31,39). It may be crucial to assess quickly the 
individual risk of biomedical problems based on changes in certain physiological, psychological, or environmental 
indicators to initiate countermeasures (10,19). It is important to predict the impact of the selected countermeasures 
on crew health, safety, and performance. If more than one change in crew status is observed, it is critical to evaluate 
each countermeasure relative to the others. 

Automation technology is required to support this decisionmaking process. It reduces the volume of data, facilitates 
data interpretation, and resolves incompatible data. For example, expert or knowledge-based systems can automate 
the medical diagnostic process (20,28,42). The knowledge that is represented in medical textbooks and/or the 
expertise of a physician is incorporated into computer software (13). These systems handle a large quantity of related 
physiological or anatomical data; however, each expert system is developed for only one specific discipline (5*^,7). 


322 



Expert systems are commonly implemented as rule-based production systems based on a series of "iL.theo" 
reasoning rules (13). The Software Technology Branch at NASA/Johnson Space Center has developed a rale-based 
production system called CLIPS, the C Language Integrated Production System (9,12,38). CLIPS is being used to 
automate the prediction process of the BDRA prototype (see below) and BRAIN. 

NASA has supported the development of four life sciences expert systems for use on long duration space flight: 

• The EDRA prototype assesses the risk of infectious diseases and recommends countermeasures to reduce the 
risks. The implementation approach and the results of this development are presented in this paper. 

• The ExerCISys prescribes an exercise protocol to maintain muscle strength and cardiovascular aerobic capacity 
In flight 

• The Medical Equipment Computer (ME C) provides decision-support for disease diagnosis and drug therapy in 

flight. 

• The Performance Prediction Model (PPM) assesses the effect of environmental and mission factors on the team 
performance and predicts its level accordingly. This project is in the early stages of development 

The limitations of these expert systems are that they are independent from each other. They are designed for a single 
user, and the data are not automatically shared between systems or users. A solution to the problems associated with 
multiple expert systems is the Biomedical Risk Assessment Intelligent Network (BRAIN). The application of 
knowledge-based systems or artificial intelligence is a vital component of BRAIN. BRAIN is an integrated network 
for biomedical risk assessment and management It provides a composite of multiple experts similar to that 
generated by the Medical Management Group during the Sky lab missions. We hypothesize that BRAIN will reduce 
the time required for a flight surgeon to arrive at real-time decisions about individual biomedical risk analysis and 
management This paper describes an implementation approach to develop a BRAIN prototype and the development 
of an BDRA prototype to test the feasibility of the approach. 

Others outside NASA will benefit from the development of BRAIN. Institutions such as hospitals, medical clinics, 
boarding schools, military services, nursing homes for the mentally and physically handicapped, and home medical 
care services are potential users. 


IMPLEMENTATION APPROACH 


Documentation of Requirements 

The BRAIN concept is illustrated as a triangle (Figure 1) with users on the left side and expert systems on the right 
side. The network still permits each user and system to work independently and interact independently with the 
flight surgeon. Through BRAIN, each system may access pertinent data from other systems. BRAIN cooperates 
with the independent expert systems by use of a knowledge base that relates all of them. 

The functions of BRAIN are to: 

• access BDRA, ExerCISys, MEC, PPM, and other undefined separate systems for pertinent information. 

• assess a composite biomedical risk and recommend countermeasures. 

• function as a clearing house of information to be shared between systems. 

• resolve incompatible information given by other expert systems and derive a composite recommendation for a 
flight surgeon. 

The preliminary software requirements of BRAIN will be documented according to the IEEE Standards Board and the 
American National Standards Institute (2). 


323 




Figure 1. The BRAIN Concept. The users on the left interact verbally with the flight surgeon and mechanically 
with each independent expert system. BRAIN cooperates with each expert system using a knowledge base that 
relates all of them. A composite recommendation is then presented to flight surgeon for real-time decisionmaking. 
(CHeCs-Crew Health Care System, ECF-Exercise Countermeasures Facility, HMF-Health Maintenance Facility, 
BMAC-Biomedical and Countermeasures) 

System Design 

Knowledge Definition 

A major activity of this project is to develop the knowledge-based system design. This includes the identification of 
data sources, knowledge definition, knowledge design, and the architecture of the hardware/software environment for 
BRAIN. The knowledge definition task defines the knowledge requirements of the network and identifies and selects 
the knowledge sources. The knowledge is acquired, analyzed, and extracted. The knowledge design comprises the 
knowledge representation, i.e., rules, internal fact structure, detailed control structure, and preliminary user interface 
( 13 ). 

BRAIN receives input from and gives it to PPM, IDRA, MEC, and ExerCISys, or the user, as illustrated in Figure 
1. Other data that are required by BRAIN reside in a separate data base, are retrieved as necessary, and are stored in a 
local or working data base. Unknown data or inaccessible data may be simulated for the version 1.0 development. 

The data structure and network configuration of BRAIN must be compatible with IDRA, ExerCISys, MEC, and 
PPM. These expert systems share related data through BRAIN by accessing the working data base. We will test the 
feasibility of IDRA, ExerCISys, MEC, and PPM to regularly post data that are required by other systems. A 
standard protocol will be established for each system to access BRAIN and vice versa. 

The knowledge base for BRAIN utilizes and interprets the data, predicts the risk of biomedical problems and 
recommends the appropriate countermeasures. The information in the data base is extracted from the sources such as: 

* Spaceflight Historical Information 

* Expert Medical and Science Personnel 

* Texts, Journal Article and Reviews 

* Epidemiological Studies of Normal Populations 


324 





The resources available in the medical sciences arena and NASA life sciences groups are explored for the knowledge 
definition of BRAIN. The relationships among EDRA, ExerCISys, MEC, and PPM are defined by means of 
workshops, personal consultation and collaboration of existing study results. Experts e.g. flight surgeons or 
scientists, will be identified and interviewed to model their expertise and to evaluate the demonstration of BRAIN 
during the developmental stages. 

Knowledge Acquisition 

Once the knowledge base has been defined for BRAIN, methods will be developed to acquire the specific knowledge. 
Because a great deal of knowledge has to be acquired for BRAIN, an automated method may be required, for that 
purpose. Several knowledge acquisition tools will be evaluated for consistency and reproducibility in extracting 
information from human experts and written sources. 

The investigative team has access to and experience with several automated knowledge acquisition tools (e.g.. Design 
Alternatives Rationale Tool [DART], Nextra, Task Analysis/Rule Generating Tool [TARGET], Knowledge 
Acquisition and Representation Tool Kit [KART], and Knowledge Network Organizational Tool [KNOT]). 

Nextra operates as a knowledge acquisition front-end tool to an expert system development package called Nexpert 
Object Both tools are marketed by Neuron Data from Palo Alto, CA Nextra allows users to graphically represent 
entity relationships between the various elements of a subject or domain. DART is another tool that analyzes design 
alternatives and their associated rationale knowledge. Both Nextra and DART tools can address problems concerned 
with taxonomies and classification. Both also use repertory-grid knowledge representations. The relationship 
among the outputs of MEC, ExerCISys, IDRA, and PPM will be examined with these tools in order to derive 
appropriate rules for biomedical risk assessment. New tools may have to be developed to acquire the appropriate 
knowledge for BRAIN. 

Although various types of expert knowledge exist within the NASA environment, procedural knowledge is prevalent 
in many areas including the biomedical environment. A procedural analysis tool, TARGET, models a set of actions 
or procedures associated with a task using a graphical user interface. This tool will be tested to analyze the procedure 
used by a flight surgeon to solve problems associated with the recommendations given by MEC, ExerCISys, IDRA, 
and PPM. The specific details will be defined during the knowledge definition phase of the project. 

K n owled g e Desig n 

A conceptual design of BRAIN is illustrated in Figure 2. Further definition of the knowledge representation and 
design is delayed until knowledge acquisition is completed. At that time, more will be known about the structure of 
the knowledge and bow it can best be represented. 

It is anticipated that the knowledge may be subjected to a software tool called RuleMaster that uses the Iterative 
Dicotomizer (ID) 3 algorithm. The ID3 algorithm analyses empirical data and derives rules for the knowledge base 
of BRAIN. Advanced techniques, e.g. CLIPS, will be tested to automate the biomedical prediction process. Other 
existing and newly-developed tools will be evaluated for their best knowledge representation and design capability. 

BRAIN will be designed with a learning capability. It will incorporate, by a feed-back mechanism, the experience of 
a human expert The decisions and interpretations of data obtained from actual test cases are acquired automatically 
in the knowledge base and new rules are induced. 

This function is entirely under the control of the appropriate user. But once initiated, it is automatically included in 
the knowledge base.Tools such as the Automated Reasoning Tool (ART) and Automated Structured Rule Acquisition 
(ASTRA) are being used to capture the expertise of exercise physiologists for ExerCISys. ART and ASTRA are 
being evaluated for application to BRAIN. 

Knowledge Verification/Validation 

Verification and validation of BRAIN is a vital step throughout the life cycle of its development (18). Verification 
of BRAIN determines that the software is developed according to specifications. The knowledge base will be verified 
by checking specific details to the level of each rule. 


325 



Validation determines that BRAIN performs the functions as specified by the requirements and is usable for field 
testing (1 1). Validation of BRAIN will encompass aspects of the validation process such as determining the 
validation criteria and developing a library of test cases and detailed space flight scenarios that are described in (1 1) 

and (27). 



Figure 2. Conceptual Design of BRAIN. The working data base is integrated with IDRA, ExerCISys, MEC, PPM, 
and additional data bases that contain the facts required by the network, e.g. countermeasures. The expertise of flight 
surgeons is also captured during the knowledge acquisition process and rules are automatically induced to reflect this 
expertise. All the rules are stored in the knowledge base and the inference engine executes the appropriate rules for a 

given working data base. 


After the Preliminary Design Review of the project, the detailed design description will be documented. It will 
specify the logic and content of the knowledge base, the implementation of the system, hardware requirements, the 
detailed user interface, and the detailed demonstration plan. 

The hardware/software environment of BRAIN will be compatible with MEC, PPM, IDRA, ExerCISys, and Space 
Station Freedom standards to communicate related information. The development environment that is used to create 
the software may not run on the identical platform as the demonstration version. 


It is essential for the flight components of BRAIN to have user friendly interfaces. Ease of use may determine 
whether or not a system is fully utilized. Early prototypes will be developed with prototyping tools to explore the 
user interface. The user interfaces to BRAIN will be designed in accordance with human factors principles (43) and 
the Space Station Volume of the Man Systems Integration Standards (NASA STD 3000) document (26). In 
addition, the user interface code will be portable and compatible with the Space Station Freedom Data Management 
System. Some of the factors that will be addressed are information grouping, user system dialogs, and information 
highlighting techniques. Prior to completion of the final BRAIN design, all interfaces will be empirically evaluated 
using subjects similar to the typical user. Based upon findings of this study, the design of the interfaces will be 
refined. The final product is BRAIN, version 1.0, that will have been tested and proven to function as an integrated 
network of the MEC, IDRA, ExerCISys, and PPM prototypes, with a validated, well-designed user interface. 

FEASIBILITY TESTING 


3MJDEA f r otoiyps 

The feasibility of using integrated knowledge-based systems for biomedical risk assessment was tested in the IDRA 
prototype. Because the prevention of infections during manned space flights is important (3,30,35), the IDRA 
prototype was developed initially to assess the probability of influenza infection. 


326 












The epidemiology of and procedures for preventing, diagnosing, and treating influenza are well defined ( 1 , 4 , 40 ). 
Epidemiological studies have evaluated the risk factors and their predictive value for influenza in the general 
population (8,14,25,37,41) and the efficacy of chemotherapeutic prophylaxis (15). Earlier studies investigated the 
outbreak of influenza in isolated populations, e.g., on an aircraft (29), a ship at sea, (34) and college campuses 
(24,36). From these sources, we concluded that sufficient information was available to construct a knowledge base 
about influenza. 

The Integration of IDRA and ExerCISvs 

Studies indicate that exercise has a profound effect on the immune system (23,32,33), sometimes inducing changes 
similar to those arising from the stress of space flight (16). Therefore, exercise regimen and related physiological 
data are factors that must be taken into consideration for die risk assessment of infectious diseases and for prescribing 
an exercise program. This was suggested on the Soviet MIR Space Station when Cosmonaut Gennady Strekalov 
"caught a cold" following exercise (reported by the Associated Press, October 18, 1990). 

The IDRA prototype is compatible with the ExerCISys prototype, and we will integrate IDRA with the ExeiCISys 
as a model for BRAIN. When BRAIN is actually implemented as described in the approach, BRAIN, IDRA, and 
ExerCISys will be separate systems. However, to test the feasibility of integrating two independent systems 
initially, the integrated knowledge base will reside in the IDRA prototype. This also provides an opportunity to 
evaluate the type of information that will be shared and what will remain private between the systems. When the 
requirements for BRAIN are better defined, the integrated knowledge base will be moved to a separate hardware and 
software environment, and all systems will be connected to BRAIN through a network communications link. 

IDRA Preliminary Results 

The knowledge for the IDRA knowledge base was extracted and analyzed from textbooks and journal articles cited 
above. We identified the critical indicators that predict the probability of influenza. The risk of influenza for an 
individual is described by general population statistics. It depends on an individual’s location, age group, and level of 
immunity. This information is encoded in a set of 40 rules using CLIPS. Two examples of the rules are in Table I. 
A subset of these rules incorporates the effect of exercise on the risk of infections. Depending on the individuals 
condition at any given point in time, a risk of influenza can be assessed based on epidemiological data and the 
individual's medical record. Once the communication link is completed between the IDRA prototype and the 
ExerCISys prototype, IDRA will query ExerCISys for the level of fitness of each subject based on aerobic capacity. 
This information will execute additional rules by IDRA that generate a risk assessment of influenza The prototype 
requires further development, validation, and testing. 



Figure 3 illustrates the major components of the IDRA prototype. A C-based data manager interacts with all the 
components of the system. It processes information from the data base and from the user interface. The expert 


327 





system using CLIPS assesses the probability of influenza. It retrieves the information from the data manager and 
outputs it to the user interface. For the preliminary user interface, we used the X-Window System. The probability 
of infection and illness is displayed in the form of text and a graph. All tools are portable and compatible with 
Space Station Freedom requirements. The preliminary results suggest that an integrated IDRA prototype is feasible 
and can serve as a model to develop BRAIN. 


Table I. Examples of IDRA Rules. The normal state is defined by a., and the 
effect of moderate exercise is defined by b. 


a. (defrule normal-state" 

(phase disease-prediction) 

(personal-data (name ?name) (identification ?id) 

(ages ?x&: (or (<?x 18) (> ?x 64))) 

(environment normal) Oocation -Houston) 

(nasal-sIgA ?n&: (< ?n 2.75)) (flu-vaccination -yes)) 
(amantadine no) (flu-exposure no) (exercise light)) 

=> 

(update-risk-factor ?id 0.527 0.428); 0.527 is mathematically calculated 

(printout t "Subject : " ?name crlf) 

(printout t "Identification : " ?id crlf) 

(printout t "age : " ?x crlf) 

(printout t "has a 42.8% chance to get influenza illness due to the age" crlf) 
(printout t " and lacking of NASAL slgA" crlf alf)) 


b. (defrule moderate-exercise-state 
(phase disease-prediction) 

(personal-data (name ?name) (identification ?id) 

(ages ?age) (location ?) 

(environment -crowded) 

(nasal-sIgA ?n&: (< ?n 2.75)) (flu-vaccination -yes) 
(amantadine no) (flu-exposure no) (exercise moderate)) 

=> 

(update-risk-factor ?id 0.38 0.28) 

(printout t "Subject ?name crlf) 

(printout t "Identification : " ?id crl0 

(printout t "age : " ?age crlf) 

(printout t "has only a 28% chance to get influenza illness due to" crlf) 
(printout t "moderate exercise" alf) 

(printout t "and lacking of NASAL slgA" alf alf alf)) 


REFERENCES 

1. Atmar, R. L., Greenberg, S. B„ Quarles, J. M., Wilson, S. M., Tyla B., Feldman, S., and Couch, R. B.: 
1990, Safety and pharmacokinetics of rimantadine small-particle aerosol. Antimicrobial Agents and 
Chemotherapy 34, 2228-2233. 

2. Beall, J. H.: 1984, IEEE Guide to Software Requirements Specifications. The Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers, Inc., New York. 

3. Beisel, W. R. and Talbot, J. M. (eds.): 1885, Research Opportunities on Immuncompetence in Space. 
Federation of American Societies For Experimental Biology, Bethesda. 


328 






4. Betts, R. F., Douglas, Jr R. G.: 1990, Influenza virus. In: Gi. Mandell, R.G. Douglas, Jr, and J.E. 
Bennett (eds.), Infectious Diseases. Churchill Livingstone, New York, pp. 1306-1325. 

5. Blomberg, DJ„ Guth, JL., Fattu, J.M., and Patrick, E.A.: 1986, Evaluation of a new classification system 
for anemias using Consult Learning System. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 22, 1 19-125. 

6. Bratko, I., Mozetic, I., and Lavrac, N.: 1989, KARDIO: A Study in Deep and Qualitative Knowledge for 
Expert Systems. The MIT Press, Massachusetts. 

7. Buchanan, B.G. and Shortliffe, E.H.: 1984, Rule-Based Expert Systems: The MYCIN Experiments of the 
Stanford Heuristic Programming Project. Addison- Wesley Publishing Company, Menlo Park, California. 

8. Clover, RD„ Abell, T., Becker, L.A., Crawford, S., and Ramsey, C.N.: 1989, Family functioning and 
stress as predictors of influenza B infection. Journal of Family Practice 28, 535-539. 

9. Culbert, C.: 1989, CUPS Reference Manual. National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Houston, 
JSC-22948. 

10. Fry, R. J. M.: 1989, Radiobiological features of the space radiation environment Guidance On Radiation 
Received in Space Activities. National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements, Bethesda, MD, 
pp. 50-144. 

11. Geissman, J. R. and Schultz, R. D.r 1991, Verification & validation of expert systems. In: U. Gupta (ed.), 
Validation And Verifying Knowledge-Based Systems. The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 
Inc., Washington, pp. 12-19. 

12. Giarrantano, J.: 1989, CUPS User's Guide. National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Johnson Space 
Center, Houston. 

13. Giarrantano, J. and Riley, G.: 1989, Expert Systems. PWS-KENT, Boston. 

14. Glezen, W.P., Decker, M., Joseph, S.W., and Mercready, Jr., R.G.: 1987, Acute respiratory disease 
associated with influenza epidemics in Houston, 1981-1983. Journal of Infectious Diseases 155, 1119-1126. 

15. Glezen, W.P., Grose, N„ Haddock, A., and Couch, R.B.: 1989, Chemotherapy and management of 
respiratory virus infections. Proceedings of the 16th International Congress of Chemotherapy. 1989, Israel. 

16. Gmunder, F.K., Lorenzi, G„ Bechler, B., Joller, P., Muller, J., Ziegler, W.H., and Cogoli, A.: 1988, Effect 
of long-term physical exercise on lymphocyte reactivity: similarity to spaceflight reactions. Aviation Space 
and Environmental Medicine 59, 146-151. 

17. Goldberg, J. et al. : 1987, A Strategy for Space Biology. National Academic Press, Washington, D.C. 

18. Gupta, U.: 1991, Validating and Verifying Knowledge-Based Systems. The Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers, Inc., Washington. 

19. Haley, R.W., Aber, R.C., and Bennett, J.W.; 1986, Surveillance of nosocomial infections. Hospital 
Infections, 2nd Edition. Little, Brown & Co., Boston, pp. 51-71. 

20. Hand, D J.: 1987, Artificial intelligence and medicine. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 80, 563- 
565. 

21. Johnston, R.S.: 1977, Skylab medical program overview. In: R.S. Johnston, and L.F. Dietlein (eds.). 
Biomedical Results From Skylab. National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Washington, D.C., pp. 1- 
19. 

22. Kan as, N.: 1985, Psychosocial factors affecting simulated and actual space missions. Aviation Space and 
Environmental Medicine 56, 806-8 it. 


329 



23. Keast, D., Cameron, K., and Morton, A.R.: 1988, Exercise and the Immune Response. Sports Medicine 5, 

248-267. 

24. Layde, P.M., Engelberg, A.L., Dobbs, H.I., Curtis, A.C., Craven, R.B., Graitcer, P.L., Sedmak, G.V., 
Erickson, J.D., and Noble, G.R.: 1980, Outbreak of influenza AAJSSR/77 at Marquette University. Journal 
Infectious Diseases 142, 347-352. 

25. Longini, Jr., M., Koopman, J.S., Haber, M., and Cotsonis, G.A.: 1988, Statistical inference for infectious 
diseases. Risk-specific household and community transmission parameters. American Journal of 
Epidemiology 128, 845-859. 

26. Man-Systems Integration Standard, Vol. IV, NASA STD-3000, Rev. A, June 1991. 

27. Marcot, B.: 1991, Testing your knowledge base. In: U. Gupta (ed.). Validating And Verifying Knowledge- 
Based Systems. The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc., Washington, pp. 188-199. 

28. Miller, Pi.: 1988, Artificial intelligence in medicine: An emerging discipline. In: Pi. Miller (ed.), 
Selected Topics in Medical Artificial Intelligence. Springer-Verlag, New York, pp. 11-24. 

29. Moser, M.R., Bender, T.R., Margolis, H.S., Noble, G.R., Kendal, A.P., and Ritter, D.G.: 1979, An 
outbreak of influenza aboard a commercial airliner. Journal of Epidemiology 1 10, 1-6. 

30. Nicogossian, A£. and Garsbnek, V.: 1989, Historical perspectives. In: AE. Nicogossian (ed.), Space 
Physiology and Medicine. Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia, pp. 17-29. 

31. Nicogossian, AJE. (ed.): 1989, Space Physiology and Medicine. Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia. 

32. Nieman, D.C., Johanssen, L.M., and Lee, J.W.: 1989, Infectious episodes in runners before and after a 
roadrace. Journal of Sports Medicine and Physical Fitness 29, 289-296. 

33. Nieman, D.C. and Nehlsen-Cannarella, S.L.: 1991, The immune system. In: C.B. Rians (ed.). Principles 
and Practice of Sports Medicine. Human Kinetics Publishers, Champaign, IL, pp. 1-49. 

34. Olson, J.G., Ksiazek, T.G., Irving, G.S., and Rendin, R.W.: 1979, An explosive outbreak of influenza 
caused by a/USSR/77-like virus on a United States naval ship. Military Medicine 144, 743-745. 

35. Pierson, DJL.: 1986, Space Station Infectious Disease Risks. National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration, Johnson Space Center, Houston, JSC-32104. 

36. Pons, V.G., Canter, J„ and Dolin, R.: 1980, Influenza AAJSSR/77 (H1N1) on a university campus. 
American Journal of Epidemiology 111, 23-30. 

37. Reuman, P.D., Bernstein, D.I., Keely, S.P., Sherwood, J.R., Young, E.C., and Schiff, G.M.: 1990, 
Influenza-specific ELISA IgA and IgG predict severity of influenza disease in subjects prescreened with 
hemagglutination inhibition. Antiviral Res 13, 103-110. 

38. Riley, G.: 1989, CUPS Architecture Manual. National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Houston, 

JSC-23047. 

39. Robbins, F. et al.: 1988, Exploring the Living Universe/A Strategy for Space Life Sciences. National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration, Washington, D.C. 

40. Taylor, R„ Nemaia, H., Tukuitonga, C., Kennett, M., White, J„ Rodger, S., Levy S, and Gust I: 1985, An 
epidemic of influenza in the population of Niue. Journal of Medical Virology 16, 127-136. 

41. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: 1989, Vital and Health Statistics: Current Estimates From 
the National Health Interview Survey, 1988. DHHS Publication, Hyattsville, Maryland, (PHS) 89-1501. 


330 



42. Winkel, P.: 1989, The application of expert systems in the clinical laboratory. Clinical Chemistry 35 , 
1595-1600. 

43. Woodson, WJE.: 1981, Human Factors Design Handbook. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York. 


331 



