N96- 12946 


A Graphical Interface to CLIPS 
Using SunView 



f/ 

/ 


i 

0 


Terry Feagln 

University of Houston • Clear Lake 


Abstract 

The importance of the incorporation of various graphics-oriented 
features into CLIPS is discussed. These features, which have been implemented 
in a version of CLIPS developed for a popular workstation, are described and 
their usefulness in the development of expert systems is examined. 


Introduction 

When developing expert systems that are intended to interact heavily with 
the user (as opposed to those systems that operate in a primarily independent 
manner), it is essential to provide an interface that enhances and accelerates the 
process, that allows meaningful dialog with the least effort, that provides clear and 
unambiguous two-way communication, that expedites the handling of sensitive or 
emergency situations, and that provide intuitive mechanisms for giving commands 
to and for receiving responses from the expert system. Computer graphics has 
long been recognized as a valuable aid in facilitating the flow of information 
between users and their computer-based applications. Instead of allowing only a 
few one-dimensional streams of characters (i.e., input and output files and a 
command line interface), modem computer graphics admits the possibility of 
interacting with the user via a number of two-dimensional color images that can 
move or be influenced directly by the user using a mouse, light pen, keyboard, 
joystick, or other graphic input device. The images are often organized into 
windows and user-interaction is often provided via menus that are 
mouse-selectable. 

There are, of course, several enhanced versions of CLIPS that provide support 
for graphic-based interactions. However, these are primarily provided to enhance 
the giving of commands or setting conditions at the top-level (which level of 
support, it might be added, is also provided by the system described below). 


733 



For example, the Macintosh interface allows users to clear, load, reset, run, etc. 
by making conventional menu selections. However, there is no direct support for 
opening windows or generating menus from within an executing expert system. 

Because of the extensible nature of CUPS, it is not difficult to develop such 
support by adding user-defined functions. This paper, as well as several other 
papers presented at this conference, offers the expert system developer the ability 
to support directly such graphic-oriented interfaces to the user. 

In an expert system, it is often desirable to convey to the user a set of conditions 
that may be true or false or indeterminate (inactive, disabled, etc.). Additionally, it 
may be important to show a precise measurement or reading. In the traditional 
command-line versions of CLIPS, these conditions would normally be exhibited 
via printed messages. In a graphic-oriented interface, the natural vehicle for 
conveying such information would be to provide an image or icon that might be 
immediately recognized by the user and to alter the image in a way that might 
graphically depict the level of the condition. For example, in an expert system 
developed to assist the operators in a nuclear power plant, excessive temperature 
conditions might be indicated by flashing red in an image depicting a 
thermometer. In an expert system developed to control a chemical reaction, the 
pH of a solution might be indicated by showing a dial. If the pH exceeds certain 
limits (either high or low), then the dial could be repainted, for example, in red for 
low pH and in blue for high pH values. If a serious or emergency condition holds, 
a graphic-oriented interface might be set up to flash the whole screen or window in 
color, to set off audible alarms (such as a beep or buzzer sound), to present the 
operator with an alert window with various possible actions or options designated, 
and to allow the operator to view and evaluate the consequences of his/her 
actions on the system via explanatory text revealed in windows and additional 
diagrams of equipment, meters, or fault nets. 


Specific Advantages of a Graphical Interface 


Most of the advantages of providing a graphical user interface to an expert 
system are obvious. Human operators are usually more receptive to a new 
environment if it is intuitive, pleasing to the eye, and easy-to-learn. A 
well-designed graphical interface assists the operator in visualizing the problem 
at hand, the relationships between entities in the system or variables in the 
problem, the ways in which she/he can or cannot affect the behavior of the system 
or the solution of the problem, the current state of the system or the solution 
process, the distinction between essential and non-essential characteristics or 
conditions, and any hierarchical organizational relationships. 


734 



Any change in the system can be identified almost immediately and the more 
significant changes can be allowed to trigger the more visually stimulating 
graphical effects (such as flashing lights or images and alert windows). This kind 
of separation of more significant from less significant events is difficult to 
accomplish as effectively with a simple command line interface. 

Animation of windows or objects within windows can be used to represent 
higher level concepts such as a sequence of actions or events that are particularly 
difficult to represent in a simple command line interface. This is especially helpful 
if the speed of the animation can be varied. 

In a graphical user interface, it is easier to control and restrict the user's input 
when it is important. Typographical errors can be eliminated. Other types of user 
input errors such as clicking on the wrong object are possible, but can be readily 
monitored and the user can be requested to confirm any unusual input. 

Even a simple presentation of images within windows can be effective. The 
images can be used to present aspects of the problem or system that are 
otherwise difficult or impossible to present. In many of the science and 
engineering disciplines, there are times when some kind of two-dimensional 
image is the best way to represent a problem or method of solution. For example, 
in an expert system that might be used to help solve heat transfer problems, it may 
be desired to show the temperature distribution over the surface of some physical 
object like a flat plate of copper. The actual temperature distribution could be 
displayed as a color-coded image within one of the windows and used to show 
progress toward a solution. 

In an object-oriented approach within CLIPS, one may wish to identify specific 
graphic objects or items that represent the objects about which the system is 
reasoning. As the attributes of the objects change, the graphic representations 
(position, size, shape, color, motion, etc.) could be made to change as well, 
thereby giving the user a view of the reasoning process that might be difficult to 
provide with the more usual command line interface. As the new object-oriented 
version of CLIPS emerges, this advantage may become even more significant. 

Another advantage of a graphical approach concerns explanation facilities. If 
one creates an expert system in which the user can simply depress a mouse 
button over an object to signify that the user requires an explanation of the 
reasoning process or simply requires help regarding the meaning of the object, 
then the expert system can be more readily understood and may even be used for 
training new users. Also, if a user enters an unusual, expensive, hazardous, or 
dangerous request of the system, the system can ask for confirmation with an alert 
window complete with a cautionary warning. Security can be enforced by 
requiring passwords at critical points before actions are taken. 


735 



A graphics environment is less tiring to the user. Graphical output is generally 
able to convey more information with less eyestrain than simple text. In a 
command line interface, a user may miss an important detail that can become lost 
in line after line of alphanumeric characters. For input, many users often find that 
using a mouse is easier than typing. 


Some Graphics Primitives Useful in Creating Expert Systems 

The kind of graphics primitives that one might select for creating an expert 
system will undoubtably vary from one application to another. A general expert 
system shell that proposes to support the user in all of the ways mentioned above 
must therefore be able to support a wide variety of graphic objects and functions. 
In this section, several kinds of graphic objects and functions are described and 
some examples of how they might be used in an expert system are given. 


WINDOWS - A CUPS programmer should be able to call functions that 
cause windows to be created, opened, closed, hidden, exposed, and destroyed. 
The size and position of any window should be adjustable from within CLIPS or 
directly by the user. Other useful attributes might include scrollbars, labels, and 
colors. The windows should have the same appearance as non-CLIPS windows. 

It should be possible to retrieve most window attributes directly. 

ITEMS - There should be the ability to support a number of graphic objects or 
items within each window. It should be possible to create, hide, show, and destroy 
items. It should be possible to label the items, and move them about under user 
control or program control. Several especially useful types of items might be 
identified. For example, a button item would be useful for selecting conditions or 
indicating operator actions. Most graphical interfaces provide for this type of 
object. Such items should be displayable as general graphical images in color or 
as simple labeled buttons. Another useful type of item would be text items. These 
items could be used to prompt the user for input with text strings and enable the 
user to enter filenames, passwords, or other text input. Such objects could also be 
used for short messages to the user. Other types of items might also be defined. 
Animation of items would be also useful, particularly in simulations (another area 
where the use of CLIPS is growing rapidly). 


736 



Items should be selectable and the result of a user selecting such an object 
should be the assertion of a fact describing the event. It would also be useful for 
items to be highlighted when selected, thereby providing positive feedback to the 
user. It would also be useful to be able to get most item attributes directly. 

MENUS - Menus should be supported for both windows and items within 
windows. Menus should be displayed according to the conventions supported by 
the windowing system in general. Whenever a menu selection is made, a fact 
should be asserted describing the selection. It should be possible to remove a 
menu and create a new menu for an item or a window. 

DRAWING PRIMITIVES - Certain simple drawing primitives should be provided 
as a minimum, including the ability to draw lines, draw polygons, fill regions , load 
images from raster files into windows, and save window images (all in color, of 
course). It would also be important to be able to get the pixel value at a particular 
location within a window. 

OTHER FEATURES - Other helpful features of a graphical interface to CLIPS 
would include the ability to change the color definitions in the colormap segment 
for a window, to cycle a window’s colors, to repaint a window, to cause an item to 
be highlighted, to change the menu for an item, to remove all items in a window, to 
remove all windows, and to remove all the items in all the windows. 

There are also a number of functions that might be provided for debugging 
purposes such as the ability to print a list of all the windows or a list of all the items 
in a window for examination. 


Implementation : Some Questions 

Most of the functionality for graphical objects described above is supported for 
C programs executing on Sun™ workstations under the windowing system 
SunView™. Making this functionality available to CLIPS programs is somewhat 
complicated by a number of issues: 

How many of the hundreds of options available under SunView are really 
important for supporting the development of expert systems ? What features not 
currently supported by SunView should be added ? 

Should the central control loop remain within CLIPS or should control be given 
to the main loop in SunView and returned to CLIPS only for the handling of 
predesignated events ? The latter callback mechanism is the one normally used 
when developing SunView applications. Also, how should multiple simultaneous 
input streams be treated ? 


737 



Should the SunView distinction between a window for images or drawings 
(known as a "canvas" in SunView) and a window for button and text items (known 
as a "panel") be maintained or should a "new" type of window be adopted that 
would incorporate the essential features of both panels and canvasses ? The 
second approach would be less confusing and present additional power to the 
CLIPS programmer. 


Implementation : Some Answers 


Out of the hundreds of options available to general SunView applications, it 
was decided that only those most useful to the expert system developer would be 
supported. In the current version of the system, the most significant functions 
supported are as follows: 

create_window - causes a window to be created with attributes as specified, 
remove.window - causes a window to be destroyed, releasing resources used, 
remove_all_windows - causes all windows to be removed, 
hide_window - causes a specified window to be hidden from view, 
show_window • causes a hidden window to be exposed, 
open_window • causes a closed, iconified window to be opened, 
close_window - causes an open window to be iconified or closed, 
set_window • allows resetting of a window's attributes, 
get_window - allows retrieval of a window's attributes, 

set_window_color - allows redefinition of the particular colors used in a window, 
set_window_fg - sets the window’s foreground color, 
set_window_bg - sets the window’s background color, 
draw_window - allows drawings to be created within a window, 
load_window_image - allows a user-specified image to be loaded in a window, 
save_window_jmage • causes the window's image to be saved in a file, 

createjtem - causes an item of specified type to be created in a window, 
removejtem - causes an item to be removed permanently from a window, 
remove_aJIJtems - causes all the items in a window to be removed, 
remove_allJtemsJn_alLwindows - causes all items to be removed, 
hidejtem - causes an item to be hidden from view, 
showjtem - causes an item to be exposed, 

set_item - allows for resetting of attributes of an item, including its image, 
getjtem - allows for retrieving attributes of an item, 
highlightjtem - allows the item to be highlighted for a flashing effect, 
animatejtem - permits the item (i.e., its image) to appear to move within a 
window at a specified rate of speed. 


738 



create_item_menu - causes a user-specified, item-dependent menu to be 
created for the item, 

remove_item_menu - causes menu to be removed from the item, 
set_item_menu - allows menu attributes to be established, 

get_alert_window - causes an alert window to be displayed and blocks user 
from entering input (except to indicate a response to the alert), 
cycle_window_colors - allows the colors in a window to be cycled, 
repaint_window - allows the window to be repainted, 
snooze - causes CLIPS to sleep for a user-specified number of milliseconds, 
list_windows - causes a list of the presently defined windows to be produced, 
listjtems - causes a list of presently defined items to be produced, 


In almost all of the above functions, the number of arguments has been limited 
in order to make the syntax of each function easier to remember. The arguments 
are generally ordered in such a way that the most significant arguments appear 
first, thus allowing the CLIPS programmer to omit some of the less significant 
arguments (thereby implicitly specifying default values for such arguments). 

In addition to the explicit function calls listed above, a user can interact with the 
system in a number of ways, primarily by making mouse movements and mouse 
button selection over windows, items, and menus. Text entry is also supported. 

Regarding the issue of control, it was determined that the central control loop of 
CLIPS would be maintained and that SunView*s Notifier (the dispatcher which 
allows client programs to register event handlers and receive notifications later 
when the respective events occur) would be called explicitly after each rule firing 
and implicitly during any blocking or non-blocking read. This allows the user to 
obtain good response to graphics input events while CLIPS is firing rules and also 
when the user is entering commands or function calls directly to the CLIPS prompt. 

It was also determined that the distinction between a canvas and a panel in 
SunView would be superfluous. The features of both have therefore been 
combined by adding the essential features of a canvas (namely, most 
two-dimensional graphics primitives such as drawing lines, constructing images, 
setting colors, and getting pixel values) to the panel type of window. Therefore, to 
the CLIPS programmer, there appears to be a core type of window that allows for 
buttons, simple text interactions, and color graphics output. 

Another feature that was not directly supported under SunView is the dynamic 
movement of items under user control. By dragging the item with the middle 
mouse button depressed, the user can reposition the item at will. Afterwards, the 
new position of the item is reported to CLIPS as a new fact assertion. These last 
two features make the package much simpler and more useful for developing 
expert systems. 


739 



The animation of an item is also not directly supported under Sun View. 
However, given the growing interest in using CLIPS for the development of 
simulations (whether or not such simulations are a part of an expert system), the 
animation feature as given above has also been provided. 


Conclusions 


The project has now been successfully completed and over thirty-five new 
functions (mostly graphics-oriented) have been added to CLIPS. Work is now 
underway to enhance these capabilities even further and study their usefulness 
within several existing expert systems. 


740 



