Alloy Design Workbench-Surface 
Modeling Package Developed 

NASA Glenn Research Center’s Computational Materials Group has integrated a 
graphical user interface with in-house-developed surface modeling capabilities, with the 
goal of using computationally efficient atomistic simulations to aid the development of 
advanced aerospace materials, through the modeling of alloy surfaces, surface alloys, and 
segregation. The software is also ideal for modeling nanomaterials, since surface and 
interfacial effects can dominate material behavior and properties at this level. Through the 
combination of an accurate atomistic surface modeling methodology and an efficient 
computational engine, it is now possible to directly model these types of surface 
phenomenon and metallic nanostructures without a supercomputer. 

Fulfilling a High Operating Temperature Propulsion Components (HOTPC) project level-I 
milestone, a graphical user interface was created for a suite of quantum approximate 
atomistic materials modeling Fortran programs developed at Glenn. The resulting "Alloy 
Design Workbench-Surface Modeling Package" (ADW-SMP) is the combination of 
proven quantum approximate Bozzolo-Ferrante-Smith (BFS) algorithms (refs. 1 and 2) 
with a productivity-enhancing graphical front end. Written in the portable, platform- 
independent Java programming language, the graphical user interface calls on extensively 
tested Fortran programs running in the background for the detailed computational tasks. 
Designed to run on desktop computers, the package has been deployed on PC, Mac, and 
SGI computer systems. 

The graphical user interface integrates two modes of computational materials exploration. 
One mode uses Monte Carlo simulations to determine lowest energy equilibrium 
configurations. The second approach is an interactive "what if" comparison of atomic 
configuration energies, designed to provide real-time insight into the underlying drivers of 
alloying processes. 

By using a Metropolis Monte Carlo algorithm for atomic exchanges, ADW-SMP can 
simulate an annealing run on an alloy, prompting the user for the number of temperature 
stages, the number of atomic exchanges per stage, and the temperature of each stage of 
the anneal. At each temperature, a Metropolis algorithm is used to determine if two unlike 
atoms in the alloy should be exchanged, considering whether the exchange lowers or raises 
the total energy of the material. Another option of particular importance for surfaces is a 
lattice position relaxation calculation, in which the coordinates of each atom can be 
optimized. Because they are located on the surface, atoms can rearrange to lower the total 
energy of the computational cell in a process called surface reconstruction, which can 
greatly affect subsequent surface interactions. The ADW-SMP program then gives the 
user a graphical representation of the results, as well as available statistical summaries 
such as the coordinatio n of each type of atom in the computational cell, indicating the 
type and number of neighboring atoms at nearest- and next-nearest-neighbor distances. 



In the second approach to alloy modeling implemented in ADW-SMP, the static energies 
of similar collections of atoms are computed and compared. This allows users to explore 
how arranging atoms in different configurations affects the total energy. The ability to 
perform atom-by-atom analysis of the energetics helps users to understand most surface 
processes in greater detail. For example, users can leam why, energetically, specific alloy 
components may segregate preferentially to a surface, either promoting or poisoning 
catalytic reactions, or determine why some otherwise immiscible metals will form surface 
alloys, mixing only in the presence of a surface. 


«SSEm! 




Display from the ADW-SMP of an annealed face-centered cubic [111] copper nanowire 
showing initial indications of local thinning. 


This figure depicts an example computational cell, showing the real-time, three- 
dimensional representation of the array of atoms as seen by a user. Shown is an annealed 
copper nanowire with local thinning becoming visible. Extensive atom display routines 
enable on-screen manipulation to better visualize and understand the atomic arrangements 
and their energetically favored configurations, under interactive pointer control. 
Incorporated editing capabilities allow users to graphically choose atoms to move or 
modify or to choose where to place additional alloying components. 


With the ever-increasing computational power available to researchers on their own 
desktops, more sophisticated simulation tools become increasingly attractive. For 



materials scientists engaged in the creation of advanced alloys, the ADW-SMP software 
suite should become an interesting tool to potentially guide and instruct parallel 
experimental work. With immediate, on-screen feedback, researchers can design and 
launch alloy simulations to guide the much more expensive laboratory explorations of 
alloy properties, or use the simulations to aid in detailed interpretation of experimental 
results. 

Find out more about this research http://www.icmsc.org/. 

References 

1. Bozzolo, G., et al.: An Introduction to the BFS Method and Its Use to Model 
Binary NiAl Alloys. J. Computer-Aided Mater. Design, vol. 6, no. 1, 1999, pp. 1- 
32. 

2. Bozzolo, G., et al.: Surface Segregation in Multicomponent Systems: Modeling of 
Surface Alloys and Alloy Surfaces. Comput. Mater. Sci., vol. 15, no. 2, 1999, pp. 
169-195. 

Glenn contacts: Dr. Phillip B. Abel, 216-433-6063, Phillip.B.Abel@nasa.gov; and Dr. 
Ronald D. Noebe, 216-433-2093, Ronald.D.Noebe@nasa.gov 

Ohio Aerospace Institute (OAI) contact: Dr. Guillermo Bozzolo, 440-962-3103, 
Guillermo.H.Bozzolo@grc.nasa.gov 

Authors: Dr. Phillip B. Abel, Dr. Ronald D. Noebe, Dr. Guillermo H. Bozzolo, Dr. Brian 
S. Good, and Elaine S. Daugherty 
Headquarters program office: OAT 
Programs/Projects: Propulsion and Power, HOTPC 



