June 1973 



NASA TECH BRIEF 

Goddard Space Flight Center 


B73-10162 



NASA Tech Briefs announce new technology derived from the U.S. space program. They are issued to encourage 
commercial application. Tech Briefs are available on a subscription basis from the National Technical Information 
Service, Springfield, Virginia 22151. Requests for individual copies or questions relating to the Tech Brief program may 
be directed to the Technology Utilization Office, NASA, Code KT, Washington, D.C. 20546. 


GREMEX Update (Goddard Research Engineering Management Exercise) 


The problem: 

The explosive growth of science and technology has 
created a seemingly overwhelming paradox: the effective 
management of vast manpower and dollar budgets allo- 
cated to programs whose goals are well defined, but 
whose achievement requires a course of action evolved 
from many alternatives. 

. In today’s space and defense project-oriented research 
and development where scientific needs and techno- 
logical development must be blended and matched 
against the harsh realities of available manpower, funds, 
and time schedules, the problem is particularly acute. 


The solution: 


In an effort to meet these shortcomings, manage- 
ment simulation techniques are being employed to offer 
training in management problems. GREMEX was de- 
veloped to provide experience in Research and Develop- 
ment (R&D) project decision making from a manage- 
ment rather than a technological perspective. 


How it’s done: 

GREMEX is a man-machine management simulation 
game of the life of an R&D project. It depicts the 
mythical project from just after the development of the 
project plan through the construction phase. The game 
is computer based to the extent that a computer is 
used to calculate (simulate) the effects of management 
actions and contractor performance. 

GREMEX is not new in that it has previously had 
wide distribution, but the program and documentation 
have been revised innumerable times in the past. This 
report is for the revised version as it exists to date. 

The basic action of the GREMEX program is to 
simulate one month of project work for each computer 
input or play. The project itself is described in terms of 
a PERT network and is originally established by data 
cards at the start of the game. The numerical reactions 
of the model are related to typical R&D projects and 


the PERT data cards include probabilities of meeting 
the time, cost, and performance goals. Provisions for 
student inputs (decisions) to change these values are 
provided. 

The computer program itself must be supported by 
other paper simulation data such as project plan or 
contractor evaluation and selection documents. This 
simulation may be adjusted for the teaching intent or 
needs of the group by change in emphasis on the 
various areas of the project. 

The general purpose GREMEX program handles a 
project that consists of one to fifteen contracts. Any 
sort of system may be represented by the program pro- 
vided that it consists of a connected sequence of events 
that can be described in a flow chart. 

The program will accept any project that consists of 
less than 1000 events. A smaller memory computer 
could be utilized by reducing the number of events and 
redefining certain dimension statements through the 
routines. 

Initially, the players are presented with the project 
with the understanding that no ground rules exist: 
however, NASA policy should be their guide. They are 
permitted to do almost anything and the model will 
react as it would in real life. To each player or team of 
players there is assigned a referee-instructor who serves 
as the interface between the players and the computer 
program. He converts the players’ decisions to a form 
that will be acceptable to the model. 

The “Design Manual for GREMEX Simulation” is 
written around the IBM-360 version; however, a memo 
is included in the IBM-7094 documentation that lists 
the major differences between the IBM-360 and the 
IBM-7094 versions. The principal difference between 
the two versions is a result of packing several items of 
data into each 7094 word in COMMON files to save 
core. As a result, a number of additional machine 
language subroutines are required to store or retrieve 
the items. 


(continued overleaf) 


This document was prepared under the sponsorship of the National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration. Neither the United States 
Government nor any person acting on behalf of the United States 


Government assumes any liability resulting from the use of the 
information contained in this document, or warrants that such use 
will be free from privately owned rights. 


Notes: 

1. This program consists of two versions: 

Version 1 - programmed in FORTRAN IV (93%) 
and MAP (7%) for the IBM-360 computer. 
Reference: GSC-11512 

Version 2 — programmed in FORTRAN IV (61%) 
and MAP (39%) for the IBM-7094 computer. 
Reference: GSC-1 1515 


2. Inquiries concerning this program should be directed 
to: 

COSMIC 
112 Barrow Hall 
University of Georgia 
Athens, Georgia 30601 
Reference: GSC-1 1512-1 5 

Source: M. J. Vaccaro and M. F. Denault 
Goddard Space Flight Center 
(GSC-1 1512-15) 


B73-10162 


Category 09 



