
\Rnuj:Rv 

JOURNAL 


THE 

FIELD ARTILLERYMAN 

HAAPTB 


JJJLJi? 

'JX 


mAfmvESijim. 

a ricxMtf nut* f.o&es 
f«£ Kurujtf 


KVULMiA 


w w w:rac e bo^oKrc^myriiiriesl 


iDe^ment of tlie ArmvAPB6M51j 


[siiiiiiBWAWiW^aTiiTnvv 

.mil/fi 


11 



H0L 



j 



iHUBiiL 


















































Report Documentation Page 


Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 


Public reporting burden for the collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and 
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, 
including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington 
VA 22202-4302. Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it 
does not display a currently valid OMB control number. 


1. REPORT DATE 

JAN 2011 


2. REPORT TYPE 


3. DATES COVERED 

00-01-2011 to 00-02-2011 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Fires. A Joint Publication for U.S. Artillery Professionals. January 
February 2011 


5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 


5b. GRANT NUMBER 


5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 


6. AUTHOR(S) 


5d. PROJECT NUMBER 


5e. TASK NUMBER 


5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Fires,Building 652, Room 203, McNair Road,Fort Sill,OK,73503 


8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 


9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS (ES) 


10. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S ACRONYM(S) 


11. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 


12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited 


13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 


14. ABSTRACT 


15. SUBJECT TERMS 


16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 


a. REPORT 

unclassified 


b. ABSTRACT 

unclassified 


c. THIS PAGE 

unclassified 


17. LIMITATION OF 

18. NUMBER 

ABSTRACT 

OF PAGES 

Same as 

68 

Report (SAR) 



19a. NAME OF 
RESPONSIBLE PERSON 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std Z39-18 





fc 

11=5 



January-February 201 1 


100 Years of Fires; Fires Bulletin-100 
page 4 years of service to the professional Fires 
Soldier 

By MG David D. Halverson 

Status of the US Field Artillery Association 
P and US Air Defense Artillery Association 

History of the US Army Field Artillery 
School from birth to the eve of World War 

Page 7 

II: Part I of II 

By Dr. Boyd L. Dastrup 

Air Defense Artillery contributions, 

Page 11 solutions and issues during World War I 

By David A. Christensen 

New artillery school will serve as the Fires 
foundation for the professionalism of 
page 13 Afghan National Army 

By LTC Charles D. Kirby, U.S. Army, and LTC Richard Vagg, Royal 
Australian Artillery 



Volum 


pac > i6 Keeping it real: Don’t let Joint Fires Observer skills deteriorate 

By MSG Timothy Ryan 

p 19 Employing joint Fires in Afghanistan 

By LTC John C. Allred 

page 30 Bouncing Back: How are we building resilient Soldiers and units? 

By COL (Ret) Joyce DiMarco and LTC (Ret) Richard McConnell 

Millennials and transformational leaders: A winning team for the 
Page38 future — Part II of II 

By COL James E. Lackey, Professor Gene Kamena and COL Paul Calvert 



Headquarters, Department of the Army • PB644-11-1 





















dumber 1 


iel. 


the 

FIELD ARTILLER 
JOURDAD 


JANUARV- 


•MARCH 



CAPTAIN army 

SIXTH FIELD AH £D1 tOR 


Back cover 

Select articles 
from The Field 
Artillery Journal’s 

first edition 


DISCLAIMER: Fires, a professional bulletin, is published 
bimonthly by Headquarters, Department of the Army under 
the auspices of the Fires Center of Excellence (Building 
758, McNair Road), Fort Sill, Okla. The views expressed are 
those of the authors and not the Department of Defense 
or its elements. Fires’ content doesn’t necessarily reflect 
the U.S. Army’s position or supersede information in other 
official Army publications. Use of news items constitutes 
neither affirmation of their accuracy nor product endorse¬ 
ments. Fires is printed by Monarch Litho Inc., a private 
firm in no way connected with the Department of the 
Army. Fires assumes no responsibility for any unsolicited 
material. By Order of the Secretary of the Army: 

George W. Casey Jr. 

General, United States Army 
Chief of Staff 

Official: 0< - Af. 

' C . r 

Joyce E. Morrow 

Administrative Assistant to the 
Secretary of the Army, 1029202 

David D. Halverson 

Major General, United States Army 

Commanding General 
Fort Sill, Okla. 


Editor-in-Chief: Sharon McBride 
Managing Editor: Jennifer McFadden 

Art Director: Jason Kelly 
Assistant Editor: Paul Jiron 


PURPOSE: Founded in 2007, Fires serves as a forum 
for the professional discussions of U.S. Army and Marine 
Field Artillery (FA) and Army Air Defense Artillery (ADA) 
professionals, both active and Reserve Component (RC); 
disseminates professional knowledge about the FA’s and 
ADA’s progress, developments and best use in cam¬ 
paigns; cultivates a common understanding of the power 
limitations and application of joint Fires, both lethal and 
nonlethal; fosters joint Fires interdependency among the 
armed services; and promotes the understanding of and 
interoperability between the FA’s and ADA’s active and RC 
units—all of which contribute to the good of the FA and 
ADA, Army, joint and combined forces, and our nation. 


OFFICIAL DISTRIBUTION: Free copies are sent to USA 
and USMC FA units: FA/Fires brigade, brigade combat 
team (BCT), Stryker cavalry regiment (SCR), FA Marine 
regiment and battlefield coordination detachment (BCD) 
headquarters; 13 per FA/Fires battalion/squadron; 3 per 
fire support element (FSEL Fires and effects cell (FEC). 
effects coordination cell (ECC) fire support cell (FSC). and 
separate battery or detachment: 2 per fire support team 
(FIST); and 1 per Master Gunner. Free copies to Army ADA 
units: 7 per air and missile defense command (AAlMDC) 
and ADA brigade headquarters; 13 per ADA battalion: 
and 3 per air defense airspace management cell (ADAM) 
and separate battery or detachment. The FA and ADA 
Schools’ departments, directorates and divisions each 
get 2 copies. Other Army branch and US armed services 
units/organizations and US government agencies that 
work with FA or ADA personnel, equipment, doctrine, 
tactics, training organization or leadership issues may 
request afree copy—including, but not limited to—ROTCs, 
recruiting commands, libraries, attaches, liaison officers, 
state adjutants general, public affairs offices, military 
academies, laboratories, arsenals, major commands, etc. 
Contact Fires at http://sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/. 


SUBSCRIPTIONS: Those not eligible for official distribu¬ 
tion may subscribe to Fires via theTJ.S. Superintendent of 
Documents, P.O. Box37154, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954 
(1-866-512-1800). 


SUBMISSIONS: Email to the Editor, Fires, at firesbul- 
letin@conus.army.mil; mail to P.O. Box 33311, Fort Sill, 
OK 73503-0311; overnight to Building 758, Room 7, 
McNair Road, Fort Sill, OK 73503-5600' or call at DShl 
639-5121/6806 or commercial (580) 442-5121/6806. 


REPRINTS: Fires is pleased to grant permission to reprint; 
please credit Fires, the authorfs) and photographers. 

POSTMASTER: Fires( USPS 309-010) (ISSN 1935-4096) 
is published bimonthly; periodical postage paid by Depart¬ 
ment of the Army at Lawton OK 73501 and an additional 
mailing post office. Send address chanqes to Fires, P.O. 
Box 33311, Fort Sill, OK 73503-0311. 







COMMANDING GENERAL'S 
FORWARD 



100 years 

Mum BdMm = 1®® 



mwt >- 


1'MS 


"For most men the matter of learning is one of 

PERSONAL PREFERENCE. BUT FOR ARMY OFFICERS, THE 
OBLIGATION TO LEARN, TO GROW IN THEIR PROFESSION, 
IS CLEARLY A PUBLIC DUTY. 


GEN OMAR BRADLEY 


li 


earn from the past, keep an 
eye on the present, and prepare 
the future. This special 


* m m > f us 


or 

commemorative edition marks the 
100th anniversary of the Fires Bulletin 
magazine. The first edition January- 
March 1911, known as the Field Artillery 
Journal , started a proud tradition of 
providing leaders and Soldiers with up 
to date information on doctrine, tactics, 
techniques, and procedures. 

Several of the articles in this issue touch 
on challenges of the past, changes that 
brought us to the present and conditions 
they set for the future. Many of the themes 
we talk about today are highlighted in the 
historical articles of our branches and 
validates Bradley’s quote as we address 
similar issues today - “Happy 100th 
Birthday - Fires Bulletin.” Therefore, 
we must be well grounded in the basics 

of our warfighting function _ 

of Fires- our Army and our 
country depend on it. 

The journal was born 
to meet the need of an 
U.S. Army Field Artillery 

branch that was setting the conditions for a professional training 
and education system and as a way to keep its members up to date 
on the current professional tactics, techniques and procedures. CPT 
William J. Snow (who later became MG Snow) came up with the 
concept for the magazine and was also the first editor. Although 
resources were scarce, he worked tirelessly to get the magazine going 
in its formative years and it has developed into the professional 
bulletin we have today. 

Throughout the years the Fires Bulletin has gone through several 
name changes, reflecting Department of the Army policies, the 
reoccurring splitting and merging of branches and various other 
changes that required a title change. Today, just as in 1911, the 
bulletin serves as a professional outlet for the Fires forces to address 




us.ABUy 

llflp 


By MG David D. Halverson 

Commanding General of the U.S. Army Fires Center of Excellence 

and Fort Sill, Okla. 


challenges and issues we all face. Two 
articles in particular, provide the context for 
the last 100 years. As with a democracy, the 
maturity of the Fires Center of Excellence 
will take time, but focus, the basics and our 
chararacter will posture us well. 

The first is a historical article by Dr. Boyd 
L. Dastrup, the field artillery historian for 
the U.S. Army Field Artillery School. His 
article, “History of the U.S. Army Field 
Artillery School from birth to the eve of 
World War II,” is part one of a two-part series 
that chronicles the many milestones and 
achievements Fort Sill and the FA branch 
have achieved since its inception a century 
ago. Many challenges we face within the 
Army, our all-volunteer human capital, 
how to shape the force for the future fight, 
and creating a professional organization in 
a resource-constrained environment, are 
not new challenges, but are ones the Fires 

_ Force must deal with now 

and in the future. We must 
take an enterprise approach. 

The School of Fires, 
like the Fires Bulletin , 
overcame many challenges 
as well. CPT Dan T. Moore, the first Commandant of the School 
of Fires, visited several different European Artillery Schools 
before establishing the School of Fires at Fort Sill in September 
1911. He used the German School as the model which had combat 
development, testing capability and training under one roof - much 
like the Fires Center of Excellence we have today. Another forward 
thinking officer, LTC Butner’s quote from 1923 could fit into our 
current Joint and Combined Fires University Implementation 
Plan.. .“The subject of Field Artillery is a life study and the school 
hopes to lay the foundation on sound principles for such study. 
The artillery officer must continue the study of his profession, 
or he will fail when the time comes to practice it. And failure in 
war means failure in life, for the Soldier.”(Dastrup, 2010). LTC 



January-February 2011 


Fires 
















Butner’s thoughts focus on life-long learning and the importance 
of a “foundation” or the “basics” of the profession. 

The second article which helps draw on the past is written by Mr. 
David A. Christensen on the history of the U.S. Army Air Defense 
Artillery. In it he talks about the birth of the ADA to meet a new 
threat and how force design and weapons systems put the U.S. 
ADA at the top of the coalition pile when it came to employment of 
Fires - a feat achieved in very short order through a focus on basics 
and a strong training program that developed effective battle drills 
and gunnery skills important to a professional branch. The latest 
training techniques and tactics were studied from across Europe to 
produce a U.S. shoot to kill ratio of “600 rounds per enemy aircraft” 
versus the closest coalition partner rate of “6,000 to 1.” 

Innovative leaders understood the new “technology” (aircraft) and 
how it was changing their operating environment. They developed 
the skills and training needed for LT A.T. Slaten and his crew to 
shoot down the first enemy aircraft for an American ADA crew in 
May 1918. Those techniques spread across the force and made the 
U.S. ADA crews the most effective of the war. 

Additional articles in this issue share common threads with 
the ones from 1911 such as caring for your equipment, scouting 
techniques and joint force development. Several articles from the 
1911 issue are printed this month to highlight some of the discussions 
and focus of that period in our history. 


Today, the Fires Bulletin highlights the best lessons learned and 
forward thinking of both the FA and ADA branches. It maintains the 
tradition started 100 years ago of a professional journal dedicated 
to the Soldiers and leaders of the Fires force. 

Although the continuation of publishing of the bulletin has been 
tenuous over the years, two key themes have endured for the past 
100 years and continue to resonate during present day: the continual 
emphasis on combined arms doctrine and the continual effort to 
include joint, intergovernmental, interagency and military (joint 
and combined) components in the overall Fires campaign strategy 
and concepts. 

Today, the synergies between the two branches continue to grow, 
especially in our capabilities department. Constant professional 
dialogue between the branches is imperative, and submitting articles 
to the Fires Bulletin is just one way to achieve this objective. As 
we move deeper in to the Fires force of the future and continue to 
learn from our past, we face unprecedented opportunities that as a 
Fires force we are just beginning to realize. We have a wealth of 
talent and innovation among our force. So as Fires professionals let’s 
not only take time to celebrate how far we’ve come, but continue 
to engage and collaborate providing input to the Fires Center of 
Excellence in order to make the next 100 years just as productive 
as the first. 

Fit to Fight - Fires Strong. 


Artillerymen fire during a gas mask attack in the Argonne Forest Area, Wis., during World War I. (Photo from Fires Bulletin historical archive.) 















The SITREP 

One hundred years ago, the Field Artillery Journal 
published its first article. Below are updates on where 
the U.S. Field Artillery Association and Air Defense 
Artillery Association stand today. 




Air Defense Artillery Association 


US Field Artillery Association 


Major accomplishments: 

100th anniversary celebration, May 2010 

Donation of the Field Artilleryman Statue in front 
of the Field Artillery Museum, Fort Sill, Okla. 

Addition of five new scholarships 

Benefits of membership: 

Subscription to Field Artillery Journal, fellowship 
with professional field artillerymen, eligibility to 
win scholarships for members and members’ 
immediate family, invitation to U.S. Field Artillery 
Association functions and events 

Dues: 

One year: $25, two years: $40, three years: $60, 
five years: $100 and lifetime: based on age 

How to join: 

Visit the association’s office at 758 McNair 
Avenue, Fort Sill, Okla., or the association’s 
website at http://www.redlegoutpost.com 


Major activities: 

General membership meeting, Oct. 6, 2010 

Board member advisors engaging and 
educating students in the ADA schoolhouse 

Establish contract to emplace first brick 
campaign orders at the base of the Air 
Defenders Statue 

Benefits of membership: 

Receive updates on current Air Defense 
Artillery Association initiatives, receive the 
ADAA Journal (to be launched tentatively in 
April 2011), discounts on ADAA merchandise, 
contribute to helping ADA causes 

Dues: 

Annual membership: $25 or lifetime 
membership: $200 

How to join: 

Visit the association’s website at http://www. 
firsttofire.com/ 


6 January-February 2011 • Fires 










By Dr. Boyd L. Dastrup 

T he 20th century ushered the 
U.S. Army into a new world. 
During the latter part of 1800s, 
the Army fought Native Americans in the 
Trans-Mississippi West and was scattered 
in small forts to accomplish its mission. A 
good example, Fort Sill, Okla., in Indian 
Territory served as a cavalry post and as a 
base of operations during the Red River War 
of 1874-1875 against hostile Comanche, 
Cheyenne, and Kiowa bands and even 
guarded Geronimo as a prisoner of war. 
International events, however, prodded 
the Army to reexamine its priorities. The 
Spanish-American War of 1898 propelled 
the U. S. into the international arena, causing 
it to emerge as a world power. This and 
the vital need to modernize, in view of an 
European arms race, encouraged the Army 
to convert from a frontier constabulary, 
designed for policing the Trans-Mississippi 
West, to a force capable of fighting an 
European-styled army. This transformation, 
in the beginning of the 20th century, led to 
the opening of the School of Fire for Field 
Artillery in 1911 to train field artillerymen. 

B irth, struggle, and validation. 
Secretary of War, Elihu Root, who 
was appointed in 1899 by President William 
McKinley, restructured the Army over 
several years. Under his direction, the 
War Department fashioned a progressive 
and sequential education system in 1901, 
consisting of the U.S. Military Academy; 
garrison schools at each post for elementary 
instruction in theory and practice; service 


schools (the Artillery School, the Engineer 
School of Application, the School of 
Antisubmarine Defense, the School of 
Application for Cavalry and Field Artillery 
and the Army Medical School); the General 
Staff and Service College; and the Army 
War College for professional training. Root 
also noted the lack of long-range planning 
capabilities, in the War Department, 
and urged Congress to create a general 
staff to prepare military plans. Despite 
stiff opposition in Congress and the War 
Department, Congress adopted Root’s 
recommendations in 1903, establishing a 
chief of staff and a general staff. 

Root also pushed Congress to enlarge 
the Army, to meet the country’s newly 
acquired overseas needs. In February 1901, 
a congressional act expanded the infantry 
from 25 to 30 regiments, dissolved the 
artillery’s regimental organization, which 
mixed coast and field artillery units in the 
same regiment, and established the corps 
of artillery, composed of coast artillery and 
field artillery units. 

Six years later, Congress finally 
acknowledged the need for two separate 
artillery branches. On Jan. 25, 1907, 
Congress divided the coast artillery and the 
field artillery into independent branches and 
created permanent field artillery regiments 
and battalions during peacetime, allowing 
the War Department to develop officers, 
noncommissioned officers, and enlisted 
personnel with field artillery expertise. 

The separation of the coast artillery and 
field artillery, the adoption of sophisticated 
field guns, the emergence of indirect fire, and 
the lack of field artillery training prompted 


action. In 1908, the Chief of Coast Artillery, 
MG Arthur Murray, recommended opening 
a school of fire for field artillery. About the 
same time, President Theodore Roosevelt 
and a group of progressive field artillery 
officers also pushed for formal training to 
make the branch more professional. 

To this end, Roosevelt directed the War 
Department to send CPT Dan T. Moore of 
the 6th Field Artillery Regiment, a man 
educated abroad and a former aide to the 
president, to Europe in 1908 to observe 
European field artillery training. While he 
was there, he visited field artillery schools 
in Austria, Hungary, Holland, England, and 
Italy and studied at the German Army’s 
Artillery School at Juterborg. Because it 
developed and improved methods of fire, 
tested new material, and emphasized firing 
and tactical exercises, among other things, 
the German school especially impressed 
Moore. 

At the direction of the War Department, 
Moore subsequently traveled to Fort Sill in 
November 1910, to make arrangements 
for a field artillery school there, using the 
Juterborg school as a model. Fort Sill’s 
wide expanse of land, 51,000 acres of 
varied terrain providing sufficient room 
for target practice and maneuvering of field 
artillery batteries; a mild climate permitting 
training all year; and the presence of the 1 st 
Field Artillery Regiment, caused Moore to 
endorse the Oklahoma post as a home for 
field artillery training. 

Also favorably inclined to the location, 
the War Department eventually approved 
Fort Sill as the home for the new school. 
War Department General Orders, No. 72, 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 7 
















June 3,1911, authorized the School of Fire 
for Field Artillery at Fort Sill, outlined its 
priorities of providing practical instruction 
and designated the courses of instruction. 
A couple of days later, War Department 
General Orders, No. 73, made the school 
an official part of the War Department’s 
professional educational system that 
included the U.S. Military Academy, post 
schools for enlisted personnel, garrison 
schools for officers, and branch service 
schools for branch and technical training. 
Shortly after, on July 19, 1911, the 
War Department selected Moore as the 
commandant. 

Several months later, the School of 
Fire for Field Artillery opened its doors 
on Sept. 15, 1911, to mark the beginning 
of standardized gunnery instruction and 
training and some instruction in field 
artillery tactics and brought an end to Fort 
Sill’s days as a cavalry post. Operations 
began with a small staff and faculty, CPT 
Dan T. Moore, 1LT Ralph M. Pennell, 1LT 
Roger S. Parrott, and 1LT John C. Maul. 
Of the four, only Moore had experience 
as a field artillery officer. Parrott had 
recently transferred from field artillery to 
ordnance, giving him minimal field artillery 
expertise. Pennell was a cavalry officer 
and Maul was an infantry officer. Moore 
wrote, “they set out to teach officers by 
actual practical exercise ... the general 
principals in conducting fire . . . [and] the 
tactical employment of field artillery, with 
a clear emphasis on gunnery.” 

During the school’s first years, Moore 
focused on the basics. Students spent time 
with flash targets, prepared firing data and 
learned to adjust fire onto a target. They 
also learned panoramic sketching, technical 
and tactical battery drill, and practical 
ballistics. Among other things, they also 
fired field guns, and for many this was a 
new experience. Some students could even 
hit a target and compute gunnery solutions 



French liaison officers at the School of Fire in 
1917. (FROM LEFT TO RIGHT) Lieutenant LA. 
Girard, Captain C.P.F. Pierret, Major E. Durette, 
Lieutenants H. Negre and J. Varrall. (Photo courtesy 
of U.S. Army Field Artillery School) 


within the allotted fifteen seconds. 

Moore’s successor, LTC Edward P. 
McGlachlin, continued improving the 
school. He published supplementary 
training literature and gave additional 
training time to tactics. This created a more 
comprehensive instruction program and 
produced a more broadly trained graduate. 

With Moore and McGlachlin as 
commandants, the School of Fire made 
concrete progress since opening in 1911. In 
a memorandum for the Chief of Staff of the 
Army, MG Hugh L. Scott, about the school, 
the Chief of the War College Division, BG 
M.M. Macomb, on Dec., 18, 1914, stated, 
“graduates could shoot and hit targets better 
than their predecessors of 1911-1913.” The 
memorandum credited the improved firing 
of FAbatteries to the school and its graduates 
who returned to their regiments and taught 
their colleagues. 

W ar years. The Mexican Revolution 
soon influenced the infant school, 
in August 1915, the War Department 
shipped two of the school’s field batteries 
to the border, causing McGlachlin to close 
the school in the fall of 1915, permitting 
students to return to their units. Although 
the school reopened in February 1916, 
reoccurring Mexican border troubles forced 
closure, once again. On May 9, 1916, the 
War Department shutdown the School of 
Fire and the School of Musketry, which 
had been at Fort Sill since 1913 and had 
competed with the School of Fire for limited 
resources, and sent all officers to the border. 
The last field artillery officer left July 9, 
1916; and the School of Fire did not open 
again until July 1917, during World War I. 

World War I invigorated the School of 
Fire for Field Artillery. In early July 1917, the 
school consisted of a caretaker detachment 
under COL Robert M. Blatchford, an 
infantry officer and the commander of Fort 
Sill. On July 10,1917, a brief telegram from 
the War Department, notified Blatchford 
of plans to reopen the school, satisfying 
wartime requirements. Five days later, SGT 
Morris Swett, the school librarian, met 21 
students as they stepped off a train from 
Oklahoma City, Okla., for training. 

Subsequently, the instructors, handpicked 
by the incoming Commandant of the School 
of Fire for Field Artillery, COL William J. 
Snow, who had also participated in founding 
the Field Artillery Association and the “Field 
Artillery Journal” in 1910 as a captain to 
promote professionalism, and school staff, 
slowly began to show up. On July 19,1917, 
Lieutenant Colonels F.E. Hopkins, and Fred 
T. Austin, Captains Robert M. Danford and 
Cliff Andrus, as well as other active Army 
field artillery officers, reported for duty to 


serve as instructors. Afterwards, on Aug. 
3, 1917, a small contingent of French field 
artillery officers, with combat experience on 
the western front, arrived to teach French 
doctrine and tactics. 

Meanwhile, on July 27, 1917, Snow, 
from the 4th Field Artillery Regiment, 
reported for duty and replaced COL (later 
Brigadier General) Adrian S. Fleming. Snow 
found Fleming, struggling to organize a 
school, with little or no resources. In fact, 
the small cadre of instructors lectured out 
of the Field Artillery Drill and Service 
Regulations of 1916, to the diverse class of 
21 students who had arrived earlier in July. 
They formed class zero, distinguishing it 
from the regular wartime classes that began 
in October 1917. Some officers of class zero 
were active U.S. Army Cavalry and Coast 
Artillery officers, who had been transferred 
to the field artillery, filling shortages. Some 
were National Guard officers; and some 
were former noncommissioned officers 
who had recently been commissioned. 

Despite and competition for firing ranges 
and other resources with the 36th Division, 
composed of Oklahoma and Texas National 
Guard units, the 35th Division, comprised 
of Kansas and Missouri National Guard 
units and CPT Harry S. Truman’s 129th 
Field Artillery Regiment, and the School of 
Musketry, which had reopened and later left 
for Camp Benning, Ga., in the fall of 1918 to 
make room for field artillery training, and the 
inexperience of zero class, Snow achieved 
remarkable success. Students in zero class 
graduated and left for France. To support 
school’s training, the War Department built 
a school complex, for classes, as well as 
barracks on the plateau northwest of the 
old post, using Snow’s facility plan. Named 
Snow Hall, after Snow, who later became the 
first chief of field artillery on February 15, 
1918, the central school building included 
the office of the administrator, large class 
rooms, a movie theater, small class rooms, 
and other rooms. 

In the midst of the construction, the 
first wartime class assembled on Oct. 1, 
1917, for 12 weeks of training. The class, 
composed of active Army, National Guard, 
and National Army officers, ranging from 
second lieutenant to colonel, received its 
introduction to the school in the Old Trader’s 
Store, also serving as the administration 
building and school library until the school 
complex was completed. As Fleming, who 
had replaced Snow in September 1917 when 
he left to command a field artillery brigade, 
explained to the students, the school’s main 
mission focused on gunnery instruction, 
although it also trained aerial observers, in 
a two-week course at Henry Post Field on 


8 January-February 2011 


Fires 






Recruiting poster for the U.S. Army Field Artillery, circa 1919. (Photo courtesy of Library of Congress) 


Fort Sill. Upon graduation from the school’s 
observer course, some students entered the 
School for Aerial Observers at Henry Post 
Field, later reorganized as the Air Service 
School in August 1918, for additional aerial 
observer training. 

During the last training week, the 
school’s culminating training event gave 
the students the opportunity to conduct 
unobserved indirect fire, using maps, and 
observed indirect fire from trenches modeled 
after those in France, for realism. Employing 
this trench system, other practical exercises 
and class room instruction, the school 
trained 3,000 officers in open warfare and 
trench warfare during the war and formed 
the heart of an extensive field artillery 
training program, composed of replacement 
schools, for training officers and enlisted 
personnel, brigade firing centers, such as the 
one at Camp Doniphan on Fort Sill where 
field artillery brigades were mobilized and 
trained, and an officer training school, for 
officer candidate training. 

As Snow observed, the School of Fire 
for Field Artillery started from scratch and 
had a rebirth in July 1917. Closing the 
school, during the crisis on the Mexican 
border, in 1916 and 1917, ended a brief 
but successful era and created a void. The 
School of Fire for Field Artillery, under 
Snow and Fleming, competed for limited 
resources with the National Guard divisions, 
the brigade firing center, and the School of 
Musketry, innovated by developing an aerial 
observer course and constructing a World 
War I trench system. The school rose to 
the occasion after reopening, becoming a 
training focal point, for officers with duty 
in France. 

A tenuous existence. While World 
^==^War I validated the School of Fire 
for Field Artillery’s reason for being, 
peacetime brought uncertainty. As part of 
the National Defense Act of 1920, guiding 
military activities during peacetime, 
Congress revamped the War Department’s 
education system, outlining an extensive 
sequential and progressive training and 
education system, for the U.S. Army active 
and Reserve forces with the Field Artillery 
School being a key element. In early 1922, 
the War Department, however, concluded 
its existing officer education system was 
too cumbersome and expensive, in an era 
of declining military budgets, and formed 
a board to streamline training and save 
money. Headed by McGlachlin, now a 
brigadier general, the board scrutinized the 
school system. 


Atthe time, the War Department 
had a decentralized field artillery 
training system, conducting 
field artillery training in the 
Basic Course, Camp Knox, 

Ky., the Battery Officers’ 

Course, Fort Sill, and the 
Field Officers’ Course, Camp 
Bragg, N.C. This prompted 
the McGlachlin board to 
propose consolidating the 
three field artillery schools 
at one location, with Camp 
Bragg and Fort Sill being the lead 
contenders. Because Fort Sill was relatively 
small, the board viewed locating the school 
there as a temporary solution, until money 
was available to move it to a better site. 
Backed by this recommendation and the 
availability of firing ranges and other 
resources at Fort Sill, the War Department 
selected the Oklahoma installation as a 
short-term expedient and consolidated all 
field artillery courses there in 1922, to reduce 
expenses. 

Addressing the importance of the officer 
courses, Assistant Commandant of the F ield 
Artillery School, COL Henry W. Butner, 
commented in “The Shrapnel,” the school’s 
yearbook, in 1923, about the school’s crucial 
role in professional education. According to 
Butner, graduation from the Field Artillery 
School marked the beginning of a career. 

He wrote, “The subject of field artillery 
is a life study and the school hopes to lay 
the foundation on sound principles for such 
study. The artillery officer must continue 
the study of his profession, or he will fail 
when the time comes to practice it. And 
failure in war means failure in life, for the 
Soldier.” Butner reinforced professional 
life-long learning, beyond the school so 
officers would be successful in war when 
it came. 

Akey strength of the school’s instruction 
program involved practical exercises, 
which reinforced classroom instruction. 
During the 1920s and 1930s, such inventive 
training gave U.S. Army, National Guard, 
Reserve, and Marine Corps officers 
attending the school full-time, opportunities 
to apply theoretical knowledge to field 
conditions. They participated in map 
problems, practiced night adjustment of 
fire, and conducted live fire, among other 
practical exercises. Meanwhile, enlisted 
Soldiers acquired skills in shorthand, 
motor mechanics, horse shoeing, saddlery, 
communications and cooking in resident 
courses. 


Meanwhile, 
the school’s 
future at Fort 
Sill remained 
unclear. 
To end the 
uncertainty, the 
War Department 
explored other 
potential locations 
and narrowed its 
search to Fort Sill 
and F ort Bragg, N.C. 
Fort Bragg had more 
rain and snow and was 
larger, with 120,454 
acres, than Fort Sill. In 
contrast, Fort Sill had 
more housing, varied terrain and an 
elaborate firing range; but the installation 
was small, only 51,292 acres, but with 
a warmer, drier, windier and sunnier 
climate, permitting outdoor instruction 
almost every day. Influenced by this and 
the requirement to build a field artillery 
firing range, barracks and other facilities 
at Fort Bragg, Secretary of War, Patrick J. 
Hurley, who was bom in Indian Territory, 
ended years of indecision about the Field 
Artillery School’s permanent location. On 
Dec. 10, 1930, Hurley designated Fort Sill 
as the school’s permanent home. 

Hurley’s decision formed a critical 
milestone in the evolution of the school, 
removing any doubt about the school’s 
future, at Fort Sill and reinforced the 
invaluable training being conducted there. 

M ore missions. In the midst of the 
struggle over its location, the 
assumed an active role in combat 
developments. In cooperation with the 
field artillery board that moved from Fort 
Bragg to Fort Sill, in 1922, the school 
evaluated developmental motor-drawn 
(towed) howitzers and guns, self-propelled 
howitzers and guns, signal equipment, 
sights and other field artillery equipment, 
in the 1920s. In 1928 and 1929, the school 
tested portee field artillery, where light field 
pieces were loaded onto tmcks or trailers 
for rapid transportation, but failed to reach 
any firm conclusions about its suitability, 
not making any recommendations. Later 
in 1933 and 1934, the school tested an 
experimental battalion of tmck-drawn field 
artillery. Completed in 1935, the school’s 
study demonstrated the maneuverability 
of tmck-drawn field artillery, finding it 
less vulnerable and less subject to fatigue 
than horse-drawn units, and urged adopting 
motor vehicles as prime movers, but only 
after they had become more reliable. 



sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 9 




Although it participated in other combat 
development projects, the school’s most 
innovative work came with the creation 
of the fire direction center in the 1930s. 
During the 1920s, massing fires with 
observed indirect fire proved to be difficult. 
Observed fire relied on a forward observer, 
locating targets by providing a descriptive 
reference to a prominent terrain feature on 
a map, or by giving the target’s coordinates 
to the batteries for plotting. As long as maps 
were available, the battalion could mass 
observed indirect fire. Without maps, the 
battalion had to adjust its firing batteries 
individually onto the target, and this was 
time consuming. 

Motivated by the need to mass fires 
more rapidly on a battlefield that was 
growing more mobile, the Director of the 
Gunnery Department, MAJ Carlos Brewer, 
set out in 1929-1933 to make fires more 
responsive. Brewer and his instructors 
abandoned massing fire by a descriptive 
terrain feature or grid coordinate reference. 
They introduced a firing chart, adopted the 
practice of locating battery positions by 
survey, and designated targets with reference 
to the base point on the chart. In the spring of 
1931, the Gunnery Department successfully 
demonstrated massing battalion fire using 
this method. Yet, Brewer did not centralize 
computing firing data, at the battalion, 
even though he and other field artillery 
officers advocated this practice. He kept 
this function in the battery, because he could 
not, at the battalion, find a reliable method 
of computing firing data. 

Brewer’s successor, MAJ Orlando 
Ward, eventually solved the problem of 
centralizing computing firing data. From 
1932 to 1934, Ward and his instructors 
developed the fire direction center. 
The battalion commander became the 
director of fire whenever fire control 
could be centralized; and the battery 
commander became 
the conductor of 
fire. With accurate 
maps, the battalion 
fire direction 
center could 
mass fire within 
ten minutes of 
receiving a 
call for fire; a 
battery could 
provide fire 
within five 
minutes. 

Without 
maps, 
the fire 
direction 


center generally took longer to mass Fires. 

Although the fire direction center 
promised to make fire support more 
responsive, the field artillery and the 
War Department resisted adopting it. 
Refinements to the center in 1939 by the 
Director of the Gunnery Department, LTC 
H.L.C. Jones, and his staff and instructors 
paved the way for acceptance. He displayed 
his improvements, in early 1941, to the 
Commandant of the Field Artillery School, 
BG George R. Allin, convincing him to 
accept the center. After the Chief of Staff, 
GEN George C. Marshall, witnessed a 
four-battalion shoot at Fort Sill on April 
10, 1941, the War Department adopted 
the fire direction center. Subsequently, a 
demonstration of the fire direction center in 
October 1941 finally converted the Chief of 
Field Artillery, MG Robert M. Danford, to 
the concept. Coupled with the graphic firing 
table introduced in 1940 and the portable 
radio, the school’s fire direction center 
revolutionized fire support. As a team, they 
permitted shifting observed Fires, rapidly 
and effectively around the battlefield. 

Reinforcing its leadership, in fire 
support doctrine and organization, the 
school meanwhile worked on organic aerial 
observation. To make aerial observation 
more effective, the Field Artillery School 
and the field artillery advocated adopting 
organic field artillery aerial observation 
after World War I but gained few adherents. 
Although organic field artillery aerial 
observation received little attention during 
the 1920s, Danford revived interest in it in 
the late 1930s because longer range field 
guns being introduced and the growing use 
of camouflage and deeply defiladed batteries 
made ground observation problematic. He 
wanted the U.S. Army Air Corps to supply 
the field artillery with light aircraft, pilots 
and ground crews and proposed aircraft 
be assigned directly to field artillery units, 
rather than corps headquarters, as outlinedby 
U.S. Army doctrine. Organic field artillery 
aerial observation would furnish 
responsive aerial observation and 
facilitate engaging deep targets. 

Undeterredby opposition 
from airpower enthusiasts and 
U.S. Army doctrine and supported 
by MAJ William Ford’s article 
on organic aerial observation in 
the “Field Artillery Journal” in 
April 1941 and various studies by 
the Field Artillery School, Danford 


Recruiting poster for the U.S. Army Field 
Artillery, circa 1920. (Photo courtesy of Library 
of Congress) 



formally petitioned the War Department 
on Oct. 8, 1941, for organic field artillery 
aerial observation. Although he initially 
encountered stiff resistance, from the Chief 
of the U.S. Army Air Corps, MG Henry H. 
Arnold, the airpower enthusiast relented and 
agreed to support any experimenting. With 
this endorsement, Danford subsequently 
obtained approval from the War Department 
on Dec. 10, 1941, to test organic field 
artillery aerial observation in February and 
March 1942. Using various light aircraft 
models, the experiments demonstrated the 
timeliness and reliability of organic field 
artillery aerial observation. This prompted 
the War Department to issue a directive, 
on June 6, 1942, establishing organic field 
artillery aerial observation and creating the 
Department of Air Training in the Field 
Artillery School to train students to land 
small aircraft on roads, short-improvised 
landing strips and open fields, as well as 
observing fire from the air, among other 
critical skills. 

As participation in the development of 
organic field artillery aerial observation 
suggested, the Field Artillery School 
became a noteworthy institution. While 
classroom instruction and innovative 
practical exercises trained field artillerymen 
in their trade, the school’s stress on life-long 
professional development and pioneering 
efforts in combat developments led to the 
fire direction center, organic field artillery 
aerial observation, and Army aviation and 
paved the way for the powerful field artillery 
arm of World War II. 


Dr. Boyd L. Dastrup is the U.S. Army Field 
Artillery branch historian for the U.S. Army 
Field Artillery School, at Fort Sill, Okla. He 
received a Ph.D. in U.S. Military and Diplomatic 
History from Kansas State University, in 1980. 
He has written, “The U.S. Army Command 
and General Staff College: A Centennial 
History;” “Crusade in Nuremberg: Military 
Occupation, 1945-1949;” “King of Battle: 
A Branch History of the U.S. Army’s Field 
Artillery;” “Modernizing the King of Battle: 
1973-1991;” “The Field Artillery: History and 
Sourcebook;” and “Operation Desert Storm 
and Beyond: Modernizing the Field Artillery in 
the 1990s.” He has also written articles in, “A 
Guide to the Sources of United States Military 
History;” “The Oxford Companion to American 
Military History;” “The U.S. Army and World 
War II;” and “Professional Military Education 
in the United States: A Historical Dictionary.” 
He has also appeared on the History Channel 
in “Dangerous Missions: Forward Observation 
(2001),” and “Extreme Marksman (2008),” 
as well as the Military History Channel on, 
“Artillery Strikes (2005),” and “Weaponology: 
Artillery (2006).” 


10 January-February 2011 


Fires 





rw 



Air Deffei 
Artillery 
ntributions v 
lutione and 
oeeuee during 
WoHd WiP 


By David A. Christensen 


A s the U.S. entered World War I, it became apparent a 
new technology had been introduced into 
L combat, and this new technology was quickly becoming 
a force multiplier. The new threat was the Aero-Plane. The Aero- 
Plane was soon adapted by war planners to serve in a variety of 
missions, ranging from aerial observation, to long-range bombing 
missions deep behind enemy lines. 

By 1915, the Germans had developed bombers that terrorized 
Paris, and by 1917, these German Gothas, which were heavier- 
than-air strategic bombers, were crossing the English Channel 
successfully bombing London. To counter this new threat, the war 
department reached out to the U.S. Army Coastal Artillery and 
elected Brigadier General James B. Shipton to be the first chief 


Soldiers train on the Lewis machine gun at Camp Mills, N.Y. (Photo courtesy 

of Library of Congress) 


of the Anti-Aircraft Service. GEN Shipton would soon depart for 
France where he stood up the first American Air Artillery School, 
Sept. 26, 1917, while in theater with the American Expeditionary 
Force. 


T he original class of 1917. The first course consisted of 25, 
U.S. Army Coastal Artillery officers, who received their 
anti-aircraft instruction from French officers. After completing their 
training, these first officers served as cadre for the artillery section of 
the American AA School. Two more sections of instruction were soon 
added to the AA school, a machine gun section and the searchlight 
section. Shipton augmented these two courses of instruction by 
outsourcing other branches within the American Expeditionary 
Force; the machine-gun training was provided by infantry officers, 
and the searchlight instruction was taught by engineer officers. In 
all, the American Anti-Aircraft School produced 659 officers and 
12,000 enlisted Soldiers by war’s end. 

D octrine and tactics. The Anti-Aircraft Service had a maxim 
that “firing should not be adjusted, but prepared.” The 
reason this maxim was adopted, was because of the inaccuracy of 
the 75mm cannon as the high-altitude anti-aircraft deterrent, and the 
tactics of employing such a weapon. Aiming adjustments during an 
engagement with the 75mm, became an impossible task. Instead, 
gun crews would pre-register their guns. This pre-registration 
consisted of firing a volley of rounds into the air, to determine 
where the desired air burst would occur. With multiple gun systems 
concentrating on the same avenue of approach, “volume of fires” 
soon became the solution to the aerial problem. This solution was 
also a result of how the aircraft was typically employed. Aircraft 
pilots used terrain features to navigate, and they preferred linear 
routes. These observations of aircraft techniques allowed AA units 
to develop plans that employed their guns along these predicted 
routes. “Diversity of fires” along these routes was also important. 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 11 













Machine guns were used against low-altitude targets, while air 
bursts delivered from the 75mm engaged the high-altitude threat. 

The Anti-Aircraft Service also developed a doctrine of “deterrent 
fires.” It had become widespread knowledge that “although hitting a 
plane was common, bringing one down was regarded as a fortunate 
incident.” From this lesson learned, American AA students were 
instructed on techniques to deter the aircraft and keep it at a distance. 
Instructors drilled into the students that forcing an aircraft to fly at 
a higher altitude would decrease their accuracy, as was the belief 
that a successful volume of fire would discourage the pilot from 
reaching his objective. 

The American Anti-Aircraft Service was the principal user of 
searchlights during World War I. In all, the AA Service had 34 
platoons activated while in theater. Most European’s believed that 
searchlights were impractical and would give frontline positions 
away to enemy targeting. The American’s however, adopted the 
searchlights primarily for rear defenses. The searchlight quickly 
made an impact as a deterrent to nighttime bombing raids. Their 
success was achieved, in part, by the ability to track and highlight a 
threat. However, the nighttime tracking of an aircraft by a searchlight 
often hindered a pilot’s ability to see and would cause him to become 
disorient and ineffective, often abandoning his target. 

he first recorded kill. The highlight for the newly formed 
service came to fruition on the 18th of May 1918. A 
German observation plane was crossing between the security of 
the Germany’s lines, and into the buffer of no man’s land, trying 
to collect information on unit positioning. An alert crew of the 2nd 
Anti-aircraft Battery was located approximately 2,700 meters away 
and was armed with two French 75mm guns. As the crew prepared 
the shell fuses for the desired altitude, LT A.T. Slaten calculated the 
necessary data, on range, location, and speed. Soon the air was filled 
with the burst of powder and fragmentation, and the effects provided 


results. The German observation plane went into a dive, followed 
by an uncontrolled spiral, finally crashing into the 500 meters of 
ground known as no-man’s land. The crew managed to survive the 
crash, and was viewed scrambling from the wreckage and behind 
German lines. That night, a French infantry patrol ventured across 
friendly lines to strip the enemy plane of its machine guns, and 
other useful equipment. The patrol was also successful in cutting 
away a piece of the aircraft underbelly and later presented it to the 
American Battery Commander, CPT E. A. Mellon as a souvenir 
and confirmation of the American’s first recorded kill. 

By the war’s end, America’s Anti-Aircraft Service was the most 
successful among the allies. The success was attributed to the tenants 
of good training, the doctrine they developed and used, and to the 
skill and discipline of the crews operating the weapon systems. 
When comparing the data, it took a British gun crew 10,000 rounds 
and the French crew 6,000 rounds to down a single plane. But, it 
took only 600 rounds for the Americans to bring one down. 

First to Fire! 


David A. Christensen currently serves as the U.S. Army Air Defense 
historian for the U.S. Army Air Defense Artillery School at Fort Sill, 
Okla. He spent 22 years of active service with the U. S. Army in various 
assignments as both an NCO and commissioned officer. He served 
with the Training and Doctrine Command as a professor of military 
history at the Army’s Command and General Staff College for the past 
several years, before arriving to Fort Sill in 2009 as the Air Defense 
Branch Historian. He is also resourced by Cameron University as an 
adjunct professor. He received graduate degrees from The University 
of Oklahoma, 1993, Kansas State University, 2003, and is a graduate of 
the Army’s Command and General Staff College resident course, 2001. 



Anti-aircraft searchlights illuminate the night sky above Washington Barracks, District of Columbia. (Photo courtesy of the Library of Congress) 





New ©©tool _ 

s founded©© fep 

§D©miltam ©f ^hm 



l bmn Ney©n®D Army 


By LTC Charles D. Kirby, U.S. 
Army, and LTC Richard Vagg, Royal 
Australian Artillery 


D n March 2010 the Afghan National 
Army was at odds with itself. 
The ANA leadership had long since 
identified a requirement for a long-range 
indirect fire capability. They decided 
to fill this requirement with the D-30, a 
Soviet designed 122 mm howitzer, with 
a max range of 22 kilometers donated to 
Afghanistan a few years prior. However, 
by March 2010, the only capability the 
D-30 had brought to the ANA was a huge, 
inaccurate, direct-fire weapon system. The 
only manual that had been developed for 


the operators was a poor translation of an 
old Russian maintenance manual. Programs 
of instruction were developed for a 6-week, 
direct-fire course to be conducted as a part 
of their advanced combat training which 
was similar to the U.S. Army’s advanced 
individual training. But, the ANA training 
did not include fire support or fire direction 
and there no supporting doctrine on how to 
nest AN A Field Artillery into the maneuver 
commander’s order of battle. 

On top of that, much of the basic issue 
items and sighting equipment for the fielded 
ANA D-30 batteries had long since been 
lost or damaged. Worse yet, maneuver 
commanders who had the King of Battle 
at their disposal reassigned their Redlegs 
to guard duty and KP-like duties because 
they had no understanding of how to 


employ them. 

In March 2010, LTC Rich Vagg, Royal 
Australian Artillery, received orders to 
report to Afghanistan to serve as commander 
of the Artillery Training Team-Kabul. 
Additionally, he was assigned to serve as 
the senior advisor to the ANA director of 
the field artillery and the commander of the 
ANA School of Artillery. 

Vagg, who is a seasoned Australian 
field artillery officer, was excited about 
his new job as an ‘advisor.’ He reported to 
Kabul in mid-April and his team of nine, 
additional Australian Red legs would follow. 
Upon arrival in Kabul, he had an office 
call with the Combined Training Advisory 
Group-Afghanistan commander to receive 
his orders, which mainly consisted of 
standing up the ANA School of Artillery. 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 13 




























This is not what he had prepared himself for 
mentally. While artillery was being taught 
in Afghanistan, there was no proponent, 
no true institutional base to refine tactics, 
techniques, and procedures, no doctrine, 
and most of all - no indirect fire capability. 

He was given this as his only definitive 
guidance: D-30 is the weapon system, and 
the first ANA Field Artillery battery needs 
to be prepared to join it’s assigned combat 
support kandak (battalion) for collective 
training at the Consolidated Fielding Center 
located at Camp Blackhorse, Afghanistan 
in time to graduate by April 2011. 

Vagg now refers to this as his “dream 
job;” because where else in one’s military 
career do you receive orders for such a huge 
undertaking and yet get so little guidance? 

The Australian Redleg had his mission 
and immediately moved to the Australian 
version of the U.S. Army military decision 
making process, the MAP or military 
appreciation process. He determined a way 
ahead and wrote the order that would be 
used as a guide to develop the ANA School 
of Artillery and the doctrine to insert the 
artillery into its operational force. When his 
team arrived, he gave out his orders—write 
doctrine, re-write POIs, write field manuals, 
determine battle drills, develop a 6400 mil 
indirect fire capability with a weapon system 
meant for 1600 mil zones of fire, figure 


out how to determine reliable firing data, 
and don’t forget to include a professional 
education system. However, the constraints 
he laid out for his team included some special 
twists — the majority of the ANA Soldiers 
they were dealing with were illiterate, 
approximately 25 percent of the weapon 
systems and associated crews had already 
deployed, and all the instructors needed to 
be ANA soldiers. 

At the time, a clear standout among the 
Australian Redlegs was LT Luke Haitas, a 
young officer assigned to develop the fire 
direction procedures. Initially, as any good 
artilleryman would do, Haitas developed 
an ANA version of ‘Charts and Darts’— 
which is still used to check safety prior 
to executing a Fires mission. From there, 
Haitas began working with a contractor to 
build a handheld fire-direction computer 
which was equipped with an internal 
Global Positioning System and tabular 
firing tables based on standard metrological 
data. The end result was simple, it could be 
operated like a palm pilot with a stylus, but 
most importantly the UDC D-30 Gunnery 
Computer calculated accurate, safe, firing 
data as quickly as a handheld calculator 
can add and subtract. Although the UDC 
D-30 Gunnery Computer was developed 
specifically for the ANA School of Artillery, 
it is quite likely that other nations could 


adopt this gunnery computer. 

The next step was to build the cadre, 
for a two-pronged approach that included 
educating all current and future ANA Field 
Artillerymen, standardizing institutional 
cadre for a training base, and creating 
mobile education training teams for the 
previously fielded ANA Field Artillery units. 
The first ANA Train the Trainer Course, 
to build the institutional base with ANA 
instructors, graduated Sept. 26,2010. These 
T3 graduates executed an end-of-course, 
live-fire exercise — ANA gunners, ANA 
FDC, and ANA fire supporters — all fired 
on time and on target. 

The new METT teams are scheduled to 
be formed with a combination of coalition 
Redlegs all trained by the new cadre of the 
ANA School of Artillery. In May 2011, the 
METTs will complete training and begin 
moving to the ANA Field Artillery area 
of operations to field newly-refurbished 
D-30s complete with basic issue items. They 
will also re-educate the currently fielded 
artillerymen and their owning commands. 

Each ANA Combat Support Kandak 
contains an ANA Field Artillery battery 
consisting of two, four-gun platoons. 
Given the asymmetric nature of warfare 
in Afghanistan, the employment of the 
currently fielded artillery batteries is ideal 
— within ANA forward operating bases. 



An Afghan National Army soldier and Mongolian 
instructor teach newly enlisted Afghan soldiers 
about the 122 mm D-30 howitzer Oct. 4,2010, at 
the ANA Kabul Military Training Center, outside 
of Kabul. These fresh recruits are part of the new 
artillery school at KMTC, where students learn 
the history of artillery and how to use artillery 
equipment. (Photo by SGT Rebecca Linder, U.S. Army) 





Lt. Gen. Shir Mohammad Karimi, left, general staff chief of operations, Afghan National Army, 
thanks an Australian trainer, who is part of the Australian led Training Team - Kabul, Oct. 4, 2010, 
at the official opening ceremony of the ANA School of Artillery at Kabul Military Training Center, 
outside of Kabul. (Photo by SGT Rebecca Linder, U.S. Army) 


Employed in this manner the ANA Field 
Artillery can provide optimal coverage 
and will nest well within the ANA order of 
battle. Further, it provides a great forum for 
the METT teams to simultaneously educate 
the various fire support elements and their 
maneuver leadership at the Kandak, brigade, 
and corps levels. The METT teams will play 
a crucial role in the proper integration of 
the artillery into the Afghan National Army. 
They will field completely refurbished 
weapon systems; but more importantly 
they will educate, inform, and advise the 
maneuver commanders at every level on 
how to utilize the King of Battle in the heat 
of battle. 

The newly established ANA School of 
Artillery, began training the first class of 
Redlegs, Oct. 4. A cadre of ANA soldiers 
(39 in all) and advisors from four separate 
countries — Australia, Singapore, the 
United States, and Mongolia currently 
make up the teaching team at the ANA Field 
Artillery School. COL Shakerulah is the 
director of ANA F ield Artillery, LTC Amin 
is the commander of the ANA School of 
Artillery, LTC Rich Vagg is the commander 
of ATT-K, and MAJ Piero Bertocchi is the 
executive officer for ATT-K. Hence the cadre 
and ATT-K is truly multinational and will 
become more so, once the METT teams 
begin to arrive, in 2011. 

In the coming year, the ANA School 
of Artillery will produce more than 1,036 
artillery soldiers — gunners, fire direction 
specialists, and fire supporters; 842 


noncommissioned officer graduates; and 
203 officer graduates. The METTs will 
execute the turn in of 93 previously-fielded 
D-30s and field 210 fully-refurbished and 
equipped D-30s across the ANA Corps. 
Additionally, the METTs will serve as the 
primary integrators and educators regarding 
all things artillery for the operational force 
throughout the ANA Corps. The future of 
the artillery within the ANA is definitely 


moving in the right direction, and by the 
summer of 2012 the artillery will take its 
rightful place in the Afghan National Army 
as the King of Battle. 


Lieutenant Colonel Charles “Skip” Kirby, U.S. 
Army Field Artillery, is currently the deputy 
director of operations, CJ3, NATO Training 
Mission Combined Security Transition 
Command - Afghanistan. Previously, he served 
as the chief of future operations, G3/5, for the 
Fires Center of Excellence, Fort Sill, Okla., until 
April 2010. He also deployed to Afghanistan 
from June 2006 to April 2007 in which he served 
as a Ministry of Defense mentor, Combined 
Security Transition Command-A Kabul and 
to Iraq in from July 20047 to February 2005 
as a counterfire officer for III Corps, Field 
Artillery. In 1984, he earned a Bachelor of 
Arts in business from Sterling College, Kan. 

Lieutenant Colonel Richard Anthony Vagg, 
Royal Australian Artillery, is currently serving 
as the commanding officer of the Afghan 
National Army Field Artillery Training Team, 
as a part of Operation SLIPPER (Australia’s 
contribution to Operation Enduring Freedom). 
Previously, Vagg has served a variety of 
regimental appointments within 4th Field 
Regiment, the 3rd Brigade and 6th Battalion 
(Motorized) of the Royal Australian Regiment, 
the 7th Brigade. On returning to Australia he 
will take up the position of the SOI Joint Fires, 
Army Headquarters. In December 2011, he 
will assume command of the newly formed 
Air Land Regiment, Royal Australian Artillery. 



An Afghan National Army soldier and Mongolian instructor teach newly enlisted Afghan soldiers 
about the 122 mm D-30 howitzer Oct. 4, 2010, at the ANA Kabul Military Training Center, outside 
of Kabul. These fresh recruits are part of the new artillery school at KMTC, where students learn 
the history of artillery and how to use artillery equipment. (Photo by sgt Rebecca Under, u.s. Army) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 15 



















_ U.S. Air Force 2nd Lt. Eamonn O'Shea looks off Snow Hall's rooftop as 

part of an exercise for the Joint Fires Observer Course at Fort Sill, Okla., 
By MSG Timothy Ryan April -| 201 o. (Photo by Marie Berberea, Fort Sill Cannoneer) 


C ongratulations, you have completed the Joint Fires 
Observer course at Fort Sill, Okla. Now what? I 
think the trend is to get back into the day-to-day grind 
of garrison operations with all the tasks that must be accomplished 
on a daily basis, but JFO skills may atrophy. 

So, after three or four months back at garrison, are you ready 
to go to war as a JFO? If you are truly honest you might answer 
‘no’ to the question. Because daily skills as a JFO might not be 
exercised, ‘just-in-time’ training might be needed to get back up 
to speed. This is the wrong approach and a better course of action 
is needed. A thorough continuation training program can help to 
ensure the maneuver commander is getting a valuable warrior. 

The joint and combined integration directorate states in the 
article “Air, Land, and Sea Applications Bulletin,” that ongoing 
training and qualification of JFOs are key factors in combat success. 
Luckily, the resources needed to build and sustain a robust JFO 
continuation training program exist at your garrison. 

ontinuous training. The integration of close air support 
into the ground scheme of maneuver is a perishable skill 
set that requires continuous training. Motivated leadership can 
build a comprehensive JFO program that can be tailored to any 
situation. Because of the joint nature of combat these days, it is 
imperative the services are able to work together in order to meet the 
supported commanders ’ intent. According to the JFO memorandum 
of agreement, the j oint F ires observer training program relies on j oint 
collaboration. As resources allow, Joint Terminal Attack Controllers 
and JFOs need to train together. A good way to accomplish is to 
visit the local tactical air control party personnel. 

Only a select few wear the Black Beret that symbolizes the 

16 January-February 2011 • 


TACP. These Air Force specialists are assigned to Army combat 
maneuver units around the world. On a battlefield, they form a 
tactical air control party team that plans, requests and directs air 
strikes against enemy targets in close proximity to friendly forces. A 
TACP is generally a two-airman team, working in an Army ground 
unit and directing close air support firepower toward enemy targets 
on the ground. 

Although the initial training begins at the JFO school house, 
JFO skills need to be honed at the home station. A great deal of 
training should be accomplished at the home station, and is the 
correct place for refresher and spin-up training. Maneuver training 
centers are vital to exercising all the pieces making up the joint 
fires team. However, they are not the venue for refresher or just- 
in-time training. Graduate level tasks should culminate at events 
such as National Training Center, Fort Irwin, Calif., and the Joint 
Readiness Training Center, Fort Polk, La. These training centers 
should be utilized for full-spectrum operations that provide JFO 
top-off training. 

There are three parts to building a comprehensive continuation 
training program. The first part is gaining knowledge. Just because 
information was retained long enough to take a test at the JFO 
school house does not mean it will be remembered for the long 
haul. Along with academic learning comes the need to review new 
technologies that continue to change at an alarming rate. The second 
part of the equation is gaining practical skills that get the procedural 
requirements of close air support down to a second nature, and 
finally, putting it all together culminating exercise with the joint 
terminal attack controller/joint fire observer team and live-flying 
aircraft. 



Fires 






























/Vcademic training. The joint mission task list, as identified in 
/ \ the JFO MO A, outlines three mission areas a JFO should 
be able to conduct. Duty Area 3, in particular, addresses the air 
to ground aspect of joint Fires. As a JTAC, I am most concerned 
with this duty area. To accomplish Duty Area 3, the JFO needs a 
solid background in the academics of the close air support mission 
set. Though this information is taught at JFO school, continual 
refreshing of this information is needed. From my point of view 
there are three ways this can be accomplished. This includes taking 
online courses, reading and digging into applicable publications, 
and being familiar with the latest tactics, techniques, and procedures 
that go with the JFO skill set. 

Many important references for JFOs are online or available 
through online courses. Distance learning is an easy way to gain 
knowledge while saving training costs. Online learning makes it 
possible to attend a course and never leave garrison. A good resource 
for distance learning is the Doctrine Networked Education and 
Training website located at www.dtic.mil/doctrine/docnet/. 

DOCNET’s mission is to promote understanding, training, and 
education in joint doctrine of the U.S. armed forces. This website 
also provides online access to many joint publications, like JP 3-09.3 
Joint Tactics Techniques and Procedures for Close Air Support , 
and also allows users to take online exams. As an added benefit, 
the American Military University grants one college credit hour 
for successful completion of each DOCNET course. This isn’t the 
only web source for information, The Joint and Combined Fires 
University located behind the AKO firewall on the Fires Knowledge 
Network also has a variety of courses that allows the user to delve 
into a variety of topics. 

dditional training. JFOs should also study and review j oint, 
/ \ U.S. Army, and U. S. Air F orce publications which will help 
build a body of knowledge that is needed to be a thorough warrior. 
Besides the JTTP for close air support, JFOs will benefit from reading 
joint publications for joint fire support and joint airspace control in 
the combat zone. These particular publications cover topics such 
as the joint targeting cycle, airspace control and how to integrate 
unmanned aerial platforms in the operational environment. Also, 
a JFO should have a good understanding of the most recent Army 
publications that put ‘steel on target.’ 

The Joint Electronic Library, located on the web at www.dtic. 
mil/doctrine/, provides access to several applicable publications, 
as well as the Curtis E. LeMay Center for Doctrine Development 
and Education, located at www.cadre.au.af.mil/main.htm. This 


site offers an Air and Space Power Course which provides a broad 
understanding of airpower. Also by logging onto FKO, which can 
only be accessed with a CAC card, a user can click onto a link to 
Joint Knowledge Online. JKO is an online repository for training and 
informational material that impacts and improves the knowledge, 
skills and abilities of the joint warfighter. 

merging doctrine. A final area to keep familiar with is 
emerging doctrine and the most current tactics, techniques 
and procedures. The 561 st Joint Tactics Squadron, located at Nellis 
Air Force Base, Nev., both publishes and keeps track of emerging 
tactics. Though their files are U.S. Air Force centric, many of the 
procedures discussed will help with Duty Area 3 of the JFO MO A. 
These publications are comprised of the most effective methods 
identified for operations in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom and 
Operation Enduring Freedom. The squadron’s focus is to ensure 
that the deploying warrior is current, relevant and extremely well 
prepared for combat, day one in theater. Though not available from 
the public domain, their website is accessible from a .mil domain 
located at http://www.nellis.af.smil.mil/units/561jts/. 

ractical training. The practical skills of the CAS mission 
set are retained, refined and enhanced over time with practice. 
Every time there’s participation in CAS training, personal skills 
sets will be enhanced and more confidence will be gained when the 
time comes to assist in the application of airpower. The following 
three training activities, tactical discussions, radio rehearsals and 
simulator controls, can provide the polish for necessary skills. 

It’s important to note, that some of the best tactical discussions I 
have taken part in have taken place after work. In my opinion, low 
key environments that minimize rank create the best atmosphere 
for the free exchange of ideas. In these discussions there are no bad 
ideas-just better ideas. These tactical discussions should be viewed 
as a “hot wash” or informal after action review. The difference 
is discussing what will happen as opposed to what did happen. 
Discussions should focus on devising new techniques to test the 
next time there is participation in a CAS training event. The best 
environment to test and refine new TTPs is during local training. 
Then validate this training at the Joint Readiness Training Center 
or the National Training Center with major exercises in preparation 
for deployment. 

ehearsals are key. The radio rehearsal is a valuable tool. In 
the case of rehearsals for CAS, radio messages will focus 
on the procedural aspects of CAS control. Voice procedures are 
important during an attack brief to a pilot, so it is imperative to 






JOINT FIRF.5 
OBSERVER 
COURSE 


,Md ( HimWncrt 




Joint Fires Observer books sit out while a JFO student trains during a simulation at Fort Sill, Okla., 
April 12, 2010. (Photo by Jason Kelly, U.S. Army) 


©OosraDc"] 

@SHi]jV7 smS m&mi 

U.8. 




[&msy n 


ana 


KUUn Mp Rubs© 


pdaBsstSsn© mfiM) 

®l? MfsMSteSgp gOds!® 

fe Bxaa»lai] Os Iks a 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 17 















SPC James D'Amico (left) and SGT Timothy Boggs from the 1st Stryker Brigade Combat Team, 25th 
Infantry Division call for support from air assets during Atlantic Strike VII at Avon Park Air Ground 
Training Complex in Avon Park, Fla., June 18, 2008. Atlantic Strike is a joint forces training exercise 
involving Joint Terminal Attack Controllers from the U.S. Army, Air Force and Marines. (Photo by ssgt 

Stephen J. Otero, U.S. Air Force) 


practice the proper calls. The flow of communication during a CAS 
mission is fast paced and follows a pattern built around information 
exchanges. Practice the information flow until it becomes ingrained. 

Another useful technique is to pull out a map and practice a target 
‘talk-on’ with someone with the same map in another room. What 
might be thought of as perfect ‘talk-on,’ may not be understood 
by another person listening in, so it’s important to practice with 
a team member. After the radio calls come smoothly, it is time to 
take the training to a simulator. 

Simulators are a great tool to re-enforce CAS procedures. A 
variety of missions can be built using a simulator and is the perfect 
place to try new techniques. Another nice thing about simulators 
is that the systems provide instant visual and auditory feedback 
to see if desired results were achieved. Also, if the simulation was 
tanked - just reset and do it again. There are a variety of simulators 
available in most Army garrisons, or work with the local Air Force 
tactical air control party to join in their training. 

L ive-fly training. I remember the first time I talked to an actual 
- aircraft I got tongue tied. Looking at a piece of ground and 
telling the aviator to hit a particular target is not a simple task. It is 
important for a Fires observer to train with actual aircraft as much 
as possible to work through this issue. Extensively utilize live-fly 
training at local ranges. Local ranges are inexpensive to utilize and 
easily scheduled. However, do not disregard unfamiliar ranges that 
provide new targets and challenges. Traveling to off-station range 
is highly encouraged if funding can be secured to make it happen. 

Whatever range the training takes place on, it is important to 
watch a target explode because it provides instant feedback. This 
is one of the reasons the JFO should accompany JTACs when they 
conduct CAS training. Local ranges present a good balance for the 
JFO. The local impact range has familiarity and is the range that JFOs 
routinely perform calls for fire missions on. However, conducting 
a CAS mission is a different mission set for most fire support 
professionals. Initial JFO training on a local range may allow JFOs 
to focus specifically on JFO skill-set building and minimize friction 
caused by range unfamiliarity. Though home-station training can 

18 January-February 2011 


be effective, it’s important to remember 
to mix it up if possible. A local impact 
range will eventually cease to provide a 
challenging training environment. Before 
long, the joint terminal attack controller 
and j oint fires observer can engage targets 
on the range from memory. 

Case in point, I can control a mission on 
Redleg Range on Fort Polk, La. to this day 
- seven years later. If funds are available, 
a change in training locations can provide 
challenges with new conditions and target 
arrays. 

ore bang for the buck. It’s 
important to note, the Joint 
Forces Command has put aside money 
to help defray training costs. The Joint 
Terminal Attack Controller -Joint Fire 
Observer Continuation Training Program 
aligns disparate JTAC/JFO units with 
CAS aircraft and provides temporary 
duty funding, otherwise not available, 
to enable live training to enhance JTAC 
proficiency and maintain currency. In 
order to apply for funding, the training 
event must involve two branches of the 
military. Military lodging can be provided. 
Also, the event must be scheduled during periods of historical 
favorable weather. The last step is to provide an after action review 
of the training event. The link to request funds can be found on 
Air Force Knowledge Now. Users, via a CAC card, must create an 
online account to access the AFKN system. 

tay in the game. A warrior should be ready to perform with 
little to no warning. This ability does not happen by itself. 
Stay ahead of the game by not allowing JFO skills to be dulled by 
the daily grind. The warrior reaches a high level of performance 
with continuous training. Growing JFO skills takes time and effort, 
but the end result is a capable combat asset for any commander. 
Get in the books and utilize all training venues and material that 
are readily available. A thorough training program that builds upon 
the knowledge, skills and abilities acquired at Fort Sill cannot be 
understated. Quality training at home station allows concentration 
on fine-tuning techniques at NTC or JRTC. The formal JFO course 
held at Fort Sill is just the beginning of a JFO’s journey. 


Master Sergeant Timothy R. Ryan is the operations superintendant 
for the 4th Air Support Operations Squadron located at U.S. Army 
Garrison, Mannheim, Germany. In April 2003, he deployed to OIF with 
the 1st Air Support Operations Squadron from Wiesbaden, Germany, 
and the 1 st Armored Division. During this deployment he participated in 
combat operations with 2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment in and around 
Diwaniya and An Najaf, Iraq. In 2007, he worked in the Republic of 
Korea’s Third Army headquarters as a member of the combined Air 
Support Operations Center. While assigned in South Korea he taught 
terminal control procedures at the South Korean Air Forces, Air Ground 
Operations School. In September 2008, prior to deployment to Iraq with 
the 20th Expeditionary Air Support Operations Squadron, he graduated 
from the Joint Operational Fire and Effects Course at Fort Sill, Okla. As 
a current and qualified joint terminal attack controller he has worked 
with infantry, mechanized infantry and armor units. 



Fires 










Employing JoinP Finefe 
in Afghanistan 



SPC Zackery Cely, from Company A, 1st Battalion, 4th 
Infantry Regiment, provides security from a tower on Forward 
Operating Base Lane in the Zabul province, Afghanistan, 
October 2009. (Photo by Tia P. Sokimson, U.S. Army) 





By LTC John C. Allred 


J oint Fires lessons are critical to 
the success of our Army’s 
ongoing operations in the 
contemporary operating environment. The 
joint Fires assets and units in this article 
detail how Fires is an essential partner and 
an enabler to maneuver units. 

The basis of this article was my 
experiences as the battalion commander 
for 2nd Battalion, 506th Infantry /Team 
Paktika East, which was operating as part 
of the 4th Brigade Combat Team, 101st 
Airborne Division (Currahee), in Paktika 
Province, Afghanistan, July 2008 through 
March 2009. Team Paktika East consisted 
of joint forces, who were deployed over 
10,000 square kilometers. They served on 
twelve outpost/observation posts, as well 
as along a 240-kilometer section of the 
Afghan-Pakistan border. 

Our area of responsibility included 
terrain ranging from high-desert plains to 
mountains up to 10,000 feet in altitude. 
Movement between outposts included 
distances and a terrain that could only be 
traversed in hours - not minutes. Employing 
joint Fires was the primary way our task 
force could rapidly influence the tactical 


situation for units who experienced enemy 
contact across this dispersed area of 
responsibility. 

The risks of employing large- 
caliber, joint munitions while fighting 
a counterinsurgency in a sovereign 
country are many. Paramount to success 
in counterinsurgency tactics is the staff’s 
and commanders’ ongoing assessment 
of risk versus reward of joint Fires use, 
and mitigation of civilian casualties. A 
commander must always explore all non- 
lethal means to effect and influence the 
enemy. 

We found that often these non- 
lethal effects were more powerful in 
accomplishing our objectives, pursuing 
the lines of effort of governance and 
development, and were the focus of most 
of the battalion’s operations. When a unit 
leader estimated he could not handle the 
fight with organic assets, aerial and indirect 
fires were often the only enablers available 
to quickly tip the balance in the favor of 
coalition forces. 

The danger of misapplication of joint 
Fires use is the loss of support of the 
indigenous population through collateral 
damage. Even with careful and precise 
consequence management, these failures 
will rapidly compromise whatever progress 


a unit has made in its area of responsibility. 
Also, the potential corrosion of Soldier 
and leader morale after inflicting collateral 
damage cannot be understated. 

ission assets. Tools that enabled 
us to rapidly employ joint Fires 
while minimizing collateral damage were 
Remotely Operated Video Receivers and 
Sniper Advanced Targeting Pods. During 
our units’ deployment to Afghanistan, 
Sniper ATPs were mounted on all U.S. 
close air support-designated aircraft. The 
battalion also received additional ROVERs 
to support company-level units upon 
arrival to Afghanistan. The Sniper ATP 
transmitted to the ROVER the same high- 
magnification images as seen in the CAS 
cockpits, allowing the battalion operations 
center, company command posts, and CAS 
pilots access to the same information and 
promoting situational understanding across 
multiple echelons of leaders. This enabled 
more precise and safer employment of 
precision munitions against insurgents. 

Signals intelligence-cuing also played 
an important role in the battalion’s joint 
Fires employment. Various off-the-shelf 
unclassified signals collection devices such 
as commercial FM radio scanners enhanced 
the units ’ situational awareness down to the 
platoon level. This allowed preemptive use 

19 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 










“The 


of joint Fires to destroy enemy forces before 
they initiated contact where friendly forces 
could not execute direct fire and maneuver 
effectively: such as an enemy in ambush 
positions where steep and rough terrain 
prevented friendly forces from effectively 
and quickly flanking; insurgents moving 
into position to set up indirect fire systems 
multiple kilometers distant from coalition 
outposts. All Signals intelligence-cued Fires 
also included a hasty analysis of targets 
considering factors like: proximity of 
historic firing points and ambush positions; 
comparison to established patterns of enemy 
activity; use of a lexicon of enemy code 
words and phrases to better understand 
our opponents’ 
intents; proximity to 
known or observed 
civilian population 
concentrations; and 
always observation of 
target area to positively 
identify enemy and 
preclude killing of civilians. 

A pplying joint Fires. A critical aid 
in the application of joint Fires 
was the Precision-Strike Suite Special 
Operations Force software. This application 
graphically portrayed weapons effects 
on overhead imagery for the target grids 
of indirect fire missions. The ability to 
understand weapons effects, in relation 
to the terrain, by the unit’s leadership 
facilitated the rapid employment of joint 
Fires in support of units receiving contact. 
On-scene commanders may not have been 
able to see across the highly-varied terrain of 
Afghanistan for nearby villages at all times, 
though they may have seen their intended 
targets clearly. PSS-SOF, in combination 
with other overhead imagery, enhanced the 
battalion’s ability to mitigate and prevent 
civilian casualties, which was a vital and 
essential measure needed for the confident 
and timely application of joint Fires in the 
current operating environment. 

One of the most important actions a 
task force commander may take to ensure 
timely and accurate joint Fires is giving 
clear guidance to subordinate leaders. The 
first step in this process is a frank discussion 
with the next highest senior commander 
of what you are both comfortable with, 
such as levels of authority for release of 
different types of munitions, and under 
what conditions are they used. Once I had 
this guidance, I published it in the simplest 
format possible and ensured my subordinate 
leaders also understood. 

E nsuring timely and accurate Fires. 
The battalion and company 
command posts, exercised Fires clearance 


drills and perfected mediums for passing 
Fires mission requests and resulting Fires 
orders. Due to the nondoctrinal dispersion 
of our artillery (four, two gun-platoons and 
Fires directions centers at four outposts) 
and a resulting shortage of communications 
platforms, our unit used Mardam-Bey 
internet relay chat to distribute information 
from the Advanced Field Artillery Tactical 
Data System. We also generated fire 
orders that were simultaneously observed 
by sender and receiver which facilitated 
situational awareness amongst three 
echelons of the command. 

An effective method of joint Fires 
employment is teaming of multiple assets, 


ebllo%7 ito urudepe^emdl weepone 
i D In natation -to the terrain, by 
the unit's leadership ffeeoDtated th® 
pepldl employments of joints Fire® In 
euppoPS of unotse reoeoving contact;."’ 


specifically unmanned aerial systems, 
indirect fire systems and fixed-wing close 
air support sorties as part of an enhanced 
joint air attack. One example of our battalion 
employing JAAT was at aperiodic daytime 
insurgent checkpoint, which had been 
identified by multiple human intelligence 
sources as suspicious. 

At this unlawful checkpoint, located 
halfway between the battalion FOB and 
our Alpha Company COP, Afghan civilians 
were harassed by and forced to pay tolls to 
local insurgents. 

Mounted and dismounted ground patrols 
had not caught the AAF checkpoint in action 
due to the enemy’s early warning system, 
established in the surrounding sympathetic 
tribes (specifically the Zadran Tribe, which 
was the parent tribe of the Haquani’s 
insurgent network) who lived in the area. 

To counter the AAF early warning 
system, we employed a Shadow UAS to 
observe the area of interest designated for 
the checkpoint. The UAS ground station 
and operators were co-located with our 
operations center. After several missions, 
the Shadow spotted a platoon-sized element 
of suspected insurgents, not in uniform, 
armed with multiple crew-served weapons, 
stopping civilian vehicles and taking goods 
and money from them. 

Once we confirmed that our Company A 
and their collocated Afghan national army 
and police counterparts were not patrolling 
in that area, we positively confirmed enemy 
activity. 

As we knew from experience, a ground 
patrol could not get to the checkpoint with 
the element of surprise. 


In response to observing the insurgent 
activity we executed the following: alerted 
the nearest outpost with indirect fire assets 
that could range the target (Company B 
with its two, 155 mm Ml98 howitzers); the 
battalion Fires cell and Joint Terminal Attack 
Controllers coordinated the airspace above 
the target to maintain UAS observation, 
flight of the 155’s rocket-assisted projectiles, 
and ingress of CAS (two F-15s aircraft). 

While waiting for the civilian vehicle 
traffic to clear the target area, with sufficient 
space to prevent collateral damage, Task 
Force JTAC oriented F-15 pilots to the 
target area. Critical to maintaining the 
element of surprise was keeping the UAS 
and the CAS assets far 
enough away in altitude 
and range from the 
target, to ensure their 
engine sounds would 
not alert the enemy, and 
yet close enough for 
their respective optics 
to maintain continuous surveillance of the 
objective. 

More important was the co-location 
of the UAS operators with the battalion 
operations center, providing real-time views 
of the target area from the perspective of 
the F-15 pilots (through ROVER) and the 
UAS (through the ground station). After a 
hasty analysis of the terrain and weapons 
effects with PSS-SOF, we initiated the 
attack with an immediate suppression- 
fire mission to fix the enemy. This was 
immediately followed by each of the 
F-15s hitting the target in succession with 
their 20 mm cannons. Within the next 24 
hours, we received confirmation, through 
human intelligence, we had killed eight- 
enemy fighters and severely wounded an 
additional 22 insurgents. The effects of this 
joint Fires application, deterring enemy 
recruitment and action in the area, resulted 
in no additional, unlawful checkpoints or 
other overt actions, for more than a month 
after the engagement. 

essons learned. We took several 
lessons learned away from this 
action, learing first-hand that one of the 
benefits of full-time partnering with the 
indigenous security forces to include 
rapid clearance of fires. The synergy we 
created, by teaming our assets, allowed 
us to circumvent the great advantages 
our enemies’ had in our current operating 
environment. 

Later in our deployment, we had another 
success when our task force coordinated 
CAS and rotary wing attack aviation teaming 
in response to an enemy, 80-plus personnel 
attack on a platoon combat outpost. The 


L* 


20 January-February 2011 


Fires 


COP sat on a high bluff overlooking a 
large, two-village complex agricultural 
area, which was also located at the western 
exit of a major insurgent infiltration route, 
reaching all the way back to insurgent base 
areas in Pakistan’s autonomous border tribal 
areas. One of the major tribes located in the 
valley was sympathetic to the insurgency, 
but the COP location enabled the battalion 
to disrupt infiltration in this area. 

Shortly before midnight, the platoon 
located at the COP spotted movement into 
the bazaar west of the outpost, as well as 
on a hill one kilometer to the north. The 
platoon executed a stand-to and alerted the 
Charlie Company commander at the FOB, 
which was located 25 kilometers to the 
south. The commander then alerted his 1 st 
platoon in case he needed a quick-reaction 
force, and requested through the battalion 
operations center CAS and an air weapons 
team (which included two AH-64 Apache 
helicopters). 

Shortly after these actions, the enemy 
opened fire from five support-by-fire 
positions which were located on a large hill 
to the north, and arrayed on the west and on 
the south of the COP. From their positions, 
the platoon leader assessed the enemy was 
attempting to suppress the crew-served 
weapons located on the COP, while the 
insurgents executed an infiltration attack on 
the COP from a deep wadis (a dry streambed) 
located 1,900 meters to the northeast. The 
COP’s 120 mm mortar fired two rounds and 
destroyed the enemy crew-served weapon 
firing from the north; the most dangerous 
of the enemy’s support-by-fire positions. 

The platoon effectively suppressed 
the other positions with a combination of 
crew-served and small-arms direct fire, and 
then the enemy attempted to break contact. 
While the enemy shifted into the large 
river wadis located between the village 
complexes, the platoon used their Tube- 
Launched, Optically-Tracked, Wireless- 
Guided Improved Acquisition Systems to 
maintain continuous positive identification 
of the insurgents and orient two A-1 Os onto 
the enemy. The battalion operations center 
observed the A-10s’ efforts through the 
Sniper ATP-ROVER medium to line up for 
a strafing attack on the retreating insurgents. 
However, to avoid damage to Afghan homes 
and civilians, we ordered the CAS sortie to 
high orbit to maintain observation and PID 
of the retreating insurgents, until the inbound 
AWT could be oriented to the target. 

After the AWT arrived and received an 
orientation to the terrain and situation, we 
task organized one AH-64 and one A-10 per 
team. Originally in a 21-man element, the 
insurgents, who had broken into four groups, 


were then tracked by the A-10s’ lasers, 
which designated and guided the AH-64s 
into position. By early morning, the two 
aerial teams had tracked and destroyed all 
the insurgents with the AH-64 30mm cannon 
fire. The AH-64 was the best system to 
finish mission in order to mitigate collateral 
damage. Charlie Company launched a patrol 
at first light and found multiple destroyed 
weapons and equipment in the various 
locations where the AH-64s had engaged 
the enemy. 

eaching points. This action offered 
us multiple teaching points and 
lessons learned such as a sound defensive 
preparation and good observation plans, 
conducted by the platoon ensured the 
outpost would not be over-run. The platoon’s 
skilled use of observation and marking 
devices also proved critical in maintaining 
positive identification of the enemy. There 
was also effective battle target hand-offs 
from observers to shooters, facilitated by 
the platoon leader, company commander, 
JTAC and aircrews, of the rotary fixed-wing 
aircraft. All the actions that night ensured 
no identified enemy escaped. 

ools and asset accessibility. Most 
of the tools detailed in this article 
have recently become available to echelons 
below brigade in the current conflict. As 
counterinsurgency is a bottom-up fight, it 
is essential to push these assets down with 
the proper subject-matter experts and help 
junior leaders employ them. 

Critical to successful use of all 
these tools is knowledge, of available 
capabilities and training assets. Armed 


with this knowledge, ground commanders 
may successfully employ joint Fires in a 
non-linear, non-contiguous environment 
against insurgents in a highly-restrictive 
terrain. Also significant to the employment 
of all these assets is the first element of 
battle command: airspace command and 
control, AOR situational understanding, 
which in turn enables airspace control; 
positive identification of the enemy, and 
observation of Fires. Most importantly, 
the battalion commander in charge, of a 
specific area of operation, must give clear 
guidance that enables the appropriate, 
timely, and effective use of joint Fires. 
Through intent-based orders, a battalion 
commander empowers subordinate leaders 
to maximize their creativity and initiative 
within the commander’s intent. For all the 
successful operations detailed in this article 
I give full credit to the subordinate leaders 
and staff on our team who enabled and 
executed them. 


Lieutenant Colonel (P) John C. Allred 
is currently an instructor at the United 
States Army Combined Arms Center, Fort 
Leavenworth, Kan., where he facilitates 
the Pre-Command Course and the Tactical 
Commanders Development Course in the 
School of Command Preparation. He is also 
a graduate of the United States Military 
Academy, West Point, N.Y., where he earned 
a Bachelors of Science, in 1989. He also 
has a Masters of Public Administration from 
Columbus State University, Columbus, Ga., 
in 2000. 



SGT Mason Levo, Charlie Company, 2nd Battalion, 502nd Infantry, 2nd Brigade Combat Team, 
101st Airborne Division, readies himself before movement from Kandahar City to the Panjwaii 
District Center, Kandahar province, Afghanistan, Oct. 6, 2010. (Photo by Cpi Carol a. Lehman, u.s. Army) 




sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 21 







Op®p®ten©ro®l ©uO^up® 
in th® US Army: 
The Fir®© Center of 
ExceDI®n©e Culture 
end ForeSgn 
Languege Si^ne^egy 
©®tf§® ^h® ®^®nd®pd] 
for th® r®®t of 
TRADOC, Army 


By Dr. Mahir J. Ibrahimov 


G lobalization, Internet 
networking, and instant 
access to worldwide news 
media have proliferated the merging or 
partnering of ideological groups that 
oppose the U.S. and/or U.S. policies. 
These groups operate in pan-regional and 
multi-regional battle space comprised 
of numerous cultures, both friendly and 
hostile. It appears likely that during the next 
decade the operational environment of our 
troops will be characterized by persistent 
and unpredictable conflicts in battle space 
teeming with multiple foreign cultures. 
The Army must be prepared to effectively 

22 January-February 2011 • 


operate along with our multinational and 
host-nation partners against sophisticated 
and adaptive adversaries in order to achieve 
U.S. objectives. This dictates that Soldiers of 
every rank must become ‘culturally astute’ 
about the areas where they operate. 

Our junior leaders face adversaries who 
employ multiple and dynamic combinations 
of conventional, irregular, terrorist and 
criminal capabilities as they engage our 
Soldiers or attack our strategic interests. 
These hybrid threats can be expected to 
use a full spectrum of options, including 
every political, economic, informational, 
and military measure at their disposal. 
Combating these threats will necessitate 
creative solutions, and such solutions will 
require military forces that are adaptive 


MAJ Paul Bollenbacher shakes hands with a 
Si Av village resident from the Bawka district 
in Farah province, Afghanistan, June 12, 2010. 
Bollenbacher is the director of the Provincial 
Reconstruction Team Farah Civil Military 
Operations Center. (Photo by SrA Rylan K. Albright, 
U.S. Air Force) 


enough to function in a variety of situations 
and against a myriad of threats with a 
diverse set of national, allied and indigenous 
partners. It will require leaders who can 
anticipate change, create opportunities and 
achieve results. 

The Army’s Leader Development 
Strategy prescribes the future security 
environment will require leaders “who 
understand the context of the factors 
influencing the military situation, act 
within that understanding, continually 
assess and adapt those actions based on 
the interactions and circumstances of 
the enemy and environment, consolidate 
tactical and operational opportunities into 
strategic aims, and be able to effectively 
transition from one form of operations 
to another.” As field artillerymen and air 
defense artillerymen support full-spectrum 
operations, challenges in how we conduct 
fire support operations will require agility 
and innovation as new adaptive threats that 
employ a mix of new and old strategies and 
technologies emerge. 

To prosecute the fight and accomplish 
the assigned mission, the U.S. Army 
Field Artillery and Air Defense Artillery 
will need leaders who are adaptive, 
competent, and capable of operating 
with confidence in these ambiguous and 
complex environments. These leaders 
must be able to operate in decentralized 
organizations; be able to network with 
their joint, interagency, intergovernmental, 
and multinational partners; and be able to 
develop plans and operations that win the 
support of the population while defeating the 


Fires 










enemy. They must have an understanding of 
how other people think and act, as well as 
an appreciation of cross-cultural diversity 
and beliefs. This cultural sensitivity is just 
as important within a Soldier’s organization 
and with other sister services and allies, 
as it is in engaging indigenous people 
and threats who exist within the contested 
operational environment. In order to meet 
these operational and environmental 
demands, we must enrich our leader 
training and education by leveraging 
and adapting training methodologies to 
replicate complexity and hybrid threats in 
the institutional classroom, at home-station 
and while deployed. 

Assessing the field artillery and air 
defense artillery community’s requirements, 
we must develop leaders who have the 
core competencies to visualize, articulate 
and build partnerships and alliances; to 
effectively lead organizations; and be able 
to adapt to unanticipated, changing and 
uncertain situations. 

he Army Culture and Foreign 
Language Strategy. To meet 
these operational and cultural challenges, 
the Army’s goal as defined in the Army 
Culture and Foreign Language Strategy, 
dated Dec. 1, 2009, is to develop and 
maintain expeditionary forces that are led 
by Soldiers who are ready to deploy and 
operate effectively anywhere in the world 
across the full spectrum of conflict. This will 
require leaders who have sufficient cross- 
cultural, regional and foreign language 
competencies to enable the successful 
execution of military operations.. .not only 
an understanding of the culture and language 
in a particular area, but an understanding 
of the implications these considerations 
have on how operations are conducted. To 
achieve this goal, leaders and Soldiers must 
increase their cultural knowledge through 
operational experience, self-development, 
or as a learning opportunity during their 
professional military education. Within 
the Training and Doctrine Command, 
this will require schools and centers to 
develop, integrate and deliver cross-cultural 
education within their respective programs 
of instruction. 

ross-cultural competence. This 
is a set of knowledge, skills and 
attributes that enables Soldiers to adapt 
effectively in any environment. It can 
develop over time through experience, but 
can be accelerated by principled learning 
methods. Cross-cultural competence enables 
negotiation and persuasion; mediation 
and conflict resolution; leadership and 
influence; cultural evaluation, synthesis, and 
predictive analysis during staff planning; 


and other abilities that pertain to a specific 
geographic area. 

Additional characteristics of cross- 
cultural competence includes awareness of 
culture and of one’s own cultural context, 
general cross-cultural schema and culture- 
analytic models, and an increasingly 
complex understanding of the impact of 
culture on military planning and operations 
(knowledge). 

Critical aspects of cross-cultural 
competence are interpersonal and 
communication skills, flexibility in seeing 
different cultural frames and perspectives, 
and the ability to regulate one’s own 
reactions (skills). 

Necessary ingredients of cross-cultural 
competence are non-ethnocentric attitudes, 
motivation to learn about culture and 
to update one’s knowledge base as new 
information is encountered and the ability 
to empathize (attributes). 

egional competence. Another 
major component of the 
culture development program is regional 
competence. This concept is defined as 
a set of knowledge, skills, and attributes 
related to a particular country, region, 
organization, or social group, which 
enables effective adaptation to that specific 
culture. Additional characteristics include 
awareness of the historical, political, 
cultural (including linguistic and religious), 
sociological (including demographic), 
economic, and geographic dimensions of 
a foreign country, global region, or other 
specific culture. 

Acquiring regional competence enables 
negotiation and persuasion; mediation 


and conflict resolution; leadership and 
influence; cultural evaluation, synthesis, and 
predictive analysis during staff planning; 
and many other abilities that pertain to a 
specific area of operations. 

It’s also the ability to adopt perspectives 
common to that culture; ability to regulate 
one’s own behavior, communication, and 
emotional expression to match cultural 
norms where appropriate. Includes positive 
attitudes toward the population and 
motivation to learn about the culture, to 
include how they make decisions. 

A combination of both competencies 
acquired during the cycle of training, 
education and experience would help 
overcome the ‘culture shock,’ and give 
Soldiers the ability to adjust to an indigenous 
culture as quickly as possible to get the 
mission done. 

overnance. The TRADOC Deputy 
Chief of Staff, G-2 serves as 
the executive agent for the CG, TRADOC 
as culture and foreign language lead for 
the Army. The commander, Combined 
Arms Center, TRADOC is the lead for 
implementation of culture and foreign 
language career development within all 
TRADOC organizations. The Army Culture 
and Foreign Language Management Office 
is delegated ACFLS implementation 
management authority from the TRADOC 
DCS G-2. Fragmentary Order 18 (weekly) to 
OPORD 09-008, TRADOC Campaign Plan 
10-11 outlines specific tasks to TRADOC 
commanders, staff and subordinate 
organizations on implementing the Army 
Culture and Foreign Language Strategy. 
TRADOC centers and schools, in their roles 



SSG Caleb Welch of 1 -178th Field Artillery Battalion, South Carolina Army National Guard interacts 
with children on a rural road in Laghman province, Afghanistan, during a engineering assessment, 
Aug. 1 8, 201 0. (U.s. Army photo) 






sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 23 









as proponents, will be integrally involved 
in defining common education and training 
required to generate the necessary culture 
and foreign language capability for the 
Army. Proponents will also determine the 
culture and foreign language capabilities 
required in operating force units for which 
they are the proponent. 

The ACFLS goal is to establish a baseline 
of culture and foreign language capabilities 
for all leaders and Soldiers to support the 
accomplishment of unit missions. The 
strategy’s end state is to build and sustain 
an Army with the right blend of capabilities 
to facilitate full spectrum operations. The 
resulting force will have the ability to 
effectively conduct operations with and 
among other cultures. 

.S. Army Field 
Artillery and Air Defense 
Artillery Schools. The FCoE CFLP’s 
desired outcome is to provide the Army with 
technically and tactically 
proficient and expeditionary- 
minded field artillery 
and air defense artillery 
leaders who can operate 
in a joint, interagency, 
intergovernmental and 
multi-national environment 
across the full spectrum of 
operations and with a level 
of competence necessary to 
perform assigned tasks in a 
specific geographic area. 

For field artillery and air 
defense artillery Soldiers 
and leaders, it is desired 
they possess a sufficient 
level of cross-cultural 
and regional competence to effectively 
accomplish duties at their assigned level, 
and to have the cognitive, interpersonal 
and cultural skills necessary to make sound 
judgments in these complex environments. 
For target mensuration and collateral 
damage estimation, it is important that all 
artillerymen and air defense artillerymen 
understand the effects that culture, people 
and civilian factors have on the targeting 
process. 

The FCoE CFLP will leverage the 
capabilities at its disposal to establish the 
initial foundational training and education 
for field artillerymen and air defense 
artillerymen to be able to competently and 
confidently lead Soldiers. This includes the 
introduction and development of a basic 
awareness in culture and languages. 

onstraints, limitations and risk. 
Time available and specific course 
length for students attending field artillery 
and air defense artillery initial military 

24 January-February 2011 • 


training and follow-on leader development 
professional military education courses are 
the principal constraints the faculty must 
contend with in order to meet the ACFLS 
desired outcome. Learning objectives will 
be achieved through modification of existing 
program of instruction, incorporating tasks 
into collective training events (capstone 
exercises) and through professional reading, 
critical writing requirements, and after-duty 
language training and civilian education 
opportunities. 

Resources and funding for additional 
instructors, role players and lesson 
materials are limited. We must leverage 
existing cultural training, language, 
civilian academic partnerships and virtual 
gaming solutions to support USAFAS and 
USAADAS ACFLS learning objectives. 

Inclusion of ACFLS learning objectives 
into course curricula should complement 
and not put at risk common core and artillery 


technical training objectives. 

raining approach. In order to build 
and sustain an Army with the right 
blend of culture and foreign language 
capabilities to facilitate full-spectrum 
operations, we must leverage existing 
professional military education programs, 
organizational and functional training and 
continuous life-long learning through a 
combination of training, education and 
experiential opportunities to attain a level 
of awareness, understanding and expertise. 
As we determine how to best implement 
the ACFLS, we will use the current leader 
development strategy that serves as a base 
for our existing instruction within the school 
and in the growth of our leaders. 

Cross-cultural training and education 
should build on the foundation of an 
individual’s existing leader attributes 
which in turn reinforces the core leader 
competencies of leading others, developing 
oneself and achieving results: 


C haracter. A leader of character 
internalizes the Army Values, 
lives by our Professional Military Ethic, 
reflects the Warrior Ethos and displays 
empathy towards Soldiers, families and 
those people affected by the unit’s actions. 
Competence places an individual in position 
to lead - character makes him or her an 
effective leader. 

resence. A leader of presence has 
credibility, exudes confidence and 
builds trust. Presence is conveyed through 
actions, appearance, demeanor and words, 
ntellect. A leader of intellect has the 
conceptual capability to understand 
complex situations, determine what needs 
to be done and interact with others to get 
it done. Leaders must have the ability to 
reason, to think critically and creatively, 
to anticipate consequences and to solve 
problems. 

At the USAFAS and USAADAS, 
the development of 
cultural awareness and/ 
or understanding will be 
the principal objective and 
introduction to a foreign 
language (basic phrases and 
elemental proficiency) is a 
supporting effort. In order 
to achieve a higher level 
of cultural understanding/ 
expertise or language 
proficiency, individuals 
would need to leverage 
other professional military 
education, civilian education 
and self-development 
programs. (See figures 1.1 
and 1.2 on page 25.) 
Cultural awareness: minimal level of 
regional competence necessary to perform 
assigned tasks in a specific geographic area; 
able to describe key culture terms, factors 
and concepts. Basic understanding of how 
foreign culture might affect the planning 
and conduct of operations is desirable. 

Cultural understanding: well developed 
cross-cultural competence in a specific 
region. A leader must be able to anticipate 
the implications of culture and apply 
relevant terms, factors, concepts, and 
regional information to tasks and missions. 
Familiarity is necessary of a specific region’s 
economic, religious, legal, governmental, 
political and infrastructural features, and 
awareness of regional sensitivities regarding 
gender, race, ethnicity, local observances 
and local perception of the U.S. and its 
allies is paramount. 

Cultural expertise: advanced level of 
cross-cultural competence in a specific 
geographic area. This generally entails some 



m ©Ri)©gw3Qa[l3oa[p©D GtpglooBoogj 
@od( 3 ©ii]m@g]®0®OQ ©DqoqoDcs] 
®od $3d© (J®oaoQ(i]a5B®[iQ 
®(? odd fa°M°]ms)[F© 

Oea&HP ©aM^oaS©© wMs Co to 

®MHjD POBODtePS©© GCd© ©Off© 

D©©(3©P ®®DuQ[p®®©ljD(3fl©© □ □ □ 





Fires 




Figure 1.1 U.S. Army Fires Center of Excellence Culture and Foreign Language Program Strategy and Implementation Plan 


Self assessment: 

• Employ Defense Language Institute assessment 
(Defense Language Aptitude Battery) tools 

• Prepare for follow on assignment 

• Tailor to individual’s learning style (Myers-Briggs 
Type Indicator) 

Skills development (Training): 

• U.S. Central Command/Pacific Command regional 
focus 

• Assignment oriented training elemental language 
proficiency (Level 0+/1) 

• Proposed languages (Dari/Pashto, Arabic, Korean 
and Russian) 

• Cameron University, Oklahoma University and 
Oklahoma State University guest lecturers 

• International Student Division/liaison officer briefs 

Situational application (Education): 

• Assignment oriented training cultural awareness 
focus 

• Strategic university partnerships 

• Lectures/seminar panels 

• Critical thinking writing requirements 

Experiential learning (Experience): 

• Redleg War (key leader engagement/civilians on 
the battlefield) 

• Role playing scenarios 


Assessment 


^____,,_ f 



Education 




Figure 1.2 U.S. Army Field Artillery School Culture and Foreign Language Program 


Course 

Course length 

Culture and foreign 
language focus 

Captains Career Course 

24 weeks 

36 hours 

Basic Officer Leader Course B 

20 weeks 

10 hours 

Warrant Officer Advanced 

Course 

10 weeks 

15 hours 

Warrant Officer Basic Course 

33 weeks 

22 hours 

Senior Leader’s Course/ 

Advanced Leader’s Course 

4-8 weeks 

2.5 hours 

Advanced Individual Training 


1 hour 


degree ofproficiency in a language; skills that 
enable effective cross-cultural persuasion, 
negotiation, conflict resolution, influence, 
or leadership; and an understanding of 
the most salient historic and present-day 
regional structural and cultural factors of 
a specific geographic area. (See figure 1.3 
on page 32.) 

In order to achieve this goal, FCoE CFLP 
will incorporate the following learning 
objectives in its initial military training and 
follow-on leader development professional 
military education courses: 

earning Objective 1 (Character). 
Demonstrate interaction and cross- 
cultural communications skills in order to 
effectively engage and understand people 
and their environment. Demonstrate a 
level of cultural awareness that includes 
a positive, openness to other people, an 
understanding of prevailing values, beliefs, 
behaviors and customs, and a desire to learn 
more about cultures and language. This 
includes an introduction to a language that 
supports current military operations with the 
intent to promote additional study through 
self-development at the institution, at home- 
station or at an academic university. 

earning Objective 2 (Presence). 
Demonstrate communication, 
influence and negotiation skills essential 
for leaders to effectively operate in a JIIM 
environment. 

Leverage the knowledge gained by 


challenging students to employ skills to deal 
with ambiguous and complex situations, 
to regulate one’s own behavior, and to 
use interpersonal abilities to deal with 
people from one’s own or other cultures. 
This includes an understanding and ability 
to engage other joint and allied military 
personnel, and host country indigenous 
leaders with a moderate level of confidence, 
earning Objective 3 (Intellect). 
Demonstrate a familiarization in 
a geographic region of current operational 
significance. Leverage critical thinking 
and cognitive skills through organizing 
information that supports cultural self- 
awareness. Depending on level of leader 
development PME, expand cross-cultural 
competence skills by gaining an awareness 
or understanding of a geographic area that 


highlights the implications of a region’s 
economic, religious, legal, governmental, 
political and infrastructural features, and 
of sensitivities regarding gender, race, 
ethnicity, local observances and local 
perception of the US and its allies. 

Apply relevant planning considerations, 
terms, factors, concepts and geographic 
information to mission planning and in 
the conduct of operations. This includes 
leveraging other TRADOC and DOD 
schools, partnerships with universities 
and academia, gaming technology and 
opportunities that stress students’ ability 
to concisely and persuasively speak and 
write, to engage in discussions, and employ 
cognitive reasoning and thinking skills, 
xecution of training. The following 
information provides USAFAS, 






sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 25 
















USAADAS and NCO Academy with a 
plan for the conduct of culture and foreign 
language training and education. The 
following implementation plan is consistent 
with current Department of the Army and 
TRADOC leader development and cultural 
awareness initiatives to incorporate culture 
and foreign language into institutional 
training and education at the schools and 
centers of excellence. 

Learning objectives and their associated 
tasks: 

Learning Objective 1 (Character): 
Demonstrate interaction and cross-cultural 
communications skills in order to effectively 
engage and understand people and their 
environment. 

• Task 1: Understand one’s self; internalize 
the Army Values, our professional military 
ethic and Warrior Ethos. 

• Task 2: Assess cultural perspectives and 
values different from one’s own; compare 
differences and sensitivities in order to 
modify one’s behavior, practices and 
language; and operate in a multi-cultural 
environment. 

• Task 3: Apply cross-cultural 
communication skills. 

Learning Objective 2 (Presence): 
Demonstrate communication, influence 
and negotiation skills essential for 
leaders to effectively operate in a 
JIIM environment. 


• Task 1: Develop communication 
skills that enable effective cross-cultural 
persuasion, negotiation, conflict resolution 
or influence. 

• Task 2: Apply communications skills 
during cross-cultural negotiations. 

• Task 3: Develop confidence in learning 
and applying language skills. 

Learning Objective 3 (Intellect): 
Demonstrate a familiarization in a 
geographic region of current operational 
significance. 

• Task 1: Apply culturally relevant terms, 
factors, concepts and regional information 
in the development of mission plans and 
orders. 

• Task 2: Assess and describe the effect that 
culture has on military operations specific 
to countries or regions of operational 
significance to the US. 

USAFAS and USAADAS instructors 
will use a variety of learning-enabled 
training, education and self-development 
techniques to teach students attending 
initial military training and professional 
military education courses at Fort Sill. 
Cultural instruction may be programmed, 
integrated into other training objectives, 
or as reinforcement through the use of 
self-paced learning tools or as research for 
presentations and writing requirements, 
acilitated instruction. Classroom 
instruction will rely on instructor- 


led discussions and facilitated problem- 
centered exercises to assist the student in 
understanding basic cultural awareness and 
then by challenging him/her through use 
of relevant scenarios they may encounter 
in their unit and/or during a deployment. 
Facilitated learning will focus on initiative, 
critical thinking and accountability for their 
actions. Small group instructors will receive 
cultural training assistance from the FCoE 
Cultural Advisor to enable them to better 
present information, lead discussions and 
to facilitate the problem-centered exercises. 
The instruction will leverage blending 
learning resources and augmented by 
professional reading requirements, self- 
paced technology-delivered instruction and 
research outside the classroom. 

eb-enabled instruction, 
simulations and gaming. The 
U.S. Army Intelligence Center, Marine 
Corps University, Defense Fanguage 
Institute Foreign Fanguage Center, and 
Near East and South Asia Center for 
Strategic Studies at the National Defense 
University all have a variety of on-line 
instructional material that is available for 
instructor use. USAFAS and USAADAS 
currently has access to and using the Army 
360 Cultural Trainer as well as VBS2 
Tactical Dari, Pashto (Afghanistan) and 
Iraqi Arabic simulation and gaming tools 
to augment instruction. As other culture 
and foreign language avatar and interactive 
simulation programs become available, we 
will evaluate and leverage those educational 
tools to augment classroom instruction and 
self-development opportunities. 

ole-playing and key leader 
engagement scenarios. 
Instructors will leverage the knowledge 
gained by challenging students to employ 
their interpersonal skills as part of in-class 
role-playing practical exercises and formal 
key leader engagement opportunities. 
The key leader engagement scenario will 
require an individual(s) to use an interpreter 
to engage other coalition military/police 
members and host country indigenous 
leaders in order to address a particular 
problem. This engagement will use mock- 
up facilities and capstone field exercises to 
reinforce the learning objectives and provide 
each student with feedback through an after¬ 
action review. Both role-playing exercises 
and the key leader engagements will result 
in constructive feedback to the individual, 
cademic lectures and seminar 
panels. We currently have 
partnerships with several local universities, 
most notably with Cameron University, 
Oklahoma University and Oklahoma State 
University. These universities support 


Figure 1.3 TRADOC Cultural Competency Categories 







26 January-February 2011 


Fires 







USAFAS instruction by providing lectures 
and seminars for our students on topics that 
address geo-political and cultural trends 
affecting the Middle East, Northeast Asia 
and other areas of operational significance 
to the Army to include specific discussions 
on Afghanistan, Iraq and Korea. The target 
audience for the lectures and seminars are 
the noncommissioned officers (Advanced 
Leader Course/Senior Leader Course, 
warrant officers (Warrant Officer Basic 
and Advanced Courses) and commissioned 
officers (Basic Officer Leader Course and 
Captains Career Course). The lecture-series 
is scheduled as part of commandant’s time 
and is conducted in sixty-to-ninety minute 
sessions once every six to eight weeks. 
We also have ongoing partnerships with 
DLI, TRADOC Culture Center, Military 
Intelligence Center at Fort Huachuca, Ariz., 
among other institutions and centers. 

everaging the International Student 
Division and FCoE liaison 
officers. All BOLC-B and CCC students 
receive country and cultural briefs from their 
fellow international students and assigned 
FCoE liaison officers during the resident 
course. Additionally, monthly “Know Your 
World” program assists students in better 
understanding the culture and geo-political 
significance of the country from where their 
classmate comes from and further expands 
the student’s awareness of other cultures, 
nalytical writing requirement. 
To address the need to develop 
critical thinking and improve written 
communication capabilities in our leaders, a 
three-to-five page analytical paper (double¬ 
spaced, 12-pitch, times new roman) will 
be required from ALC, SLC, WOBC, 
WOAC, BOLC-B and CCC students 
that addresses a cultural or geo-political 
topic of military operational significance 
to the U.S. The papers will be graded by 
USAFAS, USAADAS and NCOA faculty 
members and feedback will be provided to 
the student. The FCoE is currently working 
with our university partners to contract 
and/or hire a person to support our written 
communications requirements. 

rofessional reading program. A 
critical component of our leadership 
development and cultural awareness efforts 
includes a professional reading program 
(professional reading list is located on 
the FKN-accessed CFLP web-site). All 
BOLC-B and CCC students are encouraged 
to read one of three books based on their 
follow-on assignments: “The History of 
the Modern Middle East,” by William L. 
Cleveland and Martin Bunton; “Taliban: 
Militant Islam, Oil and Fundamentalism in 
Central Asia,” by Ahmed Rashid; or “China, 


Figure 1.4 Elemental Language Proficiency 

• Speaking 0 : No Proficiency 
I • Speaking 0+: Memorized Proficiency 
I • Speaking 1: Elementary Proficiency 

Japan, Korea: Culture and Customs,” by Ju 
Brown and John Brown. 

oreign language. The goal of the 
FCoE Culture and Foreign 
Language Program is to introduce foreign 
language to students attending PME 
instruction and to give them the opportunity 
to achieve an elemental language proficiency 
of Level 0+, 1 (See figure 1.4.) in a language 
of military operational significance. This 
includes opportunities to learn Afghan Dari, 
Pashto, Iraqi Arabic, Korean and Russian 
prior to reporting to their unit assignments. 
All PME students are issued and provided 
basic instruction on the use of “Rosetta 
Stone” or multi-platform tactical language 
software programs in tactical Iraqi, Dari, 
and Pashto. In addition, those students 
who are interested in receiving additional 
language instruction will be provided the 
opportunity to receive training on Afghan 
Dari, Pashto, Iraqi Arabic, Korean and 
Russian as part of a twelve-week, 24-to-36 
hour program. This opportunity is voluntary 
and instruction is provided through internal 
school assets and assistance from the DLI 
Foreign Language Center during off-duty 
language sessions coordinated by the FCoE 
Culture and Foreign Language Advisor. The 
DLI Foreign Language Center also provides 
a web-site to facilitate the language training 
and sustainment proficiency which can be 
found at http://www.dliflc.edu. 

dditional resources. A Culture and 
Foreign Language Resource 
Center is established in the Morris Swett 
Technical Library within Snow Hall. 
Students are provided access to computers, 
cultural resources and professional reading 
material to facilitate research, learning and 
language proficiency. 

The Culture and Foreign Language 
Program website is located on the Fires 
Knowledge Network. The website contains 
cultural awareness and foreign language 
resources, DLI Foreign Language Center 
resources, information on past lectures, 
foreign languages guides and other 
significant links. The website is available 
with an AKO login on FKN at https ://www. 
us. army, mil/ suite/doc/21617522. 

ourse implementation. Following 
is the roll-up of Culture and 
Foreign Language Program of instruction 
hours (programmed). (USAFAS is taken 


as an example to gradually promulgate to 
the USAADAS): 

• Field Artillery Captains Career Course: 
36 hours 

• Field Artillery Basic Leader Course: 
10 hours 

• F ield Artillery Warrant Officer Advance 
Course: 15 hours 

• Field Artillery Warrant Officer Basic 
Course: 22 hours 

• 13B/13D/13F/13M/13P/13R/13T 
Senior Leader Course: 2.5 hours 

• 13B/13D/13F/13M/13P/13R/13T 
Advance Leader Course: 2.5 hours 

• Advanced Individual Training: one hour 
ield Artillery Captains Career 

Course (24 weeks). USAFAS’ 
desired outcome is for FA captains to 
demonstrate an understanding of culture, 
how to leverage that knowledge in a JIIM 
environment and with a level of competence 
necessary to serve as staff officers and 
leaders within a complex environment. (See 
figure 1.5 on page 34.) 

ield Artillery Basic Officer Leader 
Course (18 weeks, 4 days). 
USAFAS’ desired outcome is for FA 
lieutenants to demonstrate a basic awareness 
of culture, how to leverage that knowledge 
in a JIIM environment and with a level of 
competence necessary to serve as company 
fire support officers and leaders within a 
complex environment. (See figure 1.5.) 
ield Artillery Warrant Officer 
Advance Course (10 weeks). 
USAFAS’ desired outcome is for junior 
W131A warrant officers to demonstrate a 
basic awareness of culture, how to leverage 
that knowledge as a BCT/division targeting 
officer. (See figure 1.5.) 

ield Artillery Warrant Officer 
Basic Course (WOBC) (33 
weeks). USAFAS’ desired outcome is 
for senior W131A warrant officers to 
demonstrate a basic understanding of 
foreign culture, and how to leverage that 
knowledge as a Corps/Theater targeting 
officer. (See figure 1.5.) 

on-Commissioned Officer 
Academy (4-8 weeks based 
on military occupational specialty). 
USAFAS’ and NCOA’s desired outcome 
for senior NCOs attending the Senior 
Leader Course is to demonstrate a basic 
understanding of foreign culture and 
how to leverage that knowledge as a 
platoon sergeant and/or first sergeant. The 
desired outcome for mid-grade NCOs 
attending the Advanced Leader Course 
is to demonstrate a basic understanding 
of culture and how to leverage that 
knowledge as a senior section sergeant 
and/or platoon sergeant. The instruction 

27 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 















Figure 1.5 Cultural Learning Objectives 


Learning Objective 1 
Character 

Learning Objective 2 
Presence 

Learning Objective 3 

Intellect 

Field Artillery Captains Career Course: 70 hours 

Assess cultural perspectives and values 
different from one’s own; compare 
differences and sensitivities in order to 
modify one’s behavior, practices and 
language, and operate in a multi-cultural 
environment 

• Cross-cultural skills building (4 hours) (P) 

• Cultural influence and military operations 
(5 hours) (P) 

• International Student Division briefs 
“Know Your World” (2 hours) (P) 

Apply cross-cultural communication skills 

• Army 360 Cultural Trainer (2 hours - self 
paced) (R) 

Develop communication skills that 
enable effective cross-cultural 
persuasion, negotiation, conflict 
resolution or influence 

• Oklahoma University media training (8 
hours) (P) 

• Cross-cultural negotiations (4 hours) (P) 

Apply communications skills during 
cross-cultural negotiations 

• Role-playing exercises (2 hours) (P) 

• Key leader engagement exercise 
(1 hour) (P) 

Develop confidence in learning and 
applying language skills 

• Introduction to a language through 

Rosetta Stone software (4 hours minimum - 
self paced) (R) 

• Additional language training (optional) 

(PD) 

Apply culturally relevant terms, factors, concepts 
and regional information in the development of 
mission plans and orders 

• Insurgency overview and theory (4 hours) (1) 

• Pattern and social network analysis and practical 
exercise (8 hours) (1) 

• Counterinsurgency intelligence preparation of the 
battlefield and planning (6 hours) (1) 

Assess and describe the effect that culture has on 
military operations specific to countries or regions 
of operational significance to the United States 

• Strength, weakness, opportunities and threat analysis 
country brief (6 hours) (P) 

• Writing requirement: Analytical paper of 3-5 pages 
(Approximately 10 hours of research) (R) 

• Analytical paper presentation/discussion (2 hours per 
section) (P) 

• FCoE CFLP lecture series (2 hours) (P) 

• Professional reading program (One book from recom¬ 
mended reading list - optional) (PD) 

Basic Officer Leader Course B: 53 hours 

Assess cultural perspectives and values 
different from one’s own; compare 
differences and sensitivities in order to 
modify one’s behavior, practices and 
language, and operate in a multi-cultural 
environment 

• Operate in a multi-cultural environment (2 
hours) (P) 

• International Student Division briefs 
“Know Your World” (2 hours) (P) 

Apply cross-cultural communication skills 

• Army 360 Cultural Trainer (2 hours - self 
paced) (R) 

Develop communication skills that 
enable effective cross-cultural 
persuasion, negotiation, conflict 
resolution or influence 

• Operate in a multi-cultural environment (2 
hours) (P) 

Apply communications skills during 
cross-cultural negotiations 

• Key leader engagement during BOLC B 
fire support/maneuver lanes (8 hour) (R) 

Develop confidence in learning and 
applying language skills 

• Introduction to a language through 

Rosetta Stone software (4 hours minimum - 
self paced) (R) 

• Additional language training (optional) 

(PD) 

Apply culturally relevant terms, factors, concepts 
and regional information in the development of 
mission plans and orders 

• Information Operations instruction (11 hours) (1) 

• Company Intelligence Support Team training 
(8 hours) (1) 

Assess and describe the effect that culture has on 
military operations specific to countries or regions 
of operational significance to the United States 

• Writing requirement: Analytical paper of 3-5 pages 
(Approximately 10 hours of research) (R) 

• Analytical paper presentation/discussion (2 hours per 
section) (P) 

• FCoE CFLP lecture series (2 hours) (P) 

• Professional reading program (One book from recom¬ 
mended reading list - optional) (PD) 

Field Artillery Warrant Officer Advance Course: 37 hours 

Assess cultural perspectives and values 
different from one’s own; compare 
differences and sensitivities in order to 
modify one’s behavior, practices and 
language, and operate in a multi-cultural 
environment 

• Cultural awareness (3 hours) (P) 

• Cross-cultural factors and considerations 
(2 hours) (P) 

• Cultural influence and military operations 
(4 hours) (P) 

Apply cross-cultural communication skills 

• Army 360 Cultural Trainer (2 hours - self 
paced) (R) 

Develop communication skills that 
enable effective cross-cultural 
persuasion, negotiation, conflict 
resolution or influence 

• Cross-cultural factors and considerations 
during negotiations (2 hours) (P) 

Apply communications skills during 
cross-cultural negotiations 

• Role-playing exercises (1 hour) (P) 

Apply culturally relevant terms, factors, concepts 
and regional information in the development of 
mission plans and orders 

• Intelligence preparation of the battlefield and indirect 
Fires threat intelligence (8 hours) (1) 

• Counterinsurgency seminar (2 hours) (1) 

Assess and describe the effect that culture has on 
military operations specific to countries or regions 
of operational significance to the United States 

• Writing requirement: Analytical paper of 3-5 pages 
(Approximately 10 hours of research) (R) 

• Analytical paper presentation/discussion (2 hours per 
section) (P) 

• FCoE CFLP lecture series (1 hour) (P) 

• Professional reading program (One book from recom¬ 
mended reading list - optional) (PD) 


28 January-February 2011 


Fires 


















Learning Objective 1 
Character 


Learning Objective 2 
Presence 


Learning Objective 3 
Intellect 


Field Artillery Warrant Officer Basic Course: 70 hours 

Assess cultural perspectives and values 
different from one’s own; compare 
differences and sensitivities in order to 
modify one’s behavior, practices and 
language, and operate in a multi-cultural 
environment 

• Cultural awareness (3 hours) (P) 

• Cross-cultural factors and considerations 
(4 hours) (P) 

• Cultural influence and military operations 
(8 hours) (P) 

Apply cross-cultural communication skills 

• Army 360 Cultural Trainer (2 hours - self 
paced) (R) 

Develop communication skills that 
enable effective cross-cultural 
persuasion, negotiation, conflict 
resolution or influence 

• Cross-cultural factors and considerations 
during negotiations (3 hours) (P) 

Develop confidence in learning and 
applying language skills 

• Introduction to a language through 

Rosetta Stone software (4 hours minimum - 
self paced) (R) 

• Additional language training (optional) 

(PD) 

Apply culturally relevant terms, factors, concepts 
and regional information in the development of 
mission plans and orders 

• Intelligence preparation of the battlefield and indirect 
Fires threat intelligence (8 hours) (1) 

• Pattern analysis and simulation exercise (16 hours) (1) 

• Counterinsurgency seminar (8 hours) (1) 

Assess and describe the effect that culture has on 
military operations specific to countries or regions 
of operational significance to the United States 

• Writing requirement: Analytical paper of 3-5 pages 
(Approximately 10 hours of research) (R) 

• Analytical paper presentation/discussion (2 hours per 
section) (P) 

• FCoE CFLP lecture series (2 hours) (P) 

• Professional reading program (One book from recom¬ 
mended reading list - optional) (PD) 

13B, 13D, 13F, 13M, 13P, 13R, 13T Senior Leader’s Course and Advanced Leader’s Course: 22.5 hours 

Assess cultural perspectives and values 
different from one’s own; compare 
differences and sensitivities in order to 
modify one’s behavior, practices and 
language, and operate in a multi-cultural 
environment 

• Cross-cultural factors and considerations 
(1.5 hours) (P) 

Apply cross-cultural communication skills 

• Army 360 Cultural Trainer (10 hours - self 
paced) (R) 

Develop communication skills that 
enable effective cross-cultural 
persuasion, negotiation, conflict 
resolution or influence 

• Demonstration on use of tactical lan¬ 
guage software (Two phrases weekly) (P) 

Assess and describe the effect that culture has on 
military operations specific to countries or regions 
of operational significance to the United States 

• Writing requirement: Analytical paper of 3-5 pages 
(Approximately 10 hours of research) (R) 

• FCoE CFLP lecture series (1 hour) (P) 

13B, 13D, 13F, 13M, 13P, 13R, 13T Advanced Individual Training: 6.5 hours 

Understand one’s self; internalize the 

Army Values, our professional military 
ethic and Warrior Ethos 

• Army Core Values (1 hour) (P) 

• U.S. Army Field Artillery history and 
museum tour (3 hours) (R) 

• Command team in-brief (1 hour) (1) 

• Initial, mid-course and final counselling 
(1.5 hours) (1) 



Legend: (P) programmed, (R/l) reinforced/integrated, (PD) professional development 


is offered through a blended learning 
approach which includes programmed 
instruction, seminars, educational tools and 
independent study. (See figure 1.5.) 

dvanced Individual Training. 
USAFAS ’ desired outcome is for 
13-series Soldiers in AIT is to internalize 
the Army Values and Warrior Ethos, live by 
our professional military ethic and displays 
empathy towards others. (See figure 1.4.) 
or more information. The point 
of contact for the FCoE Culture 
and Foreign Language Program and its 
implementation is Dr. Mahir J. Ibrahimov. 


He can be reached at mahir. ibrahimov@ 
us.army.mil or (580) 442-6666, at 
Fort Sill, Okla. 


Dr. Mahir J. Ibrahimov is the Cultural and 
Foreign Language Advisor at Fort Sill, Okla. 
He completed his Ph.D. at the Academy of 
Social Sciences in Moscow in 1991 and has 
attended several post graduate programs 
at Johns Hopkins University, and other U.S. 
institutions. He also served in the Soviet Army 
and witnessed the break-up of the Soviet 
Union. As a former high-ranking diplomat, he 


helped open the first embassy of Azerbaijan 
in Washington, D.C. While working for the 
U.S. Department of State, he instructed U.S. 
diplomats in languages and cultures. He also 
provided vital assistance as a multi-lingual 
cultural adviser to U.S. forces during Operation 
Iraqi Freedom II and became the subject of a 
Department of Defense newsreel, “Jack of All 
Languages.” Dr. Ibrahimov specializes in the 
cultural issues of the former Soviet Republics, 
south-central Asia and the Middle East. He is 
the author of “Invitation to Rain: a Story of the 
Road Taken Toward Freedom,” and numerous 
other publications. 




sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 29 



















Soldiers and airmen from Provincial Reconstruction Team Zabul return to base after a quality assurance, quality control patrol near the city of Qalat, 
Zabul province, Afghanistan, Nov. 1,201 0. (Photo by SSg Brian Ferguson, U.s. Air Force) 


By COL (Ret) Joyce DiMarco and 
LTC (Ret) Richard McConnell 


I n “The Resilience Factor” Karen Reivich and Andrew Shatt’e 
write, “Resilient people like all of us, feel anxious and have 
doubts, but they have learned how to stop their anxiety and 
doubts from overwhelming them. We watch them handle threat with 
integrity and grace and we wonder: Could I do that?” 

The ability to overcome adversity and excel is a virtue all of us 
prize. However, some are more successful than others. Wouldn’t it 
be wonderful if we could replicate and bottle that skill for others and 
ourselves? As our Army struggles with an unprecedented suicide rate, 
we do well to focus on how to improve our ability to ‘handle threat 
with integrity and grace.’ However, is focusing solely on individual 
resilience enough? 

The Command and General Staff College has incorporated 
“resilience” as a key portion of its core curriculum. The foundation of 
this idea is leaders who are more resilient will better lead subordinates 
through the myriad of challenges our current fight presents. According 
to the United States Army Combined Arms Center’s 2010 Foundations 
Student Issue Advance Book, the enabling learning objective states 
the resilience lesson outcome as, “describe a leader’s role in building 
resilience in Soldiers and organizations.” So, why is resilience so 
important to our Army today? 

American Soldiers of the 21st century are quietly making history, 
serving in combat longer than almost any U.S. Soldiers in the nation’s 
past, military historians say. There are currently 309,670 active- 
duty enlisted Soldiers who have served combat tours. Percentage of 
deployments. (See Figure 1: Percentage of deployments.) 

TVrmy combat tours. As the above quote and graphic indicates, 
/ \ building resilience into Soldiers, despite their current 
deployment rotations, is essential. It is no surprise that resilience 
training is a significant effort within the Command and General Staff 
College. Resilience training is focusing on building toughness and the 
ability to bounce back from adversity - not just physical but mental 
and emotional toughness. In light of the current tempo of deployments, 
paired with the personal and professional challenges they bring, it 
is vital we focus on the ‘total Soldier;’ but is that enough? Once we 
acknowledge the need for individual resilience, we should then focus 
on translating that same toughness to the groups of which they are 
a part. It is not enough to build toughness into the individual person 

30 January-February 2011 • Fires 


without then applying that toughness to making the group or 
unit better prepared to fight and win. 

The purpose of this article is to describe key resilience 
concepts. We will discuss how to apply these resilience concepts 
to individuals and then investigate potential ways leaders might 
apply them collectively in order to build units that are more 
resilient. 

Here are five key concepts of resilience and how they apply 
to individuals as well as units: activating events, thoughts and 
consequences, disputing beliefs, detecting icebergs, avoiding 
catastrophizing and emotional intelligence. 

TV ctivating events, thoughts, and consequences. “The bad 
/ \ news is that having a pessimistic explanatory style can 
have a big negative impact on your life. The good news is that 
you can change your explanatory style for better,” according 
to Brett and Kate Mckay’s article, “Building Your Resiliency: 
Part 1, An Introduction.” 

Most people’s explanatory style of any given adversity can 
greatly affect what they believe about themselves in relation 
to the world around them and ultimately the outcome of that 
adversity. Have you ever known someone who seemed unfazed 
by adversity? The moment they encounter adversity, they 
immediately determine a way to overcome it. What makes them 
so capable of bouncing back? 

A case study. MAJ Smith has been the assistant S3, 
operations officer at the brigade S3 shop for sixmonths. 
He has been working on a key staff action for a week when LTC 
Jones (the brigade S3) calls him into his office. Jones informs 
him he has reviewed Smith’s draft plan and has ‘big’ changes. 
Smith perceives his boss is not angry but irritated. Smith and 


Figure 1: Percentage of deployments (Source: usa Today, Jan. 12,2010) 


□ 

■ 

□ 

■ 










Jones have some choices on how they respond to this adversity - the 
question is which choice will help them effectively manage their 
activating events, thoughts, and consequence connections in such 
a way that will build resilience? 

hoice 1. MAJ Smith can feel this event activating 
definite emotions and he gets a ‘sinking’ feeling in the 
pit of his stomach. He thinks, “Man, I clearly messed this up!” 
He can tell the boss is not happy and already he considers all the 
negative consequences that could result from this encounter. He 
feels discouraged at the possibility of redoing his work and is not 
sure he can hit the mark even if he does redo the action. LTC Jones 
notes that Smith is getting a little defensive and his thoughts turn to 
negative consequences as well. The lieutenant colonel’s irritability 
starts to turn to anger and he is thinking, “Smith just doesn’t get 
it,” and, “I do not have time for an attitude problem on this.” The 
meeting ends abruptly and Smith returns to his desk wondering 
how he can get out of the pit he has gotten himself into. (See Figure 
2: Activating events.) If this becomes a cycle, this could continue 
to undermine resilience in Smith and will definitely damage their 
working relationship. 

hoice 2. MAJ Smith can feel this event activating definite 
emotions and he gets a ‘sinking’ feeling in the pit of his 
stomach. He thinks, “Man, I clearly messed this up!” He can tell 
the boss is not happy and already he considers all the negative 
consequences that could result from this encounter. He feels 
discouraged at the possibility of redoing his work and is not sure he 
can hit the mark even if he does redo the action. Smith then realizes 
he has done this to himself before. He knows from experience that 
sometimes he can blow situations like this out of proportion in his 
own mind. He decides to determine how much trouble he is in. “Sir, 
sorry I missed the boat on this - hope this has not damaged your 
confidence in me.” Jones realizes he may have been a little harsh 
and decides he has gotten his point across, “Jeff, you still have my 
confidence. Let’s just get this fixed as soon as possible.” The meeting 
ends with LTC Jones giving clear guidance and a plan of action on 
how to make up the lost time and meet the commander’s intent. 
Smith returns to his desk relieved he has not totally shot himself in 
the foot and redoubles his efforts to meet the commander’s intent. 
(See Figure 3: Activating events.) 

What are the key differences in these two choices? 

mith’s choices. If Smith’s experiences have led him to 
believe he has a bad track record in completing tasks 
or if this is his third ‘talking to’ since he started at the S3 shop he 
might go for the first choice. If he makes similar choices repeatedly, 
Smith may encounter more situations that may make it hard for him 
to deal with adversity. If Smith’s experiences lead him to believe 
he can handle most problems thrown at him, he is more likely to 
believe the adversities he faces will ultimately result in a positive 
consequence, or choice two. In choice two, when confronted by 
Jones’ displeasure that he had missed the mark, Smith tests the 
water to see if he can recover from this mistake. Fortunately, Jones 


confirms all is not lost and they can recover from this. If Smith 
then recovers from this problem successfully, this whole incident 
may result in improving his ability to bounce back from adversity 
resulting in improved resilience. 

L TC Jones’ choices. If Jones has had a history of having to 
. refocus Smith on more than one occasion he may be more 
likely to respond with irritability, at ‘yet another occasion to correct 
Smith. ’ However, with choice two, acknowledging that Smith has not 
lost his confidence and then giving constructive guidance and helping 
to build a plan of action in order to fix problems builds resilience. 
The key to making choice two, a resilience-building situation, over 
choice one, is being sensitive to the activating events, thoughts, and 
consequence connections as they begin to emerge. Smith realized 
that the adversity, or activating event, he was facing was taking 
him to a place mentally he did not want to go (thoughts that he 
cannot win resulting in becoming discouraged), and decided to do 
something about it. Jones realized that Smith had gotten the message 
and rather than continue that message decided to communicate he 
still believed Smith could get it right and provided guidance and a 
plan of action. In order to get a resilience-building outcome, both 
parties had to pay attention to the thoughts they were having and 
find a way to challenge them. 

So far, we have discussed how activating events, thoughts and 
consequences or ATCs affect individuals; however, how do ATCs 
impact groups/units and what can be done to build units that are 
more resilient? 

ncreased adversity. Three months after the above encounter, 
Smith and Jones have deployed to Afghanistan with the rest of 
the brigade staff. The chances of more adversity, both individually 
and collectively, have increased. Staff members in the S3 shop are 
aware that Smith has missed the mark in the past and been corrected 
by LTC Jones. It is the third week of operations, and Smith gets 
a second redo on a staff action, resulting in other subordinate 
staff members affected. The number of individuals involved now 
multiplies the choices. 

Here are a few potentially non-resilient options: 

• Subordinate staff member: “If Smith does not get it together 
we are in for a rough deployment.” 

• Smith: “Man the boss is just riding me. How can I get off his list?” 
• Jones: “We really do not have time for this right now. At this 
rate, we are not going to get much sleep.” (See Figure 4 on page 
32, Activating Events). 

As a result, the number of people who have them can now 
multiply all of these negative consequences. If allowed to persist, 
this attitude can cause problems that can take on lives of their own 
where all adversity reinforces bad belief/consequence linkages. 
However, we do not have to choose the above ATC linkages - how 
about a more resilient option? 

• Operations SGM Brown: “I have served with LTC Jones 
previously and know what he is looking for in this action. I am 
going to take this young major aside and get him squared away.” 





Figure 2: Activating events 

Activating event: (Failed staff action) 

+ 

Thoughts (MAJ Smith): “1 can’t win.” 

= 

Discouragement 

Activating event: (Failed staff action) 

+ 

Thoughts (LTC Jones): “He doesn’t get it.” 

= 

Anger 

Figure 3: Activating events 

Activating event: (Failed staff action) 

+ 

Thoughts (MAJ Smith): Perhaps 1 can fix 
this.” 

= 

Determination 

Activating event: (Failed staff action) 

+ 

Thoughts (LTC Jones): “1 think he got the 
message.” 

= 

Reassurance 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 31 




















Figure 4: Activating events 

Activating event: (Failed staff action redo) 

+ 

Thoughts (Staff): “This is a bad trend.” 

= 

Resignation 

Activating event: (Failed staff action redo) 

+ 

Thoughts (MAJ Smith): “1 cannot win.” 

= 

Discouragement 

Activating event: (Failed staff action redo) 

+ 

Thoughts (LTC Jones): “He just doesn’t get 
it.” 

= 

Anger/resignation 

Figure 5: Activating events 

Activating event: (Failed staff action redo) 

+ 

Thoughts (Staff): “We can help MAJ Smith.” 

= 

Determination 

Activating event: (Failed staff action redo) 

+ 

Thoughts (MAJ Smith): “1 can do this.” 

= 

Determination 

Activating event: (Failed staff action redo) 

+ 

Thoughts (LTC Jones): “I’ll try a different 
approach.” 

= 

Determination 


• Smith: “Okay, I have been here before and have been able to 
answer the mail. Let me get the staff together to make sure we get 
this iteration right - maybe I am missing something.” 

• Jones: “I am going to get SGM Brown to help us out on this. 
Maybe he can help me be clearer in my guidance and help Smith 
to grasp the big picture.” (See Figure 5, Activating Events). 

What are the key differences in these approaches? It is vital 
to see how we, as individuals, connect adversities or activating 
events with thoughts we form. Individuals and groups can develop 
a pessimistic explanatory style that can poison their resilience. This 
explanatory style can result in groups who cannot imagine what 
success looks like and thus they are likely to continue to struggle. 
In other words, if they always expect the worst they will often 
meet their expectations. This is why effective management of ATC 
connections is important. It is one thing to be someone who has 
been convinced by adversity to believe in bad outcomes - it is an 
entirely different matter when an entire group (or unit) collectively 
expects bad outcomes. It is the responsibility of leaders to first 
manage their own ATCs and then create an environment where 
Soldiers can manage theirs. Once we have resilient Soldiers, we 
have a foundation for building resilient units, who able to bounce 
back from any adversity they face. How do we do this? When we 
have an activating event, we should pay attention to our thoughts 
and find a way to challenge them. This is the resilience concept of 
disputing your beliefs. 

In their work, “Building Your Resiliency,” the McKays further 
explain, “Just because you have certain beliefs, even if you have 
held them for as long as you can remember, that does not make them 
true. If you have some beliefs that are sabotaging your resiliency, 
you need to dispute them, challenge them and have an argument 
with yourself.” 

isputing your beliefs. As the above quote implies, individual 
beliefs can defeat resilience. What can we do to prevent 
this? Dr. Martin Seligman, in his book, “Learned Optimism, How to 
Change Your Mind and Your Life,” recommends using four filters 
in order to dispute potentially destructive beliefs. He recommends 
viewing these beliefs through the filters of evidence, alternatives, 
implications, and usefulness. How do we do this? 

Reviewing the situation with Smith during the ATC discussion, 
his thoughts connect to beliefs he holds regarding himself. The big 
turning point between a resilience-defeating and resilience-building 
option is when he challenges his belief. The key moment occurred 
when he realized in the past he has blown situations like this out 
of proportion. He decided to test his belief. How did he arrive at 
that approach? 

Filter 1, evidence: “Jones is saying this current product is not 
correct. He does seem frustrated but we have had a good relationship 
up until now, could there be another reason for his frustration?” 

Filter 2, alternatives: “Jones has really been under the gun to 

32 January-February 2011 • Fires 


finish a special project for the brigade commander and I know he 
has a deadline looming. Perhaps this stress is causing some of his 
frustration, not just this current discussion.” 

Filter 3 , implications: “Jones and I have been able to work 
well together before; perhaps the boss has not lost all confidence 
in me.” 

Filter 4 , usefulness: “Jones actually gave me pretty specific 
guidance on this project and I followed it. How can he be mad 
now?” Smith decides this thought is not useful in solving the 
current problem so discards it in favor of a statement designed to 
elicit LTC Jones’ perception. 

The key to the above steps was discarding the most pessimistic 
interpretation of events in favor of a perhaps more reasonable, less 
pessimistic interpretation. Smith, at once, arrives at a more resilience¬ 
building option while at the same time not becoming unreasonably 
optimistic or ‘head in the clouds.’ If Smith can dispute his beliefs 
effectively as an individual, how can these concepts help the group 
or unit? 

As stated earlier, when a group becomes involved, the chance 
for many interpretations of events becomes a challenge. However, 
leaders can make a huge difference. In this case, Operations SGM 
Brown does so by injecting some very practical solutions. How did 
he arrive at that approach? 

Filter 1, evidence: “Jones is saying this current product is not 
correct. I have seen this before. There is always a process getting 
a new staff officer on the same page as the boss.” 

Filter 2, alternatives: “Afghanistan is a stressful place and I 
know the boss is low on sleep. I saw this before when we worked 
together at battalion level. Lack of sleep makes for more friction.” 

Filter 3, implications: “This is not the end of the world, 
misunderstandings happen especially when people are tired. Both 
of these officers are going to get there. We just need to work harder 
on communication.” 

Filter 4, usefulness: “Jones actually did give the MAJ some 
confusing guidance on this project which the major followed, but 
it’s not useful to bring that up. Let’s focus on fixing this and not 
poking the tired bear.” 

Leaders can choose to select resilience-building or destroying 
options when dealing with adversity. When disputing beliefs, 
the individual and group can decide to ‘have an argument’ with 
their interpretation of events, which can result in a more resilient 
individual and group. Why is this so hard to accomplish? Because 
much of resilience has to do with what people are thinking inside 
and perhaps not stating. 

So far, we have discussed managing ATCs and disputing beliefs. 
What can we do if we have beliefs that focus on the worst of a 
given situation? The more we think about the situation, the more 
we feel trapped into believing the worst outcome. This is called 
“catastrophizing. ” 






















A voiding catastrophizing. People can fall into thinking 
k traps by focusing on the worst-case interpretation of their 
circumstances. When the worst-case interpretation continues to 
deteriorate because the person dwells on it, serious detrimental effects 
to resiliency can result. In their article, “Building Your Resiliency,” 
the McKays call this thinking-trap catastrophizing. Catastrophizing 
can stand in the way of a resilient response to adversity. Military 
units can fall into similar collective thinking traps that can stand in 
the way of dealing effectively with adversity as a group. 

Smith’s situation is one that can easily lead to catastrophizing. 
When Jones counseled Smith about failing to meet his standard on 
the staff action, Smith could start catastrophizing by engaging in an 
inner dialog that could look like this: “Man, I clearly messed this 
up! This is not the first time this has happened - the boss has truly 
lost confidence in me. This is going to really mess up my officer 
evaluation report and I am not going to be promoted to the next 
higher rank. I am going to have to get out of the Army and find 
other employment. I am going to have to learn to sell shoes at the 
discount shoe store in the rough section of town. I will not be able 
to make the house payment, I will lose the house and my wife will 
leave me.” 

Clearly, this thinking only gets worse with further reflection 
and without some way to reverse the trend; Smith’s resilience will 
be adversely affected. How can we combat catastrophizing? 

et some perspective. In the same article by the McKays, 
combating catastrophizing is a process of “putting it in 
perspective.” In Smith’s situation, a way to combat catastrophizing 
would be something like this: 

Worst case: already accomplished by catastrophizing: “Man, I 
clearly messed this up! This is not the first time this has happened- 
the boss has truly lost confidence in me.. .etc.” 

Best case: “I will not only fix the staff action but will exceed the 


standard. Jones will be impressed by my inspired solution. I will 
receive an incredible OER resulting in selection below the zone. I 
will conclude my career as Chief of Staff of the Army.” 

Most likely: “I will fix the staff action. Jones will realize I 
screwed this one up but that I fixed it. Life will continue as before 
only now I have learned what not to do next time.” 

Once Smith has completed this inner dialog, he has successfully 
seen his left and right limits. He can realize if the best case is not 
likely to happen, then the worst case is equally not likely. Smith is 
now able to determine the most likely option and make plans for 
dealing with it. In this way, he is able to put his catastrophizing ‘in 
perspective’ and escape this thinking trap in favor of a more resilient 
response. So how can catastrophizing affect an entire group? 

Again, once a group becomes involved, the chance for many 
interpretations becomes a challenge. However, leaders can make a 
significant impact in preventing both individuals and groups from 
catastrophizing. In the case of Smith struggling with meeting Jones’ 
guidance in Afghanistan, the possibilities for catastrophizing are 
significant. 

Here is a way it could look. “If Smith does not get it together 
we are in for a rough deployment. I saw this last deployment down 
range, where we had multiple re-dos and people were down to three 
hours of sleep a night. This is how horrible accidents occur - I 
could see someone hit by a truck or worse because of people not 
getting enough rest. I could see us getting a lot of people killed at 
this rate.” 

It does not take much for this thinking to spiral down to the most 
pessimistic interpretation possible with the potential of adversely 
affecting unit morale. The difference between the unit’s situation and 
Smith’s inner dialog is more than one person on the staff might be 
sharing some or all elements of this catastrophic style of thinking. 
It is up to leaders working diligently to change this narrative in the 




SGT James Small (right) helps SPC Andreas Plaza up a mountainside in the Towr Gahr Pass, Nangarhar province, Afghanistan, Nov. 6, 2010. The 
Soldiers climbed up and down a 4,000-foot mountain to visit the town of Gurem for the first time. (Photo by SSG Ryan C. Matson, U.S, Army) 










SGT James Hatcher (right) leads a column to the village of Kautiak, 
Afghanistan, Oct. 30,2010. The Nuristan Provincial Reconstruction Team 
often visits local villagers to see how their government is helping them 
improve their lives after more than three decades of war. (Photo by CMSgt 

Richard Simonsen, U.S. Air Force) 


minds of their Soldiers. How can we do this? 

According to the 2006 Field Manuel 6-22, Army Leadership, 
Competent, Confident, and Agile, “Emotionally balanced leaders 
are able to display the right emotion for a given situation and can 
read others’ emotional state. They draw on their experience and 
provide their subordinates the proper perspective on unfolding 
events. Balanced leaders know how to convey that things are urgent 
without throwing the entire organization into chaos. They are able to 
encourage their people to continue the mission, even in the toughest 
of moments.” 

The above quote shows the balanced leader can “read others’ 
emotional state” and “provide their subordinates the proper 
perspective on unfolding events.” It is clear that leaders putting 
things in perspective for units is not a new leadership concept. 
Therefore, it is up to the leaders to address the non-resilient or 
overly pessimistic interpretation of events their Soldiers may hold. 
This is done by addressing them much like Smith, setting the left 
and right limits then focusing on what is the most likely outcome. 
How would this look? 

Worst case: already done by catastrophizing but now tempered 
for the group, “We have had some challenges getting our staff work 
up to snuff and meeting our standard and some of us are worried 
that we are in for a rough deployment. This is not our first dance 
and many of us have seen this before in previous deployments 
where multiple re-dos on staff work caused lack of sleep. I am also 

34 January-February 2011 • 


concerned about this because I know that lack of sleep does create 
an increased risk environment where accidents can happen. Some 
of you may be thinking that not getting staff actions right might 
affect units in combat where mistakes can have tragic results.” 

Best case: “But we are better than that - in fact the best case 
outcome may be, we will not only fix the staff action challenges 
but will exceed the standard. We will do so well, that all of us will 
get eight hours of sleep a night. Not only will we not have any 
accidents but we will be recognized by the chief of staff of the 
Army as best deployed unit of the year. We will do so well that the 
president will meet our plane to recognize us when we redeploy.” 

Most likely: “Ok, perhaps I got carried away. So here is what 
is most likely to occur, we will fix our challenges. We will make 
sure that all staff members have a shared understanding of how we 
fixed our challenges. The deployment will continue as before only 
now we have learned and improved as a unit.” 

Perhaps part of the above example seems farcical; however, it 
is still important for leaders to “read others’ emotional state,” and 
“provide their subordinates the proper perspective on unfolding 
events.” Setting left and right limits in this way, in order to focus 
either individuals or groups on most likely outcomes, can result in 
responses to adversity which are more resilient both individually 
and collectively. 

We have discussed managing ATCs and disputing beliefs, among 
those beliefs catastrophizing is particularly damaging to resilience. 
However, these are all beliefs of which we are aware. What do 
we do if we have beliefs that cause us to have extreme responses 
to situations that we do not understand? It is as if our emotional 
response is worsened by a belief that is not readily apparent or 
seems below the surface. These are called “iceberg beliefs.” 

etecting icebergs. At times, we encounter a brand of 
adversity which gets us more emotionally invested than 
we might believe is appropriate. Someone makes a comment to 
us, which at face value could have been intended as innocent, but 
touched a nerve and we become angry. In these situations, there is 
likely some underlying belief that makes us interpret this comment 
in such an emotional manner. These are icebergs because they are 
more than they appear on the surface. Individuals in a group of 
people can have similar beliefs causing overly emotional reactions, 
which then affect the whole group. 

Let us apply this concept to Smith’s situation on the staff action 
gone wrong in garrison. He arrives home after a frustrating day 
attempting to fix the staff action. He is home late, after the kids 
have gone to bed. His wife Peg activates his iceberg belief when 
she asks, “Why are you home so late?” Before he can realize how 
angry he is, Smith blows up at Peg and starts yelling, “Why do 
you always have to know when I work late? I am focused on work 
sometimes and I am working my tail off so I can provide for the 
family.” If Smith can calm down and review why his reaction was 
so extreme, he could ask himself a series of questions. In their 
book, “The Resilience Factor,” PhDs Karen Reivich and Andrew 
Shatte recommend asking a series of “what” questions in order to 
identify iceberg beliefs. Questions such as, what does that mean 
to me? What is the most upsetting part of that for me? What is the 
worst part of that for me? What does that say about me? What’s so 
bad about that? 

If Smith were to ‘engage in an argument with himself’ over 
this, perhaps it would look something like this: 

• Question: “Peg asked me why I was so late, what is so bad about 
that?” Answer: “I am a grown man working my tail off to provide 
for this family, I do not need her second guessing me every time 
I have to work late.” 

• Question: “What is so upsetting about her second guessing me?” 



Fires 









Answer: “I feel like it means she does not think I am in control of 
what is happening at work and thus the effect it can have on her 
and the kids.” 

• Question: “What is so bad about her thinking that you are not 
in control at work?” 

• Answer: “I feel like she is insinuating that I cannot manage my 
professional life and be a good dad and husband.” 

• Question: “Why is that so upsetting to you? Answer: “Because 
my dad struggled to hold down a job all of his life and was a bad 
provider which caused problems resulting in my parents’ divorce 
-1 am nothing like him!” 

Once Smith understand his reaction, he can start to acknowledge 
Peg’s question was innocent and not full of a meaning he applied. This 
process can readily apply to a group when this particular scenario is 
repeated in the Smith household multiple times. Perhaps Peg could 
develop her own iceberg belief, such as a deep-seated fear that her 
husband is missing important events in their children’s lives. Peg’s 
inner dialog may contribute to this iceberg something like this: “If 
he is this disconnected from the family now, how distant will he 
be after this next deployment? I did not get married to become a 
single parent but the Army is making me one.” If she shares some of 
these fears with friends in the family readiness group, such iceberg 
beliefs may become replicated across the brigade. Can this really 
happen? Absolutely! What can a leader do about this replication? 

The first step is becoming aware of the concepts we have 
discussed so far. The second step is learning how to recognize 
them in our own units and take steps to correct these problems 
before they spread to other individuals and affect the entire unit. 
In order to accomplish this, leaders must be able to gain situational 
understanding not only of their own feelings but also of those 
around them. This understanding is called “emotional intelligence” 
or, “emotional quotient.” 
motional 

intelligence. 

One analogy of 
the organizational 
leader’s ability to understand 
how team members are 
feeling and build resilience 
successfully dealing with more 
activating events, or stress, is 
the kitchen sink. (See Figure 
6: Stress and the kitchen sink.) 

Your sink has a finite amount of 
space. It has a plug to release 
water, representing stress, and a 
faucet that can add more water 
to the sink. It also can receive 
water from an outside source 
such as a pitcher or bucket. 

Everyone and every unit have a 
different size sink. The sink can 
only hold so much water before 
it overflows at any given time. 

The leader of the organization 
must monitor the water level 
in the organizational sink. It 
is within the leader’s ability 
to control how much water 
he adds to the sink by turning 
on the faucet. It is the leader’s 
responsibility to watch and 
determine when it is time to 


pull the plug and let some of the water out. There may be some 
unseen issues such as a clogged garbage disposal. The outside 
influence maybe a higher headquarters or a strategic level decision 
that is adding pitchers full of water into the sink that is beyond the 
leader’s ability to control. The leader then needs to do something 
that is very difficult to do in the context of our Army culture. He 
has to prioritize and let some things go down the drain to make 
room for the added stressors, which he cannot control. This requires 
development of EQ, both personal and organizational, and the 
ability to have perspective. 

Because everything in the Army seems to be a priority, leaders 
get where they are by ‘doing it all.’ Good organizational leaders 
recognize making everything a number one priority is neither logical 
nor possible. If a leader has a good emotional quotient, he knows 
when to pull the plug on some of lower priority tasks, ensuring that 
the sink does not overflow. In addition, the commander controls 
the communication of his vision for the organization. His example 
leads his organization, through avoiding thinking traps, disputing 
beliefs, detecting icebergs and avoiding catastrophizing. It is 
important that leaders recognize and deal with activating events and 
not ignore them. They may resurface in a negative or destructive 
way somewhere down the road. Units should deal with grief, heal 
from past activating events, develop emotional intelligence and gain 
broader perspective just as individuals do. Resilient leaders will 
take the long view, not merely the two-year command they may be 
in, and think about the organization’s long-term health. Resilient 
leaders prioritize their resources, particularly time and personnel, 
in a way that allows these resilience-building processes to occur. 

For the organization with the full sink, the same tools mentioned 
earlier for the individual can apply to building resilience for the 
unit. The self-talk technique of Smith can occur in several ways, as 


Figure 6: Stress and the kitchen sink. The water in the left sink represents too little stress. The water in the right, 
full sink represents too much stress. Leaders must monitor the water level (stress level) in their sink (organization). 

(Photo illustration by Jennifer McFadden, Fires Managing Editor) 




sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 35 






SPC David Reaves provides security alongside an Afghan National Army soldier at an ANA compound in Parwa’i village in eastern Afghanistan’s 
Nuristan province, Aug. 26, 201 0. (Photo by SSgt Steven R. Doty, U.s. Air Force) 


leaders communicate building member buy-in to a positive command 
vision. Verbalizing a vision of an improved future for the unit is a good 
start. It is imperative that the leader has an organizational message 
that represents his vision and conveys hope for the members of the 
organization. Organizational vision can be communicated in several 
ways: verbal, written or by example. An explanation of why the 
organization is in a particular stressful environment often goes a long 
way to earning buy-in and building the ability to bounce back . 

In the book, “Emotional Intelligence,” Daniel Goleman, describes 
why it can matter more than IQ. He says emotional intelligence is the 
“capacity for recognizing our own feelings and those of others, for 
motivating ourselves, and for managing emotions well in ourselves 
and our relationships.” This knowledge can result in giving others and 
ourselves an opportunity to relieve some of the pressure, like letting 
water out of the kitchen sink, caused by adversity rather than having 
an emotional response. Once we know we have beliefs that can sink us 
because of obstacles below the surface, like the icebergs we discussed, 


we can realize we can give others and ourselves ‘a little slack.’ 

Organizations share many of the characteristics of individuals 
in terms of the effects of stress and mitigating those effects. Like 
individuals, organizations can give themselves ‘a little slack.’ 
Organizational self-awareness can result in an organization that 
is able to recover from a stressful activating event or relentless 
stressful environment. 

After action reviews, and in progress reviews are good 
opportunities for a unit to develop emotional intelligence. This 
development can result in an organization that is as resilient 
as the individuals it contains. Organizational self-talk in these 
forums is the equivalent of disputing beliefs, as accomplished 
by Smith and Jones in our example. 

Leaders can also use these tools to provide an alternate 
narrative to FRGs as in the iceberg example in the Smith home 
spreading to the FRG. The leader tools available are similar for 
both the individual and the organization. 


a ®np dtoMfep© ©ood oaDoBa© (alsaD ®nso©G©DEi[% ffirflsGo 

$3d© G30dd[]d® ODoeiS ©©5© 

CoflglGo (itmmnSten KQsvmp feotetP© Co@© aGo© (top 

□QOgmSsO SDQQgfjDOQ©©© fo©©G0 DQQSP3 ©©©@0 lCS©D b M @P°]gP 

©oasssfiu gGd© ©ompajas dgjDoB (top aDo© Dsm® oam.® 


36 January-February 2011 


Fires 


* a 











C reating hardiness. In Paul T. Bartone’s article, “Resilience 
Under Military Operational Stress: Can Leaders Influence 
Hardiness?” he touches on leader’s influence, or what he calls 
“hardiness,” and makes the case for a “hardy leader influence 
process.” Army leaders’ visions include the leader’s role in building 
amore resilient organization. The Army’s efforts to develop aMaster 
Resilience Training Program is one way to provide commanders in 
the field a tool to develop a unit’s ability to bounce back. Master 
Resilience Trainers must undergo a ten-day program on the use of 
resilience practices and their application to units. Ultimately, each 
battalion-sized element will have their own MRT. According to the 
MRT Skills Teaching Overview, these senior NCO’s are learning 
how to assist other unit leaders in the tasks of building mental 
toughness. This training includes ATC, avoiding thinking traps, 
detecting icebergs, and keeping perspective. In short, these MRTs will 
be able to show commanders how to shut down counterproductive 
thinking, enabling greater concentration and focus on the immediate 
task with resilience techniques. 

Why is resilience so important to us in today’s Army? Our 
Army is ‘quietly making history’ deploying more often with less 
Soldiers than ever before in our history. Our Soldiers and units 
deal constantly with the tyranny of operational tempo that sets 
high demands. Never before has the need for mental toughness 
been more essential, in order to sustain the current fight for the 
long term. Although we should all be watchful of fellow Soldiers 
who are struggling, leaders at all levels are key to this effort. In 
the end, leaders and especially commanders, affect the resilience 
of an organization. They influence the organization’s overall 
resilience, one Soldier at a time, as well as entire groups at once. 
Like all military operations, this is a team effort. We as an Army 


should encourage all Soldiers to learn and practice these resilience 
techniques and then leaders should take the next step by applying 
them to the entire unit. Building individual and unit resilience is 
the key to how we build tougher Soldiers and Units. This is how we 
can learn to bounce back from adversity stronger than we started. 


Colonel (Ret) Joyce P. DiMarco, Army logistician, is a leadership 
instructor at the Command and General Staff College at Fort 
Leavenworth, Kan. Formerly, she commanded the 1st Transportation 
Movement Control Agency (Movement Control Brigade) in 
Kaiserslautern, Germany, with subordinate battalions deployed to 
OIF and OEF. Among other assignments, she commanded the 835th 
Transportation Battalion in Okinawa, Japan. She is a fellow of the 
School of Advanced Military Studies at Fort Leavenworth, Kan. 

Lieutenant Colonel (Ret) Richard A. McConnell, field artillery, is a 
tactics instructor at the Command and General Staff College at Fort 
Leavenworth, Kansas. Formerly he was the chief observer/trainer, 
operations group S, in the Battle Command Training Program at Fort 
Leavenworth, Kan. Previously, he was the 3/4/2 Military Transition Team 
Chief in Mosul, Iraq from 2006-2007. He was a fire support observer/ 
trainer in the Battle Command Training Program before his MiTT 
assignment. During OIF I, he was the S3 and executive officer of 1st 
Battalion, 12th Field Artillery Regiment. Among other assignments, he 
commanded Headquarters and Headquarters Battery, 41 st Field Artillery 
Brigade, V Corps Artillery, in Germany, and was a battery fire direction 
officer in 1-320 Field Artillery Regiment, 101st Airborne Division (Air 
Assault), in the Gulf during Operation Desert Storm. 


Avenger gunnery strikes deep 



Echo Battery, 5th Battalion, 52nd Air Defense Artillery’s Avenger gunnery crew successfully completed Table VIII certification of all battery crews 
at Orogrande Range, Fort Bliss, Texas, Oct. 18-21,2010. Avenger crews with the highest test scores and Table VIII performance attempted Table X 
certification, which included engaging a drone plane with a Stinger missile. (Photo courtesy of i lt Christopher Rossi, u.s. Army) 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 37 















AND TRANSFORMATIONAL 
LEADERS: A WINNING TEAM FOR 
THE FUTURE — PART II OF II 


By COL James E. Lackey, Professor Gene Kamena and COL Paul Calvert 


Transactional conversation: COL Brown told CPT Jones that 

IN ORDER TO RECEIVE A 'TOP BLOCK 7 FOR PROMOTION HE WOULD HAVE 
TO HAVE EVERYONE QUALIFY FIRST TIME ON THE RIFLE RANGE. 

Transformational conversation: COL Brown encouraged 
CPT Brown to strive fora 100 percent first time 'go 7 s 7 for his 

COMPANY ON THE RANGE. COL BROWN TOLD JONES THAT HE KNEW 
HE COULD DO IT; HE HAD THE TALENT AND LEADERSHIP TO SET A 
NEW RECORD. THE COLONEL ALSO TOLD THE CAPTAIN THAT HE WAS A 
TALENTED OFFICER AND THAT HE APPRECIATED HIS HARD WORK AND 
UNIQUE SKILLS. 


T ransformational approach 
with Millennial. Dr. Carolyn 
Martin and Bruce Tulgan have 
conducted extensive research and work¬ 
place interviews with Millennial. A 
product of their work is identification of 
expectations Millennial have for how 
they want to be led. Some of the key 
expectations are: Provide challenging work 
that really matters; balance clearly delegated 
assignments with freedom and flexibility; 
offer increasing responsibility as a reward 
for accomplishments; spend time getting to 
know staff members and their capabilities; 
establish mentoring relationships; balance 
the roles of ‘boss’ and ‘team player;’ and 
consistently provide constructive feedback. 

These expectations coupled with the 
four components of transformational 
leadership and the knowledge of Millennials 
established earlier in the paper will serve 
as the framework for assessing whether a 
transformational leadership approach would 
be effective in leading Millennials to achieve 
organizational success. 

ransactional leadership. Bass 
and Riggio state that transactional 
leadership occurs when the leader rewards 
or disciplines the follower, depending on 

38 January-February 2011 • 


the adequacy of the follower’s performance. 
Transactional leadership depends on 
contingent reinforcement, either positive 
contingent reward or the more negative 
active or passive forms of management-by¬ 
exception. Millennials will not respond well 
to threats or negative forms of leadership. 
They want to be led and inspired; they 
already have the desire to excel. 

eadership style caveat. Leadership 
in the military will never be 
an absolute choice of transformational 
or transactional style. Circumstances, 
personality of individuals involved and 
group dynamics must all be considered. 
The reality is leadership may evolve to a 
hybrid style to meet circumstances. There 
is a time and place for both transactional 
and transformational leadership. 

hallenging work that matters. 
Millennials are achievement 
oriented and capable of handling multiple 
tasks simultaneously. They have a self¬ 
perception of being special based on being 
raised in a protected environment and seek 
to contribute to an organizations success. A 
transformational leader using inspirational 
motivation will meet this expectation 
by providing clear task and purpose for 


missions to be executed ensuring purpose is 
linked to long term goals and obj ectives that 
support a stated vision. Using intellectual 
stimulation, the transformational leader 
encourages creativity and innovative 
problem solving when assigning missions 
and takes into consideration that Millennials 
are inexperienced and mistakes are 
going to be made. Underwriting honest 
mistakes allow for Millennials to grow and 
encourages future initiative. 

alance delegated assignments with 
freedom and flexibility. Raised 
in structured environments, Millennials 
are accustomed to being told what to do, 
but not necessarily how to do it. Applying 
the components of intellectual stimulation 
and individualized consideration provides 
structure for accomplishing tasks while 
simultaneously allowing for initiative. The 
transformational leader who uses these 
components defines the tasks, provides left 
and right limits for execution and allows for 
freedom of action to accomplish the mission. 
In-progress reviews become important for 
the leader, as well as the inexperienced 
Millennials, to ensure task completion 
remains on track and serves as a means to 
provide additional guidance if required. 

ffer increasing responsibility as 
a reward for accomplishments. 
This expectation of leaders speaks directly 
to the confidence Millennials have in 
themselves, as well as their peers, and desire 
for ever increasing responsibility. At face 
value, this is an exchange of reward for doing 
something good. But a transformational 
leader who uses individualized consideration 
balances the Millennials desire for increased 
responsibility as a result of achievement 
with their current experience and potential. 







Fires 















This is accomplished through mentorship 
and providing feedback to the Millennial 
ensuring not to give more responsibility 
than is capable of being handled. 

now your team. Millennial are team 
oriented by virtue of playing team 
sports growing up and being connected 24/7 
to a network of people. They understand 
the power of many is greater than that of 
an individual. Fulfilling this expectation 
affords a transformational leader the 
ability to employ all four components of 
transformational leadership. Engaging at 
the individual and organizational level - 
transformational leaders set the example 
and provide insight to common values that 
are shared. They communicate expectations 
and goals, foster a sense of team, address 
problems and gain a greater sense of the 
abilities held by individuals and units 
through personal engagement. This provides 
insight that enables the transformational 
leader to better understand his people and 
organization. 

entor your Millennials. 

Millennial have been mentored 
their entire lives. Raised by engaged parents, 
Millennials rely on mentorship from older 
adults and seek development by those 
who lead them. Establishing a mentoring 
relationship allows a transformational 
leader to use all four components of 
transformational leadership. Serving as 
a role model, demonstrating competence 
and building trust and respect are keys to 
influencing during a mentoring relationship. 

“[MfemfeD© ©p© 
qmojq dcteDoasi] \by 
off [pOaj^Ligi 
eoaouQ ©pope© 

gjPOCfflfllllg) QQp 00(3 
OjXgflODg) OOElDQOOeoCi] 

eo a [M&ffiEofc 
off poopDo. ‘uUa©^ 
oDDfilopseaiafi] eCo© 
poE33P off smms fc 
gpaaesp eCDam eCoae 
off am ftTnrf M^nnalln ^ 


As the transformational leader gains 
credibility as a mentor, he inspires the 
Millennial he is mentoring to become a 
mentor, too. As an effective mentor, the 
transformational leader stimulates the 
intellect of those he mentors and challenges 
them to higher levels of potential. 

alance the roles of ‘boss’ and 
‘team player.’ With a strong 
desire to be led and having grown up 
with an ever present authoritarian figure, 
Millennials seek a leader who demonstrates 
he is, “unafraid to get into the trenches 
with everyone else,” according to Bass 
andRiggio’s Transformational Leadership. 
Setting the example through demonstrated 
competence in worker core skills enables 
a transformational leader to connect with 
Millennials through the component of 
idealized influence. This in turn serves 
as motivation to the Millennial allowing 
the transformational leader to strengthen 
communication and further evoke a team 
oriented approach through the component 
of inspirational motivation. 

onstantly provide constructive 
feedback. Teachers, coaches, 
peers and parents have routinely provided 
Millennials with feedback on how they are 
doing. Expectedly, Millennials look for 
and seek performance feedback. Applying 
all four components of transformational 
leadership allows a leader to provide 
feedback for self-improvement during 
counseling and mentoring sessions, 
stimulate thought in Millennials to try 


new techniques for accomplishing tasks 
in relationship to organizational goals and 
objectives, and sets a positive example for 
development of young Millennial leaders. 

The Millennials’ expectations for being 
led are a product of how they have been 
raised and the traits and characteristics 
which define them. It is evident when the 
components of transformational leadership 
are applied against the Millennials’ 
expectations that a leader can inspire 
and influence individuals by providing 
purpose, direction and motivation resulting 
in organizational success, according to 
FM 6-22 Army Leadership: Competent, 
Confident and Agile. 

While this determination is somewhat 
sterile, an example is provided. A battalion 
deployed in support of OIF with greater 
than 50 percent of its Soldiers from the 
Millennial Generation. Often, battalions 
are detached from its organic headquarters, 
and in this case 12 of the 15 months this 
unit was deployed it worked for four 
different brigade headquarters. Using a 
transformational leadership approach, the 
battalion leadership established a vision for 
organizational success and communicated 
it to the subordinate units routinely. The 
subordinate units and Soldiers bought 
into the vision and took ownership of it. 
Application of the four components of 
transformational leadership was the norm 
from the lowest to the highest levels of 
leadership. Moral soared in the unit. They 
accomplished more than they ever thought 







sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 39 


Photo by SPC David A. Jackson, U.S. Army 









%, S : Xt - 

v_ Ml >3f 

Recognize that organizational success 


leader and the led. 




ii Lai 


V. 


a Millennial’s relationship with their parents. 


• Establish, a comprehensive leader 


development 


organization. 


Foster an environment where leaders are 




engaged with'subordinates. 


• Allow for collaboration and independent 




learning. 


t tv . 




. 


• The Department of Defense should facilitate a Millennial 


and then hold a Millennial conference to announce 


e results ot ine s 


• Re 


rewards and encourage competition 


military 




members. 


Authors’ recommendations for Millennial leadership. (Photo by sgt Charles Espie, u.s. Army.) 


possible and achieved a high level of 
organizational success. Transformational 
leadership of Millennial can be an effective 
approach to achieving organizational 
success. 

ecommendations. Considering 
Millennial characteristics and the 
transformational style of leadership, the 
following recommendations are offered 
for consideration. 

RECOGNIZE THAT 
ORGANIZATIONAL SUCCESS IS 
A PRODUCT OF THE COMBINED 
EFFORTS OF THE LEADER AND 
THE LED. Both are dependent upon one 
another, but responsibility to align goals and 
obj ectives of each to achieve an agreed upon 
vision for the organization falls squarely on 
the leaders’ shoulders. This transformational 
approach facilitates capitalization of 
Millennial talent and abilities far better than 
transactional leadership. It aligns individual 
and collective purposes for a desired 
outcome in the near term and solidifies a 
leader’s legacy into the next generation. 

DO NOT UNDER ESTIMATE THE 
IMPORTANCE OF A MILLENNIAL'S 
RELATIONSHIP WITH THEIR 
PARENTS. They are close and you should 
expect to see the Millennials’ parents 
in the work environment. Promotions, 
award ceremonies, school graduations, 
and Uniform Code of Military Justice 
procedures are all events parents will 

40 January-February 2011 • 


be involved in and leaders must have 
an engagement plan. Compounding the 
challenge is unit deployments because the 
parents will expect to be included in the 
information loop. Success is getting ahead 
of the bow wave and engaging the parents 
first. Establish a means to communicate with 
them and push information. For those who 
are relatively local to the unit installation, 
get them involved in unit activities. They 
will be some of the strongest supporters 
within unit support groups. Don’t lose sight 
of the added benefit an engaged parent can 
play in the retention process of their son or 
daughter. 

ESTABLISH A COMPREHENSIVE 
LEADER DEVELOPMENT 
PROGRAM ACROSS THE ENTIRE 
ORGANIZATION. Invariably, someone 
is going to fall by the wayside and another 
person will have to step up and fill their 
position. Successful organizations are those 
who have trained and prepared everyone 
to fill their boss’s boots. Millennials seek 
to be challenged and are achievement 
oriented. Aggressive coaching, teaching 
and mentoring are paramount in developing 
them to become leaders. Important to this 
approach is recognition that the youngest 
Millennials are short on experience and 
know how. Mistakes are going to be made. 
The leader’s job is to help the Millennials 
recognize mistakes and understand how 
to execute better next time. Flexible and 


adaptable leaders who can think and 
recognize when change needs to be made 
based on a changing environment is critical 
to the success of any organization. 

FOSTER AN ENVIRONMENT 
WHERE LEADERS ARE ENGAGED 
WITH SUBORDINATES. Millennials are 
accustomed to being connected andwelcome 
a leader’s interest. Being engaged enables 
leaders to build knowledge of people. 
The knowledge that is developed through 
engagement provides better understanding 
for leading, creates opportunities to 
communicate organizational vision, goals, 
obj ectives and develop mutual trust between 
the leader and led. Being engaged as a 
leader also promotes mentorship between 
the leader and follower through two-way 
feedback, helping one another to better 
see and understand themselves and the 
organization. 

Allow for collaboration 

AND INDEPENDENT LEARNING. 
The focus needs to be on outcomes based 
training for Millennials. Permit Millennials 
to transition to the ‘hands-on’ phase as soon 
as possible. The military must also build 
systems and procedures to allow feedback to 
Millennials via virtual systems. Millennials 
need to know why tasks are important and 
how they fit into the organization. In other 
words, the Millennials must receive more 
‘why’ and fewer lectures during training. 
Counseling and feedback are a must and 



Fires 












































negative feedback to Millennial must 
be conveyed in a positive manner. Senior 
leaders must foster a command climate that 
allows Millennials to be active members of 
the team and provide them opportunities for 
education online and off duty. 

The Department of 
Defense should facilitate a 
Millennial study and then 

HOLD AMILLENNIAL CONFERENCE 
TO ANNOUNCE AND DISCUSS 
THE RESULTS OF THE STUDY. 
Representatives from the academic and 
business communities as well as the 
military should be invited to participate 
in this conference. A representative 
number of Millennial officers and enlisted 
members from across the military should 
also be invited to participate. The business 
community may be able to contribute some 
best practices and ideas on how to better 
lead Millennials. In turn, the DoD must 
conduct a survey focused on Millennials 
providing feedback about their leaders, 
training environment and attitudes towards 
the service. This forum will provide the 
military invaluable information with which 
to look at how it’s leading Millennials. 

RELOOK REWARDS AND 
ENCOURAGE COMPETITION FOR 
MILITARY MEMBERS. The time is long 
overdue for the DoD to relook how it 
rewards its members. Medals are tradition 
and should be maintained, but time off, 
monetary rewards and education matter 
more to Millennials. Millennials are 
extremely ambitious; reward often. 

The Millennial Generation is uniquely 
talented with an abundance of positive traits 


and characteristics. They are a product 
of the environment in which they have 
been raised and hold tremendous potential 
for being the next ‘greatest generation.’ 
Through effective application of the four 
components of transformational leadership, 
transformational leaders are much more 
capable of capitalizing on the social and 
work-place traits and characteristics of 
the Millennial Generation. Aligning goals 
and objectives of individuals with those 
of the organization and appealing to the 
Millennials’ expectations is critical. 

Millennials constitute the majority of 
those serving in uniform today and leaders 
who take a transformational approach will 
be effective in achieving organizational 
success. The power and policy making 
authority in the U.S. military lies with 
the senior leadership reared in the Baby 
Boomer generation. Ethnocentrism plays a 
significant role in the military’s resistance 
to adapt to accommodate the Millennials, 
due to the fact that the Baby Boomers who 
make the policies see nothing wrong. Baby 
Boomers created the current policies and 
found success with them in the past, but 
the demands of the ‘Long War’ in which 
we are currently engaged necessitates that 
DoD adapt a broader leadership model to 
more effectively lead and accommodate 
our Millennial warriors. When it comes 
to warfighting and leading Millennials, 
selecting the right tool is the difference 
between success and failure. 

Editor’s note: The first half of this article 
was published in the November-December 
2010 edition of Fires. 


Colonel James Lackey, is the Chief of the Army 
Advisory Group and senior Army Advisor to 
Commander, Air University in Montgomery, 
Alabama. He also teaches in the Leadership and 
Warfighting departments of Air War College. 
During OIF he commanded 1st Battalion, 41st 
Field Artillery in the 3rd Infantry Division. His 
deployments include; Desert Shield/Desert 
Storm, Kosovo and OIF. He holds a Bachelor 
of Science in Management from the University 
of South Alabama and Masters degrees from 
Webster University and Air War College. 

Professor Gene C. Kamena currently teaches 
Leadership and Ethics at the Air War College in 
Montgomery, Alabama. He is retired from the 
Army as a Colonel of Infantry. He holds a B.A. in 
History from Auburn University and a Masters 
Degree in Military Art and Science from CGSC 
at Fort Leavenworth. He graduated from the 
Army War College in 1998 and Commanded the 
2nd Brigade, 1 AD. He also served as the Chief 
of Staff for the 1st Infantry Division, Director of 
Staff of U.S. Space Command and the Deputy 
Chief of Staff for U.S. Northern Command, 
Director for Iraqi Security Forces and formed 
and led an Iraqi Special Border Commando 
Brigade on the Syrian border. His operational 
deployments include; Desert Shield Desert 
Storm, Macedonia, Kosovo, and Iraq (OIF). 

COL Paul Calvert is an armor officer who 
currently commands 2d HBCT in the 
First Infantry Division. Prior to his current 
assignment he was a student at Air War 
College in Montgomery, Alabama. He 
previously served as commander 2/3 ACR 
and as Regimental S311 ACR, 2/11 ACR. COL 
Calvert holds a Master of Science degree in 
Strategic Studies from Air War College. 



IBluillllefeilffl i 

i - tfgjii t i <§>i?h 

the new interactive 
edition online @ 
http://sill-www.army. 
mil/firesbulletin 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 41 
















Volume I. 


Number 1. 


THE 

FIELD ARTILLERY 
JOURNAL 

JANUARY-MARCH, 1911 


CAPTAIN WM. J. SNOW 

SIXTH FIELD ARTILLERY, UNITED STATES ARMY 

EDITOR 




ft 


PUBLISHED QUARTERLY 
BY 

THE UNITED STATES FIELD ARTILLERY ASSOCIATION 
1744 G STREET N.W., WASHINGTON, D.C. 


$4.00 PER ANNUM 




1 


The Field Artillery Journal 


CONTENTS 


THE UNITED STATES FIELD ARTILLERY ASSOCIATION. 

Editorial . H2 

HOW CAN THE EFFICIENCY OF FIELD BATTERIES OF THE 
ORGANIZED MILITIA BE INCREASED? 

B y***** *. H3 

THE CARE AND TRAINING OF ARTILLERY REMOUNTS 

By Captain WM. J. Snow, Sixth Field Artillery, U.S. Army. . H9 

INSTRUCTION OF SCOUTS AND AGENTS 

By 1st Lieutenant Corlandt Parker, Sixth Field Artillery, U.S. Army. . HI 6 

THE COOPERATION OF THE ARMS IN BATTLE 

Translation by Captain Oliver L. Spaulding Jr., Sixth Field Artillery, 

U.S. Army. . H21 

“MODERN GUNS AND GUNNERY” — Book Review.. .H25 


HI January-February 2011 • Fires — 1911 The Field Artillery Journal 










The Field Artillery Journal 

Vol. 1 JANUARY-MARCH, 1911 No. 1 


THE UNITED STATES FIELD 
ARTILLERY ASSOCIATION 

Soon after the separation, in 1907, of the field artillery from the 
coast artillery, the question of the organization of a field artillery 
association and of the publication of a magazine in the interest of 
that arm of the service began to receive attention, and during the next 
three years there was considerable correspondence on and discussion 
of the subject. By the first of June, 1910, the correspondence had 
shown so much interest among field artillery men in the formation 
of an association and so many had expressed an earnest desire 
for and their willingness to support a field artillery journal, that it 
seemed evident that an organization could be made a success. A 
number of officers of the field artillery of the regular army and the 
organized militia were assembled at Fort Riley, Kansas, to participate 
in a school of instruction, and on June 7, 1910, a meeting of these 
officers was held to take the subject under consideration. At that 
meeting an organization was formed and a constitution adopted. 
The constitution contains the following provisions: 

The Association shall consist of (1) active members and (2) 
associate members. 

The following shall be eligible to active membership: 

Commissioned officers on the active lists of the field artillery of 
the regular army and of the organized militia of the several states, 
territories and District of Columbia; provided, that officers of the 
regular army when separated from the field artillery, by promotion 
or detail in staff departments, shall not thereby lose their status as 
active members. 

The following shall be eligible to associate membership: 

(a) Commissioned officers on the retired lists of the regular 
army and of the organized militia of the several states, territories 
and District of Columbia. 

(b) Those, who, as commissioned officers, either regular, militia 
or volunteer, have served with batteries or larger units of field 
artillery in time of war. 

(c) Commissioned officers of the regular army and of the 
organized militia of the several states, territories and District of 
Columbia, not now belonging to the field artillery, who have served 
at least one year as commissioned officers in field artillery. 

(d) General officers of the regular army, except as provided in 
Section 2 of this Article, and of the organized militia of the several 
states, territories and District of Columbia. 

(e) All commissioned officers and former officers of the United 
States Army, Navy and Marine Corps, and of the organized militia 
in good standing, not included in the classification hereinabove set 
forth. 

(f) Those in civil life, whose applications are approved by the 
Executive Council hereinafter provided for. 

Any person eligible, under the foregoing article, to membership, 
may become a member by making written application to the Secretary 
and paying the first year’s dues. The decision of the Executive 
Council as to eligibility of an applicant shall be final. 

Any member may withdraw from the Association at any time 


by tendering his resignation in writing, but such resignation shall 
not take effect until such member has paid all indebtedness due 
the Association at the time of such resignation. 

Any member may be dropped for cause by a maj ority vote of the 
Executive Council; but no member shall be so dropped without first 
previously notifying him, in writing, at his last known post-office 
address, of the proposal to so drop him, and waiting a reasonable 
time for his reply. 

Amember dropped under the foregoing section may be reinstated 
by a majority vote of the Executive Council, and by paying all 
sums, if any, due the Association. 

Active members only shall be entitled to vote. 

The annual dues of the Association shall be fixed by the Executive 
Council, but shall not exceed $4 per annum. 

The Executive Council shall be composed of five active members, 
three of whom shall be officers of the regular army, and two officers 
of the organized militia, to be elected biennially for a term of two 
years by a majority vote, in person or by written proxy of the active 
members. The Council shall hold its meetings at the headquarters 
of the Association, which shall be in the city of Washington. 

The Executive Council shall appoint the following officers of 
the Association: 

1. A President, to be selected from its own members, and who 
shall be an officer of the regular army. 

2. A Vice-President, to be selected from among the active 
members of the Association. 

3. A Secretary-Editor, to be selected from its own members, 
or other active members of the Association, and who shall be an 
officer of the regular army. 

4. A Treasurer, to be selected from among the active members, 
and who shall be an officer stationed or residing in Washington, 
DC. 

These officers shall hold office at the pleasure of the Executive 
Council, and shall perform the duties usually and customarily 
performed by like officers in civil associations. 

At the same meeting the Executive Council was elected, as 
follows: 

Brigadier-General M. M. Macomb, U.S. Army. 

Captain Oliver L. Spaulding, Jr., 5 th Field Artillery, U.S. Army. 

Captain Fox Conner, General Staff, U.S. Army. 

Captain John F. O’Ryan, 1st Battery, National Guard, State of 
New York. 

Captain Robert H. Tyndall, Battery A, National Guard, State of 
Indiana. 

At a meeting of the Executive Council, held in Washington, 
D. C., November 3, 1910, the organization of the Association was 
completed and the following officers elected: 

PRESIDENT: Brigadier-General M. M. Macomb, U.S. Army. 

VICE-PRESIDENT: Lieutenant-Colonel E. St. J. Greble, 
General Staff, U.S. Army. 

SECRETARY-EDITOR: Captain Wm. J. Snow, 6th Field 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 H2 




TREASURER: Captain Wm. J. Snow, 6th Field Artillery, U.S. 
Army. Artillery, U.S. Army. 

The Council passed resolutions fixing the subscription price of 
the magazine at $4 a year, and life membership and subscription 
at $100, and providing that there shall be no annual dues, a paid 
subscription to the magazine for at least one year being substituted 
therefor. 

The present management has undertaken the work of publishing 
THE FIELD ARTILLERY JOURNAL with confidence in the 
ultimate success of the enterprise; but not in the belief that success 


can be accomplished by the efforts of the management alone, for 
if any considerable degree of success is achieved it will only be 
by the united efforts of practially everyone directly connected 
with the field artillery in the United States. Assurances of support 
have been received from nearly all of the field artillery men in the 
regular army and from many of those in the organized militia; but 
even among these there are a number who have not yet subscribed. 
We have received a number of subscriptions from officers of other 
arms, and the management bespeaks the good offices and help of 
each individual reader of the magazine, not only on behalf of the 
field artillery, but generally “for the good of the service.” 


HOW CAN THE EFFICIENCY OF FIELD BATTERIES OF THE 
ORGANIZED MILITIA BE INCREASED? 


By 




The recent report of the Chief of Staff of the Army contains the 
following: 

“MILITIA 

“The field artillery is specially in need of this assistance from 
the National Government. Because of the absence of this assistance 
the instruction of this arm is far from satisfactory. Indeed, speaking 
in a general way, we may say that it is, with the exception of a few 
batteries, practically uninstructed in field duty and wholly unprepared 
for service. The gravity of this situation becomes evident when it is 
remembered that in both the regular army and the militia the field 
artillery falls far below its proper proportion with respect to the 
other arms.” 

“MOBILE ARMY 

“Field Artillery—The existing deficiency in the field artillery 
constitutes one of the greatest menaces to our country in case of 
war. ****** Under the heading ‘Militia’ the condition of militia 
field artillery has been stated. It is, with the exception of a few good 
batteries, very unsatisfactory.” 

These remarks of an officer in a position to know whereof he 
speaks disclose a serious situation, and at once suggest the question. 

“Is there any remedy for this, and, if so, what is it?” 

The writer of this article has heard some officers of the regular 
army (fortunately not many) state that militia batteries can never 
be made effective. But he does not share this opinion. Rather, the 
writer believes that the American can accomplish anything within 
reason, and that to be an efficient field artilleryman comes within 
this category; that it is merely necessary to provide the American 
with time and facilities and he will accomplish his object. But the 
writer does not believe that the American, any more than the man 
of any other nationality, can accomplish the impossible. And yet 
it looks as though, under the present conditions, this is exactly the 
task we have set for the militia field artilleryman. 

To determine the remedy to correct a general defect, we must 
analyze the latter into its specific elements, and then we are in a 
position to apply specific remedies, to be definite in our statements 
and, accordingly, an attempt is made in the following pages to carry 
out this procedure. This will involve at least a hasty glance at the 
subject in its entirety, from which we pass to details. 

H3 January-February 2011 • Fires — 1911 The Field Artillery Journal 


Relation Between Field Artillery and Infantry 

The old aphorism, “the infantry is the Army,” is still true, but 
fire action has, in recent years, so developed that unaided infantry 
can no longer advance. 

The volume and range fire from the magazine rifle, the use of 
smokeless powder, and the evolution of the rapid-fire, indirect 
laying, shielded field gun, have so modified battlefield conditions 
that movements in the open of infantry in close order have become 
practically impossible, and the old battlefield pictures of troops 
maneuvering on the field gave place in the last war (the far east) 
to an “empty battlefield.” 

Nowadays, troops in the presence of each other burrow like 
moles to escape observation and to secure protection from fire. If 
we assume for a moment the action of advancing infantry, which 
is necessarily more or less exposed, against entrenched infantry, 
neither side being assisted by artillery, we find that, theoretically, the 
loss on each side should be in proportion to the amount of surface 
exposed, or about as 5 to 1. Practically, it has been found that the 
ratio is much greater. For, in reality, a man under cover can hardly 
be reached by the flat trajectory of the small-arm; to do so requires 
an accuracy of fire which infantry cannot hope to attain under the 
conditions and emotions of the battlefield. It therefore becomes 
necessary for the advancing force to receive further assistance than 
its own rifles to enable it to hold down the fire of the defenders. 
This is accomplished by the artillery, which, by bursting shrapnel 
in the air near the enemy’s trenches, reaches the personnel behind 
the trenches, thus preventing these men from rising to fire. Either 
side being provided with artillery, the other side must also be so 
provided, for only artillery can effectively combat artillery; the 
infantry bullet is harmless against artillery shields, even if it reaches 
them in the concealed positions which are now recognized as the 
rule throughout the world. Holding down the enemy’s infantry and 
artillery fire by our artillery enables our own infantry to advance. 
In addition, only the heavier projectiles of the artillery can remove 
or destroy material obstacles in the way of our advancing infantry. 
The result of these conditions is a greater dependence of the infantry 
on its artillery. 

In addition to the material result which the artillery thus 
accomplishes, this arm is well known to furnish the greatest possible 
moral support to the infantry. This fact is recognized by all authorities, 
and with the greater nervous tension on the infantry, due to modern 
warfare conditions, the need for moral support has also increased; 
again, the more untrained the infantry, the greater the need for 


- J A 




moral support. Hence, while the field artillery is always auxiliary 
to the infantry, it has become a vital, essential, and indispensable 
adjunct. Such a thing as a large force of infantry without artillery 
has now become inconceivable; it would not be worth placing in 
the field! 

The union between infantry and artillery is so close that in all 
modem armies the two arms are closely associated in time of peace 
as well as in war, and the drill regulations of each arm contain 
copious references to the action of the other arm. In Germany, 
when “the line” is spoken of, infantry and artillery are meant, all 
other troops being regarded as auxiliary but these two being always 
classed together. This intimate relation between infantry and field 
artillery is not generally understood in the United States. 

Field Artillery in Foreign Armies 

The increasing importance attached to field artillery in foreign 
armies is shown by the following statement of the number of field 
(light, horse, and mountain) batteries maintained in 1909. The figures 
are from Von LoebelTs reports, and only the active standing army 
is considered. 

Germany.has over 570 batteries 

France.has 631 batteries 

Russia.has 549 batteries 

Austro-Hungary.has 325 batteries 

As an indication of the strength in field artillery of minor powers, 
the following is given (the figures are for the year 1909): 

Brazil.64 batteries 

Bulgaria.90 batteries 

Belgium.34 batteries 

Chili.22 batteries 

Sweden.54 batteries 

The United States has but 36 batteries in its standing army. 

From another source of information, believed to be even more 
correct than the foregoing, it is learned that the following is the 
number of guns maintained in the standing army in peace of each 
of the countries mentioned: 


France.2,936 

Germany.3,866 

Austria.1,854 

Russia.4,432 

England (in regular army).1,170 

(in territorial army).1,000 

Italy.1,470 

Mexico.176 

Japan. 954 light 

“.220 heavy 

United States.144, including 


mountain, light, horse, and heavy. 

No comment would seem to be necessary as to our inadequate 
number of guns. 

Classification of Guns 

Not only has the proportion of artillery to other arms considered 
necessary with the army been greatly increased in recent years, 
but there has also been a corresponding development of classes of 


artillery in order, so to speak, to obtain a tool adapted to each class 
of work. Briefly stated, field artillery is of the following classes: 

1. Mountain, light, or horse artillery. 

2. Heavy field artillery. 

In each class there is both a gun and howitzer, the latter intended 
by its curved fire to supplement the direct fire of its corresponding 
gun. These classes of artillery are part of the mobile army. They 
exist in time of peace, are horsed and equipped at all times, possess 
enough mobility to accompany an army, and according to all 
authorities may be expected to be present on every battlefield. 

After heavy artillery comes siege artillery, or position artillery, 
this being a class which is brought up to the front for particular 
occasions, is not permanently horsed, requires special platforms or 
anchorages, and is handled by fortress artillerymen. These fortress 
artillerymen, a class not existing in the United States, garrison the 
land frontier forts, which are equipped with much lighter guns than 
our coast forts. 

Another special class of artillery that is being developed is for 
the attack of balloons. But all aeronautical matters can well be 
left in abeyance until more pressing needs are provided for in the 
United States. 

Our own Ordnance Department, is keeping abreast of 
developments of artillery abroad; has designed for the United States 
field artillery the following guns: 

1. 3-inch mountain gun, throwing a fifteen-pound projectile, 
and to be carried by pack transportation. 

2.3-inch field artillery, light, throwing a fifteen-pound projectile, 
and with about 4,000 pounds behind the horses. This gun is 

3. An intermediate gun, throwing a thirty-pound projectile, 
and with about 5,000 pounds behind the horses. 

4. A howitzer of the same caliber and firing a projectile of the 
same weight, and with about 4,000 pounds behind the horses. 

5. A 4.7 - inch heavy field gun, throwing a sixty-pound proj ectile, 
and with about 8,000 pounds behind the horses. 

6. A light howitzer, of the same caliber and throwing a proj ectile 
of the same weight, and with about 5,000 pounds behind the 
horses. 

7. A heavy field howitzer, 6-inch caliber, throwing a 120-pound 
projectile, and with about 8,000 pounds behind the horses. 

With the exception of the thirty-pound gun and howitzer, there 
is no question but that all of the above calibers are essential and 
should now be in commission. 

It is understood that a heavier gun than any of the above is being 
designed for siege purposes but to which branch of the artillery- 
field or coast—it will be assigned is unknown to the writer. 

Of all of the above mentioned field artillery guns and howitzers, 
there are actually in service at the present time only the 3-inch light 
gun. It is understood that the mountain gun will soon be placed in 
service and also the 4.7-inch gun, but the latter only at the cost of 
withdrawing a corresponding number of 3-inch guns. 

It is important that all of these types of guns and howitzers be 
placed in service in order that their drill regulations may be prepared 
and that troops may become more or less familiar with the use 
of this ordnance before actually taking the field. The importance 
of these guns and howitzers to the mobile army is not generally 
understood in the United States. 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 H4 

























Shortage of Field Artillery in the United States 

The thirty regiments of regular infantry will form three and 
one-third divisions, requiring under the Field Service Regulations 
six and two-thirds regiments of light and mountain artillery; there 
are in existence five regiments of this artillery. 

The fifteen regiments of cavalry will supply cavalry for the 
divisions mentioned above, and also enough for a cavalry division 
requiring one regiment of horse artillery; there is one regiment of 
horse artillery in existence. 

The three and one-third infantry divisions will require three 
and one-third battalions of heavy field artillery; there are none in 
existence. Of the ten regiments of field artillery that are now required, 
therefore, for divisions which maybe formed from existing infantry 
and cavalry, we have but six in existence. There are enough militia 
infantry regiments to form about sixteen divisions requiring thirty- 
two regiments, or 192 batteries of light and mountain artillery; 
there are in existence fifty-one batteries. These divisions would 
require sixteen battalions of heavy field artillery; there are none in 
existence. 

The regular army, therefore, contains about one-half as much 
artillery as is needed for the regular infantry and cavalry, and the 
militia contains about one-fifth or one-sixth as much artillery as it 
needs for existing infantry. 

Bearing in mind the close relationship existing between infantry 
and field artillery, it may be said that the fighting value of unaided 
or inadequately supported infantry increases in direct proportion 
to the number of regiments only up to a certain point; beyond this 
each added regiment of the infantry adds a lessening proportion 
of increased strength. The forces of the United States have long 
since passed the point of maximum value, and, with our poorly 
proportioned army (both regular and militia, considered together 
or separately), we have now reached the point where the strength 
of the army can be most effectively increased by favoring in effort 
and money organizations of field artillery rather than of other arms. 

In other words, our critical shortage of field artillery should lead us 
to strain every point to bring what we have to the highest attainable 
efficiency and then to create more of this arm. 

Efficiency of Present Militia Batteries 

Of the fifty-one batteries of the militia now in existence (last 
report Chief of Division of Militia Affairs), only forty-four are 
equipped with the 3-inch rapid-fire guns. Of these forty-four 
batteries, very few have any real or potential efficiency in them 
under present conditions. As an illustration of the character of the 
average militia battery, the following extracts from the inspection 
reports of the last inspection of seventeen batteries are given: 

1. Recruited from element of doubtful character. 

2. Efficiency as field artillery almost nullified. 

3. About sixty-five per cent consists of recruits of about four 
months’ service. 

4. Present efficiency is very low and fire discipline very 
indifferent. 

5. Efficiency low; service of pieces slow and fire discipline 
indifferent. 

6. Fire control and direction very poor. 

7. Average knowledge of guns and service not high. 

8. Battery demoralized. 

9. Privates not thoroughly informed as to duties of cannoneers. 

10. Men possess fair knowledge of standing gun drill, but officers 
are in need of much instruction, particularly conduct of fire. 

11. Could not as field artillery be expected to go anywhere. 

H5 January-February 2011 • Fires — 1911 The Field Artillery Journal 


12. At present know little about field artillery. 

13. Battery as a whole inefficient and lacks interest. 

14. Very slow at drill; not efficient, captain lacks knowledge 

of drill regulations. 

15. Not at present efficient. 

16. Command is far from field service efficiency. 

17. Officers not up to requirements in instrumental work and 

handling firing data. 

The inefficient condition of state batteries is not generally 
appreciated by state authorities. 

Hasty Improvisation 

The relation of field artillery to the other arms, its importance 
to them, and the internal difficulties in organizing, equipping and 
handling it, have never been understood or appreciated in the United 
States. There still exists to some extent the opinion that this arm 
can be improvised or hastily created upon the outbreak of war. This 
opinion, always ill-founded, is absolutely wrong to-day. 

Misunderstanding as to the field artillery in the Civil War led 
General Hunt, Chief of Artillery in the Army of the Potomas, in 
his final report, dated June 5, 1865, to state: 

“I do not hesitate to state that the field artillery of this army 
(Potomae), although not inferior to any in our service, has 
been from one-third to one-half less efficient than it ought 
to have been, while it has cost from one-third to one-half 
more money than there was any necessity for.” 

But artillery conditions in that war were simple as compared 
to present requirements. The guns were mostly smooth-bore, the 
range was short, the laying appliances were extremely simple, and 
the principal work in fighting the guns consisted merely in getting 
them on the line and then firing almost point blank. There were no 
mathematical computations of firing data; there was no shrapnel fire 
to adjust in three directions; there was no sheaf of fire to manipulate 
there were no delicate, accurate instrumental scales to set, bubbles 
to center, etc., as there now are. Such targets as could be reached 
were at short range and quite visible; consequently no elaborate 
training in observation and communication was necessary for the 
personnel. 

At the present time, both in the War Department and in the 
militia of the several states, field artillery is theoretically on the 
same footing as other arms. In the militia, a company is largely 
regarded as a company, whether under the designation of company, 
troop, or battery. As a matter of fact, the field artillery is worse off 
than the other arms, because there is an actual hostility among the 
states against the arm, partially due to lack of understanding and 
partially to the cost of maintaining it. 

The result is, that we are drifting along the same way as before 
the Civil War; but the consequences of such drifting will be more 
disastrous in the next war, for the requirements to obtain efficiency 
in field artillery are now much greater than they were then. It is 
now absolutely out of the question to obtain efficient field artillery 
by hasty improvisation. It will be long after our existing infantry 
and auxiliary arms, other than field artillery, have taken the field 
before any artillery support can be obtained from batteries organized 
or created at the outbreak of war. That we are now sadly lacking 
in artillery for our existing infantry and cavalry has already been 
pointed out. 

Proof of the statement that a long time is now required to obtain 
efficient field artillery is seen in the recent war in the far east. 




The Russians had a gun that overmatched the Japanese in every 
respect—range, flatness of trajectory, rapidity of fire, and weight 
of projectile—yet it was not until after the first year of the war 
that the Russian artillery could cope with the Japanese or furnish 
its infantry the support the Japanese gun furnished its infantry 
from the very first battle. This was due simply to the fact that the 
Russians were unfamiliar with their gun, it being a new one issued 
to them at the outbreak of the war and one with which they had 
never practiced. And in this connection two things must be borne 
in mind: First, the Russians were already organized, possessing 
artillery knowledge, and not ignorant untrained men as would be 
the case in hastily raised batteries in the United States; and second, 
the gun it took the Russians months and months to learn even in 
war was far more simple than the present rapid-fire gun with which 
all nations are now equipped. The Russians, themselves, since the 
war, have adopted the true rapid-fire gun the use of which is based 
on radically different principles from that of its predecessors and 
requires an immensely increased amount of training to utilize its 
inherent powers. 

The amount of training required to obtain an effective firing 
battery is not generally understood in the United States. 

Resume 

An attempt has been made in the foregoing pages to briefly 
present the field artillery situation in the United States. It may be 
summed up as follows: 

1. Considering only existing regiments of infantry, there is 
about one-sixth enough field artillery to support these regiments. 

2. This shortage of field artillery would in real war very largely 
negative the efficiency of the infantry. 

3. In failing to make adequate artillery provision, we are pursuing 
a policy diametrically opposed to the rest of the civilized world, 
or rather, we are neglecting to have a policy. 

4. The absolute dependency of large masses of infantry upon 
its artillery is not generally understood in the United States. 

5. There will appear against us in any large war special classes 
of ordnance with which we cannot cope unless we previously 
get into service the same classes of ordnance, now being 
manufactured by our Ordnance Department. 

6. Of the existing militia field artillery, a large part has practically 
no efficiency at present. 

7. The artillery deficiency cannot be overcome by hastily 
improvising batteries when the emergency arises. 

In the preceding remarks, no attempt has been made to entertain 
certain other important field artillery considerations from which 
we suffered during the Civil War, such as higher organization and 
ammunition supply, but attention has been concentrated on our 
present policy of maintaining an inadequate quota of this arm. 

Specific Defects in Militia Batteries 

By passing now from a consideration of our generally deplorable 
condition to the specific defects in existing units of the organized 
militia, we can determine the cause of these defects and hence the 
remedies to be applied. 

Of the two actions in battle, shock and fire, the latter long 
ago became the predominating one. Field artillery is the highest 
development of fire action. It applies machine and mechanical action 
more than any other arm. It has no action except fire. But it cannot 
fire until it gets into its firing position. To get there it must be able 


to march. Marching is the combined work of men and horses. 

Untrained horses may have to be used in war; but an untrained 
driver on an untrained horse is a poor combination for moving a 
heavy load. At present drivers are untrained, due to lack of horses 
with which driving can be learned. But before a man can drive well, 
which involves managing two horses, he must be a sufficiently good 
rider to be able to devote his undivided attention to his pair without 
the necessity of devoting attention to his riding. Hence, before he 
can learn to drive he must learn to ride. There is no known way of 
learning to ride except by mounting a horse, and, as states make 
practically no provision for horses, the drivers are as a rule poor 
riders. 

Again, when pairs of horses are combined into a six-horse team, 
the difficulty of management is further increased. It is not generally 
appreciated in the service, much less in the United States at large, that 
a great deal of training is necessary to make a good artillery driver 
out of a good rider or other horseman. Moreover, in the marching 
and maneuvering of artillery, there enters not only the skill of the 
individual drivers, but in addition the noncommissioned officers 
and the officers must possess knowledge as to the management of 
the horses. This knowledge is not possessed at the present time, 
nor can it be acquired without the presence of horses. 

It is true that at maneuvers, militia batteries, as a rule, manage, 
ultimately, with their untrained men and horses, to get into position; 
but it is equally true that usually this is done too slowly and too 
confusedly to be of use in campaign. And the only reason they 
are able to do this even in peace is on account of having empty 
ammunition chests. Filling the caisson with ammunition as in 
campaign adds 90 per cent to its weight, and under this latter 
condition the average militia battery could neither maintain its 
place in a marching column nor get into its firing position. All of 
these deficiencies are manifestly due to lack of horses. 

Working horses can be maintained in condition only by properly 
fitted and adjusted harness; but to learn to fit and adjust harness 
requires horses. Furthermore, horses canbe maintained in serviceable 
condition in the field only by proper care; but without horses in 
time of peace the proper care of them will not be learned. It is safe 
to assume that if the men have not learned in peace how to care 
for horses, the latter will receive scant attention in campaign, with 
the result that the battery will soon be immobilized. 

Hence, the first class of deficiencies is: 

(a) Poor riding. 

(b) Poor driving. 

(c) Poor management of six-horse teams. 

(d) Ignorance as to fitting and adjusting harness and saddles. 

(e) Ignorance as to stable duty and care of horses. 

The remedy is, to have in the battery sufficient horses for 
instruction purposes. In the very few brilliant exceptions, where 
the battery maintains a nucleus of horses, the defects herein stated 
do not exist to any appreciable degree, conclusively proving that 
militia batteries can acquire and apply the necessary knowledge 
connected with the horse part of the battery if given the requisite 
facilities. 

And it must be borne in mind that if we include horses in the 
facilities we must include men to care for them. The number of men 
need not be great (anywhere from five to twenty), but they should 
be permanently enlisted in the battery, should care for the horses 
and be proficient in all matters properly pertaining to the duties of 
an enlisted man; they could thus also act as instructors and would 
form a nucleus of trained men that would make its influence felt in 
leavening the mass of other men that might at any time be taken 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 H6 





into the battery. 

Hence, the first need can be summed up by saying it is a nucleus 
of trained men and horses. 

It is frequently assumed that of the two essential features of field 
artillery (the horse or marching part and the gun or firing part) the 
former at present is, for the militia, the weaker end in efficiency. 
Actually this is not the case. Militia batteries are no more efficient 
in delivering an effective fire than in marching; in fact, they are 
probably less efficient. Efficiency in firing is wholly the work of 
the personnel, commissioned and enlisted; and, with the notable 
exception of a very few batteries, there is now a total lack of 
adequate instruction in this work. As a rule, the officers have not 
sufficient knowledge of reconnaissance to reconnoiter an approach 
and select a suitable position and install the battery therein for firing. 
This is important, for if struck by fire when limbered the battery is 
practically helpless, as it cannot, as can infantry, conceal itself by 
lying down in a fold of the ground. To assist the captain, there are 
provided by the Drill Regulations “Information and Communication 
details.” These are at present untrained; generally they have never 
even been appointed. Some officers do not even know the firing 
commands, many do not know how to compute firing data, and 
very few are able to manipulate the sheaf of fire. Some of these 
defects in officers are due to lack of instruction. In some cases they 
are due to lack of elementary education, the officer being unable 
to use a simple formula involving algebraic signs. 

But, aside from the question of efficiency of the officers of 
a battery, they cannot deliver an effective fire without properly 
instructed enlisted personnel. That a battery is a firing machine is the 
conception of the present rapid-fire gun. The machine sows a selected 
area with shrapnel balls by turning a rafale on it, the density of balls 
per square yard being adapted to the situation existing; the desired 
result accomplished, the sheaf of fire is shifted to another target. This 
conception is essential, for troops now present only fleeting targets. 
The idea is entirely opposed to the old one (which was suitable to 
older types of ordnance) of an aggregate of individual guns keeping 
up a continuous bombardment. Rapidity and accuracy in the setting 
of instruments is essential to the working of the firing machine. These 
requisites do not, as a rule, exist at present. Occasionally a battery is 
found that has accuracy, but it is thought that not over three batteries 
in the United States combine accuracy with rapidity. To secure this 
combination, the Drill Regulations subdivide the work of loading 
and laying so that each man has only one or two things to do; but, 
necessarily, this subdivision of labor makes each man dependent 
upon every other. Nowhere is the necessity for cooperation so vital 
as in the field artillery. One man failing to do his part will delay 
or negative one gun—that is, 25 per cent of the battery. Hence the 
necessity for a high degree of training in the individual man of the 
gun squad. In addition, the captain adjusts his fire by corrections 
based on observations of rounds just fired. If the gun detachment 
is inaccurate in its work, the firing is erratic, the captain never gets 
his fire adjusted, and, therefore, it will never be effective; hence, 
the net result will be merely a waste of ammunition—and waste 
of a round of ammunition in field artillery is very different from a 
waste of one round of small-arms ammunition. 

Batteries capable of delivering an effective fire adapted to the 
tactical situation are vital to the infantry; a battery incapable of 
delivering such a fire will be at best merely a useless expense and 
an annoyance, and may be an actual impediment and source of 
weakness requiring assistance from other arms to extricate it or 
possibly save it from capture. A battery can be capable of delivering 
an effective fire only when each individual enlisted man in it is 
thoroughly trained, when the entire personnel is trained to work 
together, and when the captain is a master in handling the machine 

H7 January-February 2011 • Fires — 1911 The Field Artillery Journal 


thus created and in skillfully manipulating the sheaf of fire delivered 
by the machine. Failure in any part of these requisites causes the 
machine to break down, and the very rapidity of fire of the gun 
will result within a few minutes in wasting the entire ammunition 
carried, for all the ammunition carried with a battery at war strength 
can be fired away in about half an hour. 

The proper training of the personnel in all that relates to fire can 
be accomplished in militia batteries, but it requires facilities and 
opportunities, time and money. These requisites do not at present 
exist, and hence the untrained condition of the personnel. These 
requisites are considered below: 

(a) Facilities and opportunities for drill and practice. 

As stated in the last report of the Chief of Division of Militia 
Affairs, instruction commences with that of the armory and passes 
up through the state encampment to the culmination in combined 
maneuvers. But at present, according to inspection reports, (see 
report Chief of Division of Militia Affairs), the armories are, as a 
rule, inadequate and poorly adapted for the purpose. The armory, 
or foundation part of the scheme, being defective, naturally the 
whole structure falls to the ground. An armory should be large 
enough to permit placing the four guns in line for instruction in 
the firing battery, and as most of the drilling is done at night the 
armory should be so lighted that the scales and bubbles on sights, 
etc., can be easily read. In addition, there should be a clear space in 
rear of the gun for the erection of aiming points, and space enough 
in front for firing sub-caliber cartridges, with a suitable back stop. 
The armory should also contain a riding ring, or there should be 
one available and conveniently located. Assuming that suitable 
armories have been erected in which the appropriate elementary 
indoor instruction for both officers and men has been held, both 
mounted and dismounted, the state encampments would afford 
facilities for carrying this instruction to the next higher degree; but 
these should be artillery encampments, in order that the batteries 
may receive necessary instruction in the technique of artillery and 
not be required to participate in combined problems for which they 
are at present wholly unready and which divert them from vastly 
more necessary work. State troops armed with the small-arm go 
into camp annually and hold target practice, and in addition the law 
provides each regiment and separate battalion with an inspector of 
small-arm practice; yet, for the field artillery, which has no action 
except fire, there is no such requirement, and no provision for firing 
instructors. It is an absolute impossibility to obtain fire efficiency 
in the field artillery under these conditions. Batteries should be 
required to hold target practice as soon as they have reached such 
a degree of development as will render such firing instructive to 
them. Many have not yet reached this stage, and many never will 
unless more encouragement is given in the future than in the past. 

Finally, as has already been indicated, the field artillery officer 
requires a high degree of training, and to assist him in this respect 
the special elementary summer school established at Fort Riley 
last June should be maintained until each and every militia officer 
outgrows it. After that, they should attend the proposed School of 
Fire at Fort Sill, under provisions and regulations that need not be 
considered now. 

Of immediate assistance toward securing a better standard 
and in preparing the batteries for their summer encampment and 
for target practice, would be the detail to each battery so desiring 
it of a noncommissioned officer from the regular field artillery. 
This simple act would require no legislation, would involve but 
slight expense, and is believed to be desired by numerous battery 
commanders. This noncommissioned officer shouldbe used entirely 
as an instructor, and not as a laborer, clerk, or caretaker of the 




armory. Classes should be ordered to Fort Riley (which seems to 
be our field artillery center of information) for a special course of 
instruction prior to being detailed to militia batteries, and should be 
given a course of instruction relating exclusively to field artillery 
and calculated to make them of the maximum value to the militia of 
that arm; and finally, the men should be obtained by increasing the 
number of noncommissioned officers in certain regular batteries, 
which can now be done under the law. This would work no hardship 
on regular batteries. 

But the capacity of a noncommissioned officer is limited, 
and, therefore, his instruction should be supplemented by that of 
regular field artillery officers. While ultimately there should be one 
such officer to each group of from three to six batteries, at present 
details should be limited, because of shortage of officers, to one to 
each of the Departments of the Lakes and the Gulf and two to the 
Department of the East. The first contains 10, the second 5, and 
the third 19 batteries, the first and third together comprising over 
one-half the militia field artillery of the United States. 

The second detail (Department of the Gulf) is recommended on 
account of the very backward condition of the batteries stationed 
therein. It is not believed that four officers could be assigned to any 
other duty in which their services would be of equal value to the 
United States. But they should be carefully selected, and should 
be almost continuously at one battery or another. They can do but 
little good if merely stationed at Department Headquarters. Personal 
contact and instruct are needed, not written communications. It is 
idle to think that field artillery will ever be made efficient without 
supplying competent instructors to the national guard. 

(b) Time and money. 

Although it is not generally recognized, it is a fact that much 
more can be done even with the present lack of facilities than is being 
done toward securing efficiency. There is a great deal of instruction 
that can be given without enlarging the present armories or requiring 
horses. Reference is had to the training of officers in computing 
firing data and manipulating the sheaf, and to the instruction of the 
specialists (information and communication details). It is merely 
necessary for these men to go out in the country a few miles, taking 
with them such instruments and appliances as can be carried by 
hand. A ride on the trolley will generally take them into the open 
country where they can secure the desired practice. But this work 
will have to be done in the daytime, and most of the personnel are 
engaged during that time in making a living. If these men could be 
gotten out for one or two afternoons a week, a course that would 
double or treble the present efficiency of the whole organization 
in a short time could be laid out. But the men cannot in general be 
expected to be absent from their daily vocations unless they are at 
least partially compensated for their loss. This necessary training 
cannot be secured in an armory at night. Granting, therefore, that 
to secure efficiency a certain amount of instruction must be given 
in the daytime, and that daytime instruction cannot be secured 
without compensation, the question arises, where is the money 
to come from? The number of field artillery officers in any state 
is so small as compared with the infantry and other officers, and 
the demand from all sources for money is so great, that the field 
artillery cannot make its voice heard. Were the infantry thoroughly 
conversant with the absolute necessity for field artillery support, 
the infantry would itself insist on more adequate training of the 
field artillery. But only a large engagement in actual campaign 
will make the question of support understood. Then there will be 
a demand from one end of the land to the other for artillery. Field 
artillery officers generally complain that they cannot get enough 
money to even approximately enable them to secure efficiency. It is 


a notable fact that one battery of the middle Atlantic states, which 
secures a large annual sum of money and has special opportunities 
in the management of its finances, compares very favorably with 
the regular artillery. The only solution, then, is a special and distinct 
appropriation for field artillery. This will have to come from either 
the states, individually, or from the United States, or partly from 
each. But to get the states themselves to make a distinct field artillery 
appropriation is regarded as hopeless. There would be too much 
opposition, and to sufficiently educate public sentiment in each 
state would be the work of years during which the field artillery 
would remain in its present inefficient condition. Moreover, there 
is at the present time a feeling that this is a distinctly national arm, 
unsuited to state police purpose, and that it is not right to ask the 
state for liberal appropriations for it. Whether this sentiment is right 
or wrong, it exists and must be reckoned with. Therefore, the only 
remedy is for the federal government to make such an appropriation. 

The second class of deficiencies, therefore, is: 

1. Inadequately trained enlisted personnel in firing duties. 

2. Untrained condition of enlisted specialists. 

3. Untrained condition of officers in using specialists. 

4. Untrained condition of officers in handling firing battery. 

5. Untrained condition of officers in computing firing data; in 
some cases insufficient elementary education to learn the work. 

6. Inadequate armory facilities for instruction. 

7. Lack of target practice. 

8. Lack of instructors, noncommissioned and commissioned. 

9. Lack of daylight instruction. 

10. Lack of financial support. 

And all of these could be remedied by a sufficient appropriation 
and by the detail of a few officers and men of the regular field 
artillery. 

Conclusion 

The steps to be taken to secure greater efficiency in batteries of 
the organized militia, mentioned in the order of ease with which 
they can be taken and the advantages that would accrue, are: 

1. Continuing to hold annually the elementary instruction camp 
for officers at Fort Riley, Kansas. 

2. Detailing a class of field artillery sergeants, similar to that 
prescribed in General Orders, No. 60, War Department, series 
of 1909, by increasing the strength of certain batteries in the 
United States field artillery, the class to consist of about 35 
men, to report at Fort Riley, Kansas, for a course of instruction 
somewhat similar to that prescribed by Circular, No. 29, War 
Department, series of 1909, but specially designed to meet the 
needs of the field artillery. Upon completion of the course the 
men would be assigned to such batteries as governors of states 
may request. 

3. Detail of a suitable field artillery officer of the regular army 
for duty in each of the Departments of the Lakes and the Gulf 
and two to the Department of the East, under suitable instructions 
to the commanders thereof. These officers should be traveling 
instructors, the matter of dates and details to be arranged by 
correspondence between the department commander and the 
governors of states concerned; the number of officers so detailed 
to be increased later, as circumstances demand and conditions 
require, and all officers so detailed to be in touch with the central 
militia authorities in Washington. 

4. Provision for the attendance of militia field artillery officers at 
the proposed School of Fire at Fort Sill, under such restrictions as 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 H8 





the War Department may impose, such for instance as the states 
defraying a part or all of the cost of such officer’s attendance; 
and admission to the school might be extended to only those 
officers who, by previous examination at the Fort Riley instruction 
camp, are found to be sufficiently advanced to profit by the 
course at Fort Sill. 

5. The passage by Congress of an appropriation act for the 
specific purpose of developing the field artillery of the organized 
militia, the appropriation to be expended, not according to 
Congressional representation under the provisions of Section 
1661. Revised Statutes, as amended, or upon any other basis of 
numbers, but to be expended as the Secretary of War may see 
fit, upon the basis of obtaining efficiency. Participation in this 
fund should be held out as a reward for incentive. It is believed 
that to allow all batteries to participate in this fund as a matter 
of right would be a mistake and would not secure the best 
progress; but the opposite policy of progressively allotting just 
so much to any battery whenever it or its state accomplishes a 
certain result as determined by examinations and inspections 
by the United States, would act as an incentive and secure true 


progress toward efficiency. 

It is thought that in no way other than as herein indicated can the 
general apathy now existing be removed. Only by radical action can 
the field artillery ever be made efficient. The sooner the deplorable 
situation now existing is realized and appropriate steps taken to 
relieve it, the sooner shall we avert the disaster we are not inviting. 
We should either spend enough money on national guard batteries 
to get some real efficiency out of them, or else stop spending on 
them entirely money for which we would get practically no real 
return in the field. We are now either spending too much or not 
enough on the field artillery. 

[The writer of this article has evidently devoted considerable 
time and thought to the subject, and it seems to be an excellent 
analysis of the situation with respect to the field artillery of 
the organized militia. Officers of the army and of the militia, 
without regard to the arm of the service to which they belong, 
are requested to express their views on the subj ect for publication 
in THE JOURNAL.—THE EDITOR 


THE CARE AND TRAINING OF ARTILLERY REMOUNTS 

BY CAPTAIN WM. J. SNOW, SIXTH FIELD ARTILLERY, U. S. ARMY. 


General Orders, No. 188, War Department, October 14, 1910, 
reads in part as follows: 

“ 1. Under normal peace conditions the total number of horses 
actually required as remounts for the Army should not exceed 
10 per centum of the maximum authorized allowance of horses 
for each organization. Requisitions for horses for the cavalry 
and field artillery, riding horses for the mounted orderlies 
of the infantry, engineers, members of the Hospital Corps 
required to be mounted, the Signal Corps, schools and staff 
colleges, and Indian scouts will not exceed in any one fiscal 
year 10 per centum of the maximum authorized allowance 
of horses for the organizations for which they are intended, 
except when specially authorized by the Secretary of War. 

“2. So far as practicable, horses will be furnished from the 
remount depots. Should this source of supply not be sufficient, 
the remainder will be supplied by purchase, as heretofore. 
Requisitions for horses should be submitted annually and 
forwarded through regular channels in time to reach the 
office of the Quartermaster General on or before March 1 
of each year. Issues of horses from remount depots will be 
made as soon as practicable after the receipt of requisitions. 

“3. As the young horses furnished from the remount depots 
will generally have been handled only with a view of making 
them gentle and accustoming them to weight carrying and 
preparing them to receive their military training, they should, 
upon receipt at posts or by organizations to which they are 
assigned, receive a careful course of training under the 
supervision of a graduate of the Mounted Service School 
whenever it is possible to obtain one, otherwise under a 
carefully selected and competent officer, before being placed 
in the ranks for regular military duties as troop and battery 
horses. Such training will continue as long as is necessary 
to qualify the horses thoroughly for the ranks, generally not 
less than one year. If the horses thus turned in are under five 

H9 January-February 2011 • 


years old they should have only moderate field service; six 
years old, full field service. In this training the fundamental 
principles laid down in the service manuals or taught at the 
Mounted Service School will be followed.” 

From this it is evident that the horses to be supplied to the army 
will hereafter as far as practicable be young untrained ones, and 
that they are to “receive a careful course of training” after being 
assigned to organizations. The order further indicates that horses 
are expected to last ten years in the service. 

Sooner or later horses must be issued to mounted organizations 
of the organized militia as well as of the regular army. In view, 
therefore, of the foregoing conditions, it is thought that the following 
notes may be of interest to field artillery men both of the regular 
army and the organized militia. No claim is made that these notes 
are complete, or even that they set forth the best method of training; 
but it is thought that they will at least be of assistance to those 
officers who have charge of remounts. 

For assistance in preparing this article, thanks are due Captain 
W. C. Short, Thirteenth Cavalry, and First Lieutenant Gordon 
Johnston, Seventh Cavalry, respectively Assistant Commandant and 
Senior Instructor in Equitation and Horse Training at the Mounted 
Service School, Fort Riley, Kansas. 

Care of Remounts 

Immediately upon their arrival horses should be inspected by 
a veterinarian, previous to taking them to the battery stables or 
corrals, any suspicious cases of infectious or contagious disease 
being at once thoroughly isolated. All the other remounts, even 
though showing no signs of disease, should be kept together in 
the most isolated part of the stable to prevent the spread of any 
incipient but undetected disease to the older battery horses. 

Each remount should, if practicable, have a stall to himself; 
should be protected from liability to colds caused by drafts or 
exposure; and all remounts should be very carefully watched, 
as they are liable to develop shipping fever and distemper. Their 


Fires — 1911 The Field Artillery Journal 




digestion is ordinarily disarranged, and they should be placed on 
a diet. Horses in civil life are fed three times daily, and as far as 
practicable the practice should be followed in the service. For the 
newly received remount a suitable diet would be: Morning, 3 quarts 
of oats; noon, 3 quarts of oats; night, 5 quarts of bran mash, made 
with cold water in summer and warm water in winter. 

When the digestive system becomes normal, as judged by the 
droppings, the bran mash may be reduced in frequency to twice a 
week, but the number of mashes should be again increased whenever 
the digestive system shows the necessity therefor. As the mashes 
are diminished the oats ration may be increased, so that ultimately 
it would be about 4 quarts in the morning, 3 at noon, and 5 at night. 
The horses should have their allowance of hay, and all the good 
clear water they desire, at least before each feeding. 

The following additional rules should be observed with the 
remounts: 

None of the remount utensils, such as currycombs, brushes, 
blankets, bridles, buckets, watering-troughs, etc., should be used 
with the older battery horses. 

Take the temperature of each animal, morning and evening. If 
in excess of 101 degrees, report the fact to the veterinarian. 

Keep the horses warm, erring on the safe side, with blankets. 

Keep a lump of salt in each stall. 

Graze the horses, if practicable. 

Lead the horses daily, equipped with a watering bridle, for a 
few days; at the end of a week, any latent sickness should have 
developed, and the well horses will be rested and in condition to 
begin training. But, even after the first week or so has passed, the 
horses should, during the entire period of acclimation and adaptation 
to military life, covering several months, be carefully watched. 
During any period of debility they should receive such exercise, 
not work, as may be beneficial. 

If at any time during the training the horse gets out of condition 
or develops blemishes or unsoundness, his training should be 
immediately lessened to such an amount as is suitable to his condition. 
Especially should the young horse (under five and one-half years 
of age) be so used as to avoid developing slight blemishes which 
may later ruin him. 

New horses should not be turned into corrals with old ones until 
after becoming accustomed to the new surroundings and being in 
good health and vigor. 

Training of Remounts — Preliminary Remarks 

The training of a remount should be appropriate to the work he 
will have to do when taken up for full duty in service. The character 
of the work to be done by an artillery horse is not the same as that to 
be done by a cavalry horse; therefore, training appropriate to one is 
not the best training for the other. This fact, sometimes lost sight of 
in the army, should be constantly borne in mind. It is not proper to 
simply regard all horses as service mounts and give them identical 
training; still less is it proper to take up the artillery horse for full 
duty without giving him any preparatory training, trusting that he 
will somehow pick up the training he should have. No commander 
would think of doing this with a recruit, and neither should he do 
so with a horse. 

The principal work of an artillery horse is draft, and not saddle; 
but any reasonable training for saddle that he gets will help him 
in his draft, just as any military training a recruit may receive will 
help him, whether the training be in his own arm of the service or 
not, but his best and necessary training must be in his own arm of 
the service, and so it is with the artillery horse. His saddle training 
is auxiliary to his draft training, and from the first attention should 


be directed toward securing a maximum development of his load¬ 
pulling qualities. 

The artillery horse occupies an intermediate position between 
the saddle horse and the draft horse, pure and simple; his work 
partakes of the nature of each, but he belongs in a distinct class by 
himself. He, like the cavalry horse, works under the saddle, and 
therefore must have saddle training; but, unlike the cavalry horse 
he must not jump, seldom makes abrupt changes of direction at fast 
gaits, does not need to work on two tracks, etc. In other words, he is 
less highly trained to obey leg action than is the cavalry horse and, 
conversely, he gets less assistance from the rider’s legs than does 
the cavalry horse. Consequently, he must be more highly trained 
for obedience to rein indications. 

Again, since about half the horses in a battery carry riders, the 
animals cannot be regarded as simply draft horses. The average 
farm or city truck horse hauls a much heavier load than an artillery 
horse, but he hauls it at a walk; the average carriage horse travels 
much longer distances at a faster sustained gait than an artillery 
horse, but his load is lighter. In other words, the draft conditions 
in the artillery are different from those in civil life. 

The demands on the artillery horse are great. He must be a fair 
saddle horse, under difficult conditions, since he is incumbered 
by harness, is coupled up with five other horses, and draws a 
considerable load, all of which affects his movements. He must 
also be a good draft horse while still acting as a saddle horse and 
carrying his driver, or as an off horse receiving but little assistance 
from the driver. He must do his work over broken and difficult 
terrain of the most varied sort. And, finally, he must be this saddle 
and draft animal at all gaits. 

The demands upon an artillery horse being thus great and of 
special character, it is evident that they can be met only by systematic 
training along appropriate lines. The foregoing remarks apply to 
every horse in a battery, even in a horse battery, for every horse 
ordinarily used under the saddle must be prepared to take his place 
in a team in an emergency. 

The training, therefore, comprises three periods: 

1. Training for saddle. 

2. Training for draft. 

3. Training for combination of the above. 

The first and second periods may be carried on concurrently 
but independently. 

General Principles 

As the elementary training of recruits in horsemanship must be 
accomplished with the aid of trained horses, so must the breaking 
of untrained animals to saddle and to harness be done by good 
riders and drivers. The future usefulness of the remounts depends 
largely upon their elementary training. In any mounted unit the 
combination of inexperienced men and untrained animals should 
be inadmissible. Therefore, the interest of the service demands 
that there shall be developed in each battery a number of men 
as horse-trainers, not only for the efficiency of the unit itself but 
also to provide the means for the rapid development of new units. 
Such men must not only be good riders and drivers, but also good 
horsemen, familiar with the care, handling, and training of horses. 
The disposition of the man communicates itself to the horse and 
reacts favorably or unfavorably as the case may be. Coolness, 
firmness, good temper, good judgment, and, above all, patience, 
are the attributes necessary to a successful trainer. 

In garrison, horses should receive a thorough training; in the 
field, they receive such as circumstances permit. But in either 
case, it must be constantly borne in mind that draft and not saddle 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 H10 





qualifications are of paramount importance. 

A horse learns by constant repetition of a lesson coupled with 
the hope of reward and fear of punishment. The latter must be 
awarded only with great judgment, the trainer exercising infinite 
patience in his work. The usual rewards are caresses, either by the 
voice or touch, a toothsome bit of food (oats, grass, etc.), rests 
succeeding obedience, dropping reins, relaxing pressure of the legs, 
dismounting, etc. Persistence in the use of the aids, employment of 
the spur, harsh tones of the voice, and finally the exceptional use of 
the whip, are the usual punishments. No definite rules can be laid 
down. The instructor must be guided by his experience and best 
judgment, bearing in mind that faults of execution must be rectified 
with gentleness and patience. Nervous, high-strung horses should 
never be physically punished. 

Most of the movements hereafter described must for a long 
time be repeated in the same order until the horse is confirmed in 
his knowledge of the effects of the aids and of the bit by constant 
repetition. In this way, laborious obedience finally becomes intuitive 
habit. 

Analysis shows that all the desired movements of the horse at all 
gaits may be obtained by combinations of four elementary actions 
directed by the rider: (1) to move forward upon pressure of the legs, 

(2) to diminish the speed or move backward upon tension of the 
rains, (3) to control the forehand by the reins, and (4) to control the 
haunches by the rider’s legs. When purchased, the horse usually 
understands the tension of the reins only; the other three actions 
are rarely understood at the time. 

The length of the training necessarily varies with the age of the 
horse at date of arrival, his previous training, skill of the trainer, 
and special conditions facilitating or retarding the work. 

High spirts in the horse generally indicate goodphysical condition 
and lack of sufficient exercise or work. This indication must not be 
mistaken for viciousness nor subjugated by violent means. Only 
unsatisfactory results will follow training when horses are not 
worked enough. Upon such manifestations the horse should at once 
be given sufficient exercise in some form, or work on the longe, 
before proceeding further with his training. The opposite extreme of 
overwork, resulting in dullness, must also be avoided. The number 
of hours of daily work should be very gradually increased, and the 
hours of daily drill should be divided into several short periods. 

Longeing 

Training on the longe is useful both for saddle and for draft. It 
is a convenient means for exercise, calming nervousness, teaching 
obedience, suppling the horse, and the best means for imparting 
balance and sure-footedness. It teaches the young horse to go ahead 
and to turn. It may be used to teach him to carry his equipment, 
whether saddle or harness. 

The cavesson is placed on the horse’s head so that the nose-band 
will rest in the middle of the lower third of the face inside the cheek- 
straps of the halter or bridle, and should be buckled fairly tight, 
so that the nose-band will have almost no play, either sidewise or 
up-and-down. Care should be taken that the jowel-strap is buckled 
tight enough to avoid all chance of the outer cheek-strap pulling 
into the eye. The throat-latch should be loose enough to allow the 
horse to breathe freely. The longe should be a rope about forty feet 
long attached to the nose-ring of the cavesson. In teaching the horse 
to longe, select a smooth place of soft ground where a circle with a 
diameter of about forty feet can be obtained. Coil the longe in the 
left hand, leading the horse with the halter shank or the reins of the 
watering bridle in the right hand, and walk around the circle to the 
left several times, thus showing the horse the road he is to follow. 

H11 January-February 2011 • Fires — 1911 The Field Artillery Journal 

■ --. — — .-A. - _ _--i 


Then tie up the halter shank around the horse’s neck, being sure 
to leave no loop hanging, through which the horse could put his 
foot. An assistant then takes the horse, holding the nose-band of 
the halter or the cheek-strap of the bridle in the right hand and the 
rope of the longe about three feet from the cavesson in the left hand. 
The trainer, with the longe in his left hand, moves about twelve feet 
toward the center of the circle and somewhat in rear of the assistant 
at the horse’s head, and then clucks to the horse, the assistant at 
the horse’s head leading him forward on the circumference of the 
circle. The trainer walks on a smaller circle and keeps in a position 
to the left rear oblique of the horse, thus urging the horse forward. 
As the horse shows willingness to go forward, the assistant may 
remove his right hand and slip his left further along the longe and 
eventually let go entirely and go out of the circle behind the horse. 
Until the horse is confirmed in going around, the assistant must 
return to the horse’s head and begin all over again at any time the 
animal ceases to go around. 

When the horse does well at either a walk or a trot without the 
assistance, the animal should be halted and rewarded, either with 
petting or with a little grain. 

The horse is halted by a slight whip cracker motion of the longe, 
and the command “Whoa,” given with decision. If he does not 
obey promptly at the snap of the longe and the command, give a 
strong pull on the longe, thus throwing the haunches with a quick 
movement off the circle and bringing the horse to a standstill. 

The horse being at the walk, to increase the gait to the trot 
command “Trot,” in a sharp tone, at the same time walking toward 
the horse, threatening him with the loose end of the longe or a whip. 
To bring the horse from the trot to the walk, command “Walk,” 
in a soothing tone, and shake the longe horizontally or resort to a 
sharp snap of the longe if the horse does not promptly obey. 

The horse will soon learn to go out on the circle as soon as 
given sufficient slack of the rope. When he is halted on the circle 
he will soon learn to come to the trainer by the command “Come,” 
accompanied by a pull on the longe. 

To avoid accidents, the longe should always be coiled and the 
slack taken up whenever the horse comes nearer to the trainer. 

When the horse has become proficient in going to the left, the 
training should commence in the same manner to the right. 

An untrained horse should not be required to go on a small circle 
until he is suppled enough to do it without great effort. Whenthe 
horse goes around with effort and leans on the longe, more rope 
should be paid out and the circle made larger. 

One side of the horse is usually “stiffer” than the other, just as 
most people have less skill with the left than with the right hand and 
arm. The stiff side of the horse is easily discovered on the longe by 
the greater difficulty he shows in going around with the stiff side 
toward the center of the circle. The greater part of the exercise on 
the longe should be directed toward suppling the stiff side, until 
both sides are equally supple. 

The principal gaits at which a horse should be exercised on the 
longe are the walk and the trot, and especially should an untrained 
horse not be required to gallop on a small circle. 

Carrying the Saddle and Harness 

When the horse, equipped with only the bridle, works freely 
in either direction on the longe, he should then be longed with a 
saddle on. Remove the stirrups and straps and put on the saddle 
leaving the cinch comparatively loose but not so much so as to 
involve any possibility of the saddle turning. After the horse has 
been longed for some minutes, the cinch may be tightened. When 
the horse has thus become accustomed to carrying the saddle, put 




on the stirrups and let them dangle. 

When accustomed to this, gradually accustom him to the harness 
in the same way, but avoid allowing the metal collar to bruise his 
shoulder by continually striking it. 

Mounting 

When the horse has become accustomed to carrying the saddle 
and harness, he should be mounted. The assistant holds the coiled 
longe to within two feet of the nose-band, in his left hand and stands 
just to the left and facing the horse’s head, with the right hand on 
the reins (which are over the horse’s neck) near the bit. The trainer 
takes the near rein and a lock of the mane in the left hand, pats the 
saddle, and catches hold of the stirrup. Whenever the horse objects, 
a slight snap of the longe by the assistant will attract his attention 
again. If the horse does not resist he should be petted. The trainer, 
with his back to the assistant, should stand close up to the horse’s 
shoulder, turn the stirrup with the right hand, and insert the foot. 
If the horse does not object, both reins are taken with the right 
hand (retaining the left rein running through the hand which had 
a hold in the mane), catching hold of the pommel, and then lifting 
the major part of the weight on the arms. If the horse still does not 
object, the trainer may sit down in the saddle, doing so very quietly. 
Whenever the horse objects, the trainer should cease until the horse 
is quieted. If the horse becomes nervous, he should be put on the 
circle again until he becomes quiet. It must be remembered that the 
horse’s first impressions are the most lasting, and hence the utmost 
care must be taken in these first lessons. 

After the trainer is able to mount repeatedly without startling 
the horse the assistant may move the horse a few steps by drawing 
him forward, being sure to maintain the hold on the rein with the 
right hand, and inducing the horse to walk on a larger circle than 
he, the assistant, does. In this position the assistant, by pulling the 
head towards him with the longe, may exercise a powerful control 
and prevent the horse from making a plunge and thus getting out 
of hand. 

The mounting lesson should be frequently repeated until the 
horse will carry the rider without trouble. The horse, mounted, 
being then placed behind a trained horse, will soon be content to 
follow without being led by the assistant. 

Accustoming the Horse to Service Surroundings 

The horse should early be accustomed to military sights and 
sounds, such as troops, colors, bands, bugles, firing, etc. This 
result is best accomplished by riding a quiet and fearless horse and 
leading the new one, gradually making him familiar with his new 
surroundings. In approaching any object the appearance of which 
frightens the new horse, he should be kept in motion, being led 
toward the object a short distance and then edged away from it, 
each time approaching nearer, until he can touch it, if practicable, 
with his nose, and smell it. He must never be punished for his 
fear, but should be calmed, as he associates the punishment with 
the frightening object; nor should he be gotten up to the object by 
force. His approach must be gradual, and time will frequently be 
gained by stationing quiet and fearless horses on either side of the 
frightening obj ect. The same methods apply to accustoming the horse 
to frightening sounds. In neither case is he afraid of that with which 
he is familiar. Blank cartridges, gun or revolver, should be fired at 
some distance from him while he is being led accompanied by one 
or more quiet, fearless horses. He should then be quieted with the 
voice and caresses, and the sound repeated at lessening distances. 
The procedure should be repeated as often as necessary until the 


horse reaches the point where standing still and unaccompanied 
by other horses he is not afraid. 

Training for Saddle — To Move Forward 

At this stage of the training, nothing does so much good as 
walks and trots behind trained horses as nearly in a straight line 
as practicable, thus accustoming the young horse to the feel of the 
bit and the rider’s legs. The trainer should hold a rein in each hand 
and have only a slight feel on the mouth, giving more rein at any 
time the horse demands it and then again recovering the feel. 

In the lessons of “going ahead” (the most important), the legs of 
the trainer play the most important part and are used with only the 
amount of force necessary to gain the amount of go-ahead desired. 
Trainers must remember that the hand must give whenever a forward 
movement is demanded by the legs, so as not to ask something with 
the legs and contradict it with the hand. 

The movement ahead is demanded first by even pressure with 
the upper parts of the calves of the trainer’s legs; if that is not 
sufficient, by taps of the same parts, and then, if necessary by blows 
of the heels delivered by turning out the toes and striking with the 
heels just behind the cinch. In early training, when the young horse 
is found to have dull sides, the spurs can be used with the rowels 
wrapped with a piece of cloth or leather. Sharp spurs are liable to 
make kickers or vicious horses. If the horse does not respond to a 
demand for a forward movement, he can be pulled off his center of 
balance in place by opening one rein and pulling laterally and then 
closing that rein and immediately opening the other at the same 
time acting with both legs and clucking with the tongue. As the 
horse moves forward, do not continue the leg action or he will not 
understand what is meant by the demand for a forward movement. 
During the first lessons, to guide the horse it is only necessary to 
open the rein wide and pull sufficiently to point the head in the new 
direction, taking care to maintain enough pressure on the opposite 
rein to prevent the bit from pulling through the mouth or against 
the bars. Every day, until the horse is perfectly accustomed to being 
mounted and shows himself perfectly docile, he should be longed 
for a few minutes, as much so-called viciousness is nothing more 
than high spirits. Moreover, no time is lost by longeing, as it aids 
training in suppling the animal and teaching him to move forward 
promptly when demanded. Nothing is gained in going further with 
the training until the horse will go ahead promptly from a halt to 
a walk and from a walk to a trot by a demand from both legs. 

To Decrease the Gait 

To decrease the gait, slightly raise the hands and gently pull to 
the rear by leaning the body back; at the same time, very gradually 
close in the calves of the legs, and when the gait is reduced to that 
desired, the hands are lowered and the normal seat resumed. If at 
any time the rider feels the gait steadily increasing beyond what is 
desired, the same means for reducing are employed momentarily 
and repeated several times if necessary until the gait becomes 
steady. This is called the “half halt.” Care must be taken that the 
horse’s mouth is not jerked. 

The Trot 

Beginning early in the training, the trot should be largely used, 
as it teaches the horse to go into his bridle, puts him in balance, 
and develops his muscles. But care must be taken that the trot is 
not faster than the horse can take without effort. Do not let him go 
to “hitching.” 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 HI2 




To Make the Horse Leg-wise 

When the horse is in the riding-hall or ring going around the 
track with his right side toward the center of the ring, he is said to 
be going “to the right.” 

If no riding-hall is available, an open-air track, about 300 by 
150 feet, should be laid out, on soft level ground, in a location free 
from distracting noises. 

When the horse readily obeys the pressure of both of the trainer’s 
legs he should be taught to obey the pressure of either leg. This 
will mean obedience of the haunches, which should now be gotten 
control of. 

There are two methods of accomplishing this: One dismounted, 
and one mounted. The former was generally in use, but is now being 
superseded by the latter method. The first method: 

The trainer, being dismounted, holds the reins near the bit with 
one hand and lightly taps the horse with the riding-whip back of 
the girth, thus causing the horse to turn his haunches around the 
forehand. Care must be taken not to tap him so far to the rear as 
to cause him to kick. Vary the lesson by using the butt-end of the 
whip to lightly poke him back of the girth. If he does not yield to 
the taps and pokes alone, draw his head toward the side on which 
the whip is applied while continuing the taps and pokes, and as 
the work progresses gradually lessen the amount the head has to 
be turned until he will yield, with his head straight to the front. At 
first be satisfied with a single step, then reward him. Again, vary 
the lesson by reaching over the horse’s back and tapping him with 
the whip, so as to make him turn his haunches toward the trainer. 
When the horse turns freely dismounted, mount him, lightly kick 
him with one heel while keeping the forehand in place with reins, 
and continue the lessons until he turns by mere pressure of the 
rider’s calf. 

The second method: 

Going on the track to the right, execute a “right oblique,” and 
after moving a short distance from the track, execute a left about 
on the forehand made while still marching, causing the haunches to 
make a larger circle than the forehand, the trainer taking advantage 
of the natural desire of the green horse to get back on the track, and 
unconsciously obeying the aids. 

The aids to be employed in the turn on the forehand while at 
the right oblique are the left rein opened and pulled toward the rear 
and the left leg used vigorously, the right rein used against the neck 
to regulate the amount of its curvature to the left and to stop the 
right shoulder from running too far to the right while the horse is 
swinging around. 

As soon as the horse’s head is pointed toward the track on the 
same oblique line as that on which he left it, the movement straight 
aliead is demanded. Leaving the track on a left oblique, the aids to 
be employed are the opposite of those described above. 

Half Turn on the Forehand 

This may be taught by either of the preceding methods; but 
good horsemen now discourage the abouts in place (not marching) 
except with a hot-headed horse tending to rush ahead. 

Haunches In 

When the horse has learned to readily obey the pressure of 
either leg of the trainer in (as above) half turns on the forehand, 
the suppling of the haunches can be continued on the track by the 
movement “haunches in.” This movement is nothing more than a 
bend of the haunches toward the center of the riding track so that 

H13 January-February 2011 • Fires — 1911 The Field Artillery Journal 


the inside fore foot and the outside hind foot will track in a straight 
line. 

Marching on the track to the right, the method to be employed is 
as follows: Open the left rein with a light pull to the rear and apply 
the leg on the same side with enough force to move the haunches 
toward the inside of the track. The right rein is pressed against the 
neck so as to limit its curvature. The fore legs should continue 
their march straight to the front and not cross. In the beginning 
of training, the moment the trainer feels the least yielding of the 
haunches in obedience to the leg, the horse should be straightened. 
He is straightened by the reins bringing the head to the normal 
position and the inside leg pushing the haunches over. The horse 
soon learns to advance some distance in the position of “haunches 
in.” 

The Gallop 

After the horse understands “haunches in” he should be taught 
the gallop, as this is a gait which extends his muscles and gives him 
balance. To gallop without danger of falling he must lead with the 
inside fore and hind legs. A horse leans his haunches toward the 
side on which he is leading with the fore leg; therefore, the position 
of “haunches in” places him in position to gallop with the lead on 
the side to which the haunches are inclined. (The shoulder on the 
inside and the hind leg on the inside are both pushed farther to the 
front.) 

To secure a desired gallop lead, proceed as follows: The horse 
will be moved around a large circle at a trot which will be extended, 
and just before the trainer feels that the horse is about to break into 
the gallop the aids as indicated for “haunches in” will be applied 
so strongly as to push the horse into the gallop. The trainer must 
remember that his weight should be placed directly over the outside 
hind leg, and that his body should not be pitched forward but must 
retain its vertical position with the back supple. The gallop lead 
can be maintained by returning at any time to the position of the 
aids as in “haunches in.” The horse at the gallop making a turn 
must be supported by the inside rein against the neck, the inside 
leg over the cinch and the outside leg well behind the cinch and 
the rider sitting vertical and not leaning in or forward. 

Every horse has one lead which he prefers, and he should be 
drilled on the side on which he does not desire to gallop until he 
will take one lead as readily as the other. At the gallop, the horse 
should be given as long a rein as he demands, so that he can use 
his neck to balance himself in the rocking motion of the gait; but, 
at the same time, a gentle feel on the mouth should always be 
maintained. 

Trainers should select soft ground on which to gallop, and 
never hard ground. The gallop, like all other lessons, should not be 
continued until the horse is fatigued. It is well to cease any lesson 
after the horse has responded willingly to any new demand made 
upon him, thus leaving him with a pleasant impression of his work, 
from which he will grow to like it and not to dread it. 

Shoulder In 

It is as necessary to supple the shoulders of a horse as it is to 
supple the haunches, because the horse in all his turnings must 
bend his shoulders and move them laterally. The best movement 
to supple the shoulders is the movement, “shoulder in,” and it is 
obtained as follows: 

The horse is put on a small circle at a walk and allowed to 
relax. The trainer then, without contraction, opens the inside rein 
and leads the shoulder off the track he is following, just enough to 
cause the outside fore foot and the inside hind foot to track on the 




circumference of the circle. At that moment the trainer should carry 
the inside rein toward the withers, maintaining a slight bend in the 
neck with the horse’s head in, the outside rein pressed against the 
curve in the neck so as to keep the shoulders from swinging out, 
and at the same time the trainer must press the horse forward with 
both legs, the inside one used the stronger and just at the cinch, 
and the outside leg used farther back to prevent the haunches 
from swinging out. The horse will thus make a circle in which the 
haunches describe a slightly larger circle than the forehand, and 
the horse’s neck is bent so that, to a limited extent, he is looking 
toward the center of the circle. After the horse learns this movement 
on the circle, he should be taken off on a tangent for a few steps. 
He soon learns this movement, and there is no better suppler for 
the shoulders, the neck, and the jaw. 

This movement is exactly the reverse of “haunches in.” In 
“haunches in” the front feet of the horse stay on the track and the 
haunches are inclined to the inside of the track. In “shoulders in” 
the hind feet are left on the track and the shoulders and head and 
neck are inclined to the inside of the track. 

Half Turn on the Haunches 

The horse is now ready to be taught the “half turn on the 
haunches,” which is nothing more than an about on the haunches 
while marching, and is a movement in which the shoulders make a 
larger circle than the hind quarters. As in the turns on the forehand, 
horsemen prefer to teach this movement while moving rather than 
while keeping the horse in place, to avoid losing the “go ahead.” 

This movement is most easily obtained by executing a flank 
movement on the haunches and then, after marching a short distance 
in this position, executing another flank movement on the haunches, 
gradually cutting down the distance that the horse moves ahead 
until the two flank movements are combined and the “half turn on 
the haunches” is the result. 

Marching on the track to the right to execute a flank movement 
to the right on the haunches, slightly raise the hands, open the right 
rein, pulling laterally and leading the head to the right, pressing 
gradually the left rein against the neck not far from the withers and 
closing in the left leg behind the cinch. The weight of the trainer’s 
body is carried slightly to the rear and right. The right leg remains 
hanging naturally. After the two flank movements are united in the 
“half turn,” on the haunches and executed without effort, the circle 
described by the haunches may be gradually decreased in size. 
Haunch movements are not only excellent as a suppling means, 
but also in making quick turns they are largely used by the horse 
himself to preserve his balance. 

Change of Lead 

After the horse gallops at one lead as readily as at the other, the 
trainer can begin to train for the change of lead. While galloping to 
the right on the track, for example, the trainer will gallop around 
both turns at the end of the track and immediately after the second 
turn will change direction so as to follow the diagonal of the riding 
track and when two-thirds through the diagonal he will come to a 
trot and just before he enters the first turn at the end of the diagonal 
he will take the opposite or left lead of the gallop. He will then 
gallop around the four turns and immediately after the fourth turn 
leave the track and go across the riding track on the other diagonal, 
coming down to a trot as before and taking the opposite lead at the 
end of the diagonal. The distance at the trot can be very gradually 
cut down until it disappears entirely and the change of lead made 
just before entering the turn at the end of the diagonal. 


It must be remembered that the weight of the rider should be 
carried over the hind leg opposite to the lead at a gallop, and the 
croup should be held, by the leg of the rider, slightly inclined to the 
side of the lead. As a consequence, at the moment that the change is 
demanded the weight is shifted and the croup is pushed over toward 
the side of the new lead. For example: At a gallop with right lead, 
the weight is over the left hind leg of the horse, and the left leg of 
the rider inclines the croup towards the right. As a consequence, 
when the change of lead to the left is desired, the moment it is 
demanded the weight is shifted over on the right hind leg of the 
horse, and the croup is pushed over to the left with the rider right 
leg. 

To Passage 

This should not be attempted until the horse obeys the reins and 
legs fairly well. It is best taught in the riding-hall, or at the gun 
shed, or in some building. 

To passage to the right (left) — Ride obliquely toward the wall 
from the left, and just before reaching it, where the horse would 
change direction to the right in order to move along the wall, the 
trainer, controlling the forehand with the reins, closes his legs, 
the left one farther back and with greater pressure, and moves the 
haunches to the right. At first, be satisfied with a slight displacement 
of the haunches for a few steps only, and then move off parallel to 
the wall. Ride away from the wall and approach it as before. Each 
time that the wall is approached, increase the displacement of the 
haunches, until finally the horse moves along the wall, his body 
almost at right angles to it, the forehand slightly in advance of the 
haunches and his head and neck in prolongation of his body. The 
movement to the left is similiarly taught, approaching the wall from 
the right, and displacing the haunches toward the left. 

Another method of teaching this movement is with the assistance 
of a dismounted man. The horse is placed with his rump toward the 
wall. The rider uses his reins and legs to move the horse sidewise 
while the dismounted assistant reinforces their efforts by holding 
the cheek-piece of the bridle in one hand and shoving the forehand, 
while at the same time he taps the horse back of the girth with a 
whip to move the haunches. 

Suppling and Flexions 

The suppling of the horse’s body in all parts should constantly 
be the trainer’s aim, and the preceding movements will accomplish 
that result. The suppling of the jaw and the flexions should be 
postponed to the last part of training. It is better to begin them too 
late than too early. 

Right lateral flexions—Having the horse trained to go promptly 
against his bit at the demand of the legs, and while moving a! a 
walk on the track to the right, demand the following flexion of the 
neck and jaw: Open the right rein until the horse brings his nose to 
the right on a line which comes out of the right shoulder and which 
is parallel to the axis of the horse, press the left rein against the 
middle of the neck to limit the neck-bending to the right, and the 
moment the position desired is obtained carry the hands low and 
toward the left hip and remain so until the jaw on the right gives, 
then return the hands and reins to their normal position. Both legs 
act to push the horse straight ahead during this flexion. The left 
flexion is given on the track to the left with the opposite aids. 

Backing 

This exercise should also be reserved for the end of the training, 
except for a very hot horse, as the movement is opposed to the 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 HI4 





forward one which is the great object in all the other exercises. 

To back, the following means should be used: Slightly raise 
the hands, incline the shoulders to the rear very slightly, pull 
progressively and equally on both reins; the moment the horse 
gives a step, give the hands, and then repeat as above for each 
step backward. Back a few steps, and then immediately demand 
the forward movement with both legs, thus leaving the forward 
movement the last impression received by the green horse. If the 
horse “stilts” on the hind legs and refuses to move back, push the 
haunches a step to one side with one leg and then back a step before 
the horse has a chance to set himself again, then push the haunch 
in the other direction and back a step, and continue this until you 
can back straight. 

The Double Bridle 

All the training thus far has been in the snaffle bit; but if it 
is found that the horse begins to pull too much in the snaffle for 
his thorough control, it is time to put on the double bridle. This 
bridle should be adjusted very carefully and inspected often by the 
instructor. The snaffle or bridoon rests in the comer of the lips, and 
the curb rests just under the bridoon rings. In adjusting the bridle, the 
mouth should be opened to see that the bridoon mouth-piece rests 
just above the mouth-piece of the curb. The curb bit should be used 
at first without a curb chain until the horse becomes accustomed 
to the two mouth-pieces; subsequently, when the chain is used and 
finally adjusted, it should pass underneath the bridoon and rest 
perfectly flat in the chin groove. The curb bit adjusted with the 
curb chain should fall back at an angle of about forty-five degrees 
when pressure is put on the curb-bit rings. 

When with the double bridle the reins are held in both hands, 
the snaffle-rein should come into the hand underneath the little 
finger and both come out between the thumb and forefinger. When 
the double reins are held in one hand, the snaffle reins should be 
on the outside and the curb reins on the inside, each one separated 
by a finger, and all coming out of the hand together between the 
thumb and forefinger. 

There are other ways of holding the reins that are equally good. 

The course of training may be carried as far as desired, the 
methods of accomplishing which are given in equitation manuals. 

Bending lessons — The double bridle is especially useful in 
securing proper carriage of the head and neck. Every effort should 
be made to get the bend in the neck at the poll and not near the 
withers. The trainer is dismounted and with his left hand holds both 
snaffle reins a few inches in front and above the horse’s nose while 
playing the curb reins held in his right hand a few inches back of 
the jaw. The horse must stand squarely on his legs and must not be 
allowed to back. Great patience is necessary, the slightest yielding 
of the muscles being awarded by caressing the horse. The lesson 
should be continued only a few minutes at a time. 

When the horse obeys the rider dismounted, the lesson should 
be given mounted, the rider holding up the head with the snaffle 
reins and playing the curb reins lower down. The lesson should 
ultimately be given with the horse in motion. 

Bending lessons by turning the neck sidewise should not be 
given. They make a “rubberneck.” 

Gaits 

The horse should be confirmed in the three regulation gaits 
walk, trot, and gallop, which are at the rates of 4, 8, and 12 miles, 
respectively, per hour. 

To confirm a horse in the regulation rates of speed requires much 
H15 January-February 2011 • Fires — 1911 The Field Artillery Journal 


time and patience. Stakes should be driven at some convenient 
place daily passed over, every 117 1-3 yards apart, and numbered 
consecutively. The horse at the prescribed gait passes in one minute 
at a walk over one, at a trot over two, and at a gallop over three 
staked spaces. The new horse is best confirmed in these gaits by 
going over the above-described course, having him in harness with 
well-gaited horses. 

Training for Draft 

The object is, to train the horses so that when harnessed in any 
position in the team they will move the carriage fully equipped and 
loaded with ammunition over any terrain practicable for artillery 
and be at all times and under all circumstances under perfect control 
of the drivers. 

After the horse has become accustomed to carrying the saddle 
and does not object to being ridden, his training for draft should 
be begun. 

He may first be accustomed to the harness while he is in his 
stall, allowing him to smell it, putting on part of it, then removing 
it, proceeding gradually so as not to frighten him. 

If difficulty is anticipated, he may first be longed with the 
saddle and bridle on, or ridden, and then harnessed while still on 
the longe. In the early lessons care must be taken that the traces do 
not frighten him by continually striking his sides, nor should they 
hang so as to entangle his legs. 

It is preferable to use a wheel harness in all early lessons, as this 
accustoms the horse to the breeching, and in addition the races can 
better be held up. Neither traces nor side-straps should be allowed 
to hang down from the breeching. 

The harnessed horse, unattached to a vehicle, should not be driven 
at a trot long enough for the metal collar to bruise his shoulders or 
make them sore. 

As the only bit that newly-purchased horses are accustomed to 
is the snaffle, they should invariably be worked in this bit. 

Elementary Training 

To teach the horse to draw a load, he should be led or longed 
while a man holds ropes or pieces of sash-cord that have previously 
been attached to the traces so as to prolong them, beyond the reach 
of the horse’s heels if he kicks. These long traces will also prevent 
his wheeling around. 

As the horse moves forward, the man, following at the end of 
the traces, gradually holds back on them. If the horse halts, his 
confidence must be restored before again starting (with no pull the 
traces), and less tension should be used. He will soon learn pull well, 
after which a second man may be added at the end of the traces. 

In this exercise the horse should be urged forward by the voice 
and not with the whip. All violent, sudden movements should 
avoided. 

At the end of a few days he will work well without any carriage 
and should then be attached to a vehicle with other horses. 

Regular Training 

When placed in a team the horse should first be used as off swing 
in a well-broken team, and if he does not at first pull he should 
be allowed to trail along. All sudden or violent movements of the 
driver that would cause the horse to jump against his collar should 
be carefully avoided or the horse will bruise his shoulders and 
always fear the collar. 

When he has become accustomed to his surroundings and 



manifests a willingness to pull his share of the load as an off swing 
horse, he should be changed to some other position in the team, all 
this training, a caisson without ammunition should, if practicable 
be used, and on level ground only. 

The horse should now be moved over comparatively long 
stretches, so as to harden his shoulders, which must be carefully 
watched so as not to allow them to become sore. 

When a horse works freely in any position in the team with 
empty caisson on level ground, the difficulty of draft should be 
creased by gradually increasing the pressure of the brakes or load 
on the caisson. This training should be followed by work over more 
difficult terrain. 

Particular attention should be devoted to steep ascents, but care 
must be taken to avoid giving the horse tasks beyond his ability 
and especially is this so with spirited horses which may easily 
through errors of the trainer’s judgment be made into balkers and 
thus ruined. 

In going up steep ascents the horses should move slowly pull 
steadily. To rush teams up steep ascents is pernicious harmful. 

All difficult tasks should be approached quietly, the driver 
framing from any unnecessary movement, noise, or excitement. 

Horses when drawing well should never be struck with the whip. 
If they manifest a disposition to quit they may be threatened at the 
particular instant of stopping. They should not be allowed to jump 
against the collar, as this bruises the shoulders. 

The load should be moved by the united, simultaneous action 
of all the horses quietly working together. 

Ahorse in heavy draft requires a firm support on the reins. This 
is especially the case when the footing is at all precarious. 

Artillery horses should not be taught to jump, as by jumping 
over an obstacle a team horse generally bruises his shoulders, and, 
as the horses of the team do not jump together, each one, as he in 
turn comes against the collar, attempts alone to move the entire 


load. 

As a rule, shallow ditches, ridges, etc., should be approached 
at right angles, as when passed through or over obliquely there is 
not only the possibility of upsetting the limber but in addition the 
pole is thrown sidewise and disturbs the balance or footing of the 
wheel pair. 

The new horse, harnessed in a well-broken team, is first driven 
through or over obstructions without being hitched to any vehicle. 
When he passes the obstruction without altering his gait, the team 
is harnessed to an empty caisson, and when he works well here the 
resistance is increased gradually. 

The most difficult haul is up a steep side-hill where the carriage 
slews. Here the team must be kept pointed obliquely toward the 
crest of the hill to such an extent as to prevent the carriage from 
slewing out of the road. 

In all cases where not all of the horses of a team have good 
footing at the same time, such as in passing ditches, low walls, 
mudholes, etc., drivers whose pairs have good footing must make 
special efforts to keep the carriage moving until all secure a footing. 

Assignments After Training 

As a general principle, horses under seven years of age should 
habitually be employed as off horses; but they should be trained to 
work in any position in the team, or as individual saddle horses. 

Other guiding suggestions: The heaviest and strongest horses 
should be placed in the wheel pair on account of the extra work 
of this pair in turning the carriage and holding it back on down 
grades. In any pair, the horse of the best saddle conformation and 
most durability should be the near horse, and the freest mover 
should be the off one. If both are of the same disposition and similar 
conformation they will work in better harmony. 


INSTRUCTION OF SCOUTS AND AGENTS 

BY 1ST LIEUTENANT CORTLANDT PARKER, 6TH FIELD ARTILLERY, U. S. ARMY 


The instruction received by scouts and that by agents is identical. 
Besides instruction in signal and telephone duties it should embrace 
the following: 

1. The use of field glasses, and the use of B. C. ruler and 
hand in measuring angular distances in mils. 

2. Orientation. 

3. Map reading. 

4. Sketching. 

5. Making written and verbal reports. 

6. Instruction in the service of: 

a. Ground scouts; 

b. Route markers; 

c. Position reconnaissance; 

d. Security; 

e. Observation of the battlefield; 

f. Observation of fire; 

g. Reconnaisance of targets. 

7. Duties of courier. 

The Use of Field Glasses 

Service glasses are used in this instruction. Each man is taught 
to focus a pair of glasses and describe minutely what he sees in a 
limited portion of the terrain. The instructor checks all observations 
with his own field glasses. 


The Use of the B. C. Ruler and Hand in Measuring Angular 
Distances in Miles 

In this instruction it is not desired that the personnel be taught 
to measure deflection for the guns, but that each man be able to 
measure the angular distance between two objects in his from This 
instruction finds its application in the service of observation of the 
battlefield, in the service of observation of fire, and in the service 
of reconnaissance of targets. 

The letter T at one end of the ruler, and the figures 61,62 and 63, 
and the figures 0,1, and 2 in heavy letters are disregarded. Attention 
is called to the fact that the scale runs from left to right on top of 
the ruler and from right to left on the bottom of the ruler. The knot 
on the string is previously adjusted by the instructor and the men 
are taught to hold the knot against the cheek bone under the eye, 
and to measure angular distances of one object from another, i. e. 
“one object is so many miles to the right or left of another.” 

The hands of the men are then calibrated. For this purpose the 
instructor, using a B. C. telescope, causes white stakes about six 
feet high to be set up about 200 yards from the telescope, on a line 
normal to the line joining the stake and the telescope. There should 
be 100 mils between the two left stakes and 5 mils between the 
remainder of the stakes to the right. These latter should number 
about eight. The men are cautioned to extend the arm to the limit, 
back of hand toward the face, tips of fingers up, palm verical, and 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 HI6 



in that position measure the front covered by their four fingers 
along the line of stakes. On a piece of paper are noted the following: 


Width of finger at second joint.mils 

Width of four fingers at second joint.mils 

Width of thumb.mils 


This data i-s preserved to be pasted in the men’s notebooks. 

The hand being calibrated each man is required to measure 
angular distances as before, using handbreadths as a unit, then to 
measure angular distances with his hand and give the result in mils. 

Orientation 

For this instruction the men are assembled in a room and the 
instructor draws diagrams on a blackboard illustrating his remarks. 

The instructor explains what the cardinal points are and teaches 
the men the names of the intermediate points. The instructor draws 
on the board a diagram of the North Star, the Big Dipper, and 
Cassiopeia. 

At the first convenient opportunity the men are taken outdoors and 
required to practice the three methods of orienting themselves—by 
compass, sun and watch (or sun alone), and the stars, as explained 
in books on map reading. 

Map Reading 

The men are taught the meaning of the word map and the 
difference between a geographical and a topographical map, 
and what the scale of a map is. It is explained that in making a 
topographical map two things are required, viz.: (1) representing 
the shape of the surface of the ground; (2) representing the objects, 
natural and artificial, that are on the surface of the ground. To teach 
the men to recognize on the map the objects, natural and artificial, 
on the surface of the ground, they are required to make copies of 
the authorized conventional signs until they can recognize any of 
them. 

To teach men to recognize the shape of the surface of the ground, 
they must, of course, be taught the meaning of the contours, A 
rational explanation for the use of contours, to a beginner, is to 
state this: That the shape of the ground may be represented by 
covering the map with points and by placing opposite each point its 
elevation in feet, but that this is inconvenient as it covers the map 
with figures and, moreover, the shape of the ground is recognized 
with difficulty. Therefore the method of joining on a line all points 
of the same altitude was adopted. 

Then hill forms, valleys forms and all topographical forms an 
illustrated by sketches until a contoured map is legible to the men. 

A sand box may be used also. Finally the men are taught to deduce 
the grade of a road from an examination of the map. 

The instructor should provide himself with a dozen or so different 
sheets from the Geological Survey, and with a like number of 
the maps of the military reservation. These should be constantly 
referred to in the instruction. The men are taken indoors and are 
given exercises in the following, using the maps: 

1. Orienting the map: 

a. Knowing the position of the cardinal points; 

b. Not knowing them, but knowing the position occupied, 
ground and map. 

2. Finding the point on the map which you occupy on the ground. 

3. Study of the terrain around a point, being oriented and located. 

4. Following a route indicated on the map. 

5. To make a rapid sketch from a map. 

H17 January-February 2011 • Fires — 1911 The Field Artillery Journal 


6. Then, without their maps, to follow a route indicated on the 

map, previously committing to memory the route as indicated 

on the map. 

Sketching 

Instruction in sketching should conform to the methods specified 
in text books on the subject authorized by the War Department. 
Proficiency in the use of the service sketching case is required. 
The men are required to sketch dismounted first, having previously 
made a suitable scale. Then sketching mounted is taught. 

After the instruction in sketching is fairly on its way, the 
instruction in map reading is repeated. Many things not previously 
understood by the men, will then become clear to them. 

Instruction in Making Reports , Written and Verbal 

This instruction should be left to the last. The instructor requires 
the scout to ride over certain country and make a written or verbal 
report, as desired. He may also require the scout to submit a sketch 
of the same. 

The artillery commander may or may not specify the particular 
points on which he wishes to be informed. Therefore, the scout 
should be able to make a report giving all desirable information 
on the terrain reconnoitered. The features to be reported on may 
be the following: 

1. A road; 2, a railroad; 3, a water course; 4, a swamp or marsh; 
5, a wood; 6, a habited place. 

In order that the scout may overlook nothing of importance 
concerning these features his notebook is provided with the following 
reminders, which he should read over before he leaves on his duty 
and during the performance of it, making appropriate notes in his 
notebook. 

1. Report on a road: 

General direction. 

Total distance observed. 

Material of the road: earth, macadamized, sandy, 
Condition of the road: dry, boggy, cut with deep ruts, rocky, 
smooth, solid roadbed, or soaked through and slippery. 
Widths: Artillery can go in section column, in double section. 
Grade: Artillery can travel over it, or cannot. 

Gaits: Artillery can trot over it, or cannot trot over it, or may 

trot only between.and.etc. 

Defiles: At (such and such) bridges, railroad crossing, or 
passages through towns, or at (such) an obstacle in the road. 
Country alongside the road: The road is mostly cut, fill, or 
surface. Fences, what kind, generally, and how far along 
road. 

Artillery can or cannot leave road. 

If it can at . points. 

Neighboring country practicable or not for 
artillery. 

Nature of the surrounding country: Crops, meadowland, 
woods, waste lands, or marshes. 

Water: Where best obtainable along road, and for how 
many animals at once? 

Miscellaneous: Supposing the enemy to be located at 

., the road is concealed from the enemy from 

.to. 

2. A railroad: 

Number of tracks. 

Length of railroad observed. 

Location and extent of cuts and fills and whether they are 














passable or not for artillery. 

Grade crossings on the road from.to 


3. A watercourse: 

Length of watercourse observed. Average width and average 
depth. Strength of current: slow, swift, rushing. 

Bottom: mud, quicksand, hard, rocky. 

Banks: Vertical, high, low, of crumbling earth, hard or 
wooded. 

River can be crossed on pontoon, trestle bridge, ferry. 

Bridges are located at . Of these the 

following are not practicable for artillery: 

Fordable generally, or not. 

Fords located at . Of these the 

following are not practicable for artillery: 

Obstacles are or are not placed in the fords. 

The ice is.inches thick. 

4. A swamp or marsh: 

Length and width. 

Average depth of water. 

Nature of bottom. 

Location of fords. 

Location of roads through swamp. 

5. A habited place: 

Number of inhabitants. 

Number of stores and places of supply for men and horses. 
Ways of passing through town. 

General Remarks on the Use of Scouts and Agents with 
Artillery Commands 

Whenever the enemy is known to be near, scouts must perform 
their duties with great caution, not for the sake of their own safety, 
but for the sake of concealment for our guns. The scouts should 
attempt to get all possible information and report it, but he must 
remember that the enemy is trying just as hard to find out what is 
going on over on our side. The apearance of horsemen on a crest 
coming and going may reveal the presence of batteries which 
are coming into position. This galloping around and exposure of 
scouts on a crest may have the gravest consequence not because the 
scouts may be hit but because it shows the enemy where our guns 
are going into position. Scouts and agents work in pairs whenever 
possible. On arriving near a crest both dismount behind the crest 
and one proceeds forward cautionsly, alone, on foot and looks over 
the crest. Scouts and agents must remember that the work required 
of their horses is most hard, and that therefore they must save their 
horse’s strength and avoid useless galloping about. 

Agents march in rear of the staff of the officer to whom assigned 
in alphabetical order of batteries, right to left. When at a distance 
from the enemy scouts may march with the sections to which they 
are assigned. When they are needed, the direction is given, “Scouts 

report to-,” or “Scouts of —— Battery report to-,” 

after which they fall-in in column of twos in rear of the agents, 
alphabetical order, front to rear. 

It is understood that the scout ought to be of intelligence superior 
to the average enlisted man. In addition to this, he must always be 
attentive to what is going on about him, and especially must he be 
always oriented and always able to retrace a route passed over. 

Instruction in the Service of Ground Scouts 

This service has for its obj ect the timely warning of the existence 
of obstacles and the ways of passing them, the guidance of the 
command on the right road through all turnings, and the guidance 


of the command through towns. This service is distinct from that of 
“marking the route” to be described below. The service of ground 
scouts is appropriately used when the command is marching off 
the road across country. It may also be used when marching over 
a road, if required. The fundamental rules for its execution are as 
follows: 

1. The personnel engaged in this service must be able to see 
ahead further than the officer conducting the march of the column. 

2. Each man engaged in this service must be able to see, at all 
times, both the man ahead of him and the man following him. 

The officer conducting the march or his adjutant designates a 
non-commissioned officer to supervise the service of the ground 
scouts, designates the scouts to be used, who should not exceed two 
or three in number, and gives the command “Ground Scouts Out.” 
At this command the non-commissioned officer conducts his scouts 
on the route to be followed, leaves one of them in sight of the officer 
at the head of the column, and proceeds on. The non-commissioned 
officer arranges the scouts as required by the principles above and 
is himself accompanied by the last scout. When he arrives at an 
obstacle he places his scout at the obstacle with direction to the 
guns for passing it, and moves on. The scout next the column halts 
at the obstacle, informs the officer conducting the march in time 
to avoid halting the column and moves on, when directed. If there 
is an obstacle whose passage will involve a change of formation, 
as from line into column, timely warning must be given. 

Instruction in the service of ground scouts is carried on outdoors 
over a varied terrain. 

Instruction in the Service of Route Markers 

See par. 682, F. A. D. R., 1908. 

A good method of marking the route is as follows: The scouts are 
numbered and the officers conducting the service of route markers 
start out, followed by the scouts. Having arrived at a point where a 
marker is required, the officer posts No. 1, and proceeds, followed 
by the remaining scouts. No. 1 observes the direction taken by 
the officer and his scouts. Nos. 2, 3, etc., are posted in succession 
where required. When the column reaches No. 1 he shows to the 
officer conducting the column the direction to follow and taking an 
increased gait over that of the column moves on to No. 2’s station, 
of whom he inquires the route to No. 3, whence he proceeds to No. 
4, and so on. Having arrived at the post of the highest numbered 
scout, No. 1 is posted again, or not, as circumstances require. 
Likewise No. 2 having directed the column on to the post of No. 
3 takes the increased gait and follows No. 1, to be posted beyond 
No. 1, if necessary. This operation goes on as long as desired. Great 
economy in the use of these scouts may be obtained by messages 
left with a scout such as to stay on a particular road until directed 
off of it, etc. If the officer conducting the service of route markers 
finds himself finally left without scouts, he may request the officer 
whose route he is marking to let him use the agents. If this is not 
practicable, the officer conducting the service of route markers 
may proceed with the officer whose route he is marking until the 
latter arrives at his destination, first directing the last man posted 
to stop at his post all scouts coming up and also the column. When 
the destination is reached the officer conducting the service of 
route markers returns to the last scout posted and, if the column 
has reached that scout, guides the column to its destination. If the 
column has not reached the last scout posted, the officer continues 
the marking of the route. 

Instruction in marking the route will be carried on outdoors an 
individual man being used to represent the head of the column. 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 HI8 












Instruction in the Service of Position Reconnaissance 

Remarks.—This service has for its object the supplementing, 
by enlisted personnel, of the work of the reconnaissance officer. It 
will frequently be the case, in a cultivated and fenced in country 
that a reconnaissance officer will not, at first sight, be able to select 
positions for all the guns of a command, and that time will not 
permit a proper reconnaissance by one person. 

Method of Instruction 

The Instruction is Carried On Indoors and Outdoors 

For the indoor instruction the instructor, by a diagram on 
the blackboard of a vertical section of terrain, explains what an 
“open position” is, and shows the positions of “slight derilade,” 
“dismounted defilade,” “mounted defilade,” and “flash defilade.” He 
instructs the men in the method of obtaining the last. He cautions 
them that the slope from crest to guns must not be too abrupt; 
otherwise the guns will not clear the crest. A diagram is also drawn 
of a “counterslope position,” or a position on ground sloping toward 
the enemy, but defiladed from him by another rise in front. 

He then instructs the men in the meaning of the terms “position 
for immediate action,” “position of observation,” and “position 
in readiness” (p. 110, F. A. D. R., 1908), and follows this by the 
explanation of the composition of a battery on a peace footing and 
onawarfooting (pp. 192 and 193, F. A. D. R., 1908), and shows by 
a diagram the front in yards of a battery, battalion, and regiment in 
action. He instructs the men in the nature of positions desired for 
limbers, reserves, and train—not too far from the guns for resupply 
of ammunition and replacement of casualties and promptitude in 
limbering up, but still distant enough for concealment from the 
enemy and comparative safety from projectiles intended for the 
guns. 

It is explained that if the defilade is taken against a battery which 
has a grove of trees in its rear, this defilade against the battery will 
not hold good against a hostile scout posted in one of the trees; 
also that if our battery takes a defiladed position on a rounded 
hill against a hostile battery in its front, this defilade will not hold 
good against a hostile observer posted considerably on the flank 
of the hostile battery. On account of these facts, it is directed that 
in selecting a position its defilade against any position possible of 
occupation by the enemy be noticed, as well as its defilade against 
the positions where the enemy is known to be. This completes the 
indoor instruction in the position reconnaissance. 

The outdoor instruction will consist in the actual selection of 
positions by enlisted men. A tactical situation, including a position 
and strength for the hostile batteries, is assumed and scouts are 
sent out in pairs in a limited portion of the terrain to find positions, 
to report on the number of guns which may be placed therein at 
normal intervals, the maximum useful defilade obtainable against 
the hostile batteries, and the defilade of our guns when posted there 
against other positions possible of occupation by the enemy. 

The scouts also report on the location of posts for limbers and 
reserve and concealed routes whereby the position may be occupied. 

In each case the scouts are given a fair time limit in which to reach 
and reconnoitre the position, return and report, but an indefinite 
time is never permitted. 

NOTE.—The officer conducting these exercises should, by a 
study of the map, or, if necessary, by actual examination of the 
ground, have prepared several good tactical problems before the 
personnel report to him, and should, himself, have already solved 
the problems to the men under instruction. Haphazard problems 

H19 January-February 2011 • Fires — 1911 The Field Artillery Journal 


and critiques are of no value. A study of “des Exercises de Service 
en Campagne,” by Aubrat, will be of value to an officer conducting 
these probelms and all other outdoor work with the personnel. 

The Service of Security 

Instruction in this service is carried on outdoors by the instructor, 
a special tactical situation being assumed by him and communicated 
to his scouts. 

Remarks.—In the normal case, field artillery will be accompanied 
by the other arms and on the other arms will rest the duties connected 
with the service of security. But when the artillery advances beyond 
the bulk of the main body to take position, the amount of protection 
it may receive at this time diminishes and artillery commanders 
will take their own precautions. Likewise when having engaged the 
enemy a change of position is ordered, the artillery is threatened 
with chance encounters with small bodies and with danger from 
concealed sharpshooters. It must be remembered that one draft 
horse shot down when the column is moving on a narrow road, 
especially at increased gaits, will create a confusion which will 
materially delay the occupation of a position. To provide for the 
security of the march of the artillery in either case (an advance 
to position, or a change of position) the officer commanding the 
moving column causes to be organized a service of security to fit 
the particular needs of the case, and this, too, with the use of the 
least possible members. The great desideratum is timely warning 
of a danger. To this end advanced guards, rear guards, flank guards, 
and patrols, all of comparatively small force, may be employed. 
They must see as far as possible and at the same time have means 
of almost instant communication by means of prearranged signals 
(see last three lines, par. 675, F. A. D. R., 1908) with the artillery 
column. If the route is being marked the personnel engaged in that 
service may be of assistance in the service of security. 

When the artillery is in position and receives the protection of 
the other arms the service of security will generally be properly 
executed if a scout is placed on each flank of the isolated group to 
observe and report on the movements of the enemy. But when the 
artillery is in position and the other arms are not affording protection, 
as when an advance to a position is made ahead of the bulk of the 
main body, the officer in command of the group causes a service of 
security to be organized. Scouts are posted to the front and flanks 
to give timely warning of the approach of the enemy. The officer 
posting these scouts considers every avenue of approach open to 
the enemy, what means of escape of resistance our guns have, how 
long a time may pass before assistance from the other arms may 
be expected, and then posts his scouts in the best possible manner 
for the purpose of timely warning. He notifies the scouts of their 
particular and general duties and of his post, selected as near the 
guns as possible, and visible to the scouts, if possible, so that visual 
signals may be used. If a visual signal of danger is impracticable 
scouts are posted in pairs and messages are delivered by gallopers. 

The Service of Observation of the Battlefield 

Method of Instruction.—To train scouts to observe the battlefield 
they must first know how to describe in a few words what they see, 
then to locate what they see to another person’s eye with considerable 
accuracy. 

To teach scouts to explain in a few words what they see their 
military vocabulary and general knowledge must be increased. To 
this end explanation is made of the infantry attack, illustrating by 
diagrams on a blackboard. The tactics of cavalry, especially the 
process of dismounting to fight on foot, the normal charge, and 



charge as foragers, are explained. A description of the numbers, size 
and appearance of large units of cavalry and infantry is given, with 
the appearance of an advance guard. The scout is made familiar 
with the range of the rifle and the sound of a machine gun in action. 

To teach scouts to locate what they see to another person’s eye 
the instructor follows the principles of Pars. 455-458, F. A. D. R., 
1908. To designate the position of a target which has an appreciable 
front the scout is taught to locate a prominent object, as explained 
in paragraphs referred to. From this prominent object to locate the 
flank of the target nearer the prominent object, then to state the 
front. 

Thus, “To our right front, on the skyline, a farm house surrounded 
by evergreens. 

“250 mils to the left of the farm house and on the skyline, a 
windmill. 

“40 mils to the left of the windmill and concealed behind the 
crest of the skyline, a battery of six guns. 

“Front of the battery, 40 mils.” 

Instruction may be begun indoors and use made of the terrain 
board. The scout is taught to locate to the instructor’s eye an object 
on the board placed there by some third person. This instruction is 
repeated from time to time outdoors, the instructor requiring the 
scout to locate to a third person some object on the landscape. 

Instruction in the Observation of Fire 

The best means of instruction is the actual observation of fire. 
Scouts and agents of the element not firing should be required to 
attend and fill in a report similar to that required of officers shown 
below, the report to be turned in to their instructor. Previous to 
observing fire the men should be taught as much of the Rules of 
Fire (Pars. 387-413) and Observation of Fire (Pars. 359-386) as 
the instructor is capable of teaching. In this connection it may 
be mentioned that readings from the Drill Regulations on such a 
subject mean nothing to the average man, and the instructor must 
put things in a homely and simple vocabulary. 

Report of observation of firing by battery . 

.19 

(date) 


Range 

Burst 

Over or 

short 

Deviation 

in mils 

Remarks 

Ordered 

by 

Battery 

Com. 

Observer’s 

estimate 

No. 

in air. 
Height 
in mils 

No. 

on 

graze 












Respectfully submitted, 


.th Field Artillery. 

Instruction in the Service of Reconnaissance of Targets 
The instruction is best carried on outdoors with an assumed 


tactical situation. The problem will generally consist in reporting 
on the strength, position, surrounding topography, etc., of hostile 
artillery which may be either completely defiladed against us, have 
mounted defilade or any of the other defilades. The hostile artillery 
is represented by some objects, preferably mobile artillery targets 
O and P, and the scouts are confined to a limited portion of the 
terrain. It is explained that the map will often help to show where 
a view may be obtained of the hostile defiladed batteries whose 
general direction only is known. 

NOTE.—If a battery whose flashes are visible can be located 
on a map, and the examination of the map indicates that there can 
be but one crest concealing that battery, the hostile battery is fairly 
vulnerable, for— 

Flash defilade is 4 yards. 

The slope of most hills is not more gradual than one-tenth. 

Therefore the battery must be within at least 40 yards of the 
crest or thereabouts. 

If we range on the crest and go back in increments of 25 yards, 
taking 3 such increments, the battery should surely be within the 
area searched. 

The Duties of Couriers 
See Par. 681, F. A. D. R., 1908. 

A convenient method of instructing the men to learn and deliver 
verbal messages is the following: The men are arranged on the 
circumference of a circle of large radius, with 15 yards between 
adj acent men. The instructor goes to one man, gives him verbally the 
message, which the man repeats to the instructor; then accompanied 
by the instructor, he delivers the message to the next man, and so 
on. The message goes around the circle in this way and, if no error 
has been made the instructor waits until the message goes around, 
announces the original message and the message as finally delivered 
and tells who made the first error. 

Before assuming their duties with batteries, scouts and agents 
should be equipped with a pair of field glasses and a compass (the 
two preferably combined), a watch, a pencil and a notebook. They 
should also have a pocket knife and wire rippers. In his notebook 
the scout should leave posted the memoranda referred to above, 
and besides other useful data such as the Myer code, etc., etc. 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ 


January-February 2011 H20 

















THE COOPERATION OF THE ARMS IN BATTLE 


[Translated from Beiheft 117 zur Intemationalen Revue uber die gesamten Armeen und Flotten, April, 1910, 
by Captain Oliver L. Spaulding Jr., 6th Field Artillery.] 


In maneuvers, large and small, in militia lectures and discussions, 
and in professional publications of all kinds, the point most strongly 
emphasized of late is the necessity for cooperation of all arms, and 
more especially of the infantry and artillery. The more one studies 
military history the more is one impressed with this lesson. 

The modem principles for the use of artillery were first! laid 
down and applied by Napoleon, as is shown by Lieutenant Bircher 
in an excellent paper in the Swiss Militar Zeitung. He was the 
real originator of the use of artillery in mass, for concentrated 
effect, which is the universal practice since 1870. The battles in 
Manchuria demonstrate that this principle, when intelligently 
applied, always gives good results, but Napoleon’s application 
of it will long remain unrivalled. His massed artillery decided 
Austerlitz and later Bautzen. At Ligny the artillery of the Guard 
broke the enemy’s center; at Mont St. Jean, Drouot’s 72 guns 
not only prepared but accompanied the attack. So at Wagram the 
massed artillery decided the battle, and at Borodino it shattered 
the Russian columns of attack. 

Napoleon’s main attack was always begun and carried through 
by the infantry and artillery together. The cooperation of his 
different arms was always intelligent, and usually a model—which 
contributed not a little to the brilliant success of his tactics. His 
commanders knew how to secure this cooperation, and habitually 
did so. The power of both artillery and infantry, but especially of 
the latter, was thus greatly increased; and only in very recent years 
are we again beginning to demand as much in this way as he did. 

In spite of the lessons of the war of 1870, and in spite of the 
faulty use of artillery before Pleuna and in South Africa, it was 
long before any of the Regulations contained a statement of the 
principles governing the combined use of infantry and artillery. 
Honig, with his clear, tactical insight, hit upon the tme principles 
and explained them in his “Tactics of the Future.” In 1870 the 
artillery was still looked upon as a technical arm; Honig insisted 
that it be placed as a sister arm, on the same footing as the infantry. 

F ormerly artillery was actually massed to secure unity of action; 
today the mass effect is secured by the cooperation of separate 
groups under one command. Honig insisted that infantry and 
artillery fire be used to supplement each other; that each arm must 
rely upon the other, and that both together must constantly work 
together for the same end, the gaining of a superiority of fires as the 
necessary condition of success. The artillery of a division should 
be so incorporated in it that infantry and artillery are tactically one; 
that the last gun is ready to fight for the infantry, and that each arm 
thoroughly understands the other. Honig believed that all officers 
from the very beginning of their service should be required to 
study the principles and the spirit of the others. To have generals 
of infantry, cavalry, and artillery, is not logical; we need only one 
kind of general, but they should be at home in any saddle. 

In 1870-71 the handling of the German artillery was not 
uniformly good, but nevertheless conformed in general to modern 
ideas; from then until the time of the Manchurian campaign we 
find no instances of its scientific use. 

The effect of the Russian artillery fire at Lovtcha and before 
Plevna was most unsatisfactory. At Lovtcha, Skobeleff’s 56 guns 
bombarded the Turkish positions for hours; it succeeded in silencing 
a few guns, but as soon as it ceased firing and the infantry advanced 
the Turks opened their rifle fire upon the Russian columns of attack 
unmolested. The same thing happened to General Dobrovolski’s 

H21 January-February 2011 • Fires — 1911 The Field Artillery Journal 


column, except that here the Russian infantry was exposed to the 
fire of the Turks during the artillery preparation of the attack. 

Before Plevna things were even worse. From the 7th to the 
10th of September the Russian artillery bombarded the Turkish 
positions. The Turks had no difficulty in finding cover from the fire, 
especially as the range was from 3,000 to 4,000 m.; they had a few 
guns put out of action, but their own fire was not without effect. 
On the 11th eighty Russian battalions advanced to the assault, but 
only 45 out of 444 guns could support them; the rest had fired all 
their ammunition, or were out of action. And it is instructive to 
note that the Russian attack was successful at the one point where 
it had artillery support and failed everywhere else. 

An instance of better handling of artillery is found in the 
attack of Prince Mirski’s column at Shipka, on January 8, 1878. A 
mountain battery advanced with the 13th and 14th Rifle Battalions 
and supported the infantry attack; it then changed position, and 
by it effective fire determined the issue of the engagement. After 
occupying the enemy’s position it held its own against superior 
Turkish artillery, and even against an offensive return by infantry. 
In this way Mirski’s advance was made much more easily than 
Skobeleff’s farther west; his guns were unable to keep down the 
destructive fire of the Turkish artillery west of Shenovo. 

The failure of the English artillery in the Boer war was also due 
to incorrect tactical handling. Buller’s operations in Natal especially 
were faulty in this regard. The bombardments of the Boer positions 
at Colenso and Magersfontein, by heavy naval guns were utterly 
without effect; when the infantry advanced to the attack, the Boer 
rifle fire was found as strong as ever. 

The artillery wasted much ammunition in firing upon position 
which were in fact not occupied. In the attack on Tabanyama, six 
batteries fired for five hours upon the supposed Boer trenches. 
The result was zero; when the infantry tried to advance between 
Tabanyama and Spion Kop, it came under a destructive cross fire 
from the Boers, reinforced by a few well posted guns. The best 
General Clery could do was to withdraw his brigade, under the 
protection of the artillery. 

At Spion Kop, January 24, 1900, the English artillery, though 
much superior in numbers, could not cope with the seven Boer 
guns, which had much better positions, and which inflicted severe 
loss upon the British infantry. 

At Paardeberg, February 18,1900, the English batteries on Gun 
Hill could not keep down the rifle fire of the Boers on the banks of 
the Modder River, and so could not properly prepare the attack of 
the Highlanders and the 13th Brigade. The guns on the left could 
not be used effectively, and fired upon targets not related to the 
real point of attack, such as the Boer camp at Wolvekraal. In this 
battle, every principle of artillery tactics was disregarded. There 
was no unity of command, no attempt was made to get any mass 
effect, and the guns did not properly support the infantry. 

Taught by this experience, the English artillery at Driefontein 
did its best to support the infantry attack. Although the batteries 
did not all work together, still two horse batteries northwest of 
Cattle Kraal Hill did hold the Boer artillery on Signal Hill in check; 
while it was only the fire of the 81 st Battery upon the Boer infantry 
that enabled the 18th Brigade to gain the Boer advanced position. 
And not until the 81st and 76th Batteries, changing position to the 
front, had silenced the Signal Hill guns, did the Buffs, Welsh and 
Essex Regiments, supported by a heavy shrapnel fire from the same 




batteries, succeed in taking the Boer position on Alexandra Hill. 

Artillery and infantry should be inseparable; their action should 
be united, both in space and time. The value of a preliminary 
bombardment as preparation for the infantry attack should not be 
overestimated. Although the war in Manchuria indicated that the 
importance of artillery fire had increased 50 per cent since 1870, 
and even better results are to be looked for with better handling, 
still it will never be the predominant factor in battle, and the main 
reliance of the attack will continue to be upon infantry fire. The 
percentages of wounds from infantry and artillery fire, taking an 
average from all reports, seem to have been about 85 and 15; in 
1870-71 they were 91.6 and 8.4. 

Against inanimate targets the effect of artillery fire is not great; 
sufficient cover can always be found. Even its effect upon living 
targets should not be exaggerated. Much greater is its moral effect, 
and this must always be reckoned with. Artillery fire to prepare an 
infantry attack means nothing whatever. The defenders will let the 
projectiles go harmlessly over their heads or explode in the parapets, 
as did the Turks at Plevna and the Boers at Paardeberg; when the 
infantry advances they will occupy the position, and meet the attack 
unshaken by the artillery fire. It is essential, then, not to allow the 
action of the infantry and artillery to be separated, either in space 
or time. 

Perhaps the Japanese would not go so far as this; their infantry 
attack did not always receive the intelligent support of the artillery, 
although it must be said that the co-operation of their different arms 
was very good indeed. Paragraph 186 of the new Japanese Drill 
Regulations says: “Proper cooperation of all arms is the secret of 
success. But the infantry is the principal arm, and it must strike 
the decisive blow. It must be able to fight the battle through, even 
when not supported by the other arms.” 

Atypical instance of proper co-operation of infantry and artillery 
is found in the attack of the 2d Guards Division at St. Privat. The 
advance of the infantry was supported by the divisional artillery 
battalion and the 4th Light Battery of the Corps Artillery, which 
advanced from their position between Ste. Marie aux Chenes 
and St. Ail to within 1,800 meters of St. Privat. Later they again 
changed position, moving 400 meters to the front, and so enabled 
the infantry of the division to hold the ground it had gained and 
prepare for the assault on St. Privat. Toward evening, by order of 
General Pape, the corps artillery, southwest of St. Privat, opened fire 
upon the village; a little later, fourteen Saxon batteries at Auboue 
did the same. This fire, although it caused some casualties among 
the assaulting infantry, enabled it to take the village. 

Here we find that the various artillery units instinctively worked 
together, even without a common commander, and twenty-five 
batteries united their efforts to one end. The co-operation of the 
infantry and artillery also was spontaneous; they supported each 
other, although without any means of intercommunication. If, 
however, the artillery could have gotten word from the infantry at 
the proper time, it could have avoided firing into it. 

On this point the German Infantry Drill Regulations say: “The 
artillery must always be in touch with the advancing skirmish lines 
Habitually artillery officers are sent forward, to communicate by 
signals. Their chief duty is to keep the artillery commander informed 
of the position of the skirmish lines, so that he may continue his 
fire as long as possible.” 

The Japanese regulations express the same idea thus: “When 
the attacking infantry approaches the hostile position, the officers 
in command at the front should keep the artillery commander, or 
the nearest artillery patrols, informed of the positions of the troops 
and of the fall of the projectiles, so as to permit of proper regulation 
of the artillery fire.” 


In general, the Japanese regulated this matter well. It is difficult 
to make satisfactory deductions as to artillery from the experience 
of the Russo-Japanese war, for on neither side were the horses or 
material up to modem requirements. The guns had neither spring 
spades nor recoil on the carriage, nor were they provided with 
shields, which of course greatly affected their tactical handling. But 
unquestionably the Japanese artillery deserves the-highest praise, 
in that it supported its infantry at all times, and made the most of 
its material. Habitually it came into action in masses, and its fire 
was controlled and concentrated upon the point of attack. 

On the Yalu, the Japanese heavy artillery southwest of Wiju 
silenced the Russian guns, but could not destroy them. Against 
infantry, the effect of the fire of preparation was slight; the troops 
remained under cover until the Japanese infantry advanced, and 
then occupied the trenches. 

At Kin Chau the Japanese artillery, 198 guns, under one 
commander, prepared the attack, but did not sufficiently support it. 
This was better done at Wafangau, especially on the left. Here the 
Fourth and Fifth artillery advanced with the infantry of the Fifth 
Division; the fire was directed by flag signals. It soon silenced the 
First East Siberian Artillery brigade, and opened the way for the 
infantry. The shooting and the fire discipline of the Russian batteries 
was good, but they did not work together. 

At Tashichiao the Russian artillery was perfectly concealed; 
the Japanese could not silence it, and it kept back the attack. At 
Yushulin the Russians made the mistake of holding back a large 
artillery reserve; to do this prevents the decisive massing of guns 
which is essential to success. The excuse that there is no suitable 
position can not be admitted. If the batteries can not be brought 
together in one position, at least separate groups can be so placed 
that all the guns can be used; and with the present equipment the 
separate groups can all be controlled by one commander. 

At Lianoyang the fire of Colonel Slussarenko’s two batteries 
was very skillfully conducted; from a concealed position, they 
silenced the Japanese batteries in less than half an hour. By personal 
observation, and the use of the plotting instmment and signal flags, 
he handled his fire so well that the Japanese attack was completely 
checked. On August 31st, the Japanese brought 234 field guns 
and twenty-one heavy batteries of position into action; these only 
partially prepared the attack, but gave it effective support. 

At the Shaho, the Japanese artillery had gained sufficient 
confidence to continue its supporting fire until the advancing infantry 
gave the signal to cease by displaying the national flags; this fire 
made the Russians keep under cover. The infantry demanded the 
continuance of the fire until the skirmishers had actually entered 
the zone heaten by the shrapnel. 

As these few examples will indicate, the Russo-Japanese war 
has not fully cleared up all the questions relating to the cooperation 
of infantry and artillery. It is clear, however, that fire of preparation, 
so-called, is useless. The infantry can not wait for the artillery to 
complete its work; the enemy will not expose himself until the 
infantry advance commences. 

The Japanese procedure at Liaoyang appears to have been a 
model. The Swiss Colonel Gertsch, in his report, says of the Second 
and Fourth Armies on September 2d: “It appeared to me that the 
infantry was held back only long enough to enable the artillery to 
locate the enemy’s batteries, assign targets, and adjust the fire. This, 
in my opinion, is the only proper course in attacking a fortified 
position. The infantry can not wait until the effect of the artillery fire 
is perceptible; the expression “silencing the enemy’s guns” has lost 
its meaning. With the present artillery material andtactics guns can 
be silenced only in exceptional cases; it requires an overwhelmly 
superiority and a long time. The guns of the defense may be forced 

sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 H22 




to turn their whole attention to the artillery of the attack, and so 
prevented from firing upon the advancing infantry, but that is all. 
The first object of the artillery of the attack is to locate the enemy’s 
batteries and range on them; so as to be able to turn fire upon them 
at any moment. As soon as this is accomplished, the infantry should 
advance. 

In a general order issued before the battle of Mukden, General 
Oku, taught by experience, urges that artillery fire and infantry 
advance must go together, not one after the other. He says: “Artillery 
fire is the best preparation for the attack. But merely throwing 
projectiles into the enemy’s position is useless; the infantry must 
advance at the same time, even if its progress is slow. If the infantry 
can not advance, the artillery should wait for a time when such 
advance is possible before opening fire. Infantry advance and 
artillery fire must be simultaneous.” 

The Japanese regulations express the same idea in paragraph 
238, saying that the infantry must advance during the artillery duel, 
and not wait until the duel is decided. 

The Japanese artillery should not be condemned, as it sometimes 
is, because, although it was used in masses, it did not always get 
the results expected of it. Having no shields, the batteries were 
often compelled to use concealed positions when, to support the 
infantry properly, they should have come out into the open. 

The system of communications worked very satisfactorily. 
Observers reported the fall of the shots by signal flags and telephones; 
the Japanese artillery masses could always be handled as units, and 
the fire concentrated upon the point of attack. 

The experience of this war has nowhere been fully embodied 
in regulations. The German Infantry Drill Regulations, with last 
autumn’s supplements, seem the most advanced; the Japanese 
regulations show some of the same influence. In paragraphs 329-30, 
the German regulations prescribe that during the infantry attack the 
artillery, while keeping the hostile batteries fully occupied, must 
concentrate as much of its fire as possible upon the point of attack; 
and that the infantry must advance during the artillery duel, and 
compel the enemy to expose his troops to the artillery fire. This 
is the same idea expressed in Oku’s general order. Paragraph 371 
prescribes that while superiority of artillery fire is desirable, the 
launching of the infantry attack must not be made dependent upon 
this alone, but upon all the existing conditions; the artillery duel 
is not entirely discarded, but such bombardments as took place at 
Plevna, Paardeberg and the Yalu are discountenanced. To secure 
unity of action, the assignment of a single commander for all the 
artillery is recommended. 

A very important point is made in paragraph 446—that the 
attacking troops must expect the artillery to fire over their heads 
until just before the final rush; if the observation is poor, the fire is 
to be continued only until the first line has advanced to within 300 
m. When the fire can no longer be continued upon the enemy’s firing 
line, the ground just in the rear is to be swept, to prevent bringing up 
reserves. As recently as 1870, Prince Frederick Charles cautioned 
the artillery not to fire over the heads of the infantry, although the 
trajectory of the gun then in use was not by any means as flat as 
that of the present gun. 

Paragraph 276 of the Japanese regulations makes it the duty of 
the infantry, without express orders, to support any artillery in its 
vicinity, the flanks and rear of artillery positions being particularly 
exposed to surprise by small hostile forces. As showing that this 
spontaneous support is essential, Colonel von Freytag-Loringhoven 
mentions the Ninth Corps before Metz on August 18th. The artillery 
of the Eighteenth Division and the corps artillery, in the position 
between the Bois de la Cusse and Champenois, had support only 
on the right. The effect of the Chassepot fire from the left was so 

H23 January-February 2011 • Fires — 1911 The Field Artillery Journal 


great that the batteries here had to be withdrawn. Ten companies 
were brought up in support, but long after the artillery had come 
into action, and had all they could do to hold back the enemy. 

On the other hand, the artillery must be prepared to sacrifice 
itself for the infantry, as did von der Groben’s battery at Chlum 
Lipa, when, to cover the retreat, it exposed itself to the fire of the 
needle gun at 200 m. In the same way at Liaoyang, a battery of the 
Third Siberian Corps remained in position to cover the retreat of 
the infantry until annihilated by the Japanese rifle fire. 

Good results may sometimes be obtained by sending single 
batteries or even single guns forward with the infantry, both for 
moral effect and to guard against counter attacks. At Spicheren, 
on the Rother Berg, two batteries were used in this manner very 
effectively. At the Tanho, on August 26, a mountain battery advanced 
to the skirmish line of the Fourth Regiment, of the Japanese Second 
Division, and forced the Russians to retire. This use of artillery 
recalls the “battalion guns” of the time of Frederick the Great. 

It would seem, however, that machine guns are better adapted 
for service of this kind. The Russo-Japanese war demonstrated that 
these weapons are an indispensable auxiliary, even in the attack. 
They can be used in positions that are out of the question for 
field guns. If they can be brought into action from an unexpected 
position, they may be remarkably effective, as at Wafangau, where 
the Japanese machine guns fired upon heavy Russian Columns 
at 2,300 m. At Liaoyang, Russian machine guns on the left flank 
caught a Japanese mountain battery in a millet field at 850 m., and 
destroyed it; and the attack of the 23d Regiment, of the Japanese 
6th Division, was checked by Russian machine gun fire, and the 
regiment held stationary for twenty hours. 

At Mukden, the 11th and 21 st Regiments could make no progress 
in their attack upon Likiawopeng and Wankiawopeng until machine 
guns were pushed forward to the skirmish lines. The Russian machine 
guns were silenced by shrapnel fire from the mountain guns. 

Machine guns were found very useful in repulsing counter 
attacks. General Oku recommends this use in his general order cited 
above. “But,” he says, “the mechanism of these guns is delicate, and 
requires careful cleaning and oiling, and constant attention. Even 
the slightest injury must be repaired on the spot, no matter how 
critical the situation; hence these guns should never be isolated.” 

The Japanese assigned them singly or in pairs to battalions, and 
kept them on the firing line. In the pursuit, and in holding captured 
positions, they were invaluable. They were found so useful that 
Russia sent all the machine guns of her mobile army to Eastern Asia; 
and Japan increased her armament enough to give every battalion a 
gun. It would be very desirable for us also to increase the number 
of our machine guns, and assign them to infantry regiments. 

No general rule can be given for the advance of infantry under 
artillery fire. The Russian columns were compelled to deploy at 7,000 
paces or more from the Japanese batteries, and generally formed 
line of skirmishers. The Japanese used all kinds of formations, 
according to the ground. At Yoshirei companies advanced in column 
of platoons at 300 m. distance, each platoon in line of skirmishers 
at 5 paces interval. Sometimes the advance was by small deployed 
groups, keeping on the same general line; sometimes in line of 
platoons in column of squads, at 20 or 30 paces interval. 

For this advance, and for the combined action of infantry and 
artillery, the only rule that can be given is that each commander, 
from the highest to the lowest, must be constantly on the alert to 
discover the best course for his unit in every emergency, and then 
follow it through with the utmost energy. 

It has been remarked above that the regulations of the various 
armies have not yet felt the full influence of the teachings of the most 
recent wars as to the necessity of the close co-operation of the arms. 


- 



The French, however, even without any such requirements in their 
regulations, have of late practiced very extensively the maneuvers 
of the combined arms. Particularly noteworthy are the instructions 
given by General Percin, now of the Superior Council of War, when 
commanding the 13th Corps. This officer, who was promoted from 
the artillery, sought, in these instructions, to accustom the infantry 
and artillery to constant close co-operation. He ordered twenty 
field exercises of companies and batteries, conducted by captains 
of infantry and artillery, so as to accustom the smallest units to 
combined work and demonstrate its importance. He then ordered 
one such exercise for each regiment and each division. He further 
required that after the month of June, 1910, in all field exercises 
of a battalion or more, the artillery be outlined by infantry officers 
detailed for the purpose, representing battery commanders, agents of 
communication between the artillery and detachment commanders, 
and “orientation officers.” This last term, a new one within recent 
years, is applied to officers of artillery, specially trained in infantry 
combat, who are attached to the staff of artillery commanders for 
the purpose of keeping their chiefs constantly informed of the 
progress of the action. 

The last autumn maneuvers of the 13th Corps showed the 
results of this training. The progress of the maneuvers, it is true, 
was slower than formerly, for the reason that the infantry always 
waited for the active support of the artillery before undertaking 
any serious attack. But this slow progress and close co-operation 
were precisely the things that the corps commander was trying to 
get, for, as he justly said in his final discussion, this is the way it 
would have to be done in war. 

The Minister of War approved all General Percin’s measures, 
and ordered that exercises of this nature be held in all army corps. 
In further development of the same idea, General Brun ordered that 
corps commanders arrange to send infantry units, by rail if necessary, 
to suitable places for a day or two, for combined maneuvers and 
field firing. In this way ground can be selected which can be reached 
by infantry units from several garrisons, and cavalry and artillery 
sent there by marching. Additional opportunity is thus given for 
practice in field service by mixed forces, before the maneuvers. 

The Minister has also approved the instructions issued by 
General Joffre, until recently commanding the 2d Corps, for the 
practical management of the service of communication in the 
infantry and artillery, and adopted them for provisional use by all 
troops. They require that, in addition to the present telephone and 
signal service, each infantry regimental and battalion commander 
shall assign a mounted officer with a mounted or cyclist orderly, and 
each company commander a sergeant, as agent of communication 
with the next higher commander. Each company commander is 
required to keep with him, for this duty, a corporal, a trumpeter, 
and one private from each platoon, and each platoon commander 
to designate one man whose sole duty is to watch for signals from 
the company commander. 

In artillery communications, General Joffre’s instructions 
distinguish between communications upward and downward. First, 
the artillery commander must be kept informed by the commander of 
the whole force, how the artillery is to support the infantry; secondly, 
the batteries specially assigned to support the attack must receive 
information as to the obstacles and resistance encountered by the 
infantry. The use of both mounted messengers, and telephone and 
signal details, is provided for. 

Finally, the Minister has issued an order, intended to favor the co¬ 
operation of the two arms. It provides that the details of lieutenants, 
of not less than six years service and not more than thirty-six years 
of age, for duty with arms other than their own, shall hereafter be 
extended to periods of nine months, and shall be made in greater 


number; that captains be detailed from units not stationed in mixed 
garrisons, to serve for periods of not less than a month with other 
arms—with artillery during the season of firing practice, and with 
other arms shortly before the autumn maneuvers: and finally, that 
during field exercises of all kinds, officers of different arms serving 
at the same station exchange places as frequently as possible. In 
this connection it is interesting to note that one of the principal 
reasons given by the Minister of War for the recent transfer of 
150 lieutenants of infantry to the artillery was that these officers, 
thoroughly familiar with the methods of infantry combat, would 
greatly assist in getting co-operation between the two arms. 

Some interesting remarks on this subject were contained in 
the final comments of General Tremeau on the army maneuvers 
conducted by him last year in the Bourbonnais. He said that he 
had noticed that separate columns almost invariably kept up 
communication on the march, but frequently lost it entirely as 
soon as they began to deploy for action. He considers it one of the 
most important duties of the divisional cavalry to see that this does 
not happen; but adds that the maintenance of communication is 
necessary, not only between different arms, but between individual 
units, no matter how small. As one means to this end, he recommends 
that the headquarters of general officers, and especially of corps 
commanders, be not moved during the course of an engagement 
except in unusual cases. If it is necessary for the general himself 
to leave the spot for a time, he should do so with only such officers 
as he requires, leaving most of his staff at headquarters. Work may 
then go on without interruption, and there will be no danger of 
important messages going astray because the officer addressed has 
left his post. 

We have more maneuver grounds than the French, twenty to 
their eight, and a larger part of our infantry, together with all our 
field artillery, has access to them every year; but the two arms are 
not habitually combined for maneuvers and field firing. Unpleasant 
as it may be to crowd mixed units, infantry brigades and artillery 
regiments, into these camps for such exercises, it is the only way 
to teach a proper co-operation of these arms, and we should not 
permit ourselves to be left behind by the French in this matter. 

The preceding remarks have dealt almost exclusively with the 
necessity for co-operation between infantry and artillery, they being 
the principal arms and the main reliance on the battlefield. It is not, 
however, meant that the cavalry may be neglected, or that it is not 
entitled to as high a place as its sister arms. It is much disputed 
today what its role in future wars will be; whether, in view of the 
effect of modem firearms, it will take an active part in great battles, 
or have to limit itself to the services of information and security, to 
operations in the enemy’s rear, and to co-operation in the pursuit. 
This is not the place to discuss this question. Whatever duties may 
fall to the cavalry, in front or on the flanks of the army, in action, bn 
the march or in camp, it must always keep in touch with the other 
arms and look upon itself as a part of the whole. Especially will 
this be the case in battle. Here the cavalry must be constantly in 
touch with the commander of the whole force; keep informed of the 
progress of the action; find out where its help is needed—where the 
sister arms require support and where it may have an opportunity 
to participate in a victory or ward off danger. 

In all cases the personality of the cavalry commander will play 
an important part; upon him will depend the close co-operation of 
the cavalry with the other arms. But the troops themselves must 
be properly trained; they must understand the tactics of infantry 
and artillery and how these two arms support and assist each other. 
Then the cavalry will see what its own part in the combined action 
must be. 

Recognizing this principle also the French have taken a long 
sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ • January-February 2011 H24 





step in advance by assigning infantry companies or battalions to 
take part in the annual maneuvers of the cavalry divisions with 
their horse batteries. It is evident that this must be of the greatest 


assistance in developing the great principle—the co-operation of 
all three arms. 


“MODERN GUNS AND GUNNERY” 

% E f 

A practical manual for officers of the Horse, Field, and Mountain Artillery, by Colonel H. A. Bethell, R. F. A., published by F. J. 

Cattermole, Wellington street, Woolwich. 


Colonel Bethell in his preface to this third edition of his excellent 
work remarks that only three years have passed since the last edition 
of the book was issued and yet the changes which have taken place 
have rendered it necessary to rewrite the book throughout. 

The 1910 edition of the work covers, clearly and thoroughly, 
many of the subjects which must be mastered by the modem 
field artillery officer before he can efficiently perform his duties. 
Not the least value of the work lies in the fact that it is one of the 
very few books on modem field artillery published in the English 
language. There is a wealth of literature on this subject published 
in the French, German, and other languages; but comparatively few 
of these books are available to an officer who reads only English. 

The scope of the book is indicated by its table of contents: 

Part 3 Theoretical Gunnery. 

Part II. Principles of Constmction of Guns, Carriages, and 

Ammunition. 

Part III. Practical Gunnery. 

Part IV. Modem Quick-Firing Equipments. 

Part V. Gunnery Calculations. 

An idea of the utility of the work can be obtained from Part I, 
Chapter V, Accuracy of Fire, where examples, interesting to artillery 
officers who know the 50% rectangle of their guns, are given to 
show what results may be expected in fire. Thus: 

Example 2. What is the chance of dropping a shell into a 
rectangular gun emplacement 3 yards wide, 5 yards from front to 
rear, with the 18 pr. Q. F. at 3,500 yards? 

Assume the parapet revetted vertical, and 3 ’ high. Then since 
angle of descent (from range table) is about 1 in 6, a parapet 1 yard 
high will cover 6 yards to the rear, and it will be impossible to get 
a shell into the emplacement without going through the parapet. 
Suppose that a shell striking the superior slope within one yard of 
the crest will penetrate the parapet, then our target is reduced to a 
surface 3 yards wide by one yard from front to rear. 

Now, the 50% rectangle of the 18 pr. Q. F. at 3,500 yards is 1.75 
yards wide; 3 yards over 1.75 yards is 1.7, which factor we find 
opposite 75% in the table, so that 75% of the shots will be correct 
for line. 

Again, the 50% rectangle of the 18 pr. Q. F. at 3.500 yards is 
26 yards long; 1 over 26 is .038, or just short of factor .04 in the 
table, so that 2% of the shots will be correct for elevation. 

2% of 75% is 1.5% nearly. 

So that in 100 shots, under ideal conditions, we may expect to 
put 1.5 effective shell into the emplacement. 

Again, Part II, Chapter XIX, The Quick-Firing Field Howitzer, 
Probability of Hitting: 

Example: How many rounds of lyddite shell from the 5 inch 
B. L. howitzer with full charge will be required to make one hit on 
a field casement 20 yards wide and 10 yards deep at 3,500 yards, 

H25 January-February 2011 • Fires — 1911 The Field Artillery Journal 


presuming the range and line already found? 

From the range table, the breadth of the 50% zone is 4.74 yards, 
depth 32.6 yards. Then the 100% zones are four times as large. Four 
times 4.74 is 18.96; therefore all the shell will be correct for line. 

As regards depth, 10-326 = .3 nearly; opposite to factor .3 is 
the probability table we find 16%. Therefore all the shell will be 
correct for line, and 16% of them correct for range. 

Therefore, after range and line have been correctly found to the 
center of the target, we may expect to obtain 16% of hits, or 1 hit 
every 6 rounds. 

This assumes ideal conditions for practice, and absence of wind 
or other disturbing factor. 

Under service conditions in war the probable rectangle would 
be nearly twice that given in the range table. 

Part III, Practical Gunnery, contains excellent suggestions and 
demonstrations, especially on the subject of the bullet cone and 
shrapnel. 

In this part of the book, under the heading. Indirect Laying, the 
following normal procedure in coming into action is given: 

Under normal conditions the procedure from start to finish will 
be as follows: 

1. Battery Commander receives his orders, reads them to 
officers, battery staff, and Nos. 1 and informs them where he 
intends to go. 

2. He advances with Staff as in Fig. 93. (Note.—The Staff now 
follow as a closed body. See F. A. T., 1908, page 186.) 

3. He arrives at his position, reconnoitres the enemy, selects his 
observing position, the position for the battery, and the general 
direction of position for limbers. 

4. He proceeds to the observing position, where the rangetakers 
have in the meantime set up the director and are taking the range. 
He sends the horseholders to mark for the flanks of the battery. 

5. The two signallers lay out the telephone wire from the 
observing position of the battery, working from the center 
outwards. 

6. The battery leader gallops up, followed by his signaller; 
the B. C. points out to him the position of the battery and the 
direction of the target. 

7. The battery leader brings the battery into action as in Fig. 
94. The limbers proceed toward the position selected by the 
Battery Commander. 

8. In the meantime the B. C. measures the angle of sight and 
sends it down to the battery. He also sends down the approximate 
battery angle. 

9. The rangetakers having in the meantime taken the range to 
the target and to the battery, the B. C. works out the battery angle 
and the range with the plotter. He sends down the correction 
to the approximate battery angle (“all guns V/ 2 0 more right.”) 

10. The B. C. orders the ranging section, the nature of shell, 
and the corrector, and sends down the two elevations to the 
ranging section. 





11. The ranging rounds are fired, and the B. C. holding his 
deflection 

scale at arm’s length, measures the angle of the fall of the 
shots right or left of the target. He sends down the deflection 
correction and orders a fresh elevation or elevations. (“All guns 
30’ more right. 4,500-4,600.”) 

12. TheB. C. orders a further deflection correction if necessary, 
and a fresh elevation. If the target is bracketed he orders a fuse 
echelon. 

13. On the result of the echelon the B. C. gives the corrector 
setting and the final elevation, and orders the method and rate 
of fire. 

14. Should the target be visible guns, the B. C. orders 
“corrector—one round battery fire 10 seconds.” He notes the 
error of each gun, which is recorded by the signaller. He sends 
down the six corrections thus: “Number 1, line. Number 2, 10 
minutes more left. Number 3, 30 minutes more left. Number 4, 
doubtful. Numbers 5 and 6, line. Fire Number 4 again.” 

15. Number 4 gun having been fired again, the B. C. gives 
“Number 4, 50 minutes more right. Section fire 10 seconds.” 

16. To switch on a fresh target, the B. C. orders “Empty guns. 
Angle at sight 1° elevation. All guns 7° more right. Ranging 
section 3,800-4,100.”) 

The procedure is then as before, except that, the error of the 
day of the fuse having been determined, there is no necessity to 
fire a fuse echelon. 

The above procedure may appear complicated. But if every 
detail of it has been so thoroughly practiced as to make it a matter 
of routine, like harnessing up a horse, the whole operation will go 
off smoothly and with less mental strain to all concerned than one 
of our old drill evolutions, such as “change from right back on 
number 4.” 

There is one point which should not be forgotten, and that is the 
concealment of the B. C. and his Staff—the “brain of the battery.” 
Under ordinary tactical conditions the enemy will probably be 
able to locate the battery, though invisible, within, say, a quarter 
of a mile. Then enemy will keep a bright lookout for the B. C. and 
will fire on any likely observing point. It is therefore advisable for 
the B. C. not only to keep under cover, but to avoid selecting any 
conspicuous observing position. It by no means follows that the 
point at which the director is set up is the best position to observe 
from. 

The chapters on Ranging, Finding the Fuse, and Field Howitzer 
Fire, are all exceedingly interesting. So, also, is the chapter on 
Analysis of Practice Reports. In this latter case, by the use of 
probability tables, the range as determined by the guns is checked 
up, and errors in observation are also determined in the illustration 
given. The remarks of the brigade commander and camp commander 
are somewhat caustic. 

Part IV. Modern Quick-Firing Equipments, contains brief 
descriptions and many illustrations of the present guns and howitzers 
of most of the countries of the world. 

The entire book is of such interest that it should find its way 
into the hands of every field artillery officer, or at least be placed 
in the library of every post where field artillery is serving. 


Editor’s note: Due to space considerations, the 1911 issue, of The 
Field Artillery Journal, could not be reproduced in its entirety, 
however it can be viewed at, sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ 
archives/ 


sill-www.army.mil/firesbulletin/ 


January-February 2011 H26 







