APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TECHNIQUES IN 
UNINHABITED AERIAL VEHICLE FLIGHT 

Warren R. Dufrene, Jr., Graduate School of Computer and Information Sciences, Nova Southeastern 

University, Ft. Lauderdale, FL 


Abstract 

This paper describes the development of an 
application of Artificial Intelligence (AI) for 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) control. The 
project was done as part of the requirements for a 
class in AI at NOVA Southeastern University and a 
beginning project at NASA Wallops Flight Facility 
for a resilient, robust, and intelligent UAV flight 
control system. A method is outlined which allows 
a base level application for applying an Artificial 
Intelligence method, Fuzzy Logic, to aspects of 
Control Logic for UAV flight. One element of 
UAV flight, automated altitude hold, has been 
implemented and preliminary results displayed. 

Introduction 

The attempt of man to fly UAV’s has been 
going on for a long time. Use of UAV’s can be 
traced back to use in World War I. Current 
research continues at institutions such as Berkeley, 
MIT, Georgia Tech, and many government 
organizations such as NASA, NOAA, the Navy, Air 
Force, and the Army. Universities in countries all 
over the world continue to research unmann ed 
aerial flight and continue to push the envelope of 
the applications for Artificial Intelligence and 
conventional control methods, which guide the 
aircraft. 

Current research efforts are looking at 
advancing the UAV to full autonomous operation 
and flight. While there seem to be many definitions 
of what the autonomy encompasses, each discipline 
has highlighted its meaning and benefits. 

Liu discusses a good outline of the problems 
involved in achieving control of the complex 
systems today [1]. He outlines the heterogeneous 
modeling and design of an advanced control system 
approach. One of the key problems faced is the fact 
that the systems and sensors involved are 
heterogeneous in nature. These systems have to be 


integrated and resolved into a working system. For 
the most part, this will be true for most complex 
UAV systems, which attempt full autonomy. 

Background 

New applications of AI, which include 
Intelligent Agents, are providing new areas of 
research [2]. Research has expanded during the 
past five years within the applications of Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) methods applied to the concepts of 
flight for the Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV). 

The UAV can be described as any platform that is 
operated without on board human occupation. 
Systems, which exist today, include helicopters, 
airplanes, balloons, blimps, and even satellites. 

Their autonomy varies from human interaction from 
a remote console to fully autonomous takeoff and 
landing. Earlier research, conducted by Handelman 
and Stengel, applied AI methods such as expert 
systems and schedulers, which applied rule-based 
systems [3]. These systems attempted to formulate 
the art of flying an aircraft into logical series of 
events to maintain control of specific functions of 
the aircraft. This concept will still be a key 
component with systems designed for future use. 

The initial concept of using an Expert System 
to control an aircraft seems simple at first but 
proves difficult to apply. Some of the problems that 
still exist today include the fact that an expert 
pilot’s decision-making process is difficult to 
imitate with computers. The dynamic environment 
and dynamic conditions affecting the aircraft are 
areas that have to be adapted to such an Expert 
System. 

Later research efforts began to divide the many 
tasks involved in the control of UAV flight into 
manageable steps. Concentrated efforts of applying 
logic schemes similar to Fuzzy Logic and Neural 
Networks, are being applied to improve the 
mathematical solutions for flight control. Dr. 


Anthony J. Calise, professor of aerospace 
engineering at Georgia Tech stated that, “several 
areas of control for UAV’s can be adapted to the 
use of Neural Networks” [4], The author gives 
several accounts of the advantages of applying 
Neural Networks in addition to the normal control 
methods of a UAV through an integration of these 
systems. 

Current research efforts are starting to evolve 
the application of AI approaches into Hybrid 
Systems. Researchers are thinking about the 
expected advances in aerial vehicle control. Dr. 
Norman Fitz-Coy, professor of mechanical 
engineering at the University of Florida, stated: 
"Ultimately, it is expected that an ideal flight 
control system for an adaptive wing Miniature 
Aerial Vehicle (MAV) will use soft computing 
techniques, such as fuzzy logic, neural networks, 
genetic algorithms, pattern recognitions, or 
knowledge-based systems” [5], 

Past research efforts are being modified to 
include an integration of more AI methods. These 
current research efforts are the interesting 
advancements taking place. How does a machine 
fly an aircraft like a human can? What does a 
human think about in the process of reacting to the 
environment? Can a machine really “ think” enough 
to fly a UAV fully autonomously? These are 
questions pushing UAV research. 

The Problem Outlined 

Research of the applications of AI is co min g 
to a point where the approaches, algorithms and 
models need to be applied for further understanding 
of their usefulness and applicability towards any 
given project for a UAV [6], [7], Most of the 
research papers reviewed gave excellent theory but 
did not give enough information on the mechanics 
or steps for applying the methods outlined to begin 
a research effort. 

The focus of this research has been to outline 
some of the AI techniques used for UAV flight 
control and discuss some of the tools used to apply 
AI techniques. The intent is to succeed with the 
implementation of applying AI techniques towards 
actually controlling different aspects of UAV flight. 
These tools and techniques serve as the project’s 
basic start. 


The Approach 

There is an increase in research and papers on 
accomplishments and proposed research under the 
subject of unmanned flight. The field was 
narrowed down to include AI methods that could be 
applied easily in a lab environment. 



Figure 1. Design Approach 

During the completion of the steps in Figure 1, 
the following work was accomplished. The 
decision to use JAVA was due to a requirement for 
the AI class. Although the use of a new language 
was slow at first, this programming language 
environment proved to be very beneficial for this 
type of project. The following summary is given 
for the general approach: 

a. The first approach to the problem was to 
research the past and current efforts of UAV 
flight control at universities. This research was 
done on the web through sites and journal 
articles. 

b. Research was done after isolating the choice for 
elevator control to maintain altitude. An 
attempt was made to find a fuzzy logic program 
or applet written in the JAVA language. 

c. While doing the research several books were 
purchased for learning JAVA. The Sun JAVA 
site was also used, as recommended, for the 
initial understanding of the format and structure 
to the JAVA language. 

d. The approach for the project was to learn basic 
JAVA programming techniques for reading 



simulated UAV flight files, converting these 
files if needed, and running or modifying a 
Fuzzy Logic application. 

e. Three strong candidates for usable Fuzzy Logic 
JAVA programs were found: 

1). The first package was a complete JAVA 
class package developed for use within a JAVA 
program. This program is called Fuzzy Engine 
by Professor Edward Sazonov and can be found 
at the address: 

http://www.csee.wvu.edu/~esazonov/FuzzvEngi 
ne.htm. This package was reviewed and set aside 
as a future application for more advanced work. 

2) . The primary candidate was a program called 
FIT written for Fuzzy control by Gerald A. De 
Jong (gerald@beautifulcode.nl.) retrieved from: 
(http://www.beautifulcode.nl) . 

This package included a program already 
designed for a fan controller. The code was a 
good candidate for modification to a simple 
elevator controller for the UAV. 

3) . The second candidate was a commercial 
package with free demo download called 
FuzzyTech 5 which can be retrieved from: 
(http://www.fuzzvtech.com/index.htm) . The 
FuzzyTech package allowed input of a data file 
into a Fuzzy Controller that can be designed 
within the program’s own Graphical User 
Interface. Work was done with this package 
also and some of it will be presented. The 
licensed package will also convert the design to 
code in JAVA or C. 

The description of the contents of Figure 1, are 
discussed in greater detail. 

Review University UAV Research 

The key concepts reviewed included work 
done by Berkeley, University of Florida, and 
several other universities. The research papers 
provided key ideas for the application of the actual 
concepts to use Fuzzy Logic as a base AI approach. 
While success was not guaranteed, an educated 
evaluation was done to review the applicability. 


The main attempt was to duplicate l in ear 
control methods by using a fuzzy controller. 

Narrow AI techniques for application 

The approaches seen in most of the research 
included Expert Systems, Neural Networks, Fuzzy 
Logic, and Hybrid combinations of these and PED 
control schemes. The AI approaches selected for 
use were Fuzzy Logic, Expert System, and later a 
combination of Neural / Fuzzy for adaptive 
capability. 

Obtain applicable expertise in AI Methods 

The first AI approach employed during the 
project was Fuzzy Logic. This technique was used 
to control the altitude hold of a simulated UAV. 
Two applications were performed. The first 
application involved writing JAVA code to simulate 
a flight using calibrated steps of altitude climbs. 

The second application involved learning a demo 
copy of a commercial program for designing a 
Fuzzy Control System (FuzzyTech 5.x). The output 
data from the first application was used for input 
into the demo program. The output data file from 
FuzzyTech was imported into an Excel spreadsheet 
for comparison ag ains t the input data. 

Design a Model for AI Application 

A model was needed to allow a confined 
implementation of a simple Fuzzy control scheme. 
The chosen altitude hold was used with an added 
input for acceleration control. The acceleration 
control was for future work involving degrees of 
power needed during different scenarios of flight 
(take-off, level flight, disturbed flight, and 
approach). 

The design for the fuzzy controller is outlined 
in Figure 2. The first system only included altitude 
as an input and elevator as the output. It proved to 
be a simple and stable control scheme. 

Acceleration was added to give future degrees of 
control for a throttle output to compensate for levels 
of dynamic change in conditions of the flight 
envelope. 



Figure 2. Fuzzy Controller 


Design Autonomy definition 

The definition for autonomy for this project 
has been defined as the creation of a craft (which 
includes the smallest breakdown of agents) which 
can perform its pre-determined function without 
any additional human interaction. This definition 
will be carried out by the loading of a mission plan 
for the craft to carry out. 

Figure 3 displays the objective of the 
autonomy. This will apply to all elements of the 
design. The simple altitude hold will follow the 
same criteria. The mission plan will be the desired 
altitude to hold. The mission objective will become 
the desired altitude. The fuzzy controller will 
control the UA V Craft and a review is still done 
inherently by the change in input to the fuzzy 
controller. 



Figure 3. Autonomy Objective 

Design Project Goals 

The project goals flow diagram in Figure 4 
outlines the required steps attempted to complete 
the project. The choice was made to work with 
existing JAVA code and implement an off-the-shelf 
application. This was decided so the control output 
effects could be compared against each other for 
verification of correct response behavior. 


Topic Project Design Goals 
Learn JAVA programming language 

Code flight data file simulation in JAVA 

| Research for Fuzzy Control Code Classes/Utilities in JAVA 

1 Modify Code for UAV Run off the shelf application 

| Control Application ' OR with UAV Flight Data 

Generate Graphs of 
Inputs -vs-Output 
l Control Reactions 


Figure 4. Project Goals 













Apply AI techniques and evaluate 


The chosen technique for this project was to 
apply a specific Artificial Intelligence technique 
(Fuzzy Logic) to the problem of flight control for a 
UAV. The control problem was to maintain a 
desired altitude as shown in Figure 5. Although the 
main desired output for the aircraft was “Elevator 
Control”, the application was studied further to gain 
knowledge of the effects of aircraft speed also. 

This type of application will allow an Intelligent 
Agent approach to be implemented at a later date. 



Figure 5. Altitude Control 


The desired project was outlined (Figure 6) but 
the application chosen for the simulator graphical 
user interface (GUI) FlightGear proved too 
complex for the allotted development time. This 
will be a key application for any research because it 
provides a visual representation of the UAV control 
effects. The software is a free distribution and very 
well supported. 



Figure 6. Application of AI Technique 


Results 

The work performed is described in the 
following sections. 

Results from tests of the system with 
appropriate data. 

The results from the first program (modified 
beautifulcode fuzzy logic demo) were somewhat 
stable but required tweaking of the Degrees of 
Membership in the program to provide smoother 
transitions. The program output was in the form of 
graphs as depicted in Figure 7. Although the 
desired output for altitude and elevator was 
achieved, some experimentation was done with 
speed. A control input of the desired elevation of 
26km produced the desired output for speed 
(normal = nominal throttle for maintaining altitude). 
The desired elevator output was also achieved 
(steady = level elevator). The obvious effects of 
elevator angle will be different depending on the 
speed the aircraft is moving. This is similar to 
holding your hand out the window of a moving car. 
At slow speeds you can turn your flattened hand at 
different angles and still keep your arm still, but 
when the speed increases to around 50 MPH your 
arm becomes unstable and moves wildly about 
when you increase the angle of attack of your hand. 



Figure 7. Fuzzy Output Graph 


The off-the-shelf program (FuzzyTech demo) 
was used on a data input file created with a Java 
program written to give simulated calibrated UAV 





flight data (not real data). FuzzyTech 5.5 was used 
to design a simple fuzzy controller. The designed 
fuzzy controller was used to successfully read the 
data and output a data file. The output file was then 
read in using another Java program written for it. 
Microsoft Excel was used to graph the data file. 

The desired altitude was 5000 feet, and the graph in 
Figure 8 displays the expected elevator outputs for 
the generated altitude calibration steps. 



Figure 8. Fuzzy Controller Results 

Conclusion and Future Work 

The AI techniques can be greatly expanded 
with further work in this development. Attempts 
can be made to expand the use of AI techniques so 
a comparison can be done against more 
conventional flight controllers. While this paper 
described the accomplished work only, much time 
was spent installing and learning to compile the 
flight simulator FlightGear. This flight simulator 
program would provide an excellent interface 
option for the tools used so far. The completed 
JAVA code would have to be expanded to use one 
of the communication protocols that FlightGear 
provides. The setup and protocol for the 
communications was the primary blockade during 
this project assignment. 

Once these tools are further developed, the 
combination of code plus the capability to visually 
view the performance and analyze the results real- 
time will provide a strong, practical, and low cost 
platform for experimentation with AI techniques 
which are applied to flight control. The summary 


of some of these conclusions and future work are 
outlined in Figure 9. 


Conclusion 

1. Research gives us exposure to new technology. 

2. Furry control system works BUT adaptive system would be more 
useful for advanced dynamic controls. 

3. Open System Toolset needs to be developed. 

4. Test PID controller and compare results. 

Future Research 

1. Combinations of Particle Swarm Intelligence, Intelligent Systems 
and Knowledge Management. 

2. Integrate tools (Flight Gear, Open Source, Matlab) for End-To-End 
user research approach. 

3. Develop Open System Toolset for testing AI ( Neural / Fuzzy, 
Intelligent Agents, Particle Swarm Intelligence). 


Figure 9. Conclusion and Future Research 

The variety of research being conducted today 
is vast. Figure 10 illustrates a small part of the 
variety in UAV systems and parallel bionic types of 
systems. These types of systems are combining 
knowledge from our natural environment with 
software and advancements in technology to 
produce adaptable systems. 


References 

[1] Liu, X., J. Liu, J. Eker, and E.A. Lee, 2002, 



Figure 10. Systems of the Future 


"Heterogeneous Modeling and Design of Control 
Systems,” to appear in Software-Enabled Control: 
Information Technology for Dynamical Systems, T. 
Samad and G. Balas (eds.), New York City: IEEE 
Press. 






[2] Cannady, J., 2002, DCIS 760 Artificial 
Intelligence. (Class Lecture Viewgraphs), Nova 
Southeastern University, Graduate School of 
Information Sciences Web site, URL: 
http://scis.nova.edu/~cannady [cited January 9, 
2003] 

[3] Handelman, D., R. Stengel, 1989, “ Perspectives 
on the Use of Rule-Based Control, ” Artificial 
Intelligence in Real-Time Control, Pergamon Press, 
New York, pp. 27-32. 

[4] Wyeth G., G. Buskey, J. Roberts, 2000, “Flight 
Control Using an Artificial Neural Network, ” 
Proceedings of the Australian Conference on 
Robotics and Automation (ACRA 2000), August 30 
- September 1, Melbourne. 

[5] Page, D., 1998, “MAV Flight Control: Realities 
and Challenges, ” URL: 

http://www.hightechcareers.com/docl98e/flightcont 
roll98e.html [cited January 9, 2003] 


URL: 

http://www.asinc.com/pdfs/unmannedVehiclesMav 
2002.pdf f cited January 9, 2003] 

[7] Sehgal, B„ R. W. Deters, M.S. Selig, 2002 
“Icing Encounter Flight Simulator,” ALAA 2002- 
0817, Reno, NV, Jan. 2002. 


[6] Elmore, W., 2000, “Control of Intelligent 
Unmanned Vehicles in Dynamic Environments, ” 


