sion of traversability maps that result 
from pose estimation uncertainties, 
dealing with boundary effects to enable 
tighter maneuvers, and handling a wider 
range of obstacles. 

This work advances what has been 
previously developed and integrated 
on the Mars Exploration Rovers by 
using algorithms that are capable of 
traversing more rock-dense terrains, 


enabling tight, thread-the-needle ma- 
neuvers. These algorithms were inte- 
grated on the newly refurbished 
Athena Mars research rover, and were 
fielded in the JPL Mars Yard. Forty- 
three runs were conducted with targets 
at distances ranging from 5 to 15 m, 
and a success rate of 93% was achieved 
for placement of the instrument within 
2-3 cm of the target. 


This work was done by Issa A. Nesnas and 
Mihail N. Pivtoraiko of Caltech, Alonzo Kelly 
of Carnegie Mellon University, and Michael 
Fleder of MIT for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Lab- 
oratory. Further information is contained in 
a TSP (see page 1). 

This software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Daniel Broderick of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
danielb@caltech.edu. Refer to NPO-48062. 


Computing Radiative Transfer in a 3D Medium 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


A package of software computes the 
time-dependent propagation of a nar- 
row laser beam in an arbitrary three- di- 
mensional (3D) medium with absorp- 
tion and scattering, using the 
transient-discrete-ordinates method and 
a direct integration method. Unlike 
prior software that utilizes a Monte 
Carlo method, this software enables sim- 
ulation at very small signal-to-noise ra- 
tios. The ability to simulate propagation 
of a narrow laser beam in a 3D medium 
is an improvement over other discrete- 
ordinate software. Unlike other direct- 


integration software, this software is not 
limited to simulation of propagation of 
thermal radiation with broad angular 
spread in three dimensions or of a laser 
pulse with narrow angular spread in two 
dimensions. Uses for this software in- 
clude (1) computing scattering of a 
pulsed laser beam on a material having 
given elastic scattering and absorption 
profiles, and (2) evaluating concepts for 
laser-based instruments for sensing 
oceanic turbulence and related meas- 
urements of oceanic mixed-layer depths. 
With suitable augmentation, this soft- 


ware could be used to compute radiative 
transfer in ultrasound imaging in biolog- 
ical tissues, radiative transfer in the 
upper Earth crust for oil exploration, 
and propagation of laser pulses in 
telecommunication applications. 

This program was written by Paul Von All- 
men and Seungwon Lee of Caltech for NASA’s 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory. For more infonna- 
tion, contact iaoffice@jpl.nasa.gov. 

This software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Daniel Broderick of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
danielb@caltech. edu. Refer to NPO-44 719. 


Architectural Implementation of NASA Space 
Telecommunications Radio System Specification 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


This software demonstrates a working 
implementation of the NASA STRS 
(Space Telecommunications Radio Sys- 
tem) architecture specification. This is a 
developing specification of software ar- 
chitecture and required interfaces to 
provide commonality among future 
NASA and commercial software-defined 
radios for space, and allow for easier 
mixing of software and hardware from 
different vendors. 


It provides required functions, and 
supports interaction with STRS-com- 
pliant simple test plug-ins (“wave- 
forms”). All of it is programmed in 
“plain C,” except where necessary to 
interact with C++ plug-ins. It offers a 
small footprint, suitable for use in JPL 
radio hardware. 

Future NASA work is expected to de- 
velop into fully capable software-defined 
radios for use on the space station, other 


space vehicles, and interplanetary 
probes. 

This work was done by Kenneth J. Peters, 
James P. Lux, Minh Lang, and Courtney B. 
Duncan of Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory. Further information is contained 
in a TSP (see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Daniel Broderick of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
danielb@caltech.edu. Refer to NPO-47328. 


$ Journal and Wave Bearing Impedance Calculation Software 

John H. Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio 


The wave bearing software suite is a 
MALTA application that computes bear- 
ing properties for user-specified wave 
bearing conditions, as well as plain jour- 
nal bearings. Wave bearings are fluid 


film journal bearings with multi-lobed 
wave patterns around the circumference 
of the bearing surface. In this software 
suite, the dynamic coefficients are out- 
putted in a way for easy implementation 


in a finite element model used in rotor 
dynamics analysis. The software has a 
graphical user interface (GUI) for in- 
putting bearing geometry parameters, 
and uses MATLAB’s structure interface 


46 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2012 


