Investigation of Techniques for Simulating 
Communications and Tracking Subsystems on 
Space Station Freedom 


Final Report 

NASA/ASEE Summer Faculty Fellowship Program — 1991 
Johnson Space Center 


Prepared by: Louis A. DeAcetis, Ph.D. 

Academic Rank: Professor of Physics 


University & Department: Bronx Community College/ CUNY 

Department of Physics and Astronomy 
Bronx, NY 10453 


NASA/JSC 


Directorate: 
Division: 
Branch : 
JSC Colleague: 
Date Submitted: 
Contract : 


Engineering 

Tracking and Communications 
Systems Engineering 
Oron Schmidt 
August 16, 1991 
NGT-44-001-800 


3 


1 



Abstract 


The need to reduce the costs of Space Station Freedom has 
resulted in a major redesign and downsizing of the Station 
in general, and its Communications and Tracking (C&T) compon- 
ents in particular. Earlier models and simulations of the 
C&T Space-to-Ground Subsystem (SGS) in particular are no 
longer valid. There thus exists a general need for updated, 
high fidelity simulations of C&T subsystems. This project 
explored simulation techniques and methods that might be used 
in developing new simulations of C&T subsystems, including 
the SGS. Three requirements were placed on the simulations to 
be developed: 

a) They run on IBM PC/ XT/ AT compatible computers 

b) They be written in Ada as much as possible 

c) Since control and monitoring of the C&T subsystems 
will involve communication via a MIL-STD-1553B serial 
bus, that the possibility of commanding the simulator 
and monitoring its sensors via that bus be included 
in the design of the simulator. 

The result of the project is a prototype of a simulation of 
the Assembly/Contingency Transponder of the SGS, written in 
Ada, which can be controlled from another PC via a MIL-STD- 
1553B bus. 


3 


2 



Introduction 


The design of Space Station Freedom (SSF) has recently 
undergone a major redesign and reconfiguration. This has 
significantly impacted upon the Communications and Tracking 
Subsystem (CTS) and its space-to-ground (SGS) components. 

An earlier design was simulated [1] and used to test 
various aspects of the inter-system communications design 
of earlier models of SSF (so-called Demonstration 3B, [2]). 
These simulations are currently outdated, and the purpose 
of this investigation was to determine appropriate 
programming techniques that could be used in developing an 
updated simulation of the CTS in general, and the space-to- 
ground system in particular. 

The various subsystems on SSF will be connected by two 
networks, one a token ring fiber optic network employing 
the Fiber Distributed Data Interface (FDDI) protocol, and 
other local "networks" consisting of MIL-STD-1553B busses 
to be used to control and monitor the operation of the 
component elements (generally comprised of what are called 
orbital replacement units, or ORU's) of the various 
subsystems on SSF, including the SGS. A simulation of the 
SGS should therefore include both ORU equipment simulation 
and some method of including the MIL-STD-1553B bus and its 
characteristics [3]. Fortunately, PC/XT interface cards are 
available from several manufacturers, including the ILC 
Data Device Corporation (DDC) of Bohemia NY. Such cards 
permit the use of an actual 1553B bus, thereby obviating 
the need to simulate bus interactions. One would need only 
interface a simulation running on a PC with an interface 
card and its associated software to, in effect, simulate an 
ORU. Several ORU's, running on separate PC's with 1553B 
cards could then be used to simulate a subsystem like the 
SGS. An evaluation of the viability of the latter approach 
proved an aspect of this investigation. 


3 


3 



Method 


The entire SGS system includes both S-band and Ku-band 
communication equipment. Given the amount of time available, 
it was decided to concentrate on the S-band system in general 
(the so-called Assembly/Contingency Subsystem, ACS, Fig. 1), 
and the S-band Transponder ORU in particular. It was felt 
that if a skeleton of this ORU could be simulated along with 
an interface to the 1553B bus, then greater detail could be 
fleshed in later (the sensor measurements list is still 
undergoing changes) . A software prototye would be sufficient 
to establish proof of concept, and this became the main 
objective of the software development. 

Since Ada is the language designated for software 
development on SSF, it was decided to make its use a 
requirement of any software simulation. The Ada compilers 
used was the Alsys DOS Ada Compilation System, Version 4.3.3, 
and the Alsys FirstAda System. The software drivers [4] 
supplied with 1553B interface card, DDC model BUS-65517, are 
written in the C programming language (specifically Microsoft 
C) . This fact required the development of interface packages 
between the C and Ada languages so that the simulator 
software could communicate with the 1553B bus. In addition, a 
user interface to the bus would be needed to communicate 
control commands to the simulated ORU and to poll it for 
sensor readings (Control and Monitoring, CM) . 

Using techniques similar (but not identical) to those 
described in Ref. 1, it was decided to concentrate first on 
establishing appropriate Ada data structures to represent the 
various sensor measurements that were in the latest available 
requirements for the ACS equipment [5, 6,7,8]. Data structures 
for the sensor measurements of the three major components of 
the S-band ACS, including the baseband signal processor 
(BSP) , RF Antenna Group (RFG) as well as the transponder were 
established, and a rough simulation of the transponder was 
programmed. These various pieces of equipment can be "turned 
on" and sensor values read. In addition, the transponder can 
be "controlled" in that internal switches can be set, and 
signals change dynamically in a rough approximation of what 
would be expected when this equipment is initialized, and 
communications established. The control commands are sent to 
the transponder via the 1553B bus in the form specified in 
Ref. 6, (including appropriate 1553B subaddressing) , and are 
read from the interface card via the Ada/C software interface 
packages. For testing and demonstration purposes, a third PC 
with a different 1553B interface card (SCI Technology, Inc., 
Huntsville AL, Model BCU/PC-1553) was used as a bus monitor 
to observe bus traffic (Fig. 2) . 


3-4 




Fig. 1 — S-Band Assembly/Contingency Space-to-Ground 
Communications and Tracking Components 


3 


5 











IBM PC/XT 


Fig. 2 — Data flow between software elements and 1553B 

inter-PC serial connections for simulation testbed 


3 


6 











Discussion 


A prototype simulation of the S-band Assembly/Contingency 
Space-to-Ground Subsystem transponder was developed and 
demonstrated. In addition, a user interface running on a 
separate PC was developed which permitted Control and 
Monitoring commands to be sent to the simulator via a MIL- 
STD-1553B bus and appropriate PC/1553B interface cards. The 
prototype system indicates that it should be possible to set 
up a simulation of the space-to-ground components of the 
Communications and Tracking System of Space Station Freedom 
using separate PC's. Each PC (with MIL-STD-1553B interface 
card) could be used to simulate an ORU, and if an actual ORU 
were available, it should be possible, in principle, to 
substitute it for the simulation by plugging it into the 
1553B bus, and disconnecting the PC simulating it. 

(Additional "real" signals might have to be applied to the 
actual ORU to demonstrate signal propagation that was 
otherwise emulated by the PC's). 

The Ada programming language has some features that make 
it especially suited for this simulation. Chief among them 
was the "representation clause" construct which made it 
relatively easy to represent the complex data constructs that 
are used as Control and Monitoring data. Input/ output, 
however, remains a continuing problem with Ada unless non- 
standard features are used (packages supplied by various 
compilers that are peculiar to the compiler) . The latter was 
avoided in this exercise in order to make the code as 
portable as possible. Much time was therefore spent on the 
user interface to the system that sends Control commands to 
the 1553B bus for transmission. (Fortunately, the ANSI 
standard of "escape sequences" made what would have been an 
impossible problem at least tractable.) 


Acknowledgements 

Many thanks to all those who aided in this project. To 
name some is to omit others — you know who you are, and I 
hope that I have sufficiently thanked you all personally. 

One person who will be named is my "NASA Colleague", Oron 
Schmidt. Without his continued support and encouragement, I 
wouldn't have anyone to thank. 


3-7 



References: 


1. ''Using Ada Tasks to Simulate Operating Equipment", 

L. A. DeAcetis, 0. Schmidt, and K. Krishen, Comput . Phys . 4 , 
521-525 (1990). 

2. "End-to-End Test Capability Test Bed Interface Control 

Document - Demonstration 3B", NASA/JSC Engineering 
Directorate, Avionics Systems Division, prepared by 
Lockheed Engineering and Sciences Company, LESC-25117- 
3B, Houston TX, May 1989. 

3. "MIL-STD-1553 Designer's Guide, Second Edition", ILC Data 

Device Corporation, Bohemia NY, 1988. 

4. "BUS-69008 Microsoft C MIL-STD 1553B Driver, Rel . 1.52", 

ILC Data Device Corporation, Bohemia NY 11716, July 1989. 

5. "Interface Requirment Document, C&TS Local Buses, 

Preliminary, Volume 11 of 16, CMS-Assembly/Contingency 
Transmit-Receive Amplifier Interfaces", IRD #10033288, 
PRELIM-2, GE Aerospace, Camden NJ 08102. 

6. "Interface Requirment Document, C&TS Local Buses, 

Preliminary, Volume 12 of 16, CMS-Assembly/Contingency 
Standard Transponder Interfaces", IRD #10033288, 

PRELIM-2, GE Aerospace, Camden NJ 08102. 

7. "Interface Requirment Document, C&TS Local Buses, 

Preliminary, Volume 13 of 16, CMS-Assembly/Contingency 
Baseband Signal Processor Interfaces", IRD #10033288, 
PRELIM-2, GE Aerospace, Camden NJ 08102. 


8. ACS Transponder Specifications: "B2 Critical Item 

Development Specification", Specification No. 10033011, 
Revision B, GE Aeorspace, Camden NJ, March 14, 1991. 


3 


8 



