of control activities, such as monitoring 
and control of the electric grid, chemi- 
cal, or nuclear plant processes, air traffic 
control, and the like. 

This program, was written by Hasan Rah- 
man of Lockheed Martin for fohnson Space 
Center. Further information is contained in 
a TSP (see page 1). MSC-24337-1 


Update on PISCES 

An updated version of the Platform 
Independent Software Components for 
the Exploration of Space (PISCES) 
software library is available. A previous 
version was reported in “Library for 
Developing Spacecraft-Mission-Plan- 
ning Software” (MSC-22983), NASA 
Tech Briefs, Vol. 25, No. 7 (July 2001), 
page 52. To recapitulate: This software 
provides for Web-based, collaborative 
development of computer programs 
for planning trajectories and trajec- 
tory-related aspects of spacecraft-mis- 
sion design. The library was built using 
state-of-the-art object-oriented con- 
cepts and software-development 
methodologies. The components of 
PISCES include Java-language applica- 
tion programs arranged in a hierarchy 
of classes that facilitates the reuse of 
the components. 

As its full name suggests, the PISCES 
library affords platform-independence: 
The Java language makes it possible to 
use the classes and application pro- 
grams with a Java virtual machine, 
which is available in most Web-browser 
programs. Another advantage is ex- 
pandability: Object orientation facili- 
tates expansion of the library through 
creation of a new class. Improvements 
in the library since the previous version 
include development of orbital-maneu- 
ver-planning and rendezvous-launch- 
window application programs, enhance- 
ment of capabilities for propagation of 
orbits, and development of a “desktop” 
user interface. 

This program was written by Don Pearson, 
Dustin Hamm, Brian Kubena, and 
Jonathan K. Weaver of Johnson Space Center. 
For further information, contact the Johnson 
Commercial Technology Office at (281) 483- 
3809. MSC-23633-1 ' 


; Ground and Space Radar 
Volume Matching and 
Comparison Software 

This software enables easy comparison 
of ground- and space-based radar obser- 
vations. The software was initially de- 
signed to compare ground radar reflec- 


tivity from operational, ground based S- 
and C-band meteorological radars with 
comparable measurements from the 
Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission 
(TRMM) satellite’s Precipitation Radar 
(PR) instrument. The software is also ap- 
plicable to other ground-based and 
space-based radars. The ground and 
space radar volume matching and com- 
parison software was developed in re- 
sponse to requirements defined by the 
Ground Validation System (GVS) of 
Goddard’s Global Precipitation Mission 
(GPM) project. 

This software innovation is specifi- 
cally concerned with simplifying the 
comparison of ground- and space- 
based radar measurements for the pur- 
pose of GPM algorithm and data prod- 
uct validation. This software is unique 
in that it provides an operational envi- 
ronment to routinely create compari- 
son products, and uses a direct geomet- 
ric approach to derive common 
volumes of space- and ground-based 
radar data. In this approach, spatially 
coincident volumes are defined by the 
intersection of individual space-based 
Precipitation Radar rays with the each 
of the conical elevation sweeps of the 
ground radar. Thus, the resampled vol- 
ume elements of the space and ground 
radar reflectivity can be directly com- 
pared to one another. 

This work was done by Kenneth Mortis and 
Mathew Schwaller of Goddard Space Flight 
Center. Further information is contained in 
a TSP ( see page 1 ). Additional information 
can also be found on the GPM GVS web site: 
httb://gpm. gsfc. nasa. gov/groundvalida- 
tion.html. GSC-15738-1 


@1 Web-Based Interface for 
Command and Control of 
Network Sensors 

This software allows for the visualiza- 
tion and control of a network of sen- 
sors through a Web browser interface. 
It is currently being deployed for a net- 
work of sensors monitoring Mt. Saint 
Helen’s volcano; however, this innova- 
tion is generic enough that it can be 
deployed for any type of sensor Web. 
From this interface, the user is able to 
fully control and monitor the sensor 
Web. This includes, but is not limited 
to, sending “test” commands to individ- 
ual sensors in the network, monitoring 
for real-world events, and reacting to 
those events. 

This work was done by Michael N. Wallick, 
Joshua R. Doubleday, and Khawaja S. 
Shams of Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion 


Laboratory. For more information, contact 
iaoffice@jpl. nasa.gov. 

This software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Daniel Broderick of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
danielb@caltech.edu. Refer to NPO-47110. 


@ Orbit Determination 
Toolbox 

The Orbit Determination Toolbox is 
an orbit determination (OD) analysis 
tool based on MATLAB and Java that 
provides a flexible way to do early mis- 
sion analysis. The toolbox is primarily in- 
tended for advanced mission analysis 
such as might be performed in concept 
exploration, proposal, early design 
phase, or rapid design center environ- 
ments. The emphasis is on flexibility, but 
it has enough fidelity to produce credi- 
ble results. Insight into all flight dynam- 
ics source code is provided. 

MATLAB is the primary user interface 
and is used for piecing together meas- 
urement and dynamic models. The Java 
Astrodynamics Toolbox is used as an en- 
gine for things that might be slow or in- 
efficient in MATLAB, such as high-fi- 
delity trajectory propagation, lunar and 
planetary ephemeris look-ups, preces- 
sion, nutation, polar motion calcula- 
tions, ephemeris file parsing, and the 
like. The primary analysis functions are 
sequential filter/smoother and batch 
least-squares commands that incorpo- 
rate Monte-Carlo data simulation, linear 
covariance analysis, measurement pro- 
cessing, and plotting capabilities at the 
generic level. 

These functions have a user interface 
that is based on that of the MATLAB 
ODE suite. To perform a specific analy- 
sis, users write MATLAB functions that 
implement truth and design system mod- 
els. The user provides his or her models 
as inputs to the filter commands. The 
software provides a capability to publish 
and subscribe to a software bus that is 
compliant with the NASA Goddard Mis- 
sion Services Evolution Center (GMSEC) 
standards, to exchange data with other 
flight dynamics tools to simplify the flight 
dynamics design cycle. Using the publish 
and subscribe approach allows for ana- 
lysts in a rapid design center environ- 
ment to seamlessly incorporate changes 
in spacecraft and mission design into 
navigation analysis and vice versa. 

This work was done by James R. Carpenter 
and Kevin Berry of Goddard Space Flight 
Center and Kate Gregory, Keith Speckman, 
Sun Hur-Diaz, Derek Surka, and Dave Gay- 
lor of Emergent Space Technologies, Inc. For 


14 


NASA Tech Briefs, June 2010 


