



International Journal of Trend in Scientific 
Research and Development (IJTSRD) 
International Open Access Journal 



ISSN No: 2456 - 6470 | www.ijtsrd.com | Volume - 2 | Issue - 4 


♦ 

♦ 


A Review on Codeigniter 


Rohit Jahagirdar 

PG Student, Affiliated to Department of (MCA), 
P.E.S.’s Modem College of Engineering, 

Pune, Maharashtra, India 

INTRODUCTION 

Framework is important for large-scale object- 
oriented software systems for development. They 
offer market value for high productivity and low time 
through design and recycling codes. Codeigniter is a 
PHP framework developed by Alice Lab and does not 
require additional configuration. You do not have to 
use the command line, it is extremely light that 
usually provides a rich set of libraries for essential 
works, as well as provides a simple interface and 
logical design to access this library. Codeigniter's face 
challenges you to search for a framework that works 
better than codeigner. Codeigniter uses the MVC 
approach. Codeigniter is fully documented. 
Codeigniter is a friendly community for users. PHP5 
is a Scripting language dock to create a sophisticated, 
dynamic web-based application; It's top of its 
friendship with HTML; It's also a great language to 
honor your OOP’s skills, it is tight, safe and the 
intuitive. Many of us have only server-side language 
to meet our needs. This makes coding more easier, 
faster, and user-friendly in PHP. Model / View / 
Controller (MVC) should study the web development 
with the best practices that all developers should 
follow. It’s created on linear and easy to use folders 
configuration. It is open source, easy to configure, 
customize for its own needs. You can create your own 
clean URI line in Codeigniter. For this we create 
controller, model and view, as well as database to 
keep information. Codeigniter is a PHP MVC schema 
that aims to simplify normal operations while 
implementing Structured Code so that it is easy to 
debug, scale, and develop a team. You will compare 
Codeigniter to another framework in which Zend is 
not restricted to implementing MVC configurations. It 
can be seen as negative or positive, all of which 


Yogeshchandra Puranik 

Asst.Professor, Affiliated to Department of (MCA), 
P.E.S.’s Modem College of Engineering, 
Pune, Maharashtra, India 


depends on us and how you use it. There are many 
frameworks available and you can do some research 
to determine what will work best. 

Literature Survey 

Our study included different types of strings like "web 
development assessment" and "web development 
performance". In conclusion, most of the material is 
generally evaluated, not about the performance of web 
development. The search for data was about to 
evaluate performance and the selection of materials 
research in this area was not profitable but it was not 
easy to find. Important It is a good way to find out 
how to do research in this data and it is often found in 
an abstract but sometimes in the background. In 2001, 
Samisa Abesingh, mainly focuse on how the M-V-C 
and framework techniques makes difference in web 
development. In this book MVC is a major part of 
PHP development and is about what it does for web 
development. In 2001, Mohammed Mustafa analyzes 
the PHP development model-based MVC framework, 
in 2001, helping the developers to learn MVC 
structure more easily. Codeigniter is an analysis of 
how MVC based framework are works in 
performance and coding of user coding. The ability 
for developers is here to explain how MVC structure 
helps the development of web applications, how 
developers can develop more efficient web 
applications. In 2001, Peter Savacek and John Bartlett 
understood web performance. He presented how the 
display can be used and how it is important in the web 
business. It also shows how testing can be done and 
how the test can be affected. This paper lets 
developers know how to manage value and time in 
web application development. 


@ IJTSRD | AvailableOnline@www.ijtsrd.coml Volume-2 | Issue-4 | May-Jun 2018 


Page: 1124 







International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) ISSN: 2456-6470 


In 2003, Lance Tichkosky A. Al. A paper published 
by A Performance Cooperson of Dynamic Web 
Technologies, describes how many results of 
performance, different types of comparative analysis 
and how they performed. In 2015, David Diaz 
Clavozo compared the practical Azil Web framework, 
in which he compared the codiginiter, cakePHPt and 
the Lorevele Framework. He also reviewed the 
framework for an effective website development by a 
developer where he reviewed the various web 
applications developed using this framework. 
Code Igniter is also a MVC based PHP framework, 
written by Rick Ellis. The Codeigniter Framework has 
certain features, e.g. There are no restrictive coding 
rules, no need Template language learning, small but 
extensive libraries and complete documentation. 
These features are suitable for small and medium 
sized utensils. In Codeigniter, There is no database¬ 
like object-relational mapping (ORM). Due to the 
absence of ORM in the Codeigniter framework, 
database communication becomes complex and 
unsafe. There is a client request process in 
Codeigniter is as given below: 

a. the index.php serves as front controller in the 
Cl, that initializing the base resources needed to 
run Codeigniter smoothly. 

b. Router examine the HTTP request to determine 
what should be done with request. 

c. If cache file already exists, it’s then sent to the 
browser, by sending normal system execution. 

d. Security is loaded Before application controller, 
HTTP request & any user submitted data is 
filtered for security. 

e. the Controller loads model, helpers, core 
libraries and the other resources needed to process 
the specific request of the user. 

f. The finalized View is then rendered and sent to 
the browser to be displayed. If the caching is 
enabled, then view is first cached so that on 
subsequent requests it can be served. Framework 
is a set of libraries that are organized in 
architectural design to deliver the speed, accuracy, 
convenience and consistency in development of 
such applications, framework contains following 
elements: 


> Architecture 

> File library 

> Methodology. 

If this framework is associated with the word PHP ,it 
can be interpreted as a patterned framework that 
enables easy web development using PHP language . 

Comparison between Codeigniter and CakePHP: 

> In terms of simplicity 

Codeigniter are considered best for their view of 
simplicity, when using the Codeigniter Framework, 
web development is done in the loading library, the 
work is done in the controller and pulled in view. 
Nothing is hidden & you can see how things get done 
in Codeigniter framework. Getting PHP faster, coding 
was faster, but to learn more, the developer must go to 
the core. Otherwise, it is a somewhat hard to 
understand how things work in Codeigniter. 

> Components 

In the Codeigniter, developers have to create or 
identify an right plug-ins or tools, despite having 
numerous classes like FTP,SFTP class. On the other 
hand, CakePHP has Auth component at the core. 

> Object-relational mapping (ORM) 

Cake PHP framework follows the ORM technique 
where in ORM programming that turns data of the 
different type systems in the database. Codeigniter 
doesn’t come with ORM, so for the conversion, 
developers have to rely on the third parties. 

> Scaffolding 

Both the frameworks are loaded with the scaffolding 
feature, but it works differently with both the 
framework. Cake PHP scaffolding enables the 
developers to define way objects are linked and can 
be create or break links. Also, developers can define 
and build application, which can create, update, 
retrieve and delete objects. 

Codeigniter scaffolding yields as a quickest way to 
add, modify or remove information from database 
during web development. 


@ IJTSRD | Available Online @ www.ijtsrd.com | Volume-2 | Issue-4 |May-Jun2018 


Page: 1125 




International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) ISSN: 2456-6470 


> Code generation 

Codeigniter, there is no basic ingredients to generate 
code lies as it won’t have any code generation from 
the console. Sadly, developers have to find different 
plug-ins. 

CakePHP is endowed with Bake console that eases 
creation of models, controllers, and views. Due to 
which building a full-fledged application becomes a 
work of a few minutes. 

> MVC 

Although both frameworks are working on MVC 
architecture based, but in the Codeigniter, model 
association is absent and developers are allowed to 
build project even without using MVC that turns the 
code unsecured and the messy because anyone can 
place the query without any filtering. 

In CakePHP, the project cannot be built without 
model, so the query to get value from a table with any 
field is very simple. 

> Console 

In CakePHP it has this feature, which works great 
when team of developers is working remotely for web 
development. The console allows developers to 
upgrade the DB schema or generate the code, so other 
users are not allowed to handle the DB straightly. 
Instead, Cl doesn’t have the console. 

> Layout 

CakePHP leverages the default layout where 
implementing the header, footer or sidebar is easier. 
While Codeigniter create the view or layout with the 
direct approach, which appears like the app was built 
from the ground up. Plus, Codeigniter is also provides 
caching mechanism for view that makes the work 
easier. 

> Validation 

Using Model-View-Controller model means data 
validation is must. In Codeigniter, set of rules is 
defined and allocated to validation objects, which 
validates every data pass in the form of URL or web 
form. Validation class also automate validation 
process by displaying the fixed error messages. 


In CakePHP, single test for each and every field’s 
variable is validated and declared. For simple 
application it is good, but for the complex stuff, it 
becomes cumbersome. 

> Function calling- auto or not? 

There are some functions available in the CakePHP, 
which are automatically called, These functions are 
auto-executed when they pre-defined. In Codeigniter, 
no such auto-function exists. 

Architecture of Codeigniter 
Block Diagram 



Fig3.1.1 Block Diagram of Codeigniter 


> As shown in figure, when Codeigniter has a 
request, he will go to index page first. 

> In the step-2, Routing of the website will decided 
whether to pass this request to the 3 rd step for the 
process of caching or pass this request to the 4 th 
step for performing security check on it. 

> If the page requested is already available in the 
Caching, then Routing will pass request directly to 
the 3 rd step and response will go back to the user. 

> If the requested page doesn’t exist in Caching, 
then Routing will pass the requested page to the 
4 th step for the purpose of Security checks. 

> Then Before passing the request to the 
Application Controller, Security of the submitted 
data is checked once, only After Security check, 
Application Controller loads necessary Models, 
Libraries, Helpers, Plugins, Scripts and pass it on 
to View. 

> View will render the given page with the available 
data and passes it for Caching. As requested page 
wasn’t cached before so it will be cached in 
Caching, to process this page quickly for future 
requests. 

Directory Structure 


@ IJTSRD | Available Online @ www.ijtsrd.com | Volume-2 | Issue-4 |May-Jun2018 


Page: 1126 



















International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) ISSN: 2456-6470 


below image shows directory structure of 
Codeigniter. 

J Codeign iter-3.0.1 
J application 
cache 
config 
controllers 
core 
helpers 
hooks 

> Jwi language 
libraries 
logs 
models 
third_party 
views 
l> h . system 

u ser_g u i d e 

Fig3.2.1. directory Structure of Codeigniter 

directory structure of Codeigniter is divided into three 
folders - 

> Application 

> System 

> User guide 

Application 

As name indicates an Application folder contains all 
the code of your application that you are writing. This 
is folder where you will develop your project, an 
Application folder contains several other diffrent 
folders, which are explained as below - 

> Cache - This folder contains all the cached pages 
of the application. These pages will increase 
overall speed of accessing pages. 

> Config - This folder contains various files to 
configure application. With help of config.php 
file, user can configure the application. Using 
database.php file, user can configure the database 
of application. 

> Controllers - This folder holds controllers of 
your application. It is the very basic part of your 
application. 

> Core - It contains base class of your application. 


> Helpers - In this folder, you can put helper class 
of your application. 

> Hooks - The files in this folder provide a means 
to tap into and modify the inner workings of the 
framework without touching the core files. 

> Language - This folder contains language related 
files. 

> Libraries - This folder contains files of the 
libraries developed for your application. 

> Logs - This folder contains log of the system. 

> Models - all Database related file will be placed 
in this folder. 

> Third-party -It contains, any plugins, which will 
be used for your application to perform some 
function. 

> Views - Application’s HTML files will be placed 
in this folder which will be displayed in the users 
browser. 

System 

This folder contains Codeigniter core codes, libraries, 
helpers and other files, which help make the coding 
easy for user. These libraries and helpers are loaded 
and used in web app development for simplicity. 

This folder contains all the Codeigniter code of 
consequence, organized into various folders - 

> Core - This folder contains Code Igniter’s core 
class All of your work will take place in the 
application folder. Even if your intent is to extend 
the Codeigniter core, you have to do it with 
hooks, and hooks live in the application folder and 
no need to modify files in this folder. 

> Database - The database folder contains core 
database drivers and other database utilities which 
are essential for accessing database. 

> Fonts - The fonts folder contains diffrent font 
related information and utilities. 

> Helpers - helpers folder contains standard 
Codeigniter helpers, (such as date, cookie, and 
URL helpers) 

> Language - The language folder contains files 
related to language. 

> Libraries - The libraries folder contains standard 
Codeigniter libraries (to help you with e-mail, 
calendars, file uploads, and many more). You can 
create your own libraries or extend (and even 
replace) standard ones as per your requirement, 
but those will be saved in the application/libraries 
directory to keep them separate from the standard 


@ IJTSRD | AvailableOnline@www.ijtsrd.coml Volume-2 | Issue-4 |May-Jun2018 


Page: 1127 






International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) ISSN: 2456-6470 


Codeigniter libraries saved in this particular 
folder. 

Characteristics 

1) It is easy and flexible to learn, improve and 
integrate libraries and helper. 

2) Using MVC pattern so that the design of the 
generated code is more structured and clearly 
standard. 

3) Very friendly URL generated code ignitioner 

used at least $ GET and replaced with a URL 
Codeigniter works structure that starts with a 
browser that will be communicated by the 
controller. The moderator then receives all the 
requests received from the browser and will reply. 
For data, the controller will ask for a model and 
ask to see the UI / Template Controller. When a 
browser prompts for a web page, the router detects 
the controller 

Which can handle the request. The controller will 
then use to display the data and will use the model 
view to display the data. MVC is used to data 
access and to break business 

4) logic from the data presentation and user 
interaction . Separation was done so that any 
changes in the presentation logic or business logic 
does not give effect to each other are 

5) complex . MVC separation solution is expected 
to improve the flexibility and reusability of the 
application 

Advantages and Disadvantages 
Advantages: 

It aims to be able to develop a project faster than 
you, if you are writing a code from scratch, by 
providing a rich library of general programs for 
access to this book, as well as a simple interface 
and logical structure. Codeigniter lets you focus 
your project creatively on lowering the number of 
codes you need 

> Time 

The first and foremost issue that attracts every 
developer towards the codeigner is its fast 
response time. Codeigniter responds very quickly 
that no framework is available in this world so far 
as that can give it so fast. Codeigniter User 


Community When you have problems or 
questions, working is too big. Ready for 
Frameworks with almost zero configuration. 

> Coding 

If you are going to start a new project with custom 
PHP, then you obviously need to do things like 
create a database, create configuration files and 
much more. We will need to connect every 
database data using the database query, you need 
to use the functions directly in the functions where 
necessary. But in the codeigniter, you do not have 
to worry about such classes and structures. 

Just download latest version, download it and set 
up few things and it's done !! 

a. The whole zip comes with 3 folders 
usually, Application 

b. System 

c. User Guide 

> Flexibile, Secure & User Friendly 

Light Weight, OpenSource and Fast 

Codeigniter has rich set of libraries which are easy 
to write and change it's behaviour. 

Codeigniter is a logical compromise of this library 
access. Additional libraries are dynamically filled 
on an additional basis for your additional needs, 
so the support system is very weak and very fast. 
Coedigner comes with a fully categorized library 
so that the necessary web development tasks are 
usually enabled, such as databases, sending email, 
validating the data of the form, maintaining 
sessions, handling images, you do not have to use 
the command line. There is no need to learn a 
template language because template parse is 
optionally available. No need to use any unix 
commands. Install tools and uploads only in the 
server directory. Cl add / remove your database 
like this 

Create tables, new tables, and remove old people 
using the new database phases library. 

Codeigniter has standard Error Handellin 
technique Codeigniter keeps site secure from 
CSRF/XSRF Attacks and SQL injection by using 
built in classes and libraries. 

Codeigniter has Cache library 


@ IJTSRD | AvailableOnline@www.ijtsrd.coml Volume-2 | Issue-4 |May-Jun2018 


Page: 1128 



International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) ISSN: 2456-6470 


> UsesM-V-C 

Though it encourages MVC, but does not force it 
on you. Codeigniter uses the Model-View- 
Controller approach, which allows great 
separation between logic and presentation. 

Separation of code has been very easy in 
Codeigniter. 

> Generates Clean URLs 

The URLs generated by Codeigniter are clean and 
search-engine friendly. Codeigniter uses a 
segment-based approach Rather than using the 
standard “query string” approach to URLs. 

> Extensible 

The system can be easily extended through the use 
of your own libraries, helpers, or through class 
extensions. Codelgniterassists the developer to 
build core libraries for the system and enables you 
to integrate your own existing scripts with 
database. 

And to improve your productivity it also supports 
for third-party addons/plugins for additional 
functionality. 

> Built in security tools 

Unserving all global variables without 
registering PHP Register globals Directive 
Close Magic_quotes_runtime Directive during 
system initialization Enable Cookie 
Encryption Conversation session data with 
database exits Auto SQL queries 

Configuration and Customizable 

This aspect helps the developers to create what is 
needed for web-based development. In addition, this 
framework is easy to structure and customize fdes. 

Disadvantages 

> Its PHP based only and not very object- 
oriented in some parts 

> PHP4 legacy code, 

> Company-driven instead of community- 
driven, 

> Irregular releases, 


> Framework itself has no built-in ORM (only 
via 3rd party solutions). 

Conclusion 

The main purpose of this review paper is to establish 
the basic concepts of codeigniter framework and the 
Codeigniter. 

While selecting the big project Codeigniter study 
paper you must now have a superior perception of the 
Codeigniter mechanism. Find out how to set it up 
Find out how to create models, views and controls 
along with code designers, libraries with all designs, 
and identify how to send and use it to production. 

References 

Books: 

1) Programming with Code Igniter MVC By By Eli 
Orr, Yehuda Zadik 

Links: 

1) https://www.esds.co.in/blog/what-is-code-igniter- 
and-what-are-its-advantages-and-disadvantages/ 

2) https://www.angularminds.com/blog/article/codei 
gniter-advantages-and-disadvantages.html 

3) https://www.tutorialspoint.com/mvc_framework/ 
mvc_framework_introduction.html 

4) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CodeIgniter 

5) https://www.brainvire.com/To-10-differences- 
between-codelgniter-and-cakephp 

6) http://www.phpframeworks.com/ 

Research Papers: 

1) International Journal of Research in Computer & 
Information Technology (IJRCIT), Vol. 1, Special 
Issue 2, July-2016 

2) THE MVC FRAMEWORK-CODEIGNITER 
International Journal of Novel Research and 
Development (www.ijnrd.org) 


@ IJTSRD | AvailableOnline@www.ijtsrd.coml Volume-2 | Issue-4 |May-Jun2018 


Page: 1129 



