@ Displaying Properties of PDFs 

Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California 

larger region selected by the user; 


PDFVis is a computer program that as- 
sists in visualization of uncertainty as 
represented by a probability density 
function (PDF) located at each grid cell 
in a spatial domain. PDFVis performs 
the following functions: 

• Creates maps of first-, second-, and third- 
order statistics of the PDFs, displaying 
the maps simultaneously in one image; 

• Provides an interactive probe that dis- 
plays various forms of density estimates 
(e.g., histogram or kernel density esti- 
mator) of the PDF at a grid cell or 


• For grid cells in a row or column se- 
lected by the user, it displays surfaces 
of the PDFs as shaded walls and as 
color-mapped wall according to a 
scalar variable selectable by the user; 

• Displays the modality (basically, the 
number of peaks) and the locality of 
the peaks of the PDF in each grid cell; 

• Provides a capability for querying the 
modalities of the PDFs on the basis of 
ranges and other criteria specified by 
the user; and 


• Facilitates interactivity by providing 
simple user command keys. 

This program was written by David Kao 
and Jennifer Dungan of Ames Research Cen- 
ter and David Kao of The Regents of the 
University of California Santa Cruz. Fur- 
ther information is contained in a TSP (see 
page 1). 

Inquiries concerning rights for the com- 
mercial use of this invention should be ad- 
dressed. to the Ames Technology Partner- 
ships Division at ( 650) 604-2954. Refer to 
ARC-15039-1 


© Modular Filter and Source-Management Upgrade of RADAC 

Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland 


In an upgrade of the Range Data Ac- 
quisition Computer (RADAC) software, a 
modular software object library was devel- 
oped to implement required functional- 
ity for filtering of flight-vehicle-tracking 
data and management of tracking-data 
sources. (The RADAC software is used to 
process flight-vehicle metric data for real- 
time display in the Wallops Flight Facility 
Range Control Center and Mobile Con- 
trol Center. This software is part of the 
Range Control/Range Safety System 
used to contain impacts of debris from 


flight-vehicle operations.) The library in- 
cludes implementations of tracking-data- 
editing and -filtering techniques that can 
be readily found in the literature and was 
constructed to facilitate future incorpora- 
tion of implementations of other, more- 
exotic filtering techniques. A pragmatic 
technique is used to maintain statistics on 
differences between measurements and 
estimates of positions in order to com- 
pute a figure of merit for each radar, 
Global-Positioning-System, or inertial- 
navigation-system source of tracking data. 


An automatic source-qualification tech- 
nique is implemented to enable optional 
replacement of a pre-existing manual 
data-qualification function. The library 
was written in the C++ language and was 
designed to be hosted within an applica- 
tion program running on virtually any 
computing platform. 

This program was written by R. James 
Lanzi and Donna C. Smith oj Goddard Space 
Flight Center. Further information is con- 
tained in a TSP ( see page 1 ). 

GSC-14974-1 


©Automatic Command Sequence Generation 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


Automatic Sequence Generator (Au- 
togen) Version 3.0 software automati- 
cally generates command sequences 
for the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter 
(MRO) and several other JPL space- 
craft operated by the multi-mission 
support team. Autogen uses standard 
JPL sequencing tools like APGEN, ASP, 
SEQGEN, and the DOM database to 
automate the generation of uplink 
command products, Spacecraft Com- 
mand Message Format (SCMF) files, 
and the corresponding ground com- 
mand products, DSN Keywords Files 
(DKF). Autogen supports all the major 
multi-mission mission phases including 
the cruise, aerobraking, mapping/sci- 
ence, and relay mission phases. 

Autogen is a Perl script, which func- 
tions within the ‘mission operations’ 


UNIX environment. It consists of two 
parts: a set of model files and the auto- 
gen Perl script. Autogen encodes the 
behaviors of the system into a model 
and encodes algorithms for context- 
sensitive customizations of the mod- 
eled behaviors. The model includes 
knowledge of different mission phases 
and how the resultant command prod- 
ucts must differ for these phases. The 
executable software portion of Auto- 
gen, automates the setup and use of 
APGEN for constructing a spacecraft 
activity sequence file (SASF). The 
setup includes file retrieval through 
the DOM (Distributed Object Man- 
ager), an object database used to store 
project files. This step retrieves all the 
needed input files for generating the 
command products. 


Depending on the mission phase, Au- 
togen also uses the ASP (Automated Se- 
quence Processor) and SEQGEN to gen- 
erate the command product sent to the 
spacecraft. Autogen also provides the 
means for customizing sequences 
through the use of configuration files. 
By automating the majority of the se- 
quencing generation process, Autogen 
eliminates many sequence generation 
errors commonly introduced by manu- 
ally constructing spacecraft command 
sequences. Through the layering of 
commands into the sequence by a series 
of scheduling algorithms, users are able 
to rapidly and reliably construct the de- 
sired uplink command products. 

With the aid of Autogen, sequences 
may be produced in a matter of hours in- 
stead of weeks, widi a significant reduc- 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2007 


61 


