NASA/TM— 2000-210250 




Experimental Replication of an Aeroengine 
Combustion Instability 

J.M. Cohen, J.R. Hibshman, W. Proscia, T.J. Ros^ord and B.E. Wake 
United Technologies Research Center, East Hartford, Connecticut 

J.B. McVey 

jbScienceS, Glastonbury, Connecticut 

J. Lovett and M. Ondas 

Pratt & Whitney, West Palm Beach, Florida 

J. DeLaat and K. Breisacher 

Glerm Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio 



August 2000 



The NASA STI Program Office ... in Profile 



Since its founding, NASA has been dedicated to 
the advancement of aeronautics and space 
science. The NASA Scientific and Technical 
Information (STI) Program Office plays a key part 
in helping NASA maintain this important role. 

The NASA STI Program Office is operated by 
Langley Research Center, the Lead Center for 
NASA's scientific and technical information. The 
NASA STI Program Office provides access to the 
NASA STI Database, the largest collection of 
aeronautical and space science STI in the world. 
The Program Office is also NASA's institutional 
mechanism for disseminating the results of its 
research and development activities. These results 
are published by NASA in the NASA STI Report 
Series, which includes the following report types: 

• TECHNICAL PUBLICATION. Reports of 
completed research or a major significant 
phase of research that present the results of 
NASA programs and include extensive data 
or theoretical analysis. Includes compilations 
of significant scientific and technical data and 
information deemed to be of continuing 
reference value. NASA's counterpart of peer- 
reviewed formal professional papers but 
has less stringent limitations on manuscript 
length and extent of graphic presentations. 

• TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM. Scientific 
and technical findings that are preliminary or 
of specialized interest, e.g., quick release 
reports, working papers, and bibliographies 
that contain minimal annotation. Does not 
contain extensive analysis. 

• CONTRACTOR REPORT. Scientific and 
technical findings by NASA-sponsored 
contractors and grantees. 



• CONFERENCE PUBLICATION. Collected 
papers from scientific and technical 
conferences, symposia, seminars, or other 
meetings sponsored or cosponsored by 

NASA. 

• SPECIAL PUBLICATION. Scientific, 
technical, or historical information from 
NASA programs, projects, and missions, 
often concerned with subjects having 
substantial public interest. 

• TECHNICAL TRANSLATION. English- 
language translations of foreign scientific 
and technical material pertinent to NASA's 
mission. 

Specialized services that complement the STI 
Program Office's diverse offerings include 
creating custom thesauri, building customized 
data bases, organizing and publishing research 
results . . . even providing videos. 

For more information about the NASA STI 
Program Office, see the following: 

• Access the NASA STI Program Home Page 
at http://zvww.sti.nasa.gov 

• E-mail your question via the Internet to 
help@sti.nasa.gov 

• Fax your question to the NASA Access 
Help Desk at (301) 621-0134 

• Telephone the NASA Access Help Desk at 
(301) 621-0390 

• Write to: 

NASA Access Help Desk 

NASA Center for AeroSpace Information 

7121 Standard Drive 

Hanover, MD 21076 



NASA/TM— 2000-210250 




Experimental Replication of an Aeroengine 
Combustion Instability 

J.M. Cohen, J.R. Hibshman, W. Proscia, T.J. Rosijord and B.E. Wake 
United Technologies Research Center, East Hartford, Connecticut 

J.B. McVey 

jbScienceS, Glastonbury, Connecticut 

J. Lovett and M. Ondas 

Pratt & Whitney, West Palm Beach, Florida 

J. DeLaat and K. Breisacher 

Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio 



Prepared for the 

45th International Gas Turbine and Aeroengine Technical Congress 
sponsored by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers 
Munich, Germany May 8-11, 2000 

National Aeronautics and 
Space Admirustration 

Glerm Research Center 



August 2000 



Acknowledgments 



This study was funded by the NASA Glenn Research Center. The authors would like to thank the following for 

their contributions to this effort: Mr. Saumil Shah of Pratt & Whitney, Mr. Paul Hamel, Dr. Donald Hautman, 

Ms. Andrea Karalus and Mr. James Tracy of United Technologies Research Center, and 

Mr. Kestutis Civinskas of NASA Glenn. 



Available from 



NASA Center for Aerospace Information 
7121 Standard Drive 
Hanover, MD 21076 
Price Code: A03 



National Techiucal Information Service 

5285 Port Royal Road 

Springfield, VA 22100 

Price Code: A03 



EXPERIMENTAL REPLICATION OF AN AEROENGINE COMBUSTION INSTABILITY 



J.M. Cohen, J.R. Hibshman, W. Proscia, T.J. Rosfjord, B.E. Wake 
United Technologies Research Center 
East Hartford, Connecticut 

J.B. IVIcVey 

jbScienceS 

Glastonbury, Connecticut 

J. Lovett, M. Ondas 

Pratt & Whitney 

West Palm Beach, Florida 

J. DeLaat, K. Breisacher 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Glenn Research Center 
Cleveland, Ohio 



ABSTRACT 

Combustion instabilities in gas turbine engines are most 
frequently encountered during the late phases of engine 
development, at which point they are difficult and expensive 
to fix. The ability to replicate an engine-traceable combustion 
instability in a laboratory-scale experiment offers the 
opportunity to economically diagnose the problem (to 
determine the root cause), and to investigate solutions to the 
problem, such as active control. The development and 
validation of active combustion instability control requires that 
the causal dynamic processes be reproduced in experimental 
test facilities which can be used as a test bed for control 
system evaluation. This paper discusses the process through 
which a laboratory-scale experiment was designed to replicate 
an instability observed in a developmental engine. The 
scaling process used physically-based analyses to preserve the 
-relevant geometric, acoustic and thermo-fluid features. The 
process increases the probability that results achieved in the 
single-nozzle experiment will be scaleable to the engine. 



INTRODUCTION 

Aggressive performance and emissions goals for 
aeroengine gas turbine combustors have led to the 
development of combustor concepts that may operate closer to 
static and dynamic stability boundaries. Lean, direct-injection 
combustors under development share many features with the 
lean, premixed combustors used in stationary gas turbines, in 
which combustion instabilities are widely observed. 



In order to minimize development costs and time, it is 
critical to possess the ability to evaluate the dynamic behavior 
of a combustor design during the component-development 
phase, thereby mitigating the need for expensive full-scale 
engine testing late in the development cycle. Solutions to 
combustion instability problems, such as active and passive 
controls, can be evaluated and developed more quickly in a 
laboratory-scale experiment, enabling a faster transition of 
technology into production engines. 

Laboratory- or component-scale testing of developmental 
combustor concepts is standard practice in the aircraft gas- 
turbine industry, using single-nozzle flame tubes, single- and 
multi-nozzle sectors and full-annular combustor rigs. The gas 
turbine community has developed an experience base 
regarding the fidelity with which such test rigs must replicate 
engine design details in order to characterize the emissions 
and operability characteristics of engine combustors. At this 
time there is no proven methodology for replicating engine- 
scale combustor dynamics in laboratory-scale rigs. The 
challenge in designing laboratory-scale combustion dynamics 
experiments is to replicate the engine dynamic environment in 
as simple (low-cost) an apparatus as possible. Recent 
published work suggests that bulk mode and longitudinal 
mode instabilities can be replicated in single-nozzle rigs. 
Cohen et al (1999) and Hibshman, et al (1999) performed 
active instability control experiments in single-nozzle and 
sector combustors that reproduced a bulk-mode instability 
observed in a lean, premixed industrial combustor. Paschereit 



NASA/TM— 2000-210250 



et al (1999) have developed a sub-scale combustor in which 
the boundary conditions at the inlet and exit ends can be 
varied to impose a desired acoustic mode. No relevant work 
has been published on replication of tangential modes in 
muhi-nozzle sector or configurations other than full annular 
combustors. 

While the aforementioned investigators have shown that 
it is possible to create a realistic, laboratory-scale combustion 
dynamics experiment, the scaling processes through which 
these experiments can be designed have not been described 
with sufficient specificity to allow the methodology to be 
adopted by the technical community at large. In order for the 
results of sub-scale experiments to be useful to engine 
designers, there must be a system in place to translate those 
results to engine-scale. This paper discusses such a process, 
involving the following steps: 

1. Analysis of dynamic data from the subject engine to 
determine characteristics of instability: frequency, 
amplitude, and sensitivity to changes in hardware 
configuration and operating conditions. 

2. Acoustic analysis of the engine in order to determine 
acoustic modes associated with instability. 

3. Conceptual design of a single-nozzle experiment, 
reproducing the engine's acoustic environment and 
replicating the relevant dynamic processes, as determined 
in steps 1 and 2. 

4. Acoustic analysis of sub-scale experiment to determine its 
fiindamental acoustic modes in order to confirm similarity 
with those observed in the engine. 

5. Test of the finalized laboratory-scale experiment and 
comparison of data to analyses and engine data. 

This paper presents the application of this process to an 
example problem, beginning with the analysis of an engine- 
traceable instability and culminating in the comparison of the 
lab-scale results to those from the engine 



ENGINE PROBLEM ANALYSIS 

The sample problem that was selected for this effort was 
a combustion instability that was observed during the 
development phase of a high-performance aero-engine that 
employed a full-annular combustor with 24 fuel nozzles. The 
frequency of the instability varied from about 420 Hz at low- 
power conditions to about 580 Hz at high-power conditions, as 
shown in Fig. I. At a mid-power operating point, 
corresponding to that used for the analytical phase of this 
study, the frequency of the instability was 525 Hz. The 
magnitude of the pressure oscillations resulting from the 
instability were sufficient to cause unacceptable vibratory 
stresses in the turbine component of the engine 



Passive means of reducing the magnitude of the pressure 
oscillations were developed during engine testing. This series 
of tests was able to detect a notable difference in the pressure 
oscillation magnitude when the fuel nozzle /air swirler design 
was changed. This led to the conclusion that the 
nozzle.^swirler were important contributors to the instability 
mechanism. 

To test this conclusion, a limited series of non-reacting 
experiments were conducted (Anderson, et al, 1998) to 
determine the acoustic and fluid mechanic response 
characteristics of the air swirlers that were used in the engine 
tests. The aim of these experiments was to measure 
differences in the responses of the air swirler / fuel injector 
designs that might explain their behavior in engine tests. It 
was found that the air swirlers associated with the largest 
pressure oscillations exhibited a preferential response to air 
flow perturbations in the frequency range between 300 Hz and 
500 Hz. Air swirlers that performed better in the engine did 
not exhibit this phenomenon in the non-reacting tests. 

While fast-response combustor pressure data were 
acquired during the engine tests, they were acquired at a 
limited number of locations. For this reason, it was difficult to 
draw any significant conclusions about the nature of the 
instability purely from the engine data. The analyses 
described in the next section of this paper were used to 
augment and interpret the engine data. The combination of the 
engine data, the acoustic analyses and the non-reacting 
swirler/injector characterization provided the basis for 
replicating the problem in a single-nozzle combustor rig. 

Analysis of Engine Acoustics 

A quasi-lD unsteady Euler analysis (Wake et al., 1996) 
was used to predict the bulk and longitudinal modes of the 
engine combustor. The one-dimensional Euler equations were 
solved with area variation and modeled source terms to 
account for mass addition, heat addition and pressure losses. 




^oo see 6»o 
Frequency, Hz 



Figure 1. "Waterfall" plot of combustor pressure spectra 
from an engine test, showing evolution of the instability 
during an acceleration event. 



NASA/TM— 2000-2 10250 



The resonant acoustic frequencies of the combustor were 
determined by solving for the unsteady time-accurate response 
of the system and monitoring the fluctuating pressure at a 
specified location. The analysis can be used to examine the 
sensitivity of the frequency and pressure amplitude to system 
parameters such as physical dimensions, temperature 
distribution, Mach number, flow rate and pressure drop. The 
solver was first used to compute the steady-state results, and 
then unsteady results were obtained by forcing the system. 
Forcing was accomplished by adding an unsteady component 
to the heat release. Two types of forcing signals were used: 1) 
broadband white-noise distributed forcing, and 2) swept sine 
forcing at a fixed fi-equency. The magnitude of the heat 
release forcing was 10% of the mean heat release rate. The 
resulting pressure response indicated the frequency 
dependence of the combustion system. 



to 

C 
P 



AME 5inf Swe*p PrftssureRaspw^s* 




It should be recognized that this analysis is useful for its 
intended role of the determination of acoustic modes. The 
analysis does not attempt to incorporate the physics of the 
interaction of the fluid mechanics/acoustics with the heat 
release (effects of flame shape variation, local fuel/air 
variations, etc.) and therefore is not capable of predicting the 
absolute magnitude of the pressure response. The approach 
demonstrated in this paper will show that it is, however, a 
satisfactory tool for evaluating test rig acoustic characteristics 
for different combustion dynamics experiments. 

Quasi- ID Euler calculations were conducted for the 
engine configuration at an intermediate operating condition: 
T3 = 771T (684K) and P3 = 200 psia (1.2 MPa). The engine 
geometry was converted into a one-dimensional description of 
area vs. axial position as shown by the dashed line in Fig. 2, 
which shows the distributions for both the engine and the rig 
(to be discussed later). The geometry used included an inlet 
plenum, the engine prediffuser, diffuser plenum, the cowl or 
hood, the swirler, the combustor liner and turbine vanes. The 
combustor lies between x = and 9.25 in. Beyond the turbine 



Upstream k 
Plenum 



Prediffuser 




Figure 2. Cross-sectional area vs. axial position for quasi- 
1D Euler model. 



Figure 3. Computed power spectrum of combustor pressure 
for engine configuration with 100-800Hz swept-sine forcing 
of heat release. 



vane exit, the area was expanded rapidly to create a plenum 
dump. The boundary conditions used were constant total 
pressure at the inlet plenum and constant static pressure at the 
exit plenum. 

The acoustic response of the system was obtained by 
swept-sine forcing of the entire heat release distribution. The 
fluctuation levels imposed on the heat release were 1 0% of the 
mean. The unsteady pressure amplitude at the x = 3 in. 
location in the combustor (3 in. downstream of the combustor 
dump plane) was used to determine the pressure response. 
This location was chosen because it roughly aligned with the 
centroid of the presumed heat-release distribution. The swept- 
sine response is shown in Fig. 3 and indicates a resonance at 
approximately 575 Hz. The width of the amplitude response 
peak indicates a large amount of damping. However, the width 
of the response also indicates a broad range of frequencies 
over which the system may be susceptible to combustion 
instability. 

These results indicated a longitudinal mode in the 
combustor near 575 Hz, near the observed frequency of about 
525 Hz. The pressure mode shape for this mode is shown in 
Fig. 4. The mode represents a full-wave solution to the system 
equations with zero unsteady pressure specified at each end. 
Given the high impedance at each end due to the high Mach 
number boundaries, the mode shape can also be interpreted as 
a half-wave across the diffliser-combustor domain with closed 
ends. Note there is a pressure node apparent at the air 
swirler/fuel injector (x=0). The calculated fluctuating pressure 
in the diffuser was 1 80 deg. out of phase from the pressure in 
the combustor. It is believed that this was the basic acoustic 
mode that occurred in the engine configuration instability. 



NASA/TM— 2000-210250 



Although tangential acoustic modes exist in the full-annular 
engine combustor, analysis of the engine data and two- 
dimensional Euler results have indicated that they are not 
associated with the observed instability. 



Table I - Comparison of engine and rig acoustic features. 



^~, oce. 

a 

N 0.01 



"O 006 

3 



PLh -0 01 



«J -0.01S 

ts 

c 

-002 




-10 



X (in.) 

Figure 4. Computed pressure mode shape for 575 Hz 
mode for the engine configuration at evaluation point 
conditions. 



SUB-SCALE EXPERIIMENT DESIGN 

Test Apparatus Features 

Based on prior experience (Peracchio et al, 1998) the test 
rig design approach incorporated the following guidelines: 

A. Use of full-scale fuel preparation sub-components (fuel 
nozzles, air swirlers) 

Prior evaluations (Anderson et al, 1998) indicated that 
the prototype injector/ swirler exhibited an enhanced 
response near the 525 Hz frequency observed in the 
engine data so it was important to utilize that precise 
design. While reduced-size hardware may be of 
interest in order to minimize facility requirements, this 
approach was not taken, due to the introduction of 
uncertainties associated with reduced-scale flows. 

B. Reproduction of the longitudinal acoustic behavior 

The critical elements in this regard were the 
combustor, the diffuser, the pre-diffuser, and the cowl 
(hood) which guided the diffuser air to the fuel nozzle. 
Table I shows a comparison of the geometric features 
of the annular engine burner with those of the rig. 
Here, "shroud" refers to the region between the 
combustor liner and combustor casing. Cross- 
sectional areas were chosen to replicate associated 
volumes and expansion/contraction ratios. 



Feature 


Engine 


Rig 


Combustor Volume per Injector 

(in'/cc) 


113/ 
1851 


108/ 
1770 


Combustor Length (in./cm) 


8.5/21.3 


8.5/21.3 


Shroud Volume per Injector 
(in' /cc) 


129.3/ 
2119 


103.4/ 
1695 


Nominal Shroud Height (in./cm) 


1.2/3.0 


0.80 / 2.0 


Diffuser length (in./cm) 


2.7 / 6.9 


2.7/6.9 


Pre-diffiiser Length (in./cm) 


3.9/9.9 


3.9/9.9 



C. Acoustic isolation of the combustor from facility air 
piping 

A venturi was used to choke and meter the inlet air 
flow. Since the isolation provided by the sonic throat 
condition was desired over a range of conditions, the 
venturi was designed to be underexpanded, resulting in 
a normal shock at a distance of 1.38 in. (3.5 cm) 
downstream of the venturi throat. The upstream 
boundary was largely established by the normal shock 
and the sudden expansion of the flow at the pre- 
diffliser dump. The downstream boundary was defined 
by using a choked exhaust nozzle at the station 
occupied by the first turbine inlet vane. 

D. Reproduction of the airjlow distribution, pressure drops 

and flow damping characteristics 
The pressure drops and airflow splits used in the 
engine were duplicated. That is, the fractions of air 
used for liner cooling and for primary and dilution air 
were reproduced. Designing for equivalent damping is 
important to achieving similar instability amplitudes 
between the test rig and the engine. The resistive 
damping of the system was maintained by replicating 
the system's pressure drops. Reproducing the splits 
between the different air flows replicates the 
distribution of stoichiometry and heat release rate 
within the combustor. The shroud height (distance 
between combustor liner and pressure vessel wall) was 
also preserved in order to preserve the shroud air 
velocity. 

E. Design for testing at engine operating conditions 

The instability observed in the engine occurred over a 
range of test conditions. A single "Evaluation Point" 
was chosen at 200-psia (1.2 MPa) combustor pressure, 
an entrance temperature of 771°F (684K), and 
combustor fuel-air ratio of approximately 0.03. This 
mid-power point on the engine operating curve did not 
correspond to the highest-amplitude pressure 
oscillations, but was the maximum power level 
achievable given the facility limitations. All analyses 
were conducted at these conditions. Operating at 



N AS A/TM— 2000-2 1 0250 



reduced conditions with full-scale hardware can 
change the operating characteristics of the components 
(pressure drops, atomization, etc.). 

The final consideration was whether to utilize an 
apparatus with a simple cylindrical cross-section burner or an 
apparatus having a cross-section representative of 1/24 of the 
24-nozzle engine burner - i.e., a 'single sector' burner. A 
circular cross-section was employed, as this represented the 
lower-cost, higher-strength approach. The number and size of 
the combustion and dilution air holes was adjusted to provide 
proper penetration of these air jets. 

The configuration of the test section is illustrated in Fig. 
5. Provisions for high-response pressure transducers and for 
gas sampling (not reported herein) were incorporated. 




1.491 f 



Prediffuser 



Injector 
& Air 
Swirler 



Combustor 



Choked 
Exit 



Figure 5. The combustor test section assembly. Dimensions 
are in inches. 



pressure fluctuations at frequencies between 0.5 Hz and 10 
kHz. Satisfactory durability was achieved by use of an 
integral water-cooled mounting fixture that maintained an 
acceptable temperature around the sensor. The liner pressure 
sensors communicated with the combustor through a 0.062 in. 
(1.6 mm)-diameter, 0.83 in.(2.1 cm) -long sensing tube. A 
1000 psia nitrogen supply was used to purge the tube - the 
amount of purge flow rate was negligible. The %-wave 
resonant frequency of the cavity within this tube was far above 
the frequency range of interest in this experiment. Analog 
data were low-pass filtered at 2 kHz and digitally sampled at 5 
kHz using a simultaneous sample-hold data acquisition 
system. 

Analysis of Single-Nozzle Rig Acoustics 

The single-nozzle combustor rig design was established 
to preserve the axial lengths and cross-sectional areas of the 
engine configuration relative to a single nozzle. The area vs. 
axial position distribution was maintained approximately the 
same (ref Fig. 2), but some variation existed due to 
differences in engine hardware and the axisymetric hardware 
to be used in the single-nozzle combustor. Airflow splits and 
pressure losses - swirler, bulkhead, liner, primary and dilution 
jets were also preserved by design. The inlet and exit of the rig 
were choked to acoustically isolate the system. The Euler 
models included inlet and exit plenums upstream and 
downstream of the choke points to allow constant total 
pressure and constant static pressure to be specified, 
respectively, as boundary conditions to be applied to the Euler 
code domain. 

Quasi- ID Euler calculations were conducted for the 
baseline rig configuration at the evaluation point operating 
condition: 771°F (684 K), 200 psia (1.2 MPa). Swept-sine 
forcing over the frequency range from 100 to 800 Hz was 
applied to the heat release. The resulting power spectrum of 
the pressure response is shown in Fig. 6, indicating the 



Three transducer bosses, equally spaced around the 
circumference, were located in the primary combustion zone. 
One was located in the secondary zone, and one in the dilution 
zone. Floating seals on the liner captured extension tubes 
attached to the pressure-vessel-mounted transducers such that 
the pressures at the inside liner surface could be recorded. 
Bosses for shroud flow pressure measurements were provided 
at the location of the liner primary and dilution holes. Bosses 
for diffuser pressure measurements, upstream of the 
combustor, were also provided 

PCB piezo-electric pressure transducers (P/N 124A21) 
were selected for this application based on demonstrated 
ability to withstand the severe environment encountered in the 
combustor and pre-diffuser (high temperature and pressure). 
Originally developed for measuring combustion instability in 
liquid rockets, they are capable of measuring ±250 psi. 



Rig Pia£suie Rtspwse !o Sire Sweep. 




Figure 6. Computed power spectrum of combustor 
pressure at X = 3.0 in. for the rig configuration. Quasl- 
1D Euler code results for 100-800 Hz swept-sine forcing 
of heat release. 



N AS ATTM— 2000-2 1 0250 



presence of resonances at ~115 Hz and ~575 Hz. The 
fluctuating levels imposed on the heat release were 10% of the 
mean. However, the level of forcing employed in the analysis 
is arbitrary, and within the linear response range, so that no 
significance should be attached to the absolute levels of the 
ordinates in Figs. 3 and 6. 

Further analysis of the mode shapes associated with 
these resonances revealed that the low frequency 1 1 5 Hz mode 
was a first-order longitudinal mode where the diffuser and 
combustor were in phase. The primary mode of interest was 
the 575 Hz mode since the observed instability ft-equency in 
the engine was 525 Hz. The pressure mode shape is shown in 
Fig. 7. The 575 Hz mode was essentially a half-wave 
longitudinal mode considering closed/closed acoustic 
boundary conditions fi-om diffuser inlet to combustor exit. A 
pressure node appeared to occur at the air swirler/ fuel injector 
location. The pressure in the diffuser was 180 deg. out of 
phase from the pressure in the combustor. Note there was 
some activity downstream of the combustor exit, but 
calculations performed with varying exit plenum length did 
not indicate significant changes in the resonant frequency. 



PC 



a 

S 
< 





'1 


0.06 


1 


a 04 




occ 


^^c — W-^^ 


002 


^ \^ h ^J"^^ 


0,04 




006 


1 



X (in.) 

Figure 7. Computed pressure mode shape for the 575 Hz 
mode for the rig configuration at evaiuation point 
conditions. 

The main conclusion drawn from the acoustic analyses is 
that the single-nozzle combustor rig configuration will have a 
longitudinal acoustic resonance at about 575 Hz that is very 
similar to the mode observed in engine data and predicted by 
Euler analysis of the engine configuration. 



EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 

The operating conditions of the combustor could be 
completely described by the following parameters: diffuser air 
pressure (P3), diffuser air temperature (T3) and combustor 
fuel/air ratio (f/a). Values for each of these parameters were 
chosen to correspond to three different engine operating 



conditions. These are shovm in Table II. The fuel/air ratio 
referred to is that estimated at the exit of the combustor and 
accounted for all of the air flowing into the combustor through 
the air swirler, primary and dilution holes and liner/bulkhead 
cooling passages. It was not possible to vary the test 
parameters independently because of the choked, fixed-area 
combustor exit. 



Table II - Test conditions corresponding to engine 

operating points. Evaluation-point conditions are In 

italics. 



Inlet Air 

Pressure, P3 

(psia/MPa) 


Inlet Air 
Temperature, T3 

("F / K) 


FueyAir 
Ratio 


70 / 0.48 


500/533 


0.016 


110/0.76 J 


600/589 


0.024 


175/1.21 


771/684 


0.030 



For the evaluation point operating conditions, an 
instability was observed at a frequency of 566 Hz (see Fig. 8). 
The amplitude of this mode at these conditions was +/- 0.39 
psi (2.7 kPa). The unsteady pressure results presented here are 
from the transducer located at 2.0 in. (5.1 cm.) downstream of 
the combustor bulkhead. The amplitude of the instability 
increased with increasing fliel/air ratio for fixed P3 and T3. 
At higher fiiel/air ratios, the overall RMS pressure fluctuations 
were dominated by this single tone. There was significant 
noise generated in the 100-300 Hz range, although none of it 
was particularly coherent. 




1000 1500 

Frequency (Hz) 



Figure 8. IVIeasured power spectrum of unsteady 
combustor pressure at x = 2.0 in. for Evaiuation Point 
operating conditions, showing resonance at 566 Hz, with 
an amplitude of 0.39 psi (0.78 psi p-p). 



NASA/TM— 2000-210250 



3 






3.5 

3 
2.5 

2 
1.5 

1 
0.5 





.' .i..'..:. :...[ .'.. ' L l.' j ' 1 ' 1 . 1 1 . I J ' ' : 




i -.... 






1 


--a-- Phase | 






■< 










"; ; '4 


; Bulkhead 




i ._ i....J 


t : 


i ; ; : • 


; i 


1 ; ; : : 


f : 




. — m, s- 

> 

i- 




^ 


g.. 


■v' 


■I i 

■!- I- - 

Combustor 

r r— Exit--; 


i"-^ 


i i ; J 


; 






. 


■ , i , , , ' 


' , . , i , , , i , , , i . , , i , ,w, ■ 



150 




100 


-0 












(9 


50 


^ 




i 









■n 




"> 






-50 


o 












.« 


-100 




-150 





10 



X (in.) 



Figure 9. Measured distribution of 566 Hz mode, showing 
magnitude and phase referenced to pressure measurement 
PLA1C1 at X = 2.0 inches downstream of the combustor 
bulkhead. 

Figure 9 shows the spatial distribution of the unsteady 
pressure at three locations within the combustor and one 
location in the diffuser region upstream. Within the 
combustor, there was no phase difference between 
measurements at different axial stations, and only small 
differences in amplitude. Significant 566 Hz signal was also 
apparent upstream of the combustor, which lagged the 
combustor pressure by 92 degrees in phase and was smaller in 
amplitude by a factor of 2. There were no phase or magnitude 
differences (at 566 Hz) between pressure measurements at 
equivalent axial, but differing circumferential stations. 



0.40 
0.35 
0.30 
0.25 
0.20 
0.15 
0.10 
0.05 



P3=175psi 


\. 


P3= 110 psi 




. . . .P3=70psl 


\ 


/*%. 


A 


r^^. 





0.00 



100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 
Frequency (Hz) 



Figure 10. Power spectra of unsteady combustor pressure 
at three operating conditions corresponding to those In 
Table II, showing decreasing amplitude of 566 Hz mode with 
decreasing power level. 



consistent with a longitudinal acoustic mode. The unsteady 
pressure in the shroud, just outside the dilution holes was a 
factor of 2 smaller than that in the combustor and lagged the 
combustor pressure by approximately 40 degrees. 

This mode was also observed at the other two, lower- 
power, operating conditions, although at smaller amplitudes 
and lower frequencies, as shown in Fig. 10. 

ANALYSIS OF RESULTS 

Comparison with Analytical Results 

The experimental results can be compared to the 
analytical results by referencing Fig. 6, which shows the 
predicted pressure spectrum, and Fig. 8, which shows the 
measured pressure spectrum. Recall the Euler code model 
predicted broad acoustic resonances at about 575 Hz and 115 
Hz. In the experiment, an instability centered near 566 Hz 
was observed, and there was some incoherent activity 
indicated near 1 00-200 Hz. Thus, the agreement appears to be 
good. The mode shape measured in the experiment was of 
limited spatial resolution and showed little spatial variation of 
unsteady pressure amplitude or phase within the combustor 
chamber itself for the 566 Hz mode (ref Fig. 9). This was 
consistent with the mode shape of the 575 Hz mode predicted 
by the Euler code (ref Fig. 7). Note both results did indicate a 
slight decrease in amplitude towards the upstream end of the 
combustion chamber. The Euler code prediction indicated the 
unsteady pressure in the diffuser upstream of the combustor 
would be 1 80° out-of-phase with the combustor pressure. The 
experimental results indicated a significant phase shift in the 
diffuser section, lagging the combustor pressure by about 90 
degrees at 566 Hz. This discrepancy is likely associated with 
the 1 -D limitations of the model. For example, it is expected 
that some level of coupling to the outer shroud passage would 
occur which is also coupled to the combustor via the air 
mixing holes. Therefore, some transition of the phase from in- 
phase with the combustor outside the mixing holes to out-of- 
phase in the diffuser section is expected in the 3-D problem. 
The result could be a phase relation in the diffuser section 
between and 1 80 degrees. 

Note that, because the Euler code is essentially an 
acoustic calculation, it is fundamentally limited in its ability to 
calculate the amplitude of the pressure oscillations without the 
addition of a combustion / acoustic coupling model. In 
calculations for the engine using a constant relative forcing 
level, the Euler code indicated that both the frequency and 
amplitude of the instability should increase with increasing 
engine power level. This trend was validated with engine data 
and was also reproduced in the single-nozzle experiment (ref 
Fig. I and Fig. 10). It is also encouraging that the damping 
mechanisms present in the calculations produced a broad peak 
at 575 Hz, much like that seen in the experiment (see Fig. 10). 



NASA/TM— 2000-2 1 0250 



Comparison with Engine Data 

Figure 1 1 shows a comparison between the fluctuating 
pressure spectrum in the engine and the single-nozzle 
combustor at comparable operating conditions. Both data sets 
were acquired over 10 seconds, and were processed using the 
same techniques. The frequency of the "target" mode was 
reproduced within 12%. The amplitude of this mode was 
matched within 3%. The spectral peak was significantly 
narrower in the engine data, indicating a more coherent 
instability. The single-nozzle combustor also exhibited a 
higher overall level of noise in the signal, especially at 
frequencies below 350 Hz. 



NASA SNRR004p38and Engine TX3081.2B 



0.4 



S 0.3 

0) 

•a 

3 



Q. 

E 
< 



0.2 



0.1 




100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 

Frequency (Hz) 

Figure 11. Comparison of engine and combustor rig 
pressure spectra for Evaluation-Point operation. 



CONCLUSiONS AND RECOMiVIENDATiONS 

A methodology for replicating longitudinal combustion 
instabilities observed in an aircraft engine in a single-nozzle 
test rig was successfully demonstrated. The experiment 
reproduced the frequency of the engine instability within 12% 
and its amplitude within 3%. 

Necessarily, the replication procedure must use both 
predictions from analytical tools and engineering judgements 
based on prior combustion dynamics studies. A relatively 
simple, quasi-one-dimensional Euler analysis is satisfactory 
for the prediction of the dynamics of longitudinal instabilities 
in geometrically complex burners. 

The one-dimensional analytical acoustic tools applied in 
this program predicted the basic acoustic frequencies of both 
the engine and the rig within about 10%, and supported a 
methodology to define a test rig with specific acoustic 
frequency characteristics. However, because the tool is a one- 
dimensional analysis, it cannot capture all the dynamic 
features of this combustor. For example, as reported, it did 
not quantitatively predict the phase relationship between the 
combustor and diffuser. The development of an analytical 



tool that would include multi-dimensional capability to either 
identify other modes or include the influence of parallel 
acoustic paths (e.g., shroud) is recommended. 

An extension of these tools to design sub-scale 
experiments in which instabilities associated with tangential 
acoustic modes would also be useful. Inclusion of acoustic- 
heat release coupling would also increase the tool's utility. 
Acoustic-heat release coupling models could provide a 
capability for further reductions in the scale of the experiment, 
in such parameters as geometric size, flow rates and operating 
pressure. 

In summary, a methodology for design of laboratory 
combustors, which reproduce combustion instabilities 
observed in aircraft engine combustors, has been 
demonstrated. A realistic platform for the development and 
validation of active combustion instability confrol systems was 
constructed, and will be utilized in subsequent programs. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Anderson, T.J., D.W. Kendrick and J.M. Cohen, 
"Measurement of Spray / Acoustic Coupling in Gas Turbine 
Fuel Injectors," AIAA Paper 98-0718, Presented at the 36* 
AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting & Exhibit, January 1998, 
Reno, NV. 

Cohen, J.M., N.M. Rey, C.A. Jacobson and T.J. 
Anderson, "Active Control of Combustion Instability in a 
Liquid-Fueled Low-NOx Combustor," ASME Journal of 
Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power, Vol. 121, No. 2, pp. 
281-284, April 1999. 

Hibshman, J.R., J.M. Cohen, A. Banaszuk, T.J. 
Anderson and H.A. Alholm, "Active Control of Combustion 
Instability in a Liquid-Fueled Sector Combustor," ASME 
Paper 99-GT-215, Presented at the International Gas Turbine 
and Aeroengine Congress & Exposition, Indianapolis, IN, 
June 1999. 

Paschereit, CO., E. Gutmark and W. Weisenstein, 
"Control of Combustion Driven Oscillations by Equivalence 
Ratio Modulations," ASME Paper 99-GT-118, Presented at 
the International Gas Turbine and Aeroengine Congress & 
Exposition, Indianapolis, IN, June 1999. 

Peracchio, A. A., T. RosQord, J. McVey, T. Anderson, 
A. Banaszuk, J. Cohen, J. Hibshman, C. Jacobson, A. Khibnik, 
W. Proscia and N. Rey, "Active Control for Marine and Land- 
Based Aeroderivative Gas Turbine Engines" Volume 1, 
DARPA Final Contractor Report, UTRC Report 98-16, 
December 1998. 

Wake, B.E., D. Choi, G.J. Hendricks, "Numerical 
Investigation of Pre-Mixed Step-Combustor Instabilities," 
AIAA Paper 96-0816, Presented at the 34* AIAA Aerospace 
Sciences Meeting & Exhibit, January 1996, Reno, NV. 



NASA/TM— 2000-2 1 0250 



REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 



Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 



Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average t hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, 
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this 
collection of information. Including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Sen/ices, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson 
Davis Highway. Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC 20503. 



1. AGENCY USE ONLY {Leave blank) 



2. REPORT DATE 

August 2000 



REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

Technical Memorandum 



4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 



Experimental Replication of an Aeroengine Combustion Instability 



6. AUTHOR(S) 

J.M. Cohen, J.R. Hibshman, W. Proscia, T.J. Rosfjord, B.E. Wake, 
J.B. McVey, J. Lovett, M. Ondas, J. DeLaat, and K. Breisacher 



5. FUNDING NUMBERS 



WU-523-26-13-00 



7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
John H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field 
Cleveland, Ohio 44135-3191 



8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 



E- 12370 



9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Washington, DC 20546-0001 



10. SPONSORING/MONITORING 
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 



NASA TM— 2000-210250 



11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

Prepared for the 45th International Gas Turbine and Aeroengine Technical Congress sponsored by the American Society of Mechanical 
Engineers, Munich, Germany, May 8-11, 2000. J.M. Cohen, J.R. Hibshman, W. Proscia, T.J. Rosfjord and B.E. Wake, United Technolo- 
gies Research Center, 411 Silver Lane, East Hartford, Connecticut 06108; J.B. McVey, jbScienceS, 223 Cider Mill Road, Glastonbury, 
Connecticut 06033; J. Lovett and M. Ondas, Pratt & Whitney, RO. Box 109600, West Palm Beach, Rorida 33410; J. DeLaat and 
K. Breisacher, NASA Glenn Research Center Responsible person, John DeLaat, organization code 5530, (216) 433-3744. 



12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Unclassified - Unlimited 
Subject Category: 01 



Distribution: Nonstandard 



This publication is available from the NASA Center for AeroSpace Information, (301) 621-0390 



12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 



13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) 

Combustion instabilities in gas turbine engines are most frequently encountered during the late phases of engine 
development, at which point they are difficult and expensive to fix. The ability to replicate an engine-traceable combus- 
tion instability in a laboratory-scale experiment offers the opportunity to economically diagnose the problem (to 
determine the root cause), and to investigate solutions to the problem, such as active control. The development and 
validation of active combustion instability control requires that the causal dynamic processes be reproduced in experi- 
mental test facilities which can be used as a test bed for control system evaluation. This paper discusses the process 
through which a laboratory-scale experiment was designed to replicate an instability observed in a developmental 
engine. The scaling process used physically-based analyses to preserve the relevant geometric, acoustic and thermo-fluid 
features. The process increases the probability that results achieved in the single-nozzle experiment will be scaleable to 
the engine. 



14. SUBJECT TERMS 

Aircraft engines; Engine control; Combustion control; Combustion stability; Control 



17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF REPORT 

Unclassified 



18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF THIS PAGE 

Unclassified 



19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF ABSTRACT 

Unclassified 



15. NUMBER OF PAGES 
14 



16. PRICE CODE 

AQ3_ 



20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 



NSN 7540-01 -280-5500 



Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18 
298-102 



