International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) 

Volume 3 Issue 6, October 2019 Available Online: www.iitsrd.com e-ISSN: 2456 - 6470 

» ♦ 

Future Scope in Application Development of Visual Basic 

K. Keerthana, B. Bhuvaneswari, S. Vigneshwaran 

B.Com, Computer Application, 

Sri Krishna Adthiya College of Arts and Science, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India 


ABSTRACT 


Visual Basic for Applications is a computer programming language developed 
and owned by Microsoft. With VBA you can create macros to automate 
repetitive word- and data-processing functions .Applications are created with 
the help of Visual Basic and it is inbuilt with phone, memory devices and 
upcoming Artificial Intelligence 

Programmers can create both simple and complex graphical user 
interface applications. Programming in visual basic is a combination of 
visually arranging components or control some aform, specifying attributes 
and actions for that component. BASIC means Beginners' All¬ 
purpose Symbolic Instruction Co-de. Visual Basic is a user-friendly 
programming language designed for beginners and it enables anyone to 
develop graphical user interface application easily. 

which was replaced by VB .NET. However, Visual Basic for Applications, which 
is most commonly used today to automate Microsoft Office tasks, is highly 
compatible with the classic VB 6. 


in 



INTRODUCTION 





Types of languages: 

> low level 

> high level 

> mid level 


How to cite this paper: K. Keerthana | B. 
Bhuvaneswari | S. Vigneshwaran "Future 
Scope in Application Developement of 
Visual Basic" 

Published 
International 
Journal of Trend in 
Scientific Research 
and Development 
(ijtsrd), ISSN: 2456- 
6470, Volume-3 | 

Issue-6, October 2019, pp.641-645, URL: 
https: //www.ijtsrd.com/papers / ij tsrd2 9 
206.pdf 

Copyright © 2019 by author(s) and 
International Journal of Trend in 
Scientific Research and Development 
Journal. This is an Open Access article 
distributed under 
the terms of the Ifcc] 

Creative Commons 
Attribution License (CC BY 4.0) 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/b 
y/4.0) 


The rapid application development access to data base using 
data access objects, remote data objects and creation of 
active controls and objects. 

FEATURES IN VISUAL BASIC: 

Graphical user interface: 

In visual basics, the graphical user interface language is 
means a visual basics program will always shows something 
on the screen that the user can interact .the foremost step in 
building a program is to get graphical user interface items on 
the screen. This done to pull down menus that are available 
graphical objects. 

Modularization: 

It clearly indicates what comes into the module and what 
goes out makes a program easy to understand .It is consider 
as good programming practice to modularized. It is a single 
large collection of codes and good programmer on a screen 
at one time. 


The hierarchy of languages are presented below: 
Visual Basic: 

Visual basic is a programming language for developing 
sophisticated professional application for Microsoft 
windows. In this user can drag and reposition visual 
elements like windows, buttons and forms and create events 
for this element. It is an extension of basic language and 
functions using for visual controls. It is mainly designed to 
make software development and also to create advance 
programs 


Object oriented 

Object oriented programming is a concept where the 
programmer thinks of the program that interact with each 
other, all the codes associated with the object in one place 
and force good programming practice. 

Debug 

Visual basic offers two different option for coding debugging. 


@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID - IJTSRD29206 | Volume - 3 | Issue - 6 | September - October 2019 Page 641 













International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) @ www.ijtsrd.com elSSN: 2456-6470 


> Debugging managed 

The debugging manage code individually debugs A and C++ 
application and visual basic application. 

> Run time debugger 

It helps to find and fix bugs in programs at run time 

Data Access Features 

By using this, we can use to create data base, scalable server 
side components for more data base. It also includes 
Microsoft SQL server and other level data base 

Macros IDE 

The macros, integrated development environment is mainly 
used to design and function to the visual studio IDE. It 
includes the code editor, tool windows, properties window 
and editor. 

Visual basic interface: 

Start a new project 

A project is a collection of files that make up your 
application. There are various types of applications that we 
could create, however, we shall concentrate on creating 
Standard EXE programs (EXE means executable) 

Next, click on the Standard EXE icon to go into the actual 
Visual Basic 6 programming environment. 

Start a new Visual Basic 6 Standard EXE project, you will be 
presented with the Visual Basic 6 Integrated Development 
Environment (IDE). 

It consists of the toolbox, the form, the project explorer and 
the properties window. 

The Form is the primary building block of a Visual Basic 6 
application save the project by selecting Save Project from 
the File menu, assign a name to your project and save it in a 
certain folder. 

Integrated development environment: 



New project dialog box: 

■fe. S'nwj ■ .Hi rn-1 J'i 


y- 1 h j,-i. £■. r '_i i ■> l.h ■ . j. ■ ~jt~, “r.1 i- I ■ L -■ ■ IE i- J-I 

"Itf- is * a 7 “ « • i i p-¥ * wi? ^ -lit! 41 sfi 



Form: 


Draw Your 

Program 

Here! 




Static Text-^r 
Group Box^^ 
Check Box-*^^ 
Scroll Bar-*~__^ 
Drop-Down List- 

Timer-*- 

Folder Hierarchy 
Circles and Stuff- 
Pictures-*— 


-Pictures 
•Editable Text 
Button 
Radio Button 
■List 

■Scroll Bar 
Drive List 
File List 
‘Lines 

Data Base Access 


Tools or Controls: 


The Text Box: 

The text box is the standard control for accepting input from 
the user as well as to display the output. It can handle string 
(text) and numeric data but not images or pictures. 

The Label: 

The label is a very useful control for Visual Basic, as it is not 
only used to provide instructions and guides to the users, it 
can also be used to display outputs. One of its most 
important properties is Caption. Using the syntax Label. 
Caption, it can display text and numeric data. 


@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID - IJTSRD29206 | Volume - 3 | Issue - 6 | September - October 2019 Page 642 



















































International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD] @ www.ijtsrd.com elSSN: 2456-6470 

The Command Button: 

The command button is one of the most important controls 
as it is used to execute commands. It displays an illusion that 
the button is pressed when the user click on it. The most 
common event associated with the command button is the 
Click event. 

The syntax for the procedure is 

Private Sub Commandl_Click () 

Statements 
End Sub 


The Picture Box: 

The Picture Box is one of the controls that is used to handle 
graphics. You can also load the picture at runtime using 

the Load Picture method. 


The Image Control: 

The Image Control is another control that handles images 
and pictures. It functions almost identically to the picture 
Box. 

The List Box: 

The function of the List Box is to present a list of items where 
the user can click and select the items from the list. In order 
to add items to the list, we can use the Add Item method. 


The Combo Box: 

The function of the Combo Box is also to present a list of 
items where the user can click and select the items from the 
list. 

The Check Box: 

The Check Box control lets the user selects or unselects an 
option. When the Check Box is checked, its value is set to 1 
and when it is unchecked, the value is set to 0. 


The Option Button: 

The Option Button control also lets the user selects one of 
the choices. However, two or more Option buttons must 
work together because as one of the option buttons is 
selected, the other Option button will be unselected. In fact, 
only one Option Box can be selected at one time. When an 
option box is selected, its value is set to "True" and when it is 
unselected; its value is set to "False". 

The Shape Control: 

In the following example, the shape control is placed in the 
form together with six Option Buttons. To determine the 
shape of the shape control, we use the shape property. 

The Drive List Box: 

The Drive List Box is for displaying a list of drives available 
in your computer. 


The Dir List Box: 

The Dir List Box means the Directory List Box. It is for 
displaying a list of directories or folders in a selected drive. 

Properties window: 

To design the user interface, you can add controls to the 
form and customize their properties in the properties 
window at design time or at runtime. 


iff Properties Sfei El 


Commandl CommandBulton zJ 

! .-^SQUARE IT! | 

B ackCblor 

&H8DQIX0Q54: 

Cancel 

False 

ngglQBHHMBBHMBBlSauSOuyHI 

Defaul- 

False 

D ragl con 

(none) 

D lagModte 

0 ■ Manual 

Fnabled 

T rue 

FontBold 

T rue 

Fantltalic 

False 

FontNannc 

MS Sans Serif 

FontS ize 

8.25 

FontS tiikethru 

Folse 

FantUnderime 

False 

Height 

735 

HelpConterflD 

0 

1 niden 


Left 

4200 

Molts: ePoinler 

□ ■ Default 

N ame 

Commandl 

T ahIntjaH 

5 

T abStOp 

T rue 

T ag 


T op 

1560 

Visible 

T pue 

Width 

2655 



The top of the source code window consists of a list of 
objects and their associated events or procedures. In the 
source code window, the object displayed is Forml and the 
associated procedure is Load. 

Source code window: 



List of objects: 

When you click on the object box, the drop-down list will 
display a list of objects you have inserted into your form. 



@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID - IJTSRD29206 | Volume - 3 | Issue - 6 | September - October 2019 Page 643 
































































International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD) @ www.ijtsrd.com elSSN: 2456-6470 


List of procedures: 

Similarly, when you click on the procedure box, a list of 
procedures associated with the object will be displayed. 
Some of the procedures associated with the object Forml are 
Activate, Click, DblClick (which means Double-Click) , 
DragDrop, keyPress and more. Each object has its own set of 
procedures. You can always select an object and write codes 
for any of its procedure in order to perform certain tasks. 



Creating Sub Procedures 

A sub procedure (also call subroutine) is a procedure that is 
called from the main procedure to perform a specific task. It 
is different from function in the sense that it does not return 
a value as a function does 

The structure of a sub procedure is as follows: 

Sub Procedure Name (arguments) 

Statements 
End Sub 

Visual Basic Data Types: 

Visual Basic classifies the information mentioned above into 
two major data types, they are the numeric data types and 
the non-numeric data types. 

Numeric Data Types: 

Numeric data types are types of data that consist of numbers 
that can be computed mathematically with standard 
operators. Examples of numeric data types are height, 
weight, share values, the price of goods, monthly bills, fees 
and others. 

Non-numeric Data Types: 

Nonnumeric data types are data that cannot be manipulated 
mathematically. Non-numeric data comprises string data 
types, date data types, boolean data types that store only two 
values (true or false), object data type and Variant data type. 

Suffixes for Literals: 

Literals are values that you assign to data. In some cases, we 
need to add a suffix behind a literal so that VB can handle the 
calculation more accurately. 

Declaring Variables Explicitly: 

To declare the variables before using them by assigning 
names and data types. They are normally declared in the 
general section of the codes' windows using 
the Dim statement. 


Assigning Values to Variables: 

After declaring various variables using the Dim statements, 
we can assign values to those variables. The syntax of an 
assignment is 

Variable=Expression 

Constants: 

Constants are different from variables in the sense that their 
values do not change during the running of the program. 

Declaring a Constant: 

The syntax to declare a constant is 
Constant Name As Data Type = Value 

How Visual Basic is used: 

The structure of VB is designed to allow programmers to use 
the environment to write executable files (exe files). Also, 
using VB, developers can create programs that can be 
utilized as a front end to databases. VB tools can help 
programmers develop applications or complete software 
while still allowing them to modify and revise their work 
accordingly. 

The most popular type of Visual Basic in use today is VBA. 
VBA is a version of Visual Basic that can be used to 
program Microsoft Office apps, such as Excel and 
PowerPoint. Computer professionals use VBA and macros in 
more complicated ways. Programmers will often write 
macros that can replicate large portions of code or define 
specific languages. 

Businesses and organizations can use VBA to customize 
Excel for their unique purposes, such as pulling certain 
statistics or information from a spreadsheet. 

VBA to be used on an enterprise-specific application 

Benefits of Visual Basic: 

> The major reason for its popularity is that it allows 
programmers to create Windows applications quickly 
and easily. 

> The BASIC programming language, which VB is derived 
from, is simple and easy to work with, especially when 
writing exe files. 

> VB becomes extremely beneficial when used with 
Microsoft's COM interface. 

> provides not only a programming language, but an 
integrated development environment (IDE) that has 
been written and optimized to best support RAD. 

> allows programmers to easily build GUIs and connect 
them to functions within the application. 

> the Visual Basic IDE provides views of the management 
of the program structure that are easy to understand. 

> VB enables the rapid development of Windows based 
applications while also assisting in the access of 
databases by using ActiveX data objects (ADO) while 
allowing programmers to use ActiveX control and 
various objects. 


The syantax is as follows: 

Dim VariableNamen As DataType 


@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID - IJTSRD29206 | Volume - 3 | Issue - 6 | September - October 2019 Page 644 



















International Journal of Trend in Scientific Research and Development (IJTSRD] @ www.ijtsrd.com elSSN: 2456-6470 


Sample coding: 

Private Sub Form_Load(] 

'Execute a simple message box that says "Hello, World!" 
MsgBox "Hello, World!" 

End Sub 
Option Explicit 
Dim Count As Integer 
Private Sub Form_LoadO 
Count = 0 

Timerl.Interval = 1000 ' units of milliseconds 

End Sub 

Private Sub Timerl_Timer0 
Count = Count + 1 
Labell.Caption = Count 

End Sub 

Applications in Visual Basic 

Visual Basic, is a First Class Citizen in Visual Studio. All 
features that C# has, Visual Basic .Net has. In fact, there were 


some features that VB .Net had that C# didn't have until 
Visual Studio 2010 

Feel free to program in Visual Basic .Net all you want. It will 
be fully supported for years and years to come. 

Visual Basic .Net isn't going anywhere. Yes, C# may get all 
the love, but there are countless millions of lines of code 
written in VB .Net that MS is not about to ignore. 

The Microsoft Visual Basic team still maintains compatibility 
for Visual Basic 6.0 applications on Windows Vista, Windows 
Server 2008 including R2, Windows 7, Windows 8, Windows 
8.1, Windows Server 2012, Windows 10, Windows Server 
2016, and Windows Server 2019 through its "It Just Works" 
program! 8 ] In 2014, some software developers still 
preferred Visual Basic 6.0 over its successor, Visual Basic 
.NET.On 2014 some developers lobbied for a new version of 
the VB6 programming environment. 

Conclusion: 

Computer Simulation is a useful research tool that opens up 
new techniques for solving numerical iteration problems. It 
saves time and reduces errors to its minimum level as 
compare with analytical approach which have limiting point. 
Solving numerical iterations using Visual Basic is more 
convenient to use in the simulation of numerical iterations 
and is less prone to errors. 


@ IJTSRD | Unique Paper ID - IJTSRD29206 | Volume - 3 | Issue - 6 | September - October 2019 Page 645 




