AD-A228 044 


AFHRL-TR-90-33(ll) 


AIR FORCE 





INSTRUCTIONAL SUPPORT SYSTEM (ISS): 
AN OVERVIEW FOR MANAGERS 


Barbara J. Eaton 


TRAINING SYSTEMS DIVISION 
Brooks Air Force Base, Texas 78235-5601 


£ 


Douglas Aircraft Company 
2450 South Peoria, Suite 400 
Aurora, Colorado 80014 


Mei Associates, Incorporated 
1050 Waltham Street 
Lexington, Massachusetts 02173 


September 1990 

Final Technical Report for Period October 1985 - March 1990 


Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 


LABORATORY 


AIR FORCE SYSTEMS COMMAND 
BROOKS AIR FORCE BASE, TEXAS 78235-5601 






NOTICE 


When Government drawings, specifications, or other data are used for any purpose 
other than in connection with a definitely Government related procurement, the 
United States Government incurs no responsibility or any obligation whatsoever 
The fact that the Government may have formulated or in any way supplied the said 
drawings, specifications, or other data, is not to be regarded by implication, or 
otherwise in any manner construed, as licensing the holder, or any other person or 
corporation; or as conveying any rights or permission to manufacture, use, or sell 
any patented invention that may in any way be related thereto 

The Public Affairs Office has reviewed this report, and it is releasable to the National 
Technical Information Service, where •? win be available to the geneta! public, 
including foreign nationals. 

This report has been reviewed and is approved for publication 


HENDRICK W. RUCK, Technical Advisor 
Training Systems Division 


HAROLD G. JENSEN, Colonel, USAF 
Commander 







REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 


Form Approved 
OMB No 0704-0188 


PliDS'C reporting Durden lor this collection o! information is estimated to average t hour pe response, including the time tor reviewing instructions, searching existing data so 
gathering and ma.ntaimng the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information Send comments regarding This Durden estimate cr an, other aspect • 
collection ot information, including suggestions for reducing this burden.To Washington Headquarters Services Directorate -oi information Operat ons and Ftecofs. t?’5 ^ 


Davis Higrway. Suite 1204, Arlington. 


ng this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services. Directorate -or information Ope 
i 22202 4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Pro,ect (0704 C 1 db\ Wash.r.gton, 6C 20S03 


1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank) 


2. REPORT DATE 
September 1990 


3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

Final Report - October 1985 - March 1990 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Instructional Support System (ISS): An Overview for Managers 

5. FUNDING NUMBERS 

C - F33615-85-C-0011 K (L 

C - F33615-88-C-0003—>ir 

PE - 62205F 

PR 1121 

TA - 10 

WU - 34. 43 

6. AUTHOR(S) 

Barbara J. Eaton 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

/Douglas Aircraft Company Mei Associates Incorporated 

2450 3. Peoria, Suite 400 i050 Waltham Street 

Aurora, Colorado 80014 Lexington, Massachusetts 02173 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 

REPORT NUMBER 

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAMES(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Training Systems Division 

Air Force Human Resources Laboratory 

Brooks Air Force Base, Texas 78235-5601 

10. SPONSORING MONITORING AGENCY 
REPORT NUMBER 

AFHRL-TR-90-33(ll) 

11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 

13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) 


ax 


This report describes several efforts that led to the development of the Instructional Support System (ISS) from 
prototype research and development (R&D) software toward a production computer-based training (CBT) system that 
supports both computer-assisted instruction (CAI) and computer-managed instruction (CMI) These efforts included 
the operational test and evaluation of the software, rehosting of the software to a validated Ada compiler, development 
of MicroCMI and interactive videodisc capabilities, development of critical user and system documentation, and design 
and development of a micro-based version of the software to run on IBM-comoatible hardware. ISS is a 
Government-owned product written in Ada in a modular format, enabling it to run on machines ranging from micros 
to mainframes, and is available through the National Technical Information Service (NTiS). - 


r 


ej 


This is the second of three volumes on the Instructional Support System (ISS) Volume n contains an overview of 
ISS to assist managers in determining if ISS is tne best medium tor their specific needs j' 


14. SUBJECT TERMS 
Ada 

computer-assisted instruction 
comDuter-rTr;.uy„v ;.. J t' , :s:iuii 


instructional support system 
transportable instructional system 


15.NUMBER OF PAGES 

24 


16. PRICE CODE 


17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF REPORT 

Unclassified 


18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF THIS PAGE 

Unclassified 


19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF ABSTRACT 

Unclassified 


20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 
UL 


f.Mr.cM'd F orrn 2 t >A -Rp, 

Fdescribed by ANSI ?'1 «’ 
A ‘.‘6 ‘ 0 ? 


VN 'MO O' -2B0 5*300 






SUMMARY 


This document provides training managers and administrators with information on major 
features of the Instructional Support System (ISS). The overview assumes that the training 
manager has a general understanding of computer-based training (CBT), but that further 
information about ISS is needed before intelligent decisions can be made regarding its suitability 
for a particular application. 

Chapter I describes ISS and provides a brief history. Chapter II details the wide range 
of instructional and management capabilities available with ISS. Chapter III provides technical 
specifications, including software, hardware configurations, interfaces, and professional staff 
requirements. Support features available with ISS are addressed in Chapter IV. Chapter V 
discusses essential factors to be considered by a training manager before selecting a CBT 
system. A glossary of terms follows the overview. 



i 





PREFACE 


This is the second of three volumes on the Instructional Support System (ISS). This volume 
contains an overview designed to assist managers in determining if ISS is the correct medium 
for a specific training application. 

The Overview for Managers provides training managers and administrators with information 
on major features of the ISS. This document is designed for those training managers with a 
general understanding of computer-based training (CBT). It provides specific information 
regarding the suitability of ISS for particular training applications. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

I INTRODUCTION TO ISS . 1 

A Brief History. 1 

II. ISS COMPUTER-BASED TRAINING CAPABILITIES. 2 

Instructional Capabilities . 2 

Management Capabilities. 4 

III ISS TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS . 5 

Software Specifications. 5 

Host Operating System Requirements. 5 

Hardware Requirements 6 

Interfaces. 7 

Hardware Configurations. 7 

Professional Staff Requirements 7 

IV ISS SUPPORT FEATURES . ... . 11 

Reference Manuals 11 

Training . 11 

V SELECTING COMPUTER-BASED TRAINING: FACTORS TO CONSIDER. 11 

Findings From Previous Feasibility Studies .. 12 

Instructional Factors 12 

Organizational Factors 13 

Economic Factors. 13 

Technical Factors 14 

Assessing the Results 14 

REFERENCES . 15 

GLOSSARY.. 16 

LIST OF TABLES 

Table Page 

1 Four User VAX System 8 

2 Eignt User VAX System. 9 

3 Twenty-Four User VAX System. 10 

4 Professional Staff 10 


iii 
































INSTRUCTIONAL SUPPORT SYSTEM (ISS): 
AN OVERVIEW FOR MANAGERS 


I. INTRODUCTION TO ISS 

The Instructional Support System (ISS) is a computer based training (CBT) system available 
to Government agencies. ISS combines both instructional and management capabilities into 
one system, facilitating the creation, delivery, and management of instruction for students and 
instructors alike. ISS is Government-owned and is written in Ada, a standard Department of 
Defense (DoD) programming language. Using Ada enables ISS to be transported to a variety 
of machines, ranging from mainframes to microcomputers. 

The modular construction of ISS makes it possible to load the entire system simultaneously 
or in portions, depending on the user's need. In addition to simplifying user access, the 
modular components facilitate software maintenance. 

Creating courseware also is facilitated with ISS. Because ISS uses interactive menus and 
prompts for creating courseware, instructional developers need not know a programming language 

A similar set of menu-driven management editors increases training program control and 
efficiency. Management capabilities within ISS include creating tests, enrolling students, logging-on 
students, assigning lessons automatically, tracking resources, monitoring students, evaluating 
course materials and/or student performance, and generating student performance data 

Furthermore, ISS accommodates a light pen, mouse, and touch panel. ISS also interfaces 
with videodisc players and graphic overlay devices. 


A Brief History 


In the early 1970s, the Air Force Human Resources Laboratory (AFHRL) initiated a research 
and development program to explore CBT. Although a few commercial systems existed at that 
time, none of them met Air Force needs. The Advanced Instructional System (AIS) was designed 
to train and manage a large number of students using a mainframe computer. AIS implementation 
was highly dependent on the hardware and software available at the time. 

In the early 1980s, microprocessor technology emerged, along with alternative CBT 
configurations. To capitalize on the new hardware and software developments, ISS became the 
successor to AIS. The Air Force accepted ISS as a prototype on the VAX 11/780 minicomputer 
in October 1985. In 1986, the Strategic Air Command at Dyess AFB, Texas, served as the 
operational test and evaluation site, using ISS to develop B-1B aircrew training. 

ISS was rehosted from an early Ada compiler to a validated Ada compiler in September 
1986, making it a more stable and maintainable product. Several management enhancements 
were added. A training package was developed in-house that provides on-line instruction for 
developing courseware 

An on-line training package for designing and managing curricula using ISS’s management 
component has been developed. In addition, the application software has been documented 
to facilitate transitioning the software to a long-term support agency. 


1 





An interactive videodisc capability was integrated into ISS in 1988. In addition, management 
software has been developed which is compact enough to run on microcomputers yet powerful 
enough to track student progress and preserve data required to evaluate instructional effectiveness 

ISS has been rehosted to the Zenith 248 and Micro VAX II. The Zenith 248 version may 
be networked, allowing several workstations to access the same database residing on an 
Operating System/2 (OS/2) server. Because the Zenith 248 venture was successful, ISS could 
provide the basic architecture for a common Air Force-wide CBT system. 


II. ISS COMPUTER-BASED TRAINING CAPABILITIES 

As a CBT system ISS is divided into two major functions: computer-assisted instruction 
(CAI) and computer managed instruction (CMI). In this overview, these two major functions are 
referred to as instructional and management capabilities, respectively. The instructional capability 
provides the development and delivery of courseware on-line, while the management capability 
controls instructional resources and tracks student progress. 


Instructional Capabilities 

ISS instructional capabilities allow non-programmers to develop exciting and interactive 
courseware which addresses individual student needs. Five separate capabilities deserve 
comment text presentation, graohics, student interaction, individualization, and simulation. 

Text Presentation By usina an instructional editor, courseware authors create text by 
engaging in an on-going dialogue with the system via the use of menus. The text, in turn, is 
presented to the student in a series of screen displays. The ISS software incorporates many 
different types of displays; each display represents a single chunk of information or asks a 
question Collectively, the different displays broaden instructional options and better serve the 
needs of individual students. Students initiate the displays at a rate compatible with their own 
learning styles. Text presentation in ISS, however, consists of more than a one-way. linear 
delivery of information Student interest and curiosity are maintained throughout a course of 
instruction by numerous opportunities for interaction, branching, remediation, feedback, and 
prompting. 

Given that minimum display station requirements (to be discussed in Chapter III) are met, 
ISS offers the following text characteristics: 

• 24 to 32 lines per screen with a minimum of 80 characters per line 

• 96 standard ASCII characters 

• Varying character sizes 

• Different style fonts 

• Color text and background 

• Blink capability 

Graphics Graphics are used to lessen the explanatory burden of the text as well as to 
emphasize key points in the lesson Because much of high quality technical training depends 
upon clear and unambiguous graphics. ISS users are fortunate to have available n highly 


2 






diversified capability for creating graphics. An ISS menu-driven graphics editor guides the 
graphics artist in creating detailed schematics and illustrations. Rapid access to the graphics 
database and the ability to quickly insert, delete, display, and change graphics results in 
considerable labor savings for artists and their supervisors. To assist the artist further, ISS 
supports a variety of input devices, including keyboard, joydisk, light pen, and data (bit) pad. 

ISS supports the following graphics display capabilities: 

• Any mixture of graDhicc, text, and background 

• Graphics and text displayable in eight basic colors and a variety of color fills 

• Screen size 13-inch-diagonal minimum 

• Drawing primitives including points, arcs, vectors, circles, and rectangles 

• 4b0 (horizontal) by 360 (vertical) minimum resolution 

• Blink capability with background and foreground elements 

• Random cursor positioning 


Student Interaction. ISS supports student interaction through the creation of interactive text 
(questions) and branching response. Interactivity transforms students from passive recipients of 
information to active participants. For example, embedding questions in the lesson materials 
stimulates student interest, and active involvement reinforces the learning process. Feedback 
is immediate and tailored to student responses. Tne student proceeds to another task or 
problem, based on the correctness of the response. If needed, remediation can be provided 
by branching techniques. Student input devices such as touch screens and light pens further 
facilitate interactivity. 

Individualization. With ISS, students progress at their own pace. Slower students are not 
left behind, nor do faster students lose interest. An authoring editor makes it possible to 
individualize courseware by means of branching logic; students are routed along different paths, 
based on individual responses. Students can control lesson material by choosing alternative 
paths from branching displays. By changing the order in which courseware is presented, 
students adapt the courseware to their own learning styles. Prompts can also be delivered to 
the student and are provided on the basis of a response, completion of lesson segments, or 
even the non-completion of lesson segments. Help and elaboration frames are available and 
make the overall instructional process more personal and responsive. The ISS software 
incorporates many different types of frames; each frame represents a single chunk of information 
or asks a question. Collectively, the different frames broaden instructional options and better 
serve the needs of individual students. 

Simulation. As an approximation to a real-life situation or system, a simulation helps replace 
expensive or impractical equipment use. A computer-based simulation prevents unnecessary 
wear on operational equipment and reduces possible accidents by novices unfamiliar with the 
equipment In ISS, a special simulation editor assists the author or artist via menus in creating 
high-resolution graphics in real-time or near-real-time animation. Animation, for example, can 
show process flow or movement, and can represent gauges and meter readouts. With ISS. 
simulation is an excellent instructional tool for teaching problem-solving and decision-making 
skills required in a progressively complex technical environment By using animated graphics, 
ISS simulation offers the added training benefits of realism and increased student motivation 


3 





Management Capabilities 


Anyone who has served as a course administrator or instructor in a Government or military 
setting knows that the recordkeeping and administrative chores can be overwhelming at times 
The highly efficient management capability of ISS manages both student progress and training 
resources Because ISS helps perform these management functions, course administrators and 
instructors can use their skills more productively 

Special ISS management editors assist course administrators in performing numerous student 
management, resource management, and report generation functions For discussion purposes, 
the student management capabilities have been further divided into scheduling, progress 
management, student monitoring, mastery testing, managing resources, report generation, and 
additional management functions 

Scheduling. Scheduling and assigning students to instructional activities traditionally has 
been a time-consuming administrative task in most training organizations The ISS scheduling 
capability allows course administrators to set up automatic schedules, including on-line and 
off-line assignments, tests, and other instructional activities. As a result, false starts are avoided 
and students are directed into appropriate courses and lesson paths Furthermore, student 
records are updated each time a student signs onto the system and works on lesson assignments 
Instructors can receive a complete progress report on each student 

Progress Management Lesson content varies in difficulty Students may have difficulty 
with certain portions of the lesson material, but not with other portions Progress management 
is a valuable instructor tool which processes student assignments and keeps track of how long 
students take to complete lessons For example, if the mean time for completing a particular 
lesson is significantly greater than the time to complete other lessons for the same students, 
the instructor may want to supplement the material with off line inst>uction or mark it for 
subsequent courseware revision. 

Student Monitoring. The instructor's ability to monitor students from a remote terminal 
during on-line instruction is another valuable management tool In a traditional classroom 
setting, it is often difficult to determine if students are having problems with lesson material in 
that tests are given infrequently and often too late in the course With ISS. the instructor can 
observe whether students are having difficulty while they are learning the material and not 
several days or weeks later If the instructor observes that the student is spending an excessive 
amount of time on a particular lesson, it may be necessary to elaborate on the instruction or 
schedule additional activities 

Mastery Testing. Mastery tests immediately confirm whether students are performing at the 
specified level. ISS provides a special test editor used for creating, copying, modifying and 
defining passing criteria for mastery tests. The editor is designed primarily for criterion referenced 
tests, but can also be used to develop norm-referenced tests. Test keys identify test records 
quickly Tests may be developed for both on-line and off-line presentation. Alternate forms of 
the same tests are easy to create with the special editor. In brief, the automatic presentation, 
scoring, recording, and analysis of mastery tests are highly valued ISS features 

Managing Resources. Training resources, like students, need to be managed if they are 
to achieve their optimal potential. As with other management functions. ISS employs special 
menu-driven editors for managing different resources. Resources are classified as portable (i e., 
items that can be moved), facility (e g., simulators and learning centers), or consumable (e g , 
pens, pencils, and paper). In each of these categories, the manager can scan the different 
resources, get a description of each, identify the number in the inventory, and the number 
currently available The manager can also change the number of available resources to reflect 
supply increments or decrements Another resource editor allows the instructor to reserve 


4 



resources for students who may be available only on specific dates and times Resource 
reservations can be updated daily or weekly 


Report Generation As an aid in evaluating course material and student performance. ISS 
prints out several different reports in various formats Student performance reports can be 
collected across different instructional levels (i e , module, block, course), or individually for text 
and question frames containing branching (decision) logic One report accumulates and reports 
student comments Data can be analyzed by groups, lessons or blocks A variety of summary 
statistics are available, including number of students in the sample, mean and standard deviation 
of time spent on a block of instruction, numbers and percentages of different types of failures 
(eg cognitive and performance), and mean and standard deviation of time to lesson completion 
Test item evaluations, as well as correlations of items with objectives and of items with the 
entire test, are also available 

Additional Management Functions Two additional management functions are worthy of note 
a message function and an off-line interface The message function permits sending assignments 
or other communications between instructors or between an instructor and a student The 
message function allows busy instructors and students to keep in touch in a manner compatible 
with their individual schedules The off-line interface provides data collection through off line 
test scoring and attitude tracking in a vari ty of instructional settings by means of an optical 
mark reader 


III. ISS TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS 

The Air Force developed a transportable system that can run on a variety of candidate 
systems Some basic specifications for candidate systems are discussed below. These have 
been divided into software specifications, host operating system requirements, hardware 
requirements interfaces, hardware configurations, and professional staff requirements 


Software Specifications 

Because ISS is implemented in the Ada language, candidate systems must have an Ada 
compiler Training managers should be aware, however, that an Ada compiler does not guarantee 
successful ISS implementation Some validated compilers place limits on code/data sizes and 
pragma implementation (i e , information that is conveyed to the compiler without affecting the 
correctness of the program) Other compilers may provide only partial implementation of the 
features needed by ISS 

Certain pragmas are necessary for efficient ISS implementation For example, pragma PACK 
compresses data sufficiently to keep records small and ensure data management performance; 
pragma INTERFACE ensures smooth communication with required virtual machine layer (VML) 
procedures, and pragma SUPPRESS, or its equivalent, eliminates costly execution time checks 
which cause performance degradation due to high central processing unit (CPU) utilization In 
some cases a system may be implemented without the above pragmas, alternate methods which 
achieve the same effect should be considered 


Host Operating System Requirements 


To provide a variety of ISS capabilities and meet performance needs, the application support 
layer (ASL) software must utilize VML machine dependent procedures The VML procedures 
must be rewritten and compiled to rehost ISS to a candidate system The VML procedures 


5 





can be divided into those that call host operating system software for the needed capability 
and those that have been created to attain necessary performance. To clearly specify the host 
operating system software requirements, tables have been prepared which ider.tify the VML entry 
point names and the capability and performance requirements fulfilled (see AFHRL-TR-85-53, 
Instructional Support Software System, pp. 13-14). Because it may be possible to implement 
some of the VML procedures in Ada on some systems and still meet capability and performance 
requirements, alternate yet equivalent implementations should be pursued where appropriate. 


Hardware Requirements 


Computer hardware varies considerably with respect to capability, capacity, and performance. 
This can make selecting a system difficult. An essential first step is knowing the basic 
requirements The basic hardware requirements for developing and implementing ISS are 
described next under two categories: processor/peripheral requirements and display station 
requirements 

Processor I Peripheral Requirements Although a more restricted version of ISS can be 
implemented on hardware with less capacity, the minimum processor and peripheral requirements 
for successfully executing ISS are as follows: 

• Processor clock of 8 MHz minimum 

• Capability to address a minimum of 1 megabyte (MB) of random access memory 
(RAM) for software development and ISS execution 

• A minimum of 40 MB hard disk storage for operating system, program development, 
and ISS data applications storage 

• A 1 MB floppy disk drive 

Display Station Requirements. The following display station requirements are considered 
the minimum for successfully presenting ISS displays: 

• Interactive color graphics monitor with alphanumeric and graphics display; a mixture 
of text, graphics, and background olors is allowed 

• Points, vectors, arcs, circles, and rectangles as drawing primitives 

• Clipped picture elements that do not exceed screen boundaries 

• Specific monitor requirements: 

13-inch-diagonal screen or larger 
Dot triad spacing of 0 31 mm or better 

Minimum 42 Hz, non-interlaced refresh rate to prevent flicker 
480 (horizontal) by 360 (vertical) minimum resolution 
Blink capability 


6 


24 to 32 lines with minimum of 80 characters per line 


480 characters-per-second writing rate minimum 
- At least 10 microseconds-per-pixel vector-writing rate 

• Keyboard with function keys and numeric pad 

• 96 standard ASCII characters plus varying character sizes 


Interfaces 


ISS supports the following user interfaces. 

• A touch screen interface is available which can be connected to almost any display 
screen This allows the student to select answers or make choices by touching the 
corresponding area of the screen. 

• Bit and data pads are supported but are display station specific and should be 
selected when stations are evaluated and purchased. 

• A videodisc and graphics overlay capability is available which expands media selection 
options 

• An optical mark reader interface provides optical scoring of off-line tests for CMI data 
collection 


Hardware Configurations 


ISS is currently implemented on the VAX 8600, VAX 11/785, VAX 11/780, Micro VAX, and 
Zenith 248 computer systems. The display station types used with ISS include Digital VT100, 
Digital VT125, Tektronix 4105, Tektronix 4107, and Tektronix 4109. 

Tables 1 through 3 that follow list the typical equipment required for VAX installations, 
including item quantities, mounting hardware, and software requirements using configurations of 
four, eight, and twenty-four stations. 


Professional Staff Requirements 


One of the most important components of any CBT system is the people who will manage 
and develop courseware on the system. Staff selection should focus on the skills needed for 
ISS implementation Though the skills needed will vary with the type of CBT involved and the 
size of the program, most programs require the professional staff members listed in Table 4. 

It should be noted that different skills are in greatest demand at different stages in the 
instructional process For example, the systems manager will be doing a lot of planning before 
the system is procured. Designers need to outline the curriculum before developers create 
lesson materials Instructors cannot monitor students until students are actually interacting with 
the courseware, and training managers cannot evaluate the courseware's effectiveness until a 
certain number of students have completed their courses. 


7 



Table 1. Four-User VAX System 


Hardware 

4-User 

Tempest System 

4-User 

Non-Tempest System 

MICROVAX II SYSTEM 

1-5 MB 

1-9 MB (3-RD53/TD50) 

MEMORY-4 MB MOS 

1 

- 

DISK CONTROLLER (RD53) 

2 

1 

EXTENDER FOR RQDX3 

1 

- 

RD53 DISK DRIVE (71 MB) 

1 

- 

TS05 MAG TAPE 1600 BPI 

1 

1 

TABLETOP TERM (CONSOLE) 

1 

1 

TEKTRONIX C/G TERMINALS W/64K 

4 

4 

INFOSCRIBE PRINTER 

1 

1 

RFI SHIELDED RS232 CABLE 

4 

- 

RS232 CABLE 

- 

4 

Mounting Equipment 

5.25 RACK ADAPTOR 

1 

- 

TS05 CABINET KIT 

1 

1 

Software 

MICROVMS LIC. 1 8 USERS 

1 

1 

MICROVMS MEDIA AND DOC 

1 

1 

TXV05 I/O DRIVER 

1 

1 

TSV05 MEDIA AND DOC 

1 

1 


8 




Table 2 Eight-User VAX System 


■ 




8-User 

8-User 

Hardware 

Tempest System 

Non-Tempest System 

VAX 8200 4 MB (RACKMOUNT) 

1 

1 

MEMORY 8200/8300, 2 MB 

4 

4 

MEMORY BATTERY BACKUP 8200/8300 

1 

1 

VAXBI TO UNIBUS ADAPTER 

1 

- 

VAXBI RA DISK CONTROLLER 

2 

1 

RA60 205 MB DISK (removable 


2* 

w/o cabinet) 

TU80 MAG TAPE 1600 BPI 

■j * * 

1 

COMMUNICATIONS CONTROLLER 

1 

1 

TABLETOP TERM (CONSOLE) 

1 

1 

TEKTRONIX C/G TERMINALS W/64K 

8 

8 

PRINTRONIX LINE PRINTER, 600 LPM 

1 

1 

FILTER I/O CABLE ASSEMBLY 

1 

- 

RFI SHIELDED RS232 CABLE 

8 

- 

RS232 CABLE 

- 

8 

BULKHEAD I/O PANEL 

1 

- 

UNIBUS EXPANDER BOX 

1 

- 

EXPANSION BACKPLANE 

1 

- 

* - one with cabinet, one without 

cabinet 


** ■ requires tempest cabinet 

Mounting Equipment 

TEMPEST CABINET 

1 

- 

CABINET KIT 

1 

1 

Software 

VMS MEDIA AND DOC 

1 

1 


9 








Table 3. Twenty-Four User VAX System 


Hardware 

24-User 

Non-Tempest System 

VAX 11/785 COMPUTER 6 MB 

1 

MEMORY 2 MB MS780-GA 2ECC MOS 

5 

FLOATING POINT ACCELERATOR 

1 

UDA50 DISK CONTROLLER 

2 

RA60 205 MB DISK (removable 

3 

w/o cabinet) 

TU77 MAG TAPE 1600 BPI 

1 

DMF32 COMMUNICATIONS CONTROLLER 

3 

LA100 TABLETOP TERM (CONSOLE) 

1 

TEKTRONIX C/G TERMINALS W/64K 

24 

PRINTRONIX LINE PRINTER, 600 LPM 

1 

LQP02 DAISY WHEEL PRINTER 

3 

RS232 CABLE 

24 

Mounting Equipment 

None Required 

Software 

VMS MEDIA AND DOC 

1 


Table 4 Professional Staff 


Skill Position 

Systems Manager 

Course Administrator 

Instructional Designers/ 
Developers/Authors 

Graphics Artist 

Instructors 

Subject-Matter Experts 


Major Responsibility 


Insures software is up and running, minimizes 
downtime; plans system updates. 

Schedules students, instructors, and resources, 
evaluates training effectiveness. 

Design and create on-line and off-line courseware. 

Creates graphic screen displays to support 
instructional program. 

Facilitate the instructional process, monitor students. 
Work with authors to develop courseware 


10 










For small-scale programs, some of the professional staff may need to serve dual roles. 
Given the diversity of skills involved and the different stages of courseware development, delivery, 
and evaluation, the need for effective management of the overall process is apparent. 

For additional information on planning a management strategy for CBT development, the 
reader is directed to Electronic Systems Division (ESD) Prototype Methodology for Designing 
and Developing Computer-Assisted Instruction, 21 August 1986. Contact Lt John Herman, 
ESD/XRSE, DSN768-2713 or commercial (617) 377-2713. 


IV. ISS SUPPORT FEATURES 

Newcomers to ISS do not have to fend for themselves when they have questions and need 
to learn more about the system. Documentation support and self-paced on-line and off-line 
training materials are available for becoming proficient with ISS in the shortest possible time. 


Reference Manuals 


Reference manuals have been prepared for each ISS editor module. Each manual contains 
a brief overview of the capabilities and functions of the editor. ISS terminal hardware specifications 
include charts to help users determine available hardware features based on their own unique 
needs. For example, a function chart provides specifications on each terminal’s capabilities, 
and a keystroke detail chart specifies the keys or control commands used on each terminal. 
Each manual defines ISS terms and specific modules; detailed procedures for using each module 
also are given. Furthermore, error messages are provided, with a brief explanation of their 
meanings and a list of corrective actions. The last chapter of each manual provides solutions 
to problems that are not addressed by error messages. 

For individuals that may be interested, programming and development specifications for the 
support environment are available. There is also documentation for the application software, 
the data structures and database documentation for the entire system. 

A report which describes the development of ISS, entitled Instructional Support Software 
System, AFHRi.TR-85-53, can also be obtained. 


Training 

A training program on the ISS instructional component is available to the first-time user and 
combines on-line and off-line instruction. The training package includes descriptions of editor 
functions and capabilities, as well as practice exercises for each editor. 


V. SELECTING COMPUTER-BASED TRAINING: 

FACTORS TO CONSIDER 

Effective and cost efficient training of personnel represents a continuous challenge to the 
Air Force training community. It is understandable that many training managers want to develop 
training programs that reflect state-of-the-art training technology and realize the benefits associated 
with CBT. Although there is evidence of the expected benefits with the well-planned introduction 
of CBT in appropriate settings, there also are instances where well-intended efforts have gone 
awry. 


11 





Findings From Previous Feasibility Studies 


Previous feasibility studies of CBT implementation have shown some major differences when 
compared to the conventional classroom approach. Most studies have shown higher start-up 
costs associated with CBT but lower ongoing costs when compared to instructor-based training. 
The initial costs of instructor-based training are relatively small, but with each offering of the 
course, costs associated with salaries and travel can increase considerably Due to courseware 
development and hardware acquisition, the initial costs for CBT are going to be higher, but 
ongoing costs become less as economies of scale are realized with repeated offerings. 

Given a training program that is likely to be in demand for a long time and for which 
student volume is sizable, CBT is likely to be more cost-effective. Conversely, if the course is 
to be offered only a few times, it is unlikely that CBT implementation costs will be justified. 

Because CBT represents a significant undertaking for many organizations, a feasibility study 
on those factors likely to determine the success or failure of a CBT program is recommended 
as the first step. Instructional, organizational, economic, and technical factors need to be 
evaluated. 


Instructional Factors 


Instructional feasibility raises the question: Does adopting a CBT system make sound 
instructional sense? Some important instructional questions are listed below that should help 
a decision maker when examining instructional feasibility: 

• Does the total number of students requiring training annually justify CBT? 

• Will the training course be in demand for a long time? How many times will the 
course be repeated? 

• Does a need exist for standardized training; that is, should the course always be 
offered the same way? 

• Do differences in student entry levels necessitate self-paced and individualized 
instruction? 

• Would students benefit from instructional concepts and procedures which emphasize 
participative learning, interactivity, and frequent practice? 

• Does training involve the use of scarce subject-matter experts or equipment? 

• Is training required on short notice whenever and wherever needed? 

• Does management of student records need improvement? 

• Is the student likely to use computers or automated systems on the job? If CBT 
were adopted, would the job environment benefit from exposure to computers during 
training? 

• Can large portions of the training be conducted without an instructor? 


12 






Organizational Factors 


Due to the fact that the introduction of a CBT system frequently changes individual roles 
within an organization, it is necessary to evaluate the organizational climate and conditions 
before introducing and implementing CBT. Without serious organizational support and 
commitment, successful CBT implementation would indeed be difficult. Candid questions regarding 
organizational readiness and expectations should be asked. 

• What potential organizational problems might jeopardize CBT success? 

• Do you have the resources to provide ongoing operational management for the CBT 
system? 

• Are trained personnel available to create and update CBT materials? 

• Are administrative personnel available to plan, supervise, and manage CBT activities? 

• Ate expectations realistic in terms of what CBT can and cannot do? 

• Are current program and policy pronouncements compatible with the introduction of 
CBT? 

• Is there a demand for greater sectors within the organization to become more 
computer-oriented? 

• Are the top decision makers in the organization likely to support CBT? 

• Can the long-term cost effectiveness of CBT be demonstrated? 


Economic Factors 


It is well known that training budgets are fixed and often limit proposed programs in spite 
of their instructional and organizational feasibility. Someone is sure to ask: "How much is all 
this going to cost?" Before that question is answered, it is important to know all of the costs 
associated with the existing program, as the proposed CBT program costs are likely to be 
compared to current costs. A minimal evaluation of CBT cost feasibility requires answers to 
these questions: 

• What are the total costs for the existing training system (include instructors, 
administrators, facilities, equipment, materials, preparation time, student/instructor 
travel)? 

• What are the total development costs associated with the proposed CBT system 
(design, development, testing)? 

• What are the total delivery costs of the proposed CBT system (hardware acquisition, 
software, system operation and maintenance, course management, facilities, 
documentation, off-line materials)? 

• Do amortized CBT costs result in annual or life cycle savings over the existing 
system? 


13 






• What are the added benefits of the proposed system? 

• Are assumptions regarding costs and utilization clearly stated and reasonable? 

• Is sufficient funding available to cover start-up costs, assuring a reasonable chance 
of success? 


Technical Factors 


Technical considerations refer to the hardware and software features of the proposed CBT 
system and whether the system has the functional capability for meeting the training requirements 
of the end user. A clear specification of technical considerations will ensure that whatever 
system is selected, it will satisfy the user’s functional requirements. The following basic technical 
factors require examination: 

• Does the proposed system have the input, display, and output capabilities required? 

• Does the system come with mature software and courseware development packages? 

• Will the system support the required number of simultaneous users during peak load 
periods? 

• What is the system response time under peak load conditions? Is it conducive to 
real-time interaction and rapid student response? 

• Can courseware be downloaded to run on microcomputers? 

• Does the system have the required instructor/student communication capability? 

• Is the system’s storage capacity adequate for present needs? Will it accommodate 
further expansion of courseware and student records? 

• What is the system’s record on unscheduled downtime? Have good reliability and 
service been demonstrated? 


Assessing the Results 


Only individual organizations can determine how to weigh the above factors when assessing 
CBT feasibility. To be sure, each organization will need to supplement the above factors with 
questions that address its own unioue requirements. Rarely will all the factors be resolved in 
a way that unequivocally supports or does not support CBT. Given recent advances in 
state-of-the-art training technologies, technical feasibility factors can usually satisfy most 
Instructional requirements; however, economic and organizational factors still provide significant 
obstacles. Many organizations prefer not to implement CBT as a total training system but 
instead, to try it on a small-scale or pilot project basis. 

For a more detailed discussion of the above factors, the reader is directed to an excellent 
introductory book entitled, Computer-Based Training: A Guide To Selection and Implementation, 
by Greg Kearsley. Another recommended source is AFHRL-TR-84-46, Computer-Assisted Training: 
Decision Handbook, April 1985. 


14 




REFERENCES 


McDonnel Douglas Astronautics Company. (1986). Instructional Support Software System 
(AFHRL-TR-85-53, AD-166 776). Lowry AFB, CO: Training Systems Division, Air Force Human 
Resources Laboratory. 

Kearsley, Greg. (1983) Computer-Based Training: A Guide to Selection and Implementation. 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. 

Kemner-Richardson, S., Lamos, J.P., & West, A S. (1985). Computer-Assisted Instruction: Decision 
Handbook (AFHRL-TR-84-46, AD-A154 646). Lowry AFB, CO: Training Systems Division, Air Force 
Human Resources Laboratory. 


15 






GLOSSARY 


The following is a glossary of terms used in this overview and other ISS documentation 


Definition 


The standard Department of Defense (DoD) programming 
language, developed to enhance DoD software development 
productivity. 


Application Software 


Computer programs developed to meet user requirements 
for a specific purpose or task 


Application Support Layer (ASL) 


Part of the ISS application support environment which assists 
terminal communications, data management, inter-process 
communication, text handling, program control, and 
mathematical services. 


ASCII 


Refers to American Standard Code for Information 
Interchange, a widely used convention whereby 128 keyboard 
characters are defined by seven-bit code 


Bit Pad 


A graphic art input device used with a mouse or stylus 
Also called a data pad. 


Block 


A unit of instruction within a course, comprised of lessons 
and modules, covering a specific subject. 


Branch 


An instructional feature that transfers students from one 
lesson path to another. 


Branching 


Instructions that route students to individual paths based 
on responses or author-defined conditions. 


CAI Authoring Support System 
(CASS) 


An ISS application program that allows authors to create 
lesson materials by combining informational text, graphics, 
questions, and simulations. 


Cognitive Test 


A test used to determine student knowledge of lesson 
material. 


Computer-Assisted Instruction 
(CAI) 


Interactive instruction presented to the student on a computer 
Also known as courseware. 


Computer-Based Training (CBT) 


Instruction that is developed, delivered, and managed on 
computers. 


Computer-Managed Instruction 
(CMI) 


The use of computers to provide administrative support for 
CAI. This includes managing student progress and tests, 
scheduling students and resources, and generating 
management reports. 


16 






GLOSSARY (Continued) 




Term 

Definition 


Consumable Resources 
Courseware 

Curriculum 

Database 

Data Pad 
Display 

Drill and Practice 

Editor 


Error Messages 

Facility Resources 

Fill 

Flag 

Frame 

Graphics Editor 

Plardcopy 


Expendable resources used by students (eg., paper) 

Also known as computer-assisted instruction. Interactive 
training developed and displayed by computer. 

Largest organizational unit within the ISS program of study 
Consists of courses, course versions, course blocks, and 
lessons. 

Collection of data in a form capable of being processed by 
a computer. 

An input device used by artists. See Bit Pad 

The visual contents on the video screen, which could be 
menus, lists, text, and graphics. 

A basic instructional technique whereby a problem or question 
is presented, a student’s response is accepted, and feedback 
is provided based on correctness of the response 

Program that allows the user to develop, implement, and 
evaluate instructional materials. In ISS, editors allow quick 
access to the database via menus and prompts. System 
users need not be programmers. 

Instructions that appear on the screen warning users they 
have made a mistake. Instructions on how to correct the 
error are provided. 

An immobile instructional environment which includes learning 
centers, classrooms, and simulators. 

A graphics capability referring to any solid color or 
combination of colors contained within a polygon. 

A marker which can be attached to frames in order to give 
special instructions. 

A display screen which presents information or asks 
questions. Each frame should normally contain only one 
chunk of information. 

A special purpose ISS program that enables an author to 
create illustrations for lessons. 

Information or data output from a computer on printed 
paper. 


17 




GLOSSARY (Continued) 



Term 

Definition 

Hardware 

The essential physical components that go into a computer 
the CPU, memory, and input/output devices 

High-Order Language 

Programming languages that are less dependent on the 
limitations of a specific computer; in other words, languages 
common to most computer systems 

Individualization 

An Instructional feature that allows students to proceed at 
their own pace through a variety of paths In ISS, 

individualization is achieved through branching and 
curriculum design 

Instructional Support System 
(ISS) 

A large-scale, computer-based training system providing both 
instructional and management capabilities ISS is a software 
package, written in Ada, designed to be machine- 
independent, and grouped into functional modules that may 
be executed individually or combined as needed to support 
user requirements 

Lesson 

Basic unit of instruction in the ISS system 

Mastery Test 

Tests designed in the ISS test editor to evaluate a student's 
comprehension of course material Scores on master tests 
may be recorded, evaluated, and reported 

Menu 

A list of options presented in a screen display to provide 
the user with a choice for retrieving information or for 
performing different functions 

Module 

A unit of instruction within ISS containing segments, frames 
and pages An alternate method of presenting instruction 

Off-line Instruction 

Instructional material delivered independent of a computer 
system (e g., lecture, discussion, workbooks) 

On line Instruction 

Training delivered via a computer system 

Optical Mark Reader 

Device that reads the markings from off-line tests and enters 
the test data into the computer 

Overlay Function 

Allows previewing frames or a series of frames as they will 
be presented to students. 

Part-Task Trainer 

A training device which addresses a well-defined subset of 
tasks to be trained 


18 






GLOSSARY (Concluded) 




Term 

Definition 

Peripherals 

Accessories that can be added to a computer system (e g , 
printers, disc drives, joy-sticks, videodisc players) 

Portable Resources 

Training materials that a student can carry from one location 
to another (e g., books, handouts, video or audio cassettes) 

Progress Management 

An ISS management capability which processses student 
assignments and keeps track of the time students take to 
complete lessons 

Prompt 

A brief message displayed on a computer terminal which 
instructs the user 

Response Time 

Time required for the microprocessor to respond to an input 
device 

Restricted Access 

A condition that can be established within ISS that allows 
a user access to certain modules but not others 

Simulation 

In ISS, an animated, graphic portrayal of a real-life situation 

Student Monitoring 

Capability that allows an instructor to view a screen while 
the student is working on a lesson or taking a test 

Unlimited Access 

Access given to the highest level ISS users Unlimited 
access allows a user to author, alter, or delete courseware, 
and to manipulate, delete, or add data to records 

Videodisc 

A peripheral device with a large storage capacity Displays 
instructional sequences that require high resolution and 
motion. Videodisc players can be integrated with ISS 

Virtual Machine Layer (VML) 

ISS software procedures, written in assembly language, which 
must be rewritten and compiled on a candidate system to 
rehost ISS to that system 


19 



