AD-A228 043 


AFHRL-TR-90-33(m) 


AIR FORCE 





INSTRUCTIONAL SUPPORT SYSTEM (ISS); 

AN OVERVIEW FOR INSTRUCTIONAL PERSONNEL 


Barbara J. Eaton 


TRAINING SYSTEMS DIVISION 
Brooks Air Force Base, Texas 78235-5601 


2450 South Peoria, Suite 400 


IM,. 


Douglas Aircraft Company 


Aurora, Colorado 80014 


Mei Associates, Incorporated 
1050 Waltham Street 
Lexington, Massachusetts 02173 


September 1990 

Final Technical Report for Period October 1985 - March 1990 


Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 


LABORATORY 


AIR FORCE SYSTEMS COMMAND 
BROOKS AIR FORCE BASE, TEXAS 78235-5601 



NOTICE 


When Government drawings, specifications, or other data are used for any purpose 
other than in connection with a definitely Government-related procurement, the 
United States Government incurs no responsibility or any obligation whatsoever 
The fact that the Government may have formulated or in any way supplied the said 
drawings, specifications, or other data, is not to be regarded by implication, or 
otherwise in any manner construed, as licensing the holder, or any other person or 
corporation: or as conveying any rights or permission to manufacture, use, or sell 
any patented invention that may in any way be related thereto. 

The Public Affai/s Office has reviewed this report, and it is releasable to the National 
Technical Information Service, where it will be available t .he general public, 
including foreign nationals. 

This report has been reviewed and is approved for publication 


HENDRICK W. RUCK, Technical Advisor 
Training Systems Division 


HAROLD G. JENSEN, Colonel, USAF 
Commander 


REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

Form Approved 

0MB No. 0704-0188 

Public reporting burden for this coHection of information is estimated to average t hour per response, including the time lor reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, 
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information Sendcomments regarding This burden estimate or any other aspect ol inis 
colicction of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden. To Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate tor Information Operations and Reports. 1215 Jetieison 
Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington. VA 22202-43C2, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704 0100). Washington, DC 20503 

1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank) 2. REPORT DATE 3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

September 1 990 Final Report - October 1985 - March 1990 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Instructional Support System (ISS): An Overview for Instructional Personnel 

5. FUNDING NUMBERS 

C - F33615-85-C-0011 

C - F33615-88-C-0003 

PE - 62205F 

PR - 1121 

TA - 10 

WU - 34,43 

6. AUTHOR(S) 

Barbara J. Eaton 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Douglas Aircraft Company Mei Associates. Incorporated 

2450 S. Peoria, Suite 400 1050 Waltham Street 

Aurora, Colorado 80014 Lexington, Massachusetts 02173 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 

REPORT NUMBER 

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAMES(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Training Systems Division 

Air Force Human Resources Laboratory 

Brooks Air Force Base, Texas 78235-5601 

10. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY 
REPORT NUMBER 

AFHRL-TR-90-33(lll) 

11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAIUBILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 

13. ABSTRACT (Mawimum 200 words) 

^ This report describes several efforts that led to the development of the Instructional Support System (ISS) from 
prototype research and development (R&D) software toward a production computer-based training (CBT) system that 
supports both computer-assisted instruction (CAI) and computer-managed instruction (CMI). These efforts included 
the operational test and evaluation of the software, rehosting of the software to a validated Ada compiler, development 
of MicroCMI and interactive videodisc capabilities, development of critical user and system documentation, and design 
and development of a micro-based version of the software to run on IBM-compatible hardware. ISS is a 
Government-owned product written in Ada in a modular format, enabling it to run on machines ranging from micros 
to mainframes, and is available through the National Technical Information Service (NTIS). 

This is the third of three volumes on the Instructional Support System (ISS). This volume contains an overview for 
Instructional Personnel to determine if ISS is the correct medium for a specific training application. It provides 
information on the major training development and management features of ISS. This document is designed for 
personnel involved in instructional design activities who have a general knowledge of CBT. It emphasizes the various 
ISS elements used in training development, presentation, management, and evaluation. 

/ _ 

14. SUBJECT TERMS 

Ada computer-managed instruction 

Advanced Instructional System (AIS) instructional support system 

computer-assisted instruction transportable instructional system 

15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

20 

16. PRICE CODE 

17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF REPORT OF THIS PAGE OF ABSTRACT 

Unclassified Unclassified Unclassified 

20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 

UL 


NSN ^540 01-280-5500 


Siandafd Focm 298 {Rev 2 69\ 
Prescribed by ANSI Std 7.39 10 
290 102 























SUMMARY 


This overview provides information on the major training development and management 
features of the Instructional Support System (ISS). The overview is designed for the reader 
who has a general understanding of computer-based training (CBT) and who may be involved 
in instructional development activities. It emphasizes how the various elements of ISS are used 
in the training development, presentation, management and evaluation process. 

Chapter I describes ISS and provides a brief history. Chapter II covers the range of 
instructional techniques supported by ISS. Chapter III provides a detailed description of ISS 
in the instructional development process. Support features available with ISS are addressed in 
Chapter IV. A glossary of terms follows the overview. 


Aooeaslon For 


MIS GRA4I 
MIC TAB 
Unannounced 
Justification. 


T 

□ 


Distribution/ 


Avai lability Codes 
jAvaii'and/or 
Special 






This is the third of three volumes on the Instructional Support System (ISS). Volume I 
contains a detailed description of ISS development efforts. Volume II contains an overview of 
ISS for managers, and Volume III is an overview for instructional personnel. These overviews 
are designed to aid in determining ISS suitability for specific training applications. 






TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 


I. INTRODUCTION TO ISS . 1 

A Brief History. 1 

II. INSTRUCTIONALTECHNIQUES SUPPORTED BY ISS. 2 

Tutorials. 2 

Drill and Practice . 2 

Simulations. 2 

Instructional Gaming . 3 

Testing. 3 

III. ISS CAPABILITIES IN THE INSTRUCTIONAL DEVELOPMENT PROCESS. 3 

Establish User Access . 3 

Curriculum Development. 4 

Lesson Module Development . 4 


Establish Curriculum Structure . 

Establish Mastery Testing . 

Manage Resources . 

Manage Students . 

Present Course Material and Assess Student Performance 
Generate Reports . 

IV. ISS SUPPORT FEATURES . 

Reference Manuals . 

Training . 

GLOSSARY. 10 


APPENDIX A. ISS DEVELOPMENT FRAME TYPES 


13 


mcot^t^h-oo o> 0 ) 0 ) 






























INSTRUCTIONAL SUPPORT SYSTEM (ISS): AN OVERVIEW FOR 
INSTRUCTIONAL PERSONNEL 


1. INTRODUCTION TO ISS 

The Instructional Support System (ISS) is a computer-based training (CBT) system available 
to Government agencies. ISS combines both instructional and management capabilities into 
one system, facilitating the creation, delivery, management, and evaluation of instruction for 
students and instructors alike. ISS is Government-owned and is written in Ada, a standard 
Department of Defense (DoD) programming language. The use of Ada enables ISS to be 
transported to a variety of machines, ranging from mainframes to microcomputers. 

The modular construction of ISS makes it possible to load the entire system simultaneously 
or in portions, depending on the user’s need. In addition to easy user access, the modular 
components make software maintenance easy to perform. 

Creating courseware is also made easier with ISS. Because ISS uses interactive menus 
and prompts for creating courseware, instructional developers do not need to know a programming 
language. 

A similar set of menu-driven editors allow managers to increase the level of control and 
efficiency of their training programs. Management capabilities within ISS include creating tests, 
enrolling students, logging-on students, tracking resources, monitoring students, evaluating course 
material, and generating student performance data. 

Furthermore, ISS will accommodate a light pen, mouse, touch panel, and data (bit) pad 
input devices. ISS also can interface with videodisc players and optical mark readers. 


A Brief History 


In the early 1970s, the Air Force Human Resources Laboratory (AFHRL) initiated the Advanced 
Instructional System (AIS), a research and development program to explore CBT. Although a 
few commercial systems existed at that time, none of them met Air Force needs. The AIS 
was designed to train and manage a large number of students and used a mainframe computer; 
AIS implementation was dependent on the hardware and software available at the time. 

In the early 1980s, microprocessor technology emerged, along with alternative CBT 
configurations. Capitalizing on the new hardware and software developments, ISS became the 
successor to AIS. The Air Force accepted ISS as a prototype on the VAX 11/780 minicomputer 
in October 1985. In 1986, the Strategic Air Command at Dyess AFB, Texas, served as the 
operational test and evaluation site, using ISS to develop B-1B aircrew training. 

ISS was rehosted from an early Ada compiler to a validated Ada compiler in December 
1986, making it a more stable and maintainable product. Several management enhancements 
were added and the application software was documented to aid transitioning the software to 
a long-term support agency. On-line and off-line training courses were developed to assist 
users in developing and managing courseware. 

A micro computer-managed instruction (CMI) capability was developed in July 1987. This 
version is compact enough to run on microcomputers yet powerful enough to track student 
progress and preserve data required to evaluate instructional effectiveness. Videodisc and four 
additional optical mark reader forms were integrated into ISS in January 1988. 


1 





ISS has since been rehosted to a Micro Vax II and the CAI system and micro CMI system 
components have been rehosted to the Zenith 248. The videodisc capability was rehosted to 
the Zenith in early 1988. 


II. INSTRUCTIONAL TECHNIQUES SUPPORTED BY ISS 

ISS uses an authoring system instead of an authoring language; therefore, courseware 
authors and instructors require no programming background. The editors, menus, and prompts 
allow the author to implement a full range of instructional techniques including tutorials, drill 
and practice, simulations, gaming, and testing. Each of these instructional techniques is 
discussed below. 


Tutorials 


Tutorials present information in a linear fashion, with the student initiating the presentation 
of frames at a rate with which he or she is comfortable. Frames (screen displays) are like 
pages of a book. Tutorials are used when the instruction requires a strong knowledge component. 
Questions and graphics can be introduced within frames or at the end of an instructional 
segment. An over-reliance on tutorials to the neglect of other instructional strategies runs the 
risk of having the instruction dubbed "electronic page-turning. " ISS provides a wide variety of 
screen types through utilization of the computer-aided instruction (CAI) Authoring Support System 
(CASS) Editor. The CASS Editor, in conjunction with the Graphics Editor, is used for creating 
tutorials. 


Drill and Practice 


Drill and practice is a simple way of using a computer for instruction. A problem is 
presented, a student response is accepted, the response is judged, and feedback is provided. 
The student proceeds to another task or problem based on the correctness of the response. 

Normally, drill and practice presents no new instructional material, but provides practice on 
instruction that has already been presented. Typical examples include computational tasks and 
forms completion. Generally, drill and practice techniques are appropriate for any kind of 
learning that involves basic facts, terminology, or repetitive tasks. Drill and practice is supported 
by ISS through a variety of branching techniques and response-judging available within the 
CASS and Simulation Dialogue Editor (SID). 


Simulations 


Simulations model some process, mechanism, or activity. The model allows students to 
relate input conditions to output results. In training, simulations can replace expensive and 
impractical equipment use. Simulations prevent unnecessary wear on equipment and reduce 
the chances of accidents by individuals not familiar with the equipment. Simulations also are 
well suited to training involving problem-solving or decision-making skills. A good Air Force 
example is equipment maintenance procedures which require troubleshooting. The SID Editor 
has the capability to represent process flow, hydraulics, electronic operations, and gauge and 
meter readouts under either program control or student control. The ability of this editor to 
produce high-resolution graphics with real-time animation provides an excellent training tool for 
instructional presentations. 


2 



Instructional Gaming 


Instructional gaming is sometimes discussed interchangeably with simulation; however, games 
are not typically directed at specific applications such as troubleshooting a piece of equipment. 
Instructional games can be used to enhance the performance of a wide number of skills and 
abilities that are job-related. Whether competing against a preset standard, a computer program, 
or a iive opponent, the element of competition and the aspiration to exceed one's previous 
performance gives games their vast appeal. Instructional games are useful for increasing 
motivation, deveioping generai probiem-soiving strategies, and making the instructional process 
more engaging. Within iSS, instructional gaming is supported through the use of the CASS, 
Graphics, and SiD Editors and by the system’s rapid response-judging and branching capabilities. 


Testing 


Periodic testing assesses mastery of units of materiai and transforms passive students into 
active participants. ISS provides five types of interactive questions; toucii, matching, true or 
false, multiple-choice, and constructed response. The development, scoring, and analysis of 
tests can be very time-consuming, especialiy when alternate tests or test items are generated 
for the same instructional objective. iSS enables easier performance of this activity. The 
capacity to score test responses and statistically analyze the results is a valuabie time-solving 
feature available with iSS. Authors can write tests in either the CASS Editor or the Test Editor. 
The CASS Editor is used to create embedded tests; the Test Editor is used to develop mastery 
tests. Both editors provide the same types of questions and response-judging. 


III. ISS CAPABILITIES IN THE INSTRUCTIONAL DEVELOPMENT PROCESS 

This section describes how ISS is used to implement a curriculum design on a computer 
system Emphasis i" placed on the special ICC features which make it one of the more 
sophisticated CBT systems avaiiabie today The process is divided into nine major activities 
which are necessary to implement, deliver, monitor, and manage a CBT curriculum using ISS. 
ISS modules are involved in each of the activities. These activities and their modules are as 
follows: 


Establish User Access 


ISS provides the capability to control access to any of its software modules, options within 
modules, and courseware. Access is accomplished through user log-on IDs and passwords, 
and can be tailored to each individual user. A system administrator establishes access to ISS 
through the user editor (USERED) moduie. ISS specifies five categories of user access as 
foilows: 

1. DEMO - access typically limited to demonstration programs. 

2. Author - access provided to all courseware development modules. 

3. Programmer - access provided to all ISS source code, development and management 
modules. 

4. Administrator - access provided to all ISS management modules. 


3 





5. System Programmer - access provided to all ISS modules and source code 

Additional access and options are provided to each of the above categories by the system 
administrator. Once access to ISS is provided, the CBT author can begin curriculum development 


Curriculum Development 


Course development begins by carefully planning curriculum structure Before authoring 
begins on ISS, curriculum content must be reduced to the lesson level Lesson modules represent 
the basic unit of ISS instruction. Once the expected content of each lesson is determined, 
the medium of presentation is selected. ISS supports both on-line and off-line presentation of 
lesson material. Alternate forms of lesson material are called "modules." Lessons are combined 
to form either courses or course blocks. Finally, courses are grouped to form curricula or 
curricula blocks. 


Lesson Module Development 


Lesson module development in ISS begins with the creation of screen presentations called 
"frames. " In ISS. this is accomplished through the CASS Editor. After logging into ISS, the 
author selects the CASS Editor, then identifies the course, block, version and lesson module. 
The CASS Editor then takes the author through a series of prompts leading to the display of 
a Frame List. The Frame List enables a selection of various frame types used to develop 
courseware. Three categories of frame types are provided; text, question, and extended access 
frames. (See Appendix A for a description of the frame types.) A frame type is selected and 
a series of prompts and menus again guide the author. As each frame is completed, the frame 
list is displayed and the author repeats the process. The author can insert, change, copy, 
delete, skip, or reorder the completed frames. The author can view any sequence of frames 
as the student would see them. 

Five additional capabilities support lesson module development: videodisc, graphics, 
simulation, branching, and glossary. 

1. Videodisc. Videodisc displays can be authored in CASS using adjunct material frames. 
Individual video frames or sequences of frames can be combined with text or graphics to 
provide a powerful instructional medium. 

2. Graphics. Graphics may be incorporated into either text or question frames. Graphics 
are developed using a graphics editor (GrEdt). This editor develops high-resolution, color 
graphic presentations. Objects and text generated in GrEdt can be rotated, scaled, and colored. 
Extensive editing commands allow changes to be made to graphics during the development 
process. Graphic symbol libraries can also be developed using GrEdt, enabling commonly 
used graphics to be accessed repeatedly. 

3. Simulation. Simulations may also be incorporated into text or question frames. A 
simulation uses text, graphics, and animation to represent an operation or a process. A 
simulation is made of a series of author-defined events. An event consists of objects and 
actions. Objects are developed within SID, and controlled through the use of action frames. 
The action frames control the presentation, location, and sequencing of the objects. Three 
types of objects are available: text, graphic, and computation: 

« A text object consists of a block of text or symbols positioned at a specified location 
on the screen to support a graphic or ask the student a question. 


4 



• Graphic objects are drawings, charts, or illustrations created in the GrEdt and called 
from SID Once called, SID allows the graphic object to be moved, scaled or changed 
in color A graphic object cannot be structurally changed except in the GrEdt 

• Computational objects either display values or determine the presentation sequence 
of a simulation Computational objects receive their values through randomly generated 
numbers, arithmetic, algebraic expressions, or student interaction 

4 Branching. ISS provides extensive branching capabilities. Through branching, the 
student can be directed to a particular frame, frame group, a new module, a new lesson, or 
a new course Three types of branching logic are available: 

• Pre-frame logic, in which the branching logic is evaluated before the frame is presenied 
to the student: 

• After-frame logic, in which the branching logic is evaluated after the frame is presented 
to the student: and 

• Response logic, in which the branching logic is evaluated after the student responds 
to a question 

5 Glossary. As an aid to the author and to the student, a central glossary can be created 
The glossary provides definitions of terms for one or multiple courses Within the glossary, 
options are available to add, change, copy, delete, list, and display. 


Establish Curriculum Structure 


After the lesson material is developed, it must be organized into the curriculum structure, 
ISS curriculum material is organized according to the following instructional unit hierarchy: 

1. Curriculum. Curriculum is the highest level instructional unit that can be administered 
by the ISS Several related courses can be grouped to form a curriculum (e g., aircrew training). 
A curriculum is divided into courses or curriculum groups. 

2 Courses. Courses represent subject areas of study. Versions of courses denoting the 
same instructional material on different media may also exist within a curriculum or course 
grc'jp Courses can be divided into lessons or groups. 

3 Lesson Module. A lesson module is a unit of instructional material within a lesson 
typically identified with an instructional objective and ending with a comprehensive test. To aid 
the management of courseware development, lesson modules are further subdivided into segments, 
frames, and pages. 

4 Segment. A segment is a unit of instruction within a lesson module typically identified 
with an enabling objective. A lesson module may have up to 25 segments. 

5 Frame A frame is the smallest unit of instructional information used to explain a single 
concept or ask a question. ISS provides 17 frame types for use by courseware authors. See 
Appendix A for a description of each of these frame types. 

6 Page. A page is the smallest unit of instructional presentation which represents one 
screen of information Pages combine to form frames, with up to four pages per frame. 


5 




The ISS management structure requires that a curriculum, including its courses and lesson 
modules, be precisely defined. ISS provides three editors for courseware authors to use in 
defining and structuring course material. The editors are the Lesson Definition Editor (LDE), 
the Course Structure Editor (CSE), and the Curriculum Definition Editor (CDE). Their functions 
are as follows 

Lesson Definition Editor (LDE). The LDE defines lesson modules that specify the characteristics 
of a lesson and include the number of supporting modules, identification of mastery tests, and 
rules for module selection when alternate module tracks are provided. The module definition 
component specifies the characteristics of each alternate lesson module and includes the 
instructional resources required, whether the module is on-line (CAl) or off-line (alternate media), 
and whether a remediation module is provided. ISS requires that lessons be defined in CSE 
prior to being specified in LDE. Both the Test Editor and the CSE may be accessed from 
LDE. 

Course Structure Editor (CSE) CSE completely defines and describes an instructional 
course The course definition includes: 

• Course documentation (i.e., course title, course identification (ID), date last revised, 
date last implemented, author, maximum and average number of students registered, 
and actual number of students registered) and the course hierarchy, which divides 
the course into course versions, blocks, groups, and lessons. 

• Course resource management includes management of resources, learning centers or 
classroom hours (shifts). Resources are categorized into portable, facility, consumable, 
and instructor-managed. 

• Course scheduling includes scheduling of students through course lessons and 
scheduling of resources to support the student lead. 

• Course validation/implementation ensures that course structure is correct and complete 
before students are enrolled. The validation process checks the course and displays 
error messages if inconsistencies exist or course structure is incomplete. Validation 
includes checking for incomplete or conflicting data associated with course branching, 
tests, on-line versus off-line presentation, and resource allocations. If the course 
exhibits no proolems during the validation process, the course can be implemented. 

Curriculum Definition Editor (CDE). The CDE defines a curriculum or curriculum group, 
including the curriculum or curriculum group title; an ID number; the date implemented; the 
date last revised; the list of courses included in the curriculum or curriculum group, and the 
hierarchical relationships among courses and curriculum groups. The curriculum or curriculum 
group must be validated/implemented before a student may be enrolled in the curriculum. 
Validation of a curriculum is accomplished at the curriculum level in the same manner as a 
course. The system ensures that branching between courses is correct and that references to 
each course or curriculum are correct and consistent. If the curriculum exhibits no problems 
during the validation process, the curriculum can be implemented. 


Establish Mastery Testin g 

Mastery tests can be developed for lessons, lesson groups, courses, and course groups. 
The Test Editor is used to create, define, and edit all mastery tests. The editor is primarily 
designed for the development of criterion-referenced tests, but may also be used to develop 


6 








norm-referenced tests. Tests may be developed for both on-line and off-line presentation. Tests 
may include additional versions or alternate tests. 


Manage Resources 


ISS provides the capability to manage student, facility, and instructor-managed resources. 
This is accomplished through two editors: the Resource Availability Editor and the 
Instructor-Managed Resources Editor. 

Resource Availability Editor. The Resource Availability Editor divides resources into three 
categories: portable, facility, and consumable resources. The user can view the types of 
resources in each category, the level at which they are managed, the number in inventory, the 
number currently available, and a description of each type. The user can also increment, 
decrement, or change the number available of any of the resource types. 

Instructor-Managed Resources Editor. The Instructor-Managed Resources Editor is designed 
to manage resources that have been defined in the CSE as controlled by the instructor. This 
editor allows the instructor to reserve resources for assignment to specific students on specific 
dates and times, and to update resource reservations on a daily or weekly basis. 


Manage Students 


With the course material now completed and the student and course resources established, 
the student can be enrolled in the training system by using the following editors: 

Student Registration Editor. An instructor enrolls a student in the system through the 
Student Registration Editor. The instructor establishes the student sign-on and registers the 
student into a curriculum and courses within that curriculum. The editor allows the instructor 
to update student records, examine registration data, view lists of active and completed courses 
for individual students, and view lists of all courses in specified curricula. 

Student Log-on Editor. Once students are enrolled, they can begin course study by entering 
their identification in the Student Log-on Editor, which accesses the lessons for the specified 
curriculum and allows the student to choose an assignment from a number of alternatives. 
When students have established a record within the system, they can choose alternative 
assignments, continue a previous assignment, view their completion status of lessons within the 
course or course block, or view a detailed performance record for each completed lesson within 
a selected block. 


Present Course Material and Assess Student Performance 


Once the student has selected course material to learn, the ISS employs three programs 
to control the presentation of course material on the screen: the CAI Presentation Program, 
the Simulation Presentation Program, and the Test Presentation Program. The CAI Presentation 
Program is called when the student selects the lesson assignment. The Simulation Presentation 
Program is called from the courseware when a simulation is to be introduced. The Test 
Presentation Program is called when the student takes a mastery test for the current assignment. 

Student progress may be monitored at any time. The Student Monitor allows instructors 
to observe student progress as they take on-line lessons and tests. After the instructor selects 
the student to be monitored, whatever appears on the student's terminal also appears on the 


7 





instructor’s terminal. To access student records, instructors use the ISS Administration 
Management Editor. This editor provides current and past performance on assignments, course 
progress, and graduation dates of students. Actions which can be performed within this editor 
include marking students absent, changing student assignments, moving students ahead to new 
lessons, withdrawing students from a curriculum, passing students, and updating student data. 


Generate Reports 


ISS provides an extensive report capability. Reports are generated to assess student 
performance across selected student groups and across selected curriculum materials The 
report generators are as follows; 

CAI Report Program. This program collects and presents data on the following criteria, 
decision paths, response analysis, and student comments. 

• Decision path tracking presents a summary of overall student performance by segment 
or partial segment. The data reported include the number of students in the sample, 
mean elapsed time in a segment or frame group, mean number of questions answered 
correctly in a segment or frame group, and percentage of questions answered correctly 
in a segment or frame group. 

• Response analysis tracking provides detailed student performance data for each text 
and question frame and includes the number of students in the sample, number of 
attempts allowed, correct responses, and mean elapsed time. 

• Student comments tracking collects comments entered by the student on specific 
frames and stores this information in a file accessible by the instructor. 

ISS also provides report programs which collect and print out student performance data 
across course material from the course to the lesson module level. These report programs 
include the Course Evaluation Summary, the Data Extraction Program, and the Test Item 
Evaluation. 

Course Evaluation Summary. The Course Evaluation Summary provides student performance 
statistics at the lesson, module, block, and course levels. Statistics can be selected from specific 
student groups, individual lessons or blocks, or any combination of these. Data provided by 
the report are selectable and include: number of students in the sample population, mean time 
and standard deviation spent in the block, block test score mean and standard deviation, total 
number of failures, percentage of cognitive failures, percentage of performance failures, cognitive 
score mean and standard deviation, mean time and standard deviation to complete lesson, and 
total mean time and standard deviation to mastery for all attempts. 

Data Extraction Program. The Data Extraction Program selects cases for analysis, including 
the variables to be analyzed. Over 100 variables across four categories are available for 
analysis. The four categories are across-blocks data, block-specified data, pre-assessment and 
biographical data, and across-lessons data. 

Test Item Evaluation. The Test Item Evaluation provides comprehensive test item analysis 
for both on-line and off-line tests. Results of the analysis include number of samples, total 
number of failures and failures by selective criteria, passing criteria, number of failures within 
the sample population, score mean and standard deviation, critical objective indication, number 
of questions, and number of correct answers needed to pass. Test item statistics include 


8 






question objective, mean score and standard deviation, number of students who failed, and 
critical objective indication. 


IV. ISS SUPPORT FEATURES 

Newcomers to ISS do not have to fend for themselves when they have questions and need 
to learn more about the system. User and system documentation and on-line and off-line 
training materials are available to assist the user in becoming proficient with ISS in the shortest 
possible time. 


Reference Manuals 


Reference manuals are available for each ISS editor module. Each manual contains a brief 
overview of the capabilities and functions. ISS terminal hardware specifications include charts 
to help users determine available hardware features based on their own unique needs. A 
function chart provides specifications on each terminal's capabilities, and a keystroke detail 
chart specifies the keys or control commands used on each terminal. The manuals define ISS 
terms and specific modules; detailed procedures for using each module also are given. In 
addition, error messages are provided, with a brief explanation of their meanings and a list of 
corrective actions. The last chapter of the manuals provides solutions to problems not addressed 
by error messages. 

For individuals who are interested, system documentation for the software is also available, 
including a product specification, functional description, interface document, within-code application 
software documentation, and data structure and data base documentation for the entire system. 

A report which describes the development of ISS. entitled Instructional Support Software 
System (AFHRL-TR-85-53), can also be obtained.’ 


Training 


Stand-alone training materials on the ISS CAI component are available to the first-time user 
and consist of both on-line and off-line instruction. The materials include descriptions of CAI 
editor functions and capabilities, as well as practice exercises for each editor. Training materials 
for the CMI components are also available. 


’AFHRL-TR-85-53, AD-A166 776, is available to Govenment offices and registered contractors from the Defense Technical 
Information Center (DTIC), Cameron Station, Alexandria, Virginia 22314; or for sale to the general public from the National 
Technical Information Service, U S. Department of Commerce, Springfield, Virginia 22166. 


9 





GLOSSARY 


The following terms are used in this overview and in other ISS documentation. 




Term 

Definition 


Ada The standard Department of Defense programming language 

developed to standardize DOD software development. 

Block A unit of instruction within a course, comprised of lessons 

and modules, covering a specific subject. 

Branch An instructional feature that transfers students from one 

lesson path to another. 

Computer-Assisted Instruction Interactive instruction presented to the student on a computer. 

(CAI) (See courseware.) 


Computer-Based Training (CBT) Instruction that is developed, delivered, and managed on 

computers. 


Consumable Resources 
Courseware 

Curriculum 

Database 

Display 

Error Messages 

Facility Resources 

Frame 

Lesson 
Mastery Test 


Expendable resources used by students (e g., paper). 

Interactive instruction presented to the student on a computer. 
(See computer-assisted instruction.) 

Largest organizational unit within the ISS program of study. 
Made up of courses, course versions, course blocks, and 
lessons. 

Collection of data in a form capable of being processed by 
a computer. 

The visual contents on the video screen (i.e., text, graphics, 
order sequences, etc.). 

Instructions that appear on the screen telling users they 
have made a mistake. Instructions on how to correct the 
error are provided. 

Refers to an immobile instructional environment, including 
learning centers, classrooms, and simulators. 

A screen display which presents information or asks 
questions. Each frame normally contains only one chunk 
of information. 

Basic unit of instruction in the ISS system. 

Tests designed in the ISS Test Editor to evaluate a student’s 
mastery of course material. 


10 







GLOSSARY (Concluded) 




Term 

Definition 


Menu 

Off-line Instruction 

On-line Instruction 
Portable Resources 

Prompt 

Response Time 


A list of options presented on a screen display that provide 
users a choice of retrieving information or performing different 
functions. 

Instructional material delivered independent of a computer 
system (e.g.. paper-based materials). 

Instructional material delivered on a computer system. 

Training materials that a student can carry from one location 
to another (e.g.. books, handouts, video or audio cassettes). 

A brief display message which tells the user what to do. 

The time it takes for the microprocessor to respond to an 
input device. From a user standpoint, the time between 
inputting a command to the computer and initial screen 
display. 


11 







APPENDIX A. ISS DEVELOPMENT FRAME TYPES 


INTRODUCTION TO ISS FRAME TYPES 

The ISS system provides menu-driven development of various screen presentation types 
called frames. Three basic types of frames are provided: text frames, extended access frames, 
and question frames. The following list describes these frame types and their basic functions. 


TEXT FRAMES 


Documentation Frame 


Elaboration Frame 


Help Frame 


Information Frame 


Frames used to present text and graphic information to the 
student. 

Documents lesson development status. The frame usually 
contains information such as the author’s name, date lesson 
created, lesson title, lesson objectives, and contents of each 
segment of the lesson. 

Provides added instruction to a student who needs further 
assistance. The author determines when the student sees 
this frame. 

Provides added instruction to a student who needs help. 
Developed by the author, this frame may be called up by 
the student when help is needed. Each of these frames, 
when developed, is tied to a specific block of instruction. 

Provides instruction in the form of text and graphics. 


Learning Resources Frame Lists all resources which a student needs to complete a 

module. 


Overview Frame Presents introductory material for a lesson. 

Statement of Objectives Frame Describes the information a student should know after 

ccmpleting a module. 

Title Frame Provides the title of the lesson or a subset of lesson material. 


EXTENDED ACCESS FRAMES Frames used to signal the system to display instructional 

segments that cannot be accessed in CAI Presentation 
Frames. They can also reserve the location in the 
presentation program to which it will return. 

Adjunct Material Frame Enables input of interactive video commands. These 

commands inciude displaying a frame or sequence of frames, 
erasing the video image(s), overlaying text and/or graphics 
onto video frames, etc. 


13 







Branch Frame 

Menu Frame 

Program Frame 

QUESTION FRAMES 

Constructed Response 
Matching 

Multiple-Choice 

Touch 

True/False 


Serves as a collection point for different branches through 
the instructional material. Because a branch frame contains 
only branching logic and no text or graphics, it is never 
seen by students. Used to direct a student to a specific 
instructional group based on an author-defined condition. 

Provides student-controiied branching through the use of 
menu options. 

Accesses computer programs external to the ISS. 


Frames used for tests and quizzes. The five types of 
question frames are: constructed response, matching, 
multiple-choice, touch, and true/false. 

Asks the student to supply a short answer. 

Requires a student to match the items in one column with 
those in a second column. 

Consists of a question stem and a series of up to five 
possible answers from which the student selects an answer. 

Consists of a question stem and defined touch areas on a 
screen. Students answer the question by touching a iocation 
on the screen using either their finger or a light pen, or 
by positioning crosshairs. 

A question or a statement that the student must decide if 
true or false. 


* V. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1990--761-051/20116 


14 




