Inquiries concerning rights for the commer- 
cial use of this invention should be addressed 
to NASA Glenn Research Center; Commercial 
Technology Office, Attn: Steve Fedor; Mail 
Stop 4-8, 21000 Brookpark Road, Cleve- 
land, Ohio 44135. Refer to LEW-17465-1. 


Self-Organizing-Map Pro- 
gram for Analyzing Multi- 
variate Data 

SOM_VTS is a computer program for 
analysis and display of multidimensional 
sets of Earth-image data typified by the 
data acquired by the Multi-angle Imaging 
Spectro-Radiometer [MISR ( a space- 
borne instrument) ] . In SOM_VIS, an en- 
hanced self-organizing-map (SOM) algo- 
rithm is first used to project a 
multidimensional set of data into a 
nonuniform three-dimensional lattice 
structure. The lattice structure is mapped 
to a color space to obtain a color map for 
an image. The Voronoi cell-refinement 
algorithm is used to map the SOM lattice 
structure to various levels of color resolu- 
tion. The final result is a false-color image 
in which similar colors represent similar 
characteristics across all its data dimen- 
sions. SOM_VTS provides a control panel 
for selection of a subset of suitably pre- 
processed MISR radiance data, and a con- 
trol panel for choosing parameters to run 
SOM training. SOM_VIS also includes a 
component for displaying the false-color 
SOM image, a color map for the trained 
SOM lattice, a plot showing an original 
input vector in 36 dimensions of a se- 
lected pixel from the SOM image, the 
SOM vector that represents the input vec- 
tor, and the Euclidean distance between 
the two vectors. 

This program was written by P. Peggy Li, 
Joseph C. Jacob, Gary L. Bloch, and Amy J. 
Braverman of Caltech for NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. Further informa- 
tion is contained in a TSP ( see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(818) 393-2827. Refer to NPO-40666. ' 


& Tool for Sizing Analysis of 
the Advanced Life Support 
System 

Advanced Life Support Sizing Analysis 
Tool (ALSSAT) is a computer model for 
sizing and analyzing designs of environ- 
mental-control and life support systems 
(ECLSS) for spacecraft and surface habi- 
tats involved in the exploration of Mars 
and Moon. It performs conceptual de- 
signs of advanced life support (ALS) sub- 


systems that utilize physicochemical and 
biological processes to recycle air and 
water, and process wastes in order to re- 
duce the need of resource resupply. By 
assuming steady-state operations, 
ALSSAT is a means of investigating com- 
binations of such subsystems’ technolo- 
gies and thereby assisting in determining 
the most cost-effective technology combi- 
nation available. In fact, ALSSAT can 
perform sizing analysis of the ALS subsys- 
tems that are operated dynamically or 
steady in nature. Using the Microsoft 
Excel® spreadsheet software with Visual 
Basic programming language, ALSSAT 
has been developed to perform multiple- 
case trade studies based on the calcu- 
lated ECLSS mass, volume, power, and 
Equivalent System Mass, as well as para- 
metric studies by varying the input pa- 
rameters. ALSSAT’s modular format is 
specifically designed for the ease of fu- 
ture maintenance and upgrades. 

This program was developed by Hue-Hsia 
(Jannivine) Yeh, Cheryl B. Brown, and 
Frank J. Jeng of Lockheed Martin Corp. for 
Johnson Space Center. For further infor- 
mation, contact the Johnson Technology 
Transfer Office at (281 ) 483-3809. 
MSC-23506 


& Control Software for a 
High-Performance 
Telerobot 

A computer program for controlling a 
high-performance, force-reflecting telero- 
bot has been developed. The goal in de- 
signing a telerobot-control system is to 
make the velocity of the slave match the 
master velocity, and the environmental 
force on die master match tire force on the 
slave. Instability can arise from even small 
delays in propagation of signals between 
master and slave units. The present soft- 
ware, based on an impedance-shaping algo- 
rithm, ensures stability even in the presence 
of long delays. It implements a real-time al- 
gorithm that processes position and force 
measurements from the master and slave 
and represents the master/ slave communi- 
cation link as a transmission line. The algo- 
rithm also uses the history of the control 
force and die slave motion to estimate die 
impedance of the environment. The esti- 
mate of the impedance of the environment 
is used to shape the controlled slave imped- 
ance to match the transmission-line imped- 
ance. The estimate of the environmental 
impedance is used to match the master and 
transmission-line impedances and to esti- 
mate the slave/environment force in order 
to present diat force immediately to the op- 
erator via die master unit. 


This Robert J. Kline-Schoder and William 
Finger of Creare, Inc., for Johnson Space 
Center. For further information, contact the 
Johnson Technology Transfer Office at (281) 
483-3809. 

MSC-23412 


Java Radar Analysis Tool 

Java Radar Analysis Tool (JRAT) is a 
computer program for analyzing two-di- 
mensional (2D) scatter plots derived 
front radar returns showing pieces of the 
disintegrating Space Shuttle Columbia. 
JRAT can also be applied to similar plots 
representing radar returns showing avia- 
tion accidents, and to scatter plots in 
general. The 2D scatter plots include 
overhead map views and side altitude 
views. The superposition of points in 
these views makes searching difficult. 
JRAT enables three-dimensional (3D) 
viewing: by use of a mouse and key- 
board, the user can rotate to any desired 
viewing angle. The 3D view can include 
overlaid trajectories and search foot- 
prints to enhance situational awareness 
in searching for pieces. JRAT also en- 
ables playback: time-tagged radar-return 
data can be displayed in time order and 
an animated 3D model can be moved 
through the scene to show the locations 
of the Columbia (or other vehicle) at the 
times of the corresponding radar events. 
The combination of overlays and play- 
back enables the user to correlate a 
radar return with a position of the vehi- 
cle to determine whether the return is 
valid. JRAT can optionally filter single 
radar returns, enabling the user to selec- 
tively hide or highlight a desired radar 
return. 

This program was written ley Mariusz P. Za- 
czek o/Johnson Space Center. For further in- 
formation, contact the Johnson Technology 
Transjer Office at (281 ) 483-3809. 
MSC-23742 


Architecture for Verifiable 
Software 

Verifiable MDS Architecture (VMA) is 
a software architecture that facilitates 
the construction of highly verifiable 
flight software for NASA’s Mission Data 
System (MDS), especially for smaller 
missions subject to cost constraints. 
More specifically, the purpose served by 
VMA is to facilitate aggressive verifica- 
tion and validation of flight software 
while imposing a minimum of con- 
straints on overall functionality. VMA ex- 
ploits the state-based architecture of the 
MDS and partitions verification issues 


NASA Tech Briefs, December 2005 


15 


