m Software 


Predicting Accumulations 
of Ice on Aerodynamic 
Surfaces 

LEWICE is a computer program that 
predicts the accumulation of ice on 
two-dimensional aerodynamic surfaces 
under conditions representative of the 
flight of an aircraft through an icing 
cloud. The software first calculates the 
airflow surrounding the body of inter- 
est, then uses the airflow to compute 
the trajectories of water droplets that 
impinge on the surface of the body. 
The droplet trajectories are also used 
to compute impingement limits and 
local collection efficiencies, which are 
used in subsequent ice-growth calcula- 
tions and are also useful for designing 
systems to protect against icing. Next, 
the software predicts the shape of ac- 
cumulating ice by modeling transfers 
of mass and energy in small control vol- 
umes. The foregoing computations are 
repeated over several computational 
time steps until the total icing expo- 
sure time is reached. Results of compu- 
tations by LEWICE have been com- 
pared with an extensive database of 
measured ice shapes obtained from ex- 
periments, and have been shown to 
closely approximate those shapes under 
most conditions of interest to the avia- 
tion community. 

This program was written by Colin Bidwell, 
Mark Potapczuk , and Gene Addy of Glenn 
Research Center and William Wright of 
QSS Group, Inc. Further information is con- 
tained in a TSP (see page 1 ). 

Inquiries concerning rights for the commer- 
cial use of this invention should be addressed 
to NASA Glenn Research Center, Commercial 
Technology Office, Attn: Steve Fedor, Mail 
Stop 4-8, 21000 Brookpark Road, Cleveland 
Ohio 44135. Refer to LEW-1 7378. 


^ Analyzing Aeroelasticity in 
Turbomachines 

ASTROP2-LE is a computer program 
that predicts flutter and forced re- 
sponses of blades, vanes, and other 
components of such turbomachines as 
fans, compressors, and turbines. AS- 
TROP2-LE is based on the ASTROP2 
program, developed previously for 
analysis of stability of turbomachinery 
components. In developing ASTROP2- 
LE, ASTROP2 was modified to include 


a capability for modeling forced re- 
sponses. The program was also modi- 
fied to add a capability for analysis of 
aeroelasticity with mistuning and un- 
steady aerodynamic solutions from an- 
other program, LINFLX2D, that solves 
the linearized Euler equations of un- 
steady two-dimensional flow. Using 
LINFLX2D to calculate unsteady aero- 
dynamic loads, it is possible to analyze 
effects of transonic flow on flutter and 
forced response. ASTROP2-LE can be 
used to analyze subsonic, transonic, 
and supersonic aerodynamics and 
structural mistuning for rotors with 
blades of differing structural proper- 
ties. It calculates the aerodynamic 
damping of a blade system operating in 
airflow so that stability can be assessed. 
The code also predicts the magnitudes 
and frequencies of the unsteady aero- 
dynamic forces on the airfoils of a 
blade row from incoming wakes. This 
information can be used in high-cycle- 
fatigue analysis to predict the fatigue 
lives of the blades. 

This program was written by O. Mehmed of 
Glenn Research Center and T. S. R Reddy 
and R Srivastava of the University of Toledo. Fur- 
ther information is contained in a TSP (see page 1 ). 

Inquiries concerning rights for the commer- 
cial use of this invention should be addressed 
to NASA Glenn Research Center, Commercial 
Technology Office, Attn: Steve Fedor, Mail Stop 
4-8, 21000 Brookpark Road, Cleveland Ohio 
44135. Refer to LEW-1 7477. 


Software for Allocating 
Resources in the Deep 
Space Network 

TIGRAS 2.0 is a computer program 
designed to satisfy a need for improved 
means for analyzing the tracking de- 
mands of interplanetary space-flight 
missions upon the set of ground an- 
tenna resources of the Deep Space Net- 
work (DSN) and for allocating those 
resources. Written in Microsoft Visual 
C++, TIGRAS 2.0 provides a single rich 
graphical analysis environment for use 
by diverse DSN personnel, by connect- 
ing to various data sources (relational 
databases or files) based on the stages 
of the analyses being performed. No- 
table among the algorithms imple- 
mented by TIGRAS 2.0 are a DSN an- 
tenna-load-forecasting algorithm and a 
conflict-aware DSN schedule-generat- 


ing algorithm. Computers running 
TIGRAS 2.0 can also be connected 
using SOAP/XML to a Web services 
server that provides analysis services via 
the World Wide Web. TIGRAS 2.0 sup- 
ports multiple windows and multiple 
panes in each window for users to view 
and use information, all in the same 
environment, to eliminate repeated 
switching among various application 
programs and Web pages. TIGRAS 2.0 
enables the use of multiple windows for 
various requirements, trajectory-based 
time intervals during which spacecraft 
are viewable, ground resources, fore- 
casts, and schedules. Each window in- 
cludes a time navigation pane, a selec- 
tion pane, a graphical display pane, a 
list pane, and a statistics pane. 

This program was written by Yeou-Fang 
Wang, Chester Borden, Silvino Zendejas, and 
John Baldwin of Caltech for NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. Further informa- 
tion is contained in a TSP (seepage 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Don Hart of the Cal- 
ifornia Institute of Technology at (818) 393- 
3425. Refer to NPO-30856. 


Expert Seeker 

Expert Seeker is a computer program 
of the knowledge-management-system 
(KMS) type that falls within the category 
of expertise-locator systems. The main 
goal of the KMS system implemented by 
Expert Seeker is to organize and distrib- 
ute knowledge of who are the domain 
experts within and without a given insti- 
tution, company, or other organization. 
The intent in developing this KMS was 
to enable the re-use of organizational 
knowledge and provide a methodology 
for querying existing information (in- 
cluding structured, semistructured, and 
unstructured information) in a way that 
could help identify organizational ex- 
perts. More specifically, Expert Seeker 
was developed to make it possible, by 
use of an intranet, to do any or all of the 
following: 

• Assist an employee in identifying who 
has the skills needed for specific pro- 
jects and to determine whether the ex- 
perts so identified are available. 

• Assist managers in identifying em- 
ployees who may need training op- 
portunities. 

• Assist managers in determining what 


NASA Tech Briefs, December 2003 


13 


