Digital applications development 
training achieves big successes 


By Donell Walker 

One of the greatest successes 
from the Connecting Soldiers to 
Digital Applications initiative 
since 2010 has been the course 
designed to teach military mem¬ 
bers and government civilians 
how to write native applications 
for smartphones. 

The program at the Signal 
Center of Excellence started 
with two assumptions. The first 
assumption was based the fact 
that Apple's App Store on iTunes 
had been active for just over one 
year and there were over 100,000 
iPhone apps. Additionally, the 
Android marketplace's first few 
months also saw the rapid de¬ 
velopment and deployment of 
20,000 apps. 

The staggering rise of these 


two distribution channels sug¬ 
gested that developing apps 
was not too difficult. The second 
assumption was that the military 
has members in its ranks that 
have the ability to develop apps. 
This assumption was tested and 
proven true during the Apps for 
the Army Challenge, in which 53 
apps were developed over a 75- 
day period. 

As it turns out, developing ap¬ 
plications is not as easy as first 
presumed - or at least it was 
not a task that could be picked 
up by that vast majority of our 
workforce with the same ease as, 
say, HTML. The complexity of 
quality native applications comes 
with a cost, which varies greatly 
throughout the industry and 
could range anywhere from $5K - 
$250K depending on the content. 


graphics, and cost of mainte¬ 
nance. From that came the ques¬ 
tion of whether or not the Army 
could create in-house capabilities 
for mobile app development? 

It was asked if the Army has 
Soldiers and civilians within 
the workforce who, with some 
development training, could be¬ 
come capable of developing and 
deploying mobile apps within 
training or operational contexts? 
From this question, the SIGCoE 
was tasked with examining the 
possibilities for providing in¬ 
struction for mobile apps. 

The first question was to 
determine the appropriate popu¬ 
lation for mobile app instruction. 
Many years ago, the Army had 
Soldiers who wrote applications, 
but that task faded during the 
past 30 years. Within the profes¬ 
sional military education system 
employed at the SIGCoE, the 
only course that engaged in any 
sort of programming was the 
Information Systems Manager's 
class that served as the function¬ 
al area 53 qualification course. 

At the time, the course had a 
five day section on programming 
in ASP.NET that was designed 
to satisfied the Critical Task and 
Site Selection Board task # 113- 
493-4000 to "Develop an Applica¬ 
tion". For that that task, the con¬ 
dition was: Given an operational 
requirement that cannot be met 
with a currently available COTS/ 
GOTS solution, programming 
software, network, unit SOP, AR 
25-1, AR 25-2, AR 380-5, AR 700- 
138, DA PAM 25-1-1, FM 3-0, and 
FM 5-0. The standard was: Create 
an application that satisfies the 
operational requirement IAW ap¬ 
plicable regulations, policies, and 
procedures. 

Furthermore, the following 



( Photo by Bonnie Heater) 


The AN/TSC-185 STT appears on a Signal Soldier’s Motorola Zoom Android 
Tablet after the QR Code for the equipment was scanned. This gives the Soldier 
access to the equipment user guides, training modules, maintenance manual, how¬ 
to-videos, technical manuals anywhere he or she may be. 


24 Summer - 2012 








Report Documentation Page 

Form Approved 

OMB No. 0704-0188 

Public reporting burden for the collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and 
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, 
including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington 

VA 22202-4302. Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it 
does not display a currently valid OMB control number. 

1. REPORT DATE 

2Qi2 2 • REPORT TYPE 

3. DATES COVERED 

00-00-2012 to 00-00-2012 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Digital applications development training achieves big successes 

5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 

5b. GRANT NUMBER 

5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 

6. AUTHOR(S) 

5d. PROJECT NUMBER 

5e. TASK NUMBER 

5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

U.S. Army Signal Center of Excellence and Fort Gordon,Army 
Communicator,Signal Towers (Building 29808), Room 713,Fort 

Gordon,GA,30905-5301 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 

REPORT NUMBER 

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 

11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 

12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited 

13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

14. ABSTRACT 

15. SUBJECT TERMS 

16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 17. LIMITATION OF 

___ ABSTRACT 

18. NUMBER 19a. NAME OF 

OF PAGES RESPONSIBLE PERSON 

a. REPORT b. ABSTRACT c. THIS PAGE Same 3S 

unclassified unclassified unclassified Report (SAR) 

4 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std Z39-18 





subtasks were identified: 1. Develop the require¬ 
ments for the application; 2. Select appropriate 
application tool(s) to develop the application; 3. 
Create application; 4. Conduct security and accep¬ 
tance testing; 5. Deploy the application; 6. Docu¬ 
ment application; and 7. Maintain the Application. 

When this task was approved by the CTSSB, 
it was obviously not specific to mobile applica¬ 
tions, but the subtasks are clearly all components 
required in teaching mobile application develop¬ 
ment. Therefore, for the purposes of a pilot, it was 
determined that ISM students were the most likely 
student group to benefit from mobile application 
development. 

LTC Gregory Motes was the chief of the Infor¬ 
mation Dissemination Management Division in the 
School of Information Technology and was asked 
to examine the difficulty of mobile app develop¬ 
ment and to formulate curriculum for a 5 day class. 

After some initial examination into the skills 
required to write mobile apps, LTC Motes enlisted 
the assistance of CPT Chris Braunstein and CPT 
Stacey Osborn, who were "Snowbirds" (a collo¬ 
quial term for students between courses) and had 
backgrounds in computer science. 

The result was the development of curriculum 
for a five day courses for Android and iPhone that 
were presented to separate ISM courses in Decem¬ 
ber 2010 and January 2011. Prior to these pilot 
courses, it was speculated that students attending 
the course would not represent a homogeneous 
population and would have a mix of students 
qualified to attend the class with those who did 
not have a background suitable for object oriented 
application programming. In fact, of the 23 stu¬ 
dents that took the initial iOS class, five students 
adequately absorbed the instruction and were able 
to grasp the difficult concepts at the end of the 
week. Another seven students could follow the 
instruction and were able to complete the exercises 
without too much difficulty. For the remaining 
students, the pace of instruction was extremely 
overwhelming. The Android class that followed 
had similar ratios among the 18 students. 

The issue centered on the programming 
course's prerequisites. The civilian courses that 
the ISM training was modeled on usually required 
programming experience in an object oriented 
programming language such as Java (Android) and 
Objective-C (iPhone/iPad). Even the "iPhone for 
Dummies" book series required the reader to have 
a background in C or Objective C - which is hardly 
a "Dummy". As CSDA began to mature, organiza¬ 
tions from inside and outside of TRADOC strug¬ 
gled to master mobile application development 
and numerous requests were made to the Mobile 
Apps Branch to hold a course. Civilian equivalent 


classes costs around $2,500 for 5 days of instruction 
(and more with travel and per diem), which was a 
cost barrier for a number of organizations. 

This led the SIGCoE to create a ten day course 
that included one week in object oriented program¬ 
ming fundamentals, with a focus on Java for the 
Android courses and Objective C for the iOS cours¬ 
es, followed by a second week that we designed to 
teach specific programming tasks for the designat¬ 
ed operating system. After sending out an email to 
the CSDA working group and other organizations 
that had been encountered during the first year of 
the CSDA program, 38 students were enrolled for 
the initial Android class. As a point of reference, 
a similar 10 day class in the civilian sector would 
have cost over $5,000 per student, for a total cost of 
$190,000. 

The School of Information Technology was 
well equipped with computers and a student train¬ 
ing network, allowing the students to each have ac¬ 
cess to the Integrated Development Environments 
and Software Development Kits used to program 
Android phones. Additionally, using a combina¬ 
tion of VMware Lab Manager and virtual Windows 
7 operating systems, students were able to access 
and store their work on a storage area network. 

One principal change from this class and the 
ISM classes was that students were required to 
submit a short bio outlining any programming 
education or training that they may have had, 
which allowed the class administrators to deter¬ 
mine the probability of each students success in 
the class. Students were also told that the course 
would be very challenging and requested only seri¬ 
ous inquiries. Subsequently, several students who 
did not have a background commensurate with the 
requirements were not allowed enrollment. 

At the completion of the first open class, three 
students actually published apps to the Android 
market, which demonstrated an immediate value 
to the course. This also led to an interesting talk¬ 
ing point position where, on one hand, we were 
saying that writing apps is difficult and requires 
advanced training, but on the other hand we could 
point to the Army Values iPad app that took CPT 
Braunstein only four days to complete from in¬ 
ception to submission to the app store. It really 
validated the point that app development was not 
difficult for developers who had proper training. 

In CPT Braunstein's case, it was a computer science 
degree from the prestigious Rochester Institute of 
Technology. 

On the other end of the spectrum was a hand¬ 
ful of training developers and instructors who 
each presented information suggesting they had a 
background in programming. Their attendance at 

(Continued on page 26) 


Army Communicator 


25 


(Continued from page 25) 

an iPhone programming class left them realizing 
that previous experience in scripting, modular, 
functional and procedural programming languages 
was inadequate to quickly grasp object oriented 
programming. 

Further refinement of curriculum and instruc¬ 
tion were contracted through Technology Center 
Incorporation in Norcross, Georgia, which provid¬ 
ed appropriate training materials for 10 day classes 
for iPhone and Android. Ultimately, the classes 
were set to consist of the following topics: Intro¬ 
duction to Programming using Java or Objective C, 
Getting Started with Android or iOS Programming, 
Displaying Maps, Activities and Intents for An¬ 
droid, Table Views, Application Storages, Anima¬ 
tion and Video Playback, Network Access and a 
final project. 

Over the course of the program, the SIGCoE 
held 8 courses, with an average of 25 students per 


class - essentially providing the equivalent of over 
$1,000,000 in training for a fraction of the cost. The 
last classes taught in June 2012 filled up 10 weeks 
prior to the start date and had a waiting list of stu¬ 
dents who were not allowed to attend due to the 
classes being fully booked. Students have attended 
from every corner of TRADOC, including active 
duty noncommissioned officers, warrant officers 
and officers, reservists, and DA civilians from 
each branch of the service. Furthermore, attendees 
have come from the White House Communications 
Agency, the Defense Information System Agency, 
and the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The vast 
majority of the students have been training de¬ 
velopers who will take their training back to their 
organizations have begun to integrate mobile apps 
into their work where applicable. 

As a side note, training was not limited to on 
site instruction, group instruction, or even native 
application development instruction. At various 
times, members from the SIGCoE traveled to an 
off-site location to conduct training, notably train- 



(U.S. Army photo by SGT Michael J. MacLeod) 


A paratrooper with the 82nd Airborne Division’s 1st Brigade Combat Team uses a Handheld Interagency Identity Detection 
Equipment, or HIIDE, system to verify the identify of the Taliban leader they captured 26 Jan 2012, on the simulated 
battlefield of the Joint Readiness Training Center, Fort Polk, La. The system identifies people in a database that catalogs iris 
and fingerprint data. 


26 Summer-2012 








ing 35 people at separate sessions 
during the 10th Annual Army 
distributed Learning Confer¬ 
ence in 2011 where LTC Motes, 
CPT Braunstein and Donell 
Walker received the dL Maver¬ 
ick Award as "Out-of-the-box" 
thinkers. Additionally, training 
was conducted for 10 people in 
2012 to achieved certification as 
Appcelerator Titanium develop¬ 
ers, and additional training was 
gained in Blackberry OS, JQuery 
and PhoneGap to further round 
out the profile of technologies 
used for mobile apps. On other 
occasions, the SIGCoE mentored 
student projects at Augusta 
State University and the Army's 
Telecommunications Systems 
Engineering course, and even 
presented a lecture for students 
at Syracuse University's iSchool. 
The culture of learning and 
teaching has been a grand part of 
the success of the CSDA pro¬ 
gram. 

One other topic that has 
garnered the attention of the 
SIGCoE was the release of iBooks 
Author software to develop 
eTextbooks for the iPad. Within 
days of the release of the free 
software, the SIGCoE had written 
a book to be used for demonstra¬ 
tion at a CSDA working group 
and for publication onto Apple's 
iBooks. In April 2012, the SIG¬ 


CoE hosted a workshop to teach 
training developers how to easily 
put content from their classes 
into an iBook, including text, 
pictures, image galleries, videos, 
audio, interactive images and 
additional widgets. Two very 
promising implementations are 
the inclusion of review questions 
that can be integrated within a 
books chapter and the ease at 
which instruction developers can 
incorporate a robust glossary for 
their students. Although the soft¬ 
ware is specific for iPads, there is 
an expectation that ePub formats 
for other mobile devices will 
catch up to allow other devices 
to display similar information. 

Looking down the road 
toward adoption, acceptance 
and compliance of the Army's 
Learning Model 2015 and Army 
Training Model in TRADOC 
Pams 525-8-2 and 525-8-3, "re¬ 
quires a major change in the way 
the Army's trainers and training 
developers think about enabling 
training," specifying that the 
Army needs "tools that are low 
overhead, are mobile and capable 
of being interoperable and inte¬ 
grated, are reconfigurable, and 
which can be networked together 
quickly and seamlessly with 
joint and Army MCS." Current 
models for developing Interac¬ 
tive Multimedia Instruction and 


delivering content to personally 
owned electronic devices require 
deliberate consideration in a new 
era of fiscal challenges. 

While there will be many oc¬ 
casions for organizations to write 
contracts to have mobile applica¬ 
tions developed, there ought to 
continue to be a means to teach 
training developers and instruc¬ 
tors how to create their own ap¬ 
plications within the security and 
information constraints of the 
Army. 

Donell Walker retired from 
active military service in 2004 
after 21 years of service; 18 in the 
Information Technology field. 
During his military and civilian 
career, he has served in a myriad 
of technical positions to include 
computer operations, network¬ 
ing, information dissemination, 
training, and mobile applica¬ 
tions development. He previously 
served as the Deputy and Opera¬ 
tions Chief for the U.S. Army 
Mobile Applications Branch at 
Fort Gordon, Ga, playing a vital 
role in the team's development of 
approximately 100 applications 
with over 1.5 million downloads 
from the Apple App Store and the 
Google Play. Currently serves as 
the Battle Lab Collaborative and 
Simulation Environment Branch 
technical manager. 


Acronym QuickScan 


AR - Army Regulation 
ASP.NET - Active Server Pages 
(using .NET framework) 

COTS - Commercial Off The 
Shelf 

CSDA - Connecting Soldiers to 

Digital Applications 

CTSSB - Critical Task Site 

Selection Board 

DA - Department of the Army 

FM - Field Manual 

GOTS - Government Off The 


Shelf 

IDE - Integrated Development 
Environment 
IDMD - Information 
Dissemination Management 
Division 

IMI - Interactive Multimedia 
Instruction 

ISM - Information Systems 
Management 

MCS - Maneuver Control System 


OS - Operating System 

PAM - Pamphlet 

SDK - Software Development 

Kit 

SIGCoE - Signal Center of 
Excellence 

SIT - School of Information 
Technology 

TRADOC - U.S. Training and 
Doctrine Command 


Army Communicator 


27 




