AD-A228 469 


• » 

flftt fVLE 


IBM STARS REPOSITORY 
USER'S GUIDE 


May 10, 1990 


Contract No. FI9628-88-D-0032 
Task IR40: Repository Integration 

Delivered as part of: 

CDRL Sequence No. 1550 


Prepared for 


Electronic Systems Division 
Air Force Systems Command, USAF 
Hanscomb AFB, MA 01731-5000 



Prepared by: 


DISTRIBUTION STATIJ^nC 

Ajiprpyod tor pub fie 
Distribution 

—------ .. ■ —n .• 


Science Applications International Corporation 
Ada Software Division 
311 Park Place Bivd., Suite 360 
Clearwater, FL 34619 






REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 


Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 


°uof'C reoonmg curaen tor ihiv connexion o? intonation 5 **tima!PO to average t nour oer 'esporse. including tne time *C r reviewing instructions, vearcnmg easting data sources, 
gatnermq ana maintaining the aata neeaed. and corroietmg ana reviewinq thn collection of information Send'commnnts reqaramg this buraen estimate or any other asDect of this 
collection of mformation.’nciuaing suggestions tor reauanq this ouraen to Washington neaaauarters Services. Oireaorate tor information Operations and Reports. 12ti Jetieston 
Oavis Highway, Suite 12Q4 Arlington, v-a 22202-4302 and to thn Office of Manaaement ana Budget. Pao<*rworK Reduction Project 10704-01S8). Washington, DC 20503 


\. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave 6/ank) | 2. REPORT DATE 


April-30, 1990“ 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 




3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 
—' Final 


5. FUNDING NUMBERS 

C: F19628-88-D-0032 



7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND AODR£SS(.ESr' 

IBM Federal Sector Division y 
800 N. Frederick Avenue 
Gaithersburg, MD 20879 i 


9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 


8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 


Electronic Systems Division 
Air Force Systems Command, USAF 
Hanscom AFB, MA 01731-5000 


10. SPONSORING /MONITORING 
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 


CDRL Sequence Nc 1550 



12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 


12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 


12". ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) ! 

A guide to software reuse using the STARS/Repository. This document contains the. 

IBM STARS Repository Guidebook, STARS Repository User's Guide, and STARS Reusability 
Guidelines. Each is described below. - 

IBM STARS Repository Guidebook. A guide to the STARS Repository, providing high- 
level information for all users — component reusers, component suppliers, and 
repository administrators. The Guidebook is organized according to the specific 
roles that users perform when using the system. 

aTARS Repository User's Guide . A guide on how to access and use the STARS Reposi¬ 
tory. It provides the basic information needed to use the repository software, but 
it is not a comprehensive guide to the VAX computer, on which the repository is 
built. 

STARS Reusability Guidelines. A set of Ada coding guidelines for component develop¬ 
ment that emphasize reusability. Code that follows these guidelines will be easier 
to reuse on multiple projects and nlar forms. M.nnv pxamnles are nrovided. illustr.ntin 


u subject terms guidelines. , J 

STARS, software reuse, software reuse library, Ada coding 
guidelines, Ada i. 


17. security classification 

OF REPORT 
Unclassified 


18. SECURITY classification 
of/Yhis page 

Unclassified 


19. security classification 
of abstract 

Unclassified 


15. NUMBER OF PAGES 
201 


16. PRICE COOE 


20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 


■ i 5 \ ’540 O' - 2 30-S500 

















IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10,1990 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


1 . 

User Authorization Procedure 

1 

2. 

STARS Access 

2 

3. 

Using The STARS Computer 

6 

4. 

Menu Interface 

11 

5. 

Repository Tools 

17 

6. 

STARS Repository Technical Description 

18 

A. 

APPENDIX: Ada Compiler System 

20 

B. 

APPENDIX: Help For New DEC Notes Users 

22 

C. 

APPENDIX: Using KERMIT to Transfer Files 

23 

D. 

APPENDIX: Using the MAIL Facility 

24 

E. 

APPENDIX: AdaMat 

29 

F. 

APPENDIX: Help for VMS NEWS Users 

30 

G. 

APPENDIX: Standard Generalized Markup Language 

39 

H. 

APPENDIX: STARS Account Request Form 

44 








LR10: Repository Operation 


Contract Data Requirement: None 
Contract No. F19628-88-D-0032 

Repository User’s Guide 

DRAFT 

May 10, 1990 


Prepared for: 

Electronic Systems Division (PKG-1) 

Air Force Systems Command, USAF 
Hanscom AFB, MA 01731-5000 

Prepared by: 

Science Applications International Corporation 
Software and Systems Integration Group 
Ada Software Division 
311 Park Place Boulevard, Suite 360 
Clearwater, FL 34619 





IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10,1990 


1. User Authorization Procedure 


The Software Technology for Adaptable Reliable Systems (STARS) program has 
contracted for the operation of a repository of all deliverable software, technical reports, and 
collected software. The repository also operates as medium of interchange between the prime 
contractors, the subcontractors, the consultants, and the contracting agency. Electronic mail is 
interchanged, other electronic documents are shared, software is developed, and software is 
shared and reused by the STARS contract participants with the STARS repository computer. 

Any contractor or agency directly involved with the STARS program may request an 
account on the IBM Team STARS Repository. The policies and procedures governing use of the 
system are documented in the Repository Policies and Procedures [IBM 1460] and the Repository 
Operations and Procedures [IBM 1470] documents. A request form is in the appendix and once 
completed it should be mailed to: 


Science Applications International Corporation 
Ada Software Division 
311 Park Place Blvd. 

Suite 360 

Clearwater, Florida, 34619 

The processing time is 3-4 days for user verification and account creation after receipt. Forms 
may also be FAXed to (813)797-3187. 

New users will be notified of their user identification and a password. User identifications 
are for a single individual and are not to be shared. Initially assigned passwords must be changed 
by the user at their first session (see Logging On To The Repository, section 2.2). 

NOTE: Do not reveal your password to anyone. Sharing STARS accounts with others is 
cause for termination of access privileges. 


This document provides information on accessing and using the STARS Repository. It 
provides the basic information needed to use repository software, it is not a comprehensive 
introduction to using the VAX computer upon which the repository is built. 

This documert will be revised as the repository software changes and as indicated by user 
feedback. Please direct your comments and suggestions to username ’REPOS’ via electronic 
mail on the STARS computer. 


1 





IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


2. STARS Access 


User access to the Repository is via dial-up modems into a terminal server which provides 
automatic connection to the Repository computer. Network access may become available in the 
future. There are currently eighteen telephone lines organized in a rotary group. Sixteen of these 
eighteen lines are connected to 2400-bps modems equipped with MNP Level 5 error correction 
and compression. The remaining two lines are connected to 9600-bps V.32 modems equipped 
with MNP Level 6 error correction and compression. 

The phone number for the STARS computer is (813)791-7222. The STARS computer can 
also be reached by dialing 1-800-STARS10 (1-800-782-7710). The two 9600 bits per second 
(bps) Multitech V.32 modems may be reached by the phone numbers (813)791-0535 and 
(813)791-9530. 

2.1 Required Equipment 

The STARS computer may be accessed and used by any equipment which can transmit and 
receive the American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) over the dial-up 
telephone network using Bell 212A or CCITT V.22bis compatible modems. In reality what you 
need is a 1200 or 2400 bps modem and a terminal or computer which can emulate a DEC VT100 
or a DEC VT220 terminal. Software which supports the KERMIT or XMODEM file transfer 
protocols are available and will prove useful. The STARS computer is regularly used by Apple 
Macintosh computers using software such as Red Ryder 10.3 and IBM computers using software 
such as PROCOMM or FTTERM. FTTERM offers emulation of the VT220 terminal and 
therefore allows PC users improved access to VAX software. 

NOTE: Some modem programs offer better terminal emulation than others and users are 
cautioned that many problems in using the STARS computer are due to poor software 
emulation of the VT100 terminal or its keyboard. The mapping of the VT100 keypad to the 
PC keyboard with PROCOMM can be confusing to users accustomed to the VT100 keypad. 


2.2 Logging On To The Repository 

Modem users should dial (813) 791-7222 by what ever means are offered by their terminal 
hardware and software. The connection can be made at 1200 or 2400 bps, no parity, 8 data bits, 
and 1 stop bit. Enter a (Return) character once about every' 2 seconds to allow the DecServer 
500 to determine the terminal bps rate and display its prompt: 


DecServer SOO Terminal Server VI.0 - LAT V5.1 
Please Type HELP if you need assistance 
Enter username> 

At the DecServer prompt, enter your login ID or your initials and press (Return) . You will be 
connected to the STARS computer automatically. 

NOTE: If the prompt Locai> appears, enter Connect stars and press (Return) to 
access the Repository computer. The DECServer 500 uses the line break signal as a means to 
access some of its advanced features, if a break signal is sent during a session and the 
Local > prompt is displayed you may return to your STARS session by typing 




IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


resume!Return} . 


The following announcement from the STARS computer will be displayed on your 
terminal or computer screen: 

IBM TEAM STARS REPOSITORY 

For system security, passwords are expired after 90 days of inactivity. 

If you experience any problems, please call the help line. 

(813) 191-9437 

Username: 

At the Repository username prompt, enter your assigned username and (Return} at the 
password prompt, enter your password and { Return } . (Password will not echo.) 

NOTE: A username is generated from a last name and catenating the initial of the first 
name. 


Ex. Jim Smith 
Username - SMITHJ 

If the connection is completed and all prompts answered appropriately, the Repository news text 
will be displayed. The following is an example of a session startup news text: 

IBM STARS Team VAX 3600, VMS V4.7A 

============= Last Edited Thursday 15 February 1990 at 0845 EST ============= 

The IBM STARS Team IR40 Repository interface version 2.3 may be accessed via 
the following command at the VMS prompt: 

$ repos 

-- Enhanced component search capability 
-- STARS user locator now uses the database 

— Supply Process is available to add components to the repository 
-- New 'Suggestion Box', entries are welcomed and encouraged 
-- Supports menu access to both NEWS and NOTES 
-- Supports VT100 terminals and emulators 

=============== IBM STARS Team Help phone line (813)791-9437 ================ 

Type NEWS at the VMS prompt to enter the ANU News 5.8 Bulletin Board. 
============== For assistance Call Len Turton or Steve Kutoroff ============== 

================= Problem Reports may be mailed to 'REPOS' ================== 


At the completion of this display there will be a delay while a large number of startup 
commands are processed. These commands prepare a command environment in which a number 
of repository tools become available from the command line. The standard VMS prompt for 
command entry is ”$ ", it may be changed with the command "SET PROMPT" as shown below: 


3 



















IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


$ Set prompt="»" 

>>_ 

Which has changed the prompt string from "$ " to 

When you are first given your user i.d., a default system password will be assigned to you. 
This password should be changed by issuing the set password command. The system will 
prompt you to enter your old password. You should type in the old password. Please note that the 
password will not be displayed on the terminal. Press the {Return) key after you have entered 
the old password. You will then be prompted to enter a new password. Again, the password will 
not be displayed. Remember to press {Return) after you have entered the password. Note: The 
system requires passwords to be a minimum of 6 characters (Letters, Numbers, or a $) beginning 
with with a letter. After you have the new password, the system will print verification: , you 
will then need to type in the new password again. The system will check the "verification 
password” against the "newpassword" and make sure they match before resetting your password. 
If the "verification password" and the "new password" do not match, the system will report an 
error on the verification and your password will NOT have changed. The following is what you 
will see on the terminal when you change your password: 

$ set password 

Old Password: <enter your current password> 

New Password: <enter the password you want to use> 

Verification: <enter the new password again to confirm typing> 

§ 

Answer each prompt from the computer to change your password. 

No one, not even the system manager can determine another person’s password, except by 
guessing, a process that is not only inefficient but will cause alarms to be displayed on the 
system console. The system managers can change a password, and should be called if a password 
is forgotten or if more than 90 days elapse between access to the computer at which time 
passwords are expired by the computer. Similarly, just before the expiration date, the computer 
will display a message that ones password is expiring and it must be changed. 

If at any time you have a problem while on the Repository, please document it and mail the 
information to the user 'REPOS’. The mail program is described in Appendix D of this 
document. The problem will be examined and you will be notified of the findings of the 
repository staff. Also note that the Repository has a problem reporting system. It allows the user 
to enter problems encountered on the system. It will automatically notify the Repositorian of the 
problem. 

2.3 Logging Off The STARS Computer 

To logout from the VMS command prompt one merely types log{ Return) . At the 
DecServer prompt ( Locals ), enter LOGfReturn) to drop the dial-in connection 

2.4 Getting On-Line Help 

To get help on a VMS command or a list of VMS commands and help topics, just type 
help (Return) or help topic {Return ) at the VMS prompt. The help system provides on-line 


4 







IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


information about each VMS command including examples of the command’s use. The optional 
topic may be used to specify information to any level, for example: 

$ help set password 

will provide information on using the set password command. One could type help 
set { Return } to get a list of possible options with the SET command. 

All VMS products that have their own command language, such as the Ada compiler 
system, mail, and the configuration management system have a help command that provides the 
same information as help at the VMS prompt. 


5 






IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


3. Using The STARS Computer 


There are two forms of access to the repository, using VAX commands and software in an 
interactive fashion and accessing the STARS repository database interface. The database is 
documented in the following section. 

Using Digital Command Language (DCL) allows for access to files, tools, and all the 
development software on the system. It requires learning a number of VAX commands and a 
good deal about how files are organized and referenced on the STARS system. It will also 
require learning one of the VAX editors: EDT, TPU, LSE, EMACS, or the STARS Editor (SE). 


Using the repository interface is much easier. This interface is menu driven and it provides 
paths to enter many of the tools and software normally accessed via DCL commands. This is the 
preferred access method to repository contents as it will always represent the most current 
thinking on repository organization and reuse methods. The repository interface is entered with 
the command repos {Return} . Accessing information through the database provides you with 
additional information supplied by users of the products and a filtered and organized view of the 
repository contents. The menu system uses a product called the file browser as a screen oriented 
means of reading files which have been located using the database. The alternative is to use the 
DCL command language to access files by traversing the directory structure of the STARS 
computer, a method which provides no supporting information on repository components except 
that contained in the files themselves. The root directory of the STARS repository is set with the 
Command set def Ada$: [Repository] . 

The remainder of this section shall describe frequently used VMS commands. Other 
commands or programs available on the STARS Repository will be described in the appendix or 
in other sections. The repository software will be described in a latter section. The most 
commonly used commands and programs that will be described are: 


VAX Command 

DOS equiv 

UNIX equiv 

DIR 

DIR 

Is 

COPY 

COPY 

cp 

RENAME 

RENAME 

TYPE 

TYPE 

cat 

TYPE/PAGE 

TYPE | MORE 

more 

SET DEF 

CD 

cd 

SHOW USER 

MAIL 

Ada 

KERMIT 

AdaMat 

NEWS 

SGML 

Browse 

CAS 


who 


Check_Standards 

COCOMO 

Compile_Orde r 
Pretty_Print 
Statement Profile 


Notes 


see appendix D 
see appendix A 
see appendix C 
see appendix E 
see appendix F 
see appendix G 
STARS file browser 
Count Ada Statements 

Constructive COst Model 


6 





IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


3.1 The Directory (DIR) Command 

In a manner similar to Unix and MS-DOS, VMS has the concept of a current working 
directory. Upon logging onto the computer one is placed in the account’s user directory. This 
directory has the same name as the users identification and resides on a disk with the logical 
name DISKSUSER:. The full name for a user directory is then DISK$USER:[usemame] in 
VMS. To list the files a working directory one uses the directory command, which is often 
abbreviated "DIR". 

The DIRECTORY command lists the names of files in a particular directory, and includes 
the file names, file types and version numbers of each file. In addition, you will be given the disk 
and directory name, as well as the total number of files in the directory. 


$ DIR 

$ DIR/SIZE 
$ DIR/SECURITY 
$ DIR/DATE 
$ DIR/FULL 
$ DIR Filename 


listing in alphabetic sequence 
displays size of each file 
displays owner and protection of files 
displays date file created 
displays full information on files 
displays all files with name Filename 


Note: Certain Qualifiers, like /SIZE and /SECURITY, can be used together to make a command 
DIR/SIZE/SECURITY. 

Symbols allow you to tailor the command language by defining your own DCL commands, 
or changing existing ones. Symbols affect your process only, and are not saved when you log off 
the system. To make a symbol active each time you log in, store the symbol assignment in your 
LOGIN.COM file, located in your default directory. 

Symbols must: 

1. begin with the letters A-Z, or $, 

2. can contain numbers, 

3. can be in upper or lower case, and 

4. can contain 1-255 characters. 


For example, if user SMITHJ wishes to define the symbol us to equal the command show 
users , he would type: 

$ US : == SHOW USr.,RS 


From then on (until he logs off the system), the symbol us will be active. To execute the 
show users command, you need now only enter the command: usfReturn} . 

File names under VMS consist of two pans (as in MS-DOS), a filename and a file 
extension (or type) separated by a period, as in MS-DOS. A filename may contain one to 39 
characters chosen from the letters A..Z. the digits 0..9. and the the special characters and "$". 


7 





IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


The file type may contain zero to 39 letters and numbers. Many file types are recognized by 
VMS as having a special meaning, the most common of these are: 

COM -- Command procedure (BAT in MS-DOS) 

DAT — Data file 

DIS -- MAIL distribution lists 

EXE -- Executable image file 

JOU -- Journal file produced by the EDT editor 

LIS -- Output listing file, as from compiler, etc. 

MAI -- Mail message file 

ADA -- Ada source code 

DIR -- Directory or Subdirectory file 

Three character file types are the most common in VMS; however, up to 39 characters are 
allowed as noted above. 

Every file has a version number to distinguish it from other copies of the file. It is the last 
item in a file specification, preceded by a semicolon (;). The system automatically assigns the 
version number 1 to a file that is newly created. Each time you edit the file and save it, the 
version number is incremented by 1. If you refer to a file without specifying the exact version 
number (with or without a semicolon or period), the most recent version will be accessed. 

This feature allows the retrieval of previous versions of a file should a mistake be made. It 
also can allow for a large amount of disk space to be consumed by copies of the same 
information created at different times. The command purge! Return) deletes all lower versions 
of a file or files. VMS contains numerous features for managing files, the DEC manual 
"Introduction to VAX/VMS" (Order Number AA-Y500A-TE) should be referenced for 
additional information. 

3.2 COPYING FILES 

Use the copy command to make copies of files, specifying first the name of the input file 
you want to copy, and second the name of the output file. If the name of the output file already 
exists, a new version of that file is created. To copy a file (TEMP.DAT) from the default 
directory to a subdirectory [SMITHJ.JUNK] with a new name, type: 

$ COPY TEMP.DAT [SMITHJ.JUNK]TEMPI.DAT 


When copying files from another user’s directory to your own directory, you will want to 
make sure that file accessibility and integrity is maintained (i.e., proper protection rights, 
accounting information, etc.). To do so, issue the copy command from the directory that you 
wish the copied file to reside in. (Note: you must have appropriate read rights to the source 
directory that you will be copying from!) 

In the following example. SMITHJ wishes to copy file JUNK.DAT from DOE's directory, 
and rename it TEMP.DAT. To do so, SMITHJ logs in to his account and issues the following 
command: 

$ COPY [DOE]JUNK.DAT TEMP.DAT 


8 




IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


3.3 RENAMING FILES 

To change the name of a file, use the rename command specifying first the name of the file 
to be changed and second the new file name. Only the most recent version of that file name will 
be changed. Use wildcard characters to change all versions of a file name, or to change a number 
of files with a common file name or file type. 


$ RENAME OLDFILE.NAME NEWFILE.NAME 


3.4 TYPE and TYPE/PAGE 

File contents may be viewed on the terminal screen with the command TYPE. For large 
files the command may be used with the switch "/PAGE” to pause the display at each full screen. 
The display of the file may be continued with the {Return} key or aborted with a { controi-Y} 


3.5 Changing Default Directories 

To use another directory or subdirectory as your default directory, use the set default or 
sd commands. To see the current directory, use the command show default . For example, if 
you are in the directory SMITHJ and wish to attach to the subdirectory JUNK to do some 
editing, type: 

$ SET DEFAULT [SMITHJ.JUNK] 
or 

$ SD SMITHJ.JUNK 


NOTE: sd is a non-standard VMS command. That is, we have the sd on STARS, but it 
may not be on other VAX computers, sd is used because it warns the user when trying to change 
the default directory to a directory that does not exist or that the user does not have access to. 
set default does NOT warn the user of such cases. 

To see the current directory, use the command show default . In VMS a directory name 
is enclosed in square brackets and each directory name in a path is separated by periods, for 
example ’’[REPOSITORY.STARS_PRIME.IBMi”. Letter case is not significant in commands or 
filenames under VMS. Device names or their logical equivalence precedes the directory name to 
fully declare the location of a file, for example ”Ada$:[REPOSITORY.STARS_PRIME.IBM]". 

Directories may also be specified relatively. To move from 
”[REPOSITORY.STARS_PRIMEl to the next lower level directory named IBM in the example 
above, one could enter set def [.ibmj . The character is used to move up one level in 
directory path, so that one can move to another directory at the same level with the command 

SET DEF [-.ORIENTATION_WORKSHOP] . 


9 




IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10,1990 


3.6 SHOW USER 

This command may be used to see what other users are currently using the STARS 
Repository computer. There are many options to the SHOW command, help may be used for 
more information. 


10 







IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10,1990 


4. Menu Interface 


The menu based database interface was developed under task IR40 using components from 
STARS Foundations, IQ8, and other sources. The database uses the Oracle Corporation Oracle 
Relational Database Management System (RDBMS), the Structured Query Language (SQL), and 
Oracle’s Ada interface product Pro*Ada to provide access to repository files. 'Hie following is a 
description of version 2.3 of the interface. 

Each menu is composed of several options including "EXIT” and "HELP" options. Each 
option may be selected by moving the highlight bar to the option of interest (using the up and 
down arrow keys) and pressing {Return} . A second means of selecting an option is to simply 
type the highlighted letter in the option of interest. Using the highlighted letter to select 
commands does not require entering {Return}. 

Several of the options offer submenus. Return to the next higher level of the menu system 
is always accomplished by typing "X" or moving the highlight bar to "EXIT” and entering 
{Return} . Other commands bring you to specialized screens which are used to enter queries to 
the database. 

The Repository menu is displayed after typing the command repos {Return} at the DCL 
command prompt. The message displayed after successful logon will always announce the latest 
version of the repository menu access software and any limitations on its use. This menu offers 
the following options: 

o Component Search 
o Directory Search 
o Component Supply 
o Browse Current Catalog 
o Repository Tools 
o Repository Services 
o Suggestion Box 
o Problem Reporting 
o Help 
o Exit 


4.1 Component Search 

The component search menu is used to locate an asset stored in the organized repository 
database. The menu item brings up a sequence of specialized database access screens. 

4.2 Directory Search 

This menu item is used to browse the repository disk files directly. It uses a program called 
the directory browser prepared by Boeing under the STARS contract. The directory browser 
allows movement through the directory tree and viewing files without any need to use 
VAX/VMS commands. The directory browser uses numbered menu lists for selection and enters 
the SAIC file browser to view text files. 

4.3 Component Supply 


11 






IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10,1990 


The component supply allows the user to search the repository for asset or component. 

4.4 Browse Current Catalog 

The browse current catalog allows the user to review the assets and components available 
in the repository. 

4.5 Repository Tools 

This menu item is used to select between a number of tools and programs available on the 
repository. Each of these programs is available from the command line as well as through this 
menu. The items offered in this menu are: 
o Ada Development Tools 
o Run SGML Parser 
o File Browser 
o Add A Person 
o Add An Organization 
o Problem Reporting 
o Help 
o Exit 

4.5.1 Ada Development Tools 

The Ada Development menu allows selection of commercial products such as the VAX 
Language Sensitive Editor and Ada Compiler, as well as products from the Ada repository, such 
as the lines counter and statement profiler. The following sub-menu is available under the Ada 
Development menu. 

o AdaMat 

o Edit Ada Source Code 
o Format Ada Source Code 
o Check Ada Style 
o Count Ada Statements 
o Profile Ada Statements 
o Generate Compile Order 
o Problem Reporting 
o Help 
o Exit 


4.5.1.1 AdaMat 

This menu item enters the AdaMat utility. For use of AdaMat refer to appendix E. 

4.5.1.2 Edit Ada Source Code 


12 





IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


This menu item enters the VAX/VMS Language Sensitive Editor after prompting for the 
file to be edited. 

4.5.1.3 Format Ada Source Code 

This menu item enters the Pretty Printer and will prompt for the file name of the Ada 
program to be reformatted. This program is a version of the NOSC tools program. 

4.5.1.4 Check Ada Style 

This menu item enters the Standards Checker program and will prompt for the file name of 
the Ada program to be checked. 

4.5.1.5 Count Ada Statements 

This menu item enters a program to count Ada statements, it will prompt for the input file 
to be processed. 

4.5.1.6 Profile Ada Statements 

This menu item enters the Statement Profiler tool after prompting for a file to be processed. 

4.5.1.7 Generate Compile Order 

This menu item enters the compile order tool. 

4.5.1.8 Problem Reporting 

This menu item is used to enter a problem report for the menu interface, the repository 
content, or an operational problem with the repository. The following menu is displayed for this 
item: 

o Report a Problem 
o Answer a Problem 
o Review All Problem Reports 
o Help 
o Exit 

4.5.1.9 Help 

This menu entry is used to display a help screen using the browser. 

4.5.2 Run SGML Parser 

The option prompts for the name of a file to process with the STCS SGML parser. 
Information on the STCS SGML parser and the Datalogics SGML parser is available in 
Appendix G. 

4.5.3 File Browser 

This menu item enters the File Browser tool. This tool is used to examine files in full 


13 





IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10,1990 


screen mode. 

4.5.4 Add a Person 

This menu item is only used by the Repositorian to manage the people search database. 

4.5.5 Add an Organization 

This menu item is only used by the Repositorian to manage the Organizational database. 

4.6 Repository Services 

This menu item is used to select from a number of services available to repository users. 
Some of these services are available from the VMS prompt and others are unique to the 
repository. 

o Repository Information 
o Use Mail Facility 
o Use News Facility 
o Use Notes Facility 
o People Search 
o Review Usage Statistics 
o Generate Component Catalog 
o Review Component Catalog 
o Problem Reporting 
o Help 
o Exit 

4.6.1 Repository Information 

This menu displays a list of information subjects which provide information on various 
aspects of the repository database and its organization. Selecting one of these items places the 
user in the File browser reviewing the selected information. 

o General Information 
o Review Reusability Guidelines 
o Review Facet Terms 
o Review Taxonomy 
o Review Component Types 
o Review Part Types 
o Problem Reporting 
o Help 
o Exit 


4.6.2 Use Mail Facility 

This menu item enters the VAX/VMS mail facility for sending messages to users on the 


14 






IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


STARS computer and other other computers connected to it through the network. The mail 
facility is described in Appendix D. 

4.6.3 Use News Facility 

This menu item enters the VAX/VMS N ews facility for exchanging ideas and helpful 
information for all users to view. The news facility is described in Appendix F. 

4.6.4 Use Notes Facility 

This menu item enters the VAX/VMS Notes facility for holding conferences on various 
topics. The notes facility is described in Appendix B. 

4.6.5 People Search 

This menu item supports finding names, addresses, STARS usernames, and phone numbers 
of participants in the STARS program. 

4.6.6 Review Usage Statistics 

This menu item is used to review the usage statistics on the STARS computer for the 
previous month. The previous months usage file is viewed using the file browser tool. 

4.6.7 Generate Component Catalog 

This menu item is used to generate a current catalog of all assets in the repository. The 
catalog is generated from the organized database using the SGML processing software to format 
the result. 

4.6.8 Review Component Catalog 

This menu item uses the file browser to view a component catalog. 

4.6.9 Problem Reporting 

This menu item is used to enter a problem report for the menu interface, the repository 
content, or an operational problem with the repository. 

4.6.10 Help 

This menu entry is used to display a help screen using the browser. 

4.7 Suggestion Box 

This menu entry is used to enter, review, or answer suggestions on the operation of the 
STARS Repository. 

4.8 Problem Reporting 

This menu item is used to enter a problem report for the menu interface, the repository 
content, or an operational problem with the repository. 


15 






IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10,1990 


4.9 Help 

This menu entry is used to display a help screen using the browser. 

4.10 Exit 

This menu item will return to the command line interface from the menu interface. 


16 




IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


5. Repository Tools 


A number of Ada based tools are available on the repository for use during software 
development. These tools are written in Ada and have been collected and updated as required, 
source code is available as is the original and modified documentation. These tools may be found 
in the directory Ada$:[Repository.Installed_Toolsj where they have been collected. These tools 
are also available in the STARS deliverable area under IBM tasks Q10 and Q13. 

5.1 Count Ada Statements (CAS) 

This tool was written by Col. Whitaker and is a standard for measuring the number of lines 
and Ada statements in a source file. It may be executed from the command line using the 
command cas{R eturn) , it will prompt for a filename to be processed. A file with a list of 
filenames may be provided by preceding the list filename with a character. The program 
terminates when a blank filename is entered. 

Source code and documentation are in Ada$:[Repository.Installed_Tools.CAS], 

5.2 Check_Standards 

This tool was written by the Naval Ocean Systems Command as part of the Software 
Development and Maintenance Environment (SDME) toolset, it is used to compare Ada source 
code to standards which are derived from the Ada Language Reference manual. The program 
was initially written in 1985 but has been modified by SAIC under task IQ10 in 1989. It is 
executed by typing check_standards{Return} at the command line. Source code and 
documentation may be found in Ada$.[Repository.STARS_Prime.IBM.Q10.C0430.Check]. 

5.3 COCOMO 

The COCOMO program is one that has been converted to a standalone program from the 
SDME toolset by SAIC under task IQ10. The SDME version of COCOMO was written by M. K. 
McNair of the Ford Aerospace and Communications Corporation in March of 1985. The STARS 
version is screen menu oriented for user entry of input values. This program may be used to 
compute cost values for a software project using the Constructive Cost Model developed by 
Barry Boehm. Please refer to "Software Engineering Economics", Barry Boehm, Prentice-Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, (c) 1981. 


17 






IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


6. STARS Repository Technical Description 


6.1 Central Processor 

The Repository computer system is a Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) microVAX 
model 3600 with 32 megabytes of main memory. The VAX line of computers from DEC offers 
extended virtual memory addressing and software compatibility across a wide performance range 
of CPU platforms from approximately one MIPS up to 30 MIPS. The model 3600 is rated at 2.7 
MIPS, it may be upgraded to a performance level of 3.8 MIPS with a change of CPU boards. 

6.2 Disk Storage 

The repository computer is equipped with four DEC RA82 disk drives, each of 625 
megabyte capacity. One RA82 is used exclusively for the operating system and its software 
support. This disk also contains the page and swap files used by the virtual memory operation of 
the machine. The compilers, debuggers, editors, database, and documentation software reside on 
this disk. 

A separate RA82 is used to house the user files and working storage for software 
development. This disk drive has the logical name "DiskSUser:", each user is allocated a unique 
working area for their own files on this disk drive. User files are contained in a directory whose 
name is the same as the assigned username for computer access. The convention for STARS 
users is to assign a username which is their last name plus their first initial. 

The remaining two RA82 disk drives are used to house the Ada software repository. The 
Ada software repository consists of a directory tree and a relational database of the collected Ada 
source code and deliverables from the contracts. The preferred access method to the repository is 
the database; however, there are materials in the file system which are not in the database. The 
two physically separate disk drives have been bound as one volume set giving the repository the 
equivalent capacity of a single 1.25 Gigabyte disk drive. 

6.3 Communications 

The only serial communication device connected to the VAX 3600 is the console terminal 
used for system control. All serial devices such as user terminals, modems, and printers are 
connected to the VAX 3600 via a DECServer 500 terminal server. The DECServer is a computer 
and communication interface system which concentrates the serial data and communicates to the 
VAX 3600 via an Ethernet local area network (LAN). The DECserver is programmed upon 
startup by one of the computers in the VAX cluster to which it is connected. The programming 
configures the DECServer ports and sets preferred services for each port. The ports which are 
connected to the STARS modems have a preferred service to connect to the STARS computer. 
The DECServer will prompt for a username upon making connection to the STARS computer. 
The DECServer does not verify the name entered, it is recommended that users enter their 
account username or their initials at this prompt so the system operator can identify the modem 
line they are using should a problem be encountered. 

The modems for the STARS system are all supplied by Multitech. There are eighteen 2400 
bps MNP level 5.0 modem cards in two Multitcch CC216 Modem Rack chassis. These modems 
are available by dialing (813)791-7222, the pilot number for the eighteen line rotary connection. 
The STARS computer can also be reached by dialing 1-800-STARS10 (1-800-782-7710). 
Additionally, there are two Multitech V.32 modems capable of dial-up speeds to 9600 bps. These 
two modems are available as the last two numbers in the rotary group, phone numbers 


18 





IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10,1990 


(813)791-0535 and (813)791-9530. 

STARS users may dial (813)791-9437 for assistance with accounts, logging onto the 
computer, or for help in locating products on the repository. 

6.4 Peripherals 

The STARS VAX 3600 also has a DEC model TU81-Plus 9-track industry compatible tape 
drive capable of 1600 bpi and 6250 bpi operation, a DEC LN03R Postscript Laser printer, and a 
DEC proprietary cartridge tape unit for loading software called a TK70. The TU81-Plus is used 
for backup and file exchange with the other prime contractors. 


19 





IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10,1990 


APPENDIX A. 

APPENDIX: Ada Compiler System 


The DEC Ada Compiler System (ACS) may be entered by typing the command 
acs {Return} . This will place the user in the ACS command environment with the prompt 
"ACS>". Alternatively, ACS commands may be entered from the command line by preceding the 
command with ACS as in the following command examples: 

$ ACS HELP 

$ ACS CREATE LIB directory_name_for_library 
$ ACS SET LIB directory_name_for_library 
$ ACS SHOW LIB 
$ ACS DIR 

$ ACS RECOMPILE unit_name 
$ ACS LINK main_procedure_name 


Ada compiles may be executed without entering the ACS system or using the ACS 
command prefix simply by using the command ada ' filename' {Return } In order to use the 
DEC Ada Compiler, an ADALIB must be defined. This need only be done once for each login 
session. 

To define an Ada library type: 

$ ACS CREATE LIBRARY [username.ADALIB]' 

— where 'username' is the name used in the Repository logon 
or just [.adalib] if you are in your working directory. 

The Ada library need not be named ADALIB, it is a convention 
used in this document and by most users of the DEC Ada compiler. 


If the ADALIB has previously been created, ACS will display a message. 

The next step is to tell ACS which library to use: 

$ ACS SET LIBRARY [username.ADALIB]' 

- where 'username' is the name used in the Repository logon 


Each time you logon to the STARS computer, you must use the "ACS SET LIBRARY" 
command to define the Ada library. 

Once the library has been defined, use the following command to compile: 


20 




IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10,1990 


$ ADA filename 

- where 'filename' is the name of the file to be compiled 


Once all the units for a program have been successfully compiled the program must be 
linked before it can be executed. ACS has its own link command which will invoke the DEC 
system linker. To link a main program use the command: 

$ ACS LINK main_procedure_name 

This will produce an executable file of filetype EXE. 

To run the executable, type: 


$ RUN main_procedure_name 


The DEC Ada compiler and the VAX operating system have complete facilities for 
program debugging and performance analysis. Describing these facilities is beyond the scope of 
this document. 


21 




IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10,1990 


APPENDIX B. 

APPENDIX: Help For New DEC Notes Users 


This capability of the Repository is provides for open discussion on relevant technical 
topics. The VAX Notes product from DEC supports this capability and it may be called the 
"FORUM" in other contexts on the repository. 

An individual subject is called a CONFERENCE in the nomenclature of VAX Notes and a 
FORUM in the Repository. Each FORUM (or CONFERENCE) has any number of TOPICS, 
each of which may have any number of REPLYs. The combination of a TOPIC and its REPLYs 
is called a DISCUSSION. The terminology of TOPIC, REPLY, and DISCUSSION is the same 
in DEC Notes and the Repository. 

NOTE: The Notes product is dependent on proper emulation of a DEC VT100 or VT220 
terminal. If problems with the product screen display are observed, exit Notes and issue the 
commandsET term/inquire {Return) followedby the command show TERMiReturn) . 

The first command will ensure that the VAX computer knows what kind of terminal (or 
emulator) is use, the second command will display the terminal characteristics determined by 
the first. The terminal type is displayed in the first line resulting from the "SHOW TERM” 
after the text "Device_Type:", if the text is not "VT100" or "VT200_Series", the VAX notes 
product (and many others) will not work. 


Execute VAX Notes by selecting the FORUM option from a menu or by entering 
notes (Return) at the DCL prompt. The NOTES prompt (’NOTES>’) is displayed. To exit 
NOTES, type exit {Return) ”, To view all currently available FORUMS, type: 

DIR/CONF 

In order for you to view a specific FORUM, it must be listed within your NOTEBOOK (the list 
of your specific subjects of interest). To register a FORUM in your NOTEBOOK, type: 

ADD ENTRY forum_name 

Once a FORUM has been entered in your NOTEBOOK, it remains until you delete the entry. 

In order to view the active DISCUSSIONS of a specific FORUM, type: 


OPEN forum_name 
DIR 

Type the TOPIC number to access the DISCUSSION of interest. To go from a TOPIC to its 
REPLYs, enter { Return ) . Each TOPIC is identified by a whole number; related REPLYs are 
identified by the TOPIC number followed by a decimal followed by the REPLY number. You 
can reread a TOPIC or REPLY by typing its number at the NOTES prompt. To return to the list 
of TOPICs, type "DIR". To return to the list of FORUMs in your NOTEBOOK, type EXIT . 

For further information, enter "HELP" at the NOTES prompt. 






IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


APPENDIX C. 

APPENDIX: Using KERMIT to Transfer Files 


Files may be exchanged between the VAX computer and personal computers using 
software which supports the KERMIT protocol for file transfer. The following example assumes 
that the user is using PROCOMM on a PC compatible and has already logged on the STARS 
computer with the recommended terminal settings. 

NOTE: There are file names that are permitted on a PC that are not permitted on the VAX 
and vice versa. For information on specification of VMS files use the help available with the 
command help specify file . 


C.l UPLOAD A FILE (PC TO VAX) 

At the VMS prompt type "Kermit<return>" 

At the KERMIT prompt type "Server <return>" 

Hit PgUp Key on the the PC keyboard to upload a file. 

Type "2" to select the KERMIT protocol for the transfer. 

The PC will prompt for the name of the file to be sent to the VAX. 

Type the Filename followed by a <return> 

-- type in filename you wish to send. If the filename has no 
extension, then you must put a period after filename, 
example: "a:foo.bar“ 

PROCOMM will now send your doci..,en< to the VAX using the KERMIT 
file exchange protocol. fP.OCuMM will beep several times on 
completion 

At the VMS prompt type "exit<return>" 


You may use the DIR or TYPE command to see that the files was transferred. 

C.2 DOWNLOAD A FILE (VAX TO PC) 

At the VMS prompt type "Kermit<return>" 

At the KERMIT prompt type "send 'filename'<return>" 

-- replace 'filename' with the name of the file to be transferred. 
Wildcard characters (? and *) are accepted. 

Hit the PgDn Key on the the PC keyboard to download a file. 

Type "2" to select the KERMIT protocol for the transfer. 

-- The file will be placed in a directory on the PC which has been 
changed in the menu available with the ALT-S command on the 
PC and under the "General Setup" submenu. 

At the VMS prompt type "exit<return>” 








IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


APPENDIX D. 

APPENDIX: Using the MAIL Facility 


D.l Introduction 

The Personal Mail Utility (MAIL) can be used to send mail to other users on your system 
or any other computer connected to your system via network hardware and software. This utility 
also allows you to file , forward , delete , print , and reply to messages that other users 
send to you. 

When MAIL sends you a message from another user while you are logged in, MAIL 
notifies you. You will also be notified that you have new mail when you log in and when you 
invoke the MAIL utility. 

Messages that you receive are stored in message files. The first time that you receive mail, 
a message file called MAIL.MAI is created in your MAIL directory. Large MAIL messages are 
placed in .MAI files in your MAIL directory (MAIL followed by a hex identification code to 
distinguish between messages). 

D.2 Command Summary 

Following is a summary of MAIL commands: 


Command 


Description 


BACK 

COPY FOLDERNAME Filename 
DELETE [msg-number] 

DIRECTORY Foldername 


EXIT 

EXTRACT File-spec 
FILE 


FORWARD 

HELP 

NEXT 

PRINT 


QUIT 


Backs up to previous message. 

Copies a message to another folder 
without deleting it from the current folder. 
Deletes current (last-read) message or 
designated message. The message is not 
permanently deleted until you exit from MAIL. 
Lists a summary of your mail messages; the 
name of a message folder can be optionally 
specified, otherwise, current message folder 
is displayed. 

Exits from MAIL, deleting any messages marked 
for deletion. 

Places a copy of the current message into the 
specified sequential file. 

Copies current (last-read) message into 
another folder; deletes it from current 
folder. 

Sends a copy of current (last-read) message 
to specified user(s). 

Displays information on using MAIL. 

Skips to and displays next mail message. 
Queues the current (last-read) message for 
printing. Messages do not print until you 
exit the MAIL utility. 

Exits from MAIL and cancels any previous 


24 








IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


READ Foldername [msg-number] 

REPLY File-spec 
SEARCH Search-string 
SELECT Foldername 
SEND filename [/NOEDIT] 


SET FILE Filename 

SET FOLDER Foldername 
SET FORWARD Address 
SET MAIL [.subdirectory] 

SET PERSONAL NAME "Text 
String" 

SET WASTEBASKET NAME folder¬ 
name 

SHOW MAIL 
SHOW PARAMETER 


message deletions, thus leaving the message 
file intact. 

Displays next page of message or the next 
message. Entering {return} performs the same 
function. 

Sends a reply to the sender of the current 
(last read) message. You can include a file. 
Searches for a message that contains the 
specified text string. 

Moves from one folder to another within 
your mail. 

Sends a message to a user or users. The 
message can optionally be a file specified by 
filename. SEND defaults to using the editor 
to compose the message or edit the specified 
file. This message is composed using the EDT 
Editor or an editor you specify using the 
logical name MAIL$EDIT. The /NOEDIT qualifier 
prevents the system from using the editor. 
Opens the file specified by filename as the 
current mail file. 

Moves from one folder to another. 

Sets the forwarding address for your mail. 
Specifies all current mail folders and new 
mail be moved to specified subdirectory. 
Enables you to append the specified 
text string to the end of the "From:" field 
of your mail messages you send. 

Enables you to change the name of your 
waste basket folder. 

Displays detailed information about the state 
of mail. 

Displays information about the parameter that 
was established by one of the previous set 
commands. 


D.3 Examples Using VMS MAIL 

The following examples illustrate the use of the mail utility for common applications. 

User SMITHJ invokes the MAIL utility, reads his two messages, and decides to delete the 
second message. (The second message will not be permanently deleted until SMITHJ uses the 
exit command, or reads a new MAIL file. Use the quit command if you delete a message 
accidentally and wish to recover it 





IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10,1990 


$ MAIL 

You have 2 new messages. 

MAIL>R£AD 
Mail 1 

From: DOE 23-JUL-1985 11:00 

To: SMITHJ 

Subj: Cancellation of Friday's Staff Meeting 

Friday's staff meeting was canceled. Will be rescheduled next week. 
John 

MAIL>READ 
Mail 2 

From: LEE 23-JUL-1985 11:15 

To: SMITHJ 

Subj:Revised Project Plan 

The revised project plan that you requested will be forwarded 
to you in two days. 

Bill 

MAIL> DELETE 


SMITHJ decides to send a message to DOE, and exit from the MAIL utility. Mail by 
default uses the EDITOR. To turn the EDITOR off, type send/noedit at the mail prompt. 


MAIL> SEND/NOEDIT 
To: DOE 

Subj: Good News 

Enter your message below. Press CTRL/Z when complete. Use CTRL/C to quit: 
It's a good thing that the meeting was canceled. Bill says 
the new project plan will be ready in a couple of days. 

I will talk to you later about the changes in the plan. 

See me when you have time. 

Jim 

CTRL/Z 
MAIL> EXIT 


SMITHJ decides to send a message to DOE on the EAGLE VAX, then exit from the MAIL 
utility. 


26 






IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10,1990 


MAIL> SEND/NOEDIT 

To: EAGLE::DOE 

Subj: Meeting at 14:00 

Enter your message below. Press CTRL/Z when complete. Use CTRL/C to quit: 
A meeting has been scheduled for 14:00 to discuss new contracts. 

Let me know if you cannot make it. 

Jim 

CTRL/Z 
MAIL> EXIT 


SMITHJ decides to send a message to user DOE at the DDN computer site SRI-KL. To 
send the message through Network, specify the network mail processor. Do this by using an 
address of the format: networks"usemame@host". DOE@ SRI-KL is the DDN (or Internet) 
address of the recipient 

MAIL> SEND/NOEDIT 
To: ARPA%"DOE@SRI-KL" 

Subj: I would like to get a copy of your new paper 

Enter your message below. Press CTRL/Z when complete. Use CTRL/C to quit: 

I have just finished my latest changes on our paper. I will 
be sending you a copy through the electronic mail later today. 

Please let me know what you think about the new changes. 

Jim Smith 
DDN Addresses: 

SMITHJ@WPAFB-AAMRL.ARPA 
0WPAFB-AAMRL.ARPA:SMITHJ0STARS 
CTRL/Z 
MAIL> EXIT 


SMITHJ decides to send the file SAMPLE.TXT to user DOE at the DDN computer site 
BAFB-DDNVAX. The message is sent through network mail processor. 

MAIL> SEND/NOEDIT SAMPLE.TXT 
To: ARPA%"DOE@SRI-KL" 

Subj: Here is that copy of SAMPLE.TXT 
MAIL> EXIT 


SMITH decides to reply to a message that he just read. The system automatically uses the 
subject of the original message as the subject of this message, but adds RE: to the beginning. 


27 






IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10,1990 


MAIL> REPLY/NOEDIT 
Subj: RE: Rough draft of proposal 

Enter your message below. Press CTRL/Z when complete. Use CTRL/C to quit: 
I've just read your message. I'll get back to you later. 

Jim Smith 
CTRL/Z 
MAIL> EXIT 


D.4 Distribution Lists 

The MAIL program allows you to use distribution lists to send messages to groups of 
people. A distribution list is a file containing the MAIL address (local or using the network) of 
each person to whom you wish to send the message. For example, if you send copies of rough 
drafts of a paper to five people every time, you can create a file DRAFT.DIS that contains the 
address of those five people. 

Create your distribution list using an editor. Access it by catenating and the file name. 
In the next example, SMITHJ decides to send copies of the file DRAFT.DOC to everyone in the 
distribution list REVIEW_TEAM.DIS. 

MAIL> SEND/NOEDIT DRAFT.DOC 
To: @ REV I EVJ_TEAM 

Subj: Here is first draft of SAMPLE.TXT 

CTRL/Z 

MAIL> EXIT 


Note that the .DIS file extension was not used. Distribution lists default to using the .DIS 
file extension. If you do not use .DIS then you must specify the file extension. The file must also 
reside in the current default directory or you must specify the directory name as well as the file 
name. 


28 




IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


APPENDIX E. 

APPENDIX: AdaMat 


AdaMAT is an automated quality-reporting tool, which bases its scores on a hierarchical 
framework of metrics. It is possible to use a single command to retrieve a detailed report 
containing all the information AdaMAT will provide, as well as a series of commands to tailor a 
report to your needs. 

To use AdaMAT, you must create a sub-directory in your account for Adamat to use in 
storing intermediate files during an analysis. You must then SET that directory to serve as your 
AdaMAT library, either in your LOGIN.COM, or interactively each time you want to use 
AdaMAT. If your account name is "SMITHJ", and the directory you create for AdaMAT is a 
sub-directory of your main directory called "[.AdaMatlib]", then the command to set the library 
should read: 

adtlib set disk$user:[SMITHJ.AdaMatlib] 

If you want to put that in your login.com file, you must precede the command with a "$" (i.e., "$ 
adtlib set disk$user:[SMITHJ.AdaMatlib]”). 

To use AdaMat after setting up the library, the command is adamatall, and it can be 
followed by from one to six filenames, separated by spaces. 

example : Adamatall filel file2 file3 (where the extensions are .ada) 

With a single filename, you get a report on the contents of that file. With multiple filenames, you 
will be prompted for whether you want a comparison of the files, a combined analysis of all of 
them, or both. 

NOTE: All source filenames MUST have extension ".ada”, and you MUST NOT include 
that extension in giving the filename. If you have only one file as the object, then the report 
will have that filename and the extension ".rep". If you have more than one, you will be 
asked to give a filename (without extension). During analysis of a file, AdaMAT will 
calculate the number of lines, statements, and comments in the file. This will be displayed on 
the screen, but will NOT be placed in the report. 


Further information should be obtained from the AdaMat documentation. 



IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


APPENDIX F. 

APPENDIX: Help for VMS NEWS Users 


F. 1 Introduction 

News is a computer-based conferencing system. It is similar to the electronic mail system 
(E-mail). VMS NEWS allows the user to view all postings made by other users of NEWS and 
also allows the user to contribute to the conference by posting an item into NEWS. News items 
are classified by newsgroups (postings with similar subject matter) and all postings referring to 
the same conference are logically grouped together for presentation within a newsgroup. 

Unlike person-to-person mail, all items posted into NEWS are readable by ALL users on 
the system, so the items in NEWS are intended for general view. 

Typically, the local VMS system is linked to a wider network of systems. The local node 
receives NEWS postings from other nodes on the network and sends local postings through the 
wider network. 

F.2 NEWS Command Summary 


Command 


Description 


DEREGISTER [newsgroup] 


DEREGISTER/ALL 
DIRECTORY 


DIRECTORY/ALL 

DIRECTORY/NEW 

DIRECTORY/REGISTER 

DIRECTORY/SINCE=date 

DIRECTORY/ITEMS 


Removes your registration from a newsgroup. 

The newsgroup may either be specified as a 
parameter to the command, or, if not specified, 
the current newsgroup is deregistered. 

Removes registration tags from all newsgroups. 

In screen mode: moves between newsgroup and 
newsitem displays and selects a subset of the 
full newsgroup set to display on the screen. 

In line mode: by default lists all the news 
items in the currently selected newsgroup, on 
a page by page basis, displaying the item 
number, creation date, and item title. 

In screen mode: resets the newsgroup directory 
to display all newsgroups held on the local 
system. 

In screen mode: sets the newsgroup directory 
screen to only display those newsgroups in which 
you are registeredwith newitems you have not read. 
In screen mode: sets the newsgroup directory 
screen to only display those newsgroups in which 
you are registered. 

In screen mode: sets the newsgroup directory 
screen to display only those newsgroups in which 
new items have been entered since the date 
specified. The date is given in VMS time format: 
e.g., DIR/SINCE=22-FEB. 

Opens the 'current' newsgroup and displays the 
newsitem for that newsgroup. This command is 


?o 



IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


DIRECTORY/NEWSGROUPS 

DIRECTORY/RESET 

DOWN [Number] 

EXIT 


EXTRACT [filename] 

EXTRACT/ALL 

EXTRACT/APPEND 

FOLLOWUP 


equivalent to the basic 'SELECT' command. 

Moves the context of NEWS to the newsgroup 
directory screen. This command is equivalent 
to the 'NEWSGROUP' command. 

Clears the internal memory copy of the NEWS 
database and reads a new copy of the database 
from the master index files into memory. 

This command is not normally used -- it is 
relevant only in those situations where a 
background process is adding or deleting news 
items to the database, and the user encounters 
'file not found' errors when attempting to 
access item files. 

In screen mode: moves the current pointer down 
one line. The command has an optional numeric 
parameter, the number of lines to move down. 
Default value is 1. This command is bound to 
the down arrow key on the terminal. The command 
'DOWN 18' is bound to the 'next screen' key in 
the terminal. 

Exits from NEWS. Ctrl-Z is also interpreted as 
EXIT. On exit from NEWS, a new register file is 
written out to SYSSLOGIN. This file, (SYS5LOGIN: 
NEWS_GROUPS.REGISTER) contains the list of 
registered newsgroups, read/unread newsitems, 
the marked item list and the kill filter lines. 

The context file is used to determine which 
news items are unread and is also used to 
re-establish context on the next invocation of 
NEWS -- The next invocation of NEWS restores 
the screen displays to the state at which the 
'EXIT' command was entered. On exit the user is 
prompted for the print queue name if printer 
requests were generated during this NEWS session. 
Copies the current news item text into an output 
file. If the filename is not specified, the user 
prompted for a name (default value is 
SYS$LOGIN:NEWS.LIS). 

Copies ALL items in the current selected newsgroup 
into the file. 

Appends the output to the nominated file, rather 
than the default action of creating a new ver¬ 
sion of the output file. 

Used to post a reply to a news item back into 
NEWS. The followup item will reference the news 
item you are following up as the parent of the new 
posting. The editor is invoked to form the new 
posting, with the edit buffer preloaded with the 
text of the original item. The editor is user- 
definable. NEWS will fill in all defaulting news 
headers and will prompt for all header items which 
are non-defaulting (the subject line and the news- 


31 







IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10,1990 


groups to post the item into). If the newsgroups 
for the posting are moderated newsgroups, the 
posting is automatically re-directed as mail to 
the moderator address and NOT posted back to NEWS. 

FOLLOWUP/HEADERS Followup prompts for the subject of the posting 

and a list of newsgroups into which to post the 
item. All other header lines of che news item 
text will be filled with null values. The 
/HEADERS qualifier forces prompting for optional 
components of the item header. These fields are: 
Summary: A one line summary of the contents 

of the posting. 

Reply-To: The (internet) mail address for 

REPLYing to the item - used if 
replies are to be sent to a mail 
address OTHER than yourself (as 
the originator of the item). 
Distribution: A (comma separated) list of keywords 
designed to limit the distribution 
of a news item to a subset of the 
network. These keywords are site 
specific, but commonly include the 
keywords "local" (do not forward to 
the net) and "world" (forward as far 
as possible through the net). 
Followup-To: The list of newsgroups where 

followup postings are to be sent. 
This is used to move a discussion 
to another newsgroup. 

Keywords: A few relevant, pithy keywords which 

should indicate to other readers 
whether the item is of interest. 

FORWARD Invokes VMS MAIL, to send a copy of the current 

news item to another user (or yourself if so 
inclined). FORWARD and MAIL are equivalent. 

FORWARD/TO=user 

FORWARD/TO=(user,user) Specifies the VMS Mail address of the users to 

receive the mail (this is one of the anomalies 
of NEWS that will be addressed in a future 
version - the addresses used here should be 
internet-style addresses - not VMS Mail addresses 
-as is currently the case). This may be a 
user name or a list of names and may also 
include a distribution list file specification. 

If this qualifier is not specified, the user is 
prompted for the /TO value. 

FORWARD/SUBJECT=s ub j 

FORWARD/SUBJECT="text - Specifies the subject of the message for the 

string" heading. If not specified, the user is prompted 

for the /SUBJECT value. 

FORWARD/NOEDIT By default, invokes the editor to allow the item 

text to be edited before mailing the item. 


32 





IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


FORWARD/SELF 
FORWARD/HEADERS 

HELP 

KILL 


KILL/FROM 

KILL/SUBJECT 

MAIL 

MARK [tag] 


This qualifier sends the news text to the mailer 
without modification. The editor is user 
definable. 

Sends a copy of the message back to yourself. 

By default the news item header lines are 
stripped off the item text before it is mailed. 
This qualifier loads the item header lines into 
the mail buffer as well as the body of the text. 
Invokes the HELP processor; can be used with 
parameters to specify the command for which HELP 
is wanted. 

Allows the user to filter out all messages of a 
particular class - the READ/NEW command will mark 
such filtered items as having been read without 
displaying the text of the item to the user and 
will search forward for the next unread item. 

The KILL filter works on three attributes for a 
match; the newsgroup name, the subject line 
and the sender's address. Of these attributes, 
only one of the subject line and sender need be 
specified. Thus, it is possible to filter all 
postings by a particular sender in all news- 
groups or filter a conversation stream from a 
particular newsgroup or filter all postings 
from a particular sender within a specified 
conversation stream. The KILL command adds 
entries to the kill filter list. Removing kill 
filters must be done manually by editing these 
kill entries: they are stored in the file 
SYS$LOGIN:NEWS_GROUPS.REGISTER in the following 
format: 

news context entries 
MARKLIST 
mark entries 
KILLLIST 

newsgroup S:subject F:from line 
To remove an entry, delete the relevant 
line from this file using a text editor. 

Add the current item's From; address to the kill 
filter set. The command will then prompt for the 
set of newsgroups to which this filter will be 
applied. The default value is the current 
newsgroup; more newsgroups may be specified using 
wildcard notation ('*') or a list of newsgroups. 
Adds the current item's Subject line to the kill 
filter set. Used to filter out unwanted messages. 
FORWARD and MAIL are equivalent. 

Places a mark against the current newsitem. 

This item can be selected at a later time by 
the READ/MARK or SELECT/MARK commands. If no tag 
value is specified then the default tag, "mark" is 
used. Any tag value may be specified - tag values 


33 







IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10,1990 


are words (no space characters) of any length under 
80 characters. 

NEWSGROUPS In screen mode: pops the display stack back to the 

newsgroup directory screen from the newsitem or 
news text display screens. Synonym of the 
'DIR/NEWSGROUPS' command. 

NOSCREEN Turns off screen mode and enters line command mode. 

POST [Filename] Posts a new newsitem into NEWS. By default, the 

editor is invoked to form the new posting. 

NEWS will fill in all defaulting news headers 
and will prompt for all header items which are 
non-defaulting (the subject line and the news- 
groups to post the item into). If the newsgroups 
for the posting are moderated newsgroups, the 
posting is automatically re-directed as mail to 
the moderator address and NOT posted directly to 
NEWS. If a filename is specified, the editor is 
loaded with the text of the specified file; 
otherwise, the editor creates a new file. 

POST/NOEDIT Bypasses the call to the editor in forming a new 

item to post. If no post filename is specified, 
the editor call is forced. 

POST/HEADERS POST normally prompts for the subject of the 

posting and a list of newsgroups into which to post 
the item. All other header lines of the newsitem 
text will be filled with null values. The 
/HEADERS qualifier forces prompting for optional 
components of the item header. These fields are: 

Summary: A one line summary of the contents 

of the posting. 

Reply-To: The (internet) mail address for 

REPLYing to the item - used if 
replies are to be sent to a mail 
address OTHER than yourself (as 
the originator of the item). 

Distribution: A (comma separated) list of keywords 
words designed to limit the 
distribution of a news item to a 
subset of the network. These 
keywords are site specific, but 
commonly include the keywords 
"local" (do not forward to the 
net) and "world" (forward as far 
as possible through the net). 

Followup-To: The list of newsgroups where 

followup postings are to be sent. 
This is used to move a discussion 
to another newsgroup. 

Keywords: A few relevant, pithy keywords which 

should indicate to other readers 
whether the item is of interest. 

POST/NEWSGROUPS=[news- Specifies the list of newsgroups to receive the 


34 






IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10,1990 


group-list] 

POST/SUBJECT="text 

PRINT 


PRINT/ALL 

QUIT 


READ 


READ/HEADER 

READ/NEW 

READ/EDIT 

READ/NEXT 

READ/LAST 

READ/BACK 
READ/PARENT 


READ/IDENTIFTEF=id 


posting. If this qualifier value is not specified, 
the user is prompted for the newsgroups. The 
list is a comma separated list of newsgroup names, 
string" Specifies the subject of the message for the 

heading. If not specified, the user is prompted 
for the /SUBJECT value. 

Appends the current news item to a temporary 
print file. As each item is PRINTed, it is 
appended to this print file. At the end of the 
NEWS run, the user is prompted for the name of 
the queue to which the output is to be sent. 

The temporary print file is deleted once the 
print job is complete. 

Copies ALL of the items in the current selected 
newsgroup into the file. 

Exits from NEWS without updating the user's 
news register file. Thus, no changes are made 
to the set of unread items, nor are any changes 
made to the set of marked news items (this is a 
more graceful means of Ctrl-C or Ctrl-Y!). 

Reads the next item from the current selected 
newsgroup and displays the item on the screen 
page-by-page. The actions of READ can be modified 
by giving a Newsitem number, which will display 
that item. 

Normally NEWS suppresses the display of all 
network routing headers. This qualifier produces 
a full display of the item contents including 
mail header lines. 

Displays the next unread newsitem from the set of 
registered newsgroups; may cause an implicit 
SELECT of a different newsgroup to obtain the next 
unread item. 

Uses an editor in read-only mode to view the 
newsitem. This is useful when it is necessary to 
scroll through the item text or extract a part of 
the text into a file. 

Skips the remainder of the current newsitem and 
displays the next item. 

Skips the remainder of the current newsitem and 
displays the previous item. 

Equivalent to the /LAST qualifier. 

NEWS items may reference a previous posted item. 

In such a case the text of the item begins: 

"In article i<identifier>}, {username} writes:” 
When a news item references previous items, 
the header includes the identifier of the parent 
item. READ/PARENT will display the parent item 
referenced by the current item. 

All NEWS items are identified by a unique message 
identification string. (This identifier can be 
displayed using the READ/HEADER command, and 


35 






IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


READ/MARK=tag 

READ/FOLLOWUP 

READ/PREV 

REFRESH 

REGISTER [Newsgroup-name] 

REPLY 

REPLY/HEADERS 

REPLY/SUBJECT=subj 

REPLY/SELF 

SEARCH [target string] 


noting the "Message-Id: ..." line). An item to 
be displayed can be selected by providing the 
identifier of the item, e.g.: 

READ/IDENTIFIERS’<24 30esc.anu. oz>" 

Displays the text of the NEXT newsitem marked with 
the specified tag value. If no tag value is 
specified, then the next item marked with any tag 
is used. 

Scans the current newsgroup for the next newsitem 
with a subject field which matches that of the 
current newsitem subject (within the current 
newsgroup); permits viewing of the responses 
(if any) to the current newsitem. 

NEWS maintains a history of the last 10 items 
read. READ/PREV pops the most recent item index 
off this history stack and displays the item. 
Repeated calls to READ/PREV will continue to 
pop the stack until the history stack is emptied. 
In screen mode: repaints the screen. By default 
bound to the Ctrl-W key. 

Adds newsgroups to the user's register file. 
Registering to a newsgroup implies that NEWS 
will automatically keep track of which items in 
the newsgroup have been read, so the user can 
view only the unread news items with repeated 
READ/NEW commands. The newsgroup-name parameter 
specifies the name of the newsgroup to register. 

If the parameter is not specified, the current 
newsgroup is added to the register file. 

Posts a MAIL reply directly to the sender of a 
newsitem; used to respond directly to the poster 
of an item without the item appearing on the net. 
NEWS will pre-load the edit buffer with the text 
of the item to which the reply is being sent, 
then invoke the editor. 

By default, newsitem headers are stripped from 
the item text before it is mailed. This 
qualifier loads the item header lines into the 
mail buffer along with the body of the text. 
Specifies the subject header of the mail reply. 

If not specified, NEWS will prompt for a 
"Subject:" field for the mail. 

Forwards a copy of the outgoing mail item back 
to the sender. 

Directs NEWS to locate a newsitem containing a 
specified text string. The next item containing 
the text string is displayed on the screen. 
Repeated calls to SEARCH (without specifying a 
text string) will locate successive occurrences 
in other news items that are in the specified 
rewsgroups. If no target string is specified, 
the search is resumed using the previous target 


36 






IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


SEARCH/NEWSGROUP S 
groups 

SEARCH/EDIT 

SEARCH/HEADER 

SEARCH/NODISPLAY 

SCREEN 

SELECT newsgroup 

SELECT/NEW 

SELECT/MARK=tag 

SHOW KILL 
SHOW MARK [tag] 


string. The search is usually case-insensitive, 
but this may be reversed (made case-sensitive) 
by specifying a mixed-case string (i.e., upper 
case only and lower case only target strings are 
case-insensitive). To specify a mixed-case string 
you must enclose the string in " characters 
(e.g. SEARCH "String"). Since this action 
involves examining the contents of all specified 
item files, this command may take a long time to 
execute. The search may be interrupted by 
pressing the RETURN key. This will call up a NEWS 
input prompt, and the search may either be resumed 
(with another RETURN) or a new command may be 
given. 

news- By default. Search is limited to the current 
newsgroup. This can be modified by specifying 
the newsgroups which should be searched. 

The wildcard character ('*') may be used to 
include a set of newsgroups. A number of news- 
groups may be specified with the usual list 
notation (comma separated list). 

Uses an editor in read-only mode to view the 
newsitem. This is useful when it is required 
to scroll through the item text or extract a part 
of the text into a file. 

Normally NEWS suppresses the display of all 
network routing headers. This qualifier produces 
a full display of the item contents including 
mail header lines. 

Positions the screen directory to the item 
containing the the target string, but does 
not display the item text. 

Enters NEWS screen display mode (the default 
mode). This command is normally given after 
a NOSCREEN command. 

Changes newsgroup context to the nominated 
newsgroup. If no newsgroup is given, selects 
the current newsgroup. Otherwise, the specified 
newsgroup is opened. 

Selects the next registered newsgroup containing 
unread newsitems. If the current newsgroup 
contains unread items, no action is performed. 
Moves the current item pointer to the NEXT 
newsitem marked with the specified tag value. If 
no tag value is specified, the next item marked 
with any tag is used. 

Displays the current KILL filter set. 

Displays a listing of the set of marked newsitems. 
If no tag value is specified, all mark tag values 
are displayed. If a tag is used, only those tag 
values which match using wildcard matching are 
displayed. 


37 










IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10,1990 


SKIP 

specified, 

SKIP/ALL 

SKIP/BEFORE=date 

SKIP/FOLLOWUP 

SKIP/NEWSGROUP 

SPAWN 

UNMARK [tag] 

UNREAD 
UP [Number] 

VERSION 


Marks individual newsitems or all newsitems within 
a newsgroup as having been read by the user. If 
the current display is the newsitem directory, 

SKIP marks the 'current' newsitem as read and 
advances the newsitem pointer to the next 
newsitem. If the current display is the newsgroup 
directory or the /NEWSGROUP qualifier is 

then ALL newsitems within the 'current' newsgroup 
are marked as having been read. 

Mark ALL news items in ALL newsgroups as having 
been read by the user. 

Marks all items in the current newsgroup which 
were created on the local system before the date 
specified as having been viewed by the user. 

May also be used with the /ALL qualifier to mark 
all items in all newsgroups created prior to the 
specified date, as having been viewed. 

The date format is the standard VMS date-time 
format; e.g. SKIP/BEFORE=22-FEB. "TODAY" and 
"YESTERDAY" are accepted as valid date strings. 
Marks as read all newsitems in the current 
newsgroup with a subject field matching the 
current newsitem; used to skip entire conversation 
streams: all newsitems with related subject 
fields will be marked as having been read. 

Marks ALL items in the current newsgroup as read. 
If the current display is the newsgroup directory, 
/NEWSGROUP is the default action - if the 
current display is the newsitem directory, 
/NONEWSGROUP is the default action, and only the 
current item is marked. 

Spawns a DCL level subprocess from NEWS (using 
LIBSSPAWN). LOGOUT from the subprocess returns 
to NEWS. 

Clears the mark from the current newsitem. 

If a tag is specified, only those tag values are 
be cleared. If no tag is specified, all tags are 
removed from the item. The tag may be specified 
using wildcard characters. 

Marks the current item as UNREAD; allows the item 
to be displayed at a later time by READ/NEW. 

In screen mode: moves the cursor up one line. 

This command is bound to the up arrow key on the 
terminal, and the command "UP 18" is bound to the 
PREV SCREEN key. 

Displays the software version and crreation date 
of the local NEWS software. 


38 








IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


APPENDIX G. 

APPENDIX: Standard Generalized Markup Language 


The STARS computer supports two Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML, ISO 
8879:1986) processors, the STARS Foundations software and the Datalogics commercial SGML 
parser called ParseStation. The STARS Foundations SGML software was developed in 1988 
under a contract with the Naval Research Laboratories and is known as the SGML Text 
Composition System (STCS). STCS does not fully implement the SGML standard and suffers 
from slow execution, but it does support the processing of an SGML document through printing 
on ASCH text devices or onto Postscript printers. The Datalogics ParseStation product is a high 
speed SGML parser that fully conforms to the SGML standard. It does not support any form of 
formatted output other than a Cannonical Test Results file. The use of each described briefly 
below. 

G.l STCS 

The STCS SGML parser is supplied with four DTDs and output programs for each, all files 
for SGML may be found under the logical name SGML:. The following filename extensions are 
used in the STCS software: 

.DTD Suggested extension for SGML Document Type Definitions (DTD) 

.BNS Output file extension from the DTD to BNF translator program 

DTDTOBNF which must be used to make a new DTD available to 
parser program named SGML 

•SGM Suggested extension for source files with SGML markup 

.CDC Output file extension from the SGML parser, the file is called 

a composition document. 

•PS Output file extension from a TCS document formatting application 

designed for a particular DTD and linked for Postscript output 

.TXT Output file extension from a TCS document formatting application 

designed for a particular DTD and linked for text file output 


The STCS software has three DTDs developed for it, the Report, the Memo, and the Letter. 
A DTD for a Briefing has been prepared by task IR65. The following commands are recognized 
in support of STCS SGML, each takes a single argument of its input filename: 

STCS Used to process an STCS document from SGML to the proper 

formatting program for either REPORT, MEMO, LETTER or 
BRIEFING. This procedure runs the SGML parser to produce a 
Composition Document and then runs the appropriate TCS 
program to produce the formatted Postscript output file. 

This command queues the output to be printed on a local 
printer and renames the Postscript output file to the name 
of the input file with an extension of ".PS". STCS will 
print a short help message if no filename is given. 


39 




IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10,1990 


SGML Processes an input file to a composition document for 

input to the correct document formatting program. The 
output from this program is a file with the input filename 
and the extension ".CDC" 

DTDTOBNF Reads a DTD file and prepares an intermediate form of 

the DTD for use by SGML. This process has been done for 
the REPORT, MEMO, LETTER, and BRIEFING. The output file 
will have the extension ".BNS" 

Report TCS program which outputs a Postscript file with the 
name REPORT_OUTPUT.PS 

Report TCS program which outputs an ASCII Text file with the 
name REPORT_OUTPUT.TXT 

Letter TCS program which outputs a Postscript file with the 
name LETTER_OUTPUT.PS 

Letter TCS program which outputs an ASCII Text file with the 
name LETTER_OUTPUT.TXT 

Memo TCS program which outputs a Postscript file with the 
name MEMO_OUTPUT.PS 

Memo TCS program which outputs an ASCII Text file with the 
name REPORT_OUTPUT. 

BRIEFING Briefing TCS program which outputs a Postscript file with 

the name BRIEFING_OUTPUT.PS 

When using the STCS software, each source instance file to the parser must start with a 
document type declaration of the form: 

<!doctype report> 

— or — 

<!DOCTYPE report[ 

<!entity mo cdata ”<"> 

<!entity me cdata ">"> 

<!entity me cdata "</"> 

]> 

The second example shows the use of entity declarations in a document instance. Use of the 
STCS software is shown below to produce the Postscript and text formatted output of the file 
mydoc.sgm prepared using the Report DTD. 

$ SGML mydoc.sgm 

SGML SYSTEM -- Version 1.2.4 

Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC) 

Use limited to U.S. Gov't agencies and contractors. 

Developed Under Naval Research Laboratory Contract No. N00014-87-C-2386 


MEMO 

MEMOA 


LETTER 

LETTERA 


REPORT 

REPORTA 


40 







IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


Developed Under Contract No. F19628-88-D-0032 for USAF ESD, Hanscom AFB 

Initializing parser 
Processing BNS document 
Processing source document 
SGML processing complete 
$ REPORT mydoc.cdc 

Text Composition System -- Version 1.2.4 

Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC) 

Use limited to U.S. Gov't agencies and contractors. 

Developed Under Naval Research Laboratory Contract No. N00014-87-C-2386 
Developed Under Contract No. F19628-88-D-0032 for USAF ESD, Hanscom AFB 

$ rename report_output.ps mydoc.ps 
$ print/param=data_type=postscript mydoc.ps 
$ REPORTA mydoc.cdc 

Text Composition System -- Version 1.2.4 

Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC) 

Use limited to U.S. Gov't agencies and contractors. 

Developed Under Naval Research Laboratory Contract No. N00014-87-C-2386 
Developed Under Contract No. F19628-88-D-0032 for USAF ESD, Hanscom AFB 

$ rename report_output.txt mydoc.txt 
$ print mydoc.txt 
$ delete mydoc.cdc; 


G.2 DataLogics ParseStation 

ParseStation consists of three products: an SGML Declarations Parser (SP), a DTD Parser 
(DP), and a Document Instance Parser (IP). The only output from the Datalogics parser is a log 
file and an optional Cannonical Test Results file, no formatted output is available. Unlike the 
STCS software described above, a source instance file for the Datalogics parser must not have a 
Document Type Declaration preceding the markup source. The steps to process a source instance 
to a DTD using the Datalogics parser are described below. 

NOTE: The Datalogics products SP, DP, and IP will display a help message when executed 
with no parameters. At this time the help mesaages are corrupted by "garbage' characters. 
Datalogics has not yet addressed this problem though they have been notified that it exists. It 
is due, they say, to the special version they prepared to run under VMS 4.7. 


An SGML Declarations file must be processed to inform the parser of the coding scheme 
(syntax) used in the preparation of the SGML document. A sample file is available which 
implements the reference concrete syntax, as used for basic SGML documents and with the 
STCS parser. The SGML Declaration parser is used as follows: 

$ SP report.sds 

SGML Declaration Parser 


41 




IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10, 1990 


Version 4.7b 

Copyright (c) Datalogics 1989, 1990 
An SGML Program Conforming to 
International Standard ISO 8879 
Standard Generalized Markup Language 

Parsing SGML Declarations File 'report.sds'. 

Closing Statistics: 

Output File: 'report.sdo'. 

Bytes used for string space: 131. 

Bytes used for control blocks: 1952. 

SGML Declarations Parser Completed Successfully. 

SGML Declarations Parser Exit Code: 0. 

$ 


The DTD must be processed by the DTD Parser, as show below: 

$ DP report.dtd 

SGML Document Type Definition Parser 
Version 2.9b 

Copyright (c) Datalogics 1988, 1989, 1990 
An SGML Program Conforming to 
International Standard ISO 8879 
Standard Generalized Markup Language 

Log File: 'report.log' 

SDO File: 'report.sdo' 

Namecase General is True. 

Namecase Entity is False. 

Parsing DTD File: 'report.dtd' 

Parsing DOCTYPE REPORT 

This DTD Conforms to the ISO 8879 Standard 

DTO File 'report.dto' Created 

Closing Statistics: 

Capacity Points: 560 

Bytes of DTO File String Space: 397 
SGML Descriptor Blocks: 164 

Document Type Definition Compliant and Parsed Normally. 

Program Status Code: 0. 

$ 


42 




IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10,1990 


A Job File file must be prepared. The job file will have four lines as shown below, each line 
tells the instance parser where to find a file it needs. Using the file names that have been 
processed with the above commands, the job file will look like: 

Column 

0 12 
123456789012345678901234567890 


DTD 

report.dtd 

«« 

DTD file name 



DTO 

report.dto 

«« 

output file 

name from 

DP 

(above) 

SDS 

report.sds 

«« 

input file 

name from : 

SP 

(above) 

SDO 

report.sdo 

«« 

output file 

name from 

SP 

(above) 


Process a source instance file prepared with SGML markup for the DTD referenced in the 
above Job File. The source instance must not contain a declaration statement and must be 
prepared in the syntax specified by the SGML Declaration file. 

$ IP doc.sgm 

SGML Document Instance Parser 
Version 2.9b 

Copyright (c) Datalogics 1987, 1988, 1989 
An SGML System Conforming to 
International Standard ISO 8879 
Standard Generalized Markup Language 
IPA0112: 

************************************ 

Program messages will be written to: 
doc.log 

★*********************************** 

Reading File 'report.jbf', File Type 'JOB FILE'. 

Loading Data Structures From DTO File 'report.dto' . 

SDO File: 'report.sdo' 

Concrete Syntax Settings In Effect For This Parse: 


NAMECASE 

GENERAL: 

YES 

NAMECASE 

ENTITY: 

NO. 

NAMELEN: 


8 . 

SHORTTAG: 


NO. 


Closed 'report.jbf', File Type 'JOB FILE'. 

Reading File 'doc.sgm'. File Type 'DIRECT INPUT FILE'. 
Closed 'doc.sgm', File Type 'DIRECT INPUT FILE'. 
Document Parsed Successfully, No Errors or Warnings. 

Instance Parser Exit Status: 0. 

$ 


43 






IBM Team STARS Repository User’s Guide 

May 10,1990 


APPENDIX H. 

APPENDIX: STARS Account Request Form 


STARS User Account Request Form 


Name: __ 

Organization: 

Address: __ 

Address: __ 

City/State/Zip: _ _ 

Phone: _ 

FAX; 

Network: 

IBM _ Boeing _ Unisys 

will used for accessing the 

repository? 


Check affiliation if subcontractor : _ 

For our records, what kind of equipment 


Mail To: 

Science Applications International Corporation 
Ada Software Division 
311 Park Place Blvd. 

Suite 360 

Clearwater, Florida, 34619 
Or FAX to (813)797-3187 
For SAIC Use Only 


Username : 


Group 

IBM Approval : 

by 

date 

User Notified : 

by 

date 

Database Entry: 

by _ _ 

date 


44 




