Software 


Using Satellite Data in 
Weather Forecasting: I 

The GOES Product Generation System 
(GPGS) is a set of computer codes and 
scripts that enable the assimilation of 
real-time Geostationary Operational En- 
vironmental Satellite (GOES) data into 
regional-weather-forecasting mathemati- 
cal models. The GPGS can be used to de- 
rive such geophysical parameters as land 
surface temperature, the amount of pre- 
cipitable water, the degree of cloud cover, 
the surface albedo, and the amount of in- 
solation from satellite measurements of 
radiant energy emitted by the Earth and 
its atmosphere. GPGS incorporates a pri- 
ori information (initial guesses of thermo- 
dynamic parameters of the atmosphere) 
and radiometric measurements from the 
geostationary operational environmental 
satellites along with mathematical models 
of physical principles that govern the 
transfer of energy in the atmosphere. 
GPGS solves the radiative-transfer equa- 
tion and provides the resulting data prod- 
ucts in formats suitable for use by 
weather-forecasting computer programs. 
The data-assimilation capability afforded 
by GPGS offers the potential to improve 
local weather forecasts ranging from 3 
hours to 2 days — especially with respect 
to temperature, humidity, cloud cover, 
and the probability of precipitation. The 
improvements afforded by GPGS could 
be of interest to news media, utility com- 
panies, and other organizations that uti- 
lize regional weather forecasts. 

This program was written by Gary J. 
Jedlovec and Ronnie J. Suggs of Marshall 
Space Flight Center and Juan M. Lecue of 
the Universities Space Research Association 
and the Global Hydrology and Climate Center. 
For further information, contact Sammy Nabors, 
MSFC Commercializatcm Assistance Lead, at 
sammy.a.nabors@nasa.gov. Refer to MFS- 
31615. 


Using Dissimilarity 
Metrics To Identify 
Interesting Designs 

A computer program helps to blend 
the power of automated-search software, 
which is able to generate large numbers 
of design solutions, with the insight of ex- 
pert designers, who are able to identify 
preferred designs but do not have time to 
examine all the solutions. From among 


the many automated solutions to a given 
design problem, the program selects a 
smaller number of solutions that are wor- 
thy of scrutiny by the experts in the sense 
that they are sufficiently dissimilar from 
each other. The program makes the se- 
lection in an interactive process that in- 
volves a sequence of data-mining steps in- 
terspersed with visual displays of results of 
these steps to the experts. At crucial 
points between steps, the experts provide 
directives to guide the process. The pro- 
gram uses heuristic search techniques to 
identify nearly optimal design solutions 
and uses dissimilarity metrics defined by 
the experts to characterize the degree to 
which solutions are interestingly differ- 
ent. The search, data-mining, and visuali- 
zation features of the program were de- 
rived from previously developed 
risk-management software used to sup- 
port a risk-centric design methodology. 

This program was written by Martin 
Feather of Caltech and James Kiper of Miami 
University, Oxford, Ohio, for NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. Further informa- 
tion is contained in a TSP (see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-40456. 


@ X-Windows PVT Widget 
Class 

The X-Windows Process Validation 
Table (PVT) Widget Class (“Class” is used 
here in the object-oriented-programming 
sense of the word) was devised to simplify 
the task of implementing network regis- 
tration services for Information Sharing 
Protocol (ISP) graphical-user-interface 
(GUI) computer programs. Heretofore, 
ISP PVT programming tasks have re- 
quired many method calls to identify, 
query, and interpret the connections and 
messages exchanged between a client 
and a PVT server. Normally, program- 
mers have utilized direct access to UNIX 
socket libraries to implement the PVT 
protocol queries, necessitating the use of 
many lines of source code to perform fre- 
quent tasks. Now, the X-Windows PVT 
Widget Class encapsulates ISP client 
server network registration management 
tasks within the framework of an X Win- 
dows widget. Use of the widget frame- 
work enables an X Windows GUI pro- 
gram to interact with PVT services in an 


abstract way and in the same manner as 
that of other graphical widgets, making it 
easier to program PVT clients. Wrapping 
the PVT services inside the widget frame- 
work enables a programmer to treat a 
PVT server interface as though it were a 
GUI. Moreover, an alternate subclass 
could implement another service in a 
widget of the same type. 

This program was written by Matthew R. 
Barry of United Space Alliance for Johnson 
Space Center. For further information, con- 
tact the Johnson Technology Transfer Office 
at (281) 483-3809. 

MSC-23582 


@ Shuttle Data Center File- 
Processing Tool in Java 

A Java-language computer program 
has been written to facilitate mining of 
data in files in the Shuttle Data Center 
(SDC) archives. This program can be ex- 
ecuted on a variety of workstations or via 
Web-browser programs. This program is 
partly similar to prior C-language pro- 
grams used for the same purpose, while 
differing from those programs in that it 
exploits the platform-neutrality of Java 
in implementing several features that 
are important for analysis of large sets of 
time-series data. The program supports 
regular expression queries of SDC 
archive files, reads the files, interleaves 
the time-stamped samples according to a 
chosen output, then transforms the re- 
sults into that format. A user can choose 
among a variety of output file formats 
that are useful for diverse purposes, in- 
cluding plotting, Markov modeling, 
multivariate density estimation, and 
wavelet multiresolution analysis, as well 
as for playback of data in support of sim- 
ulation and testing. 

This program was written by Matthew R. 
Barry and Walter H. Miller of United Space 
Alliance for Johnson Space Center. For 
further information, contact the Johnson 
Technology Transfer Office at (281) 483- 
3809. 

MSC-23584 


|jp Statistical Evaluation of Uti- 
lization of the ISS 

PayLoad Utilization Modeler 
(PLUM) is a statistical-modeling com- 
puter program used to evaluate the ef- 
fectiveness of utilization of the Interna- 


NASA Tech Briefs, July 2006 


17 


