AJ 


O / S /> 3 Aj 

/// ~6 / * < ' 

J / a S3 ^ 


AdaNET Executive Summary 


R. Michael Digman 

MountainNet, Inc. 


( NAS A-CR-1S7 303 ) AddNfcT 
(MountainNet) 265 p 


executive summary 

CSCL 09B 


N91-13091 


Unci as 

G3/61 0312532 


August 1988 


Cooperative Agreement NCC 9-16 
Research Activity No. SE.18 


NASA Headquarters 
NASA Technology Utilization Program 



Research Institute for Computing and Information Systems 
University of Houston Clear Lake 



TECHNICAL REPORT 



J 

j 


The 

RICIS 

Concept 


The University of Houston-Clear Lake established the Research Institute for 
Computing and Information systems in 1986 to encourage NASA Johnson Sp ace 


Center and local industry to actively support research in the computing and 
information sciences. As part of this endeavor, UH-Clear Lake proposed a 
partnership with JSC to jointly define and manage an integrated program of research 
in advanced data processing technology needed for JSC’s main missions, including 
administrative, engineering and science responsibilities. JSC agreed and ente red i nto 
a three-year cooperative agreement with UH-Clear Lake beginning inMay, 1 986, W 
jointly plan and execute such research through RICIS. Additionally, under 
Cooperativ e Agre ement NCC 9- 1 6, computing an d educati onaljaeilities are shared 
by tfie two institutions t o condu ct the research. 

The mission of RICIS is to conduct, coordinate and disseminate research on 
computing and information systems among researchers, sponsors and users from 
UH-Clear Lake, NASA/JSC, and other research organi zatio ns. Withi n UH- Cl ear 
Lake, the mission is being implemented through interdisciplinary i nvolve ment of 
faculty and students from each of the four schools: "B usiness, Education, Human 
Sciences and Humanities, and Natural and Applied Sciences. 

Other research organizations are involved via the “gateway” concept. UH- Clear 


Lake establishes relationships with other universities and research organizations^ 
having common research interests, to provide additional sources of expertise to 
conduct needed research. 

A major role of RICIS is to find the best match of sponsors, researchers and 
research objectives to advance knowledge in the computing an d inform atic 
sciences. Working jointly with NASA/JSC, RICIS advises on research needs, 
recommends principals for conducting the research, provides technical and 
administrative support to coordinate the research, and integrates technical results 
into the cooperative goals of UH-Clear Lake and NASA/JSCr ~~~ : 


Hi? 



AdaNET Executive Summary 




Preface 


This research was conducted under the auspices of the Research Institute for 
Computing and Information Systems by MountainNet, Inc., under the supervision of 
R. Michael Digman. Peter C. Bishop, Director of the Space Business Research 
Center at the University of Houston-Clear Lake, served as RICIS technical 
representative for this project. 

Funding has been provided by the NASA Technology Utilization Program of 
NASA Headquarters through Cooperative Agreement NCC 9-16 between NASA 
Johnson Space Center and the University of Houston-Clear Lake. The NASA 
technical monitor for the activity was Roy Bivins, Manager, Information & Network 
Operation Technology Utilization Division, NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C. 

The views and conlcusions contained in this report are those of the author and 
should not be interpreted as representative of the official policies, either express or 
implied, of NASA or the United States Government. 





AdaNET Executive Summary 

MountainNet, Inc. is researching and developing AdaNET in response to the 
needs of the United States industrial base. This NASA and DoD co-sponsored 
initiative will combine the strengths of software engineering and Ada technology. 

The US Department of Defense recognized that proliferation of computers 
and resultant software was requiring an unacceptable level of funding and other 
resources to field and reliably maintain critical defense systems. In response to 
this, the Ada language was developed and introduced. Ada has achieved a suc- 
cessful introduction in the defense and space community. However, experts in the 
field of software engineering have recognized the applicability of Ada in the com- 
mercial sector; most notably in process control applications, factory automation 
techniques, communications and management information systems. 

The goal of AdaNET is to transfer existing and emerging software engineer- 
ing technology from the federal government to the private sector. As a change 
agent introduced into the infrastructure of US industry, AdaNET will provide a 
distributed information base on software engineering and Ada as well as a library 
of reusable software. 

Reautomation is essential to maintain US industrial competitiveness in the 
global marketplace. AdaNET’s key service will be to significantly aid this pro- 
cess. First, the AdaNET Information Services will provide users with insight into 
the Ada community and it’s related software engineering technology. This will 
be accomplished through value added information services detailing training op- 
portunities, government initiatives, technology breakthroughs and marketplace 
information. Additionally, AdaNET will act as an automated “clearinghouse” 
gateway into other information sources. Second, the Dynamic Software Inven- 
tory will contain software “profiles” and “parts” which can be used to build a 
portion of, or am entire, software subsystem. Significantly, these components will 
be part of an entire software lifecycle inventory which will include requirements 
statements, software architecture design and component, or part, detailed de- 
sign. Such documentation is extremely important in order for software reuse to 
be effective. 

Creating the environment to promote good software engineering practices 
is a key ingredient to AdaNET. Beginning with the existing Ada community, 
AdaNET will reach out to the U.S. business and manufacturing communities. 
This change agent function will serve to speed up the transition of technology 
and eiihance the ability of U.S. industry to integrate factory floor, management 
information and distribution systems. 


1 


AdaNET is being designed and implemented by MountainNet, Inc., a West 
Virginia based software engineering and communications company. Funding is 
being provided by the NASA Technology Utilization Division and the DoD Ada 
Joint Program Office, through the Johnson Space Center, under subcontract to 
the University of Houston - Clear Lake. Support for the program is being provided 
by NASA’s Technology Utilization Division, the DoD Ada Joint Program Office, 
the Department of Commerce, Office of Productivity, Technology and Innovation, 
and the DoD Department of the Army. 

AdaNET is an important put of U.S. industry, as a technology transition 
mechanism, a change agent, and a resource for manufacturing reautomation. 


2 


Disclaimer Notice 


The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the au- 
thors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies 
or recommendations of the Technology Utilization Division of the National Aero- 
nautics and Space Administration, the Ada Joint Program Office of the U. S. 
Department of Defense, or the Office of Productivity, Technology and Innovation 
of the U. S. Department of Commerce. 


3 


Overview 


This is MountainNet, Inc.’s final res earch repor t for The Initial Study of the 
Feasibility of Expansion and Commercialization of an Ada Technology Transfer 
Network and Implementation of Such a Network. It is the culmination of efforts 
to describe the operational components of AdaNET. The Natio nal Aeronautics 
and Space Administration Technology Utilization Division and the Depa rtment 
of Defense Ada Joint Program Office, through the Johnson Space Center, are 
supporting this technology transition initiative, under the direction of the the 
University of Houston-Clear Lake. All participating government agencies look to 
use AdaNET in helping to extend software engineering and Ada technology be- 
yond the aerospace and defense industries, out to US business and manufacturing 
communities. 

As the initial feasibility study of the commercialization of AdaNET as an 
Ada Technology Transition Network, with plans for implementation of this net- 
work, this report details those components necessary for success. The objective 
of UHCL’s Research Institute for Computing and Information Sciences (RICIS) 
was to “obtain a comprehensive plan for organization and operation of an Ada 
technology transfer activity which, within a reasonable time, has a high proba- 
bility of being self supporting and which will effectively promote the increased 
utilization of Ada in commercial applications.” 

This report is the culmination of a two-phase research activity, with phase 
HI, continuing research in lifecycle library design and first stage services imple- 
mentation, being subject to future funding availability. 

This report was prepared by MountainNet, Inc., a software engineering and 
communications company located in Morgantown, WV. MountainNet recom- 
mends that additional funding be set aside to phase-in the AdaNET service 
over time. During the initial funding period for implementation, MountainNet 
will track revenues versus expenditures, with in-depth evaluation of resources uti- 
lization and user activity in specific services areas, so as to more clearly identify 
when the AdaNET service can become totally self supporting. 

This report contains: 


Organizational Views A report which specifies the desires and views of co- 
sponsoring organizations and potential AdaNET users; 


4 



Organizational Plan This report presents the planned organizational struc- 
ture for services development and technology transition of AdaNET services to 
potential user communities; 

Business Plan The plan to operate the AdaNET service as a commercial ven- 
ture; 

Technical Plan The plan from which the AdaNET can be designed, including 
detailed requirements analysis; 

Analysis of User Fees and Charges and Proposed Fee Schedule 

Organizational Documents The documents necessary to operate the AdaNET 
service on a commercially self-supporting basis. These include license agreements, 
nondisclosure agreements and others. 


5 



Final Report 
For The 

Initial Study of the Feasibility 
of 

Expansion and Commercialization 
of an 

Ada Technology Transfer Network 
and 

Implementation of Such a Network © 

August 2, 1988 

Subcontract No. 002 
Cooperative Agreement NCC9-16 
Project No. RICIS No. SE. 18 


Submitted toT 

University of Houston - Clear Lake 
2700 Bay Area Boulevard 
Houston, TX 77058-1096 


Restricted Rights Notice 


Use, reproduction, or disclosure is subject to restrictions set forth in Government Co- 
operative Agreement Number NCC9-16 between the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration and the University of Houston-Clear Lake and a subcontract thereun- 
der, Number 002, RICIS No. SE.18 between the University of Houston-Clear Lake and 
MountainNet, Inc. 


Prepared by: 
MountainNet, Inc. 
Eastgate Plaza 
P. 0. Box 370 
DeUslow, WV 26531-0370 


® AdaNET, MountainNet and the AdaNET logo are registered trademarks of MountainNet Inc. 


Final Report 
For The 

Initial Study of the Feasibility 
of 

Expansion and Commercialization 
of an 

Ada Technology Transfer Network 
and 

Implementation of Such a Network © 

August 2, 1988 

Subcontract No. 002 
Cooperative Agreement NCC9-16 
Project No. RICIS No. SE. 18 

Submitted to: 

University of Houston - Clear Lake 
2700 Bay Area Boulevard 
Houston, TX 77058-1096 



R. Michael Digman, Mount ainNet, Inc. 


1 


Contents 


1 AdaNET Organizational Views 11 

1.1 AdaNET Project Report 12 

1.2 Participant’s Views . . 14 

1.2.1 Ada Joint Program Office . 14 

1.2.2 DOC Office of Productivity, Technology and Innovation . . 15 

1.2.3 NASA Technology Utilization Division 16 

Computer Software Management and Information Center 
(COSMIC) 19 

High Technologies Laboratory 20 

NASA Industrial Applications Center (NIAC) 21 

NASA Technical Applications Team (TA) 21 

1.2.4 Beckley College 22 

1.2.5 Software Valley Corporation 23 

1.2.6 West Virginia University /WVU Research Corporation ... 23 

1.3 Summary of AdaNET Services 24 

2 Organizational Structure 26 

2.1 Project Activity . , . 27 

2.2 Organizational Structure 28 

2.2.1 History of the Concept 28 

2.2.2 Current Developmental Structure 30 

2.2.3 Intern al Audit Controls . . 31 

2.2.4 For-Profit Development Model 33 


2 


2.2.5 Internal Development Structure 35 

2.2.6 Organizational Panels 36 

Federal Advisory Panel 37 

Mission and Goad Statement 39 

The Business and Industry Council 40 

Mission amd Goad Statement 41 

Technology Advisory Council .42 

Mission amd Goad Statement 42 

2.2.7 Long Term Interaction with University of Houston - Clear 

Lake 44 

2.2.8 Interaction With SEAD 44 

2.2.9 Incorporation of New Project Sponsors 46 

2.2.10 Interaction with NASA Affiliates 47 

2.2.11 Incorporation of Private Sector Participants 47 

2.3 Outline of Project Activity 48 

2.3.1 AdaNET Project Meetings 48 

2.3.2 Initial AdaNET Survey 49 

2.3.3 AdaNET Participant Communications 49 

2.3.4 Network Plamning 50 

2.3.5 Current Network Implementation 51 

2.3.6 User Survey and Marketing Implications 52 

AdaNET Brochure 52 

Generad Impressions 53 

Initial Market Survey 53 

Attachment A: Project Participants 56 

Attachment B: Project Deliverables 57 

Attachment C: Ada Market Survey 58 

Attachment D: Mail Registration Form 50 

Attachment E: Agenda 52 

Attachment F: Brochure “Step-Paiges” 53 

3 Business Plan 


3 


3.1 Executive Summary 67 

3.1.1 The Company 67 

3.1.2 MountainNet’s AdaNET Services 67 

3.1.3 The Market 68 

3.1.4 Financial Projections 69 

3.2 Background 70 

3.3 The Market 72 

3.3.1 The Software Engineering and Ada Marketplace 72 

Ada in a Software Engineering Environment 72 

The Current Ada Marketplace 73 

3.3.2 Market Trends 75 

3.3.3 Market Participants . 76 

3.3.4 Market Composition 77 

3.3.5 Market Segments 78 

3.3.6 Distribution Media 79 

3.3.7 Complementary Services 80 

3.4 Market Strategy 83 

3.5 Products 86 

3.5.1 Description 86 

3.5.2 Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) 87 

Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) 87 

3.5.3 AdaNET Information Services (AIS) 88 

Professional Information 88 

3.5.4 Spinoffs 89 

3.5.5 Revenue Classes 89 

3.6 Management , 91 

3.6.1 James W. Rautner 91 

Presentations 91 

3.6.2 Donn Philpot • 92 

3.6.3 Kevin J. Dyer .93 

Professional Activities (Partial) 93 

3.6.4 Linda K. Braun 95 


4 


3.7 Financial 96 

3.8 Appendix A: Initial Marketing Survey Results for the AdaEXPO— 

Boston, MA, December, 1987 106 

Respondent Profile 107 

Affiliation With Professional Organizations 107 

Survey Data-Raw Results 108 

Questions in Order of Perceived Importance 109 

Ranking of Importance 109 

4 Technical Plan HO 

4.1 Scope HI 

4.1.1 Goal HI 

4.1.2 AdaNET System Overview 112 

Participating Organizations Views 114 

Applicable documents 114 

4.1.3 Schedule Constraints 115 

4.2 AdaNET Functional Requirements . 115 

4.2.1 Networking and Communications 115 

Existing Elements 116 

Planned Expansion 116 

4.2.2 Hardware 120 

Present Configuration 120 

Future Expansion 122 

4.2.3 Software 123 

Off-the Shelf 123 

Developmental Activities 126 

4.2.4 Data and Information Sources 126 

4.2.5 Operational Considerations 127 

Expected Volume 129 

Distribution Media 129 

User Assistance 130 

Service Revenue Structures 130 


5 


Telephone Support 131 

User Documentation 131 

On-Line Access 131 

Microcomputer Access 133 

4.2.6 Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) 133 

Background 133 

Reuseable Ada Software 134 

Other Life Cycle Objects 134 

Documentation . _._j_ . . 134 

Metrics 134 

Profile Information 134 

Reuse Database/ Taxonomy 135 

Retrieval/Duplication 135 

Tutorials 135 

4.2.7 AdaNET Information Services (AIS) 136 

User Forums . 136 

AdaNET Bibliographic System (ABS) 136 

Educational Materials 136 

Electronic Communications 136 

Full Text Information 136 

Directories/Publications 137 

Other Repositories and Services . . 137 

4.2.8 Access Security 137 

4.3 Tasks and Deliverables ... 138 

4.3.1 AdaNET System Design . 139 

4.3.2 Data Gathering . . . . . , 139 

4.3.3 System Documentation 140 

4.3.4 AdaNET Information Services (AIS) 140 

4.3.5 Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) Design 143 

Object Evaluation 143 

Object Inquiry .... . . . . .. . . . . • 144 

Object Retrieval 144 


6 


Library /System Configuration 145 

4.3.6 Initial Network Introduction 145 

4.3.7 Growth Plan for Additional Services 146 

Spinoffs • 146 

Medium Term 147 

Long Term Goals 148 

4.4 Quality and Standards Assurance 149 

4.4.1 Verification Requirements 149 

Networking and Communications 149 

Hardware 150 

Software . . . 150 

Data and Information Sources 150 

Operational Considerations 150 

Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) 151 

Database 151 

AdaNET Information Services (AIS) 151 

4.4.2 Validation Demonstration 151 

4.4.3 Process Standards Compliance 152 

4.5 Additional Resource Requirements 152 

4.5.1 Hardware 152 

4.5.2 Software 153 

4.5.3 Networking and Communications 153 

4.5.4 Personnel 153 

4.5.5 Administrative 154 

AdaNET Organizational Structure 154 

4.6 AdaNET Research Project 156 

5 Revenue Plan 15® 

5.1 Overview 159 

5.2 Products and Services 150 

5.2.1 Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) 160 

Reusable Ada Software 160 


7 


Other Life. Cycle Objects 160 

Documentation 160 

Metrics 161 

Profile Information 161 

Retrieval/Duplication 161 

Reuse Database/Taxonomy 162 

Tutorials 162 

5.2.2 AdaNET Information Services (AIS) 162 

User Forums 162 

AdaNET Bibliographic System (ABS) 162 

Educational Materials 163 

Electronic Communications 163 

Full Text Information 163 

Directories/Publications ............ 163 

Other Repositories and Services 163 

5.2.3 Professional Support Services 164 

Consultant Services 164 

Seminars and Workshops 164 

5.3 Target Market 164 

5.3.1 Market Segments 164 

5.3.2 Market Composition 166 

5.3.3 Initial Market Survey 166 

5.4 Sources of Ada Software and Technology 168 

5.5 R evenue Struc tures . . . . . . . • • • • ■ .......... • • ... 168 

Revenue Classes for AdaNET Services 171 

5.5.1 Defraying Costs of Operation 172 

5.5.2 Maintaining Commercial Competitiveness . . 173 

5.5.3 Standardizing Revenue Structures 173 

5.5.4 Implementing Incentive Programs , • • • 173 

5.5.5 Providing Economically Disadvantaged Discounts 173 

5.5.6 Reimbursing of Direct Contributions . . . . . ... . . • • • • 174 

5.6 Comparative Pricing m 


8 


5.6.1 On-Line Services Delivery 174 

Communications Fees 174 

Connect Time Charges 175 

Print or Display Charges 175 

Per Search Term Charges 175 

Flat Rates 175 

Annual “Password” Fees 176 

Deposit Account Charges 176 

Credits 176 

5.6.2 Alternate Distribution Media 176 

CD-ROM Products 176 

Floppy Disk Products 176 

Magnetic Tape 177 

Printed Media 177 

5.6.3 Workshops, Seminars and Consultants 177 

8 Organizational Documents 178 

Nondisclosure Agreement 18° 

Full T im e Employment Agreement 185 

MountainNet Software License - Terms and Conditions 187 

Database Agreement I® 7 

Subcontract Between MountainNet and Subcontractor 202 

Teaming Agreement 234 

AdaNET Electronic Mail Service Registration • • 244 

6.1 Internal Documents 246 

6.1.1 Summary .246 

7 Acronyms 254 

7.1 List of Acronyms 254 

Bibliography 258 


9 


List of Figures 

2.1 Basic Federal Funding and Program Management of the AdaNET 

Service 32 

2.2 AdaNET Service Implementation Model 34 

4.1 AdaNET Gateway/Clearinghouse Functional Overview 113 

4.2 AdaNET Network Connectivity 121 

4.3 AdaNET Proposed Systems Configuration 124 

4.4 Sources of Software Engineering and Ada Technology 128 

4.5 AdaNET Organizational Structure 155 

4.6 Proposed Milestones and Deliverables 157 

5.1 Source of Ada Software and Technology 169 


10 


Chapter 1 


AdaNET Organizational 
Views 


11 


1.1 AdaNET Project Report 


This report summarizes the views and perspectives of the current AdaNET 
project participants. These participants, and the affiliated organizations iden- 
tified with them include: 


National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) 

Technology Utilization Division 

• Computer Software Management and Information Center (COSMIC) 

• University of Georgia, GA 

• High Technologies Laboratory 

• University of Houston, Clear Lake, TX 

• NASA Industrial Applications Center (NIAC) 

• University of Pittsburgh, PA 

• NASA Technical Applications Team 

• Research Triangle Institute, NC 

Department of Commerce (DOC) 

• Office of Productivity, Technology and Innovation ( OPTI) 

Department of Defense (DOD) 

• Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO) 

Beckley College 
Beckley, WV 

West Virginia University/WVU Research Corporation Morgantown, WV 

The information in this report is based on the discussions that have been 
held with these organizations since the beginning of the project on October 12, 
1987. During the latter part of October and November, regular meetings were 


12 


held with the participating NASA offices and affiliated organizations, DOC offices 
and with the AJPO. (See Attachment A for a complete list of meetings). These 
meetings culminated in a series of meetings held on November 16 and 17, with an 
ad hoc planning meeting held on the 17th that included all of the charter project 
participants. 

This report contains the following sections: 

• Each participant’s views concerning: 

• Long and short term goals for AdaNET 

• Organizational structure 

• Resources and returns. 

• Summary of identified AdaNET services. 

• Summary of the organizational model currently under discussion by the 
NASA TU, DOD AJPO and DOC OPTI with the AdaNET developers. 

Due the extreme diversity of these groups, and the current levels of commit- 
ment of the key individuals in these organizations, these discussions have been 
limited in number and scope. As a starting point, this report summarizes the 
AdaNET project team’s understanding of the participant’s initial views. As dis- 
cussions mature, these views will migrate into defined and mutually agreed and 
accepted AdaNET organizational structures, teaming relationships, and a more 
focused understanding of how these complex interdisciplinary interrelationships 
will combine to strengthen the development of AdaNET. 


13 


1.2 Participant’s Views 

1.2.1 Ada Joint Program Office 

Initially, AdaNET will develop a facility that provides commercial access to the 
software and information that is available on the Army’s SIMTEL-20 Ada Soft- 
ware Repository This access should be provided via telecommunications, hard- 
copy and electronic media access. As the project matures, there is a need for the 
development of value added services to the software repository activities, such as 
measure for verification and validation, metrics, and an improved organizational 
structure of repository materials. Cost recovery measures need to be developed 
to allow the facility to establish a base of independent operation withi n a three to 
five year period. Included were discussions of the on-going support for the Ada 
community provided by AdaNET through its network of value-added functions in 
the areas of education, training, and identification of developing Ada technology 
resources. Over the longer term, AJPO may utilize the multiple network linkages 
that will exist through AdaNET to provide solutions to other needs identified 
by the AJPO; such network utilization might includ e es tablishing th e Ada In- 
formation Clearinghouse bulletin board as a node available through AdaNET ’s 
front-end commercial network access, rather than through long distance dial-up 
numbers; no or very low cost telecommunications commercial access to the De- 
fense Data Network’s Ada users accounts host system at the Software Engineering 
Institute (SEI); linkage of other repositories with AdaNET that are operated by 
various activities within the DOD. The AdaNET will become a node for Ada 
info rmation, services and software, in the greater network that is being defined 
by the AJPO. 

AJPO will provide financial support for AdaNET through Y88* No determi- 
nation has been made as to financial commitments beyond that point. Addition- 
ally, the AJPO will continue to provide support to network AdaNET with the 
existing Ada community, and to help keep AdaNET focused on those areas that 
it sees are essential for the continuing development and proliferation of Ada in 

the commercial and governmental sectors. 

While no preferred organizational structure for the actual AdaNET facility 
has been specified by the AJPO, discussions have been focused on the for-profit 
model for its implementation. More importantly, the need for establishing or- 
ganizational structures and policies for the interaction of various participating 
organizations has been recognized. Additional questions as to how new orga- 
nizations may participate at various levels within AdaNET is another area of 
keen interest to the AJPO. Such questions need to be addressed prior to the 


14 


introduction of new members to these boards, and particularly the Board of 
Governors. One basic question to be addressed concerns additional activity on 
the part of other DOD organizations with AdaNET, and how that participation 
should be coordinated with respect to the AJPO, considering the AJPO’s cat- 
alyst role within the DOD. A major organizational meeting of NASA, AJPO, 
DOC and AdaNET development team leaders is planned for December 10, 1987 
following the AdaEXPO in Boston, at which time some of these questions should 
be resolved. 

1.2.2 DOC Office of Productivity, Technology and Innovation 

OPTI sees a great need for the development of a base of Ada software and tech- 
nology that can be applied to industrial automation and Flexible Computerized 
Manufacturing (FCM). OPTI hopes to see Ada technology utilized in the imple- 
mentation of such systems, since the DOD’s concerns for fault tolerant, reliable 
embedded systems that can be developed and maintained at the lowest possible 
cost, are shared by the commercial sector. AdaNET must have an applications 
focus, rather than a research orientation. Successful use of resources available 
through AdaNET will depend on continuing support services to aid individual 
companies in applying that technology to their specific applications. Types of 
support identified by OPTI as necessary include: help in selection of computer 
hardware and software development tools that are best suited for specific applica- 
tions development, and access to continuing support and expertise for companies 
transitioning to the use of automation technologies. Such support is critical for 
large scale transition to automation technology by the American industrial base; 
without it, those industries lacking their own internal capabilities will be unable 
to utilize existing technology. 

AdaNET needs to develop a basis for cost recovery, so that its operation be- 
comes one of commercial self-sufficiency. This basis should be established through 
a for-profit entity due to the extreme emphasis on industrial marketing and com- 
mercial interaction that is an integral part of AdaNET services development. Ag- 
gressive te chn ology transfer activities, if undertaken by a non-profit entity, could 
be seen as a base of unfair competition with the commercial sector. Therefore, 
the for-profit model, supported by strong linkages with educational institutions 
anH other co mme rcial sector entities, is the preferred structure emerging from 
OPTI. 

OPTI has concern about the names and wording of statements of mission 
and goals for the various organizational boards that have been currently defined, 


15 


these include the Board of Governors and the Technology Advisory Board. Their 
concern focuses on: 

• The question of whether members of government agencies may sit on panels 
with regular attendance of commercial sector representatives, and 

• The need for specific recognition that these governmental representatives 
are in no way sitting on a corporate board of a commercial entity, and hence 
directing the activities of a commercial entity as part of their governmental 
representation; rather, that they are members of a board providing steering 
and oversight for a government funded project. 

OPTI will continue to provide the types kinds of in-kind services as identi- 
fied in the AdaNET proposal. These services include: analytic, informational, 
and networking services, including organizational and busines s plan as ses s ment s. 
OPTI will give valuable assistance in defining an organizational structure that 
will not be vulnerable to anti-trust violations. OPTI will also provide network- 
ing functions for AdaNET with commercial sector entities that are identified as 
either potential participants in the AdaNET cooperative, or potential users of 
AdaNET services. Such organizations may migrate into AdaNET through either 
the Technology Advisory Board or the Business and Industry Council. 


1.2.3 NASA Technology Utilization Division 

NASA’s TU division has provided the leadership in establishing the AdaNET 
project. In addition to its financial support, many TU affiliate organizations 
will participate and contribute from their individual areas of expertise. This 
broadened base of support and diversity of resources will serve to both strengthen 
AdaNET’s development, and enhance the scope of technical, information, and 
cons ultan t re sources t hat will be provided by AdaNET to its end users. 

In discussions with NASA and affiliate organization representatives, the fol- 
lowing determinations have been made; AdaNET must be a multi-faceted service 
organization: - ^ ~ 

• AdaNET cannot be just another bibliographi c database system, or static 
repository system, or just another network joining the hundreds of networks 
that already exist. 

• AdaNET must, in all areas, provide value-added services that not only will 
allow it to fill a gap that exists for value added software and information 


16 


relating to Ada technology, but also will enhance the value of the many 
existing software and informational systems, by providing node access to 
those third party services identified. 

In this way, AdaNET will provide a much higher base of potential users to 
those services that might previously have been standalone in function. The value 
attached to accessing AdaNET will be greatly increased by making available 
additional bases of information that were not developed by AdaNET , but that 
are offered as part of the total pool of resources available. 

It is essential to make some AdaNET services commercially available dur- 
ing 1988, with at least low-level value added functions applied to that software, 
such as initial taxonomic organization, flexible user interfaces, software system 
verification (similar to the verification done by COSMIC on its software mod- 
ules), and documentation and tutorials for the re-construction and use of those 
software systems that are offered. Additionally, informational and educational 
services need to be provided, so that early on users will find a variety of useful 
resources available through AdaNET. 

Over the longer term, these value added services will graduate to the full 
scope of services that have been defined. Such services include: 

• Decomposition and recomposition of total software systems into reusable 
components and modules, 

• Verification, validation, and metrics of software at the system and compo- 
nent levels, and a high-level taxonomic organization of all software resident 
in AdaNET libraries. 

AdaNET will use an open architecture telecommunications network model, 
with nodes easily added to the base of services available through AdaNET, and 
with AdaNET itself capable of serving as a node to other existing networks. 

Through discussions with NASA, it was identified that AdaNET should broaden 
its base of support during the first phase. Since the October 12 public announce- 
ment of the AdaNET project, and subsequent media releases (See Attachment 
E), highly enthusiastic and favorable response has elicited from the governmen- 
tal and commercial sectors. As will be discussed in the section on AdaNET 
organizational structure, the difficulty currently encountered in bringing in new 
participants to AdaNET is establishing structures and policies for interaction of 
all currently participating organizations, developing criteria and policies for in- 
teraction of new organizations at both the Board of Governors and Technology 


17 


Advisory Board, as well as the formation of a Business/Industry Council. NASA 
has identified the need for standardized agreements, such as the Memorandum of 
Agreement signed by the three original government agencies supporting AdaNET 
(see Attachment B , -vide for a standardized mechanism for the incorpora- 
tion of additional agency support. A similar document needs to be establ ishe d to 
encourage the participation of industry consortia, and with i ndividual commer- 
cial and educational entities, for their interaction with AdaNET. Following are 
some of the organizations the AdaNET team has had discussions with to date 
to focus this response into the continuing controlled development of the broad 
based cooperative that comprises AdaNET: 

• The Software Engineering Institute (SEI) — Director Larry Druffel 
has identified a member of the SEI staff to serve as a point of contact for 
AdaNET activities. 

• Martin Marietta Corporation — An initial meeting was held with a cor- 
porate representative of Mutin Marietta, who expressed interest in Martin 
Marietta’s support for AdaNET’s activities,, as well as interest in encour- 
aging the participation of the Software Productivity Consortium (SPC) in 
Reston, VA. 

• U.S. Department of the Army — Individuals representing the Army 
have held discussions with AdaNET and NASA representatives, about the 
Army’s participation with AdaNET. It appear s that access and a working 
relationship with the SIMTEL-20 White Sands Ada Software Repository 
may be established through these initial contacts. 

Other commercial organizations have expressed interest in participation with 
AdaNET. It is. anticipated that following resolution of some of the above men- 
tioned questions, there will be a high-level of commercial interaction with AdaNET. 

AdaNET will provide NASA with a specialized outlet for transferring Ada 
and related technology to the comm ercia l sector. Large volumes of A da based 
software have already been developed, a nd with full scale work b eginning on th e 
space station activity, the amount of Ada based software and information that 
will be producedjn the near f uture will req uire a facility such as AdaNE T to 
process that information and compile it _into reusable formats. The AdaNE T 
activity will not only provide a mechanism for commercial transfer, but also will 
allow for technology “re- insertion” back into NASA’s own development activities. 

As organizations having their own established Ada technology bases become new 
participants in AdaNET, the base of developed Ada software and technology that 

18 

ORIGINAL PAGE IS 

OF POOR QUALITY 



is available to NASA will expand to include these additional resources. It is this 
cumulative factor that presents the greatest benefit to individual AdaNET users. 

NASA TU will continue to provide financial support for AdaNET at least 
through its early phases of development, during the initial five years defined as 
the period for services and facility development, and development and applica- 
tion of cost recovery measures. Costs for services to be provided by affiliate 
organizations will also be underwritten by NASA. One longer term goal for the 
AdaNET partnership established with these organizations will be to provide a 
greater base for cost recovery for their own operations, by identifying additional 
applications and commercial uses of their services, through markets being ser- 
viced by AdaNET. 


Computer Software Management and Information Center (COSMIC) 
University of Georgia, GA 


COSMIC serves as NASA’s main software repository for software systems 
that have been developed by NASA field centers and NASA contractors, as well 
as other government agencies. The repository provides no value added functions; 
testing that is done on programs is primarily to ascertain the completeness of 
submitted systems, as well as their relative reusability. COSMIC maintains ap- 
proximately 1400 programs in its active inventory. COSMIC has established an 
extremely successful operational structure, with cost recovery measures that both 
provide for affordable access to the software systems it provides, and allow COS- 
MIC to recover the majority of its operational costs. It has been found that one 
out of three programs maintained by COSMIC find re-use within NASA-related 
organizations. Copies of programs are obtained by ordering from COSMIC. On- 
line user access to COSMIC programs is not provided. COSMIC has established 
/-Vi annels for software acquisition from NASA’s Field Centers, as well as with 
NASA contractors. It also has available resources for and experience with vol- 
ume media duplication of software systems. 

The COSMIC center has expertise in several areas that are of interest to 
AdaNET, particularly: methodologies used by COSMIC in building its acqui- 
sition and distribution channels; use of the DEDS in its software classification; 
evaluation systems used currently on software offered through COSMIC. 

Concern has been expressed by John Gibson, COSMIC Director, that the 


19 


functions of AdaNET will duplicate services of or compete with COSMIC, since 
both facilities are involved with NASA software reuse. It is this similarity that 
can be used to strengthen the operations of each facility. It is desired that 
a mutually beneficial partnership will be developed with COSMIC, with each 
facility providing complement ary services to the operations of the other. 


Potential teaming activities: 


• AdaNET could provide an on-line COSMIC directory and order system for 
AdaNET users to browse and make on-line orders. 

• AdaNET could make available the total software systems it receives to 
COSMIC, for COSMIC’s review for acceptance into its inventory. 

• COSMIC could provide to AdaNET its Ada-based software systems as they 
are received by COSMIC, for AdaNET’s application of value added func- 
tions to those systems. Systems receiving the value-added functions could 
be marketed through COSMIC with the additional value added informa- 
tion. 

High Technologies Laboratory 
University of Houston - Clear Lake, TX 

In the short term, AdaNET will be used to enhance information contained 
in the Software Engineering and Ada Database (SEAD ) bibliograp hic system 
located at Johnson Flight Center (JFC), in Houston, TX. Methodologies will 
need to be established so that information relevant to SEAD may be provided 
regularly as an up date to the SE AD from A daNET. One longe r term goal ma y 
be for the SEAD, which is currently available only to NASA Field Centers a nd 
contractors, to be established as a network node available through AdaNET, in 
addition to other methodologies th e High Technolog ies Laborator y wil l implement 
for expanding its base of potential users. This would make the SEAD system 
available through the many interactive government and commercial networks 
that will interconnect with AdaNET. 

Of particular interest in the development of AdaNET’s value added services is 


20 


the development and implementation of a highly refined taxonomic system, which 
would entail a virtual taxonomy of taxonomies. Current service implementations 
for the value-added repository functions would be structured in such a way that 
more refined taxonomic systems could be integrated with little or no restructuring 
of the databases of information established. Also, it has been recommended that 
AdaNET examine DOD-STD 2167 as a potential documentation standard for 
software maintained by AdaNET . 


NASA Industrial Applications Center (NIAC) 
University of Pittsburgh, PA 


NIAC’s technology transfer activities include providing computerized infor- 
mation retrieval from NASA’s Technology Utilization Network, technical consul- 
tation services and/or linkage with other experts in the field of inquiry, to public 
sector organizations. NIAC serves a six state region, including West Virginia. 
Dr. Paul McWilliams, Executive Director, is serving as NASA’s local point of 
contact for AdaNET activities. While the level of activity between AdaNET and 
NIAC is still undefined, early discussions suggest that a strong, mutually syner- 
getic relationship will be developed. AdaNET will provide access to a continually 
increasing base of Ada technology and applications information, providing an ad- 
ditional resource to NIAC for services it provides to its user base. NIAC will be 
connect directly to AdaNET, either through AdaNET’s linkage with the NASA 
Technology Transfer Network, or with a direct link. This relationship wiU be 
further defined as discussions continue. 

NASA Technical Applications Team (TA) 

Research Triangle Institute, NC 


The NASA Te chni cal Applications Team provides technology matching and 
problem solving assistance to public sector organizations, to identify and solve 
critical problems with the application of existing NASA technology. Discussions 
with TA Director Dr. Doris Rouse, and other members of the TA staff indi- 
cate that its relationship with AdaNET will be equivalent to NIAC’s. A base 
of expertise in industrial applications needs to be established as an integral part 
of AdaNET’s overall commercial applications support, that can be called in to 


21 



address industry specific technology issues. The participation of the Technology 
Applications Team with AdaNET provides an immediate source for such exper- 
tise. AdaNET will provide the Technology Applications Team with an expanded 
base of potential users for their services. Additionally, through the AdaNET, 
DOC OPTI wishes to utilize the technology and expertise of the TA Team to 
provide support to commercial entities seeking automation and FCM solutions. 


1.2.4 Beckley College 

Beckley College, in Beckley, WV is located in the heart of southern West Vir- 
ginia, in a region where many of the traditional infrastructure industries of West 
Virginia are represented. These industries include coal, oil and gas, timber and 
glass; industries which are struggling to regain a competitive position in the na- 
tional and world markets. Beckley College has been developing a curriculum 
that emphasizes Ada and software engineering in its undergra duate computer 
science curricul um . It has particular interest in establishing a base of expertise 
to aid in the development of Ada based applications that will support and im- 
prove the productivity of those industries in its region. AdaNET is will work 
with Beckley College to utilize the multiple resources and support available, in 
a branch regional center that can focus those resources on industries represented 
in its region, helping to catalyst industry migrati on to the us e o f c om petitive 
technologies. Effectively, the “sub-center” model developed could be duplicated 
throu gh out the country. With AdaNET ’s support, Beckley College hopes to de- 
velop a base of value added and niched industry specific commercial applications 
that will help it to establish a basis for cost recovery for operation of its center 
for applied Ada technology. This cost recovery would result from consulting and 
development fees which could be generated by industrial support for development 
of these industry specific applications. This will be one of the pilot models for 
AdaNET sub-center operations. Software and technology developed at the Beck- 
ley College sub-center will become available through AdaNET. Beckley College 
will commit ongoing support to AdaNET with faculty and student resources, 
and local administrative support in establishing their local sub-cen ter. Beckley 
College has and will continue to sponsor local telecommunications access to the 
MountainNet teleco mmuni cations network, in its region, as part of its efforts to 
stimulate local economic development. 

Beckley College desires a seat on the Technology Advisory Board (TAB), be- 

22 


cause the TAB’s unique interdisciplinary forum will provide valuable expertise 
in &reas to be addressed in the development of this model for regional technol- 
ogy transfer. As this sub-center becomes operational, Beckley College will itself 
provide a base of expertise in the application of technology transfer models for 
regional economic development. 

1.2.5 Software Valley Corporation 

AdaNET will serve as a resource for helping in the development of small ad- 
vanced technology businesses located in the Software Valley region. AdaNET 
will provide another base of technology to help establish the long term imaging 
of the Software Valley region as a center for advanced software technology, by 
providing a national focus for the collection of Ada and software engineering in- 
formation and technology. With the Software Valley Initiative’s emphasis on Ada 
as the tool for the application of software engineering technology, AdaNET also 
provides additional resources to aid in the continued Ada technology training of 
a large base of software engineers, programmers, and technicians in the region. 
As part of AdaNET’s activities in training and professional development, it will 
provide its resources and technical expertise in the longer term plan to establish 
a National Ada Training Center, that would be a subset and initial component of 
a National Software Campus. Additionally, AdaNET will promote and support 
the utilization of Ada software technology that has been developed for automa- 
tion and FCM applications in industrial and manufacturing interests represented 
in the Software Valley. This supports the long term initiative of developing the 
region into a center for FCM software technology. 

1.2.0 West Virginia University /WVU Research Corporation 

WVU will use the resources that become available through AdaNET to establish 
a stronger base of Ada technology training and software engineering. Starting 
in Fall 1988, Ada will be the initial computer language taught for all incoming 
computer science freshmen. This will provide a far greater base of Ada literate 
programmers and software engineers than has been possible in the past. A student 
intern program that is being established will allow WVU students to obtain 
practical work experience, as well as exposure to the wealth of information and 
technology available through AdaNET. These same resources will provide support 
to the research and development activities of WVU, in the areas of software 
engineering, automation sciences, knowledge engineering, and communications 
technologies. AdaNET information resources, combined with the aforementioned 


23 



areas of research, will aid in WVU’s research programs for the development of 
FCM technologies. 

As has been stated, one long term goal of WVU/WVURC and the Software 
Valley Corporation is the establishment of a National Software Campus in Mor- 
gantown, with inter-disciplinary areas of study and research and development to 
include: Ada and Software Engineering, Flexible Computerized Manufacturing, 
Artificial Intelligence/ Knowledge Engineering, and Communications. Support 
for many of these functions is best provided by non-profit, educational institu- 
tions, whose primary missions are education and advanced research. Therefore, 
WVU has specific interest that those areas of AdaNET expansion supporting the 
development of such a facility should have a high degree of university interaction 
and support for its day-to-day operation. 


1.3 Summary of AdaNET Services 

In summary, the consensus and aggregate views of the organizations described 
above for the service mission and goals of AdaNET throughout the next three to 
five years include: 

Value-added Ada software and services, and access to similar third party systems: 

• Validation and verification 

• Taxonomic classifications “ - 

• Documentation and tutorials 

• Topical search categories 

• Life cycle identification 

• Electronic and hardcopy duplication of information 
■ E lectronic bu lletin boards 

• Services and products publications 

Network access and expansion: 

• Access to Ada Information Clearinghouse 

• Access to COSMIC information 

• Access to SEAD 

» Access to other third party Ada software and information services 

Outreach and support programs, and access to similar external programs: 

• Access to high level expertise for specific commercial applications de- 
velopment 

• Industry transition 


24 


ii a 


• Proprietary software 

• Industry forum 

Educational information, expertise, and training access: 

• On-line courseware 

• Seminars and workshops 

Support services for application of Ada technology by commercial sector 
entities. 


25 


Chapter 2 

Organizational Structure 


26 


2.1 Project Activity 

This report details the organizational structure being defined for AdaNET. 
The structure discussed reflects the views and inputs of the sponsoring 
government agencies and supporting organizations. Topics covered include. 

• Use of For-Profit Development Model 

• Internal Development Structure 

• Organizational Boards 

• Interaction with UHCL RICIS and SEAD 

• Incorporation of New Project Sponsors 

• Interaction with NASA Affiliates 

• Incorporation of Private Sector Participants 

Another section of this document outlines the current activity on the AdaNET 
project, including AdaNET project imaging, technical and network plan- 
ning and team development, and initial assessments of the Ada commu- 
nity’s interests and needs. A description of AdaNET related activities at 
the AdaEXPO ’87 is also included. There is coverage of the December 10, 
1987 project meeting including a list of attendees, and information concern- 
ing: 

• the initial AdaNET survey, 

t facilitation of AdaNET participant communications, 

• network planning and implementation, and 

• marketing implications of the initial survey. 

An agenda of the this Project Meeting held in Boston during the Ada Expo 
is also included as Attachment F. 


27 



2.2 Organizational Structure 

There has been much discussion about what organizational structure would 
best serve the mission and goads of the AdaNET project and promote ef- 
fective interaction between its sponsoring agencies. AdaNET must serve 
both the public and private sectors, as both a catalyst and a clearinghouse 
for the acquisition and use of advanced software technologies. However, 
while encouraging re-use of Ada software technology by governmental or- 
ganizations is obviously one of the project’s goals, its primary focus is to 
encourage the application and use of Ada technology in the private sector . 
This is combined with the additional task of building a basis for cost re- 
covery into the services provided so that over time the facility will attain 
operational independence. 

These are diverse goals, and may seem contradictory in nature. It is essen- 
tial that the service develop cost recover y measures to insure its continued, 
long term survivability; however, it is just as important t h at services be 
provided in such a way that small businesses, manufacturers and educa- 
tional institutions with limited resources experience no economic barriers 
to acquiring the information available. Such users represent those sectors 
which should experience the most benefit from the AdaNET service. 

In light of such considerations, it is critical that the correct mechanisms be 
put in place in the early stages of AdaNET’s development to allow flexible 
interaction with public and private sector organizations. An organizational 
structure must be established that promotes successful internal develop- 
ment of the service. ■-*= 

The following topics are discussed in this report: 

• Use of For-Profit Development Model 

• Internal Development Structure 

• Organizational Boards 

• Incorporation of New Project Sponsors 

• Interaction with NASA Affiliates 

• Incorporation of Private Sector Participants 

2.2.1 History of the Concept 

Mount ainNet, Inc. was organized as a for-profit West Virginia corpora- 
tion in 1983. The foundation of its business plan involves development 


28 


of software, information services, and related telecommunications required 
for their delivery. MountainNet presently offers access to Ada, artificial 
intelligence and expert systems software, and office automation software 
tools on its own host computer system. Access is provided through a pri- 
vate network consisting of 17 nodes within West Virginia, and nationally 
via the Telenet Public Access Network. MountainNet also provides an 
inter-network gateway with The West Virginia Network for Educational 
Telecomputing (WVNET), and organization that provides host computer 
and telecommunications services for all state-supported higher education in 
West Virginia. 

MountainNet first conceived the AdaNET service in 1986 in response to 
projections of explosive growth of Ada technology and related software en- 
gineering tools. Despite a large and growing investment by the government 
in Ada and software engineering, important element of the infrastructure 
required to produce gains in real terms in software reuse and software en- 
gineering productivity have been lacking. 

MountainNet ’s concept involves building a set of services to be offered pri- 
marily to commercial software developers and government agencies to which 
those developers contract. Such a service would have two major compo- 
nents: 


Ada Information Services A value-added information service detailing 
training opportunities, government initiatives, technology breakthroughs 
and marketplace information. 

Dynamic Software Inventory Software parts which can be reused to 
build a portion of, or an entire system. The DSI will include related require- 
ments statements, software architecture design and component (detailed) 
design. 


These services would be driven by input from relevant commercial soft- 
ware developers and government agencies. The service would be operated 
by MountainNet, with revenue from operations complemented by basic re- 
search funding from government agencies where appropriate. 

In October, 1987, federal funding for initial research and planning was 
announced. The DoD Ada Joint Program Office and the U. S. Department 


29 



of Commerce entered an Interagency Cooperative Agreement with NASA 
to provide basic support for the AdaNET service. In March, 1988, the 
Department of the Army also signed the cooperative agreement. 

2.2.2 Current Developmental Structure 


MountainNet, Inc. is currently serving as subcontractor to NASA, un- 
der management of the University of Houston-Clear Lake RICIS to re- 
search the feasibility of commercialization of technology transfer of govern- 
ment developed software engineering and Ada technology. The case study 
for this research is MountainNet , Inc.’s AdaNET service. As described 
throughout this document, successful implementation of AdaNET services 
is based upon development of a broad based infrastructure of organizations, 
each providing unique resources to create a spectrum of available products 
and te chn ologies to apply to the implementation plan. In order to main- 
tain stability in this dynamic environment, MountainNet, as the developer 
of AdaNET, maintains operational relationships with these organizations 
through formal subcontract and service agreements. This holds true for the 
West Virginia organizations providing original support to MountainNet for 
AdaNET development, such as West Virginia University and Beckley Col- 
lege. It is planned to build on this base of experiences with the addition of 
other operational agreements in the next phase. 

MountainNet, Inc. has established teaming agreements with a limited num- 
ber of for-profit organizations to provide support to MountainNet in various 
phases of AdaNET research and development. These agreements form the 
basis for organizational relationship, but in themselves are not binding to 
specific Statements of Work. When executed, these relationships are for- 
malized through standard subcontract arrangements. 

Memorandums of Understanding are currently in place to link governmental 
and educational organizations into the AdaNET infrastructure. At the 
governmental level, these Memoranda are held by NASA TU with each 
supporting agency. For educational organizations, such Memoranda are 
held directly with MountainNet, Inc. by the institution. Memorandums are 
currently under deliberation with sister TU organizations such as COSMIC 
(University of Georgia) and NIAC (University of Pittsburgh). 
Organizational structures supporting technology transition activities, such 
as the Federal Advisory Panel, the Technology Advisory Council, and the 
Business and Industry Council have not as of yet been activated. Full char- 


30 


ters for each of these organizations tire under developments. Activation of 
the membership of these boards will be initiated during the latter part of 
the next phase of the project. These panels are intended to be advisory, 
rather than governing, in nature, providing technology transition informa- 
tion and recommendations to MountainNet, Inc. in its development and 
operation of AdaNET. 

2.2.3 Internal Audit Controls 

It has been recognized that appropriate mechanisms to ensure account- 
ability for federal and other funds be established, particularly to observe 
the need to avoid the appearance of impropriety resulting from comingling 
of funds or from unfair competition with private businesses. To this end, 
MountainNet has implemented accounting structures to ensure complete 
audit trail traceability of individual activity centers. Therefore, Mountain- 
Net’s research activity with UHCL has unique activity center, apart and 
separate from any other activity. While receiving government support for 
research into the development of this facility, MountainNet will provide 
AdaNET services on a no-fee basis to its governmental sponsors. Cost 
recovery structures, from the the research activities, will be tested with 
private and commercial sector entities, to demonstrate the commercial vi- 
ability of AdaNET. 


31 


NASA/DoD/DOC 

~r~ 

University of Houston, 
Clear Lake 

HZ 

MountainNet, Inc. 
AdaNET 


Figure 2.1: Basic Federal Funding and Program Management of the AdaNET 
Service 


32 






2.2.4 For-Profit Development Model 

AdaNET has two primary purposes: 

1. to develop a transfer mechanism for government developed Ada and 
software engineering technology to the commercial sector, and 

2. to provide such services with cost recovery measures to achieve com- 
mercial independence. 

Figure 2.1, Basic Federal Funding and Program Management of the AdaNET 
Service is the profile of funding requirements. Figure 2.2, AdaNET Service 
Implementation Model shows how the AdaNET would be created. 

It is the consensus of all sponsoring agencies that due to the high level of 
identification that the AdaNET service must establish to be effective in the 
commercial sector, there is specific advantage in the service maintaining 
a for-profit focus. Aggressive marketing approaches will be necessary to 
maximize the likelihood of success in achieving the stated goals of the ser- 
vice. This approach also allows a more active emphasis in areas necessary 
to gain commercial recognition and use, such as marketing, advertising, 
revenue planning, and corporate teaming. 

Keeping a for-profit focus will avoid the spectre of unfair competition in 
the commercial sector by a non-profit entity. This is of particular concern 
when considering: 

• the orientation of AdaNET towards commercial applications in addi- 
tion to research; 

• AdaNET ’s level of visibility, commercial activities and interaction; 

• the number of different private sector entities that will be asked to 
participate; 

• the level of commercial influence possible, and 

• the long term goal of independent operational status. 

While the service will concentrate on its for-profit mode of operation, some 
activities developing from AdaNET will emphasize areas that have tradi- 
tionally been serviced by non-profit, educational entities. One such activity 
might be the development and operation of a national center for advanced 
software technology. This would require major support from the educa- 
tional institutions that are already participants in the AdaNET service and 
from those institutions which may participate in the future. 

Commercial support will be provided through specific contracted work to 
develop specific services, or through actual use of the AdaNET service. 
Initial discussions with commercial entities suggest this to be the case. This 
is in keeping with AdaNET ’s goal of establishing other bases of support 


33 


NASA 

DcO 

OX 

Academia 
US Industry 
Other Govt Agencies 


I 


Sources of Information 


MountainNet, Inc. 
AdaNET 


AIS 

Ada(«r 

Information 

Services 


OSl 

Dynamic 

Software 

Inventory 


User 

Interface 


Distribution Modes 


Consultant 


On-line 


jZI 

L= 

CCM 

ROM 


Print 


Magnetic 

Media 


^Information, components 

User Community 
US Industrial Base 
US Govt Agencies 
Consortia/ RID 
Academia 


Figure 2.2: AdaNET Service Implementation Model 


34 











that we commercially based and longer term than governmental funding. 
It also serves to heighten responsiveness to the commercial marketplace; the 
service will not attain commercial viability without that responsiveness. 

2.2.5 Internal Development Structure 

The most critical element for successful implementation of the AdaNET 
service is the development of teams for internal management, technical 
development, and marketing. These teams will be responsible for both in- 
ternal development, as well as the coordination and delivery of contracted 
services. One of the major outcomes of current planning and research will 
be the development of the technical implementation team. MountainNet’s 
internal technical staff will coordinate the activities of the extended devel- 
opment and support team described below. This staff will consist of key 
“anchor” individuals possessing specific areas of technical expertise, who 
will coordinate application of internal and external resources to their spe- 
cific implementation areas. 

Private sector participants represent another resource to which AdaNET 
users can be directed. AdaNET will utilize the resources of many com- 
mercial and educational organizations, thereby enlarging the available pool 
of expertise. MountainNet is entering into corporate teaming agreements 
with many commercial organizations with areas of expertise that will also 
be valuable to development of the AdaNET service. Such agreements are of 
strategic importance in the development and long term support of the ser- 
vice; this concept will continue to be used as the service matures. As part 
of these agreements, private sector participants will be able to maintain 
their proprietary interests. 

In keeping with the role of AdaNET as both a catalyst and clearinghouse, it 
is not the intent of MountainNet to develop all required capabilities and ex- 
pertise internally, or to offer only internally developed services. AdaNET ’s 
goal is to provide an open architecture into which organizations providing 
valuable information, services or expertise can offer their resources as part 
of the total pool of services available. Likewise, the public information and 
technology available through AdaNET will not be held to any closed group. 
The success of the service is based on the interaction with as many par- 
ticipants as possible. Its use and growth are synergetic: information and 
technology are put into the service, and users take out what they need, in 
turn developing their own bases of expertise. Through continued participa- 
tion, these same users can become additional resources available to other 


35 


AdaNET users. 


2.2.8 Organizational Panels 

Much time has been spent trying to define organizational relationships that 
facilitate effective interaction be tween MountainNet’s AdaNET service, its 
governmental sponsors, and the private sector organizations either provid- 
ing support to or using the services. Three panels will be formed. Earlier 
discussions referred to these panels as: 

• Board of Governors 

• Business and Industry Council 

• Technology Advisory Board ^ -r- 

After subsequent deliberation and inquiry into the various federal laws reg- 
ulating governmental and private sector interaction, the following names 
will be adopted: 

• Federal Advisory Panel 

• Business and Industry Council 

• Technology Advisory Council 

Following sections will discuss the purpose of each of these panels. The Of- 
fice of Productivity, Technology and Innovation attorneys have researched 
the potential legal implications of these organizational structures with re- 
spect to public and private sector representatives holding seats on the same 
panel. They have determined that the organizational structures defined in 
this document are well within allowable federal guidelines. 

The major difference in focus between the organizations defined early in 
the project and those defined in this document is the separation of gov- 
ernmental and private sector interaction with the AdaNET service. The 
organizational panels h ave maintaine d the same focus; however, the gov- 
ernmental and private sector representatives have been separated on two of 
the panels. The Federal Advisory Panel is now composed entirely of gov- 
ernmental representatives, and the Business and Ind ustry Council consists 
solely of private sector representatives. The Technology Advisory Council 
still has representation from both sectors. 


36 


The intent in creating the original Board of Governors was to facilitate 
participation by any organizations committing resources or “sponsoring” 
AdaNET development. All organizations meeting this criteria are govern- 
mental organizations, and this will continue to be the case. (As mentioned 
previously, commercial support will be provided both by end users, and 
through specific contracts and teaming agreements.) 

The Business and Industry Council will serve as the main point of inter- 
action with identified economic communities, industries, professional orga- 
nizations, or individual companies that desire a higher level of input and 
involvement with the AdaNET service than that of being only an end user 
of services. It also provides an initial point for interaction with those or- 
ganizations that represent additional resources for development and service 
offerings, and potential new user communities. 

The Te chn ology Advisory Council will provide the focus for those organiza- 
tions working more closely with development, providing technical focus in 
all areas necessary. These include not just areas of competence within the 
field of hardware and software engineering and communications, but also 
include expertise in marketing, advertising, corporate teaming and partner- 
ing, finance, business plan analysis and strategic planning. The Technology 
Advisory Panel consists of representatives from both public and private 
sector organizations. 

MountainNet will serve as the focal point for communications and coordina- 
tion between governmental and commercial sector interests and will be the 
mechanism to solicit the involvement of private sector interests. The follow- 
ing are more detailed descriptions of the organizational groups described 

above: 

Federal Advisory Panel 

A way to coordinate between the three sponsoring government agencies 
has been needed. Major cooperation and communication between these 
partners needs to occur to insure mutually successful returns on participa- 
tion. Quarterly project review sessions Me not adequate for the higher level 
interaction required. Some structure is necessMy to facilitate the process. 
PMticipation on the Federal Advisory Panel will provide this mechanism. 
Representatives from the three government agencies supporting the AdaNET 
service will work with MountainNet to determine the initial membership of 
this panel. 

The Federal Advisory Panel will consist of those government organizations 


37 



with the highest levels of resources committed to the project. The indi- 
viduals on this board will hold positions within their organizations from 
which they can direct the resources that are to be applied to the AdaNET 
service. As was true of the previous structure, the Executive Council of 
this Federal Advisory Panel will likely be that subset of the participants 
that represent those government organizations who are the original stake- 
holder participants, and those organizations with the the highest level of 
committed resources, 

The Federal Advisory Panel will: 

• provide a common forum for the resolution of questions relating to 
interagency interactions, 

• provide input into the direction of project focus and deliverables, and 

• establish a common point for regular interaction said working sessions 
with MountainNet’s staff and agency representatives. 

Within the current government organizations supporting the AdaNET ser- 
vice, there is an ongoing need to explicitly define the deliverables and sched- 
ules that satisfy the goals of individual participants. Each organization has 
specific returns that are sought for supporting the service and specific mile- 
stones and deliverables are desired to build those returns. The Federal 
Advisory Panel will be used as the vehicle for such discussions. The agen- 
cies now participating in this interagency cooper ati ve will use this forum to 
determine mutually acceptable project deliverables, with high level inter- 
action with MountainNet’s project management stafF. Frequent meetings 
of the panel will be held, in addition to regular electronic communications 
through electronic maul, to maintain a high level of contact auid interaction 
among sponsors and the members of MountainNet’s manage ment tea m . 
These same agencies need to address general panel operating guidelines, 
especially pertaining to the admission of new project sponsors to the Federal 
Advisory Panel. Issues for consideration include: - 

• Definition of criterion for new board membership 

• Criterion for continuance or termination of membership 

• Process of incorporation of new members’ goals with those of existing 
members 

Discussion has indicated that it is the consensus of the agency participants 
that criteria for membership on this bo ard sh ould be established. One 
generally accepted criterion is that all organizations represented must have 
made a substantial committment to the AdaNET service of the types of 
resources described in the statement of mission and goals. This topic is fur- 
ther addressed in a later section entitled Incorporation of New Project 


38 


Sponsors. 

The panel's official contact with private sector project participants will be 
through MountainNet; this does not include those entities which we con- 
tractually affiliated with any of the sponsoring agencies. Recommendations 
and conclusions reached by members which are part of the interagency co- 
operative with NASA will pass those recommendations to NASA (as con- 
tracting agency) for consideration, and subsequent direction will be passed 
to MountainNet if desired and appropriate. 

Mission and Goal Statement 

The mission of the AdaNET Federal Advisory Panel is to provide assistance 
and guidance to MountainNet staff throughout the development and oper- 
ation of AdaNET services. The Federal Advisory Panel links the AdaNET 
service with the government organizations and communities it serves, re- 
flecting the ideas, focuses, and needs of each sponsor. The panel is composed 
of key individusds from the governmental sector who have been instrumen- 
tal in encouraging and committing their respective organization’s support 
of the AdaNET service. Each of the Federal Advisory Panel members 
shall hold such positions within their respective organizations to be able to 
govern, direct or allocate resources, including human, fiscal, informational 
and /or technical, as appropriate, to further the mission and goals of the 
service. 

The panel will give assistance and guidance in the following functional 
project categories: 

• Guidance in Organizational and Operational Policies 

• Determination of Milestones and Deliverables 

• Identification of Sponsors’ Individual Goals 

• Identification of Sponsors’ Participation and Commitments 

• Coordination of Governmental Sponsors’ Efforts 

• Incorporation of New Governmental Sponsors 

These recommendations will keep the AdaNET service responsive to its ser- 
vice base and will be incorporated by the MountainNet staff as it manages 
and directs the course taken by the service. 

The board plans to meet quarterly to be apprised of the current status 
of operations, as well as to provide assistance and guidance in the above 
referenced functional project categories. The use of electronic communi- 
cations will provide on-going communications between all members of the 
panel and MountainNet. More active interaction may be established by 


39 



each member through the identification of representatives from within their 
respective organizations to provide concentrated technical support to the 
AdaNET service. The initial number of members of the Federal Advisory 
Panel shall be set at eleven (11) charter members. These charter members, 
with the MountainNet staff, shall serve as the nominating committee for 
additional members. At no time shall the Federal Advisory Panel exceed 
twenty-one (21) members. Organizations will maintain representation on 
the Federal Advisory Panel for a period of up to nine months following the 
organization’s termination of support. 

A standing Executive Committee of no more than seven but at all times at 
least five members shall be initially constituted from the Charter organiza- 
tions providing human, monetary and/or technology resources in support 
of the AdaNET service. The Executive Committee will make policy recom- 
mendations for ratification by a majority of the Federal Advisory Panel. 


Revised June 1988 
AdaNET Project Staff 


The Business and Industry Co unci l 

The Business and Industry Council shall serve as the mechanism for bring- 
ing commercial and other private sector entities into participation with 
the AdaNET service. Organizations looking for additional ways to utilize 
the technology available through the AdaNET service should initially in- 
teract at this level; such orgamzations may include major industry a n d 
manufacturing concerns, large and small businesses representing additional 
resources of Ada technology expertise, and professional organizations. This 
provides an initial mechanism for their interaction, as well as allows those 
organizations not wanting higher level involve ment to maintain a t ie with 
the activities and developments. Representatives on the Business and In- 
dustry Council should somewhat parallel the authority repr esen ted on the 
the Federal Advisory Board. These individuals may elect to nominate rep- 
resentatives to the Technology Advisory Panel, to provide more technically 

oriented interaction with the Ad aNET s ervice. _ _ _ s _ iaiiS3E: 

This panel provides a direct link to those c ommuni ties to which Moun- 
t ainN et will target its outreach and support activities. It will also provide 


40 



a link between those industrial entities who currently have strong estab- 
lished bases of technology and those organizations trying to develop such 
expertise. Activity on the Business and Industry Council represents a more 
“arms-length” relationship with MountainNet than that of the governmen- 
tal sponsors or the organizations with subcontract or corporate teaming 
agreements in place. Many organizations initially interacting only at these 
board levels may recognize that a higher level of interaction is warranted 
by their capabilities and expertise, as well as the recognition of how par- 
ticipation supports their individual self-interests. Such organizations may 
migrate into roles on the development and support team. 


Mission and Goal Statement 

The mission of the Business and Industry Council is to provide assistance 
and guidance to MountainNet staff throughout the development and oper- 
ation of the AdaNET services. The Business and Industry Council links 
the services with the organizations and communities it serves, reflecting 
the ideas, focuses, and needs of each participating and targeted segment 
of these organizations and communities. The council is composed of indi- 
viduals from key commercial sector organizations who have demonstrated 
leadership in innovation, research, development and the application of tech- 
nology for America’s productivity enhancement. Each of the Business and 
Industry Council members shall hold such positions within their respective 
organizations to be able to influence the participation with or support for 
the AdaNET service by their respective industries, companies, or profes- 
sional organizations. 

The council will give assistance and guidance to MountainNet in the fol- 
lowing functional project categories: 

• Target sector identification and needs 

• Service recommendations 

• Organizational participation and resources 

• Productivity enhancement applications 

These recommendations will serve to keep the AdaNET service responsive 
to its service base and be incorporated, as appropriate, by MountainNet 
staff as it manages and directs the course taken by the service. 

The board shall meet semi-annually, to be apprised of the current status of 
operations, as well as to provide assistance and guidance in the above ref- 
erenced broad based functional project categories. More active interaction 


41 


may be established by each member through the nomination of represen- 
tatives from within their organization to serve on the Technology Advisory 
Council. No limitation has been set on the number or organizations with 
representation on the Business and Industry Council. 

A standing Executive Committe e of no more than s even but at all tunes at 
least five members shall be initially constituted. The Executiv e Comm ittee 
will convey recommendations made by the Business and Industry Council. 


Revised June 1988 
AdaNET Project Staff 

Technology Advisory Council 

The Technology Advisory Council provides the techni cal applications inter- 
face between MountainNet and organizations represented on the Business 
and Industry Council, as well as organizations working more closely with 
MountainNet in subcontract /teaming arrangements as part of the develop- 
ment and support team. 

While interaction and support of member organizations with MountainNet 
and the AdaNET service can occur without a formal structure, this coun- 
cil will help to organize and coordinate the efforts of this highly diverse 
and potentially very large group more e ffectively. Additionally , since each 
member will only interact with MountainNet staff and small groups of other 
Technology Advisory Council members, meetings will allow interaction of 
the whole council that would otherwise not occur. Such interaction is valu- 
able to bolh the AdaNET service &nd the members themselves in allowing 
for a wider ranging flow of communications, ideas, and creativity. Mr. 
Donn Philpot is serving as the Technology Advisory Council Coordinator 
to organize initial membership council. 1 

Mission and Goal Statement 

The mis sion of the Technology Advisory Council is to provide technical 
assistance in specific areas of expertise to MountainNet sta ff throughout 
the development and operation of the A daNET service. The Technology 
Advisory Council provides an interactive technical resource from each or- 
ganization^ The areas of technical experti se represented on the T echnology 
Advisory Council will be maintained to reflect the di verse i deas, fo cuses , 
and needs of each participating and impacted segment of the organizations 


42 


and communities served by the AdaNET service. The council is composed 
of individuals from each of the commercial and educational sector orga- 
nizations supporting the AdaNET service, who possess areas of expertise 
needed to round out the base of available talent and knowledge required 
for successful development and maintenance of the AdaNET service. Each 
Technology Advisory Council member shall provide regular and on-going 
technical support and input to the MountainNet staff, as appropriate. 

The council will give technical assistance and guidance in the following 
functional project categories: 

• Research, development and maintenance of repository functions 

• Services development 

• Market research 

• Revenue planning 

• Fiscal planning and analysis 

• Operations research 

• Productivity enhancement measurements 

This technical input will provide a base of technical emphasis that would 
be unavailable within any one organization. 

Due to its diversity and potentially large number of participants, the board 
shall meet semi-annually, to be apprised of the current status of operations, 
as well as to report on each functional area of activity. The Technology 
Advisory Council shall be functionally segmented. Members of the Tech- 
nology Advisory Council also may also serve as the active representatives 
of organizations with membership on the Business and Industry Council. 
No specific limitation has been set for a maximum number of members of 
the Technology Advisory Council. 


Revised June 1988 
AdaNET Project Staff 


43 



2.2.7 Long Term Interaction with University of Houston - 
Clear Lake 

MountainNet has held discussions with representatives of UHCL RICIS to 
explore potential long term interaction of UHCL RICIS with Mountain- 
Net’s AdaNET facility, once AdaNET is commercially self-supporting. The 
following are under consideration, for further discussion with UHCL RICIS 
representatives: 

• Support in coordination of the Technology Advisory Panel: Moun- 

tainNet proposes that Dr. Charles McKay serve as Chief Advisor to 
this organization, and that University of Houston - Clear Lake host 
its meetings. r 

• Access to resources and information maintained by MountainNet in 
support of the AdaNET project to support RICIS research activities; 
this may include hardware, software, research library and staff re- 
sources. Such resources may be provided through telecommunications 
access, or on-site research at MountainNet facilities, under sponsored 
research programs. Continuing discussions will define the scope and 
structure of such arra nge ments. 

• Incorporation of RICIS programs as part of the service offerings avail- 
able through AdaNET. In addition to interaction with SEAD (detailed 
in the following section), services provided by the Space Business Infor- 
mation Center and the Software Engineering Professional Education 
Center could be offered through AdaNET. 


2.2.8 Interaction With SEAD 

As part of the Phase H Statement of Work, MountainNet was tasked with 
pl anning for how the AdaNET service could support the RICIS Software 
Engineering and Ada Database (SEAD). Specifically, it is desired to in- 
crease SEAD’s commercial focus. Throughout the course of Phases I and 
II MountainNet has investigated various possibilities for how such support 
could be provided to the SEAD. 

Discussions with Morris Liaw, Principal Investigator of the SEAD project 
and others at UHCL have identified the following levels of potential inter- 
action between Mount ainNet’s AdaNET Information Services (AIS) and 
UHCL’s SEAD: 


44 


1. No integration; 

2. Communications integration: MountainNet provides a telecommuni- 
cations link into the SEAD for access to the SEAD by AdaNET users; 

3. Data integration: AIS and SEAD exchange data on a regular basis; 
or, 

4. Full integration: Merging AIS and SEAD under same name, structure 
and user interface. 

The first option would indicate that no valuable interaction can occur be- 
tween the two organizations, and that the AdaNET service can do little to 
help expand SEAD or to provide commercialization support; this is believed 
to be false, and hence is not considered as a viable option. 

MountainNet believes a combination of both 2) and 3) to be the most 
effective level of interaction, for the following reasons: 

• The combination of choices allows MountainNet to achieve its goal of 
providing support in augmenting information available through SEAD 
(through regular updates to the SEAD of information collected in the 
AIS); and 

• Through establishment of telecommunications connections, provide 
additional commercialization support to SEAD, by expanding its base 
of potential users to include all users of the AdaNET service; 

• There would be very little restructuring of the service functions and 
goals of either SEAD or AIS; 

Complete integration as defined in 4) is not believed to be desirable for the 
following reasons: 

• AIS and SEAD services are currently targeted to two separate user 
co mmuni ties. SEAD currently services internal NASA organizations 
and NASA contractors/subcontractors who access SEAD via NASA 
internal telecommunications networks. AdaNET’s primary focus is on 
private sector users. Clarification has not yet been given on whether 
SEAD can expand its services for general private sector use, and still 
maintain its direct linkages to its NASA users (due to network security 
concerns); 

• Elimination of the AIS as a major service within AdaNET will radi- 
cally reduce the value of information presented through AdaNET , and 
hence, its commercial viability; the alternative, merging of SEAD into 
AdaNET, is not considered a reasonable alternative to the developers 
of SEAD; 


45 


• Presentational formats and retrieval mechanisms for information to 
be contained in the AIS differ from those of SEAD; MountainNet has 
evaluated various presentational formats and retrieval mechanisms for 
on-line information. The method chosen (text retrieval/ hypertext 
systems) is deemed to be the most desirable for the AdaNET environ- 
ment. It is suggested that a quantitative study be conducted to assess 
relative user responsiveness/usage levels on both systems, to evalu- 
ate (where information may be duplicated) user-preferred methods of 
delivery. 

Before further planning of AdaNET/SEAD interaction can occur, addi- 
tional planning by the SEAD staff must be completed. As stated above, 
one major decision will be whether SEAD will be allowed to incorporate 
non-NASA private sector users while maintaining its linkage into NASA 
networks. Additionally, clarification as to the SEAD’s ultimate host ma- 
chine will aid greatly in determining the level of data exchange possible and 
specific requirements for establishing telecommunications linkages. Further 
elaboration of RICIS goals for SEAD commercialization are necessary, in 
order to completely address how MountainNet, through its AdaNET service 
can help add other commercialization support services. 

2.2.9 Incorporation of New Project Sponsors 

New government sponsors may become active in supporting development 
of the AdaNET service. Such support could be provided through either 
interagency agreement and support through the existing cooperative, or 
through additional contracting mechanisms. In the prior case, a standard 
Memorandum of Understanding with NASA, fas the contracting agency), 
based on the one signed by the three original sponsors, will be established. 
It is agreed upon by all existing sponsors that as other governmental or- 
ganizations apply their resources to development of the AdaNET service, 
those organizations should be given representation on the Federal Advisory 
Panel . This has positive re sult s for b oth th e newcomers and the existing 
sponsors, since all participants will have a common forum for sharing in- 
formation about their respective goals in the project, and the resolution 
of potential conflicts in those goads. The new sponsors’ agendas will need 
to be incorporated into the common agenda of the existing sponsors, and 
project milestones and deliverables will need to be adjusted and expanded 
accordingly. 



2.2.10 Interaction with NASA Affiliates 

A strong working relationship is evolving with NASA affiliate organizations 
identified to support the AdaNET service. The support, participation and 
resources contributed by these organizations is currently being underwritten 
by NASA as part of its in-kind contribution to the service. This participa- 
tion is intended to provide early returns to all participants: 

For example: 


• A base of resources and expertise will be made available to apply to 
various facets of development of the AdaNET service; such support will 
help in “lessons learned” and in applying existing technology solutions 
to planning development, and implementation. 

• These organizations represent additional sources of expertise and tech- 
nology that will be made available to users of the AdaNET service. 

• Through markets identified, additional opportunities for commercial/private 
sector support will be afforded to participating affiliates. 

• MountainNet will perform catalyst and networking functions, plac- 
ing entities needing specific technology solutions in touch with those 
organizations possessing such expertise. 

See Attachment A for a listing of those NASA affiliates currently providing 
support. 


2.2.11 Incorporation of Private Sector Participants 

MountainNet ’s interaction with the private sector will be as both provider 
and user of services and expertise. The delineation between those organi- 
zations that are providers of resources and those that are users should be 
almost impossible. The same groups using services and utilizing the infor- 
mation, software and expertise available, should also represent, in time, an 
additional resource that can be added to the team of organizations sup- 
porting the AdaNET services. 

The AdaNET project staff will serve as the focal point for communications 
and coordination between governmental and commercial sector interests. 
This is appropriate to the service’s main focus on commercial sector or- 
ganizations; this will provide the mechanism to recruit the involvement of 


47 





commercial sector interests both as additional resources and as users of 
services. The AdaNET project staff will identify the needs of those pri- 
vate sector communities with which it interacts, and then work through 
the Federal Advisory Panel to bring those needs to the attention of the 
federal agency sponsors. Private companies listed as users of software and 
services should eventually come full circle in the process, until they are also 
providers of software and technology to the AdaNET user base. 

2.3 Outline of Project Activity 

Initial presentation of the AdaNET servi ce w as made to attendees of the 
Ada Expo ’87 and ACM SIGAda conferences. This presentation was the 
culmination of planning and development in organizational planning, project 
imaging, and strategic and technical planning. The week’s activities were 
centered around: 

• AdaNET Project Meetings 

• Ada Users Survey 

• Network Planning and Implementation 

• Initial Market and Services Analysis 

2.3.1 AdaNET Project Meetings 

Project meetings were held on on the evening of December 10, 1987, follow- 
ing completion of the Ada Expo ’87. The first meeting held included only 
representatives of the sponsoring agencies. Specific points for discussion 
focused on the need for higher level coordination between governmental 
participants, MountainNet, and the University of Houston - Clear Lake. 
Discussion was also held on the participation of the Department of the 
Army DISC4 in the AdaNET project. 

A second meeting was held, with the following in attendance: 

Virginia Castor - DOD AJPO Roy Bivens - NASA TU 

Edward Liebhardt - DoA DISC4 Henry Clarks - NASA TU 

Charles McKay - RICIS Paul McWilliams - NLAC 

Mike Digman - MountainNet James Rautner - MountainNet 

Kevin Dyer - MountainNet Frances Van Scoy - WVU 

John Heizer - DOD OPT! Robert Wallace - TA 

Topics for discussion included: 

• Final changes to Organizational Views report 


48 


• General update on AdaNET’s Ada Expo ’87 activities; 

• Discussion of project deliverables; 

• Organizational planning. 

The views expressed in all areas of discussion are reflected in either the 
discussion of Organizational Views or in the discussion of current organi- 
zational structure described in this chapter. The agenda of this meeting is 
included as Attachment E. 

2.3.2 Initial AdaNET Survey 

An initial survey was conducted at Ada Expo ’87; copies of the survey 
instrument were distributed at the Ada Expo ’87 with brochures about the 
AdaNET project. This survey was intended to gather the following types 
of information: 

• general demographic information, 

• Ada applications areas represented at the conferences, 

• levels of interest in potential service offerings, and 

• current hardware and telecommunications utilization. 

The survey, while only a preliminary sampling of those in attendance, 
yielded interesting information about the current interests, among those 
participating in the Ada marketplace. The survey was designed with a 
limited number of very focused questions, to increase the likelihood of re- 
sponse, as well as to get initial information about those areas needing more 
extensive follow-up. The demographic information provided is enabling the 
AdaNET project staff to follow up with mailings and further survey ac- 
tivities. Some findings from the survey are noted in the sections which 
follow. 


2.3.3 AdaNET Participant Communications 

Two factors have created a need for a means of communication and ex- 
change of textual information regarding the AdaNET project. There are: 

• the wide geographic distribution of participants in AdaNET project 
oversight and technical development, and 

• the difficulty in coordinating schedules for meetings and expense of 
travel to meetings. 

Many of the individuals involved already participate in one or more com- 
puter networks or services. These services include: 

• Defense Data Network (DDN) 


49 



a link between those industrial entities who currently have strong estab- 
lished bases of technology and those organizations trying to develop such 
expertise. Activity on the Business and Industry Council represents a more 
“anns-Iength” relationship with MountainNet than that of the governmen- 
tal sponsors or the organizations with subcontract or corporate teaming 
agreements in place. Many organizations initially interacting only at these 
board levels may recognize that a higher level of interaction is warranted 
by their capabilities and expertise, as well as the recognition of how par- 
ticipation supports their individual self-interests. Such organizations may 
migrate into roles on the development and support team. 


Mission and Goal Statement 

The mission of the Business and Industry Council is to provide assistance 
and guidance to MountainNet staff throughout the development and oper- 
ation of the AdaNET services. The Business and Industry Council links 
the services with the organizations and communities it serves, reflecting 
the ideas, focuses, and needs of each participating and targeted segment 
of these organizations and communities. The council is composed of indi- 
viduals from key commercial sector organizations who have demonstrated 
leadership in innovation, research, development and the application of tech- 
nology for America’s productivity enhancement. Each of the Business and 
Industry Council members shall hold such p ositions wi thin their respective 
organizations to be able to influence the participation with or support for 
the AdaNET service by their respective industries, companies, or profes- 
sional organizations. 

The council will give assistance and guidance to MountainNet in the fol- 
lowing functional project categories: 

• Target sector identification and needs 

• Service recommendations 

• Organ izati o nal p articipation and resources 

• Productivity enhancement applications 

These recommendations will serve to keep the AdaNET service responsive 
to its service base and be incorporated, as appropriate, by MountainNet 
staff as it manages and directs the course taken by the service. 

The board shall meet semi-annually, to be apprised of the current status of 
operations, as well as to provide assistance and guidance in the above ref- 
erenced broad based functional project categories. More active interaction 


• NASA’s electronic mail system 

• ARPANET 

• BITNET 

• Dialcom 

• Telenet electronic mail 

• CompuServe 

• MCI mail 

• Source 

• Other commercial networks and private host computer systems 


At this stage of the project, there is no practical method for creating inter- 
network gateways among all the different networks that would be required 
for every project participant to be able to use that participant s own host 
system for electronic mail and document transfer activities. In view of this, 
the project team has implemented an electronic mail and document service 
for AdaNET project participants hosted on a DEC Vax computer system. 
The service is menu-oriented, very easy to use, and can be accessed at no 
charge through Telenet. 

Terminal emulations that are presently supported include DEC VT series, 
Data General, Lear Siegler, Televideo, ADDS, and other video terminals 
and emulators. (Responses to an item on the Ada Expo ’87 questionnaire 
suggest that DEC, IBM PC, and Apple computers and video terminals are 
by far the most common hardware used by the respondents.) Copies of the 
Kermit communication and file transfer protocol which typically provides 
DEC VT series emulation are available from MountainNet for virtually any 
model of microcomputer. 

An AdaNET Document Transfer and Electronic Mail Service User Require- 
ments Documentation form has been prepared and distributed to the var- 
ious agencies and organizations participating in the project at this point. 
Attachment D of this document is the standardized form developed for es- 
tablishment of usernames for project participants. Completion of this form 
by each project participant is required prior to account activation. 


2.3.4 Network Planning 

In order to ascertain the extent to which some of the various electronic 
mail and document transfer systems are used by potential AdaNET users, 
a question regarding network use was asked on the informal questionnaire 


50 


distributed at the Ada Expo ’87 in Boston. The following table summarizes 
responses to that question: 

Electronic Mail and Networks Used 
by Ada Expo Attendees 


Network Name 

Frequency 

Percent 

DDN 

20 

233 

ARPANET 

32 

37.2 

NASA MAIL 

02 

02.3 

BITNET 

09 

10.5 

TELENET 

15 

17.4 

MCI 

00 

0 

COMPUSERVE 

12 

14.0 

DLALCOM 

02 

02.3 

SOURCE 

04 

04.7 

USENET 

03 

03.5 

TYMNET 

01 

01.2 

CSNET 

03 

03.5 

OTHERS 

09 

10.5 


Notes: Number of respondents as 86; respondents were asked to mark all 
those networks that apply. 


Though use of various network services for electronic mail and document 
transfer is common among this group, even ARPANET, the most commonly 
used network, was used by less than 40 percent of the respondents. As al- 
ready noted, responses to a second item on the Ada Expo ’87 questionnaire 
suggest that DEC, IBM PC, and Apple computers and video terminals are 
by far the most common hardware used by the respondents. 

2.3.5 Current Network Implementation 

Two host computer systems are initially being used to support planning 
and development activities: a Digital Equipment Corporation Vax 11/780 
located in Buckhannon, WV; and a Data General MV8000 located in Dell- 
slow, WV. 

These host computer systems are connected to MountainNet’s own telecom- 
munications network. That network is linked to Telenet and the West Vir- 
ginia Network for Educational Telecomputing, which is in turn connected 


51 



to ARPANET, BITNET, and Suranet. Through these network gateways, 
host computer systems are available via local direct or dialup access from 
most of the continental United States. 

2.3.6 User Survey and Marketing Implications 

Approximately 550 project brochures with market survey forms included 
were distributed, individually, at the conference. Eighty-six (86) completed 
market survey forms were completed at the conference, a response rate of 16 
percent. Since the conference additional surveys have been returned, some 
with cover letters expressing further interest in becoming involved with the 
support and use of AdaNET. Some have also responded with telephone 
inquiries about the project. 

AdaNET Brochure 

Included with the market survey, the brochure incorporated three "step- 
pages” of information describing the AdaNET project, the government 
agencies and private businesses involved in its inception, and the value- 
added services and products it will provide. These are included as Attach- 
ment F. A summary of the intent of these pages follows: 


AdaNET 

The Advanced Development Network 
For Ada Software Applications 

This page explains the AdaNET service as an effort involving government, 
education and the private sector, and its reason for being; that is, to gather, 
refine and disseminate information regarding the Ada computer language 
and software engineering in order to encourage use of Ada for better soft- 
ware engineering and improved productivity. 


AdaNET 

The Ada Soft- Where- House 


This page outlines how the AdaNET services and products will be stored, 


52 



classified and made available to the commercial market place, and academic 
and government organizations, and describes a few of these organizations 
that should benefit immediately and directly. The Ada Soft-Where-House 
represents the focus for access to the reusable components, objects and 
information sendees. 

AdaNET — — — - - 

Value-added Services and Products 


This page is a detailed Listing of the services and products that are to be 
offered. 


General Impressions 


The AdaNET project staff had discussions with many attendees of the 
Ada Expo’87 Conference, both on the floor of the display area and in small 
informal discussion groups. The impressions gleaned from these discussions 
and from the communications which have taken place since the conference 
have resulted in the general impression that the primary questions regarding 
the AdaNET service are: 

1. How soon will it be available? 

2. How can one access AdaNET? 

3. How much will access cost? 

A fourth impression is that many attendees felt that the AdaNET project 
represents a needed and timely step. 

Initial Market Survey 

A preliminary analysis of the initial market survey revealed some interest- 
ing characteristics, which sire under further analysis for distribution to the 
project participants in the near future. The complete form is included as 
Attachment C. Here is a summary of the three questions posed to survey 
respondents: 

1. With which Ada-related professional organizations are you 
affiliated? 



2. Is your organization involved in Ada software development? 
If yes, please check all that apply (various categories were listed). 

3. Which AdaNET services or information would you find use- 
ful? (various services were listed; users responded that each service was 
“Not Useful”, “Useful”, or “Very Useful”) 

The results to question one were as follows: 

YES NO 



N 

Percent 

N 

Percent 

SIGAda 

61 

70.9 

25 

29.1 

AdaJUG 

12 

14.0 

74 

86.0 

IEEE 

34 

39.5 

52 

60.0 


As was expected, considering the audience that was being addressed, a sig- 
nificant number of respondents, 70.9%, indicated a membership in SIGAda. 
The balance of the respondents show 14.0% membership in AdaJUG, and 
39.5% membership in IEEE. The total adds to more than 100% due to 
multiple membership affiliations by some respondents. 

From these respondents, most of whom are members of professional Ada 
organizations and who represent a sophisticated population, significant in- 
dicators are beginning to emerge. From the responses of this group to the 
third question, the most useful services are those listed below. These areas 
were the areas that elicited a “very useful” response from over 66% of the 
respondents. 

• Ada Faceted Classifications for Reuse 

• Ada-Specific Metrics 

• Software Engineering Methodology 

• Topical Search Categories for Reuse 

Services or information which were viewed as “useful” by audience include: 

• Commercial products and services 

• Contracting opportunities 


54 


• Documentation and information 

• Pro ject management s oft ware .. 

• User Communications 

Services or information viewed as “not useful” to this audience are as fol- 
lows: . ■_ 

• On-line tutorials 

• Computer based training 

• Telephone Help Line 

Respondents who indicated that Ada-faceted Classifications for Reuse, Top- 
ical Search Categories for Reuse, and Software Engineering Methodology 
were “very-useful” tended to fall into the following software development 
categories: 

• Data Bases 

• Education 

• Engineering 

• MIS Functions 

• Process Control 

• Scientific 

• Telecommunications 

• Tools 

• Weapons 

Ada-specific Metrics were found to be “very useful” for the following soft- 
ware development categories: 

• Scientific 

• Data Bases ™r~r- — . .. 

• Engineering 

• Telecommunications 

• Weapons - - — - 

Initial service offerings will be concentrated upon those categories which 
this preliminary survey indicates would have the highest tendency to be 
probable value-added migration paths for technology transfer offerings. 


55 


Attachment A 
Project Participants 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) 

Technology Utilization Division 

• NASA Industrial Applications Center (NIAC) 

University of Pittsburgh, PA 

• NASA Technology Application Team 
Research Triangle Institute, NC 

• Computer Software Management and Information Center (COSMIC) 
University of Georgia, GA 

University of Houston— Clear Lake (RICIS) 

Research Institute for Computer and Information Systems 

• Space Business Information Center 

• High Technologies Laboratory 

Department of Commerce (DOC) 

• Office of Productivity, Technology and Innovation (OPTI) 

Department of Defense (DOD) 

• Ada Joint Program Office 

Department of the Army (0DISC4) 

• Office of the Secretary of the Army, Directorate of Information Sys- 
tems for Command, Control, Communications and Computers 

West Vir gini a. University /WVU Research Corporation 
Morgantown, WV 

Beckley College 
Beckley, WV 


56 



Attachment B 

Project Deliverables 


Report on participant 
organizational views 

November 30, 1987 

Draft organizational plan 

December 21, 1987 

Final organizational plan 

January 25, 1988 

Draft business plan 

February 22, 1988 

Draft organizational documents 
and agreements 

February 22, 1988 

Draft technical plan 

March 7, 1988 . 

Draft schedule of user fees and 
charges and associated analysis 

March 14, 1988 

Final organizational documents 
and agreements 

April 25, 1988 

Final technical plan 

April 25, 1988 

Final schedule of user fees and 
charges and associated analysis 

April 25, 1988 

Final Business Plan 

May 30, 1988 

Final Report on Phases I and II 

May 30, 1988 


57 


AdaNET 

Ada Market survey 


0^,. . i S^!•^.“!:SdHn y r^:.‘ P * ,,,, 

answering the questions oeiow P - lf yOU w j sh to receive more 

and will be reported in summary form. 

By taking the time to answer the questions below you identify yourse ! f 
as candidate for participation in onsite user tests of AdaNET services. 


With which Ada-related professional organizations are you affiliated" 
SlGAda AdaJUG IEEE Other_ 


2 . 


No 


is your organization involved in Ada software deve opment 
y y Yes. please check all types that apply: 

— Consumer Scientific Engineering 

“Business/ “Data Bases Telecommunications 

MIS Functions 


Education 
Process Control 
Tools 


Financial Applications _Weapon$/C3 

Chemicals/Petroleum Compilers 


Which AdaNET services or information « 

cuid you 

find useful" 

(Ci rcle One) 

Not 

Useful 

Use fu ! 

Very usefu 

Commercial Product and Services 

•> 

1 

1 

1 

1 

t 

1 

1 

l 

1 

1 

2 

2 

2 

Contracting Opportunities 

•j 

Ada Faceted Classifications for Reuse 

■j 

3 

n 

2 

Topical Search Categories for Reuse 

2 

Documentation and Information 

w 

2 

User Communications 

j 

2 

Ada-Speci fic Metrics 

■J 

2 

On-Line Tutorials 

J 

2 

Computer-Based Training 

n 

2 

Telephone Help Line 


l 

1 

2 

Project Management Software 
Software Engineering Methodology 

J 

3 

2 


-(a > . 


ib ) 


i l 


00 ;° “S- - 

"MCI Mail CompuServe Dialcom — ou 

’ What computer hard-are do you use to access you checked 

_uicrocomputer-p lease identify the manufacturer and mode I : . 


Video termina 


-please identify the manufacturer and model., 


. . -, noec ,-ard here or provide your name, address, and 

Please attach your business vara nere ui v j 

telephone number: 


Your Name: 

Organ i :at i on : 

Posi ticn or Title: 
Mai l ing Address: 


City. State . Zip 


Thank you for tak.ng the time to prov-de the 


information requested. 


AdaNET ‘Janagement Team 

(December 1 987 


AdaNET 

Electronic Mail Service and Document Transfer 
User Registration Form 


Please type your information at the " >" 


1. Name, address, telephone: 


Person’s Name: — > 

Organization: > 

Address (#1): — > 

Address (#2): > 

City and State: > 

Zipcode: > 


Primary Telephone Number: > 

Alternate: > 

FAX Number: > 

(Continued on next page) 


60 


2. Network ID’s (e.g.: BITNET: VM5521 @ WVNVM, DIALCOM, COM- 
PUSERVE, etc) 


Preferred AdaNET userid: 

> 

DDN userid: 

> 

NASA Mail userid: 

> 

BITNET userid/node: 

> 

DIALCOM userid: 

> 

COMPUSERVE userid: 

> 

SOURCE userid info: 

> 

MPL userid: 

> 

other (specify): 

> 


3. From what location will you normally be accessing AdaNET? 


4. What device will you be using to access AdaNET (e.g., IBM-PC, Tele- 
video 924 video terminal , etc) ? Please be specific as to the manufacturer 
and model number. 

5. What type of telephone modem do you have connected to the device 
listed in #4 above? Please be specific as to the manufacturer and model 
number. 

Thank you. Please return this questionaire to: 

AdaNET 

c/o MountainNet, Inc. 

Attn. Mr. Michael Digman 
P. 0. Box 370 
Dellslow, WV 26531 


61 



Attachment E 

Agenda 

AdaNET Project Meeting 

9 

December 10, 1987 

6:00 P.M. - 7:00 P.M. 

• Specific responsibilities of each of three sponsoring agencies 

• Review specific objectives for the combined effort 

• Define specific goals for each of three sponsoring agencies 

• Coordination between three sponsoring agencies 

• Direction to contractor 
7:00 P.M. - 9:00 P.M. 

• Discussion of current AdaNET activities 

1. Outline of status report 

2. Marketing and Imaging 

3. Marketing Survey 

• Project Management 

1 . Expanded discussion of deliverables 

2. Accountability of contractor & sponsoring agencies 

• Role of other government agencies 

1. Methods for incorporation of additional agencies 

2. Criteria for consideration 

• Federal Advisory Panel 

1. Role of Panel 

2. Criteria for Membership 

• Technology Advisory Council 

1. Role of Council 

2. Criteria for membership 

• New Business 

1. Next Scheduled meeting 


62 


AdaNET* 

The Advanced Development Network 
For Ada* Software Applications 


AdaNET is a cooperative effort between 
government, education and the private sec- 
tor to create a resource that will aid in facil- 
itating the wide-spread use of Ada technol- 
ogy. 

AdaNET will be a gateway to Ada and ad- 
vanced software technology information. It 
will be a resource to aid in the identification 
and acquisition of information needed at all 
levels of expertise. 

AdaNET will serve as a test bed for new Ada 
training methodologies and will be acces- 
ible via established telecommunications 
linkages with existing government, educa- 
tional and commercial networks. 



AdaNET will provide continuous refinement 
of Ada software and software engineering 
information and technology, and will pro- 
vide a system for identifying and acquiring 
needed information. 

AdaNET will serve as a source for advice re- 
lating to specifics of the Ada language and 
its usage, and what tools are essential for 
good software development practices. 

By organizing and enlarging the scope of 
knowledge available and the ease with 
which it may be obtained, AdaNet can give 
business, industry, government, and the in- 
dividual many of the tools needed to make a 
transition into the Ada culture. 


AdaNETe is a registered trademark of MountainNet, Inc. 

Ada# is a registered trademark of the U S. Government (AJPO) 


63 


AdaNET- 

The Ada* Soft-Where-House 


AdaNET is a facility providing centralized 
accumulation of Ada information and tech- 
nology. 

This free flow of information will allow ad- 
vances in technology that have been made, 
primarily through government funded de- 
velopment , to be disseminated throughout 
all levels of the private and public sectors. 

With a gateway such as AdaNET, with the 
various attendant services that will be of- 
fered, the road will be opened to rapid ad- 
vancement in many fields. 

Some of those organizations that will ben- 
efit almost immediately include: 

• Traditional industries faced with the need 
to automate in order to re-establish a com- 
petitive position in the international mar- 
ketplace 



• The academic community for the educa- 
tion of Ada trainers and software engi- 
neers, as a tool for research and develop- 
ment, and for academic/industry transfer 

• Commercial developers concerned with 
applications and "embedded” software 
for commercial products development 

• Large and small industries exploring the 
transition to Flexible Computerized Man- 
ufacturing (FCM) 

• NASA, the U.S. Department of Defense, 
and the U.S. Department of Commerce 

• Contractors developing Ada systems and 
programs for Federal agencies 


AdaNET® is a registered trademark of MountainNet, Inc. 

Ada# is a registered trademark of the U.S. Government (AJPO) 


64 


AdaNET* 

Value-added Services and Products 



AdaNET will offer a wide array of services 
and products designed to enhance the appli- 
cation of Ada*technology at all levels of ex- 
pertise. 

AdaNET Information Services will include: 

• On-line Repositories Access 

• Taxonomic Classifications 

• Repository Reproductions 

• Easy to Use Topical Search Categories 

• Electronic Bulletin Boards 

• User Communications 

• AdaNET Telephone Help Line 

• Ada "Starter" Packages 

• Services and Products Publications 

• Validation and Verification 

• Documentation and Tutorials 

• Libraries of Reusable Modules 

• Life Cycle Identification 

Collateral and Supplemental Products and 
Services will include: 

• Seminars and Workshops 


• Development and Management Tools 
Needed to make Optimal Use of Ada Soft- 
ware 

• Industry Transition 

• Proprietary Software 

• Special Interest Groups 

• Specialized Libraries 

• AdaNET Publications and Newsletters 

Those interested in Ada technology and its 
applications will be able to acquire the infor-, 
mation available from AdaNET through a 
variety of methods; telephone, telecommun- 
ications, electronic media or by hard copy. 

AdaNET is an interactive partnership. Ada- 
NET will identify new information on Ada 
technology, provide ac cess to it in usable 
formats, and support its transfer to any in- 
terested party. This will, create a wide-open 
forum that will provide a free flow of infor- 
mation in an active, rapidly expanding field. 

From government agencies to private bus- 
iness, AdaNET will be a dynamic tool in 
working with Ada technology and the appli- 
cation of this powerful technology. 


AdaNET* i« a ragi*t*r*d trademark of MoontainNat. Inc. 

Ada* it a ragiatarad trad* mark of tha U.S. Govammant (AJPO) 


Chapter 3 

Business Plan 


66 


3.1 Executive Summary 


This plan describes the development of AdaNET, the purpose of which 
is to disseminate software engineering and Ada technology and aid in the 
transition of this important technology. Since Ada’s first commercial avail- 
ability in 1982, there has been continual development of Ada applications in 
both the public and private sectors, nationally and internationally. Moun- 
tainNet, Inc., is developing AdaNET as a means to capture and reuse the 
increasing volumes of Ada software technology and related information be- 
ing generated by public sector activities. Through value-added information 
services and reusable Ada software, AdaNET will offer technology solutions 
not previously available. AdaNET development is supported jointly by the 
Technology Utilization Division (TU) o f National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA), the Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO) of the De- 
partment of Defense (DoD), and the Office of Productivity, Technology and 
Innovation (OPTI) of the Department of Commerce (DOC). 

3.1.1 The Company 

MountainNet, Inc., is a communications and software engineering company 
formed in 1983 to provide services throughout West Virginia. Mountain- 
Net currently serves the government , commercial and educational commu- 
nities within the state. In 1985, MountainNet recognized the vast potential 
market for Ada related services. The DoD developed the Ada computer 
language for mission- critical systems, but Ada technology seemed to have 
broad potential beyond the defense community. This potential, plus the 
fact that very few companies existed with established expertise in Ada 
technology, combined to present an excellent market opportunity. 

In response, MountainNet developed AdaNE T, a ser vice designed to ad- 
dress the need for specialized software and information for the software 
engineering and Ada technology market, and submitted a unique proposal 
to NASA to support its development. 

3.1.2 Moun tainNet *s AdaNET Services 

MountainNet is using its telecommunications, information distribution and 
Ada technology expertise to develop a system that will coordinate informa- 
tion from a multitude of sources for consolidated direct access by AdaNET 
subscribers. Services will include access through a variety of media to: 


67 


• Ada software; 

• Information about that software; 

• Communications among Ada professionals; 

• Retrieval systems for general Ada related information; 

• Catalogs of government sponsored Ada programs and technology; 

• Catalogs of existing software engineering/ Ada products and services; 

• Third party services representing areas of Ada related expertise. 

An important part of the AdaNET system will be the development and on- 
going support of a Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI), a library of reusable 
Ada components and their associated life cycle products. Specialized value- 
added services to encourage reuse of this software will also be provided. 
These services include software classifications, testing, performance metrics, 
documentation, tutorials, and quality ratings. Ada repositories currently 
exist, but the incorporation of these value-added services and accessibility 
to a wide market base make the AdaNET system unique. MountainNet is 
entering this market at an ideal time, when there is recognized need and 
currently no major source of competition. AdaNET will complement and 
augment existing related public and private sector services. 

Through AdaNET, MountainNet will capture for reuse the growing amount 
of Ada technology being developed for NASA and DoD programs. This 
technology will be collected, organized, evaluated, and made available to the 
private sector to encourage transition to use of Ada technology. Mountain- 
Net will also identify current activities within various government organiza- 
tions to lessen potential duplication of effort. Another goal of the AdaNET 
system is to apply acquired software technology to Computer Integrated 


and industrial automation activities in the United States. 

The revenue structure will utilize both standard subscriptions and incre- 
mental fees. MountainNet will provide quality information at affordable 
rates to encourage widespread usage of software engineering and Ada tech- 
nology. AdaNET rate structures will be based on high volume usage. Moun- 
tainNet’s service goal for AdaNET is to provide reliable information services 
at cost effective rates. 


3.1.3 The Market 

Markets for AdaNET software and information services include: 

• Existing Ada community 

• International software industry 


68 


• Manufacturing and aut omation communities 

• Educational communities 

• Government organizations 

Initial technology transition efforts will be directed to the existing Ada 
community, as well as that portion of the traditional software industry 
seeking entry in the software engineering and Ada marketplace. 

Many of the services offered through AdaNET will be of use to all o f these 
target user groups, and additional services will be offered to cater to other 
specific user communities. AdaNET services will be offered in many forms, 
including seminars, workshops, professional co nsulting, and the D SI with 
its supporting information. This information will be distributed through a 
variety of methods, including on-line, CD-ROM, diskette, and print. 

The market for Ada products will be several hundred million dollars in 
1988, and is expected to exceed one billion dollars by 1991, surpassing 
four billion dollars by 1995, according to a survey conducted by IRDI. The 
most immediate potential user base is the current software engineering and 
Ada community. Preliminary market surveys conducted by MountainNet 
indicate that there is interest and perceived need for the types of services 
to be offered through AdaNET. 

3.1.4 Financial Projections 

Support for AdaNET development is being provided by a subcontract from 
the NASA - Johnson Space Center (JSC) through the of Houston - Clear 
Lake (UHCL). Full implementation of planned se rvices wi ll en able research 
and development of computer based resources and value-added services, fa- 
cilitate acquisition of necessary computer and network resources, and sup- 
port aggressive technology transition pirns. Full financial projections are 
contained in section 3.7 of this document (page 96). 


69 


3.2 Background 

MountainNet, Inc., a West Virginia business, was incorporated in 1983 to 
provide telecommunications and software engineering services. Mountain- 
Net currently maintains 17 dial-in nodes across the state, with internet- 
work linkages to the West Virginia Network for Educational Telecomputing 
(WVNET), a state supported network, and the commercial international 
Telenet network. The MountainNet network is used to access a variety of 
computer hosts and other networks by governmental, commercial and ed- 
ucational users of on-line information services. For example, MountainNet 
provides telecommunications access to a computer hosting an on-line in- 
formation system supported by the West Virginia Department of Energy. 
The Software Valley Bulletin Board, a free public access electronic bulletin 
board service, is made available through a cooperative effort of Mountain- 
Net and MPL Corporation, an affiliated computer services corporation. 
MountainNet is entering the software engineering and Ada technology infor- 
mation services market with development of its AdaNET system. Through 
AdaNET, MountainNet will collect and disseminate software and informa- 
tion in the fields of software engineering and the Ada computer language. 
Interest in Ada technology has rapidly increased in both the public and 
private sectors, nationally and internationally, since Ada s first commercial 
availability in 1982. AdaNET’s purpose is to encourage greater growth of 
the Ada community in the private sector, as well as to capture for reuse the 
vast, ever increasing amounts of Ada software and related information be- 
ing generated by public sector activities. The information available through 
AdaNET will be offered with accompanying value-added services, resulting 
in a source of information which will be unique in the Ada market. 
MountainNet has found that several major barriers exist for new companies 
trying to enter the Ada technology marketplace. Critical information about 
training and software engineering /Ada technology is difficult and expensive 
to obtain, and very few support services exist to aid in the collection and 
use of this information. In addition, the rapidly expanding base of public 
domain Ada software has not been organised effectively for widespread dis- 
tribution and reuse. Such information has primarily existed in disparate 
centers serving focused user bases, with little information sharing between 
such activities. There is a market for efficient, reliable access to this in- 
formation by both the existing Ada market and by new market entrants. 
AdaNET will provide such access. 

An import suit part of AdaNET will be the development and ongoing sup- 


70 


port of an Ada software library, with accompanying specialized services to 
encourage reuse of this software. This library will be unique to the industry. 
Only recently has the software industry as a whole re cogn ized the need for 
technologies supporting reuse of software. Current activities in developing 
software reuse technologies and methodologies are primarily government 
supported. As these new technologies become available, MountainNet will 
apply them the AdaNET reusable software library. 

With software life cycle costs continuing to increase, and the need for new 
software systems in both the public and private sector rising each year, 
the demand for more efficient technologies to manage this “software crisis" 
has never been greater. Through AdaNET, MountainNet will provide a 
central information source for such emerging technologies, and will use these 
technologies in building its own reusable components libraries. Anyone 
producing software engineering or Ada software products in this market is a 
potential AdaNET user. AdaNET should also encourage new entrants into 
the software engineering and Ada market by making the technology more 
accessible, particularly in the area of CIM/FCIM software development. 
AdaNET will provide its user base with the following: 

• A teleco mmuni cation linkage for government, academic and 
commercial entities; 

• A clearinghouse of information for professional, educational, 
said current events news; — 

• Contracting information to encourage greater competitive- 
ness in the software engineering and Ada marketplace; 

• Access to other market participants for:~^ 

— Potential teaming opportunities 

— Expertise in a variety of areas related to software engi- 
neering and Ada technology ssa 5“: = 

• Access to Ada software libraries, aiding users in software 
reuse; 

AdaNET will be directed initially to two target markets: the existing Ada 
community; and the traditional software development co mmuni ty seeking 
entry into the Ada market. The buyers of AdaNET services will include: 

• Software engineers and developers 

• Software managers 

• Contractors and subcontractors 

• Government agencies 

• Educational communities 


71 


MountainNet currently has 12 full time equivalent (FTE) personnel, of 
which ten are assigned to AdaNET. During the next phase of the project, 
MountainNet will add to its internal technical and technology transition 
staff, reflecting the shift from initial project planning to full scale AdaNET 
implementation. MountainNet will add approximately six people during 
the next year. Long term growth of the company is anticipated to peak 
between 20-30 FTE personnel. 

MountainNet has maintained controlled growth by subcontracting services 
whenever possible. This approach has allowed a high degree of flexibility in 
response to market demands. MountainNet will subcontract with a variety 
of companies representing areas of expertise essential to successful AdaNET 
development. MountainNet is currently working with eleven companies and 
organizations, and is discussing formalizing relationships with several ma- 
jor technology and industry leaders, thus broadening the base of available 
resources. 


3.3 The Market 

This section is an initial marketing plan for the AdaNET. It discusses the 
current marketplace, presents results of an intial market survey and de- 
scribes the beginning implementation plan for AdaNET. 

3.3.1 The Software Engineering and Ada Marketplace 

This section discusses the use of Ada in a software engineering environment, 
describes the current Ada marketplace and offers a view of Ada as applied 
to the commercial sector of the economy. 

Ada in a Software Engineering Environment 

Ada is a tool for software engineering in embedded computer applications. 
Although initially defined as a language for DoD mission-critical computer 
resources, Ada is being recognized as a language which has much broader 
applications. For example, most process control systems in place on factory 
floors require the same degree of tightly controlled development as DoD 
applications. Implementation of object-oriented design, information hiding 
and packaging concepts using Ada is appropriate for the development of 
the automated factory of the future. 

One of the most critical elements of Ada is that it encourages the use of good 


72 



software engineering practices. When used properly, Ada can reduce costs 
and enhance the engineers’ ability to reuse components in new systems. 
The AIS will provide necessary information that will aid in the proper use 
of software engineering principles. 

While originally developed for embedded systems development, similar ben- 
efits from use of Ada are being experienced in development and support of 
applications software, such as management information systems, database 
systems, and software tools. 

The Current Ada Marketplace 

The initial Ada technology market was completely driven by the United 
States government, and more particularly, by DoD demand. Development 
of the Ada language was sponsored by the DoD in an effort to control 
software costs in vital defense and weapons systems. Ada’s development 
was intended to: 

• Establish one standardized language that would be used by all DoD 
agencies in the development of mission-critical systems; 

• Hold down the rising costs and improve the reliability of developing 
and maintaining software by encouraging good software engineering 
design; 

• Encourage reuse of software by including features that would enhance 
the potential for reuse of software components. 

The process of developing Ada, from its early specifications documents 
through the first commercial compilers, spanned the period from 1975 to 
1982. Hence, the Ada market is just emerging from its infancy. Major 
development efforts using Ada in the United States have been, for the most 
part, government sponsored activities. Internationally, the jyte^ofAda in 
the commercial market has been more widespread; banking, telecommuni- 
cations, and aerospace systems have been developed using Ada technology. 
One of the largest companies to adopt Ada early on was the Japanese Nip- 
pon Telegraph- Telephone (NTT), which began developing their software in 
Ada shortly after the first commerci al comp ilers became available. 
However, the market demand created by defense appli cat ion s ha s been sig- 
nificant. A DoD directive issued in 1983 mandated that Ada must be used 
for all new mission-critical applications. In 19 85, North Atlantic Treaty Or- 
ganization (NATO) directed that all NATO-developed systems developed 
after January 1986 must use Ada. In 1986, a DoD directive expanded the 
use of Ada to all new weapons systems development. The defense market 


73 


for Ada applications alone generated more than than 100 million dollars 
per year. 

Three areas historically holding back Ada’s widespread adoption were the 
lack of commercial compilers and tools for many popular computer sys- 
tems, the general lack of trained professionals in the field, and the lack of 
technology and market information. 

Ada use is rapidly spreading to the commercial applications market, now 
that its advantages in software productivity and reliability are being real- 
ized. Major applications in supporting real time control systems are being 
developed. Weirton Steel, in Weirton, West Virginia, is undertaking a 300 
million dollar modernization project for new hot rolling mill technology 
that will use Ada as its control language. The development is being done 
by General Electric Corporation. Ada is also being used in the United 
States to program microwave ovens, commercial aircraft navigational sys- 
tems, telecommunications, database management systems, and many other 
applications. 

The government market continues to drive the process of Ada’s adoption 
by the world’s software industry: 

• In December 1987, NASA awarded a 1 billion dollar contract to Boeing 
Corporation for the development of a space station, to be completed in 
the mid-1990’s. The software will be written in Ada and is estimated 
to require 10.5 million lines of code. 

• A 508 million dollar contract was released by the DoD in January, 
1988, to Martin Marietta Corporation for the development of the 
Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) National Test Bed. This project 
will be developed using Ada. 

• The Software Technologies for Adaptable, Reliable Systems (STARS) 
has solicited proposals for major research to be conducted simultane- 
ously by three major prime contractors for developing new technologies 
that will encourage software reusability in Ada. STARS has indicated 
that a centralized software repository to coordinate the results of this 
research is needed. 

• The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) (Department of Trans- 
portation) has chosen Ada as its standard development language. 

Recent commercial sector activities are also significant: 

• Ada compilers and tools are proliferating; there are currently 123 com- 
mercially available compilers listed in the Ada Information Clearing- 
house (AdalC), which run on the most common mainframe, mini and 
micro computers. 


74 


• Ada education is also expanding, with Ada and software engineering 
courses being offered at many small colleges, as well as at most major 
universities. The number of companies providing Ada education for 
the existing professional market has also increased. 

• The Software Productivity Consortium (SPC), a research consortium 
established by the nation’s largest defense and aerospace companies 
to develop new automation, knowledge based systems, and reuse tech- 
nologies, is using Ada as its primary develop men t langu age. 

• Space Industries, Incorporated, a Texas company which proposed the 
development of the Industrial Space Facility (ISF), a parallel program 
to NASA’s space station, is using Ada technology to support its de- 
velopment. 

• A study released by International Resource Development, Incorpo- 
rated (IRD) in December, 1986, has determined that Ada market op- 
portunities for 1988 total several hundred million dollars. Such growth 
is introducing many newcomers to the Ada marketplace. The need 
for skilled Ada software engineers far exceeds the number currently 
available. Major corporations and leading defense contractors have 
undertaken internal training programs to develop enough expertise to 
meet their current contract demands. Newcomers to the market still 
have extreme difficulty locating educational and professional informa- 
tion, gaining access to currently existing technology and compilers, 
and finding contracting and subcontracting opportunities. 

It is apparent that the software engineering and Ada technology market is 
on a steep upward climb. The government market alone will continue to 
support steady growth, thus creating a base of long t e rm stability in the 
Ada market. However, significant accompanying growth in private sector 
use of Ada is also probabjle, as the use of software engineering principles 
be come more comm on and advant ag es in rea l c ost and rel i ab ility savings 
are realized. IRD’s study indicates that the market for Ada technology in 
1991 alone will have grown to more them a billion dollars. 

3.3.2 Market Trends 

AdaNET’s immediate markets are the existing Ada community, and com- 
panies maWitig entry to that community. New companies will continue to 
enter the market as the government demand for Ada software continues to 
grow and as the cost savings of using Ada technology are realized. Such 
savings include reduced life cycle costs, increased software reliability, and 


75 


savings through reuse of software components. The languages and tech- 
nologies used in the past are now unable to meet the growing demands for 
larger, more reliable, longer term software solutions. Companies are finding 
Ada an attractive alternative. 

The heightened emphasis on interconnectivity and standardization in all 
facets of communications is causing many companies to favor use of the 
standardized Ada language. With the shift to Ada technology to support 
the government market, it is becoming more cost-effective for government 
software producers to use Ada for all their applications. 

As more software companies increase their competitiveness by adopting 
Ada, others will be forced to explore the transition to the Ada market in 
to maintain a competitive market position or even to remain in the 
market at all. To support this transition, developers are seeking sources of 
software engineering/ Ada related technology, educational, and market in- 
formation. In spite of radically increased use of Ada, such sources are still 
scarce. To realize the advantages of software reuse encouraged by software 
engineering/ Ada technology, developers are seeking new tools, design and 
evaluation methodologies, and access to the millions of dollars of govern- 
ment developed Ada software that is in the public domain. 

3.3.3 Market Participants 

Current products in the Ada market are summarized as follows: 

• Ada Compilers 

• Applications Software (e.g., CRI’s Relate 3000 relational database sys- 
tem) 

• Customer Specific Applications (e.g., Weirton Steel’s hot rolling mill) 

• Software Development Environments (e.g., CASE products) 

• Computers (e.g., Rational computers) 

• Educational Materials 

• Metrics (e.g., McCabe and Associates, Autometrics) 

• Newsletters (e.g., Ada Strategies, AdaData, AdalC) 

• Seminars (e.g., EVB Software Engineering, Texel Putnam Associates) 

• Tools (e.g., program design languages, configuration management) 

While all the Ada product areas listed above represent potential users of 
AdaNET services, MountainNet views the producers of Applications/Customer 
Specific Applications as the potentially largest group of AdaNET users. 
MountainNet is conducting an ongoing market assessment as part of the 
planning to provide continuing refinement to the Technical Plan and Rev- 


76 



enue Structures reports. The following questions are being researched for 
each of the service areas listed: 

• How many companies are producing software engineering and Ada 
training materials? 

• How is the service made available to users? 

• What is the anticipated growth in this market by number of market 
participants and total market share? 

These statistics will be used as the basis for final revenue projections, by 
applying service revenue structures to each of these markets. Indepen- 
dent market growth projections in each area, coupled with final results of 
MountainNet’s own market studies, will allow more accurate predictions of 
growth in each service sector. Current projections are made on baseline 
minimum use for each service area in the current market environment. 

3.3.4 Market Composition 

MountainNet has identified several major professional areas represented 
within each of its potential market segments: 

• Software Engineers/Developers 

• Managers/ Administrators 

• Educators 

• Applications End Users 

The initial market survey conducted at Ada Expo ’87, indicated that these 
individual user co mmu nities have interests in specific service areas: 

• Software Engineers /Develop ers a lready worki ng with Ada 
technology were interested in software engineering methodologies, 
Ada specific metrics, reusable software, and Ada faceted classifica- 
tions for reuse. They had li ttle interest in Education and Support, or 
Contract Opportunities/Market Trend information. 

• Those representing Administrative or Business oriented func* 

tions within their organizations, whether governmental or commer- 
cial, registered interest in services providing contracting/subcontracting 
information, current events, market t rends, governmental activities 
with respect to the use of Ada, and information about companies and 
products in the Ada market. They had little interest in technically 
oriented services. 

• Educators, fewest in number of those groups represented in the sam- 
pling, indicated the strongest interest in technically oriented informa- 


77 


tion, such as: Ada faceted classifications for reuse; software engineer- 
ing methodology; topical search categories for reuse; and Ada tutorials. 
All other areas registered median interest, with the exception of con- 
tracting, products, and telephone help line, which were of little or no 
interest. 

• The last category includes potential Manufacturing/Industrial com- 
munities examining Ada technology as part of an overall advance tech- 
nology solution to aid in their productivity, competitiveness and re- 
liability. Areas of interest to representatives actively involved in the 
development Ada applications include: information about current in- 
dustrial applications, educational and professional information, and 
information about companies possessing specific areas of Ada technol- 
ogy expertise. 

This survey, along with more in-depth inquiries, is being distributed to a 
much broader sampling of both the Ada and non- Ada communities. For a 
more detailed analysis of the data collected at the Ada Expo, see appendix 
A. 

3.3.5 Market Segments 

MountainNet has identified five separate market segments which represent 
the key areas in its implementation strategy: 

• Current Ada market participants 

• New entrants to the Ada market 

• Educational institutions 

• Government organizations 

• Industrial/Manufacturing 

The current Ada market represents the most immediate market for AdaNET 
services. MountainNet is gradually becoming established in that commu- 
nity, through activity in professional organizations and through Mountain- 
Net’s expanding base of government contacts. Based on preliminary sur- 
veys, the professional Ada community will comprise the initial base-line 
of services planned by AdaNET. Particular interest has been expressed in 
reusable software components and supporting value-added services, pro- 
fessional papers, and general information services such as market trends 
and contract opportunities. Development of these services must occur be- 
fore expansion into later markets, such as the industrial and manufacturing 
markets. 


78 


The educational community does not represent a potentially high level rev- 
enue base. However, those colleges and universities that have established 
bases of Ada expertise will be some of AdaNET’s most valuable sources 
of new research, development and emerging technology. For those institu- 
tions trying to gain Ada technology expertise, AdaNET’s purpose will be 
to provide as much high quality, low cost information and support as pos- 
sible, as they begin to incorporate Ada and software engineering into their 
curriculums. 

The government market represents a highly stable, proactive environment 
for AdaNET’s services. While AdaNET’s stated purpose is the transfer of 
software engineering and government developed Ada software to the private 
sector, another implicit role that has emerged for AdaNET is to inventory 
available software within various government agencies. Much time has been 
spent in AdaNET’s planning phase to determine the scope of existing Ada 
and software engineering information and related projects in progress at 
various NASA field centers. In discussions with DOC, NASA, and DoD 
organizations, it has become apparent that there is duplication of efforts 
within these organizations. AdaNET will provide a means by which these 
agencies can communicate to coordinate their Ada related activities. This 
information can be shared, allowing faster development and greater tech- 
nological advances. 

Entry into the industrial/manufact uring mar ket will require a more pro- 
longed effort. Significant pre-market education will probably be required 
for individual communities to see the direct advantages of applying soft- 
ware engineering/ Ada technology to their specific appli cations. AdaNET 
will provide educational and consultant support for^ successful long term 
software engineering/ Ada technology transfer in such areas as Paperless 
Order Processing (POP), Just In Time Inventory (JIT), CIM/FCIM, and 
other real time control systems. 

3.3.6 Di stribution Media _ 

AdaNET services will be delivered through a variety of distribution media. 
On-line computerized AdaNET s ervic es wiU be availabl e internationally 
through Mount ainNet’s network, as well as through internetwork gateways 
to commercial, educational and governmental telecommunications carriers. 
Other distr ibution formats will include hardcopy, magnetic tape, diskette 
and CD-ROM. A centralized point of distribution will be established for 
each medium. Wherever possible, Mount ainNet will seek alternate distribu- 


79 


tion channels, to increase the overall market base for its services. Mountain- 
Net is currently in discussions with distributors of CD-ROM information 
about potential use of existing distribution channels for AdaNET’s CD- 
ROM based services. Similar possibilities will be examined in the diskette 
duplication market. 

3.3.7 Complementary Services 

Currently, there are few sources for the information services that Moun- 
tainNet will be providing. Other sources of related information do exist, 
but those services either do not provide the same kinds of value-added 
services, or are limited in the range of information provided. Mountain- 
Net views the organizations listed below as potential partners in building 
AdaNET resources and providing additional complementary resources to 
the AdaNET user base. It is a goal of the AdaNET project to form co- 
operative relationships with any organizations that can provide valuable 
services to AdaNET subscribers. MountainNet will seek to provide services 
that complement and augment existing services rather than duplicate their 
efforts. 

Publications and Bulletin Boards: 

AdaData: A monthly publication by IRD provides information about 

market trends and commercial development in Ada software, services and 
equipment. 

Ada Information Clearinghouse (AdalC): An activity sponsored by 

the DoD AJPO, publishes a quarterly newsletter with information primar- 
ily about DoD related activities, as well as current developments in the Ada 
compilers and software tools market, and current events updates. Newslet- 
ters and other information are made available on a PC-based bulletin board 
system operated by the AdalC. Since both AdaNET and the AdalC are 
projects sponsored by the AJPO, both groups will work to coordinate their 
activities to avoid duplication of effort. Discussions are in process now. 

Software Engineering and Ada Database (SEAD): An on-line database 

service operated by UHCL for JSC, NASA. As part of MountainNet ’s Phase 
I and II Statement of Work with UHCL, MountainNet has investigated ways 
in which AdaNET can augment the information contained in SEAD, and 


80 


explore how SEAD could be made available through MountainNet ’s devel- 
oping AdaNET network. 

Ada Strategies; A monthly periodical by Cutter Publications providing 
information about the commercial and governmental Ada market, current 
events and trends. Ralph Crafts, editor of Ada Strategies, has recently 
signed a teaming agreement on behalf of his company, Software Strategies 
and Tactics, with MountainNet to provide marketing support to Moun- 
tainNet for AdaNET development. These services may include general Ada 
market assessment, evaluation of AdaNET charges, services evaluation, and 
target marketing. 


Software service activities (providing access to public domain software): 


Aide Publishing; Operating a CD-ROM based service with duplications 
of the Ada Software Repository (ASR) and other public domain software, 
primarily serving the Minnesota market area, where its major users are 
Honeywell and CD C. No value-added functions are provided in analysis or 
support of the software. 

Initial discussions with Aide Publishing have indicated that Aide would 
be highly interested in serving as a distribution channel for the CD-ROM 
services MountainNet will be establishing. 

Army White Sands Ada Software Repository (ASR); Located on 
the Army’s SIMTEL-20 node of the MIL-NET, and serving as the major 
clearinghouse for public domain DoD Ada software. The service provides 
on-line access to subscribers for a $2000 annual fee. Remote software re- 
quests from accounts on the Defense Data Network (DDN) are serviced, 
as are r emo te requests from educational networks. SIMTEL-20 and DDN 
accounts are limited to DoD organizations and contractors. Due to resource 
limitations, restrictions are set on the volume of software transmitted per 
request. Low level testing is performed on software, with no verification, 
metrics, or evaluation for potential reusability of subcomponents being per- 
formed. Due to the volunteer nature of much of the service, there is typically 
a backlog of duplication requests. 


81 


Through discussions with Richard Conn, originator of the ASR, it was 
discovered that AdaNET can service the private sector with access to the 
the Ada software information that the ASR is providing to the defense 
market. ASR is currently receiving more electronic and written requests 
for software than it can effectively provide. Many of the incremental services 
AdaNET will offer, such as verification and metrics applications, are not 
expected to become standard ASR offerings. MountainNet currently has 
copies of the ASR as well as other software collections, such as the Common 
Ada Missile Packages (CAMP), available on its computer systems. 

Computer Science Management and Information Center (COS- 
MIC): NASA’s repository for collected NASA software system that are 

general enough for redistribution to the public and private sectors. Both 
COSMIC and AdaNET receive funding from NASA’s TU division. NASA 
TU has stated the need for cooperation between AdaNET and COSMIC. 
One way in which AdaNET could work with COSMIC is to provide on- 
line access to COSMIC’s software directory, hence broadening COSMIC’s 
market ing channels. Discussions are being held with John Gibson, COS- 
MIC Director, about possible cooperative relationships. A Memorandum 
of Understanding between University of Georgia (COSMIC’s operator) and 
MountainNet is currently being put in place, to identify service areas ad- 
dressed by each organization and specific areas of interaction. 


Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC)t Currently 
under contract to STARS to provide no cost private sector access to ASR 
and Naval Ocean Systems Command (NOSC) software. This software is 
made available on magnetic tape. No value-added functions are provided 
in analysis or support of the software. 


Proprietary Ada Software Libraries: 


EVB Software Engineering’s Generic Reusable Ada Components 
for Engineering (GRACE): Some proprietary Ada software libraries 

are now being marketed, of which GRACE is the most widely known. The 
components supply fundamental data structures and functions, indexed by 
a taxonomy refined from that proposed in the book, “Software Components 


82 


with Ada”, by Grady Booch. The components are tested, supported, and 
are highly portable. Costs for the system depend on the buyer’s host com- 
puter. MountainNet believes that more companies will enter the reusable 
components market as that market matures. 


3.4 Market Strategy 

Based on the five key market segments previously identified, MountainNet 
has chosen two specific areas in which to establish its initial AdaNET service 
base: 

• Ada Information Services (AlS), technology information services 

• Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI), Ada reusable software and asso- 
ciated life cycle products 

MountainNet is utilizing the following strategies to develop its technology 
base and gain exposure to the most current trends and developments, as 
well as to become integrated into the Ada culture: 

• Identification of existing NASA technologies: This includes col- 
lection of publications and standards pro duc ed by various NASA field 
centers and divisions, identification of related projects and technolo- 
gies, and communication with the individuals involved in such activi- 
ties. 

• Development and broadening of AdaNET’s support infras- 
tructure: MountainNet is creating organizations for the formal in- 
teraction of public and p riva t e sect or entities with AdaNET. These 
organizations are the Federal Advisory Panel, the Technology Advi- 
sory Council, and the Business and Industry Council. Discussions with 
representatives of other NASA organizations, as well as other govern- 
ment agencies, will be ongoing. As part of this effort, AdaNET is 
participating in NASA’s Software Management and Assurance Work- 
shop and in the National Bureau of Standards’ FEDMAIN working 
group. As a result of continuing discussions with the executive coun- 
cil of the ACM’s SIGAda, the council has indicated interest in using 
AdaNET as their electronic communications medium. 


MountainNet approach in developing AdaNET revenue structures is to offer 
affordable, general baseline services to a wide user audience and to provide 


83 



incremental services at additional cost for high end or specialized user re- 
quests. The three major goals of this fee structure are to be able to provide 
a large amount of information across a wide variety of media, to keep in- 
dividual user starting costs low, and to distribute part of the high costs of 
expense services across other low cost categories. 

In order to stimulate AdaNET customers to become new sources of Ada 
technology for the AdaNET information base, the AdaNET services infor- 
mation group will develop special incentive programs. One possibility would 
be a system of AdaNET credit points. Users who submit new, reusable ob- 
jects or refinements to existing objects could be awarded points based on 
the quality and quantity of their submissions. Point values could be periodi- 
cally adjusted to reflect changing supply and demand needs in the inventory 
of reusable components. For example, bonus points could be offered during 
a specified time period to users who submit a particular component lacking 
in the DSI but in high demand from subscribers. These points would make 
the holders eligible for special recognition, additional benefits, and special 
services. This creative method of soliciting high-demand components has 
the potential to make AdaNET highly responsive to user needs. 

In order to attract the professional markets previously identified, the AdaNET 
system must be established as a highly professional, “cutting-edge” tech- 
nology service. To achieve this, AdaNET will demonstrate easily accessible 
information that is truly of value to computer professionals. Presentation 
of the DSI will emphasize the wealth of software available, as well as the 
inherent value of the AIS to the software development process. Presenta- 
tion of AdaNET services will be of high quality and will set AdaNET apart 
from current information services. 

MountainNet will promote AdaNET services through: 

• Attendance at related major trade shows and conferences. 

• Direct marketing to: 

- corporate organizations; 

- professional organizations; 

- consortia, such as the Software Productivity Consortium (SPC). 

• Expanded technology transfer activities with additional government 
organizations. 

• Survey and advertising materials in professional and trade publica- 
tions. 


84 



Utilization of existing distribution channels for the types of media 
provided by MountainNet through AdaNET. 



3.5 Products 

3.5.1 Description 

Implementation of AdaNET services will continue over a two year period, 
with new services being phased in as other services are under development. 
The following is a listing and description of services currently planned. 



Target Service Date 

Description 

Low Level 

Prototype 

Standard 

High-End 

Dynamic Software Inventory 

08/88 

12/88 

04/89 


Reusable Ada Software 

05/88 

08/88 

12/88 

04/89 

Other Life Cycle Objects 





Documentation 

05/88 

08/88 

12/88 


Metrics 


09/88 

12/88 

04/89 

Profile Information 

08/88 

10/88 

12/88 

i ij vi * 

Reuse Database/Taxonomy 


08/88 

12/88 

' 

Tutorials 




H 

AdaNET Information Services 





User Forums 

05/88 

07/88 

10/88 


AdaNET Bibliographic System 

04/88 

07/88 

10/88 


Educational Materials 

03/88 

07/88 

09/88 


Electronic Communications 

NOW 


08/88 


Full Text 

04/88 

06/88 

08/88 


Directories/Publications 

06/88 

10/88 



Other Repositories b Services 


06/88 

08/88 


Professional Support 



■ 


Consultant services 





Seminars and Workshops 



H 



86 



3.5.2 Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) 

The Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) will provide access to both software 
and associated life cycle products, along with v alue-added services relevant 
to that software. Its design will allow users to view these objects across and 
within the phases of the life cycle. MountainNet uses the term Dynamic 
Software Inventory to distinguish this service from that of a “repository" . 
Like a repository, the DSI will store reusable components. However, unlike 
other repositories, The DSI will also store other life cycle products associ- 
, ated with the reusable components, such as requirements documents, de- 
sign documents, and test plans. Also, the contents of the DSI will undergo 
constant improvement through the application of value-added services that 
include quality and performance testing, portability reports, and extended 
profile information. Furthermore, the DSI will contain built-in mechanisms 
by which users of the reusable components will be encouraged to make 
refinements to the components and resubmit them to the inventory. 

Reuseable Ada Software: An inventory of public domain Ada software 
from NASA, DoD, other government organizations, and private sector 
sources will be evaluated for inclusion in the DSI. Wherever possible, 
associated life cycle products will also be incorporated in the DSI. 

Other Life Cycle Objects: In later phases of the project, the inventory 
of reusable components will be expanded to include other objects from 
the software life cycle, such as requirements documents, test plans, and 

software specifications. ... ... . .. . 

Documentation: Standard documentation accompanying software com- 
ponents and related life cycle products will be stored in the DSI. 
Standards or guidelines under evaluation for possible adoption include 
NASA’s DID’s (Ada version) and M1LSTD-2167A. For standard life 
cycle and AdaNET specific documents, AdaNET developers are con- 
sidering the adoption of the SGML ISO standard to develop Document 
Type Descriptions (DTD) representational ma rkup. 

Profile Information: Each inventoried software object will have an as- 
sociated profile. Current profile attributes include abstract, author, 
hardware/OS requirements, size, documentation status, portability re- 
port, etc. 

Reuse Database/ Taxonomy: Objects in the DSI will be stored in the 
reuse database using a faceted classification scheme, which will allow 
for a flexible design. The design of this database will be independent 


87 


of the data model used to ensure that it will not be constrained by the 
current “state of the practice”. 

Tutorials: This consists of instructional information on the use of the DSI, 
and on the use of inventoried components. 

3.5.3 AdaNET Information Services (AIS) 

User Forums: A variety of bulletin board services, each relating to a gen- 
eral topic area will be developed. Current events, Special Interest 
Groups (SIGs), discussion forums, news, and product information will 
be offered. 

AdaNET Bibliographic System ( ABS): A bibliographic retrieval sys- 
tem for texts of interest to the software engineering/ Ada community 
will be available. Information will be accessed by key field/key word 
search categories, including article and periodical/ publication refer- 
ences and abstracts. 

Educational Materials: Access to or information about educational books, 
video courses, overhead slide presentations and CAI tutorials and other 
types of educational materials about software engineering and Ada will 
be provided. 

Electronic Communications: Standard electronic mail and document 
transfer services atfe available. 

Full Text Information: Full text information relevant to software engi- 
neering, Ada and related technologies in the AdaNET library, that 
MountainNet is authorized to make available to AdaNET users, will 
be provided. 

Directories/Publications: Printed information about software objects 
in the DSI, and regular user updates concerning new and/or improved 
AdaNET services and activities will be available. 

Other Repositories and Services: Information about known public and 
private software repository activities throughout the country for both 
Ada and non Ada software will be provided. Such repositories include 
the ASR, and NASA’s COSMIC. 

Consultant Services: MountadnNet’s stadf and those companies compris- 
ing the AdaJ'JET support infrastructure will be available via AdaNET 
for specialized software engineering/ Ada technology consultant ser- 


OA 


vices. 


Seminars and Workshops: MountainNet will sponsor workshops, work- 
ing groups, and conferences. 

3.5.4 Spinoffs 

As the AdaNET system evolves, other spinoff services will be pursued. Such 
services include: 

• Consultant services to aid manufacturers in their transition from tra- 
ditional technologies to Ada based CIM/FCIM technologies. 

• Consultant services to private sector organizations in their develop- 
ment of reusable software components inventoriesT ' 

• Expansion to the international Ada technology market; AdaNET may 
be able to serve as a technology transfer medium for software engi- 
neering and Ada technology developed overseas to the United States 
market. 

3.5.5 Revenue Classes 

Three revenue classes are being examined. Some services will be offered on 
a subscription basis, where levels of services are available for fixed rate fees; 
these services are denoted by an “S” in the following table. Other services 
are offered for incremental fees, denoted by an “I”, allowing users to “pay 
as they go” for services not standard to their regular subscriptions. A third 
potential structure is full purchase of product, denoted by a “P”, in which 
users buy a working application or other specific AdaNET product. The 
revenue classes listed below are for discussion purposes only at this time; 
final recommended revenue structures will be provided in the final report 
on Revenue Structures, which will be reflected in the fi nal draft of this 
business plan. Services will be provided across a variety of media, which 
include: on-line computer access; CD-ROM distribution; magnetic tape; 
diskette; hardcopy; misc (including Teleconference and video media); and 
live support. 


89 



Revenue Classes for AdaNET Services 


Description 


On-Line 


CD-ROM 


Dynamic Software Inventory 
Ada Software Components 
Documentation 
Metrics 

Profile Information 

Reuse Database/Taxonomy 

Tutorials 


ISP 

IS 

IS 

IS 

IS 

IS 

IS 


SP 

SP 

SP 

SP 

SP 

SP 

SP 


Information Services 


Distribution Medium 


Tope 


Diikette 


Hardcopy 


Mile. 


Live 


P 

P 

P 


PS 

PS 

PS 


p 

p 

p 


User Forums 
Bibliographic System 
Educational Materials 
Electronic Communications 
Full Text 

Directories/ Pu blications 
Outside Services 


IS 

IS 

IS 

S 

I 

S 


PS 

PS 


P 


PS 


s 

PS 

PS 


PS 


P 


p 


PS 

PS 


Professional Support 


Consultant services 
Seminars and Workshops 


I = Incremental S = Subscription P - Purchased 


90 


*0 13 












3.6 Management 

MountainNet’s management team for the AdaNET project includes: 
James W. Eautner — Project Director 
Donn Philpot — Technical Director 

Kevin J. Dyer — Strategic Planning 

Linda K. Braun — Contract Administrator 

3.0.1 James W. Rautner 


Mr. Rautner’s background includes a B.S. in computer science, coupled 
with a strong business background. He worked with software installations at 
various West Virginia educational institutions; this work included complete 
user analysis, software installation, customization, and end user training. 
He has served as consultant and troubleshooter in support of MPL Corpo- 
ration timesharing clients, and is working as an analyst in the design and 
development of several interactive business products being developed by 
MPL. He. is active in the marketing efforts and market research of MPL ser- 
vices, and has been instrumental in developing current corporate marketing 
approaches and product evaluations. As Vice President of MountainNet, 
he is heavily involved with the strategic planning and long range market 
analysis of new products and services development. 

His computer languages and software experience includes: Ada, Pascal, 
FORTRAN, LISP, VAX Macro, BASIC, POISE, TROFF, LaTeX, Runoff, 
DCL, CLI, VAX/VMS, AOS/VS, MS-DOS, EDT, SED, EMACS, Wordstar, 
Calcstar, 20/20. Computer hardware experience includes Digital Equip- 
ment Corporation (DEC) MicroVAX, VAX 11/750 and 11/780, Data Gen- 
eral MV /8000 series, and various PC compatibles. 

Presentations 

• “Overview of Ada Language Technology” ; Association of System Man- 
agers, Pittsburgh Chapter, November, 1986. 

• “Telecommunications for ‘Non- Tech’ Businesses”; Cheat Lake Rotary, 
February, 1987. 

• “Co mm unications and Business Resource Identification ; North Cen- 
tral WV Chapter, Software Valley, March 1987. 


91 


3.0.2 Donn Philpot 

Mr. Philpot has more than twenty-five years experience in computer soft- 
ware and software engineering. His background includes development of 
management information systems, embedded computer applications and 
business communications. Specifically, Mr. Philpot has experience in pro- 
gram management, marketing and sales management, and technical devel- 
opment and training management. 

From 1963 until 1969, Mr. Philpot worked for the General Electric Com- 
pany from computer operations to senior programmer. Significantly, Mr. 
Philpot was part of the team which introduced the first commercial time- 
sharing system in the country. From 1970 through 1980, Mr. Philpot was 
involved in various time-sharing and software business ventures where he 
gained experience in training, program management and software engineer- 
ing. In 1979, Mr. Philpot re-joined GE as a program manager on NASA 
projects, especially the maintenance said enhancement of Landsat C soft- 
ware. Mr. Philpot moved to GE Corporate Headquarters where he acted 
as a staff consultant to various GE businesses, including manufacturing, 
robotics, aerospace and defense and power generation. In this capacity, 
Mr. Philpot was GE’s corporate representative to the Ada Joint Program 
Office, and served on panels and committees to refine the STARS program 
and Federal Aquisition Regulations. 

In 1983 Mr. Philpot joined the Software Engineering Institute as the Direc- 
tor of Affiliate Relations. In this capacity, Mr. Philpot was responsible for 
negotiating agreements between the SEI and over 130 affiliate companies. 
Following a brief period as the Vice President for .Sales and Marketing for 
Tartan Laboratories, an Ada Compiler company, Mr. Philpot formed his 
consulting business. Mr. Philpot is currently serving in a technical capacity 
and advising the AdaNET program. 


92 



3.6.3 Kevin J. Dyer 

Mr. Dyer (A.B.A., Accounting; B.S.B.A.;Management/Marketing, M.B.A., 
Finance) brings to the AdaNet project in excess of 25 years experience in 
management, marketing, and data processing project participation. Plan- 
ning, project management, teaching, management, operations, system de- 
sign, conversions, evaluations, and training have been his areas of concen- 
tration, coupled with extensive experience in supervision of personnel and 
production operations. His consulting experience includes the following: 

Mr. Dyer was project manager and senior technical staff manager responsi- 
ble for the planning, organizing and implementation of projects and tasks 
within the scope of a Federal contract with the Center for Disease Control; 
project team leader, financial, for several joint projects executed for the Na- 
tional Institute of Health (NIH) and Health and Human Services (H&HS); 
Account Manager, National Cash Register Company (NCR); director of pa- 
tient services, Peter Bent Brigham Hospital in Boston; administrator, CFO 
& CEO for Ambulatory Group practice supervising over 100 employees and 
operations in multiple locations; senior systems analyst, responsible for in- 
stallation, development, and conversion of ADP applications in the health 
care field; operations manager for New England based timesharing and 
telecommunication corporation. Specialist in financial systems and project 
management. Mr. Dyer has been project manager or co-Manager of over 
150 projects in his professional career. 

His systems experience includes: IBM 402, IBM/1440, IBM/1401, IBM/3081, 
Honeywell 1200 and 200 series, IBM 360/30 and 40, IBM 370/45 and 55, 
CDC 3600 and 6600, NCR 50, 100, and 200 systems, and IBM 34 and 
36 mini’s DEC PDP/8.PDP/11, VAX 11/750, 11/780 and DG Eclipse se- 
ries in addition to a host of PC compatibles. Mr. Dyer has programmed 
in COBOL, FORTRAN, BAL, BASIC, RPG H, Neat/3, APL, EASY- 
CODER, COMPASS, FOCAL, and AUTOCODER and is familiar with most 
operating system and application (CP/M, DOS etc) tools. 

Professional Activities (Partial) 

• Software Valley Corporation: one of incorporators, served as trea- 
surer and secretary to the Board of Directors. 

• Software Valley Foundation: one of incorporators, served as sec- 
retary to the Board of Directors. 

Both organizations are West Virginia state wide non-profit corpora- 


H j 


93 


tions dedicated to the development and education of the high-technology 
industry. 

• Small Business Network: one of incorporators, presently secretary 
to the Board of Directors of this state-wide focus for small business in 
West Virginia. 

• Member of numerous boards of directors 

• Guest lecturer and case method team leader: 

— Harvard Dental School 
- Boston University Medical School 
— Yale University School of Public Health 

Professional presentations are numerous and include a broad spectrum of 
organizations and subject matter. 


94 



3.6.4 Linda K. Braun 

Contract Administrator 
Education: 

• Waynesburg College, Pa. Courses in Mathematics and Programing. 

• Ohio Valley General Hospital School of Nursing - 3 Year 

• Program in Nursing Administration and College Science Studies. 
Brings to MountainNET, Inc. and the AdaNET project over 18 years expe- 
rience in project and contract management, financial analysis and manage- 
ment of royalty, investment, and accounting functions of an international 
oil and gas well operation. Relevant experience includes contract manage- 
ment of over 100 producing wells with multiple investment streams and 
royalty planning and accounting functions. Responsible to the investment 
pool directors. 

Independent business owner and operator of a small trucking company ser- 
vicing the oil and gas industry. Using the equity built from this enterprise 
founded a service station as a vertical market support business. Both en- 
terprises were successfully sold at a profit. This entrepreneurial experience 
has direct transference to the contract administration responsibilities of the 
AdaNET project in the “change agent” role from government to the private 
sector. 

Linda maintains an active role in community affairs as follows: 

« Member 5 year planning committee for a school district. 

• Long range planning committee Treasurer school district. 

• Member Board of Elections for the county. 

• Musical director of multi-church Methodist district. 

• Business manager of the Small Business Network, Inc. 



3.7 Financial 


The following pages detail MountainNet’s projections for the first five years 
of the development of AdaNET. As can be seen, support for development 
of AdaNET services is provided by NASA. Revenue generating services are 
phased in early in the second year of development. By year three, a strong 
base of services will be available and generating approximately 30 percent 
of the total operating costs. By year four, NASA funding will account for 
less than 30 percent of the total AdaNET operating budget. By the fifth 
year, NASA funding will account for less than 10 percent of AdaNET’s 
total operating expenses. Major cost items, as MountainNet moves into 
early implementation, 


96 



ST 


fD 



! 

ro 


cn 


s ^ 


s 

rr 


Cfl 



S ft Q) n n 
tn < n “ 
Oj H* O (5 


< o a ^ 



O 

m 

8 

Crt 

rr 


3 

rr 

to 


o> 


CD 

CD 

UJ 


O' 


tO 

LH 

o> 


CD 

-J 


VO 

UJ 

un 


CD 

O 


o 

o 

LH 


UD 


O' 

CD 

O 


o o o o o o o 


•o 

\o 

© 


o o o o o o un 


uo 

— J 


On 

CD 


CD 

CD 

CD 

-o 

-o 

£* UJ 



% ^ 


vO 

H-» -O 

UJ 

UJ 

© ^ 

o o o o o o un 

un 

'■O 


o o o o o o o 


CD 

o 


•o 

<D 


o 

un 


vO 

-J 

«% 

cr\ 

CD 

O 


fO UJ 


K UJ W 
to UJ UJ 


o UJ O' CD O ^ ^ 

O UJ O' O UJ VO tO 

©ujo^oo^^o 


O' 
UJ -J 

UJ -o 

vO uO 

o o 


to UJ 


w 




O' 

•o 

cn 

-o 

o% 

UJ ^ 

to H* 

sj w CD to ^ CD 

CD 

CD 

o o o o O o UJ 

CD 

CD 

UJ 

to O' 
uj un 

UJ ^ 

un uj o cd to o o 

O UO O' O O -j 

SwOnIOOUIAW 

© 

*o 

to 

o o o © o o 

67,256 

64,054 

3,203 

to M 

to uj cd s) un to uo 

o UJ O' CD H* -o UJ 

S uj O' o vo J— * un 

OUlO'JOOWOW 

1 


uj to 
O H* 


o UJ O'' to H O ^ 

O UJ O' O ^ ^ © 

OWOnIOOOWH 


rr 

CD 


75,281 

3,764 

20,613 

33,000 

4,394 

1,900 

0 

0,667 

0 

3,333 

3,375 

93,029 

4,651 

UJ UJ 

m uj CD A M ^ W W 

' ^ ' ' ' ' 

UJ UJ O' un <o UO Q CD 

UJ O' O O VO Q o 

UIUJOnJOO *oo 


CD 

-J 


£ 

n 


C4 

5 


CD 

CD 


ro 

or 


CD 

CD 


n 

3" 


CD 

CD 


97 




First Year Projections 


97,680 97,680 158,390 158,390 150,390 158,390 1,299,890 



£ sr 


cn 


38 


o 

rr 

9 

tn 

9 



5 

v-i- 

O 

n 

9 

W 

rr 

£ 


3 

rr 

cn 


VO 

8 

O O O O O O O 


vO 

-J 

8 

o o o o o o o 

J-* 

8 

UJ 

vO 

o o o o o o o 

H* 

8 

UJ 

o o o o o o o 

8 

UJ 

o o o o o o o 


o o o o o o 


8 

Ul 

s 


NJ 

VO 

*o 

"cD 

vO 


vO 


CD 

o 


VO 

ON 

CD 

o 


8 

UJ 

8 


8 

UJ 

VO 

O 


8 

** 

UJ 


VO 
X* UJ 

QN O 
ui NJ 
H-* VO 


VO 
X* UJ 

ON O 
un nj 
H-* vO 


N> UJ 

O -J 

0 N 

Ul UJ 
vO O 


NJ UJ 

O -J 

Ov 'J 
Ul UJ 

vO o 


N) UJ 
O -4 
«* ** 
ON H» 
Ul UJ 
VO O 


NJ UJ 
O -4 


ON *-4 
I ui uj 
oUo 


8 


UJ UJ CD ^ 

UJ UJ <£ 

•s] W ^ ^ 
Ul UJ o -j 


UJ UJ 
K A UJ W 

i^O WOO 

SvO O ON 

X* o o 


UJ UJ 


OD ^ M 


UJ UJ 
X* UJ UJ 


o O O o O O CD 


N> 

8 

00 

vO 

OD 


uj uj 2 ) 

-J U> ON 
Ul UJ O '-J 


I VO UJ o QD 

8 VO Q Ch 
X* O O 


UJ UJ 
O UJ 


J-* NJ ^ ON 

O O N> ON ON ”*4 

% ^ ^ ^ ^ % 

O o to Q O M 

_ Q O ON $ O UJ 
ujooO'-jooo 


UJ UJ 


H- NJ ^ V*J un 
o o N> ON ON -J 


UJ O O NJ Q 2 n 

uj O O ON Q Q y 

ujooo-jooo 


H* NJ _ UJ U] 
UJ UJ O O W ON ON -J 

O UJ Q O N> 2 2 

lSo§83lS8 


UJ UJ 


3 


00 

CD 


3 

CD 

OD 


►-* nj _ . 
o O N> OV ON j-J 


UJ OON) 
UJ O O ON 
UJ O O O "Ul 


UJ 

o 


l— CD 
X* Ul 
«* % 
UJ Ul 

O' NJ 
® VO 


UJ uj 
vO VO 


8 


© VO NJ jg 8 j*j 
55 uj ^ vo 'J uj 
^ ^ ^ ^ % 
u> m NJ H* j— £* 

© O' © O VO -J UJ 


98 


June '88 July'88 Aug. '88 Sept. '88 Curulative 


5 -fi n 

Sp?'“?sq 

3 1 5 g S S I 

||' l 8 ?||- 

S* 3 -S 2 ! g 

•a 8 £ O I " 

w s S 8 

fT 


r s 

< 9 g 

££ 8 - 

$$ 9 

9 $ 


\%239X 

ffl (T 0 ) n n 

J cn < n jq 
Q» H»* Q (B Q 
n a H- 5 ? 

f 2 S | § 

fall q 

row 5 


o o o o o o o 


HN ^ £ WJ 

UJ O O to ON ON — J 

fjj O O N> O O H* 

uJ OQO'OOW 

UJOOO-UOOO 


S S <3 Oj £ 

o OOOOOOO 


M N> _ ^ Uj 

O O N-> ON ON O 
^ ^ ' 

§ ON)OOH 

o^oo w 

0*0000 


UI *o 2 Jfi E 

S LH oo ^ 

o ooooooo 


H* tO £ Ol 

o o to ON ON -O 


m *o 

P sj to o> 

>J H ui O w 
S UIUIOOW 

o ooooooo 


I—* fO ON 

H W tv) ^ H un 

yi o ^ 52 J O 
pooooo 
i o O O *0 o o o 


nIwOO 


o I o o 


§§s 

o o o 


ON | ON lO 
UI I VO £ 

O I H> o 


to Xk. ON 

UJ CO ON H - 1 UN 

g ONO ^ 

qooo 

0-0000 


H* ^ to UI 

iili§ 


M to ^ ON 

H W tO ON H <J 1 


99 


.'88 Dec. '88 Jan. ’89 Feb. ' 89 March '89 


"Dotal Revenue: 181 , 630 181,630 181,630 181,630 181,630 181,630 2,109,842 


IS 5-fi 3 2? 
g ELn&crS p 

m ? o 9 S 3 

\ 5 \ 3 P- rr 

S »s 

t p *-*• ft 3 E" 

3. s 5 1 s 
8 US'S." 
w s 3 8 


m 




5 

sr 


cn 


rB rr 


s 

3 

rr 


sr 



o o 


ON 

P* ON UN CD 
O VO UN O NJ 

g g888 


CO 


ON 

UJ 

o 


N> CH 
UJ 

ON VO 
VO £* 
P" O 


NJ £* ON 

UJ H W lO ON H (J1 

^ ^ ^ ' 

m J1 O O' VO ^ 

UJ O O O O Q O 

i (jj o O O — -J o o o 


£ 

n 


HH^JO 


8 


o o § o § ^ O 


CD 


N> cn 

UJ -4 


ON I ON VO 
U» I VO £ 
O I P* O 


UJ UJ 


p* tO ^ ON 

H W to O H Ol 


g o o 1 


> CD 

> UJ o o o 

> UJ O O © — 1 


:g§ 


(/I H tO H >J O 


s 


OOOOH 

o O Q Q UJ 

o o o o o 


ON 

o 


nj cn 

UJ ^4 

ON VO 
VO 

P> o 


P* N> ON 

UJ UJ H W N) OV P oi 

> ON VO , *J 

!3SSS 


CD 

UJ ^ 
UJ o 


On 

PtOP©>JH 


cn 

H UJ H CD 03 VO 


ON 

UJ 

o 


ON 

UJ 

o 


ON 

8 


NJ Cn 
UJ 

ON VO 
vO A. 

P* o 


nj cn 

UJ -4 

ON VO 
VO ** 
P* O 


H to JU ON 

UJUJ p* uj nj on p* cn 


CD <J 

UJ O^O 

UJ © © O ~4 


ON VO ^ 

88 


P> NJ •&» ON 

uj uj p* uj nj on p* cn 

„ ^ <»'•'» 'l ^ ' 

§ 00 m g g vO ^ -4 

WOwO'J 


88 


CD 

VO 


I 


p* cn 

cnp^poODP* 


UJ 

o 


VO 

m p* on ^ cn 

O ^ CD VO ^ VO ^ 

S o cn o UN ro cn 

_isgsss 


ON 

© 

NJ 

p* 

8 

0 D 

NJ 


n> cn 

UJ *4 

ON VO 
VO ^ 
P* o 


NJ 0D 
-4 UJ 

cn & 

P» ON 
VO ^ 
-4 ON 


P* NJ ON 

ujuj p uj tv) cn p cn 

009 2 2 

8wo5oS888 


3: 


8 


M N) _ 

3388: 

^ ^ H 'l ' 

cn O NJ P* On 

glass 


-4 

ON 

NJ 


100 


Second Year Projections (cant'd) 




a 

sr 



53 ffl Q 

w b Q 3 S 3 

**fl*»g 


»*£»!** 
3.8 3 I 8 
8 CS-I* 

■ S 8 8 

rr 


cn 


a 

sr 


*£ 


O 

P* 

3 

rr 


CT 


<0S 


5 2 3 2 !? 

S rr 0| n ~ 
m <: m 



5 

t— i. 

O 

n 

8 

rr 

p 


Cft 


to 

O 

on 


g 


to i 


UJ N> CD ui a O oi 

■* s ^ ^ ^ % 

S tn o l/l Q O ^ 

i8§ls« 


to 

o 

un 

g 


to -J 

on 00 
** -<• 
"O ON 
vO UN 

Co 'J 


to ^ -J 

o\ to "O •o un 
« ^ ^ ^ 

l ,£* ON VO ON UN 
iUIOWHI /1 
iO'JUIOLJI 


i 


to 
O 
l n 


g 


to 

o 

un 


g 


to 

O 

LH 


g 


to 

o 

un 


g 


to 

o 

UN 


g 


to 

u> 

vo 

vo 

s 

to 


to P ^ 
tsj Xk> 00 ON un oo H* 

p* 

to to to 
oo un vo on 'O o vo 

P* 

M to to u» 
WH 

h“* 

P-» W to H 

CO O P o O ^ o 


h-t W to H 

to oo to oo to yi oo 


vo 


g 


NNO) 

gsss^ 


VO 

to 


to 

o 

cn 


g 


to 

o 

un 


g 


to 

o 

UN 


g 


to 

o 

UN 


g 


to 

o 

UN 


g 


to 

CO 

vO 


3 

to 


to *o 

ON 00 


ON 

cn 

-o 


3 


to -o 
ON 00 

%i ^ 

«0 ON 

S3 


to *o 
ON 00 

On 

S 3 


to -O 
ON 00 

-U ON 

$3 


to *o 

ON 00 
% ^ 
-J ON 

S 3 


to 

vo © 
00 
to H* 
«* ^ 
to 

ON CO 
o to 


VO 


vo 


(— * to A o 

H Ol W O O Ol 
% ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 
UI ^ ON VO ON UN 

o (ji o ui p vn 

iSoovnoui 


p* to ^ -U 

p ON w o o vn 

cn ^ O' vO ON ui 

O UN O to UN 

iSonIoio^ 


P* tO ^ "O 

p» ON to -J tn 
^ ^ ' 
On vO ON UN 
UN O VO M UN 
o >j ui o in 


p* to X* -O 

p* ON to 'J UN 
^ ^ ^ ^ 
UN ^ ON NO ON UN 
O UN © VO P* UN 
i O O -J UN O UN 


g to -j 5 tn 
^ ^ ^ ^ ' 

I A ON NO ON UN 

S o to p tn 

ij UN O UN 


S3 

i'So 


t to tn cd 

ui 5 w vo vr o 

5 O P m to o 


iSSPSf 

> O UN UN © A. 


OD 

VO 


vO 

O 


VO 

© 


I 


8 


102 


Third Year Projections (cant'd) 



a»S 

° £3 


V p w 8 < 

3. 8 5 I 8 

n rrH-S m 

n e- o g* 

w 3 3 8 


I S* S 
3 oS 

< 8 jj 

P.C9- 


52323 
s cri 3 3 
“ £* 3 9 

Q. n .. rr P» 


U) -J to to U 1 s 
<ji i/i (ji ts» o un ~J 

§ ooaiQOLn 

iiilss 


u< os >-* to yn to 
gMMOOU' 

m q cn o o o 

gissso 


u:ONwy;ofl 3 
1/1 Ln in w o CD 

g o O IT o © UJ 
o o o o © o 
o o o o o o o 


W OD l-> to UJ NJ 
nJ p w o o 


)->>-* P-* 
UJ to <-£ -4 CD 
yn lp SJ O in 


sss 

o o o 


W CD M Ni un NJ 

gpwooin 


u> -4 to k> yn -J ® 

LH LH to O LH 


W OD H W W 

ijHtOOOUl 


O **4 "J 
^ o o <-n 
o o o o 


OOOQO 

88888 


SS SK8S8S 
oo Vooe'ss 
1 §o8S888S 


103 


NET Fourth Year Projections 
(Quarterly Distribution) 


Balance: 





56 ff| 3 n 

& H** fD (5 

n Q< H 5 



O 

n 


cn 

rr 

ta 


3 

rr 

tn 


CD 


-J 

CD 


3 


«sj 

CD 


VO 

H* 

to 

In 

o 

o 


VO 

h-* 

to 


cn 


h* uj to 

UJ 03 UJ M O UJ CD 

O o LH O vl o 


cncnyio 
o o o o 
o o o o 


cn cn 
o o 
o o 


H* UJ tO 

UJ CD UJ tO O CO 00 
LH O nI vl 


CD CD 
O O 

O O O O O O O 


cn cn cn o 
o o o o 


00 

CD 

cd 

o 

to 

cd 


03 

cn 

CD 

<* 

o 

to 

cn 


H* -O 
h- 1 £* 
H* UJ 
% ^ 
cn a? 
to Q 
CD o 


H* -J 
P^ UJ 


cn < 

to 

CD 


VO tO 

o o 

o o o 


i-> to to 

Xk 0 D H to H 

U o to to to W 


ocncn' 
moo 
o o o 


cn 

o 


VO to 
o o 

S© 


l— k to to 

uj 3 to top p 

yssssg 

o o o o o o o 


w 


f 


vn 


LP 


vO 

h-» 

to 

cn 


UJ CD UJ to 

o o o in ^ 

sss's 

o o o o 


UJ 


to 

UJ CD 
-J -J 

\n cn 
o o 
o o 


oo 

cn 

CD 


to 

CD 


CD i 

to 

CD 


VO to 


;s 

> o o 


P-* CO tO 

^ CD H (O H ^ 

UJ O to to to W 


i vn vn o 

i o o cn 


-o i 

S: 


I o o o 


n 

a 


CD 


CD 


VO 

P-* 

to 


CD 


p-» UJ tO 

uj 03 uj to o uj ao 
o o o cn o o o 

§ CD CD O O <D CD 

§§oo 8 o 


03 

CD 

CD 

o 

to 

CD 


H* -O 


CD < 
to < 
CD ' 


VO to 


p to to 

Xi.OOHtOHXfc 

w o to to to UJ 
^ ^ ^ ^ , 
■ vn cd y? o 
ooom 


l8oSi§8§ 


to 

to 

VO 

VO 

O 

o 


UJ 

av 

s 


p* O H H tO VO W 

8 SS 88 SS 


ooooo 
ooooo 
ooooo 


o 

o 

o 


to 

o 


to 

VO 
ON ^ 


o 

o 


H* ^4 CD VQ 

tttfi 3 S 5 S 8 SS 

11 'll! §11 


5 

£ 


104 



ar p* o? ff 

n h* u> 3 
< g n 3 

M* 0 J < C 
Q rr k -3 
(5 h*Q m* 

OT 9 i s 

rr 


i-i S Q 

S SB 

w- rr 

° »s 

93 & 


® tji s? 

S'? s 
<85 
&C 9 - 

M 8 

O 'S 


s & 

2 i 

K* 5 

3 rr 

Cft W 


C\ NJ 

§ vO 
O CD 


H- * W ^ 

S VO to <J1 © OJ 

OJ A- 10 »J U> 

w ui to H H H 

UJ O <T\ £± H* ON 

O Cn O CD ^4 U 


vO 

H* P* CN JP LH 

A 

§ ogioai woi 
o O O O O to 


*-* K> A. -J 

^ OJ C\ OJ OD 09 On 

^ UsJOOOM 
«» ^ ** ^ *> *■ ^ 

^ U 1 Q JO H ^ ON 

VP 00 ^ 00 $ 
OnOOOX^OOO^ 


to JO ON 
^ v£> cr> ON Q -J 

UJ ^ On UJ CD O O 


H OJ LH CD 

OJ UJ o OJ NO JN o 

$N O S O H JO w o 


o JO H ON O 

S O P NO o 

on on o ^ 


p w p -J 

SS888SS 


o o o 
888 


M NO 

8 I 88 


S 2 S 888 


PnIPPWnOW 

SSS 88 SS 


VO O 

8 8 


8 8 


H* <nJ ® VO Pf 

DiSSiSSSOi S 

^ ^ ^ NJ 


105 


Five Year Projection 


3.8 Appendix A: Initial Marketing Survey Re- 
sults for the AdaEXPO-Boston, MA, December, 
1987 

This doc um ent represents the results of a survey of participants at the Ada 
Expo ’87, held in Boston, MA during December of that year. Mountain- 
Net recognizes that two key elements exist regarding the participants and 
respondents: 

1. The largest majority ( 45%) of survey respondents were from the 
Aerospace and Defense contractor community. This represents a bias 
which cannot be ignored. 

2. Although this bias exists, the results of this survey are significant 
because the Aerospace and Defense contractor community represent 
the baseline constituency for the AdaNET service. 

Each form receives it’s own page and accompanying analysis in order to 
make the results readable and the analysis more understandable. Finally, 
conclusions are drawn from this survey which explain the view espoused in 
the business plan. 


106 


Respondent Profile 


Affiliation Count 

Aerospace and Defense 44 

Software Companies 12 

Government 12 

No Affiliation Listed/ Other 12 

Educational Institutions 9 

Hardware Manufacturers 9 

TOTAL 98 

Affiliation With 

Professional Organizations 

Affiliation Count 

SIGAda 68 

IEEE 36 

None or No Response 17 

AdaJUG 15 

Other* 9 

TOTAL 145 

* “Other” = one response only. Represented were: SIGPLAN, AIAA NSIA, 
etc. 


107 


Survey Data 

Raw Results 

Questions Asked 
by Order 

* Note: Responses to each question were; Very Useful, Useful, Not Useful. 

In some ewes, no response was given. All Responses were ordered by % of 
responses without regard for no response. 



Response 

Rank 



Question 

Very Use 

Use 

Not Use 

Very Use 


Not Use 

Commercial Products and Services 

24 

41 


8 

2 

4 

Contracting Opportunities 

29 

19 


6 

10 

3 

Ada Faceted-Classifications for Reuse 

40 

25 


4 

9 

6 

Topical Search Categories for Reuse 

45 

25 

10 

2 

9 

5 

Documentation and Information 

32 

40 

6 

5 

3 

7 

User Communications 

21 

39 

13 

9 

4 

4 

Ada-Specific Metrics 

44 

35 

3 

3 

5 

8 

On-Line Tutorials 

15 

34 

28 

10 

0 

3 

Computer Based Training 

15 

30 

26 

10 

6 

3 

Telephone Help-line 

15 


29 

10 

8 

2 

Project Management Software 

25 

53 

9 

7 

1 

6 

Software Engineering Methodology 

54 

33 

3 

1 

■ 

8 

Total Responses 

359 

404 

178 


■ 



108 


















Based on Percentage of Response 


, n 


Question 

% Response 

— 

1. Software Engineering Methodology 

91.83 


2. Project Management Software 

88.77 


3. Ada Specific Metrics 

83.67 

■ 

4. Topical Search Categories for Reuse 

81.60 

- 

5. Documentation and Information and 



Commercial Products and Services 

79.59 


6, Computer-Based Training 

77.55 


7. On-Line Tutorials 

76.53 

M 

8. Contracting Opportunities and 



Ada Faceted Classification for Reuse and 



Telephone Help- Line 

75.50 

=■ 

9. User Communications 

74.48 


Ranking of Importance 


■— 

Topic 

Rank 

* 

1. Software Engineering and Methodology 

256 



2. Ada Specific Metrics 

228 


3. Topical Search Categories for Reuse 

200 


4. Ada Faceted Classifications for Reuse 

180 

==- 

5. Documentation and Information 

150 


6. Project Management Software 

94 


7. Commercial Products and Services 

61 


8. User Communications 

49 


9. Contracting Opportunities 

17 


10. On-Line Tutorials 

-33 


11. Telephone Help- Line 

-47 

n 

12. Computer Based Training 

-67 



* Note: Ran In ng Methodology. Very Useful=+10; Useful— +1; Not Useful— - 
1 . 

• Highest possible score = 275 

• Lowest Possible score — -239 


109 


Chapter 4 
Technical Plan 


110 



4.1 Scope 


This document is the Technical Plan for AdaNET Project Services imple- 
mentation. Additionally, the document represents a deliverable item under 
Cooperative Agreement #NCC9-16. The intent of the Technical Plan is 
to describe how MountainNet, Inc. will establish a software engineering 
and Ada technology transfer network. Further, it takes into account that 
the University of Houston - Clear Lake (UHCL), Research Institute for 
Computing and Information Systems (RICIS) has an in-place network of 
computing facilities. Additionally, this plan accounts for other networks 
which may be instrumental in the formation of this network. The network 
is called: “AdaNET: The Advanced Software Engineering Network for Ada 
Applications" to inform potential users of the general-purpose nature of 
the network. AdaNET is a registered trademark of the commercial entity 
MountainNet, Inc., AdaNET’s developer. 

This document first discusses AdaNET, including it’s current configuration. 
Next, the functional requirements are detailed, followed by a statement of 
the tasks and deliverables MountainNet expects to meet. Additionally, 
quality and standards assurance sire specified as part of this plan. Finally, 
the plan details the additional resources required to successfully implement 
this important technology transfer mechanism, including an organizational 
structure and a milestone and deliverable schedule. 

4.1.1 Goal 


The goal of AdaNET is to act as a change agent by transferring existing 
and emerging software engineering and Ada technology from the federal 
government to the private sector. 

Attainment of this goal is based upon accomplishment of three primary 
objectives: 

1 . Develop a service center offering a wide spectrum of software engineer- 
ing and Ada technological information services. 

2. Achieve long term commercial independence through cost recovery 


111 


measures. 

3. Create a broad-based intergovernmental and private sector infrastruc- 
ture to ensure continuing AdaNET services. 

This plan concentrates on specifying implementation of the first of these 
objectives. Other documents generated during the first and second phases 
of this project will address remaining objectives. 

4.1.2 AdaNET System Overview 
AdaNET is divided into three main categories: 

1. AdaNET Information Services (AIS), which will incorporate user fo- 
rums, bibliographic and full text information, educational materials, 
electronic communications, directories and publications, and informa- 
tion about other Ada repositories and libraries. 

2. Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI), which will be comprised of li- 
braries of public domain Ada software components and their asso- 
ciated life cycle objects. Accompanying value-added services, such as 
the tracking and classification of these objects across and within the 
life cycle, will encourage and aid in the reuse of these objects. 

3. Professional support services such as general and specialized consul- 
tant services, seminars and workshops. 

These services will be provided on a wide spectrum of distribution media 
that include: 

• CD-ROM 

• Diskette 

• Magnetic Tape 

• On-line Access 

• Printed Media 

Figure 4.1 depicts the AdaNET Gateway /Clearinghouse Functional Overview 


112 




Figure 4.1: AdaNET Gateway/Clearinghouse Functional Overview 


113 









Participating Organizations Views 

One of the earlier deliverables for this project was a report detailing the 
views of several key organizations involved in the AdaNET program. These 
organizations were interviewed and their comments incorporated into that 
document. The organizations are: 

• National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Technology 
Utilization Division (TU) 

1. Computer Software Management and Information Center (COS- 
MIC) 

2. NASA Industrial Applications Center 

3. NASA Technical Applications Team 

• University of Houston - Clear Lake, Research Institute for Computing 
and Information Systems 

• Department of Defense Ada Joint Program Office (DoD AJPO) 

• Department of Commerce, Office of Productivity, Technology and In- 
novation (DOC OPTI) 

• Beckley College 

• Software Valley Corporation (SVC) 

• West Virginia University /WVU Research Corporation 

To sum up the results of the meetings and information exchange, three 
federal government organizations funded the AdaNET project to: 

“increase U.S. competitiveness through the transfer of soft- 
ware engineering technology and government developed Ada soft- 
ware, to benefit the manufacturing, industrial, educational and 
other private sector communities” 

These three organizations are the NASA TU, DoD AJPO, and DOC OPTI. 
Applicable documents 

The following list of documents have been previously delivered under the 
subject contract. This list is included for reference, and individual docu- 
ments will be referred to by name in the body of this report. 

• Subcontract No. 002, UHCL to MountainNet 

• AdaNET Electronic Mail Service, Draft Users Guide 

• AdaNET Organizational Structure and Report of Project Activity 


114 


• AdaNET Organizational Documents 

• AdaNET Business Plan 

4.1.3 Schedule Constraints 

This section provides an overview of potential obstacles to the proposed 
schedule (See Section 4.6). This does not mean the schedule will change, 
only that MountainNet is aware of these possible disruptions and is taking 
management action to ensure schedule adherence. 

Potential constraints that would serve to alter and extend the schedule of 
deliverables includ e r v "" 

• Interruptions in funding; 

• Expansion or addition of elements in the statement of work (SOW); 

• Delays in coordination and direction from government /private sector 

participants, where such interaction is necessary for deliverable devel- 
opment^ _ „ . : . . r-. T : i . , ■ _ . 

• Deferred developmental schedules in other federally funded projects 
whose deliverables support technical development of AdaNET services. 

4.2 AdaNET Functional Requirements 

This section describes the functional requirements for the AdaNET system. 
These derived requirements are based on input from the principal organiza- 
tions supporting the project. (Section 4.1.2 delineated those organizations.) 
Requirements are_ discussed for: 

• Networking and Communications; 

• Hardware; 

• Software; 

• Data and Information Sources; 

• Operational considerations; 

• The Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI); ~~ ' • —• 

• The Reuse Database; 

• The AdaNET Information Services (AIS). 

4.2.1 Networking and Communications 

This subsection addresses the need AdaNET has to establish and operate 
a network system in order to communicate with a potentially large popula- 


115 


tion. It considers that in some instances, AdaNET will act as a stand-alone 
network with it’s own dial-in capability. In other circumstances, AdaNET 
will be required to be a part of a larger, heterogeneous network. The latter 
will be discussed in subsection 4.2.1 and in section 4.3.7, “Growth Plan for 
Additional Services”. 

Existing Elements 

Mount ainNet ’s current telecommunications configuration provides on-line 
computer access to host systems available within the MountainNet telecom- 
munications network, as well as host systems located in state supported 
telecommunications networks. Access is provided through remote user node 
sites connected directly into the MountainNet network with dedicated data 
circuits, and through local dial-in telephone lines located throughout West 
Virginia. 

Access to MountainNet host systems, such as those forming the AdaNET 
host configuration, is currently available through MountainNet’s own dial- 
in lines, through all state educational network (West Virginia Network for 
Educational Telecomputing (WVNET)) dial-in lines, and by cooperative 
agreement, through a Telenet Sprint connection currently providing direct 
access to the WVNET DCA network server. Current volume capabilities 
for the Telenet link are 15 simultaneous users; this number will be increased 
as usage justifies further expansion. 

Planned Expansion 

Systems Interconnectivity: Plans are being finalized for internal net- 
work interconnection of all host systems used to develop AdaNET. 
A configuration which allows a high level of interconnectivity includes 
use of a commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) star network controller. This 
controller supports Ethernet and TCP/IP (Transmission Control Pro- 
tocol/Intemet Protocol) communications. Additionally, layered com- 
munications software, supporting electronic mail transfer between many 
vendors hardware products and operating systems and the Internet, 
is also included. Specialized software is under development to sup- 
port electronic mail transfer between Digital Equipment Corporation 
(DEC) Virtual Memory System (VMS) and Data General (DG) Ad- 
vanced Operating System/ Virtual System (AOS/VS) host systems 
currently in the configuration. For full support of direct intersystem 
disk access and data transfer, an additional COTS package would be 


116 


layered on top of the star controller, providing complete DEC/DG 
compatibility. This controller may be connected directly into the 
MountainNet network, to provide network level single point access 
to AdaNET users for all on-line services. 


Direct Telenet Connection: This service provides direct connection to 
MountainNet’s network at the Telenet prompt level for AdaNET users. 
A final step is to route users directly to AdaNET specific front-end 
network controllers. The user is then prompted for specific AdaNET 
systems. 


MountainNet Network Expansion: For those areas where a substan- 
tial base of AdaNET users exist, MountainNet will establish dedicated 
lines to support them with a higher level of telecommunications ser- 
vice than that provided by Telenet. Direct connections are currently 
being discussed for: 

Washington, D.C.: For Government Access 

Clear Lake, TX : For UHCL and Johnson Space Center (JSC) 

Other potential areas of high level usage during subsequent phases of 
implementation include: 

Huntsville, AL : For Marshall Space Flight Center (SFC) 

Boston, MA : To provide computer vendor coverage 
Pittsburgh, PA : For the Software Engineering Institute (SEI) 


NASA Networks Interconnection: AdaNET is comingling the diverse 
Ada community which includes NASA, DoD, academia and the pri- 
vate sector. However, the majority of AdaNET users already commu- 
nicate on one or more electronic mail systems. The users of AdaNET 
include key individuals from diverse (and unc on nected) telecommu- 
nications systems. Introduction of another autonom ous mail system 
presents an obstacle to the community already using these other net- 
works. Therefore, in addition to building its own internal base of 
AdaNET user accounts, MountainNet is studying how inter-network 


117 


connections can be established to provide electronic mail transfer as a 
minimum level of service. 

The volume of development activities using Ada technology at vari- 
ous field centers is radically increasing. The inter-network connection 
would facilitate communications with these field centers and heighten 
the availability of Ada technology developments to AdaNET users. 
MountainNet is currently studying the NASA network structures in 
place at various field centers and the network architectures which cur- 
rently link those centers together. MountainNet will determine the 
feasibility of this network connection. 

The NASA Scientific Network, which is also supported in part by the 
National Science Foundation (NSF), is an example of a gateway which 
will be pursued because it is intended to provide a mechanism for 
public/private sector technology exchange. This network is TCP/IP 
based, and so connection will be supported by the equipment currently 
being integrated into the configuration. Administrative and policy 
issues regarding approval for connection is also being pursued. 

Internet/DDN Connections A connection to the DoD Defense Data 
Network (DDN) is essential to maintain and enhance the base of sup- 
port being provided by various DoD organizations. The majority of 
the national Ada community is affiliated with the DoD, either as mili- 
tary, government, or contractor /subcontractor personnel. With ongo- 
ing and proposed expansions in DoD based Ada programs, this link- 
age will facilitate a higher level of activity and cooperation between 
AdaNET and the Ada community. SIGAda, whose executive coun- 
cil is trying out the AdaNET as their major communications source, 
has indicated that such a connection is essential for continued use, 
since a large percentage of their membership currently use the Inter- 
net. Discussions with the U.S. Army Office of the Directorate for 
Information Systems for Command, Control, Communications and 
Computers (0DISC4) led to the recent signing of a Memorandum 
of Understanding (MOU) between NASA and the Army to support 
AdaNET development. A key objective of this MOU is to expand 
the base of support for AdaNET ’s connection to the Internet with 
other Army activities such as the Information Systems Engineering 
Command (ISEC). MountainNet is currently evaluating the telecom- 
munications and software requirements necessary for this connection. 


118 


USENET Communications: USENET information transfer occurs through 
a WVU DEC/ VAX system. As the AdaNET Information Services 
(AIS) system is developed, MountainNet will task one individual to 
conduct regular checks of the USENET information. Information 
which is relevant to the AdaNET user community will be transferred 
to the AIS. An expansion of the AdaNET level of service includes di- 
rect connection of USENET into the MountainNet network. This will 
provide regular access to this resource. 


SEAD Connection: By establishing a data line with local dial-in in the 
Houston area, MountainNet will be able to pro vide a direct link for in- 
terconnection of the SEAD (Software Engineering and Ada Database) 
system operated by UHCL. This connection will make SEAD available 
to any AdaNET user at the network prompt level as another avail- 
able host node and service. Building this di stributed network of host 
services enhances the direction of growth and increases the value of 
AdaNET as a single point of access to a multitude of diverse services. 


OSI Integration: As the Open Systems Interconnect (OSI) protocol is 
implemented at all levels, we will study the feasibility of integration 
of that protocol into AdaNET. An applications gateway between the 
mail layer and the file transfer layer of the TCP/IP and OSI protocols 
is being developed for the DoD. DoD plans to require that all future 
pro curem ents be based on OSI p rotocols. Integration of an OSI imple- 
mentation for AdaNET would most likely occur sometime after such 
requirements became mandatory. 



Figure 4.2 depicts AdaNET Network Connectivity. 

4.2.2 Hardware 

This subsection describes the current hardware configuration for AdaNET. 
It describes each element and details future hardware requirements to en- 
sure continuing viability. 

Present Configuration 

MountainNet utilizes a multi- vendor systems environment for services im- 
plementation. The following resources for early prototyping and implemen- 
tation are being applied: 

• (2) Digital Equipment Corporation VAX 11/7XX (VMS) 

• (1) Digital Equipment Corporation VAX 11/750 (UNIX) 

• (1) Data General MV8000 (AOS/VS) 

• Various micro-computers (Apple & IBM PC compatibles) 

The systems are being used in the following capacities: 

DEC VAX 11/780 (VMS)s This resource is MPL Corporation’s VAX 
time-share service. The system is configured on-line into the Moun- 
tainNet network. MountainNet is using this machine to provide all 
computing services for internal project administration. It is initially 
being used to provide AdaNET Electronic Mail and Document Trans- 
fer services. Prototyping of low level repository access, library in- 
formation services, and information system screen formats is being 
performed on this VAX. However, the addition of AdaNET services 
on this resource intensive service will tax the system beyond manage- 
able limits. Although AdaNET’s internal administrative computing 
will continue to be performed on this system, additional resource re- 
quirements are expected. 

DEC VAX 11/750 (VMS): A DEC VAX 11/750 is being merged into 
the AdaNET configuration for dedicated AdaNET use. This system 
will ini tially provide a migration point from the VAX currently in use, 
and will offer services for prototyping and development. AdaNET 
plans to use DEC VAX/ VMS systems as the main user interface. 
Among the reasons for this decision: 


120 





r 




Figure 4.2: Ad&NET Network Connectivity 


121 












• VMS library routines and terminal identification tables support 
multiple terminal translations for interactive user communications. 

• VMS supports high level interconnectivity with other vendor ma- 
chines. 

• Most packages support microcomputer (e.g., Apple Macintosh, 
etc.) to minicomputer high end communications such as mouse 
driven user entry to the remote machine are supported in the VMS 
environment. 

DEC VAX 11/750 (UNIX)s Use of a DEC VAX 11/750 UNIX is being 
provided as part of the WVU Statistics and Computer Science in-kind 
contribution to AdaNET development. This system will be used to 
develop initial software testing and analysis for the Dynamic Software 
Inventory (DSI) components. The system will be available through 
AdaNET. 

Data General MV8000 (AOS/VS): MountainNet’s system, equipped 
with multiple disk controllers, high volume storage and DG’s Ada 
Development Environment (ADE) is being used for storage, compila- 
tion and evaluation of Ada Software Repository (ASR) components. 
Through planned network expansion, this system will serve as the 
main resource for implementation of the object retrieval system of 
the DSI.The systems interconnection allows development of applica- 
tions to support data transfer between the DG storage system and the 
DEC VAX/VMS system, with complete transparency to DSI users. 
Low level access to components is being established so that users can 
obtain copies of repository software which have not been entered into 
the DSL 

Future Expansion 

Service expansion will require continuing system enhancement and develop- 
ment. MountainNet’s long term systems strategy is to study the possibility 

of utilization of a combination of the following hardware resources: 

DEC VAX 8500 (VMS): As the first tier of services are developed and 
made commercially available, volume usage is expected to exceed the 
capacity of the VAX 11/750. It will either continue to serve as an 
internal development machine, or be networked with other AdaNET 
host systems and provide continuing services support. The main user 
interface system(s) used to access the Dynamic Software Inventory 


122 



(DSI) and AdaNET Information Services (AIS) will require the level of 
resources provided by a machine of this class. After analysis of the mix 
of users of various services, an alternate strategy may be to establish 
multiple host systems providing one or more related services and to 
segregate those services which require competing types of resources. 

Harris HCX9 (UNIX): Network access is being expanded for this sys- 
tem in the WVU configuration. Resources will be utilized on this 
system to support AdaNET as part of WVU’s in-kind support. This 
machine may also be utilized for development of automated code test- 
ing and evaluation processes. 

Terradata DBC/1012: MountainNet expects growing storage require- 
ments within the next two years of development. We are looking at 
various mass storage and database machine technologies to support 
the DSI software library. Currently, both the relational and object 
oriented database models are being re s e arch ed. If the relational model 
is chosen, the Terradata machine will be considered. 

Terradata represents one of only two major producers of database ma- 
chines (the other being Britton-Lee). Use of this type of machine 
architecture is preferable to use of other mass storage technologies, 
such as Optical Disk/WORM (Write Once/Read Many) Storage and 
Retrieval systems, which are not designed for dynamic use. Terra- 
data’s Shared Information Architecture system provides connectivity 
to a variety of processing environments and information tools. The 
DBC/1012 can be connected to multiple host mainframes at the same 
time. 

Figure 4.3 depicts the proposed AdaNET configuration. 

4.2.3 Softwar e 

This subsection describes software acquisition and development activities 

for AdaNET. It includes software which may be available in the public 

domain. 

Off-the Shelf 

The following COTS software is either required or being evaluated to sup- 
port services delivery: . ^ . ; 




123 




Figure 4.3: AdaNET Proposed Systems Configuration 


124 




Digital Equipment Corporation DECnet network software: This 

software will be supported on all MountainNet VAX systems in its config- 
uration, which will provide DECnet-level connectivity between VAX and 
Data General system resources, allowing disk to disk information access. 


Ki Research DEKnet network software: This software, layered on 

top of an Ethernet carrier, will integrate with DEC D ECnet software, 
providing systems interconnectivity between AdaN ET host DEC and DG 
systems. It will be supported on MountainNet’s Data General MV8000 
(AOS/VS) system. 


Relational Database Management System: Commercially available 

relational database management systems (RDBMS) are being evaluated 
for supporting the design and implementation of the reuse database, which 
provides the object inquiry facility of the DSI. Should a database machine 
become available, the design of the database would be easily transferable 
to that machine. Should the relational model be chosen, only RDBMS’ that 
support Structured Query Language (SQL) will be considered. As part of 
the evaluation, RDBMS’ implemented in Ada will be examined, such as 
CRI’s Relate 3000. 


Ada/SQL Binding: The development of satisfactory Ada/ SQL bindings 

has become a major topic in the Ada marketplace. Should they become 
available, AdaNET will utilize Ada/SQL bindings that are being devel- 
oped as part of the Software Technologies for Adaptable, Reliable Systems 
(STARS) tools development programs. 

Configuration/Library Management: The AdaNET staff will utilize, 

wherever possible, tools developed in other government supported programs 
for configuration and library management. Programs sponsored by STARS, 
such as the Army Institute for Research in Management Information, Com- 
munications, and Computer Science program ( AIRMICS), may yield valu- 
able toolsets. 


Text Retrieval System: To support the provision of specific areas of the 

AdaNET Information Services (AIS), evaluation of various text retrieval 


125 


database systems are being conducted. One package that is being closely 
evaluated is the INMAGIC package, developed by INMAGIC, INC. 


DCDS/ Adas Members of the AdaNET staff are currently beginning eval- 
uation of the DCDS/ Ada (Distributed Computing Design System) dis- 
tributed Ada development environment, whose development is being sup- 
ported by the Army STARS initiative. 


SGML Implementation: A commercially available copy of Standard 

Generalized Markup Language (SGML) will be obtained. 


Development Tools and Environments: AdaNET is also evaluating 

other support tools and environments that may support internal software 
development activities. Such products will include EVB Software En- 
gineering’s Ada MacHost product, Iconix Software Engineering’s Power- 
tools system, and the Distributed Ada Programming Support Environment 
(DAPSE) project software under development by the Army STARS initia- 
tive. 

Developmental Activities 

Software to be developed for AdaNET includes: 

• User interfaces 

• Automated Software Testing Tools 

• Software Retrieval System Applications Software 

• Configuration/ Library Management Tools 

4.2.4 Data and Information Sources 

This subsection details the sources of life cycle products which will become 
part of the Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI), specified in subsection 4.2.6. 
It describes the known repositories to which MountainNet has access and 
permission to include. 

Life cycle products are being solicited from a variety of sources that include 
public domain libraries, software projects which are obtained directly from 
developers as they evolve, and proprietary sources. 


126 



Current sources of non- classified components include: 


NASA sources: 

• Space station software (Software Support Environment (SSE), etc.) 

• Products of Software Reuse Environment 

• COSMIC 

• Other major NASA development activities 

DoD - STARS 

• Foundations 

• Competing Primes 

• Shadows 

• Future repositories established by STARS Army “ - 

• SIMTEL-20 Ada Software Repository (ex., Worldwide Military Com- 
mand and Control System (WWMCCS)) 

• Reusable Ada Packages for Information Systems Development (RAPID) 

• Specific software development programs (ex., MAFIS) Air Force 

• Naval Ocean Systems Command (NOSC) library (primarily included 
in the ASR) 

• Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) STARS Foundations software 

• Specific software development programs (ex., AWHMS) 

DOC 

• National Bureau of Standards (NBS): automation primitives and tools 
taxonomies, CIM/FCIM (Computerized Integrated Manufacturing/Flexible 
Computerized Integrated Manufacturing) Ada systems development 

Department of Transportation 

• Federal Aviation Administration (FAA): All new systems will be de- 
veloped using Ada 

Private sector sources with whom MountainNet is establishing 
operational agreements. 

AdaNET is continually working to increase new sources of Ada components 
and repositories. 

Figure 4.4 depicts the initial sources of life cycle products. 

4.2.5 Operational Considerations 


127 


Department 

of 

Commerce 


AA 



L28 


In addition to the purely technical considerations for requirements, the 
AdaNET project must also address the boundaries of day-to-day operations. 
This is due to the outreach nature of AdaNET. In order to implement the 
service, items must be addressed which are not necessarily germane to the 
successful operation of a networked database systems. 

This section addresses eight important operational considerations and their 
impact on AdaNET. These are: 

• the expected volume of data and usage; 

• distribution of information beyond on-line computing; 

• a user- assistance function; 

• user billing; 

• telephone support for user questions; 

• user documentation; 

• on-line access methods; 

• microcomputer access. 

Expected Volume 

MountainNet expects a user base of 250 accounts during the first full year 
of operation. Based on statistical samples of current accounts /users, we 
can expect approximately 50 simultaneous users on AdaNET. 

AdaNET will track usage profiles over time in order to determine the opti- 
mum mix of resources for future expansion. 

Distribution Media 

Users of AdaNET will not only be able to access information on-line, they 
will also be able to receive information through other media, in a variety of 
formats. Media currently planned are: 

• CD-ROM 

• Diskette 

• Magnetic Tape 

• Printed matter 

Additional media will be made available as the desire for them is expressed. 
The information will be made available on CD-ROM/Magnetic tape to 
interested parties, thus allowing users to reduce on-line access and connect 
time charges. As preferences for formats shift over time, MountainNet will 
modify its support accordingly. In this way, the value-added nature of 
AdaNET will be free to expand the boundaries of service in response to 

user needs. 


129 



User Assistance 

Due to the service-oriented nature of AdaNET, we can expect a high level of 
client interaction. This means that MountainNet plans to establish admin- 
istrative and operational procedures to ensure that each AdaNET client 
receives the service necessary to promote usage, goodwill and expanded 
knowledge of AdaNET environment. 

From a revenue perspective, user support must be included as a key element 
in billing algorithms. Most likely, AdaNET will spread the cost of user 
support among all clients, as a percentage of system access usage. In this 
way, we can be sure that full service will be provided to each client and 
that no client will suffer from a lack of human resources. 

Service Revenue Structures 

The AdaNET project will gather usage information whenever clients log 
onto the system. This data will account for: 

• Log-on time; 

• Log-off time; 

• Number of disk accesses; 

• Amount of data down-loaded to users’ systems; 

• Different types of information retrieved. 

In all cases, MountainNET understands that the difference between data 
and information will make a difference in billing for a given session. For 
example, if a client retrieves data which points him toward another resource 
for information, he will be billed less than if the retrieval nets information 
which is unavailable elsewhere. This logic follows an automated path for 
traditional inf ormation and data services, i.e.; the Auerbach Report. Al- 
though not automated, a substantial fee is charged. The difference with 
AdaNET is that it will be billed only for the information retrieved, not all 
the information on the database. 

Another aspect of billing which AdaNET will take into account is the dif- 
ference between government, commercial and academic sectors of our econ- 
omy. Since the government’s primary goal is cost avoidance, they will be 
billed at a reduced rate. Basically, academic institutions and government 
sponsored R&D facilities will be billed at the same rate as the government. 
The major rationale for the difference is that industry organizations will 
use AdaNET information for the purpose of increasing their profits. This 
is expected and welcome. However, because of that reason, “the market” 


130 


(industrial organizations) will bear a higher cost for data. 

Wherever possible, revenue structures will be established that will allow 
simple and affordable low-level access charges using combinations of sub- 
scription, purchase, and incremental charges. For a more complete discus- 
sion of revenue structures, please refer to the AdaNET Revenue Support 
Structure report prepared as another deliverable item to UHCL. 

Telephone Support 

On-line telephone support will be provided as needed to AdaNET users, 
giving help in the use of system services, with more detailed help available 
for use of specific services (such as the DSI and other library services). 
This support is available now, and is being provided for the services cur- 
rently available, which are electronic mail and document transfer. As new 
services are made available, such as the on-line AdaNET Bibliographic Sys- 
tem (ABS), support requirements are expected to increase. 

Individuals responsible for implementation of specific services are providing 
this support. For example, questions about use of the electronic mail ser- 
vices are fielded by the AdaNET Communications Coordinator; telecom- 
munications access or difficulties are handled by individuals in Network 
Support; ABS inquiries are taken by the AdaNET librarian, and questions 
regarding the use of the DSI are fielded by a member of that team. 

Detailed information about telephone support will be included in the AdaNET 
Operational Policies and Guidelines handbook which is currently being as- 
sembled. 

User Documentation 

User documentation is one of the most important requirements for AdaNET. 
Primarily, it is the means by which each user will be able to access and uti- 
lize the AdaNET resource. 

On-Line Accezz 

The AdaNET system user interface being developed satisfies several major 
requirements [Shneiderman]: 

• proper functionality 

• reliability 

• availability 

• security 


131 


• integrity 

• schedules 

• budgets 

The development team is determining the tasks and subtasks the interface 
needs to perform. Functionality of this interface includes those tasks needed 
to tie users to applications and/or databases. Compatibility of the interface 
with different vendor machines that may be used to access AdaNET services 
will be a major consideration during interface design. 

Human factors determined through MountainNet’s experience in analysis 
of behavioral patterns and responses of the many diverse interactive user 
groups in its user base, as well as current research, form the foundation for 
design of the AdaNET interface. These factors include: 

• time to learn 

• speed of performance 

• rate of errors by users 

• subjective satisfaction 

• retention over time 

The AdaNET interface will be designed for both ease of learning in a short 
period of time and full functionality for the experienced user. Rules gov- 
erning this interface design are: 

• Consistency: Response conventions will be the same throughout the 
system. 

• Shortcuts: Frequent users will be able to use shortcuts to more rapidly 
traverse the system. 

• Offer informative feedback: Respond to all the user actions. 

• Design dialogs to yield closure: Each group of actions has a beginning, 
middle, and an end. Users receive proper feedback at the close of the 
group of actions. 

• Simple error handling: The system will be designed to avoid serious 
errors by users. If errors are made, easy error handling mechanisms 
will be provided. 

• Easy reversal of actions: Actions will be reversible wherever possible. 

• Internal locus of control: Give users a feeling of control over the sys- 
tem, making them initiators of actions rather than responders. 

• Reduce short-term memory load: Users should not have to remember 
more than seven plus/minus two items at any given time. Help will 


132 


always be available to assist users with code mnemonics and sequences 
of actions. 

AdaNET 's standard interface environment will use elements of most of the 
major current interaction styles at various levels of the system. Current 
interaction styles include: 

• Menu selection: Allow users to choose among several options. 

• Form fill in: Users fill in blanks and the cursor is automatically moved 
using predefined keys. ;_ - 

• Natural language: Users construct queries in their natural language, 
which are then interpreted by the system. 

• Direct manipulation: Users are allowed to manipulate objects on the 
screen directly using a pointing device. 

Microcomputer Access 

In addition to providing on-line access to repository components, the AdaNET 
development team plans to implement a stand-alone microcomputer version 
of the Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI), utilizing graphic, windowing, and 
mouse interface capabilities. 

This interface will initially be developed for the Apple Macintosh, using 
the Toolbox provided by Apple. The Toolbox supports design of windows, 
dialog boxes, drop down menus and some direct manipulation techniques. 
The Teiegen2 system, developed by Telesoft, is being considered as a way 
to develop this interface. The Ada Compiler and related tools developed by 
Meridian Software Systems, Inc. and Alsys, Inc. are also being investigated. 
Telesoft and Meridian are developing an interface to the Macintosh Toolbox, 
and have developed a compiler for the Macintosh II system. 

4.2.0 Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) 

This subsection defines the requirements for a Dynamic Software Inventory 
(DSI), a branch of the AdaNET Information Services (AIS). It discusses 
the background and rationale for the DSI. 


Background 

The DSI will provide access to both life cycle objects and value-added 
services relevant to those objects. Its design will allow users to view objects 


133 


across and within the phases of the life cycle. Furthermore, mechanisms 
will be developed within the DSI to encourage users to submit their own 
life cycle objects for inclusion in the DSI. 

Reuseable Ada Software 

An inventory of public domain Ada software from NASA, DoD, other gov- 
ernmental organizations and private sector sources will be evaluated for 
inclusion in the DSI. Wherever possible, associated life cycle products will 
also be incorporated in the DSI. 

Other Life Cycle Objects 

In the process of software development, various life cycle products are gen- 
erated, such as requirements documents, design documents, and test plans. 
In later phases of the project, the inventory of reusable objects will be 
extended to include these products. 

Documentation 

Standard documentation accompanying software components and life cycle 
products will be stored in the DSI. Standards or guidelines under eval- 
uation for possible adoption include NASA SMAP DID’s (Ada version) 
and MIL-STD-2167A. For standard life cycle and AdaNET specific docu- 
ments, AdaNET developers are considering the adoption of the SGML ISO 
standard to develop Document Type Descriptions (DTD) represent at ional 
markup. 

Metrics 

As objects pass through quality and performance tests, metrics will be 
collected to yield relative values in specific areas tested. Such information 
will be provided to users searching for objects in the reuse database as part 
of the extended profile information for objects in the DSI. Such information 
may help users to restrict their selection prior to making requests for object 
retrieval. 

Profile Information 

Each inventoried software object will have an associated profile. Current 
profile attributes being examined are: 


134 



• Identification Code 

• Abstract 

• Author 

• Developing Organization 

• Point of Contact 

• Hardware/OS Requirements 

• host 

• target 

• integration 

• Compiler/Version 

• Size 

• Documentation Status 

• Portability Report 

• pragma usage 

• dependencies on vendor supplied systems 

• usage of low level I/O, memory addressing, etc. 

• Problem Report 

Reuse Database/ Taxonomy 

Objects in the DSI will be stored in th e reu se database using a faceted 
classification scheme. This scheme will allow for a flexible database design. 
The design of the database will be independent of the data model used to 
ensure that it will not be constrained by the current “state of the practice" . 
Guidelines for design will closely follow the EA/RA model and IRDS. 

Retrieval/Duplication 

Objects inventoried in the DSI may be retrieved through either on-line 
access or distribution media such as magnetic tape, diskette, or CD-ROM. 
For objects not available on-line in the DSI, on-line order processing will 
be provided. 

Tutorials 

This consists of instructional information on the use of the DSI, and on the 
use of inventoried components. 


135 



4.2.7 AdaNET Information Services (AIS) 

This subsection describes the requirements for the AdaNET Information 
Services. Each of the separate databases will be structured according to 
the information contained in them. A common command structure will 
provide the powerful text retrieval access necessary and will function at the 
level of expertise desired by the user. 

User Forums 

A variety of bulletin board services, each relating to a general topic area will 
be developed. Current events, Special Interest Groups (SIGs), discussion 
forums, news and product information will be offered. 

AdaNET Bibliographic System (ABS) 

A bibliographic retrieval system will be available for texts identified as re- 
lated to Ada and software engineering technologies. Some of the covered 
topics will comprise technical subject areas, costing and market informa- 
tion, and information available on related subject areas such as CIM/FCIM. 
Information will be accessed by key field/key word search categories, includ- 
ing article and periodical/publication references and abstracts. 

Educational Materials 

Access to or information about educational books, papers, video courses, 
overhead slide presentations, CAI tutorials and other types of educational 
materials about software engineering and Ada will be provided. 

Electronic Communications 

Internetwork electronic maul and document transfer services are available. 
Full Text Information 

Full text information relevant to software engineering, Ada and related 
technologies in the AdaNET library, that MountainNet is authorized to 
make available to AdaNET users will be provided. News and current events 
information will be included here. 


136 


Directories/Publications 

Printed information about software objects in the DSI, and regular user 
updates concerning new and/or improved AdaNET services and activities 
will be available. 

Other Repositories and Services 

Information about known public and private software repository and in- 
formation activities throughout the country for both Ada and non Ada 
software will be provided. Such repositories include the SIMTEL-20 ASR, 
NRL STARS repository, and NASA’s COSMIC. Such information will in- 
clude general information about the services provided by each of these fa- 
cilities. Information regarding access and/or ordering, and in some cases, 
on-line or distribution access to software obtained from these sources (such 
as the ASR) will be supplied. However, software provided at this level of 
service will be virtually in an “as-is, buyer beware” format, and should not 
be confused with services provided through the DSI. This service is being 
made available to provide early access to Ada software currently in demand 
by the private sector, in the interim period during implementation of the 
DSI. Other information services may include access to SEAD and the Ada 
Information Clearinghouse (AdalC). 

4.2.8 Access Security 

All systems now available on the MountainNet network have implemented 
tight systems security measures to insure the integrity and reliability of user 
data and applications. Security measures currently in place provide satis- 
factory protection; no breach of security has ever been experienced. How- 
ever, as systems in the AdaNET configuration establish increasing visibility 
in the computing world, the highest level security possible must be imple- 
mented. As was stated earlier, the information on host systems available 
on the MountainNet network is unclassified . T here are no plans to incorpo- 
rate systems carrying classified information. Systems security measures are 
in place to insure privacy, integrity, and safety of user information stored 
on host systems, and in protecting host syst ems from the introduction of 
“worms” and “viruses” into the systems. Prior to making AdaNET services 
commercially available, it is anticipated that a security audit, conducted by 
an outside consulting firm, will be run, to reinforce current measures. 
Current systems security for systems in the AdaNET configuration include: 


137 


• Regular mandatory password changes 

• Multiple passwords for privileged accounts, or accounts where requested. 

• Restricted system privileges to a very few users in administrative po- 
sitions and with a need for such privileges; on all systems currently 
in the configuration, only three users have such privileges for each 
system. 

• Tightly controlled public accounts: accounts that are "public” (that 
have no password required for entry) give tightly controlled access to 
specific applications. Defensive measures are in place to ensure that 
users cannot "crash” these applications and obtain system entry. For 
planning of AdaNET systems services, public accounts (for applica- 
tions for information or market survey collection), may be established 
on stand-alone systems (such as microcomputers) to insure main host 
systems security and internetwork systems security. 

• Tightly controlled user accounts: as with public accounts, defensive 
measures are in place to provide secure user interactions. 

• Archiving and backup that includes: 

1. Daily incremental backups of all systems 

2. Weekly system wide backups of all systems 

3. Off-site storage of backup tapes in secure environments 

4. Off-site storage of copies of archived information 

5. Contingency plans for backup systems to support the critical users, 
in case of disaster. 

Continuing study and implementation of enhanced security measures should 
be performed. MountainNet expects to study trusted systems such as NSA’s 
Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC) in future phases 
of AdaNET implementation. 

4.3 Tasks and Deliverables 

This section describes the tasks to be performed and the deliverables to be 
generated for this Technical Plan. It details the work to be performed and 
MountainNet ’s approach to its completion, which is in the form of specific 
deliverable items. These are: 

• AdaNET System Design 

• Data Gathering 


138 


• System Docume ntat ion^ 1 

• AdaNET Information Services (AIS) 

• Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) 

• Init ial N etwork Introduction 

• Growth Plan for Additional Services 

• Spinoffs 

4.3.1 AdaNET System Design 

MountainNet views the design objectives of the AdaNET system as; I) the 
storage of data and information in the most efficient manner for retrieval, 
and 2) the enhancement of interface functions to allow users to perform 
inquiries in the most effective manner. The AdaNET system is comprised 
of two main functional areas; the AdaNET Information Services (AIS) and 
the Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI). Each of these are dealt with in 
subsequent portions of this document. 

4.3.2 Data Gathering 

Data gathering will be an ongoing, dynamic process for AdaNET. Initial 
efforts will be important to the successful introduction of the service. To 
that end, MountainNet expects to perform a marketplace survey to de- 
termine the optimum mix of information for inclusion. In this way, early 
efforts can be expected to provide useful data to the user community and 
ensure AdaNET ’s early acceptance. This marketplace survey will be con- 
ducted among the most likely current users of software engineering and 
Ada technology. Specifically, MountainNet expects to survey and inter- 
view key individuals and organizations involved in SIGAda, AdaJUG, and 
academic institutions with ties to Ada and software engineering such as 
UHCL, Carnegie Mellon University, WVU, the University of Georgia, and 
the University of Maryland. 

Interviews will be conducted with NASA TU and field center programs de- 
veloping Ada technology applications, AJPO, STARS program and other 
DoD organizations including service labs and operational programs. Fi- 
nally, MountainNet will contact it’s largest potential constituency, aerospace 
and defen se cont ractors. In order to ensure future potential growth, we will 
also interview the commercial divisions of these same companies. This will 
help determine the potential for commercial applications such as industrial 
and manufacturing automation. 


139 


The deliverable under this task will be the Phase HI marketplace survey, 
which shall include conclusions and recommendations based on statistical 
analysis. 

4.3.3 System Documentation 

System documentation for AdaNET will take the form of descriptive, op- 
erational and maintenance information. 

Descriptive information will include all organizational, business and tech- 
nical plans called for under Subcontract No. 002 for RICIS project No. SE 
18. These documents also include a schedule of user fees, and the agreement 
documents required to conduct AdaNET business activities. 

Operational documentation will include the users guide; preliminary and 
detailed database design documentation; operational manuals for commu- 
nications, data entry and update; and hardware/software Configuration 
and operational instructions. Maintenance information includes those items 
necessary to correct, enhance, or adapt the system. In addition to design 
documentation, detailed design requirements will be supplied. This doc- 
umentation will be delivered as AdaNET is funded and the development 
program is underway. These documents will form an early deliverable on 
future program phases. 

4.3.4 AdaNET Information Services (AIS) 

This section discusses the design of the AdaNET Information Services. The 
AIS is the cornerstone of the AdaNET system. It represents that portion of 
AdaNET that we believe will yield immediate benefits as a technology tran- 
sition and cost recovery mechanism. Further, AIS will provide a gateway 
function into the Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) and other AdaNET 
services. 

Clearinghouse functions are primarily dependent on the information and 
data provided by the clearinghouse itself. Therefore, a key element in design 
of the AIS is the data gathering and database design functions discussed in 
section 4.3.2 and in section 4.2.6. Planning these functions is tantamount 
to the preliminary design. The following paragraphs describe the minimal 
design frameworks for the AIS. 

The following services have been defined: 

• Bibliographic Information 

• Electronic Communications/Document Transfer 


140 



• User Forums 

• News & Current Events 

• Other Repositories and Services 

• Special Interest Groups 

• Full Text Information 

• Educational Materials 

• Directories/Publications 

The AdaNET Information Service (AIS) wilT provide a wide spectrum of 
information services to its user community. These services will be pro- 
vided through on-line access and a mix of printed, CD-ROM, diskette and 
magnetic tape media. 

The following paragraphs describe each service category and the projected 
first stage service offerings. 


Bibliographic Information: This need will be met through a combi- 

nation of AdaNET ’s li brary refer ences and with existing library catalogues 
such as the SEI’s library and publication lists from user forums and work- 
shops. This feature will allow the user to glean information specifically 
regarding Ada, software engineering and related subjects and applications. 

Electronic Communications/Document Transfer: Systems mail util- 

ities will form the core service mechanism, linked to the applications user 
interface. When internetwork gateways are established, internetwork mail 
transfer will be established through use of standardized mail server proto- 
cols.. ; . _ : ~"7 :. 7 : . : 

User Forums: AdaNET will keep an updated list, with accompanying 
information, of user forums available on the syst em . This list is intended 
to be a quick reference as well as an announcement medium. Software to 
support the actual forums is currently in place. 

News 4c Current Events: This service will provide the user with ex- 
cerpts from the press and highlight s pecial events sudh as the Intern ational 
Conference on Software Engineering, Ada Expo, National Conference on 
Ada Technology, Ada contracts awards, and significant technology develop- 
ments. This service will be designed using a text retrieval database system. 


141 


Other Repositories and Services: This information will guide the 

user toward existing repositories of reusable software systems and com- 
ponents. It will extend beyond Ada per se in that repositories of a more 
general nature such as NASA’s COSMIC system of components will be 
referenced. Initially, only Ada software will be provided for distribution 
through AdaNET. Due to market demand, some software will be made 
available through AdaNET in “as is” form, taken from other public domain 
repository sources such as the ASR and NRL. 

Special Interest Groups: Special interest groups abound in the Ada 

world, the most visible of these being SIGAda. However, groups are formed 
based on “birds of a feather” sessions at conferences and workshops. Other 
non Ada specific groups require information about the current status of 
Ada. The Electronic Industries Association and the National Security In- 
dustrial Association each have software subcommittees concerned with Ada 
and software engineering. Further, Ada may become a significant factor in 
the DoD’s Computer-aided Aquisition and Logistics System (CALS) ini- 
tiative. Each of these special interest groups will most likely be willing to 
share data and become users of AdaNET. 

Full Text Information: This is one of the most significant services 

AdaNET will offer. It will provide information on Ada projects throughout 
the industry and act as the host for abstracting certain items of documen- 
tation from those projects. For example, if a management overview of the 
Space Station SSE were to be available through AdaNET, its dissemination 
to the marketplace would be greatly enhanced. In addition to project in- 
formation, public domain documents basic to Ada, such as standards, will 
be made available as is possible. 

Educational Materials: Because use of software engineering and Ada 

technology requires an extensive re-education effort, educational informa- 
tion will be provided. Actual course description and curriculum designs, 
as well as references to a whole range of educational materials including 
Computer Based Training (CBT), video tapes, films, etc., will be available. 

Directories/Publications: In order to make the AdaNET system as 
easy to use and widely familiar as possible, a set of printed information 
is being developed. These publications will include a catalog of services 
available, user reference guides, and brochures describing AdaNET. 


142 


4.3.5 Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) Design 

The design of the DSI has been divided into the four functional areas: 

• Object Evaluation 

• Object Inquiry 

• Object Retrieval 

• Library /Systems Configuration Management 

During first stage of DSI design the majority of work will concentrate on 
implementation of the first three categories, with development of a Config- 
uration Management Plan. The following sections describe planned design 
implementation for each of these component areas. 

Object Evaluation 

Each candidate object must undergo testing and evaluation as part of its 
incorporation into the DSI library. Software objects will be evaluated for: 

• Completeness: Determine if all necessary components have been pro- 
vided to allow successful compilation and execution of the software 
object; 

• Portability: Check for features that compromise portability; 

• Errors/Constraints: Determine constraints placed on variables and 
types; test robustness of error handling; 

• Complexity: Determine the component’s relative code complexity; 

• Performance: Run benchmarks against software components; 

• Classification: Assign facet terms; 

Results of each phase of the evaluation will yield the unit’s profile, which 
is entered Into the reuse database for user retrieval and evaluation. 

The following steps will be taken to develop the software evaluation process: 

• Identify initial parameters/procedures for evaluation;, 

• Document such parameters in an AdaNET Reuse Policy and Guide- 
lines manual; 

• Develop procedures for completeness testing; 

• Identify features to test for portability analysis; 

• Develop procedures for object portability analysis; 

• Develop automated portability analysis procedures; 

• Identify complexity analysis tool(s J to be used; 

• Develop method for applying tool(s) to software objects; 

• Develop automated methods to generate the object testing framework; 

• Develop method for facet terms assignment; 


143 


• Develop procedures for object classification. 


Object Inquiry- 

Access to objects available or inventoried by AdaNET will be provided 
through a reuse database. The database will contain results of evaluation 
testing to provide potential reusers with a profile of the software object. 
Information such as object type, function, functional area, algorithm and 
system information will be provided as terms defined for the various facets 
that make up an object descriptor. Key design activities include: 

1. Domain analysis of objects; 

2. Facet definition; 

3. Assignment of initial facet terms; 

4. Classification of a representative sample of programs; 

5. Design database. 

Object Retrieval 

To form an object descriptor, the user chooses facet terms under each facet. 
In order to examine specific objects resident in AdaNET libraries, one of 
two actions, depending on object size and other criteria, is taken: 

1. On-line object retrieval initiated 

2. On-line ordering request initiated 

For objects that can be provided on-line, the files referenced by the object 
descriptor will be returned to the user. The user may then select which 
specific objects are desired. The associated files are then transferred to 
the retrieval system to be downloaded. Items that must be ordered become 
open orders and are entered into AdaNET’s distribution center. Accounting 
information provided by users will allow direct billing for all distribution 
requests. 

Development of the retrieval system will consist of: 

• System requirements definition; 

• Top level design of object retrieval system; 

• Systems communications design; 

• Database/retrieval system interface design; 

• Retrieval system/distribution system integration design; 

• Retrieval system implementation. 


144 


Library/System Configuration 

A Configuration Management Plan defining policies and procedures for DSI 
management will be developed. Issues to be addressed in this document 
include such areas as: 

• Object insertion into reuse database; . - ... 

• Object raodification/revision; 

• Multiple version tracking; 

• Life cycle object collection management; 

• Maintenance history; 

• User problem report notification. 

4.3.6 Initial Network Introduction 

The initial introduction of AdaNET will be based on one overriding prin- 
cipal: only that which is available and operational will be included. In this 
way, AdaNET can ensure that user expectations don’t exceed the systems 
capabilities prior to feature availability. Clearly one of the most important 
aspects of the introduction process is the public announcements about the 
service. In order to clearly specify the overall plan, we will state the shorter 
range goals and follow that with longer term commitments. 

The primary goal for the short term (May - October 1988) is the implemen- 
tation of services to be offered commercially beginning with the TRI-Ada 
’88 meeting. This represents the first step in making the AdaNET project 
self-sustaining on a for-profit basis. The TRI-Ada ’88 meeting wil l be held 
in Charleston, West Virginia, October 24-28. Services to be announced at 
the meeting are: 

• The existing Ada Software Repository currently on the SIMTEL20 
system at White Sands Missile Range with some value-added services 
and other software inventoried at that time; 

• Electronic mail linking members of the Ada community; 

• User forums and information services. 

Activities Activities during this period will be in the following areas: 

• Implementation of commercially available Dynamic Software Inven- 
tory (DSI); 


145 


• Implementation of commercially available AdaNET Information Ser- 
vices (AIS); 

• Preparation for TRI-Ada ’88 marketing effort; 

• Planning for additional services to be made available in future phases 
of implementation; 

• Identify other repositories to be referenced through AdaNET; 

• Identify software tools useful in performing software evaluation and 
configuration management functions for AdaNET; 

• Develop an EA/RA model of repository with faceted classification; 

• Build a list of potential additional services to be offered by AdaNET; 

• Attend relevant conferences and trade shows. 

4.3.7 Growth Plan for Additional Services 

This section specifies the plans for AdaNET’s growth and the additional 
services that will be incorporated. It includes medium and long term goals 
for spinoffs, additional repositories, software and communications. 

Spinoffs 

As AdaNET evolves, other spinoff services will be pursued. Such services 
include: 

• Consultant services to aid manufacturers in their transition from tra- 
ditional technologies to Ada based CIM/FCIM technologies. 

• Consultant services to private sector organizations in their develop- 
ment of reusable software components inventories. 

• Expansion to the international Ada technology market; AdaNET may 
be able to serve as a technology transfer medium for software engi- 
neering and Ada technology developed overseas to the United States 
market. 

During first stage implementation of the DSI, inventoried objects will be ex- 
clusively from the coding and unit testing stages of the software life cycle. 
This limi tation is a consequence of the fact that we will be first evalu- 
ating existing Ada source code components obtained from public domain 
sources such as the ASR, NOSC Ada tapes, and other identified existing 
Ada repositories. Initial minimal evaluation criteria are being developed, 


146 



and will form the basis for quality evaluation for potential reusability at this 
components/subcomponents level. These requirements will be detailed in 
the document AdaNET Reuse Policy and Guidelines during this first stage 
of implementation. It is anticipated that this document will be expanded to 
include all life cycle products incorporated into the AdaNET inventory dur- 
ing future phases of DSI implementation. From these guidelines, standard 
procedures for component evaluation will be developed to analyze quality. 
MountainNet’s long term goal for implementation of the AdaNET DSI is 
to develop a system that will implement the life- wide object representation 
model proposed by Dr. Charles McKay, Director of the Software Engineer- 
ing Resources Center (SERC) at the University of Houston at Clear Lake 
City. MountainNet’s development team recognizes that the true benefits 
of reusability will come only when life wide information about available 
software components can be offered to AdaNET users. 

MountainNet is balancing the longer term development of this model against 
the current need to provide access to reusable software in a fairly short time 
(i.e., within the next year). For this reason, we emphasize in the current 
document the planning for a DSI of reusable software designed to provide 
growth and expansion that will allow later evolution to Dr. McKay’s pro- 
posed taxonomy of taxonomies, but that can be realistically implemented 
within the time frames described herein. 

Medium Term 

The following subsection describes medium term (1-2 yrs) goals for AdaNET 
services. 

The primary goals over the medium period (November 1988 - December 
1989) include: ~ 

• Provide additional value-added services for the DSI; 

• Identify and/or develop tools for decomposition and recomposition of 
total software systems into reusable components and modules; 

• Incorporate other repositories within the AdaNET taxonomy; 

• Identify existing Ada software that can be used for CIM/FCIM appli- 

catio ns. .. , 


The following list of planned activities is grouped according to the four 
goals listed above. :: 


147 


Additional Value-Added Services: Activities related to the provision 

of additional value-added services to the repository include: 

• Testing for correct behavior 

• Classifying according to Booch’s taxonomy 

• Improving user documentation and tutorials 

• Widening the range of evaluation applied to units 

Tools for Decomposition and Recomposition: It is anticipated that 

large systems of Ada software developed for the federal government will 
eventually be delivered to the AdaNET project for evaluation, decomposi- 
tion into reusable units, and inclusion in the DSI. To assist in this activity, 
the te chni cal team will need access to software tools for detecting reusable 
portions of code and for decomposing large systems into smaller ones. Ini- 
tially, tools for measuring cohesion and coupling would be useful. The 
necessary procedures are: 

1. Identify candidate tools and metrics; 

2. Learn to use these tools; 

3. Deter min e their utility in assisting with the decomposition of systems; 

4. Construct other needed tools. 

Other Repositories: Several collections of reusable Ada code are well- 

known in the Ada community. These include the ASR, CAMP, STARS 
Foundations, the Booch Components, and GRACE components. Each of 
these collections has its own organization. AdaNET will provide references 
to units in other repositories. AdaNET will attempt to provide a thesaurus 
to support context dependent specifications used by each affiliated reposi- 
tory and add unit references to the reuse database. 

Existing Ada Software: The DOC OPTI support of AdaNET is pro- 

vided to stimulate leadership in development of CIM/FCIM Ada technol- 
ogy applications. AdaNET will attempt to work with mature leaders in 
CIM/FCIM applications, to build a base of Ada technology in support of 
this technology. 

Long Term Goals 

The goals over the long term period (January - December 1990) are: 


148 


• Link services provided directly by AdaNET with those provided by 
other systems such as the AdalC bulletin board and SEAD; 

• Develop and provide support and expertise for companies making tran- 
sition to the use of automation technologies; 

• Develop expertise to provide help in selection of computer hardware 
and software development tools best suited for specific applications 
development. 

4.4 Quality and Standards Assurance 

This section of the technical plan states AdaNET’s verification requirements 
and details a validation demonstration to meet those requirements. Moun- 
tainNet plans to follow basic software engineering principles in the evolution 
of AdaNET. To this end, a section on ’’Process Standards Compliance” is 
included. 

4.4.1 Verification Requirements 

This subsection addresses the way in which AdaNET requirements will 
be verified as complete. Since AdaNET is more than the software which 
drives it, this subsection also deals with those items which are import amt 
to the overall implementation of AdaNET, but not necessarily software. 
For example, AdaNET’s requirement to distribute information in printed, 
CD/ROM and diskette format will be proven to be complete through the 
creation of information using these formats, which will then be forwarded 
to UHCL. 

This subsection first lists each requirement as stated in section 4.2 of this 
document, then follows that with the plan for proof the requirement has 
been met. Please note that an overall system demonstration is planned and 
is covered in section 4.4.2 “Validation Demonstration 

Networking and Communications 

This requirement will be verified through remote login to AdaNET through 
the existing network schema. The logins will take place at the UHCL facility 
and will be performed in the following manner: 

• Login through the Telenet access to AdaNET; 

• Login to MountainNet directly; 

• Login to AdaNET directly. 


149 


In each case, the record of the login sequence will be saved and printed to 
show proof of performance. 

Hardware 

Verification of existing hardware cannot be accomplished in the traditional 
sense, nor does it need to be. Since AdaNET is using existing services, 
MountainNet plans to provide initial signature pages for the agreements 
between MountainNet and the vendors of those services. 

Software 

There are two types of software verification for AdaNET. One is the test- 
ing of software which is to be included in the Dynamic Software Inventory 
(DSI). Since this is a separate subject, it will be dealt with in subsequent de- 
liverables. The second is verification of the software developed for AdaNET. 
MountainNet will follow standard testing procedures for software. Standard 
testing procedures include: 

• Unit test all code during development. These tests will be conducted 
by the software engineer responsible for that piece of code; 

• Build tests that will be conducted using stems and stubs, as appropri- 
ate; 

• Sub-system testing will be conducted as supersets of each build test; 

• In all cases, software engineers will follow internal MountainNet Soft- 
ware Test Plan. 

Data and Information Sources 

Verification of Data and Information sources will be verified by supplying 
UHCL with duplicate copies of the agreements signed by the supplier with 
AdaNET. 

Operational Considerations 

Operational aspects of AdaNET will be confirmed through copies of re- 
quired deliverables from this subcontract. 


150 


Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) 

The DSI will be a constantly changing entity. However, verification of 
it’s robustness will be accomplished through publication of the contents 
and internal monthly reports detailing problem areas, new additions and 
deletions and planned activities for expansion. In this way, a running record 
of the DSI will be kept, allowing an historical perspective for future changes. 

Database 

Database access and security will be tested and proven through the Val- 
idation Demonstration. Although MountainNet has not chosen a specific 
database management system vendor, it is anticipated that a key element 
in vendor selection will be the access, security and record/element admin- 
istration functions available. 


AdaNET Information Services (AIS) 

Beyond the testing for software discussed in section 4.4.1, the AJS will be 
tested for clarity and ease of use. Most of this testing will take place in 
preparation for the Validation Demonstration discussed in the next subsec- 
tion. 

4.4.2 Validation Demonstration : — 

The ultimate test of any service-oriented endeavor is the application itself. 
Since fielding a new system will always uncover unanticipated problems, 
the most valid test for such a syste m is a validation demonstration. Moun- 
tainNet plans a two-phased approach to this demonstration. These are: 

1. Demonstration to UHCL/RICIS and; 

2. Demonstration to NASA headquarters and the liason office for Sen. 
Robert Byrd. 

Primarily, the demonstration will take the form of accessing AdaNET then 
allowing the user to brows e throug h the services o ffere d . In this way two 
key elements will be addressed; one, access and availability and; two, ease 
of use. MountainNet will perform these tests internally with non computer- 
literate personnel prior to the live demonstration. 


151 


4.4.3 Process Standards Compliance 

Processes have helped most engineering disciplines overcome the problems 
associated with the design and implementation of a given system. Although 
the term “software engineering” was coined more than twenty-five years ago, 
the process of software engineering is just beginning to become a practiced 
method of development . MountainNet plans to comply with NASA’s SMAP 
methodology in development of AdaNET. Although not entirely a software 
subsystem, AdaNET can benefit now and in the future by compliance with 
this disciplined approach to development. 

Quality Assurance practices will take into account each phase and step of 
SMAP, and ensure that each is measurable and accurate. Additionally, 
MountainNet will employ the practices espoused by Dr. Roger Pressman 
in his book, Software Engineering - A Practitioners Approach. 

Process standards compliance will be measured based on the stated goals 
in Dr. Pressman’s volume. Finally, MountainNet recognizes the need to 
track this measurement , and will do so with modified versions of a “module 
development folder” . Each functional area will receive it’s own folder which 
will be kept by the chief programmer or administrator for the team charged 
with accomplishing the goals of that functional entity. 

4.5 Additional Resource Requirements 

This section of the technical plan delineates additional resources needed 
in order to meet the objectives surrounding a viable AdaNET service. It 
specifies the needs associated with hardware, software, networking and com- 
munications and personnel and administration. 

At this point in time, it’s understood that additional resources are contin- 
gent upon additional contracting dollars not yet allocated. MountainNet is 
also pursuing further corporate partnering agreements with an eye toward 
baseline funding for expansion. 

4.5.1 Hardware 

Specific hardware additions are: 

• VAX 8500 and/or other VAX systems to support a greater number of 
users and distribution of services requiring competing resources; 

• Harris HCX9 to expand the in-kind services currently being supplied 
by WVU; 


152 


• Terradata DBC/1012 to serve as a standalone Reuse Database system; 

• IBM 9370 (MVS) to support the Terradata. 

4.5.2 Software 

Software required to expand AdaNET is: 

• COTS software for to provide compatibility between DEC and DG 
computers; 

• COTS implementation of SGML; 

• COTS implementation of IRDS; 

• COTS development tools and environments; 

• Relational Data Base Management software (prior to incorporation of 
dedicated database machines. 

4.5.3 Networking and Communications 
Networking and Communications needs are: 

• A star network controller; 

• Direct connection between AdaNET and Telenet for ease of access; 

• Direct lines to the RICIS at UHCL, Washington, D.C., Huntsville, Boston 
and Pittsburgh; 

• A link into the NASA network; 

• A link into the DoD’s DDN. This is an imperative connection in order 
to become the foci for Ada- related information services; 

• A direct connection between AdaNET and SEAD. 

4.5.4 Personnel 

Development team personnel required for first stage implementation are 
10 FTE staff members plus senior level software engineering consultants. 
These staff positions will be divided among: 

• 6 Software Engineers 

• 1 Library Information Systems Specialist 

• 1 Systems Analyst 

• 2 Programmers 


153 


I I! 9B 


4.5.5 Administrative 


Estimated administrative resources required for first stage implementation 
include: 

• 3 PC AT compatible microcomputer systems with expanded memory 

• 3 PC compatible printers 

• 1 Macintosh II 

• 6 Computer workstation desks 


154 


DOC OPT! - Department of Commerce, Office of Productivity, Technology and Innovation 
DoD * AJPO - Department of Defense • Ada Joint Program Office 
DoO - DA - Department of Defense • Department of the Army 
NASA TU - National Aeronautics and Space Administration • Technology Utilization 
UHCL* RICIS - University of Houston, Clear take - 

Research Institute for Computing and information Systems 


Figure 4.5: AdaNET Organizational Structure 


155 

















4.6 AdaNET Research Project 

June 1, 1988 through October 31, 1988 

The following is a list of proposed deliverables and milestones to be estab- 
lished for the next phase, first stage implementation, of AdaNET develop- 


ment: 




Description Milestone 

Deliverable 

Start* 

Finish* 


1.0 Phase I/II Final Report 

Y 

Y 

1 

6 



2.0 Develop Planning Documents 






2.1 Draft One Year Plan 

Y 

Y 

5 

10 


2.2 Revise One Year Plan 

Y 


11 

14 

— 

2.3 Final One Year Plan 

Y 

Y 

15 

16 


2.4 Draft Five Year Plan 

Y 

Y 

17 

20 

— 

3.0 AIS System Research 






3.1 Develop Draft System Plan 

Y 


5 

12 


3.2 Release Draft System Plan 

Y 

Y 

13 

16 


3.3 Revise Draft System Plan 

Y 


17 

19 


3.4 Release System Plan 

Y 

Y 

20 

21 

— 

4.0 DSI System Research 






4.1 Develop Initial System Plan 

Y 


5 

16 


4.2 Release Initial System Plan 

Y 

Y 

17 

20 


4.3 Revise Initial System Plan 

Y 


21 

23 


5.0 Tech. Adv. Council Implementation 





5.1 Council Selection 

Y 

7 


8 


5.2 Council Approval 

Y 

Y 

9 

9 

. 

5.3 Meeting Notice 

Y 


11 

11 


5.4 Meeting 

Y 

Y 

15 

15 


* Week number during development phase that activity begins and 

com- 


pletes. 






156 



WEEK # 


Phase i'll Final Report 

Develop Planning Documents 
• Draft One Year Plan 

■ Revise One Year Plan 

- Final One Year Plan 

Oratt Five Year Plan 

viS System Design 

Develop Oratt System Plan 

Release Oratt System Plan 

- Revise Draft System Plan 

Release System Plan 

n<r»al DSl System Planning 
■ Develop initial System Plan 

Release initial System Plan 

• Revise initial System Plan 


\7 


start 

deliverable 


o 


milestone 








Figure 4.6: Proposed Milestones and Deliverables 


157 






Chapter 5 

Revenue Plan 


158 


5.1 Overview 


This document is the Revenue Plan for implementation of MountainNet’s AdaNET 
project. Additionally, the document represents a deliverable item under Cooper- 
ative Agreement #NCC9-16. 

AdaNET is designed to provide government -developed Ada technology infor- 
mation to: 

• Industrial and manufacturing organizations 

• Educational institutions 

• Small business and other private sector organizations 

• Governmental agencies 

The information available through AdaNET will be offered with accompa- 
nying value-added services, making it a gateway and clearinghouse for software 
engineering and Ada technology that is unique. These services will be offered 
through a cost recovery structure that provides for migration to full commercial 
viability. 

This chapter describes what is to be offered to defined market segments, 
sources of Ada software and technology, revenue structures, reimbursement of 
direct contribution and comparative pricing. 


159 


llllliil! 


5.2 Products and Services 

Services to be offered are defined as one of three specific services categories: 

• Dynamic Software Inventory 

• AdaNET Information Services 

• Professional Support Services 

The following subsections provide descriptions of specific services to be offered 
under each of these categories: 

5.2.1 Dynamic Software Inventory (DSI) 

The Dynamic Software Inventory consists of software (and other life cycle objects) 
within an environment developed to support ease of definition and access to 
information about objects for reuse. 

Reusable Ada Software 

An inventory of public domain Ada software from NASA, DoD, other government 
agencies and private sector sources will be evaluated for inclusion in the DSI. 
Wherever possible, associated life cycle products will also be incorporated in the 
DSI. 

Other Life Cycle Objects 

In the process of software development, various life cycle products are generated, 
such as requirements documents, design documents and test plans. In later phases 
of the project, the inventory of reusable objects will be extended to include these 
products. 

Documentation 

Standard documentation accompanying software components and life cycle prod- 
ucts will be stored in DSI. Standards or guidelines under evaluation for possible 
adoption include NASA SMAP DID’s (Ada version) and MIL-STD-2167A. For 
standard life cycle and AdaNET specific documents, AdaNET developers are 
considering the adoption of the SGML ISO standard to develop Document Type 
Descriptions (DTD) representational markup. 


160 



Metrics 


As objects pass through quality and performance tests, metrics will be collected 
to yield relative values in specific areas tested. Such information will be provided 
to users searching for objects in the reuse database as part of the extended profile 
information for objects in the DSI. This information may help users to restrict 
their selection prior to making requests for object retrieval. 

Profile Information 

Each inventoried software object will have an associated profile. Current profile 
attributes being examined are: 

• Identification Code 

• Abstract 

• Author 

• Developing Organisations 

• Point of Contact 

• Hardware/ OS Requirements 

• host » 

• target 

• integration 

• Compiler/Version 

• Size 

• Documentation Status 

• Portability Report 

• pragma usage 

• dependencies on vendor supplied systems 

• usage of low level I/O, memory addressing, etc. 

• Problem Report 

Retrieval/D up lication 

Objects inventoried in the DSI may be retrieved through either on-line access or 
distribution media such as magnetic tape, diskette or CD-ROM. For objects not 
available on-line in the DSI, on-line order processing will be provided. 


161 


Reuse Database/Taxonomy 

Objects in the DSI will be stored in the reuse database using a faceted classifi- 
cation scheme. This scheme will allow for a flexible database design. The design 
of the database will be independent of the data model used to ensure that it will 
not be constr ain ed by the current ’’state of the practice”. Guidelines for design 
will closely follow the EA/RA model and IRDS. 

Tutorials 

This consists of instructional information on the use of the DSI, and on the use of 
some specific inventory components (such as tools, training systems or complete 
operational systems). 

5.2.2 AdaNET Information Services (AIS) 

This subsection describes the requirements for the AdaNET Information Services. 
Each of the separate databases will be structured according to the information 
contained in them. A common command structure will provide the powerful text 
retrieval access necessary and will function at the level of expertise desired by 
the user. 

User Forums 

This service consists of a variety of bulletin board services including current 
events, Special Interest Groups (SIG’s), forum discussions, news and product 
information. 

AdaNET Bibliographic System (ABS) 

A bibliographic retrieval system will be available for texts identified as related 
to Ada surd software engineering technologies. Some of the covered topics will 
comprise technical subject areas, cost and market information, and information 
available on related subject areas such as CIM/FCIM. Information will be ac- 
cessed by key field/key word search categories, including article, periodical and 
publication references, and abstracts. 


162 


Educational Materials 


Access to or information about educational books, papers, video courses, over- 
head slide presentations, CAI tutorials and other types of educational materials 
about software engineering and Ada will be provided. 

Electronic Communications 

Internetwork electronic mail and document transfer services will be provided to 
support communication with other Ada software engineering professionals. 

Full Text Information 

Full text information relevant to Ada, software engineering and related technolo- 
gies in the library, that MountainNet is authorized to make available to users of 
AdaNET. News and current events information will be included here. 

Directories/Publications 

Printed information about software objects in the DSI and regular user updates 
concerning new and/or improved AdaNET services and activities will be made 
available. 


Other Repositories and Services 

Information about known public and private software repository and information 
activities throughout the country for both Ada and non-Ada software will be 
provided. Such repositories include the SIMTEL-20 ASR, NRL STARS repos- 
itory and NASA’s COSMIC. Such information will include general information 
about the services provided by each of these facilities. Information regarding 
access and/or ordering, and in some cases, on-line or distribution access to soft- 
ware obtained from these sources (such as the ASR) will be supplied. However, 
software provided at this level of service will be virtually in an “as is, buyer 
beware” market composition format, and should not be confused with services 
provided through the DSI. This service is being made available to provide early 
access to Ada software currently in demand by the private sector, in the interim 
period during implementation of the DSI. Other information services may include 
access to SEAD and the Ada Information Clearinghouse (AIC). 


163 



5.2.3 Professional Support Services 
Consultant Services 

MountainNet’s staff and companies comprising the project support infrastructure 
will be available for specialized software engineering and Ada technology consul- 
tant services. This service will be key to successful use of the AdaNET services, 
and will be essential to the catalyst role of encouraging transition to use of Ada 
technology in private sector initiatives. 

Seminars and Workshops 

Seminars and workshops will be provided to educate and train the user base. 


5.3 Target Market 

The following sections define target markets identified as potential users of the 

AdaNET services: 

5.3.1 Market Segments 

The target market can be divided into the following categories. 

• Current Ada users 

• New entrants into the Ada market 

• Industrial and manufacturing organizations 

• Government agencies 

• Educational institutions 

The current Ada users market represents the most immediate market for 
AdaNET. Based on preliminary data, the professional Ada community has spe- 
cific interest in baseline services planned. Of particular interest is reusable soft- 
ware components, supporting value-added services, professional papers and gen- 
eral information services such as, market trends and information about contract 
opportunities. Major users in this area are currently the aerospace industry and 
defense contractors. 


164 


Market entry into the industrial and manufacturing areas will require a more 
prolonged effort. Significant pre-market education will probably be required for 
industry segments to see the direct advantages of applying Ada technology to 
their unique applications. Specific component taxonomies relative to manufac- 
turing pr imi tive!!, will be adopted, similar to the approach used in presentation 
of the Common Ada Missile Packages (CAMP) software to inventory software 
parts primitives. Educational and consultant support for successful long-term 
Ada technology migration in such areas as Paperless Order Processing (POP), 
Just-In-Time Inventory (JIT), Computer Integrated Manufacturing (CIM), Flex- 
ible Computerized Manufacturing technologies (FCM) and other real time control 
systems will also be provided. 

The gove rnm ent market represents a stable, proactive environment for AdaNET 
use. Although AdaNET ’s purpose is the transfer of government developed Ada 
technology to the private sector, available technology and applications within var- 
ious gover nm ent agencies and even within various divisions of the sami agency 
will also be inventoried where appropriate. For educational institutions inter- 
ested in gaining Ada technology expertise in order to introduce strong Ada and 
software engineering curriculums, high quality information will be available from 
AdaNET. 

5.3.2 Market Composition 

Several major professional areas within each market segment have been identified: 

• Software Engineers/Developers currently working with software engineer- 
ing and Ada technology have expressed interest in Ada and software engi- 
neering, methodologies, Ada specific metrics, reusable software and faceted 
classifications. 

• Managers /Administrators within commercial and government organizations 
have shown interest in services that provide contracting and subcontracting 
information, current events, market trends, governmental activities with re- 
spect to the use of Ada and information about companies and products in 
the Ada market. 

• Educators indic ated in t erest in educatio nal and t echnically oriented infor- 
mation such as, faceted classifications for reuse and Ada tutorials. 

• Members of manufacturing and industrial communities are interested in the 
place of Ada technology as part of the overall advanced technology solutions 

165 




to increase productivity, competitiveness and reliability. Areas of interest 
include information about educational and professional information, cur- 
rent industrial applications and information about companies that possess 
specific areas of Ada technology expertise. 

5.3.3 Initial Market Survey 

An initial survey for AdaNET was conducted at the Ada Expo ’87 held in Boston 
in December 1987. The survey, while a small sampling of those in attendance, 
yielded information about the Ada community’s current interests. The survey 
gathered the following types of information: 

• General demographic information 

• Ada application areas represented at the conference 

• Levels of interest in potential service offerings 

• Current hardware and telecommunications utilization 

Following are charts which summarize the data collected in the initial market 
survey. 


Survey of Ada Expo ’87 Attendees 
Areas of Ada Software Development 


area frequency 

PERCENT 

Weapons/C31 

39 

16.9 

Engineering 

35 

16.2 

Tools 

28 

12.1 

Scientific 

21 

9.1 

To le c omznun i c at ions 

20 

8.7 

Education 

18 

7.8 

Databases 

18 

7.8 

Business/MIS 

17 

7.4 

Compilers 

14 

6.1 

Process Control 

8 

3.5 

Financial Applications 

6 

2.6 

Consumer 

6 

2.6 

Chemicals/Petroleum 

1 

0.4 


166 



Survey of Ada Expo ’ 87 Attendees 
Networks Utilized 


NETWORK FREQUENCY PERCENT 


ARPANET 

DDN 

Telenet Hail 
CompuServe 
BITnet/Mailnet 
The Source 
Dialeom 
NASA Mail 


32 

33.3 

20 

20.8 

15 

15.6 

12 

12.5 

9 

9.4 

4 

4.2 

2 

2.1 

2 

2.1 


Survey of Ada Expo *87 Attendees 
Usefulness of Service Categories 

USAGE SUM OF RATINGS 


SW Eng. Methodology 130 
Ada-Specific Metrics 112 
Reuse Classifications 100 
Topical Search 97 
Documentation _ 93 
Project Management 91 
Commercial 77 
User Communications 69 
Contracting 67 
On-Line Tutorial 57 
Telephone Help Line 51 
CBT 50 


0 ■ Not Useful; 1 » Useful; 2 » Very Useful 


167 


5.4 


Sources of Ada Software and Technology 


5.5 Revenue Structures 

Careful consideration is being given to the approach taken in planning for services 
cost recovery (or revenue) structures. Current thoughts and approaches being 
taken in development of this structure axe discussed below. This document does 
not attempt to define specific dollar amounts for services structures. Such activity 
is premature, due to a lack of information about total investment in development 
of services; specific operational costs of supporting services delivery; resource 
requirements and allocations necessary for delivery of various services and specific 
information about potential market demand for individual or group services. 
Such information will become available and realistic projections possible in future 
phases of the project, as it moves from planning, research and early prototyping 
into f ull scale services implementation. Criteria that must be met by the revenue 
structure include: 

• Defraying costs of operation 

• Maintaining commercial competitiveness 

• Standardizing revenue structures 

• Implementing incentive programs 

• Providing economically disadvantaged discounts 

• Reimbursing of direct contributions 

The revenue structure will utilize standard subscriptions, incremental charges, 
purchase fees and a differential fee structure as described below. These structures 
will be based on high volume usage, rather than charging individual users pre- 
mium prices as the service goad is to provide reliable information services at cost 
effective rates. The most common structures to be used will be: 


Subscription Rate 

An annual, quarterly or monthly base rate allowing access to services (or 
groups of services) through on-line connect, CD-ROM, diskette and printed me- 
dia. 


168 



Figure 5.1: Source of Ada Software and Technology 


169 



Incremental Rate 

Users “pay as they go” for on-line services not standard to their regular 
services subscriptions. 

Purchase Price 

Users purchase products on an individual unit basis. 


Differential Fee Structure 

Usage information will be collected as clients log onto the system. This data 
will include: 

• Log-on time 

• Log-off time 

• Number of disk accesses 

• Amount and kind of data down-loaded to user’s system 

• Types of information retrieved 

In all cases, MountainNet understands that the difference between data and 
information will make a difference in billing for a given session. For example, if a 
client retrieves data which points him toward another resource for information, 
he will be billed less than if the retrieval nets information which is unavailable 
elsewhere. This logic follows an automated path for traditional information and 
data services; i.e., the Auerbach Report. Although not automated, a substantial 
fee is charged. The difference with this service is that the user will be billed for 
only the information retrieved and not for all of the information in the database. 


170 


Revenue Classes for AdaNET Services 


Distribution Medium 


Description 

On-Line 

CD-ROM 

Tape 

Diskette 

Hardcopy 

Dynamic Software Inventory 

ISP 

SP 




Ada Software Components 

IS 

SP 

p 

PS 


Documentation 

IS 

SP 

p 

PS 

p 

Metrics 

IS 

SP 

p 

PS 


Profile Information 

IS 

SP 



p 

Reuse Databaee/Taxonomy 

IS 

SP 




Tutorials 

IS 

SP 

p 

p 

p 

Information Services 






User Forums 

IS 




s 

Bibliographic System 

IS 

PS 



PS 

Educational Materials 

IS 

PS 

p 

PS 

PS 

Electronic Communications 

s 





Full Text 

I 

PS 

p 

p 

PS 

Directories / Publications 





PS 

Outside Services 

s 





Professional Support 






Consultant services 






Seminars and Workshops 







Mi»c. 


Live 


I = Incremental 


S = Subscription 


P = Purchased 


171 













5.5.1 Defraying Costs of Operation 


As a minimum requirement, revenue structures established for services must pro- 
vide a realistic basis for cost recovery for a given target number of users. Below 
are estimated resource requirements at full staffing. Costs for these resources do 
not include variable costs associated with specific services delivery. 

Human Resources 


Type of support 


Number of FTE* 


General information services 4 

Library information services 1 1/2 

Software evaluation 5 

Configuration management 2 

Database 2 

Distribution personnel 3 

Marketing/Advertising 2 

Network and systems 3 

Infrastructure support services 4 


*FTE = Full Time Equivalent 

Hardware / Software 


• Six (6) Large scale computer systems 

• Network support 

• New acquisition and maintenance of software 

• Administrative and travel expenses 


Notes: 

The estimated number of FTE’s in various activity centers are based on cur- 
rent knowledge of staffing needs, as well as comparative staffing requirements in 
similar programs, such as the USAISEC SDC-W RAPID program. Estimates on 
other expense areas are projected for current operational costs. 


172 



5.5.2 Maintaining Commercial Competitiveness 

AdaNET must be competitive (as a minimum) with comparative commercially 
available services. The difference between minimum charge scales necessary for 
cost recovery and current market rate structures for similar services establishes 
a margin within which there is flexibility for determination of revenue structures 
(see Section 6 for comparative pricing rates). 

5.5.3 Standardizing Revenue Structures 

Revenue structures must be standardized with few ''add-on” charges for specific 
services usage (see Section 6 for comparative pricing structures). For most on- 
line services, standardized subscription services will be introduced, at levels that 
will allow cost recovery of resources expended for services delivered at average 
usage levels. Services would be “packaged” in incremental subscription levels. 
This will allow delivery of highly affordable general services (hence removing 
economic barriers). It will also allow alternate cost recovery structures (such as 
those listed in Section 6) for services delivering strategically valuable or resource 
intensive information. 


5.5.4 Implementing Incentive Programs 

Attractive pricing and/or special incentives to induce use of services and reinser- 
tion of information by U.S. and foreign businesses and government organizations 
will be provided. Such programs may includ e introd uctory service “credits" to 
organizations providing valuable technology reinsertion, hence providing an ad- 
ditional incentive to encourage continued use of the services. 


5.5.5 Providing Economically Disadvantaged Discounts 

Special pricing discounts to remove economic barriers to access of information 
by qualifying educational or small business users will be provided. These mar- 
ket segments generate potentially less expendable revenue that can be used for 
investment in new technology areas, this may present an econo mic farrier to 
entry in new technological markets. Use of software engineering and Ada tech- 
nology by these market segments will be encouraged. Specific qualifications for 
such discounts remain to be determined; criteria used must be easily obtain- 
able and verifiable, and not represent high resource requirements in supporting 


173 



such verification. By establishing such a pricing structure in the form of a dis- 
count, the established standard pricing structure is not eroded by non-standard 
fee structures available to special groups of users. Not all small businesses and 
educational institutions will meet criteria established for these discounts, and 
should legitimately be charged standard rates. 

5.5.6 Reimbursing of Direct Contributions 

Reimbursement of direct contributions of sponsoring governmental agencies will 
be made. This reimbursement will be realized through the value of technology 
transferred for reuse by public and private sector users of AdaNET. Methods are 
currently being developed to analyze the relative value of various information 
components distributed so that a reuse value of that information can be estab- 
lished. Within ten years, the total value of that information should be greater 
than or equal to the original governmental investment. 


5.6 Comparative Pricing 

Below is a description of pricing strategies used by various companies that offer 
s imil ar types of inf ormation services and products. These do not reflect the pro- 
posed fee structure for the AdaNET services, but rather are indicative of existing 
market pricing strategies. These services include on-line information services, 
information provided through alternate distribution media, and consultant and 
educational services. 

5.6.1 On-Line Services Delivery 

The following revenue categories are related to delivery of on-line communications 
networks, provided through telecommunications network access. 

Communications Fees 

Fees associated with communications networks access, such as TYMNET and TE- 
LENET. These fees vary based on geographic location, data transmission speed 
and the availability of a local dial-in number to access services. Fees generally 
range from a few dollars per hour to over $30.00 per hour depending on data 
transmission speed and which subservice is accessed. 


174 


Connect Time Charges 

Connect time charges are based on the amount of time the user is actually con- 
nected to the system. Rates are quoted on a per hour basis and are dependent 
upon the type of information and subject matter required. Business and technical 
information are available at higher rates than citations and abstracts. Databases 
that provide citations and abstracts to publications usually cost less than those 
that provide information such as, a company’s name or address or a history of 
stock quotations for a particular industry. Connect time fees can range from 
$15.00 for access to subsets of several files for teaching purposes to $300.00 for 
access to citations for chemical patents. 

Print or Display Charges 

Print or display charges are assessed for each record displayed on the screen or 
printed offline. The fee varies as a function of the amount of information provided. 
Little or no charge is associated with viewing the title and subject headings for 
a record. Fees ranging from $.10 to $4.00 can be associated with viewing enough 
in f orm at inn to allow user to obtain the item which is being searched or for actually 
displaying the information. Files that allow the user to create reports are charged 
per item, per record listed. 

Per Search Term Charges 

This is a new approach introduced by database producers. This option is not yet 
available to users. Use of search terms as a charge base has many implications 
for vendors and users. Searchers always attempt to minimize on-line search costs. 
To minimize costs which are based on the number of keywords used to conduct 
the search has different implications than minimizing costs based on the amount 
of time the user is actually on line and the number of items retrieved. 

Flat Rates ^ ~ 

This can be set up as a monthly minimum fee to be paid, regardless of whether 
searches are actually performed. 


175 


Annual “Password” Fees 

"Password" fees are designed to cover the cost of maintaining the account and 
costs involved in the billing process. Fees are usually between $25.00 and $100.00 
per year. 

Deposit Account Charges 

A deposit account (or pre-paid account) often offers discounts, usually "stepped” 
according to the amount of the deposit. Sometimes fees, other than connect time 
charges, are deducted from the deposit account. 

Credits 

Some systems issue credits for certain transactions on the system. An example is 
OCLC, an interlibrary loan system. A fee is incurred for use of a record. A credit 
equal to the fee incurred for such a use is given for input of a catalog record not 
already in the system or for lending an item. 

5.6.2 Alternate Distribution Media 
CD-ROM Products 

Products associated with on-line search services are usually licensed on an annual 
basis with updates on a quarterly basis. Annual subscription fees cover updates 
to the search software necessary to access the information on the CD. Discs with 
older information on them are sometimes made available for purchase. Prices 
vary widely in products marketed to the general public or to libraries. These 
prices range from $300.00 for an outright purchase to $18,000.00 for a yearly 
licensing fee. 

Floppy Disk Products 

Floppy disks are produced on a one time basis and are not normally updated. 
The distribution is usually an ASCII file to be used with a word processor and 
generally sells for less than $100.00. 


176 



Magnetic Tape 

As with floppy disk products, magnetic tape products are usually produced on 
a one time basis and are not normally updated. Formats available generally in- 
clude Unix TAE and ANSI labeled, in densities ranging from 800 bpi to 6250 bpi. 
Comparable services include: ASR (Ada Software Repository) ANSI labeled du- 
plications for $200 (user supplied tapes); COSMIC software duplications, where 
prices range from $50 to $10,000 per individual software system (tapes and doc- 
umentation supplied). 


Printed Media 

Printed media include directories of available software and services, news and 
information newsletters and full text information^ COSMIC’s charges for its 
software directory runs from $25.00 for printed media to $50.00 for magnetic 
tape version of that directory. 

5.0.3 Workshops, Seminars and Consultants 

Costs for technical workshops and seminars can range from free to $4,000 per day 
plus cost of course materials and travel expenses for the instructor. Technical 
workshops are usually limited in size (15 to 20) people. Business oriented courses 
are normally unlimited in size and can cost $4,000 depending on the nature of 
the lecture. Seminars open to the public are generally on a per person cost scale 
and range from $1,200 to $1,500. Consultant fees can be as much as $500.00 per 
hour for highly technical information. 


177 



Chapter 6 

Organizational Documents 


178 


Summary 


This document contains draft copies of the organizational documents that are 

either currently in use by RdountainNet to support development of AdaNET, or 

that will become necessary in the near future as the AdaNET facility makes its 

initial services offerings available commercially. Documents in this draft include: 

Disclosure Agreement (long form) Draft agreement defining terms of non- 
disclosure of proprietary materials, or knowledge obtained through employ- 
ment at MountainNet. Recommended for use with programmers and similar 
employees. 

Full-Time Employment Agreement Draft of general form employment con- 
tract. 

MountainNet Software License Draft software license for MountainNet soft- 
ware to be distributed to others. 

Database Agreement Draft agreement for subscription access to on-line “data- 
base” materials. 

Subcontract between MountainNet and Second Party General form of sub- 
contract for work pursuant to MountainNet /NASA/University of Houston- 
Clear Lake project. 

Teaming Agreement General form of agreement in principle to work with a 
second party on various specified projects, tasks or other activities. 

AdaNET Electronic Mail Service Registration General form used for reg- 
istration to on-line electronic mail and document transfer services. 

Miscellaneous Documents General draft documents used internally for pur* 
chase and travel requests, to be included as put of the AdaNET operational 
policies and guidelines. 


179 



NONDISCLOSURE AGREEMENT 


THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into this day of 

19 , by and between MountainNet, Inc., (hereinafter 

“Company”), a corporation duly organized and existing under the laws of the 
State of West Virginia, and (hereinafter “Recipi- 

ent”), a corporation duly organized and existing under the laws of the State of 


In consideration of $ 10.00, receipt of which is acknowledged by Recipient, and 
other good and adequate consideration, including the undertaking by the parties 
of the obligations herein, the parties hereto, intending to be legally bound, do 
hereby covenant and agree as follows: 

Section 1 

PURPOSE OF AGREEMENT 

1.1 This Agreement is entered into for the sole purpose of authorizing Recip- 

ient to receive from Company certain proprietary computer software and 
related end-user documentation (if any) (collectively referred to as the Pro- 
gram) which is more specifically described as Exhibit A hereto, which is 
incorporated herein by this reference. 

Section 2 

GRANT OF LIMITED LICENSE 

2.1 Recipient is granted a personal, non-exclusive license to install the Program 

on its [designate computer by make, model, and serial number] (the “Des- 
ignated Computer” ) and to use the Program during the term of this Agree- 
ment only for the purpose of evaluating the performance of the Program 
in order to determine whether Recipient wishes to enter into the Company 
Program End- User License Agreement, a copy of which is included as Ex- 
hibit B hereto, which is incorporated herein by this reference. 


180 



Section 3 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF TITLE 


3.1 Recipient acknowledges that all right, title, and interest in and to the Pro- 

gram shall remain with Company. Nothing herein shall be deemed to con- 
vey or transfer any such right, title, and interest to Recipient. Recipient 
acknowledges that this Agreement shall convey to Recipient only a limited 
license as set forth in Section 2.1 hereof, not coupled with an interest, and 
revocable in accordance with the terms of this Agreement. 

Section 4 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF PROPRIETARY INFORMATION; 
LIMITATION ON USE THEREOF 

4.1 Recipient acknowledges that the Program embodies valuable confidential and 

secret information (collectively referred to as Proprietary Information) of 
Company, which is entrusted to Recipient only for the purposes expressly 
set forth herein. Except as expressly authorized herein, Recipient shall not 
use or store the Program; download the Program in a retrieval system or 
computer of any kind; or copy, transfer, disclose, or permit access to the 
Program or any portion thereof to any other person. In no event shall Re- 
cipient attempt to decompile or reverse engineer the object code portion of 
Program into source code (human-readable) form. The provisions of this 
Section 4.1 shall survive termination of this Agreement and shall continue 
for so long as Recipient continues to possess or have access to the Propri- 
etary Information. The confidentiality obligations set forth herein shall not 
apply to such of the Proprietary Information as may become part of the 
public domain. 

Section 5 

RIGHTS TO INJUNCTIVE RELIEF .j 

5.1 Recognizing and acknowledging that any use or disclosure of its Proprietary 

Information by Recipient or any employee or agent of Recipient in a man- 
ner inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement may cause Company 


181 


irreparable damage for which other remedies may be inadequate. Recip- 
ient agrees that Company shall have the right to petition for injunctive 
or other equitable relief from a court of competent jurisdiction as may be 
necessary and appropriate to prevent any unauthorized use or disclosure of 
any such information by Recipient, its employees, or its agents, and that, 
in co nn ection therewith, Recipient shall not oppose such injunction on the 
grounds that an adequate remedy is available at law. Such remedy shall be 
in addition to other remedies available to Company. 


Section 6 

TERM OF AGREEMENT; 
TERMINATION 


6.1 This Agreement shall continue from the date set forth above until the earlier 

of (1) execution by Recipient and Company of the Program End-User Li- 
cense Agreement designated as Exhibit B, (2) 30 days from the date hereof, 
or (3) two days’ written notice of termination by Company for any reason. 
Upon termination of this Agreement pursuant to (2) or (3) above, Recipi- 
ent shall immediately return to Company the Program and all Proprietary 
Inf ormation of Company, however embodied. Recipient shall thereupon 
certify to Company that it has not retained any copies or portion of the 
Program or any Proprietary Information of Company. 

Section 7 

DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY; 

LIMITATION ON LIABILITY 

7.1 COMPANY DISCLAIMS ANY AND ALL WARRANTIES RESPECTING 

THE PROGRAM AND USE THEREOF, INCLUDING ANY IMPLIED 
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PAR- 
TICULAR PURPOSE. In no event shall Company be liable for any indirect, 
exemplary, incidental, or consequential damage arising out of or otherwise 
relating to the use or performance of the Program, however caused, even if 
Company has been advised of the possibility or likelihood of such damages. 


182 


Section 8 


MISCELLANEOUS 

8.1 INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS. The parties hereto are independent 

contractors, and nothing herein shall be construed as creating any agency, 
joint venture, partnership, or other form of business association between 
the parties. 

8.2 GOVERNING LAW. This Agreement shall be construed and governed in all 

respects in accordance with the laws of the State of West Virginia. 

8.3 NOTICES. Any co mmuni cation, transmittals, correspondence, or notice shall 

be in writing, postage prepaid, to the authorized representative of each 
party at the address set forth below. 

8.4 SEVERABILITY. In the event that one or more terms of this Agreement are 

determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be void or unenforceable, 
such determination shall not affect the remaining terms her eof. 

8.5 BINDING NATURE OF AGREEMENT; NO ASSIGNMENT. This Agree- 

ment shall be binding upon and inure to the b enefit of the parties hereto and 
their respective successors. No assignment of this Agreement or the rights 
and obligations herein undertaken shall be made by eitherO party without 
the prior 'written consent of the other. No amendment to this Agreement 
shall be binding upon the parties unless it is in writing and is executed by 
each of the parties hereto. 

8.6 ENTIRE AGREEMENT. This Agreement constitutes the entire scope of 

agreement between the parties respecting the subject matter hereof and 
supersedes all prior correspondence, propossds, understandings, representa- 
tions, and communications . 


183 



WHEREBY, the parties have caused this Agreement to be executed by their 
duly authorized representatives as set forth below. 


COMPANY RECIPIENT 

BY: BY: 


Name 


Title 


Address 


Address 


Name 


Title 


Address 


Address 


184 


FULL TIME EMPLOYMENT 
AGREEMENT 


This agreement, entered into this day of — — , 19—, 

between MountainNet Corporation and i* f° r suc ^ 

services as shall be requested by MountainNet Corporation on a full time basis. 

In consideration of mutual exchange of promises contained herein, the Em- 
ployee agrees to provide services to MountainNet Corporation and MountainNet 
Corporation agrees to accept such services and pay employee as follows: 

Monthly rate is $ Hourly rate is (what- 

ever applies). 

This contract will commence on the date of signature and shall remain in full 
force for one year. 

Employee agrees to keep company materials confidential and to return all 
such materials to MountainNet Corporation when Employee’s need therefore has 
ended, or Employee’s employment has terminated, whichever first occurs. If 
unable to return such material, employee must destroy any such material in his 
possession so as not to disclose any information or portion thereof to anyone 
not a party to this agreement. Employee agrees to keep ALL company business 
confidential. Failure to keep company information confidential may result in 
immediate termination of employment. 

Unless otherwise agreed in writing, Employee releases, assigns, conveys, trans- 
fers and gives up in favor of MountainNet any right to materials developed for 
MountainNet Corporation or its clients, or developed with materials or infor- 
mation which was or reasonably could have been obtained through employment 
hereunder. 

Employee agrees to disclose immediately and in writing to the president of 
MountainNet any inventions conceived or first actually reduced to practice in 
the performance of work under this agreement. The disclosure intended under 
this provision shall be made in sufficient time to permit the filing of patent 
applications prior to U.S. or foreign statutory bars. 

Upon completion of 90 days of satisfactory employment, Employee will be 
permitted to participate in such health and/or life insurance benefits as may 
from time-to— time be offered by the company. 

185 

03 


Employee understands that he will be periodically evaluated as to the quality 
and quantity of his work, with a major review after not more than 90 days of 
employment. If work is available and performance is satisfactory, employee will 
continue with Mount ainNet Corporation under this agreement. If performance as 
determined in MountainNet’s sole and exclusive determination is unsatisfactory, 
employment may be terminated immediately. In the event that contracts with 
clients being served by employee expire or are otherwise terminated, Mountain- 
Net Corporation has the right to terminate or reduce Employee’s employment 
and agrees to provide notice of such anticipated termination or reduction to the 
Employee as far in advance thereof as is reasonably possible under the circum- 
stances. 

In the event that any term or condition of this agreement is for any reason 
determined to be void or enforce, for any reason, the void or unenforceable term 
shall be stricken and the remainder sh all remain in full force and effect. 

Failure by either party to enforce any term of this agreement shall not be 
considered to be a continuing waiver of such term, and the same may be enforced 
or applied at any time thereafter. 

This document constitutes the full and complete agreement between the par- 
ties. 

I acknowledge that I have read this agreement, have had and taken advantage 
of an opportunity to ask questions concerning it, understand it and agree with 
the terms and conditions contained within the document. 


MountainNet Corporation: 


Employee: 


President 


186 



MOUNTAINNET SOFTWARE LICENSE 
TERMS AND CONDITIONS 


This license agreement made on the date indicated below is by and between 
Mount ainNet, Inc. (“MountainNet”), a corporation, doing business at Dellslow, 
West Virginia, U.S.A., and (Licensee). 

MountainNet agrees to grant, and the Licensee agrees to accept, a non- 
exclusive License to use the “Software” attached as Exhibit A, including any 
subsequent updates according to the following terms and conditions: 


OWNERSHIP OF SOFTWARE 

The Software is licensed for use on a single non-clustered VAX computer 
system located at the address indicated in this agreement. Licensee acknowledges 
that by virtue of this agreement, Licensee acquires only the right to use the 
Software while this agreement is in effect and does not acquire any title to, 
or ownership of, the Software listed in Exhibit A. Ownership of all Exhibit A 
Software remains with MountainNet. 

TRANSFER 

In the event of a transfer of the MountainNet license and Software to an 
alternate Central Processing Unit (“CPU”), notification must be given in writing 
to MOUNTAINNET within 30 days and must be accompanied by the Transfer of 
MOUNTAINNET Software License agreement. Transfer of the license terminates 
the right to use the Software on the original CPU. Additional costs may be 
incurred depending on the new CPU model. 

MULTIPLE LICENSE AGREEMENT 

After purchasing one Software license, Licensee can purchase each additional 
Software License for the then prevailing price. 


187 



NON-DISCLOSUEE BY LICENSEE 


Software licensed under this agreement is the proprietary property of Moun- 
tainNet. This Software is distributed for use on a single computer system, and 
may not be copied except for use on the designated system and must always 
include the Copyright notice of MountainNet and all features which disclose the 
Software name and licensed site. MountainNet Software and/or documentation 
cannot be copied except for the internal use by the licensed MountainNet instal- 
lation. MountainNet Software and/or documentation cannot be shared, sold, or 
otherwise dispersed without the written permission of MountainNet. 

Licensee agrees to take appropriate action by instruction, agreement, or no- 
tice to its employees, agents or other persons permitted access to MountainNet 
Software in order to satisfy Licensee’s obligations under this agreement with re- 
spect to use, copying, and maintaining the proprietary nature of MountainNet 

Software. 

Licensee agrees not to provide or otherwise make available any program in 
any form or media, to any individual or corporation or entity without express per- 
mission in writing from MountainNet. This written authorization must be signed 
by one of MountainNet ’s corporate officers. Licensee nor his representatives will 
divulge any information with respect to the technology embodied within Moun- 
tainNet Software. Licensee is further required to obtain a signed non- disclosure 
agreement from any outside agency before allowing that agency to view or in 
any manner access MountainNet programs, documentation, or source code. One 
signed copy of the non-disclosure agreement must be provided to MountainNet 
If Licensee or any of its employees, agents or representatives shall attempt to use 
or dispose of the Software or any of its aspects or components or any duplication 
thereof in a manner contrary to the terms of this agreement, MountainNet shall 
have the right, in addition to such other remedies which may be available to 
MountainNet by law, to injunctive relief against such acts or attempts. 

Only licensed MountainNet sites are authorized to possess or use any Moun- 
tainNet Software, including any Software or applications based upon Mountain- 
Net code or b uildin g blocks. Licensee can share Software applications with other 
licensed MountainNet sites through the MountainNet users Group, provided the 
applications do not compete with applications which are being developed or sold 
by MountainNet. 


PAYMENT TERMS 


188 


Payment for the Software shall be due according to the terms specified in Exhibit 
A. If payment is not received within the stated period at MountainNet’s place 
of business, MountainNet shall have the right to terminate Licensee’s usage of 
Software and Licensee hereby waives any rights to continued usage of Software if 
these pay ment term s are not met. MountainNet shall be held harmless for any 
claim whatsoever arising out of the termination of usage of Software by Licensee 
due to nonpayment. 

All applicable taxes shall be p aid b y Licensee. The unpaid balance of each 
module of Software is to be paid for upon installation at Licensee’s site. 

Listed prices refer to single standard MountainNet modules., If two or more 
versions of an y application must be developed by Mountai nNet the Licensee will 
be charged for each. The Licensee can contract with MountainNet for additional 
programming or systems assistance, if desired. Charg es for modification or assis- 
tant will be at the standard prevailing rate. MountainNet will be held harmless 
if modifications requested by Licensee result in the elimination of any features or 
safeguards normally provided by the Software. 

INSTALLATION AND SCHEDULING 

Software installation cm normally begin within 30 days after the computer 
is installed. Within practical limits, the priority o f modules contracted for and 
the order of installation can be determined by the Licensee. MountainNet will 
attempt to com plete installation of each mpdule wfthma time frame to accom- 
modate the Licensee’s needs; however, completion according to specific deadlines 
cannot be guaranteed. Some of the standard Software modules include a specific 
number of user defined parameters. Before work can begin, M ountainN et must 
have a clear understanding of the Licensee’s requirements and of all factors which 
affect the implementation of the module. Completed parameter packages and 
other requested information must be given full consideration, but no obligation 
is assumed by MountainNet to fulfill all requests. MountainNet will determine 
whether Licensee requests can be implemented, and if said implementation would 
result in additional costs. MountainNet will proceed with additional chargeable 
services only if authorized by Licensee. After providing MountainNet with the 
requested information, no changes should be made in these items without imme- 
diately contacting MountainNet Changes in the original requirements, data files, 
or any other changes causing extra effort by MountainNet may delay installation 
and result in additional charges L 

If the Fiscal Reporting module is ordered, the Licensee staff member most 
knowledgeable in financial reporting requirements and the person who will be 


189 


responsible for data processing should plan a trip to the MountainNet offices to 
assist in defining the details of the Fiscal Reporting System. Licensee is respon- 
sible for travel and per diem expenses. There is, however, no additional charge 
by MountainNet for this service. 

MountainNet shall be held harmless from any claim whatsoever caused by the 
act, omissions, conduct, or negligence of the Licensee, its agents, representatives, 
or employees. Licensee will be responsible for additional expenses incurred by 
MountainNet if MountainNet is prevented from fulfilling commitments because 
of any act, conduct, omission, or negligence of the Licensee, its agents, repre- 
sentatives, or employees. Such negligence includes, but is not limited to, the 
failure to advise MountainNet in advance of any known problems which might 
interfere with performance of duties, the absence of staff members necessary for 
consultation and decision making, and the lack of necessary facilities and prop- 
erly functioning equipment. Maintenance and repairs must not be scheduled 
for the time that MountainNet staff members are on-site. Licensee negligence 
also includes diversion of MountainNet personnel from scheduled tasks to non- 
scheduled projects or anything contrary to the declared purpose of the on-site 
visit. Additional expenses for which Licensee can be charged include, but are not 
limited to, any extra travel, per diem, and labor costs incurred in the fulfillment 
of implementation. 


DELAY 

Postponement or delay of installation which is not caused by MountainNet 
may, at MountainNet ’s option, result in price increases. Prices are based on 
costs and conditions existing on date of quotation and are subject to change if 
implementation cannot be performed within a reasonable time. 

CONVERSION 

Some utility programs for data conversion are provided with the understand- 
ing that MountainNet assumes no responsibility for their support. During DMS 
initial installation, MountainNet personnel will provide Licensee’s staff members 
with a m aximu m of four hours assistance in the use of the utilities. Additional 
hours of assistance will be chargeable at the then prevailing rate. MountainNet 
will not be responsible for conversion unless explicitly agreed to in writing. 

INTERFACING 


190 


MountainNet will not be responsible for interfacing MountainNet system to 
other systems, unless explicitly agreed to in writing. 


TRAINING 

On-site training is provided during installation for each module based on the 
terms specified in Exhibit A. It is important that those who will be directly 
involved in the use of the Software attend these classes. This training is included 
in the price of the Software. Licensee’s staff who will be involved in the use of the 
Software must become knowledgeable in the use of the Data Management System 
and the application areas for which they will become responsible in order to 
perform the process necessary for file maintenance and reporting. It is imperative 
that key people be available during installation and training. 

DOCUMENTATION 

MountainNet will provide one printed copy of documentation with each soft- 
ware module purchased. The Licensee has the option to purchase additional 
copies from MountainNet or licensee may reproduce the documentation for in- 
ternal use only. Orders to MountainNet for documentation for obsolete software 
versions may not be available. 

Documentation for most special application systems must, by the nature of 
the Software, be generated on the Licensee’s site as the systems are implemented. 

AVAILABILITY OF SOURCE CODE 

Licensee may acquire the right-to-use source code based on the then prevailing 
pricing. Once the right-to-use source code has been acquired, Licensee is prohib- 
ited from allowing source code to be used on any CPU which is not covered by 
this License. 

SOFTWARE WARRANTY AND LIMITATION OF LIABILITIES 

MountainNet warrants to the Licen see that the S oft ware will confo rm tq the 
Software product descriptions provided to Licensee. MountainNet ’s obligation 
under this agreement, however, is limited to providing corrected Software which 
conforms to the Software product descriptions. No representation or other affir- 
mation or warranty is made concerning the capacity, suitability, or performance of 
the computer Software. MountainNet further makes no representations as to the 


191 


compatibility of MountainNet Software with the equipment, operating systems, 
or Software currently in use or contemplated by Licensee unless stated herein. 

Except as specifically provided in this Agreement, there are no other war- 
ranties, express or implied, including but not limited to any implied warranties 
of merchantability or fitness of Software. MountainNet shall in no event be liable 
for damages, including but not limited to loss of profits or other economic loss, 
direct, indirect, special, consequential, or other damages, including but not lim- 
ited to those arising out of any breach of this agreement or obligations hereunder. 
There are no warranties which extend beyond the description on the face of this 
agreement. 

This warranty does not apply and will be considered null and void if the 
Software is used or operated in a manner or in an environment not consistent with 
its intended purpose or is modified or repaired in any manner which adversely 
affects its operation or reliability. Software designed for different computers and 
operating systems is not identical. MountainNet shall assume no liability or offer 
any warranty regarding Software operated on equipment or operating system 
other than that for which it was designed. 

Each module of MountainNet Software is warranted in accordance with the 
terms of this agreement for a period of ninety days following installation. Quali- 
fied professional help is readily available by telephone. The Licensee’s system may 
be dialed up from the MountainNet offices providing that dial-up facilities exist 
at Licensee’s site. MountainNet reserves the right to make the decision on the 
best means of Software correction, and assumes no responsibility for maintenance 
of programs which have been modified by other than MountainNet personnel. 

Successful implementation depends upon mutual effort and involvement, and 
requires a positive attitude toward the MountainNet user-oriented philosophy. If 
Licensee’s staff is not receptive toward the utilization of the user-oriented Soft- 
ware or any vendor- supplied Software, the chance for success is greatly dimin- 
ished. Thorough testing of each module is the responsibility of the Licensee, and 
should begin immediately upon installation. Licensee must maintain an adequate 
and properly trained staff of resource people to assist other users. These resource 
people should serve as the focal point with MountainNet in order to eliminate 
unnecessary or repetitious phone calls. 

Upon request, MountainNet may, at its discretion, choose to provide assis- 
tance beyond the obligations of this agreement, with the understanding that 
MountainNet may in no way be held responsible for any problems which might 
result, and such action does not imply any obligation to continue such assistance. 
If MountainNet deems Licensee’s questions or requests to be unreasonable or too 


192 


time consuming, MountainNet can upon notification charge Licensee for future 
assistance. 


SUBSCRIPTION SERVICE 


After the ninety day warranty, telepho ne support and enhancements for the Soft- 
ware will be provided for an annual subscription fee. Subscription service is 
integral to the grant of this license, and payment of the annual subscription ser- 
vice fee entitles Licensee to conti nued use of the So ft ware. Lic ensee will be billed 
for Subscription Service based on a percentage of the then current list price of 
the Software for the period from each J uly 1 to June 30 of the following^ year . 
To keep billing on a regular cycle, Licensee will be billed for the months between 
expiration of the ninety day warranty and the following June 30 on a pro- rated 
basil. ~ r r': 77 r. - • 


Subscription Service updates will be made available periodically. Mountain- 
Net will deter min e the enhancements to be added to the Software, based upon the 


requests and suggestions of subscribers. Patches and new releases of Software are 
provided on magnetic tape or on hard copy, depending upon volume. Licensee is 
responsible for implementing patches. All mandatory patches must be installed 
to insure proper program performance and continued support. Failure may result 
in time and materials billing at current applicable rate. MountainNet makes no 


representation that future Software updates will be usable on Licensee’s system, 


an d assumes no responsibility for problems c aus ed by replacing existing Software 
with updates. Licensee assumes full responsibility for any problems which may 
result from the installation of updates, and should exercise extreme caution in 
replacing Software which has been modified or tailored to suit specific needs. 


The MountainNet Product Center reserves the right not to release enhance- 
ments to DMS and application software during the term of the annual renewal 
of subscription service. Failure to release enhancements to DMS and application 
software during the term of the renewal does not constitute default on the part 
of the MountainNet Produc t Center bec ause of the continuation of telephone 
support and other support-related services. 

If MountainNet determines that a Subscription Service update requires addi- 
tional or revised documentation, one copy of such do cum entation will be provided 
to the Licensee. At the option of MountainNet this documentation may take the 
form of new manuals, change pages to existing manuals, manual addendums, 
machine read able text, or any combination of these methods. 

Maintenance of the Licensee’s hardware, operating system, and environment 
is the responsibility of the Licensee, and not of MountainNet. 


193 


Licensee is responsible for maintaining adequate back-up procedures for safe- 
guarding all data files, programs, and applications on Licensee’s premises. Moun- 
tainNet assumes no responsibility for providing replacement Software if any is lost 
or destroyed. 


TITLES 

The titles of the articles and sections of this agreement are for convenience 
only and are not a part of this agreement and do not in any way limit or amplify 
the terms and provisions of this agreement. 

ASSIGNMENTS 

The parties hereto agree that no sublicensing, nor assignments of rights or 
interest, nor delegation of duties under this agreement shall be made or become 
effective without the prior written consent of both MountainNet and Licensee. 
This prohibition of sublicensing, assignment and delegation extends to all sub- 
licensing, assignments and delegations that may be lawfully prohibited by this 
agreement. Any attempted sublicensing, assignment or delegation without prior 
written consent shall be wholly void and ineffective for all purposes. 

CHOICE OF LAW 

The parties hereto agree that the laws of the State of West Virginia shall 
govern this agreement and any question arising hereunder shall be constructed 
according to such laws. No action arising out of any claim, breach of this agree- 
ment, or obligations under this agreement may be brought by Licensee more than 
one year after the cause of action has occurred. All such actions may only be 
brought in the State of West Virginia. 

LIMITATION OF CLAIMS 

Should MountainNet 1 s responsibilities under this agreement be breached or 
should MountainNet in some manner be negligent, regardless of the form or 
theory of any legal or equitable action brought against MountainNet by Licensee, 
Licensee’s sole remedy and recovery shall be limited to the price of the allegedly 
defective or inadequate program involved, and that Licensee’s sole and exclusive 
remedy against MountainNet shall be for MountainNet to repair or replace said 
defective or inadequate program. 


194 


SAVING CLAUSE 


All quotations and agreements are contingent upon accidents, fires, availabil- 
ity of materials and all other causes beyond the control of either party. Typo- 
graphical and stenographic errors are subject to correction. Terms inconsistent 
with those stated herein, which might appear on the Licensee’s formal order or 
Request for Proposal, will not be binding on MountainNet. 

INTEGRATION 

This agreement contains the full agreement of the parties hereto. No commit- 
ment beyond those explicitly stated js implied or intended. No prior agreement 
or underst anding pertaining to any matters discussed herein shall be effective. 
This agreement may not be changed orally, but only by an agreement in writing 
signed by a corporate officer of MountainNet and an authorized representative 
of Licensee. MountainNet may not be held responsible for any claim of verbal 
instructions or agreements. 


INVALIDITY 

If any of the provisions of this agreement shall be construed to be invalid 
under the laws of the State of New Mexico, such conditions shall not invalidate 
any other provisions of this agreement. The remaining valid provisions of this 
agreement shall continue in full effect and shall be binding on the parties hereto. 


IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this agreement 
on the date written below. 

Agreed to this day of , 19 


For Mount ainNet: 


For Licensee: 


DATABASE 

AGREEMENT 


THIS AGREEMENT is made and entered into this day of 

19 f by and between MountainNet, Inc., (hereinafter 

“Provider”), a corporation with an address for purposes of this Agreement at 

p.O. Box 370, Dellslow, West Virginia 26531-0370, and , 

(hereinafter "Subscriber”) a — with an address for purposes 

of this Agreement at 


WITNESSETH: 

WHEREAS, Provider maintains, sponsors and makes available compilations 
of programs, subroutines, information and materials through Provider s AdaNET 
computer- assisted information-retrieval services (the Service ) for access and use 
by customers of Provider, such as Subscriber; and 

WHEREAS, Subscriber desires to obtain access to the Service and use it for 
its internal business purposes; 

NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS AGREED: 

Section 1 

THE SERVICE; CHARGES 

1.1 During the term of this Agreement, Provider shall provide Subscriber the 

Service, including the libraries set forth in Exhibit A, as supplemental 
and updated from time to time, in accordance with Provider’s agreements 
with the organizations sponsoring the Service, and Subscriber will pay the 
charges calculated in accordance with Provider’s standard rate schedule, 
the current version of which is set forth in Exhibit B hereto. Provider may 
change its standard rate schedule at any time, provided that Subscriber 
is given thirty (30) days’ advance notice of such change before it becomes 
effective. 

1.2 The charges set forth in this Agreement are exclusive of any state or local 

sales or use taxes, or taxes of a similar nature, which Subscriber shall pay 
either directly to the taxing authority or as reimbursement to Provider. 



197 


1.4 During the term of this Agreement, Provider will make the Service available 
to Subscriber during the days and hours specified in Exhibit which days 
and hours are subject to modification from time to time. Further, the 
Subscriber agrees and recognizes that interruptions to service may occur 
as a result of system maintenance and upgrading. The Provider agrees 
that routine maintenance and upgrading will when possible be scheduled 
to avoid business day service outages. 

Section 2 

BILLING AND PAYMENT PROCEDURES 

2.1 Subscriber will authorize one or more individuals in its offices to use the 

Service and Provider will assign a personal billing number to each individual 
authorized by Subscriber to use the Service. Provider reserves the right to 
change any hi llin g numbers from tune to tune. Each individual authorized 
by Subscriber to use the Service will specify his billing number each time 
the Service is used. Subject to Section 2.2 hereof, Subscriber will pay for 
all use of the Service ordered through the billing number assigned to an 
authorized individual in Subscriber’s offices. 

2.2 If Subscriber learns at any time that the billing number assigned to an in- 

dividual in its offices pursuant to Section 2.1 hereof has been obtained by 
a person not authorized to use the Service on behalf of Subscriber or for 
its account, or if Subscriber otherwise suspects that any unauthorized use 
is being made of a billing number assigned to an individual in its offices, 
Subscriber will notify Provider immediately by telephone and confirm such 
notification in writing. Provider will then cancel such billing number and 
will assign a new billing number to the appropriate individual. 

2.3 Each month, Provider will send to Subscriber an invoice for all charges in- 

curred by Subscriber during the preceding month. Within — days af- 
ter receiving each invoice, Subscriber will pay to Provider the full amount 
payable thereunder. If Subscriber does not make timely payment, Provider 
may terminate this Agreement, may cease to provide the Service to Sub- 
scriber until such time as Subscriber pays the full amount due to Provider, 
or may exercise any other remedies provided by law. In addition, Provider 
may charge Subscriber the lesser of — percent or the maximum legal in- 
terest on its unpaid balance. 


198 


Section 3 

PROHIBITION ON THIRD-PARTY CHARGES 

3.1 Except as a part of charges made for services rendered in the course of 

Subscriber’s normal professional activities, Subscriber will not charge or 
receive compensation for use of the Service, for conducting research for 
others with the aid of the Service, or for instructing or assisting others in 
the use of the Service. 

Section 4 

4.1 Provider will make an appropriate adjustment to any amount paid or payable 

by Subscriber for any use of the Service involving faulty retrieval, failure 
of retrieval, or loss of research, except to the extent caused by improper 
use of the Service by Subscriber, but only if Subscriber promptly reports 
to Provider such faulty retrieval, failure of retrieval, or loss of research. 

4.2 If in any given month the Service is unavailable to Subscriber for any reason 

within the control of Provider, for four or more consecutive hours during 
which the Service is scheduled to be available to Subscriber, then Sub- 
scriber’s minim um monthly commitment in use charges in such month will 
be reduced by an amount computed by multiplying Subscriber’s minimum 
monthly commitment in use charges for such month by a fraction, the nu- 
merator of which is determined by first computing the total number of 
hours that the Service is not available to Subscriber in all such periods of 
four or more consecutive hours during such month for each access terminal 
and then adding all such totals together, and the denominator of which 
is the total n umb er of hours that the Service is scheduled to be available 
during such month multiplied by the number of access terminals installed 
in Subscriber’s offices. 

4.3 Subject to Section 4.6 hereof, Subscriber assumes sole responsibility for all 

use of the Service and hereby indemnifies and holds harm less Provider 
ag ains t any liability or claim of any person arising from such use, except 
when such liability or claim is the result of faulty retrieval, failure of re- 
trieval, or loss of research not attributable to improper use of the Service 
by Subscriber. 

4.4 No Provider personnel are authorized to assist Subscriber in framing a re- 

search request. If, notwithstanding this, Subscriber requests and receives 


199 


assistance from Provider personnel in framing a search request, such as- 
sistance will be at Subscriber’s risk and Provider will not have any re- 
sponsibility or liability arising therefrom. For purposes of this Agreement , 
“framing a search request” shall mean the process by which a user identifies 
the research problem; selects the words, phrases, or numbers to be used in 
the search; and determines the relationship to each other of such words, 
phrases, and numbers and the order in which they are to be submitted. 

4.5 The obligations set forth in Sections 4.1 and 4.2 hereof are the full extent 
of the responsibility of Provider to Subscriber for faulty retrieval, failure 
of retrieval, or loss of research, and in no event will Provider be liable to 
Subscriber for consequential, exemplary, or special damages resulting in 
whole or in part from Subscriber’s use of the Service. 

4.0 Provider hereby indemnifies and holds harmless Subscriber from and against 

any and all claims of copyright or patent infringement arising out of Sub- 
scriber’s use of the Service. Provider will have the right to assume the 
defense of any such claims, irrespective of the validity or merits of such 
claims, and Subscriber will assist Provider, as may reasonably be required, 
in such defense. 

4,7 Provider warrants that, without the express consent of Subscriber, no Provider 
employee or agent will disclose to any third party any information regarding 
research performed through the use of the Service by any of Subscriber’s 
authorized users. 

Section 5 
TERM 

5.1 The term of this Agreement shall commence on the date of execution of this 

agreement and will continue in force until terminated by either party upon 

months’ written notice to the other party, provided, however, that it 

may not be terminated prior to — year(s) after the date on which the term 
first commenced. 

Section 6 

ASSIGNABILITY 

6.1 This Agreement may not be assigned, in whole or in part, by Subscriber with- 

out the prior written approval of Provider, except that it may be assigned 
without such approval to any successor in interest of Subscriber. 


200 


Section 7 

SOLE AGREEMENT 

7.1 This Agreement contains the entire agreement of the parties and cannot be 

changed or modified except by a written instrument executed by a duly 
authorized representative of the party against whom enforcement of such 
charge of modification is sought. 

Section 8 

ENFORCEABILITY 

8.1 If any part of this Agreement is held unenforceable, the rest of the Agreement 

will nevertheless remain in full force and effect. 

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have set their hands and seals 
the date and year first hereinabove written. 


MountainNet, Inc. 

By: R. Michael Digman, 
President 


[Subscriber] 



SUBCONTRACT 

Between 

MOUNTAINNET, INC. 
and 


THIS SUBCONTRACT is entered into by and between MountainNet, Inc. 

located in Dellslow, West Virginia, and — located in 

, , (hereinafter referred to as “Subcontractor”). 

WITNESSETH: 

WHEREAS, The University of Houston, Clear Lake, and the National Aeronau- 
tics and Space Administration (NASA) (hereinafter referred to as Government ) 
have entered in Cooperative Agreement No. NCC9-16, which involves the project 
entitled Research Institute for Computing and Information Systems (RICIS); and; 

WHEREAS, MountainNet, Inc. and the University of Houston, Clear Lake, 
(hereinafter referred to as “Houston”) have entered in an agreement or sub- 
contract which involves the project entitled Research Institute for Computing 
and Information Systems (RICIS); and 

WHEREAS, Subcontractor has proposed to cooperate and assist Mountain- 
Net, Inc. in establishing the feasibility of expanding commercial utilization of 
Government Ada (R) Technology; 

NOW, THEREFORE, the parties hereto do covenant and agree as follows: 

ARTICLE I: 

SCOPE OF WORK 

Subcontractor agrees to perform the work set forth in the Scope of Work ap- 
pended hereto and incorporated as Appendix A. The Scope of Work shall not be 
changed except by duly executed amendment to this Subcontract. 


202 



ARTICLE II: 

PERIOD OF PERFORMANCE 

The initial period of performance for this Subcontract shall commence on 

and shall ter min ate on unless extended by mutual agreement 

in writing between the parties or unless terminated by MountainNet, Inc. as 
provided in Article XIV. It is understood that the parties intend to extend per- 
formance subject to further funding availability. 

ARTICLE HI: 

PROJECT DIRECTION 

(a) Subcontractor’s performance of the work shall be under the technical direc- 

tion of James Rautner who is hereby named MountainNet, Inc.’s Technical 
Representative in the monitoring of this project. This Technical Represen- 
tative is authorized to exercise the technical direction of this project only 
within the general scope of work. 

(b) All matters affecting the terms of this subco ntra ct or the administration 

thereof shall be referred to Michael Digman, who is hereby named Contract 
Administrator. Prior written approval from Contract Administrator shall 
be required for any changes or amendments to this subcontract, including 
but not limited to, changes in the scope of work, period of performance, 
cost, and report requirements. 

ARTICLE IV: 

CONSIDERATION AND PAYMENT 

(a) As consideration and compensation for the work cited in Appendix A, Moun- 

tainNet, Inc. agrees to pay Subcontractor its costs in the amount not to 

exceed $ All costs shall be in accordance with the cost 

principles set forth in the Federal Acquisition Regulation Part 31 and the 
NASA FAR Supplement Part 18-31 which are hereby incorporated by ref- 
crcncc and are made a part of this subcontract with the saine force and 
effect as if set forth in full text. 

(b) Invoices for expenses incurred shall be submitted in triplicate, monthly, to 

the following address: 


203 


Mount ainNet, Inc. 
Attention: Michael Digman 
PO Box 370 
Dellslow, WV 26531 


(c) Payment of said invoices shall be contingent upon approval by MountainNet, 

Inc.’s Technical Representative. Said invoices shall be in accordance with 
the billing format appended hereto and incorporated as Appendix B. 

(d) A maximum of ten percent (10%) of the costs billed by the Subcontractor 

to this subcontract shall be withheld and retained until the final require- 
ments have been completed by Subcontractor and approved by Mountain- 
Net, Inc.’s Technical Representative. 

ARTICLE V: 

KEY PERSONNEL 

The individuals set forth in Appendix C are considered essential to the work 
being performed under this agreement; substitutions for any such individuals or 
substantial reductions in any of the efforts require MountainNet, Inc. approval. A 
change in key personnel by the Subcontractor without the approval of Mountain- 
Net, Inc. shall be justification for termination of this subcontract in accordance 
with Article XTV, Termination. 


ARTICLE VI: 

TRAVEL 

(a) Prior authorization for travel must be obtained from MountainNet, Inc. s 

Te chni cal Representative. All travel reimbursable hereunder shall be via 
economy class rates when available. If not available, reimbursement vouch- 
ers will be annotated that economy class accommodations were not avail- 
able. 

(b) All foreign travel must be clearly essential to the research effort and must, 

to be charged to this subcontract, have the prior approval of MountainNet, 
Inc. for each specific trip regardless of its inclusion in a proposal budget. 
Approvals will be made in accordance with the policies and procedures set 
forth in paragraph 516 of the NASA Grant and Cooperative Agreement 
Handbook. 


204 


(c) All other travel costs shall be reimbursable in accordance with the Federal 
Travel Regulation which is incorporated by reference and is made part of 
this subcontract with the same force and effect as if set forth in full text. 

ARTICLE VH: 

DELIVERABLES 

Subcontractor shall submit the reports/deliverables described in Appendix 
A and in accordance with the time frames specified in Appendix A. It is under- 
stood that the schedule of deliveries provides for maximum times and that earlier 
delivery is encouraged. 


ARTICLE Vm: 

INSPECTION AND ACCEPTANCE 

Inspection and acceptance of the required deliverables referenced in Article 
VII under this subcontract will be accomplished by Mount ainNet, Inc.’s Technical 
Representative. Shipment of all deliverables shall be made to: 

MountainNet, Inc. 

Attention: Michael Digman 
PO Box 370 
DeUslow, WV 26531 

ARTICLE IX: 

PUBLICATIONS 

(a) All measurement values employed in technical reports prepared under this 

cooperative agreement shall be expressed in the International. System of 
Units (SI). Expression in both SI units and customary units is acceptable 
where the use of SI units alone would obviously impair conimtmications or 
reduce the usefulness of the report to the primary recipients. When both 
systems of units are used, SI units are to be stated first and customary 
units afterwards in parentheses. In each case, the report shall state which 
system of units was used for the principal measurements and calculations. 

(b) Draft and final technical reports shall have a title page that displays the 

title of the cooperative agreement and this subcontract, the type of report, 


205 


the name of the Principal Investigator, the period covered by the report, 
the name and address of the Subcontractor, and the cooperative agreement 
and subcontract number. 

(c) Twelve (12) copies of all draft reports and final reports shall be submitted 

to MountainNet, Inc. 

(d) In the event any draft, interim, or final technical report submitted to Moun- 

tainNet, Inc. contains information describing a “Subject Invention for 
which the Subcontractor has elected or may elect title, MountainNet, Inc. 
will use reasonable efforts to delay public release or publication until six 
months from the date of receipt in order for a patent application to be filed 
provided the Subcontractor identifies the information and the “Subject In- 
vention” to which it relates at the time of submittal. 

ARTICLE X: 

CONFIDENTIALITY 


(a) Each party shall use its best efforts to maintain in strict confidence and 

shall not disclose or permit others to disclose the content of any and all 
confidential materials of any kind or nature which are provided by the 
other party and are marked as such. 

(b) Except with regard to participation in this subcontract, neither party shall 

use or permit others to use the name of the other party, or any part or 
branch thereof in any manner whatsoever without obtaining the express 
prior written consent of such other party. 


\ 


206 


ARTICLE XI: ' 

NOTICES 

AH notices or communications to either party by the other shall be delivered 
personally or sent by U.S. mail, postage prepaid, addressed to such party at the 
following respective addresses for each and shall be deemed given on the date so 
delivered or so deposited in the mail unless otherwise provided herein. 

MountainNet, Inc, 

Attention: Michael Digman 
PO Box 370 
Dellslow, WV 26531 


ARTICLE XII: 

INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR 

Subcontractor herein is an independent contractor, not a partner or joint 
venturer, and shall not act as an agent for MountainNet, Inc. Nor shall Sub- 
contractor be deemed to be an employee of MountainNet, Inc. for any purposes 
whatsoever. Subcontractor shall not have any authority, either express or implied, 
to enter any agreement, incur any obligations on MountainNet, Inc.’s behalf, of 
commit MountainNet, Inc. in any manner whatsoever without MountainNet, 
Inc.’s express prior written consent. 

ARTICLE Xm: 

LIABILITY 


207 


Subcontractor agrees to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless MountainNet, 
Inc. from any and all claims, injuries, damages or other liability arising in tort 
or breach of contract and resulting directly or indirectly from any intentional or 
negligent (including grossly negligent) acts or failure to act by Subcontractor’s 
principals, officers, agents, or employees arising in favor of any person or entity. 

ARTICLE XIV: 

TERMINATION 

In the event of default by Subcontractor of the obligations under this sub- 
contract or in the event that Houston terminates work by MountainNet, Inc. on 
this subject matter, then performance by Subcontractor maybe terminated by 
MountainNet, Inc. at any time by giving written notice. Such notice shall be 
effective upon the receipt of written notice by Subcontractor. 

ARTICLE XV: 

CIVIL RIGHTS 

This subcontract is subject to the provisions of Title VI of the Civil Right 
Act of 1964 (Public Law 83-352; 42 U.S.C. 200d- 1), Title IX of the Education 
Amendments of 1972 (20 U.S.C. 1680 et seq.), Section 504 of the Rehabilitation 
Act of 1973, as amended (29 U.S.C. 794), the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 
U.S.C. 6101, et seq.), and the NASA implementing regulations (14 CFR 1250). 

ARTICLE XVI: 

SAFETY 

(a) The Subcontractor shall act responsibly in matters of safety and shall take 

all reasonable safety measures in performing under this subcontract. The 
Subcontractor shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws 
relating to safety. The Subcontractor shall maintain a record of and will 
notify MountainNet, Inc. of any hazards that come to its attention as a 
result of the work under the subcontract through routine reports furnished 
in compliance with this subcontract. 

(b) Where the work under this subcontract involves flight hardware, the haz- 

ardous aspects, if any, of such hardware will be identified, in writing, by 
the Subcontractor. Compliance with the provisions of this clause by lower 
tier subcontractors will be the responsibility of Subcontractor. 


208 


ARTICLE XVII: 


SUBCONTRACTS 

(a) Approval of subcontracts for the purchase of property or equipment under 

this subcontract shall be obtained in accordance with the provisions herein 
entitled “Equipment and Other Property.” All other subcontracts not pro- 
vided for in Appendix D (if any) require the prior consent of MountainNet, 
Inc. 

(b) In accordance with the Small Business Act Amendments, Public Law 95- 

507, small and disadvantaged firms shall be utilized as subcontractors to 
Subcontractor to the maximum extent. 

ARTICLE XVm: 

EQUIPMENT AND OTHER PROPERTY 

(a) Acquisition of property costing in excess of $1,000, the cost of which will 

be charged to this subcontract, except as identified in Appendix A hereto, 
requires the prior approval of MountainNet, Inc. 

(b) MountainNet, Inc. funds shall not be used to purchase items such as furni- 

ture, furnishings, office equipment or other items of a nontechnical nature 
without the prior written permission of MountainNet, Inc. Under no cir- 
cumstances shall MountainNet, Inc. funds be used to acquire land or any 
interest therein, to acquire or construct facilities or to procure passenger 
carrying vehicles. - ~ 

(c) Title to equipment purchased with MountainNet, Inc. funds vest in Moun- 

tainNet, Inc. unless otherwise provided. MountainNet, Inc., reserves the 
right to require transfer to the United States Government of title to items 
purchased at a cost of $1,000 or more. Such reservation is subject to the 
conditions of Paragraph 505 of the NASA Grant and Cooperative Agree- 
ment Handbook. Wr.\i 

(d) Title to Government property (including equipment, title to which has been 

transferred to the Government pursuant to subparagraph (c) prior to com- 
pletion of the work) will remain with the Government. 

(e) Title to expendable property shall vest in the recipient upon acquisition. 


209 


(f) The Subcontractor shall maintain property records and otherwise manage 
nonexpendable personal property utilized in the performance of this sub- 
contract in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 509 of the NASA 
Grant and Cooperative Agreement Handbook. The Subcontractor will sub- 
mit annually an inventory listing of Government owned property held in 
contemplation of use under this agreement and in its custody to Mountain- 
Net, Inc. Such listings will be as of June 30, will be submitted by July 15, 
and will reflect the record elements required in paragraph 509(b)(1) and 
beginning and ending dollar value totals for the period. Upon completion 
of the subcontract or when the property is no longer needed, the recipi- 
ent shall notify MountainNet, Inc. who will obtain disposition instructions 
from the NASA Grants Officer, through UHCL. 

ARTICLE XIX: 

COMMUNICATIONS 

The Research Coordinator may expect to be contacted by NASA and Univer- 
sity of Houston, Clear Lake, personnel and MountainNet, Inc.’s Technical Repre- 
sentative named herein in connection with the technical aspects of the work under 
the subcontract. However, written or oral communications of an administrative 
nature, such as approval of foreign travel, property matters, patent matters, ex- 
tension of the terms of the subcontract, etc., shall be channeled through the 
Subcontractor’s business office to the Contract Administrator unless otherwise 
specified by the Contract Administrator. 

ARTICLE XXI: 

CLEAN AIR-WATER POLLUTION 

If this subcontract is in excess of $100,000, the Subcontractor agrees to notify 
the Contract Administrator promptly of the receipt, whether prior or subsequent 
to the Subcontractor’s acceptance of this subcontract, of any communication 
from the Director, Office of Federal Activities, Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA), indicating that a facility to be utilized under or in performance of this 
subcontract or any lower tier subcontract hereunder is under consideration to be 
listed on the EPA “List of Violating Facilities” published pursuant to 40 CFR 
15.20. By acceptance of a subcontract in excess of $100,000, the Subcontractor (i) 
stipulates that any facility to be utilized thereunder is not listed on the EPA “List 
of Violating Facilities" as of the date of acceptance; (ii) agrees to comply with all 


210 



requirements of Section 114 of the Clean Air Act as amended (42 U.S.C. 1857, 
et seq., as amended by Public Law 91-604) and Section 308 of the Federal Water 
Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq., as amended by Public 
Law 92-500) relating to inspection, monitoring, entry, report and information, 
and all other requirements specified in the aforementioned sections, as well as all 
regulations and guidelines issued thereunder after award of and applicable to this 
subcontract; and (iii) agrees to include the criteria and requirements of this clause 
in every subcontract hereunder in excess of $100,000, and to take such action as 
the Contract Administrator may direct to enforce such criteria and requirements. 

ARTICLE XXII: 

PROCUREMENT STANDARDS 

The Subcontractor’s procurement practices shall meet the standards set forth 
in paragraph 512 of the NASA Grant and Cooperative Agreement Handbook. 

ARTICLE XXID: 

RIGHTS IN DATA 

(A) Definitions 

"Data”, as used in this clause, means recorded information, regardless of form or 
the media on which it may be recorded. The term includes technical data 
and computer software. The term does not include information inciden- 
tal to contract administration, such as contract cost analyses or financial, 
business, and management information required for contract administration 
purposes. 

“Technical data”, as used in this clause, means that data (other than computer 
software) which is of a scientific or technical nature. 

“Computer software”, as used in this clause, means computer programs, com- 
puter data bases, and documentation thereof. 

“Form, fit, and func tion data”, as used in this clause^ means data relating to 
items, components, or processes that are sufficient to enable physical and 
functional interchangeability, as well as data identifying source, size, config- 
uration, mating and attachment characteristics, functional characteristics, 


211 



and performance requirements; except that for computer software it specif- 
ically excludes the algorithm, process, formulas, and flow charts of the 
software. 

“ Government purpose rights’’, as used in this clause, means rights to use, du- 
plicate, or disclose technical data or computer software, in whole or in part 
and in any manner, for Government purposes only, and to have or per- 
mit others to do so for Government purposes only. Government purpose 
rights include purposes of competitive procurement but do not grant to the 
Government the right to have or permit others to use technical data or 
computer software for commercial purposes. 

“ Limited-rights data”, as used in this clause, means data produced at private 
expense that embodies trade secrets or is commercial or financial and con- 
fidential or privileged. 

“ Limited rights”, as used in this clause, means the rights of the Government in 
limited-rights data as set forth in the Limited Rights Notice of subparagraph 

(g)(1)- 

"Restricted computer software”, as used in this clause, means computer software 
developed at private expense and that is a trade secret, is commercial or fi- 
nancial and confidential or privileged, or is published copyrighted computer 
software, including minor modifications of such computer software. 

"Restricted rights”, as used in this clause, means the rights of the Government 
in restricted computer software, as set forth in the Restricted Rights Notice 
of subparagraph (g)(2). 

"Unlimited rights”, as used in this clause, means the right to use, disclose, 
reproduce, prepare derivative works, distribute copies to the public, and 
perform publicly and display publicly, in any manner and for any purpose 
whatsoever, and to have or permit others to do so. 

(B) Allocation of Rights 

1. Except as provided in paragraph (C) below regarding copyright, the Govern- 
ment shall have Government purpose rights in: 

• i. Data first produced in the performance of this subcontract; 

• ii. Form fit and function data delivered under this subcontract; 


212 



• iii. Data delivered under this subcontract (except for restricted com- 
puter software) that constitutes manuals or instructional and training 
material for installation, operation, or routine maintenance and repair; 
and 

• iv. All other data delivered under this subcontract unless provided 
otherwise for limited-rights data or restricted computer software in 
accordance with paragraph (g) below. 

2. The Subcontractor shall have the right, solely for performance under this 
subcontract, to: 

• i. Use, release to others, reproduce, distribute, or publish any data first 
produced or specifically used by the Subcontractor in the performance 
of this subcontract unless provided otherwise in paragraph (d) below; 

• ii. Protect from unauthorized disclosure and use that data which is 
limited-rights data or restricted computer software to the extent pro- 
vided in paragraph (g) below; 

• iii. Substantiate use of, add, or correct limited- rights or restricted 
rights notices and to take other appropriate action, in accordance with 
paragraphs (e) and (f) below; 

• iv. Establish claim to copyright subsisting in data first produced in 
the performance of this subcontract to the extent provided in subpara- 
graph (c)(1) below. 


(C) Copyright 

1. Data first produced in the performance of this subcontract. Unless provided 
otherwise in subparagraph (d) below, the Subco ntracto r shall establish 
claim to copyright data first produced in the performance of this subcon- 
tract. If claim to copyright is made, the Subcontractor shall affix the ap- 
plicable copyright notice o f 1 7 U.S.C. 401 or 402 to the data when such 
data is delivered to MountainNet, Inc., and include that notice as well as 
acknowledgment of Government sponsorship on the data when deposited 
in the U.S. Copyright O ffice or published. The Subcontractor shall grant 
to RJCIS by assignment sole rights to reproduce, prepare derivative works, 
distribute copies to the public, and perform publicly and display publicly, 
by or on behalf of the Government, for all such data. 


213 


2. Data not first produced in the performance of this subcontract. The Subcon- 

tractor shall not, without prior written permission of MountainNet, Inc., 
incorporate in data delivered under this subcontract any data that is not 
first produced in the performance of this subcontract and that contains the 
copyright notice of 17 U.S.C. 401 or 402, unless the Subcontractor identifies 
such data and grants to the Government, or acquires on its behalf, a license 
of the same scope as set forth in subparagraph (1) above, provided, how- 
ever, that if such data is computer software the Government shall acquire 
a copyright license as set forth in subparagraph (g)(2) below. 

3. Removal of notices. MountainNet, Inc. agrees not to remove any copyright 

notices placed on data pursuant to this paragraph (c), and to include such 
notices on all reproductions of the data. 

(D) Release, publication and use of datai 

1. Except in performance of this contract, the Subcontractor shall have no right 

to use, release to others, reproduce, distribute, or publish any data first 
produced or specifically used by the Subcontractor in the performance of 
this subcontract unless either provided otherwise below in this paragraph 
or expressly set forth in this subcontract. 

2. The Subcontractor agrees that to the extent it receives or is given access to 

data that is necessary for the performance of this subcontract and that 
contains restrictive markings, the Subcontractor shall treat the data in 
accordance with such markings unless otherwise specifically authorized in 
writing by MountainNet, Inc. or NASA Grant Officer. 

(E) Unauthorized marking of data: 

1. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subcontract concerning inspec- 
tion or acceptance, if any data delivered under this subcontract is marked 
with the notices specified in subparagraphs (g)(1) or (g)(2) below and use 
of such is not authorized by this clause, or if such data bears any other re- 
strictive or limi ting markings not authorized by this subcontract, the NASA 
Grant Officer may at any time either return the data to MountainNet, Inc. 
for return to the Subcontractor, or cancel or ignore the markings. How- 
ever, it is understood that the NASA Grant Officer will not cancel or ignore 
markings unless: 


214 


• i. UHCL or the NASA Grant Officer makes written inquiry to Moun- 
tainNet, Inc. or Subcontractor concerning the propriety of the mark- 
ings, providing 30 days (or a shorter period of not less than 5 days from 
the date of receipt of such inquiry if UIICL or the NASA Grant Of- 
ficer determines, in accordance with 1827.473-2(g) of the NASA-FAR 
Supplement, that there are exigencies justifying such shorter period) 
to respond; and 

• ii. There is no response within the set period (or a longer time ap- 
proved by UHCL or the NASA Grant Officer for good cause shown) 
or the response fails to substantiate the propriety of the markings. 

2. UHCL or the NASA Grant Officer shall consider the response if, and determine 

whether the markings shall be canceled or ignored. UHCL or the NASA 
Grant Officer shall furnish written notice to MountainNet, Inc. of the 
determination. MountainNet, Inc. shall immediately provide UHCL or the 
NASA Grant Officer’s written notice to the Subcontractor. 

3. MountainNet, Inc. shall immediately notify the Subcontractor of any inquiry 

it receives from UHCL or the NASA Grant Officer concerning the propriety 
of a Subcontractor marking. MountainNet, Inc. shall exert its best efforts 
to assist the Subcontractor to make a timely response to the inquiry. How- 
ever, the Subcontractor bears the burden of justifying the propriety of the 
questioned marking to the satisfaction of the Government. 

4. The above procedures may be modified in accordance with Government reg- 

ulations implementing the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552), if 
necessary to respond to a request for data thereunder. 

(F) Omitted or incorrect markings: 

1. Data delivered to the Prime Contractor , to UHCL or the Government without 
any notice authorised by paragraph (g) below, and without a copyright 
notice, shall be deemed to have been furnished with unlimited rights, and 
MountainNet, Inc., UHCL and the Gove rnment assume no liability for the 
disclosure, use, or reproduction of such data. However, to the extent the 
data has not been disclosed without restriction outside the Government, 
the Subcontractor may request, within 6 months (or a longer tim e approved 
by MountainNet, Inc., UHCL or the NASA Grant Officer for good cause 
shown) after delivery of such data, permission to have notices placed on 
qualifying data at the Subcontractor’s expense, and MountainNet, Inc. or 
the NASA Grant Officer may agree to do so if the Subcontract: 


215 


• i. Identifies the data to which the omitted notice is to be applied; 

• ii. Demonstrates that the omission of the notice was inadvertent; 

• iii. Establishes that the use of the proposed notice is authorized; 

• iv. Acknowledge that MountainNet, Inc., UHCL and the Government 
have no liability with respect to the disclosure or use of any such data 
made prior to the addition of the notice or resulting from the omission 
of the notice. 

2. MountainNet, Inc., UHCL or NASA Grant Officer may also: 

• i. Permit correction, at the Subcontractor’s expense, of incorrect no- 
tices if the Subcontractor identifies the data on which correction of 
the notice is to be made and demonstrates that the correct notice is 
authorized; or 

• ii. Correct any incorrect notices. 

(G) Protection of limited-rights data 
and restricted computer software: 

1. MountainNet, Inc. may require the delivery of limited-rights data under this 
subcontract. Limited- rights data formatted as a computer data base is to 
be treated as limited- rights data under this subparagraph. If delivery of 
such data is required, the Subcontractor may affix the following “Limited 
Rights Notice” to the data and MountainNet, Inc. will thereafter treat 
the data, subject of the provisions of paragraphs (E) and (F) above, in 
accordance with such notice: 

Limited Rights Notice 

a. This data is submitted with limi ted rights under Government Cooperative 
Agreement No NCC9-16 between the National Aeronautics and Space Ad- 
ministration and the University of Houston, Clear Lake, and a subcontract 
thereunder between the University of Houston, Clear Lake, and Mountain- 
Net, Inc. It may be reproduced and used by MountainNet, Inc., the Univer- 
sity of Houston, Clear Lake, and the Government with express limitation 
(hat it will not, without permission of the Subcontractor, be disclosed out- 
side the Government; except that the Government may disclose this data 


216 


outside the Government for the following purposes, if any, provided that 
the Government makes such disclosure subject to prohibition against fur- 
ther use and disclosure; 


[Insert permissible purposes for disclosure.] 


b. This notice shall be marked on any reproduction of this data, in whole or in 
part. 

[End of notice] 


2.i. MountainNet, Inc. may require by written request the delivery of restricted 
computer software. If delivery of such computer software is so required, 
the Subcontractor may affix the following “Restricted Rights Notice” to 
the computer software and MountainNet, Inc., the University of Houston, 
Clear Lake, and the Government will thereafter treat the computer soft- 
ware, subject to paragraphs (E) and (F) above, in accordance with the 
Notice. 

Restricted Rights Notice 

(a) This computer software is submitted with restricted rights under Govern- 

ment Cooperative Agreement No NCC9-16 between the National Aero- 
nautics and Space Administration and the University of Houston, Clear 
Lake, and a subcontract thereunder between the University of Houston and 
MountainNet, Inc. It may not be used, reproduced, or disclosed by the 
Government, the University of Houston or MountainNet, Inc., except as 
provided below or as otherwise expressly stated in the subcontract. 

(b) This computer software may be: 


• (1) Used or copied for use in or with the computer for which it was 
acquired, including use at any installation to which such computer 
may be transferred; 


217 


• (2) Used with a backup computer if the computer for which it was 
acquired is inoperative; 

• (3) Reproduced for safekeeping (archives) or backup purposes; 

• (4) Modified, adapted, or combined with other computer software, 
provided that the modified, adapted, or combined portions of the 
derivative software incorporating restricted computer software shall 
be subject to the same restricted rights; and 

• (5) Disclosed and reproduced for use by support subcontractors or 
their subcontractors in accordance with subparagraphs (1) through 
(4) above, provided the disclosure is made subject to these restricted 

rights. 

(c) Notwithstanding the foregoing, if this computer software is published copy- 

righted computer software, it is licensed to MountainNet, Inc., the Uni- 
versity of Houston, Clear Lake, and the Government, without disclosure 
prohibitions, with the minimum rights set forth in paragraph (b) above. 

(d) Any other rights shall be marked on any reproduction of this computer 

software, in whole or in part. 

[End of notice] 


ii. Where it is impractical to include the above Notice on restricted computer 
software, the following short-form Notice may be used in lieu thereof: 

Restricted Rights Notice (Short Form) 

Use, reproduction, or disclosure is subject to restrictions set forth in Govern- 
ment Cooperative Agreement Number NCC9-16, Project No. RJCIS No. SE. 18, 
between the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the University 
of Houston, Clear Lake, and a subcontract thereunder between the University of 
Houston, Clear Lake, and MountainNet, Inc. 


[End of Notice] 


(H) Subcontracting. 


218 



The Subcontractor has the responsibility to obtain from its lower tier sub- 
contractors all data and rights therein necessary to fulfill the Subcontractor’s 
obligations under this subcontract. If a lower tier subcontractor refuses to accept 
terms affording MountainNet, Inc., the University of Houston, Clear Lake, and 
the Government such rights, the Subcontractor shall promptly bring such refusal 
to the attention of MountainNet, Inc. and not proceed with subcontract award 
without further authorization. 

(I) Relationship to patents. 

Nothing contained in this clause shall imply a license to the Government 
under any patent or be construed as affecting the scope of any license or other 
right otherwise granted to the Government. 

ARTICLE XXIV: 

AUDIT 

(a) The MountainNet, Inc. Contract Administrator, the University of Houston, 

Clear Lake, Contract Administrator, the Administrator of NASA, and the 
Comptroller General of the United States, or any of their authorized repre- 
sentatives, shall have access to any pertinent book, document, papers, and 
records of the Subcontractor and of its subrecipients to make audits, exami- 
nations, excerpts and transcripts. All of the foregoing provisions shall apply 
to any subrecipient performing substantive work under this subcontract. 

(b) The books of account, files and records of the Subcontractor which are ap- 

plicable to this subcontract shall at all reasonable times be available for 
inspection, review and audit by the cognizant federal audit agency to de- 
termine the proper application and use of all funds paid to or for the account 
or benefit of the Subcontractor; in addition, the Subcontractor shall provide 
such special reports as required by MountainNet, Inc. to permit evaluation 
of progress on the project. — — .. . .. ... 

(c) Subcontractor agrees to maintain all financial records pertinent to this agree- 

ment for a period of three years from the later of final payment under any 
phase of this subcontract or submission of the final report. 

(d) Upon request, the Subcontractor must provide MountainNet, Inc. with a 

copy of a third party annual audit report of activities under this subcon- 
tract. If this report is not available, Subcontractor will obtain the services 

219 


of an accounting firm at its expense to audit this subcontract as required 
by the federal Government. 

(e) Subcontractor shall reimburse to MountainNet, Inc. a sum of money equiv- 
alent to the amount of any expenditures disallowed should the funding 
agency or authorized agency rule through audit exception or some other 
appropriate means, that the expenditures from funds allocated to the Sub- 
contractor were not made in compliance with the regulations of the funding 
agency or the provisions of this subcontract. 

ARTICLE XXV: 


(a) Definitions: 


1. “ Invention ” means any invention or discovery which is or may be patentable 

or otherwise protectable under Title 35 of the United States Code. 

2. “Subject Invention ” means any invention of the Subcontractor conceived or 

first actually reduced to practice in the performance of work under this 
subcontract. 

3. “Practical Application ” means to manufacture in the case of a composition or 

product, to practice in the case of a process or method, or to operate in 
the case of a machine or system; and, in each case, under such conditions 
as to establish that the invention is being utilized and that its benefits are, 
to the extent permitted by law or Government regulations, available to the 
public on reasonable terms. 

4. “Made” when used in relation to any invention means the conception of first 

actual reduction to practice of such invention. 

5. “Small Business Firm * means a domestic small business concern as defined 

at Section 2 of Public Law 85-536 (15 U.S.C. 632) and implementing reg- 
ulations of the administration of the Small Business Administration. For 
the purpose of this clause, the size standards for small business concerns in- 
volved in Government procurement and subcontracting at 13 C.F.R. 121.3-8 
and 13 C.F.R. 121.3-12, respectively, will be used. 

6. “Nonprofit Organization ” means a domestic university or other institution 

of higher education or an organization of the type described in Section 


220 



501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 [26 U.S.C. 501(c)] or any 
domestic nonprofit scientific or educational organization qualified under a 
state nonprofit organization statute. 

(b) Allocation of Principal Rights. 


The Subcontractor may retain the entire right, title, and interest throughout 
the world to each Subject Invention subject to the provisions of this clause and 
35 U.S.C. 203. With respect to any Subject Invention in which the Subcontractor 
retains title, the federal Government shall have a non-exclusive, non-transferable, 
irrevocable, paid- up license to practice or have practiced for or on behalf of the 
United States the Subject Invention throughout the world. 

(c) Invention Disclosure, Election of Title and Filing of Patent Ap- 
plications by Subcontractor: 


1. The Subcontractor will disclose each Subject Invention to MountainNet, Inc., 

the University of Houston, Clear Lake, and NASA within two months after 
inventor discloses it in writing to Subcontractor personnel responsible for 
patent matters. The disclosure shall be in the form of a written report 
and shall identify the cooperative agreement and the subcontract under 
which the invention was made and the inventor(s). It shall be sufficiently 
complete in technical detail to convey a clear understanding, to the extent 
known at the time of the disclosure, of the nature, purpose, operation, 
and the physical, chemical, biological or electrical characteristics of the 
invention. The disclosure shall also identify any publication, sale or public 
use of the invention and whether a manuscript describing the invention has 
been submitted for publication and, if so, whether it has been accepted for 
publication at the time of disclosure. In addition, the Subcontractor will 
promptly notify MountainNet, Inc., the University of Houston, Clear Lake, 
and NASA of the acceptance of any manuscript describing the invention 
has been submitted for publication and, if so, whether it has been accepted 
for publication at the time of disclosure. In addition, the Subcontractor will 
promptly notify MountainNet, Inc., the University of Houston, Clear Lake, 
and NASA of the acceptance of any manuscript describing the invention for 
the publication or of any sale or public use planned by the Subcontractor. 

2. The Subcontractor will elect in writing whether or not to retain title to any 

such invention by notifying MountainNet, Inc. within twelve (12) months of 


221 


disclosure to Subcontractor personnel responsible for patent matters; pro- 
vide that in any case where publication, sale or public use has initiated 
the one year statutory period wherein valid patent protection can still be 
obtained in the United States, the period for election of title may be short- 
ened by NASA to a date that is no more than sixty (60) days prior to the 
end of the statutory period. 

3. The Subcontractor will file its initial patent application on an elected inven- 

tion within two (2) years after election or, if earlier, prior to the end of 
any statutory period wherein valid patent protection can be obtained in 
the United States after publication, on sale, or public use. The Subcon- 
tractor will file patent applications in additional countries within either ten 
(10) months of the corresponding initial patent application or six months 
from the date permission is granted by the Commissioner of Patents and 
Trademarks to file foreign patent applications where such filing has been 
prohibited by a Secrecy Order. 

4. Requests for extension of the time for disclosure, election, and filing may, at 

the discretion of NASA, be granted. 

(d) Conditions When the Government May Obtain Title. The Sub- 
contractor will convey to NASA, upon written request, title to any 
Subject Invention: 


1. If the Subcontractor fails to disclose or elect the Subject Invention within the 

times specified in (c) above, or elects not to retain title. NASA may only 
request title within sixty (60) days after learning of the Subcontractor’s 
failure to report or elect within the specified times. 

2. In those countries in which the Subcontractor fails to file patent applications 

within the time specified in (c) above; provided, however, that if the Sub- 
contractor has filed a patent application in a country after the times spec- 
ified in (c) above, but prior to its receipt of the written request of NASA, 
the Subcontractor shall continue to- retain title in that country. 

3. In any country in which the Subcontractor decided not to continue the prose- 

cution of any application for, to pay the maintenance fees on, or defend in 
reexamination or opposition proceeding on, a patent on a Subject Invention. 

(e) Minimum Rights to Subcontractor: 


222 



1. The Subcontractor will retain a none x clu sive, royalty- free License throughout 

the world in each Subject Invention to which NASA obtains title except if 
the Subcontractor fails to disclose the Subject Invention within the times 
specified in (c), above. The Subcontractor’s license extends to its domestic 
subsidiaries and affiliates, if any, within the corporate structure of which 
the Subcontractor is a party and includes the right to grant sublicenses of 
the same scope to the extent the Subcontractor was legally obligated to do 
so at the time the grant was awarded. The license is transferable only with 
the approval of NASA, except when transferred to the successor of that 
party of the Subcontractor’s business to which the invention pertains. 

2. The Subcontractor’s domestic license may be revoked or modified by NASA to 

the extent necessary to achieve expeditious practical application of the Sub- 
ject Invention pursuant to an application for an exclusive license submitted 
in accordance with applicable provisions in NASA’s Patent Licensing Reg- 
ulations, 14 C.F.R. 1245.2. This license will not be revoked in that field of 
use or the geographical areas in which the Grantee has achieved practical 
application and continues to make the benefits of the invention reasonably 
accessible to the public. The license in any foreign country may be revoked 
or modified at the discretion of NASA to the extent the Subcontractor, 
its licensees, or its domestic subsidiaries or affiliates have failed to achieve 
practical application in that foreign country. 

3. Before revocation or modification of the license, NASA will furnish the Sub- 

contractor a written notice of its intention to revoke or modify the license, 
and the Subcontractor will be allowed thirty (30) days (or such time as may 
be authorized by NASA for good cause shown by the Subcontractor) after 
the notice to show cause why the license should not be revoked or modi- 
fied. The Subcontractor has the right to appeal in accordance with NASA 
Patent Licensing Regulation, 14 C.F.R. 1245.2, any decision concerning the 
revocation or modification of its license. " 

(f) Subcontractor Action To Protect the Government’s Interest: 



1. The Subcontractor agrees to execute or have executed and promptly deliver to 
MountainNet, Inc. all instruments necessary to: (i ) estab lish or confirm the 

rights the Government has throughout the world in those Subject Inventions H ! 


223 


to which Subcontractor elects to retain title; and (ii) convey title to NASA 
when required under (d) above, and to enable the Government to obtain 
patent protection throughout the world in that Subject Invention. 

2. The Subcontractor agrees to require, by written agreement, its employees, 

other than clerical and non- technical employees, to disclose promptly in 
writing to personnel identified as responsible for the administration of 
patent matters and in a format suggested by the Subcontractor, each Sub- 
ject Invention made under this subcontract in order that the Subcontractor 
can comply with the disclosure provisions of (c) above, and to execute all 
papers necessary to file patent applications on Subject Inventions and to 
establish the Government’s rights in the Subject Inventions. This disclosure 
format should require, as a minimum, the information required by (c)(1) 
above. The Subcontractor shall instruct such employees through employee 
agreements and suitable educational programs on the importance of report- 
ing inventions in sufficient time to permit the filing of patent applications 
prior to U.S. or foregoing statutory bars. 

3. The Subcontractor will notify MountainNet, Inc. and NASA of any decision 

not to continue the prosecution of a patent application, pay maintenance 
fees, or defend in a reexamination or opposition proceeding on a patent, 
in any country, not less than thirty (30) days before the expiration of the 
response period required by the relevant patent office. 

4. The Subcontractor agrees to include, within the specification of any United 

States patent application and any patent issuing thereon covering a Sub- 
ject Invention, the following statement: “THIS INVENTION WAS MADE 
WITH GOVERNMENT SUPPORT UNDER COOPERATIVE AGREE- 
MENT NO. NCC9-16, UHCL PROJECT NO, RICIS NO. SE. 18, SUB- 
CONTRACT NO. 2, AWARDED BY NASA AND THE UNIVERSITY 
OF HOUSTON, CLEAR LAKE.. THE GOVERNMENT HAS CERTAIN 
RIGHTS IN THIS INVENTION.” 

5. The Subcontractor shall furnish MountainNet, Inc.: (i) interim reports every 

twelve (12) months from the date of this subcontract, listing all Subject 
Inventions required to be disclosed during that period, or stating that there 
were no such Subject Inventions; (ii) a final report prior to close out of the 
Subcontract listing (A) all Subject Inventions or stating that there were 
none and (B) all subcontracts containing a patent rights clause or stating 
that there were none; (iii) notification of all subcontracts for experimental, 


224 


development, research, design or engineering work and identification of the 
patent rights clause (either the “New Technology” clause as required by 
NASA FAR Supplement Subpart 18-27. 373(b) or the “Patent Rights” clause 
as required by this subcontract, and a copy of the subcontract upon request; 
(iv) upon request, the filing date, serial number, and title, a copy of the 
patent application (including an English translation when available), and a 
patent number and issue date for any Subject Invention in any country in 
which the Subcontractor has applied for patents. 

(g) Subcontracts: 


(1) The Subcontractor will include this clause, suitably modified to identify the 

parties, in all lower-tier subcontracts, regardless of tier, for experimental, 
developmental, or research work to be performed by a small business firm 
or nonprofit organization. The lower tier subcontractor will retain all rights 
provided for the Subcontractor in this clause, and the Subcontractor will 
not, as part of the consideration for awarding the lower tier subcontract, 
obtain rights in the lower tier subcontractor’s Subject Inventions. 

(2) The Subcontractor will include in all other lower tier subcontracts, regardless 

of tier, the experimental, developmental, research, design or engineering 
work the patent rights clause as required by NASA FAR Supplement 18- 
27.373(b). 

(h) Reporting on Utilization of Subject Inventions. 


The Subcontractor agrees to submit on request periodic reports no more fre- 
quently than annually on the utilization of a Subject Invention or on efforts at 
obtaining such utilization that are being made by t he Subcontract or or its li- 
censees or assignees. Such reports shall include information regarding the status 
of development, date of first commercial sale or use, gross royalties received by 
the Subcontractor, and such other data and information as NASA may reason- 
ably specify. The Subcontractor also agrees to provide additional reports as may 
be requested by NASA in connection with any march-in proceeding undertaken 
by NASA in accordance with paragraph (j) of this clause. To the extent data or 
information supplied under this section is considered by the Subcontractor, its 
licensee or assignee, to be privileged and confidential and is so marked, Subcon- 
tractor may submit such data or information in a sealed package to MountainNet, 


225 



Inc. and MountainNet, Inc. shall submit said package unopened to NASA under 
the provision in its cooperative agreement under which NASA agrees that, to the 
extent permitted by law, it will not disclose such information to persons outside 
the Government. 

(i) Preference for United States Industry. 

Notwithstanding any other provision of this clause, Subcontractor agrees that 
neither it nor any assignee will grant to any person the exclusive right to use 
or sell any Subject Invention in the United States unless such person agrees 
that any products embodying the Subject Invention or produced through the 
use of the Subject Invention will be manufactured substantially in the United 
States. However, in individual cases, the requirement for such an agreement may 
be waived by NASA upon a showing by the Subcontractor or its assignee that 
reasonable but unsuccessful efforts have been made to grant licenses on similar 
terms to potential licensEes that would be likely to manufacture substantially in 
the United States or that under the circumstances domestic manufacture is not 
commercially feasible. 

(j) March-in Rights. 

The Subcontractor agrees that with respect to any Subject Invention in which 
it has acquired title, NASA has the right in accordance with the procedures es- 
tablished by the NASA Procurement Regulation which are consistent with OMB 
Circular A- 124 to require the Subcontractor, an assignee or exclusive licensee of 
a Subject Invention to grant a non- exclusive, partially exclusive, or exclusive 
license in any field of use to a responsible applicant or applicants, upon terms 
that are reasonable under the circumstances, and if the Subcontractor, assignee, 
or exclusive licensee refuses such a request, NASA has the right to grant such 
a license itself if NASA determines that: (i) such action is necessary because 
the Subcontractor or assignee has not taken or is not expected to take within 
a reasonable time, effective steps to achieve practical application of the Subject 
Invention in such field of use; (ii) such action is necessary to alleviate health or 
safety needs which are not reasonably satisfied by the Subcontractor, assignee, or 
their licensees; (iii) such action is necessary to meet requirements for public use 
specified by federal regulations and such requirements are not reasonably satis- 
fied by the Subcontractor, assignee, or licensees; or (iv) such action is necessary 
because the agreement required by paragraph (i) of this clause has not been ob- 
tained or waived or because a licensee of the exclusive right to use or sell any 
Subject Invention in the United States is in breach of such agreement. 

(k) Special Provisions for Grants with nonprofit Organisations! If 
the Subcontractor is a nonprofit organization, it agrees that! 


226 



1. Rights to a Subject Invention in the United States may not be assigned with- 

out the approval of NASA, except where such assignment is made to an 
organization which has one of its primary functions the management of 
inventions and which is not, itself, engaged in or does not hold a substan- 
tial interest in other organizations engaged in the manufacture or sale of 
products or the use of processes that might utilize the invention or be in 
competition with embodiments of the invention provided that such assignee 
will be subject to the same provisions as the Subcontractor. 

2. The Subcontractor may not grant exclusive licenses under United States patents 

or patent applications in Subject Inventions to persons other than small 
business firms for a period in excess of the earlier of (i) five years from 
first commercial sale or use of the invention; or (ii) eight years from the 
date of the exclusive license excepting that time before regulatory agencies 
necessary to obtain premarket clearance, unless on a case- by- case basis, 
NASA approves a longer exclusive license. If exclusive field of use licenses 
are granted, commercial sale or use in one field of use will not be deemed 
commercial sale or use as to other fields of use, and a first commercial sale 
or use with respect to a product of the invention will not be deemed to 
end the exclusive period to different subsequent products covered by the 
invention. 

3. The Subcontractor will share any royalties collected on a Subject Invention 

with the inventor. 

4. The balance of any royalties or income earned by the Subcontractor with re- 

spect to the Subject Inventions, after payment of expenses (including pay- 
ments to inventors) incidental to the administration of Subject Inventions, 
will be utilized for the support of scientific research or education. 

(1) Communications. 

NASA has designated a New Technology Representative and a Patent Rep- 
resentative to be the central point of contact for administering this clause in ac- 
cordance with the procedures of NASA FAR Supplement Subpart 18-27.373(3), 
which representatives are listed in Appendix A. The Subcontractor shall include 
such designation in all lower-tier subcontracts containing either this clause or 
the clause required by NASA FAR Supplement Subpart 18-27. 373(b). The Sub- 
contractor will forward a copy of all disclosures of Subject Inventions, election 
of rights, interim and final reports, and other reports and information required 


227 


by this clause to the NASA-Houston Installation Patent Counsel in addition to 
furnishing such information to the Contract Administrator. 

ARTICLE XXVI: 

GOVERNING LAW 

The interpretation of this subcontract shall be governed by the laws of the 
State of Texas, United States of America. The only appropriate venue for resolu- 
tion of disputes to this subcontract shall be in the State of Texas, United States 
of America, unless the same is a dispute solely between MountainNet, Inc., and 
Subcontractor (and its subcontractors, if any), in which case this subcontract 
shall be governed by the laws of the State of West Virginia and the only proper 
venue shall be in Monongalia County, State of West Virginia, United States of 
America. 

ARTICLE XXVII. 

MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

(a) This document with attached Appendices constitutes the entire agreement 

between the parties relative to the subject matter, and may be modified or 
amended only by a written agreement signed by both parties. 

(b) If one or more of the provisions of this subcontract shall be held to be 

invalid, illegal or unenforceable in any respect, the validity, legality and 
enforceability of the remaining provisions shall not in any way be affected 
or impaired thereby. 

(c) Failure of either party to insist upon strict performance of any covenant or 

condition of this subcontract in any one or more instances shall not be 
construed as a waiver for the future of any such covenant or condition, but 
the same shall be and remain in full force and effect. 

(d) This subcontract may be executed simultaneously in two or more counter- 

parts, each of which shall be deemed an original, but all of which together 
shall constitute one and the same instrument. 

(e) The captions of this subcontract are for convenience and reference only and 

in no way define, describe, extend, or limit the scope or intent of this 
agreement or the intent of any provision hereof. 


228 


(f ) This subcontract shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the parties 

and their respective successors, personal representatives, and assists. 

(g) All nouns or pronouns and any variation thereof shall be deemed to refer 

to the masculine, feminine, neuter, singular, or plural, as the identify of 
the parties, or their personal representatives, successors and assigns may 
require. 

(h) Notice required to be given to NASA or the Government, the University of 

Houston, or any other entity shall additionally require that a copy of said 
notice be delivered to MountainNet, Inc. 

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this subcontract 
on the day and year last specified below. 


MOUNTAINNET, INC. 


By: 

By: 

Title 

Title 

Date 

Date 


229 


APPENDIX A 

SCHEDULE OF DELIVERABLES 


230 


APPENDIX B 


231 


APPENDIX C 


KEY PERSONNEL 

Key personnel employed during contract performance are as follows: 


232 



APPENDIX D 


SUBCONTRACTORS 


233 


TEAMING AGREEMENT 
BETWEEN 

MOUNTAINNET, INC. 
AND 


This agreement made and entered into this — day o£ , 19—, by and 

between Mount ainNet Inc., a West Virginia Corporation, having its principal of- 
fice at Dellslow, West Virginia (hereinafter referred to as "Mount ainNet”), and 

a , having its principal office at , 

hereinafter referred to as “client”, 

WHEREAS, MountainNet is planning a number of projects to further the 
awareness of the capabilities and use of Ada as a programming language; and 
WHEREAS, MountainNet is a West Virginia small business corporation which 
has extensive experience with private networks and related services. 

WHEREAS, client is a West Virginia small business providing consulting 
services in the use of Ada and Ada related technology to small businesses, large 
defense contractors, government agencies and commercial businesses, 

WHEREAS, MountainNet and client desire to share these various areas of 
expertise in a mutually beneficial relationship; and 

WHEREAS, MountainNet and client desire to establish a mechanism whereby 
projects related to Ada and software engineering can be identified and a mutual 
agreement regarding pursuit of such projects can be formalized. 

NOW THEREFORE, to effectuate the foregoing, MountainNet and client, in 
consideration of the mutual covenants hereinafter contained, agree as follows: 


1. Relationship of the Parties 

Definition of teaming relationships such as Prime Contractor or Subcontractor 
will be dependant upon the specific requirements of each individual project under 
consideration and will be subject to mutual acceptance by each party. This 
mutual acceptance will be recorded in the form of a signed amendment to this 


t 


234 


Agreement (Annexes), in advance to the marketing of such project. A sample 
Annex Format is attached to this Agreement. 


2. Mutual Obligation 

t 

Each party will exert its best efforts to produce a proposal(s) which will cause 
the award of each specific program to the team as constituted herein. 

A. The Prime Contractor will recognize and identify the Subcontractor in its 

proposal and keep the Subcontractor fully advised of any change which 
may affect the Subcontractor’s area of responsibility. 

B. During the effective term of this agreement, for opportunities specifically 

identified herein or by attached Annexes, the parties will team and compete 
together on an exclusive basis. However, except as hereafter provided, 
this Agreement shall not preclude either party from bidding or contracting 
independently from the other on any opportunity which is not identified 
herein or by Annex to this agreement. 

C. In the event the Prime Contractor is awarded the contract for this Program, 

the Prime Contractor and the Subcontractor agree to negotiate in good 
faith and proceed in a timely manner to execute a mutually acceptable 
subcontract for the work to be performed by the Subcontractor, as to be 
described in a Statement of Work or other description of work to be per- 
formed and attached to each Annex associated with the program being 
pursued. 


3. Limitation of Acceptability of the Agreement 


This Agreement shall apply only to the proposals related to the Programs 
identified herein and in each Annex and to no other effort undertaken by the 
Prime Contractor or the Subcontractor jointly or separately. The parties hereto 
shall be deemed to be independent contractors, and the employees of one shall 
not be deemed the employees of the other. Neither party is authorized to make 
commitments or representations on behalf of the other, without prior written 
mutual agreement, which shall be satisfied by the execution of an Annex hereto. 


235 


4. Subcontractor’s Responsibility to Provide 
Information and Support 

The Subcontractor will provide all proposal material and technical support per- 
tinent to the work assigned in the attached Statement of Work of each Annex. 
The Subcontractor shall provide the Prime Contractor, as part of its cost pro- 
posal, supporting schedules in sufficient detail to permit the Prune Contractor s 
evaluation. However, the Subcontractor will not be required to disclose indirect 
rates to the Prime Contractor. Cost format and Work Breakdown Structure shall 
be specified by the Prime Contractor. If requested by the Prime Contractor, the 
Subcontractor will assure the availability of management and technical person- 
nel to assist the Prime Contractor in any discussions and negotiations with the 
client. In this regard, during the negotiations the Subcontractor will be fully 
advised of all issues effecting or having the potential to effect the Subcontractor s 
price and/or proposed work, and will be given every opportunity prior to com- 
pletion of negotiations to provide additional data as necessary in support of the 
proposed price and/or Statement of Work. 

5. Anticipated Subcontract Content 

Without restricting the terms and conditions of the subcontract, the contem- 
plated subcontract will contain provisions passing down those terms and condi- 
tions of the prime contract which must be passed on to the Subcontractor in order 
to comply with such prime contract. The subcontract will be negotiated at a fair 
and reasonable price(s) established after cost or price analysis. Further, price 
consideration for the work to be performed will be based on the Subcontractor s 
proposal and negotiations with the client. It is understood between the Prime 
Contractor and the Subcontractor that any such subcontractor may be subject 
to the approval of the client, regardless of the provisions hereof. 

6. Limitation of Right to Reimbursement, 

Payment or Compensation 

Each party to this Agreement will bear the respective costs, risks, and liabilities 
incurred by it as a result of its obligations and efforts under this Agreement. 
Therefore, neither the Prime Contractor or the Subcontractor shall have any right 
to any reimbursement, payment, or compensation of any kind from each other 
during the period prior to the award and execution of any resulting subcontract 
between the Prime Contractor and the Subcontractor for the Program and work 
described in this Agreement. 


236 


7. Recruitment 


It is expressly agreed Mid understood that neither party will solicit personnel 
of the other party who are engaged in the pursuit of this Program for the purpose 
of inducing them to join their employ during the course of this Agreement and any 
resultant subcontract hereunder and for a period of one (1) year after termination 
thereof. 


8. Limitations of Use of Data and Information 

A. The parties anticipate that under this Agreement it may be necessary for 

either party to transfer to the other information of a proprietary nature. 
Proprietary information shall be clearly identified in writing by the disclos- 
ing party at the time of disclosure. Oral disclosure, when necessary, shall 
be clearly identified as proprietary at the time of the disclosure and shall 
be reduced to writing within 30 days. 

B. Each of the parties agrees that it will use the same reasonable efforts to protect 

such information as are used to protect its own proprietary information. 
Disclosures of such information shall be restricted to those individuals who 
are directly participating in the proposal and subcontract efforts identified 
herein. 

C. Neither party shall make any reproduction, disclosure, or use of such propri- 

etary information except as follows: 

1. Such data furnished by the Subcontractor may be used by the Prime 
Contractor in performing its obligations under this Agreement. 

2. Such data furnished by the Prime Contractor may be used by the 
Subcontractor in performing its obligations under this Agreement. 

3. Such data may be used in accordance with any written authorization 
received from the disclosing party. 

D. The limitations on reproduction, disclosure, or use of proprietary informa- 

tion shall not apply to, and neither party shall be liable for reproduction, 
disclosure, or use of proprietary information with respect to which any of 
the following conditions exist: 

1. If the information has been developed independently by the party re- 
ceiving it, or has been lawfully received from other sources, provided 


237 


such other source did not receive it due to a breach of this Agreement 
or any other agreement. 

2. If the information is published by the party furnishing it or is disclosed 
by the party furnishing it to others, without restriction, or it has been 
lawfully obtained by the party receiving it from other sources, or if such 
information otherwise comes within the public knowledge or becomes 
generally known to the public by lawful means, not in breach of any 
agreement. 

3. If any part of the proprietary information has been or hereafter shall 
be disclosed in a United States patent or copyright issued to the party 
furnishing the proprietary information hereunder, after the issuance 
of said patent. The limitations on such proprietary information as is 
disclosed in the patent shall be only that afforded by the United States 
Patent or Copyright Laws. 

E. Neither the execution and delivery of this Agreement, nor the furnishing of 

any proprietary information by either party shall be construed as granting 
to the other party, either expressly, by implication, estopel, or otherwise, 
any license under any invention or patent, hereafter owned or controlled by 
the party furnishing same. 

F. Notwithstanding the expiration of the other portions of this Agreement, the 

obligations and provisions of this paragraph 8 shall continue for a period 
of twenty-four (24) months from the date on which such information is 
transferred, without regard to the then effective status of this Agreement 
otherwise. 

G. Each party will designate one or more individuals within its organization 

as the only point(s) for receiving proprietary or confidential information 
exchanged between the parties pursuant to this Agreement. 

H. Unless otherwise specifically agreed, proprietary information shall be re- 

turned to the furnishing party at the expiration of the project for which it 
was provided, or at the termination of the need therefore, whichever shall 
first occur. 


9. Rights in Inventions 

Inventions shall remain the property of the originating party. In the event of 
joint inventions, the parties shall establish their respective rights by negotiations 


238 


between them. In this regard, it is recognized and agreed that the parties may 
be required to and shall grant licenses or other rights to the Client to inventions, 
data, and information under such standard provisions which may be contained 
in the prime contract contemplated by this Agreement, provided, however, such 
license or other rights shall not exceed those required by said contract. 

10. Public Release of Information 

Neither party shall issue a news release, public announcement, advertisement, 
or any other form of publicity concerning his efforts in connection with this Agree- 
ment without obtaining prior written approval of such release, announcement, 
etc., from the other party. In the event such approval is granted, any resulting 
form of publicity shall give full consideration to the role and contributions of 
both parties, and shall accurately reflect the Prime Contractor/Subcontractor 
identifies and relationship of and between the parties. 

11. Designation of Responsible Individuals 

All co mmuni cations relating to this Agreement shall be directed to the spe- 
cific person designated to represent the Prime Contractor and the Subcontractor 
on this Program. Each of the parties to this Agreement shall appoint one tech- 
nical and one contractual representative (which may be the same person). These 
appointments shall be kept current during the period of this Agreement. Commu- 
nications which are not properly directed to the persons designated to represent 
the Prime Contractor and the Subcontractor shall not be binding upon the Prime 
Contractor or the Subcontractor. Provided, however that material mailed to the 
address of such represent ative(s) shall be considered binding ten (10) days after 
the mailin g thereof, or upon receipt, whichever shall first occur. 

The technical and contractual representatives appointed for this Agreement 
are as follows: 

A. FOR MOUNTAINNET INC.: 

Technical 

James W. Rautner 
Vice President 
MountainNet, Inc. 

P.O. Box 370 
Dellslow, WV 26531-0370 
(304) 296-1458 


Contractual 

R. Michael Digman 
President 
Mounta inNet, Inc. 

P.O. Box 370 
Dellslow, WV 26531-0370 
(304) 296-1458 


239 


B. FOR client: 


Technical 


Contractual 


12. Expiration of Agreement 

This Agreement, which is effective upon the date of its execution, shall auto- 
matically expire and be deemed terminated effective upon the date of the hap- 
pening or occurrence of any one of the following events or conditions, whichever 
shall first occur; except for the conditions expressed in Paragraphs 7 and 8 hereof: 

A. Mutual agreement between the parties. 

B. Notification in writing, by either party, to the other not less 
than thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of the desired termi- 
nation. 

C. The expiration of a two (2) year period commencing on the 
date of this Agreement except as such period may be be extended by 
mutual agreement of the parties. 

13. Expiration of Amendments (Annexes) 

Each Amendment (Annex) to the Agreement is effective upon the date of its 
execution shall automatically expire and be deemed terminated effective upon the 
date of the happening or occurrence of any of the following events or conditions, 
whichever shall first occur; except as otherwise provided in this Agreement: 

A. Official client announcement or notice of the cancellation of the 
specific program being pursued. 

B. The receipt by the Prime Contractor of written notice from the 
client that it will not award to it the contract for the specific program 
being pursued. 


240 


C. The receipt of written notice from the client that it has awarded 
the contract for the specific program to someone other them the Prime 
Contractor. 

D. The receipt of official client notice that the proposed Subcon- 
tractor will not be approved as a s ubcontractor under a contract to the 
Prime Contractor on the specific program, or that substantial areas 
of the Subcontractor’s proposed responsibility have been eliminated 
from the requirements. 

E. Award of a subcontract by the Prime Contractor to the Sub- 
contractor for its designated portion of the specific program, 

F. The occurrence of any of the events specified in Paragraph 12 
herein. 



14. Assignment 

This Agreement may not be assigned or otherwise transferred by either party, 
in whole or in part, without the express prior written consent of the other party. 


15. Limitations on the Nature of the Agreement 

This Teaming Agreement does not constitute or create a joint venture, pool- 
ing arrangement, partnership, or formal business organization of any kind, and 
the rights and obligations of the parties shall be only those expressly set forth 
herein. Neither party shall have authority to bind the other except to the extent 
authorized herein. Nothing herein shall be construed as providing for the sharing 
of profits or losses arising out of the efforts of any of the parties. 

16. Applicability of State Law 

This Agreement shall be governed by and interpreted under the laws of the 
State of West Virginia. 




241 


17. Scope of the Agreement 

This Agreement contains the entire agreement of the parties and cancels and 
supercedes any previous understanding. All changes or modifications to this 
Agreement must be agreed to in writing between the parties. 

In the event that any term or provision of this agreement is for any reason 
found by any competent entity or court of law to be illegal or otherwise un* 
enforcible, such term or provision shall be stricken, and the remainder of this 
agreement shall continue in full force and effect. 

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Agreement to 
be executed in duplicate, each of which shall be considered an original, by their 
respective signatory officials thereunto duly authorized, as of the day and year 
first above written. 

MountainNet, Inc.: 


By: 


By: 


Title 


Title 


Date 


Date 



SAMPLE ANNEX 


Project 1: 


Name 

SYNOPSIS: 


The objective of this proposal is to: 


MountainNet /client Relationship: 


Acceptance of Project: 


By: 


Title 


Date 


By: 


Title 


Date 


243 



AdaNET 

Electronic Mail Service and Document Transfer 
User Registration Form 


Please type your information at the " >" 


1. Name, address, telephone: 


Person’s Name: > 

Organization: — > 

Address (#1): — > 

Address (#2): > 

City and State: — > 

Zipcode: > 


Primary Telephone Number: > 

Alternate: > 

FAX Number: — > 


(Continued on next page) 


244 


2. Network ID’s (e.g.: BITNET: VM5521 @ WVNVM, DIALCOM, COM- 
PUSERVE, etc) 


Preferred AdaNET userid: 

> 

DDN userid: 

> 

NASA MaU userid: 

> 

BITNET userid/node: 

> 

DIALCOM userid: 

> 

COMPUSERVE userid: 

> 

SOURCE userid info: 

> 

MPL userid: 

> 

other (specify): 

> 


3. From what location will you normally be accessing AdaNET? 

4. What device will you be using to access AdaNET (e.g., IBM-PC, Televideo 
924 video terminal, etc) ? Please be specific as to the manufacturer and model 
number. 

5. What type of telephone modem do you have connected to the device listed in 
#4 above? Please be specific as to the manufacturer and model number. 


Thank you. Please return this questionaire to: 
A daNET 

c/o Mount ainNet, Inc. 

Attn. Mr. Michael Digman 
P. 0. Box 370 
Dellslow, WV 26531 


245 



6.1 Internal Documents 

6.1.1 Summary 

The following comprise the list of forms used internally for any project and/or 
activity center operated under the auspices of MountainNet, Inc., Eastgate Plaza, 
Second Floor, P. 0. Box 370, Dellslow, WV 26531. 


MTNET-101/88: CASH EXPENSE REPORT This form is for use by 
employees only to report out- of-pocket expenses incurred in carrying out busi- 
ness, whether in travel or day to day operations. Each item reported should be 
accompanied by a dated receipt. Once it is filed with the Coordinator, it will 
require the routine approval method before payment can be made. 

MTNET-102 / 88: CONSULTANT EXPENSE INVOICE This form is 
for use by consultants under personal service contracts to MountainNet, Inc., 
regardless of Activity Center/Code. Requires routine approval method. 

MTNET-103/88s TRAVEL REQUEST FORM This form is for use once 
a project /company team member has been informed of impending travel. It 
should be filed as far in advance as possible to allow for adequate coordination. 
Requires routine approval method. 

MTNET-104/88: PURCHASE AUTHORIZATION FORM This form 
is to be used when any purchases are to be made for any area of the business. 
Small office supplies used in daily operations are the only exception to this form. 
Once filed, routine approval is required before purchase. The timeliness and 
execution of the request is left to the discretion of the President of MountainNet, 
who is the final signature required. Every effort will be made to provide prompt 
service on critical items needed for project continuation. 

MTNET-105/88: REQUEST FOR CONTRACTED SERVICES FORM 
This form is used when the services of an outside consultant/contractor is required 
on a one-time only basis. Routine approval required. 


246 


MTNET— 100/88: TRAVEL/CONFERENCE REPORT This form is to 
be completed after business related travel or conference attendance. This form 
is the final step in documenting business / conference related travel. 



247 


MTNET 101/88 


CASH EXPENSE REPORT (EMPLOYEE) 
MountainNet , Inc . 


NAME: 


DATE: 


Activity Center/Code 
ITINERARY: 


CASH ADVANCE 
TRIP NUMBER: 


EXPENDITURES 


03 Cl - AdaNET Project /NASA 
03 C3 - Telecommunications Serv. 

03 C5 - Hardware Facilities Mngmt . 


03 C2 - MV8 Timeshare Serv. 
03 C4 - Venture Center Serv. 
03 C6 - AdaNET/Unspons . 


DATE 


ITEM 


AMOUNT 


TOTAL AMOUNT OF THIS EXPENSE REPORT 
LESS ADVANCE (il any) 

AMOUNT OF REIMBURSEMENT 


Submitted Date 

APPROVED: 

Contract Administrator Date 

APPROVED: 

Project Director (if applicable) Date 
APPROVED : MountainNet t Inc . 

By: - 

R. Michael Digman, Pres. 


248 


' MTNET 102/88 


CONSULTANT EXPENSE INVOICE 
MountainNet , Inc . 


NAME: 


Data 


MONTH: 


INV.# 


ACTIVITY CENTER/CODE : ------ 

(if submitting an invoice lor more than one Activity 
Center, please use a separate form for each one.) 


03 Cl - AdaNET Project/NASA 03 C2 - MV8 Timeshare Serv. 
03 C3 - Telecommunications Serv. 03 C4 - Venture Center Serv 
03 C5 - Hardware Facility Serv. 03 C6 - AdaNET/Unsponsored 

DATE ITEM AMOUNT 


TOTAL AMOUNT OF THIS INVOICE 

APPROVAL FOR PAYMENT: 

APPROVED: .... ..... 

Contract Administrator Date 

APPROVED: 

Project Director Date 

APPROVED: MountainNet, Inc. 

BY: 

R. Michael Digman, Pres. Date 

REMARKS: 


249 


MTNET 103/88 


TRAVEL REQUEST FORM 
MountainNet, Inc. 


Illllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll 

NAME: DATE: 

Itinerary: 

(Name of conlerence/reason for travel, destination, etc. 


03 Cl - AdaNET Project/NASA 03 C2 - MV8 Timeshare Services 

03 C3 - Telecommunications Serv. 03 C4 - Venture Center Serv. 

03 C5 - Hardware Facility Mgmt. 03 C6 - AdaNET Project/Unspons . 


Activity Center/Code: 

LODGING REQUIRED: Dates: thru No. of nights: 

TRANSPORTATION REQUIRED: 


Rental Car: Pref. 

Airlines: Pref. 


Departure time /day preferred: 

Arrival time/day back pref : 

Cash Advance required: 

Conference/Registration Fee: 

(amount/to whom payable) 


Requested by: 
APPROVED : 
APPROVED: 
APPROVED : 


(signature) 

Date 

Contract Administrator 

Date 

Project Director 

Date 


MountainNet , Inc . 

By: 

R. Michael Digman, Pres. Date 

250 




PURCHASE AUTHORIZATION FORM 
MTNET 104/88 MountainNet , Inc. 

T77777TTT7777T77TT777T777777T77T7TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT7TT777TTTTTTTTTT7T 


03 Cl - AdaNET Project/NASA 
03 C3 - Telecommunications Serv. 
03 CS - Hardware Facility Mgmt. 


03 C2 - MV8 Timeshare Serv. 
03 C4 - Venture Center Serv. 
03 C6 - AdaNET /Unspona . 


Description of Item: — . — ----- — 

PURCHASING INFO : — 

(cost, part number, etc.) 


SUPPLIER: 

ADDRESS/PHONE: 


Activity Center/Code: 


PERSON MAKING REQUEST: 
APPROVED : 


Signature 


Contract Administrator 


Date 


Date 


APPROVED : 
APPROVED: 

P.O. #: 


Project Dir . /Coordinator (if appl.) Date 
MountainNet , Inc . 

By : 

R. Michael Digman, Pres. Date 


251 



PROPOSED TO: / 

Company Act. Center/code 

DESCRIPTION OF 


PROPOSED SERVICE: 

SELECTED 

CONTRACTOR/ 

CONSULTANT: 


CONSULTANT/ 
CONTRACTOR RATE: 

NUMBER OF JOB 
UNITS REQUIRED: 

SUBMITTED : 

Approved : 

Approved : 

Approved : 

By: 


/ 

(rate) (per hour, job, etc.) 

(Enter N/A if proposed 

service is by job) 

(hours , days , etc . ) 


Signature Date 

Contract Administrator (if applicable) Date 

Project director/coordinator (if applicable) Date 
MountainNet, Inc. 


R. Michael Digman, President Date 


Amount approved: Total for above services 

not 

to exceed this amount. 


252 



TRAVEL/CONFERENCE REPORT FORM 
MTNET 106/88 MountainNet , Inc. 

TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT7TTTTTTTTTT7TTT7777T7TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT 

NAME: „„ Date: — 

TRAVEL/CONFEREMCE : — 

BRIEF SYNOPSIS: (please list dates of travel and brief outline of 

activity) 


Conference Proceedings/manuals: 


Submitted to Librarian: 


list titles of books if any 


Date 


253 


Chapter 7 

Acronyms 


7.1 List of Acronyms 


ABS 

ACE 

ACM 

ADAM 

ADE 

AFATDS 

A dalC 

AIRMICS 

AIS 

AJPO 

ALS/N 

AOS/VS 

ANSI 

ASR 

ATC 

ATSE 

AWHMS 

CALS 

CAMP 

CBT 


A list of acronyms used by the AdaNET project: 

AdaNET Bibliographic System 
Ada Center of Excellence 
Association for Computing Machinery 
Automated Data Manipulation 
Ada Development Environment 
Advanced Field Artillery Data System 
Ada Information Clearinghouse 

Army Institute for Research in Management Information, 
Communication and Computer Science 
AdaNET Information Services 
Ada Joint Program Office 
Ada Language System/Navy 
Advanced Operating System/ Virtual System 
American National Standards Institute 
SIMTEL-20 Ada Software Repository 
Air Traffic Control 

Army Test Program Set Support Environment 
Aircraft Wire Harness Manufacturing System 
Computer- aided Acquisition and Logistics System 
Common Ada Missile Packages 
Computer Based Training 


254 


CD-ROM 

CIM 

COSMIC 

COTS 

DA 

DAPSE 

DASD 

DBMS 

DCDS/Ada 

DDN 

DEC 

DET 

DG 

DID 

DOC 

DOC OPTI 


DoD 

DSI 

DTD 

EA/RA 

ESA 

FAA 

FCIM 

FTE 

GRACE 

IRD 

IRDS 

ISEC 

ISF 

JSC 

MAFIS 

MIMS 

MIS 

MOU 

NASA 

NASA TU 

NASA TUNS 


Compact Disk - Read Only Memory 
Computerized Integrated Manufacturing 
Computer Software Management Information Center 
Commercial-off- 1 he- shelf 
Department of the Army 

Distributed Ada Programming Support Environment 

Direct Access Storage Device 

Database Management System 

Distributed Computing Design System/ Ada version 

Defense Data Network 

Digital Equipment Corporation 

Design Evaluation Tool 

Data General 

Data Item Description 

Department of Commerce 

Department of Commerce Office of Productivity, 

Technology and Innovation 
Department of Defense 
Dynamic Software Inventory 
Document Type Description 
Entity Attribute/ Relation Attribute 
European Space Agency 
Federal Aviation Administration 
Flexible Computerized Integrated Manufacturing 
Full Time Equivalent 

Generic Reusable Ada Components for Engineering 
International Resource Development, Incorporated 
Information Resource Dictionary System 
Information Systems Engineering Command 
Industrial Space Facility 
Johnson Space Center 

Mobile Automated Field Instru mentation System 
Mobile Information Manage ment System 
Management Information Systems 

Memorandum of Understanding .... . , . . . 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration Technology Utilization 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration Technology Utilization 


Network System 


255 



NATO 

National Atlantic Treaty Organization 

NBS 

National Bureau of Standards 

NIAC 

NASA Industrial Applications Center 

NOSC 

Naval Ocean Systems Command 

NRL 

Naval Research Lab 

NSF 

National Science Foundation 

NTT 

Nippon Telegraph- Telephone 

ODISC4 

Office of the Directorate for Information Systems for 
Command, Control, Communications and Computers 

OSI 

Open Systems Interconnect 

OPTI 

Office of Productivity, Technology and Innovation 

RAPID 

Reusable Ada Packages for Information 
Systems Development 

RDBMS 

Relational Database Management System 

RICIS 

Research Institute for Computing and Information Systems 

SDI 

Strategic Defense Initiative 

SE 

Software Engineering 

SEAD 

Software Engineering and Ada Database 

SEI 

Software Engineering Institute 

SERC@UHCL Software Engineering Research Center at 
University of Houston Clear Lake City 

SFC 

Space Flight Center 

SGML 

Standard Generalized Markup Language 

SIG 

Special Interest Group 

SIGAda 

ACM Special Interest Group on Ada 

SMAP 

Software Management Assurance Program 

SPAWAR 

Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command 

SPC 

Software Productivity Consortium 

SOW 

Statement of Work 

SQL 

Structured Query Language 

SSE 

Software Support Environment 

STARS 

Software Technologies for Adaptable, Reliable Systems 

SVC 

Software Valley Corporation 

TCP/IP 

Transmission Control Protocol/ Internet Protocol 

TCSEC 

Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria 

TU 

See NASA TU 

UHCL 

University of Houston at Clear Lake City 

VMS 

Virtual Memory System 

WIS 

WWMCCS Information System 


256 



WORM 

WVNET 

WWMCCS 


Write Once/ Read Many 

West Virginia Network for Educational Telecomputing 
Worldwide Military Command & Control System 


257 


Bibliography 


Papers and Periodicals 

[1] Anderson, J.D., Perkins, J.A., Experience using an Automated Metrics 
Framework in the Review of Ada Source of WIS, Proceedings of the Sixth 
National Conference on Ada Technology, Arlington, VA, March 14-17, 1988, 
pp. 32-41. 

[2] Andrews, Timothy, 

[3] Bailin, S., The CTA Object-Oriented Development Facility, Abstract, Com- 
puter Technology Associates, Inc., Laurel, MD. 

[4] Bailin, S., Moore, J., An Object-Oriented Specification Method for Ada, 
Extended Abstract, Computer Technology Associates, Inc., Laurel, MD. 

[5] Bailin, S., Informal Rigor: A Practical Approach to Software Reuse, Com- 
puter Technology Associates, Inc., Laurel, MD. 

[6] Bailin, S., Moore, J., A Software Reuse Environment, Computer Technol- 
ogy Associates, Inc., Laurel, MD. 

[7] Bailin, S., An Automated Quality Assessor For Ada Object-Oriented De- 
signs, Computer Technology Associates, Inc., Laurel, MD. 

[8] Basili, V.R., Rombach, H.D., TAME: Tailoring an Ada Measurement Envi- 
ronment, Proceedings of the Joint Ada Conference, Washington, DC, March 
1987, pp. 318-325. 

[9] Brykczynski, Bill R., Preliminary Version: Ada/SQL: A Standard, Portable 
Ada-DBMS Interface, IDA Paper P-1944, IDA Log No. HQ 86-31239, In- 
stitute for Defense Analyses, April 1987. 


258 


[10] Brykczynski, Bill R., Methods of Binding Ada to SQL: A General Discus- 
sion, Institute for Defense Analysis Paper. 

[11] Burton, B.A., Aragon, R.W., Bailey, S.A., Koehler, K.D., Mayes, L.A., The 
Reusabile Software Library, IEEE Software, July 1987, pp. 25-32. 

[12] Carney, David, Software Methodology and the AIE Program Library, Ada 
Companion Series, Ada: Managing the Transition, Proceedings of the Ada- 
Europe International Conference, Edinburgh , May 6-8, 1986. 

[13] Chen, P.P, The Entity- Relationship Model-Toward a Unified View of Data, 
Transactions on Data Base Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, March 1976, pp. 166-193. 

[14] Conn, R., The Ada Software Repository and Software Reusability, Proceed- 
ings of the Joint Ada Conference, Washington, DC, Much 1987, pp. 45-53. 

[15] Conn, R. (Editor), Ada Software Repository Newsletter, Management As- 
sistance Corporation of America, issue 103, January - February 1988. 

[16] Conn, R., The Ada Software Repository (ASR) on Simtel 20, Ada- 
JUG/SigAda, March 1988. 

[17] Conti, R.A., Critical Run-Time Design Tradeoffs in an Ada Implementa- 
tion, Proceedings of the Joint Ada Conference, Washington, DC, March 

1987, pp. 486-495. 

[18] Crawford, R.G., Becker, H.S., A Novice User’s Interface to Information 
Retrieval Systems, Application Processing and Management, vol. 22, no. 4, 
1986, pp. 287-298. 

[19] Dausmann, M., Library Structures for Reusable Components, ACM SIGAda 
International Conference, Boston, MA, December 1987, pp. 226-235. 

[20] Delaney, R.P., Summerill, L.F., Ada Software Metrics, Proceedings of the 
Sixth National Conference on Ada Technology, Arlington, VA, March 14-17, 

1988, pp. 24-31. 

[21] Dobbins, G.L., Szarek, V.E., Webster, W.H., An Ada/Prolog Database 
Management System for Ada Source Code, Third Annual Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence & Ada, Washington Dulles Ramada Renaissance Ho- 
tel, Herndon, VA, October 1987, pp. 23-39. 


259 


fl I II 



[22] El-Ghoroury, H., LaBarbera, P.R., Bollenbacher, J., Software Portability in 
Embedded, Distributed Systems, Proceedings of the Joint Ada Conference, 
Washington, DC, March 1987, pp. 420-431. 

[23] Freeman, P., A Perspective on Reusability, Computer Society Press of the 
IEEE, Washington, D.C., December 1986, pp. 2-9. 

[24] Freeman, P., Reusable Software Engineering: Concepts and Research Direc- 
tions, ITT Proceedings of the Workshop on Reusability in Programming, 
1983, pp. 2-16. 

[25] Goel, A., Wong, E., Evaluation of Existing Benchmark Suites for Ada, Pro- 
ceedings of the Sixth National Conference on Ada Technology, Arlington, 
VA, March 14-17, 1988, pp. 42-48. 

[26] Goguen, J., Reusing and Interconnecting Software Components, IEEE Com- 
puter, February, 1986, pp. 16-28. 

[27] Gorzela, R.S., Perkins, J.A., Experience Using an Automated Metrics 
Framework to Improve the Quality of Ada Software, Proceedings of the 
Joint Ada Conference, Washington, DC, March 1987, pp. 277-284. 

[28] Harrison, C., An Automated Method of Referencing Ada Reusable Code 
Using LIL, Proceedings of the Joint Ada Conference, Washington, DC, 
March 1987, pp. 1-7. 

[29] Hendler, J.A., Wong, Y.C., AIRS: An Al-based Ada Reuse Tool, Third 
Annual Conference on Artificial Intelligence & Ada, Washington Dulles 
Ramada Renaissance Hotel, Herndon, VA, October 1987, pp. 1-22. 

[30] Horowitz, E., Munson, J.B., An Expansive View of Reusable Software, 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering September 1984, pp. 477-487. 

[31] Hulkkonen, T.O., Software Component Library, Ada Companion Series, 
Ada: Managing the Transition, Proceedings of the Ada-Europe Interna- 
tional Conference, Edinburgh, May 4-6, 1986. 

[32] Ichbiah, J.D., On the Design of Ada, Information Processing 83, Edited by 
R.E.A. Mason, 1983, pp. 1-10. 

[33] Jones, T.C., Reusability in Programming: A Survey of the State of the Art, 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, September 1984, pp. 488-494. 


260 


[34] Lanergan, R.G., Grasso, C.AV, Software Engineering with Reusable Designs 

and Code, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, September 1984, 
pp. 498-501. r 

[35] Leach, R.J., Ada Software Metrics and Their Limitations, Proceedings of 
the Joint Ada Conference, Washington, DC, March 1987, pp. 285-293. 

[36] McKay, C.W., A Position Paper: The Need to Advance Beyond the Rela- 
tional Data Model and SQL, 1988. 

[37] McKay, C.W., A Proposed Framework for the Tools and Rules to Support 
the Life Cycle of the Space Station Program, IEEE, 1987. 

[38] McKay, C.W., Technical Issues: Software Trade-off Considerations for Run 
Time Risk Management in Target Environments, NSIA Conference, 1987. 

[39] Muser, D.R., Stepanov, A. A., A Library of Generic Algorithms in Ada, 
ACM SIGAda International Conference, Boston, MA, December 1987, pp. 
216-225. 

[40] Narfelt, K., SCHEFSTROM, D., Extending the Scope of the Program Li- 
brary, Ada Companion Series, Ada In Use, Proceedings of the Ada Inter- 
national Conference, Paris, May 14-16, 1985. 

[41] Olsen, R., Manufacturing Strategies for the 1990’s , Conference Proceedings, 
Presented at James Madison University, 21-22 March 1988. 

[42] Owen, G.S., Gagliano, R., Honkanen, P., Functional Specifications of 
Reusable MIS Software in A da, Proceedings of the Joint Ada Conference, 
Washington, DC, March 1987, pp. 19-26. 

[43] Paraas, D.L., Clements, P.C., Weiss, D.M., Enhancing Reusability with 
Information Biding, ITT Proceedings of the Workshop on Reusability in 
Programming, 1983, pp. 72-76. 

[44] Perlman, G., User Interface Development, SEI Curriculum Module SEI- 
CM-17-1.0, Carnegie Mellon University, Software Engineering Institute, 
Draft for Public Review, April 1988. 

[45] Potosnak, K., (Editor, The Koffler Group), Do icons make user interfaces 
easier to use?, HUMAN FACTORS, May, 1988, pp. 97- 


E3 


13 I 


fa 



261 



[46] Poutanen, 0., Notes on Building a Relational Database Management Sys- 
tem in Ada , Ada Companion Series, Ada in Use, Proceedings of the Ada 
Inter- national Conference, Paris, May 14-16, 1985. 

[47] Preston, D., Nyberg, K. Mathis, R., An Investigation into the Compatibility 
of Ada and Formal Verification Technology, Proceedings of the Sixth Na- 
tional Conference on Ada Technology, Arlington, VA, March 14-17, 1988, 
pp. 13-23. 

[48] Prieto-Diaz, R., Freeman, P., Classifying Software for Reusability , IEEE 
Software, January 1987, pp. 6-16. 

[49] Prieto-Diaz, R., Domain Analysis for Reusability, Proceedings of the 
COMPS AC 87, Tokyo, Japan, October 1987. 

[50] Prieto-Diaz, R., Jones, G. A., Breathing New Life into Old Software, GTE 
Journal, pp. 22-31. 

[51] Prieto-Diaz, R., Faceted Classifications and Reuse Across Domains, Ab- 
stract. 

[52] Radi, T.S., TestGen - Testing Tool for Ada Designs and Ada Code, Pro- 
ceedings of the Sixth National Conference on Ada Technology (Sponsored 
by: United States Army, United States Navey, United States Air Force, 
United States Marine Corps, Ada Joint Program Office), Arlington, VA, 
March 14-17, 1988, pp. 1-6. 

[53] Rice, J.R., Schwetman, H.D., Interface Issues in a Software Parts Tech- 
nology, ITT Proceedings of the Workshop on Reusability in Programming, 
1983, pp. 129-137. 

[54] Rogers, P., A Taxonomy for Ada Software Components, Master’s Thesis, 
University of Houston at Clear Lake, December 1987. 

[55] Russell, G., Experiences Implementing a Reusable Data Structure Compo- 
nent Taxonomy, Proceedings of the Joint Ada Conference, Washington, 
DC, March 1987, pp. 8-18. 

[56] Selby, R.W., Incorporating Metrics into a Software Environment , Proceed- 
ings of the Joint Ada Conference, Washington, DC, March 1987, pp. 326- 
333. 


262 


[57] Sivley, K.E., Experience and Lessons Learned, in Transporting Ada Soft- 
ware, Proceedings of the Joint Ada Conference, Washington, DC, March 
1987, pp. 436-440. 

[58] Slonaker, P., Prizant, S., Smith, M.S., Giles, J., Development of Multi- 
Tasking Software in Ada- A Case Study, Proceedings of the Joint Ada Con- 
ference, Washington, DC, March 1987, pp. 304-317. 

[59] Smith, J. M., Chan, A., Danberg, S., Fox S., Nori A., A Tool Kit for 
Database Programming in Ada, Ada Companion Series, Ada in Use, Pro- 
ceedings of the Ada International Conference, Paris, France, May 1985. 

[60] Tauson-Conte, H.J., Ada Complexity Extension (ACE) An Extension of 
McCabe’s Cyclomatic Complexity Metric for Analysis of Ada Software, Pro- 
ceedings of the Sixth National Conference on Ada Technology, Arlington, 
VA, March 14-17, 1988, pp. 7-12. 

[61] Tracz, W., Ada Reusability Efforts: A Survey of the State of the Practice, 
Proceedings of the Joint Ada Conference, Washington, DC, March 1987, 
pp. 35-44. 

[62] Vbase: Technical Overview, a publication by Ontologic, Inc. for Vbase re- 
lease version 0.8, March 6, 1987. 

[63] Vizard, M., Battle of the Network Protocols, Digital Review, August 24, 
1987, pp. 73-74. 

[64] Vizard, M., OSI Gains Momentum in Protocol Struggle, Digital Review, 

August 24, 1987, pg. 75.- ---- - -r • • > ~ ••• 

[65] Wagner, P., Varieties of Reusability, ITT Proceedings of the Workshop on 
Reusability in Progra mm i n g, 1983, pp. 30-44. 

[66] Walker, J.E., Skyles, S.D., Gilliam, P.U., A Practical Experience with Ada 
Portability, Proceedings of the Joint Ada Conference, Washington, DC, 
March 1987, pp. 432-435, 

[67] Wolf, A.L., Clarke, L.A., Wileden, J.C., Ada-Based Support for Program- 
ming in-the-Large, IEEE Software, March 1985, pp. 58-71- 

[68] Woodfield, S.N., Embley, D.W., A Knowledge Structure for Reusing Ab- 
stract Data Types in Ada Software Production, Proceedings of the Joint 
Ada Conference, Washington, DC, March 1987, pp. 27-34. 


263 



[69] Wu, L., Basili, V.R., Reed, K., A Structure Coverage Tool for Ada Software 
Systems , Proceedings of the Joint Ada Conference, Washington, DC, March 
1987, pp. 294-303. 

[70] Yoelle, S.M., Kaiser, G.E., Using Conceptual Clustering for Classifying 
Reusable Ada Code, ACM SIGAda International Conference, Boston, MA, 
December 1987, pp. 208-215. 


264 



Books 


[71] Booch, Grady, Software Engineering With Ada, 2nd Edition, The 
Benjamin/ Cummings Series in Ada and Software Engineering, Ben- 
jamin/Cummings, Menlo Park, CA, 1980. 

[72] Booch, Grady, Software Components With Ada , The Benjamin/Cummings 
Series in Ada and Software Engineering, Benjamin/ Cummings, Menlo Park, 
CA, 1987. 

[73] Conn, R., The Ada Software Repository and the Defense Data Network: A 
Resource Handbook, New York Zoetrope, New York, NY, 1987. 

[74] , COSMIC, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA, 1988. 

[75] General Electric Company, Corporate Information Systems, Software En- 
gineering Handbook, McGraw-Hill Series in Software Engineering and Tech- 
nology, McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1986. 

[76] Kemighan and Pike The UNIX Programming Environment 

[77] Kiger, J.I., The Depth/Breadth Trade-off in the Design of Menu-Driven 
User Interfaces. 

[78] Matsumoto, Y., A Software Factory: An Overall Approach to Software Pro- 
duction, Computer Society Press of the IEEE, Washington, D.C., December 
1986, pp. 155-178. 

[79] Nissen, J., Wallis, P., Portability and Style in Ada, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, 1984. 

[80] Shneiderman, B., Designing the User Interface: Strategies for Effective 
Human-Computer Interaction, Addison- Wesley Publishing Co., Reading, 
MA, 1987. 

[81] Integration and Pagination: Long Documents, Proposals, Books, Seybold 
Rep. Publ. Syst., April 1987. 



Standards and Government Documents 


[82] , Standard for Electronic Manuscript Preparation and Markup, Electronic 
Manuscript Series, Association of American Publishers, Washington, D.C., 
February 1986. 

[83] Reference Manual for the Ada Programming Language, ANSI/MIL-STD- 
1815A-1983, American National Standards Institute, Inc., New York, 1983. 

[84] SQL Standard American National Standards Institute, Inc., New York, 198 

[85] Distributed Computing Design System - A Technical Overview, CDRL 
B003, 25 July 1987. 

[86] Distributed Computing Design System (DCDS) Methodology Guide (Ada 
Version), CDRL A008, October 1987. 

[87] Distributed Computing Design System (DCDS) Tool User’s Guide (Ada 
Version ), Draft, CDRL B006, May 1987. 

[88] Distributed Computing Design System (DCDS) Tool User’s Guide (Ada 
Version), CDRL B006, October 1987. 

[89] Distributed Computing Design System (DCDS) Methodology Guide (Ada 
Version ) Appendices, CDRL A008, October 1987. 

[90] Distributed Computing Design System (DCDS) Tools User’s Guide (Ada 
Version) Appendices, CDRL B006, October 1987. 

[91] Defense System Software Development, Military Standard, DOD-STD- 
2167, AMSC NO. N3608, AREA MCCR, June 1985. 

[92] Version Description Document for the Missile Software Parts of the Com- 
mon Ada Missile Packages (CAMP), October 1987. 





