1 Enhanced Reporting of Mars Exploration Rover Telemetry 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


Mars Exploration Rover Enhanced 
Telemetry Extraction and Reporting Sys- 
tem (METERS) is software that generates 
a human-readable representation of the 
state of the mobility and arm-related sys- 
tems of the Mars Exploration Rover 
(MER) vehicles on each Martian solar 
day (sol). Data are received from the 
MER spacecraft in multiple streams hav- 
ing various formats including text mes- 
sages, sparsely-sampled engineering 
quantities, images, and individual motor- 
command histories. Typically, only parts 
of this data generated on Mars are re- 
ceived the same day they were created, so 
the summary report tools have to work 


well even when data is missing. All infor- 
mation is grouped by type into easily- 
browsable Web pages (see Figure 1). 

METERS is the first software to pro- 
vide an integrated view of the mobility 
and arm operations even when data are 
missing. METERS combines the data re- 
ceived in the various telemetry streams 
during an entire sol, making clear what 
has occurred and annotating what data 
are missing. METERS comprises a set of 
software tools (primarily in C, C++) and 
Perl language scripts for robustly com- 
bining these data into a concise, human- 
readable format. Raw data products are 
converted into Hypertext Markup Lan- 


guage files, compatible with Web- 
browser software, that include thumbnail 
images (see Figure 2) , summaries of mo- 
tions, and plots of engineering data. Au- 
tomatically generated reports also sum- 
marize the classes of mobility and arm 
activities that occur during each sol. 

This work was done by Mark W. Maimone, 
Jeffrey J. Biesiadecki, Robert R. Liebersbach, 
Joseph L. Carsten, and Chris Leger of Caltech 
for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 

This software is available for commercial li- 
censing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-45366. 



Figure 1. This top view of a METERS Auto-Generated Main Web Page in- 
cludes a motion summary in plain text, graphical course plot, and a pull- 
down menu to select individual reports. 



Figure 2. Another page includes Thumbnail Views of All Images, including 
thumbnail-sized elevation data automatically extracted from stereo pairs of 
images. 


64 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2008 









