Improvement in Visual Target Tracking for a Mobile Robot 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


In an improvement of the visual-tar- 
get-tracking software used aboard a mo- 
bile robot (rover) of the type used to ex- 
plore the Martian surface, an 
affine-matching algorithm has been re- 
placed by a combination of a normal- 
ized-cross-correlation (NCC) algorithm 
and a template-image-magnification al- 
gorithm. Although neither NCC nor 
template-image magnification is new, 
the use of both of them to increase the 
degree of reliability with which features 
can be matched is new. In operation, a 


template image of a target is obtained 
from a previous rover position, then the 
magnification of the template image is 
based on the estimated change in the 
target distance from the previous rover 
position to the current rover position 
(see figure). For this purpose, the target 
distance at the previous rover position is 
determined by stereoscopy, while the 
target distance at the current rover posi- 
tion is calculated from an estimate of the 
current pose of the rover. The template 
image is then magnified by an amount 


corresponding to the estimated target 
distance to obtain a best template image 
to match with the image acquired at the 
current rover position. 

This program was written by Won Kim, 
Adnan Ansar, and Richard Madison of Cal- 
tech for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Labora- 
tory. Further information is contained in a 
TSP ( seepage 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-42682. 



Turn-in-Place Experiments show beginning image (left) and end image (right) after 80° rover rotation. As the rover turns, the mast camera turns in the op- 
posite direction to point to the target. 


Software for Simulating Air Traffic 

Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California 


Future Air Traffic Management Con- 
cepts Evaluation Tool (FACET) is a sys- 
tem of software for performing compu- 
tational simulations for evaluating 
advanced concepts of advanced air-traf- 
fic management. FACET includes a pro- 
gram that generates a graphical user in- 
terface plus programs and databases 
that implement computational models 
of weather, airspace, airports, navigation 
aids, aircraft performance, and aircraft 
trajectories. Examples of concepts stud- 
ied by use of FACET include aircraft self- 
separation for free flight; prediction of 
air-traffic-controller workload; decision 
support for direct routing; integration 
of spacecraft-launch operations into the 
U.S. national airspace system; and traf- 
fic-flow-management using rerouting, 


metering, and ground delays. Aircraft 
can be modeled as flying along either 
flight-plan routes or great-circle routes 
as they climb, cruise, and descend ac- 
cording to their individual performance 
models. The FACET software is modular 
and is written in the Java and C program- 
ming languages. The architecture of 
FACET strikes a balance between flexi- 
bility and fidelity; as a consequence, 
FACET can be used to model system- 
wide airspace operations over the con- 
tiguous U.S., involving as many as 10,000 
aircraft, all on a single desktop or laptop 
computer running any of a variety of op- 
erating systems. Two notable applica- 
tions of FACET include: (1) reroute con- 
formance monitoring algorithms that 
have been implemented in one of the 


Federal Aviation Administration’s na- 
tionally deployed, real-time, operational 
systems; and (2) the licensing and inte- 
gration of FACET with the commercially 
available Flight Explorer, which is an In- 
ternet-based, real-time flight- tracking 
system. 

This program was written by Banavar 
Sridhar, Karl Bilimoria, and Shon Grabbe of 
Ames Research Center and Gano Chat- 
terji, Kapil Sheth, and Daniel Mulfinger of 
Raytheon Co. Further information is con- 
tained in a TSP (see page 1 ). 

This invention is owned by NASA and a 
patent application has been filed. Inquiries 
concerning rights for the commercial use of 
this invention should be addressed to the 
Ames Technology Partnerships Division at 
(650) 604-2954. Refer to ARC-14653-1. 


NASA Tech Briefs, September 2006 


55 



