ATARI* PROGRAM EXCHANGE 






Dale Yocum & Jerry White 


BASIC PROGRAM COMPRESSOR 


APX-20008 


User-Written Software for ATARI Home Computers 





































































Dale Yocum & Jerry White 


BASIC PROGRAM COMPRESSOR 


APX-20008 































































EE" tAi S HI O 


F" Ft OGK". 1A1 M C O M PRESSO FS: 
< MASHER > 


by 


Dale 

(Modified by 


Yocum 

Jerry 


White) 


ProqraM and Manual Contents ©1981 Atari* Inc* 

Copyright and riaht to make backup copies * On receipt of this computer program and 
associated documentation (the software)* ATARI grants you a nonexclusive license to execute 
the enclosed software and to make backup or archival copies of the computer program for your 
personal use only* and only on the condition that all copies are conspicuously marked with the 
same copyright notices that appear an the original* This software is copyrighted* You are 
prohibited from reproducing* translating* or distributing this software in any unauthorized 
manner* 



TRADEMARKS OF ATARI 


The following are trademarks of Atari, Inc* 
ATARI 

ATARI 400 Home Computer 
ATARI 800 Home Computer 
ATARI 410 Program Recorder 
ATARI 810 Disk Drive 
ATARI 820 40-Column Printer 
ATARI 822 Thermal Printer 
ATARI 825 80-Column Printer 
ATARI 830 Acoustic Modem 
ATARI 350 Interface Module 


Distributed by 

The ATARI Program Exchange 
P* O* Box 427 

155 Moffett Park Drive, B-i 
Sunnyvale, CA 94086 

To request an AFX Software Catalog, write to the address above, or call toll-free* 

300/538-1862 (outside California) 

800/672-1850 (within California) 

Or call our Sales number, 408/745-5535* 




This APX diskette is unnotched to protect the software against 
accidental erasure. However, this protection also prevents a program 
from storing information on the diskette. The program you've 
purchased involves storing information. Therefore, before you can use 
the program, you must duplicate the contents of the diskette onto a 
notched diskette that doesn't have a write-protect tab covering the 
notch. 

To duplicate the diskette, call the Disk Operating System (DOS) menu 
and select option J, Duplicate Disk. You can use this option with a 
single disk drive by manually swapping source (the APX diskette) and 
destination (a notched diskette) until the duplication process is 
complete. You can also use this option with multiple disk drive 
systems by inserting source and destination diskettes in two separate 
drives and letting the duplication process proceed automatically. 

(Note. This option copies sector by sector. Therefore, when the 
duplication is complete, any files previously stored on the 
destination diskette will have been destroyed.) 



INTRODUCTION ♦ ♦ ♦ 1 

Overview ♦ ♦ ♦ 1 
Required accessories ♦ ♦ ♦ 1 
Optional software ♦ ♦ ♦ 1 

GETTING STARTED . ♦ ♦ 2 

USING MASHER ♦ ♦ ♦ 3 

Setting up ♦ ♦ ♦ 3 
Execution ♦ ♦ ♦ 4 
Evaluating the results ♦ ♦ ♦ 4 

TROUBLESHOOTING ♦ ♦ ♦ 5 

Error message ♦ ♦ ♦ 5 

Program operation warnings ♦ ♦ ♦ 5 

Suggestions for tracking down faulty program execution 


ADDITIONAL COMPRESSION TECHNIQUES ♦ ♦ . 6 




OVERVIEW 


MASHER is a ultility program to help you squeeze every last byte out of your 8K BASIC 
software. It compresses your BASIC programs into as litle memory as possible by 

(1) Removing all unreferenced REMark statements 

(2) Converting your most frequently used constants into variables 

(3) Packing together several short lines to form longer ones 

Don't use line numbers 3 - 9 or assign variable names QO - Q999 in your BASIC programs. MASHER 
uses these lines and variable names to define its variables that replace frequently used 
constants in your program. 


REQUIRED ACCESSORIES 
32K RAM 

ATARI BASIC Language Cartridge 
ATARI 810 Disk Drive 


OPTIONAL SOFTWARE 

BASIC CROSS-REFERENCE UTILITY (XREF) 

This ATARI Program Exchange (AFX) program tells you how many variables you've used in 
your program (as well as providing other information). (Order No. APX -20009) 

VARIABLE CHANGER 

This APX program automatically shortens your program's variable names, which often 
further reduces the program's memory requirements. It also tells you how many variables 
you've used in your program. (Order No. AFX-20012) 


- 1 - 



1. Insert the ATARI BASIC Language Cartridge in the (Left Cartridge) slot of your computer. 


2. Make sure your BASIC program to be compressed is in LIST format (rather than in SAVE 
format). See page 10 of the BASIC Reference Manual or see the Disk Operating System 
Reference Manual far information about LIST format. 

3. Turn on your disk drive and insert the MASHER diskette. 

4. Power up your computer and turn on your video screen. 

5. At the READY prompt, type RUN "DIMASHER" and press the RETURN key. If you're using more 
than one disk drive, remember to follow the device initial (D) with the number of the drive 
containing the MASHER diskette (e.g., RUN "D2JMASHER" for disk drive two). The program will 
load into RAM and start. The first display screen will be the COPYRIGHT 1981 ATARI notice. 

6. If you're using just one disk drive, remove the MASHER diskette and insert your BASIC 
program to be compressed. 









SETTING UP 


You use MASHER by responding to three prompted questions* 

1 COMPLETE INPUT FILE NAME? 

Type in the complete name of the file in LIST format containing your BASIC program* Use 
the format 

D {filename ♦ ext 

where ”D" is the device initial, "filename” stands for the name of your file (use 
upper case), and "♦ext" is the extender, if you used one* An example is 
DtADDRESS*BAS ♦ If you're using more than one disk drive, remember to specify the number 
of the drive containing your file (e*g*, D2!ADDRESS*BAS for disk drive two)* 

2 COMPLETE OUTPUT FILE NAME? 

Using the format described in prompt 1, type the complete file name under which you want 
MASHER to store your compressed program in LIST format* Your output file must have a 
different name than your input file* 

3 NUMBER OF VARIABLES USED IN SOURCE PROGRAM? 

Type in the number of variables used in your input file* MASHER uses this information to 
determine how many constants it has room to define as variables (remember that BASIC is 
limited to 128)* 

You can determine this number in three ways* 

(1) Count them! This method is fine if you don't mind spending the time* Increment 
your count by a small amount as a "fudge factor” against your having missed a few* 

(2) Guess* For small programs, guessing is acceptable* If you guess too high, MASHER 
might not compress your program as well as it might have with the true count* If you 
guess too low, MASHER might unknowlingy exceed BASIC's 123-variable limit and your 
program will generate an ERROR 4- (Too Many Variables) when you run it* It's better 
to guess high* 

(3) Use the BASIC CROSS-REFERENCE UTILITY (XREF) or VARIALBE NAME CHANGER, available 
through AFX* Both programs give you the exact variable count far your program* 


MASHER then takes over and starts compressing your program* 



EXECUTION 


MASHER displays the message 
PLEASE STAND BY 

for a short time* It then clears the video screen to go into “attract mode", which allows 
MASHER to run about 40 percent faster since the screen isn't interrupting the microprocessor* 

MASHER can take a long time* A small program might take only £ few minutes to compress* but 
a large program can take hours! As long as the disk drive is read periodically* all is well* 

Take this opportunity to relax and browse through the latest APX software catalog for gift 
ideas — for yourself and others! 

When MASHER finishes* it reactivates the video screen and displays the number of lines in your 
input and output files* 


EVALUATING THE RESULTS 

Occasionally* your output file might have mare lines than does your input file* In these 
cases* check the amount of RAM used by each program before rejecting the compressed version* 
Because MASHER adds lines to redefine constants* the line count might increase but the 
compressed program will still require less RAM to run* A compressed program is rarely* if 
ever* larger than your original BASIC program* 

Normally* MASHER saves between 5 and 60 percent of your program's original required RAM* The 
amount depends on your individual programming style* Programmers who use many remarks and 
single statement lines will save the greatest amount* In short* the more structured and 
easy-to-read your input file* the more MASHER can compress! 






ERROR MESSAGE 


The error message 

SOURCE CODE ERROR , LAST LINE t ” 

<last line read> 

occurs when a file contains some text that is illegal in BASIC (e.g., a line with no line 
number). This error causes MASHER to abort. Fix the problem in your source program and rerun 
MASHER. 


PROGRAM OPERATION WARNINGS 

MASHER is quite demanding of disk drives. Because a long program can take hours to compress, 
even the best system might stumble. Try rerunning MASHER before throwing in the towel. 

MASHER can't resolve variable GOTOs (e.g., GOTO X). Check your compressed program if you used 
this kind of GOTO. 


SUGGESTIONS FOR TRACKING DOWN FAULTY PROGRAM EXECUTION 

If you find that your compressed program doesn't run correctly, check these points; 

(1) Did you leave lines 3-9 available for MASHER's use? MASHER will try to use these 
lines to define its constants 

-, even if you use these lines as well. MASHER's constant definitions will be 
overwritten, causing some strange errors! 

(2) Did you leave variable names QO - Q999 for MASHER's use? 

(3) Did you use a CLR statement anywhere in your program? This statement clears out 
MASHER's QO - Q999 definitions, causing all sorts of problems! In most applications, CLR 
is unnecessary and you can safely eliminate it. If you include a CLR statement, make sure 
your program re-executes lines 3-9 afterward. 

(4) Did you use computed line references (e.g., GOTO X)? If so, these may reference lines 
that don't exist anymore if MASHER merged the statements with other lines. One way to 
preserve these lines when running MASHER is to place a dummy reference to these lines at 
the beginning of your program. For example; 


20 

♦ 

ON I 

GOTO 1500,2000,2100 

♦ 

60 

GOTO 

X 



MASHER can save you a lot of RAM* but it's not the only method available to you as a 
programmer. Here are some other techniques. 

(1) Use strings instead of numeric arrays to store data. 

(2) Add two "Q" variables together to form a constant, rather than defining a new 
constant. For example, the constant I=Q2+Q5 takes less RAM than does the constant 1=7 
if you've already defined Q2 and Q5. 

(3) Use subroutines for common functions. 

(4) Recode parts of your BASIC program into machine language. 

(5) Reuse variables when they don't interfere with each other. The XREF program, 
available through APX, can help detect interference. 

(6) Use short variable names. The VARIABLE CHANGER program, available through APX, can 
help you change variable names in existing programs. 


(7) Chain in parts of your program from disk rather than maintaining your entire program 
in RAM. 

(3) Use the graphics mode requiring the least amount of RAM but is still suited to your 
application. For example, Modes 1 and 2 require less RAM than does Mode 0. 

(9) POKE data into unused RAM areas instead of keeping data in arrays. Appendix D of the 
BASIC Reference Manual shows where some of these areas are. You can also use the 
printer and cassette buffers for data if you're not using these devices. 


DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY AND LIABILITY ON COMPUTER PROGRAMS 

Neither Atari, Inc. ("ATARI"), nor its software supplier, distributor, or dealers 
make any express or implied warranty of any kind with respect to this computer 
software program and/or material, including, but not limited to warranties of 
merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose. This computer program software 
and/or material is distributed solely on an "as is" basis. The entire risk as to the 
quality and performance of such programs is with the purchaser. Purchaser accepts 
and uses this computer program software and/or material upon his/her own inspection 
of the computer software program and/or material, without reliance upon any 
representation or description concerning the computer program software and/or 
material. Should the computer program software and/or material prove defective, 
purchaser and not ATARI, its software supplier, distributor, or dealer, assumes the 
entire cost of all necessary servicing, repair, or correction, and any incidental 
damages. 

In no event shall ATARI, or its software supplier, distributor, or dealer be liable 
or responsible to a purchaser, customer, or any other person or entity with respect 
to any liability* loss, incidental or consequential damage caused or alleged to be 
caused, directly or indirectly, by the computer program software and/or material, 
whether defective or otherwise, even if they have been advised of the possibility of 
such liability, loss, or damage. 


LIMITED WARRANTIES ON MEDIA AND HARDWARE ACCESSORIES 

ATARI warrants to the original consumer purchaser that the media on which the 
computer software program and/or material is recorded, including computer program 
cassettes or diskettes, and all hardware accessories are free from defects in 
materials or workmanship for a period of 30 days from the date of purchase. If a 
defect covered by this limited warranty is discovered during this 30-day warranty 
period, ATARI will repair or replace the media or hardware accessories, at ATARI'S 
option, provided the media or hardware accessories and proof of date of purchase are 
delivered or mailed, postage prepaid, to the ATARI Program Exchange. 

This warranty shall not apply if the media or hardware accessories (1) have been 
misused or show signs of excessive wear, (2) have been damaged by playback equipment 
or by being used with any products not supplied by ATARI, or (3) if the purchaser 
causes or permits the media or hardware accessories to be serviced or modified by 
anyone other than an authorized ATARI Service Center. Any applicable implied 
warranties on media or hardware accessories, including warranties of merchantability 
and fitness, are hereby limited to 30 days from the date of purchase. Consequential 
or incidental damages resulting from a breach of any applicable express or implied 
warranties on media or hardware accessories are hereby excluded. Some states do not 
allow limitations on how long an implied warranty lasts, so the above limitation may 
not apply to you. Some states also do not allow the exclusion or limitation of 
incidental or consequential damage, so the above limitation or exclusion may not 
apply to you. 




EXCHANGE 



REVIEW FORM 


We're interested in your experiences with APX programs and documentation * both favorable and 
unfavorable* Many software authors are willing and eager to improve their programs if they know 
what users want* And* of course* we want to know about any bugs that slipped by us* so that the 
software author can fix them* We also want to know whether our documentation is meeting your needs 
You are our best source for suggesting improvements! Please help us by taking a moment to fill in 
this review sheet* Fold the sheet in thirds and seal it so that the address on the bottom of the 
back becomes the envelope front* Thank you for helping us! 

1* Name and APX number of program 

2* If you have problems using the program* please describe them here* 


3* What do you especially like about this program? 


4* What do you think the program's weaknesses are? 


5* How can the catalog description be more accurate and/or comprehensive? 


6* On a scale of 1 to 10* 1 being "poor" and 10 being "excellent"* please rate the following 
aspects of this program? 

Easy to use 

User-oriented (e*g** menus* prompts* clear language) 

Enjoyable 

Self-instructive 

Useful (non-game software) 

Imaginative graphics and sound 

Describe any technical errors you found in the user instructions (please give page numbers)* 



3* What did you especially like about the user instructions? 


9. What revisions or additions would improve these instructions? 


10. On a scale of 1 to 10, 1 representing "poor" and 10 representing "excellent", how would you 
rate the user instructions and why? 


11. Other comments about the software or user instructions! 


I 

I 


I 

ISTAMF1 

I 


* 


ATARI Program Exchange 
F.O. Box 427 

155 Moffett Park Drive* B-l 
Sunnyvale* CA 94036 


Cseal here] 





