23 rJ i't'j'jridri' Ftmcui-ch ftwb.'ty; Wtffldwide Mi/nitpfintf <!} iVut /t ‘<tr Espitthtitta - Ocii?bi!t 2-i, 2Qftf 


NUCLEAR SOURCES AND ASSETS DATABASE (NUSAD) DEVELOPMENT 
Joel C. Rynes and Daniel Leussing 
Veridian Systems 

Sponsored by Defense Threat Reduction Agency 
Contract No. DTRA01-99-C-0031 


ABSTRACT 


The Nuclear Sources and Assets Database (NUSAD) has been developed and is being maintained by the 
Atmospheric Radionuclide Monitoring Program at the Center for Monitoring Research (CMR). NUSAD is 
an Oracle-based database that contains information regarding nuclear sources and assets throughout the 
world. A source is any facility that could potentially release radionuclides and an asset is any device that 
can detect radionuclides. The database can be accessed through the NUSAD Geographical Display Tool 
(GDT). The GDT is a graphical user interface that provides users not only the capability to view, enter, 
and modify NUSAD data but also to geographically visualize the data on configurable maps. The NUSAD 
GDT consists of the ArcIMS geographical information system (GIS) coupled with NUSAD and specialized 
Java-based software. The database and the GDT will be used to assist in identifying the source of 
radionuclides found in data from the International Data Centre (1DC) and other institutions. This paper 
describes the data contained in NUSAD and demonstrates the capabilities of the NUSAD GDT. 

KEY WORDS : radionuclide monitoring, geographical information system, CMR, IDC, ArcIMS 


OBJECTIVE 


The objective of this work was to create and make available to authorized users a database of worldwide 
devices that could potentially release or potentially measure airborne radionuclides. These data could then 
be used to help determine the source of radionuclides found in data from the IDC or other institutions and 
to identify additional assets to either confirm or contradict IDC data. Anticipated users of the database are 
the United States (US) National Data Center (NDC) and other authorized institutions investigating the 
cause of a potential nuclear event. Due to the critical nature of its use, it is essential that this database 
maintains the utmost accuracy and integrity. In addition, it is essential that an interface be provided with 
the database so that users can easily and quickly interact with its data. 


RESEARCH ACCOMPLISHED 


NUSAD has continuously grown and evolved since its conception in 1998. It originally consisted of a few 
Microsoft Excel spreadsheets that contained nuclear reactors and nuclear facilities within the US and 
worldwide nuclear assets. In 1999, the database was converted to Oracle and worldwide nuclear reactors 
and facilities were added to the database. In 2000, the NUSAD Data Entering Tool (DET) was created. 

The DET is a Java-based graphical user interface (GUI) that allows users to easily view, edit, and insert 
NUSAD data. Previously NUSAD users had to use the Structured Query Language (SQL) to access 
NUSAD data. 

Substantial development occurred in 2001. The entire database underwent a Quality Assurance and Quality 
Control (QA/QC) program to ensure database accuracy and integrity. The NUSAD Geographical Display 
Tool (GDT) was created. The GDT is a web-based ArcIMS 1 with Java-applets GUI that allows users to 


1 Commercially available geographical information system produced by Environmental Science Research 
Incorporation (ESRI) 


251 



Report Documentation Page 


Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 


Public reporting burden for the collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and 
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, 
including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington 
VA 22202-4302. Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it 
does not display a currently valid OMB control number. 


1. REPORT DATE 

OCT 2001 


2. REPORT TYPE 


3. DATES COVERED 

00-00-2001 to 00-00-2001 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Nuclear Sources And Assets Database (NUSAD) Development 


6. AUTHOR(S) 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Veridian Systems,1400 Key Blvd, Suite 100,Arlington,VA,22209 

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 


5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 


5b. GRANT NUMBER 

5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 

5d. PROJECT NUMBER 


5e. TASK NUMBER 


5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 


10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 

11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 


12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited 


13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

Proceedings of the 23rd Seismic Research Review: Worldwide Monitoring of Nuclear Explosions held in 
Jackson Hole, WY on 2-5 of October, 2001. U.S. Government or Federal Rights. 

14. ABSTRACT 

See Report 

15. SUBJECT TERMS 

16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 


a. REPORT 

unclassified 


b. ABSTRACT 

unclassified 


c. THIS PAGE 

unclassified 


17. LIMITATION OF 

18. NUMBER 

ABSTRACT 

OF PAGES 

Same as 

8 

Report (SAR) 



19a. NAME OF 
RESPONSIBLE PERSON 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std Z39-18 





23 rJ i't'j'jridri' Ftmcui-ch ftwb.'ty; Wtffldwide Mi/nitpfintf <!} iVut /t ‘<tr Espitthtitta - Ocii?bi!t 2-i, 2fffft 


interact with NUSAD data on a geographical background (maps). Finally, a list of US radioactive material 
(RAM) license holders was added to the database. 

This section begins with a description of current content of the database and a description of the QA/QC 
program. Next, the NUSAD DET is discussed. The section concludes with a description of the NUSAD 
GDT. 

NUSAD Description 

The content of NUSAD has evolved continuously since 1998 and it is anticipated that the database content 
will continue to evolve over the next several years. The current state of NUSAD will be described here. 
NUSAD contains three broad classes of data: assets, sources, and geographical. Table 1 summarizes the 
types of data currently contained in NUSAD. Table 1 also shows the reference in which the majority of the 
data for each type came from. However, in most cases the data were also cross-referenced and/or 
supplemented with other data sources. Information on each reference is included in the database, such as 
the title, publication details, author’s name, and how its data were used in NUSAD. 


Table 1: Data Contained in NUSAD 


Class 

Type 

Area 

Major Reference 

Asset 

International Monitoring System 
(IMS) stations 

World 

CTBT Treaty and Working Group B 
publications 


Collateral monitoring stations 

World 

Appendix F and Prototype International 

Data Centre (PIDC) database 


Direct radiation stations 

World 

Miscellaneous 

Source 

Nuclear power reactors 

World 

International Atomic Energy Agency’s 
(IAEA) Power Reactor Information System 
(PRIS) 


Research reactors and government 
facilities 

US 

US Department of Energy 


Radioactive Material (RAM) 
License holders 

US 

US Nuclear Regulatory Commission and 
individual states governing nuclear 
organizations 


Research reactors and other 
radiation handling facilities 

World 

IAEA 


Past nuclear explosions 

World 

PIDC database 

Geographical 

Countries, regions, and states 

World 

Central Intelligence Agency's (CIA) World 
Factbook 2000 


Cities 

World 

United Nation's (UN) Demographic 
Yearbook 1995 


Country borders and geographical 
features ( e.g ., rivers, lakes) 

World 

Libraries included with ArcIMS 


An asset is any device that can detect radionuclides. The three types of assets are International Monitoring 
System (IMS) stations, collateral stations, and direct radiation stations. The IMS stations consist of the 79 
particulate and 40 xenon radionuclide stations as defined in the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty 
(CTBT). The status of each station (planned or operational) is updated as needed. Collateral monitoring 
stations consist of atmospheric monitoring stations not included in the IMS network in which data could be 
obtained to supplement the IMS station data. An example of a collateral station is a station in the Center of 
Slovak Radiation Monitoring Network. Direct radiation stations record the absolute magnitude of radiation 


252 













































23- rJ Sehtfift 1 j , i , L - L.:iJ L r l j Hitfldnidt! frlc’MlttffJnft aj 5iuik‘<tr - Oxtvimt 2-5, IWft 


present at a site. They do not differentiate between the type of radiation, and, more importantly, the type of 
radionuclides present. An example of a direct radiation station is a station in the Neighborhood 
Environmental Watch Network (NEWNET) operated by Los Alamos National Laboratory. Pertinent 
information regarding each asset is recorded in the database including the station’s name, location (address, 
latitude, longitude, and elevation), sensor type and design, point of contact information, data format, and 
how to obtain data from the station. 

A source is any facility that could potentially release radionuclides. Table 2 lists the types of sources 
currently included in NUSAD. Data for nuclear power plants predominantly came from the Power Reactor 
Information System (PRIS) maintained by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Data for other 
nuclear facilities come from a variety of references summarized in Table 1. NUSAD also contains a list of 
RAM license holders within the US. These data come from each state’s governing nuclear organization 
and the US Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC). Pertinent information regarding each source is 
recorded in the database including the source’s name, location, point of contact information, 
organization)s) responsible for maintaining the source, and the types of nuclides potentially emitted from 
the source. Additional information is recorded for nuclear reactors including design type, power capacity, 
and information pertaining to the reactor history ( e.g ., criticality date). 


Table 2: NUSAD Source Types 


Code 

Source Type 

NPP 

Nuclear power plant 

NRF 

Nuclear research facility 

KTS 

Known nuclear test site 

PTS 

Potential nuclear test site 

FRP 

Fuel reprocessing facility 

UEF 

Uranium enrichment facility 

WFP 

Weapon fabrication plant 

FFP 

Fuel fabrication plant 

NWL 

Nuclear weapons lab 

RPF 

Radioisotope production facility 

NMF 

Nuclear medical facility 

FSF 

Fuel storage facility 

RAM 

Other radioactive material license 


Because the NUSAD data is to be displayed on maps, the database must also contain geographical data. 

The majority of geographical features (e.g., rivers) and country borders came from the geographic data 
provided with ArcIMS. These data are provided in shapefde 2 format and are not technically part of the 
Oracle component of NUSAD but are displayed with the NUSAD data in the GDT. Additional data were 
required to fill gaps in the ArcIMS libraries. These data are regions, countries, states, and cities. The city 
data contains location and population. The references for the geographical data are given in Table 1. 

The data contained in NUSAD must be accurate and beyond reproach in order for it to be considered a 
reliable source of information. Hence, a QA/QC program was established to determine the reliability of a 
source of information (i.e., a reference) and the accuracy of material entered into NUSAD. The execution 
of the QA/QC program follows the step process depicted in Figure 1. The material contained in NUSAD is 
drawn from various official and unofficial references. A reliability rating numbered five through one is 
assigned to each reference where a rating of five represents a very dependable reference and rating of one 


A shapefde is the format used by ESR1 products to represent spatial data and is the de facto standard file 
format often used in geographical information systems. 


253 






23 rJ i't'j'jridri' Ftmcui-ch ftwb.'ty; Wtffldwide Mi/nitpfintf <!} iYulA. ‘<tr Expttrthtrr, - Ocii?biit 2-i, 2fffft 



Figure 1: Flowchart of QA/QC Procedure 


denotes an unreliable reference. Factors that affect the reliability rating include the consistency of their 
content with other works received, the date of publication, the publisher, the author, and the author’s 
position on the topic discussed in the document. The ratings are stored in NUSAD and the NUSAD 
reference library. 

The position (longitude and latitude) of most assets, sources, and cities are stored in NUSAD. Each 
position is also assigned a reliability rating that is based on reliability of its reference, the precision of the 
data, and how the position was obtained. Many of the source and asset references did not contain position 
data. In these cases the position had to be estimated from its address or nearest city. The position 
reliability rating informs a NUSAD user on the precision and accuracy of each position datum. 


254 

















23- rJ Sehtfift 1 j , i , L-L.:iJ L r l j HiH'ldn-idt? frlc’Mlt-GfJnft aj 5iuik‘<tr E.zpiftdfttif. - Oxtvimt 2-5, Ififft 


Data Entering Tool 

The NUSAD data are stored in an Oracle database. When 
properly connected to the database all data can be viewed 
using SQL. However, this method requires substantial 
knowledge of SQL and the database schema. The DET was 
created to provide easier access to the data. It provides an 
interface to the database that allows users to easily enter, 
delete, modify, and view data. The DET is implemented as a 
Java application and thus may be run on any platform that 
supports the Java runtime environment. Supported platforms 
include Windows 2000/NT and most UNIX workstations. 
The NUSAD DET application may connect to the database 
via any workstation that has a connection to the Internet 
provided the user has proper authorization. 

The NUSAD DET provides two main methods for viewing 
and editing data in the database: the browser window and the 
editor window. The browser window displays multiple data 
elements in a tabular format that provides an overview of 
specific database tables or table combinations. The data 
displayed in a browser window was determined to be the 
most pertinent representing that data type. The editor 
window is required to access all data related to a particular 
data element. A list of the possible browser windows is 
shown in Figure 2. Figure 3 shows the Source Browser 
Window. The editor windows can be accessed through the 
browser windows. 



Figure 2: List of Browser Windows 


The editor windows provide a more detailed view of the data for an individual entry in the database. The 
editor window uses a data entry format that allows users to edit all individual fields associated with a data 



Figure 3: Source Browser Window 


255 
















































23- rJ Sehtfift 1 j , i , L - L.:iJ L r l j ftcrrew: Hitfldnidt! frlc’Mlt-GfJnft aj 5iuik‘<tr E.zpiftdfttif. - Oxtvimt 2-5, IWft 


element. Using this window a user can also add new entries or delete existing entries from the database. 

An example of the Source Editor Window and the Reactor Editor Window is shown in Figures 4 and 5, 
respectively. Many of the sources, assets, and references contained in NUSAD have web pages associated 
with them not maintained as part of NUSAD. However, links to these web pages are stored in NUSAD. A 
user can open these web pages in their default browser from some editor windows. 



Figure 4: Source Editor Window 



Figure 5: Reactor Editor Window 


256 

























































23- rJ Sehtfift 1 j , i , L - L.:iJ L r l j ftcrrew: HiH'ldn-idt? frlc’Mlt-GfJnft t>j \at:k‘(tr E.cfrittthttiX - Oxtvimt 2-5, IWft 


Geographical Display Tool 

The GDT allows users to geographically visualize NUSAD data on configurable maps. The GDT consists 
of the ArcIMS geographical information system (GIS) coupled with NUSAD and specialized Java-based 
software. Users with Internet access and proper authorization can log onto the GDT server and download 
the GDT client. Using the GDT client running through Microsoft’s Internet Explore (Netscape is not 
currently supported), the user can select the map configuration and the NUSAD data to be displayed. The 
user submits a request to the GDT server. The GDT server then processes this request and returns a 
shapefile containing the requested information. The GDT client displays the shapefile as a map. Figure 6 
shows a world map with IMS stations and nuclear power plants displayed. All maps are downloaded in 
worldview. However, the user can manipulate the worldview by zooming in or by changing the baseline 
projection. Figure 7 shows map of northern Europe with IMS stations, collateral stations, nuclear power 
plants, and known nuclear test sites displayed. 

All of the data types listed in Table 2 along with IMS stations, collateral stations, direct radiation stations, 
and certain geographical features can be display through the GDT. Each data type is displayed as a discrete 
symbol on the map. Combinations of certain data types can also be displayed as discrete symbols. Once a 



Figure 6: NUSAD GDT - World View 


o Nuclear Power Reactor 
Fac ilities 

^ IMS Radionuclude 
Stations 



© 

A 


E 


Figure 7: NUSAD GDT - Northern Europe View 


Historic Nuclear We^ on 
Test Sites (NZ) 

Nuclear Power Reactor 
Facilities 

IMS Radionuclude Stations 

Collateral Radionuclide 
Stations 


257 
























23 rJ i't'j'jridri' Ftmcui-ch ftwb.'ty; Wtffldwide Mi/nitpfintf <!} iVut /t ‘<tr Espitthtitta - Ocii?bi!t 2-i, 2fffft 


data type is downloaded it can be turned on or off without downloading a new map. However, additional 
data will have to be downloaded if new data types are to be displayed. 

The symbols used on the map contain hot-links so that a user can easily obtain additional information 
concerning the data. A mouse over a particular symbol displays the name of the data element. A click on 
the symbol provides the user with a selection of auxiliary windows that can be opened with an additional 
click. The auxiliary windows are a table viewer displaying pertinent information about the data element 
and the NUSAD DET 3 preloaded to the selected item. 

CONCH SIGNS AM) RECOMMEMXVl'IONS 


The Nuclear Sources and Assets Database (NUSAD) has been developed and is being maintained at the 
CMR. NUSAD is an Oracle-based database that contains information regarding nuclear sources and assets 
throughout the world. All data has undergone a QA/QC program to ensure accuracy and integrity. The 
NUSAD data can be accessed using the DET and the GDT. The DET is a Java-based GUI that provides an 
interface to the database allowing users to easily enter, delete, modify, and view all data in the database. 
The GDT is an ArcIMS-based GIS that allows users to geographically visualize NUSAD data on 
configurable maps. The DET and the GDT can be used to interact with NUSAD data from within CMR or 
via the Internet with proper authorization. NUSAD with the DET and the GDT can be used to assist in 
identifying the source of radionuclides found in data from the IDC and other institutions. It can also be 
used to identify additional assets to either confirm or contradict IMS station data. 

Three recommendations will be made to enhance NUSAD. First, in order for the NUSAD to obtain 
maximum usefulness, its data must remain current. Certain data must periodically be investigated to ensure 
its accuracy. For example, several of the nuclear assets originally identified in 1998 have recently ceased 
operations; a static database would not reflect this change. Maintaining a quality database is an ongoing 
effort. Second, the quantity and quality of nuclear source data, excluding nuclear reactors, within the US is 
superior compared to data for the rest of the world. Additional work needs to be performed to identify and 
quantify worldwide nuclear sources other than nuclear reactors. Finally, as described in Seber (2000), 
databases also exist that are similar to NUSAD but orientated towards seismic events instead of 
radionuclide releases. It would be useful to merge these data sets (and data viewers) so that individuals or 
organizations researching the cause of a potential nuclear event can obtain all pertinent auxiliary 
information from one location and in one format. 


REFERENCES 


Seber, D., E. Sandvol, C. Sandvol, C. Brindisi, and M. Barazangi (2000), Global and Regional GIS 
Database Development in Support of CTBT Monitoring, Proceedings of 22 nd Annual DOD/DOE 
Seismic Research Symposium, 12-15 September, 2000. 


3 Assuming the DET is installed locally on the user’s computer. 


258 



