A Tool for Automated Design and Evaluation of Habitat 

Interior Layouts 


Matthew A. Simon 

NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA, 23681, USA 
Dr. Alan W. Wilhite 

Georgia Institute of Technology, Hampton, VA, 23666, USA 


The objective of space habitat design is to minimize mass and system size while providing 
adequate space for all necessary equipment and a functional layout that supports crew 
health and productivity. Unfortunately, development and evaluation of interior layouts is 
often ignored during conceptual design because of the subjectivity and long times required 
using current evaluation methods (e.g., human-in-the-loop mockup tests and in-depth CAD 
evaluations). Early, more objective assessment could prevent expensive design changes that 
may increase vehicle mass and compromise functionality. This paper describes a new 
interior design evaluation method to enable early, structured consideration of habitat 
interior layouts. This interior layout evaluation method features a comprehensive list of 
quantifiable habitat layout evaluation criteria, automatic methods to measure these criteria 
from a geometry model, and application of systems engineering tools and numerical methods 
to construct a multi-objective value function measuring the overall habitat layout 
performance. In addition to a detailed description of this method, a C++/OpenGL software 
tool which has been developed to implement this method is also discussed. This tool leverages 
geometry modeling coupled with collision detection techniques to identify favorable layouts 
subject to multiple constraints and objectives (e.g., minimize mass, maximize contiguous 
habitable volume, maximize task performance, and minimize crew safety risks). Finally, a 
few habitat layout evaluation examples are described to demonstrate the effectiveness of this 
method and tool to influence habitat design. 


Nomenclature 


Acronyms 
ECLSS = 

EVA 

ISA-GJK = 
ISS 


Environmental Control and Life 

Support System 

Extra- Vehicular Activity 

Incremental Separating Axis - Gilbert- 

Johnson-Keerthi 

International Space Station 


LSS 

MPLM 

PCM 

PSO 


Lunar Surface System 
Multi-Purpose Logistics Module 
Pressurized Core Module 
Particle Swarm Optimizer 


I. Introduction 


D esigning habitats for crewed in-space or planetary surface missions is a complex, highly constrained task with 
many conflicting objectives. Habitats must provide a living volume appropriate for the mission duration and all 
of the functions and consumables required to support crew (e.g., a breathable atmosphere, clean water, food, a place 
to sleep, workstations to support crew tasks, etc.) Designers must ensure all of these systems are included and 
properly integrated while minimizing mass and cost. This is critical as habitats are often large, massive elements 
which must be pushed through most of a mission’s propulsive maneuvers to support the crew. This large ‘gear ratio’ 
drives the design of launch vehicles and propulsion stages and often drives the overall cost and complexity of a 
mission. Therefore, the optimization of habitat designs is an important aspect of the development of any human 
space exploration mission. 

The habitat design process involves the selection, sizing, and arrangement of the interior equipment and 
logistics required for a mission into an interior layout, which must fit within an appropriately sized pressure shell. 
The objective of habitat designers is to minimize mass and vehicle size while providing adequate space and a 
functional layout for crew health and productivity 1,2,3 . The interior arrangement step of this process seeks to ensure 
that the interior equipment required for a crewed mission can be physically accommodated while providing the best 


1 

American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 


compromise between performance metrics such as mass, volume, workflow efficiency, and habitability. Balancing 
interior layout performance is especially critical at the conceptual design so that feasibility issues, safety concerns, 
and requirements violations can be identified before they result in expensive design changes, increased mass growth, 
or reduced functionality. However, ensuring that an interior layout is effectively balanced is non-trivial as there is 
currently no comprehensive and timely method to measure the effectiveness of an interior layout and track the 
complex, conflicting habitat design objectives during conceptual design. This missing evaluation capability 
increases the uncertainty surrounding conceptual habitat designs and prevents further efforts to optimize habitat 
designs for improved exploration mission performance. These concerns led to current research to improve the 
interior layout evaluation process for conceptual design in pursuit of an end-to-end habitat optimization capability. 

This paper outlines a new, structured method to quickly measure the effectiveness of habitat interior designs, 
allowing for comparison of layouts at conceptual design and enabling the previously undemonstrated capability to 
automate the generation of habitat interiors. This will increase the understanding of habitat interior concerns at 
conceptual design and potentially result in cost and performance improvements enabling long duration missions. 
Section II will describe the proposed interior layout evaluation process which was developed through application of 
a systems engineering methodology. The section will also describe the selection of evaluation criteria and how these 
feed together into a multi-criteria objective function measuring overall layout effectiveness. Section III describes 
how these criteria are quantified using collision detection algorithms, functional separation/collocation matrices, and 
the use of discrete grid-based iterative methods. Section IV discusses the structure of the computer program created 
to implement this method. Section V provides a description and results from the example problem used to 
demonstrate the method, and Section VI describes the remaining work to complete this research. 

II. Evaluation Method 

Current methods for evaluating the goodness of these layouts involve human-in-the-loop mockup tests, in-depth 
CAD evaluations, and subjective design evaluation studies 1 . However, none of these methods are currently 
compatible with the conceptual phase of design or automation because of the significant time required to prepare 
and evaluate each layout. These methods were compared to the NASA Systems Engineering Trade Study Process 4 to 
identify gaps which must be addressed to improve the habitat interior layout evaluation process. The major 
improvements identified to enable fast habitat interior layout evaluation are: 

A comprehensive, automatically quantifiable set of evaluation criteria 
A mathematical, computer representation of layout geometry and subsystem characteristics 
A structured method to capture designer preferences 

A multi-criteria objective function providing an aggregate measure of overall layout effectiveness 

In order to evaluate multiple layout alternatives quickly and repeatably, a structured systems engineering- 
derived process built around quantifying a multi-criteria objective function for alternative layouts has been 
developed. This process needed to implement each of these improvements and employ several time-saving 
techniques to achieve the desired evaluation time of seconds per layout. A two part process is proposed: Layout 
Generation and Layout Evaluation, first, a structured Layout Generation method is created to translate mission 
requirements into the required layout geometric ‘building blocks’ and then generate mathematically representable 
layouts alternatives from these pieces compatible with the evaluation process. Then each of the layout evaluation 
improvements can be integrated into a systems engineering-derived Layout Evaluation process to calculate an 
objective function value which measures the overall acceptability of each layout, figure 1 and figure 2 present the 
proposed combined process for layout generation and evaluation based upon the basic systems engineering trade 
study process described in Ref. 4, but customized to implement the desired improvements. 

Lor illustration, the NASA Scenario 12.0 Pressurized Core Module (PCM) habitat from the NASA 
Constellation Lunar Surface Scenario (LSS) team study 5 shown in figure 1 is used to demonstrate each step. This 
habitat was designed as part of a three module lunar surface habitat to support four crewmembers for durations up to 
180 days. The diverse mix of functions represented in the design will facilitate discussion of the chosen evaluation 
criteria and measurement methods. 

A. Layout Generation Process 

figure 1 shows the Layout Generation process, which translates requirements into geometric representations of 
physical hardware that can then be constructed into layouts for evaluation, first, the design problem and any design 
constraints to be enforced are defined. Examples of design problem descriptions with constraints are: “redesign 


2 


Layout Generation Process 


EXAMPLE: 

Scenario 12.0 Pressurized Core Module (PCM) 5 



Requirements: 

Improve upon NASA Scenario 12.0 PCM (lunar surface habitat 
for 1 80 days crew stays) design by rearranging layout 

Functional Decomposition: 

Galley, Wardroom, ECLSS, Stowage, Exercise, Waste and 
Hygiene, Medical, and Bio/Life Workstation 

Generate Physical Subsystems: 

0 




Evaluate: 

Calculate Objective Function Value 

• Evaluation Criteria (e.g. habitable volume,...) 

• Designer Preferences (relative importance of evaluation criteria, 
desired values of criteria) 

• Constraints (habitable volume, aisle width, ...) 


Figure 1: Systems Engineering Basic Habitat Interior Layout Process 


Layout Evaluation Process 



Figure 2: Proposed Systems Engineering Interior Layout Evaluation Process 


3 

















the interior of an existing International Space Station module keeping pressure vessel geometry constant” or “design 
a minimum mass lunar surface habitat.” Additionally, specific mission requirements such as crewed duration, 
number of crew, and the destination must be defined. These requirements are necessary to dictate the required 
functions and set the appropriate context for the definition of designer preferences. In the case of the Scenario 12.0 
PCM, the design problem statement and mission requirements are to redesign the interior of one module of a habitat 
supporting four crewmembers for 180 days of exploration of the lunar surface while maintaining the current 
pressure vessel and complement of subsystems. 

The functions necessary to achieve the mission can be readily identified through a functional decomposition of 
the duration, mission tasks, and destination requirements established in the first step 6,7 . Fundamentally, most habitats 
provide the same functions, but the level of performance required within each function varies at certain breakpoints 
as mission requirements become more challenging. Comparing the mission requirements to these breakpoints leads 
to a direct determination of the hardware necessary for the required performance. This hardware is then distributed 
amongst the habitat modules (if multiple modules are assumed) based upon the specialized purpose of each habitat 
module. For example, in the Scenario 12.0 habitat concept, the 180 day duration at a lunar surface destination 
dictated the selection of appropriate subsystem hardware. Hardware items allocated to the PCM are focused on 
group and work activities and include: Galley, Wardroom, Life Support (partially closed), Stowage, Waste and 
Hygiene, Medical, and Biology/Life Science Research Station. 

The ‘generate physical subsystems’ step involves the creation of a mathematical representation of hardware 
geometry and other characteristics of the equipment that influence its layout placement (e.g., tasks performed at 
hardware, mass, etc.) The historical habitat interior design process uses detailed CAD models or drafted drawings to 
represent the space taken up by the hardware in the layouts. These models can be powerful tools at the detail design 
phase, but their long creation times and complexity is often incompatible with fast layout evaluation. The proposed 
process uses a simple polyhedral representation of the hardware geometry derived from computer animation and 
video game programming which is well structured for use in layout creation and evaluation criteria calculation 
methods. By representing geometries as simple polyhedral objects specified by matrices of vertices and faces as 
shown in Figure 3, the overlap of geometries can be detected with standard collision detection algorithms to prevent 
the creation of unrealizable layouts 8 . Additionally, this polyhedral object representation allows for generation of 
layouts by simply manipulating the location and orientation of each subsystem through definition of translation and 
rotation matrices. What results is a fast, simple, mathematically operable method of constructing layout alternatives 
with relatively simple sets of data. Generating layouts in the following step simply involves assigning positions and 
orientations to each polyhedral object. 

Additionally, using object-oriented programming allows for the embedding of detailed function and interface 
information together with the geometry data in arrays or matrices within an indexed object. The types of object 
information required include: the mass of an object, the function it belongs to, any separation or collocation 
relationships associated with the provided function, geometry and location of anthropometric envelopes reserved for 
human interaction with the object, and keep out zones for moving parts. Collocated storage of this information with 
geometry data facilitates straightforward calculation of evaluation criteria which track these characteristics in 
combination with geometry. The importance of this layout and data representation method will be discussed more in 
Section III. The full list of inputs provided to the evaluation process is shown in Table 1. 



Object j 



0.0 


Geometry Matrices 
Location Matrices 

- Mass 

- Function 

- Separation/Colocation 

- Preferred Orientation 

- Anthropometric Envelopes 
'Keep out' zone Envelopes 


Figure 3: Mathematical Representation of Object Geometry Collocated with Detailed Information 


4 




Table 1: Full List of Inputs Provided to the Evaluation Process 


Mission Specifications 

Destination (LEO, Moon, Mars, etc) 
Duration of stay 
Number of crew 
Crew composition (scheduling) 

EVA requirements 

Landing requirements 
Gravity orientation / magnitude 
Surface dust requirements 


Pressure Vessel Geometry and Specifications 

Basic dimensions 

Shape 

Orientation 

Mass (input option available) 

Floor height or floor area 

Ceiling height 
Number of hatches 
Hatch locations 

Hatch dimensions 


Component Geometry and Specifications 

Dimensions 
Vertices coordinates 
Location (XYZ coordinates) 
Orientation 

Face data (which vertices in what 
face, normal vectors) 

Specification of front face(s) 
Component Mass 
Reserved volumes type 
Reserved volume geometries 
(vertices/lines/faces) 

Function / task supported 

Line runs required 

Zoning requirements (privacy, noise, 
clean/dirty) 

Criticality of component 
Frequency/duration of use 


External Interfaces 

Location of hatch closest to EVA area 

Distance of functions from hatch in 

external element (actual or estimate) 

Orientation 

Water inlet location 

Power inlet location 


Hatch type (EVA, inter-element, etc) 
Diameter of endcap flattening for hatch 
placement 


B. Layout Evaluation Process 

Figure 2 shows the proposed Layout Evaluation process, which combines quantitative evaluation criteria 
measurements, subjective designer preferences, and design problem constraints into a single aggregate measure of 
the overall performance of a layout. In order to enable the comparison of multiple layouts at conceptual design 
leading to the automated generation of acceptable layouts, this process and its component steps must be carefully 
structured to reduce the evaluation time of each layout. First, before any layouts are evaluated, the three types of 
information are collected from the designer: 1) the relative importance of the evaluation criteria to establish criteria 
weightings , 2) desired values and acceptable ranges for each of the criteria to establish utility functions , and 3) any 
constraints the designer wishes to place on the design problem. By collecting this information before layout 
evaluation, it is possible to apply the same preferences and constraints to multiple layout concepts enabling apples- 
to-apples comparisons. Each of these three is described in more detail. 

Criteria Weightings 

The relative importance of the evaluation criteria gives the designer an opportunity to customize the objective 
function to his/her preferences and the appropriate context of the design problem. This relative importance can be 
determined through expert elicitation using Analytic Hierarchy Process, a pair-wise comparison method which 
converts relative preferences scores between criteria to calculate normalized ‘criteria weightings’ for each 
criterion 9,10 . These weightings are used to screen the evaluation criteria to those with the most effect on the objective 
function. 

Utility Functions 

In order to ensure each of the evaluation criteria values are combined in the objective function using common 
units (preventing criteria with high numerical values from dominating the solution), a function is used to normalize 
each calculated criteria value to a number between 0 and 1 (where 0 is lowest permissible performance and 1 is peak 
performance). This normalized score represents the designer’s perceived ‘utility’ of a criteria value over the possible 
range of values. In most cases, linear utility functions are acceptable. However, linear improvement in the value of 
an evaluation criterion does not always correspond to a linear improvement in the designer’s preference of that 
value. For example, at low values of habitable volume (e.g., 5 m 3 /person) even slight volume increases may provide 
significantly improved human comfort, safety, or productivity. However, at high values (e.g., 40 m 3 /person), even 
large increases in volume have diminishing returns as the volume becomes spacious to the point of being wasted. 
This diminishing return is reflected in the shape of the habitable utility function shown in Figure 4, which shows a 
negligible utility improvement past the value corresponding to the optimal amount of volume 11 . The method selected 
for collecting and applying this designer preference is Mid-Preference Level Splitting 10 which uses a structured set 
of questions to shape the ‘utility function’ used to map evaluation criteria values to utilities. 


5 


Utility of Habitable Volume = 0.96 



Constraints 

Constraints are limits specified by designer preference, physical realizability or human/spaceflight standards 
which are placed upon either the physical location of interior equipment or the values of the evaluation criteria 
measurements. Examples of constraints include hardcoded placement of certain pieces of hardware, prevention of 
overlapping hardware geometries, or human performance standard constraints like minimum volumes and minimum 
translation path widths. One of the difficulties in enforcing constraints on the interior layout is the decision of how 
to implement the constraints into the decision process. For hardware -hardware interferences, the simplest option 
would be to declare a configuration unfeasible if interferences occur. However, this will make automating the 
placement of interior components very difficult (e.g. if a layout is close to the optimum performance but a small 
clearance problem caused it to be missed). Selectively allowing interferences to some degree can improve traversal 
of the layout design space towards optimum configurations. 

Penalty functions applied at the objective function level are the anticipated best method to implement 
constraints. Penalty functions return exponentially increasing large values as constraints are violated, which can be 
subtracted from the unconstrained weighted sum of evaluation criteria to prevent layout designs which violate 
constraints from being acceptable. Interior penalty functions increase before the constraint is violated to enforce 
‘hard’ constraints which must be met for feasible designs. Exterior penalty functions are used for ‘soft’ constraints 
where slight violations are acceptable. In general, exterior penalty functions are anticipated to provide more 
flexibility in finding solutions. Additionally, all constraints can be relaxed during early iterations to prevent a lack of 
freedom for the optimization method to explore the design space and some schedule of the rate of increase of the 
penalty functions can be implemented to avoid local optima. For more information on external penalty functions see 
Ref. 12. 

Evaluation Criteria 

Apart from designer preferences, the only part of Figure 2 feeding into the objective function not defined yet is 
the automatically quantifiable evaluation criteria values. Investigation of previous evaluation methods identified 
that no comprehensive, expert approved list of quantifiable evaluation criteria capturing both engineering and human 
habitability concerns has been created 6 ’ 13 ' 16 . In particular, the desire to improve consideration of habitability issues 
into the layout evaluation is well documented 5,16 " 22 . The development of a comprehensive set of automatically 
quantifiable evaluation criteria calculable from layout geometry and hardware functional characteristics is critical to 
ensuring high-quality habitat designs and speeding up the evaluation process. 

The proposed evaluation criteria set is derived from existing quantitative and qualitative habitat and terrestrial 
architecture evaluation methods and human integration handbooks 1,6,14,15,19,23 ' 26 . In order to ensure a comprehensive 
set of criteria was chosen, a structured screening process was used to assess whether a criterion was essential to the 
assessment of interior layouts. First, a comprehensive list of all possible habitat interior layout evaluation criteria 
was created from an extensive literature review of space habitat design 7,11,27 , space vehicle habitability 6,14,24,26 , 
industrial engineering, and terrestrial architecture references (particularly from Architectural Programming 28 and a 


6 


field of study focusing on automation in architecture, and Space Layout Planning ’ ’ Additionally, several of the 
more complete evaluation criteria sets used in existing habitat design literature were included 6,13,14,15,24,32 " 34 . The hilly 
comprehensive list of possible criteria was then screened based upon the following list of desired characteristics. 
Criteria should be: 

As independent as possible from other criteria to prevent an over-emphasis on any particular measure 10 

Explicitly dependent upon layout or pressure vessel geometry, which allows for the exclusion of many 

aesthetic criteria such as color or textures which can be changed with little to no impact after optimizing 

interior layouts 

Intuitive and easy to justify 10 

Consistent with existing requirements 1 1,35 

Finally, as the habitat design experts are the target users of this methodology, the criteria should be habitat expert 
recognized and approved. This final step was achieved by vetting the resulting list of criteria with the NASA 
Johnson Space Center habitation and layout evaluation experts. 

The resulting comprehensive evaluation criteria set is shown in Figure 5 grouped into the following four 
categories: Mass, Volume, Task Performance, and Crew Health, Well-Being, and Safety. Mass criteria track the 
effect that the interior layout has on the overall mass of the habitat. Volume criteria measure the efficiency in the 
utilization of the interior volume and general psychological acceptability of the space. Task Performance criteria 
measure the impact of the layout to the productivity of crew through the impact of schedule based factors and the 
placement of tasks within the habitat. Finally Crew Health, Well-Being, and Safety criteria track several factors 
which directly impact the physiological or psychological health of the crew or pertain to contingency operations. 
Each of these criteria is summarized in Appendix A: Evaluation Criteria Descriptions 

Table 5 in Appendix A and described in detail (including quantification methods) as shown in Appendix A: 
Figure 18 and Figure 19 for habitable volume and separation for privacy examples. 


Mass 


— Structure 
Mass 

— Equipment Mass 
Line Run Mass 


Volume 


— Habitable 
Volume 

— Unusable 
Volume 

— Available 
Non-dedicated 
Stowage 
Volume 

— Habitable Floor Area 
Other Usable 
Horizontal 
Surface Area 

Largest Spatial 
Vista 


Task 

Performance 


— Colocation of 
Sequential Tasks 

— Anthropometry 
of High Duration 
Tasks 

Interferences 

— Colocation of 
Equipment/ 
Related Storage by 
Function 

— Placement for 
Function/ 
Ergonomics 


Crew Health, Well 
Being, and Safety 


— Size of Dedicated 
Private Space 

— Separation for 
Privacy 

— Separation of 
Clean and Dirty 
Zones 

— Separation for 
Noise 

— Minimum 
Translation 
Path Width 


— Placement for 
High Frequency/ 

Duration Use 

Figure 5: Comprehensive Habitat Interior Layout Evaluation Criteria Set 


In the development of this set of evaluation criteria, several qualitative criteria were mapped to quantitative 
proxies. Review of previous evaluation methods has shown that user measurement of evaluation criteria must be 
reduced to ensure consistent evaluations and accelerate the evaluation process. In the creation of a fully quantitative 
set of evaluation criteria, analysis and reformulation of qualitative measures is needed. Figure 6 outlines the process 
taken to reformulate the criteria with a practical example. Spaciousness is a broad measure of the psychological 
acceptability of the size and shape of an interior layout. It is measured by a wide range of criteria which can loosely 
be split into two categories: quantitative and qualitative. The quantitative measures are easily measurable and 
straightforward in definition. The qualitative measures are more difficult to measure, as they deal more with 
perception than physical measurement. Qualitative measures can be divided into three basic categories. Semi-layout 
independent measures like color or a “clean look’ tend to be modifiable with little to no impact on the design, 
layout, or size and can be removed from consideration. Designer preferences like the relative importance of each of 
these measures or the acceptable values of each criterion have already been discussed as weightings and utilities. 


7 






Spaciousness 


Perception-driven measures are still 
dependent upon layout, but cannot be 
determined without user assessment of the 
layout in an analogous test situation. 

However, measurable proxy variables can be 
used to approximate qualitative perception- 
based criteria. For example, in Figure 6 
crowdedness measures the degree to which 
crewmembers will feel crowded or that their 
tasks are impeded by the presence of other 
crew members. This is strongly correlated 
with the privacy measure which measures the 
extent to which crew feel that their privacy 
needs are met. The combination of several 
quantitative measures like the number of 
overlaps of high-frequency and high duration 
tasks (which use schedules and task locations 
to measure how often crew locations might 
overlap) and the width of the translation paths 
(which measures the ability of crew to pass by 
one another without intersecting) can 
approximate the potential for crowding. Similarly the size and distribution of private and public spaces can also 
approximate aspects of crowdedness and privacy. By mapping all qualitative perception-based measures to 
quantitative proxies which approximately measure the same factors, a fully quantitative criteria set can be created. 
Every criterion in Figure 5 can be measured directly or by some quantitative proxy. Ensuring that these criteria can 
be automatically measured is the focus of Section III. 


Example: 

'V 

Quantitative measures 

• Ceiling height 

• Spatial vista 

• Habitablevolume 

• Habitablefloor area 

Quantitative proxies of 
qualitative measures 

• Task interference 

• Translation path width 

• Size of private spaces 

• Separation of private 
spaces from public 
spaces 


Qualitative measures 



Designer Preferences 
• Relative importance of 
each measure 


Figure 6: Mapping of Qualitative Evaluation Criteria to 
Quantitative Proxies 


Objective Function 

The final step of the layout evaluation process is the assembly and calculation of a weighted, constrained multi - 
criteria objective function from the designer preferences, evaluation criteria values, and applicable constraints. A 
high level description of the weighted-sum multi -criteria objective function is provided in Equation 1. 


y(A) = \-Y u w,u i (x i (A)) + 

j 


( 1 ) 


where: Y(A) = the aggregate value of layout A 

Wi = the relative importance weighting of each criteria i 

Xi(A) = the measured/calculated values of each criterion, i, corresponding to the layout A (specified by 
locations of equipment) 

Ui(Xi(A)) = The utility function value for each criteria calculated from the measured value X { (A) 

Pj(A) = Penalty function values to enforce constraint j for layout A 
f 0 if constraint is met 

w ere ^ ' (a * gj(x)2 if the jth constraint is violated 

where g(x) is the amount the constraint is violated and a is some constant indicating how hard the 
constraint is to be applied 


The resulting function represents an aggregate measure of the overall performance of a layout for the specific set of 
designer preferences. It provides a structured and quantifiable way to justify the selection of one configuration over 
another and provides insight into which interior design features most directly affect the ‘goodness’ of a 
configuration. Furthermore, eliminating subjectivity in the measures of layout effectiveness enables the use of a 
stochastic optimization method to quickly improve interior layout designs, so long as the methods used to calculate 
the evaluation criteria are not too time consuming. This process has been utilized on many similar problems in space 
layout planning 29 " 31 . 

It should be noted that the quality of each evaluation greatly depends on the fidelity of the modeling and 
supporting data that feeds into the measured evaluation criteria values. For this paper, low-medium fidelity data is 
used to demonstrate the operation of the methodology. 


8 


III. Evaluation Criteria Quantification Methods 

Though each of the evaluation criteria shown in Figure 5 is quantifiable, that does not imply that a method 
exists to automatically calculate its value without user interaction. For example, habitable volume is a quantifiably 
measurable quantity, but the current method for measuring it from an interior layout is manual measurement using a 
CAD model 36 . There are also several other desired characteristics of the measurement methods: 

Calculable from layout and available data, with no user interaction 
Require minimal computational time to solution 
Scalable to various design precisions 

Traceable to definitions of measures provided in references (particularly Ref. 6) 

Easy to setup 

Several mechanisms enabling the automatic calculation of evaluation criteria values were identified through 
extensive investigation of related fields of study including packing/container loading problems 37,38 and space layout 
planning 29 " 31 . In particular, three mechanisms were identified which will enable the development of measurement 
methods meeting all desired characteristics: 1) collision detection, 2) grid-based numerical methods, and 3) 
separation/collocation matrices. 


A. Collision Detection 

Collision detection (also 
known as interference detection 
or contact determination) is the 
detection of contact, overlap, or 
intersection of geometries 8 . It is 
used extensively in video games, 
virtual prototyping, robotics, 
animation, and engineering 
simulations. In the evaluation of 
habitat layout alternatives it 
serves two purposes. First, 
interferences between pieces of 
hardware and between hardware 
and pressure vessel structure must be detected to ensure that only physically realizable layouts are acceptable. 
Second, collision detection can be used to measure several of the volume evaluation criteria which measure volume 
or task performance criteria counting potential interferences between different types of objects. 

To develop quantification methods for the evaluation criteria listed in Figure 5 and Appendix A, the three types 
of collision tests are summarized in Figure 7. Figure 7 also lists the criteria which depend upon these methods for 
quantification. Testing if a point is inside an object allows for the determination of sizes of open volumes when 
combined with numerical methods discussed in the next section. Determining the intersection point between a line 
and an object can be used to determine line of sight distances. Collision detection between three-dimensional 
geometries enables the detection of interferences between pieces of hardware or anthropometric envelopes and is 
critical to the calculation of the realizability constraint. 

The methods for performing these collision tests are well understood and code is freely available 38,39 . Three 
figures of merit are used in the evaluation of collision detection methods: performance (i.e., run time), accuracy in 
detecting collisions, and ease of implementation. Based upon these figure of merit and the availability of a collision 
detection library in Ref. 39, the Incremental Separating Axis - Gilbert- Johnson-Keerthi (ISA-GJK) algorithm 39,40 
was selected for each of the types of collision detection in Figure 7. This algorithm provides fast and consistent 
collision detection between any two convex geometries. When a collision test between a point and hardware 
geometry is required, the point can be modeled as a small sphere enabling one type of collision test for all 
applications. This algorithm is described in detail in Ref 39. 

Because numerical methods requiring several million collision detection calls are used to calculate evaluation 
criteria, fast and reliable collision detection is necessary. The criticality of fast collision detection tests for video 
game and computer animation applications has resulted in the development of many methods to speed up collision 
detection tests. The primary way of ensuring real-time performance of collision detection methods is to eliminate 
low-level tests by removing pairs of objects which clearly do not collide from consideration. This is achieved by the 
use of two major concepts: bounding volumes and spatial partitioning. Bounding volumes use simplified geometries 
to approximate more complicated objects so that expensive tests of complex objects can be avoided. Spatial 


Test if point is in interior of an object 

• Habitable volume, unusable volume, stowage volume, minimum 
translation path width, size of dedicated private space 

Intersection point between a line and an object 

• Spatial vista, minimum translation path width 


Collision detection between three-dimensional 
geometries 

• Anthropometry of high duration tasks, 

• Realizability check 

Figure 7: Types of Collision Detection Needed in Automatic Evaluation 
Criteria Quantification Methods 



9 





partitioning sets up a hierarchy to reduce the number of object pairs tested based upon their location, only testing 
those in the same region of space. In particular, axis aligned hierarchal partitioning where each parent can have 8 
children known as an octree is used in this analysis. 


B. Grid-Based Numerical Methods 

To eliminate CAD-based manual 
measurement of volumes, an automatic method 
of measuring and characterizing different types 
of volume is required. A numerical integration 
approach using an orthogonal Cartesian grid of 
discrete test points spanning the pressurized 
volume of the habitat, shown in Figure 8, was 
proposed. This method first tests points in 
space to determine if they are occupied by Figure 8: Orthogonal Cartesian Grid of Test Points for 
hardware or free’. It then applies several Iterative Evaluation Criteria Measurement Methods 
Boolean collision detection tests based upon the definitions of volume -based criteria to determine if the point should 
count towards a particular type of volume. After characterizing all points in the pressurized volume, the total amount 
of a particular type of volume can then be determined by summing the points conforming to the criteria definition 
and using this sum with the resolution of the grid to make a numerical approximation to the volume represented by 
the points. 

For example, a test point can be characterized as part of the habitable volume by testing whether it is within the 
free, accessible, and functionally usable volume. The specific Boolean tests used to determine if the point should be 
included in habitable volume are all “point-hardware” collision tests defined in the previous section: 

- Is the point inside of the pressure vessel? 

- Is the point under the floor or above the ceiling? (as represented by polyhedral geometry features) 

- Is the point inside any hardware geometry? 

- Is the point above reachable height? (assuming a non-micro gravity environment)? 

- Is the point accessible by a standing or prone astronaut? (illustrated in Figure 9) 

- Is the point accessible by a reaching arm connected to a standing or prone astronaut? (illustrated in Figure 9) 
These points can then be summed as shown in Figure 10 for the Scenario 12.0 PCM to calculate the total habitable 
volume. A similar set of test points can be defined for all of the volume -related evaluation criteria. 




Figure 9: Illustration of Accessible Space for Habitable Volume Calculation 



Resolution (m) 

Number of 
points 

Habitable 
Volume (m 3 ) 

0.10 

33600 

33.6 

0.05 

269600 

33.7 

0.01 

33720000 

33.7 


Figure 10: Calculation of Scenario 12.0 PCM Habitable Volume 


The discrete grid of points can also be used for iterative methods of defining length-based evaluation criteria, 
particularly spatial vista and minimum aisle width. Spatial vista measures the maximum amount of volume that a 
crewmember can see within the habitat as shown in Figure 11. The point of origin from which the viewer’s 
perspective originates is important to the find the maximum possible volume. The discrete points in the grid can be 


10 


used in combination with an optimization method to converge to the point of view measuring the maximum spatial 
vista. Similarly, to quantify the minimum translation path width, points of origin must be on the translation path, 
which changes with every layout. The grid of points can be used with a robot path planning algorithm like A* or 
Djkstra’s algorithm to construct a translation path from the available points. Then these identified points can be used 
as the points of origin for the measurement of translation path width as shown in Figure 12. 



Figure 11: Use of Discrete Grid-based Iterative Method to Calculate Spatial Vista 



Figure 12: Use of Grid-based Iterative Methods to Measure Minimum Translation Path Width 

It is important to note that for even moderately sized habitats, the assumed resolution of the grid necessary to 
get accurate measurements may include a computationally prohibitive amount of points. For example, a habitat with 
3 m diameter and 7 m length may take as many as 60 million points to characterize the space. Storing data such as 
the location and exact characteristics of each of these points would be difficult. Two methods are taken to prevent 
this problem: 

1. Reduced grid resolution to reduce the number of points which must be tracked. This is particularly 
important in finding the minimum translation path width which must keep track of the location of points in 
the translation path. 

2. Additive calculation with no data can be used to eliminate the need for data storage. For example, when 
calculating habitable volume, the number of points passing each of the Boolean tests can be simply be 
counted using a running counter to determine the volume. 

C. Separation-Colocation Matrices 

Several evaluation criteria measure how well the functional relationships between systems are accommodated 
by their location. This can also be thought of as the degree to which conflicting or complementary hardware are 
separated or collocated, respectively. In spacecraft design and terrestrial architecture this is known as a functional 
relationships analysis 24,26 . 

A calculation method utilizing two types of matrices has been identified in literature 24 : 

1. Matrices capturing the functional relationships between crew tasks are drawn from station crew 
schedules and crew preference elicitation. Mapping these tasks to pieces of hardware provides guidance as 
to whether hardware should be separated or collocated based upon specific criteria such as noise, hygiene, 
etc. 

2. Matrices of the distances between objects can be defined based upon the layout and combined with the 
function relationships matrices to derive a measure of how successful the layout is at accommodating these 
functions. The distances included in these matrices need not be restricted to Euclidean distances. Some 


11 


criteria desire visual separation or hygiene separation which can be augmented by partitions while others 
dealing with the length of shared consumable lines which run along the pressure vessel of the habitat 
behind equipment are best measured with some cylindrical mapping of Manhattan distance. 

The structures of these matrices are shown in Figure 13. In order to derive a single measure of the overall 
effectiveness of a layout to capture these relationships, the Euclidean norm of the Hadamard Product (entry-wise 
product) of the Relationships (R) and Distance (D) matrices was used. ||[R°D]ij||. While this quantity is not 
physically interpretable as any measurement, it can be compared to the range of possible values of this product 
determined by a design space exploration of the distance matrix for the specified pressure vessel geometry to gage 
its performance against possible values. 


Relationships Matrix R[i,j) 

Function (f) 



Distance Matrix D(/,y) 


Function (/) 



Figure 13: Functional Relationships and Distance Matrices 

Detailed automatically calculable algorithms have been created for each of the evaluation criteria in Figure 5 by 
implementing combinations of each of the three enabling mechanisms with logical definition-derived measurements. 
These algorithms are designed for implementation in an object oriented programming language compatible with 
basic geometry modeling. A high level comparison of the quantification methods used in the upcoming example 
problem can be found in Appendix A. 


IV. Software Tool Implementation 

C++ and OpenGL were chosen to implement the method described above. These languages were primarily 
chosen because of the availability of collision detection libraries and the ability to generate a transferrable 
executable file to facilitate sharing. The code operates in the following order. First, the problem description 
information, such as the size of the habitat, is defined. Then, information about the pieces of hardware to be included 
in the layout is read from .csv input files. This includes the geometry of these objects, geometry of reserved volume 
to interact with them, mass, volume, what tasks are 
associated with hardware, etc. The positions of 
hardware may be specified in this input file to 
model one layout or they may be separately defined 
in another file to create a population of layouts. All 
of the information about the objects is stored in 
“structs”, which allow for colocation and facilitated 
access of geometry, position, and functional 
relationship data. Other input files capture the utility 
functions and criteria weightings which are 
determined from expert elicitation over the course 
of a few hours, but these inputs could also be pulled 
from libraries of previous runs in future code 
implementations . 

After all input information is captured; the 
evaluation criteria are calculated from the hardware, 
layout, and relationship data. Iterative methods with 
several Boolean tests are used to measure volumes, 
numbers of interferences, and priority placement of 
hardware. For other criteria, simple analytical 
calculations are used to obtain values. Values for 



Figure 14: OpenGL Output of Layout Evaluation Tool 


12 




these criteria are combined with input utility function parameters to map these measured values to the utility values, 
which are then combined with weightings in a weighted sum to obtain the unconstrained performance of each 
layout. Then a set of collision tests are used to calculate constraint violations. Violated constraints are then added to 
the unconstrained objective function values to obtain the constrained performance of a layout. Images of the layout 
are then rendered using the OpenGL visualization capability as shown in Figure 14, using transparent blue and 
yellow boxes to track the reserved volumes and translation paths. 

In addition to evaluating single layouts, the tool is set up to generate new layout matrices and evaluate multiple 
alternative layouts. These populations of layouts are generated using Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) which is a 
stochastic optimization algorithm which has been successful for similar problems in space layout planning 41 " 43 . This 
algorithm alters the layout matrices based upon global and personal best objective function values in previous 
iterations. Alternative methods derived from PSO are being investigated to achieve better optimization performance. 


Exercise 

EVA 

Science 

Logistics 


Water 

Storage 


Hygiene 


Crew 

Quarters 


V. Example Problem: 180 day Cis-Lunar Habitat 

In order to demonstrate this tool and drive out necessary improvements, the following example design problem 
was proposed: 

Evaluate the layout performance of a cis -lunar habitat designed to sustain four crew for 180 days in 
deep space with an entry capsule. Assume the spacecraft is 4.5 meters in diameter and 6 meters long 
with one hatch on an endcap. Assume a pre-defined set of rack-based hardware with standard 
anthropometric use envelopes, which is to be packaged within this habitat while maintaining a central 
translation path corridor. 

The topology of the baseline 
layout to be evaluated is shown in 
Figure 15. The positions of each 
of the subsystems are indicated by 
the rows which correspond to the 
standard wall, ceiling, and floor 
rack locations. The functions in 
this module (long duration 
accommodations and closed loop 
life support) are focused on 
increasing crewed duration while 
functions in attached modules are 
focused on increased exploration 
and science. 


Oxygen 

Generation 


Galley 


Power 


Air 

Revitalization 


Wardroom 



Water 

Reclamation 


Water 

Reclamation 


Power 

Thermal 


Crew 

Quarters 


Crew 

Quarters 


Crew 

Quarters 


Wall 


Overhead 


Wall 


Deck 


Figure 15: Notional Layout of Cis-Lunar Habitat 


The evaluation began with the definition of designer preferences. First, the evaluation criteria are weighted based 
upon the design problem context. Larry Toups, an architect and habitat design expert from NASA Johnson Space 
Center, performed pair-wise comparisons of the evaluation criteria which were used to create the prioritized list 
shown in Figure 16 where the weightings are expressed in percentages. The criteria used to evaluate the cis-lunar 
habitat are reduced to those which make up the top 80% of the weightings. The methods for measuring these criteria 
are included in Appendix A. Linear utility functions are assumed for these criteria with value ranges indicated in 
Table 2. Habitable volume ranges are set based upon human spaceflight design documents, but could be modified if 
additional living volumes are assumed to be provided by additional modules. The other criteria value ranges are 
assumptions based upon values seen in a quick analysis of possible layouts. 


Table 2: Utility Functions for Cis-Lunar Habitat Evaluation Criteria 


Evaluation Criteria 

Value for U=0 

Value for U=1 

Plumbing/Electric Line Run Masses 

1 kg 

100 kg 

Habitable Volume 

0 m3 

100 m3 

Unusable Volume 

20 m3 

0 m3 

Largest Spatial Vista 

0 m3 

3 m3 

Anthropometry of High Duration Tasks Interferences 

30 interferences 

0 interferences 

Placement for High Frequency/Duration Use 

0 

1 

Separation for Privacy 

0 

25000 

Separation of Clean and Dirty Zones 

0 

900 

Separation for Noise 

0 

28000 


13 


■•SSSSSSSW 


0.0 


5.0 


10.0 


15.0 


20.0 


25.0 



Separation for Privacy 
Separation for Noise 
Habitable Volume 
Largest Spatial Vista 
Separation of Clean and Dirty Zones 
Plumbing/Electric Line Run Masses 
Anthropometry of High Duration Tasks Interferences 
Placement for High Frequency/Duration Use 
Unusable Volume 

w : v : . £eS$3^ 

-;::-J-:;:;;: : : • I:-:':-:::;*’;"-:;:-:' • : 


80% Cuto 


Figure 16: Prioritized Weighting of Evaluation Criteria 


For simplicity, the only constraints chosen for this example problem are hardware interferences (“object-object” 
and “object- wall”) and clearance checks (“anthropometric envelope -object”, “object-translation path”, and “object- 
hatch clearance envelope”). Constraints are implemented based upon the number of interferences observed. For 
example, some multiple of the number of anthropometric reserved volume and object collisions is added to the 
unconstrained objective function to decrease acceptability. These tests are implemented with the same ISA-GJK 
collision detection test used for the evaluation criteria quantification methods. 

Results: 

Evaluation of the baseline layout yielded the results shown in Table 3. Assuming the utility ranges are 
appropriate, the resultant utilities indicate that all evaluation criteria perform moderately well except line run mass, 
spatial vista, and separation of clean and dirty tasks. The aggregate value shows that this layout performs moderately 
well (minimum values are preferred). Because of the somewhat arbitrary selection of value ranges in the utility 
function definitions, few definitive conclusions can be drawn about whether the performance of the layout for a 
specific criterion is acceptable or not. However, comparing multiple layouts with the same set of assumptions and 
designer preferences allows for the determination of a relative acceptability of the layouts which can be used to 
guide iterations towards an optimal solution. 

For example, trading the rack based locations of a few subsystems as shown in Figure 17 yields the results 
shown in Table 4. This layout performs better on line run mass and anthropometric interferences, but at the expense 
of the separation-colocation criteria and placement for high duration/frequency of use. Because of the relatively high 
weighting of these separation-colocation criteria, this significantly decreases the overall acceptability of this layout. 


14 


Table 3: Baseline Layout Objective Function Calculation 


Evaluation Criteria 

Measured Value 

Utility 

Weightings 

Total Line Run Mass 

61.5 kg 

0.38 

0.065 

Habitable Volume 

63.0 m 3 

0.63 

0.169 

Unusable Volume 

0.28 m 3 

0.99 

0.058 

Spatial Vista 

1.57m 3 

0.52 

0.078 

Anthropometric Interferences between High Duration Tasks 

5 

0.83 

0.060 

Placement of Items for High Duration /Frequency Use 

0.62 

0.62 

0.059 

Separation for Privacy 

20555 

0.82 

0.262 

Separation of Clean and Dirty Spaces 

498.9 

0.55 

0.079 

Separation for Noise 

23233 

0.83 

0.170 

Constraints 

Measured Value 



Number of Object-Object Collisions 

0 



Number of Object-Pressure Vessel Collisions 

0 



Number of Anthropometric Envelope-Object Collisions 

0 



Number of Object-Translation Path Collisions 

0 



Number of Object-Hatch Clearance Envelope Collisions 

0 



OBJECTIVE FUNCTION VALUE 

0.28 




Exercise 

EVA 

Science 

Logistics 






Maintenance 


Hygiene 


Oxygen 

Generation 

Crew 

Quarters 


Air 

Revitalization 


Water 

Reclamation 


Crew 

Quarters 

Galley 


Wardroom 


Water 

Reclamation 


Crew 

Quarters 

Power 


Power 

Thermal 


Water 

Storage 


Crew 

Quarters 


Wall 


Overhead 


Wall 


Deck 


Figure 17: Alternate Layout of Cis-Lunar Habitat 


Table 4: Alternative Layout Objective Function Calculation 


Evaluation Criteria 

Measured Value 

Utility 

Weightings 

Total Line Run Mass 

44.6 kg 

0.55 

0.065 

Habitable Volume 

63.0 m 3 

0.63 

0.169 

Unusable Volume 

0.31 m 3 

0.98 

0.058 

Spatial Vista 

1.57m 3 

0.52 

0.078 

Anthropometric Interferences between High Duration Tasks 

3 

0.9 

0.060 

Placement of Items for High Duration /Frequency Use 

0.51 

0.51 

0.059 

Separation for Privacy 

13431 

0.54 

0.262 

Separation of Clean and Dirty Spaces 

313 

0.35 

0.079 

Separation for Noise 

14351 

0.51 

0.170 

Constraints 

Measured Value 



Number of Object-Object Collisions 

0 



Number of Object-Pressure Vessel Collisions 

0 



Number of Anthropometric Envelope-Object Collisions 

0 



Number of Object-Translation Path Collisions 

0 



Number of Object-Hatch Clearance Envelope Collisions 

0 



OBJECTIVE FUNCTION VALUE 

0.42 




15 


VI. Conclusions and Future Work 

The proposed evaluation method has been fully successful in delivering structured, fast, and complete habitat 
interior evaluations useful for habitation design community and any other community designing highly constrained, 
highly integrated interiors. The critical contributions of this research are the development of a comprehensive, 
measurable set of evaluation criteria which capture a full range of engineering (mass and volume) and habitability 
(quality of volume, functionality, safety, etc.) concerns and the development of automatic methods to measure them. 
These quantification methods substantially increase the state of the art in evaluation times (each layout evaluation 
requiring numerical volume estimations can be performed in about a second, while evaluations not requiring 
numerical methods are several orders of magnitude faster). These fast criteria measurement methods substantially 
increase the information available at the conceptual design phase. They provide a structured and quantifiable way to 
justify the selection of one configuration over another for a given set of objective preferences, which will enable 
trades to be performed identifying the architectural elements which most directly affect the ‘goodness’ of a 
configuration. They will also increase available knowledge of the mechanisms of designing utility into interior 
designs and enable designers to trade the shapes/sizes of hardware and pressure vessels to suit the objectives dictated 
by the mission. 

The main focus of future work is to enable the automated generation of layout interior designs by continuing to 
mature the implementation of the particle swarm optimizer to deal with the discontinuous, multi-modal nature of the 
interior layout design space. Initial results utilizing the particle swarm optimizer tend to be dominated by 
constraints. Currently, modified particle swarm methods are being investigated to deal with these challenges. 

The addition of fast interior layout generation and optimization to the evaluation tool will also: 

Facilitate designer capabilities to respond to requirements changes, investigate ‘what if scenarios, and 
ensure good integration with other elements of the system architecture as the concept is developed (lander, 
propulsive stages, and launch vehicles); all of which are characteristic of conceptual design process of 
exploration missions. 

Enable early representation of the layout dependent habitat design concerns affecting mission design or the 
design to project management or other element design teams during conceptual design. 

Provide more complete coverage and documentation of the configuration design space, leading to the 
discovery of better alternatives or the identification of important features which improve the design. 

Enable designers to provide justified ‘push-backs’ on limiting constraints or requirements for the first time 
in literature. 

Could reduce design time and resources to save in development costs both directly (less spent - more 
saved) and indirectly (better configurations require less expensive design changes later in the product 
lifecycle). 

Enable trade studies, including understanding the impact to the habitat configuration when trading various 
requirements, managerial preferences (weightings), choice of subsystems, and different component 
geometry shapes. Trades such as these can be used to expedite knowledge normally discovered in later 
design stages to the conceptual design phase. 

References 

^owe, A. S. and Sherwood, B., Out of this World: A New Field of Space Architecture , AIAA, 2009. 

2 Kennedy, Kriss, “The Vernacular of Space Architecture”, AIAA 2002-6102, AIAA Space Architecture 
Symposium, Houston, TX, 2002. 

3 Simon, Matthew, and Wilhite, Alan W., “Systems Level Evaluation of Space and Planetary Habitat Interior 
Layouts”, AIAA-20 10-8220, Modeling and Simulation Technologies Conference, Toronto, ON, Canada, 
2010 . 

4 NASA, “SP-2007-6105: NASA Systems Engineering Handbook”, NASA, 2007. 

5 Kennedy, K., Toups, L., Rudisill, M., “Constellation Architecture Team-Lunar Scenario 12.0 Habitation 
Overview”, NASA, JSC-CN- 19097, 2009. 

6 NASA, “Human Integration Design Handbook”, NASA/SP-20 10-3407, 2010. 

7 Larson, W. J. and Pranke, L. K., Human Spaceflight: Mission Analysis and Design , McGraw Hill Companies Inc., 
New York, NY, 1999. 

8 Ericson, C., Real Time Collision Detection , Elsevier, San Francisco, CA, 2008. 

9 Saaty, T. L., The Analytic Hierarchy Process, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1980. 

10 Smith, G. Logical Decision for Windows: Users Manual. Fairfax, VA. http ://www. lo gicaldecisions .com , 2007. 


16 


1 National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Man-Systems Integration Standards, NASA STD-3000, Revision 
B. Houston: Johnson Space Center, 1995. 

12 Vanderplaats, G.N. Numerical Optimization Techniques for Engineering Design , McGraw-Hill Book Company, 
New York, 1984. 

13 SICSA, “Report IV: Lunar Module Habitability and Interior Outfitting Considerations and Concepts”, SICS A 
Report, University of Houston, Houston, TX, 2009. 

14 Celentano, J. T.; Amorelli, D.; Freeman, G. G., “Establishing a Habitability Index for Space Stations and Planetary 
Bases”, AIAA 63-139, AIAA/ASMA Manned Space Laboratory Conference, Los Angeles, California, 
USA, 1963. 

15 Cohen, M., “Habitat Multivariate Design Model Pilot Study”, SAE 2004-01-2366, 34th International Conference 
on Environmental Systems (ICES), Colorado Springs, CO, July 2004. 

16 NASA, “Guideline and Capabilities for Designing Human Missions”, NASA-TM-2003-2 10785, NASA, January, 
2003. 

17 Rysavy, G. and Council, C. D., “Architecture and Environment: Basic Tools of Habitability in Space System 
Design”, AIAA- 197 1-879, AIAA/ASMA Weightlessness and Artificial Gravity Meeting, Williamsburg, 
VA, 1971. 

18 Jones, Walton, “Habitability in Long-duration Space Missions”, Environmental Biology and Medicine , Vol.2, p 
29-45, 1973. 

19 Cohen, M. M. “Designing Space Habitats for Human Productivity”, SAE 901204. In, SAE Transactions, Journal 
of Aerospace, vol. 99, sec. 1, part 1, p. 352-364, 1990. 

20 Whitmore, M., McQuilkin, M., Woolford, B., “Habitability and Performance Issues for Long Duration Space 
Flights”, NASA/CR-97-1 12974, NASA, 1997. 

21 Adams, C., “Four Legs in the Morning: Issues in Crew-Quarter Design for Long-Duration Space Facilities (SAE 
981794)”. 28th International Conference on Environmental Systems (ICES), Danvers, Massachusetts, 
USA, 13-16 July 1998. 

22 Adams, C., McCurdy, M., “Habitability in Advanced Space Mission Design, Part Two: Evaluation of Habitation 
Elements.” In S. Johnson, K. Chua, R. Galloway, P. Richter (Eds.), Space 2000 (p. 72-88). 7th 
International Conference and Exposition on Engineering, Construction, Operations, and Business in Space, 
Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA, 27 February - 2 March 2000. 

23 0sburg, J., “An Interdisciplinary Approach to the Conceptual Design of Inhabited Space Systems”, Dissertation, 
University of Stuttgart, Germany, 2002. 

24 Tullis, T. and Bied, B., “Space Station Functional Relationships Analysis Final Technical Report, NASA-CR- 
177497,” NASA, 1988. 

25 Nixon, D., “Space Station Group Activities Habitability Module Study”, NASA CR-4010, NASA, 1986. 

26 Fitts, D. J., “International Space Station (ISS) Internal Volume Configuration (IVC)”, AIAA 2002-6114, 1st 
Space Architecture Symposium (SAS 2002), Houston, Texas, USA, 10-1 1 October 2002. 

27 Eckart, P., Spaceflight Life Support and Biospherics , Kluwer Academic Publishers. Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 
and Microcosm Inc. Torrance, CA, 1996. 

28 Duerk, D. P., Architectural Programming: Information Management for Design , New York: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold, 119-150,210-218, 1993. 

29 Kalay, E.Y., Architecture's New Media. Principles, Theories, and Methods of Computer-Aided Design. The MIT 
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 2004. 

30 Lobos, D., Donath, D., “The Problem of Space Layout in Architecture: A Survey and Reflections”, 
arquiteturarevista - Vol. 6, n° 2:136-161, July to December, 2010. 

31 Homayouni, H., “A Literature Review of Computational Approaches to Space Layout Planning”, Final Paper, 
Arch 588 Research Practice, University of Washington, Fall 2006. 

32 Di Capua, M., Mirvis, A., Medina, O., and Akin, D., ’’Minimum Functionality Lunar Habitat Element Design: 
Requirements and Definition of an Initial Human Establishment on the Moon,” SAE Int. J. Aerosp. 4(1): 1 OS- 
129, 2011, doi: 10.4271/2009-01-2369. 

33 SICSA, “Report 1: Figure of Merit Criteria for Evaluating and Selecting Lunar Habitat module Concepts”, SICSA 
Report, University of Houston, Houston, TX, 2008. 

34 Wise, J. A. “The Quantitative Modeling of Human Spatial Habitability”. NASA CR- 1797- 16. NASA Ames 
Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, USA, 1985. 

35 NASA, SSP 50005: International Space Station Flight Crew Integration Standards, NASA, 1999. 


17 


36 Szabo, R.; Kallay, A.; Twyford, E.; Maida, J., “The Human as a System - Monitoring Spacecraft Net Habitable 
Volume throughout the Design Lifecycle”, Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 51st Annual Meeting, 
Baltimore, MD, Oct. 2007. 

37 Dyckhoff, H., A typology of cutting and packing problems. European Journal of Operational Research , 44:145- 
159, 1990. 

38 Wascher, G., HauBner, H., Schumann, H., An improved typology of cutting and packing problems. European 
Journal of Operational Research , 183:1 109-1 130, 2007. 

39 van den Bergen, Gino, Collision Detection in Interactive 3D Environments (The Morgan Kaufmann Series in 
Interactive 3D Technology). Morgan Kaufmann, October 2003. 

40 Gilbert, E. G., Johnson, D. W., Keerthi, S. S., “A Fast Procedure for Computing the Distance between Complex 
Objects in Three-Dimensional Space”, IEEE Journal of Robotics and Automation , vol. 4, no. 2, 1988. 

41 Omit S., Tuzkaya , U. R., Dogac , B., “A particle swarm optimization algorithm for the multiple -level warehouse 
layout design problem,” Computers & Industrial Engineering , Volume 54, Issue 4, Pages 783-799, May 
2008. 

42 Cheng, M.Y., Lien, L.C.: A Hybrid Swarm Intelligence Based Particle Bee Algorithm For Benchmark Functions 
And Construction Site Layout Optimization. In: Proceedings of the 28th IS ARC, Seoul, pp. 898-904, 2011. 

43 Ning, L., Fe, L., Debao, S., Chang, H., “Particle Swarm Optimization for Constrained Layout Optimization,” 
Proceedings of the 5th World Congress on Intelligent Control and Automation, June 15-19, Hangzhou. P.R. 
China, 2004. 


18 


Appendix A: Evaluation Criteria Descriptions 



Description 

Mass 


Structure Mass 

The mass of primary and secondary structures which vary dependent on the configuration. 
This includes the pressure vessel, launch integration structure, hatches, windows, walls, 
floors, ceilings, and support mass for equipment. 

Equipment Mass 

The mass of the ECLSS, TCS, Power Distribution, Stowage, Crew Accommodations, 
Logistics, Avionics, etc equipment. Does not include power and consumable distribution 
lines. 

Plumbing/Electric Line 
Run Masses 

The mass of power distribution, atmosphere distribution, vacuum, and various water 
distribution lines based upon the placement of interior objects. 

Volume 


Habitable Volume 

The free, pressurized volume, excluding the space required for subsystems, structural 
elements, stowage, outfitting, accommodations, and structural Inefficiencies (nooks and 
crannies). It is literally the space livable, accessible, and functionally usable to crew, 
(referred to as Net Habitable by JSC) 

Unusable Volume 

The inaccessible volume and structural inefficiencies caused by the particular packing 
strategy. Also not usable for stowage) 

Available Non-Dedicated 
Stowage Volume 

The available space for the storage of goods within the free volume outside of translation 
paths and anthropometric envelopes. 

Habitable Floor Area and 
Other Usable Horizontal 
Surface Area 

The floor area available for crew movement (often indicating anthropometrically 
accessible floor area by a standing astronaut (excludes skinny spaces, space behind racks, 
under beds, under desks, etc.)) and the area of horizontal surfaces occupied by crew 
including desks, tables, work counters, shelves, beds, and chairs. 

Largest Spatial Vista 

The maximum volume swept by the eye of a crew member. A measure of spaciousness 
and psychological/physiological acceptability of the environment. Analogous to maximum 
contiguous line of sight and contiguous field of view. 

Task Performance 


Colocation of Sequential 
Tasks 

The degree of colocation of tasks which are sequential (according to analogous crew 
schedules). A measure of the overall minimized required crew translation distances 
throughout an interior. 

Anthropometry of High 
Duration Tasks 
Interferences 

The number of long duration tasks whose anthropometric volumes interfere with either the 
anthropometric volumes of other high duration tasks, translation paths, or hatch clearance 
areas. 

Colocation of Equipment 
by Function 

The degree of grouping of equipment and components based upon the function or task 
they belong to. 

Placement for 
Function/Ergonomics 

A measure of the displacement of equipment from the location required by its function or 
ergonomic operation (e.g. a desk in a gravity environment should be ~36 in from the 
floor). 

Placement for High 
Frequency/Duration Use 

A measure of the displacement of 'high frequency/duration of use' equipment from the 
'prime real estate' locations for human interaction (along wall, away from hatches, waist to 
eye level) 


Size of Private Spaces 

The size of the crew quarters or waste and hygiene closet or other space designated as 
private. 

Separation for Privacy 

The degree of separation between public and private areas, such as the crew quarters and 
the wardroom 

Separation of Clean and 
Dirty Zones 

The degree of separation between clean and dirty areas, such as crew quarters and hygiene 
area 

Separation for Noise 

The degree of separation between noisy and quiet areas, such as crew quarters and the 
wardroom area 

Minimum Translation 
Path Width 

The minimum width along the path which allows access to each hatch and subsystems 


19 


Habitable Volume (Quantifiable) 

• Inputs : Pressure vessel geometry, interior subsystems geometries and locations, astronaut 
anthropometric dimensions 

• Definition : 

- The "usable spacecraft volume" remaining in the pressure vessel after accounting for the losses 
caused by deployed equipment, outfitting, structure, stowage, and structural inefficiencies 
("nooks and crannies"). [Rudisill 08, Simon 10b] 

- The space that the crew has to live and work within a spacecraft interior [Simon 10b] 

• Quantification Method : 

- Numerical estimation using Boolean collision tests to identify usable volume [Simon 10b] 

• References : 

- Requirements: Celentano 63, Fraser 68, NASA 95, Rudisill 08, NASA 10 

- Quantification: Cohen 08, Szabo 07, Simon 10b 




Figure 18: Example of Evaluation Criteria Information: Habitable Volume 
Separation for Privacy (Quantifiable using Proxy Measurements! 

• Inputs : Interior subsystem locations, associated subsystem functions, separation relationships [NASA 
10, Tullis 88] 

• Definition : 

- A measure of the separation of public functions from private functions ranked by degree of 
desired separation (ex. Sleeping quarters and wardroom) [Tullis 88] 

• Quantification Method: 

- Functional relationships analysis using the Euclidean-norm of the Hadamard product of 
separation relationships and Euclidean distance matrices [Tullis 88] 

• References: "Group” 



20 



Line Run Mass (Quantitative Proxy) 

• Inputs : Locations of systems or equipment, specification of what kind of line runs apply to each piece 
of equipment 

• Definition : 

- The mass of power distribution, atmosphere distribution, vacuum, and various water 

distribution lines are highly dependent upon the placement of interior objects which connect to 
these lines and the amount of material to be transported within the habitat. Colocation of 
systems sharing a certain type of line can reduce this mass by reducing the length of the line 
run. 


• Quantification Method : 

- Determine the minimum path length connecting the objects sharing a particular type of line run 
through mathematical calculation of distances (Manhattan or Euclidean) between objects for a 
full factorial set of possible path orders (ABCD, ABDC, BDCA, etc.) 


• References : 

- Quantification: 

Anderson and Bagdigian 
(phone conversations) 



Unusable Volume (Quantifiable) 

• Inputs : Pressure vessel geometry, interior subsystems geometries and locations, astronaut 
anthropometric geometries 

• Definition : 

- This is a measure of the inaccessible volume and structural inefficiencies caused by the 
particular packing strategy [Rudisill 08, Simon 10b] 

- Unoccupied, inaccessible volume (Space which is within the pressure shell, but not included in 
in habitable, hardware, or stowage volumes) 

• Quantification Method : 

- Numerical estimation using Boolean collision tests to identify wasted volume [Simon 10b] 

• References : 

Requirements: No requirement - Quantification: Simon 10b 



Largest Spatial Vista (Quantifiable) 

• Inputs : Pressure vessel geometry, interior subsystems geometries and locations, astronaut 

anthropometric dimensions 

• Definition : 

- Spatial vista/maximum contiguous line of sight/ contiguous field of view is a measure the 
maximum volume swept by the eye of a crew member. This is a measure of spaciousness and 
psychological/physiological acceptability of the environment. This is also a measure of the quality 
of the interior volume [NASA 10, SICSA 08] 

• Quantification Method : 

- Numerical estimation using Boolean collision tests to identify "line-of-sight" lengths which can be 
integrated to calculate visible volume [Simon 10a] 

• References : 

- Requirements: No requirement 



Anthropometry Interferences of High Duration Tasks (Quantifiable) 


• Inputs : Pressure vessel geometry, interior subsystems geometries and locations, astronaut 
anthropometric geometries associated with each piece of hardware, durations of tasks 

• Definition : 

- This is a measure of the number of long duration tasks whose anthropometric volumes interfere 
with either the anthropometric volumes of other tasks, translation paths, or hatch clearance 
areas.[Fitts 02, NASA 10, Simon 10a] 

• Quantification Method : 

- Counting collisions detected between anthropometric volumes associated with each high- 
duration function and other high-duration functions, translation paths, and hatch clearance 
areas [Fitts 02, Simon 10a] 

• References: 


□ 

S3 


Requirements: Fitts 02, NASA 10 
Quantification: Tullis 88, Simon 10a 

High-Duration 
Anthropometric Volumes 

Translation Paths 



Interferences Detected 




22 



Placement for High Frequencv/Duration Use (Quantifiable using Proxy Measurements) 


• Inputs : Ranges of acceptable positions for use of objects, nominal value for position for frequent use 
of object, actual locations of various objects, frequency of use and duration of use for each object 
[Tullis 88, NASA 10] 

• Definition : 

- Rather than placing equipment based upon relationships to other interior systems, this criteria 
measures the appropriateness of placement based upon the need for comfortable, long- 
duration or frequent access to a piece of equipment, (i.e. between waist and shoulder heights) 

• Quantification Method: 

- Calculate a weighted sum of utilities functions (Functions defined by optimal location as in 
ergonomics placement evaluation criteria and weightings normalized by frequency/duration of 
use). Sum for all objects. [Simon 10a] 

• References : 

Requirements: NASA 10 

- Quantification: Tullis 88, Simon 10a 

High Frequency/Duration Access 
□ Low Frequency/Duration Access 





Separation of Clean and Dirty Zones (Quantifiable using Proxy Measurements) 

• Inputs : Interior subsystem locations, associated subsystem functions, separation relationships [NASA 
10, Tullis 88] 

• Definition : 

- A measure of the separation of clean function/zones (e.g. crew quarters) from dirty 
functions/zones (e.g. EVA workstations) ranked by degree of desired separation [Tullis 88] 

• Quantification Method: 

- Functional relationships analysis using the Euclidean-norm of the Hadamard product of 
separation relationships and Euclidean distance matrices [Tullis 88] 

• References : 

Requirements: Tullis 88, NASA 95, NASA 10 

- Quantification: Tullis 88 



23 




Separation for Noise (Quantifiable using Proxy Measurements) 

• Inputs : Interior subsystem locations, associated subsystem functions, separation relationships [NASA 
10, Tullis 88] 

• Definition : 

- A measure of the separation of noisy functions from functions requiring noise isolation ranked 
by degree of desired separation (ex. Sleeping quarters and wardroom) [Tullis 88] 

• Quantification Method: 

- Functional relationships analysis using the Euclidean-norm of the Hadamard product of 
separation relationships and Euclidean distance matrices [Tullis 88] 

• References : 

- Requirements: Tullis 88, NASA 95, NASA 10 



24 


