Software 


(i$) Computing Isentropic 
Flow Properties of Air/ 
R-134a Mixtures 

MACHRK is a computer program 
that calculates isentropic flow proper- 
ties of mixtures of air and refrigerant 
R-134a (tetrafluoroethane), which are 
used in transonic aerodynamic testing 
in a wind tunnel at Langley Research 
Center. Given the total temperature, 
total pressure, static pressure, and 
mole fraction of R-134a in a mixture, 
MACHRK calculates the Mach number 
and the following associated flow prop- 
erties: dynamic pressure, velocity, den- 
sity, static temperature, speed of sound, 
viscosity, ratio of specific heats, 
Reynolds number, and Prandtl num- 
ber. Real-gas effects are taken into ac- 
count by treating the gases comprising 
the mixture as both thermally and 
calorically imperfect. The Redlich- 
Kwong equation of state for mixtures 
and the constant-pressure ideal heat- 
capacity equation for the mixture are 
used in combination with the depar- 
ture-function approach of thermody- 
namics to obtain the equations for 
computing the flow properties. In addi- 
tion to the aforementioned calcula- 
tions for air/R-134a mixtures, a re- 
search version of MACHRK can 
perform the corresponding calcula- 
tions for mixtures of air and R-12 
(dichlorodifluoromethane) and for 
air/SF 6 mixtures. [R-12 was replaced by 
R-134a because of environmental con- 
cerns. SF 6 has been considered for use 
in increasing the Reynolds-number 
range.] 

This program was luritten by Ray Kvaternik 
ofL angley Research Center. Further infor- 
mation is contained in a TSP ( see page 1 ). 
LAR-1 7095-1 


fa Java Mission Evaluation 
Workstation System 

The Java Mission Evaluation Worksta- 
tion System (JMEWS) is a collection of 
applications designed to retrieve, dis- 
play, and analyze both real-time and 
recorded telemetry data. This software 
is currently being used by both the 
Space Shuttle Program (SSP) and the 
International Space Station (ISS) pro- 
gram. JMEWS was written in the Java 
programming language to satisfy the re- 
quirement of platform independence. 


An object-oriented design was used to 
satisfy additional requirements and to 
make the software easily extendable. By 
virtue of its platform independence, 
JMEWS can be used on the UNIX work- 
stations in the Mission Control Center 
(MCC) and on office computers. 
JMEWS includes an interactive editor 
that allows users to easily develop dis- 
plays that meet their specific needs. The 
displays can be developed and modified 
while viewing data. By simply selecting a 
data source, the user can view real-time, 
recorded, or test data. 

This program was written by Ross Pet- 
tinger; Tim Watlington, Richard Ryley, and 
Jeff Harbour of Lockheed Martin Corp. for 
Johnson Space Center. For further infor- 
mation, contact the Johnson Innovative Part- 
nerships Office at (281) 483-3809. 
MSC-23665 


Ml Using a Quadtree Algorithm 
To Assess Line of Sight 

A matched pair of computer algo- 
rithms determines whether line of sight 
(LOS) is obstructed by terrain. These 
algorithms were originally designed for 
use in conjunction with combat-simula- 
tion software in military training exer- 
cises, but could also be used for such 
commercial purposes as evaluating 
lines of sight for antennas or determin- 
ing what can be seen from a “room with 
a view.” The quadtree preparation algo- 
rithm operates on an array of digital el- 
evation data and only needs to be run 
once for a terrain region, which can be 
quite large. Relatively little computa- 
tion time is needed, as each elevation 
value is considered only one and one- 
third times. The LOS assessment algo- 
rithm uses that quadtree to answer LOS 
queries. To determine whether LOS is 
obstructed, a piecewise-planar (or 
higher-order) terrain skin is computa- 
tionally draped over the digital eleva- 
tion data. Adjustments are made to 
compensate for curvature of the Earth 
and for refraction of the LOS by the at- 
mosphere. Average computing time ap- 
pears to be proportional to the number 
of queries times the logarithm of the 
number of elevation data points. Accu- 
racy is as high as is possible for the avail- 
able elevation data, and symmetric re- 
sults are assured. In the simulation, the 
LOS query program runs as a separate 
process, thereby making more random- 


access memory available for other com- 
putations. 

These programs were written by Joseph 
Gonzalez, Robert Chamberlain, Eric Tailor, 
and Gary Gutt of Caltech for NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. Further ■ informa- 
tion is contained in a TSP ( see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(818) 393-2827. Refer - to NPO-40596. ' 


fa Software for Automated 
Generation of Cartesian 
Meshes 

Cart3D is a collection of computer 
programs for generating Cartesian 
meshes [for computational fluid dy- 
namics (CFD) and other applications] 
in volumes bounded by solid objects. 
Aspects of Cart3D at earlier stages of 
development were reported in “Robust 
and Efficient Generation of Cartesian 
Meshes for CFD” (ARC-14275), NASA 
Tech Briefs, Vol. 23, No. 8 (August 
1999), page 30. The geometric input to 
Cart3D comprises surface triangula- 
tions like those commonly generated 
by computer-aided-design programs. 
Complexly shaped objects can be rep- 
resented as assemblies of simpler ones. 
Cart3D deletes all portions of such an 
assembled object that are not on the 
exterior surface. Intersections between 
components are preserved in the re- 
sulting triangulation. A tie-breaking 
routine unambiguously resolves geo- 
metric degeneracies. Then taking the 
intersected surface triangulation as 
input, the volume mesh is generated 
through division of cells of an initially 
coarse hexahedral grid. Cells are subdi- 
vided to refine the grid in regions of in- 
creased surface curvature and/or in- 
creased flow gradients. Cells that 
become split into multiple uncon- 
nected regions by thin pieces of sur- 
face are identified. 

These programs were written by Michael J. 
Aftosmis and John E. Melton of Ames Re- 
search Center and Marsha J. Berger of the 
Courant Institute of Mathematics at New 
York University. Further information is con- 
tained in a TSP (see page 1 ). 

Inquiries concerning rights for the commer- 
cial use of this invention should be addressed 
to the Technology Partnerships Division, 
Ames Research Center, (650) 604-2954. 
Refer to ARC-14275-1. 


NASA Tech Briefs, January 2006 


11 


