N92-22 338 


THE APPLICATION OF INTEGRATED KNOWLEDGE-BASED SYSTEMS 
FOR THE BIOMEDICAL RISK ASSESSMENT INTELLIGENT NETWORK 

(BRAIN) 


Karin C. Loftin (KRUG Life Sciences, Inc.), Bebe Ly (NASA, JSC), Laurie Webster (NASA- 
JSC), James Verlander (KRUG Life Sciences, Inc.), Gerald R. Taylor (NASA-JSC), Gary 
Riley (NASA-JSC), and Chris Culbert (NASA-JSC) 


ABSTRACT 

One of NASA's goals for long duration space flight is 
to maintain acceptable levels of crew health, safety 
and performance. One way of meeting this goal is 
through BRAIN, an integrated network of both human 
and computer elements. BRAIN will function as an 
advisor to mission managers by assessing the risk of 
inflight biomedical problems and recommending 
appropriate countermeasures. This paper describes 
the joint effort among various NASA elements to 
develop BRAIN and the Infectious Disease Risk 
Assessment (IDRA) prototype. The implementation of 
this effort addresses the technological aspects of: (1 ) 
knowledge acquisition, (2) integration of IDRA 
components, (3) use of expert systems to automate 
the biomedical prediction process, (4) development of 
a user friendly interface, and (5) integration of the 
IDRA and ExerCISys systems. Because C Language, 
CLIPS, (the C Language Integrated Production 
System), and the X-Window System are portable and 
easily integrated, they have been chosen as the tools 
for the initial IDRA prototype. 

INTRODUCTION 

One of NASA’S goals for long duration space flight is 
to maintain acceptable levels of crew health, safety 
and performance. To do this, NASA will monitor crew 
physiological, psychological and task performance. It 
also must administer appropriate countermeasures 
(17,29,37). It is our philosophy that determining the 
risk of inflight performance problems is the first step of 
preventing them. 

Biomedical risk assessment estimates the probability 
of a specified human response to a challenge (10,19). 
The probability estimate is based on epidemiological 
studies of populations at risk after exposure to 
extreme conditions. And, certain physiological, 
psychological and environmental indicators change 
the estimation of risks for the individual. The 
specificity of the indicator to predict a human 
response is the limiting factor in the risk assessment. 
The acceptable limits of risk have to be understood to 
manage them. 


As the duration of space flight lengthens, the risk and 
number of biomedical problems will increase. It is 
crucial to make an assessment and initiate 
countermeasures. It also is important to predict the 
impact of the selected countermeasures on crew 
health, safety and performance. If more than one 

change in crew status is observed, it is critical to 
evaluate each countermeasure relative to the others. 

A partial solution to the decision-making process 
required for long duration flights is the application of 
automated technology. It reduces the volume of data, 
facilitates data interpretation and resolves 
incompatible data. For example, expert or 
knowledge-based systems can automate the 
diagnostic process that relies on large quantities of 
related physiological or anatomical data (20,25,40). 
Each specific discipline has its specific expert system 
(5,6,7). 

Expert systems are commonly rule-based production 
systems (13). The Software Technology Branch at 
NASA/JSC has developed a rule-based production 
system called CLIPS, the C Language Integrated 
Production Systems (9,12,35). CLIPS and its 
functions serve as an example of the principles and 
programming of expert systems (13). CLIPS is being 
used to automate the prediction process of the 
Infectious Disease Risk Assessment (IDRA) prototype 
(see below) and BRAIN (Biomedical Risk Assessment 
Intelligent Network). 

NASA is presently supporting the development of 
three life sciences expert systems for use on long 
duration space flight: 

1 . The IDRA prototype, which assesses the risk of 
infectious diseases and recommends 
countermeasures to reduce the risks. The 
implementation approach and the results of this 
development are presented in this paper. 

2. The Exercise Countermeasures Intelligent System 
(ExerCISys), which prescribes an exercise protocol to 
maintain muscle strength and cardiovascular aerobic 
capacity inflight. 


522 


3. The Performance Prediction Model (PPM), which 
assesses and predicts the level of work performance 
of astronauts. PPM assesses the cognitive sensory 
motor performance of the individual as it relates to the 
individual job tasks, or the individual's job as a whole. 

These expert systems are independent from each 
other. They are designed for a single user and the 
data are not automatically shared. The greatest 
concern to us is the length of time required for a 
mission manager to resolve recommendations from 
these systems and then make real-time decisions. 

A solution to this concern is the (BRAIN). The 
application of knowledge-based systems or artificial 
intelligence is a vital component of BRAIN. BRAIN is 
an integrated network for biomedical risk assessment 
and management. It provides the consensus of 
multiple experts. We hypothesize that BRAIN will 
reduce the time required for one to arrive at real-time 
decisions about biomedical risk analysis and 
management. 

Others outside NASA will benefit from the 
development of BRAIN. Institutions such as hospitals, 
medical clinics, boarding schools, military services, 
and nursing homes for the mentally and physically 
handicapped are potential users. 

IMPLEMENTATION APPROACH 

1. Documentation Of Requirements 

The preliminary software requirements of BRAIN will 
be documented according to the IEEE Standards 
Board and the American National Standards Institute 
(20). 

The BRAIN concept is illustrated as a triangle (Figure 
1) with users on the left side of the triangle and expert 
systems on the right side. The network still permits 
each user and system to work independently and 
interact independently with the mission manager. 
Through BRAIN-, each system may access pertinent 
data from other systems. BRAIN cooperates with the 
independent expert systems by use of a knowledge 
base that relates all of them. 



Figure 1. The BRAIN Concept 


The functions of BRAIN are to: 

• access IDRA, ExerCISys, PPM and other undefined 
systems for pertinent information. 

• assess the biomedical risks and recommend 
countermeasures. 

• function as a clearing house of information to be 
shared between systems. 

• resolve incompatible information given by other 
expert systems and derive a consensus for a mission 
manager. 


2. System Design 
Knowledge Definition 

A major activity of this project is to develop the 
knowledge-based system design. This includes the 
identification of data sources, knowledge definition, 
knowledge design and the architecture of the 
hardware/software environment for BRAIN. The 
knowledge definition task defines the knowledge 
requirements of the network and identifies and selects 
the knowledge sources. The knowledge is acquired, 
analyzed and extracted. The knowledge design 
comprises the knowledge representation, i.e. , rules, 
internal fact structure, detailed control structure and 
preliminary user interface (13). 

BRAIN receives input from PPM, IDRA, and 
ExerCISys, or the user, as illustrated in Figure 1 . 

Other data that BRAIN requires are derived from 
textbooks, journal articles and reports. Inaccessible 
data may be simulated as necessary during initial 
development. The data are stored in a local or 
working database. 

The data structure and network configuration of 
BRAIN must be compatible with IDRA, ExerCISys and 
PPM. These expert systems share related data 
through BRAIN by accessing the working database. 
We will test the feasibility of IDRA, ExerCISys and 
PPM to regularly post data that are required by other 
systems. A standard protocol will be established for 
each system to access BRAIN and vice versa. 

The knowledge base for BRAIN utilizes and interprets 
the data, predicts the risk of biomedical problems and 
recommends the appropriate countermeasures. It is 
retrieved from the sources listed below. 

• Spaceflight Historical Information 

• Expert Medical and Science Personnel 

• Texts, Journal Article and Reviews 

• Epidemiological Studies of Normal Populations 


523 





The resources available in the medical sciences 
arena and NASA life sciences groups are explored 
for the knowledge definition of BRAIN. The 
relationships among IDRA, ExerCISys and PPM are 
defined by means of workshops, personal 
consultation and collaboration of existing study 
results. Experts will be identified so we can model 
their expertise and to evaluate the demonstration of 
BRAIN during the developmental stages. 

Knowledge Acquisition 

Once the knowledge base has been defined for 
BRAIN, methods will be developed to acquire the 
specific knowledge. Since a great deal of knowledge 
has to be acquired for BRAIN, an automated method 
may be required for that purpose. That method must 
be consistent and reproducible while extracting 
information from human experts and written sources. 

Knowledge Design 

A conceptual design of BRAIN is illustrated in Figure 
2. Further definition of the knowledge representation 
and design is delayed until the Knowledge 
Acquisition is completed. At that time, more will be 
known about the structure of the knowledge and how 
it can best be represented. 

It is anticipated that the knowledge may be subjected 
to a software tool called RuleMaster that uses the ID3 
algorithm. The ID3 algorithm analyses empirical data 


and derives rules for the knowledge base of BRAIN. 
Advanced techniques, e.g., CLIPS, will be tested to 
automate the biomedical prediction process. Other 
existing and newly developed tools will be evaluated 
for their best knowledge representation and design 
capability. 

BRAIN will be designed with a learning capability. It 
will incorporate, by a feed-back mechanism, the 
experience of an expert . The decisions and 
interpretations of data obtained from actual test cases 
are acquired automatically in the knowledge base 
and new rules are induced. This function is entirely 
under the control of the appropriate user. But once 
initiated, it is automatically included in the knowledge 
base. Tools such as the Automated Reasoning Tool 
(ART) and the Automated Structured Rule Acquisition 
(ASTRA) are being used to capture the expertise of 
exercise physiologists for ExerCISys. ART and 
ASTRA are being evaluated for application to BRAIN. 

Knowledge Verification/Validation 

Verification and validation of BRAIN is a vital step 
throughout the life cycle of its development (9,18). 
Verification of BRAIN determines that the software is 
developed according to specifications. Validation 
determines that BRAIN performs the functions as 
specified by the requirements and is usable for field 
testing (11). 


RECOMMENDATIONS 

DATA 


w?m m 1 

PWQ'fO’fYP'E I 



Figure 2. Conceptual Design Of Brain 


524 









During the knowledge design, verification determines 
that the design adheres to the requirements. The 
knowledge base is verified by checking specific 
details to the level of each rule. 

Validation of BRAIN encompasses aspects of: 

• determining the validation criteria. (25) 

• specifying the sets of input data. 

• developing a library of test cases and detailed 
space flight scenarios. 

• validating BRAIN by an independent panel of 
experts. 

• using BRAIN in parallel with the independent 
operation of PPM, IDRA and ExerGISys and then 
comparing the results. (1 1) 

After the Preliminary Design Review of the project, the 
detailed design description will be documented. It will 
specify the logic and content of the knowledge base, 
the implementation of the system, hardware 
requirements, the detailed user interface and the 
detailed demonstration plan. 

The hardware/software environment of BRAIN will be 
compatible with PPM, IDRA, ExerCISys and Space 
Station Freedom standards. The development 
environment that is used to create the software may 
not run on the identical platform as the demonstration 
version. 

3. User Interface 

It is essential for the flight components of BRAIN to 
have user friendly interfaces. Ease of use is important 
to whether or not a system is fully utilized. The X- 
Window System will be used to develop the 
preliminary user interface. The user interfaces to 
BRAIN will be designed in accordance with human 
factors principles and the Space Station Volume of 
the Man Systems Integration Standards (NASA Std 
3000) document. Some of the factors that will be 
addressed are controls, visual displays and auditory 
demonstration displays (41 ). Prior to completion of 
the final BRAIN design, all interfaces will be 
empirically evaluated using subjects similar to the 
typical user. Based upon findings of this study, the 
design of the interfaces will be refined. 

After BRAIN is developed, it will be field-tested during 
future space flights, bed rest studies, military activities 
and Antarctic expeditions. New versions of BRAIN 
will be developed (based on field-test results) to 
accommodate each test environment. The scientific 
potential for advancing telescience communications 
between BRAIN and remote study locations also 
exists and will be explored. Advanced computer 
technology promises to assist humans in the 21st 
century to better cope with the uncertainties of health, 
safety and performance at home and in the work 
place. 


Table I. Expected results. At the end of the project 
period the products will function as indicated. 


PRODUCTS 

FUNCTION 



BRAIN SOFTWARE 
(Interference Machine) 

Automates the biomedical 
risk assessment and 
prediction process by 
appropriately executing 
the rules 


Accesses IDRA, 
ExerCISys, and PPM 

WORKING DATABASE 

Contains the facts 
required for rules 

BRAIN KNOWLEDGE 
BASE 

Evaluates and interprets 
the related outputs of 
IDRA, ExerCISys, and 
PPM in a set of rules. 

BRAIN OUTPUT 

Generates a composite 
risk analysis and 
recommendations to 
assist the user in making 
real-time decisions 

STANDARDIZED 
PROTOCOL FOR 
INTEGRATION 

A standard procedure to 
integrate expert systems 
in BRAIN 

COMPUTER HARDWARE 
CONNECTIONS 

Communicate with IDRA, 
ExerCISys, and PPM 

USER-FRIENDLY 

COMPUTER 

HARDWARE/SOFTWARE 

Increase efficiency, 
productivity, and quality 
of the BRAIN output 


4. The IDRA Prototype 


Because the prevention of infections in space is 
important, an IDRA prototype was developed 
(3,28,33). The goal of the functional IDRA prototype is 
to test the feasibility of using knowledge-based 
systems for infectious disease risk assessment. 

The IDRA prototype focused on respiratory infections, 
especially influenza. The epidemiology and 
procedures for preventing, diagnosing and treating 
influenza are well defined (1,4,38). 

Epidemiological studies have evaluated the risk 
factors and their predictive value for influenza in the 
general population (8,24,35) and the efficacy of 
chemotherapeutic prophylaxis (14). Earlier studies 
investigated the outbreak of influenza in isolated 
populations, e.g., on aircraft (27), ships at sea (32) 
and college campuses (23,34). From these sources, 
we concluded that sufficient information was available 
to construct a knowledge base about influenza. 


525 




Studies show that exercise has a profound effect on 
the immune system (22,30,31) and sometimes 
induces changes similar to those arising from the 
stress of space flight (16). The exercise regimen and 
related physiological data are factors that must be 
taken into consideration for the risk assessment of 
infectious diseases and for prescribing an exercise 
program. This was exemplified on the MIR when 
Cosmonaut Gennady Strekalov caught a cold 
following exercise (reported by the Associated Press, 
October 18, 1990). The IDRA prototype will be 
compatible with the ExerCISys prototype. We will 
integrate IDRA with the ExerCISys as a model for 
BRAIN. 

IDRA Results 

The knowledge for the IDRA knowledge base was 
extracted and analyzed from textbooks and journal 
articles. We identified the critical indicators that 
predict the probability of respiratory infections. These 
indicators were best understood for influenza. 

The risk of influenza for an individual is described by 
general population statistics. It is dependent on an 
individual's location, age group and level of immunity. 
This information is encoded in a set of 23 rules using 
CLIPS. The integrated knowledge-base of IDRA and 
ExerCISys will contain information about the 
relationship between exercise, the immune system 
and infections. 

Figure 3 illustrates the major components of the IDRA 
prototype. A C-based data management tool interacts 
with all the components of the system. It processes 
information from the database and from the user 
.interface. The expert system using CLIPS assesses 
the probability of influenza. It retrieves the information 
from the data management tool and outputs it to the 
user interface. A screen displays the probability of 
infection and illness in the form of a text and a graph. 

For the preliminary user interface, we used the X- 
Window System. All of the tools are portable and 
compatible with Space Station Freedom 
requirements. 

CONCLUSIONS 

• BRAIN can help solve the problems of assessing 
biomedical risks and performance decrements of 
humans working in microgravity. 

• BRAIN can provide a consensus to the mission 
manager by surveying independent expert systems. 

• The functional IDRA prototype demonstrates that 
risk analysis for influenza can be automated using C 
Language, CLIPS, and the X-Window System. The 
IDRA prototype will be integrated with ExerCISys and 
used to develop BRAIN. 



Figure 3. The Major Component Of The IDRA Prototype 

REFERENCES 

1. Atmar RL, Greenberg SB, Quarles JM, Wilson 
SM, Tyler B, Feldman S, Couch RB. Safety and 
pharmacokinetics of rimantadine small-particle 
aerosol. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 
1990; 34(1 1):2228-2233. 

2. Beall JH, chairman. IEEE Guide to Software 
Requirements Specifications. New York: The Institute 
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.; 1984. 

3. Beisel WR, Talbot JM, editors. Research 
opportunities on immunocompetence in space. 
Bethesda: Federation of American Societies For 
Experimental Biology; 1885. 

4. Betts RF, Douglas JR. Influenza Virus. In: 
Infectious Diseases , 3rd Edition. Mandell GL, 

Douglas, Jr RG, Bennett JE, editors. New York: 
Churchill Livingstone; 1990, pp 1306-1325. 

5. Blomberg DJ, Guth JL, Fattu JM, Patrick EA. 
Evaluation of a new classification system for anemias 
using consult learning system. Comput Methods 
Programs Biomed 1 986; 22:1 1 9-1 25. 

6. Bratko I, Mozetic I, Lavrac N. KARDIO: A Study in 
Deep and Qualitative Knowledge for Expert Systems. 
Massachusetts: The MIT Press; 1 989. 

7. Buchanan BG, Shortliffe EH. Rule-Based Expert 
Systems : The MYCIN Experiments of the Stanford 
Heuristic Programming Project. Menlo Park, 

California: Addison-Wesiey Publishing Company; 
1984. 

8. Clover RD, Abell T, Becker LA, Crawford S, 
Ramsey CN. Family functioning and stress as 
predictors of influenza B infection. J Fam Pract 1989; 
28(5):535-539. 

9. Culbert C. CLIPS Reference Manual. Houston: 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration; 

1989. 


526 





1 0. Fry RJM. Radiobiological features of the space 
radiation environment. In: Guidance On Radiation 
Received In Space Activities. Bethesda, MD: National 
Council on radiation Protection and Measurements; 
1989, pp 50-144. 

1 1 . Geissman JR, Schultz RD. Verification & 
validation of expert systems. In: Validating And 
Verifying Knowledge-Based Systems. Gupta U, 
editor. Washington: IEEE Computer Society Press; 
1991, pp 12-25. 

12. Giarrantano J. CLIPS User’s Guide . Houston: 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration; 

1989. 

13. Giarrantano J, Riley G. Expert Systems. Boston: 
PWS-KENT; 1989. 

14. Glezen WP, Decker M, Joseph SW, Mercready 
JR. Acute respiratory disease associated with 
influenza epidemics in Houston, 1981-1983. J Infect 
Dis 1987; 1 55(6):1 119-1126. 

15. Glezen WP, Grose N, Haddock A, Couch RB. 
Chemotherapy and management of respiratory virus 
infections. Proceedings of the 16th International 
Congress of Chemotherapy. 1989, pp 659.1-659.3. 

16. Gmunder FK, Lorenzi G, Bechler B, Joller P, 
Muller J, Ziegler WH, Cogoli A. Effect of long-term 
physical exercise on lymphocyte reactivity: similarity 
to spaceflight reactions. Aviat Space Environ Med 
1988; 59:146-151. 

1 7. Goldberg J, et al. A Strategy for Space Biology. 
Washington, D.C.: National Academic Press; 1987. 

18. Gupta U. Validating and Verifying Knowledge- 
Based Systems. Washington: IEEE Computer 
Society Press; 1991. 

19. Haley RW, Aber RC, Bennett JW. Surveillance of 
nosocomial infections. In: Hospital Infections, 2nd 
Edition. Bennett JV, Brachman PS, editors. Boston: 
Little, Brown & Co.; 1986, pp 51-71 . 

20. Hand DJ. Artificial intelligence and medicine. J 
Royal Soc Med 1987; 80:563-565. 

21 . Kanas N. Psychosocial factors affecting 
simulated and actual space missions. Aviat Space 
Environ Med 1985; 56:806-811. 

22. Keast D, Cameron K, Morton AR. Exercise and 
the Immune Response. Sports Med 1988; 5:248-267. 

23. Layde PM, Engelberg AL, Dobbs HI, Curtis AC, 
Craven RB, Graitcer PL, Sedmak GV, Erickson JD, 
Noble GR. Outbreak of influenza A/ USSR/77 at 
Marquette University. J Infect Dis 1980; 142(3): 347- 
352. 


24. Longini Jr. IM, Koopman JS, Haber M, Cotsonis 
GA. Statistical inference for infectious diseases. Risk- 
specific household and community transmission 
parameters. Am J Epidemiol 1988; 128(4): 845-859. 

25. Marcot B. Testing your knowledge base. In: 
Validating And Verifying Knowledge-Based Systems. 
Gupta U, editor. Washington: IEEE Computer Society 
Press; 1991, pp 188-199. 

26. Miller PL, Fisher PR. Causal models for medical 
artificial intelligence. In: Selected Topics in Medical 
Artificial Intelligence. Miller PL, editor. New York: 
Springer-Verlag; 1988, pp 11-24. 

27. Moser MR, Bender TR, Margolis HS, Noble GR, 
Kendal AP, Ritter DG. An outbreak of influenza 
aboard a commercial airliner. J Epidemiol 1979; 

1 1 0(1 ):1 - 6 . 

28. Nicogossian AE, Garshnek V. Historical 
perspectives. Nicogossian AE, editor. In: Space 
Physiology and Medicine. Philadelphia: Lea and 
Febiger; 1989, pp 17-29. 

29. Nicogossian AE, Huntoon CL, Pool SL. Space 
Physiology and Medicine. Philadelphia: Lea and 
Febiger; 1989. 

30. Nieman DC, Johanssen LM, Lee JW. Infectious 
episodes in runners before and after a roadrace. J 
Sports Med Phys Fitness 1989; 29(3):289-296. 

31. Nieman DC, Nehlsen-Cannarella SL. The 
immune system. In: In: Principles and Practice of 
Sports Medicine. Rians CB, editor. Champaign, IL: 
Human Kinetics Publishers; 1991, pp 1-49. 

32. Olson JG, Ksiazek TG, Irving GS, Rendin RW. An 
explosive outbreak of influenza caused by 
a/USSR/77-like virus on a United States naval ship. 
Milit Med 1979; :743-745. 

33. Pierson DL. Space Station Infectious Disease 
Risks. Houston: National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration; 1986:1-1 to 4-16. 

34. Pons VG, Canter J, Dolin R. Influenza 
A/USSR/77 (HI N1 ) on a university campus. Am J 
Eiodemiol 1980; 111(1 ):23-30. 

35. Reuman PD, Bernstein Dl, Keely SP, Sherwood 
JR, Young EC, Schiff GM. Influenza-specific ELISA 
IgA and IgG predict severity of influenza disease in 
subjects prescreened with hemaglutination inhibition. 
Antiviral Res 1990; 13:103-110. 

36. Riley G. CLIPS Architecture Manual. Houston: 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration; 

1989. 


527 



37. Robbins F, et al. Exploring the Living Universe/A 
Strategy for Space Life Sciences. Washington, D.C.: 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration; 
1988. 

38. Taylor R, Nemaia H, Tukuitonga C, Kennett M, 
White J, Rodger S, Levy S, Gust I. An epidemic of 
influenza in the population of Niue. J Med Virol 1985; 
16:127-136. 

39. Vital and Health Statistics: Current Estimates 
From the National Health Interview Survey, 1988. 
Hyattsville, Maryland: DHHS Publication; 1989. 

40. Winkel P. The application of expert systems in 
the clinical laboratory. Clin Chem 1989; 35(8):1595- 
1600. 

41. Woodson WE. Human Factors Design 
Handbook. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co.; 1981. 


528 



