N96- 12917 




■ If 


ISLE: Intelligent Selection of Loop Electronics 
A CLIPS/C ++ /INGRES Integrated Application 

Lynn Fischer, U S WEST Advanced Technologies 
Judson Cary, U S WEST Advanced Technologies 
Andrew Currie, Bolder Heuristics 


1.0 Abstract 

The Intelligent Selection of Loop Electronics (ISLE) system is an integrated knowledge-based system 
that is used to configure, evaluate, and rank possible network carrier equipment known as Digital 
Loop Carrier (DLC), which will be used to meet the demands of forecasted telephone services. 
Determining the best carrier systems and carrier architectures, while minimizing the cost, meeting 
corporate policies and addressing area service demands, has become a formidable task. Network 
planners and engineers use the ISLE system to assist them in this task of selecting and configuring the 
appropriate loop electronics equipment for future telephone services. 

The ISLE application is an integrated system consisting of a knowledge base, implemented in CLIPS; 
a planner application, implemented in C++, and an object database created from existing INGRES 
database information. The embedibility, performance, and portability of CLIPS provided us with a 
tool with which to capture, clarify, and refine corporate knowledge and distribute this knowledge 
within a larger functional system to network planners and engineers throughout U S WEST. 


2.0 Overview 

The selection of Digital Loop Carrier equipment has a significant impact on network operations and 
business costs. In today’s environment, the network planner faces a growing number of DLC 
equipment vendors and potential carrier systems. Perhaps more significantly, new earner architectures 
(such as dynamic concentration and integration) have been introduced. Each system has different 
features, functions, capacities, and costs. Determining the best earner system and architecture, while 
minimizing the cost, has become a formidable task. The planner must consider all possible choices, 
screen out incompatible solutions, and then rank the remaining contenders in a manner that optimizes 
functionality, minimizes cost, and meets corporate objectives. In addition, corporate policies set forth 
as guidelines for equipment selection need to be included in the planning process. 

The ISLE system was developed to bring the appropriate knowledge to the network engineer and 
support the evaluation of many more DLC equipment options than previously possible. U S WEST 
network planners and engineers currently use ISLE to assist them in choosing the appropriate DLC 
electronics equipment and architectures when configuring equipment within a specific geographic area 
for future telephone services. The ISLE program assures that corporate policies are implemented and 
provides a thorough analysis of all applicable systems. 

The ISLE system is an integrated knowledge-based system which is currently deployed on UNIX 
workstations in U S WEST Communications. The knowledge-base module of the system was 
developed using CLIPS, an OPS-like, rule-based language implemented in C. The control module 
was written in C++ with interfaces to INGRES/SQL databases. 


© 1990, U S WEST Advanced Technologies 


420 



3.0 The ISLE system 

The major functionality of the ISLE system is to evaluate telephone service requirements and produce 
recommendations about DLC equipment which has optimal price and performance to meet those 
requirements. The ISLE system generates all potential DLCs or sets of various DLCs, evaluates those 
solutions, ranks the solutions, and determines the housing required for each equipment solution. 


ISLE provides planners with the following information: 

-A cost summary of all equipment/architectures and housing technically capable of providing 
the forecasted service for the geographic area. 

-A configured parts listing for the recommended DLC system(s). 

-Economic comparison graphs for potential DLCs. 

-Comments on corporate strategics related to DLC equipment. 

-Service capabilities of a given DLC system. 

-Engineering information and assumptions used to configure DLCs. 

Some of the benefits derived from the ISLE system are: 

• improved decision-making, in the planning process with the result of more effective and cost- 
efficient DLC installations 

• consistent application of corporate guidelines 

• increased productivity for planners 

• superior training for planners with an accelerated learning curve for the design process. 

By developing a uniform process for carrier design, planners throughout U S WEST benefit from the 
knowledge of the company's expert engineers coupled with the assimilation of large amounts ot data 
collected over many years and stored in the U S WEST engineering databases. Planners can more 
thoroughly and quickly evaluate equipment configurations, ultimately arriving at a better solution. 
The previous manual approach to planning required the planner to complete many computations and 
search the databases for information. Even after that time-consuming process, the planner still did not 
have the benefit of the knowledge collected and delivered by ISLE. Delivering that expertise on an 
on-going basis shortens the learning curve for planners, both new and experienced, by systematically 
increasing their awareness of new solutions and corporate polices in the planning process. 


4.0 ISLE Architecture 

ISLE is an integrated system which uses the CLIPS rule-based system, C++, and information from 
INGRES/SQL databases, all running under a UNIX* operating system. Currently ISLE contains over 
200 CLIPS rules, consists of 20 C++ modules, and uses data from two INGRES databases. The major 
components of the system are shown in Figure 1. 


•UNIX is a registered trademark of American Telephone and Telegraph Co. 


421 




Figure I. Integrated Components the ISLE system 


The high-level program control is maintained by the C++ modules which call CLIPS for rule-based 
constraint satisfaction and equipment configuration. INGRES/SQL databases provide service forecast 
information, equipment descriptions, and costs. All DLC equipment, parts, and housings are 
represented as objects in C++. The user provides additional information concerning characteristics of 
the geographic area. ISLE then begins generating possible DLC solutions which can meet the 
forecasted service demand in the area. During the generation/evaluation process, various sets of 
CLIPS rules are invoked to eliminate or comment on various DLCs. Figure 2 is a high-level data flow 
which depicts the high degree of integration between the the C++ processes and the CLIPS rules. 

ISLE relies on two INGRES databases which contain data related to the various equipment models, 
(eg. pan ids, costs, modes) and telephone service forecasts for various geographic areas. ISLE uses 
SQL queries to several tables in these databases to retrieve information that is referenced by CLIPS 
rules. The data from the database query is fetched into a structure, then used to construct new C++ 
objects. When this information is needed by a ruleset that is about to be run, an assen method is called 
on one or more of these C++ data objects. This two step process also allows us to translate the data 
from the format and structure found in the INGRES tables to one more useful for the ISLE systems. 
In the course of rules firing, the CLIPS rules also generate information that must be resumed to the 
C++ environment. For this task, ISLE has a special interface ruleset whose sole task is to pass back 
certain types of information (costs, comments, etc.) and create new C++ objects or revise that 
information in existing C++ objects. 


422 










Figure 2. High-level Data How of the ISLE System 


ISLE also contains some information that is not stored in databases, but is information neoessuy for 
the generation of solution sets of DLC equipment which can meet the ' el 'P f h °™J K2.25S 
Most of this information is a kind of "engineering expen common knowledge *at js bes * 
as association lists. An example of this information is the mapping of specific types of telephone 
services to the appropriate hardware components which support each service. 

Most of the information that is required by the rules, but not available in U S databases is 

obtained from the user through the use of simple menus and forms created using C++ -and to cwsw 
oackaee in UNIX. Some additional information may be required based on the user input to the lbLfc. 
forms 8 This information is obtained by direct query of the user from the rules themselvesviaacurses 
interface function exported to CLIPS. In all cases where ISLE is using data from the databases, or 
deriving data in some other way, the user is given the opportunity to inspect and change a "y data t 
does not seem appropriate for the analysis. The data change task is performed by using object 
browsers written in C++ or using forms written in curses. 

Currently all CLIPS rules remain in working memory during the entire ISLE sessiw ^d context facts 
are used to activate the appropriate group of rules as ISLE performs its analysis. With this approach, 
CLIPS performance (i.e. speed and memory usage) has been acceptable to date, although some ra c 

optimization has been necessary to work within memory constraints and I ,000 

run time. This is especially true when ISLE is used to analyze geographic areas with more than 1000 
service lines. Such a scenario can generate over 500 different types of objects 
evaluated by the CLIPS rules. The likely introduction of new types of DLC or different architectures 
could significantly increase the number of objects in CLIPS working memory and dramatically impact 
the system performance. 


423 




















5.0 ISLE Knowledge base 

The ISLE knowledge base contains knowledge related to corporate policies, equipment limitations, 
and qualitative costs. The knowledge represented in ISLE is well-suited to representation in a rule 
structure. The following is a typical ISLE rule along with the CLIPS representation: 

If integration architecture is allowable in this carrier serving area 
and the central office switch is a type-a 
and the total number of lines forecasted exceeds 600 

and no special services are forecasted or specials could be groomed to copper, 
then Integration is recommended in this carrier serving area. 

(defrule csa-integ-type-a-600 
(csa-integration possible) 

(csa-info-object ?idcsa co-switch type-a) j-nnw 

(csa-service-forecast-object ?sfo total -forecast ?forecast-lines&:(> .forecast-lines 600)) 

(or (not (csa-service-forecast-object ?sfo total- specials ?no)) 

(could-groom-specials-to-copper)) 

=> 

(assert (csa-info-object ?idcsa arch-comment 

"Integration is recommended within this CSA for the following reasons: 

1. A type-a switch can be integrated. 

2. The service forecast is over 600 lines. 

3. The number of specials (non vf-asgn services) is insignificant. )) 

(assert (csa-integration recommended))) 

A wide variety of knowledge sources were required to obtain all the information necessary for the 
generate/evaluate task. Figure 3 identifies some of the information sources which were used to 
generate the ISLE knowledge base. 



Figure 3. ISLE Knowledge-base Sources 


424 




The ISLE knowledge base is divided into five areas which focus on different concerns related to 
generation and evaluation of DLC equipment and housing. Those knowledge base subject areas are 
corporate rules, architecture rules, cost rules, housing rules, and rank rules. 

CORPORATE RULES provide knowledge about which DLC electronics equipment is the most 
desirable in terms of future cost-effectiveness and viability. These rules focus on overal 
corporate strategies and also corporate policies on the use of specific earner systems. Inis 
knowledge will encourage planners to explore unfamiliar solutions in planning for geographic 
areas and adhere to corporate guidelines. 

ARCHITECTURE RULES help configure DLC candidates by providing knowledge about 
concentration and integration architectures at the individual DLC level, and identify the most 
appropriate configuration modes for a given DLC. Recommendations for integration 
architectures, remote switching units, and fiber use are made based on the general 
characteristics of a geographic service area. 

COST RULES provide estimates of costs for factors such as training, installation, the ™ rnt)er of 
T-lines and P-lines, and other expenses. Comments on qualitative costs are also provided. 

HOUSING RULES define which type of housing can be used with a specific solution set. This 
cost is then added to the total cost of the solution set. 

RANK RULES re-rank ISLE solution candidates based on factors other than cost, such as 
corporate strategies or equipment features. 


6.0 Summary 

In summary, ISLE is a system "that uses human knowledge to attain high levels of performance in 
solving difficult problems within a narrow problem domain". The U S WEST network planner is 
aided in the difficult problem of planning for geographic areas by the data and knowledge collected 
and assimilated within ISLE. The planner becomes more productive and the corporation benefits from 
higher-quality, lower-cost installations which fulfill corporate strategies and policies. 

CLIPS provided an integral component to the overall business solution of the ISLE system. The 
versatility and portability of CLIPS allowed us to deliver the ISLE system on the user s chosen 
platform of UNIX. This approach also allowed us to integrate the system with C++ modules and 
existing INGRES/SQL databases on the delivery machine. In general, we have found that a majority 
of real-world AI business applications are best delivered as integrated business solutions, rather than 
stand-alone systems. CLIPS seems to allow for the high portability and integration with external 
systems necessary for production knowledge-based systems. 


425 



