N96- 12943 



Executing CLIPS Expert Systems in a Distributed Environment 


James Taylor 

Intel 1 iCorp, Mountain View, California, USA 
Leonard Myers 

CAD Research Unit, California Polytechnic State University 
San Luis Obispo, California, USA 


This paper describes a framework for running cooperating agents in a 
distributed environment to support the Intelligent Computer Aided Design 
System (ICADS), a project in progress at the CAD Research Unit of the Design 
Institute at the California Polytechnic State University. Currently, the 
system aids an architectural designer in creating a floor plan that 
satisfies some general architectural constraints and project specific 
requirements. At the core of ICADS is the Blackboard Control System. 
Connected to the blackboard are any number of domain experts called 
Intelligent Design Tools (IDT). The Blackboard Control System monitors the 
evolving design as it is being drawn and helps resolve conflicts from the 
domain experts. The user serves as a partner in this system by manipulating 
the floor plan in the CAD system and validating recommendations made by the 
domain experts. 

The primary components of the Blackboard Control System are two expert 
systems executed by a modified CLIPS shell. The first is the Message 
Handler. The second is the Conflict Resolver. The Conflict Resolver 
synthesizes the suggestions made by domain experts, which can be either 
CLIPS expert systems, or compiled C programs. In DEM01 [1], the current 
ICADS prototype, the CLIPS domain expert systems are Acoustics, Lighting, 
Structural, and Thermal; the compiled C domain experts are the CAD system 
and the User Interface. 


686 



COMMUNICATION FRAMEWORK 


The communications framework supports multiple hierarchies of connections 
among both C and CLIPS processes. Each connection provides an independent 
two-way stream communication path between processes using UNIX sockets [2]. 
The current network of connections demonstrates some of the possibilities 
(Fig. 1). From the point of view of the Blackboard Message Handler (MH), 
the Conflict Resolver consists of a single connected component. However, to 
increase performance, the rule set of the Conflict Resolver was divided into 
three independent rule sets and distributed as separate processes across the 
network. The User Interface has also been divided into two processes to 
take advantage of the organizational power of the Rete Network in CLIPS and 
the graphical display capabilities of the X Windows Tool Box. 


MESSAGE HANDLER 

The part of the Blackboard called the Message Handler (MH) is a CLIPS expert 
system with additional functions for message passing. The MH has two primary 
functions. First, it initializes the system by starting each IDT. Second, 
it distributes modified values to IDTs that request them. The MH 
initializes the system in two phases. During the first phase, the MH 
establishes a connection with the IDT to allow message passing, and receives 
the input requests specifying the blackboard values the IDT needs to produce 
its results. During the second phase, the MH builds a hash table and 
transmits it to each IDT to reduce future message sizes. An important 
prerequisite in this framework is that all system components use the same 
naming convention. Without a consistent naming convention, too much time 
would be spent converting between different representations. This common 
naming scheme is provided by a frame-based representation developed as part 
of the ICADS project [3]. 


REPRESENTATION 

The parti cul ar- frame based representation used in ICADS is implemented as a 
set of CLIPS facts. A frame is a collection of infonnation about a class or 
object. The information is represented in CLIPS with a frame header fact 
and any number of slot facts. Slots can define a particular value of the 
class or identify a "has-a" relation to another class. 

A frame header is a fact of the form: 

(FRAME <class> <instance>) where 
FRAME is a keyword, 

<class> is the name of the class of this frame, and 
<instance> is the frame identification number. 

The FRAME header is useful in performing operations on the entire frame (ie. 
deleting the frame), but is not needed to access the slots within the frame. 





688 















A value slot is a fact of the form: 

(VALUE <class> <attr1bute> <instance> <value>) where 
VALUE is a keyword, 

<class> and <instance> are the same as in the frame header, 
<attribute> is the slot name or attribute, and 
<value> is the actual value of the slot. 

The <value> field is one or more values, depending on the nature of the 
slot. For example, a slot for the coordinate of a point would have two 
values, whereas a slot for the length of a wall would only have one value. 

A relation slot is a fact of the form: 

(RELATION <classl> <class2> <instancel> <instance2>) where 
RELATION is a keyword, 

<classl> and <class2> are the names of classes, and 
<instancel> and <instance2> are the frame identification 
numbers of <classl> and <class2> respectively. 


An example of an architectural object is the room or space object. Shown 
below is an instance of the class 'space' with an id number of 15, a name of 
LOBBY, a center coordinate of (128, 384), a perimeter of 108 feet, and four 
wal 1 s : 

(FRAME space 15) 

(VALUE space name 15 LOBBY) 

(VALUE space center 15 128 384) 

(VALUE space perimeter 15 108) 

(RELATION space wall 15 1) 

(RELATION space wall 15 2) 

(RELATION space wall 15 3) 

(RELATION space wall 15 4) 

Changes to existing frames are made by inserting an action as the first 
field of the slot. Slots can be added, deleted, and modified using the 

keywords ADD, DELETE, and MODIFY. The ADD action asserts the slot. The 
DELETE action retracts the slot, and the MODIFY action retracts the existing 
slot and asserts the new slot. For example, if the above instance of a 
'space' class exists and (MODIFY VALUE space area 5 216) is asserted, then 
the following actions occur: 

retract (VALUE space area 5 108) 
assert (VALUE space area 5 216) 
retract (MODIFY space area 5 216) 

When the DELETE action is asserted with the frame header, the entire frame 
(ie. all slots and the header) is retracted. 


689 



EXTERNAL FUNCTIONS 


The external functions added to CLIPS to implement message passing are 
divided into two categories -- initialization and transmission. Messages are 
composed of any number of slots (ie. CLIPS facts), and are received 
explicitly with an external function that asserts the slots in the message. 
Messages are built with commands that have been added to the standard CLIPS 
command set and have the same syntax as the CLIPS 'assert' command. 


INITIALIZATION FUNCTIONS 

The functions used during initialization are briefly described below: 

(new server <name of process>): 

Called by the MH and IDTs to create a server to allow future 
connection. Returns zero if no errors occurred. 

(connect bb [<name of message handler>]): 

Call id by an IDT to establish a two way connection between the 
IDT and the MH. Returns IDT identification number. If no 
argument is present, the IDT identification number is returned. 

(accept idt): 

CalTed by the MH to establish a two way connection between the 
MH and an IDT. Returns IDT identification number. 

(unaccept_idt <IDT Id number>): 

Called by the MH to terminate the connection between the MH and 
the IDT specified. Returns zero if no errors occurred. 

(insert hstring <f1eldl> <field2> ...) 

CalTed by the MH and IDTs to add a string composed of the 
concatenated fields to the hash table. Returns zero if no 
errors occurred. 


TRANSMISSION FUNCTIONS 

The functions used during the transmission of facts are briefly described 
below: 


(receive message [<IDT id number>]): 

Cal lid by MH and IDTs to receive a message in FIFO order and 
assert the facts in the message. Receives a message from only 
the MH, if zero is supplied as the IDT id number. Receives a 
message from only the IDT specified, if IDT id number is 
supplied. Returns zero if no errors occurred. 

(bb_assert (<fact 1>) [(<fact 2>) ...1): 

Called by IDTs to add facts to the message buffer. Uses the 
same syntax as the CLIPS 'assert' command. Returns zero if no 
errors occurred. 


690 



(bbend message): 

Called by IDTs to send the message buffer built with the 
bb_assert command to the MH. Returns zero if no errors occurred. 

(idt_assert <IDT id number> (<fact 1>) [(<fact 2>) ...]): 

Called by MH to add facts to the message buffer of the IDT 
specified. Separate message buffers are maintained to allow 
messages for different IDTs to be built simultaneously. Returns 
zero if no errors occurred. 

(idt end_message <IDT id number>): 

Called by MH to send the message buffer built with the idtassert 
command to the IDT specified. Returns zero if no errors 
occurred. 


INITIALIZATION 

The Message Handler (MH) has two phases of initialization. In the first 
phase, it starts each IDT, establishes a connection to allow message 
passing, and receives input requests specifying the slots an IDT requires as 
input. Each IDT sends Its input requests as its first message in the form 
of 'input' value slots in an 'idt' frame. The following example demonstrates 
the actions performed by the MH and two IDTs during the first phase: 


MESSAGE HANDLER 
(newserver "mhandler") 

(system "sound. start") 

(receive message (accept_idt)) 
(system ¥ 1 ight. start") 

(receive message (accept_idt)) 


SOUND IDT 

(new server "sound") 

(bini ?no (connectbb "mhandler")) 

(bb assert 

(ADD FRAME idt ?no) 

(ADD VALUE idt input ?no FRAME space) 

(ADD VALUE idt input ?no FRAME space name) 

(ADO VALUE idt input ?no FRAME space area)) 

(bbendjnessage) 

LIGHT IDT 

(new server "light") 

(bin3 ?no (connectbb "mhandler")) 

(bb assert 

(ADD FRAME idt ?no) 

(ADD VALUE idt input ?no FRAME wall) 

(ADD VALUE idt input ?no VALUE wall length) 


691 



(ADD VALUE Idt input ?no RELATION wall window)) 

(bbendmessage) 

As shown above, an optional argument is supplied to receivejnessage to 
specify that the next message be received only from the most recently 
started IDT. This prevents messages sent by previously started IDTs from 
being mistakenly received and interpreted as the input requests for the most 
recently started IDT. 

In the second phase of initialization, the HH builds a hash table to 
decrease the percentage of time spent transmitting messages by reducing the 
amount of information sent across the network. This technique reduces 
message sizes by a factor of four or five. The HH builds the hash table 
from the input requests of the IDTs. The keyword and class name fields of 
the input request slots are concatenated into a string and entered into a 
hash table. Then, when an instance of that slot is added to the message 
buffer with bb_assert or 1dt_assert, the string of consecutive words starting 
with the second field is converted to a hash code, transmitted across the 
network as an integer, and then converted back to the original string of 
words upon receipt. If the string cannot be found in the hash table, each 
field is transmitted as a sequence of separate words. To insure that the 
hash code is correctly converted back to the original fields, the MH and all 
IDTs must have identical hash tables. Thus, even though an IDT may never 
receive a particular slot, the slot name is still contained in the hash 
table of the IDT. 

Using the example from Phase I, the following strings would be entered into 
the hash table of the HH, the sound IDT, and the light IDT: 

(insert_hstring FRAME space) 

(insert_hstring VALUE space name) 

(insert_hstring VALUE space area) 

(insert~hstring FRAME wall) 

(1nsert_hstring VALUE wall length) 

(insert~hstring RELATION wall window) 

When the slot shown below is added to the message buffer, the second, third, 
and fourth fields (ie. VALUE space name) are converted to a single integer 
hash code, sent across the network, and converted back to the original three 
fields upon receipt of the message. 

(bbassert (MODIFY VALUE space name 5 RECEPTION)) 


DISTRIBUTION 

After initialization, the basic loop of the MH receives the next available 
message, distributes the slots of the message to the IDTs that request them, 
and then retracts the slots. The following rules accomplish this for VALUE 
slots: 


692 



(defrule receive -mess age 

(declare (salience 40)) 
?f <- (RECEIVE) 

■> 

(retract ?f) 
(receive_message) 

) 


(defrule build-message 

(declare (salience 30)) 

(VALUE idt input ?no VALUE ?class ?attribute) 

(?action VALUE ’class ?attribute ?instance $?value) 

-> 

(idt_assert ?no (?action VALUE ?class Tattribute ?instance $?value)) 
(assert (SEND FRAME idt ?no)) 

) 

(defrule send-message 

(declare (salience 20)) 

?f <- (SEND FRAME idt ?no) 

-> 

(retract ?f) 

(Idt end_message ?no) 

) 

(defrule loop-rule 

(declare (salience 10)) 

(not (RECEIVE)) 

-> 

(assert (RECEIVE)) 

) 

Similar rules send the FRAME header and RELATION slots. 

Assertion of (DELETE FRAME idt <IDT id number>) causes the MH to retract the 
frame and terminate the connection of the IOT specified. This fact must be 
asserted for an IDT to exit prior to receipt of (KILL) without causing an 
error. Assertion of (KILL) causes the MH to distribute this fact to all of 
the connected IDTs and then exit. The IDTs exit upon receipt of this fact. 


693 



COMMUNICATION ARCHITECTURE 

There are three levels of C modules below the actual IDT in the 
communication architecture (Fig. 2). 



Figure 2: Levels of C Modules in Communication Hierarchy 

At the lowest level in the hierarchy is the MESSAGE module which implements 
transmission of information between distributed . processes using UNIX 
sockets. This module takes care of mapping the logical name supplied by a 
process into a network address, creating and binding the socket to this 
address, establishing multiple connections to a single socket, and receiving 
facts from distributed processes in first-in-first-out order. The next 
level in the hierarchy is the FACTIO module which implements reading and 
writing of the elements in a CLIPS facts. This module hides the 
representation and means of transmission of the fact. The next level in the 
hierarchy depends on the language in which the IDT is written. CLIPS 
knowledge bases use KBIO, while C programs (ie. CAD system. User Interface) 
use BBIO. Both modules implement establishing a two way connection between 
the MH and an IDT, and the hashing and unhashing of the static fields of 
frame slots. The KBIO module allows facts to be transmitted using the same 
syntax as the CLIPS 'assert' command. The BBIO module allows facts in the 
frame format to be transmitted with a single C function call. 


CONCLUSION 

I CADS DEMOl is currently very stable. However, for the system to become 
usable in a professional setting, the response time needs to be much faster. 
Presently, the response time is slow because of the large size of the 
knowledge bases. The response time could be Increased by dividing the large 
IDTs into multiple rule sets, and adding an expert system to coordinate 
them. The communications framework supports this creation of multiple 
hierarchies of expert systems. 

An IDT should be divided into rule sets that are as independent of each 
other as possible. This will minimize the transmission and subsequent 


694 




assertion of local facts between the sub-IOTs. In addition, one slow 
sub- IDT will not affect the calculation of results from the other sub-IDTs. 
Optimumly, the facts produced by the sub-IDTs will be blackboard values to 
be passed directly from the coordinating IDT back to the Blackboard Message 
Handler. 

The IDT would control its sub-IDTs using the same technique as the 
Blackboard Message Handler. The multiple rule sets would be coordinated by 
their own message handler. All communication among the rule sets would go 
through this message handler. Only this message handler would be connected 
to the Blackboard Message Handler, allowing the IDT to continue to be 
treated as a single connected component. 

Based on run-time profiles of ICADS DEM01, the percentage of time spent in 
communication (5 percent) is insignificant compared to the percentage of 
time spent managing expert system execution (75 percent). The functions 
which are taking the highest percentage of time are join_compute, find_id, and 
request_block. The execution time of all these functions would decrease with 
smaller rule sets. The savings gained .from dividing large knowledge bases 
outweighs the added overhead for the necessary communication. 

The slowest and thus the most logical system to divide is the Conflict 
Resolver. This knowledge base is the largest with over 250 rules. It would 
be divided into three relatively independent rule sets: no conflict, direct 
conflict, and indirect conflict. The no conflict division would have rules 
to post a blackboard value which only one IDT produces. The direct conflict 
division would have rules to decide the blackboard value based on 
suggestions for that value from more than one IDT. The indirect conflict 
division would have rules to infer a blackboard value from a set of other 
blackboard values. The coordinating expert system for these divisions would 
be implemented using the same rules contained in the Blackboard Message 
Handler. 

The Conflict Resolver is the largest and most complex knowledge base, and 
thus would need to be divided first. However, in the future, each IDT will 
be expanded to produce more in depth analysis and simulation, and thus 
become larger and slower. When this time comes, these expanded IDTs will 
also need to be divided. 


REFERENCES 

1. Pohl , J., L. Myers, A. Chapman, J. Cotton (1989); ICADS: Working Model 
Version 1; Tech. Report, CADRU-03-89, CAD Research Unit, Design 
Institute, Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo, California. 

2. Kernighan, B. and R. Pike (1984); The UNIX Programming Environment; 
PrenticeHall . 

3. Assal, H. and L. Myers (1990); An Implementation of a Framebased 
Representation in CLIPS; Proc. First CLIPS Users Conference, Houston, 
Texas. 


695 



