secutive radar profiles are offset slightly 
(by amounts much less than A r) with re- 
spect to each other according to the rel- 
ative change in geodetic altitude. As a 
consequence, in a case in which the sur- 
face area under examination is homoge- 
nous (e.g., an ocean surface), a se- 
quence of consecutive radar profiles of 
the surface in that area containssamples 
of the surface response with range reso- 
lution (Ap) much finer than the range- 
bin increment (Ap «A r). 

Once the high-resolution surface re- 
sponse has thus become available, the 
profile of surface clutter can be accu- 
rately estimated by use of a conventional 
maximum-correlation scheme: A trans- 


lated and scaled version of the high-res- 
olution surface response is fitted to the 
observed low-resolution profile. The 
translation and scaling factors that opti- 
mize the fit in a maximum-correlation 
sense represent (1) the true position of 
the surface relative to the sampled sur- 
face peak and (2) the magnitude of the 
surface backscatter. 

The performance of this algorithm has 
been tested on CloudSat data acquired 
over an ocean surface. A preliminary 
analysis of the test data showed a surface- 
clutter-rejection ratio over flat surfaces of 
>10 dB and a reduction of the contami- 
nated altitude over ocean from about 1 
km to about 0.5 km (over the ocean). 


The algorithm has been embedded in 
CloudSat LIB processing as of Release 04 
(July 2007), and the estimated flat sur- 
face clutter is removed in L2B-GEOPROF 
product from the observed profile of re- 
flectivity (see CloudSat product docu- 
mentation for detailsand performance at 
http:/ / www.cloudsat.cira.colostate.edu/ 
dataSpecs.php?prodid=l). 

This work was done by Simone Tanelli, 
Kyung Pak, Stephen Durden, and Eastwood Im 
of Caltech for N A SA'sJet Propulsion Laboratory. 

The software usd in this innovation is 
available for commercial licensing. Please 
contactKarina Edmonds of the California In- 
stitute of Technology at (626) 395-2322. 
Refer to NPO-44873. 


MODIS Atmospheric Data Handler 


Stennis Spa ceCen ter, M ississippi 

A number of science data sets are derived 
from the observations of the Moderate 
Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer 
(MODIS) instrument onboard NASA's 
Terra and Aqua satellites. These data 
typically contain information on re- 
trieval techniques, quality-control flags, 
and geo-referencing information. 
These datasets, distributed in H DF (FI i- 
erachical Data Format), must be fur- 
ther processed to extract relevant infor- 
mation for weather analysis studies and 
numerical models input. The MODIS- 
Atmosphere Data H an d I er software 
converts the FI DF data to ASCII format, 
and outputs: (1) atmospheric profiles 


of temperature and dew point and (2) 
total precipitable water. Quality-control 
data are also considered in the export 
procedure. 

The package currently consists of pro- 
grams to process the MOD05 and 
MOD07 data products from MODIS. 
The software is written using the C pro- 
gramming language and contains Make- 
files for easier compilation and installa- 
tion. The MODIS-ADFI software helps 
ease the overhead involved in data pro- 
cessing so that the numerical modelers 
may concentrate on their science and 
modeling tasks rather than manipulat- 
ing data for their models. 


This program was written by Valentine 
Anantharaj and Patrick Fitzpatrick of the 
Northern Gulf Institute at M ississippi State 
University for Stennis Space Cen ter. 

Inquiries concerning rights for its commer- 
cial use should be addressed to: 

M ississippi State University 
Northern Gulf Institute 
BLDG 1103, Room 233 
Stennis Space Center, MS 39529 
PhoneNo.: (228) 688-1157 
Fax: (228) 688-7100 
E-mail: val@gri.msstate.edu 
Refer to SSC-00267, volume and number 
of this NASA Tech Briefs issue, and the 
page number. 


6»M ultibeam Altimeter N avigation U paate U sing Faceted 
Shape Model 

T he model is applicable to a body having almost any complex shape. 

NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California 


A method of incorporating informa- 
tion, acquired by a multibeam laser or 
radar altimeter system, pertaining to the 
distance and direction between the sys- 
tem and a nearby target body, into an es- 
timate of the state of a vehicle upon 
which the system is mounted, involves 
the use of a faceted model to represent 
the shape of the target body. I n the orig- 
inal intended application, the vehicle 
would be a spacecraft and the target 
body would be an asteroid, comet, or 
similar body that the spacecraft was re- 
quired to approach. The method could 


also be used in navigating aircraft at low 
altitudes over terrain that is rough 
and/or occupied by objects of signifi- 
cant structure. 

Fundamentally, what one seeks to 
measure isthe distance from the vehicle 
to the target body. The present method 
is the product of a generalization of a 
prior method of altimetry, in which the 
target body has a simple shape repre- 
sented by a spherical or ellipsoidal 
model. In principle, the estimate of dis- 
tance or altitude obtained by use of a 
multibeam altimeter can be more robust 


than that obtained by use of a single- 
beam altimeter, but if the surface of the 
target body has a complex and/ or irreg- 
ular shape, then it becomes more diffi- 
cult to define the distance and compute 
the distance from readings of a multi- 
beam altimeter. 

The faceted shape model of the pres- 
ent method facilitates the definition and 
computation of distance to a target ob- 
ject having almost any shape, no matter 
how irregular and complex. The use of 
faceted shape models to represent com- 
plex three-dimensional objects is com- 


N ASA Tech Briefs, December 2008 


7 


