
Software 


Software For 
Displaying Data From 
Planetary Rovers 

Science Activity Planner (SAP) 
DownlinkBrowser is a computer pro- 
gram that assists in the visualization of 
processed telemetric data [principally 
images, image cubes (that is, multispec- 
tral images), and spectra] that have 
been transmitted to Earth from ex- 
ploratory robotic vehicles (rovers) on 
remote planets. It is undergoing adap- 
tation to (1) the Field Integrated De- 
sign and Operations (FIDO) rover (a 
prototype Mars-exploration rover oper- 
ated on Earth as a test bed) and (2) the 
Mars Exploration Rover (MER) mis- 
sion. This program has evolved from its 
predecessor — the Web Interface for 
Telescience (WITS) software — and 
surpasses WITS in the processing, or- 
ganization, and plotting of data. SAP 
DownlinkBrowser creates Extensible 
Markup Language (XML) files that or- 
ganize data files, on the basis of con- 
tent, into a sortable, searchable prod- 
uct database, without the overhead of a 
relational database. The data-display 
components of SAP DownlinkBrowser 
(descriptively named ImageView, 
3DView, OrbitalView, PanoramaView, 
ImageCubeView, and SpectrumView) 
are designed to run in a memory foot- 
print of at least 256MB on computers 
that utilize the Windows, Linux, and So- 
laris operating systems. 

This program was written by Mark Powell, 
Paul Backes, Jeffrey Norris, Marsette Vona, 
and Robert Steinke of Caltech for NASA’s J et 
Propulsion Laboratory. Further informa- 
tion is contained in a TSP ( see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Don Hart of the Cal- 
ifornia Institute of Technology at (818) 393- 
3425. Refer to NPO-30673. 


@ Software for Refining or 
Coarsening Computational 
Grids 

A computer program performs calcu- 
lations for refinement or coarsening of 
computational grids of the type called 
“structured” (signifying that they are 
geometrically regular and/ or are speci- 
fied by relatively simple algebraic ex- 
pressions) . This program is designed to 
facilitate analysis of the numerical ef- 


fects of changing structured grids uti- 
lized in computational fluid dynamics 
(CFD) software. Unlike prior grid-re- 
finement and -coarsening programs, 
this program is not limited to doubling 
or halving: the user can specify any re- 
finement or coarsening ratio, which 
can have a noninteger value. In addi- 
tion to this ratio, the program accepts, 
as input, a grid file and the associated 
restart file, which is basically a file con- 
taining the most recent iteration of 
flow-field variables computed on the 
grid. The program then refines or 
coarsens the grid as specified, while 
maintaining the geometry and the 
stretching characteristics of the original 
grid. The program can interpolate 
from the input restart file to create a 
restart file for the refined or coarsened 
grid. The program provides a graphical 
user interface that facilitates the entry 
of input data for the grid-generation 
and restart-interpolation routines. 

This program was written by Russell 
Daines and Jody Woods of Lockheed Martin 
Corp. for S tennis Space Center. 

Inquiries concerning rights for the commer- 
cial use of this invention should be addressed 
to the Intellectual Property Manager, Stennis 
Space Center, (228) 688-1929. Refer to SSC- 
00167. 


Q Software for Diagnosis of 
Multiple Coordinated 
Spacecraft 

Distributed Real-Time Model-Based 
Diagnosis (DRMD) is a computer pro- 
gram for diagnosing faults in multiple 
spacecraft cooperating in a specific task 
(e.g., flying in formation to constitute 
an interferometer) . DRMD takes advan- 
tage of both (1) the superiority of 
model-based software for representing 
complex hardware systems (though not 
necessarily for making diagnoses in real 
time) and (2) the ability of rule-based 
software to provide diagnoses in real 
time. A multiple-spacecraft system is 
modeled as a set of interacting subsys- 
tems that comprise interacting compo- 
nents, each of which operates in one of 
a number of modes that define the re- 
lationships between its inputs and out- 
puts. Then diagnosis is performed fol- 
lowing a knowledge-compilation 
approach implemented in a three-step 
process: (1) A representation of the sys- 


tem is expanded into a network of 
processed components at compilation 
time; (2) a Boolean equation for the 
system is constructed at compilation 
time; and (3) the equation is evaluated 
iteratively at run time. The program- 
ming language used to express the 
model of the system defines observables 
and commands local to each subsystem, 
thereby facilitating the distribution of 
portions of the Boolean equation to 
multiple computers on the multiple 
spacecraft. 

This program was written by Anthony Bar- 
rett of Caltech and Seung Chung of MIT for 

NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Fur- 
ther information is contained in a TSP (see 
page 1). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Don Hart of the Cal- 
ifornia Institute of Technology at (818) 393- 
3425. Refer to NPO-30876. 


Software Helps Retrieve 
Information Relevant to 
the User 

The Adaptive Indexing and Re- 
trieval Agent (ARNIE) is a code li- 
brary, designed to be used by an appli- 
cation program, that assists human 
users in retrieving desired information 
in a hypertext setting. Using ARNIE, 
the program implements a computa- 
tional model for interactively learning 
what information each human user 
considers relevant in context. The 
model, called a “relevance network,” 
incrementally adapts retrieved infor- 
mation to users’ individual profiles on 
the basis of feedback from the users 
regarding specific queries. The model 
also generalizes such knowledge for 
subsequent derivation of relevant ref- 
erences for similar queries and pro- 
files, thereby, assisting users in filter- 
ing information by relevance. ARNIE 
thus enables users to categorize and 
share information of interest in vari- 
ous contexts. ARNIE encodes the rele- 
vance and structure of information in 
a neural network dynamically config- 
ured with a genetic algorithm. ARNIE 
maintains an internal database, 
wherein it saves associations, and from 
which it returns associated items in re- 
sponse to a query. A C++ compiler for 
a platform on which ARNIE will be uti- 
lized is necessary for creating the 


NASA Tech Briefs, October 2003 


17 


ARNIE library but is not necessary for 
the execution of the software. 

This program was written by Nathalie 
Mathe and James Chen of Ames Research 
Center. Further information is contained in 
a TSP (see page 1 ). 

Inquiries concerning rights for the commer- 
cial use of this invention should be addressed 
to the Patent Counsel, Ames Research Center, 
(650) 604-5104. Refer to ARC-14136. 


© Software for Simulating a 
Complex Robot 

RoboSim (Robot Simulation) is a com- 
puter program that simulates the poses 
and motions of the Robonaut — a devel- 
opmental anthropomorphic robot that 
has a complex system of joints with 43 de- 
grees of freedom and multiple modes of 
operation and control. RoboSim per- 
forms a full kinematic simulation of all de- 
grees of freedom. It also includes inter- 
face components that duplicate the 
functionality of the real Robonaut inter- 
face with control software and human op- 
erators. Basically, users see no difference 
between the real Robonaut and the simu- 
lation. Consequently, new control algo- 
rithms can be tested by computational 
simulation, without risk to the Robonaut 
hardware, and without using excessive 
Robonaut-hardware experimental time, 
which is always at a premium. Previously 
developed software incorporated into Ro- 
boSim includes Enigma (for graphical dis- 
plays) , OSCAR (for kinematical computa- 
tions), and NDDS (for communication 
between the Robonaut and external soft- 
ware). In addition, RoboSim incorporates 
unique inverse-kinematical algorithms for 
chains of joints that have fewer than six 
degrees of freedom (e.g., finger joints) . In 
comparison with the algorithms of 
OSCAR, these algorithms are more read- 
ily adaptable and provide better results 
when using equivalent sets of data. 

This program was written by S. Michael 
Goza o/Johnson Space Center. Further in- 
formation is contained in a TSP ( see page 1 ). 
MSC-23602 


Software for Planning 
Scientific Activities on Mars 

Mixed-Initiative Activity Plan Gener- 
ator (MAPGEN) is a ground-based 
computer program for planning and 
scheduling the scientific activities of 
instrumented exploratory robotic vehi- 
cles, within the limitations of available 
resources onboard the vehicle. MAP- 
GEN is a combination of two prior soft- 
ware systems: (1) an activity-planning 
program, APGEN, developed at 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory and 
(2) the Europa planner/scheduler 
from NASA Ames Research Center. 
MAPGEN performs all of the follow- 
ing functions: 

• Automatic generation of plans and 
schedules for scientific and engineer- 
ing activities; 

• Testing of hypotheses (or “what-if” 
analyses of various scenarios) ; 

• Editing of plans; 

• Computation and analysis of re- 
sources; and 

• Enforcement and maintenance of con- 
straints, including resolution of tem- 
poral and resource conflicts among 
planned activities. 

MAPGEN can be used in either of two 
modes: one in which the planner/ sched- 
uler is turned off and only the basic 
APGEN functionality is utilized, or one 
in which both component programs are 
used to obtain the full planning, sched- 
uling, and constraint-maintenance func- 
tionality. 

This program was written by Mitchell Ai- 
Chang, John Bresina, Ari Jonsson, Jennifer 
Hsu, Bob Kanefsky, Paul Morris, Kanna 
Rajan, and Jeffrey Yglesias of Ames Re- 
search Center and Len Charest and Pierre 
Maldague of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Labora- 
tory. Further information is contained in a 
TSP (see page 1 ). 

Inquiries concerning rights for the commer- 
cial use of this invention should be addressed 
to the Patent Counsel, Ames Research Center, 
(650) 604-5104. Refer to ARC-15053. 


Software for 

Training in Pre-College 

Mathematics 

The Intelligent Math Tutor (IMT) is 
a computer program for training stu- 
dents in pre-college and college-level 
mathematics courses, including funda- 
mentals, intermediate algebra, college 
algebra, and trigonometry. The IMT 
can be executed on a server computer 
for access by students via the Internet; 
alternatively, it can be executed on stu- 
dents’ computers equipped with com- 
pact-disk/read-only-memory (CD- 
ROM) drives. The IMT provides 
interactive exercises, assessment, track- 
ing, and an on-line graphing calcula- 
tor with algebraic-manipulation capa- 
bilities. The IMT provides an 
innovative combination of content, de- 
livery mechanism, and artificial intelli- 
gence. Careful organization and pre- 
sentation of the content make it 
possible to provide intelligent feed- 
back to the student based on perfor- 
mance on exercises and tests. The 
tracking and feedback mechanisms are 
implemented within the capabilities of 
a commercial off-the-shelf develop- 
ment software tool and are written in 
the Unified Modeling Language to 
maximize reuse and minimize develop- 
ment cost. The graphical calculator is 
a standard feature of most college and 
pre-college algebra and trigonometry 
courses. Placing this functionality in a 
Java applet decreases the cost, provides 
greater capabilities, and provides an 
opportunity to integrate the calculator 
with the lessons. 

This program was written by Robert O. 
Shelton of Johnson Space Center and 

Travis A. Moebes and Scot Van Alstine of Sci- 
ence Applications International Corp. For 
further information, contact the Johnson 
Commercial Technology Office at (281) 483- 
3809. 

MSC-23150 


18 


NASA Tech Briefs, October 2003 


