Computer Technology 

NASA’s Software Bank 



A SPECIAL NASA SERVICE CONTRIBUTES 
TO NATIONAL PRODUCTIVITY BY SUPPLYING 
INDUSTRY REUSABLE SOFTWARE AT 

In these davs when competition among business- 

LOWCOST 4 , _ . , K t / 

es is at an alLtnne high, companies throughout 

the nation are vigorously exploring every possible avenue to cost reductions, in order to 

increase productivity and competitiveness. 

To businesses that are computerized, and today that includes nearly all of them, 
NASA offers a means of reducing automation costs through a special type of spin off service 
operated by the Computer Software Management and Information Center (COSMIC)®. 
COSMIC supplies to American businesses, at relatively low cosh government-developed 
computer programs that have secondary utility. 

Use of such software obviates the need to develop entirely new programs, which is 
time consuming and expensive; software costs sometimes amount to 30-40 percent of the 
total cost of computerizing a business or an industrial process. Thus, business users can 
realize significant savings by taking advantage of a national resource available to them, the 
large “bank” of computer programs developed in the course of work for NASA, the 
Department of Defense and other technology generating agencies of the government. 

An example of how secondary use of government-developed software technology 
aids business and industry is the use of a COSMIC progr am by The Signal Group, 

Wake Forest, North Carolina, a company that designs and manufactures radio and data 
communications systems and equipment. 



While much of 
The Signal Group's work 
is of a conventional 
nature, the company 
does “probe the frontier 
a bit” to provide some 
unique approaches to 
clients' needs - — for 
example, a system that 
links a desert area that 
has no communications 
facilities with civilization. 
The reason: a hunting/ 
falconry party of wealthy 
Middle Eastern men 

Shown being deployed is a tethered 
blimp, a Key element oi a novel 
system that enables blimp-relayed 
communications between an Isolated 
Middle Eastern desert and a metropo- 
lis. The system was developed by 
The Signal Group: a COSMIC comput- 
er program provided an assist In 
development ol the system’s software 


118 



This is a typical 3D graphic 
depiction of a mountain area used 
in a radio propagation study ol the 
desert communications system. 



must penetrate deep into the desert to the best hunting grounds, yet they must also keep in 
touch with their businesses and their families in the city - 

The Signal Group's answer in that instance was a portable system that includes the 
latest in tvvo-way radio technology along with a small, inflatable blimp tethered 5,000 feet 
above the desert floor on a Kevlar line; the blimp serves as a solar-powered relay station for 
radio communications. 

A COSMIC program helped The Signal Group provide this advanced service during 
the system development phase. The company first had to perform transmission studies to 
assess the reliability of voice and data communications* An important influence in system 
performance is how radio waves propagate over the particular terrain in which the system is 
i n te n de d to o pe r a te . 

In the U.S., these studies could readily be accomplished by computer analysis of digi- 
tized terrain data. Satellite derived terrain data has been compiled for most of Earth’s land 
masses, but in some parts of the world governments consider computer 
A "bank” OF government DEVELOPED COMPUTER records of their geography strategically important Dissemination of such 
PROGRAMS CONSTITUTES A NATIONAL RESOURCE data, therefore, is severely restricted if not totally prohibited. That rules out 

computer prediction of RF propagation. 

Since a number of The Signal Group's clients fall under such a restriction, the com- 
pany undertook development of a process that would use terrain data from available printed 
maps to create a proprietary analysis of RF propagation* 

Topographic maps encompass a wide variety of sometimes outdated projections, 
spheroid models, and scales. The Signal Group wanted to develop a method that would be 
essentially universal with respect to input, but during the research phase of the software 
design effort a number of con Hi c ting aspects of the cartographic process were encountered* 
A p i og ra m o b la i n c d fro m t X) 5 M I C o lie red a so 1 uti o n. Title tl 7 mnsverse Mercator 
Map Projection of the Spheroid Using Transformation of the Elliptic Integral and originally devel- 
oped by Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the program not only helped resolve the conflicts 
encountered, it also provided The Signal Group a capability to perform certain types of 
analyses not previously possible. (Conunued) 


•‘COSMIC registered trademark of the National AtTnnnuiir* and Space Administration 


119 


Computer Technology 


NASA’s Software Bank 


{C, (mumied) 




Astronautics Corporation’s Active 
Magnetic Regenerator proof of prin- 
ciple apparatus, a device used to 
lest different types of materials that 
might be employed m magnetic 
refrigerators. The company uses 
COSMIC software in its research 
and development on refrigerators 
l hat operate below minus 321 
degrees Fahrenheit 


Located at the University of Georgia, COSMIC gets a continual flow of government- 
developed software and Center personnel identify those programs that can be adapted 
to secondary usage. Much of the software is directly applicable to secondary application; 
most of it can be adapted to special purposes at far less than the cost of developing a 
new program. 

The ('enter stores the programs and informs potential users of their availability 
through the publication NASA Tech Briefs (see page 141). 

COSMICs library numbers more than 1,200 programs applicable to a broad 
spectrum of business and industrial applications, COSMIC customers can purchase a 
program for a fraction of its original cost; in most instances, users get a return many times 
their investment. Industry's acceptance has been extraordinary. The Center has 
distributed thousands of programs, some of which have made possible savings in the mil- 
lions. Thus, COSMICs service represents one of the broadest areas of economic benefit 
from spinoff technology. 

Here are some additional examples of how COSMIC’s service aids users: 

Astronautics Corporation of America, Madison, Wisconsin designs and manufac- 
tures electronic equipment and aerospace systems. Among advanced research and develop- 
ment projects under way at the company’s Astronautics Technology Center is an investiga- 
tion of possible materials and designs for magnetic refrigerators, which operate under the 
principle that some materials heat up when placed in a magnetic held 
and cool down when removed from it. Applications of these low tem- 
perature (below minus 321 degrees Fahrenheit) refrigerators include 
cooling superconducting magnets used in magnetic resonance 
imaging systems at hospitals, in particle accelerators for high 
energy physics research, and in magnetic containment vessels for fusion 
e n e rgy re sea re 1 i . 

In Astronautics Corpor ation's quest for efficient magnetic refrig- 
erator devices, Technology Center personnel use the COS MIC-supp lied 
SIN DA *85/ FLU I NT, a software system developed by NASA for solving 
physical problems governed by diffusion-type equations. Initially, engi- 
neers employ SINDA ‘85/FLUINT in the conceptual design process; 
the various possibilities for a design are modeled with the COSMIC pro- 
gram to allow comparison of relative efficiencies for selection of the best 
concept. SINDA ‘85/FLUINT is later used to develop a more complex 
model for predicting temperature distribution in the refrigerator. 

Another example involves use of a COSMIC program called 
NETS (A Neural Network Development Tool) in a university artificial intel- 
ligence research program. Originally developed by Johnson Space 
Center, NETS is a software system for mimicking the human brain. It is 
designed to help scientists engaged in exploring artificial intelligence 
solve problems that involve learning and pattern matching. 


120 




Dr. Jerry Darsey (standing) shows 
University o! Arkansas at Little Rock 
student Archie Stone a result ol cal- 
culations generated by COSMlC's 
NETS program, a so It ware system lor 
applying artificial intelligence. The 
pair are pari of a University of 
Arkansas/Oak Ridge National 
La heraldry I earn seeking la Train" a 
computer to recognize pattern rela- 
tionships in chemical systems. 


Dr- Jerry Darsey of the University of Arkansas 
(UArk) at Little Rock, Dr. Don Noid of Oak Ridge 
National Laboratory , and students of the UArk 
Chemistry Department are collaborating on a project 
to apply NETS to pattern matching of chemical sys- 
tems. A successful effort could greatly help chemists 
identify mixtures of compounds without lengthy and 
sometimes costly separation procedures. 

Using NETS as a framework, the group has 
trained the computer to recognize certain pattern 
relationships in a known compound and associate the 
results to an unknown compound. Dr. Darsey terms 
the research "promising" and adds, “Designing a mol- 
ecule or compound on a computer before we even go 
into the laboratory may be possible*" 

A third COSMIC application exemplifies how use of NASA technology can give a 
small business a competitive edge over large companies. 

Esse Systems, Portland, Oregon is a small consulting company that designs computer 
programs for regional manufacturers. Typically, Esse's work involves writing custom software 
that would help a client automate a portion of his operation. 

Believing that better information management is the key to helping clients improve 
productivity, the firm began exploring expert systems, computer programs that make deci- 
sions based on what an expert in the field would do if faced with a problem. 

Esse first looked at a number of existing tools for writing expert systems* The firm 
settled on CLIPS (C Language Integrated Production System), a software shell for developing 
expert systems that originated at Johnson Space Center* With CLIPS, Esse initiated a proto- 
type computer program that would act as a scheduling expert; the company felt that clients 
could save a great deal of time and use human experts more efficiently by automating many 
routine, repetitive scheduling decisions, freeing employees to spend time on other matters 
that required creative thinking. 

After developing its prototype expert system and publishing a 32-page Expert 
Systems Pri m n\ Esse Syste ms i s n ow p rovi di ng cli e n ts service in that a r ea , Thee o m pa ny’s 
first contract involves development and implementation of an expert system to schedule reac- 
tors for Siltec Silicon, a Salem, Oregon semiconductor manufacturer* The three-phase pro 
feci promises to provide significant time and cost savings for Siltec. 

"We bid the job against some prestigious companies," says Esse Systems software engi- 
neer Ken Dellinger. "One reason we got the job was our understanding of the problems and 
our grasp of the technology available to solve the problem* By capitalizing on NASA technol- 
og}', we 1 1 e ah 1 e to pn >vi de ou r cu st o me rs with ex pe r t sys te m s faster an d mo re ec o n o m i ca 1 ly 
than we could if we had to start from scratch.” • 


121 


