OSS NEWSLETTER 

JANUARY, 1984 



The management and staff at OSS would like to wish all of our users the very 
best for a Happy New Year. In addition we would like to thank you for your 
support and patronage throughout 1983. In 1984 we will be introducing a new 
line of Commodore products as well as expanding our current line of Atari 
software. OSS will continue to bring you quality products and technical 
support throughout 1984. 



PRODUCTS FOR THE NEW YEAR 



ACTION! ACTION! ACTION! 



Our first and second runs of ACTION! were complete sell-outs! We are pleased 
to announce that we now have a sufficient supply of cartridges to fill your 
orders — we hope! 

ACTION! is for the BASIC programmer who is ready to step up to a structured, 
compiled language. A straightforward, easy-to-use language (with roots in C 
and Pascal) with a superb built-in screen editor, ACTION! allows you to put 
the "bells and whistles" into your programs. Since your time is valuable, 
ACTION! gives you speed, without resorting to lengthy assembly language 
programming . 

ACTION! 's incredible speed and remarkable versatility make it the most powerful 
tool ever for Atari computers. Benchmark tests show ACTION! even outperforms 
high level languages on the IBM PC! Since it is 100's of times faster than 
BASIC, you can even use it to write animated arcade games. 

We are not just tooting our own horn. Critics who have reviewed ACTION! have 
also been praising its speed and versatility. Atari user groups who received 
advance copies and demo disks have been unanimous in their admiration of this 
great new product. 

Here are some quotes from one reviewer: "Once again words have failed me. 
Nothing is like the ACTION! experience. It's simply awesome!" [With ACTION!] 
"you have ... low-level control and speed; and because you write a routine at 
a time and even a long routine will compile in a few seconds, you have 
interaction as well. It is like you are inside the machine when you get going 
with it." 

And watch for full reviews in ANTIC magazine and HI-RES magazine (both sometime 
in early 1984 ) . 

SS888888888888888888888888888888888888888838888S8888888888838888888888S888888888888 

ACTION! PROGRAMMERS' AID DISK 



The Programmers' Aid Disk, designed exclusively for ACTION! programmers, 
contains a useful library of subroutines to access special Atari features such 
as player-missile graphics and floating point numbers. Some helpful routines, 
written in ACTION!, are also included to do such things as formatted print, 
extended disk I/O, and more. This disk also contains several demonstration 
programs (including a couple of very playable games) written in ACTION! to aid 



page 2 



you in learning the language. The programs and examples on the Programmers' 
Aid Disk normally require the ACTION! cartridge. By also using the runtime 
disk, these ACTION! programs can run on any Atari computer. 

Programs or routines on the Programmers' Aid Disk include: 

ALLOC. ACT — this group of routines allow you to allocate and 
free blocks of memory at run-time. 

CIRCLE. ACT — a fast circle drawing routine which doesn't use 
sine or cosine. 

10. ACT — a group of routines which implement extended 
Input/Output functions such as rename .protect , unprotect, etc. 

MISC.ACT — - a group of miscellaneous routines including 
character test functions (uppercase, lowercase, digit) and 
modified joystick functions. 

PMG.ACT — routines designed to make player/missile graphics 
easy to use, including routines to: enable or disable P/H 

graphics, set the hue and luminance of a specified P/M, return 
the address of a given P/M's memory block, clear out a 
specified P/M's memory block, and move a specified P/M. 

PRINTF.ACT — a PrintF procedure which is far more advanced 
than the Library PrintF, including field size specification, 
field justification, zero fill, and redirection of output to a 
specified channel (much like the standard C printf) . 

REAL. ACT — a group of routines which allow you to use 
floating point (real) numbers in ACTION!. Both arithmetic and 
I/O routines for F.P. numbers are included. 

TURTLE. ACT — a group of routines which implement turtle 
graphics ala Logo. 

GEM. ACT — a video game using both character and P/M graphics. 

SNAILS. ACT — a video game similiar to "SURROUND". This game 
was originally written in BASIC and then translated to ACTION! 

(so you know that it can be done) . 

KALS COPE. ACT — a kaleidoscope program which demonstrates 
ACTION! 's amazing speed and graphics capabilites. 



Each of these files have an accompanying documentation file (labelled 
.DOC) which describes each in some detail. 




BASIC XL 



Apparently, BASIC XL was exactly what many of you were waiting for. Like 
ACTION! , our first run of BASIC XL was sold out before it was released. In 
addition, we ran into problems we never anticipated. As publishers of 



page 3 



software, there are many phases in our production process. 

First, the system and then the documentation to accompany it must be written. 
We set deadlines and add two weeks to allow for problems. Advertisements must 
be placed in magazines three months ahead of schedule. Normally, we are close 
to our deadlines. With BASIC XL we ran into problems we have never encountered 
before: bad manuals that had to be returned to the printer and a hardware 
problem with the boards. We apologize for the resultant delay. 

The response to BASIC XL has nonetheless been overwhelming. Many of our users 
have been delighted with the added features. Automatic line numbering, program 
renumbering, automatic string allocation, and string arrays make programming in 
BASIC XL easier for beginners as well as experienced programmers. 

BASIC XL is even simpler to use and more dependable, because it includes such 
outstanding major additions as structured programming and PRINT USING. In 
addition, BASIC XL has enhanced input /output , improved graphics, and extensive 
business capabilities. 

For the beginner and the experienced programmer alike, OSS BASIC XL is the 
precision software tool you need to keep complications out of your programming 
while allowing you to produce creative and intricate programs. 

mmmemmmm mm w imu i u u Mw aiim w 

MAC/65 



Many of you have been waiting for our new MAC/65 cartridge to be released. We 
anticipate that MAC/65 will be available on January 30th. 

The new MAC/65 cartridge is an enhanced version of the disk product we have 
been selling for more than one year. The new version will have a few 
additional features including better printer control and a full cross-reference 
capability. MAC/65 also features a complete and comprehensive array of 
operators such as: +, *, -, /, &, <, >, <=, >=, =, <>, !, .AND, .OR, .NOT, and 
more, including low-byte-of-address and high-byte-of— address in accordance with 
MOS Technology standard usage. MAC/65 even supports the NCR 65C02 CMOS 
microprocessor instruction set. 

(If you would like to receive a spec sheet on the NCR 65C02 microprocessor 
chip, send your request with a self-addressed, stamped (20 cent), envelope 
large enough to hold several 8 1/2 by 11 sheets of paper to: 65C02 Spec Sheet, 
OSS, 1173D S. Saratoga/ Sunnyvale RD. , San Jose, CA 95129). If you are 
unfamiliar with MAC/65, there is an article entitled "Nightmare Mission" in the 
October issue of ANTIC magazine which compares MAC/65 to other assemblers 
currently on the market. David and Sandy Small indicate the reason why they 
chose OSS's MAC/65 over all the others. 

One reason the Smalls selected our MAC/65 over the competitions' compilers was 
MAC/65's speed. MAC/65 can do memory to memory assemblies at the rate of 
thousands of lines per minute. Even disk to disk assemblies proceed at 
hundreds of lines per minute... as much as 25 times faster than the Atari 
assembler/editor cartridge. 

In addition, MAC/65 takes the drudge work out of assembly language. By 
building macro libraries, you can easily write readable code. You can readily 
find out how many arguments were passed to a macro, extract the length of a 



page 4 



string argument, find out if a label has been defined and/or referenced, and 
much more. Naturally, you may use nested macros^ powerful conditional 
assembly directives (.IF, .ELSE, . ENDIF) , listing controls, included files, and 
other control and formatting directives. 

SuperCartridge 

If you have been complaining about not having enough ram space for your 
programs, the new SuperCartridge from OSS can alleviate that problem. Thanks 
to some sophisticated memory bank management hardware, the OSS SuperCartridge 
allows the user to access the full power of a 16,000 byte language while 
occupying the memory space of an ordinary 8K cartridge. 

Because our SuperCartridge can even turn itself off and on, the RAM normally 
occupied by a cartridge is available for other uses. DOS XL is specifically 
designed to take advantage of this added space, thus providing you with as much 
as 5K to 6K of additional RAM for your programs. Truly we can say that OSS 
gives you the power of a 16,000 language and a DOS while using as little as 3K 
of user space. 



DOS XL 



DOS XL is the only DOS for Atari computers which lets you choose either an 
easy-to-use menu or a versatile command processor. When you use DOS XL in 
conjunction with the OSS SuperCartridge or the Atari XL computers, you also 
gain up to 5K of user memory. Finally, DOS XL gives you Atari DOS file 
compatib iltiy while giving you the flexibility of running in either single or 
double density modes. 

The DOS XL menu provides simple access to disk files and utilities. Unlike 
Atari DOS, the menu is resident so you need never wait for it to load from 
disk. 

Or choose the power of the DOS XL command processor. DOS XL provides both 
resident and disk— based commands, even allowing you to add commands to the 
system. Plus, DOS XL provides a convenient method of batch processing. 

If you own a SuperCartridge or an XL machine, DOS XL gives you an added bonus. 
By taking advantage of advanced memory management techniques, DOS XL saves you 
precious memory space. Even when using the menu, DOS XL with a SuperCartridge 
gives you more memory than Atari DOS without a menu! 

Finally, if you own a disk drive produced by INDUS, TRAK, ASTRA, RANA, PERCOM, 
AMDEK, CONCORDE, or NCT, you will be glad to know that DOS XL is compatible 
with these units. 

In our last newsletter, we neglected to tell you about two of our products. 
Perhaps, because we have been distributing them for more than a year, we think 
of their existence as common knowledge. The following is a brief description 
just in case you are not familiar with them. 



BUG/65 



page 5 



Get one of the most powerful debuggers yet for your Atari computer. BUG/65 
includes all the traditional debugging operations: display memory, change 

memory, disassembly, instant assembly and more. However, BUG/65 shows its real 
power with its single step and trace mode that even displays the status 
register in a readable fashion. In addition it has a breakpoint capabiltiy 
that allows for "conditional breakpoints" ( those that occur only if some 
register has some particular value) . 



BUG/65 is a stand — alone program which allows you to read files into memory 
(optionally with an offset), writes files, and read or write single sectors. 

Still not enough? How about allowing BUG/65*s output to go only to the 
printer, so any display you have on the screen will not be affected? And one 
more unique and powerful feature: BUG/65 can be loaded ANYWHERE in memory, so 
as not to disturb your program. 



So why not make BUG/65 part of your software tools, and make debugging almost 
fun for a change! 



C/65 



Another FIRST from OSS! ! ! C/65 is the first commerically available C compiler 

for the Atari which actually produces assembly language output. C/65 is based 
on the "Small C" compiler, as published in DR. DOBBS JOURNAL. However, it has 
been restructured to enable it to run on and produce code for 6502 based 
machines . 

C/65 is a usable subset of the powerful C language: it supports INTegers and 
CHARacters, arrays thereof, and pointers thereto. Naturally, it also features 
full recursion, easy assembler interface, #INCLUDE, and a non-macro version of 
//DEFINE .' Other variables available include: AUTOmatic, global and EXTERNal . 
Even though neither static nor initialized variables are directly supported, 
one may easily include assembly language code which effects the desired 
results. And the language DOES work: we have used it to write several new DOS 
commands . 

Because C/65 produces a output file which is compatible with MAC/65, you must 
also have a copy of our very popular assembler. On the plus side, since the 
assembly language version of your C code is available to you, you can easily 
optimize specific code sections as you wish. 
pssggggffsagsgs igaaaggssssaseegsssgassasssgssassssggsegsgsssgsssgsgsaaggggagaaaeeaaaaag 

UPDATES 

As software is developed bugs are found, fixed and improvements are made. In 
order to provide you with the most up-to-date versions, OSS has the following 
update policy: 

For ACTION! owners: to receive the most recent version of ACTION! you must 
send back your cartridge— not the manual — and a check or money order for 
$20.00. California residents please include sales tax. No charge card orders 
will be accepted. The charge for this service reflects the actual cost to OSS. 



page 6 

Yourupdate will include a new cartridge, binder, and new manual. 

For MAC/65 owners: to receive the lastest DISK version of MAC/65 you must send 
back your disk and a check or money order for $20.00. California residents 
please add sales tax. No charge orders will be accepted on updates. The 
update will include a new disk, binder, and manual. Please note: this update 
is for the DISK version only. 

For 0S/A+ owners: to update 0S/A+ to DOS XL, you must send us the first page of 
the OS/A+ manual and a check or money order for $15.00. California residents 
please add sales tax. No charge orders will be accepted on updates. The 
update will include a 2-sided disk and a new manual. 

PLEASE NOTE: we ran out of the beginner's manuals. Please do NOT send us any 
more checks for $3.00 for this product. 

ALSO PLEASE NOTE: we are no longer offering updates for 4.1 0S/A+. These were 
available at the time of our last newsletter for $9.95. We anticipate being 
able to offer DOS XL version 4 in the not too distant future, but that project 
is on indefinite hold while higher priority projects are completed. 

8S£eSS8SSSSSgSSgSSSgSSeSSSSSSSSggS8SeS83SeSS8S3SSSSg8SSSgggS8gS8gSSSggSSSSSSSSS: 

RETURN POLICY 



Effective immediately: any product returned to OSS must have a RMA (Return 
Merchandise Authorization ) Number clearly marked on the front of the package. 
Returns which do not have an RMA number will be sent back to the owner. 

To obtain a RMA number, call us at 408-446-3099 between 9:00 am and 4:00 pm 
Pacific Standard Time. Ask for the Return Desk. 



Returns must be made within 30 days from the invoicing date, 
for refund are subject to a 15% restocking fee. 



SOFTWARE AUTHORS: 



Products returned 

?aeaaa aaaaaaaaaas8 



OSS pays some of the best software royalties in the industry, and we like to 
think our products reflect this. Some of our authors earn quite substantial 
sums for the OSS products you like and use. 

As a software publisher, OSS can help you take the risk out of marketing your 
product. We at OSS estimate that it takes a minimum of $15,000 to bring a new 
software product to market; but, if your software is accepted for publication 
by OSS, you bear none of the financial burden of preparing and printing 
documentation, preparing advertising artwork, placing magazine advertising, 
duplicating the disk(s) or cartr idge( s) , or any of myriad other costs involved 
in becoming a start-up in the software jungle. 

OSS is looking for products that are high level systems or languages. We would 
be interested in microcomputer word processors, data bases, and business 
software. At this time, we are not marketing any games, but we are impressed 
by quality in any form, so we welcome your submissions here as well. 

If you have developed one of the above mentioned products and would like us to 
review it, please send us a copy of the disk and any documentation that is 




page 7 



available. Upon request, a 
advance . 



nondisclosure agreement will be sent to you in 



test 



TECHNICAL SUPPORT 



The technical staff at OSS is happy to answer all of your questions. However, 
their expertise is needed to improve current products and to develop new ones. 
As a result, we have found it necessary to change their phone hours to the 
following : 



Monday through Friday 9:30 to 12:00 a.m. 
Our phone number is 408-446-3099 . 



SPEAKING OF MAIL 



and 1:30 to 4:30 p .m . PACIFIC TIME. 






As we announced in the last issue of our newsletter, we have moved. Our new 
address is : 



OSS 

1173D S. SARATOGA/ SUNNYVALE RD. 

SAN JOSE, CA 95129 

In the process of moving a box containing mail was lost. Recently it was 
returned to us. We are in the process of answering your letters. If you have 
not heard from us, please call during the above technical hours or rewrite your 
letter. We apologize for all the inconvenience, but the move really disrupted 
our office procedures. 

If writing to us is more convenient for you, it would help us a great deal if 
your letters included the following: 

1) Your name and complete address printed on the letter 
itself — not just on the envelope. 

2) Please list your questions and allow sufficient 
space for answers below each individual question. 
Programmers often answer letters while waiting for 
printouts or listings. If all the information is on 
one sheet, it makes it easier for them to answer 
your questions. 

3) If your question concerns one of your programs, 
please enclose a listing and a copy on disk, if 
possible. (Do NOT send copies of copyrighted soft- 
ware.) 



COMMERICAL LICENSES 



Did you know that it is possible to purchase a commerical license for all OSS 
products? This license allows the owner to sell products which are created 
with OSS systems for commerical distribution. 






FYI 



page 8 



Did you know that Bill Wilkinson, V.P. of Technical Development at OSS and 
author of a monthly column in COMPUTE! , has written a new book entitled THE 
ATARI BASIC SOURCE BOOK. Bill along with Kathleen O'Brien and Paul Laughton 
wrote the original Atari BASIC. The book provides a inside look at Atari BASIC 
and includes the original source code. Recommended for intermediate and 
advanced programmers, THE 

ATARI BASIC SOURCE BOOK published by COMPUTE! , should be available in your 
local book stores. 

Also, Bill is featured in the January issue of ATARI CONNECTION. The article 
includes some information concerning Bill's background and 10 tips for becoming 
a better programmer. 

DOS XL, the newest operating system produced by OSS, is being distributed with 
the disk drives produced by the following manufacturers: Indus, Astra, Percom 
and (by the time you read this, we hope) Trak. 

All products currently produced by OSS are compatible with all Atari machines 
and will be compatible with the new 1450 XLD when it is released. 



PANDORA'S QUESTION BOX 



This is a new feature, of the OSS NEWSLETTER. In each issue we will highlight a 
question or two that we are frequently asked. If you would like to see a 
particular question answered in this section, please send your question to: 
PANDORA'S QUESTION BOX, C/0 OSS, 1173D S. SARATOGA/ SUNNYVALE RD., SAN JOSE, CA 
95129. 

This month's questions: When I try to used INIT , DUPDSK, SDCOPY, COPY utilities 
I get an ERROR 2 — MEMORY FULL. WHY? 

ANSWER: When using the above utilities, you must remove the cartridge out in 

order to work properly. 

Question: Why can't I get my FILE MANAGER 800 to LOAD with DOS XL? 



ANSWER: There are a few programs on the market that cannot load using DOS XL. 
A solution which works on some of these programs is to hold down the select key 
while loading. 




BUGS! BUGS! BUGS! 

MAC/65 BUGS: 



Please note the following patch was incorrectly given in the last newsletter! 
This is the correct patch-- we promise! 

The following patch allows the use of ';' to introduce a comment anywhere on a 
line. Apply this patch if you wish to have this feature: 

C B857 < 20, AO, BB 
C B9ED < ID 
C BA 49 < C7,A9 



OS/A+ BUGS 



page 9 



Warmstart problem revisited: 

If you do not use the RS232 driver (RS232.COM) with 0S/A+ please ignore this 
section . 

In the last newsletter a bug was reported in which 0S/A+ erroneously left the 
system warmstart flag in the coldstart state after the boot process. 
Unfortunately, a bug in Atari's RS232 driver (RS232.COM) causes that driver to 
load improperly if the warmstart flag is set. Applying the warmstart patch in 
the last newsletter to either version 2 or 4 of 0S/A+ will cause you to be 
unable to use the RS232 driver. Since the fix to this and other bugs in 
Atari's RS232 software is too extensive to explain in this space, DO NOT use 
the patch described in the last newsletter. Instead, if you wish to use the 
RS232 driver, just use the unpatched version. Also, this and other problems 
with Atari's driver have been fixed in our DOS XL software. 

The following is not really a bug. However, we have had many requests for a 
patch to use Atari Writer with 0S/A+: 

From Dl: prompt, type 

TYP E: STARTUP. EXC [RETURN] 

When screen clears, type 
CAR [RETURN] 

[CTRL] 3 

Then, the next time you boot that disk with the AtariWriter cartridge inserted, 
you will be sent to the cartridge and may perform all AtariWriter functions. 
Exception: if AtariWriter is used with version 4 of 0S/A+, the disk inventory 
(disk directory) command will not work properly (because of the 30 character 
file names of version 4) nor can you format diskettes other than with a DOS 
command. All other functions work properly under version 4 or version 2, in 
single or double density (and even double sided, in the case of version 4). 

FOR CURRENT OWNERS OF ACTION 1 



ACTION! CARTRIDGE BUGS & MANUAL ERRATA 

Unfortunately, the ACTION! cartridge does have some bugs. Fortunately they 
are not serious ones and can be patched by inserting a few lines of ACTION! 
source code into your programs. Also, the manual contains both typographical 
and content errors. In presenting the bugs and errata to you we faced a 
dilemma: should we give short (possibly unclear) explanations and fixes in this 
newsletter, or should we ask you to send in for a list of the errata and bugs, 

including detailed explanations and fixes. We chose the latter for the simple 

reason that it will save us from answering innumerable calls about the 'fuzzy' 
explanations in the newsletter. 

To get the 'bugs' letter, simply send a stamped (20 cent), self addressed 

envelope large enough for 8 1/2 by 11 paper to: 

ACTION! BUGS 
OSS, Inc. 

117 3D S. Saratoga Sunnyvale Rd . 

San Jose, CA 95129 



ORDER FORM 



Name 






Daytime phone 


Address 


City 




State 


Zip 


ATARI 

PRODUCT 


QTY 


TOTAL 


MANUALS ONLY* 


ACTION! (CAR.) 


@$99.00 




@$15.00 [] 


BASIC XL (CAR.) 


@$99.00 




@$20.00 [] 


MAC/65 (CAR.) 


@$99.00 




@$15.00 [] 


C/65 


@$80.00 






BUG/65 


@$34.95 






DOS XL (VERSION 2) 


@$30.00 






PROGRAMMERS' AID 
DISK FOR ACTION! 


@$30.00 






NON-COMMERCIAL ACTION! 
RUN-TIME DISK 


@$30.00 







PRODUCT TOTAL 

CA RESIDENTS ADD 6% SALES TAX 



TOTAL 

METHOD OF PAYMENT: 



CHECK ( ) VISA ( ) MASTERCARD ( ) COD ( ) 

CREDIT CARD# EXP. 



Phone orders also accepted 408-446-3099 for MasterCard, VISA or 
COD. To save shipping and handling charges, send check or money 
order . 



* Each cartridge comes with a manual. If you wish to order only a 
manual, you may do so for ACTION!, BASIC XL, and MAC/65 only. 
After reviewing the manual, should you decide to order the 
cartridge, you will receive a $10.00 credit toward the purchase 
price . 




OSS™ 

Optimized Systems Software, Inc’ 



(408) 446-3099 • 1173D S. Saratoga Sunnyvale Rd., San Jose, CA 951 29 





OSS™ 

Optimized Systems Software, Inc. 



Bulk Rate 
U.S. Postage 

PAID 

Permit No. 488 
Cupertino, CA 



(408) 446-3099 • 1 173D S. Saratoga Sunnyvale Rd.. San Jose. CA 95129 





