Software 


Supplier Management 
System 

Supplier Management System (SMS) 
allows for a consistent, agency-wide per- 
formance rating system for suppliers 
used by NASA. This version (2.0) com- 
bines separate databases into one cen- 
tral database that allows for the sharing 
of supplier data. Information extracted 
from the NBS/ Oracle database can be 
used to generate ratings. Also, supplier 
ratings can now be generated in the 
areas of cost, product quality, delivery, 
and audit data. Supplier data can be 
charted based on real-time user input. 
Based on these individual ratings, an 
overall rating can be generated. 

Data that normally would be stored in 
multiple databases, each requiring its 
own log-in, is now readily available and 
easily accessible with only one log-in re- 
quired. Additionally, the database can 
accommodate the storage and display of 
quality-related data that can be analyzed 
and used in the supplier procurement 
decision-making process. Moreover, the 
software allows for a Closed-Loop System 
(supplier feedback) , as well as the capa- 
bility to communicate with other federal 
agencies. 

While Version 1 .0 only had an Approved 
Supplier list, Version 2.0 includes the Ap- 
proved Supplier List, Supplier Rating Sys- 
tem, and the Supplier Outreach and 
Process Control Assurance System. The 
Supplier Rating System is a new database 
that was developed specifically for this soft- 
ware. The system allows for segregation of 
data to ensure sensitive data is protected. 

This program was written by Eric Ramirez, 
Sandy Gutheinz, James Brison, Anita Ho, 
James Allen, Olga Ceritelli, Claudia Tobar, 
Thuykien Nguyen, and Harrel Crenshaw of 
Caltech and Roxann Santos of SkillStorm 
Inc. for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-44084. ' 


@ Improved CLARAty Func- 
tional-Layer/Decision-Layer 
Interface 

Improved interface software for com- 
munication between the CLARAty Deci- 
sion and Functional layers has been de- 


veloped. [The Coupled Layer Architec- 
ture for Robotics Autonomy (CLARAty) 
was described in “Coupled-Layer Robot- 
ics Architecture for Autonomy” (NPO- 
21218), NASA Tech Briefs, Vol. 26, No. 12 
(December 2002), page 48. To recapitu- 
late: the CLARAty architecture was de- 
veloped to improve the modularity of ro- 
botic software while tightening coupling 
between planning/ execution and basic 
control subsystems. Whereas prior ro- 
botic software architectures typically 
contained three layers, the CLARAty 
contains two layers: a decision layer 
(DL) and afunctional layer (FL).] Types 
of communication supported by the 
present software include sending com- 
mands from DL modules to FL modules 
and sending data updates from FL mod- 
ules to DL modules. 

The present software supplants prior 
interface software that had little error- 
checking capability, supported data pa- 
rameters in string form only, supported 
commanding at only one level of the FL, 
and supported only limited updates of 
the state of the robot. The present soft- 
ware offers strong error checking, and 
supports complex data structures and 
commanding at multiple levels of the FL, 
and relative to the prior software, offers a 
much wider spectrum of state-update ca- 
pabilities. 

This program was written by Tara Estlin, 
Gregg Rabideau, Daniel Gaines, Mark John- 
ston, Caroline Chouinard, Issa Nessnas, and 
I-HsiangShu of Caltech for NASA’s Jet Propul- 
sion Laboratory. Further information is con- 
tained in a TSP (see page 1 ). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(626) 395-2322. Refer to NPO-44571. ' 


@ JAVA Stereo Display Toolkit 

This toolkit provides a common inter- 
face for displaying graphical user inter- 
face (GUI) components in stereo using 
either specialized stereo display hard- 
ware (e.g., liquid crystal shutter or polar- 
ized glasses) or anaglyph display 
(red/blue glasses) on standard worksta- 
tion displays. An application using this 
toolkit will work without modification in 
either environment, allowing stereo soft- 
ware to reach a wider audience without 
sacrificing high-quality display on dedi- 


cated hardware. 

The toolkit is written in Java for use with 
the Swing GUI Toolkit and has cross-plat- 
form compatibility. It hooks into the 
graphics system, allowing any standard 
Swing component to be displayed in 
stereo. It uses the OpenGL graphics li- 
brary to control the stereo hardware and 
to perform the rendering. It also supports 
anaglyph and special stereo hardware 
using the same API (application-program 
interface) , and has the ability to “simulate” 
color stereo in anaglyph mode by combin- 
ing the red band of the left image with the 
green/blue bands of the right image. 

This is a low-level toolkit that accom- 
plishes simply the display of components 
(including the JadeDisplay image dis- 
play component). It does not include 
higher-level functions such as disparity 
adjustment, 3D cursor, or overlays — all 
of which can be built using this toolkit. 

This program was written by Robert Deen 
and Oleg Pariser of Caltech for NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory. 

The software used in this innovation is 
available for commercial licensing. Please 
contact Karina Edmonds of the California 
Institute of Technology at (626) 395-2322. 
Refer to NPO-43786. 


Remote-Sensing Time Series 
Analysis, a Vegetation Moni- 
toring Tool 

The Time Series Product Tool (TSPT) 
is software, developed in MATLAB®, 
which creates and displays high signal- 
to-noise Vegetation Indices imagery and 
other higher-level products derived 
from remotely sensed data. This tool en- 
ables automated, rapid, large-scale re- 
gional surveillance of crops, forests, and 
other vegetation. TSPT temporally 
processes high-revisit-rate satellite im- 
agery produced by the Moderate Resolu- 
tion Imaging Spectroradiometer 
(MODIS) and by other remote-sensing 
systems. Although MODIS imagery is ac- 
quired daily, cloudiness and other 
sources of noise can greatly reduce the 
effective temporal resolution. To im- 
prove cloud statistics, the TSPT com- 
bines MODIS data from multiple satel- 
lites (Aqua and Terra). The TSPT 
produces MODIS products as single 
time-frame and multitemporal change 
images, as time-series plots at a selected 


NASA Tech Briefs, April 2008 


25 


