/■ 


N96- 12961 


Applying CLIPS to Control of Molecular Beam Epitaxy Processing 


Arthur A. Rabeau 1 , Abdelhak Bensaoula 2 , Keith D. Jamison 2 , Charles 
Horton 2 , Alex Ignatiev 2 , John R. Glover 3 , University of Houston, Houston, 
Texas 77004. 


1 Department of Electrical Engineering and Space Vacuum Epitaxy Center. 

2 Department of Physics and Space Vacuum Epitaxy Center. 

3 Department of Electrical Engineering. 



1. Introduction 


A key element of U.S. industrial competitiveness in the 1990’s will be the exploitation 
of advanced technologies which involve low-volume, high-profit manufacturing. The 
demands of such manufacture limit participation to a few major entities in the U.S. and 
elsewhere, and offset the lower manufacturing costs of other countries which have, for 
example, captured much of the consumer electronics market. 

One such technology is thin-film epitaxy, a technology which encompasses several 
techniques such as Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE), Chemical Beam Epitaxy (CBE), and 
Vapor-Phase Epitaxy (VPE). Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE) is a technology for 
creating a variety of electronic and electro-optical materials. Compared to standard 
microelectronic production techniques (including gaseous diffusion, ion implantation, 
and chemical vapor deposition), MBE is much more exact, though much slower. 
Although newer than the standard technologies, MBE is the technology of choice for 
fabrication of ultraprecise materials for cutting-edge microelectronic devices and for 
research into the properties of new materials. 

Investigation of MBE processing science and technolojgy is one of the foremost goals 
of the Space Vacuum Epitaxy Center (SVEC) at the University of Houston. SVEC, a 
NASA-sponsored Center for the Commercial Development of Space, is a consortium 
which includes a number of industrial, academic and government members. Research at 
the Center includes both study of MBE science at the basic level and investigation into 
advanced MBE techniques and applications. SVEC's centerpiece project is the Wake 
Shield Facility (WSF), an orbital MBE laboratory which holds promise for unparallelled 
quality and volume of MBE processing. The first flight of the WSF is scheduled for 
April 1992, at which time it will be held at the end of the Shuttle's manipulator arm for an 
experimental run lasting about two days. 

As will be seen below, each individual MBE experiment is a relatively slow process, 
with a mixture of many straightforward features and some requiring careful attention by 
an experimenter. Without computer automation, MBE is manpower-intensive to the 
extent of absorbing a large amount of researchers’ time. Fortunately, it is relatively 
simple to apply automatic control to a typical MBE production system with a PC-class 
microcomputer. This has been done with the laboratory MBE system at SVEC, using a 
PC-AT computer to control the sequencing of basic experiment actions. However, the 
conventional program used to control the experiment is relatively inflexible in any 
unusual or contingency situation. To remedy this situation and take the place of the 
experimenter as much as possible, an expert system addition is being developed at SVEC 
using the CLIPS (C Language Integrated Production System) expert system tool. The 
applications and implementation of this CLIPS application are described below. 


2. Overview of Molecular Beam Epitaxy 


The term epitaxy refers to the accumulation of atoms on a surface in an orderly 
fashion. This means that, if atoms accumulate epitaxially on a crystalline surface, the 
new atoms will form a crystalline structure that duplicates and extends the lattice of the 


927 



original crystal 1 . In MBE parlance, the original crystal surface is known as a "substrate" 
and the deposition-accumulation process is simply called "growth." In the ideal case of 
epitaxial growth ("two-dimensional" or "layered" growth), hot atoms falling on a hot 
crystal will have enough kinetic energy when they hit the substrate to migrate to an 
unoccupied, energetically-favorable spot on the surface where it bonds with neighbor 
atoms to form flat surface "islands." Thus, the material being deposited will form in 
ordered layers a single atom thick. 


Si cell 


Shutter closed 
(zero flux) 



Electron gun 



A1 cell 


Shutters open 


Substrate 


Phosphorescent 

Screen 


RHEED 

Video 

Camera 


Figure 1. MBE Processing (Growth of AlGaAs film) 


MBE growth is achieved by directing a flux of the desired growth materials onto a 
substrate, which must be in an ultrahigh vacuum (U’ V) on the order of 10 11 ton to 
avoid contamination of the growth surface (1 atmosj re = 760 ton). The deposition 
flux is provided by beams of atoms evaporated from solid ingots heated in cylindrical 


928 



crucibles ("cells"). A typical MBE growth process, in which layers of aluminum gallium 
arsenide (AlGaAs) are deposited on a GaAs substrate, is illustrated in Figure 1 . The 
process and apparatus shown are enclosed, in the laboratory, in a stainless steel vacuum 
chamber pumped down, baked out at about 200° C for about two days (to drive out 
contaminants from the chamber walls) and pumped down further to its final operating 
pressure using ion and turbomolecular pumps. 


3. MBE Processin£ 


The basic method of MBE growth is fairly straightforward. As shown in Figure 1 , the 
substrate is placed in front of the deposition sources (effusion cells) which contain ingots 
of the material to be deposited. The substrate is heated to drive off surface oxides and 
other impurities and then is adjusted to the proper temperature for favorable surface 
growth conditions. The cells which are to be used are also heated to drive out impurities, 
and are then adjusted to the proper growth temperatures, i.e. the temperature for each cell 
which yields the proper evaporated flux of its deposition material. Care must be taken 
during this step to avoid thermally stressing the ingots as well as the crucibles 
themselves. When the proper temperatures have been attained, flat shutters covering the 
aperture of the appropriate source cells are opened, permitting evaporated atoms from the 
cells to reach the substrate "target". (It should be noted that even with the sources active, 
the entire growth chamber is still in a hard vacuum by most standards.) Atoms from the 
active cells (in this example, aluminum, gallium and arsenic) spray onto the substrate and 
collect in an ordered manner, forming a lattice on the substrate in a layer-by-layer manner 
(if the growth parameters are correct and impurities are minimized). A typical growth 
rate is about one monolayer (single atomic layer) per second, or about a micron per hour. 
Typical temperatures involved are approximately 150° C for the substrate, 200° for the 
As cell, 1050° for the A1 cell and 950° for the Ga cell. 

The principle means for determining the rate and characteristics of the growth is 
electron diffraction monitoring, also as shown in Figure 1. In this technique, called 
RHEED (Reflection High Energy Electron Diffraction), 10 keV electrons are fired at a 
grazing angle onto the substrate as growth occurs. The electrons are diffracted by the top 
few layers of atoms on the growth surface, and the constructive and destructive 
interference forms a diffraction pattern on a phosphorescent screen opposite the electron 
gun. A video camera is used to monitor the pattern, which can indicate whether two- 
dimensional growth is occurring or not, and what the surface crystal characteristics are. 
A trained MBE physicist can determine whether or not the growth process is occurring 
satisfactorily by looking at the screen, and adjust the parameters accordingly. Also, since 
layered growth produces regular cycles from maximum constructive to maximum 
destructive interference in the diffracted beams, the physicist can tell how many 
monolayers have been deposited by simply counting the number of cycles of intensity in 
the diffraction pattern. 


4. Control of MBE - Hardware 


There are a variety of devices in an MBE system with a mixture of instrumentation 
and control interfaces. These are summarized in Table I below. The most important 


929 



control devices are those which operate the cells, which are viewed from a control 
standpoint as the effusion sources and associated shutters taken together. Under optimum 
circumstances, a particular cell will yield a known flux of its material when its 
temperature reaches a certain setpoint and its shutter is opened. If all conditions were 
known and constant, it would be possible to obtain highly reproducible results from run 
to run without any monitoring. 



Table I. MBE Instrumentation and Control Interfaces 


Function 

Interface 

Source Cell 

Source effusion 
Temperature sensing 

Heater driven by programmable power supply 
Power supply driven by controller voltage signal 
Controller driven by serial command link: 
Setpoint from computer 
Power signal from controller 
Power (voltage, current) from power supply 
Thermocouple voltage signal to controller 
Controller reports voltage via serial data link 

Shutter 

Flux modulation 

Shutter motor driven by digital control board 
Control board driven by computer digital output 

Ion Gauge 

Pressure sensing 

Sensor generates analog reading of pressure 
Computer A/D reads sensor signal 

Mass 

Spectrometer 

Composition 

analysis 

Mass spec generates numeric readings 
Computer starts/reads via serial comm link 

RHEED 

Electron gun 

Electron gun controlled by voltage signals 
Computer D/A generates voltage signals 


Of course, the conditions of neither the effusion cells nor the other parts of the growth 
chamber remain the same. A variety of sensors are used to provide feedback from the 
source cells themselves (controller signal level, thermocouple reading, power supply 
levels) and from other devices which monitor the flux of the beam and chamber 
environment (ion gauges, mass spectrometer). Information from these sensors is used not 
only to monitor the proper progression of an experiment and watch for fault conditions 
but also to confirm settings of previous growth runs and to calibrate settings against each 
other when system modifications are made. 

The usage of the devices discussed above is illustrated by analyzing the growth 
process shown in Figure 1 with referral to Table 1. We consider the growth of aluminum 
gallium arsenide (AlGaAs) on a typical substrate, e.g. gallium arsenide (GaAs). Initially, 
die substrate and sources are all at standby temperatures (Al: 600° C, Ga: 500°C, As: 
100° C, substrate: 100°C) with all shutters closed. The first step is to warm up the 


930 





sources and substrate to growth temperature (Al: 1050°C; Ga: 950°C; As: 200°C, 
substrate: 160°C). This is done by the computer issuing a serial command to the 
temperature controllers to hold a certain setpoint. In each case, the source or sample must 
be ramped or "staircased" up in temperature through a certain range in which it is 
especially vulnerable to undue thermal stress. (The aluminum, for example, is actually 
molten at growth temperature and must be eased through a phase change.) Also, before 
reaching their final values, each source/sample is heated above its growth temperature by 
a small amount to drive off surface contaminants and oxidation. The sequence of 
warming up the system can take up to about two hours. 

When all temperatures have been reached as indicated by the temperature controller 
readings (measured via thermocouple), the sources are checked for proper flux. This is 
done by opening the shutter for each cell (by generating a discrete digital signal to the 
shutter motor controller) and checking the value of its pressure reading with an ionization 
gauge. (These readings should agree from run to run within about 25 percent.) The 
desired fluxes are obtained by adjusting the cell temperatures up or down. With all cells 
properly set, the shutters for (in this case) the aluminum, gallium and arsenic cells are 
opened and growth begins. At this point, growth is now monitored by using the 
ionization gauges and mass spectrometer to check the deposition fluxes and the RHEED 
pattern to verify that epitaxial growth is occurring as planned. When the experiment is 
finished, the shutters are closed and all temperatures are taken down in reverse sequence 
to standby temperatures. 


5. Control of MBE - Software 


Epitaxy process control, as seen above, does not generally require much rapidity of 
response or analysis on the part of the controlling system, unlike most "real-time" process 
applications. This fact has enabled us to develop the MBE control software for the SVEC 
laboratory to satisfy other important requirements, namely: (1) the need to isolate 
software development from the hardware as much as possible to accommodate changes 
and transfers to other systems; (2) the need for ease of software development and 
maintenance in an academic environment with regular personnel changes; and (3) the 
need for an open architecture to allow additions and other upgrades (such as integration 
of CLIPS into the software). 

Based on these needs, the primary MBE control software at SVEC has been designed 
to be modular and functionally layered. Modularity, i.e. separation of different software 
functions into individual units, allows for rapid development of the code by relatively 
uncoordinated individuals and groups of programmers - again, a desirable feature in an 
ac ade mic setting where regular schedules are difficult to set. Layering allows for a clean 
separation of the details of the system hardware from the purpose and form of the control 
software itself. This eases design of the code to make it user-friendly and useful for 
experimenters who are concentrating on science aspects rather than on esoteric details of 
programming. In effect, it enhances contact between the highest level of the experiment - 
the user - with the basic level - the physical processes going on in the MBE growth itself. 

The layering begins at the lowest level, that of hardware. Although most MBE 
chambers and supporting equipment are essentially similar, the control and data- 
acquisition interfaces vary widely from manufacturer to manufacturer, so the "look" of 


931 



the devices to the controlling system can be very different At the hardware level, then, 
nothing is assumed other than the basic kind of information the devices collect and 
accept. The types of parameters which are measured/controlled (e.g., flux of gallium 
atoms, temperature of die substrate) are known but the manner in which they are changed 
or monitored is a detail which varies as the laboratory equipment is maintained or 
upgraded. Thus, these details should be encapsulated as much as possible. 

This encapsulation or isolation of system hardware details is achieved by the next 
level of control, the lowest level of software: the hardware-specific front-end code. This 
code is composed of drivers and linkages which use and manipulate the machine -specific 
data on the "bottom" side, i.e. that which couples to the hardware. However, on the "top" 
side, that which deals with the rest of the software, the view is of process parameters such 
as those mentioned above. The front-end software thus separates the experimenter's 
model (physical variables) of the MBE process from the programmer’s model (e.g., 
writing a string to a serial port, reading a D/A signal). The modules which perform this 
function can be changed relatively easily to accommodate different types of equipment, 
in a manner similar to changing printer drivers on a word-processing program. Unlike 
those drivers, however, the front-end modules separate conceptual data levels rather than 
perform a direct translation. 

Above this level is the software that deals with the experiment control itself, which is 
termed the supervisor level. The supervisor oversees the process by dealing with the 
process variables on one hand and the commands issued by the experimenter on the other. 
It performs the timing functions for the experiment, setting temperatures, waiting for 
setpoints to be reached, opening and closing shutters at predetermined events or intervals, 
and checking the system for fault conditions. The supervisor software is responsible for 
suspending operations (closing the shutters, possibly bringing temperatures down to 
standby) and notifying the experimenter in event of a fault. A fault could be anything 
from a temperature controller time-out reported by the front-end software to an out-of- 
range condition on a cell (e.g., measured temperature above high operating limit). Such 
software, implemented in Turbo Pascal version 5.0, has been in operation at SVEC on a 
trial basis for about four months and shown acceptable performance running on an AT- 
class computer. Current capability involves cell temperature and shutter control, with 
temperature range-checking implemented. Monitoring of flux (pressure) gauge and mass 
spectrometer data will be added during the summer of 1990. Feedback on the shutter 
status, requiring some modifications to the MBE hardware, should also become available 
during this period. 


6. Integration of CLIPS into MBE Control Software 


Using the MBE process control software described above frees up time for 
experimenters to a certain extent. However, it is limited to operating by preset 
parameters alone. If the process does not fit these parameters as it moves along, the 
supervisor program can only either continue or suspend the process while signalling for 
operator intervention. This means that there is still a need for an experimenter to be 
immediately r dlable for responding to computer-gene ated events. To compensate for 
this, we seek i.; add a layer of higher "understanding" above those described above - a 
layer of knowledge and guidelines for dealing with the exigencies of MBE growth that 
does not need a human operator present. The layer we are describing, of course, is an 


932 


expert system. The system to be applied to the MBE software is being developed and 
tested, and ultimately integrated, at SVEC using CLIPS version 4.3. 

The modular-layered structure of the conventional MBE process control software 
makes it easy for CLIPS to be added to the system. The block architecture of the epitaxy 
control system is shown in Figure 2. Again, the lowest level is the instrumentation and 
control hardware itself, topped by the front-end software. The front end takes in data in 
raw form using machine-specific codes and converts them to process-variable 
information. For control, the data flows and conversion occur in the opposite direction as 
commands from the supervisor are converted into the appropriate groups of control 
signals. Above this level, the supervisor code stores and monitors the process data, 
comparing it to prestored configuration data and "scripts" of process commands entered 
by the experimenter. 



The expert system, as seen in Figure 2 above, fits conceptually into this schematic 
above the supervisor and "halfway" below the human experimenter. The experimenter, 
of course, is the final authority on any facet of MBE processing, but when operating 
unattended, the expert system will have enough of the experimenter's knowledge and 
experience loaded into it that it will be able to make the same adjustments and decisions 
an experienced human researcher would make. 


933 




The mechanism for implementing this is scheme is fairly straightforward. Since the 
control software discussed in section 5 is written in Turbo Pascal, the code is being 
rewritten in Turbo C to take advantage of the direct interfacing methods between C and 
CUPS 2 . This allows data to be transferred back and forth between CUPS and the rest of 
the program. In this program, then, CLIPS is used to "advise" (actually order) the 
supervisor what to do in a given situation, based on data passed to it from the supervisor, 
its own rulebase, and data gathered directly by CLIPS. 

As an example, consider a typical sequence, wherein the supervisor program obtains a 
flux reading for the aluminum cell, stores it in a global data area and finds it 50% lower 
than it should be. The supervisor then pauses the growth (closes the shutters), and then 
uses the assert(string) function to add the facts (flux A1 low) and (growth status paused) 
into the CLIPS knowledge base. The supervisor now uses the run(iters) function to call 
CLIPS and allow forward chaining to proceed. Appearance of the new facts causes rules 
to fire which retract any previous items about (growth status) and (flux Al). The expert 
system can now invoke C functions which return data about the cell directly from global 
storage, such as power and temperature readings. CLIPS ihen forward-chains with all the 
data to come to a conclusion about what to do about the misbehaving cell. After reaching 
a conclusion, CLIPS uses C functions to set flags which tell the supervisor to raise the 
temperature, notify an operator or any other appropriate acuon; then control is returned to 
the supervisor. 

Typically, the supervisor would invoke CLIPS after each polling cycle of the MBE 
devices, i.c. after all the process variables have been refreshed. The supervisor performs 
the initial checking on the variables as given in the above example; the boundaty checks 
can be performed much faster this way, instead of the expert system individually 
retrieving and testing each piece of data. When called, CLIPS can be allowed to run to 
completion if a contingency condition exists, or otherwise can be restncted to run through 
a small number of rules at a time. Another consideration on invoking the expert is the 
mode of experiment at the time. For example, during experiments in Atomic Layer 
Epitaxy (ALE), the experimenter attempts to grow single monolayers of atom, which 
requires rapid (<1 sec) cycling of the shutters. During this type of experiment, the 
supervisor will not invoke CLIPS because it is too busy; in fact, all device polling might 
be suspended during such an experiment During intermediate-speed runs, CLIPS would 
definitely be call ed with a firing limit of just a few rules. 


7. Application o f CUPS to MBE Processing 


As illustrated in the example above, CLIPS has two basic roles in the MBE 
processing system. The first is the monitoring and adjustment of growth parameters 
which are not at their desired points; this is required quite often in MBE work even when 
there is nothing "wrong" with the MBE apparatus. It is a combination of a number of 
quite normal factors, which MBE experts have learned to work around - results are 
simply calibrated for the changed parameters. Naturally, there are also times when an 
errant parameter is the result of a malfunction in the control or process hardware. The 
second role of CLIPS, then, in the MBE control software is to guard the process and 
handle such situations while preserving in orde- (1) safety, (2) chamber function and (3) 
as much as possible in the way of experimental results. 


C-7 



As an example, consider the operation of an aluminum (Al) effusion source cell as 
depicted in Figure 3. During a growth run, we set the cell (actually, the temperature 
controller driving the power supply driving the heater filament) to a certain temperature 
setpoint. At that setpoint, there should be a certain flux (±25% front run to run), a certain 
power signal level reported by the temperature controller to maintain the setpoint, and a 
certain range of voltage/current readings from the power supply itself as it pushes power 
through the resistive coil of the heater filament. The temperature of the cell is measured 
by a thermocouple touching the back of the crucible; the voltage generated across the 
thermocouple is measured and interpreted by the temperature controller, which is 
calibrated (presumably) for the correct thermocouple type. 


heater filament 
power leads 


cell crucible 



heater filament coil 

/ 1 \\ 


shutter (closed) 




CZD-S 

shutter motor UHV feedthrough 

mechanism 


Figure 3, MBE Source Cell 


Suppose, for example, that we measured an aluminum flux that was too low - clearly 
out of the bounds of normal variation - for the current temperature setpoint during a 
growth of AlGaAs. Can the use of CLIPS help here? It can - especially if the 
experimenter currently running the machine is relatively inexperienced, and thus not sure 
of all the system's possible behaviors. This situation is analyzed by an MBE expert in the 
following manner: 

• is the temperature controller power reading too high for the established setpoint? If 
so, there is probably a partial break in the filament. This is easily checked by measuring 
the resistance across the leads to the cell heater filament. 

• Is the controller power reading too low? The thermocouple setting on the 
temperature controller may be wrong. This is also easily checked and corrected by using 


935 



the front panel keys on the temperature controller. If this is not the problem, then the 
thermocouple may have shifted position and be touching or close to the filament. This 
can only be checked by removing the cell, which exposes a UHV chamber coated with 
arsenic dust to the air. This means full clean-room gowns and masks for all personnel 
while the inspection is made, and another lengthy bakeout period to restore the chamber 
to operation. This is the least desirable option. The optimum action is to attempt to 
change the cell setpoint until the desired flux is measured, ignoring the temperature 
measurement, and continue the experiment. 

• Is the controller power reading normal? There may be several causes. The shutter 
may not have moved nilly out of the way and is partially blocking the cell aperture. This 
is easily checked through a chamber inspection port, and is fixed by adjusting the cell 
motor position. If the shutter position is correct, then the problem may be a cracked cell, 
caused by thermal stress as discussed previously. When this happens, liquid aluminum 
flows out of the cell and onto the filament and chamber wall. The determination for this 
is to look for a filament shorted by the spilled aluminum. This can be detected by 
looking at the power supply - is the current very high and the voltage correspondingly 
low? If not, the cell may simply be empty - all the aluminum has been used. 
Unfortunately, there is no way to tell with the chamber closed. Repairing either of the 
last two problems, of course, requires opening the chamber, with all the problems 
mentioned above. 

As seen above, the condition we could describe as (flux A1 low) can have a number of 
causes and remedies of widely varying complexity. The value of an expert system here is 
that this knowledge can be codified quite nicely for entering onto the system, so it can 
deal with the contingency competently. The system could notify the operator and ask for 
the results of the non-intrusive checks above, and make a recommendation. If mnning 
unattended, the system could halt growth of the AlGaAs sample, cover it with a "buffer 
layer", and proceed with some other useful material (e.g., GaAs) that did not require use 
of the aluminum cell. 


8. Future Applications of CLIPS to MBE Projects 


There are some important uses for CLIPS-using MBE control software waiting in the 
very near future. One is the use of the expert system to analyze RHEED data. As 
discussed before, RHEED is the primary analytical "real-time" tool for assuring proper 
epitaxial growth of a sample. There are two main types of RHEED data: one is the 
counting of layers deposited during the growth process. This information has been 
successfully extracted with a computer at SVEC by taking the Fourier transform of the 
oscillations of diffracted RHEED beam brightness 3 . The other application, use of the 
actual diffraction-pattern geometry to determine growth modes, will require the 
integration of pattern recognition and image analysis tools with the expen system to 
successfully implement on the computer 4 . 

Successful incorporation of these RHEED techniques into a CLIPS-using epitaxy 
control system will greatly enhance the effectiveness of a much more ambitious project, 
the Wake Shield Facility (WSF) described in the Introduction. The Wake Shield Facility, 
currently under construction in Houston, is a circular platform about four meters in 


936 


diameter which will be carried in the Shuttle Orbiter payload bay and deployed by the 
Remote Manipulator Subsystem arm. The platform has a circular shield which faces the 
direction of orbital motion, pushing aside the incident gas particles which exist at an 
ambient pressure of about 10’ 8 torr. Since the orbital speed of the platform is greater than 
the thermal speed of the ambient panicles, a low-pressure wake of approximately 10‘ 14 
torr total pressure is formed behind the shield. 

The wake side of the WSF contains the epitaxial growth facility, consisting of a 
rotating tray ("carousel") of prepared substrate samples, effusion sources (cells) and 
associated shutters. Monitoring equipment includes, as on the ground-based facilities 
already discussed, ionization gauges, mass spectrometers, a RHEED system, plus various 
auxiliary experiments. An 8086-based computer on the Wake Shield will carry out the 
process sequencing. For the first two flights, all analysis will be done on remote 
computers via telemetry from the WSF, but the system will then be tested as a free-flying 
facility which must be able to operate autonomously for days at a time. If successful, this 
will be the precursor to larger production platforms, operating up to six months at a time 
while turning out hundreds of ultra-high-quality epitaxial wafers. Such facilities will 
obviously need a high degree of robust expert control. The use of CLIPS for MBE in the 
laboratory will provide the development and testing necessary to provide that control. 


9. Closing Remarks 


We have seen that molecular beam epitaxy is a technology that is well-suited for a 
control software system using CLIPS as a top-level expert consultant. MBE has a 
number of well-defined problems which require more expertise than broad knowledge or 
problem solving to master. Additionally, MBE growth is a slow process which definitely 
benefits from having a machine take over the task from human researchers, yet has 
computational loads low enough for CLIPS to be invoked frequently on a 80286-class 
computer controlling the experiment. 

The epitaxial control software at SVEC will integrate CLIPS into a C-language 
version of a currently-operational Turbo Pascal software package. This will be able to 
perform standard epitaxial processes in stand-alone mode while dealing flexibly with a 
fairly broad range of system fluctuations and faults. With the expertise of several MBE 
researchers at SVEC gradually built up into the system, it will also provide useful training 
for new personnel at the laboratory, as it has the ability to guide them through the 
experimental process. The development of CLIPS-using control software at SVEC will 
eventually lead to use in other facilities, including potentially other MBE research centers 
as well as the Wake Shield orbital MBE facility. 


937 



References 


1 Marian Herman and Helmut Sitter. Molecular Beam Epitaxy: Fundamentals and 
Current Status, Springer- Verlag, Berlin: 1989. 

2 Chris Culbert. CUPS Reference Manual, Version 43, Artificial Intelligence 
Section, NASA-Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center: July 1989. 

3 Jay S. Resh. The Use of Reflection High-Energy Electron Diffraction for 
Molecular Beam Epitaxy, Master's thesis. Department of Physics, University of 
Houston: August, 1989. 

4 Patrick H. Winston. Artificial Intelligence, second edition, Addison-Wesley, 
Reading, Massachusetts: 1984. 


938 



AUTHOR INDEX 


Al-Mutawa, Souhaila 803 Faul, Ben M 

Aldrobi, M 621 Feagin, Terry 

Anastasiadis, S 621 Fenske, T. E 

Assal, Hisham 570 Fink, Pamela K 

Athavale, N. N 51 Fischer, Lynn 

Auburn, Mark 614 Flores, Luis M 

Barbee, Diann 881 Frainier, R 

Barr, Stanley J 893 Fritz, Robert H 

Barry, Matthew R 742 

Batra, Sajeev 342 Gathmann, Thomas P 

Bensaoula, Abdelhak 926 Geissman, James R. 

Bhatnagar, Himanshu 554 Geyer, Steve 

Bhatnagar, R 320 Glover, John R 

Brandt, Larry 881 Goldstein, David G. 

Braylan, R. C 375 Gossage, Brett 

Bretz, R. E 2 Groleau, N 

Brodale, Howard N 523 

Brooks, William D .* 792 Hansen, Roger F. 

Callegari, Andres C 698 Heindel, Troy A 

Cameron, Barry W 82 Helbig, H. R 

Cary, Judson 420 Hicks, Jaye 

Cassaro, M. A 51 Hill, Randall W., Jr. 

Charnock, Elizabeth 542 

Chen, Tom 881 Horton, Charles .... 

Cheng, Linfu 822 Hua, Grace 

Chirica, Laurian 426 

Coleman, John 554 Ignatiev, Alex 

Colombano, S 320 

Compton, M 320 Jamison, Keith D. 

Conway, Tim '. . . . 765 Johnson, Coe 

Culp, Donald R 290 Johnson, Dean 

Currie, Andrew 420 Johnson, Sally C. 

Jones, Don D 

De Mori, R 621 

Diaz, Aurora C 581 Jordan, Janice A. ... 

Dixit, Vishweshwar V 118 

Duque, R. E 375 

Ebaud, Stephen 174 Kamil, Hasan 

Eng, Norman 542 Khalife, B 

Engel, Bernard A 381 Kontogiannis, K. ... 

458 


708 

733 

51 

771 

420 

140 

240 

320 

347 

486 

286 

594 

926 

603 

831 

320 

140 

240 

305 

82 

218 

62 

479 

926 

69 

926 

926 

662 

662 

274 

381 

458 

131 

523 

642 

621 

621 


939 


90:PT4:0 1 7/Author Index 



Kosta, Charles P 534 

Krolak, Patrick D 534 

554 

893 

Lai, S 320 

Lam, C 320 

Landauer, Christopher 493 

Lardas, George D 247 


Lavery, David B 792 

Leigh, Albert 147 

Lin, Min-Jin 131 

523 


Lincoln, David T 771 

Liu, Jefferey 822 

Loftin, R. Bowen 174 

Logie, David S 542 

Lowe, Carlyle M 742 

Luger.G. F 2 

Lund, Chet 784 

Macinnes, Mark A * 342 

Mack, John F 498 

Maguire, John 881 

Mainardi, Joseph D 334 

Manahan, M 320 

Marsh, Christopher A 442 

Mason, Larry 168 

Matthews, John 218 

Mayer, Richard J 131 

523 

McConagha, Patrick 839 

McGee, Brenda J 554 

893 

McKendrick, John D 822 

Mehrotra, Mala 274 

Miller, Mark D 893 

Miller, Ross C 534 

Moon, Young Bai 803 

Morris, Keith E 92 

Mueller, Stephen J 75 

Muratore, John F 305 

Murphey, Amy Y 257 

Myers, Leonard 570 

662 

686 


Nagy, Thomas J 522 

Nanne>,Van 831 

Nivens, Cody R 902 

O’Donnell, Richard 404 

Orchard, Robert A 581 

Parkinson, W. J 2 

Patton, Charles R 470 

Pauls, Barbara 508 

Pease, J. N 386 

Pickering, Brad 62 

479 

Porter, Ken 39 

Rabeau, Arthur A 926 

Ragade, R. K 51 

Rangan, RaviM 186 

Rasmussen, Arthur N 305 

Read, D. R 864 

Rewerts, Chris C 458 

Reynolds, Joseph 839 

Rhykerd, C.L 381 

Rhykerd, C. L., Jr 381 

Rhykerd, L. M 381 

Rhvkerd, R. L 381 

Rogers, James L 200 

Rogers, Joseph B 458 

Saito.Tim 174 

Salzman, G. C 375 

Schultz, Roger D 676 

Sherman, Mark 508 

Shewfelt, R. L 386 

Smith, Cathy 550 

Snyder, James 426 

Sobkowicz, Clifford 652 

Srinivas, Vijay 803 

Srinivasan, Raghavan 458 

Statler, 1 320 

Sterle, Mark E 131 

523 

Stewart, C.C 375 

Stobie, Iain C 676 

Swanson, David J 871 

Szatkowski, G. P 334 

Szolovits, P 320 


940 


90:PT4:017/Author Index 



Taylor, James . . 
Taylor, Pam .... 

Thai, C. N 

Tischendorf, Mark 


686 

550 

386 

412 


Wess, Bernard P., Jr 


White, W. A 234 

Whitson, George 550 

Wu. Cathy 540 


Vesty, Matt 


534 


Wannemacher, Tom 
Warinner, Andrew 


155 

881 


Young, Gary B 180 

Young, L 320 


941 


90:PT4:0 \ 7/Author Index 


NASA-JSC 



