N 9 3 - 8 2 142 


AN ON-LINE EXPERT SYSTEM FOR DIAGNOSING ENVIRONMENTALLY 
INDUCED SPACECRAFT ANOMALIES USING CLIPS 

by 

Marie Rolineik, University Research Foundation, Greenbelt, MD 20771 
Michael Lauriente, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Code 420, Greenbelt, MD 20771 
Harry C. Koons & David Gomey, The Aerospace Corporation, P.O.Box 92957, LosAngeles, CA 90009 


ABSTRACT 

A new rule-based, expert system for diagnosing 
spacecraft anomalies is underdevelopment The knowl- 
edge base consists of over two-hundred (200) rules and 
provides links to historical and environmental data- 
bases. Environmental causesconsidered are bulkcharg- 
ing, single event upsets (SEU), surface charging, and 
total radiation dose. 

The system’s driver translates forward chaining 
rules into a backward chaining sequence, prompting the 
user for information pertinent to the causes considered. 
The use of heuristics frees the user from searching 
through large amounts of irrelevant information and 
allows the user to input partial information (varying 
degrees of confidence in an answer) or ‘unknown’ to 
any question. 

The expert system not only provides scientists with 
neededrisk analysis and confidence estimates notavail- 
able in standard numerical models or databases but is 
also an effective learning tool. In addition, the architec- 
ture of the expert system allows easy additions to the 
knowledge base and the database. For example, new 
frames concerning orbital debris and ionospheric scin- 
tillation are being considered. The system currently 
runs on a Micro VAX and uses C Language Integrated 
Production System (CLIPS), an expert shell developed 
by the NASA Johnson Center AI Laboratory in Hous- 
ton. 


BACKGROUND 

The Air Force ( 1 ) and NASA (2) joindy are design- 
ing a new rule-based, on-line expert system for diagnos- 
ing in-flight spacecraft anomalies. This system pro- 
vides an effective method for saving knowledge and 
allows computers to sift through large amounts of data, 
homing in on significant information. Most impor- 
tantly, it uses heuristics in addition to algorithms which 
allows approximate reasoning and inference, and the 
ability to attack problems not rigidly defined. 

The modularity of the expert system allows for easy 
updates and modifications. It not only provides scien- 
tists with needed risk analysis and confidence not found 
in the usual programs, but it is also an effective learning 
tool, and the window implementation makes it very 
easy to use. The system currently runs on a micro VAX 
II at Goddard space Flight Center (GSFC). The infer- 
ence engine used is NASA’s C Language Integrated 
Production System (CLIPS) (3). CLIPS is not only 
compatible with both C andFortran languages, but it has 
features which include the ability to compile the rules 
and save them in a binary image file, thus allowing 
faster execution than a typical rule interpretive system. 
This feature qualifies CLIPS to be used as an expert 
shell, i.e. , an environment where the rules can reside and 
be accessed. The expert system is divided into frames, 
something most programmers would call “modules,” 


329 


and each frame relates to one of the causes of the satellite 
anomaly. 

DESCRIPTION 

The knowledge base consists of over two-hundred 
(200) rules and provides links to historical and environ- 
mental databases. Initially, recognized experts in the 
field were queried on how to diagnose anomalies. The 
“rules of thumb” they provided were formatted into 
logical rules. The system output was verified by refer- 
ring to historical case studies and historical data. The 
architecture of the system was designed to emulate the 
way the user normally looks at data to diagnose anoma- 
lies. The expert system not only consolidates expertise 
in a uniform, objective, and logical way, but it also 
offers “smart” ways of accessing various databases 
which are transparent to the user. Then by applying 
various rules in its knowledge base, the system is 
queried, as appropriate, to arrive at a conclusion. 

The current version of the Space Environment 
Anomalies Expert system (SEAES) is able to attribute 
the causes of satellite anomalies to one of several 
possible categories, including surface charging, bulk 
charging, single event upsets (SEU), and total radiation 
dose. (“Unknown” is also a possible and plausible 
conclusion, depending on the quantity of data available. 
The architecture of SEAS is such that other causes could 
be added if a satisfactory rule base were developed. 
Some examples that have been considered are iono- 
spheric scintillation (e.g., pertinent to commanding 
errors or telemetry link failures) and orbital debris 
(pertinent to mechanical breakups or damage). Rule 
bases and data bases are being compiled for each of 
these categories, and these new frames will be added to 
the SEAES after verification and testing has been 
completed. The system goes through a “decision tree” 
based on these rules in order to arrive at the likely cause 
of anomaly. The rule base includes the expert system 
rules that will be “fired” under control of the inference 
engine and entered in a defined “if-then” format. The 
user interface links to databases which include past 
environmental data, satellite data and previous known 
anomalies. Informationregardingsatellitedesign, speci- 
fications and orbital history need to be assimilated with 


previous anomalies data and environmental conditions, 
while addressing the specific circumstances of indi- 
vidual users. 

NEW FRAMES 

As an example of our approach to the addition of 
new frames, consider the case of orbital debris diagno- 
sis. The rationale for including orbital debris in an 
analysis of satellite anomalies is that debris is an ever- 
increasing threat to spacecraft. The effects of orbital 
debris on spacecraft range from minor erosion of sur- 
faces to more severe mechanical damage or even breakup 
in the case of collisions with large objects. From a 
system design standpoint, it is useful to understand the 
cause of a mechanical breakup. For example, breakups 
can be caused by internal component ruptures or explo- 
sions of pressurized systems such as fuel, attitude 
control gases, or batteries. Design changes would be 
called for in these cases, while design mitigation would 
not be appropriate for collisional breakups. While or- 
bital debris data bases offer some guidelines for assess- 
ing the probabilities of collisions for spacecraft, they do 
not offer any insight into a particular occurrence of a 
breakup. An expert system would be able to help the 
user interpret the available data bases in terms of the 
particular anomaly under study. Furthermore, it is pos- 
sible to examine orbital debris on the resulting frag- 
ments to specifically identify the cause of the breakup 
as being due to collision or explosion. 

A common and useful data display for understand- 
ing satellite breakups is the Gabbard diagram(4), Figure 
1. The Gabbard diagram plots an apogee and perigee 
height against its orbital period for each of the trackable 
fragments following breakup. In an elliptical orbit a 
Gabbard diagram will have two points: The apogee and 
perigee heights aligned above its orbital period. To 
denote apogee, “x” symbols are used and “+” symbols 
are used for perigee. In a circular orbit, the Gabbard 
diag ram is a single point for each fragment. Figure 1, 
shows a Gabbard diagram, plotting the apogee and 
perigee heights versus orbital period for fragments 
following breakup. The distribution, symmetry and 
scatter of the points can all be used in analysis of the 
event. Theserules can be incorporated into a knowledge 


330 


Sample Gabbard Diagram 



base which, when applied to actual data can be used to 
assess a breakup. 


A sample exponential fit to Gabbard diagram: 

If b<2.0 then CAUSE=COLUSION CF25 
If b>2.0 then CAUSE=EXPLOSION CF25 

Perform polynomial fit to Gabbard diagram: 

If A, <.15 then CAUSE=COLLISION CF25 
If A, >.15 then CAUSE=EXPLOSION CF25 

Dispersion of large pieces: If any fragments larger 
than 1 m 2 are dispersed over 50% of the total range of 
fragments, then CAUSE=EXPLOSION CF10 ELSE 
CAUSE=COLLISION CF10. 

Asymmetry of large fragments: If fragments larger 
than 1 m 2 are asymmetrically distributed about the 


parent, then CAUSE=EXPLOSION CF15 ELSE 
CAUSE=COLLISION CF15. 

Orderedness of dispersion: If the Gabbard diagram 
is very ordered, then CAUSE=COLLISION CF15 
ELSE CAUSE=EXPLOSION CF15. 

Velocity analysis: If average velocity imparted 
decreases as fragment size increases, then 
CAUSE=COLLISION CF10 ELSE 
CAUSE=EXPLOSION CF10. 

A set of rules as these can be added easily as a 
separate frame of the expert system. Similarly, rule sets 
for other causes, such as ionospheric scintillation or 
others, can be added as well. 

RESEARCH TOOL 

The on-line feature was considered a natural com- 
munication tool for educating the users on this innova- 
tive venture. In addition, the opportunity was there for 
the users to feedback information to improve on the 
system. The key to advancement in this endeavor is 
communication between users. The user here is either 
a forecaster, a scientist, an engineer, an operator, or 
perhaps a contractor, who needs to know something 
about the effects of the environment on a satellite or a 
satellite subsystem, recognizing that they will have 
access to a variety of databases and knowledge. As of 
the present, we call it a “research system.” That is a 
technical name for an expert system at a specific state of 
development beyond the prototype stage, where it has 
been shown to produce useful answers. It doesn’t 
contain all the possible rules it could, but it is getting 
close to being ready for other people to start evaluating 
it. We are interested in granting accounts to users for the 
purpose of evaluation. 

KNOWLEDGEBASE 

Unlike its algorithmic predecessors, an expert sys- 
tem can be flexible in the way that it attacks complex 
problems. By virtueofits three basic parts (aknowledge 
base, afact base, and adriver interface) an expert system 


331 


more closely simulates the methods of human experts 
who use a combination of known, empirically derived 
formulae, hunches based on degrees of certainty and 
experience, and even judicious “fudging” when spe- 
cific data is lacking. Figure 2 shows the expert system 
configuration. 

The knowledge base, with its set of rules, is what 
makes a rule-based expert system unique. Best thought 
of as an independent collection of “if.. .then” statements, 
the rules are created by experts in their respective fields 
and reflect the current level of human experience, along 
with its uncertainties. Under the weight of these rules, 
and by the use of multi-field variables, an expert system 



Figure 2. Expert System Configuration 


can be said to “ponder the possibilities” presented by the 
databases and current knowledge which are too exten- 
sive to be readily assimilated by any single person. 
Rather than being limited to conclusions that must 
satisfy a set of tightly ordered mathematical statements, 
the system is free to offer suggestions, considerations, 
and likelihoods. 

The rule format used in the expert system is shown 
in Figure 3. Each rule has a subject associated with it (in 
this case one of the four causes considered), a descrip- 
tion of the rule, and then the actual rule itself. The rules 
also have what is termed a ‘confidence factor’ associ- 
ated with the right hand side of each rule. Algorithms, 
which normal programs are limited to using, have a 


RUU201 

SOBJtCT :: BDU_CH*86DK-R0LES 
DESCRIPTION : : Jrecurs when fluence high) 

If l) the recurrence of the anoialy, and 

2) the recurrence is OF J?IGH JENETRATINGJLUX , and 

3) 1) the seven-day accumulated fluence of penetrating electrons is 

HIGH, or 

2) the seven-day accumulated fluence of penetrating electrons is 
VERYJHGH, 

Then there is suggestive evidence (60%) that the cause of the anomaly is 
BULKJHARGING. 

IF : : (RECURRENCE AND PERIODICITY * OF HIGH PENETRATING FLUX AND 
(ACCOM FLUEN * HIGH OR ACCUM FUJEN -"VERY HIGH f) 

THEN :: (CAUSE * BULK CHARGING CF 6Q)‘ 


RULE110 

SUBJECT :: TOTALDQSE-RULES 

DESCRIPTION (Local time recurrence rules out total radiation dose. 
If 1) the recurrence of the anomaly, and 

2) the recurrence of an anoialy in a specific local- tiie sector., 

Then it is definite (100%) that the cause of the anomaly is not T0TAL_D0SE. 

IF :: (RECURRENCE AND LT RECUR) 

THEN :: (CAUSE 1- TOTALJDOSE) 


Figure 3. Rule Format 

100 % certainty to them, and are a subset of the general 
heuristic rules which the expert system uses. 

This aspect of the rule-based expert system is very 
important in diagnosing anomalous behavior since 
much of the knowledge, rules and experience required 
to diagnose these anomalies have confidence factors 
associated with them. The use of such confidence 
factors in the expert system introduces the concept of 
‘risk assessment’ to the diagnostic procedure and the 
inclusion of knowledge which otherwise would be lost, 
since it is, at the very least, extremely difficult to 
represent such knowledge using mathematical formu- 
lae. 

VARIABLES 

SEAES’ use of variables is another area which 
makes this system unique, allowing it to handle non- 
algorithmic, equivocal problems. A variable in this 
system can take on one of three settings. It can be 
‘unset’, meaning that it has not been input by the user 
and that no rule has been able to determine a value for 
it; it can be ‘unknown’ which means the user was 
prompted for the variable but did not know it; or it can 
have one or more ‘values’. The unique aspects of the 


332 









system are that not only can the expert system continue 
to execute when variables are unknown, but when 
variables do have values, each value has a confidence 
factor associated with it Figure 4 shows examples of 
variable formats. 


INCLINATION 

TRANSITION :: {the inclination of the plane of the orbit with respect 
to the earth* s equatorial plane ) 

PROMPT :: (Select the inclination of the satellite with respect to the 
earth's equatorial plane. ) 

TYPE :: SINGLEVALUED 

EXPECT : : {EQUATORIAL I0HINCLIKATION HIGH_INCU NATION POLAR OTHER) 
UPDATED- BY : : (RULE041 RULE133 RULE134 KULE135 RULE 13 6 RULE132 RULE138 
KULB139 RULE140 RULE141 RULE142 RDLE137 ) 

ANTECEDENT-BY :: (RULE026 RULB030) 

USED-BY :: (RULE017 RULE016 RULE091 RULE089) 

HELP :: ("Low inclination orbits are below 30 deg. High 

inclination orbits are above 60 deg. Polar orbits 
are above 80 deg. Interplanetary orbits are undefined. 11 ) 
CERTAINTY-FACTOR-RANGE :: UNKNOWN 


LT_RECUR 

"translation : : {the recurrence of an anoaaly in a specific local-tiae 
sector. ) 

PROMPT :: ("Indicate the degree of certainty that you have that this 

type of anoialy has a strong tendency to recur in one local 
tiie sector, for exaiple the nightside or the dayside of the 
earth?" ) 

TYPE :: YES/NO 

USED-BY :: (RULE019 RULE020 RULE110 RULE054 RULE188 RUU189 RULE190 
RULE191 RULE 19 2 RULE193 RULE194 RULE043 ) 

HELP :: (The anonaly should have occurred a few tines (i.e. six or aore) 
before you have confidence that the recurrence is related to a 
specific local-tine sector. Generally we are asking if the 
anonaly has a very strong tendency to occur within a 12 hour range 
in local tine. } 

CERTAINTY-FACTOR-RANGE :: POSITIVE 


Figure 4. Variable Format 


In the variable format, the translation and prompt 
string are self-explanatory. Each variable also has a 
type associated with it, either ‘single-valued’, ‘multi- 
valued’, or ‘yes/no’. The ‘expect’ field is a list of the 
possible values for that variable which the user can 
select when and if he/she is prompted for that variable. 
The ‘updated_by ’ field is a list of rules which are able 
todetermine values for thatvariable, while the ‘usedjby ’ 
field contains rules which require this variable in order 
to fire. (It is possible that in order for a rule to fire, a 
variable must be ‘unknown’). The ‘help’ field is the 
information displayed when the user presses the help 
key, requesting more information on the variable being 
prompted for. The ‘certainty-factor-range’ (CFR) is 
particular to this system, and can have a value of 
‘unknown’, ‘positive’, or ‘full’. The CFR being ‘un- 
known’ means that this is a possible input for that 


variable. If the CFR is ‘positive’, the user can input 
degrees of confidence from 0 to 100 for each of the 
inputted values for that variable. Finally, if the CFR is 
‘foil’ theusercan inputdegreesof confidence from -100 
to 100 which mean a range from being 100% certain the 
variable is notaspecific value to being 100% certain that 
the variable is a specific value. 

The confidence factors relay the confidence the user 
has in a certain value of the variable. This is very 
important since there is most likely information of 
which the useris not 100% sure. Such information is lost 
in normal programs. The combination of the confidence 
factors of variables and those of the rules propagates the 
confidence factors to other variables which are deter- 
mined by these rules and ultimately to the cause of the 
anomaly. 

Figure 5 shows an input screen for a single- valued 
variable (which assumes 100% confidence), and a CFR 
of ‘unknown’. Figure 6 is an example of the input 
screenforamulti-valued variable with a ‘positive’ CFR. 
Notice how the variable in figure 6 can have more than 
one value, and each value has its own confidence factor 
associated with it. 

FACT BASE 

The fact base, a collection of informative sources 
related to the topic of interest, is the second basic part of 
an expert system. It can consist of as many separate data 
bases as may be deemed pertinent to solving the prob- 
lem at hand. In the case of spacecraft anomalies, a fact 
base might contain information on the hardware cur- 
rently in use, other active and past satellite systems, and 
historical data for orbital environments. 

The database selection screen is shown in Figure 7, 
which shows the databases available for this system 
along with an example of the expert system help facility 
which is available for any variable. An important advan- 
tage obtained in using the expat system is that once it 
has been established which databases are available, the 
rules determine which information is pertinent, access 
the database for the relevant information and apply this 
information, (all of which is transparent to the user). 
Also, the database accessing is modular and easily 
expandable, thus if more databases need to be added, 


333 


SPACECRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL ANCiALIES 


SPACECRAFT EKVIROUKHtTAL ANOMALIES 


Select the name of the satellite that has experienced the anoialy. 

OSCAR 32 

TELSTAR 3D 

OSCAR 31 

GSTAR 1 

MSP 

I&SAT3 

GOES 7 

SCATHA 

FLTSATCOH 7 
POLAR BEAR 
-> NOAA 10 
GSTAR 2 
SATC0NK1 
SATC0HK2 
NAVSTAR 11 
ASCI ’ 
OSCAR 30 
OSCAR - 24 

UNKNOWN 


Use arrov key to position cursor, press BITER to continue. 


Figure 5. Satellite Selection 


Figure 6. Multi-valued input with confidence 

only the selection screen needs to be changed, and the 
new rules added to the knowledge base. These capabili- 
ties free the user from sifting through large amounts of 
data and ensure that only pertinent information and all 
pertinent information is used in the diagnosis. 


IMS that are available for thia aystei. 

HELP WINDOW 

The ASOKALY database it the NOAA Satellite 
Anotaly database fn» the Rational Geophysical 
Data Center. The FLARE database contains X 
class x-ray flares. The KP database contains 
values of the planetary Magnetic index, Kp, 
since 1932. 


** End - press ENTER to continue. 


Figure 7. Database selection screen 
INTERFACE 

The interface is one of the aspects which makes all 
expert systems different from one another. Since the 
expert shell, databases and knowledge base are inde- 
pendent and modular, the main purpose of the interface 
is to create a coordinating system which is not only user 
friendly, but also provides the necessary features to 
assist the user in understanding the system and the 
results. 

The system’s current interface driver translates 
forward chaining rules into a backward chaining se- 
quence, prompting the user for information pertinent to 
the causes he/she wishes to consider. The main purpose 
of the driver is to maintain information regarding the 
variables which are being determined, the rules which 
can determine these variables, the status of the variables, 
and which rales can be fired. 

Some variables are designated as initial variables or 
goal variables. The system first prompts the user for the 
initial variables. The driver then stacks the goal vari- 
ables on the ran time stack and searches the knowledge 
base for rules which determine (or ‘update’) these 
variables, and then puts them on the stack as well. The 
system focuses on those possibilities of high confidence 
and then assists the user by directing him/her to areas of 
consideration that directly affect the particular problem. 


SPACECRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL AMALIES 


Set your confidence level for all of the tines that have been identified 
for the recurrence of this specific anoialy. 

Yes 

0 SATELLITE SPIN PERIOD 

0||| DIURNAL ' 

0 SOLAR ROTATION 

o||||||||~solar“cyclb 

0 SPRING/FALL 

0 MAGNETICALLY DISTURBED 

0 OF HIGH PENETRATING FIDE 


Using arrov keys to position cursor, indicate certainty factors on all 
lines that apply. After salting selections, press ENTER to continue. 


Select all of tha 

Its 

X ANOMALY 
FLARE 
X KP 


334 





The goal (variable) in our system is the CAUSE of the 
anomaly, a multi-valued field variable with a ‘full’ 
CFR, since it can take on any number of the four 
possible causes where each cause has its own confi- 
dence factor associated with itranging from - 100 to 100. 

If a variable on the left hand side of a stacked rule is 
unset, this variable becomes the current goal variable 
and is put on the stack, and the process continues. If a 
variable is on the stack and has not determined by any 
rules, or by the available database, and it has a prompt 
string, the user is prompted for it. This can be thought of 
as a transformation of the forward chaining rules in the 
knowledge base into a backward chaining variable 
sequence. Once a variable has a value, it is removed 
from the stack and the rules which use this variable are 
fired, discarded, or require the driver to put the next 
variable on that rule’s left hand side onto the stack. The 
chaining process continues until the stack is empty. 

Any mle on the stack that can be fired does so 
transparently to the user, where the confidence factors 
of the individual variables on its left hand side (LHS) are 
used for determining the confidence or validity of the 
entire LHS. When a rule fires, it executes the right hand 
side (RHS), and the confidence factor associated with 
its LHS is used in conjunction with the confidence 
factor of the rule to propagate the confidence to the 
RHS. This RHS execution can entail the setting of 
variables, the use of mathematical calculations, or the 
accessing of databases. 

LEARNING TOOL 

One of the most beneficial aspects of the system is 
its use as a learning tool for diagnosing spacecraft 
anomalies. A user is initially given a choice between 
either ‘novice’ or ‘expert’ mode for the current session. 
If the user selects the novice mode the system automati- 
cally gives detailed explanations and descriptions of 
terms and reasoning as the session progresses, in a sense 
teaching the user about the topic or topics. The expert 
mode, on the other hand, simply executes the session 
without giving these extra explanations, unless the user 
specifically requests them. 

The user is also given the option of selecting which 
causes are to be considered. (See figure 8) This selection 


SPACECBWT MIROMEHTM, AHOKMUS 


Sclict all of the causes that you vish to consider for this anonaly* 

111 

ALL 

X BULK CHARGING 
SURFACE CHARGING 
SEU 

X TOTAL DOSE 
PARTICLRS/PIASMA 


Using arrow keys to position cursor, select all applicable responses. 
After asking selections, press ENTER to continue. 


Figure 8 . Causes selection screen 

determines a knowledge base sub-group, so that only 
rules in this specific environmental area are considered. 
In this way the user can learn what variables, informa- 
tion and data affect, and are important to, that cause. In 
addition to this, in the features described next, the user 
is actually able to access the relevant rules him/herself 
and other variables and facts which were determined by 
using these rules. 

The ability to add intricate features and options is 
primarily due to the modularity of the system which the 
expert shell and expert system knowledge base concept 
itself provide. These features are the most impressive in 
demonstrating the capabilities of the EnviroNET expert 
system and its advantages over the usual, strictly math- 
ematical, programming techniques. 

The user interface alsoprovidesforaccessinggraph- 
ics. For example, if the user inputs that one of the 
databases available is Kp, the system will ask if he/she 
wishes to see the Kp historical graph for the time around 
which the anomaly occurred. If the input is ‘yes’, then 
a graph similar to the one shown in figure 9 will be 
displayed. (If .however, the date is ‘unset’, then the 
system will first ask for it, and if the date is ‘unknown’ 
the system will ignore this line of questioning alto- 
gether.) This gives the user a much needed overall view 
of environmental information and conditions around 
the date in question. 


335 




f Planetary Magnetic Index, Kp 1 





^ 6 - 1-80 J 

Figure 9. Kp Graph 
UNIQUE FEATURES 


Another feature which makes the expert system 
unique is its trace capability. The user can turn on the 
trace and send it to the screen or a file. The trace shows 
the rules as they are tested, variables as they are pushed 
onto the run time stack and determined, and searches of 
the databases. (See figure 10) This allows the user to 
understand what is happening at any step and see the 


Setting TOTAL DOST TECHNOLOGY ■= AHORPHOUSJBL cf 100 

Testing RD12U9 

RULE119 FAILS 

Testing KDI2128 

KULE12S FAILS 

Testing RDLI129 

1012129 FAILS 

Testing 8012131 

Applying KUI2131 

Setting TOTAL DOSE IHRESBOID * 1000000 cf 100 
Testing RUI2120 
Applying RDI2120 

Setting CAUSE « TOTAL.D0SE Cf -8« 
old cf -30 

Kark_antec_rules_for CAUSE 8ULEQ27 
Try iartef antec* rules 
Testing RUI2027~ 


** More - press BITER to continue. 


Figure 10. Trace example 

knowledge that is being used, thus giving the user 
confidence in the system. This type of capability is 
obviously not available in the purely algorithmic pro- 


grams. Due to the amount of information the user could 
be prompted for and depending on the particular ses- 
sion, the user may want to review his/her inputs. This 
capability is available in the ‘REVIEW’ facility. This 
option also provides the user with a simple way of 
comparing different inputs of different sessions. 

A feature which demonstrates a definite advantage 
of the rule-based expert system is what is called the 
‘WHY’ option. Any time the system prompts the user 
for a variable, the user can ask the expert system why the 
system needs this variable. The system then uses its run 
time stack (a backward chaining stack) to follow and 
show the reasoning backward to the goal; that is, the 
cause of the anomaly. Figures 1 1-12 show an example 
of this. This is not only vital to understanding and 


SPACECRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL ANOMALIES 
Enter a value betveen 0 and 400 for the laxlnum value of the planetary 

m KUDO* 

the three hour planetary index 1$ is needed to detenine the level of 
■agnetic activity in the nagnetosphere 

RDUS094 

If the three hour planetary index Ap is greater than 30, 

Then it is definite (1004) that the level of nagnetic activity in the 
nagnetosphere is DISTURBED. 


»* More - press ENTER to continue. 


Figure 11. Backward reasoning 

having confidence in the system, but it also is an 
important part of the expert system’s use as a learning 
tool. 

A final feature which sets the expert system apart is 
the ‘HOW’ command. As with all programs, the expert 
system is constantly determining variables by means 
other than the user inputting them, whether by the 
heuristics and algorithms in the rules or by extracting 
values from the databases. This command allows the 
users to, at any time, see what variables have been 


336 





SPACECRAFT fflYIBMSTil UKMUJtS 



Figure 12. Backward reasoning (con't.) 


determined by means other than userinput, their values, 
and which rules (or databases) were used to determine 
them. Figures 13-15 show an example of this feature. 
The user first selects which variables he/she wants to 
look at and then the system proceeds to show which 
rules determined them. Notice how it is possible for 
variables to be determined (or updated) by more than 
one rule. The user of course can choose any number of 
variables, though for this example only one variable, the 
cause of the anomaly, was selected. This feature not 
only gives the user complete control over the system, 
but allows him/her to see all the facts and knowledge 
that can be inferred from the inputs they have given, the 
available databases, and the expertise in the rules. As a 
final option, the user is also allowed, at any point, to exit 
from the program or begin a new session without ever 
leaving the program’s window screen. 

RESULTS 

The diagnostic results are in the form of confidence 
factors derived from both the confidence assigned to 
rules by the experts and also the confidence of variables 



Figure 13. HOW facility 

SmCECMR EKVIRONKKXWi MCUUK 


Select the ten that bast describes the radiation shielding of the circuit 

HOW WINDOW 

*** also detenined by: 

KULE005 

If the seven-day accuiulated fluence of penetrating electrons is 
VERYJIGH, 

Then there is suggestive evidence (60%) that the cause of the anoialy 
is BUUt CHARGING. 


*• More - press ENTER to continue. 

Figure 14. HOW facility (con't.) 

SPACECRAFT EXVIROKKBTOlL AKOMALIES 


Select the ten that best describes the radiation shielding of the circuit 

hon raws 

the orbit of the satellite is determined by: 

RHLE181 

If 1) the perigee of the satellite is leu than $00 but grutsr than 
or equal to 735, and 

2) the apogee of the satellite is less than 920 but greater than 
or equal to 750, and 

3) the inclination of the satellite as read fros a Phase III file 
Is leu than 110 but greater than or equal to 90, 

Then it is definite (100%) that the orbit of the satellite is DMSF. 


** More - press INTER to continue, 


Figure IS. HOW facility (con't.) 


337 












input by the user. Both the confidence in the rules/ 
heuristics and the input of certainty factors by the user 
are needed to diagnose anomalies as they contain vital 
knowledge which can only be represented as such. The 
results window is shown in Figure 16. 

The results window in our system includes, in 
addition to the cause(s) of the anomaly, the orbit of the 
satellite, whether input by the user or determined by 
rules, and a list of the causes considered in the diagnos- 
tics. The window can easily be modified to display any 
other information which is considered important. In the 
example, the cause of the anomaly was determined to be 
bulk charging with a confidence of 64%, and deter- 
mined not to be total radiation dose with a confidence of 
80% . The knowledge base does, of course, contain rules 
and formulae which can determine the cause of the 
anomaly with 100% confidence, or completely rule out 
a particular cause. For these situations the system will 
simply say that the cause, for example, is bulk charging 
or is not total dose. 

The main concern with the system is the actual 
confidence and validity of the rules themselves. Since 
experts in any field are likely to disagree over certain 
areas, there may be rules to which other experts would 
apply slightly higher or lower degrees of confidence. 
This is certainly a consideration when using such a 
system, though it must be remembered that it is due to 
such a confidence/certainty question in the field that this 
type of expert system is needed. In general, as more 
quantitative environmental data becomes available in 
the immediate area of a spacecraft, we can apply the 
higher confidences to all of the system’s rules. In 
addition, the features provided by the interface allow the 
user to see exactly what rules are being used so there is 
complete awareness and understanding of the formulae 
and knowledge being used. 

An advantage of this particular system is that its 
interface is completely generic. Not only can the system 
run on many machines, the interface can be used in any 
field since the rules acknowledge base are completely 
independent of it. By substituting rules from another 
field, the system becomes an expert system for that field 
able to diagnose or solve problems towards which its 
tailored rules converge. In this sense the software is 
completely reusable. 


SPACECRAFT EKVIROHMEKTAL ANOMALIES 


The orbit of the satellite is as follow: DHSP 

lbe possible causes of the anoialy that you wish to consider is as follows: 
BOU_CHARQING TOTAL DOSE 

The cause of the anoialy is as follow: 

BULK CHARGING (fill) 

Rot TOTAL DOSE (801) 


« End - press EATER to continue. 


Figure 16. Results screen 
FUTURE WORK 

We are improving our EnviroNET network with 
the addition of an IBM RISC 6000. Once there, not only 
will the speed of the Expert System be increased, but 
with the use of X Windows the system will also be 
enhanced. 

For example, with X Windows the user could have 
one query window which prompts him/her for informa- 
tion, another separate window that displays which rules 
are being tested and fired, which variables are being 
searched for, and another window for graphics. With 
these multiple windows the user can see the entire 
system working at once and be freed from having to 
change windows to see system information. 

CONCLUSION 

SEAES combines the algorithmic capabilities of 
mathematical programs and diagnostic models with 
expert heuristic knowledge, and uses confidence fac- 
tors in variables and rules to calculate results with 
degrees of human confidence associated with them. 
Since the causes of environmentally induced spacecraft 
anomalies depend not only on algorithms, but also on 


338 




environmental conditions, rules and information the 
conclusion can rarely be known with 100% certainty. 
Based on present experiences, the role for the expert 
system is for either quasi-real time, or post analysis. 
There is a need to greatly improve our ability to predict 
the environment before meaningful work can be done in 
forecasting satellite anomalies. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We are indebted to the staff of NASA’s Johnson 
Space Center’s AI Laboratory for their cooperation in 
the use of CLIPS. Funding was provided by NASA’s 
Office of Safety and Mission Quality, the U.S. Air 
Force's Phillips Laboratory and Space Systems Divi- 
sion under contract P04701-88-C-0089 

REFERENCES 

1. Koons, H. G, and Gomey, D. J., “Spacecraft 
Environmental Anomalies Expert System: A Status 
Report,” Aerospace Report # ATR-88 (9562)-l, The 
Aerospace Corporation, El Segundo, CA., 1 Dec. 1988. 

2. EnviroNET: An On-line Environmental Interac- 
tive Resource, Proc. Fourth Annual Space Operations 
and Research (SOAR) Symposium, June 26-28, 1990 

3. Giarratano, J. C. (1989, May). “Artificial Intelli- 
gence Section,” CLIPS User’s Guide, Version 4.3 of 
CLIPS, Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center. 

4. Johnson, Nicholas L. and Darren S. McKnight, 
“Artificial Space Debris”, Orbit Book Company, 
Malabar FL, 1987. 


339 


