^3 



''w 



Popular Summary: Decadal Changes in Global Ocean Chlorophyll 
Watson W Gregg, Margarita E Conkright 
Submitted to Science 2001 

The Sea-viewing Wide Field-of-view Sensor (SeaWiFS) has produced the first multi-year time series 
of global ocean chlorophyll obser\ations since the demise of the Coastal Zone Color Scanner (CZCS) 
in 1986. Global observations from 1997-present from SeaWiFS combined with obsen/ations from 
1979-1986 from the CZCS should in principle provide an opportunity to observe decadal changes in 
global ocean chlorophyll. However, incompatibilities between algorithms have so far precluded 
quantitative analysis. We have developed and applied compatible processing methods for the CZCS, 
using modem advances in atmospheric correction and consistent bio-optical algorithms to advance the 
CZCS archive to comparable quality with SeaWiFS. We applied blending methodologies, where in 
situ data observations are incorporated into the CZCS and SeaWiFS data records, to provide 
improvement of the residuals. These re-analyzed, blended data records provide maximum 
compatibility and permit, for the first time, a quantitative analysis of the changes in global ocean 
chlorophyll in the early-to-mid 1 980's and the present, using synoptic satellite observations. 

An intercomparison of the global and regional chlorophyll concentrations from these blended satellite 
observations is important to understand global climate change and the effects on ocean biota. 
Chlorophyll-containing phytoplankton are responsible for oceanic primary production, which 
represents the uptake of carbon in the oceans and potentially ultimately from the atmosphere. Previous 
efforts to estimate global primary production have relied upon CZCS and SeaWiFS estimates of 
chlorophyll. However, intercomparisons of global primary production are not quantifiable because of 
the same differences in processing methodologies affecting chlorophyll retrievals. This analysis of 
decadal change in global chlorophyll concentrations, which are the primary independent variable for 
primary production estimates, is a first step toward understanding changes in global primary 
production. 

Global seasonal means of ocean chlorophyll decreased from the CZCS record to SeaWiFS, by 
8% in winter to 16% in autumn. Chlorophyll in the high latitudes was responsible for most of the 
decadal change. Conversely, chlorophyll concentrations in the low latitudes increased. The 
differences and similarities of the two data records provide evidence of how the Earth's climate 
may be changing and how ocean biota respond. Furthermore, the results have implications for the 
ocean carbon cycle. 



Science Priorities: Decadal Changes in Global Ocean Chlorophyll 
Watson W. Gregg, Margarita E Conkright 
Submitted to Science 2001 

Priority#4 Long-term Climate Variability 
Priority#2 Seasonal to Interannual Climate Prediction 
Priority#l Land Cover and Global Productivity 



Decadal Changes in Global Ocean Chlorophyll 
Watson W. Gregg'*, Margarita E. Conkright 
Submitted to Science, May, 2001 
Abstract 

The global ocean chlorophyll archive produced by the Coastal Zone Color Scanner 
(CZCS) was revised using compatible algorithms with the Sea-viewing Wide Field-of- 
view Sensor (SeaWiFS), and both were blended with in situ data. This methodology 
permitted a quantitative comparison of decadal changes in global ocean chlorophyll from 
the CZCS (1979-1986) and SeaWiFS (Sep. 1997-Dec. 2000) records. Global seasonal 
means of ocean chlorophyll decreased over the two observational segments, by 8% in 
winter to 16% in autumn. Chlorophyll in the high latitudes was responsible for most of 
the decadal change. Conversely, chlorophyll concentrations in the low latitudes 
increased. The differences and similarities of the two data records provide evidence of 
how the Earth's climate may be changing and how ocean biota respond. Furthermore, the 
results have implications for the ocean carbon cycle. 

Introduction 

The Sea-viewing Wide Field-of-view Sensor (SeaWiFS) has produced the first multi- 
year time series of global ocean chlorophyll observations since the demise of the Coastal 
Zone Color Scanner (CZCS) in 1986. Global observations from 1997-present from 
SeaWiFS combined with observations from 1979-1986 from the CZCS should in 
principle provide an opportunity to observe decadal changes in global ocean chlorophyll. 
However, incompatibilities between algorithms have so far precluded quantitative 



analysis. We have developed and applied compatible processing methods for the CZCS, 
using modem advances in atmospheric correction and consistent bio-optical algorithms 
(7.2) to advance the CZCS archive to comparable quality with SeaWiFS. However, even 
with careful application of modem methodologies, there remain residual errors as a result 
of assumptions of atmospheric and oceanic optical behavior. We applied blending 
methodologies (3), where in situ data observations are incorporated into the CZCS and 
SeaWiFS data records, to provide improvement of the residuals. These re-analyzed, 
blended data records provide maximum compatibility and permit, for the first time, a 
quantitative analysis of the changes in global ocean chlorophyll in the early-to-mid 
1980's and the present, using synoptic satellite observations. 

An intercomparison of the global and regional chlorophyll concentrations from these 
blended satellite observations is important to understand global climate change and the 
effects on ocean biota. Chlorophyll-containing phytoplankton are responsible for oceanic 
primary production, which represents the uptake of carbon in the oceans and potentially 
ultimately from the atmosphere. Previous efforts to estimate global primary production 
have relied upon CZCS (4) and SeaWiFS (5) estimates of chlorophyll. However, 
intercomparisons of global primary production are not quantifiable because of the same 
differences in processing methodologies affecting chlorophyll retrievals. This analysis of 
decadal change in global chlorophyll concentrations, which are the primary independent 
variable for primary production estimates, is a first step toward understanding changes in 
global primary production. 

Climate Controls on Ocean Chlorophyll 



Climate affects ocean chlorophyll by changing the physical environment in which 
phytoplankton reside. Although temperature affects phytoplankton and zooplankton 
physiological activity, the primary physical effects on chlorophyll concentrations are 
related to nutrient and light supply. Increasing ocean temperature can stratify the surface 
mixed layer more strongly (6, 7) and at shallower depths, reducing the supply of nutrients 
(«) and inhibiting photosynthesis. This typically has the effect of reducing chlorophyll 
concentrations. In the local winter, cooler temperatures facilitate convective overturn and 
increased vertical mixing, which increase the supply of nutrients to the surface mixed 
layer, where most phytoplankton growth occurs. However, there is a balance between 
nutrient and light limitation, and if the mixed layer becomes too deep, it may suppress 
phytoplankton growth by reducing the average light encountered by phytoplankton as 
they mix in the surface layer (9). Surface wind stresses can modulate the stratification 
process and affect the depth of the surface mixed layer. Stronger winds supply kinetic 
energy that tends to destroy the stratification and deepen the mixed layer. 

Global and Basin Scale Decadal Changes in Blended Ocean Chlorophyll 

Blended satellite observations indicate that global ocean chlorophyll has decreased 
since the CZCS data record (Table 1) in each of the four seasons (10). The decreases 
range from about 8% in winter, to 16% in autumn. Seasonal temporal patterns between 
the blended satellite chlorophyll records are similar, indicating a global maximum in 
summer and a minimum in winter. 

However, these global ocean chlorophyll changes are not evenly distributed in the 
oceans. Most of the global decrease is due to changes in the high latitudes (Fig. 1). 



Blended CZCS data are often >20% larger than blended SeaWiFS in the North Pacific, 
North Atlantic, and Antarctic basins (Fig. 1) (//). The largest differences are often in 
local autumn and winter, when the potential for primary production is lowest, due to low 
surface irradiances. The southern mid-ocean basins. South Indian, South Pacific, and 
South Atlantic, exhibit significant decreases in blended chlorophyll in local autumn and 
winter, up to 40% in the South Pacific. 

These results have major implications for the global carbon cycle, since models 
suggest greatest sensitivity of ocean-atmosphere carbon flux in these high latitude regions 
(72. 13). Furthermore, these regions are dominated by diatoms {14, 15, 16), which 
typically grow and sink faster than other phytoplankton groups, and thus can represent an 
important carbon transfer mechanism to the deep oceans. 

The blended SeaWiFS record, in contrast, exhibits an increase in the low latitude 
oceanographic basins from the CZCS period (Fig. 1). All 4 of the equatorial basins 
(North Indian, Equatorial Indian, Equatorial Pacific, Equatorial Atlantic) show major 
increases for the blended SeaWiFS. The increases often exceed 40%. The only 
exceptions are winter and autumn in the equatorial Pacific. Here winter exhibits almost 
no decadal change while autumn indicates a decrease from the blended CZCS. 

The observation that the blended satellite chlorophyll records indicate a decadal 
decrease in the high latitudes and an increase in the low latitudes may have important 
consequences for the ocean carbon cycle. The high latitudes typically represent a net 
sink of atmospheric carbon, while the low latitudes represent a source (17). To the extent 
that phytoplankton population dynamics play a role in the ocean carbon cycle, the results 
suggest a reduced high latitude carbon sink due to decreased chlorophyll concentrations 



and a reduced low latitude carbon source due to increasing chlorophyll. This implication 
is related to the carbon uptake role played by phytoplankton in photosynthesis, and 
sequestration to deeper water through sinking and death. However, a balance of effects is 
not necessarily implied because of differences in the areal change of biomass regionally, 
and because of differences in regional ecosystem structure and function, which can affect 
uptake, death, and sinking rates, and thus the cycling of oceanic carbon. 

Synoptic Scale Decadal Changes in Blended Ocean Chlorophyll 

Synoptic scale observations (100-1000 km) of global ocean chlorophyll trends from the 
early-to-mid 1980's and the present can provide a detailed understanding of the global 
and basin scale changes and a basis for estimating the causes. Figs. 2 and 3 depict the 
synoptic scale blended chlorophyll distributions from 1979-to-mid 1980's (blended 
CZCS) and the present (blended SeaWiFS). The overall distributions are remarkably 
similar: the extent, location, and shape of the global ocean mid-ocean gyre regions, the 
equatorial upwelling regions, and the sub-polar frontal regions exhibit a large degree of 
commonality between the two decadal time segments. This similarity of global scale 
patterns was not apparent in the previously available versions of the CZCS (3). Its 
presence in the re-analyzed data suggests the validity and compatibility of the two 
archives, and supports the quantitative decadal comparison. 

There are indications of major decadal changes in the intercomparisons. Northern high 
latitude chlorophyll concentrations have diminished since the 1980's (Fig. 2), as 
previously indicated by the basin-scale analyses (Fig. 1). Chlorophyll in the North 

Pacific is vastly reduced in summer, as are the central and northern portions of the North 



Atlantic. Compensation occurs in the eastern North Atlantic near Great Britain and in the 
North Sea and affects the summer basin mean. 

In the subarctic North Pacific and North Atlantic, the timing of the spring bloom is also 
changed: the spring bloom peaks one month earlier in the present decade (May) than in 
the 1980's (June, Fig. 4) (18). The spring bloom is also not as large as in the 1980's. In 
a coupled general circulationA)iogeochemical/radiative model tracking the SeaWiFS 
record, it was found that warmer ocean temperatures produced accelerated mixed layer 
shoaling, and an earlier spring bloom (19). Analysis of sea surface temperature (SST) 
data (20) for the North Atlantic indicates that the recent decade exhibits substantial 
warming relative to the 1980's: 0.6°C in spring and 0.8T in summer. Levitus et al. (21) 
observed a warming of about 0.4^ in the top 300 m in the extended North Atlantic basin 
(equator to pole) from the 1980's to 1997. The North Pacific did not indicate a similar 
SST wanning in spring but mean spring surface wind stresses (22) decreased about 8%, 
which could contribute to accelerated mixed layer shoaling and stratification. In summer 
the North Pacific SST's were warmer by about 0.4°C. These results correspond with 
increased 300-m volume mean ocean temperatures from the 1980's to 1997, where an 
increase of about 0.3°C occurred in the extended North Pacific basin (equator to pole) 

(21). 
Changes are maximum in autumn and winter in the subarctic Northern Hemisphere 

basins. The large concentrations observed during these seasons in both the blended 

CZCS and SeaWiFS may be the result of resuspension of deep nutrients (see 23, 24) that 

can support increased chlorophyll, and possibly also the presence of resuspended 

chlorophyll. Both the North Atlantic and Pacific indicate colder SST's in the 1980's in 



autumn, about 0.66° and 0.20°C, respectively. These decreases in chlorophyll will have 
relatively small influence on carbon uptake however, because reduced light limits 
photosynthesis during this season in these regions. 

These decadal patterns in chlorophyll and SST may be related to the North Atlantic 
Oscillation (NAO) (25) and Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO) (26). The phasing of each 
climatic event has changed from the early 1980's to the present decade. The CZCS 
observations occurred in a period of positive NAO (27), while most of the SeaWiFS 
record here was in negative phase, although there is an indication of a recent switch back 
to positive phase. Positive NAO produces strong winter winds and decreased 
temperatures (27) which can produce increased deep convective mixing and nutrient 
supply to support increased autumn and winter chlorophyll concentrations, which is 
consistent with the findings here. Interestingly, the extreme northeastern portion of the 
North Atlantic, in the North Sea and near Great Britain, exhibit positive temperature 
anomalies in positive NAO (27, 28), and thus colder ocean temperatures recently. This 
corresponds to the increasing chlorophyll observed in this region in the blended satellite 

analysis (Fig. 2). 

Similarly, the PDO changed to positive phase in 1977 (26), which produced colder 
winter SST's in the central and western North Pacific (26, 29), again potentially 
supporting convection and nutrient supply to support increased chlorophyll 
concentrations in winter, as observed here. Reversed phase in 1997-1999 led to warmer 
SST's in the central and western North Pacific, colder eastern SST's, and increased 
coastal chlorophyll (30). These NAO and PDO events may also be responsible for the 
earlier spring blooms observed in these basins by requiring less surface heating to shoal a 



shallower winter mixed layer enough to support a bloom. Reduction of the bloom 
amplitude may be the result of decreased nutrient availability from shallow mixing and 
convection in the previous winter. 

Decadal results in the mid-Northern Hemisphere basins generally indicate little change, 
although there are exceptions. In the autumn North Central Pacific and North Central 
Atlantic, there appears to have occurred a reduction since the 1980's, and summer in the 
North Central Atlantic, where an increase has occurred. The reductions derive mostly 
from the northern portions of the two basins between 30-40° N, where the sub-polar front 
appears to have receded northward recently. Some of this may be due to reduced 
convection and mixing and shallower mixed layer depths associated with warmer 
temperatures recently, again implicating NAO and PDO. Warmer ocean temperatures are 
in fact indicated in the autumn SST record, with increases of nearly 0.4"C in both basins. 

Like their Northern Hemisphere counterparts, the Southern Hemisphere basins 
generally indicate substantially decreased surface chlorophyll concentrations from the 
1980's to the present (Fig. 1). The differences are also substantial, often > 20%. Again 
like the Northern Hemisphere, the largest decreases occur in spring and summer, when 
light levels are reduced, thus minimizing the potential effect on carbon uptake through 
photosynthesis. Furthermore, spring and summer sampling south of -40° latitude by the 
CZCS was sparse, so these results should be viewed with caution. 

The Antarctic and South Indian basins indicate large decreases from the 1980's to the 
present in autumn and winter. In the Antarctic in autumn, the decreases are due to vastly 
smaller chlorophyll concentrations in the Indian Ocean sector, especially between 30° and 
60° E longitude and 90 to 140°E, in the Drake Passage, and in the central portion of the 



Atlantic sector. These large increases are partially offset by increases south of New 
Zealand and between 60-90°E in the central Indian sector, but the net effect is a reduction 
of >20%. A more modest decrease of about 9% occurs in winter, based mostly on the 
Drake Passage, the southeastern portion of the Pacific sector, the Ross Sea, and along the 
edge of the Antarctic continent. 

In autumn and winter the South Atlantic shows the opposite pattern as the rest of the 
Southern Hemisphere basins in the growing season - it indicates a very large increase in 
chlorophyll in the recent decade (Fig. 3). The increases are nearly 20% in the winter and 
> 30% in autumn (Fig. 1). They are nearly entirely due to vastly larger chlorophyll 
concentrations along the South Atlantic sub-polar front and the Patagonian shelf (Figs. 2, 
3). While elevated chlorophyll is clearly apparent in both time segments, SeaWiFS 
indicates expansive enhancement and also more coherent spatial structure. This spatial 
coherence is probably due to the routine sampling of SeaWiFS in contrast to the CZCS. 
There is also an indication of gyre contraction in the recent decade, as the southwest 
portion of the gyre has elevated chlorophyll in the SeaWiFS record, along with some 
additional increases in the northeastern portion offshore of Namibia. 

The plume on the Patagonian shelf and extending eastward has 41% larger chlorophyll 
concentrations in autumn in the recent decade. Local observations in the plume indicate 
23% stronger winds than in the 1980's, deriving from a more northerly and easterly 
direction, i.e., directly from the land/shelf SST's are 0.17°C colder. This evidence 
suggests that winds have increased in the SeaWiFS record and changed direction, which 
is driving upwelling and producing elevated chlorophyll concentrations that extend nearly 
across the South Atlantic. 



The New Zealand/Tasmania/Tasman Sea region indicates large changes in the decade 
between CZCS observations and SeaWiFS. In autumn and winter, chlorophyll 
concentrations in these regions indicate substantial increases (Fig. 3). However, spring 
and summer indicate major reduction (Fig. 2). It is this region that is most responsible 
for the spring and summer basin-wide reductions observed. Data in the recent decade 
follow a more normal local spring bloom pattern while the 1980's indicate a reverse 
pattern. This areas was sampled systematically by the CZCS, so sampling alias is not as 
much a problem as in other parts of the hemisphere in spring and summer. Summer 
decreases in chlorophyll from the 1980's to the present are about 29%, and are associated 
with a rise in SST of nearly 0.5°C in this region. This, along with less vigorous mean 
summer wind stresses (-19%) helps to explain the spring and summer reductions in 
chlorophyll by reducing mixing and re-supply of nutrients. In autumn a 54% increase m 
chlorophyll here was also associated with more vigorous wind stresses (+16%) and a 
negligible warming (+0.05°C) that tends to run counter to expectations. Possibly the 
increased winds produce mixed layer deepening and enhance nutrient entrainment to 
support phytoplankton growth. 

The global tropics represent an overall increase in chlorophyll concentrations from the 
1980's to the present. This is especially true for the spring and summer seasons. The 
North and equatorial Indian Oceans indicate increases in equatorial upwelling zone 
concentrations, disappearance of a small gyre region, enhancement of chlorophyll on the 
eastern side near Indonesia, and a vast expansion of chlorophyll in the Arabian Sea and 
the Somalian coast during the southwest monsoon. Spring increases exceed 40% in each 
basin, and summer increases are 43% and 22% in the North and equatorial Indian oceans. 



10 



respectively. Winter differences, which represent a transition from the northeast 
monsoon to the intermonsoon, are considerably less than the other seasons. 

The changes in the equatorial Pacific are mostly related to the relative over- 
representation of the 1997-1998 El Nifio Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events in the data 
records. Although each observational time segment contained and equal number of El 
Niiio and La Nifia events (1 each), the duration of the total record (3.5 years and 7.5 
years, for SeaWiFS and CZCS, respectively) changes their influence on the seasonal 
mean. Also, the La Nifia event in the SeaWiFS record lasted 2.5 years, compared to 
nearly 2 years for the CZCS, and was much stronger in intensity. In fact, the 3 years of 
summer season data for the SeaWiFS record are composed entirely of La Nifta 
conditions. Thus it is not surprising that substantial differences exist between the two 
observational segments, due to the relative importance of these events. The apparent 
increase along the equator in summer in the SeaWiFS record directly reflects the over- 
representation of La Nifia (Fig. 2). Similarly, apparent decreases in autumn and winter 
are due to the relative importance of the 1997-1998 El Nifio in the SeaWiFS record. 

Spring and summer chlorophyll concentrations in the equatorial Atlantic represent the 
largest decadal changes in the global comparison (Fig. 1). The summer increase (57%) is 
due to vasfly enhanced chlorophyll along the equator in the upwelling zone (Fig. 2). 
Additional contributions are from the Congo, Amazon, and Niger River outflows. 
Extreme summer rainfall in 1999 produced flooding in the Niger River basin (30), which 
contributes to the seasonal basin mean. High chlorophyll is observed in the Gulf of 
Guinea in the recent record that does not appear in the blended CZCS. The Congo River 
is largely responsible for the increases in chlorophyll in this basin for the autumn and 



11 



winter seasons, as well. Part of this is due to a major flood that occurred in the Congo 
drainage basin in winter 2000 (57). It is important to note that these tropical rainforest 
rivers primarily contribute chromophoric dissolved organic matter (CDOM) to the 
oceans, rather than chlorophyll, but the satellite ocean color algorithms cannot distinguish 
them. There were no in situ observations of the river plumes to allow the blended 
analysis to correct this error. The increased equatorial chlorophyll in the central portion 
of the basin was not accompanied by anomalously low SST's (19), as would be expected 
if it was enhanced upwelling. In fact, the basin exhibits strongly wanner SST's than the 
1980's, ranging from 0.28° in autumn to 0.48°C in spring. Other than the enhanced 
summer equatorial upwelling and the riverine discharges, the equatorial Atlantic 
chlorophyll patterns are generally similar between the two data records. 

Summary 

A revision of the CZCS ocean chlorophyll archive using compatible atmospheric 
correction and bio-optical algorithms with the modem generation ocean color sensor 
SeaWiFS, permits, for the first time, a quantitative comparison of the decadal trends in 
global ocean chlorophyll from 1979- mid-1986, when the CZCS sensor was active, to the 
present (Sep. 1997-Dec. 2000), observed by SeaWiFS. Blending of both archives with 
available coincident in situ data improves the residuals of each and provides fiirther 
compatibility. The analysis of the two chlorophyll records indicates large similarity in 
the global spatial distributions and seasonal variability. This includes the extent and 
spatial structure of the mid-ocean gyres, the equatorial upwelling regions, and the bloom- 
recede dynamics of the high latitudes. There are also many decadal changes indicated in 



12 



the analysis of the archives. Generally, chlorophyll concentrations in the high latitudes 
appear to have decreased from the CZCS record (1979-1980's) to the present. 
Conversely, chlorophyll in the low latitudes appears to have increased. Mid-ocean gyres 
exhibit limited changes, however, expansion of the North Central Pacific gyre and 
contraction of the South Atlantic gyre is apparent. These results may indicate facets of 
climate change, some of which may be related to regional oscillation behavior such as the 
NAO, PDO, and ENSO. Some of the decadal changes can be attributed to observed 
changes in SST or meteorological forcing, but some cannot. The overall spatial and 
seasonal similarity of the two data records strongly suggests that the changes are in fact 
due to natural variability, aUhough some residual effects due to CZCS sensor design and 
sampling may still exist. We believe that this reanalysis of the CZCS and SeaWiFS 
archives enables identification of some aspects of decadal change, and provides a marker 
of how the Earth's climate may be changing and how the ocean biota respond. 

The results also have potential implications for our understanding of ocean carbon 
cycling. To the extent that phytoplankton population dynamics modulate the ocean 
carbon cycle, the results suggest a reduction in the high latitude carbon sink due to 
decreased chlorophyll concentrations since the 1980's and a reduction in the low latitude 
carbon source due to increasing chlorophyll. 

References and Notes 

1. W. W. Gregg, etal.,Appl. Opt., submitted (2001). 

2. Our methods for improving CZCS data take advantage of recent advances in 
atmospheric correction and bio-optical relationships (/). This includes revised CZCS 



n 



calibration (32), and common methods for navigation modification (33), Rayleigh 
scattering (34), water-leaving radiance estimation at near infrared bands (35), aerosol 
scattering (36), spectral foam correction (37, 38) and blending with in situ data (3). 
Aerosol type is determined from the clear water radiance technique (39) and extrapolated 
to high chlorophyll areas using the Successive Correction Method (40), a standard 
meteorological methodology. The bio-optical algorithm is a three-band maximum band 
ratio method (41) similar to the four-band maximum band ratio method used for 
SeaWiFS (41), and derived from the same in situ data set. There remain two exceptions 
to the processing: 1) SeaWiFS corrects for shadowing effects due to waves, and 2) 
SeaWiFS provides a correction to sun glint outside a masking area where the glint is 
heaviest. The shadowing effects are only important at very large solar zenith angles (> 
65°) (42), and in this analysis only CZCS data with angles less than this limit are utilized. 
Second, independent analyses of SeaWiFS data without applying the sun glint correction 
method have indicated no effect at the space and time scales used here. 

SeaWiFS chlorophyll data were obtained from the NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center 
(GSFC)-Distributed Active Archive Center (DAAC) using version 3 algorithm and 
processing methodologies (43). CZCS data were processed using new algorithms from 
Level- 1 A uncalibrated radiance data, also from the GSFC-DAAC. Both data sets were 
averaged to produce seasonal means at 1 deg. x 1 deg. spatial resolution. 

3. W. W. Gregg, M. E. Conkright, J. Geophys. Res. 106, 2499 (2001). 

4. C. B. Field, M. J. Behrenfeld, J. T. Randerson, P. G. Falkowski, Science 28, 237 
(1998). 

5. M. J. Behrenfeld, et al. Science 291, 2503 (2001). 



14 



6. J. F. B. Mitchell, T. C. Johns, J. M. Gregory, S. F. B. Tett, Nature 376, 501 (1995). 

7. S. Manabe, R. J. Stouffer, Nature 364, 215 (1993). 

8. E. Maier-Reimer, U. Mikolajewicz, A. Winguth, Clim. Dyn. 12, 711 (1996). 

9. H. U. Sverdrup, J. Cons. Cons. Int. Explor. Mer 18, 287 (1953). 

10. We use the Northern Hemisphere convention for seasons, where winter is defined as 
Jan-Mar, spring is Apr-Jun, summer is Jul-Sep, and autumn is Oct-Dec. 

1 1. We follow the conventions of the National Oceanographic Data Center (NODC) {44) 
in defining the 12 major oceanographic basins: equatorial basins are between -10° and 
10" latitude, the Antarctic is defined as south of -50°, and the North Pacific and North 
Atlantic are > 40". The other basins fall within these limits. 

12. D. E. Archer, et al. Glob. Biogeochem. Cycles 14, 1219 (2000). 

13. J. L. Sarmiento, T. M. C. Hughes, R. J. Stouffer, S. Manabe, Nature 393, 245 (1998). 

14. F. Eynaud, J. Girardeau, J.-J. Pichon, C. J. Pudsey. Deep-Sea Res. 46, 451 (1999). 

15. J. A. Hardy, Hanneman, M. Behrenfeld, R. Homer, Deep-Sea Res. 43, 1647 (1996). 

16. E. Maranon, P. M. Holligan, M. Varela, B. Mourino, A. J. Bale, Deep-Sea Res. 47, 

825 (2000). 

17. T. Takahashi et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 94, 8292 (1997). 

18. Monthly blended data sets were produced from the seasonal data by averaging the 
algorithm-improved CZCS monthly mean data over each season, computing an offset 
between the mean seasonal and blended, and applying this offset to each of the months in 
the 3-month seasonal mean. 

19. W. W. Gregg, Deep-Sea Res., in press (2001). 



15 



20. SST data was obtained as Optimal Interpolation fields from the NOAA/National 
Center for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) Reanalysis Project. The data were 
averaged over the two decadal segments, Jan 1979- Jun 1986, corresponding to the CZCS 
and Sep 1997-Dec 2000 corresponding to SeaWiFS. Only co-located data with the ocean 
color data were used in the means. 

21. S. Levitus, J. I. Antonov, T. P. Boyer, C. Stephens, Science, 287, 2225 (2000). 

22. Surface mean seasonal wind stresses were obtained from the NCEP Reanalysis 
Project. Data were averaged as for SST. 

23. M. E. Conkright, et al, NOAA Atlas NESDIS 3, 10, 217pp (1998). 

24. M. E. Conkright, et al, NOAA Atlas NESDIS 37 11, 217pp (1998). 

25. J. W. Hurrell, Y. Kushnir, M. Visbeck, Science 291, 603 (2001). 

26. N. J. Mantua, S. R. Hare, Y. Zhang, J. M. Wallace, R. C. Francis, Bull. Am. 
MeteoroL Soc. 78, 1069 (1997). 

27. C. Eden, T. Jung, J. Clint. 14, 676 (2001). 

28. V. C. Slonosky, P. Yiou, Geophys. Res. Lett. 28, 807 (2001). 

29. F. Biondi, A. Gershunov, D. R. Cayan, J. Clim. 14, 5 (2001). 

30. F. Schwing, C. Moore, Eos, Trans. Am. Geophys. Union 81, 301 (2000). 

31. D. Le Comte, Weatherwise March/April (2000). 

32. R. H. Evans, H. R. Gordon, J. Geophys. Res. 99, 7293 (1994). 

33. F. S. Patt, R. H. Woodward, W. W. Gregg, Int. J. Remote Sens. 18, 331 1 (1997). 

34. H. R. Gordon, J. W. Brown, R. H. Evans, Appl. Opt. 27, 862 (1988). 

35. D. A. Siegel, M. Wang, S. Maritorena, W. Robinson, Appl. Opt. 39, 3582 (2000). 

36. H. R. Gordon, M. Wang, Appl. Opt. 33, 443 (1994). 



16 



37. H. R. Gordon, M. Wang, Appl. Opt. 33, 7754 (1994). 

38. R. M. Frouin, M. Schwindling, P. Y. Deschamps, J. Geophys. Res. 101, 14361 

(1996). 

39. H. R. Gordon, et al, Appl. Opt. 22, 20 (1983). 

40. R. Daley, Atmospheric data analysis (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, MA, 

1991). 

41. J. E. O'Reilly, et al., NASA Tech. Memo. 11, 8 (2000). 

42. W. D. Robinson, G. M. Schmidt, C. R. McClain, P. J. Werdell, NASA Tech. Memo. 
2000-206892 10,12 (2000). 

43. NASA Tech. Memo. Ser. No. 2000-206892, Vols. 9-11 (NASA, Greenbelt, MD, 2000). 

44. M. E. Conkright, S. Levitus, T. P. Boyer, NOAA Tech. Memo. 79, IS pp. (1994). 

Acknowledgements. We thank the NASA/GSFC-DAAC for the Level-3 SeaWiFS data 
and Level-IA CZCS data (in particular James Acker, whose assistance was invaluable), 
NOAA/NCEP for meteorological and SST data, Orbimage and the SeaWiFS Project for 
acquiring SeaWiFS data, the contributors of in situ data to the NOAA/NODC archives, 
the SeaBASS archive for contemporaneous in situ data for the SeaWiFS era, and the data 
contributors to this archive. We also thank J. E. O'Reilly for bio-optical algorithms, F. S. 
Patt for improved CZCS navigation, and M. Wang for developing the methodology to 
retrieve CZCS aerosol multiple scattering radiances from the SeaWiFS tables. This work 
was supported by NOAA's Climate and Global Change Program, NOAA/NASA 
Enhanced Data Sets Element, Grant No. NOAA/RO#97-444/ 146-76-05 and the NASA 
Pathfinder Program. 



17 



Table 1. Global ocean chlorophyll concentrations (mg m'^) from the blended CZCS 
record (1979-1986) and the modem blended SeaWiFS record (1997-2000), and the 
percent change (SeaWiFS-CZCS). 





Winter 
(Jan-Mar.) 


Spring 
(Apr.-Jun.) 


Summer 
(Jul.-Sep.) 


Autumn 
(Oct.-Dec.) 


CZCS 


0,332 


±0.556 


0.378 


±0.727 


0.403 


±0.709 


0.388 


±0.675 


SeaWiFS 


0.306 


±0.537 


0.344 


±0.808 


0.370 


±0.938 


0.326 


±0.630 


% difference 


-7.8 


-9.0 


-8.2 


-16.0 



Fig. 1. Seasonal differences between blended SeaWiFS and blended CZCS chlorophyll 
in the 12 major oceanographic basins. Differences are expressed as blended SeaWiFS- 
blended CZCS). Generally, blended CZCS exceeds blended SeaWiFS in the high 
latitudes, while blended SeaWiFS exceeds blended CZCS in the low latitudes. These 
trends appear to hold seasonally. The basin scale decadal changes from CZCS to 
SeaWiFS are often large (>30%). 

Fig. 2. Summer (Jul-Sep) chlorophyll distributions for the blended SeaWiFS era (1997- 
2000), the blended CZCS era (1979.mid-1986), and the difference. Units are mg m'\ 
Fig. 3. Autumn (Oct-Dec) chlorophyll distributions for the blended SeaWiFS era (1997- 
2000), the blended CZCS era (1979-mid-1986), and the difference. Units are mg m ^ 
Fig. 4. Monthly mean blended chlorophyll concentrations for the CZCS (solid squares) 
and SeaWiFS (solid diamonds). Top; North Atlantic. Bottom: North Pacific. 

Affiliations 



18 



1. Laboratory for Hydrospheric Processes, NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center, 
Greenbelt, Maryland 20771, USA 

2. Ocean Climate Laboratory, NOAA/National Oceanographic Data Center, Silver 

Spring, Maryland 20910, USA 

*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: gregg@cabin.gsfc.nasa.gov 



19 




0) CO (/) ^ 

S" 3 13 13 

3 3 <Q 5 

3 (D ^^ cr: 

>-v "• Q) Q) 

O <=: 15 3 

a s- iZ. i 

«^ S § i 

CD iS ■ r» 



SEAWIFS BLENDED CHLOROPHYLL AUTUMN 




30 60 



90 120 150 180 -150 -120 -90 -60 -30 



SEAWIFS BLENDED CHLOROPHYLL SUMMER 




CZCS BLENDED CHLOROPHYLL SUMMER 




-90 
90 



DIFFERENCE (SEAWIFS-CZCS) SUMMER 




North Atlantic 



•SeaWiFS- O -CZCS 




0.0 



Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 

North Pacific 



1.8 1 








.^^ 




1.6- 








* * 


1,1^1^ .-€. 


1.4 








//X 


v: ^ — .--^- 


1.2 








/- ^ N. 


^ B- • , 






% 


» J 


V 


"^ *^^^^ 


1 0.8- 




Q--- 


-^^^^ V 




^^N^ 


0.6 - 


^~k^ZZ^^^^ "* 


0.4 




0.2 


, .... . . , ^ ^ 



Jan 



Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 



