2nd-0rder CESE Results For Cl.l: Transonic Ringleb Flow 

David J. Friedlander 

NASA Glenn Research Center , Cleveland, OH, 44^5 


1 Code Description 

The Conservation Element and Solution Element (CESE) method [1, 2] was used as implemented in the 
NASA research code ez4d [3]. The CESE method is a time accurate formulation with flux-conservation 
in both space and time. The method treats the discretized derivatives of space and time identically and 
utilizes a staggered mesh approach consisting of conservation elements (CE) and solution elements (SE). 
While high-order versions of the method exist [4, 5, 6], the 2nd-order accurate version was used. In regards 
to the ez4d code, it is an unstructured Navier-Stokes solver coded in C-ft- with serial and parallel versions 
available. As part of its architecture, ez4d has the capability to utilize multi-thread and Messaging Passage 
Interface (MPI) for parallel runs. 

2 Case Summary 

Cases were run on a single Intel Xeon W3680 core and considered converged when the L2 density residual 
dropped ten orders of magnitude from the initial solution. Times for running the TauBench executable 
ranged from 8.042s to 8.292s with an average of 8.154s. 

3 Meshes 

Meshes were made from scratch using Pointwise®and tried to mimic the structured versions provided by the 
workshop. The structured versions of the grids were then diagonalized by cutting each structured cell into 
two triangular cells using the “best fit” option within Pointwise®. Mesh refinement consisted of doubling 
the number of cells in the i and j directions per grid level while keeping cell spacing uniform. See Table 
1 for structured domain sizes. While inflow and outflow boundary conditions were utilized for the top and 
bottom of the domains, two different boundary conditions were applied at the left and right boundaries of 
the domains: an inviscid solid wall boundary condition and the analytical solution. Results will be shown 
for both sets of boundary conditions. 


Table 1: Structured Domain Sizes 


Grid Level 

i Cells 

j Cells 

1 

4 

12 

2 

8 

24 

3 

16 

48 

4 

32 

96 

5 

64 

192 

6 

128 

384 


4 Results 

4.1 Contour Plots 

Mach number contours of the converged solutions for each grid level are shown in Fig. 1 through 6. It can 
be seen that grid levels 1 and 2 are too coarse with the inviscid solid wall boundary condition at the walls, 
resulting in a converged solution with two inner-lobes rather than the expected one lobe. Also, it can be 
seen that using the analytical boundary condition at the walls improves the solution at all grid levels and 


1 


eliminates the tendency to converge to a two inner-lobe solution, as shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. Another 
thing noted by looking at the Mach number contours is the tendency for error to build up around the lower- 
half of the inner wall. This is due to a combination of the boundary condition and from representing the 
smooth-curved wall geometry by linear elements. Thus using a more exact boundary condition (via using 
the analytical solution) and/or using a finer approximation of the smooth-curved wall geometry (via more 
grid cells along the wall contour) reduced the buildup of error along the inner wall. 


(b) Analytical boundary condition. 
Figure 1: Mach number contours for the level 1 grid. 


3 

(a) Solid wall boundary condition. (b) Analytical boundary condition. 

Figure 2: Mach number contours for the level 2 grid. 




2 



(a) Solid wall boundary condition. (b) Analytical boundary condition. 

Figure 3: Mach number contours for the level 3 grid. 



(a) Solid wall boundary condition. (b) Analytical boundary condition. 

Figure 4: Mach number contours for the level 4 grid. 


3 



(a) Solid wall boundary condition. (b) Analytical boundary condition. 

Figure 5: Mach number contours for the level 5 grid. 



(a) Solid wall boundary condition. (b) Analytical boundary condition. 

Figure 6: Mach number contours for the level 6 grid. 


4.2 Workshop Metrics 

The workshop requires the L2 norm of the entropy error of the converged solution to be computed and 
compared to the work units and length scale for each grid. The entropy L2 norm was computed as follows: 


Error L2 ( s ) 


N 2 

E f Sexact,i ) dV 

i = 1 ^ 


E W 

i= 1 


S = 


P_ 

p 17 


(1) 

( 2 ) 


4 


The work units were defined as the time it took ez4d to run 100 iterations normalized by the time it took to 
run the TauBench executable. 


WorkUnit = ^ z4d ’ 100 (3) 

t TauBench 

Following suite, the length scale was defined as follows: 


VnDOF y/n C eiis 

Figure 7 shows the entropy error verses work units and length scale. It can be seen that while the entropy 
error decreases with mesh refinement (represented by decreasing length scale and increasing work units) for 
both boundary conditions at the wall, the rate of decrease of the entropy error is different between the two 
boundary conditions. Also as expected, solutions using the analytical solution boundary condition have less 
entropy error than solutions using the inviscid solid wall boundary condition per given grid level. 



(a) Entropy error verses work units. 


(b) Entropy error verses length scale. 


Figure 7: Workshop metric results. 


Acknowledgments 

The author would like to thank the Aerosciences Project under the NASA Fundamental Aeronautics Program 
for support with this effort as well as Chau-Lynn Chang and Balaji Venkatachari for guidance and support 
with using the ez4d code. 


References 

[1] Chang, S. C., “The Method of Space-Time Conservation Element and Solution Element - A New Approach 
for Solving the Navier-Stokes and Euler Equations,” Journal of Computational Physics , Vol. 119, No. 2, 
1995, pp. 295-325. 

[2] Chang, S. C., Wang, X. Y., and Chow, C. Y., “The Space-Time Conservation Element and Solution 
Element Method - A New Resolution and Genuinely Multidimensional Paradigm for Solving Conservation 
Laws,” Journal of Computational Physics , Vol. 156, No. 1, 1999, pp. 89-136. 

[3] Chang, C. L., “Time- Accurate, Unstructured-Mesh Navier-Stokes Computations with the Space-Time 
CESE Method,” Tech. Rep. AIAA 2006-4780, July 2006. 


5 


[4] Venkatachari, B., Cheng, G., and Chang, S. C., “Development of a High-Order CESE Scheme For Tran- 
sient Viscous Flows,” Tech. Rep. AIAA 2009-3984, June 2009. 

[5] Chang, S. C., “A New Approach for Constructing Highly Stable High Order CESE Schemes,” Tech. Rep. 
AIAA 2010-543, January 2010. 

[6] Chang, C. L., Venkatachari, B., and Cheng, G., “Time- Accurate Local Time Stepping and High-Order 
Space-Time CESE Methods for Multi-Dimensional Flows with Unstructured Meshes,” Tech. Rep. AIAA 
2013-3069, June 2013. 


6 


