a Software 


Quantum Entanglement 
Molecular Absorption 
Spectrum Simulator 

Quantum Entanglement Molecular Ab- 
sorption Spectrum Simulator (QE-MASS) 
is a computer program for simulating two- 
photon molecular-absorption spec- 
troscopy using quantum-entangled pho- 
tons. More specifically, QE-MASS 
simulates the molecular absorption of two 
quantum-entangled photons generated by 
the spontaneous parametric down-conver- 
sion (SPDC) of a fixed-frequency photon 
from a laser. The two-photon absorption 
process is modeled via a combination of 
rovibrational and electronic single-photon 
transitions, using a wave-function formal- 
ism. A two-photon absorption cross sec- 
tion as a function of the entanglement 
delay time between the two photons is 
computed, then subjected to a fast Fourier 
transform to produce an energy spectrum. 
The program then detects peaks in the 
Fourier spectrum and displays die energy 
levels of very short-lived intermediate 
quantum states (or virtual states) of the 
molecule. Such virtual states were only 
previously accessible using ultra-fast (fem- 
tosecond) laser systems. However, with the 
use of a single-frequency continuous wave 
laser to produce SPDC photons, and QE- 
MASS program, these short-lived molecu- 
lar states can now be studied using much 
simpler laser systems. QE-MASS can also 
show the dependence of the Fourier spec- 
trum on the tuning range of the entangle- 
ment time of any externally introduced 
optical-path delay time. QE-MASS can be 
extended to any molecule for which an 
appropriate spectroscopic database is 
available. It is a means of performing an a 
priori parametric analysis of entangled- 
photon spectroscopy for development 
and implementation of emerging 
quantum-spectroscopic sensing tech- 
niques. QE-MASS is currently imple- 
mented using the Mathcad® software 
package. 

This program was written by Quang-Viet 
Nguyen of Glenn Research Center and 
Jun Kojima of the National Academy of Sci- 
ences. Further information is contained in a 
TSP (see page 1). 

Inquiries concerning rights for the commer- 
cial use of this in vention should be addressed 
to NASA Glenn Research Center, Innovative 
Partnerships Office, Attn: Steve Fedor, Mail 
Stop 4-8, 21000 Brookpark Road, Cleve- 
land, Ohio 44135. Refer to LEW-17830-1. 


FuzzObserver 

Fuzzy Feature Observation Planner 
for Small Body Proximity Observations 
(FuzzObserver) is a developmental com- 
puter program, to be used along with 
other software, for autonomous plan- 
ning of maneuvers of a spacecraft near 
an asteroid, comet, or other small astro- 
nomical body. Selection of terrain fea- 
tures and estimation of the position of 
the spacecraft relative to these features is 
an essential part of such planning. Fuz- 
zObserver contributes to the selection 
and estimation by generating recom- 
mendations for spacecraft trajectory ad- 
justments to maintain the spacecraft’s 
ability to observe sufficient terrain fea- 
tures for estimating position. The input 
to FuzzObserver consists of data from 
terrain images, including sets of data on 
features acquired during descent to- 
ward, or traversal of, a body of interest. 
The name of this program reflects its use 
of fuzzy logic to reason about the terrain 
features represented by the data and ex- 
tract corresponding trajectory-adjust- 
ment rules. Linguistic fuzzy sets and con- 
ditional statements enable fuzzy systems 
to make decisions based on heuristic 
rule-based knowledge derived by engi- 
neering experts. A major advantage of 
using fuzzy logic is that it involves simple 
arithmetic calculations that can be per- 
formed rapidly enough to be useful for 
planning within the short times typically 
available for spacecraft maneuvers. 

This program was written by Ayanna 
Howard and David Bayard of Caltech for 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Fur- 
ther information is contained in a TSP ( see 
page 1). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(818) 393-2827. Refer to NPO-41290. ' 


Internet Distribution of 
Spacecraft Telemetry Data 

Remote Access Multi-mission Process- 
ing and Analysis Ground Environment 
(RAMPAGE) is a Java-language server 
computer program that enables near- 
real-time display of spacecraft telemetry 
data on any authorized client computer 
that has access to the Internet and is 
equipped with Web-browser software. In 
addition to providing a variety of dis- 


plays of the latest available telemetry 
data, RAMPAGE can deliver notification 
of an alarm by electronic mail. Sub- 
scribers can then use RAMPAGE displays 
to determine the state of the spacecraft 
and formulate a response to the alarm, if 
necessary. A user can query spacecraft 
mission data in either binary or comma- 
separated-value format by use of a Web 
form or a Practical Extraction and Re- 
porting Language (PERL) script to auto- 
mate the query process. RAMPAGE runs 
on Linux and Solaris server computers 
in the Ground Data System (GDS) of 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory and 
includes components designed specifi- 
cally to make it compatible with legacy 
GDS software. The client/server archi- 
tecture of RAMPAGE and the use of the 
Java programming language make it pos- 
sible to utilize a variety of competitive 
server and client computers, thereby 
also helping to minimize costs. 

This program was written by Ted Specht of 
Caltech and David Noble of Oak Grove Con- 
sulting /or NASA’s Jet Propulsion Labora- 
tory. Further information is contained in a 
TSP (see page 1). 

This software is available for commercial 
licensing. Please contact Karina Edmonds of 
the California Institute of Technology at 
(818) 393-2827. Refer - to NPO-41168. ' 


(fe Semi-Automated 

Identification of Rocks 
in Images 

Rock Identification Toolkit Suite is a 
computer program that assists users in 
identifying and characterizing rocks 
shown in images returned by the Mars 
Explorer Rover mission. Included in 
the program are components for auto- 
mated finding of rocks, interactive ad- 
justments of outlines of rocks, active 
contouring of rocks, and automated 
analysis of shapes in two dimensions. 
The program assists users in evaluating 
the surface properties of rocks and soil 
and reports basic properties of rocks. 
The program requires either the Mac 
OS X operating system running on a 
G4 (or more capable) processor or a 
Linux operating system running on a 
Pentium (or more capable) processor, 
plus at least 128MB of random-access 
memory. 

This program was written by Benjamin 
Bornstein, Andres Castano, and Robert An- 


NASA Tech Briefs, April 2006 


13 


