mesh to the fine mesh uses bilinear inter- 
polation; and prolongation of the coarse 
grid solution uses bicubic interpolation. 

This program was written by Raymond E. 
Mineck, Jaynes L. Thomas, and Robert T. 
Biedron of Langley Research Center and 
Boris Diskin of the National Institute of 
Aerospace. Further information is contained 
in a TSP (see page 1 ). 

LAR- 16608-1 


Doclet To Synthesize UML 

The RoseDoclet computer program 
extends the capability of Java doclet soft- 
ware to automatically synthesize Unified 
Modeling Language (UML) content 
from Java language source code. [Do- 
clets are Java-language programs that 
use the doclet application programming 
interface (API) to specify the content 
and format of the output of Javadoc. 
Javadoc is a program, originally de- 
signed to generate API documentation 
from Java source code, now also useful 
as an extensible engine for processing 
Java source code.] RoseDoclet takes ad- 
vantage of Javadoc comments and tags 
already in the source code to produce a 
UML model of that code. RoseDoclet 
applies the doclet API to create a doclet 
passed to Javadoc. The Javadoc engine 
applies the doclet to the source code, 
emitting the output format specified by 
the doclet. RoseDoclet emits a Rose 
model file and populates it with fully 
documented packages, classes, methods, 
variables, and class diagrams identified 
in the source code. The way in which 
UML models are generated can be con- 
trolled by use of new Javadoc comment 
tags that RoseDoclet provides. The ad- 
vantage of using RoseDoclet is that 
Javadoc documentation becomes lever- 
aged for two purposes: documenting the 
as-built API and keeping the design doc- 
umentation up to date. 

This program was written by Matthew R. 
Barry and Richard N. Osborne of United 
Space Alliance for Johnson Space Center. 
For further information, contact the Johnson 
Technology Transfer Office at (281) 483- 
3809. 

MSC-23580 


fa Computing Thermal Effects 
of Cavitation 
in Cryogenic Liquids 

A computer program implements a 
numerical model of thermal effects of 
cavitation in cryogenic fluids. The 


model and program were developed for 
use in designing and predicting the 
performances of turbopumps for cryo- 
genic fluids. Prior numerical models 
used for this purpose do not account 
for either the variability of properties of 
cryogenic fluids or the thermal effects 
(especially, evaporative cooling) in- 
volved in cavitation. It is important to 
account for both because in a cryogenic 
fluid, the thermal effects of cavitation 
are substantial, and the cavitation char- 
acteristics are altered by coupling be- 
tween the variable fluid properties and 
the phase changes involved in cavita- 
tion. The present model accounts for 
both thermal effects and variability of 
properties by incorporating a general- 
ized representation of the properties of 
cryogenic fluids into a generalized com- 
pressible-fluid formulation for a cavitat- 
ing pump. The model has been exten- 
sively validated for liquid nitrogen and 
liquid hydrogen. Using the available 
data on the properties of these fluids, 
the model has been shown to predict 
accurate temperature-depression val- 
ues. 

This progam was written by Ashvin 
Hosangcidi, Vineet Ahuja, and Sanford M. 
Dash of Combustion Research and Flow Tech- 
nology, Inc., for Marshall Space Flight Cen- 
ter. For further information, contact Ashvin 
Hosangcidi at hosangad@craft-tech.com. 
MFS-32140 


GUI for Computational 
Simulation of a Propellant 
Mixer 

Control Panel is a computer program 
that generates a graphical user interface 
(GUI) for computational simulation of a 
rocket-test-stand propellant mixer in 
which gaseous hydrogen (GH 2 ) is in- 
jected into flowing liquid hydrogen 
(LH 2 ) to obtain a combined flow having 
desired thermodynamic properties. The 
GUI is used in conjunction with software 
that models the mixer as a system having 
three inputs (the positions of the GH 2 
and LH 2 inlet valves and an oudet valve) 
and three outputs (fire pressure inside 
the mixer and the oudet flow tempera- 
ture and flow rate) . The user can specify 
valve characteristics and thermodynamic 
properties of the input fluids via user- 
friendly dialog boxes. The user can enter 
temporally varying input values or tempo- 
rally varying desired output values. The 
GUI provides (1) a set-point calculator 
function for determining fixed valve posi- 
tions that yield desired output values and 


(2) simulation functions that predict the 
response of the mixer to variations in the 
properties of the LH 2 and GH 2 and man- 
ual- or feedback-control variations in 
valve positions. The GUI enables schedul- 
ing of a sequence of operations that in- 
cludes switching from manual to feed- 
back control when a certain event occurs. 

This progam was written by Fernando 
Figueroa of Stennis Space Center, Hanz 
Richter of the National Research Council, 
and Enrique Barbieri and Jamie Granger 
Austin of Tulane University. 

Inquiries concerning rights for the commer- 
cial use of this invention should be addressed 
to the Intellectual Property Manager, Stennis 
Space Center, (228) 688-1929. Refer to SSG 
00213. 


Ijf Control Program for an 
Optical-Calibration Robot 

A computer program provides semiau- 
tomatic control of a moveable robot used 
to perform optical calibration of video- 
camera-based optoelectronic sensor sys- 
tems that will be used to guide auto- 
mated rendezvous maneuvers of 
spacecraft. The function of the robot is 
to move a target and hold it at specified 
positions. With the help of limit switches, 
the software first centers or finds the tar- 
get. Then the target is moved to a start- 
ing position. Thereafter, with the help of 
an intuitive graphical user interface, an 
operator types in coordinates of speci- 
fied positions, and the software responds 
by commanding the robot to move the 
target to the positions. The software has 
capabilities for correcting errors and for 
recording data from the guidance-sensor 
system being calibrated. The software 
can also command that the target be 
moved in a predetermined sequence of 
motions between specified positions and 
can be run in an advanced control mode 
in which, among other things, the target 
can be moved beyond the limits set by 
the limit switches. 

This prrogam was written by Albert (Nick) 
Johnston of Marshall Space Flight Center. 

For further information, contact Sammy 
Nabors, MSFC Commercialization Assistance 
Fead, at sammy.a.nabors@nasa.gov. MFS- 
31925-1 


0 SQL-RAMS 

SQL-RAMS (where “SQL” signifies 
Structured Query Language and 
“RAMS” signifies Rocketdyne Auto- 
mated Management System) is a succes- 


14 


NASA Tech Briefs, November 2005 


