September 1975 


B75-10194 


• NASA TECH BRIEF 


Langley Research Center 



NASA Tech Briefs announce new technology derived from the U.S. space program. They are issued to encourage 
commercial application. Tech Briefs are available on a subscription basis from the National Technical Information 
Service, Springfield, Virginia 22151. Requests for individual copies or questions relating to the Tech Brief program may 
be directed to the Technology Utilization Office, NASA, Code KT, Washington, D.C. 20546. 


Executive Computer Program for Linking Independent 
Computer Programs: ODINEX 


The problem: 

It was necessary to provide a user-oriented, 
computer-aided design-synthesis tool capable of 
utilizing independent, often existing, technology 
programs without modification as its analytical base. 


The solution: 

ODINEX is a new computer program for linking 
independent computer programs into an interde- 
pendent system of programs. 


How it’s done: 

ODINEX controls the sequence of execution of a 
network of program elements and maintains a data 
base of common information which forms the 
communication link among the programs. Any 
program element may access or modify the data base 
through the ODINEX executive computer program. 

The ODINEX program is structured to provide the 
following: 

a. A dynamically-constructed data base containing 
all interprogram data. The data base can be 
permanently stored at user-selected points 
throughout the simulation. 

b. A language for controlling the execution sequence 
of an arbitrary network of independent programs 
by simple commands. The flow path may be based 
on information from the data base. 

c. A control-card data base for storing information 
with regard to the retrieval and execution of 
individual programs. These data-base files can be 
updated either by a separate run or dynamically in 
the simulation. 

d. A language for automatically retrieving data-base 
information as input to any program in the net- 
work. An advanced-information access-and-re- 
trieval system was developed and included as an 


integral part of ODINEX. The language requires 
no modification to the independent program. 

e. A simple technique for allowing any program in 
the network to update the data base. The tech- 
nique does not influence the normal stand-alone 
operation of the program. 

f. A capability for generating one or more reports 
describing the status of the design. This informa- 
tion can be printed as a part of the normal com- 
puter output. 

g. Operational flexibility of batch or interactive 
modes of operation. 

ODINEX has general applicability throughout 
industry wherever multiple-program tasks are in- 
volved. Any process involving more than one program 
for which the independent program elements are 
available can be synthesized. 

Notes: 

1. This program was written in FORTRAN IV and 
COMPASS for the CDC 6000-series computer. 

2. Inquiries concerning this program should be 
directed to: 

COSMIC 
112 Barrow Hall 
University of Georgia 
Athens, Georgia 30601 
Reference: LAR-11324 

Source: C. R. Glatt, D. S. Hague, 
and D. A, Watson of 
Aerophysics Research Corp. 

under contract to 
Langley Research Center 
(LAR-11324) 


Category: 09 (Mathematics and 

Information Sciences) 


This document was prepared under the sponsorship of the National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration. Neither the United States 
Government nor any person acting on behalf of the United States 


Government assumes any liability resulting from the use of the 
information contained in this document, or warrants that such use 
will be free from privately owned, rights. 



