


The Lunar Prospector Mission: 

Final Results of Trajectory Design, 

Quasi-Frozen Orbits, Extended Mission Targeting, and 

the Lunar Topography and Potential Models 

/ 'r '^V ; 

David Folta & Mark Beckman / 

Guidance, Navigation, and Control Center 

Goddard Space Flight Center, NASA " 

and 

David Lozier & Ken Galal 

Space Projects Division 

Ames Research Center, NASA 

Abstract: 

The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) selected Lunar Prospector as one of the 
discovery missions to conduct solar system exploration science investigations. The mission was NASA's 
first lunar voyage to investigate key science objectives since Apollo and was launched in January 1998. In 
keeping with discovery program requirements to reduce total mission cost and utilize new technology, 
Lunar Prospector's mission design and control will focus on the use of innovative and proven trajectory 
analysis programs. As part of this effort, the Goddard Space Flight Center and the Ames Research Center 
became partners in the Lunar Prospector trajectory team to provide the trajectory analysis and orbit 
determination support. 

At the end of 1998, Lunar Prospector completed its one-year primary mission at lOO-km altitude above the 
lunar surface. On December 19, 1998, Lunar Prospector entered its extended mission phase. The mission 
orbit was lowered from 100 km to a mean altitude of 40 km. Due to lunar potential effects, the altitude of 
Lunar Prospector varied from 25 to 55 km above the mean lunar geoid. After one month at 40 km, the lunar 
potential model was updated based upon the new tracking data at 40 km. On January 15, 1999, the altitude 
was lowered again to a mean altitude of 30 km. The spherical ahitude varied between 15 km and 45 km 
above the mean lunar geoid while the topographical altitude varied between 10 km and 50 km. Various 
means were employed to get accurate lunar surface elevation including Clementine altimetry and LOS 
analysis. Based upon the best available terrain maps. Lunar Prospector reached actual altitudes of 8 km 
above lunar mountains in the southern polar region. This extended mission phase of six months will enable 
LP to obtain science data up to 3 orders of magnitude better than at the mission orbit. At the end of the 
operations mission, LP was targeted for impact at a chosen location that allowed optical observation of the 
lunar ejecta as LP ended its mission at 1.6 km/sec. 

This paper details the trajectory design and orbit determination planning and actual results of the Lunar 
Prospector nominal and extended mission including maneuver design, eccentricity vs. argument of perigee 
evolution, topographical altitude estimation, and lunar potential modeling. This paper provides 
understanding of the quasi-frozen orbit design of the LP mission, the optimization process of lunar orbit 
targets, the impacts that the selected lunar potential models play, and discusses the feasibility of meeting 
the mission goals. Observed evolution of the Keplerian orbit elements are compared to the theoretical 
predictions using the latest lunar potential model available which incorporates the Lunar Prospector 
Doppler data. Mapping orbit maintenance maneuver design along with results of the actual maneuvers to 
maintain the orbital requirements are also presented. 



The figure below presents recent results of orbital maintenance and the parameters considered in selected 
targets. The polar plot shows the w vs. eccentricity evolution that is a constant form. 




Jiggg/GZ/ZB; i OO : OO : OO . OGOOGO' 

Eccentricity vs. 
Arg of Perispsis 



End, Feb 28th 



AV, Jan29 

@075(r 
1 10 . a 




(Prcmineuvcr) 



Q.QQO t* 0.013 



Spherical Altitude Above Mean Sphere 




Selenographic Altitude 
Using Merged Database 



> Selenographic Latitude vs. Longitude 




15 km 



t' ■>' t t t r t 



v^^ 



Start 



(Premaneuver) 



'- VvA 



End 






O.OOQ 9 a I * n A 9 r aph 1 e Lan^ltud* 3ao.O 



CSFC/CNCC/J»n II, M 



NOTE: 



A '5' minute movie of the entire mission is proposed for presentation during the paper or 
as an additional exhibition. This movie is a high quaHty movie with both orbit and 
science information provided. 



