REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 


Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 


The oublic reoortinq burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources 
natherina and maintaininq the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection 
^nformahon Including suggestions for reducing the burden, to Department of Defense, Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports 
?0704-0^8 8)° P 1215 J eff e rs or? Da vis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302. Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be 
subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB control number. 

PLEASE DO NOT RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS. _ r— _ 

1 REPORT DATE (DD-MM-YYYY) I 2. REPORT TYPE ~ ~ 3. DATES COVERED (From - To) 

10-26-2000 CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

THE DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT OF AN INTERNET-BASED 
GRAPHICAL USER INTERFACE USING A COMMERCIAL DESIGN 
TOOL AND JAVA 


6. AUTHOR(S) 

Stephanie A. Myrick, Marlin L. Gendron, Maura C. Lohrenz, and Stephanie 
S. Edwards 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

Naval Research Laboratory 
Marine Geosciences Division 
Stennis Space Center, MS 39529 


5a. CO! 

\ITRACT NUMBER 

5b. GR> 

\NT NUMBER 

5c. PRC 

)GRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 

5d. PRC 

)JECT NUMBER 

5e. TASK NUMBER 

5f. WO 

RK UNIT NUMBER 


REPORT NUMBER 

NRL/PP/7440-00-1010 


9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME{S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

NAVAIR 


10. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S ACRONYM(S) 


11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 


12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release, distribution is unlimited 


13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 


20010102 018 


14. ABSTRACT 

This paper describes the design and development of an Internet-hosted Graphical User Interface (GUI) to plan digital aeronautical 
chart coverages for cockpit moving-map displays by U.S .military aircraft mission planners, requirements officers, and aircrew. 
The GUI is a component of the Moving-Map Composer (MMC) software that has been developed by the Naval Research 
Laboratory at the Stennis Space Center (NRLSSC). MMC performs a wide variety of naval mission planning systems and in-flight 
moving-map displays. 


15. SUBJECT TERMS 

graphic user interface, moving-map displays, aircraft optical disks, X-designer and X-library 


Stephanie A. Myrick 


16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 
a. REPORT 1 b. ABSTRACT 1 c. THIS PAGE 

17. LIMITATION OF 
ABSTRACT 

18. NUMBER 
OF 

PAGES 

1 

Unclassified 

Unclassified 

Unclassified 



19b. TELEPHONE NUMBER (Include area codeI 

228-688-5499 


4 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8/98) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39.18 
















Proceedings of the Southern Conference on Computing 
The University of Southern Mississippi, October 26-28, 2000 


THE DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT OF AN INTERNET-BASED GRAPHICAL 
USER INTERFACE USING A COMMERCIAL DESIGN TOOL AND JAVA 

Stephanie A. Myrick, Marlin L. Gendron, Maura C. Lohrenz, and Stephanie S. Edwards 1 


Abstract. This paper describes the design and development of am Internet-hosted Graphical User Interface (GUI) to 
plan digital aeronautical chart coverages for cockpit moving-map displays by U.S* militaiy aircraft mission planners, 
requirements officers, and aircrew. The GUI is a component of the Moving-Map Composer (MMC) software that has been 
developed by the Naval Research Laboratory at the Stennis Space Center (NRLSSC). MMC performs a wide variety of 
aeronautical chart planning functions, including the design and construction of chart images from user-specified data for use in 

naval mission planning systems and in-flight moving-map displays. , 

* 

1. Introduction. X-Designer is a commercial GUI design tool (offered by Imperial Software 
Technology) that produces source code for the GUI designs created. X-Designer originally was used 
to produce an X Windows-based version of MMC and has proven to be an excellent tool for 
generating X Library (Xlib) and OSF/Motif source code. MMC is comprised of C functions and X- 
Designer generated code and is implemented as a standalone system on a Compaq Alpha workstation 
running OpenVMS. The main MMC GUI is shown in figure 1. A new version of MMC (due to be 
released in early 2001) will also run on a PC platform running Linux. Peripheral devices for 
performing optical disk operations are included as part of the system hardware configuration. 



Figure 1. Main MMC GUI 


Since its inception, MMC has undergone numerous software revisions to provide increased support to 
the fleet and, as a result, now is in greater demand. However, MMC is only available to those who 
have access to an Alpha workstation and the requisite peripheral devices, which are expensive to 
maintain and nearly obsolete in terms of CPU speed, memory, disk storage, etc. While the Linux 

- DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A 

1 Naval Research Laboratory, Code 7440.1, Stennis Space Center, MS 39529 Approved for Public RGI63SG 

Distribution Unlimited 














2 


Myrick, Gendron, Lohrenz, and Edwards 


PC version of MMC will help to alleviate obsolescence problems, many pilots and mission planners 
do not have access to these platforms, either. Therefore, NRLSSC scientists are starting to redesign 
MMC into a web-based system that would provide structural and platform independence. There are 
two principle benefits of this redesign: (1) As a web-based system, MMC will be accessible to a 
substantially greater number of users, primarily pilots and mission planners; (2) As a portable system, 
MMC no longer will be tied to any one hardware platform and will benefit from newer, faster 
hardware and peripherals as they become available. 


2. Discussion. Software implementations using X-Windows, Java and C programming languages 
will meet these needs. NRLSSC scientists are utilizing the most recent version of X-Designer (v5.5) - 
which generates Java code - to generate the GUI portion of MMC in Java and OSF/Motif. Two 
companion papers being presented at this symposium address (1) the design and implementation of 
the Java Server portion of this MMC redesign, and (2) the design of Java-based moving-map 
simulations, on-line surveys and databases to solicit evaluations of future moving-map displays from 
pilots and mission planners stationed around the world. 

The decision to continue utilizing X-Designer for software development was primarily based on 
product licensing and extensive familiarity with its use. Production costs were reduced since the 
license was current and scientists had previous experience with its use as a development tool. X- 
Designer also enabled GUI design and implementation to progress in a consistent manner by 
maintaining the design’s “look and feel”, maintaining the independence of lower level code, and 
streamlining individual programming styles. With personnel changes that are inherent in multi-year 
programs, it is essential to maintain control and consistency with programming techniques. 

The following sections address the primary issues that are being during this transition to a web-based 
system: Section 2.1 covers design modification issues associated with using X-Designer for Java 
source code generation, and Section 2.2 covers MMC enhancements for web use. 

2.1 Design Modifications. Modifications (e.g., additional buttons or windows) are quickly and 
easily made. Once a design is created or modified, the Generation feature of X-Designer is used to 
generate Java source code (including individual files for callback routines). These files are compiled, 
along with other existing low-level C functions, to create an executable application that is MMC 
(figure 2). 



—► 


m 

Java files and low-level 

—► 



tilename.java 

fiIename_CaIlback.java 

1 




MMC 


Figure 2. The transformation steps of a GUI design from its creation to its final form as an executable 

Java application. 


To date, the only significant problem encountered generating Java source code (instead of X- 
windows) has been associated with the X-Designer Layout Manager and attachments. Specifically, 
some of the GUI component (i.e., widget) placement and size specifications have been set erroneously 
in the Java source code and required manual correction (figure 3). All manual corrections are 
documented within the source code. This problem appears to be limited to Java source code 
generation since the same design appears correct when implemented in X-Window source code. This 
may be one disadvantage of using X-Designer instead of other development tools that have been 
designed exclusively for generating Java source code. 







Myrick, Gendron, Lohrenz, and Edwards 


3 


However, these errors are easily corrected through modifications to the FormLayoutConstraint 
definitions and do not appear to be substantial impediments to the completion of this project. 



(a) Before correction, both widgets are (b) After correction 

misaligned within the display area 
with Widget 2 drawn too small. 

Figure 3. Widget placement and size attachments. 


2.2 Development for Web use. MMC has been enhanced to serve in a client/server architecture on 
the Internet. The existing low-level C language code is robust and well tested. Therefore, in order to 
minimize software modifications and avoid introducing new bugs, only a few key changes are being 
made. These modifications primarily include file naming conventions, and file location operations. As 
an application, MMC now generates individual queries that belong to a set of ASCII-based query 
language commands that are being developed as part of this project. These commands are understood 
by both client and server and serve as their logical link (figure 4). 



Figure 4. The Internet-based MMC GUI client application and its Java server. 


For example, using the File Menu option to open a final composition (figure 5), generates the 
following query which is subsequently interpreted by the Java server: 

build file[type=ascii] template[location=hd, name=all] 

Queries are incorporated as part of the individual callback routines used within MMC. The 
appropriate C functions are then invoked to complete the tasks identified in the query. In the above 
example, a file selection menu is provided to obtain the name of a final composition and once opened, 
is available for use. With MMC available on the Internet, pilots and mission planners can design map 































4 


Myrick, Gendron, Lohrenz, and Edwards 


mission-specific compositions from their respective workplaces and maintain a library of chart 
coverages that are available for future use or may be modified as needed for other missions. With 
system hardware upgrades being transparent, these users will be able to rely on MMC, as a state of the 
art resource for their map display needs. 



I Sav.eAs Working Composition Ctrt+S 



Figure 5. MMC File menu option 


3. Summary. NRLSSC scientists have begun to redesign MMC into a web-based system that will 
provide structural and platform independence. As a web-based system, MMC will be accessible to a 
substantially greater number of users, primarily pilots and mission planners. As a portable system, 
MMC no longer will be tied to any one hardware platform and will benefit from newer, faster 
hardware and peripherals as they become available. X-Designer is being used in this effort since 
production costs can be reduced (due to the existence of current license agreements and in-house 
experience with its use as a development tool). X-Designer also offers the advantages of enabling 
GUI design and implementation to progress in a consistent manner by maintaining the design’s “look 
and feel”, maintaining the independence of lower level code, and streamlining individual 
programming styles. Primary issues that are being addressed during this transition to a web-based 
system include design modifications associated with using X-Designer for Java source code 
generation, and MMC enhancements for web use. 

4. Acknowledgements. The Naval Air Systems Command funds this work in support of their AV-8B 
and F/A-18 aircraft programs. 


REFERENCES 

[1] L.C. Lohrenz, et.al., AV-8B Map System II: Moving Map Composer (MMC) Version 3.3, 
Software User’s Manual, 2 nd Edition, NRL/FR/7440-00-9938, June 30,2000. 

[2] M. L. Gendron, P. B. Wischow, M.E. Trenchard, M.C. Lohrenz, L.M. Riedlinger, and M.J. 
Mehaffey, Moving Map Composer , Naval Research Laboratory, Patent Pending, Case No. 
76,358,1-29, 1997. 

[3] X-Designer User’s Guide , Imperial Software Technology Limited, December 1999. 

[4] M. L. Gendron, S. S. Edwards, S.A.Myrick, M. Lohrenz, and M.E. Trenchard The Design 
and Development of an Internet-based Graphical User Interface Using a Commercial Design 
Tool in Java , Publication pending in the Proceedings of the Southern Conference on, 
Computing Hattiesburg, Mississippi, October 26-28, 2000. 



PUBLICATION OR PRESENTATION RELEASE REQUEST 


1. REFERENCES AND ENCLOSURES |2. TYPE OF PUBLICATION OR PRESENTATION 


Ref: (a) NRL Instruction 5600.2 
(b) NRL Instruction 5510.40D 

Enel: (1) Two copies of subject 
paper (or abstract) 


) Abstract only, published { 

) Book ( 

} Conference Proceedings ( 

(refereed) 

) Invited speaker ( 

) Journal article (refereed) ( 

) Oral Presentation, published ( 
) Other, explain 


( I Abstract only, not published 
( ) Book Chapter 

( X Conference Proceedings 
(not refereed) 

( ) Multimedia report 

{ ) Journal article (not refereed) 

( I Oral Presentation, not published 


SSC,-/ S'L-OO NRIINST 5600.2 


3/ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 


STRN NRLPP/7440-00-1010 


Route Sheet No. ' _ •" 

Job Order No._] 

Classification _ x U_C . 

Sponsor NAVAIR 

approval obtained_yes_no 


4. AUTHOR • ' _ 


Title of Paper or Presentation /j/.,... . 

THE DESIGN AN DEVELOPMENT OF AN INTERNET-BASED GRAPHICAL USER INTERFACE USING A 
COMMERCIAL DESIGN TOOL AND JAVA ' P-V .iTV 


Author(s) Name(s) (First, Mi, Last), Code, Affiliation if not NRL . 

STEPHANIE A. MYRICK, (Code 7440.1), MARLIN L. GENDRON (Code 7440.1), MAURA C. LOHRENZ 
(Code 7440.1) and STEPHANIE S. EDWARDS (Code 7440.1) 


It is intended to offer this paper to the 


SOUTHERN CONFERENCE ON COMPUTING 

(Name of Conference) 


w: t« nci r j a t vm*) im x: i cw * i kki kki iJaWiTw kd a m w m aa >iu f * i Utei fujj 


(Date, Place and Classification of Conference) 

and/or for publication in____ _ 

(Name and Classification of Publication) (Name of Publisher) 

After presentation or publication, pertinent publication/presentation data will be entered in the publications data base, in 
accordance with reference (a). 

It is the opinion of the author that the subject paper (is_) (is not X ) classified, in accordance with reference (b). 

This paper does not violate any disclosure of trade secrets or suggestions of outside individuals or concerns which have been 

communicated to the Laboratory in confidence. This paper (does_) (does not )( ) contain any militarily critical technology. 

This subject paper (has_) (has neve r ) been incorporated in an official NRL Rdtart. a 

STEPHANIE A. MYRICK, NRL Code 7440.1 _ _44 


Name and Code (Principal Author) /(Signature) 0 


5. ROUTING/APPROVAL 


CODE 

SIGNATURE 

DATE 

COMMENTS 



HG-NRL 5511/6 {Rev. 12-98) (e) 


THIS FORM CANCELS AND SUPERSEDES ALL PREVIOUS VERSIONS 






















































0 A- Approved for public rel ease, distribution is unlimited. _ 

□ B- Distribution authorized to U.S. Government agencies only (check reason below): 

□ Foreign Government Information □ Contractor Performance Evaluation □ Critical Technology 


i Proprietary Information I I Administr 

| Test and Evaluation ED Software 

Date statement applied 

Other requests for this document shall be referred to 


u Administrative/Operational Use 
□ Software Documentation 


I "~l Premature Dissemination 
□ Cite "Specific Authority 


(Identification of valid 


(insert Controlling DOD 


□ c- Distribution authorized to U.S. Government agencias and their contractors (check reason below). 


ition □ 


_I Foreign Government Information I—I Software Documentation 

Administrative/Operationa! Use □ Critical Technology 
Date statement applied _____ 

Other requests for this document shall be referred to _ 


Cite "Specific Authority 


(Identification of valid 


(Insert Controlling DOD 


f~| d - Distribution authorized to DOD and DOD contractors only (check reason below): 


Foreign Government Information 


Software Documentation 


ED Criti 


Critical Technology 
Cite "Specific Authority 


_I Administrative/Operational Use 

Date statement applied __ 

Other requests for this document shall be referred to 


(Identification of valid 


(Insert Controlling DOD 


□ B* Distribution authorized to DOD components only (check reason below): □ Critical Technology 


Premature Dissemination 


□ Proprietary Information □ Premature Dissemination □ Direct Military Support 

| | Foreign Government Information I 1 Software Documentation ED Test and Evaluation 

□ Administrative/Operational Use □ Contractor Performance Evaluation □ Cite "Specific Authority 


(Identification of valid 

Date statement applied __ 

Other requests for this document shall be referred to 

(Insert Controlling DOD ___ 


□ F - Further dissemination only as directed by______ 

(Insert Controlling DOD 

Date statement applied __ or higher DO D authority 

“□"x - Distribution authorized to U.S. Government agencies and private individuals or enterprises eligible to obtain export-controlled 
technical data in accordance with regulations implementing 10 U.S.C. 140c. 


Date statement applied 

Other requests for this document shall be referred to 


(Insert Controlling DOD 


♦For NRL publications, this is usually the Commanding Officer, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC 20375-5320 . .. _ 

' ' ... . . J ■ ' ' ' ' . . 



Classification only 


DTIC exempt (explain) 


Classification Review 
(Initial/Date) 


Substantive changes made in this document after approval by Classification Review and Public Release invalidate 
these reviews. Therefore, if any substantive changes are made by the author. Technical Information, or anyone else, 
the document must be returned for another Classification Review and Public Release. 


Author completes and submits this form with the manuscript via line channels to the division head for review and approval according to 
the routing in section 4. 

1. NRL Reports...Submit the diskette (if available), manuscript, typed double-spaced, 

complete with tables, illustrations, references, draft SF 298, and 
proposed distribution list. 

2. NRL Memorandum Reports.Submit a copy of the original, typed manuscript complete with 

tables, illustrations, references, draft SF 298, and proposed 
distribution list. 

3. NRL Publications or other books, brochures, pamphlets,.Handled on a per case basis by Site Technical Information Office. 

proceedings, or any other printed publications. ___ —- 


HQ-NRL 5219/1 (Rev. 5-97) (e) (Back) 














