INTER-OFFICE MEMO 


I 


ATARI 


TO: 

Distxibution^^7 


FROM: 

Dale Yocum 

DATE: H/14/79 

SUBJECT: 

Pascal Proposal (Meta Tech) 



Attached is Meta Tech's proposal for Pascal on our 400/800. 

A few notes in preface from a conversation I had with Mike Lehman today: 

1. The times quoted are conservative in his estimation. 

2. They would be able to work out seme agreement where they 
would not market the package for other personal computers. 

This, I feel, is important. This Pascal is much superior to 
others on the market and would give Atari a big advantage. 

3. If we went into a royalty-type agreement instead of the one¬ 
time one quoted, we would have exclusive rights to the product. 
The prices would be in the neighborhood of $30K upfront and 
$5-$10 per copy royalty. This may give us better support and 
more of a lever if things go wrong. 

Please give me your inputs on this proposal as soon as possible. I 
would like to get underway on Pascal promptly as many applications 
programs would be written in it. 


DY/db 

Attachment 


Q A Warner Communications Company 



Specializing In Innovative 
Information Processing 


November 9, 1979 


Mr. Dale Yocum 
Atari Corporation 
1272 Borregas Ave. 
Sunnyvale, CA 94086 


Dear Dale, 

V/e are pleased to submit to Atari the enclosed proposal 
to develop a Pascal capability for the Atari personal computer. 

We feel very confident of our ability to produce a high 
quality, supported software product for Atari. We have had 
extensive experience in working with Pascal, Fortran, BASIC 
and the 6502 processor. Our personnel have developed more- than 
a dozen assemblers, at least ten compilers and numerous other 
software tools over the last ten years. Our experience with 
Pascal has been particularly intensive working with the internal 
details of the UCSD Pascal system over the last two years. 

In addition to the enclosed Pascal proposal we would like 
to indicate our interest in pursuing the Fortran idea which we 
discussed with you last Tuesday. We feel that Atari could 
significantly benefit from a Fortran on the system 800. This 
would be very important in the university and engineering lab 
environments. It is our opinion that a suitable compiler for 
Fortran could be developed which would generate the same run¬ 
time P-code as used by our proposed Pascal. V/e would like the 
opportunity to discuss this further after the Pascal proposal 
has been evaluated. 

We look forward to hearing from you about the Pascal 
proposal. If you have any questions feel free to contact us 
at (714) 455-6618 at any time. We look forward to the prospect 
of working with Atari. 


Sineerly yours 

Michael G.' Lehman 
President 





Enclosure: Pascal Proposal 


8672-1 Via Mallorca 


La Jolla. CA 92037 


(714)455-6618 



/Meta Te&\ 

Specializing In Innovative 
Information Processing 


Atari Pascal Development Project Proposal 


Submited by MetaTech 
November 9, 1979 


Mallorca 


La Jolla. CA 92037 


(714) 



/Aieta Te&\ 

Specializing In Innovative 
Information Processing 

Atari Pascal Proposal -2- 


Table of Contents 


1.0 Introduction 

2.0 Pascal Language Issues 

3.0 Atari Pascal Extensions 

4.0 P-code Implementation 

5.0 Native 6502 Code Implementation 

6.0 Separate Compilation Facilities 

7.0 Atari Pascal Product Test Plan 

8.0 Atari Pascal Product Support Plan 

9.0 Software Development and Pricing Schedul 

10.0 Software Product Legal Considerations 

11.0 Summary 


8672-1 Via Mallorca 


La Jolla. CA 92037 



/Aieto Te&\ 

Specializing In Innovative 
Information Processing 

Atari Pascal Proposal -3- 

1.0_Intro duction 


This proposal covers the development of a Pascal 
Compiler for the 6502 with enhancements for the Atari 
personal computer system model 800. This product will be 
identified in this document as Atari Pascal. 

The Atari Pascal development project will involve 
development of both a P-code generator and a native 6502 
object code generator for the Atari Pascal language. In 
addition, a separate compilation facility will be developed 
which will allow Pascal procedurew which have been previously 
compiled to be linked into a host module. Because of the 
desirability of linking assembly language modules to Pascal 
host programs, this development project will define the object 
module format required. Complete documentation including a 
user's manual and "program logic" documentation for the 
compiler, interpreter and linker will be supplied to Atari. 

Enclosed are sections describing standards and 
extensions for the Atari Pascal compiler and a description of 
testing and development methods to he used. 

Section 9.0 describes development schedules and 
pricing for the entire project. 


8672-1 Via Mallorca 


La Jolla. CA 92037 


(714)455-6618 



/Meta Te&\ 

Specializing In Innovative 
Information Processing 

Atari Pascal Propo sal -4- 


2.0 Pascal Lan cuage Issues 

The state of development in the field of Pascal 
compilers is currently in flux. IEEE, ANSI, and ISO 
standardization ef forts are currently in progress. Because 
of U.S. Federal government requirements for educational 
grants in software development projects, the final result of 
this project will be a compiler capable of meeting those 
Federal requirements. 

Because of the need for an immediate Pascal capability 
for the Atari system 800, this project will supply to Atari a 
compiler for a subset of the language Pascal which would be 
suitable for internal use for game and business applications 
development. Subsequently, a full compiler for the Atari Pascal . 
language will be developed ansi delivered to Atari. See section 9.0 
for details. 

While a subset compiler will be the first deliverable 
software item under this proposal, theP-code interpreter must 
be developed and checked out as soon as possible. The lead 
time for MOS ROM fabrication is quite long dictating .that the 
development of the P-code interpreter be completed so that 
the ROMs can be manufactured. This implies that the P-code 
interpreter be fully tested before manufacturing ROMs. A P-code 
interpreter is a very complicated product. In order to handle 
errors found after fabrication of ROMs has begun, the compiler 
and interpreter will be developed.in such a manner that the 
compiler will be able to include in the P-code program alternate 
object code for routines in the P-code interpreter which contain 
errors. This will allow a P-code interpreter in ROM to be 
used even if it contains programming errors. 


8672-1 Via Mallorca 


La Jolla, CA 92037 


(714)455-6618 



/Meta 

Specializing In Innovative 
Information Processing 

Atari Pascal Proposal -5- 

3.0 Atari Pascal Extensions 

There are a number of additional features which are 
necessary in any higher level language to support all of the 
custom hardware elements of the Atari system 800. These 
features include special graphics modes, sqund generation, 
joy stick I/O, and game controller I/O. Special features in 
the form of built-in procedures and functions will be added 
to the standard Pascal language to create Atari Pascal. 

In addition, the standard Pascal language does not 
support sufficient facilities for development of serious 
business applications programs. Atari Pascal will include 
four specific extensions to the standard Pascal language to 
facilitate development of business applications. * 

First, the addition of a file name parameter to the 
standard procedures RESET and REWRITE will allow the 
programmer explicit access to external storage files by name. 

Second, the addition of a SEEK procedure for random 
access of disk files will be included. Standard Pascal allows 
only sequential file access. 

Third, a new built-in data type called FIXED will be 
implemented as an 18-digit number with 4 fixed decimal places. 

This will be implemented via BCD arithmetic allowing exact 
calculations to be made with automatic rounding. 

Fourth, a data type called STRING will be implemented. 

This will be equivalent to string facilities present in BASIC. 

In addition to facilities for implementing business 
applications, described above, Atari Pascal will include 
built-in procedures for direct bit manipulation. The procedures 
SETBIT,CLRBIT,RSHIFT,LSHIFT and the function TSTBIT will be 
implemented to allow access to bit manipulation with out requiring 
typical "tricks" normally used in most Pascal environments. 

Also, the functions SWAP, LO, and HI will allow access to 
individual 8-bit bytes of integer data items. 


8672-1 Via Mallorca 


la Jolla. CA 92037 


(714)455-6618 



/AletQ Te&\ 

Specializing In Innovative 
Information Processing 

Atari Pascal Proposal -6- 


4.0 P-code Implementation 

In order to generate the most memory space conserving 
programs with a higher level language a Pseudo-machine with 
an interpreter is often used. Atari Pascal will include such 
a P-machine. The object code which the P-machine will 
execute is called P—code. This P—machine includes instructions 
for efficiently implementing Pascal language programs. 

This does not mean that the P-machine is incapable of 
executing programs v/ritten in other languages (e.g. Fortran or 
BASIC). 


The P-machine to be used in Atari Pascal will support 
native 6502 code procedures produced either by the Atari Pascal 
compiler or generated by a suitable assembler. 

The P-machine will also include all I/O manipulation 
software required to implement the Pascal language. This 
also includes software to interface to the graphics, sound 
and Disk I/O (DOS) software. 

Because it is desirable to place the P-machine 
interpreter into a ROM cartridge on the system 800, the size 
of the interpreter must not exceed 8K bytes of memory. Every 
effort will be made to limit the size of the interpreter to 
this size. However, if this is not possible, then a technique 
similar to the one described in section 2.0 (used to handle errors) 
will be used to dynamically include code to handle specific 
features into the user's program. These features, which may not 
be commonly used by all programs, such as SEEK, graphics I/O and 
disk blocking/deblocking software would be added tothe user's 
P-code program as necessary by the compiler. 

The specific P-codes tote used to implement Atari 
Pascal will be described (as much as possible) in the specification 
which will be developed as the first step of the Atari Pascal 
developement project. This will allow early visibility as to the 
true memory requirements for the P-machine interpreter, (see 
section 9.0). 


8672-1 Via Mallorca 


La Jolla. CA 92037 


(714)455-6618 



/Aieto Te&\ 

Specializing In Innovative 
Information Processing 

Atari Pascal Proposal -7- 

5.0 Native 6502 Code Implementation 

While P-code generates the most space efficient coding 
for a particular Pascal program, this P-code is not the 
fastest code which can be generated. Normally, the P-code 
execution speed is sufficient for most programs. However, 
certain procedures sometimes need to be faster because they 
contain frequently executed loops and/or time sensitive coding. 

In order to allow Atari Pascal to be used in a wide 
variety of application environments, the Atari Pascal compiler 
will contain a native 6502 code generator in addition to the 
P-code generator. This native code (called N-code) will be 
useable on a procedure-by-procedure basis. Because of disk 
I/O speed it will typically used for compilation of 
separate modules which will be linked into host modules 
compiled into P-code. The main program in an Atari Pascal 
program must be P-code. 

Because the N-code for the 6502 will be heavily dependent 
upon the P-code interpreter, the interpreter cartridge (or 
equivalent) will be required at run-time for execution of N-code 
programs. A "mini" interpreter could be developed for programs 
which would be primarily compile to N-code but do not use 
all of the P-code instructions. 

It is estimated that N-code will be 3 to 5 times larger, 
and 3 to 10 times faster than P-code for the same program. 


8672-1 Via Mallorca 


la Jolla. CA 92037 


(714)455-6618 



/AietQ Teck\ 

Specializing In Innovative 
Information Processing 

Atari Pascal Proposal -8- 

6.0 Separate Compilation Facilities 

While the Pascal language is the current rage, it lacks 
some of the features of a practical programming system. In 
particular as the user's program grows the need for some form 
of logical partitioning becomes evident. The soultion to this 
problem to be used in Atari Pascal will allow separate compilation 
of collections of procedures and functions and subsequent linking 
of these separate compilations into a complete 'program* 

The Atari Pascal compiler will provide facilities for 
generating separate object modules from a group of procedures. 

The Atari Pascal Linker will allow these procedures to be 
linked together prior to execution. These separate modules 
may be either N-codr or P-code modules. See section 4«0 paragraph 
number 2 regarding linking assembly language procedures^. 

Details of the'linker operation will be specified in 
the system specification to be developed at the beginning of 
this project. 


8672-1 Via Mallorca 


La Jolla. CA 92037 


(714)455-6618 



/Meta Te&\ 

Specializing In Innovative 
Information Processing 

Atari Pascal Proposal -9- 

7»0 Atari Pascal Product Test Plan 

In order to properly test a program the size of the 
Atari Pascal compiler/interpreter/linker a suitable "suite” 
of test programs must be developed. While there are a number of 
such "suites" currently available from various sources, not all 
of these are suitable for the Atari Pascal project for various 
reasons. Some of these test programs would be too large to run 
in a 48 K Atari system 800 and some of these depend upon specific 
implementations of Pascal which contain extensions to the 
standard Pascal language. In addition there are features 
available in Atari Pascal which are not implemented in any other 
implementation of Pascal. J 




a 

s 


8672-1 Via Mallorca 


La Jolla. CA 92037 


(714)455-6618 



/Aieto Tecfr\ 

Specializing In Innovative 
Information Processing 

Atari Pascal Proposal -10- 

8.0 Atari Pascal Product Support Plan 

MetaTech attempts to provide only bug-free software 
products. However, the sheer volume of programming required 
to implement the Atari Pascal Compiler,interpreter and linker 
implies that continuing support will be required for Atari by 
MetaTech. This support will take the form of "patches", fixes, 
and additional extensions to the Atari Pascal system. 

The MetaTech policy regarding software support will 
be to warrant the product against defects fora period of one 
year providing tho softwarG support contract is signod by Atari* 
Section 9*0 gives further details about this contract. 

Additional extensions desired to the system by Atari 
will be handled on a consulting basis (or fixed price contract) 
y^th the rate to be determined at the time of consultation. 


8672-1 Via Mallorca 


La Jolla. CA 92037 


(714)455-6618 



/Meta Te&\ 

Specializing In Innovative 
Information Processing 

Atari Pascal Proposal -11- 

9.0 Software Development and Pricing Schedule 

MetaTech is a small company specializing in software 
tool development for microprocessors. In light of our small 
size we cannot develop a product as large as Atari Pascal on 
a single lump sum financial arrangement. In addition, we feel 
that too many computer software development projects are done 
with too much concern about how without enought thought 
as to what is desired in the end product. We always generate a 
Functional specification before proceeding with the large body of 
a programming project. 

As was mentioned in section 2.0 Atari indicated to 
MetaTech the time sensitive nature of the Atari Pascal development. 
To meed these requirement we are proposing to first develop the 
whole P-machinejnterpreter and a compiler for a subset of the Atari 
Pascal language. This approach would allow Atari to begin using 
Pascal for internal development of applications software while 
allowing MetaTech sufficient time to properly develop a full 
Pascal compiler starting with the subset compiler as a base. 

MetaTech proposes that the project cost $55,000 (fifty 
five thousand dollars) following the development and payment 
schedule listed below: 


From start 
0 

1 month 

4 months 


• 6 months 


Delivery 

Contract signed 

Specification for language, 
P-code, N-code format, and 
linker format 

Complete P-machine interpreter; 
Subset Pascal compiler including: 
Atari Extensions, 

Missing: HEAP,WITH,GOTO,SETS; 
Preliminary user's documentation 


Payment 
$ 7,500 

$ 7,500 


$ 15,000 


Complete Atari Pascal compiler $10,000 


7 months 


Linker 


5,000 


8 months 


Native 6502 code generator 

Complete documentation $10,000 


$55,000 


8672-1 Via Mallorca 


la Jolla. CA 92037 


(714)455-6618 




/Ai eta Te&\ 

Specializing In Innovative 
Information Processing 

Atari Pascal Proposal -12- 

Note that the payments to he made do not necessarily 
reflect the ammount of effort required to prepare the software 
for delivery, but simply indicate what MetaTech considers 
reasonable. 

MetaTech will warantee the software produced under this 
proposal for a period of one year providing a support contract 
is signed by Atari. This support contract will cover all problems 
discovered yd thin the Atari Pascal package exclusive of additional 
extensions desired by Atari. This support contract will cost $5000 
(five thousand) per year payable in advance (at the completion^of 
the project)• 

Every effort will be made to include all features 
desirable in the initial package. However, every software 
development which extends a "standard" inevitably overlooks some 
desireable features the first time around. To provide support 
to Atari for extensions MetaTech will be glad to provide 
programming either on a hourly consulting basis or a fixed price 
contract basis at the request of Atari. 


8672-1 Via Mallorca 


La Jolla, CA 92037 


(714)455-6618 



/fcfetQ Te&\ 

Specializing In Innovative 
Information Processing 

Atari Pascal Proposal -13- 

10.0 Software Product Legal Considerations 

In consultation with Atari, Atari indicated to MetaTech 
that Atari does not wish to deal with software development on a 
royalty arrangement. This is acceptable with MetaTech providing 
MetaTech retains the right to re-market the basic product, exclusive 
of Atari specific hardware extensions. MetaTech feels that re-marketing 
of the basic product would provide sufficient benefits to MetaTech 
to allow MetaTech to forego any royalties which would have been 
gained under other arrangements. 

In any case, MetaTech would provide to Atari full 
source programs and all documentation for the Atari version of 
the compiler, interpreter and linker to be used by Atari for 
internal support. Atari would no be licensed to supply this 
source data to any other party under any conditions unless agreed 
to in writing by MetaTech. Atari would recognize the information 
supplied to Atari as being trade secrets of MetaTech and would 
not disclose or allow disclosure of this information to any other 
party or parties. 

MetaTech would retain full copyright privileges and 
would grant unlimited use of Atari Pascal in all forms to 
Atari for use with Atari software and hardware products with 
no royalty charges. 


8672-1 Via Mallorca 


La Jolla. CA 92037 


(714)455-6618 



Specializing In Innovative 
Information Processing 

Atari Pascal Proposal -14- 

11.0 Summary 

MetaTech proposes to supply to Atari a Pascal system 
suitable for the Atari system 800 including a P-code/N-code compiler, 
a P-code interpreter and a linker capable of linking output produced 
by the compiler. This would cost Atari $55>000. Extensions for 
Atari proprietary peripherals will be included as well as support 
for bit-manipulation and business applications programming. Support 
is to be supplied to Atari for S5000 per year. Full user documentation 
and "program logic" documenetaion for the compiler, interpreter and 
linker is to be provided as described. 

Atari will acquire exclusive rights to market Atari 
Pascal for Atari hardware products. MetaTech will retain the 
right to market the basic 6502 Pascal package exclusive of 
Atari hardware extensions. Copyright and trade secret information 
will be honored by Atari and all copyright privileges will remain 
with MetaTech. Atari will allow MetaTech copyright notices to 
appear v/hen the software products (compiler and linker) are 
executed. 


8672-1 Via Mallorca 


la Jolla, CA 92037 


(714) 455-6618 



