Third Mars Polar Science Conference (2003) 



8086.pdf 



VOLATILE-RICH CRATER INTERIOR DEPOSITS IN THE POLAR REGIONS OF MARS: EVIDENCE 
FOR ICE CAP ADVANCE AND RETREAT Patrick S. Russell^ James W. Head\ Michael H. Hecht', ^Geology. 
Dept., Brown Univ., Providence, RI 02912 USA, ^JPL, Pasadena, CA, USA. Patrick_Russell@Brown.edu. 



Introduction: Many craters on Mars are partially filled by 
distinctive material emplaced by post-impact processes. This 
crater fill material is an interior mound which is generally sepa- 
rated from the walls of the crater by a trough that may be con- 
tinuous along the crater circumference (i.e. a ring-shaped 
trough), or which may only partially contact the crater walls 
(i.e. a crescent-shaped trough). The fill deposit is frequently 
offset from the crater center and may be asymmetric in plan 
view. Populations of such craters include those in the circum- 
south polar cap region, in Arabia Terra, associated with the 
Medusae Fossae Formation, and in the northern lowlands 
proximal to the north polar cap. We focus on those craters in 
circum-polar regions and assess their relationship to polar cap 
advance and retreat, especially the possibility that fill material 
represents remnants of a formerly larger contiguous cap. 

Motivated by assessment of the martian hydrological cycle, 
especially the groundwater system, we have previously exam- 
ined northern lowlands craters for signs that the impacts may 
have interacted with the groundwater system [4]. Given the 
physical and thermal disruption of the ground associated with 
impact, disruption of the subsurface cryosphere could have 
allowed effusion of sub-cryosphere confined groundwater into 
the crater under artesian-like conditions [4,5]. In a globally 
interconnected hydrosphere-cryosphere system [5], this process 
would be favored in the northern lowlands, where hydraulic 
pressure head of groundwater should be greatest [4]. Such a 
scenario presents an alternative hypothesis for volatile-rich 
crater fill in northern lowlands craters, but impacts into high- 
elevation circum-south polar terrain would not be expected to 
have accessed subsurface water. In addition, the only large 
craters in the northern lowlands containing significant fill mate- 
rial (e.g., Korolev) are those closest to, but isolated from, the 
north polar cap [6]. Unless these impacts were very recent, 
such that the volatile fill had not yet sublimated away [7], this 
non-random clustering near the north pole suggests that there 
has been either preferential deposition by polar-like processes 
in isolated craters, or deposition contiguous to, or part of, a 
formerly more extensive polar cap [e.g., 3] and subsequent 
preferential removal of material in intercrater plains. Fill depos- 
its in some craters around the south pole are contiguous with 
south polar layered material [1], which argues for a similar 
process of deposition with possible later exhumation or flow 
into the crater [2]. 

Volatile-rich deposits have the property of being modifi- 
able by the local stability of the solid volatile, which is gov- 
erned by local energy balance. Here we test the hypothesis that 
asymmetries in volatile fill shape, profile, and center-location 
within a crater result from asymmetries in local energy balance 
within the crater, due mainly to variation of solar insolation and 
radiative effects of the crater walls over the crater interior. 
Model profiles of crater fill are compared with MOLA topog- 
raphic profiles to assess this hypothesis. If asymmetry in mor- 
phology and location of crater fill are consistent with radiative- 
dominated asymmetries in energy budget within the crater, then 
1) the volatile-rich composition of the fill is supported (this 
process should not be effective at shaping volcanic or sedimen- 
tary deposits), and 2) the dominant factor determining the ob- 
served shape of volatile-rich crater fill is the local radiative 
energy budget (and erosive processes such as eolian deflation 
are secondary or unnecessary). 



We also use a geographic and energy model approach to 
specifically test the idea that material in partially filled craters 
around the south pole may once have been contiguous to the 
cap and may have been sustained and modified by radiative 
processes specific to the crater environment (as opposed to the 
surrounding plains) as the cap retreated. 

Korolev Crater: Korolev crater (-80 km diameter; [6,8]) 
is superposed on Amazonian mantle material surrounding north 
polar terrain [1]. While the crater is circular, rim height is not 
uniform around its circumference. The smooth-surfaced, 
roughly circular fill deposit within Korolev does not extend 
completely to the interior walls of the crater, leaving an inter- 
vening ring-shaped trough. Relative to the crater's center, the 
fill deposit is displaced to the north and east, where it reaches 
closer to and higher up the crater walls. The highest point of 
the fill deposit is also displaced in the same sense. Based on 
rim-to-floor depths expected at a fresh, unfilled crater of 
Korolev's diameter [8,9] the actual deepest point of the crater 
is not much deeper than the observed elevation. The maximum 
thickness of the fill mound is then -1.5 km [8]. 

Circum-South Polar Craters: There are many craters 
with fully or partially visible rims within the polar layered ter- 
rain of the south polar cap, especially on the half oriented to- 
wards 180° (e.g.. Fig. 1). Around the fringes of the cap, north- 
ern parts of crater rims are fully exposed, while on pole-ward 
sides crater fill material is still clearly contiguous with polar 
material (e.g.. Fig. 2; [10]). Up to ~ 12° of latitude from the 
edge of the polar layered terrain are craters with fill material 
isolated from polar material (e.g.. Fig. 3). This isolated fill 
appears to become less circular and symmetric at greater dis- 
tances, often located in the northern portions of the crater (e.g.. 
Fig. 4). These materials have been mapped as extensions of 
polar layered material (Apl; [1]) or as ice and fine dune mate- 
rial possibly derived from polar layered terrain and possibly 
covering polar layered terrain material deposited in areas of 
low wind velocity (Ad; [1 ]). 

Based on morphologic and topographic similarity, and in 
some cases contiguousness, of crater fill with polar layered 
deposits, we hypothesize that fill material either 1) was depos- 
ited preferentially in craters rather than on surrounding plains, 
or 2) was once present in the plains as well, as part of a larger 
continuous polar cap, and preferentially remains in the craters 
today as polar material has retreated from the plains. Fill mate- 
rial in craters partially visible around the edges of the polar 
layered terrain appears to be maintained by the same conditions 
as the surrounding, extra-crater polar layered terrain, unless 
both materials are being deflated and the craters are being ex- 
humed. In some cases there is evidence that physical flow of 
polar layered material contributed to crater fill deposits [2,10]. 
Further north, craters not physically connected to the polar 
layered terrain contain less fill, and this is generally in the form 
of a circular mound. Yet further north, crater fill is significantly 
less, occurring only locally within craters. The observed trend 
of decreasing fill amount with increasing northerly latitude 
suggests that either deposition and equilibrium-amounts of fill 
are less at more northern latitudes, or erosive, sublimation, or 
ablation processes have been more severe at more northern 
latitudes. 

Energy Balance Model: Our approach to determine where 
and how much modification of an assumed existing water-ice 



Third Mars Polar Science Conference (2003) 

VOLATILE-RICH CRATER FILL IN POLAR REGIONS: P. S. Russell et al. 



8086.pdf 



crater-fill occurs is to calculate the main energy input and out- 
put pathways for a patch of the surface and assume any excess 
input energy is available for sublimation. The main processes 
involved are as follows: 1) solar insolation, including shadow- 
ing effects of the crater walls, 2) temperature-dependent re- 
radiation from the surface, including the geometric effects of 
the crater walls on reducing emittance to the sky, 3) diffusion 
of heat into or out of the body of ice below the surface, and 4) 
energy, if any, available for phase change and sublimation of 
CO2 and H2O [11]. By iteratively calculating the energy bal- 
ance of these processes at different points within the crater, we 
determine the relative amount of sublimation at each point. The 
same is done for a point in the plains, outside a crater environ- 
ment. As an observed proxy for evolution of the modification 
process, we use characteristic fill morphologies at increasing 
distance from the south polar cap terrain. If actual fill shape is 
largely consistent with these modeled processes, then 1) the 
deposit is likely largely ice-rich, 2) radiative effects likely 
dominate over wind effects, for example, in the size, location, 
and shape of such fill, and 3) the retreat (in the plains) of a 
formerly larger polar cap is supported. 

We are interested in timescales less than those of eccentric- 
ity and obliquity variations, given the rapid rates of sublimation 
expected on Mars [7], so we hold orbital parameters constant 
during each trial. However, the stability of ice changes drasti- 
cally at different orbital configurations [e.g., 12], so we test 
several combinations of obliquity and eccentricity. The sensi- 
tivity of the model and resulting crater-fill morphology and 
asymmetry is assessed with respect to physical and geometric 
parameters such as albedo, emissivity, slope angle, atmospheric 
scattering (based on [13]), proximity to the crater wall, and 
crater wall height. 

The relative role of incident solar radiation on differently- 
facing slopes is dramatic. As expected at the high northern 
latitude of Korolev, south facing slopes receive more total 
yearly insolation, yet the maximum daily insolation occurs on 
north-facing slopes due to obliquity effects. With a nominal, 
non-dust storm, atmospheric optical depth of 0.5, incident inso- 
lation is reduced by 10-30% when the sun is more than 10° 
above the horizon [13]. Albedo can vary by a factor of 4 [11], 
which directly effects absorbed insolation. The latter two ef- 
fects affect the total amount of insolation, while the first, and 
the geometry of the crater, affect the relative distribution of 
insolation. Asymmetry in insolation is clearly a candidate for 
being the major control on volatile fill asymmetry, which is 
supported by observation in a north-south profile across 
Korolev showing a strong asymmetry in which fill is concen- 
trated to the north, consistent with more yearly energy input 
from southerly insolation [6]. 

A nearby high rim, however, will also decrease radiative 
heat loss by reducing the angle of sky seen by a surface [11]. 
Due to a thin atmosphere that is ineffective at convecting heat, 
the sky on Mars is very cold relative to these crater walls. Thus, 
the greater the visible angle of sky, the more energy can be 
radiated away, and the more the crater wall fills the field of 
view, the less the effective emissivity [11]. This concept of 
effective emissivity is summarized in the following equation: 
radiated energy = : 

(^crr;„^/ - (^sly) * sky fraction + 

(1) 



(EoKrf - (^T^aii)* cwallfraction 



the surface is divided into that fraction which is open to the sky 
and that which is filled, or "blocked" by the crater wall. 

Conduction of energy into the subsurface is represented 
simply by a one-layer slab the thickness of the skin depth. It is 
assumed that, at each iteration of time, this slab changes tem- 
perature based on its heat capacity and the difference between 
its temperature at the previous time iteration and the tempera- 
ture at the surface. 

The amount of CO2 deposited and sublimated each season, 
which we take to be a relatively thin cover over the H2O ice- 
rich fill material, is tracked over the interior of the crater based 
on the latent heat available and assuming the surface tempera- 
ture never drops below the CO2 frost point of 148K. 

At current orbital configuration, significant energy for sub- 
limation of water ice is not available, thus evolution of deposits 
may not be currently active. If outlier fill material between 
-150° and 240° W longitude was once part of a larger contigu- 
ous southern cap, we estimate that on the order of 0.5-2 x 10^ 
km^ of material has since been removed. We are further testing 
a variety of orbital configurations which will reveal under what 
conditions, when, and for how long, evolution of ice-rich crater 
deposits will occur. This will help constrain the relationship of 
fill material to polar cap material over geological history. 

References: [1] Tanaka, K.L., andD.H. Scott (1987) USGS Map 
I-1802-C. [2] Head, J.W. (2001) JGR 106, 10075-10085. [3] Fish- 
baugh, K.E., and J.W. Head (2000) JGR 105, 22455-22486. [4] Rus- 
sell, P.S., and J.W. Head (2002) GRL 29, 17, 
doi:10.1029/2002GL015178. [5] Clifford, S.M. (1993) JGR 98, 10973- 
11016. [6] Russell, P.S., et al. (2003) LPSC XXXIV, #1249. [7] 
Kreslavsky, M.A., and J.W. Head (2002) JGR 107, E12, 
doi:10.1029/2001JE001831. [8] Garvin, J.B. et al. (2000) Icarus 144, 
329-352. [9] Pike, R.J. (1988) in Mercury, F. Vilas et al., eds., Univ. 
Arizona Press, 165-273. [10] Pratt, S., and J.W. Head (2002) LPSC 
XXXIII, #1866. [11] Hecht, M.H. (2002) Icarus 156, 373-386. [12] 
Mellon, M.T., and B.M., Jakosky (1995) JGR 100, 11781-11799. [13] 
Pollack, J.B. et al. (1990) JGR 95, 1447-1473. 




where £" is emissivity of the surface, a is the Stephan-Boltzman 
constant, and T is the temperature of the surface, sky, and crater 
wall, respectively. The hemisphere centered on the normal to 



Figure 1. Crater rims visible, or partially visible, through the south 
polar layered terrain. 75°S, 120°W. All figures at roughly same scale: 
-200 km wide. Figure 2. Crater mostly exposed, but still half sur- 
rounded with south polar layered terrain. Fill material is still contigu- 
ous with polar terrain. 80°S, 124°W. Figure 3. Crater isolated from 
south polar layered terrain, with circular fill material. Nearby fringes of 
polar layered terrain visible at top. 78°S, 126°W. Figure 4. Craters 
with local, isolated, irregularly-shaped fill material. These craters are 
furthest from the polar layered terrain. 74°S, 131°W. 



